
      
         
            
            
               ❧A declaration of certaine principall Articles of Religion,
ſet out by the order of both Archbiſhops Metropolitans, and the reſt of the Byſhops,
for the vnitie of doctrine to be taught and holden of all Parſons, Vicars, and Curates, aſwell in teſtification of their
common conſent in the ſayde doctrine, to the ſtopping of the mouthes of them that go about to ſlaunder the miniſters of the Church
for diuerſitie of iudgement: as neceſſarie for the inſtruction of their people, to be read by the ſayd Parſons, Vicars, and Curates,
at their poſſeſſion taking o
                  •
                firſt entrie into their Cures: And alſo after that yeerely at two ſeuerall times. That is to ſay,
the Sundayes next following Eaſter day and Saint Michael tharchan
                  •
               ell, or on ſome other
Sunday within one moneth after thoſe feaſtes, immediatly after the Goſpell.
            
               FOraſmuch as it appertaineth to all Chriſtian men, but eſpecially to the miniſters and the
paſtours of the Church, being teachers & inſtructers of others, to be ready to giue a reaſon
of their faith when they ſhalbe thereunto required: I for my part nowe appointed
your Parſon, Vicar, or Curate, hauing before mine eyes the feare of God, & the teſtimonie
of my conſcience, do acknowledge for my ſelfe, and require you to aſſent to the ſame.
i Fyrſt that there is but one liuing and true God, of infinite power, wiſedome, & goodneſſe,
the maker and preſeruer of all things, and that in vnitie of this Godhead, there be three perſons of
one ſubſtance, of equall power and eternitie, the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghoſt.
            ii I beleeue alſo whatſoeuer is conteined in the holy Canonicall Scriptures, in the which Scriptures
are conteined all things neceſſarie to ſaluation, by the which alſo al errours & hereſies may ſufficiently be
reproued and conuicted, and all doctrine and Articles neceſſarie to ſaluation eſtablyſhed. I do alſo moſt
firmely beleeue and confeſſe all the Articles conteined in the three Creedes: the Nicene Creede, Athanaſius
Creede, and our common Creede, called the Apoſtles Creede: for theſe do briefly conteine the principall
Articles of our faith, which are ar large ſet forth in the holy Scriptures.
            iii I acknowledge alſo that Church to be the ſpouſe of Chriſt, wherein the word of God is truly taught,
the Sacraments orderly miniſtred according to Chriſtes inſtitution, and the authoritie of the keys duely
vſed. And that euery ſuch particular Church hath authoritie to inſtitute, to change, & cleane to put away
Ceremonies and other Eccleſiaſticall rites, as they be ſuperfluous, or be abuſed, and to conſtitute other,
making more to ſeemelyneſſe, to order, or edification.
            iiii Moreouer I confeſſe that it is not lawfull for any man to take vpon him any office or miniſtery, eyther
Eccleſiaſtical or ſecular, but ſuch onely as are lawfully thereunto called by their high authorities, according
to the ordinances of this Realme.
            v Furthermore I do acknowledge the Queenes Maieſties prerogatiue, and ſuperioritie of gouernement
of all eſtates & in all cauſes, aſwel Eccleſiaſticall as Temporal, within this Realme, & other her dominions
& countreys, to be agreeable to Gods word, & of right to appertaine to her highneſſe, in ſuch ſort
as is in ye late Act of Parliament expreſſed, & ſithens by her Maieſties Iniūctions declared & expounded.
            vi Moreouer, touching the Byſhop of Rome, I do acknowledge and confeſſe, that by the Scriptures
and word of God, he hath no more authoritie then other Byſhops haue in their prouinces and dioceſſes:
And therefore ye power which he now challengeth, that is, to be ye ſupreme head of the vniuerſall Church
of Chriſt, and ſo to be aboue all Emperours, Kinges, and Princes, is an vſurped power, contrary to the
Scriptures and worde of God, and contrary to the example of the primitiue Church. And therefore is
for moſt iuſt cauſes taken away, and abolyſhed within this Realme.
            vii Furthermore I do graunt and confeſſe, that the booke of common prayer & adminiſtration of the
holy Sacraments, ſet forth by authoritie of parliament, is agreeable to the Scriptures, & that it is Catholike,
Apoſtolike, & moſt for the aduauncing of Gods glory, and the edifying of Gods people, both for
that it is in a tongue that may be vnderſtanded of the people, and alſo for the doctrine and fourme of miniſtration
contained in the ſame.
            viii And although in the adminiſtration of Baptiſme, there is neyther exorciſme, oyle, ſalt, ſpittle, or halowing
of the water nowe vſed. And for that they were of late yeeres abuſed, and eſteemed neceſſarie,
where they perteine not to the ſubſtance and neceſſitie of the Sacrament, they be reaſonably abolyſhed:
and yet the Sacrament ful and perfectly miniſtred to all intents and purpoſes agreeable to the inſtitution
of our Sauiour Chriſt.
            ix Moreouer I do not onely acknowledge, that priuate maſſes were neuer vſed amongſt the fathers of
the primitiue Church, I meane publike miniſtration & receiuing of the Sacrament by the prieſt alone,
without a iuſt number of communicants, according to Chriſtes ſaying, Take ye, and eate ye, &c. but alſo
that the doctrine, which maintaineth the maſſe to be a propitiatorie ſacrifice for the quicke and the dead,
and a meane to deliuer ſoules out of purgatorie, is neyther agreeable to Chriſts ordinance, nor grounded
vpon doctrine Apoſtolike, but contrarywiſe moſt vngodly & moſt iniurious to the precious redemption of
our Sauiour Chriſt, and his onely ſufficient ſacrifice offered once for euer vpon the altar of the croſſe.
            x I am of that minde alſo, that the holy Communion or Sacrament of the body and bloud of Chriſt, for
the due obedience to Chriſtes inſtitution, and to expreſſe the vertue of the ſame, ought to be miniſtred vnto
the people vnder both kindes, & that it is auouched by certaine fathers of the Church, to be a plaine ſacriledge
to robbe them of the myſticall cup, for whom Chriſt hath ſhed his moſt precious bloud: Seing he
him ſelfe hath ſaid, Drinke ye all of this. Conſidering alſo that in the time of the auncient doctours of the
Church, as Ciprian, Ierome, Auguſtine, Gelaſius & others, vi.C. yeeres after Chriſt and more, both the
partes of the Sacrament were miniſtred to the people.
            Laſt of all, as I do vtterly diſalowe the extolling of Images, Relickes, and fayned myracles, and alſo
all kindes of expreſſing God inuiſible, in the fourme of an olde man, or the holy Ghoſt, in fourme of a
Doue, and all other vaine worſhipping of God, deuiſed by mans fantaſie, beſides or contrary to ye Scriptures:
(as wandring on pilgrimages, ſetting vp of candles, praying vpon beades, & ſuch like ſuperſtition,)
which kinde of workes haue no promiſe of reward in ſcripture, but contrarywiſe threatnings and maledictions:
So I do exhort all men to the obedience of Gods lawe, and to the woorkes of faith, as charitie,
mercie, pitie, almes, deuout and feruent prayer with thaffection of the heart, & notwith the mouth onely,
godly abſtinence & faſting, chaſtitie, obedience to the rulers & ſuperiour powers, with ſuch like works
and godlynes of life, commaunded by God in his word: which as Saint Paul ſaith, hath promiſes both
of this life, and of the life to come, and are workes onely acceptable in Gods ſight.
            Theſe thinges aboue rehearſed, though they be appointed by common order, yet do I without all
compulſion, with freedome of minde & conſcience, from the bottome of my heart, and vpon moſt ſure perſwaſion,
acknowledge to be true and agreeable to Gods word. And therefore I exhort you al, of whom
I haue cure, heartily & obediently to embrace and receiue the ſame, that we al ioyning together in vnitie
of ſpirit, faith, & charitie, may alſo at length be ioyned together in ye kingdome of God, & that through the

                  •••…
               ts and death of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt. To whom with the Father and the holy Ghoſt be all

                  •••
               ry and empire, nowe and for euer. Amen.
         
      
      
         
            ¶Imprinted at London by Chriſtopher Barker, printer
to the Queenes Maieſtie.
         
      
   