
      
         
            
            ¶Iniunctions for the clerge.
Exhibite Die menſis Anno dn̄i. M. CCCCC. xxxviii.
In the name of God Amen.
            By the authorite and commiſſion of the mooſte excellent Prince Henry by the grace of god kynge of Engeland, and of Fraunce
defenſor of the fayth, lorde of Ireland, & in erth ſupreme heed vnder chryſt of the church of England. I Thomas lord Crumwell,
lorde priui ſeaſe, vicegerent vnto the kynges ſayde hyghnes, for all his iuriſdiction eccleſiaſticall wythin this realme,
do for the auaūcement of the true honour of almyghty god, encreaſe of vertu, and diſcharge of the kynges maieſtye, gyue and
exhybite vnto you 
                  〈1 span left blank〉
                theſe Iniunctions folowyng to be kept / obſerued and fulfylled vpon the
paynes hereafter declared.
            ¶Fyrſt that ye ſhall truely obſerue and kepe 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               nd ſinguler the kynges hyghnes iniunctions, geuen vnto you heretofore in my name by
his graces auctorite, not only vpō the paynes therin expreſſyd, but alſo in your defaulte now after this ſecond monitiō continued, vpō further
punyſhment to be ſtraytly extended towarde you by the kynges hyghnes arbitremēt / or his vicegerent afore ſayd.
            ¶Item that ye ſhall prouyde on thiſſide the feaſt of 
                  〈1 span left blank〉
                next cōmyng, one boke of the hole byble of the largyeſt volume in
Englyſhe and the ſame ſet vp in ſum conuenient place wythin the ſaid church that ye haue cure of, where as your pariſhoners may moſte
cōmodiouſly reſorte to the ſame and reade it. The charge of which boke ſhalbe ratably borne betwene you the ꝑſon & the pariſhoners a fore
ſayd: that is to ſay, thone half by you, and thother half by them.
            ¶Item that you ſhall diſcorage no man priuely or apertly from the readynge, or herynge of the ſayde bible / but ſhall expreſſely prouoke,

                  •
               ere, and exhorte euery perſone to rede the ſame, as that whiche is the very lyuely worde of god, that euery chriſten perſon is bounde to enbrace,
beleue, and folowe / yf they loke to be ſaued / admonyſſhynge them neuertheleſſe to auoyde all contention and altercation therin, but
to vſe an honeſt ſobrietie in thinquiſition of the trewe ſence of the ſame, and to referre thexplication of obſcure places to men of higher iugement
in ſcripture.
            ¶Item that ye ſhall euery ſondaye and holydaye throughe the yere openly and playnly recite to your pariſhoners twyſe or thryſe to gyther,
or oftener if nede requyre, one particle or ſentēce of the Pater noſter or crede in Engliſhe, to thintent they may lerne the ſame by harte.
And ſo from day to day to geue them one lyke leſſon or ſentence of the ſame, tyll they haue lerned the hole Pater nofter and Crede in Englyſhe
by rote. And as they be taught euery ſentence of the ſame by rote, ye ſhal expounde and declare the vnderſtandynge of the ſame vnto
them, exhortynge all parentes and houſeholders, to teache theyr children and ſeruauntes the ſame, as they are bounde in conſcience to do.
And that done ye ſhall declare vnto them the .x. cōmaūdementes one by one euery ſonday & holiday tyll they be lykewyſe ꝑfite in ye ſame.
            ¶Item that ye ſhall in confeſſions euery Lent examyn euery perſon that cometh to confeſſion to you, whither they can recite tharticles of
our faythe, and the Pater noſter in Engliſhe, and here thē ſay the ſame particularly, wherin if they be not perfite ye ſhal declare to the ſame
that euery chriſten perſon ought to knowe them before they ſhulde receyue the bleſſed ſacrament of thaulter, and monyſhe them to lerne the
ſame more perfitely by the nexte yere folowinge / or els, lyke as they ought not to preſume to come to goddes boorde without perfite knowlege of the ſame, and if they do, it is to the great peryll of theyr ſoules: So ye ſhall declare vnto them that ye loke for other Iniunctions
from the kynges highnes by that tyme to ſtay and repell all ſuche from goddes boorde as ſhalbe founde ignorant in the premiſſes / wherof
ye do thus admonyſhe them, to thintent they ſhuld bothe eſchewe the peryll of theyr ſoules, and alſo the worldly rebuke that they might
incurre hereafter by the ſame.
            ¶Item that ye ſhall make or cauſe to be made in the ſayde churche and euery other cure ye haue, one ſermon euery quarter of a yere at the
leaſte, wherin ye ſhall purely, and ſyncerely declare the very goſpel of chriſte, and in the ſame exhorte your herers to the workes of charite,
mercy and faythe, ſpecially preſcribed, & cōmaunded in ſcripture, and not to repoſe there truſt or affiaunce in any other workes deuyſed by
mens phanthaſyes beſydes ſcripture, as in wanderyng to pilgrimage, offeryng of money, candelles or tapers to Images or relyques, or
kyſſing or lyckyng the ſame, ſaying ouer a nombre of beades, not vnderſtanded ne mynded on, or in ſuch lyke ſuperſticion, for the doynge
wherof, ye not only haue no promyſe of rewarde in ſcripture, but contrary wyſe greate threates and maledictions of god, as thynges tendyng
to ydolatrye & ſuperſtition, which of all other offences god almyghtye dothe moſte deteſt and abhorre, for that the ſame diminyſheth
moſt his honour and glorie.
            ¶Item that ſuche Images as ye knowe in any of your cures to be ſo abuſed with pilgrimages or offeringes of any thyng made thervnto,
ye ſhal for auoydyng of that moſte deteſtable offence of Idolatrie, furthwyth take down and deley, and ſhall ſuffre frome henſforthe no
candels, tapers or Images of war to be ſet afore any Image or picture, but only the lyghte that comenlye gothe acroſſe the church, by the
roode lofte, the lyght afore the ſacrament of thaulter, and the lyght about the ſepulchre, which for thadourning of the church and diuine ſeruyce
ye ſhal ſuffre to remayn ſtyll admoniſſhyng your pariſhoners, that Images ſerue for no other purpoſe, but as to be bokes of vnlerned
men, that can no letters, wherby they myght be otherwyſe admonyſſhed of the lyues & conuerſacion of thē that the ſaid Images do repreſent,
which Images if they abuſe for any other intent than for ſuch remēbraunces / they cōmytte Idolatrye in the ſame to the great daunger
of theyr ſoules. And therfore the kinges highnes gratiouſly tendering the weale of his ſubiectis ſoules hathe in parte alredy and more
wyll hereafter trauayle for the aboliſſhinge of ſuche Images, as myghte be occaſyon of ſo greate an offence to god, and ſo great daunger
to the ſoules of his louyng ſubiectes.
            ¶Itē that in al ſuch benefices or cures as ye haue, where vpon ye be not your ſelf reſident, ye ſhall appoynt ſuch curates in your ſtede / as
both can by there habilite, and wyll alſo promptely execute theſe Iniunctions, & do there dutye otherwyſe that ye are boūde to do in euery
behalf accordingly, & may profyte there cure, no leſſe wyth good exemple of lyuing, than with declaracion of the worde of god, or els theire
lacke and defaulte ſhalbe imputed vnto you, who ſhall ſtraytly anſwer for the ſame, if they do otherwyſe.
            ¶Itē that ye ſhall admytte no man to preach wythin any of your benefices or cures, but ſuch as ſhall appere vnto you to be ſufficientlye
licenced therto by the kynges hyghnes or his grace authoryte, by tharchbiſſhop of Cantorb. or ye byſſhop of this dioces And ſuch as ſhalbe
ſo licenced ye ſhall gladly receyue to declare the worde of god wythout any reſiſtence or contradiction.
            ¶Itē if you haue heretofore declared to your pariſhoners any thige to thextollig or ſetting forth of pylgremages, reliques, or Images or
any ſuch ſuperſtition, ye ſhall now openly afore the ſame recante and reproue the ſame, ſhewyng them (as the truth is) that ye dyd the ſame
vpon no grounde of ſcripture, but as one beynge led & ſeduced by a cōmen errour and abuſe crepte into the church through the ſufferaūce
and auarice of ſuch as felt profytte by the ſame.
            ¶Itē yf you do or ſhal know any mā within your paryſh, or els where yr is a letter of the word of god to be redde in Englyſh, or 
                  〈◊〉
               
preached, or of thexecutiō of theſe iniunctions, or a fautor of the byſſhop of Romes pretenſed power, now by the lawes of this realme 
                  〈…〉
               .
         
      
   