
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  ¶Tabula.
                  HEre begynneth a ſhorte and abreue table on the Cronycles / and ye muſte vnderſtand that in euery leef of the boke aboue is the tytle wherin is Pars prima. ii.iii.iiii.v.vi. and .vii· tylle ye come at the bookes ende & therby ſhall ye knowe what maters conteyne in the table bytwene parte & parte / And ſo ſhall ye fynd aboue bytwene pars and pars in the margyne wryten.
                  
                     
                        ¶The Prologue.
                        The werke of the fyrſte .vi. dayes.
                        Adam the fyrſte man
                        Eua the fyrſt woman
                        Seth ſone to Adam
                        Delbora ſyſter to Abell
                        Abel ſone to Adam
                        Cayn and Calmana ſyſter & wyfe to cayn
                        Eenos
                        Chanam
                        Malaleel. Iareth. Enoch. of the lyne of Cryſte
                        Matuſale. Lameth. of Cryſtes lyne
                        Tuball the fyrſte grauer
                        Iabe foūde ye fyrſt pauelyōs
                        Iuball founde the fyrſte crafte to playe
                        Neoma fōde fyrſte weuynge
                        Neo / the ſhyppe / the raynebowe
                        Cham. Sem. & Iapher Noes ſones
                        Arpharat & hys chyldern
                        Chus and hys chyldern
                        Sale and his ſone
                        Heber and hys chylder
                        Phaleg
                        Iacten. Nemroch. and Sulphen. the buylders of ye Toure of Babylon
                        How gentylman began
                        Saruk of Cryſtes lyne
                        Belus kynge of Babylon
                        Nynuns kynge of Babylon
                        Thare of the lyne of Cryſte
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        ¶Here begynneth the hyſtorye of the holy Patryarkes & contynued to Brute.
                        Abraham and hys brethern with theyr progenye
                        Abrahams wyues
                        Melchiſedech kyng of Salē
                        
                        Semiramis kȳg of Babylō
                        
                        Ninus kynge of Babylon
                        Arius kynge of Babylon
                        yſaac of che lyne of Cryſte & of hys wyues and hys ſones
                        Of Gomora and of the wyfe of Loth
                        Iacob of ye lyne of cryſt & his wyues and theyr progenyezers kynge of Babylon
                        Armauiccre after hym
                        Belocus kynge of Babylon
                        Inachus the fyrſte kynge of Grece
                        Phoromius was kynge after hym
                        Iudas of the lyne of Cryſte
                        Belus kynge of aſſurio
                              
                                 
                              
                              rum
                           
                        
                        Athlas Aſtronomyer
                        Sarapis kynge of Greyes
                        Argus kynge of Grekes
                        Omogires put fyrſt oxen to the plongh
                        Belus kynge of Babylon
                        Pharao kynge of Egypte
                        Amithus kyng of Babylon
                        Pharao kyng of Egypte
                        Aram of Cryſtes lyne
                        Iob the holy man
                        Moyſes the Iuge of Iſraell
                        Aron the byſſhop
                        Dafrus kynge of Babylon
                        Cycrops kynge of Athenes
                        Amynadab of Cryſtes lyne
                        Moyſes the fyrſte Iuge
                        Aron the fyrſte byſſhoppe
                        Phorao kynge of Egypte
                        Naſonſone to Amynadab whan ye lawe of god was gyuen in the hylle of Synay
                        Salmen of the lyne of Cryſt
                        Ioſue the Iuge
                        Eleazar byſſop
                        Othonyell Iuge
                        Aoth Iuge
                        Ionas ye fyrſt kyng of ytaly
                        Amictus kynge of Babylon
                        Boos of the lyne of Cryſte
                        Sanger Iuge
                        Delbora Iuge
                        Phenies byſſhop
                        Saturnus kynge of ytaly
                        Picus kynge of ytaly
                        Gedeon Iuge
                        Bocci byſſhop
                        Abimalech Iuge
                        Tola Iuge
                        Bocci byſſhop
                        Iayr Iuge
                        Fanus kynge of ytaly
                        Latinus kynge of ytaly
                        Tauranꝰ kyng of Babylon
                        Lamydon kynge of Troy
                        The newe ſynnes of Iſraell
                        Ozy byſſhop
                        Ebaſſam Iuge
                        Abialoo Iuge
                        Abdon Iuge
                        Athamam kyng of aſſuria
                              
                                 
                              
                              rum
                           
                        
                        Agamenon kyng of Grece
                        Eneas kynge of ytaly
                        Vlixes an eloquent man
                        Obeth of the lyne of Cryſte
                        Sampſon Iuge
                        Ieſſe of the lyne of Cryſte
                        Saull kynge of Iſraell
                        Aſcanius kynge of ytaly
                        Siluius kynge of ytaly
                        Venes and Padua were buylded
                        Homere the grete poete
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        ¶Here begynneth the ſeconde parte and of the kyngdme of Brytayne
                        Albyon ye fyrſte woman that was of Englonde
                        Bruce kynge of Bryytane
                        Lotrin kynge of Brytayne
                        Madan kynge of Brytayne
                        Dauyd kynge of Iſra
                              •
                           ll
                        M
                              ••
                           pris kyng of brytayne
                        Salomon kynge of peak
                        Sadoch byſſhop
                        
                           Roboas kynge of peas
                        Achimias byſſhop
                        Ieroboas kynge of Iſraell
                        Abdias kynge of Iewes
                        Aſa kynge of Iewes
                        Azarias byſſhop
                        Baſa kynge of Iſraell
                        Hela kynge of Iſraell
                        Amri kynge of Iſraell
                        Archa kynge of Iſraell
                        Ebrack kynge of Brytayne
                        Brute Greneſhelde kyng of Brytayne
                        Leyll kynge of Brytayne
                        Ioſaphat kynge of Iewes
                        Helyas the grete prophete
                        Macheas & Abdias ꝓphetes
                        Ochoſias kynge of Iſraell
                        Lududibras kynge of Brytayne
                        Bladud kynge of Brytayne
                        Ioram kynge of Iewes whā Helyas was rauyſſhed in to Paradyſe
                        Ochoſias or Aſarias kynge of Iewes
                        Ioram kynge of Iſraell
                        Iehen kyng of Iſraell
                        Athalia moder to Azari kynge of Iewes
                        Ioathas kynge of Iſraell
                        Ioam kynge of Iſraell
                        Lyer kynge of Brytayne
                        Amaſias kynge of Iewes
                        Ieroboam kynge of Iſraell
                        Ozias kynge of Iewes
                        Ozee byſſhop and prophete
                        Ioell Ananias and Adias prophetes
                        zacharias kynge of Iſraell
                        Phaſcia kynge of Iſraell
                        Phaſe kynge of Iſraell
                        Morgan and Conedag kynges of Brytayne
                        Reynolde Borbodiā Ferres & Porres kynges of brytayn
                        How foure kynges helde alle Brytayne & of theyr names
                        Scater & Dawalier kynges
                        Rudac and Clo
                              •
                           en kynges
                        Donebant kynge Brytayne
                        Brenne and Belin kynges of Brytayne
                        Cormbratus kynge of Brytayne
                        Ioathan kynge of Iewes
                        Amarias byſſhop
                        Olympias were ſete ī Grece
                        Acham kynge of Iewes
                        Achitob byſſhop
                        Ozee kynge of Iſraell
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        ¶Here begynneth the thyrde parte and contynued to ye Natyuyte of Cryſte.
                        Rome was buylded by Romulus
                        Ezechias kynge of Iewes
                        Sadoch byſſhop
                        Manaſſes kynge of Iewes
                        Sellū & Echias byſſhoppes
                        Numa kynge of Rome
                        Amon kynge of Iewes
                        Ioſias kynge of Iewes
                        Azaſtas byſſhop
                        Tobias the holy man
                        Tu
                              •
                           ius kynge of Rome
                        Nabugonodonoſor kyng of Babylon
                        Ancus kynge of Rome
                        Danyell the prophete
                        Ioathas kynge of Iewes
                        Iachim kynge of Iewes
                        Damias byſſhop
                        Ioachim kynge of Iewes
                        Sedechias kynge of Iewes
                        Ioſedeth byſſhop
                        Abacuk prophete
                        The Tranſmygracyon
                        Priſcus Torquinus kynge of Rome
                        Nabugodonoſor & Enylmedach kynges of babylon
                        Howe the playe of Cheſſe was founde
                        Salathiell of ye lyne of Cryſt
                        Seruius Tulyus kynge of Rome
                        Reguſes Sabuſardach and Balchaſar kynges of Babylon.
                        Monarchia Perſarum
                        Daryus kynge of Babylon
                        Cyrus Emperour of Perſes
                        Babylon was deſtroyed
                        Tarquinus Superbus kynge of Rone
                        Lucres a wy
                              •
                           
                        
                        How the gouernaūce of Rome was chaunged after the kynges
                        Hyſtoria libri Eſdre
                        zorobabell the duke
                        Eſdras preeſt
                        Cambyſes kynge of Perſes
                        Enereydes and Darius kynges of Perſes
                        Ab
                              •
                           uch of the lyne of Cryſte
                        Ioachim byſſhop
                        Senatours of Rome were ordeyned
                        Arthararſe and zerſes kynges of Perſe
                        Segdianus kinges of Perſe
                        Elyac of the lyne of Cryſte
                        Eſdras an holy man
                        Neemias ye butelere
                        Permenides. Socrates. D
                              •
                           
                           mocritus and ypocras phyloſophers
                        Azor of the lyne of Cryſte
                        Elyaſyb byſſhop
                        Camillus dictator of Rome
                        Darius kynge of Perſe
                        Plato a phyloſopher
                        Titus di
                              ••
                           ator of Rome
                        Gaius a Senatour
                        Marcus Valertus a Senatoure
                        Arthararſes Arſamus and Darius kynges of Perſes
                        Iodas and Iohannes byſſhoppes
                        Ariſtotiles and Socrate phyloſophers
                        Guentolen. Sayſell. Kymor
                        Howan. Morwith kynges of Brytayne
                        Grandobodiam. Artogaill. and Heſyder kynges of Brytayne
                        Howe .xxxiii. kynges regned in peas eche after other in Brytayne
                        
                           Lud kynges of Brytayne
                        Sadoche of the lyne of chyſt
                        Iudas byſſhop
                        Eneas byſſhop
                        Manipus and Fablius Conſulers of Rome
                        Monarchia Greco
                              
                                 
                              
                              rum
                           
                        
                        Alexander kynge
                        Achym of the lyne of Cryſte
                        Symon and Elcazarus byſſhoppes Dolobela Emilius
                        Marcus Curius
                        Genutius Conſules of Rome
                        Ptholomeꝰ kyng of egypte
                        Elyud of the lyne of Cryſte
                        Omias and Symon byſſhoppes
                        Sempronius. Apptus Claudius. and many moo Senatours of Rome
                        Ptholomias kynge of Egypte.
                        Hanyball kynge of Peno
                              
                                 
                              
                              rum
                           
                        
                        Lu
                              •
                           acius. Simp
                              •
                           onius Valerius &c̄. were Conſuies at Rome
                        Ep
                              •
                           phanes kyng of Egypte
                        Autrochus kynge of Syrre
                        Ouias and Symon byſſhoppes
                        Eleazar of the lyne of Cryſte
                        Adrianus and Euſtachius
                        Onias byſſhop
                        Paulus Scipio Senatoues at Rome
                        Philometor kynge of Egypte.
                        Mathathyas an holy man
                        Iudas Machabeus and Ionathas his brother byſhoppes
                        Antiochus kynge of Surry
                        Quintus Marchus and Tiberius were Senatours of Rome
                        Mathon of ye lyne of Cryſt
                        Symon and Iohannes byſſhoppes
                        Publus. Lucius. Lucius and Lucius Senatours of Rome
                        Petholomeus kynge of Egypte
                        Ariſtobolus kynge & preeſt
                        Alexander byſſhoppe
                        Saruius. Lucius. Fabius
                        Senatours of Rome
                        Ptholomeꝰ kynge of egypt
                        Iacob of the lyne of Cryſte
                        Alexandra wyf and byſſhope
                        Hircanus kynge of Iewes
                        Virgill the grete poete
                        Oracius and Saluſtius hyſtoricus
                        Quinte and Gaius Conſules of Rome
                        Pompeius. Marcus. and Iulyus were dictatours of Rome
                        Cathon phyloſopher
                        Caſſybolon kynge of englodde
                        Andragen kynge of englonde
                        Ihoſhep of the lyne of cryſte
                        Anthigonus byſſhope
                        Titus Liuius and Ouidius hyſtoricus
                        Octauian emperour
                        The huſbondes of Saynte Anna
                        Herode Aſcolonyca kynge of Iewes
                        Kymbalyn kynge of englōde
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        ¶Here begynneth the fourthe part and contynued to ye comynge of the Saxons.
                        The Natyuyte of cryſte
                        Anninus Rufus and Valeri
                        Graccus byſſhoppes
                        Pylatus the Iege
                        Of Pylatus natyuyte
                        Ouidius Naſo
                        Tyberius emperour
                        Mathia the appoſtle
                        Iudas ſcaryoth
                        The makynge of the credo
                        The foure Euangelyſtes
                        Peter the fyrſte pope
                        Gaius emperoure
                        Gyder kynge of englonde
                        Armager kynge of englonde weſtmer kyng of Englonde
                        Coill kynge of Englonde
                        Claudius Emperour
                        Iames the more the appoſtle
                        Nero Emperour
                        Seneca Neroes mayſter
                        Iuuenalis and Lucanus poetes
                        Iame the leſſe the appoſtle
                        Linus a martyr and pope
                        Galba Emperour
                        Otho Emperour
                        Vitellus Emperour
                        Veſpaſianus Emperour
                        Cletus a martyr and pope
                        Titus Emperour
                        Domician Emperour
                        Clemens a martyr pope
                        Nerua Emperour
                        Traianus Emperour
                        Anacle
                              •
                           us a martyr & pope
                        Plinius Orator
                        Euriſtus a murtyr and pope
                        Alexander a martyr & pope
                        Sixtus a martyr and pope Emperours
                        Theleſphorus a martyr and pope
                        Ignius a martyr and pope
                        Anthonius Emperour
                        Pompoius hyſtoryograph
                        Pius a martyr and pope
                        Anicetus martyr and pope
                        Galienus aleche
                        Marcus and Lucius Emperours
                        Lucie kynge of englonde
                        Aſtelepades kynge of englonde
                        Coill kynge of englonde
                        Conſtance kynge of englonde
                        Conſtantyn kynge of englōd
                        Octauian kyng of englōde.
                        Maximian kynge of englonde
                        Of the .xi. thouſande maydens
                        Gracyan kynge of englonde
                        Conſtanitne kynge of Englonde
                        
                           Cōſtance kynge of englonde
                        Sother a martyr and pope
                        Elentherius a Martyr and pope
                        Marcus Anthonius and Lucius Comodius were Emperours
                        Helius Emperour
                        Victor martyr and pope
                        zepherius a martyr & pope
                        Origenes the noble clerke
                        Caliſtus a martyr and pope
                        Anthonius Emperour
                        Anthonius Marcus Empeour
                        Aliſander Emperour
                        Vrbanus a martyr & pope
                        Ponſianus a martyr & pope
                        Anteros a martyr and pope
                        Maximianus Emperour
                        Gordian Emperour
                        Phylyp Emperour
                        Decius Emperour
                        Fabianus martyr and pope
                        Conelius a martyr & pope
                        Lucius pope
                        Gallus and Volucianus emperours
                        Valerian emperour
                        Stephanus a martyr pop
                        Sixtus a martyr & pope
                        Dyoniſius a martyr pope
                        Feler a martyr and pope
                        Claudius Emperoure
                        Eu
                              •
                           icianus a martyr & pope
                        Aurelius emperour
                        Tacitus emperour
                        Probus emperour
                        Carus and hys two ſones Emperours
                        Dyocleſian emperour
                        Maximian emperour
                        Gaius pope and martyr
                        Arcellinus a martyr & pope
                        Marcellus a martyr & pope
                        Euſebius a martyr & pope
                        Melchiades a martyr & pope
                        Galerius emperour
                        Silueſter pope
                        Conſtantyne emperour
                        Saynt Nicholas
                        Anaſtaſius byſſhop / & he made Qecū
                           
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            vult ſaluus eſſe
                        Mercus pope
                        Iulius pope
                        Conſtantinus emperour
                        Liberius pope
                        Felix pope
                        Iulianꝰ apoſtata emperour
                        Iominianus emperour
                        Valentinian emperouer
                        Damacian pope
                        Vales emperour
                        Aaguſtinus rethoricus ſiritius pope
                        Theodoſius emperour
                        Claudius poeta
                        Archadius emperour
                        Honorius emperour
                        Ierom the doctour
                        Sanctus Heracides
                        Iohannes Cryſeſtomus
                        Anaſtaſius pope
                        Innocēcius pope
                        zozimus pope
                        Bonifacius pope
                        Celeſtinus pope
                        Theodoſius emperour
                        Sextus and Leo popes
                        Marcianus & valētinianus were emperours
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        ¶Here begynneth the fyfth parte and contynued to the comynge of the Danys. Engiſt
                        Vortiger kynge of englonde
                        Vortimer kynge of englond
                        Aurilābros kyng of englond
                        Vterpendragon kynge of englonde
                        Arthur kynge of englongde
                        Conſtaneyne
                        Adelbright
                        Edell
                        Curan
                        Conan
                        Cortyf
                        Gurmonde all kynge of enlonde
                        Adelbrigeth
                        Sic with elfride
                        Brecinal al kīges of englōde
                        Cadewan
                        Oſwalde
                        Oſwy
                        Edwyn
                        Cadwalin all kynges of Englonde
                        Cadwaldre kyng of englōde
                        Offa
                        Oſbryght
                        Elle all kynge of Englonde
                        Saynt edmonde eddelf
                        Edred all kȳges of englōde
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        ¶Here beginneth the popes and emperour and other notable thynges in the tyme of the Saxons beynge in Englonde.
                        Leo the fyrſte Emperour
                        Leo pope
                        Hellarius pope
                        Simpicius pope
                        zeno emperour
                        Felix pope
                        Gelaſius pope
                        Anaſtaſius emperour
                        Anaſtaſius pope
                        Simachus pope
                        Clodianus kynge of Fraūce
                        Hornuſda pope
                        Iuſtinus emperour
                        Priſcinans grāmaticus
                        Iohannes pope
                        Felix the fourth pope
                        Iuſtintanus emperoure
                        Bonifacius pope
                        Iohannes the ſeconde pope
                        Agapitus a confeſſour pope
                        Siluerius a martyr pope
                        Virgilius pope
                        Sinodus quarta
                        Pelagius pope
                        Iohannes the thyrde pope
                        Iuſtinus the ſeconde emperoure
                        Tyberius the ſeconde emperour
                        Benedictus pope
                        Pelagius emperour
                        Mauricius emperour
                        What tyme ſaynt Auſten c
                              •
                           
                           me

in to Englonde
                        Focas Emperour
                        Gregorius the fyrſte pope
                        Saninianus pope
                        Bonifacius the thyrde pope
                        Bonifacius ye fourth pope
                        Heraclius Emperoure
                        Deus dedit pope
                        Bonifacius the fyfth pope
                        Machomite the duke of Saraſyns
                        Conſtantyne the thyrde Emperour
                        Martinus the fyrſte pope
                        Eugenius pope
                        Vitellianus pope
                        Adeodatus pope
                        Conſtantyne the fourthe Emperour
                        Demusa Romayne pope
                        Bonifacius pope
                        Agatho pope
                        Leo pope
                        Senedictus ye ſeconde pope
                        Iuſtinianus the ſeconde emperour
                        Hohannes the fyfth pope
                        zeno pope
                        Sergius pope
                        Saynte Beda
                        Leo the ſecōde pope
                        Tiberius Emperour
                        Leo the thyrde pope
                        Iohannes the ſixte pope
                        Iohannes the .vii. pope
                        Iuſtinianus Emperour
                        Siſinus pope
                        Conſtantyne pope
                        Philyp the Seconde Emperour
                        Anaſtaſius the ſeconde Emperour
                        Gregorius the ſeconde pope
                        Theodoſius Emperour
                        Leo and Conſtantyne Emperours
                        Gregorius the thyrde pope
                        Conſtantinus Emperour
                        zacharias pope
                        Stephanus the ſecōde pope
                        Paulus a Romayne pope
                        Conſtantyne ye ſeconde pope
                        Karolus magnus
                        Stephanus the thyrde pope
                        Adrianus pope
                        Leo the fourth pope
                        Conſtantinus Emperour
                        Nychoferus Emperour
                        Michaell Emperour
                        Karolus magnus the fyrſte a ſaynt
                        Leo pope
                        Ludoucius Emprour
                        Stephanus the fourth pope
                        Paſchall pope
                        Eugenius the fourth pope
                        Valentinus pope
                        Gregorius the fourth pope
                        Lotherius pope
                        Sergius the ſeconde pope
                        Leo pope
                        Benedictꝰ Romayne pope
                        Ludouicus Emperour
                        Iohannes a woman pope
                        Nicholaus pope
                        Adrianus pope
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        ¶Her begynnete the .vi. parte & contynued to the comynge of the Normans. Alured kynge of Englonde Iohannes the .viii. pope Karolus the ſeconde Emperour
                        Martynus pope
                        Adryanus the .thyrde. pope
                        Stephanus the .v. pope
                        Karolus the thyrde Emperour
                        Arnulphus Emperour
                        Formoſus pope
                        Bonyfacyus pope
                        Stephanus the .vi. pope
                        Iohannes the .ix. & .x. popes
                        Theodorus pope
                        Iohannes the .xi· pope
                        Benedictus the fourth pope
                        Leo pope
                        
                           
                              •
                           priſtoforus the fyrſte pope
                        Ludouicus the thyrde Emperour
                        Beryngaryus & Conradus Emperours.
                        Edwarde kynge of Englonde.
                        Sergius the thyrde pope
                        Anaſtaſius pope
                        Laudo and Iohānes popes
                        Henrycus Emperour
                        Adelſtone kyng of Englond
                        Edmonde kyng of Englōde
                        Eldred kynge of Englonde
                        Edwyn kynge of Englonde
                        Leo the .v. pope
                        Stephanus the .vii. & .viii. popes
                        Martinus the thyrde pope
                        Agapytus pope
                        Iohannes the .xii. pope
                        Edger kynge of Englonde
                        Beringarius the thyrde Emperour
                        Lotharyous Emperour
                        Beryngaryus the fourthe Emperour
                        Leo the .viii. pope
                        Iohannes the .xiii. pope
                        Benedictus the .vi. pope
                        Otto the fyrſte Emperour
                        Otto ye ſeconde Emperour
                        Of ſaynt Edwarde martyr and kynge of Englonde▪
                        
                        Eldred kynge of Englonde
                        Swyne kynge of Englonde and of denmarke
                        Bonus pope
                        Bonifacius pope
                        Benedictus pope
                        Iohannes the .xiiii.xv. and xvi. popes
                        Gregorius the .v. pope
                        Otto the thyrde Emperour
                        Silueſter the ſeconde pope
                        Iohannes the .xviii. and .xix popes
                        Henrycus the fyrſte Emperoure
                        Benedictus pope
                        Iohannes the .xx. pope
                        Knoght kynge of Englonde
                        Edmonde Irenſyde kynge of Englonde
                        Knoght kynge of Englonde
                        Benedictus the .ix. pope
                        
                           Conradus Emperour
                        Harode kynge of Englonde
                        Hardiknoght kynge of Englonde
                        Of the vylany that the Danys dyde to the Englyſſhmē
                        
                        Of Bodewin the fals traytoure
                        Alured martyr
                        Silueſtre the thyrde pope
                        Damaſius the ſeconde pope
                        Saynt Edwarde kynge of Englonde and confeſſour
                        Victor the ſeconde pope
                        Henry the ſconde Emperoure
                        Stephanus the .ix. pope
                        Benedictus pope
                        Henricus the thyrde Emperoure
                        Nicholaus the ſeconde pope
                        Alexander the ſeconde pope
                        Harolde kynge of Englonde
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        ¶Here begynneth the .vii. parte & contynued vnto our dayes / that is to ſaye / kynge Edwardes regne the fourth the .xxiii. yere
                        wyllyam conquerour
                        Gregorius the .vii. pope
                        Victor the thyrde pope
                        Vrbanus pope
                        wyllyam Rous kynge of Englonde
                        Henricus the fourthe Emperoure
                        Gelaſius pope
                        Colixtus pope
                        Honorius pope
                        Lotharius Emperour
                        Hugo de ſancto victore
                        The ordre of Suynt Iohan Baptyſte
                        Innocencius pope
                        Stephen kynge of Englonde
                        Celehinus the ſeconde pope
                        Lucius pope
                        Eugenius the ſeconde pope
                        Petrus Lombardꝰ byſſhop
                        Petrus Cūmeſtor
                        Fredericus the fyrſte Emperour
                        Anaſtaſius pope
                        Henry the ſeconde kynge of Englonde
                        Adrianus the fourth pope
                        Alexander the thyrde pope
                        Lucius the thyrde pope
                        Vrban the thyrde pope
                        Gregorius the .vii. pope
                        Clemens the thyrde pope
                        Rycharde the fyrſt kynge of Englonde
                        Henrycus the fyfthe Emperoure
                        Celeſtinus the thyrde pope
                        Innocēcius the thyrde pope
                        wyllyam of Parys
                        Franciſcus an ytalyon
                        Iohan kynge of Englonde
                        Frederucus the ſeconde Emperour
                        Honorius the thyrde pope
                        Henry the thyrde kynge of Englode
                        Gregorius the .ix. pope
                        Celeſtinus the frouth pope
                        Innocencius the fourthe pope
                        Thomas de Aquine
                        Albertus magnus
                        Euſtacius
                        Bonauenture
                        Alexander and Vrbanus popes
                        Rychardus Emeperour
                        Clemens the fourth pope
                        Gregorius the .x. pope
                        Innocencius the .v. pope
                        Adrianus pope
                        Iohannes the .xxi. pope
                        Nicholaus the thyrde pope
                        Radulphus Emperour
                        Murtinus the fourth pope
                        Nicholaus de lyra
                        Honorius the fourth pope
                        Nicholaus the fourth pope
                        Edwarde the fyſte kynge of Englode
                        Celeſtinus pope
                        Bonifacius pope
                        Benedictus the .xi. pope
                        Adulphus Emperour
                        Albertus Emperour
                        Clemens pope
                        Iohannes the .xxii. pope
                        Henry the .vi. Emperour
                        Edwarde the ſeconde kynge of Englonde
                        Lodowicus Emperour
                        Iohan Mundeuyl a doctour of phyſyke and knyght
                        Benedictus pope
                        Edwarde the thyrde kynge of Englonde
                        Clemeus the .vi. pope
                        Karolus the four the Emperoure
                        Innocencius the .vi. hope
                        Vrbanus the .v. pope
                        Gregorius the .ix. pope
                        wenſelaus Emperour
                        Vrbanus pope
                        Bonifacius the .ix. pope
                        Rycharde the ſeconde kynge of Englonde
                        Innocencius the .vii. pope
                        Robert Emperour
                        Iohannes the .xxiii. pope
                        Sygyſmundus Emperour
                        Henry the fourthe kynge of Englonde
                        Martyn the .v. pope
                        Eugenius pope
                        Henry the fyfth kyng of Englonde
                        Felix the fyfth pope
                        Alberte Emperour
                        Fredericus the thyrde Emperour
                        Nicholaus the .v. pope
                        Henry the .vi. kynge of Englonde
                        Calixtus the thyrde pope
                        Prynters of bokes
                        pius the ſeconde pope
                        Paulus a Vene
                              •
                           yan pope
                        Sixitus the pope
                     
                     
                        ¶The deſcrypcyon of Englonde walys. Scotlond and Irlonde / In the later ende of this presente Cronycles.
                     
                  
                  ¶Thus' endeth the Table
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  The Prologue
                  IN ſoo moche that it is neceſſary to all creatures of cry
                        ••
                     en relygyon / or of falſe relygyon / or gentyles / & machomytes to knowe theyr prynce / or princes / that regne vpon thē & them to obey. So it is comodydus to knowe theyr noble actes & dedes / & the cyrcūſtaūce of theyr lyues. Therfore in the yere of oure lorde. M.CCCC.lxxxiii. ye yere of ye regne of kynge Edwarde ye fourth at ſaynt Aldons / ſo that all men may knowe ye actes namely of our noble kynges of Englonde / is cōpyled togyder ī this boke / & moreouer is tranſlated out of latyn in to englyſſhe / fro the begynnynge of the worlde ye lygnage of Cryſt / from Adam tyll it be comen to Dauyd / & from Dauyd ye kynges of Iſrael & of Iewes ye hyghe byſſhops ī theyr dayes with the Iuges & prophetes. The foure pryncypall reames of ye worlde / that is to ſay of Babylon. of Percees. of Grekes. & of Romayns. And all the Emperours of Rome / or Popes / by ordre / & theyr names. And many a notable fader with certē of theyr actes As more playnly is declared in the chapytre nexte after. ¶And here ben reherſed the names of the Auctours / of whom theſe Cronycles ben trāſlated mooſt namely. ¶Galfridus Nunmoth monke in his boke of Brute Saynt Bede in ye actes of Englōde. I
                        •
                      Bede in his boke of tymes. Gyldas in ye actes of Brytayne. wyllyā Malmeſbury monke in ye actes of kynges of Englonde & byſſhops. Caſſiderꝰ of ye actes of Emperours & byſſhops. Saynt Auſtyn de cidei. Titus Liuius de geſtis Romano
                        
                           
                        
                        rum
                     . Martyn Penytencyary to ye pope in his cronycles of Emperours & byſſhops. And namely Theobaldꝰ Cartuſien
                        •
                      & conteynynge in his boke ye progreſſe of all notable faders from ye begynnynge of the worlde vnto our tyme with ye notable actes of the ſame. ¶In thys newe trāſlacyon are cōtayned many notable & maruaylous thynges. And thoſe ben alledged by auctoryte of many famous clerkes. And that euery man may knowe how theſe Cronycles ben ordred▪ ye ſhall vnderſtande / that this boke is deuyded in .vii. partes. Of the whiche ye fyrſt parte contayned from Adam tyll Bru
                        •
                     e came in to Brytayne. The ſeconde parte cōtayneth frome Brute came fyrſt in to Englonde. vnto the cyte of Rome was buylded by Romolus. The thyrde parte conteyneth ſyth rome was b
                        •
                     ylded / vnto C
                        •
                     yſte was borne of ouer lady Mary. The fourth from thens vnto ye comynge of Sa
                        •
                     dus in to Englonde. The fy
                        •••
                      parte from thens vnto the comynge of the Danys. The ſyxte parte from thene / vnto ye comynge of ye Normans. The ſeuēth parte fro the Normās / vnto our tyme. whiche is vnder ye regne of Edwarde the fourth .xxiii. yere / whoos noble cronycles by cuſtome maye not 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſene. ¶And ſoo in euery parte of theſe .vii. partes ben ſhewed ye mooſt & neceſſary actes of all ye kynges of Englōde & theyr names wryten aboue in ye margene / that euery man maye fynde them ſone. And afore the kynge of Englondes actes ben wryten / there is wryten ye lygnage of cryſt from Adam tyll that Cryſt was borne of oure lady / with the hye byſſhop & the Iu
                        •
                     e that were in that tyme / & certayne of theyr actes neceſſary / tyl it be comyn tyl cryſt was borne. And after that Cryſte was borne / & Peter was Pope of rome / is ſhewed by ordre the names of all the popes & emperours of Rome / afore / & after / with certeynt of theyr actes breuyatly / & many other dyuers thynges & merueyles in thoſe mennes dayes fallynge. And it is ſhewed euery thynge in his place / howe many yere it fell after the begynnyng of ye worlde & how longe afore that Cryſte was borne. And whan that I come to Cryſt was borne then it is wryten / how longe ony thynge fell after the Natyuyte of Cryſt / And this is ye ordre of this boke & the thynges that ben ſpoken of.
                  ANd as to mennes deſyrynge to haue a very knowledge / of theſe cronycles or of ony other / it is neceſſary: to knowe .vi. thinges. ¶The fyrſt is the ſtates of thynges / and thoſe ben two One is fro the begynnynge of ye worlde vnto Cryſt / the whiche is called the ſtate of Diuiacion. The ſecunde is frome Cryſte to the ende of ye worlde / ye whiche is called ye ſtate of Reconſiliacion. ¶The ſeconde thynge is the diuiſyon of tymes & thoſe ben thre. One is afore the lawe of moyſes / & an other is vnder ye lawe of Moyſes / an other is vnder ye lawe of grace after cryſt dyed. ¶The thyrde is ye gouernynge of kyngdomes. And as for that ye muſt know: that al though there were foure pryncypall kyngdomes / that is to ſay. Of Babylon / of Perſces / of Grekis / and Romayns.

neuertheles: as to the cours of the worlde: & the ordre of holy ſcrypture: ye fyrſt gouernyng was vnder faders: from Adam vnto moyſes. The ſeconde vnder Iuges from Moyſes vnto Saul. The thyrde vnder kynges: frō Saul vnto zorobabel. The fourthe vnder byſſhops from zorobabel vnto Cryſt. ¶The fourth is the dyuerſyte of lawes & thoſe were fyue. The fyrſt was the lawe of nature: and that was comen of all men. The ſeconde is the lawe or the cuſtome of gentyles: whan that vnder kynge Nyon ye peple began to worſhyp fals goddes. The thyrde is vnder the lawe wryten: roſe the lawe of Iewes: whā ye Circūciſyon deuyded ye Iewes from other peple The fourth is vnder Cryſt / roſe the lawe of criſten men / whan faythe and grace of the ſacramentes / enformed ye lyf of men. The fyfth vnder Machomete / roſe the lawe of Sarraſyns & Turkes. ¶The fyfthe is / the nobleneſſe or vnnobleneſſe in dedes ¶And as to theſe / it is to knowe that .vii. perſons ben redde of / whome the dedes many tymes are had in mynde in hyſtoryes. That is to wyte / of a prynce in his reame / of a knyght in batayll. of a Iuge in his place / of a byſſhop in the clergy / of a polytyk man in the peple of an huſbonde man in the hous / & of an abbot ī his chirche. And of theſe are wryten many tymes the laudes of good men / & the punyſſhemētes of the curſyd men. ¶The ſixthe is ye true coū
                     tynge of the yeres and as to that it is to be knowe / that there were .viii. maner of nombryng or coūtynge of the yeres. Thre after the Hebrewes. Thre after the Grekis. One after ye Ramayns· And one nowe after the cryſten men. The Hebrewes thre maner of wyſe begyn̄eth theyr yere. After the Hebrewes there is the yere vſuall / begynnynge at Ianuary / the whiche they vſe ī couenaūtes & bargēs makyng. And the yere leyfull begynnyng at Marche / ye whiche they vſe in theyr cerymonyes. And the yere Emergens from May begynnynge whan they went from Egypt. they vſe in theyr cronycles & calculacions. ¶The Grekis nombreth theyr yere thre manere of wyſe. Fyrſt to ye glory & Ioye of theyr victory / coūteth theyr yeres from the deſtruccyon of Troy The fyrſt / the ſeconde / the thyrde / the fourth &c. ¶Thenne after the chyualry beganne at the hylle of Olympus / they notefyed ye yeres after the ſame Olympyadū. And what Olympyades is / ye ſhall knowe after in ye boke. The thyrde / whā they begā to haue lordſhyp of all ye world they notefyed theyr yeres theſe maner of wyſe In ye yere of the regne of Grekys the .iiii. the .x. the: xv. &c. As it is open in ye boke of Machabeo
                        
                           
                        
                        rum
                      ¶Then̄e after the Romayns gouernynge ye worlde / counted & nombred theyr yeres (ab vr be condita) ¶The laſt of all Criſten men coū
                     teth theyr yeres from ye Incarnacyon of cryſt And bycauſe we ben Cryſten men we vſe moſte to nombre / from ye begynnynge of the worlde / vnto cryſt was borne. And fro Cryſte was borne vnto our tyme. And this ordre is obſerued and kepte in all the booke / of euery thyng in his place as it is ſayd before.
                  ¶Explicit Prologus.
               
               
                  ¶Hic incipit Fructus tempo
                        
                           
                        
                        rum
                     .
                  BYcauſe of this bokes made / to tel what tyme of ony thynge notable was. Therfore the begynnyge of all tymes ſhortely ſhall be touched. For the whiche after doctours it is to be knowen / that .iiii. thynges were made fyrſte / & in one tyme: & of one aege. That is to wyte / the heuen Imperyall / aūgels nature: ye matere of ye foure elemētes: & tyme. And that doctours calle: the werke of the creacyon: the whiche was made afore ony daye or nyght of the myghty power of god. And was made of nothynge. ¶Thenne after foloweth the werke of the dyuyſyon: the whiche was made in thre of the fyrſt dayes in whiche is ſhewed the hyghe wyſdome of the maker. ¶Thenne after foloweth the arayenge of this werke in the whiche is ſhewed the goodnes of the creature the whiche was made .iii. of the nexte dayes folowynge (Vt patꝪ clare in te
                        ••
                     u gen̄. primo) ¶The fyrſt day god made / & deuyded ye lyght from the darkeneſſe. ¶The ſeconde daye god made: & ordeyned the fyrmament: & deuyded the water from the water. ¶The thyrde daye god made in the
                        •
                      whiche he gadered ye waters in to one place: 
                        〈◊〉
                      erthe then appered. ¶The fourth daye god made: in the whiche he ordeyned the ſonne: ye mone & the ſterres & put them in the fyrmament. ¶The fyfth daye god made: in the whiche he ordeyned fyſſhes and foules: and grete whales in ye water. ¶The ſixte daye god ordeyned: in the whiche he made beeſt and man. ¶The ſeuenth daye god made:

and in that daye he reſted of al werkes that he hadde ordeyned / not as in werkynge beynge wery. But he 
                        •
                     eaſed to make mo newe creatures (Vide plura gen̄ .i.)
                  BE it knowē / that Adam ye fyrſt man / of whom it is wryten ī this fyrſt age next lowynge / lyued .ix.C. yere & .xxx. And he gate .xxxii. ſon̄es / & as many doughters.
                  
                     ¶Anno mundi .i. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatem v.M.C.lxxxxix·
¶Here begynneth the fyrſte aege durynge vnto the floode of Noy 
                           Adam Eua
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           depiction of Adam and Eve, the Tree, and the Serpent
                        
IN the fyrſt yere of the worlde the ſyxte day / god made Adam in the felde. Damaſc
                           •
                        n̄ & eua of one of his rybbes / puttyng thē in paradyſe. And bad them to kepe his cōmaūdemēt yt they ſholde not ete of ye fruyte of lyfe vnder ye payne of deth. And ye ſame day that they had ſynned: anone he caſte them out of paradyſe in to ye londe of curſydnes that they ſholde lyue there with ſwetynge & ſorowe tyl they dyed (Vide plura gen̄ .i.) ¶This Adam was an holy mā all the dayes of his lyfe / & grete penaūce dayly he dyd. And he cōmaūded his chyldren to lyue ryghtwyſly. And namely that they ſhold auoyde in all wyſe from the company of Cayn and his chyldren. Nor that they ſholde not marye with none of thē. ¶This mā Adā was oure fyrſt fader. And for one ſyn̄e he put vs oute of paradys. But thrugh his holy cōuerſacyon & penaūce / he gaue vs enſample to come to the kyngdome of heuen. And he that wyl not folowe his holy cōuerſacyō & exāple / for one ſyn̄e ryghtwyſly / he can not cōplayne on hym / as we do many. ¶Seth ſone to Adam was borne after the begynnynge of ye worlde .C. & .xxx. yeres / & lyued .ix.C. & .xii. But Moyſes ouerſkypped an hundreth of thoſe / in the whiche Abell wept in ye vale of Ploracyon nyghe Ebrō Thys Seth for the oyle of mercy to be go
                           •
                        en / wēte to paradys. Delbora was ſyſter to Abell Abell was ſlayn of cayn his brod. This Abell the fyrſt martyr began ye chyrche of god. This man after Auſtyn made the cytee of god / & he was ye fyrſt cytezyn of that cyte. And bycauſe that he was ryghtwyſe our lorde receyued his offeryng. ¶Calmana was ſyſter & wyf to Cayn. This Cayn was a curſed man / & he made ye fyrſt erthely cyte that euer ī this world was in the whiche he put his people for drede in ſo moche as he vſyd caryn & vyolēce. For he truſteth ſuche thyng to be done to hym as he dyd to other / therfore he put hym & hys ī to a ſyker place. Thys man ſlewe his brother Abell for enuye / & he was punyſſhed of god / and wandred aboute in a dyſpayre. And after was ſlayne of Lamath a blynde man.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mundi .iiii.C.xxxv. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē .iiii.M.ix.C.lxxiiii.
                     ENos of the lyne of cryſt lyued .ix.C. yere & .v. This Enos began to call the name of our lorde. It myght happe be foūde ſome wordes of prayer / or made ſome ymages for god to be worſhypped / as now is in ye chyrche ¶Chanam lyued after .ix.C. yere and .x.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mundi .vii.C.lxxxxv. Et ante natiuitatem .iiii.M.iiii.C.iiii.
                     MAlaleel of the lyne of cryſte lyued .viii.C.lxxxxv. yere ¶
                           •
                        areth of the ſame lyne lyued .ix.C.lxii. ¶Enoch of the ſame lyne lyued .iiii.C. yere .lxv. This Enoch was a ryghtwys man / & pleaſed god. And for his grete holyneſſe our lorde tranſlated hym in to paradyſe where he lyueth with Hely / in grete reſte of body and ſoule / tyll ye comynge of Antecryſt Then they ſhall go forthe for ye comfortacyon of good men. And they ſhall be crowned with the crowne of martyrdome.
                     
                        MAtuſalē of Cryſtys lyne: lyued .ix.C. lxix. yeres. This matuſale was the oldeſt mā that euer ony ſcrypturs hath mynde of For whā he had lyued nyghe fyue hondred yere: our lord ſayd to hym Buylde the an hous & thou wyle: for yet thou ſhalt lyue .v. hondred yere. And he anſwered & ſayd. For ſo lytel a tyme as .v. hondred yere. I wyll buylde no hous But reſted vnder trees and hegges: and there ſlept / as he was wonte to do for a tyme.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mundi .M.iiii.C.liiii. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē .iii.M.vii.C.xlv.
                     LAmeth was of aege vii. hōdred .lxxvii. This Lameth the fyrſt agaynſt nature & good maneres ordeyned that a mā myghte haue two wyues / in doyng his auowtry. And he was ſore punyſſhed of them / for they gaue hym many a grype For it is ſo that bi what thī
                        ge a man ſen̄eth / by the ſame he is punyſſhed. This Lameth ſlewe Cayn wylfully not. But whan he was olde & blynde / he was ladde of a childe ye whiche trowed that he had ſeē a wylde beſte & ſayd to his mayſter that he ſholde ſhote & ſo he ſlewe Cayn. wherfore he bete the childe ſo ſore that the childe alſo was deed ¶And it is to be knowē that al craftes / or ſcyēces lyberal or hande craftes / or of phyſyke ſeruyng to the curyoſyte of man are redde that they were foſtden of ye childern of Lameth and for they dradde the perylle to come of the flood & of the fyre therfore Tuball graued ye ſame craftes ī two pylers. The one was of Marbyll / the other of 
                           •
                        yle or brycke. ¶Tuball foūde fyrſt the crafte to werke golde & ſyluer / & yren. And was ye fyrſte grauer that euer was ¶Iabe foūde firſt Tē
                        
                        
                           •
                        oria for ſhepherdes / and pauelyons for other men. ¶Iuball founde fyrſte the crafte to playe vpon an harpe and organs and other muſycall Inſtrumentes he vſid. ¶Nocma founde fyrſt ye crafte for to weue lynnen & wollen clothe / and to drawathredes of wulle and flexe. And afore that tyme / the people vſed the ſkynnes of beſtes for ther clothes.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mundi .M.vi.C.xlii. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē .iii.M.v.C.lvii.
                     THe ſhyppe of Noe hadde in length .iii. hondred cubytes / in brede .l. in altytue
                        
                           •
                        . (Vide plura geneſis .vi. ¶Knowe ye after 
                           •
                        uctours that a cōuenyent payne this tyme was ordeyned to the worlde. For thenne lechery habūded the whyche defouled mannes body. And there by water ye erth was waſſhed & clēſed in ſygne of the promyſe that god made to mā that there ſholde neuer be ſuche a flood agayne ¶And the Raynebowe hath two pryncypall coloures the whiche repreſente the two Iugementꝭ The water colour repreſēteth the flood that is paſſyd the fyre colour betokeneth the Iugement to come / & fyre / by that whyche we certēly aby
                           •
                        e ī the ende of thꝭ world by cauſe couetyſe ſhal haboūde by fyre it ſhal be brente Golde & ſyluer by ye fyre is wonte to be clēſyd.
                  
                  
                     ¶Here begynneth the ſeconde aege of the worlde durynge to Abram
                     
                         
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           depiction of Noah's ark
                        
THis Noe was a ryghtwys mā & foūde grace ayēſt god whā Noe was fyue hō
                        dred yere of aege he had gotē Chā. Sem. & Iapheth that tyme bi ye cōmaūdemēt of god he began to make a ſhyppe. & he made it parfyte in

an .C. yere. And the .C. yere complete / our lord god appered agayne to hym / & cōmaūded him that he with his wyf & his childern & ye wyues of them ſhold entre the ſhyppe with all maner of beſtes / & all maner of foules alſo. &c̄. ¶And anone the flood came / & ſtode aboue all hylles xv. cubyte (Vide plura gen̄ .viio) ¶After the flood a greate dronkeneſſe betyde vnto Noe. & through occaſyō of that drōkeſſe he bleſſyd his two ſones. Sem & Iaphet / for the faders honour that they had to hym & for ye honeſt ſhame that they couered mekely ther fader membres whan he was ſlepynge. & his ſone Cham / for his ſcornynge & his vnreuerence / he curſyd. ¶And here after ſaynt Auſtyn is made / ye fyrſte mencyon of boūdage / & of noblyneſſe contrary to it· For Noe ſayd that Chā ſhold be ſeruaūt in bondage to Sem & Iaphet / for his vnreuerēce. Neuertheles ye ſhall not trowe / that all that deſcēded of Cham were vnnoble mē & of no power. For they began fyrſt to be myghty men of ye erthe. As it is open of Nemroth & the kyng of Canaan & Aſco
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                        . Nor all of Sem & Iaphet were vertuous & noble & myghty mē whan almoſt euerche one fell in to the cryme of ydolatry / and were ofte tymes oppreſſed of other men. But this bleſſynge & this curſyng hath a reſpect to vertue & vyce / for ye whiche a man is called truly a noble mā or an vnnoble man. For he that is vertuoꝰ is a noble mā & he that is vnuertuous is not noble. the ſame maner of wiſe tho that foloweth ye faith of abrahā rathar were called his childern than ye Iewes the whiche carnally deſcēded frō hym. Neuertheles they had a ſpyrytuall preuelege of god / for the faders merytꝭ & his bleſſyng. & theſe .iii ſones oe Noe he beynge alyue after thy ſtory of Phil
                           •
                        īs were born .xxiiii.M. & .vii.C. mē wythout wym̄en & childern. And they had on thē thre prynces Nemroth. Iactan. & Suphen.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mundi .ii.M.ii.C.xlii. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē .ii.M.vi.C.lvii.
                     SEm ſone to Noe / the ſeconde yere after the flood gate Arpharat / & other whyle he is called Melchiſedeth The whiche fyrſt after the flood made the cyte of Salem / & now it is caled Ieruſalem ¶Cham his broder opteyned Affricam / & gate ſones tweyne. Chus and Meſrayam. And the two gate ſones & doughters / & many a regyon was of them & many of them to vs ben vnknowen. For they enhabyte & haue theyr manſyons in ye occydentall ynde. ¶Iaphet was broder vnto Cham / & was bleſſyd of his fader / & this Iaphet had .vii. ſones. as Gomor. magog. Maday. Ianam· Tuball. Maſog. & Iras. And theſe .vii. gate ſones & doughters / & of them came many a regyon (Vide p
                           ••
                        a Gen̄ .xv.) ¶Arpharat ſone to ſ
                           •
                        m lyued .CCCC. & .xxx. yere. And gate Elam. Aſſure. Ludde / & Aram / & they gate many a ſone & doughter (vt pꝪ gen̄) ¶This Aſſur / by cauſe he wolde not rebell ayenſt god. in the edefyenge & buyldynge of ye toure of Babylon / as Nemroth dyd therfore he was dryuen vnto ye londe of Sennaars londe / whyche was ryght ſtraunge to hym & was not afore enhabyted / The whiche was called after his name Aſſuria. And there he edefyed & buylded a cyte afterwarde named Niniue / ye whiche was Metropolon of all the kyngdom of Aſſuriū. ¶Chus ſone to Cham was fader to Nemroth. Thys Nemroth was a gyaunt of .x. cubytes longe. & he began to be myghty in ye worlde & he is called a boyſtous hunter afore god This man begā that wretched vyce of coueytouſneſſe by hꝭ tyranny / with the whiche vyce euermore after this worlde is fulfyled. And the pryncypaleſt kyngdom that he had was Babylon. & he had Archade. Ediſſa. Selencia / & the londe of Sennaar. ¶Sale ſone to Arpharat lyued .cccc. & .xxxiii. yeres. & of hym in ſcrypture is no thynge wrytē but that Moyſes nombred hym ī the lyne that cometh of cryſte. Thꝭ Sale gate a ſone that was named Heber The whiche after ye Hebrewes had the ſpyryte of prophecye. And of this Heber ye Hebrewes ben named. For the Hebrewes tonge bode alone in his hous in the confuſyon of the lāgage And that lāgage was called mānes langage / the whiche euery man vſed afore the toure of Babyloa was buylded ¶This Heber hadde two ſones / and one was called Iectan thrughe enſample of Nemroth decenſendynge from Cham toke the Pryncehode vpon the childern of Sem. And he hadde .xiii. ſones. But theſe people after Ierom are not knowen of vs / for ferneſſe of the coūtree / or muta
                           •
                        yon & chaungynge of the people / or elles of ſome other manere cauſe.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mūdi .ii.M.vi·C.xliii Et ante xp̄i natiuitatem .ii.M.v.C.lvi.
                     
                        
                        
                           ¶Turris Babylonis.
                        
PHaleg lyued two .C. & .xxxix. yeres this phaleg was the yonger ſone of Heber / & ī his dayes was made the confuſyon of langages For in his hows abode the olde tonge al oule / & yt was Hebrewe. wherfore after Saynt Auſtyn / in hym apered a greate ſtedfaſtneſſe of right wyſnes For this hous was free of that payne / As not cōſētynge to the buyldynge of the toure. (
                           •
                        t ſecundū Aug) there was .lxxii. generacōns / & ſo there were .lxxii. langage. ¶Iacta
                           •
                         oder to Phaleg Sem Nemroth prynce of Cham Sulphen of Iaphet / theſe thre prynces with there peple gadred thē to gyder in ye felde of Sennaar / dredynge ye 
                        
                           ••
                        ood to come ayen ſayd. Lette vs buylde a toure / of the which: ye hyght ſhall reche to heuen &c. Gen̄. xii. Our lord ſawe the folyſſhnes of the people. Maruayllouſly for ye payne of ther ſynne / he confoūded the tonge of thē. ī ſo moche that none vnderſtode what an other ſayd. And ſo they were diſperpled & aſondred by all ye worlde. ¶Of the malyce of thys Nemroth bokes ben wryten full ¶And after the cōfuſyon of ye langage he went to the londe of Pertees / & there he enſtrocte & taught them to doure & worſhyp ye fyre as god. And he left his ſone Belus in Babylon / the whyche Belus ſu
                           •
                        ceded hym. And ſo from thens his progenye opteyned ye kyngdom / vnto the tyme of many a yere after. ¶In this tyme began many kyngdoms. & the moſt of thoſe kyngdoms was the kyngdome of Scitarum. But there were ſoo many rude & boyſtous people in it / that cyte was neuer hadde in worſhyp. And it was a ſtronge and a myghty regyon of dyſtaū
                        ce. ¶And about this tyme began the kyngdome of Egept / the whiche with dyuers and many alteracyons often tymes was chaunged· alſo it is ſpoken of many tymes in ſcrypture ¶Noblyneſſe or gentylmen about this ſayd tyme beganne. And this noblyneſſe or gentylmen was ordeyned for many cauſes. ¶The fyrſt cauſe was neceſſyte. For whan makend drewe ſore & men were prompte & redy to doo euyll. it was very neceſſary / to withſtande the greate malyce of the curſyd people / agaynſte good men Ther of a man is called a gentylmā or a nobleman / as before other in vertues notable. ¶wher of Ierom ſayth. I ſee no thynge elles in nobleſſe or ī gentylmen bute that they are bounden in a creteyn neceſſyte / that they ſhall not recede fro the vertue / and the gentylneſſe of ther noble auncetours. ¶The ſeconde was the dyuers worſhyppynge of the people. For no man worſhypt thenne / but as hys naturall reaſon gaaf. And they knewe not ryghtwyſly what they ſholde worſhyp / all thoughe they lyued peaſyble amonge themſelf For they were ſo dull of wytte / that they coude pondre no grete thynge / but ye was publyſſhed by the comyn people. wherfore it was expedyent for ther peas be kept that they ſholde haue princes of noble byrth. ¶The thyrde cauſe procedeth of ſome ſynguler ſtrength. Many tymes the comynalte were greued thrugh enmyes comynge vpon them. And then they ſayd ye who ſomeuer wolde deffende & kepe them from theſe peryles / he ſhold haue the ryght of nobleneſſe for hym & his heyers for euer more & in thys maner of wyſe many are radde to be noble mē ¶The fourth cauſe of noblyneſſe / was grete haboundaunce of goodes. Somtyme the people we holdē with grete penury of mete & drynke. And then they toke them and theyrs to ſome ryche man / that thrugh that couenaunte / they ſ
                           •
                        old tempre the grete ſtraytneſſe of ther hungre / and after that they ſhold knowe hym as theyr lorde and a noble man. ¶Alſo there be founde certen noble men by the prouyſyon of god / thoughe they were but fewe of the whyche ſome abode in vertue / as Dauyd: and ſome fayled anone: as Saull and Ieroboam. Alſo it is radde: that many were noble men by tyranny and vyolence. Of the whyche ſome

were deſtroyed anone. And ſome abode in ſtableneſſe / as Paynymes myght.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mundi .ii.M.ix.C. & .v. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē .ii.M.ii.C.lxxxiiii.
                     SAruk lynelly deſcended from our forn fader Adam to Abraham And Nachor was ſone / & he lyued an houndred and .xlviii. yere. ¶And aboute this tyme ydolatry began to encreace myghtely. And yf ye reuolue & loke the hyſtoryes / ye ſhall fynde that thre thynges pryncypally brought men to the ſynne of ydoly. That is to vnderſtonde. the affeccyon whyche theg had to deed men. Dredde & flaterynge agaynſt ther prynces. And the dylygence of artyfycers & crafty men about ſcultures or grauynges. wycked fendes thenne entred in to ye ydollis / and gaue anſweres to the people And theſe wycked ſpyrytes confermed the erroure of the peple myghtely. In ſo moche / that what ſome euer manere of perſone / wolde not conforme hym to the reaſon / he ſholde greuouſly ſuffre the payne of deth. Alſo there was added and put to theſe thynges the dyſceyuynge laude and prayſynge of Poetes / the whiche wretches and alſo dampned men in to heuen with alle theyr gaye aourned wrytynges exalted / And that ſame tyme / whanne deuylles beganne for to ſpeke / ſo fayrly and ſo mekely to man The good lorde of his greate and abundaunt mery / ſente his aungelles / That they ſholde ſpeke to hys elected men in vyſybly / leeſt that all man kynde ſholde peryſſhe wyth thys myſcheuous errour.
                     BElus ſone to Nemroth this tyme was kynge of Babylon. And he was ye fyrſt kyng of this world / & this man was he whom the errour of the people fyrſt trowed / ſhold be a god / wherfore dyuers people named hym dyuerſly. And ſome called hym Bell / ſome Baal ſome Baalim / ſome Beelphagor / & ſome Belſabub And this vnhappy errour ſtode in man kynde more than two .M. yeres. ¶Ninus ſone to Belus the ſeconde kynge of Babylon of aſſuriorū / regned .liiii. yeres. And thys Ninus deſyred for to haue lordſhyp & worſhype and to that entēt that he myght be lorde of all ye coūtre about hym / he gaue batayll to all that dwelled nyghe about hym. And by cauſe that tyme the people were rude and had not the comynge of yght ynge nor armour / anone he ſubdued vnto hym all Aſiam. And there was made the fyrſte Monarche in the eeſt party. And whan his herte was ſory for the deth of his fader Belus / he made to be made to hym for his cōforte an ymage of his fader. to whom he gaf ſo myghty reuerēce that what ſomeuer gylty mā had fledde to that ymage ther ſhold no mā do vnto hym no hurte / and he pardonned hym of all his treſpaſſe· And thrugh his enſample many a man began to worſhyp the deed ymage / of theyr dere frendes. Thenne theſe malycyous ſpyrites ſeynge the curyoſyte of the peple / hydde them within them / and gaaf anſweres vnto the peple / and ſayd they were goddes. And cōmaunded them to doo reuerence vnto them as goddes Thꝰ that vnhappy ſynne of ydolatry was brought in / the whiche repugned myghtely to goddes mageſte. And in ſo moche this madneſſe grewe. that he ſhold ſuffre the payne of deth that ſayd / they were men but goddes.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mūdi .iii.M.C.xiiii. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatem ii.M.lxxv.
                     THare ſone to Nachor lyued .ii.C. & .v. yere. this Thare after ye deth of Aram went frome Vr of Calde / & paſſed in to Chartam with his childern & his neuewes And it is ſayd / by cauſe he wolde not worſhyp the 
                           〈◊〉
                         as Nemroth had taught he was banyſſhe
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         coūtre. And the comyn opynyon of the Hebrewes is Nemroth regned there the whiche was called an other name Amraphel the kynge of Sennar / whom longe tyme after this Abraham ouercame Vt dicitur Gen̄. xiiii.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mūdi .iii.M.C.lxx
                           ••
                        iii. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatem .ii.M.xv. ¶Here begynneth the thyrde arge of the wrolde durynge to Dauyd. 
                     
                     
                         HEre begyneth the deuoute & holy ſtorye of holy patryarkes ye whiche worſhype the very god / & in ther worſhyppyng they caughte it (vide pla gen̄. xii. vſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ad finē
                        
                           •
                         ¶This Abraham a faythfull louer of god was born ye xliii. yere of Ninꝰ kyng of Babylon. & knowe ye that ye .lxxiv. yere of Abrahā thorugh ye myghty glorye of ye hye god. The worde of mercy deſcēded vpon mākynd / for then he gan appere the oraculus of ye promyſe of god 
                           •
                        vide Au. xvi. de ci. dei. Itm̄ gen̄. xv. For this tyme holy aūgels appered to vs in forme of mankynde. ¶This Abraham had two brethern. Aram & Nachor. and Aram gate Loth a ryghtwys mā & an holy. & he deſerued to be vyſyted with aū
                        gles

                        
                           depiction of Abraham
                         as his vncle Abraham was· And for this Loth abraham ſmote .iiii. kyngꝭ / for they toke Loth (gen̄. xiiii. Of whom one was ſayd to be Nemroth but he is called here amraphel. And Abrahā had many wyues / as Sara & Agar. & his childern & his brethern had many childern But for vs that write cronycles it is not neceſſary / to ſpeke of all men / but of ye noble faders (ſed vide pla 
                        
                           •
                        ine gen̄) ¶Melchiſedech this tyme was kyng of Salē. This man was called a ryght wys kyng / for his excedynge holyneſſe And he offred bred & wyne to Abrahā in ſygne of a gret myſtery. He was alſo the preeſt of the hye god. ¶Semiramis ye thyrde kyng of Babylon / he ordeyned an army / & went into ynde & opteyned that coūtre. And ſo by all Aſyā / the kyngdom of Aſſurio
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                         was dilated. & he multiplyed ye cyte of Babylon myghtly. & made walles about it. This Semiramis had a wyf & he forſoke her & it is wrytē that ſhe was ſlayne of her ſone Ninꝰ / by cauſe ſhe prouoked hym to the vnlefull cōcupyſcēce (ſic di. Au. viii.dcci. dei.) & ye mayſter ī hꝭ ſtoryes ſayth that ſhe wedded hir owne ſone & he gate a childe on her / the whiche ordened babylon / to be ye heed of al his reame. ¶Ninus the fourth kyng of Babylon was ſone to grete Ninus. Of this man lytell is wryten but that he ſlewe his owne moder as is ſayd afore ¶Arrius was the fyfth kyng of Babylon. And vnder hym was borne yſaac.
                     
                        
ALſo yſaac ſone of Abraham / of ye lyne of Cryſt / lyued .C.lxxx. yere. this yſaac had a wyf called Rebecca & on her he gate two ſones Eſau & Iacob. This Eſau ſolde his he rytaūce to his broder Iacob. & he was ye fader of Idumeo
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                         / & he had in poſſeſſyon ye hylle of Seyr / & put fyrſt marys to aſſes wher of was engēdred mules. ¶About this tyme .xxx. lord ſhyps & Gomorra for ther horryble ſyn̄e were ouerthrowen. the wyf of Loth / lokynge backwarde torned in to a ſalt ſtone / ſheweth ye noo man in the waye of delyberacyon ſhold deſyre thynge paſt (hec Augꝰ de ciuitate dei)
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mundi .iii.M.iii C.xliiii. Et ante xp̄inatiuitatē .M.viii.C.lvi.
                     IAcob lyued .C.xlvii. yere. This Iacob had four wyues or ſome cōcubines that is to wyte. Lyam Balam▪ zelphā & Rachel Lyam was ye fyrſt wyf / & ſhe was bler
                           •
                        eyed. And ſhe bare hym .vi. ſones Iudas. Ruben. Syme
                        
                           •
                        n. Leuy· yſachar. zabulon / & a doughter ye hyght dyna. Bala ſeruaūt to Lya & cōcubyne to Iacob / bare hym two ſones. Dan & neptalim ¶Rachel ye ſeconde wyf to Iacob was barayne longe tyme / & at ye laſt ſhe bare hym two ſones. Ioſeph & Beniamyn zelpha ſeruaūt to rachel bare Iacob two ſones. Gad & Aſer / & eueryche of theſe made a trybe / of whō in this place it is not neceſſary to ſpeke (vide plura gen̄) ¶Ioſeph ſone to Iacob was borne lxxxx. yere of his fads aege / & he lyued .C.i. yere. ¶zerſes this tyme was kyng of babylon vnder whom was borne Iacob / & was ye .vii. kyng of Babilon. ¶Armauirre was kyng after him. & after ſaynt auſtyn ī that mānes daies our lord appered to yſaac / promyſynge hym thoſe thynges the whiche he promyſed to his fader. ¶Belocꝰ the .xi. kyng of Babylon was after this man. And vnder Belocus / or in this tyme our lorde

ſpake wyth Iacob / promyſynge hym / that he hadde promyſed to his fader / the whiche were two. The poſſeſſyon of the londe of promyſſyon & Canaan / & the benedyccyon of all ye people in his ſeed / ye whiche is our lorde Iheſu cryſte. Abraham about this tyme deceſſyd / & was buryed in hebron. ¶Inachus the fyrſt kynge that euer was in Grece was this tyme: for thē ye kyngdom begā. ¶Phoromius was ye kyng after hym / & he ordeyned lawes to ye grekis. &c̄
                     
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mundi .iii.M.iii.C.iiii. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē .M.vii.C.lxxxxix.
                     IVdas ſon̄e of Iacob deſcēded of hym / & of this trybe of Iudas came the kynges progeny / & at laſt Cryſt our lorde. Iudas gate Phares / & Phares Eſron / & of theſe men lytel is had inſcrypture / but Math reherſeth them. ¶Beleus in this Pares dayes was kynge of Aſſurio
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                         / or of Babylon & he was the .x. kyng vnder whom yſaac deceſſed. ¶Athlas the grete aſtronymyer was alſo the whiche is ſayd to bere vp heuen on his ſholdre / for ye very knowledge of the ſterres. ¶Sarapis was ye thyrde kyng of Arguio
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                         or of Greco
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                         & this Sarapꝭ was called otherwyſe Apis / & he came in to Egypte with a myghty nauy / & there deceſſed & was made of ye blynde gentyles ye egypcyens the greteſt god amonge them. Aand that tyme began a meruaylous ſuperſtycyon in ydolatry of a calfe of two coloure whiche they called Apē / & that calfe dyed / ye deuylles procured a lyke calfe to that / for to be made / that they myȝt deceyue the rude peple / & aft
                           
                              
                           
                           er
                         that it came that the chyldrē of Iſrael dyd on the ſame wyſe (vt pꝪ) And what thynge coude be more wretched or folyſſhe ī mā hauyng reaſō. ¶Argus was the fourthe kynge of Grekis / after whom the noble cyte of Argus toke his name. Cyeropis edefyed Athenes ī Grecia / & this 
                           ••
                        te was the nou
                           •
                        yſſher of lyberal ſcyēce 
                           •
                         & of many phyloſophers / yet they were deceyued by deuylles / & grete ſuperſtycyoſyte in the cyte was made (vide augꝰ et mirabilē fabulā reperies (¶Omogires the fyrſte man put oxen to the ploughe. ¶Belus this tyme was kyng of Babylon / & he was the .x. kynge of the regyon / & vnd hym deyed yſaac: ¶Pharao was kynge of Egypt whiche receyued Ioſeph / & exalted hym for the interpretacyon of his dremes (vide ſcientiam palcherrimā
                        
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         hiſtoriam. gen̄. xlii. &c. ¶Amithus was the .xii. kynge of Babylon / vnder whom dyed Ioſeph a bleſſyd man in chaſtyte. ¶Pharao Emonophis aboute Eſdroms dayes was kynge of Egypt / & this Pharao know not Ioſeph ne none of his lygnage & he cōmaū
                        ded ye 
                        chyldn of Iſrael to be drowned / as it is had (Exodi .i.) ye clerkes may loke that booke and we laye wyl loke to cronycles / but aboute this tyme the ſtory of Exodi began.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mundi .iii.M.v.C.xliiii. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatem .M.vC.lx.
                     ARam ſon̄e to Eſrom of the lyne of criſt was about this tyme & he gate Aminadab. Naaſon / of theſe men letell is wryten in ſcrypture & therfore I procede to other maters ¶Iob that holy man & of al pacyēce enſāple about this tyme was borne / of the lyne of Nachor the broder of Abraham / & he lyued many yeres: & after that god had viſyted hym: & had aſſayed his pacyēs / he lyued an .C. & .xl. yere ꝑ ang. greg. & .lix) ¶Moyſes aboute this tyme was borne / & the chyldrē of Iſrael were ī grete trybulacyō & bondage. & Moyſes was put in the water to be drowned. ¶Aron aboute this tyme was borne. ¶Dafrus was kyng of Babylon & was the .xiiii. kynge / and Moyſes was borne vnder hym in Egypt. ¶Cycrops was the fyrſt kynge of Athenes. And after ſaynt auſtyn / that tyme many leſyng
                           •
                         were wryten / in the hyſtoryes of the Grekis the whiche comynly were leſſe than the comyn fame fa
                           •
                        
                        the / of a lytell thynge they wrote a grete ma
                           •
                        ere / bycauſe to ſhewe theyr connynge for there was the vnyuerſyte of Grekys.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mūdi .iii.M.vi.C.lxxviii. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē M.v.C.xi.
                     AMynadab ſon̄e to Aron / of cryſtes lyne was this tyme. Thys Amynadab fyrſt after moyſes with a full fayth / entred in to the reed ſee / & dredde not whan many a hondreth were ferde leſte they ſholde be drowned / and therfore he deſerued to brynge forthe the kynges lygnage / of whome deſcended our lorde Iheſu Cryſt. Moyſes was the fyrſt of Iſrael that euer was / & he was Iuge .xl. yere. This Moyſes was the moſt excellent prophete that euer god made / and the mooſt notable wryter of ſtoryes / & of his louynge heuen & erthe ſpekethe. For he ſawe almyghty god clerely face to face whiche in this frayl lyf was neuer foū
                        den

in ſcrypture but of hym & Poul thapoſtle ¶Aron ye fyrſt byſſhop lyued a .C.xxiii. yere / this Aron was called of god in to ye dignyte of the hye preeſt or of a byſſhop & was ordened ye eternal teſtamēt to himſelf & to al that come after hym for the gret power of preſthode. whā he was a .C.xxiii. yere of aege / he deceſſed and was buryed in the hylle of Hor. And his ſone Heleazarus ſucceded hym in ye byſſhopryche. ¶Pharao Boccaris this tyme was kynge of Egypt / & this Pharao wolde not here the cō
                        maūdement of god / ne delyuer the childern of Iſrael / wherfore he was punyſſhed with ten plages (Vt patꝪ exo) And after he with all his hooſt were drowned ī ye red ſee. Naſon ſone to Amynadab was prynce of the trybe of Iudas in the deſerte / and about this tyme the lawe of god was gyuen in the hylle of Synay / & the boke of Leuicici was wryte / and another booke was called Numerū / & the tabernacle was ordeyned. The boke of Deuteromanū was made. Balaam was prophete and was ſlayne.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mundi .iii M.vii.C.xxxv. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē .M.iiii.C.lxxiiii.
                     SAlmen of the lyne of cryſt was aboute thꝭ tyme / & had a wyfe that hyght Reab Moyſes about thys tyme deceſſed / the water of frome Iordan was drye. Ierico was take / the ſon̄e ſtode in the fyrmament Inmeuable (Hiſtoria li. Ioſue incipit. et Iudicū) Ioſue ſeconde Iuge of Iſrael was a myghty mā in batayll / & the fyrſt in deſerte he ouercame Amalech / & after Moyſes of god he was ordened iuge of Iſrael / of whom ye bataylles the werkes & the relygyous lyf / ye may ſee in ye boke of Ioſue wryten. ¶Eleazar was ye ſecōde byſſhop And he & Ioſue deuyded the londe of promyſſy on to the childern of Iſrael. And of hym deſcē
                        ded the byſſhops vnto cryſt / a fewe excepted. ¶Othonyell of ye trybe of Iuda / was ye thyrde Iuge. And thys man delyuered ye chyldern of Iſrael from ye oppreſſyō of the reame of meſopotamie / the whiche he ouercame in batayl This man toke Axam to his wyf / ye whiche aſked the vale londes aboue & beneth of her fad Calepth (vt pꝪ Iudicū .i.) ¶Aoth was ye four the iuge of Iſrael· This man ſubdued Eglon the kyng of Moab & delyuered the childern of Iſrael. This was a myghty man in batayl: & he vſed the one as wel as thother for his ryght honde. ¶About this tyme ye kyng of ytaly began. And many tymes theyr names ben chaū
                        ged: of the whiche progenyte of the Romayns more clerely is ſhewed. ¶Ian
                           •
                        s was ye fyrſt kyng of ytaly: & after warde of ye rude gētyles he was worſhyped as god: & they feyned hym to haue two faces. for they worſhypped his feeſt in ye begynnyng of the yere: as he were the ende of ye laſt yere. And the begynninge of the fyrſt. And of hym ye moueth of Ianuary hath his name. ¶Amictus was the .viii· kynge of Babylon vnder whom Ioſue deceſſed.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mūdi .iii.M.vii.C.lxxv. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē. M.iiii.xxiiii
                     BOos ſone to Salmon of ye lyne of cryſt was this tyme: but of hym is lytel wryten / but that Ma
                           •
                        he. nombred hym in ye Genology. As doctours ſaye / there was made ſkyppynge of names bytwyxt Boos & Obeth. For at the leſt betwyxt them were .ii.C.lxxii. yere / ye whiche tyme to one mā may not be referred and therfore here many thynges is ſpoken of or I come to ye lyne of cryſt agayne) Nicholaꝰ de lyra dicit qd ſūc .iii. boos vnꝰ poſt alium) ¶Sāgar was ye .v. Iuge of Iſrael / but he lyued no yeres. ¶Dolbara was ye .vi. Iuge / thꝭ Dolbora was a womā / & for ye grace of her ꝓphecy / was gyuē to her honour that ſhe Iuged Iſrael. She by the cōmaūdemēt of god called Baruch that he ſhold go fyght with ye enemyes of Iſrael / & ye chyldren of Iſrael gate ye vyctory agaynſt Iabyn ye kyng of Chanaan & Cizaram ye prynce of his chyualry & he deſtroyed them (vt ptꝪ iudicū .iiii) ¶Phenies was byſſhop / & this Phenies yet a yonge man for goddes ſake ſlewe many lecherous men / & therfore our lorde was pleaſed with hym. ¶Saturnus this tyme was kynge of yealy & he was ye ſecōde kyng there / this Saturnꝰ is ſayd / to come fro ye londe of cretens in to ytaly / who by ydolatry & thrughe a maruaylous blyndenes they ſayd he was no man but a god. & yet they ſayd that he regned vpon them as theyr kyng And he taught men to dounge theyr feldes. And of Saturnꝰ ye Romayns were called Saturniani. Picꝰ was ſon to ſaturnꝰ & or he was kyng ī ytaly he was kyng ī larētin / & after his dethe / he was worſhyped of ye gētyls for a god
                  
                  
                     Anno mundi .iii.M.viii.C.lxxv. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē. M.iii.xliiii.
                     
                        GEdeon ye .vii. Iuge of Iſrael was thys tyme / this Gedeon ſubdued .iiii. kynges. Oreb. zebe
                           •
                        . zeb. and Salmana. And he ſubdued Madean to Iſrael. (Vide plura Iudicum .vi.vii. et .viii.
                     BOcci was byſſhop in Iſraell then. ¶Abimalech the .viii. Iuge in Iſraell was natural ſon̄e to gedeon. & he was not called of god / but malycyouſly tooke on hym the pryncehode of Iſrael. And he ſlewe lxx of hys brethern / wherfore he ended hys lyfe myſcheuouſly (Vt pꝪ iudicū) ¶Tola was ye .ix. Iuge in Iſrael. And this man guyded hym after the olde gouernaūce of Iuges / by the maner of dyreccyon & coūſell / more than by domynacyon ¶Bocci was byſſhop aboute this tyme / but of hym lytell is wryten. ¶Iayr the .x. Iuge of Iſrael had .xxx. ſon̄es whom he made prynces of .xxx. Cytees. And by cauſe they were goode men and ruled to the pleaſure of god. Therfore in the dayes of theſe two men. Iſrael drewe to our lorde. And therfore al thynge came and was in proſperyte and welthe.
                     FAnus was the .iiii. kynge in ytaly & he was kynge of larentin both. ¶Latinꝰ was kynge in ytaly after Fanus / & of this Latinꝰ was called ye kyngdome of Latino
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                        . And Carmentꝭ doughter of Euandri foūde fyrſte latyn letters. Tauranꝰ about this tyme was kynge of Babylon or of Aſſirio
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                         / & vnder this man Troy was dyſtroyed fyrſt. The occaſyō of the batayl of Troy began for a lytell thyng In ſo moche as Lamydon kynge of Troy receyued not Hercules & Iaſon with due honoure / as they ſholde haue receyued / & of ſo lytell a treſpaas / how many harmes & hurtes grewe. ¶Sibilla delphica afore the batayll of Troy prophe
                           •
                        yed / how a chylde ſholde be borne of a vyrgyn without mānes ſeed. ¶Lamydō kynge of Troy was ſlayne / & his doughter Roxoma was taken in to Grekys londe. For ye whiche foloweth myghty batayll & mooſt ferdfull myſcheues (vide hyſtoria troianam) Hercules with Iaſon deſtroyed Iliū or Troy ye whiche anone after was buylded of Pryamus ſon̄e to Lamydon. This Hercules dyd many merueylous thyngꝭ & many mighty bataylles. And infynyte leſynges ben fayned on hym. At ye laſt whan he had ouercome moche people / he was ſore hurte in warre. And whan he myght not ſuffre the payne of his ſore with the whiche he was greued. Hymſelfe he ranne in to the fyre / and whan he was deed / he was worſhypped amonge the goodes of ye Gentyles myghtely.
                  
                  
                     ¶Circa annū mūdi .iii.M.ix.C.lxxv. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē .M.ii.C.xxiiii.
                     AFter the dethe of Iayr Iuge of Iſraell the people of Iſrael added newe ſyn̄es to theyr olde. And our lorde toke them in to the power of Philiſtiens & to the chyldren of Amō xviii. yere. And they were gretely oppreſſed / & thenne they cryed to oure lorde. Then̄e Repte was eſpyed with almyghty god / and faught agaynſt Amon & ſedycyous peple of the hylle of Effraym. And for an vnprudent voys he ſ
                           •
                        ewe his owne doughter folyſſhly / & dyd ſacrefyſe to god with her (Iudicū .xi. et .xii. ¶Ozy this tyme was byſſhop in Iſrael / & he was of the ſeed of Aron / by ye lyn
                           •
                         of Eleazari ye whiche deyed / thrugh the prouyſyon of god ye byſſhopryche torned to the lyne of ythamar an .C & .xx. yere / in the whiche lyne He y was ye fyrſt hyghe byſſhop. And Ab
                           •
                        achar was the laſte. ¶Ebaſſam was Iuge in Iſrael .vii. yere & he was the .xii. Iuge / & he was named other wyſe Boos ye whiche wedded Ruth. ¶Abialon the xii
                           •
                        . Iuge of Iſrael was Iuge .x. yere. And vnder theſe tymes ye chyldren of Iſrael were quyete. And therfore none notable thynges were done in theſe dayes. ¶Abdon ye .xiiii. Iuge gouerned in Iſraell .viii. yeres. And aboute this tyme the hyſtorye of Ruth was wryten. ¶Authamanis this tyme was kynge of Aſſeri
                           •
                         & Priamꝰ kyng of troy ſon̄e to Lamido
                           •
                         ye buylded his cyte agayne merueylouſly ſtrōge. And began batayl with the Grekes vnto his owne hurte. And he had a ſon̄e was called Hector a leyffull gentyl ſon̄e by his wyfe Eccuba. This man was faythfull & wyſe & Incōparable of ſtrēgth & noblenes. This Priamus had an other ſon̄e that was called parys ye whiche toke away fro ye lōde of grekes helena wyf to me nelaiꝰ ye kyng. ¶Agamenon ye kyng brother to Menelaius the leder of al the Grekes hoſte faught agaynſt Troy / and at the laſte he wanne the Cyte falſly / and to the Grekes mooſte ſhame and ſclaunder that myght be. For certaynly that myght be called an vnhappy batayll where no man gyueth louynge to ye Grekes / but euery man reporteth ſhame.
                     
                        ¶Eneas was kynge of ytaly thre yere. And this Eneas after Troye was deſtroyed of the Grekes / that came īto ytaly with .xx. ſhyppes & dyde myghty batayles there. And this man had wedded Priamus doughter Elinſaram. And he was made a god thrughe the errour of the comyn people / & of this man came Iulius cezar & Octauianꝰ auguſtꝰ. ¶Vlixes an eloquent man amonge all ye Grekes / after many perylles on the ſee wente home to hys Penelopem. the mooſte faythfull & the mooſte chaſte woman that is radde of. And the Grekes peryſſhed wretchedly after that they had deſtroyed Troy / bothe on the water & on the londe as they wēte home warde ayen. ¶And that was ye pryncypal date of theyr wrytynge after that victory. For they wrote theyr hyſtoryes and other wrytynges (ſic āno primo. vel ſecūdo. &c̄. poſt Troiam captam) And that was the thyrde yere of abdon Iuge of Iſraell.
                  
                  
                     ¶Circa annū mundi .iiii.M.xxv. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatem .M.C.lxxiiii.
                     OBeth of cryſtes lyne ſone to Boosis reherced in Ma. ¶Sampſon the .xv. Iuge regned .xx. yere / this ſampſon was ye mooſt ſtrongeſt man that euer was / & he delyuered Iſraell from ye Philiſtiens / & fro his meruaylous ſtrengthe men trowed he had ben Hercules (et rius mirabilia oꝑa vide Iudicū .xiii.)
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mundi ·iiii.M.lx
                           •
                        v. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatem .M.C.xiiii.
                     IEſſe ſone to Obeth of the lyne of cryſte otherwyſe called yſay fad to dauyd this tyme lyued a notable man ī honeſte. No kyng 
                           •
                        egrete gouernour. But of hym many times is made mēcyon ī holy ſcrypture. For of hym deſcēded cryſt our ſauyour. ¶This tyme Ely was Iuge & byſſhop of Iſrael the whiche had two ſones Ophni & Phinees. & for he corrected thē not ſuffycyently / he & they were punyſſhed both of our lorde. For they were ſlayne of the Philiſtiens. And Ely felle of his ſete & brake his necke. This Ely was Iuge nexte after ſampſon & not of ye lygnage of Aran: that was fyrſt byſſhop of god electe / but of ythamar / ye lygnage dured an hundred & .xx. yere. In the whiche lygnage Ely was fyrſte byſſhop / and Abiathar the laſt (Vide plura primo regum)
                     THys tyme Saul was kynge in Iſraell after ye mayſter in his hyſtoryes / & Ioſephꝰ in his ·viii. boke. This Saul was fyrſte kynge in Iſrael / & regned .xx. yere / the whiche or he was kyng was a good mā & electe of god but after warde wretchedly he fayled: & he was ſlayne & his thre ſones in the hylles of Gylboy ¶In the tyme of Saull Samuel was Iuge & prophete in Iſrael / an holy man / & borne of a barayne moder many a daye. And he mynyſtred afore our lorde from a chylde to his aege. And was not hyghe byſſhop / but he Iuged Iſrael al the dayes of his lyfe. And was the very prophete of god. Two kynges he anoynted. Saul fyrſt / & after Dauyd. This ſamuel alone / & Moyſes are radde. that they prayed for theyr enemyes in al ye olde teſtamēt. Of this ſamuel & Saul be dyuers oppynyons. ¶Iſyder ſayth / that Samuel & Saul ruled Iſrael .xl. yere. ¶And Ioſepus in his .viii boke / & ye mayſter in his ſtoryes ſayth. Samuel to be Iuge .xii. yere alone. And after hym Saul to regne .xx. yere (Plura vide primo regū)
                     AScanius the .vii. kynge of ytaly was ſonne to Eneas / & buylded the cyte of Alby
                           •
                        n. And he was called ye kynge of Albano rū. This aſcanius gate Siluius the .viii. kynge of ytaly / the whiche Siluius was fader vnto Brute kynge of brytayne / nowe called Englōde. And I leue of ye kynges of ytaly: for they dyd but lytell noble thynges / tyll it be comen to Romulus & Remus yt buylded Rome. And then ſhall thoſe kynges come agayne / & nowe to procede to ye cronycles of Englonde / for the whiche namely this boke is made. ¶And Venes & Padua were buylded aboute this tyme / of the reſydue of the Troyans. ¶Homere the grete poete aboute this tyme was / the whiche wrote & fayned gloryouſly many a leſynge.
                  
                  
                     ¶Incipit regnū Britanie. nūc dicit
                           
                              
                           
                           ur
                         Anglia.
¶Here may ye ſe how London fyrſte began at Albyon 

                           Albyon
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        ¶Afore that I wyll ſpeke of Brute / it ſhall be ſhewed howe the londe of Englonde was fyrſt named Albyon / and by what encheſon it was ſo named.
                     
                     OF the noble londe of Sirrie / there was a ryal kynge & myghty & a man of grete renowne / that was called Dyocleſyā that wel & worthely hym gouerned & ruled thrugh hys noble cheualry. Soo that he conquered all the londes aboute hym / ſo that almooſt al the kynges of ye worlde to hym were attendaūt. ¶It befell thus that this Dyocleſyā ſpowſed a gentyl damoyſell that was wōder fayre / that was his vncles doughter Labana. & ſhe loued hym as reaſon wolde / ſo that he gate vpō her .xxxiii daughters / of the whiche ye eldeſt was called. A bine. And theſe damoyſelles whā they came vnto aege became ſo fayre that it was wonder wherof Dyocleſyan anone lete make a ſomonynge / & cōmaunded by his letters that all ye kynges that helde of hym ſholde come at a certayne daye / as in his letters were conteyned to make a feeſt ryall. At whiche daye thyther they came / & brought with theym Admyralles prynces and dukes / and noble chyualry. The feeſt was ryally arayed / and there they lyued in Ioye & myrth ynough / that it was wonder to wyte. And it befell thus / that Dyocleſyan thought to mary his doughters amonge al tho kynges that were at that ſolempnyte. ¶And ſo they ſpake & dyd / that Albine his eldeſt doughter & al her ſyſters rychely were maryed vnto xxxiii. kynges / that were lordes of grete honour & of power at this ſolempnyte. And whā the ſolempnyte was doone / euery kynge toke his wyfe & ladde them in to theyr owne coūtre & there made them quenes. And it befell thus afterwarde that this dame Albine became ſo ſtoute & ſo ſterne / that ſhe tolde lytell pryce of her lorde / and of hym had ſcorne & dyſpyte & wolde not do his wyll / but ſhe wolde haue her owne wyl in dyuers maters. And al her other ſyſters euery chone bare them ſo euyl agaynſt theyr lordes that it was wonder to wyte. And for as moche that thē thought that theyr huſbondes were not of ſo hyghe parentage come as theyr fad But thoſe kyngꝭ that were theyr lordes / wolde haue chaſtyſen them with fayre manere vpō al loue & frendſhyp that they ſholde amende theyr ſelfwylled condycyons. But all was for noughte / for they dyd theyr owne wyl in al thynge that thē lyked. & had of power. wherfore thoſe .xxxiii. kynges vpon a tyme and ofte tymes bete theyr wyues. For they wē
                        de that they wolde amende theyr tatches. And theyr wyckedneſſe. But of ſuche condycyons they were / that for fayre ſpeche & warnynge / they dyd all ye wors / & for betynges ofte tymes moche the wors. Wherfore the kynge that had wedded Albine wrote the tatches and condycyons of his wyfe Albine / and ſente the lettre to Dyocleſyan his fader. And whan the other kynges herde that Albines lorde hadde ſente a lettre to Dyocleſyan. anone they ſente letters ſealed with theyr ſeales the condycyons & tatches of theyr wyues. whan the kynge Dyocleſyan ſawe & herde ſo many playntes of his doughters. He was ſore aſhamed 
                           •
                         & became wonder angry and wrothe towarde his doughters and thought. howe he then̄e myght amende it that they ſo myſdyde. And anone ſente his letters vnto the .xxxiii. kynges that they ſholde come to hym: & brynge with theym theyr wyues euerychone at a certayne daye. For he wolde there chaſtyſe theym of theyr wyckedneſſe / yf he myght in ony maner wyſe. So the kynges came all at that tyme & day that then was ſette bytwene hym and the kynges. Dyocleſyan receyued them with moche honoure / and made a ſolempne feeſt to all that were vnderneth his lordſhyp. And the thyrde day after that ſolempnyte / the kynge Dyocleſyan ſente after his .xxxiii. doughters that they ſholde come & ſpeke with hym in his chābre. And whan they were come / he ſpake to them of theyr wyckednes & of theyr cruelte and ſpytefully them repreued & blamed / & to them he ſayde. That yf they wolde not be chaſtyſed / they ſholde his loue loſe for euermore. And whan the ladyes herde al this / they became abaſſhed & gretly aſhamed. And to theyr fader they ſayde / that they wolde make al amendes and ſo they departed out of theyr faders chābre. And dame Albine that was the eldeſt ſyſter ladde theym alto her chambre / & then made to voyde all that were therin ſo that no perſone was amonge theym but ſhe and her ſyſters togyder. ¶Then ſayd Albine. My fayre ſyſters wel we know that ye kynge our fader vs hath reproued ſhame and dyſpyſed / for bycauſe to make vs obedyen
                           •
                        
                        
vnto our huſbondes. But certes that ſhall I neuer whyles that I lyue / ſythe that I am come of a more hygher kyngꝭ bloode than myn huſbonde. And whan ſhe had thus ſayde / alle her ſyſters ſayd the ſame. And thē ſayd Albine well I wote fayre ſyſters that our huſbondes haue cōplayned vnto our fader vpō vs wherfore he hath vs thus foule reproued & diſpiſed wherfore ſyſter my counſell is / that this nyghte whan our huſbondes ben a bede / all we with one aſſente for to kytte theyr throtes and thenne we may be in peas of them And beter we now do this thynge vnder our faders power than other where elles. And anone all the ladyes conſented and graunted to this counſell. And whan nyght was comen / the lordes and ladyes went to bedde / And anone as theyr lordes were a ſlepe / they kette all theyr huſbō
                        des throtes / and ſo they ſlewe them all. whan that Dyocleſyan theyr fader herd of this thinge / he became furyouſly wrothe agaynſte hys doughters / And anone wolde them alle haue brente. But all the barons and lordes of Sirrie coūſeyled not ſo for to do ſuche ſtreytneſſe to his owne doughters / but only ſholde voyde the londe of them for euer more ſo that they neuer ſholde come ayen / and ſo he dyde. And Dyocleſyan that was theyr fader anone cōmaunded them to go in to a ſhyppe / & deliuered to thē vytaylles for half a yere· And whan this was done / all the ſyſters went in to the ſhyppe and ſaylled forthe in the ſee / & betoke all theyr frendes to Apolin that was theyr god. And ſo long they ſaylled in the ſee / tyll at the laſt they came and arryued in an yle / that was all wylderneſſe. And whan dame Albion was come to that londe & all her ſyſters. This Albyne went fyrſte forth out of the ſhyppe / & ſayd to her other ſyſters. For as moche ſayde ſhe as I am the eldeſt ſyſter of all this company / & fyrſt this londe hathe taken / and for as moche as myn name is Albine. I wyll that thys londe be called Albion / after myn owne name. And anone al her ſyſters graunted to her wyth a good wyll Tho wente oute all the ſyſters of the ſhyppe & toke the londe Albyon as ther ſyſter called it. And there they wente vp & downe / and foūde neyther manne woman / ne childe / but wylde beeſtes of dyuerſe kyndes. And whan the vytaylle were dyſpended & they fayled / they fedde them with herbes and fruites in the ſeaſon of the yere / and ſo they lyued as they beſt myghte. And after that they toke fleſſhe of dyuerſe beeſtes & became wonder fatte. And ſo they deſyred mannes company / and mannes kynde that thē fayled. And for hete they waxed wō
                        der courageous of kynde / ſo that they deſyred more mānes company than ony other ſolace and myrthe whā the deuyll that perceyued wē
                        te by dyuerſe countrees and toke a body of ye ayre & lykynge natures ſhed of men / & cam in to the londe of Albyon / & laye by tho wym̄en & ſhadde tho natures vpon them & they conceyued / & after brought forth gyaūtes. Of ye whiche one was called Gogmagog / and an other Longherigam And ſo they were named by dyuers names / & in this maner they came forth and were borne horryble gyaūtes in Albyon And they dwelled in caues and in hylles atte ther wylle And hadde the londe of Albyon as them lykyd / vnto ye tyme that Brute arryued and came to Tornes that was in the yle of Albyon. And there this Brute cōquered and dyſcomfyted the gyauntes aboueſayde.
                  
                  ¶Explicit prima pars.
               
               
                  ¶Here begynneth now how Brute was goten / & how he ſlewe firſt his moder / & after his fader. And how he conquered Albyon / that after he named Brytayne after his owne name that now is callyd Englonde after ye name of Engyſt of Saxonie. ¶This Brute came in to Brytayne aboute the .xviii. yere of Hely.
                  BE it knowen that in the noble cytee of grete Troy / there was a noble knyght & a man of grete power that was called Eneas. And whan the cyte of Troy was loſte & deſtroyed thrugh them of Grece. Thys Eneas wyth all his meyne fledde thēs & came to Lombardy. That thē was lorde & gouernoure of ye londe a kyng that was called Latyne. And an other kynge there was that was called Turocelyne / that ſtrongely warred vpon this kynge Latyne / that oftentymes dyde hym moche harme And whā this kynge Latyne herde that Eneas was come / he receyued hym with moche honour / & him with helde for as moche as he had herde of hym / & wyſt wel that he was a noble knyght & a worthy of hys body & of his dedes. This Eneas helped kyng Latyne ī his warre / And ſhortely for to telle / ſo well and ſo

worthely he dyde that he ſlewe Turocelyne / and diſcomfyted hym and all his people. And whan all this was done / kynge Latyne gaaf all that londe that was Turocelynes / to thys noble man Eneas in maryage wyth Lauyne his doughter ye mooſt fayreſt creatue that ony man wyſt. And ſo they lyued togyder in yoy
                        •
                      & myrthe all the dayes of ther lyftyme ¶And after Aſcanius ſone to Eneas wedded a wyf / & vpon her he gate a ſone that was called Silueyne. And this Silueyne whan he coude ſome reaſon of man / vnwetynge his fader and aenſt his wyll aqueyted hym with a damoyſell that was coſyn to Lauyne that was kynge Latynes doughter ye quene that was Eneas wyf / and brought the damayſell with chylde. And whan Aſcanius his fader it wyſt / anone lete enqueyre of ye wyſeſt mayſters & of ye gretteſt clerkes / what chylde the domoyſell ſholde brynge forth / & they anſwerde & ſayd / that ſhe ſholde brynge forth a ſone that ſhalde kylle bothe his fader & alſo his moder. And ſo he dyde. For his moder deyed in berynge of hym. And whan this childe was borne / his fader lete calle hī Brute And the mayſters ſayd that he ſholde do moche harme & ſorowe in many dyuers places / and after he ſholde come to grete honour and worſhyp. This kyng Aſcanius deyed whan god wolde / and Silueyne his ſone receyued the londe / & made hym wonderly well beloued amonge his people. And ſo whā Brute that was Silueynes ſone was .xv. yere olde / he wente vpon a day with his fader for to play & ſolace. And as Brute ſholde haue ſhot vnto an herte / his arowe myſhappe and glā
                     ced / and ſo there Brute ſlewe hys fader.
                  
                     ¶How Brute was dreuen out of the londe / and how he helde hym in Grece.
                     ANd whan this myſchaūce was befall all ye people of the londe made ſorowe ynough & were ſore an angred. And for enche ſon there of they droue brute out of the lōde / & wolde not ſuffre hym among them. And whā he ſawe that he myght not there abyde / he wē from thens in to Grece / and there he founde .vii. thouſande men that were of the lygnage and kynred of Troy that were come of grete blood as the ſtory telleth / as of men and wymmen and chyldern / the whyche were all hollde in thraldome and bondage of the kynge Pandras of Grece / for the dethe of Achilles that was betrayed and ſlayne at troy. This brute was a wonder fayre man and a ſtronge and a huge of his age and of gladde there and ſemblaunt / and alſo worthy of body / & was well beloued amonge his people. Thys kyng Pandras herde ſpeke of his goodnes & his condicions / and anone made hym dwelle wyth hym ſoo that brute became wonder preuy & moche beloued with the kynge / ſoo that longe tyme brute dwelled with the kynge So at the laſte they of Troy and brute ſpake togyders of kynred and of lygnage & of acquayntaunce / & there playned them vnto Brute of ther ſorowe & of ther bondage / & of many other ſhames that the kynge Pandras had them done. And vnto brute they ſayde vpon a tyme. ye be a lorde of our lygnage & a ſtrong man & a myghty 
                           •
                         ye be our capytayne & lorde / and gouernoure / & we wyll become your men / & your cōmaundemē
                        tes doo in all maner of thynges / & brynge vs out of this wretchedneſſe and bondage / & we wyll fyghte with the kynge for trouthe with ye grace of the grete god / we ſhal hym ouercome and we ſhall make you kyng of the londe and to you doo homage / and of you we ſhall holde euer more. Brute had tho grete pyte of theyr bōdage that they were brought ī. And preu
                           •
                        ly wente then from the kynges courte and tho them that were of Troy / wente and put them in to woodes and in to moūtaynes and them there helde. And ſente vnto kynge Pandras / that he ſholde gyue them leue ſauely for to wē
                        de out of the londe / for they wolde noo l
                           •
                        nger dwelle in his bondage. The kynge Pandras wexed tho ſore anoyed and tho ſwore that he ſholde ſlee them euerychone / and ordeyned a grete power and wente to warde them all for to fyght. But Brute and his men māly them defended and fyerfly fought and ſlewe all the kynges men that none of them eſcaped / and toke the kynge and helde hym in pryſon / and ordeyned counſell bytwen them what they myghte done And ſome ſayde that he ſholde be put to dethe / and ſome ſayde that he ſholde be exiled out of ye londe And ſome ſayd / that he ſholde be brēte. And tho ſpake a wyſe kynght that was called Mempris / and ſayd to Brute and to alle tho of Troy. yf kynge Pandras wolde yelde hym and haue his lyf. I counſell that he

gyue vnto Brute that is our duke & our ſouerayne / his doughter Gennogen to a wyf / and in maryage wyth her an hōdred ſhyppes well arayed / and all his treſoure of golde & ſyluer of corne & of wyne / & as moche as we nede to haue of 
                           •
                        o thyng & other. & then̄e go we out of this londe / & ordeyned vs a londe elles where. For we nenōe of our kynred that come after vs ſhall neuer haue peas in this londe amōge theym of Grece. For we haue ſlayne ſo many of ther knyghtes and of other frēdes that euer more warre and contake ſholde be among vs Brute tho and all his folke conſented well to that counſeyll. And this thynge they tolde to kyng Pādras. And he for to haue his lyf graū
                        ted as moche as they axed / and anone gaf vnto Brute Gennogen his doughter to wyfe / & an hondred ſhyppes with aſmoche / as them neded of all vytaylles / as afore was ordeyned Brute tho toke his wyfe and all his men / that forſoke the londe of Grece and went them vnto the ſee and had wynde & weder at theyr wyll and came ye thyrde daye in to an Ile that was called Lorgers. Thys Brute anone ſente of his men a londe for to eſpye the maner of the countree. And they founde an olde cyte all waſted and forlet that was ther in nother mā ne woman / ne no thynge dwellynge / and in the mydeell of this cyte they founde an olde temple of a fayre lady that was called Dyana the goddeſſe. And they came ayen vnto Brute & tolde hym what they had ſeen and foūde. And they counſelled hym to goo and doo ſacrefyce vnto dame Dyana / for ſhe was wōte to yeue anſwere of what euer men prayed her and namely vnto them that her honoured with ſacrefyce. Brute wente vnto that yamge and ſayd Dyana noble goddeſſe that all thynge haſte in thy myght and power / wyndes / waters. woodes / felde / and all thynge of the world / and all manere of beeſtes that theryn ben. To you I make my prayer / that ye me counſeyll and telle / where / and in what place: I ſhall haue a couenable dwellynge for me and for my people and there I ſhal make in honour of you a well fayre temple and a noble / wherin ye ſhall alwaye be honoured / whā he had done his prayer. Dyana anſwerd in this maner Brute ſayde ſhe go euen forth thy waye ouer the ſee in io Frauce to warde the weſt / and there ye ſhall fynde an yle that is called Albyon / & that yle is be compaſſed all wyth the ſee / and noo man maye come ther in but it be by ſhyppes and in that londe were wonte to dwelle gyauntes / but now it is not ſoo / but all wyldernes. And that londe is deſtenyed and ordeyned for you and for your people.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Corin became Brutes man / and how kynge Goffar was dyſcomfyted.
                     THenne whan Brute had this anſwere of Dyana the goddes. Anone he lete ye ancres wynde vp & ſayled in to the hyghe ſee. And whan he & his men had ſaylled .xx. dayes and moo / they foūde faſt beſyed a coſt of ye ſee a thouſande men of the lygnage & kynred of Troy. And ther ſouerayne & ther mayſter of all was called Corin· And whan Brute wyſte whens they were / he tho toke them wyth moche Ioye in to hys ſhyppes / and ladde theym forth wiht hym Thꝭ Corin there be came brutes man & to hym dyde homage. And ſo longe they ſaylled forth in the ſee tyll they cam vnto Gaſcoyne. And anone they arryued in the hauen of Lyegers & there they dwlled .viii. dayes them for to reſt. & ther ſaylles to amēde there that it was nede. Tydynges ſoone came to kynge Goffar that was lorde of that lōde howe that moche people of ſtraūge londe were arryued in to his lōde in ye hauen of Lyegres wherfore he was ſore angreged & anoyed / that they came and arryued in his londe wythout his lycence and his leue. And anone ordened hym a gret power for to dryue out brute & to deſtroye hym & all his people. But it was ſo that kyng Goffar was dyſcomfyted & all his peple. And hym ſelf fledde in to Fraūce / there for helpe & ſocour. And in that tyme regned in Fraunce ·xii. kynges / & an .xi. of them aſſembled a grete power for to helpe Goffar & for to fight ayeſt Brute. This Goffar dwelled with thē of fraū
                        ce halfe a yere & more. And in the meane tyme whan Goffar was in Fraūce. Brute and his company deſtroyed all the londe of Gaſcoyne and lete take all the treſour that kyng Goffar had / & there lete brynge it all in to his ſhyppes And this Brute founde in that londe a fayry place and couenable / & there brute made a fayre caſtel and a ſtronge. ¶whan that this was done / kyng Goffar came from Fraunce and .xi. kynges with hym and brought wyth hym

.xx.M. men for to fyghte with Brute and his company and Brute had but .vii.M. & .CCC men. And neuertheles whanne the two hoſtes mette togyder. Brute folke thorugh helpe of hymſelf: & of Turin his coſen: and of Corin ye well and manly hym defended: and fought ſo tyll that in lytell tyme they hadde ſlayne of the Frenſſhemen two thouſande & mo. Anone all that were alyue fledde awaye. And in this bataylle Turin Brutes coſyn was ſlayne. And Brute lete entere hym worthely whan he had ſpace & leyſer in the caſtell that he had made: & tho lete calle that ſame caſtell Toures: For by cauſe of the name of Turin that there was entred. And yet vnto this day there is a noble cyte that is called Toures. And kynge Goffar wyſte that Turin was deed he came agayne with his men: & after yaue a ſtronge bataylle vnto Brute. But brute & his men were ſo wery for fyghtynge: that they myght noo lenger endure: but to megre hym & all his. And then Brute yede in to his caſtell with his men: and made the gates faſte for to ſaue them: and for to take counſell amoage them what were beſt for to do. Brute and Corin gaaf counſell and ordeyned pryuely: that Corin ſholde go oute & buſſhe him ī a wood tyll on the morne ſoo that in the mornynge whan that Brute ſholde fyghte with his enemyes: thenne Corin ſhold come with his folke in the one ſyde: and ſlee and do all the harme that he myght. And in a mornynge in the dawnynge of the daye Brute wē
                        te out of the caſtell: and fyerſely faughte with his enmyes: and they manly deffended them. But within a lytell tyme Brute and his folke ſlewe .viii. hondred of kynge Goffars men. Thenne came Corin with ye buſſhement and ſmote to grounde he & his companye all thoſe that wolde ſtonde or abyde. So that the kyng Goffar & his cōpany were dyſcōfyted: & faſte they began to flee And brute & Corin with ther cōpany fyerſely them purſewed & ſlewe mo of them in ye fleynge than they dyd in ye batayll. And ī this maner Brute had the victory. and neuertheles brute made moche ſorowe for his coſyn Turī that there was ſlayne & other alſo that he haded loſt of his men. That is to ſaye. vii· hondred and .xv. The whiche nobly he entered in the ſame caſtell of Toures / there where he had entered Turin his coſyn.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Brute arryued at Totneſſe in the yle thenne called Albyon / and of the bataylle that was betwixt Corin and Gogmagog.
                     SO whan all this was done Brute wolde no lenger there dwell / for to fyghte / nor for to leſe no moo of his people. For kynge Goffars people myghte euery daye encreace / mo and moo. And Brutes loſſened. And therfore he toke all his men and wente vnto the ſee and had wende and weder at theyr wyll. And the fyfth daye after they arryued in an hauen at Totneſſe / and came in to the yle of Albyon And there neyther man nor woman as the ſtory telleth they founde but Gyaūtes. And they dwelled in hylles & in caues. And Brute ſawe the londe was fayre and at his lykynge. And was good alſo for hym and for his people / as Dyan a the goddeſſe hadde hym behyght. And therfore was Brute wonder gladde and lette aſſembled vpon a daye all his 
                           •
                        ol
                           •
                        e to make a ſolempne ſacrefyce and a grete feeſt in honour & reuerence of Dyana the goddeſſe of the whiche he hadde counſeyll fyrſte for to come in to this londe. And thenne whan that they hadde ther ſolempnyte done / as they vpon a daye ſate at ther meete / there came in vpon them .xxx gyauntes & ſlewe of Brutes men .xxx. Brute and his men anone ſtrete vp and faught with the gyauntes and ſlewe them euerychone excepte one that was called Gogmagog. & he was mayſter of all the Gyauntes. And he was ſtrō
                        ger and hygher than ony of other. And Brute kepte hym for by cauſe that he ſholde wreſtyll with Corin that was Brutes mā. Fo he was greter & hygher than ony of bruces men from the gyrdelſtede vp warde. ¶Gogmagog and Corin vndertoke there for to wreſtell. And ſo togyders they wente / and wreſtlyd a longe tyme / but at the laſt Gogmagog Helde Corin ſo faſt that he brake two rybbes of h
                           •
                         ſyde wherfore Corin was ſore angry. And there he toke Gogmagog betwixt his armes and caſt hym downe vpon aroche / ſoo that Gogmagog brake all to peces / and ſoo he deyed an euell deth. And therfore the place is called vnto this daythe ſaute of Gogmagog. ¶And thenne after Brute yaue alle that contree vnto Corin. And there Corin called it after his name Cornewayl
                           •
                        . And his men he called Cornewaylles / and ſo ſholde men of tha countree be called

for euermore / And in that contree dwelled Corin and hys men. And they made townes and howſes / and enhabyted the londe by theyr owne wyll
                  
                  
                     ¶How Brute buylded London and called thys londe Brytayne / and Scotlonde Albyne / and walys Camber.
                     
                        
                           ¶London.
                           depiction of London
                        
BRute and his men wente forth / and ſawe about in dyuers places / where that they myght fynde a good place and couenable that they myght make a Cyte for hym and his folke. And ſoo at the laſte they came by a fayre Ryuer that is called Tamys and / there Brute began to buylde a fayre cyte / and lete calle it newe Troy / in mynde and remembraunce of the grete Troy / from the whiche place all ther lygnage was comen. And this Brute lete felle downe woodes / and lete eere and ſowe londes And alſo lete mawe downe medowes for ſuſtenaunce of hym and of his people. And thenne he departed the londe to theym / ſo that euery
                        
                           •
                        he of theym had a parte / and a certayne place for to dwelle in. ¶And thenne Brute lette calle this londe Brytayne after his owne name and his folke he lette calle Brytons. And this Brute had goten on his wyf Gennogen thre ſones / that were worthy of dedes. The fyrſt was called Lotrin / the ſeconde Albanak and the thyrde Cambar. And brute bare crowne in the cytee of Troy .xx. yere after the tyme that the cytee was made. And there he made ye lawes that the Brytons holde / and this brute was wonderly well beloued amonge all men. And Brutes ſones alſo loued wonderly welle togyder· And whan Brute had ſought all the londe in lengthe and alſo in brede he founde a londe that Ioyned to Brytayne / that was in the northe and that londe Brute yaue to Albanak his ſone. And lete calle it Albanie after his name / that nowe is called Scotlonde. And Brute founde an other countree towarde the weſte / and yaue that to Cambar his other ſone / and lete calle it Cambar after his name / & now is called walys. And whan Brute hadne regned .xx. yere as before is ſayd / then̄e he deyed in the Cyte of newe Troy.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Lotrin that was Brutes ſone entred with moche honoure / & gouerned the londe well and worthely.
                     AFter Brute regned Lotrī hꝭ ſone / that was the ſeconde kynge in Brytayne. The whiche began to regne the ſeconde yere of Samuell. And this Lotrin was crowned kynge wyth moche ſolempnyte and glorye of all the londe of Brytayne. And after whan he was crowned kynge. Albanak and Cambar his two brethern wente agayne into theyr owne countree & there they lyued with moche honour / & worſhyp. And Lotrī theyr brother regned / & was kynge & gouerned it well & wyſely for he was a good man & wonderly well beloued of all his londe. And it befell ſo that Albanak dwelled in his owne londe with moche honoure and worſhyp. And thenne came kynge Humbar of Hunlonde with a grate power & aryued in Albyne / & wolde haue conquered the londe / & began to warre vpon kyng Albanak was ſlayne / the people of that londe fledde vnto Lotrin & tolde hym for he was kynge of brytayne / how that his brother was ſlayne / & prayed hym of his helpe and of his ſocour for to auenge his brothers dethe. Lotrin there anone lete aſſemble all the Brytons of Kente / of Douer in to Dere went of Norfolke and Southfolke / of Keftefen / and Lyndeſſey. And whan they were aſſembled they ſpedde them faſte towarde there enemyes for to yeue them batayll And Lotrin had ſente to Cambar his brother that he ſholde come vnto hym with all the power that he myght make hym for to helpe / & to he dyde with a good wyll. And ſo they came togyders / & toke ther waye pryuely for to go and ſeke Humbar where they myght hym fynde. And ſo it befell that thys Humbar was beſyde a water that was a grete Ryuer wyth hys folke

/ hym for to dyſporte. And there came Lotrin and Cambar his brother with all ther people ſodaynly or that ony of that other wyſte. And whan Humber ſawe them come he was ſore adradde / for as moche as his men wyſt it not afore / and alſo they were vnarmed. And anone Humbar for dredde lepte in too the water / and drowned hym ſelfe / and ſoo he deyed / and hꝭ men were all ſlayne ſo that none of thē eſcaped. And therfore is that water called Hū
                        bar / and euer more ſhalbe for bi cauſe that thꝭ kynge Humbar therin was drowned. ¶And after that Lotrin wente to his ſhyppes & toke there golde and ſyluer as moche as he founde vnto hym ſelf. And all that other pylfre he gaf vnto other foke of the hoſte. And they founde in one of the ſhyppes a fayre damoyſell / that was kynge Humbars doughter / & ſhe was called Eſtrylde· And whan Lotrin ſawe her / he tooke her with hym for her fayrneſſe / And for her he was ouertaken in loue, and wolde haue wedded her. This tydynges came to Corin / & anne thoughte to auenge hym vpon Lotrin. For as moche as Lotrin had made couenaū
                        
                           •
                         for to ſpowſe Corins doughter / that was called Guentolin. And Corin in haſte wente vnto hym vnto newe Troy / and thus he ſayd to Lotrin. Now certes ſayde he / ye rewarde me full euyll / for the paynes that I haue ſuffred & had many tymes for Brute youre fader. And therfor ſyth it is ſo I wyll auēge me now vpō you. And he drewe his fawcon on hygh & wolde haue ſlayne this Lotrin the kynge. But the damoyſell wente bytwene tho & made them to be accorded in this manere. That Lotrin ſholde wedde or ſpowſe Guentolin that was Corins doughter / & ſo Lotrin dyd. And netheles whan that he had ſpowſed Guentolin Corins doughter / pryuely he came to Eſtrylde / & broughte her with childe / & gate vpon her a doughter / the whiche was called Abram. And it be fell ſo that anone after Corin deyed / and after whan he was deed. Lotrin forſoke Guentolin that was his wyfe / and made Eſtrelde quene. And there Guentolin that was his wyf went from thens all in greate yre and wrathe vnto Cornwayle / & there ſeaſed all the londe in to her owne honde / for as moche as ſhe was her faders heyre ſhe vndetoke feautes and homages of all the men of the londe. And after warde aſſembled a greate hoſte and a grete power of men / for to be auenged vppon Lotrin that was her lorde / and to hym came & yeue hym a ſtronge batayll and there was Lotrin her huſbonde ſlayne and his men dyſcomfyted in the v. yere of his regne. Guentolin let take Eſtrylde and Abram her doughter / and bounde thē bo
                           •
                        he honde and foot / and caſte them bothe in to a water / and ſo they were drowned wherfore that water was euermore after called. Abram / after the name of the dāmoyſeyll that was Eſtryldes doughter· And Englyſſhe men calle that water Seuerne / And walſſhtmen calle it Abram vnto this daye to. And whan this was done Guentolin lete crowne her quene of all the londe / and gouerned the londe ful welle and wyſely vnto the tyme that Madan her ſone that Lotrin hadde goten vppon her was of .xx. yere of aege that he might be kynge and ſoo the quene regnd .xv. yere. And thenne lete ſhe crowne her ſone kynge / and he regned and gouerned the londe well and worthely. And ſhe wente in to Cornewaylle / and there ſhe dwelled all her lyues tyme.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Madan regned in peas all his lyf.
                     MAdan ſone to Lotrin regned on ye Brytons .xl. yere / the whiche began to regne the .xv. yere of Saull. And this Madan lyued in peas all his daye / and gote two ſones. Mempris and Maulyn. Then̄e he deyed and lyeth at newe Troy.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mundi .iiii.M.C.xxii. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē .M.lxxxiiii▪ ¶Here begynneth the fourth aege durynge to the tranſfyguracyon.
                     
                         
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           depicion of King David
                        
DAuyd the ſecond kynge in . Iſrael regned this tyme a mā choſen after the deſyre of god. And he was anoynted in his yō
                        ge aege by Samuell and after the dethe of Saul regned .xl. yere This Dauyd was a meruayle in all mankynde In whom euer was founde ſo moche power and ſoo moche humylyte / ſoo moche noblynes & ſo moche mekenes ſo greate a charge of ſeculary thynges / and ſo pure & deuoute a contemplacyon of ſpyrytual thyngꝭ / ſo many men to kylle / & ſo many teres to wepe for his treſpaas. (Plura vide .i. regū) ¶Abiathar this tyme was byſſhop / & he fledde from Saull vnto Dauyd / and he was gloryous with hym all his dayes. Gad. Nathan / and Aſoph were prophetes thenne. And Nathan was brother ſone to Dauyd
                  
                  
                     ¶How Mempris ſlewe his brother Maulyn.
                     THis Mempris and hys brother Maulyn ſtroue faſt for the londe And Memprin began to regne the .xxxv. yere of Dauyd. And for by cauſe that he was the eldeſt ſone / he wolde haue had all the londe / and Maulyn wolde not ſuffre hym ſo that they toke a daye of loue and accorde· And att this daye Mempris lete kylle his brother thorugh treaſon and hym ſelf after warde helde the londe. And anone lete crowne hym kynge and regned. And after be came ſoo lyther a man that he deſtroyed within a whyle alle the men of his londe. And at the laſte he be came ſoo wycked and ſoo leche
                           •
                        nus / that he forſoke hys owne wyfe and vſed the ſynne of Sodomy. wherfore almyghty god was gretely dyſpleſed and ſore wrothe with hym. And vpon hym toke vengaunce for by cauſe of his weckedneſſe. For on a daye as he wente forthe on huntynge in a foreſt / there he loſte alle his men that were wyth hym and wyſte not what he ſholde doo / and ſoo he wente vp and downe hym ſelf allone / and cryed after his men but they were gone. And there camen wulues anone and alle to drewe hym in peces whanne he hadde regned .xxiiii· yere. whan hys people herde that he was ſoo deed / they made Ioye and myrthe ynough and anone made Ebrac his ſone kynge and he regned with moche honoure.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mūdi .iiii.M.C.lxv. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē. M.xxxiiii.
                     SAlomon the kynge of peas of the gyfte of our lorde / had a ſynguler excegynge aboue alle men that euer was in this worlde / but alonly god in wyſdome and in ryches / in deyntees and in glory & famylyaryte with god And all though Moyſes and Dauyd. Peter & Poul· Ierom and Auſtyn & other mo / exceded hym in holyneſſe but yet they exceded him not in glory and ryches· And this man ſo excedynge all men wretchedly felle. Of this Salomon is redde in a pyſtle of ſaint Ierom that he gote a childe on the doughter of Pharao at .xi. yere of his aege (Vide plura regū) ¶Sadoch thys tyme was byſſhop / and for he declyned not to the parte of Adonie Dauyd ſone but was with Nathan for Salomon / and Abyathar on the other parte was depoſed.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mundi .iiii.M.ii.C.v. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē .ix.C.lxxxxiiii.
                     ROboas ſucceded Salomon hys fader in his kyngdome / but not in wyſdome. He was dyſceyued thorughe the counſeylle of yonge men. And loſte .x. trybus in ſoo moche as he anſwered not waſely the people / as it is open (iii. regum.) ¶Achimias was byſſhoppe / and was the ſone of Sadoch (Vt patet. primo parali)
                  
                  
                     ¶Reges Iſrael incipiunt.
                     IHeroboas regned kynge in Iſraell .xx.ii yere / and he was fyrſt of the hous of Salomon and a good mad / But whanne he was made kynge he was a mycheuous man in ydolatry / and made Iſraell to ſynne in ydolatry / and many greeate Inconuyences were done / almooſte to the deſtruccyon of Iſraell. For he was the fygure of Machomete (Plura vide .iii. regum) ¶Abdias the ſone of Roboas regned in the Iury thre yere / And other whyle a good man and holpen by god / and other whyle wretchedly dyſpoſed in ydolatrye / and therfore our lorde ſuffred hym to regne lytyll tyme (Vt pꝪ .iii. regum et .ii. parali.)
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶Anno mundi ·iiii.M.ii.C.xxv. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatem .ix.C.lxxiiii.
                     ASa the ſone of Abdias regned .xvi. yere. In the begynnynge of his regne he was a ryghtwys man and walked as Dauyd dyde. And he ouercame the Ethyopes / and deſtroyed ydolles / but after that he was ſworne to ye kynge of Syrie Benedab For Baaſa kynge of Iſraell / then̄e began to fyght ayenſt hym the / whiche dyſpleaſed god. wherfore he ſende to hym the prophete Anani / whome he put in pryſon / and therfore he hadde the gowte ſtrō
                        gely & deyed ther of (Vt pꝪ .iii. regum .ii. para) ¶Azarias ſonne to Achomas was byſſhop. Nadab kyng of Iſraell regned to yere / ye whyche beganne to regne the ſeconde yere of Aſa kynge of Iewes / and dyde not as hys fader. And Baaſa ouerthrewe hym and regned for hym (Vt pꝪ .iii. regū ¶Baaſa kynge of Iſrael regned .xxiiii. yere / the whiche began to regne the thyrde yere of Aſa kynge of Iewes / and he walked in the ſynnes of Ieroboam and ſlewe Iehen the prophete ¶Hela theſone of Baaſa regned in Iſrael two yere \ & zamri ſlewe hym & regned .vii. dayes. ¶Amri regned .xii. yere / & dyde not as his predeceſſours dyd. ¶Archa ſone to Amri regned on Iſraell .xxii. yere / and aboue all that were afore hym he was curſyd for wycked Ieſabell ruled more than he / & meued hym to folowe her (vt pꝪ .iii. regū)
                  
                  
                     ¶Of kynge Ebrac / the whiche began to regne the .xv. yere of Dauyd / and how he conquered Fraunce.
                     THys Ebrac regned .lx. yere / & a ſtronge man he was & a myghey And thys Ebrac thorugh hys myght & helpe of his Brytons cōquered all Fraunce. And wanne there ſo moche golde & ſyluer that whā he came ayen in to this londe he made a cyte / and after hys owne name he lere calle it Ebrac that is called Euerywyk. And this kynge made the caſtell of Maydens / that now is called Edenbrugh. This kyngehad. xx ſones and .xxiiii. doughters by dyuers wymmen goten / & theſe ſones were called as ye ſhal here Brute greneſchelde de. Margāde. Iakyn. Kymbar. Roſelm. Spadogh. Godeherl. Thormnan. Gldaugh. Iorkaughut. Haibor. Ketyn. Rother. Kaier / & Aſſaruth. And all the dougters hyght as ye ſhal here after. Eligene. ymogen. Oghdas. Guenbran. Guardith. Auganrel. Guenthold Tanguſtell. Gorghō. Michel. Medhan. Mailour Ondre. Cambredan. Ragā. Renthely. Neeſt Cheghā. Skaldud. Gladus. Herherhen. Abalaghe and Blandan. And theſe were tho .xxiiii doutghters And the brethern becam good knyghtes and worthy in many countrees
                  
                  
                     ¶Of kynge Brute Greneſchelde the fyrſte ſone of Ebrackynge.
                     AFter the dethe of kyng Ebrac / regned brute Greneſchelde his. ſone .xxx. yere that was Ebracs fyrſt ſone / that well and nobly regned. And whan tyme came he deyed / and lyeth at yorke.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of kynge Leyl that was Brute. Greneſcheldes ſone.
                     ANd whan Brute Greneſchelde was deed / regned hys ſone Leyl .xxii· yere. And he made a fayre towne and lette calle it Karleyl after his owne name. And he was a worthy man and welle beloued of his peop
                           •
                        e. And ſo whan he badde regned .xxii· yere he dyed / and lyeth at Karlyll. ¶And in his tyme regned kyng Salomon in Iheruſalem / and made the noble Temple. And to him came quene Sibylle quene of Saba / for to here and ſee yf it were ſothe that men ſpake of the greate and noble wytte and wyſdome of kynge Salemō And ſhe founde it ſoth that men had her tolde.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mūdi .iiii.M.ii.C.li vi. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē .ix.C.xlii.
                     IOſaphat kynge of Iewe / was a good man and a 
                           •
                        ycke and a deuoute in the waye of oure lorde: and regned .x
                           •
                        v. yere: and dyde none yll: but to the curſed kynge of Iſraell gaue helpe: and other lytel thyng. And therfore oure lorde was with hym (vt pꝪ. ii
                           •
                         para) ¶Helyas the greate prophete was thys tyme an hooly man: that was lyfted vp in to paradyſe with grete ſolace 
                           •
                         a charre. ¶Macheas and Abdias prophecyed wyth hym. ¶Ochoſyas ſone of Achab regned in Iſraell .ii. yere. And ſende to Belſabub god of Acharam to be helyd. For. the whyche he deyed: after the ſayenge of Hely (Vt pꝪ .iiii. Regum)
                  
                  
                     ¶Of kynge Lud Ludibras that was kynge Leyles ſone.
                     LVd Ludibras this kyng: made the cyte of Caunterbury & wyncheſter. And

he regned .xxxix. yere and thenne he deyed and lyeth at wyncheſter.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of kynge Bladud that was Ludibras ſone how he regned and was a god man / and a Nygromancer.
                     SO after this Ludibras regned bladud his ſone / a greate Nygromancer. And thorugh his crafte of Nygroman
                           •
                        y / he made the meruayllous hote bathe / As the geſte 
                           •
                        elleth. And he regned .xxi. yere / and he lyeeh at the newe Troy.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mundi ·iiii.M.ii.C.lxxxxi. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē .ix.C.viii.
                     IOram kynge of Iewes ſonne to / Ioſaphat regned .viii. yere / this Ioram was a curſyd man & had a good fader / & ſlewe hys brother / & wyckedly lyued / as dyde the kynge of Iſrael· Therfore he was ſore correcetd & dyed vnhappely (vt pꝪ .iio para) ¶This tyme he lyas was rauiſſhed in the Paradyſe ¶Ochoſias or Aſarias kyng of Iewes regned oo yere & lyued not as his fader dyd & anone was ſlayne with all the hous of Achab. ¶Athalia moder to Aſarias toke the kyngdome / & ſlewe all the kynges blod: & regned .x. yere. And the .vii. yere of Ioiada byſſhop ſhe was ſlayne (iiii. regū) This Aſarias & his ſone Ioas: & his neue we Amaſia. Matheus the goſpeller putteth not in the lyne of Cryſte for ther offences. Ioram kyng of Iſrael regned .xii. yers: the whiche began to regne the .xviii. yere of Ioſaphat for his brother Ochoſie: & curſedly he lyued: and was ſlayne of Iehen with alle his faders houſholde (vt pꝪ) ¶Iehen anoynted of ye childe of Helyſe: vpon Iſrael ſlewe Achariam the kyng of Iewes: & Ioram the kynge of Iſraell and Iſabell moder to Ioram: and .lxx. childn of Achab: and ·xlii. brethern of Azari: & all the preeſtes of Baall. And he regned .xviii. yere. ¶Athalia moder to Azari kyng of Iewes doughter to Achab regned on ye Iewes .vi. yere & flewe the kyngis blood of Ioram: except Ioas the ſone of Azari / the whiche was kepte amō
                        ge ſhepeherdes / and afſhe was ſlayne.
                  
                  
                     Anno mundi .iiii.M.iii.C·ix. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē .viii.C.lxxxxiii.
                     IOam ſone to Achazie regned in the Iury .xl. yere / whome Ioiada the byſſhop crowned kynge at .vii. yere of aege. And helyued well as longe as he was ruled by Ioiada / but after he forſoke god and martred Azrias that tyme byſſhop ſone to Ioiada / for he blamed hym that he forſoke hys god (Vide plura .ii. para) ¶Ioathas ſone to Iehen / regned in Iſraell .xvii. yere / in whoos dayes Helyſe the prophete deyed. And he began to regne the .xx. yere of Ioas (Vide plura iiii. regum) ¶Ioam ſonne of Ioathas regned in Iſraell .xvii. yere / and he troubled Amazia (Plura vide .iiii. regum .xiii.)
                  
                  
                     ¶Of kynge Leyr ſone to Bladud and of the anſwere of his yongeſt doughter / that gracyouſly was maryed to the kynge of Fraunce.
                     AFter kynge Bladud regned Leyr hys ſone. And thys Leyr made the towne of Leycetre / and lete calle the towne after his name / and gouerned the towne welle and nobly. This kynge Leyr hadde thre doughters. The fyrſte was called Gonorill. The ſeconde Rigan. And the thyrde Cordeill / and the yongeſt doughter was fayreſt and beſte of condycyons. The kynge theyr fader became an olde man / and wolde that his doughters were maryed or that he dyed. But fyrſte he thought to aſſaye whiche of them loued hym moſte and beſt. For ſhe that loued hym beſt ſholde beſt be maryed And he axed of ye fyrſte doughter how well ſhe loued him. And ſhe anſwerde and ſayde / better than her owne lyf. Now certes ſayde her fader / that is grete loue: Thenne he axed the ſeconde doughter: how moche ſhe loued hym. And ſhe ſayde more and paſſynge all the creatures of the worlde. Per ma foy ſayd her fader I may noo more axe. And tho axed he of the thyrd doughter how moche ſhe loued hym Certes fader ſayde ſhe: my ſyſters haue tolde you gloſynge wordes: but I ſhalle tell you the crouth for I loue you as I ought to loue my fader. And for to brynge you more in certayne how I loue you. I ſhall tell you. As moche as ye be wroth: ſo ſhall ye be loued The kyng her fader wēde that ſhe had ſcorned hym & be came wonder wroth: & ſwore by heuē & erth ſhe ſholde neuer haue good of him but hꝭ doughts that loued hym ſo moche ſholde be well auaūced & maryed. And the fyrſt doughter he maryed to Mangles kyng of Scotlonde. And the ſeconde he maryed to hanemos erle of Cornewayle & they ordened & ſpake bytwene thē that ye ſholde

departe the reame bytwene them two after the dethe of kynge Leyr theyr fader. Soo that Cordeill his yongeſt doughter ſholde nothynge haue of his londe. But this Cordeill was wonder fayre & of good condicyons & maners That the kynge of Fraunce Agampe herde of her fame / & ſente to the kynge Leyr her fader for to haue her vnto his wyf / and prayed hym therof. And kynge Leyr her fader ſente hym worde that he had departed his londe & gyuen hit al vnto his two doughters before ſayd: & he ſayd he had no more lōde wherwith her to marye. And whan Agampe the kynge of fraunce herde this āſwere / he ſent anone agayne to Leyr & ſayd. That he axed nothyng with her but oonly her clothynge and her body. And anone kynge Leyr ſente her ouer ſee to the kynge of fraunce. And he receyued her with moche worſhyp / and with ſolempnyte he ſpowſed her / & made her quene of Fraunce.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Leyr was dryuen out of his lō
                        de thrugh his folke. And how Cordeill his yongeſt doughter holpe hym in his nede.
                     THus it befell afterwarde / that tho two eldeſt doughters wolde not abyde tyll Leyr theyr fader was deed. But warred vpon hym whyles that he was on lyue & dyde hym moche ſorowe and ſhame / wherfore they toke from hym holy ye realme / & bytwene them had ordeyned / that one of thē ſholde haue kyng Leyr to ſoiourne all his lyfe tyme with .lx. knyghtes & ſquyres / that he myght worſhypfully ryde & go whether that he wolde & in to what coū
                        tre that hym lyked to play & to ſolace. So that Maugles kynge of Scotlonde hadde kynge Leyr with hym in the maner as is aboue ſayd And or the other halfe yere were paſſed. Gonoril that was his eldeſt dought & quene of Scotlonde / was ſoo anoyed of hym & of his people that anone ſhe & her lorde ſpake togyder wherfore his knyghtes halfe & his ſquyres fro hym were gone / & no moo lefte with hym but oonly .xxx. And whan this was done / Leyr began to make moche ſorowe for bycauſe that his ſtate was empeyred. And men had of hym more ſcorne & dyſpyte than euer they hadde before. wherfore he wyſt not what to done. And at the laſte he thought he wolde go in to Cornewayll to Rigan hys other doughter. And whan he was come / the erle and his wyfe that was Leyrs doughter hym welcomed / and with hym made moche Ioye. And there he dwelled with xxx. knyghtes & ſquyres. And he had not dwelled ſcarſly .xii. monethes there / that his doughter was wery of hym and his company. And her lorde & ſhe of hym had grete ſcorne & deſpyte / ſoo that from .xxx. knyghtes they broughte vnto .x. And afterwarde he had but fyue / & ſo they lefte hym no moo. Thenne made he ſorowe ynoughe. and ſayd ſore wepyng. Alas that euer I came in to this londe & ſayd. yet had ye be better to haue dwelled with my fyrſte doughter. And anone he wente thens to his fyrſte doughter agayne / but anone as ſhe ſawe hym come / ſhe ſwore by god & by his holy name / & by as moche as ſhe myght: that he ſholde haue no moo with hym but one knyght \ yf he wolde there abyde. Then beganne Leyr to wepe. and made moche ſorowe: and ſayd then. Alas now haue I to longe lyued / that this ſorowe & myſcheyf is to me nowe fallen. For now I am poore: that ſomtyme was ryche. But nowe haue I noo frende ne kynne that to me wyll do ony good. But whan I was ryche all men me honoured & worſhyped & now euery man 
                           •
                        athe of me ſcorne & dyſpyte. And now I well wote that Cordeill my yongeſt doughter ſayde me trouth / whan ſhe ſayd. As moche as I had ſoo moche ſholde I be loued. And all ye whyle that I had good: ſo longe was I loued & honoured for my ryches. But my two doughters gloſed me then: & now of me they ſet lytell pryce. and ſoth tolde me Cordeil: but I wolde not byleue it ne vnderſtonde. & therfore I lete her goo frome as a thynge that I ſette lytell pryce of: and now wote I neuer what for to do ſyth my two doughters haue me thus dyſceyued: that I ſo moche loued: & now muſt I nedes ſeke her that is in an other londe: that lyghtly I lete her go from me without ony rewarde of gyftes. And ſhe ſayde / that ſhe loued me as moche as ſhe ought to loue her fader by all maner of reaſon And then I ſholde haue a
                           •
                        ed her no more. And thoſe that me otherwiſe behoteth thrugh their fals ſpeche: now haue me deſceyued. In thys maner Leyr lōge tyme begā to make his moone: & at ye laſt he ſhypped hym to ye ſee & paſſed ouer in to Fraunce: and axed & aſpyed where ye quene myght be foūde. And men tolde hym where ſhe was▪ & whan he came to ye cyte that

ſhe was in pryuely he ſent his ſquyre vnto the quene / for to tell her that her fader was come to her for grete nede. And whan the ſquyre came to the quene / he tolde her euery deale of her ſyſters frome the begynnynge vnto the ende. Cordeil ye quene anone toke golde and ſyluer plenty / & toke it to the ſquyre in coūſell that he ſholde go & bere it to her fader / & that he ſholde go in to a certayne cyte / & hym aray & waſſhe / & then come agayne to her. And brynge with hym an honeſt company of knyghtes .xl. at ye leeſt with theyr meny. And then he ſholde ſende to her lorde ye kyng / & feyne that he were come for to ſpeke with hys doughter / & hym for to ſe & ſo he dyde. And whan the kynge and the quene herd that they came: with moche honoure they hym receyued. And ye kynge of fraunce then lete lende thrugh al ye realme / & cōmaunded that al men ſholde be as entendaūt to kynge Leyr the quenes fader in all maner of thynges as it were vnto hymſelfe. whā kynge leyr had dwelled there a moneth & more / he tolde to the kynge & to the quene his doughter / how his two eldeſt doughters hadde hym ſerued. Agampe anone lete ordeyne a grete hooſte of Frenſſhmē & ſente in to Brytayne with Leyr ye quenes fader for to cōquere his lōde agayne & his kyngdome. And Cordeill alſo came with her fader in to Brytayne / for to haue ye realme after her faders dethe. And anone they wente to ſhyppe & paſſed the ſee & came in to Brytayne & fought with ye felons / & thē dyſcomfyted & ſlewe / & then had he his lōde agayne / & after lyued .iii. yere & helde his realme ī peas & after warde dyed. & ſo Cordeill his doughter thenne let enter him with moche honour at Leyceſtre
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mūdi .iiii.M.iii.C.xlix. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē .viii.C liii.
                     AMaſius ſonne to Ioam regned on the Iewes .xxix. yere / after the whiche the kyngdom of Iewes was without kynge .xiii. yere. This man worſhypped ye goddes of Seyr (vt pꝪ .ii. para .xv. ¶Ieroboam ſone to Ioam regned on Iſrael .xli. yere the whiche was manly and vyctoryous. For he ouercame the kynge of Sirie / & reſtored Iſrael & Damaſke after the worde of Iono the prophete. But he was not good. Therfore ſayth auſtyn. if good men regne / they profyte many a man. And yf ylle men regne / they hurte many men·
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mūdi .iiii.M.iii.C.lxxxviii. Et ant xp̄i natiuitatē .viii.C.xi.
                     Ozias or Azarias ſone to Amaſie regned on the Iury .lii. yere / the whiche lyued wel afore oure lorde / of hym is none euyl thynge wryten but that he vſurped the dygnyte of preeſthode vnder Azari / ye whiche he forbode hym. For yt whiche cauſe our lorde ſtroke hym with a leper (vt pꝪ .ii. para) ¶Ozee byſſhop & prophete was this tyme the fyrſt of ye .xii. that is ſende aſtaynſt ye .xii. tribus. ¶Ioel ye ſecōde of ye .xii. prophecyed of Iuda. Ananias ye thyrde prophecyed agaynſt many people. Abdias ye fourth of the .xii. prophecyed agaynſt Edom ¶zacharius ſon̄e to Ieroboam regned in Iſrael .vi. monethes / the whiche began to regne the .xxxviii. yere of Ozias & was nought ī his lyuynge as his predyceſſours were. And Sellum ſlewe hym / & regned a moneth. And Manahen ſlewe hym & toke his kyngdome (vt pꝪ .iiii. regū) This Manahen regned .x. yere / the whiche began to regne the .xxxix. yere of Ozias \ & he ruled hym myſcheuouſly. And our lorde toke hym in the power of the kynge of Aſſurio
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                        . And he payed to hym a thouſande talentes of ſyluer. (vt pꝪ .iiii. regū) ¶Phaſeia ſon̄e to Manahen regned in Iſrael .ii. yere / & he began to regne the .l. yere of Ozias: and he was nought in his lyuynge. ¶Phaſe ſlewe phaſeia: & regned .xx. yere: & he began to regne the .lii. yere of Ozias: & dyde as other curſed men dyde (Plura vide .iiii. regū) And after this. Iſrael was without ony kynge .viii. yere
                  
                  
                     ¶How Morgan and Conedag that were neuewes to Cordeill warred vpon her. And put her in pryſon.
                     NOw as kynge Leyr was deed Cordeil his yongeſt doughter regned the .x. yere of Ozias kynge of Iury. And after her regned Conedag the .xv. yere of Ozias: & Cordeil that was Leyrs yongeſt daughter after ye deth of her fader had all the londe .v. yere. And in ye meane tyme deyed her lorde Agampe / hat was kynge of Fraūce: & after his dethe ſhe was wydowe. And there came Morgan and Conedag that were Cordeils ſyſters ſones & to her had enuyte: for as moche as theyr aunte ſholde haue the londe. So that bytwene them they ordeyned a grete power: and vpon her warred gretely. And neuer they reſted tyll they had her taken

and put her vnto deth. And tho Morgan and Conedag ſeaſed all the londe / & departed it bytwene them. And they helde it .xii. yeres. And whan that thoſe .xii. yeres were gone there began̄e bytwene them a grete beatel / ſo that they warred ſtrōgely togyders. And eueryche of theym dyde other moche dyſeaſe. For Morgan wolde haue all the londe frome beyonde Humbre that Conedag helde / But he came agaynſt hym wyth a grete power / ſo that Morgan durſte not abyde but fledde a waye in to walys. And Conedag purſued hym / and toke hym & ſlewe hym. And tho came Conedag agayne and ſeaſed all the londe in to his honde and held it And regned after .xxxiii· yere. And thenne he deyed and lyth at newe Troy.
                     ¶And by cauſe the matere conteyneth mooſt comodyouſly togyder of ye kynges of Brytayne / now called Englonde / for ye tyme of them is not certaynly knowē / what tyme of ye wrolde the kynges folowen regned. Therfore they ſhall be togyder / tyll it be comen vnto Guentolen kyng of Brytayne now called Englōde
                  
                  
                     ¶How Reynolde that was Conedags ſone regned after his fader: & in his tyme it rayned blood thre dayes in to kenynge of grete deth.
                     ANd after thys Conedag regned Reynolde hꝭ ſone that was a wyſe knyght & a hardy & curteyes that wel & nobly gouerned the londe / & wonder welle made hym beloued of all maner of folke. And in hys tyme regned blood that laſted thre dayes. As god wolde / & ſoone after ther came a grete dethe of people / For hoſtes wythout nombre of people fought tyll that almyghty god ther of toke mercy and pyte & tho gā it ceſſe. And this Reynolde regned .xxii. yere & deyed and lyeth at yorke.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Gorbodian regne in peas that was Reynoldes ſone.
                     AFter thys Reynolde that was Conedags ſone / regned Gorbodian that was thys Reynoldes ſone ·xv. yere / and thenne he deyed and lyeth at yorke.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Gorbodian had .ii. ſones & how that one ſlewe the other for to haue the herytage / & how ydoyne ther moder ſlewe that other wherfore the londe was deſtroyed.
                     SO whan thys Gorbodian was deed / hys two ſones that he had be came ſtoute and proude and euer warred togyder for the londe. And that one was called Ferres / and that other Porres. ¶And thys Ferres wolde haue all the londe / but that other wold not ſuffre hym. This Ferres had a felonous herte & thoughte thrugh treaſon to ſlee his brother. But pryuely he wente in to Fraunce / and there abode with the kynge Sywarde tyll vpon a tyme whan he came ayen / and fought wych his brother Ferres / But full euyll it happed tho / he was ſlayne fyrſte. whan ydoyne ther moder wyſt that Portes was deed / ſhe made grete ſorowe / for by cauſe that ſhe loued hym more than that other. And thought hym for to ſlee pryuely. And pryuely ſhe came to her ſone vpon a nyght with two knyues and ther with kytte his throte / and ye body in to ſmale peces who herde euer ſuche a curſed moder / that ſlewe with her owne hondes her owne ſone And longe tyme after laſted the repreef & ſhame to the moder / that for by cauſe of ye one ſone ſhe murdred the other / & ſo loſt them bothe.
                  
                  
                     ¶How foure kynges curtouſly helde all Brytayne / and what were ther names ye ſhall here after.
                     AS the two brethern were deed they lefte not behynde them nother ſonne ne dougter / ne none other of the kynred that myghte haue the herytage. And for as moche as the ſtrōgeſt mē droue & deſcomfyted the febleit & toke all ther lōdes ſo that ī euery coūtre they had grete ware and ſtryfe vnder them but amonge all other thynge / there were amonge them in the counther / that ouercame all the other / and though ther myghte and ſtrengthe they toke all the londes / and euery of them toke a certayne countree / & in hys contree lete calle hym kyng / & one of thē was called Scater / & he was kyng of Soctlonde / & that other was called Dawalier / & he was kynge of Loegers / & of al ye lōde that was Lotris / that was Brutes ſone / the thyrde was called Ruda
                           •
                         / & he was kīge of walys / & the fourth was called Cloten / & was called kynge of Cornewayle. But this Cloten ſholde haue had all the londe by reſon for by cauſe that there was no man that wyſte none ſo ryght an heyre as he was. But they that we ſtrongeſt ſette lytel by them that were of leſſe eſtate / and therfore this Cloten hadde noo more londe amonge them but Cornewaylle
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶Of kynge Donebant that was Clotens ſone wanne the londe.
                     THis Cloten had a ſone that was called Donebant: that after the dethe of hys fader became an hardy man and a fayr and a curteis ſo that he paſſed al ye other kīges of fayreneſſe & of worthyneſſe & anōe a he was knyghte he wyſte well that whā hys fader lyued he was mooſt ryghtfull heyre of all ye londe: and ſhold haue had by reaſō. But ye other kynges that were of a moche more ſtrengthe than he was: toke from hym his londe. And after warde this Donebant ordened him a grete power and conquered fyrſte all the londe of Loegers & after he wolde haue conquered all the londe of Scotlōde & walys. And Scater came with his men & yaue hym batayll. And Rudac cam ayen wyth his walyſſhmen for to helpe hym▪ but ſo it befel that Rudac was ſlayn & alſo ſcater in playne batayll. And ſoo Donebant had the victory: & conquered alle the londe: & well mayntened it in peas & in quyete / that neuer before it was ſo well mayntened.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Donebant was the fyrſt kyng that euer bare crowne of golde in Brytayne.
                     THis Donebant lete make hym a crowne of golde / & wered the crowne vpon his heed as neuer kyng dyde before / and he ordened a ſtatute that & a mā had done neuer ſo moche harme & myȝe come ī to ye Temple / there ſholde no man hym myſdo / but go there in ſauete & in peas / and after go in to what londe or coūtree that hym pleaſed wythout ony harme / and yf ony man ſette ony hōde vpon hym He then̄e ſholde leſe his lyf And this Donebāt made the towne of Malmeſbury / and ye towne alſo of the Vyſe. And whan he had regned well and worthely .xl. yere / then̄e he deyed and lyeth at newe Troy.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Brenne and Belin departed bytwene them the londe after the deth of Donebant ther fader. And of the warre bewixt them.
                     ANd after that this Donebant was deed / his ſones that he had departed the londe bytwene them / as ther fader had ordeyned ſo that Belin his eldeſt ſone had the al the londe of brytayne / from Humber South warde. And his brother Brenne had all the londe from Humber vnto Scotlond. ¶But for as moche that Belin had the better parte. Brenne therfore wexed wroth / and wolde haue had more of ye lond / & belin his brother wold graū
                        te hym no more / wherfore cōtake & warre aroſe amonge them two But Brenne the yonger brother had no myght ne ſtrength ayenſt Belin / & therfore Brenne rhrugh coūſel of his folke went from thens in to Norwaeye to ye kynge Olſynges / & prayed hym of helpe & ſocour for to conquere all the londe vpon Belin hys brother vpō that couenaūt that he wolde haue his doughter to wyf and the kynge Olſynges hym graunted / And Belin anone as hys brod was gone to Norweye he ſeaſed in to his honde all the londe of Northoumberlonde / and toke al the caſtelles & lete them be arrayed & kepte the coſtes of the ſee / that Brenne ſholde not arryue in noo ſyde / but that he were taken· ❀ ¶The kynge Olſynges lette aſſembel a grete hoſte / and delyuered hys doughter to Brenne and all the people that he had aſſembled. And thys damoyſell Samie had longe tyme loued a kynge that was called Gutlagh and to hym ſhe tolde all her coūſel / how that Bren̄e ſholde her haue / and her lede with hym for euer more and ſo he ſholde leſe her but that ſhe myght for ſake Brenne. And whan Gutlagh had herde this tydynges / he lay for to aſpye Bren̄e with as many ſhyppes as he myght haue. Soo the two fletes mette togyder and longe tyme they faught / ſoo that Brennes men tourned ayen were dyſcomfyted. And kynge Gutlagh toke Samie & put her in to his ſhyppe. And Brēne ſhamefully fledde thens as a man dyſcomfyted. And this kyng Gutlagh wold haue gone in to his owene coūtree / but there came vpon hym ſuche a grete tempeſt that fyue dayes laſted / ſoo that thorugh that tempeſt he was dryuen in to Brytayne with thre ſhyppes and no moo / and tho that kepte the coſtes of the ſee toke Gutlagh and Samie and all his folke and them preſented to Belin And Belin put them in pryſon.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Belin droue out of his londe kyng Gutlagh of Denmerk and Samie.
                     IT was not longe after that Brenne came agayne with a grete nauy / & ſent to his brother Belin / that he ſhold yeld ayen his londe to his wyfe and his folke / and his caſtelles alſo. Or elles he wolde deſtroye his londe. ¶Belin dradde noo thyng his malyce / & wolde

no thynge do after that he hadde ſayd. wherfore Brenne came with his folke and foughte with Beline. And then Brenne was diſcomfyted and his folke ſlayne / & hym ſelf fledde wi
                           •
                        h .xii. men in to Fraunce. And this Belin that was Brenne brother wente thenue to. yorke / and toke coūſeyll what he ſhold do with kyng Gutlagh. For kynge Gutlagh proferde to become his man / & for to holde his londe fo him yeldynge yerely .M.li. of ſyluer for euermore / and for ſureneſſe of this couenaut to be kepte Gutlagh ſho
                           •
                        de brynge hym good hoſtage / & to hym ſholde doo homage & his folke / & yet he ſholde ſwere vpon a booke yt it ſholde neuer be broke ne fayled. Belin tho by counſeyll of his folke graūted him his axenge / & ſo Gutlagh be came his mā & Belin vndertoke of him his homage by an othe & by wrytynge the ſame couenaūtes. And vpō theſe couenaūtes kyng Gutlagh toke Samie & his folke & wente thens / & torned ayen to Denmak. Euer more after were the couenaūtes holden & the treuage payed tyll the tyme that Honelus was kyng of Denmarke & alſo of his lond thorugh his wyf Gildebu
                           •
                        h that he had ſpouſed for ſhe was ryghe heyre of his londe. ¶This Belin dwelled tho in peas / & worſhyp fully hym helde amōge his barons / and he made foure ryall wayes / one from the eeſt in to the weeſt & that was called watlynge ſtrete / and an other frome the north vnto the ſouth / and that is callen Ikelme ſtrete. And two other wayes he made in boſſynge thrugh out ye lōde that one is called foſſe & that other Foſſe dyke. And he mayntened well the good lawes that Donebant his fader had made. & ordeyned in his tyme / as befor is ſayde.
                  
                  
                     ¶How acordemēt was made bytwene Brē
                        ne & Belin thorugh Cornewen ther moder.
                     BRenne that was Belins brother hadde longe tyme dwelled in Fraūce / & there had conquered a grete lordſhyp thrugh maryage. For he was duke of Bourgoyne thrugh the dought of the duke fewyn that he had ſpouſed that was ryght heyre of the lond. And this Brenne ordened a grete power of hys folke / & alſo of Fraunce / & came in to this londe for to fyght with Belin his brother. And belin came ayenſte hym with a grete power of Brytons / and wolde tho haue yeuen hym batayll. But ther moder Cornewen that tho lyued had that one brother wolde haue deſtroyed that other and wente bytwene her ſones and them made acorde with moche payne So that at the laſte tho two brethern with moche blyſſe wente togyder in to newe Troy / that now is called Lō
                        don / and there they dwelled a yere. And after they toke theyr counſeyll for to goo & conquere all Fraunce. And ſo they dyd / and brente towne & deſtroyed the londe both in length and in brede. And the kyng of Fraūce yaue them batayl with his power / but he was ouercome / & yaue trauge vnto Belin & to his brother. And after that they wente forth vnto Rome 
                           •
                         conquered Rome & all Lombardy & Garmany / & tooke humage & feaute of erles bacons & of all other. And after they came in to thys lond of brytayne / and dwelled there wyth brytons in Ioye and reſt. And tho made brenne the twone of bryſtowe / and after he wente ouer to his owne lordſhyp / and theyr dwelled he all his lyf And belin dwelled at newe Troy and there he made a fayre gate that is called belynges gate after his owne name. And whan thys belin hadde regned nobly .xi. yere he deyed and lyeth at newe Troy.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kyng Cormbratꝰ ſlewe the kynge Cenmark / for by cauſe that he wolde not paye his truage as he ſhold
                     ANd after thys belin regned hys ſone Cormbratus a good man and a worthy. And the kyng of Denmark wolde not pay to hym his truage that is to ſaye a thouſande pounde as he had ſworne by othe for to paye it / and alſo by wrytynge recorde to belin his fader. wherfore he was euyll appayed & wrothe / and aſſembled a grete hoſte of bry
                           •
                        ons & wente in to Denmark & ſlewe the kynge Gutlagh / and brought the londe in ſubgec
                           •
                        ion all newe. And toke of the folke feautes and homage / and after wente ayene in to his owne londe. And as he came fothe by Orkeney / he foū
                        de .xxx. ſhyppes full of men and wymmen beſyde the coſte of the ſee. & the kynge ared what they were. And an Erle that was mayſter of them all curteyſly anſwered vnto the kyng & ſayd. That they were exieled out of Spane / & ſoo that they had traueyled halfe an yere and more in the ſee / to wyte yf they myghte fynde ony kynge in ony londe that of them wold haue pyte or mercy to gyue them ony lōde in ony

countree where in they myght dwuell and hauereſt / and become his lyege men / and to him wolde do homage and feuate whyle that he lyued / & to his heyers after him / and of hym & of his heyres holde that londe. And whan ye kynge this herde / he had pyte of hym / & yaue them an yel all wylderneſſe / there that no man was dwellynge ſauf oonly wylde beſtꝭ. And the Erle thanked moche the kynge and became hys man & dyde him homage and feaute and toke all his folke and wente in to the ſame yle. And the Erle was called Irlamall / and therfore he lete calle the londe Irlonde after his owne name. This kyng Cormbratus came ayen in to his londe and regned .xxv. yere / and after he deyed and lyeth at newe Troy.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mūdi .iiii·M.iiii.C.xl. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatem .vii.C.lvi.
                     IOathan ſone to Oſias regned in ye Iury .xvi. yere / of this Ioathan no thynge is wryten of / but that he toke not awaye excelſa as other dyde) vt pꝪ .ii. para) ¶Amarias was byſſhop. And yſayas the noble prophete was in his dayes. ¶Olympias with the Grekes began the fyrſte yere of Ioathan after Ioſephus. And after Beda Troy was deſtroyed foure hondred yere afore the fyrſte Olympias began vnder Eſalo a Iuge of Athens. In whiche Coribus gate ye chyualry amongꝭ all men Olympus is the name of an hylle in Grecia / the whiche for hys precyouſneſſe is called the hylle of god· And after Ierom one Olympias conteyneth fully foure yere / in the whiche foure yere / foure yerely prynces are made. And theſe Olympiades are places ordeyned tothe worſhyp of Iupater vnder the hylle of Olympo. And the lawe of this. That who ſomeuer is beſte in ony chyualry / what ſomeuer he deſyreth he ſhall haue.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mūdi .iiii.M.iiii.C.lvi. Et ante xp̄i natiuitetem .vii.C.xliii.
                     ACham the ſone of Ioathan regned on the Iewes .xvi. yere of this Acham no thinge that is good is wrytē for he forſoke oure lorde. And our lord ſtroke him wyth hys owne people ſtrongly / and with the kynges of Tirri (vt pꝪ .ii. para. xx viii.) ¶Achicob this tyme was byſſhop. Ozee kynge of Iſraell regned ·ix. yere the whiche beganne to regne the .xii. yere of Acham kyng of Iewes. This Ozee dradde not god / for he lyued noughte. And he was the laſte kynge of Iſraell· And in the .ix. yere of hys regne he was taken of Salmanaſar. And Iſraell was tranſlated in to Aſſirias (vt habetur .iiii. regum .xvii.)
                  
               
               
                  
                     ¶Anno mundi .iiii.M.iiii.C.lxii. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē .vii.C.xl.
                     
                        
                           ¶Rome.
                           depiction of Rome
                        
AFter Euſeby Rome was made in the hyl of Palatin the fourth yere of Achā kyng of Iewes of two brethern Romulus and Remus .xi. Kal. Man. the .vii. Olympiades begynnynge. Ioſephus & Beda ſayen the .vi. Olympiades / & ſo they defferre a yere. Neuertheles it is redde other men to haue regned about that place myghtly in ytaly. That is to wyte Ianus. Picus Famus. Latinus / the whiche vnto Eneas regned about two hondred yere. And thenne after warde frome this Eneas to Romulus / it was regned vnder .xv. gouernours .iiii.C.xxxii. yere. After that fro the Cytee was made vnto the laſte yere of Tarquyne yt proude / it was regned vnd .vii. kynges about two hondred and .xliii. yere· Then̄e after warde vnder Senatours and Counſullers / vnto Iulius Cezar Emperour / by foure hondred .lxiiii. yere. Romulus the fyrſte of Romayns / of whome they ben called in latyn Romans / made the cyte to be named Rome after his name. The whyche gadred togyder the peple on euery ſyde an .C. of the ſage men and wyſeſte he choſe / the coūſell of whom all thynge he dyſpoſed / the whiche he named Senatours for ye tyme of theyr aege. And he made theyr names to be wryten in golden letters / wherfore we wryte noble faders and thynges ſoo yet. Alſo he called .M. men of armes the whyche he named

Milites (a numero mi
                           •
                        i
                           •
                        to) But theſe were noble blod. Therfore as ſaynt Auſtyn ſayth (de ciuit
                           •
                        . dei) And alſo ther was longe warre betwixt the Sabyns and them. For Romulis toke many wymmen of the noble blode of Sabyns / & maryed theym to that vnnoble blood. Of thys Romulus Oroſyus wryteth moche euyll (Vt patet in libro ſuo) ¶Aboute this tyme Merodach the kynge of Babylon ſende grete gyftis to Ezechie the kyge of Iewes (vt pꝪ .iiii. regū .xx.) And then̄e the kyngdome of Babylon begon.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mundi .iiii.M.lxxii. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatem .vii.C·xxvii.
                     Ezechias the .xiiii. kyng of Iewes a good childe of a curſyd fader regned wyth a partyte herte to our lorde. And he reſtored the hous of god / & ther was none lyke hym afore nor after amonge the kyngꝭ of Iewes / therfore our lorde god gloriyed hym. For whan Senancheryb the kyng of Aſſurio
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                         came ayenſte Ezechias with a myghty hoſte / our lorde ſtroke hys people and ſlewe an ·C.lxxxv. of fyghtynge men / & Sennacheryb fledde ſhamfully (vt pꝪ .iiii. regum .ix. et .ii. para .xxxii.) ¶Sadoch this tyme was hyghe byſſhop there.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mundi .iiii.M.v.C.i. Et ante xpi natiuitotem .vi.C·lxxxxviii.
                     MAnaſſes kyng of Iewes regned .lv. yere / & he was an euyll chylde of a good fader / for he dyd more curſedly than ony that was afore hym. For he ſlewe the prophetes of god / that the ſtretes in Ieruſalem were al blody. And he made yſai the prophete to be ſawen the peces with a ſawe of tree. wherfore ye kynge of Aſſurio
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                         waſted the Iury / and toke Manaſſes 
                           •
                         put him in pryſon. And after Manaſſes repented his treſpaas & cryed for mercy to our lorde / & was herde. Thenne he was reſtored to his kyngdome / & he amended his lyf) vt pꝪ .iiii. regū .xxi. et .ii. para. xxxiii) ¶Sel
                           •
                        um was byſſhop / and Echias after hym This tyme ye .vii. wyſe men had worſhyp in Grece. 
                           •
                        . Tale. Solon. Chilon Poreandus Eldobolus Bias. Pitacus. Thys Talus founde fyrſte the defawte of the ſonne and the moone) Vide plura. auguſt .viii. deci. dei) ¶Numa the ſeconde kynge this tyme regned in Rome .xlii. yere / the whyche was a greate worſhypper of fals goodes. He fulfylled Rome ſoo full / that he myght haue noo place for hym ſelf to dwele in. This man put Ianuary and February to the begynnynge of the yere (Vide plura in auguſt. de ciui. dei.) ¶Aboue alle reaſon it is meruaylle that ſuche men ſo extedyng in wytte in all thynges that was ylle receded fro the knowlege of very god. Amon kyng of Iewes regned two yere / the whiche was noughte in his lyuyng. And he was ſtrykyn of his ſeruaū
                        tes / and he deyed without ony repentances.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mundi .iiii.M.v.C.lviii. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatem .vi.xli.
                     IOſias the ſone of Amon ac .viii. yere of his aege began to regne & regned .xxxi. yere / a good chylde of a peruerſe fader. in hys yonge aege he ſaught the grace of god. And in that grace laudably abode vnto his ende. His relygyous lyfe and his werkes ye maye ſee. (iiii. regum .xxii. et .ii. para. xxxiiii) ¶Azaſtas the ſone of Elchie was byſſhop. ¶Tobyas aboute this tyme deyed. And he was a very holy man. And he prophecyed the deſtruccyon of Ieruſalem· ¶Tulius Hoſtilius was the thyrde kynge in Rome. And ſaint Auſtyn ſayth in his boke deciuitate dei. that from Rome was made vnto Auguſt the Emperour / there was too contynuell bataylle / that it was take for a merueylle / and they were one yere without bataylle / excepte ·xlii. in Nume dayes in the whiche was contynuell peaas. And that Tulius by cauſe he hadde reſte / he dyd curſedly to hys neyghburs and thenne he was ſlayne and all hys huſholde wyth a ſtroke of lyghtnynge. ¶Nabugodonoſor thys tyme was kynge of Babylon / a manly man and a victoryous. For he was the ſcourge of our lorde / to punyſſhe the ſyn̄es of many people. This man was kynge of Babylon / and after he conquered ye kyngdom of Aſſuriorum and made it one monarche. But many wayes ſcrypture ſpeketh of this man / nowe good and nowe euyll. And for by cauſe ſcrypture concludeth that he ended his lyf in the louynge of god / by the prayer of Danyell / and in the knowlege of one very god / ſome doctours ſaye. He is ſaued / and ſome ſaye it is doubte. ¶Ancus Marcius the fourth kyng of Rome regned .xxiii. yere This man for grace and truſte that he had to Tarquinus Preiſcus made hym the gouernour of his chyldren And Ayres and he ylle rewarded

hym. ¶Danyell yet a chylde delyuerd ſaynt Suſan / and ſtode in the conceyte of the kyng wyth his felowes / and after warde he dyſcuſſed the dremes of the kynge and was made a man of grete honeſte / (Vt pꝪ Danielis prio.) ¶Ionathas the ſeconde ſone of Ioſie regned on the Iewes thre monethes / and was made kynge by the people / and he was not good. And Pharao tooke hym and ladde hym in to Egypte / and made hys elder brother kynge. (vt pꝪ .iiii. regum .xxiii.)
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mūdi .iiii.M.v.C.lxxxviii. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē .v.C.xi.
                     IOachim or Ieconyas the ſone of Ioſie was made kynge of Iewes by pharao / regned .xi yere. And by cauſe he lyued nought ne herde not the prophetes. Nabudonoſor toke hym and made hym his ſeruante thre yere. And he rebelled ayenſt hym after warde / and he toke hym & was aboute to haue ladde hym vnto Babylon / but his coūſell was chaūged and ſo Nabugodonoſor ſlewe hym in Iheruſalem and caſt his body ouer the walles after ye prophecy of Ieremy / and tooke with hym the veſſelles of our lord Iheſu (vt pꝪ .ii. para. vlt) ¶Samias was byſſhop vrias prophete was ſlayne of Iecony the kynge / and Ieremi was preſente. ¶Ioachim ſone to Ieconias regned in the Iury thre monethes & lyued nought / & therfore anone he was meued that he ſholde regne no lenger / and was boūde and tranſlated in to Babylon / and many with hym were tranſlated (vt pꝪ .iiii. regum .xxiiii. ¶Daniel. Anamas. Azarias. Myſaell. Ezechiel & Mardocheus / all theſe with Ioachim the kyng were ladde in to Babylon / yonge chyldern / for by cauſe they werre of the noble blood.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mundi .iiii.M.vi.C. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē .vi.C.
                     SEdechias the thyrde ſone of Ioſie regned on the Iewes .xi. yere / thys Sede
                        
                           •
                        hias was a myſcheuous man in his lyuynge And he wolde not here Ieremy the prophete / therfore he peryſſhed wretchedly / and alle the Iury wyth hym And his eyen were put out / & hys chyldern were ſlayne (vt pꝪ .iiii. regum.) ¶Ioſedech the ſone of Azarie was byſſhop / & was trāſlated fro Iheruſalem by Nabugodonoſor in to Babylon. ¶Abacuk prophecyed ayenſt Nabuch at Babylon. And there be opynyons what tyme this Abacuk 
                           •
                        as. This Abacuk brought mete to Danyel whan he was put to the lyons after Ierom
                     And here endeth the fourth Aege / & the hyſtore of Regum.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Here begynneth the fyfth aege of the worlde durynge to the Natiuite of Cryste.
                     
                         
                        
                     
                     THys tyme ye Temple of Salomō was brente of the Caldes & Ieruſalem was deſtroyed / this Temple ſtode .cccc. & .xlii. yere that is to wyte / fro the fyrſt makyng / the whyche was made ye fourth yere of Salomō. And fro ye deſtruccion / ye whiche was made by Tytus that is to wite .xlii. yeres after the paſſiō of Cryſt. ¶Priſcus Torquinꝰ the fyfth kyng of Rome regned. And he made Capitoliū (quaſi caput ſolū) For in the groūde werke was foū
                        de an heed without ony body / as for prophecy of thynges to come. For there after warde the Senatours ſate as one heed of all the worlde. ¶This tyme thre childern were caſt ī to a furnays bren̄yng / & with a myracle they were delyuern / as it is ſayd (in dan̄. prio) ¶Nabugodonoſor ye ſone of Nabugodondſor ye myghty regned in Babylō / this man an hyngyng garden with myghty coſtes for his wyfe (& many meruailloꝰ thynges he dide. So that he wolde be named to excede Hercules in his greteneſſe & ſtrengthe. Enilmerodach brother to ye later Nabugodonoſor / regned in Babylon. Thys man toke Ioachim out of pryſon. and worſhiped hym. his fader deed body after the coūſeyl of this man / he deuyded to an hundred grypes leeſt yt he ſhold ryſe from deth to lyue. ¶Nota This playe of the cheſſe was foūde of Xerſe a Philoſopher. For the correctōn of Eniimerodach thys tyme the kynge of Baby a grete tyraunte. the whyche was wonte to kylle hys owne mayſters and wyſe men And for he durſte

not rebuke hym openly / with ſuche a wytty game / he procured hym to be meke.
                  
                  
                     Anno mūdi .iiii.M.vi.C.xxxiiii. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē .v.C.lxv.
                     SAlathiel of the line of Cryſte was ſone to Iecony the kynge of Iewes. the whiche he gate after the tranſmigracōn of Babylon. as Mark ye Euāgeliſte ſayth ¶Seruius Tulius the ſixt kyng of Rome was of a bonde condicyon on the maders ſyde. For ſhe was a captyue mayde. but ſhe was of ye noble blode / This man had grete louynge & nobly he bare hym in euery place / Thre hylles to the cyte he put· & dyched ye walles roūde about. ¶Reguſar Sabuſardach & Balthaſar were brethern the whyche regned one after a nother & were kynges in Babylon. And Balthaſar was the laſte kynge of Babylon / the whyche was ſlayne of Darius & Cirꝰ (Plura vide daniel .v.
                  
                  
                     ¶Incipit monarchia Perſarum.
                     
                        DArius vncle to Ciro. felowe in ye kyngdom with Ciro trā
                        ſlated the kyngdomes of Babylon Caldees in to the kyngdom of Perſa
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                         & Medo
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                         Cirus was emperour .xxx. yere This Cyrus helde the monarche hole at Perſes. Of this man prophecyed yſayas / & he deſtroyed Babylon: & ſlewe Balthaſar kyng of Babylon / & he worſhyped gretly danyel ye Iewes he ſende home ayen that they ſholde buylde the Temple of god (Vt pꝪ Eſdre prio) ¶Babylō that ſtrōge caſtel was deſtroyed & hꝭ power was take from hym as it was prophecyed. This was the fyrſt cyte & the greteſt of all the worlde / of ye whyche Incredyble thynges are wryten / & this that was ſo ſtronge ī one nyght was deſtroyed / that it might be ſhowed to ye power of god / to the whiche power all other ben but a ſperke & duſte. For it is ſayd forſoth: that it was Incredyble to be made with mannes hō
                        de or to be deſtroyed with mānes ſtrēgth wherof al the world myght take an enſāple & it wolde or myght be enfourmed. ¶Tarquinꝰ Superbus was the .vii. kynge of Rome / & he regned .xxxv. yere. Thys man concyued fyrſt all the tormentes whiche are ordryned for malefactours. As exile / pryſon / welles / & galowes feters and manacles / chaynes & colous and ſuche other▪ And for his grete pryde and cruelnes god ſuffred hym to myſchyef and in what maner of wyſe it ſhall be ſhewed. He had a ſone of the ſame name / ye whiche defoyled a worthy mannes wyfe / they called hym Collatin & his wyf was called Lucres. Thys Tarquinꝰ that was this .vii. kynges ſone aforeſayde came vnto the ladyes hous abſente her huſbonde to ſupper and to lodgyng And whan all were a ſlepe he a roſe with a ſwerde in hys honde and with ſtrengthe and fere he rauyſſhed the woman. And whan he was gone ye nere daye after / ſhe ſende vnto her fader and to her huſbonde / for ſhe was of greate kynne / and thus ſhe ſayde to them. The kynges ſone came hyther & as frende / of whome▪ I had no myſtruſt and thus he hath defoylled my chaſtyce & loſte my name for euermore. Thenne her frendes ſawe her wepe and pytouſly complayned and they comforted her as well as they coude and ſayd it was noo vylany vnto her for it was ayenſt her wyll. She anſwered & ſayd yet ſhall ther neuer woman excuſe her by Lucres / For though ſhe cōſented not to thys dyde yet ſhall ſhe not dye without payne for that dede. And with that worde ſhe had a knyf redy vnder her mantell / with the whiche ſhe ſmote herſelf to the here & for this cruelnes & this pyteous deth the peple of rome aroſe & exiled ye king for euer more & all his progenye. And thus ſeaſed theſe kynges of Rome & neuer was none after.
                  
                  
                     Of the gouernaunce of Rome tyll the Emperours beganne.
                     AFter thys tyraunte was deed the Romayns ordened that theyr ſho
                           •
                        de neuer be kynge more in Rome. But they wolde be gouerned fro that forthe by Cōſules. So whā tho kynges had regned .ii. hondred yere and .xl. they made thys ſtatute that two Conſules ſholde be choſen: & they ſholde gouerne the cyte & the people. & for this cauſe theſe two were choſen that ony of thē wolde make ony yf exceſſe: the other ſholde gouerne hym. For theyr was no thynge obeyed: but yf they conſented bothe. Alſo they ſholde not ſtonde in ther dygnyte paſſynge one yere: for thys cauſe. That for domynacyon of longe tyme: they ſholde not vſurpe vpon them more than was ryght In alle thys tyme the Empyre of Rome was not dylated poſſynge .xii. myle. The fyrſt Conſules that were made: they called Lucium and

the other Brutū / and theſe two men dyde grete thynges in theyr time But yet ye peple bare heuy of theyr domynacyon / wherfore they choſe an other man / the whyche ſhold haue more auctoryte than they / & they called hym Dictator ¶In this ſame tyme theyr was a grete dyſcencyon betwixt the people and the Senate werfore they choſe Trybunas wyth theyr Iuges ouer the people / and defended them fro wronge as ſaythe yſyder. For the Dictator whan he was choſe he laſted .v. yere / and the Trybunas were remeued euery yere. ¶But ye muſte vnderſtōde that ye ſhall not haue here after all ye Conſules named that gouerned Rome bytwene ye ſeſſynge of kyngꝭ / & the begynnynge of themperours. For it were to long to wryte / ſpecyally whan euery yere were newe ſyn / that one man myght be choſen ſoo oftentymes as we rede / and alſo for the endurynge of ther gouernaunce. For they were gouernours of Rome .v.C. yere .lxvii. So the moſte famous men of theſe ſhalle be reherced / after the fourme of Cronycles / and as they ſtonde in the boke was echeone after other.
                  
                  
                     ¶Incipit hiſtoria libri Eſdre. ¶Anno mūdi .iiii.M.vi.C.lix. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē .v.C.xl.
                     zOorobabell after the commaundemēt of god foūded the Temple and made it parfyte / but it was longe after (Vt pꝪ Eſdre .vi.) After the people of Ieruſalem came fro Babylon / theſe two ruled Iheſus the hyghe preſt as gouernour / and zorobabelas duke. And this maner of guydynge was kepte vnto Herodes tyme that the hyghe preeſtes ſholde be prayncypall / and the dukes vnder theym. But the dukes were euer of ye trybe of Iuda / after the prophecye of Iacob. And vnder that good gydynge of preeſtes it is not redde the people to haue receded fro the very true fayth / as they dyde afore in the tyme of Iewes / & of kynges. For then many tymes they ra
                           •
                        e to ydolatrye. ¶Eſdras the preeſt of ye kynrede of Aron thys tyme exceded men in hoolynes / thorugh whoſe grete wyſedome all the Iewes ſtate was hopen. ¶Cambyſes the ſone of S
                           •
                        
                        ri regned oon the kyngdome of Perſarum / the whyche commaunded mygtely the Temple of Ieruſalem ſhold not be buylded ayen. Hy
                           •
                         faders commaunded it ſholde be buylded. Thys Cābyſes made a curſyd Iuge to be
                           •
                        leyed or helte a lyue and made his ſone to ſytte on his faders ſkynne / that thrughe that drede he ſholde drede falſhede and Iuge ryghtwyſely. Thys Cambyſes hadde many names in holy ſcrypture in the boke of Eſdre. Arthaxerſe
                           •
                         or Aſſures in hiſtory
                           •
                         Iudith / that was done vnder hym he called Nabugodonoſcor / or Olyfernes the prince of his chyualry ſubdued many londes to his lorde. And at the laſt he came vnto Bethuleem / and there was ſlayne of Iudith a woman / (vt pꝪ Iudith .ii. et .xlii.) ¶Enereydes regned in Perſes half a yere. ¶Darius regned at the Perſees / the whiche by ye mocyon of zorobabel commaunded the werke of the Temple to be taken ayen. And commaunded his prynces that on nowyſe they ſhold lette it / but ſholde helpe it in all that they coude. (Vide plura in Eſore. vode. vo tempore ambiguū propter diuerſitatē docto
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                        )
                  
                  
                     ¶Circa annū mūdi .iiii.M.vii.C.xxxiiii. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē .iiii.C·lxv.
                     ABiuth ſone to zorobabell of ye lyne of Cryſte was aboute this tyme. For of hym and of other folowynge vnto Ioſeph / nothyng is hadde in ſcrypture / but tha
                           •
                         Mathe theuangelyſt nombreth theym in the Genelogy / and therfore the certayn tyme of them duely can net be knowe. ¶Ioachim thys tyme byſſhop after Ioſephus was called Ioſedech vnder whome Ieruſalem was buylded ayen (vt dicit. et hoc idempatet Neemie .xii.) ¶In the .ii. hōdred and .xliiii. yere after that Rome was made / the Romayns ordeyned two Conſules in the ſtede of theyr kynge / the whyche ſholde gouerne one yere alone / leeſt that by taryenge they ſhold be proude: and that the one ſholde co
                           •
                        recte the other yf he exceded or erred ¶Brutus was the fyrſte Conſull: and Lucius the ſeconde. And thenne was there a man that was called Dictator / the name of an offyce: the whyche ſholde go wyth the people ayenſte ther enmyes. ¶Titus Puphis. Marcus conſules. ¶Thenne after the Romayns cō
                        playned gretly on the condycyons of the Conſules. And then the power was put to .x. men to an excedynge coſte to the comyn peple. For eueryche one of them wente lyke a kyng) and nede cauſed them to leue that dygnyte. And they truſted neuer to reſte the warre was ſoo

ſtronge agaynſt them. ¶Arthaxeſes was kynge of Perſa
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                         / vnder whome Eſdras came to Ieruſalem. And Neemias was buteler to the ſame kynge. whom after warde he ſēt to buylde the walles of Ieruſalem. ¶zerſes regned after him two monethes. Segdianus .vii. monethes / and lytell they dyde.
                  
                  
                     ¶Circa annū mundi .iiii.M vii.C.lix. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē .iiii.C.xl.
                     ELyac is reherced in the lyne of Cryſt in Mathee. prio & more of hym is not had in 
                           •
                        crypture. Eſdras a holy man a connynge and worſhypfully was had amonge the peple this man came frome Babylon with other / & he meued with very Charyte went ayen to babylon / that he myght wynne moo of Iſrael / & ſaue the ſoules & brynge them home with hym In this tyme he repeyred the lawe and the holy bokes the whiche the Caldees had brente / & an happy wytneſſe to all the worlde he lefte in ſcrypture. He foūde newe letters / and lyghter in faccyon / the whiche thorugh the holy gooſt fulfylled he came ayen to Iheruſalem wyth a grete multytude / and with the kynges preuylege / that he ſholde teche ye people the lawe that he had repeyred. And there he deyed in a good aege. ¶Neemias an Hebrewe butelere of kynge Arthaxerſes / at his lordes cōmaundement wente from Babylon in to Ieruſalem. where of he hadde .xii. yere the ledynge of the people / And the .v. yere he began to repeyre the yates and the walles of Ieruſalem / the whiche werke he ended in two yere and four monethes / & that whit greue Impedymentes. For the halfe of the people ſtode armed without the cytee to withſtod the people of other nacyonne. intendynge dyſtroy them / & ye other parte laboured in armes holdinge in the one honde ſtones for walles / and in the notable other honde aſwerde / or nyghe by it (Vide pluralio. ſuo) ¶Permenides a phyloſopher / and namely in mortall thynges was abute thys tyme. ¶Socrates a phyloſophar whyche vnderſtode moche of the power of god / and he was Platoes mayſter. Democritꝰ ypocras / and other / of whom the noble werkes abode were alſo.
                  
                  
                     ¶Circa annū mūdi .iiii.M.viii.C. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē .iii.C·lxxxx.
                     Azor is reherced in the lyne of Cryſte in Mathe .io. but no thynge of his dedes is wryten in ye ſcriptur. ¶Elyaſyb or Elyſaphat ſucceded Ioachim in the biſſhopryche (vt dicit Euſebius et magiſter hiſto) ¶Camillus was Dictator at Rome / in whoos dayes myſcheuous playes were ordeyned / that peſtylence ſholde ceſſe atte Rome. Of the playes ſaynt Auſtyn treateth dylygently in repreuynge the falſhede of the goddes / the whyche deſyred to be pleaſed with ſuche wretched playes. Soo ſhamefully theſe playes were vſed with naked men and wymmen / that honeſt men & wymmen wolde not 
                           •
                        e at thoſe playes / ne yet beholde them (Vide plura in Aug. de ciuitate dei.) ¶Darius Notus regned at the Perſees .xix. yere. ¶Plato the deuyne phyloſopher and Aryſtotle his diſcyple were this tyme noble and famous clarkes. ¶Titꝰ Quintꝰ was dictator atte Rome / and he was a couetous man whome Auſtyn de ciuitatē dei. bryngeth in ayenſte coueytous and proude Cryſten men. ¶Gaius was a Senatour vnder whom was a grete bataylle agaynſt the kynge of Turco
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                         And .viii. thouſand men of theym were taken ¶Marcus Valerius was alſo a noble Senatoure of Rome / the whiche wyth .lx. thouſande Romayns foughte wyth the Frenſſhmen & had the better and ſlewe many of them. ¶Arthaxereſes kyng of Perſees called ayen to his Empyre Egypte. And he put Nacranabo the kynge in Ethyopia: & many Iewes in to tranſmygracyon. Alſo he ſende Vagoſum a prynce ouer Flom Iordan to aſke ayen to the trybute that was forgete: to Eldra that was the .vii. yere rente (propter ſubbam terre) ¶A
                           •
                        ſamus ſucceded hym: and regned a yere. ¶Darius the ſone of Arſamus regned with the Perſees xxiiii. yere. This Darius was a myghty man and a bolde: the whyche aſked of the Grekes a trybute: & that was the cauſe of the deſtruccyon of the monarche of Perſarū: For it was tranſlyted to the Grekes: after the prophecye of Danyll. For it is ſayd: that Dariꝰ brought .xv. hondred thouſande fyghtynge men: whō all Alexander ſlewe. ¶Iodas the ſone of Elyſaphat was hygh byſſhop in Ieruſalem in tyme of Mardachin. Iohannes his ſone ſucceded hym. ¶Aryſtotiles the mooſt ſubtell and famous phyloſopher lerned this tyme. Senocrate the mooſte chaſte phyloſopher was thys tyme: with dyuerſe other moo.
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶by cauſe the kynges of brytayne nexte after lyued in peas mooſt parte / & lytell of them is wryten / therfore they ſhall be ſette togyder / tyll it be comen to Caſſibolon kynge of brytayne the whyche was brother to Lud.
                     ANd whan Cormbratus was deed regned Guentholen / that was his ſone a man of good condycyons and well beloued / and he gouerned the londe welle and wyſely. And he regned .xxv. yere / and after he deyde lyeth at newe Troy.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Seyſell regned and well gouerned the londe after Guentholen.
                     ANd after Guentholen regned hys ſone Seyſell welle and worthely gouerned the londe as his fader hadde done before. And he regned .xv. yere / and deyed and lyeth at newe Troy.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Kymor regned after Syſell his fader / and he begate Howan that regned after his fader in peas.
                     ANd after Seyſell regned his ſone Kymor well & nobly .xix. yere ī peas & thē
                        ne after hym regned Howan his ſone .x. yere / and thenne he deyed / & lyeth at Ikaldowne·
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Mor with dyed thorugh myſchaund
                           •
                        e / thorugh a beeſt.
                     AFter thys Howan regned Morwith / and he became ſo wycked & ſo ſterne: tyll at the laſt a grete vengeaunce came vpon hym. For whan as he wente vpon a tyme by the ſee ſide hemette with a grete beeſt: that was black and horryble & hydeous. & he wēde that it had be a whale of the ſee: & bent an arblaſt & wolde haue ſlayne that beeſt with his quarell but he myghte not ſmyte hym. & whan he had ſhot al hꝭ quarlles that beeſt anōe came to him in a grete haſt: & hym deuoured a lyue: & ſo he deyed for hys wyckedneſſe: thorugh vengeaū
                        ce of god: after that he had regned .ix. yere.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of Grandobodiam that was Morwith ſone that made Cambrydge.
                     AFter that thys Mor with was dede: ye brytons crowned Brandobodiā his ſone / & this Grandobodiam longe tyme regned in goodnes: & made temples and townes this Grandobodiam made the twone of Cambrydge: & ye towne of Graūtham was well beloued of ryche & poore / for he honoured the ryche / and helped the poore. This Grandobodiam had .iiii. ſones. Artogaill. Heſyder. Higamus & Petitur· And whan he had regned .xi. yere / he deyed / and lyeth at newe Troy.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of Artogaill that was Grandobodiās ſone / howe he was made kynge / and ſythe put downe for his wyckedneſſe.
                     AFter Grandobodiam regned his ſone Artogaill .v. yere / & he became ſo wycked & ſo ſterne yt the brytons wolde not ſuffre hym to be kynge / but put hym downe & made Heſyder his brother kynge / & he be came ſo good & merci able that mē hym called kyng of pyte. And whan he had regned .v. yere he had ſo grete pyte of hꝭ brother Artogaill that was kī
                        ge before· And anone he forſoke his dignyte & toke his brother the crowne ayen & made him kynge ayenſt all the brytons wyll. ¶And after Artogaill became ſoo good of condicōns / that he was well beloued of the londe for he came ſo debonayr and free / and dyde ryght & reaſon to all maner of men. And he regned .vi. yere and deyed / and lyeth at Grauntham.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Heſyder was made kynge after the deth of his brother.
                     AFter the deth of Artogail / ye brytons crowned an other tyme Heſyder / but his two brethern Hygamus & Petitur had of hym grete ſpyte & ſcorne / & ordeyned them for helpe to warre vpon the kyng ther brother / & ſoo they tooke hym & put hym in pryſon the ſeconde yere of his regne. And they departed all the londe betwixt them both but Higamus lyued but .vii. yere / and tho had Petitur all the londe and he made the towne of Pickerynge.
                  
                  
                     ¶How the brytons came and tooke Heſyder oute of pryſone / and made hym kynge the thyrde tyme.
                     ANd whan thys Petitur was deed the brytons toke Heſyder anone and made hym kynge the thyrde tyme / And tho regned he in peas .xiiii. yere. And after he deyed and lyeth at Karleyll.
                  
                  
                     ¶How .xxxiii. kynges regned in peas eche after other after Heſyder.
                     AFter the deth of Heſyder regned .xxxiii kynges eche after other in peas & with out ony longe taryēge. I ſhal tell thē all & how lōge eche regned as ye ſtory telleth. the firſt kynge of tho .xxxiii. was called gerbodia he regned .xii. yere after hym regned morgan. yere. And

after him regned Cighnus .vi. yere And after hym regned Iowalā .viii. yere. And after him regned on Rohugo .xi. yere / And after regned Voghen .xiii. yere / And after hym regned Catyll .xv. yere / And after hym regned Porrex .ii. yere / & after hym regned Cherin .xvii. yere & after hym regned Coyl .xii. yere / & after him regned Sulgenis .xiiii. yere / & after hym regned Eſdad .xx. yere / & after hym regned Andragie .xvii. yere / & after hym regned vrian, v. yere / and after hym regned Eliud .ii. yere / And after he regned Eldadan .xv. yere / And after hym regned Claten .xii yere / & after hym regned Ouirgūde .viii. yere / & after hym regned Mortan .vi. yere / and after hym regned Bledagh .iiii. yere / & after hym regned Caph .i. yere / & after hym regned Gen. ii. yere / and after hym regned Seyſel & kyng Bled .xxii. yere / & kynge Tabreth .xx. yere / & Archynall .xiiii. yere / and Croll .xxx. yere / & Rodyngir .xxxii. yere & Hectir .v. yere & Harpir ·vi. yere & Carpour .vii. yere / and Digneyll .iii. yere and Samuell .xxiiii. yere / and Rede .ii. yere / & Ely .vii. monethes. This Ely had thre ſones. Lud. Caſſiballam / and Enemion.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Lud was made kynge after the deth of Ely his fader.
                     AFter the dethe of Ely regned Lud hys ſone & gouerned well the londe & mo
                        
                           •
                        he honoured good folke / & tempred & amēded wycked folke / thys Lud leued more to dwelle at Troy than in ony other place of the londe. wherfore the name of newe Troy was left / & tho was the cyte called Ludſtone. But the name is chaūged thrught varyaunce of letters / and now is called London. And this king made in the cyte a fayre gate / & called it Ludgate after his name / And the folke of ye cyte are Lodoners And whā he had regned .xi. yere he dyed & lyeth at London. And he had two yonge ſones that one was called adraghē & that other 
                           •
                        ormace. But they coude neyther ſpeke ne go for yongthe / And therfore the Brytons crowned a ſtrōge knyght that was called Lud / that was Caſſibalanius brother / & made hym kynge of Brytayne / now called Engonde.
                  
                  
                     ¶Circa annū dm̄ .iiii.M.viii.C.lxxxxiiii. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē .ii.C.xv.
                     SAdoch of the lyne of Criſt / is nombred in Mathe. primo / but in ſcryture there is nomore mēcyon / made of hym ¶Iadu
                           •
                         the ſone of Iohn̄ was hygh byſſhop in Ieruſalem / this tyme kyng Alexander regned / ye whiche was wrothe with ye people of Iheruſalem and came to the cytee. Thenne Iadus arayed in his Pontyfycall ornamentes came to mete hym. And he ſodeynly was pleaſed & worſhyped the byſſhop & with peas & Ioye entred the cyte. And he made to be brought to hym the boke of Daniell \ & the prophecy to be expowned to hym the whiche was ſpoken of hym. & that done he Ioyed ſtrongly. For all thyng the whiche he had herde by ye dreme in due ordre was fulfylled. And it was lykely to hī that he ſholde be the ſame perſone of whom Daniell prophecyed: & of that he toke more hardynes to fyght wyth Dariꝰ kynge of Perſe: dyde the ſacrafyce: & badde the Iewes to aſke what they wolde haue he graūte that they ſholde kepe theyr owne lawes at ye .vii. yere ſhold be without tribute (vid mg
                           •
                        m in hiſto) ¶The hoſte of Alexander as Oroſiꝰ ſayth was .xxxii. M. of foot mē and .iiii. M. horſmen: & ſhyppes C.lxxx. And it is vncertayne whether it is more meruaylle: that he ſholde conquere all the worlde with ſo lytel a power or how that euer he durſt go vpō them with ſo lytell a power. And ther was of Alexand & his hoſte ſlayne ye 
                        
                           •
                        yng of Perſa
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                         (Et vt oroſiꝰ dicit quīquies decies cētena milia) Eneas ye ſone of Iady was byſſhop after his fader. Manilius Papirius & Fabius we
                           ••
                         cōſulers at rome. This papiriꝰ whā he was a child he was very wyſe & he feyned many fayr leſīge that he myght kepe hꝭ mayſters coūſel & the Senatours. And whan he came vnto mā
                        nes ſtate: he was ſo noble a war
                           •
                        you
                           ••
                         That whan ye Romayns dradde Alexander he was choſen for to goo ayenſte hym· And of the goddes charged not but he ſcorned and reproued the goddes: ſayenge afore that vnhappy thynge ſholde falle· And that to his grete louynge hooly douctours ſaye
                  
                  
                     ¶Incipit monarchia Grecorum. et ceſſat monarchia Perſaram.
                     Kynge Alexander thys tyme began to be lorde of all the worlde: and he was called gret Aliſand for his gret victory ye whiche he had in ſo lytell tyme It was an euydēc Iuge mēt of ye wrath of god ayēſt ſyn̄ers of that time

certenly ſome myracle oure lorde dyde in helpynge of his power for hym / for ye ſee of Pamphilicon was deuyded to hym as in olde tyme the reed ſee to the Iewes whan he perſecuted Dariꝰ. Alſo at his prayer the hylles of Caſpii were ſhytte that certen of the curſed Iewes mygh neuer come out. But at laſt in babylon with venym he was poyſōed & dyed the ·xxxiii yere his of age / & ye fyfth yere of his monarche the .xii. yere of the kyngdome of Macedon. ¶Knowe ye that whan Alexander was deed thoſe .xii. to whom he deuyded his kyngdome accorde they myghte not / & then began Infenyte batylles / & at the laſte foure opteyned all the kyngdome (Vide plura in Oroſio)
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mundi .iiii·M.ix.C.ix. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē .ii.C.ix
                     AChym of the lyne of Cryſt ſone to Sadoch is nombred ī Mathe prio. and of him is nomore had in ſcriptur. ¶Symō was byſſhop this tyme an holy man / & alſo ryghtwys he was named of the people. ¶Eleazarꝰ was byſſhop after ſyomon / this man ſende to Pretholomeo kyng of Egypt .lxxii. lerned mē of euery trybe ſex / to Interpret the lawe of the Iewes / the whiche tranſlated from Hebrewe ī to Greke thorugh a grete miracle that ſo manimen ſholde in .lxxii. dayes tranſlate all holy ſcripture with one accorde (Vide aug. de ciui. dei) ¶Dolobela Emilius. Marcus Curius. Genutus tyme were Cōſules at Rome Thys Dolobela conquered Samnites / & after many bataylles hadde / and Marcus ſubdued Epitoras and ſlewe .xxiii.M. of his men / & then fledde kynge Pirro / the whyche ſende to hym for peas & offrynge to hym greere yeftes. And then this Conſull anſwered & ſayd / ther ſhall no batayl cauſe me to flee / nor no moneye corrupte me. For I had leuer cōmaūde ryche mē to doo this & this than be ryche myſelf. ¶Tonucius ſubdued the cyte of Argiuo
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                         / & a legyon of knyghtes of Rome he ſende to Rome / & cauſed them to be bete openly in the myddes of the market / for they had them not lefully to the courte of Rome For the lawe was thenne kepte ſo ſtreytly at Rome / that & they had fayled to do ye due obſeruaunce in vertue they ſholde be punyſſhed. Theſe Romayns and many afore and after were the mooſte noble men of the worldes honeſte that myght be: and in all maner of vertue circumſpect: As hooly doctours ſaye that they put ther examples to Cryſten men but not the Intencyon: for they lacken the keye of fayth
                  
                  
                     ¶Incipiunt reges Egyti or alr non pt̄ ſerī cōtinuacō. et intexent̄ reges Sirie.
                     PTholomeus Philodolphus this tyme was kyng ī Egypt: this Philodolphus was the very worſhyper of one god: & full gracyous to the Iewes: of whome .xx.M. & .C. he delyuerd out of captyuyte: & that he dyde that he myght pleaſe the god of Iſrael: of whom he herde the meruayles. And his lawe he deſyred to haue: nor it myght not be tranſlated in to none other longage but of deuoute mē: and that with a due reuerence & a ſolempnite. Certayne men atempted to haue wryten it amon the Gentyle ſtoryes: whome the plage of god ſtroke tylle they repented. Thys kynge ſende vnto Eleazar the byſſhop: to ſende to hym lerned men: The whyche he dyde gladly (Vide plura in mgrō hiſto)
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mundi .iiii.M.ix.C.lix. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē .ii.C.xl.
                     ELyud of the lyne of cryſt: gate Eleazar as it is open ī Mathe. io. & more in ſcrypture is not hadde of hym. ¶Omias byſſhop was ſōe to Symon ſimō was biſſhop after hī the whiche was a very relygyous man. He refourmed the Temple of god in to better and enceraced the cyte of Ieruſalem with mani other good thynges. ¶Sempronius. Appius. Claudius. Gueus. Gaius. Artilius. Rgulus. Emelius Fabius thys tyme were Senatours at Rome. Thys Sempronius fought ayenſt the countre of Picentes: and almooſt the chyualry on both the partyes were ſlayne: excepte a fewe Romayns were lefte a lyue: & ſubdued the coūtree. Appius Claudiꝰ ſubdued Siracuſanas & ye coūtree of Penos: & put grete trybute to thē. Atilꝰ Regulꝰ a noble ſenatour ouer came thre Kynges & .lxxiii. cytees he ſubdued: & a dragō of a .C.xv. foot he kylled. After warde whan he was ouer cruell ayenſt his enmyes: & denyenge to yeue them peas: but yf they wolde paye a myght trybute: they almooſt beynge in dyſpayr & fought ayenſt hym: & ouercame hym & his hoſte & toke hym: & neuertheleſſe yet they wolde fayne haue had peas: but thys mooſt faythful man had leuer dye in paynes

grete / than to yeue reſt and peas to curſyd peple. His louynge gretly ſaynt Auſtyn exalteth. ¶Emelius Fabiꝰ and Gaiꝰ wolde haue delyuerde Regulus but they opteyned not. ¶Ptholomias Euer gites this tyme was kinge of Egypt a victoryous prynce and a myghty. This man ſubdued Siriam & Ciriliā / and the mooſt parte of Aſie / & tooke ther goodes & brought them in to hys coūtree. Ptholomeus Philopater / ſone to Euergites regned in Egypte .xvii. yere. This man fought ayenſt two brethern. Seneleū & grete Antiochū / & he proſtrated many a thouſāde / but neuertheles he preuayled not (Vide plura in Iohē ſuꝑ Danielis) ¶Hanyball the mooſt curſed kynge of Peno
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                         & of Affricano
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                         myghtely hoted ye Romayns / for he deſtroyed them almooſt to ye vttermeſt ende / & nyghe the cytee of Rome he deſtroyed. And ſoo many noble men of Rome he ſlewe at one time / that thre buſſheles ful of golde rynges he drewe offyngers. Alſo ī a certayne water / of the ſlayne bodyes of theſe Romayns / he made as it were a brydge / that his hoſt myght paſſe. And at the laſte Cipio ye noble ſenatur direckid his hoſt to hym & ſcōfyted hym and almooſt Cipioes hoſte of Romayns was ſlayne. ¶Lucaciꝰ conſull. Simproniꝰ Valerius. Fulnius Lutinꝰ ſtaius & Cipio / ruled at Rome / this tyme the Romayns had peas one yere alone / & it was take for a myracle tha
                           •
                         they had reſt ſo long. For afore this tyme in .iiii.C. & .xl. yere the Romayns had neuer reſt. Theſe Conſules whan the yere was done gadred all the ſtrengthe of ytaly / & they had in theyr hoſt .viii.M. armed men for drede of the Frenſſhmen / whom they dradde ſtrongly / & after warde ye Romayns ſubdued them. ¶Epiphanes the ſone Philopater regned in Egypte .xxiiii. yere. Cleopatra doughter to grete Antiochus was his wyf· ¶Antrochꝰ magnus thys tyme regned in Syr
                           •
                        y / the whiche dyde moche myſchyef to the Iewes (vt pꝪ Mathe) ¶Onias this tyme was byſſhop in Ieruſalē. This Onias for the tyranny of Antiochus fledde with many Iewes in to Egypte / feynynge hym to fulfyll the prophecye yſaie .xix. that is to wyte To builde the Temple. But ī that he ſin̄ed for he ſayd otherwyſe than he thought. The kynge of Egypte gracyouſly receyued hym / & gaf hym ye londe of Helipolees / & there he buylded his Temple. ¶Somon his ſone was byſſhop at Ieruſalem / after that his fader was fledde.
                  
                  
                     ¶Circa annū mundi .v.M.xxxiiii. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatem .C.lxv.
                     ELeazar of the lyne of cryſt was aboute this tyme. Of hym no thyng wryten in ſcrypture: but that Mathe nombreth hī (vt pꝪ prio) ¶Onias Pius was to the byſſhop thys tyme an holy man: & well beloued with god & man And not alonely with good men but euyl men alſo. At the laſt vnryght wyſly was ſlayne of Adronito (vt pꝪ .ii. machabeo
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                        ) ¶Paulus Tereneius Scipio Affricanus: theſe were Senatours at rome. Theſe two erected an hoſte ayenſt Hanyba
                           •
                        l: & there almoſt the Romayns hope dyed· For there was ſlayne. xl
                           •
                        iii.M. Romayns. And this noble Scipio affricanus brought ayen ye ſtate of the Romayns people the whyche ſtode in a diſtpayre euer to haue recouered. For he fought with Hanybal manly & dyſcōfyted hym. All Spayne 
                           •
                        e ouer came All Affrica he ſubdued: gre
                           •
                         Antiochus he brought to be his ſeruaunt. All Aſie he made trybutary to the Romayns: this man ſo noble & ſo victoryus by his owne vnkynde coū
                        tree was outlawde: & there he deyed. ¶Philometor the ſone Epiphanes of Cleopatra regned in Egypt .xxxv. yere. This kyng ye
                           •
                         a childe / noble Antiochꝰ gretly oppreſſyd with many dyſceytes but the Romaynes ſent Legates the whiche cōmaūded Antiochus that he ſhold ceſſe of his tyranny ayenſt him. And Marcus Publius made a cercle to Antiochus thus ſaynge. The Senatours of rome & the peple cō
                        maūde yt that thou go not out of thys cercle 
                           •
                        yl thou haue anſwered to this mater This Antiochꝰ ſeynge that he myght not contynue
                           •
                        h
                           •
                         tyranny ſayd yf it be thus cōmaūded me of the Senatours & Romayns peple I muſte nedes tourne ayē & ſo wood āgry he was that he loſt the ſege of Alexandre / & tourned to ye poore releues of ye Iewes / vengynge hym vpon them by cauſe he myghte not venge hym on a more myghtyer people (vt pꝪ iii lio Machabeo
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                         .ii.
                     MAthachias an holy man / and of all louynge mooſt worthy hated in hys herte the conuerſecyon of all ſynners / alonly truſtynge in our lord god of Iſraell (vt pꝪ primo macha. ii.) And thys man had .v. ſones of the ſame loue vnto god. Thys man was not byſhop

in Iſraell / but his thre ſones were. ¶Iudas Machabeus was byſſhop .iii. yere / & he was ſone to Mathathias. This Machabeus was the mooſt named man that euer was ī Iſraell / the whiche had neuer none lyke hym afore ne after. He was in batayll a myghty man & offred hym to deye a martyr for the lawes of god. ¶Ionatas his brother ſucceded him .xix yere. The whyche grewe in vertue and gouerned & ſtode ſtedfaſte in the lawes of god / & after falſely was ſlayne of Cryphone & two of his ſones (Plura vide Iuda et frēm eiꝰ li. macha. Antiochus Epiphanes ſone to Antiochꝰ the myghty this tyme was kynge of Syrry, This man from the heed vnto the feet within & without all was curſed / And therfore he was fygured to Antecryſt. Many martyrs cruelly he made & falſely he dyſpoſe hym to entre in to Egypt as his fader dyde / but he opteyned not for the Romayns letted hym. His mooſt vnhappy werke / & how he was in haſtage at Rome / and howe the prophecy of Danyell was completed in hym / ye maye ſee in the boke of Machabeo
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                        . ¶Quintus Flaminius. Marchus Cato. Thiberius Gracius were Senatours of Rome. This tyme was ſoo contynuall and ſo moche bataylle / that lerned men of Gentyles and of the true fayth both were wery for to wryte the actes or to haue thē in mynde. In the whiche bataylles men meruaylled gretly on the ſtedfaſtneſſe of the Romayns / that no trybulacyon / no drede no hardeneſſe myght not fere them / but euer contynued in batayll. And certaynly theſe Romayns after the worldes honeſte / they were the mooſt wyſeſt men that were. And therfore the Machabees deſyred ther company.
                  
                  
                     ¶Circa annū mundi .v.M.lix. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatem .C.xl.
                     MAthon ſone to Sadoch of the lyne of Cryſt gate Iacob (vt patet Mathei .i.) ¶Symon ſone to mathias was byſſhop .viii yere. Thys Symon was a very wyſe man / & from youth vntyll his aege was euer of good conuerſacyon / euer more vertuous. And at ye laſt he was ſlayne of his brother Elay. (vt pꝪ .i. macha) ¶Iohannes Hircanus ſone to Symon / was after his fader .xxix. yere / a noble man as al the kynrede was before hym. This man after his deceſſe left his wyf a very wyſe woman & his fyue ſones to gouerne the Iury of the eldeſt was called Ariſtobolus an vnpacyent man & an vnhappy. Hys owne moder with thre of his yonger brethern he pryſoned & ſlewe them thrugh hungre & ſoo alone he lyued kynge & byſſhop one yere (Vide plaura li. Machabeo
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                        ) ¶Publius Lucimius. Lucius Emilius. Lucius Lucinius. Lucius Conſorinus were Conſules att Rome. In whoos tyme the Cartagynes & the Romayns warred ſtrongely· But the Romayns ſubdued them / entendynge to haue deſtroyed ye Cartagynes vtterly. But among the Romayns ther was a notable wyſe mā called Scipio Nauta. And amonge many notable coūſeylers two he ga
                           •
                         ſpecyally to be had ī minde. The fyrſt that Cartago ſholde not be deſtroyed that thrugh the occaſyon of for and bataylles / a In warde cō
                        corde ſholde abyde amonge the Romayns / & a perpetuell ſtrength for contynuell excercyſe of batayll. The ſeconde. That in no wyſe the other ſholde be buylded in Rome. For he ſayd that was the mooſt enmye that myght be to ye people that vſed warre For that place nouryſſhed ſlouth and prouoked lechery ¶And how wyſely this notable man gaaf counſeyll / the tymes folowyng declareth (vide plca in Aug. dei ciuite dei libro .iiii.) ¶yet for all this counſeyll that noble cyte of Carcago was deſtroyed of Cipio & the Senatours. And it brente .xvii. dayes contynuelly Many men there were ſolde / & many men ranne in to the fyre wylfully. ¶Corinthꝰ this ſame yere was deſtroyde of the Romayns / the whyche was the rycheſt countree of the worlde. ¶Ptholomeus this tyme regned in Egypte / & was famylyer wyth the Romayns. And ſo longe he & his predeceſſours regned as they kept fydylyte to the Romayns. And knowe euery man that there was none other cauſe that the power of ye Romayns encreaſed ſo ſtrongly abue other people / but vertue / the whyche habundanly rygned in them / & namely reght wyſneſſe whiche aboue all thynge they vſed. And as longe as they kept meſures & loued ryght wyſneſſe / ſoo longe they were neuer ouercome And as ſone as they were corrupted / it is radde / they were ouercomē. ¶It is had in a certayne reuelacyon of god ſhewed to ſaynt Brygyte that oure lorde god bereth wetneſſe to theſe olde Romayns.

That none in this naturell lyf lyued more ryght wyſely. And what lyghtes of faythe they ſhewed in the tyme of Cryſten relygyon ſhall be ſhewed after warde.
                  
                  
                     ¶Regum Iude orum reſtituitur.
                     ARiſtobolus was the fyrſte kynge and preeſt in ye Iury this man regned one yere alone / and tooke to hym the Dyademe of the kyngdome. And he helde hym not contente with that his fader gaaf hym in his teſtamente. But he put his moder in pryſon & his brethern. And therfore he peryſſhed wretchidly with his brother Antigonꝰ the whiche was of his coūſeyll and helped hym.) Vide magyſtrum in hiſtoriis (¶Antigonus brother vnto the kyng was ſlayne thrugh the enuytee of the quene. ¶lexander was byſſhop after Arſtobolus / & he ſtode .xxvii· yere. And he was al atyraunte / all though he appered ſobre in the begynnyng. But he made it knowen what he was in his ſtomacke / for he ſlew his owne brother. And in .xii. yere he ſlewe .l. thouſande of the olde ſage faders of grete vertue / by cauſe they tolde hym his myſgydyng. Then̄e whan he ſholde deye / he left two ſones behynde hym Hircanū and Ariſtobolum. But certaynly he ſayde his wyf ſholde regne / for ſhe ſtode in the grace of the people. ¶Seruius Flaccus. Lucious. Fabiꝰ. Plubius this tyme were Senatours at Rome This tyme bataylles amonſte them ſif began̄e. Of the whiche the firſte cauſe & the begynnynge / was Graceus a myghhy man / well knowen with noble Romayns / began to ſeke a cauſe ayenſt them. And by cauſe that he myght do no thynge alone to them / he meued the comyn people to theym ſayenge / That all the londes & poſſeſſyons ſholde be deuyded equaly / and alſo the moneye. &c̄. And for that cauſe there was an Inſurrreccyon / in the whiche Graccus was ſlayne / and many myſcheues felle after (Vide Oroſium) ¶In ye tyme of theſe men / there was a chyld borne at Rome / hauynge foure feet / foure armes / two faces and foure eyen. ¶The hylle of Ethna ſpetted out flammynge fyre horryble / and deſtroyed the places nyghe aboute it. ¶And theſe men berynge rule. Cartago was cōmaunded to be reſtored. And it was fulfylled of the Romayns people. And there was myghty batayll in the cyte of Rome. ¶Fabius with a lytell hoſt ouercame the kynge of Armenye And there were drowned an honyred & four ſcore thouſāde men in the water of Rome. ¶Ptholomeus Alexander was kynge in Egypte. In his tyme was borne Lucerius a Poete / ye whiche afterward was madde for loue of wym̄en & ſlewe hymſelf. ¶Pthoiomeus ſone to Cleopatre regned after him / vnder whom Saluſtius ye noble wryter of hyſtoryes was borne. ¶Ptholomeꝰ Dioniſius was after this man And in his tyme virgyll & Oraciꝰ were borne.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno mūdi .v.M.C.xxxiiii. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatē .ix.C.v.
                     IAcob naturell fader to Ioſeph of the lyne of creſt is reherted in Luke & Mathe & lytell of hym is had in ſcrypture. ¶Alexandra wyf to Alexander was byſſhop in the Iury .ix. yere / & ſhewed moche tyrannye al yf ſhe was made byſſhop by her feyned holy relygyon. ¶And Hircanū her ſone ſhe prouoked to the byſſhopryche / & ſhe ordeyned that he ſhold regne after. This woman in ye lyne of the byſſhops is put fro the coūtynge of ye yeres. Not as ſhe vſed the offyce of a byſſhop for it was not leyfull to her. ¶Hircanus ſone to Alexandra regned .xxxiii yere. This Hircanus after the deceſſe of his moder ſucceded in the kyngdom / in ye whyche he had lytell proſperyte for percyalte of the peple. For anone he was ouer comen / & after warde he was reſtored thrugh the helpe of the Arabees. And thenne he was made trybutary to the Romayns. And ſoo 
                           〈◊〉
                         was in peas a lytell tyme. But not in ye name of kynge. At the laſt he dyd wretchedly for he was begyled thrugh the fraude Partho
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                         the whiche Antigonꝰ hyred ayenſt hym (vide plene magiſtrū hiſtorie) ¶The hereſye of ye Pharyſees aboute this tyme began. And amonge them were thre ſectes in the Iury. Pharacey. Saducey. & Eſſey. All theſe were deuyded frō the comyn vſe of the Iewes / & were enfe
                           ••
                        e with mani errours for thei ſayd that thei were holyer than other men. For they lyued ſtreytlyer than other men dyde (Vide plus alias) ¶Virgyll the mooſt excellent of Potes was magnefyed this tyme / & meruaylous thynges he dyd. And amonge other whan that Neopolis was vexed wyth deedly payne of myghty wormes. Virgyll caſte a worme of golde in to a pounde or a water / and it laye a certayne ſeaſon

there. And whan it was take vp in to the towne / all the cyte was made full of wormes. And tyll the worme of golde was put in to the water ayen / they hadde In fyte wormes. And whan it was in the water all the wormes wente a waye. ¶Alſo it is wreten in the cronycles of Rome / that Virgyll by connynge condeſcē
                        ded or thycked the ayre / ſoo that he walled his gardyne with the ayre. And he made a brydge of the ayre / by the whiche he myght paſſe euery tyme that he lyſt Alſo he aſked Morcellū Neopolitanū / neuewe vnto the Emperour / yf he wolde haue a byrde taught to kylle all byrdes or a flye taught to dryue all flyes out of the cyte. And this Marcellū tolde this to the Emperour. And he deſyred to teche a flye to kylle all flyes. For the comyn people were ſore anoyed with 
                           ••
                        yes. And many other maruales he dyde (vide magiſtrū Rodulfū Ceſterū) ¶Oracius Flaccus / and Saluſtius Criſpus hiſtoricus were at this tyme. Quintus Cipio. Gaiꝰ Lucis this tyme were Conſules at Rome. ¶Pompeius. Marcus Craſſus & Iulius Cezar this tyme were Dictatours at Rome. For as it is ſayd / afore there were many dygnytees at Rome / of the whiche ſome dured one yere / ſome two yere. And amonge all the dygnytees the Dictatours exceded / for it dured fyue yere. But whan the comyn peple and the lord ſhypes of Rome encreaſynge were made thre Dictatours. And thys tyme was pompeius. Iulius & Marcus Craſſus Dictatours. And by cauſe Pompeius was of grete honour and aeged / he bode at Rome to kepe the comyn people of Rome. ¶Marcus Craſſus was ſende to ſubdue and fyght with the regyon of Perthus. And thrugh treaſon he was taken and ſlayne ¶Iulius Cezar was ſende to the weſte parte of the worlde to ſubdue them. And he hathe wyth hym ſeuen legyons of people. And whan that he hadde ſubdued Lomberdye and Fraunce his fyue yere were ſpended / the whiche were aſſygned to hym and no lenger. There by his owne auctoryte he toke other fyue yere vpon hym / in the whiche he ſubdued Caſſybolon kynge of Brytayne / and the Frenſhmē that rebelled agaynſt hym ¶This ſame Iulius after he had conquered the countrees / vnto Rome he roode agayne / for to be receued with certayn worſhyp as conquerours were before hym but it was denyed hym / and alſo the entree of the Cytee / by the Inſtygacyon of a lorde called Pompei. wherfore thys Iulius Cezar was annoyed / and wyth force of myghte entred the Cyte / and robbed the comyn treaſoure and ladde it wyth hym / and departed it amonge the ſeuen legyons that were his ſeruauntes. Thenne wente he in to Spayne to fyght agaynſte this Pompei. For Pompei hadde the gouernaunce of Cartago. But after that Iourneye in ytale Pompei and he encountred togyder. ¶In the whyche bataylle Pompei fledde vnto the kynge of Egypte / and that ſame kynge for ſpecyall loue that he hadde vnto this Iulius Cezar ſmote or Pompeus heed and ſente it to Iulius Cezar. yet for all the enuyte that was betwixt them two Iulius wepte whan that he ſawe thys Pompeius heed· Thys Iulius was excedynge in wytte afore other men / and he faught in bataylle .lii. tymes. This man alone exceded Marcus Craſſus: the whyche is ſayde to haue foughten .xxxix. tymes. Thys man tooke fyrſte the Empyre of Rome vpon hym: whan Pompei and other noble men of the Romayns were ſlayne. ¶And atte the laſte the fyfthe yere of hys Empyre: Thys Iulius Cezar the ruler of all thys worlde was ſlayne in the coūſell hous thrughe treaſon of hys lordes. ¶Cathon the mooſt named phyloſopher: Seeynge Iulius Cezar haue the victorye: whom he fauoured not: at a towne called Vticam dyde ſlee hym ſelfe (iuxta illud Mauult cota mari: quam deroget vrbis honorari) But for that after Auſtyn he was not excuſed of ſenne.
                     ¶This tyme the Iury was trybutarye to the Romayns for percyalyte of two brethern Ariſtobolus and Ercanus bothe of them for enuye of other caſte them to the Romayns that they myghte regne. ¶This tyme thre ſonnes appered in heuen to warde the eeſt parte of the worlde: the whiche by lytell and lytelle were broghte in to one body. A grete ſygne it was that Affrica. Aſia: and Europa ſholde be broughte ī to one monarche and that ye lordſhyp of Anthony the Senatoure and Lucius Anthonii ſholde tourne in to one lordſhyp. ¶Marcus Cicerio Tullius the mooſt noble Rethorycen was Counſell of Rume this tyme.
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶How that the Brytons graunted vnto Caſſybolon whyche thenne to fore that was Luddes brother the londe. In whoos tyme Iulius Cezar came twyes for to conquere the londe of Brytayne.
                     AFter the deth of kynge Lud regned his brother Caſſybolon & became a good man & moche beloued of his brytōs ſo that for hys goodes & corteyſy they graunted hym the reame for euer more to hym & to his heyres. & the kynge of hys goodnes lete nouryſſhe worthely bothe the ſonnes that were Lud his brother. And after made the eldeſt ſone erle of Cornewayle / and the yngeſt ſone he made erle of London. And whyle this kynge Caſſybolon regned / came Iulius Cezar that was Emperour of Rome in to the londe wyth a power of Romayns / & wolde haue had this londe thrughe ſtrength / but Caſſybolon ouer came hym in batayll thrugh helpe of the Brytons / & droue hym out of this londe. And he wente ayen to Rome & aſſembled a grete power an other tyme / & came agayne in to this londe for to gyue batayll to Caſſybolon / but he was dyſcomfyted thrugh ſtrength of ye Brytons / & thrugh helpe of the Erle of Cornewayle & the Erle of London his brother / & thrugh helpe of Gudian kyng of Scotlonde / & Corbonde the kynge of Northwalys / & of Brytayl kyng of Southwalys. And in this bataylle was ſlayne Nennon that was Caſſybolons brother / wherfore he made moche ſorowe / And ſoo went Iulius Cezar out of this londe with a fewe of Romayns that were lefte a lyue. And thenne Caſſybolon wēte ayen to London and made a feeſt to all folke that tho hym had helped. And whā that this feeſt was done / Thenne euery man yede in to his owne countree.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the debate that was betwixt Caſſybolon and the Erle of London / and of the truage that was payed to Rome.
                     ANd after it befelle thus vpon a daye / that the gentylmen of the kinges houſholde & the gentylmen of the Erles houſholde of London after meete wēte togyd for to playe And thorugh debate that aroſe amonge them Enelin that was the Erles coſyn of London ſlewe Irēglas that was ye kyngꝭ coſyn. wherfore ſwore that Enelyn ſhold be hanged. But the Erle of London that was Enelins lorde wolde not ſuffre hym / wherfore the kyng was gretely wroth and vexed towarde the Erle / & thought hym deſtroye. And preuely the Erle ſente letters to Iulius Cezar that he ſholde come in to this londe for to helpe hym and hym auenge vpon the kynge / and he wolde helpe hym with all his myghte. And whan themperour herde thys tydynges he was full glade / and ordeyned a ſtronge power / and came ayen the thyrde tyme in to thys londe / and the Erle of London helped hym with .viii. thouſande men / and at the thyrde tyme was Caſſibolon ouercome and dyſcomfyted and made peas to the Emperour for thre thouſande poū
                        de of ſyluer yeldīge by yere for trauge for thys londe for euermore. ¶And thenne half a yere after paſſed the Emperour Iulius Cezar wente ayen vnto Rome / and the Erle of London wich hym. For he durſte not abyde in this londe. And after Caſſybolon regned .vii. yere in peas / and tho he deyed the .xvii. yere of his regne and lyeth at yorke.
                  
                  
                     ¶How that the lordes of the londe after the deth of Caſſybolon and for by cauſe he had none heyer made Adragen kynge.
                     AFter the deth of Caſſybolon for as moche as he hadde none heyre of his 
                           〈◊〉
                         body begotē / the lordes of londe by ye comyns aſſente crowned Andragen erle of Cornewayle & made hym kyng. And he regned well and worthely / & he was a good man & will gouerned the londe. And whan he had regned. v
                           •
                        ii. yere thenne he deyed / & lyeth at London
                  
                  
                     ¶Circa annū mundi .v.M.C.lix. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatem .i
                           •
                        .
                     IOſeph of the lyne of Cryſte was abou
                           •
                         this tyme borne / and after was huſbonde vnto our lady. ¶Anthigonꝰ was byſſhoppe thys tyme in the Iury. This Anthigonus was ſone vnto Ariſtoboly / and on euery ſyde he was falſe. For he obeyed not to the Romaynes / and a grete plage he brought vnto the lō
                        de for to deſtroye Hircanus his vncle that he myghte regne kynge / and ſoo Hircanus was expulſed / and Flaccus was ſlayne / and Herode was exiled. But whan Herode came vnto Rome and tolde the Senatours all theſe thyngys / the Emperour cerated hym kyng ſendynge with hym an hoſte / the whiche tooke Ieruſalem. And Anthigonum the byſſhop taken / 

ledde to Anthony the Senatoure / the whiche made hym ſeker / and ſoo was Herode confermed in to his kyngdom. And he a ſtraūger regned on the Iewes / & ſo the kyngdom of the Iewes ceſſed as Iacob had ſayd. ¶Titus Liuius hiſtoricus and Quidius were thys tyme.
                  
                  
                     ¶Incipiūt imperatores auguſti. et dictus eſt auguſtus quia augebat populum
                     OCtauian was Emperour of Rome .lvii. yere .vi. mouthes ond .
                           •
                        . dayes. Thys Octauyan neuewe to Iuly whā he was a yonge man toke the Empyre vpon hym. His flouryſſhynge youthe he ſpended in warre. Fyue thouſande bataylles he dyde. And ſhortly after many bataylles / he brought all the worlde in to one Monarche / that man had no felowe And in his dayes peas was in alle the worlde thrught the prouyſyon of the very god. That the temporall peas myght glorifye the natyuyte of our ſauyour Cryſte Iheſu. This Octauyan was the fayreſt man that myghte be / and hygh in wytte / the mooſt fortunate in all thynges. And he lacked not the vyce of hys fleſſhely luſte. This man made alle the worlde to be meſured. And in the .lii. yere of his regne was our lorde Iheſu Cryſte borne / the Sauyoure of this worlde / the whiche graunteth eternall peas to his louers. ¶Hic nota ſecundum Ieronimum) that Anna and Emeria were ſyſters. ¶And of Emeria was borne Elyzabeth moder to Iohan the Baptyſte. And ſhe was fyrſte wedded to Ioachim of whome ſhe toke Mary moder of Cryſte. The ſeconde huſbonde was Cleophe / and he gate oon her Maria Cleophe / the whiche was wedded to Alphe of whom proceded Iames the leſſe Symon Cananeus. Iudas Tadeus / and Ioſeph the whiche is called Barſabas / The thyrde tyme Anna was wedded to Salome / of whome ſhe toke Mary Salome the whiche was wedded to zebede and of them came Iames ye more / and Iohan the euangelyſt ¶The fyrſte Mary wedded Ioſeph brother to Cleophe afore ſayde. This tyme Sibilla Tiburrina prophecyed of Cryſte / and ſayde to themperoure Auguſt / that he ſholde not trowe that he was not god after the folyſſhenes of the paynyms And there ſhe ſhewed hym a fayre virgyne in heuen holdinde a child in her armes / and ſayde to hym / this childe is greter than thou / and therfore doo hym worſhyp. ¶The monarche of Rome about this tyme myghtly encreſed. And whan it was ſoo that by all the world in dyuers prouynces bataylles were reyſed ſodē
                        ly all men merualynge / they were ſeſſed and put them holy to the prynce of Rome that opē
                        ly it myghte be ſhewed that ſuche an vnyuerſall peas came neuer by laboure of bataylle / but of ye powere of the very god / that in his natyuyte peas ſholde regne in all the worlde. ¶Herode Aſcolonira was kynge in the Iury .xxxv. yere This Herode ydumeꝰ was ye fyrſt ſtraūge kynge that regned on the Iewes. The mayſter in hiſtoriis ſayth / he was a noble mā and faythfull in the begynnynge / and in alle thynge he had hym nobly. He wys very gētyll vnto the Romayns and to the people that loued peas· And in his olde aege / whan he wolde moche pleaſe the Romans herde of the byrthe of Cryſte: dredynge to be expulſed of his kyngdome as a ſtraunger: wretchedly he felle and ſlewe the Innocentes and dyuer of his owne children. And at ye laſt was hatefull to all people: and felle ſyke & deyed wretchedly. ¶Mary the moder of Cryſt was borne afore the Natyuyte of cryſte .xv. yere or there aboute.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of Kymbulyn that was Andragens ſone regned after his fader
                     AFter the deth of Andragē regned Kymbalyn his ſone a good man & well gouerned the londe in moche proſperyte and peas all his lyf tyme. And in his tyme Iheſu Criſte was borne of that ſwete virgyne Mary. This kynge Kymbalyn had two ſones. Gynder and Armager good knyghtꝭ and worthy. And whan thys Kymbalyn had regned .xxii. yere: he deyed and lyeth at London.
                  
                  
                     ¶Criſtus natus eſt ex virgine maria. anno mundi .v.M.C.lxxxxiii.
                     IN the begynnyge of the .xlii. yere of Octauyan themperoure. whyche began to regne in Marche: and in .xxx. yere of Herode .vii.C. and .l. yere after that Rome was buylded / the .vi. monthe frome the conceyuynge of Iohan Baptyſt: the .viii. Kal. of Apryl: the .vi. fery at Nazareth of Galylee: of the virgyne Mary was conceyued Cryſte our ſauyour and the ſame yere was borne·
                  
               
               
                  ¶Here at Cryſtys Natyuyte begynneth the ſixte aege durynge to the fynall Iugement:

hauynge yeres as god knoweth ¶Here begynneth the ſixte aege durynge to the ende of the worlde.
                  
                      
                     
                  
                  
                      THat daye our lorde Iheſu Cryſt was borne / a welle of oyle beyonde Tybre by Rome ſprā
                     ge and ranne alle daye. The goldȳ yamge fell yt whyche Romulꝰ had made: and put it in his palays ſayenge. This ymage ſhall not fayle vnre a mayde bere a chylde. ¶whan Herode diſpoſid hym to ſlee the chyldern of Iſraell: he was commaunded by the letter of themperour to come to Rome to Anſwere to the accuſacyon of hys chyldern Alexium. and Ariſtoboli: And ther were thre Herodes grely ſpokē of for ther yll dedes The fyrſte was called Aſcolonita / and vnder this man was borne cryſte / and the chyldren of Iſraell were ſlayne. The ſecōde was called Antipas ſone to ye fyrſt Herode / vnder whom Iohn̄ Baptyſt heeded / and cryſt ſuffred deth. And the thyrde was called Agrippa ſone to Ariſtoboli / ſone to the fyrſt Herode / the whyche ſlewe Iames & pryſoned Peter. The fyrſt Herode whan he ſawe his ſones Alexiū and Ariſtoboli thrugh the pretens of hys letter by the Emperour ſende / ſtryue for the ſucceſſyon of his kyngdome / he diſpoſid and made Antipater that was his fyrſte begoten ſone to be before them: and whan they were talkynge of the deth of theyr fader he caſt them awaye: & they went to thēperour to complayne of ye wrong of therfader. And in the meane tyme the thre kynges of Coleyne came by Herode vnto Ieruſalem: & whan they came not ayen by hym he thought that they were aſhamed for to come ayen by hym for bycauſe that they were diſceyued: and that they founde not the chylde as he denied: therfore in the meane ſeaſon he ceſſed to ſlee the chyldern of Iſraell and ſo wene vnto Rome for the cytacion of themperoure. And he toke his waye by the cyte of Tarſum where he brente the ſhyppes in the whiche the thre kyngꝭ of Coleyne ſhold haue ſaylled in to ther owne countree. Thenne after a yere and certen dayes: this Herode came frome Rome ayen: accorded with his ſones And for the cō
                     fyrmacōn of his kyngdome he was made moche holder: and then he ſlewe all the chyldern of Bethleem that were of two yere of aege & vnder that had ſpace of one nyght of aege: and amonge theſe was there one of hys owne chylrden. And Ariſtoboli & Aleriū werre had in ſuſpeccion: in ſo moche as they promyſed a barbour a grete rewarde that he ſholde take & kitte ther faders throte whā that he dide him ſhaue. & whan this Herode herde this he was greued & there he ſlewe bothe his ſones. And Herode Agrippa his ſone he ordeyned to be kige. wherfore Antipater hys oldeſt ſone was aboute to poyſon his foder: the whiche Herode Agrippa vnderſtode: & pryſoned there his brother that whiche the Emperour herde and ſayd that he had leuee be an hogge of Herodes: than for to be one of his ſones: for hys hogges he ſpareth and his ſones he ſleeth. ¶And whan that Herode was .lxx. yere of age he was ſtryken with a grete ſykeneſſe in his hondes and in his feet and in his membres: that noo lethe myght come to hym for ſtenche: and ſoo he deyed. ¶So Antipater his ſone in pryſon herde tell of thys and Ioyed gretely: and therefore that cauſe he was ſlayne. ¶Thenne ſtroue Archelaus and Herodes for the ſucceſſyon of the fyrſte Herode. The Emperour there thrugh coū
                     ſeyll of the Senatours: the halfe of the Iury and Idumea gaaf to Archelaus vnder name of Tetrarche. And the other parte he deuyded in two. Galylee he gaaf to Herode Antippa.

And Ituriam and Traconidem he gaafe to Philype Herodes brother. ¶And that ſame yere Cryſte came from Egypte / And Archelaus was accuſed many tymes of the Iewes / & was exiled in to Vyennam in to fraūce. And in that place were ſette foure Tetrarchees / to the repreuynge of the vnſtablyneſſe of the Iewes. ¶And that ſame yere Octauyan ye Emperour deyed.
                  
                     ¶Anno xyriſti. xo
                     
                     
                        I.N.R.I.
                        ¶Crux χρriſti.
                        stylized depiction of cross
                     
                     IHeſus Cryſte at .xii. yere of aege herde the doctours in the Temple. ¶Our lorde. Iheſu Cryſt at .xxx. yere of Aege was baptyſed· ¶Iheſu Cryſte the lorde of all. thynges at .xxx. yere of aege & .iii. monethes deyed far hys ſeruauntes ¶Anninꝰ Rufus was byſſhop in the Iury about this tyme. ¶Valeriꝰ Geaceꝰ was after hym .xi. yere. This man openly ſolde the byſſhopryche / & he that mooſt yaaf had it. And there was moneye in alytell whyle. ¶Poncius Pylatꝰ was Iuge & Proctour in the Iury vnder ye Emperour. And vnder this man Iohn̄ Baptyſt began for to preche. And our lode ſurffred deth / the whyche was dampned to dethe vnryght wyſly for drede of themperour. ¶Tyrus a certen kynge gate a chylde on Pyla a poore mānes doughter / the whiche man hyght Arus / & this chylde of his moders name and hys be
                           •
                        ſyre put togyds was called Pylatus / This Pylatus ye fourth yere of hys aege was ſente to his fader. The whiche kynge of his lefull wyf had goten a chylde euen of the aege with Pylate / & by cauſe this lefull gotē chylde as they proceded in aege exceded this baſtarde Pylatus he was full of enuye & ſlewe his brother the lefull goten chylde. wherfore forth with his fader ſēte hym to Rome for pledge for hys trybute that he payed to Rome / entendynge he wolde neuer redeme hym. In the whiche tyme the kyngꝭ ſone of Fraunce was pledge for his trybute / ye whiche exceded hym in ſtrēgth & chyualry alſo he ſlewe hym. Therfore the Romayns ſente Pylate as a profytable man for ye comyn wele to the yle of Ponto to tame the curſyd people / the whiche ſlewe eueri Iuge that came to them And he that curſid man gouerned that vnhapy people what with thretynge & with promyſe / & with lawe & with ieftes that nōe of them durſte contrai do to his pleaſure / wherfore he was called Pylate of Ponto. ¶Herodes Antipa yonge in his conuerſacyons / with yeftes
                           •
                         and meſſages drewe hym to hym & made hym prynce of the Iury vnder hym. And this tyme Pylate gadred moche moneye / & Herode not knowynge he wente to Rome that he might receiue of the Emperour that Herode had giuē him. Wherfore Hyrode & Pylate were enmyes togyder / vnto ye paſſiō of our lord / whan that pylate ſende Iheſus vnto Herode clothed in a whyte clothe / then̄e they were made frendes. ¶Ouidius Naſo in ponto aboue thys tyme deyed the fourth yere of his exile. ¶Tyburius this tyme was Emperoure at Rome / & he regned xxiii. yere / & he lyued ī the yere that our lord Iheſu Cryſt deyed & ſomwhat after. This mā was in al his werkes greteli auyſed that there ſholde be nothing ſodenly done wyſe ī warres ſtudyous ī bokes fayr of ſpeche freſſhe in wyte / ſaue he wold of tymes feyne hymſelf to do thīges that he wolde neuer do of other. This Emperour vnderſtode & truſted in cryſt / & worſhyped hym for god Some men ſaye at the laſt he was cruel ayenſte people but it was a grete reaſō of pyte that he was euer gracious to his ſubgettes & poore men. And he had peas all his dayes / & alle the peple that ſaid ayenſt cryſtē folke with out oni mercy he deſtroyed: & he exyled pylate for euer Thenne he deceſſed & a worſe ſucceded hym. ¶After Euſeby it is wryten: our lord at .xxx. yere of his aege choſe his .xii. apoſtles: the whiche made our Crede: that is byleue. and thei made it after the Reſurreccyon of cryſt: & after ye holy ghoſt was ſende vnto thē. whan they had choſe Mathia the apoſtle & eche of thē made a part as it is ſhewed hereafter. And this mathia was choſe bytwene ye doye of the Aſcencyon

and wytſondaye in the place of Iudas Scaryot the traytouſt / of ye whiche Iudas in a hiſtory is redde thus. ¶There was a certen man in Ieruſlem that hygh Ruben / & after ſaynt Ierom he was of ye trybe of iſacar. And his wyf hyght Cyborea the whiche one a certen nyght whan he wolde luſtely knowe his wyf / ſhe dremed that ſhe ſhold bere a chyld of myſchef & ye childe ſhold be a traitour to his king & to al ye peple of that regiō & whā that childe was borne & called Iudas his fader & his mod abhorred as well to ſlee ther chyld / as to nouryſſhe a traytour to the kyng & all his people / ther fore they put him in to a panyer / or a lepe in to the ſee / & he flowed to the yle of Scaryoth / where the ladi of that place had no childe bi her huſbonde & ſhe feyned her to be with childe / but ſhe fayled And after ī a lytell ſeaſon ye ſame layd & quene cōceiued a chil of her huſbonde & whan that he was of aege. Iudas many tymes angerd hym & cauſed hym to wepe / the whiche the quene ſawe / & bete Iudas many tymes / and after ſhe knowleged that iudas was not ye kynges ſnoe hers / wherfore Iudas ſlewe the kenges ſone / & he dradde the payne of ye lawe / & fledde with certen exiles to Ieruſalem. And whā he came there: he gate hī in to Pylates courte that was Iuge & by cauſe that o curſed mā draweth to ā other: therfore he drewe to pylate & ſtode gretly in his fauour. And vpon a certen daye whā Pylate loked out of his palays in to an orcharde of a that mānes was called rubē that was very fader to Iudas. Pylate deſyred to haue apples: & Iudas went to gadre apples: & Ruben ranne to Iudas for to lette hym bycauſe he toke hꝭ apples whithaut ony leue & whā they had chyd this Iudas ſmote his fad on ye heed with a ſtone & ſlewe hym: & Iudas fled a way ſecretly aft that dede but it was ſaid that rubē died ſodenly. Then pylate gaf to Iudas all ye goodes that Rubē had & ciborea Rubēs wyf that was moder to Iudas. & he dealed not curceſly wyth her as a māſhold with hꝭ wif & for that ſhe wepte & wailed for ſhe had put her ſōe to ye ſee & that ſhe was maryed ayēſt her well It was perceyued that Iudas had ſlaī hꝭ owe fad & wedde hꝭ owne mod. Then̄e ciborea his mod & wyf meuyd hym to leue his ſynne / & then he folowed Cryſt: & he forgaue hym his ſyn̄e & made hym his procoure & apoſtle. And howfals he was to Cryſt / it nedeth not to reherce. And ye ſame yere Mathewe was choſē / & ye holy ghoſt was ſende in to them as it is ſayd afore. ¶The appoſtles or they were ſparpied in to all ye world they gadred theym cogyd in to Ieruſalē & made the Crede here folowinge that is our bileue.
                     
                        Petrus
                        ¶Credo in deum patrem omnipotentem creatoeem celi e
                              •
                            terre.
                        Andreas
                        ¶Et in the ſum xp̄m filium eius vnicum dominum noſt rum.
                        Iohānes
                        ¶Qui conceptus
                              •
                            eſt de ſpiritu ſancto natus ex maria virgine.
                        Iacobus
                        ¶Paſſus ſub poncio pilato cruci firus moreuus et ſepultus.
                        Thomas
                        ¶Deſcendit ad inferna tercia die reſurrexit amertuis.
                        Iacbus
                        ¶Aſcendit ad celos ſedet ad dexteram die patris omnipotentis.
                        Phlippꝰ
                        ¶Inde venturus eſt iudicare viuons etmortuos.
                        Bartho.
                        ¶Credo in ſpiritum ſanctum
                        Matheus
                        ¶Sanctam eccleciam catholicam.
                        Semon
                        ¶Sanctorum communionem remiſſiom peccatorum.
                        Iudas
                        ¶Carnis reſurrectionem.
                        Mathias
                        ¶Et vitam eternam Amen.
                     
                     IHeſu Cryſt our ſauyour roſe fro deth to lyf & ſayd to his diſcyples All the power in heuen and in erthe is gyuen vnto me. And goo ye thus in to all the wrold and preche and teche vnto euery creature / and Iſh all be with you vnto the ende of the world. ¶Here he chyſe hym .lxxii. diſcyples. & he had .xii. apoſtles ye whiche he ſende in to all the worlde to preche.

Ne it is not redde that there were more ordres amonge the diſcyples of Cryſte / of whom the preſtes and byſſhops in the chirche of god yet kepe the fourme. For to the appoſtles the byſſhops ſuccede / and to the dyſcyple preeſtes. To the whyche two ordres / all the chyrche is gyuen as a goodly Ierarche (Vt patet in Decreto Damaſie pape)
                     
                        Iohannes.
                        wrote in Aſia in Greke langage In principio erat verbum. & cetera.
                        Marcus.
                        wrote in ytalia but in greke langage. Innicium euangelu Ieſu criſti. &c̄.
                        Lucas.
                        wrote in Grecea in greke langage Huic in diebus herodis iude ſacerdos. &c̄.
                        Matheus.
                        wrote in the Iury in Hebrewe langage. Liber generacionis Iheſu criſti. &c̄.
                     
                  
                  
                     ¶Here begynneth the ordre of Popes of Rome / and contynneth as the lyne of Cryſt dyde afore. For in them god lefte his power. ¶Anno domini .xxxiiii.
                     PEter a Iewe the fyrſte pope was a bleſſed man & a gloryous apoſtle of Cryſt. ¶He was heed of ye chyrche .xxxvii. yere. And he helde hys byſſhopryche in the eeſt .v. yere & ſayd maſſe he made our lorde / & alone ſayd the Pater noſter. Thenne after he came to Antiochiam & there he abode .vii. yere techynge the waye of trouth. And Symon Magus he confounded away. That ſeaſon he preched to the people that were circūcyſed / the whiche were in Ponto of Galati. Capadocia. Aſia. Bichinia. Thenne herde he that Symon Magus deluded the Romayns / thrugh the loue of the fayth / he came to Rome in the fourthe yere of Claudius ye Emperour. And there he preched the worde of god / and ſhewed the falſhede of Symon Magꝰ and tourned many a man to the fayth / Thenne he ſende his precher by dyuerſe prouynces / by whome cryſten relygyon was myghtely encreaſed. ¶He ordeyned the feeſt of Lenton afore Eeſter / and Aduent and the Emerynge dayes to be faſted of all cryſtē people / in to the myrrour of the fyrſte and ſeconde comynge of our lorde Iheſu. ¶Then̄e whan he had be pope at Rome .xxv. yere .vii. monethes and ·viii. dayes / He was ſlayne of Nero (Eiꝰ pla oꝑa vide acti
                           
                              
                           
                           bus
                         
                        aplo
                              
                                 
                              
                              rum
                           
                        ) ¶Baius this tyme was Emperour at Rome & regned .iii. yere & .x. monethes. This Gaius was fyrſt vicyous in lyuynge / for two of his owne ſeſters he myſuſed / and on one of them he ga
                        
                           •
                        e a doughter / whyche chylde he ſette betwext the knees of Iupyter in the Temple / and feyned after warde that Iupyter had goten her. wherfore he dyde crye thrugh the coūtree that alle men ſholde worſhyppe her as a goddeſſe / This man alſo made an ymage lyke hymſelf and ſente it to one Patronie Preſydent at Ieruſalem vnder the Romayns commaundynge hym that he ſhold compell the Iewes to do worſhyp therto. And fore thyſe enormytees & many other / oure lorde ſuffred hym to be ſlayne at Rome in his owne Palays.
                  
                  
                     Of kynge Gynder that was Kymbalyns ſone / that wolde not paye the truage to Rome for the londe that Caſſybolon had graunted / and how he was ſlayne of a Romyne.
                     ANd after the dethe of thys Kymbalyn regned Gynder his ſone a good man and a worthy / and was of ſoo hygh herte that he wolde not paye to Rome that trybute that kynge Caſſybolon had graūted vnto Iulius Cezar wherfore themperour that was tho that was called Claudius Cezar was ſore anoyed And ordeyned a grete power of Romayns / & came in to this londe for to conquere the tribute thrugh ſtrengthe / and for to haue it on the kynge· But thys kynge Gynder and Armager his broder aſſembled & gadred a grete hoſt togyd of Brytons & yaue batayll to the Emperoure Claudius / and ſlewe of the Romayns gerte plente. The Emperour had after warde

one that was called Hamon that ſawe the people there faſt ſlayne / & pryuely caſt a waye his owe armes & toke the armes of a deed Bryton and armed hym wyth hys armour / & came in to the bataylle to the kynge & ſayd in this maner. Syr be of a good hert for goddes loue for the Romayns that ben youre enmyes anone ſhall be ſlayn & dyſcomfyted euerychone. And the kynge gaf no kepe to his wordes / ne to his ſpeche forbi cauſe of the armes that he hae vpō hym / and demyd that he hadde ben a Bryton. But the traytour euer helde hym next the kynge And pryuely vnder ye ſholder of his armes he ſmote the kynge / wherfore the kynge deyed and felle downe to the erth ¶whan Armager ſawe his brother ſo deed heraſt awaye his araſmes and toke to him his brothers armes / & come in to the batayl amonges the brytons and badde them hertly for to fyght / and faſt laye a downe the Romayns. And for the armes they wende it had be kyng Gynder that afore was ſlayne / yt they wyſt not. Thenne began ye Brytons fyerſly for to fygth / & ſlewe ye Romayns So at the laſt the Emperour forſoke the felde and fledde as faſt as they myght with his folkein to wyncheſtre. And the fals traytour Hamon that had ſlayne the kynge / faſt anone beganne for to flee with all ye haſt that he myght And Amager ye kynges brother purſued hym full fyerſly with a fyers herte / & droue hym vnto a water & there he toke hym. And anōe ſmote of both honde and feet & heed / and hewed ye body all to peres / and thenne lete caſt hym in to the water wherfore that wat was called Hamons hauen. And after there was made a fayre towne that yet ſtondeth that is called Southampten. And after Armager wente to wyncheſtre for to ſeke Claudius Cezar the Emperour of Rome. And there Armager hym tooke. And Claudius the emperour thorugh counſeyl of the Romayns that were wyth hym left a lyue / made peas with Armager ī this maner as ye ſhall here. That is to ſaye. How that Claudius the Emperour ſholde yeue vnto Armager Gennen his fayr doughter for to haue vnto his wyf. Soo that this londe from that tyme for warde ſholde he in the Emperours power of Rome vpō ſuche couenaūt / that neuer after warde no Emperour of Rome ſholde take none other trybute of thys londe / but only feaute And they were accorded. And vpō this couenaunt Claudius Cezar ſent to Rome for his doughter Gennen. And as ſhe was come Claudiꝰ Cezar yaf her vnto Armager to wyf. & Armager ſpowſed her at Lōdon with moche ſolempnyte & myrth. And thenne was Armager crowned & made kynge of Brytayne.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of kynge Armager in whoſe tyme. ſaynt Peter preched ī Anthyoche with other apoſtles in dyuers coūtrees.
                     THis Armager regned well and worthely / and gourned the londe ryght worſhypfully. ¶And Claudius Cezar in remembraūce of this accorde / and for reuerence and honoure of hys doughter made in this londe fayre town & a caſtell / and lete calle the towne after his name Claueſtren / ye whiche now is called Glouceſtre▪ & then̄e whā all this was done the Emperour toke his leue & then̄e wēte to Rome ayen. And Armager thenne was kinge / and gouerned the londe well and worthely all his lyues tyme. And this Armager gate a ſene on his wyf whiche was callyd weſtmer. And while that this Armager regned ſaint Peter preched in Anthioche And there he made a noble chirche. In the whiche he ſatte fyrſte in hys chayre And ther he dewelled .vii. yere. and after he wente to Rome: and was made pope: tylle that Nero ye Emperour lete martyr hym And then preched openly all the apoſtles in dyuerſe londes the ryght fayth. ¶And whan Armager hadde regned .xxxiiii. yere: he dyed and lyeth at the auncyente cyte of London.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge weſtmer gaaf to Berynger an ylonde forlet. And there this Berynger made the towne of Berwyke.
                     ANd after this Armager regned his ſone weſtmer: that was a good man and a worthy of body: and well gouerned the londe. It befell ſo that tydynges came to hym vpon a daye: that the kynge Roderyk of Gaſcoyne was come in to thys londe wyth an hughe hoſt of peple: & was dwellyng in Scanys more. & whā kyng weſtmer herde thoſe tydynges he lete aſſemble an huge hoſt of Brytons / & came to the kynge Roderyk & yaue hym batayll. And kynge weſtmer ſlewe kynge Rodoryke wyth hys owne hondes in playne baytaylle. ¶And whan kyng Roderyks men ſawe that

ther lorde was ſlayne / they yelded them all to kyng weſtmer / & became his men for euer more. And he gaf them a coūtree that was forletē wherin they myghte dwelled. ¶And thyther they wente And dwelle there alle theyr lyues tyme / and .ix. hondred men there were of theym & nomoo lefte at that batayll· Theyr gouernour & prynce was called Berynger. And anone he began a towne that they myght ther in dwelle & haue reſorte and lete calle the towne Berwyk vpon Twede. And there they enhabyte & becam ryche. But they had no wymmen amonge them / & the Brytons wolde not yeue there doughters to the ſtraūgers. wherfore they wēte ouer ſee in to Irlonde / & brought with them wymmen & there they them ſpo
                           •
                        wſed. But the men coude not vnderſtōde theyr langage ne the ſpeche of theſe wymmen / and therfore they ſpake togyder as Scottes. And after warde thrugh chaunginge ther langage in al Fraūce they were called then̄e Scottes & ſoo ſholde the folke of that countree be called for euer more.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kyng weſtmer lete arere a ſtone in the entrynge of weſtmerlōde / there that he ſlewe Roderyk / & there he began fyrſte houſynge.
                     ANd after this batayl that is aboue ſayde whan Roderyke was deed / kynge weſtmer in remembraunce of his victory lete arere there beſyde the way a grete ſtone on hyghe / and yet it ſtondeth & euer more ſhall ſtonde. And he lete graue ī ye ſtone lette that thꝰ ſayde The kynge weſtmer of Brytayne ſlewe in thys place Roderyk his enymye. ¶And thys weſtmer was the fyrſt that buylded hous and towne ī weſtmerlōde & at that ſtone begynneth weſtmerlōde that weſtmer lette calle after hys owne name. And whan weſtmer had ſo done he dwelled all his lyf tyme in that countree of weſtmerlonde / for he loued that coūtree more than ony other coūtre / & whan he had regned .xxv. yere / he deyed and lyeth at Karleyll.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of kynge Coill that was weſtmers ſone that helde his londe in peas al his lyues tyme.
                     AFter this: his ſone kynge Coill regned a good man & a worthy: and of goode condycyons: and well gouerned hys londe. And of all men he hadde loue and peas. And in his tyme was neuer contake debate: nor warre in Brytayne. And he regned and was kynge in peas all his lyues tyme· And whā he had regned .xi. yere he deyed & lyeth at yorke.
                     CLaudius was Emꝑour at Rome nexte after Gaius. And he regned .xiiii. yere / and .viiii. dayes. This man came in to greate Brytayne now called Englonde / for to chalē
                        ge the trybute whyche they dyde denye vnto the Romayns. And after grete bataylles ther was bytwene the Emperour Claudius & Armager kynge of Brytayne. And after accordement made / that thys armager ſholde wedde Claudius doughter / & after they two ſholde euer lyue in peas. In token werof / this Claudius named the cyte where they were wedded after hym / and called it Claudiceſtre / where we now it calle Glouceſtre. ¶This Claudiꝰ had thre wyues. And on Petiua the fyrſte wyfe he gate a doughter that hyght Antonia / the fyrſt wyf deceſſed / and he wedded Meſſalinam / & gate a ſone that hyght Brytanicꝰ & Octauia a doughter. The thirde he wedded Agrippina hauyng a ſone that hyght Nero. Claudiꝰ wedded his doughter Octauia to Nero his wyues ſone. This Claudius for loue that he hadde to Agrippina his laſte wyf / he ſlewe Meſſalina his fyrſt wyf / leeſt ſhe ſhold haue holpe Britanicus her ſone & his to Empyre. yet Agrippina the laſte wyf of Claudius dradde / leeſt her huſbonde wolde haue proferred Brytanicus and h
                           ••
                        e depoſed Nero her ſone / therfore ſhe poyſoned her huſbonde Claudius / and Nero was promoted to the Empyre. And this ſame Nero ayue his moder ſuche a rewarde ayen. For he poyſoned Brytanicus and ſlewe hys owne moder & his wyf Octauia. ¶Iames ye more the apoſtle this tyme was ſlayne of Herode Agrippa / & Peter was pryſoned (Vt pꝪ act .xii. The body of ſaynt Iames was broughte by myracle in Galeciam of Spyne.
                     ¶Nero after Claudius was Emperour / and he regned .xiii. yere & .vii. monethes. This Nero was a curſyd man / & made grethe waſte in the Empyre. He wold not fyſſhe but with nettes of golde & ropes of ſylke. A grete parte of ye lordes of Rome he ſlew He was enemye to no men but to good men. He ſlewe his broder and hys wyf his moder & his mayſter. He ſlewe alſo Peter and Poule / he wolde neuer were one cloth two tymes. Alle his hors and his mules were ſhood wyth ſyluer / & at the laſte he dyde

ſette a grete parte of Rome on fyre / ſome ſaye the Romayns complayned the ſtretes were to narowe. And as he had brente a grete parte of Rome. Nero ſayd there is ſpace to buylde the ſtretes wyder. Thenne the Senatours wyth the comyn people came vpon hym to ſleehim and he fledde by nyght in to the ſubarbes of ye cytee & hyde hym / & he herde karles & beggers ſayenge. And they wyſt where the Empe
                           •
                        rour were he ſholde neuer ſcape theym. Nero thoughte it ſhold be grete derogacyon to his name and he were ſlayne of karles. And on a grete ſtake he ranne hym ſelf to the herte and deyed and there was buryed. And deuylles kept his body many a daye after / and dyde grete hurte to the people / tyll by a myracle of our lord the body was founde and taken away / and thenne ye deuylles voyded. ¶Seneca was this tyme mayſter to Nero. ¶Iuuenalꝭ pota. ¶Lucanꝰ poeta. ¶Iames the leſſe the appoſtle byſſhop of Ieruſalem was ſlayne of the Iewes ye .vi. yere of Nero. Marcus the euaungelyſte was martred the fyrſte yere of hym.
                  
                  
                     ¶Circa annū xp̄i .lxxiiii.
                     LInus ytalicus was pope of Rome .x. yere and .iii· monethes and .xiii. dayes This Linus and his ſucceſſour Cletꝰ / thrugh theyr holy conuerſacyon were made to mynyſtre the treſoure of the chirche to the people Peter beynge a lyue. And Peter attended to prayenge & prechynge. ¶It is redde of this Cletꝰ / that he wrote fyrſt in his letters (Salutem et apoſtolicā benedictionem) ¶Afore this tyme was many a dyſcyple of Peter ſlayne vnder Nero. ¶Galba thys tyme was Emperour / & he regned .vii. monethes. This man was made Emperour by the power of Spayne in the ſame londe Nero lyuynge. And after the deth of Nero brught to Rome / & there was ſlayne of a man that came wyth whete to Rome. He ſmote of his heed and bare it to hym that was Emperour next / ſeynge all his men & none of them helpynge hym. ¶In this mānes dayes came ye grete Rethoricyen to Rome fro Spayne / & was the fyrſte that euer taught the ſcyence opēly / his nyme was Quintilian. ¶Otho regned after hym / and he regned but .iii. monethes. For one Vitellus that was Preſident of Fraunce chalenged ye Empyre. And in ytalye betwixt theſe two were thre gret bataylles And in the fourth batayll Otho ſawe he ſholde be ouercome and in grete diſpeyre he ſlewe hymſelfe. ¶Vitellus regned after Otho & he regned .viii. monethes / for he was folower of Nero mooſt ſpecyall in glotony / & in ſyngynge of foule ſonges: and at feſtes etynges oute of meſure that he myght not kepe it. ¶Veſpaſianus regned nexte after hym .ix. yere and .x. monethes and .xii. dayes. ¶The well gouerned men of Rome ſeynge the curſyd ſucceſſyon of Nero ſent after this Veſpaſian vnto paleſtyn For there he was & his ſone Titꝰ whiche had beſyeged Iheruſalem. ¶And whā be herde that Nero was deed: by whom he was ſente to Ieruſalem: & herde of theſe curſyd men regnynge. At the Inſtaunce of theſe men: not wyllyngly: toke vpon hym the Empyre. And anone as he was come to Rome: he ouercame the tyraunte Vitellus and lete hym be drawe thorugh Rome: & after in to tybre tyll he was deed: & then̄e lete hym ſayle without ſepulture for this ye people deſyred. This man was cured of waſpis in his noſe anone as he byleued in our lorde Iheſu: And yt was the cauſe whyche wente to Ieruſalem / to venge Cryſtis deth He fought .x
                           •
                        xii. tymes wyth hys enemyes & deyed the yere of grace .lxiix.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno diū lxxxiiii.
                     CLetus a martyr was pope .xi. yere thys Cletus was a Romayn and gretely beloued pylgrymages to ſayntes ſayenge it was more profyte to the helthe of mānes ſoule to viſyte the place yt ſaynt peter was in than 
                           •
                        or to faſt two yere. He curſyd alle tho men lettynge ſuche pylgrymages / or counſellers contrary therto. At the laſt he was martryd by Dami
                           ••
                        
                        an the Emperour. ¶Titus ſone to Veſpaſianus was Emperour thys tyme & regned thre yere. And he abode ſtylle at Ieruſalē after the eleccyon of his fader and deſtroyed the cytee. And ſlewe there as the ſtorye ſayth with batayll and hungre .xi. hodred thouſande Iewes And a hondred thouſāde he toke and ſolde .xxx. for a peny. By cauſe they ſolde Cryſt for .xxx. pens / and brought thens all thynge that was precyous / and put them in his hous at Rome whiche was called Tēplū pacis / But now is that place falle downe for ye mooſt party / and all theſe grete Iewelles ben dyſtrybuted to certayne chirches in Rome. ¶This Titus was ſo full of vertue that all men loued hym / ſo ſet forth / that they called hym the mooſt delectable

of men. He was full lyberall to all mē in ſo moche that he ſayd often tymes / ye there ſholde noo man goo from an Emperour with an heuy herte / but he ſhold ſom what haue of his petycyon. He wolde be ſory that daye in the whyche he hadde graunted no man no benefyte. ¶whan that he was deed euery man yt was in Rome wept for hym / as that they had loſt theyr fader. ¶Domician brother to Titus regned after him .xxiiii. yere & .v. monethes. Firſt he was 
                           •
                        aſy / and after ward full vnreſonable For moche of ye Senate was deſtroyed by his malyce / and alſo moche of his kynred. He began the ſecōde perſecucōn after Nero ayenſt cryſten men / in the whiche perſecucion Iohn̄ the euangelyſt was exiled in to Pathius after the Emperoure had put hym in to a tonne of oyle brēnynge & hurte hym not. So this man was not the folower of his fader Veſpaſian / ne his brother Titus / but rathur lyke Nero & his kyn rede. And for theſe wycked condicyōs he was ſlayne in his owne palays at Rome in the .xxvii. yere of his aege· ¶Clemens a martyr was pope .ix. yere and he ſucceded Cletus. This Clemens fyrſte of ſaynt Peter was ordeyned to be ſucceſſour to hym. And for peryll he wolde Linus and Cletus ſholde be popes & fore hym / leſt that thrugh that enſample prelates ſholde ordeyne vnder thē who ſome euer they wolde. This man made ye lyf of martyrs to be wryten by regyons. And he made many bokes He ordeyned that a chylde ſhold be confermed as ſoone as it myght / namely after it was cryſtened. And at ye laſte he was martred vnder Traian. ¶Nerua was Emperour after Domician oo yere & two monethes. And whan he was choſen he meued the Senate to make a lawe / that thynge whyche Domician comaunded to be kepte ſholde be broken / By the whyche meane ſaynt Iohan the euāgelyſt was loſed out of his exyl: & ſuffrey to come ayen to Ephaſe. This man dyde an other thynge ryght comendable that he aſſyned ſoo wyſe a man as Traian was to gouerne the people after hym. ¶Nota. ¶Traianus Hiſpanicus was Emperour .xxi. yere. This Traianꝰ many man ſayd. He was the beſt amonge all the Emperours: But in one thynge alone he was vicious In ſo moche as he for the loue of the fals goddes was aboute to deſtroye ye cryſten fayth. Iugyng in hymſelf ſo mooſt to pleaſe god. Some men ſay not by hymſelf but by other he purſewed the cryſten fayth: and in ye ende of his lyf he dyde but fewe to dethe. And all his louyng Iſette at nought. But at ſaint Gregory meued with pyte wepyng: & prayed vnto our lord for hym: that he wold haue mercy vpon hym and by his prayer haue hym out of helle: in to whiche place he was dampned. And now yf that he be ſaud or not: a grete alteracyon is amōge doctours. And to vs yt wryte Crony eles: it is no parte of our charge to determyn. But all the eeſt parte of ye world. Babylon. Selencia: the vtter partes of the ynde. Germayne the ſeconde after Alexander helde vnder. In all theſe thynges ſo pyteous and ſoo mekely he guyded hym to euery man as a kynge. He was gentyll: and to no man vngē
                        tyll: the whiche is redde of fewe: All his dayes he lyued that men ſayd he was the mooſt worthy man in all his Empyre. And thought and ſayde euer more: that noo man was more vnworthy to be Emperour than he.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno dm̄ .C.iiii.
                     ANacletus a martyr was pope ·ix yere And he. was a Greke. He monyſſhed an cryſtē men: that preeſtes ſhold be worſhypped aboue all other men. Sayenge: that preeſtes doynge ſacrifyce to god ſhold be borne out and not vexed: but be worſhypped. And preeſtes whan they ſayd maſſe the ſhold haue wyeneſſe with them and namely byſſhops Alſo he decreed that clerkes ſhold were no berdes nor longe heere. Alſo that a byſſhop ſholde be conſecrated of thre: and dyuerſe other thynge. At the laſt the .xii. yere of Traianus he was martred and buryed by the body of ſaynt Peter. ¶Plinius the ſeconde Oratour and pheloſopher wrote moche thyngꝭ. Thys man meued Traianus that he ſholde wythdrawe the ſentence yeuen ayeſte cryſten folke: wryten to hym that they ſholde do noo ylle but take hede to the vertue: But that they ſholde ryſe afore daye and worſhoppe ther god ſecretly in the nyght· ¶Euariſtus a Greke & a martyr was pope .x. yere and .vii. monethes after Anacletus. Thys man ordeyned that man and woman ſholde be wedded openly: and that they ſholde be bleſſyd openly of the preeſt and fader and moder. And he was martred ye thyrde yere of Adrian & buryed by ſaynt Peter. ¶Alexander a Romayn was pope .viii. yere and .v.

monethes. This Alexander the mooſt parte of the Senatours he conuerterd vnto our lorde And he conſtytuted and ordeyned / that hooly water ſholde be ſpynkled in to cryſten mēnes houſes. And he ordeyned that the brede that preſtes vſe to ſynge with ſholde be made of pure and clene brede and that in a lytell quantyte. At the laſte he was martred vnder Adryan that was the Emperour. And many of them he conuerted to the fayth. ¶Sixtus a Romayn was pope .x. yere and .iii. monethes. Thys man ordeyned (Sanctus Sanctus Sanctꝰ. &c̄) Sholde be ſayd in the maſſe. And that the holy thynges of the chirche ſholde not be touched but of mynyſters of ye chyrche. Alſo that the corporax ſholde not be made of ſylke / but of pure lynnen clothe wouen / and not dyed and that a woman ſholde not touche the holy / veſſell of the a wter / ne the palle. Alſo he ordeyned / that yfony byſſhop were vacant / that no byſſhop ſholde be receyued in to his benefyce but with the popes letters. Alſo that no maſſe ſhold be ſayd but vpon an a wter / & at the laſt he was martred. ¶Adrianus was emperour .xxi. yere This Adriani many thīges is cōmē dede to cryſten men / other wylle he was gracious / and certeyn of them that wolde not do ſacryfyce to the fals goddes he ſlewe. He was an vniuerſall man all mooſt in all ſcyence. Peas he had all his dayes / but with the Iewes and many a lawe he made. And thenne he cōmaū
                        ded that cryſten men ſholde not be dampned to dethe but with due proceſſe. Ieruſalem he ſubduded ayen / & forbadde that no Iewe ſholde dwelle therin by no wyſe. Criſtē mē he ſuffred there to dwelle. Ayenſt his wyll he came to the Empyre / But he gouerned hym very welle. whā ye ſenatours prayed hym to calle his ſone Emperour after hym / He ſayd / it is not ynoughte to me that ayenſt my wyll I haue regned whiche I haue not deſerued. For ye emperourꝰ of Rome ſhold go by ſucceſſyon of blood / but to ſuche men as haue deſerued it thrugh theyr merytes. Many tymes he regned vnuertuouſly that is a kynge borne / & vertue ſholde come before his kyngdom. ¶Euſtachius other wyſe called Placidꝰ & Theroſpita his wyf / & two of ther ſones / of whom merueyllous thynges ben redde / were martred by the commaundement of Adrian. This Placidus was mayſter of the Emperours knyghtes Ieruſalem was reſtored by Adrian and made larger / ſoo that the place where Cryſte deyed was within th
                           •
                         walles / the whiche was without before. And thys ys the thyrde buyl dynge agayne of that cyte / for yt was thryes deſtroyed. Of the Caldees in the tyme of zedethee / of Anthyocus in the tyme of Machabeorum / and of Tytus in the tyme of Veſpacian.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno dm̄ .C.xliiii.
                     THeleſporus a Romayne was pope .xi. yere thys man ordeyned thys aungels ympne to be ſonge in the maſſe (Glorya in excelſis deo &c̄) & the goſpell to be redde afore the ſacrynge / and ō Cryſtemaſſe daye thre maſſes to be ſonge. And he ordeyned there ſholde noo maſſe be ſonge be fore thre of the clocke. And at the laſte he was martred & buryed at ſaynt Peters· ¶Ignyus a Greke was pope foure yere. This man ordeyned that a chylde ſhold haue a god fader & a god moder at the time of baptyſynge: & alſo one at confyrmacōn. Alſo that no Archebyſſhop / excepte the pope ſhalde condempne his Suffrygan but yf the cauſe were ſhewed in the prouyncyal coūſell of byſſhops. Then̄e he was martred & buryed at ſaynt Peters. ¶Anthoniꝰ Pius was Emperour .xxii. yere with his ſones Aurolio and Lucio This mā was myghtly wyſe & naturelly fayr of ſpeche / the whiche lyghtly in oo man is not foūde Noto. ¶Excedinge men in wyſdom comynly are not fayre ſpeched / nor peaſfull namely of nature / ne contrayous. Excedynge men in fayre ſpeche comēly are leſſe than wyſe. Thys man was meued with both theſe proprytees. Therfore many kyngdomes the whyche receded from other Emperours wylfully to thys man torned ayen. And to cryſten men was no ne ſo gentyll. He ſayd thrught the enſample of Cipio. I hadde leuer kepe one heereof a man / than ſlee an hondred of myn enmyes. And ſome martyrs were made vnder hym / but they were made vnder the cōmoundemente of the Emperours afore. And the crygen people were ſoo hatefull vnto the byſſhops & to the preeſtes of ye Temple of the fals goddes: that they prouoked the prynces alwaye ayenſte them. For they ſuppoſed that the cryſten fayth ſholde deſtroye them· Therfore it was noo merualle: all though the pryce was vnpleaſed: for they ſayd All ther goddes were deuyllesy
                           •
                         lower Iuges purſued cryſten folke & mar
                           •
                        ed:

them. This tyme .x. thouſande martyrs. were crucyfyed in Arminea / in an hyghe hylle called Arath. ¶Pompeius trogus iſto tempore hiſtorias a nino vſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ad octauianū deduxit.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno dm̄ .C.liiii.
                     PIus ytalicus was pope .xi. yere. & .iiii. monethes and .xv. dayes / This mā ordeyned the feeſt of Eeſter euer more ſholde be halowed on the ſonday. And alſo an heretyke comynge fro the ſecte of the Iewes ſholde be receyued and baptyſed. Thenne he was martred and buryed in ſaynt Peter. ¶Anicetus was pope after Piꝰ almooſt .x. yere / this man made many decrees of the Canon and for byſſhops (vt in caꝰ violatores. &c̄. ¶Galienus a leche goten in Pergamo was in grete fame at Rome. The whiche not alonly expowned the bokes of ypocras but he put many of them to his bokes. And of this man is ſayd / for his diſcrete abſtynence the whyche he vſed / he lyued an hondred & .xl. yeres. He neuer ete nor dranke hys fylle. ¶Nota abſtinenciam. ¶He neuer toke rawe fruytes. Alwaye he had a ſwete brethe. He deyed all only thrugh aege & noo ſykeneſſe. ¶Marcus Anthonius the true / and Lucius Comodus were Empyrours .xix. yere. Theſe toke the Empyre after Anthony the meke / and thenne began two Emperours to regne / but Luciꝰ Comodus deceſſed. And Anthom was Emperous a lone / the whiche was a victorious man and a noble / but that he made the fourth perſecucion to kylle cryſtē men. This Marcus was of ſo grete ſadneſſe & ſtedfaſtneſſe / ye for no chaunce he lough neuer / ne chaūged no chere / nother for gladneſſe ne for ſorowe. And whan he was a childe / he was of ſuche manhode / that on a certayne tyme whā he loked his treſour / and had not that whiche he myght gyue his knyghtes & his men whan he wente to fyght ayenſte the Germayns / the Sclauous / and Sarmatus / he wolde hurte ne greue no body / but had leuer to ſelle his wyues golden veſſell and her arayment / her beddynge / & all her ryall ſtuff / than take taxe of the Sena
                           •
                        ours / or of hys prouynce vnder hym But he gate the victorye of his enmyes / & recouered all ayen / and releaſed the prouences or ther trybutes. ¶And thoſe that wolde ſelle hym his wyues treſour ayen he reſtored them ther moneye / and thoſe that wolde not / he neuer greued them. But the tables of ther dettes betwixt hym and them he brent openly in the market place and thanked them / that they helped hym in his neceſſyte.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Luie regned after his fader / that was a good man / and after he became cryſten.
                     AFter thys kynge Coill regned Lucie his ſone: that was a good man to god and to all the people. He ſente to Rome to Eulentre yt then was pope: & ſayd. He wold become a cryſten man & receyue bap
                           •
                        ym in the name of god & torne to the ryght fayth & byleue. Eulentre ſēte two Legates / yt were called Pagan: an other Elybam in to this londe & baptyſed the kyng & all his meyne And after wente from towne to towne & baptyſed the people tyll all the londe was baptyſed. And this was in the yere an hondred .lvi. after the Incarncyon of our lorde Iheſu cryſte. And this kyng Lucie made tho in thys londe two Archibyſſhops: one at Caunterbury an other at yorke & other many biſſhops that yet bē in this londe And whan theſe two Legatꝭ had baptyſed all this londe: they ordeyned preſtes for to baptyſe chyldern: and for to make the ſacramente: and after they wente ayen to Rome. And the kynge dwelled in his londe: and regned wyth moche honoure .xii. yere: and after deyed and lyeth at Glouceſtre.
                  
                  
                     ¶How this londe was longe without a kynge: and how Brytons choſe a kynge.
                     THis kyng Lucie had none heyre of his body begotē: that was after warde grete harme & ſorowe to the londe. For after thys kynge Lucies deth: none of the grete lordes of the londe wolde ſuffre an other to be kynge: but lyued in warre & debate amōges them ſelf .l. yere without kyng. But it befell after warde that a grete prince came from Rome ī to thꝭ londe that was called Seuerie: not for warre but for to ſaue the ryght of Rome. But neuer theles he had not dwelled halfe a yere in thys londe but that the Brytons ſlewe hym. And whan they of Rome wyſt that Seueri was ſo ſlayne: they ſente an other grete lord in to this londe that was called Allec that was a ſtronge man & a myghty of body & dwelled in thys londe longe tyme & dyde moche ſorowe to the Brytons. So that after for pure malyce: they choſe a kynge amonge theym that was called Aſtelepades. And aſſembled a gr
                           •
                        aee hoſte of

Brytons: & wente to London to ſeke Allec: & there they foūde hym & ſlewe hym & all his felowes. And one that was called walon deffended hym fyerſly: & fought longe with the Brytons but at the laſt he was dyſcomfyted and the Brytons tooke hym and bonde hys hondes & feet and caſt hym in to a water. wherfore that water was called euer more walbroke. Tho regned Aſtelepades in peas: tyll one of his Erles that was called Coill made a fayr towne ayenſte the kynges wyll: & lete calle the towne Colcheſtre after hys owne name. wherfor the kyng was full wroth & thought to deſtroy him And began to warre vpon hym and brought grete power of men and yaf the Erle batayll. And the Erle defended hym fyerſly wyth hys power & ſlewe the kynge hymſelf in that batayll. And tho was Coill crowned & made kyng of this londe. This Coill regned and gouerened the londe well & nobly / for he was a noble man and well be loued amonged the Brytons. ¶whan tho of Rome herde that Aſtelepades was ſlayne: they were wonder gladde: & ſente an other grete prynce of the Romayns yt was called Cōſtance. And he came to ye kyng Coill for to chalēge the trybute that was wōte to be payed to Rome. And ye kynge anſwered well & wiſely & ſayde: that he wolde paie to Rome all that ryght and reaſon wolde with good wyll. And ſo they accorded tho with good wyll and without ony cōtake. And ſo both they dwelled togyd in loue. ¶Kynge Coill yaaf to hym his doughter Eleyne for to haue her to his ſpowſe / that was bothe fayre & wyſe & good & well lettred. & this Cōſtance ſpowſed her there with moche honoure. And it befell ſoone after that thys kynge Coill deyed in the .xiii. yere of hys regne / and lyeth at Colcheſtre entyred
                  
                  
                     ¶Of kyng Conſtance that was a Romayne that was choſen kyng after ye deeh of Coill for as moche that he hadde ſpwſed Eleyne that was kynge Coils doughter.
                     AFter this kynge Coill Conſtance was made kynge and crowned / for aſmoche as he had ſpowſed kynge Coils doughter that was heyre of that londe. The whiche Cō
                        ſtance regned well and worthely gouerned ye londe And he begate on his wyf Eleyne a ſonne that was called Conſtātyne. And this kynge bare true fayth. And truly dyde vnto them of Rome all his lyf. And whan he had regned .xv. yere / he deyed and lyeth at yorke.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Cōſtātine that was kīge Conſtā
                        ce ſone / & the ſone of Saynt Eleyne gouerned & ruled the londe / & was Emperour of Rome.
                     AFter kynge Conſtance dethe regned Conſtantyne hys ſone and the ſone of ſaynt Eleyne that foūde the holy croſſe in the hooly londe. And how Conſtantyne be came Emperour of Rome. ¶It befell ſoo in ye tyme there was an Emperour at Rome that was a Sarraſy & a tyraunt / yt was called Maxence / that put to dethe all that byleued ī god & deſtroyed hooly chirche by all hiſ power & ſleweall Cryſten mī that he myght fynde And amō
                        ge all other he lete martyr Saynt Katheryne. And many other cryſten people that had drede of deth fledde & came in to this londe to kynge Conſtantyne. And tolde hym of the ſorowe that Maxence dyde to the Cryſtyanytee wherfore Conſtantyne had pyte / & made grete ſorowe / & aſſembled a grete hoſte & a gret power and wente ouer vnto Rome / and there tooke the cyte and ſlewe all that there was ī that were of myſbyleue that he myghte there 
                           •
                        ynde / And tho was he made Emperour and was a good man & gouerned hym ſo wel that all 
                           •
                        ondes to hym were attendaunt for to be vnder his gouernaunce· ¶And this deuyll & ty
                           •
                        aun Maxence that tyme was in the londe of Gre
                        
                           •
                        e / & herde theſe tydyngs / & ſodeynly became wood / and ſodeynly he deyed and ſo he ended hys lyf. ¶whan Conſtantyne went from thys londe vnto Rome: he tooke wyth hym hys moder Eleyne / for the moche wyſedome that ſhe coude / and th
                           •
                        e other grete lordes that he moche loued / ye one was called Hoell an another was called Taberne / and the thyrde Morhyn And toke alhys londe to kepe vnto the Erle of Corne wayle that was called Octauyan. And ſoo anone as thys Octauyan wyſte that hys lorde dwelled at Rome. Incōtynent he ſeaſed all the londe in to hys honde / & therwyth dyde all hys wyll amonge hyghe & lowe & they hellde hym for kynge. ¶whan theſe tydynges came to Conſtantyne the Emperoure: he was wonder worthee towarde the Erle Octauyan And ſent Taberne wyth ·xii.M. men for to deſtroye the erle for hys falſeneſſe. And they arrayued at Por teſmouth. ¶And whan Octauyan wyſt that he aſſembled a grete power of Brytons and dyſcomfyted Taberne & Taberne

fledde thens in to Scotlonde. and ordeyned there a grete power / and came ayne in to thys londe another tyme to yeue batayll to Octauian. ¶whan Octauian herde that / he aſſembled a grate power & came to warde Taberne as moche as he myght / ſoo that thoſe two hoſtes mette togyders vppon Staneſmore / and ſtrongely ſmote togyder / & tho was Octauian dyſcōfyted / & fledde thens vnto Norwaye. And Taberne ſeaſſed all the londe in his honde / townes & caſtelles / and as moche as they ther had. And ſyn Octauian came ayen from Norwaye with a grete power & ſeaſed all the londe in hys honde & droue out all the Romayns 
                           •
                         and was tho made kynge and regned.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Marimian yt was the Emperours coſyn of rome ſpowſed Octauians doughter and was made kynge of this londe.
                     
                         THis Octauian gouerned ye londe well and nobly / but he had none heyre ſaue a doughter that was a yonge childe that he loued as moche as his lyfe And for as moche as he wered ſyke and was in poynt of det / & myghte no lenger regne / he wold haue made one of his neuewes to haue be kynge / the whyche was a noble knyght & a ſtrong man that was called Conan Mer
                           •
                        edok
                           •
                         & he ſholde haue kypte the kynges doughter and haue maryed her whan tyme had ben. But the lordes of the londe wolde not ſuffre it / but yaaf her coūſeyll to be maryed to ſome hygh man of grete honour and thenne myght ſhe haue all her luſte / & the coūſell of the Emperour Conſtantyne her lorde. And at this coūſeyll they accorded / & choſe tho Cador of Cornewaylle for to go to the emperour for to do this meſſage. And he toke the waye and wente to Rome / and tolde the Emperoure thys tydynges well and wyſely. And the Emperour ſente in thys londe wyth hym hys owne coſyn that was hys vncles ſone a noble knyght & a ſtronge / yt was called Maximian. And he ſpowſed Octauians doughter / and was crowned kynge of this londe.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Maximian that was themperours coſyn / conquered the londe of Armorycam / and yaaf it to Conan Meriedok.
                     THis kynge Maximian became ſoo ryall that he thougt to conquere the londe of armory cam for the grete rycheſſe that he herde tell yt was in that londe / ſo that he ne lyfe man that was of worthynes / knyght / ſquere ne none other man / that he ne toke wyth hym to the grete damage to all the londe. For he lefte at home behynde hym noo man to kepe the londe / but toke them wyth hym fro thys londe .xxx. thouſande knyghtes that were doughty mennes bodyes / & wente ouer to the londe of. Armorycam and there ſlewe the kynge yt was called Imball / & conquered all the londe. and whan he had ſo done / he called Conan & ſayd. For as moche as kynge Octauian made you kynge of Brytayne / & thrugh me ye were lette and dyſtroubled that ye were not kynge. I gyue you thys londe of Armorycam / & you there of make kynge. And for as moche as ye be a. Bryton. I well that this londe haue the ſame name / & no more be called Armoricam / but be called Brytayne. And the londe from whens we be comen ſhall be called moche Brytayne And ſoo ſhall men knowe that one Brytayne fro thae other. Conan Meriedok thāked hym gretly / & ſoo was he made kynge of lytell Brytayne. And whan all this was done. Maximian wente from thens vnto Rome / & tho was made Emperour after Conſtantyne. And Conan dwelled ſtyll in lytell Brytayne with moche honour / & there lette ordeyne .ii. thouſande ploughmen of the londe for to culture the londe to harow it & for to ſowe it & feffed thē rychely after yt they were. & for aſmoche as kyng Conan & none of his knyghtꝭ ne nōe of his othere peple wold not take wyues of ye naciō of fraū
                        ce / he tho ſente in to grete. Brytayne to the erle of Cornewayle that mē called dionothe that he ſhold theſe thorugh out al this londe .xi.M. of maydens. That is to ſaye .viii.M. for the

meane people / and .iii·M. for the gretteſt lordes that ſholde them ſpowſe. And whan Dyonoth vnderſtode this / he made a commaundemente thorughout all the londe of Brntayne. And as many as the nombre cam to be aſſembldy togyder of maydens / for there was noo man that durſte wythſtande hys commaundementꝭ / for as moche that all the londe was take hym to warde and kepe / to doo all thynge that hym good lyked. ¶And whan theſe maydens were aſſembled / he lete them come a fore hym atte London. And lete ordeyne for them ſhyppes haſtely / and as moche as them neded to that vyage. And tooke his owne doughter that was called Vrſula that was the fayreſt creature that ony man wyſt. And he wolde haue ſent her to konge Conan / that ſholde haue ſpowſed her and made her quene of the londe But ſhe had made pryuely to god a vowe of chaſtyte / that her fader not wyſt / ne nōe other man elles that was lyuynge vpon erthe
                  
                  
                     ¶How Vrſula and .xi. thouſande maydens that were in her companye wente to warde lytell Brytayne / and alle they were martrde at Colayne.
                     THys Vrſula choſe vnto her company .xi. thouſande maydens / that of all other ſhe was lady and meyſtreſſe And all they wente to ſhyppe at one tyme in the water that is called Tamyſe / and cōmaunded her kynne and her frendes to almyghty god / and ſaylled to warde lytell Brytayne. But whan they were come in to the hyghe ſee / a ſtronge tempeſt aroſe as it was goddes wyll / and vrſula wyth her ſhyppes and her compny were dryue to Hundlonde thrugh temſtpe / and arryued in the hauen of the cyte of Coleyne And the kynge of the londe that was called Gowan / was tho in the cytee· And whan he wyſt the tydynges / that ſoo many fayre maydens were there arryued: He toke Elga hys broher and other of hys houſholde wyth hym & went to the ſhyppes to ſee that fayre company. And whan he ſawe them ſo fayre: he and hys company wolde haue ouerlayne them & take fro them ther mayndehode. But Vrſula that good mayde coumſeylled: prayed: warned: and taught theym that were her felowes that they ſholde defende them wyth all theyr myghte: and rather ſuffre deth thā ſuffre ther body to be defoyled. Soo that all tho maydens became ſo ſtedfaſt in god: that they defended them thrughe hys grace: ſoo that none of them hadde power to doo them ſhame. wherfore the kynge Gowan was ſore anone that he for wrath ſlewe them euerychone anone ryght: and ſoo were all tho maydens martred for the loue of god: and lyeth at Coleyne.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Gowan came for to deſtroy this londe and how a man of grete power that was called Gracian deifended the londe.
                     AS alle thys was done kynge Gowan that was a Sarraſyn called hys brother. Elga and ſayde to hym: that he ſholde go conquere the londe that alle thoſe fayre maydens were borne in. And he ordened tho a grete power of Pehites of denmarke of or
                           •
                        e
                           •
                        ay and of Norway· And they came in to this londe: and brente townes & ſlewe folke: and caſte a downe chirches & houſes / and 
                           •
                        obbed all the lond in length & brede & put to deth alle tho that wolde not forſake the ryght byleue & cryſtendome / for as moche as there was no ſouerayne that myght them helpe. For the kyng Maximian had take with hym all the worthy men whan he wente to conquere lytell. Brytayne And in the ſame tyme ye ye here now telle was ſaynt Albon martryd thrugh the wo
                           •
                        d tyr
                           •••
                         Dyocleſyan / in the ſame place where is now
                           •
                         an abbaye made of ſaynt Albon whyles that he was a paynym. But he conuerted hym to god thrugh the predicacyon of clerke & a wyſe man that was called. An
                           ••
                        ble that was 
                           ••
                        rbourghed a nyght in hys hous. And this was after thyn carnacyon of Iheſu Cryſte ·ii. hondred .xxvi. yere. And men ſhalle vnderſtonde that ſaynt. Albon ſuffred his martyrdom before that ſaynt Edmonde was martryd & therfore is ſaynt. Albon called the fyrſte martyr of Englond. ¶This Gowans brother and hys folke that were ſarraſyns wēt thrugh the lōde & deſtroyed al thynge that they foūde & no thynge they ſpared· whan theſe tydynges came to rome how ye kynge Gowan had begon for to deſtroye this londe / ye Emperour of come ſent a ſtrōge mā & of greate power that was called Gracian with ·xxiiii.M. well fyghtynge men for to caſte out thoſe ſarraſyns of thys londe. And all they arryued at Portſmouth. Maximian myght not come hymſelf / for as moche. as he was choſen Emperour after the deth of

Conſtantyne that was Saynt Eleyns ſone. whan this Gracian was arryued with his hoſte / he lete ſapye preuely where kyng Gowan myght be founde. And he ſette vpon them ſodenly as they laye in theyr beddes / and diſcō
                        fyted hym and ſlewe them in ther beddes euerychone / that none of them ſcaped / ſauff Gowan that fledde in to his owne countree with moche ſorowe and grete payne. ¶Soone after it befelle that Maximian was ſlayne atte Rome thrughe treaſon. And whan Gracian wyſte that tydynge he lete crowne hym kynge of this londe.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Gracian made hym kynge whan Maximian was ſlayne / & after warde the Brytons ſlewe hym for his wyckedneſſe.
                     THis Gracian whan he began to regne he became ſo wycked & ſoo ſterne / & ſo moche ſorowe dyde to the Brytons yt they ſlewe hym amonge them. ¶Tho whan kynge Gowan vnderſtode yt Gracian was ſlayne & done to dethe he aſſembled a grete power & came ayen in to this londe. And yf he had fyrſte done harme tho dyde he moche more. For tho deſtroyed he all this londe / & the cryſten peple that were in moche Brytayne ſo that no man was ſo hardy for to name god / & he that ſo dyde anone he was put to ſtrange deth. ¶But ye byſſhop of London that was that was called Goſſelim ſcaped / & went thens to them of Rome to ſeke ſocour / to helpe to dyſtroy the ſarraſyns that hadde deſtryed this londe. And the Romayns ſayd / that they had ben ſo often enoyed for ther ſendinge people in to Brytayne all for to helpe the Brytōs / & they wolde nomore ſoo do / and ſoo the Byſſhop Goſſelin wente thens wythout ony ſocoure or helpe. And tho wente he to the kynge of lytell Brytane that was called Aldroye / & this was ye thyrde kynge after Gowan Meryedok / as before is ſayde. ¶The byſſhop prayed this Aldroye of helpe & ſocoure / & the kynge had pyte in his herte whan he herde how the byſſhop fledde / & how that the cryſten men were ſoo ſlayne in grete. Brytayne thrugh ye paynyms & ſarraſyns / he graūted hym cōſtantyne his broder him for to helpe wyth power of folke. And then dyde arraye hors armour & ſhyppes & al thynges that neded to that vyage. And whā al thinge was redy / he called ye byſſhop / & to hym ſayde I take you here Cōſtantyne my broder vpon this couenaū
                        
                           •
                        . That yf god gyue hym grace the paynems & that ſarraſins to deſtroye yt ye then make hym kynge. And the byſſhop graūted wyth good wyll. ¶Conſtantyne & the byſſhop toke leue of ye king Aldroye & betoke him to god & toke men .xii. thouſande & went to ther ſhyppes & ſaylled to warde grete Brytayne & arryued at Totneſſe. ¶whan the Brytons herde theſe tydyngꝭ that to thē came ſocoure / they were ſtrongely holpen / & ordeyned thē an huge nō
                        bre of people & came to them & receyued them with moche honoure. ¶Gowan anone as he wyſt of theſe tydynges / he aſſēbled all ye Sarraſyns & cam ayenſt them & yaue thē batayle. An
                           •
                         Cōſtantyne ſlewe hym with his owne hō
                        des. And all thoſe other Sarraſyns were dyſcomfyted & ſlaine that nōe of them eſcaped but thoſe that were cōuerted vnto almyghty god.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Conſtantyne that was the kynges brother of lytell Brytayne was crowned kyng of grete Brytayne / for hys grete vertue and hys grete worthyneſſe.
                     ANone after ye batayll they wēte to Lō
                        don & crowned there Cōſtantyne & made hym kyng of this lōde. And ye byſſhop Goſſelyn ſette the crowne on his heed & anoynted hym / as it befalleth for a kynge to be. And tho began cryſtendome ayen in this londe / And anone this kyng Conſtantyne as he was crowned. Anone after he ſpowſyd hys wyf thrugh coūſeyll of ye Brytōs And he begate thre ſones on her. The fyrſt was called Cōſtance & that other Aurilambros / & ye thyrde Vter. This Cō
                        ſtance the elder brother▪ whan he cam to aege he made hym a monke atte wyncheſtre. This Conſtantyne theyr fader thrugh treaſon was ſlayne ¶For it befel on a time that a Pehite came to hym vpon a day in meſſage as yt were. And ſaid that he wold ſpeke with ye king preuely in coūſeyll. The kyng lete voyde his chambre of the men yt were there with in / & ther abode no moo but yt kyng & the Pehite. & he made a coūtenaūce as though he wold haue ſpoken with the kynge in his eere. And there he ſlewe him with a lōge knyf. And after that he wente meruaylouſly out of the chābre in to a nother chābre ſo at ye laſt no man wyſt where he was become. ¶whan the kynges mē wyſt that theyr lorde was ſo deed they made then ſo moche ſorowe that they wyſt not what to do. For as moche as his two ſones Aurilambros & Vter

were ſo yonge / that they myght not be kynge / and the thyrde was a mōke as is ſayd before. But Vortiger that was Erle of weſtſex thoughte preuely in hys herte thrugt queyntaunce for to be kyng hymſelfe. And went to wyncheſtre / where that Conſtance was monke / and ſayde vnto hym. Conſtance ſayde he / your fader is deed & your two brethern that ben wyth Goſſelyn ye byſſhop of London to nouryſſhe be ſo yonge / ye none of thē may be kyng. wherfore I counſell you / yt ye forſake your habyte & come wyth me. And I ſhall make ſuche a meane vnto ye Brytons / yt ye ſhall be made kynge.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of Conſtance that was kynge Conſtā
                        tynes ſone / that was a monke at wyncheſtre and how he was made kynge after his faders deth thorugh counſeyll of Vortyger that was Erle of weſtſex / for as moche a Aurylmabros and Vter hys two brethern were but yonge of aege. And Vortyger lete ſlee hym for to be kynge hymſelfe.
                     THys Vortyger coūſelled thys Conſtance ſo moche / tyll he forſoke hys abbot & wēte with him. And anone after he was crowned kynge by thaſſent of the Brytons. Thys kynge Conſtance whan he was crowned and made kyng / he wyſt ne knewe but lytell of the worlde ne cude nothynge what knyghthode axed· And he made vortiger his chyef mayſter and coūſeyller / & gaf hym all his power / for to-ordeyne & do as moche as to ye reame aperteyned. So that hymſelf no thynge entermedled but only bare the name of kynge. whan Vortiger ſawe that he had all the londe in his warde & gouernall / he thought a preuy treaſon to ſlee Conſtance the kynge / that he myght hym ſelf be crowned & made kynge & regne. And lete ſende after an hōdred kynghtes of Pehites the worthyeſt of all ye londe / & them helde with hym for to dwelle \ as to be kepers of hys body as he wolde goo thorugh the londe to ordeyne thinges that apperteyned to a kyng. And this Vortiger honoured ſo moche the hondred kynghtes & ſoo moche yaue them of golde & ſyluer and ſo ryche Iewelles / robes horſes and other thynges plente / wherfore they helde hym more lorde than they dyde the kynge. And Vortyger tolde them / yf he myght be kynge / ye as it were thrugh treaſon / he wolde make them rycheſt of the londe. Soo at the laſte thrugh grete gyftes that he had gyuen largely they cryed thrugh the courte that Vortyger were beter worthy to be kynge than Conſtance. wherfore Vortiger made ſemblaunt as he had ben wrothe. And he departed thens from the courte: & ſayde he muſt goo elles were for thynges that he hadde to do. And ſoo the traytour ſayde for by cauſe that they ſholde ſlee hym: that ys to ſaye Conſtance. ¶whan thys Vortyger was gone: yt befell ſoone after: yt tho hondred kynghtes of Pehyces brake the doores of the kynges chambre and there they hym ſlewe: & ſmote of hys heed ād bare it to Vortiger there that he dwelled. And ſoo whan vortiger ſawe that heed he wepte full tenderly with his eyen: and neuer theles he was ſom deale glad in hys berte of his deth· ¶And anone this vortiger toke thoſe hondred kenghtes of Pehytes: and badde hys ſeruauntes bynde theyr hondes behynde them: and ladde them to London: and ther they were dampned vnto dethe as fals traytours. And anone after all the Brytons of the londe by the comyn aſſente crowned vortiger and made hym kynge of the londe
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno dm̄ .C.lxxiiii.
                     SOther a martyr was pope after Anycetum .ix. yere the whyche decreed that a Nonne ſholde not touche the pale of the awter: nor put in ſence therto. And that ſhe ſhold were a wymple about her heed. And many perylles he ſawe aboute matrymony. Therfore he ordeyned that noo woman ſholde be callen a lefull wyf: but yf ſhe were bleſſyd of the preeſt. ¶Elentherus a martyr was pope after Sother .xv. yere: the whyche ordeyned that cryſten men ſholde refuſe no meete reſonable that was mannes mete (Nota) ¶Alſo that noo man vnaccuſed in cryme: ſholde be put from his dygnytee or degree tyll he were conuycted: thorugh enſample of cryſt the whyche kepte ſtyll Iudas Scaryoth not accuſed: and Criſt knewe hym gylty. And what ſomeuer he dyde amonge the apoſtles for the dygnyte of his ſeruyce abode ferme & ſtable· And he ſente alſo Legates vnto Lucie the kyng of Brytayne: the whiche baptyſed hym & his peple. And Fagus and Domianus legate: the whyche the pope ſente fyrſt: preched in Englonde and this cryſtendome dured in Brytayne two hō
                        dred yere: vnto the tyme of Dyocleſyan the Emperour whan ſaynt Albon was martred. ¶Marcus Anthonius: & Luciꝰ Comodꝰ were

Emperours / but Marcus deyed anone / & Lucius Comodus regned. Comodus was called prouffytable of ſcorne / for he was to euery man vnprouffytable. He was yeuen vtterly to lechery. Many Senatours & Cryſten men he made to be ſlayne. He dampned his owne wyf to deth for aege. He deyed a ſodeyne deth with ſtruglynge amonge maydens. ¶Helius Pertinax after this man was Emperour .vi. monethes / and was a man of grete diſcrecyon / whome Iulian the grete lawer ſlewe. And he entred the Empyre / & was ſlayne the .vii. moneth of Seuerus. ¶Victora martyr was pope after Elentheriū .x. yere. & for ye diſcorde of the paſchall tyme he called a coūſell ī 
                        Alexand where he was preſente yt tyme / & many other / where he decreed that Eeſters daye ſhold be kepte on the Sonday but he muſt kepte the chaū
                        ge of the moone of Apryll & that was to dyfferre fro Iewes for many byſſhops of the eeſt abode that tyme / the ſame daye that the yewes dyd halowe that feeſt. ¶Alſo he ordeyned yt in the tyme of nede / childern myſtht be criſtened in euery place / & in euery water. ¶zepherinꝰ a martyr & a Romayne was pope after victor .ix. yere. This man ordeyned that Cryſten peple of .xii. yere of aege & aboue / ſholde receyue his god on Eeeſter daye ones oo yere. alſo he ordeyned that all the veſſels of the awter ſholde be glaſſe or tynne / and not tree / as in olde tyme the conſecracyon of ye glorious blood was made in tree veſſell· And this tyme paſt / & the worſhyp of the chirche grewe / & glaſen veſſell were forbode (Vt patet de conſe. de pri. ca.) ¶Origenes the noble clerke was thys tyme / & he wrote ſo moche / that ſaynt Ierome ſayde I haue redde of Origenes werkes .iiii. thouſā
                        de volimes without pyſtles. He tranſlated the Byble from Hebrwe in to Greke / & dyde many other grete thinges. And of this Origenes Sampſon. Salomon / and Traian / is a grete queſtion amonge doctours yf yt they ben dampned or ſaued. Therfore thoſe thynges yt with out perell we ben not boūde to knowe nor the chirche is not certifyed of them. And therfore lete them alonly commytted vnto god. ¶Caliſtus a martyr & a Romayne was pope after zepherinꝰ 
                           •
                        o. yere / and he ordeyned the Cimiteri (in via apia) where many a thouſande martyr is buryed. ¶Alſo he ordeyned the feeſt of the Eemerynge dayes to be kept. ¶Anthoniꝰ Aurelius was Emperour .iii. yere. And thys man lacked no kynde of lechery / & at the laſte he was ſlayne amonge a greate multytude of peple / for hys myſcheuous lyuynge. Anthonius Marcꝰ regned after hym .vii. yere. This man lyued abſtynatly / & therfore he was ſlayne as was his predeceſſour. ¶Aliſander was Emperour after Anthoniꝰ & regned .xiii. yere This man at the Inſtaūce of his moder a cryſten woman & ye techyng of Origenes / ye whyche came to Rome to conuerte her / was made ſo good vnto cryſten men yt he ſuffred them to haue ther coūſeylles & theyr prayers by themſelf / but neuertheles in this tyme the curſed offycers of hym made many martyrs.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno dm̄ .CC.xliiii.
                     VRbanus was pope after Caliſtꝰ .viii. yere / and olde and yonge he was very vertuous. And all the halowed veſſelles of the chyrche he made of golde or ſyluer. This man lefte his popehede and went to Agryppa and .xi. thouſande virgyns wyth hym. And ye clergy ſayd he lefte not hys dygnytee for holyneſſe but for appetyte of tho virgyns / & wrote hym not in the booke of popes. And there he a virgyn was martred with thoſe virgins. ¶Poncianus a martyr ſucceded Vrbanus. And he ordeyned that pſalmes ſholde be ſoyde daye & nyght in the chyrche of god. And that a preeſt ſholde ſaye Confite or afore the maſſe. ¶Anteros a martyr was pope after this man / this man ordeyned that a byſſhop myght be remeued from one vnto an other. And he made the lyfe of martyrs to be wryten. And he was ſlayne and buryed in the Cimitery of ſaynt Calixt ¶Maximianus was choſen Emperour act Magūcia of the hoſte / & not by ye Senatours and regned thre yere / and deſtroyed the chyrche myghtely / and was ſlayne for Origene. ¶Gordian regned after hym .vi. yere / and of hym is lytell wryten / but he was ſlayne (Hiis diebus Celus dux Colcheſtrie in aſclepio regnat in britannia annis quaſi .xxx. vſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ad aduentum Conſtancii. Lati .M. vacat) ¶Phylyp was Emperour after hym / & this Phylyp choſe to hym Phylyp his ſone / & they regned .xvii. yere: & were the fyrſt Emperours yt were cryſtend: and after ſlayne of the hoſt: They be queued all ther treſour in ther deth: yt it ſholde be dyſpoſed to poore men. And ſaynt Laurence at the aſſygnacyon of his mayſter the pope

departed this treſour about Rome / the whyche was greate cauſe of his martyrdome (Vt quidē dicunt) ¶Decius was Emperour thre yere / & in all thynges a tyraūt. For he entred thempyre whan he & the hoſte had ſlayne the two Philyppes his lordes & after that he was ſlayne with his ſone. ¶Fabianꝰ a martyr & a Romayne was pope after Anteros .xii. yere / this was a very holy man. For whan Cryſten men ſtode to abyde the eleccyon of the pope / ſodenly a whyte douue or a culuour deſcēded on hys heed / ſayenge vnto hym / thou ſhalt be pope of Rome. This man ordeyned euery yere ye Creme ſholde be halowed vpon Sherethurſdaye. Alſo he deuyded regyons to deakens the whiche ſholde wryte the lyf of maetrys. And at the laſte Dicitus ſlewe hym. ¶Cornelius a martyr & Romayne was pope after Fabianꝰ .iii. yere. This man toke vp the bodyes of Peter & Poul / & with grete honoure put them in worſhypfull places with beata Lucina· ¶Lucius was pope after Cornelius thre yere / and of hym lytell is wryten. ¶Gallus with his ſone Volucianus were Emperours two yere / & they foughte with Emilianus / & were ſlayne And Emilianꝰ the thyrde moneth was ſlayne ¶Valerian was Emperoure wyth hys ſone Galyene .xv. yere. Thys man was vertuous and manly in the begynnynge / but after was gyuen to vyce / & moche wrytchedneſſe. And ſo was his ſone Galiene. This valerian wente vnto the londe of Perſe. And therfore ye grete blod of martyrs whiche he had ſhedde was taken of the kyng of Perſe. And whan he had take hym he put out both his eyen & kept hym in grete bondage. And to this entente he kept hym / that whan ſo euer he ſhold ryde / this Veferian ſhalbe lye downe / & he ſholde ſette hys leet vpon hys backe whan he wolde take hys horſe. This herde Galiene his ſone yt was lefte at Rome. And that cauſed hym that he was not ſo cruell ayenſt Cryſten men. ¶And here was the .viii. perſecucyon of the chyrche made by the Emperour. And made ye Romayns to leſe ther kyngdomes / the whiche were neuer recouerd ayen to the emperour / And generall peſtelence was thrugh out all ye world for ther treſpaſſe. ¶Stephanus a martyr after Lucius was pope .iii. yere / this man ordeyned that no man ſholde vſe none halowed clothes but to ye worſhip of god. ¶Sixtus a martyr and a Romayne was pope after Stephanus two yere. Thys man ordeyned that the maſſe ſholde beſayd vpon an awter the whiche afore was not / and thenne he deyed. ¶Dyoniſius a Romayne was pope after hym two yere. Thys man deuyded paryſſhes and chyrcheyardes / and aſſygned to chyrches certen preeſtes. ¶Felix a martyr was pope after Dyoniſius two yere. He ordeyned that for the memorye of martyrs maſſes ſholde be ſayde. Alſo he ordeyned the Dedycacyon of the chyrche euery yere ſholde be ſayde. ¶Claudius was Emperour after Valerian / this emperour ſubdued Gothas nobly / and thenne he deſſeſſed.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno dm̄ .CC.lxxiiii.
                     EVticianꝰ a martyr was pope after Felix .viii. yere. This man ordeyned that corne & beenes ſholde be bleſſyd on the awter. And he buryed .CCC & ·xliiii. ma
                           •
                        tyrs wyth his owne hondes. ¶Aurelius was Emperour after Claudius .v. yere this Au
                           •
                        elius 
                           〈◊〉
                         cryſten men was gentyll wherfore he had the victory in euery place gloryouſly. And whan he was deſceyued by curſyd men & pur
                           •
                        e
                           ••
                        d cryſten men myghtly / and namely in Frauce for there he abode / & after that he hadde neuer good fortune. But was ſlayne. And this was the nynth perſecucyon of the chyrche & c
                           ••
                        ſten fayth. ¶Tacitus was Emperour after thys man / And he regned but thre monethes and was ſlayne in Ponto. ¶Probus was Emperoure after hym .v yere and ·iiii. monethes. Thys man recouered Fraunce ayen: the whyche was occupyed with Barbaryk men. And he yaue them & Pannonias lycēce to haue vyne yerdes. And whan he had almooſt a
                           •
                        l thynges well in peas he ſayde. Knyghtes wyth in a lytell tyme ſhalle not be neceſſary: and anone after he was ſlayn at Sir
                           ••
                        iū· ¶Carus and his two ſones Carunꝰ & Numerian were emperours after Probus but ſome were they dede: and theyr fader was drowned: and the two ſones were ſlayne: all theſe thre regned but .ii. yere. ¶Dyocleſian and Marimian came after theſe thre Emperours the one regned in the Eſt: and the other in the weſte. ¶The fyrſte thynge that Dyocleſyan dyde: he brente all ye cryſten mennes bokes that myght be founde. The two tyrauntes dyde more harme to Cryſten men than euer dyd ony other· For .x. yere laſted the perſecucyon. And as we rede. wyth

in ·xxx. dayes .xx. thouſande men were ſlayne for Cryſtis ſake. And in Englonde all faythe was almoſt deſtroyed in ye tyme of maximian ¶Gaius was pope after Euticianꝰ / this mā ordeyned that no man ſholde accauſe a byſſhop or an other clerke to ony ſeculer Iuge. And yt a pagon or an heretyke ſholde not accuſe a Cryſten man. Alſo he ordeyned that he yt was worthy ſhold aſcende gree by gree to his ordre / fyrſten Benet / than Colet / ſubdeacon / deacon / & than preeſt. And at ye laſt he was martred vnder Dyocleſyan. Arcellinꝰ a martyr was pope after Gaius .xi. yere and .iiii. monethes This mā was perſecuted ſore / for drede of deth he of freed thre cornes of incenſe to the ſacrefyce of the ydolles. And after warde he openly repented / & ſuffred the payne of deth for the fayth of the chyrche of god. Hys body laye vnburyed thre dayes for dred of the curſe of god. And after thorugh auyſyon of ſaynt peter & Marcell he was buryed at ſaynt Peters foot. ¶Marcellus was pope after Marcellinus .v. yere. This man ordeyned that a generall counſeyl myght not be ordeyned without the auctorite of the pope (vt pꝪ .xvii. di .c. ſinodū) ¶Alſo he choſe .xv. Cardynalles in the cyte to burye criſten men. At the laſt whan he had kept beeſtes longe tyme in a houſe cloſed in with them / by the commaundement of Maximian / he deyed for faute. ¶Euſebiꝰ a martyr was after this man two monethes & certayne dayes. Thys man of a laye man was made pope / & he ordeyned that no laye māſholde accuſe his byſſhop but yf he went fro his fayth (vt pꝪ .ii.ix.vii.c. laicos) Nato. ¶This tyme ſaynt Albon was martred in Brytayne. This Albon whan he was a pagan / he lodged a certayne man / the whyche conuerted hym to the fayth and after was Iuged vnto dethe. And moche people he torned vnto our lorde / that were nygh the water / the whiche he made drye thrugh his prayer. And he ſuffred deth nygh ye cyte of verelom (Vide plura in vita ſancti Albani) ¶Melchiades a martyr ſucceded Euſebius .iiii. yere. This man forbode ye men ſholde faſt on Sondaye or on Thurſdaye in ſo moche as paganes faſte on thoſe dayes. Atte the laſte he was martred as al his predeceſſours were. ¶And vnderſtonde ye that there were .xxxiii. popes of Rome martred eche one after other. Peter was the fyrſte / and thys melchiades was the laſte. And then̄e it was laudable after Gregory / a man to deſyre a byſſhopryche. ¶Galerius was Emperour after Dyocleſyan two yere / and an other wyth hym called Conſtācius So was the Empyre in thoſe dayes deuyded. Thys Conſtācius after he had conquered all ſpayne / he came in to grete Brytayne / & there he wedded a kynges doughter an whom he gate grete Conſtantyne. And this ſame Conſtancius deyed in Brytayne / & lyeth at yorke / as Martyne ſayth in his Cronycles / and left on lyue Conſtantyne that was goten on Eleyne and was kynge of Brytayne and of Fraunce
                  
                  
                     ¶Circa annū dm̄ .CCC.viii.
                     SIlueſter was pope after Melchiades. This was a glorious Cōfeſſour / & many wayes he worſhiped ye chirche of god what in wrytynge / what in myracles. He recyued ye pratrymony of ſaint Peter. That is for to ſay the kyngdom of ytalye with the cyte of Rome of Conſtantynople the Emperour / and to the worſhyp of the hole vnyuerſal chyrche of god he torned it. He baptyſed Eeleyne and the Iewes / & thenne he deceſſyd an holy Confeſſour ¶Conſtantyne the myghty was Emperour this tyme. This Conſtantyne was a glorious man and a victoryous in bataylle. In gouernynge of the comyn people he was very wyſe And in the neceſſyte of the byleue he was with out compayre. Deuoute. His pyte and his holynes ben ſo wryten in the bokes of holy doctours / that wythout doubte / he is to be nombred amonge Sayntes. And the Grekes ſaye that in the ende of his lyf he was made a amō
                        ke. And more ey maye here of hym in the Cronycles of Englōde. For he was kyng in Englonde. ¶Helena the quene moder to Conſtantyne repayred agayne the holy Croſſe this tyme. And ſhe made .lxx. Colleges / and ſhe glorifyed the ſtate of all holy chyrche. ¶Nicholas byſſhop of Myrree ſeete an holy mā was this tyme. ¶Athanaſius was thys tyme byſſhop in Alexandre a gloryous doctoure / made the (ſymbalum Quicun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         vult ſaluus eſſe. &c̄. ¶Marcus was pope after Silueſter two yere and .viii. monethes / this man ordeyned the Crede ſholde be openly ſonge in the chyrche. And that the byſſhop of Hoſtience ſholde conſecrate the pope / & that he ſholde were a palle. ¶Iulius was pope after Marcus .xi. yere / vnder Conſtantyne the ſeconde. ¶Conſtanꝰ

this mā was exiled .x. yere & after ſuffred deth vnder Conſtantyne the ſeconde. ¶Conſtantinus wyth hys two brethern redned .xxiiii. yere. And in his laſte ende he was peruerted by the hereſyet of the Arience by a byſſhop called Euſebe. And he purſued ye chyrche of god ſtrō
                        gely. The ende of this mā was thys. as he ſholde go to cōſtātynople vnto agret counſeyll in ye whych coūcyl he thought to haue cōdēpned ye byſſhop & ye clerkes of true byleue / he wēt before vnto a chambre to auoyde ſuche thyngꝭ as nature requyred / & anone ſodenly his bowels felle from hym / & therby was deed as ye now here. ¶Liberius was pope after Iulius .xix. yere and .vii. monethes. Thenne was the ſeconde dyſcorde of the chirche bytwene Liberyus & Felix / for the hereſye of the Ariens ye whyche fauoured Lyberyus. Thenne Conſtancyꝰ themperour called ayen Liberius from his exyle / by cauſe he fauoured thys hereſye And the chyrche deycede Liberyus & toke Felix for pope / & the other was expulſed as an heretyke of the chyrche. But Felyx obteyned not / for the Emperour put in Lyberyus & expulſed Felyx. ¶Feilix was pope after the deth of thys Lyberyus. And he declareed Conſtancyus the Emperour an heretyke & anone after he was martred. ¶And here was the firſt that euer ye chirche of Rome had an Infamed pope. For all ye predeceſſours of thys Liberyus were ſayntes & yaue holy enſamples. ¶Iulymus Apoſtata was after Conſtancyus Empero ur two yere & .viii. monethes / He was called Apoſtata for he fleede thys Conſtancius / whyche ſlewe hys brother. And for fere of deth was made a cryſten man & a monke. But after warde by the coūſeyll of Nygromancers / he aſked ye deuyll whether he ſholde be Emperoure or not. The deuyll ſayd that he ſholde be Emperour vpon a condycyon that he ſholde forſake his cryſten fayth and be vtter enmye to criſten men And ſo he dode. For he yaue leue to the Iewes that they ſholde buylde ayen the Temple in ſpyte of the cryſten men. And he toke all the goodes that cryſten men had and deſtroyed many of them. ¶Iomynyanus was Emperour after hym .viii. monethes. For whan Iulyanꝰ was deed the hoſte choſe hym Emperour. And he was a cryſten man. And he ſayd it was not leſtull to a cryſten man to be lorde ouer ſo many hethen people. They anſwered and ſayde. Rather than he ſhold forſake ye Empyre they wolde be cryſtened. And thus toke he the dygnytee. But ſoone he was deed / and in a meruayllous maner. For he was layde in a cholſe hous after hys Iourneye made all of ſtone newely whyted wyth lyme / in ye whiche they made to his cōforte as they thought a fyre of charcoole· And of the ayre of theſe two in the morowe he was founde deed. ¶Valentinian wyth hys brother Valent was Emperour after Iominianꝰ .xi. yere For he departed the Empyre & gaue hys brother the eeſt / and kepe hymſelfe the weſt parte / This Valentinian was a lord wyth Iulyanus Apoſtata. And it happed hym on a tyme for to goo in a Temple of falſe goddes for to doo ſatcrefyce. And mynyſtres ſtode there with water halowed after the gyſe with the whiche they ſtrynkled the lordes. This valentinian ſmote the mynyſter that caſt the water vpon hym & ſayd. He was rather defoyled by it than clenſed. For this Iulianꝰ dyde exile hym. But our lorde god for hys open confeſſyon of hys name rewarded hym wyth the Empyre. Hys brother Valent fell in to the opynyon of the Ariens and deyed in that hereſye. Thys ſame Valent lyued foure yere after Valētinian wyth Gracian themperour. 
                           •
                        Thys tyme lyued ſaynt Ambroſe.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno dm̄ .CCC.xliiii.
                     
                        DAmacias was pope after. 
                           〈◊〉
                         lix.xviii. yere and two mon
                           •
                        
                        thes this was an eloquent man in meter. And he wrote many ſtories of popes & martyrs· He ordeyned that. G
                           •
                        oria patri ſholde be ſayd in ye endes of the pſalmes. And that was at the prayer of ſaynt. Ierom. And thrugh the mocyon of this pope. Ierome tranſlated the. Byble from Hebrewe in to Latyn / and thenne he deceſſed a cōfeſſour. ¶Valence with Gracian & Valentinian were Emperours foure yere / In this tyme were chirches opened ayen and cryſten men hadde leue to renewe the ſeruyce of god that was defended afore wyth Emperours enfected wyth hereſye as was Valens & other / wherfore the chirche had no lyberte whan valens was on lyue. ¶A Synodus of a hōdred & .l. byſſhops were gadred vnder Damaſiꝰ pope at Conſtā
                        tynople ayenſte Macedoniū an heretyke / the whiche denyed the holy ghoſt to be very god.

And then̄e was the Crede made / that is ſonge on holy dayes in the chirche. ¶Auguſtynus a Cartaginen̄ of Affrica was this tyme He was as noble a Rethoricien as myght ebe. And in. all phyloſophye and poetrye in comparable And all thynge that ony phyloſopher founde in his yougth he vnderſtode with lytel labour And about this tyme he was ſent to Mediolanum where he was torned anone of ſaynt Ambroſe & baptyſed. Thys man grewe vnto anoble doctour of the chyrche. And not longe after that he was byſſhop of yponen̄. And there he lyued .iiii. yere / and moche dyuynyte he wrote (vt patet in librisſu is) ¶Siritꝰ was pope ofter Damaſiꝰ .xv. yere / he dampned heretykes & lytell elles is wryten of hym. ¶Thodoſyus ſone to Gracian with valētyne hys vncle were Emperours .
                           •
                        xvii. yere / Thys man was a cryſten man & gracyous / & in gouernaunce lyke to Trayanꝰ / ſoone wroth & anone reconſyled. Thys man on a daye whan he wolde haue gone to haue herde maſſe / ſaynt Ambroſe forbadde hym the entree of ye chyrche / tyll he had penaunce & made ſatyſfaccion for the ſleenge of .xxx. knyghtes the whych he ſlewe in angre at Conſtantynople. wherfore they made a lawe that the ſentence of a prynce ſholde be deferred .xxx. dayes of thoſe yt ſholde do execuſoon yf they myght falle in the grace of the prynce wythin the .xxx. dayes. ¶Aboute thys tyme was a chylde borne in the caſtell of Emons / from the nauyll & aboue deuyded in two bodyes / hauynge two heedes and two wyttes / ſo ye the one ſlepynge or etynge / the other ſlept not neete not. And whan they were two yere of a ege / the one deceſſyd & the other lyued thre dayes after. ¶Claudius poeta was thys tyme. ¶Arcadius and Honorius regned .xxx. yere. And in theyr tyme Rome was nere deſtroyed by a kynge called Alaticus. Of the whiche deſtruccyon roſe a grete blaſphemye of the Romayns. For they ſayd they farde neuer well ſythen Cryſt came to Rome / and bereeued them ther goodes by the prechyng of Peter & Poul And yet thys Arcadyꝰ ſubdued all hys enmyes by the power of god / & ſhedde no blood. Ayenſte this blaſphemye ſaynt Auſtyn made that ſolempne werke / the whyche they calle (de cyuytate dei) Honorius was Emperour with Theodoſius his brothers ſone .xv. yere & he was a man of holy lyf. For two wyues he had / & yet wyth both he deyed mayden· He loued ſpecyally the chirche & hated heretykes. ¶Ierom deyed this tyme at Bethleem the yere of hys aege .lxxxi. ¶Sanctus Heracides the whiche wrote Vitas patrū to lapſn̄ epiſcopū was this tyme. ¶Iohōnes Cryſoſtomꝰ was exiled of Endochia the wyf of Arcadius / & thrugh heete of the ſonne he was deed. ¶Anaſtaſius was pope after Siritius thre yere. This man or deyned that eueryman ſholde ſtande at the redynge of ye holy goſpell. & that he that was a maymed man ſholde not be preeſt. ¶Innocenciꝰ was pope after Anaſtaſius / thys man ordeyned ye ſyke men ſholde be anoynted with hooly oyle. And at maſſe ye kyſſe of peas to be yeuen And he dampned Pelagyen an heretyke & many other thynges dyde (vt patet .xxvi. q. i.)
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno dm̄ .CCCC.xiiii.
                     zOzimus was pope after Innocēcius two yere & .viii. monethes / This man ordeyned that clerkes ſholde be noo tauerners ne ſelle no wyne / & that a boūde man ſholde be made no preeſt 
                           〈…〉
                         the lycence of his lorde. ¶Bo
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                         Romayne was pope after zozimus foure yere. This man ordeyned that a woman ſholde not touche ye palle of the water ne ſholde not waſſe the awter. ¶Celeſtimꝰ a Romayne was pope after Bonifacius .viii. yere & .ix. dayes / the whyche ordeyned the pſalme afore maſſe. (Iudica medeus. &c̄.) And at the begynnyng of the maſſe ſholde be ſayde a verſe of a pſalme / and at the Grayle / and that the Offertorye ſholde be ſayde afore the ſacrynge. This ſame man ſente ſaynt Patryke to Irlonde to conuerte ye londe and Palladius deaken of. Rome to the. Scottes to be conuerted. ¶And in the fourth yere of thys man there was a generall. Synody at Ephyſima of thre hondred byſſhops ayenſte Neſtorium an heretyke. ¶Theodoſius the yonger wyth valentinian his neue we regned .xxvii. yere. In his tyme was the feeſt ordeyned / whyche is called Aduincula ſancti petri. And in his tyme deyed ſaynt Auſtyn / in the yere of his aege .lxxvi. And this tyme was reyſed the .vii. ſlepers / ye whiche ſleped two hondred yeres. Thys man deyed at Conſtantynople & there was buryed. ¶This tyme the. Saxons entered Englonde / and anone by lytyll and lytell they grewe vp myghtely. And at the laſte they opteyned all the londe. ¶Sixtus a Romanyne

was pope after Celeſtinus .viii. yere. This was a holy man & a meke And lytell of him is wryten but ye he buylded Sācta māria maior. ¶Leo Tuſcus a Confeſſour was pope after Sixtus. Thys man was as hooly as ony mā. Fyue tymes in a daye or more he wolde ſaye maſſe. And on a tyme. After yt befell whan a cretayne woman kyſſed hys honde / he was tempted wyth her / And for the treſpaas that he hadde done / vnto hys penaunce he made hys hode to be ſtryken of. And whan the noyſe roſe vpon hym that he myght not ſaye maſſe as he was wonte to do / thenne he was ryght ſory. And all only betoke hym in prayre to our lady to helpe hym. And our lady reſtored hym hys honde ayen and thenne he ſayde maſſe as he was wonte for to doo. And ſo that myracle was openly ſhewe to all people. And in the tyme of thys pope. Marcian the Emperour beynge there / was congregate at. Calcedony the fourth vnyuerſall. Synody of .vi. ❀ hondred and .xxx. byſſhops agaynſt. Eugicem the abbot of. Conſtantynopolyton. & (Alexandrum epiſcopum. qui negauerunt in chryſto veram carnem fuiſſe. et etiam negabant carnis noſtre reſurrectionem.) ¶And after he hadde made many notable ſermons and epyſtles he deceſſed. ¶Marcianus and valentianus were Emperours thys tyme .vii. yere. In whoſe tyme was the grete. Synody afore reherced / whan Euſticem and Dyoſcorus were condempned.
                     IN the tyme that Macianus was Emperour vortyger was kynge in Brytayne now called. Englond. In whoſe tyme ye. Saxons came in to Brytoyne & made many kynges. That is to wyte as is playne by the Cronyeles .vii And by cauſe it is tedyous to mannes reaſon to reherce many dyuers names to gyder as .vii. kynges of Englonde and in one tyme / the Emperours and Popes. Therfore the Cronycles of Englonde ſhall be ſette togyder tylle yt we ſhall treate of Alured. In whoſe tyme the Danes came in to Englonde. And ye Popes and ye. Emperours and other kynges deed the ſame tyme ſhall be ſe
                           •••
                         togyder.
                  
               
               
                  
                     ¶Circa annū dm̄ .CCCC.xlix.¶How the wardeyns that had thoſe chyldern to kepe that were Conſtanſtynes / ladde theym to lytell Brytayne / for the treaſon and the falſeneſſe of vortiger. Hyre begynneth the fyfth parte durynge to the comynge of the Danes.
                     
                         
                        
                        THys tyme came ye. Saxons that were pagans fyrſte in to Brytane now called. Englonde vnder vortiger the whyche was crowned kinge of this londe. This tyme thoſe yt had theſe two childern in kepinge ye whyche were Cō
                        ſtantynes ſons. That is to ſaye Aurilambros and vter / thrugh ordynance of Goſſelin that was byſſhop of. London after the faders deth that is to ſaye. Conſtantyne durſt not dwelle in this londe with thoſe childern / but conueyed them vnto the kynge of lytell Brytayne. For as moche as he tho wiſt the treaſon of vortiger that tho was made kynge. Thorugh who me. Conſtance the elder brother was ſlayne / wherfore the hondred knyghtꝭ of Pehites were put to dethe and bore all the blame as that vortiger hadde not wyſt ther of ne conſented. And ſo the kepers of thoſe two chyldern dradde leſt vortiger ſholde put them to deth thrugh his treaſon and falſeneſſe / As he had done the brother before. And therfore they were ladde ouer in to lytell. Brytayn / and the kyng them receyued with moche honour and lete them to nouryſſhe. And there they dwelled tyll they became fayre knyghtꝭ & ſtronge and fyers. And thourght to be auenged vpon Conſtaunce theyr brother whan they ſawe theyr tyme and ſo they dyde as ye ſhalle here telle after warde. ¶It was not longe after warde that ye tydynges came ouerſee to ye kynred of the hondred knyghtꝭ of Pehites that were dampned & put

to deth thrugh Vortiger in thys londe / therfore they were wonderly wrothe and ſwore that they wolde be auenged of theyr kynnes mens deth. And came in to this londe with a greate power / and robbed in many places / & ſlewe & dyde all ye ſorowe that they myght. whan Vortiger it wyſt / he made moche ſorowe and was ſore anoyed / And in an other place alſo tydynges came to hym that Aurilambros and Vter his brother aſſembled a grete hoſte to came in to moche Brytayne / that is to ſaye in to thys londe / for to be auenged vpon Conſtance theyr brothers deth. Soo in that one half and in that other / he was brougho in to ſo moche ſorowe that he ne wyſt whether to go.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Engiſt and an .xi. thouſande mē came in to this londe / to whom vortiger yaue a place that is callde Thongcaſtell.
                     
                        
ANd ſoone after this ſorowe / tydinges came to vortyger that a grete nauy of ſtraūgers were arryued in ye coūtree of Cent / he wyſt not whēs they were ne wherfore they were come in to this londe. ¶The kynge ſent anone a meſſager thyder / that ſome of ſholde come and ſpeke wyth hym / for to wyte what folke they wert and what they axed / and in to what coūtree they wolde. ¶There were two brethern mayſters and prynces of that ſtronge company / that one was called Engiſt and that other Horne. Engiſt wente to the kynge and tolde hym the cauſe wherfore / they were come in to this londe and ſayde. Syrewe ben of a countree that is called Saxonne / that is ye londe of Germayne / wheryn ys ſo moche ſorowe / That of the people ben ſoo many that the londe maye not them ſuſteynes. And the mayſters and prynces that haue ye londe to gouerne and rule. They made to come before them men and wymmen that boldeſt ben amonge theym for to fyghte / and that beſte maye trauayll in to dyuerſe londes. And ſoo they ſholde them yeue horſe and harnes / armour / and all thynge that they nedeth. And after they ſhall ſaye to them / that they go in to an other countree where that they mowelyue / as theyr And cetrees dyde them before. ¶And therfore ſyr kynge / yf ye haue ought to doo wyth our company: we ben comen in to youre londe: And wyth good wylle you wolde ſerue your londe kepe helpe and defende from your enmyes yf that ye nede. ¶whan vortyger herde theſe tydynges: he ſayde gladly he wolde theym wyth holde: vppon ſuche couenanuce: yf they myghte delyuer hys londe of hys enmyes: he wolde yeue theym reſonable lōdes where they ſholde dwelle for euer more. ¶Engyſt thanked hym goodly: and in thys maner he and his cō
                        pany a .xi. thouſande ſholde dwelle wyth the kynge vortiger. And moche they dyde thrugh theyr boldeneſſe: they delyuered hys londe of his enmyes clene. ¶Tho prayed Engyſt the kynge of ſo moche londe that he myghte make to hym a Cyte and for hys meyne. ¶The kynge anſwered / it was not to doo wythoute the coancell of Brytons. ¶Engiſt prayed hym eftſones of as moche plyce as he myghte compace with a thonge of a ſkyn̄e wherupon he myghte make a. Mancer for hym to dwelle in. And the kynge hym graunted freely.
                     ¶Tho toke Engiſt a bulles ſkynne / and kytte it as ſma
                           •
                        e as he myghte all in to oo thonge all a roūde. And ther with compaced he as moche londe as he myght then̄e make vpon a fayre caſtell. And ſo whan this caſtell was made / he lett calle it Thongcaſtell for as moche as ye place was marked with a thonge.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of Ronowen that was Engiſtes douhter / and how the kynge Voreiger ſpowſed her for her beaute.
                     SO whan this caſtell was made / & full well arayed. Engiſt pryuely dyd ſende by letter ī to ye coūtree where he cam fro / after an .C. ſhyppes fylled with men ye were ſtrong & alſo well fyghtynge in all bataylles / & ye they

ſholde alſo brynge wyth them. Ronowen hys doughter that the fayreſt creture that a man myghte ſee. ¶And whan thoſe people were. come that he hadde ſente after / he tooke them in to the caſtell wyth moche. Ioye. And hymſelf vpon a daye went vnto the kynge / & prayed hym there worthely that he wolde come and ſee hys newe maneer that he had made in the place yt he had compaſſed wyth the thonge of the ſkynne. The kynge anone graunted hym frely. And with hym went thyder / & was well apayed wyth the caſtell & wyth the fayr werke and togyder they ete and dranke wyth moche Ioye. And whan nyght came that the kyng- Vortiger ſholde go in to hys chambre to take there hys nyghtes reſte. Ronowen yt was Engiſtes doughter came wyth cuppe of golde in her honde / and kneled before the kynge & ſayd to hym (waſſaylle) And the kynge knewe not what it was for to meane ne what he ſhold anſwere there vpon / for as moche as hymſelf / ne none of all his Brytons coude noo Englyſſhe ſpeſe ne vnderſtonde it / but he ſpake in the ſame langage that. Brytons done yet. Neuertheles a latiner tolde it to the kynge the full vnderſtandynge therof (waſſayll) and that other ſholde drynke (hayll) And that was the fyrſte tyme that (waſſhayll) and (drynkhall) came vp in this londe. And frome ye tyme vnto thys tyme / it is well vſed in this londe. ¶The kynge Vortiger ſawe the fayrneſſe of Ronowen / & his armes layde about her necke / & thryes ſwetely kyſſed her / & anone ryght he was enamoured vpon her yt he deſyred to haue her to wyf & aſked of Engiſt her fader. And Engiſt graunted hym vpon this couenaūt / yt the kyng ſholde yeue him all the coūtree of kent / that he there myghte dwelle in and hys people. The kynge hym graunted pryuely wyth a good wylle. And anone he ſpowſed ye damoyſell / and that was moche confuſyon to hymſelfe. And therfore alle the. Brytons became ſoo wrothe / for by cauſe he ſpowſed a woman of myſbyleue. wherfore they wente all frome hym / and noo thynge to hym tooke / ne halpe hym in thynge that he had to done.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Vortimer that was Vortigers ſone was made kynge / & Engiſt dryuen out. And how Vortimer was ſlayne.
                     THis Engiſt wente in to Kente and ſeaſed all ye londe in to his honde for hym and for his men / & bycame with a lytyll whyle of ſoo grete power and ſo moche people hadde / that men wyſte not lytell tyme whyche were the kyngꝭ men and whyche were Engiſtes men. wherfore all the Brytons hadde of hym dredde / and ſayd amōges theym. But yf that they ne toke other counſeyll bytwene them all the londe ſholde be bytrayed thrugh Engiſt & his people. ¶Vortiger the kyng had begoten on his fyrſt wyf thre ſones. The fyrſt was called vortimer. The ſeconde Catagien / and the thyrde Paſſent. ¶The Brytons euerychont by one aſſent choſe vortimer to be theyr lod & ſouerayne / and counſeyler in euery batayll / & crowned hym and made hym kynge / & wolde not ſuffre vortiger no lenger to regne / for cauſe of the alyaunce betwixt Engiſt and hym. ¶The Brytons ordeyned a grete hoſt to dryue out Engiſt and his company of the londe / and yaue hym thre bataylles. The fyrſte was in Kente there he was lorde / the ſeconde was at. Tetforde / and the thyrde in a ſhyre a thys half Colcheſtre in a more. And in this batayll theym mette. Catagien and. Horne. Engiſtes brother / ſo that eche of thym ſlewe other· but for as moche as the countree was yeuen longe befor to horne thrugh vortiger tho 
                           •
                        e ſpowſed his coſyn / there he made a fayr caſtell that is called Horne caſtell after his owne name. And vortiger was ſo anoyed for his brothers dethe / that anone he lete fell downe the caſtell to the grounde. And after he ne lefte nyght ne daye tyll he had dryuen out. Engiſt & his people of the londe. And then̄e Ronowen his doughter made ſorow ynogh. And quen
                           •
                        ely ſpake to them that were nexte the kyng vortimer and pryuyeſt with hym. And ſo moche ſhe gaue hym of gyftes / that he was enpoyſoned & deyed at London the fourth yere of hys regne and there he lyeth
                  
                  
                     ¶How the. Brytons choſe an other tyme Vortiger to be theyr kynge / &. Engiſt came in to this londe / and how they fought togyders.
                     AFter vortimers dethe: the Brytons by theyr comyn aſſēt eft ſones made vortiger theyr kynge vpon this couenaunt: that he ſholde neuer after ſuffre. Engiſt ne none of his eft ſones to come ī to this londe And whā all this was done. Ronowen the quene pryuely ſente by letter to. Engiſt that ſhe hadde en. poyſoned vortimer: and that vortiger her lorde

bare ayen ye crowne and regned. And that he ſholde come ayen in to this londe well arayed wyth moche people for to auenge hym vppon the Brytons and for to wynne this londe ayen. ¶And whan Engiſt herde theſe tydynges / he made grete Ioy. And appareylled hym haſtely with .xv. thouſande men / yt were deughty in euery batayll / & came in to this londe And whan vortyger herde telle that. Engyſt was come ayen wyth a grete power in to thys londe / he aſſembled hys. Brytons / & tho went ayenſt Engyſt for to yeue hym Batayll & hys folke. But Engiſt dradde hym ſore of the Brytons for they had dryuen hym before & diſcomfyted hym with ſtrēgth. wherfore this Engiſt prayed hym for a loue daye / & ſayd he was not comen in to this londe for to fyght / but for to haue hys lond ayen yf he myght accorde with the. Brytons / & of them to haue loue and grace The kynge Vortiger thrugh counſeyll of hys Brytons graūted hym a loue daye. And thus it was ordeyned thrugh the Brytons / yt the ſame daye ſholde be holden faſt beſyde Salyſbury vpon a hylle. And Engyſt ſholde come thyder with four hordred kdnghtes without moo And the kyng with as many of the wyſeſt men of hys londe· And at that daye the kynge came with his coūſeyll as it was ordeyned / but Engiſt had warned hys knyghtes pryuely / & then conmaunded that euery one of them ſhold put a longe knyf in hys hoſe. And whan he ſayde Fayre ſyres now ys tyme to ſpeke of loue & peas euery man Anone ſhold drawe out hys kynue & ſlee a Bryton. And ſo they ſlewe. a M.lxi. knyghtes / & wyth moche ſorowe many of them eſcaped. And the kyng vortyger there hymſelf tho was taken / & ladde to Thongcaſtell & put in pryſon. And ſome of Engyſtes men wolde that the kynge had be brente alle quycke And vortiger tho for to haue hys lyf / graūted them as moche as they wolde are / & yaue vp all the londe townes / caſtelles / cytees / & borughs to Engiſt and to his folke. And all the Brytons fledde thes in to waiys / and there they helde them ſtyll. And Engyſt wente thorugh the londe and ſeaſed all the londe / wyth fraunchyles And in euery place lete caſt a downe chyrches and houſes of Relygyon / And waſted and deſtroyed cryſtendome thrughout all thys londe And lete 
                           •
                        aunge ye nam of thys lond called brytayne: that noo man of hys were ſoo hardy after that tyme to calle this lōde Brytayne: but calle Engiſt londe. And then ne he departed all the londe to hys men: and there made .vii. kynges for to ſtrength the londe that the Brytons ſholde neuer after come therem. ¶The fyrſt kyngdome was Kent: there that Engiſt hymſelf regned: and was lorde & mayſter ouer al ye other. ¶The other kyng had Southſex yt now is called chycheſtre ¶The thyrdet kyng had weſtſex. ¶The fourth had Eeſtſex. The fyfth had Eſtangill: yt now is called Northfolke Southfolke. Merchemeryk: that ys to ſaye therldome of Nycholl. ¶The ſixth had Leycheter ſhyre. Northampton ſhyre. Herforde: and Huntyngdon. ¶The ſeuenth hadde Ox enforde. Gloucheſtre. wyncheſtre. wer wykeand Derbyſhyre.
                  
                  
                     ¶How that Vortyger wente in to walys & beganne there caſtell yt wolde not ſtande wyth out morter tempred wyth blood.
                     AS Engiſt had departed all the lond in thys maner bytwene hys men: and in lyuerde vortyger out of pryſon & ſuffred hym freely to go whyther that he wolde. And he toke his waye and wente in to walys there that his Brytons dwelled: for as moche as ye londe was ſtronge & wycked to wynne. And Engyſt 
                           •
                        neuer came therene neuer knew it before that londe. ¶Vortiger helde hym there wyth hys Bratons / and axed counſeyll what hym was beſt to do. And they yaue hym counſeyll to make a ſtronge caſtell that hym myghte hymſelf there in kepe and defende yf nede were. Ma
                           •
                        e ſons in haſte tho were fette / & began to werke vpon ye hylle of Breigh / but certes thus it befell that all the werke that the maſons made a daye downe it felle the nyght / and they wyſte not what it myght be. Ther of the kynge was ſore anoyed of that chaunce & wyſte not what to do. werfore he lette ſende after the wyſeſt clerkes & alſo lerned men than were thorugh out walys that myght be foude / for they ſholde tell wherfore ye foūdament ſo fayled vnder the werke / and they ſholde hym tell what was beſt for to doo. And whan theſe wyſe men longe tyme had ſtudyed they ſayde to the kynge / that he ſholde doo ſeke a chylde borne of a woman that neuer had with man to do And that chylde ſholde be ſlayne / and tempred with his blood the morter of the werke. And ſoo ſholde the werke euer endure withouten ende.
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶How the kynge lette ſeke. Merlyn thorugh out all walys / for to ſpeke wyth hym.
                     AS the kynge herde this he commaunded his meſſagers anone to go thrugh out walys to ſeke that chylde yf they myghte hym fynde / and that they ſholde hym brynge forthe with them vnto hym. And in recorde & in wytneſſe of thys kynge he hadde take them his letters that they ne were diſtroubled of no▪ man ne lette. And tho the meſſengers wente thens / and ſpedde ſoo faſte that they came in to a towne that was called Carmardyne / and as they paſſed for the theyr waye they founde two chyldern of .xxiiii· yere of aege thydynge togyder with haſty wordes. And one of them ſayde to that other Donebat ſayde he ye do all wronge to chyde or ſtryue with me for ye haue no wytte ne no reaſon as I haue. Certes merlyn ſayde he / of your wytte ne youre reſon. I make no force. For men telle comynly that ye haue no thynge of god all myghty ſyth ye had neuer fader / But euery man knoweth who was youre moder. ¶The meſſengers of the kynge vortiger whan they herde the ſtryue betwixt the two gromes they axed of them that ſtode beſyde them whens that· Marlyn was borne / and alſo whom hym nouryſſhed. And the folke them tolde / that a greate gentyll woman hym bare in. Carmadyne that was called Adhanr But neuer myght noth man wyte who was his fader. ¶whan the kynges meſſengers herde theſe tydynges they wente anone to hym that was wardeyne of the towne & tolde hym the kyngꝭ wyll and ſhewed hym his leter wherfore they were come thyder.
                     ¶Merlyn and his moder were fetched before the wardeyne of the towne. And he commaunded them that they ſholde go to the kynge as it was ordeyned by his meſſagers. Merlyn and his moder wente thens and came vnto ye kynge and there they were receyued with moche honour. And the kynge axed of that lady yf ye chylde were her ſone & whome hym be gate. The lady anſwered full tenderly wepynge and ſayde. She neuer hadde company of worldly man. But ſyr ſayde ſhe As I was a yonge mayden in my faders chambre / and other of greate lygnage were in my company / that oftentymes wente to place and ſolace. I belefte alone in my chambre / wolde not goo 
                           •
                        orthe for bernnynge of the ſonne. And on
                           •
                         tyme there came a fayre bacheler and entred in my chambre there that I was alone. But how he came in to me / and where. I wyſt it neuer \ ne yet knowe I not. For the doores were faſt barred and with me he dyde game of loue For I ne had myght ne power / hym to defen- from me. And often he came vnto me in ye forſayd maner / ſo that he begate this childe. But neuer myght I wyte what he was.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the anſwere of Merlyn wherfore the kynge axed why his caſtel myght not ſtonde that he had begonne ne proue.
                     SO whan Merlyn hadde herde all that his moder hadde ſayd. He ſpake to the kynge in this maner. ¶Syre how I was begoten axe ye no more For it be falleth not to you ne to none other to wyte. But telle me the cauſe wherfore I am to you brought & wherfore ye haue ſente after me. ¶Truely ſayd the kyng / my wyſe couſeyllers haue done me to vnderſtode / yt ye morter of a werke that I haue begonne / behouety to be thempred with your blood / or the foundament ſhall fayle for euer more. ¶Syr ſayd Merlyn. wyll ye ſlee me for my blood to tempre with your morter. ye ſayd the kyng / or elles my caſtell ſhall neuer ſtande as my coūſeyllers do me to vnderſtonde Tho- anſwerd Merlyn to the kyng. Syr he ſayd he ſayd / lete them come before me thoſe wyſe coū
                        ſeylles & I woll preu they ſaye not well ne truly. And whan ye wyſe men were comen. Merlyn axed yf his blod were ye cauſe to make this werke to ſtōde & endure. All tho wyſe men were abaſſhed & coude not anſwere. Merlyn tho ſayd to the kynge. Syr I ſhall tell you ye cauſe wherfore your werke thus fayleth & may no
                           •
                         ſtande. There is vnder the moūtayne there yt ye haue buylded youre toure a grete ponde of water & ī ye botome of ye ponde vnder ye water there ben two dragons / & ye one is whyte & ye other reede / ye fyght togyd ayēſt your werke do ye myne depe eyll your men come to ye pond / & cauſe your men to take a way ye water all out / & thenne ye ſhall ſee ye dragans as I haue you tolde ye togyder fyght ayēſt your werke & this is the cauſe wherfor your foūdament fayleth The kynge anone lete dygge vnder that men came to the ponde / And lette doo a waye the water / and there they founde two dragons as Merlyn had tolde that egerly fought togyder The whyte dragon egerly aſſayled the reede

and lyadde on hym ſo ſtrongely that he myght not endure / but withdrewe hym and reſted in the ſame caue. And whā he had a whyle reſted hym / he wente before & aſſayled the reede dragon angerly / & helde hym ſoo ſore yt he myght not ayenſte hym endure / but withdrewe hym & reſted And after came ayen ye whyte dragon and ſtrongly fought wyth the reede dragon. & bote hym euyl & ouercame. that he fledde from thens and nomore came agayne.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the ſygnycacyon of thoſe two dragons that were in the botome of the ponde that fought togyder
                     THis kynge vortyger and hys men that ſawe thys batayll had grete meruayſle and prayed Merlyn to tell him what it myght betoken. Syr quod Merlyn I ſhall telle you. The reede dragon betokeneth yourſelfe / and the whyte betokeneth the folke of Saxon that fyrſte ye toke & helde in your londe that fyght ayenſt you / and you haue dryuen & enchaced. ¶But Brytons of ynure lygnage ouercame them and droue them a waye And ſythen at ye comynge ayen of the Saxons they recouered this londe and helde it for euer more. And droue out the Brytons and dyde wyth this londe all they wyll / and deſtroyed cryſtēdom thrugh out thys londe. ye had fyrſte grete Ioye wyth theyr comynge / But now yt ys torned to you grete damage and ſorowe. For tho brethern of Conſtance that was kynge the whiche ye lete ſlee ſhal come before a quīzeme paſſed with a grete power from lytell Brytayne / & ſhall auenge the deth of theyr brother. And they ſhal brenne you fyrſt wyth ſorowe / and after they ſhall ſlee a grete parte of Saxons / & ſhall dryue out all the remenaūt of the londe. And therfore abyde ye here noo lenger to make caſtell nor other werke. But anone goo elles where youre lyues alle for to ſaue. To god I you betake / trouthe I haue ſayde to you of thynges that ſhalle befalle. ¶And vnderſtande ye welle that Aurilambros ſhalle be kynge But he ſhalle be enpoyſoned / and lytell tyme ſhall he regne
                  
                  
                     ¶Of kynge Aurilambros how that he purſued vortiger and Engiſt and how they deyed.
                     MErlyn and hys moder departed frome the kynge / and torned agayne to Carmardyn. And ſoone after tydynges came to ye Brytons that Aurilambros and vter his brother were arryued at Totneſſe wyth a greate hoſte / And anone the Brytons aſſembled thē and wente to receyue Aurylambros and Vter wyth grete nobleſſe. And had them vnto London / and crowned Aurylambros & made hym kynge / and dyde vnto hym homage. And anone he axed where. Vortyger that was kynge myght be founde / for he wolde be auenged on his brothers dethe / and after he wolde warre vpon paynems. And they tolde hym that Vortyger was in walys / & ſoo they ladde hym thyther warde. ¶Vortiger wyſte welle that tho brethern came hym to conquere / And fledde thens in to a caſtell that was called. Gerneth that ſtode vppon an hyght mountayne / and there hym helde. Aurilambros and Vter hys brother and theyr folke had beſyeged the caſtell full long tyme / for the cagell was ſtronge and well arrayed. ¶So at the laſte they caſted wylde fyre and brente howſes and men & all theyr araye: and as moche as was wythin the caſtell. Soo that Vortiger was brente amonge all other: and ſoo he deyde wyth moche ſorowe. ¶Tho was Engiſt in Kente and regned there: ane herde thys tydynges: and anone fledde and wolde haue gone in to Scotlonde for to haue had ſocoure. But Aurilambros and his men mette with hym in the north coū
                        tre and yane hym batayl. And Engiſt and his men defended whyles that they myghte. But he and his folke were diſcomfyted and ſlayne And Octa his ſone fledde vnto yorke. And Aurilambros hym folowed egerly. And. Octa a lytell whyle withſtode hym: But after warde he put hym to his mercy. And aurilambros receyued hym: and to hym and to hys men gaafthe countree of Galewaye in. Scotlonde: and there they dwelled. ¶The kyng aurilambros wente thorugh out the londe: and put awaye the name of. Englonde: that. Engiſt after hys name had called it befoere. Tho lete he it calle agayne grete. Brytayne: and lete make ayen cherches: houſes of religyon: caſtelles: cytees and broughs. And towones that the. Saxons hadde deſtroyed. And came to London: and lete make the walles of the cyte: whyche Engiſt and his folke hadde caſtedowne. ¶The Brytons ladde hym vnto the mount of. Ambrian that ſomtyme was an hous of relygyon: that tho was deſtroyed thrughe the paynems:
                     
                        ¶wherof a knyght that was called Ambri ſometyme was founder of that houſe. And therfore the ſame hylle was called the mount of. Ambrian. And after it was called. Ambreſbury. And ſhall be ſo for euermore
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                     ¶How Aurilambros dyde redreſſe the londe of greate Brytayne / that whyche was deſtroyed thorugh the Saxons before ſayde.
                     HOw the kynge Aurilambros lete amende and redreſſe the houſe of Ambreſbury / and there in put monkes. But now there ben Nonnes a lytell fro the place that was called Salyſbury / are that the Saxons ſlewe the Brytons / where Engiſt and they ſhold haue made a laue daye. In the whyche tyme were ſlayne a thouſande knyghtes .lxi. thrugh treaſon of Engiſt· The kynge therof had grete pyte and thoughte to make in mynde of them a monument of ſtone that myght endure to the worldes ende. And of thys thynge they tooke ther counſeyll what therof was beſt for to do. ¶Tho ſpake to the kynge the byſſhop of London that was called Ternekyn that he ſholde requyre after. Merlyn. For he coude beſt telle how this thyng myght beſt be made. And merlyn after was ſought and founde and came to the kyng. And the kynge tolde hym hys wyll of the monumente that he wolde haue made. Merlyn anſwered to the kynge & ſayd. There ben grete ſtones in Irlonde and longe vpon the hylle of Kyan that men called. Gyauntes karoll. And yf they were in this place as they ben there / they wolde endure for eurer more in remembraunce of thoſe knyghtes that here be entyred. ¶Per may foy ſayd the kynge as harde ſtone ben in my londe as in Irlonde.
                     ¶Soth ſayde Merlyn. But in all your londe ben none ſuche. For gaūtes ſette them for grete good of themſelf. For atte euery tyme that they were woūde or in ony maner hurte / they wyſſhe the ſtones with hote water / And thenne they wyſſhe them ther with and anone they were hoole.
                  
                  
                     ¶How the Brytons wente for to ſeke the grete ſtones in Irlonde.
                     AS ſoone as the. Brytons had herde of this thynge / they yede and ſwore amō
                        ge them they wolde go ſeke thoſe ſtones. And toke with them. Vter the kynges broder to be thyef capytayne and .v. thouſande men / and Merlyn counſelled them for to go vnto Irlonde and ſoo thye dyde / And whan the kynge of Irlonde that was culled Guillomer herde tell ſtraungers were arryued in his londe / he aſſē
                        bled a grete power & fought ayenſt them But he & his folke were dyſcomfyted. ¶The Brytons went before tyll they came to the mount of Kyan / and clymmed vp vnto the mounte. But whan they ſawe the ſtones & the maner how they ſtode / they had grete meruaylle and ſayde bytwene themſelf / that noo man ſholde them remeue for noo ſtrengthe ne engyne ſoo grete they were and ſoo longe. But. Merlyn thrugh his crafte he remeued them and broughte them in to theyr ſhyppes and came ayen in to thys londe. And Merlyn ſette the ſtones there that the kyng wolde haue them. And ſette them in the ſame manner that they ſtode in Irlonde / and whan ye kynge ſawe that it was made he thanked Merlyn / And rychely hym rewarded at his owne wyll. And that place lete calle Stonhenge for euer more.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Paſſent that was Vortigers ſone and the kynge Guillomer came in to thys londe / and how a traytour that was called Cappa enpoyſoned ye kynge Aurilambros.
                     ANd men ſhall vnderſtonde that Paſſent that was Vortigers ſone lyued ye ſame tyme / and came in to thys londe wyth a grete power / and arryued in the north coūtre & wolde be auēged of his faders deth Vortiger and ſtrongely truſted vpon the company that he had brought wyth hym out of the londe of Germayne / and had conquered all the North countree vnto yorke. ¶And whan kynge Aurilambros herde this he aſſemled a grete power of Brytons & went for to fyght with paſſēt & he dyſcomfyted Paſſent & all his peple. but Paſſent eſcaped thens with ſome of his men / & fledde thens in to Irlonde & come to kynge Guillomer & prayed hym of helpe and ſocour. The kynge graūted hym with good wyll and ſayde / that he wolde helpe hym / vppon that couenaunt that I my ſelfe muſte go with you with all my power in to brytayne. And I wolde me aduenge vpon the Broytons the rather for they came in to my londe & toke the ſtones with ſtrength that is called Gyauntes karoll ¶The kyng Guillomer lete ordeyne his ſhippes & went to the ſee with .xv. thouſāde men

and arryued in walys & began to robbe / & moche ſorowe he dyde. ¶It befell ſo that kynge Aurilambros laye ſyke at wyncheſtre / & myghte not helpe hym ſelf. So that he ſente in his name Vter his brother with a power to helpe walys. And thyther warde he went as moche as he myght. ¶The kynge of Irlonde & Paſſente herde telle that Aurilambros was ſyke / & to hym there came a Sarraſyn that was called Cappa & ſayde. Syre dwelle ye here all in peas with your hoſt & I behyght you thorugh my quaynteſye ye I ſhall ſlee the kynge Aurilambros that is ſyke. Thenne ſayd Paſſent / yf ye doo ſo I ſhall you rychely auaunce. The traytour Cappa put vpon hym an habyte of relygyon / & lete ſhaue hym a brode crowne & came vnto the kynges courte / and ſayde that he wolde help
                           •
                         the kynge of his malady. Tho ſayd the traytour Cappa vnto the kyng. Syr be of good comforte. For I ſhall yeue you ſuche a medicyne that ye ſhalle ſwete anōe ryght & lyſte to ſlepe & haue good reſte. And the traytour yaaf hym ſuche poyſon to ſlepe anone ryghte / & deyed in hys ſlepynge. And ye traytour ſayd yt he wolde go out to the felde tyll he were awaked / & ſo eſcaped he awaye. For no man had to hym ſuſpeccyon / for by cauſe of his habyte that he was clothed ī / & alſo for hys brode ſhauen crowne. But whan the kynges men wyſte that he was deed / they became wonder ſory / and faſte ſoughte the traytoure / but they myghte not fynde hym· For ye Cappa torned ayen vnto the hoſte frem whes yt he came.
                  
                  
                     ¶whan Aurilambbros deyed a ſterre in the morne was ſeen wyth a clere lyght / & at the bought of the beeme was ſene the heed of an horryble dragō
                     
                     SO whan the kyng Aurilambros was deed & enpoyſoned at wincheſtre. On the morne after he was dede aboute the tyme of Pryme there was ſene a ſterre grete & clere & the beeme of that ſterre was brygheter thā ye ſonne. And at the bought of ye beeme apperyd a dragons heed / & out of hys mouth came two huge lyghtes / that were as bryght as ony fyre brennynge. & that one beeme to warde Fraunce and ſtreyght ouer the ſee thyther warde. And out of that beeme came .vii. beemes full clere and longe as it were the lyghte fyre. ¶This 
                           ••
                        erre was ſeen of many a man / But none of them wyſte what it be tokened. ¶Vter that was the kynges brother / that was in walys wyth hys hoſte of Brytons / ſawe that ſterre & the grete lyght that it yaue / they wondred ther of gretly what it myghte betoken. And lete calle Merlyn and prayed hym for to telle what yt it myhght betoken.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the betokenynge of the ſterre.
                     
                        
MErlyn ſawe ye ſterre / and behelde yt a longe tyme. And ſythen he quoke and wepte tenderly. And ſayde· Alas alas that ſoo noble a kyng & worthy ys deed And I do iou to vnderſtānde that Aurilambros your brotherds poyſoned / & that I ſee well in thys ſterre. And yourſelfe ys betokened the heed of the dragon that is ſeen at the bought of the beeme that ys your ſelf that ſhall be kynge and regne. And by the beeme that ſtondeth to warde the Eeſt ys vnderſtonde that ye ſhall gete a ſone that ſhall conquere all Fraunce / and all the londes that belongeth to the crowne of Fraunce / that ſhalle be a wrothyer kynge & of more honoure than euer were ony of his auncetours. ¶And by the beeme that ſtretched towarde Irlonde is betokened that ye ſhalle gete a doughter that ſhalle be quene of Irlonde. ¶And the ſeuen beemes betoken that ye ſhall haue .vii. ſones. And euery one of them ſhall be kyng / and regne wyth moche honoure. And abyde ye no lenger here / but goo and yeue batayll to your enmyes / and fyghte wyth them booldely for ye ſhalle ouercome them and haue the victory. ¶Vter thanked hertely Merlyn and toke his men and wente to warde hys enmyes / & they fought togyder mortally / and ſoo he dyſcomfyted his enmyes & them deſtroyed. And hym ſelf ſlewe Paſſēt that was vortigers ſone And his Brytons ſlewe Guillomer that was kyng of Irlonde and all his men. ¶And Vter anone after that batayll toke hys waye to warde wyncheſtre / for to doo entyere Aurilambros kynge that was his brother. But tho was the body borne vnto. Stonhenge with moche honour / that he had done make in remembraū
                        ce of the Brytons that there were ſlayne thrugh treaſon of Engiſt / that ſame day that

they ſholde haue ben accorded. And in the ſame place they entyered. Aurelambros the ſeconde yere of hys regne wyth all ye worſhyp ye myght belonge to ſuche a kynge. On whoos ſoule god haue mercy. Amen.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of Vter Pendragon / and therfore he was called ſo ye ſhall here. And how he was ouertake with the loue of Igreyne that was the Erle of Cornewaylles wyf.
                     AFter the dethe of. Aurilambros. Vter his brother was crowned and regned well & worthely. And in remembraunce of the dragon that he was lykened to / He lete make two dragons thrugh coūſeyll of his. Brytons And made that one for to be borne before hym whā he wēte in to batayll / and ye other for to abyde att wyncheſtre in the byſſhop chyrche. And for that cauſe he was called euer after vter Pendragon. ¶And Octa that was Engiſtes ſone cōmended vter but lytell yt was made newe kynge. And ayenſte hym began to meue warre. And ordeyned a grete power of his frē
                        des & of hys kynne / and of. Oſſa hys brother \ and had taken all the londe from Humbre vnto yorke / But thoſe of yorke helde ſtrongely agaynſt them / and wolde not ſuffre them to come in to the cytee / neyther to yelde the cytee to them. And he beſyeged the towne anone ryght and yaue therto a ſtronge aſſawte. But they of the cyte them kept well & ſtrongely. ¶And whan vter herd therof / he came thyther wyth a grete ſtronge power for to helpe & reſcowe ye towne & put a way the ſyege / & yaue a ſtronge batayll. And Octa & his company them defended as well as they myght. But at ye laſte they were dyſcōfyted & the moſt partye of thē ſlayne. And. Octa and. Oſſa were taken & put in pryſon at London. ¶And vter hymfelf dwelled a whyle atte yorke / and after he wente to London. And at the Eeſter after he wold vere crowne & holde a ſolempne feeſt. And lette ſomone all his Erle and Barons / that they ſholde come to that feeſt. And all thoſe that hadde wyues ſholde brynge them alſo to that feeſt. And all the ſeygnoury came at the kynges cō
                        maundemente as they were commaunded. ¶The feeſt was rychely arayed and holden. And all worthely ſette to meete after that they were of aſtate. Soo that the· Erle Gorloys of Cornewaylle and. Igreyne his wyf ſate nexte vnto the kynge. And whan the kyng ſawe the fayrneſſe of that lady and the beaute that ſhe had. He was anone rauyſſhed for her beaute and often he made to her nyce countenaunce in lokynge and laughynge. So at the laſte the Erle perceyued the preuy lokynge and laughynge and the loue bytwene them. And roſo vp from the table in wrathe / and toke his wyf 
                           •
                        nd called to hym hys knyghtes and wente thens wrath / wythout takynge leue of ye kynge. ¶The kynge anone ſente after hym that he ſholde come agayne and goo not thens in dyſpyte of hym. And the erle wolde not come agayne in no maner of wyſe. ¶wherfore the kynge was wrothe / and in wrathe hym defyed as his deedly enmye. ¶And the erle wente thens in to Cornewaylle with his wyfe in the caſtell of Tyntagyll. ¶And the kynge lete ordeyne a grete hoſt and came in to Cornewaylle / for to deſtroye the erle yf that he myghte. But he hadde put hym in ſuche a caſtell that was ſtronge and welle arayed called. Tyntagyll / and wollde not yelde hym to the kynge. ¶And the kynge anone beſyeged the called / & there dwelled .xv. dayes that neuer myghte ſpede / and euer he thought vppon Igreyne / & vpon her layde ſo moche loue / That he wyſte not what to doo. ¶So at the laſte he called to hym a knyght that was called vlfin that was preuy wyth hym and tolde hym all hys counſeyll / and axed hym wha
                           •
                         was beſt for to done ¶Syr ſayde he / ſende after Merlyn anone / for he came telle you the beſte counſeyll of ony man lyuynge Merlyn anone was ſente after & came to the kynge. And the kynge tolde hym all his counſeyll and his wyll. Syr ſayd Merlyn. I ſhall doo ſo moche thrugh crafte that I can / that I ſhalle make you come to nyght 
                           〈◊〉
                         the caſtell of. Tyntagyll / & ſhall haue all yo
                           •
                         wyll of that lady.
                  
                  
                     How vter begate on Igreyne / that 
                           •
                        as the Erles wyf of Cornewaylle Arthur.
                     MErlyn thrugh craft yt he co
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                         the kynges fygure in
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                         of the Erle / and Vlfin Garlois 
                           〈…〉
                         in to the fygure of Iorda
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                         erles chambrelayne / ſo that ec
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                         tranſfygured in to others lyke
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                         Merlyn had ſoo done / he ſayde 
                           〈…〉
                         Syr ſayd he / now ye may goo
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                         caſtell of Tyntagyll & axe ene
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                         your wyll. The kynge toke pry
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
to gouerne and lede to a knyght that he moche loued / & tooke his waye towarde the caſtell / & with hym toke Vlfin his Chambrelayne and Merlyn / & whan they came thyder the porter demyd it had ben hys owne lorde. And whan tyme came for to go to bedde / the kynge went to bedde with Igreyne the erles wyf and dyde with her alle his wyll. And begate vpon her a ſone that was called Arthur. And vppon the more we the kynge tooke his leue of the lady & wente ayen to hys hoſte. And the ſame nyghte that the kynge laye by Igreyne in bedde that was the erles wyf the kynges men gaaf a grete aſſawte vnto the caſtell. And the erle & hys men manly them defended. But at the laſte it befell ſo / that in the ſame aſſawte the erle hym ſelf was ſlayne & the caſtell taken. ¶And the kynge anone torned againe to Tyntagill and ſpowſed I greyne with moche honour & made her quene ¶And ſoone after tyme came that ſhe ſholde be lyuered & bare a chylde a ſonne yt was called Arthur. & after gate on her a doughter that was called Amya▪ / And whan ſhe came to aege / a noble. Baron that was lorde of Lyons weded her. ¶whan Vter longe tyme had regned / ther came vpon hym a grete ſykeneſſe as it were a ſorowe. ¶And in ye meane tyme thoſe that had to kepe Octa yt was Engiſtes ſone & Oſſa his brother / that then̄e were in pryſon / they lete them go for grete yeftes that they them yaue & went wyth thē. And whan tho two brethern were eſcaped & were in to theyr owne countree agayne / Thenne they ordeynede them a gret power of folke and began for to warre ayen vpon the kynge.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kyng Vter thoſe A loth to kepe the londe of. Brytayne / whyle that he was ſeke / for as moche as he might not for his ſykneſſe.
                     ANd for as moche as kynge Vter was ſyke & myght not helpe hym ſelf / he or
                        
                           •
                         Aloth ſone of Eleyne that tho was cho
                        
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         to be wardeyne and chyeftayne of alle 
                           〈…〉
                        . And ſoo he anone and all hys Bry
                        
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        mbled a grete hoſte & yaue bataylle to 
                           〈…〉
                         his folke / but Octa at the laſt was 
                           〈◊〉
                        . ¶It befell thus after warde / 
                           〈…〉
                         
                        
                           ••
                        ytons had dedignacion of Aloth 
                           〈…〉
                         
                        
                           •
                        othe to hym attendaūt. wherfore 
                           〈…〉
                         
                        
                           •
                        as anoyed wonder ſore & lete put 
                           〈…〉
                         in the hoſte amonges his folke 
                           〈…〉
                         
                        
                           •
                        de hym to. Vereloyne yt tho was a fayre cyte / there that ſaynt. Albon was martred. And after was the cytee deſtroyed wyth paynems thrugh warre· & thyther they hadde ſente. Octauian and. Oſſa & ther people. And entered in to the towne / and lete make ſure ye yates / & there they helde them. And the kynge came & them beſyeged / & made a ſtrōge aſſawte / but the that were within manly theym deffended / ¶The kyng lete ordeyne his gunnes and his engynes for to breke the walles / & the walles were ſoo ſtronge that no man myghte them myſdo. ¶Octa & his people had grete deſpyte / that a kynge lyenge in a letere had the ym beſyeged. And they toke counſeyll among them for to ſtande vp in the morowe erly and come out and yeue batayll to the kynge / & ſoo they dyde. And in that batayle were both Octa and Oſſa ſlayne / & all the other ye eſcaped a lyue fledde in to Scotlonde / & made Colegyn theyr chyeftayne. & the Saxons yt were a lyue & eſcaped fro the batayll / brougth ayen a grete ſtrēgth & amōge thē they ſayd that if kyng Vt were deed they ſholde well conquere the londe and thought to enpoyſen the kynge / & ordeyned men for to do this dede / & yaue them of yef tis grete plente this thynge to do. And they ordeyned them thyderwarde there that ye kynge was dwellyng / and clothed them in poore wede the better all for to ſpede theyr fals purpoſe But neuertheles all theyr falſenes & ſubtylte they myght neuer come to nygh ye kyng. But ſo at the laſt they aſpyed that the kynge dranke noo other lycoure but only water of a clere wel tha
                           •
                         was nyghe beſyde & ye fals traytours vpon a daye preuely wente to the welle & put therin poyſon / ſoo that all the water was enpoyſoned. And anone after as the kynge had dronke of that water / he began to ſwelle / and ſoone after he deyed: and as many as dranke of that water deyed alſo. And anone as thys was aſpyed folke of the towne lette ſtoppe the welle of euermore. ¶whan ye kynge was deed his folke bare hym to Stonhenge wyth grete ſolempnyte of byſſhops and barons that were there hym to burye beſyde Aurilambros hys bro
                           •
                        her. And after torned ayen tho euerychone and ſent after his ſone: and they made him kyng of the londe with moche reuerence after his faders deth: the .xvii. yere of his regne.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Arthur that was the ſone of Vter was crowned after his faders deth: and

how he droue Colegryn and the Saxons and Cheldri
                           •
                         of A
                           •
                        mayne out of this londe
                     
                        
As Arthur was made kyng of the londe / he was but yonge of aege of .xv. yere / but he was fayr and bolde and doughty of body. And to meke folke he was good and curteys / and large of ſpendinge / & made hym welle beloued amonge them there that yt was nede / & whan he began to regne heſwore truely that ye. Saxons neuer ſhold haue reſte ne peas tyll that he hadde dryuen them out of 
                           •
                        he londe. And aſſē
                        bled a greate hoſte and fought wyth Colegryn the whyche after ye tyme that Octa was deed the Saxons mayntened. And thys Colegryn was dyſcomfyted & fledde vnto yorke & tooke the towne / & there hym helde. And the kyng beſyeged hym there but he myght no thynge ſpede for the cyte was ſo ſtrong. And they wythin the towne kept the cyte well & orpedly. ¶And in the mene tyme Colegryn lette the towne to Bladulf & f
                           •
                        ledde hymſelfe to Cheldryk yt was kynge of almayne / for to haue of hym ſocour. And the kynge aſſembled a grette power & came & arryued in Scotlonde with .xv. hondred ſhyppes. And whā Arthur wyſt of theſe tydynges that he had not power & ſtrength ynough to fyght ayenſt. Cheldrik / he lete be the ſyege & went to London / & ſent anone his letters to ye kynge of lytell Brytayne that wys called Howell hys neuewe hys ſyſters ſone / that he ſholde come to hym with all the power that he myghte. And he aſſembled a grete hoſte and arryued at Southampton. And whan kynge Arthur it wyſt he was gladde ynough & wente ayenſte them / & them receyued wyth moche honour. Soo that thoſe two hoſtꝭ mette & aſſembled them / & tooke theyr waye euen vnto. Nycholl that Cheldryk had beſyeged / But it was not taken. And they came vpon cheldrik & his people or they wyſt where that they were / and them egerly aſſaylled. ¶The kynge Cheldrik and his men defended hym manly by theyr power. But kyng Arthur & hys men ſlewe ſo many Saxons / hat neuer was ſeen ſuche ſlaughter / & Cheldrik & hys men that were left alyue fledde a waye. And kynge Arthur them purſewed and droue them out in to a wood tha they myghte no ferder paſſe. ¶Cheldrik & hys mē ſawe well that they were brought in to moche dyſeaſe / & them yelded to kynge Arthur in thys manner wys. That he ſholde take theyr horſes theyr armour / & all that they had / and they muſt only go on foot in to theyr ſhyppes. And ſo they wolde goo home in to theyr owne londe / and neuer come ayen in to this londe. ¶And vpon aſſuraunce of thys thynge they yaue hym good hoſtages. ¶And Arthur by counſeyll of his men graunted this thynge: & receyued ye hoſtages: & therupon yt other wente to theyr ſhyppes. And whan they were in ye hyghe ſee the wynnde chaunged as the deuyll it wolde: & they torned theyr nauy & cam ayen in to this londe & arryued at Totneſſe: & wente out of the ſhyppes and tooke the londe: and clene robbed it: and moche people ſlewe: and tooke all the armour that they myghte fynde. And ſoo they wente foorth tyll they came vnto Bathe. But the men of the towne ſhytte faſte theyr yates / and wolde not ſuffre theym to come wy thinthe towne· And they deffended thē well and orpedly ayenſt them
                  
                  
                     ¶How Arthur yaue bataylle vnto the Saxons whan they came agayne in to this londe: & had beſyeged the towne of Bathe and them ouercame.
                     
                        
ANone as. Artur herde thys tydynges he lete hange ye hoſtages / & le
                           •
                        t Howell of Brytayne his neuewe / for to kepe the marche to warde Scotlonde with halfe his people and hymſelf wente to helpe & reſcowe the towne

of. Bathe. whan he 
                           ••
                        me thyther he yaue a ſtrong batayll to Cheldrik and ſlewe almooſt all the people that he had· For no man myght hym wythſtonde ne endure vnder ye ſtroke of his ſwerde. And there bothe were ſlayne Colegryn and Bladulf hys brother / and Cheldryk fledde thens & wold haue gone to hys ſhyppes ¶But whan Arthur it wyſt / he toke .x. thouſande knyghtes to Cador yt was erle of Corne waylle for to lette & ſtoppe hys comynge. And Arthur hymſelf wente towarde the marche of Scotlonde. For meſſengers tolde hym that ye Scottes had beſyeged Howell of. Brytoyne there that laye ſyke / & therfore he haſted hym thyther warde. ¶And Cador purſe wed after Cheldryk / & toke hym er he myght come to his ſhyppes & ſlewe Cheldrik and his people. And whan Cador had done thys vyage / he haſted hym ayen to warde. Arthur as faſte as he myghte / & founde hym in Scotlonde there that he had reſcowed Howel of Brytayn but ye Scottes were ferre wythyn Nounref / & there they helde them a whyle. But Arthur them purſewed. And they fledde thens in to Limoigne / yt were in that countre .xl. Iles & grete plente of byrdes / and grete plente of Egles that were wonte to crye and fyght togyders / and make greate noyſe whan folke came to robbe that londe / and warne as moche as they myght / & ſo they dyde. For the Scottes were to grete rauenours / that they tooke all that they myghte fynde in the londe of Lymoygne wythout ony ſparynge / and there with charged ayen the folke in to Scotlonde for to wende.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Arthur axed of Merlyn ye aduentures of .vi. of the laſt kynges that were to regne in Englonde / & how ye londe ſhold ende
                     Syr ſayd Merlyn. In the yere of the Incarnacyon Iheſu Cryſte .M·CC.xv. ſhall come a lambe out of wyncheſtre / ſhall haue a whyte tonge and true lyppes / and he ſhal haue wryten in his herte holynes. This lambe ſhall make many goddes houſes / & he ſhall haue peas the mooſt parte of his lyfe. And he ſhall make one of the fayreſt places of ye wor
                           •
                        
                        de / that in his tyme ſhall not fully 
                           •
                        e made an ende of. ¶And in the ende of his lyf wulf of a ſtraunge londe ſhall doo hym moche harme and ſorowe thrugh warre. But at the ende the lambe ſhall be mayſter thrugh helpe of a reede foxe / that ſhall come out of the North weſt / & hym ſhall ouercome / and the wulf ſhall dey
                           •
                         in water. And after that tyme the lambe ſhall lyue noo whyle / but he ſhall deye. ¶His heed ſhall be in a ſtraūge londe. And the londe ſhall be wythout a gouernour a lytell tyme
                     ANd after this ſhall come a dragō medled with mercy & alſo with woodneſſe And that ſhall haue aberde as a gote that ſhal gyue in Englonde a ſhade we / and ſhall kept the londe fro colde & hete / and hys owne foo
                           •
                         ſhall be ſette in wyke & that other in London. And he ſhall enbrace Inhabitaunces. And he ſhall open his mouth to warde walys. And the tremblynge of the hydour of his mouthe / hys 
                           •
                        eres ſhall ſtretche to warde many habytacyons and countrees. And his breth ſhall be full ſwete in ſtraūge londe. And in his tyme ſhall the ryuers renne blood and with brayne. And he ſhall make ī places of his londe walles that ſhall do moche harme vnto hys ſeed after hys tyme. ¶And thenne ſhall there come a people out of the North weſt durynge his regne that ſhall be ladde thrughout a wycked hare / that the dragon ſhall do crowne kynge / that afterwarde ſhall flee ouer the ſee wyth out comynge ayen for drede of the dragon. ¶And in that tyme the ſonne ſhall be as reed as an blood that ſee thorughout all the worlde / that ſhall betoken grete peſtylence & dethe of folke / thorugh dynt of ſwerde. And that people ſhall be faderles / tyll the tyme that the dragon deye thrugh an hare: that ſhal meue ayenſt hym warre vnto the ende of his lyf: that ſhall not fully be ended in his tyme ¶This dragon ſhall be holde in his tyme the beſt body of the worlde. and he ſhall deye beſyde the marches of a ſtraūge londe: and the londe ſhall dwel faderles wythout a good gouernour: and men ſhall wepe for his dethe: from the yle of. Shepey to the hauen of Marcyll. ¶wherfore Alas alas ſhall be theyr ſonge of faderles folke: that ſhall ouer lyue in his londe deſtroyed.
                     ANd after this dragon ſhall come a gote out of. Kar that ſhall haue hornes & a berde of ſyluer / and there ſhall come out of his noſethryll a dompe that ſhall betoken hungre and ſorowe and grete dethe of the people. And moche of his londe in the begynnynge of hys regne ſhall be waſted. ¶Thys gote ſhall go ouer vnto Fraūce: and ſhall open the floure of his lyf and deth. ¶In his tyme there ſhal

aryſe an E
                           ••
                        e in Corne way
                           •
                        e that ſhall haue fethers of go
                           •
                        e / that of pryde 
                           •
                        ha
                           •
                         be without pere of the londe. And he ſhall deſpy
                           •
                        e lordes of blood. And a
                           ••
                        er he ſhall flee ſhamefully by a beer at G
                           •
                        uer
                           •
                        e
                           •
                        h / and after ſhall be made brydges of men vpon the coſtes of the 
                           •
                        ee and ſtones ſhall falle from caſtelles / & many other townes ſhall be made playne. ¶In his tyme ſhall ſeme that the beer ſhall brenne / and a batayll ſhall be done vpon the armes of the ſee in a felde ordeyned as a ſheld And at that batayl ſhall deye many whyte heedes / wherfore thys batayll ſhall be called the whyte batayll. And the forſayd beer ſhall do thys gote moche harme / & it ſhall come out of the South weſt & of his blood. Thenne ſhall the go
                           •
                        e leſe moche / & of hys londe / tyll that the tyme that frenſhyp ſhall hym ouercome. And thenne ſhall he cloſe hym in a lyons ſkynne / & thenne ſhall he wynne that he had before loſt & more therto. For a people ſhall come out of the North weſt yt ſhall make the gote ſo ſore aferde thet he ſhall be in grete perplexite. And he ſhal aduenge hym on his enmyes thrugh coūſeyll of two owles that fyrſte ſhall be in peryll for to be vndone. But the olde owle ſhall wende away a certayne tyme / & after he ſhal come ayen in to this londe. Theſe two owles ſhall do grete harme to many one / and ſoo they ſhall counſeyll the gote to arere warre ayenſt the forſayd beer. And at ye laſt the go
                           •
                        e and the owles ſhall come at Burton vppon Trent / and ſhall go ouer / and for drede the beer ſhall 
                           ••
                        ee & a ſwanne wyth hym fro his company to Burton warde the north and there they ſhall be with an harde ſhoure. And thenne ſhall the ſwanne be take & ſlayne wi
                           •
                        h ſorowe and the beer taken heeded al ther next his 
                           •
                        eſt / that ſhall ſtande vpon broken brydge / on whom the ſonne ſhall caſt hys beemes. And many ſhall hym ſeke for vertue that from hym ſhall come. ¶In ye ſame ſhall deye for ſorowe 
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        are ap
                           •
                        ple of his londe / ſoo that londes ſhall be vpon hym ye more bo
                           •
                        der after warde. And thoſe two owles ſhall doo moche ſorowe to the foreſayd floure of lyf / & her ſhall lede in to dyſtreſtre / ſo that ſhall paſſe ouer the ſee into Fraunce / for to make peas bytwene the gote and ye flouredelyſe / and there ſhe ſhall dwelle tyll a tyme that her ſede ſhall come and ſet
                           •
                        e her: 
                           •
                         they ſhall be ſtyll tyll a tyme: that they ſhalle them clothe wyth grache. And they ſhall fethe the owles and ſhall put them to dyſpytous deth. And after ſhall this gote be broughte to dyſeaſe and great Anguyſſhe: and in ſorowe he ſhall lyue all his lyf
                     AFter thys gote ſhall come out of wyndeſore a boore: that ſhall haue an heed o
                           •
                         a whyte lynons herte: and pyteous lokynge ¶His vyſage ſhalle be reſte to lyke men. Hys breeſte ſhall be ſtaunchynge of thyrſte to tho that be thryſty: His worde ſhall be goſpell. hys herynge ſhall be meke as a lambe· In the fyrſte yere of his regne he ſhall haue grete payne to Iuſtefye thē that ben vntrue. ¶And in his tyme ſhall hys londe be multeplyed wyth alyauntes. And this boore thorugh fyreſneſſe of hys herte that he ſhal haue: ſhal make wulues to become lambes. & he ſhall be called thorugh out of ye worlde Boore of holyneſſe / fyerſ
                           •
                        eſſe of noblyneſſe and of mekeneſſe. And he ſhall meſurably al that he ſhall do vnto the brough of Ieruſalem. ¶And he ſhall whette his teeth vpon the yates of Pards: and vpon foure londes. Spayne ſhall tremble for drede. Gaſcoyne ſhall ſwete. In Fraūce he ſhal put his wynge. His grete tayle ſhall reſte in Englonde ſoftly. Almayne ſhalle quake for drede of hym. ¶This boore ſhal yeue bantelles to two townes of Englonde: and ſhall make the Ryuer renne wyth blood & brayne. And he ſhall make many medowes reede: and he ſhall gette as moche as his auncetours dyd. And er that he dyed / he ſhall bere thre crownes / and he ſhall put a londe in greate ſubiecyon / And after it ſhall be releued / but not in his tyme. ¶This boore after he is deed for hys doughtyneſſe / ſhall be entyred at Coleyne. And his lōde ſhall be fulfylled of all good.
                     AFter this boore ſhall come a lambe: yt ſhalle haue f
                           •
                        et of leed: and an heed of braſſe: and herte of loppe a ſwynes ſkynne. And an harde. And in hys tyme hys londe ſhal be in peas: the fyrſte yere of his regne he ſhall do make a cytee that all the worlde ſhall ſpeke there of. ¶This lambe ſhall leſe in his tyme a grete parte of his londe thrugh an hydeous wulfe: but he ſhall recouer it: and yeue a lordſhyp to an Egle of his londe and this egle ſhal welle gouerne it tyll the tyme that pryde ſhall hym ouercome. Alas the ſorwe: For he ſhalle deye of hys brothers ſwerde. And after ſhall the londe falle to the forſayd lambe: that ſhall

gouerne the londe in peas all hys lyues tyme. And after he ſhall deye / and the londe be fulfylled of all maner of good.
                     AFter this lambe ſhal come a mold warpe / curſyd of goddes mouth / a caytyf / a cowarde / an haare / He ſhall haue an elderly ſkynne as a gote / & vengeaunce ſhall falle vpon hym for ſyn̄e. ¶In the fyrſt yere of his regne he ſhall haue of all good gret plente in hys londe and to warde hym alſo / And in hys londe he ſhall haue grete prayſyge / tyll the tyme that he ſhal ſurffre his people lyue in to moche pryde without chaſtyſynge / wherfor god wyl be wrothe· ¶Thenne ſhall aryſe vp a dragon of the North / that ſhall be full fyerſe / and ſhal meue warre ayenſt the forſayd mold warpe / & ſhal yeue hym batayle vpon a ſtone. This dragon ſhall gadre ayen in to his company a wulfe / that ſhall rome out of the weſt to meue warre ayenſt the forſayd mold warpe in hys ſyde / ſo ſhall the dragon / and bynde theyr tayles to gyders ¶Then̄e ſhall come a lyon out of Irlonde / that ſhall falle in company wyth them. And thenne ſhall tremble the londe that ſhall becalled Englonde as an aſpen leyf / And in that tyme ſhal caſtelles be felled downe vpon Tamyſe. And ye ſhall ſeme that Seuerne ſhal be drye / for the bodyes that ſhall falle deed there in / The foure chyef floodes in Englonde ſhall renne in blood. And grete drede ſhall he / & anguyſſhe that ſhall aryſe. ¶After the mold warpe ſhall flee and ye dragon. The lyon and the wulf ſhall them dryue a waye / and the lon ſhall be wythout them. And the mold warpe ſhall haue no maner of power ſauf only a ſhyppe wherto he maye wynder ¶And after that he ſhall goo to londe where the ſee is wythdrawe. And after that he ſhall yeue the thyrde parte of hys londe / for to haue the fourth parte in peas and in reſte. And after he ſhall lyue in ſorowe all his lyftyme· ¶And in his tyme the h
                           ••
                        r bathes ſhal become colde. And after that ſhall the mold warpe deye auenturouſly and ſodenly. Alas for ſorowe / for he ſhall be drowned in a flood of the ſee His ſeed ſhall be come faderles in ſtraunge loude for euer more. And then ſhall the londe be departed in to thre partes / that is to ſaye / to the wulf / to the dragan / and to the lyon. And ſoo ſhall it be for euermore· And thenne ſhalle thys londe be called the 
                           •
                        de of Conqueſt. And ſo ſhall the ryghe heyres of Englonde ende
                  
                  
                     ¶How Arthur ouercame Guillomer that was kynge of Irlonde. And how the Scottes became his men
                     THen̄e whan Guillomer that was kynge of Irlonde herde tydyges ye kynge Arthur was entred at Glaſtenbury: he ordeyned agrete pewer of Iryſſhmen and came to the ſee wyth his Iryſſhe people; & ſoo came in to Scotlonde ouer the ſee & arryued faſt there by that kynge. Arthur was with his hoſte: & a none as he wyſt therof: he went to warde hym and yaue hym bataylle & ouercame hym anone ryght. And Guillomer fledde wyth hys mē agayne in to Irlond. And whan thys was done and dyſcomfyted hym Arthur torned hym ayen there that he was: in to the place there that he had lefte the Scottes and wolde haue them all ſlayne. But the byſſhopes: abbottes and other folke of ye countree and ladyes open heeded came before kynge. Arthur and cryed hym mercy and ſayde. Syre gentyll kynge & myghty: haue mercy and pyte vpon vs. And as yourſelf be of the ryght lawe to holde and mayntene Cryſtendome. For full grete dyſhoudur yt ſhold be to ſlee hym that byleueth in almyghty god as ye do. And for goddes loue haue mercy and pyte on vs & ſuffre vs. For we haue hadde moche ſorowe and payne. For the Saxons haue many tymes paſſed thrugh our londe. But that is not ynough to you: for often tymes they haue done vs ſorowe & dyſeaſe For our caſtelles they haue taken and our beeſtes ſlayne & eten: and moche harme they haue vs done And yf ye wolde vs now ſlee: it were none honour to a kynge to ſlee them that crye hym mercy. For ynough ye haue done to vs & haue vs ouercome. And for ye loue of god yt ye wyll ſuffre vs for to lyue: & haue mercy on cryſten people yt byleue in Cryſt as ye do. ¶whā kynge. Arthur herde this ſorowe: he had pyte of them & yaue them lyf & lymme without ony more harme. And they fell downe to his feet & thanked hym and became his lyege men: and he toke of them homage. ¶And after ye kynge Arthur torned ayen wyth hys hoſte the came vnto yorke: and made there hys bydynge durynge that vyage. And tho gaue he al Logrys to Aloth that had ſpowſed his ſyſter and other gyftes grete plente· And tho was Gawen his coſyn but of youge 
                           •
                        ege. And to all hys other

men that hym had ſerued in hys warre / he gaue ryche gyftes / and thanked them moche of all theyr good ſeruyce
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Arthur ſpowſed Gūnor that was Gūnors coſyn Erle of Corne wayle / and after he conquered of Guillomer all Irlonde.
                     
                        
                     
                     ANd whan Arthur hadde broughth ys lond in peas and reſt and in good ſtate / and all was well in euery countre. Tho toke and wedded a wyf that was called Gūnor and made her quene / a fayre lady and a gentyll that Cador the Erle of Corne wayle hadde nouryſſhed ī his chambre that was his coſyn. But neuer they had childern togyder. And neuertheles kyng Arthur loued her wonder well & deyrly And anone as wynter was paſſed / he lete aſſemble a grete hoſt / and all his Barons and ſayd that he wolde goo in to. Irlonde for to conquere the londe. And he trayed not longe that he paſſed ouer in to Irlone. ¶And Guillomer the kynge lete aſſemble a grete hoſte & yaue bataylle to kynge Arthur / but Guyllomer was dyſcomfyted and yelded hym ot ye kynge and became his man / and to hym dyde fewte and homage and of hym helde alle that lond fro that tyme for warde. And after peaskynge. Arthur ferthermore & conquered But londe and Iſlonde / and toke homage of the folke and of the londe / and there dwelled .xii. yere in peas & regned wyth Ioye & myrthe. And there warred no man ne woman vpon hym. And he became ſo curtys and large & honorable / that the Emperours courte of Rome / ne none other thrugh out all the worlde was not accoūted to kyng Arthurs / that ony mā wyſt of / ne none ſoo well prayſed· And therfore the beſte knyghtꝭ of all maner a londes came vnto hym there for to dwelle. And he theym receyued with good wyll and reuerence. ¶And all the knygehtes were ſo good that noo man knewe the werſte. And therfore kyng Arthur made a rounde table that whan they ſholde ſytte at ther meete / all ſholde be ylyke hyghe and euenly ſerued at the table that nōe of them ſholde make auaūt that one of them were hygher thanne an other. And kynge Arthur hadde at that table Brytons & Frenſhmen. Normans and Flemynges. Burgoyns Mauſers & Lotherins / and of all the londes a thys halfe the mount Goryt: and of hys londe of Brytayne and of the grete Corne wayle: of walys and of Irlonde: and of Scotlonde And ſhortly to tell of all the londes that woldes worſhyp chyualry: ſuche came to kynge Arthurs courte.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Arthur yede into Fraunce and conquered that londe of. Froll yt was a Romayne: and how he ſlewe hym.
                     
                        
                     
                     Syth it befell that thrugh counſell of hys barons and lordes: kynge Arthur wolde conquere alle Fraunce that tho was called Galle thrugh Romaynes that tho helde ye londe in theyr power & in theyr gouernnūce. And the Romayns had taken that londe to a noble knyȝt and a worthy of body: that was called Froll. And whan he wyſt that Arthur came: he ordeoned an hoſt of a grete power & fought with the kynge. And he & his folke were dyſcomfyted and fledde vnto Parys & entred the cyte: and cloſed the yates & there helde them. ¶whan Arthur wyſt that Froll was gone to

Parys he purſued after & came thyder: & hym beſyeged. But the cyte was ſo ſtronge & well arayed / & tho that were therin deffended theym well and manly. ¶Kynge Arthur dwelled there more than amonethe. And there was ſo moche people in the cyte that they dyſpended all theyr vytayle that they had wythin. and ſo grete hungre became amonge them / that they deyed wenderly thycke within the cyte for hō
                        gre. And came vnto Froll & prayed hym to be accorded with kynge. Arthur for to haue peas & they wolde yelde theym vnto hym & the cyte alſo. ¶Froll ſawe yt he myght no lenger holde the towne ayenſt theyr wyll \ & truſted gretely vppon his owe ſtrenth / and ſent to ye kynge Arthur that he ſhold come fyght with hym body for body / & ſo ſholde they departe Fraunce bytwene them two. ¶Kynge Arthur anōe graū
                        ted yt. And wolde not that none of hys people vndertoke the batayle for hym. ¶And vpon the morne both came wel arayed without Parys there that they ſholde fyght. & anone they ſmote togyders ſo fyerſly & ſo wel they fough on both ſydes that no man demed the better of them / and ſoo it befell ye Froll yaue Arthur ſuche a ſtroke yt he kneled to the grounde wolde he nolde he / And as Froll wounded kynge Arthur in the forhede yt the blode felle downe by his eyen & his face. Arthur anone ſterre vp hertely whan he felte hym hurte as a man yt ſemed almooſt wood. And he toke taburne hys good ſwerde / & drewe it vpon hyghe and yaaf Froll ſuche aſtroke that thyr with he claue his hede downe to the ſholders ſo that his helme myght not be his warraunt / & ſo he fel downe deed in the place. And thenne tho of the cytye made grete ſorowe for Froll. And euerychone yelded them to kynge. Arthur and the towne alſo & became hys men / & dyd to hym homage and feaute. And he receyued them & tooke of them goodly hoſtages. And kynge Arthur after that wente forthe with his hoſte & conquered Augien & Angyers. Gaſcoyne. Pehito. Nauerne and Burgoyne. Berry. Lotherne Turyn and Peythers / and all the other londes of Fraunce he conquered all hooly. whan he had conquered & taken by homages and feautes / he torned ayen to Parys and there he dwelled longe tyme / & ordeyned peas longe tyme ouer all ye coūtree / & thrugh al Fraūce. ¶And whā peas was made ouer all thrugh hys noble knyghthode that he hadde / and alſo for hys owne worthynes. And no man were he neuer ſo grete a lorde durſte not meue warre ayenſt hym nother to aryſe for to make the londe of Fraū
                        ce inquyete. And in peas he dwelled there .ix. yere / and dyde many greate wonders / and repreued many proude men and euyll tyraūtes theym chaſtyſed after theyr demerytes
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Arthur auaunced all his men that had trauaylled in his ſeruyce.
                     ANd after warde yt befel thus at Eſter there that he helde a feeſt at. Paras / & rychely he gan auaūce his knyghtes for ye ſeruyce that they had hym holpen in hys cōqueſt. He yaue to hys ſtewarde that was called. Kay Augien & Angoers. And he yaue to Bed were his. Butler. Normandye / that tho was called Neuſtrye And to Holdē in hys chambrelayn he yaue Flaunders & Mance And to Dorell hys coſyn he yaue Bolayne. And to Rycharde hys enewe he yaue Pountyf / and to all other he yaue large londes and fees after they were of eſtate / And whan Arthur had thus his knyghtes feoffed / at Aperyll next after ſuynge he came ayen in to Brytayne hys owne londe. And after at wytſontyde ſewynge by counſeyll of his Barons / he wolde be crowned kynge of Glomergon / and helde a ſolempne feeſt. And lete ſomone barons erls and knyghtes / yt they ſhold come thyder euery chone. and there was Scater kynge of Scotlande. Cad were kynge of South waylys. Guiliomer kyng of North walys. Maded kyng of Irlonde. Malgamus kynge of Gutlonde. Achelles kynge of Iſlonde. Aloth kyng of Denmarke. Gone was kynge of Norwaye / and Hell hys coſyn kynge of Dorkeney. Cador kynge of lytell Brytayne. Mor with Erle of Cornewaylle. Mauran erle of Gloucetre. Guerdon erle of wyncheſtre. Boell erle of Hartforde. Vrtegi erle of Oxforde. Cuiſall erle of Bathe. Ionas Erle of Cheſtre. Enerall erle of Dorcheſtre. Kymare Erle of Salyſbury. waloth erle of Caunterbury. Iugerne erle of Checheſtre. Arall erle of Leyceter / and the erle of wer wyke / & many other moo ryche lordes. Brytons there came moo / that is to ſaye. Dippon Donande. Gennes / & many other that be not named here were atte the feeſt. And many a fayre feeſt kynge arthur hadde holde before / but neuer none ſuche / ne ſoo ſolempne / and that laſted .xv. dayes wyth moche honoure and myrthe. ¶Of the letter yt was ſēt fro Rome to pryde to kynge Arthur
                     
                        THe thyrde daye as kynge Arthur ſatte at his meet amonge his knyghtes and amonge them that ſatte at the feſte / before thē cam in ·xii. men of age rychely arayed / and curteuſly they ſalewed the kynge / and ſayde they came fro Rome ſente as maſſengers fro the Emperoure. And toke hym a letter that thus moche was to vnderſtād· ¶Gretely vs maruaylleth arthur / that thou art ones ſo hardy with thyn eyen in thy heed to make open warre or contake ayenſt vs of rome / that owne all the worlde to redeme / For thou haſte neuer yet before thys tyme proued ne aſſayed the ſtrengthe of the Romās / and therfore though it ſhall in a lytell tyme. For Iulyus Cezar conquered all the londe of Brytayne / ayd toke therof truage / and our folke haue it longe I had / & nowe throughe thy pryde thou with holde it. wherefore we of Rome commaunde the that thou yt yelde ayen / and yet haſte thou more foly done that thou haſte ſlayne Froll that was our baron of Fraunce with wrōge. And therfore all the comens of Rome warneth the & cōmaūde the vpon lyfe & lymme that thou in haſte be at Rome amendes for to make of thy myſdedes that thou haſte done. And it ſo be that thou come not we ſhall paſſe the hyll of Ioye with ſtrē
                        gthe / and we ſhall the ſeke where euer thowe may be founde / & thou ſhalt not haue a foot of londe of thyn owne / yt we ne ſhall dyſtroye it / & afterwarde with thy body we ſhall do al our wyll. whan this letter was redde & all men it herde they were anoyed all yt were at ye ſolempne feſte. And the Brytons wolde haue ſlayne ye meſſengers / but the kynge wolde not ſuffre them & ſayde / that ye meſſengers ſholde haue no harme / & may by reaſon none deſerue But commaūded them to be worſhypfully ſerued And after meet he toke coūſeyll of kynges / erles & barons / what anſwere he myght geue ayen to the meſſengers and they coūſeylled him atones / that he ſhulde aſſemble a grete power of al ye lōdes of whiche he had lordeſhyp & mā
                        ly auenge hym vpon the Emperour of the deſpyte that he had ſēde hym ſuche a letter & they ſwore by god & by all his holy name that they ſholde hym purſewe & bren̄e as moche as they myght And ſayde that they wolde neuer fayle kynge Arthur / & rather to be deed. And they lete wryte a letter to ſende to the Emperour by the ſame meſſengers in this manere of wyſe· Of the bolde anſwere that kynge Arthur ſēte to the Emperour of Rome & to the Romans
                     VNderſtondeth amonge you of Rome that I am kynge Arthur of Brytayne and freely it holde and ſhall holde. And at Rome haſtely I wyll be / not to geue you truage / but for to axe truage. For Conſtantyne that was Eleyns ſone that was Emperour of Rome & of all the honour that ther to belongeth. And Maximian kynge conquered all Fraunce and Almayne / and mount Ioye paſſed and conquered all Lombardy. And theſe two were myn auncetours / and that they helde and had. I ſhall haue thorught goddes wyll.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the reuerence that kynge Arthur dyde to the Emperours meſſengers.
                     ANd whan this letter was made & enſealed / kynge Arthur to theſe meſſēgers & gaue grette yeftes / and after that the meſſengers toke theyr leue and wente thens / and came to the courte of Rome agayne. And tolde the Emperour how worthely they were receyued And alſo of ſuche a ryall company that he hadde hym for to ſerue / and howe he was more ryally ſerued than the Emperour of Rome or ony other kynge lyuynge in all the worlde. ¶And whan the Emperour had ouerſene the letter / and hadde harde what was therin and ſawe yt Arthur wolde not be ruled after hym. He lete aſſemble and ordeyne a grete hoſte for to deſtroye kynge Arthur yf that he myghte. ¶And kyng Arthur as touchynge hys power and partye / ordeyned hys power or knyghtes of the table rounde.
                  
                  
                     How kyng arthur faught with a gyaūt ī ſpayne yt was called Dinabus yt ſlewe Eleyne that was kynge Howels coſyn of lytell Brytayne.
                     Kynge Arthur hadde not dwelled in that coūtree but a lytel tyme / yt men hym tolde that there was come a greate gyaunt in to Spayne / & had rauyſſhed fayre. Eleyne that was coſyn vnto. Howell of lytell Brytayne. And hadde brought her vpon an hylle that ys called the mount of ſaynt Bernarde. And there was no man in that countree ſoo bolde ne ſo hardy that durſte fyght with hym / ne come nye the place there yt the gyaunt dwelled tha
                           •
                         was called Dinabus. And moche ſorowe he dyde in the countree. ¶whan kynge Arthur heede this tydynges / he called to him Kay and Bedwere & cōmaunded them to go pryuely & eſpye where the gyaunt myght be foūde. And they came to the ryuage there that men ſholde

go to the mount / that was all encloſed a boute with water & yet is / & euer ſhall be. And they ſawe a brennyge fyre vpon the hylle. And there was alſo an other hylle nye that / and there was vpon that an other fyre brynnyge. Kay & Bed were came to the next hylle / & foūde a wydowe open heeded ſyttynge beſydes a tombe ſore wepynge / & grete ſorowe made. & ofte ſhe ſayd Eleyne eleyne. And Kay & Bed were axed what ſhe was / & wherfore ſhe made ſo moche ſorowe and who laye in that tombe. ¶O ſyyde ſhe what ſorowe & myſauenture fayre lorſeke ye here. For yf the. Gyaunt may you here fynde he wyl you ſlee anone. ¶Beſtylle good wyf ſayd they therof dyſmaye you not but tell vs the ſouth why that thou makeſt ſo moche ſorowe & wepynge. ¶Syrs ſayd ſhe For a damoſel that I nouryſſhed with my breeſt yt was called Eleyne / yt was nece to. Howell of Brytayne. And here lyeth the body in thys tombe that to me was taken to nouryſſhe. And ſoo there came a deuyll a Gyaunt & rauyſſhed her and me alſo / & ladde vs both with hym a way he wolde haue for layne that mayde that was yonge and tendre of aege but ſhe myght it not ſuffre ſoo grete & ſo huge as the. Gyaunt was. And for certayne yf he come now as he is wō
                        te to doo / he wyll you both now ſlee & therfore go ye hens. Thenne beſpake theſe two meſſengers & ſayd to her / wherfore goo ye not frome hens. ¶Certes ſayde ſhe whan that Eleyne deed the. Gyaunt made me to abyde and haūt his wyll / & I muſt nedes it ſuffre. And god it wote I do it not with my wyll / for I had leuer to be deed than with hym to deale / ſoo moche payne & ſorowe I haue whan he me 
                           •
                        oclyeth. ¶whan Kay and. Bed were had all that thys woman thē tolde / they torned ayen & came to kynge Arthur and tolde hym all that they had ſeen and herde. ¶Arthur anone toke them bothe wit hym and wente pryuely by nyght that none of his hoſte wyſte and came on the morowe erly to the. Gyaunt and faught wyth hym ſtrongely / and at the laſte hym ſlewe And Arthur badde. Bed were ſmyte of hys heed / and brynge it to the hoſt to ſhewe it for a wonder / for it was ſoo grete and huge. ¶whan they came ayen to the hoſte / they tolde wherfore they hadde ben out / and ſhewed to them the heed / and euery man was gladde and. Ioyefull of the worthy dede that kynge. Arthur had done that was theyr lorde. And Howell was full ſorowfull for his nece yt was ſo loſte. And after warde whan he had ſpace / he lete make a fayre chapell of our lady ouer Eleyns tomebe.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge. Arthur yaue bataylle to the Emperperour / in the whyche bataylle the Emperour hymſelf was ſlayne
                     
                        
                     
                     ARthur and his people herde tydynges that the. Emperour had aſſembled a greate power / as well of ſaraſyns as of paynyms and cryſten men. wherof the nombre was .lxxx. thouſande hors men with foot mē. ¶Arthur and his people ordeyned faſte forth theyr waye towarde the. Emperour and paſſed. Normandy and. Fraunce vnto. Burgoyne / and wolde haue gone vnto the hoſte. For men tolde hym that the. Emperours hoſt wolde come to Lucie. ¶The Emperour and hys hoſte in the begynnynge of. Auguſt remeued from Rome / and came forthe ryght the waye 
                           •
                        o warde the hoſte ¶Tho came kyng Arthur ſpyes and ſayde / yf that. Arthur wolde he ſholde fynde the Emperour there faſte by put they ſayd. yt the Emꝑour had ſo grete power wyth hym of kinges of ye lōde of Paynems & alſo criſten peple yt it were but folyt to kyng Arthur to mete with thē For ye ſpyes tolde / yt the emꝑour had fyue or ſix men ayenſt one of his. ¶Kyng Arthur was blody & hardy / and for noo thynge hym nyſmayed and ſayede. Goo we boldely in goddes name ayenſte the. Romayns / that wyth them lede. Sarraſyns and. Paynems / that noo maner truſte they haue in god / But only vpon theyr ſtrengh. Go we now and ſeke them ſharply in the name of almyghty god

& ſlee we the▪ Paynems and cryſten men that ben ayenſt vs with thē for to deſtroye. Cryſtē men. And god ſhall vs helpe thē to ouercome For we haue the ryght 
                           •
                        penyon / and therfore haue we truſte in god. And we ſo that the enmyes that be to cryſtendome and to god may be deſtroyed and ouercome / & that men maye recorde ye worthyneſſe of knyght hode. whan kynge Arthur hadde thus ſayd / they cryed all wyth an hyghe voys. ¶God that is fader almyghty worſhypped be thy name without ende. Amen. And graunt vs grace well for to do and to deſtroye oure enmyes that ben ayenſt cryſtendome. In the name of the fader / the ſone / and holy ghoſt. Amen. And god yeue hym neuer grace ne worſhyp in the worlde / ne mercy of hym to haue / that thys daye ſhall faynte well for to ſmyte and egerly. And ſo they rode ſoftly / & ordeyned his wynges well & wyſely. ¶The Emperour herde telle that kynge. Arthur & his folke were redy appaerylled for to fyght with hym and how they were comynge He lete ordeyne hꝭ wynges ī the beſt wyſe that he cowde And more truſted vpon his ſtrenght than in god almyghty / & that was ſeen afterwarde· For whan the two hoſtes mette / the. Emperour loſt four of hys folke ayenſt one of Arthur. And ſo many were ſlayne \ what on ye one party & on that other / that it was grete pyte to wyte & to be beholde. ¶In thys batayll were ſlayne thrugh kynge. Arthurs fyue kynges of the Paynems and of other wonder moche people / and kyng. Arthurs men fought ſo well / that the Romayns and paynems hadde nomore ſtrengthe to wythſtonde them / than .xx. ſhepe ayenſt fyue wulues. ¶And ſo it befelle that in thys batayll in the ſhoure / that was wonder harde & longe durynge in that one ſyde and in that other / the. Emperour amonge them there was ſlayne / but ther was no man that wyſte for very ſo the who hym ſlewe.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Arthur lete entyere his knyghtes that he had loſt there in batayll / and how he ſente the. Emperours body to. Rome that there was ſlayne in batayll
                     SO whan the. Romayns wyſt that the Emperour was deed / they forſoke the felde & the paynens alſo. And kynge. Arthur after them chaced tyll it was nyght / & ſoo many of them ſlewe yt it was wonder to tell. And the torned kynge Arthur ayen whan it was nyght & thanked god of hys victorye. And on the morowe he lete loke and ſerche all the felde for his knyghtes that he there loſt. That is to ſaye. Borell Erle of Maunt. Bed were / and Kay / and. Lyegiers Erle of. Boleyne. Vortiger Erle of Baac. Aloth Erle of wyncheſtre. Cuiſall Erle of Cheſtre / and after Holden Erle of. Flaandres. Theſe were the grete lordes that kynge. Arthur loſte in that batayll / wyth other worthy knyghtes them amonge. And ſome he lete entere in abbayes by the countree / ſome he lete to be borne in to theyr owne coū
                        tree. ¶And the Emperours body he lete take & put vpon a beyr & ſente it to Rome. And ſayde to ye Romayns / that for Brytayne & Fraū
                        ce whiche he helde: other truage wolde hen one paye. ¶And yf they axe
                           •
                         hym ony other truages: ryght ſuche truage he wolde theym payne. ¶The kynge lete bere Kay to Kenen his owne caſtel & there hym entered. And Leygier was borne to. Boleyne there he was lorde. And Holden was borne to Flaunders: there he was entered: And all the other he lete entere wyth moche honour in abbayes & in houſes of relyon in the coūtre that they were ſlayne. ¶And Arthur hymſelf ſoiourned that ſame yere in. Bourgoyne with his hoſte & thoughte the ſame yere folowynge to paſſe the mount. Ioye: & haue gone to. Rome alſo to haue taken the Cyte and haue put the Romoyns in ſubiecyon: but the wycked tyraunt. Mordred hym lette: as afterye ſhall here
                  
                  
                     ¶How the traytour. Mordred: to whome kynge. Arthur tooke hys londe to kepe and his caſtelles: helde them ayenſt hym▪
                     
                     AS Arthur had taken to. Mordred hys reame to kepe: & gone ayenſt ye Emperour of rome: & was paſſed ye ſee. Mordred anōe toke homages & feates of all theym yt were ī this londe: & wolde haue had this londe to his owne vſe: & toke caſtelles about: & lete thē be arayed. & after thys falſeneſſe he dyde an other grete wronge: for ayenſt ye lawe of cryſtē te he tooke hys owne emys wyf as a traytour ſhold: ordeyned him a grete hoſt ayēſt arthurs comyng: to hold ye londe ayenſt hym with ſtrē
                        gthe for euer more: & to ſlee kyng Arthur yf he myght & ſent by ye ſee & by londe: & lete aſſēble paynems & cryſten peple. And he ſent to Saxons & to Danys for to helpe hym. & alſo. Mordred ſent to Cheldrik to ſende men to hy mour

of. Saxon yt was a worthy duke / & promyſed hym yf that he brought wyth hym moche people he wylde graunte hym. Inherytaunce for euer / all the londe fro Humbre to Scotlonde / and all the londe that Engiſt hadde of. Vortigers ye
                           •
                        re / whan that he ſpowſed hys doughter. ¶And cheldrik came with a grete ſtrengthe and power of people / and. Mordred hadde aſſembled alſo on his half / that they hadde .xl. thouſande of ſtronge knyghtes whan that they hadde nede.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Arthur enchanced Mordred the traytour and how he was ſlayne / and alſo kynge Arthur wounded to the deth.
                     AS thys tydynges came to kynge. Arthur there that he was in Bourgoyne he was full ſore anoyed / and toke all Fraunce to Howell for to kepe with the half deale of his men. And prayed hym that he wold it kepe tyll he came ayen. For hymſelfe wolde paſſe in to Brytayne / and auenge hym vpon. Mordred that was his traytour. And forth with Arthur wente his waye & came to wytſande / and made his men to go in to ſhyppe and wolde haue arryued at Sandwyche / & brought with hym a grace hoſt of Frēſhemen alſo with his owne londe men / But or that he myght come to londe wyth his people that were come out of hys ſhyppes. Mordred was come wyth all his power / and yaue a ſtronge batayll / ſoo that kynge Arthur loſt many a man are that he myght come to londe. For there was. Gawayne hys neuewe ſlayne / & Anguyſſhell that helde Scotlonde / and many other wherof kynge. Arthur was ful ſory. But after they were come to londe. Mordred myghte not ayenſt them endure. But anone was dyſcomfyted & flydde thens the ſame nyght with his men / & vpon the morne came to· London. But tho of the cyte wolde not ſuffre hym to come in. And from thens he fledde to wyncheſtre / and there he hym helde with his people yt came with him. ¶Kynge Arthur lete take the body of. Gawyne his cofyn / & the body of. Anguyſſhell / and lete ye one be borne in to Scotlonde / and the other to Douer & buryed Anone after kynge. Arthur toke his waye for to deſtroye mordred / & he fledde thens in to Cornewayle. ¶And ye quen Gun
                        
                           •
                        or yt was kyng Arthurs wyf yt thoſoiourned 
                           〈◊〉
                         yorke / herde ye Mordred was fledde thens & that he might not endure ayenſt kyng Arthur ſhe was fore aferde & had grete doubte / & wyſt not what was beſte of all for to done. For ſhe vnderſtode well that her lorde kynge. Arthur wolde neuer of her for to haue marcy for ye grete ſhame that ſhe had done vnto hym / And toke her a waye pryuely with four men without moo / and came to. Karlyon / & there ſhe dwelled all there lyue / and neuer after was ſeen amonges the folke her lyf duryng. ¶Kynge Arthur wyſt that Mordred was fledde in to Cornewayle / & lete ſende after his men in to. Scotlonde and Northomberlonde vnto Humbre / and lete aſſemble folke without nombre / and came fro thens in to. Cornewayle to ſeke and purſewe after Mordred. ¶And Mordred had aſſembled to hym all the folke of. Cornewayle and had people without nombre 
                           〈◊〉
                         wyſt that Arthur was comynge / and had leuer to deye and take his chaūce / than longer flee & abode and yaue an harde batayll to kynge. Arthur & to his people ſo that moche people was ſlayne what of one ſyde & what of that other / that noman wyſt who had the better party. But ſo it befell at the laſt that Mordred was ſlayne & al his folke / & the good chyualry that kynge. Arthur had gadred & nouryſſhed of dyuer londes and alſo the noble knyghtes of the rounde table / that ſo moche were prayſed thorugh oute all the worlde were there ſlayne / & kynge Arthur hymſelf was wounded vnto dethe. But he lete hym to be borne to Auioun to be heeled of his woundes. And yet the. Brytons ſuppoſed that he lyued in an other lond / and that he ſhall come yet and conquere alle Brytayne. ¶But certes this is ye prophecye of Merlyn. He ſayde that his deth ſhall be doubtous / and ſayde ſothe. For therof yet men haue doubte / and ſhall haue for euer more as men ſaye. For mē wote not wyther that he is on lyue or deed. ¶Arthur was borne at Auioun the .xxii. yere of his regne after the. Incarnacyon of our lorde Iheſu Cryſte .v.C.xlvi. yere.
                  
                  
                     How kynge Arthur delyuered the reame vnto Conſtantyne the ſone of Cador his neuewe
                     AS kynge Arthur wyſte that he myght noo lenger regne / he lette come before hym Conſtantyne yt was Cadors ſone Erle of Cornewayle his coſyn & to hym betoke all his reame & toke him ſayd / & bad hym therof to be kynge tyll that he came ayen / for as moche as

he had none heeyre of hys body begoten. And grete damage was it / that ſoo noble a kynge and ſoo doughty as he was / hadde noo chylde of his body begoten. But all thynge that god woll haue done muſt be done / whoſe name be bleſſyd wythout ende
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Conſtantyne was vexed of Mordred two ſones.
                     THis Conſtantyne was a noble knyght and a worthy of body. And tho two ſones that. Mordred had begoten had grete enuy of Conſtātyne that tho was crowned kynge. And ſo it befell yt they meued warre ayenſt hym. And aſſembled a grete hoſt of them that were before with Mordred / & had ben dryuen a waye / & that dyd moche ſarowe & anguyſſhe thrughout all that londe. That one brother ordeyned / & purpoſed hym towarde the auncyent Cyte of London for to take ye cyte And that other went to wyncheſtre. But Conſtantyne came to Lōdon & ſlewe hym yt was there. And after he went to wȳcheſtre & ſlewe hym yt was there alſo. So yt bothe his enmyes were deed. ¶And whan Conſtantyne had regned well & worthely four yere / he deyed & lyeth at Lōdon.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the kynges Adelbryght & of Edell.
                     AFter kynge Conſtantynes dethe there were two kynges in Brytayne / ye one was called. Adelbryght yt was a danoys. And he helde the coūtree of. Norfolke &. Southfolke. That other hyght Edell & was a. Bryton \ and helde Nicholl. Lendeſer / and all the londe vnto. Humbre. Theſe two kynges faſte warred togyder / but after accorded they were and loued togyder / as they had ben borne of oo body. ¶The kynge Edell had a ſuſter that was called Orewenne. And he gaf her thrught grete freodſhyp to kyng. Adelbryght to wyf. And he begate vpon her a doughter that was called. Argentyll. And in the thyrde yere after came vpon hym a ſtrange ſykeneſſe that nedes he muſt deye. And he ſente to kynge. Edell hys broder in lawe that he ſholde come and ſpeke wyth hym / and he came to hym wyth a good wyll. ¶Tho prayed he the kynge and coniured hym alſo in the name of god / That after whan he were deed / he ſholde take hys doughter Argentyll and the londe / and that he kepte her welle / and nouryſſhe her in hys chambre. And whan ſhe were of aege / ſhe ſholde be maryed to the ſtrongeſt and worthyeſt man that he myghte fynde / and thenne he ſholde yelde vp her londe ayen. ¶Edell it graunted and by othe confermed hys prayer. ¶And whan Adelbryght was deed and enteryd / Edell tooke the damoyſell. Argentyll / and nourrſſhed her in hys chambre: and ſhe became as fayre as ony myghte be.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Edell maryed that damoyſell to a knaue of his kechyne.
                     THis kyng Edell that was vncle to Argentyll: be thought how that he myght falſely haue the londe fro his nyce for euer more: and falſely aynſt hys othe thought to dyſceyue ye damoyſell: and to marye her to a knaue of his kechyne that was called Curan: and he became ye worthyeſt and ſtrongeſt man of body that ony man wyſt in ony londe that tho lyued: and to hym he thought her ſhamfully haue maryed for to haue had her londe afterwarde / but he was clene dyſceyued. For thys Curan was Hauelockis ſone that was kynge of. Kyrkelane in. Denmarke: and this. Curan conquered hys wyues londe after warde and ſlewe kyng Edel that was h
                           •
                         wyues vncle and had al her londe / as in an other place it telleth more openly: & he regned but .iii. yere for Saxons &. Danes hī ſlewe & that was grete harme to all Brytayn & Srytons bare hym to. Sto
                           •
                        
                        henge and entyred hym honourably.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of kyng Conan that was Curans coſyn.
                     AFter this Curan regned his coſyn Conan that was a wonder proude knyghte. And regned and coude haue noo maner of loue / but euer he was medlynge wyth hys people. And tooke his vncle with warre and ſlewe his two chyldern. ¶The Saxons warred ayenſt hym oftentymes: but he them ouer came: and ſoo he was in peas all his lyf tyme· And he regned .xiiii. yere: And after he deyed and lyeth at London.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of kynge Cortyf & of Gurmonde that came thorugh the paynems in to Brytayne.
                     AFter this Conan regned his coſyn cortyf that was behated of all his peple & no thynge beloued. & this. Cortyf loſt all Brytayne thrugh warre. And ī his tyme fell ye grete myſcheyf in Brytayn ye cryſtendom was deſtroyed & all ye Brytons were dryuē out of the londe and the londe loſt with out ony recouer. But after warde left the londe to the Saxons as ye afterwarde ſhall here. For in that tyme

there was a paynem that was called Gormō
                        de / that was the kynges ſone Daufrices of the panems folke that hadde the reame after hys fader / & was kynge / ſauf he bequaue & yaue it to his broder. And ſayd that he wolde neuer be kynge / but yf that he myght gete and conquere a reame in a ſtraunge countree. For he was bolde & ſtronge of body. And of hym prophecyed Merlyn & ſayde / that heſholde be a wulf of the ſee. And he lette aſſemble paynems wythout nombre / & lete appareylle ſhyppes / & wente by many londes / & toke homages & feautees of many. And ſo he wente by the ſee & conquered many dyuerſe londes. So that he came in to Irlonde / & conquered that lond / that often tymes warred vpon. Brytons / and Brytons vpon them & oft wonne & oft loſt & yaue hoſtages to Brytons. And ſo they ſent to Gurmonde there that he was in Irlonde / that he ſhold come in to Brytayne and helpe them ayenſt ye Brytons / to helpe them to delyuer that londe of them / & they wolde hym holde gladly for theyr lord. For he was a paynem / and they were paynems & the Brytons were cryſtened. well ought he them for to helpe / ſo as they were all of one lawe. whā Gurmonde herde this prayer he haſted him as moche as he myght & arryued in Scotlonde / & came in to Northomberlonde there that the Saxons were dwellynge and they confermed the couenaūtes bytwene them that were made by othes & by hoſtages / for to bere hym true fay / & holde hym for lorde and paye to hym truage by the yere ¶Tho began the. Saxons and ye. Affricans to deſtroye robbe and brenne townes / & deſtroye all theng
                           •
                         in aſmoche as they myght & ſpared neyther man woman ne chylde lerned ne lewde / But all they ſlewe / & caſte downe townes caſtels & chirches / & ſo put they all the londe in grete deſtruccyon. And as ſoone as they myghte flee / they fledde thens as well poore as ryche / byſſhops / abbottes / chanons / & all other grete & ſmal / ſome in to lytell Brytayne / & ſome in to Cornewayle / all tho ye ſhyppes myghht haue.
                  
                  
                     ¶How the kynge. Gurmonde droue kyng Cortyf to Checheſtre / & ſlewe the Brytons / & thrugh crafte & engyne gate the ſame towne.
                     COrtyf the kyng fledde thens in to Checheſtre that tho was ſtronge / and there helde hym .xx. dayes / & this Gurmonde came and it beſyeged. But the cytee was ſo ſtronge that he myght not gete it by no maner of wyſe with engyne that they myght doo. Tho bethought they vpon a ſubtylte for to brenne the towne. They made engynes wyth glewe of nettes / & toke pecys of thunder & of fyre & bonde it to ſparowes feet & than lete them flee and they anōe flewe & lodged thē in ye towne ther yt theyr neſtis were / & in ſtackes & eueſynges of houſes / & ye fyre began to kyndle & brente all ye towne / And whan the. Brytons ſawe that in euery ſyde they hyed them out & fought / but anone they were ſlayne and dyſcomfyted / And whyle batayll dured the kynge pryuely hydde hym and ſtale awaye in to walys / & men wyſt neuer where he became / and ſoo was the towne of Checheſtre taken and deſtroyed. And after. Gurmonde wente and deſtroyed townes and cytees that neuer were after made ayen / as it is ſeen yet in many places of thys londe.
                  
                  
                     ¶How thys londe was called Englonde for the name of Engyſt / & how many kynges were made after in thys londe.
                     SO whan. Gurmonde had deſtroyed al the londe thrugh out: he yaue the londe to the Saxons: & anone they toke it with good wyll / for the Saxons longe tyme had deſyred it. For aſmoche as they wereof. Engiſtꝭ kynred that fyrſt had all the londe of. Brytayne & lete them be called. Englyſſmen: for by cauſe of Engiſtes name: & the lond they lete call Englonde in theyr langage: & the folke ben called Englyſhmen: for aſmoche as in thys tyme it was called Engiſtꝭ londe whan he had cōquered it of. Vortiger: that ſpouſed hys doughter But fro the tyme yt Brute came fyrſt in to Englonde: thys londe was called. Brytane: and the folke Brytons. But ſyth the tyme yt thys Gurmonde conquered it eftſones and yaue it vnto the. Saxons: they anone ryght chaūged the name as before is ſayde. And whan thys was done. Gurmonde paſſed ouer in to Fraū
                        ce: & there conquered many londes: & deſtroyed all criſten peple there that he came. And the Saxons dwelled in this londe and began faſt to enhabyte it at ther owne wyll. And they wolde haue made newe kyngis & lordes: but they myght neuer aſſent to haue only oo kynge for to be to them attendaunt / & therfore they made many kynges in dyuerſe ſhyres: as it was in Engiſtes tyme. The fyrſte kyngdome was Kente: & that othe. Southſexe: and the thyrde

weſtſex / the fourth Eeſtſex / & the fyfth Nothū
                        berlonde / and ye ſixth Eſtangle that is to ſaye Northfolke / and Southfolke and the ſeuenth Mercheryche / and that is the Erldoſte of Nycholl. Hūtyngdon. Herforde. Gloucetre. wynlcheſtre. wer wyke & Derby / and ſo departed all Englond in to .vii. partyes. ¶And after that it befell that tho kyngꝭ warred oft tymes togyder. And euer he that was ſtrongeſt toke hym that was febleſt / and ſoo it was longe tyme yt they had noo kynge crowned amonge theym / ne no cryſten man was tho amonge them / ne cryſtendome nather. But were paynems tyll that ſaynt Gregory was pope of: Rome / that had ſeen childern of the nacyon of Englonde in the cyte of Rome / that were wonder fayre creatures / & had grete wyll and deſyre theym to beholde. And axed of ye marchaūtes whens they were / and of what nacyon. And men tolde hym that they were of Englonde / and Inglyſſhe they were called / but they & all the people of Englonde were paynems: and byleued not vpon god. ¶Alas ſayde ſaynt Gregory: well maye they be called Englyſſhe: for they haue the vyſages of angels and therfore well ought they to be cryſtened. And for this cauſe ſaynt Gregory thereſente ſaynt. Auſtyn in to Englōde & .xl. good mē with hym that were of good lyf & holy men to preche & teche & to comuetre the Englyſſhe people & them to torne to god: & that was in the .vi. yere that ſaynt Gregory had be pope of Rome / that is to ſaye / ofter thyn carnacyon of our lorde Iheſu Cryſte .v.C.lxxxv. yeres as the Cronycle telleth.
                  
                  
                     ¶How ſaynt Auſtyn baptyſed and conuerted kynge Adelbryght and the byſſhoppes that he made his felowes.
                     AS ſaynt Auſtyn came fyrſte in to. Englonde / he arryuen in the yle of Tenet and ſo paſſed forth & came vnto Caunterbury and there ſoyourned. And kynge Adelbryght of Kent that was the lygnage of Engiſt goodly receyued ſaynt Auſtyn & hys felowes wyth moche honour / and them foūde all that them neded. And more ouer he yaue theym a fayre place / that now is called the abbay of. Shynt Auſtyn / in whiche place he lyth hym ſelf ſhryned. ¶This kynge Adelbryght was a good man & wyth good wylle herde ſaynt Auſtyns predycacyons / and yaue hym leue to preche thrughout all hys londe before ſayd of Kente / to torne and conuerte to hym all ye people that he myght. ¶It befelle ſoo after thorugh goddes grace / that in lytell tyme the kynge hymſelf was conuerted to god / and all hys peop of his londe were baptyſed. And in the meane whyle the peple torned them to god. ¶Saynt Auſtyn came to. Rocheſtre / & there he preched the worde of god. And the paynems therfore hym ſcorned / and caſte vpon hym reygh taylles / ſo that all his mantell was hanged full of theſe reygh tayles / and for more dyſpyte / they caſte vpon hym the guttes of reyghes & other fyſſhe. wherfore the good man Saynt Auſtyn was ſore anoyed and greued. And prayed to god that all tho chyldern of that cyte that ſholde be borne after warde / that is for to ſaye in the of Rocheſtre / myght haue taylles and ſoo they hadde And whan the kynger herde of this vengeaunce that was falle thrugh ſaynt Auſtyns prayer. He lete make an houſe in the honour of almyghty god / wherin wymmen ſholde be delyuered of theyr childern at the bryges ende / In the whiche hous yet wymmen of the cyte ben delyuerde of chylde. ¶whan that ſaynt Gregory hadde hrede tell how the Englyſſhe people were torned to god & comuerted he ſente vnto ſaynt. Auſtyn his pallyon by a b
                           •
                        ſſhop / that was called Paulin and made hym Prymate & Archebyſſhop of Englonde And ſente worde that he ſholde ordeyne & make dyſpoſynge the londe. And anone Auſtyn had the pallyon of the dygnyte of the Archebyſſhyp. He made two byſſhops of his felowes that came with hym fro Rome & one was called Mellite & he dwelled at London & that other was called Iuſtin that helde the dygnyte at. Rocheſtre. And this byſſhop Mellite tho went to preche in to Eſtſex and eryſtened the kynge of the countree that was called Sicwith that was kynge Adlebrytes coſyn hys ſyſters ſone. ¶Thys Iuſtyn wente to preche in Southſe
                           •
                         and torned moche of the people to god. And Saynt Auſtyn hymſelfe preched thorugh out Englonde.
                  
                  
                     ¶How ſaynt Auſtyn wente in to waels there the Brytons were / & how they wolde not beobedyent tothe. Archebyſſhop of Caūterbury.
                     SO whan all Englonde was cryſtened and torned to god / ſaynt Aſtuyn went in to that londe there that the Brytons were for to kepe them frome Englyſſhmen / that is▪
                        
to ſaye in to ways. And there he founde monkes & abbayes and .vii. byſſhops. For ye Brytons alwaye deſtroyed the cryſten people that ſaynt Auſtyn had conuerted. And he ſayde to the byſſhops that he was a Legate of Rome & Prymate of all. Englonde / & that they ſholde by all reaſon to hym be obedyenc & they ſayde they nolde / but to the. Archebyſſhop of Carlyon they wolde. They wolde neuer for noo maner thynge be obedyent to the Englyſſhe men For the Englyſſhemen they ſayde ben our aduerſaryes & our enmyes & haue dryuen vs out of our countree / & weben cryſten men & euer haue be. And the Englyſſhemen haue euer be paynems / but now of late that they ben conuerted. ¶Saynt Auſtyn of them myght haue none anſwere otherwyſe / but ſayd pertly that they wolde neuer them meke to hym / ne to the pope of Rome. And ſaynt Auſtyn torned ayen tho to kynge Adelbryght yt was kynge of Kent and tolde hym that hys folke wolde not be to no man obedyent / but to the. Archebyſſhop of Carlyon. And whan the kynge herde thys / he was ſore anoyed & ſayd that he wolde them deſtroye / and ſent to Elfryde kynge of Northunberlonde that was hys frende / that he ſholde come to hym with al the power that he myght and that he wolde mete hym at Leycetre / and fro thens they wolde go in to walys / and there deſtroye the Archebyſſhop of Carlyon / and all tho that had refuſed ſaynt Auſtyn
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Adelbryght and the kynge Elfryde ſlewe Brecinall that was a kynge of Brytons that helde the countree of Leycetre.
                     IT be tell ſoo that there was a kynge of Brytons that helde the countree of Leycetre and alle the countree aboute / hys name was Brecinall. And this Bryton herde telle that tho two Englyſſhe kynges wolde mete there at Leycetre for to goo in to walys. He lete ordeyne all the power that he had for to goo fyght with theſe two kynges / but lytel it auayled hym / for his folke that he had were ſlayne and hymſelf fledde / & loſte his londes for euer more. ¶And theſe two kynges Adelbryght & Elfryde dwelled a whyle at Leycetre / and departed the londe amonge them / and tooke homagꝭ and feautees of the folke of the countree And after they wente to warde walys and thot of walys herd telle of theſ comfyture that Breic
                           •
                        all had at Leycetre / and were wonder for adrad of tho two kyngeꝭ. And tooke and thoſe amonge them good men and hooly of hemytes monkes and preeſtes / & of other people grete plentye that wente bare foote and wulwarde for ta haue mercy of thes two kynges / but tho kynges were ſo ſterne & ſo wyked yt they wold neuer ſpeke to thē but them ſlewe euerychone Alas for ſorowe / for they ne ſpared them noomore than the wulfe dothe the ſhepe / but ſmot of theyr heedes euerychone / & ſo they were all martrd that to them came / that is to vnderſtande .v.C. & .xl. After they wente fro thens to Bangor for to ſlee all thoſe that ther myghte there fynde of the Brytons. And whan ye Brytouns herde that / they aſſembled and ordened all ther power for to fyght with thyem. Two was there a baron in walys that was called. Bledrik of Cornewayle that ſome tyme was lorde of Deuenſhyre but the kynge. ¶Adelbright had dreuen hym out in to walys and after there he yaue them batayll. And at that batayll was kynge Adelbright ſlayne and Efrydeſore woūded & forſoke the felde / & the mooſt partye of his people ſlayne. And Elfryde flede in to Northumberlonde that was his owne lō
                        de· ¶And after that the people of Leycetre ſhyre made with ſtrenght Cadewan yt was Brycinals ſone kynge of Leceytre / And he afterregned nobly and with grete honour.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Cade wan kynge of Leycetre & Elfryde kynge of Northumberlonde were frendes / & of the debate yt after was bytwene Edwyn & Cad walyn that were both theyr ſones
                     ANd after that thys bataylle was done yt Brytons aſſembled them and wente thens and came to Leycetre / and made there Caudewan that was Brecinals ſone kynge of Leycetre and of all the countree. Aed he toke homages & feautes of all the folke of the countree. And after that he aſſembled a grete hoſte and ſayde he wolde goo in to Northumberlonde / to deſtroy kynge Elfryde and ſle hym yf he myght. And whan he was come thether / frendes wente ſo bytwene them that they accorde them in this manere / that Elfryde ſholde holde all the londe fro Northumberlonde to Scotlonde. And Cadewan ſholde haue all the londe a thys ſyde Humbre to the Southe / and after they were good frendes all theyr lyf / and loued as they had ben brethern. ¶And thys Elryde had a ſone called Edwyn that helde all
                           •
                        
                        
the londe of Northūberlonde after his fathers dethe as his fader hadde holde all his lyf tyme ¶And Cadewā had another ſone called Cadwalyn that helde his faders londe as he it helde whyle he was alyue / and theſe loued as bretheren. And ye loue laſted betwyxt them but only two yere / & after began debat betwyxt them throughe a ſynple enuyous coſyn of Cadwalins. called Bryens / ſo yt they aſſembled a grete hoſte in bothe partyes. And at the laſte it be fell ye Cadwalin was dyſcūforted / & Edwen hym purſued & droue hym fro place to place ſo at the laſt he fledde in to Irelonde. And ye other deſtroyd & pylled his londe / and caſt downe caſtels & brente his maners / & departed all Cadwalins londe amonge his frendes. And longe tyme after came Cadwalen ayen fro Irlonde with a ſtronge pour / and in playne batayll ſlewe Edwyn & all his frendes / & namely tho yt with helde his londes by Edwyns yefte.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Oſwallde was ſlayne thoughe kynge Cadwalin and Peanda / and howe Oſwy that was ſaynte Oſwaldes broder regned after hym and ſlewe Peanda.
                     AS Edwyn was ſlayne. Offris his ſone vndertoke that warre ayenſte Cadwalin his came / ſo yt this Offris deyed durynge ye warre. And after ye dethe of this Offris tho regned a gentyl cryſten man that moche loued god almyghty yt had all the londe of Northumbrelonde by herytage / yt was called Oſwalde & he was kynge of all the londe. But for as moche as he was frende to Edwyn / and helde a grete parte of the londe of Cadwalin. This ſame cadwalyn warred vpon hym & droue hym to warde Scotlond. And whan Cadwalin ſawe that he wolde not abyde. Cadwalin wolde no lenger hym purſue / but toke ſome of his folke to Peanda his broder in lawe & prayed hym to purſue after Oſwalde / tyl that he were takē & ſlayne / and Cadwalin toruned home ayen. ¶whan Oſwalde herde theſe tydynges that Cadwalin tourned home ayen / he wolde no lē
                        ger flee / but abode Peanda & yaue hym batayll / and Peanda was dyſcomfort
                           •
                        e & fledde & came ayen to Cadwalyn & ſayde that he wolde neuer holde one fote of londe of hym / but yf ſo were that he wolde auenge hym of Oſwalde. ¶Cadwalin lete aſſemble a grete hoſte for to fyght with Oſwalde ſoo that he and Peanda came to Northumberlonde & yaue batayll vnto Oſwalde And in the ſame batayll was Oſwalde ſlayne & his heed ſmyten of / & after he was entered at the abbay of Berdenay in whiche place god hadde wrought for hym many a fayre myracle / bothe there and elles where. ¶And anone Oſwy his brother ſeaſed all the londe in to his honde that was this Oſwaldis And the folke of Northumberlonde loued him wonderly well / and helde hym for theyr lorde. But he had men of his kynne worthy ynough that wolde haue departed the londe / and they warred togyed well. And for aſmoche as they were not ſtronge ynoughe / they came to Peanda and prayed hym of helpe & ſocour. And behyght hym of ye lōde largely vpō this couenāt that he wold them gouerne & helpe / & counſeyl ¶Peanda herde theyr prayer & ſo ſpake with Cadwalyn / that he ſholde ordayne a grete hoſt and faſte ordeyned hym in to Northumberlonde for teyght with Oſwy. And Oſwy was a meke man / & moche loued peas & charyte and prayed Peanda of loue & peas and profe
                           •
                        ede hym of golde and ſyluer grete plentye. ¶And this Peanda was ſo proude yt he nolde graunt hym peas fo no maner thynge but for all thynge he wolde with hym fyght. S
                           •
                        o at the laſte there was ſette a daye of batayll. And Oſwy euer truſted vpon god and Peanda truſted tomoche vpon pryde and vpon his hoſte that he had. And to gyder they ſmote egerly but Peanda was anone dyſcomforted and ſlayne. And this was After the Incarnacyon of oure lorde Iheſu Cryſte .v.C.lv. yere And this Oſwy regned .xxviii. yere And a kynge that was called Oſwyne / that was Peandaes coſyn warred vpon hym and togyder fought / But Oſwy hadde the victory of Oſwyne. And Oſwyn was dyſcomforted and ſlalyne / and lyeth at Tynnemouth.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Cadwaldre that was Cadwalins ſone regned after his fader / and was the laſte kynge of Brytons.
                     AFter the deth of Cadwelin regned hys ſone Cudwaldre well and nobly. And his moder was ye ſyſter of Peanda. And whan he had regned .xii. yere / he felle in to a grete ſykeneſſe / & thenne was there a greate dyſcorde bytwene the lordes of the londe / that euery of them warred vpon other. And yet in that tyme there fell ſo grete derth & ſcarſyte of corn & other viteylles in this londe / that a man myghte

go .iii. or iiii. dayes fro towne to towne yt he ſholde not fynde to bye for golde ne ſyluer brede / wyne ne none other vitayle where wich a man myght lyue. But onely the people lyued by rotis of herbes / for other lyuynge had they none / ſo moche was it faylled all aboute / Fyſſhes / wylde beſtes / & all other thynge ſoo that yet to this myſauenture / there felle ſoo greate mortalyte and peſtelens amonge the people by the corrupcyon of the ayre that ye lyuynge people ſuffyſed not to burye the deed bodyes. For they deyed ſoo ſodenly / bothe grete and ſmalle lorde & ſeruaunt / in etynge goynge & ſpekynge they fell downe and deyed / ſo that neuer was herde of more ſodeyne deth amonge the people For he that wente for to burye the deed body / with the ſame deed body was buryed. And ſoo they that myght flee fledde & forſoke theyr londes and houhes / as welle for the grete hungre derth & ſcarſyte of corne & other vitayll / as for the grete mortalyte & peſtylence in the londe / & wente into other londes for to ſaue theyr lyues and lefte the londe all deſerte & waſt / ſo yt there was noman for to trauayle & tylthe the londe So that the londe was barayne of corne & all other fruytes for defawte of tyllyers / and this myſauenture dured .xi. yere and more that noman myght ere ne ſowe
                  
                  
                     ¶How Cadwaldre wente out of this londe in to lytell Brytayne.
                     CAdwaldre ſawe grete hungre mortalyte & peſtylence / and the londe all poore / & faylynge cornes ād other vytaylles / and his folke peryſſhed / & ſawe alſo the mooſte partye of his londe all waſted & voyde of people. He apparelled hym and his folke that were lefte alyue / and paſſede ouer in to lytell Brytayne with a lytell nauy vnto kynge Alayne that he moche loued / that was his coſyn and that his fader hadde moche loued in his tyme. And as they ſayled in the ſee / he made moche lamentacyon / and ſo dyde alle tho that were with hym and ſayde. (Dediſti nos domine tanquan
                           •
                         oues eſcarū. et in gentibus diſperſiſti nos)
                     ANd thenne began Cadwaldre to complayne hym to his folke pyteouſly and ſayd· Alas ſayd he / to vs wretches & caytyues is ſorowe for our grete ſynnys / the whiche we wolde not amende vs whyle we had ſpace / & now repentaunce is comen vpon vs throughe my ſauenture / whiche chaced vs out of oure reame and propre ſoyle. And out of the whiche ſomtyme Romayns. Becottes. Saxons / neyther Danys myght not exyle vs. ¶But what auaylleth it now to vs that before tyme / oft tymes haue goten many other londes / ſyth it ys not the wyll of god that we abyde and dwelle in our owne londe. God that is very Iuge yat all thynges knoweth before they ben done or made / he ſeeth that we wolde not ceſſe of oure ſynnes / and that our enmyes myghte not vs ne our lygnage exyle fro / and out of our reame He wolde that we amende vs of oure folyes and that we ſee our propre defautes.
                     And therfore hath ſhewed to vs wrathe / and woll chaſtyſe vs of our myſdedes. Syche that he doth vs with out batayll / or ſtrength of our enmyes / by grace companyes / wretcchedly to leue our reame & propre londe. ¶Torne ayen ne ye Romanys / torne agayne ye Scottes torne agayne ye Saxxons / torne agayne ye Fraū
                        ſoys. Now ſeweth to you Brytayne all deſerte the whiche your power myght neuer make deſerte / ne yet oure power hathe not put vs now in exyle But onely the power of the kynge allmyghty whom we haue often offended by our folyes / the whiche we wolde not leue vntyll he chaſtyced vs by dyuyne power ¶Amonge the worldes & lamentacyon that the kynge Cadwhldre made to his folke / they arryued ī lytell Brytayne / and came to kynge Alayne before ſayd ¶And the kynge receyued hym with grete Ioye / and made hym to be ſeruede wonder nobly. And there abode they longe tyme after ¶The Engleſſhe people that were left a lyue and were eſcaped the grete hungre and mortalyte / lyued in the beſt wyſe that they myght. And moche people ſprange and came of them ¶And they ſente in to Saxonye where that they were borne to ther frendes for men / wyemen / and chyldren / to reſtore the cytees with people and the townes that were all voyde of people / and for to laboure / traueyll and tylthe the erthe. ¶whan the Saxons herde theſe tydynges / they came in to ye londe wonder thyeke in grete companyes / and herborowed therſelfe in the countree all aboute where that they wolde / for they founde no man them for to lete ne withſtonde. And ſo they waxed & multeplyed gretely. And vſed the maners and cuſtomes of the countree wherof they were come. And they vſed alſo the lawes and the langages

and ſpeche of theyr owne londe that they came fro. And alſo they chaunged all the names of Cytyes / twones / caſtelles / & brought / & yaue them names and called as they nowe ben called And they helde the Counrees. Baronages & lordeſhyps in manere as the Brytons before tyme had compaſſed them / And amonge other grete companyes that came frome Germayne in to this londe / came the noble quene that was called Se
                           •
                        burga with men & wymmen without nombre· And arrayed in the coū
                        tree of Northumberlonde / and tooke the londe frome Ilbion vnto Cornewaylle for her & for her folke. For there was none that myght thē lette / for alle was deſolace & voyde of people / but it were a fewe poore Brytons that were lefte on mountayns & woddes vntyll that tyme. ¶And fro that tyme forthe loſte the Brytons this reame for all theyr dayes. And the Englyſſhe people begane to regne / and departed the lōde bytwene them. And they made many kynges aboute by dyuerſe partyes of the londe as here ben dyuyded. The fyrſt of weſteſexe / The ſecond
                           •
                         Merchenriche / The thyrde Eſtangle / the fourthe Kente / the fyfth Southſex. All thoſe regned in this londe after ye Cadwaldre was paſſed out of this londe / & dwelled in lytell Bryten with kynge Alayne his coſyn and true frende. And whan he had longe dwellede there / and had knowynge that the mortalyte and peſtelence was ouerpaſſed / & that the londe was replenyſſhed / ayen wyth people / he thought to torne ayen in to his londe And prayed kynge Alayne his coſyn of ſocour & helpe yt he myghte be reſtored ayen to his owoe propre reame and fyrſte dygnyte / And kynge Aleyne graunted hym his aſkynge. ¶Thenne dyde he appareylle hym to take his wayt and vyage in to this londe. And prayed god allmyghty deuoutly that he wolde make to hym demonſtracyon / yf his prayer to this londe were too hyme pleſaunt or none / for ayenſte the wyll of god allmyghty he wolde no thynge do. ¶whā he had thus deuoutly made his prayer / avoys fro heuen to hym ſayd. And hadde hym leue ye Iurney a waye in to Englonde / and that he ſholde goo to the pope of Rome for it was not the wyll of almyghty god yt the Brytons ſholde regne more in Brytane / ne neuer recouered it vnto the tyme of the prophecye that Marlyn ſayd before he fu
                           •
                        fylled. And that ſholde neuer be vnto ye tyme were come / that the relyques of his body ſhall be broughte fro Rome & tranſlated in to Brytayne / And whan the ralykes of other ſayntes that haue ben hedde for ye perſecucyon of the paynem folke ſhall be founde & openly ſhewed / thenn ſhalle they recouer theyr londe agayne / the whyche they haue ſoo longe tyme loſte throughe theyr deſertes. ¶whane Cadwaldre hadde herde this anſwere / he maruayled gretely and tolde it to the kynge Aleyne ¶Thene kynge Aleyne dyde ſende for the clergye of his londe / and made them to brynge the ſtoryes and prophecyes that Merlyn and Sybyll had ſayd in theyr prophcyes. And whan he knewe that the prophycye that Feſtom had prophecyed of the Egle. And other prophecyes accorded to the dyuyne aunſwere that Caddewalldre had herde. He counſelled hym & ryght faythfully deſyred hym to leue his people and his nauy / & ſubmytte hym to the dyſpocyſyon of god / and do all that the aungell had cōmaū
                        ded hym. ¶Thenye Cadwaldre called y
                           •
                        or his ſone and ymori his coſyn that was his ſyſters ſone / & ſayd to them. Taketh ſayde he my folke & my nauy that is here all redy / & paſſe into walys and be ye lordees of Brytons that no dyſhonoure come to them by interrupcyon of the Paynem folke for defaute of lordes. ¶And thene hymſelfe lefte his reame of Brytayne and his folke for euer more / and tooke his waye vnto the pope of Rome Sergius the whyche worſhypede hym moche / and ſo he was confeſſed / and toke penaunce for hys ſynnes. And he had not longe dwelled there that he ne deyed / the .xii. Kalendis in Maye 
                           •
                         the yere of grace .v.C.lxxii.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Offa was ſouerayne aboue all the kynges of Englonde / and how euery kynge warred vpon other.
                     IT befell ſo that all the kynges in that tyme that were in yu londe. as they of weſtſex. Marchenryche. Eſtangle / of kente / and of Southſex and of other coſtes eche warred vpon other And he that moſte myght toke the londe of hym that was mooſte febleſt. ¶But there was a kynge amonge them that was called Offa / that was ſaynte Oſwaldes brother. This Offa conquered all the kynges of ye londe / and regned all aboue them all. ¶And ſ
                           ••
                         gret was the yt warre in euery there bytwene

grekes / that no mā myght wyte how the lond wente. But abbottos pryours / & men of Relygyon wrote yt lyues & dedes of kynges / & how longe euery of theym regned & in what coūtre & in what manere euery kynge deyed / & of byſſhops alſo. And therof made grete bokys and lete calle them Cronycles. And the good kyng Alured had that booke in his warde. And lette brynge it vnto wyncheſtre / and lete it be faſte tacked to a pylar that men ſholde it not remeue / ne bere it thens / ſo that euery man ſholde it ſee & therupon loke For therin ben the lyues of all the kynges that euer were in Englonde.
                  
                  
                     ¶How the kynge of Northumberlonde Oſbryght forlaye the wyf of Buerne Bocarde thrugh ſtrength / and after this Buerne conquered the kyng with power and ſtrength.
                     ANd thus it befell in ye ſame tyme / that there was a kyng in Northumberlond 
                           •
                        e that was called Oſbryght / and ſoyourned atte yorke. ¶And this kynge wente hym vppon a daye in to a wood hym for to / dyſporte. And as he came ayen / he wente pryuely in to a good mannes houſe / that was called Buerne / and the good man of that place was gone that tyme to the ſee. ¶For oftentymes there he was wonte to ſpye theues and robbers that oftentymes were wonte to come in to the londe / to robbe / brenne / and ſlee. The lady that was Buernes wyfe was a wonder fayre woman. ¶And the kynge came vnto her whan that herhuſbode was abſente / and ſhe truſted none harme vnto the kynge / and welcomed hym with moche honour / and worthely hym ſerued in all thynge. ¶whan the kynge hadde eten / he tooke the lady by the honde and 
                           •
                        adde her in to a chambre and ſayde. He wolde ſpeke with her a counſeyll. And all the folke he made voyde fro the chambre / ſaue only the lady and he. But the lady wyſt not wherfore he it dyde / tyll that he had done alle hys wyll. And whan he hadde done this dede / He torned agayne to yorke. And the lady he lefte there ſore wepynge for the dede that the kynge to her had done. ¶And whan he
                           •
                         lorde was came home and ſawe her wepe and ſuche ſorowe and mornynge make / he axed of her what ſhe hadde done / and why ſhe made ſuche ſorowe. ¶Syre ſhe ſayde / ſubtylly and falſely the kynge Oſbryght
                           •
                         hathe doo me ſhame and vylanye ayeaſt my wyll. And tolde hym all the truthe how the kynge had 
                           •
                        orlayne her with ſtrengthe / wherfore ſhe ſayde ſhe hadde leuer to be deed than tolyue. ¶Fayre loue be ſtylle ſayde he / for ayenſt ſtrengthe febleneſſe is yltell worthe / and therfore of me ſhalte thou neuertheleſſe beloued and namely for thou haſt tolde me the treuthe. And yf almyghty god graūt to me my lyf I ſhall the aueng. ¶This Buerne was a grete man and a myghty lorde / and was well beloued and grete frendes hadde. And lete ſende for the gretteſt lordes of the londe / and to them made hes complaynte of the deſpyte / that the kynge to hym hadde done and ſayde / he wolde be auenged how euer yt were. And all hys frendes counſeylled hym that he ſholde goo vnto yorke there that the kynge was hym to defye. And Buerne toke his mayne and came to the kynge. whan the kynge hym ſawe / he called hym curtouſly Buerne by name. And Buerne hym anſwerred to hym ſayde. Syre I you defye / and yelde vp feautes homages and londes / and as moche as I haue holden of you / & fro this tyme for warde I wyll neuer of the nothynge holde. And ſoo he departed fro the kynge without more ſpeche or ony abydynge and tooke leue of his frendes and went in to Denmarke / and playned to the kynge Godern / & tolde hym of the deſpyte of that the kynge Oſbryght to hym hadde donne of his wyfe. And prayed hym of ſocour / and helpe hym for to auenge. ¶whan kynge Godern of Denmarke and the danys hadde herde the complaynt of thys Buerne / and the prayer that he badde / they were ryght wonder glasde in theyr hertes / for as moche as they myght fynde a cauſe for to goo in to Englonde for to warree vpon Engleſſhe men / and for to aenge Buerne of the deſpyte that the kyng Oſbryght hadde done vnto hys wyf. And for as moche as Buerne was ſybbe v
                           •
                        to the kynge of Denmarke / anone they lette ordeyne a greate hoſte of men and lete ordeyne theym ſhyppes / and as moche as theym nede for to haue to that vyage. And whan all the hoſt was redy / the kyng made his two brethern chyef capytayns / that were noble knyghtes of body & alſo bolde. That one was called Hunga / & that other Hubba.
                  
                  
                     ¶How the Danys tooke yorke / and ſlewe the kynge Oſbrygt / and ſoone after ſlewe kynge Eelle.
                     
                        
                        
Sall was redy yt two brethern toke leue ofthe kynge Godren. and wente towarde the ſee for to paſſe
                           •
                         ouer in to Inglonde as faſt as they myght ſpede Now is Buerne ſo welle comforted and faſte hyed hym wyth the Danys that they ben arryued in the North coūtre & comen thrugh out Holdernes / and deſtroyed all the countree and brenned townes / & robbed folke / and ſlewe all that they myght take tyll that they came vnto yorke. And whan kyng Oſbryght ſawe them come / He tooke alle hys people that he had with hym & came out of the cytee & faught with them / but noo foyſon he ne hadde ayenſt them / and moche of the people that there was were ſlayne on bothe partyas. And kynge Oſbryght hym ſelf there was ſlayne / and the cyte anene was take and the Danys wente in. ¶And there was alſo an other kynge in Northumberlonde / that Buernes frendes hadde thoſe & helde hym for kynge / a man that was called Elle / for as moche as they wolde not to kynge Oſbryght be attendan̄t / for the deſpyte that he had done vnto Buerne theyr coſyn. ¶It befell thus that the kyng Elle was gone in to the wood hym for to dyoſporte & of the venyſon ſome he had taken. And as he ſate in the wood at meete / to a knyght he ſayde. we ha
                           •
                         wel ſpedde and moche venyſon taken. ¶And with that worde came in a man & to hym ſayd yf yeſo moche of venyſon haue wonne / an hodred tymes ſo moche more ther ayenſt haue ye loſte. For all thys coūtree the Danys haue goten / and taken the Cytee of yorke / and ayenſt you ſhall it holde / that neuer ye ſhalcome therin / and for ſoo moche they haue ſlayne kynge Oſbryght. whan kynge Elle herde theſe wordes / he lete aſſemble all the folke of he coūtree and ordeyned all the power that he myght haue and wolde haue goten the towne of yorke with ſtrength. But the Danys came out anone & yaue hym a ſtrōge batayll. And ſelwe the kyng Elle & the mooſt parte of ye peple yt he had brought with hym. ¶And the ſame place there they were ſlayne / ſhalle euer more be called Elle crofte / and that place is a lytell from yorke. ¶And the reſted the Danys neuer tyl that they hadde conquered all Northumberlonde. And in that countree they made wardeynes / and wente further in to the londe / and tooke Notyngham. And there they abode all ye wynter / and dyed all the ſorowe that they myght ¶And after whan Somer tyme came they remeued frome Notyngham and came in to Nicholl and Lyndeſey / and to Holonde. For noo man myght them wythſtande / ſoo moche power and ſtrengthe they had
                  
                  
                     How ſaynt Edmōde the kynge was Martyred
                     
                        
ANd ſoo ferre hadde the Danys paſſed frome / countree to countree. and euer more brynnynge and robbynge and deſtroyenge al that they myght tylle they came vnto / Tetſtforede. ¶
                           •
                        nd in that coū
                        tree they founde a Cryſten kynge / that moche loued god and hys werkes that was called Edmonde. And he was a kynge of Norfolke and Southfolke ¶Thys ſaynt Edmonde kynge ordeyned as moche folke as he myghte / and foughte wyth the Danys / but he and his folke were dyſcomfyted / And the kynge hymſelfe dryuen vnto the caſtell of F
                           •
                        amelynham. And the Danys hym purſhewed / & came vnto ye ſame caſtell / ¶And whan kynge Edmonde ſawe that the caſtell myghte not them withſtande he came ayenſte theym / wyth whome the Danys fyrſte dyde ſpeke. And anone they a
                           •
                        ed of hym where kynge Edmonde was.
                     ¶How forſothe ſayde he whan I was in the caſtell / there was the hyng / and whan I wente out of the caſtell he went out alſo / and whether he ſhalle eſcape or deye / atte goddes wyll muſte it all be. ¶whan ſaynt Edmonde hadde named god / by that worde wyſte they well that it was hym ſelf· And anone Hubba & Hū
                        gar toke hym & ſayd / that he ſholde god forſake & all cryſten lawes / as many other had done hym before· ¶And ſaynt Edmonde ſayde that he wolde neuer / but rather he wolde ſuffre dethe for goddes loue and his lawes to.
                     ¶Tho toke they kynge Edmonde and bonde hym vnto a tree / & made theyr archers to ſhote at hym with arowes / tyll that his body ſty
                           •
                        
                        ked as fulle of arowes as an orchen is fulle of pryckes. But for all the payne that they hym dyde he wolde neuer god for ſake. And in the ſame payne / and torment he deydd / and betoke

his ſoule vnto almyghty god. ¶And whan they ſawe that he was dede / they ſmote of his heed. ¶And of this manere as ye haue herde was ſaynt Edmonde martred.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Hubba and Hungar toke the towne of Redynge
                     SO whan Saynt Edmonde was martred. Hungar and Hubba yede thens wyth all the Danys vnto Redynge. & as they wente thyderwarde they brente townes and tyees / & ſlewe all cryſten pele yt woldē opnote forſake hod / & caſte downe chyrche & came to Redynge & toke the towne & there helde them tyll that the kynge Edelf of weſtſex came thyther with all his power for to take the townes Tho came out the Danys for to yeue batayll to Edelf / & at that batayll was ſlayne an erle of the Danys that was called Sidrak. Vpon the morowe came kynge Eldred and hys brother Alured wyth a ſtronge power and a grete hoſte. And the kynge Edelf came agayne that had foughten the daye before to that bataylle And the Danys tho cam out for to fyght wyth theym / and the bataylle was wonder ſtronge For many a man was there ſlayne & the Danys that daye had the vyctorye / & the kyng Eldred & hys brother Alared that daye were dyſcomfyted. ¶But the fourth daye after warde the Danys & the Englyſſhe fought tohyder an other tyme vpon Elkedene / & there was ſlayne a kynge of Denmarke that was called Rafin and foure erles of grete power. And that daye had the Danys ſhame / for they were dryuen vnto Engilfelde. ¶And the .xv. day after the Danys & the Englyſſhe men fought an ather tyme at Rafynge & there were the Englyſſhemen dyſcomfyted / & from thens a dane yt was called Roynt wente to redynge with his hoſte and deſtroyed all that he myght take. And kinge Eldred faught wyth hym / but he was woū
                        ded ſore wherfore he deyed / and he regned but .v. yere / and lyeth at womborn.
                  
                  
                     ¶Circa annū dm̄ .iii.C.xlix.
                     
                        LEo the fyrſt was Emperour after Marcianus .xvii. yere. In hys tyme were the Ragacyon dayes ordeyned afore ye Aſcenſyon of ſaynt Marmer byſſhop of Vyenne. ¶The pope of Rome at that tyme hyght Leo a noble clerke / & with hym had many clerkes. ¶Hellar us was pope after Leo .vii. yere This mā ordeyned yt no byſſhop ſholde ordeyne hys ſucceſſary) vt pꝪ .viii.ix.i. ¶Simpliciꝰ was pope after hym / whyche ordeyned that noo clerke ſholde take noo garment to be clothed in after the ſeculer maner of a laye man / by the reaſon of his offyce or of his benefyce. ¶zeno was Emperour after. Leo .xv. yere / and thys man was an heretyke and cruell ayenſt criſtē men. And in this mānes dayes the bodyes of ſaynt Mathewe the Euangelyſt & ſaynt Barnaby were foūde / & with them the goſpell that ſaynt Mathewe wrote. ¶Aboute this tyme there was a certayne comyn womā bare .vii: chyldern at on byrth / of the whyche one was made after kynge of Lombardye. ¶Felix the thyrde was pope after Symplicius thre yere and .viii. monethes. This man ordeyned that reſpyte ſholde be yeuen to a man that was accuſed that he myght auyſe hym how heſhlode anſwere And that the Iuges and the accuſers ſholde be ſuche / and that they ſholde take alle ſuſpeccyon and ſpytte. ¶Gelaſius a Romayne was pope after Felix .v. yere Thys man ordeyned the Canon of the maſſe. with the Preface / ympnes / tractes / oryſons / as ſaynt Ambroſe made them / and that ordres ſholde be yeuen foure tymes in the yere. ¶Anaſtaſiꝰ was Emperour after zeno .xxvii. yere / & he was a curſed man & an heretyke / and hateful to god and man. And he was ſlayne with lyghtuynge
                           •
                         And in hys tyme deyed ſaynt Patryke the fyrſte byſſhop of· Irlonde / in the .C.xxii. yere of his aege. And his felowe was ye abbot of Columba and ſaynt Brygyda whom ſaynt Patryk made a Nonne And they were buryed in one tombe / and att dyuers tymes and thys ys the Epitaphi (Hii tres ī gelido: cumulo tumulantur in vno. Brigida patricius: at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         columba pius) ¶Anaſtaſius a Romayne was pope after Gelaſyus two yere and thre monethes. The whyche ordeyned that no preſt for wrath ne hate ſholde leue of to ſaye his dyuyne ſeruyce in the chyrche / excepte the maſſe. ¶And he curſyd themperour Anaſtaſius for he was an heretyke / and yt ys wryten of hym / that afterwarde he torned for drede to the opynyon of the emperour. And he is called ye ſeconde euyll famed pope yt is in (Catholico pontificū) And afore hym was Liberius famed in hereſye.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno dm̄ .iiii.C.lxxxiiii.
                     
                        SIinachus was pope after hym .xv. yere / and with hym was ordeyned an other pope that was called Laurencius / and betwext them was a grete dyſcencyon. And they bothe put them to the Iugemente of Theodoria the kynge and he Iuged that he that was fyrſte ordened and that mooſt men of the chyrche helde with ſholde be pope. And Symachꝰ preualid the whiche loned the chyrche and pore men and for Paſchalius the deaken Cardynal helde ayenſt Symachus with the parte of Laurence to his dethe Therfore he was put to the paynes of purgatori / to kepe the batthes after his dethe / as Gregory ſayth in his boke of Dyalogis. This man ordeyned that) Gloria in excelſis) ſholde be ſayd euery Sondaye and feeſtes of martyrs.
                  
                  
                     ¶Nota. ¶That Englonde was longe tyme Cryſtened afore Fraunce.
                     CLodianus the fyrſte Cryſten kynge of Fraunce / was thys ſame thyme baptyſed of ſaynt Remigio / & he hadde a cryſtyn woman to his wyf / and ſhe meued hym many tymes to the fayth & ſayd. He ſholde be fortunable & victoryous yf he wold torne / & ſo he was and neuer afore. ¶Hornuſda was pope after Synachus .ix. yere. This man was of grete mercy and almeſſe to poore men / & ornamentis he gaue many to chyrches. And here conſyled ye Grekes / yt whiche were curſed for theyr hereſye. ¶Iuſtinus was emperour after Anaſtaſaſius· And he regned ix. yere & was a very cryſten man / & all that euer themperour Anaſtaſius had done ayeuſt the chyrche / he reuoked / and obeyed the pope Hornuſda / & called ayen the byſſhops that were exyled be his prede ceſſours. ¶Priſcanꝰ gramaticꝰ was this tyme. And this yere the whiche is the .lxxi. fro the comynge of the Saxons / began the kyngdom of weſt Saxon / and Cerdico was kyng ¶Iohānes was pope after Hornuſda thre yere & .ix. montches. & Theodocius the kyng of ytaly an heretyke toke the pope with other Senatours & ſente them to the Emperour Iuſtinus / determynynge yt & he wolde not lette the heretykes be in peas he ſholde ſlete all cryſten folke in ytaly. And after he toke pope Iohn̄ & Simachū patriciū & Boyclū the Senatours & ſlewe them in pryſon. But Boys defended hym by ye reaſon of thauctoryte of the Senatours / & he ſent hym to ye cyte of Papy for perpetuell exyle / where he made the boke De conſolatiōe philoſophie And at the laſt the coūtrie of Mediolanen̄ he cauſed Boys throte to be cutte / and ſo he deyed. ¶Felix pope ſuccedded Iohn̄ foure yere. This man cōmaunde yt ſyke men ſholde be aneled for the deth / but cryſt ordeyned ye fyrſt. ¶Iuſtinianꝰ was Emperour xxxviii. yere / this man drewe the lawe of the Romayns out of almooſt .ii.M. bookes. & .iii.C. verſes ouer longe & accordynge in to oo volumen of .xii. bookes & called it Iuſtinian. He made alſo the Digeſtes & deuyded thē in to .iii. bokys. ¶Bonifaciꝰ the ſeconde was pope after Felix two yere / and lytel of hym is wryten. ¶Iohānes the ſeconde was pope after Bonifaciꝰ / & this man had a grete ſtryf with Iuſtinianꝰ themperour / whether ye cryſt was of .ii. natures or one. The pope ſayd he had two natures. One of god & an other of man. T
                           •
                        e emperour ſayd / other cōſente to vs / or thou 
                           •
                        hat go in to perpetuell exyle. The pope anſwered I deſyre to come to Iuſtilianus the mooſt c
                           •
                        iſten Emperour / but as me ſemeth I haue foū
                        de Dyocleſyan the perſecutour of cryſten man But certaynly I drede not thy malyce / Ne I fere not thy threthynges. Thenne the Emperour meked hymſlef & felle downe to the groū
                        de / and aſked mercy and abſolucyon.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno dm̄ .v.C.xxxiiii.
                     AGapitus a confeſſour was pope after Iohn̄ two yere / this Agapitus torned Iuſtimanus fro the errour fully of the heretykes. This man ordeyned that proceſſyōs ſholde be done the Sondayes and thenne he dyed arte Conſtantynoble. & Siluerius a martyr was pope after this man thre yere. He was exyled fro cryſten fayth / and ſlayne by the proctour of Theodory. For he wolde not reſtore ye byſſhop of Athenes an heretyke to his benefyte ayē. ¶Virgiliꝰ was pope after hym .xviii. yere. And he entred euyll to his benefyte / but he gouerned hym well. And he ſuffred his perſecucyon pacyently. ¶And he was exyled fro Rome. And at the laſte after grete paſſyōs of Theodory in Conſtantynople deyed. ¶Synodus quatra conſtantinopolitana cō
                        tra theodorū & o
                           ••
                        s hereticos alios fuic iſto tē
                        pore. Iſta ſynodꝰ dampnauit hereſim theodori 
                           •
                         Qui dixit alium eſſe deū verū. & aliū criſtū. Et qd beata virgo non ſit dei genitrix. ſed hominis tantū ¶Pelagius was pope after Vigilius

foure yere and .x. monethes: This man ordeyned that heretykes Sciſmatykes & Rennegates / ſholde be punyſſhed by the ſeculer power. ¶Iohannes the thyrde was pope after this man .xiii. yere. Of thys man lytell is wryten / but that he reſtored the chyrcheyerde of ye appoſtles Philyp and Iacob. ¶Iuſtinus the ſeconde after Iuſtinian was Emperour .xi. yere. This man dyſpyſed poore men He robbed ye Senatours. He was yeuen to all coueytouſneſſe / ſo that he made cheſtes of yron / for to kepe his moyneye in. Thenne anone he felle in hereſye / & wexed out of his mynde. ¶And thenne was choſe Tyberyus a good man for to gouerne the comyn people. ¶Tyberius ye ſeconde was Emperour afteſt Iuſtinus .vii. yere. Thys man was a vertuous man. He yaue Innumerable good to poore men In ſo moche many tymes yt hys wyf chydde wyth hym and ſayd that he caſt awaye the goodes of the Empyre as ſtones. And he anſwered ayen & ſayde. I truſte in god that our cheſtes ſhall neuer lacke of moneye / and we put treſour in to heuen. ¶And vpon a certayne daye whan he went by his palys at Conſtantynople / he ſaw in the mar
                           •
                        yll pament a croſſe grauen / And thought ye ſholde not be troden vppon & commaūded that ſtone to be left vp. For the croſſe ought to be put in the hertes of faythfull men and there he founde Ineſtymable treſoure of golde. This man ſubdued Herſes / and deyed blyſſydly. ¶Benedictus was pope after Iohanes foure yere: This man ſuffred grete perſecucyon of hungre peſtelence and enmyes. Thys man brought many a thouſande quarter whete from Egypte / whan Rome was beſyeged by kynge Albanack / and almooſt loſte for vytayll. wherfore they wrote on his graue this Epitaphi. ¶Magna tuis monimenta pater benedycte re iquis: virtutum tītulus et decus at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         dolor ¶Pelagius was Emperour after Benedictus .v. yere. In his tyme Rome was beſyged by the Lombardes / and lytell he dyde in his dayes. ¶Mauricius was Emperour after Tyberyꝰ .xxi. yere. Thys man was a very cryſten man and ſubdued Perſas and Armenyas / and in the later ende of hys dayes he dyſcorded with ſaynt Gregory and entended to haue ſlayne hym. And then̄e appered a man in Rome clothed a in relygyous habyte / holdynge a naked ſwerde in hys honde / and cryed aboute the Cyte in this wyſe. The Emperour ſhall be deſtroyed. The whiche the emperour herde / and he corrected hym ſelf of hys treſpaas and prayed to god to withdrawe hys ſentence. To whom our lorde apperyd in hys ſlepe & ſayde. wyll thou that I ſpare the now or ī tyme to come. And he was a louer of wretches / and ſayde / yeue me here my rewarde. Then̄e was he Emperour after many a deye And whan he ſholde haue corrected hys knyȝtes for the extorcyon that they dyd / they aſked hym why yt he wolde not paye them theyr wages. And ſo they fell at varyaunce / and choſe Foka for to be Emperour and ſlewe him and his thre ſones. ¶This tyme ſaynt Auſtyn came in to Englonde and ordeyned two Archebyſſhops that is to ſaye of London / & of yorke by the commaundement of ſaynt Gregory. ¶And remembre that many tymes is made mēcyon of dyuers regyons & coūtrees / that of tyme they haue be torned to ye fayth For alway the fayth abode not in them for dyuers cauſes Soo it is of Englonde. Fraunce. Perſia. Iewery. And in this thynge Rome was pryueleged / for the fayth of Peter neuer fayled. ¶Focas was Emperoor after Maurici hys mayſter / whome he and other ſlewe. And by cauſe he began euyl he ended nought. For in his dayes the Romayns faught ſtrongely ayenſt the Perſees / and the Romayns were dyſcōfyted and loſte many a prouynce. And at the laſt he was ouercome & ſlayne of Heraclius. For as he dyde vnto other men / ſo he was done vnto.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno dm̄ .v.C.lxxxiiii.
                     GRegory the fyrſte a Romayne & amonke was pope after Pelagyus .xiii. yere. Thys man was called Gregoryꝰ magnus for many thyngꝭ yt he exceded in: He paſſed other men in power / in ryches / in vertue / in noblyneſſe / in wyſdome / in holyneſſe / in fame / & in experyence. & vnder this man the euyl thyngꝭ of curſydneſſe paſſyd were ſeſſed. & many a nobled boke he worte to the Incomparaple profyte of all holy chyrche / He was one of the pryncypall doctours of all the foure doctours of ye chirche / This man forſoth alone with ſaynt Fabyan after ſaynt Peter / was choſen of god in all the ordres of the popes of Rome / Many thynges he ordeyned in the chirche / as is ſhewed in hys regyſtre (Deus in adyutoryū) for to be afore the begynnygge of ye houres he cō
                        maunded

to be ſayd. He renewed & made all ye offycers of the churche in a fayre & a more compendyous manere / the whiche abydeth yet vnto this daye / & is called Gregorianū. & ſhortly for to conclude on this holy man / mānes tonge cannot expreſſe lyghtly ye louynges of this man what in wrytynges / & alſo in example of vertuous dedes. & Saninianus was pope after Gregory one yere & .v monethes This mā ordeyned tyngynge of belles at the houres of the daye / but this man bachyted ſaynt Gregory for hys lyberalyte that he had to poore men & thought he ſpe ſaynt Gregory rebuked hym thryes for it. And the four the tyme he laye in his bedde / and thought ſaynt Gregory ſmote hym on the heed / & he waked and deyed anoe This was the thyrde pope amonge the popes the whyche is noted to deye a dredefull dethe ¶B
                           ••
                        facyus the thyrde was pope after Saniniamꝰ .viii. monethes. He ordeyned yt none but whyte clothes ſholde be put vpon the awter· ¶Bonifacius the fourth was pope foure yere and ·viii. monethes / this man purchaſed of the Emperour Focas the chyrche of ſaynte Peter of Rome ſholde be the heed of al the chirche in the worlde. For afore Conſtantynople was the heed chirche. Alſo he gate lycēce yt the chyrche called Panton the whyche was dedy
                        
                           •
                        ate to the honoure of Neptunꝰ and other fals goddes / where cryſten men many tymes were ſlayne of deuylles / myght be dedicate to ye worſhyp of all ſayntes in heuen. This man ordeyned that monkes myghte vſe the offyce of prethynge / cryſtenynge / and confeſſynge.
                     ¶Heracliꝰ was Emperour after Focas .xiii. yere. And in the thyrde yere of his regne. Coſdras the kynge of Perſe brente Iheruſalem & other worſhypfull places. zachary the patryarke with other moche people he toke in captyuyte The parte of the hooly croſſe / the whiche Eleyne lefte there he toke with hym in to his countree. But the .xii. yere of Heraclius. Coſdras was ſlayne of Heraclyus and the croſſe was brought ayen / the people were delyuered. And whan Heraclius wold haue entred the cytee proudely / the yates of the cyte by power of god ſhytte therſelf / and the Emperour meked hym to god aboue & the yates opened. And thē
                        ne was the feſte of the exaltacyon of the croſſe made. ¶Deus dedit was pope after Bonifacius thre yere / this was an hooly man. For on a certayne daye whan he kyſſed a lyppre / anone the leppre was hole. ¶This tyme a Cyteyzin of London thrugh ye mocyon of Ethelbryghte buylded a chyrche of ſaynte Peter in the weſt parte of London / in a place that was called Thorneye.
                  
                  
                     ¶Circa annū dn̄i .vi.C.xliiii.
                     BOnyfacyus the fyfthe was pope after Deus dedit fyue yere. The whiche ordened that noman ſholde be taken out of the chiccheyarde. And lytell elles of hym is wryteu.
                  
                  
                     ¶Nota Machomitum.
                     ¶Machomite the duke of Sarraſyns and Turkes was this tyme. And he was ye dyſſeyuer of all the worlde / a faulſe profete / ye meſſenger of the deuyll. The forgooer of antecryſt ye fulfyller of herecye / & of all fals men the meruaylleſt· Of whome the dominacyon thus began· ¶There was a certayne famous clerke at Rome and / coude not ſpede in his maters yt deſyred to haue ſpede in. Thene he recedde frō Rome ouer the ſee and procured many a man to haue gone with hym. Amonge whome was this Machomyte a grete man of wytte. And this clerke promyſed hym to make hym duke of the coūtree yf he wolde be gyded after hym ¶There he nouryſſed a douue / and put alle the corne that ye douue ete in Machom
                           •
                         ee
                           •
                        e and ſo this douue had neuer noo meete but in his eere The foreſayd clerke on a daye called the people & meued thē to theſe ſuche a p
                           ••
                        nce as the holy goſt wold ſhewe to them in lykeneſſe of a douue. And anone this clerke ſecretely lete flee this douue / the whiche after his olde cuſtome that he wonte to / fell anone to ye ſholdyr of Machomyte & put his bylle in his eere. And the people ſawe this / anone he was choſē duke of that people of Coroſame / he ſayd that he was the very prophete of god ¶Thenne he made a boke of his lawe that was called Alkaron. But he dyde it by Informacyon of thre of his mayſters. To whome the deuyl minyſtred the autoryte and the connynge. ¶The fyrſte mayſter was a Iewe a grete Aſtronomyer & a Nygramancer. The ſeconde was Iohn̄ de Anthiochia. The thurde was Sergius an herytyke. And theſe thre made an vngracyous lawe and an vnhappy. ¶And what ſomeuer was harde of beleue and noyous to doo / they lefte that out of the lawe / and they put that thynge in the lawe / the whiche the worldly men were

proue and redy to do. That ys to ſaye. Glotony / Lethery / repyne / and ſuche other. And alſo thys Machomyte ordeyned that a man ſholde haue as many wyues as he myght occupye and fynde / and refuſe them twyes or thryes / or foure tymes / and take them agayye / & many meruayllous & fals thinges ht made in hys lawe / the whiche were to longe to reherce here But they be playne in his booke of. Alkaron· And euer he wrote in hys boke / that our lorde ſpake to. Machomyte hys prophete / ſayenge on this wyſe / or on this. ¶Thus by hys falſe meanes he dyſceyued the people. And whan his mayſters & he had made this that was ſoo delectable. He wrote it in a boke with letters of golde· And alſo he nouryſſhed a myghty camell ſecretly in a pryue place / & alonly wyth ye hondes of. Machomyte was alwaye fedde / & there pryuely he tyed this boke of the law that he had made about the camels necke \ and put this camel forth on a tyme in to the felde afore daye. And thys camell Ioyed in hys lyberte for he was neuer loſe afore. And he wolde ſuffre noo man to come and touche hym. And ſo there was a grete fame of ſuche a camell / and the people ranne to ſee hym. Amonge whome was this Machomyte. But whan the camell ſawe hym that had fedde hym al waye. Anone he ranne vnto hym. And he had taught this camell afore tyme to falle downe on his knees & lycke his hondes. And ſo he dyd afore all that people. The people thenne cryed & ſayde / that there was a very enſample yt he was the true prophete of god. ¶Thenne they prayed Machomyte to open that holy boke with hys holy hondes / the whiche was ſent from heuen euer more to be kepte. In ye whiche boke is ſhewed how the peple ſhail worſhyp god. ¶And Machomyte ſayd / this boke was wryten wyth aū
                        gels honde / Soo by theſe fals meanes / he torned to his lawe all the londe of. Perſe / and all the Eeſt Imperyall agaynſte. Heraclium the Emperour· And he occupyed vnto the ende of Ale
                           •
                        dndre and Egypt. Libya. Arabya and Siria. Thenne after he enfected alle Affrycam. And but the grace of god wythſtode hym / He had enfected all Spayne and Fraunce. And many other thynges he dyde whyche were to moche to wryte in this boke.
                     COnſtantyne the thyrde / the ſone of Heraclii was Empour .xxvii. yere. Thys Conſtantyne was a grete tyraunt & a curſyd man / and an heretyke. Fals / ſubtyll / and odyous to cryſten men. Ne he gaaf no place to pope. Mertyne / & he reyſed a grete hoſte agaynſt the Lombardes. And there he loſte the felde / & fledde vnto Rome. And honourably was receyued of the pope Viteliianus / & other of the the cyte. And he rewarded not them lyke after theyr merytes as a prynce ſholde haue done. But vſed forth tyrannye and hereſye. wherfore at the laſt he was ſlayne of his owne knyghtes in a bath / the whyche wolde no lenger ſuffre his tyraunye. And ſo he wretchedly lyued / and deyed vnhappely. ¶Martinus the fyrſt was pope after Theodorum .vi. yere. Thys Martynus was a very holy man / & 
                           •
                        rongely ſtroue for the fayth of god And wh
                           •
                        n 
                           •
                        e 
                           •
                        ge maſſe oon a certayne daye a
                           •
                         the 
                           〈◊〉
                         / there purſewed hym to ſlee▪ him a man yt was called Spataryus of Olymphe. And whan he wolde haue ſmyten hym / he was blynde ſodaynly. This ſame man called a Synody in the Cyte of Rome: and dampned Syrum. Alexandrun Sergium. Pyrum: and Paulum heretykes. wherfore. Conſtantyne the Emperour exyled hym: and he deyed a ſaynt. ¶Eugemꝰ a Romayne was pope after Martyne almooſt thre yere: and was an holy man: but of hym lytell actes is wryten. ¶Vitellianus was pope after hym .xiiii. yere. Thys man made the ſonge that the. Romayns vſe: And accorded it alſo with the orgayns. And he alſo had the grace of the emperour: the whiche was worth wyth his predeceſſours. Neuertheleſſe after warde he ſtode not ī his concorde. Ne hetherto I coude not fynde that euer the chyrche of Rome. hadde fully after the dethe of. Conſtantyne the myghty lordſhyp of the cyte and of other the whiche he yaue to the chyrche.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno dm̄ .vi.C.xliiii.
                     ADeodatus a. Romayne was pope after Vitellianus foure yere / and in his dayes was tranſlated the body of ſaynt Benedictus / with the body of ſaynt Scolaſtica his ſyſter fro the hylle of Caſſyn vnto ye monuſterye of Floriecens nyghe Aurelian. ¶Conſtā
                        tyne the fourthe was Emperour after hys fader Conſtantyne the curſyd man. Thys Conſtantyne was a good mā and hated heretyk 
                           •
                         ouer all thynge. The chirche he repeyred / and grace he recounſyled agayne to the chyrche 
                           •
                        
                        
come & he with ye pope gadred togyder the .vi. generall Synodus in ye whiche was graūted to preſtes of Grece / for to vſe theyr leyfull wyues / & to the preeſtes of ye Eeſt for cauſe of grete he
                           •
                        e / but not to thoſe of the weſt party by no meanes For they 
                           〈…〉
                        ytted chaſtyte in ye tyme of ſaynt Gregory. And euery man may auertyſe and prondre how moche the goodnes of a prynce is wrothe / to the quyete ſtate of ye chyrche / & to the promocyon of the fayth / and alſo the contrary / how moche the malyce of a prince hurteth that thynge. Theſe two Conſtanyns the fader and the ſone ſhewed openly. For in the faders dayes the chirche neuer had reſt and in ye ſones tyme it was quyete. yet neuertheles our lord ſuffred the Sarraſyns and the Bulgars to entre in thys londe / that he them myght not wyth ſtande / but that he made hys peas with them / & payed to them yerely a truage / ſo nyghtely preuaylled that curſyd ſecte of Machomyte / and after he deyed bleſſydly. ¶Nota. ¶That there were .vi. generall Synodus / & mooſt pryncypall of the whyche the auctoryte is equall to ye goſpell for ye truth of the goſpell is declared by them ayenſt the .vi. pryncypall hereſyes the whyche ſtrongely trowbled the chirche for the ſubtyltee of theſe heretykes to dyſceyue ſymple men. ¶Thys tyme deyed Saynt Cedde of Lytchefelde / the thyrde yere of his byſſhopryche. ¶Demus a Romayne was pope after Adeodatus thre yere. Of this man lytell is wryten. ¶Bonyfacyus was pope after hym / & lytell of hym is wryten / but that he lyued ly
                           •
                        e a preeſt. ¶Agatho was pope after hym / and he was a very holy man. For on a daye whan he kyſſed a lepre / the lepre anone was made hoole. ¶Iſte et de conſenſu princypys iuſſit celebrari ſextū ſinodum apud ꝯſtantinopolin .CC.lxxx. ep̄o
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                        . in qua aſſeret duas naturas et duas voluntates eſſe in xp̄o. ¶Leo the ſeconde was pope after Agatho thre yere / this Leo was an holy man & ſuffycyently taught in latyn & greke / this man ordeyned that the pax ſholde be yeuen after agnus dei / and dyed a bleſſyd man. ¶Benedictus the ſeconde pope after Leo almoſte thre yere. This man aboue all thyng was vertous and his name accorded with his dedys. And in his tyme was a grete peſtylence. ¶Iuſtinianus the ſeconde was Emperour this tyme / & he was a very good man / a prudent & a large / & he encreaced ye Empyre of Rome myghtely / But he charged the offyce of the chyrche ouer moche. Many lawes he made / and after was not good he intended to haue lette the dycrees of the .vi. Synodus / wherfore the .x. yere of hys. Empyre he was taken of Leo the prynce of patrici
                           •
                         and Tyberio / & they cutte of hys noſe & hys tonge & exyled hym to Cryſonā. There was then turbacyon in the chirche for ſtryue & heretykes. ¶And knowe all men whan varyaunce falleth betwixt grete lordes Thenne errours ben multeplyed / for there is no man corrected them / therfore that ys often tyme preued in the cyirche. Thenne after felle a varyaunce betwixt Leo and Tyberio. And Tybereo preuaylled / and he exyled Leo / & cutte of his noſe the thyrde yere of his regne / and regned for hym· Iuſtinianꝰ fledde to the Sarraſyns and the Bulgars / the whyche reſtored hym ayen to his Empre / and ſlewe Leo and Tyberio / ye whiche fauoured heretykes. Thenne this ſame Iuſtinianus reformed hymſelfe to the chyrche of god / and had grete repentaū
                        ce But he venged hym to cruelly on his aduerſaryes / ſo that he wolde haue ſlayne the 
                           •
                        r Innocent childern Therfore he was ſlayne wyth his ſone / of Phylyp whom he exyled.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno dm̄ .vi.C.lxxxiiii.
                     IOhannes the fyfth was pope after Benedyctus too yere / he was a good man / but he deceſſyd aone. ¶zeno was pope after hym. And he was a very holy man / for he wolde not medle with ſeculer maters. And ī beaute he was an angell / quyete in vertues / & meke in ſoule and very demure in langage of hys relygyous lyf / this man was choſen at the laſt wyth one accorde of the chirche and laye men. But there was a grete diſtruccyon / for ye clergy entended to haue choſe Perys ye Archebyſſhop. And the hoſt of laye men wolde haue had Theodorum a preeſt. But at the laſte the holy gooſte tourned the wyll of all this people in to this holy man. ¶Sergius was pope .ix. yere. This man was vertuous & comendable ī hys lyf. And in his eleccyon a grete dyſcorde was / for one partye of the clergye choſe Theodorū / and an other partye Paſchalem. But as oure lorde wolde at the laſt they tourned all to thys man. Thys man tranſlated the body of ſaynt Leo. He alſo founde a grete parte of the holy

croſſe by myracle. And he cryſtened Cad waldre the laſt kynge of Brytayne. He cōmaūded (Agnus dei) to be ſayd or ſonge thryes at maſſe. And deceſſyd bleſſydly. ¶Nota. ¶Saynt Beda the worſhypfull preeſte was thys tyme a grete man of fame in Englonde / the whyche was take the .vii. yere of hys aege to Benedycte the abbot Gyrwyen̄ monaſtery to be taught. And thenne after to Colfrido the abbot after the deth of benedict. And atte the .xix. yere of his aege he was made Deaken of ye byſſhop of yorke. And at .xxx. yere he was made preeſt / in the whiche yere he began to wryte So he contynued al the tyme of his lyf in that monaſtry / in gyuynge his labours to wrytynge and ſcrypture to be expowned. He made .lxxviii· bokes / the whiche he nombreth in the ende of his Edglyſſhe booke. Thys man was euer in labour other in prayer or in ſyngynge dayly in the chyrche / or to lerne teche or wryte. For whiche thynge men maye Iuge by reaſon that he was neuer at Rome / all though ſome ſaye he wente to Rome that he myght ſee yt his bokes accordeth with the doctryne of ye holy chyrche. But it was certayne that he was blynde / and wente to preche / & had a ſeruaunte that was not good / and made him to preche to a myghty multytude of ſtones and ſayde / that they were men. ¶And whan all hys ſermon was done / the ſtones anſwered and ſayd Amē. But that he wente to Rome thryes / and founde wryten thre arres / thre effes / and expowned them / it was neuer founde in no boke of auctoryte. There was after the talkyng of the people ſuche a wrytynge on the yates of Rome (RRR. FFF) And ſuche an expoſycyon (Regna Rome Ruent. Ferro Flama Fame) But it is certayne that Beda was deſyred to come to Rome by the wrytynge of ſergius the pope to Colfrido his abbot. And thys Beda tranſlated the goſpell of ſaynt Iohan in to Englyſſhe tonge / and dyſſeſſyd bleſſydly. The fame ſayth that now he lyeth at Deuelyn with Saynt Curberte / & there is buryed with hym the knowlege of the dedes of Englonde almooſt to ye conqueſt. ¶Leo the ſeconde was Emperour / and lytell of hym is wryten. ¶Liberiꝰ was Emperour after hym .vii. yere / he roſe ayenſt Leo & entred his kyngdom / and kept hym in pryſon as longe as he regned In this tyme Iuſtinianus the ſeconde whiche in olde tyme was exyled to Cryſonam openly ſayd / he wolde recouer his Empyre agayne. wherfore the people of that countree / for the loue of Liberius / were aboute to ſlee that Iuſtinianus. wherfore he fledde to the prynce of Thurcorum and wedded hys ſyſter. And thorugh helpe of his brother and the Bulgars he recouered his Empyre and ſlewe Liberius & Leo the vſuper of his reame And as many tymes almooſt as he wyped ony drope from his noſe / the whiche they kytte of / ſo many tymes he made one of his enmyes to be ſlayne ¶Leo the thyrde was pope after Sergius two yere. This mā was made pope by the power of the Romayns and was not put in the nombre of popes / for the euyll entred / but he dyde none euyll. ¶Iohannes the .vi. was pope after hym a Greke. And he was a martyr / but of whome and wherfore the cauſe is not founde in hyſtoryes. It is ſayd / yt it was of the dukes of Lambardy for they were enmyes to the chyrche myghtely. ¶Iohannes the .vii. a Romayne was pope after hym thre yere / but no thyng of hym is wryten. ¶Iuſtinianas was Emperour ayen with his ſone Tyberiꝰ .vi. yeres. And this was he the whyche was reued the Empyre afore by Leo / And whan this mā was reſtored ayen he toke hym to the ryght fayth / and worſhypped the pope Conſtantyne. And certaynly he deſtroyed Creſon the place where he was exyled unto / and all that dwelled in it / except the chyldern he ſlewe them / And he came ayen an other tyme to haue ſlayne the Innocentes. And the men of that countree made them a capytayne / a certayne man that was called Philyp an outlawe / yt whiche anone went to hym in batayll / and ſlewe hym for his outragyous cruelneſſe ayenſt thoſe chyldern. ¶Syſinnius was pope twenty dayes / and thenne was grete ſtryfe / and he deceſſyd \ but lytell of hym is wryten. ¶Cōſtantine was pope after hym vii. yere. This man was a very meke man & ſo bleſſyd / that of all men he was beloued. He wente ouer the ſee to Iuſtinianus the Emperour / and was receyued with grete honour / & deyed a bleſſyd man. ¶Philyp ye ſeconde was Emperour one yere / the whyche fledde in to Scicilis for the hoſte of the Romayns And he was an heretyke / and cōmaunded all pyctures of ſayntes for to be beſtroyed. wherfore the Romayns caſt a way his coyne / ne wolde not

receyue noo moneye that hys name or ymage were wryten vpon ¶Anaſtaſius thſeconde after he had ſlayne Philyp was Emperoure thre yere. This man was a cryſten man / and helyued well. But by cauſe he put out phylipis eyen / and ſlewe hym after warde. And therfore Theodoſius fauſtht ayenſt hym and ouercame hym / And thenne he was made a preeſt / & lyued ſoo quyetly.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno dm̄ .vii.C.xiiii.
                     GRegoryus the ſeconde was pope after Conſtantyne .xvii. yere / this Gregoryꝰ was a chaſte man & a noble man in ſcrypture And about this tyme the popes began to deale more temporally wyth the Emperours than they were wonte for theyr falſneſſe & theyr he reſye. And alſo for to remeue thempyre fro oo people to an other as the tyme requyred / thys man curſyd Leo ye Emprrour by cauſe he brē
                        te the ymages of ſayntes. This ſame Leo cō
                        maunded / Gregorius the pope yt he ſhold brenne chirches & deſtroye them. And he ſette noo thynge of hys ſayenge / but cōmaūded the coū
                        trary manly. And ſo it ys openly ſhewed / yt the deſtruccyon of the Empyre of Rome / was the cauſe of hereſy. For certaynely faythfull people wyth the prelates wyth one wyll / drewe to the pope & conſtrayned the Emperours for to leue theyr tyrannye and theyr hereſye. ¶And thys tyme in the eeſt parte of ye worlde ſtrongly faylled the very fayth / for that curſyd lawe of the fals Machomete· ¶Theodoſius was Emperour & regned but one yere And he was a very cryſten man / & euen as he dyde ſo was he done vnto. For Leo depoſyd hym & made hym a preeſt. ¶Leo ye thyrde with Conſtantyne his ſone was Emperour .xxv. yere this Leo whan he was myghty he depoſyd Theodoſyꝰ & regned for hym / & was deſceyned by a certayne Apoſtata / the whiche badde hym yt he ſholde take and brenne all the ymages of ſayntes. wherfore he was punyſſhed both in batayll & in peſtylence / & with other Infortunes. And by cauſe he was accurſyd of Gregoryus / & bode ther in thre dayes / therfore the pope wyth ye comyn peple toke for hym the beſt parte of hys Empyre / cōmaūdynge yt no man ſhold obeye hym ne ſocour hym / by cauſe he lyued lyke an heretyke. ¶Holy men ſayde ayenſt hym. And many by hym were marted & exyled. And at ye laſt in his miſbyleue he deyed wretchedly. and in this manes dayes / but that Karolus Marcellus holpe the Cryſten fayth / & faught manly nyenſt the Sarraſyns / & draue them backewarde in Spayne the whyche they had ſubdued els they had entred in to Fraunce. And Karolus ſlewe thre hondred thouſāde Saraſyns & moo· And of his people were ſlayne but .xv. thouſande. ¶Nota. ¶This man for the contynuall batayll toke to laye men the treſoure of the chirche. wherfore Saynt Eucharius the byſſhop of Aurelian / as he was in his prayers / ſawe that ſame Karolus in ſoule and body payned in helle. And the aungell that ſhewed the byſſhop this man ſayde. That yt was the Iugement of all thoſe that toke a waye the goodes of the chirche / or of poore men. And to fortifye that / that the byſſhop ſayd and 
                           •
                        
                        ue it / the abbote of ſaynt Deuys wente to the ſepulcre there that Karolus was burye
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         opened the cheſte that he laye in And there th
                           ••
                         ſee a grete dragon go out but he had no 
                           〈◊〉
                         ¶Gregorius the thyrde a Romayne 
                           〈◊〉
                         pope after Gregoryus the ſeconde. The 
                           〈…〉
                         confermed the woorſhyppes of the 
                           〈…〉
                         ſayntes / with ye coūſeyll almooſte of a thou
                           •••
                        
                        de byſſhops. And he curſyd horrybly all the deſpyers of theſe ymages. As the Emperour 
                           •
                        nd other that were of ye condycyon. ¶Conſtan
                           •
                        
                        nus the fyfth was Emperour a
                           •
                        te: his 
                           〈◊〉
                         Leo .xxxv. yere He was a curſed man & a p
                           ••
                        e heretyke / to yt he dyde ſacrefyſe to the deuylles He purſued the chyrche. And 
                           〈…〉
                         is good of hym is wryten. And ſo by ye 
                        
                           •
                        
                        ce of god the chyrche was trowbled longe t
                           •
                        
                        me. About this tyme were many maruayl
                           •
                        es & there were merueyllous erth quakys. And certayne cytees that were ſette on mountayns they were remeued & borne awaye with ye hylles in to the feldes .vi. myle thens as they ſtode and the cytees were not broken ne hurte In the londe of Meſopotanian the erthe was broken by the ſpace of two myle / And alſo there was a mule that ſpake in a mannes voys. Aſſhes fell fro heuen And in the ſee of Poncico there was yſe for grete froſte that was .xxx. cubytes of thykeneſſe. And the ſterres fell fro heuen ſoo myghtely that men trowed that ye ende of the worlde had be comen. All theſe betokened meruaylus thynges for to come.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno dm̄ .vii.C.xliiii.
                     Acharias was pope after Gregorius.

x. yere. This zacharis was a noble mā & arayed wyth all vertue / wyth all men he was loued for his mekeneſte. And he depoſyd the kynge of Fraunce Hydery / and put in hys place Puppynus / for he was more profytable. ¶Here may ye ſee what power the thyrche had yt tyme / the whiche tranſlated that famous kyngdom fro ye very heyres / to ye kyngdome of Pippinus / for a leyfull cauſe (Vthab
                              •
                           t .xv. q. v. alius) ¶Stephanus the ſeconde a Romayne was pope after zacharyas .v. yere. Thys man in all thyng was profytable vnto the chirche / as wel in worde as in doctryne And he gouerned the ſpyrytualtee & the temporaltee noble. He was the louer & the defender of poore men. Thys man anoynted Pyppynꝰ the kynge of Fraunce / & ſente hym ayenſt the Lombardes / that he ſholde compell them to reſtore the chirche of ſuche goodes as they had with holde from theym longe tyme vnryghtwyſ
                           •
                        y the whyche he dyde. He alſo tranſlated the Empyre of the Grekes to ye Frenſſhemen. ¶Paalꝰ a Romayne was pope after hym .x. yere. Thys was a very holy man / for he dyde grete almeſſe to fadleſſe chyldern & pryſoners wydowes / & other poore men / yt he myght be a folower of ſaynt Poule ¶Conſtantyne a Romayne the ſeconde was pope after Poul two yere. Thys Conſtantyne was a lay man & ſodeynly was made a preeſt / as a tyraunt / & toke on hym the dygnytee of the pope. And with a grete ſlaūdre to the chyrche was pope a lytell tyme. But the faythful men put hym out / and put out his eyen. And this was the fyfth Infamed pope / amonge ſo many herde tofore. So the holy ghoſt ye holy apoſtels ſete kepyin al honour & holyneſſe ¶Infynyte martyrs were made this tyme by Conſtantyne ye emperour for he was ſuche an heretyke. And men trowe that there was neuer Emperour ne no pagon that ſlewe ſo many martyrs· And in his tyme the chirche was trowbled full ſore / & very precyouſly bought the worſhyppynge of the ymages of the holy ſayntes / for the grete ſhedynge of blood of martyrs. And certaynly ye curſyd Emperour was not vnpunyſſhed. For whan that he deyed he cryed with an horryble voys & ſayd. I am taken to a fyre / yt is vnable for to be deſtroyed. And ſo he yelded vp the ghoſt to euerlaſtynge payne. ¶The Empyre of rome was deuyded about this tyme For Stephanꝰ the pope tranſlated ytaly & other vnto Karolus a yonge man. And Conſtantyne helde the londe of Grece with other londes ouer the ſee with a grete labour and many rebellynge. ¶This tyme Karolus magnus was a noble yonge man. And he began for to regne vpon Fraunce / & was the ſone of Pippinus / & hys moder was called Berta· ¶Stephanus the thyrde was pope after Paulus thre yere. And he amended all the errours of Conſtantyne. And he degarded all thoſe the whiche Cōſtantyne ordeyned in a generall Synodus.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno dm̄ .vii.C.lxxxiiii.
                     ADrianus a Romayne was pope after Stephanus .xxiiii. yere. Thys man was myghtely worſhypped of the people / noo man greter afore hym in honour / ryches / and buyldyng. This man ſette two ſolempne Syno
                           •
                        is. The fyrſte of the thre hondred and fyfty faders The ſeconde in Rome with an hondred and fyfty faders beynge preſent Charles the kynge of Fraunce / to whom it was graunted the lyberte of eleccyon of the popes and to ordeyne the appoſtles ſete. ¶Leo the fourthe regned Emperour with the Grekes fyue yere This Leo was a curſyd man / but not ſo moche as his fader was. And he was a couetous man / and he toke a way a certayne crowne of a chyrche and put it vpon his heed. And anon
                           •
                         he was corrupted with an axes and ſore deſeaſed. And he had a curſed wyf / yt whiche regned after hym with her ſone. ¶Conſtantyne was Emperoure after Leo / & he was a meke man / and put a waye his moder fro the kyngdom / that ſhe myght take hede vnto her wymmens werke. But ſhe with a fayned rancour put out his eyen after warde and his childern alſo / and regned agayne thre yere. And at ye laſt ſhe was about for to haue be wedded And whan the Grekes perceyued that ſhe wold be wedded to grete Karolus / they toke her & ſhytte her vp in a monaſtery / and toke Nychofe
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                         to be theyr Emperour. ¶The .v. vnyuerſhall ſtudy the whiche in olde tyme was tranſlated from Anthenes vnto Rome / aboute this tyme was tranſlated to Parys / by Karolus kynge of Fraunce. ¶Nychoferus was Emperour after Conſtantyne. He was a very nygon / and was exalted to his Empyre by the Grekys But he profyted not / for ī his tyme all ye E
                           •
                        ſt Imperyall was brought to noughte. For the

Romayns put them vnder Karolus magnus ¶Ieruſalem about this tyme was recouered by Karolus / with all the hooly londe. And the ſecte of the Sarraſyns was deſtroyed ſtrongly· For the ſtruccyon of wretches came then̄e ¶Michael was Emperour two yere / and he was a very cryſten man / and he was well beloued / and alſo he was connyge in alle ſcyences. And tho that Nychaferus had hurte and dreſtreſſyd of theyr goodes by hys coueytouſneſſe / this Mychaell reſtored them and made them ryche ayen. ¶Nota. ¶Karolus. magnus the fyrſt ſaynt was Emperour after Michaell. And he was crowned Emperoure by Leo the pope / frome the whyche tyme the Empyre was tranſlated frome the Grekes to Fraunce and Germane. And for the tranſlacyon of that Empyre / the Grekes alwaye were defectyue vnto the Romayns And the Grekes ſtroue euer more with them. But it was more wyth venomous wordes thanne wyth ſtrenghthe / and more with crafte thanne with batayyll. ¶For they hadde ſoo grete enuye at the Romayns / that they wolde not obeye ye chyrche of Rome. For certaynly whan that the popes wold wryte vnto them / for to obeye the chyrche of Rome / they wrote agayne & ſayde. ye haue taken from oure kynrede the Empyre / and therfore we wolde not obeye / And we vs take from you / And for this noble Emperour Rarolus it is to be vnderſtande / thys man whan he was a yonge man / he was anoynted kynge of Fraunce by Stephanus ye pope. In the yere of our lorde Iheſu Cryſte .vii. hondred .liiii. whan his fader Pippinꝰ lyued. Vnder whome / and wyth whome he regned ·xv. yere vnto the dethe of his fader. ¶Thenne after hys fader vnder the yere our lord god vii. hondred .xlviii. This Karolus with hys brother Karolomannus regned two yere. And thenne his brother deſeaſed in the ſeconde yere. And this Karolus there helde alle the hoole kyngdome .xiiii. yere / to the yere of our lorde .vii. hondred .lxxxiiii. In ye whiche yere he wente to Rome / that he myght be crowned Emperour of the pope Adrianus. And he regned emperour .xvi. yere / to the yere of our lorde .viii.C. whan pope▪ Leo confermed hym ayen the Emperour. And after that he was Emperour xiiii. yere. And he dyſſeaſed in the yere of hys aege .lxxii. The whiche was the yere of oure lorde .viii.C. and .xiiii. ¶yf ye wyll ſee more of Karolus / goo to the boke of Turpinus and Libraminus his mayſter / for they wrote hys noble actes. ¶Leo the fourth was pope after Adrianus .xx. yere / thys man whan he wente on a certayne daye with the Lentany to ſaynt Peters chyrche on Saynt Markes daye / he was taken with curſyd people / and bothe hys eyen put out & his tonge cutte of But our lorde merueylouſly reſtored hym ayen hys ſyght and his ſpeche / ſoo that he ſpake without tonge and ſawe by myracle. Afterwarde he wente with Karolꝰ in Fraunce. And he came with hym vnto Rome / and venged the pope on his enmye. And thenne he crowned Karolus. And he late afore crowned / confermed hym agayne. ¶Lodouicus the meke the fyrſte begoten ſone of Karolus was Emperour after his fader .xxvi. yere / in whoſe tyme was put a waye that clerkes ſholde vſe no gyrdes wyth precyous ſtones / ne ſtraunge arayment. This Ludouicus of his fyrſte wyf gate two childern & both had an euyll ende. In all thynge that wē
                        te ayenſt hym he was pacyent / & in the laſt ende he euer ouer cāe. For ayenſt god he abode deuoute. And his childern folowed hym in cō
                        dycyons / he dyſſeſſyd a bleſſyd man. ¶Stephanus the fourth was pope after Leo thre yere. This Stephanus redemed many captyue men / & crowned Lodouicꝰ ye Emperour. And then̄e he dyſſeſſyd & was buryed at Rome. Paſchall was pope after Stephanus. This Paſchall was a grete dylygence to relyques of Sayntes. And he tooke vp Innumerable bodyes of ſayntes / & buryed them worſhypfully as in the vyſyon of ſaynt Cecile he was cōmaūded. ¶Eugenius the fourthe was pope after Paſchall / and he was a very hooly man. And alle thoſe thynges that were for cryſt he toke hede to. This man was crowned a martyr / and by the laye men of Rome he was buryed in ſaynt Peters chyrcheyerde.
                  
                  
                     ¶Circa annū on̄i .viii.C.xliiii.
                     VAlentinus was pope after Eugenius xl. dayes / and lytell of hym is wryten. ¶Gregorius the fourth was pope after hym xii. yere / this Gregorius ſawe many heuy tymes / for the plages amonge the comyn people And at this mannes petycyon. Lodouicus the Emperour / & Marcio the prynce of Lombardy exyled al ye Sarraſyns fro ytaly. And at the

laſte he dyſſeſſed after Innumerable good dedes & werkes yt he had done at ſaynt Peters. ¶Lotherius the firſt ſone of Ludouicus was Emperour .xv. yere in ytaly & Rome & the partyes of Germayne next to the hylles of. Alpy. This Lotherius roſe ayenſt his broder Ludouicus &. Karolus for the kyngdom of Duchelonde / the whyche ſome tyme Pyppynus theyr broder helde. And they fought at a place called Fomanecū / where Lotherius was dyſcomfyted. And there was ſuche ſlaughter made oon both the ſydes / that they had no men for to reſyſte theyr aduerſaryes. Thys vnderſtode a fals cryſten man / & ſent vnto Soudan of the Sarraſyns yt he ſholde come anone. And he toke Rome / & ſaynt Peters chirche was made a ſtable for theyr horſes. But Ludouycus wyth the Frenſhemen & Lombardes all ye Infynyte nombred deſtroyed / & that with grete ſhedynge of criſten blode. ¶Sergius ye ſeconde was pope after Gregoriꝰ two yere. This man was called fyrſte. (os porci) in Englyſſhe / hoggeſmouth. where fore yt mā & all the popes names are chaunged whan they are choſen And yt for thre cauſes. The fyrſt for Cryſte chaunged the names of thoſe men yt whiche he made popes. The ſeconde / for as moche as they are chaunged in the name / ſholde they be chaūged in perfectyon of lyfe / The thyrde leeſt he whiche is choſen to an excedynge degree ſholde he hurte in name. ¶Leo was pope after Sergius. viii yere. This Leo was an holy man / and alſo he was in prudence as ſharpe as a ſerpente / & in his dedes as meke as a douue. ¶And he was brought forth vertuouſly in a monaſtery And whan that he was made pope / he laboured to repeyre his chirches agayne / the whiche falſe Sarraſyns one after an other had deſtroyed. This man was a myghty wryter & a grete precher / & myghtely laboured in watche & prayer and ſo deyed / & was buryed and lyeth at ſaynt Peters. ¶Benedictus a Romayne was pope after Leo two yere. This Benedictus had the name of ye thynge. For in all thyng he was bleſſyd. This man ordeyned ye clerkes ſhold go ordynatly and honeſty. ¶Ludouicus the ſone of Lotherius was Emperour thys tyme / & anoynted of Sergius the pope / & a whyle regned with his fader / & after regned .xxi. yere alone. This man had a ſone ye hyghe Karolus / in to whom the deuyll entred & vexed him a fore his fader. And then̄e he conſpyred his faders deth And in his tyme many a meruaylle felle. ¶Nota. ¶Iohannes Anglicus of the nacyon of Maguncin about thys tyme was pope / & ſhe was a woman arayed in mānes garmentes. But ſhe profyted ſo in holy ſcrypture that there was foūde none lyke her Then̄e ſhe was choſē pope / but after ward ſhe was with childe. And whan ſhe ſhold haue gone openly in proceſſyon / ſhe trauelled and deceſſyd. And this is the ſixte pope / the whyche to this tyme had the name of holyneſſe / and were vycyous And this perſone as other popes were was punyſſed of god / ne ſhe was not nombred in the boke of popes. ¶Nicholaus a Romayne was pope after this woman .ix. yere. This Nicholaus was of grete holynes / that there was no man comparable to hym after 
                           •
                         Gregory ye pope. And whan he was made. Ludouicus the Emperour was preſente. And after he deceſſyd a very good man & was buryed in ſaynte· Peters chyrcheyerde. ¶Adrianus a Romay
                           •
                         was pope after Nicholaus. This Adrianus curſed Lotherius broder to themperour ye kynge of Lotharynge for his aduoutry. But whā he came to Rome to excuſe hym of his aduoutry / he ſayde that he was curſyd wrongfully. And he brought with hym al the noble men of his regyon / and all were deed within one yere and the kynge deyed in the waye whan he came to the 
                           •
                        yte of Placenciam.
                  
               
               
                  
                     ¶Anno dm̄ .viii.C.lxxiii. ¶Of kynge Alured / and how the Danys in his tyme prayed hym of mercy that they myght goo out of the londe. ¶Thys tyme came the Danys in to Englonde.
                     
                         
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
AFter the deth of this Eldred regned hys broder Alured that Dolfynes was called. ¶Tho wente the Danys and aſſembled them / And wente for the to ſeke Alured yt tho was kyng newe made of Southſex / and there they foū
                        de hym atte wylton wyth a lytell people / And neuertheleſſe he faught with them / but at the laſte he fledde thens from the felde / and wente in to weſtſex and ordeyned ſo moche people of his owne reame / and alſo of other tyll that he had a ſtronge hoſte ſoo that the Danys hadde no power ayenſt hym to withſtande. And he came to London with his hoſte / and there were the Danys ſoionrned. And there he wolde haue foughten with them. But ye Danys durſte not with hym fyght / but prayed hym of peas / and that they myghte goo ayen in to theyr owne countree / and neuer to come in to Englonde ayen / that is to ſaye ony harme for to do And vppon thys couenaunt they ſholde gyue hym to pledge good hoſta
                           •
                        es and ſuche as the Englyſſhmen wolde are.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Hubba and Hungar were ſlayne atte Chyppenham / and how the Danys brought theyr kynge to our kynge.
                     ANd the ſame daye that the Danys departed frome London / ſoo faſte they rode bothe nyghe and daye / and neuer tooke reſt of goynge tyll that they came vnto Exceſtre / and tooke tho the towne / and there helde them. ¶Whan kynge Alured herde theſe rydynges / anone he lette take the hoſtages / and wente from thens vnto Exceſtre wyth all the power that he hadde / And whan the Danys herde telle of hys comynge / they wente frome thens unto weſtſix / and came vnto Chyppenham / and there they dyde moche harme in the countree / they robbed folke / and brough theym in pryſon. The kynge Alured them purſewed & came vpon them ryght ſoone & fyerſely theym aſſayled. And there were ſlayne bothe Hubba and Hūgar his broder / & Buerne Bocader. And in this bataylle were moche folke ſlayne in that one & in that other. But the gre
                           •
                         of that felde bode with the Danys / for as moche as the kyng came with fewe folke. ¶The kynge haſted hym as moche as he myghte for to goo agayne. And whan the Danys founde Hubbaes body lyeng deed they buryed it / and layd vpon it a grete logge / and lete calle it Hubeſlowe / and ſoo it is called vnto thys daye. And that place is in Deuenſhyre. The Barons of Somerſet· wyltſhyre and dorſet herde tell how that theyr kyng was dyſcomfyted and ordeyned all the power that they myghte haue and came to the kyng there he was / and thanked god that they hym yet founde alyue / for they had wende that ye Danys hadde hym ſlayne. Tho toke they a counſeyll the kynge & his barōs / that wolde go and ſeke the Danys with them for to fyght. And ſo they rode all & nyght theim for to ſeke and came on the morowe aboute Pryme to Abyndon there that the Danys were. The kyng Alured & his barons to aſſembled & there aſſaylled the Danys egerly / & there yaue them a ſtonge batayll. And the Danys put them a longe tyme that noo man wyſt whether parte more people were ſlayne. But thys it befell as god wolde that the kyng Alured had the victory with moche honoure. For the Danys were ſoo dryuen that ne wyſt whyther for to torne. And .xv. dayes the 
                           •
                        yng them purſewed at his wyll / that gladly & 
                           •
                        ayne they were for to ſpeke of peas and accorde / and toke hym good hoſtage / & ſayd they wolde neuer more vpon hym warre ne no debate arere. ¶And more ouer they behyght vnto the kyng Alured / that they wolde go & b
                           •
                        ynhe theyr owne kynge vnto hym and that theyr kynge & they all ſhold be baptyſed. And vpon this condycyon kynge Alured graunte them lyf & lymme. And ſayd vnto theym / that they ſholde gone theyr kyng for to ſeke / & at a certayne daye to come ayen yt to theym was ſette. And ſo they wente forth faſt & came ayen at a daye that to them was aſſygned· And all ye Danys brought theyr kynge with them. ¶The kyng Alured anone lette them 
                           •
                        e baptyſed / & theyr names chaunged. And ſoo the kynge of Denmark was called Athelſtone And .xxx. of his felowes names were chaunged alſo / and the other were baptyſed to the ryght byleue. ¶And all this was done atte weſtmeſtre. And after that kynge Alured helde wyth hym kynge Athelſtone and all hys Danys .xii dayes at ſoiourne with moche ſolempnyte / and yaue th
                           •
                        
                        ̄
                        
grete yeftes. And after that they were baptyſed and ſoo departed. Tho was kynge Alured all at eaſe / whan he hadde his enmyes ouer comen / and that they were torned to ye ryght by leue of god almyghty.
                  
                  
                     ¶How the Danys that came in to Fraunce with Gurmonde came agayne in to Englonde / and of the deth of kynge Alured.
                     ANd thus it befell after warde / that the Danys of Northumberlonde yt were paynems came with a grete ſtrength & an huge hoſte of Fraūce / that is to vnderſtōde \ with them that went in to Fraūce with Gurmonde of Affyke / whan he had conquered Englonde & yaue it vnto ye Saxons. And tho yt came fro Fraūce arryued in Kent & ſent in to Northumberlonde that they ſhold come to them / & whan thoſe two hoſtꝭ were come & aſſembled / anone they yede to deſtroye alle the cryſten people of Englonde from place to place / & dyde moche ſorowe. It befelle thus as almyghty god wolde an harde chaunce in to Englonde. For the good kyng alured yt was wonte to abate ye Danys deyed 
                           •
                        n the meane tyme. Thys kynge Alured regned .xxx. yere / & a good kyng had he & welle coude chaſtyſe his enmyes. And alſo he was a good clerke / & lete make many bokes & a boke he made in Englyſſhe of aduentures of kynges / and of bataylles that had ben done in the londe / and many other bookes of Geſtes he lete them wryte that were of greate wyſdome and of good lernynge / thrugh whyche bookes many a man may hym amende / that woll them rede and vpon them loke / Vpon whoſe ſoule almyghty god haue marcy. ¶And thys kynge Alured lyeth at wyncheſtre.
                     IOhānes the .viii. was pope after Adryan .viii. yere. This Iohannes anoynted Karolus the Emperour. And he ſuffred grete wronge of ye Romayns for he fauoured not ye ſayd Emperour. And therfore he put the ſayd pope in kepyng. Alſo he degarded the byſſhop of Portuenſe / the whyche was ye occaſyon of all his ſorowe. Karolꝰ ye ſeconde was Empour after Ludouicus. This Karolus had a brother the whyche was called Ludouicus / & he was the kyng of Germayne / & he ordeyned batayll agaynſt his brother / but karolus or they faughte was poyſened. And he made many a monaſterye. ¶Martynus was pope after Iohā
                        nes one yere. This Martynus lytell profyted for he lyued but lytell tyme. ¶Adrianꝰ ye thyrde was pope after hym oo yere. And of hym is no thinge wrynten. ¶Stephanꝰ the fyfth was pope after hym .vi. yere. And no thyng of him in wryten / but yt he tranſlated the body of ſaynt Martyn. ¶Karolus the thyrde was Emperour after the ſeconde .xii. yere. This Karolus had in poſſeſſyon peaſſyble all Fraunce & all Germayne / and was crowned Emperour of Iohānes the pope. And after this gloryous vyctory / he torned all Normandye to the faythe of god almyghty / and he myght nomore recyſte the Frenſhemen but four yere he regned on them / He was vnprofytable to them / and therfore they put hym a waye. ¶Arnulphus was emperour after Karolus .xiii. yere. This Arnulphus vtterly conſtrayned the Normās the wyiche deſtroyed the Frenſhemen .xl. yere Thenne he was ſyke and had noo comforte of no leche / for he was ī a meruayllous ſykeneſſe / ſo that he was conſumed with lyf and was deed. ¶Formoſus was pope after Stephanꝰ .v. yere / this man fyrſt was byſſhop of Portuenſys. And pope Iohn̄ was depryued for hys Inobedyence / & was degrated to the laye fee. But by Martyn ye pope he was reſtored. And ayenſt his othe / he came not aloonly to Rome but to offre hym the dygnyte of the pope / for yt whiche there was grete alteracion. ¶Bonfacius the .vi. was pope .v. dayes. ¶Stephanꝰ the .vi. one yere and thre monethes. ¶Iohannes thre monethes and .xii. dayes. ¶Iona alſo thre monethes and twelue dayes. ¶Theodorus the ſeconde twenty dayes. ¶Iohannes the enleuēth was two yere & .xv. dayes. ¶Benedictus the fourth a yere and two monethes. ¶Leo the fourthe was .xl. dayes. ¶Xpriſtoforus the fyrſte .vii. monethes. All theſe .viii. popes were but lytell tyme / & therfore we can not tell of them none notable thynges / But yf we ſholde wryte ſclaūdre of them that myght be fon̄de / for ye vnharde ſtryfe & contencion in that holy appoſtles ſete. For one ſtroue ayenſt an other / and repreued the dedes of an other. And for to tell how they ſtroue / it were no grete honour to ſhewe for ye hooly appoſtles ſete. ¶Lodouicus the thyrde was emperour after Arnulphus .vi yere. This man had not ye popes bleſſynge / for the vnſtableneſſe of them yt whiche regned in ytaly· And he was conſtreyned to expulſe Berynge. And this man was ye
                        
laſte Emperour of alle the kynred of Karolus kynge of fraunce. ¶This tyme the Empyre was remeued and tranſlated and dyuyded. For the Frenſhemen halpe not the chyrche / the whiche theyr faders had edifyed and fortefyed / but deſtroyed / ne halpe not ye Romayns ayenſt Lombardes / the whiche vexed the Romayns ryght ſore. Therfore by the comyns aſſente they were excluded fro the Empyre / and the ytalyens beganne to be Emperour in ytaly / and the Almayns in Almayne / vntyll Ottanen the whiche regned in bothe the places. The Frenſhemen were conſtrayned to abyde in theyr owne countree / and no more to be emperour for theyr myſheuous lyuynge. ¶Beringarius the fyrſt. ¶Conradus and Beryngarius the ſeconde / & Hugo were Emperours after Lodouicus But they are not nombred amonge the Emperours. For ſome were but in Almayne / and ſome were in yralye.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of kynge Edward that was kynge Alucedes ſone.
                     ANd after this Alured regned hys ſone Edwarde / and was a good mā & a wyſe / that was called Edwarde / and was wonder curteys. ¶The danys dyd moche ſorowe in the londe / and theyr power encreaced and began for to were frome daye to daye. For the Danys came often wyth theyr companyes in to this londe. And whan the kynge ſawe that he myght no better do / then he toke peas wyth them graūted them this trewes. And neuertheleſſe the trewes dured not longe that the Danys ne began ſtrongly for to warre vpon the Englyſſhmen and dyde them moche ſorowe. wherfore kynge Edwarde dyd aſſemble a grete hoſte for to fyght with them· And then this kyng Edwarde deyed whan god wolde. This kynge Edwarde regned .xxiiii. yere / and lyeth at wyncheſtre beſyde his fader.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno dm̄ .ix.C.xiiii.
                     SErgius ye thyrde was pope after Xpiſtoforꝰ .vii. yere / This man was a Cardynall of Rome / and was expulſed by Formoſus the pope / and then he went to the Fernſſhemen. And ſo thorugh the helpe & fauour of thē he came agayne to Rome and anone expulſed ſed Xpriſtoforus the pope. ¶And thenne was pope hymſelfe. And for to auenge and werke his exyle / he tooke out the body of pope Formoſus where that he was buryed. And arryed hym in the popes arraymente and cauſed hym to be heeded and to be caſte in the water of Tybre by Rome / Thenne fyſſhers founde hym and broughte hym in to the chyrche. And the hooly ymages of ſayntes bowed downe to hym / whan the body of hym was broughte in to the chyrche / that all men myght ſee / and honourably hym halſyd. yet Sergius deſtroyed all that thinge the whiche ye holy man had ordeyned. ¶Anaſtaſius was pope after hym two yere. ¶Laudo was pope .v. monethes / and lytell they dyde. ¶Iohannes the .x. was pope then̄e. This Iohanes was the ſone of Sergius pope / doth of nature & of maners And he was pope by myghty. And wretchedly ſlayne of Guidois knyghtꝭ for they put on his mouthe a pylowe and ſtopped his brethe. And after hym was a nother put in / but anone he was out / & therfore he is not named as pope. ¶Henricus the duke of Saxone was Emperour of Almayne .xvii· yere / this Henricꝰ was a noble man / but he is not nombred amonge themperours. for he regned but aloonly in Almayne. And he had a very holy woman vnto his wyf / & her name was Matylda / on whom he gate two ſones / yt is to ſaye. Otto & Harry And Otto ſuccedded hym in the Empyre And Harry had moche londe in Almayne. And he gate an other ſone yt hygh
                           •
                         Brimen & he was a very holy man / & was byſſhop of Coleyne. And he founded the monaſtery of Panthal
                           •
                        ō.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of kynge Adelſtone.
                     NOw after this Edwarde regned Adelſtone his ſone· And whā he had regned foure yere he helde batayll ayenſt the Danys. And droue kynge Gaufride that was kyng of the Danys and all his hoſte vnto the ſee / & 
                           •
                        eſted by Scotlonde / & toke ſtrongely al the countree an hoole yere. And after yt tho of Comberlonde & of Settes of weſtmerlonde begāne to warre vpon kyng Adelſtone. And he gaue thē ſo ſtronge batayll / yt he ſlewe ſo many of them that no man conde tell the nombre of them. And after yt he regned but thre yere / and he regned in all .xxv. yere / & lyeth at Malmeſbury.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of kynge Edmonde.
                     THenne after this Adelſtone regned edmōde his brother. For kyng Adelſtone had no ſone / and this Edmōde was a worthy man and a doughty knyghte of body / and a
                           •
                        
                        
noble alſo. And the thyrde yere after that he was kynge / he wente ouer Homber in to that countree in the whiche coūtree he fonude two kynges of Danys. That one was called Enelaf. And that other Renant· This kynge Edmonde droue them bothe fro the londe / and after wente / and toke a grete proye in Comberlonde. This Edmonde regned but .vii. yere / and lyeth at Glaſtenbury.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of kynge Eldred
                     ANd after this Edmōde regned Eldred his broder that auenged Edwarde his fader of his enmyes that dyde hym ſlee. And after he ſeaſed all Northumberlonde in to his honde. And made the Scottes for to bowe and meke vnto his wyll. And in the ſeconde yere of his regne came Arnalaf Guyran that was kynge of Denmarke / and ſeaſed all Northumberlonde / and helde that londe two yere. And after that came kynge Eldred and draue hym out of this londe. And this kynge Eldred was a noble man and a good / Of whoos goodnes Saynt Dunſtane preched. And this kynge Eldred regned .xi. yere / & lyeth at whyncheſter.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of kynge Edwyn.
                     ANd after this Eldred regned Edwyn the ſone of Edmonde. And he was a ſymple man to warde god and the people. For he hated folke of his owne londe / and loued & honoured ſtraunge men. And ſette lytell by holy chyrche. And he toke of hooly chirche all the treſour that he myght haue. That was greate ſhame & vylany to hymſelf / and peryll to hys ſoule. And therfore god wolde not that he ſholne regne no lenger than foure yere and deyed / and lyeth at wyncheſtre·
                     
                        LEo the ſyxt a Romayne was pope .vi. monethes. ¶Stephanus the .vii. was after hym two yere. ¶Iohannes the .xi. a Romayne was pope thre yere. ¶Stephanus the .viii. a germayne was pope after hym .viii. yere / ¶Martinus the thyrde was pope after hym thre yere / and of theſe .vi. popes is noothynge hadde in ſcrypture. For what cauſe I can not telle.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno dn̄i .ix.C.liiii.
                     AGapitus a Romayne was pope after Martinus two yere and .viii. monethes / & no thynge of hym is wryten / ¶Iohēs the .xii. a Romayne was pope after Agapitus viii. yere / & he had a fader yt hyght Albertyke & was a worthy man in ye chyte of Rome. He induced ye noble men to ſwere yt after the deth of Agapytus they ſholde theſe Ottauianus hys ſone pope / and ſoo it was done & was named Iohn̄ / and he was a hunter & a lecherous man ſo that openly he kepte wymmen wherfore certen Cardynalles wrote vnto Otto the Emperour of Saxon / that he ſholde come to Rome for to helpe to deſtroye the ſclaūdre of the chirche. This the pope perceyued / & ye honde that wrote ye pyſtle he made to be carte of And many tymes he was warned by the Emperour and the clergy that he ſholde correcte hymſelf but he nolde for noo thynge / Thenne he was depoſyd / and Leo was put in to a place. wherfore the Emperour was anoyed / and came ayen and beſyeged Rome ſo longe tyll they toke Benedycte to hym / and reſtored Leo.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of kynge Edgar that regned aboue the kynges of Scotlonde & of walys / and how he
                           •
                         was begyled thrug the takynge of his wyf.
                     ANd after this Edwyne regned Edgar hys brother a man that moche loued god and peas / and the ryght of hooly chyrche alſo. And he was a worthy man / & a grete lord of blood and myghty / and maycened well this londe in peas. And this Edgar was lorde and kynge aboue all the kynge of Scotlonde & of walys / fro the tyme that Arthur was gone / & neuer was ſythen kynge of his power. ¶And this Edgar was ſaynt Edwardes fader. And whan Edgars wyf was deed yt was ſaynt Edwardes moder & entryd / he herde ſpeke of the fayrneſſe of Eſtrylde / that was Orgarus doughter a baron of Deuenſhyre that was ſo fayre a woman / that all men dyde ſpeke of her. He called one of hys knyhhtes that he moche loued & truſted vpon & tolde hym. Go
                           •
                         ſayde he to the noble baron Orgarus of Deuenſhyre / & ſee yf that hys doughter be fayre as men ſpeke of / & yf it be ſothe I wyll haue her vnto my wyfe. ¶This knyght that was called Edelwolde wente forthe his waye as the kynge hym had ſayd / & came there that the lady was And whan he ſawe her ſo fayre / he thought to haue her hymſelf to wyfe. And therof ſpake to Grgarus her fader. And her fader was an olde man and no man chyldern but oonly her / & ſawe yt Edelwode was a fayre yonge knyght

with the kyng / & thought his doughter ſholde well be maryed & be ſette vpon hym / & graunted hym his doughter yf the good lorde ye kynge wolde conſente therto. ¶And thenne thys Edel wolde came ayen vnto the kynge & colde hym / that ſhe was fayre ynough vpon to ſee / but ſhe was wonder lothly. ¶Tho anſwerede the kynge and ſayd that he toke but lytell charge. Syr ſayd Edelwolde / ſhe is her faders heyre / and I am not ryche of londes / & yf ye wolde conſente and graunte that I myght her haue / thenne ſholde I be ryche ynough. In goddes name ſayde the kynge. I conſente therto. Edel wolde tho thanked the kynge ryght mothe / & wente ayen in to Deuenſhyre & ſpowſed the damoyſell / and in that coūtree he dwelled. ¶And thus it befell vpon a tyme / that he tolde his coūſeyll & all this thynge vnto his wyf / how & in what maner he had begyled his lord the kynge that wolde haue hadde her to wyfe. And anone as ſhe it wyſt / ſhe loued him neuer more after warde as ſhe dyde before. ¶Thys lady conceyued by hym a ſone. And whan tyme wan that the chylde ſholde be borne. Edelwolde came to the kynge and prayed hym to haue a ſone of his at the fonte ſtone. The kynge hym graunted / And lete calle hym Edgar after his owne name. And whan this was done he thought that alle was ſyker ynough for the kynge / that he wolde not take hys wyf for as moche as hys lord was a Ioly man and an amerous.
                  
                  
                     ¶How that kynge Edgar wedded Eſtrylde after the deth of Edel wolde·
                     THus it befell that all men in kynge Edgars courte then̄e ſpake & ſayd / yt Edel wolde was rychely auaunced / thrugh the forſayd maryage of his wyf. And yet they ſayd he was auaunced an hondred folde more· For he had ſpowſed the mooſt fayreſt creature yt euer ſeen. And ye kyng herde ſpeke ſo moche of her beaute / yt he thought he wolde haue hym dyſceyued / & begyled. And thought pryuely in his herte / that he wolde goo into Deuenſhyre / as it were for to hunte for the harte & for ye hynde & other wylde beeſtes / & then̄e he ſholde ſee there the lady or he departed thens. And this lady was dwellynge at manere place beſyde the foreſt / there that the kynge wolde hunte / And a
                           •
                         that manere he was her borowed all nyghte. And whan tyme came that the kynge ſholde ſuppe / and the ſonne ſhone / the kyng aſked after his goſſyppe and after hys godſone· And Edelwolde made her to come before the kynge And neuertheleſſe yf it other wyſe myght haue be ſhe ſholde not haue come in hys ſyght by hys wyll. ¶The lady welcome
                           •
                         the kynge & ſwetely hym kyſſed. And he toke her by ye honde / and to nexte by hym her ſa
                           •
                        te / and ſo ſouped they togyder. ¶And there was a cuſtome and an vſage in this londe that tyme. That ſo whan on drake to an other / the drynker ſholde ſaye waſſayll. And that other ſholde anſwere / and ſaye Drynke hayll. And thys dyde the kynge & the lady / and kyſte many tymes. And after ſupper whan tyme was for to go to bedde / the kynge wente to bedde / then kynge hertely on the 
                           •
                        ayrneſſe of that lady / & then̄e was ouer come for her loue / that hym thought that he ſholde deye / but yf he hadde his wyll on her. ¶Vppon the morowe the kynge aroos and in the foreeſt wente hym for to dyſporte wyth hartes & hyndes & all other wylde beeſtes. & of the hertes grete plente he ſence to ye lady. And thryes he went for to ſolace and to ſpeke wyth that lady the whyles he dwelled there in that countree. ¶And after that the kyng remeued thens / and thought hym how he myghte beſt delyuer Edelwod fro hys wyf / as he had hym fyrſte deſceyued. And the kynge anone after .viii. dayes ordeyned a parlyament at ſalyſbury of all his baronage counſeyll to haue. And for to ordeyne how the countree of Northumberlonde ſholde beſt he kepte that the Danys came not there / the londe for to deſtroye. And thys Edelwode came vnto the kyngꝭ parlyament. And the kynge ſent hym to yorke / for to be keper of that countree. ¶And thus it befel that knewe hym not ſlewe hym by the waye. ¶And anone as the kynge herde telle that he was deed / he lete ſende after the lady E
                           •••
                        ylde that he ſholde come vnto the cyte of London and ther he wedded to the kyng with grete ſolempnyte and worſhyp. And helde a ſolempne feeſt. And he ware a crowne yt was of golde & the quene an other. ¶And ſaynt Dunſtane on the morowe came vnto the kynge in to the chambre / and founde the kynge in bedde an
                           •
                         the quene togyders. And ſayn
                           •
                         Dunſtane axed the kynge who ſhe was / And the kynge anſwered and ſayd / yt ſhe was the quene E
                           ••
                        yllde. And the Archebyſſop ſaynt Dunſtance ſayde

that he dyde grete wronge / and ayenſt goddes wyll to take a woman to wyf whoſe chylde ye had take at fonte ſtone. And ye quene for that worde neuer loued ſaynt Dunſtance after. And the good man warned of that foly to be lefte / but it auaylled but lytell / for the loue bytwene them was ſo moche. The kynge begate vpon her a ſone that was called Eldred· whan this childe was .vi. yere olde / the kynge his fader deyed. And aboute that tyme he had regned .xvii. yere / & lyeth at Glaſtenbury.
                     BEryngarius ye thyrde was Emperour after Henrycus ·vii. yere / thys Beryngarius was Emperour in ytaly. In whoos tyme was grete dyuyſyon. ¶And Henricus thē
                        perour deceſſed / and. Otto began to regne in Almayne. ¶Lothariꝰ regned after hym two yere / and deceſſed whan. Otto regned in Almayne. And hadde a wyf that hyght Dalnyham. The whiche after wedded Otto. ¶Beringarius the fourth was after hym / this man with grete tyrannye ſubduedytaly / wherfore the pope and other romayns called Otto that he myghte delyuer them whiche he dyde. And he toke Beryngaryus by ſtrength / and twyes he outlawed hym. And he toke Lotharius wyfe the whiche the tyraūt had pryſoned. ¶Leo the .viii. was pope after Benedictus one yere and foure monethes. This man was choſen with the comyn voys / and Iohannes was depoſyd. This Leo ordeyned that no pope ſholde be made without conſente of ye Emperour For the malyce of ye Romayns the whiche oppreſſyd them. Thys man graunted all the yeftes to Otto and hys ſucceſſours / the whyche were yeuen by Iuſtinianus and Karolus to ye chyrche / that he myghte defende ytaly frome the reberlyons. ¶Iohanes the .xii. was pope after hym almooſt .viii. yere \ thys Iohēs ſuffred grete wronge of ye Romayns For he was take and exyled but Otto bare this heuyly. For he ſlewe the noble men of Rome / and certayne of them exyled for euer more. Benedyctus the .vi. was pope after hym .vi· yere / thys man was take / and in the caſtell Aungell was ſtrangled. ¶Nota. ¶The Empyre in thys tyme was tranſlated to the Almayns. And the ſame cauſe is here as was before / for the 
                           •
                        ycyous lyuynge. Ne theſe vnhappy men cowde not be Informed / that they ſhold eſchewe that 
                           •
                        o woyce / thrugh the whiche they ſa
                        
                           •
                        e ſoo many noble men to peryſſhe. ¶Otto was Emperour after Beryngarius .xii. yere. This Otto was the fyrſt Emperoure of Almayne. And he was all vertuous as an other kynge karolus for he was the defender of the chyrche of god / and the ſyngular promoter for the whyche he was worthy to be Emperoure Many men of fals byleue he conuerted And he helde with hym pope Benedictus the vſurper of the popeherd in to Soxony. And there he deceſſyd in his exyle. And this Emperoure deceſſyd a ryche man in vertue and goodnes. ¶Otto the ſeconde was Emperour after his fader. And he was a noble man to the chyrche as his fader was. And many a batayll he had ayenſt the fals men of byleue. And at the laſte he almooſt loſte all his hoſte in Kalabur / yet for ſothe with all his mynde beſought ſaynt Peter to helpe. And meruellouſly ſaynte Peter delyuered hym And his wyf was the doughter of ye Emperour of Conſtantynopolytan of the Romans bloode And this man was crowned of Benedictus the pope.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of ſaynte Edwarde the martyr how Eſcrylde hys ſtepmoder lete kylle hym / for to make Eldred her owne ſone kynge.
                     ANd after this Edgar regned Edwarde his ſone / that he begate vpon hys fyrſte wyfe / that wyll and nobly gouerned the londe. For he was full of all maner of goodnes and ledde a full holy lyf. And aboue all thynge he loued god & holy chyrche. And the quene Eſcrylde that was his ſtepmoder lete ſlee hym by cauſe to make her owne ſone Eldred kynge. And this on a daye he was ſlayne / as ye ſhalle here afterwarde. ¶It befell thus vpon a day that tha
                           •
                         kynge Edwarde wente in to a woode for to playe / in the ſouthe coūtree be ſyde a towne that is called warham. In yt whiche foreſte was grete pleyntye of hartes and hyndes. And whan he had ben whyle there hym for to playe he thought vpon his broder Eldrede that was with hys moder the quene / for her place waſte nygh the foreſte / and thought for to goo thyder and vyſyte and ſee hys brother. And toke with hym but a lytell meyne / & wente hym towarde hys ſtepmoders hous / that in that tyme ſoiourned in the caſtell of Corfe. And as he rede in ye thyckenſſe of a wood is ſpeye hys game / it befell that he wente amyſſe and loſte hys meyne that with hym came. And at the laſte he came

out of the wood. And as he lo
                           •
                        d hym about / he ſawe there there faſt beſydes a 
                           •
                        e that hys ſtepmoder dwelled in / and thyder warde he wente alone And anone it was tolde the quene / how that the kyng was comen alone wyth out ony company. And therfore ſhe made Ioy ynough / and thought how that ſhe myght do that he were ſlayne as pryuely as ſhe myght / called to her one of her knyghtes. To whome ſhe had tolde moche of her counſeyll bytwene them. And bothe they came to the kynge and curteyſly hym receyued. ¶And the kynge tolde that he was come to vyſyte / and alſo for to ſpeke with Eldred his broder The quene many tymes hym thankyd. and hym prayed for for alyght / and her borugh with her al yt nyght ¶The kynge ſayd / that he myght not. But agayne he wold goo vnto hys folke / yf he myghte theym fynde. ¶And whan the quene ſawe that he wolde not abyde / ſhe prayed hym that he wolde ones drynke / and he graunted her. And anone as the drynke was come / the quene dranke vnto the kynge. And the kynge tooke the cuppe and ſette it to his mouth. And in the meane whyle that he dranke / the falſe knyght yt was with ye quene with a knyfe ſmote the kyng vnto the herte. & there he fell downe deed vnto the erthe of his palfroy. The quene for this dede gaue the knyght golde and ſyluer greate plente and of other ryches ynough And the knyght anone as thys was done wente hym ouer the ſee. And ſo eſcaped he oute of this londe. ¶Whan this kyng Edwarde was thus martred. It was in the yere of the Incarnacyon of our lorde Iheſu Cryſte .ix.C.lxxx. And he had regned .xii. yere and an halfe / and lyeth at Glaſtenbury.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the kynge Eldred / & how the kynge Swyne of Denmake helde Englonde. and how Eldred that ſaynt Edwardes brother was not beloued in hys Realme / and therfore he fledde in to Normandye.
                     SO after this Edwarde regned Eldred his brother. And ſaynt Dunſtane crowned hym· And this ſaynt Dunſtane deyed ſoone after that he hadde foryeuen the quene her treſpa
                           •
                        s / by cauſe that ſhe was cauſe of kynge Edwardes deth. And ſaynt Dunſtane had her aſſoylled / and penaunce hadde her 
                           ••
                        oyned. And ſhe lyued after a chaſte lyf and a clene. ¶This kynge Eldred wedded an Englyſſhe woman / & on her begate Edmonde Irenſyde and an other ſone that was called Edwyne. And after deyed the quene theyr moder. ¶And in that tyme came Swyne in to Englonde that was kyng of Denmark / for to chalenge and to conquere all that his auncetrees had before that tyme. And ſoo he conquered & had it all his axyng. ¶For the good erle Cuthberte of Lynd eſeye and all the people of Northumberlonde / and almooſt al the grece of Englonde helde wyth Swyne that was kyng of Denmark / for ſo moche as they loued no
                           •
                         kynge Eldred / for by cauſe that hys good brother Edwarde was ſlayn for loue of hym. And therfore no man ſette but lytell by hym. wherfore kynge Swyne had all hys wyll / and toke alle the londe. And Eldred the kynge fledde th
                           •
                         in to Normandye. And ſoo ſpake to the duke Rycharde / that the duke yaue hym his ſyſter Emme to wyf Vpon the whiche he gate two ſones that one was called Alured and that other Edwarde. And whan Swyne had conquered all the londe / he regned nobly and lyued .xv. yere and thenne he deyed and lyeth at yorke.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Eldred came ayē from Normandy / and how knoght the Dane regned / & of the warre betwixt hym and Edmonde Irenſyde.
                     THus after ye deth of Swyne that was a Dane. Knoght hys ſone dwelled in Englonde / and wolde haue ben kynge. And tho came agayne Eldred out of Normandye with moche nombre of people / & with a ſtronge meyne that Knoght durſte not abyde / but fledde thens in to Denmarke. The kynge Eldred had agayne his reame / and helde ſo grete worſhyp / that he began for to deſtroye all tho that halpe Swyne that was a Dane ayenſte hym. And afterwarde came agayne this Knoghte from Denmark wyth a grete power / ſoo that kynge Eldred durſte not with hym fyght but fledde from thens vnto London / and there he helde hym. ¶Tho came Knoght & hym beſyeged ſoo longe / tyll that kyng Eldred deyed in the Cytee of London / and lyeth at ſaynt Poules. And he regned .ix. yere.
                     BOnu
                           •
                         was pope after Benedictꝰ one yere. This man abode but a lytell tyme ¶Bonifacius was pope after hym fyue monethes. ¶Benedictus was pope after hym .x. yere / This man crowned Otto the ſeedde / &

made many Romayns to be taken And he gadred a counſeyll agaynſt the kynge of Fraunce / where Gylbert the Nygramancer was depoſed. ¶Iohannes the ·xiiii. was pope after hym .viii. monethes. And he was put in the caſtell Aungell / and was famyned to dethe. ¶Iohannes the .xv. was pope after hym foure monethes. ¶Iohannes the .xvi. was pope after hym almooſt .xi. yere. Thys man was taught in armes / & made many bokes / & elles lytell of hym is wryten. ¶Gregorius the .v. was pope after this man almooſt thre yere. And this Gregorius was made pope atte the Inſtaunce of the Emperour Otto thyrde / for he was his conſyn / And whan he hadde be a lytell whyle pope / and the Emperoure receded from the cyte of Rome. Placentinus was put in by Crecenſius a Counſul for moneye / And thenne was ſtryfe a fewe dayes. But the Emperour came ſoone after / and tooke Crecenſius the Conſull / and ſtroke of his heed / & putte out the eyen of this man Placencius pope / ye whiche put out his coſyn of the dignyte of the pope▪ And maymed hym on other membres / his knyghtes ne his dukes halpe hym no thynge. For he dyde that thynge that he ſholde not haue done. And he ſuffred that that he deſerued. ¶Nota. This Gregorius with the Emperour Otto ordeyned the cheſers of the Empyre / the whiche frome thens forth hathe a bode vnto this daye. For the Frenſſhmen ne none other myghte not breke that ordynaunce. And thoſe the
                           •
                        ers of the Empyre by the pope and Otto were not made for ony blame of the Saxons / but to eſchewe the euylles to come. And theyr names ben wryten for lerned men in latyn in theſe verſes. (Maguntinenſis Treuerenſis Colonienſis Quilibe
                           •
                         imperu fit cancellarius horum. Et Palatinus da
                           •
                        ifer Dux Portitorenſis. Marchio prepoſitus camere. Pincerna Bohemus Huſtatuunt dominum cuntis perſecula ſummum. Palatinꝰ eſt comes ren
                           •
                        . Marcio eſt Brandebur genſis Dux ſaxorum et rex Bohemorum. verū vt quidam dicunt. ¶Thrugh this occaſyon the Egle hathe loſte many a feder. And in the ende he ſhall be made naked. ¶Otto the thyrde was Emperour .xviii. yere. Thys man was a worthy man alle the dayes of hys Empyre. And after the wyſdome of his fader / he was a very holy faythfull man to the chirche. And in many bataylles he proſperyd by cauſe he was deuoute vnto almyghty god and hys ſayntes. And yaue myghty worſhyppynge to ye relykes of ſayntes. And oftentymes he vyſyted hooly places. ¶This man was crowned by Gregorius hys coſyn. And atte the laſte he deceſſyd at Rome.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno dm̄ .M.iiii.
                     SIlueſter the Seconde was pope after Gregorius foure yere· And he was made pope by the helpe o
                           •
                         the deuyll / to whom he dyde homage / for he ſholde yeue hym all thynge that he deſyred. And he was called Hylbecte· And his enmye gate hym the grace of the kynge of Fraunce / and he made hym the byſſhop of Remenſis / but anone he was depoſyd And after he gate the grace of the Emperour / and was made the byſſhop of Rauennie / and after the pope / But he hadde an ende anone and ſoo haue all that put theyr hope in fals deuylles. ¶yet men truſte in his ſaluacyon / for certayne demonſtracyon of his ſepulcre / and for the grete penaunce that he dyde in hys laſt ende. For he made his honde and in his legges to be curte of / and dyſmembred in all his body and to be caſte out at the doore to foules / and thenne his body to be drawen wyth wylde beeſtꝭ and ther to be buryed where ſomeuer they reſted as an honde. And they ſtode ſtyl at ſaynt Iohan lateranenſis / and there he was buryed And that was ſygne of his ſaluacon. ¶Iohannes the .xviii. was pope fyue monethes. ¶Iohannes the .xix. was pope after hym fyue yere. And theſe two dyde lytell thynges. ¶Henricus the fyrſte was Emperour in Almayne .xx. yere / This henricus was duke of Barry / and all accordynge he was choſen for his bleſſyd fame and good name the whiche he hadde. ¶And it is redde / that many of theſe dukes of Barry werre holy men / not all only in abſteydynge of fleſſhely dyſyres / but alſo in vertuous lyuynge. And this man had a ſyſter that was as holy as he / the whome he yaue to wyf vnto the kyng of Hūgry And ſhe brought all Hungry vnto the ryght byleue & the criſten fayth. And his wyues name was (ſancta Konnogundis) with whom he lyued a vyrgyne all his lyues dayes. And alſo he dyde many a batayle / as well in ytaly / as in Almayne ayenſt the rebellyous / and proſperyd ryght wyſly. Atte the laſte wyth a bleſſyd ende he deceſſyd.

And in the lyfe of ſaytn Laurēce he and hys wyf be put for enſamples. ¶Benedictꝰ was pope after Iohānes .xi yere. This man hadde grete ſtryfe in hys dayes / for he was put out \ and a nother put in. And this Benedictus after that he was deed was ſeen of an holy mā byſſhop in a wretchyd fygure / and he had grete payne. And thys fygure ſayd. He truſted no thynge in the mercy of god. And no thyng profyted hym yt was done for hym / for it was goten with extorcyon & vniuſtely. Thenne this byſſhop left his byſſhopryche for dred of thys ſyght & went in to a monaſtery & lyued vertuouſly all hys dayes. ¶Iohānes the .x. was pope after hym ·xi. yere / and lytell profyted.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of kynge Knoght that was a Dane.
                     ANd after the dethe of Eldred Knoght that was a Dane began to regne. but Edmonde Irenſyde that was kyng Eldredes ſone by his fyrſte wyf / ordeyned a grete power of men / & began for to warre on kyng Knoghte / And ſo he dyde many tymes and often / And the warre was ſo ſtronge & harde / ye wonder it was to wyte· ¶And the quene Emme that dwelled tho in weſtmeſtre / had grete drede of her two ſones of the warre Alured & Edwarde / leſt they ſholde be defoyled & myſdone thorugh this warre. wherfore ſhe ſente theym ouer ye ſee in to Normandy to ye duke Rycharde theyr vncle. And there they dwelled in ſaufte and peas longe tyme. ¶This Edmonde Irenſyde and Knoght the Dane warred ſtrongely to gyder. But at the laſt they were accorded in this manere / yt they ſholde departe ye reame betwixt them both / and ſoo they dyde / & after they became good frendes. And ſo well loued to gyder as they had ben brethern goten of one fader and of one moder borne.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Edmonde Irenſyde traytourſly was ſlayne thorugh a traytour / that was ralled Eldred of Strotton.
                     ANd after tho regned kynge Irenſyde and Knoght the Dane. But thus it befel afterwarde / that in the ſame yere that they were accorded / and ſo moche loued to gyder. wherfore a fals traytour hadde enuytee to the loue that was betwixt theym and frendſhyp / whoos name was Edrith of Stratton / yt was a grete lord / that was Edmonde Irenſydes man / & of hym helde all the londe that he had. And neuertheles he thought his lord to betray & make Knoght kynge of the londe / to the entente rychely to be auaūced / and with hym be well beloued / wherfore he prayed hys lord Edmonde Irenſyde vppon a daye wyth hym for to ete. And the kynge hym curteyſly graunted & to hym came at his prayer And at the mete ye kynge ryally was ſerued wyth dyuers meeteꝭ and drynkes. And whan the nyght came yt he ſholde go vnto bedde. The kynge toke his owne meyne & went vnto the chambre there yt he ſholde take his nyghtes reſte. And as he loked hym about / he ſawe a fayre ymyge & well made / and in ſemblaūt as it were an Archer with a boowe / & in the boowe a fyne arowe. ¶Kynge Edmonde wente tho nere for to beholde it better what it myght be. And anon the arowe ſmote hym thrughe the body & there ſlewe the kynge· For that engyne was made for to ſlee his owne lorde traytourſly. ¶And ſoo whan kynge Edmōde was thus deed and ſlayne he had regned but .x. yere. And his peple for hym made moche ſorowe. And his body they ba
                           •
                        e vnto Glaſtenbury & there theym hym en
                           •
                        yred ¶And this fals traytour Edrith anone went unto the quene / that was kynge Edmondes wyf / that wyſt not of her lordes dethe. Anone he toke frome her tow ſones that were fayre & yonge / that her lorde had vpon her goten that one was called Edward / & that other Edwyn And lawe theym with hym to Londen & toke them vnto kynge Knoght / yt he ſholde do wyth them what his wyll were. And tolde hym how ſubtylly he had ſlayne kyng Edmonde / for by cauſe & loue of hym / ſo that kynge Knoght all Englonde in his power hooly myghte haue. ¶O thou fals traytoure / haſte thou my true brother that was ſoo true thus ſlayne for me / mā I moſt loued in ye world. Now by my heed I ſhall for thy traueyll well rewarde as thou haſt deſerued / & anone lett hym be take & bounde honde & foot in maner of a traytour / & lete caſt hym there in to Tamyſe / & in thys maner the fals traytour ended his lyf. The kynge toke the two childern and put them unto the abbot of weſtmeſtre to warde & to kepe tyll that he wyſt was beſt with them to do.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Knoght ſente kynge Edmondes ſones both in to Dēmarke to be ſlayne / and how they were ſaued.
                     SO it befell ſoone after that kynge Knoghte had all the londe in his honde / and

ſpowſed the quene Emme thorughe conſente of his baronage. For ſhe was a fayre woman the whiche was Eldredes wyf and the dukes ſyſter of Normandye / and they lyued togyder with moche loue as reaſon wolde. The kynge axed vpon a daye counſeyll of the quene what was beſt to do with the ſonnes that were Edmonde Irenſydes. Syre ſayd ſhe. they ben the ryght heyres of ye londe / and yf they lyue they wyll do moche ſorowe with warre / and therfore lete ſende them in to a ſtrange londe a ferre to ſome man that maye them defoyle and deſtroy. The kynge anone lete calle a dane that was called walgar / and commaunded hym that he ſholde lede tho two childern / in Denmarke / and ſoo to doo and ordeyne for them / that he ſholde neuer here more of theym. Syr ſayde this walgar / gladly your commaundement ſhall be done & anone tho two chyldern he toke and ladde them in to Denmarke. And for as moche as he ſawe that the chyldern were wonder fayr and alſo meke / he had of them grete pyte & ruthe / & wolde them ſlee / but ladde them to the kynge of Hungry for to nourſſhe / for this walgar was well be knowen with the kynge & well beloued. Anone the kynge axed whens the childern were / & walgar tolde hym and ſayde / that they were the ryght heyres of Englonde and therfore men wolde deſtroye them / And therfore ſyr vnto you they be come mercy & helpe for to ſeke. And for ſothe yf they may lyue / your men they ſhal become / and of you they ſhall holde all theyr londe. The kynge of Hungry receyued them wyth moche honour / and lete them worthely be kepte. ¶And thus it befell after warde that Edwyne ye yonger brother deyed / & Edwarde ye elder brother lyued / a fayre man & a ſtronge / & a large of body & gentyll / and curteys of condycyons / ſo yt all men hym loued / And this Edwarde in the Cronycles is called amonge the Englyſſhmen Edwarde ye outlawe. ¶And whan as he was made knyght / the kynges doughter of Hūgry hym moche loued for hys goodnes & hys fayrnes / that ſhe him called her derlyng. The kynge that was her fader perceyued well the loue that was betwixt them two / and had no heyre but only that doughter / and the kyng vowche ſauf his doughter to no man ſo well / as he dyde to hym that ſhe loued ſoo well & he her / & yaue her vnto hym with a good wyll / and Edwarde her ſpowſed with moche honour. The kynge of hungry ſente after all hys baronage and made a ſolempne feeſt & a ryche weddynge. And made all mē to vnderſtande / that this Edwarde ſholde be kynge of that londe after the deceſſe of hym. And of that tydynges they were all full gladde. This Edward begate vppon his lady a ſone / that was called Edgar Helynge / & afterwarde a doughter that was called Margarete that afterwarde was quene of Scotlonde. And by the kynge of Scotlonde yt was called Mancolin ſhe had a doughter that was called Maude yt was quene afterwarde of Englonde / thrugh kynge Henry that was the fyrſte ſone of the conquerour that her wedded And he begate on her a doughter that was called Maude that afterwarde was Empreſſe of Almayn. And of this Maude came ye kynge of Englonde that vnto thys daye is called Henry the Empreſſe ſone. And yet hadde thys Edwarde an other doughter by hys wyfe that was called Cryſten and ſhe was a Nonne.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Knoght that was proude man conquered Normandy / & how he became afterwarde meke and mylde.
                     NOw haue we herde of Edmonde Irenſydes ſones that kynge Knoght wende they had ben ſlayne as he had commaunded walgar before· And this kynge Knoght hadde in his honde all the reame of Englonde & denmarke. And after that they wente vnto Norwaye that londe for to conquere. But the kynge of the lond that was called Elat came with his people / & wende his londe to haue well kepte & defended / & ſoo there he faught wyth hym tyll at the laſte he was ſlayne in that batayll. And tho this Knoght toke all the londe in hys honde. And whan he had conquered Norway and taken feaute & homages there / he came ayen into Englonde / and helde hym ſelf ſo grete a lord / that hym thought in all the world hys pere noo man was. And he came ſoo proude & hauteyne that it was grete wonder. ¶And ſo it befell vpon a daye as he had herde maſſe at weſtmeſtre / and wolde haue gone in to hys palays / the wayes of the Tamyſe ſo ſwyftely ayenſt hym came that almooſt they touched his feet. Tho ſayd the kynge with a proude herte I cōmaunde the water to torne ayen / or elles I ſhall make the \ The wawes for his cōmaundemente wolde not ſpare / but flowed euer in

heyght more and more. ¶The kynge was ſo proude of herte that he wolde not flee the water and bete it with a rodde that he had in hys honde / and cōmaunded the water that it ſholde go no ferder. But for all his cōmaundemēt the water wolde not ceſſe / but euer wexed more and more on hygh / ſo that the kyng was all wete & ſtode depe in the water. And whan he ſawe that he had abyden there to longe / & the water wolde no thynge do his cōmaundemēt tho ſoone he with drewe hym / and tho ſtode he vpon a ſtone and helde his hondes on hyghe & ſayde theſe wordes herynge alle the people. ¶This god that maketh the ſee thus aryſe / is kynge of all kyngꝭ / and of all myghtes mooſt. And I am a catyf and a man deedly / and he maye neuer deye / & all thynge dothe hys commaundement / & to hym obedyent. ¶To that god I praye / that he be my warraunt. For I knowlege me a caytyf feble / and of no power And therfore I wyll goo vnto Rome without ony longe lettynge / and my wyckedneſſe for to punyſſhe and me to amende. For of god I clayme my londe for to holde / and of none other. And anon made redy his heyre and hym ſelfe wente to Rome withoute ony lettynge. And by the waye dyde many almeſſe dedes / and whan he came to Rome alſo. And whan he hadde be there / for his ſynnes doo penaunce / he came ayen in to Englonde / and became a good man and a holy. And lyued and lefte alle manere pryde and ſtoutenes / lyued an hooly lyfe after / and made two abbayes af ſaynt Benet / one in Englonde and an other in Normandye / for as moche as he loued ſaynte Benet more ſpecyally thanne other ſayntes. And moche he loued ſaynt Edmonde the kynge. And ofte he yaue greate yeftes to the how ſe / wherfore it was made ryche. ¶And whan he hadde regned .xx. yere he deyed / and lyeth at wyncheſtre.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno dm̄ .M.xviii.
                     BEnedictus the .ix. was pope after Iohannes / and he was a grete lechour / & therfore he was dampned / and he apperyd to a certayne man vnder a meruaylous fygure & an horryble. His heed & his tayle was lyke an aſſe / that other parte of his body lyke a bere. And he ſayd to this man to whom he apperyd. Be not aferde / for I was a man as ye now be but I apeyre now / for I lyued vnhappely in olde tyme lyke a beeſt whan I was pope. In this mannes tyme there was grete dyuyſyon & ſclaūder to ye chirche for he was put out & in two tymes. ¶And here Tholomeus noteth / that the pryde of byſſhops hadde euer an euyll ende. And it was euer the occaſyon of moche vnreſt and batayll. ¶Conradu
                           •
                         ye fyrſt was Emperour after Henricus .xx. yere. This man made many lawes / and commaunded peas to be kepte mooſt ſtraytly of ony man. But the erle of Ludolf was accuſed / & he fledde frome his londe / & deſyred more to lyue lyke a churle than lyke a gentyll man / & yet meruayllouſly his ſone was made Emperour by the cōmaundemente of god ayenſt the wyll of Conradus. And at the laſte they were accorded. And he toke Corodis doughter to his wyf.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of kynge Harold that leuer had goo on foot than ryde on hors.
                     THis Knoght of whom we haue ſpoken of before / hadde two ſones by his wyf Emme / & that one was called Hardyknoght / and that other Harold. And he was ſo lyght of foot that men called hym mooſt comynly Harolde Hare foot. And this Harold had no thynge the condycyons & the maners of kyng 
                           •
                        noghte that was his fader. For he ſette but lytell pryce of chyualrye / ne noo curteyſe nother worſhyp / but only by hys owne wyll And he became ſoo wycked that he exyled hys moder Emme. And ſhe went out of ye lōde in to Flaū
                        dres / & there dwelled with the erle / wherfore after there was neuer good loue betwixt hym & his broder For his broder hated hym deedly 
                           •
                         and whan he had regned two yere and lytell more / he deyed and lyeth at weſtmeſtre.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of kynge Kariknoght that was Haroldes brother.
                     AFter this Harold Hare foot / Regned his brother Hardiknoght a noble knyghte and a worthy man / and moche loued chyualry / and all maner of goodnes / And whan thys Hardiknoght had regned a lytell whyle / he lette vncouere hys brother Harold & ſmote of his heed / that was his brother att weſtmeſtre / & lete caſt the heed in to a gonge / & the body in to Tamyſe. And after came fyſſhers & toke the body with theyr nettes by nyght / and bare hym to ſaynt Clementes chyrche and there hym caryed. And in this maner auenged hym Hardiknoght of hys broder for in none other

maner he myght be auengeb· This kyng Hardiknoght was ſo large a yeuer of meete & drynke / that his tables were ſete euery daye thre tymes full ryall meetes & drynkes for his owne meyne / and for all that came vnto / hys courte to be rychely ſerued of ryall meetes. And thys kynge Hardiknoght ſent after Emme his moder / & made her come ayen ī to Englonde / for ſhe was dryuen out of Englonde whyle that Harold Hare f
                           •
                        ot regned / thrugh counſeyll of the erle Godewin / yt tho was the gretteſt lorde of Englonde next the kyng / & mooſt myght do thrugh oute all Englonde what he wolde hys cōmaūdement / for as moche as he had hys ſpouſed doughter of ye good kyng Knoght / that was a Dane / whiche doughter he had by hys fyrſte wyfe. ¶And whan this quene was dryuen out of Englonde / and come to the Erle of Flaundres / that was called Balde wyne her coſyn / he founde her there all thynge that her neded / vnto the tyme that ſhe went ayen in to Englonde / that the kynge Hardiknoght had ſente for her that was her ſone and made her come ayen with moche honour. This kynge Hardyknoght whan he had regned fyue yere he deyed and lyeth at weſtmeſtre.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the vylany that the Dany
                           •
                         dyde to ye Englyſſhmen. wherfore fro ye tyme after was no Dane made kynge of this londe.
                     ANd after the deth of this kynge Hardyknoght / for as moche as he hadde noo thynge of hys body begoten / The erles & barons aſſembled / & made a coūſell / that neuer more after noo man ye was a Dane / though he were neuer ſo grete a man amonges them / he ſholde neuer be kynge of Englonde for the deſpyte that the Danes hadde done to Englyſſhmen. For euermoore before & yf it were ſo that the Englyſſhmen and the Danys hapened for to mete vpon a brydge / the Englyſſhmen ſholde not be ſo hardy to meue ne ſtyre a foot / but ſtande ſtyll tyll the Dane were paſſed for the. And more ouer yf ye Englyſſhmen had not bowed downe theyr heedes to doo reuerence vnto the Danys / they ſholde haue ben beten & defoylled. And ſuche maner deſpytes & vylany dyde the Danys to our Englyſſhmen. wherfore they were dryuen out of ye londe after tyme that kynge Hardyknoght was deed / for they had no lord ye theym myght mayntene. ¶And in this maner auoyded the Danys Englonde that neuer they came ayen. ¶The erles & barons by theyr comyn aſſent & by theyr counſelles ſent unto Normandy for to ſeke thoſe two brethern Alured & Edwarde yt were dwellyng with the duke Richharde that was theyr came in entente for to crowne Alured the elder brother / & hym make kynge of Englonde. And of this kynge to make an ende / the erles & barons made theyr othe. But the Erle Godewin of weſtſex falſely & traytourſly thought to ſlee the ſe two brethern anone as they ſholde come in to Englonde / in entent / to make hys ſone Harolde kynge the whyche ſone he had begote vp on his wyf / the whiche was kynge Knoghtes doughter that was a Dane. And ſo this Godewin pryuely hym wente to South hampton for to mete there the two brethern whan that they ſholde come vnto london. ¶And thus it befell the meſſengers that went in to Normandy / foūde but oonly Alured that was the elder brother For Edwarde hys brother was gone in to hūgry for to ſpeke with his coſyn Edwarde the outlawe / yt was Edmonde ſone with the Irenſyde. The meſſengers tolde & ſayde Alured / how that erles & barons of Englonde ſente after hym / & that he boldely ſholde come in to Englonde and receyue the reame. For kynge Hardiknoght was deed and all the Danes dryuen out of the londe.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Godewin the fals traytour toke Alured vppon Gyldeſdowne whan that he came from Normandy to be kynge of Englonde and how he cauſed hym to be martyred in the yle of Ely.
                     AS Alured herde theſe tydynges he thā
                        ked god. And in ſhyppe went with all the haſt yt he myght & paſſed the ſee / & arryued at Southhampton there Godewin the fals traytour was. And whan this traytour ſawe that he was come / he welcomed hym and receyued hym with moche Ioye & ſayd / that he wolde lede hym to London there ye all the barons of Englonde hym abode to make hym kynge. And ſo they went on theyr waye to warde London / And whan they came on Gyldeſdowne tho ſayd the traytour Godewin vnto Alured Take kepe aboute you both on the left ſyde & ryght ſyde / & of all ye ſhall be kynge / and of ſuche and hondred more Now forſothe ſayd Alured. I behyght you & yf I be kynge. I ſhall ordeyne & make ſuche lawes / wherfore god and

man ſhal
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           •
                        ell pleaſed. Now had the traytour cōm
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                         al his men yt were with hym That wh
                           〈…〉
                        re come vpon Gyldeſdowne that the
                           〈…〉
                        lee all that were Aluredes cōpany / that 
                           ••
                        re with hym fro Normandy / and after that take Alured & lede hym in to the yle of ely & after put out hys eyen of his heed & afterwarde brynge hym to ye deth / & ſo they dyde. For they ſlewe al ye cōpany that there were / ye nōbre of xii. gentylmen that were come with hym fro Normādy / & after toke they Alured & in ye yle of Ely they put out his eyen & rent hys wombe & toke the chyef of his bowels / & put a ſteke in the groūde / & an ende of ye bowels ther to faſtened / & with nedles eyleſſe of yren they prycked the good chylde / & ſo made hym to go about ye ſtake tyll yt al his bowels were drawē out of his body / & ſo dyed Alured there thrugh treaſon of the erle Godewin. ¶Whan the lordes of Englond had herde & wyſt how Alured that ſhold haue be theyr kyng was put to deth thrugh the fals traytour Godewin they were wonder wroth. And ſwore bytwene god & thē that he ſholde deye a more wors deth / than dyde Edrith of Strattō / yt had betrayed his lord Edmonde Irenſyde / & they wolde haue pute hym to deth / but ye theyf traytour fledde thens in to Denmark / & there helde hym foure yere and more / and loſt all his londe in Englonde.
                     SIlueſter the thyrde was pope after Benedictus. ¶Thys Silueſter was choſe / and Benedictus was expulſyd. And after warde was he expulſyd / and Benedictus was put vp ayen. And after he was put out / and Gregorius was made pope. ¶And he was but a ſymple lettred man / and therfore he choſe an other man for to be conſecrate with hym And whan many men were dyſpleaſed wyth thys godynge of two popes / the thyrde was brought in the whyche ſholde occupye the place of bothe the tow. And ſo they ſtroue amonge themſelf. But Henry the Emperour came thenne to Rome & depoſyd them all and made Clement the ſeconde pope / whom he made anone to crowne hym. And he ſayde to the Romayns / they ſholde neuer cheſe pope wythout his aſſente. And ſoo fyue beynge popes / ſixte was put in. And many men ſaye / this Gregorius was an holy man. ¶Damaſius the ſecō
                        de was after Clemente .xx. dayes. This man was an vſurper of the popeheed / and ſo he deyed ſodenly. And anone the Romayns aſked to haue a pope / & that the Almayns ſholde haue none. For they were ſo harde herted / that they myhht not enclyne to the entence of the Emperour / the whiche ſayd. There ſholde be no pope choſen but yf he wolde be of counſeyl of the eleccyon. But for all that the put in this holy man Leo / and after he had of that conſcyence and refuſed. And anone he was choſyn by the comyn aſſent / this Leo put Cryſte in the fourme of a Laſer in his owne bedde / and in ye morowe he founde no thynge there.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of ſaynt Edwarde the confeſſour / that was Aluredes brother / & how he was kynge of Englonde.
                     
                        
ANd whan this was done / al the barons of Englonde ſente an other tyme in to Normandy / for that Edw
                           •
                        rde ſholde come in to Englond with moche honour. And this Edwarde in hys chyldehode loued almyghty god & hym dradde. And in honeſte and clenneſſe hadde his lyf and hated ſynne as dethe. And whan he was crowned and anoynted wyth a ryall power forgate not his good maners and condycyons that he fyrſte vſed. And forgate not alle good cuſtomes for no maner of honour / ne for ryches / ne no manere hyghnes. But euermore and more yaue hym to goodneſſe and loued god and hooly chyrche paſſynge all other manere thynge. ¶And poore men alſo be loued / and theym helde as they hadde ben hys owne brethern. And to them ofte he yaue greate almeſſe with full good wyll.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the fyrſte ſpecyall loue that god ſhe
                           〈…〉
                         to ſaynt Edwarde lyuynge.
                     IT befell on a daye / as he went from the chyrche of weſtmeſtre. And hadde herde maſſe of ſaynt Iohan the Euangelyſt / for as moche as he loued ſaynt Iohn̄ euangelyſt more ſpecially after god and hour lady than he dyde ony other ſaynt. And ſo there came to hym a pelgryme / & prayed hym for the loue of god and our lady and ſaynt Iohan the euangelyſt ſome good hym for to yeue. And the kynge pryuely toke his rynge of his fynder / that no man perceyued it and yaue it to the pelgryme / and he it receyued and wente thens. ¶This kynge

Edwarde made all the good lawas of Englonde / that yet ben mooſt vſed and holden. And was ſo mercyable and ſo ful of pyte / that noo man myght be more.
                  
                  
                     ¶How the erle Godewyn came ayen in to Englonde & had ayen all his londe / and afterwarde ſaynt Edwarde weded his doughter.
                     AS the Erle Godewin that was dwellynge in Denmarke had moche herde of the godneſſe of kyng Edwarde / & yt he was ſo full of mercy & of pyte. He thought yt he wolde go ayen in to Englonde / for to ſeke & to haue grace of the good kynge Edwarde that ſoo mercy full was / that he myght haue ayen hys londe in peas. And arayed hym as moche as he myght & put hym to warde the ſee & came in to Englonde to London there the kynge was that tyme and all the lordes of Englonde / and helde a parlyament. Godewin ſente to hym yt were his frendes / and were the mooſt gretteſt lordes of the londe / & prayed them to beſeche the kynges graet for hym / & that he wolde hys peas & his londe graunte hym. The lordes ledde hym before the kyng to ſeke his grade. And anone as the kynge hym ſawe / he apeled hym of treaſon & of the deth of Alured his brother and theſe wordes vnto hym ſayde. Traytour Godewin ſayd the kynge I the appele / yt thou haſt betrayed & ſlayn my brother Alured. Certes ſyr ſayde Godewin. ſauynge your grace & your peas and your lordſhyp. I hym neuer betrayed / ne yet hym ſlewe· & therfore I put me in rewarde of ye courte. Now fayr lordes ſayd the kynge. ye yt ben my lyeges / erles & barons of the londe that here be aſſembled / fulle welle ye herde my appele / And the anſwere alſo of Godewin / and therfore I woll that ye a warde and dooth ryght. The erles & Barones tho gadred them all togyder for to do this a warde by themſelf / and ſo they ſpake dyuerſely amū
                        ge them. For ſome ſayd / there was neuer alyaunce by homage ſeriment ſeruyce ne by lordſhyp bytwene Godewin and Alured / for whyche thynge they myght hym drawe. And att the laſte they deuyſyd and demed / That he ſholde put hym in ye kynges mercy all togyder. Tho ſpake ye erle Leuerik of Couentree a good mā to god and to all the worlde / and tolde hys reaſon in this manere & ſayd. The erle Godewin is the beſt fended man of Englonde after the Kynge / & well it myght not be agayne ſayd / ye wythout counſell of Godwin Alured was neuer put to dethe / wherfore I a warde as towchynge my parte / that hymſelf & hys ſone & euery of vs .xii. erles that ben hys frendes goo before the kynge / charged with as moche golde & ſyluer as we maye bere betwyxt our hondes / praynge ye kyng to forgyue his euyll wyll to the erle Godewin / & receyue hys homage / & his londe yelde ayen. And they accorded vnto that a warde / and came in thys maner as is aboueſayd euery of them with holde and ſyluer as moche as they myght bere bytwene her hondes before the kynge / & there ſayd the fourme & the maner of they accorde & of theyr a warde The kyng wolde not theym agayne ſaye / But as moche as they ordeyned / he graunted & confermed And ſo was ye erle Godewin accorded with the kynge / & ſo he had ayen all his londe. And afterwarde he bare hym ſo well & ſo wyſely / that the kynge loued hym wonder moche / & with hym he was fulle preuy. And within a lytell tyme they loued ſo moche / that there the kynge ſpowſed Godewyns doughter / & made her quene. And neuertheleſſe though the kyngge had a wyf / yet he lyued euer in chaſtyce & clē
                        neſſe of body without ony fleſſhely dede doynge with his wyf. And the quene alſo in her halfe ladde an holy lyf two yere / and deyed. And afterwarde the kyng lyued all hys lyf without ony wyf. ¶The kynge yaue the erledome of Oxenforde to Harolde that was Godewyns ſone / and made hym erle. And ſo well they were beloued / bothe the fader and he / and ſo pryue with the kyng / both the fader and the ſone that they myghte doo by ryght what thynge that they wolde For ayenſt ryght wolde he nothynge doo for noo maner man / ſoo good and true he was of conſcyence. And therfore oure lorde Iheſu Cryſte greate ſpecyall loue vnto hym ſhewed.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kyng Edwarde ſawe Swyne kynge of Denmark drowned in the ſee in the tyme of the Sacrament as he ſtode & herde maſſe.
                     IT befelle vppon wytſondaye as kynge Edwarde herde his maſſe in the greate chyrche of weſtmeſtre nyghe att the leuacyon of Iheſu Cryſtis body / and as alle men were gadred in to the chyrche. and came nyght the awter for to ſee the ſacrynge. the kyng his hondes lyfe vp on hygher and a grete laughter toke vp. Wherfore all that aboute hym ſtode gretely

ganne wonder. And after maſſe / they axed why the kynges laughter was fayre lorde ſayd kyng Edwarde. I ſawe Swyne the yonger that was kynge of Denmarke come in to the ſee with hys power for to haue come in to Englonde vpon vs for to warre. And I ſawe hym and hys folke drowned in the ſee / and all thys I ſawe in the leuacyon of Cryſtis body bytwene ye preeſtes hondes and I had therfore ſo grete Ioye that I myght not my laughter withholde. ¶And the erle Leueryk beſyde hym ſtode at the leuacyon / and openly ſawe ye fourme of brede torne in the lykeneſſe of a yonge chylde / and tooke vp hys ryght honde and bleſſyd the kynge and after the erle and the erle anone torned hym to ward ye kȳge for to make hym ſee ye hooly ſyght. And to ſaide ye kynge ¶Syre Erle ſayde he I ſee welle yt ye ſee / thā
                        ked be god that I haue honoured my god my ſauoyour vyſybly Iheſu Cryſt in fourme of man. whoos name he bleſſyd in all worldes.
                  
                  
                     ¶How the rynge that ſaynt Edwarde had gyuen to a poore pelgryme / for the loue of god & ſaynt Iohan Euangelyſt came ayen to kynge Edwarde.
                     THys noble man Saynt Edwarde regned .xiii. yere. And thus it befelle vpon a tyme are he deyed / that two men of Englonde were gone in to holy londe / and had done theyr pelgrymage / and were goynge ayen in to theyr owne countree where they came fro And as they went in ye waye / they mette a pylgryme that curtely theym ſaluwed / and axed of them in what londe and in what countree they were borne. And they ſayd in Englonde. Tho axed he who was kynge of Englonde. And they anſwered & ſayd. the good kyng Edwarde. ¶Fayre frendes ſayd tho the pelgryme / whan yt ye come in to your countres ayen. I praye you yt ye wyll go vnto kynge Edwarde / & oftentymes grete hym in myn name and oftentymes hym thanke of hys grete curteyſy that he to me hath done & namely for the rynge that ye haue me whan he hadde herde maſſe at weſtmeſtre for ſaynt Iohans loue Euangelyſt. And toke it to ye pelgremes & ſayd. I pray you go and bere this rynge & take it vnto king Edwarde / and tel hym that I ſende it hym and a full ryche yefte I wyll hym yeue. For vpon the .x. daye he ſhall come unto me / & euermore dwelle in bleſſe without ony ende. ¶Syr ſayde ye pelgremes / what mē be ye / & in what countree is your dwellynge. ¶Fayr frendes ſayd he I am Iohn̄ the Euāgelyſte / and I am dwellynge with almyghty god / and your kynge Edwarde is my frende / & I loue hym ī ſpecyal for by chauſe that he hath euermore lyued in clenneſſe & is a clene mayde & I praye you my meſſage fulfyll as I haue you ſayd. whan ye ſaynt Iohan the euangelyſt had them thus charged ſodenly he voyded out of theyr ſyghtes bothe / The pelgrymes tho thanked almyghty god & wene forth theyr waye. And whan they hadde gone two or thre myle. they begā to waxe wery & ſette them a downe for to reſt them / & ſo they felle one ſlepe / And whan they had ſlepte well one of them a woke & lyfe vp hys heed & loked about / & ſayd to his felowe. Aryſe vp & walke we in our way. what ſayd that one felowe vnto that other / where be we now. Certes ſayde that other / it ſemeth me yt this is not the ſame coūtree there we layde vs downe in for to reſt & ſlepe. For we were from Ieruſalem but thre myle. They toke vp theyr hondes and bleſſyd them / & went forth in theyr way And as they went in theyr waye / they ſawe ſhep
                           •
                         goynge wyth theyr ſhepe ye ſpake none other langage but englyſſhe. ¶Good frendes ſayd one of the pelgrymes / what countree is this & who is lorde therof. ¶And one of the ſheperdes anſwered & ſayd. this is ye coūtree of kent in Englonde / of the whiche the good kyng Edwarde is lorde of. The pelgrymes 
                           •
                        anked tho almyghty god and ſaynt Iohn̄ Euangelyſt & wente forthe in theyr waye and came to Caunterbury / and fro thens vnto London / and there they founde the kyng And tolde hym all frome the begynnynge vnto ye endynge aſmoche as ſaynt Iohn̄ had them charged & of al thynges how they hadſped by the waye. And tooke the rynge to the kynge Edwarde / & he tooke it 
                           •
                         & thanked almyghty god and ſaynt Iohn̄ Euangelyſt. And tho made hym redy euery daye fro daye to daye to departe out of thys lyf / whan god wolde for hym ſende.
                  
                  
                     ¶How ſaynt Edward dyed ye Twelfth day.
                     ANd after it befell thus on Cryſtmaſſe euen / as the holy man Edwarde was at goodes ſeruyce Matyns for to hereof that hyghe ſolempne feeſt. He became full lyke and in the morowe endured with moche payne the maſſe for to here. And after maſſe he lette hym

be ladde in to his chambre / There for to reſte hym. But in hys halle amonge hys barons & his knyghtes myght he not come theym for to comforte and ſolace / as he was wonte for to do at ye worthy feeſt. wherfore all theyr myrth and comforte amonge all that were in the halle was torned in to care and ſorowe / by cauſe they dradde for to leſe the good lorde ye kynge. ¶And vpon Saynt Iohn̄ daye Euangelyſte that came nexte / the kynge receyued hys ryghtes of hooly chirche / as yt befaylleth to euery criſten man & abode the mercy and the wyll of god. And ye two pylgrymes he lete before hym come and yaue theym ryche yeftes and betoke theym to god. Alſo the abbot of weſtemeſtre he lette before hym come and tooke hym that rynge in the honour of god and ſaynt Mary / and of Saynt Iohan the euangelyſt. And the abbot toke it & put it amonge other rekyles / ſo that it is at weſtmeſtre / & euer ſhall be ſo laye the kyng ſyke tyll the twelfth eue. And tho deyed the good kynge Edwarde att wehmeſtre / & there he lyeth. For whoos loue god hathe ſhewed many a fayre myracle. ¶And this was in the yere of the. Incarnacyon of oure lorde Iheſu Cryſte .M.lxv. And after he was translated and put in the ſhryne by the noble martyr ſaynt Tomas of Caunterbury.
                     VIctor the ſeconde was pope after Leo And of hym lytell is wryten. ¶Henry the ſeconde was Emperour after the fyrſte Henry .xvii. yere / this man was coſyn to Conradus / & he was borne in wood / & twyes takē for to be ſlayne whan he was a chylde / but god defended hym euermore. whan he was made Emperour / many amonaſtery he made in the ſame place in the wood where he was borne. This mā was a victoryoꝰ mā / & he entred ī to ytaly / & there he toke Padulphus the prynce of Campany. ¶Stephanus the .ix. was pope after Victor .ix. monethes. ¶Benedictus after hym / & he toke the dygnyte of the pope Stephanus by ſtrengthe & kepe it .ix. monethes / & thēne deceſſyd. ¶Henry the thyrde was Emperour after Henry the ſeconde / This Henry was an Inquyete man / and many times troubled that hooly man Gregorius the .vii. And fyrſt he axed foryeueneſſe & was aſſoyled· But he perceyuered not longe but brought in to an other pope ayenſt hym / & ſayd he was an heretyke. And Gregoriꝰ curſyd hym. And the cheſers of the Emperoure they thoſe the duke of Baxon for to be Emperour / whom thys Henry in batayll ouercame. And then̄e he came to Rome with his pope & purſewed pope Gregorius & the Cardynalles alſo. ¶And then̄e anone Robert ye kyng of Naples droue hym thēs & delyuered the pope & his Cardynalles. Neuertheleſſe yet he was a man of grete almeſſe. & .iii. tymes he faught in batayll / & at ye laſt he deyed wrytchedly / for he was put there by his owne ſone. For ſo as he dyde to other men / ſo was he done vnto. ¶Nicholaꝰ ye ſeconde was pope after Benedictꝰ two yere / this Nicolaꝰ called a coūſeyll ayenſt yt Archedeken of Turonoſeus / ye whiche was an heretyk / & taught ayenſt ye fayth. For he erred in ye ſacramēt / & after he was cōuerted & was an holy man but he coude neuer conuerte his dyſcyples. ¶Nota ¶Alexander ye ſecōde was pope after hym xii. yere / this Alexander was an holy man. & he ordeyned yt vnder payne of curſynge yt noo man ſholde here a preeſtꝭ maſſe whom men knewe had a lemman. (Vt pꝪ .xxxii. p̄cer hoc) He had ſtryue with one Codulo / but he expulſyd hym as an vſurper / & put hym out as a ſymonyer.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Harolde that was good wyns ſone was made kynge / and how he eſcape from the duke of Normandy.
                     AS ſaynt Edwarde was gone oute of this worlde / & was paſſed to god and worthely enteryd as to ſuche a grete lorde oughte / the barons of the londe wolde haue had Edwarde Elygus. ſone to Edwarde the outlawe that was Edmonde Irenſydes ſone to be kynge / For as moche as he was mooſt kyndeſt kynges blood of the reame. ¶But Harolde ſone thrugh the erle Godewyn / & ye ſtrengthe of his fader Godewyn / and thrugh other grete lordes of the reame / yt were of his kynne & vnto hym ſybbe ſeaſed all Englōde in to hys honde / & anone lette crowne hym kynge after the enterement of Saynt Edware. This Harolde that was Godewynes ſone the ſeconde yere afore that ſaynt Edwarde was deed / wolde haue gone in to Flaundres / but he was dryuen thrugh tempeſt in to the coūtree of Pountyſe / and there he was taken brought to duke wyllyam And this Harolde wende yt tho thys duke wyllyam wolde haue be auenged vpon hym for by cauſe yt the Erle Godewyn yt was roldes fader / had lete ſlee Alured that was ſaynt

Edwardꝭ brother / and pryncipally for by cauſe that Alured was quene Emmes ſone / ye was Rychardes moder duke of Normandy / that was aīenll to the duke wyllyam And neuertheles whan the duke wyllyam had Harolde in pryſon & vnder hys power / for aſmoche as this Harolde was a noble wyſe knyght & a worthy of body / & that hys fader & he was accorded with good kynge Edwarde / & therfore wolde not myſdo hym. But all manere thynges that betwext them was ſpoken and ordeyned. Harolde by hys good wyll ſwore vpon a boke / & vpon 
                           •
                        oly ſayntes that he ſholde ſpouſe & wedde duke wyllyams doughter after the deth of ſaynt Edwarde / & that he ſholde beſely doo his deuour for to kepe and ſaue the reame of Englonde vnto the profyte and auantage of duke wyllyam. ¶And whan Harolde hadde thus made his othe vnto the duke wyllyam he lette hym goo / and yaue hym many a ryche yeftes. And he tho wente thens / and came in to Englonde / and anone dyde in this manere whan Saynte Edwarde was deed / and as a man falſly for ſworne / He lette crowne hym kynge of Englonde / and falſely brake the coue name yt he hadde made before wyth duke wyllyam / wherfore he was wonder wroth wyth hym and ſwore / that he wolde vppon hym be auenged what ſome euer hym befell. ¶And anone duke wyllyam lette aſſemble a grete hoſte and came in to Englonde to aueng
                           •
                         hym vppon Harolde / and to conquere the londe yf that he myght. ¶And in the ſame yere that Harolde was crowned. Haralde Hereſtynge kynge of Denmarke arryued in Scotlō
                        de and thought to haue be kynge of Englonde and he came in Englonde and robbed / and deſtroyed all that he myght / tyll that he came to yorke / and there he ſlewe many men of armes a thouſande and a hondred preeſtes. whā this tydynges came to the kynge / He aſſembled a grete power / and wente for to fyght with Haralde of Denmarke / and wyth hys owne hondes de hym ſlewe / and the Danes were dyſcomfyted / and tho that were lefte a lyue wyth moche ſorowe fledde to theyr ſhyppes. And thus kynge Harolde of Englonde ſlewe kynge Haralde of Denmarke.
                  
               
               
                  
                     ¶Anno dm̄ .M.lxvi. ¶How wyllyam Baſtarde duke of Normandy came in to Englonde / & ſlewe kyng Harolde ¶Here come Normans and expulſyd Harolde a Saxon.
                     
                         
                        
                     
                     
                         
                        ANnd whā this bataylle was done. Harolde be came ſo proude / & wolde no thynge parte with his people of the thynge that he had goten / but helde it all to hym ſelf. wherfore the mooſt parte of his people were wrothe and frome hym departed / ſoo that oonly with hym abode no moo but his ſoldyurs. And vpon a daye as he ſate atte meete / a meſſager came to hym and ſayde / that wyllyam baſtarde the duke of Normandy was arryued in Englonde with a greate hoſte / & had take all the londe about Haſtynge / & alſo myned the caſtell. whā the kynge had herde this tydynges / he wente thyther with a lytell power in all the haſt that he myght for there but fewe people wyth hym lefte. And whan he was come thyder / he ordeyned to yeue batayll to duke wyllyam. But the duke axed him of theſe thre thynges / yf that he wolde haue his doughter to wyf as he made & ſwore his othe & behyght / or that he wolde holde the londe of hym in truage / or he wolde determyne thys thynge in batayll. This Harolde was a proude man & a ſtronge and truſted wonder moche vpon his ſtrength and faught with duke wyllyam and with his people. But Harolde & his men in this batayll were dyſcō
                        fyted / & hymſelfe there was ſlayne / and thys batayll was ended at Tombryge in the ſeconde yere of his regne / vpon ſanyt Calixtꝰ daye / and ſo he was buryed at waltham.
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶Of kynge william baſtarde & how he gouerned hym well & wyſely / & of the grete warre bytwene hym and the kynge of Fraunce.
                     AS willi
                           •
                        m Baſtarde duke of Normā
                        dy had conquered all the londe / vpon Cryſtmaſſe daye then nexte lete crowne hym kynge at weſtmeſtre and as a worthy kyng yaue vnto Englyſhmen largely londes / & to hys knyghtes And after warde he wene hym ouer the ſee & came ī to Normandy / & there he dwelled a whyle. And in the ſeconde yere of his regne he came ayen in to Englonde / and brought with hym Maude his wyf & lette crowne her quene of Englonde oon wytſondaye. ¶And tho anone after the kynge of Scotlonde / thoe was called Malcolin began to ſtryue & warre with the kyng wylyam. And he ordeined hym towarde Scotlonde with his men both by lō
                        de and by ſee / for to deſtroye kynge Malcolin But they were accorded / & the kynge of Scotlonde became hys man / and helde all hys londe of hym. And kynge wyllyam receyued of hym is homage and came ayen in to Englonde. And as kynge wyllyam hadde be kynge .xvii. yere. Maude the quene deyed / on whom kynge wyllyam hadde begote many fayr chyldern / that is for to ſaye. Robert Curthos wylllyam Rous Richarde alſo that deyed. Henry· Beauclerke / and Maude alſo that was the erles wyf of Bleynes / and other foure fayr doughters. ¶And after his wyues deth / grete debate began betwixt hym & the kynge of Fraunce Philyp but at the laſte they were accorded And tho dwelled ye kynge of Englonde in Normandy / & no man hym warned / & he no man longe tyme. ¶And the kynge of Fraunce ſayde vppon a daye in ſcorne of kynge wyllyam had longe tyme lyen in chylde bedde / and lōge tyme had reſted hym there. And this worde came to the kynge of Englonde there that he dyde lye in Normandye at Rome. And for thys worde was tho euylle apayed / & alſo wonder wrathe towarde the kynge of Fraunce. And ſwore by god / that whā he were aryſyn of his ſykeneſſe / he wolde lyghten a thouſande condelles to the kynge of Fraūce / & anone lete aſſemble a grete hoſt of Normandy & of Englyſſhe men. And in the begynnynge of the Herueſt he came in to Fraunce / and brente all the townes that they came by thrugh the coūtree and robbed & dyde all ye ſorowe that he myght thrugh out all Fraunce. And at ye laſt he brenned the cyte of Mandos / and cōmaunded his people to bere wood / & as moche as he myght brenne. And hym ſelf halpe ther to all ye he myghte with good wyll. And there was a greate hete / what of the fyre what was ſo grete / & of the ſonne that it was wōdder hote / that it ſtuffed hym ſo yt he became & fell in to a grete dyſeaſe & ſykeneſſe And whan he ſawe yt he was ſo ſtronge ſyke / he ordeyned & aſſgned alle Normandye to Robert Curthos his ſone / & all englonde to wyllyam the Rous / and bequone to Henry Beaclerke al his treaſour. And whan he thus had done / he receyued all the ſacramē
                        tꝭ of holy chyrche / and deyed ye .xx. yere of his regne \ and lyeth at Cane in Normandy.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno dm̄ .M.lxvi.
                     GRegorius the .vii. was pope after Alexander .xii. yere / this man ordeyned in a generall Synodus / that no preeſt ſholde haue a wyf ne ſholde dwelle with wymmen / but tho that the holy Synodus of Micena and other decrees had ſuffred. And then̄e the preeſtꝭ ſette nought or lytell pondred hys ordynaunce. This pope cōmaunded that no man ſholde here maſſe of a preeſt that had a concubyne And he on acertayne tyme whan he was Cardynall and Legate in to Fraunce / proceded ſharpely ayenſt prelates and / that were ſymomers. And amonge other was one byſſhoppe there that was gretely famed with ſymonye. And thoſe that accuſed hym / pryuely hyered them to ſaye the countraye. The whiche the Legate conceyued / and afor
                           •
                         all the people he ſayde. Lete the Iugement of this men ceſſe at this tyme / for it is dyſceyuable / and lette god dyſpoſe for it. And ſayde / thus it is certayne. That the dygnyte of a byſſhop is the yeuer of the holy ghoſt. And whoſomeuer byeth a byſſhopryche / doth ayenſt the holy ghoſt. Then̄e yf thou byſſhop dyde not ayenſt the holy ghoſt ſaye openly afore all the people (Glori
                           •
                         petri et filio et ſperitui ſancto) And many tymes he beganne to ſaye it / but he coude neuer ſpeke (ſpiritui ſancto) Thenne he was depoſyd of his byſſhopryche / and after he coude ſpeke it wyll ynoughe. ¶Victor the thyrde was pope after hym oo yere / & this man was poyſoned with venym in the chaly
                           •
                        . ¶Vrbanus was pope after hym two yere. This man curſyd ye kynge of Fraunce for his adu
                           •••
                        erys. And he

called a counſeyll at Claurum in the whyche he ordeyned / that matyns of our lady ſhold be ſayd euery daye / and on Saterday her ſolempne maſſe. And it is ſayde / that this was ſhewed vnto ye freres of Cartuſis. ¶Alſo he called an other counſeyll att Turan for the holy londe to be wonne ayē / and pryuoked the people to that matere / and within a lytell tyme after that matere / the holy londe was recouered and the ſepulcre of our lorde / and Anthioche with many other cytees taken fro the Sarraſyns. And it is ſayd and byleued that .CC.M. cryſten men wente to that Iourny For there wente of ſtates olde men and yonge / and alſo ryche and poore / and noo man compelled theym. And this paſſage was made by the vyſyon of our lady. And the prynces of thys peaple were dyuerſe One was Godfroy de Boloynt a full noble man of all the worlde / and a vertuous man / and an other was Beemonde the Duke of Neaples. And ye thyrde was Hughe the kynges brother of Fraunce / and many other / the whyche / dyde full nobly for the fayth of god. ¶And it were to longe in this boke to reherce the gloryous actes that they dyde. ¶Of kynge wyllyam Rous that was kynge williams baſtardes ſone ye deſtroyed townes / & houſes of Relygyon for to make ye newe foreſt.
                  
                  
                     ANd after thys wyllyam baſtarde regned his ſonne wyllyam the Rous.
                     ¶And thys wyllyam was a wonder contraryous man to god and holy chyrche / and lete amēde & make the towne of Cardies / that the Paynems had deſtroyed. Thys kynge wyllyam deſtroyed holy chirche & theyr poſſeſſions in what parte he myght them fynde. And theyr fore there was ſo moche debate bytwene hym and the Archebyſſop of Caunterbury Ancelmus. For by cauſe that he repreuyd hym of hys wyckedneſſe / that he deſtroyed holy chyrche. And for that cauſe the kynge bare to hym grete wrath. And ſo he exyled hym out of thys londe / & the Archebyſſhop went to the courte of Rome / & there dwelled with the pope / And this kynge made the newe foreſt / & caſte downe & deſtroyed .xxvi. townes. & .lxxx. houſes of Relygyon / all for to make his foreſt lenger and broder· And became wonder gladde & proude of his wood & of his foreſt. And nouryſſhed ye wylde beeſtes yt were within / that it was meruayle for to wyte / ſo that men called hym keper of wodes & of paſtures. And the more lenger that he lyued / the more wycked he became both to god & to all holy chyrche & to all his mē ¶And this kynge lete make the grete halle of weſtmeſtre. So vpon a daye in the wytſontyde he helde therin his fyrſte feeſt / and he loked hym aboute & ſayd / that the halle was to lytell by the half deale. And at the laſte he became ſo contraryous / that al thynge yt pleaſed god dyſpleaſed hym / & all thynge that god loued / he hated deedly. ¶And ſo it befell that he dremyd vpon a nyght a lytell or that he deyed / that he was lete blood / and bledde a grete quantyte of blood / & a ſtreme of blood lepte on hygh to warde heuen more than a hondred fadom and the clereneſſe of the daye was torned vnto nyghte and derkeneſſe of the fyrmamente alſo ¶And whan that he a woke he hadde grete drede ſoo that he not wyſt what for to do. And tolde his dreme to men of his counſeyll and ſayde that he had grete drede / and ſuppoſyd that to hym was ſome myſcaunce to come. ¶And the ſeconde nyght before a monke dremyd of ye houſholde / that the kynge wente in to a chyrche wyth moche people / & he was ſo prowde that he dyſpyſed all the people that were with hym & that he toke ye ymage of the Crucefire & ſhamefully bote it with his teeth. And the Crucefixe mekely ſuffred all that he dyde. But yer y
                           •
                         kyng and as a wood man rente of the armes of the Crucefixe / & caſte it vnder his feet / and defoylled it / and threwe it alle a brode / And 
                           •
                         grete fyre came out of the Crucefixe mouthe. Of whiche dreme many a man had grete meruaylle and wonder. ¶The good mā that had dremyd this ſtraunge dreme / tolde it to a knyghte that was mooſt pryue wyth the kynge of all men / & the knyght was called Hamondes ¶Soone the mōke and he tolde the dremes to the kyng & ſayd. That it ſholde betoken other thynge than good / And neuertheles the kyng laughed ther at twyes or thryes / and lytell ſe
                           •
                        
                        te therby / & thought that he wolde go & hunte / and playe in the foreſt. And men counſeylled hym ye he ſhold not go ye day for no maner thinge ne come in the wood / ſo that he abode at home before meete / But oonly as he had eten no man hym myght lette / but he wolde go vnto the wood for to haue his dyſporce. ¶And ſo it befell that one of his knyghtes that hyght walter Tyrell / wold haue ſhot to a harre / and

hys arowe glenſyd vpon a braunche / & thorughe myſauenture ſmote the kynge to the herte And ſo he felle downe deed to the groūde with out ony worde ſpekynge / and ſo ended hys lyf dayes. And it was no meruaylle / for the day yt he deyde he had lete to ferme the Archebiſſhop ryche of Caūterbury / & xabbayes alſo / & euer more dyde grete deſtruccyon to holy chyrche / thrugh wrongfull takynge & axenges / for no man durſte withſtande that he wolde haue done. And of his lewdenes he wolde neuer withdrawe / nother to amende hys lyf. And ther fore god wolde ſuffer hym no lenger to regne in his wyckednes. And he had be kyng .xiii. yere and .vi. wekes / and lyeth at weſtmeſtre.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno dm̄ .M.lxxxviii.
                     PAſchall was pope after Vrbanꝰ .xviii. yere and .v. monethes / the wiche ye .xiii. ye
                           •
                        e of his byſſhopryche with his cardynalles was put in pryſon / by Henry ye fourth Emperour & they myght not be delyuered vntyll the pope had ſwore that he ſholde kepe peas with hym / and that he ſholde neuer curſe hym / and on that promyſe / the pope yaue the Emperour a preuylege / and the yere after the pope damned that preuylege / & ſayd on this wyſe. Lete vs comprehende all holy ſcrypture the olde teſtament & the newe the lawes of the prophecyes the goſpell & the canons of appoſtles / & all the decres of the popes of Rome / that all they helde I holde / and that that they dampned 
                           •
                         dampne / and mooſt ſpecya
                           •
                        le that preuylege graunted to Henry the Emperour / the whiche rather is graūted to venge his malyce than to multeplye hes paceyence in vertue. For euermore I dampne ye ſame preuylege
                  
                  
                     ¶Of kynge Henry Beauclerk that was william Rous brother / & of the debate bytwene hym & Robert Curthos his brother.
                     ANd whan wyllyam Rous was deed. Henry Beauclerk his broder was made kyng bycauſe wyllyam Rous had no chylde begoten on his body. And this Henry Beauclerk was crowned kynge att London the fourth daye after that his brother was deceſſyd / that is to ſaye / the fyfthe daye of Auguſt. ¶And anone as ancelmus that was Archebyſſhop of Caūterbury that was at the court of Rome herde telle that wyllyam Rous was deed / he came ayen in to Englonde & the kynge Beauclerk welcomed hym with moche onour. And the fyrſt yere that kyng Henry regned & was crowned. He ſpowſed maude ye was Margaretes doughter the quene of Scotlonde. And the Archebyſſhop Ancelmus of Caunterbury wedded theme And this kynge begate vpon his wyf two ſones & a doughter / that is to ſaye. wyllyam and Richarde & Maude. And this Maude was after warde the Empreſſe of Almayne. ¶And in the ſeconde yere of hys regne / his broder Robert Curthos / that was duke of Normandy came with an huge hoſte in to Englond for to chalenge the londe. But thrughe counſeyle of wyſe men of the londe / they were accorded in this manere. That the kynge ſholde yeue his brother the duke a thouſande pounde euery yere. And whiche of them that lyued lengeſt ſholde be that others heyre and ſo bytwene them ſholde be noo debate ne ſtryfe. ¶And thenne whan they were thus accorded / ye duke wente home agayne in to Normandye· ¶And whanne the kynge had regned foure yere. There a roſe a grete debate bytwene hym and the Archebyſſhop of Caunterbury Ancelmus. For by cauſe that the Archebyſſhoh wolde not graunte to hym for calēges of chyrches at hys wyll. And the reforde perſonse the Archebyſſhoppe Ancelmus wente ouer the ſee vnto the courte of Rome and there he dwelled with the pope. And in the ſame yere the duke of Normandy came in to Englonde to ſpeke with hys brether. ¶And amonge all other thynges the duke of Normandye. for yaue vnto the kynge hys brother the forſayde thouſande pounde by yere that ſholde paye vnto the duke. ¶And with good loue the kynge and the duke departed / & there the duke went ayen in to Normundy. And whan tho two yere were agone / Thrugh the entycement of the deuyl and of ſymple mē / a greate debate aroſe bytwene the kynge and ye duke / ſo that thrugh counſeyll the kynge wente ouer the ſee in to Normandy / and whan the kynge of Englonde was come in to Normandy / all the grete lordes of Normandye torned vnto the kynge of Englonde and helde ayenſt the duke theyr owne lorde / and hym forſoke / and to the kynge them helde / and all the good caſtelles and townes of Normandy. And ſoone after was the duke taken and ladde with the kynge in to Englonde. And the kynge lette put the duke in to pryſon / and this was the vengeaun
                           •
                        e of god.

¶For whanne the duke was in the holy londe god yaue hym ſuche myghte and grace that he was choſen for to haue be kynge of Iheruſalem / and he forſoke it and wolde not take it vpon hym / And therfore god ſente hym that ſhame and dyſpyte for to put in hys brothers pryſon / Tho ſeaſed kyng Hery all Normandye in to hys honde / and helde it all hys lyfe tyme. ¶And in the ſame yere came the byſſhop Ancelmus for the courte of Rome in to Englonde ayen. And the kynge and he were accorded. ¶And in the nexte yere comynge after / there began a grete debare bytwene the kynge Phylyppe of Fraunce and kynge Henry of Englende / wherfore kynge Henry wente in to Normandye / and there was ſtronge warre bytwene them two. And tho deye
                           •
                         the kynge of Fraūce & lowys his ſone was mad kyng anone after his deth. And tho went kyng Henry ayen into Englond / & maryed Maude his doughter vnto henry ye emꝑour of Almayne.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the debate that was betwixt kynge Lowys of Fraūce & kynge Hery of Eenglonde / & how kynhe Henryes two ſnes were loſte in the hyghe ſe
                           •
                        .
                     AS kynge Henry had be kynge .xvii. yere / a grete debate aroſe betwixt kynge Lowys of Fraunce and kynge Henry of Englonde / for by cauſe that the kynge had ſente in to Normandy to hys men / that they ſholde be helpynge vnto therle of Bloys as moche as they myght in warre ayenſt the kyng of Fraū
                        ce / And that they ſholde be as redy to hy
                           •
                         as they were to theyr owne lord / for by cauſe that therle hadde ſpowſed hys ſyſter dame maude. And for this cauſe the kynge of Fraunce dyde moche ſorowe to Normandy. wherfore ye kynge of Englonde was wonder wroth / & in haſt wen
                           •
                        e ouer the ſee with a grete power / & came in to Normādye for to defende that londe And the warre bytwene them laſted two yere / tyll at the laſte they two faught to geder. And the kynge of Fraunce was dyſcomfyted / & vnnethes eſcaped awaye wyth moche payne / & the mooſt partye of his men were taken. And the kynge dyde with theym what hym beſt lyked / And ſome of them he lette go freely / and ſome he lete be put vnto the deth. But afterwarde thoſe two kynges were accorded. And whan kynge Henry had oonly all the londe of Normandy / & dyſcōfyted his enmyes of Fraunce / he torned agayne in to Englonde with mochē honour. And his two ſones wyllyam and Richarde wolde haue come after the fader & wente to the ſee with a grete company of people. But are that they myghte come to londe / the ſhippe came ayenſt a roche and alle were drowned that were there in / ſaue oo man that was in ye ſame ſhyppe that eſcaped. And this was vpon ſaynt Katheryns daye / and theſe were ye names of them that were drowned. Wyllyam and Richarde the kynges ſones / the Erle of Cheſtre Ottonell / his brotger Geffroy Rydell Walter Emurci. Godefray Archedeken / the kynges doughter / the coūteſſe of Perches the kynges nece the counteſſe of Cheſtre / & many other. ¶Whan kynge Henry and other lordes arryued in Englonde / and herde theſe tydynges / they made ſorowe ynough / And alle theyr myrthe and Ioye was torned in to mornynge and ſorowe.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Maude the Empreſſe came ayen in Englonde / & how ſhe afterwarde wedded to Geffroy therle of Angoy.
                     ANd whan that two yere were agone yt the Erle had dwelled wyth the kynge / the erle went from the kyng / and begā to warre vpon hym & dyd moche harme in the londe of Normandy / & toke there a ſtronge caſtell & there he dwelled all that yere. And tho came to hym tydynges yt Henry the Emperour of Almayne yt had ſpowſed Maude hys doughter was deed / and that ſhe dwelled no lenger in Almayne / & yt ſhe wold come ayen in to Normandy to her fader And whā that ſhe was come vnto hym / he toke her tho to hym & came ayen in to Englonde / & made the Englyſſhemen to do othe and feaute to the Empreſſe And the fyrſte man that made the othe was wyllyam ye Archebyſſhop of Caūterbury And that other Dauid kyng of Scotlōde / and after hym all ye barons and erles of Englonde. ¶Alſo after that ye noble man therle of Angoy yt was a worthy knyghte / ſent vnto ye kynge of Englōde / yt he wolde graūt hym for to haue his doughter to ſpowſe / that is to ſaye Maude the Empreſſe. And for by cauſe yt her fader wyſt that he was a noble man / the kynge hym graunted & conſented ther to. And tho tooke he his doughter & ladde hir in to Normandy / & came to the noble knyghte Geffroy / & there he ſpowſed the forſayde Maude wyth moche honour / & the Erle beg
                           •
                        
                        te

vpon her a ſone / yt was called Henry ye Empreſſe ſone. ¶And after whan al this was done / kynge Henry dwelled all that yere in Normandy. & after ye lōge tyme a greuous ſykeneſſe toke him where thorugh he deyed. And this kyng Henry regned .xxxv. yere & foure monethes. And after deyed as is before ſayd in Normandy. And his herte was enteryd in ye grete chirche of our lady in Rouen. & his body was brought with moche honour in to Englonde & enteryd at Redynge in the abboye / of ye whyche abbaye he was begynner and founder.
                     HEnrycus the fourth was Emperour in Almayne after Harry the thyrde .xv. yere. This man put his owne fader in pryſon / & there helde hym tyll he deyed. And tooke pope Paſchall wyth hys Cardynalles / & preſente them as it is ſayd afore. For the whiche cauſe as it is ſuppoſed he lacked yſſue. For he wedded the kynges doughter of Englonde Maude. But after warde he came to grace / and all the lawes of ye chirche freely he reſyned to Calixtus ye pope. And beſought hym to yeue hym in penaūce that he ſholde neuer come ayen to his Empyre / that he myghte haue remyſſyon of his treſpaas. And after ye oppynyon of many a man / he was wylfully exyled and deyed and hys wyfe bothe at Cheſtre in Englonde. ¶Gelaſius was pope after Paſchall two yere. And fledde frome Henry the Emperour in to Bourgoyne and there deceſſyd. Thys Emperour thoſe Benedyctus a Spanyarde to be pope / the whiche ſtroue with Calixtus. ¶Calixtus was pope after hym two yere and fyue monethes. Thys Calixtus was the ſone of the duke of Bourgoyne & was choſen in the place of Gelaſius / And whan he ſholde come to Rome / he toke the for ſayd Benedictus / and made hym to ryde afore hym ſhamefully. For he on a mule torned hys face to the tayle of ye mule / & helde the tayle in hys honde as a brydell / tyll he came thrugh the cyte / and there he was put in pryſon. And this pope made peas wyth the Emperour. ¶Honorius was pope after hym two yere / and lytell of hym is wryten. ¶Nota. ¶Hary the fourth Emperour of Almayne deceſſyd thys tyme and was buryed with his progenytours / after ſome men wyth ſuche an Epytaphe (Filius hic: pater hic Auus hic: proauus iacet iſtis) ¶But it is lykely to be truer that ye Geralde ſayd (in Itinerario walke) wherfore he ſayth / that after he had pryſoned his carnall fader / & hys ſperytuell fader the pope with his Cardynalles / after he was reconſyled & wylfully he was exyled. And he lefte Maude his wyf the kynges doughter of Englonde pryuely / and lyued an heremytes lyf at Cheſtre .x. yere where he myght lyue as noo man knewe hym. And he called hymſelfe Godyſcallus / the whyche Godyſſon is called. So the Emperour ſecretely went awaye / & Maude hys wyf the Empreſſe there / ſhe went vnto her fader Henry in to Normandy. where anone after ſhe was wedded vnto Geffroy Plantaginet the duke of Andegame vpon whom he begate Henry the ſeconde afterwarde kynge of Englonde. Vnder whom ſaynt Thomas of Caunterbury regned & deyed ¶Lotharius was Emperour aftey Henry the fourth .xii. yere / And lytell of hym is wrytem / but that he was manerely to the chyrche. And that he ſubdued Roger the vſurper of the kynge of Cycyle. ¶Hugo de ſancto Victory was a noble man this tyme atte Parys / and a noble doctour / of the nacyon of Saxons. ¶The ordre of ſaynt Iohan Baptyſt at Iheruſalem began thys tyme / by the worſhypfull man Reymonde myghtely dyſpoſed vnto the we
                           •
                        ke of mercy. ¶All this ordre make theyr waye to ſerue poore men.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno dm̄ .M.C.xxxiiii.
                     INnocencius was pope after Honorius xiiii. yere. and .vii· monethes. This mā was a very deuoute mā / and wyth ſuche men he accompanyed hym and he had ſtryf ayenſt▪ Perys of Lyon the whiche named hym Anocletus. And by ſtrenth he tooke the popehede. The whiche Innocēcius ſawe / and with two Galeys he fledde in to Fraūce / & was worſhyp fully receyued of ſaynt Bernarde the whiche that tyme had alle the kynges and prynces in his honde. And he prouoked them for to brynge this pope Innocencius in to dygnyte ayen. And at the laſt all thynge was ſeſſyd / and hys enmyes were deſtroyed thrugh the Iugement of god. And he was pope ayen / & lyued prouffytably / & was buryed at Latranence·
                  
                  
                     ¶How Stephen yt was kyng Henryes ſyſters ſone / was made kynge of Englonde.
                     AFter thys kynge Henry that was the fyrſte / was made kynge his neuewes ſyſter ſone. Stephen erle of Bolonye. For anone

as he herde the tydynges of hys vncles deth / thēne he paſſed the ſee and came in to Englonde thrught counſeyll & ſtrength of many grete lordes in Englonde / ayenſt the othe that they had made to Maude the Empreſſe / toke the reame / & he lete crowne Stephen kyng of the londe. ¶And the Archebyſſhop wyllyam of Caunterbury / that fyrſte made the othe of feaute to Maude the Empreſſe / ſette the crowne vpon Stephens heed and hym anoynetd. And byſſhop roger of Salyſbury mayntened the kynges parte in as moche as he myghte. ¶The fyrſte yere ye kynge Stephen began to regne / he aſſembled a grete hoſte and went to warre Scotlonde / for to haue warred vppon the kynge of Scotlonde. But he came ayenſt hym in peas and in good manere and to hym truſted. But he made to hym none homage / for as moche as he had made vnto thempreſſe Maude. ¶And in the fourth yere of his regne Maude the Empreſſe came in to Englonde & tho began debate bytwene kynge Stephē & Maude thempreſſe. This Maude went vnto the cyte of Nicholl / & the kyng her beſyged longe tyme and myght not ſpede / ſo well the cyte was kept & defended. And tho yt were within ye cyte / meruaylouſly ſcaped a way wythout ony maner of harme. And tho toke ye kyng the cyte / and dwelled therin tyl Candelmaſſe And tho came the barons that helde wyth the Empreſſe. That is for to ſaye / the erle Radulphe of Cheſtre the erle Robert of Gloceſtre. Hugh Bygot. Robert of Morley / and theſe brought wtth them a ſtronge power & faught wyth the kyng / and yaue hym a grete bataylle In ye whiche bataylle kyng Stephen was taken / & ſette in pryſon in the caſtell of Brytowe.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Maude the Empreſſe wente fro wyncheſtre to Oxenforde / and after ſhe eſcaped to walynforde / and of the ſorowe and dyſceaſe that ſhe had.
                     NOw as the kynge was takē & brought in to warde in ye caſtel of Briſtow / this Maude the Empreſſe was made lady of Englonde / & all men helde her for lady of the londe But thoſe of Kent helde with kyng Stephens wyfe / & alſo wyllyam of Prece & his retenewe halpe them & helde warre ayenſt Maude them preſſe. And anone after the kynge of Scotlonde came to them wyth a huge nombre of peple And tho went theyr togyder to wyncheſtre / there that the Empreſſe was / & wolde haue takē her But the Erle of Gloceſtre came wyth his power & fought with them. And the Empreſſe in the meane whyle that the batayll dured ſcaped from them & wente vnto Oxenforde and there helde her. And in that bataylle was the erle of Glocetre dyſcomfyted & taken & wyth hym many other lordes. And for hys delyueraunce / was kyng Stephen delyuered out of pryſon. And whā he was delyuered out of pryſon / he wente thens vnto Oxenforde & beſyeged thempreſſe yt was tho at Oxenforde. And the ſeyge endured fro Myghelmaſſe vnto ſaynt Andrews tyde. ¶And the Empreſſe lette clothe her tho alle in whyte lynnen clothe 
                           〈◊〉
                         by cauſe ſhe wolde not be knowen. Fo
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         ſame tyme there was moche ſorow
                           •
                         and 
                           ••
                        e eſcaped by ye Tamyſe from them a waye that were her enmyes. And from thens 
                           •
                        he w
                           •
                        nte to walyngforde & there helde her. And the kynge wolde haue beſeyged ther / but he had ſo moche to doo with the erle Radulphe of Ch
                           •
                         and with Hugh Bygot that ſtrongely wa
                           •
                        d vpon hym in euery place 
                           •
                         that he wyſte whether for to torne. And the erle of Gloceſter 
                           •
                        alpe hym with his power.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Gaufryde ye erle of Angoy 
                           •
                        au
                           •
                         vnto Henry the Empreſſe ſone all Normandy
                     ANd after thys the kynge wente vnto wylton / and wolde haue made a caſtel there. But tho came to hym the erle of Gloceſtre wyth a ſtronge power & there almooſte he had taken the kynge but yet the kyng eſcaped with moche payne. And wyllyam Mar
                           •
                        ell there was takē. And for whoos delyuera
                           •
                        ce they yaue vnto the erle of Gloceſtre ye good caſtell of Shyrborn that he had taken. ¶And whan this was done / the erle Robert & all ye kynges enmyes went vnto Faryngdon and begā there for to make a ſtronge caſtell / but the kynge came thyder with a ſtronge power and droue hym thens / And in that ſame yere the erle Radulphe of Cheſtre was accorded with ye kyng and came to his courte at his cōmaundement And the erle demed ſauely for to come. And the kyng anon lete take hym / & put hym in to pryſon. And myght neuer for no thynge come out tyll that he had yelded vp to the kynge the caſtell of Nicholl / the whiche he had taken from the kynge with his ſtrengthe in the .xv. yere of his regne. ¶And Gaufride the erle of Angoy

yaue vp vnto Henry his ſone all Normandy. And in the yere that nexte enſewed / deyed the erle Gaufryde. And Henry his ſone tho anōe torned ayen to Angoy / & there was made erle wy
                           •
                        h moche honour of all hys men of the londe. And to hym dyde feaute & homage the mooſt party of the londe. And tho was thys Henry the Empreſſe ſone erle of Angoy / & alſo duke of Normandy. ¶In the ſame yere was made a dyuorce bytwnene the kynge of Fraunce / and the quene hys wyfe that was ryght heyre of Gaſcoyne. For bycauſe yt it was knowen and proued / that they were ſybbe and nyghe of blood. And tho ſpowſed her Henry the Empreſſe ſone erle of Angoy and the duke of Normandy / and duke of Gaſcoyne. ¶In ye .xviii yere of thys Stephen thys Henry came in to Englonde with a ſtronge power / & began for to warre vpon this kyng Setphen. & toke the caſtell of Malmeſbury / & dyde moche harme. And the kynge Stephen had ſo moche warre that he wyſt not whyther for to go. But at the laſte they were accorded thrugh the Archebyſſhop Theobaldus / & thrugh other worthy lordes of Englonde / vpon this condycyon. that they ſholde departe the Realme of Englonde but wene theym two / ſo yt Henry the Empreſſe ſone ſholde hooly haue the half of all the londe of Englonde. And thus they were accorded & peas was cryed thrughout al Englonde. And whan ye accorde was made bytwene tho two lordes / kynge Stephen became ſo ſory / for bycauſe that he had loſt half Englonde / & felle in to ſuche a malady / and deyed in the .xix. yere / and .viii. wekes and .v. dayes of his regne all in warre and in contake. And he 
                           •
                        yeth in the abbaye of Feuerſham / the whyche he lets make in the .xvi. yere of his regne.
                     CEleſtynus the ſeconde was pope after Innocencius .v. monethes. And lytell he dyde. ¶Lucius was after hym & lytell proffyted / for they deyed both ī a peſtylence. ¶Eugenius the ſeconde was pope after hym .v. yere & foure monethes. Thys man fryſt was the dyſcyple of ſaynt Bernarde / & after the abbot of ſaynt Anaſtaſius by Rome. And came to ye chirche of ſaynt Ceſary and was choſen pope by the Cardynalles / he no thynge knowynge therof / And for drede of ye Senatours he was conſecrated without thys cyte / thys man was an holy man / & ſuffred trybulacyon. And atte the laſt he deceſſyd / and lyeth at ſaynt Peters And after anone deceſſyd Saynt Bernarde. ¶Petrus Lombardus the byſſhop of Parys brother to Graciam / compyled the foure bokes of the Sentence this tyme. ¶Petrus Cō
                        meſtor brother to Graciā and to Pyerrs Lombardus / made Hyſtoriam Scolaſticam / and other bokes. ¶Fredericus primus after Conradus was emperour in Almayne & in Rome ·xxxiii. yere. This man after the deth of Adryan the pope the whyche crowned hym / dyde curſydly wyth Alexander to hym grete preiudyce For he dyd helpe foure that ſtroue ayenſt the appoſtles ſete. And he faught myghtely ayenſte the kynge of Fraunce. through power of the Danys & other nacyons. But Rycharde ye kynge of Englonde halpe for to expoulſe hym. And he deſtroyed medyolanū to the grounde / Of the whiche cytee / the walles were hygher than the walles of yny other cytee / This man at the laſte after that he had done many vexacyons to the pope / he was recounſyled / for he dradde leſte the Lombardes wolde haue rebelled ayenſte hym / he axed for yeuenes of the pope. And toke the croſſe vpon hym / and wente vnto the holy londe / and dyde many meruayllous thynges there / almooſt as moche as euer dyde Karolus magnus. And there he came by a towne that men calle Armeniam and in a lytell water he was drowned / and at Tyrum he was buryed. ¶Anaſtaſius was pope after Eugenius foure yere / and more. This man was abbot of Rufy / and thenne he was choſe Cardynall / and after pope.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of kynge henry the ſeconde that was the Empreſſe ſone / in whoſe tyme ſaynt Thomas of Caunterbury was Chaunceller.
                     
                        ANd after thys kynge Stephen regned Henry the Empreſſe ſone / and was crowned of the Archebyſſhoppe Theobaldus the .xvii. daye before Cryſtemas. And in the ſame yere Thomas Beket of london Archebyſſhop of caunterbury was made the kynges Chaunceller of Englonde. ¶The ſeconde yere that he was crowned / he lete caſte downe all the newe caſtels yt were longyngt to the Crowne / the whiche kynge Stephen had yeue vnto dyuerſe men / & them hade

made erles & barons / for to holde with hym & to helpe hym ayenſt Henry thempreſſe ſone. ¶And the fourth yere of his regne he put vnder his owne lordſhyp the kyng of walis. And in the ſame yere the kyng of Scotlond had in his owne honde / yt is to ſaye / ye cyte of Karleyll the caſtell of Bambrugh / and the newe caſtell vpon Tyne / and the erledom of Lancaſtre. ¶The ſame yere the kyng with a grete power wente in to walys / & lete caſte downe woodes and made wayes & made ſtronge the caſtell of Rutlonde Baſyngwark. And amonge ye caſtels he made an howſe of the Temple. ¶And in the ſame yere was Rycharde his ſone borne / that afterwarde was erle of Oxforde And the fourth yere of his regne / he made Gaufryde erle of Brytayne. And in that yere he chaunged his moneye. And the .vi. yere of hys regne he ladde a grete hoſte to Tolouſe & conquered it. And the .vii. yere of his regne deyed Theobaldus the Archebiſſhop of Caunterbury / and tho almooſt al the cyte of Caūterbury through myſchyef was brēte. The .ix. yere of his regne Thomas beket that was his Chaūceller was choſen Archebyſſhop of Caunterbury· And vpon ſaynt Bernardes daye he was ſacred. And in that yere was borne the kyngꝭ doughter Eelenore. ¶And in the .x. yere of his regne ſaynt Edwarde ye kyng was tranſlated wyth moche honour. ¶And the .xi. yere of hys rgne he helde his parlamēte at Northampton / and fro thens ſledde ſaynt Thomas Archebyſſhop of Counterbury for the grete debate that was betwixt the kynge & hym. For yf he had be foū
                        de on the morowe he had be ſlayne / & therfore he fledde thens wyth thre felowes on foot oonly / that no man wyſte where he was \ & wente ouer the ſee to the pope of Rome And this was the pryncypall cauſe. For aſmoche as the kynge wolde haue put clerkes to deth that were ataynt of felonye / without ony preuelegye of holy chyrche. ¶And ye .xii. yere of his regne was Iohan his ſone borne. ¶And the .xiii. yere of his regne deyed Maude ye Empreſſe that was moder. ¶The .xiiii. yere of his regne the duke of Saxon ſpowſed Maude his doughter. And he begate vpon her thre ſones / that were called Henry. Othus. and. Wyllyam ¶And in the xv. yere of hys regne deyed the good Erle Robert of Gloceſtre / that founded the abbaye of Nonne of Eton. And in the ſame yere Marke kynge of Ieruſalem conquered Babylon ¶And the .xvi. yere of his regne / he lete crowne his ſone Henry at weſtmeſtre· & hym crowned Roger Archebyſſhop of yorke / ī harmyng of Thōas archebyſſhop of Caūterbury. wherfore this ſame Roger was accuſyd of ye pope.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Henry that was ſone of kynge. Henry the Empreſſe ſone / and of the debate that was bytwene hym and his fader whyle that he was in Normandye.
                     AFter the cornacyon of kynge Henry the ſone of kyng Henry the Empreſſe lone. That ſame Henry thempreſſe ſone wente ouer to Normandy & there he lete mary Elenore his doughter of the Dolphyn yt was kynge of Almayne. And in the .vii. yepe that the Archebyſſhop ſaynt▪ Thomas had bē our lawed / the kyng of Fraūce made the kyng & ſaynt Thomas accorded. And then̄e cam Thomas the Archebyſſhop to Chaunterbury ayē to his owne chyrche. & this accorde was made in the begynnyng of Aduente & afterwarde he was ſlayne & martred the fyfth daye of Cryſtmaſſe thenne folowynge. For kynge Henry though
                           •
                         vpon ſaynt Thomas the Archebyſſhop vpon Cryſtmaſſe daye as he ſate at hys mete & theſe wordes ſayd That yf he had ony good knyghtes wyth hym / he had be many a day paſſe
                           •
                         auenged vpon the Archebyſſhop Thomas· ¶And anone ſyr Wyllyam Bretō ſyr Hugh Moruile / ſyr wyllyam Tracy & ſyr Reygn
                           •
                        l
                           •
                        
                        de Fitz vrſe / beers ſone in Englyſſhe pryuely wente vnto the ſee / & came in to Englonde vnto the chyrche of Caūterbury & there they hy
                           •
                         martred at ſaynt Benets awter in the mode
                           •
                         chyrche. And that was in ye yere of the Incarnacyon of Iheſu Cryſt .M.C.lxxii. yere. And anone after Henry the newe kyng began for to make warre vpon Henry his fader & vpon his brothern wyllyam & Othus. ¶And ſo vpon a daye the kyng of Fraunce & al ye kynges ſones / and the kynge of Scotlonde and all the greteſt lordes of Englonde were ryſen ayenſt kyng Henry the fader. And at the laſt as god wolde / he conquered all his enmyes. And the kynge of Fraunce & he were accorded· ¶And tho ſente kyng Henry ſpecyally vnto the kynge of Fraunce / & prayed hym hertely for his loue that he wolde ſende to hym the names bi letters of them yt where ye begynners of ye warre ayenſt hym. And ye kyng of fraunce ſent ayen to

hym by letters ye names of thē that began that warre ayenſt hym. The fyrſte was Iohn̄ hys ſone / & Rycharde his brother / & Hēry ye newe kyng his ſone. Tho was Henry ye king wōder wroth / & curſyd ye tyme ye euer he hym begate / & whyle ye warre dured. Hēry his ſone ye newe kyng deyed ſore repētyng his myſdedes & mooſt ſorow made of ony mā for bycauſe of ſaint Thomas deth of Caūterbury. and prayed hys fader wyth moche ſorowe of herte mercy for his treſpaas. And his fader forgaaf hym / and had of hym grete pyte. And after he deyed the .xxxvi. yere of his regne / & lyeth at Redynge.
                  
                  
                     ¶How the cryſten men loſte alle the holy londe in the forſayd kinges tyme by a fals Cryſten man that became a ſarraſyne.
                     ANd whyle thys kynge regned / the grete bataylle was in the holy londe bytwene the cryſten men and the ſarraſyns but Cryſten men were there ſlayne thrugh greate treaſon of ye erle Tyrpe / that wolde haue had to wyf the quene of Iheruſalem / that ſomtyme was Baldewynes wyfe / but ſhe forſoke hym and toke to her lorde a knyght a worthy man / that was called ſyr Gnyperches / wherfore the erle Tyrpe was wroth / & wente anone ryght to the Soudan that was Soudan of Babylon / & became his man and forſoke hys cryſtendome / and alle cryſten lawe. And the ceryſten men wyſt not of his dedes / but wende for to haue had grete helpe of hym as they were wonte to haue before. ¶And whan they came to the bataylle / thys fals Creſten man torned vnto the Sarraſyns / & forſoke his owne nacyon. And ſoo were the cryſten men there ſlayne with the Sarraſyns. ¶And thus were the cryſten men ſlayne & put to horryble dethe / and the cyte of Ieruſalem deſtroyed / and the holy croſſe borne a waye. ¶The kynge of Fraunce & all the grete lordes of the londe lete them be croſſyd for to go in to the holy londe· And amonges them wente Rycharde kynge Henryes ſone / fyrſt after the kynge of Fraunce / that tooke the croſſe of the. Archebyſſhop of Toures / But he toke not the vyage at that tyme for cauſe that he was lette by other maner wayes / & nedes to be done. ¶And whan kynge Henry his fader had regned .xxxvi. yere and .v. monethes and four dayes / he deyed and lyeth at Fonntenerad.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno dm̄ .M.C·lvi.
                     ADrianus the fourth was pope after Anaſtaſius ·v. yere. This pope was an Englyſſhe man & the voys of ye comyn people ſayth he was a boūde man & to the abbote of ſaynt Albon in Englonde. And whan he deſyred to be made a monke there he was expulſyd and he wente ouer ſee and gaue hym to ſtudye and to vertue. And after was made byſſhop of Albanacens / thenne he was made Legate in to the londe of wormacian / and he conuerted it to the fayth. Thenne he was made pope and for the woundynge of a Cardynall he enterdyted all the cytee of Rome / And he curſyd wyllyam the kyng of Cecyle / and cauſed hym to ſubmytte hym. This man the fyrſt of all ye popes with his Cardynalles dwelled in the olde cyte. ¶Alexander the thyrde was pope after hym .xii. yere. This Alexander had ſtryfe ·xvii. yere / and the foure ſtryuers that the Emperour ſette ayenſt hym / he ouercame them & curſyd them / and all deyed an euyll deth This man alſo accorded Frederyke the Emperour and▪ Emanuell of Conſtantinoble / & the kynge of ſeculorū And this man nouryſſhed ſaynt Thomas of Caunterbury in his exyle. ¶Nota. ¶Saynt Bernarde was canonyſed by this Alexander / and his abbot for bode hym he ſholde do no myracles / for there was ſo myghty concours of people. And he obeyed to hym whan he was deed and dyde no moo. ¶Lutius the thyrde was pope after Alexander .iiii. yere and two monethes. Of hym lytell is wryten. In hys dayes deceſſyd Henry the fyrſte ſone to Henry the ſeconde / & this is his Epytaphy. Omnis honoris honor decor et decus vrbis et orbis. Milicie ſplendor gloria lumen aper. Iulius ingenio virtutibus hector. Achellis viribus. Auguſtus moribus ore paris. ¶Vrbanus the thyrde was pope after Lucius two yere / this man deceſſyd for ſorowe whā he herde tell that Ieruſalem was taken with the ſarraſyns· ¶Gregorius the viii. was pope after hym foure monethes And he practyſed myghtely howe Ieruſalem myght be wonne ayen / but anone he deceſſyd.
                     ¶Clemens the thyrde was pope after hym thre yere / and lytyell he dyde.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of kynge Rycharde yt conquered ayen al the holy londe / yt the cryſten men had loſte.
                     ANd after this kyng Henry regned Rycharde his ſone a ſtowte man & a ſtronge

& a worthy / & alſo bolde. And he was crowned at weſtmeſtre of the Archebyſſhop Baldewyn the thyrde daye of Septembre. ¶And in the ſeconde yere of his regne / kyng Rycharde hymſelf and Baldewyn the Archebyſſhop of Caunterbury / and Hubert byſſhop of Salyſbury / and Radulf erle of Glocetre / and other many lordes of Englonde / went in to the holy londe / And in that vyage deyed the Archebyſſhop of Caunterbury. And kynge Rycharde wente before in to the hooly londe & reſted not tyll that he came forthe in his waye vnto Cypres / and tooke it with grete force. And after that kynge Rycharde went forth to warde the hooly londe / & gate there as moche as the cryſten men had there before loſt. And conquered the londe ayen thoruhh grete myght / ſaufe only the holy croſſe. And whan kynge Rycharde came to the cyte of Acres for to gete the cytee / ther aroſe a gret debate bytwene hym & ye kynge of Fraunce / ſo yt the kyng of Fraūce went ayen in to Fraunce & was wroth towarde kyng Rychard but yet for all yt / are kyng Rycharde wente ayen / he toke the cyte of Acres. & whan he had take it / he dwelled in the cyte a whyle. But to hym came tydynges / that ye erle Iohn̄ of Oxenforde hys brother wolde haue ſeaſed all Englonde in to his honde / and Normandy alſo / and wolde lette crowne hym kynge of all the londe. ¶And whan kynge Rycharde herde telle of theſe tydynge / he wente ayen towarde Englond with all the ſpede that he myghte. But ye duke of Oſtryche mette with hym and toke hym and brought hym vnto the Emperour of Almayne / And the Emperour hym brought vnto pryſon. And afterward he was delyuered for an Huge raunſon / that is for to ſaye / an hundred thouſande pounde. And for the whiche raunſon to be paied / eche other chalyce of Englonde was molten and made in to moneye. And all the monkes of the ordre of Cyſteaux yaue alle theyr bookes thrugh oute all Englonde / for to doo them to ſelle / and the raunſon for to paye.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Rycharde came agayne from the holy londe / & auenged hym of his enmyes.
                     SO as this kyng Rycharde was in pryſon / the kynge of Fraunce warred vpon hym ſtrongly in Normādye / and Iohn̄ his broder warred vpon hym in Englonde. But the byſſhops and the barōs of Englonde with ſtode hym with all theyr power that they myghte gete / & tooke the caſtell of wyndeſore and other caſtelles. And the forſayde Iohn̄ ſawe yt he had no myght ne power ayenſt the barons of Englōde for to fyght But anone went hym ouer the ſee vnto the kynge of Fraūce. ¶And whan Rycharde came out of pryſon / & was delyuered and came in to Englonde / anone after Candelmaſſe in grete haſte / he went vnto Notyngham / & the caſtell of Notyngham to hym was yolden / and tho dyſcomfyted he hys brother Iohan and tho that with hym helde. And after he wente vnto the cyte of wyncheſtre / & there he lete hym crowne kynge of Englonde. And after he wente vnto Normandy for to warre vpon the kyng of Fraūce And the kynge of Fraunce came with .vi. hondred knyghtis to warde Giſors. And kynge Rycharde mette hym / and tho wolde haue yeuen hym bataylle. But the kynge of Fraunce fledde tho / and hondred knyghtes of his were taken and two hondred ſtedes that were trapped wyth yren. ¶And anone after wente kyng Rycharde for to beſyege the caſtell Gaillarde 
                           •
                         And as he rode vpon a daye by the caſtell for to take a uyſemente of the caſtell an arbarlaſter ſomte hym with a quarell that was enuynymmed. And the kyng drewe out the ſhafte of the quarell / but the quarels heed abode ſtyll in hys heed. And it began for to rancle / that he ne myghte not helpe hymſelfe / ne meue his armes. And tho he wyſt that he had dethes wonde vpon hym / that he myght not be hoole for noo manere of thynge. ¶He cōmaūded anōe ſharpely all his men for to aſſoyle the caſtell. Soo that the caſtell was taken or he deyed. And ſoo manly his men dyde yt al ye people that were in the caſtell were taken / & the kynge dyde wyth them what he wolde. And commaūded his mē that they ſholde brynge before▪ hym the man yt hym ſo hurt & ſo wounded. And whan he came before ye kyng / the kyng axed hym what was his name. And he ſayd my name is Bertham Gurdon wherfore ſayd the kynge haſte thou me ſlayne / ſyth I dyd the neuer none harme. Syr ſayd he. Though ye dyde me neuer none harme / ye your ſelf with your owne honde ſlewe my fader & my broder. And therfor I haue quyte now your trauaylle. Tho ſayd kyng Rycharde. He yt dyed vpon ye croſſe / to bryng mā
                        nes

ſoule fro payne of helle / foryeue yt my deth and I alſo foryeue it the. Tho cōmaunded he that no man ſholde hym myſdo. But for all ye kyngꝭ defendynge ſome of ye kyngꝭ men hym folowed and pryuely hym ſlewe. And the .vi. daye after the kyng dyde ſhryue hym / & ſore repentaunce hauynge of hys myſdedes / & was houſeled and enoynted. ¶Rud this kyng regned but .ix. yere and .xxx. wekes / and deyed & lyeth beſyde his fader at Fontenerad.
                     HEnyicus ye fyfth was Emperour .viii. yere This Henricus was ſone to frederyk / & he wedded Conſtaunce the kyngꝭ doughter / of Cecyle / & though the occaſyon of her he ſubdued alle the kyngdome of Apulye / & he droue all the people out ye enhabyte that londe. ¶Celeſtinus the thyrde was pope after Clemens almoſt thre yere. This man was crowned vpon Eeſter daye / & the daye folowynge he crowned Henry the emperour. And he made a palays at ſaynt Peters / & deceſſyd. ¶Innocencius ye thyrde was pope after hym .viii. yere & .v. monethes. this man was wel lettred & he made a boke of the wretchydneſte of mā
                        nes cōdicōn. & he made ſpeculū miſſe & he mad many cōſtytucyons. This man dāpned ye boke of Iohn̄ Ioachim / yt whiche he made ayēſt mayſter Peyrs Lombarde / the maker of the Sentence. This tyme deceſſyd ye Emperour Henry. And the prynces of almayne diſcorded for ſome choſe Otto / & ſome choſe Phylyppe brocher to Henry. Thenne Phylyppe was falſely ſlayne / & Gtto was crowned of Innocencius in Fraūce / yt whiche anone afught with the Romayns / for they yaue hym no dewe honour. And for that cauſe / ayenſt ye popes wyll he toke the kyngdom of Apulye frome Frederyk / wherfore the pope curſyd hym. Thenne after the fourth yere of his regne / the prynces of Almayne made Frederyk Emperour / and victoryouſly he ſubdued Otto. ¶wyllyam of Parys this tyme began the ordre of the freres Auſtyn / the whiche ben called (fratres mendicantes) Franciſcus an ytalyon a man of grete perfeccyon & an enſample to many a man / dyde many a myracle this tyme. And he ordeyned the frere Minors. ¶And the .vi. yere of pope Innocencius the thyrde / the ordre of the frere prechers beganne vnder Domynyke / but it myght not be confermed tylle the fyrſte yere Honorius.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of kynge Iohn̄ / that in the fyrſte yere of gis regne loſte all Normandye.
                     AS kyng Rycharde was deed / by cauſe that he had none heyre / nother ſone / ne doughter / then̄e his brother Iohn̄ was made kynge / and crowned at weſtmeſtre of Hubert that tho was Archebyſſhop of Caunterbury. And whan he began for to regne / he became ſo meruaylous a man / and wente ouer in to Normandye / and warred vpō the kynge of Fraunce. And ſoo longe they warred togyder / tyll at the laſte kynge Iohan loſte all Normandy & Angoy / wherfore he was ſore anoyed / & it was no meruaylle. ¶Tho lete he aſſē
                        ble before hym at London Archebyſſhops / byſſhops / abbots / & pryours / Erles & Barons & helde there a grete parlyament & axed there of the Clergye / the tenthe of euery chyrche of Englonde / for to conquere and gete ayen Normā
                        dy & Angoy yt had loſt. They wolde not graunt that thynge / wherfore he was wonder wroth. ¶And in that ſame tyme deyed Hubert. The pryour & ye couent of Caūterbury choſe ayenſt the kynges wyll to be Archebyſſhop Stephen of Langton a good clerke / that dwelled at the courte of Rome / & ſent to the pope theyr cleryon / & the pope confermed it / and ſacred him at Viterbi· ¶Whan the kynge wyſt theſe tydynges / he was wonder wroth / & droue ye pryour and the couente fro Counterbury / and exyled out of Englonde / & commaūded that no letter that come fro Rome / ne commaūdement / ſholde be receyued ne pleryd in Englonde. Whan theſe tydynges came to the pope / he ſente kynge Iohan his letter / & prayed hym with good wyll and good hert / that he wolde receyue Stephen ye Archebyſſhop of Caunterbury to hys chyrche / & ſuffre ye pryour and hys monkes to come ayen to theyr owne dwellynge. But the kynge wolde not graunte it for no thynge.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Iohn̄ wolde noo thynge do for the popes commaundement. wherfore all Englonde was enterdyted and ſuſpended.
                     ANd at the laſt the pope ſent by his auctoryte / and enioyned to the byſſhops of Englonde / that yf the kyng wolde not receyue the pryour of Caunterbury & his monkes / that they ſhold do general enterditinge thrugh out all Englonde. And graunted full power to foure byſſhops to pronounce the enterdytynge / yf he it warned· The fyrſt was byſſhoppe

wyllyam of London / & that other byſſhop Euſtace of Ely / & the thyrde was byſſhop Walter of wyncheſtre / & the fourth was byſſhop Gyles of Hertforde. ¶And theſe foure byſſhops prayed the kynge / knelynge on theyr knees / & ſore werynge / that he wolde do ye popes commaundement. And ſhewed hym ye popes Bulles of the entertydynge / but for no prayer that they myght praye he wolde not conſente therto. And whan ye byſſhops ſawe this / they wente fro the kyng. And in the morne after the Annunciacion of our lady / they pronounced ye generall enterdytynge thrughout all Englonde ſo that the chyrche doores were ſhytte with keys & with other faſtynges & with walles. And whan the enterdytynge was pronoūced / thenne the kynge began for to wexe all out of meſure / & anone toke in to his honde al ye poſſeſſiōs of ye foure byſſhops / & of all the clergye thrugh out of all Englond / the lōde he toke / and ordeyned men for to kepe it / that the clerkꝭ myghte not haue theyr lyuynge. wherfore ye byſſhops curſyd all them / that put / or ſhold medle with holy chyrche goodes / ayenſt the wyll of theym that ought theym. ¶And whan the kyng wolde not of hys malyce ceſſe for no maner thynge. Theſe foure byſſhops afore ſayd wente ouer the ſee / and came to the byſſhop of Caunterbury / & tolde hym all thynge. And ye Archebyſſhop to them ſayd / that they ſhold go ayen to Caunterbury / and he ſholde come thyder to theym / or elles he wolde ſende vnto theym certayne perſones in hys ſtede / that ſholde do as moche as of he hymſelf were there. And whan the byſſhops herde thys they torned agayne in to Englonde / and came vnto Caunterbury. The tydynges came to the kynge / that the byſſhops were come againe to Caunterbury / and hymſelf myght not come thyder that tyme he ſente thyder byſſhops Erles / & abbotes / for to create with them / that the kynge ſholde receyue tharchebyſſhop Stephen / & the pryour and all the monkes of Caunterbury / that he ſhold neuer after that tyme no thynge take of hooly chyrche ayenſt the wyll of them that oweth ye goodes. And that the kynge ſholde make full amendes to them / of whom he had ony goodes taken. And that hooly chyrche ſholde haue alle fraunchyſe / as ferforth as they hadde in ſaynt Edwardꝭ tyme the holy Confeſſour.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Stphen of Langton came ayen▪ in to Englonde thrugh the popes cōmaū
                        dement / and how he wente ayen.
                     SO whan the fourme of accordemente thus was ordeyned. It was in a payer of endentures / & theyr ſeales to that one par
                           •
                        e and they yt came in the kynges name put theyr ſeales to that other parte of ye endentures. And four byſſhops aboue ſayd toke that one parte of the endentures to them. And that other parte of the endentures \ they bare with theym to ſhewe to the kynge. ¶Whan the kynge ſawe the fourme and vnderſtode / he helde hym full well apayed of all maner thynges as they had ordened / ſauynge as touchynge / reſtytucyon of the goodes for to make ayen. To that thynge wolde not accorde / & ſo he ſente worde ayen to the foure byſſhops / that they ſholde do out and put awaye that one poynt of reſty
                           •
                        ucyon. But they anſwered / that they wolde not doo one worde out. ¶Tho ſente the kynge to the Archebyſſhop by the four byſſhops yt he ſholde come to Caunterbury for to ſpeke wyth hym there / and ſente vnto hym ſaufcondyte vnder pledges. that is to ſaye / his Iuſtyces Gylbert Peyteum. Wyllyam de la Brener 
                           •
                         and Iohan fitz Hugh / that in theyr conduyte / ſauely he ſholde come & go ayen at his owne wyll And thus in this maner tharchebyſſhop Stephen came to Caunterbury. whan the Archebyſſhop was come / the kyng came to Chill
                           ••
                         For he wolde no nyghe Caynterbury at that tyme. But he ſente by his Treſorer byſſhop of wynceſter yt he ſholde do out of the endentures the clauſe of reſtytucyon / for to make of ye goodes ¶And tharchebyſſhop made hys othe that he wolde neuer doo out oo worde therof ne yet 
                           ••
                         chaunge of yt the byſſhops had ſpoken & ordeyned. And tho the Archebyſſop yede ayen to Rome without ony more doyng. ¶Kynge Iohan was wrother thā euer he was before and lete make a comyn crye thrugh out all Englonde / that all tho yt had holy chyrche rentes / and wente ouer the ſee / yt they ſholde come ayen in to Englonde at a certayne daye / or elles they ſhold leſe theyr rentes for euer more. And yt he commaunded to euery Shyref thrugh out all Englonde / that they ſhold enquyre yf ony byſſhop abbot or pryour / or ony other Prelate of holy chyrche / fro ye daye afterwarde / receyue ony commaundement that cometh fro the pope. That they ſholde take the body / & bryng it

before hym / and that they ſholde take in to the kynges hondes all theyr londes of holy chyrche / that were yeue to ony man / by the Archebychop or by the pryour of Caūterbury / from the tyme of eleccion of the Archebyſſhop. And commaunded that alle the woodes that were the Archebyſſhops ſholde be caſte downe vnto the grounde / and all ſolde.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Iohn̄ deſtroyed the ordre of Ceſteaux.
                     ANd in the ſame yere / the Iryſſhe men began to warre vpon kynge Iohn / & the kynge ordeyned hym for to go in to Irlonde / & lete arere an huge taxe thrughout al Englonde / that is for to ſaye .xxx. thouſande marke. And thus he ſent thrugh out all Englonde vnto mōkes of the ordre of Ciſteaux that they ſhold helpe hym of ·vi. thouſande marke of ſyluer. ¶And they anſwered and ſayd / that they durſt no thynge do without theyr chyef abbot yf Ciſteaux. wherfore kynge Iohan whan he came ayen from Irlonde / dyde them ſo moche ſorowe & care / that they wyſt not wheder to a byde / for he tooke ſo moche raunſon of euery hous / & the ſomme amoūted to .ix. thouſande & .iiii. hondred marke / ſo that they were clene loſt & deſtroyed / & voyded cheyr houſes & theyr londes thrughout all Englonde. And the abbot of wauerſaye draded ſo moche hys menace / that he forſoke all the abbaye & went thens & pryuely ordeyned hym ouer the ſee to ye hous of Ciſteaux. whan the tydynges came to the pope / that the kynge hath done ſo moche malyce / then he was to warde the kynge full wroth And ſente to Legates vnto the kyng / that one was called Pandulf / & ye other Duraunt / that they ſholde warne the kynge in the popes name / that he ſholde ceſſe of his perſecucion yt he dyde vnto holy chirche / & amende the wronge & the treſpaſſe / yt he had done to the Archebyſſhop of Caunterbury / & to the pryour & vnto the monkes of Caunterbury / & to all the clergye of Englonde. And that he ſholde reſt ore al the goodes ayen yt he had taken of them ayenſt theyr wyll & elles they ſholde curſe hym by name / And to do this thynge / and to conferme the pope toke them his letters in bulles patentes. ¶Theſe two Legates came in to englonde / & came to the kynge to Northamton / there yt he helde his parlyamente / & full curteyſly they hym ſalewed & ſayd. Syr we come fro ye pope of Rome / the peas of the holy chyrche & the londe to amende. And we admoneſt you fyrſt in the popes half / that ye make full reſtytucyon of the goodes yt ye haue rauyſſhed & taken of holy chyrche & of the londe. And that y
                           •
                         receyue Stephen Archebyſſhop of Caunterbury in to his dygnytee / & the pryour of Caunterbury / & his mōkes. And that ye yelde ayen vnto the Archebyſſhop alle his londes & rentes / without ony withholdynge. ¶And ſyr yet more ouer / yt ye ſhall make reſtytucyon / vnto all holy chyrche / wherof they ſhall holde them wel apayed. Tho anſwered the kynge as touchynge the pryour & his monkes of Caunterbury. All that ye haue ſayde I wyll do gladly / and all thynge yt ye wyll ordeyne. But as touchynge the Archebyſſhop. I ſhall tell you in my herte as it lyeth. That the Archebyſſhop leue his archebyſſhoppryche / & that ye pope then̄e for hym wolde praye / & then̄e vpon auenture / me ſholde lyke ſome other byſſhopryche to yeue hym in Englond And vppon this condicyon I wyl hym accepte & receyue And neuertheles as Archebyſſhop in Englonde yf he abyde / he ſhall neuer haue ſo goodꝭ ſaufconduyte / but that he ſhall be take. ¶Tho ſayde Pandulf vnto the kynge / Syre holy chyrche was wonte neuer to dyſcharge an Archebyſſhop wythout cauſe reſonable. But euer it hath be wonte to chaſtyſe prynces / yt to god & holy chyrche were In obedyence. ¶What how now ſayde the kyng menace ye me. Naye ſayde Pandulf / But ye now openly haue tolde / as it ſtandeth in your herte. And to you we wyll tell what is the popes wyll. And thus it ſtandeth / yt he hathe you hooly enterdyted & accurſyd / for the wronges that ye haue done to holy chyrche & to the clergye. And for as moche as ye dwelle / & beth in wyll to abyde in malyce & in wretchedneſſe / & wyll not come out therof / ne to amēde ye ſhall vnderſtande / yt this tyme after warde the ſentence is vpon you yeuen and holdeth ſtede and ſtrength / and vpon all tho that with you hath comuned before this tyme / whether they ben erles / barons / or knyghtꝭ / or ony other what ſo euer yt they be we them aſſoylle / ſaufly vnto this day· & fro this tyme after warde of what condycyon ſomeuer yt they ben we them accurſe / yt with you comyne ony worde / & do wene ſē
                        tence vpon them openly and ſpecially And we aſſoyle clene / erles / barrns / knyghtes / and all

other mē of theyr homages / ſeruyces and feautres / that they ſholde vnto you do / And this tydynge to conferme / we yeue playne power / to the byſſhop of wyncheſtre / and the byſſhop of Norwhiche. And the ſame power we yeue in to Scotlōde to the biſſhop of Rocheſtre and of Salyſbury. And in walys we yeue the ſame power to the byſſhop of ſaynt Dauyd and of Landaf & of ſaynt Aſſe. And more ouer we ſente thrugh out all Cryſtendom / that all the byſſhops beyonde the ſee / that they do accurſe all tho that helpe you / or ony counſeyl yeueth you in ony maner nede that ye haue to doo in ony parte of the worlde. And we aſſoyle them alſo all / by auctoryte of ye pope / & commaūde them alſo with you for to fyght / as with hym that is enmye to all holy chyrche. ¶Tho anſwered ye kynge. what may ye do more to me ¶Tho anſwered Pandulf. we ſaye to you in the worde of god / that ye ne no heyr that ye haue / neuer after this daye may be crowned. Tho ſayd ye kyne. By hym that is almyghty god / & I had wyſt this are that ye came in to my londe / that ye had brought me ſuche tydynges. I ſhold haue made you redy all one yere. ¶Tho anſwered Pandulf / Full well wende we at our fyrſt comynge / that ye wolde haue be obedyent to god & holy chyrche / & haue fulfylled the popes commaūdement / & now we haue ſhewed vnto you / & pronounced the popes wyll / as we were charged therwith / And as now ye haue ſayde / that yf ye had wyſt the cauſe of our comynge / that ye wolde haue do vs to ryde all an hole yere. And as well ye myght haue ſayd / that ye wolde haue taken an hoole yere of reſpyte / by the popes leue. ¶But for to ſuffre what deth ye coude ordeyne / we ſhall not ſpare for to tell you hooly all the popes meſſage and his wyll / that we were charged with.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Pandulf delyuered a clerke that had falſyd & counterfetyd the kyngꝭ moneye before the kynge hymſelf.
                     ANd anone tho commaunded the kynge the Syrefs & Baylyfs of Northampton / that were in the kynges preſence / yt they ſholde brynge forth all ye pryſoners / that they myght be done to deth before Pandulf / for by cauſe the kynge wened that they wolde haue gaynſayd theyr dedes / for cauſe of the deth all thynge that they hadde ſpoken afore ¶Whan the pryſoners were come before the kynge the kynge commaunded ſome to be hanged / and ſome to be drawen and ſome to drawe out theyr eyen out of theyr heed. And amonge alle other / there was a clerke that had falſyd ye kynges moneye. And the kynge cōmaunded that he ſhoyde be hanged and drawed· And whan Pandulf herde this commaundemente of the kynge / he ſterte hym vp ryght quyckly / & anone axed a boke and a candell / and wolde haue curſyd the kynge / & all theym that wolde ſette vpon ye clerke ony honde. And Pandulf hym ſelf wente for to ſeke a croſſe. And the kynge folowed hym / & delyuered hym the clerke by the hōde that he ſholde doo with hym what he wolde. And thus was the clerke delyuered & went thens. ¶And Pandulf and Duraunt his felowe went fro the kyng / & came agayne to the pope of Rome. And tolde hym that kynge Iohan wolde not amended be. But euer abode ſo acrcuſyd ¶And neuertheles the pope graū
                        ted that yere thorughout alle Englonde that preeſtes myght ſynge maſſe in couenable chyrches / and conſecrate our lordes body 
                           •
                         & gyue it to ſyke men whiche were lykely to paſſe out of this worlde. And alſo that men myght cryſten chyldern ouer all the londe. ¶And whan the pope wyſt and ſawe that the kynge wolde not be vnder the rule of hooly chyrche for noo maner thynge. The pope then̄e ſent to the kynge of Fraūce in remyſſeon of his ſynnes / that he ſholde take with hym alle the power that he myght / & go in to Englond for to deſtroye the kynge Iohan ¶Whan theſe tydyges came to kynge Iohan / thenne was he ſore anoyed & ſore dradde leſt he ſholde leſe his reame & hym ſelf be done to the deth. ¶Thenne ſente he to the pope meſſengers & ſayd. He wolde be Iuſtifyed / & come to amendemente in all thynges / and wolde make ſatyſfaccyon to all maner of men after the popes ordynaunce. ¶Then̄e ſente the pope ayen in to Englonde Pandulf and other meſſenger / and came to Caunterbury to the kynge & there abode· And the .viii. daye of May / the kynge made anothe
                           •
                         for to ſtande to the popes ordynaunce / before Pandulf ye Legate in all maner of thynges in whyche he was accurſyd. And that he ſholde make full reſtytucyon to all mē of holy chyrche & of relygyon / and of the goodes that he had taken of them ayenſt theyr wyll And all the grete lordes of Englonde ſwore vpon the boke and by

theyr holydom / that yf ye kynge wolde not holde his othe / they ſayd ye they wolde by ſtrength make hym holde it. ¶Thenne put the kymge hym to the courte of Rome / and thenne gaaf he vp the reame of Englonde and of Irlonde for hym and for his heyers for euer more that ſholde come after hym / ſoo that kynge Iohan and his heyers ſholde take the two reames of the popes hondes And ſholde euery yere paye ferme vnto the courte of Rome a thouſande marke of ſyluer. And tho toke ye kyng ye crowne of hys heed & ſete it vpon his knees And theſe wordes ſayd he in herynge of all ye grete lordes of Englonde. Here Ireſygne vp the crowne & the reame of Englonde in to the pope Innocencius hondes the thyrde / & put me hooly in his mercy and in his ordynaunce. ¶Tho receyued Pandulf the crowne of kynge Iohn̄ and kept it 
                           •
                        yue dayes as fore ſeaſynge / takynge of two realmes / of Englonde & of Irlonde. And cōfermed all maner thyngꝭ by his Chartre that foloweth afer.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the letetr oblygatorye ye kynge Iohn̄ made to the courte of Rome / wherfore the Peters pens ben gadred thrughout al Englonde.
                     TO all cryſten people throghout all the worlde dwellynge. Iohan by the grace of god kynge of Englonde gretynge to your vnyuerſyte. And be it knowen that for as moche as we haue greued and offended god and our moder holy chyrche of Rome. And for aſmoche as we haue nede vnto the mercy of our lorde Iheſu cryſt. And alſo we may no thynge ſo worthy of
                           •
                        re / as competent ſatyſfaccyon to make to god and to holy chirch / but yf that yt were owr owne body / as wyth our reames of Englonde and of Irlonde. Then̄e by the grace of god we deſyre to meke vs / for the loue of hym that meked hym to the dethe of the croſſe Thorugh coūſeyll of theſe noble erles and barons / we offre all freely / graunt to god and to the appoſtle ſaynt Peter and ſaynt poule / and to our moder chirche of Rome / and to our holy fader pope Innocencius the thyrde / and to all the pooes that cometh after hym all the reame and patronages of chirches of Englonde and of Irlonde / with theyr appertenaunces / for remyſſyon of oure ſynnes / and for helpe & helthe of our kynne ſoules / and of all cryſten ſoul is So that from this daye after warde we wyll receyue / & holde of our moder chyrche of Rome / as fee ferme / doynge feaute to our holy fader pope Innocencius the thyrde / and ſo to all the popes that cometh after hym / in the ſame manere aboue ſayd. And in preſence of the wyſe man Pandulf ye popes Subdeaken / we make lyeges homage / as it were in the popes preſence / and before gym were. And ſhall do all manere thyngꝭ aboue ſayd / And therto we bynde vs / and all that cometh after vs / & our heyres for euer more / without ony agayn ſayenge to the pope / and eke the warde of chyrche vacauntz. And in token for this thyng for euer to laſte / we wyll conferme and ordeyne / that our ſpecyall rentes of the forſayd r
                           •
                        ame / ſauynge ſaynt Peters pens in al thynge to the moder chyrche of Rome payēge bi yere a thouſande marke of ſyluer and two termes of ye yere for all manere cuſtomes that we ſholde doo for the forſayd reames / that is to ſay to Myghelmas / and atte Eeſter. That is to ſaye .vii. hondred marke for Englonde / & thre hondred marke for Irlond Sauynge to vs and to our heyres our Iuſtyces / and other fraunchyſe / & other ryaltees / that perteyne vnto the crowne And theſe thynges & before ben ſayd we wyll / that it be ferme & ſtable without ende. And to that oblygacyon / we & our ſucceſſours & oure heyres in this manere be bounde / that yf we / or ony of oyr heyres / thorugh ony preſumpcyon falle / in ony poynt ayenſt ony of theſe thynges aboue ſayde / and he be warned / and wyll not ryght amende / he ſhall thenne leſe the forſayd reame for euermore. And that is chartre of oblygacyon and our warraunt for euer more / be ferme and ſtable without ony gaynſayenge. we ſhall fronte this daye afterwarde be true vnto god and to the moder of holy chyrche of Rome \ and to the pope Innocencius the thyrde / and to all that cometh after hym· And the realme of Englonde and of Irlonde / we ſhall maynten truely in alle manere poyntes ayenſt alle manere men by our power thrugh goodes helpe.
                  
                  
                     ¶How the clerkes that were outlawed came agayne & how kyng Iohan was aſſoylled.
                     SO whan thys chartre was made and enſealed / the kynge receyued agayne his crowne of Pandulfus honde And ſete anone vnto the Archebyſſhop Stephen / and to all his other clerkes and lewede men / that he had exyled out of thys londe / that they ſholde come

ayen in to Englonde / and haue agayne theyr londes and allo theyr rentes. And that he wolde make reſtytucyon of the goodes that he had taken of theyrs ayenſt theyr wyll. ¶The kynge hymſelf tho and Pandulf and erles and barons went unto wyncheſtre ayenſt the Archebyſſhop Stephen. ¶And whan he was come the kynge wente ayenſt hym and fell adowne to his feet / and thus to hym ſayde. Fayre ſyre ye be welcome. And I crye you mercy by cauſe that I haue treſpaſſed ayenſt you. ¶The Archebyſſhop toke hym vp tho in hys armes / and kyſſyd hym curteyſly oftentymes / and after ledde hym to ye doore of ſaynt Swythunes chyrche by the honde / and aſſoylled hym of the ſentence / and hym reconſyled to god & to holy thyrche. And that was on ſaynt Margaretes daye. And the Archepyſſhop anone wente for to ſynge maſſe. And the kyng offred at the maſſe a marke of golde. ¶And whan the maſſe was done / all they wente for to receyue theyr londes / without ony manere gaynſayenge. ¶And that daye they made all myrth & Ioye ynough. But yet was not the enterdytynge releaced / by cauſe the pope had ſette that the enterdytynge ſholde not be done / tyll the kynge had made full reſtytucyon of the goodes that he had taken of the holy chyrche. And that hym ſelf ſholde do homage to the pope by a certayn Legate / that he ſholde ſende in to Englonde. ¶And thenne tooke Pandulf his leue of the kynge and the Archebyſſhop / and went agayne vnto Rome. ¶And the Archebyſſhop anone lete come before hym prelates of holy chyrche at Redynge / for to treate & counſeyll how moche / and what they ſholde axe of the kyng / for to make reſtytucyon of the goodes that he had taken of theym. And they ordeyned & ſayd that the kyng ſholde yeue to the Archebyſſhop thre thouſande marke for the wronge that the kynge had done vnto hym. And alſo by procyons to other clerkes .xv. thouſande marke. ¶And the ſame tyme Nycolaus byſſhop of Tuſcam Cardynall Penytenciarius of Rome came in to Englonde thrugh the popes conmaundement / the fyfth kalendas of Octobre and came to London / the fyfth Nonas of Octobre / for by cauſe that kynge Iohan and alle the kynges that came after hym / ſholde euer more holde the reame of Englonde and of Irlonde / of god and of the pope / payenge to the pope by yere as it is aboue ſayd.
                  
                  
                     ¶How the enterdytynge was vndone in Englōde / and of the debate that was bytwene kynge Iohan and the barons of the reame.
                     AS kynge Iohan had done his homage to the Legate that ſhewed hym the popes letter / that he ſholde paye to Iulyan & yelne ayen that was kynge Rychardes wyfe the thyrde parte of the londe of Englonde and of Irlonde that he had withholde ſyth that kyng Rycharde deyed. ¶Whan kynge Iohn̄ herde this / he was wonder wroth. For vtterly yt enterdytynge myght not be vndone tyll yt he had made gre
                           •
                         and reſtytycyon to the forſayd Iulyan / of that ſhe aſked. The Legate went thenne agayne to the pope after Cryſtmaſſe. And ye kynge ſente ouer ſee to Iulyan that was kynge Rychardes wyf for to haue a relate of that ſhe axed of hym. ¶And ſo it befell that Iulyan deyed anone after Eeſter. And in ſo moche the kynge was quyte of that thynge that the axed. ¶But thenne at the feeſt of ſaynt Iohan that came nexte after / thorugh the popes commaundemente / the enterdytynge was fyrſt releaſyd thrughout alle Englonde 
                           〈…〉
                         daye of Iulii. And .vii. yere was the londe 
                           •
                        
                        terdyted. And on the mornynge m
                           •
                        n rough & ſayd maſſe thorugh out all London and ſo 
                           ••
                        
                        ter thorugh out all Englonde· ¶And the ne
                           ••
                         yere after there began a grete debate bytwene kynge Iohan and the lordes of Englonde 
                           •
                        or by cauſe that he wolde not graunte the law
                           ••
                         and holde / the whiche ſaynt Edwarde had ordeyn
                           •
                        d / and had ben vſed & holden vnto that tyme that he had them broken. For he wolde holde noo lawe / but dyde all thynge that hym lyked / and dyſheryted many men without conſente of lordes and perys of ye londe. And wo
                           •
                         dyſheryte the good erle Radulf of Cheſtre for by cauſe that he vndertoke hym of hys wyckedneſſe / & for by cauſe that he dyde ſo moche ſhame and vylany to god and to holy chyrche▪ And alſo for he helde and haunted hys owne brothers wyfe / and laye alſo by many wymmen greate lordes doughters. For he ſpared no woman that hym lyked for to haue. wherfore all the lordes of the londe were wrothe / & toke the cyte of London. To ceſſe this debate the Archebyſſhop and lordes of the londe aſſenbled before the feeſt of ſaynt Iohn̄ Bap
                           •
                        yſt in a medowe beſyde the towne of Stanys / that

is called Romney mede. And the kynge made them there a chartre of fraunchyſe / ſuche as they wolde axe / and in ſuche manere they we
                        
                           •
                        e accorded / and that accordement laſted not full longe. For the kynge hymſelf ſoone after dyed ayenſt the poyntes of the ſame chartre that he had made. wherfore the mooſt parte of the lordes of the londe aſſembled and began to warre vppon hym ayen / and brenned his townes / & robbed his folke / and dyde all the ſorowe that they myght / & made them as ſtronge as they myght with all the power they hadde / and thought to dryue hym oute of Englonde / and make Lowys the kyngꝭ ſone of Fraunce kynge of Englonde. ¶And kyng Iohn̄ ſente tho ouer ſee and ordeyned ſo moche people of Normans / & of Pycardes / & of Flemynges / ſoo that the londe myghte not ſuſteyne them / but with moche ſorowe. ¶And amonge alle this people 
                           •
                         there was a man of Normandye that was called Fawkis of Brent / and thys Normā and his company ſpared nother chirches ne houſes of relygyon / but they brente & 
                           •
                        obbed it / and bare a way a
                           •
                        l that they myght take ſo that the londe was all deſtroyed / what one ſyde and other. ¶The barons & lordes of Englonge ordeyned amonge theym the beſte ſpekers and wyſeſt men / and ſente them ouer the ſee to kynge Phylyp of Fraūce / and prayed hym / that he wolde ſende Lowys hys ſone in to Englonde to be kynge of Englonde / and to receyue the crowne.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Lowys the knges ſone of Fraunce came in to Englonde with a ſtronge power of people 
                           •
                         to be kynge of Englonde·
                     ANone as kynge Phylyp of Fraunce herde theſe tydynges / he made certayne alyaunce bytwene theym by theyr comune eleccyon / that Lowys kynge Phylyps ſone of Fraunce ſholde go with theym in to Englonde / and dryue out kynge Iohan of the londe. And all that were in preſence of Lowes / made vnto hym homage / & became his men. ¶And the Barons of Englonde helde them ſtyll att London / and abode Lowys the kynges ſone of Fraunce. And thys was the nexte Saterdaye before the Aſcenſyon of our lorde / that Lowys came into Englonde wyth a ſtronge power. And that tyme kynge Iohn̄ had taken alle the caſtels of Englonde in to Alyens hondes / ¶And tho came Lowwys / and beſyeged Rocheſtre caſtell / and tooke yt wyth ſtrength. And the thurſdaye in wytſon weke lete hange all the Alyens that were therin / And ye Thurſdaye nexte ſe wynge / he came to London / and there he was receyued with moche honur of the lordes that abode hym there / & all to hym made homage. ¶And after warde on the Tewyſdaye nexte after the. Trynyte ſondaye he toke the caſtel of Reigate. And on the morowe after the caſtell of Gilforde / and the Frydaye nexte after the caſtell of Farneham. And the Mondaye nexte after the cyte of wyncheſtre to hym was yolde / and the morowe after Saynt Iohans daye the maner of wu
                           •
                        ueſeye to hym yelden▪ And the Tewyſdaye after the Vtas of ſaynt Peter and Poule they toke the caſtell of Odyham. And the mondaye after ſaynt / Margaretes day / he ordeyned hym to warde Bawmore / for to ſyege the caſtell / and there he dwelled .xv. dayes and myghte not gete the caſtell / and thenne wente he thens and came to London and the Toure to hym was yolden.
                  
                  
                     How ye pope ſēte in to Englonde a legate yt was called Swalo & of ye deth of kynge Iohan.
                     ANd in the ſame tyme the pope ſente in to Englond a Legate / that was called Swalo / and he was preeſt Cardynall of Rome / for to mayntene kynge Iohans cauſe / ayenſt the barons of Englond. But the barons had ſo huge parte & helpe / thorugh lowys the kynges ſone of Fraūce / that kyng Iohn̄ wyſt not to 
                           •
                        orne ne go. And ſo it befell that he wolde haue gone to Nycholl· And as he went thyder warde / he came by the abbaye of Swyneſ hede / & there he abode two dayes And as he ſate at mete / he axed a monke of ye hous how moche that a loof was wroth that was ſette before hym vpō the table / And the monke ſayd 
                           •
                        hat the loof was wroth but an half peny. O ſayd the kynge tho. Here is greate chepe of brede. Now ſayde he tho / and I may leue ony whyle ſuche a loof ſhall be wrothe .xx. ſhelynges or half a yere be gone. And ſo whan he ſayd this worde / moche he thought / & often he ſyghed / & toke and ete of the brede / and ſayd by god / ye worde that I haue ſpoken / it ſhall be ſothe· ¶The mōke that ſtode before the kyng was for this worde full ſory in hys herte / & thought rather he wolde hym ſelf ſuffre deth / & thought yf he myght ordeyne therfore ſome maner remedy. And anone the monke wente vnto hys

abbot and was ſhryuen of hym / and tolde the abbot all that the kynge had ſayd. And prayed hys abbot for to aſſoyle hym / for he wolde yeue the kynge ſuche a drynke that all Englond ſholde be glad therof and Ioyfull Tho yede the monke in to a gardeine / and foūde a grete tode therin / and toke her vp and put her in a cuppe & prycked the tode thorugh with a broche many tymes tyll that the venym came out of euery ſyde in the cuppe And tho tooke the cuppe & fyllyed it with good ale / and brought it before the kyng knelynge ſayenge. Syr ſayd he waſſayll / for euer the dayes of all your lyf dronke ye of ſo good a cuppe. ¶Begyne monke ſayd the kynge. ¶And the monke dranke a greate draught / and toke the kynge the cuppe / and ye kynge dranke alſo a greate draught / and ſette downe the cuppe. The monke anon ryght wente in to farmere & there deyed anone / on whoos ſoule god haue mercy Amen. And fyue monkes ſynge for his ſoule ſpecyally / & ſhall whyle that the abbaye ſtandeth. The kynge roſe vp anone full euyll at eaſe and commaūded to remeue the table / and axed after the monke. And men tolde hym that he was deed / for his wombe was broken in ſondre. ¶Whan ye kyng herde this / he cōmaunded for to truſſe / but it was for nought / for is bely began to ſwelle for the drynke yt he had drōke / & within two dayes he deyed on ye morowe after ſaynt Lukys daye / & had many fayr chyldern of his body begaten / that is to ſay. Hēry his ſone yt was kyng after Iohan his fader / & Rycharde that was Erle of Cornewaylle / and yſabell that was Empreſſe of Rome / & Elenore that was quene of Scotlonde. And this kyng Iohan whan he had regned .xiiii. yere & fyue monethes & fyue dayes / he deyed in the caſtell of ne werke. And his body was buryed at wyncheſtre.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno dm̄ .M.CC.
                     FRedericus the ſeconde was Emperour xxx. yere / This man was crowned of Honorius the pope ayenſt Otto for by cauſe that he ſholde fyght wyth hym / the whyche he dyde / and expulſyd hym. And fyrſte he nouryſſhed the chyrche / and afterwarde he dyſpoyled it / as a ſtepmoder· wherfore Honorius curſyd hym / and all tho that were contrary to hys opynyon the pope aſſoyled. And the ſame ſentence Gregorius the .ix. renewed And this ſame man put Henry hys owne ſone in to pryſon / and there murdred hym. wherfore whan thys Emprerour an other ſeaſon was lyke / by an other ſone of his owne he was murdred / in the tyme of Innocentius the fourth. ¶Honorius the thyrde was pope after Innocenciꝰ .x. yere / & confermed the ordre of frere Prechers & Mynors· And made certayne Decretalles.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of kynge Henry the thyrde that was crowned at Gloucetree
                     ANd after this kynge Iohan regned his ſone Henry / & was crowned at Gloucette whan he was .ix. yere olde / on ſaynt Symondes daye & Iyde of Swalo the Legate of Rome thrugh counſeyll of all the grete lordes that helde with kynge Iohan hys fader that is to ſaye / the erle Radulf of Cheſtre. wyllyam erle Marſhall erle of Penbroke. Wyllyam ye Brener erle of Feries. Serle ye manly baron. And all other grete lordes of Englonde helde with Lowys the kynges ſone of Fraūce. And anone after whan kynge Henry was crowned Swalo the Legate helde his counſeyll at Bryſtowe at ſaynt Martyns feeſt. And there were xi. byſſops of Englonde & of walys / and of other prelates of holy chyrche a grete nombre / and erles & barons / & many knyghtes of Englonde. And all tho that were at that counſeyll ſwore feawte vnto Henry the kyng that was kynge Iohn̄s ſone. ¶And anone after the Legate enterdyted walys / for cauſe that they helde with the barons of Englonde. Alſo all tho that holpe / or yaue ony counſeyll to meue warre ayenſt the newe kynge Henry he accurſyd them. And at the begynnynge he put in the ſentence the kyngꝭ ſone of Fraunce Lowys. And neuertheles the ſame Lowys wolde not ſpare for all that. But wente and toke the caaſtell of Barchamſtede / & aleſo ye caſtell of Hirtfo
                           •
                         And from that daye afterwarde / the Barons dyde there ſo moche harme thrughout all Englonde. And pryncypally ye frenſſhemen that were with kynge Lowys. wherfore the grete lordes / and all the comyn people of Englonde lete them dreſſe / for to dryue Lowys & his company out of Englond / but ſome of the barons and Frenſſhemen were gone to the cyte of Nycholl / & toke the towne & helde it to kynge Lowys profyte. But thyther came kyng Henryes men with a grete power / that is to ſaye the erle Radulf of Cheſtre / & Wyllyam erle Marſhall / & Wyllyam the Brenererle of Feryers &

many other lordes with them / & yaue batayll vnto Lowys men. And there was ſlayne the erle of perchees & Lowys men were fowle dyſcomfyted. And there was taken Serle erle of wyncheſtre / and Humfroyde. Boune erle of Hertforde / & Robert the ſone of walter / & many other that began warre ayenſt the kynge / there they were taken & ladde vnto kyng Henry / that was kynge Iohn̄s ſone. ¶And whan the tydynges cam to Lowys of the dyſcomfyture / yt was the kynges ſone of Fraūce. He remeued fro thens & wente vnto London / and lete ſhytte the yates faſte of the cyte. And anone after the kynge ſente to the Burgeys of Lō
                        don / that they ſholde yelde them vnto hym / & the cyte alſo. And he wolde theym graunte all theyr fraunchyſes that euer they were wonte to haue before. And wolde conferme them by his grete newe chartre vnder hys brode ſcale.
                     ¶And in the ſame tyme a grete lorde that was called Euſtace the monke came oute of Fraunce wyth a grete company of Lordes / & wolde haue come in to Englonde / for to haue holpen Lowys the kynges ſone of Fraunce. But Hubert of Brugh / & ye fyue por
                           •
                        es wyth .viii. ſhyppes tho mette with them in ye hyghe ſee 
                           •
                         & aſſaylled them egerly / & ouer came them with ſtrength / & ſmote of Euſtace the monkes heed. And toke alſo .x. grete lordes of Fraunce & put theym in to pryſon. And ſlewe almooſt all the men that came with theym / and anone drowned the ſhyppes in the ſee.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Lowys corned ayen in to Fraunce / & of ye confermacyon of kynge Iohans hartre.
                     SO whan Lowys herde theſe rydynges he dradde ſore to be deed & loſt. And lete or
                           ••
                        yne / & ſpeke bytwene the kynge & Lowys by the Legate Swalo And throughe the Archebyſſhop of Caunterbury / & thrugh other grete lordes that all the pryſoners on that one halfe and that other ſholde be delyuerd & go quyte. A
                           •
                        d Lowys hym ſelf ſholde haue for his coſtes a thouſande poūde of ſyluer. and ſhold go out of Englonde / and come neure more ther in agayne. And in this maner was ye accorde made bytwene kynge Henry & Lowys. And tho was Lowys aſſoylled of the popes Legate / ye was called Swalo of the ſentēce that he was in / & the Barons of Englonde alſo. And after thys kynge Henry & Swalo the Legate & Lowys went to Merton & there was the peas cō
                        fermed / & bytwene them ordeyned. And after Lowys wente from thens vnto London & toke his leue & was brought with moche honour vnto the ſee with the Archebyſſhop of Caunterbury and with other byſſhops / & alſo wyth erles and barons / and ſo went in to Fraunce. ¶And after warde the kynge & the Archebyſſhop / and alſo erles & barons aſſembled them and came to the cyte of London att Myghelmas that nexte came tho ſewynge and helde there a grete parlament at London / And there were tho reuewed all the fraūchyſe ye kyng Iohn̄ had graunted / at Romney mede \ & kynge Henry tho confermed by hys chartre / the whiche yet ben holden thrugh out all Englonde. ¶And in that tyme the kyng toke of euery plough lōde .ii. ſhleynges / & Hubert of Brugh was made tho cheyf Iuſtyce of Englond And this was in the fourth yere of kynge Henryes regne ¶And in the ſame yere was ſaynt Thomas of Caunterbury tranſlated the .l. yere after his martyrdome. And after it was ordeyned by all the lordes of Englonde / that all Alyens ſolde go out of Englonde / and come nomore therin. And kynge Henry toke tho all the caſtelles in to his honde / ye kynge Iohan his fader had yeue & take to Alyens for to kepe yt helde with hym. ¶But the proude Fawkys of Brytayn rychely lete araye his caſtell of Bedforde / whiche he had of kynge Iohn̄s yefte / & helde that caſtell ayenſt kynge Henryes wyll with myght and ſtrength. And the kynge came thyder with a ſtrong power / and beſyeged the caſtell. And the Archebyſſhop mayſter Stephen of Langton / wyth a fayre company of knyghtes came to the kynge hym for to helpe. And from the Aſcenſyon of our lord vnto the Aſſumpcyon of our lady laſted the ſyege. And tho was the caſtell wonne & take. And the kynhe lete hange all tho that went in to the caſtell with theyr good wyll. for to holde the caſtell. That is for to ſaye .lxxx. men. ¶And tho after warde fawkys hymſelfe was founde and had in a chyrche at Couentre / & there he forſwore all Englonde with moche ſhame / and wente agayne in to his owne countree. ¶And whyles that kynge Henry regned. Edmonde of Abyndon / that was 
                           •
                        relorer of Salyſbury was conſecrated Archebyſſhop of Caunterbury. And this kynge Henry ſente ouer the ſee vnto the erle of prouynce / that he ſholde lende hym

his doughter in Englond / that was called Ellenore / and he wolde ſpowſe her. And tho ſhe came in to Englond after Cryſtmas. And on the morowe after ſaynt Hylaryes daye / ye Archebyſſhop Edmonde ſpowſed them togyder at weſtmeſtre with grete ſolempnyte. And there was a ſwete ſyght bytwene them. That is to ſaye Edwarde that was nexte kynge after hys fader / floure of curteyſy and of largeneſſe and Margarete that was after quen of Scotlonde / and Beautrice that was after counteſſe of Brytayne / Katheryne that deyed mayde in relygyon.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the quinzeme of goodes that were graunted for ye newe chartre / and of the purueaunce of Oxforde.
                     ANd thus it befell that ye lordes of Englonde wold haue ſome addycyous moo in the chartre of Fraunchyſe that they had of the kynge / & ſpake thus bytwene them. And ye kynge graunted them all theyr axenge. And made to them two chartres / that one is called the grete chartre of fraunchiſes / & that other is callad the chartre of foreſt. And for the graunt of theſe two chartres / prelates / Erles and Barons / and alle the comyns of Englonde / yaue to the kynge a thouſande marke of ſyluer. ¶Whan kyng Henry had be kynge .xliii. yere the ſame yere he and his lordes / Erles and Barons of the reame wente to Oxforde / and ordeyned a lawe in amendemente of the reame. And fyrſt ſwore the kyng hymſelf / & afterwarde alle the lordes of the londe / that they wolde holde that ſtatute for euermore / and who that them brake ſholde be deed. But the ſeconde yere after that ye ordynaunce / the kynge thrugh counſeyll of Edward his ſone / and of Rycharde his brother / that was erle of Cornwaylle / & alſo of other repented hym of that othe that he made for to holde that lawe and ordynaūce· And ſente to ye courtre of Rome to be aſſoylled of that othe. And in the yere next comynge after / was the grete darth of corne in Englonde For a quarter of whete was worth .xxiiii. ſhelynges. And the poore people ete netles and other wedes for hūgre. And deyed many a thouſande for defawte of mete. ¶And in ye .xlviii. yere of kynge Henryes regne began warre & debate bytwene hym & his lordes / for by cauſe he had broken the couenauntes that were made bytwene them at Oxforde. ¶And ye ſame yere was the towne of Northamton taken / & folke ſlayne that were wythin / For by cauſe that they had ordeyned wylde fyre for to brenne the cyte of London. ¶And in the monethe of Maye that the next after / vpon ſaynt Pancras daye / was the Batayll of lewes / that is to ſaye / the weneſday before Saynt Dūſtans daye. And there was taken kynge Henry hym ſelf / and ſyr Edwarde his ſone / and Rycharde his broder erle of Cornewaylle / and many other lordes. And in the ſame yere nextſe wynge ſyr Edwarde the kynges ſone brake out of the warde of ſyre Symonde of Mountforth / erle of Leycetre at Hertforde / and wente vnto the barons of the Marche / and they rceeyued hym with moche honour. ¶And the ſame tyme Gylbert of Claraunce erle of Glocetre that was in the warde alſo of the forſayd Symon de thorugh the commaūdement of kynge Henry / that wente fro hym wyth grete herte / for cauſe that he ſayd / that ye forſayd Gylbert was a foole / and helde hym with kynge Henry ¶And on the Saterdaye nexte after the myddes of Auguſt / ſyre Edwarde the kynges ſone dyſcomfyted ſyr Symonde de Mountforth ac Kelyngworth / but the greate lordes that were there with hym were takē / that is to ſaye. Baldewyne wake. And Wyllyam de Mouchentye and many other grete lordes. And the Tewyſdaye next after was ye batayll done at Euſbā. And there was ſlayne ſyr Symonde de Moūtforth. Hugh the Spenſer / & Mountforth that was Raufe Baſſectes fader of Drayton and other many greate lordes / And whanne thys batayll was done / all the gentylmen that had ben with the erle Symonde were dyſhery
                           •
                        ed / and ordeyned togyder and dyde moche harme to all the londe. For they deſtroyed theyr enmyes in all that they myght.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the ſyege of Kenylworth & how ye gē
                        tylmen were dyſheryted thorugh counſeyll of the lordes of the reame of Englonde and how they came agayne and had theyr londes.
                     ANd the nexte yere comynge in May / the fourth day before the feeſt of ſaynt Dunſtane / was the bataylle & ſcomfyture are Cheſtrefelde / of them that were dyſheryted / & there was many of theym ſlayne· ¶And Robert Erle of Feriers there was take / and alſo Baldewyne wake / & Iohan delahay / with moche ſorowe eſcaped thens. And oon ſaynt Iohan
                           •
                        
                        
the Baptyſt tho ſewynge / began the ſyege of the caſtell Kenylworth / & the ſyege laſted to ſaynt Thomas eue the appoſtle. in whyche daye ſyr Hugh Haſtynge had the caſtel for to kepe / yt yelded vp the caſtell vnto the kynge in this manere / that hymſelf & the other yt were within the caſtell / ſholde haue theyr lyues & lymme / & as moche thynge as they had therin both hors & harneys / & foure dayes of repyte / for to delyuer clenly the caſtel / of them ſelf & of all other maner thynge / as they had within ye caſtell / & ſoo they wente fro the caſtell. And ſyr Symonde Noūtforth the yonger / & the counteſſe his mo
                           •
                         were gone ouer ye ſee in to Fraū
                        ce / & there helde them as people yt were exyled out of Englonde for euer. ¶And ſoone after it was ordeyned by the Legate Octobone / & by other grete lordes / the wyſeſt of Englonde that all tho that had be ayenſte the kynge and were dyſheryted / ſholde haue ayen theyr londes by greuous raūſons / after that it was ordeyned. And thus they were accorded with the kynge & peas cryed thorughout all Englonde and thus the warre was ended. And whan yt was done the Legate toke hys leue of the kynge & of the quene / of ye grete lordes of Englonde & wente tho to Rome the .lv. yere of kynge Henryes regne 
                           •
                         & Edwarde kynge Iohn̄s ſone of Brytayne Iohan Veſſi. Thomas of Clare. Rogere of Clyfforde. Othes of Graūſtone Robert le Brus. Iohn̄ of Verdon / and many other lordes of Englonde / and of beyonde the ſee toke theyr waye to warde the hooly londe. And the kynge Henry deyed in the ſame tyme at weſtmeſtre / whan he had regned .lv. yere & .xix. wekes / on ſaynt Edmonds daye the Archebyſſhop of Caumterbury. And he was enteryd on ſaynt Edmondes daye the kynge / in the yere of the Incarnacyon of our lorde Iheſu Cryſte .M.CC.lxxii.
                  
                  
                     ¶Prophecye of Merlyn of the kyng Henry the th
                           •
                         expowned that was kynge Iohans ſone.
                     ANd of this Hēry prophecyed Merlyn & ſayd / that a lambe ſholde come out of wyncheſtre / in the yere of ye Incarnacyon of our lord Iheſu criſte .M.CC. & .xvi. with true lyppes & holyneſſe wryten in his hert / And he ſayd ſothe / for the good Henry the kynge was borne in wyncheſtre / in the yere aboueſayd / & he ſpake good wordes & ſwete / & was an holy man & of good conſyence. And Merlyn ſayd / that this Henry ſhold make the fayreſt place of the worde / that in his tyme ſhold not be fully ended / & he ſayd ſoth. For he made the newe werke of the abbaye of ſaynt Peters chirche at weſtmeſtre / yt is fayrer of ſyght than ony other place yt ony man knoweth thorugh out al cryſtendom. But kyng Henry deyed are that werke were fully at an ende / & that was grete herme. ¶And yet ſayd Merlyn / yt this lambe ſholde haue peas the mooſt parte of hys regne And he ſayd full ſoth / for he was neuer noyed thorugh warre / neyther dyſeaſed in no maner wyſe / a lytell afore his deth / & Merlyn ſayd in his prophecye more / & in ye regne & ende of the forſayd lambe / a wulf of a ſtraunge londe ſhal do hym moche harme thorugh his warre / and that he ſholde at ye laſt be mayſter thorugh helpe of a reed foxe / that ſholde come forthe of the North weſt & ſholde hym ouercome. And that he ſholde dryue hym out of the water / & ye prophecye full well was knowen. For within a lytell tyme or ye kyng deyed Symonde of Moūtforde Erle of Leycerre / yt was borne in Fraunce / beganne ayenſte hym ſtronge warre / thorugh whyche doynge / many a good bacheler deſtroyed was and deyed / and dyſheryted. ¶And whan kyng
                           •
                         Henry had the vyctory at Euſham / & Symonde the erle was ſlayne thorugh helpe & myght of Gylbert of clare erle of Glocetre / that was in kepynge & warde of the forſayde Symonde / thrugh ordynaunce of kynge Henry that wente ayen vnto the kynge wyth moche power. wherfore the forſayd Symonde was deſtroyed and that was grete harme to the comyns of Englonde / that ſo good a man was ſlayne for the trouth / and deyed in thar
                           •
                        y
                           •
                        e / & for the comyn profyte of the ſame folke / & therfore almyghty god for hym hathe ſyns ſhewed many a fayre myracle to dyuers men & wymmen of ye ſykeneſſe & dyſceaſe that they haue had for the loue of hym ¶And Merlyon alſo ſayd in his prophecye / that afer that tyme / the lame ſholde lyue no whyle / & thenne his ſeed ſholde be in ſtraunge londe wythout ony paſture / and he ſayd ſothe / for kyng Henry lyued no whyle after that Symonde Mounforde was ſlayne / that kynge Henry ne deyed anone after hym. And in the meane tyme ſyre Edwarde hys ſone / that was the beſte kyng of the worlde ef honour / was tho in the holy lond

and gate there. Acres. And in that countree he begate there vpon dame Elenore his wyf Iohan of Acres hys doughter / that afterwarde was counteſſe of Glocetre / & made ſuche a vyage in the holy londe / that all the worlde ſpake of his knyghthode / & euery man dradde hym hye & lowe thorughout all cryſtendome / as the ſtorye of hym telleth / as afterwarde ye ſhall here more openly. ¶And from the tyme yt kynge Henry deyed / tyll that ſyr Edward was crowned kynge / al the grete lordes of Englonde were as faderles childern wythout ony ſocoure / that theym myght mayntene & gouerne / and defende ayenſt theyr deedly enmyes.
                     GRegorius the .ix. was pope after Honorius / thys man canonyſed many ſayntes / & defended myghtely ye chyrche ayenſt Frederyk / therfore the tooke many prelates & two Cardynalles / the whiche wente to counſeyll ayenſt hym This pope was ſegyd in the cyte of Rome by the Emperour / & he ſawe the Romayne were corrupte by the moneye of the Emperour. Thenne he toke in hys honde the heedes of the appoſtles Peter & Poule / and went with proceſſyon fro the chyrche of ſaynt Iohn̄ Latranente / to ſaynt Peters chyrche. ¶And ſo he gate the hertꝭ of the Romayns / & the Emperour went fayr a waye fro the cyte. This pope made frere Ianond to compyle the fyue bokes of Decretales / of many pyſtles and decrees. And after with many trybulacōns of chyptyraūt and other / he deceſſyd and wente to heuen. ¶Celeſtinus the fourth was pope after Gregorius almooſt a moneth / and he was in his lyf and in hys conynge laudable. And he was an olde man & a feble & deceſſyd / & there was no pope after hym almooſt a .xii. month. ¶Innocenciꝰ the fourth was pope after hym almooſt .xi. yere & .vi. monethes / thys man canonyſed many ſayntes / & Frederyke the Emperour he depoſyd as enmye vnto god in the thyrde yere that he was made pope / & he was holpe by the Ianuencꝭ. ¶Thenne was Henry the ſixt choſen & wyllyam / by the popes commaundement ayenſt Frederyk that one after an other / but they preuayled not to ouercome hys tyranny / for he was ouermyghty / ne theſe were not crowned / for they deceſſyd anone. ¶Thomas de Alquine an holy doctour Albertus magnus the byſſhop of Ratyſponens. Euſtacius. Bonouenture a deuoute doctour were thys tyme / the whiche deſtroyed moche hereſye enfected by the Emperour. ¶Alexander was pope after Innocencius .viii. yere / & lytell of hym is wryten ¶Vrbanus was after hym thre yere & thre monethes / This man droue awaye the hoſt of the Sarraſyns by men marked with the croſſe / the whiche Maufred had ſent ayenſt the chyrche / And the pope toke the kyngdome of Cecyle to the kynges brother of Fraunce / yt he ſholde fyght with Maufrede / & thenne he deceſſyd. And Maufrede after loſte his lyf and his kyngdom bi Karolus· ¶Alphō
                        ſus the kynge of Caſtell Rychardes brother to the kynge of Englonde erle of Corne waylle / were choſen Emperours after the longe vacacyon of the Empyre / for the cheſers of the Emperour were diuyded in ſondre and there was grete ſtryfe many yere. At the laſt deceſſyd Rycharde / & Alphonſus came agaye afore Gregorius the .ix. by the ſygne of peas 
                           •
                         and vtterly renoūced all this tytle of the Empyre & he hadde ony / for he was a very wytty mā / and a noble aſtronemer / and hys tables ben very famous the whiche he made / for they be compendyons ¶Clemens the fourth was pope after Vrbanus .iii. yere & .ix· monethes this Clemēs was an holy man / & ſayd thrugh the ſpyryte of prophecy / yt the enmyes of the chyrche ſhold peryſſhe as the ſmoke. And it is to byleued that god ceſſyd the trybulacyons of the chyrche thorugh his merytes. Thys man afore had a wyf and chyldern / and whan he was preeſt and after byſſhop he was ſente in to Englonde Legate / and he no thynge knowyng was choſen pope / and after deceſſyd bleſſydly for hys vertuous lyuynge. ¶Gregorias the .x. was pope after hym foure yere / after he was made pope for the deſyre that he had to the holy londe. the whyche he entended to vyſyte perſonally / a
                           •
                        e Londō in Fraunce he made a ſolempne counſeyll / in the wihche the counſeyll of the Grekes and the Tartars were & there the Grekꝭ promyſed to be refourmed by the vnyte of the chirche. And the Tartars were but a lytell afore baytyſed / & promyſed the ſame. And there were gadred .vi.C. byſſhops & .M. prelates / and therfore a certayne man ſayde Gregorius gadred togyder all kynde of people / & there was decreed / that all perſones & vycaryes ſhold be called preeſtꝭ / & no prelates / & yt no man ſholde aſſygne his tythes to what chyrche he wolde / 

and they dyed afore. But they ſholde be payed to his moder chirche. And he dampned ye pluralyte of benefyces / and deyed a bleſſyd man. ¶Innocencius the .v. was after hym .v. monethes / & lytell he dyd. ¶Adrianus was after hym 
                           •
                        o monethe / & dyde leſſer ¶Iohānis the .x
                           •
                        i. was after hym .viii. monethes / & he was in dyuers ſcyences a famous man / but in maners a fole & deceſſyd anone. ¶Nicholaus the thyrd was pope after Iohn̄ oo yere. Thys mā was in his dayes in buldynge a noble man. & well gouerned the cyte all his dayes. & the ſecō
                        de yere he deceſſyd. ¶Radulphus was Emperour .xviii yere / this man was Erle of Hanebrough a wyſe mā in armes / noble and vyctoryous & was choſen at Baſyle· And he toke ye croſſe on hym for the holy londe. Thimperyall bleſſynge he had not / but the pope alowed the eleccyon for fauour of the holy londe:
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno dm̄ .M.CC.lxxiiii.
                     MAr
                           •
                        inus ye .iiii. was pope after Nycholaus .iiii. yere. thys man was a grete louer of relygyous men / & great attendynge to vertuous werkes. Thys man curſyd the Emperour of Conſtantynople / in ſo moche as he promyſed for to torme to the fayth in the generall counſeyl▪ and dyde not / for the whyche he ſuffred many paſſyons & all holy chyrche. Alſo he curſyd the kyng of Aragon / for he expulſyd the kyng of Cecyle fro his kyngdome. And after he had done many bataylles ayenſt men of myſbyleue & many trybulacōns ſuffred / he deceſſyd & dyd many miracles. ¶Nycholaꝰ delira a noble douctour of dyuyte was thys tyme at Parys this man was a Iewe of nacyon / & he was cōuerted & myghtely profyted in the ordre of frere Mynours. & he wrote ouer all the Byble. Grelles he was in the yere of our lord .M·CCC.xxx. & ſome man ſay he was a Braban & yt his fader & his moder were cryſtne but for pouerte he vyſyted ye ſcole of ye Iewes / & ſo he lerned the Iewes langage or elles thys Nycholaꝰ was informed of the Iewes in hys yonge aege. ¶Honorius ye fourth was pope after Martynꝰ two yere / & lytell of hym ys wryten / but that he was a temperat man & a dyſcerte. ¶Nicholaus the fourth was pope after hym foure yere / this man was a frere Mynor / & although he was a good man in himſelf / yet many vnhappy / thynges fell in his tyme to ye chirche. For many a batayll was in ye cyte thrugh his occaſyon / for he drewe to moche to the one parte. And after hym thre was no pope two yere and .vi. monethes.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Edwarde that was kynge Henryes ſone.
                     ANd after this kyng Henry regned Edwarde hys ſone the worthyes knyght of the worlde in honour / for goddes grace was in hym / for he had the vyctorye of hys enmyes & as ſoone as hys fader was deed / he came to London with a noble company of prelates / erles and barons / and all mē dyd hym moche honour. For in euery place ye ſyr Edwarde rode in London / the ſtretes were couered ouer hys heed with ſylke of tapiſcery / and other riche couerynges. And for Ioye of his comynge / the burgeys of the Cyte caſte out at theyr wyndowes golde and ſyluer hondes full / in tokenynge of loue and worſhyp / ſeruyce and reuerence. And out of condyte of Chepe ranne whyte wyne and reed / as ſtremes both of the water / and euery man dranke therof ye wolde at theyr owne wyll. & this kyng Edwarde was crowned and enoynted as ryght heyer of Englonde with moche honour. And after maſſe ye kynge wente in to his place to holde a ryall feeſt amō
                        ge them that dyde hym honour. And whan he was ſette to meete / The kynge Alexander of Scotlonde came to do hym honour and reuerence / with a q
                           •
                        eynteſye & an hondred knyghtes with hym well horſyd & arayde. And whan they were alyght of theyr ſtedes / they lete theym go whether they wolde / & who that myght take them tooke at theyr owne wyll / wythout ony chalenge·r And after came ſyre Edmonde kynge Edwardes brother a curteys knyght & a gentyll of renowne / & the erle of Corne wayllle / and the erle of Gloceſtre. And after thenne came the erle of Penbroke / & the erle of Garenne. And eche of them by themſelf ladde in theyr honde an hondred knyghtes gayly dyſgyſed in theyr armes. And whan they were alyghted of theyr horſes / they lete them go whether that they welde / & who yt myght them catche / them to haue ſtyll without ony chalenge. And whan all this was done / kyng Edwarde dyde his dylygence & his myghte for to amende and dreſſe the wronges in the beſte manere that he myght to the honour of god & holy chyrche / & to mayntene his honoure / and to amende the noyannce of the comyn people.
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶How ydeyne that was Lewelyns doughter of walys / prynce Aymer / that was ye erles brother of Moūforde were taken in the ſee.
                     THe fyrſte afterwarde ye kynge Edwarde was crowned Lewelyn prynce of wales ſent in to Faraunce to the erle Moūforde / that thorough coūſeyl of his frendes / ye erle ſholde wedde his doughter. And the erle tho auyſed hym vpō this thynge / and ſent vnto Lewelyn and ſayd. that he wolde ſende after hys doughter. & ſo he ſent Aymer his broder after the damoyſell. & Lewelyn arayed ſhyphes for his doughter and for Syre Aymer. and for her faare company that ſholde goo with her. And this Lewelyn dyd grete wronge. for it was couenaūted that he ſholde yeue hys doughter to no manere man / without counſell & conſente of kyng Edwarde. And ſo it befell that a Burgeys of Bryſtow came in the ſee with wyne laden. and mette them & toke them with myght and power. And anone the Burgeys ſent theym to the kyng. And whan Lewely herde this tydynges he was very wroth / and alſo ſorowfull· and gan to warre vpon kynge Edwarde and dyde moche harme vnto Englyſſhmen / and bete downe ye kynges caſtels / and began for to deſtroye kynge Edwardes londe. And whā tydynges cam vnto ye kyng of this thyng he wente in to walys and ſo moche he dyde thorough goddes grace and his grete power that he drofe Lewelyn vnto grete myſchyef / that he fledde all maner of ſtrength & came & yelded hym vnto kyng Edwarde. & yaue hym .l. marke of ſyluer to haue peas. And toke the damoyſell & all his herytage. & made an oblygacōn to kynge Edwarde to come to his parlyamente two tymes of the yere And in the ſeconde yere after that kynge Edwarde was crowned / he helde a generall parleamente att weſtmeſtre / & there he made the ſtatutes for defaute of lawe by the comune aſſent of all his baronage / and at Eſter nexte ſewenge / the kynge ſente by his letter vnto Lewelyn prynce of wales that he ſholde come to his parlemēt for his londe / and for hys holdynge in wales / as the ſtrenthe of his letter oblygatory wytneſſyd. Tho Lewelyn had ſcorne and dyſpyte of the kynges commaundement / And for pure wrache ayen began warre vpon kyng Edwarde. and deſtroyed his londe. And tho whan kynge Edwarde herd of theſe tydynges / he wexed wonder wrothe vnto Lewelyn & in haſt aſſembled his people / & went hym to warde wales. And warred ſo vpon Lewelyn the prynce / tyll that he broughte hym in moche ſorowe & dyſeaſe. And Lewelyn ſawe that is defence myghte hym not auaylle / and came ayen / and yelded hym to ye kynges grace / & cryed hym mercye. and longe tyme kneled before the kynges fote. The kynge had of hym pyte / & cōmaunded hym for to aryſe. And for his mekenes foryaue hym hys wrathe / and to hym ſayd / that yf he treſpaſſed to hym a nother tyme that he wolde dyſtroye hym for euermore. ¶Dauid that was Lewelyns brother that ſame tyme dwelled with kynge Edwarde / and was a felle man and a ſubtyll and enuyous and alſo ferre caſtynge / and moche treaſon thoughte· and euermore made good ſemblame / and ſemyd ſoo true that noo man myght perceyue his falſnes.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Lewelyn thrugh eggynge of his brother Dauyd werryd agayn vpō kȳg Edward
                     IT was not longe after that tyme ye kynge Edwarde yaaf to Dauyd Lewelyns broder the lordſhyppe of Frodeſham. & made hym a knyght and ſo moche honour dyde he neuer after to mā of walys by cauſe of hym kynge Edwarde helde his parlemente at London whan he hadde do in walys that he wolde and chaunged his moneye / that was full yll kytte / wherfore the people playned ſore. So that the kynge enquered of the treſpaſſours. And thre houndred were atteynted of ſuche maner falſnes / wherfore ſome where hanged and ſomme drawen and after hangyd. ¶And afterwarde the kynge ordeyned / that the ſterlynge halfpeny ſholde go thorugh out all hys londe / And commaūded that no man fro that daye afterwarde yaue ne feoffed hous of religyō with londe / tenemente without ſpecyall leue of the kynge. And he yt dyde ſholde be punyſſhed att the kynges wyll / & the yeft ſhall be for nought. And it was not longe after ye Lewelyn prynce of walys thrugh the tycemente of Dauyd hys brother / & bothe theyr conſente / they thought to dyſheryte kynge Edwarde / in aſmoche as they myght / ſo that thorugh them both ye kynges peas was broken. And whan kynge Edwarde herde of this / anon he ſent his barons in to Northumberlonde & the Surreys alſo / yt they ſholde go & take theyr vyage vpon ye traytours Lewelyn & Dauyd. And wonder herde

it was for to warre tho / For it is wynter ī walys / whan in other coūtres is Somer. And Lewelyn lete ordeyne & well arayed & vytayll hys good caſtell of Swandon. and was ther in an huge nombre of people / & plente of vytaylles ſo that kynge Edwarde wyſt not wher for to entre And whan the kynges men it perceyuer and alſo the ſtrenth of walys they lete come in the ſee bargees & botes. and grete plankys as many as they myght ordeyne & haue: for to go to the ſayd caſtell of Swandon. wyth men on foot & alſo on hors. But the walſſhmen had ſo moche people / & were ſo ſtronge. that they draue the Englyſſhmen ayen / ſo yt ther was ſo moche preſſe of people at ye tornynge ayen that ye charge & the burden of men made ye bargees & the botes to ſynke & there was drowned many a good kynght / yt is to ſay. ſyr Robert Clyfford ſyr wyllyam of Lyndeſeye yt was· ſyre Iohn̄s ſone Fitz Robert. & ſyr Rychard Tanny and ā huge nombre of other / & all was thrugh there owne foly. For yf they had had good eſpyes / they had not be harmyd. whan kynge Edwarde herde tell that hys people were ſo drowned▪ He made ſorowe ynough. but tho came ſyr Iohan of Veſſy frome the kynge▪ Aragon. And brought wyth hym moche people of bachelers and of Gaſcoynes / and were ſouldyurs. And dwelled with the ſayde Iohn of Veſſy & receyued of hym wages and with hym were witholde. and noble men they were for to fyght and brente many townes / & ſlewe moche people of walſſhmen. All that they myght take. And all tho wyth ſtrenth & myght made aſſawte vnto the caſtell of Swandon and gate the caſtell / And whan Dauyd the prence brother herde of this tydynges he ordeyned hym to flyght and Lewelyn the prynce ſawe that his broder was fledde / then he was ſore abaſſhed for he had no power to his warre for to mayntene. And ſoo Lewelyn gan for to flee / and wynde well for to haue ſcapedde. But in a morowe ſyre Roger mortymer mette wyth hym oonly wyth .x. knyghtes. And ſette hym rounde aboute. And to hym went / & ſmote of hys heed / & preſented ye ſame heed vnto kynge Edwarde. And in thys manere Lewelyn the prynce of walys was taken / and hys heed ſmyten of / and alſo alle hys heyres dyſheryted for euermore thrugh ryght full dome of all the lordes of the reame.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Dauyd that was Lewelyns broder prynce of walys was put to dethe.
                     
                        DAuid that was the prynces broder of walys / thrugh pryde wende to haue be prynce of walys / after his brothers dethe / and vpon this he ſent after walſſhemen to hys parleament at Dynbygh and folyſſhely made walys to aryſe ayenſt the kynge and began to meue warre ayenſt kynge Edwarde and dyde all the ſorowe and dyſeaſe that he myghte by hys power. whan kynge Edwarde herde of thys thynge / he ordeyned men to purſewe vppon hym. And Dauyd fyerſly hym defended / tyll ye he came to the towned of ſaynt Morice / and there was Dauyd take as he fledde. and ladde to the kynge. And the kynge cōmaunded that he ſholde be hangyd & drawen / & ſmyte of hys heed / & quarter hym / & ſende his hede to London and the foure quarters ſende to the foure chyef townes of walys. For they ſholde take enſample therof and beware. And afterwarde kynge Edwarde lete crye his peas thrugh out all walles & ſeaſed all the londe in to his honde & all the grete lordes that were left alyue came to do feaute & homage to the kynge Edwarde as to theyr kynde lorde / And tho lete kyng Edwarde amende the lawes of walys that were defectyue And he ſent to all ye lordes of walys by letter patentes / that they ſholde come all to parlament And whan they were come yu kyng ſayd to them full curteyſly lordynges ye be welcome / & me behoueth your counſeyll & your helpe for to go vnto Gaſcoyne for to amende the treſpaſſe yt to me was done whan I was there And for to entreate of peas bytwene the kynge of Aragon & the prynce of Morrey / & all ye kynges lyege men erles & barons cōſented & graū
                        ted therto. And tho made hym kynge Edwarde redy & went in to Gaſcoyne. & lete amende all the treſpaſſes yt hym was done in Gaſcoyne. And of the debate yt bytwene the kynge of Aragon & the prynce of Morrey he ſeſſyd and made theym accorded. And whyle good kyng Edwarde and Elynore his wyf were in Gaſcoyne. The good erle of Cornewayll was made wardeyn of Englonde tyll that kynge Edwarde came ayen. And tho enquered he of hys traytours yt coniected falſeneſſe agaynſt hym. And eche of them all receyued ther dome after that they had deſerue. But in the meane tyme

that the good kynge Edwarde was beyonde the ſee to doo / them for to make amendes that ayenſt hym had treſpaſſyd ther was a falſe the yf / a traytoure that was called Ryſap Merydok / began for to make werre ayenſt kyng Edwarde. and yt was for cauſe of ſyr payne Typtot. wrongfully greued & dyſceaſed the forſayde Ryſap meradok. And whan kyng Edwarde herde all this matere & it well vnderſtode anone he ſente by hys letter pryue ſeale to the forſayd Rebellyō Ryſap Merydok that he ſholde begynne in no maner wyſe for to make & reyſe werre but yt he ſholde be in peas for his loue / & whan he came ayen in to Englonde he wolde vnder take the quarell & amende al yt was myſdon. This forſayd Ryſap Merydok dyſpyſed the kynges commaundement and ſpared not to doo all the ſorowe that he myght to the kynges men of Englond But anon after he was take and ladde to yorke / and there he was drawen and hangyd for his felonye.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of dreſſyng that kynge Edwarde made of his Iuſticꝭ and of his clerkes that they had done for ther falſnes and how he draue the Iewes out of Englonde for ther vſury and myſbyleue.
                     AS kynge Edwarde had dwelled thre yere in Gaſcoyne a deſyre came to him for to goo in to Englonde ayen. And whan he was come ayen he foūde ſo many playntes made to hym of his Iuſtyces & of his clerkes that had done ſo many wronges & falſneſſe yt wonder it was to here and for whiche falſneſſe ſyre Thomas waylond ye kynges Iuſtyce / for ſwore Englonde at the toure of London / for falſneſſe that mē put vpon hym / wherfore he was atteynt / & proued fals· And anone after whan the kyng had done his wyll of the Iuſtices tho lete he enquere & eſpye how the Iewes dyſceyued and begyled his people / thorugh the ſynne of falſneſſe and of vſury. And lete ordeyne a preuy parlement amonge his lordes. And they ordeyned amonge theym / that all the Iewes ſholde voyde out of Englonde for theyr myſbyleue / and alſo for theyr fals vſury that they dyde vnto cryſten men. And for to ſpedde and make an ende of this thynge / all the comyn alte of Englonde yaue vnto the kynge the .xv. peny of all theyr goodes meuable / and ſoo were the Iewes dryuen oute of Englonde. And tho went the Iewes in to Fraunce. And there they dwellyd / thorugh leue of kynge Phylyp that tho. was kynge of Fraunce.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Edwarde was ſeaſed in alle the londe of Scotlonde through cōſente and graunte of all the lordes of Scotlonde·
                     IT was not longe after that Alexandre kynge of Scotlonde was dede / and Dauyd the erle of Huntyngdon that was the kynges brother of Scotlonde axed & claymed the kyngdom of Scotlond after his brother was deed for cauſe yt he was ryghtfull heyre / But many grete lordes ſayd nay. Wherfore greate debate aroſe bytwene theym & there frēdes for aſmoche as they wolde not conſente to hys coronacyon / and the meane tyme the forſayd Dauyd deyed / & ſo it befell that ye ſayd Dauyd had thre doughters yt worthyly were maryed / the fyrſt doughter was maryed to Bayloll / the ſeconde to Brus / and the thyrde to Haſtynges. The forſayd Bayloll & Brus chalenged ye londe of Scotlonde / & greate debate & ſtryf aroſe bytwene them by cauſe eche of them wolde haue be kynge· And whan the lordes of Scotlonde ſaw the debate bytwene them / came to kynge Edwarde of Englonde. & ſeaſed hym in all the londe of Scotlond as chyef lord. & whā the kyng was ſeaſed of ye forſayd lordes ye forſayd Baylol Brus & Haſtinges came to the kynges courte axyd of the kyng whyche of them ſhold be kynge of Scotlonde And kyng Edwarde ye full gentyll & true / lete enquyre by the Cronycles of Scotlonde / and of the greteſt lordes of Scotlonde / whiche of them was of the eldeſt blood. And it was foūde that Baylol / was the eldeſt. And that ye kyng of Scotlond ſholde holde of the kynge of Englonde / & do hym frauce and homage. And after this was done Baylol went in to Scotlōde / and there was crowyed kynge of Scotlonde. ¶And ye ſame tyme was vpon the ſee grete warre bytwene the Englyſſhemen and the Normans But vpō a tyme the Normans arryued all at Douer. and ther they martred an holy mā that was called Thomas of Douer / And afterwarde were the Normās ſlayne. that there eſcaped not one of thē ¶And ſo afterwarde kynge Edwarde ſholde lete the duchye of Gaſcoyne thrugh kynge phylyp of Fraūce thrugh his fals caſtynge of the Douſepers of the londe / wherfore ſyr Edmond that was kynge Edwardes brother yaue vp his domage vnto the kynge of Fraūce. ¶And in the

tyme the clerkes of Englond graunted to kynge Edwarde half 
                           •
                        eale of holy chirche goodes in helpynge to recouer his londe agayne in gaſcoyne. And the kyng ſent thether a noble company of hys bachelers. And hymſelf wolde haue gone to Portelmouth / but he was let thrughe one maddok of walys yt had ſeaſed the caſtell of Swandon in to his honde & for that cauſe the kynge torned to walys at Criſtmaſſe / & by cauſe that the noble lordꝭ of Englond yt were ſent in to Gaſcoyne had no comforth of there lorde the kynge they were take of ſyr Charlys of Fraūce / yt is to ſay / ſyr Iohn̄ of brytayne / ſyr Robert Tiptot / ſyr Raufe Tanny / ſyr Hugh Bardolfe / and ſyr Adam of Cretynge / And yet att the aſſenſyon was Maddok take in walys & a nother that was called Morgan And they were ſent to the tour of London and there they were byheded.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Syre Iohan Baylol kyng of Scotlonde with ſayde his homage.
                     ANd whan ſyre Iohn̄ Baylol kynge of Scotlonde vnderſtande ye kynge Edwarde was werred in Gaſcoyne / to whom ye reame of Scotlond was delyuerd / Falſly tho ayenſt his othe with ſayd his homage thrugh procurynge of his folke & ſent vnto ye court of Rome thrugh a fals ſuggeſtyon to be aſſoylled of that othe yt he ſwore vnto the kyng of Englonde & ſoo he was by letter enbulled. ¶Tho choſe they of Scotlonde douſepers / for to brnyge Edward of his ryght. ¶And in ye tyme came two Cardynalles from ye cource of Rome fro the pope Celeſtme / to trete of acorde bytwene ye kyng of Englōd. & as tho cardinalles ſpake of accorde. Thā as turbeluyll was takē at Lyons & made homage to the warde of Parys & put his ſones in hoſtage / & thought to go in to Englonde aſpye the countre / & tell them whan he came to Englond that he had broken the kynges pryſon of Fraunce by ryght & ſaid that he wolde do yt all Englyſſhmen & walſhemen ſholde aboute the kynge for to brynge to the ende he ſwore / & vpon thys couenaunt dedes were made bytwene them / & that he ſholde haue by yere a thouſand poūdes worth of londe. to byrnge this thynge to an ende. This fals traytour toke his leue / & wente thens & came in to Englonde vnto the kynge & ſeyd. that he was broke oute of pryſon & yt he had put hym in ſuche peryll for his loue wherfore the kyng cowde hym moche thanke & full gladde was of his comynge. ¶And the fals traytoure fro that daye / aſpyed all the doynge of the kynge & alſo his counſelle / for the kyng loued hym full welle and with hym full preuy But clerke of Englonde / that was in the kynges hows of Fraunce: herde of this treaſon / and of the falſneſſe / and wrote to another clerke / that tho was dwellynge with Edwarde kynge of Englonde. all how Thomas Turbeluyll hadde done his fals c
                           •
                        niectynge / and all the counſelle of Englonde was wryte for to haue ſende vnto the kynge of Fraunce. ¶And thoruhhe the forſayde letter that the clerke hadde ſente fro Fraunce it was founde vppon. wherfore he was ledde to London and hangyd and drawe there for his treaſon. And hys two ſones that he hadde put in Fraunce for hoſtage. were thenne beheeded.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the Conqueſt of Berwyke.
                     SO whan the twoo Cardynalles were gone agayne in to Fraunce for to trete of the peas of cambroy the kynge ſent thether of his erles and barons. This is to ſaye ſyr Edmonde his broder erle of Lancaſtre and of Lecetre / ſyr Henry Lacy erle of Nychol / & Wyllyam Veſſy Baron / and of other baronettes. aboute .xiii. of the beſt and wyſeſt of Englonde ¶And in the ſame tyme the kynge Edwarde toke his vyage to Scotlonde / for to werre vpon Iohn̄ Baylol kynge of Scotlonde. ¶And ſyr Robert Roos of Berwyk ſledde fro ye Englyſſhmen / & wente to the Scottes. And kyng Edwarde wente hym towarde Berwyk / and beſegyd the towne. And tho that were within manly them defended & ſette a fyre and brente two of Kynge Edwardes ſhyppes / and ſayde in dyſpyte and reprey
                           •
                         of hym (wenyth kynge Edwarde with his longe ſhankys / to haue gete Berewyk all our vnthankes gas pykes hym / and whan he was doon gas dykes hym) whan kyng Edwarde thys ſcorne / anone thorugh hys myghteneſſe / he paſſed ouer the dyches and aſſaylled the towne / and came to the yates / and gate and conquered the towne / and thrughe hys gracyous power ſlewe .xxv. thouſande and .vii. hondred ſcottes. and Kynge Edwarde loſte no man of renoune ſaufe ſyr Rycharde of Cornewayle. and hym kylled a Flemynge out of the redde halle with a quarell as the forſayd Rycharde dyde of hys helme. And

comaunded theym for to yelde them / and put them in the kynges grace. And ye Scottes wolde not wherfore that halle was brent and caſt downe. And all tho that were therin were brente and kynge Edwarde loſte noo moo men at that vyage of ſymple eſtate but .xxvii. Englyſſhemen. And the wardeyn of the caſtell yaue vp the keyes of ye caſtell wythout ony aſſawte And there was taken ſyre Wyllyam Douglas Symonde Fryſell and the erle patryk yelded them to the peas. But Ingham of Humbreſmylle & Robert the Brus that were with kynge Edwarde forſoke kynge Edwarde and helde with the Scottes. And afterward they were taken and put in to pryſon And tho lete kynhe Edwarde cloſe in Berwyk wyth walles & with dyches / and after Robert Rous went to Tyndale / and ſette wuyerbrydge a fyre and Exham / and Lamerſtok and ſlewe and robbyd the folke of the countree. And after that he wente fro thens to Dunbarre. And the fyrſte weneſdaye of Marche the kynge ſent the erle of Garenne. ſyr Hugh Percy and ſyre Hugh Spenſer wyth a fayre company for to beſege the caſtell. But one that was called ſyre Rycharde Sywarde a traytoure and a fals man ymagyned for to begyle the Englyſſhmē / and ſente to the Englyſſhmen theym for to deſeeyue / and ſayd / That he wolde yelde to theym ye caſtell. yf they wolde graunt them .viii. dayes of reſpyce / that he myhht ſende and telle to ſyr Iohan Bayloll that was kynge of Scotlonde how is men fared that were within the caſtell. ¶And hym worde but yf he wolde remeue the ſege of the Englyſſe men / that they wolde yelde that caſtell vnto the Englyſſhe men. ¶The meſſenger tho came to ſyr Iohan Baylol that tho was kynge of Scotlōde where that he was wyth his hooſte / and the meſſenger tolde hym all the caas / And ſyr Iohan toke his hoſte and came on the morowe erly towarde the caſtell. and ſyr Rycharde ſywarde ſawe hym come yt was mayſter of the counſeyll and keper of the caſtell and ſayd vnto the Englyſſgmen O ſayde he. now I ſee a fayre company and well apparelled I wyll goo ayenſte theym / and wyth them to mete / and theym aſſaylle. And ſyr Hughe Spenſer ſawe the falſneſſe of hym· and ye treſon· And ſayd to hym O traytour take and proue your falſneſſe ſhalle not auaylle you. And Hughe Spenſer commaunded anone to bynde hym. And all in haſt wente ayenſt ther enmyes / and ſlewe of Scottes .xxii. thouſand. For the Scottes had that tyme no man wyth them of honour ſaufe Patryke Graham that manly foughte / and longe at the laſte he was ſlayne. And tho ſayde the Englyſſhmen in repreyf of the Scottes (Thyſe ſcaterande Scottes holde I for ſottes of wrenches vn ware. Erly in a mornynge in an euyll tymynge wente ye fro Dūbare. ¶As tho that ware within the caſtell ſawe the ſcomfyture they yelded vp the caſtell vnto the Englyſſhmen. And bounde theyr bodyes godes & caſtels to kynge Edwarde. And ſoo there were take in that caſtell thre erles .vii. barons / and .xxxviii. knyghtes & xi. clerkes / and .vii. Pycardys and all were preſentyd to kynge Edwarde And he ſente thē to the towre of London to be kepte.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Edwarde of his greate grace delyuered ayen the Scottes oute of pryſon that were cheyftayns of that londe and they drewe them to the Frenſſhemen thrugh counſeyll of Wyllyam waleys.
                     AS kynge Edwarde had made tho an ende of ye werre. and taken the chey
                           ••
                        eyns of Scotlonde. tho came ſyr Iohan Baylol and yelded hym vnto kynge Edwarde & put hym in his grace and he was ledde to London and whan kyng Edwarde was come thether they were brough before hym / And the kynge axed howe they wolde make amendes of the treſpaas and loſſe that they had doon to hym and they put theym in his mercy. Lordynges ſayde the kynge I wyll not of your londes ne your goodes / but I wyll that ye make to me an othe vpō goddys body to be true to me and neuer after this tyme ayenſt me bere armys▪ And all they conſentyd to the kynges wyl and ſwore vpon goddys body. That is to ſaye ſyr Iohn̄ of Comyn. the erle of Scra
                           •
                        hron / the erle of Carryk / and alſo foure byſſhops vndertoke for all the clergye and ſo the kynge delyuered thē / and yaue them ſauf conduyce to go in to ther owne londe. And it was not longe afterwarde that they ne aryſe ayenſt kynge Edwarde / for cauſe that they wyſt well that kynge Edwardes folke was take / in Gaſcoyne / as before is ſayd But ſyr Iohn̄ Bayloll kynge of Scotlonde wyſte well. that his londe ſholde haue ſorowe and ſhame / for theyr falſneſſe· And in haſt wēte hym ouer the ſee to his owne

londes and there he helde hym and came neuer ayen wherfore the Scottes choſe vnto theyr kynge wyllyam waleys / a rybaude & an harlot comen vp of nought / and moche harme dyde to Englyſſhmen and kyng Edwarde thoughte how he myght haue delyueraunce of his peple that were take in Gaſcoyne. And ī haſt wente hym ouer the ſee in to Flaunders for to werre vpon the kyng of Fraūce. And the erle of Flaunders receyued hym wyth moche honour and grayntyd hym all his londys at hys owne wyll. And whan the kynge of Fraunce herde telle the kyng of Englonde was aryued in Flaundres and came wyth a greate power hym for to dyſtroye. He prayed hym of trewes for two yere / ſo that the Englyſſhe marchauntes & alſo Frenche myght ſaufly go and come in bothe ſydes. The kynge Edwarde graūted 
                           ••
                        . ſo that he muſte haue his men out of pryſon that were in Gaſcoyne & the kynge of Fraunce anone graunted and ſo they were delyuerd. ¶And in ye ſame tyme the Scottes ſente by ye byſſhop of ſaynt andrewes in to Fraūce to the kynge & to ſyr Charles his brother. ye ſyr Charles ſholde come wyth hys power and they of Scotlōde wolde come with theyr power / and ſo they ſholde go in to Englonde / that loude to dyſtroye from Scotlonde vnto they came to 
                           •
                        ente. & the Scottes truſtyd moche vpon the Frēſſhmen but of ye thyng they had no maner graūt & neuertheles ye Scottes beg to robbe & kylle in Northūberlond / & dyd moche harme.
                  
                  
                     ¶How wyllyam waleys lete reyſe ye londe of Scotlonde as cheyf lorde. And ſyr Hugh of Creſſynham & of the batayll of Fonkyrke.
                     AS tydynges was come to kynge Edwarde that wyllyam walys had ordeyned ſuche a ſtronge power. And alſo that alle Scotlonde to hym was attendaunt & redy for to ſlee Englyſſhmen and to dyſtroye the londe he was ſore anoyed / and ſente anone by letter to therle of Garrenne / to ſyr Henry Percy / & to wyllyam Latomer / & to ſyr Hughe of Creſſynham his treſoroer. that they ſholde take power / and go in to Northumberlonde. and ſoo forth in to Scotlōde. For to kepe the countres and whan wyllyam waleys herde of theyr cō
                        mynge. He began to flee and the Englyſſhmen hym folowed & dr
                           •
                        ue hym tyll he cam to Stryuelyn & there he helde hym in the caſtell. And the walſſhmen euery daye them eſcryed & menacyed / and dyde all the dyſpyte that they myghte ſoo that Englyſſhmen vpon a tyme in a mornynge went out fro the caſtell / the moūtenaunce of .x. myles / and paſſed ouer a brydge & william waleys came with a ſtrōg power / & droue them abak / for the Englyſſhmen had ayenſt hym noo power tho but fledde. and they that myght take the brydge ſcaped. but ſyr hughe the kyngs treſorer there was ſlayne / and many other alſo / wherfore was made moche ſorowe. ¶Tho had kynge Edwarde ſped all hys maters in Flaūdres / and was come ayen in to Englonde / and in haſte toke his waye in to Scotlonde / and came theder at the Aſcencyon tyde. And all that he founde he ſette a fyre and brente / But the poore people of Scotlonde came to hym wonder thyck and prayed hym for goddys loue / that he wold on them haue Mercy & pyte tho the kynge cōmaunded yt no man ſholde doo them harme yt were yolden to hym / ne to no man of ordre ne to no hous of relygyon / ne no manere chyrche. but lete eſpye all that he myght where yt he myght fynde ony of his enmyes tho came a ſpye vnto the kynge & tolde where that ye Scottes were aſſembled to abyde bataylle. And on ſaynt Mary Mawdelyns daye / ye kynge came to Fonkyrk and yaue bataylle to the Scottes and at that bataylle were ſlayne .xxx. thouſande Scottes / and of Englyſſhemen .xviii. and no mo. Of the whyche was a worthy knyght ſlayne yt was a knyghte hoſpytelere that was callyd Frery bryan Iay. For whan Wyllyam waleys fledde from the batayll that ſame Frery bryan hym purſewed fyerſly / & as his hors ranne it ſtert in a mire of a marys vp to the bely And Wyllyam waleys torned tho agayne and there ſlewe the forſayde bryan. & that was moche harme. ¶And that whyle kynge Edwarde wente thorugh Scotlonde / for to enquere yf he myght fynde ony of hys enmyes. And in that londe he dwelled / as longe as hym lyked / And there was no enmye that durſt hym abyde. ¶And ſoone after Kynge Edwarde wente to Southampton for he wolde not abyde / in Scotlonde in wynter ſeaſon / for eſement of his people And whan he came to London / he lete amende many myſdedys that were done ayenſt his peas and lawes he beynge in Flaundres.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of ye laſte maryage of kȳge Edwarde / & howe he wente ye thyrde tyme in to Scotlōde.
                     
                        ANd after it was ordeyned thrughe the courte of Rome / that kynge Edwarde ſholde wedde dame Margarete / that was kynge Phylyp ſyſter of Fraunce. And the Archebyſſhop Robert of wynchelſe ſpowſed them to gyders / thrugh the whiche Maryage there was made peas· bytwene kynge Edwarde of Englonde and kynge Phylyp of Fraunce. ¶Kynge Edwarde went tho the thyrde tyme in to Scotlonde & tho within the fyrſte yere he had enfamyned the londe / ſo that he lefte not one that he ne came to hys mercye. ſauf ſuche as were in the caſtell of Eſtreuelyn that welle were vytaylled and ſtored for .vii. yere.
                  
                  
                     ¶How the caſtell of Eſtrefelyn was be ſeged and wonne.
                     Kynge Edward came to ye caſtell of Eſtreuelyn with a huge power & beſeged the caſtell / but it lytell auaylled. for he myhht doo the Scoctes no harme / for the caſtell was ſoo ſtronge & well kept. & kyng Edwarde ſayde ye & bethought hym vpon a queynteſy· and let make anon two payr of hygh galowes before the tour of the caſtell. & made his othe that as many as were within the caſtell. Notwithoutſtandynge were he Erle of Baron / & he were take wyth ſtrength but yf he wolde the rather hym yelde / he ſholde be hangyd vpon the ſame galowes. And whan tho that were within the caſtell herde this. they came & yelde them all to the kynges grace & mercy / & the kynge for yaf thē all his male talent & there were all the grete lordes of Sfotlonde ſwore to kynge Edwarde / that they ſholde come to London to euery parlement & ſhode ſtonde to his ordynance.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Troylebaſton was fyrſte ordened.
                     THe kynge Edwarde went thens to london & wende to haue had reſt & peas of hys warre in whiche werre he was occupyed .xx. yere. that is to ſaye in Gaſcoyne in walys & in Scotlonde / and thought how he myght recouer hys treſour yt he had ſpended aboute hys werre / & lette enquere thrugh the reame of alle the tyme that he had be oute of hys reame that men called Troylebaſton and ordeyned therto Iuſtyces / and in thys manere he recouered treſoure without nombre: And hys purpoſe was for to haue goon in to the hooly londe / to haue werred vpon goddes enmyes by cauſe he was croſſyd lōge tȳe before And neuertheles ye law that he had ordeyned dyd moche good thrugh out all Englonde to them that were myſbode For tho ye treſpaſſed were well chaſtyſed. and after more meke & better & ye pore comyns were in reſte and peas And the ſame tyme kynge Edwarde pryſoned his owne ſone Edwarde / by cauſe that Walter of Lanton byſſhop of Cheſtre / that was the kynges treſorer had complayned on hym & ſayd the forſayd Edwarde thrughe coūſell & entyſynge of one Ganaſtō aſquyre of Gaſcoyne had broke the parkꝭ of the forſayd byſſhop. And thys Peers counſelyd and ladde the ſame Edwarde and for that cauſe the kynge e
                           •
                        yled his ſone out of Englonde.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the dethe of Wyllyam waleys the fals traytoure.
                     ANd whan thys kynge Edwarde had hys enemyes ouercome in walys Gaſcoyne and Scotlonde and dyſtroyed hys traytours / all but only that rybaude Wyllyam 
                           •
                        
                        les / that neuer the kynge wolde hym yelde and at the towne of ſaynt Dominyk. in the yere of kynge Edwarde regne .xxxiii. ye fals traytour was take and preſentyd to the kynge. But the kyng wolde not ſee hym / but ſent hym to London to receyue his Iugement: and vpon ſaynt Barthylmewes eue was he hangyd and drawe / & his hede ſmyte of & his bowelles take out of his body and brente & hys body quartered and ſent vnto four of the beſt townes of Scotlonde / and hys heed put vpon a ſpere▪ and lete vpon London brydge. In enſample 
                           〈◊〉
                         the Scottes ſholde haue in mynde for to do a myſſe ayenſt theyr lyege lorde eftſones.
                  
                  
                     ¶How the Scottes came to kynge Edwarde for to amēde theyr treſpaſſe that they had done ayenſt hym.
                     ANd at Myghelmas tho nexe comyng kynge Edwarde helde hys parlament at weſtmeſtre / & thyder came ye Scottes that is to ſaye the byſſhop of ſaynt Andreas: Roberte the Brus erle of caryk. Symonde Fryſell / Iohan the erle of Athell & they were accorded with the kynge and bounde by othe ſwore that they afterwarde yf ony of them myſbare them ayenſt kynge Edwarde that they ſholde be dyſheryted for euermore. And whan theyr peas was thus made they toke theyr leue pryuely / and wente home in to Scotlonde.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Robert Brus chalēged Scotlonde.
                     SO after thys Robert the Brus erle of Caryk ſent by hys letters to the erles &

barons of Sotlonde that they ſholde come to hym to Scone in the morowe after the Concepcion of our lady for grete nedys of the londe. And the lordes came at the daye aſſygned. And the ſame daye ſyr Robert the Brus ſayd Fayre lordes fulle well ye knowe / yt in my perſone dwellyd the ryght of the reame of Scotlonde / & as ye wote well I am ryghtfull heyer Syth that ſyre Iohn̄ baylol yt was our kynge vs hath forſake / & left his londe. And though it ſo be ye kynge Edwarde of Englonde wyth wrongfull power hath made me to hym aſſent ayenſt my wyll / yf that he wyll graunte that I may be kynge of Scotlonde I ſhal kepe you ayenſt kynge Edwarde of englonde / & ayenſt all manere men / & wyth ye worde the abbot of Scon / aroſe vp / & before them all ſayd / that yt was reaſon for to helpe hym & the londe to kepe & defēde. And tho ſayd in preſēce of thē all yt he wolde gyue hym a .M. poūde for to mayntene ye londe. & all the other graūted the londe to hym & wyth ther powre hym for to helpe / & defyed kyng Edward of Englonde. & ſayd ye Robert Brus / ſholde be kynge of Englonde.
                  
                  
                     ¶How ſyr Iohn̄ of Comyn ayenſt ſayd the crownynge of ſyr Robert Brus.
                     LOrdynges ſayd ſyr Iohan of Comyn. thynke on the truthe & othe ye made to kynge Edwarde of Englond & touchynge my ſelf I wyll not breke myn oth for no man / & ſo he went from ye company at ye tyme. wherfore Robert ye brus & all tho ye to hym conſēted were wroth / & menaced ſyr Iohn̄ of comyn Tho ordened they another coūſeyll at Dumfrys to whyche came ye for ſayd ſyr Iohn̄ of Comyn / for he dwelled but two myle fro Dumfris. there he was wont to ſoiorne and abyde.
                  
                  
                     ¶How ſyr Iohn̄ was traytourſly ſlayne.
                     SO whan Roberte the Brus wyſt that all the grete lordes were come of Scotlond to Scon / ſauf ſyr Iohn̄ Comyn ye ſo
                           •
                        ourned nyghe ſcon he ſent ſpecyally after the ſayd ſyr Iohn̄ to come & ſpeke with him. And vpon that he came & ſpake with hym at the grayfreres in Dumfris & yt was the thurſday after Cā
                        delmaſſeddy. & ſyr Iohn̄ graunted to go wyth hym. And whan he had herde maſſe / he toke a ſoope & dranke & after warde he beſtrode hys palfroy & rode to Dumfris / whan Roberte the brus ſawe hym come at a wyndow as he was in his chambre made Ioye ynoygh / & came ayenſt hym / & collyd hym about ye necke / & made with hym gode ſemblaūt. And whan all the erles & barons of Scotlonde were preſent Robert ye Brus ſayd ſyrs ye wote well ye / cauſe of this comynge & wherfore it is. yf ye wyl graūt that Ibe kyng of ſcotlonde as ryght heyre of ye londe. And all the lordes that were there ſayd with one voys that h ſholde be crownede kynge of Scotlond▪ and yt they wolde hym helpe & mayntene ayenſt all maner men on lyue / & for hym yf it were nede to deye / the gītyll knyght tho Iohn̄ of Comyn anſwerd certes neuer forme. ne for to haue of me aſmoche helpe as the value of a baton. For that oth that I haue made vnto kynge Edwarde of Englonde I ſhall holde whyle my lyfe woll laſte. And with that worde he wente from the cōpany and wolde a lyght vpon his palfroy. and Roberte the Brus purſewed hym with a drawenſwerde / & bare hym thrugh the body & ſyr Iohn̄ Comyn felle downe vnto the erth. But whan Roger yt was ſyr Iohn̄ Comyns brother ſawe the falſneſſe. He ſtert to ſyr Robert the Brus & ſmote hym wyth a knyfe But ye fals traytour was armyd vnder. ſo that ye ſtroke myght do hym no harme. and ſo moche helpe came aboute ſyre Robert the Brus ſo ye Robert Comyn was there ſlayne & all to hewen in to peces. & Robert the Brus torned ayen there yt ſyr Iohn̄ Comyn ye noble barō lay wounded. and pyned to warde his deth / beſyde the hygh awter in the chyrche of the graey freres / & ſayde vnto ſyr Iohan comyn. O traytoure thou ſhalt be dede / & neuer after lete myn auauncement / & ſhoke his ſwerde at the hygh awter. and ſmote hym on his hede / that ye brayne felle downe vpon the groūde. and the blood ſtorte on hygh vpon the walles / and yet vnto thys daye is that blood ſeen there that no water maye waſſhe it a waye. And ſo deyed that noble knyght in holy chyrche.
                     ANd whan thys traytoure Roberte the Brus ſawe. that no man wold ſete hys coronacyon / he cūmaūded all thē that were of power ſholde come vnto hys crownynge to ſaynt Iohans towne in Scotlonde· And ſo it be fell vpon our lady daye the Annūcyacyon the byſſhop of Glaſton & the byſſhop of ſaynt Andrewes crowned for ther kynge thys Roberte the Brus in ſaynt Iohans towne / & made him kynge And anone after he droue all thenglyſſſhemen

out of Scotlonde. And they fledde. & came & compleyned them vnto kyng Edwarde / how that Robert ye Brus had dryue them out of the londe / and dyſheryted theym.
                  
                  
                     ¶How that kynge Edwarde dubbyd at weſtmeſtre .xxiiii. ſcore knyghtes.
                     ANd whan kyng Edwarde herd of this myſchyef / he ſwore that he ſholde be ouenged therof / and ſayde / That alle the traytours of Scotlonde ſholde be hangyd and drawen / and that they ſholde neuer be raunſonned. ¶And kynge Edwarde thought vppon this falſneſſe that the Scottes had to hym done And ſente after all the bachelers of Englonde / that they ſholde come vnto London at wytſōtyde / & he dubbyd at weſtmeſtre .xxiiii. ſcore knyghtes. ¶Them ordened the noble kynge Edwarde for to go in to Scotlonde / to werre vpon Robert the Brus / And ſent before hym in to Scotlonde ſyr Aymer the valaunce erle of Penbroge. And ſyre Henry Perey baron with a fayre company / that purſewed ye Scottes and brente townes and caſtels. And afterwarde came the kynge hymſelf with erles and barons a fayre companye.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Robert Brus was dyſcōfyted / in batayll / & how Symonde fryſelly was ſlayne.
                     THe Frydaye next before the Aſſumecyon of our lady kynge Edwarde mette Robert Brus beſyde ſaynt Iohans towne in Scotlōde and with his companye / of the whyche company kyng Edwarde ſlewe .vii. thouſande / whan Robert Brus ſawe thys myſcheyf he began to flee / and hydde hym that no mā myght hym fynde / But ſyr Symonde fryſeld purſewed hym ſore / ſo that he torned ayen & abode batayll / for he was a worthy knyght and a bolde of dody. And thenglyſſhmen purſewed euer ſore in euery ſyde and ſlewe the ſtede that ſyr Symonde rode vpon / and they toke hym and ladde hym vnto the hoſt. And ſyr Symonde began for to flatre and ſpeke fayre / and ſayde lordes I ſhall yeue you four thouſand marke of ſyluer / myn hors / harneys and all myn armour / and become a begger. Tho anſwered Theobaude of Peuens that was the kynges archers. Now ſo god me helpe it is for nought that thou ſpekeſte. For all the golde in Englonde I wolde. not lete the go with out commaundement of kynge Edwarde / & tho was he had vnto kyng Edwarde & the kyng wolde not ſe hym but cōmaunded to lede hym a waye / to haue his dome at London. and on our ladyes eue Natiuite he was hangyd and drewe & his heed ſmyte of. & hangyd ayen wyth cheynes of yern vpon the galowes. And his heed was ſete vpō London brydge vpod a ſpere / and ayenſt Cryſtemaſſe the bodye was brente by cauſe that the men / that kepte the body by nyght they ſawe ſo many deuyls rampyng wyth grete yren hokes renynge vpō the galowes and horryble tormented ye body. & many yt them ſaw anone after they deyed for drede / & ſome wexed mad
                           •
                         / fore ſyknes they had. & in that batayll was take ye byſſhop of Baſton & the byſſhop of ſaynt Andrewes / and the abbot of Scōne all armyd with yren as men of armes. as fals traytours and fals prelates ayenſt theyr othe. And they were brought to the kynge and the kynge ſente them vnto the pope of Rome. that he ſhold do with theym what his wyll were.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Iohan therle of Alethes was taken and put to dethe.
                     ANd at that bataylle fledde ſyre Iohan erle of Alethes / and wente to a chyrche and there hydde hym for drede / but he myghte haue there noo refute for cauſe that the chyrche was enterdyted thrugh generall ſentence / and in the ſame chyrche he was taken. And this ſyr Iohan went well to haue ſcaped fro ye deth / for cauſe yt he claymed kynred of Kynge Edwarde. & the kynge wolde not lenger be bytrayed of his traytours but ſent hym to London in haſt. And there was hangyd & hys head ſmyten of & his body brent all to aſſhes. But at the prayer of the quene Margerete / for cauſe that he claymed of kynge Edward kynred his drawynge was for yeuen hym.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Iohan that was Wyllyam waleys brother was put to dethe.
                     AS the gretteſt mayſter of Scotlonde were thus doon to euyll deth & deſtroyed for theyr falſneſſe. Iohan that was Wyllyam waleys brother was take & doon vnto dethe. as ſyr Iohan erle of Alethes was.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Robert the Brus fledde from Scotlonde to Norway.
                     ANd at ye ſame tyme was robert ye / brus moche hated amonge the peple of ſcotlonde / ſo yt he wyſte not what he was beſt to do & for to hyde hym he wente to Norway to the kynge that had ſpowſyd his ſyſter. & there helde

hym ſocour for to haue. & Robert the Brus myght not be foūde in Scotlonde. Sokynge Edward tho lete crye hys peas thrught out all the londe / and his lawas were vſyd / & hys mynyſtrys ſerued thrugh out all the londe.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Edwarde deyed.
                     SO as kynge Edwarde had abatyd hys enemys turned ſouth warde. and ſykened atte Burgh vpon ſande in the marche of Scotlonde. and callyd to hym Henry Lacy erle of Nichell. ſyr guy erle of warwyk. ſyr Aylmer erle of Penbroke / and ſyr Robert of Clyfforde baron and prayed theim vpon the fayth that they hym oughte / that they ſholde make Edwarde of Carnaruan kynge of Englonde aſſone as they myght. And that they ſhold not ſuffre Peers of Ganaſton come agayne in to Englonde / for to make hys ſone to ryot / and they graunted hym with good wyll. And the kynge toke hys ſacramente of hooly chyrche as a good Cryſten man ſholde. and deyed in repentaunce And whan he hadde ben kynge .xxxv. yere he deyed / and was buryed at weſtmeſtre with moche ſolempnyte / Vpon whoſe ſoule god haue mercy.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of Merlyns prophecyes that were declared of kynge Edwarde. That was kynge Henrys ſone.
                     OF this kyng Edward prophecyce Merlyn / and called hym a dragon the ſeconde of the .vi. kynges that ſholde regne in Englonde and ſayd / that he ſholde be medled with mercy / and alſo with ſtrenthe and fyerneſſe. That ſholde kepe Englonde frome colde and hete. And that he ſholde opene hys mouthe towarde walys and that he ſholde ſette his foot in wyk and that he ſholde cloſe with walwes / that ſholde doo moche harme to his ſede. And he ſayde ſothe. For the good kynge Edwarde was medled with mercye and with fyerneſſe / with mercy ayenſt his enmyes of walys / and after of Scotlonde with fyerneſſe / whan he put them to dethe for ther falſneſſe / and traytourily as they hadde deſerued. And welle keped he Englond frome colde and heet / ſythe he kepte it frome alle manere of enmyes that ranne vppon hym to doo hym ony wronge. ¶And welle he opened his mouthe to warde walys / and made it quake thrughe hydour of hys mouthe / whan he conqueryd it thruoghe dynte of ſwerde. For the prynce Lewelyn and Dauyd hys brother. Ris and Morgan. were put to dethe thrughe theyr falſneſſe and theyr foly / And he ſette hys foot in to wyk / and conquered Berwyk at the whiche conqueſt were ſlayne .xxv. thouſande and .vii. hondred / out take ſuche as were brente in the redde halle. ¶And the walles yt he lete make ſhall be noyous / vnto his ſede. As men ſhall here after inthe lyf of ſyre Edwarde of Carnaruan hys ſone. And yet ſayd Merlyn that he ſholde make ryuers ren in blood & wyth brayne. & ye ſemyd well in hys warres there as he had ye mayſtry And yet Merlyn ſayd yt ther ſholde come a people out of ye nortweſt durynge the regne of the forſayd dragon yt ſhold be ladde by an yll greyhoūde / yt ſhold the dragon crowne kynge. that afterward ſholde fle ouer ye ſee for drede of the dragon without comynge ayen. & that was proued by ſyr Iohn̄ Baylol ye kynge Edwarde made to be kynge of Scotlonde. ye falſly aroyſe ayenſt hym▪ & after he fled to his owne londes of Fraūce / & neuer he came ayen in to Scotlond for drede of kyng Edward: And yet ſayd Merly: that peple yt ſhold lede ye ſayd greyhoūd ſholde be faderles vnto a certayne tyme ſoth he ſayd. For the peple of Scotlonde gretly were dyſeſyd after ſyr Iohan baylol was fled. And merlyn ſayd the ſone ſhold become in hys tyme as redde as ony blood in tokenynge of grete mortalyte of people And that was knowe wel whā the Scottes were ſlayne. And ſyth ſayd Merlyn / ye ſame dragon ſhold nouryſhe a Fox. that ſholde meue grete werre ayenſt hym / yt ſholde not in hys tyme be ended / and that ſemed well by Robert the Brus. that kynge Edwarde nouryſſhed in hys chambre that ſythen ſtale a way & meued grett werre ayenſt hym / whiche werre was not ended in his tyme And yet ſayd merlyn that the dragon ſholde deye in ye marche of an other londe / & that hys londe ſholde be long without a good keper. And that men ſhold were for his dethe from the yle of Shephey vnto the yle of Mercyll / wherfore alas ſhall be ther ſonge amonge the comyn people faderles in the londe waſtyd And that prophecie was knowe ouer all full well. For the good Kynge Edwarde deyed at Burgh vp ſandys / that is vpon the Marche of Scotlonde the englyſſmen were dyſc
                           •
                        mferced and ſorowed in Northumberlonde / For cauſe that kynge Edwardes ſone ſete by the Scottes no force. for the ryot of

Peers of Ganaſton / wherfore alas was the ſonge thrugh out all Englond / for defawte of theyr good wardeyne from ye yle of Shephey vnto the yle of Mercyll / the people made moche ſorowe for good kynge Edwardes / dethe. ¶For they wende that good kynge Edwarde ſholde haue gone in to the holy londe / For that was holy his purpoos. ¶Vpon whoos ſoule god for his hygh & Inginyte grace haue mercy
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno. dm̄ .M.CC.lxxxiiii.
                     CEleſtinus was pope after Nicolas fiue monethes / and nothynge noble of hym is wryten / but that he was a vertuous man. Bonefacyus the eyght was pope after hym .viii. yere. This bonifacius was a man in thoſe thynges the whiche perteyneth to courte for he was very experte in ſuche maters / And bycauſe he had no pere / he put no meſure to hys prudence. And toke ſo grete pryde vpon hym that he ſayd / he was lord of all the worlde. and many thynges he dyde with his myght & power· the whyche fayled wretchedly in the ende / He yaue an enſample to all prelatis yt they ſholde not be haue ne proude. But vnder the fourme of a very ſhepeherde of god they ſhod 
                           •
                         more ſtudy for to belouyd of other ſubgectes: thā dradde / This man is he / of whom it is ſayd yt he entred as a fox. He lyued as a lyon / & deyed as a dogge. ¶This tyme ye yere of grace was ordeyned from an hoūdred yere to an hondred yere. And the fyrſte Iubyle was in the yere of our lord Iheſu Cryſt a thouſande thre hoūdred ¶Benedictus the enleuenth was after Bonefacius .xi. monethes. This man was an holy man / of the ordre of the frere prechers / and lytyll whyle lyued but dyſſeſſyd anone.
                     ADulphus was Emperour .vi yere / This man was erle of Anoxone / And this Adulphus was not crowned by the pope / for he was ſlayne in batayll. ¶Albertus was Emperour after hym ·x. yere. This man was the duke of Aſtryr & fyrſte was repreued of the pope / & after was confermed by the ſame pope for the malyces of the kyng of Fraunce / ye whiche was an enmye vnto ye chyrche· & to ye alberte the ſame pope yaue the kyngdom of Fraūce as he dyde other kyngdoms. But it proffyted not / for at ye laſt he was ſlayne of his neuewe. ¶Clemens was pope after Benedictus almoſte .ix. yere / and he was a greate buylder of caſtels and other thynges. And he dampnyd the ordre of Templaryes / and he ordeyned the ſeuen booke of the Decretales / the whiche be callyd the queſtyons of Clementyns. ¶And anone after in a counſeyle the whyche he helde atte Vyenna he reuokyd the ſame boke the whiche is ſucceſſary Iohan called ayen in corporyd it and publyſſhyd it. This Clement fyrſte of all popes teanſlatyd the popes ſette fro Rome to Auinion / and whether it was done bi the mocyon of god. or by the boldenes of man dyuers men meruaylle. ¶Iohn̄ the ·xxii. was pope after bym .viii. yrre. This man was all gloryous / as for thoſe thynges that were to be vſed thrugh the actyf lyf. And he publyſſhed ye Conſtytucyons of the clementynes & ſent thē to all the vnyuerſytees. And many ſayntes he canonyſed & theſe fatte byſſhopryches he deuydyd and he ordeyned many thynges ayēſte the pluralytae of benefyces / & many herytykes he dampned / but whether he was ſaued or not our lord wolde not ſhewe to thoſe be louyd very well. ¶Henry the .vii. was Emperour after Albert .v· yere / this Henry was a noble mā in warre. and he coueyted to haue peas by londe and water. He was a gloryous man in batayll. And neuer ouercome with enmyes and atte the laſte he was poyſened of a frere whan that he howſelyd hym by receyuynge of the ſacramente.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of kynge Edwarde that was kynge edwardes ſone.
                     ANd after this kyng Edwarde regned Edwarde his ſone / that was borne att Carnriuan / and thys Edwarde wente hym in tho Fraunce. and there he ſpowſyd Iſabell the kynges doughter of fraunce. the .xxv. daye. of Ianuari at the chyrche of our Lady at Boloyne in the yere of our lorde Ihū Cryſte .M. CCC vii. And the .xx. day of Feuerer the nexte yere that came after / he was crownyd ſolemply att weſtmeſtre of the Archebyſſhop of Caunterbury. And there was ſoo grete preſſe of people. that ſyre Iohan Bakwell was ſlayne and murdred. And anone as the good kynge Edwarde was deed. ſyr Edwarde hys ſone kyng of englonde. ſent after Pers Ganaſton in to Gaſcoyne / & ſo moche louyd hym / yt he callyd hym brother. & anone after he yaue vnto hym the lordſhyp of walyngforde. And it was not longe after yt he yaue hym therldom of Cornewaylle ayenſt the lordes wyll of englonde.

¶And tho brought ſyr walter of langton byſſhop of Cheſtre in to pryſon & duraūce. in the toure of London. wyth two knaues alonely hym to ſerue. For the kynge was wrothe wyth hym / fore by cauſe that ſyre water made complaynt on hym to hys fader / wherfore he was put in pryſon in the tyme of Troylebaſton. & the for ſayde Pers of Ganaſton made ſo grete mayſtreys. that he wente in to the kynges treſory in ye abbay of weſtmeſtre / & toke the table of golde with ye treſtls of ye ſame & many other ryche Iewels / yt ſomtyme were the noble and good kyng Arthurs / & toke thē to a marchaūt that was called ameri of Friſcōbande / for he ſholde bere them ouer ye ſee in to Gaſcoyne. & ſo he went thens & they came neuer ayen after wherfore it was a grete loſſe to this londe And whan this Pers was rychely auaūſyd / he became ſo proude & ſo ſtowte. wherfore all ye grete lordes of the reame had hym īdyſpyte for his grete berynge / wherfore ſyr Henry Lacy erle of Nicholl. & ſyr Guy erle of warwyk ye whyche grete lordes / the good kynge Edwarde ſyr Edwardes fader kyng of Englonde / chargyd that Pers of Ganaſton ſholde not come in to Englonde for to brynge his ſone Edwarde in to ryot. And all the lordes of Englonde aſſembled them a certayn day att the frere prechers at London: And there they ſpake / of the dyſhonour ye kynge Edwarde. dyde to hys reame & to his crowne and ſo they aſſentyd alle / bothe erles and barons / and all the comyns that the for ſayd Peers of Ganaſton ſholde be exyled out of Englonde for euer more / and ſo it was done / For he for ſwore Englonde and went in to Irlonde / and there the kyng made hym cheyfteyne / & gouernour of the londe by hys commyſcyon. And there this Pers was cheyfteyne of all the londe / And dyd there all that hym lykyd▪ and hadde power what he wolde / and that tyme wer the templers exyled thrugh all criſtiantee. for by cauſe that myn put vppon theym / that they ſholde do thynges ayenſt the fayth and good byleue. Kyng Edwarde louyd Peers of Ganaſton ſo moche / that he myght not for bere his cōpany. And ſo moche the kynge yaue & behyght to the people of Englonde / that the exylyge of the forſayd Peers ſhold be reuokyd atte Stamforde / thrugh them yt hym had exyled / wherfore Pers of Ganaſton cam ayen into Englond / And whan he was come ayen in to his londe he dyſpyſed ye gretteſt lordes of this londe / And called ſyr Robert Clare Erle of Gloucetre horeſone. And the Erle of Nycholl ſyr Henry Lacy bruſtenbely / and ſyr Guy Erle of warwyk the blacke hound of Arderne: And alſo he callyd ye noble erle Thomas of Lancaſtre churle. / & many other ſcornes and ſhamys them ſayde / and many other grete lordes of Inglonde / wherfore they were to warde hym full angry and wroth & ryght ſore anoyed. And in the ſame tyme deyed the Erle of Nycholl. But he chargyed or yt he was deed / Thomas of Lancaſtre Erle that was his ſone in lawe that he ſholde mayntene hys quarell ayenſt this ſame Peers of Ganaſton vpon his bleſſynge. ¶And ſo it befell thorugh helpe of the erle Thomas of Lancaſtre and all ſo of the Erle of warwyk that the forſayd ſyr Peers was heeded att gauerſich beſyde warwyk in the .xx. day of Iune. in the yere of grace .M.CCC. and .xii. wherfore the kyng was ſore anoyed / and prayed god that he myght ſe that daye to be auenged / vpon the deth of the forſayde Peers. ¶And ſo it befell afterwarde as ye ſhall here Alas ye tyme. For the forſayd Erle of Lancaſtre & many other grete barons were put to a pyteous dethe. and martred for by cauſe of the forſayde quarell. The kynge was to att London. And helde a parleament and ordeyned the lawes of Symonde Mountforde / wherfore the erle of Lancaſtre / and the Erles and alle clergye of Englonde. made an othe thrugh counſeyll of Robert of wynchelſe for to mayntene the ordynauntes for euer.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Robert Brus came ayē in to Scotlonde and gadryd a grete power of / men for to werre vpon kynge Edwarde.
                     ANd whan ſyre Robert the Brus that made hym kynge of Scotlonde / that before was fledde in to Norway for drede of deth of the good kynge Edwarde. And alſo he herde of the debate that tho was in englond bytwene the kynhe & his lordys. he ordeyned an hoſte & came in to Inglonde in to Northumberlonde / and clene dyſtroyed the countree. ¶And whan kynge Edwarde herde this tyynges he lete aſſemble hys hoſte and mette the Scottes at Edſtreyelyn in the daye of the Natiuite of ſaynt Iohan Baptyſt in the thyrde yere of his regne / & in the yere of oure lorde .M.CCC. & .xiiii. Alas the ſorowe & loſſe that ther

was done. For there was ſlayne the noble Erle Gylbert of clare ſyr Robert Clefford baron and the kynge Edwarde was ſcomfyted and Edmonde of maule ye kynges Stewarde for drede wente & drowned hymſelf in a freſſhe ryuer that is called Bannokyſborne wherfore they ſayd in repreyf of kynge Edwarde for aſmoche as he louyd to go by water & alſo for he was dyſcomfyted at Bānoſborne / therfore ye maydens made a ſonge therof in ye countree of kynge Edwarde▪ and in this manere they ſōge Maydēs of Englonde ſore may ye morne / for tyȝt haue loſt your lēmans at bānokyſborne / with heuelogh. what wenyth the kyng of Englonde to haue gote Scotlond with rombylogh.
                     AS kynge Edmonde was dyſcomfyted wōder ſore and faſte he fledde with his folke that were left aliue & wēt vnto Berwyk / & there helde hym. & after he toke hoſtages .ii. chyldern of the rycheſſe of the towne. And the kynge went to London. & toke coūſeyl of thynges that were nedefull to ye reame of Englōde ¶And in ye ſame tyme it befel / that tho was in Englonde a rybaude. that was called Iohan Tāner. And he yede & ſayd that he was ye good kynge Edwardes ſone and lete hem calle Edwarde of Carnariuā. And therfore he was take at Oxforde / And there he chalēged frere carmes / chyrche that kyng Edwarde hadde yeue them whiche was the kynges halle. And afterwarde was thys Iohan ladde to Northampton / & drawen & hangyd for his falſneſſe & or yt he was deed he confeſſyd & ſayd before all tho that were there. that the deuyll beyhyght hym that he ſholde be kynge of Englonde & that he had ſerued the deuyll thre yere.
                  
                  
                     ¶How the towne of Berwyk was take thrugh treaſon / and how two Cardynales were robbyd in Englonde.
                     ANd on mydlente Sondaye. in the yere of our lorde .M.CCC.xvi. Berwyke was loſte thorugh falſe treſon of oon Pers of Spaldynge. the whyche Pers the kynge had put there. For to helpe that ſame towne with many burgeyſes of the ſame towne / wherfore the chyldren that were put in hoſtage thrughe the burgeyſes of Berwyk folowed the kynges march
                           ••
                        ſe many dayes fettred in ſtrōge yrens And after ye tyme two Cardynalles in to Englonde / as the pope had theym ſence for to makepe as bytwene Englonde and Scotlonde. And as they wente to warde Durham / for to haue ſacred mayſter Lowys of Beamont byſſhop of Durham they were take & robbed vpon the moore of wyngleſdom / Of whiche robbery ſyr Gylbert of mytton was atteynt & take and hangyd & drawen at Lōdon & his heed ſmytte of. & put vpon a ſpere / & ſet vpon newe gate / & the foure quarters ſent / to foure cytees of Englonde. and that ſame tyme befell many myſcheues in Englonde / for the poore people deyed in Englonde for hungre / and ſo moche and ſo faſte deyed. that vnethe mē myght bury them For a quarter of whete was at .xl. ſhelynges▪ and two yeres & an half a quarter of where was worth .x. marck· and of tyme the poore people ſtole chyldern and ete them / & ete alſo ye hoūdes that they myghte take: & alſo hors and cattes And after there fell a grete myrreyne amonge beſtes in dyuers countrees of englōde durynge kynge Edwarde lyues tyme.
                  
                  
                     ¶How ye Scottes robbyd Notūberlonde.
                     ANd in the ſame tyme came the Scottes ayen in to Englonde and dyſtroyed Northumberlonde / and brē
                        
                           •
                        t and that londe / and robbyd it / and ſlewe mē wymmen & chyldren that laye in there cradyls / & brent alſo holy chyrche / and deſtroyed cryſtendome / & toke & bare Englyſſhe mennys godes as they had ben ſaraſyns / or paynems. And of the wyckydneſſe that they dyde / all the worlde ſpake of it.
                  
                  
                     ¶How the Scottes wolde not a mende theyr treſpaſſe. and therfore Scotlonde was enterdyted.
                     SO pope Iohan the .xxii. after ſaynt Petir herde of the grete ſorowe and m
                           •
                        che y
                           •
                         that the Scottes wrought he was wonder ſorye / that cryſtendome was ſo dyſtroyed thrughe the Scottes / & namely they deſtroyed ſo
                           •
                         holy chyrches wherfore the pope ſente a generall ſentence vnder his bulles of l
                           •
                        ed vnto the Archebyſſhop of Caunterbury. And to tharchebyſſhoppe of yorke that yf Robert ye Brus of Scotlonde wolde not be Iuſtyfyed & make amendes vnto the kynge of Englonde Edwarde theyr lorde / & make amendes of hys loſſe / & of his harmes that they / had doon in Englonde. And alſo reſtore the goodes that they had taked of holy chyrche / that the ſentence ſhold be pronouncyd thorughe out alle Englonde. And whan the Scottes herde this / they wolde not leue theyr malyce / for the popes commaundemente

wherfore Roberte the Brus. Iamys Douglas and Thomas Radulf erle of Moref and all tho that with theym comyned or them helpe in worde or dede were accurſyd in euery chirche thrugh out all Englonde euery day at maſſe .iii. tymes And no maſſe ſhold be ſonge in holy chyrche thrugh out all Soctlonde but yf the Scottes wolde make reſtitucyon of the harmes that they hadde made vnto holy chyrche wherfore many a good preſt and holy men therfore were ſlayne thrugh ye reame of Scotlonde / bycauſe they wolde not ſynge maſſe ayenſt ye popys cōmaundemet & ayenſt his wyll and to do & fulfyll the tyrauntes wyll.
                  
                  
                     ¶How ſyre Hughe Spenſers ſone was made the kynges chamberlayne. And of the bataylle of Mitone.
                     ANd it was not longe after warde / that the kynge ordeyned a parlemente atte yorke / And there was ſyr / Spenſers ſone made Chambrelayne. And the meane tyme whyle the werre laſted / the kynge wente ayen in to Scotlonde / that it was wonder for to wytte & beſeged the towne of Berwyk / but the ſcottes wente ouer the water at Sole wath. that was thre myle frome the kynges hoſte and pryuely they ſtole a way by nyght / & came in to Englō
                        de / & robbyd & dyſtroyed all that they myght / and ſparde no manere thynge tyll that they came vnto yorke / & whan the englyſſhmen that were left at home / herde thyſe tydīges / all tho that myghte traueyll / as well monkꝭ / preſtes freres / chanons / & ſeculers came & mette wyth the Scotes at Myton vp ſwale the .xii. day of Octobre. Alas for ſorowe / for the Englyſſhe huſbonde men that coude no thynge of yt werre kyllyd & drowned in an arme of the ſee And the cheyftyenes ſyre wyllyam of Melton Arche byſſhop of yorke & the abbot of ſelby wyth there ſtedes fledde / & came to yorke / and that was theyr owne foly / that they had that myſchaunce. For they paſſed the water of Swale. And the Scottes ſette a fyre the ſta
                           •
                        kes of hey and the ſmote ther of was ſo huge / that ye Englyſſhmen myght not ſe ye Scottes. And whā the engliſſhmen were gone ouer the water tho came ye Scottes wyth theyr wynge in maner of a ſhelde / and came to warde the Englyſſmē in araye. And the Englyſſhemen fledde. For 
                           •
                        neth they hadde ony men of armys. For the kynge hadde them almooſt loſt at the ſyege of Berwyk / and the Scottes hobylers went bytwene the brydge and the Englyſſhmen / And whan the grete hoſt them mett / the englyſſhemen fled bytwene the hobylers & the gret hoſte. And the Englyſſhmen almooſt were there ſlayne / & he that myght go ouer the water were ſaued / But many were drowned. Alas for there were ſlayne / many men of relygyon / ſeculers preeſtes & clerkes / with moche ſorowe tharchebyſſhop eſcaped. & therfore the Scottes callyd that batayll the whyte batayll.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Edwarde dyde alle manere thynge that ſyr Hugh Spenſer wolde·
                     NOw as kynge Edwarde herde this tydynges he remeued his ſege from Berwyk & came agayn into Englond. But Syr Hugh Spenſer that was the kynges Chamberlayne. kept ſo the kynges chambre. that no mā myghte ſpeke with the kynge. But he had made with hym a fret for to do alle his nede. & that ouer meſure. And this Hugh bare hym ſo ſtowte that all men had of hym ſcorne and dyſpyte. and the kynge hymſelf wolde not be gouerned / ne rulyd by no manere of man but only by his fader & by hym. And yf ony knyghte of englonde hadde wodes maneyrs or londes that they wolde coueyte anone the Kyng muſt yeue it them or elles the man that ought it. ſholde be falſly endyted of forfeyt or felony. And thrugh ſuche doynge they dyſheryted many a bachelere / and ſo moche londe he gate that it was grete wonder and whan the lordes of enlonde ſawe the grete couetyſe & falſneſſe of ſyr Hugh Spenſer the fader & of ſyr Hugh the ſone / they come to the gentyll erle of lancaſtre / & axyd hym of counſeyll of the dyſeſe. that was in the reame / though ſyr Hugh Spenſer & his ſone. & in haſt by one aſſente they made pryue aſſēble. at ſhirburne
                           •
                         Elmede & they made there an othe for to breke & dyſtouble ye doinge bytwene the kynge and ſyr Hugh Spenſer and his ſone vpon theyr power. And they went in to the marche of walys. and dyſtroyed the londe of the forſayd ſyr hughes.
                  
                  
                     ¶How ſyr hugh Spenſer and his fader were exyled out of Englonde·
                     SO whan kyng Edwarde ſawe ye grete harme and dyſtruccyō that tho Barōs of Englonde dyde vnto ſyre hugh Spenſers londe. and to his ſone in euery place that they came vpon the kynge tho thrugh hys counſeyl

yll exyled ſyr Monbraye. ſyr Roger Clyfforde & ſyr Goſſelyn Dauyll. & many other lordes yt were to theym conſente / wherfore the barons dyde tho more harme than they dyde before / & whā the kynge ſawe that ye barons wolde not ſeſſe of theyr cruelte / the kyng was ſore adradde leſt they wolde dyſtroy hym & his reame for his mayntenaūce / but yf he aſſented to them. And ſo he ſente for thē by hys letters that they ſholde come to London to hys parlement at a certaine daye as in his letters were conteyned & they came with thre bataylles / well Armyd at al poyntes. & euery batayl had cotarmours of grete clothe. And therof the ryght quarter was yelowe. wyth whyte bendes / wherfore ye parlemente was callyd the parlement of the whyte bende. And in ye company was ſyr Hunfrey de bohoune erle of Herford & ſyre Roger Clyfforde. ſyr Iohan Monbray. ſyr Gloſſelyn Dauyll. ſyr Roger Mortymer vncle of ſyr Roger mortymer of wygmore. ſyr Henry of Trays ſyr Iohn̄ Gyffarde & ſyre Barthylmewe of Badeleſſemore that was ye kynges ſtewarde. yt the kynge had ſente to Shyrborne in Elmede to ye erle of Lācaſtre / and to all yt with hym were for to trete of accorde / ye hym alyed to the barons / & came with that company. & ſur Roger Dammory & ſyr Hugh dandale yt had ſpouſyd the kynges neces ſyſter. & ſyr Gylbert of clare erle of Gloucetre yt was ſlayne in Scotlonde as before is ſayd. And tho two lordes had tho two partyes of the erldom of Gloucerte. & ſur Hugh Spenſer had thyrde party in his wyues half / the thyrde ſyſter and tho two lordes wente to the barons wyth all theyr power ayenſt ſyr Hugh theyr brother in lawe. And ſo there came wyth them ſyr Robert Clyfforde ſyr Iohan Mōbray. ſyr Goſelyn Dauyll. ſyr Roger Mortymer of werk. ſyr Roger Mortymer of wykmore his neuewe. ſyr Henry Trays ſyre Iohā Gyffarde. ſyr Barthylmewe of Bardeſmore. with all theyr cōpany. and many other / that to them were conſent. all the grete lordes came vnto weſtmeſtre to ye kynges parlemente. And ſo they ſpake & dyde. that bothe ſyr Hughe Spēſer the fader & alſo the ſone / were out lauwed of englonde for euermore And ſoo ſyre Hugh the fader wente vnto Douer and made moche ſorowe / & fell downe vpon the grounde by the ſee banke. a croſſe wyth his armes / and ſore wepynge ſayd Now fayr Englonde and good Englonde to almyghty god I the betake And thryes kyſſed the grounde and wenyd neuer to haue come ayen· And wepynge curſyd ye tyme that euer he begate ſyr Hugh his ſone. & ſayd for hym he had loſt all Englond. And tho in preſence of thē all that were aboute hym yaue hym his curſee & went ouer ſee to his londes But Hugh the ſone wolde not go out of Englonde / but helde hym in the ſee. and his company robbyd .ii. dromedores beſyde Sandwyth and toke and bare a waye alle the godoes that was in them to the value of .lx.M.li.
                  
                  
                     ¶How the Kynge exyled erle Thomas of Lancaſtre and alle that helde with hym and how the Mortymer came and yelded hym to the kynge / & of all the lordes.
                     IT was not longe after that the kynge made ſyr Hugh Spenſer the fader / & ſyr Hugh the ſone / come ayen in to Englond ayenſte the lordes wyll of the reame. And ſoone after the kynge with a ſtrōge power came and beſeged the caſtel of Ledys. and in the caſtel was ye laby of Bladeleſmore for cauſe that ſhe wold not graunt that caſtell to the quene Iſabel kinge Edwardes wyfe but the pryncypall cauſe was / for ſyr Berthylmewe was ayenſt ye kynge / and helde with the lordes of Englōde. & neuertheles the kynge by helpe & ſocoure of men of London / & alſo of helpe of Southeren men gate the caſtel maugre of them all yt were with in / and toke with them al that they myght fynde. And whan the barons of Englonde herde theſe tidynges / ſyr Roger Mortymer & many other lordes toke the towne of Brugge wroth wyth ſtrenth. wherfore the kyng was wonder wrothe / and lete outlawe Thomas of Lancaſtre / and Vmfroy de Bohoune erle of Herforde and alle tho that were aſſentynge to the ſame quarel. And the kyng aſſēbled an huge hoſt and came ayenſt the lordes of Englond wherfore the Mortymers put them in the kynges grace. And anone they were ſente to the toure of London and there kept in pryſon. And whā the barons herd thys thyng they came to poutfert there that ye erle Thomas ſoiourned and tolde hym how that Mortymers both had yelde them to the kynge. & put them in hys grace.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the ſyege of Tykhyll.
                     SO whan Thomas Erle of Lancaſtre herde thys he was wonder wrothe & all that were of there company & greatly they were

dyſcomfyted / & ordeyned there power togyder. and beſyeged the caſtell of Tykhyll / But tho that were wyth in manly defended them / that the barnos myght not gete the caſtel. and whan the kyng herde yt his caſtell was beſeged he ſwore by god & by his names. that the lege ſholde be remeued. & aſſembled an huge power of people / & wente theder ward to reſcowe the caſtell. & his power encreſyd fro daye to daye. whan the erle of Lancaſtre & the erle of Herforde & the barons of there cōpany herde of thys thynge they aſſembled all theyr power & wente them to Burton vpon trent & kept the brydge that the kyng ſhold not paſſe ouer▪ but it befell ſo on the tenthe daye of Marche in the yere of grace .M.CCC.xxi. the kyng & the Spenſers ſyr Aymer Valaunce erle of Penbroke / & Iohan erle of Araundell & theyr power wente ouer the water & dyſcomfyted therle Thomas and his company· And they fled to the caſtell of Tetbury & from thens they went to Pountfret. And in that 
                           •
                        yage deyed ſyr Roger Daumore in thabbay of Thebury. And in that ſame tyme the erle thomas had a traytour wyth hyme yt was callyd Robert Holonde knyght. that the erle had brought vp of nought / & had nouryſſhed hym ī hys butrye. & had yeue hym a thouſāde marke of londe by yere. And ſo moche the erle louyd hym that he myght do in the erles court all that hym lyked bothe amonge them hyghe & lowe / and ſo craftly the theyf bare hym ayenſte his lorde / that he truſtyd more vpon hym than ony man on lyue. and the erle had ordeyned by his letters for to goo in to the erledome of Lancaſtre / to make men aryſe to kepe hym in that vyage / That is to ſaye .v. hū
                        dred men of armys. But the fals traytour came not there: no manere men for to warne ne for to make arayſe to helpe his lord. And whan that the fals traytour herde tell yt hys lord was dycomfyted at Burton vpon Trent. as a fals traytour theyf. ſtele a way & robbyd in Rauēſdele his lordes men that came fro the ſcomfyture. And toke of them hors & harneys / and al that they had & ſlewe of them all that they myghte take / & came & yeldyd hym to the kynge. ¶whan the good erle Thomas wyſte that he was ſo bytrayed. He was ſo abaſſhed / & ſayde to hymſelf / O almyghty good how myght Robert Holonde fynde in hys herteme to betray / ſythe that I louyd hym ſo moche O god well maye nowe a man ſe by hym yt no man maye dyſceyue a nother rathar than he yt he truſtyth mooſt vpon. He hath full euyll yelded me my goodnes & the worſhyp yt I haue to hym done and thrugh my kyndneſſe haue hym auaūcyd & made hym hyghe where yt he was lowe. And he makyth me go from hyghe vnto lowe / but yet ſhall he deye an euyll dethe.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the ſcomfyture of Brurbrygge.
                     THe good Erle Thomas of Lancaſte. Humfroy de Bohoune ele of Herford and the barons yt with theym were toke counſell bytwene them at ye frre prechers in Poūtfret. tho thought Thomas vpon the traytour Roberte Holonde. And ſayde in repreyf / Alas Robert Holonde hath me betrayed / and is the red of ſome euyll ſhred. And by the comyn aſſent they ſholde goo to the caſtell of Dunſtanbrughe / the whiche perteyned to therldome of Lancaſtre / & yt they ſholde abyde ther tyll that the kynge had for yeue them his male talente. ¶But whan the good erle Thomas this herde / he anſwered in this manere & ſayd. Lordes ſayd he / yf we go to wade the North / the Northen men woll ſaye that we go to warde ye ſcottes / ſo we ſhall be holden traytours / for cauſe of dyſtaūce that is bytwene kynge Edwarde & Robert ye Brus that made hym kynge of Scotlonde. And therfore I ſay as touchyng my ſelf that I wyll not go no ferder into the Northe / than to myn owne caſtell at Poūtfret. ¶And whan ſyre Roger Clyfford herde this he aroſe vp anone in wrathe. and drawe his ſwerde on hye / & ſwore by god almyghty & by his holy names / but yf yt he wolde go with them / he ſholde hym ſlee there. the noble and gentyll erle Thomas of Lancaſtre was ſore a ferde & ſayd. Fayr▪ ſyres I wyll go with you whether ſome euer ye me bydde. Tho went they togyder in to the North / & wyth them they hadde .vii.C. men of armys came to Burbryg. And whan ſyr Andrew of Herkela that was in the north countre thrugh ordynaūce of the kynge. For to kepe ye countree of Scotlonde / herde tell. how yt Thomas of Lancaſtre was ſcomfyted & hys company at Burton vpon trent / he ordened hym a ſtronge power / and ſyr ſymonde warde alſo that was the ſhyref of yorke / and mette the barons at burburgge. and anone they brake the brydge that was made of tree ¶And whan ſyr Thomas of Lancaſtre. herde ye ſyr Andrewe

of Herkela had broughte wyth hym ſuche a power he was ſore adradde. & ſente for ſyr Andrewe of herkela / wyth hym ſpake. & ſayde to hym in thys manere ſyr Andrewe ſayde he. ye may wel vnderſtōde that our lorde ye kyng. is ladde and myſgouerned by moche fals counſel thrugh ſyr Hugh Spenſer the fader & ſyr Hughe is ſone: ſyr Iohan erle of Arūdel / & thrugh mayſter Robert Baldok a fals pylled clerke. yt now is in the kynges courte dwellynge wherfore I praye you that ye wyll come wyth vs with alle youre power that ye haue ordeyned / & helpe to dyſtroie the venym of Englond. and ye traytours that ben therin. & we wyll yeue vnto you all the beſt parte of fyue Erldoms / that we haue & holde. & we wyll make vnto you an othe. that we wyll neuer doo thynge wythout your counſell / & ſoo ye ſhalbe left as well with as euer was Robert Holande Tho anſwered ſyr Andrew of Herkela & ſayd ſyr Thomas yt wolde not I do ne conſent therto for no manere thynge wythout the wyll & cōmaundement of lorde the kynge / for them ſhold I be holden a traytour for euermore. And whan that ye noble erle Thomas of Lācaſtre ſawe that he wolde not conſent to hym for no maner thyng ſyr Andrew he ſayd wyll ye not conſent to dyſtroy the venym of the reame as we be conſente at one worde ſyr Andrewe I tel the that are this yere begoō / that ye ſhall▪ be take and holde for a traytour. and more than ony of you hold vs now / & in worſe dethe ye ſhall deye than euer dyde ony knyght of Englonde. And vnderſtonde wel / that ye dyd neuer thynge That ſorer ye ſhall you repente. And now go and doo what you good lykyth / & I wyll put me in to the mercy of god. And ſo went the fals traytour tyraū
                        ce a fals forſworne man For thrugh the noble erle Thomas of Lancaſtre he receyued the armys of Chyualrye / and thrughe hym he was made a knyght. Tho myghte men ſe archers drawe them in that one ſyde and in that other and knyghtes alſo. And foughte tho togyder wonder ſore. And alſo amonge all other Humfroy de Boughon Erle of Herforde a worthy knyght of renoune thrugh out all cryſtendom ſtode a fought with his enmyes vppon ye brydge. and as the noble lord ſtode & foughte vpon the brydge a theyf rybaude ſculkyd vnder the brydge / & fyerſly with a ſpere. ſmote the noble knyght in to ye fūdement / ſo yt his bowellys came out aboute his fete ther. Alas for ſorowe & pyte. For there was ſlayne the floure of ſolace & of comforth / & alſo of curteyſye. ¶And Syr Roger Clyfforde a noble & a worthy knyghte ſtode euer & fought / and well & worthyly hym defended as a noble baron. But at the laſt he was ſore woundyd in his heed / And ſyr Wyllyam of Sullaynde. & ſyr Roger of Benfeelde were ſlayne at that batayll. whan ſyr Andrewe of Herkela ſawe that ſyr thomas mē of Lā
                        caſtre / laſſed & ſlakyd. anone he and hys company came vnto the gentyll knyght ſyr Thomas & layd vnto hym in an hyghe voyce yelde the traytour yelde the. The gentyll erle Thomas of Lancaſtre anſwered thenne and ſayde Nay lordes traitours we ben none and to you we wyll neuer vs yelde whyle that oure lyues laſt But leuer we had to be ſlayne in our thruth than yelde vs vnto you. And ſyre Andrewe 
                           •
                        
                        en gardyd vppon ſyr Thomas and hys company / yellynge and cryenge lyke a wode wulf yelde you traytours taken yelde you / and ſayde wyth an hyghe voys Beware ſyres yt none of you be ſo hardy vpon lyf and lymme to myſ do Thomas body of Lācaſtre / And wyth that worde the good erle Thomas yede into the caſtell / & ſayd knelynge vpon hys knees and torned hys vyſage to warde the croſſe and ſayd almyghty god to the I yelde / & holy I put me vnto thy mercy. and wyth that the vylaynes and rybaudes lept aboute hym on euery ſyde as tyraūtes & wood tormentours & dyſpoyled hym of his armoure & clothed hym in a 
                           •
                        obe of ray
                           •
                         that was of his ſquyres lyuetay 
                           •
                         and forth ladde hym unto yorke by water. Tho myght men ſee moche ſorowe & care For the gentyl knyghtes ſledde on euery ſyde & ye rybaudes and the vyllayns egerly. them dyſcryed / and cryed on hyghe yelde traytours yelde you. And whan they were yelden they were robbyd & bounden as theuys. Alas the ſhame and dyſpyte that the gentyll orde of knyghthode had there at that batayll. And the londe was tho without lawe For holy chyrche had tho nomore creuereence than it had be a burdell hous / And in that batyall was the fader ayenſt the ſone 
                           •
                         and the vncle ayenſt the neuewe. For ſo moche vnkyndeneſſe / was neuer ſeen before in Englonde / as that tyme amonge folkes of one nacyon. For one kynred had noo more pyte of that other. than an hungry wulf hathe of a ſhepe / And it

was no wonder. For the grete lordes of Englonde were not alle of one nacyon / But were medlyd with other nacōns / That is for to ſay ſome / Brytons / ſome Saxons / ſome Danys / ſome Pehypes / ſome Frenſſemen / ſome Normans / ſome Spanyerdes / ſome Romayns / ſome Henaude ſome Flemynges and other dyuers nacyons the whyche nacyons accordyd not to the kynde blood of Englonde. And yf ſoo grete lordes had be oonly weddyd to Englyſſhe people. Thenne ſholde peas haue ben and reſte amonge theym without ony enuye. And at that batayll was Roger Clyfforde take. ſyr Iohn̄ Mombray ſyr wyllyam Tuchy
                           •
                         Syr wyllyam fitz wyllyam / and many other worthy knyghtes there take at that batayll & Syr Hugh Dandell nette daye after was taken and put in to pryſon / and ſholde haue be doon to dethe yf he hadde not ſpouſyd the kynges nece / that was Erle Gylbertes ſyſter of Glouceſtre 
                           •
                         and anon after was ſyr Berthylmewe of Badeleſmore taken at Stow parke a maneyr of the byſſhop of Lyncoln that was his neuewe & many other barons and baronetters. wherfore was made moche ſorowe.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Thomas of Lancaſtre was heedyd at Pountfret / and .v. barons hangyd and drawen there
                     ANd now I ſhall tell you of the noble erle Thomas of Lancaſtre. wha he was take & brought to yorke / many of the cyte were full glade and vpon hym cryed with an hyght voys O ſyr traytour ye be welcome. bleſſyd be god for now ye ſhall haue the rewarde / that longe ye haue deſerued. And caſte vppon hym many ſnowe balles / & many other repreues they dyd hym. But the gentyll erle all ſuffred / & ſayd nother o worde nor other. ¶And at the ſame tyme ye kyng herde of thys ſcōfyture / & was ful glad & Ioyous / & in grete haſt came to Poūtfret. And ſyr Hugh Spenſer. and ſyr Hugh his ſone / & ſyr Iohn̄ erle of Arundell and ſyr Edmonde of wodeſtoke ye kynges brother erle of Kent. & ſyr Aymer of valaunce erle of Penbroke and mayſter Robert Baldoke. a fals pyllyd clerke / that was pryue / and dwelled in the kynges court / & all came theder wyth the kynge. And the kyng entryd in to the caſtel and Syr Andrewe of Herkela a fals tyraunte thrugh the kynges cōmaundement. toke wyth hym the gentyll Erle. Thomas to Pountfret and there he was pryſoned in his owne caſtell that he had newe made that ſtode ayenſte the abbaye of kynge Edwarde. ¶And ſyr Hugh Spenſer the fader & the ſone caſt and thought how & in what maner the good erle Thomas of Lancaſtre ſholde be deed / wythoute Iugement of hys perys. wherfore it was ordeyned thrugh the kynges Iuſticus that the kyng ſholde put vpon hym poyntes of treaſon. And ſo it befell that he was ledde to barre before the kynges Iuſtices bare heed as a theyf / in a fayre halle in his owne caſtell yt he had made ther in many a fayre feſte. both to ryche & to poore. ¶And theſe where is Iuſtices ſyr Hugh Spē
                        ſer the fader. & Aymer of Balaunce erle of Pē
                        broke / ſyr Edmonde of wodſtok erle of Kent / ſyr Iohan of Brytayne erle of Rychemonde / & ſyr Robert Malemethrop Iuſtyce and ſyre Roberte hym a couplyd in this manere. ¶Thomas court excludeth you of all maner anſwer Thomas our lorde the kynge / puttyth vppon you▪ that ye haue in hys londe ryden wyth baner dyſplayed ayenſt his peas. as a traytour. ¶And with ye worde the gentyll erle Thomas with an hygh voyce ſayd / Nay lordes forſoth and by ſaynt Thomas I was neuer traytoure ¶The Iuſtyce ſayd ayen tho. Thomas oure lorde the kyng putteth vpon you that ye haue robbyd his folke / and murdred his people as a theyf. Thomas alſo the kynge puttythe vpon you that he dyſcōfyted you & our people wyth his folke / in his owne reame / wherfore. ye wē
                        te & fledde to the woode as an outlaw▪ and thomas as a traytoure ye ſhall be hangyd by reaſō. but ye kynge hathe foryeuen you that Iugement / for loue of quene Iſabell. And Thomas reſon wolde yt ye ſholde be hangyd / but ye kynge hath foryue you that Iugemēt for by cauſe & loue of your lygnage. But for aſmoche. Thomas as ye were taken fleenge / and as an outlawe. the kynge: woll that your heed ſhalle be ſmyten of / Anone haue hym oute of prees and brynge hym to his Iugement. ¶Whan the gē
                        tyll knyght Thomas had herde all theſe wordes / wyth an hygh voyce he cryed ſore wepynge and ſayd alas ſaynt Thomas fayr fader. Alas ſhall I be deed thus Graunt me now bleſſydful▪ god anſwere. But all auayled hym no thynge For the curſyd Gaſcoyns put hym hyther & thyder / & on hym cryed wyth an hyghe voys. O kynge Arthur mooſt terryble & dredefull

/ well knowen & ſhewed now is thyn open traytour. And an euyll deth ſhalt thou ryght anone deye. Haſte thou not ryght well deſerued it. ¶And thenne thyſe cruell folke ſette vpon the gode knyhht Thomas for very ſcorne an olde chaplet that was alle to rente / yt was not worth an halfe peny. And after that they ſette hym vpon a whyte palfroy full vnſemely / & alſo all bare / wyth an olde brydell. And wyth an horryble noyſe they draue hym out of the caſtell to warde hys deth / and they caſt vpon hym many balles of ſnowe in dyſpyte. And as the traytours lad hym out of the caſtell tho ſayde he theſe pyteous wordes. And his hondes helde vp on hygh to warde heuen Now the kyng of heuen yeue us mercy for the erthly kyng hathe vs forſaken and a frere precher wente with hym out of the caſtell tyll he came to the place that he endeth his lyfe. vnto whome he ſhroue hym all hys lyfe. And the gentyll erle helde the frere wonder faſt by the clothes & ſayd to hym Fayr fader abyde with vs tyll yt I be deed. for my fleſſhe quakyth for drede of dethe. ¶And the ſothe for to ſay / The gentyll erle ſette hym vpon hys knees / and torned hym to warde the eeſt: but a rybaude that was called Hygone of moſ
                           ••
                        on ſette honde vpon the gentyll Erle and ſayd in dyſpyte of hym Syr traytour torne the towarde the Scottes / thy fowle deth to receyue / & torned to warde the Noſth. The noble erle Thomas anſwered tho wyth a mylde voys and ſayd now fayr lordes I ſhall do your wyll And with that worde ye frere went from hym ſore wepynge. And anone a rybaude wente to hym / & ſmote of hys heed / the .xi. Kalendas of Auerell. In the yere of grace .M.CCC. & .xxi. ¶Alas that euer ſuche a gentyll blood ſholde be don to deth withouten cauſe & reaſon. And traytourſly the kynge was counſeylled / whan he thrugh the fals counſeyll of the Spenſer ſuffred ſyr Thomas his vncles ſone to be put to ſuche a deth / & ſo he beheeded ayenſt all maner of reaſō / And grete pyte it was alſo / that ſuche a noble kynge ſholde be dyſceyued and myſgouerned thrugh counſell of the fals Spenſers / the whyche tho he mayntened thrughe loſelry ayenſt his honour & alſo his proffyte. For after warde there fell grete vengaunce in Englonde. for by cauſe of the forſayd· Thomas dethe. whan the gentyll erle of his lyf was paſſyd. ye pryour & the monkys of Pounfret gate the body of ſyr Thomas of the kynge & buryed it before the hyghe awter on the ryght ſyde. ¶That ſame daye that thys gentyll knyght was dede / were hangyd and drawen / for the ſame quarel at Poūtfret ſyr Wyllyam Tuchet. Syr Wyllyam. Fitz Wyllyam. ſyr werreyn of Iſell. Syr Henry Bradborn / & ſyr Wyllyam Cheyne barons al / and Iohn̄ page eſquyrer. and ſoone after at yorke were drawen & hangyd ſyr Roger Clyfforde / ſyre Iohan of Mambray barons. & ſyr Goſelyne Deuyll knyght. ¶And at Bryſtowe were drawē and hangyd / Syr Henry of wemyngton / & ſyr Henry Moun
                           •
                        torde barōs ¶And at Gloucerre were drawē and hangyd ſyr Iohn̄ Gaffarde and ſyr Wyllyam of Elmebrughe barons / & at Londō were hangyd and drawen Syr henry Tyes baron. ¶And atte wynchelſe ſyr thomas Clepepyr knyght. And ferthermore to telle of thys cruell occyon atte wyndſore was drawe & hangyd ſyr Fraunc
                           •
                        s waldēham baron / & at Caunterbury was drawē and handyg ſyr Berthylmew Badeleſmore and ſyr Berthylmew of Aſſhe bourucham barons and at Cardyf in walys ſyr Wylyam Flemmynge baron.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Edwarde wente into Scotlonde wyth an hundrde thouſande mē of armys / and myght not ſpede.
                     SO whan kynge Edwarde of Englonde had brought the floure of cheua
                           •
                        
                        ▪ vnto theyr deth. thrugh counſell & con
                           •
                        ente of ſyr Hugh Spenſer the fader / & ſyr Hughe the ſone he became as woode as ony lyon▪ & what ſo euer the Spenſers wolde haue it was done So well the kynge louyd theym yt they myght do with hym all thynge that them lyked wherfore the kynge gaaf vnto ſyr Hughe Spenſer the fader ye erldom of wyncheſtre and vnto ſyr Andrewe of Herkela the erldome of Cardoyll
                           •
                         in preiudyce and in harmynge of hys crowne. And kyng Edwarde tho thrugh counſel of the Spenſers dyſheryted alle them that had be ayenſt hym in ony quarel with Thomas of L
                           •
                        
                        caſtre. And many other were dyſheryted alſo / by cauſe that the Spenſers coueyted for to haue theyr londes. And ſo they had all that they wold deſyre wyth wronge / & ayenſt all reaſon. Tho made the kynge Robert Baldok a fal
                           •
                        e pylled clerke Chaunceler of Englond. thrugh counſell of the forſayde Spenſers. ¶And he was a falſe rybaude / And a coueytouſe. And

ſo they counſeylled the kynge moche / that the kyng lete take to hys owne warde all the gooddes of the lordes that were put wrongfully to the deth in to hys owne honde. And aſwell they toke the goodes yt were within hooly chyrche / es the goodes yt were wythout / & lete theym be put in to hys treſoury in London / & lette them calle hys for feytes. And by there coūſell ye kynge wrought for euer more he dyſheryted them that the godes ought / & thrugh ther coūſell lete arer a talegge of all the goodes of Englonde / wherfore he was the rycheſt kyng yt euer was in Englonde. after wyllyam Baſtarde yt comquered Englonde. / And yet thrughe coūſell of them hym ſemyd yt he hadde not ynough. But made yet euery towne of Englonde for to fynde a man of armys vpon theyr owne coſtes / for to go & werre vpon the Scottes yt were his enmyes / wherfore the kynge went in to Scotlonde with an houndred thouſande men of armys at wytſontyde in the yere of our lord Iheſu Criſt .M.CCC.xxii. But the Scottes wente / & hyd them in moūteyns & in wodes and caryed the Englyſſhmen fro day to day / that the kynge myght for no manere thynge fynde thē in playne felde / wherfor many Englyſſhmen that had lytyl vytaylles deyed ther for hungre wonder faſt an ſodenly in goynge and comynge and namely tho that had bene ayenſt Thomas of Lancaſtre & robbyd his men vpon hys londes. whan kynge Edwarde ſawe that vytaylles fayled hym / he was wonder ſore dyſcomfyted. bycauſe alſo yt hys men deyed. & for he myght not ſpede of his enmyes. So att the laſt he came ayen in to Englonde / & anone after came Iames Douglas and alſo Thomas Radulph with an huge hooſte into Englonde in to Northumberlonde / and wyth them the Englyſſhmen that were dryuen out of Englonde / and came and robbed the countree / and ſlewe ye people / & alſo brente the twone yt was callyd Northallerton & many other twones to yorke. And whan the kynge herde thys tydynges he lete ſo mane all maner men that myght trauyllee. And ſo the Englyſſhmen mette the Scottes at ye abbay of Beyghelande the .xv. day after Mygelmas. en the ſame yere aboue ſayd / and the Englyſſhmen were there dyſconfyted. And at that dyſcomfyture was take ſyr Iohan of Brytayne Erle of Rychmonde that helde the countree & the erldome of Lancaſtre and after he payed an huge raunſonne & was lete goo. And after that he wente in to Fraunce and came neuer after agayne.
                  
                  
                     ¶How ſyr Andrewe of Herkelay was take and put to deth / that was Erle of Cardoil.
                     THen at that tyme was ſyr Andrew of Herkela / ye new was made erle of Cardoil / for cauſe that he had taken the good erle Thomas of Lancaſtre. ¶He hadde ordeyned thrugh the kynges cōmaundement of Englonde. for to bringe hym all the power yt he myght for to helpe ayenſte the Scottes aſ the abbaye of Beglonde. And whan ye fals traytour had gadred all the people that he myght & ſhold haue come to the kynge vnto the abbaye of Beyghelande / ye fals traytour ladde them by a nother coūtre thrughe Copelonde. And thrughe therldome of Lancaſtre / & went thrugh ye coū
                        tree & robbed & ſlewe the folke all yt he myght. And ferthermore the fals traytour had take a grete ſomme of golde and ſyluer of ſyr Iames Douglas for to be ayenſt the kyng of Englonde. & to be helpynge & holdynge with the Scottes / thrugh whoſe treaſon the kynge of Englonde was ſcomfyted at Beyghelande or yt he came thyder. wherfore the kyng was to ward hym wonder wrothe. and lete pryuely enquere by the coūtre aboute how yt it was. And ſome men enquered and aſpeyed / ſo at the laſte the trough was foūde & ſought. And he atteynte & take as fals traytour / as ye gode erle Thomas of Lancaſtre hym tolde of yt he was pute vnto deth at hys ta
                           •
                        ynge att Burbrugge. & to hym ſayd. Or ye that were doon he ſholde be take & holde a traytour And ſo it was as the holy mā ſayd. ¶wherfore the kyng ſent pryuely to ſyr Anthony of Lucy / a knyght of the countre of Cardoil that he ſholde take ſyr Andrew of Herkela & put hym vnto the dethe. And to brynge this thynge vnto the ende. the kynge ſente hys Commyſſion ſo that thys ſame Andrewe was take at Cardoill and ladde vnto the barre in the maner of an erle worthyly arayed / & wyth aſwerde gyrde aboute hym / and hoſyd and ſporyd. ¶Tho ſpake ſyr Anthoyn in this maner ſyr Andrewe ſayd he the kynge puttyth vpon the for aſmoche as thou haſt be orpyd ī thy dedys / he dyde to the moche honour / & made the erle of Cardoil. & than as a traytour to thy lorde laddeſt the people of hys countere that ſhold haue holpe hym at the batayll of Beyghel and

and thou laddeſt them awaye by the countree of Copelande / and thrugh the erldom of Lancaſtre wherfore our lorde the kynge was dyſcomfyted there of the Scottes thrugh thy treaſon & falſneſſe and yf thou haddeſt come by tymes he had had the bataylle and treaſon thou dydeſt for ye grete ſomme of golde & ſyluer that thou receyued of Iames Douglas a Scot the kynges enmye And our lorde the kynge wyl / yt the ordre of knyghthode. by the whiche thou receyued al thyne honour and worſhyppe vppon thy body be all brought to nought & thyn eſtate vndoyne. that other knyghtes of lower degree mowe after beware / whyche lorde hathe the auaunted hugely in dyuerſe countrees of Englonde and that al may take enſample by there lorde after warde. truly for to ſerue. ¶Tho commaunded he anone a knaue / To hew of hys ſpores of his helys / and after he lete breke the ſerde ouer hys heed. the whiche the kynge yaue hym for to kepe and defende hys londe ther wyth whan he / made hym Erle of Cardoyll. And after he lette hym be vnclothed of hys furred taberde and of hys hode / and of his furryd cotes / and of his gyrdell. ¶And whanne this was done / Syr Anthony ſayde thenne vnto hym. Andrewe ſayde he Nowe arte thou noo knyghte But a knaue / and for thy treaſon the kynge wylle that thou ſhalte be hangyd and drawen and thy heed ſmyten of / and thy bowels take oute of thy body and brente before the / and thy body quartryd and thy heed ſente to London / and there it ſhall ſtonde vpon London brydge / and the foure quarters ſhall be ſente to foure townes of Englonde / yt all other maye beware and chaſtyſed by yt And as Anthony ſayde / ſo it was done all manere of thynge in the laſte daye of Octobre. in the yere of grace .M.iii.C.xxii. yere. And the ſonne torned in to blood as the peple it ſaw / and that dured from the morne tyll .xi. of the cloke.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the myracles yt god wrought for ſaȳt Thomas of Lancaſtre / wherfore the kynge lete cloſe in ye chyrche dores of ye pryory of Poūtfert / that no mā ſholde come therin for to offre
                     ANd ſone after that the good erle Thomas of Lancaſtre was martryd there was a preeſt that lōge tyme had be blynde / dremed in his ſlepe / that he ſholde go to ye hylle there the good Erle Thomas of Lancaſtre was doon vnto deth / and he ſholde haue his ſyghte ayen & ſo he dremed thre nyghtes ſewynge. and the preeſt lede hym to the ſame hyll and whā he came to ye place yt he was martryd on deuowtly he made there his prayers / And prayed god and ſaynt Thomas / that he myghte haue hys ſyght ayen / And he was in hys prayers he layed hys ryght hōde vpon the ſame that the gode man was martryd on / & a drope of drye blood and ſmale ſonde cleuyd on hys honde / & there with ſtryketh his eyen. And anone thrugh the myght of god & ſaynt Thomas of Lancaſtre / he had his ſyght ayen. And thankyd tho almyghty god and ſaynt Thomas. And whan this myracle was knowen amonge men / the people came thither on euery ſyde. and knelyd and made theyr prayers at his tombe that is in the pryory of Pountfret and prayed that holy martyr of ſocour and of helpe / & god herde there prayer. ¶Alſo there was a yonge chylde drowned in a welle in the towne of Pountfret and was deed thre daye and thre nyghtes. And men came and layed ye deed chylde the ſayd Thomas tombe the holy martyr / and the chylde aroſe from dethe to lyfe. as many a man it ſawe. ¶And alſo moche peple were out of ther mynde / and god ſent them theyr mynde ayen. thorough vertue of that holy man. And god hathe yeue there alſo to cryppyls theyr goynge / & the crokyd theyr hōdes & there feet / and two blynd alſo theyr ſyght. & to many ſyke folke there 
                           •
                        elthe of dyuers maladyes for the loue of this gode martyr. ¶Alſo there was a ryche man in Coūdom in Gaſcoyne and ſuche a malady he had that al his ryght ſyde rotyd & fel a way frō hym / that men myght ſee his lyuer & hys herte and ſo he ſtanke / that vnneth they myght come nyghe hym. wherfore hys frendes were for hym wonder ſory. But at the laſt as god wolde. they prayed to ſaynt Thomas of Lancaſtre / that he wolde pray almyghty god for that pryſoner & behyght for to go to Pountfret for to doo theyr pylgrymage / he thought that the Martyr ſaynt Thomas came to hym. and anoynted alle his ſike body / and therwith the good man a woke & was all hole / & his fleſſhe was reſtored ayē that before was ro
                           •
                        yd & fallē a way. For whiche myracle the good man and his frē
                        des louyd god and ſaynt Thomas euermore after. And this good man came into Englonde And toke with him foure felowes: and came to Poūtfret to ye holy martyr. & dyd theyr pylgrymage.

& the good man that was ſyke came thyther all nakyd / ſaufe his preuye clothes. And whan they had done. they torned home ayen in to theyr owne coūtre. and tolde of the myracle wher ſoo euer that they came. ¶And alſo two men haue ben heelyd there of the mormale thrugh helpe of ye holy martyr / thoughe that euyll be holde in curable. And whan ye Spenſers herde yt god dyde ſuche myracles for thys holy man they nolde byleue yt in noo manere wyſe
                           •
                         / but ſayde openly that it was grete hereſye / ſuche vertue of hym to byleue. and whan ſyr Hugh Spenſer the ſone ſawe all this doynge / anone he ſente his maſſager from Pountfret there that he dwelled to kyng Edwarde yt tho was at Grauen at ſcypton / for cauſe yt the kynge ſholde vndo ye pylgrymage / And as the rybaude ye meſſager went to warde the kynge for to do his meſſage / he came by the hylle the
                        
                           •
                        e the good martyr was doon to dethe. And in the ſame place he made his ordure / and whan he hadde done. he rode to warde the kynge and a ſtronge flyre came vpon hym or that he came to yorke / and tho he ſhed alle hys bowelles at his fūdment. And whā ſyr Hugh Spenſer herde this tygynges / ſomdele he was adradde and thoughte for to vndo thys pylgrymage yf he myghte by ony manere a waye / and anone he wente to the kynge / and ſayde that they ſholde be in greate ſklaundre thrughe out alle cryſtendome / for the deth of Thomas of Lancaſtre yf yt he ſuffred ye peple to do there pylgrymage at Poūtfret & ſo he counſeled the kynge that he cōmaūded to ſhyt the chyrche dores of Pountfret / in the wyche chyrche ye holy martyr was enteryd. and thus they dyd ayenſt all fraūchyſes of holy chirche ſo ye foure yere after myght no pylgryme come to the holy bodye. & bycauſe the monkes ſuffred men to come & honour that holy body of ſaynt Thomas ye martyr. thrugh coūſell of ſyr Hughe Spenſer the ſone / and thrugh coūſell of mayſter Roberte Baldok the fals pylled clerke. that was ye kynges chaūceles. the kyng conſented yt they ſholde be lette to theyr wages / & lete make wardeyns ouer there owne good longe tyme / & throughe cōmaūdement of the forſayd ſyr Hugh Spenſer .xiiii. Gaſcoynes well armyd kepte the hylle there that the good man ſaynt Thomas was don vnto his deth ſo that no pylgryme myght come by that way / Full well wente he to haue take cryſtis myght & hys power & ye grete boos of miracles / that he ſhewed for hys martyr ſaynt thomas thrugh all cryſtendom And that ſame tyme the kynge made Roberte of Baldok the fals pylled clerke. thrugh prayer of ſyr Hugh Spēſer ſone. was made Chaū
                        ſeler of Englonde. And in ye ſame tyme was ye caſtell of walyngforde holden ayenſt the kynge thrughe pryſoners that weren wythin the caſtell for ſaynt Thomas loue of Lancaſtre / wherfore the people of the coūtre came & toke the caſtell of the pryſoners wherfore ſyr Iohn̄ of Goldyngton knyght and ſyr Edmonde of Becche pryſoners were taken & ſent vnto the kyng to Pountfrete & there they were done in pryſon. and the forſayd Roger was ſent vnto yorke / and there he was drawē & hangyd. And anone after ſyr Roger Mortymer of wygmore brake out of the tour of London in thys manere. The forſayd Roger herde that he ſholde be drawe & hangyd at London in the morow after ſay
                           •
                         Laurence day and on the day before he helde a fayre feeſt in the toure of Lōdon and there was ſyre Stephen Segraue conſtable of the tour and many grete men with them and whan they ſholde ſoupe / the forſayd Stephen ſente for all ye offycers of the tour. & they came & ſowped with hym / and whā they ſholde take there leue of hym. & ſquyre yt was callyd Stephen▪ that was full preuy with the forſayd Roger thrugh hys counſell. yaue them all ſuche a drynke that the leeſt of them all ſlept two dayes & two nyghtes. & in the meane tyme he eſcaped a waye by water / by the thamys and went ouer the ſee and helde hym in Fraunce. wherfore the kynge was ſore anoyed / and put the ſame Stephen out of his Conſtabellary.
                  
                  
                     ¶How the quene Iſabell went in to Fraunce / for to treate of peas bytwene her lorde ye kynge of Englonde / and the kynge of Fraū
                        ce her broder.
                     THe kyng went tho vnto London and there thrugh coūſell of ſyr Hugh Spenſer the fader. & of his ſone & of mayſter Robert Baldok a fals pylled clerke his Chaūcheler. let ſeaſe to all the quenes londes into hys hondes. and alſo all ye londes that were ſyre Edwardes his ſone. and were ſo put to theyr wagys / ayēſt all maner of reaſon. & that was thrugh the falsneſſe of the Spenſers. ¶And whan the kyng

of fraunce yt was quene Iſabelles brother herde of this falſneſſe he was ſore anoyed ayenſt the kynge of Englonde & his fals counſellers. wherfore he ſent a letter to kyng Edward vnder his ſeale· yt he ſhold come at a certayne day to do hys homage / & therto he ſomoned hym. & els he ſholde leſe all Gaſcoyne. And ſo it was ordeyned in Englonde thrugh the kyng & hys coūſel / that quene Iſabel ſholde go into Fraunce / for to treate of peas bytwene her lorde and her broder. & that Olyuer of yngham ſhold go into Gaſcoyne / & haue with hym .vii.M. men armys & moo / to be Seneſchall & wardeyne of Gaſcoyne. & ſo it was ordeyned that quene Iſabell / came into Fraunce and with her wente ſyr aymer of Valaunce erle of Penbroke that was there murdred ſodenly in apreuyſege / but that was thrugh goddes vengaūce for he was one of the Iuſtycys that cōſented to ſaynt thomas deth of Lancaſtre and wolde neuer after repent hym of that wyckyd dede. And all that tyme ſyr Olyuer of yngham wente ouer into Gaſcoyne / & dyde moche harme to ye kynge of Fraunce & tho he gate ayen that kynge Edwarde had loſte. and moche more therto.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Edwarde ſente ſyr Edwarde hys ſone the eldeſt in to Fraunce.
                     THe quene Iſabell had but a quater of a yere dwelled in Fraunce whan ſyr Edwarde her eldeſt ſone axed leue tho for to go in to Fraūce / for to ſpeke with his moder / Iſabel the quene / & his fader the kynge grauntyd him with a good wyll / & ſayd to hym go my fayr ſone in goddys blyſſynge and myn / and thynke for to come ayen as haſtely as thou may / And he wēte ouer the ſee in to Fraunce & the kynge of Fraunce hys vncle receyued hym with moche honour / & ſayd vnto hym / Fayr ſon ye be welcome / and for by cauſe that your father come not to his homage. for ye duchye of Guyon / as his auncetours were wont for to do. I yeue you that lordſhyp holde it of me in herytage as all manerauncetours dyd before you wherfore he was callyd duke of Guyon.
                  
                  
                     ¶How the kynge exyled his quene yſabell & Edwarde her eldeſt ſone.
                     AS kynge Edwarde of Englonde herde tell how the kyng of Fraunce had yeue the ducye of Guyon vnto ſyr Edward his ſone / without conſent and wyll of hym & that is ſone had receyued the duchye he became wonder wrothe. & ſente to hys ſone by letter / yt they ſholde come ayen in to Englond in all ye haſte that they myght / And the quene Iſabel and ſyr Edwarde her ſone were wonder ſore a dradde of the kynges menaced. & of hys wrath / pryncypally for the falſneſſe of the Spenſers / both of the fader / & alſo the ſone. & at his cōmaundement they wolde not come wherfore kyng Edward was full ſore anoyed / & lete make a crye at London / that yf quene Iſabell & Edwarde his eldeſt ſone / came not in Englōde that they ſholde be holde as our enmyes / both to the reame & alſo to the crowne of Englonde & for that they nolde come into englonde / but both were exyled the moder & her ſone. ¶Whan the quen herd thyſe tydynges. She was ſore adradde to be dyſtroyed / thrughe the fals conyectynge of the Spenſers / & wente wyth ye knyghtes that were exyled out of Englonde / for ſaynt Thomas cauſe of Lācaſtre that is to ſay ſyr Roger of wigmore. ſyr wyllyam Truſell ſyr Iohan Cromwell & many other good knyghtes wherfore they toke theyr counſell & ordeyned among them / for to make a maryage bytwene ye duke of Guyhenne ye kynges ſone of Englond & ye erles doughter of Henaude / that was a noble knyght of name. and doughty in hys tyme. & yf that thynge myght be brought a bowte then̄e ſtode they trowynge wyth the helpe of god and with his helpe to recouer theyr herytage in Englond / wherfore they were put out thrugh the fals cocnectynge of the Spenſers.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kyng Edwarde thrugh coūſel of the Spenſers ſent to the Douzephers of Fraūce. yt they ſhold helpe that ye quene Iſabell & her ſone ſyr Edwarde were exyled out of Fraunce.
                     AS kynge Edwarde and the Spenſers herde how that quene Iſabell & ſyr Edwarde her ſone▪ had alyed them to the Erle of Henaude / & to them that were exyled out of englonde for cauſe of thomas of Lancaſtre they were ſo ſory that they wyſt not what for to do / wherfore ſyr Hugh Spenſer the ſone ſayde to ſyr Hugh the fader in this maner wyſe. Fader curſyd by the tyme & the counſel that euer ye cō
                        ſented that the quene Iſabell ſholde goo in to Fraunce / for to treate of accorde betwene the kynge of Englonde & her broder the kynge of fraunce for that was your counſell. for at that tyme for ſoch your wytt fayled / for I drede me ſore / leeſt thrugh her & her ſone we ſhall be dyſtroyed.

But yf we take the better counſeylle. ¶Now fayre ſyres vnderſtonde / howe merueylous felony & falſhede the Spenſers ymagyned & caſt. For pryuely they lete fyll fyue barelles ferrours with ſyluer / the ſōme amoūtyd .v.M. pounde. & they ſent thoſe barelles ouer 
                           •
                        ee pryuely by an alyaunt / that was callyd Arnold of Spayne / that was a broker of Lōdon That he ſholde go to the Douzepers of Fraū
                        ce / that they ſholde procure / and ſpeke to the kyng of Fraunce / that quene Iſabell & her ſone Edwarde wer dryuen & exyled out of Fraū
                        ce. And amonge all other thynges. That ther were braught to ye deth as pryuely as they myghte but almyghty god wold not ſo / for whan this Arnold was in the hygh ſee / he was take wi
                           •
                        h Selanders that mette hym in the hyghe ſee and toke hym and ladde hym to the erle of Henaude theyr lorde & moche Ioye was made for that takynge. And at the laſte this Arnold pryuely ſtele a waye from thens. And came to London And of thys takynge & of other thyn
                        
                           ••
                        s the erle of Henaude ſayd to the quene Iſabell. Dame make you mery & be of good there for ye be rycher than ye wened for to be / & take thyſe fyue barelles full of ſyluer. that were ſ
                           ••
                        
                        te to the Dourpers of France for to ſlee you & youre ſone Edwarde. and thynke you haſtely for to goo in to Englonde / and take with you Syre Iohan of Henaude my brother / and .v. hoūdred men of armys. For many of them of Fraunce in whom ye haue had grete truſte done you for to ſcorne. and almyghty god graunte you that grace your enmyes to ouercome. ¶The quene Iſabell ſent tho thrugh Henaude and Flaundres / for her ſouldyours / & ordened her euery daye for to go in to Englonde ayen / & ſo ſhe had in her company ſyr Edmonde of wodſtok. that was erle of Kent. that was ſyr Edwardes broder of Englde.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Edwarde lette kepe the coſtes by the ſee. and lete trye all the pryce men of armys and foot men thrugh Englonde.
                     AS kynge Edwarde herde telle ye quen Iſabell & Edwarde her ſone. wolde come in to englonde / wyth a grete power of alyaūtes. & with them yt were outlawed out of englonde for there rebellyouſneſſe. he was ſore a dradde to be put downe / & for to leſe his kyngdom wherfore he ordeyned to kepe hys caſtels in walys as well as in Englond / with vytayllers & theyr appa
                           •
                        ylles / and lette kepe hys ryuers & alſo ye. & at ye feeſt of Decolaciō of ſaynt Iohn̄ Baptyſt ye Cytezyns of London ſent to the kyng to Procheſtre an .C. men of armys. & alſo he cōmaūded by hys letters ordeyend / yt euery hundred & wepētake 
                           •
                        otrye as wel men of armys as men on foot. and yt they ſholde be put in .xx. ſōme. and in an hundred ſōme / And commaunded ye alle tho men were redy whan ony ſhoute or crye were made / for to purpoſe & take the alyauntis yt came in to Englond for to ben bme hym the londe for to put him out of his kyngdon / And more ouer he lete crye thorugh his patent in euery fayre & in euery market of Englonde / yt the quene Iſabell & ſyr Edwarde his eldeſt ſone. & the erle of Kent. yt they were take. and ſaufly kepte without ony manere harme vnto them doynge / & all other manere people yt come with them. anone ſmyte of ther hedys. without ony manere raunſom takynge of them. And what man myght brynge ſyr Rogeres mortymer heed of wygmore. ſholde haue an hūdred poūde of money for his trauall. ¶And ferthermore he ordened by his patrent & cōmaunded to make. a fyre vpon euery hyll / beſyde the ryuers and in lowe countrees. for to make hyghe bekeneſſe of rymbre. That yf it ſo were that the alyuntes came vnto londe by nyght tyme that then̄e the Inhabycauntys there aboute ſholde endeuoyr them ſelfe in goodly haſt to lyght & fyre ye bekenes that the countree maye be warned & come & mete there enmyes. And in ye tyme deyed ſyr Roger Mortymyer his vcle in the toure of London.
                  
                  
                     ¶How the quene Iſabell and ſyr Edward duke of Guyhenne her ſone came in to London at her with / and how they dyde.
                     AS quene Iſabell and ſyr Edwarde her ſone duke yf Guyhenne ſyr Edwarde of wodſtok erle of Kente / & ſyr Iohn̄ the erles brother of Henaude & there company. dradde not the menace of ye kyng ne of hys traytours for they truſted all in goddys grace / & came to Her with in South floke ye .xxiii. daye of Septembre / in the yere of grace .M.CCC.xxvi. And the quene & ſyre Edwarde her ſone ſent letters to the Mayre & comynalte of London requyrynge them / that they ſholde be helpynge in the quarell and cauſe that they had / that is to ſaye to dyſtroye the traytours of the reame. But none anſweres were ſent ayen: whe
                           •
                        
                        fore

the quene and ſyr Edwarde her ſone ſent a nother patent letter vnder the ſeaſes the tenour of whiche letter here folowyth in this maner. ¶Iſabell by the grace of god quene of englonde / lady of Irlonde / and coūteſſe of Pountyf / and we Edwarde the eldeſt ſone of the kynge of Englond. duke of guyon / erle of Cheſtre of Pauntyf / & of mouſtroyl. to the Mayre & to all the comynaltee of the cytee of London ſendyth gretynge for aſmoche as we haue before the tyme / ſent to you by your letters / how we be come into thys londe in good arraye and in good manere / for the maner / for the honour & profyte of holy chyrche and of our dere lorde ye kyng and all the reame with al the reame with all our myght and power / to kepe / and mayntene / as we / and al the good folke of the forſayd reame are holden to doo. And vppon that we praye you that ye wolde be helpynge to vs in as moche as ye maye in this quarell that is for the comune profyte of the forſayd reame / and we haue had to this tyme none anſwere of the forſayde letters 
                           •
                         ne knowe not your mynde in that party. wherfore we ſende to you ayen and praye & charge you chat ye bere you ſo ayenſte vs / that we haue no cauſe to greue you / but ye ye ben vnto vs helpynge by all the wayes that ye maye or may knowe / For wytte ye well in certē that we and all that be come with vs into thys reame / thynke not to do ony thynge. but that thynge that ſhall be for the comyn profyte of all the reame / but oonly to deſtroye Hugh Spēſer our enmye and enmye to all the reame as ye it wel knowe. wherfore I praye you / and charge you in ye fayth that ye owe vnto our lyege lord ye kynge & to vs / & vpon al that ye ſhall mowe for fayre ayen vs. that yf the ſayd ſpenſer our enmye come within your power / that ye do hym haſtely to be take / & ſaufly kepe vntyll ye haue ordeyned of hym our wyll & ye ye leue it not in no maner wyſe as ye deſyre honour & profyte of vs all & of all ye reame. Vnderſtondynge ye ryght well that yf ye do this our prayer and ſtreyghte cōmaundemēt / we thynke vs ſo moche the more beholdynge vnto you. And alſo ye ſhall gete you worſhyp & alſo profyte. yf ye ſende as haſtely anſwere of all your wyll ayen at Baldok the ſyxte daye of Octobre. whiche letter in the dawnynge of the day of ſaynt Denys / was tackyd vppon the newe croſſe in Chepe / and many topyes of the ſame letter were tackyd vpon wyndowes and dores & vpon other places in the cyte of london / that all men paſſynge by the way myght them rede and ſe / And in the ſame tyme kyng Edwarde was at London in the toure at his mete / And a meſſager came in to the halle & ſayde / that the quene Iſabell was come to londe at Herewhiche. and hath brought in her company ſyr Iohan of Henande & with hym mē of armes without nombre. And with that worde ſyr Hugh Spenſer ye fader ſpake / & thus vnto the kynge ſayd. My mooſt worſhypfull lorde & kynge of Englond now make good chere for certenly they ben all oures. The kynge ſawe this worde comfortable. yet he was fulle ſorowfull & penſyf in hys herte And the kynge had not fully eten but there came in to the halle a nother meſſager / & ſayde that the quene Iſabell was arryued at Her whiche beſyde ypſwytche in Soutfolke Syr Hugh Spenſer the fader ſpake to the meſſager & ſayd / Tell ſothe in gode fayth my fayre frendes: is ſhe come with a grete ſtrenth. Now c
                           ••
                        
                        tes the ſothe for to ſaye ſyr ſayd the meſſager. She ne hath in her companye but v
                           •
                        . hoūderd men of armys. And with that worde ſyr Hughe Spenſer the fader cryed with an hygh voice & ſayd / Alas alas we ben alle betrayes. Fortes with ſo lytell power ſhe had neuer come to londe / but yf folke of thys lōde were vnto her concente. And therfore after there mete they toke counſell. and went to warde walys for to arere the walſſhmen ayenſt the quene Iſabell and Edwarde her ſone / all for to ryght and ſo they were in purpoſe euery chone.
                  
                  
                     ¶How mayſter water Stapylton byſſhop of Excetre that was ye kynges treſorer was heedyd at London
                     ANd in the ſame tyme kynge Edwarde was ſore adradde. leeſt that men of london wolde yelde theym vnto the quene Iſabell And to her ſone Edwarde / wherfore he ſette mayſter walter Stapylton his treſorer for to be wardeyne / and keper of the cyte of Londō / with the Mayre / And ſoo came to the Gyldeha
                           ••
                        e of London: and axed the keyes of the yates of the Cyte / thrughe vertu & ſtrength of hys commyſſyon & wolde haue had the kepynge of the cite And ye comuners anſwered: & ſayd that they wolde kepe the cyte to the honour of kynge Edwarde & of Iſabell the quene / & of ye duke the kynges ſone without ony more. the byſſhop

tho was ſore onoyed / & ſwore othes / they all ſholde abye it anone as the kynge Edward were come out of walyes. ¶And ye comuners all anone of the cyte toke ye byſſhop & lad hym anone amyddes of the Chepe / & ther they ſmote of his heed / & ſet his heed in his ryght honde And forth with the ſame comyns of the cyte of London by heedyd two of his ſquyres yt helde with the byſſhop / and one of them was callyd wylliam of wayle / yt was the byſſhops neuew And that other was callyd Iohn̄ of Padyntō. And alſo they toke a burgeys of Lōdon yt was callyd Iohn̄ Merſhall. that was ſyr Hugh ſpē
                        ſer eſpye the fader & ſmote of his heed alſo: & in that ſame tyme ye byſſhop had in London a fayr toure in makynge in his cloſe / vpon the ryuer Temſe yt was withou
                           •
                         temple barre / & he fayled ſtone to make therof an ende & he commaūded his men to go the frere Carmes / and there they toke ſtone to make ther with the toure / & moche ſonde & morter & olde robous that was left. And for the dyſpyte the byſſhop had done vnto holy chyrche / he & hys two ſquyres were buryed in that ſonde. As thoughe they had ben houndes / and there they laye .xi. wekes tyll that the quene Iſabell ſent her letters to the comuners / & prayed them that they wolde ſuffre and graunte. that the byſſhop myght be take out of that place / & be buryed at Excetre at his owne chyrche And ſoo he was / & hys two ſquyres were buryed at ſaynt Clementes chyrche without temple barre. And it 
                           •
                         was no wonder thoughe that byſſhop deyed an euyll deth. For he was a coueytous man & had wyth hym no mercy / & euyll counſeylled the kynge. And ſoone after was Arnold of Spayne take. that aſſētye to lede the .v.M.li. of ſyluer in fyue barelles feryers vnto ye douzepers of Fraū
                        ce / for to helpe & haſte the quene Iſabell to her deth. And Edwarde her ſone alſo. and this Arnold was put to deth without the cyte·
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Edwarde & ſyr Hugh Spenſer and the erle of Arundell were taken.
                     AS kynge Edwarde had ſente mayſter walter Stapylton / hys treſorer in to London / for to kepe the cyte vnto hym ayenſt the quene Iſabell hys wyf / & ayenſt Edwarde his ſone anone hymſelf toke with hym ſyr Hughe Spenſer the ſone. & ſyr Iohn̄ of Arundell and mayſter Robert Baldok hys Chaunceler a fals pylled clerke & toke theyr waye to warde Bryſtowe / And there the kynge abode a lytyll tyme / and made ſyr Hugh Spenſer the fader as Coneſtable and keper of the caſtel. Ane the kynge & that other Spenſer went to ſhyppe / and ſaylled to warde walys / & toke noo leue of the kynges Stewarde / ne of none of the kyngys houſholde / & went ouer in to walys for to arere the walſſhmen ayenſt dame Iſabell the quene & the duke her ſone / And the erle of Kente / and ſyr Iohn̄ Henaude / And he wente and purſued after them / And theyr power encreacyd euery daye / So at the laſte the kynge was taken vpon an hyll in walys / and Syr Hugh Spenſer the ſone in that otherſyde of ye ſame hylle / & the falſe pylled clerke mayſter Robert Baldok there faſte beſyde theym. And were broughte ayen in to Englonde / as almyghty god wolde / And the kyng hymſelf was put in ſauf kepynge in the caſtel of Kenylworth / and hym kept ſyr Henry yt was ſaynt Thomas brother of Lancaſtre / and ſyr Hugh the fader came & put hym in the quenes grace & Edwarde her ſone duke of Guyon / but ſyr Hugh Spenſer after ye tyme that he was take. wolde neuer eete no more meete ne drynke no maner drynke / for he wyſte to haue no mercy / ſauf only to be deed. ¶And the quene & her counſell had ordeyned / that he ſholde haue be doon to deth at London. But he was ſoo feble for hys moche faſtynge yt he was nygh deed & therfore it was ordeyned. yt he ſhold haue his Iugement at her forde. & at a place of the toure hys heed was take from his body & alſo fro Robert Baldok yt was a fals pylled clerke & the kynges chaunceler. And men ſette vpon theyr heedys chaplettys of ſharpe netles / and two ſquyres blewe in ther eerys / with two grete bugle hornes / vpon the twoo pryſoners. that men myght here ther blowen oute wyth hornes more than a myle. & one Symond of Rydynge ye kynges Marſhall bare before them vpon a ſpere ther armys reuerſyd / in token / that he ſholde be vndon for euermore. And vpon the morowe was ſyr Hughe Spenſer the ſone dampned to dethe & was drawen hangyd & heedyd. & hys bowels taken out of hys body. & brent. & after yt he was quartred / & hys four quarters were ſent to the four townes of Englonde / & his heed ſente to London brydge / And this Symond for cauſe yt he dyſpyſyd quene Iſabell / he was drawen & hanged in a ſtage made a myddes the forſayd ſyr

Hughes galowes. And the ſame daye a lytell from thens was ſyr Iohan of Arundell be heddyd by cauſe he was one of ſyr Hugh ſpenſers counſelers. And anone after was ſyr Hughe Spenſer fader hangyd and drawē / & heedyd at Bryſtow / and after hangyd ayē by the armys with two ſtronge ropes. & the fourth day after he was hewen all to pecys / & houndes ete hym. And bycauſe that ye kyng had yeuen hym ye erldom of wyncheſtre hys heed was ſent thether and put vpō a ſpere / And the fals Baldok was ſent to London & ther he deyed in pryſon amō
                        ge theues / for men dyd hym nomore reuerence / than they wolde do vnto an hounde. And ſo deyed the traytours of Englond bleſſyd be almyghty god. And it was no wonder. for thrughe there coūſel the good erle Thomas of Lancaſtre was doō vnto dethe & all that helde with Thomas of Lancaſtre thrugh ye traytours were vndone & all theyr heyres dyſheryted.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Edwarde was put downe / and his dygnyte take from hym.
                     ANd anone after as all this was doone. the quene Iſabell and Edward her ſone and all the grete lordes of Englonde at one aſſente / ſente to kynge Edwarde to the caſtell of Kenylworth / there as he was in kepyng vnder the warde of ſyr Iohan Hachin. that was the byſſhop of Ely. and of ſyr Iohan of Pereye a baron / for bycauſe that he ſhold ordeyne hys parlement at a certayne place in Englond for to redreſſe & amende the ſtate of ye reame. And kynge Edwarde them anſwerde & ſayde Lordes ſayd he ye ſe ful well how it is. Lo here my ſeale / & I gyue to you all my power for to calle and ordeyne a parlement where that ye wyll. ¶And thenne they toke theyr leue of hym & came ayen to the barons of Englōde / And whan they hadde the kynges Patent of this thynge / they ſhewed it to the lordes. And tho was ordeyned / that parlemente ſholde be at weſtmeſtre. at the Vtas of ſaynt Hylary / And all the grete lordes of Englonde lete ordeyned theym there ayenſt that tyme that the parlement ſholde be And at whiche daye ye parlement was the kynge wolde not come there for no maner of thynge / as he had ſete hȳ ſelf & aſſygned. And neuertheles the barons ſent vnto hym oo tyme and other. And he ſwore by goddys ſouie. that he wolde not come there oo fote wherfore it was ordeyned by all the grete lordes of Englonde / that he ſholde no lenger be kynge / but be depeſed And ſayd / that they wolde crowne Edwarde his ſone / the elder / that was ye duke of Guyhenne. And ſent tydynges vnto the kynge there that he was in warde vnder ſyr Iohan Erle of Garen. & ſyr Iohn̄ of Bothun. that was byſſhop of Ely / & ſyr Henry Percy a baron / & ſyr wyllyā Truſell a knyght / that was with ye Erle ſyre Thomas of Lancaſtre 
                           •
                         for to yelde vp there homages vnto hym for all them of Englonde. ¶And ſyr wyllyam truſſell ſayd thyſe wordes. ¶Syr Edwarde for cauſe that he haue trayed your people of Englonde & haue vndone many grete lordes of Englonde without ony cauſe / ye ſhal be depoſyd / & now ye be with ſtand thankyd be god / And alſo for cauſe that ye wolde not come to the parlemēt as ye ordeyned att weſtmeſtre / as in your letter patent is conteyned / for to treate wyth your owne lyege men as a kynge ſholde. And therfore thrughe al ye comyns aſſente / & all the lordes of Englonde / I tell vnto you theſe wordes ▪ ye ſhal
                           •
                        e vnderſtōde ſyr / that ye barons of Englond at one aſſente / wyll that ye be no more kynge of Englonde but vtterly haue put you out of youre ryalte for euer more / And the byſſhop of Ely ſayd tho to the kynge ſyr Edwarde I yelde vp feaute & homage for alle the Archebiſſhops and byſſhops of Englonde & for all the clergy Tho ſayd ſyr Iohan erle of Garenne ſyr Edwarde I yelde vp here vnto you feaute & homage for me and for alle the erles of Englonde. ¶And ſyr Henry Percy yaue vp alſo his homage for hym & for al the barons of Englonde. And tho ſayde ſyr wyllyam Cruſcell / I yelde vp nowe vnto you myn homage for me & alſo for all the knyghtes of Englonde & for all them that holde by ſeryaūtre. or by ony other thynge of you ſo that from thys daye after ye ſhall not be clamyd kynge / nother for kyng be holde for a ſynguler man of all the people. ¶And ſo they wē
                        te thens to London that the lordes of Englonde them abode / and ſyre Edwarde abode in pryſon in good kepynge / And thys was on the daye of the Conuerſyon of ſaynt Poule in the .xx. yere of his regne.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the prophecye of Merlyn declared of kynge Edwarde the ſone of kynge Edwarde the fyrſte.
                     OF this kyng Edwarde prophecyed merlyn & ſayd that there ſholde come a gote

                        
                           •
                        t of Carre that ſholde haue hornes of ſyluer & aberde as white as ſnowe. And a drope ſholde come out of his noſethrylles / yt ſholde betoken moche harme Hungre / & dethe of people & grete loſſe of his londe / And that in the begynnynge of his reyge ſholde be haūted moche lechery. And he ſayd ſothe. alas ye tyme For kynge Edwarde yt was kyng Edwarde ſone was borne att Carnaryuane in walys for ſothe he hornes of ſyluer: & a berde as whyte as ſnowe whan he was made prynce of walys to moche he yaue hym to ryot. and to foly And ſo moche Merlyn in hys prohhecye yt there ſholde come out of his noſe a drope. For in hys tyme was grete hungre amonge the poore people / & ſtrō
                        ge deth amonge the ryche / yt deyed in ſtraunge londe wyth moche ſorowe / & in were in Soctlonde. And after he loſte Scotlonde & Gaſcoyne / and whyle that hymſelfe was kynge there was moche lechery haūtyd. ¶And alſo Merlyn tolde and ſayd that this gote ſhold ſeke the floure of lyf and of deth and he ſayd ſothe. For he ſpowſyd Iſabell the kyngꝭ ſyſter of Fraūce And in his tyme Merlyn ſayd / that there ſholde be made brydges of folke vpon dyches of ye ſee / and that was well ſeen at Bannockyſborne in Scotlonde whan he was dyſcōfyted there of the Scottes / And Merlyn tolde alſo that ſtones ſholde fall from caſtels. and many townes ſholde be made playne. And he ſayd ſothe / For whan that kynge Edwarde was dyſcō
                        fyted in Scotlonde & came tho ſouth warde / ye Scottes beſegyd the caſtels / & dyde them moche harme & brent townes in to the herde erth ¶And after ward Merlyn tolde that an Egle ſholde come of Corne wayle / that ſholde haue feders of golde / yt of pryde ſhold haue no pere & he ſhelde dyſpyſe lordes of blod & after he ſholde dey throgh a beer at Gauerſych & that prophecye was full well knowe & funde ſothe For by the egle vnderſtonde ſyr Pers of ganaſton that tho was erle of Corne wayle yt was a wonder proude man that dyſpyſed ye baronage of Englonde. but after warde he was heeded act Gauerſich thrughe the erle of Lancaſtre and thrugh therle of warwyk. ¶And merlyn tolde / that in his tyme it ſholde ſeme that the beer ſholde brenne & that batayll ſholde be vpon an arme of the ſee in an felde / arayed lyke a ſhelde where ſholde deye many whyte hedes. And he ſayd ſothe. For by the brynnynge of the beer yt betokenyd grete drede thrugh kyttyng of ſwerdes at that bataylle of Myton / for there came the Scottes in manere of a ſ
                           •
                        elde / in maner of a wynge and ſlewe men of relegyon preſtes & ſeculers / wherfore the Scottes callyd that batayll in dyſpyce of the Englyſſmen / the whych batayll. And after Merlyn ſayde the forſayde beer ſholde do the gote moche harme. and that ſholde be vpon the ſouth weſt. & alſo vpon hys blode / And ſayde alſo / that the gote ſholde leſe moche deale of his londe. tyll the tyme ye ſhame ſholde hym ouer come / & them he ſholde clothe hm in a lyons ſkyn̄e ſholde wynne ayen that he had loſt and more thrugh people that ſholde come out of the Northweſt / that ſholde make hym to be a ferde. And hym auenge vppon his enmyes thrugh counſell of two owles / ye fyrſt ſholde be in pa
                           •
                        yll to be vndone. And that tho two owles ſhold go ouer ſee in to ſtraūge lond. And there they ſholde dwelle vnto a certayne tyme. and thenne they ſholde come in to Englonde ayen / And tho owles ſholde doo moche harme vnto many one. And that they ſholde counſell the gote to meue warre ayenſt the forſayd beer. And the gote and the owles. ſholde to an arme of the ſee at Burton trente / & ſholde go ouer / & that for drede the beer ſholde flee with a ſwanne in companye to Bury towarde the. North. thrugh an vnkynde outpulter / and that the ſwanne then̄e ſhall be ſlayne wyth ſorowe / and the beer ſholde be ſlayne ful nyghe his owne neſt. that ſholde ſtonde vppon pounfret / vpon whom the ſonne ſhall ſhede his beemes. And many folke hym ſhalle ſeke for vertue. And he ſayd ſothe. For the good erle Thomas of Lancaſtre was borne in ye Northweſt And coſyn to the kynge. & his vncles ſone. and by lawe he made the kynge leſe moche londe / the whiche he had purchacyd wylfully. tyll at the laſt the kyng toke therof ſhame / & hym ſelf ſlewe with cruelte And after he gate ayen that he had loſt / and moche more thrugh folke that he 
                           •
                        ette aſſēble out of ye Northweſt / tha
                           •
                         made hym to be adradde. And auengyd hym on his barons / thrugh counſell of ſyr Hugh Spenſer the fader / and of ſyr Hugh the ſone that before were outlawed for theyr wyckydneſſe· But afterwarde they came ayen in to Englonde / ſyr

                        
                           •
                        e wer
                           ••
                         vpon Thomas of Lancaſt
                           ••
                        . Soo yt the kynge and the Spenſers & the erle of Arundell and theyr power mette wyth Thomas of Lancaſtre 
                           〈◊〉
                         Burton vpon trente / and hym there dyſcomfyted and ſyr Vmfroy erle of her forde was in his company. And after fledde ye forſayd Thomas and Humfroy with theyr cō
                        pany to burbrugge metinge with ſyr Andrew of Herkela / that is callyd the vnkynde outpulter / and alſo ſyr▪ Symonde warde erle of yorke came and mette with Thomas of Lancaſtre with an huge power / and thē dyſcomfyted & in that ſcomfyture the erle of Herforde was ſlayne vpō the brydge cowardly wyth ſpere in the foundement. and the erle Thomas was take & ladde vnto Poūfret. and tho was heedyd beſyde his owne caſtell. But afterwarde many hym ſought for myracles that god dyde for hym. ¶And in that tyme Merlyn ſayd. for ſorowe and harme ſhold deye a people of his londe / wherfore many londes ſhold be vpon hym the more bolder / and he ſayd ſothe for bycauſe of his barons that were doone to dethe for ſaȳt Thomas quarell of Lancaſtre. peple of many londes became the bolder / for to meue werre vpō the kyng / for theyr blood was torned to many nacyons. And afterwarde Merlyn tolde & ſayd that the forſayd owles ſholde doo moche harme vnto the flour of lyf and deth / and they ſhold brynge her to moche / dyſeſe. So that ſhe ſholde go ouer ſee into Fraunce. for to make peas to the floure delyte. & there ſholde abyde tyll a time her ſede ſholde come and fetche her / and tho they ſholde abyde bothe tyll the tyme that they ſholde clothe them wyth grace / & tho two owles ſhe ſholde ſeke. And put thē to pyteuous deth. And that prophecy was full well knowe. and was full ſothe / for ſyr Hugh Spenſer the fader. and ſyr Hugh the ſone / dyde moche ſorowe & perſecucyon vnto ye quene Iſabel thrugh theyr procurement to her lorde the kynge / So they ordeyned amonge them. that ſhe was wagys. That is to ſaye .xx. ſhelynges in the daye wherfore ye kynge of Fraūce her brother was ſore anoyed. and ſente into Englonde by his letters vnto kynge Edwarde to come vnto hys parlement to Parys in Fraunce. But kynge Edwarde was ſore adradde to come there / for he wende to haue be areſtyd tyll yt he had made amendes for the treſpaſe ye ſyr Hugh Spenſer the fader and the ſone had done and for ye harme that they had done vnto quene Iſabell h
                           ••
                         ſyſter / wherfore thrughe hys ordynaunce and conſente of the. Spenſers. the quene Iſabell went ouer ſee in to Fraunce for to make accorde betwene kynge Edwarde and the kynge of Fraunce her brother. And ther dwellyd ſhe in Fraunce tyll Edwarde her Eldeſt ſone came her for to ſeke / and ſo they dwellyd there both tyll that alyaunce was made bytwene thē and the gentyll erle of Henaude / that yf they wyth ther vertue myght dyſtroye and ouercome the venym and the falſneſſe of the Spenſer / that ſyr Edwarde ſholde ſpowſe dome Phylyp the worſhypfull lady / & the erles doughter of Henaude / wherfore the quene Iſabel and Edwarde her ſone / and ſyr Edwarde of wodſtok the kynges brother of Englonde / and ſyr Iohn̄ of Henaude / and ſyr Roger Mortymer of wygmore / and ſyr Thomas Rocelyn and ſyr Iohan of Cromwell and ſyr wyllyam Truſſell / and many other of the alyaunce of the gentyll erle Thomas of Lancaſtre / that were exyled out of Englonde for his quarel / and were dyſheryted of theyr londes / ordeyned / them a grete power / and arryued at Here with in South folke / And ſoone after they purſewed ye Spenſe
                           •
                        s tyll that they were takē & put pyteuous dethe as before is ſayd. and theyr cōpany alſo for the grete falſnes yt they dyde to kynge Edwarde to his peple. ¶And Merlyn ſayd alſo more that the gote ſholde be put in grete diſtreſſe and in grete anguſſhe and in grte ſorow he ſholde be lede his lyf / and he ſayd ſothe For after the time that kyng Edwarde was take he was put into warde tyll that the Spenſers were put to deth / and alſo bycauſe that he wolde not come vnto his parlement at. London as he had ordeyned and aſſygned hymſelfe vnto hys baronage / and alſo wolde not gouerne. and rule his people / ne his reame as a kynge ſholde doo. Wherfore ſome of the barons of Englonde came and yelde vp ther homages vnto hym / for theym & al the other of the reame. in the daye of the cōuerſyon of ſaynt Poule in the yere of his regne .xx. And they put hym out of hys ryaltee for euermore / And euer lyued afterwarde in moche ſorowe and anguyſſhe.
                     LOdowicus was Emperour after Henry four
                           •
                         yere. this Lodowicus was duke of Banare and he dyſpyſed the coronaciō of ye pope wherfor ye pope hȳ / & moche labour & depoſyd

many perylles he had aft. & he trowbled gretly the vnyte of holy chyrche. And thē was choſyn ayenſt hym Frederyk ye duke of Oſtryche. and he ouer came the duke & abode a rebelyon to hys ende. and in grete peryll to hys ſoule / And at the laſt Karolus was choſyn ayenſt hym / the whiche preuaylled / and ſodenly Lodowic fell downe of his hors and dyſceſſyd. ¶Iohn̄ Mandeuyll a douctour of phyſyk & a knyght borne was in Englonde abowte thys tyme. And he made a merueyllous pylgrymage. For he went almooſt abowte all the worlde And he wrote his dedys in thre langages. and deceſſyd· and was buryed at Saynt Albons. ¶Benedictus the .xxii. was pope after Iohn̄ .vii. yeres and more / thys man was a monke / and in all his ynogthe he was of good conuerſacyon / and a doctour of dyuinite. And whan he was made pope he refourmed thorder of ſaynt Benet in that thynge yt was neſceſſary / & he was a harde man to graunt benefyces / leſt he had graūtyd it to an vncunnynge man / he made a decretall / the whiche began (Benedictus deus in donis ſuis) And he was very cruel in fayth / & for that of ſommen lytyll louyd / he was ſo ſtoute a man that almooſt he wold not knowe his owne coſyns.
                  
                  
                     ¶Anno dm̄ .M.CCC.xxii. ¶Of kynge Edwarde the thyrde after the Conqueſte.
                     ANd after this kyng Edwarde Carnariuan regned ſyr Edwarde of wyndſore his ſone / the whyche was crowned kyng / & anoynted at weſtmeſtre / thrugh coūſell & conſent of all the grete lordes of ye reame. the Sondaye in Candelmaſſe eue. in the yere of grace. M.CCC.xxvi. that was of aege at that tyme but .xv. yere. And for cauſe yt hys fader was in warde in the caſtell of Kenilworth & alſo was put downe of his ryaltee / the reame of Englō
                        de was without kyng from ye feeſt of ſaynt Katheryn from the yere aboue ſayd to the feeſt of Candelmaſſe. And tho were all manere plees of the kynges bynche aſtente. And tho was cō
                        maūded to all the Shyrefs of Englonde thrughe wrytte to warne the partyes to defendaū
                        tys / thrugh ſomnynge ayen. And alſo ferthermore / that all pryſoners yt were in the kynges gayolles / that were attachid thrugh Shyrefs ſholde be lete go quyte. ¶The kynge Edwarde after hys coronacyon / at the prayer / & beſechynge of his lyege of ye reame graūtyd them a chartre of ſtedfaſt peas to all them that wolde it axe / And ſyr Iohnn of Henaude. and hys company toke his leue of the kynge & of the lordes of the reame. & tornyd home to theyr owne coūtre ayen. And eche of them hade full ryche yeftes. euery men as he was of value & eſtate. ¶And tho was Englond in reſt & peas / & grete loue bytwene the kyng & hys lordes. And comynly englyſſhmen ſayd amonges them that the deuyll was dede but the innumerable / treſour of the kyng his fader / & the treſour of the Spenſers / both of the fader & of the ſone / and of the erle of Arundell / and of mayſter Robert Baldok that was the kyngꝭ chaūceler was departyd after the quene Iſabelles ordynaunce & ſyr Roger Mortymers of wygmore / ſo that the kynge hadde noo thynge therof. but at her wyll & her delyuerraūce / ne of theyr lōdes as afterwarde ye ſhall here. ¶How kynge Edwarde wēte vnto ſtāthop for to mete ye ſcottes.
                     ANd yet in the ſame tyme was the Kynge in the caſtell of kenilworth vnder the kepynge of ſyr Henry / yt was erle Thomas of Lancaſtres broder. that tho was erle of Leycetre. And the kynge graūtyd hym ye erldome of Lancaſtre / that ye kyng his fader had ſeaſyd in to his honde & put out Thomas of Lancaſters broder. & ſo was he erle of Lancaſtre & of Leycetre / and alſo Stywarde of Englonde as hys broder was in his tyme But ſyr Edwarde that was kyng Edwardes fader made ſorowe wythout ende / by cauſe he myght not ſpeke wyth hys wyf. ne with his ſone / wherfore he was in moche myſcheyf / For though it was ſo that he was ledde & rulyd by fals counſeyll / yet he was kyng Edward
                           •
                         ſone callyd Edwarde with the longe ſhankys / and came out of the worthyeſt blood of the worlde. and they to whom he was wonte to yeue grete yeftes & large. were moſt pryue with the kyng hys owne ſone / & they were his enmyes bothe nyght & daye / & procured to make debate & contake bytwene hym & hys ſone / & Iſabell his wyf But the frere prechers were to hym gode frēdes euer more & caſt both by nyghte & by daye. how they myghte brynge hym out of pryſon. And amonge theyr company that ye freres had priuely brought / ther was a frere yt was callyd / Dunhened 
                           •
                         and he had ordeyned & gadryd a grete cōpany of folke to kepe att that nede / but ye frere was taken & put in

                        
                           〈◊〉
                         of Pountfret / & there he deyed in pryſon / & ſyr Henry erle of Lancaſtre / that hadde ye kynges fader in kepynge / thrugh cōmaūdemēte of the kynge. delyuered Edwarde ye kynges fader by endēture of ſyr Thomas of Berkelay. And ſo ſyr Iohn̄ Matreuas & they ladde hym from ye caſtell of kenylworth to the caſtell of Berkelay / & kepte hym there ſaufly. ¶And att Eſter next after his coronacyon: the kynge ordeyned a grete huge hoſt / for to fyght ayenſt the Scottes And ſyr Iohn̄ the erles brother of Henaue came from beyonde the ſee / for to helpe kynge Edwarde / & brought wyth hym .vii.C. men of armys & arryued att Douer / & they had leue for to go forth tyll they came to yorke There the kynge them abode / and the Scottes came thether to ye kynge / for to make peas & accorde / but the accordement laſted not bytwene them bat a lytyll tyme And at that tyme ye Englyſſhmen were clothed al in cotes & hodes paynted with letters and with floures ful ſemely with longe berdes & therfore the Scottes made a byl that was faſtenyd vpon ye chyrche doores of Saynt Petyr towarde ſtangate. & thus ſayd ye ſcrypture in dyſpyte of Englyſſhemen Longe berdes hertles / prynted hodes wytles gay cotes graceles / makyth Englōde thryftles
                     SO in the Trinyte daye next after began the contak in the cyte of yorke bytwene the Englyſſhmen & ye Henaudes: & in ye debate were ſlayne of ye erldom of Nicholl & murdred lxxx. men. & after they were buried in ſaynt clementis chyrche in Folgate. & for cauſe that the Henaudes came to helpe the kyng. there peas was 
                           •
                        ryed vpon payne of lyf & lymme. in that other halfe it was founde by an enqueſt of the cytye that the Englyſſhmen began the debate.
                  
                  
                     ¶How the Englyſſhmē ſtoppyd the Scottes in the parke of Stanope and howe they torned ayen into Scotlonde.
                     THys tyme the Scottes had aſſembled all theyr power & came into Englonde & ſlewe & robbyd all yt they myght take & brent & dyſtroyed all the North coūtree thrugh out / tyll that they came vnto the parke of S
                           •
                        āhope in weridale / & there ye Scottes helde theym in a buſſment / but whā ye kyng had harde thorou ſpyes where ye Scottes were anone ryght hoſte deſegyd them within the forſayd parke ſo that ye ſcottes wyſt not where to go out but only vnto ther harmes. And they abode in the parke .xv. dayes / & vytaylles faylled them in euery ſyde. ſo that they were gretly peyred of bodyes & ſyth that Bruce came fyrſt into Brytayne vnto thys tyme / there was neuer ſeen ſo fayre an hoſte / what of Englyſſhmen / & of alyāces & of men of fote / the whyche ordeyned theym for to fyght wyth ye Scottes / thrugh eggynge of ſyr Henry of Lancaſtre & of ſyr Iohan Henaude. yt wolde haue gone ouer the water of wyth for to haue fought with the 
                           •
                         Scottes. But ſyr Roger Mortymer cōſentyd not therto / for he had pryuely taken mede of the Scottes them to helpe that they myght go away into theyr owne coū
                        tre. ¶And this ſame Mortymer counſeylled ſomoche Thomas of brotherton ye erle Marſhall that was kynge Edwardes vncle. that ye forſayd Thomas ſhold not aſſemble at ye tyme vnto the Scottes. And he aſſentyd. but wyſte not the doynge bytwene the Scottes & the forſayd Mortymer / And by cauſe yt he was Marſhall of Englonde / as to hym perteyned euer after warde. he ſent haſtely to the erle of Lancaſtre / & to ſyr Iohn̄ of Henaude / yt they ſholde not fyght with the Scottes / in preiudyce and harmynge of hym & his fee / & yf they dyde that they ſholde ſtonde to theyr owne paryll. And the forſayd erle Marſhall was all arayed with his batayll. att the reredoos of the erle of Lancaſtre / for to haue fought with hym & with his folke yf he had go to fyght wyth the Scottes / & in thys manere he was deceyued & wyſte no thynge of the treaſon And thus was the kyng pryncypally dyſceyued. And whan it was nyghte Mortymer / yt had the watche for to kepe of ye hoſt / that nyght diſtrobled ye watche yt noo thynge myght be done. And in the meane whyle the Scottes ſtele by nyght to ward theyr owne coūtre as faſt as they myght. ¶And ſo was the kyng faſly betrayed that wenyd that alle ye traytours of londe had ben brought to an ende as it was ſayd before. ¶Now here you lordes how tratourſly kyng Edwarde was dyſceyued. & how meruayllouſly. & boldly the ſcottes dyde of werre / For Iames douglas wyth two hūdred men of armys rode thrught out all the hoſt of kyng Edwarde / the ſame nyght the Scottes eſcaped towarde theyr owne coūtree as is aboue ſayd / tyl that they came to ye kyngꝭ pauylyon / & ſlew there many men in theyr beddes / & cryed Naward naward / and nother tyme a Douglas a Douglas wherfore the kyng

that was in hys pauylyon & moche other 
                           ••
                        lke were wonder ſore a frayed / But blyſſyd be almyghty god ye kynge was not taken / & in greto peryll was tho the reame of Englonde. and that nyghte the mone ſhone full clere / and bryghte. And for all the kynges men the Scottes ſcapyd harmeles. ¶And oon the morowe whan the kynge wyſte that the Scottes were eſcapyd in to theyr owne coūtree he was wonder ſory / and fulle hertely wepte wyth hys yonge eyne / and yet wyſte he not who hadde hym doone that treaſon· ¶But that fals treaſone was fulle welle I knowen a good whyle after as the ſtorye makyth mencyon. ¶Tho kynge Edward came ayen vnto yorke full ſorowfull And hys hoſt departyd / and euery man wente in to his owne countree wyth full heuy chere & mornynge ſemblaunt / And the Henaudes toke theyr leue and went in to theyr owne countree. And the kynge for theyr trauayll / hugely rewarde them. ¶And for bycauſe of that vyage / the kynge had dyſpended moche of his treſoure and waſtyd. And in that tyme were ſeen two moones in the fyrmament / ye one was clere / & that other was derke▪ / as men myghte ſee thrugh the worlde. ¶And a grete debate was that ſame tyme agaynſt pope Iohan the .xxii. after ſaynt Petyr. & the emperour of Almayn tho made hym emperour ayenſt ye popys wyll that tho helde hys ſee at Auinyon. werfore the emperour made hys crye at Rome & ordeyned a nother pope / ye hyght Nycholas / yt was a frere Mynor / & that was ayeng the ryght of holy chyrche. wherfore he was curſyd. & the power of that other pope ſoone layed. And for cauſe that ſuche merueylles were ſeen / men ſayde that the worlde was nygh at an ende.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the dethe of kynge Edwarde of Carnaryuan.
                     ANd now go we ayen / to ſyr Edwarde of Carnaryuan yt was kynge Edwardes fader ſomtyme kynge of Englonde. & put downe of hys dygnyte. Alas for his trybulacyon & ſorowe that hym befell thrugh fals counſell. yt he louyd & truſtyd vpon to moche. yt after warde were dyſtroyed thrughe theyr falſneſſe as god wolde. ¶And this Edward of Carnariuan / was in the caſtel of Berkelay vnder ye warde & kepynge of ſyr Moryce of Herkelay / & alſo of ſyr Iohn̄ Matreues & to them he made his complaynte of hys ſorowe & of his dyſeſee. & ofte tymes axyed of his wardeyns. what he had treſpaſſyd ayenſt dame Iſabell hys wyf and ſyr Edwarde his ſone. yt was made newe kyng / that they wolde not vyſyte hym. ¶And tho anſwerde one of hys wardeyns and ſayd. My worthy lord dyſpleyſe you not yt I ſhal telle you the cauſe is for it is doon them to vnderſtonde / that yf my lady youre wyfe came ony thynge nyghe you· that ye wolde her ſtrangle and ſlee / and alſo that ye walde doo to my lorde your ſone in the ſame wyſe. ¶Tho anſwerde he wyth ſymple there Alas alas am not I in pryſon / and all at youre owne wyll / now god yt wote I thought yt neuer / and now I wolde that I were dede / ſoo wolde god that I were. For thenne were alle my ſorowe paſſyd. ¶It was not longe after that ye kynge thrugh counſell of Roger Mortymer / graūtyd the warde & kepynge of ſyr Edward his fader vnto ſyr thomas Toiourſy & to the forſayd ſyr Iohan Matreuers thrugh the kynges letter / & put out holy the forſayd ſyr Moryce of the warde of the kynge. And they toke and ladde the kynge vnto the caſtell of Corf. the whiche caſtell the kynge hatyd as ony dethe. And they kept hym there tylle it came vnto ſaynt / Mathewes daye in Septembre in the yere of grace .M.CCC.xxvii. that the forſayde ſyr Roger Mortymer ſent the maner of the deth / how & in what wyſe ſholde be done to deth. And anone as the forſayd Thomas & Iohan had ſee the letter / & cō
                        maundement / they made kynge edwarde Carnariuan good there: and good ſolace / as they myght at that ſoupere / & nothynge the kynge wyſt of the traytory. And whan tyme was for to go to bed the kynge went to his bedde & laye and ſlepte faſte. And as the kynge laye and ſlepte the trautours fals forſworne ayenſt theyr homage and feaute came pryuely into the kynges chambre / and theyr company wyth them / and layd an huge take vppon his wombe / and wyth men preſſyd / and helde faſte downe the foure corners of the table on hys body / wherwyth the good mane a woke / and was wonder ſore adradde to be deed and there ſlayne / and torned hys body vp tho ſo downe. Tho tooke the fals traytours / and tynauntes an horne. And put it in to hys foundemente as depe as they myghte / and a ſpyt of copre brennynge / and putte it thrughe the horne in to hys bodye

and ſoo they ſlewe theyr lorde / that noo thynge was perceyued / And after he was enteryd atte Gloucetree.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Edward ſpowſyd Phylyp ye erles doughter of Henaude at yorke.
                     ANd after Cryſtmaſſe tho next ſewynge ſyr Iohan of henaude brought with hym Phylyp his brothers doughter / yt was erle of Henaude hys nece in to Englonde / and the kynge ſpowſyd her atte yorke. with moche honour. And ſyr Iohan of Bothum byſſhop of Ely / & ſyr wyllyam of Melton Archebyſſhop of yorke / ſange the maſſe the Sondaye on the euen of the Conuerſyon of ſaynt Poule / In the yere of grace .M.CCC.xxvii. But bycauſe that the kyng was but yonge & tender of aege whan he was crowned full many wornges were doon whyle that his fader lyued / bycauſe that he trowed / the counſerllers that were fals aboute hȳ / that coūſyelled hym to doo other wiſe thā reaſon wold wherfore grete harme was do to ye reame & to ye kynge / & all mē dyrected it the kynges dede / & it was not ſo almyghty god it wote / wherfore it was ordeyned att the kynges crownynge. that ye kynge for his tender aege / ſholde be gouerned by .xii. of the gretteſt lordes of Englonde / wythout whome no thynge ſholde be doon. That is to ſay tharchebyſſhop of Caunterbury / tarchebyſſhop of yorke / the byſſhop of wyncheſtre / and the byſſhop of Herforde / the erle of Lancaſtre / therle Marchall / & the erle of kent / that were ye kynges vncles. & the erle of Garenne / ſyr Thomas wake. Syr Henry Percy. ſyr Olyuer yngham and Iohan Rous barons / all thyſe were ſworne truly for to counſeyll the kynge. And they ſhold anſwer euery yere in parlement / of that that ſhold be done in the tyme of theyr gouernall / but that ordynaunce was ſone vndoon / & that was moche harme to all Englonde / For the kyng & all ye lordes that ſholde gouerne hym were gouerned and rulyd after the quene his moder dame Iſabell. and by ſyr Roger Mortymer: and as they wolde all thynge was done / bothe amonge hygh and lowe. And they toke vnto theym caſtels townes londes / and rentꝭ in grete harme. And loſſe to the crowne. and of the eſtate out of all meſure.
                  
                  
                     ¶Howe the peas was made bytwene the Englyſſhemē and the Scottes and alſo of Iuſtyfyenge of Troyleſbaſton.
                     Kynge Edwarde at wytſontyde in the ſeconde yere of this regne thrughe the coū
                        ſeyll of his moder / & ſyr Roger Mortymer / ordeyned a parlemēt at Northampton. & at that parlement ye kyng thrughe hys coūſell / & none other of ye londe / within aege grauntyd to be accordyd with ye ſcottes in this manere. that all ye f
                           •
                        autees & homages. that ye ſcottes ſholde do to the crowne of Englonde / foryaue theym for euermore / by hys chartre enſealed. And ferder more an endenture was made of the Scottes vnto kynge Edwarde / that was kynge Hēries ſone / whiche endenture they calle it regman. In ye whyche were conteyned all the homages & feautees / Fyrſt of the kyng of Scotlond & of the prelates / erles barons of ye reame of Scotlonde wyth theyr ſeales ſet theron & other chartres & remēbraūcis that kynge Edwarde & his barons had of theyr ryght in ye forſayd reame of Scotlonde / it was foryeue ayen holy chyrche / & alſo with the blake croſſe of Scotlond ye whiche the good kynge Edwarde cōquered in Scotlōde & brought it out of ye abbay of ſcone that is a full precyous relyque / & alſo ferthermore / he relacyd and fully forgaue the londe that the noble barons had before that tȳe in ye ream of Scotlond / by olde conqueſt. And ferthermore yt thys peas for to be holden & cōtynuelly laſt the Scottes were bounde vnto ye kynge in xxx. thouſande poūde of ſyluer to be payed wythin thre yere / that is euery yere .x.M. poūde by euē procyons. ¶And ferthermore aboue all this they ſpake bytwene the partyes aboue ſayd. ye Dauyd Drytonautyer that was kynge Roberte Brus ſone / ye fals tyraunt▪ & fals forſworne ayenſt his othe yt aroſe ayenſt hys leyge lord ye noble & good kynge Edward. and falſly made hym kynge of Scotlonde / yt was of aege .v. yere. And ſo thys curſyd coūſeyll Dauid ſpouſed at Berewyk dame Iohn̄ of ye Toure / that was kynge Edwardes ſyſter / as the geſtes tellyth vpon Mary Mawdeleyns day. in the yere of grace. M.CCC.xxviii. to greate harme & empayrynge of all the kynges blode wherof that gentyll lady came. alas the tyme / For wonder moche ye fayer dāoyſell dyſperagyd / ſyth that ſhe was maryed ayenſt al the comyns wyl and aſſent of Englonde. And frome the tyme that Brute had conquered Albyon· & named the londe after his owne name. Brytayne: that now is callyd Englonde after the name of Engyſt

And ſo the reame of Scotlonde was holde of the reame of Englond / & of ye crowne by feaute & homgae. For Brute conquered that londe & yaue it to Albanak / yt was his ſeconde ſone / And he callyd ye londe Albayn after hys owne name / ſoo that hys heyres yt came after hym. ſhold holde of Brute & of his heyres / yt is to ſay of the kynges of Brytayn / by feaute & homage: And frome that tyme vnto thys tyme of kynge Edwarde / the tame of Scotlond was holde of the reame of Englonde by feaute and ſeruyce / as aboue ys ſayd in the Cronycles of Englonde & of Scotlonde & berythe wytneſſe more playnely. And accurſyd be ye tyme that this parlement was holden at Northampton For there by fals councyll. the kyng was there falſly dyſheryted and yet he was with in aege. ¶And yet whan that kyng Edward was put out of hys ryalte of Englonde yet men put not out of the feautes & ſeruyſe Scotlonde. Ne of the fraunchyſes dyſheryted hym for euer more. ¶And neuertheles the grete lordes of englonde were ayenſt to conferme the peas & the 
                           •
                        rwes aboueſayd / ſa
                           •
                        f only quene Iſabell / yt tho was the kynges moder Edwarde / and the byſſhop of Ely / and the lorde Mortimer. But reaſon and lawe wolde not that a fynalle peas ſholde be made bytwene them without the comyn aſſente of Englonde.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the debate that was bytwene quene Iſabell & ſyr Henry erle of Lancaſtre & of Leycetre / and of the rydynge of Bedforde.
                     THen as the for ſayde Dauyd had ſpowſyd dame Iohan̄e of the toure in ye towne of Berwyk as before is ſayde / The Scottes in dyſpyte of ye Englyſſhmen called dame Iohanne the counteſſe make peas / for the cowardly peas yt tho was ordeyned. But ye kynges perſone bare all the wyte and blame wyth wronge of makynge of the accorde / And alle was done thrugh the quene / & Roger Mortymer. And it was not longe after that the quene Iſabell ne toke in to her hondꝭ all the lordſhyp of Pountfret almoſte all the londes that were of ony value that apperteyned to the crowne of Englonde / Soo the kynge had not to dyſpendede / but of hys vſes and of hys eſcheker / For the quene Iſabell & the Mortymer hadde grete mayne of the retenewe yt folowed ye kynges courte euer more & went and toke the kynges pryces for her peny worthes at good ch
                           •
                        
                        pe / wherfore the countre that they came in were / fullſore addrade / and almooſt dyſtroyed of theym. ¶Tho began the comyna
                           •
                        te of Englonde for to haue enuye to Iſabell the quene. yt ſomoche louyd her before whan ſhe came ayen for to purſue ye fals traytours ye Spenſers fro Fraunce. And in that ſame tyme the fals traytour Roberte of Holonde / that bytrayed hys lorde ſyr Thomas of Lancaſtre. was tho delyuerde and out of pryſon / & was wonder preuy witth the quene Iſabell / & alſo with Roger Mortymer. But that auaylld hym but lytyll For he was taken at Myghelmaſſe yt tho cam nexte after / as he rode to warde quene Iſabell to London / and ſyr Thomas whyther ſmote of his heed beſydes the towne of ſaynt Albons And thys ſyr Thomas dwelled with ſyr Henry erle of Lancaſtre / and he put hym aſyde for drede of the quene / For the quene loued hym wonder moche. And prayed vnto the kyng for hym that ye ſame Thomas might be exyled out of Englonde. And the noble erle ſyr Henry of Lancaſtre had often tymes herde the comyn claymore of ye Enghyſſhmen / of ye dyſeaſe that were doon in Englond / & alſo for dyuers wrō
                        ges that were done to the comyn people. of the whyche the kyng bare the blame with wronge For he was but fulle yonge & tender of aege. & thought as a good man / for to do awaye / & ſlake the ſklaūder of ye kynges perſone / yf that he myght in ony manere a wyſe / ſo as the kynge was therof nothynge gylty / wherfore he was inperyll of lyf & lymme· ¶And ſo he aſſēbled all his retenuwe & wente & ſpake with them of the kynges honoure / and alſo for to amende his eſtate. And ſyr Thomas Brotherton erle of Marchall / and ſyr Edmond wodſtok / that were the kynges vncles / and alſo men of London made theyr othe hym fo. to mayntene in ye ſame quarell. And theyr cauſe was this / that the kynge ſholde holde his houſe and hys meyne / as a kyng ought for to do / and haue all his ryalt
                           •
                        e· And that the quene Iſabell ſholde delyuer out of her hondes in to the kynges honde alle manere of lordſhyps rentys / townes and caſtels that apperteyneth vnto the crowne of Englonde as other quenes haue done here before / and medle with none other thynge. ¶And alſo that ſyr Roger Mortymer ſholde abyde and dwelle vpon his own
                           •
                         londes / For

moche people / In ſo moche that the comyn people were dyſtroyed and gretely domaged / thoroughe ſuche wrongfulle takynge. ¶And alſo the enquere howe and by whome that the kynge was betrayed and falſly dyſceyued att Stanhope / and thrughe whoſe counſeyll that the Scottes went awaye by nyght from the kynge / And alſo how and thrugh whoos counſeyll the ordynaūce that were made at the kynges coronacyon / was put downe. That is to ſaye / that the kynge for amendement and helpynge of his reame / & in honour of hym ſholde be gouerned and rulyd by .xii. of the gretteſt & wyſeſt lordes of the reame / and wythout them Sholde no thynge be grauntyd ne done / as before is ſayd / whiche couenauntes were malicyouſly put downe fro the kynge / where many harmes. ſhamys and repreues haue falle to the kyng & hys reame / and that is to vnderſtonde for aſmoche as Edwarde kynge of Englonde ſome tyme / was ordeyned by aſſent in playne parlement for to be vnder warde & gouernaunce of Henry erle of Lancaſtre his coſyn / for ſaluacyon of hys dody he was take out of the caſtell of Kenilworth / there that he was in warde. & thrugh colour of quene Iſabell / & of the Mortymer without conſent of ony parlement they tooke & ladde hym there that neuer after none of his kynred / myght wyth hym ſpeke ne ſee. & after tratorurſly toke & morored hym for whoſe deth aroſe a ſklaūdre thrugh all cryſtendom whan it was done. And alſo the treſore ye ſyre Edwarde of Kernaruian left in many places in Englonde and in walys was waſtyd & borne awaye / wythout the wyll of kynge Edwarde his ſone / in dyſtruccyō of hym & of al his folke. ¶Alſo thrughe whoſe counſeyll / that ye kynge yaue vp the kyngdom of Scotlond / for the whiche reame / the kynges aūcetours had full ſore traueiled / and ſo dyd many a noble mā for theyr ryght / & was delyuered vnto dauyd that was Robert brus ſone all ye ryght / yt no ryght had to the reame. as all the world it wyſt. And alſo by whom the chartres & remēbraunces yt they had of the ryght Scotlond were take out of the treſory / taken to the Scottes the kynges enmyes / to dyſheritynge of hym and of his ſucceſſours / & to grete harme of hys lyeges / & grete repreef to all Englyſſhemen for euer more. ¶Alſo wherfore dame Iohan of the toure the kynges ſyſter Edward / was dyſperagyd and maryed vnto Dauyd that was Robertbrus ſone. that was a traytour & enmye vnto Englonde. & thrugh whoos counſeyl ſhe was take into our enmyes hondes out of Englonde. ¶And in this meane whyle. ye good erle Henry of Lā
                        caſtre & hys companie toke counſeyl how thoſe poyntes aboue ſayd myght be amended to the worſhyp of the kynge & to hys profyte & to the profyte of his leygꝭ / and the quene Iſabel thrughe coniectynge & alſo of the Mortymers lete ordeyne a parlement at Salyſburye. And at ye ſame parlement / the Mortymer was made erle of Marche ayenſt all the barons wyll of Englonde in preiudyce of ye kyng & of hys crowne And ſyr Iohan of Eltham the kynges brother was gyrde with a ſwerde of Corne waylle. and tho was callyd erle of Corne waylle. & euer more quene Iſabell procuryd ſo moche ayenſt her ſone ye kyng / that ſhe had the warde of ye forſayde ſyr Edward & of his lōdes. And at that parlemente the erle of Lancaſtre wolde not come / But ordeyned all his power ayenſt quene Iſabel and the Mortymer / And men of London ordeyned them with fyue hūdred men of armys. ¶Whan quene Iſabel wiſt of the doynge 
                           〈◊〉
                         ſwore by god and by hys names full angerly / that in an euell tyme he thought vppon tho poyntes / Tho ſente the quene Iſabell & the Mortymer after theyr retenwe & after the kyngys retenewe / ſoo that they had ordeyned amonge them an huge hoſte. And they counſeylled the kynge / ſo that vppon a nyght 
                           •
                         they rode .xxiii. myles to Bedford / there the erle of Lancaſtre was with his company / and thought to haue hym dyſtroyed / and that nyght ſhe rode beſyde the kynge her ſone as a knyght for drede of dethe. And it was done the kyng to vnderſtond / that the erle Henry of Lancaſtre and hys company wolde haue dyſtroyed the kyng and hys counſeylle for euer more / wherfore the kynge was ſomdele to wardes hym heuy and anoye
                           •
                         ¶Whan the erle Marſhall and therle of Kente the kynges brother herde of thys tydynges / they rode ſoo in meſſage bytwene theym / that the kynge grauntyd hym hys peas to therle Henry of Lancaſtre / for a certayne raunſomme of an leuen thouſande pounde / But that was neuer payed afterwarde. And thyſe were the lordes that helde with Syr Henry of Lancaſtre. Syr Beaumont / ſyr Fouk fytz waren ſyr Thomas Rocelyn / Syr wyllyam Truſdr
                           ••
                        
                        
                        
                           •
                        ynghtes moo that were to hym conſented / and alle thoſe were exyled thrughe counſeylle of the quene Iſabell and of Mortymer. For ye Mortymer wayted to haue theyr lōdes yf that he myght thrugh ony maner coniectynge / For he was to coueytous & hadde to moche his wyll and that was grete pyte.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Edwarde went ouer the ſee for to doo his homage vnto the kynge of Fraū
                        ce / for the duchye of Guyhenne.
                     IT was not longe after that the kyng of Fraunce / thrugh counſeyll of hys Donzepers / ſente to kynge Edwarde of Englode that he ſholde come to Parys & do his homage as reaſon it wolde / for the duchye of Guyon / & ſo thrughe coūſell of the lordes of Englonde kynge Edwarde went ouer ſee. And at the Aſcyon tyde / he came vnto Parys / the thyrde yere of his regne / for to do his homage vnto the kyng of fraūce. & the kyng receyued hys homage / & made of hym moche Ioy & worſhyp / but whan kynge Edwarde had done hys homage haſtyly he was ſent for in to Englonde thrugh the quen Iſabell his moder & anone haſtyly he came ayen in to Englonde / vpon wytſonday without ony takynge leue of ye kynge of Fraū
                        ce. wherfore he was wonder wrothe.
                  
                  
                     ¶How ſyr Roger Mortymer bare hym proudely and ſoo hyghe.
                     ANd now ſhall ye here of ſyr roger mortymer of wygmore that deſyred and coueted to be at an hygh aſtate / ſo that the kyng grauntyd hym to be callyd erle of Marche thorughe out all hys lordſhyp. And he became ſoo proude & hauteyn / yt he wolde leſe & forſake the name yt his elders had euer be fore / & for ye cauſe he let hym calle erle of marche. And none of the comnyns of Englonde durſte calle hym by other name / for he was callyd ſo by ye kyngys crye. that men ſhold calle hym erle of Marche And mortymer bare hym ſo hauteyn & ſo proude that wonder it was for to wyte. & alſo dyſguyſed hym with wōnder ryche clothes out of al manere of reaſon / both of ſhapynge and of werynge. wher of the Englyſſhmen had grete wonder / how / and in what manere he myght contryue or fynde ſuche manere pryde. & they ſ
                           •
                        yd amonge them comynly / yt his pryde ſholde not longe endure. ¶And the ſame tyme ſyr Gyffray Mortymer the yonge / that was mortymers ſone. lete calle hym kynge of foly / and ſo it befell after warde in dede / for he was ſoo full of pryde and of wretchydneſſe / that he helde a rounde table in walys / to all men that the der came / and coūterfeted the doynge and the manere of kyng Arthurs table / but openly he fayled / for the noble kynge Arthur was ye mooſt noble lord of renomme / that was in all the worlde in hys tyme & yet came neuer none ſuche after / For all ye noble knyghtes ī all cryſtē
                        dom of dedys of armys aſſayed / dwellyd wyth kynge Arthur / & helde hym for there lorde and ſouerayne / And that was well ſeen / for he conquered in a bataylle a Romayne yt was callyd Froll. And gate of hym the reame of Fraunce and ſlewe hym wyth hys owne hondes / & alſo he faught with a gyaunt that was callyd Dynabus / & ſlewe hym that had rauyſſhed fayre Elayne that was kyng Howels ne
                           •
                        e / kynge of lytyll Brytayn & after he ſlewe in bataylle the Emperour of rome / yt was callyd Lucye / that hadde aſſembled ayenſt Arthur / for to fyghte wyth hym ſo moche people of Romayns and Pebytes & ſaraſyns / that no man cowde nombre them / and he dyſcomfyted them alle as the ſtory tellyth ¶And in that ſame thyme comyn voyce ſpronge in Englond thrugh coniectynge and ordynaunce of the frere prechers / that ſyr Edwarde of Carnariuan / that was kyng Edwardes fader of whome the geſte tellyth / ſayde that he was alyue in the caſtell of Corf / wherof all the comyns of Englonde almooſt were ī ſorowe and drede / whether that it were ſoo or not / For they wiſt not how traytourſly Mortymer had hym done murthred.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Edmonde of wodſtok that was erle of Kente & the kynges brother Edwarde of Carnaryuan / was heedyd at wyncheſtre.
                     ANd vppon a tyme it befell ſoo / that ſyr Edmonde of wodſtok erle of Kent ſpake vnto pope Iohan the .xxii. at Auinion / & ſayde that almyghty god had ofte tymes done for Thomas loue of Lancaſtre many grete myracles to many men and wymmen / yt were thrughe dyuers maladyes vndoone. ¶As vnto the worlde / and thrughe his prayer they were broughte vnto there helthe. and ſoo ſyr Edmonde prayed the pope hertely that he wolde graunt hym grace / the forſayde Thomas myghte be traunſlatyd. But the pope ſayde naye that he ſholde not be traunſlatyd / vnto the tyme that he were better certyfyed of the clergye of Englond

and ſeen by theyr obedyence what thynge god had done for the loue of ſaynt Thomas of Lācaſtre after the ſuggeſtiō that the forſayd erle of Kent hadde vnto hym made And whan this Edmonde ſaw that he myght not ſpede of his purpos: as touchynge the traunſlacion He prayed hȳ of coūſell. as touchynge ſyr Edwarde of Carnariuan hys brother / & ſayd. that not longe agon he was kynge of Englonde / what thynge myghte beſte be done as touchynge his delyueraūce / ſythe yt a comune fame was thrugh Englonde yt he is alyue. hole & ſauf whā ye pope herde hȳ tell yt ſyr Edwarde was alyue. He cōmaūded ye erle vpō his blyſſynge. that he ſholde helpe with all the power that he myght / that he were deliuered out of pryſon / & ſaue his body in all manere that he myght. And to brynge this thynge to an ende he aſſoyled hym & his cōpany a pena et culpa) & all that to his delyueraūce. Tho toke Edmond of wodſtok his leue of ye pope & came ayen into Englōde / & whā ſyr Edmonde was come / ſome of ye frere prechers came & ſayd that ſyr Edwarde his brother yet was alyue in ye caſtell of Corf / vnder ye kepynge of ſyr Thomas Gurnay. tho ſped hȳ the forſayd Edmonde as faſt as he myght / tyll he came to ye caſtel of Corf / & acquaynted hym & ſpake ſo fayre to Iohn̄ Dauerel / that was coneſtable of the ſame caſtell / & yaue hym ryche yeftes for to haue acquayntaunce of hym & to knowe of his coūſell. And thus it befel that the forſayd Edmonde prayed ſpecyally to tel hym pryuely of his lorde his brother ſyr Edward / yf that he lyued or were deed / & yf he were alyue he prayed hym ones to haue a ſyght of hym. And this ſyr Iohn̄ Daueryl was a hygh herted mā & ful of courage / & anſwerde ſhortly to ſyr Edmond & ſayd / that ſyr Edwarde hys brother was in helth. & vnder hys kepynge. & durſt not ſhewe hym vnto no man ſyth it was defended him in the kyngys halfe Edwarde / yt was Edwardes ſone of Carnuariuan & alſo by the cōmaundement of quene Iſabel ye kynges moder / & of ſyr Roger Mortymer / that he ſholde ſhewe hys body to noo mā of the world ſauf only to thē vpō lyf & lym̄e & diſherytynge of his heyres for euer more. But the fals traytour falſly lyed. For he was not in his warde / but was take thēs and lad to the caſtell of Berkeley by ſyr Thomas of gurney by the cōmaūdemente of Mortymer tyll he was dede as before is ſayd / But ſyr Edmonde of wodſtok wyſt no thynge that ſyr edwarde his brother was deed / wherupon he toke a letter vnto kyng Edward his brother as to his worthy lorde & receyued ye letter of hym and behyght hym ryght faythful to do his meſſage without fayll. And with that ſyr Edmonde toke leue of the forſayd Iohn̄ / and yede into his owne coūtre & lordſhyp in kent that he had there. Anone as this ſame Iohan wiſt. that ſyr Edmonde was gone into Kent his owne lordſhyp. anone he went in all ye haſt that he myght fro the Caſtell of Corf & came vnto ſyr Roger Mortymer and toke hym the letter that ſyr Edmond of wodſtok erle of Kent had taken hym cloſyd and enſealed with his owne ſeale / And whan ſyr Roger Mortymer had receyued the letter / he vncloſed it / and ſawe that was conteyned therin / & began it to rede. wherof the begynnynge was this. ¶Worſhyppes and reuerence wyth brother alyegaunce & ſubieccyon / ſyr knyȝt worſhypfull & dere brother 
                           •
                         yf it you pleaſe I praye you hertely that ye be in gode cō
                        forthe / for I ſhall ſoo ordeyn for you yt ye ſhall come out of pryſō & be delyuered of that dyſeſe that ye ben in / and vnderſtondyth of your grete lordſhyp / that I haue to myn aſſentynge all mooſt all the grete lordes of Englonde wyth all theyr apperyll / that is to ſay wyth armour with treſour wythout nombre / for to mayntene your quarell ſo ferforth / that ye ſhall be kynge agayn as ye were before / and that they haue ſworne to me vpon a boke / and aſwell prelates as erles and barons. ¶Whan ſyr Roger Mortymer ſaw & vnderſtode / the myght and the ſtrenth of the letter anone his hert for wrathe began to boll and euyll herte bare to ward ſyr Edmōde of wodſtok that was erle of kent. and wyth all the haſt that he myght / he wente vnto dame Iſabell the quene / that was ye was the kynges moder / & ſhewed her ſyr Edmonds letter / his wyll and his purpoſe and how that he had coniected & ordeyned to put downe kynge Edwarde of wyndſore her ſone. of his ryalte and of his kyngdome / Nowe certes ſyr Roger ſayd ſhe hathe ſyr Edmonde done ſo now by my faders ſoule ſayde ſhe / I wyll be therof auenged / yf that god graunte me lyf / and that in a ſhorte tyme. And with that quene Iſabell wente vnto kynge Edwarde her ſone / there he was att the parlemente at wyncheſtre. to haue

amende the wrongys and the treſpaſſes that were done amonge the people of hys reame / & tho ſhe toke and ſhewed hym the letter that ſyr Edmond of wodſtok had made / and enſealed with hys owne ſeale and badde hym vpon her bleſſynge. that he ſholde be auengyd vpon ſyr edmond as vpon his dedely enmye. Tho was the quene ſore wrothe to warde ſyr Edmonde erle of Kente. And ſeſſyd neuer to praye vntyll her ſone / tyll that he had ſente in all the haſt after hym. And vpon that the kynge ſent by hys letters after ſyr Edmoode of wodſtok / that he ſholde come & ſpeke wyth hym att wyncheſtre all manere thinge left. And whan ſyr edmond ſawe that the kynge ſente after hym wyth hys letters enſealed / ye haſtyd hym in alle yt he myghte tylle that he came to wyncheſtre. ¶But whan the quene wyſt that ſyr Edmonde was come to wyncheſtre tho anone ſhe prayed and ſo faſte wende vnto kynge edwarde her ſone / that the good erle was areſted anone / and ladde vnto the barre before Robert of Hamonde that was Coroner of the kynges houſholde. And he aſſocyed vnto hym ſyr Roger Mortymer. And tho ſpake the for ſayd Roger and ſayde ſyr edmonde erle of Kent / ye ſhall vnderſtō
                        de that it is done vs to wyte / and pryncypally vnto our lyege lorde the kynge edwarde of englonde almyghty god hym ſaue and kepe / that ye be his deedly enmye / and a traytoure / and alſo a comune enmye to the reame and that ye haue ben aboute many a day. For to make pryue delyueraunce of ſyr edwarde ſomtyme kynge of englonde your broder / the whiche ſomtyme was put downe of hys ryaltee by ye comyn aſſent of the lordes of englond / in peaſynge of our lorde the kynges eſtate / and alſo of his reame. ¶Tho anſwerd the good man and ſayd / For ſoth ſyr vnderſtonde well that I was neuer traytoure to my kynge / ne to the reame / & that I doo me on god / and on all the worlde / & therfore by my kynges leue. I ſhalle it preue & defende as a man ought for to do. ¶Tho ſayde Mortymer. ſyr Edmonde. it is ſo ferfor the knowe that it may not be well gaynſayd / and that in preſence of all that here been. it ſhalle be well prouyd. Now had this fals mortymer the ſame letter that ſyr edmonde hadde take to Syr Iohan Daueryll in the caſtell of Corf for to take to kynge edwarde hys brother that ſyr Edmonde wyſt not of ne ſuppoſed no thynge that ſyr Iohn̄ Daueryll had be ſo fals to delyuer his letter in ſuche wyſe vnto Mortymer. And thought no manere of thynge of that letter. Thenne Mortymer ſayd to ſyr edmonde / and ſhewed a letter ſealed. & axed hym yf that he knewe ye letter and ye ſeale. This ſyr edmonde lokyd theron / & auyſed hym longe tyme on the prynte of the ſeale / for he myght not ſee the letter with in. and wyſt well that it was his ſeale / & thought that it had be ſomme letter that had bore no grete charge / & thought no thinge of that other letter. And ſayd openly in herynge of them all / ye for ſoth thys is my ſeale. and I wyll it not for ſake. ¶Lo ſayde the Mortymer / ſyres ye here al what he hath ſayd / & that he knowlegyth hym that this is his letter & hys ſeale. And now ye ſhall here what is conteyned therin / & thenne Mortymer openyd the letter that he had folde tofore togyder. & redde it openly worde by worde in herynge of theym all / & whan the letter was redde / he ſayd / Loo ſyres ye haue herde alle ye herin is wrytē / and that he hath knowlegyth that this is his letter & his ſeale. & he may not go therfro / And thenne they cryed & yaue dome / that he ſholde be hangyd & drawen / & hys heed ſmyten of in a manere of a traytour & he & hys heyres dyſheryted for euer more / & ſo he was ladde forth and put in to pryſon. and whan this was done. & the quene wiſt that he was dampned by way of lawe / both of lyf and of lym̄e / & hys heyres dyſheryted for euermore. thrugh open knowlegynge in playncourt / where them thought that it were good / that the forſayd ſyr Edmond were haſtyly ſlayne / wythout wyttynge of the kyng / or elles the kynge wolde lyghtly foryeue hym hys dethe / & thenne it ſhode torne theym ſo moche ſorowe / ſo as he was empechyd / And anone the quene thrugh counſeyll of the Mortymer / and wyth out ony other counſell ſent in haſt to the Baylyfe of wyncheſtre that they ſholde ſmyte of Syr Edmondes heed Erle of Kente wythout ony manere abydynge or reſpyte vpon payne of lyf and lymme. And that he ſholde haue none other execuſyon / By cauſe of caryenge not withſtandynge the Iugement. Tho toke the Baylyes ſyr edmonde out of pryſon / and ladde hym beſyde the caſtell of wyncheſtre / & there they made a gonfermer ſmyte of hys heed / for none other durſte it doo / and ſoo he deyed there / alas the whyle. That is to ſay the tenth

daye of Octobre / the thyrde yere of kynge Edwarde regne. ¶And whan the kyng wiſt therof / he was wonder ſory / and lete entyere hym at the frere Mynors at wyncheſtre.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the deth of ſyr Roger Mortymer Erle of Marche.
                     ANd ſo it befell at that tyme that ſyr Roger Mortymer erle of ye Marche / was ſo proude and ſo hauteyne that he helde no lorde of the reame his pere. And tho became he ſo coueytous / that he folowed dame Iſabell the quenes courte that was kynge Edwards moder and beſet hys peny worth with the offycers of the quenes houſe holde in the ſame manere that the kynges offycers dyde. And ſo he made his takynge / as touchynge of vytayle and alſo of caryages / and all he dyde for bycauſe of expencys / and to gadre treſoure / And ſo he dyde without nombre in all that he myght. ¶Tho had he made hym wonder preuy wyth the quene Iſabell / And ſo moche lordſhyppe and rete we had / that all the grete lordes of Englonde of hym were adrad wherfore the kyng and his counſeylle / to warde hym were agreued / And ordeyned amonge them to vndo hym thoroughe pure reaſon and lawe for cauſe that kynge Edwarde that was ye kȳges fader traytourſly thrugh hym was murdred in the caſtel of Corf as before is ſayde more playnly in ſome parte of his boke / of his deth. ¶And ſome that were of the kynges counſeyll louyd Mortymer / & tolde hym in preuyte / how that ye kynge & counſel were aboute from daye to daye / hym for to dyſtroye and vndo wherfore Mortymer was ſore anoyed & angry as the deuyll ayenſt them of the kynges counſeyll / & ſay he wolde of them be auenged / how ſo euer he toke on. ¶It was not longe afterwarde / that kynge Edward & dame Phylyp his wyf / & dame Iſabell the kynges moder. and ſyr Roger Mortymer / ne wente vnto Notyngham there for to ſoiurne / And ſo it befell that quene Iſabel thrugh coūſeyll of Mortymer / toke to her the keyes of the yates of the caſtell of Notyngham. So that no man myght come nother in ne out but thrugh commaundement of Mortymer / ne the kynge / ne none his coūſeylle. ¶And that tyme it fel. that the Mortymer as a deuyll for wrath bolled / & alſo for wrathe that he had ayenſt the kynges men Edward / and pryncypally ayenſt theym that had hym accuſyd to the kynge / of the deth of ſyr Edwarde his fader. ¶And pryuely a coū
                        ſeyll was take bytwene quene Iſabell and the Mortymer and the byſſhop of Lyncoln & ſyre Symōde of Bedford / and ſyr Hugh of Trompyngton / & other preuy of theyr counſeyll / for to vndo theym all that the Mortymer had accuſyd vnto the kynge of his faders deth / of treaſon & of felonye. ¶Wherfore all tho that were of the kynges coūſeyll / whan they wiſt of the Mortymers caſtynge: pryuely came to kynge Edwarde and ſayd / that Mortymer wold theym dyſtroye / bycauſe that they had hym accuſyd of kynge Edwardes dethe. his fader \ And prayed hym that he wolde mayntene them in theyr ryght. ¶And thyſe were the lordes that purſued this quarell / Syr wyllyam of Mountagu / ſyr wyllyam de Bohum / Syr wyllyam his broder / ſyr Rauf Stafforde / ſyr Robert of Herforde / ſyr wyllyam of Clynton / ſyr Iohan Neuell of Hornby and many other of theyr cō
                        ſent. And all thyſe ſwore vpon a boke to mayntene the quarell / in as moche as they myghte. And it befell ſo after· that ſyr wyllyam Mountagu ne none of the kynges frendes muſte not be herberowed in the caſtell for the Mortyme
                           •
                         but went and toke theyr herberowe in dyuerſe place of the twone of Nothyngham. And tho were they ſore a ferde / leeſt that mortymer ſholde theym dyſtroye. And in haſte they came vnto kyng Edward ſyr wyllyam of Mauntagu and other that were in the caſtell. And pryuely hym tolde / that he ne none of hys cōpany. ſholde not take the Mortymer. without counſeyll & helpe of wyllyam of Elande. conſtable of the ſame caſtell. ¶Now truelye ſayd the kynge I loue you well· & therfore I counſeyl you that ye go to the forſayd coneſtable / & commaūde hym in my name / that he be your frende and youre helpe / for to take the mortymer / al thynge yleft vpon peryll of lyf & lym̄e. ¶Tho ſayd Mountagu Syr my lorde graunt mercy ¶Tho wente forthe the forſayd Mountagu / and came to the Coneſtable of the caſtell / and tolde hym the kynges wyll. ¶And he anſwerde and ſayde· The kynges wyll ſholde be doone in as moche as he myghte. and that he wolde not ſpare for no manere of dethe / And that he ſwore and made his othe. ¶Tho ſayde ſyr wyllyam of Moū
                        tagu to the conſtable / in herynge of them alle. that were helpynge to the ſame quarell. Now certes dere frende / vs behouyth to werke & do

by your aduys for to take the Mortymer / ſyth that ye be keper of the caſtell. and hath the keyes in your warde. ¶Syr ſayd the Conſtable / wyll ye vnderſtonde / that the caſtell yates ben lockyd with the keyes that dame Iſabell ſent hyther. and by nyght ſhe hath the keyes ther of and layeth them vnder the lurſell of the bedde vnto the morowe. and ſo ye maye not come in to the caſtell by the yates / by no manere of wyſe / But I knowe an aleye that ſtretchythoute of the warde vnder the erthe in to the for ſayde caſtell / that gothe in to the weſte. whiche aleye dame Iſabel the quene / ne none of her men ne the Mortymer / ne none of his company knowith it not. And ſo I ſhall lede you thrugh ye aley / & ſo ye ſhall come in to the caſtell withoute aſpyenge of ony man yt are your enmyes. And the ſame nyghe ſyr wyllyam Mountagu / & all the lordes of his quarell / & the ſame Conſtable alſo went theym to hors / & made ſemblaūt as it were for to go out of Mortymers ſyght But anone as Mortymer harde thys tydynges / he wende yt they wolde haue gone ouer ſee for fere of hym. ¶And anone ryght he & his cōpanye toke a coūſeyll amonge theym for to lete theyr paſſage / & ſnetelletters anone to the porters ſo that none of the grete lordes ſholde go home to theyr owned coūtrees / but yf they were areſted & take. And amonge other thynges wyllyam Elande Coneſtable of the for ſayd caſtell. pryuely ladde ſyre wyllyam of Mountagu & hys company by the for ſayd waye vnder the erth / tyll they came in to the caſtell & went vp in to the toure that Mortymer was in. But ſyr Hughe of Trompynton theym aſcryed hydouſly and ſayd a traytours it is all for nought. that ye ben comyn in to this caſtell ye ſhall deye yet an euell dethe euerychone. And anone one of theim that was in Mountages company vp wyth a mace / and ſmote the ſame Hugh vpon the heed / that the brayne braſte out and fell on the grounde / and ſoo was he deed of an euyll deth. ¶Tho toke they mortymer as he armyd hym at the toures dore / whan he herde the noyſe of theym for drede. ¶And whan the quene Iſablell ſawe that the Mortymer was taken ſhe made moche ſorowe in herte / & thyſe wordes vnto theym ſhe ſayd / Now fayre ſyres / I praye you that ye doo noo harme to his body a thy knyght our welbeloued frende and our dere coſyn. ¶Tho wente they thens / and came and brought Mortymer / and preſentyd hym vnto kynge Edwarde / & he commaunded to brynge hym in ſaue warde. ¶But anone as they that were conſentynge vnto mortymers doynge / herde tell that he was taken they wente & hydde them / and pryuely by nyght wente out of the towne eche one his waye / with heuy herte and mornynge chere & lyued vpon theyr londes as well as they myghte. ¶And that ſame yere that Mortymer was take. He hadde .ix. ſcore knyghtes without quyres and ſergaū
                        tes of armys / & fote men / And then̄e was mortymer ladde to London / and ſyr Edmonde of Bedforde was ladde wyth hym / and was taken to ye conſtable of the toure to kepe. ¶But after warde was the Mortymers lyfe examyned at weſtmeſtre before the kynge / and before all the geate lordes of Englonde / for peryll that myght falle to the reame / And to enquer
                           •
                         alſo whiche were conſentynge to ſyr Edwardes dethe the kynges fader / & alſo thrugh whome the Scottes eſcaped fro Stanhope in ſcotlonde / without leue of kynge Edwarde. And alſo how ye chartre of ragman was delyuered vnto the Scottes them the homages and feautees of the lordes of Scotlōde were conteyned that the Scottes ſholde doo euer more to the Englyſſhe kynge for the reame of Scotlond / wherfore he was Iugyd to be drawen and hangyd for his treaſon / And this myſcheyf came vnto hym on ſaynt Andrewes euen. In the yere of the Incarnacyon of our lorde Iheſu cryſte .M.CCC.xxx.
                  
                  
                     ¶Howe kynge Edwarde gate ayen vnto hym gracyouſly the homages and feautees of Scotlonde / wherof he was put oute thrughe ye falſe counſeyll of the quene Iſabell his moder & ſyre Roger Mortymer. that was newely made Erle of Matche.
                     NOw haue ye herde how Iohan Bayllol in the tyme of peas was choſen to be kynge of Scotlonde for cauſe that he came of the eldeſt doughter of the Erle Dauyd of Huntyngton / that was kynge Alyſanders broder of Scotlond / that deyed without heyre of hys body begoten / And how this Iohan made his feaute and homage to kynge Edwarde / Henryes ſone the thyrde. for his londes of Scotlonde / And how he afterwarde with ſayd hys homage / thrugh counſeyll of the Scottes / in the yere of our lorde ·M.CC.lxxiiii. and ſente vnto

the pope thrugh. a fals ſuggeſtyō that he made hys othe vnto the forſayd kynge Edwarde ouer hys eſtate and his wil / of the whyche othe the pope hym aſſoyled thrughe hys bullys to hym yſent. ¶And anone as kynge Edwarde wyſt therof / he ordeyne anone hys barons and came vnto Berwyk / and cōquered the towne. at the whyche conqueſt there were ſlayne .xxv. thouſande & .vii. hundred. & Bayllol that was kyng of Scotlond came & yeldyd hym to gode kynge Edwarde / & ye kyng delyuered hym out of the toure of London. and all the grete lordes with hym yt tho were taken at Berwyk & yaue theym ſaufconduyte / to goo into Scotlonde. And the Scottes ſythe thrugh theyr falſneſſe / warred vpon the good kynge Edwarde. And whan ſyr Iohan Bayloll kynge of Scotlonde ſawe all this / he wente ouer ſee vnto Dunpier and lyued there vpon hys londes as well as he myght. tyll that ye Scottes wolde amende theym of theyr myſdedys and treſpaas / and ladde with hym ſyr Edwarde his ſone. wherfore the Scottes in dyſpyte of hym callyd hym ſyr Iohan Turnlabard / for bycauſe that he wolde not ne offend ne treſpaas ayenſt the good kynge Edwarde of Englonde. And ſoo he for ſoke hys reame of Scotlonde / and ſette therof but lytyll pryce. And this ſyr Iohan dwellyd longe tyme in Fraunce / tyll that he deyed there & ſyr Edward his ſone receyued hys herytage / and dyde homage to the kynge of Fraunce / for his londes of Dunpier / And ſo it befell afterwarde / that Edward that was Iohan Bayllols ſone / had with hym a ſquyre of Englond yt was in yorke ſhyre / that was callyd Iohan of Barnaby / and this Edwarde Bayllol louyd hym moche / and was nyghe hym / & full preuy. And ſo this Iohn̄ of Barnaby was in debate with a Frenche man in the towne of Dunpier / & ſo he ſlewe hym and wente hys way in all the haſte that he myghte in to the caſtell. For to haue ſocoure and helpe of hys lorde. And anone came offycers of the towne. to take Iohn̄ of Barnaby as a felon. and ſyr Edward his lorde holpe hym / and reſcowed hym / and by nyght made hym go out of the caſtell / and ſo he went hys waye and came in to Englonde withoute ony harme. ¶And whan the kyng of fraunce ſaw that ſyr Edwarde had reſcowed his felon. He became wonder wrothe ayenſt ſyr Edward. & anone lete hym areſtyd and toke into hys hondes all his londes. Tho dwellyd ſyr 
                           •
                         Edward in pryſon / vnto the tyme that ſyr Henry of Beaumount came into fraunce / the whiche Henry ſomtyme was erle of Anguyſſhe in Scotlonde and was put out therof whan chacordement was bytwene Englonde and Scotlond thrugh the quene Iſabell and ſyr Roger Mortymer and theyr company for ye moryage that ſhe made bytwene Dauyd / that was Roberte Brus ſone and dame Iohanne of Tour kynge Edwards ſyſter of Englond / & well vnderſtonde thys / that att the ende he ſholde come to his ryght / but yf it were ſyre Edwarde Baylloll / that was ryght heyre of the reame of Scotlonde. ¶And the kyng of fraunce Lowys louyd moche this ſyr Henry. And he was wyth hym full preuy / and thought for to make a delyueraunce of ſyr Edward Baylloll / yf he myghte in ony maner of wyſe. ¶Tho prayed he the kynge that he wolde of his grace gaūt hym ſyre Edwarde Bayllols body / vnto the nexte parlement. that he myght lyue with hys owne rentes in the meane tyme / and that he myghte ſtonde to be Iugyd with his perys att the parlement. And the kynge grauntyd hym his prayer / and made the forſayde Edwarde to be delyuered out of pryſon / in the manere aboue ſayd And anone as he was out of pryſon ſyr Henry toke hym forth with hym & ladde hym in to englonde / and made hym dwelle pryuely att the manere of Sandhall vpon Ouſe in yorke ſhyre with the lady Veſcy. And ſoo he ordeyned hym there an huge retenewe of Englyſſhmen and alſo of alyuntes / for to conquere ayen his herytage / and ſo he yaue moche ſyluer vnto ye ſouldyours and alyauntes for to helpe hym 
                           •
                         And they behyght for to helpe hym in that they myght / but they faylled hym att hys mooſt nede. ¶And at that tyme Dauyd erle of Moryf herde tell how that ſyr Edward Bayloll was pryuely come into englond. And came to hym and made wyth hym gerte Ioye of his comynge and ſayd vnto hym and behyght hym that all the greate lordes of Englonde / ſholde be to hym entendaunte / & ſholde hym holde for kynge as ryght heyre of Scotlōde / and dyd to hym feaute· ¶Tho came ſyr Henry of Beaumonte to kynge edwarde of Englonde. And prayed hym in the waye of charyte / that he wolde graunt of his greate vnto ſyr Edwarde Baylloll that he myghte ſau
                           •
                        ly goo by londe frome

Sandhall / vnto Scotlonde / to conquere hys ryght & herytaunce in Scotlond. ¶The kynge anſwerde & ſayde / yf that I ſuffre Bayllol. go thrugh my londe in to Scotlonde. thenne the people wolde ſaye / yt I ſhold be aſſentynge vnto the company. ¶Now ſyr I praye you yt ye wolde yeue hym leue to take with hym ſouldyours of Englyſſhmen that they myght ſaufly lede hym thrugh your londe to Scotlonde / And ſyr vpno thys couenaunte that yf it ſo befall / as god it for bydde that he dyſcomfyted in bytayll thrugh the Scottes / that I and alſo al the lordes that holde with Bayllol / ben for euer more out of our rentes that we haue in englonde. And there the kynge vppon this couenaunte / grauntyd theyr bone / as towchynge hym / and tho that were of the ſame quarell the whiche claymed for to haue londes and rentes in the reame of Englonde And thyſe were the names of tho lordes that purſued this for ſayd matere and quarell. ¶That is to ſaye / ſyr Edwarde Bayllol / the whiche chalengyd the reame of Scotlonde. ſyr Henry Beaumonte erle of Anguſſhe / ſyr Dauyd of Stroboly erle of a theles / ſyr Geffray of Mombraye / walter Comyn and many other that were put out of theyr herytage in Sctlonde whan the peas was made bytwene Englonde and Scotlonde as before is ſayde / And ye ſhall vnderſtonde that thyſe lordes tooke with theym fyue houndred men of armes. and two thouſande Archers & of fote men. and tho wente in to ſhyppe at Rauen. pore / & ſayled by the ſee / tylle that they came vnto Scotlond. and came to londe at Kynkehorne .xii. myle fro ſaynt Iohannes towne / And anone ſent out there ſhyppes agayne / for that they ſhold not be hurte / ne empeyred / neyther taht no man ſholde go in to the ſhyppes agayne thoughe that they had nede / but abybe all perylles and not flee but ſtonde / and rather ſuffre deth than flee for to mayntene their true quarell. whan the erle of Fyffe. a fyers man & a ſterne / harde that Bayllol was come / for to taſte the londe of Scotlond / he came in haſt to Kynke horne / with ·iii. thouſand Scottes / for to dyſtroye hym / that he ſhold not come to londe / But ſyr Edwarde Bayllol and his company there hym dyſcomfyted / at the whiche dyſcomfyture ſyr Alyſāder Seton was there ſlayne / & many other. The Erle of Fyffe / was th
                           •
                         ſore and full euyll aſhamyd / that ſo lytyll a cō
                        pany had hym dyſcomfyted / and ſhamefully put hym and all his company that were alyue for to flee. ¶Tho came ſyr Edwarde Bayllol and toke the coō tree all aboute hym. tyll he came vnto the abbay of Dūfermlin. and ther he founde vytaylles for hym and for his folke / & amonge all other thynge he founde in a chambre aboute fyue houndred of grete ſtaues of 
                           •
                         fyne oke with longe prykes of yren. and of ſtele And he toke them & delyuerd them to the moſte ſtrōgeſt men of his companye. And anone after he yede fro thens. And lodged hym in a felde .ii. myles from ſaynt Iohānes towne. And whan the burgeys of the towne herde how the erle of Fyffe was dyſcomfyted thrughe Baylloll. brake ye brydges that they had made ouer the water of Erne. ſo that Bayllol myght not go ouer / wherfore he lodged hym there all that nyght / but lytyll hede he toke of reſte. and ſayde vnto his people / Now dere lordes ye know full well. that ben now lodged bytwene our enmyes / and they maye vs hampre / there is noo bote but dethe. wherfore yf we abyde ſtylle all this nyght· I wene it ſhall torne vs to moche harme. For the power of Scotlonde may euery wexe and encrece and we maye not ſo doo. And we ben but lytylle people ayenſte theym wherfore I praye you for the loue of almyghty god make we vs bolde and hardy and that we may myghtely take the Scottes this nyght / & boldly werre vpon theym. and lete vs purſue theym thys nyghte. And yf they be trauaylled thorugh vs. & ſee our hardyneſſe. other Scottes that ſee them ſo traueylled and wery· the ſorer woll they be adradde with vs to fyght and fyerſly thenne ſhall we fyght with them. And on them purſue. Soo that thrughe the grace of god / all the worlde ſhall ſpeke of the doughtynes of our chyualry. ¶And ſyres vnderſtondeth wel that all the companye that came with ſyr Robert Baylloll / graunted well vnto that counſeyll / and were therof ryght gladde. and anone purſued vppon the Scottes. that they became wonder wery. And Baylloll & his company ſore folowed them / and dyde them moche harme and ſorowe / thrugh ther aſſente. ſo that thy myght not for feblyneſſe theym helpe and for lytyl people. ¶But tho ſayd the Scottes amonge them / what is nowe befall that ſo lytyll a people as Baylloll hath in wynge doth vs ſo moche traueyll and ſorowe Now certes

it ſemyth vs that he werketh by grace / for he is wonder gracyous in hys quarell and we certes ſhall be dede or that we maye come to hym vs for to yelde Sith that his fader ſete of vs no pryce. ¶And amonge alle hys other thynges Baylloll and his people paſſed the water of Erne ſo that Robert Swynerton the ſone was fyers and angrye / and wente forthe and they ſawe people of armys full well arayed. and forth they wente vnto them and wyth them faught And ſlewe and toke as many as wolde abyde: And neuertheles at that aſſewte they wende it had be the grete hoſte of Scotlond. And whan it came to the morowe. they gadred theym togyder / and reſtyd theym a whyle· ¶And whyle the Englyſſhemen reſted them / the noble baron Thomas Veſcy / and the noble barō / Stafforde / pryckyd theyr hors vp and downe by the hylles / for to kepe the eſtrees of the countree / & as they pryckyd vp and downe. they ſaw a grete hoſt of gode araye ordeyned in theyr wynge with helmes and ſheldes ſhynynge comynge vpon them. and then̄e came tho two barōs ayen vnto Bayllols folke / & ſayd. Now for the loue of god almyghty be of good cōforth for ye ſhall haue batayll an one ryght. ¶And tho ſpake ſyr fouk the ſone of Garenne· a baran of greate renowne and of dedys of armys / Syres vnderſtonde what I wyll ſaye / I haue ſeen many dyuers wynges / as well amonge ſaraſyns and Iewes / as amonge the Scottes / and yet ſawe I neuer the fourthe parte of the wynge fyght. & therfore yf ye wyl abyde our enmyes / we ben ynough for them. but yf we be not of gode herte and of good courage we been but loſte. And therfore for the loue of god. take to vs gode herte / and lette vs be bolde / ad thynke we neuer of our wyues ne of oure chyldren / but only to cō
                        quere our enmyes in batayll. ¶And thrugh the helpe of our lorde we ſhall them ouercome And wyth that came the hoſte of the Scottes to warde theym full ſerely / and ayenſt ſyr Edwarde Baylloll in thre bataylles well arayed in armoure. ¶And wonder fyerſly they came to warde the Bayllols company / But whan ſyr Donald erle of Marcell that was with the Scottes / ſawe all this / he ſayd vnto Roberte Brus the ſone of Robert the Brus thyſe wordes / Syr Robert ſayd he full fore me for thynkyth att my herte / that thyſe people that Baylloll hathe brought wyth hym ſholde deye wyth dy
                           •
                        te of Scottes ſwerdes / ſythe that they ben cryſten men as we ben. And therfore me thynkyth that it were grete charyte for to ſende vnto theym / for to yelde theym / vnto our mercy / and raunſomme theym vnto greuous raunſomme / for as moche as they haue taken oure londes and done yll. Now certes ſayd ſyr Roberte the Brus / I haue well rerceyued / that thou arte an enmye and a traytour vnto Scotlonde / ſythe that thou wylte conſente to ſaue our dedely enmyes / that haue done vs moche ſorowe and ſhame & now it ſemyth wel that ye be of theyr aſſente Now certes Robert ſayde ſyr donald / falſly ye lye. I am not of theyr company ne of theyr conſent / & yt haſtyly ye ſhall ſe for I wyll fyz
                           •
                        e wyth them rather than ony of thys company / & certes ſyr Robert ſayd he I ſhall in mauger of thy hede aſſayll they or thou And wyth yt they pryckyd theyr ſtedys fye
                           •
                        ſly vpon Gaſkemore. and theyr wynge theym folowed on a reng. & tho came they & mette wyth Baylloll & hys cōpany at an hangynge bough of the more ī a ſtrayte paſſage & ſo faſt they haſtyd thē vnto ye Englyſſhmen ye thouſand / felle vnto the grounde echone ouer vpon other into an hepe hors and man bayllol & his men myghtyly ſtode ayenſt theym / & faſt ſlewe the Scottes to the grounde / and many they wounded / ſoo longe / tyll that they ſtode vpon theym and foyned theym wyth theyr ſwerdes and ſperes thrughe theyr bodyes / and fulle ſore they were trauaylled vppon theym / tylle that they became wonder wery / and wyſte not what for too doo. And the Scottes that were lete alyue fledde awaye / for to ſaue them ſelfe in the beſte manere that they myght. And tho purſued theym ſyre Edwarde baylloll and hys men / and ſlewe of theym tyll it was nyght. And fro thēs they wente to Saynt Iohannes towne / and toke it. & helde them there and vytaylled them ſelf at there owne wyll / for they foūde ynough wherwith to make mery. Tho made Baylloll his men yt were wonded goo to ſhyp / to ſayll in to Englonde / to hele ther woundes. & in ye tyme there was a flēmynge in the ſee. a ſtonge theyf And a robber that was callyd crab & this flēmī
                        ge was dryuen out of Flaundres for hys wyckydneſſe & therfore he came into Scotlond to holde with the ſcottes / & dyde as moche harme to the Englyſſhmen as he myght do. And thys Crabbe mette Bayllols men in ye ſee that were

woūded before in batayll yt were ſent ayen into Englonde. for to hele theyr woundes. and this crabbe yaaf to theym a gete aſſawte. and wold haue ſlayne theym euery chone. But the Englyſſhmen defended them well & manly & dyſcomfyte Crabbe & his company & tho gan he fle into Scotlond. ¶And as he cam towarde ſaynt Iohānes towne / he foūde a grete conpany of ſcottes / yt were come ayen togyder after the dyſcomfyture at Gaſkemore. the whyche byſeyged Bayllol and hys men ī the ſame towne of ſaynt Iohan· And anone tolde tolde the Scottes how that he was dyſcomfyted of the Englyſſhmen / yt were woundyd at Gaſkemore / that went towarde Englonde / forts hele theyr woundes / And ſayd to the Scottes / yt they ſholde haue nother power ne myghte ne grace ayenſt Edwarde Bayllol / by cauſe that he ſcomfyted / & empeyred alle the chyualry of Scotlond with a handfall of men as to 
                           •
                        ōpte ayenſt the Scottes that were ſlayne. wherfore he coūſeylled to remeue the ſege from ſaynt Iohannes towne / & kepe theym in the beſt manere that they myght. ¶The Scottes vnderſtode that crabbe ſayd ſothe / for ſoke the ſege and wente thens by nyghte. ¶whan thys thynge was knowe thrughe Scotlonde how that the lordes & knyghtes were dyſcomfyted at Gaſkemore of Scotlonde thrughe ſyre Edwarde Bayllol / ye ſhall vnderſtonde yt the lordes & ladyes / & the gentyls of Scotlond came wonder faſte to ſaynt Iohannes towne / & yeldyd theym vnto Bayllol. & to hym dyd homage & feaute for theyr ſondes & yelde theym to his peas & he theym receyued frely / And fro thens he wē
                        te to the abbay of Scone. & there he was crowned kyng of Scotlond / & after he lete crye hys peas thrughe out all the londe. ¶And at that ſame tyme it befell that kynge Edwarde helde his parlement amonge hys leyges at the newe caſtell vpon Tyne for to amende the treſpaces and the wronges that had ben done in his londe. And ſyr Edwarde Bayllol kynge of Scotlonde came to hym thyther / and dyde to hym homage & feautee / for the reame of Scotlond And in thys maner kynge Edwarde of Englonde gadred ayen hys homages & feautees of Scotlonde / wher of he was put out / thrughe counſeyll and aſſent of dame Iſabell hys moder / and of ſyr Roger Mortymer erle of Marche / Tho toke Bayllol kyng of Scotlond hys leue of kynge Edwarde of Englonde / & went thens in to his owne londe of Scotlonde & ſet but lytyll by ſuche as had counſeylled hym / & holpen hym in hys quarel / wherfore they wente from hym & went & lyued by theyr owne londes and renttes in Scotlond. ¶And ſo it befel after warde not longe / that that the kynge of Scotlonde ne remeued & came to the toure of Anande & there tooke hys dwellynge / and thyder came to hym a company of knyghtes ſtronge men & worthy / & yelded them vnto the kynge. And bare theym ſo fayr in dede and in coū
                        tenaūce / ſo that he truſtyd moche vpon theym And anone as the traytours ſawe that he truſtyd moche vpon theym / they ordened amonge theym fyfty in a company / and wolde haue ſlayne theyr lorde the kynge / But thrugh the grace of almyghty god / he brake thrugh a walle an hole in his chambre / & as god wolde ſcapyd theyr trechery / & all hys men were ſlayne / and he eſcaped with moche dred vnto the towne of Cardoyll / And there he helde hym ſore anoyed. And this befell vpon our ladyes euen ye cōcepcyon. ¶Tho ſent kynge Edward Baylloll to kynge Edwarde of. Englonde / how falſly and tratourſly he was in lytyll tyme / put to ſhame & ſorowe thrughe his lyege men / vppon whom he truſtyd wonder moche. And prayed hym for ye loue of god that he wolde mayntene hym & helpe hym ayenſt hys enmyes. the kynge of englond had of hym grete pyte / & behight to helpe hym & ſocour hym. and ſēt hym worde that he ſhold hold hym in peas ſtyll in ye forſayde cyte of Cardoyll / tyll yt he had gadred his power. ¶Tho ordeyned kyng Edwarde of Englonde a counſeyll at London / & lete gadre his men in diuers ſhyres of Englond. and whan he was alle redy / he wente towarde the towne of Berwyk vpon Twede / and theder came to hym kyng Edward Baylloll of ſcotlond with his powere / and beſeged the towne / And made without the towne a fayr towne of pauylyons and dyched theym all abowte / ſo that they had no drede of the▪ Scottes / & made manye aſſawte with 
                           •
                        onnes and wyth other engynnes to ye towne. wherwyth they dyſtroyed many fayre houſes / & chyrches alſo were beten downe to ye erthe with grete ſtones / the ſpitouſly came out of gonnes & other engynes. And neuertheles ye Scottes kept ryght well the towne / yt tho two kynges myghte not come therin longe tyme. &

n
                           •
                        theles the kynges abode there ſo longe / tyll tho that were within ye towne fayled vytaylles & alſo they were ſo wery of wakynge. that they wyſt not what for to do. ¶And ye ſhall vnderſtende that tho ſcottes yt were wythin ye towne of Berwyk / thrugh comyn counſeyl & theyr aſſent. lete crye vpon ye wallys of the twone. that they myght haue peas of the Englyſſhmē and therof they prayed the kyng of his grace & mercy & prayed gym of trwes for .viii. dayes vpon this couenaunte / yt yf they were not reſcowed in that ſyde of the towne towarde Scotlond of ye Scottes within .viii. dayes yt they wolde yelde theym vnto ye kyng & the towne alſo / And to holde this couenaunt / they prouffred to the kinge .xii. hoſtages out of the towne of Berwyk. ¶Whan the hoſtages were delyuerde / vnto ye kynge / anone tho of the towne ſent vnto ye ſcottes / & tolde theym of theyr ſorowe & myſcheyf / And the Scottes tho came pryuely ouer the water of Twede to ye bought of the abbaye. & ſyr wyllyā Dyket that was tho Stewarde of ſcotlonde. & many other that came wyth hym / put theym theyr in grete peryll of themſelf att that tyme & of ther lyf / For they came ouer a brydge yt was to broke & ye ſtones away / & many of theyr company were there drowned / But the forſayd wyllyam went ouer / & other of company / & came by the ſhyppes of Englond / & ſlew in a barge of Hull .xvi· mē and after they went into the towne of Berwyk by the water ſyde / wherfore the Scottes helde tho the towne reſcowed / & aſkyd theyr hoſtages ayen of the kynge of Englonde / & the kynge ſente theym worde ayē that they axyd theyr hoſtages with wrō
                        ge ſyth thath they came into the towne of Enlonde ſyde / for couenaunt was bytwene theim that the towne ſholde be reſcowed by the halfe of Scotlonde and anone tho commaūded kynge Edwarde to yelde the towne / or he wolde haue the hoſtages and the Scottes ſayd the towne was reſcowed welle ynoughe & therto they wolde theym holde / whan kyng Edwarde ſawe the Scottes breke theyr couenauntes that they made / he was wonder wrothe. and anone lete ſyr Thomas. Fytz wyllyam and ſyr Alyſā
                        der of Feton warden of Berewyk the whyche Thomas was perſon of Dunbarre. and lete thē be take fyrſte afore that other hoſtages for cauſe that Syr Alyſanders fader was keper of the towne. ¶And tho commaunded euerye daye two hoſtages of the towne / tyll that they were all do to deth. But yf they yelded the towne / & ſo he ſholde teche them for to breke theyr couenauntes. And whan they of the towne herde thyſe tydyngꝭ they became wonder ſory and ſente to the kyng that he wolde graunt them other .viii. dayes of reſpyte. So that bytwene two hundre men of armys and .xx. men of armes myght by ſtrenthe go bytwene them to ye towne of Berwyk theym for to vytaylle / that the towne muſt be holde for reſcowed. And yf ſoo were that .xxi. or .xxii. or more were ſlayne of tho two hundred before ſayde. that the towſholde not be holde for reſcowed. And thys couenaunte to be holde. they ſente to hym other .xii. of the forſayd towne in hoſtage / the kynge of Englonde grauntyd theym theyr prayer & toke the hoſtages. on ſaynt Margaretꝭ eue. in the yere of grace .M·CCC.xxxiii. the Scottes came fyerſly well arayed in foure wynges for to mete kynge Edwarde of Englonde. and Edwarde the kynge of Scotlonde / with theyr power / and came faſte and ſharply ayenſt euenſonge tyme / And the ſame tyme was flood atte Berwyk in the water of Twede / that no man myghte goo ouer on hys hors / nor on fote 
                           •
                         and the water was bytwene tho two kynges and ye reame of Englonde. And that tyme abode the Scottes in that other ſyde for cauſe that the englyſſgmen ſholde haue be drowned.
                  
                  
                     ¶Thys was the arraye of the Scottes / how that they came in batayll ayenſt the two kynges of Englonde and of Scotlonde. In the vaunt warde of Scotlonde where thyſe lordes.
                     THerle of Moryf / Iamys Fryſell Symond Fryſell / Walter ſtewarde Reynolde Cheyn. Patryke of Greham. Iohan le graunt Iamys of Cordoyl Patryk Parkeys. Roberte Caldecottes Phylyp of Melledrum Thom̄s Gylbert Rauf wyſeman. Adam gurdon / Iamys Gramat. Roberte Boyd. Huhhe Park. with .xl knyghtꝭ newe dubbyd & .vi.C. men of armes & .iii.M. of comyns / In the fyrſte parte of thalfe batayll were thyſe lordes / the Stewarde of Scotlonde / the erle of Mory Iamys his vncle / wyllyā douglas dauyd of Lyndeſey. Marcolyn Flemynge / Wyllyam of keth Dn̄ſen Cankok with .xxx. bachelers new dubbyd. ¶In the ſeconde parte of the batayll were

thyſe lordes. Iamys Stewarde of Corden. Alein Stewarde / wyllyam Abbrehin / wyllyā Morys: Iamys Fytz wyllyam. Adam lemoſt. walter Fytz. Gylbert. Iohn̄ of Cerleton. Robert wallam with .vii.C. men of armys / and .xvii.M. comyns. ¶In the thyrd parte of the batayll of Scotlonde were thyſe lordes. The erle of Moref. the erle of Ruf / therle of Strahern. ye erle of Soth erlonde. william of Kyrkkelay. Iohn̄ Cābron / Gylbert of Hey / wyllyam ramſey / wylliam Prēdegeſt. Kyrſton Harde / wyllyam Gurde / Arnold Garde Thomas Dolphyn / wyth .xl. knyghtes newe dubbyd .ix.C. men of armys & .xv.M. of comyns. ¶In the fourth warde of the batayll of Scotlonde were thyſe lordes Archbalde Douglas / ye erle of Lencuax Alyſander le Brus. ye erle of Fyff. Iohn̄ Canbell erle of Atheles. Roberte Lawether / wyllyam of Vypouynt / wyllyam of Lonſton. Iohnn de Labels Groos de Sherenlawe Iohan de Lyndeſey Alyſander de Gray. Ingram de Vmfreuille. Patryk de Poleſworthe Dauyd de wymes. Mychell Scot. wyllyam Landy Thomas de Boys. Roger Mortymer with xx. bachelers new dubbyd .ix.C. men of armys .xviii.M. & .iiii.C. of comyns. The erle of Dunbar keper of the caſtelle of Berewyk halpe the Scottes with .l. men of armys. And ſyr Alyſander of Ceton keper of ye for ſayd towne of Berwyk with an .C. men ef armys. And alſo the comyns of ye towne wyth ·iiii.C. men of armys / & with .viii.C. of fote men. ¶The ſomme of therles & lordes aboue ſayd / amounteth .lxvi. ¶The ſome of bachelers newe dubbyd amoūteth to an .C.lx. ¶The ſōme of men of armys amounteth .iii.M.C. ¶The ſūme of the comnyns amounteth .liii.M. and .iii.C. ¶The ſōme totalle of the people aboueſayd amounteth .lxv.M.vii.C.xlv. And thyſe .lx. & .vi. gretate lordes / ladde all the other greeſte lordes aboueſayde. Infonre bataylles / as it is tolde beforen allon fote. and kynge Edwarde of Englonde / and Edwarde Bayllol kyng of Scotlonde / hadde well apparelled theyr folke in foure bataylles / for to fyghte on fote ayenſt the Scottes theyr enmyes. ¶And the Englys the mynſtrels blewe theyr trumpetes and the. yr claryons / and hydouſly aſcryed the Scottes. And tho had euery Englyſſhe batayll two wynges of pryce archers. The whiche at that batayll ſhot arowes ſo faſte and ſoo ſore: that the Scottes myghte not helpe themſefle. And they ſmote the Scottes thouſandes vnto the grounde. And they began for to flee fro the englyſſhmen for to ſaue theyr lyues: And whan the Scottes knaues ſaw the ſcomfyture and the Scottes fall faſt to the grounde / they preckyd faſte theyr mayſters horſe with the ſporis for to kept theym from peryl / & ſete theyr mayſters at on force And whan thenglyſſmen ſaw that they lept on theyr horſes / & faſte purſued the Scottes / & all that abode they ſlewe downe ryght. ¶There men myght ſee the doughtineſſe of the noble kynge Edward & of hys men how manly they purſewed the Scottes / that flowe for drede. And there men myght ſee many a Scottyſſhman caſte downe vnto ye groū
                        de / & the baners dyſplayde hackyd in to peces & many a gode haberyoyne of ſtele in the blode bathe / And many a tyme the Scottes were gadred in to cōpanyes / but euer more they were diſcomfyted. ¶And ſo it befell as god almyghty wolde. that the Scottes had that day nomore fayſon ne myghte ayenſt the Englyſſhemen than .xx. ſhepe among .v. wulues. And ſo were the Scottes dyſcomfyted / & yet the ſcottees was well .v. men ayenſt one englyſſhmen And ye batayll was done on Halydoune hyll beſyde the towne of Berwyk. At the whiche batayll were ſlayne of the Scottes .xxxv· thouſande & .vii. houndred and .xii. And of the Englyſſhemen but only .xiii. And this victory befel to the Englyſſhmen on ſaynt Margyretes euen the holy virgyn & martyr in the yere of our lorde Iheſu cryſte .M.CCC.xxxii. ¶And whyle thys doynge laſtyd the Englyſſhe pages toke the pylfre of the Scottes that were ſlayne / euery man that he myght take. wythout ony chalengynge of ony man. And ſo after thys gracyous victory. the kynge torned hym agayne vnto the ſame ſyege of Berewyk. ¶And whan they be ſyeged ſawe and herde how kynge Edwarde had ſpede / they yelded to hym the towne wyth the caſtell / on the morowe after ſaynt Margaretes daye. ¶And thenne the kynge dyde ordeyne ſyr Edwarde Baylloll / with other noble and worſhypfull men / to be kepers and gouernours of all Scotlonde in hys abſence. And hymſelfe torned ayē and came into Enlōde after this vyctorye / with moche Ioye and alſo worſhyp and in the nexte yere folowynge after / that is for to ſay in the yere of the Incarnacyon

of oure lorde Iheſu eryſte .M.CCC.xxxiii. And of kynge Edwarde .vii· he wente ayen in to Scotlonde / in wynter tyme Atte the whiche vyage the caſtell of kylbrygge in Scotlonde / for hym and for his men that were with hym he recouered and had ayenſt the Scottes All at his owne luſte. ¶And in that ſame yere ſyr Edwarde Bayloll kyng of Scotlonde / helde his parlement in Scotlonde with many noble lordes of Englonde that were at that ſame parlemente / bycauſe of theyr londes and alſo lordſhyps that they had in the reame of Scotlonde. And helde all of the ſame Baylloll. And in the .viii. yere of hys regne / abowte the feeſt of ſaynt Iohan Baptiſt ſyr Edward Bayllol they vere and true kynge of Scotlonde / as by heretage & right lyne / made his homage and feaute vnto kynge Edwarde of Englonde for the reame of Scotlonde att new caſtell vppon Tyne. In the preſente of many a worthy man and alſo of comyns bothe of the reame of Englonde / and alſo of Scotlonde· ¶And anone after in the ſame yere kynge Edwarde of Englonde / receyued of the duke of Brytayne hys homage / for the erldom and lordſhyp of Rychmonde. And ſo folowynge in the .ix. yere of hys regne after Myghelmas rode into Scotlond And there was faſte by ſaynt Iohānes towne almooſt all the wynter tyme / And ſoo he helde his Cryſtemas at the caſtell of Rokerſbourgh ¶And in the ſame yere trughout all Englonde / abowte ſaynt Clementys tyde in wynter. ¶Chere aroſe ſuche a ſprengynge and wellynge vp of waters / and alſo flodes / bothe of the ſee and alſo of the freſſhe ryuers and ſprenges that the ſee bankes / walles and coſtes / brake vp / that mennys beſtes and houſys in many places & namely in lowe countrees / vyolently and ſodaynly were drowned / and fruyte dryuen awaye of the erthe / thrugh contynaunce and abundaunce of waters of the ſee / ouer more afterwarde were torned into more ſaltneſſe and ſoureneſſe or ſauoure. ¶The .x. yere of kynge Edwardes regne. kynge Edwarde entred the Scottes ſee after Mydſomer. And to many of the Scottes he haue bataylle / and ouercame theym and many he treatyd and bowed vnto hys peas / thrughe hys doughtyneſſe and hardyneſſe. ¶And after the feeſt of ſaynt Myghell thenne nexte folowynge was the erle of Moryf hadde and taken at Edenbrugh & brought into Englonde and put into pryſon. ¶And in the monethes of Iune and Iulii thā next folowynge in the xi. yere of his regne was ſeen and apperyed in the fyrmament a beme ſterre the whiche clarkes calle ſtella Cometa & that ſterre was ſeen in dyuers partes of ye fyrmament. ¶Where after anone there folowed in Englonde goode chepe and wonder greate plente of chaffare vytaylles & marchandyſe / & there ayenſt honger ſcarſyte myſcheyf and nede of monye. ¶In ſo moche that a quartre of whete at London was ſolde for two ſhellynge and a good fatte oxe att a noble / and fyue good douues byrdes for a peny. In whiche yere deped ſyr Iohn̄ of 
                           •
                        l
                           •
                        am erle of Cornewaylle that was kynge Edwardes brother and lyeth atte weſtmeſtre.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Edwarde made a duchye of the Erldome of Cornewayle and alſo of ſyxe other Erles that were newe made / and of the fyrſte chalēge of ye kyngdodome of Fraunce.
                     IN the yere of our lorde a .M.CCC.xxx.vii. and of kynge edwarde .xii. in the moneth of marche durynge the parlement at weſtmeſtre in lente tyme kynge Edwarde made of the erldome of Cornewayle a duchye and lete it calle the duchye of Cornewayle / the whiche ducye he gaaf vnto Edwarde hys fyrſte ſone with the erldom of Cheſtre. And alſo kyng Edwarde made att that ſame tyme ſyxe other erles / That is for to ſaye Syr Henry the erle of Lancaſtres ſone erle of Leycetre / Wyllyam of Bughū erle of Northamptō / wyllyam of Mountagu / erle of Salyſbury / Hughe of Awdell erle of Glouceſtre / Roberte of V
                           •
                        orde erle of Southfolke / And wyllyam of Clyton Erle of Huntyngeton. ¶And in that ſame yere it was ordeyned in the ſame parlemente that no man ſholde were noo clothe that was wrought out of Englond. as clothe of golde ne of ſylke or veluet or damaſke or ſatyne baudkyn ne none ſuche other ne none wylde ware ne furres of bynde yt ſee. But ſuche as myght ſpende an hundred poūde of rente by yere. but this ordynaūce & ſtatute was but of lytyl effect For yt was no thynge holden. ¶In the .xiii. yere of his regne kynge Edwarde went ouer ſee into Braban with quene Phylyp his wyf there beryng a chylde at And warpe there he dwellyd more than a yere for to treate wyth the duke

of Braban and other alyed vnto hym of the chalengynge of the kyngdome of Fraunce. to kynge Edwarde of Englond by ryght and by herytage after the deth of Karoll the grete kynge of Fraunce brother Gerymayne of quene Iſabell kynge Edwardes moder / the whyche was holden and occupyed vnryghtfull by Phylyp of Valoys the ēmys of kynge Karoll / the wheche duke and all his in ye forſayd thynges & all other longynge there to with alle hys men and goodes kynge Edwarde founde redy vnto hym and made & behyght hym ſuerte by good fayth & truſte / and after that ye kyng hath hym ayen into Englonde & lelft there the quene ſtyll be hynde hym in Braban. Than in ye .xiiii. yere of his regne whan all ye lordes of his reame & other that oughten to be at his parlement were called & aſſembled togyder in ye ſame parlemēt holden at London after the feeſt of ſaynt Hylarye / The kynges nedes were put forth & promothed as touchinge the kyngdom of Fraunce. For whiche nedes to be ſpedde the kynge axed the fyfte parte of alle the meuable goodes of Englonde & the wulles & the .ix. ſheep of euery corne / And alle the lordes of euery towne where ſuche thynges ſholde be taxed & gadryd ſholde anſwere to the kynge therof / & had it and helde it at his owne luſt & wyl wherfore yf I ſhold knowleche the very trouth / the ynner loue of the people was torned in to hate And the comyn prayers in to curſinge / for cauſe that the comune people were ſoo ſtrongely greued. ¶Alſo the for ſayd Phylyp Valoys of Fraunce had gadred vnto hym a grete hoſte & deſtroyed in hys partyes & kyngdome / many of the kynges frendes of Englonde wyth townes & caſtels many other of theyr lordhypoes and many harmes ſhamys & dyſtytes dyd vnto the quene / wher fore kyng Edwarde whan he herde thys tydynges ſtrongely meued therwythe and red. and ſente dyuers letters ouer ſee to ye quene & to other that were his frendes Glagynge them certefyenge them yt he wolde be there hymſelf in all the haſte that he mygh. ¶And anone after Eſter whan he had ſped of all thinges yt hym neded to haue / he went ouer ſee ayen. Of whoſe cominge ye quene & all hys frendes were wonder glad & made moche Ioy And all that were his enmyes and held ayenſt hym made as moche ſorow. ¶In the ſame tyme the kynge thrughe counſeyll of hys trewe lyeges and counſell of hys lordes that there we repreſent wyth hym wryte the kynhe of Fraū
                        ces name / and toke and medled the kynges armes of Fraunce quartred with tharmes of Englond and commaunded forth with hys coyen of golde vnder dyſerypcyon and wrytynge of the name of englonde and of Fraunce be made beſte that myght bee / and that is to ſaye the floreyne that was callyd the noble pryce of .vi ſhellynge .viii pens ſterlynge / and the half nobell the value .iii· ſhellynge and .iiii. pens / and the far thynges the value of .xx. pens.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Edwarde came vnto the ſcuys and dyſcomfyted alle the power of Fraunce in the hauen.
                     ANd in the next yere after / that is to ſay the .xv. yere of his regne he cōmaūded and lete wryte in his chartres wryttes & other letters the date of the regne of fraunce the fyrſt And whyle that he was thus doynge and trauayllynge in fraunce thrughe his counſeyll he wrote to al the prelates dukes erles and barōs and the noble lordes of the countre / and alſo to dyuerſe of the comune people dyuers letters & maundementes berynge date att Gandaue the viii. daye of February. ¶And anone after wythin a lytyll tyme he came ayen in to englonde with the quene and her chyldren. ¶And in the ſame yere on mydſomer euen he began to ſaylle to warde Fraunce ayen / and manly and fyerſly he felle vpon Phylyp of Valoys the whyche longe tyme laye and had gadryd to hym a full longe & boyſtous meny of dyuers nacions in the hauen of Sceuys / & there they foughten togyder the kynge of fraūce and he wyth theyr hoſtes fro myddaye to thre of the clocke in the morne / in the whyche batayll were ſlayne .xxx. thouſande men of the kynges cōpany of fraunce / and many ſhyppes and cogges were taken And ſoo thrugh goddes helpe he had there the vyctorye. and bere thens a gloryous chyualry ¶And in the ſame yere abowte ſaynt Iames tyde without the yates of Saynt Omers Robert of Arthoys with men of Englōde & Flaun faught ayenſt ye duke of Burgon & the Frenſſhemen / att whiche batayll were ſlayne & take of the frenſſhmen .xv. barons & .lxxx. knyghtes & ſhyppes & barges were take vnto the nombre of CC. and .xxx. ¶The ſame yere the kynge makynge & abydynge vpon the ſege of 
                           •
                        ornay the erle of Henaude with Englyſſhe archers made

aſſaul
                           ••
                         vnto the towne of Saynt A
                           •
                        ande where they ſlewe .l. knightes & many other and alſo deſtroyed the towne. ¶And in the .xvi. yere of hys regne folowynge in the wynter tyme the kynge ſtylle vpon the forſayd ſeyge & ſente of tyme into englond vnto hys treſorer & other purueyours for golde & moneye that ſholde be ſēte vnto hȳ there ī his nede but his proctours and meſſyngers curſedly and ful ſlouly ſerued hym at hys nede & deceyued hym / on whoos defaute & latches the kyng toke trewes bytwene hym and the kynge of fraūce / And thenne kynge Edwarde full of ſhame and ſorowe in hys herte wyth drewe hym fro the ſege & come into Brytayne and there was ſoo grete ſtryue of batayll that he loſte many of his peple. And whan he had doone there that he come for he dreſſyd hym ouer ſee in to Englond warde. ¶And as he ſaylled to warde Englonde in the hyghe ſee the mooſt myſhappes ſtormes and tempeſtes thondre & lyghtnynge felle to hym in ye ſee / the whyche was ſayde that it was done & yrayſyd thrugh euyll ſpirytes made by ſore ery & nygro mancye of them of fraunce / wherfore the kynges herte was ful of ſorowe / and āguyſſhe welllynge & ſyghynge & ſayd vnto our lady in thys wyſe· ¶O bleſſyd lady Saynt Mary what is the cauſe that euer more goynge into fraunce al thynges & wethers fallen to me Ioyfull and lykynge and as I wold haue them / but alway tornynge into Englonde warde all thyngꝭ fallen vnprofytable and very harmfull neuertheles he ſcapyd all perelles of the ſee as god wolde / and came to the tour of London by nyght. ¶And the ſame yere the kyng helde his Cryſtmas at Meneres & ſent worde to the Scottes by his meſſagers that he was redy & wolde doo fyght with theym. but the Scottes wolde not abyde that but fledde ouer ye Scottes ſee & hyd them a well as they myght. ¶And in the .xvii. yere of his regne aboute the feeſt of the Cōuerſyon of ſaynt poull kynge Edwarde whan he had ben in Scotlond & ſawe that ye ſcottes were fledde tho he come ayen into Englond. And a lytell before lent was the turnement at Dunſtable / tho the whyche tourmente come alle the yonge bachelary & chyualry of Englond with many other erles and lordes. At the whiche turnemente kyng Edward hymſelf was there preſent ¶And ye next yere folowyng in the .xviii. yere of his regne att hys parlemente holden at weſtmynſter the auyzeme of paſke kynge Edwarde the thyrde made Edwarde his fyrſt ſone prynce of walys. ¶And in the .xix. yere of his regne anone after in Ianyuer before lente the ſame kynge Edwarde lete make full noble Iuſtes & grete feeſtes in the place of hys byrth at wyndſore that there was neuer none ſuche ſeen there afore. At whiche feeſt & ryalte were two kynges & two quenes the prynce of walys the duke of Cornewayle .x. Erles .ix. Counteſſes barons and many burgeys the whiche myghte not lyghtly be nōbred / & of dyuerſe londes beyonde the ſee weren many ſtraungers. And at the ſame tyme whan the Iuſtes were done. kynge Edward made a grete ſouper in ye whiche he ordened & began hys rounde table & ordened & ſtedfaſted the daye of the rounde table to be holden there att wyndeſore in the wytſone weke neuer more yerely. & this tyme Englyſſh men ſo moche haunted and cleuyd to the woodnes & foly of the ſtraungers / that from tyme of comynge of Henaudes .xviii. yere paſſed they ordeyned and chaunged theym euery yere dyuerſe ſhappes and dyſguyſynge of clothynge of longe large and wyde clothes dyſtytute & dyſerte frem all olde honeſt and gode vſage. And an other tyme ſhorte clothes and ſtrayte waſtyd gagged and kyt and on euery ſyde ſlatered and botoned with ſleues and tapytis of ſurcotes and hodes ouer longe and ouermoche hangynge / that yf I the ſothe ſhall ſaye they were more lyke to tormentours & deuyls in theyr clothynge & ſhokynge & other araye than to men & the wymen more nycely yet paſſed the men in araye & euouſlyer / for they were ſo ſtrayte clothed that they lefe hange fore tayles ſewyd byneth wythin there clothes for to fele and hyde theyr arſers / the whiche dyſguyſynges & pryde parauenture / afterwarde broughte fourthe & cauſed many myſhappes & myſchyef in ye reame of Englonde. ¶The .x
                           •
                        . yere of kynge Edwarde he wente ouer in to Brytayne and Gaſcoyne In whoos cōpany wente the erle of warwyk / the erle of Souffolke. the erle of Huntyngton and the erle of Arundell / and many other lordes and comune people in a greate multytude wyth a greate Nauye of .CC. and .xl. ſhippes / anone after mydſomer for to auenge hym of many wronges and harmes to hym doone by Phylyp of Valoys kynge of Fraunce ayene the trewes before honde grauntyd / the whych

the trewes he falſly and vntrewely by cauelacyons and dyſquatter
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Edwarde ſaylled in to Normandy & arryued at hogges with a grete hoſt.
                     IN the .xxi. yere of hys regne kynge Edwarde thrugh counſeyll of alle the grete lordes of Englond callyd & gadred togyder in his parlemente at weſtmeſtre before Eſter ordeyned hym for to paſſe ouer the ſee agayn for to diſeaſe & dyſtrobled the rebelles of Fraūce. And whan his Nauye was come togyder and made redy he wente with a grete hoſte the .xii. daye of Iulii. and ſaylled in to Normandye & arryued at hogges. ¶And whan he had reſted hym ther .vi. dayes for by cauſe of trauaylyng of the ſee and for to haue out all his men with all theyr neceſſaryes out of theyr ſhyppes / he wente towarde Cadomun brenuynge waſtinge & deſtroyenge all the townes that he founde in his waye. ¶And the .xxvi. dayes of Iuly at the brydge of Cadony manly and nobly ſtrēgthed and defended with Normans he had there a ſtronge batayll & a longe durynge / thrugh whiche a grete multytude of people were ſlayne / And there were taken of pryſoners the erle of Ewe / the lorde of Thonkeruyll / and an hū
                        dred of other knyghtes & men of armes / and .vi. hondred of foot men nombred & the towne and the ſubbarbes / vnto the bare walle / and of all thynges that they myghte bere & caryen out was robbyd & dyſpoyled. After the kynge paſſed forth by ye coūtre about the brede of .xx. myle he waſtyd all manere thynge yt he founde whan Phylyp of Valoys perceyued thys / alle thought he were faſte by hym wyth a ſtronge hoſte yet he wolde not come nygh hym but breke all the brydgꝭ beyonde ye water of Seyn fro Royn to Parys / & hymſelf fled vnto the ſame cyte of Parys with all the haſt that he myght. ¶For ſothe noble kyng Edwarde whan he came to Parys brydge & founde it broken / within two dayes he let make it agayne / And in the morowe after the Aſſumpcōn of our lady kynge Edwarde paſſed ouer ye water of Seyn goyege to warde Creſcy & dyſtroyed by the way townes with the peple dwellynge ther in / & in the feeſt of ſaynt Bartholomewe he paſſed ouer the water of ſōme vnhurt with all his hoſt there as neuer before fonde ony manere way ne paſſage. where .ii.M. were ſlayne of them that letted theyr paſſage. ouer. ¶Therfore the .xxvi. daye of Auguſte / kynge Edwarde in felde faſt by Freſcy hauynge thre batayls of Englyſſhmen en coūtred & mette with Phylyp of Valoys hauīge with hym .iiii. batayls of whyche the leeſt paſſed gretly the nombre of englyſſhe people. And whan theſe two hoſtes mette togyder / there fell vpon hym the kyngh of Beme / the duke of Loreyn. & erles alſo of Flaunders / Dalaūſon / bloys harecourt / Aumarle & Neuors / & many other Erles barons lordes & knyghtꝭ and men of armes ye nombre of a .M.v.C.xlii. without foot men & other men armed that were no thynge rekened. And for all thys the vngloryous Philyp with drewe hym with the reſydue of his people. wherfore it was ſayde in cōmune amonge his owne people. Nerē be all ſoy retreyt. that is to ſaye our fayre wyth draweth hym. ¶Than kynge Edward & our Englyſſhmē thankyd almyghty god for ſuche a vyctory after there gret labour take to theim all thynge nedefull to theyr ſuſtynaunce / & ſauynge of theyr lyues & for drede of theyr enmyes reſted them there. And full erly in the mornynge after ye Frenſſhmen with a grete paſſynge hoſte come ayen for to gyue batayll & fyght with the Englyſſhmen / with whom mette & encountred the erle of warwyke Northampton and Norfolke with theyr cōpany and ſlewe .ii. M. & tooke many pryſoners of the gentyls of them. And the remenaunt of ye ſame hoſt fledde thre myle thens. And the thyrde day after ye batayll ye kyng went to Calays warde deſtroyenge all ye townes as he rode thyder / whā that he comē that is to ſay ye thyrde daye of Septēbre he began to beſege ye towne with ye caſtell & contynued hys ſege fro the forſayd thyrde daye of Septembre to ye thyrde day of Auguſt ye nexte yere after. And in the ſame yere durynge ye ſyege of Calays the kyng of Scotlōde with a grete multytude of ſcottes came in to Englōde to Neuyles croſſe / aboute ſaynt Lucas daye the Euāgelyſt hopynge and truſtynge for to haue foūde all ye londe voyde of people for as moche as the kyng of Englond was beyonde the ſee / ſauf oonly preſtes & men of holy chyrche & women & chyldren / & plowmen and ſuche other labourers / & there they come & robbyd & dyd moche preuy ſorowe. But yet founde they ynoughe that theym withſtode bi ye grace of almyghty god / & ſo a day of batayll was as ſygned bytwene theym and certayne lordes & mē of holy

chyrche yt were of ye countree wyth other comune people faſt by the cyte of Dureſme. at whyche daye through the grace & helpe of god almyghty the Scottes were ouercomen and yet were there thre tymes ſo many of thē as of englyſſhemen· And there was ſlayne all the chyualry & knyghthode of the reame of Scotlond. And there was taken as they wolde haue fled thens Dauyd of kynge of Scotlonde hymſelfe and the erle of mentyf Syr wyllyam Douglas and many other greate men of Scotlande. ¶And after that our Englyſſhemen whan they had reſted theym a fewe dayes and had ordeyned theyr kepers of the North countre. they came to London and broughte with them ſyre Dauyd the kynge of Scotlonde and all the other lordes that were taken pryſoners vnto the toure of London with alle the haſte that they myghte. and left them there in ſauf kepynge vnto the kynges comynge and wente home ayen in to theyr owne countre. And after warde was the kynge raunſon of Scotlond taxed to an hondred thouſande marke of ſyluer to be payed within .x. yere / that is to ſaye euery yere .x. thouſande marke.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kȳge Edwarde beſyeged Calays & how it was wonne & yolden vnto hym.
                     IN the .xxii· yere of kyng Edwardes regne wente ouer ſee in the wynter tyme / & laye al ye wynter at the ſege of Calays / the whiche yere whyle the ſyege laſted & endured Phylyp the kynge of fraunce caſte & purpoſed traytourſly & with fraude to put awaye the ſyege & came the ·xxvii. daye of Iuyll in the ſame yere with a grete hoſt & ſtronge power and neyghed to the ſege of Calays. The whiche Phylyp the laſt daye of Iulii. ſente to the kynge Edwarde worde that he wolde gyue hym playne batayll ye thyrde daye after ye about Euēſonge tyme yf he durſt come fro the ſege and abyde. And whā kynge Edward herde that ony without longe taryenge or longe auyſentente accept gladly ye daye & houre of batayll yt Philyp had aſſygned And whan the kynge of Fraunce herde that / ye next nyght after he ſet hys tentys a fyre & remeued & went his waye thens cowardly. Thenne they that were in ye towne & in the caſtell beſyeged ſaw all this that they had none other helpe ne ſocour of ye kynge of Fraunce ne of his men And alſo that theyr vytayls within them were ſpended and waſtyd & for faute of vytayls & of refreſſhynge they eten horſes houndes cattes & myſe for to kepe theyr trouth as long as they myght And whā they ſawe & was foūde amonge them at the laſt that they had no thyng amō
                        ge them for to ete ne lyue by ne no ſocour ne reſcowe of the frenſſhemē / of that other ſyde they wiſt well that they muſte nedes deye for defaute or els yelde the towne / & anone they went & toke downe ye baners and the armes of fraūce on euery ſyde that were hangē out & wente on ye walles of ye forſayd towne on dyuerſe places as naked as euer they were borne ſauf only theyr ſhertes and theyr pryue clothes. & helde their ſwerdes naked & the poynt donward in theyr hondes / and puttē ropes & halters about theyr neckes & yelded vp the keys of the towne & of the caſtell to kynge Edward of Englond with grete fere & drede of theyr liues and goodes and drede of herte / And kynge Edwarde ſawe alle thys as / a mercyable kynge and lord receyyed them to grace / & fewe of the gretteſt pryſoners of eſtate and gouernaunce of the towne he ſent into Englonde there for to abyde theyr raunſon and the kynges grace. And al the comynallte of the towne the kynge lette goo weder they wolde in peas and wyth out ony harme / & lete them bere with thē all theyr thynges yt they myghte bere & carye away kepynge ye twone & the caſtell to hymſelf· Thenne thrugh meditacyon of Cardynales that were ſente from the pope / trewes was take there by twene Fraunce & englond for .ix. monethes than next folowynge. And aboute Myghelmas kynge Edwarde come ayen into Enlond with a gloryous vyctory. ¶And in the .xxiii. yere of his regne. in the Eeſt partyes of the worlde there aroſe and began a peſtylence & deth of Saraſyns and Paynyms that ſo grete a deth was neuer herde of a fore / that waſted away the people ſo that vnneth the tenth perſon was left alyue. ¶And the ſame yere aboute the ſuche countrees and alſo in the weſt countrees there fell ſo moche rayne & ſo grete waters that from Cryſtmas to myd ſomer there was vnnethes no daye ne nyght but that it rayned ſome what / thrugh whyche waters the peſtylence was ſo enfected & ſo habūdaunte in al countres. & namely aboute the courte of Rome. & other places and ſee coſtes that there were left lyuynge folke for too bury theȳ that were dede honeſtly But made greate dyches & pyttꝭ that were wōder brode & depe &

therin buryed them / & made a renge of dede bodyes & caſte a lytell erthe to fele them aboue / & than caſte in a nother renge of dede bodyes / & an other renge aboue theym / and thus were they buryed & none other wyſe / but yf it were ſo that they were men of greate eſtate ſo yt they were buryed as honeſtly as they myghte. And after all this in the .xxiiii. yere of kyng Edwardes regne it was done hym to wete & vnderſtā
                        de of a treaſon that was begon at Calays & ordeyned for to ſell that towne for a greate ſōme of Florens vnto kynge Phylyp of Fraunce thrughe the falſneſſe & or dynaūce of a knyght that was called ſyre Geffrey of Cherney was wonder preny wyth kynge Phylyp of Fraūce And whan kynge Edwarde herde this he toke with hym the nobleſt and gentylleſt lordꝭ and many other worythy men of armes that were there preſente with hym for the ſolempnyte of that hygh feeſt. And well wyſely in al the haſt that he myghe / and as pryuely as he myght he wente ouer ſee to warde Calays. And that ſame yere the gode kyng edwarde helde his cryſtmas at Hauerynge. And the morne after new yers daye the kynge was in the caſtell of Calays with his men of armes that none of the alyens wyſt ther of. And that faiſ conſpiratour and traytour Geffrey of Cherney ſyth that he myght not openly haue his purpoſe of the caſtell / pryuely and ſtelyngly he come in & helde ye towne with a grete hoſt. And whā he wyth hys men were comen in / he payed the for ſayd ſomme of floreyns as couenaunte was to a Geneweye in the towne that was keper of the caſtel and conſentinge to the ſame Geffrey in all his falſneſſe and trechorye & bounden the Englyſſhe mynſtrels and ſeruaūtes that were in the caſtell yt they myght not helep themſelf ne lette them of theyr purpos. And than wenyng that they had ben ſure ynough / then they ſpaken al their wickydneſſe & falneſſe openly on hygh yt all men myght here. & now ſhall ye here howe they were deceyued / for they came in by a preuy poſterne ouer a lytyll brydge of tree / & whā they were comen in ſubtyly & pryuely the brydge was drawen vp and kept that nōe of them that came in myght go out ne no moo myghte come to them / & anone our Englyſſhmen wente out at preuy holes and wyndowes & ouer ye walles of the towne and of the caſtell & went & faught manly with the frenſſhmen that were withoute & had the better of them / the whyche whan they were occupyed by them ſelf on theyr ſyde / the kynge that was within the towne hauynge ſcarſely but .xxx. men of armes drew out his ſwerde & with a loude voys he creyed on hygh. Oſaynt Edwarde. Oſaynt George. And whan the peple herde that / they come rennynge to hym & gaaf there to theyr enmyes ſo greate aſſawte that there were moo than two hondred men of armes & many mo other ſlayne and many fled a waye. And ſoo by grace of god almyghty the vyctory felle vnto the Englyſſhmen. Thenne the kynge toke with hym this Geffrey that was fynder of this trechory And alſo many other Frenſſh pryſoners / and thenne within a whyle after he come agayne in to Englonde. And in thys ſame yere and in the yere afore and alſo in ye yere next folowynge was ſoo greate a peſtylence of men frome the eeſt in to ye weſt & namely through botches that tho that ſykened / as on thys daye deyed on the thyrde daye after / to the whyche men that ſoo deyed in this peſtylence had but lytell reſpyte of lyſſynge. ¶The pope Clemente of his goodneſſe and grace gaf theym full remyſſyon and forgyueneſſe of all theyr ſynnes that they were ſhryuen of / and this peſtylēce laſted in London fro Myghelmas vnto Auguſt. next folowynge almooſt an hole yere. ¶And theſe dayes was deth wythout ſorowe / weddynges wythout frendſhyp / wylfull penaunce / & derth without ſcarſyte. And fleynge without refute or ſocour. for many fled from place to place by cauſe of peſtylence. But they were enfected & myght not eſcape the dethe / after that the prophete Iſay ſyth who that fleeth fro the face of drede he ſhalle falle into the dyche. And he that wyndeth hym out of the dyche he ſhall be hold and eyed wyth a grenne / but whan thys peſtylēce was ceſſyd as god wold vnnethes ye tenth parte of the peple was left on lyue. And in ye ſame yere began a wonder thynge that all that euer were borne after that peſtylence had twoo cheketh in theyr heed laſſe than they had afore.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kyng Edward had a grete batayll with Spanyardes in ye ſee faſt by wynchelſe.
                     ANd in the .xxv. yere of hys regne about ſaynt Iohans daye in harueſt in the ſee faſt by wynchelſe kynge Edwarde had a grete batayll with men of Spayne where yt theyr ſhyppes and nauye laye chayned togyder / that

other they muſte fyght or be drenched. And ſo whan all other worthy mē and of the ſee coſtes faſt by wynchelſe & romeny were gadred togyder / and our nauye & ſhyppes al redy to the warre / the Englyſſhemen mette manly and ſtrongly wyth theyr enmyes comynge fyerſly ayenſt them. ¶And whan the Spayns veſſels & nauye were cloſed all about / there men myght ſe ſtronge batayll on both ſydes & longe duryng in ye whiche bataylle was but fewe that faught but they were rytouſly hurte. And after the batayll there were .xxiii. ſhyppes taken & ſoo the Englyſſhemen had the better. And in the nexte yere folowynge of hys regne. that is to ſay the xxvi. yere the kynge thrugh hys counſeyll lete ordeyne and make hys newe money / that is to ſaye the peny the grote value of .iiii. pens and the halfe grete of .ii. pens. But it was of leſſe weyght than ye olde ſterlynge was be .v. ſhels. in the pounde. ¶And in the .xxvii. yere of his regne was the grete derth of vytayls yt whiche was called the dere ſomer. And the .xxviii. yere of his regne in the parlement holden atte weſtmeſtre after Eſter. ſyr Henry erle of Lancaſtre was made duke of Lancaſtre and in this yere was ſoo greate a drought that frō the monethe of Marche to the Monethe of Iuyll there fell no rayne on therth / wherfore all fruytes ſedes and herbes / for the mooſt parte were loſte in defaute wherfore come ſo greate dyſeaſe of men and beeſtes and derth of vytayls in Englonde that thys londe that euer afore had ben plenteuous hadde nede that tyme to ſeke vitayls and refreſſhynge at other out yles & countres. And the .xxix. yere of kynge Edwarde it was accorded graūted and ſworne bytwene the kynge of Fraunce & kynge Edwarde of Englonde that he ſhode haue ayen all his londꝭ & lordſhyppes that lōged to ye duchye of guyhen of olde tyme the whiche had bē withdrawen and wrongfully occupyed by dyuers kynges of Fraunce before honde to haue & to holde to kynge Edwarde & to hys heyres & ſucceſſours for euermore. frely peſybly and in good quyete vpō this couenaunt that ye kynge of Englonde ſholde leue of and releaſen all his ryght & clayme that he had claymed of the kyngdome of fraūce and of the tytle that he toke therof / vpon whyche ſpeche and couenauntes it was ſente to the courte of Rome on both ſydes of the kynges. that ye forſayd couenaunt ſholde de enbulled. but god ordeyned better for the kynges worſhyp of Englonde. for what thrugh fraude & dyſceyte of the frenſſhmē and what thrugh lettynge of the pope & of the court of Rome the forſayd couenaū
                        tes were dyſquate and left of. ¶And in the ſame yere the kyng reuoked by his wyſe and dyſcrete coūſeyll / the ſtaple of wulles out of flaundres into Englonde with all ye lybertees fraunches and fre cuſtomes that longed therto and ordeyned it in Englōde in diuerſe places / that is for to ſaye atte weſtmeſtre / Caunterbury. Chycheſtre. Bryſtowe. Lyncoln. And Hulle wyth all the forſayd thynges that longen therto. And that this thynge that ſhold thus be done the kynge ſwore hymſelf therto / and prynce Edwarde hys ſone wyth other many grete wytneſſes that there where preſent. ¶And the xxx· yere of hys regne anone after wytſontyde in the parlemente ordeyned att weſtmenſtre it was tolde and certefyed to the kyng that Phylyp that helde the kyngdome of Fraunce was deed. And that Iohan his ſone was crowned kynge. And that this Iohan had gyuen Karoll his ſone the duchye of Guyhen. of the whiche thynge kynge Edwarde whan he wyſt therof he had greate Indygnacyon vnto hym & was wonder wrothe & ſtrongly meued. And therfore afore alle the wrothy lordes that there were aſſembled at that parlement callyd Edwarde his ſone vnto hym / to whom ye duchye of Guyhen by ryght herytage ſholde longe to & gaue it hym there byddynge & ſtrenthynge hym that he ſholde ordeyne hym for to defende hym and auenge hym vpō his enmyes and ſaue & mayntene his ryght. And afterwarde kyng Edwarde hymſelf / & his eldeſt ſone Edwarde went to dyuers places and ſayntes in Englonde on pylgrymage for to haue the more helpe & grace of god and of his ſayntes. And ye .ii. kal of Iuyll. whan all thynge was redy to that vyage & batayll & all his retenue & power aſſembled & hys nauy alſo redy he toke with hym ye erle of warwyk the erle of Suffolk the erle of Salyſbury and the erle of Oxforde & a thouſande men of armes & as many archers / and in the Natyuyte of our lady / toke theyr ſhyppes at plūmouth & began to ſayll. And whan he come & was arryued in Guyon / he was there worſhypfully taken & recyued of the mooſt nobleſt men and lordes of that countree. ¶And anone after kynge Edwarde toke wyth hym his two ſones.

that is to ſaye. ſyr Lyonell erle of Vlton & ſyr Iohn̄ hys brother erle of Rychemonde & ſyr Henry duke of Lancaſtre wyth many erles & lordes and men of armes & two thouſande Archers & ſaylled towarde Fraunce & reſted hym a whyle at Calays & after the kyng went with hys hoſte aforſayd & with other ſouldyours of beyonde the ſee that there abode the kyngꝭ comynge the ſeconde daye of Nouembre and toke hys Iourney towarde kynge Iohn̄ of Fraū
                        ce there as he trowed to haue founde hym faſt by Odoma
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                         as hys letters and couenaūt made mencyon yt he wolde abyde hym there with hys hoſt. And whan kynge Iohan of Fraunce herde telle of the kynges comynge of Englonde / he wente awaye wyth his men and caryage cowardly and ſhamfully fleynge and waſtynge all vytayls that Englſſhmē ſholde not haue ther of. ¶And whan kynge Edwarde / herde telle that he fledde he purſued hym wyth all his hoſt tyll Henede / and than he beholdynge the ſcarſyte and waytynge of vytayls and alſo the cowardyſe of the kyng of Fraunce he torned ayen waſtynge all the countre. ¶And whyle all thyſe thynges were a doynge / ye ſcottes pryuely & by nyght. toke the towne of Berwyk ſleynge theym that withſtode theym and no man els. But bleſſyd be god the caſtell was ſaued & kept by Englyſſhmen that were therin whan the kynge perceyued alle thys / he torned ayen in to Englonde as wrothe as he myghte be / wherfore in the parlemēt at weſtmynſtre was grauntyd to the kynge of euery ſacke of wulle .l. ſhellyngꝭ durynge ye terme of .vi. yere that he myght myghtlyer fyght and defende the reame ayenſte the Scottes and other myſdoers. And ſo whan all thynges were redy the kynge haſted hym to warde the ſyege.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kyng Edwarde was crowned kynge of Scotlonde / and howe prynce Edwarde toke the kynge of Fraunce and ſyr Philyp hys yonger ſone at the batayll of Peyters.
                     ANd in the .xxxi. yere of hys regne the .xiii. daye of Ianyuere the kynge beynge in the caſtell of Berwyk with a fewe men / but he hauynge· there faſte by a greote hooſt. The towne was yolden vnto hym without ony maner defence or dyffyculte. Thā the kynge of Scotlond that is for to ſaye ſyr Iohn̄ Bayloll conſyderynge howe that god dyde many meruaylles and gracyous thynges for kynge Edwarde att his owne wyll fro daye to daye / he toke & gaaf vp the reame of Scotlonde and the crowne of Scotlond at Rokeſburgh in ye kynges hondes of Englonde vnder hys patent letter there made. And anone after kynge Edwarde in preſence of all the prelates and other worthy men & lordes that were there lette hym crowne kyng of Scotlond. And whan all thinges were done and erdeyned in that countres at his wyll / he torned ayen into englonde with a greate worſhyppe. ¶And whyle this vyage was in doynge in Scotlonde / ſyre Edwarde prynce of wales as a man enſpyred ī god was in Guyhen in the cytee of Burdeux treatynge and ſpekyge of the chalenge and of the kynges ryght of Englonde that he hadde to the reame of Fraūce / & that he wold be auēged wyth ſtronge honde / and to the prelateg peres and myght men of that countree conſented welle to hym. Than ſyr Edwarde the prynce wyth a greate hooſte gadred to hym the .vi. daye of Iuyll wente frome Burdeux goynge and traueylynge by many dyuerſe countrees / and he tooke many pryſoners moo than ·vi. thouſande mem of armes by the countree as he wente and tooke the towne of Remorantyne in Saloygne and beſyeged the caſtell .vi. dayes· And att the .vi. dayes ende they yolde the caſtell vnto hym / and there was taken the lorde of crowne and ſyr Burſygaude and many other knyghtes and men of armes moo than .lxxx. And fro thens by Toren and Peten faſt by Chyneney hys noble men that were with hym hadde a ſtonge batayll with Frenſſhmen / and an hundred of theyr men of armes were ſlayne. And the erle of Daunce and the ſtewarde of / fraunce were taken wyth an hondred men of armes In the whyche yere the .xix. daye of Septembre faſte by Pyeters the ſame prynce wyth a thouſande and .ix. hondred men of armes and archers ordeyned a batayll to kynge Iohan of fraunce comynge tho the prynce warde wyth .vii. thouſande choſen men of armes and moche other people a greate nombre / of the whyche were ſlayne the duke of Burbon and the duke of Athenes and many other noble men & ef the prynces men of armes a thouſande and of other the trewe accompte and rekenynge .viii.C. And there the kynge of France was taken and ſyr Phylyp his yonger ſone and many dukes and noble men and worthy knyghtes

and men of armes aboute two .M. and ſo the vyctory fell there the prynce / and to the peple of Englonde by the grace of god. And many that were taken pryſoners were ſette at theyr raunſon and vpon theyr trouthe and knyghthode were charged and hadde leue to goo. But the prynce tooke wyth hym the kynge of Fraunce and Philyp his ſone with alle the reuerence that he myghte & wente ayen to Burdeux wyth a gloryous vyctory / the ſomme of the men that there were taken pryſoners and of theym that were ſlayne the daye of batayll .iiii.M.iiii.C.xl. and in the .xxxii. yere of kynge Edwarde the .v. daye of Maye prynce Edwarde with kynge Iohn̄ of Fraunce and Philyp hys ſone & many other worthy pryſoners arryued gracyouſly in the hauen of plūmouth And the .xxiiii. daye of the ſame moneth aboute thre after none they came to London by Lō
                        don brydge and ſo wente forthe to the kynges palays atte weſtmynſtre / and there came ſoo grete a multytude & preſſe of peple abowte theym to beholde and ſe that wonder and ryall ſyghte that vnnethes fro maddaye tylle nyghte myghte they not come to weſtmyſter. And the kynges raunſon of Fraunce was taxed and ſette to thre myllyons of ſcutes / of whom two ſholde be worthe a nobell. And ye ſhall vnderſtande that a myllyon is a thouſande thouſande / and after ſome mennys raunſon was ſette att thre thouſande thouſaynde floreyns and all is one effecte· And this ſame yere were made Iuſtꝭ ſolempne in Smytfende beynge preſent the kynge of Englonde / the kyng of Fraunce / and the kynge of Scotlonde / and many other worthy and noble lordes. ¶The .xxxiii. yere of his regne the ſame kynge Edwarde at wynſore as well for loue of knyght hode as for his ownne worſhyppe and att reuerence of the kynge of fraunce and other lordes that were there att that tyme / he held a wonder ryal and coſtly feeſt of ſaynt George paſſynge ony that euer was holden afore. wherfore the kynge of fraunce in ſcornynge ſayd that he ſaw neuer ne herde ſuche a ſolempne feſtes ne ryaltes holden ne done wyth taylles wythoute payenge of golde or ſyluer. ¶And in the .xxxiii. yere of hys regne the .xiiii. kalendas of Iulii. Syre Iohan erle of Rychmonde kynge Edwardes ſone wedded dame blaunche duke Henryes doughter of Lancaſtre coſyn to the ſame Iohan by dyſpencyon of the pope. And in the meane tyme were ordeyned Iuſtes atte London thre dayes of roga
                           •
                        yons / that is for too ſaye. The Mayer of London wyth his .xxiiii. aldermen ayenſt alle that wolde come / in whoos name and ſtede the kynge pryuely wyth his foure ſones Edwarde / Lyonell / Iohan and Edmonde and other .xix. greate lordes helden the felde. with worſhyppe. ¶And this ſame yere as it was tolde and ſayd of theym that ſawe it there come blood out of ye combe of Thomas ſomtyme erle of Lancaſtre as freſſhe as that daye that he was done to dethe. ¶And in the ſame yere kynge Edwade choſe this ſepulture and hys lyggynge att weſtmeſtre faſte by the ſhryne of ſaȳt Edwarde. and anone after the xxvi. daye of Octobere. he wente ouer ſee to Calays makynge proteſtacōn that he wolde neuer 
                           ••
                        
                        me ayen into Englonde tyll he had in endes the warre bytwene fraūce and hym ¶And ſoo in the .xxvi. yere of hys regne in the wynter come kyng Edward was & trauaylled in the Ryne coſtes. And aboute ſaynt Hyllarye tyde he departes his hoſt and went to Burgon warde / wyth whom than met peaſybly the duke of Bourgon. behyghtynge him .lxx. thouſande floreyns that he ſholde ſpare hys men and h
                           •
                        s peple / & the kynge grauntyd att his requeſte. And dwelled vnto the .xvii. daye of Marche yt whiche tyme come to kynge Edwardes eere that ſtrōge theues were on the ſee vnder the erle of ſaynt Poule the .xv. daye of Marche 
                           •
                        yggynge a wayte vpon the townes of Raſtynge Rye and other places & vyllages on the ſee coſt hadden entred as enmyes in to the towne of wynchelle / and ſlewe all that euer withſtode them and with ſayd theyr comynge. wherfore y kynge was gretly meued and wratthed and he torned ayen so warde Parys. and cōmaūded his hoſte to dyſtroye and ſle all with ſtrench of ſwerde that he had before honde ſpared. And ye .iii. daye of Apryl the kyng come to Parys & there departed his hoſt in dyuers batayls with .iiii.C. knyghtes newe dubbyd on that one ſyde of hym. And ſyr Henry duke of Lancaſtre vnder peas & trewes went vnto the yates of the cyte proferynge to them yt wolde abyde a batayll in the felde vnder ſuche condicyon yt yf the kynge of Englonde were ouer comen there / as god forbyd it ſholde / yt than he ſholde neued chalenge the kyngdom of fraunce. And there he had

of theym but ſhort & ſcornfull anſwere & came & tolde it to the kynge & his lordes what he had herde & what they ſayd / And then̄e went forth the newe kynghtes with many other makyng aſſawte to the cyte & they dyſtroyed the ſubbarbes of the cyty. And whyle al theſe thynges were doynge the Englyſſhmen made them redy for to be auenged vpon the ſhame and dyſpyte that was done ye yere at wynſhelſe and ordeyned a nauye of .lxxx· ſhyppes of men of London and of other marchauntes & .xiii. thouſande men of armes and archers and went & ſerched and ſkūmed the ſee and manly token and helde the yle of Caux. wherfore the Frenſſhmen that is for to ſay the abbot of Cluyn the erle of Tankeruyll & burſygaude yt tho was ſtewarde of Fraunce wyth many other men of the ſame coūtre by ye comune aſſent of ye lorde Charles yt th
                           •
                         was regned of Fraunce they haſtyd them & went to the kyng of Englond aſkynge & beſechynge hym ſtedfaſte peas & euerlaſtynge vpon certayne condycōnes yt there were ſhewed wryten / The whiche whan ye kyng & hys coūſeyll had ſeen it / it pleaſed hym neuer a deale. but ſyth it wolde be none other wyſe ye tyme of better accorde & delyberacyon / ye Frenſſhemen beſely & with grete in ſtaūce aſked trewes for the ſee coſtes. and the kyng graūtyd them. ¶And in the morow after the vtas of Paſche the kynge torned hym wyth his hoſt to warde Orlyaūce deſtroyenge & waſtynge all ye coūtre by the way. And as they went theder ward there felle vpon theym ſeche a ſtorme & tempeſt yt none of our nacyon neuer herde ne ſawe none ſuche. thrugh the whyche thouſandes of ouer men & thryr horſeſ in theyr Iourney as it were thrugh vengeaunce ſodeynly were ſlayne & peryſſhed. the whiche tempeſtꝭ were full grete yet fered not ye kyng ne moche of his peple but they wente forth in theyr vyage yt they had begōne / wherfore about ye feeſt of Phylyp & Iacob in May faſt by in Carnocū the for ſayd lordes of Fraūce metynge there with the kyng of Engelonde apſyble accorde & a fynall vpon certayne condyons & graūts artycularly gadred wryten togyder euermore for to laſte dyſcertly made & to both the kynges proffytable & to both theyr reames of one aſſente of Charles the regner & gouernour of Fraūce & of Parys of the ſame reame wryten & made vnder dare of carnocū the .xv. daye of May. they offred & ꝓffred to ye kyng of Englōd requyring his grace in all thynges wryten yt he wolde benyngl
                           •
                         admyt them & holde thē 
                        
                           •
                        erme & ſtable to thē & to theyr heyres for euermore thens for the / the whiche thyngꝭ & artycles whan kyng Edwarde had ſeen thē he graūtyd them ſo yt both partyes ſholde be ſworne on goddes body / & on the Euangelyſt yt the for ſayd couenaunt ſholde be ſtablyſſhe & ſo they accorded graciouſly Therfore were ordeyned and dreſſed on euery ſyde two barons two baronettes and two kynghtes to admitte and receyue that othes of ye lord Charles regēt of Fraūce & of ſyr Eeward the fyrſte ſone and heryre of kynges Edwarde of Englonde. And the .x· daye of May there was ſongen a ſolempne maſſe at Parys. and after the Agnus dei ſayd with dona nobys pace
                           •
                         in preſence of ye for ſayd men yt were ordeyned to Admitte & receyue the othes & of all other yt there myght be. Soo Charles layd hys ryght. honde on the patent with goddes bodye & hys left honde on the myſſall & ſayd we. N. ſweren on goddes body & the holy goſpels yt we ſhall trewly & ſtedfaſtly hold toward vs ye peas & ye accorde made bytwene the two kynges / and 
                           •
                         all hys lordes for more loue and ſtrenth of wytneſſe he deaſed and departed the relyques of ye crowne of Cryſt to the knyghtes of Englond & they token curtouſly theyr leue / & the fryday nexte the ſame othe in preſence of the forſayde knyghtes & of other worthy mē prynce edwarde made att Louers. Afterwarde both kynges & theyr ſones & the mooſt noble men of both reames. within the ſame yere made ye ſame othe & for to ſtrength all theſe thyngꝭ afore ſayd the kynge of Englond axyd ye greteſt men of fraunce. & had his aſkynge that is to ſaye .vi. dukes .viii. erles & .xii. lordes all noble barons & good knyghtes And whan ye place & tyme was aſſygned in whiche both kynges with theyr counſell ſholde come to gyders. al ye forſayd thynges bytwene theym ſpoken for to retefye & make ferme and ſtable / the kyng of Englond anone wē
                        te toward the ſee & at Hountflet began to ſaylle leuynge to hys hoſtes that were lefte behynde hym by cauſe of his abſence made moche heuynes and after the .xix. day of Maye he came in to Englond & went to his palays att weſtmynſtre of ſaynt Dunſtons daye & the thyrde daye after he vyſyted Iohan Kynge of / fraunce that was in the tour of London and delyuerd hym

frely from all maner of pryſon / ſauf fyrſt they were accorded of thre myllyons of floreyns for his raunſōme / and the kynge comfortyd hym & cheryd hym in all places wyth all ſolace and myrthes that longen to a kynge in his goynge home warde. ¶And the .ix. daye of Iulii in the ſame yere this ſame Iohan kynge of / fraunce that afore laye here in hoſtage wente home ayen / in too his owne londe to treate of tho thynges and other that londe and fallen to the gouernaunce of his reame. ¶And afterwarde mette and came togyder att Calays bothe two kynges with bothe theyr counſeyll aboute all Halowen tyde. And there were ſhewed the condicyons and the poyntes of the peas and of the accorde of bothe ſydes wrytten / and there with out ony with ſayenge of bothe ſydes gracyouſly they were accorded And there was done and ſongen a ſolempne maſſe and after the thyrde Agnus dei / vpon goddes body and alſo vppon the maſſe boke bothe the kynges & theyr ſones and the gretteſt lordes of bothe reames and of theyr counſeyll that there were preſente & had not ſworne before the forſayde othe that they had made and tytled bytwene theym they behyghten to kepe / and alle other couenauntes that there bytwene them ordeyned· ¶And in thys ſame yere men beeſtes trees and houſes wyth ſodayne tempeſte and ſtronge lyghtnynge were peryſſhed / and the deuyll apperyd bodely mannes lyknes to moche people as they wente in dyuers places in the countrees / and ſpake to theym in that lyknes.
                  
                  
                     ¶How the greate company aroſe in / fraunce / and the whyte company in Lombardye and of other meruaylles.
                     Kynge Edwarde in the .xxxvi. yere of his regne anone after Cryſtenmaſſe in the feeſt of the conuerſyon of Saynt Poule helde parlemente at weſtmeſtre / in the whyche parlemente was put forthe and ſhewed the accorde and the treates that was ſtabliſſhed and made bytwene the twoo kynges whyche accorde pleaſed to moche people. And therfore by the kynges commaundement / there were gadred and come togyder in weſtmynſter chyrche the fyrſte ſondaye of lente. That is to ſaye the .ii. kal / february. the forſayd Englyſſhemen and frenſſhmen where was ſonge a ſolempne maſſe of the Trynyte of the Archebyſſhop of Caunterbury mayſter Symonde Iſſepe. And whan Agnus dei was done the kynge beynge there with his ſones / And alſo the kynges ſones of fraunce. and other noble and greate lordes / wyth candell lyght and croſſes brought forth / and that were callyd therto / that were notte ſworne afore ſwore ye ſame othe that was wryten vppon goddes bodye & on the maſſe booke in thys wyſe / we / .N. and .N: ſweren vppon goddes body and on the holy goſpels ſtedfaſtly for to holde and kepe towarde vs the peas. and the accorde made bytwene the two kȳges and neuer for to do the contrary / & whan they had thus ſworne they toke theyr ſcrowes that theyr othes were comprehended into the notaryes. And in this ſame yere in the Aſcencyons euen aboute myddaye / was ſeen the clypſes of ye ſonne / And there folowed ſuche a drought that for defaute of rayne there was grete brennynge of corne fruyte and hey. ¶And in the ſame moneth the .vi. kal of Iune there fell a ſanguyne rayne almoſte lyke blode at Burgon. and a ſāguyne croſſe from morne vnto pryme apered & was ſeen at Bolyn in the heyre the whiche many men ſaw / and after it meued and felle in the myddes of the ſee. ¶And in the ſame tyme 
                           〈◊〉
                         fraunce and Englond and many other londes as they that were in playne countre
                           •
                        s and d
                           •
                        
                        ſerte / baren withneſſe ſodeynly there apperyd two caſtels / of the whiche wēte out two hoſtes of armed mē. And that one hoſte was cloſed in whyte and that other in blacke. and whan Batayll bytwene theym was begonne the whyte ouer came the blacke toke herte tho theym and ouer come the whyte and after that they wente ayen in to theyr caſtels: and thā the caſtels and all the hooſt vanyſſhed away. ¶And in this ſame yere was a grete and an huge peſtylence of people and namely of mē / whoos wyues as womē out of gouernaunce toke huſbondes as well ſtraungers as other lewde and ſymple peple. the whyche forgetynge theyr honoure and worſhyp coupled and maryed theym with thē that were of lowe degre and lytyll repuracyon ¶In this ſame yere deyed Henry duke of Lā
                        caſtre. ¶And alſo in this ſame yere Edwarde prynce of walys wedded the counteſſe of Kente that was ſyr Thomas wyf of Holōde yt whiche was departed ſomtyme & deuorced fro the erle of Salyſbury for cauſe of the ſame knyght ¶And aboute this tyme begā and roſe a grete

company of dyuerſe naſoyns gadred togyder of whom theyr leders & gouernours were Englyſſhe people & they were called a peple wyth out ony hede the whyche dyd moche harme in the partye of fraunce· ¶And not longe after there aroſe an other company of dyuerſe nacyons that was called the whyte company / the whiche in the partyes and countrees of Lombardy dyde moche ſorowe. ¶This ſame yere ſyr Iohan of Gaunt the ſone of kyng Edwarde the thyrde was made duke of Lancaſtre by reaſon & cauſe of his wyf yt was the doughter & the heyre of Henry ſomtyme duke of Lācaſter.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the greate wynde / and how prynce Edwarde tooke the lordſhyp of Guyhē of his fader and wente theder·
                     ANd in the .xxxvii. yere of kyng Edwarde the .xv. daye of Ianyuer / that is too ſaye on ſaynt Maryes daye about euynſonge tyme there aroſe & come ſuche a wynde out of the ſouthe wyth ſuche a fyerſnes and ſtrenthe that it braſted and blewe downe to the grounde hyghe houſes and ſtronge buyldynges toures chirches & ſteples and other ſtrōge places and all other ſtronge werkes that ſtoden ſtylle were ſhaken ther with that they ben yet & ſhall euermore be the febler and weyker whyle they ſtande. And this wynde laſted without ony ceſſynge .vii. dayes contynually· And anone after there folowed ſuche waters in the hey tyme and in the harueſt tyme that all felde werkes were ſtrongely lette and lefte vndoyn. ¶And in the ſame yere prynce Edwarde toke the lordſhyp of Guyhen & dyde to kynge Edwyrde his fader homage and feaute therof / & wente ouer ſee in to Gaſcoyne with his wyf & chyldren. ¶And anone after kynge Edward made hys ſone Lyonell duke of Clarence. and ſyr Edmonde his other ſone / erle of Cambridge / & in the .xxxviii. yere of his regne it was ordeyned in the parlement that men of lawe bothe of the chyrche and temporeſlawe ſhold fro that tym for the plete in theyr moder tonge. ¶And in ye ſame yere in to Englond thre kynges that ys to ſaye the kynge of Fraunce the kynge of Cypres and the kynge of Scotlonde by cauſe to vyſyte and for to ſpeke with ye kynge of Englonde. And after that they had be here longe tyme two of them went home in to theyr owne countres and kyngodms / but ye kynge of Fraunce throughte greate ſekeneſſe and malady that he had abode ſtylle in Englonde. And in the .xxxix. yere of his regne. was a ſtrō
                        ge & a grete froſte & that laſted longe that is to ſaye fro Saynt Andrewes tyde to the .xiii. kal of Aprylſ / that the tylthe and ſowynge of the erthe and other ſuche feld werkes and honde werkes were moche lette and lefte vndoyne for colde & hardnes of the erth. And at orray in Brytayn was ordeyned a grete dedely bataylle bytwene ſyre Iohn̄ of Mountforde duke of Brytayne and ſyr charles of Bloys / but vyctory fell to the forſayd ſyr Iohn̄ thrughe helpe and ſocour of thenglyſſhmen. And there were taken many knyghtes & ſquyres & other men that vnnōbred / in ye whiche batayll was ſlayne Charles hymſelf with all yt ſtode about hym & of Englyſſhmen were ſlayne but ſeuen. and in this yere deyed at ſauoy Iohan the kynge of fraunce whos ſeruyce & exequyes kyng edwarde lete ordeyne & dyd in dyuers places worhypfully to be done / and at Douer of worſhypful men ordeyned hym worthely tho be ledde with his owne coſtes and expēces / & fro thens was brought to fraunce & buryed at ſaynt Denys. ¶In the .xl. yere of kyng Edwarde the vii. kal of Februer was borne Edwarde prynce Edwards ſone ye whiche whan he was .vii. yere of-aege he deyed· And in the ſame yere it was ordeyned yt ſaynt Peters pens fro ye tyme forthe ſholde not be payed the whyche kyng yuo ſomtyme kynge of Englond of the countre of weſt ſaxen yt began to regne ye yere of our lord god .vi· hondred .lxxix. fyrſt graunted to Rome for ye ſcole of Englond therto be contynued. ¶And in thys ſame yere there fell a grete rayne in hey tyme yt it waſted & dyſtroyed both corne & hey. And there was ſuche debate & fyghtinge of ſparowes by dyuerſe places in theſe dayes yt men founde innumerable dede in the feldes as they wente. And there fell alſo ſuche a peſtylence yt neuer ſeen ſuche in noo mannes dayes yt than lyued / for men yt wente to beded hole & in good poynt ſodenly they dyed. ¶Alſo ye tyme a ſykenes that men calle the pockes ſlewe bothe mē & women thrugh theyr enfectinge. ¶And in the xli. yere of kynge Edward was borne at Burdeux Rycharde the ſeconde ſone of prynce Edwarde of Englond / the whiche Rychard kynge Rycharde of Amorycan heueden at the foū
                        
                           •
                         ſtone after whom he was called Rychard. and this ſame Rycharde whan his fader was deed

& kyng Edwarde alſo / he was crowned kyng of Englonde the .xi. yere of his aege thrugh ryghte lyne and herytage / & alſo by the com
                           •
                        ne aſſent and deſyre of ye comynalte of the reame. ¶Aboute this tyme at kyng Edwardes commaundement of Englond whan all the caſtels & townes were yolden to hym that longe were holden in / fraunce by a grete company aſſembled togyder ſyr Bartram Claykyn a noble knyght and a good warryour wente and purpoſed hym to put out Pers kynge of Spayne out of his kyngdome with helpe of the mooſte partye of the forſayd grete company truſtynge alſo vpon helpe and fauour of the pope for as moche as it come to his eeres that ye ſame pers ſholde lede & vſe a ſynfull lyf / the whiche Pers ſmyten wyth drede of this tydynge fledde into Gaſcoyne to prynce Edwarde for to haue ſocoure of hym. And whan he was fledde out of Spayne Henry his broder that was baſtarde by aſſent of the mooſt party of Spayne & thrughe helpe of ye ferefull company that I ſpake of fyrſt was crowned kyng of Spayne. & ye nombre of that ſame cōpany was rekened & ſette at the nombre of .xl.M. fytynge men. ¶This ſame yere in the moneth of Iune there come a grete cōpany & a nauye of ye Danes gadred them togyder in the Northe ſee purpoſynge them to come into Englonde to reue and to robbe and alſo to ſle with whom they countred & mette in the ſee. maryners and other gode fytynge men o
                           •
                         the countre & dyſperpled theym. And they aſhamyd went home ayen into theyr owne coū
                        tre / but amonge ye other there was a boyſtous veſſell and a ſtronge of theyr nauye that was ouer ſaylled by the Englyſſhmen & was peryſſhed & drenched In the whiche the Stewarde & other worthy and greate men of Denmarke were taken pryſoners / & the kynge of Englonde & his coūſeyll pryſoned them. the whiche lordes the Danes afterwarde ſought them all about for to haue hadde them ayen wyth. theyr goodes yt they had loſt / & they not well apayed ne pleaſed of ye anſwer that they had / & they torned homwardes ayen leuynge behynde thē in there Innes preuely writen in ſcrowes and on walles. yet ſhall Danes waſt the wanes Thenne happed there an Englyſſhe wryter & wrote ayenſt the Duke in this manere (here ſhall Danes fette theyr banys) ¶And in this time pers the kynge of Spayne with other kynges that is to ſaye. the kynge of Nauerne and the kynge of Malogre beynge meanes wenten bytwene and prayed counſeyll and helpe of ſyr Edwarde the prynce whos counſeyll whan he had vnderſtandynge theyr artycles and deſyre that he was requyred of tho kynges / lothe he was and aſhamed to ſaye nay and contrary to them. But netheles he was a gaſt leſt it ſhold be ony preiudyce ayenſt the pope and longe tyme taryed them or that he wolde graunte or conſente therto tyll he had better counſeyl rauyſemente with good delyberacyon of kyng Edward his fader. But whan they were with hym euery day & contynually beſechynge of many noble men requyred & ſpoken to / & with many prayers ſente & made bytwene them. thā prynce edward ſente to his fader both by cōplaynyng letters & alſo by confortable conteynyng al theyr ſuggeſtyons & cauſes wyth all ye other kynges epyſtles & letters for to haue cōforte & helpe of the wronges not only done to the kyng Spayne. but alſo for ſuche thynges as myght falle to other kynges. Alſo yf it were not ye ſoner holpē and amended thrugh the done & helpe of knyghthode to thē that it aſked & deſyred. ¶The whiche letter whan the kynge & hys counſeyll had ſeen ſuche a kynge ſpoylynge & robbynge with moche merueyll. And ſente ayen comfortable letters to prynce Edwarde hys ſone & to that other kynges & warned them for to arme them & ordeyne theym ayenſt that miſdoer and to withſtande them by the helpe of god that were ſuche enmies to kynges. whā this noble prȳ
                        ce had receyued this letters / hym ſelf with that other kynges before ſayd all there counſeyl called togider or that he wolde vndertake the quarell he bounde & knytte ſore ye kynge that was depoſed with a grete oth / that is to ſaye that he ſholde euer after mayntene the ryght byleue & faythe of holy chyrche / and alſo wyth all theyr mynyſters ryghtes & libertees to defende from all theyr enmyes & all euylles. And al that were there ayenſt bytterly to punyſſhe & deſtroble & al ye ryghtꝭ lybertes preuyleges of holy chirche encreaſe & mayntene / & amende alle thynges yt were wronfully taken withdrawen and borē a waye by hym or by ony other by cauſe of hym haſtely to reſtore ayen & to dryue and put oute ſaraſyns & all other myſbyleued people out of his kyngdom wyth all his ſtrenth & his power and ſuffre ne admitte none ſuche for no manere

thynge ne cauſe to dwelle therin / And that whan he had taken a cryſten woman he ſholde neuer come in to none other womans bedde / ne none other mannes wyfe to defoyle. ¶All thyſe for ſayd thynges trewly for to kepe contynue and fulfyll as alle hys lyfe tyme he was douuden by othe afore notaryes in preſence & wytneſſe of tho kynges wyth other prynces. ¶And than that gracyous prynce Edwarde vndertoke the cauſe & the quarell of the kyng that was depoſed and behyghte hym with the grace of almyghty god to reſtore hym ayen to his kyngdom / & lette ordeyne & gadre togyder forth with in alle haſte his nauye with men of armes for to warre and fyght in his for ſayde cauſe. ¶And in this ſame yere vpon the ſande of the Scottes ſee yt many a man ſawe it thre dayes togyder there were ſeen two Egles / of the whiche ye one come out of the ſouthe & that other out of the north & cruelly & ſtrongly they fought togyder & wraſtled togyder / & the ſouth elge fyrſt ouercome ye north Egle & all to rente hym with his bylle & his clawes yt he ſhold not reſte ne take no byrthe & the ſouth Egle fleyth home to his owne coſtes· ¶And anone after there folowed & was ſeen in the morne after ye ſonne ryſynge & after in the laſt daye of Octobre ſauynge one many ſterres gaddred togyder on an hepe felle downe to the erthe leuynge byhynde them fyre bemes in maner of lyghtnynge / was flammes brent & cōſumed mens clothes & mens heer wallyng on ye erth as it was ſene & knowē of many a man. ¶And yet yt northern wynde yt is redy & deſtymate to alle ylle fro ſaynt Katherynes eue tyll thre dayes after loſte grete good without nobre. ¶And in this ſame dayes ther fell & alſo come ſuch lyghtnynge thondre ſnowe & hayll that it waſted and deſtoyed men beſtetes howſes and trees.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the batayll of Spayne beſyde the watre of Naxers that was bytwene prynce Edwarde / and ſyr Henry baſtarde of Spayne.
                     IN the yere of our lord a .M.CCC.lxvii and of kynge Edwarde .xlii. the thyrde daye of Aprylle there was a ſtronge batayll & a grete in large felde called Pryazers faſte by the water of Nazers in Spayne bytwene ſyre Edwarde the prynce & ſyr Henry the baſtarde of Spayne / but the vyctory fyll to prynce Edwarde by the grace of god. ¶And this ſame prynce Edwarde had with hym ſyr Iohn̄ duke of Lācaſtre his broder & other worthy men of armes about the nombre of .xxx. thouſand. ¶And the kynge of Spayne had on hys ſyde men of dyuers nacyons to the nombre of an hondred thouſande & moo / wherfore the ſharpeneſſe and fyerſneſſe of hys aduerſary wyth his fyll boyſtous and grete ſtrenthe made and dryue ye ryghtfull partye a backe a grete waye but thrugh the grace of almyghty god paſſynge ony mannes ſtrenth that greate hoſte was dyſparpled myghtefully by the noble duke of Lancaſtre and his hooſt / or ye prynce Edwarde came nyghe hym. And whan Henry baſtarde ſawe that / he torned with his men in ſo grete haſte and ſtrenth for to flee / that a gret company of them in the for ſayd flood & of ye brydge ther of fellen dowen & peryſſhed. And alſo there were taken the erle of Dene & ſyr Bartram Cleykyn that was cheyfmaker and cauſe of ye warre & alſo cheyftayne of the vauntwarde of the bataylle wyth many other greace lordes and knyghtes to the nombre of two thouſande / of whome two hondred were of Fraunce and many alſo of Scotlonde. ¶And there were felled in the felde on oure enmyes ſyde of lordes & knyghtes wyth other meyn people to the nombre of .vi. thouſande and moo / and of Englyſſhmen but a fewe. And after this the noble prynce Edward reſtored ye ſame Peers to this kyngdome ayen / the whiche Peers afwarde thrugh trechery and falſnes of the forſayd baſterd of Spayne as he ſatte at his mete he was ſtrangled & deyed. But after this vyctorye many noble men of Englond / & alſo hardy in Spayne thrug the flyx & dyuers other ſekenes toke theyr dethe. ¶And alſo in the ſame yere in the Marche was ſeen ſtella Come ta bytwene the north coſtes & ye weſt whoos bemes ſtretched towarde fraunce. ¶And in the next yere folowynge of kyng Edwardes regne xliii. in Apryll ſyr Lyonell kynge Edwardes ſone that was duke of Clarnece wente to warde Melayne with a choſen meyne of the gētyls of Englonde for to wedde Galoys doughter & haue hyr to hys wyfe / by whom he ſholde haue half ye lordſhyp of Melayne but after that they were ſolemply wedded and about ye Natyuyte of our lady the ſame duke of Melayne deyed. And in the ſame yere / frenſſhmen brake the peas & the trewes rydynge on ye kyngꝭ grounde & lordſhyp of Englond in the ſhyre & countre of

Puūtyfe / & token & helde caſtell & townes / & bere the Englyſſhmen on honde falſly & ſubtyll that they were cauſe of brekynge of trewes. & in thys ſame yere deyed the duches of Lācaſtre and is buryed worſhypfully in ſaynte Poules chyrche. ¶The .xliiii. yere of kyng Edwardes regne was the greteſt peſtylence of men and of grete beſtes & by the grete fallynge of waters yt felle at that tyme / there fell grete hyndrynge & deſtroyenge of corne in ſo moche that ye next yere after a buſſhell of whete was ſolde for .xl.d. ¶And in thys ſame yere about the laſte ende of Maye kynge Edwarde helde tho his parlement at weſtmyſter in whiche parlement was treated & ſpoken of the othe & trewes that was brokē bytwene hym and the kynge of / fraunce & how he myght be auenged vpon his wronge ¶In this ſame yere in the Aſſumpcyō of our lady deyed quene Phylyp of Englonde a fulle noble & gode lady & at weſtmyſter full worſhyp fully is buryed and entered And aboute mydſomer ye duke of Lancaſtre & the erle of Herforde with a grete company of knyghtes wente into fraunce where as they gate them but lytel wroſhyp & name / for there was a grete hoſte of the frenſſhenmen vppon Calkhull brydge / and an other hoſte of Englyſſemen faſte by the ſame brydge that lōge tyme had lyued there And many worthy & grete men of Englonde ordeyned & yaf counſeyll for to fyght & yaf batayll to the frenſſhemen but the forſayd lordes wolde not conſent therto for no maner thynge. ¶And anone after it happened that ye erle of warwyke come thyderwarde for to warre / and whan the frenſſhmen herde of his comynge of that he came fully to londe they left theyr tentes & pauylyous wyth all theyr vytayls & fledde & went a waye pryuely. And whan the erle was comē to londe wyth his men he went in all haſt towarde Normandy & deſtroyed the yle of Caux with ſtrenthe of ſwerde and thrugh fyre But alas in his retornynge to Englond warde home ayen at Calys he was taken with ſykenes of peſtylence & deyed not leuynge behynde hym after his dayes ſoo noble a knyght of armes. ¶In whyche tyme regned & warred ye noble knyght ſyr Iohn̄ Hawkewod yt was an Englyſſhman borne / hauynge with hym at his gouernaunce the white cōpany that is a forſayde. yt whiche o tyme ayenſt holy chirche & an other tyme ayenſte lordes warred & ordeyned grete batayls and there ī that ſame coūtre he dyde many merueyllous thynges. ¶And aboute the cōuercyon of ſaynt Poule the kyng whan he had ended & done the entrynge & exequyes wyth greate coſtes and ryaltes about ye ſepulture of & buryeng of quene Phylyp his wyf he helde a parlement at weſtmyſter in whyche parlement was axed or ye clergye a thre yeres dyme / that is for to ſaye a grete dyme to payed thre yere durynge / & the clargye put it of and wolde not graunte it vnto Eſter next comynge / & than they graunted wel that in thre yere by certayne termes that dyme ſholde be payed and alſo of the laye fee was a thre yere .xv. graunted to the kynge.
                  
                  
                     ¶How ſyr Robert Knolles with other certayne lordes of the reame went ouer ſee in to frauce and of theyr gouernaunce.
                     ANd in the .xlv. yere of kynge Edward in the begynnynge kynge Edwarde with vnwyſe counſeyll & vndyſcrete borowed a grete ſōme of golde of the prelates marchauntes & other ryche men of his reame ſaynge that it ſholde deſpended in defendyn he of holy chyrche & of his reame netheles it profyted no thynge / wherfore aboute mydſomer after he made a grete hoſt of the worthyeſt men of hys reame Amōges whom were ſome lordes yt is to ſay the lorde Fytzwater & the lord graunſon and other worthy knyghtꝭ of whyche knyghtꝭ the kynge ordeyned ſyr Robert Knolles a proude kny
                           •
                        t and a welle aſſayd in dedes of armes for too be gouerneur / & that thrugh his counſeyl & gouernaunce all thynge ſhold be gouerned & dreſſed And whan they come into / fraunce as longe as they dwelled & helde them hole togyder yt frenſhemen durſte not fall vpon them. And att the laſte about ye begynnynge of wynter for enuye & couetyſe that was amōge them / and alſo dyſcorde they ſondred & parted them into dyuerſe cōpanyes vnwyſely & foleſly. But ſyr Robert Knolles & hys men wente & keped thym ſaufe within a caſtell in Brytayne. And whan the frenſſhmen ſawe yt our men and felauſhyp were diuyded into dyuerſe companyes and places not holdynge ne ſtrengthynge thym togyders as they out for to do / they felle fyerſly on oure men / & for the mooſt partye toke them or ſlewe thē. & tho that they might take ledde with them pryſoners. ¶And in ye ſame yere pope Vrban
                           •
                         came fro rome to Auynyon for this cauſe that he ſholde accorde & made peas bytwene ye kynge

of Fraūce & the kynge of Englond for euer more. But alas or he began his treates he deyed wyth ye ſekeneſſe the .xxi day of Decembre / and was buryed as for the tyme in the cathedrall chyrche of Auynyon faſt by the hygh awter. and the nexte yere after whan he had lyen ſo his bones were taken out of the erth & buryed new in the abbay of ſaynt vyctorye faſt by Marcylle / of the whiche abbaye he was ſomtyme abbot hymſelf. And in both places that he was baryed in there he many grete myrcales done & wrough thrugh the grace of almighty god to many mānes helpe & to the worſhyp of god almghty. ¶And after whom folowed nexte and was made pope Gregorye Cardynalle Deken that before was called Pyers Roger. ¶In the ſame yere Lymoge rebelled & faught ayenſt the prynce as other cytes dyde in Guyhem for grete taxes coſſages & raunſons yt they were put and ſete to by prynce Edwarde / whyche charges were importable / wherfore they turned fro hym and fellen to the kynge of Fraunce. And whan prynce Edwarde this he was ſore chafed & agreued / and in hys tornynge home warde ayen in to Englonde with ſore ſcar muſſhes and fytynge and grete ſautes fought with theym and toke the forſayd cytee and deſtroyed it almooſt to the grounde and ſlewe all that he founde in the cyte. And than for to ſay the ſothe for dyuerſe ſekenes & maladyes that he had and alſo for defaute of money yt he myghte not with ſtande ne tary on hys enmyes he hyed hym ayen in to Englonde with his wyfe and menye leuynge behynde in Gaſcoyne the duke of Lancaſtre & ſyr Edmond erle of Cambrydge wyth other worthy and noble men of armes. ¶In the .xlvi. yere of kynge Edward at the ordynaunce and ſengynge of kynge Edwarde / the kynge of Nauerne come to hym to Claryngdon to treate wyth hym of certayne thynges touchynge his warre in Normandye where kynge / Edwarde had left certayne ſyeges in his ſtede tyll he come ayen. But kynge Edwarde myghte not ſpede of that that he ſeked hym. And ſo the kynge of Nauerne wyth grete worſhyp & grete gyftes to his leue & wente home ayen. ¶And abowte begynnynge of Marche whan the parlemente at weſtmyſter was begon the kyng aſked of the clergye a ſubſydye of .l.M. poūde the whiche by a good auyſement and by a generall cōuocaōn of the clergye it was graunted & ordeyned that it ſholde be payed and reyſed of the lay fee. And in thys parlement at the requeſt aſkynge of the lordes in hatred of men of holy chirche. the Chaunceler & the treſourer that were byſſhops and the clerke of the pryue ſale. were remeued and put out of offyce & in theyr ſtede were ſeculer men put in. And whyle thys parlement laſted there come ſomlepne embaſſatours fro the pope to treate with the kyng of peas and ſayd that the pope deſyred to fulfyll his predeceſſours wyll but for all theyr comynge they ſped not.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the beſygynge of Rochell & how the erle of Penbroke & his cōpany was takē in ye hauen wyth ſpanyerdes & all hys ſhyppes brent.
                     THe .ix. daye of Iune kynge Edward in the .xlvii. yere of his regne helde his parlemente at whyncheſtre & it laſted but .viii. dayes / to the whiche parlement were ſompned by wryte of men of holy chyrche .iiii. byſſhops & .v. abbottes without ony moo. This parlement was holden for marchauntes of London of Norwhiche & of other dyuerſe placꝭ in dyuerſe thynges and poyntes of traſon that they were defamed of / that is to ſaye that they were rebell & wolde ariſe ayenſt the kynge this ſame yere the duke of Lancaſtre & the erle of Cambrydge his brother come out of Gaſcoyne into Enlonde & tooke & wedded to theyr wyues peters doughter ſomtyme kynge of Spayne Of whyche two doughters the duke had the elder & the erle ye yonger. & that ſame tyme there were ſent two Cardynals fro the pope / that is to ſaye an Englyſſhe Cardynall & a Cardynal of Parys to treate of peas bytwene theſe two reames / yt whyche whan they had ben both longe eche in his prouynce & countreees faſt by treatynge of the forſayd peas / att the laſt they toke with theym the lettes of procuracye & went ayen to Rome without ony effect of theyr purpoſe. ¶In this yere was there a ſtronge Batayll in the ſee bytwene Englyſſhmen and flemynges and ye Englyſſhmen had the victory & toke .xxv. ſhyppes with ſalt and ſleynge and drenchynge all ye mē that were therin vnwetynge they they were of that countree. And moche harme ſhold haue fallen therof had not peas & accorde ſone be made bytwene them. ¶And in this ſame yere the frenſſhmen beſyeged the towne of Rochell wherfore the erle Penbroke was ſent into gaſcoyne wyth a grete company of men of armes

for to dyſtroye the ſyege / whyche paſſed the ſee and came ſauf to the hauen of Rochell / & whan they were there at the hauē mouth or that they myght entre / ſodaynly come vpon them a ſtrō
                        ge nauye of Spanyardes ye whiche ouercame the Englyſſhmen in moche blemyſſhynge hurtinge and ſleynge of many people for as moche as the Englyſſhmen were than not redy for to fyght ne were ware of them. And as the Spanyerdes came vpon them all the Englyſſhmen other they were takē or ſlayne / and .x. of theym were ſore woūded to the deth and all theyr ſhyppes brente / and there they toke the erle wyth a grete treſour of the reame of Englōde and many other noble mē alſo on mydſomer euen the whiche is ſaȳt Edeldredꝭ daye and ledde them with them into Spayne. And of this myſcheyf was no grete wonder for this erle was a full ylle lyuer as an open lechoure And alſo in a certayne parlemente he ſtode and was ayenſt the ryghtes & fraunchyſe of holy chyrche And alſo he counſeylled the kyng and counſeyll that he ſhold axe mo of men of holy chyrche than other perſones of the laye mē. And for the kynge and other men of hys counſeyll accepted and tooke rather ylle opynyons and cauſes ayenſte men of holy chyrche than he dyd for to defende and mayntene the ryght of holy chyrche / it was after ſeen many tymes for lacke of fortune & grace they had not ne bare awaye ſo grete vyctory ne power ayenſt theyr enmyes as they dyd before. ¶This ſame yere the kyng with a grete hoſt entred the ſee to remeue the ſyege of Rochell / but the wynde was euer contrarye vnto hym and ſuffred hym not lōge tyme to go fer fro the londe / wherfore he abode a certayne tyme vpon the ſee coſtes abydynge after a good wynde for thē & yet come in not So at ye laſt he come thens with his mē to lond warde ayen. & anone as he was a londe yt wynde began to torne & was in an other coſt than he was afore.
                  
                  
                     ¶How the duke of Lancaſtre with a grete hooſt wente into / flaundres & paſſyd by Parys thrugh Burgon & thrugh all fraūce tyll he come vnto Burdeux.
                     SOone after in the .xlviii. yere of the regne of kynge Edwarde the duke of Lancaſtre with a grete power went into / flaundres & paſſed by Parys thrugh Burgon & thrughe all / fraunce tyll he came vnto Burdeux without ony maner wythſtandynge of the / frenſſhemen \ and he dyde them but lytell harme ſaufe he toke & raunſoned many places & townes & many men & lette theym go after frely. The ſame yere the kyng ſent certayne embaſſatours to ye pope prayenge hym that he ſholde leue of & medle not in his court of the kepīge and reſeruacyōs of benefycꝭ in Englonde. And that tho that were choſē to byſſhoppes ſees & dignetees frely & wyth full myght Ioy & haue & be confermed to the ſame of theyr metropolytans & Archebyſſhops as they were wonte to be of olde tyme Of theſe poyntes and of other touchynge the kyng & his reame / whan they had theyr anſwer of the pope / the pope enioyned them that they ſholde certefy hym ayen by theyr letter of ye kynges wyll & of hys reame or they determyned ought of the forſayd artycles In this ſame yere deyed Iohan the Archebyſſhop of yorke / Iohan byſſhop of Ely / wyllyam byſſop of worceſtre. In whoos ſtedes folowed & were made byſſhops by auctoryte of pope. maſter. Alexander Neuyll to the Archebyſſhop of yorke. Thomas of Arūdell to the byſſhopryche of Ely. and ſyr Henry wakfelde to the byſſhopryche of worceſtre. In the whiche tyme it was ordened in ye parlement that all Cathedrall chyrches ſhold Ioy & haue theyr eleccōns hole & yt the kyng fro that tyme afterwarde ſhold not wrytte ayenſt thē that were choſen / but rather helpe them by his letters to theyr confyrmacyon & this ſtatute dyd moche profyte. ¶And in this parlemēt was graūtyd to the kynge a dyme of the clergy & a .xv. of lay fee. ¶In the .xlix. of the regne of kyng Edward deyed Mayſter wyllyam wytleſey Archebyſſhop of Caunterbury & the mō
                        kes of the ſame chirche aſked and deſyred a cardynall of Englonde to be Archebyſſhop. & therfore the kyng was agreued & ment & purpoſed to haue exyled the mōkes of the ſame. and they ſpended moche good or they myght haue ye kynges grace ayen & his loue but yet wold the kynge not conſent ne graunt to theyr eleccōn of ye Cardynall ne of the pope alſo ne his Cardynalles. ¶And at the begynnyge of Auguſt it was treated & ſpoken at Bruges of certayne poyntes / and artycles hangynge bytwene the pope and the kynge of Englond / this treates laſted almooſt too yere. And at the laſte it was accorded bytwene theym that the pope fro that tyme forth ſholde not vſe ne dele wyth the reſeruacyons of benefytes in Englonde / and that

the kynge ſholde not graunt ne lette no benefyces by hys wrytte yt is called (Quare impedyt) But as touchynge the eleccion aboueſayd there was noo thynge touched ne done. And that was wyted and put vpon certayne clerkes the whiche rather ſuppoſed and hoped to be auaū
                        ced & promoted to byſſhhpryches whiche they deſyred and coueyted by the court of Rome rather than by ony other eleccyons / ¶This ſame yere about Candelmaſſe there mette togyder att Bruges many noble & worthy men of bothe ſydes and reames to trete of peas bitwene tho two kynges. And this tretes laſted two yere with grete coſtes & large expenſens of bothe partyes. And at the laſte they went & departed thens without ony accorde or effecte. The next yere after the .l. yere of kynge Edward ye .iiii. Non̄ of May beynge yet voyde & vacaunt the Archebyſſhopryche of Caunterbury mayſter Symonde ſudbery byſſhoppe of London was made Archebyſſhop & mayſter wyllyam courteney that was byſſhop of Herforde was than made byſſhop of London / & the byſſhop of Bangor was made byſſhop of Herforde. ¶And this ſame tyme in a certayne treates & ſpekynge of peas trewes was taken bytwene them of Fraūce & Englonde fro mydſomer to mydſomer come ayen an hole yere & about the begynnyng of Aprell ye duke of brytayne wyth many erles barons and worthy lordes & men of Englond went ouer ſee in to Brytayn where he hathe had all his luſte deſyre & purpoſe ne had the for ſayd trewes be ſoo ſoone taken the whiche letted them. ¶This ſame tyme the yle of Conſtantyne where that the caſtell of ſaynt Saueour is in. that longe tyme was foughten at & beſyeged of the Frenſſhmen than yelde to the Frenſſhmen with al the apportenaūtes in to grete harme & hyndrynge of ye reame of Englonde And thys ſame yere there were ſo grete and ſo paſſynge hetes & ther with all a gret peſtylence in Englonde & in other dyuerſe partyes of 
                           •
                        he worlde yt it deſtroyed & ſlewe vyolently & ſtrōgly both men & wymen without nombre. Thys ſame yere deyed ſyr Edwarde ye lorde ſpencer a worthy knyghte & a bolde & in the mynſter of Teukeſbury worſhipfully is buryed. And laſtynge this peſtilence the pope at the inſtaunce and prayer of an Englyſſhe Cardynale graunted to all people that deyed in Englonde that were ſory & repentaūt for theyr ſynnes and alſo ſhryuē full remyſſyon by two bulles vnder lede .vi. monethes than next to laſt. ¶In this ſame yere the erle of Penbroke was taken & raūſoned bi Bartram Clayken bytwene Parys & Calays as he come towarde Englond vpon ſaynt Atheldredes day yt whiche ſaynt as it was ſayd the erle oftentymes had affē
                        ded / and within a lytyll whyle after he deyed. ¶And in Nouembre next after there mette at Bruges the duke of Lancaſtre and the duke of Angoy with many other lordes and prelates of bothe reames for to treate of peas.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the dethe of prynce Edwarde and of the lorde Latymer and dame Alyce peres thrughe whome and hyr maynteners ye Reame many a daye was myſgouerned.
                     NOt longe after the .li. yere of Kyng Edwardes regne he lette ordeyne & holde at weſtmynſter the gretteſt parlement yt was ſeen many a yere afore. In the whiche parlemente he aſked of the comynaltee of the reame as hee had done afore a grete ſubſydye to be graunted to hym for defēdynge of hym and of his reame but ye comunes anſwerd that they were ſoo ofte daye by daye greued & charged with ſo mani talag
                           •
                        s & ſubſydyes yt they myght no lēger ſuffre noo ſuche burthōs and charges & that they knewe & wyſt well ynough that the kynge had ynough for ſauynge of hym and of hys reame yf the reame were well & truely gouerned / But that it had bee ſoo longe euyll gouerned by ylle offycers / that the reame myght nother be plenteuous of chaffre & marchaundyſe ne alſo with rycheſſe. And in theſe thynges they profyred themſelf yf the Kyng wolde certaynly to preue it and ſtande by. and yf it were foundē and proued afterwarde that the Kynge had nede they wolde gladly euery man after hys power and ſtate hym helpe and lene. And after this were publyſſhed & ſhewed in the parlemente many playntes and defautes of dyuers offycers of ye reame and namely of the Lorde Latymer the kynges chamberlayne bothe to the Kynge and eke to the reame. ¶And alſo att the laſte there was ſpoken & treated of dame Alyce Pers for the grete wronges & euyll gouernaunce yt was done by hyr counſeyl in the reame The whiche dame Alyce pers that ye kyng had holden longe tyme to hys lemman wherfore it was the laſte wonder though thrugh the frealter of the womans excytynge & hyr ſteringe he conſented to

hyr lewdneſſe & euyll coūſeyl the whiche dame Alyce & alſo the lorde Latymer & other ſuche ye meued the kynge to euyll gouernaunce ayenſt his profyte & the reame alſo / all the comynalte aſked & deſyred that they ſholde be remeued & put awaye and in theyr ſtedes wyſe mē & worthy that were trewe & wel aſſaied & proued and of good gouernaunce. ſholde be put in theyr ſtedes. So amonge al other there was one amonge the comunes that a wyſe knyght and a trewe / and an eloquent man whoos name was Pers delamare. And this ſame pers was choſen to be ſpeker for the comunes in the parleament And for this ſame Pers tolde and publyſſhed the trouthe and reherſed ye wronges ayenſte the forſayd dame Alyce & other certayne perſones of the kynges counſeyll as he was bydde by the comyns. ¶And alſo truſtynge moche to be ſupported & mayntened in thys mater by helpe & fauour of the. prynce anone as the prynce was dede att the inſtaunce & requeſte of the forſayd dame Alyce / thys Pers de amare was Iugyd to perpetual pryſon in the caſtell of Notyngham. ¶And in the .vi. kal. of Iule laſtynge ye ſame parlemente deyed prynce Edwarde kynge Edwardes fyrſt ſone / that is to ſaye in trynyte ſonday in worſhyp of whyche feſte he was wōte euery yere where that euer he were ī ye worlde to holde and made the mooſt ſolēpnyte that he myght. whos name & fortune of knyghthode but yf it had be of an other Ector alle men bothe cryſten & hethen whyle that he liued & was in good poynt wōdred moche and dradde hym wonder ſoore / whoos body is worſhypfully buryed in Crychyrche at Caunterbury. And in this ſame yere the mē and the erles tenauntes of warwyk aroſe malycyouſly ayenſt ye abbot & couent of Eueſham & theyr tenauntes. & deſtroyed thabbaye. & the towne & woūded & bete theyr men & ſlewe many of theym / & wente to theyr maners & places & dyde moche harme / and brake downe ther parkes & cloſes & ſlewe theyr wylde beſtes & chaced them brekynge theyr fyſſhe poundes & hedes & lete the water of theyr pondes ſtewes & ryuers renne out & toke the fyſſhe & bare it with them. and dyde theym all the ſorowe that they myght. in ſo ferforthe that forſoth they had deſtroyed perpetuall that abbay with all theyr membres & apportenaunces but yf the kynge the ſoner had not holpen it & taken hede therto. & therfore the kyng ſent his letters to ye erle of warwyk chargyng hym & cōmaūdynge hym that he ſholde ſtynt redreſſe & amende tho euyll doers & brekers of his peas. and ſo by meanes of lordes & other frendes the peas was made bitwene them. and for this hurtynge as it is ſayd ye kynge wolde not be gouerned as that tyme bi his lordes that there were in ye parlement. but he toke & made his ſone the duke of Lancaſtre his gouerneur of the reame / the whiche ſtode ſoo ſtyll as gouernour tyl ye tyme that he dyed. ¶The ſame yere after. cā
                        delmaſſe or the parlement was done / the Kynge aſked a ſubſidye of the clargy & of the lay fee & it was graūtyd hȳ / that is to ſay that he ſholde haue of euery perſone of ye lay fee both man and woman that paſſed fourtene yere of aege foure pēs out takē pore beggers that were knowen openly for nede pore beggers. ¶And that he ſhold haue of euery man of the holy chyrche that was benefyced or promoted twelue pens and all other that were not promoted iiii. pens out taken the .iiii. ordres of the frere beggers This ſame yere after Myghelmaſſe Rycharde prynce Edwardes ſone was made prynce of wales to whom the kyng gaf ye duchy of cornewayle with ye erldom of cheſtre. And about this tyme ye Cardynale of Englond ye .iiii. day before mary Mawdalenes day after dyner ſodaynly was ſmyte with the paſlye and loſte his ſpeche / & on mary Mawdalen
                           •
                        s daye deyed.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of ye dethe of Kynge Edwarde & how ſyr Iohan Monſter warch knyght. was drawē & hanged for his falſneſſe.
                     Ryght anone after in the .lii. yere of Kynge Edward in the begynnynge of Octobre pope Gregorye the .ix. broughte & remeued his courte wyth hym from Auy
                           •
                        yon to come. ¶And the .xii. daye of Apryl. Iohan Monſterwarthe. Knyght att London was drawen & hangyd & than quartred & ſent to four cheyf townes of Englond & his heed ſmyten of & ſete vpon londen brydge / for this ſame Iohn̄ was full vntrewe to the kynge and to ye reame & coueytous & vnſtable / for he tooke oftymes grete ſōmes of money of the kynge & his coūſeyll for men of armes wages that he ſholde haue paed them & tooke it to his owne vſe / & he dradde that att the laſte he ſholde be ſhent & accuſed for the ſame cauſe and fled pryuely to the kyng of Fraunce & was ſworne to hym & become hys man and behyghte hym a greate nauye out of

Spayne in to confucyon & deſtroynge of Englonde / But the ryghtfull god to whom no preuyte is vnknowen ſuffred hym fyrſt to beſhente & ſpylt or that he ſo traytourſly and falſly betrayed hys lyege lorde the kynge of Englonde and his peple in hys reame in the whiche groū
                        de this ſame Iohn̄ was borne & wyckydly thrughe batayll deſtroyed or he brought about hys curſed purpoſe. In the feeſt of Saynt George tho next kynge Edwarde gaaf to Rychard of Burdeux his heyr yt was prynce Edwardes ſone at wyndſore thordre of knughthode & made hym knyght the whyche kyng Edward whan he had regned .li. yere the .xi. kal of Iune he deyde at Shene & is buryed worſhypfully at weſtmyſter on whos ſoule god haue mercy. Thys kynge Edwarde was for ſoth of a paſſynge godenes & full gracyous amonge all the worthy men of the worlde for he paſſed & ſhone by vertue of grace gauen to hym from god aboue all his predeceſſours yt were noble men & worthy and he was a well harted man & an hardy / for he drade neuer no myſhappes ne harmes ne euyll fortune yt myght fall a noble warryoure & a fortunate / for both on londe & ſee & in all batayls & aſſembles with a paſſinge glory & Ioy he had the vyctory he was meke & benygne homely ſobre & ſoft to all mē as well to ſtraūgers as to his owne ſubgettes & to other yt were vnder his gouenaūce. He was deuoute & holy bothe to god & hooly chyrche / for he worſhypped holpe & mayntened holy chirche & theyr mynyſtres wyth all maner reuerence / he was treatable & well auyſed in temporall & worldly nedes wyſe in counſeylle & dyſcrete & meke to ſpeke with / in his dedes & maners gentyll and well taught / hauynge pyte of them that were in dyſeace / plecteuous in geuynge of bene faytes & almoſes beſy & curyous in bayldynge / & lyghtly he bare & ſuffred wronges and harmes and whan he was gyuen to ony occupacyon he lefte all other thynge for the tyme & tended ther to ſemely of body and a meyne ſtature / hauynge al waye to hyghe & to lowe a good chere. And here ſpronge and ſhone ſo moche grace of hym that what man had beholde hys face or had dremed of hym he roged that daye that all thynge ſholde hap to hym Ioyfull and lyſynge. And he gouerned hys kyngdome gloryouſly vnto his aege / he was large in geuynge and wyſ in ſpentes / he was fulfylled wyth all his honeſte of good maners and vertues / vnder whom to lyue it was as for to regne. wherfore hys fader and his loos ſpronge ſo ferre that it came in to hethenes & Barbary ſhewynge and tellynge his worthynes & manhode in alle londes / and that no londe vnder heuen had brought forthe ſo noble a kynge ſoo gentyll and ſoo bleſſyd or myght reyſe ſuche an other whan he was dede Neuertheles lechery and meuynge of his fleſſhe hauntyd hym in his aege / wherfore the rather as it is to ſuppoſe for vnmeſurable fulfyllynge of his luſte his lyfe ſhorted the ſoner. ¶And hereof take good hedelyke as his dedys bereth wymeſſe for as in hys begynnynge alle thynges were Ioyfull & lykynge to hym / and to all people. And in hys myddel aege he paſſed all people in hyghe Ioye worſhyp and blyſſydnes. Ryght ſoo whan he drewe in to aege drawynge donwarde thrughe lechery and other ſynnes lytell and lytell alle tho Ioyfull & bleſſyd thynges and proſperite decreaſyd and myſſhcaped and vnfortunate thinges and vnprofytable harmes with many euyls began for to ſprynge and the more harme ys yt contynued longe tyme after.
                     CLemens the .vi. was pope after Benedict .x. yere / thys man in name and dede was vertuous / and many thynges that Benedict was rygous in / he made eaſy / and certayne that he depryued he reſtored / and the rygouſenes of the fayth of Benedict was laudable 
                           •
                         But moche more laudable was the mekeneſſe of Clement. This man was a noble prechour and many ſermons he gadred / and lete noo mā paſſe frome hym but he gaaf hym good counſeyll / and deceſſyd a bleſſyd man. ¶Karolus the .iiii. was Emperour after Lodewyk .xxxi. yere. Chis man was kynge of Beme a wyſe man and a myghty. And this man was choſen Emperour by the cōmaundement of Clemens Lodewyk beynge a lyue in his contemacy / and bycauſe he aſked mekely the poopes bleſſynge and too be crowned of hym as other good kynges dyde. therfore he was protected of god and preueyled ouer all his enmyes. And many fauourable lawes he made ſpyrytuall men / the whiche yet are called Karolma / att the laſte he deceſſed a ryche man in vertue and gooddes· ¶Innocentius the .vi. was pope after Clemē
                        te .x. yere / and he was a grete louer of relygous men and he founded a moneſtery in Fraunce

of the ordre of Cartuſyens. and was a greate canonyſt. ¶Vrbanus the .v. was pope after Innocent. this man was abbot of Myſſolens of the ordre of Saynt Benet a doctour and is taken for a ſaynt. he made the croſſe too be preched ayenſt the Turkes / and he made a paſſage to the Turkes / And to hym ſaynt Brygt was ſente frome Cryſte for the confyrmacyon of theyr rule and thanne he was poyſened and deceſſyd. ¶Gregory the .ix. was pope after hym .viii. yere This Gregory dyd lytell. And after hym folowed the trybulacyon the whiche our lorde ſhewed to ſaynt Brygyt for the ſynne of the clargye ¶Venſelaus ſone to Karolus a forſayd was Emperoure .xiiii. yere. And he was a chylde and was choſen whan hys fader was on lyue / but he tooke no kepe of them pyre / and whan he was warned many tymes for to take hede vnto it and wolde not. He was depoſed / For he gaaf all his delyte and luſte to lechery / and hys ende was without honour for he wente gretly from the maners and the vertues of hys noble fader. And he was crowned with themperyall dyademe. and the wyſdome of his fader paſſed into Sygyſmonde his brother as after it ſhall appyre. ¶Trbanus was pope after Gregory .vi. yere / this Vrban was choſen in the cytee of Rome by the ſtrenth of ye Romayns but the Cardynals dyde yt fo. drede & not wyllyngly / Wherfore they fled vnto the Cyte of Foundorū And they ſayd yt he was not pope / & choſe in his place ſyr. Robert of Gebennys the ſame yere the whiche was called Clement the .vii· ¶Nota. And here began ye .xii. ſtryfe in the chyrche. And it was more worſe than euer was ony other before / for it was ſoo ſubtyll / that ye wyſeſt mē that were & ye beſte of conſcyence coude not deſerue wyth whome it was beſt to ſaye & to holde. And this ſtryfe dured xl. yere with a grete ſclaunder vnto the clergye and greate peryll vnto mennys ſoules for hereſyes and other euyll thynges the whyche were brought in than. In ſo moche that there was no doctryne in the chirche for myſdoynge and therfore frome this daye Vrbane the .vi. vnto Martyne I knowe not who was pope. ¶The feeſt of the vyſytacōn of our lady was ordeyned by Vrbane the .vi. after the fourme of the ſacramente of the awter for a peas & an vnyte to be had amonge them thrugh the merytees of our bleſſyn lady. ¶Bonefacias the ·ix. was pope after Vrbane .xv yere. ¶This Boneface was choſen at Rome in the ſtede of Vrbane / & the ſtryfe contynued For Benedictys was choſen in Auynyon in the place of clement and was call
                           •
                        d Petrus de luna & he dured to the counſeyll of Conſtantinus / & thenne he wolde not obaye but euer abode obſtynate. And at the laſte he deceſſed in the Kyngdom of Aragon. And he commaunded his Cardynals to theſe an other pope the whyche they dyde anone. And they ſete vpon an ydoll and named hym Clement / but they profyted not.
                  
                  
                     ¶Circa annū dm̄ .M.CCC.lxxx. ¶And after kynge Edwarde the thyrde that was borne in wyndeſore regned Rycharde of Burdeux that was prynce Edwardes ſone of wales / the whiche prynce Edwarde was kynge Edwards ſone.
                     ANd after the gode kynge Edward the thyrde that was borne at wyndeſore regned Rycharde the ſeconde that was the good ſyr Edwardes ſone / prynce of wales. the whyche kynge Rycharde was borne in the cy
                           •
                        ee of Burdeux in Gaſcoine / & was crowned at weſtmynſter in the .xi. yere of hys aege. And in the ſecōde yere of his regne / for ye debate that was bytwene the lorde Latymer and ſyr Rauf Feryers knyght that was ayenſt Hawell & S
                           •
                        akell ſquyre for ye pryſoner yt was take in Spayne / by theſe two ſquyres / and the whiche pryſoner the lorde Latymer and ſyr Rouf Feryers wolde haue had / the whyche pryſoner was the Erle of Dene that they tooke in the batayll of Spayne / wherfore theſe two lordes come into the chyrche att weſtmynſter and they founde thys one ſquyre to herynge his maſſe beſyde ſaynt Edwardes ſhryne & there they ſawe hym yt whiche was called Hawell. ¶And Shakell was areſted & put into the Toure of London And there he was longe tyme for he wolde not delyuer the erle of Dene his pryſoner vnto theſe two lordes / by ſyr Aleyn Burhyll conſtable of the Towre / and by Syr Raufe Feryes one of hys aduerſaryes / tyll the kynge had graunted hym grace. ¶In the thyrde yere of kynge Rycharde came the Galays of▪ fraunce into Englonde vnto dyuerſe portes and brent and robbed and ſlewe moche people of Englonde that ys to ſaye / at wynchelſee / Rye / & Haſtinge Portyſmouth. and Hamp
                           •
                        on \ Stormore and Graueſende / and they dyd moche harme and

wente home ayen. And in this ſame / yere was a parlement holden at weſtmynſter. And atte that ſame parlement was ordened that euery man woman and chylde that were at the aege of .xiiii. yere and aboue thrugh out all the reame pore folke and other ſholde paye to the ta
                           •
                        age / foure pens / wherfore came and befel after warde greate myſcheyf & moche dyſeaſe to all the comynalte of the reame. ¶And in the .iiii. yere of kynge Rychardes regne the comynes aroſe vp in dyuerſe partyes of the reame and dyden moche harme / the whiche tyme they called the hurynge tyme. ¶And they of Kent & of Eſtſex made them two cheyftayns for to rule and for gouerne the company of Kente and of Eſtſex. That one was called Iacke ſtrawe and that other watte Tyler / and they come & aſſembled theym vppon blacke hethe in Kente. And on Corpus chirſti daye after they came downe South werke / and taken vp the pryſon hous / that is to ſaye the kynges bynche & the Marchelſee and delyuerde oute all the pryſoners. And ſoo the ſame daye they came in to London and there they robbed the people and ſlewe all the alyens that they myghte fynde in the cyte and aboute the cyte and dyſpoyled all there gode and made auowe. And on the fryedaye next folowinge after that was on the morowe and than they came to the toure of London and ye kynge beynge ther in / they fette out of the Toure the Archebyſſhop of Caunterbury. ſyr Symonde Sudbery / and ſyr Robet halys hoſpyteler pryoure and mayſter of Sayn
                           •
                         Iohans hous / and a whyte frere that was cō
                        feſſoure vnto kyng Rycharde & brought them vnto the Towre hylle and there they ſmote of theyr heedes and came agayne in to London and ſlewe in othe people of the Cytye. ¶And thenne they wente vnto the. Dukes place of Lancaſtre beyonde ſaynt Mary of the ſtronde that was called the Sauoy / and there they deuoured and deſtoyed all the goodes that they therin myght fynde and bare them away and than they brente vp the place. And than after warde they wēte to ſaynt Iohn̄ without ſmyth felde & deſtroyed the godes there & brente vp ye hous to the harde grounde / and wente to weſtmynſter and ſaynt Martyns the graūte & made them go out of ſent wary all that were with in for ony maner of gylthe / And that come vnto ye Temple & to al other Innes of men of law and dyſpoyle theym & robbe theym of theyr godes & alſo tooke theyr bokes of lawe / & thenne they came to London and brake vp the pryſon of Newgate & drofe out all ye pryſoners felons and other / & of bothe countrees and all the people that were wyth in theym and deſtroyed all the bokes of the counters. And thus they contynued both ſaterdaye & ſonday vnto the mondaye next after in all their malyce and wyckydnes. ¶And than on mondaye kynge Rycharde with his lorde that were wyth hym that tyme & with the mayer of London wyllyam walworth that was that tyme come wythe the aldermen and the comunes of the cyte / & they come in to South werke to here and to know the entoncyon of theſe rebelles & myſgouered pefple. And this Iacke ſtrawe made a crye in the elde that all tke people of accorde ſholde come nerer and here his claymours & his crye & hys wyll. And the lordes and the mayer and the aldermen mith the comynaltee hauynge indygnacōn of his rouetyſe & falſnes & his foule preſumpcōn / Anone wyllyam walworth that tyme beynge mayer drewe out his knyfe & ſlewe Iacke ſtraw / & anone ryght ſmote of his hede & ſete it vppon a ſpere & ſo it was borne thrugh London and ſette vpō London brydge. Anone theſe ryſers & myſgouerned peple were vanyſſhed as it had not be they / & thenne the kyng of his greate goodneſſe & by prayer of hys lordes made there .vi. knyghtes of good & worthy mē of the cyte of London / yt is to ſay wyllyam walworthe art ye tyme mayer & ſlewe Iacke ſtrawe and the ſeconde was Nycholas brembre / and the thyrde Iohan Phylipot / & ye fourth Nycholas twyforde / and the fyfte Robert laundes / & the ſyxte Robert gayton. And than the kynge wyth hys lordes and knyghtes retorned ayen to the tour of London and there he reſted hym tyll hys people were better ceſſed and ſette in reſte and peas. And than by proceſſe of tyme as they myght take and gete theſe rebelles and ryſers they honge theym vppon the nexte galothrugh out euery lordſhyp in the reame of Englōd by .xl. by .xxx. by .x. and by .xii. euer as they myght be gotē and taken in ony partyes. And in the .v. yere of kynge Rychardes regne was the grete erth quake and was generall thrugh out the world the weneſbaye after wytſonday in the yere of our lorde .M.CCC.lxxxxi. wherfore all maner people were ſore agaſt and aferde

longe tyme for drede of vengeaūge that our lorde ſhewed and dyd. ¶And in the .vi. yere of kyng Rychard / then ſyr Henry ſpēſer byſſhop of Norwiche wente with a grete cōpany ouer ſee into Flaundres and there they gete the towne of Grauynge and the towne of burbrugge Dunkerk and Newport and there they laded and fraughted .li. ſhippes with pelage for to haue comen into Englond with theſe ſhyppes & goodes. And the byſſhop of Norwiche and his counſeyll lete brenne theſe ſhyppes with al the plege in the ſame hauen all into harde aſſhes & att Dunkerk was done a grete batayll bytwene the Flemynges and the Englyſſhemen. And at that batayll were ſlayne a grete multytude of the Flemynges and a grete nōbre. And thā went ye byſſhop with hys retenue to ſypers and beſyeged it a longe tyme but it myght not be goten. And ſo left that ſyege and came ayen into Englonde / for oure Englyſſhmen were fouly deſtroyed and many deyed on the flyx. & in this yere come quene Anne into Englonde for to be ſpouſed to kynge Richarde and hyr fader was Emperour of almayne & kyng of Beme / & with hyr come the duke of Taſſy hyr vncle and many other worthy lordes & knyghtes of hyr countree of Beme and of other duche tonges to doo hyr reuerence and worſhyp. And ſyr Symonde beuerle a worthy knyght of the garter and other knightes and ſquyres that were the kynges embaſſatoures broughte hyr in to Englonde and ſoo forthe to London· And the people of the cyte / that is to ſaye the mayer and the aldermen and alle comynes roden ayenſte hyr to welcome hyr. And euery man in goode araye and euery crafte wyth hys mynſtralſye in the beſte manere wyſe and mette wyth hyr on the blacke hethe in Kente and ſoo brought hyr vnto London thrugh the cyte & ſo forthe vnto weſtmynſter vnto the kynges palays. And there ſhe was ſpouſed vnto kynge Rycharde well and worthely in the abbaye of weſtmynſter and there ſhe was crowned quene of Englonde. And all hyr trendes that came with hyr haddē grete gyftes and were well cheryſſhed & refreſſhed as longe tyme as they aboden there. ¶And in thys ſame yere there was a batayll done in the kynges palays at weſtmeſter for certayne poyntes of treaſon bytwene ſyr Iohan Anſley knyght defendaūt / & Carton ſquyre the appellaunt. But thys ſyre Iohan of Anſley ouercame this Carton & made hym to yelde hym wythin the lyſtes. And anone was this Carton dyſpoyled of his harneys & drawē out of the lyſtes and ſo forth vnto Tyburne & there he was hangyd for his falſneſſe. ¶And in the .viii. yere / of the regne of kynge Rycharde the ſeconde / ſyr Edmonde of Langley the. Erle of Canbrydge kynge Rychardes vncle wente in to Portyngale with a fayr company of men of armes and archers in ſtrengthynge and helpynge the kynge of Portyngale ayenſt the kynge of Spayne & hys power / and there the kynge of Portyngale had the victory of his enemyes thrugh helpe & comforth of our Englyſſhmen. And whan that Iourney was done the erle of Cambridge come home ayē with his people in too Englonde in haſte bleſſed be god his bleſſyd gyftes Amen· ¶And this ſame yere kynge Rycharde helde his Cryſtemas in the maner of Eltam. ¶And the ſame yere & tyme the kyng of armony fledde out of hys owne londe and came into Englond for to haue helpe and ſocoure of our kynge ayenſt hys enmyes that hadde dryuen hym out of hys owne reame. And ſo he was brought vnto the kyng to Eltham there as the kynge helde his ryall feeſt of Cryſtmaſſe. ¶And there our kynge welcomed hym and dyd moche reuerence & worſhyp and commaunded all hys lordes to make hym all the chere that euer they coude. And than he beſought the kynge of hys grace and of helpe & of his comforthe in hys nede & that he myghte be brought ayen to his kyngdome and londe. For the Turkes had deuoured and deſtroyed the mooſt parte of his londe 
                           •
                         and how he fled
                           •
                         for drede / and come hyder for ſocoure and helpe. And thenne the kynge hauynge on hym pyte and compaſſyon of hys grete myſcheyf and greuous dyſeaſe anone he tooke hys counſeyll and aſked what was beſte to do. And they anſwerde and ſayde yf it lyked hym to gyue hym ony good it were weldone. And as touchynge hys peple for to trauell ſo ferre into our londes it were a grete Ieoperdye. And ſoo the kynge gaf hym golde and ſyluer and many ryche gyftes and Iewels and betaught hym to god / and ſo he paſſed ayen out of Englonde. ¶And in thys ſame yere kynge Rycharde wyth a ryall power wente into Scotlonde for to warre vppon the Scottes for the falſnes and deſtruccyon that the Scottes had done vnto Englyſſhemen

in the Marches. And than the Scottes come downe to ye kynge for to treat wyth hym and with his lordes for trewes as for certayne yeres. And ſo ouer kynge & his coūſeyll gaūted theym trewes for certayne yeres / and our kynge torned hym ayen in to Englōde. And whan he was comen vnto yorke there he abode and reſted hym there ſyr Iohn Holonde the erle of Kentes broder ſlewe the erles ſone of Stafforde and his heyre with a daggar in the cytee of yorke / wherfore the kynge was ſore anoyed & greued and remeued thens & came to London And the mayer with the aldermen and the comyns with all the ſolempnyte that myghte be done ryden ayenſt the kyng & brought hym ryally thrught the cytye and ſo for the vnto weſtmynſtre to his owne palays. ¶And in the .ix. yere of kynge Rychardes regne he helde a parlemēt at weſtmynſter & there he made two dukes & a marqueys & fyue erles. The fyrſte that mas made duke was the kynges vncle ſyr Edmonde of Langle erle of Cambridge & hym he made duke of yorke / & his other vncle ſyr Thomas of wodſtok that was erle of Bukyngham hym he made duke of Glouceſtre. And ſyr Lyonuer yt was erle of Oxford hym he made marqueys of Deuelyne. & Henry of Balyngbrok the dukes ſone of Lancaſtre hym he made erle of Derby. And ſyr Edwarde the dukes ſone of yorke hym he made erle of Ruttelond / And ſyr Iohan Holonde that was the Erle of Kentes broder & hym he dyde make erle of Huntyngdon· ¶And Syr Thomas Mombraye / hym he made erle of Notyngham and the erle Marſhalle of Englond. And ſyr Mychell de lapole knygh
                           •
                         hym he made erle of Southfolke and Chaunceler of Englonde. And the Erle of the Marche at that ſame parlemēt holden at weſtmynſter in playne parlement amonges all the lordes and comyns was proclamed erle of the Marche and heyre Parente to the trowne of Englonde after kynge Rycharde / the whiche erle of the Macche wente ouer ſee in to Irlonde / vnto hys lordſhyppes and londes / for the erle of Marche is erle of Vlſter in Irlond and by ryght lyne & herytage. And there at the caſtell of hys he laye that tyme / and ther came vpon hym a grete multytude in buſſhmentes of wylde Iryſſhmen for to take hym and deſtroy hym. & he come oute fyerſly of his caſtell wyth his people and manly faughte with the mans there he was taken & he wen all to peces and ſo he deyed vpon whos ſoule god haue mercy. ¶And in the .x. yere of kyge Rychardes regne the erle of Arundell wente to the ſee with a greate nauye of ſhyppes and armed with men of armes and goode archers / And whan they come in the brode ſee they mette wyth the hole flete that come with wyne lade frome Rochell the whiche wyne were enemyes goodes. And there our nauye ſete vpon theym & toke theym all and brught theim vnto dyuerſe portes and hauens of Englonde & ſome to London / & there ye myght haue had a tonne of Rochel wyne of the beſte for .xx. ſhellynges ſterlynge / and ſo we had grete chepe of wyne in Englonde that tyme thanked be god almyghty.
                  
                  
                     ¶How the fyue lorde aroſen at Rattecote brydge.
                     ANd in the regne of kyng Richarde the .xi. yere thenne fyue lordes aroſen atte Rattecote brydge in the deſtruccyon of the rebelles that were ye tyme in all ye reame. ¶The fyrſte of theſe fyue lordes was ſyr Thomas of wodſtoke the kynges vncle & duke of Glouceſtre / and the ſeconde was ſyr Rycharde erle of Arundell / & the thyrde was ſyr Rycharde erle of warwyk / the fourth was ſyr Henry Balynbrok erle of Derby / the fyft was ſyr Thomas Monbray erle of Notyngham. And theſe .v. lordes ſawe the myſchyef and myſgouernaunce & the falſnes of the kynges counſeyll / wherfore they that were that time cheyf of the kīges counſeyl fled out of his londe ouer ſee that is to ſyr ſay Alyſander Neuyll the Archebyſſhop of yorke / & ſyr Robert Lewe marqueys of Deuelyne & erle of Oxforde & ſyr Mychell de la pole Erle of Southfolke and Chaunceler of Englonde. And theſe thre lordes went ouer ſee & came neuer ayen for there they deyed. ¶And thā theſe fyue lordes aboue ſayd made a parlemente at weſtmynſter & there they toke ſyr Robert Treſilyam the Iuſtyce and ſyr Nycholl Brembre knyght and cytezeyn of Lōdon & ſyr Iohn̄ Salyſbury a knyght of ye kynges houſholde & vſke ſergeaunt of armes & many moo of other peple were taken and Iuged vnto the deth by the counſeyll of theſe .v. Lordes in that parlemēte at weſtmeſter for the treaſō that they put vpon theym be drawen from ye tour of Londō thrugh out the cyte & ſo fourth vnto Tyburne & there they ſholde be hanged & theyr throtes

to be cutte & thus they were ſerued and deyed. And after th
                           •
                         in thys ſame parlement at weſtmynſter was ſyr Symonde Beuerle that was a knyghte of the garter & ſyr Iohn̄ Beauchāp knyght that was ſtewarde of the kynges houſholde / & ſyr Iames Berners werefore Iuged vnto the deth and than they were ledde on fote to the toure hylle & there were there hedes ſmyten of and many other moo by theſe .v. lordes. ¶In this ſame parlement and in the .xii. yere of kynge Rychardes regne he lette crye & ordeyne a generall Iuſtes that is called a turnement of lordes & knyghtes. And this Iuſtes & turnement were holden at London in ſmythfelde of all manere of ſtraūgers of what londe or countree that euer they were & thyder they were ryghte welcome & to them & too all other was holden opē houſholde and grete feſtes & alſo grete gyftes were gyuen to all manere of ſtranges. And of the kynge ſyde were all of one ſute theyr cotes ther armure ſheldes hors trappure and all was whyte hertes with cownes abbout theyr neckes and chaynes of gold hangynge thervpō and the crowne hangynge lowe before the hertes body / the whyche herte was the kynges leueraye that he gaafe too Lordes and ladyes knyghtes and ſquyres for to knowe hys houſholde frome other people. ¶And in this feeſt camen to the Iuſtes .xxiiii. ladyes and ladde. 
                           •
                         xxiiii. lordes of the garter with chaynes of gold and alle the ſame ſutes of hertes as it is before ſayde frome the Toure on horſbacke thrughe the Cytye of London into ſmytfelde there that the Iuſtes ſholde be holden. ¶And this feeſte / and Iuſtes was holden generalle for al tho that wolde come theder of what londe and nacyon that euer they were. And this was holden durynge .xxiiii. dayes of the kynges coſtes and theſe .xxiiii. lordes too anſwere all manere people that wolde come thyd. And theder came the erle of ſaynt Poule of fraūce & many other worthy knyghtes wyth hym of dyuerſe partyes full worthely arayed. And out of Holande & Henaude came the lorde Oſtruaūt that was ye dukes ſone of Holande & many other worthy knyghtes with hym of Holand & full well arayed. And whan this feeſt & Iuſtynge was ended the kynge thanked this ſtraungers and gaf thē many ryche gyftes. And ſo they token theyr leue of the kynge and of other lordes & ladyes & went home ayen into theyr owne coūtres with grete loue and moche thanke. ¶And in ye .xiii. yere of kyng Rychardes regne there was a batayll done in the kynges palays att weſtmynſter bytwene a ſquyer of Nauerne yt was wyth kynge Rycharde / & an other ſquyre yt was called Iohn̄ walſſh for poȳtes of treaſō that thys Nauerne put vppon this walſſhman. but this Nauerne was ouercomē & yelde hym recreaūt to his aduerſary. And anone he was dyſpoyled of his armure and drawē oute of the palays to Tyburne and there was hāged for his falſnes And the .xiiii. yere of kynge Rychardes regne ſyr Iohan of Gaunt duke of Lancaſtre wente ouer ſee into Spayne for to chaleng hys ryght that he had by his wyfes tytle vnto the crowne of Spayne with a grete hoſt of people and mē of armes and archers. and he had with hym 
                           •
                         ducheſſe hys wyf and hys thre doughters ouer ſee into Spayne / & ther they were a grete whyle / & att the laſt the kynge of Spayne began to treate with the duke of Lācaſtre and they were accorded togyder thrugh theyr bothe counſeyll in this maner / that ye kynge of Spayne ſholde wedde the dukes doughter of Lancaſtre that was the ryght heyre of Spayne and ſhold gyue vnto ye duke of Lancaſtre golde & ſyluer that were caſte into grete wegges and many other Iewels as moche as .viii. charyetes myght carye. And euery yere after duringe the dukes lyf of Lācaſtre and of the duches his wyf .x. thouſande marke of golde Of whyche golde the auenture & charges ſholde be to theym of Spayne & yerely bryng vnto Bayon to the dukes aſſygnes by ſuerte made. And alſo the duke maryed an other of hys doughters vnto the kyng of Portyngale the ſame tyme▪ and whā he had done ſo he come home ayen into Englonde and hys good lady hys wyf alſo / but many worthy men deyed vpon the flyx. ¶In the .xv. yere of kynge Rychardꝭ regne he helde his cryſtmaſſe in the manere of wodſtok and there the erle of Penbroke a yonge lord and tendre of aege wolde lerne to Iuſte with a knyghte that was called ſyr Iohn̄ of ſaynt Iohn̄ & roden togyder in the parke of wodſtoke. and there this worthy erle of Penbroke was ſlayne with that other knyghtes ſpere as he caſte it from hym whan that they had coupled / & thus the good erle made ye
                        re his ende / and therfore the kynge & the quene made moche ſorowe for his deth. ¶And in the xvi. yere of kynge Rychardes regne Iohan hē
                        de

beyng that tyme mayer of London & Iohn̄ wal worth & Henry vanner beynge ſhreues of London / that ſame tyme a bakers man bare a baſket of hors brede in to Fletſtrete to warde an hoſtre and there came a yonge man of the byſſhop of Salyſbury that was called Romayn and he toke a bors lofe out of the baſket of ye bakers / & he aſked hym why he dyde ſoo / and this Romayn torned ayen & brake the bakers heed / And neyghbours came out and wold haue areſted thes Romayn & he brake from them & fledde to his lordes place & ye Conſtable wolde haue hym out / but the byſſhops men ſhette faſt the yates & kept the place yt no man myght entre and than moche more people gadred thyder and ſayd that they wolde haue hym out or els they wolde brenue vp ye place and alle that were wyth in / And than came the mayer and ſhreues wyth moche other people & ceſſyd the malyce of the comyns & made euery man to go home to there hoſes and kepe peas. And thys Romayns lord the byſſhop of Salyſbury mayſter Iohan waltham that at ye tyme was treſorer of Englonde when ſyr Thomas Arundell Archebyſſhop of yorke & Chaunceler of Englonde / & there the byſſhop made hys complaynte vnto the Chaunceler on the peple of the cyte of Lōdon. And than theſe two byſſhops of grete malyce & vengeaunce come vnto the kynge at wyndeſore & made a greate cōplaynt vpon the mayer and ſhreues. And anone all the cyte after warde came before the kynge & his counſeyll / and they caſte vnto the Cytye a greuous herte and a wonder grete malyce / And anone ſodeynly ye kyng ſent after ye mayer of Lōdon and for the two ſhreues / & they came to hym vnto the caſtell of wyndſore. And the kynge rebuked the mayer and ſhreues full foule for the offence that they had done ayenſt hym & his offycers in hys chambre at London / wherfor he depoſed and put out the mayer and bothe ſhreues / and this was done the .xiiii. dayes afore ye feeſt of ſaynt Iohn̄ Baptyſt. And than ye kynge called to hym a knyght that was called ſyre Edwarde dalyngrygge & made hym wardeyne & gouernour of the cyte and chambre of Lō
                        don & ouer all hys people ther in. And ſo he kepte that offyce but foure wekes bycauſe that he was ſo gentyl & tendre to the Cytezens of London / wherfore the kynge depoſed hym & made ſyr Bunde wyne radyngton knyght that was Conrtrouller of the kynges houſhold wardeyne & gouernour of his chambre of his people ther in / and choſe to hym worthy men of the cyte to be ſhreues wyth hym to gouerne & kepe ye kynges lawes in the cyte / that one was called Gelbert Mawefelde & that other Thomas ne wenton ſhreues. And than ye mayer & the two ſhreues and all the aldermen wyth all the worthy craftes of London wente on foot vnto the toure of London / & there came out the Coneſtable of the towre & gaaf the mayer and ye ſhreues theyr othe & charge as they ſholde haue taken in the Eſcheker of weſtmynſter in ye kynges court of his Iuſtyces & Barons of the Eſcheker & than went they home ayen. And than the kynge & hys counſeyll for the grete malyce and deſpyte yt they had to the Cyte of London remeued all his courtes from weſtmynſter vnto the Cyte of yorke / yt is to ſaye the Chaūceler the Eſcheker the kynges bynche & the comune place / & there they helde all theſe courtes of lawe fro mydſomer / that is to ſaye the feeſt of ſaynt Iohn̄ Baptyſt vnto the feeſt of Cryſtmaſſe next comynge. And than the kynge and hys counſeyll ſawe it not ſo proffytale there. as it was at London / than anone he remeued yt ayen to Lōdon and ſoo to weſtmynſter for grete eaſe of his offycers & a vauntage to the kyng & all the comunes of the reame. ¶And whanne the people of London ſaw and knewe that theſe courtes were comē ayen / and the kynge and hys people alſo / than the mayer and the aldermen with the chyef Comunes of the Cyte gaue a grete ſomme of golde of all the Comunes of the Cyte / and ordeyned & made grete ryaltees ayen hys comynge too London for to haue hys grace good lordſhyp and / alſo theyr lybertees and Fraunchyſes geaūted vnto them ayē as they were wonte to haue afore tyme. And thrugh grete inſtaunce and prayer of the quene and of other lordes and ladyes the Kynge graū
                        ted theym grace. And this was done at Shene in Sutherey. And than the Kynge within two dayes after came to London / & the mayer of ye Cyte with the ſhreues aldermē and all the worthy men of the afterwarde rode ayenſt hym in good araye vnto the hethe of hys ſyde of Shene the mayer ſubmyttynge theym homely and mekely with all maner obeyſſaunce vnto hym as they oughten too do. And thus he brought ye kynge and the quene to London. And whan ye
                        
kynge came to the yate of London brydge there they preſenttd hym wyth a mylke whyte ſtede ſadled and brydled and trapped wyth cloth of golde and reed partyed to gyder. and the quene a palfrey alle whyte in the ſame ararye trappyd with white andreed / and al the conduytes of London ranne wyth wyne both whyte and reed / for all maner people to drynke who wolde. And bytwene ſaynt Poules and the croſſe in chepe there was made a ſtage a ryall ſtandynge vpon hygh and theyn were many angelles with dyuers melodyes & ſonges. And than an angelle came downe frome the ſtage on hyghe by a vyce and ſete a crowne of golde pyght wyth ryche perles & precyous ſtones vpon the kynges heed and an other vpon the quenes heed. And ſoo the cytezeyns / brought the kyng & the quene to weſtmynſter into theyr palays. And than on the morne after the mayer and ye ſhreues and the aldermen of London camen vnto the kynge to hys palays att weſtmynſter and preſente hym with two baſyns of ſyluer & ouergylted full of coyned golde the ſomme of .xx. hoūdred pounde prayenge hym of his hygh mercy & grace and lordſhyp and ſpecyally grace that they myght haue his good loue with the lybertees. And fraunchyſes lyke wyſe as they were wōte for to haue before tymes and by his letters patentes and his chartre confermed. And the quene and other worthy lorde and ladyes fell on ther knees and beſoughte the kynge of grace to conferme this. Than the kynge toke vp the quene & graunted hyr all hyr aſkenge. And than they thanked the kynge & the quene & wente home ayen. ¶And in .xvi· yere of kyng Rychardes regne certayn lordes of ſcotlonde came into Englond for to gete worſhyp as by feet of armes / this were the perſones. The erles Marre & he chalēged the erle Marſhall of Englond to Iuſte with hym certayne poyntes on horſbak wyth ſharpe ſperes & they rode togyder as two worthy knyghtes & lordes certayne courſes / but not the full chalenge that the Scottes erle made / for he was calle bothe hors and man & two of hys rybbes brokē with that falle and ſo he was borne thēs out of ſmythfelde home to his Inne. And within a lytyll tyme after he was caryed home in a hors lytter and att yorke he deyed. ¶And ſyr Wayllyam Darell knyght and the kynges banerer of Scotlonde than made an other chalenge wyth ſyr Peres courtayne knyght and the kynges banerer of Englonde of certayne courſes yet on horſbacke in the ſame felde / and whan he had ryden certayne cours & aſſayed he myghte not haue the better he gaaf it ouer & wold nomore of his chalenge with ſyr pers courtayne knyght & the kyngꝭ banerer of Englonde & torned his hors and rode home vnto hys owne Inne. And one Cockeborne a ſquyre of Scotlonde chalenged ſyr Nycholl Haberke a knyght of certayn courſes yet wyth ſharpe ſperes and roden fyue courſes togyder and at euery courſe the Scot was caſte downe both hors & man / and thus ouer Englyſſhe Lordes thanked be god hadde the felde. ¶And in the .xvii yere of kyng Rychardes regne deyde the good gracyous quene Anne that was wyt to kyng Rycharde in the manere of Shene in the ſhyre of Surrey vpon wytſondaye / & than was ſhe broughte to London and ſoo to weſtmynſter and there was ſhe buryed and worthely entered beſyde Saynt Edwardes ſhryne on whoos ſowle almyghty god haue pyte and in hys mercy. Amen.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Rycharde ſpowſed dame Iſabell the kynges doughter of Fraunce in the towne of Calays and broughte hyr in to Englond and lette hyr be crowned quene in the abbaye of ſaynt Peters of weſtmynſtre.
                     IN the .xx. yere of kynge Rychardes regne he wente hymſelfe ouerſee vnto Calays wih dukes erles lordes & barons and many other worthy ſquyes wyth grete araye and comune people of the reame in good araye as longed to ſuche a kynge and prynce of hys noble & of hys owne perſone to do hym reuerence and obſeruaūce as oughte to be done to theyr lyege lorde & ſo myghty a kynge & Emperoure in hys owne to abyde & receyue there that worthy and gracyous Lady that ſhold be hys wyf a yonge creature of .xix. yere of aege dame Iſabell the kynges doughter of Fraūce and other worthy lordes of greate name bothe barons & knyghtes wyth moche other people yt camen to the towne of Grauenynge & tow dukes of Fraunce that one was the duke of Burgoyn and that other the duke of Barre that wolde no furtherleſſe than they hadde pledges. And than kynge Rycharde delyuered two pledges for them for to go ſauf and come ſaufe his two

worthy vncles the duke of Glouceſtre and the duke of yorke & theſe two wente ouer the water of grauenynge & abode there as for pledge to the tyme yt the maryage was done / and thatꝭ theſe two dukes of Fraunce were come ayen vnto Grauenynge water. And than two worthy dukes came ouer the water at Grauenynge & ſo to Calays with this worthypfull Lady Dame Iſabell that was the kynges doughter of Fraunce & with hyr came many worthy lorde & eke lady & knyghtes & ſquyres in the beeſt araye that myght be & ſo brought hyr in to the t
                           •
                        wne of Calays· And there ſhe was receyued with all the ſole mpnyte & worſhyp yt myght be done vnto ſuche a lady. And that they brought hyr vnto the kynge. And the kynge toke hyr & welcomed hyr and all hyr fayre company and made there all the ſolempnyte that myghte be done. ¶And than the kynge & his counſeyll aſked of the Frenſſhe lordes whether all the couenauntes & forwardes wyth the compoſycyon that wer ordeyned and made on bothe partyes ſholde be truely kepte and holde bytwene theym. And they ſaye ye / and there they ſwore and toke theyr charge vpon a boke & made theyr othe well & truly it to holde in alle maner of poyntes & couenauntes wythout contradyccyon or delay in ony maner wyſe. And than was ſhe brought to ſaynt Nycholas chyrche in Calays and there ſhe was worthely wedded wyth the mooſt ſolempnyte that ony kyng or quene myght be wyth Archebyſſhops & byſſhoppes & all the mynyſtres of hooly chyrche. And than they were brought too the caſtell & ſette to mete And were ſerued with all delycaſye of ryall metes & drynkes plēteuouſly to al maner of ſtraū
                        gers & a
                           •
                         other & no creature warned that feeſt. but all were welcome / for there were grete halles & tentes ſet vpon the grene wythout the caſtell to receyue all manere of people. And euery offyce redy for to ſerue them all. And thus this worthy maryage was ſolēply done and ended with all ryalte. And than theſe two worthy dukes of Fraun
                           •
                        e with theyr people token theyr leue of the kynge and of the quene and wente ayen vnto Grauenynge water. And there the Frenſſhe lordes / that is to ſaye the twoo dukes and all theyr menye were comen ouer the water to Grauenynge & they mette wyth our two dukes / & euery chone toke leue at other and ſoo they departed / and our lordes camen ayen vnto calays / and the Frenſſhe lordes went ouer the water and ſoo home in to Fraunce ayen. ¶And anone after the kynge made hym redy with the quene & all his lordes and ladyes and all theyr people with theim and came ouer the ſee in to Englonde & ſo vnto London. And the mayer and the ſhreues wyth alle the aldermen and worthy commens roden ayenſt them vnto the blacke he the in to Kent / & there they mette with the kynge & the quene and welcomed theym and that in good araye / and euery men in the clothynge of his craft and theyr mynſtrels before them. And ſo they brought theym vnto ſaynt Georges barre in South warke & there they token theyr leue. And the kynge & the quene rode to Kenyngton & than the peple of London torned home ayen / And in tornynge ayen to London brydge there was ſoo greate preſſe of people bothe on hors and on foot that there were deed on the brydge .xi. perſones of men & women and children on whos ſoules al myghty god haue mercy & pyte. Amen. ¶And than afterwarde the quene was brought to the towre of London / & there ſhe was alle nyght & on the morne ſhe was brought thruge the cyte of London and ſo forthe vnto weſtmynſter and there ſhe was crowned quene of Englond / & than ſhe was broughte ayen vnto the kynges palays and there was holden open / and ryall feeſt al hyr coronacyon of all maner peple that 
                           •
                        heder come / and thys was done the ſondaye nexte after the feeſt of ſaynt Clemente. in. the .xx. yere of kynge Rychardes regne. And than the .xxv. daye of Auguſt / next after by veyll excytacyon and fals counſeyll & for grete wrath and malyce that the kyng had of olde tyme vnto his vncle the good duke of Glouceſtre and to the erle of Arundell to the erle of warwyk. Anone the kynge by his euuyll excytacyon and his euyll counſeyll & malyce late in the euenynge on the ſame daye aboue ſayd made hym redy wyth his ſtrenth & rode into Eſtſex vnto ye towne of Chemeſforde & ſoo come to Plaſſhe ſodenly there ſyr Thomas of wodſtok ye good duke of Glouceſtre laye / and the good duke came to welcome the kynge anone. And the kynge areſted the good duke hymſelf wyth his owne body / & ſo he was ladde downe to the wa
                           •••
                         and anone put into a ſhype and anone had too Calays & brought in to the Capytayns warde 
                           •
                        o be kepte in holde by the kynges commaundement

of Englonde. And ye tyme therle Marchall was Capytayne of Calays. And anone after by commaundement of the kyng and by his fals counſeyl commaunded the capytayne to put hym to deth. ¶And anone certayne yemen that had the good duke in kepynge toke theyr counſeyl how that they ſhold put hym vnto deth. And this was theyr appoyntemente that they ſholde comen vppon hym whan he were in his bedde and a ſlepe on a fetheren bedde / and anone they bounde honde and foot and charged hym to lye ſtyll. And whan that they hadde done thus they token twoo ſmale towelles and made on theym two rydynge knottes & caſte the towelles about hys necke. And than they tooke the fetheren bedde that laye vnder hym & caſt it aboute hym & than they drewe theyr to welles eche wayes and ſome laye vpon ye fetheren bed vpon hym vnto the tyme that he was dede bycauſe that he ſhold make no noys and thus they ſtrangled thys worthy duke vnto the deth / vppon whos ſoule god for his hygh pyte haue mercy. Amen. ¶And whan the kynge hadde reſted thus this worthy duke and his vncle & ſente hym to Calays he came ayen to London in all the haſte wyth a wonder greate people. And as ſoone as he was comen he ſent for the erle of Aurundell / and for the good erle of warwyk and anone as they came he areſted theym hymſelf. And ſyr Iohan Cobham and ſyr Iohn̄ Chyne knyghtes he areſted theym in the ſame. maner tyll he made his parlement. & anone they were put into holde / but the erle of Arundell went att large vnto the parlement tyme / for he founde ſoffycyent ſuerte / to abyde ye lawe & to anſwere to all manere poyntes that the kynge & his counſeyll wolde put vpon hym ¶And the .xxi
                           •
                         yere of kynge Rychardes regne he ordeyned hym a parlement att weſtmynſter the whiche was called the greate parlemente. And this parlement was made for Iuge thys thre worthy lordes and other moo as they lyſt at that tyme / And for that Iugement / the kynhe lete make in all the haſt a lōge hous and a large of tȳbre the whiche was called an halle and couered with tyles ouer & it was open all aboute on both ſydes that all maner of men myght ſe thrugh out / and there the dome was holden vpon theſe forſayd lordes and Iugement gyuē at this forſayde parlemente. And for to come vnto this parlement the kynge ſent hys wryttes to euery lorde baron knyght & euery ſquyre in euery ſhyre thrugh oute Englōde that euery lorde ſholde gadre and bringe his retenue with hym in as ſhorte & in the beſte araye that they myghte gete in maintenynge and in the ſtrengthyng of the kyng ayenſt theym that were hys enemyes / and that this were done in all haſte & come to hym in payne of deth. And the kynge hymſelf ſent into Cheſtreſhyre to cheyftayns of that countre / & they gadred & brought a grete and an huge company of people bothe of knyghtes and ſquyres and prencypally of yomē of Cheſtreſhyre the whyche yemen and archers the kynge tooke to hys owne courte and gaate them bowge of court and good wages to be kepers of his owne body bothe by nyght and by daye aboue all other perſones and moſte loued and beſte truſte / the whyche ſoone afterwarde torned the kynge to grete loſſe and ſhame hyndrynge and hys vtterly vndoynge and deſtruccyon as ye ſhall here afterwarde. And that tyme came ſyr Henry of Derby with a grete menye of armes and archers / and the erle of Rutlonde came wyth ſtronge power of people bothe of men of mares and archers And the Erle of Kente brought a greate power of men of armes and archers. the Erle of Marſhall came in the ſame manere. And the lorde Spenſer in this ſame manere. The erle of Northumberlonde and ſyr Henry Percy his ſone and ſyre Thomas Percy the erles brother. And all theſe worthy lordes broughte a fayre menye and a ſtronge power and eche man in hys beſte araye. And the duke of Lancaſtre and the duke of yorke came in the ſame maner wyth men of armes and archers folowynge the kynge. And ſyr Wyllyam ſtrop treſourer of Englond came in the ſame manere. And thus in thys araye came all the worthy men of this londe vnto our kynge and theſe peple came to London in one daye / in ſo moche that euery ſtrete and lane in London and in the ſubarbes were full of them lodged and .x. or .xii. mylle about London on euery waye. And theſe people brought the kynge too weſtmynſter and wente home ayen to theyr lodgynge bothe hors and mā / and than on the mondaye the .xii. daye of Septembre the parlemente began att weſtmynſter the whiche was called the grete parlemēt. ¶And on the frydaye nexte after the erle of Arundell was broughte in to the parleamente amonge

all the lordes / and that was on ſaynte Mathewas daye the appoſtle and euangelyſt / there he was for Iuged vnto the dethe in thys halle that was made in the palays at weſtmynſter / And this was his Iugemente / he ſholde go on foot wyth hys hondes bounde behynde hym frome the place that he was Iuged in. And ſo forth thrugh the cyte of London vnto the toure hylle and hys heed to be ſmyten of and ſo it was done in dede in the ſame place .vi. of the gretteſt lordes that ſate on his Iugemente roden wyth hym vnto ye place there he was done to dethe / and ſo to ſe that the excucyon were done after the dome. And by the kynges cōmaundemente / wyth them wente on foot men of armes and archers a grete multytude of Cheſtreſhyre men in ſtrenthynge of the lordes yt broughte thys erle to hys dethe / for they dredde leſte terle ſholde be reſcowed and taken from them whan they come in to London. Thus he paſſed forthe the Cytye vnto his dethe. And there he tooke it full pacyenly / on whoos ſoule god haue mercy / Amen. ¶And than come the frere. Auſtyns and tooke vp the body and the hede of this good Erle and bare it home to theyr place and buryed hym in theyr quyre. And in the morne after was ſyr Rycharde erle of warwyk brought in to the parlemente there as the erle of Arundell was for / Iuged / and they gaf the erle of warwyk the ſame Iugement that ye for ſayd erle had / but the lordes had compaſſyon of hym by cauſe he was of more getoer age and releaſed hym in to perpetuall pryſon / and put hym in to the ylonde of Man. And thenne on the mondaye nexte after / the lord Iohanne Cobham of Kent / & ſyr Iohan Cheyn knyghtes were alſo brought in to the ſame parlemente in the ſame halle / and there they were for Iuged for to be hanged and drawen / but thrugh the prayers and grete Inſtaunce of all the lordes that Iugement was foryeuen to them and releaſed in to perpetuall pryſon. ¶And in this ſame yere was Rycharde wyttyngdon mayer of London / and Iohan wodecoke & wyllyam Aſkam ſhreues of London. ¶And they ordeyned at euery yate of London durynge thys ſame parlemēt ſtronge wache of men of armes and archers and thrughout euery warde alſo And the kynge made .v. dukes & one markeys and foure erles / and the fyrſt of them was the erle of Derby & he was made duke of Herforde And the ſeconde alſo was the erle of Rutlonde and he was made duke of Awemarle. And the therde was the erle of Kent & he was made duke of Surre. And the fourth was ye erle of Hū
                        tyngdon and he was made duke of Exceſtre / And the fyft was the erle of Notyngham & he was made duke of Northfolke. And the erle of Somerſet he was made markeys of Dorſeet· And ye lorde Spenſer was made Erle of Glouceſtre / And the lorde Leuyll of Raby was made erle of weſtmer londe And ſyr Thomas percy was made erle of worceſtre. And ſyr wyllyam ſcrope that was treſourer of Englōd was made erle of wylteſhyre· And ſyr Iohn̄ Montagu erle of Salyſbury. And whan the kynge had thus done he helde the parlemet and ryall feeſt vnto all his lordes and to all maner people that thyder wolde come. ¶And this ſame yere deyed ſyr Iohn̄ of Gaūt the kynges vncle and duke of Lancaſtre in the byſſhops Inne in Holborne. and was brought fro thens to ſaynt Poule & there the kynge made & helde hys enterement well and worthely with all his lordes in the chyche of ſaynt Poule in London / and there he was buryed beſyde dame B
                           •
                        unce his wyf yt was doughter & heyre vnto ye good Henry that was duke of Lancaſtre. In ye ſame yere there fell a dyſcencyon bytwne the duke of Herforde & ye duke of Norfolk in ſo moſhe that they waged batayl & caſtē downe theyr gloues & than they were take vp & enſealed & ye batayll Ioyned & ye daye ſet & ye place aſſygned where & whan & this ſholde be at Couentre. ¶And thyder come ye kynge with all his lordes att yt daye & was ſette in ye felde & than theſe two worthy lordes came into ye felde well and clene armed & well arayed with al theyr wepen & redy to done theyr batayll and were redy in ye place for to fyght at vtteraunce But ye kynge bad thē ceſſe & toke the quarel in to his hond And forth with ryght there preſent exyled the duke of Herford for terme of .x. yere and the duke of Northfolke for euermore. And ſyr Thomas of Arundell Archebyſſhop of Caunterbury was exyled the ſame tyme for euer & depoſed out of hys ſee for malyce of the kyng / & anone theſe thre worthy lordes were cōmaunded & defended the kyngꝭ reame. And anone they gate theym ſhyppes at dyuerſe hauēs and wente ouer ſee into dyuerſe londes eche his waye. And ye duke of Northfolke wente to Venece & there he deyed on whos

ſoule god hauē mercy. Amen. ¶And than kynge rychard made a clerke of his ſyr Roger walden Archebyſſhop of Caunterbury. ¶And in the .xxii. yere of kyng Rycharbes regne by fals coūſeyll ymagynacyon of coueytous men that were about hym were made & ordeyned blanke chertres and made theym to be enſeled of all maner ryche men thrughout the reame. In ſo moche that they cōpelled dyuerſe people to ſette theyr ſeaſes therto· ¶And thys was done for grete couetyſe wherfore all good hertes of the reame were clene torned away fro the kynge for euer after. And that was vtterly his dyſtruccyon & ende to hym that was ſo hygh and ſo excellente prince and kynge & thrugh couetous & fals counſeyll falſly betrayed. Alas for pyte that ſuche a kyng myght not ſe. ¶And than kynge Rycharde ſette his kyngdome & hys ryall londe of Englonde to ferme vnto foure perſones / the whiche were theſe. Syre wyllyam ſtrop erle of wyltſhyre and treſourer of Englonde / and ſyr Iohan Buſſhe / & Henry greue / and ſyr Iohan Bagot knyghtes that whiche / torned theym to myſcheyf and dethe wythin a lytell tyme as ye ſhalle fynde here afterwarde wryten. ¶And than kynge Rycharde made grete ordynaunce & wente hymſelfe ouer ſee in to Irlond & many grete lordes with hym wyth a grete hoſte for to ſtrenth theyr kyng wyth mē of armes archers & moche grete ſtuffe & ryght good ordynaunce as longed vnto warre. And or he paſſed ouer ſee he ordeyned & made ſyr Edmōde of Langley his vncle the duke of yorke / hys lyueteaunte of Englonde in hys abſence with the gouernaūce & counſeyll of theſe foure knyghtes that had taken Englond to ferme of the kynge. And than he paſſed the ſee and came into Irlonde and there he was wel and worthely receyued. And theſe rebelles that ben called wylde Iryſſhmen came downe to the kynge and yolde them to hym both body & goodes all at his owne wyll / and ſwore vnto hym to be his lyege men / and there dyde to hym homage and feaute and good ſeruyſe & thus he conquered the mooſt parte of Irlonde in alytyll tyme ¶And whyle that kynge Rycharde was thus in Irlonde / ſyr Henry of Bolyngbroke erle of Derby that the kyng had made before duke of Herforde / the whyche duke the kynge had exyled out of this londe was comen ayen into Enlonde for to chalenge the dukedome of Lancaſter as for his ryght & trew herytage / & he came downe out of Fraunce by londe vnto Calays And thē met hym ſyr Thomas of Arūdell that was Archebyſſhop of Caunterbury that was exyled out of Englōde. and with hym came the erle of Arūdell his ſone & heyre the whiche was in kepyng of ſyr Iohn̄ ſhelly knyght ſomtyme with the erle of Hūtindon and with the duke of Exceſtre the whyche was tho in the caſtell of Reygate in Soutſex / and there he ſtale hym a waye and came to Calays and there he was keped well & worthely tyll theſe other two lordes were comen / to Calays. ¶And than this worthy duke & ſyr Thomas of Arundell Archebyſſhop of Caunterbury ſhypped in the hauen of Calais and drewe theyr cours norwarde and aryued in yorke ſhyre at Rauenſporne faſte by wydlyngton / and there came and en
                           •
                        red fyrſte the londe and two lordes with hym and theyr nauye. And ſo than moche people of the reame that whan they herde of his comynge and knewen where that he was and anone they drewen vnto hym and welcomed theſe lordes and ſoo gaaf theym courage in all manere thynge and ſo paſſed forthe into the londe and gadred moche people to them. ¶And whan kyng Rycharde hede and wyſte that theſe twoo lordes were comen ayen in to Englond & alſo were lō
                        ded / Than the kynge lefte his ordynaunce in Irlonde and come into Englond warde in all the haſte that he myght and come the caſtell of Flynte and there he abode to take his counſeyl and what myghte he done. But to hym come none. And thanne ſyr Thomas Percy erle of worcheſtre that was the kynges ſtewarde wiſt and knewe all this / anone he came into the halle amonges all the people / & he brake the yerde of the ryall kynges houſholde / and anone euery man was dyſparple and wente hys waye & forſoke theyr mayſter and ſouerayne lord and lefte hym allone. And thus Kynge Rycharde broughte downe & deſtroyed and ſtode hymſelf allone wythout comforth or ſocoure or yf ony good counſeyll of ony mā / alas for pyte of this ryall kynge. And anone came worde that ſyre Henry of Bolyngbroke was vp with a ſtronge powre of people and that all the ſquyres of Englonde reyſon vp the ſhyres in ſtrenthynge of hym ayenſt kyng Rycharde. ¶And thus ſone he was come out of the North countre to Bryſtowe and there he met with ſyr wyllyam

S
                           •
                        rope erle of wyltſhyre & treſourer of Englonde & with ſyr Iohn̄ Buſſhe and ſyr Henry grene and Iohn̄ Bagot but he eſcaped frome theym and wente ouer ſee in to Irlonde / & the ſethre knyghtes were taken & theyr hedes ſmytē of & thus they dyed theyr for fals couetoyſe. ¶And than was kynge Rycharde taken and brought vnto ye duke / and anone the duke put hym in faſt warde and ſtronge holde vnto hys cominge to London. And than was there a rumore in London and a ſtronge noyſe that kynge Rycharde came to weſtmynſter / and the peple of London ranne thyder and wolde haue done moche harme and hurte in there woodneſſe had not the myyer and the alder men and other worthy mē ceſſed them wt fayr wordes and torned theym home agayne vnto Lōdon And there was Syr Iohan Slacke dene of ye kynges chapell of weſtmynſter taken & broughte to London / and put in pryſon in Ludgate. And Iohan Bagot was taken in Irlonde and ſo brought to London and put in pryſon in Newgate there to be kepte and abyde hys anſwere. ¶And ſoone after the duke brought kynge Rycharde pryuely vnto London and put hym in the toure vnder ſure kepynge as a pryſoner. And than came the lordes of the reame with all theyr counſeyll vnto the Toure to kynge Rycharde and ſayd to hym of his myſgouernaun
                           •
                        e and extorcyon that he hadde done made and ordeyned to opreſſe all the comyne peple and alſo to all the reame. wherfore all the comyne people of the reame wolde hym haue depoſed of all his kyngdom· And ſo he was depoſed at that tyme in the Toure of London by all his lordes counſeyll and comune aſſent of alle the reame / And than he was put frome the Toure vnto the caſtell of Ledes in Kente & ther he was kepte a whyle And thanne he was had frome thens vnto the caſtell of Pounfret in the North countree to be kepte in pryſon / & ryght ſoone after there made his ende. ¶And than whan kinge Rycharde was depoſed and had reſygned his crowne and his kyngdom & was kept faſt in holde / than all the lordes of ye reame with ye comyns aſſent & by accorde choſen this worthy lord ſyr Henry of Bolyngbroke erle of Derby duk of Herforde & duke of Lā
                        caſtre by ryght lyne herytage & for hys ryghtfull manhode that the people foūde in hym before alle other they choſe hym and made hym kynge of Englande amōnges theym.
                     INnocencyus the .vii. was choſen at rome and lyued but two yere & than Gregory .xii. was after hym .xii. and euer was debate. Than was Alexander choſen in the coū
                        ſeyll of Pyſan and he was called fyrſte Petrꝰ de Candyda and ſo was put ſtryf to ſtryf euerychone of thoſe thre ſayd he was pope. Than was there a counſeyl at Pyſan where they began to make a cūcorde and there they depoſed the two and thyrde ſtode and ſo was worſe deuyſyon made than before. For that they ordeyned preuayled not. ¶Robert was Emperour after wenſelaus .i
                           •
                        . yere / thys man was duke of Bauary and Erle of Palatyn a Iuſte man and a good / and was crowned of Bone face the .ix. This man entrde ytaly wyth a greate hooſt of. Almayns ayenſte Iohan the duke of Galyas / but with an heuy hoowe he torned ayen and was had de worthy to ſuffre for his ryghtwyſnes. ¶Iohan the .xxiii. ſucceded Alexander .iiii. yere and fyrſte he began well for an vnyte / and he was in the counſeylle a
                           •
                        te Conſtantis and offred hym to reſygne the popehode. and after ſecretly and worthely he feldde awaye but it profyted hym notte for he was taken and conſtreyned to peas and was made a Cardynall and buryed atte Florens. ¶Sygyſmundus was Emperoure after Roberte .xxvii. yere / and he was ſone too Karolus and kynge of Vngarye and mooſt cryſten prynce. And was ſoo deuoute to god that he deſerued to be canonyſed. This man holpe the chyrche thrughe hys merueylous prudence and wytte / for he ſpared no laboure ne no thyynge that he hadde tyll he hadde made a ful peas amonge ye clergy. ¶And he hadde .ix. Batayls ayenſt the Turke. And euer he had the vyctorye / and what more alle thynge that euer was wrytē in louynge to Conſtantyne Theodoſio Karolo Otto maye truely be wryten of hym. And he was crowned in Vngarye and deceſſed a bleſſed man.
                  
                  
                     ¶Circa Annū dm̄ .M.CCCC.vii. ¶Of ſyr Henry of Bolynbroke Erle of Derby that regned after Kynge Rycharde / whiche was the fourthe Henry after the conqueſt.
                     ANd after Kynge Rycharde the ſeconde was depoſed and out of hys kyngdom the lordes and the comynes all wyth one aſſente

and all other worthy of the reame choſen Hē
                        ry of Bolyngebroke Erle of Derby ſone and heyre of Iohan the duke of Lancaſtre for his worthy manhode that ofte tyme had be founde in hym and in dedes preued. vppon Saynt Edwardes daye the confeſſour he was crowned kynge of Englonde at weſtmynſter by aſſente of alle the reame nexte after the depoſynge of kange Rycharde. Than he made Henry his eldeſt ſone prynce of wales and duke of Cornewayle & erle of Cheſt
                           •
                        e. And he made ſyr Thomas of Arūdell Archebyſſhop of Caunterbury ayen as he was before. And ſyr Roger walden that kynge Rychard had made Archebyſſhop of Caunterbury be made byſſhop of London for that tyme it ſtode voyde. And he made the Erles ſone of Arundell that came wyth hym ouer the ſee frome Calays in to Englonde. He made hym erle of Arundell as his fader had bē and put hym in poſſeſſyon of all his londes. and he made homage and feaute vnto his liege lorde the kynge as all other lordes hadde don. ¶And than anone deyed kynge Rycharde in the caſtell of Poūfret in North countre / for there he was enfamed vnto deth by hys keper / for he was kept there .iiii. or .v. dayes frome meete or drynke / & ſo he made his ende in thys world yet moche people in Englonde and in other londes ſayde he was alyue many a yere after hys deth. But whether he was alyue or dede ye people helde theyr fals opynyon & byleue that many had & moch people came to grete myſcheyf & foule deth as ye ſhall here aftewarde. ¶And whan kyng Henry wyſt & knewe verely that he was dede he lete ſere hym in the beſt manere & cloſed it in a fayre cheſt wyth dyuerſe ſpyces & bawmes and cloſed hym in a lynny
                           •
                         cloth al ſauf his vyſage and that was left opē that al mē myghtſe his perſone from all other men. And ſo he was brought to london with torche lyght brēnynge to Saynt Poules chyrche & there he had his maſſe and dyryge with moche reuerēce & ſolempnyte of ſeruyce. And whā all this was done than he was brought from Saynt Poule into the abbay of weſtminſter & ther he had his hole ſeruyce ayē. And fro weſtmynſter he was brought to Langley and there he was buryed vpon whoos ſoule god haue mercy. Amen. ¶And in the fyrſt yere of kynge Henryes regne he helde his Cryſtmaſſe in the caſtel of wyndeſore. And oon the .xii. euen came the duke of Awemarle vnto ye kynge & tolde hym that he & the duke of Surri and the duke of Ex
                           •
                        eſtre and the erle of Salyſbury and & erle of Glouceſtre and other moo of theyr affynyte werre accorded to make a mommynge vnto the kynge on .xii. daye att nyght / & there they purpoſed 
                           •
                        ee th
                           •
                         kynge in the reuelynge. And thus he the duke of Awemarle warned the kyng And whan the kynge came ye ſame nyght to Londō preuely ne all ye haſt that he myght to gete hym helpe ſocoure and comforth and coūſeyll / And anone theſe other that wolde haue put the kynge to dethe fledde in all the haſte that they myght / for they knewe well that theyr counſeyll was bewrayed. And than fled the duke of Surrey and the Erle of Saleſbury with all theyr menye vnto the towne of Cyceſtre. And there the people o
                           •
                         the towne wodle haue areſted them And they wolde not ſtande to theyr areſtynge but ſtode at defence & faught manly But at the laſt they were ouercomen & taken. And there they 
                           •
                        mote of the dukes heed of Surrey and the Erles heed of Salybury & many other moo & theſe they put theyr quarters in to ſackes & theyr hedes on poles borne on hyghe and ſo they were brought thrugh he cyte of London to London brydge and there theſe hedes were ſette vpō 
                        
                           ••
                        
                        ghe / and ther quarters were ſent vnto other gode townes & Cytees of Englonde and ſette vp there. ¶At Oxforde was taken Blon
                           •
                        e knyghte and benet Cely knyght / & Thomas wy
                           •
                        
                        terſell ſquyre & ye there by heded and quartred and the knyghtes hedes were ſet vppon pooles and brought to London and ſette vppon London brydge. and the quartres ſent forth to other good townes. ¶And in the ſame yere a
                           •
                         Pryetell well in a mylle in Eſtſer there ſyr Iohn̄ Holonde the duke of Exceſtre was taken wyth the comynes of the coūtree / and they brought hym from the mylle to the Plaſſhe & to the ſame place that kynge Rycharde hadde reſtyd ſyr Thomas of wodſtok ye duke of Glouceſtre & ryght there in the ſame place they ſmote of the dukes heed of Exceſtre and brought it vnto London vppon a poole and it was ſette vpon London brydge. ¶And in the ſame yere at Bryſtowe was taken the lorde Spenſer ye kynge Rycharde had made erle of Glouceſtre / & the comyns of the towne of Bryſtowe toke hym and broughte hym into the market place of the towne & there they ſmote of his heed & ſente it vnto London

/ and ther it was ſet vnto London brydge. ¶And in this ſame yere was ſyr Bernard brokeyns knyght taken and areſted and put in the Tour of London & ſyr Iohn̄ ſhelly knyght and ſyr Iohn̄ Mawdelyn and Syr wyllyam Feryb
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        erſones of kyng Rychardes and they were areſted and put in to the Toure of London / And thyder came the kynges Iuſtices & ſatte vpon theym in the Tour of London and there they were dampned all foure vnto the dethe. and the dome was gyuen vnto Syr Bernarde Brokeys that he ſhold go on foot from the Toure thrugh the Cytee of London vnto Tyburne and there to be hāged and after hys heed ſmyten of / and ſyr Iohan Shelly knyght and ſyr Iohan Mawdelyn and ſyr wyllyam Fery
                           •
                        e perſones were drawē thrugh out ye cyte of Lōdon to Tyburne & there they were hanged and theyr hedes ſmyten of and ſet on London brydge. And in this ſame yere kynge Henry ſente quene Iſabell home ayen in to Fraunce the whiche was kynge Rycharder wyf and gaaf hyr golde & ſyluer & many other Ieweles and ſoo ſhe was dyſcharged of all hyr power ſent out of Englond. And in the ſeconde yere of kynge Henry the fourth was ſyr Roger Claryngton knyghte and two of his men and the pryoure of Launde and ·viii. freres mynors & ſome mayſters of dyuynyte and other for treaſon that they wrought ayenſt the kynge were drawen & hāged at Tyburne all .xii. perſones And there began a greate dyſcencyon and debate in the countre of wales bytwene the lorde Grey rythen and Owen of Glendere ſquyre of wales & this Owen arered a greate nombre of walſſhmen & kepe all that coūcre about ryghte ſtrongly & dyde moche harme and dyſtroyed ye kynges townes & lordſhyppes thrughe out all wales and robbed & ſlewe the kynges people both / Englyſſhe and waleſſhe and thus he endured a .xii. yere largely. And he toke the lorde Grey rythen pryſoner and kepte hym faſt in holde tyll he was raunſoned of pryſoners of the marche and kepte hym longe tyme in holde. And at the laſte he made hym wedde one of his doughters & kepte hym ſtyll with his wyf and ſoone after he deyed. ¶And than kyng Henry knowynge this miſcheyf deſtruccyon and treaſon ye this Owen had wrought And anone he ordeyned a ſtrong power of mē of armes & archers & moche other ſtuffe ye longed to warre for to abate and dyſtroye the malyce of this fals walſſhe man. And than ye kynge came in to wales with his power for to dyſtrye this Owen & other rebelles fals walſſhemen. And anone they fled in to the Montayns and there myght the kynge do them no harme in no maner wyſe for the montayns / & ſo the kynge came ayen in to Englond for leſynge of moche of his peple / & thus he ſpedde not there. ¶In this ſame yere was grete ſcarſyte of whete in Englonde for a quarter of whete was at .xvi. ſhellynge. And there was marchaundyſe of Englonde ſent in to Prure for whete / & anone they hadde lade & fraughtſhypoes Inough and came home in ſaufte thanked be god of all his gyftes. ¶And in the .iii. yere of kynge Henryes regne there was a ſterre ſeen in ye fyrmament that ſhewed hym ſelf thrugh all the worlde for dyuerſe tookens that ſholde befall ſoone after / the whiche ſterre was named by clergy
                           •
                         Stella cometa / and on ſaynt Mary Mawdelenes daye next folowynge in ye ſame yere / was the bataylle of Shroweſbury. And thyder came ſyr Henry Percy the erles ſone of Northū
                        berlonde wyth a grete multytude of men of armes and archers and gaaf a batayll to Kynge Henry the fourth thrugh the fals and wycked counſeyll of ſyr Thomas Percy his vncle erle of worcheſtre / and there was ſyr Henry Percy ſlayne & the mooſt parte of hys people in the flede / and ſyr Thomas Percy taken and kept faſte in holde twoo dayes tyll the kynge had ſette in reſte hys people on bothe ſydes. And than ſyr Thomas Percy was Iuged to the deth to be drawen and hanged and hys heed ſmyten of for his fals treaſon atte Shroweſbury and his heed brought to london and ſete on london bridge. ¶And the other people that there was ſlaine oon bothe parties the kynge lette burye. ¶And there were ſlayne on the kynges ſyde in that batayll the Erle of Stafforde and ſyr walter Blunte in the kynges cote armur vnder the kynges baner and many moo worthy men vpon whoos ſowle god haue mercy. Amen. ¶And in the fourthe yere of kynge Henryes regne came the Emperouer of Conſtantynople with many gretee ſolaes and knyghtes and moche other people of his countree in to Englonde to kynge Henry wyth hym to ſpeke and to dyſporte and to ſe the good gouernaunce & condycions of our peple & to knowe

the cōmydytees of Englonde. And our kyngē with al his lordes goodly and worſhypfully receyued and welcomed hym and alle his menye that came with hym and dyde hym all the worſhyppe that they coude and myghte. And anone the kynge commaunded all maner offycers that he ſholde be ſerued as worthely and ryally as it lōged to ſuche a worthy lorde. And Emperoure on his owne coſte as longe as the Emperoure was in Englonde and all hys men that came with hym. ¶And in this ſame yere camen dame Iane the duches of Brytayne into Englonde and londed atte fallemouthe in Cornewayle / And frome thens ſhe was broughte to the Cytee of wyncheſtre and there ſhe was wedded vnto kynge Henry the fourth in the abbaye of ſaynt Swythynes of wyncheſtre wyth all ye ſolempnyte yt myght be done & made. And ſone afterwarde ſhe was brought from thens to London. And the mayer and the aldermē with the comunes of the cyte of London rode ayenſt hyr & welcomed hyr and brought hyr thrugh the cyte of London to weſtminſter & there ſhe was crowned quene of Englōde & there the kynge made a ryall and ſolempne feeſt for hyr and for al maner of men ye thyder wold come. And in this ſame yere dame Blaūche the eldeſt doughter of kyng Henry ye fourth was ſent ouer ſee with ye erle of Somerſet hyr vncle & with mayſter Rychard Clyfforde than byſſhop of worceſtre and with many other lordes knyghtes ladyes & worthy ſquyres as longed to ſuche a kȳges doughter and came into Colayn. And thyder came the dukes ſone of Barre with a fayre menye and receiued this worthy laby and the byſſhop of worceſtre wedded & ſacred theym togyder as holy chyrche it wold. And there was made a ryall feeſt & a grete Iuſtynge in the reuerence of worſhyp of thē & all people ye thyder came whan this maryage and feeſt was done the erle & the byſſhop and al theyr menye toke theyr leue of the lorde & the lady & came home ayen into Englond in ſaufte thanked god. ¶And in the .v. yere of kyng Hē
                        ryes regne the lorde Thomas hys ſone wente ouer ſee & the erle of Kent & many other lordes and knyghtes wyth mē of armes and archers a greate nōbre to chaſtyſe ye rebelles that afore had done moche harme to oure Englyſſhmen & marchauntes / & to many townes & portes in Englonde on the ſee coſtes. And the lord Thomas the kynges ſone came into Flaundres before a towne that is called / Scluſe amonge all ye ſhyppes of dyuers nacyons that were there / & after there they rodē with theyr ſhyppes amō
                        ge them and wēt on londe & ſported them there two dayes & came ayen to theyr ſhyppes & toke the brode ſee & there they mette wyth thre Carackes of Iene that were laden wyth dyuerſe marchaūdyſe & wel māned. & they fought togyder longe tyme but the Englyſſhmen had the vyctory & brought the Carackes into the Cambre before wynchelſe & there they cun
                           •
                        ed theſe goodes / & one of theſe Carackes was ſodaynly brente there. And the lordes and theyr people torned theym home ayen and went no further at that tyme. ¶And the ſame tyme Serle yoman of kynge Rychardes robbes came in to Englonde out of Scotlonde & tolde to dyuerſe people that kynge Rycharde was on lyue in Scotlōde & ſo moche people byleued in his wordes wherfore a grete parte of ye people of the reame were in grete errour & grutchynge ayēſte the kynge thrugh informacyō of lyes and fals leſynges that this· Serle had made. For moch people truſted & byleued in his ſauynge. But at the laſte he was taken in the Northe countree & ther by law Iuged to be drawen thrugh euery cyte & good brugh townes in Englond & ſo he was ſerued & at the laſt he was brought to london vnto the gylde halle before the Iuſtyce and there he was Iuged for to be brought to ye toure of. london and there to be layd on an hurdell and than to be drawen thrugh the cyte of London to Tyburne & there to be hanged & thanne quartred and his heed ſmytē of and ſet on London brydge & hys quartres to be ſent to four gode townes of Englonde & there ſette vp & thus ended he for hys treaſon and deceſſed. ¶And in the .vi. yere of kyng Henryes regne ye fourth the erle of Marre of Scotlonde by cauſe conduyt come into Englonde to chalenge ſyr Edmonde erle of Kent to certayne courſes of warre on horſbacke. And ſo this chalenge was accepted & graūted and the place taken in ſmythfelde at london. and this erle of Marre ye Scot came proudly into the felde as hys chalenge aſked. & anone came the erle of Kent & rode vnto the ſcot & manly rode togyder wyth ſharpe ſp
                           •
                        
                        res dyuerſes courſes / but the erle of Kent had ye felde & gate hym moche worſhyp and thanke of all maner men of his manful dedes. ¶And

in the .vii. yere of kyng Henryes regne ye four the ſyr Rycharde Scrop Archebyſſhop of yorke and the Erle Marchall of Englonde gadrede vnto theym a ſtronge power ayenſt kynge Henry. And the kynge herynge ther of in all ye haſt yt he myghty came with his power Northwarde and mette with them at yorke / and there were theſe two Lordes taken and broughte to the kynge. ¶And anone the Iuges were ſette and theſe two lordes brought forth and there they were dampned vnto deth and both theyr heedes ſmyten of and there they made an ende on whos ſoules god for his pyte haue mercy Amen. ¶And whan this was done the kynge came to London ayen and there reſted hym· Anone god of his greate goodneſſe wrought. & ſhewed many grete myracles for thes worthy clerke Archebyſſhop of yorke that thus was done to deth. ¶And in the .vii. yere of kyng Henryes regne dame Luce the dukes ſyſter of Melayne came in to Englonde & ſoo to London & there was wedded to ſyr Edmonde erle of Kente in ye pryory of ſaynt Marye oueres in ſouth warke wyth moche ſolempnyte & greate worſhyp / The kynge was there▪ hymſelf & gafhyr at the chirche dore & whan that they were wedded & maſſe was done the kynge his owne perſon brought & ladde this worthy lady in to the byſſhops place of wyncheſtre and there was a wonder grate feeſt hold on to all maner of peple that wolde come. And the ſame yere ſyr Robert Knolles knyȝt a worthy warryour deyed at his maner in Northfolk and from thens he was brought to London on a hors bere wyth moche torche lyght & ſo he was brought vnto the whyte freres in Fletſtrete & there was do & made for hym a ſolempne feeſt & a ryall enterement for tho that thyder wolde come / both ryche & poore & there lyeth buryed by dame Conſtance his wyf in the mydde of the body of the chyrche on whoos ſoule god for his pyte haue mercy / Amen. ¶And thus in this ſame yere ſyr Thomas Rampſton knyght & Conſtable of the Tour of London was drenched at London brydge as he came fro weſtmyger In wardes to the Tour in a barge & all thrugh lewdeneſſe. And in the ſame yere dame Phylyp the yonger doughter of kynge Henry was ladde ouer ſee with ſyr Rycharde the dukes brother of yolke and ſyr Edmond Courteney byſſhop of Norwiche & many other lordes kynghtes & ſquyres ladyes & gentyl women that apparteyned to ſuche a kynges dougher and came in to Denmake / and the kynge receyued thys worthy lady for his wyf / & welcomed theſe worthy lordes & dyd vnto theym moche worſhyp / and they were brought vnto a towne that was called London in Denmarke / & there was this lady wedded and ſacred to the kyng of Denmarke Norway and Swythen & there was crowned quene of Denmarke wyth moche ſolempnyte & there was made a ryall feeſt. And whan thys feeſt and maryage was done and ended theſe lordes and ladyes tooke theyr leue of the kynge and the quene and came ayen in to Enlonde in ſaufte thanked be god. ¶And in the .viii. yere of kynge Henrys regne there was a man that was calld the walſſhe clerke / & he apelyd a kynght that was called ſyr Percyuale Snowdone of treaſon / & there they were Ioyned to fyght vnto ye vtteraūce wyth in / Lyſtes & the daye and place & tyme aſſygned & lymytted to be done & ended in ſmythfelde / at ye whyche daye tho two perſons came in to the felde and foughten ſore & myghtely togoder / but at the laſte the knyght ouer come the clerke & made hym yelde hym as recreaunt of his fals enpechement that he had ſayd on hym / & than was he dyſpoyled of his armure & drawen oute of ye felde to Tybu
                           •
                        ne & there he was hangyed and the knyght taken to grace & was a good man. / ¶And in the ſame yere the Erle of Northumberlonde and the lorde Bardolfe came out of Scotlonde in preiudyce and dyſtruccyō of kynge Henry / wherfore they of the Northe countree aroſon vpō theym and foughte with them and ſcomfyted them and tooke theym & ſmote of theyr hedes and quartred theyr bodyes and ſente the hede of the erle & a quarter of the lorde Bardolfe to London and there they were ſets vpō London brydge for fals treaſon that they had purpoſed ayenſt the kynge. ¶And in the ix. yere of kynge Henryes regne was ſyre Edmonde Holonde Erle of Kente made Amerall of Englonde for to kepe the ſee / and he wente to the ſee wyth many ryall ſhyppes that were full well arayed and enparelled and enarmed wyth many a good man of armes and arches and of good defence of warre in the kynges name of Englonde / and ſoo he londed at the laſte in the coſte of Brytayne in the yle of Bryak with alle his folke / and he beſyeged the caſtell

and aſſaūted it & they withſtode hym wyth grete defence & ſtrenth. And anone he layd his ordynaunce & in the lyenge of a gōne there come a quarell & ſmote the good erle Edmonde in ye heed & there he caught his deed woūde / but yet they lefte not tylle that they hadde goten the caſtell and alle that were therin. ¶And there this good Lorde deyed on whoos ſoule god haue mercy. Amen. ¶And than this menye came home ayen into Englonde with the Erles body and was buryed amonges hys aūceſtres ryght worthely. ¶And in the ſame yere was a grete froſt in Englond that dured .xv. wekes. longe. ¶And in the .x. yere of kynge Henryes regne the fourthe came the Soneſchall of Henaude with other menye in Englonde to ſeke auentures and to gete hym worſhyp in dedes of armes bothe on horſback and on foot att all maner poyntes of war
                           •
                        e. ¶And the ſeneſchal chalenged the erle of Somerſet and the erle delyuered hym full manfully of all his chalenges and put his aduerſary vnto the worſt in all poyntes and wāne hym there grete worſhyp and the degre of the felde. And on the next day after came into the felde an other man of armes of Seneſchals partye. And ayenſt hym came ſyr Rycharde of Arundell knyght / & the Henaude had the better of hym on foot in on poynte for he brought hym on his knees. And on the thyrde daye come in an other man of armer in to the felde / and ayenſt hym trere came. ſyr Iohn̄ Corne waylle knyghte / and manly and knyghtly he quyte hym in all manes poyntes ayenſte his aduerſary and had the better in the felde And on the fourth daye came a nother man of armes of Henaude in to the felde / and ayenſte hym came ſyr Iohn̄ Chaynes ſone and manly quyte hym ayenſte his aduerſary. For he caſte hors and man into the felde / and the kyng for his manhode at that tyme dubbed hym knyght And on the fyfte day there came an other man of armes of the Henaudes partye into the felde / and to hym came in Syr Iohan ſtewarde knyght / and manfully he quyt hym in all maner poyntes & had the better. And on the ſyxte daye after came an other Henaunde / and to hym came Wyllyam porter ſquyre and manfully he quyte hym and had the better in ye felde / and the kynge dubbed hym knyght that ſame tyme. And on the ſeuenthe day after came an other man of armes of Henaude in to the felde & to hym came Iohan ſtandiſſhe ſquyre and manfully he quyte hym on his aduerſarye and had the better of hym in the felde and there the kynge dubbyd hym knyghte that ſame daye / And on the ſame daye came an other man of armes of Henaude / and to hym came a ſquyre of Gaſcoyne / and proudely and manly he quyte hym of hys aduerſary & had the better of hym in the felde / and anone the kynge dubbed hym knyght. ¶And on the .viii. daye came into the felde two other men of armes of Henaude and wyth them mette two ſouldyours of Calays the whiche were two bretheren that were called Burghes / & they well and manly quyte them ſelfe vpon theyr aduerſaryes and haddē the better of theym in the felde. and thus ended theſe chalenges wyth many grete lordſhyppes And thenne the kynge att the reuerēce of theſe worthy ſtraungers made a greate feeſt & gaafe vnto theym many grete and ryche gyftes and thenne they toke theyr leue and went home ayē into theyr owne countree. ¶And in the .xi. yere of kynge Henryes regne the fourthe there was a grete batayl doo in ſmythfelde bytwene two ſquyres / that one was called Glouceſtre that was the parlement. And Arthur was the defendaunte / and well & manly they foughten togyder longe tyme / & the kyng for theyr manfulneſſe and of his grace toke theyr quarel into his honde and made theym to go out of the felde at ones & ſo they were deuyded of the batayl and ye kynge gaf them grace. ¶And in the .xii. yere of kynge Henryes regne the fourth. Ryſdye a ſquyre of wales that was arybelle a ryſe
                           •
                         & ſupporter to Omē of Glendre yt dyde moche dyſtruccyon to the people of wales was taken and brought to London & there he came afore the Iuſtices and was dampned for his treſon / and than he was layd on an hurdell & ſoo drawen to Tyburne thrugh the cyte and there he was hanged and lete downe ayē & his heed ſmitē of and the body quartred & ſente vnto foure townes and his hede ſete on London brydge. ¶And in the .xiii. yere of kynge Henryes regne tho deyed ſyre Iohan Beauforde erle of Somerſette. that was Capytayne of Calays and was buryed at the abbaye of the Tour hyll on whos ſoule god haue mercy Amen. And in the ſame yere the lorde Thomas kynge Henryes ſone wedded the Counteſſe / of Somerſette. ¶And in this ſame yere cam ye embaſſatours

of Fraunce in to Englonde frome the duke of Burgoyne vnto the prynce of Englonde kynge Henryes ſone & heyre for to haue helpe and ſocour of men of armes and archers ayenſt ye duke of Orlyaunce. And tho went ouer ſee the erle of Arundell. ſyr Gylbert Vmfreuyll erle of Keme / and the lorde Cobham ſyr Iohn̄ Oldecaſtelle and many other god knyghtes and worthy ſquyres & men of armes and good archers in to Fraunce and came to Parys to the duke of Burgoyn And there he receyued & welecomed theſe Englyſſhmen ye lordes & all other meny. And than it was done hym to wete that the duke of Orlyan̄ce was comen to Semttlowe faſt by Parys wyth a grete nōbre of armes and arbalaſters / & thyder went our Englyſſhmen & foughte wyth them & gate the brydge of Sem
                           •
                        clowe & there they ſlewe moch
                           •
                         people of Frenſſhmen & arbalaſters & the remenaunte fledde & wolde not lenger abyde. And than our Englyſſhmē came ayen to Parys & there they toke theyr leue of the duke and came ayen in to Englonde in ſaufte and the duke gaafe them grete gyftes / & anone folowynge ye duke of Orlyaunce ſent enbaſſatours in Englond to kynge Henry the fourth beſe chynge hym of hys helpe & ſocure / ayenſt hys dedely enmye ye duke of Burgoyn. And than the kynge made Thomas hys ſone duke of Clarence. And hys other ſone Iohn̄ duke of Bedforde / and hys other ſone Humfrey duke of Glouceſtre & Syr Thomas Beauferd erle of Dorſet & the duke of Awe marle he made duke of yorke. And thā the kynge ordeyned his ſone ſyr Thomas the duke of Clarence Thomas Beauforde erle of Dorſet & ſyr Iohn̄ cornwyll with many other lordes knyghtes & ſquyres and men of armes archers for to go ouer ſee ī to Fraūce in helpynge and ſtrengthynge of the duke of Orlyaū
                        ce. And theſe whothy lordes with ther retenue ſhypped att Hampton & ſaylled ouer the ſee in to Normandye & londed at Hogges. And there mette with theym the lorde Hambe at theyr londynge wyth .vii. thouſande men of armes of Frenſſhmen & thre Serge auntes of armes with them and all were put to flyght & taken of theym ·vii. hondred men of armes and .iiii. hondred horſes with out tho that were ſlayne in the felde. And ſo they rode forth thrugh out all Fraūce and token caſtels and townes and ſlewe moche peple of frenſſhmen that with ſtode them & toke many pryſoneere as they roden And ſo they paſſed forth tyll they came to Burdeux & there they reſted theim a whyle & ſet the coūtre in peas & reſte tyll the wynde was redy for to ſayll. ¶And than the duke with his menye come home in to Englonde in ſaufte thanked god / And in ye ſame yere was the kynges coyn chaunged thrugh oute Englonde by the kynge & his counſeyll / yt is to ſaye ye noble half noble and ferthynge of golde. ¶And the .xiiii yere of kyng Henryes regne the fourth he lete make Galays of warre for he had hoped to haue paſſed the grete ſee & ſo forth to Iheruſalem & there to haue ended hys lyf / but god vyſyted hym ſo ſoone after with Infyrmytees & grete ſekeneſſe yt he myght no well endure no whyle ſo feruently he was taken & brought in bedde at weſtmynſter in a fayre thambre And as he laye in his hed he aſked hys chāberlayll what they called that chambre that he laye in & he anſwered & ſayd Iheruſalem. And than he ſayde that the prophecye ſayd yt he ſhold make an ende & deye in Iheruſalē And than he made him dyd vnto god & dyſpoſed all his wyll. And ſo on after he dyed & was caryed by water from weſtmynſter in a barge vnto Feuerſham and from thens he was caryed to Caunterbury by londe with moche torche lyght brennynge into the abbaye of Crechyrche and there he was entered & buryed beſyde ſaynt Thomas of Caunterburyes ſhryne & thus ended the worthy kynge Henry & about mydlente ſondaye in the yere of oure lorde a. M.CCCC. and .xxi. vppon whoos ſoule god haue mercy Amen.
                     MArtyn the .v. was pope after Iohn̄ .xiii. yere / this man was choſen by the counſeyll of Conſtantynoble & the other was depoſed that ſtrof. and ſo came peas in the chyrche the whiche longe tyme afore was deſyred & neceſſarye for the defence of the fayth. This was the myghtyeſt pope yt euer was of rycheſſe / & a grete Iuge. He edefyed townes walles ſtretes & he deſtroyed hereſyes / & he dyde moche good thrughe the noble prynce Sygyſmonde. And he gadred moche moneye for to geten the holy londe ayen / but deth came vppon hym & letted hym & he made a counſeyll afore his deth for ye mater & there he deceſſyd. ¶Eugenius was pope after Martyn .xvii. yere / this Eugenius was choſen peaſyble after ye deth of Martyn / & no man doubted but he was pope / but ſoon

after he was expulſed frome Rome / for it was ſo that he fledde naked alſo he was cyted to the counſeyll of Baſylyens & depoſed / but he dyſcharged hym not / and for that begā the ſtryffe ayen the whiche ſtode to his deth. And thoſe yt fauoured hym ſayde he was worthe moche louynge / & the contrary ſayde thoſe that were ayenſt hym but what ſomeuer he was after he had taken the dygnyte vpon hym afore he was of grete obſtynaunce & of gode fame .& what he dyde after that I leue to the Iugement of god·
                  
                  
                     ¶Circa Annū dm̄. M.CCCC.xxi. ¶Of kynge Henry the fyfte that was kynge Henryes ſone.
                     ANd after the deth of kynge Henry the fourth regned kȳge Hēry his ſone that was borne at Monmouthe in wales that was a worthy kynge and a gracyous mā and a grete conquerour. ¶And in the fyrſte yere of hys regne for grete loue & goodneſſe he ſente to the ferres of Langley there as his fader had do burye kinge Rychard the ſecōde & lete take his body out of the erthe ayen and dyde brynge it to weſtmynſter in a ryal chare couered with blacke veluet & baners of dyuerſe armes aboute & all the hors drawynge the chare were trapped in blacke & beten with dyuerſe armes / & many a torche brennynge by all the waye tyll he came to weſtmynſter / and there he lete make for hym a ryall and ſolempne enteremente and buryed hym by quene Anne his wife as his owne deſyre was on ferther ſyde of ſaynt Edwardes ſhryne in the abbaye of ſaynt Peters in weſtmynſter on whos ſoule god haue mercy Amen ¶And in this ſame yere were a certayne of lollers taken and fals herytykes that had purpoſed thrugh fals treaſon for to haue ſlayne oure kyng / and for to haue deſtroyed all the clargye of the reame and they myghte haue had theyr fals purpoſe. But our lorde god wolde not ſuffre it / for in haſte our kynge hadde warnynge therof and of alle theyr fals ordynaunce and werkinge and came ſodenly with his power to Saynt Iohans withoute ſmythfelde and anone they toke a certanye of the Lollers and fals herytykes and broughte them to the kynges preſence / and there they tolde all there fals purpoſe & ordynaunce howe they wolde haue doo and wrought yf they myghte haue regned and hadde theyr wyll / and there they tolde whyche were theyr Capytayens and gouernours and than ye kynge commaunded theym to the Towre of London / and thanne toke moo theym bothe within the Cytye and wythoute and ſente them too Newgate and to bothe / counteers. And thanne they were broughte in examycyon before the clergye and the kynges Iuſtyces and there they were conuycted for theyr fals hereſie and dampned before the Iuſtyce for theyr fals treaſon. ¶And this was theyr Iugement that they ſholde be drawen frome the Towr of London to Saynt Gelys felde and there to be hanged and brente on the galowes. ¶And there was taken ſyr Roger Acton knyghte for hereſye and eke for treaſon ayenſte the kynge and the Reame / and he came afore the clergye and was conuy
                           •
                        
                        te for his hereſye and dampned before the Iuſtyce too be drawen frome the Towre of London thrughe the Cyte to Saynt Gelys and to be hanged and brente. ¶And in the ſeconde yere of Kynge Henryes regne the fyfthe he helde a counſeylle of alle the lordes of the reame atte weſtmynſter and there he putte hym this demaunde and prayed and beſought them of theyr goodneſſe and of theyr gode counſeyll and wylle to ſhewe hym as touchynge the tytle of the ryghte that he hadde to Normande Gaſcoyne and Guyhen the whiche the kynge of Fraunce wythelde wrongfully and vntyghte fully / the whyche hys aunceſtrees before hym hadde by trewe tytle of conqueſt and ryghte heretage / the whiche Normandye Gaſcoyn and Guyhen the good Kynge Edwarde of wyndeſore and hys aunceſtres before hym hadde holden all theyr lyues tyme. And his lordes gaaf hym counſeyl to ſendde enbaſſatours vnto the kynge of Fraunce and hys counſeyll that he ſholde gyue vp vnto hym hys ryght herytage / that is to ſaye Normandye Gaſcoyne Guyhen the whiche his predeceſſours hadde holden afore hym or els he wold it wyn̄e wyth ſtrength of ſwerde in ſhorte tyme with the helpe of almyghty god. ¶And thanne the Dolphyn of Fraunce anſwered to oure enbaſſatours and ſayde in thys manere that the Kynge was ouer yonge and to terder of aege for comak ony warre as ayenſte hym and not lyke yet to be a good warroure to doo and make ſuche aconqueſte there vppon hym. And ſomwhat in ſcorne and dyſpyte he ſente to hym a tonne fulle of tenes balles bycauſe he wolde

haue ſom what for to playe wyth alle for hym and for his lordes / for that wolde be come hym better thenne for to
                           •
                         mayntene ony warre. ¶And thenne anone oure Lordes that werre enbaſſatours tooke theyr leue and came in to Englonde ayen & tolde the kynge & hys counſeyll of the vngoodly anſwere that they had of the Dolphyn / & of the preſent ye whyche he had ſent to our kynge. ¶And whan the kynge had herde theyr wordes & the anſwere of the Dolphyn he was wōder ſore agreued & ryght euyll apayed towarde the Frenſſhemen & towarde the kyng & the Dolphyn / & thought to auenge hym on them as ſoone as god wold ſende him grace & myght / & anōe lette make tenes balles for the Dolphyn in all the haſt that myght be / and they were grete gonſtones for ye Dolphin to playe with all / And than anone ye kynge ſente for all hys lordes & helde a grete counſeyll at weſtmynſter & tolde vnto them the anſwere yt they had of the Dolphyn & of the worthy preſē
                        te that he ſent to hym and to his lordes to playe with all. And there the kyng & his lordes were accorded yt they ſholde be redy in armes wyth ther pow
                           •
                        r in the beſt araye that myght be done and gete men of armes & archers yt myght be goten & all other ſtuff that longed to warre & to be redy wyth all theyr retenue to mete atte Southampton by Lammaſſe next folowyng without ony delaye. wherfore the kyng ordeyned his nauye of ſhyppes was with all manre ſtuffe & vytayll ye longed to ſuche a warryoure of all maner of ordynaūce in the hauē of Southampton in to the nombere of .CCC. and .xx. ſaylles. And than felle there a greate dyſeaſe & a foule myſchef for there were .iii. lordes whyche that the kynge truſted moche on / & thrugh fals couetyſe they had purpoſed & ymagyned the kynges deth & thought to haue ſlayne hym and all his bretherne or he had taken ye ſee the whiche thre lordes were named thus ſyre Rycharde erle of Chambrydge broder to the duke of yorke / the ſeconde was ſhe lorde Scrop treſourer of Englonde / the thyrde was ſyr Thomas Gray knyght of the North countre. And theſe thre lordes afore ſayd for lucre of money hadde made a promeſſe vnto the Frenſſhmen for to haue ſlayne kynge Henry the fyfte & alle his brethern by a fals trayne ſodaynly or they had be ware. But god almyghty helde hys holy honde ouer them and ſaued them from theſe peryllous menye. And for to haue done thys they receyued of the Frenſſhemen a Myllyon of golde / and that was there openly knowen / and for theyr fals treaſon they were al thre Iuged vnto the deth / and this was the Iugemēt that they ſholde be laadde thrughe Hampton & withoute Northgate there to be heded / & thus they ended theyr lyues for thyr falſe couetyſe and treaſon / And anone as this was done the kynge and all his men ye made them redy and wente to ſhyppes and ſaylled forthe wyth fyften hondred ſhyppes and aryued with in Seyn at Kydecauſe vpon our ladyes euen the Aſſumpcyon in Normādy wyth all hys ordynaū
                        ce. And ſo went him forth to Harflet & he beſyeged the towne alle aboute by londe and eke by water & ſent to the Capytayne of the towne & charged hym to delyuer towne. And Capytayne ſayd yt he wolde delyuer hym none he wolde hym yelde / but bad hym do his beſt. And than our kynge layd hys ordynaunce vnto the twone / that is to ſaye Gonnes Engynnes & trypgettes & ſhotten and caſte att the walles & eke vnto the towne / & caſte downe both towres & towne and layd theym vnto the erthe / & there he played att the tenes wyth hys harde gon ſtones. ¶And they that were within the towne whan they ſhold playe theyr ſonges was well awaye and Alas that euer ſuche tenes balles were made / and curſyd all tho that warre began and the tyme that euer they were borne. ¶And on the morne the kyng dyd crye att euery gate of the towne that euery man ſholde be redy on the morne erly to make aſſaute vnto ye towe. and wyllyam Boucher & Iohan Graunte wyth .xii. other burgeys worthy men came to the kynge & beſought hym of hys ryall pryncehode & power to wythdrawe his malyce and deſtruccyon that he dyd to them and beſought hym of .viii. dayes of reſpyce & trewes yf ony reſcowe myghte come to theym / & els to yelde vp the towne vnto hym wyth all theyr goodes And than the kyng ſent forthe the Capytayne and kept the remenaunt ſtyll with hym & ye lorde Gaucort that was Capytayn of the towne went forth to Royn in al the haſt vnto the Dolphyn for helpe & ſocour but there was none ne no man of reſcowe / for the Dolphyn wold not abyde. And thus this Capytayne come ayen vnto the kynge & yelded vp the towne and delyuered hym the keys and bad hym go and put

out all the Frenſſhmen both men women and chyldren and ſtuff hys towne of Har
                           •
                        et wyth Englyſſhe people. And than the kynge ſente in to Englonde and dyde crye in euery good towne of Englonde that what crafty man wolde come thydes & enhabyte hym there in that towne he ſholde haue houſe and houſholde to hym and to his heyres for euer more. ¶And ſoo tho wēte many dyuerſe marchauntes and crafty men and enhabyte theym there to ſtrength the towne and were welcome. ¶And whan the kynge ſawe that thys towne was well ſtuffed both of vytayls and of mē this worthy prince toke his leue & went to Calays warde by londe / and the Frenſſhmē herd of his comyng they thought for to haue ſtopped hym his way that he ſhold not paſſe that waye and in all the haſt that they myght braken alle the brydges where that as ony paſſage was for hors and man in ſo moche that there myght no man paſſe ouer the Ryuer nother on horſe ne on foot but yf he ſhold haue be drowned. And therfore our kynge with all his people wente and ſought thys waye ferre vp to Parys warde and ther was all the ryall power of Fraunce aſſembled and redy to gyue hym batayll & for to dyſtroye alle his people. But almyghte god was hys guyde and ſaued hym & al his menye & defended hym of hys enmyes power and purpoſe thanked be god that ſaued ſo hys owne knyght & kynge in his ryghtfull tytle. ¶And than our kynge be holdynge and ſeyenge the grete multytude and nombre of his enmyes to wythſtande his way and gyue hym batayll / than the kynge wyth a meke herte & a good ſpyryte lyft vp his hondes to almyghty god & be ſouhht hym of hys helpe and ſocoure and that daye to ſaue his trewe ſeruauntes. And than oure kynge gadred all his lordes & other peple about & bad them all to be of gode there / for they ſholde haue a fayre daye and a gracyous vyctorye & the better of all theyr enemyes / and prayed thē alle to make them redy vnto the batayll. For he wolde rather be deed that daye in the felde. than to be taken of his enmyes for he wold neuer put the reame of Englonde to raumſome for his perſone.
                     ¶An the duke of yorke fell on hys knees and beſought ye kynge of aboue that he wolde graū
                        te hym that daye the auauntwarde in hys batayll / and the Kynge grauntyd hym hys aſkynge and ſayd / gramercy coſyn of yorke and praied hym to make hym redy. And than he hadde euery man to ordeyne hym a ſtake of tree and ſharpe both endes that ye ſtake myght be pyght in the erthe a ſlope that theyr enemyes ſholde not ouercome them on horſback for that was there fals purpoſe & arayed thē for to ouer ride our enmye ſodaynly att the fyrſte comynge on of them at the fyrſte brunte. And all the nyght before the batayll the / frenſſhmen made many grete fyers and moche reuyll with howtynge 
                           •
                         ſhowtynge and playd our kynge & hys lordes at the dyſe. And archer alwaye for a blanke of theyr money / for they wēde yt all had bē theyrs the morne aroſe the daye ganne ſpynge. And the kynge by good auyſe lete araye hys batayll and his wynges and charged euery mē to kepe thē hoole togyder and prayed them alle to be of good there. And whan they were redy he aſked what tyme of the day it was & they ſayd pryme Than ſayd our kynge now it is good tyme for all Englond prayed for vs / and therfore be of good chere & lete vs goo to oure Iourney. And than he ſayde wyth hyghe voys in the name of almyghty god & ſaynt George auaunce Baner and ſaynt George thys day thyn helpe. ¶And than this Frenſſhemen came pryckynge downe as they wold haue ouer ryden all our meny. but god and oure archers made thē ryght ſone to ſtomble / for our archers ſhote neuer arowe amyſſe but it peryſſhed & brought vnto ye groū
                        de both hors & man / for they ſhote that day for a wager. And our ſtakes made theym toppe ouer terue eche one ouer other that they laye onhepes two hepes lenth of hyghe. And our kynge with his menye and with his men of armes and archers that ſthacked on them ſoo thycke with arowes and layd on with ſtaues & our kȳ
                        ge wyth his hōdes fought māly that daye. And thus god almyghty and ſaynt George brought oure enmyes to groūde & gaf vs that daye the vyctory. There werre ſlayne of Frenſſhmen ye daye in the felde of Agyngcourt moo than .xi. thouſand wyth our pryſoners that were taken & there were nombred that daye of Frenſſhmē in the felde moo than ſyr ſcore thouſande. But god that daye faughte for vs. And after came there tydynges to our Kynge that there was a new batayll of Frenſſhmen ordeyned redy for to ſtele on hym and came towardes hym. And anone oure Kynge lette crye that euery man ſholde doo ſlee hys pryſoners that he hadde taken

/ and anone to make theym ayen redy for to fyghte wyth the Frenſſhe men / And whan they ſaw that our men kylled downe theyr pryſoners than they dyde wythdrawe / them and brake theyr batayll & all their araye. and thus our kynge was a worthy conquerour had that daye the vyctory in the felde of Agyngcourte in Pycardye / And than oure kynge retorne ayen there that the batayll was for to ſee what people were ſlayne of Englyſſhmen / & yf ony were hurt that they myght be holpen. And there were deed in the felde the duke of Barrye ye duke of Alaūſome ye duke of Braban the Erle of Nauerne chyef Conſtable of Fraunce / and .viii. erles & the Archebyſſhop of Saūce and of gode barons an hondred and mo / & of worthy Knyghtes of greate alyaūce of cote armures a thouſande & .v. hondred. And ſo of Enelyſſhe men was deed the duke of yorke and ye erle of Southfolke / & of all other Englyſſhmen there were not deed paſſynge .xxvi. bodyes thanked be god. And this batayll was on a fryday whyche was ſaynt Cryſpyne & Criſpymanes daye in the moneth of Octobre / and anone the kynge commaūded to bury them and the duke of yorke to be caryed forth wyth hym and the erle of Southfolke. And there were pryſoners the duke of Orlyaūce the duke of Burbon the erle of Vendome the erle of ewe the erle of Rychemonde & ſyr Burſygaunt Marchall of Fraū
                        ce & many other worthy lordes were taken there in this batayll of Agyngcourte & were broughte vnto the towne of Calays & ſo ouer the ſee wyth the kynge in to Englonde and landed at Douer in Kente with all pryſoneres in ſaufte thanken bo god almyghty / & ſo came to Caunterbury and offred at ſaynt Thomas ſhryne & ſo he rode forthe thrught the countre of Kente the nexte waye vnto Eltham & there he reſted tyll that he wolde come to London. And than the mayer of London and the aldermen ſhreues / wyth all the worthy comuners and craftes came to the blacke hethe well and worthely arayed / for to welcome our kynge with dyuer melodyes / and thanked almyghty god of hys gracyous vyctory that he ſhewed for hym And ſo the kynge and hys pryſoners paſſed forthe by theym tyll he came to ſaynt thomas waterynge / and there mette with hym all relygyous men with proceſſyon and welcomed hym and ſoo the kynge came tydynge wyth hys pryſoners thrugh the Cyte of London where that then was ſhewed many a fayr ſyght at all the conduytes and at the croſſe in chepe as in heuenly araye of angells archaūgelles patryarkes prophetes and virgynes with dyuerſe melodyes ſenſynge and ſynginge to welcome the kynge and alle the conduytes rennynge wyth wyne & the kynge paſſed forthe to ſaynt Poules and there mette wyth hym ·xiiii. byſſhopes all reueſſed & mytred with ſenſers to welcome the kynge / and there they ſonge for hys gracyous vyctory. Tedeum laudamus. And there the kynge offred and toke his hors and rode to weſtmynſter / & than the mayer tooke hys leue of the kynge and rode home ayen. ¶And in ye thyrde yere of kynge Henryes regne the fyfth come the Emperour of Almayne kynge of Rome and of Hungrye in to Englonde and ſo to the cyte of London. And the mayer & the aldermen wyth the ſhreues and worthy craftes of London by the kynges cōmaundement mette with hym on the blacke hethe in the beſt araye that they coude 
                           •
                        on horſbacke. And there they welcomed hym and broughte hym vnto London with moche honour and greate reuerence And at ſaynt Thomas wateryng there mette with hym the Kyng wyth all his lordes in gode araye. And there was a worthy metynge bytwene the Emperour and Kyng Henry the fyfte and there they kyſſed togyder. And enbraced eche other / and than the Kynge tooke the Emperour by the honde and ſo they came rydynge thrugh the cyte of London vnto ſaynt Poules and there they alyghted and offred and alle the byſſhoppes ſtode reueſſhed wyth ſenſers in theyr hōdes ſengynge to theym. And than they tooke theyr horſes and rode vnto weſtmynſter And the Kynge lodged the Emperoure in hys owne palays and there he reſted hym a greate whyle & alle at the Kynges coſte. ¶And ſoone after came the duke of Hollande into Englonde to come and ſe there the Emperoure and to ſpeke wyth hym and wyth our Kynge Hēry of Englōde. And he was worthely receyued and lodged in the byſſhops Inne of Ely and all at the kynges coſte. ¶And whan the Emperour had welle reſted hym and ſeen the londe in dyuerſe partyes and knewe the commodytes thā by the proceſſe of tyme he tooke hys leue of the kynge / but or he yode he was made knyght of the garter and reteyned and wered ye lyueray.

And than he thanked the kynge and all hys lordes. And than the kynge and he wente ouer the ſee vnto Calays and aboden there longe tyme to haue an anſwere of the Frenſſhe kynge. and at ye laſte it came and pleſed hym ryght noughte / and ſo the Emperour toke his leue of ye kynge and paſſed forth in goddes name / and oure kynge came ouer ayē into Englonde in all the haſt that he myght & that was on ſaynt Lucas euen that he came to Lambythe / and the mondaye nexte he came in to ye parlemēte atte weſtmynſter. ¶And in this ſame yere was a grete derth of corne in Englond. but thanked be god it laſted not longe.
                     ANd in the fourth yere of Kynge Henryes regne the fyfthe he helde hys parleamente atte weſtmynſter in the begynnynge of Octobre and laſte to the puryfycacyō of our lady than nexte after. And there was graunted vnto hym to mayntene his warres both of ſpyrytualtee and of tēporalte an hoole 
                           •
                        are & a dyeme. And than anone the kynge prayed all hys lordes to make them redy to ſtrengthe hym in his ryght. And anone he lete make a newe retenue and charged al his mē to be redy at Hampton in wytſon weke than next after wyth out ony delaye. And there the kynge made the duke of Bedford protectour and defender of his reame of Englōde in hys abſence and charged hym to kepe hys lawes & mayntene bothe ſpyrytuall and temporall. And whan the kynge had thus do and ſette all thynge in his kynde. On ſaynt Markes daye he toke hys hors atte weſtmynſter and came ridynge to Poules and there offred and tooke his leue / and ſo rode forthe thrugh the cyte takenge hys leue of all maner of people as well poore as ryche prayenge theym all in generall to praye for hym. And ſo he rode forth to ſaynt Georges and there offrede & toke his leue of the mayer chargynge hym to kepe well his chambre. And ſo he rode forth to Hampton and there abode tylle his retenue were redy and comē for there was al his nauye and ſhyppes wyth hys ordynaunce gadred togyder and well ſtuffed as longed to ſuche a ryall kynge wyth all manere of vytayls for ſuche a ryall people as welle for hors as for man as longed for ſuche a warryoure. That is to ſaye gonnes trypgytes engynes ſowes baſtyles / Brydges letge
                           •
                         ſclynynge ladders malles and ſpades ſhoueles pyckes pauys bowes and arowes bowes ſtrynges and tōnes cheſtes and pypes fulle of arowes as neded for ſuche a worthi warryoure that noo thynge was to ſeche whā
                        ne tyme come / thyder came to hym ſhyppes laden with gonnes and gonpoudre. ¶And whan this was redy & hys retenue come ye kynge and all his lordes wyth alle hys ryall hooſte wente to ſhyp and tooke the ſee and ſayled into Normandye and londed at Touke vpon Lammaſſe daye than nexte after / And there he made .xlviii. knyghtes att his londynge. And than the kynge herynge of many enmyes vpon the ſee / that is for to ſaye .ix. greate Carackes huſkes Galays and ſhyppes that were comynge to dyſtroye his nauye. And anone he commaū
                        ded the erle of Marche to be chyef chyeftayne and many other worthy lordes wyth hym and with men of armes and archers to goo to ye ſee that none enemyes defouled hys nauye ne entred his vyage ne his Iourney. And anone the erle toke hys menye & went to ſhyp & ſcommed the ſee & kepte the ſee coſtes that noo manere of enmyes durſte rowte vpon the ſee / and anone the kynge ſente hys heraudes vnto the Capytayne of Touke and charged hym for to delyuer hym hys caſtell and hys towne and els he wolde neyther leue man ne chylde alyue. And anone the Capytayne and foure other burgeſes of the towne brought the keyes to the Kynge and beſought hym of grace. And the Kynge delyuered the keyes to ſyr Iohan Kyke
                           •
                        a
                           •
                        e and made hym Capytayne & cōmaunded hym for to put out all Frenſſhmen bothe of caſtell and of the towne. And there beſyde was the caſtell of Louers and thyder the kynge ſente the erle Marchall wyth a fayremenye and aſſauted ye towne / and anone it was yolden to the erle and brought hym the keyes / and he brought them to the Kynge and the Kynge tooke them to hym ayen and made hym Capytayne of the caſtell of Louers & of all that longed therto / and charged hym to delyuer out alle the frenſſhmē / and than the kynge helde forth hys way to Cane yt was a ſtronge towne & a fayre & a ryall caſtell therin / and anone he ſent his Heraudes to the Capytayne & charged hym to delyuer the towne & his caſtell or els he wolde gete theym with ſtrenght of honde. And they anſwered & ſayde. that he toke them none to kepe ne none the wolde delyuere vnto hym. And ſo anone he layde his ſyege vnto the towne and layde gonnes on

euery ſyde and caſte done bothe walles & towres and ſlewe moche people in theyr houſes / & alſo in ſtretes. And the good duke of Clarence layde downe the walles on his ſyde vnto ye bare groande / And ſo wyth in a whyle the kynge by his counſeylle aſſauted the towne all about And anone the Duke of Clarence was entred in to the towe and ſlewe downe ryght tyll he came to the kynge and ſpared nother man no chylde / and euer they cryed a Clarence a Clarence and ſaint George / And there was deede on the walles on the kynges ſyde a worthy mā that was called Sprynges yt whiche ye kynge cōmaunded to be buryed in the abbaye of Canefaſt by wyllyam Conquerour. on whos ſoule god huue mercy amen. And than the kynge came in to the towe wyth hys broder the Duke of Clarence and many other worthy lordes wyth moche ſolemnyte & myrthe. And then ye kynge cōmaunded the Capytayne for to delyuer hym his Caſtell. And he beſought ye kynge to gyue hym xiiii. dayes of reſpyte yf ony reſcowe wolde come / & yf none wolde come to delyuer hym the keyes & the caſtell at his cōmaundement. And vnder this comepoſycion was ye towne & the caſtell of Bayous with other townes fortreſſes and vyl
                           •
                        ages in to the nobre off xiiii· vpon the hylle be fore the Caſtel of Cane our kynge pyght all his tentes that ſemed a towne as moche as the Cane & by that tyme came tydynges that none reſowe wolde come there And ſo at the .xiiii. dayes ende the Capytayne of the caſtell came out and deliuered the keyes of the caſtell to our kynge / & bayous & the other xiiii. townes were delyuered vnto hym alſo / & anone the kynge delyuered the keyes to the duke of Clarence & made hym Capytayne bothe of the towne and alſo of the caſtel / & made hym Capytayne of Bayorus & of all the other townys alſo / And ſo he entred the towne & the caſtell / & there he helde ſaint Georges feeſte / and there he made xv. knyghtes of the bathe / there was ſyr Lowes Robert ſalyn Chaynye Mougomerye & many other worthy men & the kynge cōmaunded them for to put out all the frenſſhemen and women / & no man ſo hardy to defoule no woman ne take noo manere of good awaye frome theym but let them paſſe in peas on payne of dethe. And there paſſed oute of the towne in one daye moo than xv. hondred women / And than the kynge lete ſtuffe the towne and Caſtell with Englyſſhemen and ordeyned there twoo Capytayns that one for ye towne & an other for the caſtell. ¶And charged theym vppon theyr lyues to kepe well the towne and the caſtell. And or that oure kyng wente thens he gate Valeys Newelyn and layde aſyege to Chyrburgh / and that ſeyge layde the Duke of Glouceſtre wyth a ſtronge power and a myghty / and by proceſſe of tyme and made ther a Capytayne of the ſame towne. ¶And this ſame tyme the good Eerle of warwyk layed a ſeyge vnto Donnfronte and gate it and put therin a Capteyne. And for to ſpeke more of the Eerle of Marche that the kynge ordeyned tho for to ſcomme the ſee and to kepe the coſtes of Englonde for all manere of enmyes. The wynde roſe vppon theym that they wende all to haue bē loſte / but thorough the grace of almaghty god and good gouernaunce they rodden afore the yle of wyght all that ſtorme. And ther was loſte two Carackes and twoo Balyngers wyth marchaundyſe and other grete goodes / & al the people that were within theym. And an other Caracke broke vp before Hampton and threwe his maſte ouer the walles of the towne and this was on ſaynt Barthelomeus daye / And whan all this ſtorme was ceſſed. Thys worthy Erle of marche toke his ſhyppes wyth hys menye and wente to the ſee & londed in Normandye at Hogges and ſo roden forth to wardes ye kynge / ¶And euer as he came the Frenſſhemen fledde / & there came to theym an Anthony pygge and folowed the hooſte alle the waye Tyll they came to a grete water and there they dradde to haue be drowned or drenched / For the water cloſed theym ſoo that they myghte noo where gete oute / ¶But at the laſte god almyghty and thys Anthony Pygge broughte theym alle in ſaufte oute / And there they caughte theym a gyde that knewe the Countree aboute and he brought theym thorough a quycke Sande / And ſo forthe in to an Ile. and alſo they toke many pryſoners by the waye to warde the kynge in theyr Iourneye / and ſo they to men vnto the caſtel Cane And there the kynge welcomed hym and toke hys Iourney atte Argentun and anone tho 
                           •
                        t was yolden to the kynge and they had theyr lyues and wente theyr waye. And than oure kynge remeued vnto a ſtronge towne that tho was called Ceſe / and there was a fayer mynſter and they yelde it vp

anone vnto the kynge. And thanne the kynge wente from thens to 
                           •
                        laūſome and wanne the towne & the brydge / and the kynge ſent the Erle of warwyk to a towne that was called Beleſme wyth a grete & ſtronge power and anone they yelde it and put them al to the kynges grace & in hys mercy / & ſo dyde many ſtronge townes and caſtels that were in tho partyes. And from thens they wente to Vernyll in Perche. & anone it was yolden vnto the kynge bothe the towne and the caſtell and bodyes and godes to the kynges good grace / and ſo the Kynge gate and conquered all the townes & caſtelles pyles ſtrengthes and abbays vnto the cyte of rone. ¶And in the fyfth yere of kynge Henryes regne the fyfth / ſyr Iohan Oldcaſtell that was ye lorde cobham was areſted for hereſie and broughte vnto the Towre of London / & anone afte he brake the Towre and wente into wales & there he kepte hym longe tyme. And att the laſt the lord Powys toke hym / but he ſtode att grete defence longe tyme and was ſoore wounded or he wolde be taken and ſoo the lorde Powys men brought hym out of wales vnto London agayne in a whyrlcole and ſoo he was brought to weſtmynſter and there was examined of certayne pointes that were put vppon hym. and he ſayd not naye & ſo he was conuyte of ye clargye for hys hereſye / And dampned before the Iuſtyces vnto the dethe for treaſon. And then he was ladde to the Toure ayen / and there he was layde on an hurdell & drawen thrugh the cytye to ſaynt Gelys felde & there was made a newe payre of galowes and ſtronge & a coler of yren for hym and there he was hanged and brēte on the galowes and al for his leudeneſſe and his fals opynyons.
                     ANd in the .vi. yere of kynge Henrye the fyfth. He ſente hys vncle ſyr Thomas Beauforde duke of Exceſtre with a fayre menye of mē of armes and archers before the cyte of Rone and there dyſpleyed his Baner & ſente herodes vnto the towne and badde theym yelde that cyte vnto our kynge theyr lyege lorde & they ſayde he tooke them none to kepe ne none he ſholde haue there but yf it were dere bought and meued with theyr hondes for other anſwere wolde they none gyue but gonnes. ¶And there the duke toke gode any ſemēt of ye grounde all about. And anone there yſſued out of the cytee a grette menye of men of armes bothe on horſbacke and on foote and and anone our menye mette wyth them and ouer trewe a greate hepe of them and there takē and ſlayne xxx. perſones of full ryght good mennys bodyes and the remenaunt fledde aien in to the towne / and the duke wente vnto Pountlarge vnto the kynge. and tolde hym al how that he had ſpedde and howe that he lyked the grounde. ¶And anone as the duke was gone they caſte downe all the ſubarbes aboute the Cyte vnto the harde grounde. For bycauſe the kyng ſholde there noo refuſynge. And vpon the frydaye before lammaſdaye thanne nexte folowynge. onre kynge with his hoſte came before Rone / and anone he ſete hys ſyege rounde about that Cytye / and anone he lete laye hys ordynaunce vnto the towne. And the kynge wyth hys lordes were logded wythin the chartre houſe and grete ſtrengthe aboute theym and that was in the Eeſt partye of the Cytee. And than the duke of Clarence lodged hym with all his ſtrengthe and power att the weſte ende in a waſte abbaye before proce Chanx. And the duke of Excheſtre with his menye in the Northe ſyde before the porte Beauueſyn. And bytwene the duke of Clarence and the duke of Exceſtre was the Erle Marchall lodged wyth moche people and a ſtronge power before the caſtell gate. ¶And thanne the Erle of Ormonde with the lorde Haryngton and alſo the Lorde Talbott wyth theyr Retenue and companye next hym ¶And thanne Syr Iohan Cornewayle with manye othere noble Knyghtes and Squyres of name wyth all theyr Retenue laye wyth the noble duke of Clarence. ¶And thanne frome the duke of Exceſtre towardes the kynge were lodged the Lorde Roos / and the lorde wylleby wyth the Lorde Phehewe and Syre wyllyam porter knight with theyr retenue before the porte of Saynt Hyllary. And than̄e was the Erle of Mortaye with his retenne lodged in the abbaye of Saynte Katherynes. ¶And the Erle of Saleſbury wyth hys retenue laye on that other ſyde of Saynt Katherynes / and Syr Iohan Graye knyght was lodged att the abbaye that is called mounte du ſaynt Mychel And ſyr Phylyp Leche. knyght the kynges treſourer was lodged bytwene the water of Seyn and the abbaye and kept the warde vnder the hylle And the baron of Carowe was lodged vnder the water ſyde for to kepe the paſſage / and

Ienyco the ſquyre laye nexte hym on the water ſyde / and theſe two ſquyres kept manly the water of ſeyn & fought with theyr enmyes oft tymes. And on that other ſyde of Seyn laye ye erle of Hontyngdon & maſter Neuyll the erles ſone of weſtmer london / and ſyr Gylbert Vm
                        
                           •
                        reuyll erle of Keme / and ſyr Rycharde erle of Arundell & the lorde Feryers wyth theyr retenue before porte du poūte and eche of theſe lordes had ſtronge ordynaūce / & the kynge dyde make at Poūtlarge ouer the water of Seyn a ſtronge and amyghty chayne of Iron & put yt thrught grete pylis faſt pyght in the grounde & that wente ouer the Ryuer of Seyn that no veſſell myght paſſe yt in to kynde. And aboue that chayn the kynge lete make a brydge ouer the water of Seyn that man & hors & all other caryage myght go to and fro at all tymes whā nede were. And than came ye erle of warwyke and had goten Doūfronte vnto kynge Henry of Englonde. And anone the kynge ſent the erle of warwyk to Cawdebeke for to be ſeyge yt / And whan he came before the towne he ſente his Heraudes vnto the Capytayne and badde hym yelde vp the towne vpon payne of dethe and anone he layde his ſege. And the Capytayne beſought the erle that he myght come vnto hys preſence and it pleaſed hym & ſpeke wyth hym / and ſoo the good erle graūted hym for to come. And than he came oute and foure other burgeys came wyth hym & entreated ſoo wyth this erle that this ſame towne was vnder compoſycyon to be done as the Cyte of Rome dyde and the Erle graunted and conſented tho
                           •
                        to vpoon thys condycyon that the kynges nauye of Englonde wyth hys ordynaunce / myghte paſſe by theym in ſaufte with out ony manere of lette or dyſturbaunce. And to his compoſycyon they ſete to theyr ſeales. And the ſhyppes paſſed vp by them in ſaufte and came before the Cytee of Rone in to an hondred ſhyppes & there they caſte theyr ankers / and thanne thys Cyte was beſyeged bothe by londe and by water. And whan all this was done and the ſhyppes comen vp than came the erle of warwyke ayen to the kyng and lodged hym bytwene the abbaye of ſaynt Katherynes and the kyng tyll that the abbaye enteraced and ſo was yolden vnto the kynge. And thanne he remeued hym thens and lodged hym before the porte Martenuylye / and tho was the erle of Salyſbury commaunded by the Kynge for to make hym redy for to ryde but there came haſty tydynges and made hym to abyde. And ſoo he retorned ayen and lodged hym beſyde the good Erle of Huntyngdon tylle that ſyege was ended. ¶And thenne came the good duke of Glouceſtre the kynges brother from the ſyege of Chyrbourghe the whiche he hadde goten and ſtuffid it agayne vnto the kynges behoue and profyte vnto the crowne of Englond. And whan he was comen to the kynge before Rone he lodged with greate ordynaunce before the porte Saynt Hyllary more nerer the towne and hys enmyes thenne ony other laye by .xl. roddes of lenthe within ſhote of quarell. And wyth hym laye the Erle of Southfolke and the Lorde of Bergeyeney wyth all hys retenue and ſtronge ordynaunce and manly and proudly faughte euery day wyth theyr enmyes euer whan they yſſued out of the cyte. ¶And thanne came the pryoure of Kylmayne of Irlonde ouer the ſee to the kynge wyth a fayr meny of armes of theyr owne countree gyſe the ſomme of .xvi. hondred good mennys bodyes / and the kyng welcomed theym and made theym goode there. ¶And thanne came thydynges vnto the kynge that the kynge of Fraūce and the Dolphyn with the duke of Burgoyne wolde come downe and reſcowe the Cyte of Rone with a ſtronge power of all manere of nacyons and breke the ſyege And caſteth hym to entre on the northe ſyde of the hooſte by cauſe that there was the beſte entrynge and mooſt playne and there for the kynge aſſyned the pryoure of Kylmayne wyth his power and lodged hym on the northe ſyde of the hoſte for to ſtoppe theyr paſſage and was by the foreſte of Lyons and of this ordynaunce they were full gladde & ſo they went forthe in all haſte & kepte the grounde and the place that the kyng & his counſeyll had aſſygned / and they quyte them as good warryours vnto thyer kynge. ¶Now wyll I tell you whyche were the chyef Capytayns & gouernoure of the Cytee of Rome. Monſyr 
                           •
                        uy Boteler was cheyf Capytayne bothe of the cyte and of the caſtell. And Mon ſyre Teymygan he was Capytayne of porte Canx. Mon ſyr de al Roche he was Capytayne of the Dyſners. Mon ſyr Anthony he was Lyuetenaūt to. Mon ſyr Guy Botyler / Henry Chantfyen he was the Capytayne of the porte dela Pounte· Iohan

Materuas was Capytayne of the porte de la Caſtell / Mon ſyr de Preant he was Capytayne of the porte of Saynt Hyllary / The baſtarde of Tyne he was Capytayn of ye porte Martenuylle / And graunt Iakes a worthy warryoure he was Capytayne of al mē of warre and he wys gouernour outwarde both on horſbacke and on foot of all men of armes whan they yſſued out of the cytee of all the portes than he arayed them al they ſholde encountre with our menye. And eche of the Capytayns ladde fyue thouſande / men of armes and ſome moo. And of the fyrſte comynge of our Kynge theyr were nombred by Heroudes in to thre hundred thouſande of mē and womē & chyldren what yonge and olde / & amonge all theſe was many a man full man of his hondes and ſo the preued them whan they yſſued out of the cytee both on horſbacke and on foot / for they came neuer att one gate allone / but at thre or foure gates and attē euery gate two or thre thouſande of good mennys bodyes armed & manfully encoūtred with our Englyſſmē and moche people ſlayne dyuerſe tymes wyth gonnes quarelles and other ordynaunce. And this ſyege dured ·xx. wekes and euery they of the towne truſted to haue be reſcowed but there cam none / ſo att the laſte they kepte towne ſoo lange that there deyed many a thouſādes within the towne for defaute of mete of men and chyldren / for they had eten theyr horſes dogges and cattes that were in the towne. And often tymes the men of armes drofe out the pore people out att the gates of the towne for ſpendynge of vytaylles / and anone our Englyſſhmen drofe theym into the towne ayen Soo at the laſte the Capytayne of the towne ſawe the myſchyef and that they were not reſcowed and alſo the ſcarſyte of vytaylle and that the people deyed ſoo for defaute of meete euery daye many thouſandes / And alſo ſawe yonge chyldren lye and ſouke theyr moders pappes & were deed. ¶Than anone they ſente to the kynge beſechynge hym of hys grace and mercye and broughte the keyes of the towne vnto the kynge and delyuered the towne to hym & al the ſoudyours voyed the towne with theyr horſes and harnes and the comunes of the towne for to abyde and dwelle ſtyll in the towne yerely / to paye to hym & to hys ſucceſſours for alle manere cuſtomes and ſee fermes & katerenes. And than the kyng entred in to the towne and reſted hym in the caſtell tyll of ye wne was ſette in rule and in gouernaunce.
                  
                  
                     ¶How the kynge of Englond was made enheyrytoure and regente of Fraūce and how he wedded quene Katheryne.
                     ANd anone after that Rone was goten Depe and manye other townes in the baſſe Normandye gaf them ouer without ſtroke or ſyege whan they vnderſtode that the kynge had goten Rone Alſo this yere had be a peas made & ſworne bytwene the duke of Bugoyne and the Dolphyn whiche were ſworne on goddes body that they ſholde loue and aſſyſſe eche other ayenſt theyr enemyes. And after this contrary to this othe duke Iohn̄ of burgoyne was ſlayne and pyteouſly murdred in the preſence of the Dolphyn wherfore the Frenſſhmen were gretly deuydeb & of very neceſſyte laboured to haue a treatye wyth the kynge of Englonde. for the kynge of Englonde wanne dayely of them townes caſtels▪ & fortreſſes. ¶Alſo thys ſame yere was quene Iane areſted & brought vnto the caſtell of Ledes in Kent. And one 
                           •
                        rere Radulfe a doctour of dyuynyte confeſſour whyche afterwarde was ſlayne by the perſoone of the Toure fallynge at wordes and debate. And after warde quene Iane was delyuered. ¶And in the .vii. yere both the kynge of fraū
                        ce and of Englonde were accorded and kynge Henry was made heyre and regent of Fraunce and wedded dame Katheryne the doughter of / fraunce at Troyes in Champayne▪ on trynyte ſondaye. And this was made by the menne of Phylyp newe made duke of Burgoyne whiche was ſworne to kynge Henry to auenge hys faders deth and was become Englyſſh. ¶And thanne the kynge wyth hys newe wyfe wente to Parys where as he was ryall
                           •
                         receyued. And from thens he wente wyth his lordes And the duke of bourgoyn. and many other lordes of / fraunce and layd ſyege to dyuerſe townes & caſtels that helde of the Dolphyns partye and wanne them but the towne of Milon helde longe tyme for therin were good defenders. In the .viii. yere the kyng and the quene came ouer ſee and londed on Landelmaſſe daye on the morne att Douer. And the .xiiii. daye of / feuerer the kynge came to London. And ye xxi daye of the ſame monthe the quene came. And the .xxiiii. of the ſame ſhe was crowned at weſtmynſter. ¶Alſo that ſame yere anone

after Eſter the kyng helde a palement at weſtmynſter / at whiche parlemente it was ordeyned that that golde in Englyſſhe coyn ſholde be weyed & none receyued but by weyght. 
                           •
                        nd anone after wytſontyde the kynge ſaylled to Calays and paſſed forth ſo in to Fraūce. And in the .xxii. daye of Marche before the kyng came ouer the duke of Clarence was ſlayne in Fraunce and dyuerſe other lordes taken pryſoners as the erle of Huntyngdon the erle of Somerſet with dyuerſe other / and all was bycauſe they wold not taken none archers with them but thoughte to haue ouercome the Frenſſhemen themſelf without archers. And yet whan he was ſlayne the archers came & reſcowed ye body of the duke whiche they wolde haue caryed with them / god haue mercye on his ſoule he was a valyaunte man. And the ſame yere bytwene Cryſtmaſſe and cādelmaſſe the towne of Mylon was yolden vnto the kynge. ¶In the .ii. yere on ſaynt Nycholas daye in Decembre was borne Henry the kynges fyrſte begoten ſone at wyndeſore / whos god faders at the font ſtone was ſyr Henry byſſhop of wyncheſtre and Iohn̄ duke of Bedford and the ducheſſe of Holonde was godmoder / and Henry chychelay Archebyſſhop of Caūterbury was god fader at confermynge. ¶And in the .x. yere ye Cyte of Mews in Bry was goten whiche had ben longe beſyeged And this ſame yere the quene ſhypped at Hampon and ſayled ouer to the kynge in Fraunce where ſhe was worſhypfully receyued of the kynge / and alſo of the kyng of Fraynce hyr fader and of hyr moder. And thus kynge Henry wanne faſte Fraunce and helde grete aſtate and ſate at a greate feeſt in Parys crowned & ye quene alſo whiche hadde not been ſeen before / and alle people reſorted vnto his courte / but as to the kynge of Fraunce he helde none aſtate ne rule but was lefte almooſt allone. ¶Alſo this yere the weder toke was ſete vpon Poules ſteple at London. And this yere in the monethe of Auguſt the kynge waxed ſeke at Boys devyncynt / and whan he ſawe he ſholde deye he made hys teſtamēt & ordeyned many noble thynges for hys ſoule and deuoutly receyued all the ryghtes of holy chyrche / in ſoo ferre for they that whanne he was anoynted he ſayde the ſeruyſe with the preeſt / & at ye verſe of the ſpalme of Miſerere mei deus that was Benigne fac dn̄e in bona voluntate tuaſyon / vt edificentur mury Iheruſalem / he badde tarye there and ſayd thus O good lorde thou knoweſt that myn entente hathe ben and yet is yf I myght lyue to redyfye the walles of Iheruſalem. And thanne the preeſt proceded forth and made anende. And anone after thys mooſte noble prynce and dyctoryous kynge floure in hys tyme of cryſten chyualrye. whome all the worlde doubted gaaf hys ſoule in to the handes of god and deyed and made an en / de of his naturall lyfe att the for ſayde Boys / de vyncent beſyde Parys ye .xxxvi. yere of hys aege / vppon whoos ſowle god haue mercy. Amen. ¶Than was the body enbamed and cyred and layd in a ryall chare and an ymage lyke to hym was layde vpvon the corps open wyth dyuerſe baners and horſes couered rychely with the armes of Englonde and Fraunce / and alſo the olde armes of ſaynt Edwarde ſaynt Edmonde and other with grete multytude of torches / with whome wente the kynge of Scotlonde and many other lordes whyche accompanyed the body tyll it came vnto weſtmynſter by London in Englonde and euery towne by the waye he had ſolempnely his dyryge on the euē and maſſe on the morne and moche almes was gyuen to poore peple by ye waye And the .vii. daye of Nouembre after ye corps was brought / thrugh London wyth grete reuerēce & ſolempnyte to weſtmynſter where as he nowe lyeth / it was worſhypfully buryed / & after was layd on his tombe a ryal ymage lyke hȳſelf of ſyluer and gylde which was made att the coſt of quene Katheryne. And thus ended and is entered and buryed the noble kyng Hē
                        ry ye fyfth / vpon whoos ſoule and al cryſtē ſoules god haue mercy Amē.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of ye lawe of kynge Hēry ye fyfth and what he ordeyned for kyng Rycharde & for hymſelf after his dethe.
                     HEre is to be noted that this kynge Henry the fyfth was a noble prynce after he was kynge and crowned how it before in hys yo
                           •
                        gth he had be wylde recheles & ſpared noo thynge of hys luſt ne deſyres but accōpleſſhed them after his lykyng / but as ſoone as he was crowned enoynted & ſacred anone ſodaynly he was chaunged into a newe man & ſet all his entent to lyue vertuouſly in mayntenynge of holy chyrche / deſtroyenge of heretykes / kepynge Iuſtyce & defendynge of his reame & ſubgettes

¶And for as moche as hys fader had depoſed by hys labour the good kyng Rycharde & pyteouſly made hym to deye / & for the offence done to hym ayenſt his legaunce he had ſent to rome for to be aſſoyled therof For whiche offēce our holy fader ye pope enyoyned hym to make hym to be prayed for perpetually. and lyke as he had done to be takē from hym his naturall lyf therfore he ſhold do fyſide four tapers to brēne perpetually about his body that for the extynccōn of his bodely lyf his ſoule may euer be remembred and lyf in heuē in ſpyrytual lyfe. And alſo that he ſholde euery weke on ye daye as come aaboute of hys deth haue a ſolempne maſſe of requiē & on ye euē afore dyryge wyth .ix. leſſons & a doole to poore peple alwaye on that daye of a xi. ſhellynges & .vii. pens to be deled peny mele / and ones in the yere at his annyuerſary his termēte to be holden in ye moſt honeſt wyſe / & 
                           •
                         bedeled ye daye .xx. poūde in pens to poore people And to euery monke .xx. ſhellynge whyche alle theſe thynhes performed thys noble kynge for his fader for kyng Henry the fourth / his fader performed it not durynge hys lyf of whome as it is ſayd that god dyd touche hym & was lepreor that he deyed. ¶And alſo thys noble prynce lette do calle all ye abbottes & pryours of ſaynte Benets order in Englond & had all them into the chapytre hous of weſtmynſter for the reformacyon of theyr order wherin he had comunycacyon / and alſo wyth byſſhops and mē of the ſpyrytualte / in ſo ferre forth that they doubted ſore as that he wold haue had the temporaltes out of theyr hondes / wherfore by the aduyſe labours and procurynge of the ſpyrytuallyte encouraged the kyng for to chalenge Normandye and his ryght in Fraunce / to that entente to ſet hym a warke there that he ſhold not ſeke none occaſyons for to entre into ſuche maters And than all his lyf tyme afterwarde he laboured & was beſy in the warre & in conquerynge a grete parte of the reame of / fraunce. and ſo afterwarde yt by the grement of the Kynge Charles he had the gouernaunce & the rule of the reame of / fraunce and he was proclamed regnet & heyre of / fraunce. ¶And ſo notwithſtandynge for alle this grete warre that he had / neuertheles yet he remēbred his ſoule & alſo thought that he was mortall & nedes muſt deye / for whyche cauſe he ordeyned by hys lyfe tyme the place of his ſepulture where as he is buryed / and hath euery daye thre maſſes perpetually ſongen in a chapell our his ſepultur of the whiche ye myddyll maſſe & the fyrſte and the laſte maſſe ſhall be as it is aſſygned by hym as it apperyeth by theſe verſes folowynge.
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Henrici miſſe quinti ſunt hic tabulate.
                                    Que ſucceſſiue ſunt per monachos celebrate.
                                 
                                 
                                    ¶De dm̄ca.
                                    Prima ſit aſſumpre de feſto virginis alme.
                                    Poſcit poſtremā criſtus de morte reſurgens
                                 
                                 
                                    ¶Feria ſecunda.
                                    Prima ſalute de feſto virginis extat.
                                    Nunciat angelicis laudē poſtrema choreis
                                 
                                 
                                    ¶Feria tercia.
                                    Eſſe deum natum de virgine prima fatetur
                                    Cōmemorat natam ſic vicima miſſe mariam
                                 
                                 
                                    ¶Feria quarta.
                                    Prima celebretur ad honorē neupmatꝭ almi.
                                    Vltima conceptam denunciat 
                                          •
                                       ē mariam
                                 
                                 
                                    ¶Feria quinta.
                                    Semper prima colideber de corpere criſti.
                                    Vltima ſit facta de virgine purificata
                                 
                                 
                                    ¶Feria ſexta.
                                    Concedet vt prima celebretur de truce ſanctā.
                                    At
                                          
                                             
                                          
                                          que
                                        ſalutate f
                                          •
                                       et poſtrema maria
                                 
                                 
                                    ¶Sabbato.
                                    Omnes ad ſanctos eſt prima coleda ſuper nos
                                    Vltima de requie pro defunctis petit eſſe.
                                    Semper erit media de proprietate d
                                          •
                                       ci.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     ¶And yet the noble Kynge Henry the fyfte founded twoo houſes of relygyon on is called Syon beſyde Braynforde of ye ordre of Saynt Brygf
                           •
                        te both of mē and women and on that other ſyde of the Ryuer Tamyſe an hows of monkes of Chartrehous / in whyche twoo places he is contynually prayed for nyght & daye / For euer whan they of Syon reſten than they of the Chaptre hous do theyr ſeruyce & in lyke wyſe whan they of the Chartre hous reſten the other gooth to / & by ryngynge of the belles of eyther place eche knoweth whan they haue ended theyr ſeruyte whyche be nobly endowed / & do dayly there grete almes dedes / as in Charter hous certayne chyldren be founde to ſcole. & at Syon certayn almes geuen dayly. And yet beſyde all thys he founde a recluſe the whyche ſhall be alway a preeſt to praye for hym by the ſayd Chartre hous whyche preeſt is ſuffycyently endowed for hym & a ſeruaunt Lo here may all prynces take enſample by thys noble prynce that regned ſo lytyll tyme not fully .x. yere &

dyde ſo many noble actes as well for his ſoule to be perpetually remembred & prayed for / as in his conqueſtes & he beynge in his moſte luſty aege dyſpoſyd to eſchewe ſynne & was a grete Iuſticer
                           •
                         in ſo moche yt all the prynces of cryſtendome dradde hym & alſo of hethenes / & he had determyned in hymſelf yf god wolde haue ſpared hym to haue warred on the Saraſyns & for to knowe the ayde of other prynces & alle the paſſages in ye Iourneye he ſente a knyght of Henaude named Hugh de lanoye vnto Iheruſalem / but or he retorned he deyed at Boys de vencence in the .xxxvi. yere of hys aege. on whos ſoule god haue mercy Amen.
                     FElyx the .v. was pope whā Eugenyus was depoſed .ix. yere. This man Felyx was duke of Sauoyen deuonte prince an olde man. and he ſaw his ckyldes chylde This mā whan he lyued a holy lyf was choſen pope of the counſell of Baſyle. and eugeny was depoſed. and there was ſtryfe longe tyme. And he had no grete obediēce for the depoſycyō of eugenye: And at the laſte Eugenye deceſſed. and than felyx 
                           •
                        eſygned to Nycholas for fauoure of puas to be had & he was made legate of Fraunce & Cardynal of Sabyanus This was the xxiii. ſtryfe bytwyxt Eugeny and felyx & it dured .xvi· yere and thys was a new cauſe & neuer ſeen before for the counſeill of Baſyle depoſed Eugeny they vere pope and there was noo mo for he obeyed not the decrees of the coūſeyl of Conſtantinople as they ſayd ne he charged not to obeye the counſyel of baſyle: but he ſayde rather the countrary ſholde be done than as they decreed. wherfore there aroſe a grete alteracyon in ye mater / for ſome ſayde one waye & ſome an other & coude not accorde to thys daye for that one partye ſayde that coū
                        
                           •
                        eyll was aboue the pope. & an other partye ſayde the contrary ye the pope was about the coūſeyll. But they lefte it vndetermyned. And therfore god muſte dyſpoſe for the beſt. ¶Albert was Emperour after Syghyſmonde one yere. thys Albert was the duke of Auſtre & neuewe to Sygyſmonde / and therfore he was kynge of Beme and of Vngray for hys doughter for other heyre he left none. This man was choſen Emperour of almayne but anon he was poyſened and dyed / and he was in althynge a vertuous man yt all men ſayd he was a preſydent to alle kynges. ¶Fredericus the thyrde was Emperoure after hym. this Frederyk was the duke of Oſteryk & choſen Emperoure of Almayne but it was longe or he was crowned of the pope for deuyſyon. And at the laſt there was made an vnyte / & he was crowned with a greate honour of the pope in ye cyte & was a peaſyble man & a quyete & of a ſynguler pyte & he hated not the clergye (he wedded the kynges doughter of Portyngale / & in hys tyme whyles that heregned he made a grete cūuocacion of prynces in Ratyſpona for the Incours of the Turkes / & ſhewed vnto them yt nowe within this ·xx. yere cryſtendom was made laſſe by two hū
                        dred myle. and he warned theym yt they ſholde be redy to reſyſt hym. ¶And the Imperyal cyte of Conſtantynople was take at ye ſame tyme of the myſbyleuynge Turkes & betrayed by a Ianuēs whom for his labour the Turke made a kynge as he promyſed hym. and the fourthe daye he called hym to hym and dyde hange hym for his dyſceyte to his maſter. And there was greate ſorowe and wepynge amonge the cryſten people for loſſe of ye noble Cyte / formany a Cryſten man was ſlayne & innumer able were ſolde: and the emperour was ſlayne & for enuye the Turke cauſed his heed to be ſmyten of whan he was deed· And almooſt all the faythe in ye londe of Greke fayled. ¶Nycholaus the .v. a Ianueus was pohe after Felyx .viii. yere. This Nycholas was choſen at Rome in the place of Eugenye· and yet the ſtryfe hen geſtyll / by a lytyll and a lytyll they obeyed hym & all men merueyled that a man of ſo poore a nacyon ſholde obteyne ayenſt the duke of Sauoy the whyche was coſyn and alyed all mooſt to alle the prynces of cryſtendoome and euerychone lefte hym. Than in the yere after there was a peas made / felyx reſygned for yt pleaſed our lorde hys name to be gloryfyed by an obiecte of the worlde as that Ianuens was in comparyſon of the duke the pope. This Nycholas was a mayſter indiuynyte and an actyue man & a ryche man in conſeytes & many thynges yt were fallē he buyldyd ayen / and al ye walles of Rome he renewed for dred of the Turke And there was a verſe made of this vnyte & publyſſhed in the cyte. ¶Lux fulſit mūdo: ceſſit felix Nychalao. And that in ye yere of our lord. M CCCC.xlix. The yere of grace with a grete deuocyon was confermed and Innumerable peple went to the appoſtels ſetes.
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶How kynge Henry the ſyxt regned beynge a chylde not one yere of aege / and of ye batayll of Vernayll in Perche.
                     AFter kynge Henry the fyfth regned Hē
                        ry hys ſone but a chylde & not fully one yere of aege. whos regnne began the fyrſt daye of Septēbre in ye yere of our lord .M.CCCC.xxii. This kynge beynge in his cradell was moche doubted / and drade bycauſe of the gret conqueſt of his fader & alſo the wyſdom & guydynge of his vncles the duke of Bedford and ye duke of Glouceſtre. ¶This yere the .xxi. daye of Octobre deyed Charles the kynge of Fraunce & lyeth buryed att ſaynt Denys. And than the duke of Bedford was made regne of Fraunce & the duke of Glouceſtre was made protectour & defēdour of Englōde. ¶And the fyrſte daye of Marche after was ſyr wyllyam Tayloure preeſt degarded of hys preeſthode & on the morne after he was brent in ſmythfeld for hereſye. ¶This yere ſyr Iames Stewarde kynge of Scottes maryed dame Iane the ducheſſe doughter of clarence the whyche ſhe had by hyr fyrſte huſbonde ye erle of Somerſet at ſaynt Mary ouerys ¶Alſo this yere the xxvii. day of Auguſt was the bataylle in Perche bytwene the duke of Bedforde regne of fraunce and the duke of Aloūſome whiche was a ful grete batayll The duke of bedforde had on hys ſyde the elre of ſalyſbury moūtagu and the lorde talbot and all the power that they coude make in Normā
                        dye and the garnyſons kepe & alſo many Capytayns wyth moche people of the duke of Burgoyns. And on that other ſyde was the duke of Ilaunſome. The duke of Turon that was the erle of Doughan and the erle Boughan with many lordes of fraūce and a grete company of Scottes and Armynaxys. And than the erle / Douglas called the duke of Bedforde in ſcorne Iohan with the leden ſwerde. And he ſente hym worde ayen yt he ſholde fynde ye daye that his ſwerde was of ſtele. And the batay
                           •
                        le Ioyned on bothe ſydes faught and lōge tyme
                           •
                         that. there wyſt no mā whoo ſholde haue the better a grete whyle / but att the laſt as god wolde the vyctory felle vnto the Englyſſhe partye. For there where ſlayn the erle Douglas whiche alytell before waſſe made duke of Turon the erle. Boughan the erle Almemere the erle of Tonu at the erle of Vaūtedor & the vyſcounte of Nerbon whyche was one of them yt ſlewe the duke Iohan of Burgoyne knelynge before the Dolphyn & many moo vnto the nombre of .x. thouſande & mo And there was takē preſoners and duke of Alaūſome and many other lordes and gentylles of / fraunce. But Scottes that daye were ſlayne downe ryght the ſubſtaunce of thē all. ¶And the thyrde yere of kynge Henry the ſyxt the duke of Glouceſtre maryed the ducheſſe of Hollāde and wēt ouer ſee with hyr into henaude for to take poſſeſſyon of hys wyue enherytaūce where he was honerably receyued and taken for lorde of that londe but ſoone after he was fayne to retorne home ayen into Englonde. and lete hys wyf and all his treſoure that he had brought with hym in a towne yt is callyd Mounle in Henaude whyche promyſed hym to be true to hym. Notwithſtandynge they delyuered the lady to the duke of Burgoyne whiche ſent hyr to Gaunt. And from thens ſhe eſcapyd in a mannys clothynge and came into zelande to a towne of hyr owne callyd Syryer And from thens ſhe went to a towne in Hollonde called ye Gowde and there ſhe was ſtronge ynoughe & withſtode the forſayd duke of Burgoyne. ¶And ſoone after the duke of Glouceſtree ſente ouer ſee in too zelonde the Lorde Fytzwater wyth certayne men of armes and archers for to helpe and ſocoure the forſayde ducheſſe of Hollande whyche londed att a place in zeelande called. Brewers hauen where the lordes of the coūtree came downe▪ and taughte wyth hym / in concluſyon he was feyne to wythdraw hym and hys menye to the ſee ayen But yet he ſlewe and kylde & hutte dyuerſe lordes & moche peple of ye ſame coūtre / & retorned home ayen into Englōde wyth his meny & preuayled noo thynge. ¶And alſo thys ſame ye
                           •
                        e the erle of Salyſbury / the erle of Souffolk
                           •
                         the lorde wylle by and the lord Scales with their retenue layd ſyege to the cyte of Manus the whiche cyte was yolde to theym wyth many other ſtrong townes & caſtels to ye nombre of .xxxvi. ¶This tyme all Normandye and a grete parte of / 
                           •
                        raunce vnto Orlyaunce was vnder the obeyſaunce of the Kynge of Englonde / and all the remenaunte of / fraunce was in grete tribulacyon and myſchyef.
                  
                  
                     ¶How thre was lyke to haue be a gret fraye bytwene the Cardynall and the duke of Glouceſtre. And of the coronacyon of Kynge Henry the ſyxte both in Englonde and in / fraunce.
                     
                        IN the fourth yere the ſame nyghte that the mayer of London Iohan Couentre had taken his charge / was a greate watche in London for a fraye yt was bytwene ye byſſhop of wyncheſtre. & the duke of Glouceſtre protectour &c̄. For the mayer wyth the peple of ye cyte wold abyde by ye duke of Glouceſtre as protectour & defendour of the reame but by laboure of lordes that went bytwene / and in eſpecyall by the labour of the prynce of Portyngale / there was a poyntement taken that there was no harme done. ¶And after ye batayll of Vernayll in Perche the duke of Bedforde came ouer in to Englonde. And on wytſondaye thys ſame yere at Leyceſtre he dubbed kynge Henry knyght. And forth with the ſayd kyng Henry dubbed all theſe / knyghtes whos names of lowen / that is to wyte ſyre Rycharde duke of yorke / alſo the ſonne and heyre of the Duke of Nurthfolk / the erle of Oxforde / ye erle of weſt merlonde / the ſone and heyre / of ye erle of Northumberlond / the ſone and heyre of the erle of Vrmonde / the lorde Roos / ſyr Iamys bottelar the lorde Martrauas / ſyr Henry gray of Tankeruyle ſyr wyllyam Neuyll / lorde Fawconbrydge / ſyr George Neuyll lord Latymer the lorde wellys / the lorde Barkle / the ſone. & heyre of the lorde Talbot / ſyr Raufe gray of werke / ſyr Robert veer ſyr Rychard gray / ſyr Edmonde hongerforde ſyre Iohan bottelar / ſyre Raynolde Cobham ſyr Iohan paſſheley / ſyre Thomas tūſtall. Iohan Chydyok / ſyr Raufe langeforde / ſyr wyllyam drury / ſyre wyllyam thomas / Rycharde Carbonell / ſyr Rycharde wyde wyle / ſyr Iohn̄ ſhrydelow ſyr wyllyam Chayne / ſyr wyllyam Badyngton. ſyr Iohnn Iune / and ſyr Gylbert beauchampe. ¶Item in the fyfth yere the duke of Bedford wyth the ducheſſhe hys wyfe wente ouer ſee to Calayes & a lytell before wente ouer ſee Henry byſſhop of wyncheſtre. And on our ladyes daye Annū
                        cyacyon in our lady thirche at Calays the byſſhop of wynceſtre as he had ſōgen maſſe was made Cardynall and he knelyge before the hyghe awter the duke of Bedforde ſet the hat vppon his heed / and there were hys bulles redde as well of hys charge as of ye reioyſynge of his benefyces ſpyrytall and temporall. And thys ſame yere was grete habundaunce of rayne / that the ſubſtaūce of heye / & alſo of corne was dyſtroyed / for it rayned almooſte euery other daye. ¶And this ſame yer ye good erle of Saleſbury ſyr Thamas of Mountagu layd ſyege vnto Orlyaunce at the whyche ſyege he was ſlayne wyth a gonne that come out of the towne on whos ſoule god haue mercy. Amen. For ſythe that he was ſlayne Englyſſhe men neuer gate ne preuayled in Fraunce / but euer after began to leſe lytyll tyll all was loſte. ¶Alſo this ſame yere a Bryton murthred a good wedowe in hyr bedde without Algate whiche wedowe foūde hym for almes / and he bare away all that ſhe and. And after this he toke the gyrthe of holy chyrche at ſaynt George in Southwarke / & there he toke the croſſe and for ſwore this londe. And as he wente it happened that he came by the place where he dyd this curſyd dede in the ſubarbes of London and the women of ye ſame paryſſhe came out with ſtaues and canell dounges and ſlewe & made an ende of hym there. Notwithſtandynge the coneſtables & many other men beynge preſente for to kepe hym for there were ſo many women and had no pyte. ¶Alſo this ſame yere the duke of Northfolk with many gentylmen and yomen toke his barge / the .vii. daye of Nouembre att Saynt Mary oueres for to haue gone thrughe London brydge. And thrughe myſgydynge of the barge it ouerthrewe on the pyles and many men drowned / but the duke hymſelfe wyth two or thre leped vppon pyles and ſoo were ſaued wyth helpe of mē that were aboue the brydge with caſtynge downe ropes / by the whyche popes they ſaued them ſelf. ¶This ſame yere on ſaynt Leonardes day kyng Henry beynge vii. yere of age was crowned at weſtmynſter / at whoos coronacyon were made .xxxvii. knyghtes. ¶This yere on ſaynt Georges daye he raſſed ouer ſee to Calays to warde Fraunce. ¶About this tyme and a fore the reame beynge in grete meſery and trybulacyon. the Dolphyn with his partye begā to make warre and gate certayne places and made diſtreſſes vpon the Englyſſhmen by the meane of hys Capytayns. yt is to ſaye la heer & poton de ſayntraylles / and eſpycyal. a mayde whiche they named la pucelle de dicu. This mayde rode lyke a mā and was a valyaunt Capytayne. amonge thē and toke vpon hyr many grete enterpryſes in ſo moche that they had a byleue for to haue recoueryd all theyr loſſes by hyr. Notwithſtandynge at the laſte after many grete f
                           •
                        autes / by

the helpe of prudence of ſyr Iohn̄ Lukemburghe the whiche was a noble Capytayne of the duke of Burgon & many Englyſſhemen Pycardes and Burgonyons whiche were of oure partye before the towne of Company the .xxiii daye of Maye the for ſayde pucelle was taken in ye feld armed lyke a man & many other Capytaynes with hyr & were all brought to Rone & there ſhe was put in to pryſon. And there ſhe was Iuged by the lawe to be brent. And than ſhe ſayd that ſhe was wyth chylde / wherby ſhe was a whyle reſpyted Butte in concluſyon yt that founden that the was not wyth chylde / & than ſhe was brent in Rone / and the other Capytayns were put to raunſome & entreted as men of warre ben acuſtomed. ¶And this ſame yere about Candemaſſe Rycharde hunder a wulle packer was damned for an heretyke & brent at Tourhylle. ¶And aboute mydlēten ſyr Thomas Baggely preeſt & vycarye of the Mauen in Eſtſex beſyde walden was dyſgraded and dampned for an heretyke and brente in ſmythfelde / ¶And alſo in thys ſame yere whyles the kynge was in Fraunce there were many heretykes and lolardes that had purpoſed make a ryſynge and caſte hylles in dyuerſe places but bleſſed be almyghty god the Capytayae of theym was taken whoos name was wyllaym Manndeuyll a weuer of Abendon & balyf of the ſame towne· whiche named hymſelf Iacke Sharpe of wygmoreſlonde in wales. And after warde he was beheded at the forſayd Abendon in the wytſon weke ī the teweſdaye. ¶This ſame yere the .vi. day of Decembre kynge Henry the ſyxth was crowned kynge of Fraunce at Parys in the chirche of oure lady with grete ſolempnyte / there beynge preſente the Cardynall of Englonde the duke of Bed fordt and many other lordes of Fraunce and Englonde. And after thys coronacyon & grete feeſt holden at Parys the kyng retorned from thens to Rone and ſo to warde Calays / and the .ix. daye of Feuerer londed att Douer / whom all the comunes of Kent mette at Beramdon bytwene Caunterbury and / Douer al in reed hodes. and ſo come forthe tyll he came to the blacke hethe where he was mette wyth the mayer Iohn̄ wellys with all the craftes of London clothed all in whyche / & ſo they broughte hym vnto London the .xxi. daye of the ſame moneth. And this ſame yere was a reſtraynt of the wulles of Caleys made by the ſoudyours bycauſe they were not pay
                           •
                        d of theyr wages. wherfore the duke of Bedford regned of Fraūce beynge than Capitayns came to Calays the tewſday in ye eſter weke. And than on ye morne after many ſoudyours of ye towne were areſted & put in warde. And in the ſame weke he rode to Terewyn / & by the meane of the byſſhop of Terewyn he wedded the Erles doughter of Saynt Poule & came ayē to Calays / And than the .xi. daye of Iune on ſaynt Bernabeys daye there were foure ſoudyours of cal
                           •
                        is that were the chyef cauſers of the reſtraynt of the wulles byheded / that is to wyte Iohn̄ Madeley / Iohn̄ Launday / Thomas Palmer / and Talbot / & an hondred and .x bannyſſſed out of the towne that ſame tyme / and before were banyſſhed an hondred and .xx ſoudyours. And on mydſomer euē after came the lorde regēce and his wyfe to London.
                     ANd than about thys tyme deyed pope Martyn. And after hym Eugen
                           •
                        e
                           •
                        he fourth was pope. This man was peaſably choſen in the courte of Rome by the Cardynals & was very and indubytate pope. But within a ſhorte tyme after he was put & expulced oute of Rome in ſuche amanere that he was fayne for to flee naked. ¶In this ſame tyme was the counſeyll of Baſyle to the whiche coūſeyll Eugenye the pope was cyted to come. And bycauſe that he came not they depoſed hym / but he rought not ne ſet not therby but gate the cytee of Rome & abode ſtylle pope .xii. yere. ¶Thys tyme about wytſontyde the heretykes of Praghe were dyſtroyed. for at two Iourneys were dyſtroyed of theym moo than .xxii. thouſande with theyr Capytaynes that is to wete Procapius Saplico & Lupus preſpyter. ¶Alſo there was taken on lyue mayſter Pers clerke an Englyſſhyſſhe man & an heretyke. ¶And alſo this ſame yere was ſtronge froſt & a longe duringe the whiche laſted .xi. wekes / for it began vpon ſaynt Katherynes euen & laſted vnto ſaynt Scolaſtycus day in Feuer yere / in the whyche tyme the vyntage that came frome Burdeux come ouer ſhoters hyll. ¶This yere was the counſeyll of ara
                           •
                         & a grete treate bytwene the kynge of Englonde and the kynge of Fraū
                        ce where were aſſembled many grete lordes of bothe partyes. at whyche coūſeyll was oſſred to the kynge of Englonde grete thinges by the meane of a Legate that came fro Rome ye whyche

was Cardynall of ſaynt Croſſe / whiche of 
                           •
                        res were refuſed by the Cardynal of Englonde and other lordes there were for the kynge. wherfore the duke of Burgoyn yt whiche had ben 
                           •
                        onge Englyſſhe ſworne forſoke our partye & retorned Frenſſhe by the meane of the forſayd Legate. & made a peas with the Frenſſhe kynge reteyuynge of kynge for recompenſynge of his faders deth the counte of Pon
                           •
                        ui / the lordſhyp of Macon with moche other as is ſpecyfyed in the ſayd treaty. And ſo our embaſſatours came home ayen in horſe caas then they went out For they loſte there the duke of Burgoyne whiche had ben with hys burgoynons and Pycardes a ſynguler helpe in all the conqueſte of Normandy & of Fraūce / This ſame yere was a grete batayl on the ſee bytwene the Ienewes & the kynge of Aragon of whiche batayll the Ienewes had the vyctory / for they toke the kynge of Aragon the kyng of Nauerne & the grete mayſter of ſaynt Iames in Galyce wyth thre hondred knyghtes & ſquyres & moche other peple / & this was on ſaynt Domynycus daye. And this ſame yere were ſeen thre ſones atones / & anone folowed the thre folde gouernaūce in the chirche / that is to wete of Eugenye of the coūſeyll and of neutralyte. ¶Alſo this ſame yere a .M.CCCC.xxxiiii. was a paſſynge grete wynde by whiche ſteples houſes & trees were ouerthrowen About this tyme was an hooly mayde in Hollonde called Lyd wyth whiche lyned only by myracle not etynge ony mete. Thys yere the duke of Burgoyn began his ordre at Lyle of ye gollden Fleys and ordeyned certayne knyghtes of the ſame ordre & made ſtatutes & ordynaunces moche accordynge vnto the ordre of the garter. ¶Alſo this ſame yere the Frenſſhmen had enter pryſed to haue ſtolen Calays in the fyſſynge tyme / for many botes of Fraūce had ſafecondy
                           •
                        es to come to Calays for to take hetynge. And ye ſoudyours of the towne had a cuſtome to come to the chyrche dore / whiche ſtaues the Frenſſhmen that were arayed lyke fyſſhers had purpoſed for to haue ſtolen theyr ſtaues and wepen for to haue wonne ſo ye towne. but one of them laye wyth a comune woman the nyght before / & he tolde to hyr theyr coūſeyll / and ſhe on the morne tolde it to the Lyuerenaunce whiche for the with alle commaunded that euery man ſholde kepe hys wepen in his honde the ſakerynge tyme & other. And whan the Frenſſhemen perceyued this yt they were myſpoynted they ſaylled ſteeyghte to Dere & ſtale & toke ye towne. & on New yeres daye / af
                           •
                         they toke Harſlet· And thus the Englyſſhmē begā to leſe a lytyll & lytyl in Normandye.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Calays & Guynes were beſeged by the duke of Burgoyne & how they were reſcowed by the duke of Glouceſtre.
                     THys yere was a greate noyſe all Englonde thrugh how the duke of Burgoyne wolde come & beſyege Calays / wherfore the erle of Mortayne with his armye that he had to haue go with hym into fraūce / was cōmaū
                        ded & charged that he ſhold go to Calays / whiche was at that tyme well vytayled & manned for ſyr Iohn̄ Ratclyfe was Leuenetaunte of ye towne for the kyng. And the baron of Dudlay Lyuetenaunt of the caſtell. ¶And the .ix. daye of Iulii the duke of Burgoyne. with all the power of Flaundres and moche other people came before Calays & ſete his ſyege about ye towne / and euery towne of Flaundres had theyr tentes by themſelfe. And this ſyege endured ther were In the meane whyle ye duke of Glouceſtre beynge protectour of Englonde toke the mooſt parte of all the lordes of Englonde and went ouer the ſee to Calays for to reſcowe the towne or for to fyght with the duke & his hooſt yf they wolde haue byden The tyme London and euery good towne of Englonde ſent ouer the ſee to his reſcowe certayne peple well arayed of the beſte and choſen men for the warre. ¶And the ſeconde daye of Auguſt the forſayd duke of glouceſtre aryued at Calays wyth all his army & .v. hondred ſhyppes & moo. ¶And the duke of Burgoyne & all his hooſt that laye in the ſyege / as ſoone as they aſpyed the ſayles in ye ſee before they approched Calays hauē ſodaynly in a mornynge departed frome the ſyege / leuynge behynde hym moche ſtuff and vytayle & fledde in to Flaundres and Pycardye And in lykewyſe dyde the ſyege that laye befor Guy
                           •
                        es where as they of Gwenes toke gregonne of braſſe called Dyg
                           •
                        on & many other grete gonnes & ſerpentes. And than whan the duke of Gloucere was aryued wyth hys hoſt He wente in to Flaunders & there he was .xii. dayes & dyde bute lytell harme excepte that he brente two fayre vyllages Poperynge & Bell & other houſes whyche were of no ſtronge buyldynge & ſo he retorned home ayen· ¶And thys ſame yere the kyng of Scotlonde beſyeged Rokeſburgh

with moche people. But ſyr Raufe graye departed frō the caſtell & ordeyned for a reſcowe But as ſoone as ye kynge of Scotlōde vnderſtode hys departynge ſodaynly he brake his ſyege & wēte his waye & lefte moche ordinaunce behynde hym / where he gate hym no worſhyp· This ſame yere the ſeconde daye of Ianyuer quene Katheryne the whiche was ye kinges moder and wyf to kynge Hēry the fyfte deīed & departed out of this wolde & was brouht ryally thrugh Londō & ſoo to weſtm̄. & there ſhe lyeth worſhypfully buryed in oure ladyes chapel ¶And alſo this ſame yere the fourth day of Ianyuer felle downe the gate wyth the tour on it on Londō brydge to warde South warde with two arches & al the ſtone theron ¶This ſame yere was a greate treate holdē bitwene Grauenynge Calays bytwene the kyng & the duke of Burgoyne / where was ī the kynges name the Cardynall of Englonde the duke of Norfolke and many other lordes / & for the duke of Burgoyne was the ducheſſe hauynge fulle power of hyr lorde as regnette and lady of hys londes where was taken by thaduyſe of bothe partyes an abſtynence of warre for a certayn tyme in the name of the ducheſſe and not of the duke by cauſe he had gone frome his othe and legaunce that he had made to kynge Henry the fyfte therfore the kynge neuer wolde wryte ne appoynt ne haue to doo with hym after. but all in the ducheſſe name. ¶Alſo thys ſame yere quene Iane deyed the ſeconde day of Iule whiche had ben wyfe to Kynge Henry the fourthe and was caryed frome Bermondſey to Caunterbury where ſhe lyeth buryed by kynge Henry her huſbonde. This ſame yere deyed all the Lyons in the toure of London. the whiche had not ben ſeen many yeres before.
                  
                  
                     ¶Howe Owen a ſquyre of wales that had wedded quene Katheryne was areſted and of the ſciſme bytwene Eugenie & Felix.
                     IN the .xv. yere of kynge Henry the ſixth deyed Sygyſmondus Emperour of Almayne and knyght of the garter / whos termē
                        te the kynge kepte at ſaynt Poules in London tyally / where was made a ryall heerſe / and the Kynge in his aſtate cladde in blewe was atte euen at dyryge & on the morne at maſſe. &c. And after hym was electe and choſen Albert duke of Oſteryk whiche had wedded Sygyſmondus doughter for to be Emperour. This man was takē & receyued to be Kynge of Beme and Vngary by cauſe of his wyf that was Sygyſmondus doughter whiche left none other heyre after hym. This Alberte was Emperoure but one yere / for he was poyſened & ſo deyed ſome ſaythe yt he deyed of flix but he was a vertuous mā & pytefull moche that all the peple ye knew hym ſayd that ye world was not worthy to hauy his preſence. ¶This ſame yere one Owē a ſquyre of wales a mē of low byrth whyche had many a day befor ſecretly wedded quene Kateryn / & had by hyr .iii. ſones 
                           •
                         one doughter / & he was takē & cōmaūded to Newgate to pryſō by my lord of Glouceſtre protectour of ye reame. And this yere he brake the pryſō by the meane of a preeſt yt was his chapelayn & after was takē ayē by my lorde Bomōde & brought ayē to Newgate / & afterwarde deliuered at large. And one of his ſones afterwarde was ma
                           •
                        e erle of Rychemōde & an oth
                           •
                        r erle of Pēbroke & the thyrde a mōke of weſtm̄ whiche mōke d
                           •
                        yed ſone after. ¶This ſame yere alſo on Newe yeres daye at Bernardes Caſtell fell downe a ſtake of wode ſodaynly at after none and ſlewe thre mē myſchyfly & foule hurte other. ¶And at Bedforde on a ſhyreſdai were xviii. mē murdred without ſtroke by fallynge downe a ſtayr as they come out of the comune 
                           •
                        alle and manifoule hurte. ¶In the .xviii yere ſyr Rycharde Beauchāp ye good erle of warwyke deyed atte Rone he beynge ye tyme lyuetenate of the kīge in Normandye and frome thens his body was brought to warwyke where he lyeth worſhypfully in a newe chappel on the ſouth ſyde of the quere. ¶And alſo this yere was a grete derth of corne thrughout all Englonde for a buſſell of where was worth xl. pens in many places of Englonde. ¶And yet they myght not haue ynoughe wherfore Steuen Browne that tyme Mayre of Londō ſente into pruce and broughte to London certayn ſhyppes laden wyth rye whiche dyd moche good to the poore people. For corne was ſoo ſcarſe in Englonde that in ſome places of Englonde poore people made them brede of fern rotes. ¶This yere ye generall coūſeyll of Baſylyde poſed Eugeny & they choſe Felix whiche was duke of ſauoy. & than began the ſcyſme whiche endured vnto the yere of our lorde .M.CCCC.xlvii. ¶This felix was a deuoute prynce & ſawe his ſones ſone / And after lyued an holy lyfe. and was choſen

pope of the coūſeyll of Byſyle & Eugeny depoſed. And ſo the ſcyſme was longe tyme. & thys Felyx had but lyttll obedience by cauſe of the naturalyte. for the mooſt parte & wel nyghe al cryſtendome obeyed and reputed Eugeny for very pope of theym bothe. gor bothe occupyed duryng the lyf of Eugeny. This ſame yere ſyr Rychard whyche was vycarye of Hermettelworth was degrated of his preeſthode at Poules & brent at toure hylle as for an heretike on ſaynt Botulphus daye. how well att his deche he deyed a good Cryſten man / wherfore after his dethe moche people come to the place where he was brēte and offred. and made an hepe of ſtones & ſet vp a croſſe of tree & helde him for a ſaynt tyll the Mayre & ſhreues by the kyngꝭ cōmaundement & of byſſhappes dyſtroyed it & made there a doūge hylle. ¶And alſo this yere ye ſhreues of London ſet out of ſaint Martins the graunte of the ſent wary fyue ꝑſones whyche after warde were reſtored ayen to the ſentwary by the kynges Iuſtices. ¶And after Alberte the thyrd. Frederyk was choſen Emperoure▪ This frederyk duke of Oſteryk was lō
                        ge Emperour & dyfferred to be crowned at Rome by cauſe of the ſcyſme. but after that vnyte was had he was crowned wyth the Imperyall dyademe wyth grete glorye and tryumphe of pope Nycholas the iiii. This was a peaſyble man. quyete. and of ſynguler pacience not hatyngethe chryche he wedded ye kynges doughter of portyngale. ¶How ye ducheſſe of Glouceſtre was areſted for traſon & cōmytted to perpetuall pryſon in ye yle of Man. & of the dethe of mayſter Roger Bolyngbrok.
                     IN this ſame yere Elynoure Cobham ducheſſe of Glouceſtre was areſted for certayne poyntes of treaſon layde ayen hir / whervpon ſhe was examynde in Saynt Stephens Chapell att weſtm̄ afore the Arche byſſhop of Caunterbury. And there ſhe was enioyned to do open penaunce to go thrughe the Chepe beryng a taper in hir hande & after to perpetuall pryſon in the yle of Man vnder the kepyng of ſyr thomas ſtanley. Alſo that ſame tyme was areſted mayſter Thomas ſouthwell a chanō of weſtm̄ mayſter Iohn̄ haue a chapelayne off the ſayd lady. mayſter Robert bolyngbroke a clerke vſyng Nygromancye. and one Margery iouroemayn called the which of Eye belyde weſtm̄. there were areſted as for beynge of con̄
                        ſeyl with the ſayde ducheſſe of Glouceſtre. and for mayſter Thomas ſuthwel deyed in ye tour ye nyght before he ſholde haue be reyned on the morowe. for he hymſelf ſayd yt he ſholde deye in his bedde & not by Iuſtyces. ¶And in ye .xx. yere mayſter Iohn̄ hume & mayſter Roger bolyngbrok were brought to ye gylde halle in Londō. & there before ye Mayre ye lordes & chyef of Englonde were reyned & dāpned bothe to be drawē & hanged & quartred but mayſter Iohn̄ hume had his charter by ye kyng. but mayſter Roger was drawen to tyburn where he cōfeſſed yt he deyed gyltles of this mater & neuer hadde treſpaced in that he deyed fore Notwithſtondyng he was hāged heded & quartred whos ſoule god haue mercy Amē. ¶And margere iurdemayn was brent in ſmythfylde. & alſo this yere was a greate fraye in london ī flete ſtrete by nyghte tyme bytwene mē of courte and men of london. And dyuerſe mē ſlayne and ſome hurte. And one Herbotel was the chyef canſer of the myſgouernaūce & affraye. ¶Alſo this yere at the cheſynge of the mayre of / londō the comēs named Robert Clopton and Raulyn Holande talyor and the aldermē toke Robert clopton and brought hym att the ryght hande of the Mayre as cuſtome is. And than certayn talyour
                           •
                         and other h
                           •
                        de craftes men cryed nay nay not thys man but Raulyn holande wherfore ye Mayre that was Padyſlye ſente theym that ſo cryed to Newgate where they abode a grete whyle & were punyſſhed· ¶In this yere were dyuerſe enbaſſatours ſente in to Guyon fro a maryage for the kynge for the Erles doughter of Armynake that whiche was concluded. but by ye meane of the erle of Suffolke it was lette & put a parte· ¶And after this the ſayd erle of Suffolke wente hem ſelf ouerſee in Fraunce and there he trated the marynge bytwene the kinge of Englonde and the kynges doughter of Cycyle and of Iheruſalem / And the nexte yere yt was concluded fully that maryage. by whiche maryage the kynge ſholde delyuer to hir fader the duke of Angeo and the erldome of Maynē whiche was the keye of Normandye / Thēne departed the erle of Suffolke wyth his wyfē & dyuerſe lordes and knyghtes in the moſte ryal aſtate that myght be oute of Englonde wyth newe chares & palfreys whiche wente thrugh the chepe and ſo wente ouer the ſee and receyued hir and than after in the lenten broughte

hyr vnto Hamton where ſhe lāded & there was ryally receyued. ¶And vpō Candelmas euen before by a grete tēpeſte of thondre & lyghenynge at after none. Poules ſtyple was ſet on fyre on the mydddes of ye ſhaft in ye tymbre. whyche was quenched by force of laboure And ſpecially by ye morowe maſſe preeſte of ye Bowe in chepe whyche was thought impoſſyble ſauf only the grace of god. ¶This yere was the erle of Stafforde made & create Duke of Bukynghm therle of werwykd of warwyk ye erle of Dorſet markys of Dorſet & the erle was made Markꝭ of Soffolk.
                  
                  
                     ¶How kynge Hēry wedded quene Margarete. & of her coronacyon.
                     THis yere kinge henry maryed at Suthwyk quene Margarete. & ſhe came to lō
                        don ye .xxviii. day of may. And by the waye al ye lordes of Englōde receyued hyr worſhypfully in dyuerſe places. And ī eſpeciall duke of Glouceſtre. & on the Blacke heth the Mayre with all the aldermē. & all the craftes in blewe gownes broudred wyth the deuyſe of hys crafte. yt they myght be knowen met with hyr with redde hodes & brought her to londō. where were dyuerſe pagēris & countenaūce of dyuerſe hyſtoryes ſhewed in dyuers places of the Cytie coſtely. ¶And the xxx. daye of May. the forſayd quene was crowned at weſtm̄ & ther was Iuſtes thre dayes durynge wythin the Sayntwary before ye abbaye ¶This yere the pryour of Kylmain apeled therle of Vrmonde of treaſon. whyche had a daye to theym aſſygued for to fyght in Smythfelde. And the lyſtes were made & the felde dreſſed But whā it came to poynt. ye king cōmaunded that they ſholde not fyghte. but toke the quarell in to his honde. And this was done at ye Inſtāce & labours of certayne prechers & doctours of lōdon. as mayſter Gylbert worthyngton perſone of ſaynt Andrewes in Holbron. & other. ¶Alſo this yere came a grete embaſſate in to Englonde out of fraūce. for to haue cōcluded a perpetual peas. but in cōcluſyon it torned in to trewes for a yere ¶Aboute this time dyed ſaynt Bernardyne a gray frere whiche began the newe reformacyō of the ordre in many places in ſo moche. yt they. that were reformed. bē called Obſeruaūtes▪ whyche obſeruauntes been gretly encreaced in Italy & in almayn. this Bernardyn was canonyſed by pope Nycholas the .v. in the yere of our lorde .MCCCC.l. ¶Iohānes de Capriſtrano was his dyſciple whiche profyted moche to the reformacion of that ordre for god hathe ſhewed many a fayre myracle. ¶Alſo here is to be noted. that frome this tyme forwarde. kynge Hēry neuer profyted ne wente forwarde. but fortune begā to torne frome hym on all ſydes. as well in fraunce Normandye. Guyon. as in Englonde. ſō men holden oppynyon that kynge Henry gaue commyſſyon preuarly to Syr Edwarde Hull ſyr Robert Roos / Deane of Saynt Senerynes and other / to cōclude a maryage for hym. with the Erle of Armynakes ſyſter. whiche was promyſed as it was ſayde and cōcluded / and after broken / and he wedded quene Margarete as afore is ſayde / and a full dere maryage for the reame of Englonde / for it was knowe verely / that for to haue hyr delyuerde was ye duchy of Angeo & the erldom of Mayn whiche was the keye of Normandye for the frenſſmē to entre / ¶And aboute this the ſayde Markys of Suffolke axed in playne parlement· a fyftene and an half / for to fetche her out of fraūce. ¶Loo what a mariage was this as to the comparyſō of that other maryage. For there ſholde haue be delyuerde. ſo many caſtels and Townes in Guyon / and ſo moche golde ſholde haue be yeuen with her / that alle Englonde ſholde haue be therby enriched / but cōtrary wyſe fell wherfore euery grete prynce ought to kepe hys promyſe / For bycauſe of brekynge of this promyſe / & for maryage of quene Margarete. what loſſe hath the reame of Englond had / by leſynge of Normādye & Guyon / by dyuyſyon in the reame / ye rebellynge of comyns ayēſt ther prince and lordes / what dyuyſyon amoge ye lordes what murdre and ſleynge of theym / what feldes foughte & made / in concluſyon ſoo many yt many a man hathe loſte his lyfe / & in concluſyon the kynge depoſed. & the quene wyth her ſoone fayne to fle into Scotlōde / & from thens in to Fraūce. & ſo to Loreyne / the place that ſhe came fyrſt fro. many mē deme that the brekyngege of the kynges promyſe to the ſyſtyr of the erle of Armynack / was cauſe of his greate loſſe & aduerſy
                           •
                        e.
                  
                  
                     ¶How the duke of Glouceſtre the kynges vncle was areſted at the parlyament of Bury / and of hys dethe / & how Angeo in Mayn was delyueredd.
                     IN the .xxvi. yere of kynge Henry was a parlyament at Bury. called Saynt Edmondes

bury / abowte whiche was cōmaunded all the comyns of the countre to be there / ī their moſte beſte defenſyable araye. for to wayte vpon the kynge / To whiche parlyament came the duke of Glouceſtre. Vmfry the kynges vncle whiche hadde be protectoure of Englō
                        de all the noneage of the kynge. And anone after as he was in hys lodgynge he was areſted by the Vycoūte Beaumont the Coneſtable of Englonde / whome accompanyed the duke of Bukyngham / and many other lordes. ¶And for the wyth all his ſeruauntes were cōmaunded to departe frome hym And xlii. of the chief of theym were areſted. and ſente to dyuerſe priſons. And anone after this ſayd areſte the ſayde duke was on ye morowe deed. on whos ſoule god haue mercy. but how he dyed & in what maner the certente is not knowe. Some ſaye he deyed for ſorowe ſome ſaid he was murdred bytwene two federbeddꝭ. ſome ſayd yt a ſpytte was put in his fūdamente. But how he deyed god knoweth. to whome no thynge in hydde. & then whan he was deede he was layde open yt all men myght hym ſe· And ſoo bothe lordes & knyghtes of the ſhyre wyth Burgeys. came & ſawe hym lye dede. but woūde ne token coude they not perceyue how he dyde Here may men marke what this worlde is ¶This duke was a noble man & a grete clerke. & ruled worſhypfully ye reame to the kinges behoue. and neuer cowde be foūde fawte to him. but enuye of thē yt were gouernours & had promyſed the duchy of Angeo & the erldome of myan. cauſed ye dyſtruction of this noble man. For they dradde yt he wolde empeſhed ye delyueraunce. And after they ſente his boody to ſaint Albons wyth certayn lyghtes. for to be buryed. And ſo ſyr Gerauys of Clyfton had then ye charge for to conueye ye corps. And ſo it was buryed at Saynt Albons in the abbaye. And fyue ꝑſones of hys houſholde were ſente to london / & there were they reyned. & Iugyd to be drawen. & hanged. & alſo quarered. Of whome the names were / ſyr roger chamberlayne knyght. & one mydelton a ſquyre. & Richard denham· whiche v. ꝑſones were draw fro ye toure of london thrugh Chepe to tyborn· & there lete done quycke and them ſtriped to haue be heded & quartred & then ye marqueys of Suffolke ſhewed there for thez ye kyngꝭ ꝑdon vnder his grete ſeale. & ſoo they were ꝑdoned of the remenaūce of all ye other execuſyon & had theyr lyues. & ſo they were brought ayē to lōdon. & after freely delyuered Thus begā trowble in this reame of Englonde. for ye dethe of this noble duke of Glouceſtre. & al the comyns of the reame begā for to murmure for it & were not cōtent· ¶And after ye pope Eugeny was deed Nycholas the fyfte was elect pope. this Nycholas was choſe for Eugenye yet hangyng theſe ſyſmo notwithſtondyng he gate the Obediēce of all cryſtē reames. For after he was electe & ſacred pope certayne lordes of fraunce & of Englōde / were ſente in to Sauoy to pope. felix. for to entreate hym to ſeaſſe of ye papacye. And by the ſpecyall laboure of ſaynt Iohānes. he ſeſſed the ſeconde yere after the pope Nycholas was ſacred. And the ſayde. felix was made Legate of fraunce and Cardynal of Sauoye· and he reſygned the hole papacye to Nycholas. And after lyued an holy lyf. & deyed an holy man. And as it is ſayde almyghty god ſhewed myracles for hym. This was ye .xxiii. ſcyſme bytwene Eugeny and Felyx. & dured .xvi. yere. ¶The cauſe was this. the generall counſeyll of Baſyle depoſed Eugeny / whyche was oonly pope and Indubytyte. for aſmoche as he obſerued not and kepte the decrees and ſtatutes of the counſeyll of Conſtance as it is ſayde before. Nether he rought not to yeue obedyence to the gener all counſeyll in no maner wyſe wherfore aroſe a grete alteracyon among wryters of thes matere (pro et contra) whiche can not accorde vnto this daye / one partye ſayth / that the counſeyll is aboue the pope. And that other partye ſayth nay. but the pope is aboue the counſeyll. God bleſſed aboue all thynge yeue and graunte his peas in holy chirche ſpouſe of cryſte amen. This nycholas was of Iene comen of lowe degree. a doctour of dyuynyte / An actyf man he Reedyfyed many places that were broken / & ruynous. and dyd make a walle aboute the palays. and made the walle newe abowte Rome for drede of the Turkis / & ye people wondred and gretely merueylled of the ceaſyng and reſynyng of pope Felix to ye pope Nycholas / cōſyderynge that Nicholas was a mā of ſo homely a byrth ye other was of affynyte to all moſte party of criſten prīces wherfore ther was a uerſe publyſſhed. as is a fore ſayde. ¶How ſyr 
                           •
                        raunſoys Aragonys toke Fogyers in Normandye / and of the loſſe of Conſtā
                        tynople by the Turke.
                     
                        IN the yere of kynge Henry .xxvii. beyng trewes bytwene fraūce and Englond A knyght of ye Engliſſhe partye named Syr Fraunces aragony toke a towne in Normādye named Fogyeſe / ayēſte the trewes / of whyche takynge begā moche ſorowe & loſſe for thys was the occaſyō / by the whiche the frenſſmmē gate all Normandye. ¶Aboute this tyme the Cyte of Cōſtantynople / whiche was the emperial cytye in all Grece / was takē by the turkes▪ Infydels whiche was bytrayde as ſome holde oppynyō / And thēperoure taken & ſlayne. & the ryall chyrche of ſaynt Sophya robbed & dyſpoyled. and the relyques and ymages and the rode drawynge aboute the ſtretes / whiche was done in ſpyte of Cryſten fayth and ſone after all cryſtē fayth in Grece peryſſhed and ceſſyd There were many Cryſten mē ſlayne. and innumerable ſolde and put in captyuyte. ¶By the takynge of this towne. the Turke gretly was enhaūced in pryde. and a grete loſſe to all cryſtendome. ¶In the .xxviii. yere was a parlyament holdē at weſtm̄) & from thens adyourned to the blacke freres at Londō / and after criſtmas to weſtmynſter ayen. ¶And this ſame yere Robert of Cane a man of weſtcountre wyth a fewe ſhyppes comynge out of the bay. lade with ſalt whiche ſhyppes were of Pruce flandres Hollande and zelande / and brought theym to Hampton wherfore the marchauntes of Englonde beynge in Flaundres were areſted. in Brydges / Ipre and other places. and myghte not be delyuered / ne theyr dettes dyſcharged / tyll they had made apoyntment for to raye ye hurtes of ſhyppes / whiche was payde by the Marchauntes of the ſtaple euery peny. & in lyke wyſe ye Marchauntes and goodes beynge in Danſyke / were alſo areſted / and made grete amendes This ſame yere the frenſſhmē in a mornyng toke by a trayne the towne of Pounte al Arche. & there in the lorde Fawconbrydge was taken pryſoner. And after that in Decembre Rone was taken & loſte beynge therin ſyr Edmonde Duke of Somerſet / & the Erle of Shreweſbury the whiche by a poyntement left pledges and loſte all Normandye / and came home into Englonde. And duryng the ſayde parlyamente. the duke of Suffolke was areſted. and ſente in to the toure & there he was a moneth. & after the kynge dyd do fetche hym oute. for whiche cauſe all the comunes were in a greate rumoure / what for the delyueraunce of Aungeo & Mayne & after leſynge of all Normādye & in eſpeccyall for the dethe of the good duke of Glouceſtre / in ſo moche in ſome places mē gadred & made theȳ Capytayns. as blewberde & other / whyche were take & put to dethe / And then the ſayde parlyamente adyounyd was to Leycetre. And theder the kynge brought with hym the duke of Suffolk. And whā the comyns vnderſtode that he was oute of the Towre & comē thyder / they deſyred for to haue execucyō on theym yt were cauſe of the delyueraūce of normādye / & hadde becauſe of the deth of the duke of Glouceſtre and hadde ſolde gaſcoyne and guyan / of the whiche they named too be gylty / The duke of Suffolke as chyef. The lorde Saye the Byſſhop of ſalyſbury / dauyel & many mo. And for to pleaſe yu comyns the duke. of Suffolke was exyled oute of Englonde for .v. yere. ¶And ſo duryng the parlyamēte he wente into Norfolke & there he toke his ſhyppyng / for to goo out of the reame of Englonde into fraunce / And this yere as he ſaylled on ye ſee a ſhyppe of werre called Nycholas of the toure mette wyth his ſhyp and founde hym therin whome they toke out. and brought hym in to theyr ſhyppe to the mayſtre & the capytayne / and there he was examyned and at the laſte Iuged to deth And ſo they put hym in a caban and his chapylayne wyth hym for too ſhryue hym / And that done they brought hym into Douer rode / & ſet hym into the bote & ſmote there of his heede / And broughte the body a londe vpō the ſondes / and ſet the heede ther by And this was done the fyrſt daye of May. Lo what auayled hym nowe all hys delyueraunce of Normandye / And here maye ye ſchow he was rewarded for the deth of the duke of Glouceſtre / thus began ſorowe vppon ſorowe / and deth for dethe.
                  
                  
                     ¶How this yere was Inſurreccyon in Kē
                        te of the comyns / of whome Iack Cade an Iryſſhe man was capytayne
                     THis yere of our lorde. M·cccc. & .l. was the grete grace of the Iubyle at Rome where was greete pardon. in ſo moche that frō all places in cryſtendome / grete multytude of people reſtorcyd thyder / And in this ſame yere was a grete aſſymble and gaderynge to gyder of the comyns of kente in to gret nombre. And made an Inſurreccyon. and Rebelled ayenſte the kynge and his lawes. And ordeyned them

a Capytayne called Iohān Cade an Iryſhmā whiche named hymſelf Mortymer / coſyn to the duke of yorke / And this Capytayne helde theym togyder / and made ordynaūces among theym. and brought theym to the blacke hethe where he made a byl of pe
                           •
                        ycyons to the kyng and hys counſeyll and ſhewed what Iniuryes oppreſſyons the poore comyns ſuffren & vnd coleur. for to come to hys aboue / and he hadde a grete maltytude of people. ¶And the .xxvii daye of Iune. ye kynge and many lordes Capitayns· and men of werre wente to warde hym to the blacke hethe· And whan the Capytayne of kent vnderſtode the comynge of the kynge wyth ſo grete puyſſaunce. he wythdrewe hym and his people to ſmok / a lytyll vyllage. And the .xxviii. day of Iune he beynge withdrawē and gone the kynge came with hys armye ſett in ordre and enbatayl led to the blacke heth / & by aduys of his coūſeyll. ſyr Vmffrey Stafforde ſquyre two valyaunt capytayns / wyth certayn people for to fyght wyth the capytayne & to take and bringe hym and hys acceſſaries to the kynge / whiche wente to Senok. ¶And ye Capytayne wyth hys felſhyp and mette wyth theym. & fought ayenſt them. and in concluſyon ſlewe them bothe / and as many as abode & wolde not yelde thē were ſlayne.
                     ¶Durīg this ſkyrmyſſhe. felle a grete variaū
                        ce amonge the lordes men and comyn people beynge on blacke hathe ayenſte theyr lordes & Capytayns / ſayenge playnly / that they wolde go vnto the Capytayne of kente. to aſſyſte and help hym / but yf they myght haue execucyon on the traytours beynge about ye kynge wher to the kynge ſayd nay. & they ſayd playnly yt ye lorde Saye treſourer of Englōde. & the biſſhop of Salyſbury. & the baron of Dubby. ye abbot of Glouceſtre. Drnyel. & treuilō. & many mo were traytours. and worthy to bee dede wherfore for to pleſe the lordes meny & alſo ſome of the kynges hous: ye lorde Saye was areſted & ſente to the toure of london. & then the kyng he ryuge tydynges of the dethe & ouer throwenge of the Staffordes he wythdrew hym to londō & frome thens to kelyng worthe / For the kyng ne the lordes durſt not truſte the towne houſholdemen. ¶Then after yt the capytayne had hadde thys vyctorye vppon the Staffordes / anone he toke ſyr Vmfreys fallete &. hys bryngantynes ſmyten ful of gylte na
                           •
                        les & alſo his
                           •
                         gylte ſpo
                           •
                         And arayed hym lyke a lorde & a capytayne & reſorted with al his meny. and alſo moo thā he had before. to ye blacke heth ayē To whome came the archebyſſhop of Caūterbury & the duke of Buckynghā to the blacke hethe & ſpake with hym. And as it was ſayd they founde hym wytty in his talkynge & his requeſt. & ſo they departed. ¶And ye thyrde day of Iuly he came & entred into London wyth al his people & there dyd make cryes in the Kynges name & in his name / that no man ſholde robbe. ne take no maner goddes but yf he payed for it And came rydyng thorough ye cyte ī grete pryde. & ſmote his ſwerde vppō london ſtone in Canwycke ſtrete. ¶And he beynge in the cyte / ſēte to ye toure for to haue the lorde Say. And ſo they fette hym & brought hym to ye yelde halle before. mayre & chaldermen where that he was examyned And he ſayd. he wolde & ought to be Iuged by his petys. And the comyns of Kent toke hym by force frō ye mayre / & office
                           ••
                         that kepte hym and toke hym to a preſt to ſhrewe. hym. And or he myght be half ſhriuē / they broughte hym to the ſtanderd in the chepe ſyde. and there ſmote of his heed. on whos ſoule god haue mery. Amen. ¶And thus deyed the lorde Saye Treſourer of Englonde. ¶And this they ſet his heed vpon a ſpere. & bare it all about the Cyte And the ſame daye about Myle ende: Cromere was beheded. And the daye before at after none the Capytayne with certayne of hys men went to Philyp malpaus houſe & robbyd hym. and toke a waye moche good. And from thens he wen to ſaynt. Margaretes patens to one Gertis houſe. and robbyd hym. and toke away from hym moche good alſo Att whiche robbyng dyuerſe men of London of thier neyghbours were at· and toke part wyth theym / ¶For this robbyng the peples hertes felle frome hym· And euery thryfty men was a ferde / for to be ſerued in lyke wyſe. ¶For there was many a man in London. that a wayted & wolde fayn haue ſene a comyn robbery whyche almyghty god forbyd. For it is to ſuppoſe yf he hadde not robbyd he myght haue goon ferre / or he had be wythſtonde. for the kynge and all the lordes of the reame of Englonde were departed except the lorde. Scalys that kept the toure of London And the fyfte daye of In
                           •
                         he dyd do ſmyte of a mānys hede in ſouth werke. And the nyght after the mayre of London with the Aldermen & the Comyns of the cyte
                           •
                        
                        
concluded to dryue away the capytayne. & hys hooſte And ſent to the lorde Scales to ye toure & to Mathegough a capytayne of Normādye yt they wolde that nyght aſſayll the Capytayne with theym of kente. And ſo they dyd come to London brydge in ſuch werke or the Capytayne had ony knowlege therof & they fought with theym that kept the brydge And the kē
                        
                           •
                        yſſhmē wēt to harnes & came to the brydge & ſhote and foughte with thē & gate the bridge & made theȳ of Londō to flee & ſlewe many of theym. & thys endured all the nyght to & fro / tyll one of ye clocke of the morowe. And at the laſte they brente the drawe brydge. where many of theym of london were drowned. In the whiche nyght ſatton and alderman of Lōdon was ſlayn Roger heyſaunte. Mathegough. & many other. And after this the chaunſeler of Englonde ſent to the Capytayne a pardon generalle for hym & an other for his meny and then they departyd fro ſuch werke euery man to his owne hous / ¶And whā they were al departed & gone ther was proclamacyons made in Kente South ſex & other places. that what man coude take the Capytayn quycke or deed. ſholde haue a thouſā
                        de poūde. ¶And after this one Alexander ydē a ſquyer of kent toke hym in a gardē in ſuthſex And in takē Iohn̄ Cade capytayne was ſlayne and beheded. And his heed ſette vpon London brydge. And anone after the kynge came in to kente / and dyd his Iuſtices ſytte at Caunterbury / and enquyred who was cauſers & chyef cauſe of this Inſurreccyon. And there were .viii. mē Iugyd to the deth in one daye & in other places mo And from thens the kynge went in to Southſex and in the weſte countree where a lytell before was ſlayne the byſſhop of Salyſbury. And this ſame yere there were ſo many Iugyd to deth that thre hedes ſtode vppon Londō brydge atte ones.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the felde that the duke of yorke toke att Drenched in kent / & of the byrch of prynce Edwarde / & of the fyrſte bataylle at Sayne Albōs where the duke of ſomerſet was ſlayne.
                     IN the .xxx. yere of the kynge / the duke of yorke came out of the Marche of walys with therle of Deuenſhyre & the lord Cobham and grete puyſſaunce reformacyon of certayne Iniurys and wrōges / and alſo to haue Iuſtice vpon certayne lordes beynge about the kynge & toke a felde at Brentheth beſyde Detford in Kente. whiche was a ſtronge felde for whyche cauſe the kinge wyth all his lordes went vnto blacke heth. wyth a grete and a ſtronge multytude of peple armyd / and ordeyned for the warre in the beſte wyſe. And whan they hadde muſtre on the hethe / certayne lordes were tho ſente vnto hym. for to treate and make apointmēt with hym. whiche were the byſſhop of Ely. the byſſhop of wynceſtre / therles of Salyſbury & of warwyk / And they concluded that the duke of Somerſet ſholde be had to warde. and to anſwere to ſuche artycles as ye duke of yorke ſholde put on hym And then the duke of yorke ſhold breke his felde / & come to ye kyng. whiche was all promyſed by the kynge. And ſoo the Kynge commaunded. that the duke of Somerſet ſholde he hadde in to warde. And then̄e the duke of yorke brake vp his felde and came to ye kynge And whan he was come contrarye to the promyſe afore made / the duke of Somerſet was preſēte in the felde / awaytynge and cheyf aboute the kynge / And made the duke of yorke ryde before as a pryſoner thrughe london. ¶And after they wolde haue put hym in holde. But a noyſe aroſe that therle of Marche hys ſone. was comynge with .x. thouſande men to London warde wherfore the kynge and hys counſeyll feryd / And then̄e they concluded that the duke of york ſholde departe att his owen wyll. ¶Abowte this tyme began grete dyuylyon ne Spruce bytwene the greate mayſter and the Knyghtes of the duchye ordre whyche were lordes of that coūtree. For the comyns & townes rebelled ayenſt the lordes and made ſoo greate werre / ye at ye laſt they called the kyng of Pole to be theyr lorde / the whiche kynge came and was worſhypfully receyued / And beſyeged the caſtell / of Mar
                           •
                        engburgh / whiche was the cheyf caſtell of ſtrength of all the londe. An
                           •
                         wa
                           •
                        
                        ne it / & droue out the mayſter of Da
                           •
                        ſke 
                           •
                         and all other places of that londe & ſo they that had ben lordes many yeres. loſte all theyr ſeygnourye and poſſeſſyons in tho londes. ¶And in the yere of the Incarnacyon of oure lorde .M.CCCC.liii. on ſaynte Edwardes daye. quene. Margarete was delyuerde of a fayre prynce whyche named was Edward. That ſame day Iohan Norman was choſē for to be Mayer of London. And the daye that he ſholde take hys othe att weſtmynſter / he wente thyder by water wyth alle the craftes / where afore tyme tho

mayer / alderme and the craftes rode on horſbacke the whiche was neuer vſyd after. For ſyn that tyme they haue euer goon by water in botes and barges. ¶ye haue well vnderſtonde before how that contrary to the promyſe of the kyng & alſo the concluſyons take bytwene the kynge & ye duke of yorke att Brentheth the duke of Somerſet went not to warde but abode about the kynge / & had grete rule / And anone after he was made Capytayne of Calays. & ruled the kyng & his reame as he wolde / wherfore the grete lordes of the reame / & alſo ye comyns were not pleaſed: For whyche cauſe the duke of yorke / the erle of warwyke / the erle of Salyſbury with many knyghtes and ſquyres and moche other people came to remeue ye ſayde duke of Somerſet and other fro the kynge / And the kyng herynge of theyr comynge / thoughte by hys coūſeyll for to haue gone weſtwarde & not for to haue mette with them. And had with hym the duke of Somerſet ye duke of Bokyngham the erle of Stafforde the erle of Northumberlonde \ the lorde Clyfforde / & many other. ¶And what tyme that the duke of yorke and his felyſhyppe vnderſtonde / that the kyng was departed wyth the lordes from London / anone he chaunged hys way / & coſted the coū
                        tre and came to ſaynt Albons the .xxiii. daye of May. & there mette with the kyng to whom the kyng ſent certayne lordes / & deſyred them to kepe the peas / and departe: But in concluſyon why
                           •
                        e they treated on that one ſyde / the erle of warwyk with the Marche men & other entred in to the twone on that other ſyde / and fought ayenſt the kynge and his party / and ſo began the batayll and fyghtinge whiche endured a greate whyle / But in concluſyon the duke of yorke obteyned. and had the vyctory of ye Iourneye / In whyche was ſlayne the duke of Somerſet / the erle of Northumberlonde. the lorde Clyfforde. and many kynghtes and ſquyres / and many moo hurte / And on the morne after they brought the kynge in grete aſtate to London / whyche was lodged in the byſſhops palays of London. And anone after was a grete parlemēt at London / in whiche parlement the duke of yerke. was made protectour of Englōde / & the erle of warwyk Capytayne of Calays / the erle of Salyſbury Chaunceler of Englonde. And all ſuche perſones as had the rule before aboute the kynge were ſet a parte / and myght not rule as they dyd before. ¶And this ſame yere deyed pope Nycholas ye fyfte. & after hym was Calixt the thyrde. This Calixt was a Catalane / & the actes of hym ſhal be ſhewed here after folowynge· ¶In this ſame yere fell a grete affraye in Lōdon ayēſt the Lūbardes. the cauſe begā / bycauſe a yonge man toke a dager frome a Lūbarde & brake it. wherfore the yōge mā on the morne was ſēte fore to come before the Mayer & the aldermē & there for offēce He was cōmytted to warde. And thēne ye mayer departed fro the yelde halle / for to goo home to his dyner But in Chepe the yonge mē Mercerye for the mooſt partye prentyſes. helde the Mayre & the Shyrefs ſtyl in Chepe. And wolde not ſuffre theym to departe / vnto the tyme that theyr felowe / whyche was commytted to warde / were delyuered / and ſo by force they reſcowed theyr felowe from pryſon. And that done the Mayre departed and the Shrefes alſo. and the pryſoner deliuered. whiche yf he had be put to pryſon. He had be in Ieoperdye of his lyfe. And thene began a rumoure in the cyte ayenſt the Lōbardes. And the ſame euenynge ye hond crafty men of the towne aroſe / and rāne to the Lumbardes houſes and dyſpoyled and robbed dyuers of them. wherfore the Mayre and the Aldermen came with the honeſt people of the cyte. And droue them thens / and ſente ſome of theym that had ſtolen to Newgate. ¶And the yonge man was reſcowed by his felowes / ſawe this greate rumoure. affraye & robbed / enſewed / of hys fyrſte meuynge to the Lumbarde / departyd and wente to weſtmynſter to ſaynt wary. Or elles it hadde coſte hym hys lyfe. For anone after came downe an Oyer determyne. for to do Iuſtyce on all theym that ſo rebelled in the Cytee ayenſte the Lumbardes / On whyche ſatte wyth the Mayre that tyme wyllyam Marowe / the duke of Bokyngham And many other lordes / to ſe execucyon done / But the comynes of the Cytee ſecretely made them redy and dyde arme them in theyr howſes and were in purpoos to haue rongen the comyne belle / whiche is called bowe belle but they lete by ſyde men / whiche came to ye knowlege of the duke of Bokyngham and other lordes. ¶And in contynente they aroſe / for they durſte noo lenger abyde / for they dowted that the hole Cyte ſholde haue ryſen ayenſt theym. But yet neuerthels two or thre of the cyte were

Iuged to dethe for this robbery / were hangyd at Tyborne ¶And anone after the kynge & the quene / & other lordes rode to Couētre and withdrewe theym fro London. for this cauſe. And a lytyll before the duke of yorke was ſent for to grenewych. And there was dyſchargyd of the protectourſhyppe. And the erle of Salyſbury of his Chaūchelerſhyppe. And after thys they were ſente fore by preuy ſeale for to come to Couētre where they were almooſt diſceyued & the Erle of warwyke alſo and ſhold haue ben dyſtroyed yf they had not ſeen well to. ¶How the lorde Egremōde was take by ye Erle of Salyſbury ſōes / & of ye robbynge of Sandwytche
                     THis yere were taken four grete fyſſhes bytwene Ereth & london that one was called Mors Maryne / the ſeconde was a ſwerde fyſſhe & the other two were whalys. In this ſame yere / for certayne affrayes done ī the northe coūtre bytwene lord Egremōde & the erle of Salyſbury ſones. ye ſayd lord Egremond whō they had cōdempned in a grete ſom̄e of money to ye ſayd Erle of Salyſbury. & therfore he was cōmytted into pryſon in Newegate in London where whan he had be a certayne ſpace he brake the pryſon / & thre pryſoners with hym / & eſcaped & wēt his waye. Alſo this yere the erle of warwyk & his wyf wēt to Calays with a fayre feliſſhyp & toke poſſeſſyon of his offyce. about this tyme was grete reformacōn of many moneſteryes of relygyō in dyuerſe partyes of the worlde wiche were refourmed after the fyrſt Inſtytutycyon and cōtynued in many places ¶This ſame yere was a greate batayll in the Marches bytwene the londe of Hūgry & Turkey. at a place is called Septedrad where Innumerable Turkes were ſlayne / more bi myracle than̄e by mānes honde / for oonly the honde of god ſmote theym / ſaynt Iohan of Capyſtrane was there preſēce. & prouokyd the criſtē people beynge thēne aferde for to purſue after ye Turkys where an Infynyte multytude were ſlayne & dyſtryed & the Turkys ſayd / yt a grete nōbre of armyd mē folowed thē that they were aferde to turne ayen & they were holy angelles. This ſame yere the pryſoners of Newgate in Londō brake theyr pryſon / & went vpon the ſedes and fought ayēſt theym of the Cytee / & kepe the gate a longe whyle / But att the laſte the towne gate the pryſon be theym. And then̄e they were ſore punyſſhed in enſample of other. ¶In this yere alſo there was a grete erthquake in Naples / in ſo moche that there peryſſhed .xl. thouſande people that ſanke there in to the erthe. ¶Alſo in the .xxxvi. yere ſaynt Oſmonde ſōtyme byſſhop of Salyſbury was canonyſed att Rome by pope Calyſt. & the .x daye of Iuly he was tranſlated at Salyſbury by the biſſhop of Caūterbury & many other byſſhoppes. ¶And in Auguſt after ſyr Pers de braſay ſeneſchal of normādye / with the Capytayne of Depe & many other Capytayns / and mē of werre went to thee ſee with a greate Nauy. and into the downes by nyght. And on the more erly before day they londed at Sandwytche / bothe bi lōde and water / and toke the towne / and ryfled & diſpoyled it / And toke many pryſoners. and lefte the towne all bare / whyche was a ryche place and moche good therin / And ladde wyth them many ryche pryſoners / In this ſame yere in many places of Fraunce Almayne / Flaunders Holonde and zeelonde / chyldren gadred theym togyder by greate companyes / For to goo on pylgrymage to ſaynt Myghels moūte in Normādye / whiche came fro ferre coūtrees wherof the people merueyled. And many ſuppoſed that ſome wyckyd ſpyryte meued them to doo ſo. but it dured not longe by cauſe of the longe waye and alſo for lac / of vytaylle as they wente. ¶In this yere Reynolde Pecok byſſhop of Cheſtre / was founde an herytyke / and the thyrde day of Decembre was endu
                           •
                        ed at Lambeth in preſence of the Archebyſſhop of Caunterbury and many other byſſhoppes doctours & lordes temporall / and h
                           •
                        s bokes brent att Poules croſſe. ¶And ye haue herde before how certayne lordes were ſlayne atte Saynt Albons / wherfore was alwaye a grutchynge / & wrath hadde by the heyres of them that ſoo were ſlayne ayenſt the duke of yorke / the Erles of wa
                           •
                        
                        wyk and of Salyſbury / wherfore the kyng by the aduys of his counſeyll ſente for theym vnto London to whyche place the duke of yorke came the .xxvi. daye of Ianueri with four honderd men and lodged hym atte Baynerdes caſtell in hys owne place. ¶And the .iv. daye of Ianuer came the erle of Salyſbury with fyue hundred men and was lodged in therber of his owne place. ¶And then̄e came the duke of Excetre and of Somerſet with .viii.C. men / and laye withoute temple barre. ¶And the erle of Northumberlonde / and the lorde Egremonde

the lorde Clyfforde wyth .xv. hundred men / & lodged without the towne. ¶And the Mayer that tyme Geffraye Boloyne / kept grete watche with the comyns of the cyte / & rode about the cytee by Holborne and Fleteſtrete / with a .v. thouſand men well arayed and armyd. for to kepe the peas / ¶And the .xiiii. daye of Feuerer the erle of warwyke came to London / fro Calays well beſeen and worſhypfully with .v hundred men In red Iakettes broudred wyth a ragged ſtaffe behynde & before. and was lodged at the graye freres / ¶And the .xv. daye of Marche the kynge came to London and the quene. And ther was accorded and peas made amonge the lordes / and they were ſette in peas. And on our lady daye the xxv. daye of Marche. in the yere of oure lorde .M.CCCC.lviii· the kynge & the quene & all the lordes went on proceſſyon at Poules in London. & anone after the kyng & the lordes departed. & in this yere was a grete fraye in Fletſtrete bytwene mē of courte & men of the ſame ſtrete. In whyche fayre the quenes Attourney was ſlayne
                  
                  
                     ¶Howe the kynges houſholde made a fraye ayenſte the Erle of warwyke / and of the Iourneye at bloreheth.
                     ALſo this ſame yere as the Erle of warwyk was at counſeyll at weſtmynſter alle the kynges houſholde meny gadred them togyder / for to haue ſlayne the ſayde erle. But by the helpe of god & his frendes he recouered his barge / and eſcapyd theyr euyll enterpryſe / how well the cokes came rennynge oute wyth ſpytes and peſtels ayneh hym. And the ſame daye he rode to wardes werwyk and ſoone after he gate hym a commyſſyon / and went ouer the ſee to warde Calays. ¶Soone after thys therle of Salyſbury comynge to Lōdon / was encoūtred at Bloreheth which the lord Audley. And moche other people ordeyned to dyſtroy hym But he hauynge knowlege that he ſhold be met wyth was accōpanyed with hys two ſones ſyr Thomas & ſyr Iohn̄ Neuell / & a grete felyſhyp of goodmen. And ſo they faught togyder / where the erle of Salyſbury wanne ye felde / And the lorde Audley was ſlayne / & many gentylmen of Cheſſhyre. & moche people hurt And the erles two ſones were hurte. & goynge homewarde afterwarde they were taken / and hadde to Cheſtre by the quenes menye. ¶After Calixt Pius was pope / & was chaſe this yere .M.CCCC.lvlii· & he was callyd before Eneas an eloquēte man / & a poete laureate. He was embaſſatour of ye Emperours before tyme. And he wrote in ye coūſeyl of Baſyle a noble treatyſe for thactoryte of ye ſame / Alſo he canonyſed ſaynte Katheryne of Senys / Thys pope ordeyned grete Indulgēce & pardonne to theym that wolde go & werre ayēſt the Turke / & wrote a pyſtle to the greate Turke / exhortynge hym to become Cryſten. And in thend he ordeyned a paſſage ayēſt the Turke at Ankon. to whiche moche people drewe out all partyes of criſtēdome / of the whiche people he ſente many home ayen by cauſe they ſuffyced not / & anone after he dyed at the ſayd Ankō / the yere of our lord .M.CCCC.lxiii. the .xiiii. daye of Auguſt.
                  
                  
                     ¶How Andrewe Trollop & the ſouldyours of Calays forſoke ye duke of yorke & theyr mayſter therle of warwyk in the weſte countre.
                     THe duke of yorke / the erles of warwyk and of Salyſbury / ſawe the gouernaū
                        ce of the reame ſtode mooſt by the quene & hyr counſeyll / & how the grete prynces of the londe were not callyd to counſeyl but ſet a parte. and not only ſoo / but it was ſayd thrugh the reame tho ſayd lordes ſholde be dyſtroyed as it openly was ſhewed at Blorehethe by them yt wolde haue ſlayne the erle of Salyſbury. Thenne for ſauacyon of theyr lyues / & alſo for the comynwele of the reame thought for to remedy thyſe thynges aſſembled them togyder with moche people / and toke a felde in the weſt countre to whiche the erle of warwyk came fro Calays / with many of the olde Souldeyours as Andrē
                        we Trollop and other / in whoſe wyſdome / as for ye werre he truſtyd moche vpon And whan they were thus aſſembled and made theyr felde. the kynge ſente out commyſſyons & preuy ſeales vnto all the lordes of his reame to come and wayte on hym in theyr mooſt beſte defenſable araye / And ſo euery man came in ſuche wyſe. that the kynge was ſtronger / and hadde more▪ peple than the duke of yorke and therles of warwyk & of Salyſbury. for it is here to be notyd that euery lorde in Englonde at this tyme / durſt not dyſobeye the quene / ſo ſhe rulyd peaſybly all that was done abowte the kynge whiche was a good and a well dyſpoſed man. And thenne whan the kynge was come to the place where they were / the duke of yorke & hys felyſſhyp made theyr felde in the ſtrongeſt wyſe

/ & purpoſyd verely to abyde & haue fouȝte / But in the nyghte Andrewe Trollop & all the olde ſoudyours of Calays wyth a greate felyſhyp / ſodeynly departyd out of the dukes hoſt. And wente ſtrayte vnto the kynges felde / where they were receiued Ioyouſly. for they knewe thentent of thother lordes / & alſo the maner of theyr felde. And then the duke of yorke with the other lordes. ſeynge thē dyſceued / toke a counſeylle ſhortly in that ſame nyght. & departed frome the felde leuynge behynde thē the mooſt partye of theyr people too kepe the felde tyl on the morowe / Then the duke of yorke with his ſecō
                        de ſone departyd thrugh wales towarde Irlonde / Leuynge his eldeſt ſone the erle of Marche with the erles of werwyk & of Salyſbury. whiche rode togyder wyth thre or foure perſones ſtrayght into Deuenſhyre. & there by helpe & ayde of one Denham / gate a ſhyp whiche coſt a .xi ſcore nobles / & wyth the ſame ſhyp ſayled fro thens in to Gerneſey & there refreſſhed theym / & frome thens ſayled to Calays. where they were receyued in to the caſtel by ye poſtern̄ / or they of ye towne wyſt of it / And the duke of yorke toke ſhypynge in walys. & ſayled ouer in to Irlonde where he was well receyued.
                  
                  
                     ¶How the erles of Marche warwyk & of Salyſbury entred in to Calays & how the erle of warwyk wence in to Irlonde.
                     THen kynge Henry wyth his hoſt in the felde / not knowynge of this ſodeyne departynge / on the morowe foūde none in the felde of the ſayd lordes. ſent out in all the haſt mē for to folowe and purſue after to take thē / but they mette not with thē as god wolde. And thē the kynge wēt to Ludlowe & dyſpoyled ye caſtel & the towne. And ſēte the ducheſſe of yorke and hyr chyldrē to the ducheſſe of Bokyngham hyr ſyſter / where ſhe was kepte longe tyme after / And forth with the kynge ordeyned the duke of Somerſet / to be Capytayne of Calays & thyſe of other lordes ſo departed / as afore is ſayd. were preclamyd rebelles & grete traytours. Then the duke of Somerſet tooke to hym al the ſoudyours that departed fro the felde and made hȳ redy in all the haſte / for to go to Calays. & take poſſeſſyon of his offyce / And whan he came he founde therle of warwyk therin as Capytayne & the erles of Marche & of Salyſbury alſo / and then̄e he londed by Scalys & wēt to gyues and there he was receyued / And it fortuned that ſome of tho ſhyppes that came ouer with hym. came in to Calays hauē by theyr fre wyll / for the ſhypmē ought more fauour to the erle of warwyk thā to the duke of Somerſet / & in whyche ſhyppes were take dyuerſe mē / as Ienyn Fynkyll Iohan felowe Kaylles & Purſer / whiche were beheded ſoone after in Calays. and after this came mē dayly ouer ye ſee to thyſe lordes to calays / & began for to wexe ſtrōger. & they borowed moche gode of the Staple / & on that other ſyde the duke of Somerſet beynge in Gynes gate people to hym whiche came out and ſcarmyſſhed with theym of Calays / & they of Calays with the whiche endured many daies 
                           •
                        ucyng moche people came ouer dayly vnto thiſe lordes ¶Thē on a tyme by thaduys and coūſeylle of the lordes att Calays ſente ouer mayſter Denham with a greate felyſhyp to Sandwhyche / whiche tooke the towne & therin the lorde Ryuers & the lorde S
                           •
                        alys his ſone / & toke many ſhyppes in the hauen / and broughte them all to calays wyth whiche ſhyppes many maryners of ther fre wyl / came to calays / to ſerue the Erle of warwyk. And after the Erle of warwyke by the aduys of the lordes. tooke all his ſhyppes and manned theym well and ſaylled hymſelfe in to Irlonde. for to ſpeke wyth the duke of yorke / and tooke his aduys how they ſholde entre in to Englonde. And whan that he had be there and done hys erandes / he retorned ayen towardes Calays / and broughte with hym his moder the counteſſe of Salyſbury. And comynge in the weſt countree on ye ſee the duke of Excetre Admyral of Englond beynge in the grace of du. accōpanyed with many ſhyppꝭ of warre met with ye erle of warwyk & hys flete. but they faught not for the ſubſtaūce of ye peple beynge with the duke of Excetre. ought better wyll & fauour to ye erle of warwyk thā to hym / & they departed and came to calays in ſauf
                           •
                        e. ¶Thē the kynges coūſeyll ſeynge yt thyſe lordꝭ had goten thoſe ſhyppes fro Sandwytche. & taken the lorde Ryuers & his ſone ordeyned a garyſon at Sandwytche to abyde & kepe the towne. & made one moūtforde capitayne of ye towne / & that no man vytayll / ne marchaūt. yt ſhold go to flaunders / ſhold go to calays. Thē they of calays ſeyenge this made Denham / & many other to go to Sandwytche & aſſayled ye towne by londe & by water & gate ix. And brought the Capytayne ouer ſee and ſmote of hys heed / And yet

                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
daylymen came ouer to theim fro all partyes.
                  
                  
                     ¶How the Erle of Marche & of warwyke and of Salyſbury entred in to Englōd & of ye feld of Northāptō where dyuerſe lordes were ſlayne.
                     ANd after thys the forſayd erles of marche warwyke & Salyſbury came ouer to Douer with moche people & there londed to whome all the coūtre drewe & came to Lōdon all armyd / and for to lete lordes of the kynges counſell knowe theyr truth & alſo theyr entente / aſſembled theym. and tolde them / that they entended no harme to ye kynges perſone / ſauf that they wolde put from hym ſuche perſones as were aboute hym. And ſoo departed frome London wyth a greate puyſſaunce towarde Northampton / where the kynge was accompanyed with many lordes / and made a ſtronge felde withoute the towne / And there bothe partyes met. and was fought a greate batayll In whyche batayll were ſlayne the duke of bokyngham & therle of Shreweſbury / ye vycoūt Beamonde / the lorde Egremonde / and many other knyghtes and ſquyres / and othere alſo / and the kynge hymſelf was taken in the felde And after warde broughte to London / And anone after was a parlement at weſtm̄. duryng whyche parlyament ye duke of yorke came out of Irlonde. wyth the Erle of Rutlande. rydynge wyth a grete felyſhyp in to the palays / & come in to the parlyament chambre & there toke the kynges place / and claymed the crowne as his propre enherytaunce and ryght and Caſte forth in wryttynge his tytele. and alſo how he was ryghtfull heyre / wherfore was moche to do / but in concluſyon yt was appoynted / and concluded. that kinge Henry ſholde regne and be kynge / durynge his natural lyfe For as moche as he hadde be kynge ſo longe / & was poſſeſſyd & aft his dethe the duke of yorke ſhold be kynge / and hys heyers kynges after hym \ and forth with ſholde be ꝓclamed heyre apparaūt and ſhold alſo be protector and regence of englonde duryng ye kynges lyfe wyth many other thyngꝭ ordeyned in the ſame parliment and yf kynge Henry durynge hys lyfe / wence frome thys poyntement or ony artycle concludyd in the ſayd paylyament he ſholde be depoſed / and the duke ſholde take the crowne / and be kynge all whyche thynges were enacted by thauctoryte of the ſame / at whiche parlyament the comyn
                           •
                         of the reame beyng aſſembled in the comyn hons / cōmynyng and treatyng vpon the tytle of the forſayd duke of yorke / ſodenly feldone the crowne. whiche henge thenne in the middes of the ſayde hous whiche is the frayter of ye abbaye of weſtm̄. whiche was takē for a prodice or tokē. that the regne of kynge Henry was endyd ¶And alſo the crowne whiche ſtode on the hygheſt toure of the ſtyple in the caſtel of douer / fell downe this ſame yere.
                  
                  
                     ¶How the duke of yorke was ſlayne and of the felde of wakefelde. & of the ſeconde Iourneye at ſaynt albōs by ye quenē & the prince.
                     BIcauſe the quene wyth the Prynce her ſone / was in the northe and abſent her fro the kynge. and obeyed not ſuche thyngꝭ concluded in the parlement / was ordeyned that ye duke of yorke as ꝓtector / ſhold go north ward to brynge in the quene / & ſubdue ſuche as wolne not obey / wyth whome wente the erle of ſalyſbury. Syr Thomas Neuyll hys ſone with moche people / And at wakefelde in Cryſtmas weke. they were ouerthrowe and ſlayne by lordes of the quenes party that is to wyte / the duke of yorke was ſlayne. the erle of Rotlonde ſyr Thomas Neuyll. and many moo / & the Eerle of Salyſbury was take and other· As Iohan horowe of london capytayne and Ruler of the fotmen and Haūſon of hull whiche were brought to poūfret. and there be heeded / & there heedes ſente to yorke / & ſette vpon the yates / And thus was the noble prynce ſlayne / the duke off yorke / on whos ſoule god haue Mercy / & thys tyme therle of Marche beyng in Shorweſbury / herynge the deth of his fader / deſyred ayde of the towne to auenge his faders dethe / & frothens wente to walys. and at Candelmaſſe after he had a battayll at Martymers Croſſe. ayenſte therle of Penbroke & of wylſhyre where the erle of marche had the vyctorye / Then the quene with thoſe lordes of the north after that they had dyſtreſſyd and ſlayne the duke of yorke and his felyſſhyp. came ſouth warde with a grete multytude of people / for too come to the kynge and defecte ſuche concluſyons as had be take before by the parlyamēt / ayenſt whos comyng the duke of Northfolke. ye erle of warwyeke. wyth moche people & ordynaunce / wente to ſaynt albons. & ladde kynge Henry wyth theym / & there encoūtred to gyder in ſuche wyſe, and faught ſo that the duke of Northfolke & Therle of werwyke / wyth many other of ther

party 
                           ••
                        edde & loſte that Iourneye. where that kynge Hēry was takē with the quene & prynce Edwarde his ſone. whiche two had got on that felde. The quene & hyr partye beynge at her aboue. ſēte anone to Lōdon / whyche was on an Aſſhe weneſdaye the fyrſt daye of lente for vytayl. ¶For whiche the Mayre ordeyned bi thaduys of the aldermē ye certen cartes lade wyth vytayll ſholde be ſente to ſaynt Albons to thē. & whā tho cartes came to Crepell yate / ye comīs of the Cyte that kept ye gate. toke the vytayles fro the cartes and wolde not ſuffre it to paſſe. Thēne were there certayn Aldermē & comyns apoynted too goo vnto bernet / to ſpeke wyth ye quenes cōſeyll to entreate yu the northren men ſholde bee ſente home ayen / in to theyr contree. for the cyte of London drad to be dyſpoyled yf they had come. And duryng this treatyſe / tydynges came. that the erle of warwyk had met with the Erle of Marche on Cotteſwolde comyng oute of walys wyth a greate menye of welſſhemē and that they bothe were comynge vnto Lōdon warde / Anone as theſe tytynges were knowe. the tratyſe was broke for the kynge / Quene Prynce / & the other lordes that were with theym departed fro ſaynt Albōs north ward with al ther people / yet or they departed thens they beheeded that lorde Bonuyll & Syr Thomas Kryell. whiche were takē in the Iourney done on ſhrewe tourſdaye. ¶Thenne the Ducheſſe of yorke beyng at london. herynge of the loſſe of the felde of ſaynt Albons. ſente ouerſee hyr twoo yonge ſones George & Rycharde / whiche wente to Vtrech. and Phylyp malpas a ryche marchaūt of Londō Thomas vaghan Squyre. mayſter wyllyam Ha
                           •
                        clyf and many other / ferynge of the comynge of the quene to London / toke a ſhyp at Anwerpe to haue gone in to zelande / & on that other coſte / were taken of one Colompne a Franſſhman / a ſhyppe of werre. And he toke theym pryſoners & broughte
                           •
                         them in to fraunce / where they payed grete good for theyr raunſon / and there was greate goode & rycheſſe in that ſhyppe.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the depoſinge of kynge Hēry the ſixte & how kynge Edwarde the fourth tooke poſſeſſyō
                        ▪ and of the batayll on Palm ſondaye. and how he was crowned.
                     THen whan the Erle of warwyke hadde wette to gader on Cot
                           •
                        yſwolde / in contynent they concludyd to go to london. and ſente worde anone te ye Mayre & to the Cytie that they wolde come / & anone ye cytie was gladde of theyr comynge / hopynge to be releuyd bi thē & ſo they came too / london / & whā they were come & had ſpoke with the lordes & eſtates beynge there. cōcluded for as moche as kynge Hēry was gone with thē north warde. that he hadde forfeyted his crowne & ought to be depoſed accordyng vnto ye actes made paſſyd in the laſte parlemēt And ſo by the aduys of ye lordes ſpyrytuall & tēporall / thenne beyng at london. the er of Marche Edwarde by the grace of god / eldeſt ſone of the duke Rychard of yorke. As ryghtfull heyre. and nexte enherytour to his fader the fourth daye of Marche / the yere of our Lorde god .M.CCCC.lix. toke poſſeſſyon of the Reame / at weſtm̄. in the chyrche of the abbaye and offred as a kynge wyth ye ceptre ryall. To whome all the lordes ſpyrytuall and temporall dyd homage. as to theyr ſouerayn lorde and Kyng And forth wyth it was proclaymed thrugh the Cyte kynge Edwarde the fourthe by name / & anone after the Kynge rode in his ryalle eſtate north warde wyth all hys lordes to ſubdue his ſubyectis that tyme beynge in the northe. & for to auenge his faders deth. And on Palme ſondaye after he had a grete bataylle in the northe coūtree at a place called Towcon not fer from yorke / where wyth the helpe of god he gate the felde and hadde the vyctorye wher were ſlayn of his aduerſaryes .xxx. thouſāde mē and moo as it was ſayde by theym that were there
                           •
                         In whiche batayll was ſlayne the Erle of North thumberlande. the lorde Cly
                           ••
                        orde ſyr Iohan Neuyll the Erle of weſtmerlondes brother andrewe Trollop. and many knyghtes & ſquers ¶Thenne Kynge Henry that had be kyng 
                           •
                         beynge wyth the quene and the prynce att yorke herynge the loſſe of that felde. And ſo moche peple ſlayne and ouerthrowe / anone forthe with departed all thre wyth the duke of Somerſet the lorde Roos. and other towarde Scotlande And the nexte daye after kynge Edward with all his armye entred in to yorke / and was ther proclaymyd kynge and obeyed as he ought too be. And the Mayre and comyns ſwore to be his lyegemen. and whan they had taryed a whyle in the northe & that all the north and that al the north countree had torned to hym he retorned ſouth warde. leuynge behynde hym the erle of werwyk in tho partyes to gouerne & rule that

countre And aboute Mydſomer after / the yere of our lorde .M.cccc.lx. & the fyrſte yere of hys regne he was crowned att weſtm̄ / & anoynted kīge of englōde hauyng poſſeſſyō of al ye reame
                     CAlyxtus ye thyrde was pope after Nycholas thre yere & v. monethes. this Calyxte was an olde mā whā he was choſe pope. & was cōtynually ſeke / ne he myght not fulfyll his deſyre. which he entēded to do ayēſt ye turkys / for deth came vpō hym. & he was choſe in ye yere of our lord .M.cccc.lv. & he deyed ye .vi. daye & he made ye fyguracyō. alſo he canonyſed ſaynt vī
                        cēt / a frere precher / & ther was a grete reformacyō of many monaſteryes of ye worlde / & thoſe reformacyons were made many tymes. but all moſt none abode. but ye retorned ayen home. by ſucceſſyō of tyme / after ye dethe of the worſhypfull faders· ye feſte of the Tranſfiguracyō was ordeyned of Calyxt for ye yefte of grace of ye merueylous vyctory done ayēſt the Turke in Hū
                        gary on ſaynt Syxtus day .M.CCCC.lvii. For there was a merueylous vyctory yeue to ye Cryſtē mē in Hungary ayēſt the greate Turke & there he loſte many a mā & fledde ſhāfully for drede of enemyes. & noman folowed hym / but alone ye hōde of god feryd ye Turke & his hooſt on ſaynt Calyxte daye ſaynt Iohn̄ de Capryſtrano was there ſeen preſēt. & he prouoked the people yt were aferde to folow the myſbeleuīge Turkes & there fell a grete vēgeaūce on theym for the Turkes ſayd / yt there was ſo grete a nō
                        bre of knyghtes that folowed thē. That vnnethe they durſte looke bacwarde. & therfore they fledde. & lefte al ther treſour behynde thē. & they were angelles that cauſed theym to flee. Nota
                     PRynters of bookes were myghtely multyplyed in Maguncie. & thrughoute the worlde & there began fyrſte· & there helde theyr craftes. & thys tyme myny mē begā to be more ſubtyll in craftes & ſwyterf thā euer they were afore
                     PIus the ſecōde was pope after Calyxt .vi. yere. Thys pius was choſe ī ye yere of our lorde .M.CCCC.lviii. & he was called Eneas an eloquēt man a grete oratour a laureate poete. and in the coūſeyll of Baſyle he wrote a noble tretyſe for thattoryte of ye ſame This mā deſyred to haue a paſſage to the Turke & moche people of dyuerſe countres came to Rome. & he yaue theym his bleſſynge and ſente theym home ayē for they were not ſufficiēt for the Turkes hoſte & anone after he deceſſyd.
                     POules a venetiā was pope after Pyus vii. yere. This poule was choſe in the ye yere of our lorde .M.cccc.lxiiii. And anone he halowed ye feſte of the preſentacyō of our lady. as pius dyd This mā was a toughmā in ryght wyſnes & he ſayd it was bett to make fewe thinges. and make them ſtedfaſtly than for to make many. & ſone reuoke thē. And he mad a grete pallays at ſaynt Markys and he deceſſed or he had ended it in ye yere of our lorde M.cccc.lxxi. ¶Leodin̄ ye londe of luke was oppreſſed with many trybulacyons. & after in the yere of our lorde .M.cccc.lxviii. vterly it was diſtroyed bi Carolū ye duke of Bourgoyn. that whiche wedded dame Margarete ſyſter to kynge Edwarde the forth of Englonde. Alſo the ſame karolū entred in the londe of Gelder. and conquyred it hooly. The yere of grace alſo was chaunged by pope Poule for fauoure of mānys ſoule frome .xxv. yere to .xxv. yere. And by caſe ye curſydneſſe aboūded ſo ſore. grea
                           •
                        e aboūded alſo ſore.
                     SIxtus the fourth a Iohannes. & a frere minor was pope after paule. This mā was geneall in ye ordre of ye frere mynors or he was Cardynal. And he was choſē in ye yere of our lorde .M.cccc.lxxi. And was called Frāciſcus de Sanona. of good fame and vertuost He was choſē Cardynall wythout his Knowlege tyll he was made. & ye ſame yere yt he was choſē pope. The turke had takē fro me criſtē mē two empyres. & four kyngdomes .xx. prouīces. and two hūdred cytyes· & had deſtroyed mē & wymmē without nōbre. And ye meuyd the pope yt he ſholde dyſpoſe hym to goo to wythſtonde hym. And for an armye to be made ayenſt the Turke ye pope gaue grete Indulgentes of pardon of ye treſori of the cyrche vnto all cryſtē reames. yt he myght ordeyne ſome treſore. to withſtande ye myſbeleued Turke. And in the lōde of Englonde / Iohn̄ abbot of Abyngdon was the popes legate. to dyſpoſe this goodli treſoure. of ye chyrche to euery feythful mā. yt was diſpoſed and that wolde able hym to receyue it.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  ¶Here endeth this preſent Cronycle of Englonde with the fruyte of tymes. compyled in A booke. And alſo newely Enprynted in the yere of our lorde god .M.CCCCC. & .xv. by me Iulyan Notary dwellynge in powlys chyrche yarde beſyde ye weſtedore by my lordes palyes
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  ¶Here foloweth a lytell treatyſe the whyche treateth of the deſcripcion of this lōde whiche of olde thyme was named Albyon. And after Brytayne And nowe is called Englonde and ſpeketh of ye nobleſſe & worthyneſſe of the ſame.
                  
                     
                  
               
               
                  ¶It is ſoo that in many and dyuerſe places the comyn Cronycles of Englonde / ben had and alſo nowe late Enprynted And for as moche as the dyſcrypcyon of thys londe whyche of olde tyme was named: Albyon / and after Brytayne / Is not deſcryued ne comynly hadde / ne ye nobleneſſe and worthyneſſe of the ſame is not knowen: Therfore I entende to ſette in this booke the deſcrypcyon of this ſayde yle of Brytayne and wyth the commodytes of the ſame.
               
               
                  
                     ¶In the fyrſte ſhalle be tolde the name of the ylonde. Capitulo primo.
                     ¶Of the ſettynge boundynge lenthe and brede. ca. ii.
                     ¶Of the worthyneſſe & perogaciones. ca. iii.
                     ¶Of the merueyles & of the wondres. ca. iiii.
                     ¶Of the chyef partyes of the ſame londe· Capitulo· v.
                     ¶Of the ylondes that been therto adiacente. Capitulo. vi.
                     ¶Of the kynges hygh wayes & ſtretes. ca: vii
                     ¶Of the famous Ryuers & ſtremes. ca. viii.
                     ¶Of auncyent cytees and townes. ca. ix.
                     ¶Of prouynces and ſhyres. ca. x.
                     ¶Of the lawes & names of the lawes. ca: xi.
                     ¶Of kyngdoms of boundes and markes bytwene them. ca. xii.
                     ¶Of byſſhopryches & theyr ſees. ca. xiii.
                     ¶Of howe many manere people. haue dwelled therin. ca. xiiii.
                     ¶Of the langages of maners and vſage of ye people of that londe. ca. xv.
                     ¶Of the londe of wales. ca. xvi.
                     ¶Of the name and why it is named: walles Capitulo .xvii.
                     ¶Of the commodytees of the londe of wales. Capitulo .xviii.
                     ¶Of the maners and rytes of the walſſhmē. Capitulo .xix.
                     ¶Of ye meruaylles wonders of wales. ca. xx.
                     ¶Of the diſcrypcyon of Scotlonde ſomtyme named Albanya. ca. xxi.
                     ¶Of the dyſcrypcyon of Irlonde. ca. xxii.
                     ¶Of the boundynge of Irlonde ca. xxiii.
                     ¶Of the gretnes and quātyte of that Londe. Capitulo .xxiiii.
                     ¶Of the defautes of the londe. ca. xxv.
                     ¶Of theym that fyrſte enhabyted Irlonde. Capitulo .xxvi.
                     ¶Of the condycyons and maners of Iryſſh men. ca xxvii.
                     ¶Of the meruaylles and wonders of Irlonde. ca. xxviii.
                     ¶Of the meruaylles of ſayntes of Irlonde. Capitula .xxix.
                     ¶Explicit tabula.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  ¶The names of this ylonde. Ca. primo
                  FIrſte as Galfrydus ſaythe thys londe was called Albyne the oldeſte doughter of Dyocleſyan and hadde .xxxii. ſyſters. And they were fyrſte enhabyted this londe. And bycauſe ſhe was the oldeſt ſyſter ſhe named thys londe Albyon after hyr owne name as ye Cronycle rether ſeth. Other ſaye that this Londe was named Albyon as it were the whyte londe of whyte rockes about the clyues of the ſee that were ſen fro ferre. After warde Brute cō
                     quered this londe and called it Brytayn after his owne name. And thenne Saxons or Englyſſhmen conquerde this londe and caled yt Anglia that is Englōde Or it is called Anglia of a quene that owed this londe / that was named Angla and was a noble dukes doughter of the Saxons. Or as yſad ſcyth Ethy .xv. anglia hathe that name as it were an angle and a corner of the worlde. Or els as Beda ſaythe lii.: Saynt Gregory ſawe Englyſſhe childrē to ſell atte Rome and he accorded to the name of the londe. And ſayde they ben ſouthely Angles / for her face chyned as angels / for the noblyte of the londe ſhone in the childrens faces. ¶Alfre. The Bryteyſſhe Anglia is called the

other worlde / and for greate plente of all good the greate Charles called in hys owne Chambre. ¶Solinus The edge of Frenſſhee clyfe ſholde be the ende of the worlde / yf the ylonde of Brytayne ne were not / whyche is worthy to haue the name of an other worlde. ¶Alfry thys ylonde ys called inſula for yt ys in ſalo / that is the ſee / And is beten of wyth dyuerſe cours of waters wyth ſtremes and wyth wawes of the ſee.
                  
                     ¶Of the ſettynge boundynge lenthe and brede of this londe.
                     THis Brytayne is accoūted a noble londe both in our ſtoryes & alſo in ye ſtoryes of Grekes. and is ſette ayenſte Germania. Gallia. Fraūce & Spayne bytwene the north and the weſt & the ſee bytwene. This londe is fyfty myle from the clyf of the men that be called morini geſſiorico. ¶Bedali .i. And for this ylonde lyeth vnder the north hede of the worlde. And it hath lyght and bryght nyghts in ye ſomer tyme. So that of tentyme at mydnyght men haue quaſtyons & doubte whether it be enyntyte or dawynge / yt is for the tyme of ye yere that the ſonne goeth not ferre vnder the erth by nyght but paſſeth by the north ſyde and cometh ſoone in to the eeſt agayne. And therfore in ye ſomer ben theyr dayes full longe of .xviii. houres & the nyghtes of .vi. houres. And after in the wynter ben longe nyghtes of .xviii. houres and ſhorte dayes of .vi. houres· Alſo in Armenia. Macedonia. Italya & in other londes of the ſame lyne the lengeſt day & lengeſt nyghte alſo is of .xv. houres. and the ſhorteſt day or nyght is of .
                           •
                        x. houres. ¶Plinius in meroe. That ylonde is chyef of blacke men / ther is ye lengeſt day .xii. houres. In Alexandre ī Egypt of .xiii· oures in ytalya of .xv· houres. In brytayne of .xviii· houres. In the ylonde named Tyle all the .vi ſomer monethes is daye & all the .vi. wynter monethes in nyght. ¶Iſyd li.xiii. Brytayn is ſette wythin Occian as yt were without the worlde / & is ſette ayenſt Fraunce & Spayne. ¶Giraldus. Brytayne in endlonge and larger in the myddell than in the endes. ¶Oroſius. Brytayne ſtretcheth in lenth out of the ſouth in to the north and in the ſouth eſt it hathe Fraunce / in the ſouth Spayne the north / Nowaye. & in the weſt Hybernia / that Is yrlonde. whan ſhyppemen paſſen the nexte clyf of that londe they ſe a cyte that heet Rupty mouth. ¶Beda .li.i· That cyte is nowe called ſhortly of Englyſhmen Reptaceſtre / ¶Solinus / Brytayne is .viii. hondreth myle of lenthe & it be moten fro ye clyf of Toteneſſe to the angle of Colydon. ¶Alfre That is from penwith ſtrete .xv. myle be yonde Mychels ſtowe in Cornwayle vnto cateneſſe that is beyonde Scotlōde & brytayn is more thā ·ii.C. myle brode frō Meneuia that is ye vtermeſt place in wales vnto yarmoth in nothfolke. ¶Beda Only out take the lengeſt out ſherynge of dyuerſe for londes with the whiche Brytayne is all aboute .xlviii. ſythe .lxx. thouſande paas.
                  
               
               
                  ¶Of ye worthyneſſe & perogacions. ca. iii.
                  AS Fraunce paſſeth Brytayne ſo Brytayne paſſeth Irlonde in fayre weder and noblyte but not in helthe. ¶Beda .li. For this ylonde is beſte. to brynge fort threes and fruyte Rutherne & beſtes And wyne groweth therin in ſome place. The londe hath plente of fowles & of beeſtes of dyuerſe maner of kynde The londe is plēteuous & the ſee alſo. The londe is noble copyous & ryche of noble welles & Ryuers with plente of fyſthe. There is greate plēte of ſmall fyſſhe of ſamon & of eeles. ¶wilhel. de. pon .li.iii. So yt the peple in ſome place fede theyr ſwyne with fyſſhe. ¶Beda li.i. there ben of tentymes taken Dolphyns. See calues / and Balayne greate fyſſhes / as whales kynde. ¶And dyuerſe maner ſhelfyſſhe amonge the whiche / ſhelfyſſhe been muſkles That within them haue Margery peerles of all maner of colour & hewe of rody & redde purpure & of blewe / & ſpecyally & mooſt of whyte ther with fyne rede / the rednes ther of is wonder fayre \ & ſtable / & ſtayneth neuer with c
                        •
                     ode ne with heet▪ with wete ne with drye but euer the older the colour is the fayrer 
                        •
                      There ben alſo ſalte welles & hote welles / ther of rennynge ſtremes of hote bathes departed in to dyuerſe places accordynge. For man & woman of alle manere age olde or yonge. ¶Baſilius ſayth. That the water that renneth & paſſeth by vaynes of certayne metal taketh in his courſe grete hete. This ylonde is plenteuous of vaynes of metalles· Bras of yron of leede of tyn / & of ſyluer alſo. ¶Plinius li.vi. ca. vi. In this ylō
                     de vnder the curfe of the londe is founde good

merle the thryfty of the fatnes dryeth hym ſelfe therin / So that euer the thycker ye felde in merled the better corne it wyll bere / There is alſo a nother maner white merle / that the lōde is the better fourſcore yere that therwith is merled. ¶Solinꝰ In this ylonde groweth a ſtone that is called Gagates / yf ye wyll knowe his fayrneſſe / it is blacke as gēmes ben / yf ye wyll knowe his kynde / It brenneth water & quencheth in oyle & as to hys myght / yf the ſtone befroted & chaffed It holdeth what hym negheth as ſuccū
                     
                        •
                      a ſtone yt is ſoo named. ¶yſydorus .li.xv. There was ſhepe that beren gode wule There ben many hertes and wylde beeſtes and fewe wulues. therfore ſhepe ben the ſurer wythoute kekynge lefte in the felde. ¶R. In this ylonde alſo ben many cytees and townes fayre and noble and ryche. many greate Ryuers & ſtremes wyth grete plente of fyſhe / many fayre wodes and grete. wyth ryght many beeſtes tame and wylde. ¶The erth of that londe is copyous of metall oor / And of ſalte welles of quareyes of Marbyll of dyuerſe manere ſtones / of reed of whyte of ſofte and of harde / chalke & of whyte lyme. There is alſo whyte claye and rede for to make pottes. crockes / ſtenes / & other veſſel and brent tyle to couer the houſes and chyrches as it were in the other ſamya yt is named ſamos alſo. ¶Flanddres loueth well the wull of this londe. And hollande the ſkynnes and felles of all maner of beeſtes. Guyan the yron and the leed. Irlonde the oor and the ſalte. Al Europe loueth and deſyreth the whete metall of this londe / Alfredus Brytayn hath ynough of mater that there nedeth to bye and ſell or is nedelull to mannes vſe / there lacketh neyther ſalte ne yron / Therfore a verſefyour in his metre prayſeth this londe in to this manere / Englonde is a good londe fruytfull of wu
                        •
                     . but it is a corner Englonde is full of playe free men wel worthy to playe / fre men / free tonges. free hertes / and free ben all theyr thynges. theyr honde is more free. and better than theyr tounge. Alſo Englonde is beauteous of londe floure of londes all aboute / that londe is full payede wyth fruyte and good of his owne. that londe reueleth ſtraunge men that hathe nede therto / And whan honger greueth other loondes that londe fedeth theym. That londe bereth fruyte & corne grete plente ynough / That londe is welle at eaſe as longe as men lyue in peas eeſte & weſt in eche londe ben knowen well the hauenes of Englonde / Her ſhyppes foundes and ofte helpeth many londes Theyr mete and money men hather more comyn alway And for to lerne men gladly yeue gyftos / In londe and ſtronge wyde ſpeke men of Englonde. Londe hony mylke theſe this ylonde therof ſhall bere the pryce. ¶Thys ylonde hath no nede of other londes. all londos muſte ſeke helpe at this alone / Of the lykynge of theyr woun / myght wonder kyng Salomō The ryches that there is an. wolde deſyre octauyan / 
               
               
                  ¶Of the meruayles & wondred ca. iiii.
                  IN Brytayne ben hote welles wel arayed and adreſſed to the vſe of manhode / mayſters of thylke welles is the grete ſpyrite minerua In her hous the fyre endureth alwaye that neuer chaungeth into aſſhen / but there the fyre ſlaketh. it chaungeth into ſtone clothes· Alfre. In Brytayn ben many wondres Neuertheles four ben moſte wonderfull / the fyrſte is att Peton there bloweth ſo ſtronge wynde out of the chynes of the erthe yt it caſteth vp agayn 
                        •
                     lothes that mē caſte therin. The ſecōde is att Stonhenge beſydes Saleſbury there ben grete ſtones & wonder huge. and ben teten on hyghe as it were yates ſette vpon other yates Neuertheles it is not konwen clerely ne apperceyued how and wherfore they bē ſo arered and ſo wonderfull honged. The thyrde is at Cherdboke there is a grete holownes vnder the erthe often many mē haue ſeen· Ryuers and ſtremes But no where can they fynde none ende The fourth is that rayn is ſeen reyſed vppon hylles and none yſpronge aboute in the feldes. Alſo there is a grete pounde that conteyned .lx. ylondes couenable for men to dwelle in that ponde is beclypped aboute with ſyx ſcore Roches & vpon euery roche an egles neſte and th
                        •
                     e ſcore Ryuers rennen into that ponde. And none of them all renne into the ſee but one / Ther is a ponde cloſed aboute with walle of tyle and of ſtone. ¶In that ponde men waſſhe and bathe ryght ofte. and euery man feleth the water hoote or colde ryght as he wyll hym ſelfe. There bē ſalte welles ferre frome the ſee and been ſalte al the weke longe vnto ſaterdaye atte none vnto monday The water of theſe welles whan it is ſoden torneth into ſmale ſalte fayre and whyte ¶Aſo there is a ponde the water ther of hath wonder werkynge. For though all an hooſte

ſtode by the ponde and tourned theyr face thyder warde the water wolde drawe hym vyolētly towarde the ponde and wete alle theyre clothes / Soo ſholde hors bee drawen in the ſame wyſe. And yf the facebe torned a waye fro the water the water noyeth not. There is a welle that noo ſtreme renneth fro ne neyther therto and yet four maner of fyſſhe be taken ther in. ye welle is but xx. foote longe and xx. foote brode ¶And bereth noo grete depte but to the knee / And cloſeth with hyghe bankes on euery ſyde. In the countree about wyncheſtre is a denne or a caue / out of ye caue bloweth al waye a ſtrō
                     ge wynde / ſo that no man may endure to ſtonde to fore yt. denne or caue. There alſo is a ponde yt torneth tree in to yron yf it be ther in a yere. And ſoo trees ben ſhapen in to wheſtones. Alſo there is in the toppe of an hylle buryels euery man that cometh & meteth that buryell / he ſhall fynde it euen of his owne lenth & meſure· And yf a pylgryme knele therto anonr he ſhall be all freſſhe & fele noo gryef of werynes. ¶Git in· top. Faſt be the mynſtre of wynburney that is not ferre fro bathe is a woode that bereth moche fruyte / yf the trees of that wood fall in to water or grounde yt is nyghe & lye there all a yere. the trees tornen ī to ſtones. ¶Giritenere. Vnder the Cyte of Cheſtre renneth ye Ryuet Dee
                        •
                      now departeth Englonde & wales. That Ryuer chaunged euery moneth hys lordes as men of the countre tellen & leueth often the chanell / but whether the water drawe more to warde Englond or to warde wales to what ſyde yt it be. that yere men of yt ſyde haue the worſt ende & ouer ſette. And men of ye other ſyde ſhall haue better ende & be at theyr aboue whan the water ſo chaungeth hys courſe yt bodeth ſuche happes. This Ryuer Dee renneth & cometh out of a lake yt heet. Pymblemere. in this Ryuer is grete plente of ſamon / neuertheles in the lake is neuer ſamon founden. ¶wyl helde re le ii. Take hede how grete lyghte and bryghtneſſe hath ben ſhewed vpon Englyſſhmē ſythe they fyrſt torned to ryght byleue. So that of no men in ony prouynce ben founden ſo many hole bodyes of men after her dethe in ſykenes of euerlaſtyngnes yt ſhall be after the daye of dome / as it well ſemeth in theſe hooly Sayntes as Edeldrede / Edmonde / the kynge Elphege: Edgar Cutberde & ſaynt Edwarde & many other I trowe yt it bedoo by a ſpecyall grace of god almyghty for ye nacyon that is ſet as it were without the world take hede to buryē
                     ge of bodyes without corrupcyō and rotynge / and ben the more bolde & ſtedfaſte for to truſt on the fynall aryſynge of dede dodyes for to laſte euermore after the daye of dome.
               
               
                  ¶Of the chyef partyes of ye ſame lond. ca. v.
                  AFter the fyrſt Brutes tyme the ylonde of Brytayne beganne for to haue the pryncypall partyes / that ben Loegria Cambria that is that wales. And Albania yt is now Scotlonde Loegria hath that name of Locrinus that was Brutes oldeſt ſone / and heet / loegria as it were. Locrinus londe / but now Loegrin is called Englōde. The boūdes and Markes were ther of ſomtyme the Frenſſhe ſee boothe by eeſt & by ſouthe. ¶Beda .li.i. ca. ii. And by north two armes of the ſee that breketh ferre in to the londe eyther ayenſt other But they reche not togyder / The eeſt arme of thylke tweyne begynneth about a two lytell myle fro the mynſtre of Ebburcurynge. In the weſte ſyde of Penulton in that arme is a towne / that is called Guydy. the weſt arme of thylke tweyne hath in the ryght ſyde a ſtronge Cyte that heet Alclyued whiche in theyr lāgage is called Clint ſtone & ſtondeth vpon a ryuer yt is called Clynt alſo. ¶R. Some men wolde mene that Loegria endeth at Humbre & ſtretcheth no ferther north warde. The ſeconde partye of Brytayne is caleo Albinia that is Scotlonde & hathe that name of Albinactus Brutes ſone & ſtretcheth fro the forſayd two armes of the ſee northe warde vnto theſe of Norwaye. Neuertheles the ſouth partyes of Albania where as pyetes dwelled ſomtyme that lyeth frome the water of twede vnto the Scotteſſhe ſee. All yt longed ſometyme to the kyngedome of Northumberlonde Brenycorne the north ſade of Northumberlonde fro the fyrſt tyme of Englyſſhe kynge to that tyme whan Kynadius kynge of Scotlonde that was Alpinus ſone dyd a way the Pyctes and ſo Ioyned that countre to the kyngdome of Scotlonde. Thē thyrde partye of Brytayne is wales walia that heet Cambria alſo / & hath that name Cambria of Cambre Brutes ſone / for he was prynce of wales. In the eeſt ſyde Seurnee departed ſome tyme bytwene Englonde & wales. But in the north ſyde the Ryuer of Dee atcheſtre and in the ſouthe ye Ryuer that is named Vaga at ye caſtel of

Srygelyn departeth Englonde and wales. All ſo kynge Offa for to haue a dyſtynccyon for euermore bytwene the kynges of Englōde and of wales made a longe dyche that dretched for the out of the ſouthe ſyde by Bryſtowe vnder the hylles of wales Seuerne and Dee almoſte to the heedes and vnto the mouthe of the Ryuer of Dee beyonde Cheſtre faſte by the caſtell it reenneth bytwene Colehyll and the mynſtre of Baſyngwercke into the ſee. This dytthe is yet in many places ſeen In ſaynt Edwardes tyme walſſhmen ſholde not paſſe that was att Erle Haroldes procurynge as it ſhall be ſayde here after. but now in eyther ſydes both ayonde half & a thys half the dyche and ſpecyally in the ſhyres of Cheſtre of Shroweſbury and of Herforde in many places been Englyſſhemen and walſſhmen medled togyders.
               
               
                  ¶Of the ylondes that ben therto adiacent. Capitulo. vi.
                  BRytayne hathe thre ylondes that ben nyght and longynge therto all without the ylondes Orcades / as it were anſwerynge to the thre chyef partys of Brytayne. For the yle of wyghte longeth & lyeth to Leogrya that is Englonde. The ylonde Mon that is called Angleſeya alſo longeth to wales / and the ylonde Enbonia that hathe two other names and is called Meneuia and Man alſo whiche longeth to Scotlonde. And all theſe thre ylondes wyght Mon and Man ben almooſt alyke moche and the quantyte / of the whyche thre all arowe foloweth our ſpeche. ¶Beda .li.i. ca. iii· Claudius ſent Veſpaſianus. and Veſpaſianꝰ wāne wyght / And wyght ſtretcheth out of the eeſt in to ye weſt .xxx. myle long. And out of the ſouth in to the north .xii. myle / and is in the eeſt ſyde .vi. myle fro the ſouth clyfe of Brytayne. And thre myle fro the weſt ſyde. ¶Beda .li.iiii ca. v. The meſure of this ylonde as Englyſſhmen geſſe is a thouſande heuſholders and two hondred. ¶Gir. in itinere. mon that is called. Angleſeya alſo his departed from north wales by a ſhorte arme of the ſee as it were two myle brode. In Mon ben thre hondred townes .lx.iii. And ben accompted for Cādredes that ben .iii. hondredes. The ylonde is as it were .xxx. my
                        •
                     e longe and .xii. myle brode Candredus is ſo moche londe as conteyneth an hondred townes / that name candredus is made out of two langages of Brytyſſhe and of Iryſſhe In prayſynge of this ylonde walſſhmen were wonte to ſaye a prouerbe and an olde ſawe. Mon Mankembri / that is to ſaye in Englyſſhe that londe is ſo good that it ſemeth that it wolde fynde corne ynough for all the men of wales. Therfore Virglys verſes maye be accordynge therto / as moche as guawes / beſtes longe Inneth dawes So moche efte bryngeth colde dewe in a nyghte ¶In that arme of the ſee that departed this londe and north wales / is a ſwolowe that that draweth ſhyppes to it that ſayleth by and ſwoloweth them in ryyght as dothe. Cylla and Carybdis that ben two peryllous places in the ſee of myddel erthe. Therfore men maye not ſayll by this ſwalowe but ſlyly at ful ſee. ¶R. Of the merueylles and wondres of the ylonde of Mon thou ſhalt fynde in the chapytre of wales. Gir. in itinere. The thyrde ylonde that is called both Eubonia & Meneuia that is Manſtondeth in the myddell bytwene the Iryſſhe vlſtere and the Scotteſſhe galle waye as it were in the nauell of the ſee. ¶Beda .iiii. ca. ix. This ylondes. The fyrſte is ſouthe warde the more condtree. And the better corne londe and conteyneth .ix. hondred and .
                        •
                     x. houſholdes· The ſecon
                        •
                     e conteyneth the ſpace of .CCC. & moo as Englyſſhmen geſſe. Gir. in 
                        •
                     op: Somtyme was ſtryf whether this ylonde Man ſholde longe to Brytayne or to Irlonde and for as moche as venemous wormes that were broughte thyder ly
                        •
                     ed there / It was Iuged that the ylonde of Man ſholde longe to Brytayne. ¶R. In that ylonde is 
                        •
                     ortylege and whyche crafte vſed. Fer women there ſelle to ſhypmē wynde as it were cloſed vnder thre knottes of threde. So that more wynde he wyll haue the moo knottes he muſte vndo. Chere often by daye tyme men of that londe ſeen men that bē deed to fore honde byheded or hoole and what dethe they deyed. Alyens ſette theyr fete vpon feeet of the men of that londe for to ſee ſuche ſyghtes as the men of that londe done. ¶Beda .li.ii. Scottes dwelled fyrſte in thys ylonde ¶Thanatos that is Tenet and is an ylonde beſydes Kente o and hath that name Thanatos of dethe of ſerpētes for there bē none. And ye erthe therof ſleeth ſerpētes yborn in other lō
                     des. There is noble corne lōde & fruyt
                        •
                     u
                        •
                     . It is ſuppoſed that this ylonde was halowed & bleſſyd of ſaynt Auſten the fyrſte doctoure of Englyſſhmen for there he arryued fryſte.
               
               
                  
                  ¶Of the kenges hye wayes & ſtretes. ca. vii.
                  MOlyuncyus kynge of Brytons· was the / xiii. of them and the fyrſte that ga
                        •
                      theym lawe. He ordeyned that plowmen folowes / goodes lawes and hyghe wayes that let den men to Cytees and townes ſhold haue the fredom of coloure ſoo yt euery man that wente to ony of theym for ſocour or for treſpaas that he hathe ſholde be ſaufe for pourſute of all hys enemyes. But afterwarde for the wayes were vncertayne & ſtryf was had· Therfor Belinus the kynge that was the forfayd Moliuncius ſone for to put a way all ſtryfe and doute / made foure hyghe kynges wayes preuyleged with all preueylege and fredome And the wayes ſtretche thrughe the ylonde. The fyrſte and greteſt of all the foure wayes is called Foſſe & ſtretcheth out of the ſouth in to the northe and begynneth frome the corner of Cornewayle & paſſeth forthe by Deuenſhyre by Somerſete & forth be ſydes Tetbury vpon Cotteſwolde beſyde Couentre vnto Leyceſtre / & ſoo forthe by wylde playnes towarde Newarke and endeth at Lyncoln. The ſeconde chyfe kynges hyghe waye is named watlyngſtrete and ſtretcheth thwarte ouer Foſſe out of the ſoutheeſt in to ye norweſt and begynneth at Douer and paſſeth by the myddell of Kente ouer Temſe beſyde London by weſtmeſtre and ſo forthe by ſaynt Albon in the weſt ſyde by donſtaple by Scratforde by Towcetre by wedō by ſouthe Lylleborn by Atheryſton vnto gylbertes hylle that nowe is called wrekene and forthe by Seuarne and paſſeth beſydes wrokceſtre / and then̄e forthe to Stratton and ſoo forthe ay the myddell of wales vnto Cardykā and endeth atte Iryſſhe ſee. The thyrde waye is called Erynnugeſtrete and ſtretcheth oute of the weſt nor weſte in to the eeſt ſoutheeſt / and begynneth in Meneuia that is ſaynt Dauyds londe in weſt wales and ſtretcheth forthe vnto Southampton: The fourthe is called. Rykenylſtrete and ſtretcheth forthe by worocheſtre by wycombe and by Brymyngeham by Lechefelde by Derby by Cheſtrefelde by yorke and forthe vnto Tynmouthe.
               
               
                  ¶Of the famous Ryuers & ſtremes. ca. viii.
                  THere ben thre famous Ryuers renayn
                     
                        •
                     e through Brytayne by ye whyche thre Ryuers marchaūtes of beyonde ye ſee coumen in ſhyppes into Brytayn wellnygh out of all manere of nacyons and lōdes. Theſe thre Ryuers ben Temſe. Seuarne and Humbre The ſee ebbeth and floweth at theſe thre Ryuers & departeth the prouynces of the ylonde as it were the thre kyngdoms aſondre. The thre partyes ben Loegria. Cambria / and Northumbri
                        •
                      That ben myddel Englond: wales. and Northumberlonde. ¶R. Theſe name Temſe ſemeth made one name of two names of two ryuers that ben Tame & yſe for the Ryuer of T
                        •
                     
                     me renneth beſydes Dorcheſtre and falleth in yſe / therfore all the Ryuer fro the fyrſt heed vnto the eeſt ſee is named Tamyſe or Temſe begynneth beſydes Tetbury that is thre myle by north Malmeſbury. There the Temſe ſpryngeth of a well that renneth eeſt warde & paſſeth the Foſſe and departeth Gloceſtre ſhyre and wylſhyre / and draweth with hym many other welles and ſtremes and wexeth grete att greceſtre and paſſeth forth than towarde Hamptō & ſo forth by Oxenforde by wallynforde by Rydynge and by Londō. ¶Wilhelmꝰ de pon. ca. ii. Atte hauen of Sandwhyche it faſ
                        •
                     eth in to ye eeſt ſee / and holdeth hys name .xl. myle beyonde London / and departeth in ſome place Kente & Eſſex weſtſex and Mercia that is as it were a grete dele of myddell Englonde. ¶R. Seuarne is A Ryuer of Brytayne & is called Habern in brytons / and hath that name Habern of Habern that was Eſtryldes doughter Guendolon the quene drenched this Habern therin / therfore the Brytons called the Ryuer Habern after the woman that was drowned therin / by corrupte latyn it is called Sabria Seuarne in Englyſſhe. Seuarne begynneth in the myddell of wales and paſſeth fyrſte to warde the eeſt vnto Shroweſbury / and then̄e torned ſouth warde vnto Bryggenorthe wyrceſtre & Glouceſtre & falleth in to the weſt ſee beſydes Bryſtow & departeth ī ſome place Englond & wales. ¶wilhel de pon .li.iii. Sauerne is ſwyft of ſtreme / fyſſhe carft is therin / wodenes of the ſwolowyng & of ye whyrlynge water caſteth vp & gadre to hepe gret hepes of grauel Seuarne oft aryſeth & ouerfloweth the bākes ¶R: Hūbre hath ye name of Hūbre kyng of. hunes. for he was drownde ther in. & ren̄eth fyrſt a croke out of ye ſouthſyde of yorke / & thenne it departed ye prouynce of Lyndeſe ye ye longed ſomtyme to ye merces from ye other contre northūberlonde Trente & Ous rennen in to Hū
                     bre

and makē the Ryuer full grete· ¶Treuiſa The merces were men as .ii. were of myddell Englonde as it ſhall be ſayd here after.
               
               
                  ¶Of auncyent cytees & townes. ca. ix.
                  THe kyngdome of Brytayne was ſomtyme made fayr wyth .xxviii. noble cytees wythout ryght many caſtels that were walled with toures with yates and with barres ſtrongely buylded. ¶After theſe were the names of the cyteis. Caerlud that is London Caerbrāk that is yorke / Caerkent that is Caunterbury Taergoraukon that is worcheſtre. Caerlyryon that is / leyceſtre. Caerclon that is Glouceſtre Caercoldē that is Colceſtre Carray that is / chicheſtre. Saxons called it ſomtyme Cyſſonceſtre: carcery that is Cyrcerre / caergunt that is wyncheſtre. Caergraunt that is / cambrygge caerleyll that is / lugibalia and Karlylle. Caerporis that is Porcheſtre. caerdrom that is Dorcheſtre. Caerludcoyt that is / lyncoln and. Lyndecolyn. Caermarthyn that is Merlyns Cyte / cerſegēt that is Siceſtre & his vpon tēſe not fer from redynge leon that is / caerlegeon alſo and hyghte fyrſte Legeceſtre and now is named Cheſtre Caerbathon that is bathe. and hyght ſomtyme Athamanus Cyte Caerpaladour that is Septon that now hyght Shafteſbury. ¶R. Other cytees ben founde in Cronycles for vnderſtondynge of ſtoryes / of whom it ſhall folowe. ¶Wyll de pon. London is a ryal and a ryche Cyte vppon. Tamyſe. of burgeyſſes of ryches of marchaūtes of cha
                        ••
                     are and of marchaundyſe. Therfore it is that ſome tyme whan derth of vytayls is in all Englonde comuly at London it is beſte chepe bycauſe of the byers and ſelles that ben at London. ¶Gaufre Brute the fyrſte kyynge of Brytons buylde & edefyted this cyte of London the fyrſte cyte of London the fyryſte cyte in remembraunce of the cyte of Troye that was diſtroyed & called it Troye newich & triuantum that is new Troye After warde kynge Lud called it Caerlud after his owne name. Therfore the Brytons had indygnacyon as Gyldas / telleth Afterwarde Englyſſhemen called the cyte London / & yet after ye Normans called it Londers 
                        •
                     nd is named in latyn lōdonia Rudhudybras kynge / leyles ſone. was the .viii. kyng of Brytons / & he buylded Caūterbury ye chyefeyte of Kent called it Caerkent. Afterwarde Englyſſhemen called it Dorobernia / but yt is not Douer that ſtondeth vpon ye clyf of ye Frenſſhe ſee & from ſhis douer .xxii. Englyſſhe myle. After warde this Dorobernia was & is called Caunterbury. The ſame kynge. Rudhudibrys buylded wyncheſtre. and called it Caerguēt & after Englyſſhmē called it went and wyncheſtre after ye name of one an Englyſſhe man that was byſſhop there All weſtſaxō was ſubget to hym ye ſame kyng buylded paladour that is Septō that now is called Shafteſbury Brytons tellē that an Egle prophecyed there ſōtyme. Bladud. Leyles ſone a Nygramancer was the .ix. kȳge of Brytōs / he buylded Bathe and called it Caerbathon. Englyſſmen called it after Athamannus cyte. But at the laſte men called it Bathonia that is Bath. ¶Wilhell. depon .li.ii. in this cyte welleth vp & ſpryngeth hote Bathes & mē wene that Iulius Cezar made there ſuche bathes. ¶R. But Gaufre 
                        •
                      monutēſis ī his Brytons boke / ſaythe that Bladud made thylke bathes bycauſe wyllyam hath not ſeen that brytyſſhe boke wrote ſo by tellīge of other mē / or by his owne geſſynge as he wrote other thynges not beſt auyſedly. Therfore it ſemeth more ſothely that Bladud made not ye hote bathes Ne Iulius Cezar dyd ſuche a dede though bladud buylded & made the Cyte. but it accordeth better to kyndely reaſon that ye water rēne the in ye erth by vaynes of brymſtone & ſulphur & ſo it is kyndely made hoot in that courſe and ſpryngeth vp in dyuerſe places of ye cyte. And ſo there bē hoote bathes that waſſheth of 
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     es ſoores ſkabbes / ¶Treuiſa. Though men myghte by crafte make hoote bathe for to endure longe ynough / thys accordeth well to reaſon & to phyloſophy that treateth of hote welles and bathes that bē in diuerſe lōdes though ye water of this bathe be more trobly & ſoruer of ſauour & of ſmell thā other hote bathes been that I haue ſeen at Akon in Almayne. And eyges in Sauoye / whiche ben fayr & clere as ony welle ſtreme I haue bē bathed therin and aſſayed them. ¶R. Claudius / cezar maryed hys doughter to Aruiragus kynge of Brytons. This Claudyus Cezar buylded Glouceſtre in the weddynge of his doughter· Brytons called this cyte friſt after Claudius name but afterwarde it was called Glouceſtre after one gloria whiche was duke of ye countre & ſtondeth vpon Seuarne in the marche of Englond & wales. Shroweſbury a cyte vpon Sauarne in the marche of Englonde

& wales ſet vpon the top of an hylle / & it is called / Shroweſburye of ſhrobbes & fruyte that grewe there ſomtyme on ye hylle / Brytons called it ſomtyme Pengre wene yt is ye hede of a fayr tre Shroweſbury was ſomtyme the hede of poweſye 
                        •
                      ſtretcheth forth thwarde ouer ye mydell of wales vnto ye Iryſſhe ſee Notyngam ſtondeth vpon Trence & ſōtyme heet Notyngham yt is the won̄ynge of den̄es / for ye Danes dwelled there ſōtyme & dygged dennes & caues vnder harde ſtones & rokes & dwelled there. ¶R. Lyncolyn is cheyf of the prouynce of Lyndeſeye & was called ſomtyme Caerlud coit and after warde Lyndecoln. It is vncertayne who buylded fyrſt thys cyte but yf yt were kyng Lud / & ſo it ſemeth by menynge of the name / for the Caer is brytyſſhe & is to ſay a cyte & a coit ys a woode & ſo it ſemeth ye Caerlud coit is to ſaye Luddes wode towne Kyng leyr
                        •
                      was Bladuddes ſon & buylded Leybeſtre / as it were in ye myddell of Englond vpon the Ryuer Sos & vpon Foſſe the kynges bye wyye.
                  
                     ¶wylhel. de pon .li.iii.
                     
                        YOrke is a ſtrete cyte in eyther ſyde of the water of Ouſe yt ſemed as fayr as Rome vnto ye tgme yt the kyng wy
                           •
                        liam had with brē
                        nynge & fyre defoulde it & ye coō
                        tre about. So yt a pylgryme wolde now wepe & h
                           •
                         ſawe it / yf he had knowen it tofore. ¶Gaufre. Ebraneus ye .v. kyng of brytons buylded yorke & called it after his owne name Caerbranck he baylded alſo two other cytees one in ſcotlond & is called Edenburgh & an other towarde Scotlond in thend of Englond & called Edenburgh / & an other toward Scotlond in thend of Englonde & is called Alcliud. ¶R. Edenburth is a cytee in ye londe of Pictes bytwene ye Ryuer of Twede & the ſcotteſſhe ſee & hee
                           •
                         ſōtyme the caſtell of Maydens & was called afterward Edenburgh of Edan kyng of Pictes ye regned there in eg
                           •
                        ridꝰ tyme kyng of Northūber
                           •
                        ond. Alcliud was ſōtyme a noble cyte / & ys now well nygh vnknowe to all Englyſſhmen. for vnder ye Brytons & pyctes & Englyſſhmen it was a noble cyte to ye comynge of ye Danes. But after ward about the yere of oure lorde ·viii.c.lxx. it was deſtroyed whan ye danes deſtryed ye coūtrees of Northū
                        berlōd. but ī what place of Brytayn ye cyte Alcliud was buylded. Ductours tellē dyuerſely ¶Beda .li.i. ſayth yt it was buylded by weſt ye arme of ye ſee yt departed bytwene the Brytōs & the Pyctes ſōtyme there Souerꝰ 
                           •
                        amoꝰ wall endeth weſtward / & ſo it ſemeth by hym that it is not fer frō Caerleyl for ye cyte is ſet at ye ende of that wall. Other wryters of ſtoryes wryten yt the cyte of Alcliud is ye cyte that now is caled Alōburgh / yt is to ſay an olde towne / & ſtandeth vpō ye Ryuer Ous not fer fro barghbrydge / yt is .xv. myle weſtward out of yorke / & it ſemeth yt he preueth that by Gaufride in his boke of dedes of Brytons / he wryteth yt Elidurꝰ kyng of brytōs was lodged at ye cyte Alcliud bycauſe of ſolace & hūtynge / & founde his brode
                           •
                         Argalon maſkynge in a wode nygh ther beſyde that hyght Calatery / but that wood Calatery whyche is caltres ī englyſſhe recheth almoſt to yorke & ſtretcheth towarde ye north by Aldburgh in length by ſpace of .xx. myle / ye mooſt dele of that wode is now drawen downe & ye lōde ytylled other mē wolde ſuppoſe that Alcliud was ye cyte that now is called Burgham in the north coūtre of weſtmerlonde faſt by Comberlond / & ſtadeth vpon the Ryuer Eden / the cyte is ther wonderly ſeen. Deme ye nowe where it is buylded. ¶Treuyſa. It is not harde to aſſoyle yf men take hede / ye many townes bere one name / as Cartage / in Affrica & Cartago in ſpayn. new porte in wales & Newporte in the paryſſhe of Barkeleye / wottonne vnder / egge and wotton paſſeth / wyk warwyk payne. & wyk in the paryſſhe of Barkelye. And two ſhyre towne eythere is called Hampton / as Southampton & Northehamptō ſo it ſemeth by ye ſtoryes ye one Alcliud was in yorkſhyre / an other ī weſtmerlonde / & one faſt by ye right ſyde of ye weſt arme of the ſee yt departeth Englonde & Scotlonde / but ye Alcliud was a right ſtrōge cyte as Beda ſayth. & ye cyte ſtandeth faſt by a Ryuer yt is called Cliud. & there is no ſuche Ryuer ī yorkſhyre in weſtmer lond as of the coūtre tell me. Some men ſay yt the Ryuer Cliud is now named ſulwach. Sulwa
                           •
                        che is but .v. myle fro Caerleyl whiche is a cyte in the coūtre of nor
                           •
                        h Enlonde toward ye north weſt & hath an other name whiche is Luguball. Leyil ye .vii. kynge of brytōs buylded caerleyll. ¶R. In this cyte ys ſōwhat of ye famous wall yt paſſeth northūberlōde. ¶wilhel. de pon. in this cyte is yet a the
                           •
                         chambred hous made of vawt ſtones yt neuer myght bee deſtroyed wyth tempeſte of weder

ne with brennynge of fyre / alſo in the countree faſt by weſtmerlōde in the fronte of a thre chanbre place is writtē in this manere / Marii. victory / what this writtinge is to ſay I doute ſomwhat but yf it were ſome of the Combres laye here ſome tyme whan the counſeyll Mariꝰ had put hym out of ytalye / But it ſemeth better yt it is wrytten in mynde of Marius kyng of brytons that was Aruiragus ſone / This marius ouercome in that place Roderyke kynge of pyctes So ſayth Gaufre in his brytyſſhe booke / Wyllyam malmeſbury ſawe neuer that booke Att Haguſtaldes chyrche is a place .lxxx. myle / out of yorke Nor weſtewarde the place is as. were dyſtroyed / ſo ſayth wylhel / li.iii. de pony. That place longed ſomtyme to the byſſhopryche of yorke / there were ſomtyme houſes wyth vyce arches and voutes in the manere of Rome / Nowe that place is called Heſtoldeſhame and hegleſham alſo / ¶Beda .li.iii. ca. i. ſayth Than that place is faſte by the longe walle of the werke of Rome in the north halfe / ¶R / There is dyfference bytwene the pryuynce of Lyndeffare and the chyrche Lyndefarne / For the prouynce of Lyndeffare & Lyndeſeye is alle one / and lyethe by eeſt lyncolne and lyncolne is the hede therof / of the whiche ſaythe Beda .li.iiii. ca. xi. that Sex wulfus was fyrſte byſſhop there / but Beda .li.iiii. ca. xiii ſayth / That lyndeffar chyrche is an ylonde that is called holy ylonde in the ryuer of Twede next Barwyke And ſo it is gadred of Bedaes ſawes that twede renneth in to the famous arme of the ſee yt nowe departed Englyſſhmē and Scottes in ye eeſt half and in that arme bē thre ylondes. that one is Maylros that nowe is called menros / Then̄e about towarde the weſt is Lyndeffarn chyrche that is called holy ylonde / Thenne the chyrche is aboue vpwarde & his the Ilondefarn and is called alſo ferny ylonde. Thenne vp warde aboute that two myle is a ryall Cyte vppon the brynke of twede / that ſomtyme hyght Bebanburgh that is Bobbes cyte and nowe is called Bamburgh and hath a ryght ſtronge caſtell. ¶Gir. initenere / twoo cytees ther ben eyther is called Charlegyon and caerleon alſo one ys Demycia in ſouth wales that is named caeruſke / alſo there the Ryuer of Vſke falyeth into Seuerne faſte by glamorgan Bellynus kynge of Brytons ſomtyme buyled the cytye and was ſomtyme the chyef cyte of Demecya in ſouth wales. Afterwarde in Claudiꝰ cezar
                           •
                         tyme it was called the cyte Legyons whan at prayer of Genius the quene Veſpiciauus and Aruiragus were accorded and / legyons of Rome were ſente in to Irlonde. tho was Caerleon a noble cyte and a grete auctoryte / & by the Romayns ryally buylded and walled about wyth walles of brent tyle. Greate nobley that was there in olde tyme is there yet in many places ſeen as the grete palayſes gyauntes toures noble bathes / releef of the temples places hyghe and ryall to ſtande and ſyte in / and to beholde aboute the places were ryally cloſed with ryall walles that yet ſomdele ſtondeth ryght nyghe cloos / And within the walles and wythoute is grete buyldynge vnder erthe / water conduytes and wayes vnder erthe and ſtewes ¶Alſo thou ſhalt ſee wonderly made. wyth ſtrayte ſyde wayes of brethynge that wonderly caſte vp heete. In this Cytie were ſomtyme thre noble chyrches. one was of ſaynt Iulius the martyr & therin a greate companye of vyrgynes that other was of ſaynt Aaron that was of the ordre of blacke Chanon that chyrche was ryght nobly adourned / The thyrde chyrche was the chyf moder chyrche of all wales and the chyef ſe. But afterwarde the chyef ſee was tourned out of the cyte into meneuya that is ſaynt Dauyds londe in weſt wales. In this Caerleon was amphybalus born thaught ſaynt Albon There the meſſagers of Rome come to greate Arthurs courte. yf it is leefull to trowe. Treuiſa. yf Giraldus was in doubte whether it w
                           •
                        
                        re leefull for to trowe or not 
                           •
                         yt were a wonder ſhewynge as men wolde went for too haue euermore in mynde & euer bee in doubte yf alle his bokes were ſuche what lorde were therin & namely whyle he maketh none euydence for in neyther ſyde he telleth what meueth hym ſoo to ¶R. There is another cyte of Legyons there his Cronycles were by trauaylled as it is clerly knowen by the fyrſte chapytre of thys booke ¶Treuyſa. That is to vnderſtondynge in ye latyn wryttynge. For he yt made it in latyn torned it not into Englyſſhe ne it was torned into Engliſſhe in the ſame place yt it was fyrſte in latyn· The vnderſtondynge of hym yt made this Cronycles is thus the begnnyng of this booke. ¶Preſentem cronicam compliauit frater Ranulphus Ceſtrēſis monachus. That is to ſaye in Englyſſhe. Broder Ranuiphe monke of

Cheſtre conpyled and made this Booke of the Cronycles / ¶R. The of Legyons that is cheſtre ſtondeth in ye marche of Englonde towarde wales bytwene two armes of the ſee yt been namedde and Merſee \ This Cytie in tyme of Brytons was heed and cheyf cyte of all Venedocia / that is North wales The foūder of this cyte is vnknowen· For who that ſeeth the foū
                        dementes of the grete ſtones wolde rather wene that it were Romayns werke or wercke off Gyauntes / than it were ſette by werkynge of Brytons. This cyte ſomtyme in brytyſſhe ſpeche heet Caerthleon Legeceſtria in latin And Cheſtre in Engliſſhe and the cite of Legyons alſo / ¶Forther delaye a wynter the legyons of knyghten that Iulius Cezar ſente for to wynne Irlonde. And after Claudius cezar ſente legyons out of that cyte for to wynne the ylonde that be called Orcades / what euer wyllyam Malmeſhury by tellynge of other men mente of this cyte. This cyte hathe plente of lyuelode of corn of fleſſhe of fyſſhe / and ſpecially of pryce of ſamon / This cytie receyueth moche marchaundyſe and ſendeth oute alſo. Alſo nyghe this cyte ben ſalte welles. metell and oor / Nor thumbres dyſtroyed thys cyte ſomtyme / But after warde Elfleda lady of Marcia buylded it agayne and made it moche more. ¶In this ſame cyte ben wayes vnder the erth wyth vowtes and ſtone werke wonderly ywrought. ther chabre werkes / grete ſtones ygrauen wyth olde mennys names ther in / There is alſo Iuliꝰ Cezar name wonderly in ſtones ygraue / and other mennes alſo wyth the wryteynge about This is the cyte that Edelfryde kynge of northumberlonde. diſtroyed / and ſlewe there faſt by nyghe two thuſande monkes of the mynſt of Bangor / This is the cyte that king Edgar come theder ſomtyme wyth .vii. kynges that were ſubgette to hym / Ametre breketh out in thys maner in prayſynge thys cyte / Cheſtre caſtel towne as it were. name taketh of a caſtell It is knowen what man bylded this cyte new Tho Lengeceſtria theſe heet nowe towne of legyones Nowe walſſhe & Engliſſhe holde this Cyte of greate pryce / ſtones on walle. ſemeth werke Hercules al. There longe wyth myght todure that hepe is a hyght. Saxon ſmall ſtones / ſet vpon grete ben attones. Ther vnder grounde. lotynge double voute is fonde / that helpeth wyth ſondes. many men of weſtern lō
                        des / Fyſſhe fleſſhe and corne lowe. This cytie towne hath yonwe Shyppes and chaffare. ſee water bryngeth ynowe there. Godeſtall there is that was emperourer this. And forthe Henry kynge / Erth is there ryght dwellynge / Off kynge Haralde. poudre is there yet halde / Bachus and marcurious. Mers and venus alſo Lauerna Protheus and plura. regnen therin the towne. ¶Treuyſa. God wote what this is to mene / dut poetes in theyr manere ſpeche faynen as though euery kynde crafte & lyuyng had dyuerſe god eueryche from other / And ſoo they fayned a god of bataylle and of fyghtyng called hym Mars and a god of couetyſe and rycheſſe and marchaundyſe and called hym mercurius / And ſoo Bachus is called god of wyne Venus goddeſſe of loue and beaute. Lauerna god of thefte and of robberyf Protheus god of falſhede and of gyle and Pluto god of helle. & ſo it ſemeth that theſe verſes wolde meane that theſe forſayd goddes regne and been ſerued in Cheſtre / Mars with fyghtynge and tockynge / Marcurius wyth couetyſe and rycheſſe / Bachus wyth grete drynkynge. Venus with loue lewdly. Lauerna with thefte and robbery Procheus with falſhede and gyle. Thenne is pluto not vnſerued that is god of hell. ¶R. Ther babylon lore more myght hathe trouth the more / 
                  
               
               
                  ¶Of prouynces and ſhyres ca. x.
                  TAke hede ye englōde cōteyned xxxii. ſhyres & ꝓuincꝭ yt now bē called Erldomſ reſerued Cernewale & the ylōde Alfre. theſe bē ye names of ye erldoms & ſhyres. Kente ſothſex. ſothery. hāpſhyre barkſhyre yt hathe his name of a bare oke yt is in ye foreſte of wyndeſore forther wonte they to take their coūſeyl. Alſo wylſhyre yt heet ſomtyme ye ꝓuince of ſemeran ſomerſet. dorſet. deynſhyre yt nowe is called Deuonia in latyn / ¶Theſe ix: Sourhſhyres the Tamyſe departed fome the other deale of Englonde whiche were ſome tyme gouerned and ruled by the weſtſaxons lawe Eeſtſex Meddelſex Soulfolke Northfolke Herdforthe ſhyre Huntyngdon ſhyre Beddeforſh ſhyre Bokyngham ſhyre. Leyceſtre ſhyre Derby ſhyre Notyngham ſhyre Lyncolnſhyre yorke ſhyre Durham ſhyre Northumberlonde Ca
                        •
                     rleyll ſhyre with Cumberlonde Appelby ſhyre with weſtmerlonde Lancaſtre ſhyre / that conteyenth

fyue lytell ſhyres. Theſe fyftene Northe and Eeſt ſhyres were ſomtyme gouerned and ruled by the lawe called Mercia in latyn and marchene in Englyſſhe It is to wyte that yorke ſhyre ſtretcheth frome the Ryuer of Humbre vnto the Ryuer of Teyſe / And yet in yorke ſhyre ben .xxii. hondredis. hondred and candredes is all one. Candrede is one worde made of walſſhe and Iryſſhe / and is to menynge a countree that conteyneth an hondred townes And alſo in Englyſſhe called wepentake. For ſomtyme in the comynge of a newe lorde tenauntes were wonte to yelde vp theyr wepen inſtede of homage. Duram ſhyre ſtretcheth from the Ryuer of Teyſe vnto the Ryuer of Tyne. And for to ſpeke proprely of Northumberlonde it ſtretcheth fro the Ryuer of Tyne vnto yu Ryuer of Twede. That is in the begynnynge of Scotlonde. Thenne yf the countre of Northumberlonde that was ſomtyme from Humbre vnto Twede be now a counted for one 
                        •
                     hyre & one Erledome as it was ſomtyme. Then̄e ben in Englonde but .xxxii. ſhyres. but yf the countre of Northumberlond be the departed in to .vi. ſhyres that ben Euerwykſhyre Duramſhyre Northumberlond Caerleylſhyre Anpelbyſhyre Lancaſtre ſhyre· Then in Englonde but .xxxvi. ſhyres without cornewale & alſo without ylondes. Kyng wyllyam made all theſe prouynces and ſhyres to be dyſcryued and moten. Then were founden .xxxvi ſhyres and halfe a ſhyre Twones two and fyfty thouſande and four ſcore Paryſſhe chyrches .xlv. thouſande and twoo Knyghtes fees .lxxv. thouſande / wherof men of relygyon haue .xxvii. thouſande and xv: knyghtes fees. But nowe the woodes ben hewen downe and the londe new tylled and made moche more than was at that tyme and many townes & vyllages buylded & ſo ther ben many mo vyllages & townes now than were in that tyme. And were as a fore is wryten that Cornewale is not ſet amonge the ſhyres of Englond it may ſtonde amonge thē well ynough for it is nether in wales ne in ſcotlonde bute it is in Englonde and it Ioyneth vnto Deuenſhyre / & ſo many ther ben accompted in Englonde .xxxvii· ſhyres and an halfe with the other ſhyres.
                  
                     ¶De legibus legū
                        
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         vocabilis:
                     DVnwallo that hyghte Molliuncius alſo made fyrſte lawes in Brytayne the whiche lawes were called Moleuncius lawes and were ſolempnely obſerued vnto wyllyam Conquerours tyme. Moliuncius ordeyned amonge his lawes that Cytees Temples and wayes that leden men therto / and plowe men ſolowes ſhold haue preuelege and fredome for to ſaue all men that fle therto for ſocoure and refuge. Thenne afterwade Mercia quene of Brytons that was Gwytelynus wyf of her ye prouynce hadde the name of Mercia as ſome man ſuppoſe. She made a lawe fulle of wytte and of reaſon / & was called Merchene lawe. Gildas that wrote the Cronycles & hyſtores. of the Brytons torned theſe two lawes out of Bryton ſpeche in to latyn. And afterwarde kynge Aluredus torned alle oute of latyn in to Saxons ſpeche / and was called marchene lawe alſo the kynge Aluredus wrote in Englyſſhe and put to an other lawe that hyght weſtſaxon lawe Then afterwarde Danes were lordes in this londe / and ſo came forth the thyrde lawe that heet Dane lawe. Of theſe thre lawes ſaynt Edwarde the thyrde made one commune lawe yt yet is called ſaynt Edwardes lawe. I holde it well done to wryte here & expowne. many termes of theſe lawes Myndebrugh hurtynge of honour & worſhyp. I frenche bleſchurd hōnour. burbruck in Frenche bleſchurde cour
                           •
                        ou de cloys Grichbruche brekyng of peas / Myſkennynge chaungynge of ſpeche in court. Shewynge ſettynge forth of marchaundyſe. Hamſokne or Hāfare a rere made ī hous Forſtallynge wronge or bette downe in ye kynges hygh waye Fritſoken ſurete in defence. Sak Forfayte Soka ſute ef court & therof cometh ſoken. Theam Sute of bondemen fyghtynge wytte Amerſemente fyghtynge. blodewytte A Merſemente for ſhedynge of bloode Flytwytte Amendes for 
                           •
                        hydynge of bloode Leyrwytte Amendes for lyenge 
                           〈◊〉
                         by a bounde woman Gultwytte Amendes / for treſpas Scot a gadrȳge to werke of bayllyes. Hydage tayllage for hydes of lond. danegheld tayllage gyuē to ye danes that was of euery bona taterre That is euery oxe londe thre pens A wepyntake and an hondred is alle one for the coūtree of townes were wonte to gyue vp wepyn in the comynge of a lorde Leſtage cuſtome chalēged in chepynges fares and ſtallage / cuſtome for ſtandynge in ſtretes in fayre tyme.
                  
               
               
                  ¶Of kyngdomes of boundes and markes

bytwene them. ca. xii.
                  THe kyngdome of Brytayne ſtode without departynge hoole and all one kyngdome to the Brytous frome the fyrſte Brute vnto Iulius Cezars tyme / and fro Iulius Cezars tyme vnto ſeuerus tyme thys londe was vnder trybute to the Romayns. Neuertheleſſe kynges they had of the ſame londe from Seuerus vnto the laſt prynce Gracyan ſucceſſours of Brytayne fayled and Romayns regned in Brytayne Afterwarde the Romayns lefte of theyr regnynge in Brytayne by cauſe it was ferre from Rome / and for grete beſyneſſe that they hadde in other ſyde / Then̄e Scottes and Py
                        •
                     tes by myſledynge of Maximus the tyraunte purſewed Brytayne and warred there with grete ſtrength of men of armes longe tyme vnto the tyme that the Saxons come at the prayenge of the Bretons agaynſt the Pyctes & put out Gurmonde the Iryſſhe kynge with his Pyctes and the Brytons alſo wyth herꝰ kynge that hyet Careticus and droſe hem out of Englonde in to wales / and ſo the Saxons were vyctours and euery prouynce after hys ſtrength made hym a kynge. And ſo departed Englonde in ſeuen kyngdomes. Netheles afterwarde theſe ſeuen kyngdomes euerychone after other came alle in to one kyngdome. All hole vnder the prynce Adelſtone Netheles the Danes purſewed this londe fro Adelwolfys tyme that was Aluredes fader vnto the thyrde ſaynte Edwardes tyme aboute a hondred .lxx. yere that regned contynuelly therin .xxiii. yere and a lytell more. and after hym Haralde helde the kyngedome .ix. monethes. And after hym Normans haue regned vnto thys tyme. But howe longe they ſhalle regne he woote to whom no thynge is vnknowen. ¶R. Of the forſayd ſeuen kyngdome & her markes mares and boundes whan they began & howe longe they endured here ſhal I ſom what ſhortly tell. ¶Alfre. The fyrſte kyngdome was the kyngdome of Kent. that ſtretcheth fro the Eeſt Occyan vnto the Ryuer of Tamyſe. There regned the fyrſt Hengiſtis and began to regne by the acomptynge of Dyonyſe ye yere of our lorde a hondred .lv that kyngdom dured thre hundred and .lviii. yere .iv. kynges vnto the tyme that Baldred was put out and Egbert kynge weſt Saxon Ioyned ye kyngdom to his owne the ſeconde kyngdome was att ſoutſaxon that had in the Eeſt ſyde Kent. in the ſouth the ſee & the yele of wyght / in the weſte Hampſhyre / & in the Northſothery there Ella regned fyrſte with his thre ſones / and began to regne the yere after the comynge of the Angles euen .xxx. but that kyngdome within ſhorte tyme paſſed into the other kyngdomes. The thyrde kyngdome was of Eeſtſaxon / and had in ye eeſt ſyde the ſee / in the weſte the countre of London / in the ſouthe Temſe and in the North ſouthfolke. The kynges of this countree of weſtſaxon fro the fyrſte. Sebertes tyme vnto the tyme of the Danes were .x. kynges yt whiche were ſubgect ſomdele to other kynges. Neuertheles of te
                        ••
                     e and lengeſte they were vnder the Kynges of Mercia & vnto that tyme that Egberte the kynge of weſtſaxon Ioyned that kyngedome to his owne. The fourthe kyngdome was of Eeſt Angels and conteyneth Northfolke and Southfolke / and had in the eeſt ſyde / and in ye North ſyde the ſee / & in the Northweſt Cambrygeſhyre / in the weſte ſaynt Edmondes dyche and Herfordſhyre / and in the ſouth Eſtſex And this kyngdome dured vnder twelue kynhes vnto the tyme that kynge Edmonde was ſlayne. And thenne the Danes toke wrongfully bothe the kyngdomes of eeſt Angels and of eeſtſaxon Afterward the Danes were put out and dryuen awaye or made ſubget. And then the elder kynge Edward Ioyned both the kyngdoms to his owne. The fyfte kyngdome was of weſtſaxon & dured lengeſt of all the kyngdomes / & had in the Eeſtſyde ſouthſaxon / in the north Tamyſe / in the ſouth & in the weſt yt ſee occean. In ye kyngdom regned Serdryd wyth his ſone Kenryk. and begā to regne the yere of our lorde fyue hondred & .xx. And then after ye comynge of Angels .lxxi. ſoo ſaythe Denys the other kyngdoms paſſed in to this kyngdome. The ſyxt kyngdom was of Mercia & was gretteſt of alle. The markes and the meres therof were in the weſt ſyde of the Ryuer Dere faſt by Cheſtre and Seuarne faſte by Shroweſbury vnto briſtowe. in the eeſt ye eeſt ſee in the ſouth Tamyſe vnto london / in the north the Ryuer of Humber. and ſo weſtwarde and downwarde vnto the Ryuer Merſe vnto the corner off wyrhall. there Humbre falleth into the weſt ſee Penda wybbes ſone regned fyſte in this kyngedome in the yere of our lorde Iheſu Cryſte .vi. houndred .xxvi. ſo ſayth Denys and fro the

comyng of Angels an hōdred .lxxv. yere. This kyngdome dured vnder .xviii. kynges aboute two hondred .lxiii. yere. vnto the laſte Colwulf the Danes betoke that kyngdome to kepe whā burdred the kynge was put out. But the elder Edwarde the kynge put out the danes & 
                        •
                     oyned the kyngdome of Mercia to his owne kyngedome. Netheles at the begynnyng this kingdome of mercia was departed into thre / in the weſt mercia. in myddell mercia. and eeſt Mercia. The .vii. kyngdome was Northamhym brorū. that is the kyngdome of Northumberlō
                     de. the meres and Markꝭ therof were by weſt. and by eeſt the ſee of Occian. by ſouthe the Ryuere of Humbre and ſo downwarde to warde the weſte by thende of the ſhyres of Notynghā and of Derby vnto the Ryuer of merce and by north the Scottes ſee. that heet forth in Scotteſſhe ſee in Englyſſhe. This kyngdom of northumberlonde was fyrſte deled in two prouynces. That one was the ſouthe ſyde and heet / Deyra and that other was the Northe ſyde and heet Brenycia / as it were twoo kyngdomes & the Ryuer departed theſe two kyngdomes that tyme. for the kyngdome of Deyra was frome the Ryuere of humbre vnto the Ryuer of tyne The kyngdome of Brenycia was fro Tyne to the Scottyſſhe ſee. And whan Pyctes dwelled there as Beda ſayth .li.iii. cap. ii. That Nynyā that holy man conuerted men of the ſouth ſyde Ida the kinge regned there fyrſte and began to regne the yere of our lord fyue hondred .xlvii. ſo ſayth Dyonyſe. In Deyra regned kyng elle the yere of our lorde fyue hondred .xlix. Theſe two kyngdomes were other whyle as it is ſayde departed bytwene twoo kynges and ſomtyme all hoole vnder one kynge. and dured as it were .xx. Englyſſhe kynges .ccc.xxi. yere / Atte laſte Oſbertus and Elle were ſlayne in the .ix. yere of her kyngdome the Danes ſlewe theym and Northumberlonde was voyd without kinge .viii. yere / Then afterwarde the danes regned in Northumberlonde .xxxvi. yere vnto the oonynge of the kyngdome Adelſtone. he made ſubgecte the kynges Danes Scotteſſhe & walſhe and regned fyrſte allone in Englonde and helde the kyngdome of Englonde all hole and one kyngdome that was the yere of oure lorde viii.C.xxviii. That Ryuer of Merſe was ſomtyme the marke & were betwene the kyngdom of Northumberlonde / that may be ſhewed in two maners fyrſt by thys properte of this merſe / is as moche to ſaye as a ſee that is abounde and a mere for it departed one kingdome from an otheri ¶Alſo it is wrytten yn Cronycles of Henry & Alfrede that kynge Edwarde ye elder faſtened a Caſtell at Mamceſtre in Northumberlonde / but that Cytie mamceſtre is from ye Ryuer of merſe ſcarſely thre myle.
               
               
                  ¶Of byſſhpryches & theyr ſees. ca. xiii.
                  LVcius was the fyrſte kynge cryſtened of the Brytons. in his tyme were thre Archebyſſhops ſees in Brytayne. one was att London / an other at yorke / And the thyrde att Caeruſk the cyte of / legeons in Glamorgan / that cyte is nowe called Caerleon / To theſe Archebyſſhoppes ſees were called Flammes To the Archebyſſhops ſee of / london was ſubget Corne wayle & all myddel Englōde vnto humbre / To yorke all Northumberlonde from the bowe of Humbre with all Scotlonde to Caerbeon all wales. there were in wayles .vii. Byſſhops / and nowe bē but foure· Tho Seuarne departed Englōde & wales. ¶Wihel. de pan. li.i. But in the Saxons tyme thoughe Saynt Gregori. had graunted / london the preuylege of tharchebyſſhops ſee Netheles ſaynt Auſten yt was ſente in to Englonde by ſaynt Gregory torned tharchebyſſhop ſee out of / london into Caunterbury. After ſaynt Gregoryes dayes at the prayer of kyng Ethelbryght and C
                        •
                      and burgeyſes of Caunterbury ther tharchebyſſhops ſee hath dured vnto nowe ſaue yt in ye mene tyme of a kynge of mercia was wrought with men of Caunterbury / and benam them that worſhyp / and worſhypped Adulphe byſſhop of / lychfelde wyth the Archebyſſhops pally by aſſent of Adryan the pope vpon Caas 
                        〈◊〉
                      yeftes ſente / Netheles vnder Kenulph the kynge it was reſtored to Caunterbury ageyne. ¶The worſhyp of the ſee of yorke hath dured there alwaye and yet dured though Scotlonde be withdrawe fro his ſubieccyon by paſſynge of tyme. ¶Gir intinere .li.i. the Archebyſſhoppes ſee was torned oute of Caerleon into Meneuia that is in the weſte ſyde of Demecya vpon the Iryſſhe ſee in Saynte Dauyds tyme vnder kynge Arthur. From ſaynt Dauyds tyme vnto Sampſons tyme were in Meneuya .xxiii. Archebyſſhops. Afterwarde felle a peſtylēce in all wales of the yelowe euyll / that is called the Iaūdis. And thēne Sampſon the Archebyſſhop

toke with hym the palle and wente in to Brytayne Armonica the laſſe Brytayne and was there byſſhop of Dolenſin. from that tyme vnto the fyrſte Henryes tyme kyng of Englōde were at Meneuia whiche is called ſaint Dauyds .xxi. byſſhops all without palle / whether it were for vnconnynge or for pouerte. Neuertheles alway fro that tyme ye byſſhops of wales were ſacryd of the byſſhop of Meneuia of ſaynt Dauyds / and the byſſhop of Meneuia was ſacred of the byſſhops of wales as of his ſuffrigans & made no profeſſyon ne ſubiection to none other chirche. Other byſſhops that come after warde were ſacred at Caunterbury compellynge and heeſt of the kynge / in token of that ſacrynge & ſubieccyon· Boneface Archebyſſhop of Caunterbury that was legate of the Croſſe ſonge in euery Catheralle chirche of wales ſolempnely. Amas he was ye fyrſte Archebyſſhop of Caunterbury that ſoo dyde in wales / & yt was dene in the ſecond Hē
                     ryes tyme. R. But nowe ben but two primates in all Englonde of Caūterbury and of yorke. To the prymate of Caunterbury ben ſubgette .xiii. byſſhops in Englonde & .iiii· in wales. The premate of yorke hath but two ſuffrygans in Englonde that ben the byſſhop of Caerleyll & of Durham: Of all theſe ſees & chaungynge of other places I ſhalle ſhewe you here folwynge. Take hede in the begyngnynge of holy chyrche in Englonde byſſhops ordeyned theyr ſees in lowe places and ſymple that were couenable for cōtemplacyon for prayers & deuocyon. But in william conquerours tyme by done of lawe: Canon it was ordeyned that byſſhoppes ſholde come out of ſmall townes in to greate cytees. Therfore was the ſee of Dorcheſtre chaunged to Lyncoln: Lychefelde to Cheſtre. Tetforde to Norwyche Shyrbron to Salyſbury. welles to Bathe. Conewayles to exeſtre / & Seleſeye to Chicheſtre. The byſſhopp of Rocheſtre hath no paryſſhe but he is the Archebyſſhops chapelayn of Caūterbury. Syth the ſee of Caunterbury was fyrſt ordeyned by ſaynt Auſten / it caunged yet neuer his place. Chycheſtre hathe vnder hym oonly South ſex and the yle of wyght / and had his ſee fyrſte in the tyme of the Archebyſſhop Theodore / and the ſee dured there .CCC.xxxiiii. yere vnder .xx. byſſhops fro the fyrſte wylfryede vnto the laſte Syth and at the commaūdement of kynge wyllyam conquerour chaunged the ſee fro Seleſeye to Chycheſtre.
                  
                     ¶De epiſcopis occidentalib
                           
                              
                           
                           bus
                         wilhelmus.
                     HAue mynde that all the prouynce of weſt ſaxon hadde alwaye one byſſhop fro the begynnynge vnto Theodorus tyme / by graunte of kynge Iſlo kynge of weſtſaxon the fyrſte Birrynus ordeyned a ſee at Dorcheſtre that is a ſymple towne by ſouthe Oxenforde beſyde walyngforde bytwene the metynge togyder of Temſe & Tame whan Birinus was deed. Kē
                        walcus the kyng ordeyned a ſee at wyncheſtre as his fader hadde purpoſed / there agylbert a Frenſſheman was fyrſt byſſhop of all the prouynce of weſtſaxon. For yt tyme the cyte & ye ſee of Dorcheſtre perceyued & longed to ye prouynce of Meria / that cyte ſtandeth with in Temſe. & the Temſe departeth bytwene Mercia & weſtſaxon. And after that Agylbert was pute out of wyncheſtre that tho hyght winton then was there an Englyſſhe byſſhop that was called wyne. / Some men ſuppoſe yt this cyte hath the name of this wyne / & is called wyncheſtre as it were wyne cyte. At the laſt he was put out and after hym come Leutherius the forſayd Agelbertes neuewe. After Leutherius hedda awhyle was byſſhop there. whan he was deed. Theodorus the Archebyſſhop ordeyned two byſſhops to the prouynce of weſtſaxon. Danyell atte wyncheſtre to hym were ſubgette two coūtres / Sothery & ſouthampſhyre / & to hym were ſubget ſyx countrees. Barkſhyre wyltſhyre Somerſete Dorſeteſhyre Deuenſhyre & Corne walyle. ¶Treuyſa. It ſemeth by this yt weſtſaxon conteyted. Sotherye Southampeſhyre Dorſeteſhyre Deuenſhyre Corne wayle ¶Wilhell. After warde in elder Edwardes tyme to theſe two ſees were ordeyned by cōmaū
                        dement of Formoſus the pope thre other ſees. At welles for Somerſete. At Kyrton for Deuē
                        ſhyre. and. At ſaynte Germayn for Cornewayle. Not longe after warde the ſyxt ſee was ſette At Rammeſbury for wyltſhyre. At the laſt by commaundement of kynge wyllyam conqueroure all theſe ſees ſaue wyncheſtre were torned and chaunged out of ſamlle Towne in to grete Cytees for Shyrborn and Rummeſbury were torned in to Salyſbury. Now to that ſee is ſubgette Barkſhyre wyltſhyre and Dorſete. The ſee of welles was torned to Bathe / therto is now ſubget all Somerſete. The ſees

of kyrton & of Cornewale were chaūged to Exeſtre therto is ſubget Deuēſhyre & Cornwale.
                  
                  
                     ¶De orientalibus epiſcopis.
                     IT is knowen that the Eeſt Saxons alwaye fro the begynnynge to nowe were ſubgette to the byſſhop of London But the prouynce of the eeſt Angels that conteyneth Norffolke and Souffolk had one byſſhop att Donwyk / the byſſhop heet Felix and was a Bourgon & was byſſhop .xvii. yere / after hym Thomas was byſſhoppe .v. yere after hym. boneface .xvii. yere. Thenne Byſy afterwarde was ordeyned by Theodorus & ruled the prouynce whyle he myght endure by hymſelf allone / After hym vnto Egbertes tyme kyng of weſtſaxon an hōdred .xliii. byſſhops ruled that prouynce oone att donwyk and an other of Elyngham. Neuertheles after Ludecans tyme kynge of Mercia lefte and was only one ſee att Elyngham vnto the .v. yere of wyllyam conqueroure / whan Herfaſtus the .xxiii. byſſhop of the eſtrene chaunged his ſee to Tetforde / and his ſucceſſour Herbertus chaunged theſe fro Tetforde to Norwhiche by leue of kynge wyllyam the reed. The ſee of Ely that is nyght therto the fyrſt kynge Henry ordeyned the .ix. yere of his regne / and made ſubgect therto Cambrydgeſhyre that was tofore a parte of the byſſhopryche of Lyncoln / and for quytynge therof / he gaafte to the biſſhop of Lyncoln a good towne called Spaldynge.
                  
                  
                     ¶De epiſcopis Merciorum wilhelmus.
                     HEre take heede that as the Kyngdome of Mercia was alwaye greteſte for the tyme / ſo it was dealed in mo byſſhopryches and ſpecyally by grete hyrte by kynge Offa. whyche was .xl yere kynge of Mercia / he chaunged the Archebyſſhops ſee fro Caunterbury to Lychfelde by aſſent of Adryan the pope. Thenne the prouynce of Mercia & of Lyndeffar in ye fyrſt begynnynge of her cryſtendom in kynge wulfrans tyme had one byſſhop at Lytchefeld the fyrſt byſſhop yt was there heet Dwyna the ſeconde heet Celath & were both Scottes / after them the thyrde Trumphere / the fourth Iarmuanus / the fyfte Chedde But in Edelfydes tyme that was wulfrans broder whan Chedde was deed / Theodorus tharchebyſſhop ordeyned ther wynfrede Cheddes deken. Netheles apud Hyndon after that for he was vnbuxum in ſome poynt / he ordeyned there Sexwulf abbot of Medāſtede that is named burgh. but after Sexwulfus fourth yere Theodorus tharchebyſſhop ordeyned fyue byſſhops in the prouynce of Mer
                           •
                        ia. And ſo he ordeyned Boſell at wyrceſtre / Cudwyn at Lychfelde / the forſayd Sexwulf at Cheſtre. Edelwyn att Lyndeſeye at cyte. Sydenia / & he toke Eata monke of the abbaye of Hylde att whyt by & made hym byſſhoppe of Dorcheſtre beſyde Oxenforde. Tho this Dorcheſtre heet Dorkynge / & ſo the ſee of that longeth to weſtſaxon in Saynt Byrynes tyme longed to Mercia from Theodorus the Archebyſſhops tyme Ethelred kynge of Mercia hadde deſtroyed Kente / this byſſhop Sexwulf tooke Pyctas byſſhop of Rocheſtre that come oute of Kente and made hym fyrſte byſſhop of Herdforde at laſt whan Se
                           •
                        fulf was dede Hedda was byſſhop of Lychefelde after hym and wylfryd flemed out of Northumberlonde was byſſhop of Cheſtre. Netheles after two yere Alfred kynge of Northumberlōde deyed and wylfrede torned agayne to hys owne ſe haguſtalden / and ſoo Hedda helde bothe the byſſhopryches Lychfelde and of Cheſtre. after hym come Albyn that heet wor alſo and after hym come thre byſſhops. Torta at cheſtre wytta at Lychfelde / And Eata was yet atte Dorcheſtre. After his dethe byſſhops of Lyndeſey helde his ſee .iii. hondred .liiii. yere vnto 
                           •
                        emygius chaunged the ſee to Lyncoln by leue of the fyrſte kynge wyllyam But in Edgars tyme byſſhop Leot winus Ioyned both byſſhopryches to gyeer of Cheſtre and lyndeffa
                           •
                         whyle his lyfe edured.
                  
                  
                     ¶De epiſcopis Northumbran Wilhel. de pon. li. ca. xi.
                     AT yorke was one ſee for all the prouynce of Northūberlonde paulinus helde fyrſte the ſee & was ordeyned of the byſſhop of Caūterbury / & helde ye ſee at yorke .vii. yere Afterwarde whā kynge Edwyn was ſlayne and thynges were dyſtroubled. Poulinus wente thens by water awaye into Kent from whens he come fyrſte & toke with hym the pall. ¶Wilhel. li·iiii. And ſo the byſſhopryche of yorke ceaſed .xxx. yere / & the vſe of the palle ceaſed there an hondred .xxv. yere vnto that Egbart the byſſhop that was the kynges brooder of the londe recouered it by auctoryte of the pope. R. whan ſaynt Oſwolde regned Aydanus a Scot was byſſhop in bernica that is ye north ſyde of Northumberlonde

/ after hym Finianꝰ after hym Salmanꝰ. ¶wylhel: vby. s. At laſt he went in to Scotlōde with grete in dygnacyon / for wylfre vnder toke hym for he held vnlawfully Beſterdaye .xxx. yere after ye Paulinus was gone from thens wilfred was made byſſhop of yorke. ¶Beda li.iiii. But while he dwelled longe in Fraūce about hys ſacrynge at excytynge of quartadecimono
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                         / that were they yt helde Eeſterdaye the .xiiii. daye of ye mone. Chedde was ytake out of hys abbay of Lynſtynge & wrongfully put out ī to ye ſee of yorkeſby aſſent of kynge Oſwy. but thre yere after warde. Theodorus tharche byſſhop dyde hym a waye & aſſygned hym to the prouynce of Mercia & reſtored wilfred to the ſee of yorke. But after by cauſe of wrathe yt was bytwene hym & the kyng Egfryde was put out of the ſee by Theodorus helpe. tharchebyſſhop that was corrupt wyth ſome maner mede this was done after ye wilfred had ben byſſhop of yorke / & Cumbert at Haguſtalde chirche / & Eata att Lyndeffar chirche yt now is called holy ylonde in ye Ryuer of Twede. Aydanus founde fyrſt the ſee. And Theodorus made Eadhedus biſſhop of Ropoune that was comen agayne out of Lyndeſeye. wilfred had be abbot of Repune. Theodorꝰ ſent Trunwynus to ye londe of Pyetes in thendes of Englonde faſt by Scotlond in a place yt heet Candida caſa. and whiterne alſo. there ſaynt Ninian a Bryton was fyrſt foūder & doctour. But all theſe ſees out take yorke fayled lytyll & lytel for the ſee of Candida caſa that is Galle waye that tho longed to \ Englonde and dured many yeres vnder .x. byſſhops vnto that it had noo power by deſtroyenge of the Pyctes. The ſees of Hagalde & of Lyndeffar was ſōtyme all one vnder .lx. byſſhops about four ſcore yere & ten and dured vnto the comynge of ye Danes. In that tyme vnder Hyngar & Hubba ardufe the byſſhop yede longe about with ſaynt Cuberts body vnto kynge Aluredes tyme kyng of weſt Saxon / & the ſee of Lydeffar was ſette at Kunegeſtre that is called Kunyngyſburgh alſo / ye place is called now Vbbeſforde vpon Twede At the laſt the .xvii. yere of kyng Egbere kyng Edgars ſone / ye ſe was chaūged to Durham / & ſaynt Cutber
                           •
                        tꝭ body was broughte thyder by the doynge of Edmonde ye byſſhop / & fro that tyme forwarde the ſee of that Haguſtalde & of lyndeffar fayled vtterly. The fyrſt kyng Henry in the .ix. yere of his regne made the newe ſeat Caerleyll. The archebyſſhop of Caunterbury hathe vnder hym .xiii. byſſhops in Englonde. and .iiii. in wales he hath Rochoſtre vnder hym / & that ſe hath vnder hym a parte in Kent alone London hath vnder hym Eſtſex Myddelſex & half Herdforthſhyre. Chycheſtre hath vnder hym Southſex & the yle of wyght. wyncheſtre hathe vnder hym Hampſhyre & Southery. Saleſbury hath vnder hym Barkſhyre wyldſhyre D
                           •
                        rſete. Exetre hath vnder hym Deuenſhyre and Cornewayle. bathe hath vnder hym Somerſeteſhyre alone / wyrceſtre hathe vnder hym Glouceſtreſhyre wyrceſtreſhyre and half warwykſhyre Herdforde hath vnder hym Herfordſhyre Cheſtre is byſſhoppe of Couentree & of Lychefelde & hath vnder hym Cherſtreſhyre Staffordſhyre Derbyſhyre halfe warwykſhyre and ſome of Shropſhyre and ſome of Lancaſtreſhyre fro the Ryuer of Merſee vnto the Ryuer Rypylle. Lyncoln hath vnder hym ye prouynces that ben bytwene Temſe and humbre that ben the ſhyres of Lyncoln of Leyceſtre of Norhampton of Huntyngdon of Bedforde of Bockyngham of Oxenforde and halfe Herdefordeſhyre. Ely hathe vnder hym Cambrygeſhyre outake Merlonde. Norwyche hathe vnder hym Merlonde Norfolke and Suffolke. Alſo tharchebyſſhop of Caunterbury hathe foure ſuffreygans in wales that ben Landaf Saynt Dauyes Bangor and ſaynt aſſaph. The Archebyſſhop of yorke hathe nowe but two byſſhops vnder hym that bene Durham and Caerleyll. ¶R. And ſo ben but two prymates in Englond what of hem ſhall do
                           •
                         to the other and in what manere poynt he ſhall be obedyent and vnder hym. It is fully conteyned within aboute the yere of our lorde Iheſu cryſte a thouſande .lxxii. tofore the fyrſt kynge wylliam & the byſſhops of Englond be commaundemente of the pope. the cauſe was handled and treated bytwene the forſayd prymates & ordeyned & demed that ye prymate of yorke ſhall be ſubgette to the prymate of Caū
                        terbury in thynges yt longen to the worſhyp of god and to the byleue of holy chirche that in what place euer it be in Englonde that the prymate of Caūtherbury wylhote & conſtreyne togader a counſeyll of clergy the prymate of yorke is holden with his ſuffrygans for to be there and for to be obedyent to the ordynaunce yt
                        
there ſhall be lawfully ordeyned whan the prymate of yorke ſhall come to Caunterbury and with other byſſhops he ſhall ſacre hym that is choſen / & ſo wyth other byſſhops he ſhall ſacre hys owne prymate / yf the prymate of yorke be dede / his ſucceſſour ſhall come vnto ye byſſhop of Caunterbury and he ſhall take his ordynaū
                        ce of hym and take hys othe with proſeſſyon & lawfull obedyence. After about the yere of our lord .xi.C.lxxxxv. in the tyme of kyng Rycharde ben reſons ſette for the partye for eyther prymate & what one prymate dyd to that other in tyme of Thurſtinus of Thomas and of other byſſhops of yorke frome the conqueſte vnto kȳ
                        ge Henryes tyme the thyrde. Alſo there it is ſayde howe eche of them ſtarte frome other. This place is but a forſpekynge and not a full treatꝭ therof Therfore it were noyfulle to charge this place with all thylke reaſons.
                  
               
               
                  ¶Of howe many manere people haue dwelled therin. ca. xiiii.
                  BRytous dwelled fyrſt in this ylonde the xviii. yere of Hely the prophete / the .xi. yere of Solinus poſtumus kynge of Latyns .xliii. after the takynge of Troye / tofore the buildynge of Rome .CCC.xxxii. yere. ¶Beda. li.i. They come hyder & toke hyr cours frome armonyk that now is that other brytayn they helde longe tyme the ſouth countres of ye ylond It befell afterwarde in Veſpaſianus tyme duke of Rome. That the Pyctes ſhypped oute of Scycya into Occean / and were dryuen aboute with the wynde and entred in to the North coſtes of Irlonde and foūde there Scottes and prayed to haue a place to dwell Inne and myghte none gete. For Irlonde as Scottes ſayd myght not ſuſtayne bothe people Scottes ſente Pyctes to the northe ſyde of Englonde and behyght them helpe ayenſte the Brytons that were theyr enemyes yf they wolde aryſe / and tooke them wyues of theyr doughters / vppon ſuche condycyon yf doubte fylle / whoo ſholde haue ryght to be kynge they ſholde rathar cheſe hym of the moder ſyde than of the fader ſyde of the women kyn rathar than of the men kynd ¶Gaufre. In Vaſpaſyan the Emperous tyme whan Marius Aruiragus ſone was kynge of Brytons One Rodryk kynge of Pyctes came oute of Scycya and ganne to deſtroyed Scotlonde / Marius the kynge ſlewe this Rodryk and gaue the north partye of Scotlonde that heet Catheneſia to the mē that were came with Rodryk and were ouercome by hym / for to dwell Inne. But theſe men had noo wyues ne none myght haue of the nacyon of brytons ther for they ſailled into Irlonde & toke to theyr wyues Iryſſhemens doughters by that couenaunte that the moder blood ſholde be put tofore in ſucceſſyon of herytage. Gir. ca. xvii. Netheles Sirinus ſuper Vyrgilium ſaythe that Pyctes agatyrſes that hadde ſome dwellynge plyce aboute the waters of Scycya and they ben called Pyctes of Peyntynge & ſmytynge of woundes / therfore they are called Pyctes as paynted men. Theſe men and theſe gothes ben all one peple. For whan Ma
                        •
                     imus the tyraunt was wente out of Brytayne into Fraunce f
                        •
                     r to occupye thempyre. Then Gratianus and Valentianus that were brethern and folowes of thempyre brought theſe gothes out of 
                        •
                     
                     cya with grete gyftes wyth flaterynge and 
                        •
                     
                     re beheſtes into the north countre of Bryta
                        •
                     
                     ne. For they were ſtalworth and ſtronge m
                        •
                      of armes and ſoo theſe theues & bryborus were made men of londe and of countree and dwelled in the northe countrees. And helde there cytees and townes. ¶Gaufre. Carancius th
                        •
                      tyraunt ſlewe Baſſyanus 
                        •
                      and gafe the Py
                        ••
                     e
                        •
                      a dwellynge place in. Albania that is Scotlond / there they dwelled lōge tyme afterwarde and medled with Brytons. ¶R. Thenne ſythe that Pyctes occupyed fyrſte the 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſyde of Scotlond. It ſemeth that th
                        •
                      dwge place that this Carancius gaat them is the ſouthe ſyde of Scotlonde that ſtretchethe frome thawrte ouer walle of Romayns werke to the Scotteſſhe ſee. and conteyneth Galleway and Lodouia that is Lodewaye. ¶Th
                        •
                     rfore Beda .li.iii. ca. ii. ſpeketh in this manere. Ninian the hooly man conuerted the ſouthe Pyttes. Afterwarde the Saxons come and made that Countree longe to Brenicia the Northe partye of Northumberlonde vnto the tyme that Kynadius Alpinus ſone kynge of Scotlō
                     de put out of the Pyctes and made that countree that lyeth bytwene Twede and the Scotteſſhe ſee longe to his kyngdome. ¶Beda .li· ca. i. Afterwarde longe tyme the Scottes were ledde by duke Renda and came oute of Irlonde that is propre coūtree Scottes and with loue or with ſtrenthe made hym a place faſt by the Pyctes in the Northe ſyde of that arme of

the ſee / that breketh in to the londe in the weſte ſyde that departed in olde tyme bytwene Brytons and Pyctes. Of thys Duke Renda the Scottes hadde the name and were caled Darlendinas as it were Rendaes parte / for in her ſpeche a parte is called dall. ¶Girp̄. The pyctes myghte haue noo wyues of Brytons bute they toke hem wyues of Iryſſhe Scottes and promyſed hem fayre for to dwell wyth theym And graunted hym a londe by the ſee ſyde / there the ſee is nowe That londe is called nowe. Galleway Marianus Iryſſhe Scotteſſhe lō
                     de datte Argall that is Scotten clyfe for Scottes londed there for to doo tharme to the Brytons or for that place is nexte to Irlonde for to come a londe in Brytayne. ¶Beda. And ſoo the Scottes after Brytons and Pryctes made the thyrde people dwellynge in Brytayne. ¶R. Thenne after that come Saxons atte prayenge of the Brytons to helpe them ayenſt the Scottes and Pyctes. ¶And the Brytons were ſoone put out in to waies. And Suxons occupyed the Londe lytell and lytell. And efte more to the Scottyſſhe ſee. And ſoo Saxoas made the fourthe manere of men in the ylonde of Brytayne. ¶Beda li.v. ca. ix. For Saxons and Angels came oute of Germania / yet ſome Brytons that dwelled nyghe callen hem ſhortly Germans. ¶R. Netheles abowte the yere of our lorde .viii. hondred Egbartus kynge of weſtſaxon commaunded and badde alle men calle the men of the londe Englyſſhmen. ¶Alfre. Thenne after that the Canes purſued the londe. Abowte two hondred yere / that is for to ſaye fro the for ſayde Egbarteus tyme vnto ſaynt Edwardes tyme / and made the fyfte manere of people in the londe / Bute they faylde after warde. Atte laſte come Normans vnto duke wyllyam and ſubdued Englyſſhemen / and yet kepe they the londe and they made the 
                        •
                     y
                        •
                     the people in the ylonde. But in the fyrſte kynge Henryes tyme come many Flemynges and receyued a dwellynege place for a tyme be ſyde Maylros in the weſte ſyde of Enlonde / and made the ſeuenth people in the ylonde. Netheles by commaundement of the ſame kynge they were put thens and dryuen to Hauer fordes ſyde in the weſt ſyde of wales. ¶R. And ſoo nowe in Brytayne Danes and Pyctes fayllen all out / and fyue nacyons dwellen ther in that been Scottes in Albania / that is Scotlond. Brytayne in Chambrya that is wales. but that Flemynges dwelle in that is weſt wales. And normans & Englyſſhmen ben medled in all the ylond / for is now doubte in ſtoryes how & in what manere they were put a way & dyſtroyed out of Brytayne. Now it is to declare how the Pyctes were dyſtroyed & ſayled. ¶Girp̄. ca. vii. Brytayn was ſomtyme occupyed with Saxons / & peas was made and ſtablyſſhed with the Pyctes / thenne the Scottes that came with the Pyctes ſawe that the Pyctes were nobler of dedes & better mē of armes though they were laſſe in nombre than the ſcottes Then̄e the Scottes hauynge therof enuye torned to theyr naturall treaſon yt they haue oft vſed for in treaſon they paſſe other mē and ben traytours as it were by kynde. For they prayed all the Pyctes & ſpecyally the grete of them to a feeſt. & wayted her tyme whan the Pyctes were mery & had well dronke they drew vp nayles that helde vp holowe bēches vnder the pyctes & the pyctes vnware ſodaynly fyll in ouer the hammes into a wonderfull pytfull. Then the Scottes fell on the Pyctes and ſlewe thē & left none alyue. And ſo of two maner people ye better warryours were holy deſtroyed. but the other yt ben the Scotes whiche ben traytours all vnlyke to the pyctes toke prouffyte by that fals treaſon / for they tooke alle that londe and holde it yet vnto thys tyme and it. Scotlonde after hyr owne name / In kynge Edgars tyme Kynadin Alpinus ſone was duke and leder of the Scottes and warred in Pycte londe / and deſtryyed the Pyctes. He warred ſyx ſythes in Saxon and tooke all the londe that is bytwene Twede and the Scottyſſhe ſee with wronge and wyth ſtrengthe.
               
               
                  ¶Of the langages of maners and vſuge of the people of that londe. ca. xv·
                  AS it is knowen howe manye manere of people ben in thys ylonde there been alſo ſo many langages and tonges. Netheles walſſhe and ſcottes that ben not medled with other nacyons kepe yet theyr langage and ſpeche but yet the Scottes that were ſomtyme cō
                     federate and dwelled with Pyctes drawe ſomwhat after theyr ſpeche / But the Flemynges that dwell in the weſt ſyde of wales haue lefte her ſtraunge ſpeche and ſpeken lyke to Saxons / alſo Englyſſhemen though they had fro the begynnynge thre manere of ſpeches. Southerne

Northern & myddell ſpeche in the myddell of the londe as they come of thre maner of people. Germania. Netheles by commixyon and mydlynge fyrſte with Danes & afterwarde with Normans in many thynges the countree langage is appared / for ſome vſe ſtraunge wlaffynge chyterynge harrynge gartynge and gryſbytynge. ¶This apparynge of the langage cometh of two thynges / one bycauſe that chyldren that gone to ſcole lerne to ſpeke fyrſte Englyſſhe / and than ben compelled to conſtre hys leſſōs in Frenſſhe & that haue ben vſed ſyn the Normans come into Englonde. Alſo gentylmens chyldren be lerned and taught frome theyr youthe to ſpeke Frenſſhe / & vp londeſſhmen wyll counterfete and lyken hymſelf to gē
                     tylmen and are beſy to ſpeke / frenſſhe for to be more ſette by / wherfore it is ſayde by a comyn prouerbe. Iack wold be a gentylmē yf he coude ſpeke frenſſhe. ¶Treuiſa. This was moche vſed to fore grete deth. but ſyth it is ſomdele chaunged / for ſyr Iohan Cornwayle a mayſter of gramer chaunged ye techynge of gramer ſcole & conſtruccyon of / frenſſhe into Englyſſhe. And other ſcole mayſters vſe ye ſame way now in the yere of our lorde. a .M.CCC.lxxxv. the .ix. yere of kynge Rycharde the ſeconde / & leue all / frenſſhe in ſcoles and vſe all cōſtruccyon in Englyſſhe wherin they haue auauntage one waye that is yt they lerne ye ſoner theyr gramer / and in a nother dyſauauntage. for nowe they lerne no Frenſſhe nor can none. whyche is hurte for them yt ſhall paſſe thee ſee. And alſo gentylmen haue moche left to teche theyr chyldred to ſpeke / frenſſhe. ¶R. It ſemeth a grete wonder ye Englyſſhmen haue ſo grete dyuerſyte in theyr owne langage in ſowne & in ſpekynge of it whiche is all in one ylonde. And the langage of Normandye is comen out of an other londe & hath one maner ſowne amonge all thē that ſpeke it in Englonde / for a man of Kente ſouthern weſtern & northern men ſpeken / frenſhe all lyke in ſowne & ſpeche but they can not ſpeke theyr Englyſſhe ſoo. ¶Treuyſa. Netheles there ben as many dyuerſe maner of / frenſhe in the reame of / fraūce / as dyuerſe Englyſſhe in the reame of Englonde. ¶R. Alſo of the forſayd tonge whiche is departed in thre is grete wonder / for men of the eeſt with men of the weſt accorde better in ſownynge of the ſpeche / than men of the north with men of the ſouthe Therfore it is ye men of mercii that ben of myddell Englonde as it were partynes wyth the endes / vnderſtond better the ſyde langages northern & ſouthern than northern & ſouthern vnderſtonde eyther other. ¶Wilhel. de pon .li.iii. All the langahes of the northūbres & ſpecyall at yorke is ſo ſharpe ſhyttynge frottynge & vnſhap / yt we ſouthern men maye vnneth vnverſtonde that langage· I ſuppoſe ye cauſe be yt they be nyght to the alyens that ſpeke ſtraungely. And alſo by cauſe the kynges of Englonde abyde and dwelle more in the ſouthe counteree than in the north countree. The cauſe why they abyde moore the ſouth countre than in the north countree / is by cauſe that there is better corne londe more people moo noble cytees and mo profytable hauens in the ſouthe countree than in the northe countree.
                  
                     ¶De gentis huius moribus. Gir. in 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        ▪
                     
                     FOr the maners and doynge of walſſhemen and of ſcottes ben to fore ſomwhat declared. Nowe I purpoſe to telle and declare the condycyons of the medled people of Englonde. But the Flemynges that been in the weſt ſyde of wales ben now all torned as they were Englyſſhmen by cauſe they companye with Englyſſhmen. And they be myghty and ſtronge to fyghte / and ben the mooſt enemyes that walſſhemen haue / and vſe marchaundyſe and clothynge and ben full redy to put themſelfe in auentures and to peryll in the ſee and londe bycauſe of grete wynnynge and bē redy ſomtyme to the plowe and ſomtyme to dedes of armes whan tyme and place areth. It ſemeth of theſe men a greate wonder that in a boon of a wethers ryght ſholder whan the fleſſe is ſoden awaye and not roſted they knowe what haue be done / is done / and ſhall be done as it were by ſpyryte of prophecye and a wonderfull crafte. They telle what is done in ferre coūtres towenes of peas or of warre / the ſtate of the royame ſleynge of men and ſpouſebreche ſuche thȳges they declare certayne of tokenes & ſygnes that is in ſuche a ſholder bone. ¶R. But the Englyſſhemen that dwelle in Englonde ben medled in the ylonde & ben ferre fro the places that they ſpronge of fyrſte tornenne to the contrarye dedes lyghtelye withoute entyſynge of ony other men by her owne aſſent. And vneſy alſo vnpacyent of peas / enemyes of beſynes / and full of ſlouth. ¶Wilhel. de pon .li.iii. ſayth

That whan they haue deſtroyed theyr enemyes all to the grounde / then̄e they fyghten wyth theymſelf and ſleeth eche other / as voyde and an empty ſtomak werketh in it ſelfe. ¶R. Netheles men of the ſouthe ben eſyer & moree mylde than men of the North. For they ben more vnſtable and more cruell & more vneſy. The myddell men ben parteners with bothe. Alſo they vſe them to glotony more than other men and ben more coſtlewe in mete and clothynge Men ſuppoſe that that they toke that vyce of kynge Herceknot yt was a Dane. For he heer ſette forth twyes double meſſe att Dyner and at ſouper alſoo. Theſe men ben ſpedefulle on hors and a fote. Able and redy to all maner dedys of armes / and be wonte to haue vyctorye and mayſtrye in euery fyght where noo treaſon is walkynge / and been curyous and can well telle dedys and wonders that they haue ſeen. Alſo they gone in dyuerſe londes vnnethe ben ony men ryche in her owne londe or more gracyous in ferre and in ſtraunge londe / they can better wynne and gete new than kepe thyr owne herytage / Therfore it is yt they be ſprade ſoo wyde and wene that euery londe be owne. The men be able to all manere ſleyght & wytte / but to fore the dede blonderynge and haſty. And more wyſe after the dede than tofore. an leuen of lyghtly what they haue begon. ¶Solinus li.vi. Therfore Eugenius the pope ſayd that Englyſſhmen were able to do what euer they wolde / and to be ſete & put tofore all other ne were that lyght wytletteth. And as Hanyball ſayd that ye Romayns myght not be ouer comee but in ther owne coūtre ſo: Englyſſhmē maye not be ouer come in ſtraunge londes but in ther owne countre they be lyghty ouercome ¶R. Theſe men deſpyſen her owne & prayſe other mennes. & vnneth be pleaſed nor apayd with theyr owne eſtate what befalleeh & becometh other men / they wyll gladly take to them ſelf. Therfore it is that a yeman arayeth hym as a ſquyre: a ſquyre as a knight a knyght as a duke / a duke as a kynge / yet ſome go abote & wyll be lyke to all manere ſtate & ben in no ſtate. For they take euery degre that be of no degre for in derynge out ward they be myntrals and herowdes. In talknynge grete ſpekers In etynge & drynkynge glotons / In gaderyng of catell huckſters and tauerners. In araye tormentours. In wnynynge argry. In trauayle tantaly. In takynge hede dedaly. In beddes Sardanapaly / In chyrches mawmetes. In courtes thōdre only in preuylege of clergy and in prebendes they knowle
                           •
                        he themſelf clerkes. ¶Treuyſa As touchynge the termes of latyn as argi / tantali / dedali / ſerdanapali / ye muſte vnderſtonde them as ye poctes feyned of them. Argus was an harde and kept beſtes he had an hōdred een. and Argus was alſo a ſhyp / a ſhyp man & a chapman / & ſo argus myght ſe before & behynde & on euery ſyde. Therfore he yt is wyſe & ware & can ſe that he be not deceyued may be called Argus. And ſo the Cronycle ſayth in plurell nombre yt Englyſſhmen ben argy. that is to ſaye they ſe about where as wynnynge is That other worde tantaly / the poete feyneth that Tantalus ſlewe his owne ſone wherfore he is dampned to perpetuall penaūce / & he ſtandeth alwaye in water vp to the neyther lyppe & hath alwaye rype apples & noble fruyte hangynge downe to the ouerlyppe. But the fruyte ne the water maye not come wythin his moute. He is ſoo holde and ſtandeth bytwene mete and drynke and maye neyther eete ne drynke / and is euer an hongred and a thyrſte that woo is hym alyue by thys manere lykeneſſe of Tantalus they that do ryght nought there ys moche is to do in euere ſyde ben called tantaly It ſemeth that it is to ſaye in trauaylle they be tantaly / for they do ryght nought therto. The thyrde worde is deda
                           •
                        e / take hede that Dedalus was a ſubtyll and a ſlye man. And therfore by lykenes they that ben ſubtyll and ſlye they becalled dedaly. And the fourth worde is ſardanapaly / ye ſhall vnderſtonde that Sardanapalus was kynge of Aſſyryens & was fulle vnchaſt / & vſed hym for to lye ſofte. And by a maner of lykenys of hym they yt lyue vnchaſtly ben called ſardanapaly. ¶R. But amonge all Englyſſhmen medled togyders is ſoo grete a chaungynge & dyuerſyte of clothynge & of a raye & ſo many maners and dyuerſeſhappes that well nyghe is there ony man knowen by hys clothynge & hys araye of whate ſome euer degre that he be Ther of prephecyed an hooly Anker in kyng Egelfredes tyme in this manere. Henry li.vi. Englyſſhmen for as moche as they vſe them to drynkel
                           •
                        wn
                           •
                        es / to treaſon & to recheleſnes of goddes hous / fyrſt by Danes & then by Normans / and at the thyrde tyme by the Scottes yt they holde the mooſt wretches &

leſt worth of all other they ſhall be ouercome. Thenne the worlde ſhall be ſo vnſtable and ſo dyuerſe and varyable that the vnſtablenes of thoughtes ſhall be bytokeneth by many manere dyuerſytees of clothynge.
                  
               
               
                  ¶Here foloweth the dyſcrecyon of the londe of wales. ca. xvi.
                  NOwe this boke taketh on honde.
                  Wales after Englonde 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  So take I my tales
                  And wende into wales
                  To that noble blood.
                  Of Pryamus blood
                  Knowleche for to wynne 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  Of greate Iupyters kynne.
                  For to haue in mynde ✚
                  
                  Dardanus kynde.
                  In theſe foure tytles I fonde
                  To tell the ſtate of that londe. 
                        •
                     
                  
                  Cauſe of the man I ſhall telle
                  And thenne prayſe the londe and well ❀
                  Thenne I ſhall wryte with my pen.
                  All the maners of the men
                  Thenne I ſhall fonde 
                        •
                     
                  
                  To telle meruaylles of the londe
               
               
                  ¶Of the name and wherfore is named wales. ca. xvii.
                  
                     WAles nowe is called wallia.
                  And ſomtyme it heet Cambria
                  For Camber Brutes ſone
                  Was prynce & there dyde wone
                  Thenne wallia was to mene.
                  For Gwalaes the quene
                  Kynge Ebrancus chylde
                  Was wedded theder mylde
                  And of that lorde Gwalon
                  With draweth of the ſonn
                        •
                     
                  
                  And put to .l.i. a. 
                        •
                     
                  
                  And thou ſhalte fynde wallia. ✚
                  
                  And though this londe
                  Be moche leſſe than Englonde
                  As good glebe is one as other
                  In the doughter in the moder
               
               
                  ¶Of the cōmodytes of the londe of wales. Capitulo. xviii.
                  THough that londe be luy
                        •
                     .
                  It is full of corne and of fruyte
                  And hath grete plente ywys
                  Of fleſſhe and eke of fyſſhe
                  Of beeſtes tame and wylde
                  Of hors ſheep
                        •
                      oxen mylde 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  Good londe for all ſedes 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  For corne gras and herbes that ſpredes
                  There ben woodes and medes
                  Herbes and floures there ſpredes.
                  There ben Ryuers and welles
                  Valeyes and alſo hylles
                  Valeyes brynge forth flood.
                  And hylles metals good 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  Cooll groweth vnder londe
                  And gras aboue at honde
                  There lyme is copyous
                  And ſlates for hous 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  Hony and mylke whyte
                  There is deynte and not lyte
                  Of braket meete and ale. ✚
                  
                  Is grete plente in that vale
                  And all that endeth to the lyue
                  That londe bryngeth forth ryue 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  But of grete ryches to be drawe
                  And cloſe many in ſhorte ſawe
                  It is a corner ſmall 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  As though god fyrſte of all
                  Made that londe ſo fele
                  To be ſelere of all hele. 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  Wales is deled by
                  A water that heet Twy
                  North wales from the ſouth
                  Twy deleth in places full couch 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  The ſouth heet Demicia
                  And the other Venedocia
                  The fyrſte ſhoteth and arowes deres
                  That other deleth all with ſpere 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  In wales how it be
                  Were ſomtyme courtes thre
                  At Carmerthyn was that one.
                  And that other was in Mone 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  The thyrde was in Powyſy
                  In Pegwern that nowe is Shroweſbury
                  There were byſſhops ſeuen
                  And nowe ben foure euen
                  Vnder Saxons all at home
                  Somtyme vnder prynces of that londe
               
               
                  ¶Of the maners and rytes of the walſſhmen. ca. xix.
                  THe maner lyuynge of that londe.
                  Is well dyuerſe frome Englonde
                  In mete and drynke and clothynge
                  And many other doynge
                  They be clothed wonder well
                  In a ſhyrte and in a mantell
                  A cryſpe brethe well ſayn
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  
                     Dothe in wynde and in rayne
                  In this clothynge they by bolde 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  Though the weder be ryght colde
                  without ſhetes alway.
                  Euermore in this araye
                  They go fyght plye and lepe
                  Stande ſytte lye and ſlepe
                  without ſurto
                        •
                      gowne cote and kyrtyll
                  without 
                        •
                     open tabarde clok or bell 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  without lace and chaplet that her lappes
                  without hode hatte or cappes
                  Thus arayd gone the ſegges
                  And alwaye with baſe legges
                  They kepe none other goynge ⸫
                  Though they mete with the kynge 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  with arowes and ſhorte ſperes
                  They fyght with them that them deres
                  They fyght better yf they neden
                  Whan they go than whan they 
                        •
                     yden
                  In ſtede of caſtell and coure
                  They take woode and mareys for ſocour
                  whan th
                        •
                     y ſeen it is to do.
                  In fyghtynge they wolde be a go 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  Gyldas ſayth they ben varyable
                  In peas and not ſtable.
                  yf men a
                        •
                     e why it be
                  It is no wonder for to ſe
                  Though men put out of londe
                  To put out other wolde fonde 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  But all for nought at thys ſtonde
                  For all many woodes ben at gronde
                  And put the ſee amonge
                  
                     
                        •
                     en caſtels buylded ſtronge
                  The men may dure longe vnete
                  And loue well conume mete 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  They can ete and ben mury
                  without greate cury
                  They ete brede colde and hote
                  Of 
                        •
                     arly and of ote
                  Brode cakes rounde and thynne 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  As well ſemeth ſo grete kynne
                  Selde they ete brede of whete
                  And ſelde they done one ete
                  They haue gruell to p
                        •
                     tage
                  And lekes kynde to com panage 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  Alſo butter mylke and cheſe
                  y ſhapeend londe and corner wyſe
                  Suche meſſes they ete ſnell
                  And that maketh hem drynke well
                  Me
                        •
                     e 
                        •
                     d ale that hath myght
                  Theron they ſpende daye and nyght 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  Euer the redder is the wyne. 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  They holde it the more fyne
                  Whan they drynke atte ale
                  They tyll many lewde tale
                  For whan drynke is in handlynge
                  They ben full of Ianglynge
                  Atte meete and after eke. 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  Her ſolace is ſalte and leke
                  The huſbonde in his wyſe
                  Telleth that a grete pryce
                  To gyue a gaudron with growele
                  To hem that ſytten on his mele
                  He deleth his meete at meele 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  And gyueth euery man his dele
                  And all the ouer pluſe
                  He kepeth to his owne vſe.
                  Therfore they haue woo
                  And myſhappes alſo
                  They eten hote ſamon alway
                        •
                     
                  
                  All though phyſyk ſay nay 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  Her houſes ben lowe with all
                  And made of yerdes ſmall
                  Not as in cytees nyghe
                  But f
                        •
                     rre a ſonder and not to hygh
                        •
                     
                  
                  Whan all his eten at home.
                  Then to theyr neyghbours wyll they ronne
                  And ete what they maye fynde and ſe
                  And then torne home ayen 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  The lyf is ydele that they ledes
                  In brennynge ſlepynge and ſuche dedes
                  Wallſhmen vſe with her myght
                  To weſſhe theyr gheſtes fete a nyght
                  yf he weſſhe her fete all and ſomme.
                  Then they knowe that they be welcome
                  They lyue ſo eſely in a route
                  That felde they bere purs aboute. 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  At her breche out and home
                  They honge theyr money and combe.
                  It is wonder they beſo hende
                  And hate crak at nether ende
                  And without ony core 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  Make theyr wardrope at the dore.
                  They haue in grete mangery
                  Harpe tabour and pype for mynſtralſy
                  They bere corps with ſorywes grete
                  And blowe londe hoenes of gheet·
                  They prayſe faſte Troyau blood. 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  For ther of come all her brode. ⸫
                  Nygh kyn they wyll be
                  Though they paſſe a hondred degree
                  Aboue other men they wyll hym dyght. 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  
                     And worſhyp preſte with her myght
                  As angels of heuen ryght
                  They worſhyp ſeruauntes of god almyght.
                  Ofte gyled was this brode
                  And yerned batayll all for woode
                  For Merlyns prophecye
                  And ofte for ſortelegye
                  Beſte in maners of Brytons
                  For company of Saxons
                  Ben torned to better ryght
                  That is knowen as clere as lyght
                  They tyllen gardyns felde and downes
                  And drawe hym to good townes
                  They ryde armed as woll god
                  And go yhoſed and yſhoode
                  And ſytten fayre at her mele
                  And ſlepe in beddes fayre and in fele.
                  So they ſeme nowe in mynde
                  More Englyſſhmen than walſſhe kynde.
                  yf men axe why they now do ſo
                  More than they wonte to do
                  They lyuen in more peas
                  Bycauſe of theyr ryches.
                  For theyr catell ſholde ſlake 
                        •
                     
                  
                  yf they vſed ofte warke
                  Drede of loſſe of her good
                  Make them now ſtyll of mode 
                        〈☐〉
                     
                  
                  All in one it is brought.
                  Haue no thynge and drede nought
                  The poete ſayth a ſawe of preef
                  The foot man ſyngeth to fore the theef
                  And is bolder on the waye.
                  Than the hors man ryche and gaye
                  
                     ¶Of the meruayls and wondres of wales.
                     THere is a pole at Brechnok
                     Therin of fyſſhe is many a floke.
                     Ofte he chaungeth his hewe on cop
                     And bereth aboue a gardyn crop
                     Ofte tyme howe it be 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     Shape of hous there ſhalt thouſe
                     Whan the pole is frore it is wonder
                     Of the noyſe that is ther vnder
                     yf the prynce of the londe hote
                     Byrdes ſynge well mery not 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     As merely as they can.
                     And ſyngyn for none other man
                     Beſydes Caerleon
                     Twoo myle fro the towne
                     Is a roche well bryght of leem
                     Ryght ayenſt the ſonne beem. 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     Goldclyf that roche hyght
                     For it ſhyneth as god full bryght 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     Suche a flour in ſtoon is nought.
                     Without fruyt yf it were ſought
                     yf men coude by craft vndo
                     The vaynes of thetth and come therto 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     Many benyfece of kynde
                     Ben nowe hyd fro mannes mynde
                     And ben vnknowe yet 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     For defaute of mannes wytte
                     Grete treſour is hyd in grounde
                     And after this it ſhall be founde
                     By grete ſtudye and beſynes 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     Of them that comen after vs
                     That olde men had by grete nede
                     We haue by beſy dede ¶Treuiſa.
                     In bokes ye may rede
                     That kynde fayleth not at nede
                     Whan no man had crafte in mynde. 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     Then of craft halpe god and kynde
                     Whan no techer was in londe
                     Men of crafte by goddes honde
                     They that had craft ſo thenne. ✚
                     
                     Taught forth craft to other men
                     Some craft that yet come not in place
                     Some man ſhall haue by gods grace
                     ¶R. An ylonde is with noyſe and ſtryfe
                     In weſt wales at Kerdyf
                     Faſte by Sauerne ſtronde.
                     Barry hyght that ylonde 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     In that hyther ſyde in a chene
                     Shalt thou here wonder dene
                     And dyuerſe noys alſo 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     yf thou put thyn ere to
                     Noys of leues and of wynde
                     Noys of metals thou ſhalt fynde
                     Frotynge of yron & weſtones thou ſhalt her
                           •
                        
                     
                     Hetynge of ouens then with fyre
                     All this maye well be.
                     By wawes of the ſee 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     That breketh in thare
                     With ſuche noys and fare.
                     At Pendrok in a ſtede
                     Feudes do oft quede 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     And throweth foule thynge inn
                           •
                        
                     
                     And deſpyſeth alſo ſynne.
                     Neyther craft ne bedes may
                     Do thens that ſorowe away 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     Whan it greueth ſoo.
                     To the men it bodeth woo
                     At crucynar in weſt wales.
                     Is a wonder buryals 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     
                        Euery man that cometh it to ſe
                     Semeth it euen as moche as he
                     Hoole wepen there a nyght 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     Shall be broken er daye lyght
                     At nemyn in north wales
                     A lytell ylonde there is 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     That is called bar
                           •
                        yſay
                     Monkes dwell there alway 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     Men lyue ſe longe in that hurſt
                     That the oldeſt deyeth fryſte
                     Men ſaye that Merlyn there buryed is.
                     That hyght alſo ſylueſtris 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     There were Merlyns tweyne
                     And prophecyed beyne
                     One heet Ambroſe an Merlyn 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     And was y goten by gobelyn
                     In demicia at carmerthyn
                     Vnder kynge Vortygryn 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     He tolde his prophecye
                     Euen in ſonwdonye.
                     Atte heed of the water of coneway
                     In the ſyde of mout eryry 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     Dynas embreys in walſſhe. ⸫
                     Ambroſe hyll in Englyſſhe
                     Kynge Vortygere ſate on
                     The waterſyde and was full of wone.
                     Then Ambroſe Merlyn prophecyed.
                     Tofore hym ryght tho ¶Treſa.
                     what wytte wolde wene
                     That a fende myght gete a childe
                     Some men wolde mene
                     That he may no ſuche werke welde
                     That fende that goth a nyght
                     wymmen full ofte to gyle
                     Incubus is named by ryght ⸫
                     And gyleth men other whyle
                     Succubus is that wyght
                     God graunt vs none ſuche vyle
                     who that cometh in hyr gyle
                     wonder hap ſhall he ſmyle
                     with onder dede ⸫
                     Bothe men and wymmen ſede
                     Fendes woll kepe
                     with crafte and brynge an hepe.
                     So fendes wylde 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     May make wymmen bere childe
                     yet neuer in mynde
                     was chylde of fendes kynde
                     For withoute eye
                     Ther myght no ſuche childe deye.
                     Clergy maketh mynde
                     Dethe ſleeth no fendes kynde
                     But deth ſlewe Merlyn 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     Merlyn was ergo no gobelyn
                     And other Merlyn of Albyn londe
                     That nowe is named Scotlonde
                     And he had names two
                     Sylueſtris and Calidonius alſo 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     Of that woode Calidonie
                     For there he tolde his prophecie
                     And heet Silueſtris as well
                     For whan he was in batell 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     And ſawe aboue a gryſly kynde
                     And fyll anone out of his mynde
                     And made no more abood
                     But ran anone vnto the wood
                     ¶Treuyſa. Silueſter is woode
                     Other wylde of mode Other elles
                     That atte wood he dwelles
                     ¶R. Silueſtris Merlyn.
                     Tolde prophecye well and fyn
                     And prophecyed well ſure
                     Vnder kynge Arthur
                     Openly and not ſo cloſe 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     As Merlyn Ambroſe
                     There ben hylles in ſnowdonye
                     That ben wonderly hye
                     with hygh as grete a waye
                     As a man may go a daye ⸫
                     And heet eryry in walſſhe
                     Snowy hylles in Englyſſhe.
                     In the ſe hylles there is
                     Leeſe Inough for all beſtes of wales
                     Theſe hylles on top beres 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     Two grete fyſſhe weares
                     Conteyned in that one ponde.
                     Meueth with the wynde an ylonde.
                     As though it dyde ſwymme.
                     And neyheth to the brymme. 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     So that herdes haue grete wonder.
                     And wene that the worlde meueth vnder
                     In that other is perche and fyſſhe
                     Euery one eyed is
                     So fareth all well
                     In Albania the mylwell 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     In Rutlonde by Tetyn well
                     There is a lytyll well
                     That floweth not al walye ⸫
                     As the ſee twyes a daye
                     But ſomtyme it is drye
                     And ſomtyme full by the eye 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     
                        There is in North wallia
                     In Mon that heet Angleſia
                     A ſto
                           •
                        e accordynge well nyghe 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     As it were a mannes thyghe ⸫
                     Howe ferre euer that ſtone
                     Ben born of ony mon.
                     On nyght it goth home his waye
                     That he founde by aſſaye 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     Hughe therto of Shroweſbury
                     Hn tyme of the fyrſte Harry
                     For he wolde the ſothe fynde
                     That ſtone to an other he gan bynde. 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     wyth grete cheynes of yron
                     And threwe all Iferen
                     ybounde at one hepe
                     In to a water depe ⸫
                     yet amorowe that ſtone 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     was ſeen erly in Mon.
                     Achorle helde hymſelfe full ſlyghe.
                     And bounde this ſtone to his thyghe.
                     His thyſthe was roten ordaye
                     And the ſtone wente a waye.
                     yf men done lechery.
                     Nyghe that ſtone by
                     Swote cometh of that ſtone. 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     But chylde cometh there none.
                     There is a roche ryght wonderly.
                     The roche of herynge by contrey
                     Though ther crye ony man born
                     And blowe alſo with an horne
                     Noyſe there though thou abyde 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     Thou ſhalt here none in this ſyde
                     Ther is an other ylonde
                     Faſt by mon at honde
                     Hermytes there ben ryue ⸫
                     yf ony of them done ſtryue
                     All the myſe that may be gete
                     Come and ete all theyr mete 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     Thenne ceſſeth neuer that woo
                     Tyl the wryfe ceſſe alſo
                     As men in this londe ✚
                     
                     Ben angry as in Irlonde
                     So ſayntes of this contreye 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     Ben alſo wretchefull alwaye
                     Alſo in this londe
                     In Irlonde and in Scotlond.
                     Ben beiles and ſtaues
                     That in worſhyp men haues
                     And ben worſhyped ſo then 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     Of clerkes and of lewde men.
                     That dredes alſo
                     To ſweten on ony of tho 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     Staffe eyther belle
                     As it ſwre the goſpelle
                     At Baſyng werke is a welle
                     That Sacer heet as men telle.
                     It ſprengeth ſo ſore as men may ſee
                     What is caſte in it throweth aye
                     Therof ſprengeth a grete ſtronde
                     It were Inough for all that londe 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     Seke at that place
                     Haue both hele and grace
                     In the welmes ofter than ones
                     Ben founde reed ſpercled ſtones.
                     In token of the blood reed
                     That the mayd wenefrede
                     Shad at that pytte 
                           〈☐〉
                        
                     
                     Whan hyr throte was kytte
                     He that dyd that dede
                     Hath ſorowe on his ſede
                     His chyldren at all ſtoundes
                     Berken as whelpes and houndes
                     For to they praye that mayd grace.
                     Ryght at that welle glace ✚
                     
                     Eyther in Shroweſbury ſtrete.
                     There that mayd reſted ſwete
                  
               
               
                  ¶Of the deſcrypcyon of Scotlonde ſomtyme named Albania. ca. xxi.
                  IT is a comyn ſaw that the countre whyche is now named Scotlonde is an out ſtretchynge of the north ſyde of Brytayn and is departed in the ſouth ſyde frome Brytayne wyth armes of the ſee / and in the other ſyde yt is be clypped with the ſee. This londe hete ſome tyme Albania and hadde that name of Albanactus that was kynge Brutes ſone Albanactus dwelled fyrſte therin / or of the prouynce Albania that ys countre of Scycia & nygh to amazona therfore Scoctea ben called as ye were ſcyttes for they come oute of Scicia. After warde that londe heet Pyctauya for ye Pyctes regned ther in a thouſande .CCC.lx· yere. And atte laſt heet. Hibernia as Irlonde hyght ¶Gir. in top. For many ſkylles / one is for affinite and alye that was bytwene them and Iryſſhmen for they tooke theyr wyues of Irlonde and that is openly ſeen in her byleue / in clothynge / in langage and in ſpeche / in weyyn & in maneres. An other ſkyll is for Iryſſhemen dwelied there ſomtyme. ¶Beda .li.i. Out of Irlonde that is the propre countree of Scottes come Iryſſhmen wyth her duke that was

called Rendar. And with loue and with ſtrenth made hem chyef ſees and Cytees beſydes the Pyctes in the Northe ſyde. ¶Gir. Nowe the londe is ſhortlye called Scotlonde of Scottes that come oute of Irlonde and regned ther in CCC.xv. yere vnto reed wyllyams tyme that was Malcolyn broder. ¶R. Manyeuydencꝭ we haue of this Scotlonde that it is oft called and byghte Hibernia as Irlonde dothe. ¶Therfore Beda .li.ii. ca. xi. ſayth that Laurence Archebyſſhoppe of Dunbar was Archebyſſhop of Scottes that dwelled in an ylonde that heet Hibernia and is nexte to Brytayne. ¶Beda .li.iii. ca. xxvii. Saythe Peſtilence of moreyn bare downe Hibernia. Alſo .li.iii. ca. ii. ſaythe that the Scottes that dwelled in the ſouth ſyde of Hibernia. Alſo: li.iiii. ca. iii. he ſayth that Cladde was a yonglynge and lerned the rule of monkes in Hibernia. Alſo .li.iiii. ca. xxii. Egfridus kynge of Northeumberlonde deſtroyed Hibernia: Alſo .li.iiii. ca. xv. the moſte dele of Scottes in Hibernia and in the ſame chapytre be called Hibernia proprely named / ye weſte ylonde is an hondred myle from eueryche / Brytayne and departed with the ſee bytwene & called Hibernia that countree that nowe is called Scotlond / there he telleth that Adamua abbot of this ylonde ſayled to Hibernia for to tethe Iryſſhmen the lawfull Eſterdaye And at laſte come ayen in to Scotlonde. ¶yſy. ethi. li.xiiii· Man of this Scotlonde ben named Scottes in theyr owne langage & Pyctes alſo. For ſomtyme her body was peynted in this manere / they wolde ſome tyme wyth a ſharpe egged tole prycke end kerue ther owne bodyes and make theron dyuerſe fygures and ſhappes & peynt hem with ynke or with other peynture or coloure / and bycauſe they were ſo peyntede they were called picti that is to ſaye peynted. ¶Erodotus Scottes ben lyghte of herte and wynde inough / but by medlynge of Englyſſhmen they ben moche amended / they ben cruell vpon theyr enmyes and hateth bondage mooſt of ony thynge and holde for a foule ſlouth yf a man deye in his bedde and grete worſhyp yf he deye in the felde. They ben lytyl of mete and mowe faſte longe / and eten ſelde whan the ſonne is vp / and eten flyſſhe fyſſhe mylke and fruyt more than brede and though they be fayr of chappe they ben defoulde & made vnſemely ynough with theyr owne cloth thȳ
                     ge They prayſe faſt ye vſages of theyr owne for faders & dyſpyſen other mēnes doynge her londe is fraytful ynoughe in paſture gardyns and feldes. ¶Gir. de. p̄. ca: xviii. The prynces of Scottes as the kynge of Spayne bē not wonte to be enoynted ne crowed. In this Scotlond is ſolēpne & grete mynde of ſaynt Andrewe thapoſtle: For ſaynt Andrewe we had the north partyes of ye worlde Scites & Pyctes to his lot for to preche & cōuert the people to cryſtes byleue. And at laſte he was martred in Achaia in grecia in a cyte yt was named Patras & his bones were kepte .CC.lxii. yere vnto yere vnto Cōſtā
                     tynus thēperours tyme. And thenne they were tranſlated in to Conſtantynople & kepte there .C.x. yere vnto Theodoſyus thēperours tyme & thenne Vngus kynge of Pyctes in Scotlond deſtroyed a grete parte in Brytayne and was beſette with a grete hooſt of Brytons in a felde called Marke. End he herde ſaynt Andrew ſpeke to hym in thys manere. Vngus vngus here thou me Cryſtes appoſtle. I promyſe the helpe and ſocour whan thou haſte ouercomen thyn enmyes by my helpe / thou ſhalt gyue the thyrde deele of thyn herytage in almeſſe to god almyghty / in the worſhyp of ſaynt Andrewe / and the ſygne of the croſſe were tofore hys hoſt and the thyrde daye he hadde the vyctory and ſoo torned home ayen and deled hys herytage as he was baden. And for he was vncertayne what Cytee he ſholde deale for ſaynt Andrewe he faſted thre daye / he and his men prayed Saynt Andrewe that he wolde ſhewe hym whate place he ſhold cheſe. And one of the wardeyns that kepte the body of ſaynt Andrewe in Conſtantynople was warned in hys ſlepte that he ſholde goo into a place whyder an angell wolde lede hym and ſoo he come in to Scotlonde wyth .vii. 
                        •
                     elowes to the toppe of an hylle named Ragmonde. The ſame our lyghte of heuē beſhone and beclypped the kynge of Pyctes that was comynge wyth hys hooſte to a place called Carceuan. Ther anone were helde many ſeke men. There mette with the kynge Regulus the monke of Conſtantynople with the relyques of Saynt Andrewe. There is founded a chyrche in worſhyppe of Saynt Andrewe that is heed of alle chyrches in the londe of Pyctes. ¶Too thys chyrche comen pylgrymmes oute of alle londes· There was Regulus fyrſte abbote and gadred monkes. ¶And ſoo

alle the 
                        〈◊〉
                      lōde that the Kynge hadde aſſygne
                        •
                      hym he departed it in dyuerſe places amō
                     ge abbayes.
               
               
                  ¶Of the deſcrypcyon of Irlonde. Capitulo. xxii.
                  HAbernia that is Irlonde. & was of olde tyme In corperate in to ye lordſhyp of Brytayne ſo ſayth Gir. in ſua pop̄. where he decryueth it at fulle. yet it is worthy & ſemely to prayſe that lond wyth large prayſynge for to come to citt
                        •
                      & fulle knowlege of that londe theſe tytles yt folowe opē the waye. Therfore I ſhall tel of the place & ſtede of ye londe how grete & what man
                        •••
                      londe it is / wherof that londe hathe plē
                     te & wherof it hathe defaute / alſo of whate mē haue dwelled therin fyrſt. Of maners of mē of that lond. Of the wōders of that lōde / & of worthynes of halowes & ſayntes of that londe.
               
               
                  ¶Of the boundynge of Irlonde Capitulo xxiii.
                  IRlonde is the laſte of all the weſte ylōdos and hyghe Hybernia of one Hyberus of Spayne that was Hermonius broder / for theſe two brethern gate and wanne that londe by conqueſt. Or it is called Hybernia of that Ryuer Hyderus that is the weſte ende of Spayn / and that londe hyghte Scotlonde alſo / for Scottes dwelled there ſomtyme er they came into that other Scotlonde that longed to Brytayne / therfore it is wryten in the Martyloge Suche a daye in Scotlond ſaynt Bryde was borne / and that was in Irlonde. Thys londe hathe in the ſoutheeſt ſyde Spayne thre dayes ſayllynge thens aſyde halfe / and hathe in the eeſt ſyde the more Brytayn thens a dayes ſayllynge / in the weſt ſyde the endles Occean and in the North ſyde. yſelonde thre dayes ſayllynge thens. ¶Solynus. but the ſee that is bytwene and Irlonde is all the yere full of grete wawes and vneſy that men may ſelde 
                        •
                     ayle ſekerly bytwene that ſee is a .C. myle brode.
               
               
                  ¶Of the greenes and qualyte of that londe. ca. xxiii.
                  IRlonde is an ylonde gretteſt after Brytayne / and ſtretched north warde from Brendas hylles vnto the londe Columbyna and conteyneth .viii. dayes Iourney euery iourney .xi. myle and from Deuelyn to Patryks hylles and to the ſee in that ſyde in brode .iiii. de
                        •
                      thanne in the endes / all other wyſe thanne Brytayne / is as Irlonde is ſhorter north warde than Brytayne / ſo is it lenger ſouth warde the londe is not playne but full of mountayns of hylles of woodes of maryes and of moores the londe is ſoft rayny wynde and lowe by the ſee ſyde and within hylly and ſondye. ¶Solinus. There is greate plente of noble paſture and of leeſe / therfore the beeſtes muſte be ofte dryuen out of theyr paſture leſte they eete ouer moche for they ſholde ſhend hym ſelf yf theye myghte ete atte theyr wyll. ¶Gir. Men of that londe haue communely theyr helth. And ſtraungers haue ofte a perylous flue by cauſe of the moyſture of the mete. The fleſſhe of kyen is there holſome / and ſwynes fleſſhe vnholſome· Men of that londe haue noo feuer but oonly the feuer ague and that ryghte ſelde. ¶Therfore the holſomnes of that londe and the clennes oute of venyme is wroth alle the boſte and rycheſſe of trees herbes of ſpycery of ryche clothes and of precyous ſtone of the Eeſt londes. The cauſe of the helthe and holſomnes of that londe is attemperate heete and colde that is therin. In quibus rebus ſufficit. In thys londe ben moo kyen thanne oxen / more paſture thanne corne / more gras thanne ſeed / there is plente of Samon / of lamprays / of eeles and of ſee fyſſhe. Of Egles / of carnes / of pecockes / of curlewes of ſparouhaukes of goſhoukes / and of gentyll fawcons. Of wulues and ryght ſhrewed myſe there ben attercoppes / bloode ſouke
                        •
                     s eeftes that doone none harme / there ben fayres lytell of body and full hardy and ſtronge / there ben barnacles foules lyke to wylde ghees whyche growen wonderly vppon trees / as it were nature wroughte agaynſte kynde. Men of relygyon ette the barnacles vppon faſtyngdayes by cauſe they ben not engendred with fleſſhe. wherin as men thinketh they erre for reaſon is ayenſt that. For yf a man hadde eten of Adams legge he hadde eten fleſſhe / and yet Adam was not engendred of fader nor moder / but that fleſſhe come wonderly of the tree. In this londe is plente of hony and of mylke of vyne and of veynerdes. ¶Solinus and yſyder. wryten that Irlonde hath noo bees Netheles it were better wryten that Irlonde hadde bees and no vyneyerdes. ¶Beda ſaythe that there is greate huntynge to roobuckes / and it is knowen that ther ben none. It is noo wonder of Beda for he ſawe neuer that londe but ſome man tolde hym ſuche tales. Alſo there groweth that ſtone Saxagonus.

And is called Iris alſo as it were the rayn bowe yf that ſtone be holde agaynſte the ſon
                        ••
                      anone it ſhall ſhape a raynbowe / there is alſo a ſtone that is called Gagates & whyte margery perles.
               
               
                  ¶Of the defautes of the londe· Capitulo xxv.
                  
                     WHere cornes ben there full ſmalle vnne the yclenced wyth mannes honde / reſerued men / all beſtes ben ſmaller there thanne in other londes. Ther lackth well nyghe alle manere fyſſhe freſſhe water that is not gendred in the ſee there lacken vnkynde faucons grefacons / per tryche feſauate / nyghtyngales / and pyes / There lacken alſo Roo and bucke / and Ileſypyles wontes and other venemous beeſtes. Therfore ſome men feynen and that fauourably that Saynt Patryk clenſed that londe of wormes and of venemous beeſtes but it is more probable and more ſkylfull that thys londe was frome the begynnynge alwaye withoute ſuceh wormes / for venemous beeſtes and wermes deyen there anone yf men brynge theym thether out of other londes. And alſo venym and poyſon broughte thether out of other londes leſen theyr malyce as ſone as it paſſeth the myddell of the ſee. Alſo poudre and erthe of that londe caſte and ſowen in other londes dryuen away wormes ſo ferfor that yf a turfe of that londe be put aboutt a worme it ſleeth hym or maketh hym thryll that erthe for teſcape a waye In that londe cockes crowe bute lytyll to fore daye / ſo that the fyrſte crowynge of cockes in that londe and the thyrde in other londes ben lyke ferre totore the daye.
               
               
                  ¶Of them that fyrſte enhabyted Irlonde. ca. xxvi.
                  GIradus ſaythe that Caſera Noes nece dradde the floode and fledde wyth thre men and fyfty wymmen in to that ylonde and dwelled ther in fyrſt the laſte yere tofore Noes floode. But after warde Bartholanus Seres ſone that came of Iaphet Noes ſone came the ther wyth his thre ſones by happe or crafte .CCC. yere after Noers floode and dwelled there and encreaced to the nombre of .ix.M. men and after warde for ſtenche of kareyns of gyauntes that they hadde kylde they deyeden alſo ſaue one Ruanus that lyued a .M.v.C. yere. vnto ſaynt Patryks tyme / and enformed the holy man of the forſayd mā and of all the doynges and dedes. Thenne the thyrde tyme come thyder Nymeth out of Scicia with hys .iiii ſones and dwelled there .CC.xvi. yere. and at laſte of his of ſprynge by dyuerſe myſhappes of warres and of morenyge they were clene deſtroyed and the londe lefte voyde .CC. yere after they fourth tyme fyue dukes that were brethern Gandiꝰ Genandus Sagandus Ruthe regus Slauius of the ſayd Nymethes ſucceſſours come oute of Grece & occupyed that londe & deled it in fyue partyes / and euery partye cōteyneth .xxii. cādredes. a Candrede is a countree that conteyneth a .C. townes and they ſet a ſtone in the myddel of ye lōde as it were in the nauell and begynnyge of fyue kyng domes. Atte the laſte Saluius was made kynge of alle the londe.
                  ¶The fyfth tyme whanne this nacyon was xxx. yere. togyder they wexe feble. Foure noble men that were Milleſius the kynges ſones come out of Spayne with many other in a nauy of .xl. ſhyppes & two of ye worthyeſt of theſe iiii brethern that heet Hyberus & Hermon deled the londe bytwene thē tweyne / but after warde couenaunt was broken bytwene them both and Hiberus was ſlayne Then Hermon was kynge of all that londe. And frome his tyme to the fyrſte Patryks tyme were kynges of that nacyon .C.xxxi. And ſo fro the comynge of Hybernenſis 
                        •
                      vnto ye fyrſt Patryk were .M.viii.C. yere. They hadde that name Hibernenſys & Hibernia of the for ſayd Hiberus / or els of Hyberus a Ryuer of Spayne. They were called alſoo gatels & Scottꝭ of one Gaytelus yt was Phenis neuewe.
                  ¶This Gatelus coude ſpeke many langages / after the langages that were made atte Nemproths towre / And wedded one Scotra Pharoes doughter. ¶Of theſe dukes come the Hibernenſis Men ſaye that this Gatelus made the Iryſſhe langage & called it Gaytelaf as it were a langage gagred of all langages & tonges. Atte the laſte Belinus kynge of Brytayne had a ſone & hyght Gurguncius come out of Donnemarke at ylondes Orcades He founde men that were called Balclenſis / and were come theder out of ſpayne / theſe mē prayed & beſught to haue a place to dwelle in

And the kynge ſent them to Irlonde that was tho voyde and waſte. And ordeyned and ſente wyth them duke and capytayns of hys owne & ſo it ſemeth that Irlonde ſholde longe to Brytayne by ryghte of olde tyme. From the fyrſte ſaynte Patryk vnto Fedliundius the kynges tyme .CCCC. yere regned .xxxiii. kynges eueryche after other in Irlonde· In thys Fedliundius tyme Turgeſius duke and capytayne of Norwayes brought theder men of Norwaye and occupyed that londe & made in many places depe dyches and caſtels ſengle double and tryble and many wardes ſtrongly walled and many therof ſtonde yet all hole but Iryſſhmen reche not of Caſtels / for they take woddes for caſtels and marayes and moores for caſtell dyches but at ye laſte Turgeſius deyed by gylefulles of women / & Englyſſhmen ſayd that Gurmundus wanne Irlonde and made thylke dyches / and made no mencyon of Turgeſius / & Iryſſhmen ſpeke of Turgeſius and knowe not of Gurmūdas. Therfore it is wryte what gurmundus had wonne Brytayne & dwelled therin / and ſente Turgeſius wyth grete ſtrenth in to Irlonde for to wynne that londe / & bycauſe Turgeſius was Capytayne and leder of that vyage and Iurney & ſeen amonge thē therfore Iryſſhemen ſpeke moche of hym as a noble mā that was ſeen in that londe and knowen at the laſte whan Gurmundus was ſlayne in Fraunce Turgeſius loued the kynges doughter of Irlonde and her fader behyghte Turgeſius that her worlde ſende her hym to the lowe largeryn wyth .xv· maydens & Turgeſius promyſed to mete there wyth .xv. of the nobleſte men that he had / and helde couenaunte and brought no gyle but ther came .xv. yonge berdeles mē clothed lyke wemen wyth ſhorte ſwerdes vnder theyr clothes / and fyll oon Turgeſius & ſlewe hym ryght there / & ſo he was traytourſly ſlayne after he had regned .xxx. yere Nat longe after .iii. bretheren Almelanus Siracus & Iuorus came into Irlonde wyth ther men out of Norwaye as it had ben for loue of peas and of marchaundyſe & dwellyd by theſe ſydes by aſſent of Iryſſhe men that were alwaye ydle as Poules knyghtes / & the Norwayes buylded thre cytees Deueyn waterfore & Lymeryche & encreaſed & after wexed rebell ayenſt men of that londe and broughte fyrſte ſparthes in to Irelonde Soo fro Turgeſius tyme vnto roderykes tyme kynge of Connacia that was kynge of all the londe were .xvii. kynges in Irlonde and ſo the kynnes that regned in Irelonde frome the Hermons tyme vnto the laſte tyme Roderyks were in all .C.lxxxi. kynges that were not crowned neyther enoynted ne by lawe of herytage butte by nyght mayſtrye and ſtrenthe of armes The ſeconde Henry kynge of Englonde made thys Roderyk ſubget ye yere of kynge Henryes aege xl. and of hys regne .xviii. the yere of our lorde .xi. hondred ·lxxii:
               
               
                  Of the condycyons and maners of Irlonde. ca. xxvii.
                  SGlinus ſaythe that men of thys londe ben ſtrange of nacyon houſeles & grete fyghters / and acount ryght and wronge alle one thynge / and ben ſyngle of clothynge / ſcarſe of mete / cruell of herte / angry or ſpeche and drynketh fyrſte blod of dede men that ben ſlayne and then weſſhen theyr vyſages therwyth and holden them payd wyth fleſſhe and fruyt in ſtede of mete & wyth mylke in ſtede of dr
                        •
                     nke and vſen moche playne and ydlenes and huntynge and trauaylle butte lytell. In theyre chylde hode they ben harde nouryſſhed and 
                        •
                     erde fed and they be vnſemely of maners and of clothynge and haue brechee and hoſen alle ne of wolle and ſtrayte hodes that ſtre
                        •
                     cheth a cubyte ouer theſholders behynde and foldynges in ſtede of mantels and of clokes. Alſo they vſe no ſadels bootes ne ſpores whā they ryde. but they dryue theyr horſes wyth a chambred yerede in ye ouer ende. In ſtede of byttes with trenches of brydels of reeſt / they vſe brydels that lete not theyr hors to ete ther mete / they fyght vnarmed naked in body / netheles wyth twoo dartes and ſperes / And wyth brode ſpar
                        •
                     den they fyghte with one honde.
                  
                     ¶Theſe men forſaken tyllynge of Londe and kepen paſture for beeſtes.
                     ¶They vſe longe berdes and lockes hangynge downe behynde ther hedes 
                           •
                         they vſe no crafte of flaxe / of wolle / of metall / ne of marchaundyſe but gyue hem to ydelnes and ſlouthe / and reken reeſt for lykynge and for fredome for ryches / And thoughe Scotlonde the doughter of Irlonde vſe harpe tymbre and to boure. Netheles Iryſſhe men beconnynge in two manere Inſtrumentes muſyke / in harpe and tymbre that is armed wythe were & ſtrenges of bras In whyche Inſtrumentes though
                           •
                        
                        
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         play haſtely and ſwyftly they make ryhgt 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           •
                        onye and melodys with thycke tewnes 
                           •
                        erbles and notes and begynne frome be mo
                           ••
                         and playen ſecretly vnder dyme ſowne in the greate ſtrenges and torne ayen vnto the ſame / ſo that the gretteſt partye of crafte hydeth the crafte as it welde ſeme as thoughe the crafte ſoo ſholde be aſhamed yf it were take Theſe men ben of euyll maneres in ther lyuynge they paye noo tythynges the wedde lawfally / they ſpare not theyr alyes / But brother wedde the broththers wyfe / they beſye to betraye her neyghbours and other they bere ſperthes in their hondes in ſtede of ſtaues and fyghte ayenſte theym that truſte mooſte to theym / theſe men ben variable and vnſtedfaſte threchours and gylefull whoo that dealeth wyth them nedeth more to be ware of gyle thanne of crafte of peas than of brennynge brondes / of hony than of kynghthode / they haue ſuche maneres that they ben not ſtronge in warre and in bataylle ne trewe in peas they become goſſyps to them that they wyll falſly betraye in the goſſybrede and hooly kynred Eueryche drynketh others bloode whanne it is ſhedde / they loue ſomd
                           •
                        l
                           •
                         hyr nouryce and her playfers whiche that ſouke the ſame mylke that they ſouked whyle they were chyldrē. And they purſewe ther brethern theyr coſyns and theyr other kyne / and deſpyſen theyr kyne whyles they lyue / and auenge theyre dethe whanne they ben ſlayne. Soo longe hath the vſage of euyll cuſtome endured amonge them that it hathe gotenne the mayſtrye ouer them and torneth treaſon in to kynde ſo ferforthe that they ben traytours by nature. ¶And alyens and men of ſtraunge londes that dwelle amonge them folowynge theyr maners that vaunteh there is none but he is be ſmetted wyth theyr treaſon aſlo. Amō
                        ge them manye men pyſſen ſyttyge and wymmen ſtandynge.
                     ¶There ben many men in that londe foule ſhapen in lymmes and in body / For in theyr lymmes they lacke the benefyce of kynde Soo that no where ben better ſhapen thanne they that ben there well ſhapen & none worſe ſhapē than they that ben euyll ſhapen. And ſkylfully nature hurte / and defouled by wyckednes of lyuynge brynge the ſuche gromes and euylle 
                           •
                        penne of hem that wyth vnlawfulle delyn
                        
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        yth foule manere and euyll lyuynge ſoo wyckedly defouled kynde and nature. In thys lond & wales olde wyues & wymmē were wōre & been yet as mē ſaye ofte to ſcape thēſ
                           •••
                         in lykees of hates for to mylke ther neyghb
                           •
                        rs 
                           •
                        ine & ſtole her mylke & ofte gr
                           •
                        y hoūdes ren
                           •
                         after thē & purſewen thē & weuen that they be hares Alſo ſome by crafte of Nygramācye 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           ••
                        tte ſwyne for to be reed of colour and ſelfe thē in markettes & fayres But as ſoone as theſe ſwyne paſſe ony water they torne into theire owne kynde whether it be ſtrawe hey gras of 
                           •
                        ues. But theſe ſwyne maye not be kept by no craft for tēdure in lykenes of ſwynes ouer thre daies Amōge theſe wonders & other take hede that in the vttermeſt ende of the worlde falleth newe meruaylles & wōders. As thoughe kynde played with large loue ſecretly and ferre in thendes than openly & nygh in the myddeell. therfore in this ylōde bē many greſely wōders & meruaylles.
                  
               
               
                  ¶Of the meruaylles and wōders of Irlonde. ca. xxviii.
                  MAny men tellen that in the northe ſyde of Irlonde is the londe of lyfe. In that ylonde no man maye deye but whan they ben olde and vexed wyth greate ſykenes / they ben borne out in to the nexte londe and deye there. There is an other ylonde in Irlonde that noo womman ther in may bere a childe / but yet ſhe may conceyue. Alſo there is an ylonde in whyche no dede body maye roten. In vltonia that is Vlſtre is an ylonde in a lake wōderly departed in twene In that one parte is grete dyſturbaunce and dyſcomforth of frendes & in that other partye grete lykyng and comforth of holy angels There is alſo ſaynt Patryks purgatory that was ſhewed at hys prayer to conferme hys prechynge & hys lore whan he preched to myſbyleued men of ſorowe and payne that euyll mē ſho
                        •
                      ſuffre for ther euyll werkes. And of Ioye and of blyſſe ye gode men ſhall receyue for ther holy dedes he telleth that who that ſuffreth the paynes of purgatory / yf it be enioyned hym for penaunce he ſhall neuer ſuffre the paynes of hell / but he deye fynally withon repentaunce of ſynne / as the enſample. is ſette more full at this chapytre ende. ¶Treuiſa. But truly noman maye be ſaued but yf he be very repentaunce what ſomeuer penaunce he do / and euery man that is very repentaunt as hys lyues ende ſhall be ſekerly ſaued / though
                        •
                      he neuer here of ſaynt Patryks purgatorye.

There is an ylond in cona
                        •
                     te Sale / that is in ye ſee of Conaccia halowed by ſaynt Brandon yt hath no myſe there dede bodyes ben not buryed but bē kept out of the erth & roten not. In Mamonia is a wel who yt waſſheth hym with that water of ye welle he ſhall waxe / hore on his heed There is an other wel in Vltonia who ſomeuer is waſſhē therin he ſhall neuer wexe hore after warde / There is a welle in Mounſtre or Mamonia \ yf ony mā touche that welle anone ſhal falle grete rayne in alle the prouȳce / & that rayne ſhalle neuer ceſſe / tyll a preſte that is a clene mayden ſynge a maſſe in a chapell that is faſte by & bleſſe the water / & wyth mylke of a cowe yt is of one her beſprynge the welle. & ſo reconcyle the welle in this ſtaunge manere. At Glyndal can aboute the oratory of Saynt Keywyn wyches beryth apples as it were apple trees and ben moore holſome than ſauery. That holy ſaynt brought forthe theſe apples by prayers for to hele his ſhylde that was ſeke. There is a lake in Vlſtre and moche fyſſhe therin / whyche is .xxx. myle in lengthe and. in brede. The Ryuer Ban renneth out of that lake into the northe Occean and mē ſaye that thys lake began̄e in this manere. There were men in that countree that were of euyll lyuynge coeuntes cūbrutis. And there was a well in that londe in grete reuerence of olde tyme / And all waye couered / yf it were lefte vncouered the welle wolde ryſe and drowned all the londe. And ſoo it happed that a wooman wente to that welle for to fetche water & hyed her faſt to her chyld yt wept in the cradell / & left the welle vncouered / then the welle ſprange ſoo faſte that is drowned the woman and her chylde & made all the countree a lake and a fyſſhe ponde. for to preue that thys is ſoo there it is greate argument / that whan the weder is clere / fyſſhers of that water ſee in the rounde vnder the water rounde toures and hyghe ſhapen as ſteples and chyrches of that londe. In the north ſyde of Irlonde in the countre of Oſſyyryens euery .vii. yere at the prayer of an hooly Abbot / tweyne that ben wedded a man and a woman muſte nedes be exyled and forſhapen in to lyknes of wolues & abyde out .vii. yere. And atte ende of .vii. yere. yf they lyue they come home agayne / And take agayne theyr owne ſhappe / And than ſhall other tweyne goo forthe in theyr ſtede and ſoo forſhapen for other .vii. yere. There is a lake in thys londe yf a poole of tree pyghte and ſtycked therin that parte of the ſhafte or poole. That is in the erth ſhall torne in to yron / And that par
                        •
                     e that abydeth in the water ſhalle torne into ſtone / And the parte that abydeth aboue ſhall be tree in his owne kynde. Alſo there is a lake that tornethe haſell in to aſſhe and aſſhe in to haſell yf it be done therin. Alſo in Irlonde ben thre Samon lepes there as ſamons lepe ayenſte a Roche of longe ſperes lenthe. Alſo in Leginia is a pounde there ben ſeen colmans byrdes. The berdes been called certelles and come homely to mannes honde but yf men do hym wronge or harme. They gone a waye and come notte agayne / and the water there ſhall be bytter and ſtynke / and he that dyde the wronge ſhall not a ſtert wythoute wretche and myſchyef but yf he do amendes. ¶R. As touchynge Patryks purgatorye. ye ſhalle vnderſtonde Saynt Patyrk that was abbote and not byſhoppe whyle he prechyd in Irlonde laboured and ſtudyed for to torne thylke wycked men that lyued as beeſtes oute other euyll lyf for drede of paynes of helle / and for to conferme hem to good lyfe and they ſayde they wolde not torne but ſome of theim myghte knowe ſom what of the grete paynes and alſo of the bleſſe that he ſpake of. Thenne ſaynt Patryk prayed to god almyghty therfore / ouer lorde Iheſu Cryſte appyered to ſaynt Patryk and toke hym a ſtaffe & ladde hȳ in to a wylde place and ſhewed hym there a rounde pytte that was derke wythin and ſayde / that yf a man were very repentaunce and ſtable in byleue and wente into this pytte and walkede therin a daye and a nyghte he ſholde ſee the lorowes and the paynes of euyll men / and the Ioye and blyſſe of good men. Thenne Cryſte vanyſſhed oute of patryks ſyght 
                        •
                      and ſaynt Patryk arered and buylded there a chyrche and putte therin chanons reguler and 
                        •
                     
                     ſe the pytte aboute wyth a walle / and 
                        〈…〉
                      in the chyrche yerde at the eeſt ende 
                        〈…〉
                      chyrche and faſte ſhette wyth a ſtronge 
                        〈◊〉
                     . For noo man ſholde nycely goo in wythout 
                        〈◊〉
                      of the byſſhoppe or the poyour of the place. 
                        •
                     
                     ny men wente in and come out agayne in Patryks tyme and tolde of paynes and Ioye th
                        ••
                      they hadde ſeen / and the meruaylles that they ſawe been there yet wryten / and by cauſe ther of many men torned and were conuerted to ryghte byleue. ¶And alſo many men went in

                     
                        •
                      c
                        •
                     me neuer agayne. In kynge ſtephens tyme 
                        •
                     ynge of Englōde a kynght yt hyght Owayne 
                        〈…〉
                      ſaynt Patryks purgatory & come agayne & dwelled euer aft duryng his life ī nedes of thabbaye of Ludēſis yt is of thordre Chyſtews & tolde manye wōdres yt he hadde ſeē in Patryks purgatorye. ¶That place is called Patryks purgatorye / & ye chirche is named Reglis Noo mā is enioyned for to goo into ye purgatorye. But coūſeylled yt he ſholde not come therin butte take vpō him other penaūce And yf a mā haue auowed & beſtale & wyll nedes goo therin He ſhall fyrſt go to ye byſſhoppe & thēne he ſhall be ſēte with letters to the pryoure of the place & they bothe ſhal coūceylle hym to leue & yf he wille nedes go therto he ſhalle be in prayers & in faſtynge xv. daies & after xv. dayes he ſhal be how ſeld & ledde to ye dore of the purgatorye with proceſſyon & letany & yet he ſhall be coūſeylled to leue it / & yf he be ſtedefaſte & wyll entre / the doore ſhal be opened & he bleſſed & goo in a goddes name & holde forthe his waye / & the dore ſhall be ſhytte tylle ye nexte daye / & whā the tyme is the pryoure ſhalle come & opene ye dore. & yf the mā be comē he ledethe hym in to ye chyrche wyth ꝓceſſyō & there he ſhall be fyftene dayes in prayers & faſtynge.
               
               
                  ¶Of the meruaylles of ſayntes of Irlonde. ca. xxix.
                  HEre Gyraldꝰ maketh mynde yt as mē of this nacyon bē more angrye / than other mē & more haſty for to take wretche whiles thei bē alyue / ſo ſayntes & halowes of this lond ben more wretchefull than ſayntes of other londes Clerkes of this lōde bē chaſte & ſayē many prayes & done grete abſtynēce a daye / & drynketh all nyghte ſo is afoūted for a myracle / ye lechery regneth not there as wyne regneth / & ben choſen out of abbayes into the clergye / & done as monkes ſholde / whate they yt bē euyll of thē bē worſte of al other. So good mē amonge theym thoughe they bē but fewe been good at ye beſte / prelates of that coūtree bē full ſlowe in correccyō of treſpas / & beſy in contemplacyn & notte in prechynge of goddes worde Therfore it is yt all the Sayntes of ye londe been cōfeſſours & noo martyrs amōge thē / & noo wōder / for all ye prelates of this londe clerkes & prelates ſholde doo as to thē vnknowē. Therfore whā it was put ayēſte ye byſſhoppe of Caſſyl how it myghte be yt ſoo many ſayntes bē in Irlonde & neuer a martyr amonge theym all ſythen that ye mē ben ſo ſhrewed & ſo angry / & the prelates ſo rycheles & ſl
                        •
                     
                     we in correccyons of treſpas. The byſſhop anſwered frowardely ynoughe & ſayde oure men bē ſhrewed & angry ynoughe to thēſelfe but to goddes ſeruaūtes they leye neuer honde but do hē greate reuerence & worſhyp But Englyſſh mē come into this londe that cā make martyrs & were wont to vſe ye crafte. ¶R. The byſſhop ſayd ſo bycauſe ye kynge Henry ye ſecōde was to newe comē into Irlonde frenſſhly after ye martyrdome of ſaynt Thomas of caūterbury Gir. In this lōde in wales & in Scotlond. bē belles & ſtaues with croked hedes & other ſuche thynges for relyques in greate reuerēce & worſhyp / Soo ye mē of this lōde dreden more for to ſwere vpō one of thylke belles & golde ſtaues thā vpō ye goſpell. the chyfe of all ſuche relyques is holdē Ihūs ſtaffe yt is atte Deuelyn. with yt whiche ſtaffe they ſaye yt the fyrſte ſaynte Patryke drofe ye wormes out of Irlōde Augus. de. ci· dei. ca. vii. yf mē axe howe it maye be that dyuerſe manere of beeſtes & of dyuerſe kynde that be kyndly gotē bitwene mayl & female come & bē in ylō
                     des after Noes flode Mē ſuppoſē that ſuche beſtes ſwāme into ylōdes aboute & fyrſte to the nexte & ſoo for forthe into other. Or els mē ſayllynge into ylondes broughte wyth hē ſuche beeſtes for loue of hūtynge / or angels that god almyghtes cōmaūdemēt brought ſuche beſtes into ylō
                     des aboute or ye erthe brought thē for ye fyrſte & fulfylled tho goddes cōmaūdemēte \ ye cōmaun: ded ye erthe to brynge forth gras & quicke beſtes
               
            
            
               
                  ¶Here endeth ye deſcrypcyō of Brytayne / the whiche cōteyned Englōde wales & Scotlonde And alſo bycauſe Irlōde is vnd ye rule of Englō
                     de & of olde tyme it hathe ſo cōtynued Therfore I haue ſette ye deſcrypcyō of the ſame aft ye ſayd Brytayne. whiche I haue takē out of Poly cronycon. and alſo enprynted by one ſomtyme ſco
                     
                        •
                     e mayſter of ſaynt / Albons vpon whoſe ſoule god haue mercy Amen.
                  Enprynted at Londō in powlys chyrche yarde at the weſt dore of powly
                        •
                      beſyde my lorde of londons palays by me Iulyan Notary ✚ In the yere of our lorde god .M.CCCCC.xv.
                  
               
            
         
      
   