
      
         
            
            
            The Cronycles of Englonde with the dedes of popes and emperours / and alſo the deſcripcyon of Englonde.
            
               
                  blazon or coat of arms
               
            
            
               
               
                  Hec roſa virtutis de celo miſſa ſereno. Eternā florens regia ſceptra feret.
                  blazon or coat of arms
               
            
         
         
            
            Tabula.
            
               ¶ Here begynneth a ſhorte and a breue Table / for to 
                     〈…〉
                   wherof ony man ſhall pleaſe hȳ to rede in this boke.
               
                  Folio prim
                        •
                     .
                  The Prologue.
               
               
                  Folio .ij.
                  The werke of the fyrſt .vj. dayes.
                  Adam the fyrſt man.
                  Eua the fyrſt woman.
                  Seth ſone to Adam.
                  Delbora ſyſter to Abell.
                  Abell ſone to Adam.
                  Cayn and Calmana ſyſter and wyfe to Cayn.
                  Enos.
                  Chanam.
                  Mala
                        •
                     eel / Iareth / Enoch / of the lyne of Chryſt.
                  Matuſale / Lameth of Chryſtes lyne.
               
               
                  Folio .iij.
                  Tuball the fyrſt grauer.
                  Iabe founde the fyrſt pauylyons.
                  Iuball founde the fyrſt crafte to playe vpon inſtrumentes.
                  Neoma founde fyrſt weuynge.
                  Noe / the ſhyppe / the raynbowe.
                  Cham / Sem / and Iaphet Noes ſones.
                  Arphaxat and his chyldren.
                  Thus and his chyldren.
                  Sale and his ſone.
                  Neuer and his chyldren.
               
               
                  Folio .iiij.
                  Phaleg.
                  Iacten / Nemroth / and Sulph
                        ••
                      were the buylders of the Court of Babylon.
                  How gentylmen began.
                  S
                        •
                     eak of Chryſtes lyne.
                  Belus kynge of Babylon.
                  Ninus kynge of Babylon.
               
               
                  Folio .v.
                  Thare of the lyne of Chryſt.
               
            
            
               ¶ Here begynneth the hyſtor
                     •
                   of ye holy Patryarkes / 
                     〈◊◊◊〉
                  .
               
                  Folio .v.
                  Abraham and his bretherne with they
                        •
                      progenye.
                  Abrahams wyues.
                  Melchiſedech kynge of Salem.
                  Semiramis kynge of Babylon.
                  Ninus kynge of Babylon.
                  Arrius kynge of Babylon.
                  Yſaac of the lyne of Chryſt / and of his wyues and his ſones.
                  Of Gomo
                        •
                     ra / and of the wyfe of Lo
                        ••
                     .
                  Iacob of the lyne of Chryſt / and of his wyues and progenye.
                  Xerſes kynge of Babylon.
                  Armauietre was kynge after hym.
                  Belocus kynge of Babylon.
                  Inachus the fyrſt kynge of Grece.
                  Phoromius was kynge after hym.
                  Iudas of the lyne of Chryſt.
               
               
                  Folio .vi.
                  Belus kynge of Aſſuriorum.
                  Athlas an aſtronomer.
                  Sarapis kynge of Grekes.
                  Argus kynge of Grekes.
                  Oniogires put fyrſt oxen to the plough.
                  Belus kynge of Babylon.
                  Pharao kynge of Egypte.
                  Amithus kynge of Babylon.
                  Pharao kynge of Egypte.
                  Aram of Chryſtes lyne.
                  Iob the holy man.
                  Moyſes the iudge of Iſraell.
                  Aaron the byſſhop.
                  Dafrus kynge of Babylon.
                  Cy
                        •
                     rops kynge of Athenes.
                  Amynadab of Chryſtes lyne.
                  Moyſes the fyrſt Iudge.
                  Aaron the fyrſt byſſhop.
                  Pharao kynge of Egypte.
                  Naſon ſone to Amynadab.
                  When the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of god was gyuen in the hyll of 
                        •
                     ynay.
                  Salmen of the lyne of Chryſt.
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      the 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  Elea
                        •
                     ar byſſhop.
                  
                     
Othonyell iudge.
                  Aoth iudge.
                  Ionas the fyrſt kynge of Ytalye.
                  Amictus kynge of Babylon.
                  Boos of the lyne of Chryſt.
               
               
                  Folio .vij.
                  Sanger iudge.
                  Delbora iudge.
                  Phenies byſſhop.
                  Saturnus kynge of Ytalye.
                  Picus kynge of Ytalye.
                  Gedeon iudge.
                  Bocci byſſhop.
                  Abimalech iudge.
                  Tola iudge.
                  Bocci byſſhop.
                  Iaer iudge.
                  Fanus kynge of Ytalye.
                  Latinus kynge of Ytalye.
                  Tauranus kynge of Babylon.
                  Lainydon kynge of Troy.
                  The newe ſynnes of Iſraell.
                  Ozy byſſhop.
                  Ebaſſam iudge.
                  Abialon iudge.
                  Abdon iudge.
                  Achamanis kynge of Aſſecium.
                  Agamenon kynge of Grece.
                  Eneas kynge of Ytalye.
                  Vlixes an eloquent man.
                  Obeth of the lyne of Chryſt.
                  Samſon iudge.
               
               
                  Folio .viij.
                  Ieſſe of the lyue of Chryſt.
                  Saul kynge of Iſraell.
                  Aſcanius kynge of Ytalye.
                  Siluius kynge of Ytalye.
                  Venyſe and Padua were buylded.
                  Homere the grete poete.
               
            
            
               ¶ Here begynneth the ſeconde parte / 
                     〈◊〉
                   of the kyngdome of Brytayne.
               
                  Folio .viij.
                  
                     
                        ••••
                     ne the fyrſt woman 
                        〈◊〉
                      was 
                        〈◊◊〉
                     
                  
               
               
                  Folio .ix.
                  Brute kynge of Brytayne.
               
               
                  Folio .xv.
                  Lotryn kynge of Brytayne.
                  Madan kynge of Brytayne.
                  Dauid kynge of Iſraell.
               
               
                  Folio .xiij.
                  Mempris kynge of Brytayne.
                  Salomon kynge of peas.
                  Sadoch byſſhop.
                  Roboas kynge of peas.
                  Achimias byſſhop.
                  Ieroboas kynge of Iſraell.
                  Abdias kynge of Iewes.
                  Aſa kynge of Iewes.
                  Azarias byſſhop.
                  Baſa kynge of Iſraell.
                  Hela kynge of Iſraell.
                  Amri kynge of Iſraell.
                  Archa kynge of Iſraell.
                  Ebrac kynge of Brytayne.
                  Brute Greneſhelde kynge of Brytayne.
                  Leyll kynge of Brytayne.
               
               
                  Folio .xiiij.
                  Ioſaphat kynge of Iewes.
                  Helyas the grete prophete.
                  Machias and Abdias prophetes.
                  Ochoſias kynge of Iſraell.
                  Lud Ludibras kynge of Brytayne.
                  Bladud kynge of Brytayne.
                  Ioram kynge of Iewes.
                  Whan Helyas was rauyſſhed into paradyſe.
                  Ochoſias or Aſarias kynge of Iewes.
                  Achalia quene of Iewes.
                  Ioram kynge of Iſraell.
                  Iehen kynge of Iſraell.
                  Athalia moder to Azari kyng of Iewes
                  Ioam kynge of Iewes.
                  Ioathas kynge of Iſraell.
                  Ioam kynge of Iſraell.
                  Leyr kynge of Brytayne.
               
               
                  Folio .xv.
                  Amaſias kynge of Iewes.
                  Ieroboam kynge of Iſraell.
                  
                     
Ozias kynge of Iewes.
                  Ozee byſſhop and prophete.
                  Ioel / Ananias / and Abdias prophetes.
                  zacharias kynge of Iſraell.
                  Phaſeia kynge of Iſraell.
                  Phaſe kynge of Iſraell.
               
               
                  Folio .xvj.
                  Morgan & Conedag kȳges of Britayn.
                  Reynolde / Gorbodian / Ferres & Portes kynges of Brytayne.
                  How foure kynges helde all Brytayne / and of theyr names.
                  Scater and Dawalyer kynges.
                  Rudac and Cloten kynges.
                  Douebant kynge of Brytayne.
               
               
                  Folio .xvij.
                  Brenne and Belyn kynges of Brytayn.
               
               
                  Folio .xviij.
                  Cormbratus kynge of Brytayne.
                  Ioathan kynge of Iewes.
                  Amarias byſſhop.
                  Olimpias were ſet in Grece.
                  Acham kynge of Iewes.
                  Achitob byſſhop.
                  Ozee kynge of Iſraell.
               
            
            
               ¶ Here begynneth the thyrde part / and cōtynueth vnto the Natiuite of Chryſt.
               
                  Folio .xviij.
                  Rome was buylded by Romulus.
                  Ezechias kynge of Iewes.
                  Sadoch byſſhop.
                  Manaſſes kynge of Iewes.
               
               
                  Folio .xix.
                  Sellum and Echias byſſhoppes.
                  Numa kynge of Rome.
                  Amon kynge of Iewes.
                  Ioſias kynge of Iewes.
                  Azaſtas byſſhop.
                  Tobias the holy man.
                  Tulius kynge of Rome.
                  Nabugodonoſor kynge of Babylon.
                  Ancus kynge of Rome.
                  Danyell the prophete.
                  Ioathas kynge of Iewes.
                  Ioachim kynge of Iewes.
                  Samias byſſhop.
                  Ioachim kynge of Iewes.
                  Sedechias kynge of Iewes.
                  Ioſedech byſſhop.
                  Abacuk prophete.
                  The tranſmygracyon.
                  Priſcus Torquinus kynge of Rome.
                  Nabugodonoſor and Enylmerodach kynges of Babylon.
               
               
                  Folio .xx.
                  How the playe of Cheſſe was founde.
                  Salathiel of the lyne of Chryſt.
                  Seruius Tulius kynge of Rome.
                  Reguſar / Sabuſardach and Balthaſar kynges of Babylon.
                  Monarchia Perſarum.
                  Darius kynge of Babylon.
                  Cyrus emperour of Perſes.
                  Babylon was deſtroyed.
                  Tarquinus ſuperbus kynge of Rome.
                  Lucres a wyfe.
                  How the gouernaunce of Rome was chaunged after the kynges.
                  Hiſtoria libri Eſore.
                  zorobabell the duke.
                  Eſoras preeſt.
                  Cambyſes kynge of Perſes.
               
               
                  Folio .xxi.
                  Enereides & Darius kynges of Perſes
                  Abiuth of the lyne of Chryſt.
                  Ioachim byſſhop.
                  Senatours of Rome were ordeyned.
                  Arthararſes & zerſes kynges of Perſe.
                  Segdianus kynge of Perſe.
                  Elyac of the lyne of Chryſt.
                  Eſoras an holy man.
                  Neemias the butler.
                  Permenides / Socrates / Democritus / and Ypocras philoſophers.
                  Azor of the lyne of Chryſt.
                  Elyaſyb byſſhop.
                  Camillus dictator of Rome.
                  Darius kynge of Perſe.
                  
                     
Plato a phyloſopher.
                  Titus dictator of Rome.
                  Gayus a Senatour.
                  Marcus Valerius a Senatour.
                  Artaxerſes / Arſamus / & Darius kynges of Perſe.
                  Iodas and Iohannes byſſhoppes.
                  Ariſtoteles & Socrates philoſophers.
                  Guentholen / Seyſell / kymor / Howan / 
                  Morwith kynges of Brytayne.
               
               
                  Folio .xxij.
                  Grandobodiam / Artogaill / and Heſyder kynges of Brytayne.
                  How .xxxiij. kynges regned in peas eche after other in Brytayne.
                  Lud kynge of Brytayne.
                  Sadoch of the lyne of Chryſt.
                  Iudas byſſhop.
               
               
                  Folio .xxiij.
                  Eneas byſſhop.
                  Manilius & Fabius Conſules of Rome.
                  Monarchia Grecorum.
                  Alexander kynge.
                  Achym of the lyne of Chryſt.
                  Symon and Eleazarus byſſhoppes.
                  Dolobella / Emilius / Marcus / Curius / 
                  Genutius Conſules of Rome.
                  Ptholomeus kynge of Egypte.
                  Eliud of the lyne of Chryſt.
                  Omias and Symon byſſhoppes.
                  Sempronius / Appius / Claudius / and many moo Senatours of Rome.
                  Ptholomeus kynge of Egypte.
                  Hanyball kynge of Penorum.
               
               
                  Folio .xxiiij.
                  Lucacius / Simpronius / Valerius &c.
                  
                  were Conſules at Rome.
                  Epiphanes kynge of Egypte.
                  Antrochus kynge of Syrre.
                  Ouias and Symon byſſhoppes.
                  Eleazar of the lyne of Chryſt.
                  Onias byſſhop.
                  Paulus / Scipio / Senatours of Rome.
                  Philometor kynge of Egypte.
                  Mathathias an holy man.
                  Iudas Machabeus and Ionathas his brother byſſhoppes.
                  Antiochus kynge of Syrry.
                  Quintꝰ Marchus and Tiberius were Senatours of Rome.
                  Mathon of the lyne of Chryſt.
                  Symon and Iohannes byſſhoppes.
                  Publius / Lucius / Lucius and Lucius Senatours of Rome.
               
               
                  Folio .xxv.
                  Ptholomeus kynge of Egypte.
                  Ariſtobolus kynge and preeſt.
                  Alexander byſſhop.
                  Seruius / Lucius / Fabius Senatours of Rome.
                  Ptholomeus kynge of Egypte.
                  Iacob of the lyne of Chryſt.
                  Alexandra wyfe and byſſhop.
                  Hircanus kynge of Iewes.
                  Virgyll the grete poete.
                  Oratius and Saluſtius hiſtoricus.
                  Quintus & Gayus Conſules of Rome.
                  Pompeius / Marcus / and Iulius were dictatours of Rome.
               
               
                  Folio .xxvj.
                  Cathon phyloſopher.
                  Caſſybolon kynge of Englonde.
                  Andragen kynge of Englonde.
                  Ioſeph of the lyne of Chryſt.
                  Anthigonus byſſhop.
               
               
                  Folio .xxvij.
                  Titus Liuius and Ouidius hiſtoricus.
                  Octauyan emperour.
                  The huſbondes of ſaynt Anne.
                  Herode Aſcolonita kynge of Iewes.
                  Kymbalyn kynge of Englonde.
               
            
            
               ¶ Here begynneth ye fourth parte / & contynueth vnto ye comynge of ye Saxons.
               
                  Folio .xxvij.
                  The Natiuite of Chryſt.
               
               
                  Folio .xxviij.
                  Anninꝰ Rufus / and Valerius Gracius byſſhoppes.
                  Pylatus the Iudge.
                  
                     
Of Pylates natiuite.
                  Ouidius Naſo.
                  Tiberius emperour.
                  Mathia the apoſtle.
                  Iudas Scaryoth.
               
               
                  Folio .xxix.
                  The makynge of the Credo.
                  The foure euangelyſtes.
                  Peter the fyrſt pope.
                  Gayus emperour.
                  Gynder kynge of Englonde.
               
               
                  Folio .xxx.
                  Armager kynge of Englonde.
                  Weſtmer kynge of Englonde.
                  Coyll kynge of Englonde.
               
               
                  Folio .xxxj.
                  Claudius emperour.
                  Iames the more the apoſtle.
                  Nero emperour.
                  Seneca Neroes mayſter.
                  Iuuenalis and Lucanus poetes.
                  Iames the leſſe the apoſtle.
                  Linus a martyr and pope.
                  Galba emperour.
                  Otho emperour.
                  Vitellus emperour.
                  Vaſpaſianus emperour.
                  Cletus a martyr and pope.
                  Titus emperour.
               
               
                  Folio .xxxij.
                  Domician emperour.
                  Clemens a martyr and pope.
                  Nerua emperour.
                  Traianus emperour.
                  Anacletus a martyr and pope.
                  Plinius Orator.
                  Euariſtus a martyr and pope.
                  Alexander a martyr and pope.
                  Sixtus a martyr and pope.
                  Adrianus and Euſtachius emperours.
                  Theleſphorus a martyr and pope.
               
               
                  Folio .xxxiij.
                  Ignius a martyr and pope.
                  Anthonius emperour.
                  Pompeius hyſtoriographus.
                  Pius a martyr and pope.
                  Anicetus a martyr and pope.
                  Galienus a leche.
                  Marcus and Lucius emperours.
                  Lucie kynge of Englonde.
                  Aſclepades kynge of Englonde.
                  Coyll kynge of Englonde.
               
               
                  Folio .xxxiiij.
                  Conſtance kynge of Englonde.
                  Conſtantyne kynge of Englonde.
                  Octauyan kynge of Englonde.
                  Maximyan kynge of Englonde.
               
               
                  Folio .xxxv.
                  Of the .xj. thouſande virgyns.
                  Gracian kynge of Englonde.
               
               
                  Folio .xxxvj.
                  Conſtantyne kynge of Englonde.
                  Conſtance kynge of Englonde.
                  Sother a martyr and pope.
                  Eleutherius a martyr and pope.
               
               
                  Folio .xxxvij.
                  Marcus Anthonius and Lucius Comodius were emperours.
                  Helius emperour.
                  Victor a martyr and pope.
                  zepherinus a martyr and pope.
                  Origenes the noble clerke.
                  Caliſtus a martyr and pope.
                  Anthonuis emperour.
                  Anthonius Marcus emperour.
                  Alyſaunder emperour.
                  Vrbanus a martyr and pope.
                  Poncianus a martyr and pope.
                  Anteros a martyr and pope.
                  Maximianus emperour.
                  Gordian emperour.
                  Phylyp emperour.
                  Decius emperour.
                  Fabianus a martyr and pope.
                  Cornelius a martyr and pope.
                  Lucius pope.
                  Gallus and V
                        〈…〉
                     ſianus emperours.
                  Valerian emperour.
                  Stephanus a martyr and pope.
                  Sixtus a martyr and pope.
                  
                     
Dionyſius a martyr and pope.
               
               
                  Folio .xxxviij.
                  Felix a martyr and pope.
                  Claudius emperour.
                  Euticianus a martyr and pope.
                  Aurelius emperour.
                  Tacitus emperour.
                  Probus emperour.
                  Carus and his two ſones emperours.
                  Diocleſyan emperour.
                  Maximyan emperour.
                  Gaius pope and martyr.
                  Arcellinus a martyr and pope.
                  Marcellus a martyr and pope.
                  Euſebius a martyr and pope.
                  Melchiades a martyr and pope.
                  Galerius emperour.
                  Silueſter pope.
                  Conſtantyne emperour.
                  Saynt Nycolas.
                  Anaſtaſius byſſhop / & he made Quicuu
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vult ſaluus eſſe.
                  Marcus pope.
                  Iulius pope.
                  Conſtantinus emperour.
               
               
                  Folio .xxxix.
                  Liberius pope.
                  Felix pope.
                  Iulianus apoſtata emperour.
                  Iominianus emperour.
                  Valentinian emperour.
                  Damacius pope.
                  Valens emperour.
                  Auguſtinus rethoricus.
                  Siritius pope.
                  Theodoſius emperour.
                  Claudius poeta.
                  Arcadius emperour.
                  Honorius emperour.
                  Iherom the doctour.
                  Saynt Heracidus.
                  Iohannes Criſoſtomus.
                  Anaſtaſius pope.
                  Innocencius pope.
                  zozimus pope.
               
               
                  Folio .xl.
                  Bonifacius pope.
                  Celeſtinus pope.
                  Theodoſius emperour.
                  Sixtus and Leo popes.
                  Marcianus and Valentinianus emperours.
               
            
            
               ¶ Here begynneth the .v. parte / & contynueth vnto the comynge of the Daues.
               
                  Folio .xl.
                  Engyſt.
               
               
                  Folio .xlj.
                  Vortiger kynge of Englonde.
                  Vortimer kynge of Englonde.
               
               
                  Folio .xliij.
                  Aurilambros kynge of Englonde.
               
               
                  Folio .xlv.
                  Vterpendragon kynge of Englonde.
               
               
                  Folio .xlvij.
                  Arthur kynge of Englonde.
               
               
                  Folio .lij.
                  Conſtantyne.
                  Adelbryght.
                  Edell / all kynges of Englonde.
               
               
                  Folio .liij.
                  Curan.
                  Conan.
                  Cortyf.
                  Gurmonde / all kynges of Englonde.
               
               
                  Folio .liiij.
                  Adelbryght.
                  Sicwith.
                  Elfryde.
                  Brecinall / all kynges of Englonde.
               
               
                  Folio .lv.
                  Cadewan.
                  Oſwalde.
                  Oſwy.
                  Edwyn.
                  Cadwalyn / all kynges of Englonde.
               
               
                  Folio .lvj.
                  Cadwaldre kynge of Englonde.
               
               
                  Folio .lvij.
                  Offa.
                  
                     
Oſbryght.
                  Ell / all kynges of Englonde.
               
               
                  Folio .lviij.
                  Saynt Edmonde.
                  Edelf.
                  Eidred / all kynges of Englonde.
               
            
            
               ¶ Here begynneth the popes and emperours & other notable thȳges in ye tyme of the Saxons beynge in Englonde.
               
                  Folio .lviij.
                  Leo the fyrſt emperour.
                  Leo pope.
                  Hilarius pope.
                  Simplicius pope.
                  zeno emperour.
                  Felix pope.
                  Gelacius pope.
                  Anaſtaſius emperour.
                  Anaſtaſius pope.
                  Simachus pope.
               
               
                  Folio .lix.
                  Clodianus kynge of Fraunce.
                  Hornuſda pope.
                  Iuſtinus emperour.
                  Priſcianus grammaticus.
                  Iohannes pope.
                  Felix the fourth pope.
                  Iuſtinianus emperour.
                  Bonifacius pope.
                  Iohannes the ſeconde pope.
                  Agapitus a confeſſour pope.
                  Siluerius a martyr pope.
                  Virgilius pope.
                  Synodus quarta.
                  Pelagius pope.
                  Iohannes the thyrde pope.
                  Iuſtinus the ſeconde emperour.
                  Tyberius the ſeconde emperour.
                  Benedictus pope.
                  Pelagius emperour.
                  Maurcius emperour.
               
               
                  Folio .lx.
                  In what tyme ſaynt Auſtyn came in to Englonde.
                  Focas emperour.
                  Gregorius the fyrſt pope.
                  Sauinianus pope.
                  Bonifacius the thyrde pope.
                  Bonifacius the fourth pope.
                  Heraclius emperour.
                  Deus dedit pope.
                  Bonifacius the fyfth pope.
                  Machomyte the duke of ſaraſyns.
               
               
                  Folio .lxj.
                  Conſtantyne the thyrde emperour.
                  Martinus the fyrſt pope.
                  Eugenius pope.
                  Vitellianus pope.
                  Adeodatus pope.
                  Conſtantyne the fourth emperour.
                  Demus a Romayn pope.
                  Bonifacius pope.
                  Agatho pope.
                  Leo pope.
                  Benedictus the ſeconde pope.
                  Iuſtinianus the ſeconde emperour.
               
               
                  Folio .lxij.
                  Iohannes the fyfth pope.
                  zeno pope.
                  Sergius pope.
                  Saynt Beda.
                  Leo the ſeconde pope.
                  Liberius emperour.
                  Leo the thyrde pope.
                  Iohannes the ſyxth pope.
                  Iohannes the ſeuenth pope.
                  Iuſtinianus emperour.
                  Syſinius pope.
                  Conſtantyne pope.
                  Phylyp the ſeconde emperour.
                  Anaſtaſius the ſeconde emperour.
                  Gregorius the ſeconde pope.
                  Theodoſius emperour.
               
               
                  Folio .lxiij.
                  Leo and Conſtantyne emperours.
                  Gregorius the thyrde pope.
                  Conſtantinus emperour.
                  zacharias pope.
                  Stephanus the ſeconde pope.
                  
                     
Paulus a Romayn pope.
                  Conſtantyne the ſeconde pope.
                  Karolus magnus.
                  Stephanus the thyrde pope.
                  Adrianus pope.
                  Leo the fourth pope.
                  Conſtantinus emperour.
               
               
                  Folio .lxiiij.
                  Nichoferus emperour.
                  Michael emperour.
                  Karolus magnus the fyrſt / a ſaynt.
                  Leo pope.
                  Ludouicus emperour.
                  Stephanus the fourth pope.
                  Paſcall pope.
                  Eugenius the fourth pope.
                  Vaientinus pope.
                  Gregorius the fourth pope.
                  Lotherius pope.
                  Sergius the ſeconde pope.
                  Leo pope.
                  Benedictus a Romayn pope.
               
               
                  Folio .lxv.
                  Ludouicus emperour.
                  Iohannes a woman pope.
                  Nicolaus pope.
                  Adrianus pope.
               
            
            
               ¶ Here begynneth the .vj. parte / & cōtynueth vnto ye comynge of ye Normans.
               
                  Folio .lxv.
                  Alured kynge of Englonde.
               
               
                  Folio .lxvj.
                  Iohannes the .viij. pope.
                  Karolus the ſeconde emperour.
                  Martinus pope.
                  Adrianus the thyrde pope.
                  Stephanus the fyfth pope.
                  Karolus the thyrde emperour.
                  Arnulphus emperour.
                  Formoſus pope.
                  Bonifacius pope.
                  Stephanus the ſyxth pope.
                  Iohannes the .ix. and .x. popes.
                  Theodorus pope.
                  Iohannes the .xj. pope.
                  Benedictus the fourth pope.
                  Leo pope.
                  Chriſtoferus the fyrſt pope.
                  Ludouicus the thyrde emperour.
                  Beringarius & Conradus emperours.
                  Edward kynge of Englonde.
                  Sergius the thyrde pope.
                  Anaſtaſius pope.
                  Laudo and Iohannes popes.
               
               
                  Folio .lxvij.
                  Henricus emperour.
                  Adelſtone kynge of Englonde.
                  Edmond kynge of Englonde.
                  Eldred kynge of Englonde.
                  Edwyn kynge of Englonde.
                  Leo the ſyxth pope.
                  Stephanus the .vij. and .viij. popes.
                  Martinus the thyrde pope.
                  Agapitus pope.
                  Iohannes the .xij. pope.
               
               
                  Folio .lxviij.
                  Edgar kynge of Englonde.
               
               
                  Folio .lxviij.
                  Beringarius the thyrde emperour.
                  Lotharius emperour.
                  Beringarius the fourth emperour.
                  Leo the .viij. pope.
                  Iohannes the .xiij. pope.
                  Benedictus the ſyxth pope.
                  Otto the fyrſt emperour.
                  Otto the ſeconde emperour.
               
               
                  Folio .lxix.
                  Of ſaynt Edwarde kynge of Englonde and martyr.
                  Eldrede kynge of Englonde.
                  Swyne kyng of Englonde and of Denmarke.
                  Bonus pope.
                  Bonifacius pope.
                  Benedictus pope.
                  Iohannes the. xiiij .xv. and .xvj. popes.
                  Gregorius the .v. pope.
               
               
                  Folio .lxx.
                  Otto the thyrde emperour.
                  
                     
Silueſter the ſeconde pope.
                  Iohannes the .xviij. and .xix. popes.
                  Henricus the fyrſt emperour.
                  Benedictus pope.
                  Iohannes the .xx. pope.
                  Knoght kynge of Englonde.
                  Edmond Irenſyde kynge of Englonde.
               
               
                  Folio .lxxj.
                  Knought kynge of Englonde.
                  Benedictus the .ix. pope.
               
               
                  Folio .lxxij.
                  Conradus emperour.
                  Harolde kynge of Englonde.
                  Hardyknoght kynge of Englonde.
                  Of the vylany that the Danes dyd vnto the Englyſſhmen.
                  Of Godewyn the fals traytour.
                  Alured martyr.
               
               
                  Folio .lxxiij.
                  Silueſter the thyrde pope.
                  Damaſius the ſeconde pope.
               
               
                  Folio .lxxiij.
                  Saynt Edwarde kynge of Englonde and confeſſour.
               
               
                  Folio .lxxv.
                  Victor the ſeconde pope.
                  Henry the ſeconde emperour.
                  Stephanus the .ix. pope.
                  Benedictus pope.
                  Henricus the thyrde emperour.
                  Nicolaus the ſeconde pope.
                  Alexander the ſeconde pope.
                  Harolde kynge of Englonde.
               
            
            
               ¶ Here begynneth the .vij. parte / & contynueth vnto our dayes / that is to ſaye vnto kyng Edwardes regue the fourth the .xxiij. yere.
               
                  Folio .lxxv.
                  Wyllyam conquerour.
               
               
                  Folio .lxxvj.
                  Gregorius the .vij. pope.
                  Victor the thyrde pope.
                  Vrbanus pope.
               
               
                  Folio .lxxvij.
                  Wyllyam Rous kynge of Englonde.
                  Paſcall pope.
               
               
                  Folio .lxxvij.
                  Henry Beauclerke kynge of Englonde.
               
               
                  Folio .lxxviij.
                  Henricus the fourth emperour.
                  Gelaſius pope.
                  Calixtus pope.
               
               
                  Folio .lxxix.
                  Honorius pope.
                  Lotharius emperour.
                  Hugo de ſancto Victore.
                  The ordre of ſaynt Iohn Baptyſt.
                  Innocentius pope.
               
               
                  Folio .lxxix.
                  Stephen kynge of Englonde.
               
               
                  Folio .lxxx.
                  Celeſtinus the ſeconde pope.
                  Lucius pope.
                  Eugenius the ſeconde pope.
                  Petrus Lombardus byſſhop.
                  Petrus Cōmeſtor.
                  Fredericus the fyrſt emperour.
                  Anaſtaſius pope.
               
               
                  Folio .lxxx.
                  Henry the ſeconde kynge of Englonde.
               
               
                  Folio .lxxxj.
                  Adrianus the fourth pope.
                  Alexander the thyrde pope.
                  Lucius the thyrde pope.
                  Vrbanus the thyrde pope.
                  Gregorius the .viij. pope.
                  Clemens the thyrde pope.
               
               
                  Folio .lxxxi.
                  Rychard the fyrſt kynge of Englonde.
               
               
                  Folio .lxxxii.
                  Henricus the fyfth emperour.
                  Celeſtinus the thyrde pope.
                  Innocentius the thyrde pope.
                  Wyllyam of Parys.
                  Franciſcus an Ytalyan.
               
               
                  Folio .lxxxij.
                  Iohn kynge of Englonde.
               
               
                  Folio .lxxxvij.
                  Fredericus the ſeconde emperour.
                  
                     
Honorius the thyrde pope.
               
               
                  Folio .lxxxvij.
                  Henry the thyrde kynge of Englonde.
               
               
                  Folio .lxxxix.
                  Gregory the .ix. pope.
                  Celeſtinus the fourth pope.
                  Innotentius the fourth pope.
               
               
                  Folio .ixxxx.
                  Thomas de Aquino.
                  Albertus magnus.
                  Euſtacius.
                  Bonauenture.
                  Alexander pope.
                  Vrbanus pope.
                  Richardus emperour.
                  Clemens the fourth pope.
                  Gregorius the .x. pope.
                  Innocentuis the .v. pope.
                  Adrianus pope.
                  Iohannes the .xxi. pope.
                  Nicolaus the thyrde pope.
                  Rodulphus emperour.
                  Martinus the fourth pope.
                  Nicolaus de lyra.
                  Honorius the fourth pope.
                  Nicolaus the fourth pope.
               
               
                  Folio .lxxxx.
                  Edwarde the fyrſt kynge of Englonde.
               
               
                  Folio .lxxxxvij.
                  Celeſtinus pope.
                  Bonifacius pope.
                  Benedictus the .xj. pope.
                  Adulphus emperour.
                  Albertus emperour.
                  Clemens pope.
                  Iohannes the .xxij. pope.
                  Henry the ſyxth emperour.
               
               
                  Folio .lxxxxvij.
                  Edward the ſecōde kynge of Englande.
               
               
                  Folio .C .ix.
                  Ludouicus emperour.
                  Iohn Mandeuyll a doctour of phyſyke and a knyght.
                  Benedictus pope.
               
               
                  Folio .C .ix.
                  Edward the thyrde kynge of Englonde
               
               
                  Folio .C .xxxij.
                  Clemens the ſyxth pope.
                  Karolus the fourth emperour.
                  Innocentius the ſyxth pope.
                  Vrbanus the fyfth pope.
                  Gregorius the .xj. pope.
                  Wenſelaus emperour.
                  Vrbanus pope.
               
               
                  Folio .C .xxxiij.
                  Bonifacius the .ix. pope.
                  Rychard the ſecond kynge of Englonde
               
               
                  Folio .C .xl.
                  Innocentius the .vij. pope.
                  Robert emperour.
                  Iohannes the .xxiij. pope.
                  Sigiſmundus emperour.
               
               
                  Folio .C .xl.
                  Henry the fourth kynge of Englonde.
               
               
                  Folio .C .xliiij.
                  Martyn the fyfth pope.
                  Eugemus pope.
               
               
                  Folio .C .xliiij.
                  Henry the fyfth kynge of Englonde.
               
               
                  Folio .C .lj.
                  Felix the fyfth pope.
                  Albertus emperour.
                  Fredericus the thyrde emperour.
                  Nicolas the fyfth pope.
               
               
                  Folio .C .lj.
                  Henry the ſyxth kynge of Englonde.
               
               
                  Folio .C .lxij.
                  Calixtus the thyrde pope.
                  Where pryntynge of bokes fyrſt began.
                  Pius the ſeconde pope.
               
               
                  Folio .C .lxiij.
                  Paulus a venycyan pope.
                  Sixtus the fourth pope.
               
               And in the latter ende of theſe preſent Cronycles ben y• deſcripcions of Englonde / Wales / Scotlonde & Irlonde.
            
            ¶ Thus endeth the table of this boke.
         
      
      
         
            
               
                  
                  The prologue.
                  
                     IN ſo moche yt it is neceſſary to all creatures of chryſten relygion / or of fals religyon or gen tyles & machomytes to knowe theyr prynce or pryces yt regne vpon them / & them to obey. So it is cō
                     modyous to knowe theyr noble actes & dedes / & the circūſtaūce of theyr lyues. Therfore in ye yere of our lorde. M .cccc .lxxxiij. the .xxij. yere of ye regne of kynge Edward the fourth at ſaynt Albons / ſo that all men may know ye actes namely of our noble kynges of englonde / is com pyled togyder this boke / & more ouer is trāſlated out of latyn in to englyſſhe / fro the begȳnynge of ye worlde / the lignage of Chryſt from Adā tyll it be comen to Da uid / & fro Dauid / the kynges of iſrael & of iewes / ye hye bys;ſhops in theyr dayes with ye iudges & ꝓphetes. The .iiij. princypall realines of the worlde / yt is to ſay Babylon / Perce / Grece / & Rome / & all ye emperours of Rome & popes by ordre / & theyr names: & many a notable fader: wt certayne of theyr actes / as more playnly enſueth. And here ben reherſed ye names of ye auctours yt trāſlated theſe cronycles ſpecially. Geffray Nūmoth mon ke in his boke of Brute / ſaynt Bede in ye actes of englonde. Alſo Bede in his boke of tymes. Gyldas in ye actes of Britayn. Willyam Malineſbury mōke in ye actes of kynges of englond & byſſhops. Caſſiderꝰ of ye actes of emperours & byſſhops Saynt Auſtin de ci. dei. Citꝰ Liuius de geſtis romano
                        
                           
                        
                        rum
                     . Martyn penitency ary to ye pope in his cronycles of emperours & byſſhops / & namely Theobaldus cartuſienſis cōteynynge in his boke ye progreſſe of all notable faders / fro ye begynnynge of ye worlde vnto our tyme / wt the notable actes of ye ſame. ¶ In this new trāſlacyon are cōteyned many notable & meruaylous thinges / & thoſe ben alledged by auctoryte of many famous 
                        ••••
                     
                     kes. And yt euery man may knowe how theſe cronycles bē ordred / ye ſhal vnderſtande yt this boke is deuyded in to .vij. partes. Of ye whiche the fyrſt parte con teyneth from Adam tyll Brute came in to Britayne. The ſeconde parte cōteyneth frō Brute came fyrſt in to englonde vnto the cite of Rome was buylded by Romulꝰ. The thyrde parte cōteyneth ſyth Rome was buylded vnto Chryſt was borne of our lady virgyn Marye. The fourth parte frō thens vnto ye comynge of ye ſaxons in to englonde: The .v. parte from thens vnto the comyng of danes. The .vj. parte frō thens vnto ye comynge of ye normans. The .v. parte fro ye normans vnto our tyme / which is vnder ye regne of kyng Edwarde ye fourth. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . yere / whoſe noble cronycles by cuſtome may not be ſeen. ¶ And ſo in euery part of theſe .vij. partyes be ſhewed ye mooſt and neceſſary actes of all the kynges of englonde / & theyr names wryten aboue in ye margent / yt euery man may fynde them ſoone. And afore ye kynges of englondes actes ben wryten / there is wry-ten ye lignage of Chryſt frō Adam tyll y• chryſt was borne of our lady wt the hye byſſhops & iudges yt were in ye tyme & certayne of theyr actes neceſſary tyll it be comen where Chryſt was borne & after that chryſt was borne & Peter was pope of Rome / is ſhewed by ordre ye names of all ye popes & emperours of Rome afore & after / with certayne of theyr actes breuyately / & many other dyuets thynges & meruayles in thoſe mennes dayes fallynge. And it is ſhewed euery thȳge in his place / how many yere it fei after ye begynnynge of ye worlde / & how lōge afore y• Chryſt was borne / & whan y• I come to Chryſt was borne / thā it is wrytē how lōge any thynge fell after ye Natyuite of Chryſt. And this is ye ordre of this boke / & of thynges ſpoken of.
                  
                     
ANd as to men deſyryng to haue a very knowlege of theſe cronycles or of ony other / it is neceſſary to knowe .vj. thynges. ¶ The fyrſt is ye ſtates of thynges / & thoſe bē two. One is fro ye begynnynge of ye worlde vnto Chryſt / ye whiche is called the ſtate of deuiacyon. The ſeconde is frō Chryſt to ye ende of ye worlde / the whiche is called the ſtate of reconſtliacyon. ¶ The ſecōde thynge is the diuyſyon of tymes / & thoſe ben thre. One is afore the lawe of Moyſes / & an other is vnder the lawe of Moyſes / an other is vnder the lawe of grace after Chryſt dyed. ¶ The thyrde is ye gouernyng of kyngdomes. And as for that ye muſt knowe / yt though there were foure prȳcipal kyngdomes / that is to ſaye / of Babilon / of Perſees / of Grekes / & of Romaynes. Neuertheleſſe as to ye courſe of the worlde / & ye ordre of holy ſcripture / ye fyrſt gouernyng was vnder faders / frō Adam vnto Moyſes. The ſecōde vnder iudges / from Moyſes vnto Saul. The thyrde vnder kȳges from Saul vnto zō
                     robabel. The fourth vnder biſſhops / frō zorobabel vnto Chryſt. ¶ The fourth is ye dyuerſite of lawes / & thoſe were fyue. The fyrſt was ye lawe of nature / & that was comyn to all men. The ſecōde is ye lawe or cuſtome of gentyles / whan yt vnder kynge Nyno began ye people to worſhyp falſe goddes. The thyrde is vnder the lawe wryten roſe the lawe of iewes / whan circūcyſyon deuyded ye iewes frō other peple. The fourth is vnder chryſt roſe ye lawe of chriſten men / whan fayth and grace of ye ſacramentes enformed ye lyfe of men. The fyfth is vnder Machomet roſe the lawe of ſaraſyns & turkes. ¶ The fyfth is the nobleneſſe or vnnoblenes in dedes. And as to theſe / it is to knowe that .vij. perſones ben redde / of whome the dedes many tymes are had in mynde in hyſtoryes. That is to wyte of a prynce in his realme / of a knyght in batayle / of a iudge in his place / of a byſſhop in the clergye / of a polytyke man in the people / of an huſbond man in the hous / & of an abbot in his chirche. And of theſe are wryten many tymes / the laudes of good men / and the punyſſhementes of the curſed men. ¶ The ſyxth is the true countynge of the yeres. And to that / it is to be knowen yt there were viij. maner of nombrynge or countynge of the yeres. Thre after the Hebrewes. Thre after the Grekes. One of the Romayns. And one now is after the chryſten men. The Hebrewes thre maner of wyſe begynneth theyr yere. After the Hebrewes there is the yere vſuall begynnynge at Ianuary / ye whiche they vſe in couenauntes and bargeyns makyng. And the yere leyfull begynnynge at Marche / the whiche they vſe in theyr cerymonyes. And the yere Emergens from Maye begynnynge / whan they wente from Egypte / they vſe in theyr cronycles & calculacyons. ¶ The Grekes nōbreth theyr yeres thre maner of wyſe. Fyrſt to the glory & Ioye of theyr victory coūteth theyr yeres from the deſtruccyon of Troye. The fyrſt / y• ſecond / the thyrde / and the fourth. &c. ¶ Than after the chyualry began at the hyll of Olympus they notyfyed ye yeres after the ſame Olimpiadū. And what Olimpiades is / ye ſhall knowe after in the boke. The thyrde whan they began to haue lordſhyp of all the worlde they notifyed theyr yeres theſe maner of wyſe. In the yere of the regne of Grekes / the fourth / the .x. the .xv. &c. as it is open in the boke of Machabeo
                        
                           
                        
                        rum
                     . ¶ Than after the Romayns gouernynge the worlde / coūted & nōbred theyr yeres (ab vrbe con dita). ¶ The laſt of all chryſtē men coū
                     teth theyr yeres from ye Incarnacyon of Chryſt. And bycauſe we bē chryſtē men

we vſe mooſt to nombre / from ye begynnynge of the worlde vnto Chryſt was borne. And fro Chryſt was borne vnto our tyme. And this ordre is obſerued & kepte in all the boke / of euery thynge in his place / as is ſayd before.
                  ¶ Explicit prologus.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     ¶ Hic incipit fructus temporum.
                     
                        BYcauſe of theſe bokes made to tell what tyme of ony thȳ
                        ge notable was. Therfore ye begȳnynge of al tymes ſhortly ſhal be touched. For the whiche after doctours it is to be knowen / that foure thinges were made fyrſt / & in one tyme & of one age / that is to wyte / the heuen imperyall / aungels nature / the matere of the foure elemētes / & tyme. And that doctours call werke of the creacion / the whiche was made (afore ony daye or nyght) of ye myghty power of god / and was made of nothynge. ¶ Than after foloweth ye werke of diuyſyon / the whiche was made in thre of ye fyrſt dayes / in whiche is ſhewed ye hygh wyſdome of the maker. ¶ Than after foloweth ye arayenge of this werke / in ye whiche is ſhewed the goodnes of the creatour / the whiche was made thre of ye nexte daye folowyng. Vt patet clare in textu gen̄ .j. ¶ The fyrſt daye god made & deuyded the lyght from the derknes. ¶ The ſeconde daye god made & ordeyned the firmament / & diuyded the water from the water. ¶ The thyrde daye god made in the whiche he gadered the waters in to one place / and the erth tho appered. ¶ The fourth daye god made / in ye whiche daye he ordeyned ye ſonne / the mone and the ſterres / & put them in ye fyrmament. ¶ The fyfth daye god made / in the whiche he ordeyned fyſſhes & foules / & grete whales in ye water. ¶ The ſyxth daye god ordeyned / in the whiche he made beeſt & man. ¶ The .vij. daye god made / & in yt day he reſted of all werkes that he had ordeyned / not as in werkyng beynge wery / but he ceaſed to make mo newe creatures. Vide 
                           pl’a
                           plura
                         ge
                           •
                         .j.
                     VNderſtande ye that Adam the fyrſt man / of whome it is wryten in this fyrſt age nexte folowynge lyued .ix. hondred yere and .xxx. And gate xxxij. ſones / and as many doughters.
                     
                        ¶ Anno mundi primo. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatem .v. M .C .lxxxxix.
                        ¶ Here begynneth the fyrſt age durynge vnto the flode of Noe.

                              Adam Eua.
                           
                        
                        
                           IN the fyrſt yere of ye worlde the ſyxth day god made and formed Adam in the felde da maſtene / & Eua of his tybbes / puttyng them in paradyſe / & bade them to kepe his cōmaundement / that they ſholde not ete of ye fruyte of lyfe vnder the payne of deth. And ye ſame daye yt they had ſynned / anone he caſt them out of paradyſe in to ye lōde of curſednes that they ſholde lyue there wt ſwerynge & ſorowe tyll they dyed. Vide 
                              pl’a
                              plura
                            ge
                              •
                           . 
                              〈◊〉
                           . ¶ This Adam was an holy man all y• dayes of his lyfe / grete penan̄ce dayly he dyd. And he cōmaūded his chyldren to lyue ryghtwylly / & namely that they

ſholde auoyde in all wyſe from the company of Cayn & his chyldren. Nor that they ſhold not mary with none of them ¶ This mā Adam was our fyrſt fader & for one ſynne put vs out of paradyſe. But through his holy cōuerſacion & penaūce / he gaue vs enſample to come to the kyngdome of heuen. And he yt wyll not folowe his holy cōuerſacion & example for one ſynne / ryghtwyſly he can not complayne on hym / as we doo many. ¶ Seth ſone to Adam was borne after the begynnynge of ye worlde .C. and. xxx yeres / & lyued .ix .C. and .xij. But Moyſes ouerſkypped an hondred of thoſe / in the whiche Abel wepte in ye vale of ploracion nygh Ebron. This Seth for the oyle of mercy to be goten went to paradyſe. ¶ Delbora was ſyſter to Abell. Abell was ſlayne of Cayn his broder. This Abell the fyrſt martyr began the chirche of god. This man after Auſtyn made ye cite of god / & he was ye fyrſt citezyn of yt cite. And bycauſe he was right wyſe / our lorde receyued his offrynge. ¶ Calmana was wyfe to Cayn. This Cayn was a curſed man / & he made the fyrſt erthly cite that euer in this worlde was / in yt whiche he put his people for drede / in ſo moche as he vſed rauyne & violence. For he truſted ſuche thynge to be done to hym as he dyd to other / therfore he put hym and his in to a ſure place. This man ſlewe his broder Abel for enuye / and he was punyſſhed of god / & wandred aboute in deſpayre. And was ſlayne of Lameth a blynde man.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mūdi. iiij .C .xxxv. Et ante xp̄i natiuitatem .iiij. M .ix .C. lxxiiij.
                        ENos of the lyne of Chryſt lyued ix .C. yere & .v. And began to call the name of our lorde. It myght happe he foūde ſome wordes of prayer / or made ſome ymages for god to be worſhypped as now is in the chirche. Chanam lyued after .ix .C. yere and .x.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno muudi. vij .C .lxxxxv. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatē .iiij. M. iiij .C .iiij.
                        MAlaleel of the lyne of Chryſt lyued. viij .C. & .lxxxxv. yere. Iareth of ye lyne lyued .ix .C. lxij. ¶ Enoch of ye ſame lyne lyued. iij .C. yere .lxv. and was a ryghtwyſe man & pleaſed god. And for his grete holynes our lord trāſlated hym in to paradyſe / where he lyueth wt Hely in grete reſt of body & ſoule tyll the comynge of Antechryſt. Than they ſhall go forth for the cōfortacyon of good men. And they ſhall be crowned wt the crowne of martyrdome.
                        MAtuſale of Chryſtes lyne lyued ix .C .lxix. yere. And was ye oldeſt man yt euer ony ſcripture hath mȳde of. For whan he had lyued nygh .v .C. yere our lorde ſayd to hȳ. Buylde ye an hous & thou wylt / for yet thou ſhalt lyue fyue hondred yere. And he anſwered & ſayd. For ſo lytell a tyme as .v. hondred yere I wyll buylde no hous. But reſted vnder trees and hedges / and there ſlepte / as he was wont to do for a tyme.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mundi. M. iiij .C .liiij. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatē .iij. M. vij .C .xlv.
                        LAmeth was of the age of .vii. C lxxvij. yere. This Lameth was the firſt agaynſt nature & good maners that ordeyned yt a man might haue two wyues in doynge his auoutry. And he was ſore puniſſhed of thē / for they gaue hȳ many a ſtrype. For it is ſo yt by what thynge a man ſynned / by the ſame he is punyſſhed. This Lameth ſlewe Cayn not wylfully. But whan he was olde & blynde he was ladde of achylde ye whiche

trowed yt he had ſeen a wylde beeſt / & ſayd to his mayſter yt he ſhold ſhote / & ſo he ſlewe Cayn / wherfore for anger he ſlewe the chylde alſo. ¶ And it is to be knowen that all craftes or ſcyences lyberal / or hande craftes / or of phiſyke ſeruynge to ye curioſite of man / are redde yt they were foūden in the children of Lameth. And for they dradde the peryll to come of the flode & of the fyre. Therfore Tuball graued the ſame craftes in two pyllers / the one was of marble / & that other of tyle or brycke. Tubal foūde firſt the crafte to werke gold & ſyluer & yren. And was the fyrſt grauer yt euer was. ¶ Iabe foūde fyrſt tētoria for ſhepeherdes / & pauylyons for other men. ¶ Iubal foūde fyrſt ye crafte to playe vpon an harpe & organs / & other muſycal inſtrumentes he vſed. ¶ Noema founde fyrſt the crafte for to weue lynnen & wollen cloth / & to drawe threde of woll & flaxe. And afore that tyme the people vſed the ſkynnes of beeſtes for theyr clothes.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mundi. M. vj .C .xlij. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatem .iij. M .v .C. lvij.
                        ¶Here begynneth the seconde age of the worlde durynge to Abraham. 

                              Noe.
                           
                        
                        THe ſhyppe of Noe had in length iij .C. cubytes / in brede .l. in altytude .xxx. Vide 
                              pl’a
                              plura
                            gen̄ .vj. ¶ Knowe ye after doctours / that a cōuenyent payne this tyme was ordeyned to the worlde. For than lechery haboūded the whiche defouled mennes bodyes. And there by water ye erth was waſſhed & clenſed / in ſygne of ye promeſſe yt god made to man that there ſholde neuer be ſuche a flode agayne. And the Raynbowe hath two prȳcypal colours / the whiche repreſent the two iudgementes. The water colour repreſenteth ye flode that is paſſed. The fyre colour betokeneth the iudgement to come / & fyre the whiche we certaynly abyde in the ende of this worlde bycauſe couetyſe ſhall haboūde / by fyre it ſhall be brente / as golde and ſyluer by the fyre is wonte to be clenſed.
                        
                           THis Noe was a rightwyſe man & foūde grace an
                              •
                           nſt god. Whan Noe was .v .c. yere of age he had goten Cham / Sem and Iaphet. That tyme by ye cōmaundement of god he began to make a ſhyppe / & he made it perfyte in an .C. yere / & the .C. yere cōplete our lorde appered agayne to hym & cō
                           maūded yt he wt his wyfe & his chyldren & ye wyues of them ſhold entre ye ſhyppe with all maner of beeſtes & al maner of foules alſo. &c. And anone ye flode came and ſtode aboue all hylles. 
                              •
                           v. cubytes. Vide plura gen̄ .vij. ¶ After the flode came grete dronkennes 
                              •
                           e
                              •
                           yd vnto Noe. And through the occaſion of that dronkēnes he blyſſed his two ſones Sem and Iaphet / for ye faders honour that they had to him / & for the honeſt ſhame that they couered mekely theyr faders membres whan he was ſlepynge. And his ſone Cham for his ſcornynge & his vnreuerence he curſed. ¶ And here after ſaynt Auſtyn is made ye fyrſt mencyon of bondage / and of noblenes cōtrary to it. For Noe ſayd that Cham ſholde be ſeruaūt in bondage to Sem and Iaphet for his

                           
                              •
                           ureuerence. Neuertheleſſe ye ſhall not trowe that all that deſcended of Cham were vnnoble men / & of no power. For they began fyrſt to be myghty men of ye erth. As it is open of Nemroth and the kynge of Chanaan & Aſtorum. Nor all of Sem & Iaphet were vertuous & noble & myghty men / whan almooſt euerychone fell vnto ye cryme of ydolatrye / and were oftentymes oppreſſed of other men. But this bleſſynge and this curſynge hath a reſpecte to vertue & vyce / for yt whiche a man is called truly a noble man or an vnnobleman. For he that is vertuous is a noble man / and he that is vnuertuous is not noble. The ſame maner of wyſe thoſe that foloweth the faythe of Abraham rather were called his chyldren than the Iewes / the whiche carnally deſcended from hym. Neuertheles they had a ſpirytuall preuylege of god for the faders merytes and his bleſſynge. And of theſe thre ſones of Noe he beynge alyue (after the hyſtory of Philoms) were borne .xxiiij. M. and an .C. men / without women and chyldren. And they had on them thre prynces / Nemroth / Iectan / and Sulphen.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mundi .ij. M. ij .C .xlij. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatē .ij. M. vj .C .lvij.
                        SEm ſone to Noe the ſeconde yere after the flode gate Arphaxat / & otherwhyle he is called Melchiſedech / the whiche fyrſt after ye flode made the cite of Salem / & now is called Iheruſalem. ¶ Cham his broder obteyned Afffricā / & gate two ſones / Chus & Meſraym / & theſe two gate ſones & doughters / and many a regyon they enhabyted vnknowen to vs in occidentall ynde. ¶ Iaphet was broder vnto Cham / and was blyſſed of his fader. And this Iaphet had ſeuen ſones / as Gomor / Magog / Maday / Ianam / Tubal / Moſog / and Iras. And theſe .vij. gate ſones & doughters / and of them came many a regyon. Vide plura geneſis .xv. ¶ Arphaxat ſoneto Sem lyued .CCC. and xxx. yere / and gate Elam / Aſſur / Lude / and Aram / & they gate many chyldren. Vt patet gene. ¶ This Aſſur bycauſe he wolde not rebell agaynſt god in the edyfyenge of the toure of Babylon / as Nemroth dyd / therfore he was dryuen vnto the londe of Sennaar londe / whiche was ryght ſtraūge to hym / & was not before enhabyted / the whiche was called after his name Aſſuria / and there he edyfyed a cite afterwarde named Ni niue / the whiche was the metropolytane of all the kyngdome of Aſſuriorū. ¶ Chus ſone vnto Cham was fader to Nemroth / this Nemroth was a gyaūt of .x. cubytes longe / and he began to be myghty in ye worlde / and he is called a boyſtous hunter before god. This man began that wretched vyce of couetouſnes by his tyranny / with yt whiche vice euermore after this worlde is fulfylled. And ye pryncypalleſt kyngdome that he had was Babylon / & he had Archade / Edyſſa / Selencia / & the londe of Sennaar. ¶ Sale ſone to Arphaxat lyued CCCC. and .xxxiij. yere / and of hym in ſcripture is nothynge wryten / but that Moyſes nombred hym in the lyne that cometh of Chryſt. This Sale ga
                              •
                           e a ſone that was named Heber / the whiche after the Hebrewes had the ſpiryte of prophecye. And of this Heber the Hebrewes ben named. For the Hebrewes tongue abode alone in his hous in ye confuſyon of the language. And that language was called mānes lāguage / the whiche euery man vſed afore the toure of Babylon was buylded. ¶ This Heber had two ſones / and one was called Iectan / and that other Phaleg. This

Iectan through enſample of Nemroth deſcendynge fro Cham toke the pryncehode vpon the children of Sem. And he had .xiij. ſones. But theſe people after Ierome are not knowen of vs for fernes of the coūtree / or mutacyon and chaungynge of ye people / or elles of ſome other maner cauſe.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mūdi .ij. M. vj .C .xliij. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatem .ij. M .v .C. lvj.
                        
                           
                              ¶ Turris Babilonis.
                           
                        
                        
                           Two hondred and .xxxix. yere lyued Phaleg. This Phaleg was the yonger ſone of Heber / & in his dayes was made the confuſyon of languages. For in his hous abode the olde tongue alone and that was hebrewe. Wherfore after ſaynt Auſtyn / in hym appered a grete ſtedfaſtneſſe of ryghtwyſneſſe / for this hous was free of that payne / as not cō
                           ſentynge to the buyldynge of the toure. Et ſcōm Aug. there was .lxxij. generacyons / & ſo there were .lxxij. languages ¶ Iectan broder to Phaleg of Sem / Nemroth prince of Cham / Sulphen of Iaphet / theſe thre prynces with theyr people gadered them togyder in ye felde of Sennaar / dredynge the flode to come agayn ſayd. Let vs buylde a toure that ſhall reche to heuen. &c. Gene .xj. Our lorde ſeynge the folyſſhenes of ye people cōfoūded theyr tōgues for theyr ſynnes In ſo moche yt none vnderſtode other / & ſo they were diſperpled through all the worlde. Of ye malyce of this Nemroth bokes ben wryten full. And after ye confuſyon of ye language he went to ye londe of Perce / and there he taught them to adoure the fyre as god. He lefte his ſone Belus in Babylon / whiche ſucceded after hym. And ſo his progenye obtayned that realme after many yeres. In this tyme began many kyngdomes / & the mooſt of all thoſe kyngdomes was the kyngdome of Scitarū. But there were ſo many rude people in it yt the cite was no worſhipped / yet was it a myghty regyon of dyſtaūce. And about this tyme began ye kyngdome of Egypte the whiche was chaūged many tymes with dyuers alteracyons / & alſo it is ſpoken of many tymes ī ſcripture. ¶ Noblenes or gentylmen began about this ſayd tyme And this noblenes or gentylmen was ordeyned for many cauſes. ¶ The fyrſt cauſe was neceſſite / for whā mankynde grewe ſore / & men were prompte & redy to do hurt & domage to other / it was very neceſſary to wtſtande ye grete malyce of ye curſed and wycked people agaynſt good & ryghtwyſe men. Therof a man is called gentylman or a noble man as before other in vertues notable. wherof ſaynt Ierom ſayth. I ſe nothynge els in noblenes / or in gentylmen / but yt they are boūden in a certayne neceſſite yt they ſhall not recede fro the vertue / & the gen

tylnes of theyr noble aūcetours. ¶ The ſeconde was ye dyuers worſhyppyng of the people / for no man worſhypped thā but as his naturall reaſon gaue / & they knewe not veryly what they ſhold worſhip / for they were ſo dull of wytte that they coude pondre no grete thynge / but that was publyſſhed by the comyn people. Wherfore it was expediēt for theyr peace to be kepte that they ſholde haue prynces of noble byrthe. ¶ The thyrde cauſe ꝓcedeth of ſome ſinguler ſtrength Many tymes ye comynaltees were greued through ennemyes comynge vpon them & than they ſayd yt who ſomeuer wōlde defende them fro thoſe perylles / he ſholde haue the right of noblenes for hȳm & for his heyres for euermore. And in this maner of wyſe many are redde to be noble men. ¶ The fourth cauſe of noblenes was haboundaūce of goodes. Somtyme ye people were holden with grete penury of meet & drynke / & than they toke them & theyrs to ſome ryche man / that through that couenaūt they ſholde tempre ye grete ſtraytnes of theyr honger / & after that they ſholde knowe hym as theyr lorde & a noble man. Alſo there be foūde certayn noble men by the ꝓuyſyon of god / though they were but fewe / of yt whiche ſom abode ī vertue as Dauyd / & ſome fayled anone / as Saul and Ieroboam. And it is redde yt many were noble men by tyrāny / of yt whiche ſome were deſtroyed anone / & ſome abode in ſtablenes / as paynyms myght.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mundi .ij. M .ix. C .v. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatē .ij. M. ij .C .lxxxxiiij.
                        S
                              •
                           ruch lynially deſcended frō our fore fader Adam to Abrahā. And Nachor was his ſone / & he lyued an .C. and .xlviij. yere. And aboute this tyme ydolatry began myghtely. And yf ye re uolue & loke ye hyſtoryes / ye ſhall fynde that thre thynges princypally brought men to ydolatry / that is to wyt
                              •
                            / the affeccyon that they had to deed men. Drede and flaterynge anenſt theyr prynces. And the dylygence of crafty men about ſculptures or grauynges. Wycked ſpirytes than entred in to ydolles and gaue anſweres vnto the people / and theſe wycked ſpirytes confermed the errour of the people myghtely. In ſoo moche that who ſomeuer wolde not conferme hym to theyr reaſon / he ſholde greuouſly ſuffre the payne of dethe. Alſo there was added and put to theſe thynges / the deceyuynge laude and prayſynge of poetes / the whiche wretches and dampned men in to heuen with theyr gaye wrytynges exalted. And that ſame tyme whan deuylles began to ſpeke ſoo fayrly and ſo mekely to man / the good lorde of his grete mercy ſente his aungelles / that they ſholde ſpeke vnto his electe men in vyſyble maner / le
                              •
                           ſt that all mankynde ſhold peryſſhe with that myſcheuous erroure. ¶ Belus ſone to Nemroth this tyme was kynge of Babylon / & he was the fyrſt kynge of this worlde. And this man was he whome the erroure of the people fyrſte byleued ſholde be a god. Wherfore dyuerſe people named hym dyuerſly / and ſome called hym Bell / ſome Baall / ſome Baalun / ſome Beelphagor / and ſome Beelſabub. And this vnhappy errour ſtode in mankynde more than two thouſande yere. ¶ Ninus ſone to Belus the ſeconde kynge of Babylon or of Aſſuriorum regned .liiij. yere. And this Ninus deſyred to haue lordſhyp & worſhyp / and to that entent that he myght be lorde of all the coūtree aboute hym / he gaue batayle to all that dwelled nye aboute hȳ. And bycauſe that tyme the people were rude / and had not the cōnynge of fyghtyng

nor armure / anone he ſubdued vnto hym all Aſ
                              •
                           am. And there was made the fyrſt Monarchye in ye eeſt part ye. And whā his herte was ſory for ye deth of his fader Belus / he made to be made to hym for his cōforte an ymage of his fader / vnto whome he gaue ſo myghty reuerence / yt what ſomeuer gylty man had fledde to that ymage / there ſholde no man do hym no hurte / & he pardoned him of al his treſpace. And through his enſample many a man began to worſhyp the deed ymage of theyr dere frendes. Than theſe malycyous ſpirytes ſeynge the curioſite of the people / hydde them within them / and gaue anſweres vnto ye people & ſayd they were goddes. And cōmaunded them to do reuerence to them as vnto goddes. Thus that vn happy ſynne of ydolatry was brought in / the whiche repugned myghtely to goddes mageſte. And in ſo moche this madnes grewe / that he ſhold ſuffre the payne of deth that ſayd they were men but goddes.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mundi .iij. M .C .xiiij. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatem .ij. M .lxxxv.
                        
                           
                              •
                           Hare ſone to Nachor liued. ij .C. and .v. yere. This Thare after the deth of Aram went frō Vr of Calde and paſſed in to Charram wt his chyldren & his neuewes. And it is ſayd / bycauſe he wolde not worſhyp the fyre as Nemroth had taught / he was banyſſhed the coūtree. And ye comyn opynyon of the Hebrewes is. Nemroth regned there the whiche was called an other name / Amraphel ye kyng of Sennaar / whome lōge tyme after this Abraham ouercame. Vt dici
                              •
                            Geneſis .xiiij.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mūdi .iij. M .C .lxxxiiij. Et aute Chriſti natiuitatem .ij. M .xv.
                        ¶ Here begynnth the thyrde age of the Worlde durynge to Dauyd.

                              Abraham.
                           
                        
                        
                           THe deuoute & holy ſtory begynneth here of holy partyarkes yt whiche worſhipped ye very god and in theyr worſhyppyng they taught it. Vide 
                              pl’a
                              plura
                            gen .xij. 
                              〈◊〉
                            ad finē. This Abraham a faythfull louer of god was borne the .xliij. yere of Ninus kynge of Babilon. And knowe ye that the .lxxxv. yere of Abraham by goddes goodnes ye worde of mercy deſcēded on mankynde / for than began to appere ye oraculus of ye promeſſe of god. Vide aug .xxj. de 
                              〈…〉
                           . Itē ge .xv. For this tyme appered to vs holy aungels in fourme of mankynde. Aram & Nachor were Abrahams bretherne / & Aram gate Loth a rightwyſe man & an holy. And he deſerued to be v
                              •
                           
                           ſited wt aungels as his vncle Abraham was. And for this Loth Ibrahā ſmo
                              •
                           e iiij. kȳges / for they toke Loth. Geneſis xiiij. Of whom one was ſayd to be N
                              •
                           
                           roth / but here he is called Amraphel. ¶ This Abrahā had many wyues / as Sara and Agar. And his chyldren and his bretherne had many chyldren. But for vs ye wryte crony
                              •
                           ies / 
                              〈◊〉
                            is not neceſſary to ſpeke of all men but of the noble faders. Sed vide 
                              pl’a
                              plura
                            ī fine ge
                              ••
                           . ¶ Me
                              •
                           
                           chiſedech this tyme was kynge of Salem. This man was called a right wyſe kynge / for his excedynge holynes. And

he offred breed & wyne to Abraham / in ſigne of a myſtery. He was in lyke wyſe the preeſt of ye hye god. ¶ Semiramis the thyrde kynge of Babylon ordeyned an army & went in to ynde / & obteyned the countree. And ſo by all Aſyam & the kyngdome of Aſſuriorum was dylated And he multyplyed the cite of Babylon myghtely / and made walles aboute it. This Semiramis had a wyfe / & he for ſoke her. And it is wryten that ſhe was ſlayne of her ſone Ninus / bycauſe ſhe prouoked hym to ye v
                              •
                           leful cōcupiſcence Sic di. Aug .xviij. de ci. dei. And ye mayſter ī his ſtoryes ſayth yt ſhe wedded her owne ſone / & he gate a childe on her / the whiche ordeyned Babylon to be ye heed of all this realme. ¶ Ninus the fourth kyng of Babylon was ſone to grete Ni nus. Of this man lytell is wrytē / but yt he ſlewe his owne moder / as is ſaid afore. ¶ Arriꝰ was ye fyfth kyng of Babylon. And vnder hym was borne Yſaac.
                        ALſo Yſaac ſone of Abraham of ye lyne of Chryſt lyued .C .lxxx. yere. This yſaac had a wyfe called Rebecca / and on her he gate two ſones Eſau & Iacob. This Eſau ſolde his enherytaū
                           ce to his broder Iacob. And he was the fader of Idumeorū / & he had in poſſeſſyon the hyll of Seyr / & put firſt mares to aſſes / wherof was engēdred mules. ¶ About this tyme .xxx. lordſhyps and Gomorra for theyr horryble ſynne were ouerthrowen. The wyfe of Loth lokynge backwarde / turned in to a ſalt ſtone / ſhe weth that no man in the waye of delyberacyon ſholde deſyre thynges paſt. Hec Aug. de ciuitate dei.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mūdi .iij. M. iij .C .xliiij. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatē. M. viij .C .lvj.
                        IAcob lyued .C .xlvij. yere. This Iacob had foure wyues or ſome cōcubynes / yt is to wyte / Lyam / Balā / zelpham / & Rachel. Lyam was ye fyrſt wyfe / & ſhe was blere eyed / & ſhe bare hȳ .vi. ſones. Iudas / Ruben / Simeon / Leuy / Yſachar / zabulon / & a doughter y• hyght Dyna. Bala ſeruaūt to Lya & cō cubyne to Iacob bare hym two ſones / Dan & Neptalim. Rachel ye ſecōd wyfe to Iacob was barayn longe tyme / & at the laſt ſhe bare him two ſones / Ioſeph & Beniamyn. zelpha ſeruaūt to Rachel 
                              •
                           are Iacob .ij. ſones / Gad & Aſar / & eueryche of theſe made a tribe / of whom in this place is not neceſſary to ſpeke. Vide 
                              pl’a
                              plura
                            in gen̄. ¶ Ioſeph ſone to Iacob was borne .lxxxx. yere of his faders age & he lyued .C. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . yere. ¶ This tyme zerſes was kyng of Babilon / vnder whom was borne Iacob / & he was ye ſeuenth kyng of Babylon. ¶ Armaui
                              •
                           tre was kyng after him. And after ſaynt Auſtin in ye mānes dayes our lorde appered to Yſaac ꝓmyſynge hym thoſe thynges yt whiche he ꝓmiſed to his fader. ¶ Belocus the .ix. kyng of Babylon was after this man. And vnder Belocus or in his tyme our lorde ſpake wt Iacob / promyſyng hym yt he had ꝓmyſed to his fader the whiche were two. The poſſeſſion of the londe of ꝓmyſſyon & Chanaam / & ye benediccyon of all ye people in his ſeed / yt whiche is our lord Ieſu chryſt. ¶ Abraham aboute this tyme deceſed / & was buryed in Nebron. ¶ Inachus the firſt kyng that euer was in Grece was this tyme / for than the kyngdome began. ¶ Phoromius was kyng after hym / & he ordeyned lawes to the Grekes. &c.
                        
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mūdi: iij. M. iij .C .iiij. Et ant
                              •
                            Chriſti natiuitatē. M. vij .C .lxxxxix.
                        I
                              ••
                           as ſone of Iacob deſcended of hym / & of this trybe of Iudas came ye kynges ꝓgenye / & at ye laſt Chryſt

our lorde. Iudas gate Phares / & Phares Eſron / & of theſe men lytel is had in ſcripture: but Mathew reherſeth them. ¶ Belus in this Phares dayes was kynge of Aſſurio
                              
                                 
                              
                              rum
                            / or of Babylon / & he was ye .x. kyng / vnder whom Yſaac deceſed. Athlas ye grete aſtronomer was this tyme / yt whiche is lykened to bere vp heuē on his ſholders / bycauſe of his knowynge in ſterres. ¶ Sarapis was the thyrde kynge of Arguio
                              
                                 
                              
                              rum
                            / or of Grecorū / & this Sarapis was otherwyſe called Apis / & he came in to Egypt wt a mighty nauy / & there deceſed / and was made of ye blynde gentyles ye egypcyens the greteſt god amonge them. And yt tyme began a meruaylous ſupſtycyon in ydolatry of a calfe of two colours / whiche they called Apem / & ye calfe dyed / the deuylles procured a lyke calfe to yt for to be made / yt they myght deceyue ye rude people. And after yt the children of iſrael dyd ſo in lyke wyſe (vt patz) And what thȳge coude be more wretched or foliſſhe in man hauyng reaſon. ¶ Argus was ye fourth kyng of Grekes / after whome ye noble cite of Argꝰ toke his name. Cicrophes edyfyed Athenes in Grece / & this cite was ye nouryſſher of liberal ſcyence & of many philoſophers / yet they were deceyued by deuils / & grete ſupſticioſite in ye cite was made (vide Augꝰ. & mirabilē fabulā reꝑies) ¶ Omogires was ye fyrſt man yt put oxen to ye plough. ¶ Belus this tyme was kyng of Babylon / & he was the .x. kyng of yt region / & vnder hym dyed Yſaac. ¶ Pharao was kyng of Egypte / whiche receyued Ioſeph / & exalted hym for thinterpretacyon of his dremes (vide ſcīam pulcherrimā
                           
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            hiſtoriā. gen̄ .xlij. &c.) ¶ A
                              ••
                           thus was the xij. kyng of Babilon / vnder whom dyed Ioſeph a bliſſed man in chaſtite. ¶ Pharao Emonophis about Eſdroms dayes was kynge of Egypte / & this Pharao knewe not Ioſeph / ne none of his kynrede / & he cōmaūded ye chyldren of iſrael to be drowned / as it is had Exodi .j. ye clerkes may loke that boke / and we lay folke wyll loke to cronydes / but aboute this tyme the ſtory of Exod
                              •
                            began.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mūdi .iij. M .v .C. xliiij. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatē. M .v. C .lx.
                        ARam ſone to Eſrom of ye lyne of Chryſt was about this tyme / & he gate Amynadab & Naaſon / of theſe men is lytel wryten in ſcripture & therfore I ꝓcede to other. ¶ Iob ye holy mā enſample of all pacience this tyme was borne of ye lyne of Nachor broder of Abraham / & he lyued many yeres / & after ye god had aſſayed hym in his pacience he lyued an .C. & .xl. yere (ꝑ Aug. gre. & 
                              〈◊〉
                           ) Moyſes about this tyme was borne / & the children of Iſrael were in grete perplexite / & Moyſes was put in ye water to be drowned. Aaron aboute this tyme was borne. ¶ Dafrus was the. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . kyng of Babilon / & Moyſes was borne vnder hym in Egypte. ¶ C
                              •
                           crops was the fyrſte kynge of Athenes. And after ſaynt Auſtyn the Grekes wrote many leſynges in theyr ſtoryes that tyme / for of a lytell thȳge they make a grete fame for to ſhewe theyr connynge for there was the vniuerſite of Grekes.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mundi .iij. M .vi. C .lxxviii. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatē. M .v .C. x
                              •
                           .
                        THis time was Am
                              •
                           nadab of chriſtes lyne / ſone to Aaron whiche after Moyſes wt a full fayth entred in to the reed ſee / & dradde not whā many an C. were aferde leſt they ſholde haue ben drowned / & therfore he deſerued to brynge forth ye kynges lygnage / of whome deſcended our lorde Ieſu Chryſt. Moyſes was the fyrſt iudge of Iſrael ye euer

was / and he was iudge .xl. yere. This Moyſes was ye mooſt excellent ꝓphete that euer god made / & the mooſt notable wryter of ſtoryes / & of his louynge heuen & erth ſpeketh. For he ſawe our lorde face to face / whiche here in ſcripture was none founde but he & Paule the apoſtle. ¶ Aaron ye firſt byſſhop lyued an C .xxiij. yere. This Aaron was called of god in to ye dignite of ye hye preeſt / or of a byſſhop / & was ordeyned ye eternal teſta ment to hȳſelfe & them yt came after him for ye grete power of preeſthode. Whan he was an .C .xxiij. yere of age he dyed & was buryed in ye hyll of Hor. And his ſone Heleazarus ſucceded in ye byſſhopryche. ¶ Pharao Boccaris this tyme was kynge of Egypte / & this Pharao wolde not here ye cōmaūdement of god / ne delyuer the children of Iſrael / wher fore he was punyſſhed with .x. plages. Vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            
                           oxod. And after he wt all his hooſt were drowned in the reed ſee. ¶ Naſon ſone to Amynadab was prince of ye trybe of Iuda in ye deſerte. And about this tyme ye lawe of god was gyuen in ye hyll of Synay / and ye boke of Leuitici was wryten / & an other boke was called Nu merū / & the tabernacle was ordeyned. The boke of deuteronomiū was made. Balaam was prophete & was ſlayne.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mūdi .iij. M. vij .C .xxxv. Et an te Chriſti natiuitatē. M. iiij .C .lxxiiij.
                        SAlmon of the lyne of Chryſt was aboute this tyme / & had a wyfe that hyght Reab. Moyſes aboute this tyme deceſed / ye water of flome Iordan was drye / Ierico was taken / the ſonne ſtode in ye firmamēt vnmeuable (Hiſtoria li. Ioſue incipit: et Iudicū) Ioſue ye ſeconde Iudge of Iſrael was a mighty man in batayle / & the fyrſt in deſerte / he ouercame Amalech / & after Moyſes he was ordeyned of god iudge of Iſrael / of whome ye batayles / the werkes / & ye religyous lyfe / ye may ſe in ye boke of Ioſue wryten. ¶ Eleazar was the ſecōde byſſhop / & he & Ioſue deuyded the loude of promyſſyon to the children of Iſrael. Of hȳ deſcended almooſt all ye byſſhops vnto Chryſt. ¶ Othonyel of ye trybe of Iuda was ye thyrde iudge / & this man delyuered ye children of iſrael by batayle from ye realme of Meſopotamye. This man toke Axam to his wyfe / ye whiche aſked ye vale londes / aboue & bynethe of her fader Caleph. Vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            iudic .j. ¶ Aoth was the fourth iudge of Iſraell. This man ſubdued Eglon ye kyng of Moab / & delyuered the chyldren of Iſrael. This was a myghty mā in batayle / & he vſed the one as well as ye other for his ryght hande. About this tyme ye kyng of ytalye began / & many tymes theyr names be chaūged / of yt whiche ꝓgenye ye Romaynes ſhewe more clerely. ¶ Ianas was ye firſt kyng in ytalye / & afterward of ye rude gentyles he was worſhypped as god / faynynge hȳ to haue two faces For they worſhypped his feeſt in ye begȳ
                           nynge of ye yere: as he were ye ende of the laſt yere / & ye begynnynge of ye fyrſt. And of hym ye moneth of Ianuary hath his name. ¶ Amictus was ye .viij. kyng of Babylon / vnder whome Ioſue deceſed.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mūdi .iij. M. vij .C .lxxv. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatē. M. iiij .C .xxiiij.
                        BOos ſone to Salmon of ye lyne of Chryſt was this tyme / but of hȳ is lytell wryten / ſaue ye Mathewe nombreth him in ye genealogye. As doctours ſaye / there was made ſkyppynge of na mes bytwene Boos & Obeth. For at the leſt bytwene them were. ij .C .lxxij. yere The whiche tyme to one man may not be referred / & therfore here many thynges

is ſpoken or I come agayn to ye lyne of Chryſt. Nicolaꝰ delyra 
                              〈◊〉
                            ſūt tres Boos vnꝰ poſt aliū. ¶ Sangar was ye v. iudge of iſrael / but he lyued no yeres. ¶ Delbora was ye .vj. iudge. This Del bora was a woman / & for ye grace of her ꝓphecy was gyuen to her honour yt ſhe iudged iſrael. She by ye cōmaūdement of god called Baruch yt he ſhold go fight with ye enemyes of Iſrael / & ye chyldren of Iſrael gate ye victory agaynſt Iabyn kynge of Chanaan & Cizaram ye prynce of his chiualry / & he deſtroyed them. Vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            iudicū .iiij. ¶ Phenies was byſſhop And this Phenies yet a yonge man for goddes ſake ſlewe many lecherous men & therfore our lord was pleaſed wt hym. ¶ Saturnus this tyme was kynge in ytalye / & he was ye ſeconde kyng there / this Saturnus is ſayd to come from ye londe of Cretens into ytaly / whome by ydolatry through a meruaylous blyndnes they ſayd he was no man but a god And yet they ſayd that he regned vpon them as theyr kynge / & he taught men to dong theyr feldes. And of Saturnus the Romayns were called Saturniam. ¶ Picus was ſone to Saturnus / & or he was kynge in ytalye he was kynge in Laurentyn / & after his deceſſe of the gentyles was worſhypped for a god.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mundi .iij. M. viij .C .lxxv. Et ante Chriſti natiuitarē. M. iij .C .xliiij.
                        GEdeon the .vij. iudge of Iſraell was this time / this Gedeon ſub dued .iiij. kynges. Oreb / zebee / zeb / and Salmana. And he ſubdued Madean to Iſrael. Vide 
                              pl’a
                              plura
                            Iudicū .vj. vij. et .viij. ¶ Bocci was byſſhop in Iſraell than. ¶ Abimelech the .viij. iudge in Iſraell was natural ſone to Gedeon / & he was not called of god / but malycyouſly toke on hym the pryncehode of Iſraell. And he ſlewe .lxx. of his bretherne / wherfore he ended his lyfe myſcheuouſly. Vt 
                              peꝪ
                              patet
                            iudicū .ix. ¶ Tola was the .ix. iudge of Iſrael / & this man guyded hym after ye old gouernaūce of iudges by ye maner of direccion & coūſeyle / more than by domi naciō. ¶ Bocci was byſſhop about this tyme / but of hȳ is lytel wryten. ¶ Iayr the .x. iudge of Iſraell had .xxx. ſones / whome he made prynces of .xxx. cytees And bycauſe there were good men & ru led to ye pleaſure of god. Therfore in the dayes of thoſe two men / Iſraell drewe to our lord / & therfore all thynge came & was in proſperite & weith. ¶ Fannus was the .iiij. kynge of ytalye / & he was kyng of Laurētyn alſo. ¶ Latinꝰ was kynge in ytalye after Fannus / & of this Latinꝰ was ye kȳgdom called Latino
                              •
                           . ¶ And Carmētis doughter to Euand
                              ••
                            foūde firſt latyn lettres. ¶ Thauranus about this tyme was kyng of Babylon or of Aſſurior / & vnder this man Troye was deſtroyed fyrſt. The occaſyon of ye batayle of Troy began for a lytel thȳge in ſo moche as Lamydon kyng of Troy teceyued not Hercules & Iaſon wt due honour as they ſholde haue bē receyued & of ſo lytell a treſpace how many harmes & hurtes grewe. ¶ Sibilla delphis ca afore ye batayle of Troye prophecyed how a childe ſholde be borne of a virgyn wtout manues ſeed. ¶ Lamydon kyng of Troy was ſlayne and his doughter Eriona was taken in to Grekes londe. For yt whiche folowed myghty batayle & mooſt ferefull myſcheues. Vide hiſtoriam troianā. Hercules with Iaſon deſtroyed Iliū or Troy / the whiche anone after was buylded of Priamus ſone to Lamydon. This Hercules dyd many meruaylous thynges / & many myghty batayles / & infynyte leſynges ben fayned on hym. It y• laſt whā he had ouertomē moche people he was betrayed by

a ſherte y• Deyanira his wyfe ſent him enuenymed / & whā he myght not ſuffre the payne / he ranne in to a fyre & brente hymſelfe / & whan he was deed he was worſhypped of the gentyles for a god.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Circa annū mundi .iij. M .ix. C .lxxv. Et an̄ Chriſti natiuitatē. M. ij .C .xxiiij.
                        AFter the deth of Iayr Iudge of Iſrael / the people of Iſrael added newe ſynnes to theyr olde / and our lorde toke them in to the power of ye philiſtiens / & to the children of Amon .xviij. yere / & they were gretly oppreſſed: & thā they cryed to our lord. Thā Iepte was enſpyred with almyghty god / & faught agaynſt Amon & the ſedycyous people of ye hyll of Effraym. And for an vnprudent voyce he ſlewe his owne doughter folyſhly / & dyd ſacriif
                              •
                           ce to god with her Iudic .xi. et .xij. ¶ Ozy this tyme was byſſhop in Iſrael / & he was of ye ſeed of Aron by ye lyne of Eleazari / the whiche deed / through ye prouyſyon of god ye byſſhopryche turned to ye lyne of Ythamar an .C. & .xx. yere / in yt whiche lyne Hely was the firſt hygh byſſhop / & Abiathar was the laſt. ¶ Ebeſſam was iudge in Iſrael .vij. yere / & he was the .xij. iudge & he was named otherwyſe Boos / the whiche wedded Ruth. ¶ Abialon ye. xiij iudge of Iſrael was iudge .x. yere. And vnder theſe tymes ye chyldren of Iſrael were quyete / & therfore no notable thȳ
                           ges were done in theſe dayes. ¶ Abdon the .xiiij. iudge gouerned in Iſrael .viij. yere. And about this tyme ye hyſtory of Ruth was wryten. ¶ Authamis this tyme was kyng of Aſſurio
                              
                                 
                              
                              rum
                           . And Priamus kynge of Troy ſone to Laomedon buylded his cyte agayne meruaylouſly ſtronge / & began batayle wt the Grekes to his owne hurte / & he had a ſone was called Hector a leyfull goten ſone by his wyfe Eccuba. This man was faythful & wyſe / & incōparable of ſtrength & noblenes. This Priamꝰ had an other ſone that was called Paris / the whiche toke away fro ye lōde of Grekes Helena wyfe to Menelaus ye kyng. ¶ Agamenon the kyng broder to Menelaus ye leder of al ye Grekes hoſt faught agaynſt Troy / & at the laſt he wanne ye cite falſly / & to ye gre kes mooſt ſhame & ſclaūdre yt might be. For certaynly yt myght be called an vnhappy batayle where no man giueth lo uyng to ye Grekes / but euery man repor teth ſhame. ¶ Eneas was kyng in yta lye .iij. yere. And this Eneas after that Troy was deſtroyed of ye Grekes came in to ytalye with .xx. ſhyppes / and dyd myghty batayles there. And this man had wedded Priamꝰ doughter Elinſuram. And he was made a god through the errour of the comyn people / & of this man came Iulius cezar & Octauianus Auguſtus. ¶ Vlixes an eloquent man amonge all the Grekes after many perylles on the ſee / went home to his Penelopem the mooſt faythful & the mooſt chaſte woman that is redde of. And the Grekes periſſhed wretchedly after that they had deſtroyed Troye bothe on the water and on the londe as they wente homewarde agayn. And that was the pryncypall date of theyr wrytynge after that vyctory. For they wrote theyr hyſtoryes and other wrytynges thus. Anno primo v
                              •
                            ſecūdo. &c. poſt Troiam captam. And that was the thyrde yere of Abdon iudge of Iſrael.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Circa annum mundi .iiij. M .xxv. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatē. M .C .lxxiiij.
                        OBeth of Chryſtes lyne ſone vnto Boos is reherſed in Mathewe. ¶ Samſon ye .xv. iudge regned .xx. yere this Sāſon was ye moſt ſtrōgeſt man yt
                           
euer was / & he delyuered Iſraell from the Philyſtyens / & for his meruaylous ſtrength men trowed he had ben Hercules. Et eiꝰ nurabilia oꝑa vide iudic .xiij.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mundi .iiij. M .lxxv. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatem. M .C .xiiij.
                        IEſſe ſone to Obeth of the lyne of Chryſt / otherwyſe called yſay fa der to Dauid this tyme lyued a notable man in honeſte / no kyng ne grete gouer nour. But of him many tymes is made mencyon in holy ſcripture. For of hym deſcended Chryſt our ſauyour. ¶ This tyme Hely was iudge & biſſhop in iſrael the whiche had .ij. ſones / Ophni & Phi nees / & for he corrected them not ſufficiently / he & they were puniſſhed bothe of our lorde / for they were ſlayne of ye Philiſtiēs / & Hely fell of his ſete & brake his necke. This Hely was iudge next after Samſon / & not of the lignage of Aron yt was fyrſt byſſhop of god electe / but of ythamar the lignage dured an .C. & .xx. yere / in yt whiche lignage Hely was the fyrſt byſſhop / & Abiathar the laſt. Vide plura .j. regum.
                        THis tyme Saul was kynge in Iſraell after the mayſter in his hyſtoryes / & Ioſephus in his .viij. boke This Saul was ye fyrſt kyng in Iſrael & regned .xx. yere / the whiche or he was kynge was a good man & electe of god / but afterwarde wretchedly he fayled / & he was ſlayne and his thre ſones on the hylles of Gylboy. ¶ In ye tyme of Saul Samuel was iudge & ꝓphete in Iſrael an holy man / & borne of a barayn moder many a daye / & he mynyſtred afore our lorde from a chylde to his age / and was not hygh byſſhop / but he iudged Iſrael all ye dayes of his lyfe / & was ye very pro phete of god. Two kynges he enoynted Saul fyrſt / & after Dauyd. This Samuel alone and Moyſes are redde / that they prayed for theyr enemyes in all the olde teſtamēt. Of this Samuel & Saul ben dyuers opynyons. Iſoder ſayth ye Samuel & Saul ruled Iſrael .xl. yere. And Ioſephus in his .viij. boke / & the mayſter in his ſtoryes ſayen Samuel to be iudge .xij. yere alone. And after hȳ Saul to regne .xx. yere. Vide plura .j. xe guin.
                        AScanius the .vij. kyng of ytaly was ſone to Eneas / & buylded ye cite of Albion / & he was called the kyng of Albanon. This Aſcanius gate Siluius the .viij. kyng of ytaly / the whiche Siluius was fader vnto Brute kynge of Brytayn / now called Englonde. And I leue of the kynges of ytalye for they dyd but lytell noble thynges tyll it be co men to Romulꝰ & Remus ye buylded Rome / & than ſhall thoſe kynges come agayn. And now to ꝓcede to ye cronycles of Englonde / for yt whiche namely this boke is made. ¶ Venys & Padua were buylded about this tyme of ye reſydue of the Troyans. ¶ Homere ye grete poete about this tyme was / yt whiche wrote & fayned gloryouſly many a leſynge.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Incipit regnum Britannie / nunc dicitur Anglia.
                        ¶ Here may ye ſe how Englonde fyrſt began at Albyon.

                              Albyon.
                           
                        
                        
                           ¶ Afore that I wyll ſpeke of Brute it ſhall be ſhewed how the londe of englonde was fyrſt named 
                              •
                           byon & for what cauſe it was ſo named.
                        IN the noble londe of Sirrie there was a noble kynge & myghty & a man of grete renome yt was called Diocleſyan that well & worthely hȳ gouerned & ruled through his noble chyualry So yt he conquered all the londes about hym / ſo that almooſt all ye kynges of the worlde to hȳ were attendaūt. It befell thus yt this Diocleſian ſpouſed a gētyll damoyſel yt was wonders fayre / yt was his vncles doughter Labana / & ſhe loued hym as reaſon wolde / ſo yt he gate on her .xxxiij. doughters / of yt whiche ye eldeſt was called Albyne / and theſe damoyſelles whan they came vnto age be came ſo fayre yt it was wonder / whereof Diocleſian anone let make a ſomnynge & cōmaunded by his lettres that all the kynges yt helde of hym ſholde come at a certayn daye as in his lettres were conteyned to make a feeſt royal. At whiche daye thyder they came / & brought with them admyrats / princes / dukes & noble ch
                              •
                           ualry. The feeſt was royally arayed and there they lyued in ioye and myrth ynough yt it was wonder to wyte. And it befell thus ye Dyocleſyan thought to mary his doughters amonge all thoſe kynges yt were at ye ſolempnite. And ſo they ſpake & dyd that Albyne his eldeſt doughter & all her ſyſters rychely were maryed to .xxxiij. kynges yt were lordes of grete honour at this ſolempnite. And whan this was done euery kynge toke his wyfe & ladde them in to theyr owne coūtre / & there made them quenes. And it befell thus afterward yt this dame Albine became ſo ſtoute & ſo ſterne that ſhe tolde lytel pryce of her lorde / & of hyȳ had ſcorne & deſpyte / & wold not do his wyll but ſhe wold haue her owne wyll in dyuers maters. And all her other ſyſters euerychone bare them ſo euyll agaynſt theyr lordes yt it was wonder to wyte. And for as moche yt them thought that theyr huſbondes were not of ſo hye parentage comē as theyr fader. But thoſe kynges yt were theyr lordes wold haue chaſtyſed them with fayre maner vpon al loue & frendſhyp yt they ſhold amende theyr euyll condicyons. But all was for nought / for they dyd theyr owne wyll in all thynge yt them lyked & had of power Wherfore thoſe .xxxiij. kynges vpon a tyme & often tymes bette theyr wyues For they wende that they wold haueamended them & theyr tatches & wyckednes. But of ſuche condicions they were that for fayre ſpeche & warnynge they dyd all ye worſe / & for betynges eftſones moche the worſe. Wherfore the kyng yt had wedded Albyne wrote the tatches and condicyons of his wyfe Albyne / & the lettre ſent to Dyocleſyan her fader. And whan the other kynges herde that Albynes lorde had ſente a lettre to Diocleſyan / anone they ſente lettres ſealed with theyr ſeales the condicyons & tatches of theyr wyues. Whan the kynge Diocleſyan ſawe & herde ſo many complayntes of his doughters / he was ſore aſhamed and became wonderſſy angry and wroth toward his doughters / and thought how he myght amende it that they ſo myſoyd / & anone ſent his lettres to the .xxxiij. kynges yt they ſholde come to hym / & brynge wt them theyr wyues euerychone at a certayn day / for he wolde there chaſtyſe them of theyr wyckednes yf he myght ī ony maner wyſe. So that ye kynges came all at ye tyme & daye that tho was ſet bytwene hym and the kynges. Diocleſyan receyued them wt moche honour / & made a ſolem
                              •
                           e feeſt vnto all that were vndernethe his lordſhyp.

And the thyrde daye after that ſolempnite ye kynge Diocleſyan ſent after his .xxxiij. doughters yt they ſhold come & ſpeke with hym in his chambre. And whā they were come / he ſpake to them of theyr wyckednes & of theyr cruelte / & angerly them reproued & blamed & ſaid to them. That yf they wolde not be chaſtyſed / they ſholde loſe his loue for euermore. And whan ye ladyes herde al this they became abaſſhed & gretly aſhamed & ſayd to theyr fader yt they wolde make all amēdes. And ſo they departed out of theyr faders chambre. And Albyne that was ye eldeſt ſyſter ladde them all to her chambre / & tho made to voyde al yt were therin / ſo yt no pſone was amonge them but ſhe & her ſyſters togyder. Thāſayd this Albyne. My fayre ſyſters / well we knowe yt the kyng our fader vs hath reproued / ſhamed & deſpyſed / for bycauſe to make vs obedyent to our huſbondes but certaynly yt ſhall I neuer whyles ye Ilyue / ſyth that I am come of a more hyer kynges blode than myn huſbonde is. And whan ſhe had thus ſaid / all her ſyſters ſayd ye ſame. And than ſayd Albyne. Well I wote fayre ſyſters / yt our huſbondes haue cōplayned vnto our fader vpon vs / wherfore he hath vs thus foule reproued & deſpyſed / wherfore ſyſters my coūſeyle is yt this night whan our huſbōdes ben a bedde / all we wt one aſſent to kytte theyr throtes / & than we may be
                              •
                            peas of them / & better we may do this vnder our faders power thā ony where els. And anone all ye ladyes conſented & graūted to this counſeyle. And whānyght was comen / the lordes & ladyes went to bedde. And anone as theyr lordes were a
                              ••
                           ept / they kytte all theyr huſbōdes throtes / & ſo they ſhewe them all. Whan Diocleſian theyr fader herde of this thynge / he became wroth ryght furyouſly agaynſt his doughters / & anone he wole them all haue brent. But all the harons & lordes of S
                              •
                           rrye counſeyled not ſo for to do ſuche ſtraytnes to his owne doughters / but ſhold boyde ye londe of them for euermore / ſo that they neuer ſholde come agayne / & ſo he dyd. And Diocleſyan yt was theyr fader anone cōmaūded them to go in to a ſhyppe / & delyuered to them 
                              •
                           itayles for halfe a yere. And whan this was done / all the ſyſters wente in to the ſhyppe & ſayled forth in ye ſee / & betoke all theyr frendes to Appolyn yt was theyr god & ſo longe they ſayled in the ſee 
                              •
                           yll at the laſt they came & arryued in an yle yt was all wyldernes. And whan dame 
                              ••
                           yne was come to ye londe & all her ſyſters this 
                              ••
                           
                           byne went fyrſt forth out of ye ſhyppe & ſayd to her other ſyſters. For as moche as I am ye eldeſt ſyſter of all this cōpany / & firſt this londe haue take / & for as moche as my name is Alb
                              •
                           ne / I wyl 
                              •
                            this londe be called Albion after my
                              ••
                            owne name. And anone all her ſyſters graūted to her with a good wyll. Than went out of ye ſhyppe all ye ſyſters & toke the londe Albion as theyr ſyſter called it & there they went vp & downe & foūde neyther man ne woman ne chylde but wylde beeſtes of dyuers kyndes. And whan theyr 
                              •
                           ttayles were diſpruded & ſayled / they fedde them with herbes & fruytes in ſeaſon of yt yere / & ſo they 
                              ••
                           
                           ued as they beſt myght / & after yt they toke fleſſhe of dyuers beeſtes & bera
                              ••
                            wonders fa
                              ••
                           e / & ſo they deſyred mānes company / & mānes kynde them fay
                              •
                           ed. And for here they wexed wonders couragyous of kynde / ſo that they deſyred more mannes company than ony other ſolace or myrth. Whan the deuyll yt per
                           
                              ••
                           yued went by dyuers coūtries & toke a body of ye ayre / & lykyng natures ſh
                              ••
                            of men / & came in to ye londe of Albion / & lay by thoſe women & ſhad tho natures

vpon them / & they conceyued & brought forth gyaūtes. Of whiche one was called Gogmagog / & another Langerigan And ſo they were named by dyuers names / & in this maner they came forth & were borne horryble gyaūtes in Albion And they dwelled in caues & in hylles at theyr wyll / & had the londe of Albion as them lyked / vnto ye tyme that Brute arryued & came to Totnes yt was in the yle of Albion / & there this Brute cōquered & diſcōfyted ye gyaūtes aboue ſayd.
                     
                     ¶ Explicit prima pars.
                  
                  
                     
                        ¶ Here begȳneth now how Brute was goten / & how he ſlewe fyrſt his moder / & after his fader. And how he conquered Albyon / that after he named Brytayne after his owne name / that now is called Englonde / after the name of Engyſt of Saxonye. This Brute came in to Brytayne aboute the .xviij. yere of Hely.
                        
                           BE it knowen that in ye noble cite of grete Troy there was a noble knyght and a man of grete power that was called Eneas. And whan ye cite of Troy was loſt & deſtroyed through them of Grece. This Eneas with all his meyny fledde thens & came in to Lombardy. And tho was lorde & gouernour of that londe a kyng that hyght Latyne. And another kynge there was ye hyght Turocelyne that ſtrongly warred vpon this kynge Latyne / ye oftentymes dyd hym moche harme. And whan this kynge Latyne herde yt Eneas was come / he receyued hym with moche honour / & hym with helde for as moche as he had herd of hȳ and wyſt well yt he was a noble knight and a worthy of his body & of his dedes This Eneas helped kynge Latyne in his wa
                              •••
                            / & ſhortly for to tell / ſo well & ſo worthely he dyd / that he ſlewe Turocelyne / & dyſcomfyted hym & all his people. And whan all this was done / kyng Latyne gaue all ye londe that was Turocelynes to this noble man Eneas i
                              •
                            maryage with Lauyne his doughter the mooſt fayreſt creature that ony man wyſt. And ſo they lyued togyder in ioye and myrth all the dayes of theyr lyues. ¶ And after Aſcanius ſone to Eneas wedded a wyfe / and vpon her he gate a ſone that was called Siluine. And this Siluyne whan he coude ſome reaſon of man vnwytyng his fader and agaynſt his wyll acqueynted hym wt a damoyſel that was coſyn to Lauyne that was kynge Latynes doughter ye quene that was Eneas wyfe / and brought the damoyſell with chylde. And whan Aſcanius his fader it wyſt / anone let enquyre of the wyſeſt mayſters and of the greteſt clerkes what chylde the damoyſell ſholde brynge forth. And they anſwered and ſayd / that ſhe ſholde brynge forth a ſone that ſhold kyll bothe his fader and his moder. And ſo he dyd. For his moder dyed in berynge of hym. And whan this chylde was borne his fader let call hym Brute. And ye mayſters ſayd that he ſholde do moche harme and ſorowe in many dyuerſe places / and after he ſholde come to grete honour and worſhyp. This kyng Aſcanius dyed whan god wolde / and Siluyne his ſone receyued the londe / and made hym wonder
                              •
                           
                           ly well beloued among his people. And ſo whā Brute that was Siluynes ſone was .xv. yere olde he went vpon a daye with his fader for to playe & ſolace. And as Brute ſhold haue ſhotte vnto an hart his arowe myſhapped & glanced / and ſo there Brute ſlewe his fader.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Brute was dryuen out of the londe / & how he helde hym in Grece.
                        
                           
ANd whan this miſchaūce was befallen / all ye people of the londe made grete ſorowe / and were ſore dyſpleaſed. And bycauſe therof they droue Brute out of ye londe / & wolde not ſuffre hym amonge them. And whan he ſawe that he might not abyde there / he went from thens in to Grece / & there he foūde vij. thouſande men that were of ye kynrede of Troye / and were comen of grete blode as the ſtory telleth / as of men and women & children / the whiche were all holden in thraldome & bondage of kyng Pandras of Grece / for ye deth of Achylles that was betrayed & ſlayne at Troy This Brute was a wōders fayre man and a ſtronge & huge of his age / and of gladde chere & ſemblaūt / & alſo worthy of body / & was well beloued amōge his people. This kyng Pandras herde ſpeke of his goodnes & condicyons / & anone made hym to dwell with hym. So that Brute became wonders preuy & moche beloued with ye kynge / & dwelled longe tyme with the kynge. So at ye laſt they of Troy & Brute ſpake togyder of kynrede & lygnage & of acqueyntaūce / and there complayned them vnto Brute of theyr ſorowe & of theyr bondage / and of many other ſhames ye kynge Pandras had done to them / & to Brute they ſayd vpon a tyme. Ye be a lord of our lignage & a ſtronge man & a myghty / be ye our capytayne & gouernour / & we wyll become your men / & fulfyll al your cōmaū dementes / & brynge vs out of this wret chednes & bondage / & we wyll fyght wt the kyng for trouth / with the grace of ye grete god we ſhall ouercome hym & we ſhall make you kynge of this londe / & to you do homage / & of you we ſhall holde for euermore. Brute had tho grete pyte of theyr bondage yt they were brought in / & pryuely went fro ye kynges courte / and tho that were of Troy went & put them in to woodes & in to moūtaynes / & helde them there / and ſente vnto kynge Pandras that he ſholde gyue them lycence for to departe ſafely out of his lōde and kyngdom / for they wolde no longer dwell in his bondage. Whan kyng Pandras herde this / he was ſore vexed and anoyed / & tho ſware that he wolde 
                              •
                           e them euerychone / and ordeyned a grete power / and went towardes them for to fyght with them. But Brute and his men manly them defended and fyerſly fought / & ſlewe all the kynges men that none of them eſcaped / and toke ye kynge and put hym in pryſon / and ordeyned a coūſeyle amonge them ſelfe what they myght do wt the kynge. And ſome ſayd that he ſholde be put to deth / and ſome ſayd that he ſholde be exyled out of the londe / & ſome ſayd yt he ſholde be brent. And than ſpake a wyſe knyght yt was called Mempris & ſayd to Brute & to all them of Troy. Yf kyng Pandras wolde yelde hym & haue his lyfe / I coūſeyle yt he gyue vnto Brute (that is our duke & our ſouerayn) his doughter Ge
                              ••
                           og
                              ••
                            to wyfe / & in maryage with her an hondred ſhyppes well arayed / & all his treaſour of golde & ſyluer / of corne & of wyne and as moche as we nede of one thynge & other / & than go we out of this londe and ordeyne vs a lōde els where / for we nor none of our kynrede yt come after vs ſhall neuer haue peas in this londe amonge them of Grece / for we haue 
                              ••
                           ayne ſo many of theyr knyghtes & of other frendes that euermore warre & dyſcord ſhall be amonge vs. Brute tho & all his folke conſented gladly to ye coūſeyle / and this thȳge they tolde to kyng Pandras And he for to haue his lyfe / graūted as moche as they demaunded / and anone gaue vnto Brute the fayre lady Gennogen his doughter to wyfe / and an hondred ſhyppes with as moche as them

                           
                              〈◊〉
                            of all vytayles / as afore was ordeyned. Thā Brute toke his wyfe & all his men that forſoke the londe of Grete & went to the ſee / & had wynde & weder at theyr wyll / & came the thyrde daye in to an yle that was called Logres. This Brute anone ſent of his men to londe for to eſpye ye maner of ye coūtrce. And they founde an olde cite all waſted & forlet / ſo that there was neyther man nor womā therin dwellynge. And in the myddle of this cyte they foūde an olde temple of a fayre lady that was called Diane the goddeſſe. And they came agayne vnto Brute & tolde hym what they had ſeen & foūde / & they coūſeyled hym to go & do ſacrifyce vnto dame Diane / for ſhe was wont to gyue anſwere of what thynge that mē aſked her / & namely vnto them that honour her with ſacryfyce. Brute wente vnto yt ymage & ſayd. Diane noble goddeſſe that all thynge haſt in thy myght / wyndes / waters / woodes / feldes / & all thynges of ye worlde / & all maner of beeſtes that ben therin / vnto you I make my prayer / that ye coūſeyle me and tell / where & in what plāce I ſhall haue a cōuenyent place to dwell in with my folke. And there I ſhall make in the honour of the a fayre temple & a noble / wherin ye ſhall alwaye be honoured. Whan he had done his prayer / Diane anſwered in this maner. Brute ſayd ſhe go euen forth thy way ouet the ſee in to fraūce towarde the weſt / & there ye ſhal fynde an yle that is called Albion / & that yle is becompaſſed all with the ſee / & no man may come therin but it be by ſhyppes / & in that londe were wont to dwell gyauntes / but now it is not ſo / but all wyldernes / & that londe is deſtenyed & ordeyned for you & for your people.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Coryn became Brutes man / & how kynge Goffar was diſcomfyted.
                        ANd whan Brute had this anſwere of Diane the goddeſſe / anone he let wȳde vp the ancres & ſayled in to the hye ſee. And whā he & his men had ſayled .xx. dayes & more / they foūde fall beſyde a cooſt of the ſee a. M. men of the kynrede of Troy / & theyr ſouerayne mayſter was called Coryn. And whan Brute wyſt whens they were / he toke them wt moche ioye in to his ſhyppes / & ſo he ladde them forth with hym. This Coryn there became Brutes man / & to hȳ dyd homage. And ſo lōge they ſayled forth in the ſee tyll they came in to Gaſcoyne / & anone they arryued in ye hauen of Lyegers / & there they dwelled .viij. dayes for to reſt them / and to amende theyr ſayles there as they had nede. Ty dynges ſoone came to kyng Goffar that was lord of that londe how that moche people of ſtraunge londe were arryued in to his londe in the hauen of Lyegers wherfore he was ſore angred & anoyed that they came and arriued in his londe without his lycence & his leue. And anone ordeyned hym a grete power for to dryue out Brute & to deſtroye hym & all his people. But it was ſo ye kynge Goffar was dyſcomfyted & all his people / & hymſelfe fledde in to fraunce for to haue helpe & ſocour. And in yt tyme regned in fraunce .xij. kynges / and .xj. of them aſſembled a grete power for to belpe Goffar / & for to fyght agaynſt Brute. This Goffar dwelled wt the kynges of fraūce halfe a yere & more. And in the meane tyme that Goffar was in fraūce / Brute & his company deſtroyed all the londe of Gaſcoyne / and let take all the treaſour that kynge Goffar had / & made it to be brought in to his ſhyppes. ¶ And this Brute foūde in that londe a fayre place and a conueny ent / & there he let make a fayre caſtell and a ſtronge. Whan this was all done / kynge Goffar came from

fraunce and .xj. kynges with hym / and brought wt hym .xx. M. men for to fyght with Brute & his company. And Brute had but .vij. M. and .iij. C. men / & neuer theles whan ye two hooſtes mette togyder / Brutes folke through helpe of hym ſelfe & of Turyn his coſyn & of Coryn / y• well & manly him defended / ſo y• within a whyle they had ſlayne of y• frenſhmen moo than two. M. Anone all tho y• were alyue fledde away. And in this batayle Turin Brutes coſyn was ſlayne / & Brute let bury hym worthely whan he had ſpace in ye caſtell yt he had made / & tho let call yt ſame caſtell Tours / for bycauſe of the name of Turin yt there was buryed And yet vnto this daye there is a noble cite yt is called Tours. And whan kyng Goffar wyſt yt Turyn was deed / he came agayne wt his men & gaue a ſtronge batayle to Brute. But Brute & his men were ſo wery for fightȳge yt they might no longer endure / & than went in to his caſtel wt all his men: & made y• gates faſt for to ſaue them / & toke coūſeyle amōge them what they ſholde do. Brute & Coryn gaue coūſeyle & ordeyned pryuely y• Coryn ſhold go out and buſſhe hym in a wode tyll on y• morowe / ſo yt in the mornynge whan Brute ſholde fyght wt his enemyes / Coryn ſhold come wt his folke on ye one ſyde & ſlee & do all ye harme yt he myght. And on the morowe at the dawnynge of y• daye Brute wente out of the caſtel & fought fyerſly wt his enemyes / & they manly defended them. But within a lytell tyme Brūte & his men ſlewe. viij hondred of kynge Goffers men / & than came Corin wt the buſſhemēt / & he & his company ſmote to the groūde all thoſe y• wolde ſtande or abyde / ſo ye kynge Goffar & his company were diſcomfyted / & faſt they began to flec. And Brute & Coryn with theyr company fyerſly them purſued / and ſlewe moo of them in the fleynge than they dyd in y• batayle. And in this maner Brute had y• victory / neuertheles Brute made moche ſorow for his coſyn Turyn that there was ſlayne & other alſo that he had loſt of his men / that is to ſaye .vij. hondred and .xv. the whiche nobly he buryed in the ſame caſtell of Tours / there where that he had buryed Turyn his coſyn.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Brute arryued at Totnes in the yle than called Albyon / and of the wraſtlyng that was bytwene Coryn and Gogmagog.
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           ANd whā all this was done Brute wold no longer dwell there for to fyght & loſe his men. For kyng Goffers people myght euery day encreaſe moo and moo / & Brutes men leſſed / & therfore he toke all his men & wente vnto the ſee / & had wynde & weder at theyr wyll. And the fyfth daye after they arryued in an hauen at Cornes / & came in to this realme yt than was called Albyon / where they founde neyther man nor woman / ſaue grete gyauntes / & they dwelled in mountaynes & in cauernes. And Brute

ſawe the londe was fayre and at his ly kynge / and was good alſo for hym & for all his people / as Diane ye goddeſſe had behyght hym. And therof was Brute wonders gladde / and let aſſemble vpon a daye all his folke to make a ſolempne ſacrifyce and a grete feeſt in ye honour & reuerēce of Diane the goddeſſe / whiche had coūſeyled hȳ fyrſt to come in to this londe. And whā they had done theyr ſolē pnite / as they ſate at theyr meet vpon a daye there came in vpon them .xxx. gyauntes / and ſlewe .xxx. of Brutes men. Brute & his mē anone ſtert vp & fought with the gyauntes / & ſlewe them euerychone / ſaue one yt was called Gogmagog / & he was mayſter of all y• gyaūtes & he was ſtrōger & hyer than ony of the other / & Brute kepte hym for to wraſtle with Corin his man / for he was greter and hyer than 
                              •
                           ny of Brutes men from the gyrdelſtede vpwarde. Gogmagog & Corin vndertoke there for to wraſtle / & ſo togyder they went / & wraſtled a lōge tyme / but at the laſt Gogmagog helde Coryn ſo faſt yt he brake two rybbes in his ſyde / wherfore Coryn was ſore angry / & there he toke Gogmagog bytwene his armes & caſt hym downe vpon a roche / ſoo that Gogmagog brake all to peces / & ſo he dyed an euyll deth / & therfore the place is called yet vnto this day the ſaute of Gogmagog. And thā after Brute gaue all that coūtree vnto Corin And than Corin called it after his name Cornewayle / & his men ben called Cornewayles / & ſo ſholde men of that countree be called for euermore. And in that countree dwelled Corin & his men / and they made townes and houſes / & euhabyted that londe by theyr owne wyll.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Brute buylded London / & called this londe Brytayn / and Scotlonde Albanye / and Wales Cambar.
                        
                           
                              ¶ London.
                           
                        
                        
                           BRute & his men wente forth and ſawe aboute in dyuerſe places where yt they myght fynde a good place and couenable that they myght buylde and make a cyte on / for hym and for his folke. And ſo at the laſt they came by a fayre ryuer / whiche now is called Temmes / and there Brute began to buylde a fayre cyte / and called it newe Troye / in remembraunce of grete Troye / from the whiche place all theyr lygnage was comen. And this Brute let fell downe wodes / & let ere & ſowe londes / & let mawe down medowes for ye ſuſtenaūce of hȳ & his people. And thā he departed ye londe to them / ſo yt eche of them had a parte & place to dwell in. And thā Brute let call all this londe Brytayne after his name and his folke Brytons. And this Brute had gotē on his wyfe Gennogen .iij. ſones yt were worthy of dedes / ye firſt was called Lotryn / ye ſeconde Albanak / & the

thyrde Cambar / & Brute bare crowne in the cite of newe Troy .xx. yere after y• tyme that ye cyte was made. And there he made the lawes yt the Britons holde And this Brute was wonderſly well be ioued amonge all his people. And Brutes ſones alſo loued wonderſly well togyder. And whan Brute had ſought all the londe in length & brede / he founde a londe yt ioyned to Brytayne in the north And that londe Brute gaue to Albanak his ſone / & let call it Albanye after his name / yt now is called Scotlonde. And Brute foūde an other countree to warde the weſt / and gaue that to Cambar his other ſone / & let call it Cambar after his name / and now it is called Wales. And whan Brute had regned .xx. yere / than he dyed in the cite of newe Troye.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Lotryn that was Brutes ſone entred with moche honour / and gouerned the londe well and worthely.
                        AFter Brute regned Lotryn his ſone / that was ye ſeconde kynge in Brytayn. And he began to regne the ſeconde yere of Samuel. This Lotryn was crowned kyng wt grete ſolempnite of all Brytayne: And after whā he was crowned kyng / Albanak & Cambar his bretherne departed in to theyr owne coū
                           trees / & there they lyued with moche honour and worſhyp. And Lotryn regned well & wyſely / & was moche beloued of his people. And it befell ſo yt as Albanak dwelled in his his owne londe wt moche honour & worſhip / there came kyng Hum bar of Hunlonde with a grete power / & 
                              ••
                           ryued in Albanye / & wold haue cōque
                           
                              •••
                            the londe / and began to warre vpon Albanak / ſlowe hȳ in batayle. Whan Albanak was deed / the people of ye lōde fledde vnto Lotryn & tolde him bycauſe he was kynge of Brytayne how yt his broder was ſlayne / & prayed hym of his helpe & ſocour for to auenge his broders deth. Lotryn thā anone let aſſemble all the Brytons of Kent / of Douer vnto derewent / of Norfolke & Suffolke / of Keft fen & Lyndeſſey. And whan they were aſſembled / they ſped them faſt towarde theyr enemyes for to gyue them batayle And Lotryn had ſente to Cambar his broder yt he ſholde come vnto hym with all ye power that he myght make / for to helpe hym to auenge his broders deth. And ſo he dyd with a good wyll. Whan they came togider they toke theyr waye pryuely for to go ſeke kynge Humbar where they myght fynde hym. And ſo it befell that this kynge Humbar was beſyde a water that was a grete ryuer with his folke for to dyſporte hym. And there came Lotryn & Cambar his broder with all theyr folke ſodeynly or that ony of theyr enemyes wyſt. And whan Humbar ſawe them come / he was ſore adrad / for as moche as his men wyſt 
                              〈◊〉
                            not afore / and alſo they were vnarmed. And anone Humbar for drede 
                              〈◊〉
                            in to the water and drowned hymſelfe / and ſo he dyed / and his men were all flayne in ſo moche that there eſcaped not one awaye on lyue. And therfore is that water called Humbar / and euermore ſhall be as longe as the worlde ſtandeth / for bycauſe that this kynge Humbar was drowned therin. And after that Locryn went to his ſhyppes & toke there golde and ſyluer as moche as he founde vnto himſelfe / & all that other pylfre be gaue vnto other folke of his hooſt. And they founde in one of the ſhyppes a fayre damoyfell whiche was kynge Humbars doughter / and ſhe was called Eſtrylde. And whan kynge Lotryn ſawe her / he toke her with hym bycauſe of the grete beaute and fayrnes that he ſawe in her And for her he was ouertaken in loue / 

and wolde haue wedded her. Theſe tydynges came to Corin: & anone thought to auenge hym on Lotryn / for as moche as Lotryn had promiſed hym to wedde Guentolyn his doughter. And Corin in haſte toke his waye to newe Troy vnto hym / & ſayd thus to Lotryn. Certes ye rewarde me full euyll for ye paynes that I haue had for your fader Brute / wher fore ſyth it is ſo I wyll auenge me now on the. And with yt drewe his ſwerde & wolde haue ſlayne Lotryn ye kyng. But the damoyſel went bytwene them / and made them to be accorded in this maner that Lotryn ſholde take Guentolyn Corins doughter to wyfe. And ſo Lotryn dyd. Neuertheles after he was maryed he wente pryuely to Eſtrylde & gate on her a doughter that was called Abram And it befell ſo yt anone after Corin dyed & after whan he was deed / Lotryn forſoke Guentolyn that was his wyfe / & made Eſ
                              〈…〉
                            quene. And than Guentolyn dep
                              〈…〉
                            frō the
                              •
                           s 
                              〈◊〉
                            grete wrath in to Cori
                              〈…〉
                           e / & there ſeaſed all the londe in to her owne ha
                              •
                           ors / for as moche as ſhe was her faders heyre / & toke homage of all y• men of y• londe. And afterwarde ſhe aſſembled a grete hooſt & a myghty of men for to be auenged vpon Lottyn y• was her lorde / & gaue hym a ſtronge but a yle / where Lotryn her huſbonde was ſlayne / & his men diſcōfyted in the .v. yere of his regne. Guētolyn let take Eſtrylde & Abram her doughter / & bounde them bothe handes & fete & caſt them bothe in to a water / & ſo they were dro
                              •••
                           ed / wherfore y• water was euermore after called Abram / after y• name of y• damoyſell y• was Eſt
                              •
                           yldes doughter / & englyſſhe men call that water Seuerine / & walſhmen call it Abram yet vn to this daye. And whan this was done Gu
                              〈…〉
                           ol yn let crowne her quene of all y• londe. And ſhe gouerned the londe well and wyſely vnto th
                              •
                           ty me that 
                              〈◊〉
                            her ſone that Lotryn had goten 
                              〈…〉
                            was .xx. yere of age / that he myght be kyng. And ſo the quene reg
                              ••
                           d .xv. yere And than let ſhe crowne her ſone kyng / and he regned and gouerned the 
                              〈◊〉
                            well & worthtly. And his moder went in to Cornewayle / and there ſhe dwelled all the dayes of her lyfe.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Madan reg
                              •
                           ed in peas all his lyfe.
                        THis Madan ſone to Lotryn regned on the Brytons .xl. yere / the whiche began to regne the .xv. yere of Saul. And this Madan lyued in peas all his dayes / & gate two ſones / Mempris and Maulyn. Than he dyed / and lyeth at newe Troye.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mundi .iiij. M .C .xxij. 
                              •
                           t 
                              〈◊〉
                            Chriſti na
                              〈…〉
                           tatem. M. 
                              •
                           xxiiij.
                        ¶ Here begynneth the fourth age durynge to the tranſmygracyon.

                              Dauyd.
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 •
                              
                           Auyd the ſeconde kynge 
                              〈◊〉
                            Iſraell regned this tyme 
                              〈◊〉
                            man choſen after y• deſy
                              〈…〉
                            god. And he was anoy
                              〈…〉
                            in his yonge age by Sam
                              〈…〉
                            / & after y• deth of kynge Saul he reg
                              ••
                           d. x
                              •
                           . 
                              〈◊〉
                            This D
                              〈…〉
                           d was as a 
                              〈◊〉
                            in 
                              〈◊〉
                            mankynde / in whome 
                              〈◊〉
                            was 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           
ſo moche power & ſo moche humy
                              ••
                           te / ſo moche noblenes & ſo moche 
                              〈◊〉
                            / ſo grete a charge of ſeculer thynges / & ſo pure & beuoute 
                              〈◊〉
                            contemplacyon of ſpirytuall thynges / ſo many men to 
                              〈…〉
                           e / & ſo many teres to 
                              ••
                           epe for his 
                              ••
                           eſpace. 
                              •
                           ide plura. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . regum. ¶ Ab
                              •
                           athar this tyme was biſſhop / & he fledde fro Saul vnto Dauid / & he was gloryous with hym all his dayes. G
                              •
                           d / Nathan / and Aſoph were prophetes than. And Nathan was broders ſone to Dauid.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Mempris ſlewe his broder Maulyn.
                        THis Mēpris & his broder Maulyu ſtroue faſt for the londe. And Mempris began to regne the .xxxv. yere of Dauid: & for bycauſe that he was the eldeſt ſone he wold haue had all y• londe / and Maulyn wolde not ſuffre hym / ſo y• they toke a day of loue & accorde / and at this daye Mempris let kyll his broder through treaſon / & hymſelfe afterward helde the londe / & anone let crowne hym kyng & regned / & after became ſo lyther a man yt he wtin a whyle all y• men of his londe. And at the laſt he became ſo wycked & ſo lecherous y• he forſoke his owne wyfe & vſed the ſynne of ſodomye / wherfore almighty god was gretly diſpleaſed & wroth with hym / & vpon hym toke vengeaunce bycauſe of his wyckednes. For vpon a daye as he went forth on huntyng in a foreſt there he loſt all his men y• were with hym / & wyſt not what he ſhold do / & ſo he went 
                              •
                           p & downe hymſelfe alone / & cryed after his mē / but they were gone / & there came wolues anone & all to drewe hym in peces / whan he had regned .xxiiij. yere. And whā his people herde y• he was ſo deed / they made ioy & myrth ynough and anone made Ebra
                              •
                            his ſone kynge / and he regned with moche honour.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mundi .iiij. M .C .lxv. Et ante Chriſti na
                              〈…〉
                           tem. M .xxxiiij.
                        SAlomon the kyng of peas of the gyfte of our lor
                              •
                            had a ſynguler excedynge aboue all men y• euer was in this world / but alonely god in wyſdom & in tycheſſe / in deyntees & in glory / & 
                              •
                           a miliarite wt god. And all though Moyſes & Dauid / Peter & Paule / Ierome & Auſtyn / & other moo exceded hym in holynes / but yet they ex
                              ••
                           ded hym not 
                              〈◊〉
                            glorye & rycheſſe. And this man ſo excedynge all men / wretchedly 
                              〈◊〉
                           . Of this Salomon is redde in an epyſtle of ſa
                              •••
                            Ierome / y• he gate a chylde on y• doughter of Pharao at x
                              •
                           . yere of his age. V
                              •
                           
                           de pſa regū. ¶ Sadoch this tyme was byſſhop / & for he deriyned not to y• parte of Adonie Dauids ſone / but was with Nathan for Salomon / & Ab
                              •
                           atha
                              •
                            on the other parte was depoſed.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mundi. 
                              •
                           iij. M. ij .C .v. Et ante Chriſti nat
                              〈…〉
                           tem .ix .C. lxxxx
                              •••
                           j.
                        ROboas ſucceded Salomō his 
                              〈◊〉
                            der in his kyngdome / but not 
                              〈◊〉
                            wyſdome. He was deceyued through y• coūſeyle of yonge men / & loſt .x. 
                              〈◊〉
                            / in ſo moche as he anſwered no
                              •
                            wyſely the people / as it is open. 
                              〈◊〉
                            regum. ¶ Achimias was byſſhop / and was y• ſone of Sadoth. Vt 
                              pꝪ.
                              patet
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           . Para
                              ••
                           po.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Reges Iſrael in
                              ••
                           pi
                              •••
                           .
                        I Hero
                              ••
                           as regned kyng in Iſrael xxij. yere / & he was fyrſt of y• houſ holde of Salomon and a good man▪ but whā he was made kyng he was a myſchenous 
                              〈◊〉
                            ydolatry / & made iſrael to ſynne i
                              〈…〉
                           ry / & many grete incō
                           uenyentes 
                              〈…〉
                           one▪ almooſt to the deſtru
                              ••
                           yon of 
                              〈◊〉
                            Iſrael. For he was y• fygure of Ma
                              〈…〉
                           . 
                              ••
                           de p
                              •
                           a .iij. regū. ¶ Abdias y• ſon
                              •
                            of Rob
                              •
                           as regned in 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           
Iewry thre yere / and other whyle as a good mā & holpen by god / & other whyle wretchedly diſpoſed in ydolatry / & ther fore our lorde ſuffred him to regne but a lytell tyme. Vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            .iij. regū. et .ij. para.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mūdi .iiij. M. ij .C .xxv. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatem .ix .C. lxxiiij.
                        ASa the ſone of Abdias regned xvj. yere / in the begynnynge of his regne he was a ryght wys man / & walked as Dauyd dyd / & he ouercame the Ethyopes / & deſtroyed ydolles. But after that he was ſworne to the kyng of Sirry Benedab / for Baaſa kyng of Iſrael than began warre agaynſt hym / y• whiche diſpleaſed god / wherfore he ſent hym y• prophete Anani / whome he put in priſon / and therfore he had the gowte ſtrongly & dyed therof. Vt 
                              ptꝪ
                              patet
                            .iij. regū .ij. para. Azarias ſone to Achonias was byſſhop. ¶ Nadab kyng of Iſrael regned two yere / y• whiche began to regne the ſeconde yere of Aſa kyng of Iewes / & dyd not as his fader. And Baaſa ouer threwe hym / & regned for hym. Vt patet .iij. regum. ¶ Baaſa kyng of Iſrael regned .xxiiij. yere / the whiche began to regne the thyrde yere of Aſa kyng of Iewes / & he walked in the ſynnes of Iheroboam / and ſlewe Iehen the prophete. ¶ Hela the ſone of Baaſa regned in Iſrael two yere / & zamri ſlewe hym & regned .vij. dayes. ¶ Amri regned .xij. yere & dyd nought as his predeceſſours dyd. ¶ Acha ſone to Amri regned on Iſrael xxij. yere / & aboue all y• were afore hym he was curſed / for wycked Ieſabel ruled more than he / and meued hym to folowe her. Vt patet .iij. regum.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kyng Ebrac the whiche began to regne the .xv. yere of Dauyd / and how he conquered fraunce.
                        THis Ebrac regned .lx. yere / & he was a ſtronge & a myghty man & through his myght & helpe of his brytons cōquered all fraūce / & wanne there ſo moche gold & ſylue
                              •
                            / y• whan h
                              •
                           came agayne in to this londe he made a 
                              •••
                           e / & after his own name called it Ebrac / y• is now called Euery wyk. And this kyng made ye caſtell of maydens / yt now is called Edenburgh. This kyng had .xix. ſones & .xxiij. doughters by diuers womē goten / and theſe ſones were called as ye ſhall here. Brute greneſheld / Margand Seiſell / Morghwyth / Flengha
                              ••
                            / Bladud / Iakȳ / Kinbar / Roſelm / Spadogh Godeherl / Thormnan / Gildaugh / Iorkanghut / Haibor / Ketin / Rother / Kaier and Aſſaruth. And ye doughters hyght as foloweth. Elegine / ymogē / Oghdas Guenbran / Gnardich / Augarel / Guent hold / Tāguſtel / Gorghō / Michel / Medhan / Mailour / Ondur / Cābredan / Ragan / Renthely / Neeſt / Cheghan / Skaldud / Gladꝰ / Heberhyn / Abalaghe / and Blandau / & theſe were the .xxiij. doughters. And the bretherne became all good knyghtes & worthy in many coūtrees.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kynge Brute greneſhelde the fyrſt ſone of kynge Ebrac.
                        AFter y• deth of kynge Ebrac regned Brute greneſhelde his ſone xxx. yere / whiche was Ebracs firſt ſone that well & nobly regned / & whan tyme came he dyed / and lyeth at yorke
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kynge Leyll that was Brute greneſheldes ſone.
                        ANd whan kynge Brute greneſheld was deed regned his ſone Leyll .xxij. yere / and he made a fayre towne and let call it Karleyll after his owne name. And he was a worthy man

and well beloued of his people / & whan he had regned .xxij. yere he dyed & lyeth at Karleyl. ¶ And in this tyme regned kynge Salomon in Ieruſalē / & made y• noble temple. And to him came Sibelle quene of Saba for to here & ſe yf it were ſoth y• mē ſpake of y• grete & noble wytte & wyſdome of kyng Salomon. And ſhe foūde it ſothe that men had her tolde.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mūdi .iiij. M. ij .C .lxvj. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatem .ix .C. xlij.
                        IOſaphat kynge of Iewes was a good man & a ryche / & a deuout in the waye of our lord / & regned .xxv. yere and dyd none yll / but to y• curſed kyng of Iſrael gaue helpe / & other lytel thȳges And therfore our lorde was wt hym. Vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            .ij. para. ¶ Helyas the grete ꝓphete was this tyme an holy man yt was lyfted vp in to paradyſe wt grete ſolace in a chayre. Marcheas & Abdias prophecyed with hym. ¶ Ochoſias ſone of Achab regned in Iſrael two yere / and ſente to Belſabub god of Acharan to be heled / for the whiche he dyed / after y• ſayenge of Helye. Vt patet .iiij. regum.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kynge Lud Ludibras that was kynge Leyles ſone.
                        ANd this kynge Lud Ludibras made the cite of Caunterbury & Wyncheſtre / & he regned .xxxix. yere / & than he dyed / & lyeth at Wyncheſtre.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kynge Bladud that was Ludibras ſone / how he regned and was a good man and a nygromancer.
                        AFter this Lud ludibras regned Bladud his ſon
                              •
                            a grete nygromancer / & through his craſte of nygromā
                           
                              •
                           y he made a meruaylous hote bath as the Ieſt telleth / and he regned .xxj. yere / and lyeth at newe Troye.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mundi .iiij. M. ij .C .lxxxxj. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatē .ix .C. viij.
                        IOram kyng of Iewes ſone to Ioſaphat regned .viij. yere. this Ioram was a curſed man / and had a good fader / he ſlewe his brethern / & wretchedly lyued as dyd the kynges of Iſraell / therfore he was ſore correcked and dyed vnhappely. Vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            .i
                              •
                           . para. ¶ This tyme Helyas was tauyſſhed in to paradyſe. ¶ Ochoſias or Aſarias kynge of Iewes regned one yere / & liued nought as his fader dyd / & anone was ſlayne wt all the hous of Achab. ¶ Achalia moder to Aſarias toke the kyngdome / & ſlewe all the kynges blode / & regned▪ 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            & the .vij. yere of Ioiada byſſhop ſhe was ſlayne .iiij. reg. This Aſarias & his ſo
                              ••
                            Ioas & his neuewe Amazia Mathe
                              •
                           e the euāgelyſt putteth not in the lyne of Chryſt for theyr myſdedes. ¶ Ioram kynge of Iſrael regned .xij. yere / y• whiche began to regne the .xviij. yere of Ioſaphat for his broder Ochoſ
                              •
                           e / & curſedly he lyued / & was ſlayne of Ie
                              •••
                            wt al his faders houſholde. Vt p
                              •
                           z. ¶ Iehen anoynted of y• chylde of Hel
                              •
                           ſe vpon Iſrael ſlewe Achariam y• kyng of Iewes & Ioram the kyng of Iſrael / & Ieſabel moder to Iorā / & .lxx. children of Achab and .xlij. bretherne of Azari / and all the preeſtes of Baal / & he regned .xviij. yere ¶ Athalia moder to Azari kyng of Iewes / doughter to Achab regned on the Iewes. v
                              •
                           . yere / & ſlewe y• kynges blode of Ioram / excepte Ioas y• ſone of Azari the whiche was kepte amonge ſhepeherdes / and after ſhe was ſlayne.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mūdi .iiij. M. iij .C .ix. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatē. viij .C .lxxxxiij.
                        
                           
IOam ſone to Achazie regned in y• Iewry .xl. yere / whome Ioiada y• biſſhop crowned king at .vij. yere of age And he lyued well as lōge as he was ruled by Ioiada / but after he forſoke god / & martyred Azarias y• tune biſſhop tone to Iaiada / for he blamed hȳ y• he forſoke his god. Vide 
                              pl’a
                              plura
                            ij. para. ¶ Ioathas ſone to Iehen regned in iſrael .xvij. yere in whoſe dayes Heliſe y• prophete dyed / & he began to regne the .xx. yere of Ioas Vide 
                              pl’a
                              plura
                            iiij. reg. ¶ Ioam ſone to Ioathas regned ī iſrael .xvij. yere / & he troubled Amazia. Vide 
                              pl’a
                              plura
                            iiij. regū .xiij.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kynge Leyr ſone to Bladud / & of the anſwere of his yongeſt doughter / that gracyouſly was maryed vnto the kynge of fraunce.
                        AFter kyng Bladud regned Leyr his ſone / and this Leyr made y• towne of Leyceſtre / & he let call y• towne after his name / & he gouerned y• towne well & nobly. This kyng Leyr had thre doughters / y• fyrſt was called Gonorill / the ſeconde Rigan / & y• thyrde Cordeill / and the youngeſt doughter was fayreſt & beſt of cōdicyons. The kyng theyr fader became an olde man / & wolde yt his doughters were maryed or y• he dyed / but fyrſt he thought to aſſay whiche of them loued him mooſt & beſt / for ſhe y• loued him beſt ſholde beſt be maryed. And he axed of y• firſt doughter how well ſhe loued hȳ. And ſhe anſwered & ſayd / better than her owne lyf. Now certes ſayd her fader / y• is a grete loue. Thā he axed the ſeconde doughter / how moche ſhe loued hym. And ſhe ſayd more & paſſynge all y• creatures of y• worlde. Per ma foy ſayd her fader / I may no more axe. And than he axed of y• thyrde doughter how moche ſhe loued him. Certes fader ſayd ſhe / my ſyſters haue tolde you gloſyng wordes / but I ſhall tell you trouth / for I loue you as I ought to loue my fader And for to brynge you more in certayne how I loue you I ſhall you tell / as moche as ye be worth / ſo moche ſhall ye be loued. The kyng her fader wende y• ſhe had ſcorned hym / and became wonders wroth / & ſware by heuē & erth ſhe ſhold neuer haue good of him / but his doughters y• loued hym ſo moche ſhold be well auaūced & maried. And y• firſt doughter he maryed to Maugles kynge of Scotlonde / & the ſeconde he maryed to Hauemos erle of Cornewayle / & ſo they ordeyned & ſpake bytwene them y• they ſholde departe y• realme bytwene them two after y• deth of kyng Leyr theyr fader / ſo y• Cordeill his yongeſt doughter ſholde no thynge haue of his londe. But this Cordeill was wonders fayre & of good cōdicyons & maners / that y• kynge of fraūce Agāpe herde of her fame / & ſent to kyng Leyr her fader for to haue her vnto his wyfe / & prayed hym therof. And kynge Leyr her fader ſent him worde y• he had departed his londe & gyuē all to his two doughters before ſaid / & ſayd he had no more lond wherwith her to mary. And whan Agampe y• kynge of fraūce herde this anſwere / he ſente anone agayne to Leyr & ſayd y• he aſked no thynge wt her but onely her clothinge & her body. And anone kyng Leyr ſent her ouer y• ſee to y• kynge of fraūce. And he receyued her wt moche worſhip / & wt ſolempnite he ſpouſed her / & made her quene of fraūce.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kyng Leyr was dryuen out of his londe through his folke. And how Cordeill his yongeſt doughter helped hym at his nede.
                        THus it befell afterwarde y• theſe two eldeſt doughters wolde not abyde tyll Leyr theyr fader was deed / 

but warred vpon hym whyles that he was on lyue / & dyd hym moche ſorow & ſhame / wherfore they toke frō hym all ye realme / & bytwene them had ordeyned yt one of them ſhold haue kyng Leyr to ſoiourne all his lyfe tyme wt .lx. knyghtes & ſquyers / yt he myght worſhypfully go & ryde wheder yt he wolde / & in to what coūtree yt hym lyked to playe & to ſolace. So yt Maugles kyng of Scotlond had kyng Leyr with hym in ye maner as is aboue ſayd / & or a yere was paſſed Gonoril yt was his eldeſt doughter & quene of Scotlond was ſo anoyed of hym & of his people / yt anone ſhe & her lorde ſpake togyder / wherfore halfe his knyghtes & his ſquyers went frō hym / & no more were lefte wt hym but .xxx. And whan this was done Leyr began for to make moche ſorow for bycauſe that his eſtate was empayred / & men had of him more ſcorne & deſpyte than euer they had before / wherfore he wyſt not what to do. And at y• laſt thought y• he wold go in to Corne wayle to Rigan his other doughter. And whā he was come y• erle & his wyfe that was Leyrs doughter welcomed hym / & wt hym made moche ioye / & there he dwelled with .xxx. knyghtes & ſquyers. And he had not ſcarſly dwelled there a yere but yt his doughter of hym & of his company was wery / & her lord & ſhe of hym had grete ſcorne & deſpyte / ſo that frō .xxx. knyghtes they brought vnto .x. and afterwarde had he but .v. & ſo they left hym no moo. Than made he grete ſorowe / & ſayd ſore wepyng. Alas that euer I came in to this londe & ſayd yet had it ben better to haue dwelled wt my fyrſt doughter. And anone he went thens to his fyrſt doughter agayn / but anone as ſhe ſawe hym come ſhe ſware by god & by his holy name / & by as moche as ſhe myght that he ſhold haue no more wt hym but one knyght yf he wold there abyde. Than began Leyr agayne to wepe and made moche ſorowe & ſayd Alas now to longe haue I lyued yt this ſorowe & myſchefe is to me now fallen. For now am I poore yt ſomtyme was ryche / but now haue I no frende ne kyn that to me wyll do ony good. But whā I was ryche all mē me honoured & worſhypped / & now euery man hath of me ſcorne & deſpite / & now I wote wel that Cordeil my yōgeſt doughter ſaid trouth whā ſhe ſayd / as moche as I had ſo moche ſholde I be loued / & all y• whyle yt I had good / ſo lōge was I loued & honoured for my rycheſſe / but my two doughters gloſed me tho / & now of me they ſet lytel pryce / & ſothe tolde me Cordeil but I wolde not byleue it ne vnder ſtande & therfore I let her go fro me as a thinge that I ſet lytell pryce of / & now wote I not what to do ſyth my two doughters haue me thus deceyued yt I ſo moche loued / & now muſt I nedes ſeke her yt is in an other londe yt lyghtly I let go 
                              ••
                           o me wtout ony reward or gyftes and ſ
                              •
                           e ſayd that ſhe loued me as moche as ſhe ought to loue her fader by all maner of reaſon / & thā I ſholde haue a
                              ••
                           d her no more / & thoſe yt me other wyſe beb
                              •
                           ght through theyr fals ſpeche now haue me deceyued. In this maner Leyr 
                              〈◊〉
                            tyme began to make his mo
                              •
                           e. And at the laſt he ſhope hym to ye ſee / & paſſed ouer into fraūce / & aſked & eſpyed where the quene myght be founde. And men tolde hym where ſhe was. And whā be came to ye cite that ſhe was in pryuely he ſene his ſquyer vnto ye quene to tell her yt her fader was comen to her for grete nede. And whan ye ſquyer came to ye quene he told her euery dele of her ſyſters from ye begynnynge vnto the ende. Cordeil the quene anone toke gold & ſyluer plente & toke it to ye ſquyer in coūſeyle yt he ſholde go in to a certayne cite and hym araye &

waſſhe / & than come agayn to her / and brynge with him an honeſt company of knyghtes .xl. at the leeſt wt theyr meyny and than he ſholde ſende to her lorde the kynge & feyne that he were comen for to ſe & ſpeke with his doughter & hȳ. And ſo he dyd. And whan the kynge and the quene herde that they came / with moche honour they hym receyued. And the kynge of fraūce than let ſende through all his realme & cōmaūded that all men ſholde be as entendaūt to kynge Leyr y• quenes fader in all maner of thinges as it were vnto hymſelfe. Whā kyng Leyr had dwelled there a moneth & more he tolde to y• kynge & to y• quene his doughter how his two eldeſt doughters had ſerued hym. Agampe anone let ordeyne a grete hoſt of frenſhmen & ſent in to Britayne wt Leyr y• quenes fader for to conquere his kyngdome agayne. And Cordeil alſo came wt her fader in to Britayn for to haue the realme after her faders deth. And anone they went to ſhyppe & paſſed the ſee & came in to Brytayne / & fought wt the felons / & diſcōfited them & ſlewe / & than had he his londe agayn / & after lyued thre yere & helde his realme in peas / & afterward dyed. And Cordeil his doughter him let bury with moche honour at Leyceſtre.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mūdi .iiij. M. iij .C .xlix. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatem. viij .C .liij.
                        AMaſias ſone to Ioam regned on the Iewes .xxix. yere / after y• whiche y• kyngdom of iewes was wtout kyng .xiij. yere. This man worſhypped the goddes of Seyr. Vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            .ij. para .xxv. ¶ Ieroboam ſone to Ioam regned on Iſrael .xlj. yere / y• whiche was manly & vyctoryous / for he ouercame the kynge of Sirie / & reſtored Iſrael & Damaſke after the worde of Iono y• prophete / but he was not good. Therfore ſayth ſaynt Auſtyn. Yf good men regne / they ꝓfyte many men. And yf yll men regne / they hurte many men.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mūdi .iiij. M. iij .C .lxxxviij. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatem .viii .C. xj.
                        Ozias or Azarias ſone to Amaſias regned on the Iewry .lij. yere / the whiche lyued well afore our lorde / of hȳ is none euyll thȳge wryten / but that he vſurped the dignite of preeſthode vnder Azari / the whiche he forbade hym. For the whiche cauſe our lorde ſtroke hym with a lepre. Vt patet .ij. para. ¶ Ozee byſſhop & prophete was this tyme the fyrſt of the .xij. that was ſent agaynſt y• xij. trybes. Iohel the ſeconde of the .xij. prophecyed of Iuda. Ananias y• thyrde prophecyed agaynſt many people. Abdias the fourth of the .xij. prophecyed agaynſt Edom. ¶ zacharias ſone to Ieroboam regned in Iſrael .vj. monethes the whiche began to regne the .xxxviij. yere of Ozias / & was nought in his lyuynge as his predeceſſours were. And zellum ſlewe hym / & regned a moneth. And Manahen ſlewe hym and toke his kyngdome. Vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            .iiij. regū. This Manahen regned .x. yere / the whiche began to regne y• .xxxix. yere of Oſias / & he ruled hym miſcheuouſly / & our lord betoke hym in y• power of y• kyng of Aſſuriorū / and he payed to hym a. M. talentes of ſyluer. Vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            .iiij. regū. ¶ Phaſeia ſone to Manahen regned in Iſrael two yere and he began to regne the .l. yere of Ozias / and he was nought in his lyuyng. ¶ Phaſee ſlewe Phaſeia / & regned .xx. yere / & he began to regne the .lij. yere of Ozias / & dyd as other curſed men dyd. Vide 
                              pl’a
                              plura
                            iiij. regū. And after this / Iſrael was wtouten ony kyng .viij. yere.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Morgan & Conedag neuewes to Cordeil warred on her & put her to deth.
                        
                           
WHan that kyng Leyr was deed Cordeill his yongeſt doughter regned y• .x. yere of Ozias kyng of the Iewry. And after her regned Conedag / the .xv. yere of Ozias. And Cordeill that was Leyrs yongeſt doughter after the deth of her fader had al y• londe fyue yere / & in the meane tyme dyed her lorde Agampe y• was kyng of fraunce. And after his deth there came Morgan & Conedag that were Cordeyls ſyſters ſones & to her had enemite for as moche as theyr aunt had y• londe / ſo y• bytwene them they ordeyned a grete power / and ſtrongly warred on her / & neuer reſted tyll they had taken her & put her to deth And than Morgan & Conedag ſeaſed al the londe & departed it bytwene them / & they held it .xij. yere / & whan y• .xij. yere were gone there began bytwene them a grete debate / ſo y• they warred ſtrongly togyder / & dyd to eche other moche dyſeaſe / for Morgan wold haue all y• londe fro beyonde Humber y• Conedag helde. But he came agaynſt hym wt a ſtronge power: ſo y• Morgan durſt not abyde but fledde away in to Wales / and Conedag purſued hym / & toke hym & ſlewe hym. And than Conedag came & ſeaſed al the londe in to his handes & helde it / & regned after .xxxiij. yere / & than he dyed / & lyeth at newe Troy.
                        ¶ And bycauſe y• mater cōteyneth moſt cōmodiouſly togyder of y• kynges of Britayn now called Englonde / for y• tyme of them is not certaynly knowen what tyme of y• worlde theſe kynges folowynge regned / therfore they ſhall be togyder tyll it be comen vnto Euentolyn kyng of Brytayne now called Englonde.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Reynolde that was Conedags ſone regned after his fader / and in his tyme it rayned blode thre dayes / in tokenynge of grete deth.
                        AFter this Conedag regned Reynold his ſone y• was a wyſe & an hardy knyght & curteys / y• well & nobly ruled y• londe / & was well beloued of all folke. And in his tyme it rayned blode y• laſted thre dayes as god wolde / & ſoone after there came a grete deth of people / for hooſtes wtout nōbre of people fought tyll y• god therof toke pite / & than it ceſed And this Reynolde regned .xxij. yere / & than dyed / & lyeth at Yorke.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Gorbodian regned in peas that was Reynoldes ſone.
                        AFter this Reynolde regned Gorbodian his ſone .xv. yere / & than dyed / and lyeth at Yorke.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Gorbodian had .ij. ſones / & how the one ſlewe y• other for to haue y• londe / & how ydoyne theyr moder ſlew y• other wherfore the londe was deſtroyed.
                        WHan this Gorbodian was deed his two ſones y• he had became ſtoute & proude / & euer warred togyder for the londe / & y• one was called Ferres & y• other Porres. And this Ferres wolde haue all y• londe / but that other wold not ſuffre hym. This Ferres had a felonous hert: & thought through treaſon to ſlee his broder / but pryuely he wente in to fraūce / & there abode wt the kynge Syward / tyll vpon a tyme whan he came agayn to fyght wt his broder Ferres but full euyl it happed him / for he was ſlayne fyrſt. Whan ydoyne theyr moder wyſt that Porres was deed ſhe made grete ſorowe / for bycauſe y• ſhe loued hȳ more than y• other / & thought for to ſlee hym pryuely. And pryuely ſhe came to her ſone vpon a night wt two knyues & therwt cut his throte / & y• body alſo in to ſmall peces. Who herde euer of ſuche a moder / y• ſlewe wt her owne handes her owne ſone. And lōge tyme after laſted y• reprefe & ſhame to y• moder / that for bycauſe

of that one ſone / ſhe murdred that other / and ſo loſt them bothe.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How foure kynges curteyſly helde all Brytayne / and what be theyr names ye ſhall here after.
                        
                           
                        
                        WHan the two brethern were deed they ne had lefte behynde them neyther ſone ne doughter ne none other of the kynrede yt might enheryte y• londe And for as moche as the ſtrongeſt men droue & diſcomfyted the febleſt & toke all theyr londes / ſo yt in euery coūtree they had grete warre and ſtryfe vnder them But amōge all other thȳges there were foure in the coūtree that ouercame all y• other / & through theyr myght & ſtrēgth they toke all the londes / & euery of them toke a certayne coūtree / & in his coūtree let call hym kynge / & one of them was called Scater / & he was called kynge of Scotlonde / & that other was called Da walier / & he was kynge of Logres / & of all the londe that was Lotryns yt was Brutes ſone. The thyrde was called Ru dac / & he was kynge of Wales. And the fourth was called Cloten / & he was kȳg of Cornewayle. But this Cloten ſholde haue had all the londe by right / bycauſe there was no man y• wyſt none ſo ryght heyre as he was. But they that were ſtrongeſt ſet lytel by them y• were of leſſe eſtate / & therfore this Clotē had no more londe amonge them but Cornewayle.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kynge Donebant that was Clotens ſone / & how he wanne the londe.
                        THis Cloten had a ſone that was called Donebāt / y• after the deth of his fader became an hardy man and a fayre & a curteys / ſo y• he paſſed all the other kȳges of fayrnes & of worthynes. And anone as he was knyght he wyſt wel that whan his fader lyued he was mooſt ryghtfull heyre of all y• londe / and ſholde haue had it by ryght / but y• other kynges y• were of moche more ſtrength than he toke frō hym y• londe. Wherfore this Donebant ordeyned hym a grete power / & conquered fyrſt the londe of Logres / and after he went to conquere all the londe of Scotlonde and Wales. And Scater came wt his men & gaue him batayle / & Rudac came alſo wt his walſhe men for to helpe hȳ / but ſo it befell y• Rudac was ſlayne & Scater alſo in playne batayle. And ſo Donebāt had y• vyctory & conquered all the londe / & well mayntayned it in peas and in quyete / that neuer before it was ſo well mayntayned.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Donebāt was the fyrſt kyng y• euer bare crowne of golde in Brytayne.
                        THis Donebant let make hym a crowne of gold / & ware ye crowne vpon his heed as neuer kyng did before & he ordeyned a ſtatute / yt yfa man had done neuer ſo moche harme and myght come in to the Temple / there ſholde no man hym myſdo / but go there in ſafete and in peas / & after go in to what londe or countree that hym pleaſed / without ony harme / and yf ony man had ſet ony

hande vpon hym / he than ſhold leſe his lyfe. And this Donebant made y• towne of Malmeſbury / & y• towne alſo of y• viſe And whā he had regned well & worthely .xl. yere he dyed & lyeth at new Troy.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Brenne & Belyn departed bytwene them the londe after the deth of Donebant theyr fader. And of the warre bytwene them.
                        ANd after y• this Donebant was deed his ſones departed y• londe bytwene them as theyr fader had ordeyned / ſo y• Belyn his eldeſt ſone had all y• londe of Brytayn from Humbar ſouthwarde / & his broder Brenne had all the londe from Humbar to Scotlonde. But for as moche as Belin had y• better part Brenne therfore waxed wroth & wolde haue had more of the londe: & Belyn his broder wolde graūte hȳ no more / wherfore ſtryfe & warre aroſe bytwene them two. But Brenne y• yōger broder had no myght ne ſtrength agaynſt Belyn / and therfore Brenne through coūſeyll of his folke went fro thens in to Norwey to y• kyng Olſynges / & prayed hym of helpe & ſo
                              •
                           our for to conquere all y• londe vpon Belyn his broder / vpon y• couenaūt yt he wolde haue his doughter to wyfe. And kyng Olſynges hȳ graūted. And Belin anone as his broder was gone to Norwey he ſeaſed in to his hādes all y• londe of Northumberlond / & toke all y• caſtels & let them be arayed / & kept y• cooſtes of the ſee y• Brenne ſholde not arryue on no ſyde but y• he were taken. Kyng Olſynges let aſſemble a grete hooſt / & delyuered his doughter to Brēne & all y• people that he had ordeyned. This damoyſell Samye had longe tyme loued a kyng y• was called Gutlagh / & to hym ſhe tolde all her coūſeyle / & how y• Brenne ſholde haue her & lede her with hym for euermore / & ſo he ſholde leſe her but that ſhe myght forſake Brenne. And whā Gutlagh had herde theſe tydynges / he laye for to eſpye Brenne wt as many ſhippes as he myght make & haue. So the two fletes mette togyder / & longe tyme they fought / ſo that Brenne & his men were dyſcomfyted. And kynge Gutlagh toke Samye & put her in to his ſhyppe. And Brenne ſhamefully fled thens as a man diſcomfyted. And this kynge Gutlagh wolde haue gone in to his owne toū
                           
                              •
                           tre but there came vpon hȳ ſo grete a 
                              〈…〉
                           ſt that laſted .v. dayes / ſo y• through y• 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            peſt he was dryuen in to Brytayn with thre ſhyppes & no moo. And tho y• kepte the cooſtes of y• ſee toke Gutlagh & Samye & all his folke / & them preſented to Belyn. And Belyn put them in pryſon.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Belyn let departe out of his londe kynge Gutlagh of Denmarke and Samye.
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            I was not longe after y• Brenne came agayn with a grete nauy & ſente to his broder Belyn that he ſholde yelde agayn his londe to his wyfe & his folke / & his caſtles alſo / or els be worde deſtroye his londe. Belyn drad noth
                              •
                           ge his malyce / & wolde no thynge do 
                              〈◊〉
                            that he had ſayd. Wherfore Brenne came with his folke & fought wt B
                              〈…〉
                            & Brenne was diſcomfyted and his folke ſlayne / & hymſelfe fledde with. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . men in to fraūce. And this Belyn that was Brennes broder went than to Yorke / & toke coūſeyle what he myght do with kyng Gutlagh / for kyng Gutlagh profered to become his man / & to holde his londe of hym / yeldynge yerely a thouſande poūde of ſyluer for euermore / and for ſykernes of this couenaunt to be hol den / Gutlagh ſholde brynge hym good hoſtages / & to hym ſholde do homage &

all his folke / & yet he ſholde ſwere vpon a boke y• it ſholde neuer be broken ne fayled. ¶ Belyn tho by coūſeyle of his folke graūted hym his aſkyng / & ſo Gutlagh became his man. And Belyn toke of hȳ his homage by an othe / & by wrytynge the ſame couenauntes. And vpon theſe couenaūtes kynge Guthlagh toke Samie & his folke & went thens & returned agayne to Denmarke. Euermore after were the couenaūtes holden & y• truage payed / tyll the tyme that Hon
                              •
                           lus was kyng of Denmarke & alſo of this londe through his wyfe Gildeburgh y• he had ſpouſed / for ſhe was right heyre of this londe. This Belyn dwelled tho in peas & worſhypfully hym helde amonge his barōs. And he made foure ryall wayes one from y• eeſt vnto y• weſt / & that was called watlyng ſtrete / & an other from y• north vnto the ſouth / & that was called Ikelme ſtrete / and two other wayes he made in boſſyng through out y• londe / y• one is called Foſſe / and that other Foſſe dyke. And he maynteyned well y• good lawes y• Donebāt his fader had made & ordeyned in his tyme / as before is ſayd.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How accordmēt was made bytwene Brenne and Belyn through Cornewen that was theyr moder.
                        BRenne that was Belyns broder had longe time dwelled in fraūce & there had conquered a grete lordſhyp through maryage. For he was duke of Burgoyne through y• doughter of duke Fewyn y• he had ſpouſed / whiche was right heyre of y• londe. And this Brenne ordeyned a grete power of his folke and alſo of fraūce / & came in to this londe for to fight wt Belyn his broder. And Belyn came agaynſt hym wt a grete power of brytons / & wolde haue gyuen hym batayle. But whā theyr moder Cornewen that thā lyued had herde that y• one broder wold haue deſtroyed that other / ſhe went bytwene her ſones / & made them accorde wt moche payne. So y• at the laſt the two bretherne wt moche blyſſe went togyder in to new Troy / y• now is called Londō / where they dwelled a yere / & after they toke theyr counſeyle for to go & cōquere all fraūce / & ſo they dyd / & brent townes & deſtroyed the londe in lengthe & brede / & the kyng of fraūce gaue them batayle wt his power / but he was ouer comen / & gaue truage to Belyn & to his broder. And after y• they went forth vnto Rome / & cōquered it & all Lombardy and Germany / & toke homage of all the chefe lordes & barons. And after they came in to this londe of Brytayn / & dwelled with theyr brytōs in ioye & reſt. And than made Brenne y• towne of Bryſtow and after he went ouer to his owne lord ſhip / & there dwelled he all his lyfe. And Belyn dwelled at newe Troye / & there he made a fayre gate that is called Belynges gate after his owne name. And whan this Belyn had regned nobly. x
                              •
                           . yere he dyed / & lyeth at newe Troye.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Cormbatrus ſlewe the kyng of Denmarke / for bycauſe that he wolde not paye to hym his truage.
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           
ANd after this Belyn regned his ſone Cormbatrus a good man & a worthy. And the kyng of Denmarke wolde not paye to hym his truage / y• is to ſay / a. M. poūde as he had ſworne by othe for to paye it / & alſo by wrytyng recorde to Belyn his fader / wherfore he was euylapayed & wroth / & aſſembled a grete hooſt of brytons and went in to Denmarke / & ſlewe y• kyng Gutlagh / & brought y• londe in ſubieccyō all newe / & toke of y• folke feaute & homage / & after went agayne in to his owne londe / & as he came forth by Orkeney he foūde. xxx ſhyppes ful of men & women beſyde the cooſt of y• ſee / & y• kyng aſked what they were. And an erle that was mayſter of them all curteyſly anſwered to y• kynge & ſayd yt they were exiled out of ſpayne / & ſo yt they had trauayled halfe a yere & more in the ſee / to wyte yf they myght fynde ony kynge in ony londe y• of them wolde haue pite or mercy to gyue them ony londe in ony countree / wherin they myght dwell & haue reſt / & become his lyege men / & to hym wold do homage & feaute whyle they lyued & to his heyres after hym / & of hȳ & of his heyres holde that londe. And whan y• kyng herd this he had pite on them / & gaue them an yle all wyldernes / where no mā was dwellynge / ſaue onely wylde beeſtes. And y• erle thāked moche y• kyng & became his man / & dyd hym homage & feaute / & toke all his folke & went in to the ſame yle And y• erle was called Irlamal / & therfore he let call y• londe Irlonde after his name. This kyng Cormbatrus came agayn in to his londe & regned .xxv. yere / & after dyed / & lyeth at newe Troye.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mūdi .iiij. M. iiij .C .xl. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatem. vij .C .lvj.
                        IOathan ſone to Oſias regned in the Iewry .xvj. yere. of this Ioathan no thynge is wryten / but 
                              〈◊〉
                            he toke not away exce
                              •
                           ſa as other dyd. Vt patet ij. para. ¶ Amarias was byſſhop. And Yſayas the noble prophete was in his dayes. ¶ Olympias with y• grekes began y• fyrſt yere of Ioathan after Ioſephus: & after Bede Troy was deſtroyed iiij .C .vj. yere afore the firſt Olympias began vnder Eſalo a iudge of Athenis / in the whiche Corebus gate y• thyualty amonge al men. Olympus is the name of an hyll in Grecia / the whiche for his precyouſnes is called y• hyll of god. And after Ierome one Olimpias cōteyneth fully. iii
                              •
                           . yeres / in y• whiche .iiij. yeres foure yerely prynces are made / & theſe Olympiades are places ordeyned to the worſhyp of Iupyter vnder the hyll of Olympo. And the lawe of them is this That who ſomeuer is beſt in our chyualry / what gyfte ſomeuer he deſyreth he ſhall haue.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mūdi .iiij. M. iiij .C .lvj. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatem. v
                              ••
                            .C .xliij.
                        ACham the ſone of Ieathan regned on the Iewes .xvi. yert. Of this Acham no thynge yt is good is 
                              〈◊〉
                            ten / for he forſoke our lorde / & our lorde ſtroke hym wt his owne people ſtrongly & with y• kynges of Sirry. Vt p
                              •
                           . 
                              〈◊〉
                           . para .xxviij. Achitob this tyme was byſſhop. ¶ Ozee kyng of Iſrael regned .ix. yere / the whiche began to regne the. 
                              〈◊〉
                            yere of Acham kynge of Iewes. This Ozee drad not god / for he lyued nought. And he was y• laſt kyng of Iſrael / & in y• ix. yere of his regne he was takē of Sal manaſar / & Iſrael was tranſlated in to Aſſirias. Vt habe
                              •
                            .iiij. regū .xvij.
                     
                     ¶ Explicit ſecunda pars.
                  
                  
                     
                        ¶ Anno mūdi .iiij. M. iiij .C .lxij. Et aute Chriſti natiuitatem. vij .C .xl.
                        
                           
                           
                              ¶ Roma caput 
                                    〈◊〉
                                 .
                           
                        
                        
                           AFter Euſeby Rome was made on ye hyll of Palatyn / the fourth yere of Acham kyng of Iewes / of two bretherne Romulꝰ & Remus .xj. kal. Maij. the. vij Olimpiades begynnynge. Ioſephus & Bede ſayen ye .vj. Olimpiades: & ſo they dyffer a yere. Neuertheleſſe it is redde other men to haue regned about ye place myghtely in ytaly / that is to wyte / Ianus / Picus / Fānus / Latinus / the whiche vnto Eneas regned about two hondred yere. Than afterwarde from Eneas to this Romulus it was regned vnder .xv. gouernours .CCCC .xxxij. yere After that fro the cite was made vnto ye laſt yere of Tarquyn the proude it was regned vnder .vij. kynges / aboute .CC. and .xliii. yere. Than afterwarde vnder Senatours & coūſeyllers vnto Iulius Cezar emperour / by .CCCC. and. lxiiij yere. Romulus the firſt of Romayns / of whome they be called in latyn Romans made the Cite to be named Rome after his name / the whiche gadered togyder the people on euery ſyde / an hōdred of ye wyſeſt men & wytty he choſe / through the counſeyle of whome all thynges he diſpoſed / the whiche he named Senatours for ye time of theyr age / & he made theyr names to be wryten in golden lettres / wherfore we write noble faders & thynges ſo yet. Alſo he called a. M. men of armes milites. a numero millenario. but theſe were of no noble blode. Therfore as ſaynt Auſtyn ſayth de ciuit. dei. And alſo there was lōge warre betwixt the Sabyns & them / for Romulus toke many women of the noble blode of Sabyns / & maried them to ye vnnoble blode of this Romulus. Oroſius writeth moche yll. Vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            in libro ſuo. ¶ About this tyme Merodoch the kynge of Babylon ſente grete gyftes to Ezechie the kynge of iewes. Vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            .iiij. regū .xx. And than the kyngdome of Babylon began.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mundi .iiij. M .lxxij. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatem. vij .C .xxvij.
                        Ezechias the .xiiij. kynge of iewes a good chylde of a curſed fader / regned wt a perfyte herte to our lorde / & he reſtored the hous of god / & there was none lyke hym afore ne after amonge ye kynges of iewes / therfore our lorde god gloryfyed hym / for whan Sennacheri
                              •
                            kyng of Aſſurio
                              
                                 
                              
                              rum
                            came againſt Ezechie with a myghty hoſt / our lord ſtroke his people & 
                              •
                           lewe au .C .lxxxv. of fyghtyng men / & Sennacherib fledde ſhamefully vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            .iiij. regū .xix. et .ij. para .xxxij. Sadoch this tyme was hye byſſhop there.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mundi .iiij. M .v .C. j. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatē. vj .C .lxxxxviij.
                        MAnaſſes kyng of Iewes regned lv. yere / and he was a full euyll

chylde of a good fader. For he dyd more curſedly than ony yt was before hȳ. For he ſlewe ye ꝓphetes of god / that ye ſtretes in Ieruſalē were all blody. And he made yſaie ye prophete to be ſawen in peces with a ſawe of tree. Wherfore ye kyng of Aſſurio
                              
                                 
                              
                              rum
                            waſted the Iewry / & toke Manaſſes & put hym in pryſon. And after Manaſſes repented him of his treſpace & cryed for mercy to god / & was herde. Than he was reſtored to his kyngdom & he amēded his lyfe. Vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            .iiij. reg .xxj. et .ij. para .xxxiij. ¶ Sellū was byſſhop & Echias after hym. This tyme the. vij wyſe men had worſhyp in Grece / yt is to ſaye / Tales / Solon / Chylon / Poriandꝰ Eldobolus / Bias / Pitacus. This Tales foūde fyrſt the defaute of the ſonne & the mone. Vide 
                              pl’a
                              plura
                            Aug .viij. de ci. dei. ¶ Numa the ſeconde kynge this tyme regned in Rome .xlij. yere / the whiche was a grete worſhipper of fals goddes He fylled Rome ſo full yt he myght haue no place for hymſelfe to dwell in. This man put Ianuary & February to ye begynnynge of ye yere. Vide 
                              pl’a
                              plura
                            in Aug. de ciui. dei. Aboue all reaſon it is meruayle that ſuche men ſo excedyng in wytte in all thynges that was yll receded fro the knowlege of ye very god. ¶ Amon kyng of Iewes regned two yere / the whiche was nought in his lyuynge / & he was ſtryken of his ſeruauntes / and he dyed without ony repentaunce.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mūdi .iiij. M .v .C. lviij. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatem. vj .C .xlj.
                        IOſias the ſone of Amon at .viij. yere of age began to regne / & regned .xxxj. yere / a good chylde of a ꝑuerſe fader / in his yōge age he ſought ye grace of god / & in that grace laudably abode vnto his ende. His relygyous lyfe & his holy werkes ye may ſe .iiij. regum. xxij et .ij. para .xxxiiij. ¶ Azaſtas the ſone of Elchie was byſſhop. ¶ Tobias aboute this tyme dyed / & he was a very holy man / & he ꝓphecyed ye deſtruccion of Ieruſalē. ¶ Tulius Hoſtileꝰ was ye thyrde kyng in Rome. And ſaynt Auſtyn ſayth in his boke de ciui. dei. that from Rome was made vnto Auguſt the emperour / there was ſo contynuall batayle / that it was taken for a meruayle & they were one yere wtout batayle / excepte .xlij. yere in Nume dayes / in yt whiche was cōtynual peas. And this Tul
                              〈…〉
                           s bycauſe he had reſt / he dyd curſedly to his neyghbours / and than he was ſlayne & all his houſholde with a ſtroke of lyghtnynge. ¶ Nabugodonoſor this tyme was kynge of Babylon / a manly man & a v
                              〈…〉
                           oryous. For he was ye ſcourge of our lord to punyſſhe the ſynnes of moche people. This man was kyng of Babylon & afterward he cōquered ye kyngdom of Aſſurio
                              
                                 
                              
                              rum
                            / and made it one monarchy. But many wayes ſcripture ſpeketh of this man / now good & now yll / & for bycauſe ſcripture concludeth yt he ended his lyfe in ye louynge of god by the prayer of Danyel / & in the knowlege of one very god / ſome doctours ſaye he is ſaued & ſome ſay it is doubte. ¶ Au
                              •
                           us Marcius the fourth kyng of Rome regned. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . yere This man for grace & truſt yt he had to Tarquinꝰ Priſcus made hym ye gouernour of his chydren & heyres & he yll rewarded hȳ. ¶ Danyel yet a childe delyuered ſaynt Suſan / & ſtode in ye cō
                           
                              ••
                           tre of the kyng wt his felawes & afterward he diſcuſſed ye dremes of ye kyng & was made a man of grete honeſte. Vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            Danielis .j. ¶ Ioathas ye ſecond ſone of Ioſie regned on ye Iewes thre monethes & was made kynge by ye people & he was not good. And Pharao toke him & ladde hym in to Egypte & made his elder broder kynge. Vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            .iiij. regū .xxiij.
                     
                     
                        
                        ¶ Anno mūdi .iiij. M .v .C. lxxxviij. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatem .v .C. xj.
                        IOachym or Ieconias the ſone of Ioſie was made kyng of Iewes by Pharao & regned .xj. yere / & bycauſe he lyued nought / ne herd not ye ꝓphetes Nabugodonoſor toke hym & made hym his ſeruaūt .iij. yere. And he rebelled agaynſt hym afterwarde / & he toke hym & was about to haue ladde hym to Babylon / but his coūſeyle was chaūged / & ſo Nabugodonoſor ſlewe hym in Ieruſalē / & caſt his body ouer ye walles after the ꝓphecy of Ieremy / & toke wt hym ye veſſels of our lorde & put them in his tē
                           ple. Vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            .ij. para .vlj. ¶ Samias was byſſhop. Vrias prophete was ſlayne of Iecony ye kyng / & Ieremy was preſent ¶ Ioachim ſone to Ieconias regned in the Iury .iij. monethes / & lyued nought & therfore he was meued that he ſholde regne no longer / & was boūden & trāſlated in to Babylon / & many wt hym were tranſlated. Vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            .iiij. regū .xxiiij. ¶ Danyell / Ananias / Azarias / Miſaell / Ezechiell / and Mardochius / all theſe with Ioachim the kyng were ledde in to Babylon yonge chyldren / for bycauſe they were of the noble blode.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mundi .iiij. M. vj .C. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatem. vj .C.
                        ¶ Here begynneth the fyth age of the Worlde durynge to the natiuite of Chryſt.

                              Tranſmigratio.
                           
                        
                        SEdechias ye thyrde ſone of Ioſie regned on ye Iewes .xj. yere. this Sedechias was a myſcheuous man in his lyuynge / & he wolde not here Ieremy the prophete / therfore he peryſſhed wretchedly / & all ye Iury wt hym / & his eyen were put out / & his chyldren were ſlayne. Vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            .iiij. reg. ¶ Ioſedech ye ſone of Azarie was byſſhop / & was trāſtated fro Ieruſalem by Nabugodonoſor in to Babylon. ¶ Abacuk ꝓphecyed agaynſt Nabuch at Babylō / & there be opinyōs what tyme this Abacuk was. This Abacuk brought meet to Daniel whā he was put to ye lyons / after Ierome. And here endeth ye fourth age / & ye hyſtory of Regum.
                        THis tyme the tēple of Salomon was brent of ye Caldees / & Ieruſalem was deſtroyed. This tēple ſtode cccc .xlij. yere / yt is to wyte / fro ye fyrſt makynge / the whiche was made ye fourth yere of Salomon. And fro ye deſtruccyon the whiche was made by Tytꝰ / yt is to wyte .xlij. yere after ye paſſyō of Chryſt. ¶ Priſcus Torquinus the .v. kynge of Rome regned / and he made Capitolliū quaſi caput ſolū. For in ye groūde werke was foūde a heed without ony body / as for prophecye of thynges to come. For there afterwarde the ſenatours ſate as one heed of all the world. ¶ This tyme thre chyldren were caſt in to a furneys brennynge / & with a myracle they were delyuered / as it is ſhewed in Daniel. 
                           
                              •
                           . ¶ Nabugodonoſor the ſone of Nabugodonoſor ye myghty / regned in Babylon. This man made an hangynge gardyn with myghty coſtes for his wyfe / & many meruaylous thynges he dyd / ſo that he wolde be named to excede Hercules in his gretnes & ſtrengthe. ¶ Enilmelrodach broder vnto the latter Nabugodonoſor regned in Babylon. This man

toke Ioachym out of pryſon & worſhipped hym / & his faders deed body after ye counſeyle of this man / he deuyded to an hondred grypes / leſt yt he ſholde ryſe frō deth to lyfe. ¶ Nota. The playe of the cheſſe was foude of 
                              •
                           erſe a philoſopher for the correccyon of Enilmerodach this tyme ye kyng of Babylon a grete tyraūt the whiche was wont to kyll his owne mayſters & wyſe men. And for he durſt not rebuke hȳ openly / wt ſuche a wytty game he procured hym to be meke.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mundi .iiij. M. vj .C .xxxiiij. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatem .v. C .lxv.
                        SAthiel of ye lyne of Chryſt was ſone to Iecony ye kyng of Iewes the whiche he gate after ye tranſmygracyon of Babylon / as Marke ye euāgelyſt ſayth. ¶ Seruius Tuliꝰ the .vj. kynge of Rome was of a bonde condycyon on the moders ſyde / for ſhe was a captyue mayden / but ſhe was of the noble blode This man had grete louynge / & nobly he bare hym in euery place. Thre hylles to ye cite he put / & dyched ye walles roūde about. ¶ Reguſar Sabuſardach & Balthaſar were bretherne / the whiche regned one after an other & were kynges in Babylon. And Balthaſar was the laſt kyng of Babylon / ye whiche was ſlayne of Darius & Cyrus. Vide 
                              pl’a
                              plura
                            Dani .v.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Incipit Monarchia Perſarum.
                        DArius vnkle to Cyro felowe in ye kyngdom with Cyro / occupyed the kyngdom of Babilon. Darius trāſlated the kyngdom of Babylons Caldees in to ye kyngdom of Perſarū & Medorū. ¶ Cyrꝰ was emperour .xxx. yere. This Cyrus held ye monarchy hole at Perſes Of this man ꝓphecyed yſaias / & he deſtroyed Babylō / & flewe Balthaſar king of Babylon / & he worſhipped gretly Daniel. The Iewes he ſente home agayne that they ſhold buylde ye temple of god. Vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            Eſore .j. ¶ Babylon ye ſtronge caſtell was deſtroyed & his power was taken fro him / as it was ꝓph
                              ••
                           ped. This was ye fyrſt cite and the greteſt of all the worlde / of yt whiche incredyble thinges are wrytē / & this yt was ſo ſtrōge in one nyght was deſtroyed / that it myght be ſhewed to ye power of god / to yt whiche power all other ben but a ſperke & duſt. For it is ſayd for ſoth yt it was incredible to be made wt mānes hande / or to be deſtroyed wt mānes ſtrength / wherof all ye worlde myght take an enſample / and it wolde or myght be enformed. ¶ Tarquinus ſuꝑbus was the .vij. kyng of Rome & he regned xxxv. yere. This man foūde fyrſt all theſe turmentes whiche are ordeined for malefactours: as er
                              •
                           e p
                              •
                           ſon welles & galowes / fetters & many
                              ••
                           es chaynes & collers & ſuche other. And for his grete pryde & cruelneſſe god ſuffred hȳ to myſcheue / & in what maner wyſe it ſhalbe ſhewed. He had a ſone of ye ſame name / yt whiche ſone defouled a worthy mānes wyfe / they called hȳ Co
                              ••
                           aryn & his wyf was called Lucres. This Tarquinus yt was this ſeuēth kynges ſone aforeſayd came to this ladyes hous (abſent her huſbōde) to ſouꝑ & to lodgynge. And whan all were a ſlepe he roſe with a ſwerde in his hāde & wt ſtrength & 
                              ••
                           re he rauiſſhed ye womā. And whā he was gone ſhe ſente vnto her fader & her huſbōde / for ſhe was of grete kynne / & thus ſhe ſayd to them. The kinges ſone came hyther as a frende / of whome I had no miſtruſt / & thus he hath defyled my 
                              •
                           haſtite / & loſt my name for euermore. Whā her frendes ſawe her wepe & pyteouſly complayne / they cōforted her as well as they coude / & ſayd it was no vylany vnto her / for it was agaynſt her wyl. She anſwered & ſayd. Yet ſhall there neuer

womā excuſe herby Lucres: for though ſhe cōſented not to this dede / yet ſhal ſhe not dye wtout payn for yt dede. And with that worde ſhe had a knyfe redy vnder her mantell / with whiche ſhe ſmote her ſelfe to the hert. And for this cruelnes & this pyteous dethe the people of Rome aroſe & exiled this kyng & all his ꝓgeny for euermore. And thus ceaſed theſe kynges of Rome / & neuer was none after.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the gouernaūce of Rome tyll the Emperours began.
                        AFter whā this tyraūt was deed the Romayns ordeyned yt there ſhold neuer be kyng more in Rome. But they wolde be gouerned fro thens forth by conſules. So whā thoſe kynges had regned .CC. yere and .xl. they made this ſtatute / that two conſules ſholde be choſen / & they ſholde gouerne the Cite & the people / & for this cauſe theſe two were choſen / that yf one of them wolde make ony exceſſe / yt other ſholde gouerne hym For there was no thynge obeyed but yf they cōſented bothe. Alſo they ſhold not ſtande in theyr dignite paſſyng one yere for this cauſe. That for dominacyon of longe tyme they ſholde not vſurpe more vpon them than was ryghtfull. In all this tyme y• Empyre of Rome was not dilated paſſyng .xij. myle / ne had no lord ſhip paſſing .xij. myle. The fyrſt cōſules that were made y• one was called Luciū & that other Brutū / & theſe two men did grete thynges in theyr tyme. But yet y• people bare heuy of theyr dominacyon / wherfore they chaſe an other man / whiche ſholde haue more auctorite thā they & they called hym Dictator. ¶ In this ſame tyme there was a grete diſcencyō bytwene the people & the ſenate / wherfore they chaſe Tribunas whiche were Iudges ouer y• people / & defended them from wronge / as ſayth yſyder. For the Dictator whan he was choſen he laſted fyue yere / & y• Tribunas were remeued euery yere. ¶ But ye muſt vnderſtande that ye ſhal not haue here after all y• conſules names y• gouerned Rome betwixt the ſeaſyng of y• kynges & y• begynynge of the emperours / for it were to longe to wryte / ſpecyally whā they were euery yere newe / ſyth that one man myght be choſen ſo often tymes as we rede. And alſo for y• enduring of theyr gouernaūce For they were gouernours of Rome .v .C. yere and .lxvij. So the moſt famous men of theſe ſhall be reherſed after the forme of Cronycles / & as they ſtande in the boke eche one after other.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Incipit hiſtoria libri Eſdre.
                        ¶ Anno mūdi .iiij. M. vj .C .lix. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatem .v. C .xl.
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            Drobabel after the cōmaūdemēt of god foūded the temple & made it perfyte / but it was longe after. Vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            eſdre .vj. After the people of Ieruſalem came fro Babylon / theſe two ruled. Ieſus the hye preeſt as gouernour / & zorobabell as duke. And this maner of guydyng was kepte vnto Herodes tyme / y• the hye preeſtes ſhold be pryncypall / & y• dukes vnder them. But y• dukes were euer of y• trybe of Iuda / after y• ꝓphecy of Iacob. And vnder yt good guydyng of preeſtes it is not redde y• people to haue receded fro the very true fayth / as they dyd afore in y• tyme of iewes & kynges / for than many tymes they ran to ydolatry. ¶ Eſdras y• preeſt of the kynrede of Aron this tyme exceded men in holynes through whoſe grete wyſdome all y• iewes ſtate was holpē. ¶ Cābiſes y• ſone of Ciri regned on y• kyngdom of Perſa
                              •
                            the whiche cōmaūded myghtely y• temple of Ieruſalem ſholde not be buylded

agayn / & his ſ
                              ••
                           er cōm
                              ••
                           i
                              ••
                           d it ſho
                              ••
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            buylded. This Cambiſes 
                              〈…〉
                            iudge to be ſlayne or kylt alyue / 
                              •
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            his ſone to ſit on his faders 
                              〈◊〉
                            / that through ye drede he ſholde 
                              •
                           rede falſhode & iudge ryghtwyſly. This Cābiſes 
                              〈◊〉
                            many ī holy ſcripture / in ye boke of 
                              〈◊〉
                            A
                              ••
                           haxerſes or 
                              •••
                           uerꝰ in hiſtoria Iu
                              •
                           ith / that was done vnder hȳ he is called Nab
                              ••
                           godonoſor / for Differ
                              •
                           es the prynce of his chyiſalty ſubdued many londes to his lord / & at y• laſt he came to Bethlee
                              •
                            / & there was 
                              ••
                           yne of Iudith a woman. Vt pate
                              •
                            Iudi .ij. et .xiij. ¶ Greneides regned in Perſe half a yere. ¶ Dariꝰ regned in Perſe / ye whiche by the mocyon of zorobabell cōmaūded the werke of ye tēple to be taken agayn / & cō
                           maunded his prynces yt in no wyſe they ſhold let it / but ſhold helpe it in all yt they coude. Vide plura in Eſore. vide hoc 
                              ••
                           e ambiguū propter diuerſitatē docto
                              
                                 
                              
                              rum
                           .
                     
                     
                        ¶ Circa anū mūdi .iiij. M. vij .C. xxxiiij Etante Chriſti natiuitatē. iiij .C .lxv.
                        ABiuth ſone to zorobabel of ye lyne of Chryſt was about this tyme. For of hym & of other folowynge vnto Ioſeph no thynge is had in ſcripture / but that Mathewe the euangelyſt nombreth them in ye genelogy / & therfore the certayne tyme of them dewly can not be knowen. ¶ Ioachim was biſſhop this tyme / after Ioſephus was called Ioſedeth / vnder whom Ieruſalē was buylded agayn. Vt dicit et hoc idem 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            Nee
                           
                              ••
                           e .xij. ¶ In the .CC .xliiij. yere after yt Rome was made / ye Romains ordeyned two conſules in the ſtede of theyr kynge the whiche ſhold gouerne one yere alone leſt yt by taryenge they ſholde be proude & that ye one ſhold correcke ye other yf he exceded or arred. ¶ Brutus was ye fyrs;t conſul / & Lucius ye ſeconde / & than was there a man yt was called Dictator / the name of an offyce the whiche ſholde go with ye people a gaynſt theyr enemyes. ¶ Titus P
                              •
                           phius 
                              〈◊〉
                            conſ
                              ••
                           es: Than after the Romayns complayned gretly on ye condy
                              •
                           yons of ye conſules / & than ye power was 
                              〈…〉
                            / to an excedynge coſt to the comyn people. For euerichone of them 
                              〈◊〉
                            lyke a kyng / & nede cauſed them to leue ye 
                           
                              ••
                           g
                              •
                           ite. And they truſted neuer to reſt / ye warre was ſo ſtrōge agaynſt them. ¶ At that 
                              〈◊〉
                            was kynge of Perſarū / under whome Eldras came to Ieruſalem ¶ 
                              ••
                           rſes Neemias was butler to the ſame kynge / whome afterward he ſent to buyide y• walles of Ieruſalem. ¶ 
                              •
                           erſes regned after him two monethes. ¶ Segd
                              •
                           anus .vij. monethes after hym / & lytell they dyd.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Circa annū mundi .iiij. M. vij .C .lix. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatē. mj .C .xl.
                        ELiac is reherſed of ye line of chryſt in Math .j. and more of hȳ is not had in ſcripture. ¶ Eſdras an holy man & a connynge / & worſhypfully was had amonge the people. This man came fro Babylon with other / & he meued with very charyte went agayne to Babylon that he myght wynne moo of Iſrael. & ſaue the ſoules / & brynge them home wt hym. In this tyme he repayred ye lawe & the holy bokes / the whiche yt Caldees had brent. And an happy wytnes to all the worlde he lefte in ſcripture. He foūde newe lettres & lyghter in faccion / ye whiche through the holy ghooſt fulfylled he came agayn to Ieruſalem with a grete multytude / & with ye kynges preuylege that he ſholde teche ye people the lawe yt he had repayred. And there he dyed in a good age. ¶ Neemias an hebrewe butler of kynge Arthaxerſes at his lordes cōmaundement went from Babylon in to Ieruſalem / where he had .xii. yere ye ledyng of the people. And the .v. yere he

began to repayre ye gates & ye walles of Ieruſalem in the whiche werke he ended in .ij. yere & .iiij. monethes / & that with grete impedymentes. For y• halfe of the people ſtode armed wtout ye cite to withſtande ye people of other nacyons / entendynge to deſtroye them / & ye other parte laboured in armes / holdynge in the one hande ſtones for ye walles / & in yt notable other hande a ſwerde or nye by it. Vide pſa li. ſu
                              •
                           . ¶ Permenides philoſophers & namely in morall thȳges were about this tyme. Socrates a philoſopher the whiche vnderſtode moche of ye power of god / and he was Platos mayſter. Democritus / Ypocras and other / of whom the noble werkes abode.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Circa annū mundi .iiij. M. viij .C .ix. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatē. iij .C .lxxxx.
                        Azor is reherſed in ye lyne of chryſt in Math .i. but no thynge of his dedes is wryten in ſcripture. ¶ Elyaſib or Elyſaphat ſucceded Ioachym in the byſſhopryche. Vt dicit Euſebiꝰ et magr̄ hiſto. ¶ Camillus was Dictator at Rome / in whoſe dayes miſcheuous playes were ordeyned that the peſtylence ſhold ceſe at Rome. Of theſe playes ſaynt Auſtyn treateth diligently / in repreuyng ye falſhede of ye goddes: the whiche deſyred to be pleaſed wt ſuche wretched playes. So ſhamefully theſe playes were vſed with naked men & women / that honeſt men and women wolde not be at thoſe playes / ne yet behold them. Vide p
                              •
                           a in Aug. de ci. dei. ¶ Darius notus regned on the Perſes .xix. yere. ¶ Plato the diuyne philoſopher / & Ariſtotel his diſcyple were this tyme noble & famous clerkes. ¶ Tytus quintius was Dictator at Rome / and he was a couetous man / whome Auſtyn de ciui. dei. bryngeth in agaynſt couetous & proude chryſtē men ¶ 
                              ••
                           yus was a ſenatour under whom was agrete batayle agaynſt ye kyng of 
                              •
                           uſ
                              •
                           o
                              
                                 
                              
                              rum
                            / and, viij. M. mē of them were taken. ¶ Marcꝰ Valeriꝰ was an other ſenatour / ye whiche wt .lx. M. Romayns fought with ye frenſhmen / & had ye victory / & ſlewe many of them. ¶ Artharerſes kynge of Perſes called agayn to his empyre Egypte / & he put N
                              ••
                           t
                              ••
                           abo ye kyng in to Ethiopia / & many Iewes in to tranſmygracyon. Alſo he ſent Vagoſum a prynce ouer Flum Iordan to aſke agayne ye tribute yt was forgyuen to Eſdre that was the .vij. yere rent (propter ſabbā terre. ¶ Arſamus ſucceded hym and regned a yere. ¶ Darius the ſone of Arſamus regned with y• Perſes .xxiiij. yere. This Darius was a myghty mā & a bolde / the whiche aſked of ye Grekes a trybute / & yt was ye cauſe of ye deſtruccyon of the monarchy of Perſarū. For it was tranſlated to ye Grekes after ye prophecy of Danyel. For it is ſayd yt Dariꝰ brought .xv. hondred thouſande fyghtyng men / whome all Alexander ſlewe. ¶ Iodas ye ſone of Elyſaphat was hye byſſhop in Ieruſalem in tyme of Matdachij. Iohānes his ſone ſucceded hȳ. ¶ Ariſtoteles ye mooſt ſubtyll & famous philoſopher lyued this tyme. ¶ Senocrate the mooſt chaſte philoſopher was this tyme / with dyuers other moo.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Bycauſe ye kynges of Britayne nexte after lyued in peas mooſt parte / & lytell of them is wryten / therfore they ſhal be ſet togyder tyll it be comen to Caſſybalon kyng of Brytayne / the whiche was broder to Lud.
                        ANd whā Cormbatrꝰ was deed Guent holen regned which was his ſone / a man of good condicyons and well beloued / and he gouerned the londe well & wyſely / and he regned .xxvj. yere

and after dyed / & lyeth at newe Troy.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kyng Seyſell regned and well gouerned the londe after Guentholen.
                        AFter this Guētholen regned his ſone Seyſell / & well & worthely 
                              〈◊〉
                            gouerned the londe as his 
                              •
                           ader had done before hym / & he regned .xv. yere & dyed / and lyeth at newe Troy.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How 
                              •
                           ymor regned after Seyſell his fader / and he begate How an that regned in peas after his fader.
                        Bymor regned after his fader Seiſell well & nobly .xix. yere in peas And than after hym regned How an his ſone .x. yere & dyed & lieth at Ikaldown.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Morwith dyed through myſchau
                              〈…〉
                            of a beeſt.
                        MOrwith regned after Howan / & he became ſo wycked that vengeaūce fell on hym. For ou a tyme as he went by the ſee ſyde he mette wt a grete beeſt yt was black & horrible / & he wend it had ben a whale of y• ſee / & bent an arblaſt & wolde haue ſlayne y• beeſt wt his quarell / but he myght not ſmyte hym / & whā he had ſhot all his quarels y• beeſt anone came to him & deuoured hȳ alyue & ſo he dyed for his wyckednes by gods vengeaūce after he had regned .ix. yere.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of Grandobodyan that was ſone to Morwith / that made Cambrydge.
                        WHan this Morwith was deed y• brytons crowued Gr
                              •
                           dobodian his ſone / & this Grandobodian longe tymed regued in goodnes: & made temples & townes / & he made y• town of Cambrydge & the town of Graūtham / & was well beloned of ryche & poore / & he had .iiij. ſones / Arthogaile / Heſidur / Higamꝰ & Petitur / & whan he had regn
                              •
                           d xj. yere he dyed / & lyeth at newe Troy.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of Arthogaſle that was Grandobodians ſone / how he was made kynge & after put downe for his wyckednes.
                        AFter Grandobodian regned his ſone Arthogaile .v. yere / & he became ſo wycked y• the brytons wold not ſuffre hym to be kyng / but put hȳ down & made Heſidur his broder kyng / & he be came ſo mercyable y• men called hȳ kyng of pite / & whā he had regned .v. yere he had ſo grete pite of his broder Artogaile that was kynge before / y• he forſoke his dignite / and toke his broder y• crowne as gayn / & made hym kynge agaynſt all y• brytons wyll / & after Artogaile became ſo good of cōdicions y• all the londe loued hym for his debonayrte / doynge right & reaſon to euery man. And he regned .vj. yere & than dyed / & lyeth at Graūtham.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Heſidur was made kynge after the deth of his broder.
                        AFter the deth of Artogaile y• brytons crowned an other tyme Heſidur / but his two bretheru Higamus & Petitur had of hym grete ſpyte & ſcorne & ordeyned them helpe for to warre vpō the kyng theyr broder / and ſo they toke hym & put hym in to pryſon the ſeconde yere of his regne / & they departed al the londe betwyxt them bothe / but Higamꝰ lyued but .vij. yere / & thā had Petit al y• londe / & he made y• towne of Pickering.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How the Brytons came and toke Heſidur out of pryſon / & made hym kynge the thyrde tyme.
                        WHan this Petitur was deed / the Brytons toke Heſidur anone and made hym kynge the thyrde tyme / and

than regned he 
                              〈◊〉
                            peas .xiiii. yere / & after he dyed and 
                           
                              ••
                           th at Kararleyll.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How xxx
                              〈…〉
                           . kynges regned in peas 
                              ••
                           he after other after y• deth of Heſidur.
                        AFter the deth of Heſidur regned xxxiij. kynges 
                              ••
                           he after other in peas / & without ony longe taryenge. I ſhall ſhewe theyr names / & how longe eche of them regned / as y• ſtory telleth. The fyrſt kynge was called Gerbodia / and he regned .xij. yere / and after hym regned Morgan .ij. yere / and after hym regned Cighnus .vj. yere / & after hym Idwalan .viij. yere / after hym regned Rohugo .xj. yere / after hȳ Voghen .xiij. yere / after hym Caril .xj. yere / after hȳ Porex .ij. yere / after hym Cherin .xvij. yere / after him Coyl .xij. yere / after him Sulgenis .xiiij. yere / after hym Eſdad xx. yere / after hym Andragie .xvij. yere / after hym Vrian .v. yere / after hym Eliud .ij. yere / after hym Eldagan .xv. yere after hym Claten .xij. yere / after hym Ouirgunde .vilj. yere / after hym Mortan .vj. yere / after hȳ Bledagh .iij. yere / after hym Caph .j. yere / after hym Gen ij. yere / after hym Seyſell & kyng Bled xxij. yere / & kyng Tabreth .xj. yere / and after hym Archinall .xiiij. yere / and after hym Croll .xxx. yere / and after hym regned Rodyngu .xxxij. yere / and after hym regned Hertir .v. yere / & after hym regned Hanipir .vj. yere / and after hym regned Carpour .vij. yere / & after hym regned Digneill .iij. yere / and after him regned Samuell .xxiiij. yere / and after hym regned Rede .ij. yere / & after hym regned Ely .vij. monethes. This kyng Ely had thre ſones / Lud / Caſſibalon / & Enemyon.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Lud was made kynge after the deth of Ely his fader.
                        
                           
                        
                        AFter the deth of Ely regned Lud his ſone / and gouerned well the londe / and moche honoured good folke / and tempred & amended wyched folke / This Lud loued more to dwell at newe Troy than in ony other place of y• londe / wherfore the name of newe Troy was lefte / & than was y• cite called Ludſtone but the name is chaunged through varyaſite of lettres / & now is called Londe This kyng made in the cite a fayre gate & called it Ludgate after his name / & y• folke of y• cite are Londoners. And whā he had regned .xj. yere he dyed / & lyeth at London. He had two yonge ſones / y• one was called Andraghen / & that other Torinace / but they coude neyther ſpeke ne go / & therfore the brytons croward a ſtrōge knyght y• was called Lud y• was Caſſiba
                              •
                           ons broder / & made hymkynge of Brytayne now called Englonde.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mūdi .iiij. M. viij .c .lxxxxiiij. Et ante Chriſti natiuitate. ij .C .xv.
                        SAdoth of y• lyne of Chryſt is nombred in Mat .j. but in ſcripture is no more had of hȳ. ¶ Iadus the 
                              •
                           one of Iohn was hye byſſhop in Ieruſalem. ¶ This tyme kynge Alexander regned the whiche was wroth with the people of Ieruſalem / & came to the cite. Than

Iadus arayed in his pontyfycall ornamétes came to meet hym / & he ſodeynly was pleaſed & worſhypped ye byſſhop / & with peas & ioye entred y• cite / & he made to be brought to hȳ y• boke of Danyel & the ꝓphecy to be expowned to hym / ye whiche was ſpoken of him / & that done he ioyed ſtrongly / for all thȳge yt he had herde by y• dreme in due ordre was fulfylled / & it was lykely to hym yt he ſhold be ye ſame ꝑſone / of whom Daniel ꝓphe cyed / & of that he toke more hardynes to fyght wt Dariꝰ kyng of Perſe / & he dyd the ſacrifice / & cōmaūded ye iewes to axe what they wold haue / & graūted them to kepe theyr owne lawes / & at ye ſeuēth yere ſhold be wtout tribute. Vide magr̄m in hiſto. The hoſt of Alexādre as Oroſiꝰ ſaith was .xxxij. M. fotemen / & .iiij. M. horſmē / & ſhyppes .C.lxxx. And it is vncertayne wheder it is more meruayle yt he ſhold cōquere all ye worlde wt ſo lytel a power / or how he durſt go vpon them wt ſo litel a power. And there was of Alexā
                           der & his hoſt ſlayne ye kyng of Perſe. Et vt Oroſiꝰ dicit qinqies decies cētena milia ¶ Enias ye ſone of Iadi was byſſhop after his fader. ¶ Maniliꝰ Papiriꝰ & Fabius were 
                              •
                           ſules at Rome. This Papirius whā he was a childe he was very wyſe / & he fayned many a fayre leſynge yt he myght kepe his mayſters coūſeyle & the ſenatours. And whan he came to mānes age he was a noble warryour / yt whā ye Romayns dred Alexādre he was choſen to go agaȳſt hȳ / & of ye goddes he charged not / but ſcorned them / ſayenge afore yt vnhappy thyng ſhold fall / & yt to his grete louynge holy doctours ſaye.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Incipit Monarchia Grecorū: et ceſſat Monarchia Perſarum.
                        THis tyme kyng Alexander begā to be lord of all ye world / & he was called grete Alexāder for his grete victory yt he had in ſo lytell tyme. It was an euydent iudgemēt of ye wrath of god agaȳſt ſynners of y• tyme / certaynly ſome myracles our lord dyd for hȳ in helpyng of his power: for ye ſee of pāphilicon was deuyded to hȳ (as ye reed ſee to ye iewes) whan he perſecuted Dariꝰ. Alſo at his prayer ye hylles of Caſpij were ſhet yt certayne curſed iewes myght neuer come out. But at ye laſt he was poyſoned ī Babylon / & dyed the .xxxiij. yere of his age / and the .v. yere of his monarchy / the. xij yere of ye kyngdom of Macedon. Whan Alexāder was deed the .xij. to whom he deuyded his kyngdom coude not accord wherof aroſe infinyte batayles / ſo ye. iiij had all ye kyugdom. Vide 
                              pl’a
                              plura
                            in Oroſio.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mūdi .iiij. M .ix. C .ix. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatē .CC .ix.
                        AChym of ye lyne of Chryſt ſone to Sadoth is nōbred in Math .j. & of hym is no more ī ſcripture. ¶ Symō was biſſhop this tyme an holy man & a ryghtwyſe he was named of ye people. ¶ Eleazarꝰ was byſſhop after Symen This man ſent to Ptholomeo kynge of Egypt .lxxij. lerned men / of euery trybe vj. to interprete ye lawe of ye iewes / whiche they tranſlated out of hebrewe in to greke by a grete miracle: yt ſo many men ſhold in .lxxij. dayes trāſlate all holy ſcripture wt one accord. Vide Aug. de ci. dei. ¶ Dolobela / Emilius / Marrꝰ Curius / Genutiꝰ this tyme were cōſules at Rome. This Dolobela cōquered Sānytes after many batayles had. And Martus ſubdued Epirotas / & ſlewe .xxiij. M. of his men: & than fled kyng Pirro / which kyng ſent to hȳ for peas offryng to him grete gyftes. Thā this cōſul anſwered. No batayle ſhall cauſe me to flee / nor no money corrupt me / for I had leuer commaūde riche men to do this & this / than be riche my ſelf. ¶ Tonu
                              •
                           iꝰ ſubdued ye cite of Argiuo
                              
                                 
                              
                              rum
                            / & a legion of Rome knightes he ſent to Rome to be be
                              •
                           ē openly in ye market place for thet held thē not lefully to ye court of rome For ye law was kept ſo

ſtraitly at Rome / that & they had fayled to do theyr due obſeruaunces in vertue / they ſhold be puniſſhed. The Romayns afore & after were y• mooſt noble men after y• worldes honeſty y• might be / & in al maner of vertue circūſpecte as holy doctours ſaye / that they put examples to chryſten men / but not the intencyon / for they lacked the key of fayth.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Incipiūt reges egipti: qr aſr non pōt fieri 
                              •
                           tinuatio: & intexunt reges Sirie.
                        
                           
                        
                        PTholomus Philodolphus was this tyme kyng in Egypt. This man was y• very worſhipper of one god & full gracyous to y• Iewes / of whome xx. M. & .C. he deliuered out of captiuite and y• he dyd y• he myght pleaſe y• god of Iſrael / of whom he had herde meruayles / & his lawe he deſired to haue / & that myght not be tranſlated in to none other language but of deuoute men / & that wt due reuerence & ſolēpnite. Certayn men attempted to haue wryten it amonge y• ſtoryes of y• gentyles / whom y• plage of god ſtroke tyll they repēted. This kyng ſente vnto Eleazer the byſſhop / to ſende to hym lerned men / the whiche he dyd gladly. Vide 
                              pl’a
                              plura
                            in magr̄o hiſtorio.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mūdi .iiij. M .ix. C .lix. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatem. ij .C .xl.
                        ALiud of the lyne of Chryſt gate Eleaſar as it is open in Math .j. And more in ſcripture is not had of him. ¶ Omias byſſhop was ſone to Symō. Symon was byſſhop after hȳ whiche was a very religyous mā / he reformed the tēple of god better / & encreaced y• cite of Ieruſalē: wt many other good thȳges ¶ Sēproniꝰ / Appius Claudiꝰ / Gueus Gaius / Attiliꝰ Regulꝰ / Emilius Fabiꝰ this tyme were ſenatoures at Rome. This Sēproniꝰ fought agaynſt y• countre of Picentes / & almooſt y• cheualry on bothe partes were ſlayne / except a fewe Romayns were lefte alyue y• ſubdued y• coūtre. Appiꝰ Claudiꝰ ſubdued Syracuſanas / & y• coūtre of Penos / & put grete tribute on them. Attiliꝰ Regulꝰ a noble ſenatour ouercāme .iij. kynges: & .lxxiij. citees ſubdued / & a dragon of .C .xv. fote he ſlewe. Afterward whā he was ouer cruell agaynſt his enemyes / denyeng to gyue them peas but yf they wold paye a mighty tribute: they almoſt in deſpayre fought agaynſt him & ouercame hȳ & his hooſt / & toke hym / & yet they wolde fayne haue had peas / but this faythful man had leuer dye in payne thā to gyue peas to curſed people. His louyng ſaynt Auſtyn gretly exalteth. Emiliꝰ Fabius & Gaius wold haue deliuered Regulus but they obteyned not. ¶ Ptholomeas Euergites this tyme was king of egipt a victoryous prynce & a myghty. This man ſubdued Syriā & Ciciliā & y• mooſt parte of Aſie / and toke theyr goddes & brought them in to his coūtre. ¶ Ptholomeus Philopater ſone to Euergites regned in Egypte .xvij. yere. This man fought agaynſt .ij. brethern. Selencū & grete Anthiocū / & he proſtrated many a thouſande / but neuertheleſſe he preuayled not. Vide 
                              pl’a
                              plura
                            i Iohāne ſuꝑ Daniel. ¶ Hanyball the mooſt curſed kynge of

Peno
                              
                                 
                              
                              rum
                            or of affricano
                              
                                 
                              
                              rum
                            mightely hated the Romayns / for he deſtroyed them almooſt to y• vttermeſt ende / & nygh y• cite of Rome he deſtroyed / & ſo many noble men of Romayns he ſlewe at one tyme / that thre buſſhelles of golde rynges he drew of theyr fyngers. Alſo in a certayn water of the ſlayne bodyes of theſe Romayns / he made as it were a brydge / y• his hooſt myght paſſe. And at y• laſt Cipio y• noble ſenatour directed his hoſt to hym & diſcōfyted hym / & almoſt Cipios hoſt of Romayns were ſlayne. ¶ Lucatius cōſul. Sipronius valeriꝰ / Fulnius lutinꝰ Gaius / & Scipio ruled at Rome. This tyme the Romays had peas one yere alone / & it was takē for a myracle y• they had ſo lōge reſt / for afore this tyme in. iiij .C. & .xl. yere y• Romayns had neuer reſt. Theſe cōſules whā y• yere was done cōgregated all y• ſtrēgth of ytaly / & they had in theyr hooſt .viij. M. armed men / for drede of y• frenſſhmen / whome they drad ſtrongly / & afterwarde y• Romayns ſubdued them. ¶ Epiphanes y• ſone of Philopat regned in egypt .xxiiij. yere. Cleopatra doughter to grete Anthiocꝰ was his wyfe. ¶ Anthiocꝰ magnus this tyme regned in Syrry / whiche dyd moche miſchefe to y• Iewes. Vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            Math. ¶ Onias this tyme was byſſhop in Ieruſalē. This Onias for y• tyranny of Anthiocus fled wt many iewes into egypt / feynynge hym to fulfyll the ꝓphecy of yſaie .xix. that is to wyte / to buylde the temple. But in y• he ſynned / for he ſayd otherwyſe than he thought. The kynge of Egypte gracyouſly receyued hym / & gaue hym y• londe of Helipolees / & there he buylded his tēple. Symon his ſone was byſſhop at Ieruſalē after that his fader was fledde.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Circa annum mūdi .v. M .xxxiiij. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatem .C .lxv.
                        ELeaſar of the lyne of Chryſt was about this tyme: of hȳ no thynge is wrytē in ſcripture / but y• Math. nombreth hȳ. Vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            .j. ¶ Omas Pius was to y• Iewes byſſhop this tyme / an holy man / & well beloued wt god & man / & not all onely wt good men / but yll men alſo. At the laſt vnright wyſly was ſlayne of Andronito. Vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            .ij. macha .iiij. ¶ Paulus Terentius / Scipto Affricanꝰ / theſe were ſenatours at Rome / theſe two erected an hooſt agaynſt Hanyball / & there almoſt y• Romayns hope dyed / for there was ſlayne .xliiij. thouſand Romayns. And this noble man Scipio Affricanus brought agayn the ſtate of y• Romayns the whiche ſtode in a deſpayre neuer to haue recouered. For he fought wt Hanyball manly & diſcōfyted hȳ. All Spayne he ouercame. All Affryke he ſubduedgrete Anthiocꝰ he brought to be his ſeruaūt. All Aſiam he made tributary to y• Romayns. This man ſo noble & ſo victoryous by his own vnkynde coūtre was outlawed / & there he dyed. ¶ Philometor the ſone of Epiphanes of Cleopatra regned in egypt .xxxv. yere. This kyng yet a chylde noble Anthiocus gretly oppreſſed with many deceytes. But y• Romayns ſent legates y• which cōmaūded Anthiocus y• he ſholde ceſſe of his tyranny agaynſt hym. And Marcus Publiꝰ made a cercle about Anthiocus ſayenge thus. The ſenatours of rome & y• people cōmaūde y• that y• go not out of this cercle tyll y• haue anſwered to this mater. This Anthiocus ſeynge y• he might not contynue his tyrāny ſayd. Yf it be thus cōmaūded me of the ſenatours and Romayns / I muſt nedes turne agayn & ſo wood angry he was y• he loſt y• ſyege of Alexādre / & turned to y• poore releues of the Iewes / vēgyng hȳ on them bycauſe he myght not venge hym on no myghtyer people. Vt 
                              pꝪ.
                              patet
                            in lib. macha .j. et .ij.
                        
                           
MAthathias an holy man / & of all prayſynge mooſt worthy / hated in his herte ye cōuerſacyon of all ſynners all onely truſtyng in our lorde god of Iſrael. Vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            prio macha .ij. And this mā had .v. ſones of the ſame loue vnto god. This man was not byſſhop in Iſrael / but his .iii. ſones were. ¶ Iudas Mathabeꝰ was byſſhop .iii. yere / & he was ſone to Mathathias. This machabeus was the mooſt named man yt euer was in Iſarel / yt whiche had neuer none lyke hym afore ne after. He was in batayle a myghty man / & offred hȳ to dye a martyr for ye lawes of god. ¶ Ionathas his broder ſuceeded hym. rir. yere / the whiche grewe in vertue: & gouerned & abode ſtedfaſt in ye lawes of god / & after falſly was ſlayne of Criphone & two of his ſones. V
                              •
                           de p
                              •
                           a iuda et fr̄e etꝰ lib. macha. ¶ Antiochus Epiphanes ſone to Antio thus ye myghty this tyme was kyng of Sirry. This man frō ye heed vnto ye fote wtin & wtout al was curſed / & therfore he was fygured to Antechryſt. Many mar tyrs he made cruelly / & falſly he diſpoſed hȳ to entre in to Egypt as his fader dyd but he obteyned not / for ye Romayns letted hȳ to his vnhappy werke / & how he was in hoſtage at Rome / & how ye ꝓphe cy of Daniel is cōpleted in hȳ ye may ſe in ye boke of Macha. ¶ Quintus flami nius / Marchꝰ Catho / Thiberiꝰ Graceꝰ were ſenatours of Rome. This tyme ſo meche batayle was ye lerned men of gen tyles & of ye true fayth bothe were wery to wryte ye actes / or haue them in mynde. In yt whiche batayles men meruay led gretly on ye ſted faſtnes of ye romayns that no tribulaciō / no drede nor hardnes might fere them / but euer contynued in batayle. And certaynly theſe Romayns after ye worldes honeſte / they were the mooſt wyſeſt men yt were / & therfore the Machabees deſyred theyr company.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Circa annū mundi .v. M .lix. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatem .C .xl.
                        MAthan ſone to Sadoth of ye lyne of Chryſt gate Iacob. Vt patet Mathei. 
                              •
                           . ¶ Symon ſone to Mathathias was byſſhop .viii. yere. This Symon was a very wyſe man / & from his youth vntyll his age was euer of good conuerſacyon / euermore vertuous. And at the laſt he was ſlayne of his broder Elay. Vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            .i. macha. ¶ Iohānes Hyrcanus ſone to Symon was after his fa der .xxix. yere / a noble man as all ye kynrede was before hym. This man after his deceſſe lefte his wyfe a very wyſe woman & his fyue ſones to gouerne the Iewry / of whome the eldeſt was called Ariſtobolus an vnpacyent man and an vnhappy. His owne moder with thre of his yōger brethern he pryſoned / & ſlewe them through honger / & ſo alone he lyued kynge & byſſhop one yere. Vide p
                              •
                           a libro machabeo
                              
                                 
                              
                              rum
                           . ¶ Publius Lucinius Lucius Emilius / Lucius Lucinius / & Lucius Cenſorinus were conſulles at Rome / in whoſe tyme the Cartagyens & the Romayns warred ſtrongly togyder / but the Romayns ſubdued them / intendyng to haue deſtroyed the Cartagyens vtterly. But amōge ye Romayns there was a notable wyſe man called Scipio Nauta / & amonge many notable coūſeyles / two he gaue ſpecyally to be had in mȳde. The fyrſt that Cartago ſholde not be deſtroyed / that through ye occaſyon of forehande batayles / an inwarde concorde and peas ſholde abyde amonge the Romayns / & a perpetuall ſtrengthe for contynuall exercyſe of batayle. The ſeconde / that in no wyſe the teathur ſholde be buyided in Rome / for he ſayd that was the mooſt enemy that myght be vnto the people whiche vſed warre / for that place nouryſſhed ſlouth

and prouoked lechery. And how wyſely this notable man gaue coſiſeyle / the tymes folowynge declare. Vide p
                              •
                           a in Au gu. deciui. dei. et Oro. lib .iiij. Yet for all this coūſeyle the noble cite of Cartagye was deſtroyed of Scipio & ye ſenatours And it brent .xvii. dayes cōtynually / many men there were ſolde / & many men ran in to ye fyre wylfully. ¶ Corinthus this ſame yere was deſtroyed of the Ro mayns / whiche was the rycheſt coūtre of the worlde. ¶ Ptholomeꝰ this tyme regned in Egipt / & was famylyer with the Romayns. And ſo longe he & his pre deceſſours regned as they kepte fidelite to the Romains. And knowe euery man that there was none other cauſe that ye power of ye Romayns encreaſed ſo ſtrōg ly aboue other people / but vertue yt whiche haboūdaūtly regned in them / & namely ryghtwyſnes / yt whiche aboue all thynge they vſed. And as longe as they kepte meſurenes & loued ryghtwyſnes ſo longe they were neuer ouercomen / & as ſoone as they were corrupted / it is redde they were ouercomē. ¶ It is had in a certayne reuelacyon of god ſhewed to ſaint Brigit / that our lord god bereth wytnes to theſe olde Romaȳs / ye none in this world of pure natural reaſon lyued more ryghtwyſly. And what lyghtes of fayth they ſhewed in ye tyme of chryſten religyon ſhall be ſhewed afterwarde.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Regnum Iudeorū reſtituitur.
                        ARiſtobolus was the firſt kyng & preeſt in the Iewry. This man regned one yere alone / & toke to hym the dyademe of ye kyngdom. And he held hȳ not content with that ye his fader gaue hym in his teſtament. But he put his moder in pryſon & his bretherne / & therfore he peryſſhed wretchedly wt his broder Antigonus / the whiche was of his coūſeyle & helped hym. Vide magr̄m in hiſtoriis. ¶ Antigonꝰ broder to ye kynge was ſlayne through ye enuy of ye quene. ¶ Alexander was byſſhop after Airſtovolus / & he ſtode .xxvii. yere / & he was a tyraūt / all though he appered ſobre in the begȳnynge. But he made it knowen what he was in his ſtomacke. For he ſlewe his owne bretherne / & in .xii. yere he ſlewe .l. M. of the olde ſage faders of grete vertue / bycauſe they colde hȳ his myſguydynge. Than whā he ſhold dre he lefte two ſones behynde hym / 
                              •
                           i
                              ••
                           anū & Ariſtobolū. But certaynly he ſayd his wyfe ſholde regne / for ſhe ſtode in ye grace of ye people. ¶ Seruius Flaccus / Lucius Celius / Fabius Publius / this tyme were ſenatours at Rome. This tyme batayles amonge themſelf began Of the whiche ye fyrſt cauſe & the begyn nynge was Gracius a myghty man & well knowen with noble Romayns began to ſeke a cauſe agaynſt them. And bycauſe yt he myght do no thynge alone to them / he meued the comyn people to them ſayenge / that all ye londes & poſſeſſyons ſhold be deuyded equally / & alſo ye money. & 
                              •
                           . And for yt cauſe there was an inſurreccyon / in yt whiche Gracius was ſlayne / & many nuſcheues fell after. Vide Oroſtū. ¶ In the tyme of theſe men there was a chylde borne at Rome hauynge .iiij. feet .iiij. armes. i
                              •
                           . faces and iiij. eyen. ¶ The hyll of Ethna ſpytted out flamynge fyre horrybly / & deſtroyed the places nye about it. ¶ And theſe mē verynge rule Cartago was cōmaūded to be reſtored / & it was fulfylled of ye Ro mayne people. And there was myghty batayle in ye cite of Rome. ¶ Fab
                              •
                           ꝰ with a lytell hooſt ouercame the kynge of 
                              •
                           rmenye / and there were drowned an hon dred and .lxxx. Nꝰ. men in the water of Reme. ¶ P
                              •
                           holomeus Alexander was kyng in Egipt. In his tyme was borne Luretius a poete / yt whiche afterwarde

was madde for loue of women & ſlewe hymſelfe. ¶ Ptholomeus ſome to Cleopatre regned after hym / vnder whome Saluſtius the noble wryter of hyſtoryes was borne. ¶ Ptholomeus Dionyſius was after this man. And in his tyme Virgyli & Dracius were borne.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno mūdi .v.M.C.xxxiiij. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatem .ix. C .v.
                        IAcob naturall fader to Ioſeph of the lyne of Chryſt is reherſed in Luke & Mathewe / & lytel of him is had in ſcripture. ¶ Alexandra wyfe to Alexā der was byſſhop in the Iury .ix. yere / & ſhe dyd moche tyranny / all yf ſhe was made byſihop by her feyned holy relygyon. And Nircanū her ſone promoted to the byſſhopryche / & ſhe ordeyned yt he ſholde regne after her. This woman in the lyne of ye by ſſhops is put for ye con̄ tynge of ye yeres. Not that ſhe vſed ye offyce of a vyſſhop / for it was not lefull to her. ¶ Hircanꝰ ſone to Alexander regned xxxiij. yere. This Hircanus after the de ceſſe of his moder ſucceded in the kyngdom / in yt whiche he had lytel proſperite for parcialite of the people. For anone he was ouercomen / & afterwarde he was reſtored through the helpe of ye Arabees And than he was made tributary to the Romayns / & ſo he was in peas a lytell tyme / but not in ye name of kyng. At the laſt he dyed wretchedly / for he was begiled through ye fraude of Partho
                              
                                 
                              
                              rum
                            / the whiche Antigonus hyred agaynſt him. Vide plene magr̄m hiſto. ¶ The hereſy of the phariſees about this tyme began & amonge them were .iij. ſectes in ye Iu ry / Phariſei / Saducei / & Eſſei / all theſe were deuyded fro the comyn vſe of the Iewes / & were infecte wt many errours for they ſayd yt they were holyer than other men / for they lyued ſtraytlyer thā other men dyd. Vide plus alias. ¶ Virgyll the mooſt famous and excellent of poetes was magnifyed this tyme / and mernaylous thinges he dyd / & amonge other whan than Neopolis was vexed with deedly payne of myghty wormes Virgyl caſt a worme of gold in to a pond or a water / & it laye there a cetayn ſeaſon. And whan it was takē vp in to the towne / all ye cite was made full of wormes / & tyll the worme of golde was put in to the water agayne / they had infynyte wormes / & whan it was in ye water all the wormes went away. ¶ Alſo it is wryten in the cronycles of Rome / ye Virgyll by cōnynge cōdenſed or thycked the ayre / ſo yt he walled his gardyn with the ayre / & he made a brydge of the ayre by the whiche he myght paſſe euery tyme that he lyſt. Alſo he aſked Marcellū Neopolitanū neue we vnto ye emperour yf he wolde haue a byrde taught to kyll all byrdes / or a flye taught to dryue all flyes out of the cyte. And this Marcellū tolde this to the emperour. And he deſyred to teche a flye to kyll all flyes / for the comyn people were ſore anoyed wt flyes And many other meruayles he dyd. Vide magr̄m Rodulfum Ceſtern̄. ¶ Dracius Flaccus / and Saluſtius Criſpus hiſtoricus were this tyme. ¶ Quintus Cipio / Gaius Lucius this tyme were conſules at Rome. ¶ Pompeius / Marcus Craſſus / & Julius Ceſar this tyme were Dictatours at Rome. For as it is ſayd afore there were many dignytees at Rome / of the whiche ſome dured one yere / & ſome two yere. And amonge all the dignytees the Dictatours exceded / for it dured fyue yere contynually. But whan ye comyn people & the lordſhips of Rome encreaſyng were made .iij. Dicta tours. And this tyme were Pompeius Iulius / & Marcꝰ craſſus dictatours / & bycauſe Pōpeius was of grete honour

and aged / he abode at Rome to kepe the comyn people of Rome. ¶ Marcꝰ Craſſus was ſente to ſubdue & fyght with ye regyon of Perthus / & through treaſon he was taken & ſlayne. ¶ Iulius Ceſar was ſent to ye weſt parte of ye worlde to ſubdue them. And he had wt hym. vi
                              •
                           . le gyons of people. And whan he had ſubdued Lombardye & Fraūce / his .v. yere were ſpended yt whiche were aſſygned to hym & no longer. There by his owne auctorite he toke other .v. yere on hym / in yt which he ſubdued Caſſibalon kyng of Brytayn / & the frenſhmen that rebelled agaynſt hym. This Iulius after he had cōquered theſe coūtrees vnto Rome he rode agayne for to be receyued wt certayne worſhyp as cōquerours were before hym / but it was denyed him / & alſo the entre of ye cite / by inſtigacyon of a lorde called Pompey. Wherfore this Iultꝰ Ceſar was anoyed / & wt force of myght entred the cite / & robbed the comyn treaſour / & ledde it with hym / & departed it amonge the .v. legyons yt were his ſeruaūtes. Than went he in to Spayne to fyght agaynſt this Pompey / for Pompey had ye gouernaūce of Cartago. But after that iourney in ytalye Pompey & he encoūtred togyder / in which batayle Pompey fledde vnto the kyng of Egipt. And that ſame kynge for ſpecyall loue yt he had vnto this Iulius Ceſar / ſmo
                              •
                           e of Pompeys heed / & ſent it to Iulius Ceſar. Yet for all ye enemyte yt was betwixt theſe two / Iulius wepte whan that he ſame this Pompeys heed. This Iuliꝰ was excedyng in wytte afore other men & he fought in batayle .lij. tymes. This man alone exceded Marcꝰ Craſſus / the whiche is ſayd to haue foughten .xxxix. tymes. This man toke fyrſt the empyre of Rome vpon hym whan Pompey and other noble men of the Romayns were clayne. And at ye laſt the fyfth yere of his empyre this Iulius Ceſar ye ruler of all the world was ſlayne in ye coūſeyll hous thrugh treaſon of his lordes. ¶ Cathon the mooſt named philoſopher leyng Iu lius ceſar haue ye victory / whome he fauoured not / at a town called Vticā ſlewe hymſelſelfe. Iuxta illud. Mauult Cato mori / quā deroget vrbis honori. But for that (after Auſtyn) he was not excuſed of ſynne. ¶ This tyme ye Iury was tributary to the Romayns for parcialite of two bretherne / Ariſtobolus / & Erranus both of them for enuy of other keſt them to ye Romayns that they myght regne. ¶ This tyme thre ſonnes appered i heuen towarde the eeſt parte of ye worlde the whiche by lytel & lytel were brought in to one body. A grete ſigne it was that Affrica / aſia & Europa ſhold be brought in to one monarchy / & that ye lordſhyp of Anthony the ſenatour & Lucus Anton
                              ••
                            ſholde turne in to one lordſhyp. ¶ Marcus Cicero Tulius ye mooſt excellent 
                              •
                           ethoricien was cōſul of Rome this tyme.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How that the Britons graūted vnto Caſſibalon that was Luddes broder ye londe / in whoſe tyme Iulius Ceſar came twyes for to conquere Brytayne.
                        AFter ye deth of kyng Lud regned his broder Caſſibalon & became a good man & moche beloued of his Bry tons / ſo that for his goodnes & curteyſy they graunted hym the realme for euer more to hym and to his heyres. And the kyng of his goodnes let nouryſſhe worthely bothe the ſones yt were Luds his broder / & after made the eldeſt ſone erle of Cornewayle / and the yongeſt ſone he made erle of London. And whyles this Caſſibalon regned came Iulius ceſar yt was emperour of Rome in to this 
                              •
                           o
                              •
                           de with a power of romayns / & wold haue bad this londe through ſtrengthe / but

Caſſybalon ouercame hym in batayle through helpe of y• brytōs / & droue hym out of this londe. And he went agayn to Rome and aſſembled a grete power an other tyme / and came agayne in to this londe for to gyue batayle to Caſſibalon / but he was diſcōfyted through ſtrength of the brytons / & through helpe of y• erle of Cornewayle & the erle of London his broder / and through helpe of Gudyan kynge of ſcotlonde / and Corbond kynge of north wales / and of Bretayll kyng of ſouth wales. And in this batayle was ſlayne Nemyon that was Caſſybalons broder / wherfore he made moche ſorow And ſo wente Iulius Ceſar out of this londe with a fewe of Romayns y• were lefte alyue. And than Caſſybalon went agayne to London / & made a feeſt to all his folke y• had holpen hym. And whan that this feeſt was all done / than euery man went home to his owne coūtree.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the debate that was bytwene Caſſybalon & the erle of London / & of the truage that was payde to Rome.
                        ANd after it befell vpon a daye y• the gentylmen of y• kȳges houſholde / & the gentylmen of y• erles houſholde of London after meet went togyder for to playe / & through debate that aroſe amonge them / Enelin that was y• erles coſyn of London ſlewe Irenglas that was the kynges coſyn / wherfore y• kynge ſware y• Enelyn ſhold be hanged But the erle of London y• was Enelyns lorde wolde not ſuffre hym / wherfore y• kyng was gretly vexed & worth to war dethe erle / & thought to deſtroye hym / & pryuely y• erle ſent lettres to Iulius Ceſar / that he ſholde come in to this londe for to helpe hym / & hym auenge vpon y• kyng / & he wold helpe hym with all his myght. And whan the emperour herde theſe tydynges / he was full glad / & ordeyned a ſtronge power / & came agayne the thyrde tyme in to this londe / & y• erle of London holpe him with .vij. M. men And at y• thyrde tyme was Caſſybalon ouercomen & dyſcomfyted / & made peas with the emperour for there thouſande pounde of ſyluer yeldynge by yere for truage for this londe for euermore. And than within halfe a yere after Iulius Ceſar the emperour went vnto Rome / and the erle of London with hym. For he durſt not abyde in this londe. And after Caſſibalon regned .xvij. yere in peas and than he dyed the .xvij. yere of his regne / and lyeth at Yorke.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How the lordes of the londe after the deth of Caſſybalon / & for bycauſe he had none heyre / made Andragen kynge.
                        AFter the deth of Caſſybalon for as moche as he had none heyre of his body lefully begoten / the lordes of the londe by the comyns aſſent crowned Andragen erle of Cornewayle / & made hym kynge. And he regned well & wor
                              •
                            thely / and he was a good man / and well gouerned the londe. And whan he had regned .viij. yere than he dyed / & lyeth at London.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Circa annum mundi .v. M .C .lix. Et ante Chriſti natiuitatem .xl.
                        IOſeph of the lyne of Chryſt was borne aboute this tyme / and after was huſbonde vnto our lady. ¶ Antigonus was byſſhop this tyme in the Iury. This Antigonus was ſone vnto Ariſtobolus / and on euery ſyde he was fals. For he obeyed not to the Romayns and a grete plage he brought vnto the londe for to deſtroye Hircanus his owne vncle / that he myght regne kynge / and

ſo Hircanꝰ was expulſed / & Falelꝰ was ſlayne / & Herode was exiled. But whan Herode came to Rome & tolde the ſenatours all theſe thynges / the emperour created hym kyng / ſendyng with hym an hooſt / the w
                              ••
                           the toke Ieruſalem / & Antigonū the byſſhop was takē & ledde to Anthony y• ſenatour / the whiche made him ſyker / & ſo was Herode cōfermed in to his kyngdome. And he a ſtraūger regned on the Iewes. And ſo the kyngdom of the Iewes ceſſed / as Iacob had ſayd. ¶ Titus Liuius hiſtoricus / and Ouidius were this tyme.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Incipiūt imꝑatores Auguſti. et dictꝰ eſt Auguſtus quia augebat populū.
                        OCtauian was emperour of Rome ivij. yere .vj. monethes & .x. dayes This Octauian neuewe to Iuly whan he was a youge man toke the empyre 
                              〈◊〉
                            hym. His floury ſſhynge youth he ſpended in warre. Fyue. M. batayles he did And ſhortly after many batayles 
                              •••
                           he worlde he brought in to one monarchy. This man had no felow / & in his dayes peas was in all the worlde through the prouiſyon of the very god / that y• tempo rall peas myght gloryfye the Natiuite of our ſauyour Chryſt Ieſu. This Octa uyan was y• fayreſt man y• myght be / & hygh in wytte / the moſt fortunate in all thynges / & he lacked nor the vyce of his fleſhly luſt. This man made all y• world to be meſured. And in the .lij. yere of his regne was borne the ſauyour of all the worlde Chryſt Ieſu / the whiche graſifeth eternal peas to his louers. ¶ Hir no 
                              •
                           a ſedz Ieronymſi. that Anna & Emeria were ſyſters and of Emeria was borne Elizabeth 
                              ••
                           der to Iohn baptyſt. And Anna was fyrſt wedded to Ioachun / of whome ſhe toke Mary
                              〈…〉
                            of Chryſt The ſeconde huſbonds was Cleophe / & be gate on her Marye Cleophe / whiche was wedded to Alphe / of whom ꝓceded Iames y• leſſe / Symon Cananeus / Iu das Tadeus / & Ioſeph which is called Barſabas. The thyrd tyme Anna was wedded to Salome / of whome ſhe toke Marye Salome / whiche was wedded to zebedi: & of them came Iames y• more & Iohn the euāgelyſt. The fyrſt Mary wedded Ioſeph broder to Cleophe afore ſayd. ¶ This tyme Sibilla Tiburtina prophecyed of Chryſt / & ſayd to y• emperour Auguſt / y• he ſholde not 
                              •
                           ro we y• he was god after y• folyſſhnes of y• paynȳs And there ſhe ſhewed hȳ a ſayre virgyn in heuen / holdyng a childe in her ariues & ſayd to hȳ. This childe is greter than thou / & therfore do hȳ worſhyp. ¶ The monarchy of Rome about this tyme encreaſed myghtely. And whan it was ſo that by all y• worlde in dyuers ꝓuynces batayles were reyſed ſodeynly all men meruaylynge they were ſeſſed and put them holy to y• prince of Rome y• openly it myght be ſhewed that ſuche an vnyuerſal peas came neuer by labour of batayle / but of y• power of y• very god / that in his natyuite peas ſholde regne in the worlde. ¶ Herode Aſcolonita was kyng in the Iury .xxxvij. yere. This Perede ydumeus was the fyrſt ſtraūge kynge that regned on y• Iewes. The mayſter in hyſtoryes ſayth he was a noble man and faythfull in the begȳuynge & in all thynge he had hym nobly. He was very gentyll vnto the Romayns & to y• people that loued peas. And in his olde age whan he wolde ouer moche pleaſe y• Ro mayns / & herd of y• byrth of Chryſt dredyng to be expulſed of his kyngdom as a ſtraūger / wretchedly fell & ſlewe y• Innocentes & dyuers of his owne children. And at y• laſt was hatefull to all people / fell ſeke & dyed wretchedly. ¶ Mary the moder of Chryſt was borne afore y• nati

uite of Chryſt .xvj. yere / or there about.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of Kymbalyn that was Andragens ſone that well gouerned Brytayne.
                        AFter y• deth of Andragen regned Kymbalyn his ſone that was a good man & well gouerned the londe in grete ꝓſperite & peas all his lyfe tyme. And in his tyme Chryſt was borne of y• blyſſed virgyn Mary. This kyng Kym balyn had two ſones / Gynder & Armager / good knyghtes and worthy. And whan this Kymbalyn had regned. xxij yere he dyed / and lyeth at London.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Chriſtus natus eſt ex virgine Maria anno mundi .v. M .C .lxxxxviij.
                        IN the begȳnynge of the .xlij. yere of Octauian the emperour y• whiche began to regne in Marche / & y• .xxxj. yere of Herode / the. vij .C .lj. yere after y• Rome was buylded / the .vj. moneth frō the conceyuynge of Iohn Baptyſt / the viij. kalend of Apryll / the .vj. fery at Nazareth of Galylee of the virgyn Marye was cōceyued Chryſt our ſauyour / and the ſame yere was borne.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        ¶ Here at Chryſtes natiuite begynneth the ſyxth age duryng to y• fynall iudgement / hauynge yeres as god knoweth.
                        ¶ Here begynneth the ſyxth age durynge to the ende of the Worlde.

                              Chriſtus natꝰ eſt.
                           
                        
                        WHan our lord Ieſu Chryſt was borne / a well of ayle ſprange beyonde Tyber by Rome / & ranne all the daye. ¶ The golden ymage fell the which Romulus had made & put in his palays / ſayenge. This ymage ſhall not fall vntyll a mayde bere a chylde.
                        ¶ Whan Herode dyſpoſed hym to ſlee y• children of Iſrael / he was cōmaūded by the lettre of y• emperour to come to rome to anſwere to y• accuſacyō of his children Alexiū & Ariſtoboli. And there were .iij. Herodes gretly ſpoken of for theyr yll d
                              •
                            des. The fyrſt was called Aſcolonita / & vnder this mā was Chryſt borne / & the children of Iſraell were ſlayne. The ſecond was called Antipas / ſone to y• fyrſt Herode / vnder whom John baptiſt was heded / and Chryſt ſuffred deth. And the thyrde was called Agrippa / ſone to Ariſtoboli / ſone to y• fyrſt Herode / y• whiche ſlew Iames & priſoned Peter. The firſt Herode whā he ſawe his ſones Alexiū & Ariſtoboli through y• pretēce of his lettre by the emperour ſent / ſtroue for y• ſucceſ ſyon of his kyngdom / he diſpoſed & made Antipater y• was his firſt begotē ſone to be before them / & whan they were tal kyng of y• deth of theyr fader / he keſt thē away / & they went to y• emperour to cō
                           playne of y• wronge of theyr fader / & in y• meane tyme y• thre kynges of Coleyn came by Herode to Ieruſalē / & whan they came not agayn by hȳ / he thought they were aſhamed to come agayn by hȳ / for bicauſe they were deceyued / & that they foūde not y• childe as he demed / therfore in y• meane ſeaſon he ceſſed to ſlee y• chyldren of Iſraell / & than he went to Rome for y• citacyon of the emperour / & he toke his way by y• cite of Tarſum / where he brent y• ſhyppes in whiche the thre kynges of Coleyne ſholde haue ſayled in to theyr owne coūtrees. Than after a yere & certayne dayes this Herode came fr
                              •
                           
                           
Rome agayn accorded wt his ſones / & for the confyrmacyon of his kyngdome he was made moche bolder / & thā he ſlewe all y• children of Bethleem y• were of two yere of age and vnder / that had ſpace of one nyght of age / & amonge theſe was there one of his owne chyldren. And Ari ſtobolus & Alexiū were had ſuſpected / in ſo moche as they promyſed a barbour a grete rewarde for to cutte theyr faders throte whan he dyd ſhaue hȳ. And whā this Herode herde this / he was greued and there he ſlewe bothe his ſones. And Herode Agrippa his ſone he ordeyned to be kyng. Wherfore Antipater his eldeſt ſone was about to poyſon his fader / the whiche Herode Agrippa vnderſtode / & priſoned there his broder / the whiche y• emperour herde / & ſayd y• he had rather be an hogge of Herodes than to be one of his ſones / for his hogges he ſpareth / & his ſones he ſleeth. And whan Herode was .lxx. yere of age / he was ſtryken wt a grete ſekenes in his handes & in his feet & in his membres / y• no leche might come to him for ſtynke / & ſo dyed. Whan Antipater his ſone y• was in priſon herd tell of this / he ioyed gretly / & there for y• cauſe he was ſlayne. Than Archelaus and Herode ſtroue for the ſucceſſyon of y• fyrſt Herode afore y• emperour. The emperour there through coūſeyle of y• ſenatours y• halfe of y• Iury & ydumea gaue to Archelaus vnder name of a tetrarche The other parte he deuyded in to two. Galile he gaue to Herode Antipas / and Ituriam & Traconitidē he gaue to Philyp Herodes broder. ¶ And y• ſame yere Chryſt came from Egypte. And Archelaus was accuſed many tymes of the Iewes / & was exiled in to Viennā in to Fraūce. And in y• place were ſet .iiij. Tetrarches to y• repreuynge of y• vnſtablenes of y• Iewes. ¶ And that ſame yere Octauian the emperour dyed.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno Chriſti .xij.
                        IEſu Chryſt our ſauyour at .xij. ye re of age herde the doctours in the temple. Our lorde Ieſu Chryſt at .xxx. yere of age was baptyſed.
                        
                           Crux Chriſti.
                        
                        ¶ Ieſu Chryſt the lorde of all lordes at. xxxiij yere of age and thre monethes dyed for his ſeruaūtes. ¶ Innius Rufus was byſſhop in the Iury about this tyme. Valerius Gracius was after hym xj. yere. This man openly ſolde the byſſhopryche / & he that gaue mooſt had it. And ſo there was many in a lytel whyle ¶ Ponciꝰ Pylatꝰ was iudge & proctour in the Iury vnder y• emperour. And vnder this man ſaint Iohn baptyſt began to preche. And our lord Ieſu Chryſt ſuffred deth / whom Pylate cōdempned to deth wrōgfully for drede of y• emperour. ¶ Tyrus a certayn kyng gate a 
                              •
                           hyſde on Pyla a poore mannes doughter named Atus / & this chylde of his med
                              •
                           rs name & his belſyre put togyder was called Pylatus. This Pylatꝰ the .iiij. yere of his age was ſent to his fader y• whiche kyng on his wyſe lefully had goten a chylde euen of the age of Pylate. And bycauſe this lefull goten chylde as they proceded in age exceded this baſtard Pylatus / he was full of enuye / & ſlewe his broder the lefull goten childe. Wherfore his fader forth wt ſente hym to Rome for pledge for his tribute y• he payd to rome entendyng he wolde neuer redeme hym In the whiche tyme the kynges ſone of Fraūce was pledge for his trybute / the

whiche exceded hym in ſtrength & chyualry alſo he ſlewe hym. Therfore y• Romayns ſent Pylate as a ꝓfytable man for the comyn wele to the yle of Ponto / to tame ye curſed people y• whiche ſlewe euery Iudge that came to them. And he that curſed man gouerned that vnhappy people / what with thretenynge and with promeſſe / & with lawe / and with gyftes / that none of them durſt do contrary to his pleaſure / wherfore he was called Pylate of Ponto. ¶ Herode Antipa yonge in his cōuerſacions / with gyftes and meſſengers drewe hym to hym and made hym prynce of ye Iury vnder hym. And this tyme Pylate gadred moche money / and Herode not knowynge he went to Rome that he might receyue of the emperour that Herode had gyuen hym. Wherfore Herode & Pylate were enemyes togyder vnto ye paſſyon of our lorde / whan y• Pylate ſent Ieſu Chryſt vnto Herode clothed in a whyte clothe than they were made frendes. ¶ Ouidius Naſo in Ponto aboute this tyme dyed the fourth yere of his exile. ¶ Tiberius this tyme was emperour at Rome / and he regned .xxiij. yere / and he lyued in ye yere that our lord Ieſu Chryſt dyed / & ſomwhat after. This man was in all his werkes gretly auyſed / yt there ſholde be nothynge ſodeynly done / wyſe in warres / ſtudyous in bokes / fayre of ſpeche / freſſhe in wytte / ſaue he wolde oftentymes feyne hȳſelfe to do thynges that he wolde not were done of other. This emperour vnderſtode & truſted in Chryſt / and worſhypped hym for god. Some men ſaye at ye laſt he was cruell agaynſt the people / but it was a grete reaſon of pyte yt he was euer gracyous to his ſubiectes and poore men. And he had peas al his dayes / & all people that ſayd agaynſt chriſtē folke / without ony mercy he deſtroyed. And he exiled Pylate for euer. Than he deceſſed & a worſe ſucceded hym. ¶ After Euſebe it is wryten / that our lord at .xxx. yere of his age choſe his .xij. apoſtles / the whiche made our Crede / that is our byleue / & they made it after the reſurreccyon of Chryſt and after the holy ghooſt was ſent vnto them / whan they had choſen Mathia ye apoſtle / & eche of them made a parte / as it is ſhewed here after. And this Mathia was choſen bytwene the daye of ye Aſcencyon & whytſondaye / in the place of Iudas ſcaryot ye traytour / of whome in an hyſtorye is redde thus. ¶ There was a certayn man in Ieruſalem that hyght Ruben / & after ſaynt Ierome he was of the trybe of yſachar / & his wyfe hyght Ciborea / y• whiche on a certayne nyght whā he wolde luſtely knowe his wyfe / ſhe dremed that ſhe ſholde here a chylde of myſchefe / & that chylde ſholde be a traytour to his kynge and to all the people of that regyon. And whan that chylde was borne & called Iudas / his fader & his moder abhorred as well to ſlee theyr chylde / as to nouryſſhe a traytour to the kynge & all his people / therfore they put hym in to a panyer or leep in to the ſee. And he flowed to the yle of Scaryoth / where the lady of that place had no chyldren by her huſbonde / & ſhe feyned her to be wt chylde / but ſhe fayled And after a lytel ſeaſon the ſame lady & quene cōceyued a childe of her huſbonde And whan he was of age Iudas many tymes angred hym / and cauſed hym to wepe / the whiche ye quene ſawe / & bette Iudas many tymes / & after ſhe knowleged that Iudas was not the kynges ſone nor hers / wherfore Iudas ſlewe y• kynges ſone / and he dradde the payne of the lawe / & fledde with certayne exiles to Ieruſalem. And whan he came there / he gate hym to Pylates courte that was iudge. And bycauſe that one

curſed man draweth to another / therfore he drewe to Pylate / & ſtode gretely in his fauour. And vpon a certayn daye whan Pylate loked out of his palays in to an orcharde of a mānes that was called Ruben the whiche was very fader to Iudas / Pylate deſyred to haue apples / and Iudas went to gader apples and Ruben ranne to Iudas for to let hȳ bycauſe he toke his apples without ony leue. And after yt they had chydden this Iudas ſmote his fader on the heed wt a ſtone & ſlewe him / & Iudas fledde away ſecretely after y• dede / but it was ſayd y• Ruben died ſodeynly. Thā Pilate gaue Iudas all Rubens goodes & his wyfe Ciborea yt was his moder. And he delte not curteyſly wt her as a man ſhold do wt his wyfe / wherfore ſhe wepte bycauſe ſhe had put her ſone in y• ſee / & yt ſhe was maryed agaynſt her wyll. It was ꝑreyued y• Iudas had ſlayne his fader & wedded his owne moder. Than Ciborea his moder & wyf ſtyred hȳ to leue his ſynne which he dyd & folowed Chryſt / & he for gaue hym his ſynnes / & made hym his proctour & apoſtle / & how falſe he was to Chryſt it nedeth not to reherſe. And ye ſame yere Mathewe was choſen / & the holy ghooſt was ſente vnto them as is ſayd before. The apoſtles or they were ſparpled in to all ye worlde / they gadered them togyder in Ieruſalem / and made the Credo our byleue here folowynge.
                        
                           Petrus
                           Credo in deum patrē oipotentem creatorē cel
                                 •
                               et terre.
                           Andreas
                           Et in Ieſum Chriſtū filiū eius vnicū dominū noſtrú.
                           Iohānes
                           Qui cōceptus eſt de ſpiritu ſctō / natꝰ ex maria virgine.
                           Iacobus
                           Paſſus ſub poncio Pylato crucifixus mortuꝰ & ſepultꝰ.
                           Thomas
                           Deſcēdit ad inferna / tertia die reſurrexit a mortuis.
                           Iacobus
                           Aſcendit ad celos ſedet ad dexteram dei patris omnipotentis.
                           Philippus
                           Inde venturus eſt iudicare viuos et mo tuos.
                           Bartholo.
                           Credo in ſpiritum ſanctum.
                           Matheus
                           Sanctam eccleſiā catholicam.
                           Symon
                           Sanctorum commu 
                                 ••
                              onem / remiſſionem peccatorum.
                           Iudas
                           Carnis reſurrectionem.
                           Mathias
                           Et vitam eternam Amen.
                        
                        IEſu Chryſt our ſauyour aroſe fro deth to lyfe and ſayd to his diſcyples. All the power in heuen and erth is gyuen vnto me. And go ye thus in to all the worlde and preche & teche vnto euery creature / and I ſhall be with you to the ende of the worlde. ¶ Here be choſe hym .lxxii. dyſcyples. And he had. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . apoſtles the whiche he ſente in to all the worlde to preche. It is not redde yt there were 
                              〈…〉
                           oo ordres amonge the diſcyples of Chryſt. Of whom the preeſtes & byſſhops in the chirche of god yet kepe the fourme. For to the apoſtles the biſſhops ſuccede / and to the dyſcyples preeſtes / to the whiche two ordres all the chirche is gyuen as a godly g
                              •
                           rarchy. Vt paret in decreto Damaſte pape.
                        
                           Wrote in Aſia in greke language. In principio erat verbū. &c. Iohannes.
                           
                           
                              
Wrote in Ytalye / but in greke language. Initium euangelij Ieſu Chriſti. &c.
                              Marcus.
                           
                           Wrote in grecia in greke language. Fuit in di
                                 •
                              bus Herodis regis iude ſacerdos. &c.
                              Lucas.
                           
                           Wrote in the Iury in hebrewe language. Liber generatiois Ieſu Chriſti. &c.
                              Matheus.
                           
                        
                        ¶ Here begynneth the ordre of popes of Rome / & contynueth as the lyne of Chryſte dyd afore. For in them god lefte his power.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno domini .xxxiiij.
                        PEter a Iewe ye fyrſt pope was a blyſſed man & a gloryous apoſtle of Chryſt. He was heed of ye chirche after Ierom .xxxvij. yere. And he held his byſſhopryche in y• ceſt .v. yere and ſayd ma
                              〈…〉
                            made our lorde / & alone ſayd y• Patt
                              〈…〉
                           oſter. Than after he came to Antioch
                              ••
                           m / & there he abode .vij. yere techynge y• waye of trouth / & Symō Magus he cōfoūded & ouercame. That ſeaſon he preched to y• people y• were circū
                           cyſed whiche were in Ponto of Galati / Capadocia / Aſia / Bithinia. Than herd he that Symon Magus deluded y• Romayns through the loue of y• fayth / he came to Rome in y• fourth yere of Claudius the emperour / & there he preched the worde of god / & ſhewed the falſhede of Symon Magus / and turned many a man to y• fayth. Than he ſent his prechers by dyuers prouynces / by whome chriſten religyon was myghtely encreaſed. He ordeyned the feeſt of lentyn afore
                           
                              •
                           eſter / and the aduent / & the 
                              〈…〉
                           yng dayes to be faſted of all chryſten people / in to the myrrour of y• fyrſt & ſeconde comyng of our lorde. Than whan he had ben pope at Rome .xxv. yere .vij. monethes & .viij. dayes he was ſlayne of Nero. Eiꝰ p
                              •
                           a oꝑa vide act. ap
                                 •
                              o
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 rum
                              . ¶ Gaius this tyme was emperour at Rome / and regned .iij. yere and .x. monethes. This Gaius was full vicyous in lyuyng / for two of his own ſyſters he myſuſed / & on one of them he gate a doughter / whiche childe he ſet betwyxt ye knees of Iupiter in the temple / & feyned afterward ye Iupiter had goten her / wherfore he dyd d
                              •
                           
                           trye through ye countre ye all men ſholde worſhyp her as a goddeſſe. This man alſo made an ymage lyke hȳſelfe / & ſent it to one Patronie preſident at Ieruſalé vnder the Romayns / cōmaūdyng hym that he ſhold compell ye iewes to do worſhyp therto. And for theſe enormytees & many other / our lorde ſuffred hym to be ſlayne at Rome in his owne palays.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kyng Gynder that was Kymbalyns ſone / that wolde not paye the truage to Rome for the londe yt Caſſibalon had graūted / and how he was ſlayne of a Romayne.
                        ANd after the deth of this Kymbalyn regned Gynder his ſone a good man and a worthy / & was of ſo hygh herte that he wolde not paye to Rome the trybute that kynge Caſſybalon had graunted vnto Iulius Ceſar / wherfore the emperour that was than that was Claudius Ceſar / was ſore anoyed and greued / and ordeyned a grete power of Romayns / and came in to this londe for to conquere y• trybute through myght and ſtrengthe / and for to haue it on the kynge. But this kynge Gynder and Armager his broder aſſembled and

gadered a grete hooſt togyder of Britōs and gaue batayle to ye emperour Claudius / & ſlewe of y• Romayns grete plente. The emperour had afterward one y• was called Hamon y• ſawe theyr people were there faſt ſlayne / & pryuely caſt awaye his owne armes / & toke y• armes of a deed bryton & armed hym therwith and came in to the batayle to ye kynge / & thus he ſayd. Syr be of a good herte for goddes loue / for the Romayns your enemyes anone ſhall be ſlayne & diſcōfyted. And the kyng gaue no kepe to his wordes / for bycauſe of ye armes that he had vpon hym / & wend it had ben a Bryton But the traytour euer helde hym nexte the kynge / & pryuely vnder ye ſholder of his arme he ſmote the kynge / wherfore the kynge dyed & fell downe to the erth. Whā Armager ſawe his broder ſo deed he caſt awaye his armes & toke to hym his broders armes / & came in to the batayle amonge ye brytons / & badde them hertely for to fyght & faſt lay downe the Romayns. And for ye armes they wende it had ben kyng Gynder that afore was ſlayne yt they wyſt not. Than began the Brytons fyerſly to fyght / & ſlewe the Romayns. So at ye laſt ye emperour for ſoke the felde & fledde as faſt as he myght wt his folke in to Wyncheſtre. And the fals traytour Hamon yt had ſlayne the kyng faſt anone began to flee with all ye haſte that he might. And Armager ye kynges broder purſued hym full fyerſly with a fyers herte / & droue hym vnto a water and there he toke hym / & anone ſmote of bothe handes & feet & heed / & hewed the body all to peces / & than let caſt hym in to the water / wherfore that water was called Hamons hauen. And afterwarde there was made a fayre towne that yet ſtandeth yt is called Southamton. And afterward Armager went to Wyncheſter to ſeke Claudius ye Emperour / and there toke hym. And Claudius ye emperour through coūſeyle of his Romayns that were lefte alyue made peas wt Armager in this maner folowyng / that is to ſaye / that Claudius ſholde gyue vnto Armager Gennen his doughter to wyfe & that this londe fro that tyme forward ſhold be in ye emperours power of Rome takyng none other tribute but homage. And they were accorded. And vpon this couenaūt Claudius ceſar ſente to Rome for his doughter Gennen. And whā ſhe was comē Claudius gaue her to Armager to wyfe. And Armager ſpouſed her at London wt grete ſolem
                              •
                           nite. And thā he was crowned kynge of Brytayne.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kynge Armager in whoſe tyme ſaynt Peter preched in Antioche with other apoſtles in dyuers coūtrees.
                        THis Armager regned well and worthely & gouerned well ye lōde And Claudius ceſar in remembraūce of this accorde / & for reuerence & honour of his doughter made in this londe a fa
                              ••
                           e towne & caſtell / & let call the towne after his name Clauceſtren / ye new is called Gloceſtre. And whā this was all done ye emperour toke his l
                              •
                           ue & went to Be
                              •••
                           . And Armager gate a ſone on his wyfe yt was called Weſtmer. And whyle 
                              〈◊〉
                            Armager regned ſaint Peter preched in Antioche / & there he made a noble chirche / in ye whiche he ſate fyrſt in his chayre / & there he dwelled .vij. yere. And after he went to Rome & was made pope tyll yt Nero ye emperour let martyr hym And than preched openly all y• apoſtles in dyuers londes the true faythe. And whan Armager had regned .xxiiij. yere he dyed / and lyeth at London.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kyng Weſtmer gaue to Berynger an ylonde forlet / & there this Berynger made the towne of Berwyk.
                        
                           
ANd after this A
                              〈…〉
                           ager regned his ſone Weſtmer / that was a good man and a worthy of body / & well gouerned the londe. It befell ſo that tydynges came to hym on a daye that the kynge Roderyk of Gaſcoyne was come in to this londe with an huge hooſt of people / and was dwellynge in Staneſmore. And whan kyng Weſtmer herde thoſe tydynges / he let aſſemble an huge hooſt of Brytons / and came to kyng Roderyk & gaue hym batayle. And kynge Weſtmer ſlewe Roderik with his owne handes in playne batayle. And whan kynge Roderykes men ſawe that theyr lord was ſlayne / they yelded them all to kynge Weſtmer / & became his men for euermore. And he gaue them a coūtre yt was forlet wherin they myght dwell / & thyder they went / and dwelled there all theyr lyfe tyme / & .ix .C. men there were of them / & no moo lefte at that batayle. Theyr gouernour & prynce was called Beringer / & anone he began a towne yt they myght therin dwell & haue reſorte & let call ye towne Berwyk vpon Twede And there they enhabyted & became ryche. But they had no women amonge them / and the Brytons wolde not gyue theyr doughters to ye ſtraūgers / wherfore they went ouer ſee in to Irlonde / & brought with them women / and there they them ſpouſed. But the men coude not vnderſtande theyr language ne ſpeche of theſe women / & therfore they ſpake togyder as ſcottes. And afterwarde through chaungynge theyr languages in all Fraūce they were than called ſcottes / and ſo ſholde the folke of that countre be called for euermore.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Weſtmer let arere a ſtone in ye entrynge of Weſtmerlōde there as he ſlewe Roderyk / & there he began fyrſt houſynge.
                        
                           
                        
                        ANd after this batayle that is aboue ſayd / whan Roderyk was ſlayne / kyng Weſtmer in remembraūce of his vyctory let arere there beſydes y• waye a grete ſtone on hygh / and yet it ſtandeth / and euermore ſhal ſtande / and he let graue in the ſaid ſtone lettres that thus ſayd. The kyng Weſtmer of Brytayne ſlewe in this place Roderyk his enemy. And this Weſtmer was ye fyrſt that buylded hous and towne in Weſtmerlonde / and at that ſtone begynneth Weſtmerlonde / that Weſtmer let call after his owne name. And whā Weſtmer had ſo done / he dwelled all his lyfe tyme in that countre of Weſtmerlonde / for he loued that countre aboue all other countrees. And whan he had regned .xxv. yere he dyed / and lyeth at Karleyll.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kynge Coyll that was kynge Weſtmers ſone / that helde his londe in peas all his lyfe tyme.
                        COyll Weſtmers ſone was crowned kyng after his fader / and he was a good man & a worthy / & of good cōdityons / & well gouerned his londe / & of all men he had loue and peas. And in his tyme was neuer contacke / debate / nor warre in Brytayne. And he regned

in peas all his lyfe. And whan he had regned .xi. yere he dyed & lyeth at Yorke.
                        CLaudiꝰ was emperour at Rome nexte after Gayus / & he regned xiiij. yere & .viij. dayes. This man came in to grete Britayn now called Englond for to chalenge the trybute whiche they dyd deny to y• Romayns. And after grete batayles there was bytwene the emperour Claudius & Armager kyng of Britayn. And after accordement made that this Armager ſholde wedde Claudius doughter / and after they two ſhold euer lyue in peas / in token wherof this Claudius named ye cite where they were maryed after hym & called it Claudiceſtre / we call it now Gloceſtre. This Claudiꝰ had .iij. wyues / & on Petiua ye firſt wyfe he gate a doughter that hyght Antonia The fyrſt wyfe deceſſed and he wedded Meſſalinā & gate a ſone y• hyght Britanicꝰ / & Octauia a doughter. The thyrde he wedded Agrippina / hauynge a ſone that hyght Nero. Claudiꝰ wedded his doughter Octauia to Nero his wyues ſone. This Claudiꝰ for loue yt he had to Agrippina his laſt wyfe he ſlewe Meſſalina his ſecōd wyfe / leſt ſhe ſhold haue helpe Britanicus her ſone & his to ye empyre. yet Agrippina ye laſt wyfe of Claudius drad leſt her huſbonde wolde haue ꝓferred Britanicꝰ & haue depoſed Nero her ſone / therfore ſhe poyſoned her huſbonde Claudius / & Nero was ꝓmoted to ye empyre. And this ſame Nero gaue his moder ſuche a reward agayn / for he poyſoned Britanicus & ſlewe his owne 
                              〈…〉
                           oder & his wyfe Octauia. ¶ Iames the more y• apoſtle this tyme was ſlayne of Herode Agrippa / & Peter was pryſo
                           
                              〈…〉
                           d. vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            act .xij. The body of ſaynt Iames was brought by myr
                              〈…〉
                            in to Ga
                           
                              〈…〉
                            of Spayne. ¶ Nero after Claudiꝰ 
                              〈…〉
                           s emperour / & he regne
                              •
                            .xiij. yere & vij. monethes. This Nero was a curſed mā / & made grete waſte in y• empyre He wolde not fyſſhe but with nettes of golde & ropes of ſylke. A grete parte of ye lordes of Rome he ſlewe. He was enemy to good men. He ſlewe his broder & his wyfe / his moder and his mayſter. He ſlewe alſo Peter & Paule. He wolde neuer were one cloth two tymes. His horſes & his mules were ſhod with ſyluer. And at the laſt he dyd ſet a grete part of Rome on fyre / ſome ſaye to ſe how Troy brent / & ſome ſaye the Romayns cōplayned ye ſtretes were to narowe. And whā he had brent a grete parte of Rome / Nero ſayd there was ſpace to buylde y• ſtretes wyder. Than ye ſenatours wt the comyn people came vpon hym to 
                              〈…〉
                           e hym And he fled by nyght in to ye ſubbarbes of y• cite / & hyd hym amonge ye vynes / & he herde karles & beggers come by hym that ſayd / & they wyſt where the emperour were / he ſholde neuer ſcape them. Nero thought it ſholde be grete derogacion to his name & he were ſlayne of karles / & on a grete ſtake he 
                              •
                           an hȳſelfe to ye herte & dyed / & there was buryed / & deuyls kepte his body many a day after / & dyd grete hurt to ye people / tyll by a myracle of our lorde ye body was foūde & taken away / & than the deuylles voyded. ¶ Seneca was this tyme maiſter to Nero. ¶ Iuuenalis poeta. ¶ Lucanꝰ poeta. ¶ Iames ye leſſe y• apoſtle byſſhop of Ieruſalem was ſlayne of ye Iewes the vj. yere of Nero. ¶ Marcus ye euāgelyſt was martyred the fyrſt yere of hym.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Cir
                              •
                           a annū Chriſti .lxxiiij.
                        
                           
                              •
                           Anus ytalicus was pope of Rome .x. yere & .iij. monethes &. xi
                              〈…〉
                            dayes. This Linꝰ & his ſucceſſour Cl
                              •
                           
                           tus through theyr holy cōuerſaciō were made to mynyſter ye treaſour of the th
                              〈…〉
                            the to the people / Peter beynge alyue
                              〈…〉
                           
                           
                           
                              〈1 page duplicate〉
                           
                           
                           
                              〈1 page duplicate〉
                           
                           
Peter attended to prayer & prechynge. It is redde of this Cletus that he wrote fyrſt in his lettres Salutē et apoſtolicā vn̄dictionē. Afore this tyme was many a dyſcyple of Peter ſlayne vnder Nero. ¶ Galba this tyme was emperour / & he regned ſeuen monethes. This man was made emperour by the power of ſpayne in the ſame londe / Nero lyuyng And after the dethe of Nero brought to Rome / & there was ſlayne of a man that came with whete to Rome. He ſmote of his heed & bare it to hym that was emperour nexte / ſeynge all his meu / & none of them helpyng hym. ¶ In this mannes dayes came the grete Rethorycyen to Rome fro Spayne / & was the fyrſt ye euer taught ye ſeyence openly / his name was Quintilian. ¶ Ottho regned after hym / and he regned but thre monethes for one Vitellus that was preſydent of Fraūce chalenged the empyre / & in Ytalye bytwene theſe two were thre grete batayles / & in the fourth batayle Ottha ſawe he ſholde be ouercomen / & in grete deſpayre he ſlewe hymſelfe. ¶ Vitellus regned after this Ottho .viij. monethes for he was a folower of Nero / mooſt ſpecyally in glotony / & in ſyngynge of foule ſonges / & at feeſtes etyng out of meſure that he myght not kepe it. ¶ Vaſpaſianus regned nexte after hym .ix. yere .x. monethes & .xij. dayes. The well gouerned men of Rome ſeynge the curſed ſucceſſyon of Nero / ſente after this Vaſpaſyan vnto Paleſtyn / for there he was & his ſone Titus / whiche had beſyeged Ieruſalem. And whan he herde yt Nero was deed / by whom he was ſent to Ieruſalem / and herde of theſe curſed men regnynge / at the inſtaūce of theſe wyſe men of Rome / & not wylfully toke vpon hym the empyre. And anone as he was comen to Rome / he ouercame the tyraūt Vitellus / & let hym be drawen through Rome / & after in Tyber tyl he was died and than let hym ſayle wtout ſepulture for this the people deſyred. This man was cured of waſpes in his noſe anone as he byleued in our lorde Ieſu / & that was the cauſe why he went to Ieruſalem to venge Chryſtes deth. He fought xxxij. tymes with his enemyes. And he dyed the yere of grace .lxxix.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno domini .lxxxiiij.
                        
                           
                              •
                           Letꝰ a martyr was pope .xi. yere This Cletus was a Romayne / & gretly he loued pilgrimages to ſayntes ſayenge it was more ꝓfyte to ye helth of mannes ſoule to viſyte the place ye ſaynt Peter was in / than to faſt two yere. He curſed all thoſe men lettynge ſuche pylgrimages or coūſeylers cōtrary therto. At ye laſt was martyred by Damacian ye emperour. ¶ Titus ſoue to Vaſpaſyan was emperour this tyme / & regned .iij. yere / & he abode ſtyl at Ieruſalem after the electyon of his fader / & deſtroyed the cite / and ſlewe there (as the ſtory ſayth) with batayle & hungre .xi. hōdred thouſande iewes / and an hondred thouſand he toke / & ſolde .xxx. for a peny / bycauſe they ſolde our lord Ieſu Chryſt for .xxx. pens / & brought theus all thynge that was precyous / & put them in his hous at Rome / whithe was called Tēplū pa cis. But now is ye place fallen downe for the mooſt party. And all theſe precyous iewelles be diſtrybuted to certayn chirches in Rome. This Citus was ſo full of vertue that all men loued hym / ſo fe
                              •
                            forth that they called hym the mooſt delectable of men. He was full lyberall to all men / in ſo moche that he ſayd often tymes / that there ſholde no maner man goo front an Emperoure with an heuy herte / but he ſholde no ſomwhat of his pe
                              •
                           icyon. He wolde be ſory that day in the whiche he had graunted no man

no benefyte. Whan he was deed / euery man yt was in Rome wepte for hym / as that they had loſt theyr fader. ¶ Domician broder to Titus regned after hym xiiij. yere & .v. monethes. Fyrſt he was eaſy / and afterwarde full vnreaſonable. For moche of ye ſenate was deſtroyed by his malyce / & alſo moche of his kynrede He began the ſeconde perſecucyon after Nero agaynſt chryſten men. In yt whiche perſecucyon John ye euāgelyſt was exiled in to Pathmos after ye emperour had put hȳ in to a tonne of brēnyng oyle & hurte hym not. So this man was not the folower of his fader Vaſpaſyan / ne his broder Titus / but rather lyke Nero & his kynrede. And for his wycked 
                              •
                           ōdicyons he was ſlayne in his own palays at Rome in the .xxvij. yere of his age. ¶ Clemēs a martyr was pope .ix. yere / and he ſucceded Cletus. This Clemens fyrſt of ſaynt Peter (as it is ſayd) was ordeyned to be ſucceſſour to him. And for peryll he wolde Linū & Cletū ſholde be popes afore hȳ / leſt yt through ye enſample prelates ſholde ordeyne vnder them who ſomeuer they wolde. This man made ye lyfe of martyrs to be wryten by regyons / & he made many bokes. He ordeyned yt a chylde ſholde be cōfyrmed as ſoone as it myght manerly after it was chryſtened. And at ye laſt he was martyred vnder Traian. ¶ Nerua was emperour after Domician one yere & two monethes. And whā he was choſen he meued ye ſenate to make a lawe / yt all thȳge whiche Domician cōmaūded to be kept ſhold be broken. By which meane ſaynt Iohn ye euangelyſt was loſed out of his exile & ſuffred to come agayn to Epheſe. This man dyd an other thynge ryght cōmendable / that he aſſygned ſo wyſe a man as Traian was to gouerne ye people after hym. Nota. ¶ Traianꝰ hyſpa uicus was Emperour .xix. yere. This Traianꝰ many men ſayd he was ye beſt amonge all the Emperours / but in one thynge alone he was vicyous / in ſo moche as he for ye loue of ye 
                           
                              •
                           als goddes was aboute to deſtroye ye chryſten fayth / iudgynge in hȳſelfe ſo mooſt to pleaſe god. Some men ſaye not by hymſelf / but by other he purſued ye chriſten fayth / & in ye ende of his lyfe he dyd but fewe to deth. And all his louyng I ſet at nought. But at ſaint Gregory meued wt pite wepyng & prayed to our lorde for hym yt he wold haue mercy vpon hym / & by his prayer haue hym out of hell / in to whiche place he was dampned. And now yf he be ſaued or not / a grete alteracyon is amōge doctours. And to vs yt wryte Cron
                              •
                           ties it is no parte of our charge to determyn. But all ye eeſt parte of ye worlde / Babyl
                              •
                            Selencia / the veter partes of the y
                              •
                           de. Germayne the ſeconde after Alexander he helde vnder. In all theſe thynges ſo pyteous & ſo mekely he guyded hym to euery man as a kynge. He was gentyll and to no man vngentyll / the whiche is red of fewe. All the dayes be lyued men ſayd he was the mooſt worthy man in all his empyre. And he thought & ſayd euermore yt no man was more vnworthy to be emperour than he.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno domini .C .iiij.
                        ANacletꝰ a martyr was pope. i
                              •
                           . yere / & he was a Greke. He monyſſhed all chriſtē men ye preeſtes ſholde be worſhipped aboue all other men ſay enge ye preeſtes doynge ſacrefyce to god ſholde be borne out / & not v
                              •
                           red but be worſhypped. And whan preeſtes ſayd maſſe they ſholde haue wytnes wt them and namely byſſhops. Alſo he decreed ye clerkes ſholde were no 
                              •
                           erdes nor longe heer. Alſo yt a biſſhop ſhold be cōſecrated of thre / & dyuers other thynges. At the

laſt the .xij. yere of Traian he was mar tyred / & buryed by the body of ſaynt Peter. ¶ Plinius ye ſecond oratour & philoſopher wrote grete thinges. This man meued Traian that he ſhold withdraw the ſentence gyuen agaynſt chryſten folke / wrytyng to hym that they dyd none yll / but that they as vertuous folke roſe afore day and worſhypped Ieſu Chryſt theyr god ſecretly in the nyght. ¶ Euariſtus a greke and a martyr was .x. yere and .vij. monthes pope after Anacletꝰ. This man ordeyned that man & womā ſholde be wedded openly / and that they ſholde be blyſſed openly of the preeſt & fader & moder. And he was martyred the thyrd yere of Adrian / & buryed by ſaynt Peter. ¶ Alexander a Romayn was pope .viij. yere & .v. monethes. This man the mooſt parte of ye ſenatours he cōuerted to our lorde. And he ordeyned ye holy water ſholde be keſt in chryſten mennes houſes / & that breed to ſynge with ſhold be made of clere breed / and that in lytell quantite. At the laſt he was martyred vnder Adrian that was emperour / and many he cōuerted to ye fayth of Chryſt. ¶ Sixtus a Romayn was pope .x. yere and .iij. monethes. This man ordeyned Sanctus ſanctus ſanctus. &c. ſholde be ſayd in ye maſſe / & that the holy thynges of the chirche ſholde not be touched but of mynyſtres of the chirche. Alſo that ye corporas ſhold not be made of ſylke / but of pure lynnen cloth wouen & not dyed / and that a woman ſholde not touche the holy veſſell of the awter / ne the pall. Alſo he ordeyned / that yf ony byſſhopryke were vacaūt / that no byſſhop ſholde be receyued in to his benefyce but with the popes lettres. Alſo that no maſſe ſholde be ſayd but vpon an awter / & at the laſt he was martyred. ¶ Adrian was emperour .xxi. yere. This Adrian in many thynges is cōmended / to chryſten men otherwhyle he was gracyous / and certayn of them that wold not do ſacrifyce to the fals goddes he ſlewe. He was an vnyuerſall man almooſt in all ſcyences. Peas he had all his dayes but with the Iewes / and many a lawe he made. And than he cōmaunded that chryſten men ſholde not be dampned to deth but with due proceſſe. Ieruſalem he ſubdued agayne / and forbade that no Jewe ſholde dwell therin by no wyſe. Chryſten men he ſuffred there to dwell. Agaynſt his wyll he came to the empyre / but he gouerned hym very well. Whan the ſenatours prayed hym to call his ſone emperour after hym / he ſayd. It is ynough to me yt agaynſt my wyl I haue regned whiche I haue not deſerued. For ye empyre of Rome ſholde not go by ſucceſſion of blode / but to ſuche men as deſerue it through theyr merytes. Many tymes he regneth vnuertuouſly that is a kyng borne / and vertue ſhold come before his kyngdome. ¶ Euſtachius otherwyſe called Placidus & Theroſpita his wyfe and two of theyr ſones / of whome meruaylous thynges ben redde / were martyred by the cōmaundement of Adrian. This Placidus was mayſter of the emperours knyghtes. ¶ Ieruſalem was reſtored by Adrian and made larger / ſo that the place where Chryſt dyed was within ye walles / yt whiche was without before. And this is the thyrde buyldynge agayne of that cyte. For it was thryes deſtroyed / that is to ſaye / of Cal dees in the tyme of zedechie / of Anthiocus in the tyme of Machabeo
                              
                                 
                              
                              rum
                            / & of Titus in the tyme of Vaſpaſian.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno domini .C .xliiij.
                        
                           
                              •
                           Eleſphorus a Romayn was pope .xi. yere. This man ordeyned this aūgelles ympne to be ſongen in the maſſe Gloria in excelſis deo. &c. and the

goſpel to be redde afore ye ſakeryng / & on Chryſtmas day .iij. maſſes to be ſongen And he ordeyned there ſhold no maſſe be ſayd afore .iij. of ye laſt he was martyred / & buryed at ſaȳt Peters ¶ Ignius a greke was pope .iiij. yere. This man ordeyned that a childe ſholde haue a godfader & a godmoder at baptym & cōfyrmacyon. Alſo that no archebyſſhop (excepted the pope) ſholde condempne his ſuffrygan but yf that the cauſe were ſhewed in ye prouyncyall coū ſeyle of byſſhops. Than he was martyred / & buryed at ſaȳt Peters. ¶ Anthonius Pius was emperour .xxij. yere wt his ſones Aurolio & Lucio. This man was myghtely wyſe / & naturally fayre of ſpeche / the whiche lyghtly in one mā is not foūde. Nota. Excedynge men in wyſdom comynly are not fayre ſpeched nor peaſfull namely of nature. Nor contrarywyſe. Excedynge men in fayre ſpeche comynly are leſſe than wyſe. This mā was meued wt bothe theſe ꝓpertees Therfore many kyngdomes the which receded from other emperours / wylfully to this man returned agayne. And to chryſten men was none ſo gentyll. He ſayd through the enſample of Cipio. I had leuer kepe one heere of a man than ſlee an hondred of myne enemyes. And ſome martyrs were made vnder hym / but they were made vnder ye cōmaunde ment of ye emperours afore. And ye chryſtē people were ſo hatefull to ye byſſhops & to ye preeſtes of ye tēple of ye fals goddes that they prouoked the princes alwaye agaynſt them. For they ſuppoſed that ye chryſtē fayth ſhold deſtroye them. Ther fore it was no meruayle (all though the prynce was yll pleaſed / for they ſayd all theyr goddes were deuyls) yf lower iudges purſued chriſtē folke & martired thē ¶ This tyme .x. M. martyrs were crucifyed in Armenia on an hye hyll called Arath. ¶ Pompeius trogus iſto 
                              •
                           ēpore hiſtorias to
                              •
                           iꝰ orbis a Nino vſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ad Occauianum deduxit.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno domini .C .liiij.
                        PIus ytalicus was pope .xj. yere iiij. monethes & .xij. dayes. This man ordeyned ye feeſt of eeſter euermore ſholde be halowed on ye ſonday. And alſo an heretyke comynge fro the ſecte of the Iewes ſhold be receyued / & be baptyſed Thā he was martyred & buryed in faſt Peters. ¶ Anicetꝰ was pope after Pius almooſt .x. yere. This man made man
                              •
                            decrees of the Canon & for byſſhops. Vt in ca. violatores. &c. ¶ Galienus a l
                              •••
                           e goten in pergamo was in grete fame 
                              ••
                            Rome / yt whiche not all onely expowned the bokes of Ypocras / but he put many of them to his bokes. And of this m
                              •••
                            ſayd for his diſcrete abſtinence yt 
                           
                              〈…〉
                            he lyued an .C. and. 
                              •
                           l. yere be neuer 
                              ••
                            ne dranke his fyll. Nota abſtinentiā. He neuer toke rawe fruytes alway he had a ſwete breth. He dyed all onely through age & no ſekenes. ¶ Martus Antonius the true / & Lucius Comodus were emperours .xix. yere. Theſe two toke ye empyre after Anthony the meke. And than began two emperours to regue but Iucius Comodus deceſed & Anthony was emperour alone yt whiche was a 
                              〈◊〉
                            ryous man & a noble but that he made the fourth perſecucyon to ſlee chryſten men. This Marcus was of ſo grete ſad nes & ſtedfaſtnes / that for no chaūce he neuer laughed / ne chaunged no there / neyther for gladnes ne for ſorowe. And whan he was a chylde he was of ſuche manhode / yt on a certayne tyme whā he loked his treſour / & had not yt whiche he myght gyue his knyghtes & his men / whan he went to fyght agaynſt ye Germayns / the Sciauōs & Sarmatas / he wolde hurte ne greue no body / but had

leuer to ſell his wyues golden veſſell / & her arayment / her beddyng & all her ryall ſtuffe / than take taxe of ye ſenatours or of his prouynce vnder hym. But he gate ye victory of his enemyes & recouered all agayn / & releaced ye prouynces of theyr tributes. And thoſe y• 
                           wold ſell hȳ his wyues treſour agayne / he reſtored them theyr money / & thoſe y• wolde not he neuer greued them. But ye tables of theyr dettes betwixt hȳ & them he brent openly in ye market place: & thāked them that they helped hym in his neceſſite.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Lucie regned after his fader / whiche was a good man / & after he became chryſten.
                        AFter kynge Coyll regned Lucie his ſone / that was a good man to god and to all the people. He ſente to Rome to Eleuther that than was pope & ſayd that he wolde become a chryſten man / & receyue baptym in the name of god / & turne to the right fayth & byleue. Eleuther ſente two legates / yt one was called Pagan / and that other Elibayn and came in to this londe & baptiſed the kynge & all his meyny. And after went from towne to towne and baptyſed the people / tyll all the londe was baptyſed. And this was in the yere an .C. and. lvj after the incarnacyon of our lorde Ieſu Chryſt. And than this kyng Lucie made in this londe two archebyſſhops / one at Caūterbury / & an other at yorke / and many other byſſhops that yet be in this londe. And whan theſe two legates had baptyſed all this londe / they ordeyned preeſtes for to baptyſe chyldren / and for to make the ſacrament. And after they went agayne to Rome. And the kynge dwelled in this londe and regned with moche honour .xij. yere / and after dyed and lyeth at Gloceſtre.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How this londe was long without a kynge / & how ye brytons choſe a kynge.
                        THis kyng Lucie had none heyre of his body begoten yt was after warde grete harme & ſorowe to ye londe. For after this kynge Lucies deth / none of the grete lordes of ye londe wold ſuffre an other to be kyng / but lyued in warre & debate amonge themſelfe .l. yere wtout kyng. But it befell afterwarde y• a grete prynce came fro Rome in to this londe y• was called Seuerye / not for to warre / but for to ſaue ye ryght of Rome. But neuertheles he had not dwelled halfe a yere in this londe but yt the brytons ſlewe hym. And whan ye Romayns wyſt that Seuerye was ſo ſlayne / they ſente an other grete lorde in to this londe yt was called Allec that was a ſtronge man & a myghty of body / & dwelled in this londe longe tyme / & dyd moche ſorow to ye brytons / ſo that after for pure malyce they choſe them a kynge amonge them that was called Aſclepades / and aſſembled a grete hooſt of Brytons / & went to London to ſeke Allec / & there they foūde him and ſlewe hym & all his felawes / & one y• was called walon defended hym fyerſly & fought longe with ye Brytons / but at the laſt he was diſcōfyted / & ye Brytons toke hym & boūde hym handes & feet / & caſt hym in to a water / wherfore y• water was called for euermore Walbroke. Than regned Aſclepades in peas / tyll one of his erles yt was called Coyl made a fayre towne agaynſt ye kynges wyll / & let call y• towne Colcheſtre after his name / wherfore the kynge was wroth / & thought to deſtroye hym / and began to warre vpon hȳ / & brought grete power of men / & gaue ye erle batayle / & the erle defended hym fyerſly with his power / & ſlewe ye kynge hymſelfe in that batayle. And thā was Coyll crowned and made

kynge of this londe. This Coyll regned nobly / & was well beloued of ye brytons. Whan y• Romayns herde y• Aſclepades was ſlayne / they were wonders glad / & ſent an other grete prȳce of y• Romayns that was called Conſtance / & he came to kynge Coyll for to chalenge y• trybute of Rome / which he graūted hym full gladly. So they accorded y• kyng Coyll gaue to hym his doughter Eleyne to wyfe / y• was bothe fayre & wyſe & well lettred / & dwelled togyder in loue. And ſoone after this kyng Coyll dyed in the .xiij. yere of his regne / & lyeth at Colcheſtre.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Conſtance a Romayn that had ſpouſed Eleyne kynge Coyls doughter was choſen kynge after kynge Coyll.
                        AFter this kynge Coyll Cōſtance was made kynge & crowned for as moch as he had ſpouſed kyng Coyls doughter that was heyre of the londe / the whiche Conſtance regned / & well & worthely gouerned the lōde. And he begate on his wyfe Eleyne a ſone yt was called Cōſtantyne. And this kyng bare true fayth / & truly dyd to them of Rome all his lyfe. And whā he had regned .xv. yere he dyed / and lyeth at yorke.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Conſtantyne that was kynge Conſtances ſone & ſone to ſaynt Eleyne gouerned and ruled the londe / and after was emperour of Rome.
                        AFter kynge Conſtance deth regned Conſtantyne his ſone & ſone to ſaynt Eleyne that foūde y• holy croſſe in the holy londe / & how Cōſtantyne became emperour of Rome. It befell that in that tyme there was an emperour at Rome yt was a ſaraſyn & a tyraūt yt was called Maxence / whiche put to deth al y• byleued in god / & deſtroyed holy chirche by all his power / & ſlewe all chryſtē men that he myght fynde / & amōge all other he let martyr ſaynt Katheryne / & many other chriſten people yt had drede of deth fled & came in to this londe to kyng Conſtantyne / & tolde hym of y• ſorowe that Maxence dyd to chryſtē folke / wherfore Cōſtantyn had pite / & made grete ſorow & aſſembled a grete hoſt & a grete power and went ouer vnto Rome / & there toke the cyte / & ſlewe all y• was therin of myſ byleue. And than was he made emperour / & was a good man / and gouerned hym ſo well / y• all londes were to hȳ attendaūt for to be vnder his gouernaūce. ¶ And this deuyll & tyraūt Ma
                              〈…〉
                            y• tyme was in the londe of Grece & herde theſe tydȳges / & ſodeynly became wood & dyed ſodeynly. ¶ Whan Conſtantyne went from this londe to Rome he toke with hȳ his moder Eleyne for her grete prudence / & thre other grete lordes y• 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            mooſt loued / the one was called Howell & y• other Taberne / & ye thyrde Mo
                              〈…〉
                           . And toke all his londe to kepe to ye erle of Cornewayle that was called Octauian And anone as this Octauian wyſt that his lorde dwelled at Rome incontynent he ceſed all the londe into his handes & therwith dyd all his wyll amōge 
                              〈◊〉
                            & lowe / & they helde hym for kyng. Whan theſe tydynges came to Cōſtantyne the emperour / he was wonders wroth towarde the erle Octauyan and ſent Taberne with .xij. M. men agaynſt hym & they arryued at Porteſmouth. Whan Octauian wyſt that he let aſſembled a grete power of Brytons & dyſcomfyted hym. And Taberne fledde in to Scotlonde / & ordeyned there a grete power / & came agayne in to this londe another tyme for to gyue batayle to Octauyan. And whan Octauyan vnderſtode that / he aſſembled a grete power / and came towarde Taberne as faſt as he myght / 

ſo that thoſe two hooſtes mette togyder on Staneſmore / & ſtrongly ſmote togyder. And than was Octauyan dyſcōfyted / & fledde thens vnto Norway. And Taberne ſeaſed all ye londe in to his handes bothe townes & caſtelles. But Octauyan came agayne fro Norway with a grete power / & droue out al ye Romayns & than he was made kyng of this lond.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Maximian that was the emperours coſyn of Rome ſpouſed Octauyans doughter / and after was made kynge of this londe.
                        
                           
                        
                        THis Octauian gouerned ye londe well and nobly / but he had none heyre / ſaue a doughter that was a yōge chylde / that he loued as moche as his lyf. And for as moche as he waxed ſeke and was in poynt of deth and might no longer regne / he wolde haue made one of his neuewes to be kyng / which was a noble knyght & a ſtronge man yt was called Conan Meriedok: & he ſhold haue kepte the kynges doughter / & haue maryed her whan tyme had ben. But the lordes of ye londe wolde not ſuffre it / but gaue her coūſeyle to be maryed to ſome hygh man of grete honour / & thā might ſhe haue al her luſt / & the coūſeyle of her lord Cōſtātyne ye emperour. And at this coūſeyle they accorded / & choſe Cador of Cornewayle for to go to ye emperour on this meſſage / & he toke ye waye & went to Rome / & tolde the emperour theſe tydynges well & wyſely. And ye emperour ſent in to this londe with hym his owne coſyn that was his vncles ſone a noble knyght & a ſtronge yt was called Maximyan / & he ſpouſed Octauyans doughter / & was crowned kyng of this londe.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Maximian that was the emperours coſyn cōquered ye londe of Amorican / & gaue it to Conan Meriedok.
                        THis kyng Maximian became ſo ryall yt he thought to conquere ye londe of Amorican for ye grete rycheſſe yt he herde tell that was in y• londe / ſo yt he ne left no man of worthynes / knyght ne ſquyer / ne none other mā yt he ne toke wt him / to ye grete domage of all ye lōde. For he lefte at home no man to kepe ye londe / for he had wt hym .xxx. M. knyghtes of good mennes bodyes / & went ouer in to the londe of Amorican / & there ſlewe the kyng that was called Imball / and conquered all the londe. And whan he had ſo done / he called Conan & ſayd. For as moche as kyng Octauyan wolde haue made you kyng of Brytayn / & through me ye were let & dyſtroubled y• ye were not kyng / I gyue you this lōde of Amorican / & make you kyng therof. And for as moche as ye be a bryton / I wyl that this lōde haue the ſame name / and that it be no more called Amorican / but ſhall be called lytell Brytayne / and the londe fro whens we be comen / ſhall be called fro hens forth grete Brytayne. And ſo ſhall men knowe that one Brytayne fro that other. Thā this Conan Meriedok

thanked hȳ curteyſly / & ſo was he made kynge of lytell Brytayn. And whan all this was done Maximyan went from thens vnto Rome / and was than made emperour after Conſtantyne. And Conan Meriedok dwelled in lytell Britayn with moche honour / & there let ordeyne two. M. plowmen of the londe for to ere the londe / to harowe & ſowe it / & feffed them rychely after yt they were. And for as moche as kynge Conan & none of his knyghtes / ne none of his other people wolde not take wyues of the nacyon of fraūce / he ſent in to grete Brytayne to ye erle of Cornewayle that men called Dio nothe / that he ſholde choſe through out all this lōde .xj. M. maydens / that is to ſaye .viij. M. for the meane people / & .iij. M. for ye greteſt lordes that ſholde them ſpouſe. And whā Dionothe vnderſtode this / he made a cōmaūdement through out all the londe of Brytayn / & as many as the nombre came to he aſſembled togyder of maydēs / for there was no man that durſt withſtande his cōmaūdemēt bycauſe he was protectour. And whan theſe maydens were aſſembled / he let them come before hym at London / & let ordeyne ſhyppes for them haſtely / wt all that therto belonged. And toke his own doughter that was called Vrſula / that was ye fayreſt creature y• ony man wyſt And he wolde haue ſent her to kyng Conan yt ſhold haue ſpouſed her & made her quene of ye londe. But ſhe had made pryuely to god a vowe of chaſtite yt her fader wyſt not / ne none other man lyuynge.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Vrſula and .xj. M. maydens that were in her company wente towarde lytell Brytayne / and all they were martyred at Coleyne.
                        THis Vrſula thoſe vnto her company .xj. M. maydens that of all other ſhe was lady & mayſtreſſe / and all they toke ſhyppynge at one tyme in the water that is called Tamyſe / & cōmaū
                           ded her kyn & frendes to almyghty god and ſayled toward lytell Brytayn. But whan they were comen in to ye hygh ſee a ſtronge tēpeſt aroſe as it was goddes wyll / & Vrſula with her ſhyppes & her cōpany were dryuē to Hunlōde through tempeſt / & arryued in y• hauen of the cite of Coleyne. And the kynge of the londe that was called Gowan was than in y• cite / & whan he wyſt the tydynges that ſo many fayre maydens were there arryued / he toke Elga his broder & other of his houſholde with hym and went to the ſhyppes to ſe that fayre company. And whan he ſawe them ſo fayre / he & his cōpany wold haue ouer
                              •
                           ayen them and haue taken fro them theyr virgy
                              〈…〉
                           
                           te. But Vrſula that good virgyn counſeyled / prayed / warned / & taught then: that were her felawes / that they ſhol
                              ••
                            defend them with all theyr myght / and rather ſuffre deth than ſuffre theyr bodyes to be defouled. So that all the virgyns became ſo ſtedfaſt in god that they defended them through his grace that none of them had power to do them ſhame. Wherfore kynge Gowan was ſort anoyed / that he for wrathe ſlewe them euerychone anone ryght. And ſo were all thoſe virgyns martyred for the 
                              •
                           our of god / and they lye at Coleyn.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Gowan came for to deſtroye this londe / and how a man of grete power that was called Gracian defended the londe.
                        WHan all this was done / kynge Gowan whiche was a ſaraſyn called to hym his broder Elga and ſayd to hym that he ſholde go and conquere the londe that all thoſe fayre

maydens were borne in. And thā he ordeyned a grete power of Pehites of denmarke / of Orkeney / & of Norway. And they came in to this londe & brent townes / & ſlewe folke / & caſt down chirches & houſes of religyon / & robbed the londe in length & brede / & put to deth all thoſe that wolde not forſake ye ryght byleue & chryſtēdom. For as moche as there was no ſouerayne yt myght helpe them. For the kyng Maximian had taken wt hym all ye worthy men whan he went to conquere lytell Brytayn. And in ye ſame tyme was ſaynt Albon martyred through the wode tyraūt Diocleſyan / in ye ſame place where is now an abbey made of ſaynt Albons / whyles yt he was a paynym. But he was conuerted vnto god through the predycacyon of a clerke & a wyſe man that was called Ancibel that was herborowed a nyght in his hous. And this was after ye incarnacion of Ieſu Chryſt .CC .xxvj. yere. And it is to be vnderſtāde that ſaint Albon ſuffred his martyrdom before ſaynt Edmond. And therfore is ſaȳt Albon called ye fyrſt martyr of Englonde. ¶ This Gowans broder & his folke that were ſaraſyns went through out the londe and deſtroyed all thynge yt they founde & no thynge they ſpared. Whan theſe tydynges came to Rome how ye kynge Gowan had begon for to deſtroye this londe / the emperour & the Romayns ſent a ſtronge man & of grete power yt was called Gracien with xxiiij. M. fyghtynge men / for to caſt out of this londe all thoſe ſaraſyns. And all they arryued at Porteſmouth. Maximian myght not come himſelfe bycauſe he was choſen emperour after the deth of Cōſtantyne yt was ſaynt Eleyns ſone Whan this Gracian was arriued with his hooſt / he let eſpye pryuely where ye kynge Gowan myght be foūde / & he ſet vpō them ſodeynly as they lay in theyr beddes / & diſcōfyted them & ſlewe them in theyr beddes euerichone / that none of them eſcaped: ſaue Gowan yt fledde in to his owne coūtre wt grete ſorowe. Soone after it befell ye Maximyan was ſlayne at Rome through treaſon. And whan Gracian wyſt of thoſe tydynges / he let crowne hymſelfe kynge of this londe.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Gracian made him kyng whan Maximyan was ſlayne / & afterward ye Britons ſlewe hym for his wyckednes.
                        THis Gracian whan he began to regne / he became ſo wycked and ſo ſterne / and ſo moche ſorow dyd to the Brytons that they ſlewe hym amonge them. Whan kyng Gowan vnderſtode that Gracian was ſlayne / he aſſembled a grete power & came agayne in to this londe / and yf he had fyrſt done harme than dyd he moche more. For he than deſtroyed all this londe and the chryſten people that were therin / ſo that no man was ſo hardy to name god / and yf they dyd they were put to ſtraūge deth. But the byſſhop of London yt was tho whiche was called Goſſelyn ſcaped & went thens to them of Rome to ſeke ſocour to helpe to deſtroye the ſaraſyns that had deſtroyed this londe. And the Romayns ſayd yt they had ben ſo often anoyed for theyr ſendyng of folke in to Britayne all for to helpe the Britons / & they wold no more ſo do. And ſo the byſſhop Goſſelyn went thens without ony ſocour or helpe. And than went he to ye kyng of lytell Brytayne yt was called Aldroie / & this was ye thyrde kyng after Gowan Meriedok / as before is ſayd. The byſſhop prayed this kynge Aldroie of helpe & ſocour. And ye kynge had pite in his herte whan he herde how ye byſſhop fledde / & how the chryſten men were ſo ſlayne in grete Brytayne through ye paynyms &

ſaraſyns / he graūted hym Cōſtantyne his bro
                              •
                           er for to helpe hym with power of folke. And cha
                              •
                            dyd araye hors / harneys & ſhyppes & all thynge yt neded to that vyage. And whan all thynge was redy / he called ye byſſhop & ſayd to hym. I take you here Cōſtantyne my broder vpon this couenaūt / yt yf god gyue hym grace to diſcōfyte ye infydelēs / that than ye ſhall make hym kyng. And ye biſſhop graūted it wt a good wyll. Cōſtantyne & the byſſhop toke leue of ye kyng Aldroie / & betoke hym to god / & toke .xij. M
                              •
                           inen & went to theyr ſhippes / & ſayled towarde grete Britayn / & arryued at Totnes. Whan ye Britons herdetheſe tydynges that ſocour came / they were glad / & ordeyned them an huge nō
                           
                              •
                           re of people / & went & receyued them wt moche honour ¶ Gowan anone as he wyſt of theſe ty dynges / he aſſembled all his faraſyns & came agaynſt them & gaue thē batayle. And Cōſtantyn ſlewe hym wt his owne handes / & all the other ſaraſyns were dyſcomfyted & ſlayne yt none eſcaped / excepte thoſe that were couerted to god.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Conſtantyne that was the kynges broder of lytel Britayn was crowned kynge of grete Brytayne for his worthynes.
                        ANone after ye batayle they went to London & crowned there Conſtantyne kyng of this londe / & ye byſſhop Goſſelin ſet the crowne on his heed / and a
                              •
                           oynted hȳ as it belongeth for a kyng. And thā began chriſtēdom in this londe agayn. And anone after whā this kyng Conſtantyn was crowned he ſpouſed a wyfe through roūſeyle of ye Brytons / & begate on herthre ſones. The fyrſt was called Cōſtance / ye ſeconde Aurilambros & the thyrde Vter. This Conſtance yt elder broder whā he came to o
                              ••
                            he 
                              〈◊〉
                            hym a monke at Wyncheſtre. And Conſtātyne theyr fader was ſlayne through treaſon. For it befell vpon a tyme that a Pehyte came to hym vpon a daye as it were on a meſſage / & ſayd that he wolde ſpeke with the kynge pryuely in coū
                           ſeyle. The kyng let 
                              •
                           oyde his chambre of the men that were there within / and there abode no moo but the kynge and the Pehite / and he made a countenaūce as though he wolde haue ſpoken with the kyng in his eere. And there he ſhewe hym with a longe knyfe. And after that he went meruaylouſly out of that chambre in to an other chambre / ſo that at the laſt no man wyſt where he was b
                              •
                           romen. Whan the kynges men wyſt that theyr lord was ſo deed / they made than ſo moche ſorowe / yt they wyſt not what for to do. For as moche as his two ſones Aurilambros and Vter were ſo yonge / that none of them myght be kynge and the thyrde broder was a monke at 
                              •••
                            cheſtre as is ſayd before. But 
                              •
                           o
                              •
                           nger that was erle of Weſtler thought pryuely in his herte through ſome ſubry
                              •
                           e for to be kynge hymſelfe. And wente to Wyncheſtre where as Conſtance was monke / & ſayd to hym. Cōſtance qued be your fader is deed / & your two brethern that ben wt Goſſelyn the byſſhop of London to nouryſſhe / be ſo yonge that neue of them may be kyng wherfore I coū
                           ſeyle you that ye forſake your habyte & come with me / and I ſhall make ſuche a meane vnto the Brytons that ye ſhall be made kynge of this londe.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of Conſtance that was kynge Conſtantynes ſone / whiche was a monke at Wyncheſtre / and how he was made kynge after his faders dethe / through counſeyle of 
                              •
                           o
                              ••
                           ger that was 
                              •••
                           e of Weſtſer for as moche as Aurilambros and 
                              〈◊〉
                            his two bretherne were but

yonge of age. And Vortiger let ſhee 
                              •
                           ya
                              •
                            for to be kynge hymſelfe.
                        THis Vortiger coūſeyled this Cō
                           ſ
                              •
                           āce ſo moche tyll he forſoke his ab
                              •
                           ot and went with hym. And anone after he was crowned kyng by ye aſſent of the Brytons. This kynge Conſtance whan he was crowned & made kynge he wyll ne knewe but lytell of ye worlde nor coude no thynge what knyghthode axed. And he made Vortyger his chefe mayſter & coūſeyler / & gaue hym all his power for to ordeyn & to do as moche as to ye realme aperteyned. So yt hymſelfe no thynge entermedled / but onely bare the name of kyng. Whā Vortiger ſawe that he had all ye lōde in his warde & gouernaūce at his owne wyll / he thought by preuy treaſon to ſlee Cōſtance ye kyng that he myght hȳſelfe be crowned & made kyng & regne / & let ſende after an hondred knyghtes of Pehytes / ye worthyeſt of all ye londe / & them helde wt hym for to dwell / as to be kepers of his body / as he wolde go through the londe to ordeyne thynges yt appertayned to a kyng. And this Vortiger honoured ſo moche ye hondred knyghtes & ſo moche gaue them of golde & ſyluer & of ryche iewelles / robes horſes & other thȳges plente / wherfore they helde hym more lord than they dyd the kyng. And Vortiger told them: yf he myght be kyng / ye as it were through treaſon / he wold make them rycheſt of ye londe. So at ye laſt through grete gyftes that he had gyuen largely / they cryed through ye court yt Vortiger were better worthy to be kyng thā Cōſtance. Wherfore Vortiger made ſemblaūt as he had ben wroth / & he departed thens from ye courte / and ſayd he muſt go elles where for thinges that he had to do. And ſo the traytour ſayd bycauſe yt they ſholde ſlee kynge Conſtance. Whan this Vortiger was gone / it befel ſoon eaſter 
                              〈◊〉
                            thoſe hondred knyghtes of Pe
                              •
                           ites wiche the dores of ye kynges chambre / & there they ſlewe hȳ / & ſmote of his heed & ba
                              •
                           e it to Vortiger there as he dwelled. And whā Vortiger ſawe ye heed / he wepte full tenderly wt his eyen / & neuertheles he was ſomdele gladde in his herte of his deth. And anone Vortiger let take thoſe hondred knyghtes of Pehites / & hadde his ſeruaūtes bynde theyr haudes behynde them & lede them to London / and there they were dampned to deth as fals traytours. And anone after all ye Brytons of the londe by the comyn aſſent crowned Vortiger & made hym kyng of ye londe.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Auno domini .C .lxxiiij.
                        SOther a martyr was pope after Anicetū .ix. yere / the whiche decreed that a Nōne ſholde not touche the pall of the awter / nor put in ſence therto And yt ſhe ſholde were a wymple about her heed. And many peryls he ſawe about matrymony / therfore he ordeyned that no woman ſholde be called a lefu
                              ••
                            wyfe / but yf ſhe were bliſſed of ye preeſt. ¶ Eleutherus a martyr was pope after Sother .xv. yere / the whiche ordeyned that chryſten men ſholde refuſe no meet reaſonable that was mānes meet Nota. Alſo that no man vnaccuſed in a cryme ſholde be put from his dignite or his degre tyl he were cōuicted / through enſample of Chryſt / yt whiche kept ſtyll Iudas Scaryoth not accuſed / & Chryſt knewe hȳ gylty. And what ſomeuer he dyd amonge the apoſtles for ye dignite of his ſeruyce abode fyrme & ſtable. This pope ſent alſo legates vnto Lucye kyng of Britayn / the whiche baptyſed hym & his people. And Fagus and Domianus legates the whiche ye pope ſent fyrſt 
                              •
                           rechc
                              •
                            in Englonde. And this Chryſtendom endured in Brytayne two hondred

yere vnto ye tyme of Diocleſian ye emperour / whā ſaynt Albon was martyred. ¶ Marcus Antonius & Lucius Comodus were emperours / but Marcꝰ dyed anone / & Lucius Comodus regned. Comodus was called profytable in ſcorne / for he was to euery man vnprofytable / he was gyuen vtterly to lechery / many ſenatours & chriſten men he made for to be ſlayne. He dampned his own wyfe to deth for age / he dyed a ſodeyn deth with ſtrouglyng amōge maydens. ¶ Helius pertinax after this man was emperour vj. monethes / & was a man of grete diſcrecyon / whome Iulian ye grete lawyer ſlewe / & he entred ye empyre / & was ſlayne the .vij. moneth of Seuerꝰ. ¶ Victor a martyr was pope after Eleutheriū .x. yere / & for the diſcorde of ye paſcall tyme he called a coūſeyle in Alexander / where he was preſent ye tyme / & many other / where he decreed ye eeſter daye ſholde be kepte on ye ſonday / but he muſt kepe the chaūge of ye mone of Apryll / & that was to dyffre fro Iewes / for many byſſhops of the eeſt abode ye tyme the ſame daye ye iewes dyd halowe that feeſt. Alſo he ordeyned yt in tyme of nede children might be chryſtened in euery place / & in euery water. ¶ zepherinus a martyr & a Romayne was pope after Victor .ix. yere. This man ordeyned that chryſtē people of .xij. yere of age & aboue ſholde receyue his god on eeſter daye ones in a yere. Alſo he ordeyned that all the veſſell of the awter ſhold be glaſſe or tynne / & not tree as in olde tyme the cōſecracyon of ye gloryous blode was made in treue veſſell. And this tyme paſſed / & the worſhyp of the chirche grewe / & glaſen veſſell were forbode. vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            de cōſe. di. pri. ca. ¶ Origines ye noble clarke was this tyme / & he wrote ſo moche that ſaynt Ierome ſayd hȳſelfe to haue redde of Origenes wer
                           
                              •
                           es .iiij. M. volumes wtout pyſtles. He tranſlated the byble from hebrewe in to greke / & dyd many other grete thynges. And of this Origene / Samſon / Salomon and Traian is a grete queſtyon amonge doctours / yf yt they be dampned or ſaued. Therfore thoſe thynges that wtout peryll we be not boūden to knowe nor the chirche is not certyfyed of them / & therfore let them be all onely cōmytted vnto god. ¶ Caliſtus a martyr & a Romayn was pope after zepherinꝰ .v. yere and he ordeyned ye c
                              •••
                           tery (in via apia) where many a. M. martyrs be buryed. Alſo he ordeyned the faſt of ye emerynge days to be kepte. ¶ Antonius Aurelius was emperour .iij. yere. And this man lacked no kynde of lechery / & at ye laſt he was ſlayne amonge a grete multytude of people for his myſcheuous lyuynge. ¶ Antonius Marcus regned after him vij. yere. This man lyued obſtynatly & therfore he was ſlayne as was his predeceſſour. ¶ Alexander was emperour after Antomꝰ / & regned .xiij. yere. This man at the inſtaūce of his moder a chryſten woman / & the techynge of Origene the whiche came to Rome to cōuert her was made ſo good vnto chryſten men yt he ſuffred them to haue theyr coūſeyles and theyr prayers by themſelfe / but neuertheleſſe in this tyme the curſed offycers of hym made many martyrs.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno domini .CC .xliiii.
                        VRbanus was pope after Caliſt viij. yere / & old & yonge he was very vertuous. And all the halowed veſſell of the chirche he made of golde or of ſyluer. This man lefte his poperyche & went to Agrippam / and .xi. M. virgins with hym. And the clargye ſayd he left not his dignite for holynes / but for appe tyte of thoſe virgyns / & wrote hym not in the boke of popes. And there he a virgyn was martyred with theſe virgyns

¶ Poncianus a martyr ſucceded Vrbanus / & he ordeyned that pſalmes ſholde be ſayd daye & nyght in ye chirche of god And that a preeſt ſholde ſaye Confiteor afore ye maſſe. ¶ Anteros a martyr was pope after this mā. This man ordeyned that a byſſhop myght be remeued from one to an other / & he made ye lyfe of martyrs to be wryten / & he was ſlayne & buryed in the Cimitery of ſaynt Calixte. ¶ Maximianus was choſen emperour at Maguncia of ye hooſt / & not by ye ſenatours / & regned thre yere / & deſtroyed ye chirche myghtely / & was ſlayne for Origene. ¶ Gordian regned after hym .vj. yere / and of hym is lytell wryten / but he was ſlayne. Hijs diebus Celus dux Colcheſtrie in aſclepio regnat in Britannia annis quaſi .xxx. vſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ad aduentū Conſtancij. lati. M. vacat. ¶ Phylyp was emperour after Gordian / & this Philyp choſe to hym Philyp his ſone / and they regned .vij. yere. And they were ye fyrſt Emperours yt were chryſtened / & after ſlayne of the hooſt. They bequethed all theyr treſour at theyr deth yt it ſholde be dyſpoſed to poore men. And ſaynt Laurence at ye aſſygnacyon of his mayſter ye pope departed this treſour about Rome the whiche was grete cauſe of his martyrdom. vt qidē dicūt. ¶ Dec
                              •
                           ꝰ was emperour .iij. yere / & in all thȳges a tyraūt For he entred the empyre whan he & the hooſt had ſlayne ye two Philyps his lordes / & after yt he was ſlayne wt his ſone. ¶ Fabianꝰ a martyr & a Romayn was pope after Anteros .xij. yere. This was a very holy man / for whan chryſtē men ſtode to abyde ye elecciō of ye pope / ſodeynly a whyte doue or a culuer deſcended on his heed / ſayenge to hym / thou ſhalt be pope of Rome. This man ordeyned that creme euery yere ſholde be halowed vpō ſherthurſday. Alſo he deuyded regyons to dekens the whiche ſhold wryte ye lyfe of martyrs. And at ye laſt Decius ſlewe hym. ¶ Cornelius a martyr & Romayn was pope after Fabianꝰ .iii. yere. This man toke vp ye bodyes of Peter & Paule & wt grete honour put them in worſhypfull places wt 
                           
                              •
                           tā Lucina. ¶ Luciꝰ was pope after Cornelius .iij. yere / & of hym lytel is wrytē. ¶ Gallus wt his ſone Voluſianus were emperours two yere / & they fought wt Emilianꝰ / & were ſlayne And Emilianꝰ the thyrde moneth was ſlayn. ¶ Valerian was emperour wt his ſone Galyene .xv. yere. This man was vertuous & manly in ye begynnyng / but after he was gyuē to vyce & moche wretchednes / and ſo was his ſone Galyene. This Valerian went to ye lond of Perſe & there for ye blode ſhedynge of martyrs he was taken of ye kynge of Perſe. And whan he had taken hȳ he put out bothe his eyen / & kepte hym in grete bondage & to this entent he kept hym / yt whan ſo euer he ſhold ryde / this Valerian ſholde lye down / & he ſhold ſet his feet vpō his backe whā he wold take his hors. This herde Galiene his ſone yt was left at Rome / & that cauſed hym yt he was not ſo cruell agaynſt chryſten men. And here was the .viij. perſecucyon of the chirche made by this emperour / & made the Romayns to leſe theyr kyngdomes / ye whiche were neuer recouered agayne to the emperour / & a generall peſtylence was through all ye worlde for theyr treſpace. ¶ Stephanus a martyr after Lucius was pope .iij. yere. This man ordeyned that no mā ſhold vſe no halowed clothes but to ye worſhyp of god. ¶ Sixtꝰ a martyr and a Romayn was pope after Stephanus .ij. yere. This man ordeyned yt the maſſe ſhold be ſayd vpō an awter / ye whiche afore was not / & than he dyed. ¶ Dioniſius a Romain was pope after Stephanꝰ .ij. yere. This man deuyded paryſſhes & chircheyerdes / & aſſygned

to chirches certayne preeſtes. ¶ Felix a martyr was pope after Dioniſius two yere. He ordeined yt for ye memory of martyrs maſſes ſhold be ſayd. Alſo he ordeyned the Dedicacion of the chirche euery yere ſhold be ſaid. ¶ Claudius was emperour after Valerian. This man ſubdued Gothas nobly / & than deceſſed.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno Chriſti .CC .lxxiiij.
                        EVticianꝰ a martyr was pope after Felix .viij. yere. This man ordeyned y• corne & benes ſholde be blyſſed on ye awter. And he buryed. iij .C. &. xliiij martyrs wt his owne hādes. ¶ Aureliꝰ was emperour after Claudius .v. yere. This Aurelius fyrſt to chriſtē men was gentyll / wherfore he had the vyctory in euery place gloryouſly / & whan he was deceyued by curſed men / & purſued chryſten men myghtely / & namely in fraūce / for there he abode / & after that he had neuer good fortune / but was ſlayne. And this was the .ix. ꝑſecucyon of ye chriſten fayth. ¶ Tacitus was emperour after this man / & he regned but .iii. monethes & was ſlayne in Ponto. ¶ Probus was Emperour after hym .v. yere & .iiij. monethes. This man recouered Fraūce agayne / the whiche was occupyed with barbary men. And he gaue them & Pannonias lycence to haue vynyerdes. And whan he had made almooſt all thȳges well in peas he ſayd. Knyghtes within a lytell tyme ſhall not be neceſſary. And anone after he was ſlayne at Syrmiū. ¶ Carus & his two ſones Carmꝰ & Numerianꝰ were emperours after Probus but ſoone they dyed / & theyr fader was drowned / & the two ſones were ſlayne. All theſe regned but .ij. yere. ¶ Diocleſian & Maximyan came after theſe thre emperours / the one regned in the eeſt / & the other regned in the weſt. The fyrſt thynge that Diocleſian dyd / he brent all the chryſten mennes bokes that myght be foūde. Theſe two tyraūtes dyd more harme to chriſtē men than euer dyd ony other. For .x. yere laſted theyr ꝑſecucyon And as we rede / wtin .xxx. dayes .xx. M. men were ſlayne for chryſtes cauſe. And in Englonde all the fayth was almooſt deſtroyed in the tyme of Maximyan.
                        ¶ Gaius was pope after Euticianus. This man ordeyned that no man ſholde accuſe a biſſhop or an other clerke to ony ſeculer iudge. And yt a pagan or an heretyke ſhold not accuſe a chriſtē man. Alſo he ordeyned that he that was worthy ſhold aſcende gree by gree to his ordres / fyrſt benet / than 
                              •
                           ollet / ſubdeken / deken & than preeſt. And at ye laſt he was martyred vnder Diocleſian. ¶ Marcell
                              〈…〉
                           ꝰ a martyr was pope after Gaius .xi. yere & .iiij. monethes. This mā was ſore ꝑſecuted / & for drede of deth he offred. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           nes of encenſe to ye ſacrifyce of ye ydolles. And afterward he openly repented and ſuffred deth for the fayth of Chryſt. His body laye vnburyed thre days for drede of the curſe of god. And after through a viſyon of ſaynt Peter & Marcell he was buryed at ſaynt Peters fo
                              •
                           e. ¶ Marcellus was pope after Marcell
                              〈…〉
                           ꝰ .v. yere. This man ordeyned that a generall coū
                           ſeyle myght not be ordeyned without ye auctorite of ye pope. vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            .xvij. d
                              •
                           . 
                              〈◊〉
                           . ſinodū. Alſo he choſe .xv. cardynalles in the cyte to bury men & chryſten. At the laſt whan he had kepte beeſtes longe tyme in a hous cloſed in with them by ye commaundement of Maximian he dyed for faute. ¶ Euſebius a martyr was after this man two monethes and certayne days. This man of a lay man was made pope / & he ordeyned that no laye man ſhold accuſe his biſſhop / but yf he went from his fayth. V
                              •
                            
                           
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            .ij .ix. vij .x. lai
                              〈…〉
                           s. ¶ Nota. This tyme ſaynt Albon was

martyred in brytayn. This Albon whā he was a pagan he lodged a certayn mā the which cōuerted hym to the fayth / & after was iudged vnto deth / and moche people he turned vnto our lorde yt were nygh ye water / the which he made drye through his prayer. And he ſuffred deth nygh the cite of Ve
                              •
                           elom. Vide plura in vita ſctī Albani. ¶ Melchiades a martyr ſucceded Euſebius foure yere. This mā forbode ye men ſhold faſt on ſondays & on thurſdays / in ſo moche as pagans faſt on thoſe dayes. At the laſt he was martyred as al his predeceſſours were. ¶ And knowe ye that there were. xxxiij popes of Rome martyred eche one after other. Peter was the fyrſt / & this Melchiades was the laſt. And than it was laudable (after Gregory) a mā to deſyre a byſſhopryche. ¶ Galerius was emperour after Diocleſian two yere / and an other with hym called Conſtancius / ſo was ye empyre in thoſe dayes deuyded. This Conſtancius after he had conquered all Spayne / he came in to grete Britayn / & there he wedded a kȳges doughter / on whom he gate grete Cōſtantyne And this ſame Cōſtancius dyed in Brytayn / & lyeth at Yorke / as Martin ſayth in his cronycles / & lefte on lyue Cōſtantyne that was goten on Eleyne / & was kynge of Brytayne & of Fraunce.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno Chriſti .CCC .viij.
                        SIlueſter was pope after Melchiades. This was a gloryous confeſſour / & many wayes he worſhypped ye chirche of god / what in wrytynge and what in myracles. He receyued the patrimony of ſaynt Peter / that is for to ſaye / the kyngdome of Ytalye with the cite of Rome of Conſtantyne the emperour / & to the worſhyp of the chirche of god he turned it. He baptyſed Eleyne & the Iewes / and than he deceſſed a confeſſour. ¶ Conſtantyne ye myghty was emperour this tyme. This Cōſtantyne was a gloryous man and a victoryous in batayle. In gouernyng of the comyn people he was very wyſe. And in ye neceſſite of ye byleue he was without compariſon deuoute. His pite & his holynes be ſo wryten in ye bokes of holy doctours that without doubte he is to be nōbred amonge ſayntes. And the Grekes ſaye that in the ende of his lyf he was made a monke. And more ye may here of hym in the cronycles of englonde / for he was kyng of Englonde. ¶ Helena the quent moder to Conſtantyne repayred agayn the holy croſſe this tyme / and ſhe made lxx. colleges / and ſhe gloryfyed the ſtate of all holy chirche. ¶ Nycholas the byſſhop of Myrre cite an holy mā was this tyme. ¶ Athanaſiꝰ was this tyme byſſhop in Alexandria a gloryous doctour / and made the cymbalū Q uicū
                           
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            vult ſaluus eſſe. &c. ¶ Marcus was pope after Silueſter two yere and .viij. monethes. This man ordeyned that ye Crede ſholde be openly ſongen in the chirche / and that the byſſhop of Hoſtienſe ſholde conſecrate the pope / and that he ſholde were a pall. ¶ Iulius was pope after Marcus .xj. yere. This man was exiled x. yere / & after ſuffred deth vnder Conſtantyne the ſeconde. ¶ Cōſtantinus wt his two bretherne regned .xxiiij. yere / & in his laſt ende he was peruerted by the hereſy of ye arryens / by a byſſhop called Euſebi / & he purſued the chirche of god ſtrongly. The ende of this mā was this As he ſholde go to Conſtantynople to a grete coūſeyle / in the whiche counſeyle he thought to haue cōdempned the byſſhop and the clerkes of true byleue / he wente before vnto a chambre to auoyde ſuche thinges as nature requyreth / & anone ſodeynly his bowelles fell frō hym

and ſo dyed. ¶ Liberſus was pope after Iulius .xix. yere and .vij. monethes. Than was ye ſeconde dyſcorde of ye chirche bytwene Liberiꝰ & Felix for ye hereſy of the arryens the whiche fauoured Liberius. Than Conſtancius ye emperour called agayne Liberius from his exyle bycauſe he fauoured this hereſy. And ye chirche deiected Liberius / & toke Felix for pope / and the other was expulſed as an heretyke of the chirche. But Felix obteyned not / for ye emperour put in Liberius & expulſed Felix. ¶ Felix was pope after the deth of this Liberius / & he declared Cōſtancius ye emperour an heretyke / and anone after he was martyred. ¶ And here was the fyrſt that euer the chirche of Rome had an infamed pope. For all ye predeceſſours of this Liberius were ſayntes / & gaue holy enſamples. ¶ Iulianus apoſtata was after Conſtancius emperour .ij. yere and .viij. monethes. He was called apoſtata bycauſe he fledde this Cōſtantius whiche ſlewe his broder / & for fere of deth was made a chryſten man and a monke. But afterwarde by ye counſeyle of a nygromancer he aſked the deuyll wheder he ſholde be emperour or not. The deuyll ſayd that he ſholde be emperour vpon a cōdycyon that he ſholde forſake his chryſtē fayth / and be vtter enemy to chryſtē men. And ſo he dyd / for he gaue leue to the Iewes that they ſholde buylde agayn ye temple in ſpyte of ye chriſten men. And toke all ye goodes ye chryſten men had / & deſtroyed many of them. ¶ Iouinianus was emperoure after hym .viij. monethes. For whan Iulian was deed the hooſt choſe hym emperour / & he was a chriſtē man And he ſayd it was not lefull to a chriſtē man to be lord ouer ſo many hethen people. They anſwered & ſaid. Rather than he ſholde forſake the empyre they wold be thryſtened. And thus toke he ye dignite. But ſoone he was deed / and in meruaylous maner. For he was layde in a cloſe hous (after his iourney) made all of ſtone / newly whyted with lyme / in ye whiche they made to his cōfort as they thought a fyre of charcole / & of ye ayre of theſe two on the morowe he was foūde deed. ¶ Valentinian wt his broder Valent was emperour after Iouinianꝰ. x
                              •
                           . yere / for he departed the empyre / & gaue his broder the eeſt / & kepte hymſelfe the weſt part. This Valētinian was a lord with Iulian apoſtata / & it happed him on a tyme for to go in to a temple of falſe goddes for to do ſacryfyce / & mynyſtres ſtode there with water halowed after theyr guyſe / with ye whiche they ſpryncled the lordes. This Valētinian ſmote the mynyſtre that keſt the water vpon hym / and ſayd he was rather defouled therby than clenſed. Bycauſe of this Iulian dyd exile hym. But our lord god for his open confeſſyon of his name rewarded hym with ye empyre. His broder Valent fell in to the opinyon of the a
                              ••
                           yans and dyed in that hereſy. This ſame Valent lyued foure yere after Valentinian with Gracian the emperour. ¶ This tyme lyued ſaynt Ambroſe.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno domini .CCC .lxiiij.
                        DAmaſus was pope after Felix xviij. yere & .ij. monethes. This was an eloquent man in metre / and he wrote many ſtoryes of popes and martyrs. He ordeyned that 
                              〈◊〉
                            patri ſhold be ſayd in the ende of the pſalmes / and that was at the prayer of ſaynt Ierom. And through ye mocyon of this pope Ierom tranſlated the byble from hebrewe in to latyn / & than he deceſſed a cōfeſſour ¶ Valent with Gracian & Valentinian were emperours foure yere. In this tyme were chirches opened agayne / and

chryſten men had leue to renewe the ſeruyce of god y• was defended afore wt emperours infected wt hereſy / as was Valens & other / wherfore y• chirche had no liberte whan Valens was on lyue. ¶ A ſynodus of an .C. and .l. byſſhops were gadred vnder Damaſe pope at Cōſtantinople agaynſt Macedoniū an heretike the whiche denyed y• holy ghoſt to be very god. And than was the Credo made that is ſonge on holy dayes in y• chirche ¶ Auguſtinus a Cartaginen̄ of Affrica was this tyme / he was as noble a retho ricyen as myght be / & in all philoſophy & poetry incōparable / & all thynge that ony philoſopher foūde in his youth / he vnderſtode wt lytell labour. And aboute this tyme he was ſent to Milan where he was turned anone of ſaynt Ambroſe and baptyſed. This man grewe vnto a noble doctour of y• chirche. And not longe after that he was byſſhop of Yponen̄. & there he lyued .liij. yere / & moche diuinite he wrote. vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            in libris ſuis. ¶ Siritius was pope after Damaſus .xv. yere He dampned heretykes / & lytell elles is wryten of hym. ¶ Theodoſius ſone to Gracian with Valētyne his vncle was emperour .xxvij. yere. This man was a chryſten man & a gracyous / & in gouernaūce lyke to Traian / ſoone wroth / and anone reconſyled. This man on a daye whan he wold haue gone to here maſſe ſaynt Ambroſe forbade hym the entre of the chirche tyll he had done penaunce / & made ſatiſfaccyon for y• ſleynge of y•. xxx knyghtes / whiche he ſlewe in angre at Conſtantinople. Wherfore they made a lawe that y• ſentence of a prynce ſhold be deferred .xxx. days of thoſe that ſhold do execucyon yf they myght fall in y• grace of y• prynce wt in the .xxx. days. ¶ About this tyme was a childe borne in y• caſtell of Emons from y• nauyll & aboue deuyded in to two bodyes / hauyng .ij. hedes and two wyttes / ſo that the one 
                              〈…〉
                           epyng or erynge / that other ſlepte nor ete not / & whā they were two yere of age / the one deceſſed / & that other lyued thre days after. ¶ Claudius poeta was this tyme. ¶ Arcadius & Honoriꝰ regned .xxx. yere And in theyr tyme Rome was almooſt deſtroyed by a kynge called Alaticus / of the whiche deſtruccyon roſe a grete blaſ phemy of the Romayns. For they ſayd they fared neuer well ſythen Chryſt came to Rome / & bereued thē theyr goddes by the prechynge of Peter & Paule. And yet this Archadius ſubdued all his enemyes by y• power of god / & ſhed no blode Agaynſt this blaſphemy ſaynt Auſtyn made y• ſolempne werke y• whiche they call. de ciuitate dei. ¶ Honoriꝰ was emperour wt Theodoſius his broders ſone xv. yere / & he was a man of holy lyf / for two wyues he had / and with bothe yet he dyed mayden. He loued ſpecyally the chirche / and hated heretykes. ¶ Ierom dyed this tyme at Bethleem the yere of his age .lxxxxj. ¶ Sanctꝰ Herachydes that wrote Vitas patrū to Lanſum ep̄m was this tyme. ¶ Ioh̄es Criſoſtomus was exiled of Eudochia ye wyfe of Arcadij / & through hete of the ſonne he dyed. ¶ Anaſtaſius was pope after Siritius thre yere. This mā ordeyned that euery man ſholde ſtande at ye redyng of ye holy goſpell / & that he that was a maymed man ſholde not be preeſt. ¶ Innocētius was pope after Anaſtaſius. This man ordeyned that ſeke men ſholde be enoynted with holy oyle. And at maſſe ye kyſſe of peas to be gyuen. He dampned Pelagien an heretyke. And many other thynges he dyd. vt patet .xxvj. q .j.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno Chriſti .CCCC .xiiij.
                        AFter Innocētius zozimus was pope two yere & .viij. monethes. This man ordeyned that clerkes ſholde

be no tauerners / ne ſell no wyne / & that a bonde man ſholde not be made preeſt without y• lycence of his lord. ¶ Bonifa cius a Romayn was pope after zozimꝰ foure yere. This man ordeyned y• a woman ſholde not touche y• pall of y• awter ne ſholde not waſſhe y• awter. ¶ Celeſtinus a Romayn was pope after Bonifacius .viij. yere & .ix. dayes / y• whiche ordeyned the pſalme afore maſſe Iudica me deus. &c. And at the begȳnynge of y• maſſe ſholde be ſayd a verſe of a pſalme and that y• Grayle & the offertory ſholde be ſayd afore the ſakerynge. This man ſent ſaynt Patryk in to Irlonde to conuerte that lond. And Palladius a deken of Rome to the Scottes to be conuerted. And in the fourth yere of this mā there was a generall Synody at Ephiſina of CCC. byſſhops agaynſt Neſtorium an heretyke. ¶ Theodoſius y• yonger with Valentinian his neuewe regned .xxvij. yere. In his tyme was y• leeſt ordeyned whiche is called Aduīcula ſancti Petri. And in his tyme dyed ſaint Auſtyn / in y• yere of his age .lxxvj. ¶ And this tyme were the .vij. ſlepers reyſed / the whiche ſlepte .CC. yere. This man dyed at Cō
                           ſtantynople / & there was buryed. This tyme the ſaxons entred in to Englonde / and anone by lytell & lytell they grewe vp mightely / & at the laſt they obteyned all the londe. ¶ Sixtus a Romain was pope after Celeſtinus .viij. yere. This was a holy man & a meke. And lytell of hym is wryten / but y• he buylded ſancta Maria maior. ¶ Leo Tuſcus a confeſſour was pope after Sixtus. This mā was as holy as ony mā. Fyue tymes on a day or more he wolde ſaye maſſe. And on a tyme after it befell whan a certayn woman kyſſed his hande he was tēpted with her / & for the treſpace that he had done / to his penaūce he made his hande to be ſtryken of. And whan y• noyſe 
                              •
                           oſe vpon hym that he myght not ſay maſſe as he was wont to do / he was ryght ſory / and all onely betoke hym in prayer to our lady to helpe hym. And our lady reſtored hym his hande agayne / & than he ſayd maſſe as he was wont to do / & ſo that myracle was openly ſhewed to all people. ¶ And in y• tyme of this pope Marcyan the Emperour beynge there was congregate at Calcedony y• fourth vniuerſall ſynody of. vj .C. and .xxx. byſſhops agaynſt Euſticem y• abbot of Conſtantinople. et Alexandrinū ep̄m: qui negauerunt in Chriſto verā carnē fuiſſe
                              •
                           et etiā negabant carnis nr̄e reſurrectionē. And after he had made many notable ſermons & epyſtles he deceſſed. ¶ Marcianus & Valētinianꝰ were emperours this tyme .vij. yere / in whoſe tyme was the grete Synody afore reherſed whan Euſticē & Dioſcorus were cōdemp
                              •
                           rd.
                        IN the tyme that Marcianꝰ was emperour of Rome Vortiger was kynge of Britayn now called Englonde in whoſe tyme y• ſaxons came in to Bry tayn & made many kynges / y• is to ſaye as is playne by the Cronycles .vij. And bycauſe it is tedyous to mannes reaſon to reherſe many diuers names togyder as .vij. kynges of Englonde / and in one tyme / the emperours and popes. Therfore the cronycles of Englōde ſhall be ſet togyder / tyll it be comen vnto Alured / in whoſe tyme the Danes came in to Englonde. And the popes and y• emperours & other thinges in the ſame tyme ſhall be ſet togyder.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Circa annū d
                              〈…〉
                            .CCCC .xlix.
                        ¶ How the wardeyns that had y• chyſdren to kepe y• were kyng Cōſtantynes ſones ladde them to lytell Brytayne / for the treaſon and falſ
                              •
                           es of Vortiger.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶ Here begynneth the fyfth parte durynge to the comynge of the Danes.

                           Engiſt.
                        
                     
                     THis tyme came the ſaxons that were pagans fyrſt in to Britayn now called Englonde / vnder Vortiger y• whiche was crowned kyng of this londe. This tyme thoſe that had theſe two chyldren in kepyng the which were Cō
                        ſtantynes ſones / that is to ſaye / Aurilambros and Vter through ordynaunce of Goſſelyn that was byſſhop of London / after theyr faders dethe / that is to ſaye Cōſtantyne / durſt not dwell in this londe with thoſe children / but conuayed them vnto the kynge of lytell Brytayn / for as moche as he knewe the treaſon of Vortiger that than was made kynge / through whome Conſtance theyr elder broder was ſlayne / wherfore y• hondred knyghtes of Pehytes were put to deth and bare al the blame / as that Vortiger had not wyſt therof / ne therto cōſented. And ſo the kepers of thoſe two chyldren dred leſt Vortiger wolde put thē to deth through his treaſon & falſnes as he had done theyr broder before / & therfore they were ladde ouer in to lytell Brytayne / & the kynge them receyued wt moche honour / & put them to nouryſſhe / & there they dwelled tyll they became fayre and ſtrōge knyghtes / & thought to be auenged of the deth of Cōſtance theyr broder whan they ſawe theyr tyme / & ſo they dyd as ye ſhal here tell afterward. ¶ It was not longe after that the tydynges came ouer ſee to the kynrede of the hondred knyghtes of Pehytes y• they were dampned & put to deth through Vortiger in this londe / wherfore they were wonderſly wroth / and ſwore that they wolde be auenged of the dethe of theyr kynneſmen / & came in to this lond with a grete power / & robbed & ſlewe in many places / & dyd all the ſorowe that they myght. Whan Vortiger it wyſt / he ma de moche ſorowe / and was ſore anoyed. And in another place alſo tydnges came to hym that Aurilambros and Vter his broder ordeyned and aſſembled a grete hooſt for to come in to grete Britayn / for to be auenged vpon Vortiger for y• deth of theyr broder Conſtance. So that on y• one ſyde & on the other he was brought in to ſo moche ſorowe that he ne wyſt wheder to go.
                     
                        ¶ How Engyſt and .xj. thouſande men came in to this lōde / to whom Vortiger gaue a place y• is called Thonge caſtell.
                        ANd ſoone after this ſorowe tydynges came to Vortiger that a grete nauye of ſtraūgers were arryued in y• coūtree of Kent / & wyſt not whens they were / ne wherfore they were comē in to this londe. The kynge ſent anone a meſſenger thyder / that ſome of them ſholde come & ſpeke wt hym for to knowe what folke they were / & what they aſked / & in to what coūtre they wolde go. There were two bretherne mayſters & prynces of that ſtronge company / y• one was called Engiſt / & that other Horne. Engiſt went to the kyng and tolde hym the cauſe wherfore they were comen in to this londe / & ſayd. Syr we be of a coū tree y• is called Saxonie / that is y• londe of Germayne / wherin is ſo moche ſorowe that of the people be ſo many that

the londe may not them ſuſteyne. And y• prynces & maiſters of the londe make to come before them men & womē of y• bold
                              •
                           ſt y• may beſt trauayle in to diuers lon des / & gyue them hors & harneys / & al y• them nedeth / & thā they byd them go in to an other to 
                              〈…〉
                           e where they may lyue as theyr aūceters dyd before them. And therfore ſyr kynge / yf ye wyll haue our ſeruice we wyll helpe you againſt your enemyes. Whan Vortiger herd this / he ſayd gladly he wold wtholde them vpon ſuche couenaūt y• yf they might delyuer his londe of his enemyes / he wold gyue them reaſonable lōdes for to dwell in for euer. Engiſt thanked hym goodly / & in this maner he & his cōpany .xj. M. were reteyned wt kyng Vortiger / & at the laſt delyuered clene y• londe of his enemyes. Than prayed Engiſt the kyng of ſo moche lōde y• he myght make for hym & his folke a cite. The kyng anſwered / it was not to do wtout coūſeyle of his brytons. Engiſt prayed hym agayn of as moche place as he might compaſſe wt a thonge of a ſkyn / wheron he might make a maner for hȳ to dwell in. And y• kyng graū
                           ted him frely. Than Engiſt cut a bulles ſkyn as ſmall as he myght in to a thōge & therwt compaſſed as moche lond as he myght buylde on a fayre caſtell / & was called Thong caſtell.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Vortiger loued Ronewen Engiſtes doughter / & how he ſpouſed her.
                        
                           
                        
                        WHan this caſtell was made and well arayd / Engiſt pryuely ſent by lettre in to the coūtree where he came fro for an hondred ſhyppes fylled with men that were ſtronge & bolde and alſo well fyghtyng in all batayles / and that they ſholde alſo brynge with them Ronewen his doughter / whiche was the fayreſt creature that ony man myght ſe. And whan thoſe people were comen that he had ſente for / he toke and ladde them in to the caſtell with moche Ioye. And hymſelfe vpon a daye went vnto the kynge / and prayed hym there full worthely that he wolde come and ſe his newe manoyr that he had made in the place that he had compaſſed with the thonge of the ſkynne. The kynge anone frely graunted hym / & went with hym thyder / and was full well pleaſed with the caſtell & with the fayre weeke And togyder there they ete and dranke with moche ioye. And whan nyght came that kynge Vortiger ſholde go in to his chambre to take there his nyghtes reſt / Ronewen y• was Engiſtes doughter came with a cup of golde in her hāde and kneled before the kynge and ſayd to hym waſſayll. And the kynge wyſt no
                              •
                            what it was to mene 
                              •
                           e what he ſhold anſwere therto / for as moche as hym ſelfe nor none of his brytons coude ſpeke none Englyſſhe nor vnderſtande it / but ſpake in y• ſame language that Britons do yet. Neuertheleſſe a latiner tolde the kynge the full vnderſtandynge of wa
                              •
                           
                           ſayll / & that other ſhold anſwere drynke hayll. And that was the fyrſt tyme that waſſayll and drynke hayll came vp in this londe / and frō that tyme vnto this tyme it is well vſed in all this realme of Englonde. And whan kynge Vortiger behelde y• grete beaute of this fayre lady Ronewen that kneled before hym / he toke her vp & layde bothe his armes

aboute her necke / & thryes ſwetely kyſſed her / & anone ryght he was enamoured vpon her / ſo that he deſyred to haue her to wyfe / and aſked her of Engiſt her fader. And Engiſt graunted hym vpon this couenaūt / that the kyng ſhold gyue hym all ye coūtree of Kent / that he & his people myght dwell therin. The kynge graūted hym pryuely with a good wyll And anone after he ſpouſed ye damoyſell and that was moche confuſyon to hym ſelfe. And therfore all ye brytons became wrothe bycauſe he ſpouſed a woman of myſbyleue / wherfore they went all frō hȳ / & wold do no thynge yt he had to do.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Vortimer that was Vortigers ſone was made kyng / & Engyſt dryuen out / & how Vortimer was poyſoned.
                        THis Engiſt went in to Kent and ſeaſed all ye londe in to his hādes for hym & for his men / & became within a lytel whyle of ſo grete power / & had ſo moche people / that men wyſt not in litel tyme whiche were ye kȳges men & whiche were Engyſtes / wherfore the Brytons had of hym drede / & ſayd amonge them / but yf they ne toke other coūſeyle bytwene them / all the londe ſhold be deſtroyed through Engiſt and his people. Vortiger ye kyng had begotē on his fyrſt wyfe thre ſones / ye fyrſt was called Vortimer / the ſeconde Catagren / & ye thyrde Paſſent. The brytōs by one aſſent choſe Vortimer to be theyr lorde & ſouerayne / & crowned hym kyng / & wold not ſuffre Vortiger no longer to regne / bycauſe of the alyaūce bytwene Engiſt and hym. The brytons ordeyned a grete hooſt for to dryue out Engiſt & his company of ye londe / and gaue hym thre batayles / the fyrſt was in Kent where he was lorde / the ſeconde was at Tetford / & ye thyrde was in a ſhyre on this ſide Colcheſtre in a moor. And in this batayle mette them Catagren & Horne Engyſtes broder / ſo that eche of them ſlewe other. But for as moche as ye coūtre was gyuen longe before to Horne through Vortiger whā he ſpouſed his coſyn / there he made a fayre caſtell that is called Horne caſtell after his owne name. Vortimer was ſo ſore anoyed for his broders deth / that anone he let caſt downe ye caſtell to ye erth. And after he ſtynted not nyght nor daye tyll he had dryuen out Engyſt & all his people of the londe. And than Ronewen his doughter made grete ſorowe / and craftely ſpake to them that were nexte to the kyng Vortimer / & pryuely entreated them / and ſo many gyftes ſhe gaue them / that the kynge was empoyſoned and dyed at London the fourth yere of his regne / and there he lyeth.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How the britons choſe an other tyme Vortiger to be theyr kynge / and Engiſt came in to this londe agayne / and how they fought togyder.
                        AFter Vortimers dethe the Brytons by theyr comyn aſſent made Vortiger agayne theyr kynge vpon this couenaunt / that he ſholde neuer after ſuffre Engiſt nor none of his to come agayne in to this londe. And whan all this was done / Ronewen the quene pryuely ſent by lettre to Engiſt that ſhe had empoyſoned Vortimer / and that Vortiger her lorde bare agayne the crowne & regned / and that he ſholde come agayne in to this londe wel arayed with moche people for to auenge hym vpon the brytons / and to wynne this londe agayne by myght and ſtrength. And whan Engiſt herde theſe tydynges / he made grete ioye / & apparayled hym haſtely with xv. thouſande men that were boughty in euery batayle / & came in to this londe.

And whan Vortiger herde tell that Engiſt was comen agayn with a grete power in to this londe / he aſſembled his brytons & went to mete Engiſt for to gyue hym batayle. But Engiſt dredyng ye brytons ſore / for they had dyſcōfyted hȳ before / prayed Vortiger of a loue day / & ſayd he was not comen in to this londe for to fyght / but for to haue his londe agayn / yf he myght accord wt the brytōs. Kyng Vortiger through coūſeyle of his brytons graūted hym a loue day. And it was ordeyned by the brytons yt the loue daye ſhold be holden beſyde Salyſbury on an hyll / & Engyſt ſholde come thyder with. iiij .C. knyghtes & no moo. And ye kyng wt as many of ye wyſeſt men of his londe. And at yt daye ye kyng came wt his coūſeyle as it was ordeined. But Engiſt had warned his knightes pryuely that eche of them ſholde put a longe knyfe in his hoſe / & whan he ſayd fayre ſyrs it is tyme to ſpeke of loue & peas / euery man anone ſhold drawe out his knyfe & ſlee a bryton. And ſo they ſlewe a. M. and .lxj. knyghtes / & with moche ſorowe many o
                              •
                            them eſcaped. And ye kynge Vortiger there was taken & ledde to Thongcaſtel and put in priſon. And ſome of Engiſtes men wolde that the kyng had ben brent all quycke. And Vortiger than for to haue his lyfe graunted them as moche as they wolde aſke / & gaue vp all the londe townes / caſtelles / cytees & bourghes to Engyſt & his folke. And all the brytons fledde thens in to Wales / & there helde them ſtyll. And Engiſt went through ye londe & ſeaſed all the londe wt fraūchiſes & in euery place let caſt down chirches & houſes of religyon / & deſtroyed ye chryſtē fayth through out all this londe / and let chaūge the name of ye londe / yt no man of his were ſo hardy after that tyme to cal this lōde Britayn / but call it Engiſt lōde And thā he departed ye londe to his men and made .vij. kynges for to ſtrengthe ye londe / that ye brytons ſholde neuer after come therin. The fyrſt kyngdome was Kent / where Engiſt hymſelfe regned / & was lorde & mayſter ouer all the other. The .ij. was Southſex / yt now is called Chicheſtre. The .iij. Weſtſex. The .iiij. Eeſtſex. The .v. Eſtangyl / yt now is called Norfolk / Suffolk / Mercheme
                              •
                           k / yt is to ſaye ye erledom of Nicholl. The. v
                              •
                           . had Leyceſtre ſhyre / Northamton ſhyre Herforde / & Huntyngdon. The .vij. had Oxforde / Gloceſtre / Wyncheſtre / Warwyk / and Derby ſhyre.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Vortiger wente in to Wales / & began there a caſtell yt wolde not ſtande without morter tempred with blode.
                        WHan Engiſt had departed all the londe in this maner to his men / & delyuered Vortiger out of pryſon to go where he wold / & he toke his way in to wales where his brytons dwelled / for yt londe was ſtronge & yll to wynne / & Engiſt neuer came there 
                              •
                           e neuer knewe 
                              〈◊〉
                           . Vortiger helde hym there wt his brytōs & aſked coūſeyle what was beſt to do
                              〈…〉
                            & they gaue hȳ coūſeyle to make a ſtrong caſtell / yt he might kepe & defende hȳſelf therin yf nede were. ¶ Maſons in haſte were fette / & began ye werke vpon ye hyll of Breigh. But certes thus it befel
                              •
                            all ye werke yt the maſons made a daye 
                              •
                           t fe
                              •
                           l downe ye night / & they wyſt not what it myght be / & therof ye kynge was ſore anoyed of yt chaūce / & wyſt not what to do Wherfore he let ſend after ye wyſeſt clerkes & lerned men that were through out wales yt myght be foūde / for they ſhold hym tell wherfore ye foūdamēt ſo fayled vnder the werke / & that they ſhold hym tell what was beſt to do. And whā theſe wyſe men longe tyme had ſtudyed / they ſayd to ye kyng yt he ſholde do ſeke a childe borne of a woman yt neuer had to do

with man / and that chylde he ſholde do ſlee / & tempre with his blode the morter of the werke / and ſo ſholde the werke euer endure without ende.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How ye kyng let ſeke Merlin through out all Wales for to ſpeke with hym.
                        
                           
                        
                        WHan the kyng herde this / he cō
                           maūded his meſſengers anone to go through out all Wales to ſeke that chylde / yf they myght fynde hym / and that they ſholde brynge hym forth with them vnto hym. And in recorde and in wytnes of this thynge he had taken them his lettres / that they ne were deſtroubled of no man ne lette. And than ye meſſengers went thens & ſpedde ſo faſt / that they came in to a town that was called Karmardyne / and as they paſſed forth theyr waye / they foūde two chyldren of .xxiiij. yere of age chydynge togyder with haſty wordes / and one of them ſayd to that other. Donebat quod he / ye do all wronge to ſtryue with me / for ye haue no wytte ne no reaſon as I haue. Certes Merlyn quod he / of your wytte ne your reaſon I make no forte / for men tell comynly yt ye haue no thȳge of god almyghty / ſyth ye had neuer fader / but euery man knoweth well who was your moder. ¶ The meſſengers of kynge Vortiger whan they herde this ſtryfe bytwene ye two gromes / they aſked of them yt ſtode beſyde them whens that Merlyn was borne / and alſo who nouryſſhed hym. And they tolde them yt a grete gentylwoman of Karmardyne called Adhan was his moder / but none knewe who was his fader. Whan the kynges meſſengers herd theſe tydȳges they went anone to hym that was wardeyne of ye towne & tolde hym ye kynges wyll / & ſhewed hym his lettre / & wherfore they were comen thyder. Merlyn & his moder anone were fetched before the wardeyn of ye towne / & he cōmaūded thē that they ſholde go to ye kynge with his meſſengers. Merlyn & his moder went thens & came vnto ye kyng / & there they were receyued wt moche honour. And ye kyng aſked of the lady yf yt chylde were her ſone / & who hym begate. The lady anſwered full tenderly wepynge & ſayd ſhe neuer had company of man worldly But ſyr ſayd ſhe / whan I was a yonge mayden in my faders chambre / wt other of grete lignage in my cōpany / that oftē tymes went to ſporte them / I left alone in my chambre & wolde not go forth for brēnynge of ye ſonne / there came on a tyme a fayre bacheler & entred ī my chambre where I was alone / but how he came in / & where / I wyſt it neuer / ne yet knowe I not / for ye dores were faſt barred / & wt me he dyd game of loue. For I had no myght nor power to defende me from hȳ. And oftē he came to me in ye fore ſayd maner / ſo yt he begate this chylde / but neuer myght I wyte what he was.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the anſwere of Merlyn vpon the kynges caſtell that wolde not ſtande.
                        WHan Merlyn had herde all that his moder had ſayd / he ſpake to the kynge in this maner. ¶ Syr

how I was begoten aſke ye no more / for it falleth not to you nor to none other to knowe / but tell me ye cauſe wherfore I am brought to you / & wherfore ye haue ſent for me. Certes quod the kynge / my wyſe coūſeylers haue done me to vnderſtande / that ye morter of a werke that I haue begon behoueth to be tēpred with your blode / or the foūdament ſhall fayle for euermore. Syr ſaid Merlin / wyll ye ſlee me for my blode to tempre with your morter. Ye quod the kynge / or elles ſhall neuer my caſtell ſtāde / as my coūſeylers tell me. Than anſwered Merlyn to the kyng. Syr ſaid he / let them come before me thoſe wyſe coūſeylers / & I wyll preue that they ſaye not well ne truly. And whan the wyſe men were comen / Merlyn aſked yf his blode were the cauſe to make ye werke ſtande & endure. All thoſe wyſe men were abaſſhed and coude not anſwere. Than ſayd Merlyn to ye kyng Syr I ſhall tell you the cauſe wherfore your werke thus falleth & may not ſtande. There is vnder the moūtayn where ye buylde your toure a grete pond of water / & in the bottom of ye ponde vnder the water there is two dragons / that one is whyte & that other reed / that fyght togyder agaynſt your werke. Do ye depe myne tyll your men come to the pond / & do your men take away ye water all out & than ye ſhal ſe the dragons as I haue tolde you / yt fight togyder agaynſt your werke. And this is the cauſe wherfore the foūdament falleth. The kyng anone let dygge vnder tyll ye men came to that ponde / & let do away all ye water / & there they foūde two dragons as Merlin had tolde them that egerly f
                              •
                           ught togyder. The whyte dragon egerly aſſayled the reed / & layde on hym ſo ſtrongly that he myght not endure / but withdrewe him 
                              〈◊〉
                            reſted in the ſame caue. And whan he had a whyle reſted hym / he went before the reed dragon & aſſayled hym angerly & helde hym ſo ſore / that he myght not endure agaynſt hym / but wt drewe hym & reſted. And after came agayn ye whyte dragon & ſtrongly fought wt the reed dragon / & bote hym euyl & ouercame hym ye he fled frō thens & no more came agayn.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the ſignificacyon of theſe two dragons that were in the bottom of the ponde that fought togyder.
                        
                           
                              •
                           His kyng Vortiger & his men ye ſawe this bataile had grete meruayle / & prayed Merlyn to tell hȳ what it myght betoken. Syr ſayd Merlyn / I ſhall tell you. The reed dragon betokeneth your ſelfe / & the whyte betokeneth the folke of Saxonie that fyrſt ye toke & helde in your lond / that fought agaynſt you / & haue dryuen & chaced you awaye But Britons of your lignage ouercame them & droue them awaye. And ſythen at the comynge agayne of the Sarons they recouered this londe / & helde it for euermore / & droue out the brytōs / & dyd with this lōde al theyr wyll & deſtroyed chryſtendom through out this londe. Ye had fyrſt ioye wt theyr comyng / but now it is turned to your grete domage & ſorowe. For the two bretherne of Cōſtance that was kyng / whiche ye let ſee ſhall come before a quinzeme paſſed wt a grete power frō lytel Brytayn / & ſhall auenge the deth of theyr broder / and they ſhall brenne you fyrſt with ſorowe / and afterwarde they ſhall ſlee a grete parte of ſaxons / & ſhall dryue out all ye 
                           
                              •
                           emenaūt of the londe / & therfore abyde ye here no lenger to make caſtel ne none other w
                              •
                           rke / but anone go els where to ſaue your lyfe. To god I you betake / trouth I haue ſayd to you of thynges yt ſhall be fall. And vnderſtande ye well that Aurilam bros ſhall be kynge / but he ſhall be poyſoned / & lytell tyme ſhall he regne.
                     
                     
                        
                        ¶ Of kynge Aurilambros / and how he purſued Vortiger and Eugiſt / and how they dyed.
                        MErlyn & his moder departed frō the kynge / and returned agayne to Karmardyne. And ſoone after tydynges came to the Brytons that Aurilam bros and Vter his broder were arryued at Totnes with a grete hoſt. And anone the Brytons aſſembled them and went to receyue Aurilambros and Vter with grete noblenes / & brought them to London / and crowned Aurilambros & made hym kyng / and dyd vnto hym homage. And anone he aſked where as Vortiger myght be foūde that was kynge / for he wolde be auenged of his broders deth / and after he wolde warre vpon ye paynyms. And they tolde hym that Vortiger was in wales / & ſo they ladde hym thyder warde. Vortiger wyſt well that thoſe bretherne came to conquere hym / and fledde thens into a caſtell that was called Gerneth / that ſtode vpon an hye moūtayne / and there helde hym. Aurilambros and Vter his broder and theyr folke had beſyeged the caſtell full longe tyme / for the caſtell was ſtronge & well arayed. So at the laſt they keſt wylde fyre and brente houſes and men and all theyr araye & as moche as was within the caſtell. So that Vortiger was brent amonge all other / and ſo he dyed with moche ſorowe. ¶ Than was Engiſt in Kent and regned there / and herde theſe tydynges / anone he fledde & wolde haue gone in to Scotlonde for to haue had ſocoure. But Aurilambros and his folke mette with hym in the north countree / and gaue hym batayle. And Engiſt and his men defended them whyles yt they myght / but he and his folke were dyſcomfited and ſlayne. And Otta his ſone fledde vnto yorke. And Aurilambros folowed hym egerly. And Otta with ſtode hym a lytell whyle / but afterwarde he put hym to his mercy. And Aurilabros receyued hym / and to hym & to his men gaue the countree of Galeway in Scotlonde / & there they dwelled. After that the kynge Aurilambros went through out the londe / and put awaye the name of Engyſt londe / that Engyſt after his name had called it before. Than he let call it agayne grete Brytayne / and let make agayn chirches and houſes of relygyon / caſtelles / cytees / and borowes and townes that the Saxous had deſtroyed / and came to London / and dyd do make the walles of the cyte / whiche Engiſt & his folke had caſt downe. The Brytons ladde hym to the moūt of Ambrian where ſomtyme was an hous of relygyon whiche than was deſtroyed through ye paynyms / wherof a knyght that was called Ambry that ſomtyme was foūder of that hous / and therfore the hyll was called the mount of Ambryan. And after it was called Ambeſbury / and ſhall be ſo for euermore.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Aurilambros dyd redreſſe the londe of grete Brytayne / whiche was deſtroyed through the Saxons.
                        HOw the kynge Aurilambros let amende and redreſſe the hous of Ambeſbury / and put there in monkes / but now there be Nonnes / alytell from the place that was called Salyſbury / or where as the Saxons ſlewe the Britons / where as Engiſt and the Britons ſholde haue made a loue daye / in yt whiche tyme there were ſlayne a thouſande & .lxj. knyghtes through treaſon of Engiſt. The kynge therof had grete pyte / & thought to make in mynde of them a monument of ſtone that myght endure to the worldes ende. And of this thynge

they toke theyr counſeyle what therof was beſt to do. Than ſpake to ye kynge the byſſhop of London that was called Ternekyn yt he ſhold enquyre after Mer lyn / for he coude beſt tell how this thȳge myght beſt be made. And Merlyn after was ſought & foūde / & came to ye kynge. And the kyng tolde hym his wyll of the monument yt he wold haue made. Merlyn anſwered to ye kynge & ſayd. There ben grete ſtones in Irlond & longe vpon the hyll of Kian yt ben called gyaūtes ka roll / & yf they were in this place as they be there / they wold endure for euermore in remembraūce of thoſe knyghtes that here be buryed. Perma foy ſayd ye kyng as harde ſtones ben in my lōde as in Ir lōde. Soth ſayd Merlyn / but in all your londe there be none ſuche. For gyauntes ſet them for grete good of themſelfe. For at euery tyme yt they were woūded or in ony maner hurt / they waſſhed ye ſtones with hote water / and thā they waſſhed them therwith / & anone they were hole.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How the Brytons went for to ſeke the grete ſtones in Irlonde.
                        ANd whā theſe Britōs had herd of this thȳge they went & ſwore amonge them that they wolde goo ſeke thoſe ſtones / & toke with them Vter the kȳges broder to be theyr chefe capitayn and .v. M. mē / & Merlin coūſeyled them for to go vnto Irlonde / and ſo they dyd. And whan the kynge of Irlonde yt was called Guillomer herde tell ye ſtraūgers were arriued in his londe / he aſſembled a grete power / & fought agaynſt them / but he & his folke were diſcōfyted. The Brytons wente before tyll they came to the moūt of Kylian / & clymmed vp vnto the moūt. But whan they ſawe the ſtones / & the maner how they ſtode / they had grete meruayle / and ſayd bytwene themſelfe that no man ſholde them remeue for no ſtrength ne engyne ſo grete they were & ſo lōge. But Merlin thrugh his crafte he remeued them / & brought them in to theyr ſhyppes & came agayn in to this londe. And Merlin ſet ye ſtones where the kyng wolde haue them / & ſet them in the ſame maner that they ſtode in Irlonde. And whan ye kynge ſawe yt it was made / he thāked Merlin & ryche ly hym rewarded at his own wyll / & let call ye place Stonehenge for euermore.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Paſſent yt was Vortigers ſone & kyng Guillomer came in to this londe & how a traytour that was called Cappa empoyſoned ye kyng Aurilambros.
                        ANd men ſhall vnderſtāde ye Paſſent yt was Vortigers ſone liued the ſame tyme / & came in to this lond wt a grete power / & arryued in ye north coū
                           tre / & wold be auēged of his faders deth Vortiger / & ſtrongly truſted vpon ye com pany that he had brought wt hym out of the londe of Germany / & had conquered all ye North coūtre vnto Yorke. And whā kyng Aurilambros herde this he aſſem bled a grete power of britons & went for to fyght with Paſſent / & he diſcomfyted Paſſent and al his people. But Paſſent eſcaped thens with ſome of his men & fledde thens in to Irlōde & came to kyng Guillomer / & prayed hym of helpe & ſocour. The kynge graūted hym wt good wyll / & ſayd yt he wold helpe hym vpon that couenaunt that I my ſelfe muſt go with you with all my power in to Brytayne / and I wold me auenge vpon the Brytons the rather / for they came in to my londe / & toke ye ſtones with ſtrength that is called gyaūtes karoll. The kyng Guillomer let ordeyne his ſhyppes and went to the ſee with .xv. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . men / & arryued in wales / & began to robbe & dyd

moche ſorowe. ¶ It befell ſo that kyng Aurilambros lay feke at Wyncheſtre / & myght not helpe hymſelfe. So that he ſent in his name Vter his broder with a power to helpe wales / & thyderwarde he went as moche as he myght. The kyng of Irlonde and Paſſent had herde tell that Aurilambros was ſeke / and to them there came a ſaraſyn yt was called Coppa / and ſayd. Syr dwell ye here all in peas wt your hooſt / & I behyght you through my queyntyſe yt I ſhall ſlee the kynge Aurilambros that is ſeke. Than ſayd Paſſent / yf ye do ſo I ſhall rychely aua
                              •
                           i
                              •
                           e you. This traytour Coppa put vpon hym an habyte of relygyon / & let ſhaue hym a brode crowne / & came vnto the kynges courte / & ſayd that he wolde helpe ye kyng of his malady. Than ſayd the traytour Coppa vnto ye kynge. Syr be of good conforte / for I ſhall gyue you ſuche a medycyne yt ye ſhall ſwete anone ryght and lyſt to ſlepe & haue good reſt. And ye traytour gaue hym ſuche poyſon to ſlepe / that anone ryght in his ſlepyng he dyed / & the traytour ſayd yt he wolde go out in to ye felde tyll he were awaked And ſo eſcaped he away / for no man had to hym ſuſpeccyon for bycauſe of his ha byte that he was clothed in / and alſo for his brode ſhauen crowne. But whan the kynges men wyſt yt he was deed / they became wonders ſory / & faſt ſought the traytour / but they myght not fynde hȳ. For that traytour returned agayne vnto the hooſt fro whens he came.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Whan Aurilambros was deed / a ſterre on ye morow was ſeen wt a clere lyght / & at yt bought of the beme was ſeen the heed of an horryble dragon.
                        WHan the kyng Aurilābros was thus deed & empoiſoned at wyn cheſtre / on ye morowe after that he was deed aboute the tyme of pryme there was ſeen a ſterre grete & clere / & ye beme of ye ſterre was bryghter than the ſoune / & at the bought of the beme appe red a dragons heed / & out of his mouth came two huge lyghtes that were as bryght as ony fyre brennynge / & the one beme toward fraūce & ſtreyght ouer the ſee thyderwarde / & out of ye beme came vij. bemes full clere & longe as it were ye lyght fyre. This ſterre was ſeen of many a man / but none of them wyſt what it betokened. Vter that was kyng Auri lambros broder yt was in Wales with his hooſt of Brytons ſawe that ſterre / & the grete light that it gaue / he wondred therof gretly what it myght betoken / & let call Merlyn / & prayed hym for to tell what it myght betoken.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the betokenynge of the ſterre.
                        MErlyn ſawe that ſterre & behelde it longe tyme / & ſythen he quoke and wept tenderly / and ſayd. Alas alas that ſo noble a kynge and ſo worthy is deed. And I do you to vnderſtande that Aurilābros your broder is empoyſoned and that I ſe well in this ſterre / & your ſelfe is betokened by the heed of the dragon that is ſeen at the bought of ye beme that is your ſelfe that ſhall be kyng and regne. And by ye beme yt ſtādeth toward the eeſt is vnderſtande that ye ſhall gete a ſone that ſhall conquere all Fraunce / & all the londes yt belongeth to the crowne of fraūce / that ſhall be a worthyer kyng and of more honour than euer was ony of his aunceters. And by the beme that ſtretcheth toward Irlonde is betokened that ye ſhall haue a doughter that ſhall be quene of Irlonde. And the .vij. bemes betoken that ye ſhall haue .vij. ſones / & euery one of them ſhall be kynge / & ſhall regne with moch honour. And abyde ye

no longer here / but go & gyue batayle to your enemyes / & fyght wt them boldly / for ye ſhal ouercome them & haue ye victo ry. Vter thāked Merlyn hertely / & toke his men & went towarde his enemyes / & they fought togyder mortally / & ſo he diſcomfyted his enemyes and deſtroyed them / & hymſelfe ſlewe Paſſent yt was Vortigers ſone. And his Britons ſlewe Guillomer that was kynge of Irlonde and all his men. And Vter anone after ye batayle toke his waye towarde Wyntheſtre for to do bury kynge Aurilābros that was his broder. But thā was the body borne to Stonehenge with moche honour / that he had do make in remem braūce of the Brytons that there were ſlayne through treaſon of Engyſt / that ſame daye that they ſholde haue ben accorded / and in ye ſame place they buryed Aurylambros / the ſeconde yere of his regne with all the worſhip that myght belonge vnto ſuche a kynge. On Whoſe ſoule god haue mercy. Amen.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of Vter pendragon / & wherfore he was called ſo ye ſhall here. And how he was ouertaken wt the loue of Igreyne yt was the erles wyfe of Cornewayle.
                        AFter the dethe of Aurilambros Vter his broder was crowned & regned worthely. And i remembraūce of the dragon that he was likened to / he let make two dragons through coūſeyle of his Britons / & made that one for to be borne before hym whā he went in to ba tayle / & that other for to abyde at Wyncheſtre in the byſſhops chirche. And for that cauſe he was called euer after Vter pendragon. And Otta yt was Engiſtes ſone cōmended Vter but lytell that was made newe king / & agaynſt hym began to moue warre / & ordeyned a grete company of his frendes / & of his kynne / & of Oſſa his broder / & had taken all ye londe from Humber vnto Yorke. But thoſe of Yorke helde ſtrongly agaynſt them / and wold not ſuffre them to come in to ye cite neyther to yelde ye cite to them / & he beſyeged the towne anone ryght / & gaue therto a ſtrōge aſſaute / but they of yt cite kepte them well & ſtrongly. And whan Vter herde therof / he came thyder wt a grete power for to helpe and reſcow the cite / & put awaye the ſyege and gaue a ſtronge batayle / & Otta & his company defended them as well as they myght. But at ye laſt they were diſcōfyted / & the mooſt parte of them ſlayne / and Otta & Oſſa were taken & put in priſon at Lon don. And Vter hȳſelfe dwelled a whyle at Yorke / & after he went to Londe. And at Eeſter after he wolde bere crowne / & holde a ſolem
                              •
                           ne feeſt / and let ſomon all his erles & barons / that they ſhold come to that feeſt / & all thoſe that had wyues ſhold brynge them alſo to ye 
                           
                              •
                           eeſt. And all came at the kynges cōmaundement as they were commaūded. The feeſt was rychely arayed & holden / & all worthely ſet to meet after that they were of eſtate So yt the erle Gorloys of Corne wayle & Igreyne his wyfe ſate nexte to ye kynge And whan the kynge ſawe the fayrnes of that lady that ſhe had / anone he was rauyſſhed for her beaute / & ofre he made to her nyce countenaūce in lokynge and laughynge. So at the laſt the erle perceyued the preuy lokynge & laughynge and the loue bytwene them / and roſe up from ye table in wrath / & toke his wyfe / and called to hym his knightes / & went thens all in wrath wtout takyng leue of the kynge. The kynge anone ſent after hym that he ſholde come agayn & go not thens in deſpyte of hȳ. And ye erle wolde not come agayne in no maner of wyſe. Wherfore the kynge was full wroth / & in wrath hym defyed as his deedly cu
                              •
                           
                           my.

And ye erle went thens in to Cornewayle with his wyfe in to the caſtell of Tyntagell. And the kynge let ordeyne a grete hooſt & came in to Cornewayle for to deſtroye the erle yf he myght. But he had put hym in y• ſtronge caſtell of Tyn tagell yt was well arayed / & wolde not yelde hym to ye kyng. And ye kyng anone beſyeged the caſtell / & there dwelled .xv. days & might not ſpede / & euer thought vpon Igreyne / & vpon her layde ſo moche loue / that he wyſt not what to do. So at y• laſt he called to hym a knyght yt was called Vlfin that was preuy with hym / & tolde hȳ all his coūſeyle / & aſked of hym what was beſt to do. Syr ſayd he / ſende after Merlyn anone / for he can tell you the beſt coūſeyle of ony man lyuynge. Merlyn anone was ſent after & came to ye kyng. And the kyng told hym all his coūſeyle and his wyll. Syr ſayd Merlyn / I ſhall do ſo moche through ye crafte that I can / that I ſhal make you come to nyght in ye caſtell of Tyntagell / & ſhall haue all your wyll of that lady.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kyng Vter begate on Igreyne that was the erles wyfe of Cornewayle Arthur kynge.
                        MErlyn through crafte yt he coude chaunged y• kynges fygure in to the lykenes of the erle / & Vlfin Garloys his chamberleyn in to ye fygure of Iordan that was y• erles chamberleyn / ſo y• eche of them was trāſfigured to others lykenes. And whan Merlin had ſo done he ſayd to the kynge. Syr ſayd he / now may ye go ſodeynly to ye caſtell of Tyntagell / & aſke entre there and haue your wyll. The kyng toke pryuely all ye hooſt to gouerne and lede to a knyght that he moche loued / & toke his waye towarde the caſtell / & with hym toke Vlfyn his chamberlayne and Merlyn. And whan they came thyder / y• porter wende it had ben his owne lord. And whā tyme came for to go to bedde / y• kyng went to bedde with Igreyne the erles wyfe / and dyd with her all his wyl / & begate vpon her a ſone whiche was called Arthur. And on the morowe ye kyng toke his leue of ye lady and went agayn to his hooſt. And the ſame nyght that the kynge laye by Igreyne in bedde yt was the erles wyfe the kynges men gaue a grete aſſaute to the caſtel. And the erle & his men manly defended them. But at the laſt it befel ſo that in the ſame aſſaute the erle hȳſelfe was ſlayne & the caſtell taken. And the kyng anone returned agayn to Tyntagell and ſpouſed Igreyne with moche honour and made her quene. And ſoone after that the tyme came y• ſhe ſholde be delyuered & had a ſone whiche was called Arthur. And after that gate on her a doughter that was called Amya. And whan ſhe was of age a noble baron that was called Aloth y• was lorde of Leons wedded her. ¶ Whan Vter longe tyme had regned there came vpon hȳ a grete ſekenes as it were a ſorowe. And in the meane tyme thoſe that had in kepynge Otta that was Engiſtes ſone and Oſſa his broder that than were in pryſon / they let them goo for grete gyftes that they gaue / and wente with them. And whan theſe two bretherne were eſcaped & came agayne in to theyr owne coūtree they ordeyned a grete power of folke / & began to warre agayn vpon the kyng.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Vter choſe Aloth to kepe the londe of Brytayne whyle yt he was ſeke / for as moche as he myght not for his ſekenes.
                        ANd for as moche as kyng Vter was ſeke & myght not helpe hȳ ſelfe / he ordeyned Aloth ſone of Eleyne that than was choſen for to be wardeyn

and 
                              •
                           heftayne of all his folke. And ſo he anone & his Brytons aſſembled a grete hooſt / & gaue batayle to Otta and to his folke / but Otta at the laſt was diſcomfyted. ¶ It be fell thus after warde that theſe brytons had indignacyon of Aloth & wolde not be to hym attendaūt / wher fore y• kynge was wonders fore anoyed and let put hym in a lyttet is the hooſt amonge his folke. And they ladde hym to Vero
                              •
                           oin that than was a fayre cite / where as ſaynt Albon was martyred / and after was that cite deſtroyed with paynyms & through warre / and thyder they had ſent Otta & Oſſa & theyr people & entred in to ye towne & let make faſt the gates / & there they helde them. And the king came & beſyeged them / & made a ſtronge aſſaute. But they y• were win manly defended them. The kyng let ordeyn his gōnes & his engynes for to breke y• walles / & y• walles were ſo ſtrōge y• no thynge myght miſdo thē. Otta & his people had grete deſpite y• a kyng lyenge in a lytter had beſteged them / & toke coū ſeyle to come out on ye morow & gyue batayle to ye king / & in that batayle Otta & Oſſa were ſlayne / & al ye other alyue fled in to Scotlonde / & made Colegrin theyr cheftayne. And ye ſaxons y• were eſcaped brought agayn a grete ſtrength / & ſayd amonge them / yf kyng Vter were deed they ſhold well cōquere ye lōd / & thought to poyſon hȳ / & ordeyned men to do this dede: gyuyng them grete gyftes / & they went thyderward in poore mēnes wede to accomplyſſhe theyr fals purpoſe / but it auayled not / for they myght not come nygh y• kyng. Tyll at ye laſt they eſpyed that ye kyng drāke none other ly
                              •
                           our but water of a clere well y• was nigh beſyde & theſe traytours on a day priuely went to ye well & put therin poyſon ſo yt al the water was poyſoned / & anone after a
                              •
                            the kyng had dronken of y• water / he began to ſwell / & ſoone after dyed / & as many as dranke of y• water dyed alſo. And anone as this was eſpyed / folke of the towne let ſtop y• well for euermore. Whā the kyng was deed / his folke bare hȳ to Stonehenge wt grete ſolempnite of byſſhops & barons y• were there to bury hȳ beſyde Aurilambros his broder / & after returned agayn euerythone / & ſent after Arthur his ſone: & they made hym king of the londe with moche reuerence after his faders deth .xvij. yere of his regne.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Arthur yt was the ſone of Vte
                              •
                            was crowned after his faders dethe / & how he droue out of this londe Coleg
                              〈…〉
                            & the ſaxons / & Cheldrik of Aimayne.
                        
                           
                        
                        WHan Arthur was made kynge of the londe he was but yonge of .xv. yere of age / but he was fayre and bolde and doughty of body / & to meke folke he was good and curteys and large of ſpendynge / and made hym wonderſly well beloued among all men where it was nede. And whā he began to regne he ſware that the ſaxons neuer

ſhowe haue peas ne teſt tyll he had dryuen them out of the londe / & aſſembled a grete hooſt & fought with Colegrin / the whiche after the tyme y• Otta was deed the ſaxons maynteyned. And this Colegrin was diſcōfyted & fledde vnto yorke & toke the cite / & there helde hym. And ye kynge beſyeged hym there / but he gate no thynge / it was ſo ſtronge / & y• cite defended it manly. In y• meane tyme Cole grin left y• cyte to Bladud & fled hymſelf to Cheldrik that was kyng of Almayne for to haue ſocour of hym. And he aſſembled a grete power & arryued in ſcotlond with .v .C. ſhyppes. And whan Arthur wyſt of theſe tydynges / & ſawe he had not folk ynough to fyght wt Cheldrik / he lefte ye ſyege & went to London / & ſent anone lettres to Howell of lytell Brytayn his neuewe his ſyſters ſone / yt he ſholde come to hym wt all ye power yt he myght. And he aſſembled a grete hoſt & arryued at ſouthampton / where king Arthur receyued hym Ioyouſly wt moche honour. And thoſe two hoſtes mette & aſſembled them / & toke theyr waye to Nichol that Cheldrik had beſyeged / but it was not taken. And they came vpon Cheldrik & his people or they wiſt where that they were / & aſſayled thē egerly. Kyng Cheldrik & his men defended them manly to theyr power. But kyng Arthur and his men ſlewe ſo many ſaxons y• neuer was ſeen ſuch ſlaughter. And Cheldrik & his men yt were left alyue fledde away / and kyng Arthur purſued them & droue thē out in to a wode yt they myght no ferder paſſe. Cheldrik & his mē ſawe well that they were brought in to grete diſeaſe / & yelded them to kyng Arthur in this maner wiſe / that he ſhold take theyr horſes & harneys & all yt they had / & they wold onely go on fote in to theyr ſhyppes / & ſo they wold go home in to theyr own lōde and neuer come agayn in to this londe. And vpon aſſuraūce of this thynge they gaue hym good hoſt ages. And Arthur by counſeyle of his men graunted this thynge / and receyued the hoſtages / and thervpon ye ſaxons went to theyr ſhyppes. And whan they were in the hye ſee the wynde chaūged as ye deuyll it wold and they turned theyr nauy and came agayne in to this londe and arryued at Cotnes / & went out of the ſhypp
                              〈…〉
                            and toke the loude / and clene robbed it / and ſlewe moche people / and toke all the armure that they myght fynde / & ſo they went forth tyll they came vnto Bathe. But the men of y• towne ſhette faſt theyr gates / & wolde not ſuffre them to come within the towne / & they defended them well and manly agaynſt them.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How king Arthur gaue batayle vnto the ſarons whan they came agayne in to this londe / & had beſyeged the towne of Bathe / and ouercame them.
                        WHan kyng Arthur herde theſe tydynges / he anone let hange the hoſtages / & lefte Howell of Brytayn his neuewe for to kepe the marche to warde Scotlond with halfe his people / & hymſelfe went to helpe & reſcowe ye towne of Bathe. Whan he came thyder he gaue a ſtronge batayle to Cheldrik / & ſlewe almooſt all ye people yt he had. For no man myght wtſtande hym ne endure vnder ye ſtroke of his ſwerde / & there were ſlayne bothe Colegrin and Bladud his broder / and Cheldrik fledde thens & wold haue gone to his ſhyppes. But whan kynge Arthur wyſt it / he toke .x. M. knyghtes to Cador that was erle of Cornewayle for to let & ſtop his paſſage. And Arthur hymſelfe went toward y• marche of ſcot londe / for meſſengers told hym that the ſcottes had beſyeged Howell of Britayn there as he
                              •
                           ay ſeke / & therfore he haſted

hym thyderwarde. And Cador purſued after Cheldrik / & toke hym or he myght come to his ſhyppes / & ſlewe hym & his people. Whan Cador had done this viage / he haſted hym agayne towarde Arthur as faſt as he myght / & foūde hym in Scotlonde / where he had reſcowed Howell of Brytayne. But the Scottes were ferre within Mountef / and there they helde them a whyle / but Arthur purſued them / & they fledde thens in to Limoigne / there were in that coūtre .lx. yles / & grete plente of byrdes & Egles y• were wont to crye & fyght togyder and make grete noyſe whan folke came to robbe that londe / and warne as moche as they myght / and ſo they dyd / for the Scottes were ſo grete rauenours / that they toke all that they myght fynde in the londe of Limoigne without ony ſparynge / & therwith charged agayne the folke for to go in to Scotlonde.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Arthur aſked of Merlyn the aduentures of .vj. of the laſt kynges that were to regne in Englonde / & how the londe ſholde ende.
                        SIr ſayd Merlyn / in y• yere of the incarnacyon of Ieſu Chryſt. M .CC .xv. ſhall come a lambe out of Wyntheſtre that ſhall haue a whyte tongue & true lyppes / & he ſhall haue wryten in his hert holynes. This lambe ſhall make many goddes houſes / & he ſhall haue peas ye mooſt parte of his lyfe / & he ſhall make one of ye fayreſt places of ye worlde that in his tyme ſhall not fully be made an ende of. And in the ende of his lyfe a wolfe of a ſtraūge londe ſhall do hȳ moche harme & ſorowe through warre / but at ye lābe ſhall be mayſter through helpe of a reed foxe that ſhall come out of the north weſt / & ſhall ouercome hym / & the wolfe ſhall dye in water. And after that tyme the lambe ſhal lyue no whyle but ſhal dye. His ſeed ſhal be in a ſtraūge londe. And the londe ſhall be without a gouernour a lytell tyme.
                        ANd after this tyme ſhall come a dragon medled with mercy and alſo with woodnes / and he ſhall haue a berde as a gote / that ſhall gyue in Englonde a ſhadowe / and ſhall kep
                              •
                            the lond from colde & hete / and his one fote ſhall be ſet in wyke / and that other in London / & he ſhall embrace in habytacyons And he ſhall open his mouth towarde wales / & the tremblynge of the hydour of his mouth his eeres ſhall ſtretche towarde many haby
                              •
                           acyons & countrees & his breth ſhall be full ſwete in ſtraūge londe. And in his tyme ſhall the ryuers renne blode & with brayne. And he ſhall make in places of his londe walles that ſhall do moche harme vnto his ſeed after his tyme. And than ſhall there come a people out of the Northweſt durynge his regne / that ſhall be ladde through a wycked hare / that the dragon ſhall do crowne kyng / that afterwarde ſhall flee ouer the ſee / without comynge agayne for drede of ye dragon. And in that tyme the ſonne ſhall be as reed as blode that men ſhall ſe through out all the worlde / that ſhall betoken grete peſtylence and deth of folke / through dynt of ſwerde & that people ſhall be faderles tyll y• tyme that ye dragon dye through an hare that ſhal m
                              •
                           ue warre agaynſt hym vnto the ende of his lyf / that ſhall not fully be ended in his tyme. This dragon ſhall beholde in his tyme the beſt body of the worlde / and he ſhall dye beſyde the marches of a ſtraūge londe / & the londe ſhall dwell faderles without a good gouernour / and men ſhall wepe for his deth from the yle of Shepey vnto the hauen of Mar
                              •
                           yl / wherfore alas ſhall be theyr

ſonge of faderleſſe folke / that ſhall ouer lyue in his londe deſtroyed.
                        ANd after this dragon ſhall come a gote out of Kar that ſhall haue hornes and a berde of ſyluer / and there ſhal come out of his noſethrilles a domp that ſhall betoken hungre & ſorowe and grete dethe of the people. And moche of his londe in y• begynnynge of his regne ſhall be waſted. This gote ſhall go ouer in to Fraūce / & ſhall open y• floure of his lyfe & deth. In his tyme there ſhal aryſe an Egle in Cornewayle that ſhall haue fethers of golde / that of pryde ſhall be wt out pere of the londe / & he ſhall deſpyſe lordes of blode. And after he ſhal flee ſhamefully by a bere at Gauerſcch. And after ſhal be made brydges of men vpon y• coſtes of the ſee / & ſtones ſhall fall from caſtelles / & many other townes ſhall be made playne. In this tyme ſhall ſeme yt the bere ſhall brenne / & a batayle ſhall be done vpon y• armes of y• ſee in a felde ordeined as a ſhelde / & at that batayle ſhal dye many whyte hedes / wherfore this batayle ſhall be called y• whyte batayle. And the foreſayd bere ſhall do this gote moche harme / & it ſhall come out of the ſouth weſt & of his blode. Than ſhal the gote leſe moche of his londe / tyll y• tyme that ſhendſhyp ſhall ouercome hȳ. And than ſhall he clothe hym in a lyons ſkyn & than ſhall he wynne that he had loſt & more therto. For a people ſhall come out of the northweſt y• ſhall make the gote ſo ſore aferde yt he ſhall be in grete ꝑplexite And he ſhall auenge hȳ on his enemyes by the counſeyle of two owles that fyrſt ſhall be in peryll for to be vndone. But y• olde owle ſhall go away a certayn tyme and after he ſhall come agayn in to this lōde. Theſe two owles ſhall do grete harme to many one / & ſo they ſhal coūſeyle y• gote to arere warre agaynſt y• foreſayd bere. And at the laſt the gote & y• owles ſhall come at Burton vpō Trent / & ſhall go ouer / & for drede the bere ſhall flee & a ſwan wt hym fro his cōpany to Burton towarde y• north / & there they ſhall be wt an harde ſhoure / & thā ſhall the ſwanne be taken & ſlayne with ſorowe / & y• bere taken & heded nexte vnto his neſt y• ſhall ſtande vpon a broken brydge / on whom the ſonne ſhall caſt his bemes / & many ſhall hym ſeke for vertue that ſhal come from hym. In the ſame ſhall dye for ſorowe & care a people of his londe / ſo that many londes ſhall be vpon hym y• more bolder afterward. And thoſe two owles ſhall do moche harme to y• ſoreſayd floure of lyfe / & ſhall lede her in to dyſtreſſe / ſo that ſhe ſhall paſſe ouer the ſee in to fraūce for to make peas bytwene y• gote & the flourdelyce / & there ſhe ſhall dwell tyll a tyme that her ſeed ſhall come and ſeche her / & they ſhall be ſtyll tyll a tyme that they ſhall clothe them with grace / and they ſhall ſeche y• owles & put them to deſpytous dethe. And after ſhall this gote be brought to dyſeaſe & anguyſſhe / and in ſorowe ſhall he lyue all his lyfe.
                        AFter this gote ſhall come out of wyndſore a bore that ſhall haue an heed of a whyte lions hert / & piteous lokynge. His vyſage ſhall be reſt to ſeke men. His breſt ſhal be ſtaūchȳg of thurſt to y• thurſty. his word ſhal be goſpel. his herynge ſhall be meke as a lambe. In y• firſt yere of his regne he ſhal haue grete payne to iuſtyfye them that be vntrue. And in his tyme ſhall his lōde be multyplyed wt aliaūtes. And this bore thrugh fyerſnes of his hert / ſhall make wolues to become lambes. And he ſhal be called through out the worlde / the bore of holynes / of fyerſnes / of noblenes / & of mekenes. And he ſhall do meſurably all that he ſhall do vnto y• bourgh of Ieruſalem

And he ſhall whette his tethe vpon the gates of Parys / and vpon foure londes Spayn ſhall tremble for drede. Gaſcoyn ſhall ſwete. In Fraūce he ſhall put his wynge. His grete tayle ſhall reſt in Englonde ſoftly. Almayne ſhal quake for drede of him. This bore ſhal gyue mantels to two townes of Englōde / & ſhal make the ryuer ren wt blode & brayne / & he ſhal make many medowes reed / & ſhall gete as moche as his aunceſters dyd / & or he dye he ſhall bere thre crownes / & he ſhal put a lond in to grete ſubieccyon / & after it ſhal be recouered / but not in his tyme. This bore after he is deed for his dough tynes ſhal be buryed at Coleyn / and his londe ſhall than be replete of all good.
                        AFter this bore ſhal come a lambe hauyng feet of leed / & an heed of braſſe & a hert of a loppe / a ſwynes ſkyn and an hard. And in his tyme his londe ſhall be in peas ye fyrſt yere of his regne He ſhal do make a cite yt all ye worlde ſhal ſpeke of. This lambe ſhall leſe through a wolfe a grete part of his londe / but he ſhall recouer it / & gyue a lordſhyp to an egle of his lond / & this egle ſhal well gouerne it tyll pryde ſhall ouercome hym / alas y• ſorowe / for he ſhall dye of his broders ſwerde. And after ſhall ye londe fall to the foreſayd lambe / yt ſhall rule ye lōde in peas all his lyfe / & after he ſhal dye / & the londe ſhall be fulfylled wt all goodes.
                        AFter this lābe ſhall come a mold warpe / curſed of gods mouth / a caytyf / a coward / an hare. He ſhal haue an elderly ſkyn as a gote / & vengeaunce ſhall fall vpon hym for ſynne. The fyrſt yere of his regne he ſhal haue of al good grete plente in his londe / and ſhall haue grete prayſyng in his lond tyll y• tyme y• he ſhall ſuffre his people lyue īto moche pryde wtout chaſtyſynge / wherfore god wyll be wroth. Thā ſhall aryſe vp a dragon of the north that ſhal be full fyers / & ſhal meue warre agaynſt y• moldwarpe gyuynge hym batayle on a ſtone. This dragon ſhal gadre in his cōpany a wolfe comynge out of the weſt to meue warre agaynſt the moldwarp in his ſyege / & ſo ſhal y• dragon & he bynde theyr tayles to gyder. Than ſhall come a lyon out of It londe yt ſhal fall in cōpany with them / & than ſhall tremble ye londe yt ſhall be called englōde as an aſpen lefe / & in y• tyme ſhall caſtels be keſt down vpon Tamyſe And it ſhal ſeme y• Seuerne ſhal be drye for the deed bodyes that ſhall fall therin The .iiij. chefe flodes in Englonde ſhall ren in blode / & grete drede ſhall be & anguyſſhe yt ſhal aryſe. After ye moldwarp ſhall flee & ye dragon. The lyon & ye wolfe ſhall dryue them away / & the londe ſhall be wtout them. And the moldwarp ſhall haue no maner of power / ſaue onely a ſhyppe wherto he may go. And after yt he ſhall gyue ye thyrde parte of his londe to haue the fourth parte in reſt & peas / & after he ſhall lyue in ſorowe all his lyfe tyme. And in his tyme ye hote baths ſhal become colde. And after yt ſhall the moldwarp dye auenturouſly & ſodemly / alas for ſorowe / for he ſhall be drowned in a flode of the ſee. His ſeed ſhall become faderles in ſtran̄ge londes for euermore & than ſhall the lond be departed in to thre partes / yt is to ſay / to the wolfe / to ye dragon / & to ye lyon. And ſo ſhal it be for euer more. And than ſhall this londe be called the londe of cōqueſt. And ſo ſhal ye tyght heyres of Englonde ende. ¶ This ſame tyme that Merlin tolde to kyng Arthur of thoſe kynges / Guillomer of Irlonde ordeyned a grete power of Iryſſhmen & arryued in Scotlonde faſt by where as kyng Arthur lay wt his hooſt.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kyng Arthur fought wt Guillomer & ouercame hym. And how ye ſcottes became his men.
                        
                           
                           
                        
                        WHan Guillomer that was kyng of Irlonde herde tydinges that king Arthur was entred at Glaſtenbury / he ordeyned a grete power of Iryſſhmen & came to y• ſee wt them / & ſo came in to ſcotlond ouer y• ſee / & arryued faſt by there as king Arthur was wt his hooſt. And anone as he wyſt therof / he went towardes hym & gaue hȳ batayle & ouercame hym. And Guillomer fled wt his men agayn in to Irlonde. And whā this was done / Arthur returned agayn in to y• place where he had lefte y• ſcottes & wold haue ſlayne them all. But y• byſſhops / abbots & other folke of y• coūtre & ladyes open heded come before kyng Arthur & cryed hȳ mercy / ſayenge. Gentyl kyng as ye are a mayntayner of chriſtē
                           dom / haue pite on vs your euen chryſtē / for by our deth ye gete no worſhip / as to ſlee chryſtē folke / & therfore haue mercy on vs / for we haue had moche ſorowe by the Saxons y• haue paſſed through our countree / but y• is not ynough to you / for they haue taken our caſtels & ſlayne out beeſtes & eten / & moch harme haue done vs / & yf ye ſlee vs cryenge you mercy / it ſholde be grete dyſhonour to you. For ye haue done ynough to vs / & haue ouercomē vs / & for goddes loue ſuffre vs to lyue & haue mercy on chryſtē people y• byleue in Chryſt as ye do. Whan kyng Arthur herd this ſorowe / he had pite on them / & gaue them lyf & lymme wtout ony more harme / & they fell down to his feet & thā
                           ked hym / & became his lyege men / & he toke of them homage. And after y• kyng Arthur turned agayn wt his hoſt & came to yorke / & there abode duryng y• vyage. And than gaue he al Logres to Aloth yt had ſpouſed his ſyſter / & plente of other gyftes. Thā was Gawen his coſyn but yōge of age. To al his men y• had ſerued hym in his warre he gaue ryche gyftes thankynge them of theyr good ſeruyce.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kyng Arthur ſpouſed Gueneuer y• erles coſyn of Cornewayle / and after he conquered all Irlonde.
                        WHan kynge Arthur had brought his londe in peas & reſt & in good ſtate / and all was well in euery coūtree. Thā toke he & wedded a wyfe y• was called Gueneuer / & made her quene / a fayre lady & a gentyl / y• Cador y• erle of Cornewayle had nouryſſhed in his chambre yt was his coſyn. But neuer they had childrē togyder / & neuertheles king Arthur loued her full well. And anone as wynter was paſt / he let aſſemble a grete hoſt and all his barons / & ſayd that he wold go in to Irlonde for to conquere y• londe. And he taryed not longe y• he ne paſſed ouer in to Irlōde. And Guillomer y• king let aſſemble a grete hoſt / & gaue batayle to kynge Arthur. But Guillomer was diſcōfyted and yelded hym to the kynge & became his man / & to hym dyd feaute & homage / & of hym helde all that londe

fro that tyme forward. And after paſſed kyng Arthur ferthermore and cōquered Gutlonde & Iſlonde / & toke homage of y• folke of the londe / and there dwelled .xij. yere in peas / and regned with ioye and myrth / & there warred no man nor woman vpon hym. And he became ſo curteys & large & honourable / that the emperours courte of Rome / ne none other through out all y• worlde was not accoū
                           ted to kyng Arthur y• ony man wyſt of / nor none ſo well prayſed. And therfore y• beſt knyghtes of all maner londes came vnto hym there for to dwell. And he receyued them wt good wyll & reuerence. And all the knyghtes were ſo good that no man knewe the werſt. And therfore kynge Arthur made a roūde table / that whan they ſholde ſyt at theyr meet / all ſholde be lyke hye & euenly ſerued at the table / yt none of them ſholde make vaunt that one were hyer than an other. And kyng Arthur had at that table brytons & frenſhmen / normās & flemynges / bur gonyons / mauſers & lotherins / & of all the londes on this halfe the moūt Gorye and of his londe of grete Brytayne / & of Cornewayle / of Wales / & of Irlonde / & of Scotlond / and ſhortly to tell of all the londes that wolde worſhyp cheualrye ſuche came to kynge Arthurs courte.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kyng Arthur went in to fraūce & conquered the londe of Froll that was a Romayne / & how he ſlewe hym.
                        SIth it befell that kynge Arthur through coūſeyle of his barons & lordes wolde go to conquere all Fraunce that than was called Galle through Romayns that than helde y• londe in theyr power & in theyr gouernaūce. And y• Romayns had taken that londe to a noble knyght and a worthy of body that was called Froll. And whan he wyſt y• kyng Arthur came / he ordeyned an hooſt of a grete power / & fought with the kynge / And he & his folke were dyſcomfyted / & fledde vnto Parys & entred the cite / and cloſed the gates / and there helde hym. Whā Arthur wyſt that Froll was gone to Parys / he purſued after & came thyder & beſyeged hym. But the cite was ſtronge & well arayed / & they that were therin defended them well and manly. Kynge Arthur dwelled there more than a moneth / & there was ſo moche people in the cite y• they diſpended all theyr vytayles y• they had wtin: & ſo grete hunger became amonge them y• they dyed wonders thycke within y• cite for hunger / & came vnto Froll / & prayed hym to be accorded wt kyng Arthur for to haue peas and they wolde yelde them vnto hym & the cite alſo. Froll ſaw that he might no longer holde the cite agaynſt theyr wyll & truſted gretly vpon his owne ſtrength & ſent to kynge Arthur y• he ſholde come fyght wt hym body for body / & ſo ſholde they departe fraūce bytwene them two. Kyng Arthur anone graūted it / & 
                              〈◊〉
                            not that none of his people vndertoke y• batayle for hym. And on y• 
                           
                              ••
                           orow bothe came well arayed wtout Parys / where as they ſhold fyght. And anone togyder they ſmote ſo fyerſly / and ſo well they fought on bothe ſydes / y• no man coude deme the better of them. And ſo it befell that Froll gaue Arthur ſuche a ſtroke y• he kneled to the groūde wheder he wold or not / & as Froll withdrewe his 
                              〈…〉
                           erde he woūded kyng Arthur in the foreheed that y• blode fell downe by his eyen & his face. Arthur anone ſterte vp egerly whā he felte hȳſelfe hurte as a man y• ſemed almooſt wood / & he toke Tabourne his good ſwerde & drewe it vp on hygh / and gaue Froll ſuche a ſtroke y• therwith he claue his heed downe to y• ſholders / ſo y• his heline myght not be his warent / &

ſo he fell down deed in ye place. And than they of ye cite made grete ſorow for Froll And euerychone yelded them vnto kyng Arthur / & the towne alſo / & became his men / & dyd to hȳ homage & feaute. And he receyued them / & toke of them good hoſtages. And kynge Arthur after that went forth wt his hoſt & cō
                           
                              •
                           uered Angeo & Angiers / Gaſcoin / Poytou / Nauerne & Burgoyn / Berry / Lotherin / Turin / & Poytiers / & all ye other londes of fraūce he conquered holly. And whā he had all conquered & taken homage & feaute / he 
                              ••
                           turned agayn to Parys / & there dwelled he longe tyme / & ordeyned peas lōge tyme ouer all ye coūtree & through out all fraūce. And whan peas was made ouer all through his noble knyghthode yt he had / & alſo for his own worthynes. And no man were he neuer ſo grete a lorde durſt not meue warre agaynſt hym neyther to aryſe to make the londe of fraūce vnquyete. And in peas he dwelled there ix. yere / & did many grete wonders / & re proued many proude men & yll tyraūtes 
                              〈◊〉
                            chaſtiſed them after theyr deſeruyng.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kyng Arthur auaunted all his men that had trauayled in his ſeruyce.
                        
                           
                              •
                           Nd afterwarde it befell thus at eeſter there as he helde a feeſt at Parys / & rychely he begā to auaūce his knightes for theyr ſeruice that they had holpen hym in his conqueſt. He gaue to his ſtewarde yt was called Kay Angeo & Ang
                              •
                           ers / & to Bedeler his butler he gaue Normādy that was called Neuſtrie And to Holdyn his chamberlayn he gaue Flaundres & Mance / & to Dorell his coſyn he gaue Boloyne / and to Rychard his neuewe he gaue Pountyf / and to all other he gaue large londes & fees after they were of eſtate. And whan Arthur had thus feffed his knyghtes / at Apryl nexte after folowynge he came agayn in to Britayn his owne londe / and after at whytſontyde nexte folowynge by counſeyle of his barons he wol
                              •
                            be crowned kyng of Glomergon / & hel
                              •
                           e a ſolempne feeſt / & let ſomon knyghtes / erles / & barons / that they ſholde come thyder euerychone / & there was Scater kynge of ſcotlōde / Cadwere kyng of ſouthwales Guillomer kyng of Northwales / Maded kyng of Irlonde / Malgamus kyng of Gutlonde / Achilles kyng of Iſlonde / Aloth kynge of Denmarke / Gonewas kyng of Norway / & Hell his coſyn kyng of Dorkeney / Cador kyng of lytell Brytayne / Morwith erle of Cornewayle / Mauran erle of Gloceſtre / Guerdon erle of wincheſtre / Bo
                              •
                           l erle of Harford / Vrtegy erle of oxford / Curſal erle of Bathe Ionas erle of Cheſtre / Enerall erle of Dorcheſtre / Kymare erle of Salyſbury Waloth erle of Caunterbury / Iugerne erle of Chicheſtre / Arall erle of Leiceſtre & ye erle of Warwyk / & many other moo ryche lordes. Brytons there came moo / that is to ſay Dippon / Donaud / Gēnes & many other yt be not named here were at that feeſt / & many a fayre feeſt kynge Arthur had holdē before / but neuer none ſuche / ne none ſo ſolempne / & that laſted xv. dayes with moche honour & myrth.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the lettre that was ſent from Rome for pryde to kynge Arthur.
                        THe thyrde daye as kyng Arthur ſate at his meet amōge his kynges / & amonge them that ſate at ye fee
                              ••
                            before them came in .xij. men of age rychely arayed / & curteyſly they ſalewed the kyng / & ſayd they came from Rome ſent as meſſengers fro the emperour / & toke to hym a lettre yt thus moche was to vnderſtande. Gretely vs meruayleth Arthur that y• arte ones ſo hardy with

the eyen in thy heed to make open warre and contake agaynſt vs of Rome / yt owe all ye worlde to deme / for y• haſt neuer yet before this tyme proued ne aſſayed the ſtrength of ye Romayns / & therfore thou it ſhall in a lytell tyme. For Iulius ceſar conquered all ye londe of Brytayn / & toke therof truage / & our folke haue it longe had / & now through thy pryde y• withholdeſt it / wherfore we of Rome cōmaū
                           de ye that y• yelde it agayne. And yet haſt thou done more foly / that y• haſt ſlayne Froll yt was our baron of Fraūce with wrōge / & therfore all ye comyns of Rome warneth the & cōmaūdeth the vpon lyfe & lym
                              •
                           e / that y• in haſte be at Rome for to make amendes of thy myſdedes that thou haſt done. And it be ſo that y• come not / we ſhall paſſe ye hyll of Ioye with ſtrength / & we ſhall ſeke ye where euer y• mayſt be foūde / & thou ſhalte not haue a fote of londe of thyn owne / yt we ne ſhall deſtroye it / & afterward wt thy body we ſhal do our wyll. Whan this lettre was red / & al men it herde / they were anoyed all yt were at yt ſolempne feeſt / & the Brytons wold haue ſlayne the meſſengers / but ye kyng wold not ſuffre them / & ſayd that ye meſſengers ſhold haue no harme & may by reaſō none deſerue / but cōmaū
                           ded them to be worſhipfully ſerued. And after meet toke coūſeyle of kȳges / erles & barons what anſwere he might gyue agayn to the meſſengers. And they coū
                           ſeyled hym yt he ſholde aſſemble a grete power of all the londes of whiche he had lordſhip / & manly auenge hȳ on ye emperour of ye deſpyte yt he had ſent hȳ ſuche a lettre / & they ſwore by god & by his na
                           
                              •
                           es yt they ſholde purſue hym & brenne as moche as they myght / & ſayd ye they wolde neu
                              ••
                            fayle kynge Arthur / & had rather to be deed. And they l
                              •
                           t wryte a lettre to ſend to the emperour by ye ſame meſſengers in this maner of wyſe.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the bolde anſwere that kynge Arthur ſent to the emperour of Rome and to the Romayns.
                        
                           
                              •
                           Nderſtande amonge you of Rome that I am kynge Arthur of Brytayne / & frely it holde & ſhall holde / And at Rome haſtely I wyll be / not to gyue truage / but for to aſke truage. For Cōſtantyne that was Eleyns ſone that was emperour of Rome / & of all the honour that therto belongeth. And Ma
                              •
                           imyan kynge conquered all Fraunce and Almayne / & paſſed mount Ioye / & conquered all Lombardy / & theſe two were myne aūceſters / & that they helde & had I ſhall haue through goddes wyll.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the reuerence that kynge Arthur dyd to the emperours meſſengers.
                        WHan this lettre was made & 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           ſealed / kyng Arthur vnto th
                              •
                           ſe meſſengers gaue grete gyftes / And after that ye meſſengers toke theyr leue & went
                              •
                            thens & came to the cour
                              ••
                            of Rome agayne / & tolde the emperour how worthely they were receyued and alſo of the ryal company that he had for to ſerue hym / and how he was more 
                              •
                           y ally ſerued than the emperour of Rome or ony other kyng lyuynge in ye worlde. And whan the emperour had ouerſ
                              •
                           en the lettre / & had herde what was therin and ſawe that Arthur wolde not be 
                              •
                           uled after hym / he let aſſemble & ordeyne a grete hooſt for to deſtroye kynge Arthur yf that he myght. And kynge Arthur as touchyng his power and party ordeyned his power & knyghtes of the rounde table.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the kynges and lordes that came for to helpe kynge Arthur agaynſt the emperour.
                        
                           
                           
                              •
                           He kyng of Scotlond / of Irlond of Gutlonde / of Denmarke / & of Almayne / eche of them had .x. M. me
                              •
                            / the duke of Normandy / Gaſcoyn / Flaū
                           dres / Poytou / and of Boloyne / eche had foure thouſand. Gerin of Chartres had x. thouſand. Howell of brytayn had .xij. thouſande / & himſelfe of his owne londe xij. thouſand. And of arbalaſtres and of archers & of other folke on fote / that no man coude nombre them. And whan all were redy for to go / kynge Arthur toke his londe & Gueneuer his wyfe to kepe to one of his neuewes that was a wyſe knight and a hardy whiche was called Mordred / but he was not all true / as ye ſhall here afterwarde. Kynge Arthur toke all his realme to this Mordred / ſaue onely the crowne. And after yt kynge Arthur toke his hooſt & went to South hamton where that the ſhyppes were brought & the folke aſſembled / and they went vnto the ſee / and had wynde and weder at wyll. And as ſoone as they myght they arryued at Ha
                              •••
                           et / and as ſhortly as they coude they went a londe out of theyr ſhyppes / and ſpradde ouer all the countree.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kyng Arthur fought wt a gyaūt in Spayne that was called Dinabus yt ſlewe Eleyue that was kynge Howels coſyn of lytell Brytayne.
                        BYnge Arthur had not dwelled in the coūtree but a lytell tyme that men tolde hym that there was comen a grete gyaunte in to Spayne / and had rauyſſhed fayre Eleyne that was coſyn vnto Howell of lytell Brytayn / and had brought her vpon an hyll that is called the moūt of ſaynt Bernarde / and there was no man in that coūtree ſo bolde nor ſo hardy that durſt fyght with hym / ne come nye the place where as the gyaūt dwelled that was called Dinabus / and moche ſorowe he dyd in that countree. Whan kyng Arthur herde theſe tydynges / he called to hym Kay & Bedewere and cōmaunded them for to go pryuely and eſpye where the gyaunt myght be foūde. And they came to ye ryuage there as men ſholde go to the moūt that was all encloſed aboute with water / & yet is and euer ſhall be. And they ſawe a brennynge fyre vpon ye hyll. And there was alſo an other hyll nye that / & there was vpon that an other fyre brēnynge. Kay and Bedewere came to the nexte hyll / & founde a wydowe open heded / ſyttynge beſyde a tombe ſore wepyng / and made grete ſorow / & ofte ſhe ſayd Eleyn Eleyn And Kay & Bedewere aſked what ſhe was / and wherfore ſhe made ſo moche ſorow / & who lay in that tombe. O ſayd ſhe / what ſorowe & myſauenture fayre lordes ſeke ye here / for yf ye gyaunt may fynde you here / he wyll ſlee you anone. Be ſtyll good wyfe ſayd they / therof diſmay you not / but tell vs the ſothe why that thou makeſt ſo moche ſorowe and wepynge. Syrs ſayd ſhe / for a damoyſell that I nouryſſhed with my breſtes that was called Eleyn / that was coſyn to Howell of Brytayn. And here lyeth ye body in this tombe whiche to me was taken to nouryſſhe. And ſo there came a deuyll a gyaunt and rauyſſhed her / and me alſo / and ladde vs bothe with hym away. And he wolde haue forlayn that mayde that was ſo yonge and tender of age / but ſhe myght not ſuffre it / ſo grete and ſo huge as the gyaūt was. And for certayne yf he come now as he is wont to do / he wyll you now bothe 
                              •
                           lee / & ther fore go ye hens. Than ſpake theſe two meſſengers and ſayd to her / wherfore go ye not frō hens. Certes ſyrs ſayd ſhe whan that Eleyn was deed / the gya
                              ••
                            made me to abyde to do and haunte his

wyll / 
                              〈◊〉
                            I muſt it 
                              〈◊〉
                            ſuffre / & god it w
                              •
                           teth I do it not with my wyll / for I had 
                              •
                           euer to be deed than to deale wt him ſo moche payne & ſorowe I haue whan he me forlyeth. Whan Kay & Bedewere had herde all yt this woman tolde them they returned agayne & came to kynge Arthur / & tolde hym all yt they had ſeen & herde. Arthur anone toke them bothe with hym and went pryuely by nyght that none of his hooſt wyſt / & came on ye morow erly to ye gyaūt & faught wt hym ſtrongly / & at ye laſt ſlewe hym. And Arthur 
                              •
                           ad Bedewere to ſmyte of his heed & brynge it in to the hooſt to ſhewe it for a wonder / for it was ſo grete and huge. Whan they came agayn to ye hoſte / they told wherfore they had bē out / & ſhewed to them the heed. And euery man was glad & ioyfull of the worthy dede yt kyng Arthur had done that was theyr lorde. And Howell was full ſorowfull for his coſyn that was ſo loſt. And after warde whan he had ſpace he let make a fayre chapell of our lady ouer Eleyns tombe.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Arthur gaue batayle to the emperour / in ye whiche batayle the emperour was ſlayne.
                        ARthur & his people had tydynges that ye emperour had aſſembled a grete power / as well of ſaraſyns as of paynyms & chryſten men / wherof the nōbre was .lxxx. M. hors men / with fote men. Arthur & his people ordeyned faſt forth in theyr waye toward ye empe rour & paſſed Normandy & Fraūce vnto Burgoyn / & wolde haue gone to ye hooſt For men tolde hym that the emperours hooſt wolde come to Lucie. The emperour & his hooſt in ye begynnynge of Auguſt remeued from Rome / & came forth ryght the waye towarde ye hooſt. Than came kyng Arthurs eſpyes & ſayd / yf yt Arthur wolde he ſholde fynde the emperour there faſt by / but they ſayd that ye emperour had ſo grete power wt hym of kynges of the londe of paynyms / & alſo chryſten people / that it were but foly to kyng Arthur to mete with them. For ye ſpyes tolde that the emperour had fyue or ſyxe men agaynſt one of his. Kynge Arthur was bolde & hardy / and for no thynge hym dyſmayed & ſayd. Go we boldly in goddes name agaynſt the Romayns that with them lede ſaraſyns & paynyms / that haue no maner truſt in god / but onely vpon theyr ſtrength. Go we now & ſeke them ſharply in ye name of almyghty god / & ſlee we ye paynyms & chryſten men yt be agaynſt vs wt them for to deſtroye chryſten men / & god ſhall helpe vs to ouercome them / for we haue the ryght opynyon / & therfore haue we truſt in god / & do we ſo that ye enemyes that be to chryſtendom & to god may be deſtroyed & ouercomen / & that men may recorde the worthynes of knyghthode. Whā kyng Arthur had thus ſayd / they cryed all wt an hye voyce. God yt is fader almyghty worſhypped be thy name wt
                           out ende. amē. And graūt vs grace well for to do / & to deſtroye our enemyes that be agaynſt chryſtendome. In the name of ye fader / the ſone / & ye holy ghoſt. amē. And god gyue hym neuer grace n
                              •
                            worſhyp in the worlde / ne mercy of hym to haue / that this daye ſhall feynt well for to ſmite & egerly. And ſo they rode ſoftly & ordeyned theyr wynges wel & wyſely The emperour herde t
                              •
                           ll that kyng Arthur & his folke were redy apparaylled for to fyght with him / & how they were comynge / he let ordeyue his wynges in the beſt maner yt he coud / & more truſted in his ſtrength than in almyghty god / & that was ſeen afterwarde. For whan ye two hoſtes mette / the emperour loſt. iiij of his men agaynſt ou
                              •
                            of Arthurs / & ſo

many were ſlayne what on ye one party & what on that other / that it was grete pyte to wyte & beholde. In this batayle were ſlayne through kyng Arthurs .v. kynges of the paynyms & of other wonders moche people. And kyng Arthurs men fought ſo wel that the Romayns & paynyms had no more ſtrength to with ſtande them than .xx. ſhepe agaynſt .v. wolues. And ſo it befel yt in this batayle in the ſhoure that was wonders hard & longe duryng on that one ſyde & on that other / the emperour among them there was ſlayne / but there was no man that wyſt for very ſothe who hym ſlewe.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How king Arthur let bury his lordes & knyghtes that he had loſt in ye batayle and how he ſent the emperours body to Rome that there was ſlayne in batayle.
                        WHan the romayns wyſt that the emperour was deed / they for ſoke the felde / & the paynyms alſo And kyng Arthur chaced after them tyl it was nyght / & ſo many of them ſlewe that it was wonder to tell. And whā it was nyght kyng Arthur turned agayn & thanked god of his victory. And on the morowe he let loke & ſerche all the felde for his knyghtes yt he there loſt / that is to ſaye Borel erle of maunt / Bedewer & kay / & Ligiers erle of Boloyn / Vrgety erle of Baar / Aloth erle of Wyncheſtre / Curſael erle of Cheſtre / and Holden erle of Flaūdres. Theſe were ye grete lordes that king Arthur loſt in yt batayle with other worthy knyghtes amonge them. And ſome he let bury in abbays by the coūtree / ſome he let be borne into theyr owne coūtree. And the emperours body he let take & put vpon a bere / & ſent it to Rome / & ſent to ſaye the Romayns that for Brytayn & Fraūce whiche he helde / other truage wolde he none paye. And yf they aſked hym ony other truages / ryght ſuche truage he wold tham paye kyng Arthur let here kay to kenen his owne caſtell / & there buryed hym. And Ligier was borne to Boloyn where he was lorde. And Holden was borne in to Flaūdres / and there was buryed. And all the other he let bury with moche honour in abbays & in houſes of relygyon in the countree there they were ſlayne. And kynge Arthur hymſelfe ſoiourned that ſame yere in Burgoyne with his hooſt / & thought yt ſame yere folowyuge to paſſe the mount of Ioye / and to haue gone to Rome for to take the cite / and to haue put the Romayns in ſubieccyon / but the wycked tyraunt Mordred letted hym / as after ye ſhall here.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How the traytour Mordred to whom kyng Arthur toke his lōde to kept & his caſtels / & he helde them agaynſt hym.
                        WHan kynge Arthur had taken to Mordred his realme to kepe / and was gone agaynſt the emperour of Rome / & was paſſed ye ſee / Mordred anone toke homage & feaute of all them yt were in this londe / & wolde haue had the lōde to his owne vſe / & toke caſtels all about and let them be arayed. And after this faiſnes he dyd an other grete wronge / for agaynſt the lawe of thryſtendom he toke his own vncles wife as a traytour and ordeyned hym a grete hoſt agayuſt kyng Arthurs comyng / to holde ye londe agaynſt hym wt ſtrength for euermore / and to ſlee kyng Arthur yf he myght / & ſent by ſee & by londe / and let aſſemble paynyms & chriſten people. And he ſent to ſaxons and to danes for to helpe hym And alſo Mordred ſent to Cheldrik to do men come to hȳ out of ſaxon / that was a worthy duke / & promiſed hym yf that he brought with hym moche people he

wolde gra
                              •••
                           e hym in herytage for euer more all the londe frō beyonde Humber to ſcotlonde / & all the londe that Engiſt had of Vortygers gyſte whan that he ſpouſed his doughtcr. And Cheldrik came wt a grete ſtrength & power of people And Mordred had aſſembled alſo on his halfe / that they had .xl. M. of ſtronge knyghtes whan that they had nede.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How king Arthur chaced yt traytour Mordred / & how he was ſlayne / & kyng Arthur Wounded to deth.
                        THeſe tydynges came to kyng Arthur where as he was in Burguyn / & was therof ſore anoyed / & toke all Fraūce to Howell for to kepe wt halfe of his men / & prayed hym to kepe it tyll he came agayn / for he hyſelfe wolde go into Britayn / & auenge hym on the fals traytour Mordred / & went his waye & came to whytſand / & toke ſhyppyng wt his men / & a grete hooſt of frenſhmen / & arryued at Sandwyche. But or that he myght come to londe wt his people / Mordred was come wt all his power / & gaue a ſtronge batayle / ſo yt kyng Arthur loſt many a man or he myght come to londe For there was Gawayne his neuewe ſlayne & Augniſſell yt helde Scotlonde / & many other / wherof kyng Arthur was ful ſory. But after yt they were comen to lōde / Mordred might not agaynſt them endure / but was diſcōfyted & fled thens the ſame nyght wt his men / & on the morowe came to London / but men of ye cite wold not let hȳ entre / & from thens fled to wyneheſtre / & there helde hym wt his people. Kyng Arthur let take ye body of Gawayn his coſyn / & ye body of Augniſſel / & let yt one be borne to ſcotlond / & that other to Pouer & buried. And after king Arthur toke his waye to deſtroye Mordred / & he fled thens into Corne Wayle. And the quene Gueneuer yt was kynge Arthurs wyfe yt thā ſoiourned at yorke herde that Mordred was fled thens / & yt he myght not endure agaynſt kyng Arthur / ſhe was ſore aferde and had grete doubte / & wyſt not what was beſt to do For ſhe wyſt well yt her lorde kynge Arthur wolde neuer of her haue mercy for the grete ſhame yt ſhe had done hȳ / & toke her waye pryuely with .iiij. men & no mo / & came to Karlyon / & there ſhe dwelled all her lyfe / & was neuer ſeen amōge folke. Kyng Arthur wyſt that Mordred was fledde in to Cornewayle / & let ſend after his men in to Scotlond & Northū
                           berlonde vnto Number / and let aſſemble folke wtout nombre & went vnto Cornewayle to ſeke Mordred. And Mordred had aſſembled to hȳ all yt folke of Cornewayle without nōbre / & wyſt yt Arthur was comynge / & had leuer to dye & take his chaūce than longer to flee / & abode & gaue an hard batayle to kyng Arthur & his people: ſo yt there eſcaped none away on lyue ſaue kynge Arthur & other that were woūded to deth / for Mordred was ſlayne & all his people / and all kyng Arthurs noble knyghtes of ye roūde table / wherof it was grete pyte. And king Arthurs made hym to be borne in a lytter to Auyon to be heled of his woundes. And yet ye Brytons ſuppoſe yt he lyueth in an other lond / & that he ſhall come yet & conquere all Brytayn. But cer
                              •
                           es this is ye prophecy of Merlyn. He ſayd his dethe ſhold be doubtous / & he ſayd trouth. For therof yet men haue doubte / & ſhal haue for euermore as men ſaye. For mē wote not whether that he is on lyue or deed. ¶ Arthur was borne to Auyon the. xxii yere of his regne / after the incarnacyon of our lorde Jeſu Chryſt .v. C .xlvi. yere.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Arthur delyuered the realme vnto Conſtantyne the ſone of Cador his neuewe.
                        
                           
                           
                        
                        WHan kyng Arthur wyſt that he myght regne no lenger / he let come before hȳ Cōſtantyne that was Cadors ſone erle of Cornewayl his coſyn / and to hym betoke all his realme byddynge hym to be kynge therof tyll that he came agayne / for as moche as he had none heyre begoten of his body / and grete harme it was / that ſo noble a kyng and ſo doughty as he was had no childe of his body begotē. But all thȳge that god wyll haue done / muſt be done / whoſe name be blyſſed wtout ende. amē.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Conſtantyne ſlewe Mordreds two ſones that warred vpon hym.
                        THis Conſtantyne was a noble & a worthy knyght of body. And yt two ſones that Mordred had begoten had grete enuy vnto Conſtantyne that than was crowned kynge. And ſo it befell yt they begā to meue warre agaynſt hym / & aſſembled a grete hooſt of them that were before with Mordred / & had ben dryuen awaye / whiche dyd moche ſorowe through out all the londe. That one broder ordeyned hȳ to go to London for to take the cite / & that other went to wyncheſtre. But Conſtantyne came to London and ſlewe hym that was there And after he wēt to wynch eſtrē & ſleme hym that was there alſo. And ſo was he quyte of bothe his enemyes. Whan Cōſtantyne had regued well & worthely foure yere he dyed / & lyeth at London.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kynge Adclbryghe and of kynge Edell.
                        AFter kynge Conſtantynes deth there were two kynges in Brytayne / that one was called Adtlbryght that was a Dane / & he helde the coūtree of Norfolke and Suffolke. That other hyght Edell and was a bryton / and he helde Nicholl / Lyndeſey / & all the londe vnto Number. Theſe two kynges faſt warred togyder / but they were after accorded / & loued togyder as they had ben borne of one body. The kyng Edell had a ſyſter that was called Orewenne / and he gaue her through grete frendſhyp to kynge Adelbryght to wyfe. And kynge Adelbryght begate vpō her a doughter that was called Argentyl. And yt thyrde yere after came vpon hym a ſtraūge ſekenes that nedes he muſt dye. And he ſent to kynge Edell his broder in lawe that he ſholde come & ſpeke with hym / and he came to hym with a good wyll. Than prayed he the kyng and coniured hym alſo in the name of god / that after whan he were deed / he ſholde take his doughter Argentyll & the londe / & kepe and nouryſſhe her in his chambre. And whan ſhe were of age that he ſhold mary her to the ſtrongeſt & worthyeſt man that he myght fynde / and than he ſhold yelde vp her londe agayne. Kyng Edell graunted it / and by othe confermed his prayer. And whā Adelbright was deed & buryed / Edell toke yt damoyſell Argentyll / & nouryſſhen her in his chambre / & ſhe became as fayre as ony myght be.
                     
                     
                        
                        ¶ How kyng Edell maryed the damoyſell to a knaue of his kerhym.
                        THis kyng Edell that was vncle to Argent yit / bet hought how he might falſly haue ye londe frō his nece / & falſly agaynſt his othe to deceyue ye damoyſell / & to mary her to a knaue of his kechin yt was called Curan / & he became the worthyeſt & ſtrongeſt man of body yt ony man wyſt in ony londe lyuyng / & to him he thought ſhamefully to haue maryed her for to haue had her londe afterwarde / but he was deceyued. For this Curan was Haueloks ſone yt was king of kyrklane in Dēmarke / & this Curan tōquered his wyues londe afterward / & ſlewe king Edel yt was his wyues vncle & had all her lond / as in an other place it telleth more openly: & he regned but thre yere / for ſaxons & danes ſlewe hym / & yt was grete harme to all Brytayn / & the brytons bare hym to Stonehenge / and there buryed hym honourably.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of king Conan yt was Curans coſin.
                        AFter this Curan regned Conan his coſyn / a proude knyght / & he regned wtout loue / & euer was medlyng wt his people / & toke his vncle wt warre ſleynge his two children. The Saxons warred agaynſt hȳ oftentymes / but he ouercame them / & ſo he was in peas all his lyftyme / & he regned .xiiij. yere / & after he dyed & lyeth at London.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kyng Cortyf & Gurmond yt came through the paynyms in to Brytayne.
                        AFter this Conan regned his coſyn Cortyf / yt was behated of all his people / & this Cortyf loſt all britayn through warre / & in his tyme fel yt grete myſchefe in brytayn yt thryſtēdom was deſtroyed / & all ye brytons were wyuen out of ye londe / but afterward lefte 
                              〈◊〉
                            to the ſaxons / as afterward ye ſhal here For in that tyme there was a paynym that was called Gurmond ye kȳges ſone Daufrikes of ye paynyms folke / & ſhold haue ben kynge after his fader / but he gaue it to his broder / & ſayd he wold be no kynge tyll he had cōquered a realme in a ſtraūge coūtree. And of hym prophe cyed Merlyn / callynge him a wolfe of ye ſee. And he let aſſemble paynyms wtout nomrbe & ſhyppes. And goynge by ye ſee he conquered dyuers londes / takyng he mage of many. And he came in Irionde & conquered it / that oftētymes warred vpon brytons / & brytons vpon them / & ofte wonne & oft loſt / & gaue hoſtages to brytons. And ſo they ſente to Gurmond there as he was in Irlonde / yt he ſholde come & helpe them agaynſt yt brytons / & they wold gladly make hym theyr lord. For he was a paynim / & they were paynyms / and the brytons were chryſten. Whan Gurmond herde this / he haſted hym & arryued in ſcotlonde / & came in to Northumberlond where as the ſaxons were dwellyng / & they cōfermed yt couenaūtes bytwene them made by othes & hoſtages / for to bere hym true fayth / & holde hym forlorde / & paye to hȳ truage by yere. Than began yt ſaxons & the affricans to deſtroye / robbe & brenne to wnes / & deſtroyed all maner thynge / ſparyng neyther man / woman / ne chylde / lerned nelewde / but ſlewe all / & keſt downe townes / caſtels & chirches / & ſo put yt londe to grete deſtruceyon. And as ſoone as they myght flee they fledde thens as well poore as ryche / byſſhops & men of religyon / grete & ſmall / ſome in to lytell Britayn / & ſome in to Cornewayle / and all thoſe that myght haue ſhyppes.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Gurmonde droue kynge Cortif to chuheſtre / & ſlewe the britons and through ſubtylte gate the towne.
                        
                           
                           
                        
                        COrtyf the kyng fledde thens in to Chicheſtre that than was a good cite and a ſtronge / & there helde hym .xx. dayes. And this Gurmond came and be ſyeged it. But y• cite was ſo ſtronge y• he myght not gete it by no maner of wyſe / wherfore they thought by ſubtylte to brenne the towne / they made engynes with glewe of nettes / and toke peces of tunder & fyre & boūde it to ſparowes feet and afterwarde let them flee / and they anone ryght flewe in to the towne there as theyr neſtes were / in thackes and in euyſſynges of houſes / & the fyre began to kyndle & brent all the towne. Whan y• brytons ſawe that / they hyed them out & fought / but anone they were ſlayne & diſcomfyted / & whyle the batayle duted the kynge all in deſpayre pryuely went in to wales / ſo y• men wiſt not where he became. And ſo was the towne of Chicheſtre takē & deſtroyed. And after Gurmond went & deſtroyed townes & citees that neuer after were made again / as it is ſeen yet in this lōde in many places.
                     
                     
                        ¶How this londe was called Englōde for the name of Engiſt / and how many kynges were made after in this londe.
                        WHan Gurmond had deſtroyed all the londe through out / he gaue y• londe to the ſaxons / & anone they toke it with good wyll. For y• ſaxons longe tyme had deſyred it / for as moche as they were of Engiſtes kynrede / that firſt had all y• londe of Brytayn / & let them be called englyſhmen / for bycauſe of Engiſtes name. And y• londe they let call Englond in theyr language / & the folke ben called Englyſhmen / for as moche as in his tyme it was called Engiſt londe whan he had cōquered it of Vortiger. But fro the tyme y• Brute came fyrſt in to this londe it was called Britayn / & y• folke brytons But ſyth y• tyme y• Gurmond conquered this londe y• ſaxons named it Englonde as before is ſayd. And whan this was done / Gurmōd paſſed ouer in to fraūce & there cōquered many lōdes / & deſtroyed all chryſten people where as he came. And the ſaxons dwelled in this londe / & began faſt to enhabyte it at theyr owne wyll / & they wold haue made newe kyn ges & lordes / but they coude neuer aſſent to haue onely one kyng for to be to them attendaūt / & therfore they made many kynges in dyuers ſhyres / as it was in Engiſtes tyme. The fyrſt kyngdō was Kent / & that other Southſex / & y• thyrde weſtſex / the fourth Eſtſex / and the fyfth Northumberlōde / the ſyxth Eſtangle / y• is to ſaye Norfolk & Suffolk / & the .vij. Merchenrich / & that is ȳ erledom of Ni choll / Huntyngdon / Harford / Glo
                              •
                           eſtre / wyncheſtre / warwyk & Derby / & ſo departed all Englōd in to .vij. partes. And after that it befell y• tho kynges warred oftē tymes togyder. And euer he y• was ſtrongeſt toke hym y• was febleſt / & ſo it was longe tyme that they had no kyng

crowned amonge them / nor no chryſten man was than amonge them ne chriſtē dom neyther. But were paynyms tyll y• ſaynt Gregory was pope of Rome / that had ſeen children of y• nacion of Englōde in y• cite of Rome y• were wonders fayre creatures / & had grete wyll & deſyre to beholde them / & aſked of y• marchaūtes of whens they were & of what nacyon. And men tolde hym they were of Englonde / & englyſſhe they were called / but they & all y• people of englond were paynyms / & byleued not on god. Alas ſayd ſaynt Gregory / well may they be called englyſſhe / for they haue y• viſages of aū gels / and therfore well ought they to be chriſten. And for this cauſe ſaynt Grego ry ſent ſaynt Auſtin in to englonde / & .xl. good men wt hym that were of good lyfe & holy men to preche & teche / & to cōuerte the englyſſhe people / & turne thē to god / & y• was in the .vj. yere y• ſaynt Gregory had ben pope of Rome / y• is to ſaye / after the incarnacyon of our lord Ieſu Chryſt v .C .lxxxv. yere as y• cronycles telleth.
                     
                     
                        ¶How ſaynt Auſtyn baptyſed & cōuerted kyng Adelbryght / and the byſſhops that he made his felawes.
                        WHan ſaynt Auſtin came fyrſt in to englonde / he arryued in the yle of Tenet / & ſo paſſed forth & came to Caun terbury / and there ſoiourned. And kyng Adelbryght of Kent y• was of y• lignage of Engiſt goodly receyued ſaynt Auſtyn & his felawes wt moche honour / & foūde them all y• them neded. And more ouer he gaue them a fayre place / y• now is cal led the abbey of ſaynt Auſtin / in whiche place helyeth hymſelf ſhryned. ¶ This kynge Adelbryght was a good man / & with good wyll herd ſaynt Auſtyns pre dicacyons / and gaue hym leue to preche through out al his lōde of Kent to turne and cōuerte to hym all y• people that he myght. It befell ſo afterward through goddes grace / y• in a lytell tyme y• kynge hymſelfe was cōuerted to god / & all the people of his londe was baptyſed. And in y• meane whyle y• people turned them to god / ſaynt Auſtyn came to Rocheſtre & there preched the worde of god / & the paynyms ſcorned hym therfore / & caſt vpon hym reygh tayles / ſo that all his mantell was hanged full of thoſe reygn tayles / & for more deſpite they caſt on hȳ the guttes of reyghes and other fyſſhe. Wherfore y• good mā ſaynt Auſtin was ſore anoyed & greued / & prayed to god y• all thoſe children of y• cite that ſholde be borne afterward / y• is to ſaye / in the cite of Rocheſtre myght haue tayles / and ſo they had. Whan the kyng herde of this vengeaūce y• was fallen through ſaynt Auſtins prayer / he let make a hous in y• honour of almyghty god / wherin women ſhold be delyuered of theyr children at the brydges ende / in the which bous yet women of the cite ben delyuered of chylde. Whan ſaynt Gregory had herde tell how the englyſſhe people were turned to god & cōuerted / he ſent vnto ſaynt Auſtyn his pallyon by a byſſhop y• was called Paulyn / and made hym prymate and archebyſſhop of Englonde and ſent worde that he ſholde ordeyne and make byſſhoppes in the londe. And anone as ſaynt Auſtyn had the pallyon of the dignite of the archebyſſhop / he made two byſſhoppes of his felawes the whiche came with hym from Rome / of whome that one was called Mellyte / & he helde his dignite at London / and that other was called Iuſtyne / and he helde his dignite at Rocheſtre. And this byſſhop Mellyte than went to preche the worde of god in Eſſex / and there baptyſed the kynge of y• countree whiche was called Sicwith y• was kyng Adelbryghtes to

ſyn his ſyſters ſone. This Iuſtyn went to preche in Southſex / & turned moche of the people to god / & ſaynt Auſtin him ſelfe preched through out all Englonde.
                     
                     
                        ¶How ſaynt Auſtyn went in to wales where as the Brytons were / and how they wolde not be obedyent to the arche byſſhop of Caunterbury.
                        WHan all Englōde was baptyſed and turned to god / ſaynt Auſtin went in to y• londe where as the brytons were to kepe them frō englyſſh men / that is to ſaye in wales / & there he foūde monkes & abbeys / & .vij. biſſhops For the brytons deſtroyed alway y• chry ſten people y• ſaynt Auſtyn had cōuerted And he ſayd to the biſſhops that he was a legate of Rome / & prymate of all Englonde / & that they ſholde by all reaſon to hym be obedyent. And they ſayd y• they wolde not / but to y• archebyſſhop of Car lyon they wolde / they wold neuer for no maner thinge be obedyent to y• englyſſh men. For they ſayd / englyſſhmen be our aduerſaryes / and haue dryuen vs out of our coūtree / & we ben chryſten men and euer haue ben / & the englyſſhmen haue euer bē paynyms / ſaue now of late that they be cōuerted. Saynt Auſtyn might of them haue none other anſwere / but ſayd pertly that they wolde neuer meke them to hym ne to the pope of Rome. Wherfore ſaynt Auſtin returned agayn to king Adelbryght y• was king of Kent & tolde him y• his folke wold not be to no man obedyent / but to y• archebyſſhop of Carlyon. Whan the king herde this / he was ſore anoyed / & ſayd that he wolde deſtroye them / & ſent to Elfryde kyng of Northumberlonde y• was his frende / y• he ſhold come to hym wt all y• power that he myght / & he wold mete hym at Leyceſtre / and fro thens they wolde go in to wales / & there deſtroye y• archebyſſhop of Carlyon / and all thoſe that had refuſed ſaynt Auſtyn.
                     
                     
                        ¶How kyng Adelbryght & kyng Elfry de ſlewe Brecynall y• was a kyng of bry tons that helde y• coūtree of Leyceſtre.
                        IT befell ſo that there was a kyng of brytons that helde the coūtre of Leyceſtre / & all the countre aboute / his name was Brecynall. And this bryton herde tell y• thoſe two englyſſhe kynges wolde mete there at Leyceſtre for to go in to wales / he let ordeyne all the power that he had for to go fyght wt theſe two kȳges / but lytel it auayled hym / for his folke were all ſlayne / & hymſelf fledde / & loſt his londes for euermore. And theſe two kȳges Adelbryght & Elfryde dwel led a whyle at Leyceſtre / & departed the londe amonge them / and toke homage & feaute of the folke of y• coūtree. And af ter they went toward wales. And they of wales herde tell of y• diſcōfyture that Brecmal had at Leyceſtre / & were won ders ſore adrad of thoſe two kynges / & toke & choſe amōge them good men & ho ly / of heremytes / mōkes & preeſtes / & of other people grete plente / y• wente bare fote and wolwarde for to haue mercy of thoſe two kynges. But y• kynges were ſo ſterne & ſo wycked y• they wold neuer ſpeke wt them / but ſlewe them all. Alas for ſorowe / for they ne ſpared them no more than the wolfe doth the ſhepe / but ſmote of theyr hedes euerichone. And ſo they were all martyred y• to them came that is to vnderſtande .v .C. and .xl. And after they wente fro thens to Bangore for to ſlee all thoſe y• they myght fynde there of y• brytons. And whan y• britons herde that / they aſſembled & ordeyned all theyr power for to fyght with them. Than was there a baron of wales whi che was called Bledrik of Cornewayle

that ſomtyme was lorde of Deenſhyre / but king Adelbright had dryuen hȳ out in to wales / & after there he gaue them batayle / & at y• batayle was kyng Adelbryght ſlayne / & Elfryde ſore woūded / & forſoke y• felde / & the mooſt parte of his people ſlayne. And king Elfryd fled in to Northumberlond y• was his owne lōde And after the people of Leyceſtreſhyre made wt ſtrength Cadewan y• was Brecinals ſone kyng of Leyceſtre / & he after regned nobly / & with grete honour.
                     
                     
                        ¶How Cadewan kynge of Leyceſtre & Elfryde king of Northumberlond were frendes. And of the debate y• after was bytwene Edwyn and Cadwalyn that were bothe theyr ſones.
                        AFter that this bataile was done the britons aſſembled them and went thens & came to Leiceſtre / & made there Cadewan y• was Br
                              ••
                           ynals ſone kyng of Leyceſtre & of all y• coūtree. And he toke homage & feaute of all y• folke of the coūtree. And after that he aſſembled a grete hooſt / and ſayd he wolde go in to Northumberlonde to deſtroye kyng Elfryde & ſlec hym yf he myght. And whā he was comen thyder / frendes went ſo bytwene them that they accorded them in this maner. That Elfryde ſhold hold all y• londe from Humber vnto ſcotlonde and Cadewan ſholde haue all y• londe on this ſyde Humber to y• ſouth. And after that they were good frendes all theyr lyf / & loued togyder as they had ben bre therne. And this Elfryde had a ſone called Edwyn y• helde all y• 
                           
                              •
                           ond of North
                              •
                           
                           berlonde after his faders deth as his fa der had hold al his lyfe tyme. And Cade wan had another ſone called Cadwa
                              ••
                            that helde his faders londe as he 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            whā he was alyue / & theſe loued as bre therne / & the loue inſted bytwene them but onely two yere / & after began debate bytwene them thrugh an euyl enuyous coſyn of Cadwalyns called Bryens / ſo y• they aſſembled a grete hoſt on bothe par tyes. And at y• laſt it befell y• Cadwalyn was diſcōfyted / & Edwyn purſued him and droue hym frō place to place / ſo y• at the laſthe fled in to Irlōde. And Edwyn deſtroyed his londe / & caſt downe caſtels & brent his maners / & departed all Cad walyns londe among his frendes. And lōge tyme after came Cadwalyn agayn from Irlonde with a ſtronge power / & in playne batayle ſlewe Edwyn and all his frendes / & namely them that withhelde his londes by Edwyns gyfte.
                     
                     
                        ¶How kynge Oſwalde was ſlayne by kynge Cadwalyn & Peanda. And how Oſwy that was ſaynt Oſwaldes broder regned after hym / & ſlewe Peanda.
                        WHan Edwyn was ſlayne Offris his ſone vndertoke the warre agaynſt Cadwalin his vncle / ſo that this Offris dyed duryng y• warre. And after the deth of Offris regned a gentyl chryſten man that moche lōued god almygh ty / that had all y• londe of Northumberlonde by herytage y• was called O
                              ••
                           ald & he was kyng of all y• londe. But for as moche as he was frende to Edwin and helde a grete parte of y• londe of Cadwa lyn. This Cadwalyn warred vpon him and droue hym towarde ſcotlonde. And whan Cadwalyn ſawe that he wold not abyde / he wolde no longer purſue hym / but toke ſome of his folk to Peanda his broder in lawe / & prayed hym to purſue after Oſwald tyll that he were taken or ſlayne. And Cadwalyn returned home agayn. Whan Oſwald herd y• 
                           
                              •
                           ydȳges that Cadwalin turned home agayn / he wolde no longer flee / but abode Peanda & gaue hym batayle / & Peanda was diſ comfyted & fled & came agayn to Cadwa lyn / & ſayd y• wolde neuer holde a fote of

londe of hym / but yf ſo were y• he wolde auenge hym on Oſwald. Cadwalyn let aſſemble a grete hooſt for to fyght with Oſwald / ſo that he and Peanda came to Northumberlonde & gaue batayle vnto Oſwald / & in y• ſame batayle was Oſwald ſlayne & his heed ſmyttenof / & after he was buryed in y• abbey of Bardeney / in whiche place god hath wrought for hym many a fayre myracle / bothe there and els where. And anone Oſwy his broder ſeaſed all the londe in to his handes y• was this Oſwaldes. And the folke of Northūberlond loued hym won ders well / & helde hym for theyr lorde: But he had men of his kynne worthy ynough y• wolde haue departed y• londe & they warred lōge togyder. And for as moche as they were not ſtrōge ynough they came to Pcanda & prayed hym of helpe & ſocour / & pmyſed hym of y• londe largely vpon this couenaūt / y• he wolde gouerne them & helpe & coūſeyle. Peauda herde theyr prayer / & ſo ſpake wt king Cadwalyn / that he ſhold ordeyn a grete hooſt / & faſt ordeyn hym in to Northum berlonde for to fyght with Oſwy. And Oſwy was a mekeman & moche loued peas & charite / & prayed Peanda of loue & peas / & profred hym of golde & ſyluer grete plente. And this Peanda was ſo proude y• he wolde not graūte hym peas for no maner thynge / but for all thynge he wolde fyght with hym. So at y• laſt there was ſet a day of batayle / & Oſwy euer had truſt vpon god / & Peanda truſted to moche vpon his pryde and vpon his hooſt that he had / and togyder they ſmote egerly. But Peanda was anone diſcomfyted & flayne. And this was after the incarnacion of our ſauyour 
                              •
                           eſu Chryſt. vj .C. and .lv. yere. And this Oſwy regned .xxviij. yere / & a kynge that was called Oſwyne that was Peandaes coſyn warred vpon hym / and togyder they fought / but Oſwy had the victory of Oſwyne / & was diſcomfyted and ſlayne / and lyeth at Cynmouth.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Cadwaldre y• was Cadwalins ſone regned after his fader / and was the laſt kynge of Brytons.
                        AFter y• deth of Cadwalin regned his ſone Cadwaldre well & nobly / & his moder was y• ſiſter of Peanda And whā he had regned .xij. yere he fell in to a grete ſekenes / & than was there a grete diſcorde bytwene the lordes of y• londe / that eche warred vpō other. And yet in that tyme there fell ſo grete derth and ſcarcete of corne & other vytayles in this londe y• a man myght go .iij. or .iiij. dayes fro towne to towne that he ſholde not fynde to bye for golde ne ſyluer breed wyne / ne none other vytayle / wherwt a man myght lyue. But onely the people lyued by rotes of herbes / for other lyuynge had they none / ſo moche was it fayled all about / fyſſhes / wylde beeſtes & all other thynge / ſo y• yet to this myſauenture there fell ſo grete mortalyte & peſtilence amonge the people by the corrupcyon of y• deed bodyes. For they dyed ſo ſodeinly / both grete & ſmall lorde & ſeruaūt in etynge / goynge & ſpe kyng / they fell downe & dyed / ſo y• neuer was herde of more ſodeyn deth amonge the people. For he y• went for to bury the deed body / with y• ſame deed body was buryed. And ſo they y• myght flee fledde & forſoke theyr londes & houſes / as well for the grete hunger / derth / & ſcarcete of corne & other vytayle / as for y• grete mor talite & peſtylence in the londe / & went in to other londes for to ſaue theyrlyues / & lefte y• londe all deſerte & waſted / ſo that there was no man for to trauayle & tyll the loude / ſo that y• loude was 
                              •
                           a
                              •
                           ayne

of corne & all other fruytes for define of tillers / & this miſauēture duted .xj. yere & more / y• no man myght ere ne ſowe.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Cadwaldre went out of this londe in to lytell Brytayne.
                        CAdwaldre ſawe grete hunger / mortalite & peſtilence / & the londe all poore / & faylynge cornes & other vytayles / & his folke periſſhed / & ſawe alſo the mooſt party of his lond all waſted & voyde of people / he apparayled hȳ & his folke y• were lefte alyue / & paſſed ouer in to lytel Brytayn with a lytel nauy vnto kyng Aleyn y• he moche loued that was his coſyn / & that his fader had moche loued in his tyme. And as they ſayled in the ſee he made moche lamētacyon / & ſo dyd all thoſe that were with hym / and ſayd. Dediſti nos dite tan
                              
                                 
                              
                              quam
                            oues eſtarū et in gentibus diſperſiſti nos.
                        ¶ And than began Cadwaldre to complayne hym to his tolke pyteouſly / and ſayd. Alas ſayd he / to vs wretches and caytyues is ſorowe for our grete ſynnes of the whiche we wolde not amende vs whyle we had ſpace / & now repentaūce is comen vpon vs through myſauēture whiche chaceth vs out of our owne realme & propre ſoyle / out of the whiche ſomtyme Romayns / Scottes / Saxons nor Danes myght not exple vs. But what auayleth it now to vs that before tyme dyuers tymes haue goten many other londes / ſyth it is not y• wyll of god that we abyde & dwell in our owne lode God that is very iudge that all thinges knoweth before they be done or made / he ſeeth that we wolde not ceſe of our ſynnes / & that our enemyes myght not vs nor our lygnage exyle fro and out of our realme / he wolde that we amended vs of our folyes / and that we ſholde ſe our propre defautes / & therfore hath ſhewed to vs wrathe / & wyll chaſtyſe vs of our miſdedes / ſyth that he doth vs without batayle or ſtrengthe of our enemyes by grete cōpanyes wretchedly to leue our realme & propre londe. Turne agayn ye Romayns / turne agayne ye Scottes / turne agayne ye Saxons / turne agayn ye frenſſhmen / now ſheweth to you Britayn all deſerte / the whiche your power myght neuer make deſerte / ne yet your power hath not put vs now in exde / but onely the power of the kyng almyghty whome we haue oft offended by our folyes / the whiche we wolde not leue vntyll he chaſtiſed vs by his diuyne power Amonge the wordes & lament acyons y• kyng Calwaldre made to his folke they arryued in lytel Gritayn & came to king Aleyn. And y• kyng receyued hym with grete ioye / & made him to be ſerued won ders nobly / and there he dwelled longe tyme after. The englyſſhe people that were lefte alyue & were eſcaped y• grete hunger & mortalite lyued in y• beſt wyfe that they might: & moche people ſprang and came of them. And they ſente in to ſaxonie where they were borne to theyr frendes for men / women / and chyldren to reſtore the citees with people and the townes that were all boyde of people / & for to labour / trauayle and tyll the e
                              •
                           th. Whan the Saxons had herde theſe tydynges / they came in to this londe won ders thycke in grete cōpanyes / & lodged themſelfe in the coūtree all about where that they wolde / for they foūde no man to with ſtande them ne lette. And ſo they wexed & multyplyed gretly / & vſed the cuſtomes of y• coūtre wherof they were comen / and the lawes & the language of theyr owne londe. And they chaunged y• names of citees / townes / caſtelles / and boutghes / and gaue them names / and called them as they now be called. And they helde the coūtets / the batonages / 

and the lordſhyppes & countrees in maner as y• Brytons before ryme had compaſſed them. And amonge other grete companyes that came from Germayn in to this londe came y• noble quene that was called Sexburga with men & women without nombre / & arryued in the coūtree of Northumberlonde / & toke the lond from Albion vnto Cornewayle / for her & for her folke. For there was none that myght them let / for all was deſolate & voyde of people / but it were a fewe poore Brytons that were lefte on moū
                           taynes & wodes vutyll that tyme. And fro that tyme forth loſt the Britons this realme for all theyr dayes / and the Englyſſhe people began to regne / & departed the londe bytwene them / and they made many kynges aboute by dyuers partes of the londe as here ben deuyſed. The fyrſt of Weſtſex / the ſeconde Merchenrych / the thyrde Eſtangle / the fourthe kent / & the fyfthe Southſex. All thoſe regned in this londe after that Cadwaldre was paſſed out of this londe & dwelled in lytell Brytayn with kynge Aleyn his coſyn and true frende. And whan he had longe dwelled there / and had knowlege that the mortalite & peſtylence was ouerpaſſed / & that the londe was replenyſſhed with alyen people / he thought to come agayn in to this londe / & prayed kynge Aleyn his coſyn of ſocour & helpe that he myght be reſtored agayn to his owne propre realme & fyrſt dignite. And kynge Aleyn graūted hym his aſkyng. Than dyd he apparayle hym to take his waye & vyage in to this londe. And prayed god almyghty deuoutly that he wolde make to hym demonſtracyon / yf his prayer in to this londe were to hym pleaſaūt or not. For agaynſt the wyll of god almyghty he wolde no thynge do. Whan he had thus deuoutly made his prayer / a voyce from heuen ſayd to hym and badde hym leue that iourney away in to Englonde / and that he ſholde go to the pope of Rome / for it was not y• wyll of almyghty god that y• Brycons ſholde regne ony more in Brytayne / nor neuer recouer the lond vnto the tyme that the pphecy that Merlyn ſayd before be fulfylled. And that ſhold neuer be vnto the tyme were comen that y• relykes of his body ſhall be brought fro Rome & tranſlated in to Brytayne. And whan the relikes of other ſayntes y• haue ben hydde for the perſecucyon of the paynym folke ſhall be foūde and openly ſhewed / than ſhall they recouer theyr lōde agayn / the whiche they haue ſoo longe tyme loſte through theyr deſeruynge. Whan Cadwaldre had herde this anſwere / he mer uayled gretly / & tolde it to kyng Aleyn. Thankynge Aleyn ſent for the clergye of his londe / and made them to brynge the ſtoryes & prophecyes that Merliu & Sybyll had ſayd in theyr prophecyes. And whan he knewe that the prophecy that Feſtom had prophecied of the Egle and other prophecyes accorded to the diuyne anſwere y• Cadwaldre had herdehe coūſeyled hym & ryght faythfully deſyred hym to leue his people & his nauy and ſubmytte hym to the diſpoſicyon of god / & do all that the aūgell had cōmaū
                           ded hym. Than Cadwaldre called ynor his ſone and yuory his coſyn that was his ſyſters ſone / & ſayd to them. Take ſayd he my folke & my nauy that is here all redy / and paſſe in to wales / and be ye lordes of Brytons y• no dyſhonour come to them by interrupeyon of y• paynyms folke for defaute of lordes. And than he hymſelfe lefte his realme of Brytayne & his folke for euermore / & toke his waye vnto the pope of Rome Sergius / the whiche worſhypped hym moche / and ſo he was confeſſed / & toke penaunce for his ſynnes. And he had not longe dwelled

there that he ne dyed the .xij. kalend of Maye / the yere of grace. b .C .lxxix.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Oſfa was ſouerayne aboue all the kynges of Englonde / & how euery kyng warred vpon other.
                        IT befell ſo that all the kynges in that tyme that were in the londe / as they of Weſtſex / Merchenrych / Eſtangle / of Kent / and of Southſex / and of other coſtes eche warred vpon other / & he y• was mooſt myghty toke the londe of hym y• was mooſt febleſt. But there was a kynge amonge them that was called Offa / that was ſaynt Oſwaldes broder. This Offa conquered all y• kynges of the lond / and regned aboue them all. And ſo grete was the warre in euery coūtre bytwene kynges that no man myght wyte how the londe went. But abbottes / pryours / and men of religyon wrote the lyues & dedes of kinges / how longe euery of them regned / & in what countree / & in what maner euery kyng dyed / and of byſſhops alſo. And therof made grete bokes / and let call them cro nycles. And the good kynge Alured had that boke in his warde. And let brynge it vnto Wyncheſtre / and let it be faſt tached to a pyller that men ſholde it not remeue ne bere thens / ſo that euery man myght ſe it & thervpon loke. For therin ben conteyned the lyues of all y• kynges that euer were in Englonde.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How the kyng of Northumberlonde Oſbryght forlaye the wyfe of Buerne Bocard through ſtrength / & afterward this Buerne conquered the kynge with power and ſtrengthe.
                        ANd thus it befell in y• ſame tyme that there was a kȳg in Northū berlonde that was called Oſbryght / & ſoiourned at Yorke / & this kynge wente vpon a daye in to a wode for to dyſporte hȳ. And whan he came agayn / he went pryuely in to a good mannes hous that was called Bucrne / & the good man of that place was gone that tyme to y• ſee. For oftentymes he went there to eſpye theues & robbers that oftētymes were wont to come in to the londe to robbe / brenne / & ſlee. The lady that was Buer nes wyfe was a wonders fayre womā And the kyng came vnto her whan her huſbonde was abſent. Ad ſo ſhe truſted none harme vnto the kynge / and welcomed hym with moche honour / & worthely ſerued hym of all thynges. Whan the kynge had eten / he coke the lady by the hande and ladde her in to a chambre and ſayd that he wolde ſpeke with her in coūſeyle. And made all y• folke vor de out of the chambre / ſaue onely the lady and he. But the lady wyſt not wherfore he dyd it / tyll y• he had done all his wyll. And whan he had done this dede / he returned agayne to Yorke / & lefte the lady there ſore wepyng for the dede that the kynge had done to her. And whan hee lord was comen home & ſawe her wepe & make ſuche ſorowe & mournynge / he aſked of her what ſhe had done / & why ſhe made ſuche ſorowe. Syr ſhe ſayd / ſubtylly and falſly the kynge Oſbryght hath done me ſhame & vylany agaynſt my wyll / & tolde hym the trouth how y• kynge had forlayne her with ſtrength / wherfore ſhe ſayd ſhe had leuer be deed than lyue. Fayre loue be ſtyll ſayd he / for agaynſt ſtrengthe feblenes is lytell worth / & therfore of me ſhalt thou neuer the leſſe be loued / and namely for thou haſt tolde me y• trouth. And yfalmyghty god graūte me my lyfe / I ſhall well auenge the. This Buerne was a grete man & a myghty lorde / & was well belo ued / & had grete frendes / & let ſende for

the greteſt lordes of the londe / & to them made his complaynt of ye deſpyte that ye kynge had done to hȳ / & ſayd y• he wolde be auenged how ſo euer it were. And all his frendes coūſeyled hym yt he ſhold go to yorke where as the kyng was to defye hym. And Buerne 
                              •
                           eke his meyny & came to the kyng. And whan the kyng ſawe hym / he called hȳ curteyſly by his name. And Buerne anſwered hym / & to hym ſayd. Syr I you defye / & yelde vp feautees / homages & londes / & as mothe as I haue holden of you / and from this tyme forwarde I wyll neuer of the no thynge holde. And ſo he departed fro the kynge without more ſpeche or ony abydynge / and toke leue of his frendes and went in to Denmarke / & complayned to the kynge Godryne / & tolde hym of the deſpyte that kyng Oſbryght had done to hym of his wyfe / & prayed hym of ſocour and helpe for to auenge hym. Whan kynge Godryne of Denmarke & the Danes had herde the complaynt of this Buerne / and of the prayer that he bad / they were wonders glad in theyr hertes / for as moche as they might fynde a cauſe for to go in to Englonde for to warre vpon Englyſſhmen / and alſo for to auenge Buerne of the deſpyte that yt kynge Oſbryght had done to his wyfe. And for as moche as Buerne was ſibbe vnto the kynge of Denmarke / they let ordeyne anone a grete hooſt of men / and let ordeyne ſhyppes for them / & as moche as them neded to haue to that viage And whan all the hooſt was redy / the kyng made his two bretherne chefe capytaynes / that were noble knyghtes of body and alſo bolde / that one was called Hungar / and that other Hubba.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How the Danes toke yorke / and ſlewe kyng Oſbryght / and ſoone after ſlewe kynge Elle.
                        ANd whan all thynge was redy the two brethern toke leue of the kynge Godryne / & went to warde the ſee for to paſſe ouer into Englōde as faſt as they myght ſpede. Now is Buerne ſo well cōforted / & ſo faſt hyed hym with y• Danes / that they be arryued in y• north coūtree / & came through out Holdernes and deſtroyed all the coutre
                              •
                            / and brent townes / & robbed folke / & ſlewe all that myght be taken tyll that they came vnto yorke. And whan kynge Oſbryght ſawe them come / he toke all his people that he had with hym & came out of the cyte & faught wt them / but no foyſon he ne had agaynſt them / & moche of y• people there were ſlayne on bothe partyes / & kynge Oſbryght hymſelfe there was ſlayne / & the cite anone was taken & the Danes went in. ¶ And there was alſo an other king in Northumberlond that Buernes frendes had choſen / and helde hym for kyng / a man y• was called Elle for as moche as they wolde not to kyng Oſbryght be attendaūt / for the deſpyte that he had done to Buerne theyr coſyn. It bef
                              〈…〉
                            thus y• kyng Elle was gone to the wode for to dyſporte 
                              •
                           ym / & of venyſou ſome he had taken. And as he ſate in the wode at meet he ſayd to a knyght. We haue well ſped & moche venyſon taken. And with y• worde came in a man & ſayd to hym. yf ye ſo moche of venyſon haue wonne / an hondred tymes more ye haue loſt / for all this coūtree the Danes haue goten / & taken y• cite of yorke / & agaynſt you ſhall it hold / y• neuer ye ſhall come therin / and for ſo moche they haue ſlayne kyng Oſ
                              •
                           right. Whan king Elle herde theſe wordes / he let aſſemble all y• folke of the countree / & ordeyned all the power that he myght haue / and wolde haue goten the cite of yorke wt ſtrength. But the Danes came out anone & gane hym a ſtronge batayle / and ſlewe kyng

Elle and the mooſt parte of the people that he had brought with him. And the ſame place there they were ſlayne ſhall euermore be called Elle crofte / and that place is a lytell from yorke. And than y• Danes neuer reſted tyll they had conquered all Northumbetlonde / & in that countree they made wardryns / & went ferther in to y• lande & toke Notyngham & there they abode all y• wyuter / doynge all the ſorowe that they myght. And after whan ſomet tyme came / they reineued from Notyngham / and came to Nicholl and Lyndefey / & to Holand. For no man myght them withſtand / ſo moche power and ſttength they had.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How ſaynt Edmund the kynge was martyred.
                        ANd ſo ferre had the Danes paſſed from coūtree to coūtree / and euermore brennynge & robbynge / & deſtroyed all y• they myght tyll they came to Tetford / & in that coūtree they foūde a chryſten kyng that moche loued god & his werkes / that was called Edmund / & he was kyng of Northfolke & South folke. This kyng ſaynt Edmund ordeyned as moche folke as he myght / and fought wt the Danes / but he & his folke were diſcomfyted / & the kyng hymſelfe was dryuen vnto the caſtell of Framelyngham / & the Danes purſued hym & tame vnto the ſame caſtell. And whan kyng Edmund ſawe y• the caſtel myght not withſtande them / he came agaynſt them / with whome y• Danes fyrſt ſpake / and anone they aſked of hym where king Edmund was. Now forſothe ſaid he / whan I was in y• caſtell there was the kyng / and whan I went out of the caſtell / he went out alſo / & whether he ſhall eſcape or dye / at goddes wyll muſt it be. Whan ſaynt Edmund had named god / by that they wyſt well that it was hymſelfe. And anone Hubba & Hungat toke hym and ſayd that he ſhold forſake god and all chryſten lawes / as many other had done before hym. And ſaynt Edmund ſayd that he wolde not / but ta ther he wold ſuffre deth for goddes loue & his lawes alſo. Than toke they kyng Edmund & boūde hym to a tree / & made theyr archers ſhote at hym wt arowes tyll y• his body ſtycked as full of arowes as an vrchen full of pryckes. But for all the payne that they dyd hym / he wolde neuer forſake god. And in the ſame turment and payne he dyed / and betoke his ſoule to almyghty god. And whan they ſawe that he was deed / they ſmote of his heed. And in this maner as ye haue herde was ſaynt Edmund martyred.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How▪ Hubba and Hungar toke the towane of Redynge.
                        WHan ſaynt Edmund was marry red / Hungar & Hubba departed thens with all theyr Danes to Redyng And as they wente thyder warde they deſtroyed & brent to w
                              ••
                           es and cyters & ſlewe all chryſten people that wolde not forſake god / and keſt downe chirches & came to Redynge and toke the cownr & there helde them tyll that kyng Ed
                              •
                           lf of Weſtſex came thider with at his power for to take y• to wne. Than came out the Danes to gyue batayle to kyng Edrif / and at that batayle was ſlayne an 
                              ••
                           le of the Danes that was called Eidrak. Vpon the morowe came kynge Eldred and his broder Alured with a ſtronge power and a grete hooſt. And the Kyng Edelf came agayne (that had fo
                              〈…〉
                            the daye before) to that batayle. And the Danes than came out for to fyght with them / & y• batayle was wonders ſt
                              ••
                           ge For many a man was there ſlayne / and

the Danes that daye had the victory / & the kynge Eldred & his broder Alured y• daye were diſcomfyted. But the fourth daye after y• Danes & the Englyſhmen fought togyder an other tyme vpō Ekel dene / & there was ſlayne a kyng of Deu marke that was called Ra
                              •
                           ing / & foure erles of grete power. And that daye the Danes had ſhame / for they were driuen to Engilfelde. And the .xv. day after the Danes & the Englyſhmen fought togyder at Rafyng / & there were y• Englyſh men dyſcōfyted. And frō thens a Dane that was called Roynt went to Redyng with his hooſt / & deſtroyed all that he myght take. And kynge Eldred fought with hym / but he was ſo woūded that he dyed. And he regned but .v. yere / and lyeth at Womburne.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Circa annū dn̄i. iiij .C .xlix.
                        LEo the firſt was emperour after Marcianus .xvij. yere. In his tyme were y• Rogacyon dayes ordeyned afore y• aſcencyon of ſaynt Mamert byſſhop of Vienne. The pope of Rome at y• tyme hyght Leo a noble clerke / & with hym had many clerkes. ¶ Hilariꝰ was pope after Leo .vij. yere. This man ordeyned y• no byſſhop ſholde ordeyne his ſucceſſory. Vt 
                              pꝪ
                              patet
                            .viij. 
                              •
                           x. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . ¶ Simpliciꝰ was pope after hym. He ordeyned that no clerke ſhold take no garment to be clo thed in / after the ſecte or maner of a lay man / through the reaſon of his office or of his benefyce. ¶ zeno was emperour after Leo .xv. yere / & this man was an heretyke & cruell agaynſt chryſten men. And in this mannes dayes y• bodyes of ſaynt Mathew y• euāgeliſt / & ſaynt Bar nabe y• apoſtle were foūde / & with them the goſpell that ſaynt Mathewe wrote. Aboute this tyme there was a certayn comyn woman bart .vij. children at one byrth / of y• whiche one was after made kyng of Lombardy. ¶ Felix the thyrde was pope after Simplicius thre yere & viij. monethes. This mā ordeyned y• reſpyte ſhold be gyuen to a man that was accuſed / that he myght auyſe hym how he ſholde auſwere. And y• the iudges & y• accuſers ſholde be ſuche / & y• they ſholde take all ſuſpeccion & ſpotte. ¶ Gelaſius a Romayn was pope after Felix .v. yere This mā ordeyned y• canon of y• maſſe wt the preface / ympnes / tractes / oreyſons as ſaȳt Ambroſe made them / & y• ordres ſholde be gyuen foure tymes in the yere ¶ Anaſtaſius was emperour after zeno xxvij. yere / & he was a curfed man & an heretyke / & hatefull to god & man / & he was ſlayne wt lyghtnynge. And in his tyme dyed ſaynt Patryk y• fyrſt byſſhop of Irlond / in the .C. and .xxij. yere of his age / & his felawe was the abbot of Columba & ſaynt Brigida / whome ſaynt Patryk made a nonne / & they were butyed in one tombe / & at dyuers tymes / And this is theyr Epytaphe. Hij tres in gelido / tumulo tumulant in vno / Brigida / Patricius / at
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            Columba pius. ¶ Anaſtaſius a Romayn was pope after Gelaſius two yere & thre monethes. He ordeyned that no preeſt for wrath ne hate ſholde leue of to ſaye his diuyne ſer uyce in the chirche / excepte the maſſe / & he curſed the emperour Anaſtaſius / for he was an heretyke. And it is writen of him / that afterward he turned for drede to the opynyon of the emperour. And he is called the ſeconde yll famed pope that is in Catholico pōtificū. And afore hym was Liberius famed in hereſy.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno domini. iiij .C .ixxxxiiij.
                        SImachꝰ was pope after hȳ .xv. yere / & with hȳ was ordeyned an other pope y• was called Laurencius / & bytwene them was a grete diſcēcyon / & they bothe put them to y• Iudgement of

Theoboria y• kyng. And he iudged that he that was firſt ordeyned / & that mooſt men of the chirche helde with / ſholde be pope. And Simachus preuayles / the whiche loued the clergy & poore men / & for Paſcalius the deken cardynall helde agaynſt Simachus wt the parte of Lau rence to his deth / therfore he was put to the paines of purgatory to kepe y• baths after his deth / as Gregory ſayth in his boke of Dialogues. This mā ordeyned that Gſ
                              •
                           a mexcelſis ſholde be ſayd euery ſondaye and feeſtes of martyrs.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Nota That Englonde was longe tyme chryſten Fraunce.
                        CLodouius the fyrſt chryſtē kyng of Fraūce was this tyme baptyſed of ſaynt Remigio / & he had a chriſten woman to his wyfe / & ſhe meued hym many tymes to y• fayth / & ſayd he ſhold be fortunable yf he wolde turne / & ſo he was / & neuer afore. ¶ Hornuſoa was pope after Simachꝰ .ix. yere. This mā was of grete mercy & grete almes vnto pooremen / & he gaue many ornamētes to chirches. And he reconſyled y• grekes y• were curſed for theyr hereſy. ¶ Iuſtinus was emperour after Anaſtaſiꝰ .ix. yere / & was a very chryſtē man. And all that euer the emperour Anaſtaſius had done agaynſt the chirche / he reuoked / & obeyed the pope Hornuſoa / and calle
                              •
                            agayne the byſſhops that were exiled by his predeceſſours. ¶ Priſcianꝰ grāmatieus was this tyme. And this yere the whiche is the .lxxi. fro the comynge of y• ſaxons / began y• kingdom of weſtſaxon and Cerdico was kynge. ¶ Iohannes was pope after Hornuſoa thre yere and ix. monethes. And Theodoricus y• kyng of ytaly an heretyke toke the pope with other ſenatours / & ſent them to the emperour Iuſtinyan / determynynge that and he wolde not let the heretykes be in peas / he ſholde 
                              〈◊〉
                            all the chryſten folke in ytaly. And after he 
                              •
                           oke pope Iohn & Simachū / Patriciſi / and Boicium the ſenatours / & ſlewe them in pryſon. But Bois defended hym by the reaſon of the aurtorite of y• ſenatours / & he ſent hym to the cite of Papy for perpetuall exyle / where he made the boke De 
                              •
                           ſolatione philoſophie. And at the laſt in the coūtre of Mediolanenſis he cauſed Bois throte to becutte / and ſo he dyed. ¶ Felix pope ſucceded Iohn .iiij. yere. This man cō
                           maūded that ſeke men ſholde be an
                              •
                           led afore theyr deth / but Chryſt ordeyned it fyrſt. ¶ Iuſtinianus was Emperour xxxviij. yere. This man drewe the lawe of the Romayns / or of Ciuyll / out of almooſt .ij. M. bokes / and .ccc. M. verſes ouer longe & yll accordynge in to one volum of .xij. bokes / & called it Iuſtinyan. He made alſo the digeſtes / and deuyded them in to thre bokes. ¶ Bonifacius the ſeconde was pope after Felix two yere. And lytell of hȳ is wryten. ¶ Iohānes the ſeconde was pope after Bonifacius And this mā had a grete ſtryfe wt Iuſtinian y• emperour / wheder y• Chryſt was of two natures or one. The pope ſayd he had two natures / one of god / an other of man. The emperour ſayd / eyther cōſent to vs / or y• ſhalte go to perpetuall exyle. The pope anſwered. I deſyred to come to Iuſtinyan the mooſt chryſten emperour / but as me ſemeth I haue founde Diocleſyan y• purſewer of chryſten men but certaynly I drede not thy malyce / ne I 
                              •
                           ere not thy thretenynges. Than the empetour meked hȳſelfe & fell downe to the groūde / & aſked mercy & abſolucion.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno d
                              •
                           i .v .C. xxxiiij.
                        AGapitus a confeſſ
                              •
                           ur was pope after Iohn two yere. This Agapitus turned Iuſtinyan ſully from the

errour of the Euticetes. This man ordeyned that proceſſyons ſholde be done on ſondayes / & than he dyed at Conſtan tynople. ¶ Siluerius a martyr was pope after this man thre yere. He was exiled fro chryſten fayth / & ſlayne by the proctour of Theodory / for he wolde not reſtore the byſſhop of Athenes an heretyke to his benefyce agayn. ¶ Virgiliꝰ was pope after hym .xvij. yere. And he entred yll in to his benefyce / but he gouerned hym well / & he ſuffred his perſe cucyon pacyently / and he was exiled fro Rome. And at y• laſt after grete paſſions of Theodora in Conſtantynople dyed. ¶ Sinodus quarta Cōſtātinopolitana contra Theodorū et oēs hereticos alios fuit iſto tēpore. Iſta ſinodꝰ dampnauit hereſim Theodori. qui dixit aliū eſſe deū verū. et aliū Chriſtū. Et 
                              
                                 
                              
                              quam
                            beata virgo non ſit dei genitrix. ſed hominis tantū. ¶ Pelagius was pope after Virgilius foure yere and .x. monethes. This man ordeyned that heretykes / ſcyſmatykes & renegates ſholde be punyſſhed by the ſeculer power. ¶ Iohannes the thyrde was pope after this man .xiij. yere. Of this man lytel is wrytē / but that he reſtored y• chircheyerde of y• apoſtles Philip & Iacob. ¶ Iuſtinus the ſeconde after Iuſtinian was Emperour .xj. yere. This man deſpyſed poore men / he robbed the ſenatours / he was gyuen to all couetouſnes / ſo that he made cheſtes of yren for to kepe his money in. Than anone he fell in to hereſye / & wexed out of his mynde. And than was choſen Tyberius a good man for to gouerne the co myn people. ¶ Tyberius y• ſecond was emperour after Iuſtinꝰ .vij. yere. This man was a vertuous man. He gaue innumerable good to poore men / in ſo moche that his wyfe often chydde wt hym / & ſayd that he keſt awaye the goodes of the empyre as ſtones. And he anſwered agayne & ſayd. I truſt in god that our cheſtes ſhall neuer lacke of money / & we put treaſure in to heuen. And vpon a certayn daye whan he went by his palays at Conſtantynople / he ſawe in the marble pauemēt a croſſe grauen / & thought it ſholde not be troden vpon / & comaunded to take it vp. For the croſſe ought to be put in the hertes of faythfull men / & there he founde ineſtymable treaſour of golde. This man ſubdued Harſas / and dyed bliſſedly. ¶ Benedictus was pope after Iohn .iiij. yere. This man ſuffred grete perſecucyon of hunger / peſtylence and enemyes. This man brought many a thouſande quarters of where from Egypte / whan Rome was beſyeged by kyng Albanak / & almooſt loſt for vitayle wherfore they wrote on his graue this epytaphe. Magnatuis monumēta pater Benedicte reliqis: virtutū titulus et de
                              •
                           us at
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            dolor. ¶ Pelagius was pope after Benedictus .v. yere. In his tyme Rome was beſyeged by y• loinbardes / & lytel he dyd in his dayes. ¶ Mauricius was emperour after Tyberiꝰ .xxj. yere. This was a very chryſten man / & ſubdued Perſas & Armenias / & in y• latter ende of his dayes he dyſcorded wt ſaynt Gregory / & entended to haue ſlayne hȳ. And than there appered a man in Rome clothed in a religyous habyte holdyng a naked ſwerde in his hande / & cryed about y• cite in this wyſe. The emperour ſhall be deſtroyed / the whiche the emperour herde / & he correcked hȳſelfe of his treſpace / & prayed to god to withdrawe his ſentence from hym. To whome our lorde appered in his ſlepe & ſayd. Wylte thou that I ſpare the now / or in tyme to come. And he was alouer of wretches & ſayd. Gyue me here my reward. Thā he was emperour after many a daye. And whā he ſhold haue correcked his knighttes for theyr extorcyon y• they dyd / they

aſked hym why that he wolde not paye them theyr wages. And ſo they fell at varyaunce / & choſe Foca for to be emperour / & ſlewe hȳ & his .iij. ſones. ¶ This tyme ſaynt Auſtin came in to Englonde and ordeyned two archebyſſhops / that is to ſaye / of London / & of yorke / by the cōmaūdemēt of ſaynt Gregory. And remēbre y• many tymes is made mencyon of dyuers regyons & coūtrees / that oftē tymes they haue ben turned to y• fayth. For alwaye the fayth abode not in them for dyuers cauſes. So it is of Englonde Fraūce / Perſia / Iewry / & in this thȳge Rome was preuileged / for there y• fayth of Peter neuer fayled. ¶ Focas was emperour after Maurici his maiſter / whome he & other ſlewe / & bycauſe he began yll / he ended nought. For in his dayes y• Romayns fought ſtrongly agaynſt the Perſes / & the Romayns were diſcomfy ted & loſt many a prouynce / & at the laſt he was ſlayne of Heraclius. For as he dyd to other men / ſo was he done to.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno domini .v .C. lxxxiiij.
                        GRegory the firſt a Romayn and a mōke was pope after Pelagius xiij. yere. This man was called Gregorius magnus for many thȳges that he exceded in. he paſſed other men in power in ryches / in vertue / in noblenes / in wyſdom / in holynes / in fame & in experience And vnder this man the yll thynges of curſednes paſſed & ſeced / & many a noble boke he wrote to y• incomparable ꝓfyte of all holy chirche. He was one of y• pryncypal doctours of all the .iiij. doctours of the chirche. This man forſothe alone wt ſayiit Fabian after ſaȳt Peter was choſen of god in all the ordres of y• popes of Rome / many thynges he ordeyned in y• chirche / as is ſhewed in his regyſtre. Deus in abiutoriū. for to be afore y• begynnynge of y• houres he cōmaunded to be ſayd. He renewed & made all the offyces of the chirche in a fayrer & a more cō pendyous maner / the whiche abydeth yet vnto this daye / & it is called Gregorianū. And ſhortly to cōclude on this holy man / mannes tongue can not expreſſe lyghtly the louynges of this mā / what in wrytynges & alſo in examples of vertuous dedes. ¶ Saumianꝰ was pope after Gregory one yere & .v. monethes. This man ordeyned y• ringyng of belles at the houres of the daye. But this man backbyted ſaynt Gregory for his liberalite that he had to poore men / & thought he ſawe ſaȳt Gregory rebuke hȳ thryſe for it / & the fourth tyme he lay in his bed & thought ſaynt Gregory ſmote him on the heed / and he waked & dyed anone. This was the thyrde pope amonge all y• popes y• whiche is noted to dye a dredefull deth. ¶ Bonifacius y• thyrde was pope after Sauimanus .viij. monethes He ordeyned y• none but whyte clothes ſholde be put on y• awter. ¶ Bonifacius the fourth was pope .iiij. yere and .viij. monethes. This man purchaſed of the emperour Foca that the chirche of ſaynt Peter of Rome ſhold be y• heed of all the chirches in y• worlde. For afore Cōſtantinople was y• heed chirche. Alſo he ga
                              •
                           e lycence y• the chirche called Panton the whiche was dedycate to the honour of Neptunus & other fals goddes / where chryſten men many tymes were ſlayne of deuyls / myght be dedycate to y• worſhyp of all ſayntes in heuen. This man ordeyned y• monkes myght vſe y• offyce of prechynge / chryſtenynge & cōfeſſyon. ¶ Heraclius was emperour after Foca xiij. yere. And in the thyrde yere of his regne / Co
                              ••
                           ras y• kyng of Perſes brent Ieruſalem and other worſhypfull places. 
                              •
                           achary the patriarke with moche other people he toke & put in captyuice. The parte of the holy croſſe the whiche

Cleyn lefte there he toke with hym in to his coūtre. But the .xij. yere of Herachꝰ Coſoras was ſlayne of Heraclius / & the croſſe was brought agayn / & the people were delyuered. And whan Heraclius wold haue entred y• cite proudly / the gates of y• cite by y• power of god ſhette by themſelfe / & the emperour meked hȳ to god aboue / & the gates opened. And thā was the feeſt of y• exaltacyon of y• croſſe made. ¶ Deꝰ dedit was pope after Boniface thre yere. This was an holy man For on a certayn daye whan he kyſſed a lepre / anone the lepre was hole. ¶ This tyme a citezin of London through y• mocyon of Ethelbryght buylded a chirche of ſaynt Peter in the weſt parte of London / in a place y• was called Thorney.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Circa annū dn̄i. vj .C .xliiij.
                        BOnifacius the fyfthe was pope after Deus dedit fyue yere / the whiche ordeyned that no man ſholde be taken out of the chircheyerde. And lytel elles of hym is wryten.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Nota Machomitum.
                        MAchomyte the duke of ſaraſyns and turkes was this tyme. And he was the deceyuer of all the worlde / a falſe prophete / the meſſenger of the deuyll / the foregoer of Antechryſt / the fulfyller of hereſy / and of all falſe men the meruayleſt / of whome the dominacyon thus began. ¶ There was a certayne famous clerke at Rome and coude not ſpede in his maters that he deſyred to haue ſpedde in / than he receded frō Rome ouer the ſee / and procured many a man to go with hym / amonge whome was this fals Machomyte a grete man of wytte. And this clerke ꝓmyſed hym to make hym duke of his coūtree / yf he wolde be guyded after hym. There he nouryſſhed a doue / & put all y• corne that the doue ete in to Machomytes ere / & ſo this doue had neuer no meet but in his ere. The foreſayd clerke on a daye called the people & meued them to choſe ſuche a prynce as the holy ghoſt wolde ſhewe to them in fourme of a doue. And anone this clerke ſecretly let this doue flee / the whiche after his olde cuſtome came to Machomyte / & put his byll in his eere. And whan the people ſawe this / anone he was choſen duke of that people. And whan he was made duke of this people of Coroſame / he ſayd y• he was the very prophete of god. Thā he made a boke of his lawe y• was called Alcaron. But he dyd it by the informacyon of thre of his mayſters / to whom y• deuyll myniſtred the auctorite & the connynge. The fyrſt mayſter was a iewe a grete aſtronomer & a nygromancer / the ſecond was Iohn de Antiochia / the thyrde was Sergius an heretyke. And theſe thre made an vn gracyous lawe & an vnhappy / & what ſomeuer was hard of byleue & tedyous to do / they lefte y• out of the lawe / & they put that thinge in theyr lawe y• worldly men were prone & redy to do / that is to ſaye / glotony / lechery / rapyne / & ſuche other. And alſo this Machomyte ordeyned y• a man ſhold haue as many wiues as he myght occupy & fynde / and refuſe them twyſe or thryſe or .iiij. tymes / & take them again. And many meruaylous & fals thinges he made in his lawe / the whiche were to lōge to reherſe here / but they be playne in his boke of Alcaron / & euer he wrote i his boke y• our lord ſpake to Machomyte his ꝓphete / ſayenge on this wyſe or on this. Thus by his fals meanes he deceyued y• people. And whā his mayſters & he had made this y• was ſo delectable / he wrote it in a boke with lettres of gold / & nouryſſhed a camell ſecretly in a pryuy place / & all onely wt the hādes of Machomyte was alway fedde

And there pryuely he tyed this boke of the lawe y• he had made about y• camels necke / & put this camell forth on a tyme in to a felde a fore daye / and this camell ioyed in his lyberte / for he was neuer loſe afore. And he wold ſuffre no man to come & touche hym. And ſo there was a grete fame of ſuche a camell / and all the people ranne to ſe hym / amonge whom was this Machomyte. But whan the camell ſawe hym that alway had fedde hym / anone he ranne vnto hym. And he had taught this camel afore tyme to fal downe on his knees & lycke his handes And ſo he dyd afore all the people. The people thā cryed & ſayd / that there was a very enſample that he was the true prophete of god. Than they prayed Machomyte to open y• holy boke wt his holy handes / the whiche was ſent frō heuen euermore to be kepte. In y• whiche boke is ſhewed how the people ſhall worſhyp god. And Machomyte ſayd. This boke was wryten with aūgels handes. So by theſe falſe meanes he turned to his lawe all the londe of Perſe / & all the eeſt imperyall agaynſt Heraclius the emperour. And he occupyed vnto the ende of Alexandre and Egypte / Libia / Arabia / & Siria. Than after he enfected all Affrica / & but that the grace of god wt ſtode hym he had enfected all ſpayne & fraūce And many other thynges he dyd / that were to moche to wryte in this boke.
                        COnſtantyne the thyrde / the ſone of Heracli
                              •
                            was emperour .xxvij. yere. This Conſtantyne was a curſed man / a grete tyraunt / and an heretyke falſe / ſubtyll & obyous to chryſten men / nor he gaue no place to pope Martyn / & he reyſed a grete hoſt agaynſt the Lombarbes / & there he loſt the felde & fledde to Rome. And honourably was receyued of the pope Vitellianꝰ / and other of the cite. And he rewarded them not lyke after theyr merytes as a prynce ſholde haue done / but vſed forth tyranny & hereſye / wherfore at y• laſt he was ſlayne of his owne knyghtes in a bath / y• whiche wolde no longer ſuffre his tyranny. And ſo he wretchedly lyued / & dyed vnhappely. ¶ Martinꝰ the firſt was pope after Theodorū .vj. yere. This Martinus was a very holy man / and ſtrongly ſtroue for the fayth of god. And whan he ſayd maſſe on a certayne daye at the awter / there purſued hym to ſlee hym a man whiche was called Spa
                              •
                           arius of Olymphe / and whan he wolde haue 
                              •
                           nytten hym he was blynde ſodeynly. This ſame man called a Sinody in the cite of Rome / and he dampned Syrum / Alexandrū / Sergiū / Pyrum / & Paulū heretykes. Wherfore Conſtantyne the emperour exiled hym / & he dyed a ſaynt ¶ Eugenius a Romayn was pope after Martyn almooſt thre yere / and was an holy mā / but of hym lytell actes ben wryten. ¶ Vitellianus was pope after hym .xiiij. yere. This mā made y• ſonge that the Romayns vſeth / and accorded it alſo with y• organes. And he alſo had the grace of the emperour / the whiche was wroth with his predeceſſours / neuertheleſſe afterward he ſtode not in his cōcorde. Ne hytherto I coude not fynde that euer the chirche of Rome had fully after the deth of Cōſtantyne y• myghty / the lordſhyp of the cyte and of other the whiche he gaue to the chirche.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno dn̄i. vj .C. x
                              ••
                           iij.
                        Adeodatus a Romain was pope after Vi
                              〈…〉
                           s .iiij. yere / and in his dayes was tranſlated the body of ſaynt Benedicti with the body of ſaynt Scolaſtice his ſyſter fro y• hyll of cally
                              •
                            to the monaſtery of 
                              〈◊〉
                            nygh 
                              〈…〉
                           
                           relyan. ¶ Conſtaneyneth fourth was

emperour after his fader Conſtantyne the curſed man. This Cōſtantyne was a good man / & he hated heretikes aboue all thynge / the chirche he repayred / and grace he reconſyled agayne to ye chirche of Rome / & he with ye pope gadred togyder the ſyxth generall ſinody / in y• whiche was graūted to preeſtes of Grece to vſe theyr lefull wyues / & to the preeſtes of the eeſt / for cauſe of grete heet / but not to thoſe of the weſt party by no meanes for they amytted chaſtite in the tyme of ſaynt Gregory. And euery man may aduertyſe & pondre how moche ye goodnes of a prynce is worth to the quyete ſtate of the chirche / & to the promocyon of the fayth. And alſo the cōtrary / how moche the malyce of a prynce hurteth / ye thȳge theſe two Conſtantynes the fader & the ſone ſhewed openly. For in the faders days the chirche neuer had reſt / & in the ſones tyme it was quyete. Yet neuertheleſſe our lorde ſuffred the ſaraſyns & the vulgars to entre in this emperours londe / yt he myght not withſtande them but that he made his peas with them / and payed yerely to them a truage / ſo myghtely preuayled that curſed ſecte of Machomyte / & after he dyed blyſſedly. ¶ Nota. that there were ſyxe generall ſynodyes & mooſt pryncypall / of ye whiche the auctorite is equall to the goſpell for the treuth of the goſpell is declared by them / agaynſt ye ſyxe pryncypall hereſyes / the whiche ſtrongly troubled ye chirche / for the ſubtylte of thoſe heretykes to deceyue ſymple men. ¶ Aboute this tyme dyed ſaynt Cedde of Lychfel
                           
                              〈…〉
                            the thyrde yere of his byſſhopryche. ¶ Demus a Romayn was pope after Adeodatus thre yere / of this man lytell is wryten. ¶ Bonifacius was pope after hym / & lytell of hym is wryten / but 
                              •
                           hat he lyued lyke a preeſt. ¶ Agatho 
                              •
                           as pope after hym / & he was a very holy man. For on a day whan he kyſſed a lepre / the lepre a none was made hole. Iſte et de conſenſu principis iuſſit celebrari ſextā ſynodū apud Cōſtantinopolī CC .lxxx. 
                              •
                           p̄orū / in qua aſſere
                              •
                            duas naturas et duas volūtates eſſe in Chriſto. ¶ Leo the ſeconde was pope after Agatho .iij. yere. This Leo was an holy mā & ſuffycyently taught in latyn & greke. This man ordeyned that the pax ſhold be gyuen after Agnus dei / and dyed a blyſſed man. ¶ Benedictus the ſeconde was pope after Leo almooſt thre yere. This man about all thynges was vertuous: & his name accorded wt his dedes And in his tyme was a grete peſtylēce. ¶ Iuſtinianus the ſeconde was emperour this tyme / & he was a very good man / a prudent & a large / & he encreaſed the empyre of Rome myghtely / but he charged y• offyce of ye chirche ouermoche Many lawes he made / & afterwarde he wexed not good / for he entended to haue letted ye decrees of ye vj. ſinody / wherfore the .x. yere of his empyre he was takē of Leo the prynce of Patricio & Tyberio / & they cut of his noſe & his tongue & exiled hȳ to Criſonā. Than was a grete turbacyon in ye chirche for ſtryfe & heretykes. And knowe all mē whā variaūce falleth bytwene grete lordes / than errours ben multiplied: for there is no mā correcketh them / therfore yt is oft tyme preued in ye chirche. Than after fell a varyaūce bytwene Leo & Tiberio / & Tiberio preuayled / & he exiled Leo / & cut of his noſe the thyrde yere of his regne: & regned for hȳ Iuſtinyan fled to ye ſaraſyns & the bulgars / y• whiche reſtored hym agayne to his empyre / & ſlewe Leo & Tyberio / the whiche fauoured heretikes. Than this ſame Iuſtinyan reformed hymſelfe to ye chirche of god / & had grete repentaūce / but he venged hym to cruelly on his aduerſaryes / ſo that he wolde haue ſlayne

theyr Innocent chyldren. Therfore he was ſlayne with his ſone / of Phylyp whome he exiled.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno dn̄i. vj .C .lxxxiiij.
                        IOhānes the fyfth was pope after Benedictus one yere. He was a good man / but he deceſſed anone. ¶ zeno was pope after hym / & he was a very holy man / for he wold not meddle with ſeculer maters / & in beaute he was as an aūgell / quyete in vertues / & meke in ſoule / & very demure in language of his religyous lyfe. This man was choſen at the laſt with one accorde of ye chirche and lay men / but there was a grete diſtinccyon / for ye clergy entended to haue choſen Pyers the archebiſſhop / and the hooſt of lay men wolde haue had Theodorū a preeſt. But at ye laſt ye holy ghooſt turned the wyll of all this people vnto this holy man. ¶ Sergiꝰ was pope .ix. yere. This mā was vertuous & cōmendable in his lyfe / & in his eleccyon was a grete diſcord / for one party of ye clergy choſe Theodo
                              
                                 
                              
                              rum
                            / & an other party Paſcalem. But as our lorde wolde at the laſt they turned all to this man. This man tranſlated the body of ſaint Leo. He alſo foūde a grete parte of the holy croſſe by myracle. And he baptyſed Cadwalidus the laſt kynge of Brytayn. He cōmaunded Agnus dei to be ſayd or ſonge thryſe at maſſe / & deceſſed blyſſedly. ¶ Nota. ¶ Saynt Bede the worſhypfull preeſt was this tyme a man of grete fame in Englonde / y• whiche was taken the .vij. yere of his age to Benedict the abbot of Gyrwyenſis monaſtery to be taught / & than after to Colfrido the abbot after ye deth of Benedict. And at .xix. yere of his age he was made deken of the byſſhop of Yorke. And at .xxx. yere he was made preeſt / in the whiche yere he began to wryte. So he contynued all the tyme of his lyfe in that monaſtery / in gyuynge his labours to wrytyng / & for ſcripture to be expowned he made .lxxviij. bokes the whiche he nombreth in y• ende of his englyſſhe boke. This man was euer in labour / eyther in prayer or in ſyngynge dayly in ye chirche / or to lerne / or to 
                              ••
                           che or to wryte. For the whiche thynge men may iudge by reaſon that he was neuer at Rome / all though ſome ſaye he went to Rome / yt he myght ſe yt his bokes accorded wt the doctryne of ye chirche. But it was certayne that he was blynde / & went to preche / & had a ſeruaūt yt was not good / & made hȳ to preche to a grete multytude of ſtones / and ſayd that they were men / & whan all his ſermon was done / the ſtones anſwered & ſayd amen. But yt he went to Rome thryſe / & foūde wryten thre arres & thre effes & expowned them / it was neuer foūde in no boke of auctorite. There was after ye talking of the people ſuche a wrytyng on the gates of Rome RRR. FFF. And ſuche an expoſicyon. Regna Rome Ru
                              〈…〉
                           . Ferro Flāma et Fame. But it is certayne that Bede was deſyred to come to Rome by the wrytynge of Sergius the pope vnto Colfrido his abbot. And this Bede trāſlated the goſpell of ſaynt Iohn in to Englyſſhe tongue / & deceſſed blyſſedly. The fame ſayth y• now he lyeth at Deuelyn with ſaynt Cuthberto / & there is buryed with hym the knowlege of the dedes of Englonde almooſt to ye cōqueſt. ¶ Leo the ſeconde was emperour and lytell of hym is wryten. ¶ Liberiꝰ was emperour after hym. vi
                              •
                           . yere / the whiche aroſe agaynſt Leo & entred his kingdom / & kepte hym in priſon as longe as he regned. In his tyme Iuſtinyan the ſeconde y• whiche in olde tyme was exiled to Criſonā / openly ſayd he wolde recouer his empyre agayn. Wherfore the people of that coūtree for ye loue of Liberius

were about to ſlee that Iuſtinyan / wherfore he fledde to the prynce of Turco
                              
                                 
                              
                              rum
                            / & wedded his ſyſter / & through the helpe of his broder & the Bulgars he recouered his empyre / & ſlewe Liberius & Leo the vſurper of his realme. And as many tymes almooſt as he wyped ony drop from his noſe the whiche they kyt of / ſo many tymes he made one of his enemyes to be ſlayne. ¶ Leo the thyrde was pope after Sergiꝰ two yere. This man was made pope by the power of ye Romayns / & was not put in ye nombre of popes / for he yll entred / but he dyd none yll. ¶ Iohānes the ſyxth a Greke was pope after hym. And he was a martyr / but of whome & wherfore y• cauſe is not foūde in hyſtoryes. It is ſayd y• it was of ye dukes of Lombardy / for they were enemyes to ye chirche myghtely. ¶ Iohānes the .vij. a Romayn was pope after hym thre yere / but no thinge of hym is wryten. ¶ Iuſtinianus the ſeconde was emperour agayne wt his ſone Tiberius .vj. yere. And this was he whiche was reued of ye empyre afore by Leo And whā this man was reſtored agayn he toke hym to the ryght fayth / & worſhypped the pope Cōſtantyn / & certaynly he deſtroyed Creſon the place where he was exiled to / & all that dwelled in it (excepte children) he ſlewe them. And he came agayn an other tyme to haue ſlayne the Innocentes / & the men of coūtree made them a capytayn a certayne man that was called Philip an outlawe / the whiche anone wente to hym in batayle and ſlewe hym for his cruelnes agaynſt thoſe children. ¶ Syſinnius was pope xx. dayes / & than was grete ſtryfe / and he deceſſed / but lytell of hym is wryten. ¶ Conſtantyn was pope after hym. vij yere. This man was a very meke man & ſo blyſſed / that of all men he was beloued. He went ouer the ſee to Iuſtinyan the emperour / & was receyued wt grete honour / & dyed a blyſſed man. ¶ Philip the ſeconde was emperour one yere / the whiche fled in to Sciſilia for ye hooſt of ye Romayns. And he was an heretyke / & cōmaūded all pictures of ſayntes to be deſtroyed. Wherfore the Romayns keſt away his coyne / nor wolde not receyue no money y• had his ymage or his name wryten vpon it. ¶ Anaſtaſius ye ſecond after he had ſlayne Philyp was emperour thre yere. This man was a chriſtē man / & lyued well. But bycauſe he put out Philips eyen & ſlewe hȳ afterward / therfore Theodoſius fought againſt hȳ and ouercame hym / and than he was made a preeſt / & ſo lyued quyetly.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno domini. vij .C .xiiij.
                        O Regorius ye ſeconde was pope after Conſtantyn .xvij. yere. This Gregory was a chaſte man / and a noble man in ſcripture. And about this tyme the popes begā to dele more temporally with ye emperours thā they were wont for theyr falſnes & theyr hereſy / and alſo for to remeue the empyre fro one place to an other as the tyme requyred. This man curſed Leo the emperour bycauſe he brent the ymages of ſayntes. This ſame Leo cōmaūded Gregory the pope that he ſhold brenne chirches & deſtroye them. And the pope ſet no thynge of his ſayenge / but manly cōmaunded the contrary. And ſo it is openly ſhewed / that ye deſtruccion of the empyre of Rome was the cauſe of hereſy. For certaynly faythfull people with theyr prelates with one wyll drewe vnto the pope / and conſtrayned the emperours for to leue theyr tyranny and theyr hereſyes. ¶ And this tyme in the eeſt partyes of the worlde ſtrongly fayled the very true fayth / for that curſed lawe of falſe Machomyte. ¶ Theodoſtꝰ was emperour / & regned

but one yere / & he was a very chryſten man / & euen as he dyd / ſo was he done vnto. For Leo depoſed hym & made him a preeſt. ¶ Leo the thyrde wt Cōſtantyn his ſone was emperour .xxv. yere. This Leo whan he was myghty he depoſed Theodoſius / & regned for hym / & was deceyued by a certayn apoſtata / y• whiche bad hym that he ſhold take & brenne all the ymages of ſayntes / wherfore he was punyſſhed bothe in batayle and in peſtylēce / & with other infortunes. And bycauſe he was accurſed of Gregory / & abode therin thre days / therfore ye pope with the comyn people toke from hym all ye weſt parte of his empyre / cōmaundynge that no man ſholde obey hym / ne ſocour hym / bycauſe he lyued lyke an heretyke. Holy men ſayd agaynſt hym / and many by hym were martyred & exiled. And at the laſt in his myſbyleue he dyed wretchedly. And in this mannes dayes but that Karolꝰ Marcellus holpe the chryſten fayth and fought manly agaynſt the ſaraſyns / & droue them backward in to Spayne y• whiche they had ſubdued / els they had entred in to fraūce And Karolus ſlewe thre hondred thouſande ſaraſyns & more / & of his people were ſlayne but .xv. thouſand. ¶ Nota This man for ye contynual batayle toke to lay men the treaſour of the chirche / wherfore ſaynt Euchery the byſſhop of Aurilian as he was in his prayers ſaw that ſame Karolus in ſoule & body payned in hell. And the aūgell that ſhewed the byſſhop this man / ſayd that y• was the iudgement of all thoſe yt toke awaye the goodes of ye chirche / or of poore men. And to fortyfye that ye the byſſhop ſayd & to proue it / the abbot of ſaynt Denys went to the ſepulture where that Karolus was buryed / & opened the cheſt that he lay in / and there they ſawe a dragon go out / but he had no body. ¶ Gregory the thyrde a Romayne was pope after Gregory the ſeconde / the whiche confermed the worſhyppynge of the ymages of ſayntes / with the coūſeyle almooſt of a thouſande byſſhops. And he horrybly curſed al the deſpyſers of theſe ymages as the emperour and other that were of that condicion. ¶ Conſtantinus y• fyfth was emperour after his fader Leo. xxxv yere. He was a curſed man and a pure heretyke / ſo that he dyd ſacrifyce to deuyls / he purſued the chirche / & noth
                              〈…〉
                           ge that is good of hym is wryten. And ſo by the ſuffraūce of god the chirche was troubled lōge tyme. ¶ About this tyme were many meruayles / and there were meruaylous erth quakes. And certayn cytees that were ſet vpon moūtaynes / they were remeued & borne away with the hylles into the feldes. v
                              •
                           . mile thens as they ſtode / and the cytees were not broken nor hurte. In the londe of Meſopotanyan the erthe was broken by the ſpace of two myle. And alſo there was a mule whiche ſpake in a mannes voyce. Aſſhes fell from heuen. And in the ſee of Pontico there was yſe for grete froſt y• was .xxx. cubytes of thycknes. And ſterres fell frō heuen ſo myghtely that men trowed that the ende of the worlde had ben comen. All theſe betokened meruaylous thynges to come.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno domini. vij .C .xliiij.
                        AFter Gregori zacharias was pope .x. yere. This zachary was a noble man / & arayed with all vertues / with all men he was loued for his mekenes. And he depoſed the kyng of Fraūce Hydery / & put in his place Pippinū / for he was more profytable. Here ye may ſe what power y• chirche had that tyme the whiche trāſlated that famous kyngdom from the very heyres to the kyngdom of Pippyn / for a lefull cauſe. Vt habetur.

xv. q .v. alius. ¶ Stephanus the ſecond a Romayn was pope after zacha ry .v. yere. This man in all thynge was profytable vnto the chirche / as well in worde as in doctryne. And he gouerned the ſpirytualte & the temporalte nobly. He was the louer & the defender of poore men. This man anoynted Pippinū the kyng of Fraūce / & ſent hym agaynſt the Lombardes / that he ſholde cōpell them to reſtore the chirche of ſuche goodes as they had withholden from them longe tyme vnryghtwyſly / the whiche he dyd He alſo trāſlated the empyre of the Grekes to the frenſſh men. ¶ Paulus a Romayn was pope after hȳ .x. yere. This was a very holy man / for he dyd grete almes to faderles children & pryſoners / wydowes and other poore men / that he myght be a folower of ſaynt Paule. ¶ Conſtantyn y• ſecond a Romayn was pope after Paule two yere. This Conſtantyn was a lay man / & ſodeynly was made a preeſt as a tyraūt / & toke on him the dignite of the pope / and with a grete ſclaūdre to the chirche was pope a lytell tyme. But the faythfull men put hym out / & put out his eyen. And this was y• fyfthe infamed pope amonge ſo many hytherto / ſo the holy ghooſt that holy apoſtles ſeet kepte in all honour and holy nes. ¶ Infynyte martyrs were made this tyme by Conſtantyn the emperour for he was ſuche an heretyke. And men trowe that there was neuer emperour nor no paynym that ſleme ſo many martyrs. And this tyme y• chirche was troubled full ſore / & very precyouſly bought the worſhyppyng of y• ymages of ſayntes / for y• grete ſhedynge of blode of martyrs. And certaynly that curſed emperour was not vnpunyſſhed. For whan he dyed he cryed with an horryble voyce & ſayd. I am taken to a fyre that is vnable to be deſtroyed / and ſo he yelded vp the ghoſt to euerlaſtyng payne. ¶ The empyre of Rome was deuyded aboute this tyme. For Stephen y• pope tranſlated ytaly & other to Karolus yet a yonge man. And Conſtantyn helde the londe of Grece with other londes ouer y• ſee with a grete labour / and many rebellynge. ¶ This tyme Karolus magnus was a noble yonge man / & he begā for to regne vpon Fraūce / & was the ſone of Pippinus / and his moder was called Berta. ¶ Stephanus the thyrde was pope after Paulus thre yere / & he amended all the errours of Conſtantyne. And he degraded all thoſe the whiche Conſtantyn ordeyned in a gouernall ſynody.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno domini. vij .C .lxxxiiij.
                        ADrianus a Romayn was pope after Steuen .xxiiij. yere. This man was myghtely worſhypped of the people / no man greter afore hym in honour / rycheſſe & buyldynge. This man ſet two ſolempne ſynodyes. The fyrſt of iij .C. and l. faders. The ſecōde in Rome with an hondred & fyfty faders / beynge preſent Charles the kynge of Fraunce / to whome it was graunted the lyberte of eleccyon of the pope / and to ordeyne y• apoſtles ſeet. ¶ Leo the fourth regned emperour with y• Grekes .v. yere. This Leo was a curſed mā / but not ſo moche as his fader was / & he was a couetous man / & he toke away a certayne crowne of a chirche / and put it vpon his heed / & anone he was corrupted with an axes & ſo deceſſed. And he had a curſed wyfe the whiche regned after hym with her ſone. ¶ Conſtantyn was emperour after Leo / & he was a meke man / and put awaye his moder fro y• kyngdom / that ſhe myght take hede vnto her womens werke. But ſhe with a fayned rancour put out his eyen afterwarde / & his children

alſo / and regned agayne thre yere. And at the laſt ſhe was aboute to haue ben wedded. And whan the Grekes perceyued that ſhe wold be wedded to grete Karolꝰ / they toke her & ſhette her vp in a monaſtery / & toke Nichoferū to be theyr emperour. ¶ The .v. vniuerſall ſtudy y• whiche in olde tyme was tranſlated frō Athenes to Rome about this tyme was tranſlated to Parys by Karolus kynge of Fraūce. ¶ Nichoferꝰ was emperour after Cōſtantyn. He was a very nygon / & was exalted to his empyre by the Grekes / but he profyted not / for in his tyme all the eeſt Imperyall was brought to nought. For the Romayns put them vnder Karolus magnꝰ. ¶ Ieruſalē about this tyme was recouered by Karolus / with all the holy londe. And the ſecte of ſaraſyns was deſtroyed ſtrongly. For the deſtruccyon of wretches came than. ¶ Mychaell was emperour two yere. And he was a very chryſt
                              •
                            man / & was wel beloued / & was alſo conuynge in all ſcyences. And thoſe that Nichoferꝰ had hurte & diſtreſſed of theyr goodes by his couetouſnes / this Michaell reſtored thē theyr goodes agayn. ¶ Nota. Karolus magnus the fyrſt ſaynt was emperour after Michaell / & he was crowned emperour by Leo the pope. From y• whiche tyme the empyre was tranſlated fro the Grekes to Fraūce & Germany. And for the tranſlacyon of y• empyre / the Grekes alway were defectyue vnto y• Romayns & the Grekes ſtroue euermore wt them / but it was more wt venymous wordes than wt ſtrength / & more wt craft than wt batayle. For they had ſo grete enuy at y• Romayns that they wolde not obey the chirche of Rome. For certaynly whan y• the popes wold wryte vnto them for to obey the chirche of Rome / they wrote agayn and ſayd. Ye haue taken from our kynrede the empyre / & therfore we wyll you not obey / and we vs take from you And as touchynge this noble emperour Karolus / it is to be vnderſtande / this man whā he was a yonge man he was anoynted kynge in Fraūce by Stephen the pope / in the yere of our lorde Ieſu Chryſt. vij .C. and .liiij. whan his tader Pippinus lyued / vnder whom / & with whome he regned .xv. yere / to the deth of his fader. Than after the deth of his fader in the yere of our lorde god. vij .C .lxviij. this Karolus with his broder Karolo manna regned two yere. Than his broder deceſſed in the ſeconde yere. And this Karolus than helde all y• hole k
                              •
                           ng dome .xiiij. yere / to the yere of our lorde vij. hondred .lxxxiiii. in the whiche yere he wente vnto Rome that he myght be crowned emperour of the pope Adryan. And there he regned emperour. rvi. yere / to the yere of our lorde god .viii .C. whan pope Leo confermed hym agayn to be emperour. And after that he was emperour .xiiij. yere. And this Karolus magnus deceſſed in the yere of his age lxxij. the whiche was the yere of our lorde god .viij. hondred and. riiii. ¶ Yf 
                              〈◊〉
                            wyll ſe more of this Karolus go to the boke of the byſſhop Turpinus and 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           braminus his mayſter / for they wrote his noble actes euerychone. ¶ 
                              ••
                           o the fourth was pope after Adrian. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . yere. This man whan he went on a cet
                              •
                           ayn daye with the Letany to ſaynt Peters chirche on ſaynt Markes daye / he was taken with curſed people / the whiche put out bothe his eyen / and his tongue was cutte of. But our lord meruaylouſly reſtored hym agayne his ſyght & his ſpeche / ſo that he ſpake without tongue and ſawe by myracle. And afterwarde he went to Karolus in to Fraunce. And he came with hym to Rome / and there venged the pope of his enemyes. And than he crowned Karolus / and he late

afore crowned / confermed hym agayne. ¶ Ludouicus y• meke / the fyrſt begoten ſone of Karolꝰ was emperour after his fader .xxvi. yere / in whoſe time was put away that clerkes ſholde vſe no gyrdels with precyous ſtones / ne ſtraūge arayment. This Ludouicꝰ on his fyrſt wyfe gate two childrē / & bothe had an yll ende In all thynge y• went agaynſt hym he was pacyent / & in the laſt ende euer he ouercame it / for towarde god he abode deuoute / & his chyldren folowed his condicyons / and he deceſſed a blyſſed man. ¶ Stephanus the fourth was pope after Leo .iij. yere. This Stephanus redemed many captyue men / & crowned Lodewyke the emperour / & than he deceſſed / & was buryed at Rome. ¶ Paſchall was pope after Stephanꝰ. This Paſchall gaue grete dilygēce to relykes of ſayntes / & he toke vp innumerable bodyes of ſayntes / & buryed them worſhipfully / as in the viſyon of ſaynt Cecile he was cōmaūded. ¶ Eugenius y• fourth was pope after Paſchall / and he was a very holy man / and thoſe thynges that were for Chryſt he toke hede to. This man was crowned a martyr / & by y• lay men of Rome he was buryed in ſaynt Peters chirche yerde.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Circa annū dūi. viij .C .xliiij.
                        TAlentinus was pope after Eugeny .xl. days / & lytell of hym is wryten. ¶ Gregory y• fourth was pope after him .xij. yere. This Gregory ſawe many heuy tymes for y• plages among the comyn people. And at this mannes peticion Lodewyke y• emperour / & Marchio the prynce of Lombardy exyled all ſaraſyns from ytaly / & at the laſt he deceſſed after innumerable good dedes & werkes y• he had done at ſaynt Peters. ¶ Lotherius the firſt ſone of Lodewyke was emperour .xv. yere in Ytaly and in Rome & in the partes of Germayn nexte to the hylles of Alpy. This Lothertus roſe agaynſt his broder Lodewike & Karolus for the kyngdom of Duchelonde / the whiche ſomtyme Pippinꝰ theyr broder helde / & they fought at a place called Fontanetū / where Lothery was diſcō
                           fyted / & there was ſuche ſlaughter made on bothe ſydes / that they had no men to reſiſt theyr aduerſaryes. This vnderſtode a fals chryſten man / & ſent vnto y• Sowdan of the ſaraſyns that he ſholde come anone. And he toke Rome / & ſaynt Peters chirche was made a ſtable for theyr horſes. But Lodewyke with the frenſhmen and lombardes all that infynyte multytude deſtroyed / & that with grete ſhedynge of chryſtē blode. ¶ Sergius y• ſecond was pope after Gregory two yere. This mā was fyrſt called Os porci / in engliſſhe hogges mouth / wherfore that man & after all y• popes names are chaūged whan they be choſen. And that for thre cauſes. The firſt for Chryſt chaūged y• names of thoſe men whiche he made popes. The ſecōd for as moche as they are chaūged in name / ſo ſholde they be chaūged in pfeccyon of lyfe. The thyrde leeſt he whiche is choſen to an excedynge degree ſhold be hurte in name. ¶ Leo was pope after Sergius .viij. yere. This Leo was an holy mā / & alſo he was in prudence as ſharpe as a ſerpent / & in his dedes as meke as a doue. And he was brought forth vertuouſly in a monaſtery. And whan that he was made pope / he laboured to repayre his chirches agayn / the whiche the fals ſaraſyns one after an other had deſtroyed This man was a myghty wryter and a grete precher / & a myghty labourer in watche & prayer / and ſo dyed / and was buryed & lyeth at ſaint Peters. ¶ Bene dictus a Romayn was pope after Leo two yere. This Benedictus had the name

of the thynge / for in all thynge was he blyſſed. And he ordeyned that clerkes ſhold go ordynatly & honeſtly. ¶ Ludouicus y• ſone of Lothery was emperour this tyme / & anoynted of Sergio y• pope & a whyle regned wt his fader / & after he regned .xxi. yere alone. This man had a ſone y• hight Karolꝰ / in to whom a deuil entred / & vexed hȳ afore his fader / & thā he conſpyred his faders deth / & in his tyme fell many meruayles. ¶ Nota. Iohānes Anglicꝰ of y• nacyō of Maguntyn about this tyme was pope / & ſhe was a womā arayed in mānes garmētes. But ſhe ꝓfyted moche in holy ſcripture. Thā ſhe was choſen pope / but ſhe was afterwarde wt childe / & goynge openly in ꝓceſſion ſhe trauailed & deceſſed. And this is y• .vj. pope yt to this tyme had y• name of holynes / & were vicious / & this ꝑſon as other curſed popes were was puniſſhed of god / nor ſhe was not nōbred in y• boke of popes. ¶ Nicolaꝰ a Romayn was pope after this womā .ix. yere. This man exceded all other in holynes / ſaue ſaynt Gregory / & after deceſſed / & lyeth in ſaȳt peters chirch yerd. ¶ Adrian a Romayn was pope after Nicolas. This man curſed Lothery y• emperours broder king of Lothering for his aduoutry. But whan he came wt his noble men to Rome to excuſe hȳ for his auoutry / he ſayd he was curſed wrongfully / & all dyed in one yere & y• king dyed goyng to y• cite of Placēciā
                        
                     
                     
                        ¶ This tyme came the Danes in to Englonde.

                              Alured.
                           
                        
                        ¶ Anno dn̄i. viij .C .lxxiij.
                        ¶ Of kynge Alured / & how the Danes in his tyme prayed hym of mercy / that they myght go out of the londe.
                        AFter y• deth of Eldred regned his broder Alured y• Dolfynes was called. Than wēt y• Danes & aſſembled them / & went forth to ſeke Alured y• tho was newly made kyng of Southſex / & there they foūde hym at Wylton wt a lytell power / & neuertheleſſe he fought wt them / but at y• laſt he fledde thens from the felde & went in to weſtſer & ordeined of his owne realme & of other y• he had a ſtrong power / ſo y• the Danes coude not withſtande hȳ. And he came to London wt his hooſt where y• Danes ſoiourned / & wolde haue fought wt them. But the Danes durſt not / but prayed hȳ of peas & that they myght go agayn in to theyr owne coūtree / & neuer more to come in to englōd agayn ony harme to do / gyuyng hym hoſtages ſuche as he wolde aſke.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Hubba & Hungar were ſlayne at Chyppenham / and how the Danes brought theyr kynge vnto our kynge.
                        ANd the ſame daye y• the Danes departed fro London they rode ſo faſt bothe nyght & day / & neuer reſted tyl that they came vnto Exceſtre / & toke the towne / & there helde them. ¶ Whan kynge Alured herde theſe tydynges anone he let take the hoſtages / and went from thens vnto Exceſtre wt all y• power that he had. And whan y• Danes herde tell of his comyng / they went frō thens vnto Weſtſex / & came to Chippenham / and there they dyd moche harme in the countree / they robbed folke / and brught them in to pryſon. The kynge Alured purſued them & came vpon them with all his people and fyerſly them aſſayled

And there were ſlayne bothe Hubba and Hungar his broder / & Buerne Bocard. And in this batayle was moche people ſlayne on that one parte & on that other. But the gree of that felde abode with y• Danes / for as moche as the kyng came with lytell company. The kyng haſted hȳ as moche as he myght to go agayn. And whan y• Danes foūde Hubbaes body lyenge deed / they buryed it / & made vpon it a grete lodge / & let call it Hubbe
                              •
                            lowe / & ſo it is called vnto this daye / & yt place is in Deuenſhyre. The barons of Somerſet / Wyltſhyre / & Dorſet herde tell how theyr king was diſcomfyted / & ordeyned all y• power that they myght / & came to the kyng where as he was / & thanked god that they foūde hym alyue for they had wende y• Danes had ſlayne hym. Than the kyng & his barons concluded to go ſeke the Danes & to fyght with them. And ſo they rode all y• nyght and on the morowe aboute pryme came to Abyngdon where as y• Danes were. Thankkyng Alured & his barons aſſem bled them / & egerly aſſayled the Danes & there gaue them a ſtronge batayle / & the Danes long tyme put them of / that no man wyſt whether parte loſt mooſt folke. But thus it befell as god wolde yt the kyng Alured had the victory wt moche honour. For the Danes were ſo dryuen / that they ne wyſt whether to turne And .xv. dayes the kyng them purſued at his wyll / that glad & fayne they were for to ſpeke of peas / & toke to hym good hoſtage / & ſayd they wold neuer warre more vpon hȳ. And more ouer they promyſed kyng Alured that they wolde go & brynge theyr owne kyng vnto hym / & that theyr kyng & they all ſhold be baptiſed. And vpō this cōdicyon king Alured graunted them lyfe & lymme / & ſayd to them that they ſhold go ſeke theyr king and at a certayne daye that was ſet to come agayne to hym. And ſo they went forth faſt / & came agayne at theyr daye that was aſſigned / & y• Danes brought theyr kynge with them. Kynge Alured anone let them be baptyſed / & theyr names were chaunged / ſo that the kynge of Denmarke was called Athelſtone / & xxx. of his felawes names were chaunged alſo / & the other were baptyſed to y• ryght byleue. And all this was done at Weſtmynſter / & after that kyng Alured helde with hym kyng Athelſton and all his Danes .xij. dayes at ſoiourne with grete ſolempnite / and gaue them grete gyftes. After that they toke theyr leue & departed. Than was king Alured well at eaſe whan he had ouercomen his enemyes / and that they were turned to the ryght byleue of almyghty god.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How y• Danes y• went in to Fraūce wt Gurmond / came agayn in to Englonde. And of the deth of kynge Alured.
                        
                        ANd thus it befel afterward that the Danes of Northumberlond

that were paynyms came with a grete ſtrength & an huge hooſt of fraūce / that is to be vnderſtande / with them y• went into Fraūce with Gurmond of Affryke whan he had cōquered Englond & gaue it to the ſaxons. And thoſe that came fro fraūce arryued in Kent / & ſent in to Northumberlonde that they ſholde come to them. And whan thoſe two hoſtes were comen & aſſembled / anone they went to deſtroye all y• chryſten people of englond from place to place / & dyd moche ſorowe ¶ In this tyme dyed kyng Alured that was wont to abbate the Danes / & .xxx. yere he regned / & had ben a good king / & well coude chaſtyſe his enemyes / & alſo he was a good clerke / & let make many bokes / & a boke he made in englyſſhe of auentures of kynges & of batayles that had ben done in y• loud / & many other bokes he let wryte of grete wiſdom & good lernynge / on whoſe ſoule god haue mercy / & lyeth at Wyncheſtre.
                        IOhānes the .viij. was pope after Adryan .viii. yere. This Iohn anoynted Karolus y• emperour / & he ſuffred grete wronge of y• Romayns / for he fauoured not the ſayd emperour / & therfore he put y• ſayd pope in kepynge. Alſo he degraded y• biſſhop of Portuenſe that was y• cauſe of al his ſorowe. ¶ Karolus y• ſecond was emperour after Ludouicꝰ This Karolꝰ had a broder y• was called Lodwyke / & he was kyng of Germayn & he ordeyned a batayle agaynſt his broder / but Karolꝰ or they fought was poyſoned / and he made many a monaſtery. ¶ Martinus was pope after Iohn one yere. This Martyn lytell ꝓfyted / for he lyued but lytel tyme. ¶ Adrianꝰ y• thyrd was pope after hȳ one yere / & of hȳ is nothȳge wryten. ¶ Stephanꝰ the .v. was pope after hȳ .vi. yere / & no thinge of hȳ is wryten / but y• he tranſlated y• body of ſaynt Martyn. ¶ Karolus y• thyrd was emperour after y• ſecond .xij. yere. This Karolus peaſybly had in poſſeſſyon all fraūce & Germayn / & was crowned emperour of Iohn y• pope. And after his gloryous victory he turned all Normandy to y• fayth. And he myght no more reſyſt the frenſſhmē but .iiij. yere he regned on them / & he was vnprofytable to them / & therfore they put hym away. ¶ Arnulphus was emperour after Karolus. 
                              •
                           ij yere. This man vtterly cōſtrayned the Normans y• deſtroyed y• frenſſhmen. rl. yere. Than he ſekened & had no cōfort of no leche / for he was in a meruaylous ſekenes / ſo y• he was cōſumed wt lyfe / and was deed. ¶ Formoſus was pope after Stephen .v. yere. This man fyrſt was byſſhop of Portuenſis / & of pope Iohn was depryued for his inobediēce / & was degraded to y• lay fe / but by Martyn the pope he was reſtored / & agaȳſt his othe he came not al onely to rome / but to offre him y• dignite of y• pope / for which there was grete altercacion. ¶ Bonufacius y• vj. was pope .xv. days. ¶ Stephanus the .vj. one yere & .iij. monethes ¶ Io
                              •
                           a thre monethes & .xij. days. ¶ Theodorꝰ the ſecond .xx. days. ¶ Iohānes the. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . was two yere & .xv. days. ¶ Benedictꝰ the .iiij. was .iii. yere & two monethes. ¶ Leo y• .iiij. was .xl. days. ¶ Xp̄oforus the fyrſt .vij. monethes. Theſe .viii. popes were but lytell tyme / & therfore we can not tell of them no notable thynges / but yf we ſhold wryte ſclaūdre of them y• myght be foūde / for the vnherd ſtryfe & cōtencyon in yt holy apoſtles ſeet / for one ſtroue agaynſt another / repreuing eche others dedes: & for to tel how they ſtroue it were no grete honour to ſhew / for y• holy apoſtles ſeet. ¶ Ludouicus y• thyrde was emperour after Arnulphꝰ .vi. yere This mā had not y• popes bleſſing / for y• vnſtablenes of them y• regned in Ytaly / & he was cōſtrayned to expulſe Bering.

And this man was the laſt emperour of all y• kynrede of Karolus king of fraūce. ¶ This tyme the Empyre was remeued / tranſlated / and deuyded. For the Frenſſhmen helped not the chirche / the whiche theyr faders had edyfyed & fortefyed / but deſtroyed them / nor helped not the Romayns agaynſt the Lombardes / whiche vexed the Romayns ryght ſore. Therfore by y• comyns aſſent they were excluded from the Empyre / & the ytalyens began to be emperours in yta lye / & the Almayns in Almayne / vntyll Octauien whiche regned in bothe y• places. The frenſſhmen were conſtrayned to abyde in theyr owne coūtre / & no more to be emperours for theyr myſcheuous lyuynge. ¶ Beringarius the fyrſt. Contadus & Beringarius the ſeconde / and Hugo were emperours after Lodewyke but they are not nombred amonge the Emperours. For ſome were but in Almayne / and ſome in Ytalye.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kynge Edwarde that was kynge Aluredes ſone.
                        
                           
                        
                        ANd after this Alured regned edward his ſone / and was a good man and a wyſe / & was alſo wonders curteys. The Danes dyd moche ſorowe in the londe / & theyr power encreaſed & began for to wexe from daye to daye / for the Danes came oft with theyr companyes in to this londe. Whan the kynge ſawe that he myght no better do / than he made peas with them / and graūted them his trewſe. And neuertheleſſe the trewſe dured not longe y• the Danes ne begā to warre ſtrongly vpon y• englyſſhmen / & dyd them moche ſorowe / wherfore kynge Edward let aſſemble a grete hooſt for to fyght with them. And than this kynge Edwarde dyed whan god wolde. And he regned .xxiiij. yere / and lyeth at Wyncheſtre beſyde his fader.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno domini .ix .C. xiiij.
                        SErgius the thyrde was pope after Chriſtofer .vij. yere. This mā was a cardynall of Rome / & was expulſed by Formoſe the pope / & than he went to the frenſhmen / & through the helpe of them he came agayne to Rome / and expulſed Chriſtofer the pope / & was pope hymſelfe. And for to auenge his exile he toke out y• body of pope Formoſe where as he was buryed / and arayed hym in popes arayment / and cauſed hym to be heded / & to be caſt in to the water of Tyber by Rome. Than fyſſhers foūde hym and brought hym in to the chirche / & the holy ymages of fayntes bowed downe vnto hym whan the body of hym was brought in to the chirche / that all men myght ſe / and honourably hym halſed. Yet Sergius deſtroyed all thoſe thynges the whiche the holy man had ordeyned. ¶ Anaſtaſius was pope after hym two yere. ¶ Laudo was pope .v. monethes / & lytel they did. ¶ Iohānes the .x. was pope than. This Iohn was y• ſone of Sergiꝰ pope / bothe of nature & of maners / & he was pope by myght / & wretchedly was ſlayne by G
                              〈…〉
                           does knightes

for they put on his mouth a pyllow and ſtopped his breth. And after hȳ was another put in / but anone he was put out / and therfore he is not named a pope. ¶ Henricus the duke of Saxonye was emperour of Almayn .xviij. yere. This Henry was a noble man / but he is not nombred amonge the emperours: for he regned but al onely in Almayn / & he had a very holy womā vnto his wyfe / & her name was Matilda / on whom he gate two ſones / that is to ſaye Ottonē & Harry / & Otto ſucceded hym in the empyre / and Harry had moche londe in Almayn And he gate an other ſone y• hyght Brimon / & was a very holy man / and was byſſhop of Coleyn / and he founded the monaſtery of Panthaleon.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kynge Athelſtone.
                        AFter this Edward regned Athelſtone his ſone / and whan he had regned .iiij. yere he held batayle againſt the Danes / & droue kyng Gaufrid that was kyng of Danes & all his hooſt to y• ſee / & reſted by ſcotlonde / & toke ſtrongly all y• coūtree an hole yere. And after that they of Cumberlonde & the Scottes of Weſtmerlōde began to warre vpō king Athelſton / & he gaue them ſo ſtronge batayle y• he ſlewe ſo many of them that no man coude tell y• nōbre of them. And after yt he regned but .iij. yere / & he regned in all .xxv. yere / & lieth at Malmeſbury.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kynge Edmund.
                        AFter this Athelſtone regned Edmund his broder / for king Athelſton had no ſone / & this Edmund was a worthy man & a doughty knyght of body & alſo noble. And the thyrd yere after that he was kyng he went ouer Hūber into y• coūtree / where he foūde two kynges of Danes / y• one was called Enelaf and that other Renant. This kyng Edmund droue them bothe from the londe and after went and toke a grete prey in Cumberlonde. This Edmunde regned but .vij. yere / & lyeth at Glaſtenbury.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kynge Eldred.
                        ANd after this Edmund regned Eldred his broder that auenged Edward his fader of his enemyes y• did ſlee hym / and afterwarde he ſeaſed all Northumberlond in to his handes / and made the Scottes for to bowe and meke vnto his wyll. And in the ſecond yere of his regne came Arnalaf Guyran / that was kyng of Denmarke / and ſeaſed all Northumberlonde / & helde y• londe two yere. And after that came kyng Eldred with a grete power & droue hym out of this londe. And this king Eldred was a noble man & a good / of whoſe goodnes ſaynt Dūſtan preched. And this Eldred regned .xj. yere / & lyeth at Wyncheſtre.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kynge Edwyn.
                        ANd after this Eldred regned Edwyn the ſone of Edmund / & he was an vncouenable man towarde god and the people. For he hated folke of his owne londe / & loued & honoured ſtraūge men / & ſet lytell by holy chirche / and he toke of holy chirche all the treaſour that he myght haue / that was grete ſhame and vylany to hymſelfe / & peryll to his ſoule. And therfore god wolde not that he ſholde regne no longer than .iiii. yere and dyed / and lyeth at Wyncheſtre.
                        LEo the ſyxthe a Romayns was pope .vj. monethes. ¶ Stephanus the .vii. a Romayn was pope after hȳ two yere. ¶ Iohn the .xj. a Romayn was pope .iij. yere. ¶ Stephanus the viij. a Germayne was pope after hym

viij. yere. ¶ Mart
                              〈…〉
                           s the thyrde was pope after hym thre yere. And of theſe vj. popes is no thynge had in ſcripture. For what cauſe I can not tell.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno domini .ix .C. liiij.
                        AGapitus a Romayn was pope after Martyn two yere and. viij monethes / & no thynge of hym is wryten. ¶ Iohānes the .xij. a Romayn was pope after Agapitus almooſt .viij. yere / and he had a fader that hyght Alberyke & was a worthy man in ye cite of Rome. He enduced the noble men to ſwere that after the dethe of Agapitus they ſholde thoſe Octauianū his ſone pope. And ſo it was done / & was named Iohn / & he was a hunter and a lecherous man / ſo that openly he kepte women. Wherfore certayn cardynalles wrote to Ottonem the emperour of Almayn / that he ſholde come to Rome for to helpe to deſtroye the ſclaundre of the chirche. This the pope perceyued / & the hande that wrote that pyſtle he made to be cutte of. And many tymes he was warned by ye Emperour & the clergy that he ſholde correcte hym ſelfe. But he wolde not for no thynge. Than he was depoſed / & Leo was put in to his place. Wherfore the emperour was anoyed / and came agayne and beſyeged Rome ſo longe / tyll they toke Benedicte to hym and reſtored Leo.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kynge Edgar that regned aboue the kynges of Scotlonde and of Wales And how he was begyled through the takynge of his wyfe.
                        ANd after this Edwyne regned Edgar his broder / a man that moche loued god & peas / & holy chirche alſo / and was a worthy man & a grete lorde of blode & myghty / & maynteyned well this lōde in peas. And this Edgar was lorde & kyng aboue all the kynges of Scotlond & of Wales / from the tyme that Arthur was gone was neuer ſyth kynge of his power. And this Edgar was ſaynt Edwardes fader. And whā Edgars wyfe was deed that was ſayt Edwardes moder and buryed / he herde ſpeke of the fayrnes of Eſtrylde / yt was Orgarus doughter a baron of Deuenſhyre that was ſo fayre a woman / that all men ſpake of her. He called one of his knyghtes that he moche loued & truſted vpon / & ſayd to hym. Go ſayd he to the noble baron Orgarꝰ of Deuenſhyre & ſe yf that his doughter be ſo fayre as men ſpeke of / & yf it be ſoth I wyll haue her to my wyfe. This knyght that was called Edelwolde went forth his waye as the kynge hym had ſayd / & came where as the lady was. And whā he ſawe her ſo fayre / he thought to haue her hȳſelfe to his wyfe / & therof ſpake to Orgarus her fader / & her fader was an olde man and had no moo chyldren but her onely / and ſawe that Edelwolde was a fayre yonge knyght and worthy & ryche / and was well beloued with the kynge / and thought his doughter ſhold well be maryed & beſet vpon hym / & graūted hym his doughter yf the good lorde the kyng wolde cōſent therto. And thā this Edelwold came agayn to ye kyng & told hym that ſhe was fayre ynough to ſe vpon / but ſhe was wonders lothly. Than anſwered the kyng & ſayd that he toke but lytel charge. Syr ſayd Edelwold / ſhe is her faders heyre / and I am not ryche of londes / & yf ye wolde conſent & graunte that I myght haue her / than ſhold I be ryche ynough. In goddes name ſayd ye kyng / I conſent therto. Edelwold than thanked the kynge moche / and went agayn in to Deuenſhyre and ſpouſed the damoyſell / and in that coūtree he dwelled. And thus it befell vpon a tyme that

he tolde his counſeyle & all this thynge vnto his wyfe / how & in what maner he had 
                              •
                           egyled his lorde the kyng yt wolde haue had her to wyfe. And anone as ſhe it wyſt / ſhe loued hym neuer more after warde as ſhe dyd before. This lady conceyued by hym a ſone. And whan tyme was that ye chylde ſhold be borne / Edelwold came to the kyng & prayed hym to heue a ſone of his at the fontſtone. The kyng hym graūted & let call him Edgar after his owne name. And whan this was done / he thought that al was ſyker ynough for the kyng / that he wolde not take his wyfe / for as moche as his lord was a ioly man and an amerous.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Edgar wedded Eſtrylde after the deth of Edelwolde.
                        
                           
                              •
                           Hus it befell that all men in king Edgars court than ſpake & ſayd that Edelwolde was rychely auaunced through the maryage of his wyfe / and yet they ſayd he was auaunced an hondred folde more / for he had ſpouſed the fayreſt woman that euer was ſeen. And whan the kyng herde ſpeke ſo moche of her beaute / he thought yt Edelwold had hym deceyued & begyled / and thought pryuely in his herte that he wolde go in to Deuenſhyre as it were for to hunt for the harte & for the hynde & other wylde beeſtes / & than he ſholde ſe there ye lady or he departed thēs. And this lady was dwellynge at a maner place beſyde ye foreſt where that the kyng wolde hunt / & at that maner he was herborowed all nyght. And whan tyme came that the kyng ſholde ſoupe & the ſonne ſhone / the kynge aſked after his goſſyp & after his godſone. And Edelwold made her to come before the kyng / & neuertheleſſe yf it otherwyſe myght haue ben / ſhe ſholde not haue comē in his ſyght by his wyll. The lady welcomed the kyng & ſwetely hym kyſſed. And he toke her by ye hande and nexte by hym her ſet / and ſo ſouped they togyder. And there was a cuſtome and an vſage in this londe yt tyme / that whan one dronke to an other / the drynker ſholde ſaye waſſayle / and that other ſholde anſwere and ſaye / drynke hay
                              •
                           e / And thus dyd the kynge & the lady many tymes & alſo kyſſed. And after ſouper whan tyme was to go to bedde ye kyng went to bedde thynkyng hertely on the fayrnes of that lady / & than was ouercomen for her loue / that hym thought ye he ſholde dye / but yf he had his wyll on her. Vpon the morowe the kynge aroſe and went in ye foreſt for to dyſporte hym with hartes & hyndes & all other wylde beeſtes / and of ye hartes grete plente he ſente to that lady. And thryes he wente to ſolace & ſpeke with that lady wh
                              ••
                           es he dwelled there in that countree. And after that the kynge remeued th
                              〈…〉
                           s / & bethought hym how he myght beſt delyuer Edelwolde from his wyfe as he had hym fyrſt deceyued. And the kynge anone after .viij. dayes let ordeyn a parlyament at Salyſbury of all his baronage to haue counſeyle & for to ordeyne how the countree of Northumberlonde shold beſt be kepte that the danes came not there to deſtroye the londe. And this Edelwolde came vnto the kynges parlyament. And the kynge ſent hym vnto yorke for to be keper of that countree. And thus it befell that men that knewe hym not ſlewe hym by the waye. And anone as the kyng herde tell that Edelwolde was deed / he let ſende after the fayre lady Eſtrylde that ſhe ſholde come to the cyte of London / and there be wedded to the kynge with grete ſolempnite and worſhyp. And whan he was come to London ſoone after he helde a ſolēpne feeſt / and he ware a crowne that was of

golde / & the quene an other. And ſaynt Dunſtan on the morowe came to ye king in his chambre / & foūde the kynge & the quene in bedde togyder. And ſaynt Dunſtan aſked the kyng who ſhe was. And the kyng anſwered & ſayd. This is the quene Eſtrylde. And the archebyſſhop ſaynt Dunſtan ſayd that he dyd grete wronge & agaynſt goddes wyll to take a woman to wyfe whoſe chylde he had holden at ye fontſtone. And the quene for that worde neuer loued ſaynt Dunſtan after. And neuertheles ye good mā warned of that foly to be lefte / but it auayled but lytell / for ye loue bytwene them was ſo moche. The kynge begate vpon her a ſone that was called Eldred. Whā this childe was .vj. yere old ye king his fader dyed / & aboute that tyme he had regned xvij. yere / and lyeth at Glaſtenbury.
                        
                           
                              •
                           Eringarius the thyrde was emperour after Henry .vij. yere. this Beringariꝰ was emperour in Ytaly / in whoſe tyme was grete dyuyſyon. And Henry ye emperour deceſſed / & Otto began to regne in Almayne. ¶ Lotherius regned after hym two yere / and deceſſed whan Otto regned in Almayn / & had a wyfe yt hyght Dalnidam / whiche after wedded Otto. ¶ Beringarius ye fourth was after hȳ. This man wt grete tyranny ſubdued Ytaly / wherfore the pope & other Romayns called Otto yt he myght delyuer them / whiche he dyd / & he toke Beringary by ſtrength / & twyes he outlawed hym / & he toke Lotherius wyfe whiche ye tyraūt had pryſoned. ¶ Leo ye viij. was pope after Benedictꝰ one yere & foure monethes. This man was choſen with the comyn voyce / & Iohn was depoſed. This Leo ordeyned yt no pope ſholde be made without conſent of ye emperour / for the malyce of the Romayns the whiche oppreſſed them. This man graunted all the gyftes to Otto and his ſucceſſours / the whiche were gyuen by Iuſtinyan and Karolus to the chirche / that he myght defende Ytaly from ye rebellions. ¶ Iohānes the .xij. was pope after hym almoſt .viij. yere. This Iohn ſuffred grete wronge of the Romayns / for he was taken & exiled / but Otto bare this heuyly. For he ſlewe the noble men of Rome / and certayn of them exiled for euermore. ¶ Benedictus the ſixth was pope after hym .vj. yere. This mā was taken / and in the caſtell Aungell was ſtrangled. ¶ Nota. The empyre this tyme was tranſlated to the Almayns. And the ſame cauſe is here as was before / for the vicyous lyuynge. Ne theſe vnhappy men coude not be enformed / yt they coude eſchewe yt one vyce / through ye whiche they ſawe ſo many noble men peryſſhed. ¶ Otto was emperour after Beringarius .xij. yere. This Otto was the fyrſt emperour of Almayne / and he was all vertuous as an other kyng Karolus / for he was the defender of ye chirche of god / and the ſynguler promoter / for the whiche he was worthy to be emperour. Many men of fals byleue he cō
                           uerted. And he helde wt hym pope Benedictus the vſurper of the popehede in to Saxony / & there he deceſſed in his exile And after this Otto the emperour deceſſed a ryche man in vertue & goodes. ¶ Otto the ſeconde was emperour after his fader. And he was a noble man to ye chirche as his fader was. And many a batayle he had agaynſt fals men of byleue. And at ye laſt he had almooſt loſt all his hooſt in Kalabre. Yet he for ſothe with all his mynde beſought ſaynt Peter to helpe. And meruaylouſly ſaȳt Peter delyuered hym. And his wyfe was the doughter of ye emperour of Conſtantinople of ye Romayns blode / & this man was crowned of Benedictus the pope.
                     
                     
                        
                        ¶ Of ſaynt Edward the martyr / & how Eſtrilde his ſtepmoder let ſ
                              •
                           ee hym for to make Eldred her owne ſone kynge.
                        AFter this Edgar regned Edwarde his ſone that he begate vpon his fyrſt wyfe / that well & nobly gouerned the londe. For he was full of all maner of goodnes / & ladde a full holy lyfe / and aboue all thynge he loued god & holy chirche. And the quene Eſtrylde that was his ſtepmoder let ſlee hym bycauſe to make her owne ſone Eldred kynge / & thus on a day he was ſlayne as ye ſhall here afterwarde. ¶ It befell thus vpon a daye that the kynge Edward went in to a wode for to playe in ye ſouth coūtree beſyde a towne that is called Warham in whiche foreſt was grete plente of hartes and hyndes. And whā he had ben a whyle there for to ſporte hȳ / he thought vpon his broder Eldred that was with his moder the quene / for her place was nygh the foreſt / and thought for to go thyder and vyſyte & ſe his broder. And toke with hym but a lytell meyny / and went towarde his ſtepmoders hous / yt in that tyme ſoiourned in the caſtell of Corfe. And as he rode in the thycknes of the wode to eſpye his game / it befell that he wente amyſſe and loſt his meyny that came with hym. And at the laſt he came out of ye wode / and as he loked aboute hym he ſawe there faſt beſydes a maner that his ſtepmoder dwelled in / and thyderwarde he wente alone. And anone it was tolde the quene / how that the king was comen alone without ony company. And therfore ſhe made Ioye ynough / and thought how ſhe myght do that he were ſlayn as pryuely as ſhe myght / and ſhe called to her one of her knyghtes / to whome ſhe had tolde moche of her coūſeyle bytwene them. And bothe they came to the kyng & curteyſly receyued hym. And the kyng ſayd that he was comen to viſyte her / and alſo for to ſpeke with Eldred his broder. The quene many tymes thanked hym / and bade hym to alyght & harborowe wt her all that nyght. The kynge ſayd that he myght not / but agayn he wold go vnto his folke / yf he myght fynde them. And whan the quene ſawe that he wold not abyde / ſhe prayed hym yt he wolde ones drynke. And he graūted her. And anone as ye drynke was come / the que
                              •
                           e dranke vnto the kynge. And the kynge toke the cuppe & ſet it to his mouth / & in the meane whyle that he dranke / the falſe knyght that was with the quene with a knyfe ſmote the kynge vnto the herte / and there he fell downe deed frō his palfrey vnto the erthe. The quene for this dede gaue the knyght golde and ſyluer grete plente & of other rycheſſe ynough. And ye knyght anone as this was done wente hym ouer the ſee / & ſo eſcaped he out of this londe. Whan this kyng Edwarde was thus martyred it was 
                              〈◊〉
                            ye yere of ye incarnacyon of our lorde. 
                              •
                           x .C .lxxx. and he had regned .xij. yere and an halfe / and lyeth at Glaſtenbury.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kynge Eldred and how the kyng Swyne of Denmarke held Englond & how Eldred that was ſaynt Edwardes broder was not beloued in his realme & therfore he fledde in to Normandy.
                        AFter this kyng Edward regned Eldred his broder / & ſaynt Dunſtan crowned hym. And this ſaynt Dunſtan dyed ſoone after yt he had forgyuen Eſtrilde the quene her treſpace bycauſe that ſhe was cauſe of kyng Edwardes deth / and ſaynt Dunſtan had her alloyled & enioyned her penaunce / and ſhe lyued after a chaſte lyfe and a clene. This kyng Eldred wedded an Englyſſhe woman

/ & on her he begate Edmund Iren ſyde / and an other ſone that was called Edwyne. And after dyed ye quene theyr moder. And in that tyme came Swyne in to Englonde that was kyng of Denmarke / for to chalenge and conquere all that his aunceſtres had before ye tyme / And ſo he conquered and had it all at his aſkynge. For the good erle Cuthbert of Lyndeſey & all the people of Northumlonde and almooſt all the greteſt men of Englond helde with Swyne that was king of Dēmarke / for as moche as they loued not kyng Eldred / bycauſe that his good broder Edwarde was falſly ſlayne for the loue of hym / and therfore no man ſet but lytell by hym. Wherfore kynge Swyne had all his wyll / & toke all the londe. And Eldred the kyng than fledde in to Normandy / and ſo ſpake to ye duke Rycharde / that the duke gaue hym his ſyſter Emme to wyfe / vpon the whiche he gate two ſones / that one was called Alured / and that other Edwarde. And whan kyng Swyne had cōquered all ye londe he regned nobly / & lyued .xv. yere / and than he dyed / and lyeth at yorke.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kyng Eldred came agayn from Normādy / and how Knoght the Dane regned / and of the warre bytwene hym and Edmunde Irenſyde.
                        AFter the deth of Swyne yt was a Dane / Knoght his ſone dwelled in Englonde / & wolde haue ben king And thā came agayn Eldred out of Nor mandy with a grete nombre of people & a ſtronge army / that Knoght durſt not abyde / but fledde thens in to Denmark. The kynge Eldred had agayne his realme / and helde ſo grete lordſhyp that he begā to deſtroye all thoſe that helped Swyne that was a Dane agaynſt hȳ. And afterwarde this Knoght came agayn from Denmarke wt a grete power ſo that kynge Eldred durſt not fyght wt hym / but fledde from thens vnto London / and there helde hym. Than came Knoght and beſyeged hym ſo longe tyll that kynge Eldred dyed in ye cite of London / and lyeth in ſaynt Paules chirche. And he regned .ix. yere.
                        BOnus was pope after Benedict one yere. This man abode but a lytell tyme. ¶ Bonifacius was pope after hym fyue monethes. ¶ Benedictus was pope after hym .x. yere. This man crowned Otto the ſeconde / & made many Romayns to be taken / & he gadered a coūſeyle agaynſt the kynge of Fraūce / where Gylbert the nygromancer was depoſed. ¶ Iohānes the .xiiij. was pope after hym .viij. monethes / & he was put in the caſtell Aungell / and was famyſſhed to deth. ¶ Iohānes yt .xv. was pope after hym .iiij. monethes. ¶ Iohā
                           nes the .xvj. was pope after hȳ almooſt xj. yere. This man was taught in armes / & made many bokes / & elles lytell of hym is wryten. ¶ Gregorius the .v. was pope after this man almooſt thre yere. This Gregory was made pope at the inſtaunce of the emperour Otto the thyrde / for he was his coſin. And whan he had ben a lytell whyle pope / and the emperour receded from the cite of Rome Placētinus was put in by Creſcencius a conſull / for money / & than was ſtryfe a fewe dayes. But the emperour came ſoone after agayn / & toke Creſcencius ye conſul & ſtroke of his heed / & put out the eyen of this man that put out his coſyn of the dignite of the poperyche / & maymed hym in other membres / and his dukes ne his knightes helped hȳ no thȳge For he dyd that thynge that he ſhold not haue done / and he ſuffred that that he deſerued. ¶ Nota. This Gregory with

the emperour Otto ordeyned there the choſers of the empyre / the whiche from thens forth hath abyden vnto this day. For ye frenſſhmen nor none other myght not breke ye ordynaunce. And thoſe choſers of the Empyre by the pope & Otto were not made for ony blame of the ſaxons / but to eſchewe the petylles to come And theyr names ben wryten in latyn for lerned men in theſe verſes. Magun 
                              •
                           inenſis. Treuerenſis. Colonienſis. quilibet imperij fit cancellarius horum. Et Palatinus dapifer Dux portitor enſis. Marchio prepoſitus camere. Pincerna Bohemus. Hij ſtatuunt dominū cūctis per ſecula ſummū. Palati
                              •
                           ꝰ eſt comes Reni. Marchio eſt Brandeburgenſis. Dux Saxonū. Et rex Bohemorū. Verū vt quidam dicunt. Through this occaſyon the Egle hath loſt many a fether / and in the ende he ſhall be made naked. ¶ Otto ye thyrde was emperour .xviij. yere. This man was a worthy man all the dayes of his empyre. And after the wyſdome of his fader he was a very faythfull man to the chirche. And in many batayles he ꝓſpered bycauſe he was deuoute to almyghty god & his ſayntes And gaue myghty worſhyppyng vnto the relykes of ſayntes. And oftentymes he viſyted holy places. This man was crowned by Gregory his coſyn. And at the laſt he deceſſed at Rome.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno domini. M .iiij. Nota.
                        SIlueſter the ſecond was pope after Gregory .iiij. yere / & he was made pope by the helpe of the deuyll / to whome he dyd homage / for he ſholde gyue hym all thynge that he deſyred / & he was called Gylbert. And his enemy gate hym the grace of ye kynge of fraūce and he made hym byſſhop of Remenſis but anone he was depoſed. And after he gate the grace of the Emperour / & was made byſſhop of Rauennie / & after pope but he had an ende anone / & ſo haue all that put theyr hope in fals deuyls. Yet men truſt in his ſaluacyon for certayne demonſtracions of his ſepulture / & for ye grete penaūce yt he dyd in his laſt ende. For he made his handes & legges to be cut of / & diſmēbred all his body / & made them to be caſt out at the dore to foules / & than his body to be drawen wt wylde beeſtes / and there to be buryed where ſo euer they reſted as an hoūde. And they ſtode ſtyll at ſaynt Iohn de Latrans / & there he was buryed / & that was ſigne of his ſaluacyon. ¶ Iohānes the .xviij. was pope .v. monethes. ¶ Iohannes the .xix. was pope after hym fyue yere. And theſe two dyd lytel thȳges. ¶ Henricus ye fyrſt was emperour in Almayn xx. yere. This Henry was duke of Barry / and all accordyng he was choſen for his blyſſed fame & good name the whiche he had. And it is redde that many of theſe dukes of Barry were holy men / not all onely in abſteynynge them from fleſſhly deſyres / but alſo in vertuous lyuyng. And this Henry had a ſyſter that was as holy as he / whome he gaue to wyfe vnto the kynge of Hungary. And ſhe brought all Hungary vnto the right byleue and chryſten fayth. And his wyues name was San
                              ••
                           a Ro
                              ••
                           ogundis with whome he lyued a virgyn all the dayes of his lyfe. And he made many a batayle / as well in ytaly as in Almayn agayuſt them that rebelled and proſpered ryght wyſly euermore on them. At the laſt with a blyſſed ende he deceſſed. And in the lyf of ſaynt Laurence he and his wyfe be put for enſamples bycauſe of theyr holy and vertuous lyuynge. ¶ Benedictꝰ was pope after Iohn .xi. yere. This man had grete ſtryfe in his dayes. For he was put out / & an other was put in. And this Benedictus after

that he was deed / was ſeen of an holy byſſhop in a wretched fygure / & he had grete payne. And this fygure ſayd he truſted no thynge in the mercy of god / & no thynge profyted hym that was done for hym / for it was goten by extorcyon & vniuſtly. Thā this byſſhop lefte his byſſhopryche for drede of this ſight / & went in to a monaſtery & lyued vertuouſly all his dayes. ¶ Iohānes ye .xx. was pope after hym .xi. yere / & lytell profyted.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kyng Knoght that was a Dane.
                        ANd after the deth of this Eldred Knoght that was a Daue begā to regne. But Edmund Irenſyde yt was king Eldredes ſone by his fyrſt wyfe ordeyned a grete power of men / & began to warre on kynge Knoght. And ſo he dyd many tymes & ofte / & the warre was ſo ſtrōge & harde ye wonder it was to wyte And the quene Emme yt than dwelled at weſtmynſter had grete drede of her two ſones Alured & Edward / leſt they ſholde be deſtroyed through ye warre / wherfore ſhe ſente them ouer ſee in to Normandy to the duke Richard theyr vncle / & there they dwelled in ſafete & peas lōge tyme. ¶ This Edmund Irenſyde & Knoght the Dane warred fyerſly togyder. But at ye laſt they were accorded in this maner / that they ſholde departe the realme bytwene them / and ſo they dyd / and loued togyder lyke two bretherne.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kyng Edmund Irenſyde was ſlayne through treaſon by a traytour yt was called Edryth of Stratton.
                        ANd than after regned kyng Edmūd Irenſyde & Knoght ye dane But thus it befel afterward yt in ye ſame yere that they were accorded & ſo moche loued togyder / wherfore a fals traytour had enuy at the loue that was bytwene them / whoſe name was Edrith of ſtra
                              •
                           
                           to
                              •
                            / that was a grete lorde yt was Edmunde Irenſydes man / & of hym helde all the londe that he had / & neuertheleſſe he thought to betraye his lorde / & make Knoght kyng of all the londe / to the entent rychely to be auaūced / & with hym to be well beloued. Wherfore he prayed his lorde Edmunde Irenſyde on a daye with hym for to ete. And the kyng hym curteyſly graūted / and to hym came at his prayer. And at meet the kyng was ryally ſerued with dyuerſe metes and drynkes. And whan nyght came that he ſholde go to bedde / the kyng toke his owne meyny and went to the chambre where as he ſhold take his nyghtes reſt And as he loked aboute hym he ſawe a fayre ymage & a well made in ſemblaūt as it were an archer with a bowe bent in his hande / & in ye bowe a fyne arowe. Kynge Edmund went nere to beholde it better. And whan he was by it / anone ye arowe ſmote hym through the body / & there ſlewe the kynge / for ye engyn was made to ſlee his owne lorde traytourſly. And whan kynge Edmund was thus deed & ſlayne / he had regned but .x. yere And his people made moche ſorowe for him / & his body they bare to Glaſtenbury / & there buryed hym. And this fals traytour Edrith anone went to ye quene that was kynge Edmundes wyfe that wyſt not of her lordes deth / & toke from her two ſones that were fayre & yonge that her lorde had goten on her / that one was called Edwarde / & that other Edwyne / & ladde them wt hym to London / & toke them to kyng Knoght yt he ſholde do with them what his wyl were. And told hȳ how ſubtylly he had ſlayne king Edmund bycauſe ye Knoght ſholde haue all the londe of Englonde. ¶ O thou fals traytoure / haſt yu ſlayne my true broder

that was ſo true bycauſe of me / a man that I mooſt loued in the worlde. Now by my heed I ſhall for thy trauayle the well rewarde as thou haſt deſerued / & anone let hym be taken / and boūde hym handes & feet in maner of a traytour / & let caſt hym in to the ryuer of Tamyſe. And in this maner the fals traytour ended his lyfe. The kyng toke ye two chyldren & put them vnto the abbot of Weſt mynſter to warde & to kepe tyll he wyſt what was beſt with them for to do.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Knoght ſent bothe kyng Edmondes ſones in to Denmarke for to be ſlayne / and how they were ſaued.
                        ANd it befel ſoone afterward that kynge Knoght had all the londe in his handes: & ſpouſed ye quene Emme through conſent of al his barons / for ſhe was a fayre woman / the whiche was Eldredes wyfe / and the dukes ſyſter of Normandy / & they lyued togyder with moche loue as reaſon wolde. The kyng aſked vpon a daye coūſeyle of the quene what was beſt to do wt Edmond Irenſydes ſones. Syr ſayd ſhe / they be the ryght heyres of the londe / and yf they lyue they wyll do you moche ſorowe wt warre / and therfore let ſende them in to a ſtraūge londe aferre / to ſome man that may deſtroye them. The king anone let call a Dane that was called Walgar / & cōmaūded hym that he ſholde lede thoſe two chyldren in to Denmarke / & ſo to do and ordeyne for them that he ſholde neuer more here of them. Syr ſayd this Walgar / your commaūdement gladly ſhall be done. And anone he toke the two chyldren & ledde them in to Denmarke. And for as moche as he ſawe that the chyldren were wonders fayre & m
                              •
                           ke / he had of them grete pite & ruth / & wold not ſlee them / but ledde them to ye kynge of Hungary for to nouryſſhe. For this Walgar was well beknowen with the kynge & well beloued. Anone the kynge aſked fro whens the children were. And Walgar tolde hym & ſayd yt they were ye ryght heyres of Englonde / and therfore men wolde deſtroye them / & therfore ſyr vnto you they be comen to ſeke mercy & helpe / & for ſoth yf they may lyue your men they ſhall become / and of you they ſhall holde all theyr londe. The kynge of Hungary receyued thē with moche honour / and let them worthely be kepte. And thus it befell afterwarde that Edwyne ye yonger broder dyed / & Edwarde the elder broder lyued / a fayre man and a ſtronge / and a large of body / & gentyll and curteys of condicyons / ſo yt all men loued hym. And this Edwarde in ye cronycles is called amonge Englyſſhmen Edwarde the outlawe. And whan he was made knyght / the kynges doughter of Hungary loued him moche for his goodnes and his fayrnes / ſo that ſhe called hym her derlynge. The kynge that was her fader perceyued well the loue that was bytwene them two / & he had none heyr but onely that doughter. And the kynge vouchedſafe his doughter to no man ſo well as he dyd to hym that ſhe loued ſo well / and he her agayn and gaue her vnto hym with a good wyll. And Edwarde her ſpouſed with moche honour. The kyng of Hungary ſent after all his barons and made a ſolemp
                              •
                           e feeſt and a ryche weddynge / and made all men to vnderſtande yt this Edwarde ſholde be kyng after his deceſſe of all the londe of Hungary. Of the whiche tydynges they were all ryght glad. And this Edwarde begate vpon this lady a ſone the whiche was called Edgar Helyng / and afterwarde a doughter that was called Margarete / that afterwarde was quene of Scotlonde. And by the

kyng of ſcotlond that was called Mancolin ſhe had a doughter that was called Maud that was quene afterwarde of Englonde through kyng Henry y• was the fyrſt ſone of the conquerour that her wedded / & he begate on her a doughter that was called Maud / that afterward was empreſſe of Almayne. And of this Maud came the kyng of Englonde that vnto this daye is called Henry the empreſſe ſone / and yet had this Edwarde an other doughter by his wyfe yt was called Chriſtian / & ſhe was a nonne.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Knoght yt was a proude man conquered Nor way / and how he became afterwarde meke and mylde.
                        NOw haue ye herde of Edmunde Irenſydes ſones yt king Knoght wende they had ben ſlayne as he had cō maūded Walgar before. And this kyng Knoght had in his handes all y• realme of Englond & Denmark. And after that they went vnto Norway for to cōquere that londe. But the kynge of the londe yt was called Elaf came with his people / & wende to haue well kepte & defended his londe / & ſo there he faught wt hym / tyll at y• laſt he was ſlayne in yt batayle. And thā this Knoght toke all y• londe in to his hādes. And whā he had cōquered Norway / & takē feaute & homage there he came agayne in to Englonde / & helde hȳſelfe ſo grete a lorde / yt hym thought in all the worlde was not his pere / & became ſo proude & hauteyne that it was grete wonder. ¶ And ſo it befell vpon a daye as he had herd maſſe at weſt mynſter / & wolde haue gone in to his palays the wawes of the Tamyſe ſo ſwyftely came agaynſt hym y• almooſt they touched his feet. Than ſayd y• kyng with a proude herte. I cōmaunde the water to turne agayn / or elles I ſhall make the. The wawes for his cōmaūdemēt wold not ſpare / but flowed in heyght more & more. The kyng was ſo proude of herte that he wold not flee y• water but abode ſtyll in y• water / & bette it wt a yerde y• he had in his hande / & cōmaūded ye water yt it ſholde go no ferder. But for all his cō
                           maūdement y• water wold not ceſe / but encreaſed more & more / ſo that the kyng was all wete / & ſtode depe in the water And whan he ſawe the water wold not do his cōmaūdement / he wtdrewe hym & ſtode vpon a ſtone / holdyng vp his handes on hye / & ſayd herynge all y• people. This god yt maketh y• ſee thus aryſe on hye is kyng of all kynges / & of all mygh tes mooſt / and I am a caytyf & a deedly man / & he may neuer dye / & all thynge doth his cōmaūdement & hym obeyeth. To yt god I praye yt he be my warraūt / for I knowlege me a caytyf feble & of no power / & therfore I wyll go vnto Rome without ony longe lettyng / my wycked nes to punyſſhe / & me to amende. For of god I clay me my londe for to holde / & of none other. And anone made redy his heyre / & hȳſelfe went to Rome without ony lettynge. And by y• waye dyd many almes dedes / & at Rome alſo. And whā he had ben there & done penaūce for his ſynnes / he came agayn in to Englonde / & became a good man & an holy / leuyng all maner pryde / & lyued an holy lyfe / & made two abbeys of ſaynt Benet / one in Englonde / and another in Norway / by cauſe he loued ſaynt Benet more ſpecyally than ony other ſaȳt / & he loued moche alſo ſaynt Edmund the kyng / & often he gaue grete gyftes to the hous / & made it ryche. And whan he had regned .xx. yere he dyed / & lyeth at Wyncheſtre.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno dn̄i. M .xviij.
                        BEnedictꝰ the .ix. was pope after Iohannes / & he was a grete lethour

/ & therfore he was dampned / & he appered to a certayne man vnder a meruaylous fygure & an horryble. His heed & his tayle was lyke an aſſe / that other part of his body lyke a beer. And he ſayd to this mā to whom he appered. Be not aferde / for I was a man as ye be now / but for my beeſtly lyuynge whā I was pope I appere now lyke a beeſt. ¶ In this mānes tyme was grete diuiſyon & ſclaūdre to y• chirche / for he was put out & in two tymes. And here Ptholomeus noteth yt the pryde of byſſhops had euer an euyl ende / & it was euer y• occaſyon of moche vnreſt & batayle. ¶ Cōradus the fyrſt was emperour after Hēry .xx. yere This mā made many lawes / & cōmaū
                           ded peas to be kept mooſt ſtraytly of ony man. But y• erle of Ludolf was accuſed & he fledde frō his londe / & deſyred more to lyue lyke a chorle than lyke a gentylman / & yet meruaylouſly his ſone was made emperour by y• cōmaundement of god agaynſt the wyl of Conradus. And at the laſt they were accorded / & he toke Conradus doughter to his wyfe.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kynge Harold that had leuer go on fote than ryde on horſbacke.
                        THis Knoght of whome we haue ſpokē of before had two ſones by his wyfe Emme / yt one was called Hardiknoght / & yt other Harold / & he was ſo lyght on fote yt men called hym comynly Harold hare fote. And this Harold was no thynge manerd after Knoght his fader / for he ſet not by cheualry / curteyſy / ne worſhip / but onely by his owne wyll. And he became ſo wicked yt he exiled his moder Emme. And ſhe went in to Flaū
                           dres / & there dwelled wt y• erle / wherfore he & his broder hated echeother deedly. And whan he had regned ij. yere & more hedyed / & lyeth at Weſt mynſter.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kynge Hardiknoght that was Haroldes broder.
                        AFter this Harold hare fote regned his broder Hardyknoght / a noble knight & a worthy / & moche loued cheualry and all maner of goodnes. And whan this Hardiknoght had regned a lytell whyle / he let vncouer his broder Harold / & ſmote of his heed / & made it to be caſt in to a gonge / & the body in to Ta myſe. And after came fyſſhers & toke y• bedy with theyr nettes by nyght / & bare hym to ſaynt Clemētes chirche / & there buryed hym. Thus auenged hym Hardiknoght on his broder. Thus kyng Har diknoght was ſo large a gyuer of meet & drynke / that his tables were ſet euery daye thre tymes full with ryall metes & drynkes for his meyny & for them that came to his courte. And this kyng Hardiknoght ſent after Emme his moder & made her to come agayn / for his broder Harold hare fote had dryuen her out of y• lond through coūſeyle of y• erle Godwyn that than was the greteſt lorde in Englonde nexte the kynge / & that had mooſt rule / bycauſe he had ſpouſed the doughter of kyng Knoght begoten on his fyrſt wyfe. And whan this quene was dryuen out of Englond & came to the erle of Flaundres that was called Baldewyne his coſyn foūde her there all thȳge that her neded / vnto the tyme that ſhe went agayne in to Englonde / that the kynge Hardiknoght had ſent for her that was her ſone / and made her to come agayne with moche honour. This kyng Hardiknoght whan he had regned .v. yere he dyed / and lyeth at Weſt mynſter.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the vylany that the Danes' dyd to the englyſſhmen / wherfore fro that tyme after was no Dane made kynge of this londe.
                        
                           
AFter the deth of this kyng Hardiknoght for as moche as he ne had no chylde of his body begoten / the 
                              ••
                           les and barons aſſeinbled and made a coūſeyl / that neuer more after no man yt was a Dane / though he were neuer ſo grete a man amonge them / he ſhold neuer be kyng of Englonde for y• deſpyte yt they had done to englyſſhmen. For euer more before / yf the englyſhmen & the da nes happened to mete vpō a brydge / the englyſhmen ſhold not be ſo hardy to mene a fote / but ſtande ſtyll tyll the danes were paſſed forth. And more ouer yf the englyſhmen had not bowed down theyr heedes to do reuerence vnto the danes / they ſholde haue ben beten & defouled / & ſuche deſpytes & vylany dyd the danes to our englyſſhmē / wherfore they were driuen out of y• londe after Hardiknoghtes deth. For they had no lorde y• myght mayntayne them. And in this maner auoyded the danes Englonde / that they neuer came agayn. The erles & barons by theyr comyn aſſent & counſeyle ſente vnto Normādy for to ſeke thoſe two bretherne Alured and Edwarde that were dwellynge wt the duke Rycharde y• was theyr vncle / in entent for to crowne Alured the elder broder / & make hym kyng of Englonde / & of this thynge to make an ende. The erles & barons made theyr othe / but the erle Godwyn of Weſtſex falſly & traytourſly thought to ſlee theſe two bretherne anone as they ſhold come in to Englond / in entent to make Harold his ſone kynge / the whiche ſone he had begoten on his wyfe kyng Hardiknogh tes doughter y• was a dane. And ſo this Godwyn went pryuely to ſouthhamton for to mete there with the two bretherne at theyr landynge. And thus it befell yt the meſſengers yt went in to Normandy foūde not but onely Alured that was y• eldeſt broder. For Edwarde his broder was gone to Hungary for to ſpeke with his coſyn Edwarde the outlawe y• was Edmund Irenſydes ſone. The meſſengers ſaid to Aluted how y• the erles & ba rons of Englond ſent for hȳ / & y• he ſhold boldly come in to Englōde & receyue the realme: for king Hardiknoght was deed & all the danes dryuen out of the londe.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Godwyn the fals traytour toke Alured vpon Gildeſdown whan that he came from Normandye to be kynge of Englonde / & how he cauſed hym to be martyred in the yle of Ely.
                        
                        WHan Alured herd theſe tydȳges he thāked god / & toke ſhyppyng with all y• haſte that he myght and paſſed the ſee and arryued at ſouth hamton there Godwyn y• fals traytour was. And whan this traytour ſawe y• he was comen / he welcomed hym & receyued hym with moche ioye / & ſayd yt he wold lede hym to London where as all the barons of Englonde hym abode to make hym theyr kynge. And ſo they went on theyr waye towarde London. And whan they came on Gyldeſdowne tho ſayd y• traytour Godwyn vnto Alured.

Take hepe aboute you bothe on the lefte ſyde & on the ryght ſyde / & of all ye ſhal be kyng / & of ſuche an hondred mod Now forſothe ſayd Alured / I behyght you and yf I be kyng / I ſhall ordeyne & make ſuche lawes / wherof god & man ſhall be well apayed. Now had the tray tour cōmaūded all his men that were wt hym / that whan they were comen vpon Gyldeſdown that they ſhold ſlee all that were in Aluredes company / that came with hym from Normādy / & after that take Alured & lede hym in to y• yle of Ely and after put out bothe his eyen of his heed / & afterward brynge hym to deth. And ſo they dyd / for they ſlewe all y• company that were there / the nombre of. xij gentylmen y• were comen with Alured frō Normandy / & after they toke Alured & in the yle of Ely they put out his eyen & rent his wombe / & toke y• chefe of his bowels / & put a ſtake in to the groūde / & an ende of the bowels faſtened therto / & with nedyls of yren they pricked y• good thylde / & ſo made hym to go aboute the ſtake tyll yt all his bowels were drawen out of his body / & ſo dyed Alured there through treaſon of the erle Godwyne. Whan the lordes of Englond had herde and wyſt how Alured that ſholde haue ben theyr king was put to deth through the fals traytour Godwyne / they were wonders wroth / & ſwore bytwene them god & his holy name / that he ſholde dye a worſe deth thā dyd Edryth of ſtration y• had betrayed his lorde Edmund Iren ſyde / & they wold haue put hym to deth but the traytour fledde thens in to Denmarke / & there helde hym .iiij. yere and more / & loſt all his londe in Englonde.
                        SIlueſter the thyrde was pope after Benedictus. This Silueſter was choſen / & Benedict was expulſed. And afterwarde was Silueſter expulſed & Benedict was put vp agayn. And after he was put out / & Gregory was made pope / & he was but ſymple lettred man / and therfore he choſe an other pope to be cōſecrate wt hym. And whan many men were dyſpleaſed with this guydyng of two popes / the thyrde was brought in / the whiche ſholde occupy y• place of bothe y• two. And ſo they ſtroue amonge them ſelfe. But Henry the emperour than came to Rome and depoſed them all / and made Clement the ſecond pope / whome he made anone to crowne hym. And he ſayd to the Romayns they ſholde neuer wtout his aſſent choſe pope And ſo .v. beynge popes / the ſyxth was put in. But many men ſaye this Grego ry was an holy man. ¶ Damaſus the ſecond was after Clement .xxiij. dayes. This man was an vſurper of y• popery che / & he dyed ſodeynly. And anone the Romayns aſked to haue a pope / & that the Almayns ſholde haue none / for they were ſo harde herted that they myght not enclyne to the entent of y• emperout the whiche ſayd there ſholde be no pope choſen but yf he wolde be of counſeyle of the eleccyon. But for all that they put in this holy man Leo / and after he had of that conſcyence / & refuſed it. And anone he was choſen by y• comyn aſſent. This Leo put Chryſt in the forme of a laſar in to his owne bedde / and on the morowe he founde no thynge there.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of ſaynt Edwarde the confeſſour that was Aluredes broder / and how he was kynge of Englonde.
                        ANd whā this was done / all the barons of englond ſent another tyme in to Normandy y• Edward ſholde come in to englond with moche 
                              •
                           onout. And this Edwarde in his chyldhode loued 
                              〈◊〉
                            hey god & hym dradde / and in

honeſte & clennes ladde his lyfe / & hated ſynne as deth. And whan he was crow ned & anoynted wt a ryall power / he forgate not his good maners & condicyons that he fyrſt vſed / & forgate not all good cuſtomes for no maner honour / ne for no rycheſſe / ne for no maner hygnes. But euer more & more gaue hym to goodnes & well loued god & holy chirche paſſyng all other maner thynge. And poore men alſo he loued / & helde them as they had ben his owne bretherne / & to them ofte he gaue grete almes wt full good wyll.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the fyrſt ſpecyall loue that god ſhewed to ſaynt Edward lyuynge.
                        IT befell on a daye as he went frō the chirche of weſtmynſter / & had herde maſſe of ſaynt Iohn ye euangelyſt for as moche as he loued ſaȳt Iohn the euangeliſt more ſpecyally after god and our lady / than he dyd ony other ſaynt. And ſo there came to hym a pylgrym / & prayed hym for ye loue of god & our lady & ſaynt Iohn the euangelyſt ſome good for to gyue hym. And the kyng pryuely toke his rynge of his fynger / yt no man perceyued it / & gaue it to the pilgrym / & he it receyued & went thens. This king Edward made all ye good lawes of Englonde / that yet ben mooſt vſed & holden. And he was ſo mercyable and ſo full of pyte / that no man myght be more.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How the erle Godwyn came agayne in to Englonde / and had agayne all his londe / and afterwarde ſaynt Edwarde wedded his doughter.
                        WHan the erle Godwyn that was dwellynge in Denmark had moche herde of the goodnes of kynge Edwarde / & that he was full of mercy and pyte / he thought yt he wolde go agayne in to Englond for to ſeke & to haue grace of the good kyng Edward that ſo mercy full was that he myght haue agayn his londe in peas. And arayed hym as moche as he myght & put hym towarde the ſee & came in to Englonde to London where ye kynge was that tyme & all the lordes of Englonde & helde a parlyamēt Godwyn ſent to them yt were his frendes / & were ye mooſt greteſt lordes of the lōde / & prayed them to beſeche ye kynges grace for hym / & that he wolde graunte him his peas & his lōde. The lordes lad hȳ before ye kyng to ſeke his grace. And anone as ye kyng ſawe hym / he appeled hym of treaſon / & of the deth of Alured his broder / & theſe wordes to hym ſayd Traytour Godwyn I the appele that thou haſt betrayed & ſlayne my broder Alured. Certes ſyr ſayd Godwyn ſaue your grace & your peas & your lordſhyp I neuer betrayed hym / 
                              •
                           e yet lewe hȳ. And therfore I put me in reward of the caurte. Now fayre lordes ſayd ye kynge / ye that be my lyeges / erles & barons of the londe yt here ben aſſembled / full well ye herde myn appele / & the anſwere alſo of Godwyn / & therfore I wyll that ye awarde & do ryght. The erles & barons than gadred them all togyder to do this awarde by themſelfe / & ſo they ſpake dy uerſly among them / for ſome ſayd there was neuer alyaūce by homage ſerment ſeruyce / nor by lordſhyp bytwene Godwyn & Alured / for whiche thynge they myght hym drawe. And at the laſt they deuyſed & demed / that he ſhold put hym in ye kynges mercy all togyder. Thā ſna ke the erle Leuerike of Couentre a good man to god & to all the worlde / & told his reaſon in this maner and ſayd. The erle Godwyn is ye beſt frended man of Englonde after ye kyng / & well myght it not be gaynſayd / that without cou
                              •
                           ſe yle of Godwyn Alured was neuer put to deth

wherfore I awarde as touchynge my parte / that hymſelf & his ſone & euery of vs .xii. erles that ben his frendes go before the kynge / charged with as moche golde & ſyluer as we may bere bytwene our handes / prayenge the kynge to forgyue his euyll wyll to the erle Godwyn and receyue his homage / & yelde agayn his londe. And they accorded vnto that awarde / and came euery of them with golde & ſyluer as moche as they myght bere bytwene theyr handes before the kynge / and there ſayd the forme and the maner of theyr accorde & of theyr awarde. The kyng wolde not them gaynſaye but as moche as they had ordeyned he graūted and cōfermed. And ſo was the erle Godwyn accorded with the kynge / and had agayne all his londes. And afterward he bare hym ſo well & ſo wyſely / that the kynge loued hym wonders moche / & with hym he was full preuy. And within a lytell tyme they loued ſo moche that ye kynge ſpouſed Godwyns doughter / and made her quene. And neuertheles though the kyng had a wyfe yet he lyued euer in chaſtite and clennes of body wtout ony fleſſhely dede doynge with his wyfe. And ye quene alſo in her halfe ladde an holy lyfe two yere / & dyed And afterwarde the kynge lyued all his lyfe without ony wyfe. The kyng gaue the erledome of Oxford to Harolde that was Godwyns ſone / & made hym erle. And ſo well they were beloued / bothe ye fader and he / & were ſo preuy with the kynge / yt they myght do by ryght what thynge they wolde. For agaynſt ryght wold he no thynge do for no maner man ſo good and true he was of conſcyence. And therfore our lorde Ieſu Chryſt ſpecyall loue ſhewed to hym.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Edwarde ſawe 
                              ••
                           wyne kynge of Denmarke drowned in the ſee in the tyme of the leuacyon of the ſacrament as he ſtode and herde maſſe.
                        IT befell vpon a whytſondaye as kynge Edwarde herde his maſſe in the grete chirche of Weſtmynſter at the leuacion of Ieſu Chriſtes body: & as all men were gadred in the chirche / and came nigh the awter for to ſe ye ſacrynge the kyng lyft vp his handes on hygh / & toke vp a grete laughter / wherfore all yt ſtode aboute hym began gretly to wonder. And after maſſe they aſked why the kȳges laughter was. Fayre lordes ſaid kynge Edward / I ſawe Swyne ye yonger that was kyng of Denmarke come in to the ſee wt all his power for to haue comen in to Englond to warre vpon vs / & I ſawe hym & all his folke drowned in the ſee / & all this I ſawe in the leuacyon of Chryſtes body bytwene the preeſtes hādes / & I had therof ſo grete wye that I myght not my laughter withholde. And the erle Leuerich ſtode beſyde hym at the leuacion / & openly ſawe the forme of breed turne in to ye lykenes of a yonge childe / & toke vp his ryght hande & blyſſed the kynge / & afterwarde ye erle / & the erle anone turned hym toward ye kynge for to make hym ſe that holy ſyght. And than ſayd the kynge. Syr erle I ſo well that ye ſe / thanked be god that I haue honoured my god and ſauyour vyſybly Ieſu Chryſt in forme of man / whoſe na me be blyſſed in all worldes. Amen.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How the rynge that ſaynt Edwarde had gyuen to a poore pylgrym for ye loue of god and ſaynt Iohn the euangelyſt came agayne to kynge Edwarde.
                        THis noble man ſaynt Edwarde regned .xiii. yere. And thus it be fell vpon a tyme or he dyed / ye two men of Englond were gone in to ye holy londe

and had done theyr pilgrymage / & were goynge agayne in to theyr owne coūtree where they came fro. And as they went in the waye / they mette a pilgrym that curteyſly ſalewed them / & aſked of them in what londe and in what coūtree they were borne. And they ſayd in Englonde Than aſked he who was kyng of Englonde. And they anſwered and ſayd / the good king Edward. Fayre frendes ſayd the pylgrym / whan that ye come in to your coūtree agayne / I praye you that ye wyll go vnto kyng Edwarde / & greet hym oftentymes in my name / & oftenty mes him thanke of his grete curteyſy yt he to me hath done / & namely for ye ryng yt he gaue me whan he had herde maſſe at Weſtmynſter for ſaynt Iohns loue ye euāgelyſt. And than toke ye rynge & toke it to the pylgryms & ſayd. I praye you go & bere this ryng / & take it vnto kyng Edward / & tell hym that I ſende it hym and a full ryche gyfte I wyll gyue hym For vpō the .xij. daye he ſhal come to me & euermore dwell in blyſſe wtouten ende. Syr ſayd ye pilgryms / what man be ye and in what coūtree is your dwellynge. Fayre frendes ſayd he / I am Iohn the euangelyſt / & I am dwellynge with almyghty god / & your kynge Edward is my frende / & I loue hym in ſpecyall for bycauſe that he hath euermore lyued in clennes & is a clene mayd / & I praye you my meſſage to fulfyll as I haue ſayd. Whan ſaȳt Iohn ye euāgelyſt had thus charged them / ſodeynly he voyded out of bothe theyr ſightes. Than thanked ye pylgryms almyghty god & went forth theyr waye. And whan they had gone two or thre myle they begā to ware wery / & ſet them down for to reſt them / & ſo they fell on ſlepe. And whan they had well ſlepte / one of them awoke & lyft vp his heed & loked aboute & ſayd to his felowe. Aryſe vp and go we in our waye. What ſayd that our felowe to that other where be we now. Certes ſayd ye other / it ſemeth me yt this is not ye ſame coūtre that we layde vs 
                              •
                           owne in for to reſt & ſlepe. For we were from Ieruſalem but thre myles. They toke vp theyr handes and blyſſed them / & went forth on theyr waye / & as they went they ſawe ſhepes herdes goyng wt theyr ſhepe that ſpake none other lāguage but engliſſhe. Good frendes ſayd one of ye pylgryms / what coūtre is this / & who is lord therof. And anone the ſhepeherdes anſwered & ſayd This is the coūtree of Kent in Englond of the whiche the good kynge Edward is lorde of. Than the pilgryms thanked almyghty god & ſaynt Iohn ye euangelyſt / & went forth on theyr waye & came to Caunterbury / & from thens to London / & there they foūde the kynge. And tolde hym all from ye begynnynge to the endynge / as moche as ſaynt Iohn had charged them / & of all thȳges how they had ſpēdde by ye waye / & toke ye rynge to kyng Edward / & he receyued it / & thanked almyghty god & ſaynt Iohn ye euan gelyſt. And than made hym redy euery daye from daye to daye to departe out of this lyfe whan god wold ſend for hym.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How ſaynt Edwarde dyed on the .xij. daye.
                        ANd after it befel thus on Chryſt maſſe euen as the holy man Edward was at goddes ſeruyce for to here matyns of ye hygh feeſt / he became full ſeke / & on the morowe endured wt moche payne for to here ye maſſe / & after maſſe he let hym to be ladde in to his chambre there for to reſt hym. But in his hall amonge his barons & knyghtes myght he not come for to comforte them and ſolace as he was wont to do at that worthy feeſt. Wherfore all theyr myrth and

cōforte amonge all that were in the hall was turned in to care & ſorowe / bycauſe they drad to leſe theyr good lorde ye kyng And vpon ſaynt Iohns daye ye euangelyſt that came nexte the kynge receyued his ryghtes of holy chirche / as it befalleth to euery chryſten man / & abode the mercy & the wyll of god. And ye two pylgryms he let come before hym / & gaue them ryche gyftes & betoke them to god And alſo ye abbot of Weſtmynſter he let come before hym / & toke hym that ryng in the honour of god & ſaynt Mary & of ſaynt Iohn the euangelyſt. And the abbot toke & put it amonge other relykes / ſo that it is at Weſtmynſter & euer ſhall be. And ſo laye ye kynge ſeke tyll the .xij. euen / and than dyed the good kyng Edward at Weſtmynſter / & there he lyeth. For whoſe loue god hath ſhewed many a fayre myracle. And this was in ye yere of ye incarnacyon of our lorde Chryſt Ieſu. M .lxv. And after he was tranſlated and put in to the ſhryne by ye noble martyr ſaynt Thomas of Caunterbury.
                        
                           
                              •
                           Ictor the ſeconde was pope after Leo / & lytell of hȳ is wryten. ¶ Henry the ſeconde was emperour after the firſt Henry .xvij. yere. This man was coſyn to Conrade / & he was borne in a wode / and twyes taken to be ſlayne whā he was a childe / but god defended hȳ euermore. Whan he was made emperour he made a monaſtery in ye ſame place in the wode where he was borne. This man was a vicyous man / and he entred in to Ytaly / & there he toke Pandulphus ye prynce of Campany. ¶ Ste phanꝰ the .ix. was pope after Victor .ix. monethes. ¶ Benedictus was after hȳ & he toke the dignite of ye pope Stephen by ſtrengthe / & kepte it .ix. monethes / & than deceſſed. ¶ Henry the thyrde was emperour after Henry the ſecond. This Henry was an vnquyete man / & many tymes troubled the holy man Gregory the .vij. And fyrſt he aſked forgyuenes & was aſſoyled / but he perſeuered not / but brought in an other pope agaynſt hym / and ſayd he was an heretyke. And Gregory curſed hym. And the choſers of the emperour choſe the duke of Saxon for to be emperour / whome this Henry in batayle ouercame. And than he came to Rome with his pope / and purſued pope Gregory & the cardynals alſo. And than anone Robert ye kynge of Naples droue hym thens / & delyuered the pope & his cardynals. Neuertheleſſe yet he was a man of grete almes / and .xij. tymes he fought in batayle. And at ye laſt he dyed wretchedly. For he was put downe by his owne ſone. For ſo as he dyd to other men / ſo was he done to. ¶ Nycolas the ſeconde was pope after Benedicte two yere. This Nycolas called a coūſeyle agaynſt the archedeken of Turonoſens whiche was an heretyke / & he taught agaynſt the fayth. For he erred in the ſa crament / & after he was cōuerted & was an holy man / but he coude neuer cōuerte his diſcyples. ¶ Nota. ¶ Alexander the ſeconde was pope after hȳ .xij. yere. This Alexander was an holy man / & he ordeyned that vnder payne of curſynge that no man ſhold here a preeſtes maſſe whome they knewe had a 
                              ••
                           man. Vt p
                              •
                            xxxij. diſt. preter hoc. He had ſtrife wt one Codulo / but he expulſed hȳ as an vſurper / & put hym out as a ſymoner.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Harolde that was Godwyns ſone was made kynge / & how he eſcaped fro the duke of Normandy.
                        Whan 
                              •
                           aȳt Edward was gone out of this worlde / and was paſſed to god / & worthely buryed as it apperteyned to ſuche a grete lorde for to be. The

barons of the londe wolde haue had Edward Helingus / ſone to Edward y• outlawe that was Edmūd Irenſydes ſone to be kyngr / bycauſe he was of y• mooſt kyndeſt kynges blode of y• realme. But Harold through the erle Godwyn his fader & through other grete lordes of y• realme that were of his kynne / ſeaſed all Englonde in to his handes / & anone let crowne hym kyng after the buryenge of ſaynt Edward. ¶ This Hatold y• was Godwyns ſone two yere afore ſaynt Edward dyed he wold haue gone in to Flaū
                           dres / but he was dryuen by tēpeſt in to the coūtree of Pountyf / & there he was taken & brought to duke Willyam. And this Harold wende that duke Willyam wolde haue ben auenged on hȳ / bycauſe that Haroldes fader had let ſlee Alured ſaynt Edwardes broder / & pryncypally bycauſe Alured was ſone to quene Emma that was Rychardes moder duke of Normandy y• was grandfader to duke Willyam. Neuertheleſſe he dyd not ſo / for as moche as Harold was a noble & a wyſe knight / & that his fader & he were accorded wt ſaynt Edwarde / therfore he wolde not myſdo hym / but alowed all thynge ordeyned bytwene them. Harold by his good wyll ſware vpon a boke & vpon holy ſaintes that he ſhold ſpouſe & wedde duke Wyllyams doughter after the deth of ſaynt Edward / & y• he ſholde do his beſy cure to ſaue & kepe y• realme of Englonde vnto y• profyte & auaūtage of duke William. And whā Harold had thus made his othe vnto duke William he let hym go free out of pryſon / & gaue hȳ many ryche gyftes. And than he departed thens & came in to Englond / and anone dyd in this maner whā ſaynt Edward was deed as a fals forſworne man let crowne hymſelfe kynge of Englonde and falſly brake the couenaunt y• he had made before with duke Willyam / wherfore he was wonders wroth with hym & ſwore that he wolde be auenged vpon hym what ſomeuer hym befell. And anone duke Willyam let aſſemble a grete hooſt & came in to Englonde to auenge hym vpon Harold / & to conquere y• londe yf that he myght. ¶ And in y• ſame yere that Harold was crowned Harald Hare ſtrenge kyng of Denmarke arryued in Scotlonde / & thought to haue ben kyng of Englonde / & he came in to Englond & robbed & ſlewe all y• he myght / tyll y• he came to Yorke / and there he ſlewe a. M. men of armes / and an hondred preeſtes. ¶ Whan theſe tydynges came to y• king he aſſembled a grete power / & went for to fyght with Haralde of Denmarke / & with his owne handes he ſlewe hym / & the danes were diſcomfyted. And thoſe that were left alyue with moche ſorow fledde to theyr ſhyppes. And thus kyng Harold of Englonde ſlewe kyng Harald of Denmarke.
                     
                  
                  
                     ¶ Here came the Normans and expulſed Harold a Saxon.

                           Wilhelums conqueſtor.
                        
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno dn̄i. M .lxvj.
                        ¶ How Willyam baſtard duke of Normandy came in to Englonde and ſlewe kynge Harolde.
                        ANd whā this batayle was done Harolde became ſo proude that he wolde no thynge parte wt his people

of ony thynge y• he had goten / but helde it all to hymſelf / wherfore y• mooſt parte of his people were wroth and departed from hym / ſo that onely were left with hym but his ſoudyours. ¶ And vpon a daye as he ſate at meet / a meſſenger came to hym & ſayd that William baſtard duke of Normādy was arryued in Englonde with a grete hooſt / & had taken all the londe aboute Haſtynges / & alſo myned the caſtell. Whan y• kyng had herde theſe tydynges / he went thyder with a ſmall power in all the haſte y• he myght for there was but fewe people left with hym. And whan he was comen thyder he ordeyned to gyue batayle to the duke Wyllyam. But y• duke aſked hȳ of theſe thre thynges / yf that he wold haue his doughter to wyfe as he had promyſed & ſworne his othe / or that he wolde holde the londe of hym in truage / or that he wold determyne this thynge in batayle This Harold was a proude man and a ſtronge / & truſted moche in his ſtrength and fought with ye duke Willyam & his people. But Harolde and his men were diſcomfyted in that batayle / & hymſelfe there was ſlayn. And this batayle was ended at Toubrydge in the ſeconde yere of his regne / vpon ſaynt Calixtes daye / and ſo he was buryed at waltham.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kynge Willyam baſtard / & how he gouerned hym well and wyſely / and of the warre bytwene hym & the kynge of Fraunce.
                        WHan Wyllyam baſtard duke of Normandy had conquered all y• londe of Englond / vpon Chryſtmaſſe daye nexte folowynge he let hym to be crowned kynge at weſtmynſter / & was a worthy kyng / & gaue to englyſſh men londes largely / & to his knyghtes. And afterwarde he went ouer the ſee & came in to Normandy / & there dwelled a whyle. And in the ſeconde yere of his regne he came agayne in to Englond / & brought wt hym Maude his wyfe / & let crowne her quene of Englonde on whyt ſondaye. ¶ And than anone after y• king of Scotlond that was called Mancolyn began to ſtryue & warre with the kyng William. And he ordeyned hym toward Scotlond with his men bothe by londe and by ſee for to deſtroye kynge Mancolyn. But they were accorded / & the kyng of Scotlonde became his man / & helde all his londe of hym. And king William receyued of hym his homage and came agayn in to Englond. And whan kyng William had regned .xvij. yere / Maude the quene dyed / on whome kynge Wyllyam had begoten many fayre children / that is to ſaye / Robert Curtoys / Williā Rous / Rycharde alſo that dyed / Henry Beauclerk / & Maude alſo that was the erles wyfe of Bleynes / and other foure fayre doughters. And after his wyues deth there began grete debate bytwene hym & Philyp the kyng of Fraūce. But at the laſt they were accorded. And than dwelled y• kyng of Englond in Normandy / & no man hym warred / & he no man longe tyme. ¶ And the kyng of Fraūce ſayd vpon a daye in ſcorne of kyng William / y• he had longe tyme lyen in chyldbed / & longe tyme had reſted hym there. And this worde came to y• king of Englonde where as he lay in Normandy at Roen. And for this worde was he euyll appayed & alſo wonders wroth toward the kyng of Fraūce & ſwore by god that whan he were aryſen fro chyldbedde he wolde lyght a thouſande candels to the kyng of Fraūce. And anone let aſſemble a grete hooſt of Normans & of Englyſſh men. And in the begynnynge of herueſt he came in to Fraunce / and brent all the townes that he came by through all the

                           
                              •
                           on̄tree / and robbed & dyd all the ſorowe that he myght through out al Fraūce / & at the laſt he brent the cite of Mandos / & cōmaunded his people to bere wode & brenne as moche as they myght / & hym ſelf holpe therto all y• he myght wt a good wyll. And there was grete hete what of fyre that was ſo grete & of the ſonne / y• it was wonders hote / & ſtuffed hȳ ſo y• he became & fell in to a grete ſekenes. And whan he ſawe y• he was ſo ſore ſeke / he aſſygned all Normandy to Robert Curtoys his ſone / & all Englōde to William Rous / & bequethed to Henry Beauclerk all his treſour. And whan he had thus done / he receyued all the ſacramentes of holy chirche / & dyed the .xxij. yere of his regne / & lyeth at Cane in Normandy.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno domini. M .lxvj.
                        O Regory the .vii. was pope after Alexander .xij. yere. This man ordeined a general ſinody / that no preeſt ſholde haue a wyfe / ne ſhold dwell with women / but thoſe that y• ſynody of Nicena & other decrees haue ſuffred. And than the preeſtes ſet lytell or nought by his ordynaūce. This man cōmaunded y• no mā ſholde here maſſe of a preeſt y• had a cōcubyne. And he on a certayne tyme as he was cardynall & legate of Fraūce proceded ſharply agaynſt prelates and preeſtes y• were ſymoners. And amonge other there was one byſſhop that was gretly famed wt ſymony / & thoſe y• accuſed hym he hyred pryuely to ſaye y• contrary / the whiche y• legate conceyued / & afore all y• people he ſayd. Let the iudgement of this man ceaſe at this tyme / for it is deceyuable / & let god diſpoſe for it / & ſayd thus. It is certayne that y• dignite of a byſſhop is the gyuer of y• holy ghoſt And who ſomeuer byeth a biſſhopryche doth agaynſt the holy ghooſt. Than yf thou byſſhop dyd not agaynſt the holy ghooſt / ſaye openly afore all the people Gloria patri et filio / et ſpiritui ſaucto. And many tymes he began to ſaye it / but he coude neuer ſpeke ſpiritui ſancto Than he was depoſed of his byſſhopryche. And after he coude ſpeke it well ynough. ¶ Victor the thyrde was pope after hym one yere. And this man was poyſoned wt venym in y• chalyce. ¶ Vrbanus was pope after hym two yere. This man curſed the kynge of Fraunce for his aduoutry. And he called a counſeyle at Clarū / in y• whiche he ordeyned that matyns of our lady ſholde be ſayd euery daye / and on Saterdaye her ſolempne maſſe. And it is ſayd that this was ſhewed vnto the monkes of Charterhous. ¶ Alſo he called another couuſeyle at Turam / for the holy londe to be wonne agayn / & prouoked the people to that thynge. And within a lytell tyme after that / the holy londe was recouered & the gloryous ſepulere of our lorde Ieſu Chryſt / & Anthiochia wt many other noble cytees were taken from y• handes of y• ſaraſyns. And it is ſayd & men byle ued that .CC. M. chryſtē men went to y• Journey. For there wente of ſtates olde men & yonge / ryche & poore / & no man cō pelled them. And this paſſage was made by y• viſyon of our lady. And y• prȳces of this people were dyuers. One was Godfrey of Bollyon y• nobleſt man of all the worlde / & a vertuous man. And an other was Bemond y• duke of Naples. The thyrde was Hugh the kynges broder of Fraūce / & many other the whiche dyd full nobly for the fayth of god. And it were to longe in this boke to recherſe the gloryous actes that they dyd.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kynge Willyam Rous that was kynge Wyllyam baſtardes ſone / that deſtroyed townes & houſes of relygyon

for to make the newe foreſt.
                        ANd after this Willyam baſtard regned his ſone Willyam Rous This Willyam was a wonders cōtratyous man to god & holy chirche / & let amende & make y• towne of Cardeis / that the paynyms had deſtroyed. This king Willyam deſtroyed holy chirche & theyr poſſeſſions in what parte he myght fyn be them. And therfore there was ſo moche debate bytwene hym and the archebyſſhop of Caunterbury Ancelme / bycauſe he cepreued hȳ of his wyckednes that he deſtroyed holy chitche. And for y• cauſe y• kynge bare to hym grete wrath and therfore exiled hym out of this lōde And the archebyſſhop than went to the courte of Rome / & there dwelled with y• pope. ¶ And this kynge made the newe foreſt / and keſt downe & deſtroyed .xxvj. townes / and .lxxx. houſes of religion / all for to make his foreſt longet & broder / & became wonders proude & gladde of his wode & foreſt / & of y• wylde beeſtes that were within it / that it was manuayle to wyte / ſo that men called hym kepet of wodes & paſtours. And the longer that helyued / the more wycked he became / bothe to god & to all holy chirche / & to all his nien. ¶ And this kyng let make the grete hall of Weſtmynſter. So vpon a day at whytſontyde he helde therin his fyrſt feeſt / & he loked aboute hym & ſayd that y• hall was to lytell by y• halfedele. And at the laſt he became ſo cōtraryous that all thynge y• pleaſed god diſpleaſed hym / & all thynge y• god loued he hated de
                              •
                           dly. ¶ And ſo it befell that he dremed vpon a night alytel or y• he dyed / that he was let blode / & b
                              ••
                           dde a grete quantite of blode / & a ſtreme of it 
                              •
                           epte 
                              •
                           n hye towarde hellen more than 
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              ••
                           deed fadom / & the clerenes of the daye was 
                              〈◊〉
                            ned vnto 
                              •
                           yght & derknes / & the 
                              〈…〉
                           ament alſo. And whan he awoke he had grete drede / ſo that he wyſt not what to do / & tolde his dreme to men of his coun ſeyle / & ſaid that he had grete drede / and ſuppoſed that to hym was ſome myſchaunce to come. ¶ And y• ſecond nyght before a monke dremed of the houſholde that the kyng went in to a chirche with moche people / & he was ſo proude / that he deſpyſed all y• people that were with hym / and that he toke the ymage of the crucyfyxe and ſhamefully bote it with his tethe. And the crucifyxe mekely ſuffred all that he dyd. But the kynge as a wood man rent of the armes of the crucyfyxe / and keſt it vnder his feet and defouled it / and threwe it all abrode. And a grete flame of fyre came out of the crucyfyxe mouth. Of the whiche dreme many men had grete meruayle & wonder. ¶ The good man that had dremed this ſtraūge dreme tolde it to a knyght that was mooſt preuy with the kynge of all men / & the knyght was called Hanumdes. Soone the monke and he tolde the dreme vnto the kynge / and ſayd that it ſholde betoken other thynge than good. And neuertheles y• king laughed therac twyes or thryes / and lytell ſet therby / & thought that he wolde go & hunte and playe in the foreſt. And men counſeyled hym that he ſholde not go that daye for no maner thynge / ne come in y• wode / ſo that he abode at home before meet. But anone as he had eten / no man myght let hym but that he wolde go vnto y• wode for to haue his dyſporte. And ſo it befell that one of his knyghtes that hyghte Walter Tyrell wolde haue ſhorte to a grete harte / & his arowe glanſed vpon a braunche / and through myſauenture ſmote the kynge vnto the herte. And ſo he fell downe deed to the grounde without ony worde ſpekynge / and ſo ended his lyfe days. And it was no mecuayle

for the daye that he dyed he had let to 
                              •
                           erme the archebyſſhopryche of Caunterbury / and .xij. abbeys alſo / and euer more dyd grete deſtruccyon to holy chirche through wrongfull takynge and aſkyng. For no man durſt withſtāde that he wold haue done / & of his 
                              •
                           ewdnes he wolde neuer wtdrawe / neyther amende his lyfe. And therfore god wolde ſuffre hym no longer to regne in his wyckednes. And he had ben kyng .xiij. yere and vj. wekes / & lyeth at Weſtmynſter.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno d
                              •
                           i. M .lxxxviij.
                        PAſcall was pope after Vrbanus xviij. yere and .v. monethes / the whiche the .xiij. yere of his byſſhoprych with his cardynais was put in pryſon by the emperour Henry the fourth. And they myght not be delyuered tyll ye pope had ſworne yt he ſholde kepe peas with hym / & that he ſholde neuer curſe hym. And on that promeſſe the pope gaue the emperour a preuylege. And ye yere after the pope dampned that preuplege / and ſayd on this wyſe. Let vs comprehende all holy ſcripture the olde teſtamēt & the newe / the lawes & the ꝓphetes / the goſpell & the canons of apoſtles / & all the decrees of the popes of Rome / that ye they helde I hold / & that that they dampned I dampne / & mooſt ſpecially that preuy lege graunted to Henry the emperour / the whiche rather is graunted to venge his malyce / than to multyply his pacyence in vertue / for euermore I dampne that ſame preuylege.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of king Hēry beauclerke yt was Willyam Rous broder / & of ye debate bytwene hym & Robert Curtoys his broder.
                        ANd whan this Willyam Rous was deed / Henry beauclerk his broder was made kynge / bycauſe that William Rous had no childe 
                              〈◊〉
                            of his body / & this Henry Beauclerk was crowned kyng at London ye fourth daye after that his broder was deed / that is is ſaye / the fyfth daye of Auguſt. ¶ And anone as Ancelme yt was archebyſſhop of Caunterbury beynge at the courte of Rome herde tell yt Wyllyam Rous was deed / he came agayne in to Englonde / & kyng Henry Beauclerk welcomed hym honourably. And ye firſt yere yt he regned he ſpouſed Maude yt was Margaretes doughter the quene of Scotlo
                              •
                           de / & the archebyſſhop Ancelme of Caunterbury wedded them. And this kynge begate vpon his wyfe two ſones & a doughter / that is to ſaye / Willyam & Rychard and Maude. And this Maude was afterwarde the empreſſe of Almayn. And in the ſeconde yere of his regne / his broder Robert Curtoys duke of Normandy came wt an huge hooſt in to Englond for 
                              ••
                            chalenge ye londe. But through coūſeyle of the wyſe men of the londe / they were accorded in this maner. That the kyng ſhold gyVe his broder ye duke a. M. poūd euery yere / & whiche of them lyued longeſt ſhold be others heyre / & ſo bytwene them ſholde be no debate nor ſtryfe. And whan they were thus accorded / ye duke went home agayn in to Normādy. And whan the kynge had regned foure yere there aroſe a grete debate bytwene hym and ye archebyſſhop of Caūterbury Ancelme. For bycauſe that ye archebyſſhop wolde not graū
                           
                              •
                           e hym to take talage of chirches at his wyll / & therfore the archebyſſhop Ancelme went agayne ouer the ſee vnto the courte of Rome / & there he dwelled wt the pope. And in the ſame yere the duke of Normandy came in to Englonde to ſpeke with his broder. And amōge all other thynges ye duke of Nor mandy forgaue vnto ye kyng his broder the foreſayd. M. poūde yt he ſholde paye

vnto the duke. And with good loue the kyng & the duke departed / and than the duke went agayn in to Normādy. And whan two yere were gone / through the entycement of the deuyll & of lewde men a grete debate aroſe bytwene the kynge and the duke / ſo that through counſeyle the kynge went ouer the ſee in to Normandy. And whā the kyng was comen in to Normandy / all the grete lordes of Normandy turned vnto ye kyng of Englonde / and helde agaynſt the duke theyr owne lorde / & forſoke hȳ / yeldyng them vnto the kyng / with all the good caſtels & townes of Normādy. And ſoone after was the duke taken & ledde wt the kyng in to Englonde / and the kyng let put the duke in to pryſon. And this was ye vengeaūce of god. For whan the duke was in the holy londe / god gaue hym ſuche myght & grace / that he was choſen for to haue ben kyng of Ieruſalem / and he forſoke it / & wolde not take it vpon hym And therfore god ſente hym that ſhame & deſpyte for to be put in to his broders priſon. Thā ceaſed kyng Henry all Normandy in to his hādes / & helde it all his lyfe tyme. And in the ſame yere came ye byſſhop Ancelme from ye courte of Rome in to Englonde agayne. And the kyng & he were accorded. ¶ And in ye yere nexte comynge after there began a grete debate bytwene kynge Philyp of Fraūce and kyng Henry of Englond. Wherfore kyng Henry went in to Normandy / and there was 
                              •
                           rōge warre bytwene them two. And than dyed the kyng of Fraūce and Lowys his ſone was made kynge anone after his dethe. And than wente kynge Henry agayne in to Englonde / & maryed 
                              •
                           a
                              •
                           de his doughter to Henry the emperour of Almayne.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the debate yt was bytwene kyng Lowys of Fraunce and kynge Henry of Englonde / & how kynge Henryes two ſones were drowned in the hy
                              •
                            ſe
                              •
                           .
                        WHan kyng Henry had ben kyng xvij. yere / a grete debate aroſe bytwene kyng Lowys of Fraū
                           ce & kynge Henry of Englonde / bycauſe the kynge had ſente in to Normandy to his men that they ſhold be helpynge vn to the erle of Bloyes as moche as they myght in warre agaynſt the kynge of Fraūce / & that they ſholde be as redy to hym as they were to theyr owne lorde / for bycauſe that ye erle had ſpouſed his ſyſter dame Maude. And for this cauſe the king of Fraūce dyd moche ſorowe to Normandy. Wherfore ye kynge of Englonde was wonders wrothe / & in ha
                              〈…〉
                            went ouer the ſee with a grete power / and came in to Normandy for to defende that londe. And ye warre bytwene them laſted two yere / tyll at the laſt they two fought togyder / and the king of Fraūce was dyſcomfyted / and eſcaped awaye with moche payne / and the mooſt parte of his men were diſcomfyted and taken And the kyng dyd with them his pleaſure / & ſome of them he let go frely / and ſome he let put to deth. But afterwarde the two kynges were accorded. Whan kynge Henry had hoolly all the lo
                              •
                           de of Normandy & diſcomfyted his enemyes of Fraūce / he returned agayn in to Englonde with moche honour. And his two ſones Willyam & Rychard wolde haue comen after theyr fader & went to the ſee with a grete cōpany of people. But or yt they might come to lōde ye ſhyppe ſtroke agaynſt a roche & brake in peces / & were all drowned yt were therin / ſaue one m
                              •
                            yt was in ye ſame ſhyppe y• eſcaped. And this was on ſaynt 
                              •
                           atherynes daye / & theſe were ye names of thē yt were drowned. Willyam & Rychard ye kȳges ſones the erle of Cheſtre Ottonell / his broder

Geffrey rydel / Walter emurci / Godfrey archdeken / the kynges doughter / ye coū
                           teſſe of perches / ye kȳges nece / ye coūteſſe of Cheſtre / & many other. Whan kynge Henry & other lordes arryued in englōde and held theſe tydynges / they made ſorowe ynough / & all theyr myrth & Ioye was turned in to mournynge & ſorowe.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Maude ye empreſſe came agayn in to englond / & how ſhe was afterward wedded to Geffrey the erle of Angeo.
                        ANd whan two yere were gone that the erle had dwelled with ye king / the erle went from ye king & began to warre vpō hym / & dyd moche harme in the londe of Normandy / & toke there a ſtronge caſtell / & there he dwelled all ye yere. And than came to hym tydynges that Henry the emperour of Almayne yt had ſpouſed Maude his doughter was deed / & that ſhe dwelled no longer in Almayn / & that ſhe wolde come agayne in to Normādy to her fader. And whā ſhe was comen vnto hym / he toke her than to hym & came agayn in to Englonde / & made ye englyſſhmen to do othe & feaute vnto the empreſſe. And ye fyrſt man that made the othe was Wylliam the arche byſſhop of Caūterbury / and that other Dauid kyng of Scotlonde / & after hym all the lordes and barons of Englonde. ¶ Alſo after that the noble erle of Angeo a worthy knyght ſent vnto the kyng of Englonde yt he wolde graūte hȳ to haue his doughter Maud ye empreſſe to wyfe And bycauſe yt her fader wyſt yt he was a noble man / the kynge graūted hym / & conſented therto. And than toke he his doughter & ladde her in to Normādy / & came to ye noble knyght Geffrey / & there he ſpouſed ye foreſayd Maude wt moche honour. And the erle begate vpon her a ſone yt was called Henry ye empreſſe ſone And after whā all this was done / kyng Henry dwelled all ye yere in Normandy. And after that a longe tyme a greuous ſekenes toke hȳ where through he dyed And this king Henry regned .xxxv. yere and .iiij. monethes. His herte was buryed in the grete chirche of our lady in Roen. And his body was brought with moche honour in to Englonde / and buryed in the abbey of Redynge / of yt whiche he was founder.
                        HEnricus ye fourth was emperour in Almayn after Henry the thyrd xv. yere. This man put his owne fader in priſon / & there helde hym tyll he dyed He toke pope Paſcall wt his cardynalles and pryſoned them / as is ſayd afore / for the whiche cauſe (as it is ſuppoſed) he lacked yſſue. For he wedded the kynges doughter of Englonde Maude. But afterwarde he came to grace / and all the lawes of the chirche he reſygned frely to Calixte the pope / and be
                              •
                           ought hym to gyue hym in penaunce that he ſholde neuer come agayne to his empyre / that he myght haue remyſſyon of his treſpace. And after the opynyon of many a man / he was wylfully exiled / and bothe he and his wyfe dyed at Cheſtre in Englonde. ¶ Gelaſius was pope after Paſcall two yere / and fledde from Henry the emperour in to Burgoyn / and there deceſſed. This emperour choſe Benedicte a Spanyarde to be pope / the whiche ſtroue with Calixtus. ¶ Calixtus was pope after hym two yere and fyue monethes. This Calixtus was the ſone of the duke of Burgoyne / and was choſen in the place of Gelaſius. And whan he ſholde come to Rome / he toke ye foreſayd Benedictus / and made hym to ryde afore hym ſhamefully. For he on a mule turned his face to the tayle of ye mule / & helde the tayle in his hande as a bry
                              •••
                           
                           
tyll he came through the cite / & than he was put in pryſon. And the pope made peas with the emperour. ¶ Honorius was pope after hym two yere / & lytel of hym is wryten. ¶ Nora. ¶ Henry the fourth Emperour of Ann
                              •
                           yne deceſſed this tyme / & was buryed with his proge
                              •
                           ytours after ſome men with ſuche an epi
                              •
                           aphe. Filius hic / pater hic / auus hic / proauus 
                              •
                           acer iſtis. But it is lykely to be truer that ye Gerald ſayth in Itinerario wallie. where he ſayth / that after he had pryſoned his carnall fader & his ſpirytuall fader the pope with his cardynals / after he was reconſyled / & wylfully he was exiled. And he left Maude his wyfe the kynges doughter of Englonde pryuely / and lyued an heremytes lyfe at Cheſtre .x. yere / where he myght lyue as no man knewe hym / & he called hȳſelfe Godiſcallus / the whiche godſon is called. So the emperour went ſecretly awaye / and Maude his wyfe the empreſſe went to her fader Henry in to Normādy / where anone after ſhe was wedded vnto Geffrey plantagines the duke of Andegāme / vpon whome he begate Henry the ſeconde that afterward was kyng of Englonde / vnder whome ſaynt Thomas of Caūterbury regned & dyed. ¶ Lotharius was emperour after Henry the fourth .xij. yere. And lytell of hym is wryten / but that he was manerly to the chirche / and that he ſubdued Roger the vſurper of the kyngdom of Cycyle. ¶ 
                              •
                           ag
                              •
                            de ſancto Victore was a noble man this tyme at Parys and a noble doctour of ye nacyon of Saxons. ¶ The ordre of ſaynt Iohn baptyſt at Ieruſalem began this tyme by ye worſhypfull man Raymond / myghtely diſpoſed vnto the werkes of mercy. All this ordre made theyr waye to ſerue poore men.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno domini. M .C .xxxiiij.
                        INnocencius was pope aftre Honorius .xiiij. yere & .vij. monethes This man was a very deuoute man / & with ſuche men he cöpanyed hym. And he had ſtryfe .vij. yere agaynſt Pyers of Lyon / yt whiche named hym Anoc
                              •
                           e
                              •
                           ū / & by ſtrength he toke the poperyche / the whiche Innocent ſawe / & wt two galeys fledde in to Fraūce / & was worſhipfully receyued of ſaynt Bernard / the whiche that tyme had all the kynges & prynces in his handes / and he ꝓuoked them for to brynge this pope Innocent in to his dignite agayn. At ye laſt all thynge was ceſſed / and his enemyes were deſtroyed through the iudgemēt of god / & he was pope agayn / and lyued profytably / and was buryed at ſaynt Iohn de Latran.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Stephen ye was kyng Henryes ſyſters ſone was made king of englond.
                        AFter this kyng Henry that was the fyrſt / was made kynge his neuew his ſyſters ſone Stephen erle of Bolloyn. For anone as he herde the rydynges of his vncles deth he paſſed the ſee & came in to Englonde through counſeyle and helpe of many grete lordes of Englonde (agaynſt theyr othe that they had made to Maude the empreſſe) toke the realme / & let crowne Stephen kyng of the londe. And the archebyſſhop Willyam of Caūterbury that firſt made the othe of f
                              •
                           aute to Maud the empreſſe ſet the crowne vpon Stephens heed / and hym anoynted / & byſſhop Roger of Salyſbury maynteyned the kynges party in as moche as he might. The firſt yere that kyng Stephen began to regne / he aſſembled a grete hooſt & went towarde Scotlonde for to haue warred vpon the kyng of Scotlōde. But he came agaynſt hym in peas and in good maner / and to hym truſted / but he made to hym none

                           
                              •
                           omage / for as moche as he had made vnto ye empreſſe Maud. And in ye fourth yere of his regne Maude the empreſſe came in to Englond. And than began debate bytwene kyng Stephen & Maude the empreſſe. This Maude went to the rite of Nicholl / & the kyng her beſyeged longe tyme & myght not ſpede / ſo well ye cite was kepte & defended. And thoſe yt were wtin ye cite ſubtylly eſcaped awaye without ony maner of harme. And than toke ye kynge ye cite / & dwelled therin tyll Candelmas. And than came ye barons ye helde wt the empreſſe / that is to ſaye / the erle Randulf of Cheſtre / the erle Robert of Gloceſtre / Hugh Bygot / Roberte of Morlay / & theſe brought with them a ſtronge power / & faught wt the kynge / & gaue hȳ a ſtronge batayle / in ye whiche batayle kyng Stephen was taken / and ſet in pryſon in the caſtell of Bryſtowe.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Maude the empreſſe wente fro Wyncheſtre vnto Oxford / and after ſhe eſcaped to Walyngford / & of the ſorowe and dyſeaſe that ſhe had.
                        WHan kyng Stephen was taken & brought in to warde in the caſtell of Bryſtowe / this Maude the empreſſe was made lady of all Englonde / and all men helde her for lady of the londe. But thoſe of Kent helde wt kynge Stephens wyfe / & alſo Willyam of Pree & his retynue helped them / and helde warre agaynſt Maude the empreſſe. And anone after ye kyng of Scotlond came to them with an huge nōbre of people. And than went they togider to Wincheſtre where as the empreſſe was / & wolde haue taken her. But the erle of Gloceſtre came with his power & faught with them. And the empreſſe in the meane whyle ye the batayle dured eſcaped from them / & went vnto Oxford / and there helde her. And in that batayl
                              •
                            was the erle of 
                              ••
                           o ceſtre diſcomfyted & taken / & with hym many other lordes. And for his delyueraunce was kynge Stephen delyuered out of priſon. And whan he was delyuered out of pryſon / he wente thens vnto Oxford & beſyeged the empreſſe ye than was at Oxford. And the ſyege endured fro Myghelmaſſe vnto ſaynt Andrewes tyme. And ye empreſſe than let clothe her all in whyte l
                              •
                           nen cloth / for bycauſe ſhe wolde not be know
                              〈…〉
                           . For in the ſame tyme was moche 
                              ••
                           owe & ſo ſhe eſcaped by the Tamyſe from her enemyes. And from thens ſhe went to Walyngforde / & there helde her. And the kynge wolde haue beſyeged her / but he had ſo moche to do with the erle Randulf of Cheſtre / and with Hugh By got ye ſtrongly war / red vpon hym in euery place / ye he wyſt not whether for to turne. And the erle of Gloceſtre holpe hym with his power.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Gaufryde the erle of Angel gaue vnto Henry the empreſſe ſone all Normandy.
                        ANd after this the kynge wente vnto Wylton / and wolde haue made a caſtell there. But than came to him the erle of Gloceſtre with a ſtronge power / & there almooſt he had taken the kynge / but yet the kynge eſcaped with moche payne / & Willyam Martell there was taken / and for whoſe delyueraūce they gaue vnto the erle of Gloceſtre the good caſtell of Shyrborne that he had taken. And whan this was done / ye erle Robert & all the kynges enemyes went vnto Faringdon / & began there to make a ſtronge caſtell. But ye kynge came thyder with a ſtronge power & droue hym thens. And in ye ſame yere the erle Randulf of Cheſtre was accorded with the kynge / and came vnto the courte at his

cōmūdemēt. And the erle wende ſafely for to come / & the kyng anone let take hȳ and put hym in pryſon / 
                              •
                            myght neuer for no thynge come out / tyll that he had yelded vp to ye kynge ye caſtell of Nicholl the whiche he had taken from the kyng with his ſtrength in the xv. yere of his regne. And Gaufryde the erle of Angeo gaue vp to Henry his ſone all Normandy. And in ye yere nexte folowynge dyed the erle Gaufryd. And anone Henry his ſone returned agayne to Anglo / & there was made erle with moche honour of his men of ye londe / & to hym dyd feaute and homage the mooſt parte of ye londe. And than was this Henry the empreſſe ſone erle of Angeo / and alſo duke of Normandy. ¶ In the ſame yere was made a dyuorſe bytwene the kynge of Fraūce and the quene his wyfe that was right heyre of Gaſcoyne / for bycauſe ye it was knowen & proued that they were ſybbe and nye of blode. And than ſpouſed her Henry the empreſſe ſone erle of Angeo & duke of Normandy & duke of Gaſcoyne. ¶ In the .xviij. yere of this Stephen / this Henry came into Englonde with a ſtronge power / & began to warre vpon this kyng Stephen / and toke the caſtell of Malmeſbury / and dyd moche harme And the kynge Stephen had ſo moche warre / that he wyſt not whether for to go. But at the laſt they were accorded through the archebyſſhop Theobalde and other worthy lordes of Englonde / vpon this cōdicyon / that they ſholde departe the realme of Englonde bytwene them / ſo that Henry the empreſſe ſone ſholde holly haue the halfe of all ye londe of Englonde. And thus they were accorded and peas was cryed through out all Englonde. And whan the accorde was made bytwene thoſe two lordes / kynge Stephen became very ſory for bycauſe that he had loſt halfe Englonde / & fell in to ſuche a malady that he dyed in ye .xix. yere and. vii
                              •
                           . wekes & .v. dayes of his regne / all in trouble & warre / & he lyeth in the abbey of Feuerſham / the whiche he let make in the .vj. yere of his regne.
                        CEleſtinus the ſeconde was pope after Innocēt .v. monethes / & lytell he dyd. ¶ Lucius was after hym / & lytell profyted / for they dyed bothe in a peſtylence. ¶ Eugenius ye ſeconde was pope after hym .v. yere &. iii
                              •
                           . monethes This man fyrſt was ye diſcyple of ſaynt Bernarde / and after the abbot of ſaynt Anaſtaſy by Rome / & came to ye churche of ſaynt Ceſary / & was choſen pope by the cardynals / he no thynge knowynge therof / and for drede of the ſenatours he was cōſecrated without the cite. This man was an holy man / & ſuffred tribulacyon. And at the laſt wt moche holynes he deceſſed / and lyeth at ſaynt Peters. And anone after deceſſed ſaȳt Bernard. ¶ Petrus Lombardus the byſſhop of Parys / broder to Gracian compyled the foure bokes of the ſentence this tyme. ¶ Petrus cōmeſtor broder to Grarian & to Pyers Lombarde made hiſtoriā ſcolaſticā / & other bokes. ¶ Frederi
                              •
                           us primus after Conradus was emperour in Almayn and in Rome .xxxiij. yere. This man after the deth of Adryan the pope the whiche crowned hym dyd curſedly with Alexander to hym grete preiudyce For he dyd helpe foure ye ſtroue agaynſt the apoſtles ſect. And he fought mightely agaynſt the kyng of Fraūce / through power of ye danes & other nacyons. But Rychard the kyng of Englond holpe for to expulſe him. And he deſtroyed Medio lanii to the groūde / of the whiche circ ye walles were hyer than ye walles of ony other cite. This man at ye laſt after that he had done many vexacyons to ye pope he was recōſyled. For he dradde leſt the

lombardes wold haue rebelled agaynſt hym / he aſked forgyuenes of the pope / & toke ye croſſe vpon hym / & went to ye holy londe / & dyd many meruaylous thinges there / almooſt as moche as euer dyd Ka rolus magnus. And there he came by a towne that men called Armeniam / & in a lytell water he was drowned / & at Tirū he was buryed. ¶ Anaſtaſius was pope after Eugenius .iiij. yere and more This man was abbot of Rufy / & than he was choſen cardynall / & after pope.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kynge Henry the ſeconde that was the empreſſe ſone / in whoſe tyme ſaynt Thomas of Caunterbury was chaunceler.
                        ANd after this kynge Stephen regned Henry the empreſſe ſone and was crowned of the archebyſſhop Theobald the .xvij. daye before Chryſtmaſſe. And in ye ſame yere Thomas Beket of London archebyſſhop of Caūterbury was made the kynges chaunceler of Englonde. The ſecond yere ye he was crowned he let caſt downe all the newe caſtels that were longynge to ye crowne the whiche kynge Stephen had gyuen to dyuers men / & them had made erles and barons for to holde with hym / & to helpe hym agaynſt Henry the empreſſe ſone. ¶ And the fourth yere of his regne he put vnder his owne lordſhyp ye kyng of Wales. And in the ſame yere ye kynge of Scotlonde had in his owne handes / that is to ſaye / the cyte of Karleyll / the caſtell of Bamburgh / & the newe caſtell vpon Tyne / & the erledom of Lancaſtre ¶ The ſame yere the kyng with a grete power went in to Wales / & let caſt down wodes & made wayes / & made ſtronge the caſtell of Rutlonde Baſingwarke / & amonge the caſtels he made an hous of the temple. ¶ And in the ſame yere was Rychard his ſone borne / that afterward was erle of Oxforde. And ye fourth yere of his regne he made Gaufryde erle of Brytayn. And in that yere he chaunged his money. ¶ And in the .vj. yere of his regne he ladde a grete hooſt to Tolouſe and cōquered it. And the .vij. yere of his regne dyed Theobald the archebyſſhop of Caūterbury. And than almooſt al the cite of Caunterbury through myſchefe was brent. ¶ The .ix. yere of his regne Thomas Beket that was his chaūceler was choſen archebyſſhop of Caūterbury. And vpon ſaynt Bernardes daye he was ſacred. And in ye yere was borne the kynges doughter Elenore. ¶ And in the .x. yere of his regne ſaynt Edwarde the kynge was tranſlated wt moche honour. ¶ And the .xi. yere of his regne he helde his parlyament at Northamton / and fro thens fled ſaynt Thomas arche byſſhop of Caūterbury for the grete debate that was bytwene ye kyng & hym. For yf he had ben foūde on ye morowe he had bē ſlayne / & therfore he fled thens wt thre felowes on fote onely / that no man wyſt where he was / & went ouer ye ſee to ye pope of Rome. And this was ye princypall cauſe. For as moche as the kyng wolde haue put clerkes to deth ye were atteynted of felony / wout ony preuylege of holy chirche. And the .xij. yere of his regne was Iohn his ſone borne. And ye xiij. yere of his regne dyed Maud ye empreſſe ye was his moder. The .xiiij. yere of his regne the duke of Saxon ſpouſed Maude his doughter / & he begate vpon her thre ſones / ye is to ſay / Hēry / Othus & Willyam. And ye .xv. yere of his regne dyed the good erle Robert of Gloceſtre ye founded the abbey of Nonnes of Eton. And in ye ſaine yere Marke kyng of Ieruſalem cōquered Babylon. ¶ And the xv
                              •
                           . yere of his regne / he let crowne his ſone Henry at weſtmynſter / & hȳ crowned

Roger the archebiſſhop of yorke / in harmyng of Thomas the archebyſſhop of Caūterbury / wherfore the ſame Roger was accurſed of the pope.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kynge Henry ye was ſone of kyng Henry the empreſſe ſone / & of the debate that was bytwene hym and his fader / whyle that he was in Normandy.
                        AFter the coronacion of kyng Henry the ſonne of kynge Henry the empreſſe ſone / that ſame Henry the empreſſe ſone went ouer in to Normandy / & there he let mary Elonore his doughter to the Dolfyn yt was kyng of Almayn. ¶ And in the .vij. yere that the archebyſſhop ſaynt Thomas had ben outlawed the kynge of Fraunce made the kynge & ſaynt Thomas accorded. And thā came Thomas ye archebyſſhop of Caūterbury agayn to his owne chirche. And this accorde was made in the begynnyng of aduent. And afterward he was ſlayne & martyred the fyfth daye of Chryſtmaſſe next folowyng. For king Henry thought vpon ſaynt Thomas the archebyſſhop vpon Chryſtmaſſe day as he ſate at his meet and theſe wordes ſaid. That yf he had ony good knyghtes wt hym / he had ben many a day paſſed auenged vpon ye archebyſſhop Thomas. And anone ſyr Willyā Breton / ſyr Hugh Moruyle / ſyr Willyam Tracy / & ſyr Reynold fitz vrſe beers ſone in engliſſhe / pryuely went to the ſee and came in to Englond vnto the chirche of Caūterbury / & there they hȳ martyred at ſaynt Benets awter / in the moder chirche. And that was in ye yere of ye incarnacyon of Ieſu Chryſt. M .C .lxxij. yere. ¶ And anone after Henry the newe kyng began to make warre vpon Henry his fader and vpon his brethern Willyam & Othus. And ſo vpon a daye the kyng of Fraūce & all ye kynges ſones and the kyng of Scotlond / & the greteſt lordes of Englonde were ryſen agaynſt kynge Henry the fader. And at ye laſt as god wolde he cōquered all his enemyes And the kyng of Fraūce & he were accorded. And than ſent kyng Henry ye fader ſpecyally vnto the kynge of Fraūce / and prayed hym hertely for his loue that he wold ſende to hym the names by lettre of them ye were ye begynners of ye warre agaynſt hym. And the kynge of Fraūce ſent agayn to hym by lettre ye names of them that began the warre. The f
                              •
                           aſt was Iohn his ſone & Rychard his broder / and Henry the newe kyng his ſone. Thā was kyng Henry wonders wrot
                              •
                            & curſed ye tyme ye euer he bega
                              •
                           e them. And whyle the warre laſted Henry his ſone the newe kynge dyed / ſore rep
                              •
                           ntynge his myſdedes / and mooſt ſore we made of ony man / for bycauſe of ſaynt Thomas deth of Can̄terbury & prayed his fader with moche ſorowe of her
                              •
                           e mercy for his treſpace. And his fader forgaue hym / and had of hym p
                              ••
                           e. And after he dyed ye .xxxvj. yere of his 
                              •
                           rgne and lyeth at Redynge.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How ye chryſten men loſt ye holy londe in the foreſayd kynges tyme through a fals chryſten man ye became a ſaraſyn.
                        ANd whyle this kyng regned the grete batayle was in ye holy l
                              •
                           de bytwene ye chryſten men & the ſaraſyns but the chryſten men were there ſlayne through grete treaſon of ye erle 
                              •
                           yrpe ye wolde haue had to wyfe ye quene of Ieruſalem / yu ſomtyme was Baldewyns wyfe / but ſhe forſoke hym / & toke to her lord a knyght a worthy man ye was called ſyr Gnyperches. Wherfore the erle Tyrpe was wroth / & went anone right to Saladyne ye was ſoudan of Babylon & became his man / & forſoke his chriſtē
                           
dom / & all chryſten lawe. And the chriſtē men wyſt not of his dedes / but wende for to haue had grete helpe of hȳ as they were wont to haue before. And whan they came to the batayle / this fals chryſten man turned to the ſaraſyns / & forſoke his owne nacyon. And ſo were the chryſtē men ouercomen wt the ſaraſyns. And thus were the chryſten men ſlayne and put to horryble deth / and the cite of Ieruſalem deſtroyed / and ye holy croſſe borne awaye. ¶ The kynge of Fraūce & all the grete lordes of the londe let them be croſſed for to go to the holy londe. And amonge them went Rychard kyng Hen ryes ſone fyrſt after the kyng of Fraūce that toke the croſſe of ye archebyſſhop of Tours. But he toke not ye vyage at that tyme / for bycauſe ye he was let by other maner wayes & nedes to be done. And whan king Henry his fader had regned xxxvi. yere & .v. monethes & foure dayes he dyed / and lyeth at Founteuerard.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno dn̄i. M .C .lvj.
                        ADrianus the fourth was pope after Anaſtaſius .v. yere. This pope was an Englyſſhe man / and the voyce of the comyn people ſayth he was a bondman to the abbot of ſaint Albons in Englond. And whan he deſyred to be made a monke there / he was expulſed / and he went ouer the ſee / & gaue hym to ſtudy & to vertue / and after was made byſſhop of Albanacens. Than he was made legate in to the londe of Wormacian / & he cōuerted it to the fayth. Than he was made pope. And for ye woūdyng of a cardynall he enterdited all the cite of Rome. And he curſed Wyllyam ye kynge of Cecyle / & cauſed hym to ſubmyt hym This man the fyrſt of al the popes with his cardynalles dwelled in the olde cite. ¶ Alexander the thyrde was pope after hȳ .xij. yere. This Alexander had ſtryfe xvij. yere / & the foure ſtryuers that the emperour ſet againſt hym / he ouercame them / & curſed them / & all dyed an euyll deth. This man alſo accorded Frederyk the emperour & Emanuell of Cōſtantynople / & the kyng of Siculo
                              
                                 
                              
                              rum
                           . And this man nouryſſhed ſaynt Thomas of Caū terbury in his exile. ¶ Nota. ¶ Saynt Bernard was canonyſed by this Alexā
                           der / & his abbot forbade hym ye he ſholde do no more miracles / bycauſe there was ſo myghty concourſe of people. And he obeyed to hym whan he was deed / and dyd no moo. ¶ Lucius the thyrde was pope after Alexander .iiij. yere and two monethes / & of hym lytel is wryten. In his dayes deceſſed Henry ye fyrſt ſone to Henry ye ſecond / & this is his epytaphe. Ois honoris honos: decor & decus: vrbis et orbis. Militie ſplēdor glia lumē apex. Iulius ingenio / virtutibꝰ hector. Achillis viribꝰ. Auguſtꝰ moribꝰ. Ore Paris. ¶ Vrbanꝰ ye thyrde was pope after Lu cius .ij. yere. This mā deceſſed for ſorow whan he herd tell ye Ieruſalē was takē with ye ſaraſyns. ¶ Gregorius the .viij. was pope after hym foure monethes / & he practyſed myghtely how Ieruſalem myght be wonne agayne / but anone he deceſſed. ¶ Clemens ye thyrd was pope after hym thre yere / & lytell he dyd.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kyng Rychard that conquered all the holy that chryſten men had loſt.
                        AFter this kynge Henry regned Rychard his ſone / whiche was a ſtoute man & a ſtronge and a worthy and alſo bolde. And he was crowned at Weſtmynſter of the archebyſſhop Baldewyn of Caūterbury / the thyrde daye of September. And the ſeconde yere of his regne kynge Rychard hymſelfe and Baldewyn the archebyſſhop of Caunterbury / and Hubert-byſſhop of Salyſbury

/ and Randulferle of Gloceſtre / and many other lordes of Englonde went in to the holy londe. And in that vyage deceſſed the archebyſſhop of Caūterbury. And kynge Rycharde went before in to the holy londe / and reſted not tyl that he came forth in his waye vnto Cipers / & toke it with grete force. And after that kynge Rychard went forth toward the holy londe / and gate there as moche as the chryſten men had loſt before / & conquered the londe agayne through grete myght / ſaue onely the holy croſſe. And whan kynge Rycharde came to the cite of Acres for to gete the cite / there aroſe a grete debate bytwene hym & the kynge of Fraūce / ſo that the kynge of Fraunce went agayn in to Fraūce / & was wroth towarde kyng Rychard. But yet for all that or kynge Rycharde wente agayne he toke the cyte of Acres. And whan he had taken it / he dwelled in ye cite a whyle But to hym came tydynges that ye erle Iohn of Oxford his broder wolde haue ſeaſed all Englonde in to his handes / & Normandy alſo / & wolde crowne hym ſelfe kynge of all the londe. Whan kyng Rychard herde theſe tydynges he came toward Englonde with all ye ſpede that he myght. But the duke of Oſtryche mette with hym / & toke hym & brought hym vnto ye emperour of Almayn. And the emperour put hym in priſon. And af terward he was delyuered for an huge raūſom / that is to ſaye / an hondred. M. pounde. For the whiche raunſom to be payed eche other chalice of Englōd was molten & made in to money. And all the monkes of the ordre of Ciſteaux gaue all theyr bokes through out all Englonde for to be ſolde / for to paye the raunſom.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Rychard came agayn from ye holy londe / and auenged hym on his enemyes.
                        WHyles this kyng Rycharde was in pryſon / the kynge of Fraunce warred vpon hȳ ſtrongly in Nor mandy. And Iohn his broder warred vpon hym in Englond. But ye byſſhops and barons of Englond withſtode hym with all ye power that they myght gete and toke the caſtell of Wyndſore & other caſtelles. And the foreſayd Iohn ſawe that he had no might ne power agaynſt the barons of Englond for to fyght but anone wente hym ouer the ſee vnto the kynge of Fraūce. And whan kynge Rycharde came out of pryſon and was delyuered & came in to Englond anone after Candelmaſſe in grete haſte he went vnto Notyngham / & the caſtell of Notingham to hym was yelded. And than diſcomfyted he his broder Iohn and all thoſe that held with hym. And after he went vnto the cyte of Wyncheſtre and there he let hym to be crowned kynge of Englonde. And after he went vnto Nor mandy for to warre vpon the kynge of Fraūce. And whan the kyng of Fraūce herde that / he came with fyur hondred knyghtes towarde Gyſors. And kynge Rycharde mette hym and wolde haue gyuen hym batayle. But the kynge of Fraūce anone fledde / and an hondred of his knyghtes were taken & two hondre horſes that were trapped with y
                              •
                           en ¶ And anone after went kyng Rychard for to beſyege the caſtell Gayllard. And vpon a daye as he rode by the caſtell for to take auyſement of the caſtell one of the arbalaſtres ſmore hym with a quarell that was enuenymed. And kyng Richard drewe out the ſhafte of the quarell but the quarelles heed abode ſtyll in his heed / and it began for to rankle / that he myght not helpe hymſelfe ne meue his armes. And whan he wyſt that he had dethes wounde vpon hym / and that he myght not be hole for no maner thynge

he cōmaūded anone all his men ſharply to aſſayle the caſtell / ſo ye the caſtell was takē or ye he dyed / & ſo māly his men dyd that all were taken ye were wtin. And the kyng dyd wt them his wyl / & cōmaūded his men to brȳge before hȳ the man ye ſo had woūded hym. And whan he came before hym the kynge aſked hym what was his name. And he ſaid my name is Bertrā gurdon. Wherfore (ſayd ye king) haſt ye ſlayne me / ſyth I dyd ye neuer no harme. Syr ſayd he / though ye dyd me neuer none harme / ye your ſelfe wt your handes ſlewe my fader & my broder / & I therfore haue quytte you now your trauayle. Than ſayd kynge Rychard / he ye dyed vpon ye croſſe to brȳge mānes ſoule fro ye paynes of hell / forgyue ye my deth / & I alſo forgyue it the. Than he cōmaū ded ye no man ſhold myſdo hym. But for all ye kynges defending / ſome of his men folowed hym / & priuely ſlewe hym. And the .vj. daye after ye kyng dyd ſhryue hȳ & ſore repented hym of his myſdedes / & was houſeled & anoynted / & had regned but .ix. yere & .xxxix. wekes / & dyed and lyeth beſyde his fader at Foūteuerard.
                        HEnricus the fyfth was emperour viij. yere. This Henry was ſone to Frederik / & he wedded Conſtans the kinges doughter of Cecile. And through the occaſion of her he ſubdued all ye kingdom of Apulie / & droue out all ye inhabytaūtes therof. ¶ Celeſtinus the thyrde was pope after Clemēs almoſt .iij. yere This man was crowned on eeſter daye & the day folowyng he crowned Henry ye emperour / & he made a palays at ſaynt Peters / & deceſſed. ¶ Innocencius the thyrde was pope after hym .viij. yere & v. monethes. This mā was well lettred & he made a boke of the wretchednes of mānes condicyon. And he made ſpeculū miſſe / and he made many cōſtitucyons. This man dampned the boke of Iohn Ioachim / the whiche he made agaynſt mayſter Pyers Lombard the maker of the ſentence. ¶ This tyme deceſſed the emperour Henry / and the princes of Almayn dyſcorded / for ſome choſe Otto / & ſome choſe Philip broder to Hēry. Thā Philyp was falſly ſlayne / & Otto was crowned of Innocent in Fraūce / ye whiche anone gaue batayle to the Romains bycauſe they gaue hym no due honour. And for ye cauſe agaynſt the popes wyll he toke ye kyngdom of Apulie from Frederyk / wherfore the pope curſed hym. Than after the fourth yere of his regne the prynces of Almayn made Frederyk emperour / and victoryouſly he ſubdued Otto. ¶ Wyllyam of Parys this tyme began the ordre of ye freres Auſtyns / the whiche ben called freres mendicantes. ¶ Frāciſcus an ytalyan a man of grete perfeccyon / and an enſample to many a man dyd many a myracle this tyme / & he ordeyned the freres minours. ¶ And the .vj. yere of pope Innocent the thyrd the ordre of the freres prechours began vnder Dominik / but it myght not be cō
                           fermed tyll the fyrſt yere of Honorius.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kynge Iohn that in the fyrſt yere of his regne loſt all Normandy.
                        Bycauſe kyng Rychard had none heyre ſone ne doughter after his deth: they made Iohn his broder king / & crowned hȳ at Weſtmynſter by Hubert the archebyſſhop of Caunterbury. And whan he began to regne / he became ſo meruaylous a man ye he went ouer in to Normandy / & warred vpon ye kynge of Fraūce. And ſo longe they warred togy der tyll at ye laſt kyng Iohn loſt all Normandy & Angeo / wherfore he was ſore anoyed: & it was no meruayle. Than let he aſſemble before hȳ at London archebyſſhops

/ biſſhops / abbottes & pryours erles & barons / & helde there a grete par lyament / & aſked there of the clergy the tenth of euery chirche of Englonde for to conquere Normandy and Angeo agayn that he had loſt. They wolde not graūte that thȳge / wherfore he was wonders wroth. ¶ In ye ſame tyme dyed Hubert Than the pryour & the couent of Caunterbury choſe agaynſt the kynges wyll to be archebyſſhop mayſter Stephen of Langton a good clerke / that dwelled at the courte of Rome / and ſent to the pope theyr eletcyon. And the pope confermed it / & ſacred hym at Viterbi. Whan the kynge wyſt of theſe tydynges / he was wonders wrothe / & droue the pryour & the couēt fro Caūterbury / & exiled them out of the londe / & cōmaūded ye no lettre nor cōmaūdement that came fro Rome ſholde be receyued ne pleted in Englōde. Whan ye pope herd this / he ſent to kyng Iohn his lettres / & prayed hȳ louyngly to receyue Stephen the archebiſſhop of Caūterbury to his chirche / & ſuffre the pryour & his monkes to come agayne to theyr owne dwellynge. But the kynge wolde not graūte it for no thynge.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kyng Iohn wolde no thynge do for ye popes cōmaūdement / wherfore all Englonde was enterdyted & ſuſpended.
                        ANd at the laſt ye pope ſent by his auctorite / & enioyned to the byſſhops of Englonde / ye yf the kyng wolde not receyue the pryour of Caūterbury & his monkes / that they ſhold do generall enterdytyng through out all Englonde & graūted full power to foure byſſhops to pronoūce the enterdytynge yf it were nede. The fyrſt was byſſhop Wyllyam of London / & that other biſſhop Euſtace of Ely / the thyrde was byſſhop Walter of Wyncheſtre / & ye fourth was byſſhop Gyles of Herford / & theſe .iiij. byſſhops prayed ye kyng knelynge on theyr knees & ſore wepyng that he wold do ye popes cōmaūdement / & ſhewed hym the popes bulles of ye enterd
                              ••
                           ȳg. But for no prayer ye they myght praye he wolde not cōſent therto. wherfore ye biſſhops ſeynge this departed thens / & on ye morowe of ye Annūciacyon of our lady they pronouced ye generall enterdytyng through all Englonde / ſo ye the chirche dores were ſhette. Whan ye enterdytyng was pronoūced ye kyng for angre toke the foure byſſhops londes in to his handes / & all ye clergy of englōde / & ordeyned men to kepe it / ye the clerkes myght not haue theyr lyuynge. Wherfore ye byſſhops curſed all them ye ſhold medle wt the goodes of holy chirche agaynſt ye wyll of ye owners. Than the iiij. byſſhops ſeynge ye malyce of ye kyng went ouer ye ſee to Rome & came to ye archebyſſhop of Caūterbury / & tolde hȳ all thyng. And ye archebyſſhop bad them returne agayn to Caūterbury / & he wolde eyther come or ſende to them in his ſtede ye ſhold do as moche as yf he hȳſelf were there. And whan ye byſſhops herde this they returned agayne in to Englonde / & came to Caūterbury. The tydynges came to ye kyng ye the byſſhops were come agayn to Caūterbury / & hymſelf might not come thyder ye tyme / he ſente thyder byſſhops / erles & abbots for to treate wt them ye the kyng ſholde receyue ye archebyſſhop Stephen / & the pryour & all the monkes of Caūterbury / & ye he ſhold neuer after ye tyme no thynge take of holy chirche agaynſt ye wyll of them ye oweth the goodes / & ye the kyng ſhold make full amendes to them / of whom he had ony goodes takē / & ye holy chirche ſhold haue all fraūchyſe / as ferforth as they had in ſaynt Edwardes tyme the confeſſour.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Stephen of Langton came agayn in to Englond through ye popes cō
                           maūdement / & how he went agayne.
                        
                           
                           
                        
                        Whan the fourme of accordement was thus ordeyned / it was in a payre of endentures / & they put theyr ſeales to y• one part / & they y• came in the kynges name put theyr ſeales to that other parte of the endentures / and foure byſſhops a fore ſayd toke that one parte of the endentures to them / & that other parte they bare wt them to ſhewe to the kyng. ¶ Whan the kynge ſawe ye forme & vnderſtode it / he helde hym full wel apayed of al maner thȳges as they had ordeyned / ſauynge as touchynge to make reſtitucyon agayne of the goodes to that thynge he wold not accorde / & ſo he ſent worde agayne to the foure vyſſhops y• they ſholde put out y• one poynt of reſtitucion. But they anſwered yt they wold not put out one worde. Than ſent the kyng to ye archebyſſhop by the foure biſſhops yt he ſhold come to Caūterbury for to ſpeke wt hym there / & ſent to hym ſafeconduyt vnder pledges / y• is to ſaye his iuſtices Gilbert Poiteuin / William de la Brener / & Iohn fitz Hugh / that in theyr cōduyt ſafely he ſholde come / & go agayn at his own wyll. And in this ma ner the archebyſſhop Stephen came to Caunterbury. Whan the archebyſſhop was comen / the kyng came to Chilham for he wolde come no nere Caūterbury at y• tyme. But he ſent by his treſourer byſſhop of Wyncheſtre that he ſholde do out of the endentures the clauſe of reſtitucyon for to make of ye goodes. And the archebyſſhop made his othe y• he wolde not do out one worde therof / ne yet chaū ge of that the byſſhops had ſpoken & ordeyned. And than ye archebyſſhop went agayn to Rome wtout ony more doynge. ¶ Kyng Iohn was than more angryer than euer he was before / and let make a comyn crye through out all Englonde that all thoſe yt had holy chirches rentes & went ouer ye ſee / that they ſholde come agayn in to Englonde at a certayn daye or els they ſholde leſe all theyr rentes for euer more / & that he cōmaūded to euery ſheryue through out all Englonde / that they ſholde enquyre yf ony byſſhop / abbot / pryour / or ony other prelate of holy chirche / from that daye afterwarde receyue ony cōmaundement that cometh fro the pope / that they ſholde take ye body and brynge it before hym / and that they ſholde take in the kynges handes all theyr lōdes of holy chirche that were gyuen to ony man by the archebyſſhop Stephen or by ye pryour of Caūterbury from ye tyme of ye eleccyon of ye archebyſſhop. And cōmaūded that all ye wodes yt were the archebyſſhops ſhold be caſten downe to the grounde / and all ſolde.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Iohn deſtroyed the ordre of Ciſteaux.
                        ANd in the ſame yere the Iryſſhe men began to warre vpon kyng Iohn / & kynge Iohn ordeyned hym for to go in to Irlonde / & let arere an huge taxe through out all Englōde / that is to ſaye .xxxv. thouſande marke. And thus

he ſente through out all Englonde vnto the monkes of the ordre of Ciſteaux that they ſholde helpe hy o
                              •
                            .vj. M. marke of ſyluer. And they anſwered & ſayd yt they durſt no thynge do wtout theyr chefe abbot of Ciſteaux. Wherfore kynge John whan he came agayn from Irlond dyd them ſo moche ſorow & care yt they wyſt not where to abyde / for he toke ſo moche raūſom of euery hous of them / that the ſomme amoūted to .ix. M. iij .C. marke / ſo that they were clene loſt & deſtroyed / and voyded theyr houſes & theyr londes through out all Englonde. And ye abbot of Wauerſay drad ſo moche his menace that he forſoke ye abbey & went thens / & pryuely ordeyned hym ouer ye ſee to the hous of Ciſteaux. Whan the tydynges came to the pope that ye kynge had done ſo moche malyce / than was he towarde the kyng full wroth / & ſent two legates vnto ye kynge / that one was called Pandulf / & that other Durant / yt they ſholde warne the kynge in y• popes name / that he ſholde ceſſe of his perſecucyon that he dyd vnto holy chirche / and amende the wronge & the treſpace that he had done to the archebyſſhop of Caūterbury / & to the pryour & to the monkes of Caunterbury / and to all the clergy of Englonde / and that he ſholde reſtore all the goodes agayne yt he had taken of them agaynſt theyr wyll / or els they ſholde curſe hym by name. And to do this thynge & to con ferme / the pope toke them his lettres in bulles patentes. Theſe two legates came in to Englonde / & came to the kynge to Northamton / where as he helde his parlyamēt / & full curteyſly they hym ſa lewed & ſayd. Syr we come fro ye pope of Rome / the peas of holy chirche and the londe to amende. And we admoneſt you fyrſt in the popes behalfe / that y
                              •
                            make full reſtitucyon of the goodes y• ye haue rauyſſhed & takē of holy chirche & of the londe / & that ye receyue Stephen archebyſſhop of Caūterbury in to his dignite and the pryour of Caūterbury and his monkes / & that ye yelde agayne vnto y• archebyſſhop all his londes and rentes without ony with holdyng. And ſyr yet more ouer / that ye ſhall make reſt
                              〈…〉
                           yō vnto all holy chirche / wherof they ſhall holde them well apayed. Than anſwered the kynge as touchynge y• pryour & his mōkes of Caūterbury / all y• ye haue ſayd I wyll do gladly / & all thynge that ye wyll ordeyne. But as touchynge the archebyſſhop I ſhall tell you as it lyeth in my hert. That the archebyſſhop leue his archebyſſhopryche / & that the pope than for hym wolde praye / & than vpon auenture me ſholde lyke ſome other byſſhopryche to gyue hȳ in Englonde. And vpon this cōdicyon I wyll hym accepte and receyue. And neuertheleſſe in Englonde as archebyſſhop yf he abyde / he ſhall neuer haue ſo good ſafecōdu
                              •
                           te but that he ſhall be taken. Than ſayd Pandulf vnto the kynge. Syr holy chirche was neuer wont to diſcharge an archebyſſhop without cauſe reaſonable. But euer it hath be wont to chaſtyſe prynces that to god and holy chirche were inobedyent. What how now quod the kynge / menace ye me. Nay ſayd Pandulf / but ye now openly haue tolde as it ſtandeth in your herte. And to you we wyll tell what is the popes wyll. And thus it ſtandeth that he hath you holly enterdyted & accurſed / for the wronges that ye haue done to holy chirche & to ye clergy. And for as moche as ye dwell & be in wyll to abyde in malyce & in wretchedues / & wyll not come out therof / 
                              〈◊〉
                            to none amendemēt. ye ſhall underſtāde that this tyme afterwarde ye ſentence is vpō you gyuē & holdeth ſtede & ſtrength & vpon all tho that wt you haue comoned before this tyme / whether they be 
                              〈…〉
                           es

barons or knyghtes / or ony other what ſo euer yt they be / we them aſſoyle ſafely vnto this daye. And fro this tyme afterwarde of what condicyon ſomeuer that they be / we them accurſe that wt you comon ony worde / & we do ſentence vpon them openly & ſpecially. And we aſſoyle clene erles / barōs / knyghtes / & all other men of theyr homages / ſeruyce / & feautees that they ſholde vnto you do. And this thynge to cōferme we gyue playne power to the byſſhop of Wyncheſtre & to the byſſhop of Norwyche. And the ſame power we gyue in to Scotlonde to ye byſſhops of Rocheſtre & of Salyſoury. And in Wales we gyue the ſame power to ye byſſhops of ſaynt Dauid & of Landaf & of ſaynt Aſſe. And more ouer we ſende through out all chryſtendom / that all ye byſſhops beyonde the ſee / that they do accurſe all thoſe that helpe you or yt ony coūſeyle gyueth you in ony maner nede that ye haue to do in ony parte of the worlde. And we aſſoyle all them alſo by the auctorite of the pope / and cōmaunde them alſo with you to fyght as wt hym that is enemy to all holy chirche. Than anſwered the kynge / what may ye do more to me. Than anſwered Pandulf / we ſaye to you in the worde of god / that ye nor none heyre that ye haue / neuer after this day may be crowned. Thā ſayd the kynge / by hym that is almyghty & I had wyſt this afore or that ye came in to my londe that ye had brought me ſuche tydynges / I ſholde haue made you tyde all one yere. Than ſayd Pandulf / full well wende we at our fyrſt comyng that ye wolde haue ben obedyent to god & holy chirche / & haue fulfylled ye popes cōmaūdement / & now we haue ſhewed vnto you & pronounced the popes wyll as we were charged therwith. And as now ye haue ſayd / that yf ye had wyſt the cauſe of our comynge / that ye wold haue made vs ryde all an hole yere / and as well ye myght haue ſayd yt ye wolde haue takē an hole yere of reſpyte by the popes leue. But for to ſuffre what deth ye coude ordeyn / we ſhal not ſpare for to tell you holly all y• popes meſſage & his wyll / that we were charged with.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Pandulf delyuered a clerke that had falſed and coūterfeyted the kynges money before the kynge hymſelfe.
                        ANd anone the kyng cōmaunded the ſheriues & baylyes of North hamton that were in ye kynges preſence that they ſholde brynge forth all the pryſoners / that they myght be done to deth before Pandulf / bycauſe ye kyng wende that they wolde haue gaynſayd theyr dedes for cauſe of dethe all thynge that he had ſpoken afore. Whan ye pryſoners were comen before the kynge / the kyng cōmaunded ſome to be hanged / & ſome to be drawen / & ſome to drawe out theyr eyen of theyr heed. And amōge all other there was a clerke that had falſed the kynges money. And the kyng cōmaunded that he ſholde be hanged & drawen. And whan Pandulf herde this cōmaū
                           dement of the kynge / he ſterte hym vp ryght quyckly / and anone aſked a boke and a candell / and wold haue curſed the kynge / and all them that wold ſet vpon the clerke ony hande. And Paudulf him ſelf went for to ſeke a croſſe. And ye kyng folowed hym / & delyuered hym ye clerke by ye hande / that he ſholde do with hym what he wolde. And thus was ye clerke delyuered & went thens. And Pandulf and Durant his felowe went from the kynge / and came agayne to the pope of Rome / and tolde hym that kynge Iohn wolde not be amended / but euer abode ſo accurſed. And neuertheleſſe the pope graſited y• yere through out all Englōde

that preeſtes myght ſynge maſſes in co uenable chirches / & cōſecrate our lordes body / & gyue it to ſeke mē whiche were lykely to paſſe out of this worlde / & alſo that men myght thryſten children ouer all ye londe. And whan the pope wyſt & ſawe yt the kyng wolde not be vnder the rule of holy chirche for no maner thinge the pope than ſent to the kyng of fraūce in remiſſyon of his ſynnes yt he ſhold take wt hym all ye power that he myght / & go in to Englonde for to deſtroye kynge Iohn. Whan theſe tydynges came to kyng Iohn / than was he ſore anoyed & ſore drad leſt he ſholde leſe his realme / & hymſelfe be done to deth. Than ſent he to the pope meſſengers / & ſayd he wold be iuſtyfyed / & come to amendmēt in all thynges / & wolde make ſatiſfaccyon to all maner men after ye popes ordyuaūce Than ſent ye pope agayn in to englonde Pandulf & other meſſengers / & came to Caūterbury to the kyng / & there abode. And the .xiij. day of Maye ye kyng made an other for to ſtande to ye popes ordynaū 
                           
                              •
                           e before Pandulf the legate / in all maner of thynges in whiche he was accur ſed / & that he ſhold make full reſtitucion to all men of holy chirche & of religyon & of the goodes that he had taken of them agaynſt theyr wyll. And all ye grete lordes of englonde ſware vpon the boke & by the holydome / that yf ye kyng wolde not holde his othe / they wolde make hȳ by ſtrength to holde it. Than the kynge put hym to ye courte of Rome & to ye pope & than gaue he vp ye realme of englonde & of Irlonde for him & for his heyres for euermore that ſhold come after hym / ſo that kyng Iohn & his heyres ſhold take thoſe two realmes of the popes handes And ſholde euery yere paye ferme vnto the courte of Rome a thouſande marke of ſyluer. And than toke the kynge the crowne of his heed & ſet hȳ on his knees and theſe wordes he ſayd in herynge of all the grete lordes of englonde. Here I reſygne vp the crowne & the realme of englonde in to the handes of pope Inno cent the thyrde / & put me hooly in to his mercy & in his ordinaūce. Pandulf than receyued y• crowne of kyng Iohn / & kept it .v. dayes as for a ſeaſynge takynge of two realmes of Englonde and Irlonde And confermed all maner thynges by his chartre that foloweth after.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the lettre oblygatory that kynge Iohn made vnto the courte of Rome / wherfore the Peter pens ben gadered through out all Englonde.
                        TO all chriſtē people throu
                              •
                           h out all the worlde dwellynge. Iohn by the grace of god kynge of Englonde gretynge to your vniuerſite. And be it knowen that for as moche as we haue greued & offended god & our moder chirche of Rome. And for as moche as we haue nede vnto ye mercy of our lorde Ieſu Chryſt / & alſo we may no thynge ſo worthy offre as competent ſa
                              〈…〉
                            to make to god & to holy chirche but 
                              〈◊〉
                            it were our owne body as with 
                              •
                           ur realmes of Englonde & of Irlonde. Than by ye grace of god we deſyre to meke vs for the loue of hym y• meked hym to the deth vpon the croſſe / through counſeyle of the noble erles & barons we offre and frely graūte to god & to y• apoſtles ſaynt Peter & ſaynt Paule / and to our moder chirche of Rome / & to our holy fader the pope Innocent the thyrde / & to all y• popes y• come after hym / all the realmes & patronages of chirches of Englōde & of Irlonde with theyr appertenaūtes / for remyſſyon of our ſynnes / & for helpe & helth of our kynne ſoules & all chryſten ſoules. So y• from this daye afterward we wyl receyue and holde of our moder

thirche of Rome as fee farme / doynge feaute to our holy fader pope Innocent the thyrde / & ſo to all the popes that cometh after hym in y• ſame maner aboue ſayd. And in y• preſence of the wyſe man Pandulf the popes ſubdeken we make lyege homage / as it were in the popes preſence & before hym were / and ſhal do all maner thynges aboue ſayd / & therto we bynde vs / & all that cometh after vs & our heyres for euermore / without ony gaynſayenge to the pope / & eke y• warde of chirche vacaūtes. And in tokē of this thynge euermore for to laſt / we wyl con ferme & ordeyn / that our ſpecyall rentes of y• foreſayd realme / ſauynge ſaynt Peters pens in all thynge to y• moder chirche of Rome payenge by yere a thouſan de marke of ſyluer at two termes of the yere for all maner cuſtomes y• we ſholde do for y• foreſayd realmes / that is to ſaye at Myghelmaſſe / and at Eeſter / that is to ſaye. vij .C. marke for Englonde / and thre hondred marke for Irlond / ſauyng to vs & to our heyres our Iuſtyces / and our other fraunchyſes / & other ryaltees that perteyneth vnto the crowne. And theſe thynges that before ben ſayd / we wyl that it be ferme and ſtable without ende. And to that oblygacyon we & our ſucceſſours and our heyres in this maner be bounde / that yf we or ony of our heyres through ony preſumpcyon fall in ony poynt agaynſt ony of theſe thynges aboue ſayd / and he be warned and wyll not ryght amende hym / he ſhall than loſe the foreſayd realmes for euermore. And that this chartre of oblygacyon and our warraūt for euermore be ferme and ſtable without ony gaynſay enge / we ſhall fro this daye afterwarde be true to god and to the moder chirche of Rome / and to the pope Innocent the thyrde / and to all them that cometh after hym / and the realmes of Englonde and of Irlonde we ſhall trewly mayntayne in all maner poyntes agaynſt all maner men by our power through goddes helpe.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How the clerkes that were outlawed of Englonde came agayn / & how kynge Iohn was aſſoyled.
                        WHan this chartre was made & enſealed / the kynge receyued agayne his crowne of Pandulfs hande / & ſente anone vnto the archebyſſhop Stephen / & to all his other clerkes and lewd men that he had exyled out of this londe / that they ſholde come agayn in to Englonde & haue agayn theyr londes & alſo theyr rentes / & that he wolde make reſtytucyon of the goodes that he had taken of theyrs agaynſt theyr wyll The kyng hymſelfe than & Pandulf / & the erles & barons went to wyncheſtre agaynſt y• archebyſſhop Stephen. And whan he was comen the kynge wente agaynſt hym / & fell downe to his feet / & thus to hym ſayd. Fayre ſyr ye be welcome / & I crye you mercy bycauſe that I haue treſpaced agaynſt you. The archebyſſhop toke hȳ vp tho in his armes & kyſſed hym curteyſly oftētymes / & after ladde hym to the dore of ſaynt Swythynes chirche by the hande / & aſſoyled hym of y• ſentence / and hym recōcyled to god & to holy chirche. And that was on ſaynt Margaretes daye. And the arche byſſhop anone went for to ſynge maſſe. And y• kyng offred at the maſſe a marke of golde. And whan y• maſſe was done / all they went to receyue al theyr londes without ony maner gaynſayenge. And that daye they made all myrth and ioye ynough. But yet was not y• enterdytynge releaced / bycauſe y• pope had ſet that the enterdytynge ſholde not be done tyll the kyng had made full reſtitucyon of y•
                           
goodes that he had take of holy chirche And y• hymſelfe ſholde do homage to the pope by a tertayne legate that he ſholde ſende into englonde. And thā toke Pandulf his leue of y• kynge & the archebyſſhop / & went agayne to Rome. And the archebyſſhop anone let come before him prelates of holy chirche at Redynge for to treate & coūſeyle how moche & what they ſholde aſke of y• kynge for to make reſtytucyon of y• goodes y• he had taken of them. And they ordeyned & ſayd / that the kyng ſholde gyue to y• archebyſſhop thre thouſande marke for the wronge y• the kynge had done vnto hym. And alſo by porcions to other clerkes .xv. M. marke. ¶ And this ſame tyme Nicolas byſſhop of Tuſcan cardynall penytencer of Rome came in to Englonde through the popes cōmaūdement / the .v. kalende of October / & came to London y• .v. nonas of October / for bycauſe that kyng Iohn & all the kynges y• came after hym ſhold euermore holde y• realme of Englonde & of Irlonde of god & of the pope / payenge to the pope by yere as is aboue ſayd.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How y• enterdytynge was vndone in englonde / & of y• debate y• was bytwene kyng Iohn & the barons of the realme
                        WHan kynge Iohn had done his homage to y• legate y• ſhewed hȳ the popes lettre y• he ſhold paye to Iulyan / and yelde agayne that was kynge Rychardes wyfe y• thyrde parte of the londe of Englonde & of Irlonde y• he had with holden ſyth that kyng Rycharde dyed. Whan kynge Iohn herde this / he was wonders wroth. For vtterly y• enterditynge myght not be vndone tyll that he had made gree & reſticucyon to the foreſayd Iulyan of that ſhe aſked The legate than went agayn to y• pope after Chryſtmaſſe. And the kynge than ſent meſſengers outr ſee to Iulian that was kyng Rychard wyfe for to haue a releſe of y• ſhe axed of hym. ¶ And ſo it befell y• Iulyan dyed anone after 
                              ••
                           ſter. And in ſo moche the kyng was quyte of that thynge that ſhe aſked. But than at the feeſt of ſaynt Iohn that came nexte after through the popes cōmaūdemēt y• enterdityng was fyrſt releaſed through out all Englonde the .vij. daye of Iuly. And .vij. yere was the londe enterdited. And on the morow men ronge and ſayd maſſe through out all London / & ſo after through out all Englonde. ¶ And y• next yere after there began a grete debate bytwene kyng Iohn & the lordes of Englonde / for bycauſe he wolde not graunte the lawes and holde / the whiche ſaynt Edwarde had ordeyned / & had ben v
                              •
                           ed and holden vnto that tyme that he had them brokē. For he wolde holde no lawe but dyd all thynge that hym lyked and dyſheryted many men without conſent of lordes & peres of the londe. And wold dyſheryte y• good erle Radulf of heſtre for bycauſe that he vndertoke hȳ of his wyckednes / and for cauſe that he dyd ſo moche ſhame & vylany to god & to holy chirche. And alſo for he helde & haunred his owne broders wyfe / and lay alſo by maner other womē grete lordes doughters / for he ſpared no woman that hym lyked for to haue. Wherfore all y• fordes of the londe were wroth / & toke the cyte of London. To ceaſe this debate the archebyſſhop & lordes of the londe aſſembled before the feeſt of ſaynt Iohn baptyſt in a medow beſyde y• towne of Stanes / that is called Romney mede. And the kynge made them there a chartre of fraunchyſe / ſuche as they wolde aſke / and in ſuche maner they were accorded And that accordement laſted not longe. For the kynge hymſelfe ſoone after dyd agaynſt the poynces of y• ſame chartre

that he had made. Wherfore the mooſt part of the lordes of the londe aſſembled them / & began to warre vyon hȳ agayn and brent his townes & robbed his folke and dyd all theſorowe that they myght and made themſelfe as ſtronge as they myght with all theyr power / & thought to dryue hym out of Englonde / & make Lowys y• kynges ſone of Fraūce kynge of Englonde. And than kyng Iohn ſent ouer ſee / and ordeyned ſo moche people or normans & of pyecardes and of flemmynges / ſoo that the londe myght not ſuſteyne them but with moche ſorowe. And amonge all this people there was a man of Normandye that was called Faukes of Brent / & this Norman & his cōpany ſpared neyther chirche ne hous of religyon but they brent and robbed it & bare awaye all that they myght take ſo that y• londe was all deſtroyed / what on one ſyde & what on another. The barons and lordes of Englonde ordeyned amonge them the beſt ſpekers and wyſeſt men / and ſent them ouer the ſee vnto kynge Philyp of Fraūce / and prayed hym y• he wolde ſende Lowys his ſone in to Englonde to be kynge of Englonde and to receyue the crowne.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Lowys y• kynges ſone of fraūce came in to Englonde wt a ſtronge power of people to be kynge of Englonde.
                        WHan kyng Philip of Fraūce herd theſe tydynges / he made certayn aliaunce bytwene them by theyr comyn eleccyon y• Lowys kynge Philyps ſone of Fraūce ſhold go with them in to Eng londe and dryue out kynge Iohn of the londe. And all that were in the preſence of Lowys made vnto him homage and became his men. And the barons of eng londe helde them ſtyll at London / and abode Lowys y• kynges ſone of fraūce. And this was the nexte batardaye brfore the Aſtention of our lorde y• Lowys came into Englonde with a ſtronge power. And that tyme kynge Iohn had taken all the caſtelles of Englonde in to alyens handes. And than came Lowys and beſyeged 
                              •
                           ocheſters caſtell / & toke it with ſtreugthe. And the thurſdaye in whytſon weke let hange all the alyens that were therin. And the thurſdaye after he came to London / & there he was receyued with moche honour of the lordes that abode hym there / & all to hym made homage. And afterwarde on the teweſdaye nexte after Trynite ſondaye he toke the caſtell of Reigate / and on the morowe after the caſtell of Gylforde / & the frydaye next after the caſtell of Farneham. And the mondaye nexte after the cyte of wyncheſtre vnto hym was yolden. And on the morowe after ſaynt Iohans daye the manoyre of wolueſey to hym was yolden. And the teweſdaye after the vtas of ſaynt Peter and ſaynt Paule they toke the caſtell of Odiham. And the mondaye after ſaynt Margaretes daye / he ordeyned hym towarde Bawmore for to ſyege the caſtell / and there he dwelled .xv. dayes and myght not gete the caſtell / and than wente he thens and came to London / & the toure to hym was yolden.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How the pope ſent in to Englonde a legate that was called Swalo / and of the deth of kynge Iohn.
                        ANd in y• ſame tyme y• pope ſente in to englōde a legate y• was called Swalo / & he was preeſt Cardynall of Rome for to mayntayn kynge Iohns cauſe agaynſt the barons of Englonde. But the barons had ſo huge party and helpe through Lowys y• kynges ſone of Fraūce that kyng Iohn wyſt not wheder

to turne ne go. And ſo it befell that he wolde haue gone to Nycholl / & as he went thyderwarde he came by ye abbey of Swyneſtede / & there he abode two dayes. And as he ſate at meet he aſked a monke of the hous how moche a lofe was worth yt was ſet before hym vpon the table. And the monke ſayd that the lofe was worth but an halfpeny. O ſaid the kyng tho / here is grete chepe of brede. Now quod the kynge / & I may lyue ſuche a lofe ſhall be worth .xx. ſhyllȳges or halfe a yere be gone. And whā he had ſayd theſe wordes / moche he thought & oft he ſyghed / & toke and ete of the breed and ſayd / by god ye wordes that I haue ſpoken it ſhall be ſoth. The monke that ſtode before ye kynge was for theſe wordes full ſory in his herte / & thought rather he wolde hymſelfe ſuffre deth / and thought how he myght ordeyn therfore ſome maner remedy. And the monke anone went to his abbot / & was ſhryuen of hym / and tolde the abbot all that the kynge had ſayd / and prayed his abbot for to aſſoyle hym / for he wold gyue the kynge ſuche a drynke that all Englonde ſholde be glad therof and ioyfull. Than went the monke in to a gardeyn & foūde a grete tode therin / and toke her vp and put her in a cuppe / and prycked the tode through with a broche many tymes tyl that the venym came out on euery ſyde in the cuppe / and than toke the cuppe & fylled it with good ale / & brought it before the kynge and knelynge ſayd. Syr quod he waſſayle / for neuer the dayes of your lyf dranke ye of ſo good a cuppe. Begyn monke quod the kynge. And the monke dranke a grete draught / & after toke the kynge the cuppe / and the kyng alſo dranke a grete draught & ſet downe the cup. The monke anone ryght went in to the farmery and there dyed anone / on whoſe ſoule god haue mercy Amen. And .v. monkes ſynge for his ſoule ſpecyally / and ſhall whyles the abbey ſtandeth. The kyng aroſe vp anone full euyl at eaſe / and commaūded to remeue the table / and aſked after the monke. And men tolde hym that he was deed / and that his wombe was broken in ſonder. Whan the kynge herde this / he cōmaū
                           ded to truſſe / but it was all for nought / for his bely began to ſwell of the drynke that he had dronken / and within two dayes he dyed / on ye morowe after ſaynt Lukes daye. And this kynge Iohn had many fayre chyldren of his body begoten / that is to ſaye / Henry his ſone that was kynge after his fader / & Rycharde that was erle of Cornewayle / & Iſabel that was empreſſe of Rome / & Elenour that was quene of Scotlonde. And this kynge Iohn whan he had regned .xvij. yere and .v. monethes and .v. dayes he dyed in the caſtell of Newarke / and his body was buryed at Worcetter.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno domini. M .CC.
                        FRedericus the ſeconde was emperoure .xxxiij. yere. This man was crowned of Honorius the pope agaynſt Otto / bycauſe y• he ſholde fyght with hym / the whiche he dyd / & expulſed hym. And fyrſt he nouryſſhed ye chirche / and after he ſpoyled it as a ſtepmoder. Wherfore Honorius curſed hym / & all that were contrary to his opynyon the pope aſſoyled. And the ſame ſentence Gregorye the .ix. renewed. And this ſame man put Henry his owne ſone in priſon / and there murdred hym. Wherfore whā this emperour another ſeaſon was ſeke / by another ſone of his owne he was murdred / in the tyme of Innocent the fourth. ¶ Honorius the thyrde was pope after Innocent .x. yere / & confermed ye ordre of freres prechours & minours / & made certayne de
                              •
                           r
                              ••
                           alles.
                     
                     
                        
                        ¶ Of kynge Henry the thyrde that was crowned at Gloceſtre.
                        ANd after this kynge Iohn regned his ſone Henry & was crowned at Gloceſtre whan he was .ix. yere olde / on ſaynt Symons daye & Iude of Swalo y• legate of Rome / through coū
                           ſeyle of all the grete lordes y• helde with kyng Iohn his fader / that is to ſay / the erle Radulfe of Cheſtre / Wyllyam erle Marſhall erle of Penbroke / Willyam y• Brener erle of Feriers. Serle y• manly baron and all the other grete lordes of Englonde helde wt Lowys the kynges ſone of Fraūce. ¶ And anone after whā kyng Henry was crowned / Swalo the legate helde his coūſeyle at Bryſtow at ſaynt Martyns feeſt / & there were .xj. byſſhops of Englonde & of Wales / and of other prelates of holy chirche a grete nombre / and erles & barons and many knyghtes of Englonde / & all thoſe that were at that coūſeyle ſware feaute vnto Henry the kyng that was kyng Iohns ſone. ¶ And anone after y• legate enterdyted Wales / bycauſe they helde wt the brons of Englonde / alſo all thoſe that holpe or gaue counſeyle to meue warre agaynſt y• newe kyng he accurſed them And at y• begȳnyng he put in y• ſentence the kynges ſone of Fraūce Lowys. And neuertheles y• ſame Lowys wolde not ſpare for all that / but went and toke the caſtell of Barcamſtede / & alſo the caſtell of Herford. And from y• day afterward y• barōs dyd there moche harme through out all Englōde / & pryncypally y• frenſh men that were with Lowys / wherfore the grete lordes & all y• comyn people of Englond let dreſſe them for to dryue out of Englonde Lowys and his company But ſome of the barons & of the frenſſhe men were gone to the cite of Nycholl / & toke y• towne & helde it to kynge Lowys profyte. But thyder came kynge Henryes men with a grete power / that is to ſaye / the erle Radulfe of Cheſtre / and Wylliam erle Marſhall / and Wyllyam the brener erle of Feriers / & many other lordes with them / & gaue batayle vnto Lowys men. And there was ſlayne the erle of Perches / and Lowys men were there foule diſcomfyted. And there was taken Serle erle of Wyncheſtre / & Vmfrey de Bowne erle of Herford / & Robert the ſone of walter / and many other that began warre agaynſt the kynge / there they were taken & ladde vnto kyng Henry y• was kyng Iohns ſone. And whan the tydynges came to Lowys of y• diſcō fyture y• was the kynges ſone of fraūce he remeued from thens and went vnto London / and let ſhette faſt the gates of the cyte. And anone after kynge Henry ſent to the burgeyſes of London y• they ſholde yelde them to hym / & the cite alſo and he wolde graunte to them all theyr fraunchyſes that euer they were wont to haue before / & wold cōferme them by his grete newe chartre vnder his brode ſeale. ¶ And in the ſame tyme a grete lorde that was called Euſtace y• monke came out of Fraunce with a grete company of lordes / & wolde haue comen in to Englonde for to haue holpen Lowys the kynges ſone of Fraūce. But Hubert of Burgh and the .v. portes with .viii. ſhyppes tho mette with them in y• high ſee / and aſſayled them egerly / and ouercame them with ſtrength / and ſmote of the heed of Euſtace the monke / and toke alſo .x. grete lordes of fraūce & put them in priſon / and ſlewe almooſt all the men that came with them / & anone drowned the ſhyppes in the ſee.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Lowys returned agayne in to Fraunce / and of the confyrmacyon of kynge Iohans chartre.
                        
                           
WHan Lowys herde theſe tydyn ges he drad ſore to be deed & loſt and let ordeyn & ſpeke bytwene the kyng & Lowys by y• legate Swalo And through y• archebyſſhop of Caūterbury & other grete lordes all y• priſoners on that one part & on that other ſhold be delyuered & go quyte / & Lowys hȳſelfe ſholde haue for his coſtes a. M. poūde of ſyluer / & ſholde go out of Englonde / and neuer come agayne therin. And in this maner was the accorde made bytwene kynge Henry & Lowys. And than was Lowys aſſoyled of y• popes legate that was called Swalo of y• ſentence that he was in / & the barons of Englonde alſo. And after this kyng Henry & Swalo y• legate & Lowys went to Merton / and there was y• peas cōfermed & bytwene them ordeyned. And after Lowys went fro thens to London / & toke his leue / & was brought wt moche honour to y• ſee with y• archebyſſhop of Caunterbury & with other biſſhops & erles & barons / & ſo went Lowys in to Fraūce. ¶ And afterwarde the kynge & the archebyſſhop & erles & barōs aſſembled them at London / & at Mighelmas nexte folowynge helde there a grete parlyament / & there were than renewed all the fraūchyſes that kynge Iohn had graūted at Romney mede / & kyng Henry than cōfermed by his chartre / the whiche yet ben holden through out all Englonde. And in y• tyme y• kyng toke of euery plough londe two ſhyllynges. And Hubert of Burgh was than made chefe iuſtyce of englōde And this was in y• fourth yere of kynge Henryes regne. And in y• ſame yere was ſaynt Thomas of Caūterbury tranſlated / the .l. yere after his martyrdome. ¶ And after it was ordeyned by all the lordes of Englonde y• all alyens ſhold go out of Englonde & come no more therin. And kyng Henry toke than all y• caſtels in to his handes y• kyng Iohn his fader had gyuen & taken to alyens for to kepe that held wt hym. But y• proude Faukes of Brent rychely let araye his caſtell of Bedford / whiche he had of king Iohns gyfte / and he helde that caſtell agaynſt kyng Henryes wyl wt might & ſtrength And the kyng came thyder wt a ſtronge power and beſyeged the caſtell. And the archebyſſhop mayſter Stephen of lang ton with a fayre company of knyghtes came to the kyng for to helpe hym. And from the Aſcencyon of our lord vnto the Aſſumpcyon of our lady laſted y• ſyege / and than was the caſtell wonne and taken. And the kynge let hange all thoſe that were gone in to y• caſtel wich the
                              •
                           : good wyll for to hold the caſtell agaynſt hym / that is to ſay .lxxx. men. And than afterwarde Faukes hymſelfe was foū
                           de in a chirche of Couentre / and there i
                              •
                            forſware all Englonde wt moche ſhame and than wente agayne in to his owne coūtree. ¶ And whyles that kyng Henry regned / Edmonde of Abyndon that was treſourer of Salyſbury was conſecrate archebyſſhop of Caunterbury. ¶ And this kynge Henry ſente ouer ſee vnto the erle of Prouance that he ſholde ſende him his doughter in to Englende that was called El
                              •
                           nore / and he wolde ſpouſe her. And ſo ſhe came in to Englonde after Chryſtmas / and on the morowe after ſaynt Hylaryes daye the archebyſſhop Edmonde ſpouſed them togyder at Weſtmynſter with grete ſolempnite. And there was a fayre ſyght bytwene them / that is for to ſaye / Edwarde that was nexte kynge after his fader floure of curteyſy and of largeſſe / and Margarete that was afterwarde quene of Scotlonde / and Beatryne that was afterwarde ducheſſe of Brytayne And Katheryne that dyed a mayde in relygyon.
                     
                     
                        
                        ¶ Of the quinzeme of goodes that were graūted for the newe chartre / and of the purucyaunce of Oxford.
                        ANd thus it befell y• the lordes of Englonde wold haue ſome addicyons moo in the chartre of fraūchyſe y• they had of the kynge / & ſpake thus bytwene them. And y• kyng graūted them all theyr aſkynge / & made to them two chartres / y• one is called y• grete chartre of fraūchyſes / & that other is called the chartre of foreſt. And for y• graūt of theſe two chartres / prelates / erles & barons / & all the comyns of Englonde gaue to y• kynge a. M. marke of ſyluer. ¶ Whan kynge Henry had ben kynge .xiiij. yere / the ſame yere he & his lordes / erles & barons of the realme went to Oxford / and ordeyned a lawe in amendement of y• realme. And fyrſt ſware y• kyng hymſelfe and afterwarde all the lordes of y• londe that they wolde holde y• ſtatute for euer more / & who that them brake ſholde be deed. But the ſeconde yere after that ordynaūce / the kynge through coūſeyle of ſyr Edwarde his ſone & of Rychard his broder that was erle of Cornewayle / & alſo of other / repented hym of that othe that he had made for to holde that lawe & ordynaūce / & ſente to y• courte of Rome to be aſſoyled of that othe. ¶ And in the yere nexte comynge after was the grete derth of corne in englonde / for a quarter of whete was worth .xxiiij. ſhyllynges And the poore people ete nettyls & other wedes for grete honger / & many a. M. dyed for defaute of meet. ¶ And in the xlviij. yere of kyng Henryes regne begā warre & debate bytwene hym and his lordes / for bycauſe that he had broken y• couenaūtes y• were made bytwene them at Oxford. ¶ And in the ſame yere was the towne of Northamton taken & folke ſlayne that were within / for bycauſe y• they had made and ordeyned wylde fyre for to brenne the cite of London. ¶ And in the moneth of Maye that came nexte after vpon ſaynt Pancras daye / was y• batayle of Lewes / whiche was y• wedneſdaye before ſaynt Dunſtans daye / & there was taken kyng Henry hymſelfe & ſyr Edwarde his ſone / & Rychard his broder erle of Cornewayl / & many other lordes. ¶ And in the ſame yere nexte folowynge ſyr Edwarde the kynges ſone brake out of the warde of ſyr Symon of Moūtford erle of Leyceſtre at Herford / and went vnto the barons of y• Marche and they receyued hym with moche honour. ¶ And the ſame tyme Gylbert of Clarence erle of Gloceſtre that was in y• ward alſo of y• foreſayd Symō / through the cōmaūdement of kynge Henry / that went from hym with a grete herte / for bycauſe he ſayd y• the foreſayd Gylbert was a fole in his coūſeyle / wherfore he ordeyned hȳ afterward ſo / & helde hȳ wt kyng Henry. And on y• ſaterdaye next after y• myddes of Auguſt ſyr Edwarde y• kynges ſone diſcomfited ſyr Symon of Moūtford at Kelinworth / but the grete lordes y• were there wt hȳ were taken / y• is to ſaye Baldewyn wake / & Williā de Moūchenſie / & many other grete lordes And y• teweſdaye nexte after was y• batayle done at Euſham / & there was ſlayne ſyr Symon of Moūtford / Hugh ſpenſer / & Moūtford that was Rafe Baſſets fader of Draiton / and many other grete lordes. And whā this batayle was done all y• gentylmen that had ben wt the erle Symon were diſheryted / & they ordeyned togyder & dyd moche harme to all y• lond. For they deſtroyed theyr enemyes in all that they myght.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the ſyege of Kelynworth / & how the gentylmen were diſherited through counſeyle of the lordes of the realme of

Englonde / and how they came agayne and had theyr 
                              •••
                           des.
                        ANd the nexte yere comynge in Maye / the fourth daye before y• teeſt of ſaynt Dunſtan was the batayle & dyſcomfyture at Cheſt erfelde of them that were diſheryted / & there was many of them ſlayne. And Robert erle of Fe riers there was takē / & alſo Baldewyn and Iohn de la hay with moche ſorowe eſcaped thens. And on ſaynt Iohn baptyſtes eue than nexte folowynge began the ſyege of the caſtell of Kenilworth / & the ſyege laſted to ſayne Thomas eue y• apoſtle / on whiche daye ſyr Hugh Haſtynge had y• caſtell for to kepe / that yelded vp the caſtel vnto the kynge in this maner / that hymſelf & the other y• were within the caſtell ſholde haue theyr lyues & lȳmes / & all that they had therin / bothe hors & harneys / & foure dayes of reſpyte for to delyuer clenely y• caſtell of themſelf & of all other maner thynge as they had within the caſtell. And ſo they went from the caſtell. And ſyr Symon de Moūtford y• yonger & the coūteſſe his moder were fledde ouer ſeem to Fraūce & there helde them as people that were exiled out of Englond for euermore. And ſoone after it was ordeyned by y• legate Dctobone & by other grete lordes y• wyſeſt of Englond / that all thoſe y• had ben agaynſt the kynge and were diſheryted ſholde haue agayne theyr londes by greuous raūſons after y• it was ordeyned. And thus they were accorded with the kynge / & peas was cryed through out Englonde / & thus y• warre was ended. And whan this was done y• legate toke his leue of y• kynge & of the quene & of all the grete lordes of englonde / & tho went to Rome the .lv. yere of kynge Henryes regne. And Edwarde kyng Iohns ſone of Brytayne / Iohn Ʋeſſt / Thomas of clare / Roger of Clifford / Othes of graū
                           ſton / Robert le Brus / Iohn of verdon / & many other lordes of Englonde & of beyonde the ſee toke theyr waye towarde the holy londe. And kyng Henry dyed y• ſame tyme at Weſtminſter whā he had ben kyng .lv. yere & .xix. wekes / on ſaint Edmondes daye y• archebyſſhop of Caū
                           terbury. And he was buryed at Weſtmynſter on ſaynt Edmōdes day y• kyng in the yere of our lorde. M .CC .lxxij.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Prophecy of Merlyn of kynge Henry the fyrſt expowned that was kynge Iohns ſone.
                        ANd of this Hēry ꝓphecyed Merlyn & ſayd that a 
                              •
                           a
                              ••
                           be ſholde come out of Wyncheſtre in y• yere of our lord. M .CC. and .xvj. with true lyppes & holynes wryten in his herte. And he ſayd ſoth / for y• good Henry y• kyng was borne ī wyncheſtre in y• yere aboue ſayd & he ſpake good wordes & ſwete / & was an holy man & of good conſcyence. And Merlyn ſayd y• this Henry ſholde make the fayreſt place of y• worlde / y• in his tyme ſhold not be fully ended. And he ſayd ſoth. For he made y• newe werke of y• abbey of ſaȳt Peters chirche at Weſtmynſter / y• is fayrer of ſyght than ony other place y• ony man knoweth through out all chryſtendom. But kyng Henry dyed or y• werke was fully at an ende / & that was grete harme. And yet ſaid Merlyn that this lambe ſhold haue peas y• moſt parte of his regne. And he ſaid ſoch. For he was neuer noyed through warre ne dyſeaſed in no maner wyſe / tyll a lytell before his deth. And Merlyn ſaid in his prophecy more / y• in the ende of y• regne of y• foreſayd lambe / a wolfe of a ſtraūge lōde ſholde do hȳ moche harme through his war / & y• he ſhold at y• laſt be maiſter through helpe of a reed fore / that ſholde

come out of the Northweſt & ſhold outr come hym / & that he ſholde dryue hym out of the water. And that ꝓphecy full well was knowen. For within a lytell tyme or the kynge dyed / Symonde of Mountforde erle of Leyceſtre that was borne in Fraunce began ſtronge warre agaynſt hym / through whiche doynge many a good bacheler was deſtroyed. And whan kynge Henry had y• vyctory at Euſham & Symon y• erle was ſlayne through helpe of Gylberte of Clare erle of Gloceſtre / that was in kepyng of the foreſayd Symon / through ordynaunce of kynge Henry / whiche went agayne to the kynge with moche power. Wherfore the ſoreſayd Symō was deſtroyed and that was grete harme to y• comyns of Englonde that ſo noble a man was ſlayne for the trouth / & dyed in charite & for the comyn profyte of the ſame folke. And therfore almyghty god for hȳ hath ſythen ſhewed many a fayre myracle to dyuers men & women ſeke for his loue. ¶ And Merlyn alſo tolde & ſayd in his prophecy / that after that tyme y• lambe ſholde lyue no whyle / and than his ſeed ſholde be in ſtraūge londe without ony paſture. And he ſayd ſothe. For kynge Henry lyued no whyle after whan that Symon Moūtford was deed / but dyed anone after hym. And in y• meane tyme ſyr Edwarde his ſone that was the beſt kynge of y• worlde of honour was than in y• holy londe / & gate there Acres. And in y• coūtree he begate on dame Elenour his wyfe Ihone of Acres his doughter that afterwarde was counteſſe of Gloceſtre. And made ſuche a vyage in y• holy londe that all the worlde ſpake of his knyghthode / & euery man dradde hym hye and lowe through out all chryſtendome / as the ſtory of hym telleth / as afterward ye ſhall here more openly. And from the tyme y• kynge Henry dyed / tyll that ſyr G
                              •
                           warde was crowned kynge all the grete lordes of englonde were as faderles chyldren without ony ſocoure that them myght mayntayne / gouerne and defende agaynſt theyr enemyes.
                        GRegorye the .ix. was pope after Honory. This mā canonyſed many ſayntes / and defended myghtely the chirche agaynſt Frederyc / therfore toke he many prelates and two cardynalles the whiche wente to counſeyle agaynſt hym. This pope was beſyeged in y• cyte of Rome by the emperour / & he ſawe the Romayns were corrupte by the money of the emperour. Than he toke in his hande the hedes of the apoſtles Peter and Paule / and wente with proceſſyon fro the chirche of ſaynt Iohn Latranēce to ſaynt Peters chirche. And ſo gate he the hertes of y• Romayns. And than the emperour went awaye fro the cite. This pope made frere Iaymonde to compyle the fyue bokes of the decretals of many pyſtles & decrees. And after with many tribulacyons of this tyraūt & other he deceſſed & went to heuen ¶ Celeſtinus y• fourth was pope after Gregory almooſt a moneth / & he was in his lyfe & in his connnynge laudable / & he was an olde man & a feble & deceſſed / & there was no pope after hym almooſt a .xij. moneth. ¶ Innocentius y• fourth was pope after hȳ .xj. yere & .vj. monethes. This man canonyſed many ſayntes / & he depoſed y• emperour Frederye & curſed as an enemy to god & y• chirche in y• thyrde yere y• he was made pope / & he was holpen by the Ianuens. ¶ And than was Henry y• ſyxth choſen & Wylliam by y• popes cōmaūdement agaynſt Frederye one after an other. But they preuayled not to ouercome his tyranny for he was ouer myghty / ne theſe were not crowned / for they deceſſed anone.

¶ Thomas de aquino. Albertꝰ magnꝰ. Euſtacius & Bonauēture were this tyme holy men / whiche deſtroyed moche hereſy infected by y• emperour. ¶ Alexā
                           der was pope after Innocent .vij. yere / & lytel of hȳ is wryten. ¶ Vrbanꝰ was pope after hym .iij. yere & .iij. monethes This man droue away an hooſt of ſara zyns by men marked wt the croſſe / that Maufred had ſent agaynſt the chirche. The pope gaue y• kyngdom of Cicyle to the kynges broder of fraūce / y• he ſholde fyght wt Maufred / & than deceſſed. And Maufred after loſt his lyf & his kyngdō by Karolꝰ. ¶ Alphonſus kyng of Caſtil & Rychard broder to y• kyng of englonde were choſen emperours / but Rycharde dyed / & Alphonſus renoūced his tytle of the empyre before Gregory the .ix. for he was a wytty mā & a noble aſtronomer / & his tables be very famous. ¶ Clemēs the .iiij. was pope after Vrban .iij. yere & .ix. monethes. This Clemēs was an holy man / & ſayd by ſpiryte of ꝓphecy y• the enemyes of y• chirche ſhold peryſſhe as y• ſmoke. And it is to be byleued that god ceſſed y• tribulacyons of his chirche through his merites. He had afore a wyfe & children / & was a preeſt after & byſſhop & legate / & beynge in englonde vnknowen to hȳ was choſen pope / & after for his vertuous lyfe deceſſed blyſſedly. ¶ Gregory y• .x. was pope after hȳ .iiij. yere. He aſſembled a cōcyle at Loduū in fraūce for y• grete deſyre y• he had to vyſyte perſonally y• holy londe / in y• whiche concyle y• Grekes & the Tartares were / and there y• Grekes ꝓmyſed to be reformed by y• vnite of y• chirche. And y• Tartares newly baptyſed promyſed y• ſame And there were gadered. vj .C. biſſhops & a. M. prelates. And therfore a certayn mā ſayd. Gregory gadereth togyder all kȳdes of people. And there was decreed y• all perſones & vycayres ſhold be called preeſtes / & no prelates / & y• no man ſhold aſſygne his tythes to what chirche he wolde / as they dyd afore / but they ſhold be payed to his moder chirche. And he dampned y• pluralite of bn̄fyces / & dyed a blyſſed man. ¶ Innocent the .v. was after hym .v. monethes / and lytell dyd. ¶ Adrian was after him one moneth / & dyd leſſe. ¶ Iohn the .xxj. was after hȳ viij. monethes / & he was i diuers ſeyences a famous man / but in maners a fole & deceſſed anone. ¶ Nycolas y• .iij. was pope after Iohn .j. yere. This man was in his dayes a noble mā in buyldyng / & wel gouerned y• ci
                              •
                           e all his dayes & y•. 
                              •
                           j yere he dyed. ¶ Rodulphus was emperour .xviij. yere. This man was cr
                              ••
                            of Haueſburgh / a wyſe man in armes noble & victoryous / & was choſen at baſtle & he toke y• croſſe on hym for y• holy londe The imperyall bleſſyng he had not but the pope alowed y• eleccyon for fauour of the holy londe.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno dn̄i. M .CC .lxxiiij.
                        MArtyn y• fourth was pope after Nycholas .iiij. yere. This man was a grete louer of relygyous men / & gretly attendyng to vertuous werkes. He curſed y• emperour of 
                              •
                           ōſta
                              •
                           tynople in ſo moche as he promyſed to turne to y• fayth in the generall concyle & dyd not / for y• whiche he ſuffred many paſſyons & all holy chirche. Alſo he curſed y• kyng of Aragon for he expulſed y• kyng of Cicyle fro his kyngdom. And after he had done many batayles agaynſt mē of miſbyleue / & had ſuffred many tribulacyōs he deceſſed & dyd many myracles. ¶ Ni colas de lira a noble doctour of dyuinite was this tyme at Parys this mā was a iewe / & was cōuerted / and myghtely profyted in y• ordre of frere minors / & he wrote ouer all the byble. Or els he was in the yere of our lorde. M .ccc .xxx. And ſome men ſaye he was of Braband / & y• his fader & moder were chriſten / but for pouerte he viſyted y• ſcoles of the iewes

And ſo he lerned the iewes language / or els this Nycolas was enfourmed of y• iewes in his yonge age. ¶ Honorius y• fourth was pope after Martyn .ij. yere & lytell of hym is wrytē / but y• he was a tēperate man & a diſcrete. ¶ Nicolaus y• fourth was pope after hym foure yere. this mā was a frere minor / & al though he was a good man in hȳſelf / yet many vnhappy thȳges fell in his tyme to the chirche / for many a batayle was in y• cite through his occaſyon / for he drewe to moche to y• one parte / and after hȳ there was no pope two yere & .vj. monethes.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kynge Edwarde that was kyng Henryes ſone. And of his ryalte.
                        
                           
                        
                        ANd after this kyng Henry regned Edward his ſone / the worthyeſt knyght of all y• worlde in honour For goddes grace was in hȳ / for he had y• victory of his enemyes. And as ſoone as his fader was deed he came to London with a fayre company of prelates & of erles & barons / & all maner men dyd him moche honour. For in euery place y• this noble Edward rode in London the ſtretes were couered ouer his heed with ryche clothes of ſylke / of tapyſſerye and with ryche couerynges. And for ioye of his comynge the burgeyſes of the cyte caſt out at theyr wyndowes golde & ſyluer handes full / in tokenynge of loue & worſhyp / ſeruyce & reuerence. And out of y• condyth of chepe ran whyte wyne & reed as ſtremes of water / & euery man dranke therof that wolde at theyr owne wyll. And this kynge Edwarde was crowned & anoynted as ryght heyre of Englonde with moche honour. And after maſſe y• kyng went in to his palays for to holde a ryall feeſt amonge them y• dyd hym honour. And whā he was ſet to mete / kynge Alexander of Scotlonde came for to do hym honour & reuerence with a queyntyſe / & an .C. knyghtes wt hym well horſed & arayed. And whan they were alighted they let theyr ſtedes go wheder they wolde / & who y• myght take them / had them ſtyll wtout ony chalengynge. And after came ſyr Edmonde kynge Edwardes broder a curteys & a gentyll knyght / & y• erle of Cornewayle & y• erle of Gloceſtre / & after them came the erle of Penbroke / & y• erle of Garēne. And eche of them by themſelfe ladde in theyr hande an .C. knyghtes gayly diſguyſed in theyr armes. And whan they were alyghted of theyr horſes / they let them go wheder they wold / & who that myght them catche / them to haue ſtyll wtout ony chalenge. And whan all this was done / kynge Edwarde dyd his dylygence & his myght for to amende & redreſſe y• wronges in the beſt maner y• he myght / to the honour of god & holy chirche / & to mayntayne his honour / & to amende the noyaūce of y• comyn people.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Ydeyne that was Lewelyns doughter of Wales / and Aymer that was the erles broder of Mountforde were taken on the ſee.
                        
                           
THe fyrſt yere after that kyng Edwarde was crowned / Lewlyn prynce of Wales ſent in to Fraūce to the erle Mountford / that through coūſeyle of his frendes the erle ſholde wedde his doughter. And the erle thā auyſed hym vpon this thynge / & ſent vnto Lewlyn and ſayd that he wolde ſende after his doughter. And ſo he ſent Aymer his broder after the damoyſell. And Lewlyn arayed ſhyppes for his doughter & for ſyr Aymer / & for her fayre company y• 
                           ſhold go with her. And this Lewlyn did grete wronge / for it was a couenaunt that he ſholde gyue his doughter to no maner man without coūſeyle & cōſent of kynge Edwarde. And ſo it befell that a Burgeys of Bryſtowe came in the ſee laden with wyne / & mette them / & toke them with myght and power. And anone the Burgeys ſent them to the kyng. Whan Lewlyn herde theſe tydynges he was wonders wroth & alſo ſorowfull / & begā to warre vpon kynge Edward / and dyd moche harme to Englyſſhe men / & bette downe the kynges caſtels / & began faſt for to deſtroye kyng Edwardes londes. And whan the tydynges came vnto the kynge of this thynge / he went in to Wales / & ſo moche he dyd through goddes grace and his grete power that he droue Lewlin to grete myſchefe / that he fledde all maner ſtrength & came & yelded hym vnto kynge Edward / & gaue hym .l. M. marke of ſyluer to haue peas / & toke the damoyſell & all his herytage / & made an obly gacyon to kyng Edward to come to his parlyament two tymes in the yere. ¶ And in the ſeconde yere after y• kynge Edward was crowned / he helde a generall parlyamēt at Weſtmynſter / & there he made the ſtatutes for defaute of lawe by the comyn aſſent of all his baronage. And at eeſter nexte after the kynge ſent by his lettre vnto Lewlyn prynce of Wales that he ſhold come to his parlyamēt for his londe / & for his holding of Wales as the ſtrength of the lettre oblygatory wytneſſed. Than Lewlyn had ſcorne & deſpyte of y• kynges cōmaūdement. And for pure wrath agayn begā warre vpon kynge Edward / & deſtroyed his londes. And whan kyng Edward herde of theſe tydȳges / he waxed wonders wroth vnto Lewlyn / & in haſte aſſembled a grete power of people & went towarde Wales and warred ſo vpon Lewlyn the prynce tyll y• he brought hym in moche ſorow & dyſeaſe. And Lewlyn ſawe that his defence myght not auayle hym / and came agayn & yelded hym to y• kynges grace / & cryed him mercy / & longe tyme kn
                              •
                           led before y• kynges feet. The kynge 
                              •
                           ad of hym pyte / & cōmaūded hym to a
                              ••
                           ſe / & for his mekenes forgaue hȳ his wrathe and to hym ſayd / that yf he treſpaced agaynſt hȳ an other tyme / that he wolde deſtroye hȳ for euermore. Dauid y• was Lewlins broder y• ſame tyme dwelled wt kyng Edward / & was a fell man and a ſubtyll / & enuyous / & alſo ferre caſtynge and moche treaſon thought / & euermore made good ſemblaunt / & ſemed ſo 
                              〈◊〉
                            y• no man myght perceyue his falſnes.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Lewlyn through 
                              •
                           gg
                              •
                           nge of his broder Dauid warred agayn vpon kynge Edwarde.
                        IT was not longe tyme that tyme that kynge Edward gaue to Dauid Lewlyns broder the lordſhip of 
                              •
                           rodeſham / and made hym knyght. And ſo moche honour dyd he neuer after to no man of Wales bycauſe of hym. ¶ Kyng Edward helde his parlyament at London whan he had done in Wales al that he wolde / & chaūged his money y• was foule kyt & roūded / wherfore the people cōplayned ſore / ſo y• the king let enquyre

of ye treſpaſſours. And .ccc. were atteynted of ſuche maner of falſnes / wherfore ſome were hanged / and ſome drawen & hanged. And afterward the kyng ordey ned / that ye ſterling halfpeny & ferthyng ſholde go through out all his londe. And cōmaūded yt no man fro that daye afterwarde gaue ne 
                              •
                           eoffed hous of religyon with londe or tenemēt / without ſpecyall leue of ye kynge / & he yt dyd / ſholde be punyſſhed at the kynges wyll / & the gyfte ſholde be for nought. ¶ And it was not longe after that Lewlyn prynce of Wales through ye entycement of Dauid his broder / and by bothe theyr conſent they thought to dyſheryte kynge Edward in as moche as they myght / ſo yt through them bothe ye kynges peas was broken And whan kyng Edward herde of this anone he ſent his barōs in to Northum berlonde & the ſurreys alſo / yt they ſhold go & take theyr vſage vpon ye traytours Lewlyn & Dauyd / & wonders harde it was for to warre than. For it is wynter in Wales / whan in other coūtrees it is ſomer. And Lewlyn let ordeyne & well aray & vitayle his good caſtel of Swandon / and therin was an huge nombre of people & plente of vitayles / ſo that kyng Edward wyſt not where to entre. And whan ye kynges men it perceyued / & alſo ye ſtrength of Wales / they let come in to ye ſee barges & botes & grete plankes as many as they might ordeyne & haue for to go to the foreſayd caſtell of Swandon wt men on fote & alſo on hors. But ye Walſhmen had ſo moche people & were ſo ſtronge / yt they droue ye Englyſſhmen backe / ſo yt there was ſo moche prees of people at the turnynge agayn / that the charge & the burden of men made ye barges & botes to ſynke / & there was drowned many a good knyght / yt is to ſay / ſyr Roger Clifford / ſyr William of Lindſey that was ſyr Iohns ſone fitz Robert / & ſyr Rychard Tanny / & an huge nombre of other / & all was through theyr owne foly / for yf they had had good ſpies they had not ben harmed. Whan kynge Edward herde tell that his people were ſo drowned / he made ſorowe ynough. But than came ſyr Iohn of Veſſye from the kynge of Aragon / & brought with hym moch people of bachelers & of Gaſcoyns & were ſoudyours & dwellynge wt Iohn of Veſſye / & of hym receyued wages / & of hym were holden / & were noble men for to fyght / and brent many townes / & ſlewe all ye walſhmen that they myght take. And all thoſe wt ſtrength & myght made aſſaute vnto the caſtell of Swandon / & gate the caſtell. And whā Dauid herde of theſe tydynges / he ordeyned hȳ to flyght. Whā Lewlyn ye prynce knewe that his broder was fledde / thā was he ſore abaſſhed / for he had no power his warre to maynteyn. And ſo Lewlyn began to flee / & wende well to haue ſcaped But in a mornyng ſyr Roger Mortimer mette wt hym onely with .x. knightes / & ſet hym roūde aboute / & to hym went & ſmote of his heed / & preſented it to kyng Edward. And in this maner Lewlyn ye prynce of Wales was taken / & his heed ſmytten of / & alſo all his heyres dyſheryted for euermore / through ryghtfull dome of all the lordes of the realme.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Dauid yt was Lewlyns broder prynce of Wales was put to deth.
                        DAuid ye prynces broder of Wales through pride wende to haue bē prynce of Wales after his broders deth / And vpō this he ſent after walſhmen to his patlyament at Dinbigh / & folyſſhly made Wales to aryſe agaynſt ye kyng / & began to meue warre agaynſt kyng Edward / & dyd all ye ſorowe & dyſeaſe that he myght by his power. Whan kynge

Edward herde of this thynge / he ordey ned men to purſue vpon hym. And Dauid fyer
                              •
                           y hym defended / tyll yt he came to ye towne of ſaynt Morite / & there was Dauid taken as he fledde / & ladde to the kynge. And the kyng cōmaūded that he ſhold be hanged & drawen / and ſmyte of his heed / & quarter hȳ / & ſende his heed to London / & the foure quarters to the foure chefe townes of Wales / for they ſholde take enſample therof & be ware. And afterward kynge Edward let crye his peas though out al wales / & ſeaſed all ye londe into his handes / & all ye grete lordes that were lefte alyue came to do feaute & homage to kynge Edward / as to theyr kynde lorde. And than let kynge Edward amende the lawes of Wales yt were defectyue. And after he ſent to al ye lordes of Wales by his lettres patentes yt they ſholde come all to his parlyamēt. And whan they were comen the kynge ſayd to them full curteyſly. Lordes ye be welcome / & me behoueth your coūſeyle & your helpe for to go in to Gaſcoyn / for to amende ye treſpace that to me was done whan I was there / & for to entreate of peas bytwene ye kynge of Aragon & the prȳce of Morrey. And all ye kynges liege men erles & barons conſented & graūted therto. And than kynge Edwarde made hym redy & went in to Gaſcoyn / & let amende all ye treſpaces yt was done hȳ in Gaſcoyn. And of ye debate that was bytwene ye kyng of Aragon & the prynce of Morrey he ceſſed & accorded them. And whyle kynge Edward & quene Elenore his wyfe were in Gaſcoyn / the good erle of Cornewayle was made wardeyn of Englonde tyll that kyng Edward came agayn. And thā enquyred he of his tray tours yt coniected falſnes agaynſt hym. And eche of thē all receyued theyr dome after that they had deſerued. But in the meane tyme whyle that kyng Edward was beyonde yt ſee to do them for to make amendes yt had treſpaced agaynſt hȳ there was a fals traytour yt was called 
                              •
                           iſap Meridoc began to make warre agaynſt kynge Edward / & that was for cauſe of ſyr Payne Tiptot ye wrongfully greued & diſeaſed ye foreſayd Biſap Meridoc. And whan kynge Edward herde all this / he ſente by his lettres to Biſap Meridoc that he ſholde make no warre but that he ſholde be in peas for his loue & whan he came agayne in to Englonde he wolde vndertake ye quarell & amende all that was myſdone. This foreſayd Riſap Meridoc deſpyſed the kynges cō
                           maundement / & ſpared not to do all the ſorowe that he myght to ye kynges men of Englond. But anone after he was taken & ladde to yorke / and there he was drawen & hanged for his felony.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the redreſſyng that king Edward made of his Iuſtices and of his clerkes that they had done for theyr falſnes / and how he droue ye Iewes out of Englonde for theyr vſury and myſbyieue.
                        WHan kynge Edward had dwelled thre yere in Gaſcoyn / a deſyre came to hȳ for to go in to Englonde agayn And whan he was comen agayn there were ſo many cōplayntes made to hym of his Iuſtices & of his clerkes that had done ſo many wronges & falſnes / that wonder it was to here. For whiche falſnes ſyr Thomas weylonde the kynges Iuſtyce forſwore Englonde at ye Toure of Londō / for falſnes that men put vpon hym / wherof he was atteynt & proued fals. And anone after whan the kynge had done his wyll of the Iuſtices than let he enquyre & eſpye how the Iewes deceyued & begyled his people through theyr ſynne of falſnes & of vſury / and let ordeyn a preuy parliament amonge his

lordes. And they ordeyned amōge them that all ye Iewes ſhold voyde out of Eng lōde for theyr miſbyleue & alſo for theyr falſe vſury that they dyd vnto chryſten men. And for to ſpede & make an ende of this thynge / all the comynalte of Englonde gaue vnto the kynge the .xv. peny of al theyr goodes mouable. And ſo were the iewes dryuen out of Englonde. And than went ye iewes in to Fraūce / & there they dwelled through leue of kyng Philyp that than was kynge of Fraūce.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Edwarde was ſeaſed in all ye londe of Scotlonde / through cōſent and graūte of all ye lordes of Scotlonde.
                        IT was not longe after ye Alexander kyng of Scotlonde was deed and Dauid the erle of Huntingdon that was the kynges broder of Scotlond aſked & claymed ye kingdom of Scotlonde after that his broder was deed / bycauſe that he was rightfull heyre. But many grete lordes ſayd naye / wherfore grete debate aroſe bytwene them & theyr fren des / for as moche as they wolde not con ſent to his crownacyon. And the meane tyme the foreſayd Dauid dyed. And ſo it befell yt the ſayd Dauid had thre dough ters that worthely were maryed. The fyrſt doughter was maryed to Bayloll / the ſeconde to Brus / & the thyrde to Haſtynges. The foreſayd Bayloll & Brus chalenged ye londe of Scotlonde / & grete debate & ſtryfe aroſe bytwene them thre bycauſe eche of them wolde haue ben kyng. And whan ye lordes of Scotlonde ſawe ye debate bytwene them / they came to kyng Edward of Englonde / & ſeaſed hym in all ye londe of Scotlonde as chefe lord. And whan the kyng was ſeaſed of the foreſayd lordes of Scotlonde / ye foreſayd Bayloll / Brus / & Haſtynges came to the kynges courte / & aſked of ye kynge whiche of them ſholde be kyng of Scotlonde. And kyng Edward that was full gentyll & true / let enquyre by the cronycles of Scotlonde / & of the greteſt lordes of Scotlonde / whiche of them was of ye eldeſt blode. And it was foūde yt Bayloll was the eldeſt / & that the kyng of Scotlonde ſhold holde of ye kyng of Englonde and do hym feaute & homage. And after this was done Bayloll went in to Scotlonde / and there was crowned kynge of Scotlond. And ye ſame tyme was vpon the ſee grete warre bytwene ye englyſſh men & the Normans. But vpon a tyme the Normās arryued at Douer / & there they martyred an holy man yt was called Thomas of Douer. And afterward were the Normans ſlayne / yt there eſcaped not one of them. ¶ And ſoone after kynge Edward ſholde leſe the duchy of Gaſcoyn through kyng Philip of Fraū
                           ce / through his fals caſtyng of ye Dou
                              •
                           e peres of the lond / wherfore ſyr Edmond that was kyng Edwardes broder gaue vp his homage vnto ye kyng of Fraūce. ¶ And in yt tyme ye clerkes of Englonde graūted to kynge Edward halfe dele of holy chirche goodes / in helpynge to recouer his londe agayn in Gaſcoyn. And the kynge ſent thyder a noble company of his bachelers. And hymſelfe wolde haue gone to Porteſinouth / but he was letted through one Maddok of Wales yt had ſeaſed the caſtell of Swandon in to his handes / & for that cauſe ye kyng turned to Wales at Chryſtmaſſe. And bycauſe that the noble lordes of Englond yt were ſent in to Gaſcoyn had no cōfort of theyr lorde the kyng they were taken of ſyr Charles of Fraūce / that is to ſay / ſyr Iohn of Brytayne / ſyr Robert Typtot / ſyr Raufe Tanny / ſyr Hugh Bardulf / & ſyr Adam of Cretynge. And yet at ye Aſcencyon was Maddok taken in Wales & another whiche was called Morgan / 

and they were ſent to the toure of London / and there they were byheded.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How ſyr Iohn Bailoll kyng of Scotlonde withſayd his homage.
                        ANd whā ſyr Iohn Bailoll kyng of Scotlonde vnderſtode yt kyng Edwarde was warred in Gaſcoyne (to whome ye realme of Scotlonde was delyuered) falſly than agaynſt his othe wt
                           ſayd his homage through procuryng of his folke / & ſent vnto the courte of Rome through a fals ſuggeſtion to be aſſoyled of the othe yt he ſwore vnto the kynge of Englonde. And ſo he was by lettre embulled. ¶ Than choſe they of Scotlonde Douſpers for to take from Edward his ryght. ¶ And in yt tyme came two cardynals from Rome fro ye pope Celeſtyne to treate of accorde bytwene the kyng of Fraūce & the kyng of Englonde. And as thoſe cardynals ſpake of accorde / Thomas Turbeluyl was taken at Lyons & made feaute & homage to the warden of Parys / & to hym put his two ſones in hoſtage / & thought to go in to Englonde for to eſpye the coūtre / & tell them whan he came in to Englonde yt he had broken the kynges priſon of Fraūce by nyght / & ſayd that he wolde do yt all englyſſhmen & walſhmen ſholde be aboute ye kyng of Fraūce. And this thynge to bryng to an ende he ſwore / & vpon this couenaūt dedes were made bytwene them / & that he ſholde haue by yere a. M. poūdes worth of londe to brȳge this thynge to an ende. This fals traytour toke his leue & went thens & came in to Englōde vnto ye kyng & ſayd yt he was broken out of pryſon / & that he had put hȳ in ſuche peryl for his loue / wherfore ye kynge coude hȳ moche thanke / & full glad was of his comynge And the fals traytour fro yt daye eſpyed all the doynge of ye kynge & alſo his coū
                           ſeyle / for the kynge loued hym well / and was wt hym full preuy. But a clerke of Englonde yt was in the kynges hous of Fraūce herde of this treaſon & falſnes / & wrote to an other clerke that than was dwellyng wt kyng Edward of Englonde all how Thomas Turbeluyll had done his fals conife
                              •
                           tynge / & all the coūſeyle of Englonde was wryten for to haue ſent vnto ye king of Fraūce. And through the foreſayd lettre that ye clerke had ſent fro Fraūce / it was foūde vpon hym wher fore he was / ladde to London and there hāged and drawen for his treaſon. And his two ſones that he had put in Fraū
                           
                              ••
                            for hoſtage were than byheded.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the conqueſt of Barwyk.
                        ANd whan the two cardynalles were gone agayn in to Fraunce for to treate of the peas of Cambrey the kyng ſent thyder of his erles & barons that is to ſaye / ſyr Edmonde his brod
                              ••
                            erle of Lancaſtre & of Leyceſtre 
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              •
                           en ry Lacy erle of Nycholl / & W
                              ••
                           yā 
                           
                              ••
                           ſſ
                              •
                            a baron / and of other baronettes aboute xiiii. of the beſt and wyſeſt of Englonde. And in ye ſame tyme kyng Edward toke his viage to Scotlōde for to warre vpon Iohn Bayloll kyng of Scotlonde. And ſyr Robert Roos of Batwyk dedde fro ye englyſſhmen and went to the Scottes. And kyng Edward went toward Barwyk & beſyeged the towne. And they yt were within māly defended them & ſet a fyre and brent two of kyng Edwardes ſhyppes / & ſayd in deſpyte & repre
                              •
                           e of hym. Weneth kyng Edward with his longe ſhankes to haue gete Barwik all our vnthankes / gas pykes hȳ / & whan he has done gas dikes hȳ. Whan kyng Edwarde had herde this ſ
                              •
                           orne / anone through his myght he paſſed ouer the dyches & aſſayled the towne / and came to the gates and gate and conquered the

towne / & through his gracyous power ſlewe .xxv. M. and. vij .C. Scottes. And kynge Edward loſt no man of renome / ſaue ſyr Richard of Cornewayle / & hym ſlewe a flemynge out of ye reed hall with a quarell as ye foreſayd Rycharde dyd of his helme & cōmaūded them for to yelde them & put them in the kynges grace / & the Scottes wolde not / wherfore ye hall was brent & caſt downe / & all thoſe that were therin were brent. And kyng Edward loſt no moo men at that vyage of ſymple eſtate but .xxvij. Englyſſhmen. And the wardeyn of the caſtell gaue vp the keys of the caſtell wtout ony aſſaute / & there was taken ſyr Williā Douglas & ſyr Symond Ft
                              •
                           ſell & the erle Patrik yelded them to the peas. But Ingham of Humſremyll & Robert the Brus that were with kyng Edward / forſoke kyng Edward & helde with the Scottes / and afterwarde they were taken & put in to priſon. And than let kyng Edward cloſe in Barwik with walles & with dyches And afterwarde Robert Rous went to Tyndale / & ſet waybrygge a fyre & Exham & Lamerſtok / & ſlewe & robbed the folke of yt coūtre. And after that he went fro thens to Dunbar. And ye fyrſt wedneſdaye of Marche ye kyng ſent ye erle of Garenne / ſyr Hugh Percy / & ſyr Hugh Spenſer wt a fayre cōpany for to beſiege the caſtell. But one yt was called ſyr Rychard Syward a traytour & a fals man ymagyned for to begyle ye englyſſhmen and ſent to ye englyſſhmen for to deceyue them / & ſayd that he wold yelde to them the caſtell / yf they wold graūt hym. viij dayes of reſpyte / that he myght ſende & tell to ſyr Iohn Bayloll that was kyng of Scotlonde / how his men fared that were within ye caſtell / & ſent hym worde but yf he wolde remeue the ſyege of the englyſſhmen / that they wolde yelde the caſtell to the englyſſhmen. The meſſenger than came vnto ſyr Iohn Bailoll (ye than was kynge of Scotlonde) where as he was with his hooſt / and the meſſenger tolde hym all the caſe. And than ſyr Iohn Bayloll toke his hooſt & came on the morowe erly towarde the caſtell. And ſyr Rychard Sywarde ſawe hym come that was mayſter of the coūſeyle and keper of ye caſtell / and ſayd vnto the Englyſſhemen. O quod he / now I ſe a fayre company and well apparayled / I wyll goo agaynſt them and mete with them / and aſſayle them. And ſyr Hugh Spenſer ſawe the falſnes of hym & the treaſon / and ſayd to hym. O traytour taken and proued / your falſnes ſhall not auayle you. And ſyr Hugh Spenſer cō
                           maūded anone for to bynde hym / and in all haſte went agaynſt theyr enemyes / and ſlewe of the Scottes the nombre of xxij. M. For the Scottes had that tyme no man with them of honour / ſaue ſyr Patryk Graham that manly fought & longe / & at the laſt he was ſlayne. And than ſayd the englyſſhmen in reprefe of the Scottes. Theſe ſcaterand Scottes holde I for ſottes of wrenches vnware. Erly in a mornynge in an euyll tymyng went ye fro Dunbare. ¶ Whan thoſe yt were in the caſtell ſawe the dyſcōfyture they yelded vp the caſtell to ye englyſſhe men / and boūde theyr bodyes londes & caſtels to kynge Edward. And ſo there were taken in ye caſtell thre erles .vij. ba rons / and .xxviij. knyghtes / and .xj. clerkes / and .vij. Pycardes / & all were preſented to kyng Edward / & he ſent them to ye toure of London to be kepte there.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Edward of his grete grace delyuered agayne the Scottes out of pryſon that were chefetaynes of the londe / and they drewe them to the Frenſſhmen through the coūſeyle of Wyllyam Waleys.
                        
                           
THan whan kynge Edward had made an ende of the warre & taken the chefetaynes of Scotlond. Than came ſyr Iohn Bayloll wt other & yelded them vnto kyng Edward & put them in his grace / & were ladde to London. And whā kyng Edward was comen thyder they were brought before hȳ / & ye kynge aſked of them how they wolde make amendes of the treſpace & loſſe yt they had done him / & they put them in his mercy Lordes ſayd the kyng / I wyll not your londes ne your goodes / but I wyll yt ye make to me an othe vpō goddes body to be true to me / & neuer after this tyme agaynſt me bere armes. And they all conſented to the kynges wyll / & ſwore vpon goddes body / yt is to ſay / ſyr Iohn of Comyn / ye erle of Strathorne / ye erle of Ca
                           
                              •
                           yk / & alſo .iiij. biſſhops vndertoke for al the clergy / & ſo ye kynge delyuered them and gaue them ſafeconduytes to go in to theyr owne coūtree. And it was not lōge afterwarde but that they aroſe agaynſt kyng Edward / bycauſe that they wyſt well that kynge Edwardes folke were taken in Gaſcoyn / as before is ſayd / but ſyr Iohan Bayloll kynge of Scotlonde wyſt well that his londe ſholde haue ſorowe ynough & ſhame for theyr falſnes / and in haſte went hym ouer ye ſee to his owne londes / and there helde hym / and neuer came agayne. Wherfore ye Scottes choſe vnto theyr kyng Willyam Waleys a rybaud and an harlot / comen vp of nought / & to englyſſhmen dyd moche harme. ¶ And kyng Edward thought how he myght beſt delyuer his people that were taken in Gaſcoyne / & in haſte went hym ouer the ſee in to Flaundres for to warre vpon the kyng of Fraunce. And the erle of Flaūdres receyued hym with moche honour / & graūted hym all his londes at his owne wyl. And whan the kyng of Fraūce herde tell yt the kyng of Englond was arryued in Flaūdres & came wt an huge power to deſtroye hym he prayed hȳ of trewſe for two yere / ſo ye englyſſhe marchaūtes and alſo frenſſhe myght ſafely go & come on bothe ſydes. Kynge Edwarde graūted it / ſo yt he had his men out of priſon yt were in Gaſcoyn And ye kyng of Fraūce graūted anone / & ſo they were delyuered. ¶ In the ſame tyme the Scottes ſent by the byſſhop of ſaynt Andrewes in to Fraūce to ye kyng & to ſyr Charles his broder yt ſyr Charles ſhold come wt his power and they of Scotlond wolde come wt theyr power & ſo they ſholde go in to Englonde ye lond
                              •
                            to deſtroye from Scotlond vnto 
                              •
                           en
                              •
                            & the ſcottes truſted moche vpon ye frenſſh men. But of yt thȳge they had no maner graūte. Yet neuertheleſſe ye Scottes began to robbe & ſlee in Northumberlonde and dyd moche harme.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Willyam Waleys let ſlee ſyr Hugh of Creſſingham / and of the batayle of Fonkirke.
                        WHan the tydynges came to kyng Edward that Wyllyam Waleys had ordeyned ſuche a ſtronge power & alſo that all Scotlonde to hym was attendaunt & redy for to ſlee Englyſſhmen and to deſtroye the londe he was ſore anoyed / & ſent anone by lettre to ye erle of Garren / & to ſyr Henry Percy and to ſyr Willyam Latomer / and to ſyr Hugh of Creſſyngham his treſourer that they ſholde take power & go in to Northumberlonde / & ſo forth in to Scotlond for to kepe the coūtrees. And whan Willyam Waleys herde of theyr comynge / he began for to flee / & ye englyſſhmen folowed hym / & droue hym tyll he came to S
                              •
                           ry uelyn / & there he helde hym in ye caſtell. And the walſhmen euery daye them eſcryed & thretened / & dyd all the deſpyte that they myght / ſo yt the Englyſſhmen

vpon a tyme in a mornyng went out frō the caſtel the mountenaūce of .x. myle / & paſſed ouer a brydge. And William Waleys came with a ſtronge power & droue them backe / for the englyſſhmen had no power agaynſt hym but fledde / & they yt myght take the brydge eſcaped. But ſyr Hugh the kynges treſourer there was ſlayn & many other alſo / wherfore was made moche ſorowe. ¶ Than had kyng Edward ſpedde all his maters in Flaū
                           dres & was comen agayn in to Englōde & haſtely toke his waye in to Scotlonde & came thyder at ye Aſcencyon tyde / & all that he foūde he ſet a fyre & brent. But ye poore people of Scotlonde came to hym wonders thycke / & prayed hym for goddes loue to haue mercy on them. Wherfore the kyng cōmaūded yt no man ſhold do them harme yt were yoldē to hym / ne to no mā of ordre / nor no hous of religion ne no maner chirche / but let eſpye where yt he myght fynde ony of his enemyes. Than came a ſpye to ye kynge & tolde hȳ where the Scottes were aſſembled for to abyde batayle. And ſo on ſaynt Mary Magdaleyns day ye kynge came to Fonkirk & gaue batayle to ye Scottes / & at ye batayle were ſlayne .xxxiij. M. ſcottes / & of englyſhmen .xxviij. & no mo / of yt whiche was a worthy knight ſlayne an hoſpytaler yt was called Frere Brian Iay. For whan William Waleys fled from ye batayle / that ſame Brian hym purſued fyerſly / & as his hors ran he ſtart in to a myre of a marys vp to ye bely / & Willyā Waleys than turned agayne / and there ſlewe ſyr Bryan / & yt was grete harme. And that whyle kynge Edwarde went through Scotlonde for to enquyre yf he myght fynde ony of his enemyes / & in ye londe he dwelled as longe as hym lyked & there was none enemy that durſt him abyde. And ſoone after yt kyng Edward went to Southamton / for he wolde not abyde in Scotlond in wynter ſeaſon for eſement of his people. And whan he came to London / he let amende many my
                              •
                            dedes that were done agaynſt his peas & his lawes whyle he was in Flaūdres
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the laſt maryage of kyng Edward / and how he went the thyrde tyme in to Scotlonde.
                        ANd afterward it was ordeyned through the court of Rome / that kyng Edward ſhold wedde dame Mar garete that was kyng Philips ſyſter of Fraūce. And the archebyſſhop Robert of wynchelſe ſpouſed thē togider / through whiche mariage there was made peas bytwene kynge Edward of Englonde & kynge Philyp of Fraūce. ¶ Kynge Edwarde went than the thyrde tyme in to Scotlond. And than wtin ye fyrſt yere he famyſſhed the londe / ſo yt he lefte not one but that al came to his mercy / ſaue they that were in ye caſtell of Eſtreuelyn / that well was vitayled & ſtored for .vij. yere.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How the caſtell of Eſtreuelyn was beſyeged and wonne.
                        BYnge Edward came to the caſtell of Eſtreuelyn wt an huge power & beſyeged the caſtell / but it lytel auayled For he myght do the Scottes no harme the caſtell was ſo ſtronge & well kepte. Whan kyng Edward ſawe that / he bethought hym on a queyntyſe / & cauſed anone to make two payr of hye galowes before the toure of ye caſtell / & made his othe / that as many as were within the caſtell (were he erle or baron) & he were taken with ſtrengthe (but yf he wolde the rather yelde hym) he ſholde be hanged vpon ye ſame payr of galowes. And whan they that were within the caſtell herde this / they came and yelded them

all to the kinges grace & mercy. And the kyng forgaue them all his yll wyll. And there were all ye grete lordes of ſcotlonde ſworne to kynge Edward / yt they ſholde come to London to euery parlyament / & ſholde ſtande to his ordynaunce.
                     
                     
                        How Troylebaſton was fyrſt ordeyned.
                        BYng Edward went thens to London / & wende for to haue had reſt & peas of his warre / in yt whiche warre he was occupyed .xx. yere / that is to ſay in Wales / in Gaſtoyn & in Scotlonde / & thought how he myght recouer his treſour yt he had ſpended about his warre And let enquyre through ye realme of all the tyme yt he had ben out of his realme that men called Troylebaſton / & ordeyned therto Iuſtices. And in this maner he recouered treſour wtout nombre. And his purpoſe was for to haue gone in to the holy londe for to haue warred vpon goddes enemyes / bycauſe he was croſſed longe tyme before. And neuertheles the lawe yt he had ordeyned dyd moche good through out all Englonde to them that were myſbode. For thoſe yt treſpaced were well chaſtyſed / & afterwarde were moche more meker & better / & the poore comyns were in reſt & peas. And ye ſame tyme king Edward priſoned his owne ſone Edwarde / bycauſe ye byſſhop of Cheſtre ye kynges treſourer had complayned on hȳ / ſayeng yt he through coū
                           ſeyle of one Pyers of Ganaſton a ſquyer of Gaſcoyn had broken his parkes. And this Pyers coūſeyled & ladde this ſame Edward. And for this cauſe kynge Edward exiled this Pyers out of Englōde.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the deth of Willyam Waleys the fals traytour.
                        ANd whan this kynge Edward had ouercomen his enemyes in Wales / Gaſcoyn & Scotlonde / & had deſtroyed all his traytours / ſaue onely ye rybaud Willyā Waleys / ye neuer wolde yelde hym to ye kyng / & at ye laſt he was taken in the towne of ſaynt Dominyk / the .xxxiij. yere of king Edwardes regne & was preſented to kyng Edward. But the kyng wolde not ſe hym / & ſent hym to London to receyue his iudgement / & vpō ſaynt Barthylmewes euen he was hanged & drawen / & his heed ſmytten of and his bowelles taken out of his body and brent / & his body quartred & ſent to foure of the beſt townes of Scotlonde / & his heed put vpon a ſpere & ſet vpō London brydge / in enſample yt the Scottes ſholde haue in mynde for to do amyſſe agaynſt theyr lyege lorde agayne.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How the Scottes came to kyng Edward for to amende theyr treſpace that they had done agaynſt hym.
                        ANd at Michelmas next comyng kyng Edward helde his parlyament at Weſtmynſter / & thyder came ye Scottes / that is to ſaye / the byſſhop of ſaynt Andrewes / Robert the Brus erle of Carik / Symond the Friſell / Iohn ye erle of Athell. And they were accorded with ye kyng & bounde / & by othe ſwore that yf ony of them afterward myſbare them agaynſt the kynge / they ſholde be diſheryted for euermore. And whā theyr peas was thus made / they toke theyr leue & went home vnto theyr coūtree.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Robert the Brus chalenged Scotlonde.
                        ANd after this Robert the Brus erle of 
                              •
                           aryk ſent by his lettres vnto the erles and barons of Scotlonde that they ſhold come to hym to Sconne on the morowe after the Coucepcyon of our lady for the grete nedes of the londe.

And the lordes came at ye daye aſſygned. And the ſame daye ſyr Robert the Brus ſayd. Fayre lordes full well ye knowe yt in my perſone dwelleth the ryght of the realme of Scotlonde / & as ye well wote I am ryghtfull heyre / ſyth yt ſyr Iohn Baylon that was our kynge hath forſaken vs & left his londe. And though it ſo be that kyng Edward of Englond with wrongfull power hath made me aſſent to hym agaynſt my wyll / yf yt ye wyll graunt yt I may be kynge of Scotlonde I ſhall kepe you agaynſt king Edward of Englonde / & agaynſt all maner men. And with yt worde the abbot of Sconne aroſe vp & before them all ſayd yt it was reaſon for to helpe hym & defende ye londe & ſayd he wolde gyue hym a. M. poūde for to maynteyn ye londe. And all ye other graūted hym the londe / and with theyr power hym for to helpe / & defyed kynge Edwarde of Englonde / & ſayd yt Robert the Brus ſholde be kyng of Scotlonde.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How ſyr Iohn of Comyn gaynſayd the crownynge of ſyr Robert the Brus.
                        ¶ Ordynges ſayd ſyr Iohn of Comyn / thynke on ye trouth & othe that ye made to kyng Edward of englōd & as touchyng my ſelfe I wyll not breke myn othe for no man / & ſo he went from them / wherfore Robert ye Brus & all tho that cōſented to hym were yll content wt ſyr Iohn of Comyn. Thā ordeyned they another coūſeyle at Domfris / to which came ye foreſayd ſyr John of Comyn / for he dwelled but two myle from Domfris there he was wont to ſoiourne & abyde.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How ſyr John of Comyn was traytourſly ſlayne.
                        ANd whā Robert the Brus wyſt that all the grete lordes of Scot lōde were come to Scōne / ſaue ſyr Iohn of Comyn that than abode nygh Scōne he ſent ſpecially for the ſayd ſyr Iohn of Comyn to come & ſpeke with hym. And vpon that he came & ſpake wt him at the gray freres in Domfris / & that was the thurſday after Candelmaſſe daye / & ſyr Iohn graūted to go wt hym. And whan he had herde maſſe / he toke a ſoppe and dranke / & afterward he beſtrode his pa
                              •
                            frey & rode to Domfris. Whan Robert the Brus ſawe hym come at a wynow as he was in his chambre / he made toye ynough / & came agaynſt hym / & colled hym about the necke / and made to hym good ſemblaūt. And whan all the erles and barons of Scotlond were there preſent / Robert ye Brus ſayn / ſyrs ye wote well the cauſe of this comynge / & wher fore it is / yf ye wyll graūte that I may be kyng of Scotlonde as ryght heyre of the londe. And all ye lordes yt were there ſayd wt one voyce yt he ſholde be crowned kyng of Scotlond / & yt they wolde helpe hȳ & maynteyn agaynſt all men lyuyng & dye for hym yfnede were. The gentyl knyght Iohn of Comyn anſwered. Cet tes neuer for me: ne for to haue as moche helpe of me as ye value of a button / for ye othe yt I haue made to kyng Edward of Englond I ſhall holde whyle yt my lyfe laſteth. And with ye word be went from the cōpany & wolde haue lepte vpon his plafrey. And Robert the Brus purſued hym with a drawen ſwerde and perced hym through the body / & ſyr Iohn Comyn fell downe to the erth. But whan Roger yt was ſyr Iohn Comyns broder ſaw ye falſues / he ſtert to Robert ye Brus & ſmote hym wt a knyfe / but ye traytour was armed vnder / ſo yt the ſtroke might do hym no harme / & ſo moche helpe came aboute Robert ye Brus / yt Roger Comyn was there ſlayne & hewen to peces And Robert ye Brus turned agayn where as ſyr Iohn Comyu the noble baron

laye wounded and drewe towarde his deth beſydes the hye awter in ye chirche of the gray freres / & ſayd vnto ſyr Iohn Comyn. O traytour thou ſhalte be deed and ſhalt neuer lette myn auauncement and ſhoke his ſwerde at the hye awter and ſmote hym on the heed yt the brayne fell downe vpon the groūde / & the blode ſtert on hygh vpon the walles. And yet vnto this daye is that blode ſeen there / & no water may waſſhe it awaye / & ſo dyed that noble knyght in holy chirche.
                        ¶ Whan this traytour Robert ye Brus ſawe yt no man wold lette his crownaciō he cōmaūded all ye barons to be at ſaynt Iohns town at his crownacion. And on the Annūciacion of our lady ye biſſhop of Glaſton & ye byſſhop of ſaynt Andrewes crowned hym kyng. And anone after he droue all the Englyſſhmen out of Scotlonde. And they fledde and came & complayned them vnto kyng Edward how that Robert the Brus had dryuen them out of the londe & dyſheryted them.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How that kynge Edward dubbed at Weſtmynſter .xxiiij. ſcore knyghtes.
                        ANd whan kyng Edward herde of this myſchete / he ſwore yt he ſhold be auēged therof / & hange & drawe all the traytours of Scotlonde without raūſom. ¶ Than kyng Edward ſent for all the bachelars of Englond / that they ſhold come to Londō at whytſontyde / & he dubbed at Weſtmynſter .xxiiij. ſcore knyghtes. Than ordeyned he to go in to Scotlonde agaynſt Robert the Brus / & ſent before hȳ in to Scotlond ſyr Aymer the valyaūt erle of Pēbroke / & ſyr Henry Percy baron wt a fayre company / yt purſued ye Scottes & brent townes & caſtlels And afterwarde came ye kyng hymſelfe with erles & barons a fayre company.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Robert the Brus was dyſcomfyted in batayle / & how Symond Friſell was ſlayne.
                        THe frydaye nexte before the Aſſumpcyon of our ſady kyng Edward mette with Robert ye Brus & his company beſyde ſaynt Iohns to 
                              ••
                           ne in Scotlonde / of yt whiche company kyng Edward ſlewe .vii. M. ¶ Whan Robert the Brus ſawe this myſchefe / he began to flee & hyd hȳ ſecretiy / but ſyr Symod Friſell was fore purſued / ſo yt he turned again & abode batayle / for he was a wor thy knyght / but our englyſſhman ſhewe his hors & toke hym & led hym to kynge Edward / but or he came to hȳ he began to flatre his takers / pmyſyng them. iiij M. marke of ſyluer / his hors & 
                              •
                           arneys & become a begger. Thā ſaid Theobald of Peuenes that was ye kynges arther. Now ſo god me helpe it is for nought yt thou ſpekeſt / for all ye golde in englend I wold not let the go wout cōmaūdement of kynge Edward. And kynge Edward wolde not ſe hym / but cōmaūded to lede hym to London to haue his dome. And on our ladyes eue the Nat
                              〈…〉
                            he was hanged & drawen / & his herd ſmytten of & hanged agayne with chaynes of 
                              •
                           ren vpon the galowes / & his herd was ſet vpon London brydge on a ſpere and agaynſt Chryſtmaſſe ye body was brent / bycauſe that the men that kepte ye body by nyght ſawe ſo many deuylles aboure hym / turmentynge hym wt yren crokes hortybly vpon ye galowes & many that ſawe them anone after dyed for drede / & ſome waxed mad / or fore ſeke. And in yt batayle was taken ye byſſhop of Baſton & ye biſſhop of ſaynt Andrewes & ye abbot of Sconne all armed as fals traytours & fals prelates agaynſt theyr othe. And they were brought to ye kynge. And the kynge ſent them vnto the pope of Rome that he ſholde do wt them his wyll.
                     
                     
                        
                        ¶ How Iohn erle of Atheles was taken and put to deth.
                        ANd at yt batayle fledde ſyr Iohn erle of Atheles / and went in to a chirche / & there hyd hym for drede / but he myght haue there no refute / bycauſe that ye chirche was enterdyted through a generall ſentence / & in ye ſame chirche he was taken. And this ſyr Iohn wend well to haue ſcaped fro ye deth / bycauſe yt he claymed kynrede of kynge Edward. And ye kyng wold no longer be betrayed of his traytours / but ſent hȳ to London in haſte / & there was hanged & his heed ſmytten of / & his body brent. But at the prayer of the quene Margarete bycauſe yt he claymed kynrede of kyng Edward his drawynge was forgyuen hym.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Iohn that was Wyllyam Waleys broder was put to deth.
                        ANd whan the greteſt mayſters of Scotlonde were thus done to euyll deth for theyr falſnes and treaſon / Iohn that was Willyam Waleys broder was taken and done to dethe / as ſyr Iohn erle of Atheles was.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Robert the Brus fledde from Scotlonde to Norway.
                        ANd at that ſame tyme was Roberte the Brus moche hated amonge the people of Scotlonde / ſo that he wyſt not what was beſt to do / & for to hyde hym he went in to Norway to ye kynge yt had ſpouſed his ſyſter / & there helde hȳ for to haue ſocour. And Robert the Brus myght not be founde in Scotlonde. So kynge Edward than let crye his peas through out all the londe / and his lawes were vſed / & his mynyſtres ſerued through out all the londe.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Edwarde dyed.
                        
                           
                        
                        ANd whan kynge Edwarde had abated the pride of his enemyes he returned agayne ſouth warde / and a malady toke him at Burgh vpō ſaudes in the marche of Scotlonde / & he wyſt well that his deth was full nygh / & called to him ſyr Henry Lacy erle of Nichol ſyr Guy erle of warwik / ſyr Aymer Valence erle of Penbroke / and ſyr Robert of Clifford baron / & prayed them vpon the fayth yt they ought hym / that they ſhold make Edwarde of Carnaruan kynge of Englonde as ſhortly as they myght / & yt they ſhold not ſuffre Piers of Ganaſton come agayn in to Englonde for to make his ſone to ryot. And they graūted hym with a good wyll. Than ye kynge toke ye ſacramentes of holy chirche as a good chriſten man ſhold / & dyed in very repen taūce whan he had regned .xxxv. yere / & was buryed at weſtmynſter wt grete ſolempnite / on whoſe god haue mercy.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of Merlyns prophecyes that were declared of kynge Edward that was kynge Henryes ſone.
                        OF this kyng Edwarde pphecyed Merlyn / and called hym a dragon the ſeconde of the. vſ. kynges that ſholde

tegne in Englonde / & ſayd yt he ſholde be medled with mercy & alſo wt ſtrengthe & ſternes / that ſhold kepe Englonde from colde & hete. And that he ſholde open his mouth toward Wales / & that he ſholde ſet his fote in Wyke / & that he ſhold cloſe with walles yt ſhold do moche harme to his ſede. And he ſayd ſothe / for the good kynge Edward was medled wt mercy & with fyerſnes / with mercy agaynſt his enemyes of Wales / & after of Scotlōde with fyerſnes whā he put them to deth for theyr falſnes & traytory / as they had deſerued it. And well kepte he Englond from colde & hete / ſyth he kepte it frō all maner of enemyes that came vpon him to do hym ony wronge. And well he opened his mouth towarde Wales / & made it quake through ye hidour of his mouth whan he conquered it through dynt of ſwerde. For ye prynce Lewlyn & Dauyd his broder / Rys & Morgan were put to deth through theyr falſnes & theyr foly. And he ſet his fote in wike / & conquered Barwyke / at the whiche conqueſt were ſlayn .xxv. M. and. vij .C. out take them that were brent in the reed hall. And the walles that he let make ſhall be noyous vnto his ſede / as men ſhall here after ſe in the lyfe of ſyr Edward of Carnaruan his ſone. And yet ſayd Merlyn that he ſholde make ryuers ren in blode & with brayn / & that ſemed well in his warres where as he had the mayſtry. And yet Merlin ſayd yt there ſhold come a people out of the north weſt durynge the regne of the foreſayd dragon / yt ſholde be ladde by an yll greyhoūde / yt the dragon ſholde crowne kyng / that afterward ſholde flee ouer ye ſee for drede of ye dragon without comynge agayn / & yt was proued by ſyr Iohn Bayloll ye kyng Edward made to be kynge of Scotlonde / that falſly aroſe agaynſt him / & after he fled to his owne londes of Fraūce / & neuer came agayne in to Scotlonde for drede of kynge Edward. And yet ſayd Meriyn the people that ſholde lede the foreſayd greyhoūde ſhold be faderles vnto a certayn tyme / & he ſayd ſothe / for ye people of Scotlonde gretely were dyſeaſed / ſyth yt ſyr Iohn Bayloll theyr kung was fledde. And yet layd Merlin yt the ſonne ſhold become in his tyme as reed as blode / in tokenynge of grete mortalite of people / & that was well knowē whan ye ſcottes were 
                              •
                           ay
                              •
                           . And Merlyn ſayd yt ſame dragon ſholde nouryſſhe a foxe that ſholde meue grete warre agaynſt hym yt ſhold in his tyme be ended / & that ſemed well by Robert ye Brus that kyng Edward nourſſhed in his chambre / that ſythen ſtale aware & meued grete warre agaynſt hym wh
                              •
                            the warre was not ended in his tyme. And afterward Merlyn tolde yt this dra gon ſhold be holden ye beſt body of all the worlde / & he ſayd ſothe for ye good kyng Edward was ye worthyeſt knyght of all ye worlde in his tyme. And yet ſaid mer lyn yt the dragon ſholde dye in ye marche of an other londe / & yt his londe ſholde be longe wtout a good keper / & yt men ſholde wepe for his deth from ye yle of Shepey vnto ye yle of Mercill: wherfore alas ſhal be theyr ſonge amonge ye 
                           
                              ••
                           myn people faderles in ye londe waſted. And ye p
                              •
                           h
                              •
                            cy was knowen ouer all full well. For ye good king Edward dyed at Burgh vpō ſandes / yt is in the marche of Scotlonde wherfore ye englyſſhmē were discōf
                              •
                           ed & ſorowed in Northumberiend bycauſe ye king Edwardes ſone ſet by ye Scottes no force for ye tyot of Pyers of Ganaſton wherfore alas was ye ſong through out all Englonde for defaute of theyr good wardeyn / from ye yle of Shepey vnto ye yle of Mareyll ye people made moche ſorowe for good king Edwardes deth. For they wende yt kyng Edward ſhold haue gone in to the holy lond / for yt was holly

his purpoſe. Vpon whoſe ſoule god for his hygh grace haue mercy.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno d
                              ••
                           i. M .CC. lxxxiii
                              •
                           .
                        CEleſtinus was pope after Nicolas .v. monethes / and no thynge noble of hym is wryten / but yt he was a vertuous man. ¶ Bonifacius the. vii
                              •
                           . was pope after hȳ .viij. yere. This Boniface was a man in thoſe thynges that apperteyneth to courte / for he was very e
                              •
                           pert in ſuche maters. And bycauſe he had no pere / he put no meſure to his prudence / & toke ſo grete pryde vpon hym / yt he ſayd he was lord of all ye worlde. And many thȳges he dyd wt his myght that fayled wretchedly in the ende. He gaue an enſample to all prelates yt they ſhold not be proude / but vnder the forme of a very ſhepeherde of god they ſholde more ſtudy to be loued of theyr ſubiectes than to be drad. This man is he of whome it is ſayd yt he entred as a fox / he lyued as a lyon / & dyed as a dogge. ¶ This tyme the yere of grace was ordeyned from an C. yere to an .C. yere / & the fyrſt Jubile was in ye yere of our lord god. M .CCC. ¶ Benedictꝰ the .xj. was pope after Boniface .xi. monethes. This man was an holy man of ye ordre of ye frere prechours & lytell whyle lyued / but deceſſed anone. ¶ Adulphus was Emperour .vj. yere. This man was ye erle of Anoxone / and was not crowned by ye pope / for he was ſlayne in batayle. ¶ Albertus was emperour after hȳ .x. yere. This man was ye duke of Auſtrie / & fyrſt was repreued of the pope / & after was confermed by ye ſame pope for the malyce of the kyng of Fraūce whiche was an enemy vnto the chirche. And to that Albert ye ſame pope gaue the kyngdom of fraūce / as he dyd other kyngdomes / but it ꝓfyted not / for at the laſt he was ſlayne of his neuewe. ¶ Clemēs was pope after Benedictus almooſt .ix. yere. This man was a grete buylder of caſtels & other thynges. And he dampned ye ordre of Templers. And he ordeyned the .vij. boke of decretalles the whiche be called y• queſtyons of Clementyns. And anone after in a coūſeyle the whiche he helde at Vienna he reuoked that ſame boke / the whiche his ſucceſſour Iohn called agayn / & incorpored it & publyſſhed it. This Clement fyrſt of al popes tranſlated the popes ſeet from Rome to Aumyon. And whyder it was done by the mocyon of god / or by ye boldnes of man / dyuerſe men meruaylleth. ¶ Iohn the .xxij. was pope after hym xviij. yere. This man was all gloryous as for thoſe thȳges that were to be vſed through the actyfe lyfe. And he publyſſhed the Conſtytucyons of the Clementynes / & ſent them to all ye vniuerſitees. And many ſayntes he canonyſed. And ye fatte byſſhopryches he deuyded. And he ordeyned many thynges agaynſt ye plu ralite of benefices / and many heretykes he dampned / but whyder he was ſaued or not / our lorde god wolde not ſhewe to thoſe that he loued very well. ¶ Henry the .vij. was emperour after Albert .v. yere. This Henry was a noble man in warre / and he coueyted to haue peas by londe & water. He was a gloryous man in batayle / & was neuer ouercome with enemyes. And at the laſt he was poyſoned of a frere whan that he houſeled hym by receyuynge of the ſacrament.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of kynge Edwarde that was kynge Edwardes ſone.
                        ANd after this kynge Edwarde regned Edwarde his ſone / that was borne at Carnaruan. And this Edward went in to Fraūce & there he ſpouſed Iſabell ye kynges doughter of Fraū
                           ce the .xxv. daye of Ianuary at ye chirche of our lady at Boloyn in the yere of our lorde Ieſu Chryſt a. M .CCC .vij. And

the .xx. daye of Feueryer the nexte yere y• came after he was crowned ſolemply at Weſtmynſter of ye archebyſſhop of Caū
                           terbury & of ye archebiſſhop of winchelſe And there was ſo grete prees of people yt ſyr Iohn Bakwel was deed & murdred And anone as the good kynge Edward was deed / ſyr Edward his ſone kyng of Englonde ſent after Pyers of Ganaſton into Gaſcoyn / & ſo moche he loued him yt he called him broder. And anone after he gaue hym ye lordſhyp of Walyngford / & after yt he gaue him ye erledom of Cornewayle agaynſt all ye lordes wyll of Englonde. And thā brought he ſyr Walter of Langton byſſhop of Cheſtre to ye tour of London in priſon wt two knaues al onely to ſerue hym. For ye kyng was wroth wt hȳ / bycauſe yt ſyr Walter made cōplaynt on hȳ to his fader / wherfore he was put in priſon in ye tyme of Troile baſton. And the fore ſaid Piers of Ganaſton made ſo grete mayſtryes yt he went in to ye kynges treſoury in ye abbey of weſtmynſter & toke y• table of golde wt the treſtyls of ye ſame / & many other ryche iewels yt ſomtyme were kyng Arthurs / & toke them to a marchaūt yt was called Aymery of 
                              〈…〉
                           and / for he ſhold bere them ouerſee in to Gaſcoyne / & ſo he went thens & neuer came agayn after / whiche was a grete loſſe to this londe. And whan this Pyers was ſo rychely auaūced / he beca me wōders proude / wherfore al ye grete lordes of ye realme had hȳ in deſpyte for his grete berynge / wherfore ſyr Henry La
                              •
                           y 
                              〈◊〉
                            of Nichol / and ſyr Guy erle of wa
                              〈…〉
                            / the whiche good lordes ye good king Edward ſyr Edwardes fader king of Englonde charged y• Pyers of Ganaſton ſholde not come in to Englond for to brynge his ſone Edward in to ryot. And all y• lordes of Englonde aſſembled them on a certayn daye at y• 
                           
                              ••
                           eres prechours at London / & there they ſpake of ye diſhonour that kynge Edward dyd to his realme & to his crowne. And ſo they aſſented all bothe erles & barons & all the comyns yt the foreſaid Pyers of Ganaſton ſholde be exiled out of Englonde for euer more. And ſo it was done: for he forſwore Englond & went in to Irlonde / & there ye kyng made hym chefetayn & gouernour of the londe by his cōmyſſion. And there this Pyers was chefetayn of all ye londe and dyd there all that hym lyked & had power to do what he wolde. And yt tyme were ye temple
                              •
                           s exiled through all th
                              ••
                            ſtendom / bycauſe ye men put vpon them that they ſhold do thynges agaynſt the fayth & good byl
                              〈…〉
                           . Kynge Edward loued Piers of Ganaſton ſo moche that he myght not forbere his company and ſo moche ye kyng gaue & behyght ye people of Englonde that ye er
                              •
                           lyng of ye foreſayd Pyers ſholde be reuoked at Stamford through them yt had e
                              ••
                           led hym. Wherfore Pyers of Ganaſton came agayne in to Englonde. And whan he was come
                              •
                            agayn in to this lond / he deſpyſed ye greteſt lordes of this londe / & called ſyr 
                              ••
                           
                           bert of Clare erle of Gloceſter 
                              〈◊〉
                            and the erle of Nycholl ſyr Henry La
                              •
                           y b
                              •
                           rſtenbely / & ſyr Guy erle of warwyk the blacke hoūde of Arderne and alſo be called ye noble erle Thomas of Lancaſtre churle / & many other ſcornes & ſhames them ſayd / & many other grete lordes of Englonde▪ wherfore they were toward hym full angry & wro
                              ••
                            a
                              •
                           d tyght 
                              •
                           ore anoyed. And in ye ſame tyme dyed ye erle of Nycholl / but he charged or yt he dyed Thomas erle of Lācaſtre that was his ſone 
                              〈…〉
                           e that he ſholde maynteyne his quarell agaynſt this ſame Pyers of Ganaſton vpon his bleſſynge. And ſo it befel through helpe of the erle Thomas of Lancaſtre & alſo of ye erle of Warwyk that the foreſayd Pyers was heded at Gauerſythe beſyde Warwyk / the .xix.

daye of Iune / in the yere of grace a. M .ccc .xij. Wherfore the kynge was ſore anoyed / & prayed god yt he myght ſe ye day to be auenged vpon ye deth of ye foreſayd Pyers. And ſo it befell afterward as ye ſhall here. Alas the tyme / for ye foreſayd erle of Lancaſtre & many other grete ba rons were put to pyteous deth & marty red bycauſe of the foreſayd quarell. The kynge was than at London and helde a parliament / & ordeyned the lawes of ſyr Symond Mounford / wherfore the erle of Lancaſtre & the other erles & all ye clergye of Englonde made made an othe through counſeyle of Robert of Wynchelſe for to maynteyn tho ordinaūces for euermore.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Robert the Brus came agayn in to Scotlonde / & gadred a grete power of men for to warre vpon kynge Edward.
                        ANd whan ſyr Robert the Brus that made hȳ kyng of Scotlond that before was fledde in to Norway for drede of deth of ye good kyng Edward / & alſo he herd of the debate yt than was in Englonde bytwene ye kynge & his lordes he ordeyned an hooſt & came in to Englonde in to Northumberlond / & clene deſtroyed ye coūtree. And whan kyng Edward herde theſe tydynges he let aſſemble his hooſt & mette ye Scottes at Eſtre uelyn on the daye of ye Natiuite of ſaynt Iohn Baptyſt / in the thyrde yere of his regne / & in the yere of grace .M.ccc.xiiij. Alas ye ſorowe & loſſe yt there was done. For there was ſlayne the noble erle Gylbert of Clare / ſyr Robert Clifford baron & there kyng Edward was diſcōfited / & Edmond of Maule the kynges ſteward for drede went & drowned hymſelfe in a freſſhe ryuer yt is called Bannokeſborne Wherfore they ſayd in reprofe of kynge Edward for as moche as he loued to go by water / & alſo for he was diſcomfyted at Bannokeſborne / therfore ye maydens made a ſonge therof in ye coūtree of kyng Edwarde / & in this maner they ſonge. 


                              Maidens of englond ſore may ye morne
                              for tyȝt haue loſt your lemmans at Bannokeſborne / 
                              wt heuelogh / 
                              what weneth the kyng of Englōd to haue goten Scotlonde
                              wt rombilogh.
                           

¶ Whan kyng Edward was diſcomfited wonders faſt he fled with his folke yt were lefte alyue / & went to Barwyk / & there helde hȳ. And after he toke hoſtages / yt is to ſaye / two chyldren of ye rycheſt of the towne / & the kyng went to London / & toke coūſeyle of thȳges yt were nedefull vnto ye realme of Englonde. ¶ In this tyme it befell that than was in Englonde a rybaud yt was called Iohn Tanner / & he ſaid yt he was the good kyng Edwardes ſone / & let call hym Edward of Carnaruan / & therfore he was taken at Oxford / & there he chalenged the frere Carmes chirche ye kyng Edwarde had gyuen them / the whiche chirche ſomtyme was the kynges hall. And afterward was this Iohn ladde to Northamton / & drawen & hāged for his falſnes / & or that he was deed he cōfeſſed & ſaid before al thoſe that were there that the deuyll behyght hym yt he ſhold be kynge of Englonde / and that he had ſerued the deuyll thre yere.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How the towne of Barwyk was taken through treaſon / & how two cardynals were robbed in Englonde.
                        ON mydlent ſondaye in the yere of our lord Ieſu Chryſt. M .ccc .xvj. Barwyk was loſt through fals treaſon of one Pyers of Spaldyng / the whiche Pyers kynge Edwarde had put there for to kepe the ſame towne with many burgeyſes of the ſame towne. Wherfore the chyldren that were put in hoſtage through the burgeyſes of Barwyk folowed ye kynges marchalſe many dayes fettred in ſtronge yrens. ¶ And after

that tyme there came two cardynals in to Englond / whiche ye pope had ſent for to make peas bytwene Englond & Scotlonde. And as they went towarde Durham for to haue ſacred mayſter Lowys of Beaumont byſſhop of Durham / they were takē and 
                              •
                           obbed vpon the more of Wyngleſoown. Of whiche robbery ſyr Gylbert of Middelton was atteynt and taken / & drawen & hanged at London / & his heed ſmytten of & put vpon a ſpere / and ſet vpon newe gate / and the foure quarters ſent to foure citees of Englōde And that ſame tyme befell many myſcheues in Englond / for the poore people dyed for hunger / and ſo moche & ſo faſt dyed that vnneth men myght them bury. For a quarter of whete was worth xl. ſhyllynges / and two yere & an halfe a quarter of whete was worth .x. marke. And often tymes the poore people ſtale chyldren and ete them / & ete alſo all the hoūdes that they myght take / and alſo horſes and cattes. And after there fell a grete moreyn amonge beeſtes in diuers countrees of Englonde durynge kynge Edwardes lyfe tyme.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How the Scottes robbed Northumberlonde.
                        ANd in the ſame tyme came the Scottes agayne in to Englond and deſtroyed Northumberlonde / and brent & robbed that lond / and ſlewe men & women / & chyldren that laye in theyr cradels / & brent alſo chirches & deſtroied chryſtendom / and toke & bare Englyſſhe mēnes goodes as they had bē ſaraſyns or paynyms / & of the wyckednes yt they dyd all chryſtendom ſpake of it.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How the Scottes wolde not amende theyr treſpace / and therfore Scotlonde was enterdyted.
                        ANd whā pope Iohn the .xxij. after ſaynt Peter herde of ye grete ſorow & myſchefe yt the ſcottes wrought he was wonders ſory that chriſtendom was ſo deſtroyed through the Scottes / and namely yt they deſtroyed ſo chirches wherfore ye pope ſent a generall ſentence vnder his bulles of leed vnto the archebyſſhop of Caunterbury & to the archebyſſhop of yorke / that yf Robert ye Brus of Scotlonde wolde not be iuſtifyed and make amendes vnto ye kyng of Englōde Edward theyr lord / & make amendes of his harmes yt they had done / & alſo to reſtore the goodes yt they had taken of holy chirche / that ye ſentence ſholde be pronounced through out all Englonde. And whan ye Scottes herde this / they wold not leue theyr malyce for the popes commaūdemēt / wherfore Robert the Brus Iames Douglas / & Thomas Randulf erle of Moref / & all thoſe that wt them comoned or holpe them in worde or dede were accurſed in euery chirche through out all Englonde euery day at maſſe .iii. tymes / & no maſſe ſhold be ſonge in holy chirche through out all Scotlonde but yf ye Scottes wolde make reſtitucyon of the harmes yt they had made vnto holy chirche / wherfore many a good preeſt & holy men therfore were ſlayne through the realme of Scotlonde / bycauſe they wolde not ſynge maſſe agaynſt ye popes cōmaūdement & agaynſt his wyll and to do and fulfyll the tyrauntes wyll.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How ſyr Hugh Spenſers ſone was made the kynges chamberlayne / and of the batayle of Mitone.
                        ANd it was not longe afterward that ye kynge ne ordeyued a parliament at yorke / & there was ſyr Hugh Spenſers ſone made chamberlain. And the meane tyme whyle the warre laſted

the kyng went agayn in to Scotlonde yt it was wonder to wyte / & beſyeged the towne of Barwyk / but ye Scottes went ouer ye water of Solewath yt was thre myle frō ye kynges hooſt / & pryuely they ſtale away by nyght & came in to englōd & robbed & deſtroyed all yt they myght / & ſpared no maner thȳge tyll yt they came to yorke. And whan ye englyſſhmen that were lefte at home herd theſe tydynges all tho yt might trauayle as well mōkes preeſtes / freres / thanōs & ſeculers came & mette wt the ſcottes at Miton vpſwale the .xij. day of October. Alas ye ſorow / for the engliſſhe huſbondmen that coude no thȳge of warre there were ſlayne & drow ned in an arme of ye ſee. And ye chefetaynes ſyr William of Melton archebiſſhop of yorke: & ye abbot of ſelby wt theyr ſtedes fled & came to yorke / & yt was theyr owne foly yt they had yt miſchaūce / for they paſ ſed ye water of ſwale / & ye ſcottes ſet a fyre the ſtackes of hey: & ye ſmoke therof was ſo huge yt the englyſſhmen myght not ſe the ſcottes. And whan ye Englyſſhmen were gone ouer ye water / than came the Scottes wt theyr wynge in maner of a ſhelde & came towarde ye englyſſhmen in araye / & the englyſſhmen fledde / for vnneth they had ony men of armes / for the kyng had them almooſt loſt at ye ſyege of Barwyk / and the ſcottes hoblers went bytwene the brydge & the englyſſhmen. And whan ye grete hooſt them mette / the englyſſhmen fled bytwene ye hoblers & ye grete hooſt / & the Englyſſhmen almooſt were there ſlayn / & they yt might go ouer the water were ſaued / but many were drowned. Alas for there were ſlayne many men of relygyon / ſeculers / preeſtes & clerkes: & wt moche ſorow ye archebiſſhop eſcaped: & therfore ye Scottes called that batayle the whyte batayle.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Edwarde dyd all maner thynge that ſyr Hugh Spenſer wolde.
                        ANd whan kyng Edward herde theſe tydynges / he remeued his ſyege from Barwik & came agayn in to Englonde. But ſyr Hugh Spenſer the ſone that was ye kynges chamberlayne kepte ſo the kynges chambre / yt no man myght ſpeke with ye kynge. But he had made with hym a f
                              •
                           ette for to do all his nede / & yt ouer meſure. And this Hugh bare hym ſo ſtoute / that all men had of hym ſcorne and deſpyte. And the kynge hymſelfe wold not be gouerned ne ruled by no maner man but onely by his fader and by hym. And yf ony knyght of Englonde had wodes / maners or lōdes / that they wolde coueyte / anone ye kyng muſt gyue it them / or els the man that ought it ſholde be falſly endyted of forfayte or felouy. And through ſuche doynge they diſheryted many a bacheler / & ſo moche loude he gate that it was grete wonder. And whan ye lordes of Englonde ſawe ye grete couetyſe & the falſnes of ſyr Hugh Spenſer the fader & ſyr Hugh the ſone / they came to ye gentyll erle of Lancaſtre and aſked hym of coūſeyle of the dyſeaſe that was in ye realme through ſyr Hugh Spenſer and his ſone. And in haſte by one aſſent they made a preuy aſſemble at Shyrburne in Elmede / and they made there an othe for to breke & dyſtrouble ye doynge bytwene ye king & ſyr Hugh ſpen ſer & his ſone vpō theyr power. And they wēt in to ye marche of wales & deſtroyed the londe of the foreſayd ſyr Hughes.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How ſyr Hugh Spenſer & his fader were exiled out of Englonde.
                        WHan kyng Edward ſawe ye grete harme & deſtruccyon that the barons of Englond dyd to ſyr Hugh Spen ſers londe & to his ſones in euery place yt they came vpon / the king than through his coūſeyle exiled ſyr Iohn Mombray / 

ſyr Roger Clifford / & ſyr Goſſelin Dauil & many other lordes yt were cōſentynge to them / wherfore the barons dyd than more harme than they dyd before. And whan ye kyng ſawe ye the barons wolde not ceaſe of theyr cruelte / the kyng was ſore adrad leſt they wold deſtroye hym & his realme for his mayntenaūce / but yf he aſſented to them / & ſo he ſent for them by lettres yt they ſholde come to London to his parliament at a certayne daye as in his lettres were conteyned. And they came wt thre batayles well armed at all poyntes / and euery batayle had cote armures of grene cloth / & therof the ryght quarter was yelowe wt whyte bendes / wherfore that parliament was called ye parlyament of the whyte bende. And in that company was ſyr Vmfrey of Bohoune erle of Herford / & ſyr Roger Clifford / ſyr Iohn Mombray / ſyr Goſſelyn Dauyll / ſyr Roger Mortimer of Wygmore / ſyr Henry of Trais / ſyr Iohn Gif fard / & ſyr Barthilme we of Badelſmore that was the kynges ſteward / that the kyng had ſent to Shyrbur
                              •
                           ein Elmede to ye erle of Lancaſtre / & to all that were with hym for to treate of accorde / yt hym alyed to the barons / & came wt that company. And ſyr Roger Dammorie / & ſyr Hugh Dandale ye had ſpouſed ye kynges neces ſyſter / & ſyr Gylbert of Clare erle of Gloceſtre yt was ſlayne in Scotlonde as before is ſayd. And thoſe two lordes had than two partyes of the erledome of Gloceſtre / & ſyr Hugh Spenſer the ſone had ye thyrde parte in his wyues halfe the thyrd ſyſter / & thoſe two lordes wēt to ye barons wt all theyr power agaynſt ſyr Hugh theyr broder 
                              〈◊〉
                            lawe / & ſo there came with them ſyr Roger Clifford / ſyr Iohn Mombray / ſyr Goſſelyn Dauyll / ſyr Roger Mortymer of Wygmore his neuew / ſyr Henry Trais / ſyr Iohn Giffard / ſyr Barthylmewe of Badelſmore with all theyr company & many other y• to them were conſentyng. All the grete lordes came to Weſtmynſter to the kynges parliament / & ſo they ſpake & dyd ye bothe ſyr Hugh Spenſer the fader & alſo the ſone were outlawed of Englonde for euermore. And ſo ſyr Hugh the fader went to Douer & made moche ſorow / & fell downe vpon y• groūde by ye ſee banke acroſſe with his armes / & ſore wepyng ſayd. Now fayre Englonde & good Eng londe to almyghty god I the betake / & thryes kyſſed ye groūde / & wende neuer to haue comen agayn / & wepyng curſed the tyme yt euer he begate ſyr Hugh his ſone / & ſayd for hȳ he had loſt all englōde & in preſence of all gaue him his curſe & went ouer the ſee to his londes. But 
                              〈◊〉
                            Hugh the ſone wolde not go out of Englonde / but helde hym on ye ſee & he & his cōpany robbed two Dromondes beſyde Sandwyche / & toke & bare awaye all ye was in them / the value of .xl. M. poūde.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How the kyng exiled ye erle Thomas of Lancaſtre / & all that helde with hym and how Mortimer came & yelded hym to the kynge / and of the lordes.
                        IT was not longe after ye the kyng ne made ſyr Hugh Spenſer th
                              •
                            
                           
                              •
                           a der & ſyr Hugh the ſone come agayne in to Englonde agaynſt the lordes wyll of the realme. And ſoone after the kyng wt a ſtronge power came and beſyeged the caſtell of Ledes / & in the caſtell was the lady of Badelſmore bycauſe ye ſhe wold not graūte that caſtell to the quene I ſabell kyng Edwardes wyfe. But ye princypall cauſe was bycauſe ye ſyr Barthilmewe was agaynſt the kyng & helde wt the lordes of Englonde / & neuertheleſſe the kynge by helpe and ſocour of men of London / and alſo of helpe of ſoutheren men gate the caſtell maugre of them all

that were within / & toke with them all that they myght fynde. And whan the barons of Englonde herde theſe tydynges / ſyr Roger Mor
                              ••
                           mer & many other lordes toke the towne of Burgworth wt ſtrength / wherfore the kyng was wonders wrothe / & let outlawe Thomas of Lācaſtre / & Vmfrey de Bohoune erle of Herford / & all thoſe that were aſſentyng to the ſame quarell. And the kyng aſſembled an huge hooſt / & came agaynſt the lordes of Englonde / wherfore the Mortimers put them in the kynges mercy & grace. And anone they were ſente to the toure of London / & there kepte in priſon. And whan ye barons herde this thynge they came to Poūtfret caſtell / where as the erle Thomas ſoiourned / & told hym how that ye Mortimers both had yelded them to ye kyng / & put them i his grace.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the ſyege of Tykhyll.
                        WHan Thomas erle of Lancaſtre herd this / he was wōders wroth and all yt were of his company / & gretly they were diſcōforted / & ordeyned theyr power togyder / & beſyeged the caſtell of Tykhyll. But thoſe that were within manly defended them / that the barons coude not gete the caſtell. And whan the kynge herde yt his caſtell was beſyeged he ſwore by god & by his names / that ye ſyege ſholde be remeued / & aſſembled an huge power of people and went thyderward to reſcowe the caſtell / & his power encreaſed from daye to daye. Whan the erle of Lancaſtre / & the erle of Herford / & the barons of theyr cōpany herde of this thynge / they aſſembled all theyr power & went to Burton vpon Trent & kepte ye brydge yt the kyng ſholde not paſſe ouer. But it befell ſo on the .x. daye of Marche in the yere of grace. M .ccc .xxj. the kyng & the Spenſers / ſyr Aymer of Valaūce erle of Penbroke / & Ioh
                              •
                           erle of Arūdell and theyr power we
                              •
                           t ouer the water & diſcom
                              •
                           yted the erle Thomas & his com pany. And they fled to the caſtell of Tutbery / & from thens to Poūtfret. And in ye vyage dyed ſyr Roget Danmore in the abbey of Tuthery. And that ſame tyme the erle Thomas had a traytour wt him that was called Robert Holand a knight that ye erle had brought vp of nought / & had nouryſſhed hym in his buttry / and had gyuen hym a. M. marke of londe by yere / & ſo moche the erle loued hym yt he myght do in ye erles courte all yt hym lyked wt hye & lowe / & ſo craftely the thefe bare hym / yt his lorde truſted hym more than ony man on lyue. And the erle had ordeyned hym by his lettres for to go in to the erledom of Lācaſtre to make men aryſe to helpe hym in yt viage / that is to ſaye .v .C. men of armes. But the falſe traytour came not there no maner men for to warne ne reyſe to helpe his lorde. And whan the fals traytour herde tell yt his lord was diſcōfited at Burton vpon Trent / as a fals traytour thefe ſtale awaye & robbed in Rauenſdele his lordes men yt came from the diſcōfyture / & toke of them hors & harneys & all yt they had & ſlewe of them al that he myght take / & came & yelded hym to the kynge. Whan the good erle Thomas wyſt yt he was ſo betrayed / he was ſore abaſſhed / & ſayd to hȳſelfe. O almighty god how myght Robert Holand fynde in his herte me to betraye / ſyth I loued hym ſo moche. O god well may now a man ſe by hȳ / yt no man may deceyue an other rather than he that he truſteth mooſt vpon / he hath full euyll yelded me ye goodnes & ye worſhyp yt I haue done to hym / & through my kyndnes haue auaūced him & made hym hye where that he was lowe / and he maketh me go from hygh vnto lowe / but yet ſhall he dye an euyll deth.
                     
                     
                        
                        ¶ Of the diſcomfyture of Burbrygge.
                        
                           
                              •
                           He good erle ſyr Thomas of Lancaſtre / Vmfrey de Bohoune erle of Herford / & the barons that were with them toke coūſeyle bytwene them at the freres prechours in Poūfret / Thomas of Lancaſtre than thought vpon ye treaſon of Robert Holand / & ſayd in reprefe. Alas Robert Holand hath me betrayed / aye is the reed of ſome euyll ſhreed. And by the comyn aſſent they ſhold go to the caſtell of Dunſtanburgh / ye whiche apperteined to the erledom of Lancaſtre / & that they ſhold abyde there tyll that the kyng had forgyuen them his maletalēt. But whan the good erle Thomas herde this / he anſwered in this maner & ſayd. Lordes ſaid he / yf we go toward ye north the northeren men wyll ſaye that we go towarde the Scottes / and ſo we ſhall be holden traytours / for cauſe of diſtaūce yt is bytwene kyng Edward & Robert the Brus that made him kyng of Scotlond & therfore I ſaye as touchynge my ſelfe I wyll not go no ferther in to the north than to myn owne caſtell of Pountfret. And whan ſyr Roger Clifford herd this he aroſe vp anone in wrath & drewe his ſwerde on hygh / & ſwore by almyghty god & by his holy names / but yf that he wolde go wt them / he ſhold there ſlee hȳ. The noble & gentyll erle Thomas was ſore adrad & ſayd. Fayre ſyrs I wyll go with you whether ſo euer ye me bydde. Than went they togider in to ye north / & with them they had. vij .C. men of armes / & came to Burbrygge. Whan ſyr Andrewe of Herkela yt was in the north coūtree through ordynaūce of the kynge for to kepe ye coūtree of Scotlonde herde tell how ye Thomas of Lancaſtre was dyſcomfyted & his company at Burton vpon Trent / he ordeyned hym a ſtronge power / & ſyr Symond Ward alſo / that than was ſhyref of yorke / and me
                              •
                           te the barons at Burbrygge / and anone they brake ye brydge that was made of tree. And whan ye erle Thomas of Lancaſtre herde that ſyr Andrewe of Herk
                              ••
                           a had brought wt hym ſuche a power / he was ſore adrad / and ſente for ſyr Andrewe of Herkela / and with hym ſpake / & ſayd to hym in this maner. Syr Andrewe ſayd he / ye may well vnderſtande how yt out lorde the kynge is ladde and myſgouerned by moche falſe coūſey
                              •
                           e through ſyr Hugh Spenſer the fader and ſyr Hugh his ſone / & ſyr Iohn erle of Arundell / & through mayſter Robert Baldok a falſe pylled clerke / that now is dwellyng in ye kynges courte. Wherfore I praye you that ye wyll come with vs with all the power that ye haue ordeyned & helpe to deſtroye ye venym of Englonde, and the traytours that ben therin / and we wyll gyue vnto you all ye beſt parte of .v. 
                              〈…〉
                           
                           domes that we haue & holde / & we wyll make vnto you an othe yt we wyll neuer do thynge without your counſeyle / & ſo ye ſhall be eft as well wt vs as euer was Robert Holand. Than anſwered ſyr Andrewe of Herkela & ſayd. Syr Thomas that wold I not do no conſent therto for no maner thȳge ye myght me gyue wt
                           out the wyll & cōmaūdement of our lord the kynge / for than ſholde I be holden a traytour for euermore. And whan yt the noble erle Thomas of Lancaſtre ſawe yt he wolde not conſent to hym for no maner thynge / he ſayd. Syr Andrew wyll ye not conſent to deſtroye ye ve
                              〈…〉
                            of the realme as we be / conſent at one worde / ſyr Andrewe I tell the that or this yere be paſſed that ye ſhall be taken & holden for a traytour / and more than ony of you holde vs now / & of a worſe deth ye ſhall dye than euer dyd knyght in Englōde / & vnderſtāde well yt ye dyd neuer thynge yt ſorer ſhal repēt you / & now go & do what

you good lyketh / & I wyll put me in to the mercy of god. And ſo wente the fals traytour tyraūt and as a fals forſworne man. For through ye noble erle Thomas of Lancaſtre he receyued the armes of chyualry / & of hym was made knyght. Than myght men ſearchers drawe thē on that one ſyde & on yt other / & knightes alſo / & thā fought togyder wonders ſore And alſo amonge all other ſyr Humfrey de Boughon erle of Herforde a worthy knyght of renome through all chryſtendom ſtode & fought with his enemyes vpon the brydge / & as ye noble lorde ſtode & fought vpon ye brydge / a thefe rybaud ſkulked vnder the brydge & fyerſly with a ſpere ſmote the noble knyght in to the foūdament / ſo ye his bowelles fell about his feet. Alas for ſorowe / for there was ſlayne the floure of ſolace & cōforte & alſo of curteyſy. And ſyr Roger of Clifford a noble knyght ſtode euer & fought / & well & worthely hym defended / but at ye laſt he was ſore wounded in his heed / & ſyr Willyam of S
                              •
                           llay & ſyr Roger of Bernefelde were ſlayue at yt batayle. Whan ſyr Andrewe of Herkela ſawe yt ſyr Thomas men of Lancaſtre leſſed & ſlaked / anone he & his company came vnto ye gentyll 
                              •
                           ayght / & ſayd vnto hym wt an hye voyce. Yelde the traitour yelde the. The gentyll erle Thomas than anſwered & ſayd. Nay lordes / traitours be we none & to you we wyll vs neuer yelde whyle that our lyues laſteth / but rather wyll we dye
                              ••
                            our treuth than yelde vs vnto you. And ſyr Andrewe agayne behelde ſyr Thomas & his company yellynge & cryenge as a wood wolfe & ſayd. Yelde you traytours taken yelde you / ſayenge with an hye voyce / beware ſyrs yt none of you be ſo hardy vpon lyfe & ly
                              ••
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                           e to miſ
                              •
                           o Thomas body of Lancaſtre. And with that worde the good erle Thomas went into the cha
                              •
                           e
                              ••
                            and ſayd k
                              •
                           elyng vpon his knees / and turned his vyſage towarde the croſſe and ſayd. Almyghty god vnto the I yelde me / & holly I put me vnto thy mercy. And with that the vylayns & rybaudes lepte aboute hym on euery ſyde as tyrauntes & wood turmentours / and deſpoyled hym of his ar mure / and clothed hym in a robe of raye that was of his ſquyers lyuerey / & forth ladde hym vnto Yorke by water. Than myght men ſe moche ſorowe & care. For the gentyll knyghtes fled on euery ſyde and ye rybaudes & vylayns egerly them deſcryed / and cryed on hygh / yelde you traytours yelde you. And whan they were yolden / they were robbed & boūde as theues. Alas the ſhame and deſpyte that ye gentyll ordre of knyghthode had there at that batayle. And the lond was than without lawe / for holy chirche had than no more reuerence thā yf it had ben a brodell hous. And in that batayle was the fader againſt the ſone / and the vncle agaynſt the neuewe. For ſo moche vnkyndnes there was neuer ſeen before in Englonde as was that tyme amonge folkes of one nacyon. For one kynrede had no more 
                              •
                           yte on that other / than an ho
                              〈…〉
                           gry wolfe hath of a ſhepe, & it was no wonder. For the grete lordes of Englonde were not all borne of o
                              ••
                            
                           
                              •
                           a
                              •
                           yon / but were 
                              〈…〉
                           edled with other na
                              〈…〉
                           s / that is for to ſaye / ſome were Brytons ſome Sa
                              •
                           o
                              •
                           s / ſome 
                              ••
                           nes / ſome Pehytes / ſome Fren
                              〈…〉
                            / ſome Normās / Spanya
                              •
                           des / Romayns / Heno
                              •
                           ers / 
                              〈◊〉
                            F
                              •
                           em
                              ••
                           ges / with m
                              ••
                           y other 
                              ••
                           oyons the whiche nacyons ac
                              〈…〉
                           ed not to the kynde blode of Englond. And yf ſo gret
                              •
                            lordes ha
                              •
                            bē onely 
                              ••
                           dded 
                              •
                           o 
                              •
                           nglyſſhe people / than ſholde reſt and pe
                              •
                           s haue ben a
                              〈…〉
                           ge them without o
                              •
                           y en
                              ••
                           y. And at ye batayle were taken pryſoners ſyr Roger E
                              〈…〉
                           ord / ſyr Iohn M
                              〈…〉
                           bray ſyr Wyllyam Tuchit / ſyr Willyam 
                              •
                           itz

Willyam / & many other worthy knygh tes there were takē at that batayle. And ſyr Hugh Dandell the nexte daye after was taken & put in to priſon / and ſholde haue bē done to deth yf he had not ſpouſed the kynges nece that was erle Gylbertes ſyſter of Gloceſtre. And anone after was ſyr Barth
                              ••
                           mew of Badelſmere taken at Stowe parke / a manoyr of the byſſhop of Lyncolnes / that was his neuewe / & many other barons & baronets wherfore was made moche ſorowe.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How ſyr Thomas of Lancaſtre was byheded at Pountfret / and .v. barons & a knyght drawen & hanged there.
                        NOw I ſhall tell you of the noble erle ſyr Thomas of Lancaſtre. Whan he was taken & brought to yorke many of the cyte were full glad / & vpon hym cryed with an hygh voyce. O ſyr traytour ye be welcome / blyſſed be god / for now ye ſhall haue the rewarde that longe tyme ye haue deſerued. And caſt vpon hym many ſnowe balles / & many other reproues they dyd hym. But the gentyll erle ſuffred all and ſayd not one worde agayne. And at ye ſame tyme the kynge herde of this diſcōfyture / & was full glad / and in haſte came to Poūtfret and ſyr Hugh Spenſer & ſyr Hugh his ſone / & ſyr Iohn erle of Arundel / and ſyr Edmond of wodſtok the kynges broder erle of Kent / ſyr Aymer of Valaūce erle of Penbroke / & mayſter Robert Baldok a fals pylled clerke / that was preuy and dwelled in the kynges courte / & all came thyder with the kynge. And the kynge entred in to the caſtell. And ſyr Andrewe of Herkela a fals tyraūt through ye kynges cōmaundement toke with hym the gentyll erle Thomas to Pountfret / and there he was pryſoned in his owne caſtell that he had newe made / that ſtode agaynſt the abbey of kynge Edwarde. And ſyr Hugh Spenſer the fader & his ſone caſt in theyr thoughtes how and in what maner the good erle Thomas of Lancaſtre ſhold be put to deth without ony iudgemēt of his peres. Wherfore it was ordeyned through ye kynges Iuſtices that the kynge ſhold put vpon hym poyntes of treaſon. And ſo it befell that he was ledde to barre before the kynges Iuſtices bare heded as a thefe in a fayre hall in his own caſtell where as he had made many a grete feeſt to riche & poore. And theſe were his Iuſtices ſyr Hugh Spenſer the fader / & Aymer of 
                              •
                           a
                              •
                           a
                              ••
                           e erle of Penbroke / ſyr Edmōd of wodſtok erle of Kent / ſyr Iohn of Brytayn erle of Rychmond / & ſyr Robert Mal
                              •
                           m
                              〈…〉
                            Iuſtice / & this ſyr Robert him acou
                              •
                           ped in this maner. Thomas at the firſt our lorde ye kyng & this courte excludeth y
                              •
                           u of all maner anſwere. Thomas our l
                              ••
                           d the kyng putteth vpon you yt ye haue 
                              〈◊〉
                            his lōd ryden wt baner diſplayed againſt his peas as a traytour. And with that worde yt gentyll erle Thomas wt an 
                              〈◊〉
                            voyce ſayd. Nay lordes forſoth & by 
                              •
                           a
                              ••
                            Thomas I was neuer traytour. The Iuſtyce ſayd agayn. Thomas our lord the kyng putteth vpō you yt ye haue robbed his folke & murdred his people as a thefe. Thomas alſo ye kyng putteth 
                              〈◊〉
                            you yt he diſcōfyted you & your people wt his folke in his owne realme wherfore ye went & 
                              ••
                           ed to ye wode as an 
                              〈◊〉
                           . And Thomas as a traitour ye ought to be hanged by reaſon but the kyng hath forgyuen you that Iudgement for 
                              ••
                           ue of quene Iſabell. And Thomas reaſon wolde that ye ſholde be hanged but the kynge hath forgyuen you yt 
                           
                              •
                           udgement for loue of your lygnage. But Thomas for as moche as ye were taken fleynge & as an ou
                              •
                           lawe ye kyng wyll yt your heed be ſmytten of as ye haue well deſerued

Anoue haue hym out of pr
                              •
                           es & brynge hym to his iudgement. Whan ye gentyll knyght Thomas had herd al theſe wor des / with an hye voyce he cryed ſore wepyng & ſayd. Alas ſaint Thomas fayre fader / alas ſhall I be deed thus. Graūt me now bliſſedfull god anſwere. But all auayled hym 
                              •
                           o thynge. For the curſed Gaſcoyns put hym hyder & thyder / & on hym cryed wt an hye voyce. O kyng Arthur mooſt terryble and dredefull / well knowen is now thyn open traytory / an euyll deth ſhalt thou anone dye / as thou haſt well deſerued it. And than they ſet vpon his heed in ſcorne an olde chapelet that was all to rent that was not worth an halfpeny. And after that they ſet hȳ vpon a l
                              •
                           ne whyte palfrey full vnſemely / & alſo all bare / & with an olde brydell and with an horryble noyſe they droue hym out of the caſtell toward his deth / and they caſt vpon hym many balles of ſnowe in deſpyte. And as the traytours ladde hym out of the caſtel he ſayd theſe pyteous wordes / holdynge vp his handes towarde heuen. Now the kynge of heuen gyue vs mercy / for ye erthly kyng hath vs forſaken. And a frere prechour went with hym out of the caſtell tyll he came to the place that he ended his lyfe / vnto whom he ſhroue hȳ of all his lyfe. And the gentyll erle helde the frere wonders faſt by the clothes & ſayd to hym. Fayre fader abyde with vs tyll that I be deed / for my fleſſhe quaketh for drede of deth. And the ſothe to ſaye / the gentyl erle ſet hym vpon his knees and turned hym towarde ye eeſt. But a rybaud that was called Higone of Moſton ſet hande vpon the gentyl erle / & ſayd in deſpyte of hym. Syr traytour turne the toward ye Scottes thy foule dethe to receyue / and turned hym toward the north. The noble erle Thomas anſwered than with a mylde voyce & ſayd. Now fayre lordes I ſhall do your wyll. And with ye worde the frere went from hym ſore wepynge And anone a rybaud wente to hym and ſmote of his heed the .xi. Kal. of Apryll / in the yere of grace. M .CCC. and .xxi. Alas yt euer ſuche a gentyll blode ſholde be put to deth wtout cauſe & reaſon. And traytourſly was the kynge counſeyled whan he through the fals coūſeyle of ye Spenſers ſuffred ſyr Thomas his vncles ſone to be put to ſuche a deth & ſo by heded agaynſt all reaſon. And grete pite it was alſo yt ſuche a noble kynge ſholde be deceyued and myſgouerned through coūſeyle of ye fals Spenſers the whiche he maynteyned through loſelry againſt his honour & alſo ꝓfyte. For afterwarde there fell grete vengeaūce in Englonde bycauſe of the foreſayd Thomas dethe. ¶ Whan the gentyll erle of his lyf was paſſed / the pryour & ye monkes of Poūtfret gate the body of ſyr Thomas of the kyng / and they buryed it before the hye awter on ye ryght ſyde. That ſame daye that this gētyl knyght was deed / there were hanged & drawen for ye ſame quarell at Poūtfret / ſyr Wyllyam Tuchet / ſyr William fitz William / ſyr Warreyn of yſell / ſyr Henry of Bradborne / and ſyr Wyllyam Chayny / barons all / & Iohn Page ſquyer. And ſoone after at Yorke were drawen & hāged ſir Roger Clifford ſyr Iohn of Mambray barōs / & ſyr Goſelyn Dauyll knyght. And at Bryſtowe were drawen and hanged / ſyr Henry of wemyngton / and ſyr Henry Mounford barons. And at Gloceſtre were drawen and hanged ſyr Iohn Geffard / and ſyr Willyam of Elmebrugge barons. And at London were drawen & hanged / ſyr Henry Tyes baron. And at Wynchelſe ſyr Thomas Colepeper knyght. And at Wyndſore was drawen and hanged ſyr Fraūceys of waldenham baron. And at Caūterbury was drawen & hanged ſyr

Barthylmewe Badelſmore / & ſyr Barthylmewe of Aſſhebourneham barons / And at Cardyfe in Wales ſyr Willyam Flemmynge baron.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kyng Edward went in to Scotlonde with an hondred thouſande men of armes / and myght not ſpede.
                        ANd whā kyng Edward of Englonde had brought the floure of chyualry vnto theyr deth through coun ſeyle & conſent of ſyr Hugh Spenſer the fader / and ſyr Hugh the ſone / he became as wood as ony lyon. And what ſo euer the Spenſers wolde haue / it was done / ſo well the kynge loued them that they myght do wt hym all thynge yt them lyked / wherfore ye kyng gaue to ſyr Hugh Spenſer the fader the erledom of Wyncheſtre / & to ſyr Andrewe of Herkela the erledom of Cardoyll in preiudyce and in harmynge of his crowne. And kyng Edward than through coūſeyle of ye Spenſers diſheryted all them that had ben agaynſt hȳ in ony quarell wt Thomas of Lancaſtre / & many other were diſheryted alſo / bycauſe yt the Spenſers coueyted to haue theyr lōdes / & ſo they had all that they wolde deſyre with wronge & agaynſt all reaſon. Than made ye kyng Robert Baldok a fals pylled clerke chaū celer of Englonde / through coūſeyle of ye foreſayd Spenſers / & he was a fals rybaude and a couetous. And ſo they coū
                           ſeyled the kyng moche that the kyng let take to his own warde all ye goodes of ye lordes yt were put wrongfully to deth in to his own hādes. And as well they toke the goodes yt were wtin holy chirche as ye goodes yt were wtout / & let them be put in to his treſoury in London / & let them call his forfeytes. And by theyr coūſeyle the kyng wrought / for euermore he diſheryted them yt ought the goodes. And through theyr coūſe
                              •
                           le let arere a tallage of all ye goodes of Englond / wherfore he was ye richeſt kyg ye euer was in englōd after Willyam baſ
                              •
                           ard of Norman
                              •
                           y ye conquered Englonde. And yet through counſeyle of them hy ſemed ye he had not ynough / but made yet euery towne of Englonde for to fynde a man of armes vpon theyr own coſtes / for to go & warre vpon the Scottes yt were his enemyes / wherfore ye kyng went in to ſcotlonde wt an .C. M. men of armes at whitſontyde in ye yere of our lord. M .CCC .xxij. But the ſcottes went & hyd them in wodes & in mountaynes & taryed ye englyſſhmen fro day to day / yt the kyng myght for no maner thȳge fynde them in playn
                              •
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            wherfore many engliſſhmen ye had 
                              〈◊〉
                            vytayles dyed there for honger wōders faſt / & ſod
                              •
                           ynly in goynge & comynge & namely thoſe that had ben againſt Thomas of Lācaſtre & robbed his men vpon his lōdes. Whan kyng Edward ſawe yt vytayles fayled hym / he was wonders ſore dyſcōforted / bycauſe alſo yt his men dyed: & for he might not ſpede of his enemyes. So at ye laſt he came aga
                              〈…〉
                            to Englōde. And anone after came Iames douglas & alſo Thomas 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            huge hooſt into Northumberlonde & wt them ye englyſſhmen yt were dryuen out of Englonde / & came & robbed ye 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            & ſlewe the people & alſo br
                              •
                           nt a 
                              •
                           owne that was called Northall
                              〈…〉
                            & many other townes to Yorke. And whan the kyng herde theſe tydynges he let 
                              ••
                           m
                              •
                           n all maner of men that myght trauayle. And ſo the Englyſſhmen mette y• Scottes at the abbey of 
                              •
                           eyghlonde the .xv. daye after Myghelmaſſe in y• ſam
                              •
                            yere aboue ſayd and the Englyſſhmen were diſcomfyted. And at that dyſcomfytu
                              ••
                            was taken ſyr Iohn of Brytayn erle of Rychemond that helde the coūtre
                              •
                            and the erledome of Lancaſtre and after he

payed an huge raunſom and was let go And after that he went in to Fraunce / & came neuer afterwarde agayne.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How ſyr Andrewe of Herkela was taken & put to deth y• was erle of Cardoyll.
                        THan at y• tyme was ſyr Andrew of Herkela that newe was made erle of Cardoyll / bycauſe y• he had taken the good erle Thomas of Lancaſtre. He had ordeyned through y• kynges cōmaū demēt of Englonde for to brynge him all the power y• he myght for to helpe hȳ agaynſt y• Scottes at y• abbey of Beyghlonde. And whan the fals traytour had gadred all y• people y• he myght & ſholde haue comē to y• king to y• abbey of Beighlond / the fals traytour ladde them by an other countree through Copelonde / and through y• erledom of Lancaſtre / & went through y• coūtree & robbed & ſlewe folke all y• he myght. And ferthermore y• fals traytour had taken a grete ſōme of gold & ſyluer of ſyr Iames Douglas for to be agaynſt y• kyng of Englond / & to be helpyng & holdyng wt the ſcottes / through whoſe treaſon y• kyng of Englond was diſcomfyted at Beighlonde or y• he came thyder. Wherfore y• kynge was toward hym wonders wroth / & let pryuely enquyre by y• coūtre aboute how y• it was. And ſo men enquyred & eſpyed / that at y• laſt the trouth was foūde & ſought / and he atteynt & taken as a fals traitour / as the good erle Thomas of Lācaſtre hym tolde / or that he was put to dethe at his takynge at Burbrydge / & to hym ſayd / or that yere were done he ſhold be taken & holden a traytour. And ſo it was as y• holy man ſayd. Wherfore the kyng ſent priuely to ſyr Anthony of Lucy a knight of the coūtree of Cardoyll that he ſholde take ſyr Andrewe of Herkela & put hym to deth. And to bryng this thynge to an ende / the kynge ſente his cōmyſſyon / ſo that this ſame Andrewe was taken at Cardoyll & ledde to the barre in y• maner of an erle worthely arayed / and with a ſwerde gyrde aboute hym / and boted & ſporred. Thā ſpake ſyr Anthony in this maner / ſyr Andrewe ſayd he / the kynge putteth vpon the for as moche as y• haſt benorped in thy dedes he dyd to the moche honour / & made the erle of Cardoyll & thou as a traytour to thy lorde laddeſt the people of his countree y• ſholde haue holpe hym at y• batayle of Beighlond / & thou laddeſt them away by y• coūtree of Copelonde & through y• erledom of Lancaſtre / wherfore our lorde y• kynge was diſcōfyted there of the Scottes through thy treaſon & falſnes / & yf thou haddeſt comen betymes he had had the batayle / And treaſon y• dydeſt for y• grete ſomme of gold and ſyluer that thou receyued of Iames Douglas a Scotte the kynges enemy. And our lorde y• kyng wyll that the ordre of knyghthode by the whiche y• receyued all thyne honour and worſhip vpon thy body / be all brought to nought & thyne eſtate vndone / y• other knightes of lower degree may after be ware / the whiche lord hath hugely auaunced the in dyuers coūtrees of Englonde / & that all may take enſample by y• / theyr lorde afterward truly for to ſerue. Than commaūded he a knaue anoue to hewe of his ſporres on his heles. And after he lette breke the ſwerde ouer his heed / the whiche the kyng gaue hym for to kepe & defende his londe therwith whan he had made hym erle of Cardoyl. And after he let hȳ be vnclothed of his furred tabard and of his hode / & of his furred cotes / & of his gyrdell. And whā this was done ſyr Anthony ſayd than to hym. Andrew ſayd he / now arte thou no knyght / but a knaue / and for thy treaſon the kynge wyll that y• ſhalte be hanged & drawen / 

and thy heed ſmytten of / & thy bowelles taken out of thy body & brent before the & thy body quartred / & thy heed ſente to Londō / & there it ſhall ſtande vpon London brydge / & the foure quarters ſhal be ſente to foure townes of Englonde / that all other may be ware & chaſtiſed by the And as ſyr Anthony ſaid / ſo it was done all maner thynge on y• laſt daye of October / in the yere of grace. M .CCC .xxij. And y• ſonne turned in to blode as y• people it ſawe / & that dured from y• morowe tyll it was .xj. of the clocke of the daye.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of y• myracles that god wrought for ſaynt Thomas of Lancaſtre / wherfore the kynge let cloſe in the chirche dores of the pryory of Pountfret / that no man ſholde come therin for to offre.
                        ANd ſoone after that y• good erle Thomas of Lācaſtre was martyred / there was a preeſt that lōge tyme had ben blynde / dremed in his ſlepe y• he ſholde go to y• hyll there y• good erle Thomas of Lancaſtre was put to deth / & he ſholde haue his ſyght agayn / & ſo he dremed thre nyghtes ſuynge / & y• preeſt let lede him to y• ſame hyll / & whan he came to the place y• he was martyred on / full deuoutly he made there his prayers / & prayed god & ſaȳt Thomas y• he myght haue his ſyght agayne / & as he was in his prayers / he layde his ryght hande vpon y• ſame place y• the good man was martyred on / and a drop of drye blode & ſmall ſande cleued on his hande / & therwith ſtryked his eyen / & anone through the myght of god and ſaint Thomas he had his ſyght agayne / & thanked than almyghty god & ſaynt Thomas. ¶ And whā this myracle was knowen amōge men / y• people came thyder on euery ſyde and kneled & made theyr prayers at his tombe that is in y• pryory of Poūtfret / & prayed y• holy martyr of ſocour & helpe / & god herde theyr prayers. ¶ Alſo there was a yonge childe drowned in a welle in y• towne of Poūtfret / & was deed thre dayes & thre nyghtes / and men came & layde y• deed chilo
                              •
                            vpon ſaynt Thomas tombe y• holy martyr / & the chylde aroſe frō deth to lyfe / as many a man it ſawe. ¶ Alſo moche people were out of theyr mynde / & god ſent them theyr mynde agayn / through vertue of y• holy martyr. ¶ Alſo god hath gyuen there to exepyls theyr goynge / & to croked theyr handes & theyr feet / & to blynde alſo theyr fyght and to many ſeke folke theyr helth of byuers dyſeaſes / for y• loue of this martyr. ¶ Alſo there was a ryche man in Co
                              ••
                            dom in Gaſcoyn / and ſuche a malady he had that all his ryght ſyde ro
                              ••
                           ed & fell away frō hym y• men might ſe his 
                              ••
                           uer & his herte / & ſo he ſtanke y• vnneth men myght come nye hȳ / wherfore his frendes were for hym wonders ſory / but at the laſt as god wold they prayd to ſaynt Thomas of Lancaſtre y• he wold praye to god for that priſoner / & behyght to go to Poūtfret for to do theyr pylgrymage he thought y• the martyr ſam
                              •
                            Thomas came to him & anou
                              •
                           ted ouer all his ſeke body / & therwith the good man aweke & was all hole / & his fleſſhe was reſtored agayn y• before was torred & fallē away For whiche myracle the good man & his frendes loued god & ſaint Thomas euer more after. And this good man came in to Englonde / & toke with hym foure ſelowes and came to Poūtfret to the holy martyr / & dyd theyr pylgrymage / & the good man that was ſeke came thyder al naked / ſaue his preuy clothes. And whā they had done / they turned home agayn in to theyr owne roūtree / and tolde of the myracle where ſo euer that they came. ¶ And alſo two men haue bē heled there of the mormale / through helpe of y• holy

martyr / though that euyll be holden incurable. ¶ And whan y• Spenſers herd that god dyd ſuche myracles for this holy man / they wold not byleue it in no maner wyſe / but ſaid openly y• it was grete hereſy ſuche vertue of hȳ to byleue. And whan ſyr Hugh Spenſer the ſone ſawe all this doynge / anone he ſente his meſſenger from Poūtfret where as he dweled to kyng Edward / that than was at Grauen at Scipton / bycauſe y• the kyng ſholde vndo y• pylgrymage. And as y• ry baud meſſenger went to ward the kyng for to do his meſſage / he came by the hyll where as the good martyr was done to deth / & in the ſame place he made his ordure / & whā he had done he rode toward the king / & a ſtronge flyxe came vpon hȳ or that he came to Yorke / & thā he ſhedde all his bowels at his foundament. And whan ſyr Hugh Spenſer herde theſe ty dynges / ſomdele he was adradde / and thought for to vndo y• pilgrymage yf he myght by ony maner waye. And anone he went to the kyng & ſayd y• they ſhold be in grete ſclaūdre through out all chry ſtendom for the deth of Thomas of Lancaſtre / yf that he ſuffred the people to dō theyr pylgrymage at Pountfret / & ſo he coūſeyled y• kyng y• he cōmaūded to cloſe the chirche dores of Poūtfret / in y• whiche y• holy martyr was buryed / & thus they dyd agaynſt all fraūchyſes of holy chirche / ſo y• foure yere after myght no pylgrym come to y• holy body / & bycauſe that the monkes ſuffred men to come & honour y• holy body of ſaynt Thomas y• martyr / through counſeyle of ſyr Hugh Spenſer the ſone / & through coūſeyle of mayſter Robert Baldok the falſe pylled clerke the kynges chaunceler / the kyng conſented that they ſholde be ſet to theyr wages: & let make wardeyns ouer theyr own good longe tyme / & through cōmaū dement of y• foreſayd ſyr Hugh Spenſer xiiij. gaſcoyns well armed kept the hyll where as the good man ſaynt Thomas was done to dethe / ſo that no pylgrym might come by y• waye. Full well wend he to haue taken Chryſtes myght & his power & the grete boos of myracles that he ſhewed for his martyr ſaȳt Thomas through all chriſtendom. And that ſame tyme the king made Robert Baldok the fals pylled clerke through prayer of ſyr Hugh Spenſers ſone chaūceler of Englonde. And in y• ſame tyme was y• caſtell of Walyngford holden agaynſt y• kynge through y• pryſoners that were wtin the caſtell for ſaynt Thomas quarell of Lancaſtre. Wherfore the people of y• coūtree came & toke the caſtell vpon y• priſoners. Wherfore ſyr John Goldington knight & ſyr Edmond of Beche priſoners / and a ſquyer yt was Roger of Walton were taken & ſent to y• kyng to Poūtfret / & there they were put in priſon / & y• foreſayd Roger was ſent to yorke / and there he was drawen & hanged. And anone after ſyr Roger Mortimer of wigmore brake out of the Toure of London in this maner. The foreſayd Roger herde yt he ſhold be drawen & hanged at London on the morowe after ſaynt Laurence daye / & on y• daye before he helde a fayre feeſt in the toure of London / & there was ſyr Stephen Segraue cōſtable of y• toure & many grete men wt them / & whā they ſhold ſoupe / y• foreſayd Stephen ſent for all y• officers of y• toure / & they came & ſouped with hym / & whā they ſhold take theyr leue of hȳ / a ſquyer yt hyght Stephen yt was full preuy with the foreſaid Roger through his coūſeyle gaue them ſuche a drȳke y• the leſt of them al ſlept .ij. days & ij. nyghtes / & in the meane tyme he eſcaped away by y• ryuer of Tamys / & went ouer y• ſee & helde hym in Fraūce. Wherfore the king was ſore anoyed / & put the ſame Stephen out of his Cōſtablery.
                     
                     
                        
                        ¶ How quene. Iſabell went in to Fraū
                           ce for to treate of peas bytwene her lorde the kynge of Englonde and the kynge of Fraunce her broder.
                        THe kynge went than to London and there through coūſeyle of ſyr Hugh Spenſer the fader & of his ſone & of mayſter Robert Baldok a fals pylled clerke his chaunceler / let ſeaſe than all the quenes londes in to his handes / and alſo all the londes y• were ſyr Edwardes his ſone / & were ſo put to theyr wages agaynſt all maner of reaſon / & that was through y• falſnes of the Spenſers. And whan the kyng of Fraūce yt was quene Iſabelles broder herde of this falſnes / he was ſore anoyed agaynſt y• kynge of Englonde & his fals coūſeylers. Wherfore he ſent a lettre to kyng Edward vnder his ſeale / yt he ſhold come in to Fraū
                           ce at a certayn day for to do his homage & therto he ſomoned hym / & els he ſhold leſe all Gaſcoyn. ¶ And ſo it was ordeyned in Englond through the kyng & his coūſeyle that quene Iſabell ſholde go in to Fraūce for to treate of peas bytwene her lorde & her broder. And that Olyuer of yngham ſholde go in to Gaſcoyn / and haue with hym .vij. M. men of armes & more / to be ſeneſſhall & wardeyn of Gaſcoyn. And ſo it was ordeyned that quene Iſabell went in to Fraunce / & with her went ſyr Aymer of Valaūce erle of Pen broke / that was there murdred ſodeynly in a preuy ſyege / but yt was through goddes vengeaūce / for he was one of the Iuſtyces y• conſented to ſaynt Thomas deth of Lancaſtre / & wolde neuer after tepent him of that wycked dede. And at that tyme ſyr Olyuer of yngham went ouer in to Gaſcoyn / & dyd moche harme to the kyng of Fraūce / and than he gate agayne that kynge Edwarde had loſt / and moche more therto.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Edwarde ſent ſyr Edward his ſone the eldeſt in to Fraūce.
                        THe quene Iſabell had but a quarter of a yere dwelled in Fraunce whan ſyr Edward her eldeſt ſone aſ
                              ••
                           d leue for to go in to Fraūce for to ſpeke wt his moder Iſabell y• quene. And his fader y• kyng graūted hym wt a good wyll & ſayd to hȳ / go my fayre ſone in goddes bleſſyng & myne / & thynke for to come agayn as haſtely as ye may. And he wēt ouer ſee in to Fraūce / & y• kyng of Fraūce his vncle receyued hȳ wt moche honour & ſayd to him. Fayre ſone ye be welcome & for bycauſe yt your fader came nor to do his homage for y• duchy of Guy
                              •
                           nne as his aunceſters were wont to do
                              •
                            I gyue you y• lordſhip to hold it of me ī herytege as all maner aunceſtres dyd before you wherfore he was called duke of Guyen.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How the kyng exiled his quene Iſabell and Edwarde his eldeſt ſone.
                        WHan kyng Edward of Englonde herde tell how y• kynge of Fraūce had gyuen y• duchy of Guyen to ſyr Edward his ſone / wtout cōſent & wyll of hȳ & that his ſone had receyued y• duchy 
                              〈◊〉
                            became wōders wroth: & ſent to his ſone by lettre & to his wyfe alſo y• they ſh
                                 •
                              ld come agayn in to Englonde in all haſte. And the quene Iſabel & ſyr Edward her ſone were wonders ſore adrad of y• kynges menaces & of his wrath / & pryncypally for y• falſnes of y• Spenſers / bothe of the fader & alſo of the ſone & at his cō
                           maūdement they wold not come. Wherfore kyng Edward was full ſore anoyed & let make a crye at London / that yf the quene Iſabell & Edward his eldeſt ſone came not in to Englonde yt they ſhold be holden as enemyes / bothe to ye realme & alſo to the crowne of Englond. And for yt they wolde not come in to Englond / but

bothe were exiled the moder & her ſone. Whan ye quene herd theſe tydynges / ſhe was ſore adrad to be deſtroyed through the fals coniectynge of the Spenſers / & went wt the knyghtes yt were exiled out of Englonde for ſaynt Thomas cauſe of Lancaſtre / that is to ſaye / ſyr Roger of wigmore / ſyr Williā Truſſell / ſyr Iohn of Tromwell / & many other good knightes / wherfore they toke theyr coūſeyle & ordeyned amōge them for to make a maryage bytwene ye duke of Guyen ye kynges ſone of Englonde & ye erles doughter of Henaud / yt was a noble knyght of name & a doughty in his tyme / & yf yt thynge myght be brought about / than ſtode they trowynge wt ye helpe of god & wt his helpe to recouer theyr herytage in Englōde / wherof they were put out through the fals coniectynge of the Spenſers.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Edward through counſeyle of the Spenſers ſente to the douze pers of Fraunce that they ſholde helpe that the quene Iſabell & her ſone ſyr Edward were exiled out of Fraunce.
                        WHan kynge Edward & the Spenſers herde how yt quene Iſabell & ſyr Edward her ſone had alyed them to the erle of Henaud / & to them that were exiled out of Englonde for cauſe of Thomas of Lācaſtre / they were ſo ſory that they wyſt not what to do. Wherfore ſyr Hugh Spenſer ye ſone ſayd to ſyr Hugh his fader in this maner wyſe. Fader curſed be ye tyme & the coūſeyle that euer ye conſented that quene Iſabell ſhold go in to Fraūce for to treate of accord bytwene the kynge of Englonde & her broder the kyng of Fraūce / for that was your coū
                           ſeyle / for at yt tyme forſothe your wytte fayled / for I drede me ſore leeſt through her & her ſone we ſhall be deſtroyed / but yf we take the better coūſeyle. ¶ Now fayre ſyrs vnderſtāde how meruaylous felony & falſhede the Spenſers ymagyned & caſt. For pryuely they let fyll .v. barels ferrours wt ſiluer / the ſomme amoū
                           ted to .v. M. poūde / & they ſent thoſe barels ouer ſee pryuely by an alyen yt was called Arnolde of Spayne / that was a broker of London / that he ſholde go to ye douzepers of Fraunce / that they ſholde procure & ſpeke to the kynge of Fraunce that quene Iſabell & her ſone Edwarde were dryuen & exiled out of Fraūce / and amōge all other thȳges that they were brought to the deth as pryuely as they myght. But almyghty god wold not ſo For whā this Arnold was in ye hygh ſee he was taken with Selanders yt mette hym in the hygh ſee / & toke hym & ladde hym to the erle of Henaud theyr lorde / & moche ioye was made for that takyng. And at the laſt this Arnold pryuely ſtale away fro thens & came to London. And of this takyng and of other thynges the erle of Henaud ſayd to the quene Iſabell Dame make you mery & be of good chere / for ye be richer than ye wend to haue 
                              〈…〉
                           n / & take theſe .v. barels full of ſiluer yt were ſente to the douzepers of Fraunce for to ſlee you and your ſone Edward / & thynke haſtely for to go in to Englonde / & take ye with you ſyr Iohn of Henaud my broder and .v .C. men of armes / for many of them of Fraunce in whome ye haue had grete truſt / do but ſcorne you. And almyghty god graunte you grace your enemyes to ouercome. Than ſent the quene Iſabell through Henaud and Flaūdres for her ſoudyours / and ordeyned her euery daye for to goo in to Englonde agayne. And ſo ſhe had in her company ſyr Edmonde of Woodſtocke / that was erle of Kent / and was alſo ſyr Edwardes broder of Englonde.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kyng Edward let kepe ye coſtes

by the ſee / & let trye all the pryce men of armes & fote men through Englonde.
                        
                           
                              •
                           Nd whan kyng Edward herde tell that quene Iſabel & Edward her ſone wolde come in to Englond with a grete power of alyens / and with them that were outlawed out of Englonde for theyr rebellyouſnes / he was ſore adrad to be put downe / and for to leſe his kyngdome / wherfore he ordeyned to kepe his caſtels in Wales as well as in Englond with vytayles & theyr apparayle / & let kepe his riuers & alſo ye ſee coſtes / wher of the .v. portes toke to kepe them & alſo the ſee. And at the feeſt of Decollacion of ſaynt Iohn baptiſt / the citezyns of London ſent to the king to Porcheſtre an .C. men of armes. And alſo he cōmaūded by his lettres ordeyned / yt euery hondred & wepentake of Englonde / to trye as well men of armes as mē on fote / & that they ſholde be put in .xx. ſomme / & in an hondred ſomme / & cōmaūded yt al thoſe men were redy whan ony oyes or crye were made / for to purſue & take ye alyens that came in to Englonde for to take the londe from hym & put hȳ out of his kyngdom And more ouer he let crye through his patent in euery feyre & in euery market of Englond / yt the quene Iſabel & ſyr Edward his eldeſt ſone & the erle of Kent / yt they were taken & ſafely kepte wout ony maner of harme vnto them doynge / & al other maner people yt came with them anone ſmyte of theyr hedes without ony maner of raūſom takynge of them. And what man might brȳge ſyr Roger Mortimers heed of wygmore / ſhold haue an C. poūde of money for his trauayle. And ferthermore he ordeyned by his patent & cōmanuded to make a fyre vpon euery hyll / beſyde ye ryuers & in lowe coūtrees for to make hye bekens of tymbre / that yf it ſo were that the alyens came to the loude by nyght / that men ſholde kyndle the bekens / that the countree myght be warned & come & mete theyr enemyes. And in that tyme dyed ſyr Roger Mortimer his vncle in the 
                              •
                           ou
                              •
                           e of London.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How the quene Iſabell & ſyr Edward duke of Guyenne her ſo
                              •
                           e came to londe at Herewich / and how they dyd.
                        
                           
                              •
                           Nd whan quene Iſabel and ſyr Edward her ſone duke of Guyenne / ſyr Edmonde of Wodſtocke erle of Kent / and ſyr Iohn the 
                              •
                           ri
                              •
                           s 
                              〈◊〉
                            of Henaud and theyr company d
                              •
                           adde 
                              〈◊〉
                            the threteuynges of kynge Edward 
                              〈◊〉
                            of his traytours / for they truſted a
                              〈…〉
                            goddes grace / and came vnto 
                              〈◊〉
                            in Suffolke the. xxii
                              •
                           j. daye of September / & in the yere of our lord Ieſu Chriſt M .CCC. xxv
                              •
                           . And the quene & 
                              〈◊〉
                            Edward her ſone ſent lettres to the May
                              ••
                            and comynalte of London / r
                              〈…〉
                           ge them that they wolde be helpyng in the quarell and cauſe that they had beg
                              〈…〉
                            that is to ſaye / to deſtroye the 
                              •
                           ray
                              •
                           ou
                              •
                           s of the realme. But none anſwere was ſent agayne / wherfore ye quene & ſyr Edward her ſone ſent another pa
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            vnder theyr ſeales / the 
                              〈◊〉
                            of wh
                              •
                           
                           che lettre here foloweth in this maner. ¶ Iſabell by the grace of god quene of Englonde / lady of Irlonde & coūceſſe of Pountyf / & we Edward the eldeſt ſone of the kynge of Englonde duke of Guyenne / erle of Cheſtre / of Pounty
                              •
                            and of Mouſtroyll / to the Mayre and 
                              •
                           o all the comynalce of the cite of London ſendeth gretynge. For as moche as we haue before this tyme ſent to you by our lettres how we be come in to 
                              •
                           his londe in good araye & in good maner / for the honour & ꝓfyte of holy chirche & of our ryght dere lorde ye kynge & all ye realme with all our myght to kepe & maynteyn / as we 
                              〈◊〉
                            all

the good folke of the foreſayd realme are holden to do. And vpon yt we praye you that ye wyll be helpyng to vs in as moche as ye may in this quarell that is for the comyn profyce of ye foreſayd realme. And we haue had to this 
                              •
                           yme none anſwere to the foreſayd lettres / ne knowe not your mynde in that party. Wherfore we ſende to you agayn & praye & charge you that ye bere you ſo agaynſt vs that we haue no cauſe to greue you / but that ye be vnto vs helpyng by all the wayes that ye may / or may know. For wyte ye well in certayn that we & all yt be comen with vs in to this realme / thynke not to do ony thynge / but yt thynge yt ſhall be to the comyn ꝓfyte of all ye realme / & onely to deſtroye Hugh Spenſer our enemy / & enemy to al ye realme / as ye it well know Wherfore we praye you & charge you in the fayth yt ye owe to our lyege lorde the kyng & to vs / & vpon all yt ye ſhall mowe forfayte agaynſt vs / yt yf the ſayd Hugh ſpēſer our enemy come wtin your power that ye do hȳ haſtely to be taken & ſafely kepe vntyll we haue ordeyned of hȳ our wyll / & yt ye leue it not in no maner wyſe as ye deſyre honour & profyte of vs all & of all the realme. Vnderſtande ye well that yf ye do this our prayer & cōmaundement / we wyll the more be holden vn to you. And alſo ye ſhall gete you worſhyp and pryfyte yf ye ſende vs haſtely anſwere of all your wyll agayn at Baldok / the ſyxth daye of October. Whiche lettre erly in the dawnynge of the day of ſaynt Denys was tacked vpon ye newe croſſe in chepe / & many copyes of ye ſame lettre were tacked vpon windowes and dores and vpon other places in the cite of London / yt all men paſſyng by the waye myght them ſe & rede. And in the ſame tyme kyng Edward was at London in the toure at his meet / and a meſſenger came in to the hall & ſayd that the quene Iſabell was comē to londe at Herewich & hath brought in her cōpany ſyr Iohn of Henaude / & with hym men of armes without nombre. And with that worde ſyr Hugh Spenſer ye fader ſpake & thus ſayd vnto ye kynge. My mooſt worſhypfull lorde & kyng of Englond / now make we good chere / for certaynly they ben all ours. The kynge herde this worde cō
                           fortable / yet was he full ſorowfull & pen ſyfe in his herte. And the kynge had not fully eten / but there came in to ye hall an other meſſenger / & ſayd yt the quene Iſabell was arryued at Herewich beſyde Ipſwyche in Suffolk. Syr Hugh ſpenſer the fader ſpake to ye meſſenger & ſaid Tell ſoth in good fayth my fayre frende is ſhe comē wt a grete ſtrength. Now certes ſyr the ſoth for to ſaye / ſhe ne hath in her company but .vij. hondred men of armes. And with yt worde ſyr Hugh ſpenſer the fader cryed with an hygh voyce and ſayd. Alas alas we ben al betrayed for certes wt ſo lytel power ſhe had neuer comen to londe but yf ye folke of this londe were vnto her conſentyng. And therfore after meet they toke theyr counſeyle and went towarde Wales for to arere ye Walſhmen agaynſt the quene Iſabell & Edward her ſone / all for to fyght / and ſo they were in purpoſe euerychone.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How mayſter Walter Stapylton biſſhop of Exceſtre ye was the kynges treſourer was heded at London.
                        
                           
                              •
                           Nd in the ſame tyme kyng Edward was ſore adrad leſt yt men of London wolde yelde them to ye quene Iſabel & to her ſone Edward. Wherfore he ſet mayſter Walter Stapylton his treſourer for to be wardeyn & keper of ye cite of London wt the Mayre / & ſo came to the 
                              •
                           ylde hall of London / & aſked the keyes of the gates of the Cyte / through

vertue and ſtrength of his cōmyſſyon / & wolde haue had ye kepyng of ye cite. And the comuners anſwered and ſayd that they wolde kepe the cite to the honour of kynge Edwarde & of Iſabell the quene and of the duke ye kynges ſone wtout ony moo. Than was ye byſſhop ſore anoyed / and ſwore othes yt they all ſholde abye it anone as kynge Edwarde were comen out of Wales. And all the comuners of the Cite anone toke the byſſhop & ladde hym amyddes of the Chepe / and there they ſmote of his heed / & ſet his heed in his ryght hande. And after they heded two of his ſquyers that helde with the byſſhop / & one of them was called Wyllyam of Wayle / that was the byſſhops neuewe / & that other was called Iohn of Padington. And alſo they toke a burgeys of London that was called Iohn Marſhall / that was ſyr Hugh ſpenſers ſpye the fader / & ſmote of his heed alſo. In the ſame tyme yt biſſhop had at London a fayre toure in makyng in his cloſe vpon the ryuer of Tamys / yt was wtout temple barre / & ſtone fayled to make an ende therof / wherfore he cōmanded his men to go to the freres Carmes / & there they toke ſtone to make therwt the toure & moche ſande & morter & olde robous yt was lefte. And for the deſpyte yt the byſſhop had done vnto holy chirche: he & his two ſquyers were buryed in ye ſande / as though they had ben hoūdes / and there they laye .xj. wekes / tyll that the quene Iſabell ſent her lettres to the comuners & prayed them that they wolde ſuffre & graūt / that the byſſhop myght be taken out of ye place & be buryed at Exceſtre in his own chirche / & ſo he was / & his two ſquyers were buryed at ſaint Clemētes chirche wtout temple barre. And it was no wonder though that byſſhop dyed an euyl deth / for he was a couetous man / & had wt hym no mercy / & euyll coūſeylled the kynge. And ſoone after was Arnold of Spayne taken / that aſſented to haue ladde .v. M. poūde of ſyluer in .v. barels ferryers vnto ye douze
                              •
                           ers of Fraūce / for to helpe & haſte the quene Iſabell to her deth / & Edward her ſone alſo. And this Arnold was put to deth wtout the cite.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kyng Edward & ſyr Hugh ſpenſer & the erle of Arundell were taken.
                        WHan kynge Edwarde had ſente mayſter Walter Stap
                              •
                           lton his treſourer to London / for to kepe the cite vnto hym agaynſt ye quene Iſabell his wyfe / & agaynſt Edwarde his ſone / anone hymſelfe toke with hym ſir Hugh Spenſer ye ſene / and ſyr Iohn o
                              •
                            Arundell / & mayſter Robert Ba
                              •
                           dok his chaunceler a fals pylled prceſt / and toke theyr waye toward Bryſtowe / & there ye kynge abode a lytell tyme / and made ſyr Hugh Spenſer the fader as Cōſtable & keper of ye caſtell. And ye kȳg & that other ſpenſer went to ſhyppe & ſayled toward Wales / & toke no leue of ye ſteward n
                              •
                            of none of ye kynges houſhold & w
                              〈…〉
                            euer in to Wales for to arere the W
                              〈…〉
                            agaynſt dame Iſabel the quene and the duke her ſone / & the erle of Kent and ſyr Iohn of Henaud. And they went & purſued after thē / & theyr power encreaſed dayly. So at ye laſt the kyng was taken vpon an hyll in Wales & ſyr Hugh ſpenſer ye ſone on ye other ſyde of ye ſame 
                              •
                           yll / & the falſe pylled clerke mayſter Robert Baldok there faſt beſydes them / & they were brought agayn in to Englonde as almyghty god wolde. And ye kyng hym ſelfe was put in ſafe kepyng in ye caſtell of Kelynworth / & hym kepte ſyr Henry that was ſaynt Thomas broder of Lancaſtre. And ſyr Hugh ye fader came & put hym in the quenes grace & ſyr Edwarde her ſone duke of Guy
                              〈…〉
                           . But ſyr Hugh

Spenſer after the tyme y• he was taken he wolde neyther ete nor drynke / for he wyſt well he ſhold haue no mercy / ſaue onely to be deed. And the quene & her coū ſeyle had ordeyned that he ſholde haue ben done to deth at London / but he was ſo feble for his moche faſtynge y• he was nygh deed / & therfore it was ordeyned y• he ſhold haue his iudgement at Herford And at a place of y• toure his hode was taken frō his heed / & alſo frō Robert Bal dok yt fals pylled clerke & y• kynges chaū celer / & mē ſet vpō theyr hedes chaplets of ſharpe nettyls / & two ſquyers blewe in theyr eres wt two grete bugles hornes vpon the two priſouers / that one myght here theyr blowynge more than a myle. And one Symond of Redyng y• kynges marſhall bare before them vpon a ſpere theyr armes reuerſed: in token that they ſholde be vndone for euermore. And on y• morowe was ſyr Hugh Spenſer y• ſone dampned to deth / & was drawen & hanged & heded / & his bowelles taken out of his body & brent / & after yt he was quartred / & his .iiij. quarters were ſent to. iiij townes of Englonde / & his heed ſente to London brydge. And this Symond for cauſe that he deſpyſed quene Iſabell he was drawen & hanged on a ſtage made amyddes y• foreſaid ſyr Hughs galowes And y• ſame daye a lytell frō thens was ſyr Iohn of Arundell byheded / bycauſe he was one of ſyr Hugh Spenſes counſeylers. And anone after was ſyr Hugh Spenſer y• fader drawen & hanged & heded at Bryſtowe / & after hanged agayn by the armes wt two ſtronge ropes: & the fourth day after he was hewen all to pe ces / & hoūdes ete hym. And bycauſe the kyng had gyuen hym y• erledom of wyn cheſtre his heed was put vpon a ſpere & ſente thyder. And the fals Baldok was ſent to London / & there he dyed in priſon amōge theues / for men dyd hȳ no more reuerence than they wold do to a dogge. And ſo dyed y• traytours of Englōd bliſſed be god. And it was no wonder / for through theyr coūſeyle y• good erle Tho mas of Lācaſtre was done to deth / & all that helde with Thomas of Lancaſtre through the traytours were vndone / & all theyr heyres diſheryted.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kyng Edward was put downe and his dignite taken from hym.
                        ANd anone after as all this was done / quene Iſabell & Edwarde her ſone duke of Guyenne / & all the grete lordes of Englonde at one aſſent ſente to kyng Edward to y• caſtell of Kenilworth where as he was in kepynge vnder the warde of ſyr Iohn Hachim that was y• byſihop of Ely / & of ſyr Iohn of Percy a baron / for bycauſe that he ſholde ordeyn his parlyament at a certayne place in Englond / for to redreſſe and amende the eſtate of the realme. And kyng Edward them anſwered & ſayd. Lordes ſayd he ye ſe full well how it is / lo haue here my ſeale / and I gyue you all my power for to ordeyne a parlyament where that ye wyll. And than they toke theyr leue of hym & came agayn to y• barons of Englonde. And whan they had the kynges patent of this thynge / they ſhewed it to the lordes. And than was ordeyned that the parliament ſhold be at weſtmynſter at the vtas of ſaynt Hylary. And all the grete lordes of Englonde let ordeyne for them there agaynſt that tyme that the parlyament ſholde be. At whiche daye that y• parlyament was / the kyng wolde not come there for no maner thynge as he had ſet hymſelfe & aſſygned. And neuertheleſſe the barons ſent vnto hym one tyme & other. And he ſwore by goddes ſoule that he wolde not come there one fote. Wherfore it was ordeyned by all the grete Lordes of Englonde that

he ſholde no longer be kyng / but be depo ſed / & ſayd they wolde crowne Edward his ſone y• elder yt was duke of Guyenne And ſent tydynges vnto the kyng there as he was in warde vnder ſyr Iohn erle of Garen / & ſyr Iohn of Bothun yt was byſſhop of Ely / & ſyr Henry Percy a baron / & ſyr Willyam Truſſell a knyght y• was with y• erle Thomas of Lancaſtre for to yeld vp theyr homages vnto hym for all them of Englonde. And ſyr Wyllyam Truſſell ſayd theſe wordes. Syr Edward / bycauſe that ye haue betrayed your people of Englond / & haue vndone many grete lordes or Englond without ony cauſe / ye ſhall be depoſed / & now ye be withſtande thanked be god. And alſo bycauſe that ye wold not come to y• parliament as ye ordeyned at Weſtmynſter as in your owne lettre patent is conteyned / for to treate wt your lyege men as a kyng ſholde. And therfore through all y• comyns aſſent & of all the lordes of Englonde I tell vnto you theſe wordes. Ye ſhall vnderſtande ſyr that the barons of Englond at one aſſent wyll that ye be no more king of Englond / but vtterly haue put you out of your ryalte for euermore. And the byſſhop of Ely than ſayd to the kynge. Syr Edwarde here I yelde vp feaute & homage for all y• archebiſſhops & byſſhops of Englond & for all y• clergy. Than ſayd ſyr Iohn erle of Garen. Syr Edward I yelde vp here vnto you feau te and homage for me & for all y• erles of Englōde. And ſyr Henry Percy gaue vp alſo there his homage for him & for all y• barons of Englonde. And than ſayd ſyr William Truſſell. I yelde vp now vnto you ſyr myn homage for me & for all the knyghtes of Englonde / & for all them y• holde by ſergeaūtry or by ony other maner thynge of you / ſo y• from this day af terward ye ſhall not be claymed kynge / nor for kynge be holden. But from this tyme afterwarde ye ſhall be holden for a ſinguler man of all y• people. And ſo they went thens to London / where y• lordes of Englonde abode them / & ſyr Edward abode in priſon i good kepyng. And this was on the daye of y• cōuerſyon of ſaynt Paule / in the .xx. yere of his regne.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the prophery of Merlyn declared of kynge Edwarde the ſone of kynge Edward the fyrſt.
                        OF this kyng Edward prophecyed Merlin & ſayd y• there ſholde come a gote out of Carre yt 
                           ſhold haue hornes of ſyluer / & a berde as whyte as ſnowe / and a droppe ſhold come out of his noſethrylles yt ſholde betoken moche harme honger & dethe of people / & grece loſſe of his londe. And that in y• begynnynge of his regne ſholde be haūted moche lechery. And he ſayd ſothe / alas the tyme for kyng Edward yt was kyng Edwardes ſone was borne at Carnaruan in Wales For ſothe he had hornes of ſyluer and a berd as whyte as ſnowe whan he was made prȳce of Wales / to moche he gaue hym to ryot and to foly. And ſothe ſayd Merlyn in his ꝓphecy / that there ſhold come out of his noſe a droppe. For in his tyme was grete honger among y• poore people / & ſtronge dethe amonge y• ty the that dyed in ſtrange londe with ſorowe & in warre in Scotlond. And afterward he loſt Scotlonde & Gaſcoyn & moche le chery in his dayes was haūced. ¶ Alſo Merlyn ſayd yt this gote ſholde ſeke the floure of lyfe & of deth. And he ſayd ſo the for he ſpouſed Iſabell y• kynges ſyſter of Fraūce. And in this tyme Merlyn ſayd that there ſhold be made brydges of folk vpon dyches of the ſee. And y• was well ſeen at Bannockeſbourne in Scotlonde whā he was diſcōtyted there of y• Scotces. And Merlyn tolde alſo that ſtones

ſholde fall from caſtels / & many townes ſhold be made playne. And he ſayd ſothe For whan kynge Edward was diſcomfyted in Scotlonde & came than ſouthwarde / the Scottes beſyeged caſtels & dyd moche harme / & brent townes vnto the harde erth. ¶ And afterward Merlyn tolde that an egle ſholde come out of Cornewayle that ſholde haue fethers of golde / that of pryde ſholde haue no pere / and he ſhold deſpyſe lordes of blode / and after he ſhold dye through a bere at Gauerſyche / & that prophecy was full well knowen & foūde ſoche. For by the egle is vnderſtande ſyr Pyers Ganaſton / that than was erle of Cornewayle / whiche was a wonders proude man / & deſpiſed the barons of Englonde / but afterward he was heded at Gauerſyche through ye erle of Lancaſtre & the erle of warwyk. ¶ And Merlyn tolde that in this tyme it ſholde ſeme that the bere ſholde brenne and that batayle ſhold be vpon an arme of the ſee in a felde arayed lyke a ſhelde where ſholde dye many whyte hedes / & he ſayd ſothe. For by the brennynge of ye bere is betokened grete drede through cuttynge of ſwerdes at that batayle of Myton / for there came ye Scottes in maner of a ſhelde in a wynge / & ſlewe men of religyon / preeſtes and ſeculers / wher fore the Scottes called that batayle in deſpyte of Englyſſhmen the whyte batayle. ¶ And after Merlin ſayd that the foreſayd Bere ſholde do the Gote moche harme / & yt ſholde be vpon ye ſouth weſt / and alſo vpon his blode. And ſayd alſo yt the Gote ſhold leſe moche dele of his londe / tyll the tyme that ſhame ſholde hym ouercome / & than he ſhold clothe hym in a lyons ſkynne / & ſholde wynne agayne that he had loſt / & more through people that ſholde come out of the north weſt / yt ſholde make hym to be fered and hym auenge vpon his enemyes through counſeyle of two owles / that fyrſt ſhold be in peryl to be vndone. And thoſe two owles ſholde go ouer ſee in to a ſtraūge londe / & there dwell a certayn tyme / & after ſhold returne agayn in to Englond / & ſhold do moche harme to many one / & that they ſholde coūſeyle ye Gote to meue warre agaynſt the foreſaid bere / & the gote & the owles ſholde come to an arme of ye ſee at Burton vpon Trent / & ſholde go ouer / & that for drede the bere ſholde flee with a ſwan in his cōpany to Bury towarde ye north through an vnkynde outpulter / & that ye ſwan thā ſhold be ſlayne wt ſorow and the bere ſhold be ſlayne full nye his owne neſt / yt ſhold ſtande vpon Poūtfret vpon whome the ſonne ſholde ſhede his bemes / & many folke ſhold ſeke hym for his vertue. And he ſayd ſothe. for ye good erle Thomas of Lācaſtre was borne in the north weſt / & coſyn to ye kynge & his vncles ſone / & by lawe he made ye kynge leſe moche lōde yt he had purchaſed wyl fully tyll at ye laſt the kynge toke therof ſhame / & hymſelfe fylled wt cruelte. And after gate agayne yt he had loſt & moche more / through helpe of folk comyng out of ye northweſt / by whom he was drad / & auenged hȳ on his barons through coū
                           ſeyle of ye two Spēſers yt afore were out lawed for theyr wickednes / & after came agayne out of Fraūce / & ſo moche theſe Spenſers coūſeyled ye kynge yt he ſhold warre vpon Thomas of Lancaſtre / ſo yt the kyng & the Spenſers and the erle of Arundell and theyr power mette with Thomas of Lancaſtre at Burton vpon Trent / and hym there diſcomfyted / and ſyr Vmfrey erle of Herford was in his company. And after fledde the foreſayd Thomas and Vmfrey with theyr company to Burbrygge / metynge with ſyr Andrewe of Herkela / that is called ye vnkynde outpulter / and alſo ſyr Symond Warde erle of Yorke they came & met wt
                           
Thomas of Lātaſtre wt an huge company / & them there diſcōſyted / & in y• diſcō
                           ſiture y• crle of Herford was ſlayne vpon the brydge cowardly with a ſpere in the foūdement / & the erle Thomas was taken & ladde to Poūtfret / & than was he heded beſyde his owne caſtell. But afterward many hym ſought for myracles y• god dyd for hym. And in y• tyme Merlyn ſayd / for ſorowe and harme ſholde dye a people of his londe / wherfore many londes ſholde be vpon hym the more bolder And he ſayd ſothe / for bycauſe of his barons that were put to deth for ſaȳt Thomas quarell of Lancaſtre / people of many londes became the bolder for to meue warre vpon theyr kyng / for theyr blode was turned to many nacyons. And afterward Merlyn tolde & ſayd yt the foreſayd owles ſholde do moche harme vnto the floure of lyfe & deth / and they ſholde brynge her to moche dyſeaſe / ſo that ſhe ſholde go ouer ſee in to Fraūce for to make peas to y• floure delyce / & there ſholde abyde tyll on a tyme her ſede ſhold come and ſeke her / and there they ſhold abyde bothe tyll y• tyme that they ſholde clothe them with grace / & thoſe two owles ſhe ſholde ſeke & put them to pyteous deth. And that prophecy was well knowen / & was full ſothe. For ſyr Hugh Spenſer the fader & ſyr Hugh the ſone did moche ſorowe and perſecucyon vnto the quene Iſabell through theyr ꝓcuremēt to her lord y• kyng. So they ordeyned amonge them y• ſhe was put vnto her wages / y• is to ſaye .xx. ſhillynges in y• daye / wher fore the kyng of Frauce her broder was ſore alwyed / & ſent in to Englonde by his lettres vnto kynge Edward y• he ſholde come vnto his parlyament to Parys in Fraūce. But kynge Edwarde was ſore adradde to come there / for he wende to haue be areſted tyll that he had made amendes for the treſpace that ſyr Hugh Spenſer the fader & the ſone had done / & for y• harme y• they had done to the quene Iſabell his ſyſter. Wherfore through her ordynaūce & cōſent of y• Spenſers y• quene Iſabell went ouer ſee in to Frauce for to make accorde bytwene kyng Edwarde & the kyng of Fraūce her broder. And there dwelled ſhe in Fraūce tyll Edward her eldeſt ſone came for to ſeke her and ſo they dwelled there bothe tyll that alyaūce was made bytwene them & the gentyl erle of Henaud / yt yf they wt theyr vertue myght deſtroye & ouercome y• ves nym & the falſnes of the Spenſers that ſyr Edward ſholde ſpouſe dame Philip the worſhypfull lady & the erles doughter of Henaud. Wherfore the quene Iſabell & Edward her ſone / & ſyr Edmonde of wodſtocke the kynges broder of Englond / & ſyr Iohn of Henaud / & ſyr Rogrt Mortimer of Wygmore / & ſyr Thomas Rocelyn / & ſyr Iohn of Cromwell / & ſyr Willyam Truſſell / & many other of the alyaunce of the gentyll erle Thomas of Lancaſtre yt were exiled out of Englōde for his quarel / & were diſherued of theyr londes / ordeyned them a grete power & arryued at Herewich in Suffolke. And ſoone after they purſued the Spenſers tyll yt they were taken & put to pytcous deth / as before is ſaid / & theyr company alſo / for y• grete falſnes that they dyd to kynge Edward and to his people. And Merlyn ſayd alſo more y• the gote ſholde be put to grete diſraſe & grete anguyſſhe & in grete ſoro wehe ſholde lede his lyfe. And he ſayd ſothe / for after y• tyme that kyng Edward was taken he was put in to warde tyll that y• Spenſers were put to deth / & alſo bycauſe he wolde not come to his parlyamēt at London as he had ordeyued & aſſygned hymſelfe vnto his haronage / & alſo wolde not gouerne and rule his people nor his realme as a kynge ſholde do. Wherfore ſome of y• barons

of Englōde came & yelded vp theyr homages vnto hym for them and all the other of the realme on the daye of y• conuerſyon of ſaynt Paule / in y• yere of his regne .xx. And they put hym out of his royalte for euermore / & euer he lyued afterward in moche ſorowe & anguyſſhe.
                        LVdouicus was emperour after Henry .iiij. yere. This Lodewik was duke of Bauare / & he deſpyſed the crownacyon of y• pope / wherfore y• pope depoſed him / and moche labour & many peryls he had after / & he troubled gretly the vnite of holy chirche. Than was choſen agaynſt hym Frederyke duke of Auſtryche. And he ouercame the duke / & abode a rebellyon to his ende / & in grete peryll to his ſoule. And at the laſt Karolus was choſen agaynſt hym / the whiche preuayled / & ſodeynly Lodewyk fell down of his hors and deceſſed. ¶ Iohn Maundeuyll a doctour of phyſyk and a knyght was borne in Englonde aboute this tyme. And he made a meruaylous pylgrymage / for he went almooſt about all y• worlde / & he wrote his dedes in thre languages / & deceſſed & was buryed at ſaynt Albons. ¶ Benedictus the .xxij. was pope after Iohn .vij. yere & more. This man was a monke / and in all his youth he was of good cōuerſacyon / and a doctour of diuinite. And whā he was made pope he reformed y• ordre of ſaynt Benet in that thynge y• was neceſſary. And he was an harde man to graunte benefyces / leeſt he had graunted it to an vnconnynge man. He made a decretall y• whiche began Benedictus deꝰ in donis ſuis. And he was very cruell ī his fayth And for y• of ſome men was lytell loued. He was ſo ſtoute a man that almooſt he wolde not knowe his owne coſyns.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Anno dn̄i. M .CCC .xxvij.
                        
                           ¶ Of kynge Edwarde the thyrde after the conqueſt.
                        
                        AFter this kyng Edward of Carnaruan regned ſyr Edwarde of Wyndſore his ſone / y• whiche was crowned kynge & anoynted at Weſtmynſter / through coūſeyle & conſent of all y• grete lordes of y• realme y• ſondaye on Candelmaſſe euen / in y• yere of grace. M .CCC .xxvj. that was of age at y• tyme but .xv. yere. And for bycauſe y• his fader was inwarde in the caſtel of Kenilworth & alſo was put downe of his royalte / y• realme of Englonde was without kyng from y• feeſt of ſaint Katherin in the yere aboue ſayd vnto the feeſt of Candelmaſſe. And than were all maner plees of y• kynges benche aſtent. And than was cōmaunded to all y• ſheryues of Englōd through wrytte to warne y• partyes to defendaū
                           tes through ſomnynge agayn. And alſo ferthermore y• al priſoners y• were in the kȳges gayles y• were attached through ſheryues / ſhold be let go quyte. ¶ Kyng Edwarde after his crownacyon at the prayer & beſechynge of his lyege men of the realme graūted thē a chartre of ſtedfaſt peas to all them y• wold aſke it. And ſyr Iohn of Henaud & his company toke theyr leue of the kyng & of y• lordes of the realme / & turned home to theyr own coū
                           tre agayn / & eche of them had full ryche gyftes / euery man as he was of value & of eſtate. And than was Englond in reſt & peas / & grete loue bytwene the kyng & his lordes. And comynly Englyſſhmen ſayd amōge them y• the deuyl was deed But the innumerable treſour of y• kyng his fader / & the treſour of the Spenſers bothe of the fader & of y• ſone / & of y• erle of Arundell / & of mayſter Robert Baldoc y• was y• kynges chaūceler was departed after y• quene Iſabelles ordynaūce & ſyr Roger Mortimers of wygmore / ſo that

the kynge had no thynge therof / but at her wyll & her delyueraūce / nor of theyr londes / as afterwarde ye ſhall here.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kyng Edward went to Stanhope for to mete the Scottes.
                        ANd yet in y• ſame tyme was the kyng in the caſtel of Kenilworth vnder y• kepynge of ſyr Henry that was erle Thomas broder of Lācaſtre y• than was erle of Leyceſtre / & the kyng graū
                           ted hym y• erledom of Lancaſtre / that y• kyng his fader had ſeaſed ī to his hādes & put out Thomas of Lancaſtre his broder. And ſo was he erle of Lancaſtre & of Leyceſtre / & alſo ſteward of Englōde as his broder was in his tyme. But ſyr Edward that was kyng Edwardes fader made ſorowe wtout ende / for bycauſe he myght not ſpeke wt his wyfe nor wt his ſōne / wherfore he was ī moche miſchefe For though it were ſo y• he was lad & ruled by fals coūſeyle / yet was he king Edwardes ſone called Edward wt the longe ſhankes / & came out of y• worthieſt blode of all y• worlde / & they to whom he was wont to gyue grete gyftes & large / were mooſt preuy wt the kyng his ſone / & they were his enemyes bothe by nyght & by daye y• ꝓcured to make debate & contake bytwene hym & his ſone and Iſabel his wyfe. But y• frere prechers were to him good frendes euermore / & caſt bothe by nyght & by day how they myght brynge hym out of priſon. And amonge theyr cō
                           pany y• the freres had pryuely brought there was a frere y• called Dunhened / & he had ordeyned & gadred a grete company of folke to kepe at y• nede / but y• frere was takē & put in y• caſtell of Poūfret / & there he dyed in pryſon / & ſyr Henry erle of Lancaſtre that had y• kynges fader in kepyng through cōmaundement of the kynge delyuered Edward y• kynges fader by endenture to ſyr Thomas of Berkeley / & ſo ſyr Iohn Mautreuers & they led him from y• caſtel of Kenilworth to y• caſtell of Berkley / & kept hȳ there ſafely And at ceſter next after his crownacyon the kynge ordeyned an huge hooſt for to fyght agaynſt y• Scottes. And ſyr Iohn the erles broder of Henaud came frō beyonde y• ſee for to helpe kyng Edward / & brought wt hym. vij .C. men of armes / & arryued at Douer / & they had leue for to go forth tyl they came to yorke where as the king them abode / & y• Scottes came thyder to y• kynge for to make peas & accorde / but the accordement laſted not bytwene them but a lytell tyme. And at y• tyme the Englyſſhmen were clothed all in cotes & hodes peynted with 
                              〈◊〉
                            & with floures full ſemely wt lōge berdes / & therfore the Scottes made a byll that was faſtened vpon the chirche dores of ſaynt Peters towarde ſtengace / & thus ſayd y• ſcripture in deſpyte of Englyſſhemen. ¶ Longe berdes bertles / peynted hodes wytles / gaye cotes graceles / maketh Englonde thryftles.
                        ON Trinite ſondaye nexte after began the cōtake in the cite of Yorke bytwene the Englyſſhmen and the Henaudes / & in that debate were ſlayne of the erledom of Nycholl & murdred. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . men / & after they were buryed vnder a ſtone in ſaynt Clementes chirche in 
                              〈…〉
                           
                           gate. And bycauſe y• the Henaudes came to helpe the king / theyr peas was cryed vpon payne of lyfe & lymme & in y• other halfe it was foūde by an enqueſt of y• cite that the Englyſſhmen began y• debate.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How y• Englyſſhmen ſtopped y• Scottes in y• parke of Stanhope / & how they returned agayne into Scotlonde.
                        ANd at y• tyme y• Scottes had aſſembled all theyr power & came in to Englōde & ſlewe & robbed all y• they myght take / & alſo brente & deſtroyed all

the north coūtree throughout tyll y• they came to the parke of Stanhope in wyre dale / & there y• Scottes helde them in a buſſhmēt. But whan y• kyng had herde through certayn ſpyes where y• ſcottes were / anone right wt his hooſt beſyeged them within y• foreſayd parke / ſo that y• Scottes wyſt not where to go out / but onely to theyr harmes / & they abode in y• parke .xv. days / & vytayles fayled them on euery ſyde / ſo y• they were gretly appayred of theyr bodyes. And ſyth y• Brute came fyrſt in to Brytayn to this tyme there was neuer ſeen ſoo fayre an hooſt what of Englyſſhmen & of alyens & of men on fote / the whiche ordeyned them for to fyght with the Scottes / through eggyng of ſyr Henry of Lācaſtre & of ſyr Iohn of Henaud y• wold haue gone ouer the water of wyth for to haue fought wt the Scottes. But ſyr Roger Mortymer conſented not therto / for he had pryuely takē mede of the Scottes to helpe them that they myght go in to theyr countre. And this Mortimer coūſeyled ſo moche Thomas of Brotherton y• erle Marſhall that was kyng Edwardes vncle that y• foreſaid Thomas ſholde not aſſemble at that tyme vnto y• Scottes / & he aſſented but he wyſt not the doynge bytwene the Scottes & the foreſayd Mortimer. And bycauſe y• he was Marſhall of Englōde & to hym perteyned euer y• vaūtwarde / he ſent haſtely to y• erle of Lancaſtre & to ſyr Iohn of Henaud that they ſhold not fyght with the Scottes / in preiudyce & harmyng of hym & his fee / & yf they did that they ſholde ſtande to theyr owne peryll. And y• foreſayd erle Marſhall was al arayed wt his batayle at y• reredoos of the erle of Lācaſtre for to haue fought wt hym & wt his folke / yf he had meued for to fyght wt the Scottes. And in this maner he was deceyued / & wyſt nothynge of the treaſon. And thus was the kyng principally deceyued. And whan it was nyght Mortymer that had the watche for to kepe of the hooſt y• nyght / dyſtroubled y• watche that nothynge myght be done. And in y• meane whyle y• Scottes ſtole by nyght toward theyr owne countree as faſt as they myght. And ſo was the kynge falſly betrayed / that wende y• all the traytours of his londe had ben brought to an ende as it was ſaid before Now here ye lordes how traytourſly y• kyng Edward was deceyued / and how meruaylouſly & boldly the Scottes dyd of warre. For Iames Douglas wt two hondred men of armes rode throughout all the hooſt of kyng Edward / the ſame nyght y• Scottes eſcaped toward theyr owne coūtre as is aboue ſayd tyll y• they came to y• kynges pauylyon / and ſlewe there many men ī theyr beddes / & cryed naward naward / & an other tyme a douglas a douglas. Wherfore y• kyng that was in his pauilyon & moche other folk were wonders ſore afrayde. But bliſſed be god y• kyng was not taken / & in grete peryll was than y• realme of Englonde. And y• nyght the mone ſhone full clere & bryght. And for all the kynges men the Scottes eſcaped harmeles. And on the morowe whan the kyng wyſt that the Scottes were eſcaped in to theyr owne coūtre / he was wōders ſory / & full hertely wepte wt his yonge eyen / & yet wyſt he not who had done hym y• treaſon / but that fals treaſon was full well knowen a good whyle after as the ſtory telleth. Than kynge Edwarde came agayne to yorke full ſorowfull / & his hooſt departed / and euery man went in to his owne coūtree with full heuy chere and mournynge ſemblaunt / & the Henaudes toke theyr leue & went in to theyr owne countre / & the king for theyr trauayle hugely rewarded them. And for bycauſe of that vyage the kynge had dyſpended moche

of his treſour & waſted. ¶ And in that tyme were ſeen two mones in y• fyrmament / that one was clere and that other was derke / as men myght ſe through y• worlde. And a grete debate was y• ſame tyme agaynſt pope Iohn the .xxij. after ſaynt Peter / & the emperour of Almayn tho made hym emperour agaynſt y• popes wyll / y• tho helde his ſee at Auinyon Wherfore y• emperour made his crye at Rome & ordeyned an other pope y• hyght Nicholas y• was a frere Minour / & that was agaynſt the ryght of holy chirche / wherfore he was curſed / & the power of that other pope ſoone was layd. And bycauſe y• ſuche meruayles were ſeen: men ſayd y• the worlde was nygh at an ende.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the deth of kynge Edwarde of Carnaruan.
                        ANd now go we agayn to ſyr Edward of Carnaruan y• was king Edwardes fader ſomtyme kyng of Englonde / & was put downe of his dignite. Alas for his tribulacion & ſorowe y• hym befell through fals coūſeyle y• he loued & truſted vpon to moche / that afterwarde were deſtroyed through theyr falſneſſe as god wold. And this Edward of Carnaruan was in y• caſtell of Berkeley / vnder y• kepyng of ſyr Moryce of Berkeley and ſyr Iohn of Mautreuers / & to them he made his cōplaynt of his ſorowe & of his diſeaſe. And ofte tymes aſked of his wardeyns what he hadde treſpaced agaynſt dame Iſabell his wyfe & ſyr Edward his ſone y• was made newe kyng that they wold not viſyte hym. And thā anſwered one of his wardeyns & ſayd. My worthy lorde dyſpleaſe you not y• I ſhall tell you / the cauſe is / for it is done them to vnderſtande / y• yf my lady your wyfe come ony thynge nye you / that ye wolde her ſtrangle & ſlee / & alſo that ye wolde do to my lorde your ſone y• ſame. Than anſwered he with a ſymple chere Alas alas am not I in priſon / and all at your owne wyll / now god it wote I neuer thought it / & now I wolde y• I were deed / ſo wolde to god y• I were / for than were all my ſorowe paſſed. It was not longe after y• the kyng through coūſeyle of Roger Mortymer graūted y• warde & kepynge of ſyr Edward his fader to ſyr Thomas Toiourney / & to y• foreſayd ſyr Iohn Mautreuers through the kinges lettre / & put out holly y• foreſayd ſyr Moryce of the warde of the kyng. And they toke & lad the kyng to y• caſtell of Corf▪ y• whiche caſtel y• kyng hated as ony deth. And they kept hym there tyll it came vn to ſaynt Mathewes day in September in the yere of grace. M .CCC .xxvii. that the foreſayd ſyr Roger Mortimer ſent y• maner of y• deth / how & in what wyſe he ſhold be put to deth. And anone as y• foreſayd Thomas & Iohn had ſeen y• 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            & cōmaūdement / they made kynge Edwarde of Carnaruan good chere & good ſolace as they might at y• ſouper / and no thynge the kyng wyſt of y• treaſon. And whan tyme was for to go to bedde the kynge wente vnto his bedde & laye and ſlepte faſt. And as the kyng laye & ſlepte the traytoures falſe for ſworne agaynſt theyr homage & feaute came pryuely in to y• kynges chambre / & theyr company with them / & layde an huge table vpon his wombe / & with men preſſed & helde faſt down the foure corners of y• table on his body / wherwith y• good man awoke and was wonders ſore adrad to be deed there & ſlayne / & turned his body tho vp ſo downe. Than toke y• fals traytours & tyraūtes an horne & put it in to his foundement as depe as they myght / & toke a ſpyt of coper brēnynge / & put it through the horne in to his body / and ofte tymes therwith thyrled his bowelles / & ſo they

ſlewe theyr lord that nothynge was perceyued / & was buryed at Gloceſtre.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Edward ſpouſed Philip the erles doughter of Henaud at Yorke.
                        ANd after Chryſtmaſſe than next folowynge ſyr Iohn of Henaud brought with hym Philip his broders doughter yt was erle of Henaud his nece in to Englond / & kyng Edward ſpouſed her at Yorke wt moche honour. And ſyr Iohn of Bothum biſſhop of Ely and ſyr William of Melton archebyſſhop of yorke ſange the maſſe ye ſonday on ye euen of the cōuerſion of ſaint Paule / in ye yere of grace. M .CCC .xxvij. But bycauſe that the kynge was yonge and tender of age whan he was crowned / full many wronges were done whyle yt his fader lyued bycauſe yt he byleued the coūſeylers that were fals aboute hym to do otherwyſe than reaſon wolde / wherfore grete harme was done to ye realme & to ye kyng / & all men directed it to ye kynges dede / & it was not ſo / almyghty god it knoweth. Wherfore it was ordeyned at ye kynges crownyng yt the kyng for his tender age ſholde be gouerned by .xij. of the greteſt lordes of Englonde / without whome no thynge ſhold be done / that is to ſaye / the archebyſſhop of Caūterbury / the archebiſſhop of yorke / the biſſhop of wyncheſtre / & the byſſhop of Herford / the erle of Lancaſtre / the erle Marſhall / & ye erle of Kent yt were ye kynges vncles / & the erle of Garen / ſyr Thomas wake / ſyr Henry Percy / ſyr Olyuer of yngham / & Iohn of Roos barons. All theſe were ſworne truly for to coūſeyle ye kyng / & they ſhold anſwere euery yere in ye parlyamēt of yt that ſholde be done in the tyme of theyr gouernall. But ye ordynaūce was ſoone vndone / & that was moche harme to all Englōde. For the kyng & all the lordes ye 
                           ſhold gouerne hym were gouerned and ruled after the kȳges moder dame Iſabell / & by ſyr Roger Mortimer. And as they wolde all thynge was done / bothe amonge hye & lowe. And they toke vnto them caſtels / townes / londes / & rentes / in grete harme & loſſe to the crowne / & of the kynges eſtate out of meſure.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How the peas was made bytwene ye Engliſſhmen & the Scottes / and alſo of iuſtyfyenge of Troylebaſton.
                        BYnge Edwarde at whytſontyde in the ſeconde yere of his regne / through the coūſeyle of his moder & ſyr Roger Mortimer ordeyned a parlyamēt at Northamton. And at that parlyamēt the kyng through theyr coūſeyle / & none other of the londe within age graunted to be accorded with the Scottes in this maner. That all the feautees and homages that the Scottes ſholde do vnto the crowne of Englonde forgaue them for euer more by his chartre enſealed. And forthermore an endenture was made of the Scottes vnto kynge Edwarde that was kyng Henryes ſone / whiche endenture they called ragman / in the whiche were cōteyned al ye homages & feautees Fyrſt of the kynge of Scotlonde & of all the prelates / erles & barons of ye realme of Scotlonde / wt theyr ſeales ſet theron / and other chartres & remembraunces yt kynge Edwarde and his barons had of theyr right in ye foreſayd realme of Scotlond / it was forgyuen them agaynſt holy chirche. And alſo with ye blacke croſſe of Scotlonde / the whiche ye good kynge Edwarde conquered in Scotlonde / and brought it out of the abbey of Scone / yt is a full precyous relyke. And alſo forthermore he releſed & forgaue all the londes that the barons of Englonde had in Scotlonde by olde conqueſt. ¶ And this peas for to be hold and laſt the Scottes were bounde vnto the kyng in .xxx. M.

poūde of ſyluer to be payed within thre yere / that is euery yere .x. M. poūde by euen porcyons. And forthermore aboue all this they ſpake bytwene the partyes aboue ſayd / that Dauyd Dritonautier that was kynge Robert the Brus ſone ye fals tyraunt & fals forſworne agaynſt his othe yt aroſe agaynſt his lyege lorde the noble and good kyng Edward / and falſly made him kyng of Scotlōde / that was of ye age of .v. yere. And ſo through this curſed counſeyle Dauid ſpouſed at Barwyk dame Ione of the toure / that was kynge Edwardes ſyſter / as ye geſt telleth vpon Mary Magdaleyns daye / in ye yere of grace. M .CCC. and .xxviij. to grete harme & empayrynge of all the kynges blode / wherof that gentyll lady came / alas ye tyme / for wonders moche was that fayre damoyſell deſparaged ſyth that ſhe was maryed agaynſt all the comyns aſſent of Englonde. And fro the tyme that Brute had conquered Albion / & named the londe after his owne name Brytayn / that now is called Englonde / after the name of Engyſt / and ſo the realme of Scotlonde was holden of the realme of Englonde / & of the crowne by feaute & homage. For Brute conquered that londe / and gaue it to Albanack that was his ſeconde ſone / and he called that londe Albayn after his own name / ſo that the heyres that came after hym ſholde holde of Brute and of his heyres / that is to ſaye of ye kynges of Brytayne by feaute & homage. And frō that tyme vnto this tyme of kynge Edwarde / the realme of Scotlonde was holden of the realme of Englonde by feaute & ſeruyce as aboue is ſayd in ye Cronycles of Englonde & of Scotlonde / and bereth wytnes more plenarly. ¶ And curſed be the tyme that this parliament was holden at Northamton. For there through fals coūſeyle the kyng was there falſly dyſheryted / & yet he was within age. And yet whan that kyng Edward was put out of his royalte of Englonde / yet men put not hym out of ye feautees & ſeruyce of Scotlonde / ne of the fraūchyſes dyſheryted hym for euermore. And neuertheles the grete lordes of Englōde were agaynſt to confyrme ye peas & the trewſe aboue ſayd / ſaue onely quene Iſabell yt was the kynges moder Edwarde / and the byſſhop of Ely / and the lorde Montmer. But reaſon & lawe wolde not yt a fynall peas ſholde be made bytwene them without the comyn aſſent of Englonde.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the debate yt was bytwene quene Iſabell & ſyr Henry erle of Lācaſtre & of Leyceſtre / & of the rydynge of Bedford.
                        WHan ye foreſayd Dauid had ſpouſed dame Ione of the toure in the towne of Barwik (as before is ſayd) the Scottes in deſpyte of the Englyſſhmen called dame Ione ye coūteſſe make peas for the cowardly peas that was ordeyned. But the kynges perſone bare al the wyte & blame with wronge of the makynge of the accorde. And all was done through the quene & Roger M
                              •
                           rtymer. And it was not longe after that ye quene Iſabell ne toke in to her handes all the lordſhyp of Pountfret almooſt all ye londes that were of ony value that apperteyned to the crowne of Englonde. So yt the kynge had not for to dyſpende but of his vſes & of his excheker. For the quene Iſabell & Mortimer had a gre
                              •
                           e meyny of theyr retynue that folowed euermore the kynges courte / & went & toke ye kynges pryces for her peny worthes at good chepe. Wherfore the coūtre yt they came in / were full ſore adrad and almooſt deſtroyed of them. Thā began ye cominalte of Englonde for to haue enuy to Iſabell the quene that ſo moche loued her before

whan ſhe came agayne fro Fraūce for to purſue the fals traytours ye Spenſers. And in that ſame tyme ye falſe traytour Robert of Holand that be
                              •
                           rayed his lord ſyr Thomas of Lancaſtre / was than delyuered out of pryſon / & was wonders preuy with ye quene Iſabell & alſo with Roger Mortimer. But that auayled hȳ but lytell / for he was taken at Myghelmaſſe next folowyng as he rode toward the quene Iſabell to London / & ſyr Thomas wyther ſmote of his heed beſydes the towne of ſaynt Albons. And this ſyr Thomas dwelled with ſyr Henry erle of Lancaſtre / & he put hym aſyde for drede of the quene / for ſhe loued hym wonders moche / & prayed vnto ye kyng for hym yt the ſame Thomas myght be exiled out of Englonde. And ye noble erle ſyr Henry of Lancaſtre had oftentymes herde the comyn damour of ye Englyſſhmen / of yt diſeaſe that was done in Englonde / & alſo for dyuers wronges yt were done to ye comyn people. Of the whiche the kyng bare the blame wt wronge. For he was yonge & tender of age. And thought as a good man for to do awaye and ſlake the ſclaundre of ye kynges perſon / yf that he myght in ony maner wyſe / ſo as ye kyng was therof nothynge gylty / wherfore he was in peryll of his lyfe. And ſo he aſſembled all his retenaunces & went & ſpake wt them of ye kynges honour / & alſo for to amende his eſtate. And ſyr Thomas Brotherton erle Marſhall / and ſyr Edmond of wodſtok yt were the kynges vncles / & alſo men of Londō made theyr othe for to maynteyn hym in that ſame quarell. And theyr cauſe was this / that the kyng ſholde holde his hous and his meyny as a king ought to do / & haue all his ryalte / & that ye quene Iſabell ſhold deliuer out of her handes in to ye kynges handes all maner lordſhyppes / rentes / townes & caſtels yt apperteyned vnto ye crowne of Englōde as other quenes dyd before her / and meddle with none other thynge. And alſo that ſyr Roger Mortimer ſhold abyde & dwell vpon his owne londes / for ye whiche londes he had holpen to diſheryte moche people / in ſo moche that ye comyn people were deſtroyed through wrongfull takynge. And alſo to enquyre how & by whome the kynge was betrayed & falſly deceiued at Stan hope / and through whoſe coūſeyle that the Scottes went away by nyght from the kynge. And alſo how and through whoſe coūſeyle ye ordynaunce that was made at the kynges crownacyon was put downe / that is for to ſaye / that the kynge for amendement and helpyng of the realme / and in honour of hym ſholde be gouerned and ruled by .xij. of the greteſt and wiſeſt lordes of the realme / and without them ſholde nothynge be graū
                           ted ne done (as before is ſayd) the whiche couenauntes were malycyouſly put downe from the kynge / wherfore many harmes ſhames & reproues haue fallen to the kyng and his realme. And that is to vnderſtand for as moche as Edward ſomtyme kyng of Englonde was ordeyned by aſſent of the comynalte in playne parlyament for to be vnder the warde & gouernaunce of Henry erle of Lancaſtre his coſyn for ſaluacyon of his body / he was taken out of ye caſtel of Ken
                              ••
                           worth where he was in warde / & through colour of quene Iſabell & of Mortimer wt
                           out cōſent of ony parliament they toke & lad hȳ where as neuer after none of his 
                              •
                           ynrede myght ſpeke wt hȳ / & after tray tourſly murdred hym / for whoſe deth aroſe a ſclaundre through all chriſtendom whan it was done. And alſo ye treſour yt ſyr Edward of Carnaruan left in many places 
                              〈◊〉
                            englōd & in wales was waſted & borne awaye without ye wyll of kyng Edward his ſone / in deſtruccion of hym

and all his folke. ¶ Alſo through whoſe coūſeyle that the kyng gaue vp ye kyngdom of Scotlonde / for ye whiche realme the kynges aunceſters had full ſore trauayled / and ſo dyd many a noble mā for theyr ryght / & was delyuered to Dauid that was Robert ye Brus ſone al ye right that no ryght had to ye realme / as al the worlde it wyſt. ¶ And alſo by whome ye charters & remembraūces yt they had of the right of Scotlōde were taken out of the treſoury & taken to the Scottes the kynges enemyes / to the dyſherytyng of hym & his ſucceſſours / & to grete harme of his lyeges / & grete reprefe to all Englyſſhmen for euermore. ¶ Alſo wherfore 
                              •
                           ame Ione of ye toure kyng Edwardes ſyſter was diſparaged & maryed to Dauid yt was Robert ye Brus ſone / yt was a traytour & enemy to Englōd / & through whoſe coūſeyle ſhe was taken in to our enemyes handes out of Englōde. ¶ And in the meane whyle the good erle Henry of Lancaſtre & his cōpany toke coūſeyle how theſe poyntes aboue ſaid might be amended to ye worſhip of ye king & to his profyte / & to ye profyte alſo of his lyeges. ¶ And the quene Iſabell through coniectynge & ſubtylte & alſo of Mortymer let ordeyn a parlyament at Salyſbury. And at that parlyamēt was Mortimer made erle of Marche agaynſt all the barons wyll of Englonde in preiudyce of ye kyng & his crowne. And ſyr Iohn of Eltham ye kynges broder was gyrt with a ſwerde of Cornewayle / & tho was called erle of Cornewayl. And euermore quene Iſabell ꝓcured ſo moche anenſt her ſone the king / yt ſhe had ye warde of ye foreſaid ſyr Edward & of his londes. And at that parlyamēt ye erle of Lancaſtre wold not come / but ordeyned his power agaynſt quene Iſabell & Mortymer / and men of London ordeyned them with .v .C. men of armes. Whan quene Iſabell wyſt of the doynge / ſhe ſwore by god & by his names full angerly / that in an euyll tyme he thought vpon thoſe poyntes. Than ſent the quene Iſabell & Mort
                              •
                           mer after theyr retynue / & after ye kynges retynue ſo that they had ordeyned amōge them an huge hooſt. And they ſo coūſeyled the kyng / that vpon a nyght they rode. xxiij myle towarde Bedford / where as ye erle of Lancaſtre was with his company & thought to haue deſtroyed hym / & that nyght ſhe rode beſyde the kyng her ſone as a knight armed for drede of deth. And it was done the kynge to vnderſtande ye the erle Henry of Lācaſtre & his company wolde haue deſtroyed the kyng & his coūſeyle for euermore / wherfore ye kyng was ſomdele towardes hym heuy and anoyed. ¶ Whan ye erle Marſhall & the erle of Kent the kynges broder herde of theſe tydynges / they 
                              •
                           ode ſo in meſſage bytwene them / that the kyng graunted hym his peas to the erle Henry of Lancaſtre for a certayne raunſom of. x
                              •
                           . M. poūde. But that was neuer payed after warde. And theſe were ye lordes ye helde with ſyr Henry of Lancaſtre / ſyr Henry Beamont / ſyr Fouk fitz war
                              ••
                            ſyr Thomas Rocelyn / ſyr Willyam Truſſell ſyrr Thomas wyther / & aboute an 
                              •
                           ondred knyghtes moo than were to hym cōſen ted / & all thoſe were ex
                              •
                           led through coū
                           ſeyle of quene Iſabell and of Mor
                              ••
                           mer for Mortymer wayted for to haue theyr lōdes yf yt he might through ony maner coniecting / for he was to co
                              〈…〉
                           us & had to moche wyll / & that was grete py
                              •
                           e.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Edwarde went ouer the ſee for to do his homage to the kynge of Fraunce for the duchy of Guyen.
                        IT was not longe after ye the kyng of Fraūce through coūſeyle of his Douzepers ſent vnto kynge Edward of

Englonde that he ſholde come to Parys and do his homage (as reaſon it wolde) for y• duchy of Guyen / & ſo through coū
                           ſeyle of y• lordes of Englonde kynge Edward went ouer y• ſee / & at y• Aſcencyon tyde he came to Parys the thyrd yere of his regne for to do his homage vnto the kyng of Fraūce. And the kyng receyued his homage / & made of hym moche ioye & worſhip. But whā kyng Edward had done his homage / haſtely he was ſente for in to Englonde through y• quene Iſabell his moder / & anone haſtely he came agayn in to Englond vpon whytſonday wtout takynge leue of y• kyng of Fraūce / wherfore he was wonders wroth.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How ſyr Roger Mortimer bare hym proudly and wonders hye.
                        ANd now ſhall ye here of ſyr Roger Mortimer of wygmore that deſyred & coueyted to be at an hye eſtate ſo that y• kyng graūted hym to be called erle of Marche / throughout all his lordſhyp. And he became ſo proude & ſo hauteyn y• he wold leſe & forſake the name y• his elders had euer before / & for y• cauſe he let call hym erle of Marche / and none of the comyns of Englonde durſt call hȳ by other name. For he was called ſo by the kynges crye / y• men ſholde call hym erle of Marche. And Mortimer bare hȳ ſo hauteyne & ſo proude / that wonder it was for to wyte / & alſo dyſguyſed hym with wonders ryche clothes out of all maner of reaſon / bothe of ſhapynge & of werynge. Wherof y• Englyſſhmen had grete wonder / how & in what maner he myght contryue or fynde ſuche maner pride / & they ſayd amōge them comynly that his pryde ſholde not longe endure. And y• ſame tyme ſir Geffrey Mortimer that was Mortimers ſone let call hym kyng of foly / & ſo it befell afterwarde in dede. For he was ſo full of pryde and of wretchednes / that he held a roūde table in Wales to all men that came thyder / & coūterfeyted the doynge & the maner of kyng Arthurs table / but openly he fayled. For the noble kyng Arthur was the mooſt noble lorde of renome y• was in all the world in his tyme / & yet came neuer none ſuche after / for al y• noble knyghtes in all chryſtendom of dedes of armes aſſayed dwellyng wt kyng Arthur / & helde hym for theyr lord & ſouerayn. And that was well ſeen / for he conquered in batayle a Romayn that was called Froll / and gate of hym the realme of Fraūce / & ſlewe hym wt his own handes. And alſo he faught with a gyaunt y• was called Dinabus & ſlewe hym / y• had rauyſſhed fayre Eleyn that was kynge Howelles nece kynge of lytell Brytayn. And after he ſlewe in batayle y• emperour of Rome that was called Lucie / that had aſſembled agaynſt kynge Arthur for to fyght with hym ſo moche people of Romayns & Phethis & ſaraſyns / y• no man coude nombre them / & he diſcomfited them all as y• ſtory telleth. ¶ And in y• ſame tyme the comyn voyce ſpronge in Englonde through coniectynge & ordynaūce of the frere prechers / that ſyr Edward of Car naruan / that was kyng Edwardes fader / of whome the geſt telleth / ſayd y• he was alyue in y• caſtell of Corf / wherfore al y• comyns of Englōde almooſt were in ſorowe & drede whether it were ſo or not For they wyſt not how traytourſly Mortimer had done hym to be murdred.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Edmond of wodſtok y• was erle of Kent & the kynges broder Edward of Carnaruan was heded at Wyncheſtre.
                        ANd on a certayne tyme it befell ſo that ſyr Edmond of wodſtock erle of Kent ſpake vnto the pope Iohn

the .xxij. at Auinyon & ſayd y• almyghty god had often tymes done for Thomas lone of Laneaſtre many grete myracles to many men & women / y• were through dyuerſe maladyes vndone (as vnto the worlde) & through his prayer they were brought to theyr helth / & ſo ſyr Edmond prayed y• pope hertely y• he wolde graūt hȳ grace y• the foreſayd Thomas might be tranſlated. But y• pope ſayd nay / that he ſhold not be tranſlated vnto the tyme he were better certyfyed of the clergy of Englonde and ſeen by theyr obedyence what thynge god had done for y• loue of ſaynt Thomas of Lancaſtre after y• ſuggeſtyon that y• foreſayd erle of Kent had made to hym. And whan this Edmond saw y• he might not ſpede of his purpoſe as touchyng the tranſlacyon / he prayed hȳ of coūſeyle as touchyng ſyr Edward of Carnaruan his broder / & ſayd not longe ago he was king of Englonde / what thynge myght beſt be done as touching his deliueraūce / ſyth y• a comyn fame is through Englonde y• he is alyue & ſafe. Whan the pope herde hym tell y• ſyr Edward was alyue / he cōmaūded the erle vpon his benyſon y• he ſholde helpe wt all the power y• he myght y• he were delyuered out of priſon / & ſaue his body in all y• he myght / & to brynge this thynge to an ende he aſſoyled hym & his cōpany (a pe na et culpa) & al tho y• holpe to his deliueraunce. Than toke Edmond of wodſtok his leue of the pope & came agayne in to Englonde. And whan ſyr Edmond was comen / ſome of y• frere prechers came & ſayd y• ſyr Edwarde his broder yet was alyue in y• caſtell of Corf / vnder y• keping of ſyr Thomas Gurney. Tho ſped hym the foreſayd Edmōd as faſt as he might tyll he came to y• caſtel of Corf / & aqueynted hym and ſpake ſo fayre with Iohn Daueryll / that was conſtable of y• ſame caſtell / & gaue him ryche gyftes to haue acqueyntaunce of hym & to knowe of his coūſeyle. And thus it befel y• the foreſayd ſyr Edmond prayed ſpecially to tell hym pryuely of his lorde his broder ſyr Edward / yf y• he lyued or were deed / & yf he were alyue he prayed hȳ ones to haue a ſyght of hym. And this ſyr Iohn Daueryll was a hye herted man & full of courage / & anſwered ſhortly to ſyr Edmond & ſayd / that ſyr Edward his broder was in helth & vnder his kepyng / & durſt not ſhewe hym to no man ſyth it was defended hȳ in y• kynges half Edward y• was Edwardes ſone of Carnaruan / & alſo by the cōmaūdemēt of quene Iſabell y• kynges moder / & of ſyr Roger Mortymer / y• he ſhold ſhewe his body to no man of the world / ſaue onely to them vpō lyf & lȳme & diſheryting of his heyres for euermore But the fals traytour falſly lyed / for he was not in his warde / but he was takē thens & lad to y• caſtell of Berkeley by ſyr Thomas Gurney / by cōmaūdement of Mortimer tyll he was deed as before is ſayd / but ſyr Edmōd of wodſtok wyſt no thynge y• ſyr Edwarde his broder was deed / whervpon he toke a lettre to kyng Edward his broder as to his worthy lorde. And receyued y• lettre of hȳ & behight hym to do his meſſage wtout ony fayle. And with y• ſyr Edmond toke leue of the foreſayd Iohn & went in to his own coū
                           tre & lordſhyp ī Kent y• he had there. And anone as this ſame Iohn wyſt y• ſyr Edmond was gone in to Kent his own lordſhip / he went in all the haſte y• be might fro the caſtel of Corf & came to ſyr Roger Mortimer / & toke hym y• lettre y• ſyr Edmond of wodſtok erle of Kent had taken hym cloſed & enſealed wt his owne ſeale. And whan ſyr Roger Mortimer had receyued the lettre / he vncloſed it & ſawe what was conteyned therin / & began to rede it / wherof y• begȳnynge was this. ¶ Worſhyps & reuerence with broders

legeaunce and ſubie
                              •
                           cyon. Syr knyght worſhipful & dere broder / yf it pleaſe you I praye you hertely y• ye be in good com forte / for I ſhall ſo ordeyne for you / that ye ſhall come out of priſon & be deliuered of that diſeaſe that ye be in. And vnderſtande of your grete lordſhyp y• I haue to myne aſſentyng almooſt all the grete lordes of Englonde with all theyr apparayle / y• is to ſaye / with armure / wt treſour without nombre / for to maynteyne your quarell / ſo ferforth that ye ſhall be kynge agayn as ye were before / & that they haue ſworne to me vpō a boke / & as well prelates as erles & barons. Whan ſyr Roger Mortimer ſawe & vnderſtode the myght & the ſtrengthe of the lettre / anone his herte for wrath began to boll & euyll hert bare toward ſyr Edmond of wodſtok y• was erle of Kent / & wt all the haſte that he might he went vnto dame Iſabell y• quene y• was y• kynges moder & ſhewed her ſyr Edmondes lettre / his wyll & his purpoſe / & how that he had coniected & ordeyned to put downe kyng Edward of wyndſore her ſone of his ryalte & of his kyngdom. Now certes ſyr Roger ſayd ſhe / hath ſyr Edmōd done ſo now by my faders ſoule ſayd ſhe I wyll be therof auenged / yf that god graūt me lyfe / & that in a ſhorte tyme. And with y• the quene Iſabel went to king Edward her ſone there as he was at the parlyament at Wyncheſtre for to amende the wronges & the treſpaces that were done amonge the people of his realme / & ſhe toke and ſhewed hym the lettre that ſyr Edmond of wodſtock had made and enſealed with his owne ſeale / and badde hym vpon her bleſſynge that he ſholde be auenged vpon ſyr Edmonde as vpon his deedly enemy. Than was the quene ſore wroth towarde ſyr Edmonde erle of Kent / and ceſſed neuer to praye vnto her ſone tyll that he had ſent in all the haſte after hym. And vpon that the kyng ſent by his lettres after ſyr Edmond of wodſtok / that he ſholde come & ſpeke wt hym at Wyncheſtre all maner thynges lefte. And whan ſyr Edmond ſawe y• the king ſent after hym with his lettres enſealed he haſted hym in all that he myght tyll that he came to wyncheſtre. But whan the quene wyſt that ſyr Edmonde was comen to wyncheſtre / anone ſhe went & prayed ſo faſt vnto kynge Edwarde her ſone that y• good erle was areſted anone and ladde vnto y• barre before Robert of Hamond y• was Crowner of the kynges houſholde / & he aſſocyed to hym ſyr Roger Mortimer. And than ſpake the fore ſayd Robert & ſaid. Syr Edmond erle of Kent / ye ſhall vnderſtāde that it is done vs to wyte / & prȳcypally vnto our lyege lorde the kynge Edwarde of Englonde almyghty god hym ſaue & kepe / that ye be his deedly enemy & a traytour / & alſo a comyn enemy vnto the realme / & that ye haue ben aboute many a daye for to make preuy delyueraūce of ſyr Edward ſomtyme king of Englonde your broder the whiche ſomtyme was put downe of his royalte by y• comyn aſſent of y• lordes of Englonde in appeaſynge of our lorde the kynges eſtate / & alſo of his realme. Than anſwered the good man & ſayd. Forſothe ſyr vnderſtande well y• I was neuer traytour to my kyng / ne to the realme / & that I do me on god & on all the worlde / & therfore by my kynges leue I ſhall it preue & defende as a man ought to do. Than ſayd Mortymer. Syr Edmonde it is ſo ferforth knowen y• it may not be well gaynſayd / & that in preſence of all that be here it ſhall be well proued Now had this fals Mortimer the ſame lettre that ſyr Edmond had taken to ſyr Iohn Daueryll in the caſtell of Corf for to take to kyng Edward his broder that ſyr Edmonde wyſt not of / ne ſuppoſed

nothynge y• ſyr Iohn Daueryll had ben ſo fals to deliuer his lettre in ſuche wyſe to Mortimer / & thought no maner thynge of the lettre. Than Mortimer ſayd to ſyr Edmonde & ſhewed y• lettre ſealed / & aſked him yf that he knewe that lettre & the ſeale. This ſyr Edmōd loked theron & auyſed hym longe tyme on y• print of y• ſeale / for he myght not ſe y• lettre wtin / & wyſt well y• it was his ſeale / & thought that it had bē ſome lettre y• had borne no grete charge / & thought nothynge on y• other lettre / & ſayd openly in herynge of them all. Ye forſothe this is my ſeale / & I wyll it not forſake. Loo ſayd Mortymer / ſyrs ye here all what he hath ſayd & that he knowlegeth y• this is his lettre & his ſeale / & now ye ſhall here what is conteyned therin. And than this Mortimer opened y• lettre y• he had folden a fore togyder / & red it openly worde by worde in hering of them all. And whan y• lettre was red he ſayd / loo ſyrs ye haue herde all that here is wryten / & that he hath knowleged y• this is his lettre & his ſeale & he may not go therfro. And than they cryed & gaue dome that he ſholde be hanged & drawen & his heed ſmyttē of in maner of a traytour / & he & his heyres dyſheryted for euermore / & ſo he was ladde forth & put in to pryſon. And whan this was done / & y• quene wyſt that he was dampned by waye of y• lawe bothe of lyf and lymme / & his heyres dyſheryted for euer more / through open knowlegynge in playn court / wherfore them thought that it were good y• the foreſayd ſyr Edmond were haſtely ſlayne without wytynge of y• kyng / or els the kynge wolde lyghtly forgyue hym his deth / & than it ſholde turne them to moche ſorowe / ſo as he was empeched. And anone the quene through counſeyle of Mortimer / & wtout ony other counſeyle / ſente in haſte to the baylyfe of wyncheſtre y• he ſholde ſinyte of ſyr Edmondes heed of wod
                              〈…〉
                           ok erle of Kent without ony maner abydynge or reſpyte / vpon payne of lyfe & lymme / & that he ſhold haue none other execucyon bycauſe of taryenge / not withſtandyng the iudgement. Than toke y• baylyfe ſyr Edmond out of pryſon / & ladde hym beſyde y• caſtel of wyncheſtre / & there they made a gongfermer to ſmyte of his dyed for none other durſt do it. And ſo he dyed there / alas y• whyle / y• is to ſay y•. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . day of October / the thyrde yere of kyng Edwardes regne. And whan y• kyng wyſt therof / he was wonders ſory / & let bury hym at ye frere Minours at wincheſtre.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the deth of ſyr Roger Mortymer erle of Marche.
                        ANd ſo it befell at y• tyme that ſyr Roger Mortimer erle of marche was ſo proude & ſo hawteyne y• he helde no lord of the realme his pere. And than became he ſo couetous that he folowed dame Iſabell the quenes courte y• was kyng Edwardes moder / & beſet his penyworthes wt the offycers of the quenes houſhold in y• ſame maner y• the kynges officers dyd. And ſo he made his takyng as touchynge vytayles / & alſo of caryages / & all he dyd for bycauſe of e
                              •
                           penſes and to gadre treſour / & ſo he dyd without nombre in all that he myght. Than made he hym wonders preuy with the quene Iſabell / and ſo moche lordſhyp & retynue he had / that all the grete lordes of Englonde of hym were adrad. Wherfore the kynge & his coūſeyle towardes hym were agreued / & ordeyned amonge them to vndo hym through pure reaſon and lawe / bycauſe that kynge Edward that was the kynges fader tray
                              •
                           ourſly through hym was murdred in y• caſtell of Corf / as before is ſayd more playnly in the ſame parte of this boke of his deth. And ſome that were of the kynges

counſeyle loued Mortimer / & tolde hym in preuite how that the kyng & his counſeyle were aboute frō daye to daye hym for to deſtroye & vndo. Wherfore Mortimer was ſore anoyed and angry as the deuyll agaynſt them yt were of ye kynges coūſeyle / & ſayd he wolde of them be auenged how ſo euer he toke on. It was not longe afterward that king Edward and dame Philip his wyfe / & dame Iſabell the kynges moder / & ſyr Roger Mortymer ne went vnto Notyngham there for to ſoiourne. And ſo it befel that quene Iſabell through counſeyle of Mortimer toke to her the keys of ye gates of ye caſtel of Notyngham / ſo that no man myght come in nor out by nyght / but through cōmaūdement of Mortimer / ne ye kynge nor none of his coūſeyle. And that tyme it befell ſo that Mortimer as a deuyll for wrath boyled / & alſo for wrath ye he had agaynſt the kynges men / & pryncypally agaynſt them yt had accuſed hym to the kyng of ye deth of ſyr Edward his fader. And pryuely a counſeyle was taken bytwene quene Iſabell & Mortymer & the byſſhop of Lyncolne and ſyr Symond of Bedford & ſyr Hugh of Trompyngton & other preuy of theyr coūſeyle for to vndo them al ye had accuſed Mortimer vnto ye kynge of his faders deth of treaſon & of felony. Wherfore all thoſe yt were of the kynges coūſeyle whā they wyſt of Mortimers caſtynge / pryuely came to kyng Edwarde & ſayd that Mortimer wolde deſtroye them bycauſe they had accuſed hym of kyng Edwardes deth his fader and prayed hym yt he wolde maynteyne them in theyr right. And theſe were the lordes yt purſued this quarell / ſyr Williā of Mountagu / ſyr Vmfrey de Boghun / ſyr Williā his broder / ſyr Rauf of Stafford / ſyr Robert of Herford / ſyr Willyam of Clynton / ſyr Iohn Neuyll of Nornby and many other of theyr conſent / and all theſe ſwore vpon a boke to maynteyne the quarell in as moche as they myght. And it befell ſo after that ſyr Wyllyam of Mountagu ne none of ye kynges frendes muſt not be herborowed in the caſtel for Mortimer / but went and toke theyr herborowe in dyuers places of ye towne of Notyngham. And tho were they ſore adrad leſt that Mortimer ſhold deſtroye them / and in haſte came vnto kyng Edward ſyr Willyam of Moūtagu yt than was in ye caſtell / and pryuely tolde hym that he nor none of his company ſholde not take Mortimer without counſeyle & helpe of Wyllyam of Eland conſtable of the ſame caſtell. Now truly ſayd ye king I loue you well / & therfore I counſeyle you that ye go to the foreſayd conſtable and cōmaunde hym in my name that he be your frende and your helpe for to take Mortimer / all thynge left vpon peryll of lyfe & lymme. Than ſayd Moūtagu / ſyr my lord graūt mercy. Than went forth the foreſayd Moūtagu and came to the conſtable of the caſtell / and told hym the kynges wyll. And he anſwered & ſayd the kynges wyll ſhold be done in as moche as he myght / and that he wolde not ſpare for no maner deth / and ſo he ſwore and made his othe. Than ſayd ſyr Willyam of Mountagu to the conſtable / in herynge of all them that were helpyng vnto the ſame quarell. Now certes dere frende / vs behoueth to werke and do by your aduyſe for to take Mortymer / ſyth that ye be keper of the caſtell & haue the keys in your warde. Syr ſayd the conſtable ye ſhall vnderſtande that ye gates of the caſtell ben locked with the lockes that dame Iſabell ſente hyther / and by nyght ſhe hath the keys therof & layeth them vnder the leueſell of the bedde tyll on the morowe / and ſo ye may not come in to the caſtell by the gates in no maner of wyſe / but I knowe an aley that

ſtretcheth out of the warde vnder ye erth in to ye foreſayd caſtel / yt goth in to ye weſt whiche aley dame Iſabell the quene ne none of her men / nor Mortymer ne none of his cōpany knoweth it not. And ſo I ſhall lede you through ye aley / and ſo ye ſhall come in to the caſtel wtout eſpyenge of ony men yt be your enemyes. And the ſame nyght ſyr William Moūtagu & all the lordes of his quarell / & the ſame conſtable alſo wente to hors them / & made ſemblaūt as it were for to go out of Mortimers ſyght. But anone as Mortimer herde theſe tydynges / he wende yt they wold haue gone ouer ſee for fere of hym And anone he & his company toke a coū
                           ſeyle amonge them for to lette theyr paſſage / & ſent lettres anone to the portes / ſo that none of the grete lordes ſholde go home to theyr own coūtrees but yf they were areſted & taken. And amōge other thynges Willyam Eland conſtable of ye foreſayd caſtell / priuely lad ſyr William of Moūtagu & his company by the foreſayd waye vnder the erth tyl they came in to the caſtel / & went vp in to the toure where as Mortymer was in. But ſyr Hugh of Trompyngton theym eſcryed hydouſly & ſayd. A traytours it is all for nought that ye be comē in to this caſtell ye ſhall dye yet an euyl deth euerychone And anone one of them yt was in Mountagues cōpany by with a mace & ſmote the ſame Hugh vpon ye heed yt the brayn braſt out & fell on ye groūde / & ſo dyed he an euyll dethe. Than toke they Mortymer as he armed hym at ye toures dore whan he herde ye noyſe of them for drede And whan quene Iſabell ſawe ye Mortymer was taken / ſhe made moche ſotowe in hert / and theſe wordes to them ſayd. Now fayr ſyrs I pray you yt ye do no harme to his body a worthy knyght our welbeloued frende & our dere coſyn. Thā went they thens & came & brought Mortimer & preſented hym vnto kynge Edward. And he cōmaunded to brynge hym in ſafe warde. But anone as they that were conſentyng vnto Mortimers doynge herde tell yt he was taken / they went and hydde them / and p
                              ••
                           urly by nyght wente out of the towne eueryche in to his countree with an heuy herte & mournyng chere / and lyued vpon theyr londes as well as they myght. And ſo that ſame yere yt Mortymer was taken he had at his retynue .ix. ſcore knyghtes without ſquyers and ſergeauntes of armes and fote men. And than was Mortymer ladde to London / & ſyr Symond of Bedford was ladde with hym / and was taken to the conſtable of the toure to kepe. But afterwarde was Mortymers lyf examyned at Weſtmynſter before the kynge & before all the grete lordes of Englonde / for peryll that myght fall to the realme / & to enquyre alſo whiche were conſentynge to ſyr Edwardes deth the kynges fader / and alſo through whome the Scottes eſcaped fro Scanhope in to Scotlonde without the wyll of kyng Edward. And alſo how yt charter of Ragman was delyuered vnto the Scottes / wherin the homages & frautees of ye lordes of Scotlonde were conteyned / that the Scottes ſholde do euer more vnto the Englyſſhe kynge for the realme of Scotlōde / wherfore in his abſence he was dampned to be draw
                              ••
                            & hanged for his treaſon. And this myſchefe came to hym on ſaynt Andrewes euen / in the yere of ye incarnacyon of our lorde Ieſu Chryſt. M .CCC. and rxx.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Now kyng Edward gate agayn vnto hym gracyouſly ye homages & f
                              •
                           au
                              ••
                           es of Scotlonde / wherof he was put out through falſe coūſeyle of quene Iſabell his moder & ſyr Roger Mortymer / that was newly made erle of March
                              •
                           .
                        
                           
NOw haue ye herd how ſyr Iohn Bayloll in the tyme of peas was choſen to be kyng of Scotlonde / bycauſe that he came of ye eldeſt doughter of the erle Dauid of Huntyngton yt was kyng Alyſaunders broder of Scotlond yt dyed without heyre of his body begoten. And how this Iohn made his feaute and homage to kyng Edward Henryes ſone ye thyrde for his londes of Scotlonde. And how he afterwarde wtſayd his homage through coūſeyle of the Scottes / in the yere of our lorde. M .CC .lxxiiij. and ſent vnto the pope through a fals ſuggeſtion that he made his othe vnto the foreſayd kyng Edward ouer his eſtate & his wyl of the whiche othe ye pope hym aſſoyled through his bulles to hȳ ſent. And anone as kyng Edward wyſt therof / he ordeyned anone his barons & came to Barwyk & conquered the towne / at whiche conqueſt there were ſlayne .xxv. M. and vij .C. and Bayloll yt was kyng of Scotlonde came & yelded hym to good kynge Edward / & the kyng afterward delyuered him out of ye toure of London / & all ye grete lordes wt hym that tho were taken at Barwyk / & gaue them ſaufconduyte to go in to Scotlonde. And the Scottes 
                              •
                           ith through theyr falſnes warred vpon the good kyng Edward. And whan ſyr Iohn Bayloll kyng of Scotlonde ſawe all this he went ouer ſee vnto Dunpier and lyued there vpon his londes as wel as he myght tyll yt the Scottes wold amēde them of theyr myſoedes & treſpace & 
                              •
                           ad wt hȳ ſyr Edward his ſone / wherfore ye Scottes in deſpyte of hym called hym ſyr Iohn Turnlabaerd / for bycauſe that he wolde not offende ne treſpace agaynſt ye good kyng Edward of Englonde. And ſo he forſoke his realme of Scotlonde / and ſet therof but lytel pryce. And this ſyr Iohan dwelled longe tyme in Fraūce tyll yt he dyed there. And ſyr Edward his ſone receyued his herytage / & dyd homage to ye kyng of Fraūce / for his londes of Dunpier. And ſo it befell afterward that Edward yt was Iohn Baylols ſone had wt hym a ſquyer of englōde that was borne in yorkſhyre / yt was called Iohn of Barnaby / & this Edwarde Bayloll loued hym moche / & was nygh hym and full preuy. And ſo this Iohn of Barnaby was in debate with a frenſſhe man in ye towne of Dūpier / & ſo he ſlewe hym & went his waye in all ye haſte yt he myght in to ye caſtell for to haue helpe of his lord. And anone came ye officers of ye towne to take Iohn of Barnaby as a felon / & ſyr Edward his lord holpe hym & reſcowed hym / & by night made him go out of ye caſtell / & ſo he went his waye & came in to Englonde wtout ony harme. And whan ye kyng of Fraūce ſawe yt ſyr Edward had reſcowed his felon / he became wonders wrothe agaynſt ſyr Edward / & anone let areſt hym / & toke in to his hādes all his londes. Than dwelled ſyr Edward in pryſon vnto ye tyme yt ſyr Henry of Beaumont came in to Fraūce / the whiche Henry was ſomtyme erle of Angos in Scotlonde through his wyfe & was put out therof whā ye accordemēt was bytwene Englonde and Scotlond through quene Iſabell & Roger Mortimer & theyr cōpany / for ye maryage yt ſhe made bytwene Dauyd yt was Robert ye Brus ſone & dame Ione of ye toure kyng Edwardes ſyſter of Englōde / & well vnderſtode this yt at ye ende he ſhold come to his ryght / but yf it were ſyr Edwarde Bayloll yt was ryght heyre of ye realme of Scotlonde. And the kyng of Fraunce Lowys loued moche this ſyr Henry / & he was with hym ful preuy / & thought for to make a delyueraūce of ſyr Edwarde Bayloll yf he myght in ony maner of wyſe. Tho prayed he ye kyng ye it wolde pleaſe his noble grace to graūt hym ſyr

Edward Baylols body vnto ye next parlyament that he myght lyue wt his own tentes in the meane tyme / & yt he myght ſtande to be iudged wt his peres at ye parlyament. And ye kyng graūted hym his prayer / & made the foreſayd Edward to be delyuered out of pryſon in the maner aboue ſaid. And anone as he was out of priſon / ſyr Henry toke hym forth wt hym & ladde hym in to Englōde / & made hym dwell pryuely at ye maner of Sandhall vpon Ouſe in Yorkeſhyre with the lady Veſcy. And ſo he ordeyned him there an huge retynue of Englyſſhemen & alſo of alyens for to conquere agayne his herytage. And ſo he gaue moche ſiluer to the ſowdyours & to alyens for to helpe hym And they behyght for to helpe hym in yt they myght / but they fayled hym at his mooſt nede. And at yt tyme Donald erle of Moryf herde tell how yt ſyr Edwarde Baylol was priuely come in to Englōde & came to hym & made grete ioye of his comynge agayn / and ſayd to hym & behyght hym yt all ye grete lordes of Scotlonde ſhold be to hym attendaūt / & ſhold holde hym for kynge as ryght heyre of Scotlōde / & dyd to hȳ homage & feaute. Than came ſyr Henry of Beaumont to kynge Edwarde of Englonde / & prayed hym in ye waye of charite that he wolde graūt of his grace to ſyr Edward Bayloll that he myght ſafely go by londe frō Sandhal vnto Scotlōde to cōquere his ryght & herytaunce in Scotlonde. The kynge anſwered & ſayd. Yf that I ſuffre Bayloll go through my londe in to Scotlonde / the people wold ſaye yt I ſhold be aſſentyng vnto ye company. Now ſyr I praye you that ye wolde gyue hym leue to take wt hym ſowdyours of Englyſſhe mē yt they myght ſafely lede hȳ through your londe in to Scotlōde. And ſyr vpon this couenaunt yt yf it ſo befall (as god it forbydde) he be dyſcomfyted in batayle through the Scottes / that I & alſo all ye lordes that holde wt Bayloll ben for euer more out of your rentes that we haue in Englonde. And there ye kyng vpon this couenaunt graunted theyr bone as touchynge hym & thoſe yt were of the ſame quarell the whiche claymed for to haue londes & rentes in ye realme of Scotlōde And theſe were ye names of thoſe lordes that purſued this foreſayd quarell yt is to ſaye / ſyr Edward Bayloll the whiche chalenged the realme of Scotlonde, ſyr Henry Beaumōt erle of Angos / ſyr Dauid of Stroboly erle of Atheles / ſyr 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           frey of Mombray / Walter Comyn and many other yt were put out of 
                              〈◊◊〉
                           
                           rytage in Scotlonde whan ye 
                           
                              〈◊◊〉
                            made bytwene Englonde & S
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            before is ſayd. And ye ſhall 
                              〈◊〉
                            that theſe lordes toke wt them .v .C. 
                              〈◊〉
                            of armes and .ij. M. archers & 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            & tho wente in to ſhyppe at 
                              〈◊〉
                            and ſayled by the ſee tyll that they 
                              〈◊〉
                            vnto Scotlonde / & came to londe 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            kehorne .xij. myle from ſayn
                              •
                            Ioh
                              〈…〉
                            towne. And anone ſente out theyr 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           pes agayne / for that they ſholde no
                              •
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            hurt ne empayred / neyther that no man ſholde go in to ye ſhyppes agayn though that they had nede / but abyde all 
                              〈◊〉
                            and not 
                              ••
                           ee but ſtande / & rather 
                              〈◊〉
                            deth thā flee for to mayn
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              〈◊◊〉
                            quarell. Whan the erle of Fi
                              〈…〉
                            a 
                              〈◊〉
                            man & a ſterne herde that 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            comen for to take the londe of Scotlonde he came in haſte to kynkehorne with xij. M. ſcottes for to deſtroye hym that he ſholde not come to londe. But ſyr Edwarde Bayloll & his company dyſcomfyted hym there / at ye whiche diſcomfyture ſyr Alyſaūder of Seron was there ſlayne / & many other. The erle of Fyffe was tho ſore & full yll aſhamed / that ſo lytell a company had dyſcomfy
                              ••
                           d hym and ſhamefully put hym & all his company

that were alyue for to flee. Than came ſyr Edward Bayloll & toke ye coun tre all aboute hym tyll he came vnto the abbey of Dunfermelin / & there he foūde vytayles for hym & for his folke / and amonge all thȳges he foūde in a chambre aboute .v .C. of grete ſtaues of fyne oke with longe pykes of yren & of ſtele / & he toke them & deliuered them to the mooſt ſtrongeſt men of his cōpany. And anone after he went from thens & lodged hym in a felde two myle fro ſaynt Iohannes towne. And whan the burgeyſes of the towne herde how the erle of Fiffe was dyſcōfyted through Bayloll / they were fore adrad / & brake theyr brydges yt they had made ouer ye water of Erne / ſo that Baylol myght not go ouer / wherfore he lodged hym there all yt nyght / but lytell hede he toke of reſt / & ſayd vnto his people. Now dere lordes ye knowe full well that we be now lodged bytwene our enemyes / & yf they may vs hampre there is no bote but deth / wherfore yf we abyde ſtyll here all this nyght / I wene it ſhall turne vs to moche harme. For ye power of Scotlonde may euer wexe & encreace and we may not ſo do / & we be but lytell people agaynſt them / wherfore I praye you for ye loue of almighty god make we vs bolde & hardy / & yt we may myghtely take the Scottes this night / and boldly warre vpon them / & let vs purſue them this nyght / & yf they be through vs trauayled & ſe our hardynes / other ſcottes that ſe them ſo trauayled and wery / the ſorer wyll they be adrad wt vs to fyght / & fyerſly than ſhall we fyght with them & on them purſue / ſo yt through y• grace of god al y• worlde ſhall ſpeke of y• dough tynes of our chyuairy. And ſyrs vnderſtande well that al the company y• came with ſyr Edward Bayloll graūted well to y• coūſeyle / & were therof ryght glad / and anone purſued vpon the Scottes y• they became wonders wery. And Bayloll & his company ſore folowed them / & did them moche harme & ſorow through theyr aſſaut / ſo y• they myght not for feblenes them helpe / and for lytell people. But tho ſayd y• Scottes amonge them / what is now befall that ſo lytell people as Bayloll hathe in wynge dothe vs ſo moche trauayle & ſorowe. Now certes it ſemeth vs that he werketh by grace / for he is wonders gracyous in his quarell / & we certes ſhal be deed or that we may come to hȳ vs for to yelde / ſyth that his fader ſet of vs no pryce. And amonge all other thynges Bayloll & his people paſſed the water of Erne / ſo that ſyr Roger of Swynerton the ſone was fyers & angry & went forth / & they ſawe people of armes full well arayed / and forth they went vnto them & with them faught / & ſlewe & toke as many as wolde abyde. And neuertheles at yt aſſaut they wende it had ben the grete hooſt of Scotlonde. And whan it came to the morowe they gadred them togyder and reſted them a whyle. And whyle ye engliſſhmen reſted them / the noble baron Thomas Veſcy & the noble baron of ſtafford pricked theyr horſes vp & down by ye hylles for to kepe the eſtres of y• coūtree / & as they prycked vp and down they ſawe a grete hooſt of good araye ordeyned in theyr wynges with helmes and ſheldes ſhynynge comynge vpon them. And there came tho two lordes agayn to Baylols folke / and ſayd. Now for the loue of god be of good cōforte / for ye ſhall haue batayle anone right. And tho ſpake ſyr Fouke ye ſone of Gareyne a baron of grete renome and of dedes of armes. Syrs vnderſtāde what I wyll ſaye. I haue ſeen many dyuers wynges / as wel amonge ſaraſyns and iewes as amonge y• ſcottes / & yet ſawe I neuer the fourth parte of the wynge fyght / & therfore yf ye wyll abyde our

enemyes we be ynough to fight againſt them. But yf we be not of good hert & of good courage we be but loſt / & therfore for the loue of god let vs take to vs good herte / & let vs be bolde / & thynke we neuer on our wyues ne on our childrē / but onely to cōquere our enemyes in batayle & through the helpe of our lorde god we ſhall them ouercome. And with yt came the hooſt of the Scottes towarde them full ſurely & agaynſt ſyr Edward Bayloll in thre bataylles well arayed in armure / & wonders fyerſly they came towarde Baylols company. But whā ſyr Donald erle of Marcil that was with y• Scottes ſawe all this / he ſaid to Robert Brus the ſone of Robert the Brus theſe wordes. Syr Roberte ſayd he / full ſore me forthynketh at my herte yt theſe people that Bayloll hathe brought wt hym ſholde dye with dynt of ſcottes ſwerdes lyth yt they be chryſten men as we be / & therfore me thȳketh yt it were grete charite to ſende vnto them for to yelde them to our mercy / & raunſom them through greuous raunſom / for as moche as they haue takē our londe & done yll. Now certes ſayd ſyr Robert y• Brus / I haue wel perceyued that yu art an enemy & a traytour to Scotlonde / ſyth that yu wylt conſent to ſaue our deedly enemyes / yt haue done vs ſo moche ſorowe & ſhame / & now it ſemeth well that ye be of theyr aſſent. Now certes Roberte (ſayd ſyr Donald) falſly ye lye / I am not of theyr company ne of theyr cōſent / & that haſtely ye ſhall ſe / for I wyll fyght wt them rather than ony of this cōpany / & certes ſyr Roberte ſayd he I ſhal in maugre of thy heed aſſayle them or thou. And with that they prycked theyr ſtedes fyerſly on Gaſkmo re / & theyr wynges them folowed on a rēge / & tho came they & mette wt Bayloll & his cōpany at an hangynge bough of the more in a ſtrayte paſſage / and ſo faſt they haſted them vnto the englyſſhmen that thouſandes fell to the groūde eche ouer other in to an hepe bothe hors & mā Syr Bayloll & his men myghtely ſtode agaynſt them & faſt ſlewe the Scottes to the groūde / & many they fore woūded ſo longe tyll that they ſtode vpon them & foyned them wt theyr ſwerdes & ſperes through theyr bodyes / and full ſore they were trauayled vpon them / tyll yt they became wōders wery / & wyſt not what for to do. And y• Scottes that were lefte alyue fledde away for to ſaue themſelfe in the beſt maner that they myght. And tho purſued them ſyr Edwarde Ba
                              〈…〉
                            and his men / & ſlewe of them tyll it was night. And fro thens they went to ſaynt Iohns towne / and toke it & helde them there / and vytayled themſelfe at theyr owne wyll / for they foūde ynough wher with to make them mery. Than made Bayloll his men yt were wounded go to ſhyppe for to ſayle in to Englonde to 
                              〈◊〉
                            theyr woūdes. And in y• tyme there was a flemyng in y• ſee a ſtronge thefe & a robber yt was called Crab / & this flem
                              〈…〉
                            was dryuē out of Flaūdres for his wyckednes / & therfore he came in to ſcotlond to holde with y• ſcottes / & dyd as me
                              ••
                           e harme to y• Engliſſhmē as he myght to And this Crab mette this Bay
                              •
                           e
                              •
                           s men in y• ſee yt were woūded before in baray
                              •
                           e that were ſent agayn in to Englonde 
                              〈◊〉
                            to hele theyr woūdes / & this Crab gaue to them a grete aſſaure and wold haue ſlayne them. But y• Englyſſhmen defended them manfully & dyſcōfyced Crab & his cōpany / & he fledde in to Scotlonde. And as he came towarde ſaynt Iohns towne / he foūde a grete cōpany of Scottes yt were comen agayn togyder after y• diſcomfyture of Gaſkemore the whiche beſyeged Bayloll & his men in the ſame towne of ſaynt Iohn. And anone tolde to the Scottes how that he was diſcofyted

of y• Englyſſhmen that were woū
                           ded at Gaſkmore y• went towarde Englonde for to hele theyr woūdes / & ſayd to the ſcottes yt they ſholde haue no power ne myght nor grace agaynſt Edwarde Bayloll / bycauſe that he dyſcomfyted & empayred all the chiualry of Scotlonde with a handfull of men as to accompte agaynſt the Scottes that were ſlayne / wherfore he coūſeyled to remeue y• ſiege from ſaynt Iohns towne / & kepe them in y• beſt maner that they myght. The Scottes vnderſtode yt Crab ſayd ſothe / & forſoke ye ſyege & went thens by nyght & holpe themſelfe in y• beſt maner yt they myght. Whan this thȳge was knowen through Scotlonde how that y• lordes & knyghtes were diſcōfyted at Gaſkmore of Scotlond through ſyr Edward Bayloll / ye ſhall vnderſtande that ye lordes & ladyes & the gentyls of Scotlonde came wonders faſt to ſaynt Iohns towne / & yelded them to Bayloll / & to him dyd homage & feaute for theyr londes / & yelded them to his peas. And he them receiued frely / & fro thens he went to ye abbey of Scone / & there he was crowned kyng of Scotlonde / & after he let crye his peas throughout all the londe. And at yt ſame tyme it befell that kynge Edward helde his parlyament amonge his lyeges at newe caſtell vpon Tyne / for to amende y• treſpaces & the wronges yt had ben done in his londe / & ſyr Edward Bayloll king of Scotlonde came to hym thyder / & dyd to hym homage & feaute for y• realme of Scotlonde. And in this maner kyng Edward of Englōde gadred agayn his homages & feautees of Scotlond / wherof he was put out through counſeyle & aſſent of dame Iſabell his moder / & of ſyr Roger Mortimer erle of Marche. Than toke Baylol kyng of Scotlonde his leue of kynge Edward of Englonde / & went thens in to his owne londe of Scotlonde & ſet but lytell by ſuche as had coūſeyled & holpen hym in his quarell / wherfore they went from hym / & went & lyued by theyr londes & rentes in Scotlond. And ſo it befell not longe afterward that the king of Scotlonde ne remeued & came to the toure of Anand / and there toke his dwellyng / & thyder came to hym a cōpany of knyghtes / ſtronge men & worthy / and yelded them vnto y• kyng / and bare them ſo fayre in dede & in coūtenaūce / ſo that he truſted moche vpon them. And anone as ye traytours ſawe yt he truſted moche vpō them / they ordeyned amōge them fyfty in a company / & wolde haue ſlayne theyr lord y• kyng. But through y• grace of almighty god he brake through a wall an hole in his chambre / & as god wolde eſcaped theyr trechery / & all his men were ſlayne / & he eſcaped wt moche drede vnto ye towne of Cardoyll / & there he helde hȳ ſore anoyed. And this befell on our ladyes euen ye concepcyon. Than ſent kyng Edward Bayloll to kyng Edward of Englōde how falſly & traytourſly he was in lytell tyme put to ſhame & ſorow through his lyege men / on whom he truſted wonders moche / & prayed hȳ for the loue of god yt he wolde maynteyn hym & helpe hym agaynſt his enemyes The kyng of Englōde had of hym grete pyte / & behyght to helpe & ſocour hym / and ſent hym worde that he ſhold holde hym in the foreſayd cite of Cardoyll tyll that he had gadred his power. Than ordeyned kynge Edwarde of Englonde a counſeyle at London / & he let gadre his men in dyuers ſhyres of Englonde. And whan he was all redy / he went toward the towne of Barwyk vpon Twede / & thyder came vnto hym kynge Edward Bayloll of Scotlonde with his power & beſyeged the towne / & made without y• towne a fayre towne of pauylyons / & dy ched them all about / ſo that they had no

drede of the Scottes / & made many aſſautes wt gonnes & with other engynes to the towne / wherwt they deſtroyed many fayre houſes / and chirches alſo were beten downe to y• erth with grete ſtones that ſpytefully came out of gonnes & of other engynes. Neuertheles y• Scottes kept well the towne / that ye two kynges myght not come therin longe tyme. And the kynges abode there ſo lōge tyll thoſe that were wtin the town fayled vitayles & alſo they were ſo wery of wakynge / yt they wyſt not what to do. And ye ſhall vnderſtand yt the Scottes yt were in the towne of Barwyk through y• comyn coū ſeyle and theyr aſſent let crye vpon the walles of the towne yt they myght haue peas of the Englyſſhmen / & therof they prayed the kyng of his grace & mercy / & prayed hȳ of trewſe for .viij. dayes vpon this couenaūt / yt yf they were not reſcowed in yt ſyde of the towne toward Scotlonde of y• Scottes within .viij. dayes / yt they wold yelde them vnto ye kyng & the towne alſo / & to hold this couenaūt they profred to y• king .xij. hoſtages out of the towne of Barwyk. Whan the hoſtages were delyuered to y• kyng / anone they of the towne ſent to y• Scottes / & told them of theyr ſorowe & myſchefe. And y• Scottes came than priuely ouer the water of Twede to y• bought of y• abbey / & ſyr willyam Diket yt was tho ſteward of Scotlonde & many other yt came wt hym / put themſelfe in grete peryll of theyr lyues at yt tyme / for they came ouer a brydge yt was broken & the ſtones away / & many of theyr company were there drowned / but the foreſayd Wyllyam went ouer & other of his cōpany / & came by y• ſhippes of Englonde / & ſlewe in a barge of Hull xvj. men / & after they went in to y• towne of Barwik by ye water ſyde. Wherfore y• Scottes helde than y• towne reſcowed / & aſked theyr hoſtages agayn of the kyng of Englonde. And the kynge ſente them worde agayne y• they aſked theyr hoſtages wt wronge / ſyth that they came in to the towne of Englōde ſyde / for couenaūt was bytwene them yt the towne ſhold be reſcowed by ye halfe of Scotlonde. Than anone cōmaūded kyng Edward to yelde the towne or he wold hange y• hoſtages. And the Scottes ſayd the towne was reſcowed well ynough / and therto they wold them holde. Whan kyng Edward ſawe the Scottes breke theyr couenaūt that they had made / he was wonders wroth / & anone let take ſyr Thomas fitz Willyam & ſyr Alyfaūder of Feton wardeyn of Barwyk / the whiche Thomas was parſone of Dunbar / & let them be taken fyrſt afore that other hoſtages / by cauſe that ſyr Alyſaunders faders was keper of the towne. And tho cōmaunded euery daye two hoſtages of y• towne tyll that they were all done to dethe / but yf they yelded y• towne / & ſo he ſholde teche them to breke theyr couenaūt. And whā they of the towne herde theſe tydynges they became wonders ſory / & ſent to the kyng yt he wolde graūt them other. v
                              〈…〉
                           . dayes of reſpyte / ſo y• bytwene tho hondred men of arntes and .xx. mē of armes myght by ſtrength go bytwene them to the towne of Barwik them force vitayle that ye towne muſt be holde for reſtowed And yf ſo were that .xxj. or .xxij. or more were ſlayne of tho .C. beforeſayd that ye towne ſholde not be holden for reſtowed And this couenaūt to be holdē they ſent to hym other .xij. of y• foreſayd towne in hoſtage. The kyng graūted them theyr prayer / & toke y• hoſtages on ſaynt Margaretes euen / in y• yere of grace. M .ccc. & xxxij. the Scottes came pricking fyerſly in foure wynges well arayed in armes for to mete kyng Edward of Englonde & Edward ye kyng of Scotlonde & wt theyr power / and came faſt & ſharply agaynſt

euenſonge tyme / & the ſame tyme was flode at Barwik in the water of Twede that no man myght go ouer on his hors nor on fote / & the water was bytwene the two kynges & ye realme of Englonde And that tyme abode the Scottes on ye other ſyde / bycauſe yt the Englyſſhmen ſholde haue ben drowned.
                     
                     
                        ¶ This was ye araye of ye ſcottes how yt they came in batayle agaynſt ye two kynges of Englōde & of Scotlōde. In ye vaūt ward of Scotlonde were theſe lordes.
                        THe erle of Moryf / Iames Friſell Symond Fryfel / Walter ſtewarde / Reynold Cheyn / Patrik of Graham Iohn le graūt / Iames of Cardoyll / Patrik Parkeis / Robert Caldecottes / Philip of Melledrū / Thomas Gilbert / Rafe wyſeman / Adam Gurdon / Iames Gramat / Robert Boid / Hugh Parke / with xl. knightes newe dubbed / & .vii .C. men of armes / & .iij. M. of comyns. ¶ In the fyrſt parte of ye halfe batayle were theſe lordes / the ſteward of Scotlonde / ye erle of Morye & Iames his vncle / Willyam Douglas / Dauid of Lyndeſey / Mancolyn Flemyng / Willyā of kethe / Dūken Cāboke / with .xxx. bachelers newe dubbed. ¶ In the ſecond parte of ye batayle were theſe lordes. Iames Steward of Colden / Aleyn Steward / Willyam Abbrehyn / Willyā Moryce / Iohn fitz Willyā / Adam le moſe / Walter fitz Gilbert / Iohn of Cerlton / Robert walham with vij .C. men of armes & .xvij. M. comyns ¶ In the thyrde parte of the batayle of Scotlonde were theſe lordes / the erle of Marrethe erle of Rof / the erle of Straherne / the erle of ſotherlond / William of Kyrkeley / Iohn Cambron / Gylbert of Hay / Willyam of Rainſey / Williā Prendegeſt / Kyrſtyn Harde / Wyllyam Gurdon / Arnold Garde / Thomas Dolphyn with .xl. knyghtes new dubbed / & .ix .C. men of armes and .xv. M. of comyns. ¶ In the fourth warde of ye batayle of Scotlond were theſe lordes. Archebald Douglas the erle of Leneuax / Alyſaunder le Brus ye erle of Fif / Iohn Cambell erle of Atheles / Robert Lawether / Willyam of Vipount / Willyam of Lonſtone Iohn de Labels / Groos de Sherenlaw Iohn de Lyndeſey / Alyſaūder de Gray / Ingram de Vinfreuille / Patrik de Polleſworth / Dauyd de Wymes / Mychell Scotte / Willyam Landy / Thomas de Boys / Roger the Mortymer / with .xx. bachelers newe dubbed .ix .C. men of armes / and .xviij. M. &. iiij .C. of comyns. The erle of Dunbar keper of ye caſtell of Barwik holpe the Scottes with .l. men of armes. And ſyr Alyſaunder of Seten keper of the foreſayd towne of Barwyk with an .C. men of armes / & alſo the comyns of ye towne with. iiij .C. men of armes / & wt them. viij .C. fote men. ¶ The ſomme of the erles & lordes aboue ſayd amoūteth .lxvj. The ſomme of ye bachelers newe dubbed amoūteth to .C. & .xl. The ſomme of men of armes amoūteth to .iij. M .C. The ſomme of the comyns amoūteth to .liij. M. &. ij .C. The ſomme totall of ye people aboue ſayd amounteth lvj. M. vij .C .xlv. And theſe .lxvj. grete lordes lad all ye other grete lordes aboue ſayd in .iiij. batayles / as it is told before all on fote. And kynge Edward of Englonde & Edward Baylloll kyng of Scotlonde had wel apparayled theyr folke in iiij. batayles for to fyght on fote agaynſt the Scottes theyr enemyes. And ye Englyſſhe mynſtrels blewe theyr trūpets & theyr claryons / & hidouſly eſcryed ye ſcottes. And tho had euery englyſſh batayle two wynges of pryce archers / ye whiche at ye batayl ſhotte arowes ſo faſt & ſo ſore that the Scottes myght not helpe them ſelfe / & they ſmote ye ſcottes thouſandes to the groūde / & they began for to flee fro

the englyſſhmē to ſaue theyr lyues. And whan y• ſcottyſſhe knaues ſawe y• diſcō
                           fyture & the ſcottes fall faſt to y• grounde they faſt prycked theyr mayſters horſes with the ſpurres for to kepe them fro peryl / & ſet theyr mayſters at no force. And whan y• Engliſſhmen ſawe y• / they lepte on theyr horſes & faſt purſued y• ſcottes / and all y• abode they ſlewe downe ryght. There men might ſe y• doughtynes of y• noble kyng Edward & of his men / how manly they purſued y• Scottes y• fled for drede. And there men myght ſe many a ſcottiſſhman caſt down to y• groūde deed & theyr baners diſplayed hacked in to peces / & many a good habergeon of ſtele in the blode bath. And many a tyme y• ſcottes were gadred in to companyes. But euermore they were diſcōfited. And ſo it befell as god wolde y• the Scottes had y• daye no more foyſon ne myght agaynſt the Englyſſhmen than .xx. ſhepe ſholde haue agaynſt .v. wolues. And ſo were y• Scottes diſcōfited / & yet y• Scottes had well .v. men agaynſt one Englyſſhman / & y• batayle was done on Ha
                              •
                           ydownhyll beſyde y• towne of Barwyk / at y• whiche batayle were ſlayne of y• Scottes .xxxv. M. vij .C. and .xij. And of Englyſſhmen but onely .xiiij. and thoſe were fotemen. And this victory befell to y• Engliſſhmen on ſaynt Margaretes euen / in y• yere of the incarnacyon of our lord Ieſu Chryſt M .CCC .xxxij. And whyle this doynge laſted y• Engliſſhe pages toke the pylfre of the Scottes y• were ſlayn / euery man myght take without ony chalengynge of ony man. And ſo after this gracyous victory the kyng returned agayn vnto y• ſame ſyege of Barwik. And whā they y• were beſyeged ſawe & herde how kyng Edward had ſped / they yelded to hym y• towne wt the caſtell on the morowe nexte after ſaynt Margaretes day. And than the kynge ordeyned ſyr Edward Baylloll with other noble & worthy men to be kepers and gouernours of Scotlonde in his abſence / and hymſelfe returned agayne and came in to Englonde after this vyctory with moche ioye and worſhyp. ¶ And in the nexte yere folowyng that is for to ſaye / in the yere of the incarnacyon of our lorde Ieſu Chryſt. M .CCC. and .xxxiij. and of kynge Edwardes regne .vij. he went agayn in to Scotlonde in wynter tyme / at whiche 
                              ••
                           age the caſtell of K
                              〈…〉
                           brygge in Scotlond for hym & for his men that were with hym he recouered and had agaynſt the Scottes all at his owne wyll. ¶ And in that ſame yere ſyr Edwarde Baylloll kynge of Scotlonde helde his parlyament in Scotlonde with many noble lordes of Englonde that were at that ſame parlyament / bycauſe of theyr londes and alſo lordſhyppes that they had in the realme of Scotlonde / and helde all of the ſame Edwarde Baylloll. ¶ And in the viij. yere of kynge Edwardes regne about the feeſt of ſaynt Iohn Baptyſt 
                              〈◊〉
                            Edward Baylloll the very & true kyng of Scotlonde / as by herytage and right lyne / made his homage and feaute vnto kynge Edwarde of Englonde for the realme of Scotlōd at Newe caſtell vpon Tyne / in the preſence of many worthy lordes and alſo of the comyns bothe of the realme of Englōde and alſo of Scotlonde. And anone after in the ſame yere kyng Edward of Englonde retryued of the duke of Britayn his homage for the erledome and lordſhyp of 
                              •
                           ychemond. ¶ And ſo folowyng in the. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . yere of his regne after Mighe
                              •
                           mas rode in to Scotlonde / and there was faſt by ſayne Iohannes towne almooſt all the wynter tyme / & ſo he helde his Chryſtmaſſe at y• caſtell of Rokeſburgh. And in the ſame yere through out al Englōde about ſayt Clementes tyde in wynter there aroſe

ſuche a ſpryngynge and wellynge vp of water / & alſo of flodes / bothe of the ſee & alſo of freſſhe ryuers & ſprynges / that y• ſee bankes / walles and coſtes brake vp that men / beeſtes & houſes in many places & namely in lowe countrees violently & ſodeynly were drowned / & fruytes dryuen awaye of the erth through contynuaunce & aboundaunce of waters of the ſee / euer more afterwarde were turned in to more ſaltnes and ſournes of ſauour. ¶ The .x. yere of kyng Edwardes regne kynge Edward entred the Scottyſſhe ſee after mydſomer / & to many of the ſcottes he gaue batayle & ouercame them / & many he treated & bowed to his peas through his doughtynes. And after at Myghelmaſſe than next folowynge was the erle of Moryf taken at Edenburgh and brought in to Englonde and put in to pryſon. ¶ And in the monethes of Iune and Iuly than nexte folowyng in the .xj. yere of his regne was ſeen and appered in y• fyrmament a bemed ſterre the whiche clerkes call ſtella Cometa / and that ſterre was ſeen in dyuers partes of the fyrmament. Where after anone there folowed in Englonde good chepe & wonders grete plente of all chaffer vytayles and marchaundyſe / and there agaynſt honger / ſcarcete / myſchefe / and nede of money. In ſo moche that a quarter of whete at London was ſolde for two ſhyllynges / and a good fatte oxe at a noble / and fyue good doue byrdes for a peny. In whiche yere dyed ſyr Iohn of Eltham erle of Cornewayle that was kynge Edwardes broder / and lyeth at Weſtmynſter.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Edwarde made a duchy of the erledome of Cornewayle / and alſo of ſyxe other erles that were newe made / and of the fyrſt chalenge of the kyngdome of Fraunce.
                        IN the yere of our lorde. M .CCC. & .xxxvij. and the .xij. yere of kyng Edward / in the moneth of Marche / durynge the parlyament at Weſtmynſter in lent tyme kyng Edward made of the erledome of Cornewayle a duchy / & let it call y• duchy of Cornewayle / the whiche duchy he gaue to Edwarde his fyrſt ſone / with the erledome of Cheſtre. And alſo kynge Edwarde made at the ſame tyme .vj. other erles / that is to ſaye / ſyr Henry erle of Lācaſters ſone erle of Leyceſtre / Willyā of Boghun erle of Northhamton / Willyam of Mountagu erle of Saliſbury / Hugh of Awdell erle of Gloceſtre / Robert of Vfford erle of Suffolke and Willyam of Cliton erle of Huntyngton. ¶ And in that ſame yere it was ordeyned in the ſame parlyamēt y• no man ſhold were no cloth that was wrought out of Englōde / as of cloth of golde ne of ſylke or veluet or damaſke or ſatyn baud kyn / ne none ſuche other / ne none wylde ware ne furres of beyonde y• ſee / but ſuche as myght ſpende an hondred poūde of rent by yere. But this ordynaūce and ſtatute was but of lytel effect / for it was nothynge holden. ¶ In the .xiij. yere of his regne kyng Edward went ouer the ſee in to Brabād with quene Philip his wyfe there beryng a childe at And w
                              •
                           rp there he dwelled more than a yere for to treate with the duke of Brabād & other alyed vnto hym of the chalengynge of y• kyngdome of Fraūce to kynge Edward of Englonde by ryght & by herytage after the deth of Karoll the grete kynge of Fraunce broder germayn of quene Iſabel kyng Edwardes moder / the whiche was holden & occupyed vnrightfully by Philip of Valoys y• emes ſone of Karoll The whiche duke & all his in y• foreſayd thȳges & all other longyng therto with all his men and goodes kynge Edward foūde redy vnto hym & made & behyght

                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                            in 
                              •
                           o Eng
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                           . ¶ Than in the .xiiij. 
                              〈…〉
                           des of his 
                              〈…〉
                            to be at his 
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                           ter the 
                              〈◊〉
                            of 
                              〈…〉
                           y. The kynges 
                              〈…〉
                            & 
                              〈◊〉
                            as touthynge the kyngdome of Fraūce. For whiche nedes to be 
                              〈…〉
                            aſked y• fyfth party of al y• 
                           
                              〈…〉
                           ble goodes of Englonde & the 
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                            the .ix. ſhefe of euery corne. And all the 
                              〈…〉
                           rdes of euery towne wh
                              〈…〉
                            ſuch
                              •
                           thynges ſhold be taxed & gadred 
                              〈…〉
                            to y• kyng therof / & he h
                              〈…〉
                            & helde 
                              〈◊〉
                            at his owne 
                              ••
                           ſt & wyll. W
                              〈…〉
                            I ſhall knowlege the very trouth / the inner loue of y• people was 
                              〈◊〉
                            into hate / & y• comyn prayers in to 
                              〈◊〉
                            / for cauſe that y• comyn people were ſo ſtrongly greued. ¶ Alſo the foreſayd 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            of Fraūce had gadred vnto h
                              •
                            a grete hooſt & deſtroyed there in his partyes & kyngdom many of y• kynges frendes of Englōde wt townes & 
                              〈◊〉
                            wt many other of theyr lordſhyps / & many 
                              〈…〉
                           s / ſhapes & deſpytes dyd vnto y• quene. Wher fore whan kyng Edward herde this / he was ſtrongly 
                              〈◊〉
                            & 
                              •
                           ngred therwt / & ſent dyuers lettes ouer ſee to y• quene & to other y• were his frendes in gladding them / & certyfyenge them y• he wolde he there hymſelfe in all y• 
                           
                              •
                           aſte y• he might. And anone after reſter 
                              〈◊〉
                            he had ſped of all thyges that hym neded to haue / he went ouer ſee agayn. Of whoſe coming the quene & all his frendes were wōders glad / & made moche toye. And all y• were his enemyes & helde agaynſt him made his moche ſorowe. In the ſame tyme the king through coūſeyle of his true 
                              〈◊〉
                            & coūſeyle of his lordes y• there were preſent with hym 
                              〈◊〉
                            y• kynge of 
                              〈◊〉
                            name / & toke 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            y• kynges armes of Frafice quartred wt the armes of Englonde / 
                              〈◊〉
                            cōmanded forth with his coyne of golde vnder deſcripcyon & 
                              〈…〉
                           yng of the name of Englonde & of Fraūce to be made beſt y• myght be / & y• is to ſaye / the floreyn y• was called y• noble pryce of. v
                              •
                           . ſhyllynges .viij. pens ſterlyng / & y• halfe noble y• value .iij. ſhyllynges &▪ 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           . peus & the farthynge of y• value of▪ 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           . peus.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Edwarde came vnto the Scluys and dyſcomfyted all the power of Fraunce in the hauen.
                        ANd in y• nexte yere after / that is to ſaye / the .xv. yere of his 
                              •
                           egne he cōmaūded & let wryte in his chartres wryttes & other lettres the date of the regne of Fraūce y• fyrſt. And whyle that he was thus doynge & 
                              •
                           rauaylynge 
                              〈◊〉
                            Fraunce through his coūſeyle 
                              •
                           e wrote to al the prelates / dukes / cries & barons & the noble lordes of y• coūtre / & alſo to dyuers of the comyn people dyuers l
                              〈…〉
                           s & maundementes berynge date at Gandaue the .viij. daye of February. And anone after within a lytell tyme he came agayn in to Englonde wt the quene & her childrē. And in y• ſame yere on midſomer euen he began to ſayle toward Fraūce as gayn / & manly & fyerſly he fell vpon Philyp of 
                              •
                           aloys / the whiche longe tyme laye & had gadred to hym a full grete & bouſtous meyny of dyuers nacions in y• hauen of Scluys: & there they fought to gyder y• kyng of Fraūce & he with theyr 
                              •
                           o
                              ••
                           es fro myddaye to thre of y• clocke on the morowe / in y• whiche batayle were ſlayne .xxx. M. men of y• kynges cōpany of Fraūce / and many ſhyppes & cogges were taken. And ſo through goddes 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            he had there y• victory / & bare theus a gloryous 
                              •
                           heualry. And in y• ſame yere

about ſaynt Iames tyme wold y• gates of ſaynt Diners Roberte of A
                              •
                           theys 
                              〈◊〉
                            men of ing
                              ••
                           de & fla
                              〈…〉
                            egerly fought agaynſt y• duke of Blitgoyn & y• frenſſhe men at whiche batayle were ſlayne & taken of the Frenſſhmen .xv. barons .lxxx. knyghtes / & ſhyppes & barkes were takē vnto y• nōbre of .CC. & .xxx. The ſame yere y• kyng makyng & abydyng vpon y• ſyege of Turney ye erle of Henaud wt engliſſhe archers made aſſaut vnto ye towne of ſaynt Amand / where as they ſlewe .l. knightes & many other / & alſo deſtroyed the towne. ¶ And in the .xvj. yere of his regne folowynge in y• wynter tyme the king dwelled ſtyll vpon y• foreſayd ſyege & ſent ofte tyme in to Englonde vnto his treſourer & other purueyours for gold & money yt ſhold be ſent to hym in his nede but his proctours & meſſengers curſedly & full ſlowly ſerued hym at his nede & deceyued him / on whoſe defaut & laches the king toke trewſe bytwene hym & the kyng of Fraūce. And thā kyng Edward full of ſorowe & ſhame in his hert withdrewe hym fro y• ſyege & came in to Bry tayn / & there was ſo grete ſtryfe for vytayle yt he loſt many of his men / & whan he had done there yt he came fore he dreſſed hym ouer ſee in to Englonde. And as he ſayled toward Englōde in y• hygh ſe
                              •
                            the moſt myſhappes ſtormes & tēpeſtes thonder & lyghtnynge fell to hym in the ſee / the whiche was ſayd yt it was done & reyſed through euyl ſpirytes made by ſorcery & nygromancy of them of fraūte Wherfore y• kynges hert was full of ſoro we & anguyſſhe wellyng & ſyghynge & ſayd vnto our lady ī this wyſe. O blyſſed lady ſaynt Mary what is y• cauſe y• euer more goynge in to Fraūce all thynges & wethers fall to me ioyful & lyking as I wolde haue them / but alway turnynge in to Englōde all thynges fall vn profitable & very harmeful / neuertheles he ſtopyng an 
                              〈◊〉
                            of the ſ
                              〈…〉
                            worde came to thē 
                           
                              〈…〉
                            of 
                              〈…〉
                            ſtyght. ¶ And ye ſame yere y• kyng wolde his Chryſt
                              〈…〉
                           e at M
                              〈…〉
                           s 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            word to y• Scottes 
                              〈…〉
                            yt he was tidy & wold fyght wt 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            but the Scottes wold not 
                              •
                           hyde / but fledde ouer y• ſcottyſſhe 
                              〈…〉
                            them as 
                              〈◊〉
                            as they myght. And 
                              ••
                           che .xvij. yere of his regne about y• fe
                              ••
                            of y• cōue
                              •
                           ſyon of ſaynt Pauleking Edward whā he has ben in Scotlonde & ſawe yt the Scottes were fled 
                              〈◊〉
                            came agayn in to Englonde. And a
                              •
                           ytel before 
                              •
                           ent was y• whiche tur neyment came al the yonge bachelary & cheualty of Englonde 
                              ••
                           many other 
                              •
                           rles & 
                              〈◊〉
                            at the 
                              〈◊〉
                            turneyment kyng Edward hymſelfe was there preſent. ¶ And in y• .xviij. yere of his regne at his parlyamīt holdē at Weſtmynſter the auy
                              •
                           zeme of 
                              •
                           eſter Edward y• thyrd made Edward his fyrſt ſone prynce of Wales. ¶ And in y• .xix. yere of his regne and
                              ••
                            afterī Ia
                              〈…〉
                           y before lent king Edward let make ful noble Iuſtes & grete feeſtes in ye place of his byrth at Wyndſore / that these was neuer none ſuche ſeen there afore. At whiche feeſt & royalte were two kinges & two quenes the prynce of Wales / the duke of Eornewayle .x. erles .ix. coūteſſes / barous and many burgeyſes the whiche might not lyghtly be nombred / and of dyuers londes beyonde the ſee were many ſtraungers. And at the ſame tyme whan the Iuſtes were done kyng Edward made a grete ſouyer / in the whiche he ordeyned & began his roūde table / & ordeyned and ſtedfaſted the daye of the rounde cable to be holden there at wyndſore in the whytſonweke euer more yerely. And in this tyme Englyſſhnten ſo moche haunted and cleued to the woodnes & foly of the ſtraūgers / that frō tyme of comynge

of y• Hen
                              〈…〉
                           es .xviij. yere paſſed they ordeyned & chaūged them euery yere dyuers ſhappes & diſguiſynges of clothȳg oflonge large & wyde clothes deſtitute & deſerte frō all olde honeſte & good vſage. And an othertyme ſhort clothes & ſtrayt waſted iagged & kyt / & on euery ſyde ſlatered & botoned with ſleues & tapytes of ſurcotes / & hodes ouer longe & ouer moche hangyng yt yf I the ſothe ſhall ſaye they were more lyke to turmētours & de uyls in theyr clothing & ſhoynge & other araye / than to men. And y• women more nycely yet paſſed the men in araye & curiouſlyer / for they were ſo ſtrayt clothed that they let hange foxe tayles ſewed by uethe wtin theyr clothes for to hele & hide theyr arſes / the whiche diſguiſynges & pryde perauenture afterwarde brought forth & rauſed many myſhappes & myſchefe in y• realme of Englōde. ¶ The .xx. yere of kyng Edward he went ouer in to Brytayn & Gaſcoyn / in whoſe company went y• erle of warwyk / the erle of Suffolk / the erle of Huntyngton / & the erle of Arundell / & many other lordes & comyn people in a grete multytude / with a grete nauy of .CC. and .xl. ſhyppes / anone after mydſomer for to auenge hȳ of many wronges & harmes to hym done by Phylyp of Valoys kynge of Fraunce agaynſt y• trewſe before hande graunted / the whiche trewſe he falſly and vntruly by cauellacyons loſed & diſquatte.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Edwarde ſayled in to Normādy / & arryued at Hogges with a grete hooſt.
                        IN the .xxi. yere of his regne kyng Edward through coūſeyle of all y• grete lordes of Englonde called & gadred togyder in his parlyamēt at Weſtmynſter before eeſter ordeyned hȳ for to paſſe ouer y• ſee agayn for to diſeaſe & deſtrouble the rebelles of Fraūce. And whā his nauy was come togyder & made redy he went wt a grete hooſt the .xij. daye of Iuly & ſailed in to Normandy / & arryued at Hogges. And whan he had reſted hym there .vj. days for bycauſe of trauayling of the ſee / & for to haue out all his men wt al theyr neceſſaries out of theyr ſhyppes he went towarde Cadomū brennynge / waſtynge & deſtroyenge all y• townes yt he foūde in his waye. And the .xxvj. day of Iuly at y• brydge of Cadony manly & nobly ſtrengthed & defended with Normans he had there a ſtronge batayle & a longe durynge / through whiche a grete multytude of people were ſlayne. And there were taken of priſoners the erle of Ewe / the lord Tankeruyll / and an .C. of other knightes & men of armes / &. vj .C. fote men nōbred / & the towne & yt ſubbarbes vnto y• bare wall of all thynge that they myght bere & cary out was robbed & deſpoyled. After y• king paſſed forth by the coūtre about the brede of .xx. myle be waſted all maner thynge that he foūde. Whan Philip of Valois perceyued this all though he were faſt by hym with a ſtronge hooſt / yet he wold not come nye hym / but brake all ye brydges beyonde ye water of Seyn fro Roen to Parys / & bȳ ſelfe fledde vnto ye ſame cite of Parys to all ye haſte yt he myght. For ſothe ye noble kyng Edward whan be came to Parys brydge & foūde it broken / wtin two dayes he let make it agayne. And on y• morowe after the Aſſumpcion of our lady kynge Edwarde paſſed ouer y• water of Seyn goynge to warde the water of Creſ
                              •
                           y / & deſtroyed by y• waye townes wt the people owenynge therin. And in the feeſt of ſaynt Barthylmewe he paſſed ouer the water of Sōme vnhurte wt all his hooſt there as neuer before had bē ony maner waye ne paſſage / where two. M. were ſlayne of them that letted theyr paſſage ouer. Therfore the .xxvj. daye of Auguſt

kynge Edward in a felde faſt by Creſ
                              •
                           y hauynge thre batayles of Englyſſhmen encountred & mette wt Philip of Valoys hauyng wt him .iiij. batayles / of whiche the leeſt paſſed gretly ye nombre of Englyſſhe people. And whā theſe two hoſtes mette togyder / there fell vpon hym the king of Beme / ye duke of Loreyn / & erles alſo of Flaūdres / Dalaūſon / Blois / Har court / Aumarle and Neuers / and many other erles / barons / lordes / knyghtes & men of armes the nombre of a. M .v .C. xlij. wtout fote men & other men armed yt were nothynge rekened. And for al this the vngloryous Philip wtdrew hȳ wt the reſydue of his people. Wherfore it was ſayd in comyn amonge his owne people Nr̄e bel ſoy retreit / yt is to ſaye / our fayr wtdraweth hym. Than kynge Edward & our engliſſhmen thanked god of ſuche a victory after theyr grete labour taken to them all thynge nedeful to theyr ſuſte naūce & ſauynge of theyr lyues / and for drede of theyr enemyes reſted thē there. And full erly in the mornynge after the frenſſhmen wt a grete hooſt came agayn for to gyue batayle & fyght with y• englyſſhmen / with whome mette & encountred the erle of warwik / Northamton & Northfolke with theyr cōpany / & ſlewe ij. M. and toke many priſoners of ye gentils of them / & the remenaūt of the ſame hooſt fled .iij. myle thens. And the thyrd daye after ye batayle ye kyng went to Ca lays warde deſtroyenge all y• townes as he rode thyder. Whan he was comen / yt is to ſaye / the thyrde daye of Septēber he began to beſyege y• towne wt the caſtel & cōtinued his ſyege fro y• foreſaid thyrd day of September to y• thyrde day of Auguſt y• next yere after. And in y• ſame yere duryng y• ſyege of Calays y• kyng of ſcot londe with a grete multytude of ſcottes came in to Englond to Nouiles croſſe about ſaynt Lukes daye the euangelyſt / hopyng & truſtyng for to haue foūde all the londe beſt ytute and voyde of people / for as moche as the kynge of Engloude was beyonde ye ſee / ſaue ouely preeſte
                              •
                            & men of holy chirche & women & children and plowmen & ſuche otherlabourers / & there they came & robbed & dyd moche preuy ſorow / but yet foūde they ynough that wtſtode them by ye grate of almyghty god. And ſo a daye of bacayle was aſſygned bytwene them & certaynelordes & men of holy chirche yt were of ye coūtres with other comyn people faſt by the cite of Durham / at whiche daye through ye grace of almyghty god y• Scottes were ouercomen / & yet were there thre tymes ſo many of them as of the englyſſhmen. And there was ſlayne all the cheualry & knyghthode of the realme of Scotlonde And there was taken as they wolde haue fled thens Dauyd the kyng of Scotlonde hymſelfe / & the erle of Mentyf / ſyr William Douglas / & many other grete men of Scotlonde. And after yt our Englyſſhmen whan they had reſted them a fewe dayes & had ordeined theyr kepers of y• north coūtree / they came to London & brought with them ſyr Dauid ye kyng of Scotlonde & all ye other lordes yt were taken pryſoners vnto ye toure of London with all the haſte yt they myght / & lefte them there in ſafe kepyng vnto the kynges comynge / & went home agayn in to theyr owne coūtre. And afterward was the kynges raūſom of Scotlonde taxed to an hondred thouſand marke of ſyluer to be payed within .x. yere / yt is to ſaye / euery yere .x. thouſande marke.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Edwarde beſyege
                              ••
                            Calays / and how it was wonne & yelded vnto hym.
                        IN the .xxij. yere of y• regne of king Edwarde he went ouer the ſee in

the wynter tyme / & laye all the wynter at the ſyege of Calays / the whiche yere whyle y• ſyege laſted & endured / Philyp the kyng of Fraūce caſt & purpoſed tray tourſly & wt fraude to put away y• ſyege / & came the .xxvij. day of Iuly in y• ſame yere wt a grete hooſt & a ſtronge power & nighed to y• ſyege of Calays / the whiche Philip the laſt day of Iuly ſent to kyng Edward worde that he wold gyue hym playne batayle y• thyrde daye after that about euenſonge tyme / yf he durſt come fro y• ſyege & abyde. And whan kyng Edward herde that / without ony longe taryenge or longe auyſemēt accepted gladly y• day & houre of batayle yt Philip had aſſygned. And whan ye kynge of Fraūce herde yt / the nexte nyght after he ſet his tentes a fyre & remeued & wente awaye cowardly. Than they yt were in ye towne & in ye caſtel beſyeged ſeynge al this how that they had none other helpe ne ſocour of the king of Fraūce ne of his men / & alſo yt theyr vitayles wtin them were ſpended & waſted / & for faute of vitayles & re freſſhing they ete horſes / hoūdes / cattes & myce for to kepe theyr treuth as longe as they myght / & whā they ſawe & was foūde amonge them at ye laſt yt they had no thynge amōge them for to ete ne lyue by / ne no ſocour nor reſcowe of ye frenſſhe men of yt other ſyde / they wyſt well that they muſt nedes dye for defaute / or elles yelde y• towne / & anone they went & toke downe y• baners & y• armes of Fraūce on euery ſyde yt were hangen out / & wente on the walles of ye towne in dyuers places as naked as they were borne / ſaue onely theyr ſhertes & their preuy clothes & helde theyr ſwerdes naked & the poynt downward in theyr hādes / & put ropes & halters aboute theyr neckes / & yelded vp the keys of ye towne & of the caſtell to kyng Edward of Englonde with grete fere and drede of herte. And whan kyng Edward ſawe this / as a merciable king and lorde receyued them all to grace / & a fewe of the greteſt perſones of eſtate & of gouernaunce of the towne he ſente in to Englonde there to abyde theyr raunſom & the kynges grace. And all y• comynalte of the towne the kynge let go whyther they wolde in peas & wtout ony harme / and let them bere with them all theyr thynges that they myght bere and cary awaye / kepynge the towne & the caſtell to hymſelfe. Than through medracion of cardinals that were ſent from y• pope trewſe was takē there bytwene Fraūce & Englonde for .ix. monethes than nexte folowynge. And aboute Myg
                              •
                           elmaſſe kyng Edward came agayne in to Englond with a gloryous victory. ¶ And in the .xxiij. yere of his regne in y• 
                           
                              •
                           eſt partyes of the worlde there began a paſ
                              •
                           ylence and deth of ſaraſyns & pay
                              〈…〉
                            that ſo grete a deth was neuer herde of afore / & that waſted away the people ſo that vnneth the tenth perſone was lefte alyue. ¶ And in the ſame yere aboute y• ſouth coūtrees there fell ſo moche rayne & ſo grete waters / that frō Chryſtinaſſe vnto mydſomer there was 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            daye nor nyght but that it rayned ſomwhat / through whiche waters y• peſty lence was ſo enfected & ſo 
                              •
                           aboundaunt in all coūtrees / & namely about y• courte of Rome & other places & ſee coſtes that vnneth there were lefte lyuyng folke for to bury them honeſtly yt were deed. But made grete diches & pyttes yt were wonders brode & depe / & therin buryed them & made a renge of deed bodyes & caſt aly tell erth to couer them aboue / & than caſt in an other renge of deed bodyes / and an other renge aboue them. And thus were they buryed & none other wyſe / but yf it were ſo yt they were men of grete eſtate ſo that they were buryed as honeſtly as they myght. ¶ And after all this in the

xxiiij. yere of kynge Edwardes regne it was done him to wyte of a treaſon that was begon at Calays & ordeyned to ſell that towne for a grete ſomme of florens to kynge Philip of Fraūce / through the falſnes & ordynaūce of a knyght y• was called ſyr Geffrey of Cheruey that was wōders preuy wt kyng Philip of Fraūce And Whā kyng Edward herde this / he toke wt hym y• nobleſt & gentylleſt lordes & many other worthy mē of armes that were preſent wt him for y• ſolempnite of y• hygh feeſt. And well & wyſely in all the haſte that he myght & as pryuely as he myght he went ouer the ſee to Calays. And y• ſame yere y• good kynge Edward helde his Chryſtmaſſe at Hauerynge / & the morow after newe yeres day y• kyng was in y• caſtell of Calays wt his men of armes y• none of the alyens wyſt therof. And y• fals cōſpyratour & traytour Geffrey of Cherney ſyth that he myght not openly haue his purpoſe of y• caſtell / pry uely & ſtelingly he came & helde y• towne with a grete hooſt. And whan he wt his men were comen / he payed the foreſayd ſomme of florens as couenaūt was to a Genewey in y• towne y• was keper of the caſtell & conſentyng to the ſame Geffrey in all this falſnes & trechery / & boūde y• Englyſſhe mynſtrels & ſeruauntes that were in y• caſtell y• they myght not helpe themſelfe ne let them of theyr purpoſe. And than wenynge y• they had ben ſure ynough / they ſpake al theyr wickednes & falſnes openly on hygh y• al mē might here. And now ſhall ye here how they were deceyued / for they came in by a preuy poſterne ouer a lytell brydge of tree / & whan they were comen in ſubtylly & priuely y• brydge was drawen vp & kepte y• none of them y• came in might go out / neno moo come in to them. And anone our Englyſſhe men went out at preuy holes and wyndowes & ouer the walles of the towne & of y• caſtel & went & faught manly with y• frenſſhmen y• were without / & had y• better of them / the whiche whan they were occupyed by thēſelfe on theyr ſyde / the kyng y• was within the towne hauynge wt hym ſcarſly but .xxx. men of armes drewe out his ſwerde & wt a loude voyce he cryed on hye. A ſaynt Edward A ſaynt George. And whan the people herde that / they came rēnynge to hym & gaue to theyr enemyes ſo grete aſſaute that there were moo than. iij .C. men of armes & many moo other ſlayn / & many fled awaye. And ſo by y• grace of god the victory fell to y• Englyſſhmen. Than the kynge toke wt hym this Geffrey y• was fynder of this treaſon & alſo many other Frenſſhe priſoners / & within a whyle after he came agayne in to Englonde. And in this ſame yere & in the yere afore / & in the yere nexte folowynge was ſo grete a peſtylence of men from the eeſt in to the weſt / & namely through botches / y• they that ſekened as on this daye dyed on the thyrde daye after / to y• whiche men y• ſo dyed in this peſtylence had but lytell reſpyte of theyr lyggȳge. Than pope Clement of his goodnes & grace gaue them full remyſſyon & forgyuenes of all theyr ſynnes that they were ſhryuen of / & this peſtylence laſted in London fro Mighelmaſſe vnto Auguſt nexte folowynge / almooſt an hole yere. And in theſe dayes was deth without ſorowe / weddynges without frendſhyp / wylfull penaūce / & derth without ſcarſete / & fleynge wtout refute or ſocour / for many fledde frō place to place bycauſe of the peſtylence / but they were enfected & might not eſcape y• deth / after that y• prophete Iſaie ſayth Who that fleeth fro the face of drede / he ſhall fall in to the dyche. And he y• wyndeth hym out of y• dyche / he ſhall be holden and tyed with a grenne. But whan this peſtylence was ceſed as god wolde

vnnethes y• tenth parte of y• people was left on lyue. ¶ And in y• ſame yere began a wonders thȳge / that all y• were borne after y• peſtylence had two cheketethe in theyr heed leſſe than they had afore.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Edward had a grete batayle With Spanyardes in y• ſee faſt by Wynchelſee.
                        ANd in the .xxv. yere of his regne about ſaynt Johns daye in harueſt in y• ſee faſt by Winchelſee kyng Edwarde had a grete batayle with men of Spayne where y• theyr ſhyppes & nauy laye chayned togyder / that eyther they muſt fyght or be drowned. And ſo whan all our Worthy men of armes & of the ſee coſtes faſt by winchelſe & Romney were gadred togyder / & our nauy & ſhyppes all redy to the warre the Englyſſhmen mette manly & ſtrongly with theyr enemyes tomynge fyerſly agaynſt them. And whan y• ſpaynyſſhe veſſels & nauy were cloſed in all aboute / there myght men ſe ſtronge batayle on bothe ſydes & longe durynge / in whiche batayle was but fewe that faught but they were pyteouſly hurte. And after y• batayle there were .xxiij. ſhyppes taken / & ſo the Englyſſhmen had the better. And in y• nexte yere folowynge of his regne / y• is to ſaye the .xxvi. yere the kyng through his coū
                           ſeyle let ordeyn & make his newe money that is to ſaye / the peny / the grote value of .iiij. pens / & the halfe grote of .ij. pens but it was of leſſe weyght than the olde ſterlyng was by .v. ſhyllyng in y• poūde And in the .xxvii. yere of his regne was the grete derth of vytayles / the whiche was called y• dere ſomer. And the. xxviii yere of his regne in y• parlyamēt hoiden at weſtmȳſter after eeſter ſyr Henry erle of Laucaſtre was made duke of Lancaſtre. ¶ And in this yere was ſo grete a drought / y• from the moneth of Marche to the moneth of July there fel no rayne on the erth / wherfore all fruytes / ſedes & herbes for y• mooſt part were loſt in defaute / wherfore came ſo grete dyſeaſe of men & beeſtes & derth of vitayles in englonde / ſo y• this londe y• euer afore had bē plenteous had nede y• tyme to ſeke vitayles & refreſſhyng at other out yles & coū
                           trees. ¶ And in y• .xxix. yere of kyng Edward it was accorded / graūted & ſworne bytwene the kyng of Fraūce & kyng Edward of Englōde y• he ſhold haue agayn all his lōdes & lordſhyps y• longed to the duchy of Guyen of olde tyme / y• whiche had ben wtdrawen and wrong fully occupyed by diuers kynges of Fraūce before hand to haue & to holde to kȳg Edward & to his heyres & ſucceſſours for euermo re / frely / peaſybly & in good qu
                              •
                           ete vpon this couenaūt that the kyng of Englōde ſholde leue of & releſe all his ryght & day me that he had claymed of y• kingdom of Fraunce / & of the tytell y• he toke therof vpon whiche ſpeche and couenaūtes is was ſent to the courte of Rome on botheſydes of y• kynges / that y• foreſayd couenaūt ſholde be embulled / but god erdeyned better for y• kynges worſhyp of Englonde / for what through fraude & deceyt of y• frenſſhmē / & what through lettyng of y• pope & of y• court of Rome y• foreſayd couenaūtes were diſquat & lefte of. And in the ſame yere y• kynge reuoked by his wyſe and dyſcrete coūſeyle the ſtaple of wolles out of Flaūdres in to Englōde wt al y• libertees fraūchiſes & free cuſtomes that longed therto / & ordeyned it in Englōde in dyuers places / that is to ſaye at Weſtminſter / Caūterbury / Chicheſtre / Bryſtow / Lyncolne & Null With all the foreſayd thynges y• longe therto. And y• this thȳge y• 
                           ſhold thus be done y• kyng ſwore hȳſelfe therto / & prynce Edward his ſone / wt other many grete witneſſes y• there were p̄ſent. ¶ And y• .xxx. yete of

his regne anone after whytſontyde in y• parlyament ordeyned at Weſtmynſter it was tolde & certifyed to y• kyng y• Philip that helde the kyngdom of Fraūce was deed / & that John his ſone was crowned king / & that this John had gyuē karoll his ſone y• duchy of Guyen / of y• whiche thȳge whan kyng Edward wyſt therof he had grete indignacion to hym & was wonders wroth & ſtrongly meued. And therfore afore al y• worthy lordes y• were there aſſembled at y• parliamēt he called Edward his ſone vnto hym / to whom y• duchy of Guyen by right herytage ſhold longe to / & gaue it hȳ there / byddynge & ſtrengthyng hym y• he ſholde ordeyn hȳ for to defend hym / & auenge hym on his enemyes / & ſaue & maynteyn his ryght And afterward kyng Edward hymſelfe & his eldeſt ſone Edward went to diuers places & ſayntes in Englond on pylgrymage for to haue y• more helpe & grace of god & of his ſayntes. And y• ſeconde kae. of July whan all thynge was redy to y• viage & batayl / & al his retynue & power aſſembled / & his nauy alſo redy / he toke with hym y• erle of Warwyk / the erle of Suffolk / the erle of Salyſbury / & y• erle of Oxford / and a. M. men of armes & as many archers / & on y• Natiuite of our lady toke theyr ſhyppes at Plommouth & began to ſayle. And whan he was arry ued in Guyen / he was there worſhypfully receyued of the mooſt noble men & lordes of y• coūtre. And anone after kyng Edward toke wt him his two ſones / y• is to ſaye / ſyr Leonell erle of Vlton / and ſyr John his broder erle of Rychemonde / & ſyr Henry duke of Lancaſtre / with many erles & lordes & men of armes / & two M. archers / & ſayled towarde Fraūce / & reſted hym a whyle at Calays / & afterwarde the kyng went wt his folke afore ſaid & wt other ſoudyours of beyonde the ſee that there abode y• kynges comynge the ſeconde day of Nouember & toke his iourney toward kynge John of Fraūce there as he had trowed to haue founde hym faſt by Ddomarū as his lettres & couenaūt made mencyon that he wolde abyde hym there wt his hooſt. And whā
                           kyng John of Fraūce herd tell of the comynge of y• kyng of Englonde / he went away wt his men & caryage cowardly & ſhamefully fleynge & waſtynge all vytayles y• englyſſhmē ſhold not haue ther of. Whan kynge Edward herde tell y• he fled / he purſued hym wt all his hooſt tyll Hedyn / & than he beholdynge y• ſcarſete & wantynge of vitayles & alſo y• cowardyſe of the kynge of Fraūce / he returned agayn waſtynge all the coūtree. ¶ And whyle all theſe thynges were a doynge the Scottes pryucly & by night toke the towne of Barwyck / ſleynge them that with ſtode them & no man els / but blyſſed be god the caſtell was ſaued & kepte by englyſſhmen y• were therin. Whan y• kyng wyſt of al this / he returned agayn in to Englōd as wroth as he myght be / wherfore in y• parlyament at Weſtmynſter was graūted to the kynge of euery ſacke of wolle .l. ſhyllynges durynge the terme of .vi. yere / y• he myght y• myghte lyer fyght & defende the realme agaynſt the Scottes & other myſdoers. And ſo whan all thynges were redy the kynge haſted hym towarde the ſyege.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Edwarde was crowned kyng of Scotlōde / & how prȳce Edward toke y• kynge of Fraūce & ſyr Philyp his yonger ſone at the batayle of Poytiers.
                        ANd in the .xxxi. yere of his regne the .xiii. daye Janyuer the king beynge in the caſtell of Barwyk with a fewe men / but he hauynge there faſt by a grete hooſt and a goodly / the towne was yelden vnto hym without ony maner

defence of 
                              〈…〉
                            an the kyng of Scotlande / y• is to ſay ſyr Iohn Ba
                              •
                            loll coſydecynge how y• go
                              •
                            dyd many me
                              •
                           uayles & gracyous thynges for kyng Edward at his own wyll fro day to day he toke gaue vp y• realme of Scotlond at kilburgh in the kynges handes of Englond vnder his paten
                              •
                            lettres there madt. And anone after king Edward in preſence of all y• prelates & worthy men y• were there letcrowne by kyng of Scotlond. Whan all thyges were done & ordeyned mȳ coūire at his wyll / he returned agayn in to Englonde wt a grete worſhyp. And whyle this v
                              •
                           age was a doynge in Scottonde ſyr Edward prȳce of wales as a man enſpiced of god was in Guyen in y• cite of Burdeux tretyng & ſpeking of y• chalenge of y• kynges right of Englōde y• he had to y• realme of Fraū
                           ce / & that he wold be aueſtged wt ſtronge hande / & y• prelates peres & mighty men of y• coūtree cōſented well to hym. Than ſyr Edward y• prynce with a grete h
                              〈…〉
                            gadred to hȳ the .vj. daye of Jui y• went from Burdeux goynge & trauaylyng by many dyuers coūtrees / & he 
                              •
                           oke many pryſoners moo than .vj. thoſande men of armes by y• coūtre as he went / & toke the towne of Remorant in Saloygne and deſyeged the caſtell. vj dayes / & at y• vj. dayes ende they yelded y• caſtell vnto hym. And there was taken the lorde of Crowne & ſyr Burſigaud & many other knyghtes & men of armes mo than. ixxx And frothens by Toren & Peten faſt by Cheney his noble men y• were wt hȳ had aſtronge batayle wt frenſſhmen / & an C. of theyr men of armes were ſlayn / & the erſe of Daunce & the ſtewarde of Fraūce were taken with an .C. Men of armes. In y• whiche yere the xix. dayd of September faſt by Poyners 
                              •
                           he ſome pryce with a thouſande xxx. 
                              〈◊〉
                            of armes and archers ordeyned a 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            John of Feaūce comynge to the prynce warde with .vij. M. thoſen men of armes & moche other people a grete nombre / of the whiche there were ſlayne the duke of Burbon & the duke of Athenes / and many other noble men. And of the prynces mē of armes a. M. and of other the true accompte & rekenynge. viij .C. And y• kyng of Fraūce was there taken and ſyr Philip his yonger ſone / & many dukes & noble men & worthy knyghtes and men of armes aboute .ii. M. And ſo the victory fell to the prynce & to the people of Englond by the grace of god. And many that were taken pryſoners were ſet at theyr tauſom & vpon theyr trouth and knyghthode were charged and had leue to go. But y• prynce toke with hym the kyng of Fraūce and Philip his ſone with all the reuerence that he myght / & went agayne to Burdeux wt a gloryous vyctory. The ſomme of the men y• there were taken pryſoners / and of them that were ſlayne the day of batayle was .iiii. M. iiij .C. & .xi. ¶ And in the. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . vere of kynge Edward / the .v. daye of Maye Fraūce Edwarde with kynge John of Fraūce & Philyp his ſone & many other worthy priſoners aryued gratyouſly in the hauen of Plūmouth / and the .xxiiii. daye of the ſame moueth about thre of y• clock at after none they came to London by Londōbrydge / & ſo went forth to the kynges palays at Weſtmynſter / & there came ſo greie a multitude & prees of people about them to be holde & ſe y• wonder & ryall ſight y• vnnethes fromydday tyll nyght myght they come to weſtminſter And the kynges raſiſom of Fraūce was taxed & ſet to thre myllyons of ſcutes of whome two ſhold be worth a noble. And ye ſhall vnderſtande that a myllyon is a thouſande thouſand. And after ſome in m
                              •
                           
                           lj is 
                              •
                           aun
                              •
                           om was ſet at thre thouſande thouſande floryns / and all is one effected

And this ſame yere were made ſolēpne Iuſtes in ſmyth felde / beynge there preſent y• kyng of Englōde / y• kyng of Fraū
                           ce / & y• kyng of Scotlonde / & many other worthy and noble lordes. ¶ The .xxxiij. yere of the regne of kynge Edwarde at Wyndſore as well for loue of knyghthode as for his owne worſhyp / & at y• reuerence of the kyng of Fraūce and of other lordes y• were there at y• tyme he helde a wonders ryall and a coſtly feeſt of ſaynt George / paſſyng ony y• euer was holden afore. Wherfore y• kyng of Fraūce in ſcor nynge ſayd y• he ſawe neuer ne herde ſu che ſolempne feeſtes ne ryaltees holden ne done wt tayles wout payenge of golde or ſyluer. ¶ And in y• .xxxiiij. yere of his regne the .xiiij. kal. of Iuly ſyr Iohn erle of Rychemonde kynge Edwardes ſone wedded dame Blaunche duke Henryes doughter of Lancaſtre / coſyn to y• ſame Iohn by diſpenſacyon of the pope / & in y• meane tyme were ordeyned Iuſtes at London .iij. dayes of Rogacyons / y• is to ſaye / the Mayre of London wt his. xxiiii aldermen / agaynſt all y• wolde come / in whoſe name & ſtede y• king priuely with his .iiij. ſones Edwarde / Leonell / Iohn & Edmond & other .xix. grete lordes held the felde wt worſhyp. ¶ And this ſame yere as it was tolde & ſayd of them that ſawe it / there came blode out of y• tombe of Thomas ſomtyme erle of Lancaſtre as freſſhe as that daye y• he was done to deth. And in y• ſame yere kyng Edward thoſe his ſepulture and his lyggynge at Weſtmynſter faſt by the ſhryne of ſaynt Edward. And anone after y• .xxvij. daye of October he went ouer ſee to Calays / makynge proteſtacyon y• he wold neuer come agayn īto Englōde tyll he had full ended y• warre bytwene Fraūce & hym. And ſo in the .xxxvi. yere of his regne in the wynter tyme kyng Edward trauay led in the tyne coſtes / & about ſaynt Hylary tyde he departed his 
                              •
                           ooſt & wente to Burgoynward / wt wh
                              〈…〉
                            than met
                              〈…〉
                            peaſybly the duke of Burgoyn / be hygh tyng hym .lxx. 
                              〈…〉
                            
                           ſhold ſpare his men & his people. And y• kyng graunted at his requeſt / & dwelled there vnto the .xvij. daye of Marche / the whiche tyme came to kyng Edwardes ere y• ſtrōge theues were on y• ſee vnder y• erle of ſaynt Paule the .xv. daye of Marche layenge awayte vpon y• townes of Haſtyng / Rye / & other places & villages on the ſee coſte had entred as enemyes into the towne of Wynch elſe & ſlewe all that euer wtſtode them & with
                              ••
                           yd theyr comyng / wherfore the kyng was gretely meued & angred / & he turned agayn towarde Parys / & cōmaūded his hooſt to deſtroye & ſlee wt ſtroke of ſwerde them y• he had before ſpared. And the .xij. day of Apryll y• kynge came to Parys / & there departed his hooſt i dyuers batayles wt iiij .C. knyghtes newe dubbed on y• one ſyde of him. And ſyr Henry duke of Lan caſtre vnderpeas & trewſe went to y• ga tes of y• cite / proferyng them y• wolde abyde a batayle in y• felde vnder ſuche cō
                           dicions y• yf y• 
                           
                              〈…〉
                           ng of Englōd were ouer comē there (as god forbede it ſhold) that thā he ſhold neuer chalenge y• kyngdom of Fraūce. And there he had of them but ſhorte & ſcorneful anſwere / & came & told it to the kyng & his lordes what he had herde & what they ſayd. And than went forth the newe knyghtes wt many other making aſſaut to y• cite & they deſtroyed the ſubba
                              •
                           hes of y• cite. And whyle thoſe thynges were in doynge y• Englyſſhmē made thē redy to be auenged on y• ſhame & deſpite y• was done y• yere at winchelſe & ordeined 
                              〈…〉
                           y of .lxxx. ſhyppes of mē of London & of other marchaūtes & xiiij M. men of armes & archers and went & ſerched and 
                              〈…〉
                           mmed the ſee / and manly they toke & helde the yle of Cau
                              •
                           . Whe
                              〈…〉
                           
                           
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            gand 
                              〈…〉
                            many other men of y• ſame coūtre by the 
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                            for theyr ſee coſtes▪ And y• king graūted them. And on y• morowe after y• 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            of ceſter y• kynge 
                              〈◊〉
                            ned hym to his hooſt towarde Orly
                              〈…〉
                            deſtroyenge & waſtyng all y• coūtre by y• way / & as they went thyderward there fel on them ſuche a 
                              〈◊〉
                            tēpeſt y• none of our n
                              ••
                            you neuer herde 
                              〈…〉
                            ſuche / through y• whiche 
                              〈…〉
                            of our men & theyr horſes 
                              ••
                           theyr 
                              〈…〉
                            as it were through 
                              〈…〉
                            were ſlayn & peryſſhed 
                              〈…〉
                            were full grete / 
                              〈…〉
                            y• kyng not moche of his people / but went forth on theyr viage y• they had begon / wherfore about y• feeſt of Philip & Iacob in May faſt by Carnoen̄ y• foreſayd lordes of 
                              〈◊〉
                            ce metynge there wt the king of Englōde a peaſyble accorde & a 
                              〈…〉
                            certayn cōdicyons & graūtes 
                              〈◊〉
                            gadr
                              〈…〉
                            and wryten togyder 
                              〈◊〉
                            to laſt but diſcretly made / & to bothe y• 
                           
                              •
                           ynges 
                              〈◊〉
                            table & to theyr realms / bothe 
                              〈…〉
                            ſent of Charles 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            gouernour of Fraūce & Parys of 
                              〈…〉
                            writen & 
                              〈…〉
                            the .xv. daye of May they 
                              ••
                           ffred & 
                              〈◊〉
                            to the kyng of Englonde / requyryng his grace in all thynges wryten y• he wolde 
                              〈…〉
                            them / & holde them fyrme & ſtable to them & to theyr heyres for euermore the
                              ••
                            forth. The whiche thynges & artycles whā kyng Edward had ſeen them / he graūt to them / ſo that both partyes ſhold be ſwor
                              ••
                            on goodes body & on y• goſpels y• the foreſayd couenaūt ſhold be ſtablyſſhed & ſo they accorded gracyoliſly. Therfore there were ordeyned & dreſſed on euery ſide 
                              〈◊〉
                            barōs twp baronets & two knyghtes to admyt & recoylle the othes of y• lorde Charles te gent of Fraūce / & of ſyr Edwarde y• fyrſt ſone & heyre of king Edward of Englōde And y• .x. daye of May there was ſongen a ſolem
                              •
                           ne maſſe at Parys / & after the thyrde Agnꝰ de
                              •
                            ſayd wt dona nobis pacē 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            preſence of y• foreſayd men y• were ordeyned to admytte & receyue y• othes & of all other y• there might be. Tho Charles layde his tyght hande on y• patent with goddes body: & his lyft hande on y• maſſe boke & ſayd. We N. ſwere on goddes bo dy & the holy goſpels y• we ſhall truly & ſtedfaſtly helde toward vs y• peas & y• ac corde made bytwene y• two kynges / & in no manes to do y• cōtrary / & there amōge all his lordes for more loue & ſtrength of wytnes he deled & departed the 
                              〈◊〉
                            of the crowne of Chryſt to y• knyghtes of englōde / & they curt
                              •
                           yſly toke theyr leue And y• fryday next y• ſame othe in ꝓſence of y• foreſayd knightes & of other worthy men prynce Edwarde made at Louers. Afterward doth kȳges & theyr ſones & 
                              〈◊〉
                            moſt noble men of bothe realmes / 
                              〈◊〉
                            y• ſame yere made y• ſame othe. And for to ſtrength all theſe thȳges aforeſayd / the kyng of Englonde ared y• greteſt men of Fraūce / & had his aſkyng / y• is to ſay .vj. dukes .viij. erles .xij. lordes all noble barōs & worthy knyghtes. And whā y• place & tyme was aſſigned in whiche bothe 
                              〈…〉
                            theyr coūſeyl ſhold come togider all y• foreſayd thȳges bytwene thē ſpoke for to ratify & make firme & ſtable / y• kȳg of englōde anone went toward y• ſee & at

Houn
                              •
                           let began to ſayle / leuynge to his hoſtes y• were lefte behynde hȳ bycauſe of his abſence moche heuynes. And after the .xix. daye of Maye he came in to Englōde / & went to his palays at Weſtmynſter on ſaynt Dunſtans daye / & the thyrde daye after he vyſyted Iohn the kyng of Fraūce that was in the toure of London / & delyuered hym frely from all maner of priſon / ſaue fyrſt they were accorded of .iij. millyons of floreyns for his raimſom / and the kynge cōforted hym & chered hym in all places with all ſolace & myrthes that longeth to a kyng in his goynge homewarde. ¶ And the .ix. daye of Iuly in y• ſame yere this ſame Iohn kynge of Fraūce y• afore laye here in hoſtage went home agayne in to his owne londe to treate of thoſe thinges & other y• longed & fallen to the gouernaūce of his realme. ¶ And afterward mette & came togyder at Calays bothe y• two kynges with bothe theyr coūſeyles about all h
                              •
                            lowen tyde / & there were ſhewed the con dicyons & the poyntes of the peas / & of y• accorde of bothe ſydes wryten / & there wtout ouy with ſayenge of bothe ſydes gracyouſly they were accorded / & there was done and ſongen a ſolempne maſſe And after the thyrde Agnus dei vpon goddes body & alſo vpon the maſſe boke bothe the kynges & theyr ſones and the greteſt lordes of both realmes & of theyr coūſeyles that there were preſent / & had not ſworne before the foreſayd othe that they had made & tytelled bytwene them they behyght to kepe and all other couenaūtes y• were bytwene them ordeyned. ¶ And in this ſame yere men / beeſtes / trees & houſes with ſodeyn tempeſt and ſtronge lyghtenynge were peryſſhed / & the deuyll appered bodyly in mannes ly kenes to moche people as they went in dyuers places in the countrees / & ſpake to them in that lykenes.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How the 
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                        
                        Bynge 
                              〈…〉
                            of his regne 
                              〈…〉
                            Chryſtin aſſe in the 
                              〈◊〉
                            of y• 
                           
                              〈…〉
                            ſaynt Paule h
                              •
                           lde his 
                              〈…〉
                            Weſtmynſter / in y• whiche parlyament was put forth & ſhewed y• accorde 
                              〈◊〉
                            y• treatys that was ſtablyſſhed & 
                              〈◊〉
                            bytwene the two kynges / whiche accorde, pleaſed to moche people / & therfore 
                              •
                           y y• kynges cōmaūdemēt there were 
                              〈◊〉
                            & come togyder in Weſtmynſter chirche y• fyrſt ſonday of le
                              •
                           t / that is to ſaye / the ſecond kal of February the foreſayd Englyſſhe men & Frenſſomen / where was ſonge a ſolempne maſſe of y• Crinite of the arche byſſhop of Caunterbury mayſter Symond Iſlepe. And whan Agnꝰ dei was done the king beynge there wt his ſones & alſo y• kynges ſones of Fraūce & other noble & grete lordes with candellyght & croſſes brought forth / & al that were not ſworne before / ſwore that ſame y• was wryten vpon goddes body & on y• maſſe boke in this wyſe. We N. and N. ſwere vpon goddes body & on y• holy goſpelles ſtedfaſtly to holde & kepe toward vs the peas & the accorde made bytwene y• two kynges & neuer for to do y• cōtrary. And whan they had thus ſworne / they toke theyr croſſes y• theyr othes were compre he
                              •
                           ded in to y• notaryes. And this ſame yere it fort
                              〈…〉
                            vpon the A
                              •
                           cēcyon euen about mydday was ſeen y• eclypſe of the 
                              〈◊〉
                            / & there folowed ſuche a drought / that for defaut of
                              •
                           ayne there was grete br
                              •
                           nnynge ofcor
                              •
                           e fruyte & 
                              〈◊〉
                           . ¶ And in the ſame moneth the .vj. 
                              〈◊〉
                            of Iune there fell a ſanguyne rayn
                              •
                            almooſt lyke blode at Burgoyne. And a ſanguyne croſſe from morow vnto pryme appered and was ſeen at Boloyn in the 
                              •
                           yre / the

whiche many men ſawe / & after it meued & fell in y• myddes of the ſee. ¶ And in the ſame tyme in Fraūce & Englonde & many other londes as they that were in playne coūtrees & deſert bare wytnes ſodeynly there appered two caſtels / of y• whiche wente out two hoſtes of armed men. And that one hooſt was clothed in whyte / & that other in blacke / & whan batayle bytwene them was begon / the whyte ouercame the blacke / & anone after the blacke toke herte to them & ouercame the whyte / & after that they went agayn i to theyr caſtels / & than y• caſtels & all the hooſt vanyſſhed awaye. ¶ And in the ſame yere there was a grete & an huge peſtilēce of people & namely of men whoſe wyues as women out of gouernaūce toke huſbādes as well ſtraūgers as other lewde & ſymple people / y• whiche forgetynge theyr honour & worſhyp & birth coupled & maried them wt them y• were of lowe degre & lytell reputacyon. ¶ In this ſame yere died Henry duke of Lancaſtre / & alſo in this yere Edwarde prynce of Wales wedded the coūteſſe of Kēt y• was ſyr Thomas wyfe of Holand the whiche was departed ſomtyme & de uorced fro y• erle of Salyſbury for cauſe of y• fals knyght. And about this tyme began & roſe a grete cōpany of diuers na cyōs gadred togider / whoſe leders were Englyſſhmen wtout ony heed / y• whiche dyd moche harme in y• party of Fraūce. And not longe after there aroſe an other cōpany of dyuers nacions / y• was called the whyte cōpany y• which in y• partyes of Lombardy dyd moche ſorowe. ¶ The ſame yere ſyr Iohn of Gaunt the ſone of king Edward y• thyrde was made duke of Lancaſtre by reaſon and cauſe of his wyfe that was the doughter & heyre of Henry ſomtyme duke of Lancaſtre.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the grete wynde / and how prynce Edwarde toke the lordſhyp of Guyen of his fader / and went thyder.
                        AAd in the .xxxvij. yere of kynge Edward the .xv. day of Ianyuer that is to ſaye / on ſaynt Mauryce daye about euenſongtyme there aroſe & came ſuche a wynde out of y• ſouth wt ſuche a fyerſnes & ſtrength that it braſt & blewe downe to y• groūde high houſes & ſtrōge buyldynges / toures / chirches & ſteples & other ſtronge places / & all other ſtrōge werkes y• ſtode ſtyll were ſhaken therwt that they ben yet & ſhall euermore be the febler & weyker whyle they ſtande. And this wynde laſted wtout ony 
                              ••
                           ſſyng. vu dayes cōtinually. And anone after there folowed ſuche water in hey tyme & in y• harueſt tyme that al felde werkes were gretly letted & left vndone. ¶ And in the ſame yere prynce Edwarde toke y• lordſhyp of Guyen / & dyd to kyng Edwarde his fader homage & fraute therof / & wēt ouer ſee in to Gaſcoyn with his wyfe & chyldren. ¶ And anone after kynge Edward made ſyr Leonell his ſone duke of Clarence / & ſyr Edmonde his other ſone erle of Cambrydge. ¶ And in y•. xxxvii
                              •
                           . yere of his regne it was ordeyned in the parlyament that men of lawe bothe of y• chirche & tēporall lawe ſholde fro y• tyme forth plete in theyr moder tongue. And in y• ſame yere came in to Englonde thre kynges / y• is to ſaye / y• kyng of Fraūce y• kyng of Cypres / & y• kyng of Sectionde bycauſe to viſyte & to ſpeke wt the kynge of Englonde. And after they had bē here lōge tyme / two of them went home in to theyr owne coūtrees & kyngdomes / but the kyng of Fraūce through grete ſekenes & malady that he had abode ſtyll in Englonde. ¶ And in y• .xxxix. yere of his regne was a ſtronge & grete froſt / & that laſted lōge / that is to ſaye fro ſay
                              ••
                            Andrewes tyde to the .xiiij. kal. of Apryll y•
                           
the tylthe & ſowynge of the erth & other ſuche felde werke & hande werkes were moche let & lefte vndone for colde & hardnes of y• erth. And at Drray in Brytayn was ordeyned a grete deedly batayle bytwene ſyr Iohn of Moūford duke of Britayn & ſyr Charles of Bloys / but y• victory fell to the foreſayd ſyr Iohn through helpe & ſocour of y• englyſſhmen / & there were taken many knightes & ſquyers & other men y• were vnnombred / in y• whiche batayle was ſlayne Charles hȳſelfe with all y• ſtode about hym / & of y• Englyſſhmen were ſlayne but .vii. ¶ And in this yere dyed at ye Sauoy Iohn y• king of Fraūce / whoſe ſeruyce and exequyes kynge Edwarde let ordeyn & dyd in dyuers places worſhypfully to be done / & at Douer ordeyned hym worthely to be ledde wt his owne coſtes & expences / & fro thens he was fet in to Fraūce / & buryed at ſaynt Denys. ¶ In y• .xl. yere of king Edwarde the .vij. kal. of Feueryer was borne Edward prynce Edwardes ſone / the whiche whā he was .vii. yere of age dyed. And in the ſame yere it was ordeyned y• ſaint Peters pens fro y• tyme forth ſholde not be payed / y• whiche kyng yuo ſomtyme kyng of Englōde of y• coūtre of weſtſaxons / y• began to regne the yere of our lord god .vi. C .lxxix. fyrſt graūted to Rome for y• ſcole of Englonde there to be cōtynued. ¶ And in this ſame yere fel ſo moche rayne in hey tyme ye it waſted & deſtroyed bothe corne & hey. And there was ſuche debate and fyghtyng of ſparowes by diuers places in theſe days / y• men foūde innumerable deed in y• feldes as they went. And there fell alſo ſuche a peſtylence / y• neuer was ſeen ſuche in no mannes dayes y• than lyued / for men ye went to bedde hole and ſoūde / ſodeynly they dyed. ¶ Alſo ye tyme a ſekenes that men call y• pockes ſlewe bothe men & women through theyr enfectyng. ¶ And in the .xli. yere of king Edward was borne at Burdeux Rychard the ſeconde ſone of prynce Edward of Englonde / y• whiche Rychard kynge Rycharde of Amorican heued at the fontſtone / after whome he was called Rychard. And this ſame Rychard whan his fader was deed & kyng Edward alſo / he was crowned kyng of Englond the .xl. yere of his age through right lyne & herytage / & alſo by y• comyn aſſent & deſyre of the comynalte of the realme. ¶ Aboute this tyme at kyng Edwardes cōmaūdemēt of Englōde whan all the caſtels & townes were yelded to hym y• were holden in Fraūce by a grete cōpany aſſembled togyder ſyr Bartram Claykyn a noble knyght & a good warryour went & purpoſed hȳ to put Piers kynge of Spayne out of his kyngdome with helpe of y• mooſt party of y• foreſaid grete cōpany / truſtynge alſo vpon helpe and fauour of y• pope / for as moche as it came to his ere y• the ſame Pyers ſholde lede & vſe a ſynfull lyfe / y• whiche Piers ſmyttē wt drede of theſe tydynges fledde in to Gaſcoyn to prynce Edwarde for to haue ſocour of hym. And whan he was fledde out of Spayne / Henry his broder that was a baſtard by aſſent of y• mooſt partye of Spayne / & through helpe of y• ferefull company y• I ſpake of fyrſt was crowned king of Spayne / & the nōbre of that ſame cōpany was rekened and ſet at the nombre of .lx. M. fyghtynge men. ¶ This ſame yere in y• moneth of Iune there came a grete company & a nauy of Danes / and gadred them togyder in the north ſee / purpoſyng to come in to Englonde to reue & robbe & alſo to ſlee with whome they encoūtred & mette in y• ſee. Maryners & other good fyghtyng men of the coūtre dyſperpled them. And they aſhamed went home agayne in to theyr owne coūtre / but amonge all other there was a buiſtous veſſel & a ſtrōge of theyr

nauy yt was ouerſayled by the Englyſſhmen & was peryſſhed & drowned / in the whiche ye ſtewarde & other grete men of Dēmarke were takē priſoners / & ye king of Englōde & his coūseyle priſoned them the whiche lordes ye Danes afterwarde came & ſought all about for to haue had them agayn wt theyr goodes yt they had loſt / & they not well ap
                              •
                           yed ne pleaſed of the anſwere yt they had there / returned home wardes agayn / leuynge behynde them in theyr Innes pryuely wryten in ſcrowes and on walles. Yet ſhal Danes waſte y• wanes. Than happed there an Englyſſhe wryter & wrote agaynſt the Dane in this maner. Here ſhall Danes fette theyr banes. ¶ This tyme Pyers kyng of Spayne wt other kinges / yt is to ſaye / the kyng of Nauerne & the kyng of Malog
                              ••
                            beynge meanes wēt bytwene & prayed couſeyle & helpe of ſyr Edward the prince / through whoſe coūſeyle whā he had vnderſtande theyr artycles & deſyre yt he was required of ye kynges / loth he was & aſhamed to ſaye nay & cōtrary them / but neuertheles he was agaſt leſt it ſhold be ony preiudyce agaynſt ye pope & longe tyme taryed them or yt he wolde graūt or cōſent therto / tyll he had better coūſeyle & auyſemēt wt good deliberacyō of kynge Edward his fader. But whan he was wt euery dayes & cōtynuall beſechyng of many noble men requyred and ſpokē to / & wt many prayers ſent & made bytwene them. Than prynce Edwarde ſent to his fader bothe by complaynyng lettres & alſo by cōfortable cōteynyng all theyr ſuggeſtions & cauſes wt all ye other kynges epyſtles & lettres for to haue cō
                           fort & helpe of ye wronges not onely done to ye kyng of Spayne but alſo for ſuche thynges as myght fall to other kynges Alſo yf it were not the ſooner holpen & amēded through ye dome & helpe of knight hode to them yt it aſ
                              •
                           ed & deſyred. The whiche lettre whā ye kyng & his coūſeyle had ſeen ſuche a kynges ſpoylyng & robbyng wt moche meruayle / & ſent agayne cōfortable lettres to prynce Edward his ſone & to ye other foreſayd kynges / & warned them to arme & ordeyne thē agaynſt that myſdoer / & to 
                              ••
                           ſtande them by the helpe of god that were ſuche enemyes to kynges. Whan this noble prynce had receyued theſe lettres hȳſelfe with ye other kynges before ſayd all theyr coūſeyle called togider or yt he wold vndertake ye quarel / he b
                              •
                           ſide & knytte fore ye kyng yt was depoſed wt a grete othe / yt is to ſaye / yt he ſhold euer after maynteyn the ryght byleue & fayth of holy chirche / wt all theyr mynyſtres ryghtes & lybertees to defende frō all theyr enemyes & all euyls / & al that were there agaynſt bytterly to punyſſhe & deſtrouble / & all ye ryghtes libertees preuyleges of holy chirche encreace & maynteyn / & amende all thynges yt be wrongfully taken 
                              〈…〉
                            & borne away by hym or by other bycauſe of hym haſtely to reſtore agayn / & to dryue & put out ſ
                              •••
                           ſyns & all other 
                              〈◊〉
                            people out of his kyngdom wt al his ſtrēgth & power / & ſuffre 
                              〈◊〉
                            admytte none ſuche for no maner thȳge ne cauſe to dwel therin▪ 
                           
                              •
                           nd yt whan he had takē a chriſ
                              ••
                            womā he ſhold neuer come in to none other womans bedd
                              •
                            / ne none other mannes wyfe to defoule. All theſe foreſayd thynges truly to kepe cōtynue & fulfyll as all his lyftyme he was boūde by othe afore 
                              〈◊〉
                            / in preſ
                              •
                           nce & wytnes of thoſe kynges wt other dry
                              •
                           e
                              •
                           s. And than that gracyous prince Edwarde vndertoke ye cauſe & the quarel of ye kyng yt was depoſed / & behyght hym with the grace of almighty god to reſtore hym agayn to his kyngdome / & let ordeyn & gadre togyder forthwt in all haſte his nauy wt men of armes for to warre & fyght in his foreſaid cauſe. ¶ And in this tyme vpon ſand of

the ſcottes ſee that many a man it ſawe thre dayes togyder there were ſeen two Egles / of the whiche y• one came out of y• ſouth / & y• other out of y• north / & cruelly & ſtrongly they fought & wraſtled togyder / & the ſouth Egle fyrſt ouercame the north Egle & al to rent hym wt his byll & his clawes that he ſhold not reſt ne take no breth. And after the ſouth Egle ſlewe home to his own coſtes. And anone after there folowed & was ſeen on the morowe afore y• ſonne ryſyng & after in y• laſt day of October ſaue one daye many ſterres gadred togyder on a
                              〈…〉
                           epe fell down to y• erth / leuynge behynde them fyry bemes in maner of lightnynge / whoſe flambes brent & cōſumed mennes clothes & mennes heere walkyng on y• erth as it was ſeen & knowen of many a mā. And yet y• northeren wynde y• is euer redy & deſtynate to all yll fro ſaynt Katherynes euen tyll .iij. dayes after loſt grete good wtout nōbre vnrecouerable. And i y• ſame days there fell & came alſo ſuche lyghtnynge thonder / ſnowe & hayle / that it waſted & deſtroyed men / beeſtes / houſes & trees.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the batayle of Spayne beſyde the water of Nazers ye was bytwene prince Edward & ſyr Henry baſtard of ſpayne.
                        IN the yere of our lord a. M. CCC lxvij. & of kynge Edward .xlij. the thyrde day of Apryll there was a ſtrōge batayle & a grete in a large felde called Priazers faſt by the water of Nazers in Spayne bytwene ſyr Edward y• prynce & ſyr Henry of Spayne / but the vyctory fell to prynce Edward by y• grate of god. And this ſame prynce Edwarde had wt hym ſyr Iohn duke of Lācaſtre his broder / and other worthy men of armes about the nombre of .xxx. M. And y• kyng of Spayne had on his ſyde men of dyuers nacyons to y• nombre of an hondred thouſande & moo / wherfore the ſharpenes and fyerſnes of his aduerſary with his full buyſtous & grete ſtrength made and droue the ryghtfull party abacke a grete waye / but through y• grace of god almyghty paſſyng ony manes ſtrength that grete hooſt was diſparpled myght fully by y• noble duke of Lancaſtre & his booſt or that prince Edward came nygh hym. And whan Henry baſtarde ſawe that / he turned with his men in ſo grete haſte & ſtrength to flee / that a grete company of them in the foreſayd flode and of the brydge therof fell downe and peryſſhed. And alſo there were taken the erle of Dene and ſyr Bartram Cleykyn that was chefe maker & cauſer of the warre and alſo cheftayne of the vauntward of the batayle with many other grete lordes and knyghtes to the nombre of two thouſande / of whome two hondred were of Fraūce / & many alſo of Scotlōde. And there were felled in the felde on our enemyes ſyde of lordes and knyghtes with other people to the nombre of vi. M. and moo / and of Englyſſhe men but a fewe. And after this y• noble prynce Edwarde reſtored y• ſame Pyers to his kyngdom agayne / the whiche Pyers afterwarde through trechery & falſnes of y• foreſayd baſtard of ſpayne as he ſate at his meet he was ſtrangled & dyed. But after this vyctory many noble and hardy men of Englonde in Spayne through the fluxe and dyuers other ſekeneſſes toke theyr deth. ¶ And alſo in the ſame yere in the Marche was ſeen ſtella cometa bitwene the north coſtes and the weſt / whoſe bemes ſtretched toward Fraūce. ¶ And in the nexte yere folowynge of kynge Edwardes regne .xliii. in Apryl ſyr Leonel kyng Edwardes ſone that was duke of Clarence went toward Myleyn with a choſen meyny of y• gentyls of Englonde for to wedde Galois doughter and haue

her to his wyfe / by whom he ſhold haue halfe y• lordſhyp of Myleyn. But after y• they were ſolemply wedded / & aboute y• natiuite of our lady y• ſame duke of Myleyn dyed. And in y• ſame yere y• frenſſhe men brake y• peas & trewſe rydyng on y• kynges groūde & lordſhyp of Englonde in the ſhyre & coūtre of Poūtyfe / & toke & helde caſtels & townes: & bare y• englyſſh men on honde falſly & ſubtylly that they were cauſe of brekyng of y• trewſe. And in this yere dyed y• ducheſſe of Lācaſtre / and is buryed in ſaynt Paules chirche. ¶ The .xliiii. yere of y• regne of kyng Edward was the greteſt peſtylence of men & of grete beeſtes / & by y• grete fallyng of waters y• fell at y• tyme / there fell grete hyndrynge & deſtroyenge of corne / in ſo moche y• the nexte yere after a buſſhell of whete was ſolde for .xl. pens. And in the ſame yere about y• laſt ende of Maye the king held his parliamēt at Weſtminſtre in whiche parliamēt was ſpoken of the othe & trewſe y• was broken bytwene hȳ & the kynge of Fraūce / & how he myght beſt be auenged vpon his wronge. In y• ſame yere on y• Aſſumpcyon of our lady dyed quene Philip of englōde a ful noble lady & a good woman / & at weſtmynſter worſhipfully is buryed. And about myd ſomer the duke of Lancaſtre & the erle of Herford wt a grete company of knightes wēt in to Fraūce where they gate them but lytel worſhip / for there was a grete hooſt of the Frenſſhmen vpon Calkhull brydge / & an other hooſt of englyſſhmen faſt by y• ſame brydge y• longe tyme had lyued there / & many worthy & grete men of the englyſſhmen ordeyned & gaue coū
                           ſeyle for to fight and gyue batayle to the frenſſhmen / but y• foreſayd lordes wold not conſent therto for no maner thynge. ¶ Anone after it happed that the erle of warwik came thyderward for to warre And whan y• frenſſhmen herde of his coming / or that he came fully to londe they left theyr tentes 
                              〈◊〉
                            pauylyons wt at theyr vitayles & fled pryuely away. And whā the erle was comen to londe wt his men he went in all haſte toward Normandy & deſtroyed y• yle of Caux wt ſtrengthe of ſwerde & through fyre. But alas ī his returnynge to Englond agayn at Calays he was taken wt ſekenes of peſt 
                              〈◊〉
                            & dyed / not leuyng behynde him after his dayes ſo noble a knyght of armes. In whiche tyme regned & warred the noble knyght ſyr Iohn Hawkewod y• was an englyſſhman borne / hauynge wt hym at his gouernaunce y• whyte cōpany afore ſayd / the whiche one tyme agaynſt holy chirche / & an other tyme agaynſt lordes warred & ordeyned grete batayles & 
                              〈◊〉
                            re in the ſame coūtre he dyd many meruaylous thȳges. ¶ And aboute y• 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            ſyon of ſaynt Paule y• kyng whā 
                           
                              •
                           e had ended & done y• enterynge & 
                              〈…〉
                            grete coſtes & rialtees about y• ſepul
                              〈…〉
                            and buryenge of quene Philip his wyfe he helde a parliamēt at weſtmynſter in whiche parliamēt was aſked of y• 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            a thre yeres dyme / y• is to ſay / a g
                              〈…〉
                            me to be payed .iii. yere duryng. And the clergy put it of & wolde not graūt it vnto Eſter next comyng / & than they graūted wel y• in .iii. yere by certayn termes that dyme ſholde be payed / & alſo of y• lay 
                              〈◊〉
                            was a .iii. yeres .xv. graūted to y• kyng.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How ſyr Robert Knolles wt other certayne lordes of the realme went ouer ſe
                              •
                            in to Fraūce / & of theyr gouernaūce.
                        ANd in the .xlv. yere of kyng Edward in y• begynnynge he w
                              ••
                           h vnwyſe coūſeyle & vndiſcrete borowed a grete ſome of golde of y• prelates lordes / marchaūtes & other ryche men of his realme / ſayenge y• it ſhold be ſpent in defendyng of holy chirche & of his realme. Neuertheles it pfyted no thynge / wherfore

about mydſomer after he made a grete hooſt of the worthieſt men of his realme amonge whome were ſome lordes / ye is to ſaye / the lorde Fitz water / & the lorde Graunſon / & other worthy knyghtes / of whiche knightes the kyng ordeyned ſyr Robert Knolles a proued knyght & well aſſaied in dedes of armes for to be gouernour / and that through his coūſeyle all thynge ſhold be gouerned & dreſſed. And whā they came in to Fraūce / as lōge as they dwelled & helde them hole togyder the frenſſhmen durſt not fall vpon them And at ye laſt about ye begȳuynge of wynter for enuy & couetyſe that was amōge them & alſo diſcord / they ſondred them & parted in to dyuers cōpanyes vnwyſely & foliſſhly. But ſyr Robert Knolles & his men went & kepte them ſafe wtin a caſtel in Brytayn. And whan the frenſſhmen ſawe yt our men were deuyded in to dyuers cōpanyes & places / not holdyng ne ſtrēgthyng them togider as they ought to do / they fell fyerſly on our men / & for ye mooſt party toke them or ſlewe them / & thoſe yt they myght take led wt them pryſoners. ¶ And in ye ſame yere pope Ʋrban came fro Rome to Auinyon bycauſe that he ſhold accorde and make peas bytwene ye kynge of Fraūce & the kynge of Englonde for euermore. But alas or he began his treatyſe he dyed wt ſekenes ye xxj. day of December / & was buryed as for ye tyme in ye cathedral chirche of Auin yon faſt by the hye awter. And the nexte yere after whā he had lyen ſo his bones were taken out of ye erth & buryed newe in ye abbey of ſaynt Ʋictory faſt by Mar cile / of ye whiche abbey he was ſomtyme abbot hymſelf. And in bothe places yt he was buryed in there be many grete myracles done & wrought through ye grace of god to many a mānes helpe & to ye worſhyp of almyghty god. ¶ After whome folowed next & was made pope Gregory cardynall deken / that before was called Piers Roger. ¶ In this ſame yere ye cite of Lymoge rebelled & faught agaynſt ye pryuce as other cytees dyd in Guyen for grete taxes / coſtages / & raūſoms yt they were put & ſet to by prȳce Edward / whiche charges were importable & chargeable / wherfore they turned fro hym & fel to ye kynge of Fraūce. And whan prynce Edward ſawe this: he was ſore chafed & greued / & in turnyng homeward agayn in to Englonde with ſore ſcarmyſſhes & fyghtyng & grete aſſautes fought with them / & toke ye foreſayd cite & deſtroyed it almooſt to ye groūde / & ſlewe al that were foūde in ye cite. And thā for to ſay ye ſothe for dyuers ſekenes & maladyes yt he had & alſo for defaute of money yt he myght not withſtande ne tary on his enemyes he hyed hym agayn in to Englōde wt his wyfe & meyny / leuyng behynde hym in Gaſcoyn the duke of Lancaſtre & ſyr Edmōd erle of Cambridge wt other worthy and noble men of armes. ¶ In the .xlvj. yere of kyng Edward at the ordinaūce & ſendyng of kynge Edward / the kyng of Nauerne came to hym to Claringdon to treate wt hym of certayne thynges touthynge his warre in Normandy / where kyng Edward had lefte certayn lyeges in his ſtedetyl he came agayn. But king Edward might not ſpede of that that he aſked hym. And ſo ye kynge of Nauerne with grete worſhyp & grete gyftes toke his leue & went home agayn. ¶ And about the begynnynge of Marche whan the parliamēt at Weſtmynſter was begon thē kynge aſked of the clergy a ſubſydy of .l. M. poūde / ye whiche by a good auyſement & by a generall conuocacyon of the clergy it was graūted & ordeyned that it ſhold be payed & reyſed of the lay fee. And in this parlyament at ye requeſt & aſkynge of the lordes in hatred of men of holy chirche / the chaunceler & the treſourer

that were byſſhops / & the clerke of the preuy ſeale were remeued and put out of theyr offyce / & in theyr ſtede were ſeculer men put in. And whyle this parlyament laſted there came ſolempne embaſſatours fro ye pope to treate with the kynge of peas / & ſayd yt the pope deſyred to fulfyll his predeceſſours wyll / but for all theyr comynge they ſpedde not.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the beſyegynge of Rochell / & how the erle of Penbroke & his cōpany was there taken in ye hauen wt Spanyardes and all his ſhyppes brent.
                        
                           
                              •
                           He .ix. daye of Iune kynge Edward in ye .xlvij. yere of his regne helde his parlyamēt at Wyncheſtre / & it laſted but .viij. dayes / to whiche parlyament were ſompned by wryte of men of holy chirche .iiij. byſſhops & .iiij. abbots wtout ony moo. This parlyament was holden for marchaūtes of Londō / of Nor wyche / and of other dyuers places in dyuers thȳges & poyntes of treaſon yt they were defamed of / yt is to ſaye / that they were rebell & wold aryſe agaynſt ye kyng ¶ This ſame yere ye duke of Lācaſtre & the erle of Cambrydge his broder came out of Gaſcoyne in to Englonde / & toke & wedded to theyr wyues Peters doughters ſomtyme kyng of Spayne / of whiche two doughters ye duke had yt elder / & the erle ye yonger. And yt ſame time there were ſent two cardynals fro ye pope / yt is to ſaye an Englyſſhe cardinall & a cardynall of Parys to treate of peas bytwene theſe two realmes / whiche whan they had ben bothe lōge eche in his ꝓuynce & coūtrees faſt by tretynge of the foreſayd peas / at y• laſt they toke wt them ye lettres of procuracy & went agayne to Rome wt
                           out ony effect of theyr purpoſe. In this yere there was a ſtrōge batayle on ye ſee bytwene Englyſſhmen & Flemynges / & the Engliſſhmen had the victory / & toke xxv. ſhyppes wt ſalte / & ſ
                              •
                           eynge & drownyng all ye men yt were therin vnwyting them yt they were of ye countree / & moche harme ſholde haue fallen therof had not peas & accorde ſoone be made bytwene them. ¶ This yere ye frenſſhmen beſyeged ye towne of Rochell / wherfore ye erle of Penbroke was ſent in to Gaſcoyn wt a grete cōpany of men of armes for to deſtroye ȳ ſyege which paſſed ye ſee & came ſafe to ye hauen of Rochell / & whan they were there at ye hauens mouth or yt they myght entre / ſodeynly came vpon them a ſtronge nauy of Spanyerdes whiche ouercame ye Englyſſhmen in moche blemyſſhynge / hurtyng & ſleynge of many people / for as moche as ye Englyſſhmen were not than redy for to fyght ne warned of thē. And as ye Spanyerdes came vpon them all the Englyſſhmen eyther they were takē or ſlayne / and. r. of them were ſore woūded to the doth
                              •
                            & al the
                              •
                           r ſhyppes brent / & there they toke ye erle wt a grete treſour of the realme of Eng
                              〈…〉
                            & many other noble men alſo on my
                              〈…〉
                            mer euen ye whiche is ſa
                              •
                           t Etheldredes day / & ledde them wt them in to Spayn
                              •
                            And of this myſchefe was no grete w
                              〈…〉
                            der / for this erle was a full 
                              〈◊〉
                            l
                              •
                           uer as an open lechour. And alſo in a certa
                              ••
                           e parlyament he ſtode & was agaynſt the ryghtes & fraūchyſes of holy chirche & alſo he coūſeyled ye kynge & his co
                              〈…〉
                            that they ſhold aſke more of men of holy chirche than other ꝑſones of the lay fee. And for the kynge and other men of his counſeyle accepted and toke rather euyll opynyons & cauſes agaynſt men of holy chirche than he dyd for to defende and maynteyne the ryght of holy chirche, 
                              •
                           t was after ſeen many tymes for lacke of fortune and grace they had not ſo grete victory ne power againſt theyr enemyes as they dyd before. ¶ This ſame yere ye kyng wt a grete hooſt entred the ſee to remeue

the ſyege of Rochell / but ye wynde was euer contrary to hym / & ſuffred hȳ not longe tyme to go ferre fro the londe / wherfore he abode a certayn tyme vpon ye ſee coſtes abyding after a good wynde & yet came it not. So at the laſt he came thens wt his men to lonoward agayn / & anone as he was on lōde ye wȳde turned & was in an other coſte thā it was afore.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How the duke of Lancaſtre wt a grete hooſt wente in to Flaundres & paſſed by Parys through Burgoyn and through all Fraūce tyll he came to Burdeux.
                        SOone after in the .xlviij. yere of ye regne of kyng Edward the duke of Lancaſtre wt a grete power went in to Flaūdres and paſſed by Parys through Burgoyn & through all Fraunce tyll he came to Burdeux wtout ony maner with ſtandyng of ye frenſſhmen / & he did them but lytel harme / ſaue he toke & raūſoned many places & townes & many men: & after let them go frely. ¶ The ſame yere ye kyng ſent certayne embaſſatours to the pope / prayenge hym yt he ſhold leue of & not medle in his courte of the kepynges & reſeruacyons of benefyces in Englōde & yt thoſe yt were choſen to byſſhops ſees & dignitees frely & with full myght ioye & haue & be confermed to ye ſame of theyr metropolytans & archebiſſhops as they were wont to be of olde tyme. Of theſe poyntes & of other touchyng ye kȳg & his realme / whā they had theyr anſwere of the pope / the pope enioyned them yt they ſhold certyfy hym agayn by theyr lettre of ye kynges wyll & of his realme or they determyned ought of ye foreſayd articles ¶ In this ſame yere dyed Iohn ye archebyſſhop of Yorke / Iohn byſſhop of Ely / William byſſhop of worceſtre / in whoſe ſtedes folowed & were made byſſhops by auctorite of ye pope / mayſter Alexander Neuyll to the archebyſſhopryche of Yorke / Thomas of Arundell to the byſſhopryche of Ely / & ſyr Henry wakefelde to ye byſſhopryche of worceſtre. In ye whiche tyme it was ordeyned in ye parlyament that all cathedrall chirches ſholde ioye & haue theyr eleccyons hole / & that ye kyng fro yt tyme afterwarde ſholde not wryte agaynſt them yt were choſen / but rather helpe them by his lettres to theyr cōfyrmacyon. This ſtatute dyd moche ꝓfyte And in this parliament was graūted to the kynge a dyme of the clergy & a .xv. of lay fee. ¶ In the .xlix. yere of kyng Edward dyed mayſter Willyam wytleſey archebyſſhop of Caunterbury / and the monkes of ye ſame chirche aſked & deſyred a Cardynall of Englonde to be archebyſſhop / & therfore ye king was agreued & purpoſed to haue exiled ye monkes of ye ſame hous. And they ſpent moche good or they myght haue the kynges grace & his loue agayn / but yet wold ye king not cōſent to theyr eleccyon of ye cardinall / ne of ye pope alſo ne his cardynals. ¶ And at ye begynnynge of Auguſt it was treated & ſpoken at Bruges of certayn poyntes & artycles hangyng bytwene ye pope & the kyng of Englonde / & this treatyſe laſted almooſt two yere. At yt laſt it was accorded bytwene them yt the pope fro ye tyme forth ſholde not vſe ne dele with ye reſeruacyons of benefyces in Englonde and that ye kyng ſholde not graūte ne let no benefyces by his wryte that is called Quare impedit. But as touchynge the eleccyon aboueſayd there was no thȳge touched ne done. And that was wyted & put vpon certayne clerkes the whiche rather ſuppoſed & hoped to be auaunced and promoted to byſſhopryches whiche they deſyred & coueyted by the courte of Rome rather thā by ony other eleccions. ¶ This ſame yere about Candelmaſſe there mette togyder at Bruges many

noble & worthy men of bothe ſydes & realmes to treate of peas bytwene the two kynges. And this treatyſe laſted .ij. yere wt grete coſtes & large expenſes of bothe partyes. And at ye laſt they went & departed thens wtout ony accord or effect. The nexte yere after the .l. yere of kynge Edward / the .iiij. non̄. of Maye beynge yet voyde & vacaunt ye archebyſſhopryche of Caūterbury mayſter Symond ſudbery byſſhop of London was made archebyſſhop: & mayſter William Courtney that was biſſhop of Herford was than made byſſhop of Londō / & ye biſſhop of Bangor was made byſſhop of Herford. And this ſame tyme in a certayne treatyſe & ſpekyng of peas trewſe was takē bytwene Englonde & Fraūce fro mydſomer to the nexte mydſomer after. And aboute ye begynnynge of Apryll ye duke of Brytayne wt many erles / barons & worthy lordes & men of Englonde went ouer ſee in to Britayne where he had all his luſt / deſyre & purpoſe ne had ye foreſayd trewſe ben ſo ſoone takē whiche letted them. ¶ This ſame tyme ye yle of Cōſtantyne where yt the caſtel of ſaȳt Sauyour is in / yt longe tyme was fought at / & beſyeged of the frenſſhmen was than yolden to them wt all the appertenaūces / to grete harme & hyndrynge of ye realme of Englond. And this ſame yere there were ſo grete & ſo paſſyng betes & therwtall a grete peſtylence in Englonde & in other dyuers partyes of the worlde yt it deſtroyed & ſewe violently & ſtrongly bothe men & womē wtout nōbre. ¶ This ſame yere dyed ſyr Edward ȳ lord ſpencer a worthy knight & a bolde / & in ye mynſter of Teukeſbury worſhipfully is buryed. And laſtȳg this peſtilence ye pope at ye inſtaunce & prayer of an englyſſhe Cardynall graūted to all people yt dyed in Englonde yt were ſory & repentaūt for theyr ſynnes & alſo ſhryu
                              •
                            full remyſſyon by two bulles vnder lede vj. monethes thā next to laſt. ¶ In this ſame yere ye erle of Penbroke was taken and raūſoned by B
                              ••
                           t
                              •
                           am Claykyn bytwene Parys & Calays as he came toward Englond vpon ſaynt Etheldredes daye / the whiche ſaynt as it was ſaid ye erle oftentymes had offended / & within a lytell whyle after he dyed. And in Nouēber nexte after there mette at Bruges the duke of Lancaſtre & ye duke of Angeo with many other lordes and prelates of bothe realmes for to treate of peas.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the deth of prynce Edwarde / & of the lord Latimer and dame Alyce Pe
                              •
                           s through whom & her maynteyners the realme many a day was myſgouerned.
                        NOt lōge after the .lj. yere of kyng Edwardes regne he let ordeyn & holde at Weſtmynſter the greteſt parliament yt was ſeen many a yere afore. In the whiche parlyament he aſked of the comynalte of ye realme as he had done afore a grete ſubſidy to be graūted to him for defendyng of hym & his realme. But the comyns anſwered ye they were ſo of
                              •
                            day by day greued & charged wt ſo many talages & ſubſidyes yt they might no longer ſuffre ſuche burthens & charges / & ye they knewe & wyſt well ynough that ye kyng had ynough for ſauynge of hym & his realme / yf ye realme were wel & truly gouerned / but ye it had ben ſo longe 
                              〈…〉
                            gouerned by yll offyeers / that ye 
                           
                              •
                           ea
                              •
                           me myght neyther be plenteous of chafer & marchaūdyſe ne alſo wt rycheſſe. And in theſe thynges they profred themſelfe / yf the kynge wolde certaynly to pre
                              〈…〉
                            and ſtandeby. And yf it were foūde & preued afterwarde that ye kyng had nede / they wold gladly euery man after his power and ſtate hym helpe and l
                              •
                           ne. And after this were publyſſhed & ſhewed in ye parlyamēt many playntes and defa
                              ••
                           es of

dyuers officers of y• realme / & namely of the lorde Larimer the kynges chamberlayn bothe to y• kyng & oke to the realme And alſo at the laſt there was ſpoken & treated of dame Alyce Pers for the grete wrōges & euyll gouernaūce y• was done by her coūſeyle in y• realme / the whiche dame Alyce Pers the kynge had holden longe tyme to his lemman / wherfore it was the leſſe wonder though through y• fraylte of y• womans excityng & her ſterynge he cōſented to her lewdnes & euyll coūſeyle / the whiche dame Alyce & alſo y• lorde Larimer & other ſuche y• meued the kynge to euyll gouernaūce agaynſt his profyte & the realme alſo / al y• comynalte aſked & deſyred y• they ſhold be remeued & put away / & in theyr ſtedes wyſe men & worthy that were true & well aſſayed & proued / & of good gouernaūce ſhold be put in theyr ſtedes. So amonge al other there was one among the comyns that was a wyſe knight & true & an eloquent mā / whoſe name was Piers de la mare And this Piers was choſen to be ſpekee for the comyns in y• parlyament. And for this ſame Pyers tolde & publyſſhed the trouth & reherſed the wronges agaynſt the foreſayd dame Alyce & other certayn perſones of y• kȳges coūſeyle as he was bydden by the comyns / & alſo truſtynge moche to be ſupported & maynteyned in this mater by helpe & fauour of y• prynce anone as y• prynce was deed / at the inſtaūce & requeſt of y• foreſaid dame Alyce this Piers de la mare was iudged to perpetuall priſon in y• caſtel of Notyngham in y• whiche he was .ij. yere. And in y•. vj kal. of Iuly laſtyng y• ſame parlyament dyed prynce Edward kyng Edwardes fyrſt ſone / y• is to ſaye / on trinite ſondaye in worſhip of whiche feeſt he was wont euery yere where y• euer he were in the worlde to hold & make y• mooſt ſolēpnite that he myght / whoſe name & fortune of knyghthode (but yf it had bē of another Hector) all men bothe chryſten & hethen whyle y• he lyued & was in good poynt wondred moche & drad hȳ wonders ſore whoſe body is worſhypfully buryed in Chryſtchirche at Caūterbury. ¶ And in this ſame yere y• men & y• erles tenaūtes of warwik aroſe malycyouſly agaynſt y• abbot & couēt of Eueſham & theyr tenaū
                           ces / & deſtroyed y• abbey & y• town / & woū
                           ded & bet theyr mē & ſlewe many of them & went to theyr maner places & dyd moche harme / & brake downe theyr parkes & cloſes & ſlewe theyr wyld beeſtes & chaced them / brekyng theyr fyſſh pondes he des / & let y• water of theyr pōdes ſtewes & ryuers ren out & toke y• fyſſhe & bare it wt them / & dyd them all y• ſorowe y• they myght / ſo ferforth y• they had deſtroyed perpetually y• abbey wt al theyrmēbres & appertenaūces but yf the kyng y• ſooner had not holp
                              ••
                            it & taken hede therte / & therfore y• kyng ſent his lettres to y• erle of warwik / chatgyng & cōmaūdyng hȳ y• he ſholde ſiynt redreſſe & amende thoſe euyl boers & brekers of his peas / & ſo by meanes oflordes & other frendes y• peas was made bytwene them / & for this hur lyng as it was ſayd y• kyng wold not be gouerned at y• time by his lordes y• there were in y• parliamēt / but he toke & made his ſone the duke of Lācaſtre his gouernour of y• realme / the which ſtode ſo ſtyll as gouernour tyll y• tyme that he dyed. ¶ The ſame yere after Candelmas or y• parlyament was done the kyng aſked a ſubſydy of y• clergy & of y• lay le / & it was graūted hym / y• is to ſay y• he ſhold haue of euery perſone of y• lay le / bothe man & woman that paſſed .xiiij. yere of age. iiij pens / out take poore beggers that were knowen openly for nedy poore beggers. And that he ſhold haue of euery man of holy thirche y• was benefyced or promoted .xij. pens / & all other y• were not proted.

iiij. pens / out take the .iiij. ordres of the freres beggers. ¶ This ſame yere after Mighelmaſſe Rychard prynce Edwardes ſone was made prȳce of Wales to whome y• king gaue alſo the duchy of Cornewayle wt the erledome of Cheſtre. And aboute this tyme the Cardynall of Englonde the fourth daye before Mary Mawdeleyns daye after dyner ſodeinly was ſtryken wt a palſey & loſt his ſpeche and on Mary Mawdeleyns daye dyed.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the deth of kyng Edward / & how ſyr Iohn Monſterwarth knyght was drawen and hanged for his falſnes.
                        BYght anone after ī the .lij. yere of kyng Edward in the begȳnynge of October pōpe Gregory y• .xj. brought and remeued his courte with hym from Auinyon to Rome. ¶ And the .xij. day of Apryll Iohn Monſterwarth knyght at London was drawen & hanged & than quartred & ſent to foure chefe townes of Englōde / & his heed ſmittē of & ſet vpon Londō brydge. For this Iohn was full vntrue to y• kyng & to the realme & couetous & vnſtable / for he toke oftentymes grete ſōmes of money of the kyng & his counſeyle for men of armes wages that he ſholde haue payed them / & toke it to his owne vſe / & he drad that at y• laſt he ſhold be ſhent & accuſed for y• ſame cauſe & fledde pryuely to y• kynge of Fraūce / & was ſworne to hym & became his man and behyght hym a grete nauy out of Spayne to cōfuſyon and deſtroyenge of Englōde. But y• ryghtfull god to whom no preuite is vnknowen / ſuffred hȳ firſt to be ſhent & ſpylte or y• he ſo traytourſly & falſly betrayed his lyege lord y• king of Englonde & his people in his realme / in the which groūde this ſame Iohn was borne / & wyckedly through batayle deſtroyed or he brought aboute his curſed purpoſe. ¶ In y• feeſt of ſaynt Gregory nexte after kynge Edward gaue to Rycharde of Burdeux his heyre that was prynce Edwardes ſone at Wyndſore the ordre of knyghthode & made hȳ knyght / the whiche kyng Edward whan he had regned .lj. yere & more / y• .xj. kal. of Iune he dyed at Shene / & is buryed worſhyp fully at weſtmȳſter / on whoſe ſoule god haue mercy. This kyng Edward was forſothe of a paſſyng goodnes & full gracyous among all the worthy men of the world / for he paſſed & ſhone by vertue of grace gyuē to hym frō god aboue all his p̄deceſſours y• were noble men & worthy & he was a well herted man & an hardy for he drad neuer no myſhappes ne barmes ne euyl fortune y• myght fall a noble warryour & a fortunate / for both on lōde & ſee & in al batayles & aſſembles wt a paſſing glory & ioy he had y• victory / he was meke / benigne / homely / ſobre & ſoft to al men as wel to ſtrangers as to his owne ſubiectes & to other y• were vnder his gouernaūce / he was deuout & holy both to god & holy chirche / for he worſhipped holpe & maynteyned holy chirch & theyr myniſtres wt al maner reuerēce / he was tre table & well auyſed in rēporall & worldly nedes / wyſe ī coūſeyle / & diſcrece & meke to ſpeke wt / ī his dedes & maners gētyl & well taught / hauȳg pite on them y• were in diſeaſe / plenteous in gyuyng e
                              •
                            benefaytes & almes / beſy & curyous in buylding / & lyghtly he bare & ſuffred wrōges & harmes / & whan he was gyuē to ony occupacyō he left all other thynges for y• tyme & tended therto / ſemely of body & a mene ſtature / hauyng alway to hygh & to lowe a good chere. And there ſprōge & ſhone ſo moche grace of hym y• what mā had behold his face / or had dremed of hȳ he hoped y• daye y• al thynge ſhold hap to hym ioyfull & lykyng. And he gouerned his kingdom gloriouſly vnto his age / he was large in gyuyng & wyſe in expēces

he was fulfylled with al honeſte of good maners & vertues / vnder whom to lyue it was as for to regne / wherfore his fame & his loos ſpronge ſo ferre y• it came in to hethynneſſe & Barbary / ſhewynge & tellynge his worthynes & manhode in all londes / & y• no londe vnder heuen had brought forth ſo noble a kyng / ſo gentyll & ſo bliſſed / or might reyſe ſuche another whā he was deed. Neuertheles lechery & meuynge of his fleſſhe haūted hym in his age / wherfore the rather as it is to ſuppoſe for vumeſurable fulfyllynge of his luſt his lyfe ſhorted the ſooner. And hereof take good hede lyke as his dedes bereth wytnes / for as in his begȳnyng all thynges were Ioyfull and lykyng to hym & to all people. And in his myddle age he paſſed all people in hygh Ioye / worſhyp & blyſſednes. Ryght ſo whan he drewe in to age drawyng downward through lechery & other ſynnes lytell & lytell all thoſe Ioyfull & blyſſed thynges and proſperyte decreaſed & myſhapped / and unfortunate thynges and vnprofytable harmes with many euyls began for to ſprynge / and the more harme is / it contynued longe tyme after.
                        CLemens y• ſyxth was pope after Benedict .x. yere. This mā in name & dede was vertuous / & many thynges y• Benedict was rigous in / he made eaſy / & certeyn that he depryued he reſtored / & the rygouſnes of y• fayth of Benedict was laudable / but moche more laudable was y• mekenes of Clemēt. This man was a noble prechour / & many ſermōs he gadred / & let no man paſſe from hym but he gaue hym good coūſeyle / & deceſſed a bliſſed man. ¶ Karolus y• .iiij. was emperour after Lodewyk .xxxj. yere. This mā was kyng of Beme a wyſe man & a myghty / & this mā was choſen emperour by y• cōmaūdement of Clemēt Lodewyk beynge alyue in his contemacy / & bycauſe he aſked mekely the popes bleſſynge and to be crowned of hym / as other good kynges did / therfore he was protected of god / & preuayled ouer al his enemyes / & many fauourable lawes he made to ſpirytuall men / the whiche yet are called Karolma. At y• laſt he deceſſed a ryche mā in vertue & goodes. ¶ Inno centius the .vj. was pope after Clement x. yere / and he was a grete louer of relygyous men / & he foūded a monaſtery in Fraūce of y• ordre of Cartuſiens / & was a grete canonyſt. ¶ Vrbanꝰ the .v. was pope after Innocēt. This man was abbot of Miſſolens of y• ordre of ſaȳt Benet a doctour / & is takē for a ſaynt. He made the croſſe to be preched agaynſt y• turkes And he made a paſſage to y• turkes. And to hym ſaȳt Brigyt was ſent frō Chryſt for the cōfirmacyon of theyr rule / & than he was poyſoned & deceſſed. ¶ Gregory the .xj. was pope after hym .viij. yere. This Gregory dyd lytell / & after him folowed y• tribulacyon y• our lorde ſhewed to ſaynt Brigit for the ſynne of y• clergy. ¶ Wenſelans ſone to Karolus aforeſaid was emperour .xiiij. yere / and he was a chylde / and was choſen whan his fader was on lyue / but he toke no kepe of the empyre. And whā he was warned many tymes to take hede vnto it and wold not / he was depoſed. For he gaue all his delyte and luſt vnto lechery / & the ende was without honour / for he went gretly from the maners & the vertues of his noble fader. And he was crowned with the imperyall dyademe / & the wyſdome of his fader paſſed in to Sygyſmūd his broder / as after it ſhall appere. ¶ Vrbanus was pope after Gregory .vj. yere. This Vrban was choſen in the Cite of Rome by ſtrength of y• Romayns / but y• cardynals dyd that for drede & not wyllyngly / wherfore they fledde to y• Cite of

Fūdorū. And they ſayd that he was not pope / & choſe in his place ſyr Roberte of Gebennys the ſame yere / whiche was called Clement the .vij. ¶ Nota. ¶ And here began the .xxij. ſtryte in the chirche And it was more worſe than euer was ony other before. For it was ſo ſubtyll / y• the wyſeſt men that were & the beſt conſcyenced coude not diſcerne with whom it was beſt to ſaye and holde. And this ſtryfe dured .xl. yere wt a grete ſclaundre vnto al the clergy / and grete peryll vnto mennes ſoules for hereſyes & other euyl thȳges y• whiche were brought in than In ſo moche that there was no doctryne in the chirche for myſdoynge. And therfore from this Vrban the .vij. vnto Martyn I knowe not who was pope. The feeſt of the vyſytacyon of our lady was ordeyned by Vrban the .vj. after y• forme of the ſacrament of the awte
                              •
                            for a peas and an vnite for to be had amonge them through the merytes of our bliſſed lady. ¶ Bonifaciꝰ the .ix. was pope after Vrban .xv. yere. This Bonyface was choſen at Rome in the ſtede of Vrban / & the ſtryfe contynued / for Benedictus was choſen in Auinyon in y• place of Clement and was called Petrus deluna / and he duced to the coūſeyle of Conſtantyneys / and than he wolde not obey / but euer abode obſtynate. And at y• laſt he deceſſed in the kyngdome of Aragon. And he cō
                           inaūded his cardynals to choſe an other pope / the whiche they dyd anone. And they ſet vp an ydoll and named hym Clement / but they profyted not.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Circa amiū dn̄i. M .CCC .lxxx.
                        
                           ¶ And after kynge Edward the thyrde that was borne at wyndſore regned Rychard of Butdeux that was prynce Edwardes ſone of Wales / whiche prynce Edward was kynge Edwardes ſone.
                        
                        ANd after y• good kyng Edward the thyrde y• was borne at wynd ſore regned Rychard y• ſecond that was the good ſyr Edwardes ſone prynce of Wales / the whiche kyng Rychard was borne in the cite of Burdeux in Gaſcoyn and was crowned at Weſtmynſter in y• xj. yere of his age. And in y• ſeconde yere of his regne for y• debate y• was bytwene the lorde Latymer & ſyr Raufe Feryecs knyght that were agaynſt Hawell and Shakell ſquyers / for y• pryſoner y• was taken in Spayne by theſe two ſquyers / the whiche pryſoner the lord Latimer & ſyr Raufe Feryers wolde haue had / the whiche pryſoner was the erie of Dene that they toke in the batayle of Spayne wherfore theſe two lordes came in to the chirche at Weſtmynſtre / and foūde this one ſquyer heryng a maſſe beſyde ſaynt Edwardes ſhryne / and there they ſlewe hym the which was called Hawell / and Shakell was areſted & put in to y• toure of London / & there he was longe tyme for he wold not delyuer the crle of Dene his priſoner vnto theſe two lordes by ſyr Aleyn Buxhyll conſtable of the toure / & by ſyr Raufe Feriers one of his aduerſaryes / tyll the kynge had graunted hym grace. ¶ In the thyrde yere of kyng Rychard came the Galays of Fraunce in to Englonde vnto dyuers portes / & brent & robbed & ſlewe moche people of Englōde that is to ſaye / at Wynchelſee / Rye / and Haſtynges / Porteſmouth / Hāton / Scor more & Graueſend / and they dyd moche harme & went home agayne. ¶ And in this ſame yere was a parliamēt holden at Weſtmynſter / and at that ſame parlyament was ordeyned that euery man woman & chylde that were of the age of xiiij. yere and aboue throughout all the realme poore folke & other ſholde paye to the tallage .iiij. pens. Wherfore came & befell afterwarde grete myſchefe & mothe

diſeaſe to all the comynalte of the realme. ¶ And in the .iiij. yere of kyng Ry chardes regue ye comyns aroſe vp in dyuers partyes of the realme / & did moche harme / the whiche tyme they called the hurlyng tyme. And they of Kent and of Eſſex made them two chefetaynes for to rule & gouerue the company of Kent & of Eſſex / that one was called Iacke ſtrawe & that other Watte Tyler / & they came and aſſembled them vpon blacke heth in Kent. And on Corpus Chriſti daye after they came downe in to South werke / & brake vp the priſon hous / that is to ſaye the kynges benche & the Marchalſee / & delyuered out all the pryſoners. And ſo the ſame daye they came in to London & there they robbed the people / and ſlewe all the alyens that they myght fynde in the cite & aboute the cite / and deſpoyled all theyr goodes & made hauoke. And on the frydaye nexte folowynge that was in the mornynge they came to the toure of London / and the kyng beynge therin they fette out of ye toure the archebiſſhop of Caunterbury ſyr Edmond Sudbery and ſyr Robert Halys hoſpitaler pryour and mayſter of ſaynt Iohns hous / and a whyte frere that was confeſſour vnto kynge Rychard / & brought them to the toure hyll / and there they ſmote of theyr heedes / and came agayne to Londō and ſlewe moche people of the cite. And than they went vnto the dukes place of Lancaſtre beyonde ſaynt Mary of ye ſtronde that was called the Sauoy / and there they deuoured & deſtroyed al the goodes that they myght fynde therin / and bare them awaye / & than brent vp the place. And than afterward they went to ſaynt Iohns without Smythfelde and there they deſtroyed all the goodes and brent vp that hous. And after they wente to Weſtmynſter and to ſaint Martyns the graūde / and made them to go out of the ſentwary all that were within for ony maner of gylt. And than they came vnto the temple and to all the other Innes of men of lawe / & deſpoyled them & robbed them of theyr goodes / & alſo toke theyr bokes of lawe. And than they came to London & brake vp the pryſon of Newgate / & droue out all y• priſoners felons & other / and of bothe Counters & all y• people that were within them / & deſtroyed all the bokes of the Counters. And thus they cōtynued bothe ſaterday & ſondaye vnto the monday nexte after in all theyr malyce & wyckednes. And than on mon daye kynge Rychard with his lordes yt were wt hym yt tyme / & with the Mayre of London Wyllyam Walworth yt was that tyme came with the aldermen & the comyns of the Cite / and they came in to South werke to here & to knowe the intencion of theſe rebelles & myſgouerned people. And this Iacke ſtrawe than made a crye in the felde that all ye people of accorde ſholde come nere & here his clamours and his crye & his wyll. And the lordes & the Mayre & the aldermen with the comynalte hauynge indignacyon of his couetyſe & falſnes and his foule preſumpcyon. Anone Willyam Walworth that tyme beynge Mayre drewe out his knyfe & ſlewe Iacke ſtrawe / and anone ryght there ſmote of his heed / and ſet it vpon a ſpere / & ſo it was borne through Londō & ſet vpon Londō brydge. Anone theſe ryſers & myſgouerned men were clene vanyſſhed as it had not ben they. And than the kyng of his grete goodnes & by prayer of his lordes made there .vj. knyghtes of good & worthy men of ye cite of London / yt is to ſaye / Wyllyam Walwoorth at y• tyme Mayre & ſlewe Iacke ſtrawe y• ſecond was Nicolas Brembre and the thyrde Iohn Philipot / and the fourth Nicolas Twyford / and the fyfth Robert Laundes / and the ſy
                              •
                           th Robert

Gayton. And than the kynge wt his lordes & knyghtes returned agayne to the toure of London / & there he reſted hym tyll this people were better ſeced & ſet in reſt & peas. And than by ꝓceſſe of tyme as they might take & gete theſe rebelles & ryſers they henge them vpon the next galous through out euery lordſhyp in y• realme of Englond by .xl. & by .xxx. by .x. & by .xij. euer as they myght be goten & takē in ony partyes. ¶ And in y• .v. yere of kynge Rychardes regne was y• grete erth quake / & was generall throughout the worlde the wedneſdaye after whytſondaye in ye yere of our lorde. M .CCC .lxxxxj. wherfore all maner people were ſore agaſt & aferde longe tyme for drede of vengeaunce yt our lorde ſhewed & dyd. ¶ And in the .vi. yere of kynge Rychard ſyr Henry Spēſer byſſhop of Norwiche went with a Croiſerie ouer the ſee in to Flaundres / & there they gate y• towne of Grauenyng & the towne of Burburgh / Dūkerk & Newport / & there they laded & fraughted .lj. ſhyppes wt pyllage for to haue comen in to Englōde wt theſe ſhyppes & goodes. And ye byſſhop of Norwyche & his coūſeyle let bren theſe ſhyppes with all ye pyllage in ye ſame hauen in to harde aſſhes. And at Dūkerk was done a batayle bytwene the Flemynges & the Engliſſhmen. And at that batayle were ſalyne a grete multytude of Flemynges And than went the byſſhop with his retynue to ypers / and beſyeged it a longe tyme / but it myght not be goten / and ſo lefte that ſyege & came agayn in to Englonde. For our Englyſſhmen were fouly deſtroyed / & many dyed of y• flyx. ¶ And in this ſame yere came quene Anne in to Englonde for to be ſpouſed to kynge Rycharde. And her fader was emperour of Almayn & kyng of Beme. And with her came y• duke of Taſſy her vncle / & many other worthy lordes & knyghtes of her coūtre of Beme & of other duche tōgues to do her reuerence & worſhyp. And ſyr Symond Beuerle a worthy knight of y• garter & other knyghtes & ſquyers that were y• kynges embaſſadours brought her in to Englonde / & ſo forth to London And the people of the cite / that is to ſaye the Mayre & y• aldermen & all y• comyns rode agaynſt her to welcome her / & euery man in good araye / & euery crafte wt his mynſtralſy in the beſt maner mette with her on the blacke heth in Kent / & ſo brought her vnto London through y• cite / and ſo forth to Weſtmynſter vnto the kȳges palays. And there ſhe was ſpouſed vnto kyng Rychard well & worthely in the abbey of Weſtmynſter / and there ſhe was crowned quene of Englōd. And all her frendes that came with her had grete gyftes & were wel cheryſſhed and refreſſhed as longe tyme as they abode there. ¶ And in y• ſame yere there was a batayle done in the kynges pala
                              •
                           s at Weſtmȳſter for certayn poyntes of 
                              〈◊〉
                            ſon of ſir Iohn Anſley knight defendaūt and Carton ſquyer the appellaunt. But this ſir Iohn Anſley ouercame this Car ton / & made hym to yelde hym within y• lyſte. And anone was this Carton deſpoyled of his harneys & drawen out of y• lyſtes / & ſo forth to Tyburne & there he was hanged for his falſnes. ¶ And in y• viij. yere of the regne of kynge Rychard ſyr Edmonde of Langley erle of Cambrydge y• kynges vncle went in to Portyngale with a fayre company of men of armes and archers / in ſtrengthynge and helpynge the kynge of Portyngale agaynſt the kynge of Spayne and his power / & there the kynge of Portyngale had the victory of his enemyes through helpe and conforte of our Englyſſhmen. And whan the iourney was done y• erle of Cambrydge came home agayn with his people in to Englonde in haſte / blyſſed

be god & his blyſſed gyftes. Amen. ¶ And this ſame yere kynge Rycharde helde his Chryſtmaſſe in the manoyr of Eltham. ¶ And the ſame yere y• kyng of Armony fledde out of his owne londe & came in to Englonde for to haue helpe & ſocour of our king agaynſt his enemyes that had dryuen hym out of his realme. And ſo he was brought vnto the kynge to Eltham there as the kynge helde his ryall feeſt of Chriſtmaſſe. And there our kyng welcomed hym & dyd hym moche reuerence & worſhyp / and cōmaūded all his lordes to make hym all y• chere that they coude. And than he beſought the kynge of his grace & of helpe and of his cōforte in his nede / & that he myght be brought agayn to his kyngdom & londe for the Turkes had deſtroyed the mooſt parte of his londe / and how he fledde for drede / and came hyder for ſocour & helpe And than the kyng hauynge on hȳ pyte and compaſſyon of his grete myſchefe & greuous dyſeaſe / anone he toke his coū
                           ſeyle & aſked what was beſt to do. And they anſwered & ſayd / yf it lyked hym to gyue hym ony good / it were well done / and as touchynge his people for to trauayle ſo ferre in to out loudes / it were a grete Ieopardy. And ſo the kynge gaue hym golde & ſyluer & many other ryche gyftes & iewels & betaught hym to god / and ſo he paſſed agayn out of Englonde ¶ And this ſame yere kyng Rychard wt a royall power went in to Scotlonde for to warre vpon the Scottes for the falſnes & deſtruccyon that the Scottes had done to the Englyſſhmen in y• marches. And than the Scottes came downe to y• kyng for to treate with hym & with his lordes for trewſe as for certayne yeres. And ſo our kyng & his coūſeyle graūted them trewſe for certayne yeres / and our kyng turned hym agayn in to Englōde. And whā he was comen to Yorke there he abode and reſted hym. And there ſyr John Holand the erle of Kentes broder ſlewe the erles ſone of Stafford and his heyre with a dagger in the cite of Yorke wherfore the kynge was ſore anoyed & greued / and remeued thens and came to London. And the Mayre with the alder men & the comyns with all y• ſolempnite that might be done rode agaynſt y• kyng and brought him royally through y• cite and ſo forth to weſtmynſter to his owne palays. ¶ And in the .ix. yere of kynge Rychardes regne he helde a parliament at Weſtmynſter / and there he made two dukes and a markeys / and .v. erles. The fyrſt that was made duke was the kynges vncle ſir Edmond of Langley erle of Cambrydge / and hym he made duke of yorke. And his other vncle ſyr Thomas of wodſtok that was erle of Bokȳgham hym he made duke of Gloceſtre. And ſyr Leonner that was erle of Oxforde hym he made markeys of Deuelyn. And Henry of Balynbroke the dukes ſone of Lancaſtre hym he made erle of Derby. And ſyr Edward y• dukes ſone of Yorke hym he made erle of Rutlonde. And ſyr John Holand y• was the erle of Kentes broder hym he made erle of Huntyngdon. And ſyr Thomas Mombray hym he made erle of Notyngham and erle Marſhall of Englonde. And ſyr Mychell de la pole knyght hym he made erle of Suffolk & chaunceler of Englonde. And the erle of the Marche at y• ſame parlyament holden at Weſtmynſter in playne parlyament amonge all the lordes and comyns was ꝓclaymed erle of the Marche and heyre parent to the crowne of Englonde after kynge Rychard / the whiche erle of the Marche went ouer the ſce in to Irlonde vnto his lordſhyps and londes / for the erle of Marche is erle of Vlſter in Irlonde and by ryght lygne and herytage. And there at the caſtell of his he lay that

tyme / & there came vpon hȳ a grete multytude in buſſhmentes of wylde Iryſſh men for to take & deſtroye hym. And he came out fyerſly of his caſtell with his people & manly fought wt them / & there he was take & hewen all to peces / & ſo he dyed / vpon whoſe ſoule god haue mercy ¶ And in the .x. yere of kyng Richardes regne the erle of Arundell went to the ſee with a grete nauy of ſhyppes enarmed with mē of armes & good archers. And whā they came in y• brode ſee they mette with the hole flete y• came wt wyne laden frō Rochell / the whiche wyne were enemyes goodes / & there our nauy ſet vpon them & toke them all / and brought them to dyuers portes & hauens of Englonde and ſome to London / & there ye myght haue had a toune of Rochell wyne of the beſt for .xx. ſhyllynges ſterlynge / and ſo we had grete chepe of wyne in Englōde that tyme thanked be god almyghty.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How the fyue lordes aroſe at Ratcote brydge.
                        ANd in y• regne of kyng Richarde the .xj. yere the fyue lordes aroſe at Ratcote brydge in the deſtruccion of y• rebelles y• were y• tyme in all the realme. The fyrſt of y• fyue lordes was ſyr Thomas of wodſtok the kȳges vncle & duke of Bloceſtre. The ſeconde was ſyr Rychard erle of Arundell. The thyrde was ſyr Richard erle of warwik. The fourth was ſyr Henry Bolynbroke erle of Derby. The fyfth was ſyr Thomas Mombray erle of Notyngham. And theſe .v. lordes ſawe the myſchefe & myſgouernaūce & the falſnes of y• kynges coūſeyle wherfore they that were y• tyme chefe of the kynges coūſeyle fled out of this lōde ouer y• ſee / that is to ſaye / ſyr Alyſaūder Neuell the archebyſſhop of Yorke / & ſyr Roberte Lewer markeys of Deuelyn & erle of Oxford / & ſyr Mychell de la Pole erle of Suffolke and chaunceler of Englonde. And theſe thre lordes went ouer y• ſee / & neuer came agayne / for there they dyed. And than theſe fyue lordes aboue ſayd made a parliamēt at Weſtmynſter And there they toke ſyr Robert Treſiliā the Iuſtyce / and ſyr Nycholl Brembre knyght & citezyn of London / & ſyr Iohn Salyſbury a knyght of y• kynges houſholde / & Vſke ſergeaunt of armes / & many moo of other people were taken and iudged to deth by the counſeyle of theſe fyue lordes in that parlyament at Weſtmynſter / for the treaſon y• they put vpon them / to be drawen from y• toute of London throughout the Cite / and ſo forth to Tyburne / & there they ſhold be hanged and theyr throtes to be cutte / and thus they were ſerued & dyed. And after that in this ſame parliamēt at Weſtmynſter was ſyr Symond Beuerley that was a knyght of the garter / & ſyr Iohn Beauchamp knyght that was ſteward of the kinges houſhold / & ſyr Iames Berners were foriudged to deth / & thā they were ledde on fote to the toure hyll and there were theyr hedes ſmytten of and many other moo by theſe .v. lordes. ¶ In this ſame parlyament and in the. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . yere of kynge Rychardes regne he let trye & ordeyne a generall Iuſtes that is called a turneymēt of lordes knightes & ſquyers And theſe Iuſtes and turneyment were holden at Londō in ſmyth
                              •
                           elde of all maner of ſtraūgers of what londe or ceūtre that euer they were / & thyder they were ryght welcome / & to them & to all other was holden open houſholde & grete feeſt & alſo grete gyftes were gyuen to al maner of ſtraungers. And of y• kynges ſyde were al of one ſute theyr co
                              ••
                           s theyr armure / ſheldes / hors trappures / and all was whyte hertes wt crownes aboute theyr neckes / & chaynes of gold hāgyng thervpon / & the crowne hangynge lowe

before the hartes body / the whiche hart was y• kynges lyueray y• he gaue to lordes & ladyes / knyghtes & ſquyers for to knowe his houſholde from other people. And in this feeſt came to y• Iuſtes .xxiiij. ladyes & ledde .xxiiij. lordes of the garter with chaynes of gold & all y• ſame ſutes of hartes as it is before ſayd frō y• toure on horſbacke through the cite of London in to ſmythfelde where as y• iuſtes ſhold be holdē. And this feeſt & iuſtes was holden generally for all thoſe y• wolde come thyder of what lōde or nacyon that euer they were. And this was holdē duryng xxiiij. dayes of y• kynges coſtes / & theſe xxiiij. lordes to anſwere al maner people that wolde come thyder. And thyder came the erle of ſaynt Paule of Fraunce / & many other worthy knightes wt hym of dyuerſe partyes full worthely arayed. And out of Hollande & Henaud came the lorde Oſtreuaunt y• was the dukes ſone of Holland / & many other worthy knightes wt hym of Holland full well arayed. And whā this feeſt & iuſting was ended the kynge thanked theſe ſtraūgers / and gaue them many ryche gyftes. And thā they toke theyr leue of y• kyng & of other lordes & ladyes & went home agayn in to theyr owne coūtrees wt grete loue & moche thanke. ¶ And in y• .xiij. yere of kyng Rychardes regne there was a batayle done in y• kynges palays at weſtmȳſtre bytwene a ſquyer of Nauerne y• was wt kyng Rychard / & another ſquyer y• was called Iohn walſhe for poyntes of treaſon y• this Nauerne put vpō this walſh man. But this Nauerne was ouercomē & yelded hym creaunt to his aduerſary / & anone he was deſpoyled of his armure & drawen out of the palays to Tyburne and there was hanged for his falſnes. ¶ And in y• .xiiij. yere of kyng Richardes regne ſyr Iohn of Gaunt duke of Lancaſtre went ouer ſee into Spayne for to chalenge his ryght y• he had by his wyues tytell vnto y• crowne of Spayne wt a grete hooſt of people / & he had wt hym y• ducheſſe his wyfe & his thre doughters in to Spayne / & there they were a grete whyle. And at y• laſt y• kyng of Spayne began for to treate with y• duke of Lancaſtre / and they were accorded togyder through bothe theyr counſeyles in this maner / that the kyng of Spayne ſholde wedde the dukes doughter that was y• ryght heyre of Spayne / & he ſhold gyue vnto the duke golde & ſyluer y• were caſt in to grete wedges: & many other iewels as moche as .viij. charyottes myght cary. And euery yere after during y• dukes lyf & the ducheſſe his wyfe .x. M. marke of golde / of whiche golde the auenture & charges ſholde be to them of Spayne / & yerely brynge to Bayon to the dukes aſſygnes by ſurete made. And alſo y• duke maryed another of his doughters to the kynge of Portyngale y• ſame tyme. And whan he had done thus he came home agayn into Englonde / & y• good lady his wyfe alſo / but many worthy men dyed of the flix. ¶ In the .xv. yere of kyng Rychardes regne he helde his Chriſtmaſſe in y• manoyr of wodſtok / & there y• erle of Penbroke a yonge lorde & tender of age wolde lerne to Iuſt wt a knyght y• was called ſyr Iohn of ſaynt Iohn / & rode to gyder in y• parke of wodſtok. And there this worthy erle of Pēbroke was ſlayne with y• other knyghtes ſpere as he caſt it from hym whan they had coupled / & thus this good erle made there his ende and therfore the kyng & the quene made moche ſorowe for his deth. ¶ And in the xvj. yere of king Richardes regne Iohn Hende beynge y• tyme Mayre of Londō and Iohn Walworth & Henry Vanner beynge ſheryues of London / that ſame tyme a bakers mā bare a baſket of horſbrede into Fleteſtrete towarde an hoſtry

and there came a yonge man of the byſſhops of Salyſbury that was called Romayn / & he toke a hors lofe out of y• baſket of y• bakers / & he aſked hym why he dyd ſo. And this Romayn turned agayn & brake the bakers heed / & neyghbours came out & wolde haue areſted this Romayn / & he brake from them & fledde to his lordes place / and the cōſtable wolde haue had hym out / but y• byſſhops men ſhette faſt the gates / & kepte the place y• no man myght entre. And than moche more people gadred thyder / & ſayd that they wold haue hȳ out / or els they wold brenne vp y• place & all that were therin. And thā came the Mayre & ſheryues wt moche other people & ceſſed y• malice of y• comyns / & made euery man to go home to theyr houſes & kepe y• peas. And this Romayns lorde y• byſſhop of Salyſbury mayſter Iohn Waltham that at y• tyme was treſourer of Englonde went to ſyr Thomas Arundel archebyſſhop of Caū
                           terbury & chaūceler of Englond / & there the byſſhop made his cōplaynt vnto the chaunceler vpon the people of the cite of Londō. And than theſe two byſſhops of grete malice & vengeaūce came vnto the kynge at Wyndſore & made a grete complaynt vpō the Mayre & ſheryues. And anone all y• cite afterward came before y• kyng & his coūſeyle / & they caſt vnto the cite a greuous hert & wonders grete malyce. And anone ſodeynly the kynge ſent for y• Mayre of Londō & the ſheryues / & they came to hȳ in y• caſtell of Wyndſore And the kyng rebuked the Mayre & ſheryues ful foule for the offence y• they had done agaynſt hym & his offycers in his chambre at Londō / wherfore he depoſed & put out the Mayre & bothe ſheriues / & this was done .xiiij. dayes before y• feeſt of ſaynt Iohn baptyſt. And than y• kyng called to hym a knyght that was called ſyr Edward Dalingrigge / & made hym wardeyn & gouernour of y• cite & chambre of London / & ouer all his people therin. And ſo he kepte that offyce but foure wekes bycauſe that he was ſo gentyll & tendre to the citezyns of London / wherfore the kynge depoſed hym / & made ſyr Bawdewyn Radyngton knyght y• was Controller of the kynges houſhold wardeyn & gouernour of his chambre and of his people therin / and choſe to hym two worthy men of the cite to be ſheryues wt hym to gouerne & kepe y• kynges lawes in the cite / that one was called Gylbert Mawfelde / & y• other Thomas Newenton ſheryues. And than the Mar
                              〈…〉
                            two ſheryues & all y• aldermen wall 
                              〈◊〉
                            worthy craftes of London went 
                              〈…〉
                            to the toure of London / & there came 
                              〈…〉
                            the Conſtable of the toure / and gaue the Mayre & ſheryues theyr othe & charge as they ſholde haue takē in y• 
                           
                              ••
                           cheker of Weſtmynſter in y• kynges courte of his Iuſtyce & barons of the eſcheker & than went they home agayne. And than the kyng & his coūſeyle for y• grece malyer & deſpyte y• they had to y• cite of Londen remeued all his courtes frō Weſtmynſter vnto the cite of yorke / that is to ſaye the chaūceler / the eſcheker / the kynges br
                              •
                           
                           che / & the comyn place & there they held all theſe courtes of lawe fro 
                              ••
                           dſ
                              •
                           mer y• is to ſay / the feeſt of ſaynt Iohn bapryſt vnto y• feeſt of Chryſtmaſſe next comyng And than the kynge & his coūſeyle it not ſo ꝓfytable there as it was at London. Than anone he remeued if agayne to London & ſo to weſtmynſter for grece eaſe of his offycers and aua
                              •
                           rage to the kynge and al the comyns of the realme. And whan the people of London ſawe 
                              〈◊〉
                            knewe y• theſe courtes were come aga
                              〈…〉
                            and the kyng & his people alſo / than the Mayre & the aldermen with y• chefe comyns of the cite let gadre a grete ſomme of golde of all the comyns of the cite / and

ordeyned & made grete rialtees agaynſt his comynge to London for to haue his grace & good lordſhyp / and alſo theyr lybertees & fraūchyſes graūted to them agayne as they were wont to haue afore tyme. And through grete inſtaunce and prayer of the quene & of other lordes & ladyes the king graūted them grace. And this was done at Shene ī ſothery. And than y• kynge wtin two dayes after came to London. And the Mayre of the cite wt the ſheryues aldermen & all the worthy men of the cite afterwarde rode agaynſt hym in good aray to y• heth on this ſyde the manoyr of Shene / humbly & mekely ſubmyttynge them wt all maner obey ſaūce vnto hȳ as they ought to do. And thus they brought y• kynge & the quene to London / & whan the kynge came to y• gate of London brydge / there they preſented hym with a mylke whyte ſtede ſadled & brydled & trapped with cloth of golde and reed partyed togyder. And the quene a palfrey all whyte in the ſame araye trapped wt whyte & reed / & all the cōdytes of London ranne wt wyne bothe whyte and reed / for all maner people to drynke who wolde. And bytwene ſaynt Paule and the croſſe in chepe there was made a ſtage a ryall ſtandyng on hye / & therin were many aūgels with dyuers melodyes & ſonges. And than an aūgell came downe from the ſtage on hygh by a vyce & ſet a crowne of gold pyght with ryche perles & precyous ſtones vpon the kynges heed / & an other vpō the quenes heed. And ſo y• citezyns brought y• kyng and y• quene to Weſtmynſter in to theyr palays. And than on the moro we after y• Mayre & the ſheryues & the aldermen of London came vnto the kynge to his palays at weſtmynſter & preſented hym wt two baſyns of ſyluer & ouer gylted ful of coyned golde the ſomme of .xx .C. poūde prayenge hȳ of his hygh mercy & grace and lordſhyp & ſpecyall grace that they myght haue his good loue with the lybertees & fraūchyſes lyke wyſe as they were wont for to haue before tyme / and by his lettres patentes and his chartre confyrmed. And y• quene & other worthy lordes & ladyes fell on theyr knees & beſought y• kynge of grace to rōfyrme this Than the kynge toke vp the quene and graunted her all her aſkynge. And than they thāked y• kynge & the quene & went home agayne. ¶ And in the .xvj. yere of kynge Rychardes regne certayn lordes of Scotlonde came in to Englonde for to gete worſhyp as by fayte of armes. And theſe were ye perſones / the erle of Marre & he chalenged y• erle Marſhall of Englōde to Iuſt with hym certayn poyntes on horſbacke with ſharpe ſperes / & they rode togyder as two worthy knyghtes & lordes certayne courſes / but not y• full chalenge that y• ſcottyſſhe erle made / for he was caſt downe bothe hors & man / & two of his rybbes broken wt the fall / & ſo he was borne thens out of Smythfelde home to his inne / & within a lytell tyme after he was caryed home in a hors lytter / & at porke he dyed. And ſyr William Darell knyght & the kynges banerer of Scotlond than made an other chalenge wt ſyr Piers curtayn knight & y• kynges banerer of Englonde of certayn courſes yet on horſback in y• ſame felde / & whan he had rydden certayn courſes & aſſayed he myght not haue the better / he gaue it ouer & wolde no more of his chalenge wt ſyr Pyers courtayn knyght & y• kynges banerer of Englonde / & turned his hors & rode to his inne. And one Cokborne a ſquyer of Scotlonde chalenged ſyr Nycholl Hawberke knyght of certayn courſes yet wt ſharpe ſperes / & rode .v. courſes togyder / & at euery courſe y• Scotte was caſt downe bothe hors & man. And thus our Englyſſhe lordes thanked be

god had the felde. ¶ In the .xvij. yere of kyng Rychardes regne dyed the good & gracious quene Anne that was wyfe to kyng Richard in the manoyre of Shene in the ſhyre of Surrey on whytſondaye And than was ſhe brought to London & ſo to Weſtmynſter / & there was ſhe buryed and worthely entered beſyde ſaynt Edwardes ſhryne / vpon whoſe ſoule almyghty god haue pyte & mercy
                        Amen.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Rycharde ſpouſed dame Iſabell y• kynges doughter of Fraūce in the towne of Calays / & brought her in to Englōde & let her be crowned quene in y• abbey of ſaynt Peters of Weſtmynſter.
                        IN the .xx. yere of kyng Rychardes regne he went ouer ſee to Calays with dukes / erles / lordes and barons / & many other worthy ſquyers with grete araye and comyn people of the realme in good araye as longed to ſuche a kynge & prȳce of his nobley and of his owne perſone to do hym reuerence & obſeruaunce as ought to be done to theyr lyege lorde & ſo myghty a kynge & emperour in his owne / to abyde & receyue there that worthy & gracyous lady that ſholde be his wyfe a yonge creature of .xix. yere of age dame Iſabell the kynges doughter of Fraūce / & many other worthy lordes of grete name / bothe barons & knyghtes / with moche other people that came to y• towne of Grauenynge and two dukes of Fraūce / that one was the duke of Burgoyn / and that other the duke of Barre that wold no ferther leſſe than they had pledges for them. And than kynge Rycharde delyuered two pledges for them to go ſafe and come ſafe his two worthy vncles / the duke of Gloceſtre & the duke of Yorke / & theſe two went ouer y• water of Grauenyng & abode there as for pledges vnto y• tyme that the maryage & the feeſt was done & that theſe two dukes of Fraūce were comen agayn vnto▪ Grauenynge water. And than theſe two worthy dukes came ouer y• water at Grauenyng & ſo to Calays with this worſhyp full lady dame Iſabell y• was y• kynges doughter of Fraūce / and with her came many a worthy lord & lady & knyghtes & ſquyers in y• beſt araye that myght be And there they met wt our meynr at Calays whiche welcomed her & her meyny wt grete reuerence / & ſo brought her in to the towne of Calays / & there ſhe was receyued wt all the ſolempnite & worſhyp y• might be done to ſuche a lady. And than they brought her to y• kyng / & the kynge toke her & welcomed her & all her fayre cōpany / & made there a grete ſolempnite And than y• kyng & his coūſeyle aſked of the frenſſhe lordes whether all the couenaūtes & forwardes wt the cōpoſycyon y• were ordeyned & made on bothe partyes ſhold be truly kepte & holdē bySpan
                              •
                            thē And they ſayd ye / & there they ſwore & toke theyr charge vpon a boke and made theyr othe well & truly it to holde i al maner poyntes & couenaūces wtout cōtradic cyō or delay in ony maner wyſe. And thā was ſhe brought to ſaȳt Nicolas chirche in Calays / & there was worthely wedded wt the mooſt ſolempnite y• ony kyng or quene myght be / wt archebyſſhops & byſſhops & all y• mynyſtres of holy chirche. And than they were brought to the caſtell & ſet to meet / & were ſerued wt all delycaſy of ryall metes & drȳkes plenteouſly to all maner of ſtraūgers & al other & no creature warned y• feeſt / but al were welcome / for there were grece halles & tentes ſet vpon y• grene wtout y• caſtell to receiue al maner of people / & euery office redy to ſerue thē all. And thus this worthy mariage was ſolemply done & ended with all ryalte. Than theſe two dukes of Fraūce with theyr people toke theyr leue of the kynge & of the quene & wente

agayne vnto Grauenynge water. And there the Frenſſhe lordes / that is to ſaye the two dukes & all theyr folke were comen ouer the water to Grauenyng / and there they mette / & euerichoue toke leue at other / & ſo they departed / & our lordes came agayne to Calays / & the Frenſſhe lordes wente ouer the water / & ſo home in to Fraunce agayne. And anone after the kyng made hym redy with ye quene and all his lordes & ladyes and all theyr people with them & came ouer ye ſee in to Englonde / and ſo vnto London. And the Mayre and the ſheryues with all the aldermen & worthy comyns rode agaynſt them vnto the blacke heth in Kent / and there they mette with the kyng and the quene / & welcomed them & that in good araye / and euery man in the clothyng of his craft & theyr mynſtrels before them And ſo they brought them to ſaynt Geor ges barre in Southwerke / & there they toke theyr leue. And the kynge and the quene rode to Kenyngton / and than the people of London turned home agayn / & in turnynge agayne to London brydge there was ſo grete preſe of people bothe on hors & on fote / that there were deed on the brydge .xi. perſones of men & women and chyldren / on whoſe ſoules god haue mercy & pyte Amen. And than afterwarde the quene was brought to the toure of London / and there ſhe was all nyght / & on ye morowe ſhe was brought through the cite of London / and ſo forth to Weſtmynſter / & there ſhe was crowned quene of Englonde / & than ſhe was brought agayne vnto ye kynges palays and there was holden open courte and a ryall feeſt at her crownacyō of all maner people that thyder came. And this was done the ſondaye nexte after the feeſt of ſaynt Clement / in the .xx. yere of kynge Rychardes regne. ¶ And than the .xxv. daye of Auguſt nexte after by euyll excitacyon & fals coūſeyle and grete wrath & malyce that the kynge had of olde tyme to his vncle the good duke of Gloceſtre & to the erle of Arundell / & to ye erle of war wyk. Anone the kyng by his euyll excitacyon & his euyll counſeyle and malyce late in the euenynge on the ſame daye aboue ſayd ma
                              〈…〉
                           edy wt his ſtrength and rode in to 
                              〈◊〉
                            to ye towne of Chelmel
                              •
                           ord / and 
                              •
                           o came to Plaſſhe ſodeynly there ſyr Thomas of Wodſtok ye good duke of Gloceſtre laye. And ye good duke came anone to welcome the kynge. And the kynge areſted ye good duke hymſelfe his owne body / & ſo he was ladde down to the water / & anone put in to a ſhyppe and had to Calays / & brought in to ye capytayns warde to be kepte in holde by ye kynges cōmaundement. And that tyme the erle Marſhall was capytayn of Calays. And anone after by cōmaūdement of the kynge & by his fals coūſeyle / commaūded yt capytayn to put hym to deth. And anone certayn yemen that had the good duke in kepyng toke theyr coūſeyle how that they ſholde put hym to dethe. And this was theyr appoyntment / that they ſhold come vpon hȳ whan he were in his bedde & a ſlepe on a fether bedde / & anone they boūde hym hande & fote and charged hym for to lye ſtyll. And whan that they had done thus / they toke two towelles / & made on them two rydynge knottes / & caſt the towelles aboute his necke / & than they toke the fether bedde that laye vnder hym & caſt it vpon hym and than they drewe theyr towelles eche wayes / & ſome laye vpon ye fether bedde and vpon hym vnto the tyme yt he was deed / bycauſe yt he ſholde make no noyſe And thus they ſtrangled this worthy duke vnto ye deth / vpon whoſe ſoule god for his hygh pyte haue mercy. Amen. ¶ And whan the kyng had thus areſted this worthy duke & his vncle and ſente

hym to Calays he came agayn to London in all ye haſte with a wonders grete nōbre of people. And as ſoone as he was comen he ſent for y• erle of Arundell / & for the good erle of warwyk. And anone as they came he areſted them hymſelf / and ſyr Iohn Cobham and ſyr Iohn Cheyn knyghtes he areſted them in yt ſame ma ner tyll he made his parliamēt / & anone they were put into holde / but the erle of Arundell went at large vnto the parly a ment tyme / for he foūde ſufficient ſurety to abyde the lawe / & to anſwere to all ma ner poyntes that ye kynge & his coūſeyle wolde put vpon hȳ. ¶ And the .xxi. yere of kynge Rychardes regne he ordeyned hȳ a parlyament at Weſtmynſter whiche was called yt grete parlyament. And this parliament was made for to iudge theſe thre worthy lordes & other moo as them lyſt at that tyme. And for yt iudgement the kyng let make in all the haſte a long hous & a large of tymbre ye whiche was called an hall / & couered with tyles ouer / & it was open all aboute on bothe ſydes & at the endes / yt all maner of men myght ſe throughout / & there the dome was holden vpon theſe foreſayd lordes & iudgemet gyuen at this foreſayd parlyament. And for to come to this parlyament the kyng ſent his wrytes to euery lorde / baron / knyght & ſ
                              •
                           uyer in euery ſhyre throughout Englonde / that euery lorde ſholde gadre & brynge his retynue with hym in as ſhorte tyme & in the beſt araye yt they myght ge
                              •
                           e / in mayntey
                           
                              •
                           yage & ſtrengthinge of ye kyng agaynſt them yt were his enemyes / & that this were done in all the haſte & come to hym 
                              〈◊〉
                            payne of deth. And the kyng hymſelf ſent into Cl
                              〈…〉
                            ſhyre to che
                              •
                           taines of ye 
                           
                              〈…〉
                           tree / & they gadred & brought a grete and an huge multytude of people bothe of knyghtes & 
                              ••
                           uyers & pryncypally of yemen of Cheſterſhyre / whiche ye
                              •
                           ten & archers the kyng toke to his own courte and gaue them bowge of courte & good wages to be kepers of his owne body bothe by nyght & by daye aboue al other perſones & mooſt loued & beſt truſt / the whiche ſoone afterward turned ye kyng to grete loſſe & ſhame / hyndrynge & his vtter vndoynge & deſtruccion as ye ſhall here afterwarde. And that tyme came ſir Henry of Derby with a grete meyny of men of armes & archers. And ye erle of Rutlonde came with a ſtronge power of people bothe of men of armes & archers The erle of Kent brought a grete power of men of armes & archers / the erle Mar ſhall came in the ſame maner / & the lord
                              •
                            Spenſer in the ſame maner. The erle of Northumberlonde and ſir Henry Pe
                              〈…〉
                            his ſone / & ſyr Thomas Pet
                              •
                           y the erles broder / all the worthy lordes brought a fayre meyny & a ſtrōge power / and eche man in his beſt aray / & the duke of Lancaſtre & the duke of yorke came in ye ſame maner with men of armes & archers folowyng ye kyng / & ſyr Willyam S
                              •
                           rope treſourer of Englonde came in the ſame maner. And thus in this araye came all the worthy men of this londe vnto our kyng / & all this people came to London in one daye / in ſo moche yt euery 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            lane in London & in the ſubbarbes were full of them lodged / and .x. or. x
                              ••
                           . myle about London euery waye. And this peo ple brought the kyng to Weſtmynſter 
                              〈◊〉
                            went home agayne to theyr lodgyng
                              •
                           s bothe hors & man / & than on ye monday
                              •
                            the .xii. daye of September ye pa
                              〈…〉
                            began at Weſtmynſter whiche was cal led yt grete parlyamēt. And on yt frydaye next after ye erle of A
                              ••
                           dell was brought in to the parlyamēt amonge all ye lordes and yt was on ſaynt Mathewes day the apoſtle and euangeliſt / there he was for iudged vnto the deth in this hall yt was made in ye palays at Weſtmynſter. And

this was his iudgement. He ſhold go on fote wt his handes boūde behynde hym from ye place that he was iudged in / & ſo forth through the cite of London vnto ye toure hyll / & his heed to be ſmytten of / & ſo it was done in dede in the ſame place. And .vl. of the greteſt lordes that ſate on his iudgement rode with hym vnto the place there he was done to dethe / & ſo to ſe that ye execucyon were done after the dome / & by the kynges cōmaundement with them wente on fote men of armes & archers a grete multytude of Cheſtre ſhyre men / in ſtrengthynge of ye lordes yt brought this erle to his dethe / for they were in drede leeſt ye erle ſholde be reſcowed & taken from them whan they came in to London. Thus he paſſed forth through the Cite vnto his deth / & there he toke it full pacyently / on whoſe ſoule god haue mercy Amen. And than came the Auſtyn freres & toke vp ye body & the heed of this good erle / & bare it home to theyr place / & buryed him in theyr quere And on yt morow after was ſyr Rychard erle of warwik brought in to the parlya ment there as the erle of Arundell was for iudged / & they gaue the erle of warwyk the ſame iudgemēt that ye foreſayd erle had / but the lordes had compaſſyon on hym bycauſe he was of more greter age / and releaſed hym to perpetuall pry ſon / & put hym in the yle of Man. And than on the mondaye nexte after ye lorde Cobham of Kent and ſyr Iohn Cheyn knyght were brought alſo in to the parlyament in to the ſame hall / & there they were iudged to be hanged and drawen / but through the prayers and grete inſtaunce of all the lordes that iudgement was forgyuen them / and releaſed to per petuall pryſon. ¶ And this ſame tyme was Rychard Whyttyngdon Mayre of London / and Iohn Wodecocke & Wyllyam Aſkam ſheryues of London. And they ordeyned at euery gate of London durynge this ſame parlyament ſtronge watche of men of armes & archers / and through out euery warde alſo. And the kynge made .v. dukes & one Markeys & foure erles / & the fyrſt of them was the erle of Derby / and he was made duke of Herford / and the ſeconde was the erle of Rutlonde / & he was made duke of Awemarle / & the thyrde was the erle of Kent and he was made duke of Surry / & the fourth was the erle of Huntȳgdon / & he was made duke of Exceſtre / & the fyfth was the erle of Notyngham / & he was made duke of Northfolk. And the erle of Somerſet was made Markeys of Dor ſet / & the lorde Spenſer was made erle of Gloceſtre / & the lorde Neuyll of Raby was made erle of Weſtmerlonde / & ſyr Thomas Percy was made erle of Worceſtre / & ſyr Willyam Scrope that was treſourer of Englonde was made erle of Wylſhyre / & ſyr Iohn Montagu erle of Saliſbury. And whan ye king had thus done he helde the parlyamēt & ryall feeſt vnto all his lordes & to all maner of people that thyder wolde come. ¶ And this ſame yere dyed ſyr Iohn of Gaūt ye kynges vncle & duke of Lancaſtre in the byſſhops Inne in Holborne / & was brought fro thens to ſaynt Paule / & there ye kyng made & helde his enteremēt well & worthely with al his lordes in the chirche of ſaynt Paule in London / & there he was buryed beſyde dame Blaūche his wyfe that was doughter & heyre vnto ye good Henry yt was duke of L
                              〈…〉
                           te. ¶ In ye ſame yere there fell a 
                              〈…〉
                           cyon bytwene the duke of Herford & ye duke of Norfolke in ſo moche y• they waged batayle & caſt down theyr gloues / & than they were ta ken vp & enſealed / & the batayle ioyned & the daye ſet / & the place aſſygned where and whan / & this ſholde be at Couentre And thyder came the kyng wt all his lor

des at that day / & was ſet in the felde / & than theſe two worthy lordes came into ye felde well & clene armed & well arayed with all theyr wepen & redy to do theyr batayle / & were redy in ye place to fyght at vtteraūce. But ye kyng had them ceſſe & toke the quarell in to his handes. And forth with ryght there preſent exiled the duke of Herford for terme of .x. yere / & the duke of Norfolke for euermore. And ſyr Thomas Arundell archebiſſhop of Caū terbury was exiled yt ſame tyme for euer & depoſed out of his ſee for malyce of the kyng. And anone theſe thre worthy lordes were cōmaunded & defended ye kynges realme. And anone they gate them ſhyppes at dyuers hauens & went ouer the ſee in to dyuers lōdes eche his waye And ye duke of Norfolke went to Veniſe & there he died / on whoſe ſoule god haue mercy Amen. And than kynge Rychard made a clerke of his ſyr Roger Walden arche byſſhop of Caūterbury. ¶ And in the .xxij. yere of kynge Richardes regne by fals coūſeyle & ymaginacyon of couetous men that were aboute hym were made & ordeyned blancke chartres / and made them to be enſealed of al maner ry the men throughout ye realme / in ſo moche yt they compelled diuers people to ſet theyr ſeales therto. And this was done for grete couetyſe / wherfore al good hertes of ye realme were clene turned away fro ye kyng for euer after. And that was vtter deſtruccyon & ende to hym yt was ſo hygh & ſo excellent a prynce & kyng / & through couetous & fals coūſeyle falſely betrayed. Alas for pyte ye ſuche a kynge myght not ſe. And than kynge Rychard ſet his kyngdome and his ryall londe of Englonde to ferme vnto foure perſones whiche were theſe / ſyr Wyllyā Scrope erle of Wylſhyre & treſourer of Englond & ſyr Iohn Buſſhe / & Henry Grene / & ſyr Iohn Bagot knyghtes / whiche turned them to myſchefe & deth within a lytell tyme / as ye ſhall fynde here afterwarde wryten. ¶ And than kyng Rychard ma de grete ordynaūce & went hymſelf ouer ſee into Irlonde & many grete lordes wt hym with grete hooſtes for to ſtrength theyr kynge / wt men of armes & archers & moche grete ſtuffe & ryght good ordynaūce as longed vnto warre. And or he paſſed ouer ye ſee he ordeyned & made 
                              〈◊〉
                            Edmond of Langley his vncle ye duke of Yorke his lewtenaū
                           
                              •
                            of Englonde in his abſence / with the gouernaūce & coūſey
                              •
                           e of theſe .iiij. knyghtes yt had taken Englonde to ferme of the kyng. And than he paſſed the ſee & came in to Irlonde and there he was well & worth
                              •
                           ly receyued And theſe rebelles that ben called 
                              〈◊〉
                            Iryſſhmen came downe to the kynge & yelded them to him bothe body & go
                              •
                           des all at his owne wyll / & ſwore vnto 
                              〈◊〉
                            to be his lyege men / & there dyd to hym homage & feaute & good ſeruyce & thus he cōquered ye mooſt parte of Irlende in a lytell tyme. And whyle that kyng 
                              〈◊〉
                            chard was thus in Irlonde ſyr Henry of Bolyngbroke erle of Derby that ye kyng had made before duke of Herford y• 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            che duke the kyng had exiled out of this londe was comen agayn in to Englonde for to chalenge ye dukedom of Lancaſt
                              ••
                            as for his right & true herytage. And he came downe out of Fraūce vnto 
                              •
                           alays And there mette hȳ ſyr Thomas Arundell yt was archebyſſhop of 
                              〈◊〉
                            that was exiled out of Englond & wi
                              ••
                            hym came the erle of Arundel his ſo
                              ••
                            & heyre the whiche was in kepynge of ſyr Iohn ſhelley knight ſomtyme wt 
                           
                              •
                           he erle of Huntyngdon & wt the duke of Exceſtre the whiche was tho in the caſtell of 
                              〈◊〉
                            gate in Suſſex & there he ſtale awaye & came to Calays / & there he was well & worthely kepte tyll theſe other two lordes were comē to Calays. And thā this

worthy duke & the archebyſſhop of Caū
                           terbury Arundell ſhypped in ye hauen of Calais / & drewe theyr courſe northward & arryued in Yorkſhyre at Rauenſporne faſt by Wydelyngton / & there he came & entred fyrſt the londe / & two lordes with hym and theyr meyny. And than moche people of the realme that herde of his comynge & knewe where yt he was / anone they drewe vnto hym & welcomed theſe lordes / & ſo couraged them in all maner thynge / and paſſed forth in to the londe and gadred moche people to them. And whan kyng Rychard herde & wyſt that theſe two lordes were comen agayne in to Englonde and were londed. Than the kynge lefte his ordynaūce in Irlonde & came in to Englondward in all the haſte that he myght / and came to the caſtell of 
                              •
                           lyut / and there he abode for to take his counſeyle & what myght be done / but to hym came none. And whā ſyr Thomas Percy erle of Worceſtre yt was ye kynges ſteward wyſt and knewe this / anone he came in to the hall amonge all ye people / and he brake the yerde of ye ryall kynges houſholde / & anone euery man was diſperpied & went his waye & forſoke theyr mayſter & ſouerayn lorde / and lefte hym alone. And thus was kynge Rycharde brought downe & deſtroyed / & ſtode hym ſelfe alone without comforte or ſocour or ony good counſeyle of ony man / alas for pite of this ryall kyng. And anone came tydȳges that ſyr Henry of Boling broke was vp with a ſtronge power of people and that all ye ſquyers of Englonde reyſed vp the ſhyres in ſtrengthyng of hym agaynſt kyng Rychard. And thus ſoone he was comen out of the North coūtree to Bryſtowe / & there he mette with ſyr Wyllyam Scrope erle of Wylſhyre and treſourer of Englonde / & with ſyr Iohn Buſſhe and ſyr Henry Grene / and Iohn Bagot / but he eſcaped frō them & went ouer the ſee in to Irlonde. And theſe thre knyghtes were taken and theyr herdes ſmytten of. And thus they died for theyr fals couetyſe. And than was kynge Rychard taken and brought vnto the duke And anone ye duke put hȳ in faſt warde and ſtronge holde vnto his comynge to London. And than was there a rumour in London & a ſtronge noyſe that kynge Rychard came to Weſtmynſter / and the people of London ranne thyder & wolde haue done moche harme & hurte in theyr woodnes / had not ye Mayre & aldermen and other worthy men ceſſed them with fayre wordes / and turned them home agayne to London. ¶ And there was ſyr Iohn Slake dene of the kynges chapell of Weſtmynſter taken & brought to London / & put in pryſon in Ludgate. And after that Iohn Bagot was taken in Irlonde & brought to London / & put in priſon in Newgate / there to be kepte and abyde his anſwere. ¶ And ſoone after the duke brought kynge Rycharde pryuely to London / & put him in the toure vnder ſure kepynge as a pryſoner. And than came the lordes of the realme wt al theyr coūſeyle vnto ye toure to kynge Rychard & ſayd to hym of his myſgouernaunce & extorcion that he had done / made & ordeyned to oppreſſe all ye comyn people / & alſo to all the realme. Wherfore all ye comyn people of ye realme wolde haue hym depoſed of his kyngdome. And ſo he was depoſed at that tyme in the toure of London by all his lordes counſeyle & comyn aſſent of all ye realme. And than he was put from ye toure vnto ye caſtell of Ledes in Kent / & there he was kepte a whyle / and than he was had from thens vnto ye caſtell of Pounfret in the North countre to be kepte in priſon / & ryght ſoone after there he made his ende. And than whan kyng Rychard was depoſed & had 
                              ••
                           ſygued his crowne & his kyngdom & was

kepte faſt in holde. Than al the lordes of the realme with the romyns aſſent & by accorde choſe this worthy lorde ſyr Henry of Bolyngbroke erle of Derby / duke of Herford & duke of Lancaſtre by ryght lyne & herytage / and for his ryghtfull manhode that ye people foūde in him before all other they choſe hym & made hȳ kynge of Englonde amonge them.
                        INnocen
                              ••
                            the .vij. choſen pope at two yere. And than Gr
                              •
                           gory the .xij. was after hȳ xij. yere 
                              •
                           euet was debate. Than was Alexander choſen in ye coūſoyle of 
                              •
                           yſan & he was called ſyr & P
                              •
                           trus de Canadia & ſo was put & ryferd ſ
                              •
                           ryfe / euery cho
                              •
                           e of thoſe thre ſayd he was pope: Than was there a counſeyle at 
                              •
                           yſ
                              •
                           n where they began to make a cōcorde / and there they depoſed ye two / & the thyrde ſtode / & ſo was worſe diuiſyon made than before For that they ordeyned preuayled not. ¶ Robert was emperour after Wenſelans .ix. yere. This mā was duke of Bauary & erle of Palatyn / a iuſt man and a good / & was crowned of Bonifate the. ix This man entred ytaly wt a grete hooſt of Almayns agaynſt Iohn the duke of Galias / but he returned wt a grete woū
                           de / & was a thynge iuſt that he ſuffred by iuſtyce diuyne. ¶ Iohn the .xxiij. ſucceded Alexander .iiij. yere / & fyrſt he began well for an vnite / & he was in ye coū
                           ſey
                              •
                           e 
                              ••
                            Conſtance / & offred hȳ to reſigne the poperyche / & after ſecretly & vntruly he fledde awaye / but it ꝓfyted hym not / for he was taken & cōſtrayned to peas / & was made a cardynall / & buryed at Florens. ¶ Sigiſmundus was emperour after Robert .xxvij. yere / & he was ſone to Ka
                              •
                           olus & kynge of Vngary & mooſt chryſten prynce / and he was ſo deuoute to god that he deſerued to be canonyſed. This man holpe ye chirche through his meruaylous prudence and wytte / for he ſpared no labour ne no thynge yt he had tyll he had made a full peas amonge the clergy. And he had. 
                              •
                           x. batayles agaynſt the Turke / & euer he had ye 
                           
                              ••••
                           ry. And what more / all thynge yt euer was wryten in 
                              •
                           ouynge to Conſtantyne / Theodoſio / Kat
                              •
                           lo / 
                              •
                           tto / may truly be wryten of hym. And he was crowned in Vngary / and deceſſed a blyſſed man.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Circa annū dn̄i. M .CCCC.
                        
                           ¶ Of ſyr Henry of Bolyng broke erle of Derby that regned after kyng Rycharde / whiche was the fourth Henry after the conqueſt.
                        
                        ANd after kynge Rychard the ſeconde was depoſed & out of his kingdom / the lordes & the comyns al
                              ••
                            one aſſent & all other worthy men of the realme choſe ſyr Henry of Bolyng broke erle of Derby ſone & heyre of Iohn 
                              •
                           uke of Lancaſtre for his worthy manhode yt often tymes had ben founde in hym & in dedes preued / vpon ſaȳt Edwardes day the confeſſour he was crowned kynge of Englōde at Weſtmynſter by aſſent of all the realme nexte after the depo
                              ••
                           nge of kyng Richard. Thā he made Henry his eldeſt ſone prȳce of Wales & duke of Cornewayle & erle of Cheſtre. And he ma
                              ••
                            ſyr Thomas of Arūdell archbyſſhop of Caūterbury agayne as he was before. And ſyr Roger Walden ye kyng Rychard had made archebyſſhop of Caūterbury he made byſſhop of London / for ye 
                           
                              •
                           yme it ſtode voyde. And he made ye erles ſone of Arundell that came wt hym ouer ye ſee frō Calays in to Englonde erle of Arundell as his fader had ben / & put hym in poſſeſſyon of all his londes. And he made homage & feaute vnto his lyege lorde the kynge as all other lordes had done. And than anone dyed kynge Rychard in

the caſtell of Pounfret in the north countree for there he was famyſſhed to deth by his keper / for he was kept there .iiij. or .v. dayes from meet & drynke / & ſo he made his ende in this world. Yet moche people in Englonde and in other londes ſayd yt he was on lyue many a yere after his deth. But whether he were alyue or deed the people helde theyr fals opinyon & byleue that many had / & moche people came to grete myſchefe & foule dethe as ye ſhal here afterward. And whan kyng Henry wyſt & knewe yt he was deed / he let 
                              •
                           ere hym in the beſt maner / & cloſed it in a fayre cheſt wt dyuers ſpyceryes and ba
                              •
                           o
                              •
                           es / & cloſed hym in a lynnen cloth all ſaue his viſage / & that was left open that all men myght ſe his perſone from all other men. And ſo he was brought to London with torche light brennynge to ſaint Paules chirche / & there he had his maſſe & his Dirige wt moche reuerēce & ſolempnite of ſeruyce. And whā all this was done / he was brought from ſaynt Paules in to the abbey of Weſtmynſter & there he had al his hole ſeruyce agayn And from Weſtmȳſter he was brought to Langley / and there he was buryed / on whoſe ſoule god haue mercy Amen. ¶ And in ye fyrſt yere of kynge Henryes regue he helde his Chryſtmaſſe in ye caſtell of Wyndſore. And on .xij. euen came the duke of Awemarle vnto the kynge & colde hym that he & the duke of Surrey & the duke of Exceſtre / & the erle of Saliſbury / & ye erle of Gloceſtre / & other moo of theyr affynite were accorded to make a mommynge vnto ye kynge on .xij. daye at nyght / & there they purpoſed to ſlee ye kyng in the reuelyng. And thus ye duke of Awemarle warned ye kyng. And than the kyng came to London pryuely in all the haſte yt he myght to gete hym helpe ſocour & cōforte and coūſeyle. And anone theſe other yt wolde haue put ye kynge to deth fledde in all the haſte yt they myght for they knewe well that theyr coūſeyle was bewrayed. And than fledde ye duke of Surrey & the erle of Salyſbury wt all theyr meyny vnto ye towne of Chicheſtre And there the people of the towne wold haue areſted them / and they tolde not ſtande to theyr areſtyng / but ſtode at defence & fought manly. But at ye laſt they were ouercomen & takē. And there they ſmote of the dukes heed of Surrey & the erles heed of Salyſbury / & many other moo / & there they put theyr quarters in to ſackes & theyr heedes on poles borne on hye / & ſo they were brought through the cite of London to London brydge / & there theſe heedes were ſet vpon hygh / & theyr quarters were ſent to other good townes and cytees of Englonde / and ſet vp there. ¶ At Oxford was takē Bloūt knyght / & Benet Cely knyght / and Thomas Wynterſell ſquyer / and there were byheded & quartred / and the knyghtes hedes were ſet vpon poles & brought to London & ſet vpon ye brydge / & the quarters ſent forth vnto other good townes. ¶ And in ye ſame yere at Prittelwell in a myll in Eſſex there ſyr Iohn Holand the duke of Exceſtre was taken with the comyns of the countree / and they brought hym from the myll vnto the Plaſſhe / & to the ſame place ye kynge Rycharde had areſted ſyr Thomas of Wodſtok ye duke of Gloceſtre / and right there in the ſame place they ſmote of ye dukes heed of Exceſtre / and brought it to London vpon a pole / & it was ſet vpon London brydge. ¶ And in ye ſame yere at Bryſtowe was taken the lorde Spenſer that kyng Rycharde had made erle of Gloceſtre / & the comyns of the towne of Bryſtowe toke hym and brought hym in to the market place of the towne / and there they ſmote of his heed / & ſente it to London / & there it was ſet vpon London brydge. ¶ And

in this ſame yere was ſyr Bernard Brokeys knight taken & areſted & put in the cou
                              •
                           e of London / and ſyr Iohn Shelley knyght / & ſyr Iohn Mawdelyn and ſyr Willyam Feribe perſones of kynge Rychardes / & they were areſted & put in to the cou
                              •
                           e of London. And thyder came ye kynges Iuſtices and ſa
                              •
                           e vpon them in the 
                              •
                           oure of London / & there they were dampned all .iiij. to deth / & ye dome was gyuen to ſyr Bernard Brokeys that he ſholde go on fote from the 
                              •
                           oure through the cite of Londō vnto Tyburne / & there to be hāged / & after his heed ſmytten of / & ſyr Iohn Shelley knyght / & ſyr Iohn Mawdelyn & ſyr Willyam Feribe ꝑſons were drawen through out ye cite of London to Tyburne / & there they were hanged / & theyr hedes ſmytten of and ſet on Londō brydge. ¶ And in this ſame yere kyng Henry ſent quene Iſabell home agayn in to Fraūce / yt whiche was kyng Rychardes wyfe / & gaue her golde & ſyluer & many other Iewels / & ſo ſhe was diſcharged of all her dowry & ſent out of Englōde. ¶ And in ye ſecond yere of kyng Henry ye fourth was ſyr Roger Claring ton knyght & two of his men / & ye pryour of Laūde & .viij. freres mynours & ſome mayſters of dyuinite & other for treaſon that they wrought agaynſt the kynge / were drawen & hanged at Tyburne all xij. perſones. ¶ And there began a grete diſcencion & debate in ye coūtre of Wales bytwene ye lorde Grey Ri
                              •
                           hen & Owen of Glender ſquyer of Wales / & this Owen arered a grete nombre of Walſſhmen / & kepte all that coūtre about ryght ſtrongly & did moche harme / and deſtroyed the kynges townes & lordſhyppes through out al Wales / & robbed & ſlewe ye kynges people bothe engliſſhe & walſſhe / & thus he endured a .xij. yere largely / & he toke the lorde Grey Ri
                              •
                           hen pryſoner / & kepte hym faſt in holde tyll he was raūſomed of pryſoners of the marche / & kepte hym longe tyme in holde. And at the laſt he made hȳ to wedde one of his doughters & kepte hym there ſtyll with his wyfe / and ſoone after he dyed. And than kyng Henry knowynge this miſchefe / deſtruc ciō & treaſon yt this Owen had wrought anone he ordeyned a ſtrōge power of mē of armes and archers and moche other ſtuffe that longed to warre / for to abate & deſtroye ye malyce of this fals Walſſheman. And than the kyng came in to Wales with his power for to deſtroye this Owen & other rebelles fals Walſſhmen And anone they fledde in to ye moūtayns and there myght the kynge do them no harme i no maner wyſe for ye mo
                              ••
                           ayns And ſo the kyng came agayn in to Englonde for leſynge of moo of his people / & thus he ſpedde not there. ¶ And in this ſame yere was grete ſcarſete of where in Englond / for a quarter of where was at xvj. ſhyllynges. And there was marchaundyſe of Englonde ſent in to Prure for where / & anone they had laden and fraught ſhyppes ynough / & came home in ſafete thāked be god of all his gyftes. ¶ And in the thyrde yere of kynge Henryes regne there was a ſterre ſeen in the firmament yt ſhewed hymſelfe through all the worlde for dyuers tokens yt ſholde befall ſoone after / the whiche ſterre was named by clergy Stella cometa. And on ſaynt Mary Mawdeleyns daye next folowyng in ye ſame yere was ye barayle of Shroweſbury / & thyder came ſir Henry Percy ye erles ſone of Northumberlonde with a grete multitude of men of armes & archers / & gaue a barayle to kyng Henry the fourth / through ye fals & wycked 
                              •
                           oūſeyle of ſyr Thomas Percy his vncle erle of Worceſtre / & there was ſir Henry Percy 
                              •
                           layne / & ye mooſt parte of his people in ye felde / & ſyr Thomas Percy takē and kepte faſt in holde two days 
                              •
                           yll the

kyng had ſet reſt amonge his people on bothe ſydes. And thā ſyr Thomas Percy was iudged to be drawen & hanged & his heed ſmytten of for his falſe treaſon at Shroweſbury / & his heed brought to London & ſet on ye brydge. And the other people yt there were ſlayne on bothe partyes the kynge let bury. And there was ſlayne on ye kynges ſyde in ye batayle the erle of Stafford & ſyr Walter Bloūt in ye kynges cote armure vnder ye kynges baner / & many moo worthy men / on whoſe ſoules god haue mercy Amen. ¶ And in the fourth yere of kynge Henryes regne came the emperour of Cōſtantynople wt many grete lordes & knyghtes & moche other people of his coūtre into Englonde to kynge Henry with hym to ſpeke & to diſporte / & to ſe ye good gouernaūce & condicions of our people / & to knowe ye cōmo dytees of Englonde. And our kyng wt all his lordes goodly & worſhypfully receyued & welcomed hym & all his meyny yt came wt hym / & dyd hym all ye reuer
                              ••
                           e & worſhyp yt they coude & myght / & anone the kyng cōmaūded al maner offycers yt he ſhold be ſerued as ryally as it longed to ſuche a worthy lord & emperour vpon his owne coſt / as longe as he & his men were in Englond. ¶ In this ſame yere came dame Iane ye ducheſſe of Brytayn into Englonde: and londed at Falmouth in Cornewayle / and from thens ſhe was brought to ye cite of Wyncheſtre / & there ſhe was wedded vnto kynge Henry the fourth / in the abbey of ſaȳt Swythyus with all ye ſolempnite yt myght be done & made. And ſoone after ſhe was brought from thens to Londō. And the Mayre & the aldermen wt the comyns of the cite of Londō rode agaynſt her & welcomed her & brought her through ye cite of London to Weſtmynſter / & there ſhe was crowned quene of Englonde / & there ye kynge made a ryall & a ſolempne feeſt for her & for all maner men yt thyder wolde come. ¶ And in this ſame yere dame Blaūche the eldeſt doughter of kyng Henry was ſent ouer ſee wt the erle of Somerſet her vncle & with mayſter Rychard Clyfford than byſſhop of worceſtre / & with many other worthy lordes & ladyes & worthy ſquyers as longed to ſuche a noble kynges doughter & came vnto Coleyn. And thyder came the dukes ſone of Barre wt a fayre cōpany & receyued this worthy lady / & ye byſſhop of Worceſtre wedded & ſacred them togyder / as holy chirche it wold. And there was made a ryall feeſt & a grete iuſtyng in the reuerence & worſhyp of them & all people yt came thyder. And whan this maryage and feeſt was done ye erle & ye byſſhop & all theyr meyny toke theyr leue of the lorde & lady & came home agayne in to Englonde in ſafete thanked be god. ¶ And in the .v. yere of kyng Henryes regne the lorde Thomas his ſone went euer ſee & the erle of Kent & many other lordes & knyghtes wt men or armes and archers a grete nombre to chaſtyſe the rebelles that afore had done moche harme to our englyſſhmen & marchauntes / & to many townes & portes in Englonde on the ſee coſtes. And the lord Thomas ye kynges ſone came into Flaū
                           dres before a towne that is called Scluſe amōge all ye ſhyppes of dyuers nacyons that were there / & after there they rode with theyr ſhyppes amonge them / and went on londe & ſported them there two dayes / & came agayn to theyr ſhyppes & toke the brode ſee / & there they mette wt thre Carackes of Gene / yt were laden wt diuers marchaūdyſes & well manned / & they fought togider longe tyme / but the englyſſhmen had ye victory / & brought ye Carackes into the Cambre before Wyn chelſee / and there they 
                              •
                           anted all theſe goodes / and one of theſe Carackes was ſodeynly brent there. And the lordes and

theyr people turned them home agayne & went no ferther at y• tyme. ¶ And in ye ſame tyme Serle yeman of kynge Rychardes robes came into Englonde out of Scotlonde / & tolde to dyuers people yt kyng Rychard was onlyue in Scotlōde & ſo moche people byleued his wordes / wherfore a grete parte of the people of ye realme were in grete errour & grutchȳg agaynſt the kyng through informacyon of lyes & fals leſynges yt this Serle had made. For moche people truſted & byleued in his ſayenge. But at ye laſt he was taken in the northcoūtre / & there by lawe iudged to be drawen through euery cite & good burgh towne in Englōde / & ſo he was ſerued / & at ye laſt he was brought to London to ye gyld hall before ye Iuſtice & there he was iudged for to be brought to ye Toure of London / & there to be layd on a hurdell / & thā to be drawen through the cite of Londō to Tyburne / & there to be hāged & than quartred / and his heed ſmytten of & ſet on Londō brydge / & his quarters to be ſent to foure good townes of Engloude & there ſet vp / & thus was he rewarded for his fals treaſon. ¶ And in the ſyxth yere of kyng Heuryes regne the erle of Marre of Scotlōde by ſafecon duyte came into englōde to chalenge ſyr Edmond erle of Kent to certayn courſes of warre on horſbacke. And ſo this chalenge was accepted & graūted / & ye place taken in ſmythfelde at Londō. And this erle of Marte came proudly in to ye felde as his chalenge aſked. And anone came in the erle of Kent & rode to the Scotte / & manfully rode togyder wt ſharpe ſperes dyuers courſes / but ye erle of Kent had ye felde / and gate hym moche worſhip and thanke of all maner men for his manfull dedes. ¶ And in ye .vij. yere of kyng Henryes regne ſyr Richard Scrop archebyſ ſhop of Yorke & ye erle Marſhall of Englonde gadred vnto them a ſtronge power agaynſt kyng Henry. And the kyng herynge therof in all the haſte yt he myght came with his power Northward / and mette with them at Yorke / & there were theſe two lordes taken & brought to the kyng. And anone the iudges were ſet & theſe two lordes brought forth / & there they were iudged to deth / & bothe theyr hedes ſmytten of / and there they made theyr ende / on whoſe ſoules god for his pyte haue mercy Amē. And whan this was done the kyng came to London agayn / & there reſted hym. Anone god of his grete goodnes wrought and ſhewed many grete myracles for this worthy clerke archebyſſhop of Yorke that thus was done to deth. ¶ And in ye .viij. yere of kynge Henryes regne dame Luce the dukes ſyſter of Mylen came in to Englonde & ſo to London / & there was wedded to ſyr Edmond Holland erle of Kent in the pryory of ſaynt Mary ouereys in South warke with moche ſolempnite & grete worſhyp. The kynge was there hymſelfe & gaue her at ye chirche dore / & whan they were wedded & maſſe was done / the kyng his owne ꝑſone brought & lad this worthy lady in to ye byſſhops place of Wincheſtre / & there was a wonders grete feeſt holden to all maner people yt 
                           wold come. ¶ And ye ſame yere ſyr Robert Knolles knyght a worthy warryour dyed at his manoyr in Norfolk / & frō th
                              •
                           ns he was brought to London on a hors bere wt moche torche light / & ſo he was brought to ye whyte freres in flete ſtrete / & there was done & made for hym a ſolempne feeſt & a ryall enter
                              •
                           ment for thoſe yt thyder wold come bothe ryche & poore / & there lyeth buryed by dame Cō
                           ſtance his wyfe in ye myddes of the body of the chirche / on whoſe ſoule god haue mercy Amē. ¶ And in this ſame yere ſir Thomas Rampſton knyght Conſtable of the Toure of London was drowned

at London brydge as he came fro Weſtmynſter inwardes to ye toure in a 
                              •
                           arge & all through lewdnes. ¶ And in ye ſame yere dame Philyp the yonger doughter of kyng Henry was ladde ouer ſee with ſyr Richard the dukes broder of Yorke / & ſyr Comond Courtney byſſhop of Norwiche / & many other lordes / knyghtes & ſquyers / ladyes & gentylwomen that apperteyned to ſuche a kinges doughter / & came in to Denmarke. And the kyng receyued this worthy lady for his wyfe / & welcomed theſe worthy lordes / & did vnto them moche worſhyp / and they were brought to a towne yt was called Londō in Denmarke / and there was this lady wedded and ſacred to the kynge of Denmarke / Norway & Swethen / and there was crowned quene of Denmarke with moche ſolempnite / & there was made a ryall feeſt. And whan this feeſt and maryage was done & ended / theſe lordes & ladyes toke theyr leue of the kynge & the quene & came agayne in to Englonde in ſafete thanked be god. ¶ And in the. viij yere of kyng Henryes regne there was a man yt was called the Walſſhe clerke / and he appeled a knight yt was called ſir Percyuall Snowdon of treaſon / & there they were ioyned to fight to ye vtteraūce within lyſtes / & the daye & place & tyme aſſigned & lymyted to be done & ended in Smythfelde / at whiche daye thoſe two perſones came in to ye felde & fought ſore & myghtely togyder. But at the laſt the knyght ouercame the clerke / & made hȳ to yelde hym creaūt of his fals empechement yt he had ſayd on hym / & than was he deſpoiled of his armure & drawen out of the felde to Tyburne / & there he was hanged / & the knyght takē to grace / and was a good man. ¶ In this ſame yere ſyr Henry erle of Northumberlōde & the lorde Bardolf came out of Scotlonde / in preiudyce & deſtruceyon of kynge Henry wherfore they of the Northcoūtre aroſe vpon them & fought wt them & diſcōfited them: & toke them & ſmo
                              •
                           e of their hedes & quartred theyr bodyes / & ſent the heed of the erle & a quarter of ye lorde Bardolf to Londō / and there they were ſet vpon Loudō brydge for fals treaſon that they had purpoſed agaynſt ye kyng. ¶ And in the .ix. yere of kyng Henryes regne was ſyr Edmond Holland erle of Kent made Amyrall of Englonde for to kepe ye ſee / & he went to the ſee wt many ryal ſhyppes that were ful well arayed & apparayled and enarmed with many a good man of armes & archers / and of good defence of warre in the kynges name of Englonde and ſo he londed at the laſt in the coſte of Brytayn in the yle of Briak with al his folke / & he beſyeged the caſtell & aſſauted it / & they withſtode hym with grete defence & ſtrength. And anone he layd his ordynaunce / & in the layenge of a gonne there came a quarell and ſmote the good erle Edmond in the heed / & there caught he his deth Woūde / but yet they left not tyll that they had goten the caſtell & all that were therin / & there this good lord dyed / vpon whoſe ſoule god haue mercy amen. And than his meyny came home agayne in to Englonde wt the erles body and was buryed amonge his aūceſtres right worthely. ¶ And in the ſame yere was a grete froſt in Englōde that 
                              •
                           ured xv. wekes. ¶ And in the .x. yere of kyng henryes regne the fourth came the Se
                           
                              •
                           eſſhall of Henaud with other meyny in to Englonde to ſeke auentures & to gete them worſhyp in dedes of armes bothe on horſbacke & on fote at all maner poyntes of warre. And ye Seneſſhall chalenged ye erle of Somerſet / & the erle delyue red hȳ full manfully of al his chalenges and put his aduerſary to the worſt in al poyntes / & wan there grete worſhip & ye degre of ye felde. And on ye nexte day after

came in to ye felde an other man of armes of the Seneſſhals party / & agaynſt him came ſyr Rychard of Arundel knyght / & the Henaud had ye better of hym on fote in one poynt / for he brought hym on his knee. And on the thyrde daye came in an other man of armes in to ye felde / and agaynſt hym there came ſyr Iohn Corne wayle a knyght / & manly & knyghtly he quytte hȳ in all maner poyntes agaynſt his aduerſary / & had ye better in ye felde. And on the fourth daye came an other man of armes of Henaud in to the felde / & agaynſt him came ſyr Iohn Chaynes ſone / & manly quytte hym agaynſt his aduerſary / for he caſt hors & man in to ye felde. And the kynge for his manhode at that tyme dubbed hym knyght. And on the fyfth daye there came an other man of armes of the Henaudes party in to ye felde / & to hym came ſyr Iohn ſtewarde knight / & manfully he quytte him there in all maner poyntes / & had the better. And on ye ſyxth daye after came an other Henaud / & to hym came Willyam Porter ſquyer / & manfully he quytte hym / & had the better in ye felde. And the kynge dubbed hym knyght ye ſame tyme. And on the ſeuenth daye after came an other man of armes of Henaud in to the felde / & to him came Iohn Standiſſhe ſquyer and manfully he quytte hym on his aduerſary / & had the better of hym in the felde / and ye kynge dubbed hym knyght the ſame daye. And on ye ſame day came an other man of armes of Henaud / and to hym came a ſquyer of Gaſcoyne / and proudly and māly he quytte hym on his aduerſary / & had the better of hym / and anone the kynge dubbed hym knyght. And on the .viij. day came in to the felde two men of armes of Henaud / & to them came two ſowdyours of Calays whiche were bretherne yt were called Burghes and well & manly quytte them on theyr aduerſaryes / & had the better in ye felde. And thus ended ye chalenges with many grete worſhyppes. And the kynge at the reuerence of theſe worthy ſtrafigers made a grete feeſt / and gaue them many riche gyftes. And thā they toke theyr leue and went home agayne in to theyr owne countree. ¶ And in the. x
                              •
                           . yere of kynge Henryes regne the fourth there was a grete batayle done in ſmyth felde bytwene two ſquyers / that one was called Gloceſtre that was appellaunt / and Arthur was the defendaūt / and well & manly they fought togyder longe tyme And the kynge for theyr manfulnes and of his grace toke theyr quarell in to his handes / and made them to go out of the felde at ones / & ſo they were deuyded of theyr batayle / and the kyng gaue them grace. ¶ And the .xij. yere of kyng Henryes regne the fourth 
                              •
                           yſdie a ſquyer of Wales that was a rebell a ryſer & ſupporter to Owen of Glendre / whiche dyd moche deſtruccyon to the people of Wales was taken & brought to London / & there he came before the Iuſtyees / and was dampned for his treaſon / & than he was layde on an hurdell and ſo drawen to Tyburne through the cite / & there he was hanged & let downe agayne / & his heed ſmytten of / and the body quartred and ſent to foure townes / & his heed ſet vpon London brydge. ¶ And in the. xiij yere of kynge Henryes regne tho dyed ſyr Iohn Beauford ye erle of Somerſet that was capytayne of Calays / & was buryed at the abbey of the Toure hyll on whoſe ſoule god haue mercy Amen. ¶ And in the ſame yere the lorde Thomas kyng Henryes ſone wedded ye coū
                           teſſe of Somerſet. ¶ And in this ſame yere came the embaſſadours of Fraunce in to Englonde fro the duke of Burgoyn vnto the prynce of Englonde kyng Henryes ſone & heyre for to haue helpe and

ſocour of mē of armes & archers againſt the duke of Orlyaunce. And than went ouer ſee the erle of Arundel / ſyr Gylbert Vmfreuyll erle of Kent / & the lorde Cobham ſyr Iohn Oldcaſtell / & many other good knyghtes & worthy ſquyers & men of armes & good archers in to Fraūce / & came to Parys to ye duke of Burgoyn / & there he receyued & welcomed theſe englyſſhe lordes & all the other meyny. And than it was done hȳ to wyte yt the duke of Orlyaūce was comen to ſaynt Clowe faſt by Parys wt a grete nombre of men or armes & arbalaſtres / & thyder went our Englyſſhmen & fought with them / & gate y• brydge of ſaynt Clowe / & there they ſlewe many Frenſſhmen and arbalaſtres / & the remenaūt fledde & wold no longer abyde. And thā our englyſſhmen came agayn to Parys / & there they toke theyr leue of ye duke & came ſafe agayne in to Englonde / and the duke gaue them grete gyftes. And anone after ye duke of Orlyaūce ſent embaſſadours in to Englonde to kyng Henry the .iiij. beſechinge him of his helpe and ſocour agaynſt his deedly enemy ye duke of Burgoyne. And than the kynge made Thomas his ſone duke of Clarence & his other ſone Iohn duke of Bedforde / & his other ſone Vmfrey duke of Gloceſtre / and ſyr Thomas Beauford erle of Dorſet / and the duke of Awemarle he made duke of Yorke. And than ye kyng ordeyned his ſone ſyr Thomas duke of Clarēce / ſir Thomas beauford erle of Dorſet / & ſyr Iohn Cornwyll with many other lordes knyghtes and ſquyers & men of armes & archers for to go ouet ſee in to Fraūce in helpynge and ſtrengthynge of the duke of Orlyaunce. And theſe worthy lordes wt theyr retynue ſhypped at Hamton & ſayled ouer y• ſee in to Normādy / & londed at Hogges. And there mette wt them y• lorde Hambe at theyr londynge with .vij. M. men of armes Frenſſhmen & thre ſergeaūtes of armes with them / & all were put to flyght / & of them were takē. vij .C. men of armes &. iiij .C. horſes / without thoſe that were ſlayne in the felde. And ſo they rode forth through out all Fraūce & toke caſtles & townes & ſlewe many Frenſſhemen that withſtode them / and toke many pryſoners as they rode / and ſo they paſſed forth tyll they came to Burdeux and there they reſted them a whyle and ſet the countree in peas / & reſted tyll the vyntage were redy to ſayle. And than ye duke with his meyny came home in to Englond in ſafete thāked be god. ¶ And in the ſame yere was the kynges coyne chaunged throughout Englonde by the kynge & his coūſeyle / that is to ſaye / the noble / halfe noble / & ferthynge of golde. ¶ And in the .xiiij. yere of kyng Hērpes regne the fourth / he let make galays of warre / for he hoped to haue paſſed the grete ſee / & ſo forth to Ieruſalem / & there to haue ended his lyfe / but god vyſyted hym ſoone after wt infirmite & grete ſekenes / that he myght not well endure no whyle / ſo ſeruently he was taken and brought in bed at Weſtmȳſter in a fayre chambre. And as he lay in his bed he aſked his chamberlayne what he called ye chambre yt he lay in. And he anſwered & ſayd Ieruſalem. And than he ſayd yt the prophecy ſayd yt he ſhold make an ende & dye in Ieruſalē. And than he made hym redy vnto god and dyſpoſed all his wyll And ſoone after he died / & was caried by water frō Weſtmynſter in a barge vnto Feuerſham / & frō thens he was caryed to Caūterbury by londe wt moche torche lyght brennynge in to ye abbey of Chryſtchirche / & there he was entered & buryed beſyde ſaint Thomas of Caūterburyes ſhryne. And thus ended ye worthy kyng Henry about mydlent ſondaye / in ye yere of our lorde a. M .CCCC. and .xiij. vpon

whoſe ſoule god haue mercy. Amen.
                        MArtyn y• .v. was pope after Iohn xiiij. yere. This mā was choſen by the concyle of Conſtance / & the other were depoſed y• ſtroue / & ſo came peas in the chirche the whiche longe tyme afore was deſyred & neceſſary for y• defence of the fayth. This was y• myghtyeſt pope that euer was of ryches / & a grete iudge He edifyed townes / walles / ſtretes / & he deſtroyed hereſyes / & he did moche good through the noble prynce Sygyſmund. And he gadred moche money for to gete y• holy londe agayn / but deth came vpon hym & letted hym / & he made a coūſeyle afore his deth for that mater / & there he deceſſed. ¶ Eugenius was pope after Martyn .xvii. yere. This Eugeny was choſen peaſybly after the deth of Martyn / & no man doubted but he was pope But ſhortly after he was expulſed from Rome / for it was ſo that he fledde naked Alſo he was cited to the concyle of Baſilieus & depoſed / but he charged hym not And for that began ye ſtryfe agayne / the whiche ſtode to his deth / & thoſe that fauoured him ſayd he was worthy moche louynge / & the contrary ſayd thoſe that were agaynſt hym / but what ſomeuer he was after he had taken the dignite vpon hym / afore he was of grete abſtynence & of good fame / & that he dyd after that I leue to the iudgement of god.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Circa annū dn̄i. M .CCCC .xiij.
                        
                           ¶ Of kynge Henry the fyfth that was kynge Henryes ſone.
                        
                        ANd after the deth of king Henry the fourth regned kynge Henry his ſone that was borne at Monmouth in Wales / that was a worthy kyng & a gracyous man and a grete conquerour. And in ye fyrſt yere of his regne for grete loue and goodnes he ſent to the f
                              ••
                           res of Langley there as his fader had do bury kynge Rychard the ſeconde / and let take his body out of the erth agayn / & dyd do brȳge it to Weſtmynſter in a ryall chare couered with blacke veluet and baners of dyuers armes about / & all the horſes drawing y• chare were trapped in blacke and beten with dyuers armes / & many a torche brennynge by all the waye tyll he came to Weſtmynſter / & there he let make for hym a ryall and a ſolempne enterement / & buryed hym by quene Anne his wyfe / as his owne deſyre was / on y• ferther ſyde of ſaynt Edwardes 
                              〈…〉
                           yne in y• abbey of ſaynt Peters of Weſtmynſter / vpon whoſe ſoule god haue mercy. ¶ And in this ſame yere were certayne lollers taken & fals heretykes yt had purpoſed through falſe treaſon for to haue ſlayne our kyng / & for to haue deſtroyed all the clergy of y• realme / & they myght haue had theyr falſe purpoſe. But our lorde god wolde not ſuffre it / for in haſte our kynge had warnynge therof & of all theyr fals ordinaūce & werkyng / & came ſodeynly with his power to ſaȳt Iohns without ſinythfelde / & anone they toke a certayn of the lollers & fals heretykes / & brought them to ye kynges preſence and there they tolde all theyr fals purpoſe & ordynaūce how they wolde haue done & wrought / yf they myght haue regned & had theyr wyl / & there they told whiche were theyr capytayns & gouernours / & than ye king cōmaūded them to the toure of Londō: & than toke moo of them bothe win ye cite & wtout / & ſent thē to Newgate & to bothe Co
                              •
                           ters. And than they were brought in examinacion afore ye clergy & the kynges Iuſtyces / & there they were cōuicte for theyr fals hereſy / & dampned before y• Iuſtyee for theyr fals treaſon / & this was theyr iudgemet / yt they ſholde be drawen frō ye toure of London to ſaint

Giles felde / & there to be hanged & brent on ye galowes. Alſo there was taken ſyr Roger Acton knyght for hereſy & eke for treaſon agaynſt ye kyng & ye realme / & he came afore y• clergy & was cōuict for his hereſy to be brent / & dampned before the Iuſtyces to be drawen from the toure of London through the cite to ſaynt Giles felde / & to be hanged & brent. ¶ And in ye ſeconde yere of kynge Henryes regne he held a coūſeyle of all ye lordes of ye realme at Weſtmȳſter / & there he put hym this demaūde / & prayed & beſouhgt them of theyr goodnes & of theyr good coūſeyle & good wyll to ſhewe hym as touchyng ye tytell & the right yt he had to Normandy Gaſcoyn & Guyen / the whiche ye king of Fraūce whelde wrongfully & vnryghtfully / y• whiche his aunceſtres before hȳ had by true tytell of cōqueſt & right herytage / the whiche Normādy / Gaſcoyn & Guyen ye good kyng Edward of Wyndſore & his aunceſtres before hym had holden all theyr lyf tyme. And his lordes gaue hym coūſeyle to ſende embaſſadours to the kyng of Fraūce & his coūſeyle yt he ſhold gyue vp vnto hym his ryght herytage / yt is to ſaye Normandy / Gaſcoyn & Guyen / y• whiche his predeceſſours had holden afore hȳ / or els he wold it wynne with ſtrengthe of ſwerde in ſhorte tyme with ye helpe of almighty god. And than the Dolphyn of Fraūce anſwered to our embaſſadours & ſaydi this maner / that the kyng was ouer yonge & to tender of age to make ony warre as agaynſt hȳ / & was not lyke yet to be a good warryour to do & make ſuche a cōqueſt there vpon hym. And ſomwhat in ſcorne & deſpyte he ſent to hȳ a tonne full of tenes balles bycauſe he ſhold haue ſomwhat to playe withall for him & for his lordes / for that wolde become hym better than to mayntayn ony warre. And than anone our lordes yt were embaſſadours toke theyr leue & came in to Englonde agayne & tolde the kynge & his couſeyle of the vngoodly anſwere yt they had of the Dolphin / & of the preſent y• whiche he had ſente to our kynge. And whan the kynge had herde theyr wordes & y• anſwere of y• Dolphyn he was wonders ſore agreued & ryght euyll apayed towarde the frenſſhmen & towarde the kynge & the Dolphyn / and thought to auēge hym on them as ſoone as god wold ſende hym grace & myght And anone let make tenes balles for the Dolphyn in all y• haſte that he myght / & they were grete gonſtones for the Dolphyn to playe withall. And than anone the kynge ſent for all the lordes & helde a grete coūſeyle at Weſtmynſter / & told to them the anſwer yt they had of the Dolphin & of his worthy preſent yt he ſent to hym & to his lordes to playe wtall. And there ye kyng & his lordes were accorded that they ſhold be redy in armes wt theyr power in the beſt araye yt myght be done and gete all the men of armes & archers that myght be goten / & all other ſtuffe yt longed to warre / & to be redy wt all theyr retynue to mete at Southhampton by Lāmaſſe nexte folowynge without ony delaye / wherfore ye kynge ordeyned his nauy of ſhyppes with all maner ſtuffe & vytayle that lōged to ſuche a warryour of all maner ordynaunce in the hauen of Southhampton to ye nombre of .CCC. and .xx. ſayles. And thā fell there a grete dyſeaſe and a foule myſchefe. For there were thre lordes whiche that the kyng truſted moche on / & through falſe couetyſe they had purpoſed & ymagined the kynges deth / & thought to haue ſlayne hym & all his bretherne or he had taken the ſee / whiche thre lordes were named thus / ſyr Rycharde erle of Cambrydge broder to ye duke of yorke / ye ſeconde was the lord Scrope treſourer of Englōde / y• thyrd was ſir Thomas Gray knyght of

the North coūtree. And theſe thre lordes aforeſayd for lucre of money had made a promeſſe vnto y• Frenſſhmen for to haue ſlayne kyng Henry the fyfth and all his bretherne by a falſe trayne ſodeynly or they had ben ware. But almyghty god of his grete grace helde his holy hande ouer them & ſaued them from theſe perillous meiny. And for to haue done this they receyued of y• frenſſhmen a millyon of gold / & that was there openly proued And for theyr fals treaſon they were all thre iudged to deth / & this was y• iudgement / that they ſholde be ladde through Hampton / & without northgate there to be heded. And thus they ended theyr lyues for theyr fals couetyſe and treaſon. And anone as this was done the kynge & all his meyny made them redy & went to ſhyppe and ſayled forth with .xv. hondred ſhyppes / & arryued within Seyne at Kydecauſe vpon our ladyes euen the Aſſumpcyon in Normandy wt all his ordynaūce / & ſo went forth to Harflet / & he beſyeged the towne all about by londe & alſo by water / & ſent to the capytayne of the towne & charged hym to delyuer the towne. And ye capytayne ſayd that he delyuered hym none / ne none he wolde hȳ yelde / but badde hym do his beſt. And than our kyng layde his ordinaūce vnto the towne / that is to ſaye / gonnes / engynes & tripgettes / and ſhotte & caſt at the walles & eke at the towne / & caſt downe bothe toures & towne & layde them on y• erth / & there he played at the tenes with his hard gonne ſtones. And they y• were with in y• towne whan they ſholde playe theyr ſonge was well away & alas that euer ony ſuche tenes balles were made / & curſed al tho y• warre began / & y• tyme that euer they were borne. ¶ And on the morowe y• kyng let crye at euery gate of the towne that euery man ſhold be redy on the morowe erly to make aſſaute to y• towne. And Willyam Boucher & Iohn Graūt with .xij. other worthy burgeſes came to the kyng & beſought hym of his ryall pryncehode & power to withdrawe his malyce & beſtruccyon that he dyd to them / and beſought hym of .viij. dayes reſpyte & trewſe yf ony reſcowe myght come to them / & els to yelde vp ye towne to hym wt al theyr goodes. And than the kyng ſent forth y• capytayne & kepte the remenaūt ſtyll wt hym. And y• lord Gaucorte yt was capytayne of y• towne went forth to Roen in all ye haſte vnto the Dolphyn for helpe & ſocour / but there was none ne no man of reſcowe / for the Dolphyn wold not abyde. And thus this capytayne came agayne vnto the kynge & yelded vp ye towne / & delyuered hym the keys. And than he called his vncle ye erle of Dorſet & made hym capytayne of the town of Harflet / & deliuered him y• keys & bad hȳ go & put out all y• frēſſhe people bothe men womē & children / & ſtuffe his town of Harflet wt englyſſhe people. And than ye kyng ſent in to Englōde & let crye in euery good town of Englōde / y• what crafty mā wold come thyder & enhabyte hym there in y• town he ſhold haue 
                              〈…〉
                           s & houſhold to hȳ & to his heyres for euer more. And thyder went many marchaūtes & crafty mē / & enhabyted them there to ſtrength the towne / & were welcome. And whā y• kyng ſawe y• this town was well ſtuffed bothe of vytayles & of men / this worthy prince toke his leue & went toward Calays by lond / & y• frenſſhmen herde of his comynge / they thought for to haue ſtopped hȳ his waye y• he ſholde not paſſe that waye / in all y• haſte y• they myght brake al y• bridges where as ony paſſage was for hors & man / in ſo moche that there myght no man paſſe ouer the ryuers neyther on hors ne on fo
                              •
                           e / but yf he ſhold haue bendrowned. And therfore our king wt all his people went & ſought

his way ferre vp toward Paris / & there was all y• ryall power of Fraūce aſſembled & redy to gyue hym batayle / & for to deſtroye all his people. But almyghty god was his guyde & ſaued hȳ & all his meyny / & defended hym of his enemyes power & purpoſe thanked be god y• ſaued ſo his owne knyght & kyng in his ryght full tytel. And than our kyng beholdyng & ſeynge y• grete multytude & nombre of his enemyes to withſtande his waye & gyue hym batayle. Than the kyng wt a meke herte & a good ſpiryte lyfte vp his handes to almyghty god / & beſought hȳ of his helpe / & y• daye to ſaue his true ſeruaūtes. Than our kynge gadred all his lordes & other people aboute & bad them al to be of good chere / for they ſhold haue a fayre & a gracyous victory & the better of all theyr enemyes / & prayed them to make thē redy to y• batayle / for he wolde rather dye y• daye in the felde / than to be taken of his enemyes / for he wold neuer put y• realme of Englonde to raūſom for his perſone. And y• duke of Yorke fell on his knees & beſought y• kyng of a bone / y• he wold graūt hym yt daye y• vaūtward in his batayle / & the kyng graūted hym his aſkyng / and ſayd gramercy coſyn of Yorke / & prayed hym to make hym redy. And than badde he euery man to ordeyn hym a ſtake of tree & ſharpe bothe endes that y• ſtake myght be pyght in y• erth a ſlope / that theyr enemyes ſhold not ouer come them on horſback / for yt was theyr fals purpoſe / & arayed them for to ouer ryde our meyny ſodeynly at the fyrſt comyng on of them at y• firſt brunt. And al the nyght before y• batayle y• frenſſhmen made many grete fyers & moche reuell with howting & ſhowting / & played our kyng & his lordes at y• dyſe / & an archer alwaye for a blanke of theyr money / for they wend al had bē theyrs. The morne 
                              ••
                           oſe y• daye gan ſprynge / & the kyng by good aduyſe let araye his batayle & his wynges / & charged euery man to kepe them hole togyder / & prayed them all to be of good chere. And whā they were redy he aſked what tyme of ye daye it was & they ſaid pryme. Than ſayd our kyng now is good tyme / for al englōd prayeth for vs: & therfore be of good chere & let vs go to our iourney. And thā he ſayd wt an hye voyce / in the name of almighty god & ſaynt George auaūt baner / & ſaynt George this day thyne helpe. And than the Frenſſhmen came pryckynge downe as they wold haue ouer rydden all our meyny / but god and our archers made them ryght ſoone to ſtomble / for our archers ſhotte neuer arowe amyſſe / but it peryſſhed & brought to ye groūde bothe hors & man / for they ſhotte yt daye for a wager. And our ſtakes made them toppe ouer terue eche one ouer ouer / y• they laye on hepes two ſperes length of heyght. And our kyng wt his meyny & with his men of armes & archers yt thacked on them ſo thycke with arowes & layde on wt ſtakes And our kyng with his handes fought manly y• daye. And thus almyghty god & ſaynt George brought our enemyes to groūde / & gaue vs that daye the victory There were ſlayne of frenſſhmen yt daye in ye felde of Agincourt m
                              ••
                            than .xi. M. Without pryſoners yt were takē / & there were nombred that daye of Frenſſhmen in the felde moo than ſyxe ſcore. M. But god that daye fought for vs. And after came there tydynges to our kynge that there was a newe batayle of frenſſhmen ordeyned redy for to ſtele on hym & came towardes hym. And anone our kyng let crye that euery man ſholde ſlee his pryſouers that he had taken / & anone araye the batayle agayne redy to fyght with the Frenſſhmen. And whan the Frenſſhmen ſawe that our men kylled downe theyr pryſoners / than they withdrewe

them & brake theyr batayle and al theyr araye. And thus our kyng as a worthy conquerour had that daye the victory in the 
                              •
                           elde of Agincourt in Pycardy. And than our kynge returned agayn where as the batayle was / for to 
                              •
                           e what people were ſlayne of Englyſſhmen / and yf ony were hurte y• they myght be holpen And there were deed in y• felde the duke of Barry / the duke of Alaūſon / the duke of Braband / the erle of Nauerne thefe conſtable of Fraūce / and .viij. other erles and the archebyſſhop of Saunce / and of good barons an .C. and mo / & of worthy knyghtes of grete alyaunce of cote armures .xv. hōdred. And of Englyſſhmen were deed yt daye the good duke of Yorke and the erle of Suffolke / and of all other Englyſſhmen there were not deed paſſyng .xxvi. bodyes thanked be god. And this batayle was on a frydaye / whiche was ſaynt Criſpyne & Criſpinians day in the moneth of October / & anone the kynge cōmaūded to bury them / and the duke of Yorke to be caryed forth wt hym & the erle of Suffolke. And there were pryſoners y• duke of Orlyaūce / the duke of Burbon / the erle of Vendome / the erle of Ewe / the erle of Richemond & ſyr But ſigaūt marſha
                              •
                            
                           
                              •
                           f Fraūce / & many other worthy lordes were taken there in this batayle of Agincourt & were brought to the towne of Calays / & ſo ouer the ſee wt the kyng in to Englonde & londed at Douer in Kent wt all his pryſoners in ſafete thanked be almyghty god / & ſo came to Caſ
                              •
                           terbury & offred at ſaynt Thomas ſhryne. And ſo forth he rode through the 
                              •
                           o
                              •••
                           re of Kent the next waye to Eitham & th
                              •
                           re he reſted tyll that he wolde come to London. And than the Mayre of London / the aldermen & ſheryues wt all y• comuners & craftes came to y• blacke 
                              •
                           eth well & worthely arayed to welcome our kyng with dyuers melodyes / & 
                              •
                           hanked almyghty god of his gracyous vyctory that he ſhewed for hym. And ſo y• kyng & his priſoners paſſed forth by them ty
                              •
                            he came to ſaynt Thomas of wateryng / & there mette wt hym all religyous men wt proceſſyon & welcomed hym. And ſo the kyng came rydyng with his pryſoners through y• rite of Londō / where as was ſhewed many a fayre ſyght at all yt condythes & at yt croſſe in chepe as in heuenly araye of aūgels / archaūgels / patriarkes / prophetes & virgyns / wt diuers melodyes ſenſyng & ſyngynge to welcome the kynge / & all the cond
                              •
                           thes 
                              •
                           e
                              ••
                           ynge with wyne / & the kynge paſſed forth to ſaynt Paules / & there mette wt hȳ. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . byſſhops reueſted & mytred wt ſenſers to welcome the kynge / & there they ſonge for his gracyous victory 
                              •
                           e deū 
                           
                              •
                           audamus. And there the kyng offred / & after toke his hors & rode to Weſtmynſter / & than the Mayre toke his leue of y• kyng & rode home agayne. ¶ And in y• thyrde yere of kyng Hēryes regne y• fyfth came the emperour of Almayn kyng of Rome & of Hungry in to Englonde / & ſo to y• 
                           
                              •••
                           e of London. And the Mayre & the aldermen wt the ſheryues & worthy craftes of London by the kynges cōmaundement mette wt hym on the blacke heth 
                              〈◊〉
                            y• beſt aray that they coude on horſbacke. And there they welcomed hym & brought hȳ to London with m
                              ••
                           he honoure & grete reuerence. And at ſaynt Thomas of w
                              •
                           
                           terynge there mette wt hym the kyng wt all his lordes in good araye. And there was a worthy metyng bytwene y• emperour & kyng Henry y• fyfth / & there they ky
                              ••
                           ed togyder & embraced eche other / & than y• king toke y• emperour by y• hande & ſo they came rydyng through y• 
                           
                              ••
                           te of Londō vnto ſaynt Paules / & there they 
                              ••
                           yghted & offred / & all y• byſſhops ſtode re
                              •
                           eſted wt ſenſers in theyr handes ſenſynge to them. And than they toke theyr

horſes & rode to Weſtmynſter. And the kynge lodged the emperour in his owne palays / and there he reſted hym a grete whyle / & all at y• kynges coſt. And ſoone after came y• duke of Holland in to Englonde to come & ſe y• emperour & ſpeke wt hym & wt our kyng Henry of Englonde / & he was worthely receyued & lodged in the byſſhops Inne of Ely / & all at y• kynges coſt. And whan the emperour had well reſted him & ſeen y• londe in dyuers partyes & knewe the cōmodytees / than by proceſſe of tyme he toke his leue of the kynge / but or he wente he was made a knyght of the garter / & receyued & ware the lyuerey. And thā he thanked y• kyng & all his lordes. And than the kyng & he went ouer y• ſee to Calays & abode there longe tyme to haue an anſwere of the frenſſhe kynge / & at the laſt it came and pleaſed hȳ ryght nought. And ſo y• emperour toke his leue of y• kynge & paſſed forth in goddes name / & our kyng came ouer agayn in to Englonde in all y• haſte that he myght / & y• was on ſaynt Lukes euen that he came to Lambeth / & on the mondaye nexte after he came in to y• parlyament at Weſtmynſter. ¶ In y• ſame yere was a grete derth of corne in englonde / but thāked be god it laſted not longe.
                        ANd in the fourth yere of kynge Henryes regne y• fyfthe he helde his parlyament at Weſtmynſter in y• be gynnynge of October / & laſted to the puryficacyon of our lady than nexte after. And there was graunted vnto hym to maynteyn his warres bothe of y• ſpirytualte & of the temporalte an hole taxe & 
                              〈◊〉
                            dieme. And than anone y• kyng prayed all his lordes to make them redy for to ſtrength hȳ in his ryght. And anone he 
                              •
                           et make a newe retynue / & charged all 
                              〈◊〉
                            men to be redy at Hamton in whyt
                           
                              〈…〉
                            weke nexte after without ony delay. And there the kyng made y• duke of Bedford protectour & defender of his realme of Englonde in his abſence / & charged hym to kepe his lawes and maynteyne bothe ſpirituall & temporall. And whan the kyng had thus done & ſet all thynge in his kynde / on ſaynt Markes daye he toke his hors at Weſtmynſter & came rydyng to Paules / & there he offred & toke his leue / & ſo rode forth through y• 
                           
                              •
                           ite takyng his leue of all maner of people / as well of poore as of riche / prayenge them all in generall to praye for hȳ. And ſo he rode forth to ſaynt Georges / & there offred & toke his leue of the Mayre / chargynge hym to kepe well his chambre. And ſo he rode forth to Hamton / & there abode tyll his retynue were redy & comē for there was all his nauy & ſhyppes wt his ordynaūce gadred togyder and well ſtuffed as longed to ſuche a ryall kynge with all maner of vytayles for ſuche a ryall cōpany as wel for hors as for man as longed for ſuche a warryour / that is to ſay gōnes / tripgites / engynes / ſowes baſtyles / brydges of lether / ſcalyng ladders / malles / ſpades / ſhouelles / pykes / paueys / bowes & arowes / bowſtringes & tonnes / cheſtes & pypes full of arowes as neded for ſuche a worthy warryour that no thynge was to ſeche whā tyme came / thyder came to hȳ ſhyppes laden with gonnes & gonpowdre. And whan this was redy & his retynue came / the kyng & all his lordes wt all his ryal hooſt went to ſhyppe & toke y• ſee & ſayled in to Normādy / & londed at 
                              •
                           ouke vpo
                              •
                            Lā
                           maſſe daye than nexte after / & there he made .xlviij. knyghtes at his londing / & than y• kynge heryng of many enemyes vpon the ſee / that is to ſaye .ix. grete Carakes / hulkes galeys & ſhyppes y• were comyng to deſtroy his nauy. And anone he cōmaūded y• erle of marche to be che
                              •
                           e chefetayne / & many other worthy lordes

                           
                              〈◊〉
                            to dethe for treaſon. And ſo he was 
                              〈◊〉
                            to the Cour
                              •
                            agayn / and there he 
                              〈◊〉
                            layd
                              •
                            vpon an hurde
                              •
                            and drawen through the Cite to ſaynt 
                              •
                           yles felde / & there was made a newe payre of ga
                           
                              ••••
                           s and a ſtronge 
                              •
                           heyn
                              •
                            and a coller of yren for 
                              〈◊〉
                            / & there he was hange
                              •
                            and bre
                              •
                           t o
                              ••
                            the galow
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              •
                           n
                              •
                            all for his 
                              〈…〉
                           es and his fals opynyons.
                        ANd in the .vi. ye
                              ••
                            of kyng Henryes 
                              •
                           ogne the fyfth he ſent his 
                              〈…〉
                            Bea
                              •
                           ford du
                              ••
                            of 
                              •
                           x 
                              〈◊〉
                            with a 
                              •
                           ayre cōpany of men of ar
                           
                              •
                           es & archers before the 
                              〈◊〉
                            of 
                              〈◊〉
                            / & there diſplayed his 
                              〈◊〉
                            / and ſent his h
                              〈…〉
                           des vnto the tow
                              ••
                            & hadde them 
                              〈◊〉
                            that cite vnto our king theyr lyege lorde. And they ſayd he toke them no
                              ••
                            for 
                              •
                           o 
                              〈◊〉
                            / 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            he ſholde haue the
                              ••
                            but yf it 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            bought and proued with theyr handes / for other anſwere wolde they 
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                           . And there 
                              〈◊〉
                            du
                              〈…〉
                            good 
                              〈…〉
                            of the groſide all 
                              〈…〉
                            there 
                              〈◊〉
                            out of 
                              〈…〉
                            o
                              •
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            o
                              •
                            a
                              •
                           mes bothe on hor
                              〈…〉
                            & on 
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            out 
                              〈…〉
                            with them and 
                              〈…〉
                            & there 
                              〈◊〉
                            taken and 
                              ••
                           y
                              ••
                           . 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           ▪ 
                           
                              •••
                           ſones o
                              •
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            good 
                              〈…〉
                           . 
                              •
                           nd 
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            to the towne. And the kyng with his lordes were lodged in the Charterhous / and grete ſtrength about them / & that was in the 
                              •
                           eſt parte of y• 
                           
                              ••
                           te. And the duke of Clarence lodged hym at the weſt ende of the 
                              〈◊〉
                            in a waſte abbey before the porte Caux. And the duke of Exceſtre with his meyny on the north ſyde before the porte Beauuoyſyn. And bytwene the duke of Clarence and the duke of Exceſtre was y• erle Marſhall lodged with moche ſolke & a ſtronge power before the caſtell gate. And than was y• erle of Ormonde / the lorde Haryngton / and alſo the lorde 
                              〈◊〉
                            with theyr retynue and company nexte to hym. And than 
                              〈◊〉
                            Iohn Cor
                              •
                           e wayle with many other noble knyghtes and ſquyers of name with all theyr retynue ſaye with the noble duke of Clarē
                           
                              ••
                           . And from the duke of Exceſtre towardes the kynge were lodged the lorde 
                              •
                           oos / and the lorde Wyllybe / with the lorde Phehew
                              •
                            / and ſyr Wyllyam Porter knyght / with all theyr retynue before the port of ſay
                              ••
                            Hyl
                              •
                           ry. And than was the erle of Mor
                           
                              •••
                           n with all his retynue l
                              •
                           dged in the abbey of ſaynt 
                              •
                           ather
                              ••
                           s. And the 
                              •
                           rle of 
                              •
                           alyſ
                              ••
                           ry with his retynue laye on that other ſyde of ſaynt 
                              •
                           atherynes. And ſyr Iohn Gray knyght was lodged at the abbey that is called le mo
                              •
                           n
                              •
                            d
                              •
                            ſaynt My
                              •
                           h
                              •
                           l. And ſyr Philip 
                              〈◊〉
                            knyght the kynges treſourer was lodged bytwene the water of 
                              •
                           eyn
                              •
                            and the abbey / and kepte the warde vnder the hyll. And the baron of Carowe was lodged vnder the wat
                              •
                           r ſyde for to kepe the paſſage. And Ien
                              •••
                            the ſquyer laye nexte hym on the water ſyde / and theſe two ſquyers kepte ma
                              •
                           ly the water of 
                              ••
                           yne / and often tymes fought with theyr enemyes. And on that other ſyde of 
                              ••
                           yne laye the 
                              •
                           rle of Huntyngdon / 
                              〈◊〉
                            mayſter 
                              〈◊〉
                            the erles 
                              ••
                           ne of Weſt
                           
                              〈…〉
                           erlonde / & ſyr Gylbert 
                              〈◊◊〉
                           
                           
of Kent / & ſyr Rychard erle of Arundell / & the lorde Feryers with theyr retynue before the porte du pount / & eche of theſe lordes had ſtronge ordynaunce / and the kynge dyd make at Poūt de larche ouer the water of Seyne a ſtronge & a myghty chayne of yren / & put it through grete pyles faſt pyght in the grounde / & that went ouer the ryuer of Seyne / that no veſſell myght paſſe in no wyſe / & about that cheyne the kyng let make a brydge ouer the water of Seyne / that men and hors & all other catyage myght go to & fro at all tymes whan nede were. And than came y• erle of warwik & had goten Dounfrout to kyng Henry of Englonde And anone y• kynge ſent the erle of War wyk to Cawdebecke to beſyeg
                              •
                           it. And whan he came before the towne he ſent his herawdes to the capytayne & hadde hym yelde vp the towne vpon payne of deth / and anone he layde his ſyege. And the capytayne beſought the erle that he myght come to his preſence and it pleaſed hym and ſpeke with hym. And ſo y• good erle graūted hym for to come. And than he came out / & foure other burgeyſes came with hym / & entreated ſo with this erle that this ſame towne was vnder compoſicyon / to do as y• e
                              •
                           te of Boen dyd. And the erle graunted & conſented therto vpon this condicyon / that y• kynges nauy of Englonde with his ordynaūce myght paſſe vp by them in ſafet
                              •
                            without ony maner of lette or dyſturbaunce / and to his compoſicyon they ſet to theyr ſeales / and the ſhyppes paſſed vp by them in ſafete and came before the cite of Boen vnto an hondred ſhyppes / & there they caſt theyr ankers / and than this cite was veſyeged bothe by londe 
                              〈◊〉
                            by water. And whan all this was done and the ſhyppes comen vp / than came y• 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            of warwyk agayne to the kynge / & 
                              〈◊〉
                            hym 
                              •
                           y
                              ••
                           ene the abbey of ſaynt Kathet y
                              •
                           s & the kyng / tyll that the abbey entreated / & ſo was the kyng. And than he 
                              〈…〉
                            & lodged hym before the 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            uylle / & than was the erle of 
                              〈…〉
                           ry rōma
                              •
                           ded by the kyng 
                              〈…〉
                            redy to ryde / but there 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            tydynges & made hym to abyde / & ſo he returned agayne & lodged hym beſyde the erle of Huntyngdon tyll that the ſyege was ended▪ And than came the duke of Gloceſtre the kynges brother from the ſyege of Shyr
                              •
                           ou
                              •
                           gh y• whiche he had wonne & goten and ſtuffed agayn to the kynges beh
                              〈…〉
                            & profyte vnto y• 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            of Englonde. And whan he was comen to the kynge before 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           ▪ as one he lodged with grete ordynaūce before y• porte ſaynt Hylary / 
                              〈◊〉
                            the towne and his enemyes than our other lay
                              •
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           . 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 
                              〈…〉
                           es of lengthe / within 
                              〈◊〉
                            of quarell / & with hym laye y• 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            of 
                              〈◊〉
                            & the lorde of 
                              〈◊〉
                            with all theyr retynue & ſtrange ordy
                              〈…〉
                            / & 
                              〈◊〉
                            & proudly 
                              〈…〉
                            theyr enemyes / euer 
                              〈◊〉
                            they yſſued out of the 
                              •
                           ite. And than came the pryour of Kylmayn of 
                              〈◊〉
                            the ſee to y• kyng with a fayre 
                              ••
                           yny of men of armes af ter theyr own 
                              〈◊〉
                            guyſe / to y• no
                              •
                           br
                              •
                            of▪ xv .C. 
                              〈…〉
                            / & y• kyng welcomed them & made them good chere. ¶ And than 
                              〈…〉
                            the kynge that 
                              〈…〉
                            the Dolphyn 
                              〈…〉
                            of 
                              〈…〉
                           yn wolde come 
                              〈…〉
                            with a ſtronge 
                              〈…〉
                            cyons & 
                              〈…〉
                            entre on y• 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            ſyde of y• 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            bycauſe that there 
                              〈◊〉
                            y• 
                           
                              〈…〉
                            & 
                              〈◊〉
                            playn 
                              〈◊〉
                            therfore y• kyng aſſigned the pryour of Kylmay
                              •
                            wt his 
                              〈◊〉
                            / & lodged hym on y• north ſyde of y• hooſt for to ſtop theyr paſſage / & was 
                              〈◊〉
                            y• foreth of Lyons / & of this ordinaūce they were

                           
                              〈…〉
                            go to y• ſee y• 
                           
                              〈…〉
                            his 
                              ••
                           uy ne 
                              〈◊〉
                            his londe 
                              〈◊〉
                            party for 
                              〈…〉
                            his vſage. 
                              〈…〉
                            y• 
                           
                              〈◊◊〉
                            his 
                              〈…〉
                            to 
                              〈◊〉
                            & 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            y• ſee / & 
                              〈◊〉
                            y• ſee co
                              〈…〉
                            y• no mane
                              •
                            of enemy 
                              〈◊〉
                            route vpon y• ſee. And anone y• kyng 
                              〈◊〉
                            his 
                              〈◊〉
                            to y• 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           pytayn of 
                              〈◊〉
                            / & charged hym to delyuer hym his 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            his towne / or 
                              〈◊〉
                            he wolde neyther leue 
                              〈◊〉
                            thylde alyue. And anone y• capytay
                              •
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                            burgeyſes of the towne brought y• 
                           
                              ••
                           ys vnto the kyng & beſought 
                              〈◊◊〉
                           . And the kynge delyuered the 
                              〈◊〉
                            to 
                              〈◊〉
                            Iohn Kekeley & made hym capytayn / & 
                              〈…〉
                           ded hym to put out all y• Fren
                              〈…〉
                            men bothe of the caſtell & of 
                              •
                           he towne. 
                              〈◊〉
                            there beſyde was the caſtell of Lo
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            / & 
                              •
                           hyder the kyng ſent y• 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            ma
                              •
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            with a f
                              •
                           yre company & 
                              〈◊〉
                            y• 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            / & 
                              〈◊〉
                            was 
                              〈…〉
                            & brought 
                              〈…〉
                            them to the kyng / 
                              〈◊〉
                            the kyng 
                              〈…〉
                            agayn / & 
                              〈…〉
                            y• 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            of Louers & of all y• longe
                              〈…〉
                            / & 
                              〈◊〉
                            ged hym to 
                              〈◊〉
                            all the F
                              〈…〉
                           men. And than y• kynge helde 
                              〈◊〉
                            his waye to Cane / that was a ſtronge downe an
                              •
                            a 
                              ••
                           yre / & 
                              〈…〉
                            he ſent his 
                              〈◊〉
                            to y• capytayn & 
                              〈◊〉
                            ged hym 
                              〈…〉
                            y• 
                           
                              〈…〉
                            his 
                              〈◊〉
                            or 
                              〈◊〉
                            he wolde gete th
                              〈…〉
                            ſtrength of hande. And they 
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                            hym▪ 
                           
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           . 
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            counſeyle 
                              〈◊〉
                            the to 
                              〈◊〉
                            all about. And 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            duke of 
                              〈◊〉
                            was entred in to the towne & ſlewe downe ryght 
                              〈◊〉
                            he came to y• kyng / & ſpared neyther man ne chylde / & euer they cryed a Clatente a Clatence and ſaynt George. And there was d
                              ••
                           d on the walles on y• kynges ſyde a worthy man that was called Springes / the whiche y• kyng 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            to be butyed in y• abbey of Cane faſt William cōquerour / on whoſe ſoule god haue mercy amē. And than y• kyng came in to the towne wt his broder the duke of Clarete and many other worthy lordes with moche ſolempuite & myrthe. And than the kyng cōmaūded y• capytayn to delyuer h
                              •
                            his caſtell. And he beſought the kyng to gyue hym .xiiij. dayes of 
                              〈◊〉
                            ſpyte yf ony reſtowe wolde come / 
                              〈◊〉
                            yf none wold come to delyuer hym y• keys & the caſtell at his cōmaundement. And vnder this compo
                              〈…〉
                            was y• towne & the caſtell of Baycus / wt other townes / fortreſſes & villages vnto the nombre of 
                              •
                           iiij. Vpon y• 
                           
                              •
                           yll before y• caſtell of Cane our kynge 
                              •
                           yght all his 
                              〈◊〉
                            / y• 
                           
                              〈◊◊〉
                            
                           
                              •
                           owne as moche as Cane. And 
                              〈◊〉
                            that tyme came tydynges y• no reſcowe wold come there. And ſo at y• .xiiij. dayes ende the capytayn of the caſtell came out & de lyuered y• keys & the caſtell to our kyng, and Bayeus and the other .xiiij. townes were delyuered to hym alſo. And anone the kyng delyuered the keys to the duke of Clarēce / & made hym capytayn bothe of the towne & alſo of the caſtell / & made hym capytayn of Baycus and of all the other townes alſo. And ſo he 
                              〈◊〉
                            the towne & the caſtell / & there he held ſayne 
                              ••
                           orges feſt / & there he made. x
                              •
                           . knigh tes of the hath / there was ſyr Lowys Roberſart / Salin / Chayny / Mougome 
                              •
                           y / 
                              〈◊〉
                            many other worthy men. And the kyng cōmaunded them for to put out all the Frenſſhmen & women / & no man ſo hardy to defoule 
                              •
                           ny woman / no take no maner of good awayt fr
                              •
                            them / but let

them paſſe ī peas on payne of deth. And there paſſed out of the towne in one daye moo than .xv .C. women. And the kyng let ſtuffe the towne & caſtell wt Englyſſh men / & ordeyned there two capytaynes / one for the towne / & an other for y• caſtell & charged them vpon theyr lyues for to kepe well the towne & the caſtell. And or that our kynge went thens he gate Faleys Newelyn / & layde a ſyege to Shyr burgh / & that ſyege layde y• duke of Glo teſtre with a ſtronge power & a myghty and by proceſſe of tyme gate it / & made there a capytayne of y• ſame towne. And this ſame tyme y• erle of Warwik layde a ſyege vnto Dounfront & gate it / & put therin a capytayne. ¶ And for to ſpeke more of the erle of Marche that y• kynge ordeyned tho to ſcomme the ſee & to kepe the coſtes of Englonde for all maner of enemyes / the wynde aroſe vpon them, that they wende all to haue ben loſt / but through the grace of god almyghty and good gouernaūce they tode afore the 
                              〈◊〉
                            of Wyght all y• ſtorme. And there were loſt two carackes & two balyngers with marchaūdyſe & other grete goodes & all the people y• were within them. And an other caracke droue before Hamton / and threwe his maſt ouer the walles of the towne / and this was on ſaynt Barthylmewes daye. And whan all this ſtorme was ceſed this worthy erle of Marche toke his ſhyppes wt his meyny / & wente to the ſee & londed in Normandy at Hogges / & ſo rode forth towarde the kyng / & euer as he came the frenſſhmen fledde. And there came vnto them an Anthony pygge & folowed y• hooſt all y• waye tyll they came to a grete water / & there they drad to haue bendrowned / for the water cloſed them ſo y• they myght no where gete out. But at the laſt almyghty god 
                              〈◊〉
                            this pygge brought them out all ſafe 
                              〈◊〉
                            there they caught a guyde y• knewe all the countree aboute / 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            brought them through a 
                              〈◊〉
                            ſa
                              •
                           de / and ſo in to an yle / and there they 
                              〈◊〉
                            many pryſoners in theyr waye toward the kynge in theyr iourney / and ſo they came vnto Cane. And there y• kyng welcomed him & toke his iourney to Argenten / & than anone it was yolden vnto the kyng / and they had theyr lyues & went theyr way And than our kynge remeued & went to a ſtronge towne that was called Ceſe / & there was a fayre mynſter / & they yelded it anone vnto the kynge. And than the kyng went from thens to Alaunſon and wanne the towne & the bridge. And the kynge ſente the erle of warwyk to 
                              〈◊〉
                            towne that was called Beleſme with a grete and a ſtronge power / & anone they yelded it / & put them all in to the kynges good grace & mercy / & ſo dyd many mo
                              •
                            ſtronge townes & caſtelles that were in thoſe partyes. And frō thens they went 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            in Perche / & anone it was yelded vnto the 
                              〈◊〉
                            bothe the towne & the caſtell / & bodyes, & goodes at the kynges good grace. And ſo the kyng gate & cōquered all y• townes & caſtelles / pyles ſtrēgthes 
                              〈◊〉
                            abbeys vnto Poūt de larche & from thens vnto y• cite of Boen. ¶ And in the fyfth yere of kyng Henryes regne the fyfth / ſyr Iohn Oldeaſtel y• was the lorde Cobham was areſted for hereſy / & brought to y• Coure of London / & anone after he brake the Cou
                              •
                           e and went in to Wales / & there kepte hym 
                              〈…〉
                           ge tyme. And at y• 
                           
                              〈…〉
                           he lorde Po
                              〈…〉
                            toke hym but he ſtode
                              〈…〉
                            grete defence longe tyme & was ſore wo
                              •
                           ded or he wolde be taken & to the lorde 
                              〈◊〉
                            man brought hym out of Wales to London 
                              〈…〉
                            wher
                              〈…〉
                            & ſo he was brought to Weſtmynſter / & there was examined of certayn poyntes that were 
                              •
                           ut on 
                              〈◊〉
                            / & he ſayd not nay / and ſo he was conuicte of the clergy for his hereſy / 
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                           ned before the Juſtyfull

glad / & ſo they went forth in haſte & kepte y• groūde & the place y• the kynge & his coūſeyle had aſſigned / & they quytte them as good warryours to theyr kyng ¶ Now wyll I tell you whiche were y• chefe capytaynes & gouernours of y• cite of Roen. Mon ſyr Guy butler was chefe capytayn bothe of y• cite & of the caſtel / & Mon ſyr Termegan he was capitayn of port de Caur. Mon ſyr de la Roche was capitayn of y• diſners. Monſyr Anthony was lewtenaunt to Mon ſyr Guy Butler. Henry Chantfien was capytayne of the porte de la pount. Iohn Mantreuas was capytayne of the porte de la caſtel. Monſyr de Preaux was capytayne of the porte of ſaynt Hylary. The baſtarde of Tyne he was capytayne of the porte Martenuylle. And graūd Iakes a worthy war
                              •
                            your he was capytayne of all men of warre / and he was gouernour outward bothe on horſbacke and on fote of al men of armes whā they yſſued out of the cite of all y• portes he them arayed as they ſholde encountre wt our meyny. And eche of the capitaynes ladde .v. M. men of armes / and ſome moo. And at y• fyrſt comynge of our kynge there were nombred by herawdes vnto .CCC. M. of men and women and chyldren / what yonge & olde. And amonge all theſe was many a manfull man of his handes / & ſo they preued them whan they yſſued out of the cite bothe on horſbacke and on fote / for they came neuer at one gate out alone / but at thre or foure gates / and at euery gate two or thre thouſand of good mēnes bodyes armed and manfully encountred wt our Englyſſhmen / & moche people ſlayne dyuers tymes wt gonnes / quarelles & other ordynaunce. And this ſyege dured .xx. wekes / and euer they of the towne truſted to haue ben reſ
                              ••
                           wed / but there came none. So at the laſt they kepte ſo longe the towne that there dyed many a thouſande within the towne for defaute of meet of men & women & chyldren / for they had eten theyr horſes / dogges and cattes that were in the towne. And oftentymes y• men of armes droue out the poore people at the gates of the towne for ſpendyng of vitayles / & anone ou
                              •
                            Englyſſhmen droue them in to the towne agayne. So at the laſt the capytayne of the towne ſawe the myſchefe / & that they were not reſcowed / & alſo the ſcarſete of vytayle / and that the people dyed for defaute of meet euery daye many thouſandes / & alſo ſawe yonge chyldren lye lyke as they had ſouked theyr moders pappes and were deed. Than anone they ſent to the kyng beſechynge hym of his grace & mercy / and brought the keys of the towne vnto y• kyng
                              •
                            & de lyuered the towne to hym / & all the ſoudyours voyded the towne wt they horſes & harneys / & the comyns of y• towne for to abyde & dwell ſtyll in y• towne / yerely to paye to hȳ & to his ſucceſſours for all maner cuſtomes & 
                              •
                           ee fermes & quater
                              •
                           
                           mes. And than the kyng entred into the towne / & reſted hym in the caſtel tyll the towne was ſet in rule & in gouernaūce.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How the kyng of Englonde was made enherytour & regent of Fraunc
                              •
                            / and how he wedded quene Katheryne.
                        ANd anone after that Roen was goten / Depe & many other townes in baſe Normandy gaue them ouer without ſtroke or ſyege whan they vnderſtode y• the kyng had go
                              •
                           ē Ro
                              •
                           n. Alſo this yere had ben a peas made & ſworne bytwene y• duke of Burgoyn & the Dolphyn / whiche were ſworne on goddes body that they ſholde loue & aſſyſt 
                              ••
                           he other agaynſt theyr enemyes. And after this cōtrary to this othe / the duke Iohn of Burgoyne was ſlayne and pyteouſly

murdred in the preſence of the Dolphyn wherfore ye frenſſhmen were gretly deuyded / and of very neceſſyte laboured to haue a treaty with ye kyng of Englonde For the kyng of Englonde wanne dayly of them townes / caſtelles and fortreſſes. ¶ Alſo this ſame yere was quene Iane areſted & brought in to ye caſtell of Ledes in Kent. And one frere Randolf a doctour of diuinite her confeſſour whiche afterwarde was ſlayne by the perſone of the Toure fallyng at wordes & debate. And after quene Iane was deliuered. ¶ And in the .vij. yere bothe ye kynge of Fraūce and of Englonde were accorded / & kyng Henry was made heyre and regent of Fraunce / & wedded dame Katheryn the kynges doughter of Fraūce at Troyes in Champayn on Tr
                              ••
                           ite ſondaye. And this was made by the meane of Philip newe made duke of Burgoyne / whiche was ſworne to kyng Henry for to auēge his faders deth & was become englyſſhe And than ye kynge with his newe wyfe went to Paris / where he was ryally receyued. And from thens he went wt his lordes & the duke of Burgoyn and many other lordes of Fraunce & layde ſyege to diuers townes of Fraūce that helde of ye Dolphyns party & wanne them. But ye towne of Melune helde longe tyme / for therin were good defenders. ¶ In the viij. yere ye kyng & ye quene came ouer ſee & londed on Candelmaſſe daye in ye mornyng at Douer. And the .xiiij. day of Feueryer ye kyng came to Londō / & the. xxj daye of ye ſame moneth ye quene came / & the .xxiiij. daye of ye ſame ſhe was crowned at Weſtmynſter. ¶ Alſo ye ſame yere anone after eeſter ye kyng helde a parlya ment at Weſtmynſter / at whiche parlia ment it was ordeyned yt the golde in englyſſhe coyne ſholde be weyed / & none receyued but by weyght. ¶ And anone after 
                              •
                           hytſontyde the kyng ſayled to Calais & paſſed ſo forth into Fraūce. And in Marche the .xxij. daye before the kynge came ouer / ye duke of Clarēce was ſlayne in Fraūce / & diuers other lordes takē priſoners / as the erle of Huntingdon / ye erle of Somerſet wt dyuers other / & all was bycauſe they wold not take none arthers with them / but thought to haue ouercomen ye frenſſhmen themſelfe without archers / & yet whan he was ſlayne the archers came & reſcowed the body of the duke / whiche they wold haue caryed wt them / god haue mercy on his ſoule / he was a valyaūt man. And the ſame yere bytwene Chryſtmaſſe & Cādelmaſſe the towne of Melun was yolden to ye kynge ¶ In the .ix. yere on ſaynt Nicolas day in Decēber was borne Henry y• kynges fyrſt begoten ſone at Wyndſore / whoſe godfaders at the font ſtone was Henry byſſhop of Wyncheſtre / & Iohn duke of Bedford / & the ducheſſe of Holland was godmoder / & Henry Chicheley archebiſſhop of Caūterbury was godfader at cō firmynge. ¶ And in the .x. yere ye cite of Meaux in Brie was goten / whiche had longe ben beſyeged. And this ſame yere the quene ſhypped at Hampton & ſayled ouer to the kynge in Fraūce / where ſhe was worſhipfully receyued of ye kyng / & alſo of the kyng of Fraūce her fader / & of her moder. And thus kyng Hery Wanne faſt in Fraūce & helde grete eſtate / & ſate at diner at a gretefeeſt i Paris crowned & the quene alſo / whiche had not bē ſeen before / & all people reſorted to his courte but the kyng of Fraūce helde none eſtate ne rule / but was left almoſt alone. ¶ Alſo this yere ye wethercocke was ſet vpon Paules ſteple at London. And this yere in the moneth of Auguſt ye kynge wexed ſeke at Boys de Vincene / & whā he ſawe he ſholde dye he made his teſtamēt / & ordeyned many noble thinges for his ſoule and deuoutly receyued al cheryghtes of

holy chirche / in ſo ferforth that whan he was anoynted he ſayd the ſeruyce with the preeſt / & at the verſe of the pſalme of 
                              •
                           iſerere mei deus. that was Benigne fac dn̄e in bona volūtate tua ſyon: vt edificētur muri hieruſalem. he badde tary there and ſayd thus. O good lorde / thou knoweſt that myn entent hath ben / & yet is / yf I might lyue to reedifye ye walles of Ieruſalem. And than the preeſt proce ded forth & made an ende. And anone after this mooſt noble prince & victoryous kyng floure in his tyme of chryſten chyualry / whome all the worlde doubted / gaue his ſoule in to the handes of god & dyed & made an ende of his naturall lyfe at the foreſayd Boys de Vincēne beſyde Parys the .xxxvj. yere of his age / vpon whoſe ſoule god haue mercy. Amen.
                        Than was the body enbawmed & cered & layde in a ryall chare / & an ymage lyke to hym was layde vpon the corps open with diuers baners / & horſes couered ry chely wt the armes of Englōde & Fraūce & alſo the olde armes of ſaynt Edwarde ſaynt Edmond & other / with grete multytude of torches / with whome went ye kynge of Scotlond & many other lordes whiche accōpanyed the body tyl it came vnto Weſtmynſter by London in Englonde. And in euery towne by ye waye he had ſolempnely his Dirige on the euen and maſſe on the morow / & moche almes was gyuē to poore people by the waye. And the .vij. daye of Nouember after ye corps was brought through London wt grete reuerence and ſolempnite to Weſtmynſter where as he now lyeth / it was worſhipfully buryed / & after was layde on his tombe a ryal ymage lyke hymſelf of ſyluet & gylt / whiche was made at ye 
                           
                              •
                           oſt of quene Katheryn. And thus ended and is entered & buryed the noble kynge Henry the fyfth / on whoſe ſoule and all thryſten ſoules god haue mercy.
                        Amen.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the lawe of kyng Henry the fyfth and what he ordeyned for kyng Richard and for hymſelfe after his deth.
                        HEre is to be noted that this kynge Henry ye fyfth was a noble prynce after he was kynge & crowned / how be it before in his youth he had ben wylde recheles & ſpared nothynge of his luſt ne deſyres / but accomply
                              ••
                           hed them after his lykyng. But as ſoone as he was crowned / anoynted and ſacred / anone ſodeynly he was chaūged in to a newe mā & ſet all his entent to lyue vertuouſly in maynteynynge of holy chirche / deſtroyenge of heretykes / kepyng Iuſtyce & defendyng of his realme & ſubgeetes. And for as moche as his fader had depoſed by his labour the good kyng Rychard / & pyteouſly made hym to dye / & for the offence done to him agaynſt his legeaunce he had ſent to Rome to be aſſoyled therof For which offence our holy fader ye pope enioyned hym to make him to be prayed for perpetually / & lyke as he had done to be taken frō hym his naturall lyfe / therfore he ſholde do foūde .iiij. tapers to bren perpetually about his body that for the extynccyon of his bodyly lyfe his ſoule may euer be remembred & lyue in heuen in ſpirituall lyfe. And alſo ye he ſhold euery weke on the daye as it came about of his deth haue a ſolēpne maſſe of Requi
                              •
                            & on the euen afore a Dirige with .ix. leſſons / & a dole to poore people alway on ye daye of .xj. ſhyllynges & .viij. pens to be deled peny mele / & ones in ye yere at his annyuerſary his enteremēt to be holden in the mooſt honeſt wyſe / & to be deled ye daye .xx. poūde in pens to poore people & to euery monke .xx. ſhyllynges / whiche all theſe thinges per
                              •
                           ournted this noble kynge for his fader. For kyng Henry the fourth his fader perfourmed it not durynge his lyfe / whome as it was ſayd

god touched and was a lepre or he dyed. ¶ And than this noble prynce let do call all the abbottes & pryours of ſaynt Benettes ordre in Englonde / & had them in the chapter hous of Weſtmȳſter for the reformacion of the ordre / wherin he had comynycacyon / & alſo with byſſhops & men of the ſpiritualte / in ſo ferforth that they doubted ſore ye he wolde haue had ye temporaltees out of theyr hādes / wherfore by the aduyſe / labours & procuryng of the ſpiritualte encouraged the kynge for to chalenge Normādy & his ryght in Fraūce / to the entent to ſet hym a werke there / that he ſhold not ſeke occaſyons to entre in to ſuche maters. And al his lyfe after he laboured in ye werres in conque ryng a grete parte of ye realme of Fraūce that by the agrement of the kyng Charles he had all the gouernaunce and rule of the realme of Fraunce / & he was proclaymed regent & heyre of Fraunce. And ſo notwithſtandynge for all this grete warre that he had / yet he remembred his ſoule / and alſo that he was mortall and muſt dye / for whiche he ordeyned by his lyfe tyme the place of his ſepulture where he is buryed / and there is euery daye thre maſſes perpetually ſongen in a chapell ouer his ſepulture / of whiche the myddle maſſe and the fyrſt & the laſt maſſe ſhall be as it is aſſygned by hym / as it appereth by theſe verſes folowynge.
                        
                           Henrici miſſe quinti ſunt hic tabulate.
                           Que ſucceſſiue ſūt ꝑ monachos celebrate.
                        
                        
                           ¶ Die dn̄ica.
                           Prima ſit aſſūpte de feſto virginis alme
                           Poſcit poſtremā xp̄s de morte reſurgēs.
                        
                        
                           ¶ Feria ſecunda.
                           Prima ſalutate de feſto virginis extat
                           Nūciat āgelicis laudē poſtrema choreis
                        
                        
                           ¶ Feria tertia.
                           Eſſe deū natū / de virgine prima fatetur.
                           Cōmemorat natū / ſicvl
                                 •
                              ia miſſa mariā.
                        
                        
                           ¶ Feria quarta.
                           Pria celebret̄ / ad honorē pneumatꝭ almi
                           Vltima conceptā / denunciat eſſe mariā.
                        
                        
                           ¶ Feria quinta.
                           Semꝑ prima coli / debet de corpore xp̄i.
                           Vltima ſit facta / de virgine purificata.
                        
                        
                           ¶ Feria ſexta.
                           Concedet vt prima / celebret̄ de cruce ſctā
                           
                           At
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               ſalutate / fiet poſtrema marie.
                        
                        
                           ¶ Sabbato.
                           Oēs ad ſctōs / eſt prima colenda ſuꝑnos
                           Vltima de requie / ꝓ defunctis petit eſſe
                           Semper erit media / de proprtetate di
                                 •
                              i.
                        
                        ¶ And yet the noble kyng Henry ye fyfth foūded two houſes of religyon / that one is called Syon beſyde Braynford of the ordre of ſaynt Brigitte bothe of men and women. And on ye other ſyde of the riuer of Tamyſe a hous of monkes of Charterhous / in whiche two places he is contynually prayed for nyght and daye / for euer whan they of Syon reſteth they of the Charterhous do theyr ſeruyce / & in lyke wyſe whan they of ye Charterhous reſteth the other gothe to / and by ryngynge of the belles of eyther place eche knoweth whan they haue ended theyr ſeruyce / whiche be nobly endowed / & do dayly there grete almes dedes / as in the Charterhous certeyn chyldren be foūde to ſcole: & at Syon certeyn almes gyuen dayly. And yet beſyde all this he foūded a recluſe whiche ſhall be alway a preeſt to praye for him by ye ſayd Charterhous which preeſt is ſufficiently endowed for hȳ & a ſeruaūt. Loo here may all prȳces take enſample by this noble prynce that regned ſo lytell tyme / not fully .x. yere / & dyd ſo many noble actes as well for his ſoule to be perpetually prayed for / as in his worldly cōqueſtes / & he beynge ī his moſt luſti age deſpiſed & eſchewed ſynne & was a grete iuſticer / in ſo moche yt al ye prynces of chriſtēdom drad hym & alſo of

                           
                              〈◊〉
                            & 
                              •
                           e 
                              〈◊〉
                            in him 
                              ••
                           fe yf god 
                              〈◊◊◊◊〉
                            to haue watred o
                              •
                            ȳ 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            & 
                              〈◊〉
                            to knowe the ay
                              ••
                            of other 
                              〈◊〉
                            & all ȳ paſſages in ye iourn
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              •
                           nyght of 
                              〈◊〉
                            named ſyr Hugh de L
                              〈…〉
                            vnto Ieru ſall / but or he 
                              •
                           etur
                              〈…〉
                            he dyed at Boy
                              •
                            de 
                              〈◊〉
                            in the .xxxvj. yere of his age on whoſe ſoul
                              •
                            Ie
                              〈…〉
                            haue mercy. Amē.
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            the .v. was pope whan Eugeny was depoſed .ix. yere. This Felix was 
                              〈◊〉
                            of Sauoye 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            prynce & an olde man / and he ſawe his childes childe. This man whā he lyued an holy lyfe was choſen pope of the concyle of Baſyle / & Eugeny was depoſed / & there was ſtryfe longetyme / & he had no grete obedyence for the depoſicyon of Eugeny. And at ye laſt Eugeny deceſſed & than Felix reſygned to Nycolas for fauour of peas to be had / & he was made legate of fraūce & cardynall of Sabianꝰ ¶ This was the .xxiij. 
                              〈◊〉
                            bytwene Eugeny & 
                              〈◊〉
                            / & i
                              •
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           . xv
                              •
                           . ȳere / & this was a newe cauſe & 
                              〈◊〉
                            ſeen before / for ye concyle of Baſyle depoſed Eugeny ye very pope / & the
                              •
                           e was no more for he obeyed not the de
                              •
                           rees of the concyle of Conſtantynople as they ſayd / ne he charged not to obey the concyle of Baſyle / but he ſayd rather ye cōtrary ſholde be done than ſo as they d
                              ••
                           r
                              •
                           ed. Wherfore there aroſe a grete altercacyon in ye mater. For ſome ſayd one waye / & ſome another / & coude not accorde vnto this daye / for yt one partye ſayd ye the concyle was aboue the pope / & an other partye ſayd ye cōtrary / ye the pope was aboue ye concyle / but they lefte it vndetermyned / & therfore god muſt dyſpoſe for the beſt. ¶ Albert was emperour after Sygyſmonde one yere. This Albert was duke of Auſtre & neuewe to Sygyſmonde / & therfore he was kynge of 
                              ••
                           em and of Vngry for his doughter / for other heyre he left none. This man was emperour of Almayne / but anone he was poyſoned & dyed / and he was in all thynges a vertuous man / yt all men ſaid he was a preſident to all kynges. ¶ Fredericus y• thyrde was emperour after hym. This Frederyk was duke of Oſteryke / & choſen Emperour of Almayne / but it was longe or he was crowned of the pope for diuiſion. At the laſt there was made an vnite / & he was crowned with grete honour of the pope in ye cite / & was a peaſy ble man & a quyete / & of ſynguler pit
                              •
                            / & he hated not the clergye / he wedded the kȳges doughter of Portyngale / & in his tyme whyles that he regned he made a grete cōuocacyon of prynces in Ra
                              •
                           ſp
                              •
                           
                           na / for ye incours of ye Turkes / & ſhewed vnto them yt now within this .xx. yere chryſtēdome was made leſſe. ij .C. myle & he warned them yt they ſholde be redy to reſyſt hym. And the imperyall cite of Cōſtantynople was taken ye ſame tyme of y• miſ
                              •
                           yleuynge Turkes / & betrayed by a Ianuens / whome for his labour ye Turke made a kyng as he ꝓmyſed b
                              •
                            / & the fourth day he called hym / & dyd d
                              •
                            hange hȳ for his deceyt to his mayſter. And there was grete ſorowe & wepyng amonge ye chryſten people for ye loſſe of yt noble cite / for many a chriſten man was ſlayne / & innumerable were ſold / & ye emperour was ſlayne / & for enuy ye Turke cauſed his heed to be ſmytten of whā he was deed / & almooſt al ye fayth in ye lōde of greke fayled. ¶ Nycolas the .v. a Ia nuens was pope after Felix .viij. yere. This Nycolas was choſen at Rome in the place of Eugeny: & yet y• ſtrife henge ſtyll / & a lytell & a lytel they obeyed hym And al men meruayled that a man of ſo poore a nacyon ſhold obtayne agaynſt y• duke of Sauoye ye whiche was coſyn & alyed almooſt to all the prynces of chry
                           
                              ••
                           endome

& euerychdue left hym. Than in the yere after there was a peas made & Felix reſygned / for it pleaſed our lorde his name to be gloryfyed by an obiect of the worlde as was y• Ianuens in comparyſon to the duke the pope. This Nycolas was a mayſter in diuinite and an actyfe man / & a ryche man in conceytes and many thynges that were fallen he buylded agayn / & all y• walles of Rome he renewed for drede of the Turke. And there was a verſe made of this vnite / & publyſſhed in the cite. 
                              •
                           ux fud ſit mun dot ceſſit Felix Nicolao. And that in the yere of our lorde. M .CCCC .xlix. The yere of grace with a grete deuocyō was confermed / & innumerable people went to the apoſtles ſetes.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Henry the ſyxth regned beynge a chylde not one yere of age / and of the batayle of Vernoyle in Perche.
                        AFter king Henry y• fyfth regned Henry his ſone but a childe / and not fully one yere of age / whoſe regne began the fyrſt daye of September in y• yere of our lord. M .cccc .xxij. This kyng beynge in his cradell was moche doubted & drad bycauſe of the grete conqueſt of his fader / & alſo the wyſdome & guydyng of his vncles the duke of Bedford and the duke of Gloceſtre. ¶ This yere the .xxi. daye of October dyed Charles the kynge of Fraūce / & lyeth buryed at ſaynt Denys. And than was y• duke of Bedford made regent of Fraūce. And y• duke of Gloceſtre was made protectour & defendour of Englonde. ¶ And y• fyrſt daye of Marche after was ſyr William Tayllour preeſt degraded of his preeſthode / & on y• morowe after he was brent in ſmythfelde for hereſye. ¶ This yere ſyr Iames Stewarde kynge of ſcottes maryed dame Iane the ducheſſe dough te
                              •
                            of Clayence whiche 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            by he
                              •
                            fyrſt huſ
                              〈…〉
                            the erle 
                              〈…〉
                            a
                              •
                            ſaynt Mary 
                              〈…〉
                            yere the .xvij. da
                              •
                           e 
                              〈…〉
                            of 
                              ••
                           rnoyle 
                              〈…〉
                            of Bedford regent of 
                              〈◊〉
                            & the duke of 
                              •
                           Alaunſon whiche was a grete batayle. The duke of 
                              〈…〉
                            his▪ ſyde the erle of 
                              〈…〉
                            & the lorde Talbot & all the power y• they coude ma
                              〈…〉
                            kepte. And alſo many 
                              〈…〉
                            with moche people of th
                              〈…〉
                            duke 
                              〈…〉
                           yns And on th
                              〈…〉
                            was the duke of Alaūſon / the duke of 
                              〈…〉
                            the erle of Douglas 
                              〈…〉
                            ha
                              •
                            / wt many lordes of Fraūce / & a grete company of ſcottes & armynackes. And than y• erle Douglas called y• duke of Bedforde in ſcorne Iohn wt the leden ſwerde. And he ſente hym worde agayne y• he ſholde fynde y• daye y• his ſwerde was of ſtyle. And ſo y• 
                           
                              ••
                           yned on bothe ſydes & fought 
                              〈…〉
                            me y• no man wyſt who ſholde haue y• better a grete whyle / but at y• laſt as god wold y• victory fell vnto y• englyſſhe party / for there were ſlayne the erle Douglas whiche a lyteil before was made duke of Turō / y• erle of Bou ghā / y• erle of Almarre / y• erle of Tounar the erle of Vaūtedor / & y• vycoūte of Ner bonne / whiche was one of them y• ſlewe duke Iohn of Burgoyn knelyng before the Dolphyn / & many m
                              ••
                            vnto y• nombre of .x. M. & moo. And there was takē pryſoners y• duke of Alaūſon and many other lordes & gentylle
                              •
                            of Fraūce / but ſcottes y• daye were ſlayne downe right the ſubſtaūce of them all. ¶ The thyrde yere of kynge Henry the ſyxth the duke, of Gloceſtre maryed the ducheſſe of Hollande / and went ouer ſee with her in to Henaud for to take poſſeſſyon of his wy ues enherytaūce / where he was honou rably receyued and taken for lord of the

londe. But ſoone after he was fayne to returne home agayne in to Englonde / & lefte his wyfe & all his treſour y• he had brought wt hym in a town that is called Mouns in Henaud / whiche promyſed for to be true to hym. Notwithſtādyng they delyuered the lady vnto y• duke of Burgoyn / whiche ſent her to Gaunt / & from thens ſhe eſcaped in a mānes clothȳge & came in to zelande to a towne of her owne called Sirixze / & frō thens ſhe wente to a towne in Hollande called the Gowe / & there ſhe was ſtronge ynough and withſtode y• foreſayd duke of Burgoyne. ¶ And ſoone after y• duke of Gloceſtre ſent ouer ſee in to zelande the lord Fitz water with certayn men of warre and archers for to helpe & ſocour y• foreſayd ducheſſe of Hollāde / whiche londed at a place in zelande called Brewers hauen / where the lordes of y• coūtree came downe & fought with hym / & in concluſyon he was fayne to withdrawe hym & his company to y• ſee agayne. But yet he ſlewe & hurte dyuers lordes & moche people of the ſame coūtree / & ſo returned home agayn in to Englonde wt his company / & preuayled no thynge. ¶ And alſo this ſame yere y• erle of Saleſbury / y• erle of Suffolke / y• lorde Wyllybe / & the lorde Scales with theyr retynue layde ſyege to the cyte of Mauns / the whiche cyte was yolden to them wt many other ſtronge townes & caſtels to y• nombre of xxxvj. ¶ This tyme all Normandy & a grete parte of Fraunce vnto Drlyaunce was vnder the obeyſſaūce of y• kynge of Englonde / & all the remenaūt of Fraūce was in grete trybulacyon & myſchefe.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How there was lyke to haue ben a grete fraye bytwene the cardynal and the duke of Gloceſtre. And of the coronacyon of kyng Henry the ſyxth bothe in Englonde and in Fraunce.
                        IN the fourth yere y• ſame nyght y• the mayre of Londō Iohn Couentre had taken his charge / was a grete watche in London for a fraye that was bytwene y• byſſhop of Wyncheſtre & the duke of Gloceſtre protectour. &c. For the mayre wt the people of y• cite wold abyde by the duke of Gloceſtre as protectour & defendour of y• realme. But by labour of lordes that went bytwene / & in eſpecyal by the labour of y• prynce of Portyngale there was a poyntement taken y• there was no harme done. ¶ And after y• batayle of Vernoyle in Perche the duke of Bedford came ouer in to Englonde. And on whytſonday this ſame yere at Leyceſtre he dubbed kynge Henry knyght. And forth with y• ſayd kyng Henry dubbed all theſe knyghtes whoſe names foloweth / y• is to wyte / ſyr Rycharde duke of Yorke / alſo y• ſone & heyre of y• duke of Norfolke / the erle of Oxford / the erle of weſtmerlonde / the ſone & heyre of y• erle of Northumberlond / y• ſone & heyre of y• erle of Vrmond / y• lord Roos / ſyr Iames butteler / the lord Matrauas / ſyr Henry gray of Tankeruile / ſyr Williā Neuyl / lord Fawconbrygge / ſyr George Neuyl lorde Latymer / the lorde welles y• lorde Berkle / y• ſone & heyre of y• 
                           lord Talbot / ſyr Rafe gray of werk / ſyr Robert 
                              •
                           eer / ſyr Rychard gray / ſyr Edmond Honger ford / ſyr Robert winkfeld / ſyr Iohn but ler / ſyr Raynold Cobhā / ſyr Iohn paſhley / ſyr Thomas Tunſtal / ſyr Iohn chi diok / ſyr Rafe langford / ſyr williā drury ſyr william ap Thomas / ſyr Rycharde Carbonell / ſyr Rycharde wydeuyle / ſyr Iohn ſhridelow / ſyr William cheyn / ſyr William babyngton / ſyr Iohn tune / ſyr Gylbert Beauchamp. ¶ Alſo in the .v. yere the duke of Bedford wt the ducheſſe his wyfe wente ouer ſee to Calays / & a lytel before went ouer Henry byſſhop of wyncheſtre. And on our lady daye Annūciacion

in our lady chirche at Calays the byſſhop of Wyncheſtre whan y• he had ſongen maſſe was made Cardinall and he knelynge before the hygh awter the duke of Bedford ſet y• hatte vpon his heed / & there were his bulles redde / as well of his charge as of the reioycynge of his benefyces ſpirytuall & temporall. ¶ And this ſame yere was grete haboū daūce of rayne / that the ſubſtaūce of hey & alſo of corne was deſtroyed / for it rayned almoſt euery other day. ¶ And this ſame yere y• good erle of Salyſbury ſyr Thomas Montague layde ſyege vnto Orlyaūce / at whiche ſyege he was ſlay ne with a gonne y• came out of y• towne / on whoſe ſoule god haue mercy / for ſyth that he was ſlayne engliſſhe men neuer gate ne preuayled in Fraunce / but euer after began to leſe lytell & lytell / tyll all was loſt. ¶ Alſo this ſame yere a Bryton murdred a good wydowe in her bed without Algate / whiche wydowe foū
                           de hym for almes / & he bare awaye all that ſhe had. And after this he toke the gyrth of holy chirche at ſaynt Georges in ſouth warke / & there toke the croſſe & forſware this londe. And as he went it happened y• he came by the place where he dyd this curſed dede in y• ſubbarbes of London / & the women of the ſame paryſſhe came out with ſtaues and canell dung & ſlewe & made an ende of hȳ there Notwithſtandynge y• conſtables & many other men beynge preſent for to kepe hym / for there were many women and had no pyte. ¶ Alſo this ſame yere the duke of Norfolke wt many gentylmen & yemen toke his barge the .viij. daye of Nouember at ſaynt Mary auerays for to haue gone through London brydge / & through myſguydyng of the barge / it ouerthrewe on y• pyles / and many men were drowned / but y• duke hȳſelf wt two or thre lept vpon y• piles & ſo were ſaued with helpe of men that were aboue the brydge with caſtynge downe ropes / by the whiche ropes they ſaued themſelfe. ¶ This ſame yere on ſaynt Leonardes daye kyng Henry beynge .vij. yere olde was crowned at weſtminſter / at whoſe crownacyō were made .xxxvj. knyghtes This yere on ſaynt Georges day he paſſed ouer y• ſee to Calays toward Fraūce ¶ Aboute this tyme & afore the realme beynge in grete myſery & trybulacyon / the Dolphyn wt his party began to make warre & gate certayn places / & made diſtreſſes vpon englyſhmen by y• meane of his capytayns / y• is to ſaye / la Heer & Poton de ſeyntraylles / & in eſpecyall a mayde whiche they named la pucelle de dieu. This mayde rode lyke a man / and was a valyaūt capitayn amonge them & toke vpon her many grete enterpriſes in ſo moche y• they had a byleue for to haue recouered all theyr loſſes by her. Notwithſtādyng at y• laſt after many grete feates / by y• helpe & proweſſe of ſyr Iohn Luxemburgh whiche was a noble capytayn of y• duke of Burgoyns & many englyſſhe men pycardes & burgonyons whiche were of our party before y• towne of Compyne the .xxiij. daye of Maye the foreſayd pucelle was takē in y• felde armed lyke a man / & many other capytayns wt her / & were all brought to Roen & there ſhe was put i pryſon / & there ſhe was iudged by y• lawe to be brent. And than ſhe ſayd y• ſhe was wt childe / wher by ſhe was reſpyted a whyle. But in cō cluſyō it was foūde y• ſhe was not with chylde / & than ſhe was brent in Roen / & the other capitayns were put to raūſon & entreated as men of warre ben acuſtomed. ¶ And this ſame yere about Candelmaſſe Richard hunder a woll packer was dampned for an heretike & brent at Toure hyll. ¶ And aboute mydlent ſyr Thomas Baggeley preeſt & vycarye of

Mauen in Eſſex beſyde walden was diſgraded & dāpned for an heretyke & brent in ſmythfelde. ¶ And alſo in y• ſame yere whyles the kynge was in Fraūce there were many heretykes & loulars y• had purpoſed to make a riſyng / & caſt bylles in many places. But blyſſed be god the capytayne of them was taken / whoſe name was Williā Maūdeuyll a weuer of Abyndon & baylyf of the ſame towne whiche named himſelfe Iacke Sharp of wigmoreſlonde in wales. And afterwarde he was byheded at the foreſayd Abyndon in the whytſone weke on the teweſday. ¶ This ſame yere y• .vj. daye of December kynge Henry the .vj. was crowned kyng of Fraūce at Parys in y• chirche of our lady wt grete ſolempnite / there beynge preſent the Cardynall of Englonde / the duke of Bedford / & many other lordes of Fraunce & of Englonde. And after this crownacyon & grete feeſt holden at Parys / the kyng returned frō thens to Roen / & ſo towarde Calays / & the .ix. daye of February lōded at Douer whome all the comyns of Kent mette at beramdoun bytwene Caūterbury & Douer all in reed hodes / & ſo came forth tyll he came to y• blacke heth / where he was mette with the Mayre Iohn welles wt all the craftes of London / clothed all in whyte / & ſo they brought hȳ vnto London the .xxj. daye of the ſame moneth. ¶ And this ſame yere was a reſtraynt of the wolles of Calays made by y• ſoudyours / bycauſe they were not payed of theyr wages / wherfore y• duke of Bedford regent of Fraūce beynge than capytayne came to Calays the teweſdaye in the eeſter weke. And on the morowe after many ſoudyours of the towne were areſted & put in to warde. And in y• ſame weke he rode to Terewyn / and by the meane of y• byſſhop of Terewyn he wedded the erles doughter of ſaynt Poule / & came agayne to Calays. ¶ And the .xj. baye of Iune on ſaynt Barnabees daye there were foure ſoudyours of Calays that were chefe cauſers of the reſtraynt heded / that is to wyte / Iohn Maddeley Iohn Lunday / Thomas Palmer / and Thomas Talbot / & an hondred and .x. banyſſhed the towne that ſame tyme / and before were banyſſhed an hondred and .xx. ſoudyours. And on mydſomer euen after came the lord regent and his wyfe to London.
                        ABoute this tyme pope Martyn dyed / & after hym Eugenye the fourth was pope. This mā was praſybly choſen in Rome by the Cardynalles and was very & indubytate pope. But ſhortly after he was put & erpulſed out of Rome / in ſuche maner that he was fayne to flee naked. In this ſame tyme was the concyle of Baſylye / to whiche concyle he was tho cyted to come. And bycauſe he came not / they depoſed hym But he rought not ne ſet not therby but gate the cyte of Rome & abode ſtyll pope xvij. yere. ¶ This yere about whycſon tyde the heretykes of Praghe were deſtroyed. For at two Iourueys were deſtroyed of them moo than .xxij. M. with theyr capitaynes / that is to wyce Procapius / Saplico / and Lupus preſbyter Alſo there was taken on lyue mayſter Peers clarke an englyſhman & an heretyke. ¶ Alſo this ſame yere was a grete froſt & a ſtronge durynge .xj. wekes for it began on ſaynt Katheryns euen and laſted vnto ſaynt Scolaſticaes daye in February. In whiche tyme y• vyntage that came fro Burdeur came on ſhoters hyll. ¶ This yere was the counſeyle of Arras / and a grete trayte bytwene the kyng of Englonde & the kyng of Fraūce where was aſſembled many grete lordes of bothe partyes / at whiche counſeyle

was offred to ye kyng of Englonde grete thynges / by the meane of a legate that came fro Rome whiche was cardynall of ſaynt croſſe / whiche offers were refuſed by the Cardynall of Englonde & other lordes that were there for ye kyng Wherfore ye duke of Burgoyne whiche longe had ben englyſſhe ſworne / forſoke our partye and returned frenſſhe by the meane of the foreſayd legate / & made a peas with ye frenſſhe kyng / receyuynge of the kyng for recompenſynge of his faders deth ye coūte of po
                              •
                           tou / the lordſhyp of Macon / with moche other as is ſpecyfyed in the ſayd treaty. And ſo our embaſſadours came home agayn in worſe caſe than they wente out. For they loſt there the duke of Burgoyn whiche had ben with his burgonyons & picardes a ſynguler helpe in all ye conqueſt of Normandy & of Fraūce. ¶ This ſame yere was a grete batayle on the ſee bytwene the Ienewes & the kynge of Aragon / of whiche batayle yt Ienewes had ye victory / for they toke ye kynge of Aragon / the kynge of Nauerne / & the grete mayſter of ſaynt Iames in Galyſe / with. iij .C. knyghtes & ſquyers & moche other people. And this was on ſaynt Dominyks daye. ¶ And this ſame yere were ſeen thre ſonnes at ones / & anone folowed ye threfolde gouernaūce in ye chirche / that is to wyte / of Eugeny / of the concyle / and of neutralite. ¶ Alſo this ſame yere M .CCCC .xxxiiij. was a paſſing grete wynde / by whiche ſteples / houſes / and trees were ouerthrowen. ¶ About this tyme was an holy mayde in Holland called Lidwith / whiche lyued onely by myracle / not etyng ony meet. ¶ This yere the duke of Burgoyn began his ordre at Lyle of the golden Flees / & ordeyned certayne knyghtes of ye ſame ordre / & made ſtatutes & ordynaūces moche according vnto the ordre of the garter. ¶ Alſo this ſame yere the frenſhmen had enterpryſed to haue ſtolen Calays in ye fyſſhinge tyme / for many botes of fraūce had ſafe condytes to come to Calays for to take herynge. And the ſoudyours of ye towne had a cuſtom to come to ye chirche & leue theyr ſtaues ſtandyng at ye chirche dore whiche ſtaues the frenſhment that were arayed lyke fiſſhers had purpoſed to haue taken / and ſo for to haue wonne the towne / but one of them laye with a comyn woman ye nyght before / & he tolde to her theyr counſeyle. And ſhe on yt morowe tolde it to the lewtenaunt / whiche forth with cōmaūded yt euery man ſhold kepe his wepen in his hande / ſakeryng tyme and other. And whan the frenſſhe men ꝑceyued this that they were myſpoynted / they ſayled ſtreyght to Depe / and ſtale and toke that towne. ¶ And on Newyeres euen after they toke Harflet And thus the englyſhmen began to leſe a lytell and a lytell in Normandye.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Calays & Guynes were beſyeged by ye duke of Burgoyn / & how they were reſcowed by ye duke of Gloceſtre.
                        THis yere through all Englonde was a grete noyſe how the duke of Burgoyne wold come & beſyege Calays / wherfore ye erle of Mortayn with his army yt he had for to haue gone wt in to fraūce was contremaūded & charged that he ſhold go to Calays / whiche was at that tyme well vitayled & māned / for ſyr Iohn Ratclife was lewtenaūt of the kyng in ye towne / & the baron of Dudley lewtenaūt of the caſtel. And the .ix. daye of Iuly the duke of Burgoyn with all ye power of flaūdres & moche other people came before Calays / and ſet his ſyege about the towne / & euery towne of flaū
                           dres had theyr tentes by themſelfe. And this ſyege endured thre wekes. In the

meane whyle the duke of Gloceſtre beynge ꝓtectour of englonde toke ye mooſt parte of the lordes of englond and went ouer the ſee to Calays for to reſcowe the towne / or to fyght with the duke & his hooſt yf they wolde abyde. This tyme London & euery good towne in englond ſent ouer the ſee to this reſcowe certayn people well arayed of the beſt & choſen men for the warre. And the ſeconde day of Auguſt the foreſaid duke of Gloceſtre arryued at Calays with all his armye and .v. hondred ſhyppes & mo
                              •
                           . And the duke of Burgoyne & all his hooſt yt laye in the ſyege / as ſoone as they eſpyed the ſayles in the ſee / before they approched Calays hauen / ſodeynly in a mornynge departed from ye ſyege / leuyng behynde hym moche ſtuffe & vytayle / and fledde in to flaundres & pycardye. And in lyke wyſe dyd the ſyege yt lay before Guynes where as they of Guynes toke the grete gonne of braſſe called Dygeon / & many other grete gonnes & ſerpentynes. And whan the duke of Gloceſtre was arryued wt all his hooſt / he went in to flaundres / and was there .xij. dayes and dyd but lytell harme / excepte that he brent two fayre vyllages Poperynge & Belle and other houſes whiche were of noo ſtrength / & ſo he returned home agayne ¶ And this ſame yere ye kynge of Scotlōde beſyeged Rokeſburgh with moche people. But ſyr Rafe Gray departed frō the caſtel and ordeyned for reſcowe. But as ſoone as the kynge of Scotlonde vnderſtode of his departynge / ſodeynly he brake his ſyege & went his waye / and lefte moche ordynaunce behynde hym / where he gate no worſhyp. ¶ In this ſame yere the ſeconde daye of Ianuary quene Katherin whiche was ye kynges moder & wyfe to kynge Henry the fyfth dyed & departed out of this worlde / and was brought ryally through London / and ſo to weſtmynſter / & there ſhe lyeth worſhipfully buryed in our ladyes thapell. ¶ Alſo this yere the fourth daye of Ianuary fell downe the gate with the toure on it on London brydge towarde Southwarke with two arches & all yt ſtode theron. ¶ This ſame yere was a grete treaty holden bytwene Graueling & Calays bytwene the kyng & the duke of Burgoyn / where for the kyng was ye Cardinall of Englonde / the duke of Norfolke / & many other lordes. And for the duke of Burgoyn was the ducheſ
                              •
                           e hauynge full power of her lorde as regent & lady of his londes / where was taken by the aduyſe of bothe partyes an abſtinence of warre for a certayne tyme in ye name of ye ducheſſe & not of the duke bycauſe he had gone from his othe & legeaūce that he had made to kynge Henry / therfore the kyng neuer wold wryte no appoynt to haue to do with hym after but all in the ducheſſe name. ¶ Alſo this ſame yere quene Iane dyed the ſeconde daye of Iuly / whiche had ben wyſe to kynge Henry the fourth / & was caryed fro Bermondſey to Caūterbury where ſhe lyeth buryed by kyng Hēry her huſbonde. ¶ This ſame yere dyed all ye lyons in the Toure of Londō the whiche had not ben ſeen many yeres before.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Owen a ſquyer of wales yt had wedded quene Katherin was areſted & of the ſcyſme bytwene Eugeny & Feli
                              •
                           .
                        IN the .xvi. yere of kynge Henry dyed Sygyſmonde Emperour of Almayn & knyght of the garter / whoſe enteremēt ye kyng kept at ſaynt Paules in London ryally / where was made a ryall herſe / and the kynge in his eſtate cladde in blewe was a
                              •
                            euen at Dirige & on ye morow at maſſe. &
                              •
                           . ¶ And after hym was electe & choſen Albert duke of

Oſtryche whiche had wedded Sygiſmondes doughter for to be Emperour. This man was taken & receyued to be kyng of Beme and Hungary bycauſe of his wyfe yt was Sygiſmondes doughter / whiche lefte none other heyre after hym. This Albert was emperour but one yere / for he was poyſoned / & ſo dyed Some ſaye he dyed of a flix / but he was a vertuous man & piteful / ſo moche yt all the people that knewe hym ſayd that ye worlde was not worthy to haue his preſence. ¶ This yere one Owen a ſquyer of wales a man of lowe byrth (whiche had many a day before ſecretly wedded quene Katheryn / & had by her .iij. ſones & one doughter) was taken & cōmaūded to Newgate to pryſon by ye duke of Gloceſtre ꝓtectour of the realme. And this yere he brake the priſon by the meane of a preeſt that was his chapelayn / & after was taken agayn by my lorde Bemond & brought agayne to Newgate / & afterward delyuered at large / & one of his ſones afterward was made erle of Rychemond / & an other erle of Penbroke / & the thyrde a monke of weſtminſter / whiche monke dyed ſoone after. ¶ This ſame yere alſo on Newyeres day at Baynardes caſtell fell downe a ſtake of wode ſodeynly at after none and ſlewe thre men myſcheuouſly / & foule hurt other. ¶ Alſo at Bedford on a ſherthurſdaye were xviij. men murdred wtout ſtroke by fallyng downe of a ſtayre as they came out of ye comin hall / & many ſore hurt. ¶ In the .xviij. yere ſyr Richard Beauchamp the good erle of warwyke dyed at Roen he beynge ye tyme lewtenaūt of ye kynge in Normādy / & frō thens his body was brought to warwyke / where worſhypfully he lyeth in a new chapel on ye ſouth ſyde of ye quere. ¶ Alſo this yere was a grete derth of corne in all englonde / for a buſſhel of where was worth .xl. pens in many places of englond / & yet had they not ynough / wherfore Steuen Brown that tyme Mayre of London ſente in to Pruce and brought to London certayne ſhippes laden wt rye / whiche did moche good to ye poore people / for corne was ſo ſcarce in englōde yt in ſome places of englonde poore people made them breed of ferne rotes. ¶ This yere ye generall concyle of Baſilie depoſed Eugenye / & they choſe Felix yt was duke of Sauoy / & thā began ye ſcyſme whiche endured vnto ye yere of our lord. M .cccc .xlviij. This Felix was a deuout prȳce & ſawe his ſones ſone / & after lyued an holy lyf / and was choſen pope of ye concyle of Baſile / & Eugeny depoſed. And ſo ye ſcyſme was lōge tyme / & this Felix had but lytel obediēce bycauſe of ye neutralite / for ye mooſt part & wel nygh all chriſtēdom obeyed & reputed Eugeny for very pope: god knoweth who was very pope of them bothe / for bothe occupyed during Eugenyes lyfe. ¶ This yere ſyr Richard wyche vicare of Hermete ſworth was degraded of his preeſthode at Paules & brent at tour hill as for an heretyke / on ſaynt Botulphes day / how wel at his deth he died a good chriſtē mā / wherfore after his deth moche peple came to ye place where he was brent & offred & made a hepe of ſtones / & ſet vp a croſſe oftre & held hȳ for a ſaynt tyl ye mayr & ſhreues by ye kȳges cōmaū
                           dement & byſſhops deſtroyed it / & made there a dung hil. ¶ Alſo this yere ye ſhreues of Londō fet out of ſaȳt Martyns ye grād .v. ꝑſones / which afterward were reſtored agayn to ye ſentwary by ye kynges Iuſtyces. ¶ After Albert ye thyrde Frederyk was choſen emperour. This Frederyk duke of Oſteryke was longe emperour / & dyfferred to be crowned at Rome bycauſe of the ſcyſme / but after ye vnite was had / he was crowned wt the imperyall dyademe with grete glory &

triūphe of pope Nicolas ye fourth. This was a peaſyble mā / quyete & of ſinguler pacience / not hatyng ye chirche / he wedded ye kynge of Portyngales doughter.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How the ducheſſe of Gloceſtre was areſted for treaſon / & cōmytted to perpetuall pryſon in the yle of Man / & of the deth of mayſter Roger Bolyngbroke.
                        IN this yere Elenore Cobham ducheſſe of Gloceſtre was areſted for certayn poyntes of treaſon layd agaynſt her / where vpon ſhe was examyned in ſaint Stephens chapel at weſtmynſter before ye archebyſſhop of Caūterbury / & there ſhe was enioyned to open penaūce for to go through chepe berynge a taper in her hande / & after to perpetual priſon in the yle of Man / vnder the kepynge of ſyr Thomas ſtanley. Alſo yt ſame tyme was areſted mayſter Thomas Southwell a chanon of weſtmynſter / mayſter Iohn Hume a chapelayn of the ſayd lady / mayſter Roger Bolyngbroke a clarke vſyng nygromancy / & one Margery iourdemayn called ye wytche of Eye beſyde weſtmynſter. Theſe were areſted as for beynge of coūſeyle wt the ſayd ducheſſe of Gloceſtre. And as for mayſter Thomas ſouthwell he dyed in ye Toure the nyght before he ſholde haue ben reyned on ye morow. For he hymſelfe ſayd yt he ſholde dye in his bedde / & not by iuſtyces. And in the .xx. yere mayſter Iohn Hume and mayſter Roger Bolingbroke were brought to ye gylde hall in London & there before ye Mayre ye lordes & the
                              •
                           e Iuſtyces of Englonde were reyned and dampned bothe to be drawen hanged & quartred / but mayſter Iohn Hume had his chartre & was pardoned by ye kyng / but mayſter Roger was drawen to Tyburne / where he cōfeſſed yt he dyed gyltles / and neuer had treſpaced in that he dyed for. Notwithſtādyng he was hanged heded and quartred / on whoſe ſoule god haue mercy. And Margery iourdemayn was brent in ſmythfelde. ¶ Alſo this yere was a grete fraye in London in Flete ſtrete by nyght tyme / bytwene men of courte & men of London / and dyuers men ſlayne & ſome hurt / & one Herbotell was chefe cauſer of ye myſgouernaunce & fraye. ¶ Alſo this yere at choſynge of ye Mayre of Londō the comyns named Roberte Clopton & Raulyn Hollande tayllour. And ye aldermen toke Robert Clopton & brought hym at ye ryght hande of ye Mayre as ye cuſtome is. And than certayne tayllours & other hande crafty men cryed nay nay not this man but Raulyn Hollād / wherfore y• Mayre that was Padyſly ſent them yt ſo tryed to Newgate / where they abode a grete whyle and were punyſſhed. ¶ In this ſame yere were dyuers embaſſadours ſente in to Guyan for a maryage for the kynge for ye erles doughter of Armyna
                              •
                            the whiche was concluded / but by the meanes of ye erle of Suffolk it was let & put aparte. And after this ye ſayd erle of Suffolk went ouer ſee in to Fraunce & there he treated ye mariage bytwene the kynge of Englōde & ye kynges doughter of Cecyle & of Iheruſalem. And ye neere yere that mariage was fully concluded by whiche maryage the kyng ſholde delyuer to her fader the duchy of Ang
                              •
                           o & the erledom of Mayne whiche was the key of Normādy. Than departed ye erle of Suffolke wt his wyfe & diuers lordes and knyghtes in the mooſt ryall eſtate yt myght be out of Englonde with newe ſhares & palfreys whiche wēt through Chepe / and ſo went ouer the ſee / and receyued her / & ſythen brought her in the lent after vnto Hampton / where ſhe londed & there was ryally receyued. ¶ And on Candelmaſſe euen before by a grete

tempeſt of thondre & lyghtnynge at after none Paules ſteple was ſet on fyre in the myddes of y• ſhafte in the tymbre / whiche was quenched by force of labour & ſpecyally by y• morowmaſſe preeſt of y• Bowe in chepe / whiche was thought impoſſyble / ſaue onely the grace of god. ¶ This yere was y• erle of Stafford made & create duke of Buckyngham / y• erle of warwyk duke of warwyk / the erle of dorſet markys of dorſet / & ye erle of Suffolke was made markys of Suffolke.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How kynge Henry wedded quene Margarete / & of her crownacyon.
                        THis yere kyng Henry maryed at South wyk quene Margarete / and ſhe came to London the .xviij. daye of Maye / & by the waye all the lordes of Englonde receyued her worſhipfully in dyuers places / & in eſpecyal the duke of Gloceſtre / & on the blacke heth ye mayre with the aldermen / and all ye craftes in blewe gownes browdred with ye deuyſe of theyr crafte / yt they might be knowen mette with her wt reed hodes & brought her to London / where were dyuers pagentes & countenaūces of dyuers hyſtoryes / ſhewed in dyuers places of ye cyte ryally and coſtly. ¶ And the .xxx. day of Maye the foreſayd quene was crowned at weſtmynſter. And there was Juſtes thre dayes durynge within ye ſentwary before the abbey. ¶ This yere ye pryour of Kylmayn appeled ye erle of Vrmond of treaſon / whiche had a daye aſſygned to them for to fyght in ſmythfelde / & the lyſtes were made and the felde dreſſed. But whan it came to poynt / the kynge cōmaunded yt they ſholde not fyght / but toke ye quarell in to his hande. And this was done at the inſtaūce & labour of certayne prechours & doctours of London as mayſter Gylbert worthyngton perſone of ſaynt Andrewes in holborne and other. ¶ Alſo this yere came a grete em baſſadour in to Englonde out of Fraūce for to haue concluded a perpetuall peas but in cōcluſyon it turned vnto a trewſe of a yere. ¶ About this tyme dyed ſaynt Barnardyn a gray frere / whiche began the newe reformacyon of y• ordre in many places / in ſo moche that they yt were reformed ben called Obſeruantes / whiche Obſeruātes ben gretly encreaced in ytalye & in Almayne. This Bernardyn was canonyſed by pope Nicolas the .v. in the yere of our lorde. M .cccc .l. Ioh̄es de Capiſtrano was his dyſeyple / whiche ꝓfyted moche to ye reformacyon of y• ordre / for whome god hath ſhewed many a fayre myracle. ¶ Alſo here is to be noted y• from this tyme forwarde kyng Henry neuer profyted ne went forward but fortune began to turne from him on all ſydes / as well in Fraūce / Normādy / Guyen / as in Englond. Some men holde opynyon that kynge Henry gaue cō
                           myſſyon plenarly to ſyr Edwarde Hull / ſyr Robert Roos dene of ſaynt Seuerynes / & other / to conclude a maryage for hym with y• erle of Armynakes ſyſter / whiche was ꝓmyſed as it was ſayd & cōcluded / but afterward it was broken & he wedded quene Margarete as afore is ſayd / whiche was a dere maryage for the realme of Englonde. For it was knowē veryly that for to haue her was delyuered the duchy of Angeo & the erle dom of Mayne / whiche was the key of Normandy for the frenſſhmen to entre. And about this y• ſayd Markys of Suffolke aſked in playne parlament a .xv. & an halfe to fetche her out of fraūce. Loo what a mariage was this / as to y• compariſon of ye other mariage of Armynak For there ſhold haue bē delyuered ſo many caſtels & townes in Guyan / & ſo moche golde ſhold haue ben gyuen wt her / y• all englonde ſhold haue ben therby enry

                           
                              〈◊〉
                            / but 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            fell / wherfore 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            ought 
                              〈◊◊◊◊〉
                            bycauſe of 
                              〈◊◊◊◊〉
                            / 
                              〈◊〉
                            for maryage of 
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                           rets w
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              〈◊◊〉
                            hath 
                              〈◊〉
                            englōde had / by loſyng of Normandy & Guyan / 
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                           nge of 
                              〈◊〉
                            agaynſt theyr pry
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            lordes / what 
                              〈◊◊◊〉
                            lordes / what murdre & ſleynge of them / what feldes 
                              〈◊〉
                            & 
                              〈…〉
                            many y• 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            a man hath 
                              〈◊〉
                            his 
                              〈◊〉
                            / 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            cōclucyon y• kyng de 
                              〈◊〉
                            / & the quene wther ſone 
                              ••
                           yne to 
                              〈◊〉
                            in to Scotland / & from thens in to Fraūce / & ſo to 
                              〈◊◊◊〉
                            y• ſhe came fyrſt fro. Many men dem
                              •
                            that the brekynge of ye kynges promeſſe to the ſyſter of ye erle of Armynak was cauſe of his grete loſſe & aduerſite.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How the duke of Gloceſtre the kynges vncle was areſted at ye parlyament of Bury / & of his deth / and how Angeo and Mayne was delyuered.
                        IN the .xxv. yere of Kynge Henry was a parlyamēt a
                              •
                            Bury called ſaynt Edmondes Bury / about whiche was cōmaūded all the comyns of ye coū
                           tree to be there in theyr mooſt beſt de
                              〈…〉
                            ſyble araye for to wayte vpon ye Kynge. To whiche parlyament came the duke of Gloreſtre Vmfrey the Kynges vncle whiche had ben pro
                              ••
                           etour of englonde all the noneage of ye kyng. And a
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            ter as he was in his lod
                              〈…〉
                            was areſted by y• vycoūte be
                              〈…〉
                            of englond / who me act 
                              〈◊〉
                            y• duke of Buckyngham / & m
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              〈◊◊〉
                            lordes. And forthwt all his ſer
                              〈…〉
                           es were commaūded to departe frō him / &. xxxi
                              •
                           . of y• chefe of them were a
                              〈…〉
                            ſent to dyuers pry
                              〈…〉
                            / & 
                              〈◊〉
                            after this ſay
                              •
                            areſt y• ſayd duke was on y• 
                           
                              〈◊◊〉
                            on whoſe ſoule god haute mercy. But how he dyed & in what maner th
                              〈…〉
                           
                           taynte is not knowē / ſome ſayd he dyed for ſorowe / ſome ſayd he was murdred bytwene two feder beddes / ſome ſayd y• a ſpytte was put in his foūdament / but how he dyed god knoweth / to whom no thynge is hyd. And thus deed he was layde open yt all men myght ſe him / & ſo bothe lordes & knightes of y• ſhyre with burgeyſes came 
                              〈◊〉
                            ſawe hȳ lye deed / but woūdene token coude they not perceyue how he dyed. Here may m
                              •
                            marke what this worlde is. This duke was a noble man & a grete clerke / & ruled worſhypfully y• realme to ye Kynges behofe / & neuer coude be foūde faute in hȳ / but 
                              〈…〉
                           uy of them yt were gouernours & had ꝓmy ſed ye duth y of Angeo & the 
                              〈…〉
                           dome of Mayne cauſen ye deſtruccyon of this noble man / for they drad yt he wolde haue empeſſhed y• delyueraunce / & after they ſent his body to ſaint Albons wt certayn lyghtes to be buryed / & ſo ſyr Ge
                              〈…〉
                           ays of Clefton had than ye charge to cōuay y• corps / & ſo it was buryed at ſaynt Albons in the abbey. And fyue perſones of his houſholde were ſente to London / & there were they reyned & Iudged to be drawen & hanged and alſo quartred. Of whom y• names were / ſyr Roger chamberlayn a knyght / Mydelton a ſquyer / Herbard a ſquyer / Arthur a ſquier / & Richarde Nedhā / whiche .v. ꝓſones were drawē fro ye toure of Londō through che pe to tyburne / & there 
                              •
                           āged & let downe quycke / & than ſtryped to haue b
                              •
                           heded & quarted / & than y• Markys of Suffolke ſhe wed there for them y• kynges pardon vnder his grete ſeal
                              •
                            ſo they were pardoned of the remenaūt of the execucyon / & had theyr lyues / & ſo they were brought agayne to London / and after frely deliuer to. Thus began grete trouble in this realme of Englonde for the deth of this noble duke of Gloceſtre / and

an the comyns of y• realme began for to murmure for it / and were not content. ¶ After ye pope Eugeny was deed Nycolas the .v. was electe pope. This Nycolas was choſen for Eugeny yet hangynge ye 
                           
                              •
                           eyſme / notwtſtandyng he gate the obedyence of all chryſtē realmes / for after he was electe and ſacred pope / certayn lordes of fraūce & of englonde were ſcut in to Sauoy to pope Felix / for to entreate hym to ſeaſe of ye pap
                              •
                           ry. And by the ſpecyall labour of y• byſſhop of Norwyche and the lorde of ſaynt Iohns he ſeaſed y• ſeconde yere after y• pope Nycolas was ſacred / & y• ſayd Felix was ma de legate of fraūce & cardynal of Sauoy And he reſygned y• hole papa
                              •
                           y to Nycolas / & after lyued an holy lyfe & dyed an holy man / & as it is ſayd almyghty god ſheweth myracles for him. This was y• xxiij. ſcyſme bytwene Eugeny & Felix / & dured .xvj. yere. The cauſe was this / ye generall concyle of Baſyle depoſed Eugeny whiche was onely pope & induby tate / for as moche as he obſerued not & kept ye decrees & ſtatutes of ye concyle of Conſtance / as it is ſayd before / neyther he cought not to gyue obedyence to ye generall concyle in no maner wyſe / wherfore aroſe a grete alteracion amōge wryters of this mater (pro et cōtra) whiche can not accorde vnto this day / one party ſayth yt the concyle is aboue ye pope / & y• other party ſayth nay / but ye pope is aboue y• cōcyle. God bliſſed aboue al thȳge gyue & graūte his peas in holy chirche ſpouſe of Chryſt. Amen. This Nicolas was of Iene comē of lowe degree / a doctour of d
                              〈…〉
                           te / an actyf man / he reed
                              •
                           
                           fyed many places y• were broken & ruynous / & dyd do make a wall about y• palays / & made y• wall newe about Rome for drede of y• turkes. And y• people won 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            gretly meruayled of y• ceaſynge & 
                              〈…〉
                            of pope Felix to pope Nycolas / conſyderynge that 
                              〈◊〉
                            was 
                              〈◊〉
                            man of ſo 
                              〈…〉
                           ly 
                              〈…〉
                            was of 
                              〈◊〉
                            to all t
                              ••
                            m
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              〈◊◊〉
                            chryſten 
                              〈◊〉
                            / wherefore there was a verſe publyſſhed / as 
                              〈◊〉
                            is ſayd.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How ſyr F
                              〈…〉
                           ys A
                              〈…〉
                            to 
                              〈◊〉
                            Fogyers in Normandye. And of y• loſſe of Conſtantynople by the Turke.
                        IN the yere of 
                              〈◊〉
                            Henry. xxvi
                              •
                            beynge tre
                              〈…〉
                            Fraūce & Englonde / a knyght of ye englyſſhe partye named ſyr Frāceys Aragonois toke a towne in Normandy 
                              〈◊〉
                            Fogyers agaynſt the trewſe / of whiche takynge began moche ſorow & loſſe / for this was the occaſion by y• whiche the frenſhmen gate all Normādy. ¶ About this tyme the cite of Cōſtantynople / whiche was the imperyal cite of all grece was taken by the Turkes infydeles / whiche was betrayed as ſome holde opynyon / & the emperour taken & ſlayne / and the ryall chirche of ſaynt Sophia robbed & ſpoyled / & the 
                              〈…〉
                           s & ymages & the rode drawen aboute y• ſtretes / whiche was done in deſpyte of the chryſten fayth / & ſoone after all chryſtē fayth in Grece periſſhed & ceaſed. There were many chriſten men ſlayne / & innumerable ſolde & put in captiuite. By the takynge of this cite the Turke gretly was enhaūced in pryde / & a grete loſſe to all chriſtendom. ¶ In the .xxviij. yere was a parlyamēt holden at Weſtmynſter / and frō thens adiourned to the blacke freres 
                              〈◊〉
                            London / & after Chriſtmas to Weſtmynſter agayne. ¶ And this ſame yere Ro
                              •
                           erte of Cane a man of the weſt coūtree 
                              〈◊〉
                            a fewe ſhyppes toke a grete flete of ſhippes comyng
                              •
                            out of ye 
                           
                              •
                           ay laden wt 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            whiche ſhyppes were out of prince / 
                              〈…〉
                           ū
                           ders / 
                              〈◊〉
                            / 
                              〈◊〉
                           : & brought them to H
                              •
                           mpton / wherfore the march auntes

of Englōde beyng in Flaūdres were areſted in Bruges / Ipre / & other places & might not be deliuered 
                              〈◊〉
                            theyr dettes diſch 
                              •
                           uged tyll they had made apoyntment for to paye y• 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            of thoſe ſhyppes / whiche was payed by y• marchaū
                           tes of the ſtaple euery peny. And in lyke wyſe the marchūtes & goodes beynge in Da
                              〈…〉
                            were alſo areſted / and made grete amendes. ¶ This ſame yere the frenſſhmen in a mornyng toke by a trayne the towne of Pount de larche / & therin the lorde Fauconbrydge was takē priſoner. And after y• in D
                              〈…〉
                           er Rom was taken & loſt / beynge therin ſyr Edmond duke of Somerſet / the erle of Shreweſbury / whiche by a poyntment left pledges / & loſt all Normādy & came home in to Englonde. And duryng y• ſayd parliament y• duke of Suffolke was areſted / & ſent in to y• Coure / & there he was a moneth / & after the kyng did do fetche hym out / for whiche cauſe all y• comyns were in a grete rumour / what for the delyueraūce of Angeo & Mayn / & after leſynge of all Normādy / & in eſpecyall for y• deth of y• good duke of Gloceſtre / in ſo moche in ſome places mē gadred & made them capytayns / as Blewberde & other / whiche were taken & put to deth. And than the ſayd parlyament was adiourned to Leyceſtre. And thȳder y• kynge brought wt hym y• duke of Suffolk. And when y• comyns vnderſtode y• he was out of the Coute & comen thyder / they deſyred for to haue execucion on them y• were cauſe of the delyueraūce of Normandy / & had ben 
                              〈◊〉
                            of the deth of the duke of Gloceſtre / & had ſolde Gaſcoyn & Guyen / of whiche they named to be gylty y• duke of Suffolke as chefe / the lorde Saye / y• byſſhop of Saliſbury / 
                              〈…〉
                           yell & many mo
                              •
                           . And for to appeaſe the comyns the duke of Suffolk was exiled out of Englonde for .v. yere. And ſo duryng the parlyament he went in to Norfolke / & there toke ſhyppyng for to go out of y• realme of Englonde in to Fraūce. And this yere as he ſayled on y• ſee a ſhyppe of warre called the Nycolas of the toure mette wt his ſhyppe & foūde hym therin / whome they toke out & brought hym in to theyr ſhyppe to the mayſter & to the capytayn & there he was examyned & at y• laſt iudged to deth. And ſo they put hym in a caban & his chapelayn wt him f
                              〈…〉
                            to ſhryue hym. And ye done they brought hȳ in to Douer rode / & ſet hȳ in to y• bote / & there ſmote of his heed / & brought y• body on londe vpon ye ſandes / & ſet ye heed therby And this was done ye fyrſt day of Maye Leo what auayled hym all his 
                              〈…〉
                           
                           raūte of Normādy &c. And here ye may here how he was rewarded for ye deth of the duke of Gloceſtre. Thus began ſorowe vpon ſorowe / & deth for deth.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How this yere was the inſurreccyon in Kent of the comyns / of whom Iarke Cade an Iryſſhe man was capytayne.
                        THe yere of our lorde. M .cccc. & .l. was the grete grace of ye Iubile at Rome / where was grete pardō / in ſo moche y• from all places in chryſtendom grete multytude of people reſorted thyder. ¶ And this yere was a grete aſſemble & gaderynge togyder of the comyns of Kent in grete nombre / & made an inſurreccyon / & rebelled agaynſt the kyng and his lawes / and ordeyned them a capytayne called Iohan Cade an Iryſſhe man / whiche named hymſelfe Mortymer / coſyn to ye duke of yorke. And this capytayn helde theſe men togyder / and made ordynaunces amonge them / and brought them to the blacke h
                              •
                           th / where he made a byll of p
                              〈…〉
                           yons to the kyng and his counſeyle / & ſhewed what 
                              〈…〉
                           
                           tyes and oppreſſyons the poore comyns

ſuffred / & all vnder colour for to come to his aboue / & he had a grete multytude of people. And the .xvii. day of Iune the kynge & many lordes / capytayns & men of warte went towarde hym to y• blacke heth. And whan the capytayne of kent vnderſtode the comynge of the kynge wt ſo grete puyſſan̄ce / he withdrewe him & his people to Seuenoke a lytell village. And the .xxviij. daye of Iune he beynge withdrawen & gone / the kynge came wt his army ſet in ordre & embatayled to y• blacke heth. And by aduyſe of his counſeyle ſent ſyr Vmfrey Stafford knyght and Willyam Stafford ſquyer two valyaūt capytaynes / with certayn people for to fyght with y• capytayne / & to take hym & brynge hym & his acceſſaryes to the kyng / whiche went to Seuenoke / & there the capytayn with his felawſhyp mette wt them / & fought agaynſt them / and in cōcluſyon ſlewe them bothe / & as many as abode & wolde not yelde them were ſlayne. Durynge this ſcarmyſſhe fell a grete varyaūce amonge the lordes men & comyn people beynge on blacke heth agaynſt theyr lordes & capitaynes ſayenge playnly y• they wolde go vnto y• capytayn of kent / to aſſyſt & helpe hym but yf they myght haue execucyon on y• traytours beynge about y• kynge / wher to the kynge ſayd naye. And they ſayd playnly that the lord Saye treſourer of Englonde / & the byſſhop of Salyſbury / the baron of Dubby / the abbot of Gloceſtre / Danyell / and Treuilian & many 
                              •
                           to were traytours & worthy to be deed Wherfore to pleaſe the lordes meyny & alſo ſome of y• kynges hous y• lord Saye was areſted & ſent to y• toure of London. And than y• kynge heryng tydynges of the beth & ouerthrowynge of the Staf
                           
                              〈…〉
                            / he withdrewe hym to London / & 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            to 
                              •
                           elyngworth / for y• kyng 
                              〈…〉
                            lordes burſt not truſt theyr owne houſholde men. ¶ Than after that the capytayne had had this victory vpon y• Staffordes / anone he toke 
                              〈…〉
                            ſallet and his brigandynes full of gylte nayles / 
                              〈◊〉
                            alſo his 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            and Arayed hym lyke a lorde and capytayne / and reſorted with all his 
                              〈◊〉
                            and alſo moo than he had before to the blacke hethe agayne. To whome came the archebyſſhop of Caunterbury / and the duke of Bokyugham to the blacke hethe / and ſpake with hym. And as it was ſayd they foūde hym wytty in his talkyng and in his requeſt. And ſo they departed. And the thyrde daye of Iuly he came & entred into London with all his people / and there dyd make cryes in the kynges name and in his name / that no man ſholde robbe ne take no maner of goodes but yf he payed for it. And came rydynge through the cite in grete pryde and ſmote his ſwerde vpon Londō ſtone in Canmyk ſtrete. And he beynge in the rite ſent to the toure for to haue the lorde Saye / & ſo they fette hym & brought hȳ to the Gyldhall before the Mayre & the aldermen / where y• he was examyned. And he ſayd he wolde & ought to be iudged by his peres. And y• comyns of Kent toke hym by force fro the Mayre & offycers y• kepte hym / & toke hym to a preeſt to ſhryue hym / & or he myght be halfe ſhryuen they brought hym to the ſtandard in Chep
                              •
                           : & there ſmote of his heed on whoſe ſoule god haue mercy. Amen. And thus dyed the lord Saye treſourer of Englōde. After this they ſet his heed vpon a ſpere / & bare it all about the cite. And y• ſame day about myle ende 
                              〈◊〉
                            mer was vyheded. And the daye before at after none the capytayne with a certayne of his men went to Philyp Malpas hous / & robbed hym / & toke awaye moche good. And from thens he went to ſaynt Margarete patyns to one 
                              〈◊◊〉
                           
                           
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                            whiche 
                              〈…〉
                            of theyr 
                              〈…〉
                            were 
                              〈…〉
                            with 
                              〈…〉
                            her
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                            man 
                              〈…〉
                            wyſe. 
                              〈…〉
                            London 
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              ••
                           myn 
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              ••
                           myghty god 
                              〈…〉
                            is to 
                              〈◊〉
                            yf he had not robbed 
                              〈◊〉
                            myght 
                              〈…〉
                            ferre or he 
                              〈…〉
                            kynge & all the lordes of y• realme of Englonde were 
                              ••
                           parted / excepte the lorde Seales that 
                              〈◊〉
                            the 
                              •
                           oure of London. ¶ And the 
                              〈…〉
                            of a 
                              〈…〉
                            South werke. And the 
                              〈◊〉
                            after the May
                              ••
                            of London wt the 
                              •
                           lderme
                              •
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            comyns of y• 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            cōcluded to 
                              〈…〉
                            the capytayn & his 
                              •
                           ooſt / & ſent to the lorde Scales to the Coure / & 
                              〈…〉
                            a capytayne of Nor 
                              〈◊〉
                            / that they walde y• nyght aſſayle the captayne 
                              〈…〉
                            them of kent. And ſo they dyd / & came to Londō brydge or the capytayne had any knowlege therof / & there they fought with them that kepte the bryoge. And the 
                              〈…〉
                            men went to h
                              〈…〉
                            came to the bridge & ſhotte and fought wt them / & gate the bridge / & 
                              ••
                           de them of Londō to 
                              〈◊〉
                            / & ſlewe many of them / & this 
                              〈◊〉
                            all the nyght 
                              〈◊〉
                            & fro 
                              〈…〉
                            the clocke on y• moro we 
                              〈…〉
                            laſt they brent y• 
                           
                              •
                           awe brydge 
                              〈◊〉
                            many of 
                              〈◊〉
                            of London were 
                              〈◊〉
                           . In whiche 
                              〈◊〉
                            Sutton an 
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              •
                           as ſlayne / Roger Neyſ
                              •
                           nt & 
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              •
                           ogh & many other. And after 
                              〈◊〉
                            the 
                              〈◊〉
                            of Englonde ſene to the capytayne a par
                              •
                           on generall / for hym & for all his m
                              •
                           yuy. And than they departed from South 
                              〈…〉
                            euery man 
                              〈◊〉
                            his owne hous. 
                              〈…〉
                            they were all departed & gone / there were proclamacyons made in 
                              •
                           ent / Southſex and other places / that what man coude take the capitayn quycke or deed ſhelde haue a thouſande marke. And after this / one Alexander Iden a ſquyer of kent toke hym in a garden in Southſex. And in y• takynge Iohn Cade the capytayn was ſlayne / and after byh
                              •
                           ded / & his heed ſet on London brydge. And than anone after the kynge came in to kent / & dyd do ſyt his Iuſtyees at Caunterbury / & inquyred who were chefe cauſers of this inſ
                              〈…〉
                           . And there were. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . men iudged to deth in one daye / & in other places 
                              •
                           oo. And fro thens the kynge went in to Southſex & in to the weſt 
                              〈◊〉
                            / where alytell before was 
                              〈◊〉
                            y• byſſhop of Salyſbury. And this ſame yere were ſo many iudged to deth / that. 
                              〈◊〉
                            hedes ſtode vpon Londō bridge at ones.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the felde that y• duke of yorke toke at Brentheth in Kent. And of the byrth of prynce Edwarde. And of the 
                              〈…〉
                           ſt batayle at ſaynt Alvons / where 
                              〈◊〉
                            duke of Somerſet was ſlayne.
                        IN the .xxx. 
                              •
                           ere of y• kynge y• duke of yorke came out of the marche of Wales with the erle of D
                              〈…〉
                           ſhyre and the lorde Cobham and a gr
                              •
                           te puyſſaunce for reformacyon of certayne 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           tyes & wronges / & alſo to haue Iuſtr
                              •
                           e vpon certayne lordes beynge aboute the kynge / and toke a feide at Brentheth beſyde Dartforde in Kent / whiche was a ſtronge felde / for whiche cauſe the kyng with all the lordes of y• 
                           
                              •
                           onde went vnto the blacke heth with a grete & a ſtronge multytude of people armed & ordeyn
                              ••
                            for the warre in y• beſt wyſe. And whan they had muſtred on the beth / certayne lordes were tho ſent to hym for 
                              〈◊〉
                            & make apoyntment with him / 
                              〈◊〉
                            were the byſſhop of Ely / the byſſhop of

W
                              〈…〉
                            the erles of Salyſbury & 
                              〈◊〉
                           . And they concluded that the duke of Somerſet ſhold be had to warde and to anſwere to ſuche artycles as the duke of yorke ſholde put on hym / & than the duke of yorke ſholde breke his felde & come to the kynge / whiche was all promyſed by the kynge. And ſo the kyng cō maūded y• the duke of Somerfet ſholde be had into warde. And than y• duke of yorke brake vp his felde and came to the kyng. And whan he was come cōtrary to the promyſe afore made / the duke of Somerſet was preſent in y• filde awaytynge and chefe aboute the kynge / and made the duke of yorke tyde before as a pryſoner through London / & after they wolde haue put hȳ in holde. But a noyſe aroſe y• the 
                              〈…〉
                            of Marche his ſone was comynge with .x. M. men toward London / wherfore the kyng & his counſeyle feted. And than they concluded that the duke of yorke ſhold departe at his owne wyll. ¶ Aboute this tyme began grete dyuyſyon in Spruce bytwene the grete mayſter & the knyghtes of the duche ordre / whiche were lordes of y• coūtree / for the comyns & townes rebelled agaynſt the lordes / & made ſo grete warre that at the laſt they called y• kynge of Pole to be theyr lorde / the whiche kynge came & was worſhypfully receyued / and layde ſyege to y• caſtell of Marienburgh / whiche was y• chefe caſtell of ſtrength of all the lorde / & wanne it / and droue out the mayſter of D
                              •
                           nſke / & all other places of that londe. And ſo they y• had ben lordes many yeres loſt all theyr ſeygnourye & poſſeſſyons in thoſe londes. ¶ And in y• yere of the incarnacyon of our lorde. M. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 
                              •
                           iij. on ſaynt Edwardes daye / y• quene Marg
                              〈…〉
                            was delyuered of a fayre 
                              〈◊〉
                            / whiche was named Edwarde. ¶ That ſame daye Iohn Norman was 
                              〈◊〉
                            to be Mayre of London. And the daye that 
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            the 
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            whiche 
                              〈…〉
                            that tyme they 
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              •
                           er in 
                              〈…〉
                           . ¶ 
                              〈…〉
                            vnderſtande 
                              〈…〉
                            to the promyſe of the 
                              〈◊〉
                            / & alſo the concluſyons taken 
                              〈◊〉
                            y• kyng & the duke of yorke at B
                              〈…〉
                           th / the duke of Somerſet went 
                              〈…〉
                            / but abod
                              •
                            aboute y• kynge / & had grete rule / & anone after he was made capytayn of Calays and ruled the kynge & his 
                              ••
                           alme as he wolde / wherfore y• grete lordes of th
                              〈…〉
                            alme / & alſo y• comyns were not 
                              〈◊〉
                           . For whiche cauſe y• duke of 
                              〈…〉
                            of Warwyk / y• 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            of Salyſbury / 
                              〈◊〉
                            many knyghtes & ſquyers / and moche other people came to remeue y• ſaid duke of Somerſet & other fro y• kynge. And 
                              〈◊〉
                            kyng heryng of theyr comyng / thought by his coūſeyle to haue gone weſtwarde & not for to haue mette wt them / & had wt hym the duke of Somerſet / the duke of Bokyngham / y• 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            of Stafford / y• 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            of Northumberlonde / y• lord Clyfford / & many other. ¶ And what tyme that the duke of yorke & his 
                              〈◊〉
                            vnderſtode that the kyng was departed 
                              〈◊〉
                            theſe lordes from London / anone he chaūged his waye & coſted the coūtre / 
                              〈◊〉
                            came to ſaynt Albons the. xxii
                              •
                           . 
                              〈◊〉
                            of Maye / & there mette wt the kynge / to whome the king ſent certayn lordes / & deſired 
                              〈◊〉
                            to kepe the peas & departe / but 
                              〈…〉
                            ſyon whyle they treated on y• one ſyde y• erle of Warwyk wt the March
                              〈…〉
                            and other entred y• towne on that other ſyde / & ſought agaynſt the kynge & his partye / & ſo began the batayle & 
                              〈◊〉
                            whiche enduted a grete whyle. But in concluſyon the duke of yorke o
                              〈…〉
                            and had the victory of that 
                              •
                           ourney. In

                           
                              〈…〉
                            of Somer 
                              〈…〉
                            / y• lord 
                              〈…〉
                            / & 
                              〈…〉
                            of 
                              〈…〉
                            eſtate 
                              〈…〉
                            / whiche was 
                              〈◊〉
                            in y• by
                              •
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                            London in whiche 
                              〈…〉
                            the 
                              〈◊〉
                            of 
                              •
                           orke was made 
                              〈◊〉
                            of 
                              〈◊〉
                            / and the 
                              〈◊〉
                            of W
                              〈…〉
                            and the erle of Salyſbury Chauncelet of Englonde. And all ſuche perſones as had the rule before aboute y• kyng were ſit aparte / and myght not rule as they dyd before. ¶ And this ſame yere dyed pope Nycolas the fyfth. And after hym was Calixt y• thyrde. This 
                              〈◊〉
                            was a Catalane / and the art 
                              〈◊〉
                            of hym ſhall be ſhewed here after. ¶ In this ſame 
                              〈◊〉
                            fell 
                              〈…〉
                            Londō agaynſt 
                              〈…〉
                            bycauſe a yo
                              〈…〉
                            man toke 
                              〈…〉
                            from 
                              〈…〉
                            the 
                              〈…〉
                            was ſent for to come before 
                              〈◊〉
                            Mayre & the 
                              •
                           ldermen / & there for the offence he was 
                              •
                           ōmytted to warde. And th
                              •
                            the Mayre departed from the 
                              〈◊〉
                            for to go home to his 
                              〈…〉
                            / but in Chepe the yonge men of y• 
                           
                              〈…〉
                            for the 
                              〈…〉
                            prentyſes 
                              〈…〉
                            in Che
                              •
                           e 
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                            was 
                              〈…〉
                            / & 
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                            from 
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            wherfore the Mayre and the 
                              •
                           ldermen come with the honeſt people of the Cite and droue them thens / and 
                              〈◊〉
                            ſome of them that had ſtolen to Newgate. And whan y• yonge man y• was 
                              〈…〉
                            by his 
                              •
                           elawes ſawe this grete rumour / af fraye & robbery enſwed of his fryſt meuynge to the Lombarde / departed and wente to Weſtmynſter to ſent wary / or 
                              〈…〉
                            had coſt hym his lyfe. For anont after came downe an Oyer determined for to do iuſtyce on all them that ſo 
                              •
                           ebelled in the Cite agaynſt the Lombardes / on whiche ſate with the May
                              •
                           e that tyme Willyā Marow / y• duke of Bo
                              〈…〉
                           am & many other lordes for to ſe exe
                              〈…〉
                            dont. But the comyns of the 
                              〈…〉
                            ly made them redy and dyd arme them in theyr houſes and were in purpoſe to haue rongen the comyn bell / whiche is called home bell / but they were 
                              〈…〉
                            ſadde men whiche came to y• knowlege of the duke of Bokyngham & other lordes / and incōtynent they aroſe for 
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              •
                           urſt no lenger abide / for they 
                              〈…〉
                            that the hole Cite wolde haue ryſen agaynſt them. But yet neuertheleſſe or thre of y• Cite were iudged to doth for this robbery / & were hāged at 
                              〈◊〉
                            ¶ And anone after y• kynge & the quene & other lordes rode to Couentre & withdrewe them from London for this cauſe And a lytell before y• duke of yorke was ſent for to 
                              〈…〉
                            / & there was diſcharged of the prot
                              〈…〉
                            & the 
                              〈…〉
                            of Salyſbury of his C
                              〈…〉
                            & after this they were ſent for by y• 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            ſcale for to come to 
                              〈◊〉
                            / where they were almooſt & y• erle of war
                           
                              〈…〉
                            alſo / and ſholde haue ben deſtroyed yf they had not ſeen well to.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How the lord 
                              〈◊〉
                            was taken by the 
                              〈◊〉
                            of Sa
                              〈…〉
                            / and of the 
                              〈◊〉
                            of 
                              〈◊〉
                           .
                        
                           
THis yere were taken foure grete fyſſhes bytwene Ereth & Londō that one was called Mors marine / the ſeconde was a ſwerde fyſſhe / & the other twayne were whales. ¶ In this ſame yere for certayne frayes done in ye north countree bytwene the lorde Egremond & the erle of Salyſburyes ſones / the ſayd lorde Egremond whom they had taken was condēpned in a grete ſomme of money to ye ſayd erle of Salyſbury / & therfore he was commytted in to pryſon in Newgate in London / where whan he had ben a certayne ſpace he brake ye pryſon / & thre priſoners wt hym / & eſcaped & went his waye. ¶ Alſo this yere ye erle of warwyk & his wyfe went to Calays with a fayre felawſhip & toke poſſeſſyon of his offyce. ¶ Aboute this tyme was a grete reformacyon of many monaſteryes of relygyon in dyuers partyes of ye worlde / whiche were reformed after the fyrſt inſtitucyon / and cōtynued in many places. ¶ This ſame yere was a grete batayle in ye marches bytwene the londe of Hungry and Turkey at a place called Septedrad / where innumerable turkes were ſlayne more by myracle than by mannes hande / for onely ye hande of god ſmote them. Saint Iohn of Capiſtrane was there preſent / & ꝓuoked ye chryſten people beynge than aferde for to purſue after ye Turkes / where an infynyte multytude were ſlayne & deſtroyed. And the Turkes ſayd yt a grete nombre of armed men folowed them / yt they were aferd to turne agayn / & they were holy aūgels. ¶ This ſame yere ye pryſoners of New gate in London brake theyr pryſon / and wente vpon the ledes & fought agaynſt them of the cite / & kepte the gate a longe whyle / but at ye laſt the cite gate ye priſon on them / & than they were put in fetters & 
                              ••
                           ens / & were ſore punyſſhed in enſam 
                              〈◊〉
                            of other. ¶ In this yere alſo there was a grete erthquake in N
                              •
                           ples / in ſo moche that there periſſhed .xi. M. people that ſanke therein to the e
                              •
                           th. ¶ Alſo in the yere .xxxvj. ſaynt Oſmond ſometyme biſſhop of Saliſbury was 
                              •
                           anonyſed at Rome by pope Calixt / & the .xvj. daye of Iuly he was tranſlated at Salyſbury by the byſſhop of Caunterbury & many other byſſhops. ¶ And in Auguſt after ſyr P
                              •
                           ers de Breſay Seneſſhall of Normandy with the capytayn of Dep
                              •
                            and many other capytayns & men of warre went to the ſee with a grete Nauy / and came in to the downes by nyght. And on the morow 
                              •
                           ely before daye they londed & came to Sandwiche / bothe by londe & water / & toke ye towne / & ry
                              ••
                           ed & deſpoy led it / & 
                              •
                           oke many pryſoners / & lefte the towne all bare / whiche was a ryche place & moche good therin / & ladde wt them many ryche priſoners. ¶ In this ſame yere in many places of Fraūce / Almayn Fla
                              •
                           idres / Hollande & 
                              〈◊〉
                            / chyldren gadred them togider by grete cōpanyes for to go on pylgrymage to ſaynt Myghels moūt in Normādy / whiche came fro ferre coūtrees / wherof y• people meruayled. And many ſuppoſed that ſome wicked ſpiryte moued them to do ſo / but it dured not longe bycauſe of the longe waye / & alſo for lacke of vytayle as they went. ¶ In this yere Reynold Pecocke byſſhop of Cheſtre was 
                              •
                           o
                              •
                           de an herety ke / & the thyrde daye of 
                              〈◊〉
                            was 
                              〈◊〉
                            at Lam
                              ••
                           th 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            of the archebyſſhop of 
                              〈◊〉
                            / and many other byſſhops / doctours & lordes 
                              〈…〉
                           all / & his 
                              •
                           okes 
                              〈◊◊〉
                           . ¶ Ye haue herde before 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            
                           
                              •
                           or des were 
                              〈◊〉
                            at ſaynt 
                              〈◊〉
                            / wh
                              〈…〉
                            fore was alway a grutchy
                              •
                           ge & 
                              •
                           r
                              •
                           th had by the heyres of them that wh
                              〈…〉
                            ſlayn agaynſt the duke of yorke / the r
                              ••
                           e of Warwycke / and the 
                              〈◊〉
                            of 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           ry / wherfore the kynge by the 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           
of his coūſeyle ſente for them to London to whiche place the duke of Yorke came the .xxvj. daye of Ianuary with .iiii .C. men / & lodged hȳ at Baynardes caſtell in his owne place. And ye .xv. daye of Ianuary came the erle of Saliſbury with v .C. men / & was lodged in therber his owne place. And than came the duke of Exceſtre & of Somerſet wt. viij .C. men / & laye wtout temple barre. And ye erle of Northumberlond / the lorde Egremond and the lorde Clifford with .xv .C. men / and lodged wtout the towne. ¶ And the Mayre yt tyme Geffray Boloyne / kepte grete watche with ye comyns of ye cite / & rode aboute the cite by Holborne & Flete ſtrete with .v. M. men well arayed & armed for to kepe ye peas. ¶ And the .xiiij. daye of February the erle of Warwyk came to London frō Calays well beſeen & worſhypfully with. vj .C. men in reed Iackettes broddred with a ragged ſtaffe behynde & before / and was lodged at the gray freres. ¶ And ye .xvij. daye of Marche ye kyng & the quene came to London. And there was a cōcorde & a peas made amonge theſe lordes / & they were ſet in peas. And on our ladyes day in Marche in the yere of our lorde. M .cccc .lviij. the kyng & the quene & all theſe lordes went on proceſſyon at Paules in London / and anone after the kyng & the lordes departed. ¶ And ī this yere was a grete fraye in Flete ſtrete bytwene men of courte & men of the ſame ſtrete. In whiche fraye the quenes atturney was ſlayne.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How the kynges houſholde made a fraye agaynſt the erle of Warwyk / and of the iourney at Bloreheth.
                        ALſo this ſame yere as the erle of Warwyck was at counſeyle at Weſtmynſter / all the kynges houſholde meyny gadred them togyder for to haue ſlayne the erle / but by the helpe of god & his frendes he recouered his barge / and eſcaped theyr euyll enterpryſe / how well the cokes came rennynge out wt ſpyttes and peſtels agaynſt hym. And the ſame daye he rode toward Warwyk / & ſoone after he gate hym a cōmyſſyon & wente ouer ſee to Calays. ¶ Soone after this the erle of Salyſbury comynge to London was encoūtred at Blor
                              •
                           heth wt the lord Awdley & moche other people ord
                              •
                           y ned for to deſtroye hym. But he hauyn
                              •
                            knowlege yt he ſholde be mette wt 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            was accompanyed wt his two ſones ſyr Thomas & ſyr Iohn Neuyll / & a grete 
                              〈◊〉
                            ſhyp of good men. And ſo they fought to gyder / where ye erle of Salyſbury wa
                              •
                            the felde / & the lorde Awdley was 
                              〈◊〉
                            & many gentylmen of Cheſſh
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            & moche people hu
                              •
                           te. And ye erles two ſones were hurte / & goynge homeward afterward they were taken & had to Ch
                              〈…〉
                            by the quenes meyny. ¶ After 
                              〈◊〉
                            Pius was pope / & was choſen this yere M .cccc. & .lviij. and he was called before Eneas an eloquent man and a poete 
                              〈◊〉
                            reate. He was embaſſadour of the empe rours afore tyme. And he wrote in ye 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            ſeyle of Baſyle a noble treaty for ye 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            rite of the ſame. Alſo he canonyſed 
                              〈◊〉
                            Katheryne of Senys. This pope ordey ned grete indulgence & pardon to them ye wolde go & warre agaynſt the Turke 
                              〈◊〉
                            & wrote an epyſtle to the grete Turke 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           hortynge hȳ to become chryſten. And in the ende he ordeyned a paſſage agaynſt the Turke at Ankone to whiche moche people drewe out of all partyes of chryſtendome / of whiche people he ſent many home agayne / bycauſe they ſuffyſed not. And anone after he dyed at the ſayd place of Ankone the yere of our lord. M .cccc .lxiiij. the .xiiij. daye of Auguſt.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How Andrewe Trollop and the ſow
                           
                              •
                           youres

of Calays forſoke the duke of Yorke and theyr mayſter the erle of war wyk in the weſt countree.
                        THe duke of Yorke / ye erles of warwyk & of Salyſbury ſawe ye gouernaūce of ye realme ſtode mooſt by the quene & her coūſeyle / & how ye grete prynces of ye londe were not called to coūſeyle but ſet aparte / & not onely ſo / but it was ſayd through the realme that thoſe ſaid lordes ſholde be deſtroyed vtterly / as it opēly was ſhewed at Bloreheth by them that wolde haue ſlayne ye erle of Salyſbury. Than they for ſaluacyon of theyr lyues / & alſo for ye comyn wele of the realme thought to remedy theſe thynges aſſembled them togider wt moche people & toke a felde in ye weſt coūtre / to whiche the erle of Warwyk came fro Calays wt many of ye olde ſowdyours / as Andrewe Trollop & other / in whoſe wyſdome as for ye warre he moche truſted. And whā they were thus aſſembled & made theyr felde / the kyng ſent out his cōmyſſyons & preuy ſeales vnto all ye lordes of his realme / to come & wayte on hym in theyr mooſt beſt defenſable aray. And ſo euery man came in ſuche wiſe yt the kyng was ſtronger & had more people than ye duke of yorke & ye erles of warwyk & of Salyſbury. For it is here to be noted that euery lorde in Englonde durſt not diſobey ye quene / for ſhe ruled peaſybly all yt was done about ye kyng / whiche was a good & a well diſpoſed man. And thā whan ye kyng was comen to the place where as they were / the duke of yorke & his felaw ſhyp made theyr felde in ye ſtrōgeſt wyſe & purpoſed verily to haue bydē & fought but in ye nyght Andrewe Trollop & all ye olde ſowdyours of Calays wt a grete felawſhyp ſodeynly departed out of ye dukes hooſt / & wente ſtreyght to ye kynges feld / where they were ioyouſly receyued for they knewe ye entent of ye other lordes & alſo ye maner of theyr felde. And than ye duke of yorke wt the other lordes ſeynge them deceyued / toke a coūſeyle ſhortly in the ſame nyght / & departed from ye felde leuynge behynde them the mooſt party of theyr people to kepe ye felde tyll on the morowe. Than the duke of Yorke wt his ſecond ſone departed through wales toward Irlonde / leuynge his eldeſt ſone yt erle of Marche wt the erles of warwik & of Salyſbury / whiche rode togyder wt thre or foure perſones ſtreyght in to Deuenſhyre / & there by helpe & ayde of one Denham a ſquyer gate for thē a ſhyppe which coſt .xj. ſcore nobles / & wt the ſame ſhyppe ſayled frō thens ī to Garneſey / & there refreſſhed them / & fro thens ſayled to Calais / where they were receyued in to ye caſtell by yt poſterne or they of ye towne wyſt of it. And the duke of Yorke toke ſhyppynge in Wales & ſayled ouer in to Irlonde / where he was well receyued.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How ye erles of Marche / Warwyk / & Salyſbury entred in to Calays / & how the erle of warwyk went in to Irlonde.
                        THan kynge Henry beynge wt his hooſt in ye felde not knowynge of this ſodeyn departynge / on the morowe foūde none in ye felde of ye ſaid lordes / ſent out in all ye haſte men for to folowe & purſue after to take them / but they met not with them as god wolde. And than the kyng went to Ludlowe / & deſpoyled the caſtell & the towne / & ſent the ducheſſe of yorke & her children to ye ducheſſe of Bokyngham her ſyſter / where as ſhe was kepte longe tyme after. And forth wt the kyng ordeyned the duke of Somerſet to be capytayn of Calays. And theſe other lordes ſo departed as afore is ſayd were proclaymed rebelles & grete traytours. Than ye duke of Somerſet toke to hym all ye ſowdyours yt departed from ye felde

and made hym redy in all the haſte to go to Calays & take poſſeſſyon of his offyce And whan he came there he foūde ye erle of warwik therin as capitayn / & ye erles of Marche & of Salyſbury alſo / & than he londed by Scales & went to Guynes and there he was receyued. And it fortuned that ſome of tho ſhyppes that came ouer with hȳ came in to Calays hauen by theyr free wyll / for ye ſhypmen ought more fauour to ye erle of warwik than to the duke of Somerſet / in whiche ſhyppes were taken dyuers men / as Ienyn Finkhyl / Iohn felow / Kaylles & Purſer whiche were byheded ſoone after in Calays. ¶ And after this came men dayly ouer the ſee to theſe lordes to Calays / & began to wexe ſtronger & ſtronger / and they borowed moche good of the ſtaple. And on yt other ſyde ye duke of Somerſet beynge in Guynes gate people to hym / whiche came out & ſcarmyſſhed wt them of Calays / & they of Calays with them whiche endured many dayes. Duryng this ſcarmyſſhynge moche people came ouer dayly vnto theſe lordes. Than on a tyme by ye aduyſe & counſeyle of ye lordes of Calays ſente ouer mayſter Denham with a grete felawſhyp to Sandwyche whiche toke the towne / & therin ye lorde Ryuers & ye 
                           lord Scales his ſone / & toke many ſhyppes in the hauen / & brought them all to Calays / wt whiche ſhyppes many maryners of theyr free wyl came to Calays to ſerue the erle of Warwyk. And after this the erle of warwyk by ye aduyſe of the lordes toke al his ſhyppes & māned them well & ſayled hȳſelfe in to Irlonde for to ſpeke wt the duke of Yorke & to take his aduiſe how they ſhold entre in to Englonde. And whan he had ben there & done his crandes / he returned agayn toward Calays / & brought wt hym his moder ye coūteſſe of Saliſbury. And comynge in ye weſt countre vpon the ſee the duke of Exceſtre admyral of englōde beynge in ye grace of dieu accōpanyed wt many ſhippes of warre mette wt the erle of warwyk & his flete / but they fought not / for ye ſubſtaūce of ye people beynge wt the duke of Exceſtre ought better wyll & fauour to ye erle of warwik than to hym & they departed & came ſafe to Calays. ¶ Than ye kȳges coūſeyle ſeynge yt theſe lordes had gotē thoſe ſhyppes fro Sand wyche & taken ye 
                           lord Ryuers & his ſone ordeyned a garnyſon at Sandwyche to kepe ye towne / & made one Moūford cap
                              •
                            tayn of ye towne / & yt no mā ne v
                              〈…〉
                            marchaūt yt 
                           ſhold go to Flaūdres 
                              〈◊〉
                            go to Calais. Thā they of Calais 
                              〈◊〉
                            this / made out mayſter Denham & many other to go to Sandwyche & ſo the
                              •
                            dyd / & aſſayled the towne by water & by londe / & gate it / & brought the capytayn ouer ſee & ſmote of his heed / & yet dayly men came ouer to them fro all partyes.
                     
                     
                        ¶ How ye erles of Marche of warwyk and of Saliſbury entred in to Englonde And of the felde of Northamton / where dyuers lordes were ſlayne.
                        ANd after this ye foreſayd erles of Marche / warwyk & Saliſbury came ouer to Douer with moche people & there lōded / to whom al ye coūtre drewe & came to Londō all armed & for to let ye lordes of ye kȳges coūſeyle knowe theyr treuth & alſo theyr entent aſſembled thē & tolde them yt they entēded no harme 
                              •
                           o the kynges ꝑſone ſaue yt they wolde put from hym ſuche ꝑſones as were aboute hym. And ſo departed frō London with a grete puyſſaūce toward Northamton where the kyng was accōpanyed with many lordes / & had made a ſtronge felde without ye towne. And there bothe partyes me
                              •
                            & was fought a grete batayle. In whiche batayle were ſlayne ye duke

of Bokyngham / y• erle of Shreweſbury the vycoūt Beamond / y• lord Egremond & many knightes & ſquyers & other alſo & the kynge hymſelfe was taken in the felde / & afterwarde brought to London. And anone after was a parlyament at Weſtmynſter / durynge whiche parlyament the duke of Yorke came out of Irlonde with the erle of Rutlonde / rydyng with a grete felawſhyp in to the palays at weſtmynſter & toke y• kynges palays And came in to y• parlyamēt chambre & there toke y• kynges place / & claimed the crowne as his ꝓpre enherytaūce & right & caſt forth in wrytyng his tytell / & alſo how he was ryghtfull heyre / wherfore was moche to do / but in cōcluſion it was appoynted & cōcluded that kyng Henry ſholde regne & be kyng duryng his naturall lyfe / for as moche as he had bē kyng ſo longe & was poſſeſſed / & after his deth the duke of Yorke ſholde be kynge / & his heyres kynges after hym / & forth with ſholde be proclaymed heyre apparaūt / & ſholde alſo be ꝓtectour & regent of Englonde duryng the kynges lyfe / wt many other thynges ordeyned in y• ſame parlyament / & yf kynge Henry durynge his lyfe went from his appoyntment or ony artycle cōcluded in y• ſayd parliamēt / he ſhold be depoſed / & the duke ſhold take y• crowne & be kynge. All whiche thynges were enacted by y• auctorite of the ſame / at whiche parlyament y• comyn hous comonyuge & treatyng vpon y• tytel of y• ſayd duke of Yorke / ſodeynly fell downe the crowne whiche henge than in y• myd des of y• ſayd hous / whiche is y• frayter of the abbaye of Weſtmynſter / whiche was taken for a prodyge or token that y• regne of kynge Henry was ended. And alſo y• crowne whiche ſtode on y• hygheſt toure of the ſteple in the caſtell of Douer fell downe this ſame yere.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Now y• duke of Yorke was ſlayn / & of y• felde of Wakefelde / & of y• ſecond iourney at ſaynt Albons by y• quene & the prince.
                        THan for as moche as y• quene wt y• prynce her ſone was in y• north & abſent her fro y• kyng / & obeyed not ſuche thynges as were cōcluded in y• parlyament / it was ordeyned y• the duke of Yorke as protectout ſhold go northward to brynge in y• quene / & ſubdue ſuche as wolde not obey / wt whom went y• erle of Salyſbury / ſyr Thomas Neuyl his ſone / wt moche people. And at wakefeld in Chryſtmaſſe weke they were all ouerthrowen & ſlayne by lordes of the quenes party / yt is to wyte / y• duke of Yorke was ſlayne / the erle of Rutlond / ſyr Thomas Neuyll & many moo / & y• erle of Saliſbury was taken & other / as Iohn Harowe of London capitayn & ruler of y• fotemen & Hanſon of Hull / Whiche were brought to Poūfret / & there after biheded & theyr hedes ſent to Yorke & ſet vpon the gates And thus was y• noble prynce y• duke of Yorke ſlayne / on whoſe ſoule god haue mercy. And this tyme y• erle of Marche beynge in ſhroweſbury heryng of y• deth of his fader / deſyred ayde of the towne to auēge his faders deth / & fro thens went to wales / & at Cādelmas after he had a batayle at Mortymers croſſe agaynſt y• erle of Penbroke & of wylſhyre / where y• erle of Marche had y• victory. Than the quene wt thoſe lordes of the north after yt they had dyſtreſſed & ſlayne the duke of Yorke & his felawſhyp came ſouthward wt a grete multytude of people for to come to y• kynge & vndo ſuche concluſyons as had ben takē before by y• parliament. Agaynſt whoſe comynge y• duke of Nor folke / the erle of warwyk wt moche people & ordynaūce went to ſaynt Albons / & lad kyng Henry wt them / & there encoū
                           tred togider in ſuche wyſe & fought / ſo y•
                           
the duke of Norfolke & y• erle of warwik with many other of theyr party 
                              •
                           ledde & loſt y• iourney / where y• king Henry was taken by y• quene & prynce Edwarde his ſone / whiche two had goten that felde. Than y• quene & her party beynge at her aboue ſent anone to Londō / which was on aſſhewedneſdaye y• fyrſt daye of lent for vytayle / for whiche y• Mayre ordeyned by y• aduyſe of y• aldermen y• certayn cartes laden wt vytayle ſholde be ſent to ſaynt Albons to them. And whan y• cartes came to crepylgate / the comyns of y• cite y• kepte the gate toke y• bytayle fro y• cartes & wold not ſuffre it to paſſe. Thā were there certayn aldermen & comyns appoynted to go to Bernet to ſpeke with the quenes coūſeyle / for to entreate y• the northeren men ſholde be ſent home in to theyr coūtre agayn / for y• cite of London drad fore to be deſpoyled yf they had comen. ¶ And duryng this treaty tydynges came that the erle of Warwyk had mette with y• erle of Marche on Cotteſwolde comynge out of Wales wt a grete meyny of walſſhmen / & that they bothe were comynge to London ware. Anone as theſe tydynges were knowen y• treaty was broke / tor y• kyng / quene / prynce & all y• other lordes y• were wt them departed fro ſaynt Albons no
                              •
                           thwarde wt all theyr people / yet or they departed thens they dyheded y• lord Bo
                              ••
                           yle & ſyr Thomas 
                              〈◊〉
                            whiche 
                              〈◊〉
                            take in y• iourney done on 
                              〈…〉
                           . ¶ Than y• duch
                              〈…〉
                            of Yorke beynge at London deryng of y• loſſe of y• felde of ſaynt Albons 
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                            whiche went to 
                              〈…〉
                           ght. ¶ And philip malpas 
                              〈…〉
                           che marchaūt of London / Thomas Vaghan ſquyer / 
                              〈…〉
                            many other 
                              〈…〉
                            of y• comynge of y• quene to London / toke a ſhyppe of Andwerpe to haue gone in to 
                              ••
                           land / 
                              〈◊〉
                            on y• other co
                              •
                           ſt were taken of one Colompne a Frenſſheman a ſhyppe of warre / & he toke them pryſoners / and brought them in to Fraūce / where they payed grete good for theyr raunſom / & there was moche good and rycheſſe in that ſhyppe.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Of the depoſynge of kyng Henry the ſyxth / & how kynge Edward the fourth toke poſſeſſyon / & of y• batayle on Palme ſondaye / and how he was crowned.
                        THan whan y• erle of Marche & y• erle of warwyk had mette togyder on Cotteſwolde / incōtynent they cō
                           cluded to go to London / and ſent worde anone to y• Mayre & to the cite that they wolde come. And anone y• cite was glad of theyr comynge / hopyng to be releued by them / & ſo they came to London. And whan they were comen & had ſpoken wt the lordes & eſtates beynge there / cōcluded for as moche as kynge Henry was gone wt them northwarde / y• he had forfeyted his crowne & ought to be depoſed accordyng vnto the actes made & paſſed in the laſt parlyament. And ſo by the aduyſe of the lordes ſpirytuall & temporall than beynge at Londō / the erle of Marche Edward by y• grace of god eldeſt ſone of Rycharde duke of Yorke / as ryghtfull heyre and nexte enherytour to his fader the fourth daye of Marche / the yere of out lord god. M .CCCC .lix. toke poſſeſſyon of the realme at Weſtmerlonde in y• grete hall / & after in y• chirche of y• abbey & offred as kyng wt the c
                              •
                           ptre royall. To whome all y• lordes ſpirytuall & tēporall dyd homage as to theyr ſouerayn lord & kyng. And forthwith it was ꝓclaymed through y• cite kyng Edward the fourth of y• name. And anone after y• kynge rode in his ryall eſtate northwarde wt all his lordes to ſubdue his ſubgectes y• tyme beynge in the north / & for to auenge his

                           
                              〈◊〉
                            deth. And on Palmeſondaye after he had a grete batayle in y• north coū
                           tree at a place called Cowton / not ferre from Yorke / where with y• helpe of god he gate y• felde & had the victory / where were ſlayne of his aduerſaryes .xxx. M. men and moo / as it was ſayd by them that were there. In the whiche batayle were ſlayne y• erle of Northumberlonde the lorde Clifford / ſyr Iohn Neuyll the erle of Weſtmerlondes broder / Andrewe Trollop / and many knightes & ſquyers ¶ Than kyng Henry that had bē kyng beynge with y• quene and the prynce at Yorke heryng the loſſe of that felde / and ſo moche people ſlayne & ouerthrowen / anone forth with departed all thre with the duke of Somerſet / the lorde Roos & other towarde Scotlōde. And the nexte daye after kynge Edward with all his army entred in to Yorke / and was there proclaymed kyng & obeyed as he ought to be. And y• Mayre / aldermen & comyns ſwore to be his iyege men. And whā he had taryed a whyle in the north / & that all y• northcoūtree had turned to hym he returned ſouthwarde / leuynge behynde hym the erle of Warwyk in thoſe partyes to gouerne and rule that countree. ¶ And aboute mydſomer after the yere of our lorde. M .cccc .lx. and the fyrſt yere of his regne he was crowned at Weſtmynſter / & anoynted kyng of Englonde hauynge poſſeſſyon of all the realme.
                        CAixtus the thyrde was pope after Nycolas thre yere and .v. monethes. This Calixte was an olde man whan he was choſen pope / & was cōtynually ſeke / ne he myght not fulfyll his deſyre whiche he entēded to do agaynſt the Turkes / for dethe came vpon hym. He was choſen pope in y• yere of our lord 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 
                              〈◊〉
                            .lv. And he dyed the ſyxth day af 
                              〈◊〉
                            he had i
                              •
                           ſtytued the trāſfiguracyon of our lorde god. He alſo c
                              •
                           nonyſed ſaynt Vincent a frere precher. And there was a grete reformacyon of many monaſteryes in dyuers partyes of the worlde / & theſe reformacions were made many ty mes / but almooſt none abode / but they returned agayne as they were afore by ſucceſſyon of tyme after y• deth of y• worſhypfull faders. The feeſt of the Tranſfyguracyon was ordeyned of Calixt for the gyft of grace of y• meruaylous victory done agaynſt the Turke in Hungary on ſaynt Sixtus daye. M .cccc. l
                              •
                           ij. For there was a meruaylous victo
                              〈…〉
                            gyuen to chriſten men in Hungary agaynſt the grete Turke / & there he loſt many a mā & fledde ſhamefully for drede of his enemyes / & no man folowed by / but alone y• hand of god fered the Turke & his hooſt on ſaynt Calixtes day. Saynt Iohn de Capiſtrano was there ſeen preſent / & he prouoked the people that were aferde to folowe the myſhyleuynge Turkes / and there fell a grete 
                              〈◊〉
                            on them / for the Turkes ſayd y• there was ſo grete a nombre of knyghtes that folowed them that 
                              〈…〉
                           th they durſt loke backwarde and therfore they fledde & leſte all theyr treſour behynde them / & they were holy aungelles that cauſed them to flee.
                        ¶ Nota. ¶ Prynters of bokes were this tyme myghtely multiplyed in Ma g
                              ••
                           cie & through out y• worlde / & there began fyrſt, & helde theyr 
                              〈◊〉
                            / & this tyme many m
                              •
                           n begā to be more ſubtyll incraftes & 
                              〈…〉
                           er th
                              •
                            euer they were afore.
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            y• ſecond was pope after▪ 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            lixt .vi. yere. This 
                              〈◊〉
                           ꝰ was choſen in the yere of our lorde▪ 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            .cccc. 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           ▪ & he was called E
                              ••
                            as an 
                              〈◊◊〉
                           
                           ▪ & a grete oratour / a laurente porte & afore he was y• emperours embaſſadour / & in y• cōcyle of Baſyle he wrote a noble treatyſe for y• auctorite of y• ſame. This man

deſyred to haue a paſſage to the Turke And moche people of dyuers countrees came to Rome / & he gaue them his bleſſynge & ſent them home agayn / for they were not ſufficyent for y• Turkes hooſt / and 
                              〈◊〉
                            after he deceſſed.
                        PAulus a venicyan was pope after Pius .vij. yere This Paulus was choſen in the yere of our lord Ieſu Chryſt. M .cccc. and .lxiiij. And anone he alowed the feeſt of the Preſentacyon of our lady as Pius dyd. This man was a taught man in ryght wyſnes / and he ſayd it was better to make fewe thynges & kepe them ſtedfaſtly / than for to make many & ſoone reuoke them. And he made a grete palays at ſaynt Markes / & he deceſſed or that he had ended it in the yere of our lorde Ieſu Chryſt. M .cccc. & .lxxi. ¶ Leodin̄. the londe of Luke was oppreſſed with many tribulacyōs and after in the yere of our lorde Ieſu Chryſt. M .cccc. & .lxviij. vtterly it was deſtroyed by Charles the duke of Burgoyne / the whiche wedded dame Margarete ſyſter to kyng Edward y• fourth of Englonde. Alſo the ſame duke Charles entred in to the londe of Geldre / & con quered it all. ¶ The yere of grace was alſo chaūged by pope Paule for fauour of mannes ſoule frō .xxv. yere vnto .xxv. yere. And bycauſe y• curſednes habounded ſo ſore / grace habounded as ſore.
                        SIxtus the fourth a Geneuoys & a 
                              •
                           rere mynour was pope after Paule. This man was generall in the ordre of y• fre
                              •
                           e mynours or he was cardynall. And he was choſen in the yere of our lorde god. M .cccc .lxxj. and was called Frāciſcus de Sanona / of good fame and vertuous. He was choſen cardynall without his knowlege tyll he was made. And the ſame yere that he was choſen pope / the Turke had taken frō chryſten men two empyres and .iiij. kyngdomes .xx. prouynces / and two hondred 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           tees / and had deſtroyed men & women without nombre. And that meued the pope that he ſholde dyſpoſe hym to go to withſtande hym. And for an army to be made againſt the Turke / the pope gaue grete indulgences of pardon of the treaſour of the chirche vnto all chryſten realmes / that he myght ordeyn ſome trea ſour to withſtande that myſbyleuynge Turke. And in the realme of Englonde Iohn abbot of Abyngdon was the popes legate to diſpoſe this godly treaſour of the chirche vnto euery faythfull man that was diſpoſed / and that wolde ab
                              ••
                            themſelfe to receyue it.
                        ¶ Thus endeth the Cronycles of Englonde with the fruyte of tymes / compyled in a boke. And was fyrſt imprynted by one ſomtyme ſcole mayſter of ſaynt Albons / on whoſe ſoule god haue mercy Amen. And now lately imprynted at London / and dilygently amended in dyuers places where as ony faute was / in Flete ſtrete / at the ſygne of the Sonne / by me Wynkyn de Worde / in the yere of our lorde god. M .CCCCC .xxviij. the ix. daye of Apryll.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                     
                        Wynkyn worde:
                        printer's or publisher's device
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  
                  The deſcripcyon of Englonde.
                  ¶ Here foloweth a lytell treatyſe the whiche treateth of the deſcripcyon of this londe / whiche of olde tyme was called Albyon / and after Brytayne / and now Englonde / and ſpeketh of the nobleſſe and worthyneſſe of the ſame.
                  
               
               
                  
                  ¶ It is ſo that in many & diuers places the comyn Cronycles of Englonde ben had & alſo now late emprynted in Flete ſtrete at the ſigne of the Sonne. And for as moche as y• deſcripcyon of this londe whiche of olde tyme was named Albion and after Brytayne / is not deſcryued ne comynly had / ne the noblenes & worthy nes of y• ſame is not knowen. Therfore I entende to ſet in this boke the deſcripcyon of this ſayd yle of Brytayn / & with the cōmodytees of the ſame.
                  
                     ¶ In the fyrſt ſhall be tolde the names of the ylonde. Caplo .i.
                     ¶ Of the ſettynge / boundynge / length and brede of Englonde. Ca .ij.
                     ¶ Of y• worthynes and prerogacyons. Capitulo .iij.
                     ¶ Of the meruaylles and of the wonders. Ca .iiij.
                     ¶ Of the chefe partyes of the ſame londe. Ca .v.
                     ¶ Of the ylondes that ben therto adiacent. Ca .vj.
                     ¶ Of the kynges hye wayes and ſtretes. Ca .vij.
                     ¶ Of the famous ryuers and ſtremes. Capitulo. Ca .viij.
                     ¶ Of auncient cytees & townes. Ca .ix.
                     ¶ Of prouynces and ſhyres. Ca .x.
                     ¶ Of the lawes & names of the lawes. Capitulo .xj.
                     ¶ Of kyngdomes & of boundes & markes bytwene them. Ca .xij.
                     ¶ Of byſſhopryches & theyr ſees. ca. xiij
                     ¶ Of how many maner of people haue dwelled therin. Ca .xiiij.
                     ¶ Of the language / of maners & vſage of the people of this londe. Ca .xv.
                     ¶ Of the londe of Wales. Ca .xvj.
                     ¶ Of the name / and why it is named Wales. Ca .xvij.
                     ¶ Of the commodytees of the londe of Wales. Ca .xviij.
                     ¶ Of the maners and ryghtes of the walſſhmen. Ca .xix.
                     ¶ Of the meruaylles and wonders of Wales. Ca .xx.
                     ¶ Of the deſcripcion of Scotlonde / ſomtyme named Albania. Ca .xxj.
                     ¶ Of y• deſcripcyon of Irlonde. ca .xxij.
                     ¶ Of the boūdyng of Irlonde. ca .xxiij.
                     ¶ Of the gretenes and quantite of that londe. ca .xxiiij.
                     ¶ Of the defautes of the londe. ca .xxv.
                     ¶ Of them that fyrſte enhabyted Irlonde. ca .xxvj.
                     ¶ Of the condycyons and maners of Iryſſhmen. ca .xxvij.
                     ¶ Of the meruaylles and wonders of Irlonde. ca .xxviij.
                     ¶ Of the meruaylles of ſayntes of Irlonde. ca .xxix.
                  
                  ¶ Thus endeth the table.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ The names of this ylonde. Caplo .j.
                  
                     FIrſte (as Galfridus ſayth) this lōde was called Albyon after y• name of Albyne y• elpeſt doughter of Dio cleſyan / & had .xxxij. ſyſters / & they were the fyrſt that enhabyted this londe / and bycauſe ſhe was the eldeſt ſyſter / ſhe named this londe Albyon after her owne name as the cronycles reherſeth. Other ſaye that this londe was named Albion as it were y• whyte lōde of whyte rockes about the clyues of y• ſee y• were ſeen fro ferre. Afterward Brute conquered this londe & called it Brytayn after his owne name. And thā ſaxons or Englyſſhmen conquered this londe & called it Anglia y• is Englonde. Or it is called Anglia of a quene y• owed this lōd y• was named Angela / & was a noble dukes doughter of

the Saxons. Or as yſid ſayth Ethi .xv. Anglia hath y• name as it were an angle & a corner of the worlde. Or els as Beda ſayth li .j. Saȳt Gregory ſawe engliſſhe children to ſell at Rome / & he accorded to the name of the londe and ſaid / they ben ſothly aungels / for theyr faces ſhyne as aungels / for the noblete of y• londe ſhone in the childrens faces. ¶ Alfre. The Brityſſhe Anglia is called the other worlde and for grete plente of all good the grete Charles called it his owne chambre. ¶ Solinus. The edge of y• frenſſhe clyf ſholde be the ende of the worlde / yf the ylonde of Brytayn ne were not / whiche is worthy to haue the name of an other worlde. ¶ Alfre. This ylonde is called inſula for it is in ſalo / that is the ſee / & is beten of with dyuers courſe of waters with ſtremes & with wawes of the ſee.
               
               
                  ¶ Of the ſettynge / boundynge / length and brede of Englonde. Ca .ij.
                  THis Britayn is acounted a noble londe bothe in our ſtoryes & alſo in the ſtoryes of Grekes / & is ſet agaynſt Germania / Gallia / Fraūce / & ſpayne by twene y• north & y• weſt & y• ſee bytwene. This londe is fyfty myle from the clyf of the men that be called morini geſſorico. ¶ Beda li .j. And for this ylonde lieth vnder the north heed of y• worlde / & it hath lyght & bright nyghtes in y• ſomer tyme ſo y• oftentymes at mydnyght men haue queſtyons & doubte whether it be euentyde or dawnynge / y• is for y• tyme of the yere y• the ſonne goth not ferre vnder the erth by nyght but paſſeth by y• north ſyde & cometh ſoone in to y• eeſt agayn. And therfore in y• ſomer ben theyr dayes full lōge of .xviij. houres / & y• nyghtes of .vj. houres. And after in y• wynter ben longe nyghtes of .xviij. houres & ſhorte dayes of .vj. houres. Alſo in Armenia / Macedo nia / Italia & in other lōdes of y• ſame line the longeſt daye & lōgeſt nyght alſo is of xv. houres / & the ſhorteſt day or nyght is of .ix. houres. ¶ Plimꝰ in meroe. That ylonde is chefe of blacke men / there is y• lōgeſt day .xij. houres. In Alexandry in Egypte of .xiij. houres / in Ytalye of .xv. houres / in Brytayn of .xviij. houres / in the ylonde named Tyle all the .vj. ſomer monethes is daye / & all the .vj. wynter monethes is nyght. ¶ Iſid .li .xiij. Brytayn is ſet wtin Occean as it were wtout the worlde / & is ſet agaynſt Fraūce and Spayne. ¶ Giraldus. Brytayn is endlōge & larger in y• myddle thā in y• endes ¶ Oroſtꝰ. Brytayn ſtretcheth in length out of y• ſouth ī to y• north / & in y• ſoutheſt it hath Fraūce / in y• ſouth Spayne in y• north Norway / & in y• weſt H
                        •
                     bern
                        •
                     a y• is Irlonde / whan ſhypmen paſſe the next clyf of y• lōde they ſe a cite y• hyght 
                        〈◊〉
                      mouth. Beda li .j. y• cite is now called of Englyſſhmen Reptaceſtre. ¶ Solinus. Brytayne is. viij .C. myle of length & it be met from y• clyf of Tornes to y• angle of Calidon. ¶ Alfre. That is from Penwithſtrete .xv. myle beyonde Myghels ſtowe in Cornewayle vnto Carnes y• is beyonde Scotlonde / & Brytayn is more than. ij .C. myle brode frō Meneuia y• is the vttermeſt place in Wales vnto Ya
                        •
                     
                     mouth ī northfolke. ¶ Beda. Onely out take y• longeſt out ſhotyng of diuers fore londes with the whiche Brytayn is all about .xlviij. ſythe .lxx. thouſande pace.
               
               
                  ¶ Of the worthynes and preroga cyons. Caplo .iij.
                  AS Fraūce paſſeth Brytayne / ſo Brytayn paſſeth Irlonde in fayre weder and noble
                        •
                     e / but not in helthe. ¶ Beda lib .i. For this ylonde is beſt to brȳge forth trees & fruytes / Rutherne & beeſtes / & wyne groweth therin in ſome places. The londe hath plente of fowles and of beeſtes of dyuers maner of kynde

The londe is plenteous and the ſee alſo. The londe is noble / copyous / & ryche of noble welles and ryuers / with plente of fyſſhe. There is grete plente of ſmall fyſſhe of ſamon & of eles. ¶ Wilhel. de pon .li .iij. So y• the people in ſome place fede theyr ſ
                        •
                     yne with fyſſhe. Beda li .j. There ben oftentymes taken dolphyns ſee calues and baleyne grete fyſſhes as whales kynde / and dyuers maner ſhelfyſſhe / amonge y• whiche ſhelfyſſhe ben muſcles that wtin them haue Margery perles of al maner of colour and hewe of rody & reed purpure & of blewe / & ſpecyally & mooſt of whyte. There is alſo plente of ſhelfyſſhe y• men dye therwith fyne reed / y• reednes therof is wonders fayre and ſtable / & ſtayneth neuer with colde ne with hete / with wete ne with drye / but euer the older y• colour is the fayrer. There bē alſo ſalt welles & hote welles therof rennynge ſtremes of hote bathes departeth in to dyuers places according for man & woman of all maner age olde or yonge. ¶ Baſilius ſayth. That y• water that tenneth & paſſeth by vaynes of certayn metall taketh ī his courſe grete hete. This ylonde is plenteous of vaynes of metalles / of bras / of yren / of leed / of tynne / & of ſyluer alſo. ¶ Plimꝰ li .vj. ca .vj. In this ylonde vnder the turfe of the lōde is foūde good merle / the thryfty of the farnes dryeth hȳſelf therin. So y• euer the thycker y• felde is merled y• better corne it wyll bere. There is alſo an other maner whyte merle y• the londe is the better .lxxx. yere y• therwith is merled. ¶ Solinꝰ. In this ylonde groweth a ſtone that is called gagates / yf ye wyll knowe his fayrnes / it is blacke as gemmes ben / yf ye wyll knowe his kynde / it brenneth in water / & quencheth in oyle / and as to his myght / yf the ſtone be froted & chafed it holdeth what hȳ nigheth as Succuns a ſtone that is ſo named. ¶ Ynd. li .xv. There ben ſhepe that bere good woll. There ben many hartes and wylde beeſtes & fewe wolues / therfore ſhepe ben the ſurer wtout kepyng lefte in the felde. ¶ 
                        〈◊〉
                     . In this ylonde alſo ben many citees & townes fayre & noble and ryche / many grete ryuers & ſtremes wt grete plēte of fyſſhe / many fayre wodes & grete / with ryght many beeſtes came and wylde. The erth of that londe is copyous of metall oor / & of ſalte welles / of quarreys of marble of diuers maner ſtones / of reed / of whyte / of ſofte & of harde of chalke & of whyte lyme. There is alſo whyte claye & reed for to make pottes / crockes / ſtenes & other veſſell / and brent tyle to couer the houſes & chirches / as it were in the other ſamia / that is named ſamos alſo. Flaūdres loueth well y• woll of this londe / & Hollonde the ſkylles and felles of al maner beeſtes. Guyen y• yren & the leed. Irlonde the oor & the ſalt. All Europa loueth & deſyreth y• whyte metall of this londe. ¶ Alfre. Britayn hath ynough of al mater y• there nedeth to bie & ſell / or is nedefull to mannes vſe / there lacketh neyther ſalte nor yren. Therfore a verſefyour in his metre prayſeth this londe in this maner. Englond is a good londe fruytful of woll / but it is a corner. Englonde is full of playe / free men well worthy to playe / free men / free tongues free hertes / & free ben all theyr thynges / theyr handes is more free & better than theyr tōgue. Alſo Englōde is beauteous of londe / floure of londes all aboute / that lōde is full payed wt fruyte & good of his owne / that londe releueth ſtraunge men that hath nede therto. And whā hunger greueth other londes / that londe fedeth them. That londe bereth fruyte & corne grete plente ynough. That londe is well at eaſe as lōge as men lyue in peas / eeſt & weſt in eche londe ben wel knowen the hauens of Englōde. Theyr ſhyppes foū
                     des

& ofte helpeth many londes. Theyr meet & money men haue there more comyn alway. And for to lerne men gladly gyue gyftes. In londe & ſtronde / wyde ſpeketh men of Englonde. Londe hony mylke cheſe this ylonde therof ſhall bere the pryce. This ylonde hath no nede of other londes / al lōdes muſt ſeke helpe at this alone. Of the lyking of theyr woun might wonder kyng Salomon. The ryches y• there is an / wold deſire Octauiā.
               
               
                  ¶ Of the meruayles & wonders. ca .iiij.
                  IN Brytayn ben hote welles well arayed & adreſſed to y• vſe of manhode / mayſtreſſe of thoſe welles is the grete ſpiryte Minerua. In her hous the fyre endureth alway that neuer chaungeth in to aſſhes / but there y• fyre ſlaketh it chaūgeth in to ſtone clottes. ¶ Alfre. In Brytayn ben many wonders / neuer theles foure ben mooſt wonderfull / the firſt is at Pecton / there bloweth ſo ſtronge wynde out of the chynes of the erthe that it caſteth vp agayne clothes y• men caſt in. The ſecond is at Stonehenge beſyde Salyſbury / there ben grete ſtones & wonders huge / & bē rered on hygh as it were gates ſet vpon other gates. Neuertheles it is not knowen clerely ne apperceyued how & wherfore they ben ſo arered and ſo wonderfully hanged. The thyrde is at Cherdhoke / there is a grete holownes vnder y• erth / often many men haue walked therin / & haue ſeen ryuers & ſtremes / but no where can they fynde none ende. The fourth is / that rayne is ſeen reyſed vpon hylles / & none ſpronge about in the feldes. Alſo there is a grete ponde that conteyneth .lx. ylondes couenable for men to dwell in / that ponde is becleped about wt ſyxe ſcore roches / and vpon euery roche an egles neſt / and thre ſcore ryuers renne in to y• ponde / & none of them all ren in to y• ſee but one. There is a ponde cloſed aboute wt wall of tyle & of ſtone. In that ponde men waſſhe and bathe ryght ſore / & euery man feleth the water hote or colde ryght as he wyll hȳ ſelfe. There ben ſalte welles ferre from the ſee / & ben ſalte all y• weke longe vnto ſaterdaye at none / & freſſhe fro ſaterday at none vnto mondaye. The water of theſe welles whan it is ſoden turneth in to ſmall ſalte fayre & whyte. Alſo there is a ponde / the water therof hath wonders werkynge / for though all an hooſt ſtode by the ponde & turned theyr faces thyderwarde / the water wolde drawe them violently towarde y• ponde & wete all theyr clothes / and ſo ſholde a hors be drawen in the ſame wyſe. And yt y• face be turned awaye fro the water / the water noyeth not. There is a well that no ſtreme renneth fro neyther therto / & yet foure maner of fyſſhe ben taken therin / that well is but .xx. fote longe 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . fote brode / & not depe but to the knee / & cloſed with hye bankes on euery ſyde. In the coūtree about Wyncheſtre is a denne or a caue / out of that caue bloweth alwaye a ſtronge wynde / ſo that no man may endure to ſtande to fore y• denne or cane. ¶ There is alſo a ponde y• turneth tree in to yren yf it be therin a yere / & ſo trees ben ſhapen in to whetſtones. Alſo there is in the toppe of an hyll buryels / euery man that cometh & meteth that buryell he ſhall fynde it euen of his owne length & meſure. And yf a pylgrym knele therto / anone he ſhall be all freſſhe & fele no grefe of werynes. ¶ Gir. in top. Faſt by the mynſtre of wymburney (that is not ferre fro Bathe) is a wode that bereth moche fruyte / yf the trees of that wode fall in to water or groūde that is nygh & lye there all a yere / the trees turne in to ſtones. ¶ Gir. in itinere. Vnder y• cite of Cheſtre renneth the ryuer Dee / that

now departeth Englōde & wales. That riuer chaūgeth eueri moneth his ſordes as men of that coūtre tell / & leueth often the chanel / but whether y• water drawe more towarde Englonde or toward Wales / to what ſyde y• it be / that yere men of that ſyde haue y• worſt ende & be ouer ſet. And men of that other ſyde ſhal haue better ende & ben at theyr aboue. Whan the water ſo chaungeth his courſe it bo deth ſuche happes. This riuer Dee ren neth & cometh out of a lake that hyght Pymblemere. In this ryuer is grete plente of ſamon / neuertheles in the lake is neuer ſamon founde. ¶ Wilhel. dere. le .ij. Take hede how grete lyght and bryghtnes hath ben ſhewed vpon Englyſſhmen ſyth they fyrſt turned to ryght byleue. So y• of no men in ony prouynce ben foūden ſo many hole bodyes of men after theyr dethe / in lykenes of euerlaſtynges that ſhall be after the daye of dome / as it well ſemeth in theſe holy ſayntes Etheldrede / Edmond the kyng / Elphege / Edgar / Cuthberte / and ſaynt Edward / & many other / I trowe that it be done by a ſpecyall grace of almyghty god / for the nacion that is ſet as it were without the worlde ſholde take hede to buryenge of bodyes wtout corrupcyon & rottynge / and ben the more bolde and ſtedfaſt for to truſt vpon the fynall aryſyng of deed bodyes for to laſt euermore after the daye of dome.
               
               
                  ¶ Of the chefe partyes of the ſame londe. Ca .v.
                  AFter the fyrſt Brutes tyme the ylonde of Brytayne began for to haue the pryncypall partyes / that ben Loegria / Cambria that is Wales / & Albania that is now Scotlonde. Loegria hath that name of Locrinus that was 
                        〈…〉
                     es eldeſt ſone / & hyght Loegria as it were Locrinus londe. But now Loegria is called Englonde. The boundes & markes were therof ſomtyme y• frenſſhe ſee bothe by ceſt & by ſouth. ¶ Beda li .j. ca .ij. And by north two armes of the ſee that breketh ferre in to the londe eyther agaynſt other / but they reche not togyder. The eeſt arme of thoſe twayne begynnynge aboute a two lytell myle fro y• mynſtre of Ebburcurynge. In the weſt ſyde of Penulton in y• arme is a towne y• is called Guydy / the weſt arme of theſe twayne hath in the ryght ſyde a ſtronge cite that hight Alcliud / whiche in theyr language is called Clyntſtone / and ſtandeth vpon a ryuer y• is called Clynt alſo. ¶ R. Some men wolde mene that Loegria endeth at Humbre / & ſtretcheth no ferther northwarde. The ſeconde party of Brytayn is called Albania y• is Scotlonde / & hath that name of Albanactus Brutes ſone / & ſtretcheth fro y• foreſayd two armes of y• ſee northward vnto y• ſee of Norway. Neuertheles the ſouth partyes of Albania where as Pictes dwelled ſomtyme / that lyeth from y• water of Twede vnto the ſcottyſſhe ſee. All y• longed ſomtyme to y• kingdom of Northumberlonde Brenycorne the north ſyde of Northumberlonde fro the fyrſt tyme of Englyſſhe kynges to y• tyme whā Kyna dius kyng of Scotlond y• was Alpinus ſone dyd away y• Pictes / & ſo ioyned that coūtre to y• kyngdom of Scotlonde. The thyrde party of Britayn is Wales Wallia that hyght Cambria alſo / & hath y• name Cambria of Cambre Brutes ſone for he was prȳce of wales. In y• eeſt ſyde Seuarne ſomtyme departed bytwene Englonde & Wales. But in y• north ſyde the ryuer of Dee at Cheſtre / and in the ſouth the ryuer y• is named Vaga at the caſtell of Strygelyn departeth Englōde & wales. Alſo kynge Offa for to haue a dyſtynccyon for euermore bytwene the

kynges of Englonde & of wales / made a longe dyche y• ſtretcheth forth out of the ſouth ſyde by Briſtowe vnder the hylles of wales Seuarne & Dee almooſt to the hedes & vnto y• mouth of y• ryuer of Dee beyonde Cheſtre faſt by the caſtell it renneth bytwene Colehyll & the mynſtre of Baſyngwerke in to y• ſee. This dyche is yet in many places ſeen. In ſaynt Edwardes tyme walſhmen ſhold not paſſe that dyche wt wepen vpon a grete payne And that was at y• erle Haroldes procurynge / as it ſhall be ſayd here after. But now in eyther ſydes bothe of that halfe and of this halfe y• dyche / & ſpecyally in the ſhyres of Cheſtre / of Shroweſbury and of Herford in many places ben Englyſſhmen & walſhmen medled togyder.
               
               
                  ¶ Of the ylondes that ben therto adiacent. Ca .vj.
                  BRytayne hath thre ylondes that ben nygh and longynge therto al without y• ylondes Orcades / as it were anſwerynge to the thre chefe partyes of Brytayn. For the yle of wyght lōgeth & lyeth to Loegria that is Englonde. The ylonde Mon that is called Angleſeia alſo longeth to Wales. And y• ylonde Eubonia that hath two other names / & is called Meneuia & Man alſo / whiche longeth to Scotlōde. And all theſe thre ylondes / Wyght / Mon / & Man ben almooſt alyke moche & of quantite / of the whiche thre alarowe foloweth our ſpeche. ¶ Be da li .j. ca .iij. Claudius ſent Vaſpaſianꝰ and Vaſpaſianus wanne Wyght / and Wyght ſtretcheth out of the eeſt in to y• weſt .xxx. myle longe / & out of the ſouth in to the north .xij. myle / and is in y• eeſt ſyde .vj. myle fro the ſouth clyf of Brytayne / & thre myle in y• weſt ſyde. ¶ Beda li .iiij. ca .v. The meſure of this ylond as Englyſſhmen geſſe / is a thouſande houſholdes & two hondred. ¶ Git. in itinere. Mon that is called Angleſeia alſo is departed from northwales by a ſhort arme of the ſee as it were two myle brode. In Mon ben .CCC. townes & .xliij. and ben accōpted for candredes that ben two hondredes. The ylond is as it were xxx. myle longe / & .xij. myle brode. Candredus is ſo moche londe as conteyneth an hondred townes / that name Candredus is made out of two languages / of Brytyſſhe & of Iryſſhe. In prayſyng of this ylōde walſhmen were wont to ſaye a prouerbe and an olde ſame. Mon Man kembry / that is to ſay in englyſſhe / that londe is ſo good / that it ſemeth y• it wold fynde corne ynough for all y• men of Wales. Therfore Virgils verſes may be accordynge therto / as moche as gnawes / beeſtes longe Inneth dawes / ſo moche efte bryngeth colde dewe in a nyght. In that arme of the ſee that departeth this londe & northwales / is a ſwalowe that draweth ſhyppes to it that ſayleth by / & ſwaloweth them in ryght as doth Cylla & Caribdis y• ben two peryllous places in the ſee of myddle erthe. Therfore men may not ſayle by this ſwalowe but ſlyly at a ful ſee. ¶ R. Of the meruayles and wonders of the ylonde of Mon thou ſhalte fynde in the chapytre of Wales. ¶ Gir. in itinere. The thyrde ylonde y• is called bothe Eubonia & Mene
                        ••
                     a that is Man ſtandeth in the myddle bytwene y• Iryſſhe vlſtere & y• ſcottyſſhe galleway as it were the nauell of the ſee. ¶ Beda li .ij. ca .ix. This ylonde Man cōreyneth as it were two ylondes. The fyrſte is ſouthward the more coūtre / & the better corne londe / & cōteyneth .ix .C. & .lx. houſholdes. The ſeconde conteyneth y• ſpace of .CCC. and moo as Englyſſhmē geſſe. ¶ Giral. in top. Somtyme was ſtryfe whether this ylonde Man ſhold long to Britayn or to Irlond / & for as moche as

venymous wormes that were brought thyder lyued there / it was iudged that the ylonde of Man ſholde longe to Brytayn. ¶ R. In that ylonde is ſortylege & wytchecraft vſed. For women there ſell to ſhypmen wynde / as it were cloſed vnder thre knottes of threde / ſo that ye more wynde he wyll haue / ye moo knottes he muſt vndo. There often by daye tyme men of that londe ſe men that ben deed tofore hande byheded or hole / and what dethe they dyed. Alyens ſet theyr feet vpon the feet of men of that londe for to ſe ſuche ſyghtes as ye men of that londe done. ¶ Beda li .ij. Scottes dwelled firſt in this ylonde. ¶ Thanatos that is Tenet / and is an ylonde beſydes Kent / and hath that name Thanatos of deth of ſerpentes / for there be none / and the erthe therof ſleeth ſerpētes borne in other londes. There is noble corne londe & ryght fruytfull. It is ſuppoſed that this ylonde was halowed & blyſſed of ſaynt Auſtyn the fyrſt doctour of Englyſſhmen / for there he arryued fyrſt.
               
               
                  ¶ Of the kynges hye wayes and ſtretes. Ca .vij.
                  MOliuncius was the .xiij. kynge of Brytons / and was the fyrſt that gaue them lawe. He ordeyned that plowmen folowes / goddes temples and hygh wayes that lede men to cytees & townes ſholde haue y• fredome of colour ſo that euery man that wente to ony of them for ſocour or for treſpace yt he had done / ſholde be ſafe for purſute of all his enemyes. But afterward for the wayes were vntertayne / and ſtryfe was had / therfore Belinus the kynge that was ye foreſayd Moliuncius ſone / for to put awaye all ſtryfe and doubte / made foure hygh kynges wayes / preuyleged with 
                        •••
                      preuylege & fredom. And the wayes 
                        〈◊〉
                      through the ylonde. The fyrſt and greteſt of the foure wayes is called Foſſe / and ſtretcheth out of the ſouth in to the north / and begynneth from ye corner of Cornewayle and paſſeth forth by Deuenſhyre by Somerſet / and forth beſydes Tetbury vpon Cotteſwold beſyde Couentre vnto Leyceſtre / and ſo forth by wylde playnes towarde Newarke / and endeth at Lyncolne. The ſeconde chefe kynges hye waye is named watlyngſtrete / and ſtretcheth thwarte ouer Foſſe / out of the ſoutheeſt in to the north weſt / & begynneth at Douer / & paſſeth by the myddle of Kent ouer Temſe beſyde London by Weſtmynſter / and ſo forth by ſaynt Albons in the weſt ſyde by Donſtable by S
                        •
                     ratford by Towcetre / by Wedom / by ſouth Lylleborne / by Atheryſton vnto Gylbertes hyll / yt now is called wrekene / & forth by Seuarne / and paſſeth beſydes Wrokceſtre / & than forth to Stratton / and ſo forth by the myddle of Wales vnto Cardykan / and endeth at the Iryſſhe ſee. The thyrde waye is called Erynnugeſtrete / & ſtretcheth out of the weſtnorth weſt in to the eeſtſoutheeſt / & begynneth in Meneuia that is ſaynt Dauids londe in weſt Wales / & ſtretcheth forth vnto Southamton. The fourth is called Rikenyldſtrete & ſtretcheth forth by Worceſtre / by Wycombe / and by Birmyngeham by Lechfelde / by Derby / by Cheſtrefelde / by Yorke / and forth vnto Tynmouth.
               
               
                  ¶ Of the famous ryuers and ſtremes. Ca .viij.
                  THere bē thre famous ryuers rennȳge through Britayn / by ye whiche thre ryuers marchaūtes of beyonde the ſee comen in ſhyppes in to Brytayn well nygh out of all maner of nacyons & londes. Theſe thre ryuers ben Temſe / Seuarne / & Humbre. The ſee ebbeth &

floweth at theſe thre ryuers / and departeth the thre prouinces of y• ylonde / as it were the thre kyngdomes aſondre. The thre partyes ben Loegria / Cambria / & Northumbria / that is myddle Englōde wales & Northumberlonde. ¶ R. This name Tamyſe ſemeth made one name of two names of two ryuers / that ben Tame & yſe / for the ryuer of Tame renneth beſydes Dorcheſtre & falleth in yſe / therfore all y• ryuer fro y• fyrſt heed vnto the eeſt ſee is named Tamyſe or Temſe. Temſe begȳneth beſyde Tetbury / that is .iij. myle by north Malmeſbury / there the Temſe ſpryngeth of a well that renneth eeſtwarde & paſſeth the Foſſe / & departeth Gloceſtre ſhyre & wylſhyre / and draweth with hym many other welles and ſtremes / and wexeth grete at Greceſtre / and paſſeth forth than towarde Hampton / & ſo forth by Oxford / by wallynforde / by Redynge / and by London. ¶ Wilhel. de pon. ca .ij. At the hauen of Sandwytche it falleth in to the eeſt ſee / and holdeth his name .xl. myle beyonde London / & departeth in ſome place Kent and Eſſex / weſtſex & Mercia / that is as it were a grete dele of myddle Englonde ¶ R. Seuarne is a ryuer of Brytayn / & is called Haberne in brytyſſhe / and hath that name Haberne of Haberne y• was Eſtryldes doughter. Guendolon y• quene drowned this Haberne therin / therfore the brytons called y• ryuer Haberne after y• woman y• was drowned therin / but by corrupte latyn it is called Sabrina / Seuarne in englyſſhe. Seuarne begynneth in the myddle of Wales / & paſſeth fyrſt towarde y• eeſt vnto Shroweſbury / & than turneth ſouthwarde vnto Brygnorth / worceſtre & Gloceſtre / & falleth in to the weſt ſee beſydes Bryſtowe and departeth in ſome place Englonde & Wales. ¶ Wilhel. de pō .li .iij. Seuarne is ſwyfte of ſtreme / moche fyſſhe is ther in / woodnes of the ſwolowynge & of the whyrlynge water caſteth vp & gadre to hepe grete hepes of grauell. Seuarne ofte aryſeth & ouerfloweth the bankes. ¶ R. Humbre hath that name of Humbre kyng of Hunes / for he was drowned therin / & renneth fyrſt a croke out of the ſouth ſyde of yorke / & than it departeth the prouynce of Lyndeſey y• longed ſomtyme to the Merces from the other coū
                     tre Northumberlonde. Trent and Ous renne in to Humbre and make the ryuer full grete. ¶ Treuiſa. The Merces were men as it were of myddle Englonde / as it ſhall be ſayd here after.
               
               
                  ¶ Of auncyent cytees & townes. ca .ix.
                  THe kyngdome of Brytayne was ſomtyme made fayre wt .xxviij. noble citees wtout ryght many caſtelles that were walled wt coures / with gates and wt barres ſtrōgly buylded. ¶ A
                        •
                     fre. Theſe were y• names of the citees. Ca
                        •
                     r lud y• is London. Caerbranke y• is Yorke Caerkent that is Caūterbury. Caergoraukon that is Worceſtre. Caerlirion y• is Leiceſtre. Caerclon that is Gloceſtre. Caercolden that is Colcheſtre. Carrey that is Chycheſtre / ſaxons called it ſomtyme Ciſſonceſtre. Caercery that is Cir ceſtre. Caerguent that is Wyncheſt
                        •
                     e. Caergraūte y• is Cambrydge. Caerleyll that is Lugubalia & Karlyll. Caerporis that is Porcheſtre. Caerdrom y• is Dorcheſtre. Caerludeoit that is Lyncolne & Lyndecolin. Caermarthyn that is Merlyns cite. Caerſegent that is Siceſtre & is vpon Temſe not ferre from Redyng. Leon that is Caerlegyon alſo / & hyght fyrſt legeceſtre & now is named Cheſtre. Caerbathon that is Bache / & hight ſomtyme Athamannus cite. Caerpaladour that is Septon / y• now hyght Shafteſbury. ¶ R. Other citees ben foūde in cro

nycles for vnderſtandynge of ſtoryes / of whom it ſhall folowe. ¶ W
                        〈…〉
                     hel. de pon. London is a ryall and a ryche cite vpon Tamyſe / of burgeyſes / of riches of marchauntes / of chaffre and marchaūdyſe. Therfore it is that ſomtyme whā derth of vytayles is in all Englonde / comyuly at Londō it is beſt chepe / bycauſe of the byers & ſellers y• ben at London. ¶ Gaufre. Brute y• fyrſt kyng of Brytons buylded & 
                        •
                     dyfyed this 
                        〈…〉
                     te of London y• fyrſt cite / in remembraūce of the cite of Troy that was deſtroyed / and called it Troy neweth & Trinouantū / yt is newe Troy Afterward kyng Lud called it Caerlud after his own name / therfore y• Brytons had indigna
                        •
                     yon as Gyldas telleth. Afterward Englyſſhmen called y• cite London / & yet after that Normans called it Londres / & is named in latyn Lōdo
                        ••
                     a. Rudhudibras kyng Leyles ſone was y• vu
                        •
                     . kyng of Brytons / he buylded Caū
                     terbury the chefe cite of Kent / & called it Caerkent. Afterward Englyſſhmen called it Doro
                        •
                     ernia / but yt is not Douer yt ſtandeth vpon y• clif of y• frenſſhe ſee / & is frō this Douer .xii. englyſſhe myle. Afterward this Dorober
                        ••
                     a was & is called Caūterbury. The ſame king Rudhudibras buylded Wyncheſtre / & called it Caerguent / & after Englyſſhmen called it went / & wyncheſtre after the name of one Wyne an Englyſſhman yt was byſſhop there. All weſtſaxon was ſubiecte to hȳ / the ſame kyng buylded Paladour that is Septon yt now is called Shafteſbury. Britons tellen yt an egle ꝓ
                        •
                     he
                        •
                     yed there ſomtyme. Bladud Leyles ſone a 
                        •
                     ygromancer was the .ix. kyng of Brytons / he buylded Bathe / & called it Caerbathon. Engliſſhmē called it after Athamannus cite. But at y• laſt men called it Bathonia y• is Bathe. ¶ Wilhel. de pō. 
                        〈◊〉
                      .ij. In this cite welleth vp & ſpringeth 
                        〈◊〉
                      bath
                        •
                     s / & men wene y• Iulius Cezar made there ſuche bathes. ¶ R. But Gaufre. monemutenſis in his brytyſſhe boke ſaith yt Bladud made thoſe bathes bycauſe William hath not ſeen that brytyſſhe boke wrote ſo by tellynge of other men / or by his own geſſyng as he wrote other thynges not beſt auyſedly. Therfore it ſemeth more ſothly that Bladud made not y• hote bathes / ne Iuliꝰ Cezardyd ſuche a dede / though Bladud buylded & made the cite / but it accordeth better to kyndly reaſon yt the water renneth in the erth by vaynes of brymſtone & ſulphur / & ſo it is kyndly made hote in that courſe & ſpryngeth vp in dyuers places of y• cite. And ſo there ben hote bathes yt waſſhen of teters / ſores & ſcabbes ¶ Treuiſa. Though mē might by crafte make hote bathes for to endure longe ynough this accordeth well to reaſon & to philoſophy y• treateth of hote welles & bathes that ben in diuers londes / though y• water of this bath be more troubly & ſourer of ſauour and of ſmell than other hote bathes ben that I haue ſeen at Acon in Almayn. And eyges in Sauoye whiche ben fayre & clere as ony well ſtreme / I haue ben bathed therin & aſſayed them. ¶ R. Claudiꝰ Cezar maryed his doughter to Aruiragus kyng of Britōs. This Claudius Cezar buylded Gloceſtre in y• wedding of his doughter. Britōs called this cite fyrſt after Claudius name / but afterward it was called Gloceſtre after one Gloria whiche was duke of y• coūtre & ſtādeth vpon Seuarne in y• marche of Englōde & wales. Shroweſbury is a cite vpon Seuerne in y• marche of englōde & wales / & is ſet vpon y• toppe of an hyll & it is called Shroweſbury of ſhrobbes & fruyte yt grewe there ſomtyme o
                        •
                      yt hyll. Brytons called it ſomtyme Pengwerne that is y• heed of a fayre tree. Shroweſbury was ſomtyme y• heed of Poweſye that ſtretcheth forth toward ouer y• myddell

of wales vnto ye Iryſſhe ſee. Notyngham ſtandeth vpon Trent / & ſomtyme hyght Notyngham yt is ye wonnynge of dennes / for ye Danes dwelled there ſomtyme & dygged dennes and caues vnder harde ſtones & rockes & dwelled there. ¶ R. Lyncolne is chefe of ye prouynce of Lyndeſey / & was called ſomtyme Caerludcoit / & afterwarde Lyndecoln. It is vncertayne who buylded fyrſt this cyte but yf it were kȳg Lud: & ſo it ſemeth by menynge of ye name / for caer is brityſſhe & is to ſaye a cite / & coit is a wode / & ſo it ſemeth yt Caerludcoit is to ſaye Luddes wode towne. Kȳg Leir was Bladuddes ſone & buylded Leyce
                        •
                     tre / as it were in ye myddle of Englonde vpon ye ryuer Sos and vpon Foſſe the kynges hye waye.
               
               
                  ¶ Wilhel. de pon. lib .iij.
                  yOrke is a grete cite in eyther ſyde of ye water of Ouſe that ſemed as fayre as Rome vnto the tyme that kyng Willyam had wt brennynge & fyre defouled it & the coūtree aboute / ſo that a pylgrym wolde now wepe and he ſawe it / yf he had knowen it tofore. ¶ Gaufre. Ebrancus the .v. kyng of Britons buylded yorke & called it after his own name Caerbranke. He buylded alſo two other citees / one in Scotlōde & is called Edenburgh / & an other toward Scotlonde in the ende of Englonde & is called Alcliud. ¶ R. Edenburgh is a cite in the londe of Pictes bytwene ye ryuer of Twede & the ſcottyſſhe ſee / & hyght ſomtyme ye caſtell of Maydens / & was called afterwarde Edenburgh of Edan kynge of Pictes / yt regned there in Egfridus tyme kyng of Northūberlonde. Alcliud was ſomtyme a noble cite / & is now well nygh vnknowen to all Englyſſhmen. For vnder the Brytons & Pictes & Englyſſhmē it was a noble cite to ye comynge of the Danes. But afterward about ye yere of our lorde viij .C .lxx. it was deſtroyed whan ye danes deſtroyed the coūtree of Northumberlonde. But in what place of Britayn that cite Alcliud was buylded / auctours tell diuerſly. Beda li .j. ſayth that it was buylded by weſt that arme of ye ſee that departeth bytwene the Britons and the Pictes ſomtyme there Seuerꝰ famous wall endeth weſtward / and ſo it ſemeth by hym that it is not ferre frō Ca
                        ••
                     le
                        •
                     ll for that cite is ſet at the ende of the wall. Other wryters of ſtoryes wryte that ye cite of Alcliud is that cite that now is called Aldburgh / yt is to ſaye / an olde towne / & ſtandeth vpon the ryuer Ous not ferre fro Burghbrigge / that is .x. myle weſtward out of yorke / & it ſemeth that he preueth that by Gaufride in his boke of dedes of Brytons / he wryteth yt 
                     
                        •••
                     
                     durus kynge of Britons was lodged at the cite of Alcliud bycauſe of ſo
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     e and huntynge / & founde his broder Arga
                        •
                     on maſkynge in a wode nygh there b
                        •••••
                      that hyght Calatery / but that w
                        •
                     d
                        •
                      
                     
                        ••
                     
                     latery whiche is Calters in 
                        〈…〉
                      recheth almooſt to yorke / and ſtr
                        ••••
                     eth towarde ye north by Aldburgh 
                        〈…〉
                      by ſpace of .xx. myle / ye mooſt 
                        〈◊〉
                      of that wode is now throwen down & the 
                        〈◊〉
                      tylled. Other men wolde ſuppoſe yt Alcliud was that cyte that now is called Burgham in the north coūtree of w
                        •••
                     
                      merlonde faſt by Comberlond and ſtandeth vpon ye riuer Eden the cite is 
                        〈◊〉
                      wonderſly ſeen. Deme ye now where it is buylded. ¶ Tre
                        ••
                     ſa. It is not harde to aſſoyle yf men take hede that many townes bere one name as Cartag
                        •
                      in Affrica & Cartago in ſpayne. Newporte in wales & Newport in ye paryſſhe of Barkeley / Worten vnder egge & worton paſſeth / wy
                        •
                     war wyk payne & wyk in ye paryſſhe of Barkeley / & two ſhyre townes eyther is called Hampton / as Southampton & Northampton ſo it ſemeth by

the ſtoryes that one Alcliud was in York ſhyre / an other in weſtmerlōd / & one faſt by the ryght ſyde of y• weſt arme of y• ſee that departeth Englonde & Scotlonde / But yt Alcliud was a ryght ſtronge cyte as Beda ſayth / & y• cyte ſtandeth faſt by a ryuer yt is called Cliud / & there is not ſuche a ryuer in Yorkſhyre nor in Weſtmerlonde as men of the coūtree tell me. Some men ſaye that the ryuer Cliud is now named Sulwatche. Sulwatche is but .v. 
                        〈◊〉
                      fro Caerleyll / whiche is a cite in y• 
                     
                        •
                     oūtre of north Englond toward y• north weſt / & hath an other name / whiche is Luguball. Leyll the .vij. kynge of Britōs buylded Caerleyll. ¶ R. In this cite is ſom what of yt famous wall that paſſeth Northumberlond. ¶ Wi
                        •
                     hel. de pon. In this cite is yet a thre chambred hous made of vawte ſtones that neuer myght be deſtroyed wt tempeſt of wederne wt brennynge of fyre. Alſo in y• coūtree faſt by weſtmerlonde in y• front of a thre chambred place is wrytē in this maner Mar
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     ictori. what this wrytyng is to ſaye I doubte ſomwhat / but yf it were ſo yt ſome of y• Combres laye there ſomtyme whan y• conſull Mariꝰ had put hȳ out of 
                        •
                     taly. But it ſemeth better yt it is wryten in mynde of Mariꝰ kyng of Britons yt was Aruitagꝰ ſone. This Mariꝰ ouer
                        •
                     ame in that place Rodryk kynge of Pictes / ſo ſayth Gaufre in his brytyſſhe 
                        •
                     oke / William malmeſ
                        •
                     ury ſawe neuer y• boke. At Hagulſtaldes chirche is a place .lxxx. myle out of york northweſtward the place is as it were deſtroyed / ſo ſaith Wi
                        •
                     hel .li .iij. de pon▪ That place longed ſomtyme to y• biſſhopriche of York / there were ſomtyme houſes wt vyce arches & bautes in y• mane
                        •
                      of Rome / now yt place is called Heſtoldeſham & Hegleſham alſo Beda 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . ca. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . ſaith that y• place is faſt by y• longe wall of the werke of Rome in the north halfe. ¶ R. There is difference bytwene the prouynce of Lindefar & the chirche Lindefarne. For the prouynce of Lyndefar & Lyndeſey is all one / & lyeth by eeſt Lyncolne / & Lincolne is the heed therof / of the whiche ſayth Beda li .iiij. ca .xj. that Sexuulfus was firſt biſſhop there. But Beda lib .iiij. ca .xxiij. ſayth y• Lyndefar chirche is an ylond yt is called holy ylonde in the ryuer of Twede nexte Barwyk. And ſo it is gadred of Bedaes ſawes yt Twede renneth in to y• famous arme of y• ſee y• now departeth Englyſſh men & Scottes in y• eeſt halfe / & in that arme bē thre ylondes / yt one is Maylros that now is called Menros. Thā about toward the weſt is Lyndefarne chirche that is called holy ylōde. Than ye thyrde is aboue vpward / & is the yloude Far
                        •
                     e & is called alſo Feruy ylonde. Than vpwarde aboue that two myle is a ryall cite vpon y• brynke of Twede whiche ſom tyme hight Bebamburgh yt is Bobbes cite / & now is called Bamburgh / & hath a ryght ſtronge caſtell. ¶ Gir. in itinere Two 
                        •
                     ytees there ben eyther is called Caerlegyon & Caerleon alſo / one is De
                     
                        〈…〉
                     ecia in ſouth wales that is called Caeruſke / alſo there the ryuer of Vſke falleth in to Seuerne faſt by Glamorgan. Bellinꝰ king of Britons ſomtyme buylded that cite / & was ſomtyme the chefe cyte of Demecia in ſouth wales. Afterwarde in Claudius 
                        •
                     eſars tyme it was called y• cite Legyons whan at y• prayer of Genius the quene / Vaſpaſianus and Aruiragꝰ were accorded / & Legyons of Rome were ſent in to Irlonde / tho was Caerleon a noble cyte & of grete auctorite / and by the Romayns ryally buylded and walled about with walles of brent tyle. Grete nobleſſe yt was there in olde tyme is there yet in many places ſeen / as the grete palayſes / gyaūtes toures / noble bathes / 
                        •
                     eleef of y• temples places of the atrees / that were places hygh &

ryall to ſtande and ſyt in / and to beholde about. The places were 
                        •
                     yally cloſed wt ryall walles that yet ſo
                        〈…〉
                     dele ſtandeth 
                        •
                     yght nygh cloſe. And within y• walles and without is grete buyldynge vndererth / water cōduytes and wayes vndererth / & ſtewes alſo y• ſhalte ſe wonderly made wt ſtrayte ſyde wayes of brethyng that wonderly caſt vp hete. In this cite were ſomtyme thre noble chirches / one was of ſaynt Iulius y• martyr / & therin a grete company of virgins. That other was of ſaynt Aaron that was of y• ordre of blacke chauons / yt chirche was ryght nobly aourned. The thyrd chirche was the chefe moder chirche of all Wales / & the chefe ſee. But after warde y• chefe ſee was turned out of that cite in to Meneuia / that is ſaynt Dauids londe in weſt wales. In this Caerleon was Amphibalꝰ borne yt taught ſaynt Albon. There y• meſſengers of Rome came to grete Arthurs courte / yf it is le
                        •
                     ull to byleue Treui
                        •
                     a / yf Giraldꝰ was in doubte whether it were lefull to byleue or not▪ it were a wonder ſhewynge as men wolde wene for to haue euermore in mynde & euer be in doubte yf all his 
                        •
                     okes were ſuche / what lore were therin / & namely whyle he maketh none euyden
                        •
                     e / for in neyther ſyde he telleth what ineueth hym ſo to ſaye. ¶ R. There is an other cite of Legyons there his Cronyeles were betrauayled as it is clerely knowen by y• fyrſt tha
                        ••
                     tre of this boke. ¶ Tr
                        •
                     uiſa. That is to vnderſtande in the la
                        •
                     yn wrytyng. For he y• made it in latyn turned it not in to Engliſſhe in y• ſame place that it was firſt in la
                        •
                     yn. The vnderſtandyng of hȳ that made this Crony
                        •
                     les is thus wryten in latyn in y• begȳnynge of this boke Preſentem Cronican
                        •
                      comp
                        ••
                     auit frat
                        •
                     r Ranulphꝰ Ceſtren
                        ••
                     s monachus. That is to ſay
                        •
                      in Engliſſhe. Broder Ranulph mon
                        •
                     e of Cheſtre compyled & made this boke of the Cr
                        •
                     ny
                        ••
                     es. ¶ 
                        〈◊〉
                     . The cite of Legions that is Cheſtre 
                        •
                     tandeth in the Marche of Englonde toward Wales by twene two armes of the ſee y• 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      named De & Merſee. This cite in tym
                        •
                      of Brytons was heed & chefe cite of a
                        〈…〉
                     
                     cia / that is Northwales. The 
                        •
                     oūder of this cite is vnknowen. For who y• 
                     
                        •
                     eeth the foūdementes of y• grete 
                        ••
                     ones wold rather wene y• it were Romayns we
                        •
                     ke or werke of gyauntes / than it were 
                        〈◊〉
                      by werkynge of Britons. This 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſomtyme in Brityſſhe ſp
                        •
                     che hyght Ca
                        〈…〉
                      leon / Legeceſtria in latyn / & Cheſtre 
                        〈◊〉
                      Englyſſhe / & y• cite of Legyons alſo. For there laye a wynter y• legyons of knyghtes that Iulius Cezar ſent for to wynne Irlond. And after Claudius Cezar ſent Legyons out of that cite for to w
                        •
                     nne y• ylonde yt he called Or
                        •
                     ades. What euer Wyllyam Ma
                        •
                     meſbury by tell
                        •
                     nge of other men mente of this cite. This 
                        〈◊〉
                      hath p
                        ••
                     te of lyuelode / of come of 
                        ••
                     eſſhe of fyſſhe / & ſpe
                        •
                     yally of pryce of ſamon. This cite 
                        〈…〉
                     yueth grete marcha
                        •••
                     ſe and ſendeth out alſo. Alſo nygh this cite ben ſalt welles / metall & 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Northumbrers deſtroyed this cite ſomtyme. But afterward El
                        ••
                     eda lady of M
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                     ded it agayn / & made it moche mor
                        •
                     . In this ſame cite ben wayes vnder the 
                        〈◊〉
                      with vawtes & ſtone werke wonderly wrought / thre chambre werkes / grete ſtones grauen with olde mēnes names therin. There is alſo Iulius C
                        ••
                     ars name wonderly grauen in ſtone and other noble m
                        •
                     nes alſo wt the wrytyng about. This is the cite that Ethe
                        •••
                     ide kyng of Northumberlonde deſtroyed / and 
                        〈…〉
                     we there faſt by nygh two thouſande monkes of the mynſter of Bangor. This is the cite that kynge Edgar came thyder ſomtyme wt .vij. ky
                        •
                     ge
                        •
                      y• were 
                        •
                     u
                        •
                     g
                        •••
                      to hym. I metre breketh out in this maner in pray
                        •
                     yng this cit
                        •
                     . Cheſtre▪ caſtell

towne / as it were / name taketh of a caſtell. It is vnknowen what man buylded this cite now. Tho legeceſtria chees hyght now towne of Legyones. Now Waiſſhe and Engliſſhe holde this cite of grete pryce. Stones on walles ſemeth werke Hercules all. There longe with myght / to dure yt hepe is hyght. Saxon ſmall ſtones / ſet vpon grete ben at ones. There vnder grounde / lotynge double voute is foūde. That helpeth wt ſondes many men of weſterne londes. Fyſſhe fleſſhe and corne lowe / this Cite towne hath ynowe. Shyppes & chaffare / ſee water brȳgeth ynough thare. Godeſtal there is / that was Emperour or this. And forth Henry kynge / erthe is there dwellynge. Of kynge Haralde / powder is there yet y halde. Bachus and Mercurius / Mars and Venus. Alſo Lauerna / Protheus and Pluto / regne there in the towne. ¶ Treuiſa. God wote what this is to mene / but poetes in theyr maner ſpeche fayne as though euery kynde crafte & lyuynge had a dyuers god eueryche from other. And ſo they fayned a god of batayle & of fyghtyng & called hȳ Mars / and a god of couetyſe & richeſſe & marchaūdyſe / & called hym Mercurius And ſo Bachus is called god of wyne. Ʋenus goodeſſe of loue & beaute. Lauer ua god of theire & of robbery. Protheus god of falſhede & of gyle / & Pluto god of hell. And ſo it ſemeth that theſe verſes wolde mene that theſe foreſayd goddes regne & ben ſerued in Cheſtre. Mars wt fyghtyng & cockynge. Mercurius with couetyſe & rycheſſe. Bachus with grete drȳkyng. Venus wt loue lewdly. Lauerna wt thefre & robbery. Procheus wt faiſhede & gyle. Thā is Pluto not vnſerued that is god of hell. ¶ R. There Babylon lore / more myght hath trouth the more.
               
               
                  ¶ Of prouynces and Shyres. Ca .x.
                  TAke hede that Englonde conteyneth .xxxij. ſhyres & prouynces / yt now ben called erledomes / reſerued Cornewayle & yt ylonde. ¶ Alfre. Theſe ben the names of yt erledomes & ſhires. Kent Southſex / Sothery / Namſhyre / Barok ſhyre that hath his name of a bare oke yt is in the foreſt at wyndſore / for at yt bare oke men of that ſhyre were wōt to come togyder and make theyr treatyes / and there take coūſeyle & aduyſe. Alſo Wylſhyre that hight ſomtyme the prouynce of Semerā / Somerſet / Dorſet / Deuen ſhyre / that now is called Deuonia in latyn. Theſe .ix. ſouth ſhyres the Tamyſe departeth frō the other dele of Englonde which were ſomtyme gouerned & ruled by the weſtſaxons lawe. Eeſtſex / Myddelſex / Southſex / Northfolke / Herford ſhyre / Huntyngdon ſhyre / Northamton ſhyre / Cambrydge ſhyre / Bedfordſhyre / Bokȳgham ſhyre / Leyceſtre ſhyre / Der by ſhyre / Notyngham ſhyre / Lyncolne ſhyre / Yorkeſhyre / Durham ſhyre / Northumberlonde / Caerleylſhyre / wt Cumberlonde / Appelbyſhyre / with Weſtmer londe / Lancaſtre ſhyre that conteyncth fyue lytell ſhyres. Theſe .xv. North and Eeſt ſhyres were ſomtyme gouerned & ruled by the lawe called Mercia in latyn & Marchene lawe in Englyſſhe. It is to wyte that Yorke ſhyre ſtretcheth from yt ryuer of Humber vnto yt ryuer of Teyſe And yet in Yorke ſhyre ben .xxij. hondredes / hondred & candrede is all one. Candrede is one worde made of walſſue and Iryſſhe / & is to menynge a coūtree that conteyneth an hondred townes / & is alſo in Englyſſhe called wepentake / for ſomtyme in the comynge of a newe lorde tenaūtes were wont to yelde vp theyr wepen in ſtede of homage. Durhamſhyre ſtretcheth frō the ryuer of Teyſe vnto yt riuer of Tyne. And for to ſpeke properly of Northumberlond it ſtretcheth fro the

ryuer of 
                        〈◊〉
                      unto the ryuer of T
                        •
                     o
                        •
                     de That is in ye begynnyngs of ScotlondeTha
                        •
                      y
                        •
                      y• co
                        •
                     tree of North
                        •
                     mberlonde that was ſomtyme from 
                        •
                     umber unto Twe
                        •
                     e be now accounted for one ſhyre & one 
                        〈◊〉
                      / as it was 
                        〈◊〉
                      yine. Than ben in Englond but .xxii. ſhyres / but yf the countre of Northumberionde be departed in to .vi. ſhyres yt ben Euerwyke ſhyre / Durhamſhyre / Norchumberlōde Cuerleilſhyre / Appelbyſhyre / Laucaſtre ſhyre / than ben in englōde .xxxvi. ſhyres without Cornewayle / & alſo without yt ylondes. Kynge William made all theſe prouynces and ſhyres to be deſcryued & meue. Than were foūden .xxxvi. ſhyres and halfe a ſhyre. Townes .iii. M. and ſoure ſcore. Paryſſhe churches .xivi. M. and two. knyghtes fees .ixxv. thouſande / wherof men of religyon haue .xxvij. thouſande and .xv. any ghtes fees. But now the wodes ben hewen towne and the londe newe tylled / and made moche more than was at that tyme / and many townes & vyllages buyiden / & ſo there be many moo vyllages & 
                        〈◊〉
                      now than were at that tyme. And where as afore is wryten that Cornewayle is not fet amonge the ſhyres of Englonde / it may ſtande amonge them well ynough for it is neyther in wales nor in Scotlonde / but it is in Englonde / & it loyneth vnto Deuenſhyre / & ſo may there be accounted in Englonde .xxxvii. ſhyres and an hath with the other ſhyles.
               
               
                  ¶ Oelegibus legum
                        ••
                      vocabulis.
                  OVnwall
                        •
                      that hight Mo
                        ••
                     in
                        •
                     aꝰ alſo made fyrſte 
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     es in Brytayne / ye whiche is 
                        〈…〉
                      lawes / & were 
                        〈…〉
                      vnto Willyam Conque
                        ••••
                     s 
                        〈…〉
                      his 
                        〈1 line〉
                      that lede men therto / and p
                        •
                     owe men ſolowes ſholde haue preuylege & fredome for to ſaue all men that wolde flee therto for ſorour and refuge. Than afterward Mercia quene of Brytous yt was Gwyl telinus wyfe / of her the prouynce had yt name of Mercia as ſome men ſuppoſe. She made a lawe full of wytte & reaſon and was called Merchene lawe. ¶ Gyis das that wrote the Cronyeles and hyſto ryes of the Brytons / turned theſe two lawes out of Brytons ſpeche in to laryn. And afterward kynge Aluredus turned all out of latyn in to Saxons ſpeche / and was called Merchene lawe. Alſo yt ſame kynge Aluredus wrote in Englyſſhe / & put to another lawe yt hyght weſtſaron lawe. Than afterwarde Danis were lordes in this londe / & ſo came forth the thyrde lawe that hyght Dane lawe. Of theſe threlawes ſaynt Edward yt thyrd made one comyn lawe / that yet is called ſaynt Edwardes lawe. I holde it will done to wryte & expowne many termes of theſe lawes. Myndebruch hurtyng of honour & worſhyp. In irenſſbe bleſc
                        •
                     ur de honnour. Burbruck in frenſide dieſchur de tourt ou de cioys. Grithburche brekyng of peas. Mylkennynge chaungynge of ſpeche in courte. Sbewynge ſet tynge forth of marchaundyſe. Hamſokne or Hamfare a rere made in hous / forſtallynge wronge or bette downe in yt kynges hye waye. Frith ſoken ſurete in defēce. Sak forſayte. Soka ſure of court and therof cometh Soken. Theam ſure of bondmen fyghrynge wytee. Amerſement for fyghtyng. Blodemytte. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     ſement for ſhedynge of blode. Flyt 
                        〈…〉
                      amendes for ſheoyng of blode. Leyr wyt amendes for lyenge by a boud woman. 
                        〈◊〉
                      yere amendes for treſpace. Scoe a gaderynge to werke of bayllyes. Nydage tayllage for dydes of londe. Danes sholde tayllage gyuen to yt Dauts that

was euery bona taterre. That is euery exe londe thre pens. A wepentake and an hondred is all one / for the countree of townes were wonte to gyue vp wepen in the comynge of a lorde. Leſtage cuſtome chalenged in chepynges fames / and ſtallage / cuſtome for ſtandyng in ſtretes in fayre tyme.
               
               
                  ¶ Of kyngdomes / of boundes and markes bytwene them. Ca .xii.
                  THe kyngdome of Brytayne ſtode without departynge hole and all one kyngdome to the Brytons / from the fyrſt Brute vnto Julius Cezars tyme / and fro Julius Cezars tyme vnto Seuerus tyme this londe was vnder trybute to yt Romayns. Neuertheleſſe kynges they had of yt ſame londe frō Seuerus vnto the laſt prynce Gracian ſucceſſours of Brytayn fayled / and Romayns regned in Brytayn. Afterwarde the Romayns lefte of theyr regnynge in Brytayne / bycauſe it was fetre from Rome and for grete beſynes that they had on yt other ſyde. Than Scottes and Pietes by myſledynge of Maximus the tyraūt purſued Brytayn / & warred there with grete ſtrengthe of men of armes longe tyme / vnto the tyme that the Saxons came at the prayenge of the Brytons agaynſt the Pictes / & put out Gurmond the Iryſſhe kyng with his Pictes / and the Brytons alſo with theyr kynge that hight Careticus / and droue them out of Englond into Wales. And ſo yt Saxons were vyctoryous / & euery prouynce after his ſtrength made hym a kyng. And ſo departed Englonde in to ſeuen kyngdomes. Neuertheleſſe afterwarde theſe seuē kyngdomes euerychone after other 
                        〈◊〉
                      all in to one kyngdome. All hole vn 
                        〈◊〉
                      the prynce Adelſtoue. Neuertheleſſe 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        ••
                     nes purſued this londe fro Adei
                     
                        〈…〉
                      tyme that was Alurents fader vnto the thy
                        〈…〉
                      abouts au .C .lxx. 
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                     lly therin .xxil. 
                        〈…〉
                     re And after hym Haralde h
                        •
                     lde the kyngdome .ix. mouethes. And after hym. Nor mans haue regned vnto this tyme / but how longe they ſhall regue he to whome no thynge is vnknowen. ¶ 
                        〈…〉
                      Of yt foreſayd ſeuen kyngdomes & theyr markes mares & boundes / whan they began / & how longe they endured / here ſhall I ſomwhat ſhortly tell. ¶ Alfre. The fyrſt kyngdome was yt kyngdome of Kent / yt ſtretcheth fro the eeſt Occean vnto yt ryuer of Tamyſe. There regned the fyrſt Engyſtes / & began to regne by the accountynge of Dionyſe the yere of our lorde A .C .lv. that kyngdome dured iii .C .lviij. yere .xv. kinges / vnto yt tyme that kynge Baldrede was put out / and Egbert kynge of weſtſaxon ioyned that kyngdom to his owne. The ſecond kyng dome was at Southſaxon / that had in the eeſt ſyde kent / in the ſouth the ſee & the yle of wyght / in the weſt Hamſhyre & in the north ſothery / there Ella regned fyrſt wt his thre ſones / & began to regne the yere after the comynge of yt Angles euen .xxx. But that kyngdome within ſhorte tyme paſſed in to the other kyngdomes. The thyrde kyngdome was of Eeſtſaxon / & bad in the eeſt ſyde the ſee / in the weſt the coūtree of London / in the fouth Temſe / & in yt north Southfolke. The kynges of this coū
                     
                        •••
                      of weſtſaron fro the firſt Sebertes tyme vnto yt tyme of the Danes were .x. kynges / the whiche were ſubgecte ſomdele to other kynges. Neuertheleſſe o
                        •
                     t eſt & longeſt they were vnder the kynges of Merci
                        •
                      / & 
                        〈◊〉
                      to the tyme y• Egbert the kynge of weſtſaxon ioyned y• kyngdome was to his owne. The fourth kyngdome was of Eeſt 
                        〈…〉
                      gles / & conteyneth Northfolke & South folke / and hath in the eaſt ſyde and in the

north ſyde the ſee / & in y• north weſt Cam bridge ſhyre / in y• weſt ſaynt Comondes dyche & Herfordſhyre / & in y• ſouth Eſſex. And this kyngdom duted vnder twelue kynges / vnto the tyme y• kyng Edmond was ſlayne. And than the Danes toke wrongfully both the kyngdomes of eeſt Angles and of eeſt Saxon. Afterwarde the Danes were put out and dryuenawaye / or made ſubgecte. And than the elder kynge Edwarde ioyned bothe the kȳgdomes to his orane. The fyfth kyng dome was of weſtſaxon / & dured longeſt of all theſe kyngdomes / & had in the eeſt ſyde fouthſaxon / in the north Tamyſe / in the ſouth & in the weſt the ſee Occean In that kyngdome regned Serdryk wt his ſone Kenryke / & began to regne the yere of our lorde god .v .C. and .xix. and than after the comynge of Angles .lxxi. ſo ſayth Denys the other kyngdomes paſſed in to this kyngdome. The ſyxth kyngdome was of Mercia / & was greteſt of all. The markes & the meres ther of were in the weſt ſyde of the ryuer De faſte by Cheſtre / and Seuarne faſte by Shroweſbury vnto Bryſtowe / in y• eeſt the eeſt ſee / in the ſouth Tamyſe vnto London / in the north the ryuer of Humber / and ſo weſtwarde and downwarde vnto the riuer Merſee vnto the corner of wyrhall / there Number falleth in to the weſt ſee. Penda Wyvves ſone regned fyrſt in this kyngdome in the yere of our lorde Jeſu Chryſt .vi. C .xxvi. ſoo ſayth Denys / and fro the comynge of Angles an hondred .lxxv. yere. This kyngdome dured vnder .xviii. kynges aboute two hondred .lxiij. yere / vnto y• laſt Colwulfe the Danes vetoke y• kyngdome to kept whan Burdred the kyng was put out / but the elder Edward the kyng put out the Danes / and ioyned the kyngdom of Mercia to his owne kyngdome. Neuertheleſſe at the begyunynge this kyngdome of Mercia was departed in to thre In weſt Mercia / in myddell Mercia / & eeſt Mercia. The .vij. kyngdome was Northamhymbro
                        
                           
                        
                        rum
                      / yt is the kyngdome of Northumberionde / the meres & markes therof were by weſt & by ceſt the ſee of Occean / by ſouth yt tyuer of Humber / and ſo downward toward the weſt by yt ende of the ſhyres of Notyngham and of Derby vnto the ryuer of Merſes / and by north the Scottes ſee / that hyght forth in Scottes / weres in Brityſſhe / y• Scot tyſſhe ſee in Englyſſhe. This kyngdom of Northumberlonde was fyrſt deied in two prouynces. That one was y• ſouth ſyde & hyght Deyra / & that other was y• north ſyde & hyght Brenicia / as it were two kyngdomes / & the ryuer departed theſe two kyngdomes that tyme / for the kyngdome of Deyra was from y• ryuer of Humber vnto the ryuer of Tyne. The kyngdome of Brenicia was fro Tyne to the Scottyſſhe ſee. And whan Pirres dwelled there as Beda ſayth li .iij. ca .ii. That Ninian y• holy man cōuetted men of the ſouth ſyde. Ida the kynge regned there fyrſt / & began to regne the yere of our lorde .v .C. & .xlvij. ſo ſayth Denys. In Deyra regned kyng Elle the yere of our lorde .v. C .xlix. Theſe two kyngdomes were other whyle (as it is ſayd) departed bytwene two kinges / & ſomtyme all hole vnder one kyng / and dured as it were .xx. Englyſſhe kynges .CCC .xxi. yere. At y• laſt Oſbartus and Elle were ſlayne in the .ix. yere of theyr kyngdome the Danes ſlewe them / & Northumberlonde was voyde wtout kynge .viii. yere Than afterwarde the Danes regned in Northumberlonde .xxxvi. yere / vnto the onynge of y• kyngdome. Adeiſtone made ſubgecte the kynges / Danes / ſcottyſſhe & walſſhe / & regned fyrſt alone in Englonge / & helde y• kyngdome of Englonde all hole and all one kyngdome / that was

the yere of our lorde. viij .C .xxviij. That tyuer of Mer
                        •
                     ee was ſomtyme marke & mere bytwene the kyngdome of Mercia and the kyngdome of Northumberlond that may be ſhewed in two maners / firſt by this properte of this Merſee / that is as moche to ſaye as a ſee y• is a boūde & a mere / for it departeth one kyngdome frō an other. Alſo it is wryten in Cronycles of Henry & Alfrede y• kyng Edward y• elder faſtned a caſtell at Māceſtre in Northumberlond / but y• cite Māceſtre is fro the tyuer of Merſee ſcarſely thre myle.
               
               
                  ¶ Of byſſhopryches and of theyr ſees. Ca .xiij.
                  IVrius was the fyrſt kyng chryſtened of y• Brytons / in his tyme were thre archebyſſhoppes ſees in Brytayne / oue was at London / an other at yorke / & the thyrde at Cacruſk the cite of Legyōs in Glamorgan / that cite is now called Caerleon. To theſe archebiſſhops ſees were ſubge
                        •
                     te .xxviij. byſſhops / & were called Flammes. To the archebyſſhops ſee of Londō was ſubgecte Corne wayle & all myddell Englōde vnto Humber. To yorke all Northumberlonde frō the bowe of Humber with all Scotlōde. To Caerleon all Wales / there were in wales .vij. biſſhops / & now ben but .iiij. Tho Seuarne departed Englonde and Wales. ¶ Withel. de pon. lib .iij. But in the Saxons tyme / though ſaynt Gregory had granted London the preuilege of the archebyſſhops ſee / neuertheles ſaint Auſtyn that was ſent in to Englonde by ſaynt Gregory turned y• archebyſſhops 
                        ••
                     e out of London in to Caūterbury. After ſaynt Gregoryes days at y• prayer of kyng Ethe
                        •
                     bryght & citezyns & burgeyſes of cauterbury / there y• archebiſſhops ſee hath 
                        〈◊〉
                      vnto now / ſaue that in y• 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      tyme Offa kyng of Mercia was 
                        〈◊◊〉
                      men of Caunterbury / & bena
                        •
                      them y• worſhip / & worſhypped Adulphe biſſhop of Lychfeld wt the arch
                        •
                     biſſhops pall by aſſent of Adrian y• pope vpon caſe by gyftes ſent. Neuertheles vnder Kenulphe y• kyng it was reſtored to Caunterbury agayn. The worſhyp of y• ſee of yorke hath dured there alway & yet dureth / though Scotlond be withdrawen fro his ſubgeccion by paſſynge of tyme. ¶ Gir. in it inere li .j. The archebiſſhops ſee was turned out of Caerleon i to Meneuia / that is in y• weſt ſyde of Demi
                        •
                     i
                        •
                      vpon the Iryſſhe ſee in ſaynt Dauyds tyme vnder kynge Arthur. From ſaynt Dauyds tyme vnto Sampſons tyme were in Meneuia .xxiij. archebyſſhops. Afterward fell a peſtylence in all Wales of y• yelowe euyll / y• is called the Iaūdys And thā Sampſon y• archebyſſhop toke with hym y• pall & went in to Brytayne Armonica y• leſſe Brytayn / & was there biſſhop of Dolenſis / from y• tyme vnto y• fyrſt Hentyes tyme kynge of Englonde were at Meneuia whiche is called ſaint Dauids .xxi. byſſhops all without pall / whether it were for vncunnynge or for pouerte. Neuertheles alway fro y• tyme the byſſhops of Wales were ſatted of y• byſſhop of Meneuia of ſaynt D
                        •
                     uyds / & the byſſhop of Meneuia was ſacred of y• byſſhops of Wales as of his ſuffrigans & made no ꝓfeſſyon ne ſubgecciō to none other chirche. Other byſſhops y• came afterwarde were ſacred at Caūterbury by cōpellyng & h
                        •
                     eſt of y• kynge / in token of y• ſacrynge & ſubgeccyon / Boniface archebyſſhop of Caūterbury y• was legate of the Croſſe ſonge in euery Cathedrall chirche of Wales ſolempnely. Amas he was y• fyrſt arch
                        •
                     biſſhop of Caūterbury that ſo did in Wales / & that was done in the ſecond Henryes tyme. ¶ 
                        〈◊〉
                     . But now ben but two prymates in all Englonde / of Caunterbury & of Yorke. To the prymate of Caunterbury ben ſubgecte .xiij.

byſſhops in Englonde and .iiij. in wales The prymate of yorke hath but two ſuf frigans in Englonde / y• ben y• biſſhops of Caer
                        ••
                     yl & of Durham. Of all theſe ſees and chaungynge of theyr places I ſhall ſhewe you here folowyng. Take hede in the begyunynge of holy chirche in Englōde byſſhops ordeyned theyr ſees ī lowe places & ſymple y• were 
                        •
                     ou
                        •
                     nable for cō templacyon / for prayers & deuocyō. But in Willyam conquerours tyme by dome of lawe canon it was ordeyned that byſſhops 
                        〈◊〉
                      come out of ſmall townes in to grete 
                        •
                     tees / therfore was y• ſee of Dor cheſtre 
                        •
                     haūged to Lyncolne. Lychfelde to Cheſtre. Tetford to Norwiche. Shyr borne to Salyſbury. Welles to Bathe. Cornewayle to Exceſtre / and Seleſey to Chycheſtre. The byſſhop of Rocheſtre hath no paryſſhe / but he is the archebyſſhops chapelayn of Caūterbury. Sith y• ſee of Ca
                        〈…〉
                     erbury was firſt ordeyned by ſaȳt Auſtin / it chaūged yet neuer his place. Chicheſtre hath vnder hȳ onely Suſſex & y• yle of wyght / & had his ſee firſt in Seleſey in the tyme of the archebyſſhop Theodore / & y• ſee dured there .ccc .xxxiii. yere vnder .xx. byſſhops fro y• fyrſt Wilfrede vnto y• laſt Stygande at y• cōmaū
                     dement of kynge Wyllyam conquerour chaūged y• ſee fro Seleſey to Chicheſtre.
               
               
                  ¶ D
                        •
                      epiſcopis occidētalibꝰ. Wilhelmꝰ
                  HAue mynde that all y• prouynce of weſtſaxon had alway one biſſhop fro y• begȳnynge vnto Theodorus tyme by graūt of king I
                        〈…〉
                      kyng of weſtſaxon the fyrſt Birinus ord
                        •
                     yned a ſee at Dorcheſtre that is a ſymple towne by ſouth Oxforde beſyde Walyngford bytwene y• metynge togyder of 
                        •
                     emſe and Came. Whan Birinus was deed / kenwaltus the kynge ordeyned a ſee at Wyncheſtre as his 
                        •
                     aber had putpoſed / there Agylbert a Fre
                        〈…〉
                     ſſhman was fyrſt byſſhop of all the prouince of weſtſaxon / fro y• tyme thecite & the ſee of Dorcheſtre p
                        •••
                     eyned to the ꝓuynce of Mercia / y• cite ſtandeth within Temſe / & the Temſe departeth bytwene Mercia & weſtſaxon. After that Agilbert was put out of Wyncheſtre / y• tho hyght Wynton / than was there an Englyſſhe byſſhop y• was calle
                        •
                      Wyne. Some men ſuppoſe y• this cite hath the name of this Wyne / and is called Wyncheſtre / as it were wyne cite. At y• laſt he was put out / & after hym came Leutherius y• foreſayd Ag
                        ••
                     berts neuewe. After Leuthertꝰ Hedda a whyle was byſſhop there / whan he was deed Theodorus y• archebyſſhop ordeyned two byſſhops to the ꝓuince of weſtſaxon. D
                        〈…〉
                      at wyncheſtre / to hȳ were ſubgect two coūt
                        •••
                     s Southery & Southamſhyre / & to hym were ſubgecte .vi. 
                        •
                     oūtrees / Barkſhyre / wylſhyre / Somerſet / Dorſetſhyre / D
                        ••
                      uenſhyre & Cornewayle. ¶ 
                        〈◊〉
                     . It ſemeth by this that weſtſaxon cō
                     
                        ••
                     yned Southery / Southamſhyre / Dor
                        •••
                     ſhyre / Deuenſhyre / & Cornewayle. ¶ W
                        〈…〉
                     
                     hel. Afterward in elder Edwardes tyme to theſe two ſees were ordeyned by commaūdemēt of Formoſus y• pope .iij. other ſees / at welles for Somerſet / at kyrton for Deuenſhyre / & at ſaynt Germayn for Cornewayle. Not longe afterwarde the ſyxth ſee was ſet at 
                        〈…〉
                     bury for wylſhyre. At y• laſt by cōmandement of kyng Willyam conquerour all theſe ſees (ſau
                        •
                      wyncheſtre) were turned & chaūged out of ſmall townes in to grete Cytees / for Shyrborne and Kammeſbury were turned in to Salyſbury. Now to that ſee is ſubgecte Barkſhyre / wylſhyre & Dorſet The ſee of welles was turned to Bathe therto is now ſubgecte all Somerſ
                        〈…〉
                     . The ſees of Kyrton and of Cornewayle 
                        〈◊〉
                      chaūged to Exceſtre / therto is ſub
                     
                        〈◊◊〉
                      & Cornewayle.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ De orientalibus epiſcopis.
                  IT it knowen that the erſt Saxons alway fro the begyunynge to now were ſubgecte to the byſſhop of London But y• prouynce of 
                        ••
                     ſt Angles that conteyneth Norfolke and Suffolke had one byſſhop at Donwyk / the byſſhop hyght Felix / & was of Bu
                        •
                     goyne / & was byſſhop .xvij. yere. After hȳ Thomas was byſſhop .v. yere / after hȳ Boniface. xvi
                        •
                     . yere. Than Byſy afterward was ordeyned by Theodorus / & ruled the prouynce whyle he might endure by hȳſelfe alone After hym vnto Egbertes tyme kynge of Weſtſaxon an .C .xliij. two byſſhops ruled that prouynce / one at Donwyk / & an other at Elyngham. Neuertheles after Ludecans tyme king of Mercia lefte and was onely one ſee at Elyngham vnto the fyfth yere of William conquerour whan Herfaſtus the▪ xxiij. biſſhop of the eſtrene chaūged his ſee to Tetford / and his ſucceſſour Herbertus chaunged the ſee fro Tetford to Norwytche / by y• leue of kynge Wyllyam the reed. The ſee of Ely that is nygh therto the fyrſt kynge Henry ordeyned the .ix. yere of his regne and made ſubgecte therto Cambrydge ſhyre / that was tofore a parte of the by
                        •
                     
                     ſhopryche of Lyncolne / and for 
                        •
                     uytyng therof he gaue to y• byſſhop of Lyncolne a good towne called Spaldynge.
               
               
                  ¶ De epiſcopis Mertio
                        
                           
                        
                        rum
                     . Wilhelmus.
                  HEre take hede y• as the kyngdome of Mercia was alway greteſt for the tyme / ſo it was deled in moo byſſhop tyches / and ſpecyally by grete herte by kynge Offa / whiche was .xl. yere kyng of Mercia / he chaūged y• a
                        •
                     chebyſſhops ſee fro Caunterbury to Lythfelde by aſſ
                        ••
                     t of Adryan the pept. Than th
                        •
                      pro
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      of Mercia and of Linde
                        ••
                     at in the firſt begynnynge of theyr 
                        〈◊〉
                      in kynge wulfrans tyme had one byſſhop of Lychfelde / the fyrſt byſſhop that was there hyght Dwyn
                        •
                      / the ſeconde hight Celath / & were bothe Scottes / after them y• thyrde Trumphere / y• fourth Iarmuanus / the fyfth Chedde. But in Edelfredes tyme that was Wulfrans broder whan Chedde was deed / Theodorus the archebyſſhop ordeyned there wynfrede Cheddes deken. Neuertheles apud Hyndon after that for he was vnbuxom in ſome poynt / he ordeyned there Sexwulf abbot of Medamſtede that is named Burgh. But after Sex wulfes fourth yere / Th
                        〈…〉
                     us y• archbyſſhop ordeyned .v. byſſhops in the prouynce of Mercia / & ſo he ordeyned Boſell at Worceſtre / Cudwyn at Lychfelde / y• foreſayd Sexwulfe at 
                        •
                     heſtre / Edelwyn at Lyndeſey at the cite Sidenia: & he to
                        ••
                      EWord
                        •
                      m
                        •
                     nke of the abbey of Hylde a
                        •
                      whythy and made hym byſſhop of Dorcheſtre 
                        •
                     e ſyde Oxford. tho hyght this Dorch eſtre Dorkynge / & ſh y• ſce of y• longed to weſtſaxon / in ſaynt Birynes tyme longed to Mercia frō Th
                        •••
                     orus y• archebiſſhops tyme Ethelred kynge of Mercia had deſtroyed kent / this byſſhop Sex
                        •
                     wulfe toke Pirtas byſſhop of Rocheſtre y• came out of Kent & made hym fyrſt byſſhop of Herford. At y• laſt whan Sexwulfe was deed Hedda was biſſhop of Lychfelde after h
                        〈…〉
                      wylfred flemed out of Northū
                     berlōd was biſſhop of Cheſtre / neuerthe 
                        •
                     es after two yere Alfred kȳg of North
                        •
                      berloude dyed & wylfred turued agayne to his owne ſee Haguſtalden / & ſo Hedda helde bothe y• byſſhopriches of Lichfelde & Eheſtre. After h
                        •
                      came Albyn y• hyght wor
                        •
                     lſo / & after 
                        •
                     ȳ came thre byſſhops. Tortant Cheſtre / witta at Lychfelde / & Eata was yet at dorcheſtre. A
                        ••
                      his 
                        •
                     eth biſſhops of Lyndſey held his ſee .ccc. 
                        ••
                     iij yere vnto 
                        •
                     emigiꝰ chaūged y• ſee to Lyncoln by leue of y• fyrſt king william. But

in 
                        •
                     ogars tyme byſſhop Leofwinꝰ wyned bothe biſſhopryches togider of Cheſtre & Lyndeffar whyle his lyf endured.
               
               
                  ¶ De epiſcopis Northumbranis. Withel. de pon .li. ca .xj.
                  AT Yorke was one ſee for all the prouynce of Northumberlo
                        •
                     de. Paulmus helde fyrſt y• ſee / & was ordeyned of y• byſſhop of Caūterbury / & helde that ſee of Yorke .vii. yere. Afterwarde whan kyng Edwyn was ſlayne & thynges were dyſtroubled / Paulinus weat awaye thens by water in to Kent from whens he came fyrſt / & 
                        •
                     oke wt hym the pall. ¶ Withel .li .iii. And ſo the byſſhop ryche of yorke ceaſed .xxx. yere / & the vſe of y• pall ceaſed there an .C .xxv. yere / vn to that Egbert y• byſſhop y• was the kynges broder of y• lōde recouered it by aucto rice of y• pope. ¶ 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Whan ſaynt Oſwold regned Aydanus a Scatte was byſſhop in Brenicia / that is y• north ſyde of Northumberloude / after hym Finiauꝰ / after hym Salmanus. ¶ Wilhel. vbi ſ
                        •
                     . At y• laſt he went in to Scotlonde wt grete indignacyon / for wilfred vndertoke hȳ / for he helde vnlawfully eeſter day .xxx. yere After y• Pa
                        〈…〉
                     is was gone from thens Wylfrede was made byſſhop of yorke. ¶ Beda li .iiii. But whyle he dwelled longe in Fraūce about his ſacrynge at excytynge of qua
                        〈…〉
                      / y• were they that helde 
                        ••
                     ſter daye the .xiiii. daye of y• mone. Chedde was takē out of his abbey of Liſtynge & wrongfully put out into y• ſee of york by aſſent of kyng Oſwy. But thre yere afterward Theoderus y• arche byſſhop dyd hym awaye / & aſſygned by to the 
                        •
                     uynce of Mercia / & reſtored wyl frede to y• ſ
                        〈…〉
                      yorke. But after bycauſe of wrath y• was bytwene hym & y• kyng Egfryde was put out of y• ſee by Theodorus helpe y• archebyſſhop / y• was corrupte with ſome maner mede / this was done after that wilfred had be
                        •
                      byſſhop of yorke / & Cumbert at Haguſtalde chie 
                        •
                     he / & Eata at Lyndeffat chirche / y• now is called holy ylonde in y• riuer of Twede Aydanus foūde fyrſt y• ſee. And Theodo rus made Eadhedus byſſhop of Repoun that was comen agayn out of Lyndeſey Wilfred had bē abbot of Repoun. Theodorus ſente Trunwynus to the londe of Pictes in the endes of Englonde faſt by Scotlōde in a place y• hyght Candida 
                        •
                     a ſa / & whyterne alſo / there ſaynt Hu
                        •
                     an a Bryton was fyrſt foūder and doctour. But all theſe ſees outtake yorke fayled lytell 
                        〈◊〉
                      lytell / for y• ſee of Cand
                        •
                     o
                        •
                      ca
                        •
                     a / y• is Galleway that tho longed to Englōde & dured many yeres vnder .x. byſſhops vnto y• it had no power by deſtroyenge of the Pictes. The ſees of Haguſtaide & of Lyndeffar was ſomtyme all one vndre ix. byſſhops aboute .lxxxx. yere / & durrd vnto y• comynge of the Danes. In that tyme vnder Hyngar & Hubba Ardu
                        •
                      the byſſhop went longe aboute with ſayne Cutbertes body vnto kyng Aluredes tyme kynge of weſtſaxon / & the ſee of Lyn deffar was ſet at Kunegeſtre y• is called Kunyngy ſourgh alſo / that place is called now Vbbeſford vpon 
                        •
                     wede. At the laſt the .xvii. yere of kyng Egberr kynge Edgars ſone / that ſee was chaunged to Dutham / & ſaynt Cutbertes body was brought thyder by y• doynge of Edmond the byſſhop / & fro y• tyme forwarde y• ſees of Haguſtalde & Lyndeffar fayled vtterly. The fyrſt kynge Henry in the .ix. yere of his regne made the newe ſee at Caerleyll. The arche byſſop of Caūterbury hath vnder hym .xiii. byſſhops in Englonde / & .iiii. in wales / he hath Rocheſtre vnder hym / & y• ſee hath vnder by a part in Kent alone. London hath vnder hym Eſſex / Myddelſex a halfe Act fordſhyre. Chycheſtre hath vnder hym Southſe / 

and the yle of wyght. Wyncheſtre hath vnder hym Hamſhyre & Southery. Salyſbury hath vnder h
                        •
                      Barkſhyre / Wylſhyre / Dorſet. Ex
                        〈…〉
                     re hath vnder hym Deuenſhyre & Cornewayle. Bothe hath vnder hym Somerletſhyre alone. Worteſtre hath vnder hym Gloceſtreſhyre / Worceſtreſhyre / & halfe Warwykſhyre. Herford hath vnder hym Herfordſhire & ſome of Shropſhyre. Cheſtre is byſſhop of Couētre & of Lychfelde / & hath vnder hȳ Cheſtreſhyre / Staffordſhyre / Derbyſhyre / halfe Warwykſhyre / and ſome of Shropſhyre / & ſome of Lancaſtreſhyre fro the ryuer of Merſee vnto y• ryuer Rypyll. Lyncolne hath vnder hym the prouynces y• ben bytwene Temſe & Humber that ben the ſhyres of Lyncolne / of Leyceſtre / of Northamton / of Hunt yngdon / of Bedford / of Bokyngham / of Oxforde and halfe Herfordſhyre. 
                        •
                     ly hath vnder hȳ Cambrydgſhyre outtake Merlonde. Norwyche hath vnder hym Merlonde / Norfolk & Suffolk. Alſo y• archcbyſſhop of Caūterbury hath foure ſuffrigans in wales that ben Landaf / ſaynt Dauyes Bangor / & ſaynt 
                        〈…〉
                     aph. The archebyſſhop of yorke hath now but two biſſhops vnder hym / y• is Durham & Caerleyll. ¶ 
                        〈◊〉
                     . And ſo ben but two prymates in Englonde / what of them ſhall do to the other / & in what mener poynt he ſhal be obedyent & vnder hym / it is fully conteyned within about y• yere of our lord god M .lxxij. tofore y• fyrſt kynge Willyam & the byſſhops of Englonde by cōmaundement of y• pope the cauſe was handled & treated bytwene the foreſayd prymates & ordeyned & demed that the prymate of Yorke ſhal be ſubgecte to the prymate of Caūterbury in thynges y• l
                        •
                     ngen to the worſhip of god & to y• 
                     
                        •
                     yleue of holy chirche / ſo that in what place ſo euer it be in Englonde y• the prymate of Caūterbury 
                        〈◊〉
                      holde & conſtrayne to gader a counſeyle of clergye the pry
                        ••
                     ate of Yorke is holden wt his ſuffrygans for to be there & for to be obedyent to y• ordinaunce that there ſhall be lawfully ordeyned. Whan the prymate of Caūterbury 
                        〈◊〉
                      deed / the prymate of Yorke ſhall come to Caūterbury and wt other byſſhops he ſhal ſacre hym y• is choſen / & ſo wt other byſſhops he ſhall ſa
                        ••
                     e his owne prymate. Yf the prymate of Yorke be deed / his ſucceſſour ſhall come vnto y• byſſhop of Caunterbury / & he ſhall take his ordynaūce of hym & take his othe with poſſeſſyon & lawful obedyence. After aboute the yere of our lorde .xi. C .lxxxxv. in y• t
                        〈…〉
                      of kyng Rycharde ben reaſons ſet for y• ryght party for eyther prymate / & what one prymate dyd to y• other in tyme of Thurſtinus of Thomas and of other biſſhops of Yorke from the conqueſt vnto kynge Henryes tyme y• thyrde. Alſo there it is ſayd how eche of them ſtarte frō other. This place is but a forſpekynge & not a full treatyſe therof / therfore it were noyful to charge this place with all ſuche reaſons.
               
               
                  ¶ Of how many maner of people haue dwelled therin. Ca .xiiij.
                  BRitons dwelled firſt in this ylond the .xviij. yere of Hely y• prophete the .xj. yere of Solinus poſtamꝰ kynge of Latyns .xiiij. yere after the takyng of Troy / 
                        •
                     ofore y• buyldynge of Rome. 
                        〈…〉
                     c .xxij. yere. ¶ 
                        〈◊〉
                     . They came hyther & toke theyr 
                        〈◊〉
                      from Armonyk that now is that other Brytayne / they helde longe tyme the ſ
                        〈…〉
                      coūtrees of y• 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . It b
                        •
                     fe
                        •
                      afterwarde in 
                        •
                     aſpa
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      tyme duke of Rome / y• the P
                        •
                     etes ſhypped out of 
                        〈◊〉
                      in to 
                        〈◊〉
                      / and were dryuen aboute w
                        〈…〉
                      wynde / & entred in to the north co
                        〈…〉
                      of Irlonde / and foūde there S
                        ••
                     ttes / & prayed them to haue a place to dwell in / and myght

                     
                        •
                     one gete. For Irlonde as Scottes ſayd myght not ſuſtayne bothe people. Scottes ſente the Pictes to the north ſyde of Englōde & behyght them helpe agaynſt the Brytons y• were theyr enemyes / yf they wolde aryſe / & toke them wyues of theyr doughters / vpon ſuche condicyon yf doubte fell / who ſholde haue ryght to be kynge / they ſholde rather choſe hȳ of the moders ſide than of y• faders ſyde / of the women kynne rather than of y• men kynne. ¶ Gaufre. In Vaſpaſyan y• emperours tyme whan Mariꝰ Aruiragus ſone was kyng of Brytons / one Rodryk kyng of Pictes came out of Scicia & began to deſtroye Scotlonde. Marius the kyng ſlewe this Rodryk / & gaue y• north party of Scotlonde y• hight Catheneſia to the men that were come with Rodryk & were ouercome by hym / for to dwell in But theſe men had no wyues / ne none myght haue of y• nacion of Brytōs / ther fore they ſayled in to Irlonde / & toke to theyr wyues Iryſſhe mēnes doughters by y• couenaūt that y• moders blode ſhold be put tofore in ſucceſſyon of herytage. ¶ Gir. ca .xvij. Neuertheles Sirinꝰ ſuꝑ Virgiliūſayth y• Pictes agatirſes y• had ſome dwellyng place about y• waters of Scicia / & they ben called Pictes of peyntynge & ſmytynge of woundes / therfore they are called Pictes as peynted men. Theſe men and theſe gothes ben all one people. For whan Maximus the tyraūt was gone out of Brytayne in to Fraūce for to occupy y• empyre. Than Gracianꝰ and Valentinianus y• were bretherne & felowes of the empyre brought theſe gothes out of Scicia wt grete gyftes / wt flaterynge & fayre byheſtes in to the north coūtree of Brytayne. For they were ſtalworth & ſtronge men of armes. And ſo theſe theues and brybouts were made men of londe & of coūtre & dwelled in the north coūtre / & helde there cytees & townes. ¶ Gaufre. Carancius the tyraunt ſlewe Baſſianus / and gaue the Pictes a dwellyng place in Albama that is Scotlonde / there they dwelled longe tyme afterward & medled with Brytons. ¶ 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Than ſith the Pictes occupyed fyrſt the north ſyde of Scotlonde / it ſemeth y• the dwellynge place y• this Carancius gaue them is y• ſouth ſyde of Scotlonde / that ſtretcheth from the thwarte ouer walle of Romayns werke to y• Scottyſſhe ſee / and conteyneth Galleway and Lodouia that is Lodeway. ¶ Therfore Bede
                        〈…〉
                      .iij. ca .ij. ſpeketh in this maner. N
                        ••
                     an the holy man conuerted y• ſouth Pictes. Afterward the Saxons came & made y• coūtre longe to Brenicia the north party of Northumberlonde / vnto y• tyme that Kynadius Alpinus ſone kynge of Scotlonde put out y• Pictes / & made y• coūtre that lyeth bytwene Twede & the Scottyſſhe ſee long to his kyngdom. ¶ Beda li .j. ca .j. Afterwarde longe tyme y• Scottes were led by duke Renda / & came out of Irlonde that is the propre countre of Scottes / & with loue or with ſtrengthe made them a place faſt by the Picces in the north ſyde of the arme of the ſee that breketh in to the londe in the weſt ſyde / that departed in olde tyme bytwene Britons & Pictes. Of this duke Renda the Scottes had y• name & were called Dalrendinꝰ / as it were Rendaes parte / for in theyr ſpeche a parte is called dal. ¶ Gir. pri. The Pictes myght haue no wyues of Brytons / but they toke them wyues of Iryſſh Scottes / and promyſed them fayre for to dwell with them / & graūted them a londe by y• ſee ſyde / there y• ſee is narowe. That londe is now called Galleway. Marianus. Iryſſhe Scottes londed at Argall y• is Scottes clyf for Scottes londed there for to do harme to y• Britons / or for y• place is next to Irlōd for to come a londe in Brytayn. ¶ Beda. And

ſo the Scottes after y• Britons & Pictes made y• thyrde people dwellynge in Brytayn. ¶ R. Than after y• came y• Saxōs at the prayenge of the Brytons to helpe them agaynſt y• Scottes & Pictes. And the Britons were ſoone put out in to wales / & Saxons occupyed the londe lytell & lytell / & efte more to the Scottyſſhe ſee And ſo Saxons made the fourth maner of men in y• ylonde of Brytayn. ¶ Beda lib .v. ca .ix. For Saxons & Angles came out of Germania / yet ſome Brytōs that dwel nygh call them ſhortly Germayns ¶ R. Neuertheles aboute y• yere of our lorde. viij .C. Egbartus kynge of Weſtſaxon cōmaūded & bad al men call y• men of y• londe Englyſſhmen. ¶ Alfre. Than after that the Danes purſued the londe aboute a. ij .C. yere / that is to ſaye / fro y• foreſayd Edbartus tyme vnto ſaynt Edwardes tyme / & made y• fyfth maner of people in y• ylonde / but they fayled after warde. At the laſt came Normans vnto duke Willyam & ſubdued Englyſſhmen & yet kepe they y• londe / & they made the ſyxth people in y• ylonde. But in the fyrſt kynge Henryes tyme came many Flemynges & receyued a dwellȳge place for a tyme beſyde Maylros in the weſt ſyde of Englonde / & made the ſeuenth people in the ylonde. Neuertheles by cōmaūdement of the ſame kynge they were put thens & dryuen to Hauerfordes ſyde in y• weſt ſyde of wales. ¶ R. And ſo now in Brytayn Danes & Pictes fayle all out / and fyue nacyons dwell therin / that ben Scottes in Albania / that is Scotlonde. Brytayne in Cambria / y• is Wales / but that Flemynges dwell in / y• is weſt Wales. And Normans & Englyſſhmen ben medled in al y• ylōde / for it is now doubte in ſtoryes how and in what maner they were put away & deſtroyed out of Brytayn. Now it is to declare how y• Pictes were deſtroyed & fayled. ¶ Gir .j. ca .vij. Brytayn was ſomtyme occupyed with Saxons / & peas was made & ſtabliſſhed with y• Pictes / than y• Scottes y• came with the Pictes ſawe y• the Pictes were nobler of dedes and better men of armes though they were leſſe in nombre than y• Scottes. Than the Scottes hauynge therof enuy turned to theyr natural treaſon y• they haue ofte vſed. For in treaſon they paſſe other men / & bē traytours as it were by kynde / for they prayed all the Pictes / & ſpecially the greteſt of them to a feeſt / & wayted theyr tyme whan the Pictes were mery and had well dronke they drewe vp nayles y• helde vp holowe benches vnder the Pictes / & the Pictes vnware ſodeynly fell in ouer y• hammes in to a wonderfull pytfall. Than y• Scottes fell on y• Pictes & ſlewe them / & lefte none alyue. And ſo of two maner people the better warryours were al deſtroyed But the other that ben y• Scottes whiche ben traytours all vnlyke to y• Pictes toke ꝓfyte by that fals treaſon / for they toke all that londe / and holde it yet vnto this tyme / & call it Scotlōde after theyr owne name. In kynge Edgarus tyme Kynadius Alpinus ſone was duke & 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     der of the Scottes / and warred in Picte londe & deſtroyed the Pictes. He warred ſyxe tymes in Saxon / & toke all y• londe that is bytwene Twede & y• Scottyſſhe ſee with wronge & with ſtrength.
               
               
                  ¶ Of the lāguages / of maners & vſage of the people of that londe. Ca .xv.
                  AS it is knowen how many maner of people ben in this ylonde there ben alſo ſo many languages and tongues. Neuertheles W
                        〈…〉
                     n and Scottes that ben not medled with other nacyons kepe yet theyr language & ſpeche. But yet y• Scottes that were ſomtyme confederate and dwelled with Pictes drawe ſomwhat after theyr ſpeche.

But the Flemynges y• dwell in the weſt ſyde of Wales haue lefte theyr ſtraunge ſpeche & ſpeke lyke to ſaxons. Alſo Englyſſhmen though they had fro y• begynnynge thre maner of ſpeches / ſoutherne northerne / & myddle ſpeche in y• myddle of the londe / as they come of thre maner of people of Germania. Neuertheles by cōmixcyon & medlynge fyrſt wt Danes & afterward wt Normans / in many thynges y• coūtree language is appayred / for ſome vſe ſtraūge wlaffynge / chyteryng harryng / garryng & gryſbytyng. This appayring of y• language cometh of two thynges. One bycauſe y• children y• go to ſcole lerne to ſpeke fyrſt englyſſhe / & thā ben compelled to cōſtrue theyr leſſons in frenſſhe / & that hath bē vſed ſyth y• Normans came in to Englonde. Alſo gentylmens children ben lerned & taught from theyr youth to ſpeke Frenſſhe / & vplondiſſhmen wyll coūterfeyte & lyken them ſelfe to gentylmen / and are beſy to ſpeke frenſſhe for to be more ſet by / wherfore it is ſayd by a comyn ꝓuerbe. Iacke wold be a gentylmā yf he coude ſpeke frenſſhe ¶ Treuiſa. This was moche vſed tofore the grete deth / but ſyth it is ſomdele chaunged / for ſyr Iohn Cornewayle a mayſter of grāmer chaūged y• techynge of grāmer ſcole & cōſtruccyon of frenſſhe in to englyſſhe. And other ſcole mayſters vſe y• ſame waye now / in the yere of our lord. M .CCC .lxxxv. the .ix. yere of king Rychard y• ſeconde / & leue all frenſſhe in ſcoles & vſe all conſtruccyon in englyſſhe wherin they haue auaūtage one waye / that is y• they lerne the ſooner theyr grā
                     mer / & in an other diſauaūtage / for now they lerne no frenſſhe / nor can none / whiche is hurte to them y• ſhall paſſe the ſee. And alſo gentylmen haue moche lefte to teche theyr chyldren to ſpeke Frenſſhe. ¶ R. It ſemeth a grete wonder y• Englyſſhmen haue ſo grete diuerſite in theyr owne language in ſowne & in ſpeking of it / whiche is all in one ylonde. And y• language of Normandy is comen out of an other londe / & hath one maner ſowne amonge all other y• ſpeke it in Englonde / for a man of kent / ſoutherne / weſterne & northerne men ſpeke frenſſhe all lyke in ſowne & ſpeche / but they can not ſpeke theyr engliſſhe ſo. ¶ Treuiſa. Neuertheleſſe there ben as many diuers maner of frenſſhe in the realme of Fraūce / as dyuers englyſſhe in y• realme of Englonde. ¶ R. Alſo of the foreſayd tongue whiche is departed in thre is grete wonder / for men of y• eeſt with men of y• weſt accorde better in ſownynge of theyr ſpeche than men of y• north wt men of y• ſouth. Therfore it is y• men of merc
                        〈…〉
                      y• ben of myddle Englonde as it were partyners with y• endes / vnderſtande better the ſyde languages northerne & ſoutherne than northerne & ſoutherne vnderſtande eyther other. ¶ Wilhel. de pon .li. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . All y• language of the northumbres & ſpecially at Yorke is ſo ſharpe ſhyteynge / fro
                        ••
                     yng & vnſhappe / y• we ſoutherne men may vnneth vnderſtāde y• language. I ſuppoſe the cauſe be y• they be nigh to y• alyens y• ſpeke ſtraūgely. Alſo y• kynges of Englonde abyde & dwell more in y• ſouth coū
                     tree thā in y• north coūtree / bycauſe there is better corne londe / more people / more noble citees / & more ꝓfytable hauens in the ſouth coūtre than in y• north coūtre.
               
               
                  ¶ De gentis huius moribus. Gir. in 
                        〈…〉
                     ere.
                  FOr y• maners & doynge of walſſh men & of Scottes ben tofore ſomwhat declared. Now I purpoſe to tell & declare y• condicyons of y• myddle people of Englonde. But the Flemynges y• ben in y• weſt ſyde of Wales ben now all turned as they were Engliſſhmen / bycauſe they company with Englyſſhmen. And

they be myghty & ſtronge to fyght / and ben the mooſt enemyes that Walſhmen haue / and vſe marcha
                        •
                     dyſe & clothynge & ben full redy to put themſelfe in auentures & to peryll in y• ſee & londe bycauſe of grete wynnyng / & ben redy ſomtyme to the plowe / & ſomtyme to dedes of armes whan tyme and place a
                        •
                     eth. It ſemeth of theſe men a grete wonder y• in a bone of a wethers ryght ſholder whan the fleſſhe is ſoden away and not roſted they knowe what hath be done / is done and ſhall be done / as it were by ſpiryte of propheeye & wonderfull crafte. They tell what is done in ferre countrees / tokens of peas or of warre / the ſtate of the realme / ſleynge of men & ſpouſebreche / ſuche thynges they declare 
                        ••
                     rtayne of tokens & ſygnes that is in ſuche a ſholder bone. ¶ R. But the Englyſſhmen y• dwel in Englōde ben medled in y• ylonde and ben ferre from the places that they ſpronge of fyrſt turne to the contrary dedes lyghtly without entycynge of ony other men by theyr owne aſſent. And vn eaſy alſo vnpacient of peas / enemyes of beſynes / and full of ſlouth. ¶ Wilhel. de pon .li .iij. ſayth. That whan they haue deſtroyed theyr enemyes all to y• groūde than they fyght with themſelfe and ſlee eche other / as a voyde and an empty ſto mak werketh in it ſelfe. ¶ R. Neuerthel
                        •
                     ſſe men of the ſouth ben eaſyer & more mylde than men of y• north. For they be more vnſtable / more cruell / and more vn eaſy. The myddle men ben parteners wt bothe. Alſo they vſe them to glotony more than other men / & ben more coſtlewe in meet & clothynge. Men ſuppoſe that they toke yt vyce of kynge Hardyknoght that was a Dane. For he badde ſet forth 
                        •
                     wyes double meſſe at dyner & at ſouper alſo. Theſe men ben ſpedefull on hors & a fote / able & redy to all maner dedes of 
                        〈…〉
                     s / & ben wont to haue vyctory and mayſtry in euery fyght where no treaſon is walkyng / and ben curyous & can well tell dedes & wōders that they haue ſeen. And they go in dyuers londes / vnneth ben ony men ryche in theyr owne londe or more gracyous in ferre and in ſtraūge londe / they can better wynne & gete newe than kepe theyr owne herytage. Therfore it is that they be ſpradde ſo wyde / & wene y• euery londe is theyr owne. The men ben able to all maner of ſleyght & wytte / but tofore y• dede blonderynge & haſty / & more wyſe after the dede than tofore / & leue of lyghtly what they haue begon. ¶ Solinꝰ li .vj. Therfore Eugenius the pope ſayd / that Englyſſhmē were able to do what euer they wolde / & to be ſet & put tofore all other / ne were yt lyght wytte letteth. And as Hanyball ſayd that y• Romayns myght not be ouercomē but in theyr own coūtre ſo Englyſſhmen may not be ouercomē in ſtraūge londes / but in theyr owne coūtre they be lyghtly ouercomen. ¶ R. Theſe men deſpyſe theyr owne & prayſe other men / & vnneth be pleaſed wt theyr owne eſtate / what befalleth other men yt they wyll gladly take to themſelfe. Therfore it is yt a yeman arayeth him as a ſquyer a ſquyer as a knyght / a knight as a duke / a duke as a kyng. Yet ſome go about & wyll be lyke to all maner ſtate & be ī no ſtate / for they take euery degre yt be of no degre / for ī beryng outward they be min ſtrels & herawdes / in talkyng grete ſpekers / in etyng & drȳkyng glotons / in gaderyng of catell huckſters & tauerners / in araye turmentours / in wynnynges Argi / in trauayle Tan
                        •
                     ali / in takynge hede Dedali / ī beddes Sardanapali / in chirches mawmets / in courtes thondre onely / in ꝑuylege of clergy & in prebēdes they knowlege themſelf clerkes. ¶ Treuiſa. As touchyng y• termes of latyn / as Argi / Tātali / Dedali / Sardinapali / ye

muſt vnderſtande them as y• poetes feyned of them. Argus was an herde and kepte beeſtes / he had an hondred eyen / & Argus was alſo a ſhyppe / a ſhipman / & a chapman / & ſo Argus myght ſe before and behynde & on euery ſyde. Therfore he that is wyſe & ware & can ſe that he be not deceyued / may be called Argus. And ſo the cronycle ſayth in plurell nombre y• Englyſſhmen ben Argi / that is to ſaye / they ſe about where as wynnyng is. That other worde Tantali / the poete feyneth that Tantalus ſlewe his owne ſone / wherfore he is dampned to perpetuall penaūce / and he ſtandeth alwaye in water vp to the nether lyppe / & hath alwaye rype apples & noble fruyte hangynge downe to the ouer lyppe. But the fruyte nor the water may not come wtin his mouth. He is ſo holden & ſtādeth bytwene meet & drynke / and may neyther ete nor drynke / & is euer an hongred and a thyrſt / that woo is hym alyue by this maner lykenes of Tantalus / they that do right nought there as is moche to do in euery ſyde ben called Tantali. It ſemeth that it is to ſay in trauayle they be Tantali / for they do ryght nought therto. The thyrde worde is Dedali / take hede that Dedalus was a ſubtyll and a ſlye man. And therfore by lykenes they that ben ſubtyll and ſlye / they ben called Dedali. And the fourth worde is Sardanapali / ye ſhall vnderſtāde yt Sardanapalus was kynge of Aſſyryens / and was full vnchaſte / & vſed hym for to lye ſofte. And by a maner of lykenes of hym they that lyue vnchaſtly bē called Sardanapali. ¶ R. But amōge all Englyſſhmen medled togyders is ſo grete a chaū
                     gynge & diuerſite of clothynge & of aray and ſo many maners & dyuers ſhappes that well nygh is there ony mā knowen by his clothynge and his araye of what ſomeuer degree that he be. Therof prophecyed an holy Anker in 
                        •
                     ynge Egelfredes tyme in this maner. Hen
                        •
                     i .li .vj. Englyſſhmen for as moche as they vſe them to dronklewnes / to treaſon / & to recheleſnes of goddes 
                        •
                     ous / fyrſt by Danes / & than by Normans / & at y• thyrde tyme by y• Scottes that they holde the mooſt wretcheſt and leeſt worth of all other they ſhall be ouercomē. Than the worlde ſhall be ſo vnſtable & ſo d
                        •
                     uers & varyable that y• vnſtablenes of thoughtes ſhall be betokened by many maner dyuerſytees of clothynge.
                  ¶ Here foloweth the deſcripcyon of the londe of Wales.
               
               
                  ¶ Of the londe of Wales. Ca .xvj.
                  
                     NOw this boke taketh in honde
                     Wales after Englonde
                     So take I my tales
                     And wende in to Wales
                     To that noble flode
                     Of Priamus blode
                     Knowlege for to wynne
                     Of grete Iupyters kynne
                     For to haue in mynde
                     Dardanus kynde
                     In theſe foure tytles I fonde
                     To tell the ſtate of that londe
                     Cauſe of the men I ſhall 
                           •
                        ell
                     And than prayſe the londe and well
                     Than I ſhall wryte with my pen
                     All the maners of the men
                     Than I ſhall fo
                           •
                        de
                     To tell meruayles of the londe.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ Of the name / and wherfore it is named Wales. Ca. xvi
                        •
                     .
                  
                     WAles now is called Wallia
                     And ſomtyme it hyght Cambria
                     For Camber Bru
                           •
                        es ſon
                     Was prynce / and there dyd won
                     
                        
Than Wallia was to me
                           •
                        e
                     For Gwalaes the quene
                     Kynge Ebrancus chylde
                     Was wedded thyder mylde
                     And of that lorde Gwalon
                     Withdraweth of the ſoun
                     And put to .l .i. a.
                     And thou ſhalte fynde Wallia
                     And though this londe
                     Be moche leſſe than Englonde
                     As good glebe is one as other
                     In the doughter as in the mother.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ Of the commodytees of the londe of Wales. Ca .xviij.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        Hough that londe be lyte
                     It is full of corne and of fruyte
                     And hath grete plente ywys
                     Of fleſſhe and e
                           •
                        e of fyſſhe
                     Of beeſtes tame and wylde
                     Of hors ſhepe oxen mylde
                     Good londe for all ſedes
                     For corne gras and herbes that ſpredes
                     There ben wodes and medes
                     Herbes and floures there ſpredes
                     There ben ryuers and welles
                     Valeys and alſo hylles
                     Valeys brynge forth flood
                     And hylles metals good
                     Cooll groweth vnder londe
                     And gras aboue at honde
                     There lyme is copyous
                     And ſ
                           •
                        lattes for hous
                     Hony and mylke whyte
                     There is deynte and not lyte
                     Of braket meete and ale
                     Is grete plente in that vale
                     And all that nedeth to the lyue
                     That londe bryngeth forth ryue
                     But of grete rycheſſe to be drawe
                     And cloſe many in ſhorte ſawe
                     It is a corner ſmall
                     As though god fyrſt of all
                     Made that londe ſo fele
                     To be ſeler of all hele
                     Wales is deled by
                     A water that hyght Twy
                     North wales from the ſouth
                     Twy deleth in places full couth
                     The ſouth hyght Demicia
                     And the other Venedocia
                     The fyrſt ſhoteth and arowes beres
                     That other deleth all with ſperes
                     In Wales how it be
                     Were ſomtyme courtes thre
                     At Carmarthyn was that one
                     And that other was in Mon
                     The thyrde was in Powyſy
                     In Pegwern yt now is Shroweſbury
                     There were byſſhops ſeuen
                     And now ben foure euen
                     Vnder Saxons all at honde
                     Somtyme vnder princes of that londe.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ Of the maners and ryghtes of the walſſhmen. Ca .xix.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        He maner lyuynge of that londe
                     Is well dyuers from Englonde
                     In meet and drynke and clothynge
                     And many other doynge
                     They ben clothed wonders well
                     In a ſhyrte and in a mantell
                     A cryſpe breche well fayne
                     Bothe in wynde and in rayne
                     In this clothynge they be bolde
                     Though the weder be ryght colde
                     Without ſhetes alwaye
                     Euermore in this araye
                     They go fyght playe and lepe
                     Stande ſyt lye and ſlepe
                     Without ſurcot gowne cote and kyrtell
                     Without iopen tabarde cloke or bell
                     Without lace & chaplet y• theyr lappes
                     Without hode hatte or cappes
                     Thus arayed gone the ſegges
                     And alwaye with bare legges
                     
                        
They kepe none other goynge
                     Though they mete with the kynge
                     With arowes and ſhorte ſperes
                     They fight with them that them deres
                     They fyght better yf they nede
                     Whan they go than whan they ryde
                     In ſtede of caſtell and toure
                     They take wodes & mareys for ſocour
                     Whan they ſeen it is to do
                     In fyghtynge they wolde be a go
                     Gyldas ſayth they ben varyable
                     In peas and not ſtable
                     If men aſke why it be
                     It is no wonder for to ſe
                     Though men put out of londe
                     To put out other wolde fonde
                     But all for nought at this ſtounde
                     For all many wodes ben at grounde
                     And put the ſee amonge
                     Ben caſtels buylded ſtronge
                     The men may dure longe vn ete
                     And loue well comune mete
                     They can ete and be mury
                     Without grete cury
                     They ete breed colde and hote
                     Of barly and of ote
                     Brode cakes rounde and thynne
                     As well ſemeth ſo grete kynne
                     S
                           ••
                        de they ete breed of whete
                     And ſelde they done ones ete
                     They haue gruell to potage
                     And lekes kynde to companage
                     Alſo butter mylke and cheſe
                     yſhape endlonge and corner weſe
                     Suche meſſes they ete ſnell
                     And that maketh them drynke well
                     Meete and ale that hath myght
                     Theron they ſpende daye and nyght
                     Euer the reder is the wyne
                     They holde it the more fyne
                     Whan they drynke at the ale
                     They tell many a lewde tale
                     For whan drynke is in handlynge
                     They ben full of ianglynge
                     At meet and after 
                           •
                        ke
                     Theyr ſolace is ſalte and leke
                     The huſbonde in his wyſe
                     Telleth that a grete pryſe
                     To gyue a caudron with groweſe
                     To them that ſyt at his mele
                     He deleth his meet at mele
                     And gyueth euery man his dele
                     And all the ouer pluſe
                     He kepeth to his owne vſe
                     Therfore they haue woo
                     And myſhappes alſo
                     They ete hote ſamon alway
                     All though phyſyke ſaye nay
                     Theyr houſes ben lowe with all
                     And made of yerdes ſmall
                     Not as in cytees nygh
                     But ferre aſonder and not to hygh
                     Whan all is eten at home
                     Thā to theyr neyghbours wyll they come
                     And ete what they may fynde & ſe
                     And than returne home aye
                     The lyfe is ydle that they ledes
                     In brennynge ſlepynge & ſuche dedes
                     Walſſhmen vſe with theyr myght
                     To weſſhe theyr gheſtes feet a nyght
                     If he weſſhe theyr feet all and ſome
                     Than they knowe yt they be welcome
                     They lyue ſo caſely in a route
                     That ſelden they bere purſe aboute
                     At theyr breche out and home
                     They hange theyr money and comb
                           •
                        
                     
                     It is wonder they be ſo hende
                     And hate cracke at nether ende
                     And without ony core
                     Make theyr wardrope at the dore
                     They haue in grete mangery
                     Harpe / tabour & pype for mynſtralſy
                     They bere corps with ſorowes grete
                     And blowe lowde hornes of ghete
                     They prayſe faſt Troyan blode
                     For therof came all theyr brode
                     Nygh kynne they wyll be
                     Though they paſſe an hond
                           •
                        ed degr
                           •
                        
                     
                     
                        
Aboue other men they wyl them dyght
                     And worſhyp preeſtes wt theyr myght
                     As aungels of heuen ryght
                     Thei worſhip ſeruaūtes of god almight
                     Ofte gyled was this brode
                     And yerned batayle all for wode
                     For Merlyns prophecye
                     And ofte for ſortylegye
                     Beſt in maners of Brytons
                     For company of Saxons
                     Ben turned to better ryght
                     That is knowen as clere as lyght
                     They tyll gardyns felde and townes
                     And drawe them to good townes
                     They ryde armed as wolde god
                     And go yhoſed and yſhodde
                     And ſyt fayre at theyr mele
                     And ſlepe in beddes fayre and wele
                     So they ſeme now in mynde
                     More englyſſhmen than walſſhe kynde
                     If men axe why they now do ſo
                     More than they be wont to do
                     They lyuen in more pees
                     Bycauſe of theyr ryches
                     For theyr catell ſholde ſlake
                     If they vſed ofte wrake
                     Drede of loſſe of theyr good
                     Make them now ſtyll of mode
                     All in one it is brought
                     Haue nothynge and drede nought
                     The poete ſayth a ſawe of prefe
                     The fote man ſyngeth to fore the thefe
                     And is bolder on the waye
                     Than the hors man ryche and gaye
                  
               
               
                  ¶ Of the meruayles and wonders of Wales. Ca .xx.
                  
                     THere is a pole at Brechnok
                     Therin of fyſſhe is many a flok
                     Ofte he chaungeth his hewe on cop
                     And bereth aboue a gardyn crop
                     Ofte tyme how it be
                     Shape of hous there ſhalte thou ſe
                     Whan the pole is frore it is wonder
                     Of the noyſe that is there vnder
                     If the prynce of the londe hote
                     Byrdes ſynge well mery note
                     As meryly as they can
                     And ſyngen for none other man
                     Beſydes Caerleen
                     Two myle fro the town
                     Is a roche well bryght of leem
                     Ryght agaynſt the ſonne beem
                     Goldelyf that roche hyght
                     For it ſhyneth as golde full bryght
                     Suche a floure in ſtone is nought
                     Without fruyte yf it were ſought
                     If men coude by crafte vndo
                     The vaynes of the erth & come therto
                     Many benefyce of kynde
                     Ben now hyd fro mannes mynde
                     And ben vnknowen yet
                     For defaute of mannes wytte
                     Grete treſour is hyd in grounde
                     And after this it ſhall be founde
                     By grete ſtudy and beſynes
                     Of them that come after vs
                     That olde men had by grete nede
                     We haue by beſy dede.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Treuiſa.
                     In bokes ye may rede
                     That kynde fayleth not at nede
                     Whan no man had crafte in mynde
                     Than of crafte halpe god and kynde
                     Whan no techer was in londe
                     Men of crafte by goddes honde
                     They that had crafte ſo then
                     Taught forth crafte to other men
                     Some crafte that came not yet in place
                     Some men ſhall haue by goddes grace
                  
                  
                     ¶ R. An ylonde is with noyſe & ſtryfe
                     In weſt wales at Kardyfe
                     Faſt by Seuarne ſtronde
                     Barry hyght that ylonde
                     In the hyther ſyde in a chene
                     Shalte thou here wonder dene
                     And dyuerſe noyſe alſo
                     If thou put thyne eere to
                     
                        
Noyſe of leues and of wynde
                     Noyſe of metals thou ſhalte fynde
                     Frotynge of yren & whetſtones y• ſhalte here
                     Hetyng of ouens than with fyre
                     All this may well be
                     By wawes of the ſee
                     That breketh in thare
                     With ſuche noyſe and fare
                     At Penbroke in a ſtede
                     Fendes do ofte quede
                     And throweth foule thynges inne
                     And deſpyſeth alſo ſynne
                     Neyther crafte ne bedes may
                     Do thens that ſorowe away
                     Whan it greueth ſoo
                     To the men it bodeth woo
                     At Crucynar in weſt wales
                     Is a wonders buryales
                     Euery man that cometh it to ſe
                     Semeth it euen as moche as he
                     Hole wepen there a nyght
                     Shall be broken or daye lyght
                     At Nemyn in north wales
                     Alytell ylonde there is
                     That is called Bardyſay
                     Monkes dwell there alway
                     Men lyue ſo longe in that hurſt
                     That the oldeſt dyeth furſt
                     Men ſaye that Merlyn there buryed is
                     That hyght alſo Silueſtris
                     There were Merlyns tweyne
                     And prophecyed beyne
                     One hyght Ambroſe and Merlyn
                     And was goten by a gobelyn
                     In Demicia at Carmarthyn
                     Vnder kynge Vortygeryn
                     He tolde his prophecye
                     Euen in Snowdonye
                     At the heed of the water of Coneway
                     In the ſyde of mount 
                           •
                        ryry
                     Dynas embreys in walſſhe
                     Ambroſe hyll in Englyſſhe
                     Kynge Vortyger ſate on
                     The water ſyde and was full of wone
                     Than Ambroſe Me
                           •
                        lyn proph
                           •
                        eyed
                     To fore hym ryght tho
                  
                  
                     ¶ Treuiſa.
                     What wyt
                           •
                        e wolde wene
                     That a fende myght gete a chylde
                     Some men wolde wene
                     That he may no ſuche werke welde
                     That fende that goth a nyght
                     Women full ofte to gyle
                     Incubus is named by ryght
                     And gyleth men otherwhyle
                     Succubus is that wyght
                     God graunte vs none ſuche vyle
                     Who that cometh in her gyle
                     Wonders happe ſhall he ſmyle
                     With wonders dede
                     Bothe men and women ſede
                     Fendes wyll kepe
                     With crafte and brynge an hepe
                     So fendes wylde
                     May make women bere chylde
                     Yet neuer in mynde
                     Was chylde of fendes kynde
                     For without eye
                     There myght no ſuche chylde dye
                     Clergy maketh mynde
                     Deth ſleeth no fendes kynde
                     But deth ſlewe Merlyn
                     Merlyn was ergo no gobelyn
                     Another Merlyn of Albyn londe
                     That now is named Scotlonde
                     And he had names two
                     Silueſtris and Calidonius alſo
                     Of that wode Calidony
                           •
                        
                     
                     For there he tolde his prophecye
                     And hyght Silueſtris as well
                     For whan he was in batell
                     And ſawe aboue a gryſely kynde
                     And fell anone out of his mynde
                     And made no more abode
                     But ranne anone vnto the wode
                  
                  
                     ¶ Treuiſa.
                     Silueſtris is wode
                     Other wylde of mode
                     Other elles
                     That at the wode he dwelles
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶ R.
                     Silueſtris Merly
                           •
                        e
                     Tolde prophecye well and fyne
                     And prophecyed well ſure
                     Vnder kynge Arthure
                     Openly and not ſo cloſe
                     As Merlyn Ambroſe
                     There ben hylles in ſnowdonye
                     That ben wonderfull hye
                     With heyght as grete a waye
                     As a man may go a daye
                     And hyght eryty in walſſhe
                     Snowy hylles in Englyſſhe
                     In theſe hylles there is
                     Leeſe ynough for all beeſtes of walis
                     Theſe hylles on top beres
                     Two grete fyſſhe weares
                     Conteyned in that one ponde
                     Meueth with the wynde an ylonde
                     As though it dyd ſwymme
                     And nygheth to the brymine
                     So that herdes haue grete wonder
                     And wene that ye worlde meueth vnder
                     In that other is perche and fyſſhe
                     Euery one eyed is
                     So fareth all well
                     In Albama the mylwell
                     In Rutlonde by Tetynwell
                     There is a lytell well
                     That floweth not alwaye
                     As the ſee twyes a daye
                     But ſomtyme it is drye
                     And ſomtyme full by the eye
                     There is in northwallia
                     In Mon that hyght Angleſia
                     A ſtone accordynge well nygh
                     As it were a mannes thygh
                     How ferre euer that ſtone
                     Be borne of ony mon
                     On nyght it gooth home his waye
                     That he founde by aſſaye
                     Hugh therto of Shroweſbury
                     In tyme of the fyrſt Henry
                     For he wolde the ſothe fynde
                     That ſtone to another he gan bynde
                     With grete cheynes of yren
                     And threwe all I feren
                     Bounde at one hepe
                     In to a water depe
                     Yet amorowe that ſtone
                     Was ſeen erly in Mon
                     A chorle helde hymſelfe full ſlygh
                     And bounde this ſtone to his thygh
                     His thygh was rotten or daye
                     And the ſtone went awaye
                     If men done lechery
                     Nygh that ſtone by
                     Swote cometh of that ſtone
                     But chylde cometh there none
                     There is a roche ryght wonderſly
                     The roche of herynge by countrey
                     Though there crye ony man borne
                     And blowe alſo with an horne
                     Noyſe there though thou abyde
                     Thou ſhalte here none in this ſyde
                     There is an other ylonde
                     Faſt by Mon at honde
                     Hermytes there ben ryue
                     If ony of them done ſtryue
                     All the myce that may be gete
                     Come and ete all theyr mete
                     Than ceaſeth neuer that woo
                     Tyll the ſtryfe ceaſe alſo
                     As men in this londe
                     Ben angry as in Irlonde
                     So ſayntes of this countray
                     Ben alſo wretchefull alway
                     Alſo in this londe
                     In Irlonde and in Scotlonde
                     Ben belles and ſtaues
                     That in worſhyp men haues
                     And ben worſhypped ſo then
                     Of clerkes and of lewde men
                     That dreden alſo
                     To ſwere on ony of tho
                     Staffe eyther bell
                     As it were the goſpell
                     At Baſyngwerke is a well
                     That Sacer hyght as men tell
                     
                        
It ſpryngeth ſo ſore as men may ſe
                     What is caſt in it throweth aye
                     Therof ſpryngeth a grete ſtronde
                     It were ynough for all that londe
                     Seke at that place
                     Haue bothe hele and grace
                     In the welle ofter than ones
                     Ben founde reed ſpercled ſtones
                     In token of the blode reed
                     That the mayde wenefrede
                     Shedde at that pyt
                     Whan her throte was kyt
                     He that dyd that dede
                     Hath ſorowe on his ſede
                     His chyldren at all ſtoundes
                     Barke as whelpes and houndes
                     To praye to that mayde for grace
                     Ryght at that welle place
                     Eyther in Shroweſbury ſtrete
                     There that mayde reſteth ſwete.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ Of the deſcripcyon of Scotlonde ſomtyme named Albania. Ca .xxj.
                  IT is a comyn ſawe that the coūtre whiche is now named Scotlonde is an outſtretchynge of the north ſyde of Britayn / & is departed in the ſouth ſyde from Britayn wt armes of yt ſee / & on the other ſyde it is becleped wt the ſee. This londe hyght ſomtyme Albania / & had ye name of Albanactꝰ yt was kyng Brutes ſone / for Albanactꝰ dwelled fyrſt therin / or of ye prouynce Albania yt is a coūtre of Scicia and nygh to Amazona / therfore Scottes ben called as it were Scyttes for they came out of Scicia. Afterward that londe hyght Pictauia / for ye Pictes regned therin. M .CCC .lx. yere. And at the laſt hyght Hibernia as Irlōde hight ¶ Gir. in top. For many ſkylles / one is for affinite & alte yt was bytwene them & Iryſſhmen / for they toke their wyues of Irlōde / & yt is openly ſeen in their byleue in clothynge / in language & in ſpeche / in wepen / and in maners. An other ſkyll is for Iryſſhmen dwelled there ſomtyme. ¶ Beda li .j. Out of Irlonde yt is ye ꝓpre coūtre of ſcottes came Iryſſhmen with theyr duke yt was called Renda / & with loue & wt ſtrength made them chefe ſees & citees beſydes ye Pictes in ye north ſyde ¶ Gir. Now the loude is ſhortly called Scotlonde of Scottes that came out of Irlonde & regned therin .CCC. rv. vere vnto reed Willyams tyme yt was Malcolyns broder. ¶ R. Many euydēces we haue of this Scotlonde ye it is of
                        •
                     e called and hyght Hibernia as Irlonde dothe. ¶ Therfore Beda li .ij. ca .xj. ſayth that Laurēce archebyſſhop of Dunbar was archebiſſhop of Scottes yt dwelled in an ylonde that hyght Hibernia & is next to Brytayn. Beda li .iij. ca .xxvij. ſayth peſtylence of moreyn bare downe Hibernia Alſo li .iij. ca .ij. ſaith that the Scottes yt dwelled in ye ſouth ſyde of Hibernia. Alſo li .iiij. ca .iij. he ſayth yt Clad was a yong lyng & lerned ye rule of monkes in Hibernia. Alſo li .iiij. ca .xxij. Egfridus kynge of Northūberlonde deſtroyed Hibernia. Alſo li .iiij. ca .xv. the mooſt drie of Scottes in Hibernia / & in ye ſame chapy
                        〈…〉
                      he called Hibernia proprely named ye weſt ylonde is an hōdred myle from eueryche Brytayn & departeth wt the ſee bytwene & called Hibernia ye countre ye now is called Scotlōde. there he telleth yt Ada
                        〈…〉
                      abbot of this ylonde ſayled to Hibernia for to teche Iryſſhmen ye lawfull Eeſter daye / & at ye laſt came agayne in to Scotlonde. ¶ Yſid. ethi. lib .xiiij. Men of this Scotlonde ben named Scottes in theyr own lāguage & Pictes alſo. for ſomtyme theyr bodyes were peinted i this maner They wolde ſomtyme wt a ſharpe edged 
                        •
                     ole prycke & kerue theyr own bodyes & make theron dyuers fygures & ſhapes / & peynt them wt ynke or with other peyn ture or colour / and bycauſe they were ſo

peynted they were called Picti / that is to ſaye peynted. ¶ Erodotus. Scottes ben lyght of herte / ſtraunge and wylde ynough / but by medlynge of Englyſſhe men they ben moche amended / they ben cruell vpon theyr enemyes / & hate bondage mooſt of ony thynge / & holde for a foule ſlouth yf a man dye in his bedde / & grete worſhip yf he dye in y• felde. They ben lytell of meet & may faſt longe / & ete ſelde whan y• ſonne is vp / and ete fleſſhe fyſſhe / milke & fruyte more than breed / & though they be fayr of ſhappe / they ben defouled and made vnſemely ynough wt theyr owne clothinge / they prayſe faſt y• vſages of theyr own forefaders / & deſpiſe other mennes doynge / theyr londe is fruytfull ynough in paſture / gardyns & feldes. ¶ Gir. de p̄. ca .xviij. The prȳces of Scottes as y• kynges of Spayne ben not wont to be anoynted ne crowned. In this Scotlōde is ſolēpne & grete mynde of ſaynt Andrewe y• apoſtle / for ſaȳt Andrewe had y• north partyes of y• worlde / Scites & Pictes to his lot for to preche & cōuerte y• people to Chriſtes byleue / & at y• laſt he was martyred in Achata in Gretia in a cite named Patras / & his bones were kepte .CC. lxi
                        •
                     . yere vnto Cōſtantinus y• emperours tyme / & thā they were tranſlated into Conſtantynople / & kepte there .C .x. yere vnto Theodoſius y• emperours tyme / & than Vngꝰ kyng of Pictes in Scotlōde deſtroyed a grete parte of Britayn / & was beſet wt a grete hooſt of Brytons in a felde called Marke / & he herde ſaynt Andrewe ſpeke to hȳ in this maner. Vngꝰ Vngꝰ here y• me Chriſtes apoſtle. I ꝓmyſe y• helpe & ſocour whan thou haſt ouercomen thyn enemyes by my helpe / thou ſhalt gyue y• thyrde dele of thyn herytage in almes to almyghty god & in y• worſhyp of ſaȳt Andrew. And the ſigne of y• croſſe went to fore his hooſt 
                        〈◊〉
                      the thyrde day he had victory / & ſo turned home agayn & deled his heritage as he was boden / & for he was vncertayne what cite he ſhold dele for ſaȳt Andrewe he faſted .iij. dayes / he & his men prayed ſaynt Andrewe that he wolde ſhewe hȳ what place he ſholde choſe. And one of y• wardeyns y• kepte the body of ſaint Andrewe in Cōſtantinople was warned in his ſlepe y• he ſhold go in to a place whyder an aūgell wold lede hȳ / & ſo he came in to Scotlonde with .vij. felowes to the toppe of an hyll named Ragmont. The ſame houre lyght of heuen beſhone & be cleped y• king of Pictes y• was comynge wt his hooſt to a place called Carceuan. There anone were heled many ſeke mē. There mette wt the kynge Regulus the monke of Conſtantynople with the rely kes of ſaynt Andrewe. There is foūded a chirche in y• worſhyp of ſaynt Andrew that is heed of all the chirches in y• londe of Pictes. To this thirche come pylgryms out of dyuers lōdes. There was Regulus fyrſt abbot & gadred monkes. And ſo all the tenth londe that the kyng had aſſygned hym / he departed it in dyuers places amonge abbeys.
               
               
                  ¶ Of y• deſcripcyon of Irlonde. ca .xxij.
                  HIbernia that is Irlōde / & was of olde tyme incorperate in to y• lordſhip of Britayn / ſo ſayth Gir. in ſua pop̄. where he deſcryueth it at full / yet is it worthy & ſemeth to prayſe that londe wt large prayſyng / for to come to clere & full knowlege of y• londe theſe tytles y• folow open the waye. Therfore I ſhall tell of y• place & ſtede of y• lond how grete & what maner londe it is / wherof y• londe hath plente / and wherof it hath defaute / alſo what men haue dwelled therin fyrſt / of maners of men of that londe / of y• wonders of that londe / and of worthynes of halowes & ſayntes of that londe.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ Of the boūdyng of Irlonde. Ca. xxiij
                  IRlonde is the laſt of all y• weſt ylondes & hyght Hibernia of one Hiberus of Spayne y• was Hermonius broder / for theſe two bretherne gate & wan that londe by conqueſt. Or it is called Hibernia of y• ryuer Hiberus y• is in y• weſt ende of Spayne / & y• londe hyght Scotlōde alſo / for Scottes dwelled there ſom tyme or they came in to y• other Scotlōde that longed to Brytayne / therfore it is wryten in y• Martyloge. Suche a daye in Scotlonde ſaynt Bryde was borne / & that was in Irlonde. This lōde hath in the ſoutheeſt ſyde Spayne thre dayes ſaylynge thens a ſyde halfe / & hath in y• eeſt ſyde y• more Brytayn / thens a days ſaylynge / in the weſt ſyde y• endles Occean / and in the north ſyde Yſelonde thre dayes faylyng thens. ¶ Solinus. But the ſee that is bytwene Brytayne & Irlonde is all y• yere full of grete wawes & vneaſy / that men may ſelde ſayle ſykerly / bytwene y• ſee is .C .xx. myle brode.
               
               
                  ¶ Of the gretenes and qualite of that londe. Ca .xxiiij.
                  IRlonde is an ylonde greteſt after Brytayn / & ſtretcheth north ward frō Brendas hylles vnto y• londe Colūbina / & cōteyneth .viij. dayes iourney / euery iourney .xl. myle: & frō Deuelin to Patrykes hylles & to y• ſee in y• ſyde in brede iiij. iourneys / & Irlonde is narower in y• myddle than in the endes / all otherwyſe than Brytayn is / as Irlonde is ſhorter north ward than Britayn / ſo is it longer ſouth ward / the londe is not playne / but full of moūtaynes / of hylles / of wodes / of marays / & of mores / the londe is ſofte rayny / wyndy / & lowe by y• ſee ſyde / & wt
                     in hylly & ſondy. ¶ Solmus. There is grete plente of noble paſture and of leeſe therfore y• beeſtes muſt be ofte dryuē out of theyr paſture leſt they 
                        •
                     te ouer moche for they ſholde ſhende themſelfe yf they myght ete at theyr wyll. ¶ Gir. Men of that londe haue comynly theyr helth / & ſtraūgers haue oft a perylous 
                        〈◊〉
                      / by cauſe of y• moiſture of y• meet. The fleſſhe of kyen is there holſom / & ſwynes fleſſhe vnholſom. Men of y• londe haue no feuer but onely y• feuer ague / and that ryght ſelde. Therfore the holſomnes of y• londe & the clennes out of venym is worth all the booſt & richeſſe of trees / of herbes / of ſpycery / of ryche clothes / & of precyous ſtones of the eeſt londes. The cauſe of y• helth & holſomnes of y• londe is y• attemperate hete & colde that is therin. In
                        •
                     
                     bus rebꝰ ſufficit. In this londe ben m
                        •
                     o kyen than oxen / more paſture than corne more graſſe than ſeed / there is plente of ſamon / of lamprays / of 
                        •
                     eles / & of other ſee fyſſhe. Of egles / of cranes / of pecoks of curlewes / of ſparowhawkes of geſhawkes / & of gentyll fawcons. Of welues & ryght ſhrewed myte / there ben attercoppes / blode ſoukers / eeftes y• do n
                        •
                      harme / there ben fayres lytell of body & ful hardy & ſtronge / there ben batnacles foules lyke wylde gees / whiche grewe wonderſly vpon trees / as it were nature wrought agaynſt kynde. Men of relygyon ete barnacles vpon faſtyng dares bycauſe they be not engendred wt fleſſhe wherin as me thȳketh they erre / for 
                        ••
                     aſon is agaynſt y• / for yf a man had eten of Adās legge he had etē fleſſhe / & yet Adā was not engendred of fader nor moder / but y• fleſſhe cometh wonderſly of y• tree. In this lōde is plente of hony & of mylke of vine & of vyneyerdes. ¶ Solinꝰ & yſ
                        •
                     d wryte y• Irlōde hath no bees. Neuertheleſſe it were better wryten y• Irlōde had bees & no vyneyerdes. ¶ Be
                        •
                     a ſayth y• there is grete hūtyng to roobuckes / & it is knowen y• there be none. It is no wonder of Beda / for he neuer ſawe y• londe / 

but ſome man tolde hȳ ſuche tales. Alſo there groweth that ſtone Saxagonꝰ / & is called Iris alſo / as it were the rayne bowe / yf that ſtone be holden agaynſt y• ſonne / anone it ſhall ſhape a raynbowe. There is alſo founden a ſtone y• is called Gagathes / & whyte margery perles.
               
               
                  ¶ Of the defaute of the londe. Ca .xxv.
                  
                     
                        •
                     Hete cornes ben there full ſmall vnneth clenſed wt mānes hande reſerued mē / all beeſtes bē ſmaller there than in other lōdes. There lacketh well nygh al maner freſſhe water fyſſhe y• is not gendred in the ſee. There lacketh vnkynde faucons / gerfaucons / pertryche / feſaūt / nyghtyngales and pyes. There lacketh alſo Roo & Bucke / & Ileſpyles / wontes / and other venymous beeſtes. Therfore ſome men feyne & that fauourably y• ſaynt Patryck clenſed y• londe of wormes & of venymous beeſtes. But it is more probable & ſkylfull y• this londe was from y• begynnynge alwaye wtout ſuche wormes / for venymous beeſtes & wormes dye there anone yf men brynge them thyder out of other lōdes. Alſo venym and poyſon brought thyder out of other londes / leſe theyr malyce as ſoone as it paſſeth the myddle of the ſee. Alſo poudre & erth of that londe caſt & ſowen in other londes dryue away wormes / ſo ferforth that yf a turfe of y• londe be put about a worme it ſleeth hym or maketh hym thryll that erth for to eſcape away. In that londe cockes crowe but lytell tofore daye / ſo that the fyrſt crowynge of cockes in that londe & the thirde in other londes ben lyke ferre tofore the daye.
               
               
                  ¶ Of them that fyrſt enhabyted Irlonde. Ca .xxvj.
                  GIraldꝰ ſayth that Caſera Noes nece drad the flode & fledde wt thre men & fyfty women in to that ylonde / & dwelled therin fyrſt the laſt yere tofore Noes flode. But afterwarde Bartholanus Seres ſone that came of Iaphet Noes ſone came thider wt his thre ſones by happe or by crafte .CCC. yere after Noes flode / & dwelled there & encreaced to y• nombre of .ix. M. men / & afterward for ſtenche of careyns of gyaūtes y• they had ſlayne / they dyed all ſaue one Ruanus that lyued. M .v .C. yere vnto ſaynt Patrykes tyme / & enformed y• holy man of the foreſayd men / & of all the doynges and dedes. Than the thyrde tyme came thyder Nimeth out of Scicia wt his. iiij ſones / and dwelled there .CC .xvj. yere. And at y• laſt of his ofſprynge by dyuers my ſhappes of warre & of moreyne they were clene deſtroyed and the londe lefte voyde .CC. yere after. The fourth tyme v. dukes that were bretherne Gandius Genandus / Sagādius / Rutheragus & Slauius / of the ſayd Nimethes ſucceſſours came out of Grece & occupied that lōde & deled it in .v. partyes / & euery partye cōteyneth .xxij. candredes. A cādrede is a coūtree y• conteyneth an .C. townes / & they ſet a ſtone in the myddle of y• lond as it were in the nauell and begynnyng of .v. kyngdomes. At the laſt Slauius was made kyng of all y• lond. The fyfth tyme whan this nacyon was .xxx. yere togyder they wexed feble. Foure noble men that were Milleſius y• kȳges ſones came out of Spayne wt many other in a nauy of .xl. ſhyppes / & .ij. of y• worthyeſt of theſe .iiij. bretherne y• hyght Hyberꝰ & Hermon deled y• lōde bytwene them two But afterward couenaūt was brokē bytwene them bothe & Hyberꝰ was ſlayne Than Hermon was kyng of all y• londe. And from his tyme to y• fyrſt Patrykes tyme were kynges of y• nacyon .C .xxxi. And ſo fro y• comynge of Hibernenſis vnto y• fyrſt Patryk were. M. viij .C. yere.

They had that name Hibernenſis & Hibernia of y• foreſayd Hiberus / or els of Hibetꝰ a ryuer of Spayne. They were called alſo Gatels & Scottes of one Gaytelus y• was Phenis neuewe. This Gaytelus coude ſpeke many lāguages after the lāguages that were made at Nemproths Toure / and wedded one Scotta Pharoes doughter. Of theſe dukes came y• Hibernēſis. Men ſaye y• this Gaytelus made y• Iryſſhe language / & called it Gaytelaf / as it were a language gadred of all languages & tongues. At the laſt Belinus kyng of Britayn had a ſone and hyght Gurgūcius that came out of Denmarke / at the ylondes Orcades he foūde men that were called Baſclenſis / and were comen thyder out of Spayne / theſe men prayed & beſought to haue a place to dwell in. And y• kyng ſent them to Irlonde that was tho voyde & waſte & ordeyned & ſent wt them dukes & capytayns of his own. And ſo it ſemeth y• It londe ſhold longe to Brytayne by ryght of olde tyme. From y• fyrſt ſaynt Patryk vnto Fedliundius y• kynges tyme .cccc. yere regned .xxxiij. kynges eueryche after other in Irlonde. In this Fedliundiꝰ tyme Turgeſius duke and capytayne of Norway brought thyder men of Norway & occupyed y• lond / & made in many places depe dyches and caſtels / ſengle / double & treble / & many wardes ſtrongly walled / & many of them ſtande yet all hole / but the Iryſſhmen retche not of caſtels / for they take woodes for caſtels / & marays & mores for caſtell dyches. But at y• laſt Turgeſius dyed by gylefulnes of women. And Englyſſhmen ſaye that Gurmūdus wan Irlonde & made thoſe dyches / & made no mencyon of Turgeſius. And Iryſſhmen ſpeke of Turge
                        〈…〉
                     ꝰ & knowe not of Gurmūdus. Therfore it is to wyte that Gurmūdus had wonne Brytayn & dwelled therin / & ſent Turgeſius with grete ſtrengthe in to Irlonde for to wynne y• londe / & bycauſe Turgeſius was capytayne & leder of y• v
                        •
                     age & iourney and ſeen amonge them / therfore Iryſſhmen ſpeke moche of hȳ as a noble man y• was ſeen in y• londe & knowen. At the laſt whā Gurmūdus was ſlayne in Fraūce Turgeſ
                        •
                     ꝰ loued y• kynges doughter of Irlonde / & her fader behyght Turgeſius y• he wolde ſende he
                        •
                      hȳ to y• lowe latheri
                        •
                      with .xv. maydens / & Turgeſiꝰ promiſed to mete there wt .xv. of ye nobleſt men yt he had: & held couenaūt & thought no gyle / but there came .xv. yonge berdles men clothed lyke women with ſhorte ſwerdes vnder theyr clothes / and fell on Turgeſiꝰ & ſlewe hym ryght there / & ſo he was traytourſly ſlayne after he had regned .xxx. yere. Not lōge after thre bretherne / Amelanus / S
                        •
                     tacus & Iuo
                        •
                     us came in to Irlōde with theyr men out of Norway as it had ben for loue of peas & of marchaūdyſe / & dwelled by ye ſee ſyde by aſſent of Iryſſhmen yt were alwaye ydle as Paules knyghtes / and the Norways buylded thre citees / Deuelin waterford & Lymerych / & encreaſed & after wexed rebell agaynſt men of that londe & brought fyrſt ſparthes in to Irlonde. So fro Turgeſiꝰ tyme vnto Roderykes tyme kyng of Connatia yt was the laſt yt was kyng of all y• londe were .xvii. kynges in Irlōde / & ſo ye kynges yt regned in Irlonde frō the Hermons tyme vnto the laſt Roderykes tyme were in all .C. l
                        〈…〉
                      kynges that were not crowned neyther enoynted / n
                        •
                      by lawe of herytage / but by myght / maiſtry and ſtrength of armes. The ſeconde Henry kynge of Englonde made this Roderyke ſubgect the yere of kynge Henryes age .xl. and of his regne xviij. the yere of our lorde. xj .C .lxxij.
               
               
                  ¶ Of the condycyons and maners of Irlonde. Ca .xxvij.
                  
                     
SOlinus ſayth yt men of this londe ben ſtraunge of nacyon / houſeles and grete fighters / and account ryght & wronge all one thynge / & ben ſyngle of clothynge / ſcarſe of meet / cruell of herte / angry of ſpeche / & drinketh fyrſt blode of deed men that ben ſlayne / & than waſſhe theyr viſages therwith / and holde them payed with fleſſhe and fruyte in ſtede of meet / & with mylke in ſtede of drynke / & vſe moche playenge & ydlenes and huntynge / and trauayle but lytell. In theyr chyldhode they ben harde nouryſſhed & harde fedde / & they ben vnſemely of maners & of clothynge / & haue breche & hoſen alone of wolle / & ſtrayte hodes that ſtretcheth a cubyte ouer the ſholders behynde / and foldȳges in ſtede of mantels & of clokes. Alſo they vſe no ſadels / bootes ne ſpurres whan they ryde / but they dryue theyr horſes wt a chambred yerde in the ouer ende. In ſtede of byttes with trenches and of brydels of reeſt / they vſe brydels that lette not theyr horſes to ete theyr meet / they fyght vnarmed naked in body / neuertheles with two dartes & ſperes / and with brode ſparthes they fyght wt one hande. Theſe men forſake tyllynge of londe / and kepe paſture for beeſtes. They vſe longe berdes & longe lockes hangynge downe behynde theyr hedes / they vſe no crafte of flaxe / of woll of metall / nor of marchaūdyſe / but gyue them to ydlenes & to ſlouth / & reken reſt for lykynge / and for fredome for rycheſſe And though Scotlonde the doughter of Irlonde vſe harpe / tymbre / and tabour. Neuertheles Iryſſhe men be connynge in two maner inſtrumentes of muſyke / in harpe and tymbre yt is armed wt wyre and ſtrenges of braſſe / on whiche inſtrumentes though they playe haſtely and ſwyftly they make ryght mery armony & melody with thycke tewnes / werbles and notes / and begyn from bemoll / and playe ſecretly vnder dyme ſowne on the grete ſtrenges / and turne agayne vnto the ſame / ſo that the greteſt party of the crafte hydeth the craft as it wolde ſeme as though the crafte ſo hydde ſholde be aſhamed yf it were take. Theſe men ben of euyll maners in theyr lyuynge / they paye no tythynges / they wedde lawfully / they ſpare not theyr alyes / but y• broder weddeth the broders wyfe / they ben beſy to betraye theyr neyghbours / and other they bere ſparthes in theyr hādes in ſtede of ſtaues / & fyght agaynſt them that truſt mooſt to them / theſe men ben varyable & vnſtedfaſt / trechours & gylefull / who that deleth with them nedeth more to beware of gyle than of crafte / of peas than of brēnynge brondes / of hony than of gall / of malyce than of knyghthode / they haue ſuche maners yt they be not ſtrōge in warre & in batayle / ne true in peas / they become goſſeps to them yt they wyll falſly betraye in ye goſſeprede & holy kynrede / eueryche drynketh others blode whan it is ſhedde / they loue ſomdele theyr nouryce and theyr playferes whiche that ſouke ye ſame mylke yt they ſouked whā they were chyldren / & they purſue theyr bretherne / theyr coſyns / & theyr other kynne / & deſpiſe theyr kynne whyles they lyue / & auenge theyr deth whan they ben ſlayne. So longe hath y• vſage of euyll cuſtome endured amonge them / that it hath goten ye mayſtry ouer them / & turneth treaſon in to kynde / ſo ferforth yt they ben traytours by nature. And alyens and men of ſtraūge londes yt dwell amōge them folowynge theyr maners that vnneth there is none but he is beſmetted wt theyr treaſon alſo. Amonge them many men pyſſe ſyttynge / and women ſtandynge. ¶ There ben many men in that londe foule ſhapen in lymmes & in body / for in theyr lymmes they lacke the benefyce of kynde. So that no

where
                        〈…〉
                      better ſhapen than they that ben there wel ſhapen
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      worſe ſhapen thā they y• ben 
                        ••
                     yll ſhapen. And ſkylfully nature hurt & defouled by wyt 
                        〈◊〉
                      of lyuynge bryngeth ſuche foul gro
                        •
                     es & euyll ſhape of them that wt vn 
                        •••
                     full de
                        •
                     ynge wt foule maners & euyll lyuyng ſo wyckedly defouleth kynde & 
                        〈◊〉
                     . ¶ In this londe & in Wales olde wyues & women were wonte & ben yet as men ſaye ofte for to ſhape themſelf in lykenes of hares to mylke theyr neyghbours kyen & ſtele theyr mylke / and ofte greyhoūdes tenne after them & purſue them / & wene that they he hares. And ſome by crafte of nygromācy make fatte ſwyne for to be reed of colour / & ſell them in markettes & fayres. But as ſoone as theſe ſwyne paſſe ony water they turne in to theyr owne kynde / whether it be ſtrawe / hey / graſſe / or turues. But theſe ſwyne may not be kepte by no crafte for to endute in lykenes of ſwyne ouer thre days. Amōge theſe wōdets & other take hede that in y• vttermeſt ende of y• 
                     world falleth newe meruayles & wonders / as though kȳde played wt large loue ſecretly & ferre in y• endes / than openly 
                        •
                     nygh in the myddel / therfore in this ylonde be many gryſely wonders & meruayles.
               
               
                  ¶ Of the meruayles and wonders of Irlonde. Ca .xxviij.
                  MAny men tell that in y• north ſyde of Irlonde is y• londe of lyfe. In that ylonde no man may dye / but whan they be olde & vexed with grete ſekenes they be borne out in to the nexte londe / & there dye. ¶ There is another ylonde in Irlonde y• no woman therin may 
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     e a chylde / but yet ſhe may cōceyue. ¶ Alſo there is an ylonde in whiche no deed body may rotte. In Vltonia y• is Ʋlſter is an yl
                        •
                     de that a 
                        •
                     uke wonderly departeth in twayne. In y• one parte is grete diſtur baunce 
                        〈◊〉
                      diſcomforte of fr
                        •
                     des / & in that other party grete lykynge & comforte of holy aungels. There is alſo ſayne Patrykes purgatory / that was ſhewed at his prayer to conferme his prechynge & his 
                        •
                     ore whan he preched to myſbyleued men of ſorowe & payne y• euyll men ſhold ſuffre for theyr euyll werkes / & of ioye & of blyſſe that good men ſhall receyue for theyr holy dedes. He telleth that who y• ſuffreth y• paynes of purgatory (yf it be enioyned hym for penaūce) he ſhal neuer ſuffre the paynes of hell / but he dye fynally wtout tepentaūce of ſynne / as ye enſample is ſet more ful at the ende of this chap
                        ••
                     te. ¶ Treuiſa. But truly no man may be ſaued but yf he be very repētaūt what ſomeuer penaunce he do / & euery man that is very repentaūt at his lyues ende ſhal be ſekerly ſaued / though he neuer here of ſaynt Patrykes purgatory. There is an ylonde in Connacte Sa
                        ••
                      / y• is in y• ſee of Conaccina halowed by ſaȳ
                     
                        •
                      Brandon / y• hath no myce / there deed bodyes ben not buryed / but bē kepte out of the erth & rotte not. In Mamoma is a welle / who y• waſſheth hym wt the waterof y• welle / he ſhall were hoore on his heed. There is an other well in Vltonia who ſomeuer is waſſhen therin he ſhall neuer wexe hoore afterwarde. There is a welle in Moūſtre or Mamoma / yf 
                        •
                     ny man touche y• well / anone ſhall fall grete rayne in all that prouynce / & that rayne ſhall neuer ceſſe tyll a preeſt y• is a 
                        •••
                     ne mayden ſynge a maſſe in a chapell that is faſt by & blyſſe y• water / & with mylke of a 
                        〈◊〉
                      that is of one yere beſprynge y• welle / and ſo reconcyle the welle in this ſtraunge maner. At Glyndal
                        •
                     an aboute the oratory of ſaynt Keywyn wytches bere apples as it were apple trees / and ben more holſome than ſauery. That holy ſayne brought forth theſe apples by prayers for to 
                        〈◊〉
                      his childe y• was ſeke

There is a lake in Ʋlſter & moche fyſſhe therin whiche is .xxx. myle in length / & xv. in brede. The ryuer Ban renneth out of that lake in to y• north Occean / & men ſaye that this lake began in this maner. There were men in yt countree yt were of euyll lyuynge (coeuntes cū Brutis) And there was a welle in y• londe in grete reuerence of olde tyme / & alwaye couered / yf it were lefte vncouered / the well wold ryſe & drowne all y• londe. And ſo it happed that a woman went to yt welle for to fetche water: & hyed her faſt to her childe that wepte in the cradell / & lefte y• welle vncouered / than ye welle ſprange ſo faſt that it drowned ye woman & her chylde / and made all the coūtree a lake & a fyſſhe ponde. For to preue ye this is ſothe it is a grete argument / that whan ye weder is clere / fyſſhers of yt water ſe in y• grounde vnder the water rounde toures & hygh ſhapen as ſteples & chirches of y• londe. In the north ſyde of Irlonde in the coū
                     tree of Oſſyryens euery .vij. yere at the prayer of an holy abbot / twayne that bē wedded a man & a woman muſt nedes be exyled and forſhapen in to lykenes of wolues / & abyde out .vij. yere. And at y• ende of .vij. yere yf they lyue they come home agayne & take agayn theyr owne ſhape / and than ſhall other twayne go forth in theyr ſtede / and ſo forſhapen for other .vij. yere. There is a lake in this londe / yf a poole of tree pyght & ſtycked therin / that parte of the ſhafte or poole yt is in the erth ſhall turne in to yren / and that parte y• abydeth in the water ſhall turne in to ſtone / and that parte that abydeth aboue ſhall be tree in his owne kynde. Alſo there is a lake that turneth h
                        •
                     ſell in to aſſhe / and aſſhe in to haſel / yf it be done therin. Alſo in Irlonde bē thre 
                        〈◊〉
                      lepes / there as ſamons lepe a
                     
                        〈…〉
                     ſt a roche a longe ſperes lengthe. 
                        〈…〉
                      Leg
                        〈…〉
                      is a pond there ben ſeen Colmans byrdes / the byrdes called Certelles / and come homely to 
                        〈◊〉
                      hande / but yf men do them wroug
                        •
                      or harme / they go away & come not agayn and the water there ſhall be bytter and ſtynke / & he that dyd y• wronge ſhall not aſtert without wreche & myſchefe / but yf he do amendes. ¶ 
                        〈◊〉
                     . As touchynge ſaynt Patrykes purgatory / ye ſhall vnderſtande that y• ſeconde ſaynt Patryke that was abbot & not byſſhop whyle he preched in Irlonde / laboured & ſtudyen for to turne thylke wycked men y• lyued as beeſtes out of theyr euyl lyfe for drede of y• paynes of h
                        •
                     ll / & for to cōferme them to good lyf. And they ſayd they wold not turne but ſome of them myght knowe ſom what of the grete paynes & alſo of y• blyſſe that he ſpake of. Than ſaynt Patryke prayed to almyghty god therfore / & our lord Ieſu Chryſt appered to ſaynt Patryke / & toke hym a ſtaffe & ladde hȳ in to a wylde place & ſhewed hym there a rounde pyt y• was derke within & ſayd / that yf a man were very repentaūt & ſtable in byleue & went in to this pyt & walked therin a daye & a nyght / he ſholde ſe the ſorowes & the paynes of euyl men / & the Ioye and blyſſe of good men. Than Chryſt vaniſſhed out of Patrikes ſyght And ſaynt Patryke arered and buylded there a chirche / and put therin chanons reguler / & cloſed the pyt aboute with a wall / & is now in the chirche yerde at the eeſt ende of the chirche / & faſt ſhette with a ſtronge dore / for no man ſholde nycely go in without leue of the byſſhop / or of the pryour of y• place. Many men went in and came out agayne in ſaynt Patrykes tyme / & tolde of paynes & Ioye that they had ſeen / and the meruayles that they ſawe ben there yet wryten / and bycauſe therof many men turned & were conuerted to ryght byleue. Alſo many men went in & came neuer out agayne.

In kyng Stephens tyme kyng of Englonde / a knyght y• hyght Owayne went in to ſaynt Patrykes purgatory & came agayn / & dwelled euer after duryng his lyfe in the nedes of the abbey of Ludenſis that is of y• ordre of Cyſteaux / & tolde many wonders that he had ſeen in Patrykes purgatory. That place is called Patrykes purgatory / and the chirche is named Reglis. No man is enioyned for to go in to that purgatory / but coūſeyled that he ſholde not come therin / but take vpon hym other penaūce. And yf a man haue auoided & be ſaable and wyl nedes go therin / he ſhall fyrſt go to the byſſhop and than he ſhall be ſent with lettres to the pryoue of y• place / & they bothe ſhall coūſeyle hym to leue. And yf he wyll nedes go therto / he ſhall be in prayers & in faſtynge .xv. dayes / and after .xv. dayes he ſhall be houſeled & ladde to the dore of the purgatory with proceſſyon & letany and yet he ſhall be coūſeyled to leue it / & yf he be ſtedfaſt and wyll en
                        ••
                     e / the dore ſhall be opened & he blyſſed & go in goddes name / & holde forth his waye / and the dore ſhall be faſt ſhette tyll the nexte daye / and whan the tyme is the pryour ſhall come and open the dore / and yf the man be comen he ledeth hym in to y• chirche with ꝓceſſyon / and there he ſhall be xv. dayes in prayers and faſtynge.
               
               
                  ¶ Of the meruayles of ſayntes of Irlonde. Ca .xxix.
                  HEre Giraldꝰ maketh mynde that as men of this nacyon ben more angry than other men / & more haſty for to take wreche whyles they ben alyue / ſo ſayntes & halowes of this londe ben more wrechefull than ſayntes of other londes. Clerkes of this londe ben chaſte and ſaye many prayers / & done grete abſtynence a daye / & drynke al nyght / ſo is accoūted for a myracle y• 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     ery 
                        〈…〉
                     th not there as wyne regneth / and ben chaſen out of abbeys in to the clergy / & done as monkes ſholde. But they y• ben 
                        ••
                     yll of them ben worſte of all other. So good men amonge them though they ben but fewe ben good at ye beſt. Prelates of that countree ben full 
                        ••
                     owe in cor
                        〈…〉
                      o
                        •
                      treſpace / and beſy in cōtemplacyon / and not in prechyng of goddes worde. Therfore it is that all y• ſayntes of that londe ben cōfeſſours and no martyrs amonge them / & no wonder / for al the prelates of this londe clerkes and prelates ſholde do is to them vnknowen. Therfore whā 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      was put agaynſt the byſſhop of Caſſyll how it myght be that ſo many ſayntes ben in Irlonde & neuer a martyr amōge them all / ſythen y• the men bē ſo ſhrewed and ſo angry / & the prelates ſo recheles and ſlowe in cor
                        •
                     eccyon of treſpace. The byſſhop anſwered frowardly ynough & ſayd. Our men ben ſhrewed and angry ynough to themſelfe / but to goddes ſeruaūtes they ley neuer hāde / but do them grete reuerence & worſhyp / but englyſſh men come in to this londe that can make martyrs / & were wont to vſe that crafte ¶ 
                        〈◊〉
                     . The biſſhop ſayd ſo bycauſe y• kyng Henry the ſeconde was tho newe comen in to Irlonde freſſhely after the marty
                        •
                      dome of ſaynt Thomas of Caūterbury. ¶ Gir. In this londe / in wales & in 
                        〈◊〉
                      londe ben belles and ſtaues with croked hedes / & other ſuche thȳges for retykes in grete reuerence & worſhip / ſo y• men of this londe drede more for to ſwere vpon one of thoſe belles & golden ſtaues than vpon the goſpels. The chefe of all ſuche relykes is holden Ieſus ſtaffe that is a
                        •
                      Deuelyn / with y• whiche ſtaffe they ſay that y• fyrſt ſaynt Patryke droue y• wormes out of Irlond. ¶ Augꝰ. de ci. dei ca .vij. yf men a
                        •
                     e how it may be y• dyuers maner of beeſtes & of dyuers kynde that

                     
                        〈◊〉
                      kyndly goten bytwene male & female come 
                        〈◊〉
                      ben in ylondes after Noes flode. Men ſuppoſe that ſuche beeſtes 
                        •
                     wāme in to ylondes about
                        •
                      / & fyrſt to the nexte and 
                        •
                     o forth in to other. Or els men ſaylynge in to ylondes brought with them ſuche beeſtes for loue of huntynge. Or aungels at god almyghtyes camaunde mēt brought ſuche beeſtes in to ylondes aboute / or the erth brought them forth fyrſt / and fulfylled tho goddes cōmaundement / that cōmaūded y• erth to brynge forth graſſe and quycke beeſtes.
                  ¶ Here endeth the deſcripcyon of Brytayne / the whiche conteyneth Englonde Wales and Scotlond / and alſo bycauſe Irloude is vnder the 
                        •
                     ule of Englonde / & of olde tyme it 
                        •
                     ath ſo contynued / ther fore I haue ſet the deſcripcyon of y• ſame after the ſayd Brytayn / whiche I haue taken out of 
                        〈…〉
                     cronycon. And bycauſe it is neceſſary vnto all Englyſſhemen to knowe y• propertees / 
                        〈…〉
                     modytees & meruayles of them / I 
                        •
                     illyā Caxton haue ſet them fyrſt in imprynt accordynge to the tranſlacyon of Treuiſa / whiche at y• requeſt of the lorde Barkeley trāſlated y• boke of Polyeronycon in to Englyſſhe.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ Lately fynyſſhe
                        •
                      and Impaynted at London in Fleteſtrete at the ſy
                        〈…〉
                      of the Sonne by wynkyn de Wo
                        〈…〉
                      the yere of our lorde god. M .CCCCC. &. 
                        〈…〉
                     viij. the .ix. daye of Apryll.
                  
                     
                        printer's or publisher's device
                     
                  
                  
               
            
         
      
   