
      
         
            
            
            Articles to be inquired of the Clergie: Set foorth by the Reuerend Father in God, Thomas Biſhop of Lincoln̄, in his firſt viſitation for his Dioceſſe. Anno Domini. 1571.
            ¶Imprinted at London, in Fleetſtreete, by Rafe Newbery.
         
      
      
         
            
            Articles.
            
               
                  FIrſt whether your Perſons, Vicars and Curates, do ſay their diuine ſeruice in their Churches at due howres, and conuenient times, and alſo doo reuerently miniſter the Sacraments to their Pariſhoners according to the booke of Common Praier, ſet out by common aucthoritie, of the Parliament of this Realme.
            2. Item, whether they do exerciſe themſelues in godly ſtudie of the holy Scriptures, and in vertuous bringing vp of youth, as in teaching of them the Cathechiſme, and other Godly exerciſes from time, to time, or no.
            3. Item, whether they do decently and orderly go in their apparel, according to the booke of Aduertiſements, lately ſet fourth in that behalfe.
            4. Item, whether they or any of them do frequent or vſe, any Tauerne, Alehouſe, or any other ſuſpected houſe, or do vſe vnlawfull Huntinge and Hawkinge contrary to the Eccleſiaſticall law and their order.
            5. Item, whether they be reſidente vppon their benefices and mainteine Hoſpitality, to their hability, and whether they haue moe benefices then one, and whether their houſes and Chauncels be in ſufficient reparacion.
            6. Item, whether ſuch as be abſente from their benefices, do leaue ſufficient Curates in their places, and whither any of them do ſerue two Cures, without ſpeciall licence of the Ordinary.
            7. Item, whether any of them do diſcourage any perſon from the reading of any part of the Bible, either in Latin or Engliſh, and do not rather comfort, and exhorte euery perſon to the reading of the ſame, at conuenient times, as the eternall worde of God, the true foode of Mans ſoule.
            8. Item, whether they haue admitted any man to Preache in their Cures not being lawfully licenced, or haue refuſed and denied ſuch to preache as haue ben licenced accordingly.
            9. Item, whether they do vſe to pray for the Quéenes Maieſty in their Churches, and exhorte the people to obedience of her grace, and other Magiſtrates being in aucthority vnder her.
            10. Item, whether they exhorte their Pariſhioners to receaue

the holy Communion, at the leaſt fowre times in the yeare, and whether they preſume to miniſter the ſame to any perſon that is out of Charitie or infamed with any notorious Crime.
            11. Item, whether they haue theyr foure quarter Sermons by ſuch as be licenced to preache, and whether they do reade once in the yeare vpon ſome ſolemne day in their Church openly, when the moſt reſorte of people ſhalbe preſent, the Confeſſion and articles agréed vpon by the Reuerende Father in God the Archbiſhop of Canterbury, and Yorke, and other Biſhoppes of this Realme.
            12. Item, whether your Parſons and Vicars be married or no, and if they be not, whether they kepe in their houſes any ſuſpected Wemen, vnder the name and colour of their Butlers, Kinſwomen, or otherwaies.
            13. Item, whether they or any of them haue any ſedicious bookes priuily, or openly, lately ſet forth by Doctor Harding & other his complices, enimies of Gods true Religion, and to their Natiue Countrey, or if any of them do ſupporte, maiteyne, or ſuccoure, the ſaide Doctor Hardinge, or any of his Complices with money or otherwaies whereas they be in the partes beyond the Seas.
            14. Item, whether they do diſtinctly and ſincerely reade the homilies ſet forthe by the Quéenes Maieſties aucthority vppon the Sondayes, and Holidayes, when there is no Sermon, and whether they do viſite the ſicke, in exhortinge them to conſider the poore, and other Charitable deedes.
            15. Item, that no Miniſter in the Miniſtration of the holy Sacramentes ſhall vſe any Popiſhe or ſuperſticious Garment, ſauing that kinde of Garmente, as ſhall be appointed by common aucthority or by the Biſhoppe of the Dioces and whether they receaue any to be Godfathers or Godmothers that haue not receiued the Communion or no.
            16. Item, whether your Parſons, Vicars, or Curates, do vſe to tole any Bell in the time of Lent as to confeſſion in the Popiſhe time, whether their tables be hanged like Aultars or no, & whether they baptiſe any Children on the workenday (or no) and bid and keepe any other holy dayes and faſting dayes then which are appoynted by the Booke.
            17. Item, whether any of them do go in their Surpleſſes in the

Rogation wéeke, and whether they do read the Quéenes Maieſties Iniunctions quarterly or no.
            18. Item, whether they deliuer the holy Sacramente of the Lordes ſupper to their people rather into their mouthes, then into their handes, and whether they or any of them do whiſper or breathe ouer the Breade in the time of conſecration or no.
            19. Item, whether they do kepe the order for the bringing of the Coarſe to the Buriall according to the Booke, &c.
            20. Item, whether they do viſit the ſicke, and impotent perſons, to comforte them in the time of their ſickneſſe, with neceſſary Doctrine out of the holy Scriptures neceſſary for that purpoſe.
         
         
            Articles to be inquired of the Laytie.
            FIRST whether you haue the Bible of the greateſt volume, the booke of common Prayer ſet forth by aucthority of Parliament, the Paraphraſe, both partes of the homilies, the Pſalter, and other bookes, neceſſary accordinge to the Queenes Maieſties Iniunctions.
            2. Item, whether there be a comly deſent framed Communion table, with a Carpet to the ſame, according to the order of a boke ſet forth in that behalfe, and alſo a conuenient Pulpit, ſet vp in ſuch place of the Churche as Gods word may be beſt heard out of it.
            3. Item, whether any in your Pariſh do depraue or diſpraiſe ye booke of Common Praier, ſet forth by aucthority of Parliament, or ſpeake againſt the homilies, or do maintaine or holde any eronious opinions, contrary to the worde of God, and the lawes of the Realme.
            4. Item, whether any man do ſtubbernly contemne or diſpiſe the order of Adminiſtration of the holy Sacraments ſet forth in the Engliſh tongue and do obſtinately refuſe to receaue the holie Communion at the leaſt foure times in the yeare.
            5. Item, whether any man doth abſent him ſelfe from diuine Seruice in the holy daies without lawfull
                  •
                and iuſt cauſe, and if ſuch do, whether the Churchewardens do leuie by the way of diſtreſſe the penalty, according to the ſtatute, and put the ſame in the poore mans Boxe.
            
            
            
               6. Item, whether there be any within your Pariſhe that doth not reuerently vſe the miniſters, or whether there be any common ſwearers, ſeditious ſlaunderers of their neighbours, or haū
               ters of any Alehouſes, in the time of diuine ſeruice, or any walkers, Ianglers, or Talkers, that diſturbeth the miniſter in the time of diuine ſeruice.
            7. Item whether there be any whoremongers, adulterers, or any that do vſe any ſorcery, inchauntmentes, or witchcraftes, or vehemently ſuſpected of naughty liuinge, within your Pariſh or no.
            8. Item, whether all monumentes of Superſtition be defaced and taken downe within your churches, or whether any do vſe to pray vpon Beades, the Latin Primmer, or other ſuperſticious bookes, or kepe any ſuperſtitious Reliques, as Veſtimentes, Albes, Banner clothes and ſuch like, in their houſes, or other places or no.
            9. Item, whether your Chalices being mere monuments of the Popiſhe Maſſe, and Popiſhe Religion, be tranſlated and conuerted, into decent and comely Communion Cuppes, and the ſame to be ſiluer at the leaſt accordinge to the value of theyr Chalices or no.
            10. Item whether your Churches be in ſufficient repaire and the Churche yardes well fenſed, and kepte from Swine, and other filthy beaſtes.
            11. Item, whether there hath bene any Fraye made in your Churches or Churche yardes, to the diſturbance of Gods ſeruice, and to the euill example of the reſt of the Pariſh, you ſhall preſent by whom, when, and after what ſort.
            12. Item, whether there be any Scholemaiſters, within your Pariſhes that do teache any Grammer ſchole either priuately or openly, how long they haue taught, and what their names be.
            13. Item, whether there be any Legacies withholden giuen to the Churche, or otherwaies, by ye Teſtatours, in whoſe hands it is, by whom it is geuen, and by whom it is withholden.
            14. Item, whether Collection be made for the poore according to the Statute, and the ſame diſtributed and accompted for accordyng to the ſame Statute, and whether any man refuſeth to geue to the poore accordingly.
            
               15. Item, whether any do ſtubbornely refuſe to brynge theyr Children to the Miniſter on the holydayes to learne the Cathechiſme or no.
            16. Item, whether your Churchwardens do truly adminiſter the goodes of the Churche, and make a true accompte of their office, and choſe new at the leaſt once euery yere.
            17. Item whether any man hath put away his wife, or any wife abſent her ſelfe from her huſband, without iuſt cauſe, or any that hath married within the degrees Leuiticall and other orders within this Realme ſet forth in that behalfe.
            18. Item, whether any do violate or breake the Saboth day and holly daies with their manuall laboure, and do keepe open their ſhops, alehouſes, and other tiplinge houſes, in the time of diuine ſeruice.
            19. Item whether ther be a conuenient cheſt for the poore mans boxe and whither there be a Regiſter booke kept of all thoſe that be Chriſtened, maried, and buried.
            20. Item, whether any within your Pariſh haue any ſedicious bookes lately ſet forth from beyonde the ſeas or that ſecretly do hide Monumentes, of Popiſhe Reliques, as Images, and ſuche like.
            21. Item, whether the Churchewardens haue prouided the Poſtels of M. Becon, as it was geuen them in a charge at the viſitacion or no.
         
         
            
            ¶Iniunctions of the Reuerende Father in God Thomas by the ſufferaunce of God byſhop of Lincoln̄ giuen in his firſt viſitation, Anno Domini. 1571. to be obſerued within the Dioces of Lincoln̄.
            FIRST that the common praier be ſayd or ſonge decently and diſtinctly in ſuch place of the Churche accordinge to the largeneſſe and ſtraightneſſe of the Church and Quire, ſo that the people may be moſt edefied.
            2. Item, that your miniſters ſhall go in decent and comely apparell, as alſo ſhall ſay the Diuine ſeruice appointed, and miniſter the holy Sacraments, within their Churches in decente apparell and to vſe no Copes, vnleſſe it be in Cathedrall and Collegiate churches, accordinge as it is ſet forthe by a booke called the aduertiſements.
            3. Item the pariſh ſhall prouide a decent communion table vppon a Frame with a comely Carpette to the ſame at their coſtes and charges as they will anſwere to the contrarie for theyr doynges.
            4. Item, the churchwardens ſhall ſearche the Tauernes, Alehouſes, and other tipling houſes, to ſe whether any perſon be ther drinking or playing at any vnlawfull game, in the time of diuine ſeruice, and they to preſent their names, and the names of them that kepe the ſaid houſes.
            5. Item, the churchwardens ſhall make their accompte yearely of their offices in the preſence of the Miniſtre and the other of the Pariſh, and immediatly vpon the ſame accompt finiſhed to chuſe new from yeare to yeare.
            6. Item, none ſhalbe admitted to be Godfathers or Godmothers, vnleſſe they haue receiued the bleſſed Communion.
            7. Item, that on the Sundayes and Holydaies, ther be no ſhops open, nor Artificers commonly goinge aboute their worldly affayres, and that in all Fayres and common Markets, falling vppon the Sonday or Holidaies, there be no ſhewing of wares, before the ſeruice be don.
            8. Item, that the Miniſters ſhall ſuffer none to preache within their cures, vnleſſe he be able to ſhew ſom ſufficient licence from the Biſhoppe of the Dioceſſe, or other that haue aucthoritie to licence the ſame.
            9. Item, no Prieſte nor Lay man ſhalbe admitted or ſuffered

to kepe any Grammer ſchole openly or priuately within this Dioceſſe, except he be alowed and licenced by the Biſhop or his Officers.
            10. Item, the Miniſters ſhall call vpon their Pariſhoners to receaue the bleſſed communion, at the leaſt foure times in the yere and alſo ſhall call vpon their Pariſhioners to ſend their children to the church to learne the Cathechiſme, vpon the Sondaies and other conuenient times.
            11. Item, your Parſons and Vicars ſhall not ſuffer nor admitte, any ſtraunge Curate comminge out of any other Dioceſſe, to ſerue within their cures, without he be firſt licenced by the Biſhoppe or his Officers.
            12. Item, that no man ſhall enterpriſe nor preſume to ring nor Iangle any Belles vppon all Halowen daie, or in the night of the ſame day, ſuperſtitiouſly or Popiſhly, as they haue bene accuſtomed to do, otherwaies then to call the people to Diuine Seruice.
            13. Item, that none of your Parſons, Vicars, nor Curates, ſhall miniſter the holly communion, to any Forener or ſtraunger, cō
               ming out of any other Dioceſſe, or from any other Pariſh, with in this Dioceſſe, without the ſpeciall licence of my Lorde, or his officers, or the Miniſter of that place, from whence the ſaid forener or ſtraunger ſhall come.
            14. Item that no Parſon, Vicar, nor Curate ſhall miniſter to any perſon or perſons, the holy Sacraments in any other church or churches, at any time or times, but in their owne, without the ſpeciall requeſt of the Parſon, or Vicar of the ſayde Pariſh.
            15. Item, no man ſhal kepe any ſuperſticious or erroneous boke of late come from beyonde the Seas, and ſet forthe by Doctor Harding and other his complices, but the ſame ſhall bringe forth and reueale before the Biſhop and other his officers according to the Queenes Maieſties proclamacion ſet forth in that behalfe.
            16. Item, that euery weeke or euery fortnight at the leaſt they ſhall reade openly in their churches the proclamation ſette out of late by the Queene her Maieſty for the callinge in of bookes of ſedicion to be deliuered to the ordinarie accordinge to the Tenor and meaning of the ſaid proclamacion.
            God ſaue the Queene.
            
         
      
   