
      
         
            
            
            
            
            ¶ The true discripcion of a Childe with Ruffes borne in the parish of Micheham in the Coūtie of Surrey in the yeere of our Lord. M. D. LXvi.
            
               The for part and the back part
            
            
               THis presēt yeere of our Lord M. D. Lxvi the .vii. day of Iune one Helene Iermin the wife of Iohn Iermin Husbandman Dwelling in the parishe of Micheham was deliuered of a Woman Childe named Christiā beeing aftur this maner & fourme following. That is to say, the Face comly & of a cheerful countenaūce. The Armes and hands, Leggs and Feet of right shape, and the Body wt all other members therunto apperteinīg, wel proporciōed in due fourme & order, sauing yt it is as it were wunderfully clothed with suche a Flesshy skin as the like at no time hath ben seene. For it hath the said flesshy skin behinde like vnto a Neckerchef growing from the reines of the Back vp vnto the neck as it were with many Ruffes set one after another and beeing as it were somthing gathered, euery Ruf about an inche brode hauīg here growing on the edges of the same, & so wt Ruffes cōming ouer ye Shoulders and couering some part of ye Armes proceding vp vnto the nape of the neck behinde and almoste round about the neck, like as many womens Gownes be, not cloce to gither before: but that the throte beeing (with a faire white skin) bare betweene bothe the sides of the ruffes, the said ruffes about the neck beeing double and as it were thick gathered, muche like vnto the Ruffes that many do vse to weare about their necks.
            ¶ This Childe beforsaid (the day of the date vnder written)was to be seene in Glene Alley in Suthwark beeing aliue and x weeks olde and iiii. dayes not vnlikly to liue long.
         
         
            ¶ An Admonition vnto the Reader,
            
               THis picture prest in paper white, our natures dooth declare:
               Whose fourme so straunge by natures spite may lerne vs to beware.
            
            
               ¶ By natures spite, what doo I saye? dooth nature rule the roste?
               Nay god it is say wel I may: by whom nature is cost.
            
            
               ¶ The face ful faire, the members all, in order stand and place:
               But yet too muche: by natures thrall, dooth woork a great disgrace.
            
            
               ¶ This ruffeling world in ruffes al rolde, dooth God detest and hate:
               As we may lerne the tale wel tolde, of Children borne of late.
            
            
               What meanes this childe by natures woork: thus Ruffed for to be?
               But by these Ruffes our natures spurk, we might be holde and sée.
            
            
               ¶ Her squares our squaring dooth set out, this here our heres dooth checke:
               This monstrouse monster out of dout, agréeth in eche respect.
            
            
               ¶ Our filthy liues in Piggꝭ are shewd, our Pride this Childe dooth bere:
               Our raggꝭ and Ruffes that are so lewd, beholde her fleshe and here.
            
            
               ¶ Our Beastꝭ and Cattel plagued are, all monstrouse in their shape:
               And eke this Childe dooth wel declare, the pride we vse of late.
            
            
               ¶ Our curled here her here dooth preche, our ruffes and gises gaie:
               Our straunge attire wherto we reche, our flesshe that plese we may.
            
            
               ¶ The poet telleth how Daphenes was, transformd into a trée:
               And Io to a Cow did passe, a straunge thing for to sée.
            
            
               ¶ But poets tales may passe and go, as trifels and vntrueth:
               When ruffes of flesshe as I doo trowe, shall moue vs vnto ruthe.
            
            
               ¶ Deformed are the things we were, deformed is our hart:
               The Lord is wroth with all this géere, repent for fere of smarte.
            
            
               ¶ Pray we the Lord our hartꝭ to turn, whilest we haue time and space:
               Lest that our soules in hel doo burn, for voiding of his grace.
            
            
               ¶ And ye O England whose womākinde, in ruffes doo walke to oft:
               Parswade them stil to bere in minde, this Childe with ruffes so soft.
            
            
               ¶ In fourme as they in nature so, a maid she is in déed:
               God graunt vs grace how euer we go, for to repent with spéed.
            
            FINIS. THE.
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London by Iohn Allde and Richarde Iohnes and are to be solde at the Long Shop adioining 
                  •
               nto S. Mildreds Churche in the Pultrie and at the litle shop adioining to the Northwest doore of Paules Churche. Anno domini. M. D. Lxvi. the .xx. of August
         
      
   