
      
         
            
            Articles to be inquired of, in the first Metropoliticall Visitation, of the most Reuerend Father: Richarde by Gods Prouidence, Archbushop of Canterbury, and Primat of all ENGLANDE, in, and for the Dioces of NORVVICH. in the yeare of our Lorde God 1605. and in the first yeare of his Graces Translation.
            
               IN DOMINO CONFIDO.
            
            ¶ At London printed by Raph Blower, ANNO DOMINI, 1605.
         
         
            
            
            
               THE Tenor of the Oath, to be ministred to the Church wardens & Swornemen.
            
               YOV shall sweare, that all Affection, Fauor, Hatred, hope of Rewarde and Gaine, or feare of displeasure or mallice set aside: You shall vppon due Consideration of the Articles giuen you in chardge: present all & euery such person, of, or within your Parish: as hath committed any Offence or fault: or made any default mentioned in thiese, or any of thiese Articles: or which are vehemētly suspected & defamed of any such Offence: fault or default: wherin you shall deliuer vprightly, & according to truth: neyther of malice: presenting any contrary to truth: nor of corupt affection sparing to present any, and so conceale the truth: Hauing in this action God before your Eyes: with an earnest zeale to maintaine truth, & to suppresse vice: so help you God, & the Contents of this booke.
            God saue the King.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧ ARTICLES To be inquired of, by the Churchwardens and sworne men: in the Visitation of the Lorde Archbushop of Canterbury: within the Diocesse of Norwich. Anno Dom. 1605.
            
               INPRIMIS, Whether haue you in your seuerall Churcehs and Chappels, the booke of Constitutions or Canons Ecciestastical, ready to be read by your Minister, according to his Maiesties pleasure, published by his Highnes Authoritie, vnder the great Seale of England, and whether hath your Minister read the same or any part thereof vpon Sundaies & Hollidaies, in the afternoone before diuine Seruice accordingly, yea or no?
            2. Item, Whether is there any within your Parish, that hath or doth impugne, the Kings Maiesties Supremacy, and authoritie in causes Ecclesiasticall: or doe any way or in any part impeach the same, being restored to the Crowne by the Lawes of this Realme established in that behalfe?
            3 Item, Whether is there any in your Parish, that denieth the Church of England, by Lawe establishes vnder the Kinges most excellent Maiestie, to be a true & an Apostolicall Church, teaching and mainteyning the Doctrine of the Apostles?
            4 Item Whether is there any in your Parish, that doth impugne any of the Articles of Religion, agreed vpon in Anno, 1562, and

established in the Church of England.
            5 Item, Whether doth your Minister vse to pray for the Kinges Maiestie King Iames, and for the Queenes Maiestie, the Prince & all their Royall Progeny, with addition of such Stile and Titles, as are due and appertaining to his Maiestie, and exhorte the people to obedience, to his Highnes, and other Maiestrates being in authority vnder him?
            6 Item, Whether is there any in your Parish, that doe impugne, or speake against the Rites and Ceremonies, established in the Church of England, or the lawfull vse of them, you shall present their names.
            7 Item, are there any in your parish, that doe impugne the gouerment of the Church of England, vnder the Kings most excellent Maiestie by Arch-bushops, Bushops, Deanes Arch-deacens and the rest that beare office in the same: Affirming that the same is Ante-christian, or repugnant to the worde of God.
            8 Item, is there any in your parish, that doth impugne the forme of Consecrating and ordeining of Arch-bishops, Bishops, Priests or Deacons, Affirming that the saine is Repugnant to the worde of God, or that they who are so ordered in that forme are not lawfully made.
            9 Item, is there any in your parish, that doth held or frequent any Conventicles, or priuate congregations, or any that doe either make or maintaine any Constitutions, agreed vpon in any such priuate Conventicles or assemblies?
            10. Item, Whether any persons haue lurked and tippled in Tauerns or Ale houses, on Sundayes or other Hollidaies, or vsed his or their manuall craft or trade, vpon the said dayes or any of them, and especially in the time of Diuine seruice.
            11 Item, are there any in your Parish, that doe or haue prophaned (since his Maiesties last general pardon) the Lords day called Sunday, or other Hollidayes contrary to the orders of the Church of England, prescribed in that behalfe?
            12 Item, Whether is the prescripte forme of Diuine seruice, vsed by your Minister vpon Sundaies and Hollidayes, according to the booke of Common prayer? And whether doth your Minister duely obserue all the Orders, Rites and Ceremonies, prescribed in the said booke of common Prayer, as well in reading publique Prayers,

the Letany as also in administring the Sacraments in such manner and forme as in the booke of common Prayer is inioyned?
            13 Item, Whether hath any person in your parish quarrelled or stricken, or vsed any violence vnto or with your Minister, or any other in the Church or Church-yard, or vsed himselfe disorderly in the Church by filthy and prophane talke, or any other rude and immodest behauiour?
            14 Item whether is that due reuerence, & humble submission vsed within your Church or Chappell, in the time of Diuine seruice, as by the 18. constitution is prescribed, whether each one in ye Church or Chappel do apply and order himselfe there in time of diuine Seruice, as by the latter part of ye same Cōstitution is mos
                  •
                commendably enioyned?
            15 Item, Whether the Church wardens and Questmen, from time to time doe their dilligence, in not suffring any idle persons or loytererers, to abide either in the Church-yard or Church-porch in Seruice or Sermon time, but causing them either to come into the Church to heare Diuine seruice, or to depart, and not to disturbe such as are hearers there.
            16 Item Whether the Church-wardens doe prouide against euery Communion with the aduice of the Minister, a sufficiente quantity of fine white Bread, and of good and wholesome Wine for the number of the Communicants that shall receiue, and that to be brought in a cleane and sweet standing pot of pewter or of other pure mettle.
            17 Item, Whether doth your Minister administer the holy Communion so often, and at such times as that euery parishioner may receiue the same at least thrice in euery yéere, whereof once at Easter, as by the booke of common prayer is appointed? And whether doth your Minister receiue the same himselfe, on euery day that he administreth it to others, and vse the words of the Institution according to the booke at euery time that the Bread or Wine is renued, in such manner and forme as by the Proviso of the 21. Cannon is directed, or wherin is he faultie? and whether is warning giuen by him before hand for the Communion, as the 22. Cannon requireth?
            18 Item, Whether hath your Minister admitted any Notorious Offendors, or Skismatickes to the Communion: contrary to the

26. and 27. constitutions.
            19 Item, Whether the Minister together with yr Churchwardēs and Questmen, do take diligent héed & care: not only that all & euery of your own Parishioners, do receiue thrice in euery yéere as aforesaid: but also, that no straungers of any other Parish do come often, & commonly to your Church from their own parish Church: and you are now to present the names of all those, who being xvj. yeares of age or vpwards, & haue not in their own Parish receiued the Communion, at or since Easter last?
            20 Item, Haue any in your parish bin Godfathers or Godmothers to their own childrē: or whether your Minister, or any Godfathers or Godmothers haue vsed, or do vse any other forme, aunswere or speach in Baptisme: then is in the Booke of cōmon prayer appointed? or whether any which haue not communicated, be admytted to be Godfathers or Godmothers?
            21 Item, Whether doth your Minister vse to signe the Children with ye signe of the crosse, when they are baptised: according to the booke of common prayer? and whether he hath deferred, or wilfully refused, to baptise any Infant in his Parish beeing in daunger, hauing bin duly informed of ye weakenes thereof: and whether the childe hath died in his default without baptisme?
            22 Item Whether is your Minister continualy resident with you vppon his benefice: or for how long time hath he bin absent? And where is he Resiant for ye most part, & what other benefice hath he?
            23 Item Whether doth your minister preach vsualy, according to the constitutions: eyther in his own cure with you, or else in some other church or chappel neere adioyning, where no preacher is? or how often hath he bin negligent in that behalfe?
            24 Item. Whether is your Minister a Preacher allowed, if yea: then by whom? if not, Whether doth hée procure Sermons to be preached among you once in euery month at ye least, by such as are lawfully licensed?
            25 Item Whether hath your minister an other benefice, and whether doth he supply his absence by a Curat that is sufficiētly licenced to preach in that cure of his, wheron he himself is not resident? or otherwise in case he doth not find a preaching minister there, by reason of the smalnes thereof?: Whether doth he preach at both of his Benefices vsually him selfe?
            
               
26 Item, whether is your Curat licensed to serue by ye Bushop of this Dioces, or any other, and by whom?
            27 Item Whether doth your Minister or Curat serue any more cures then one? if yea, then what other cure doth he also serue?
            28 Item, If your minister be not licensed to preach as aforesaid, whether doth he take vpon him to expound the Scriptures, eyther in his own cure or else where? if yea, then you are to present him, & specifie the place where he so hath preached.
            29 Item, Whether hath any person bin admitted to preach within your church or chappel, but such as you haue well knowne to be sufficiently licensed? whom haue you so admitted you shall present their names: & how often haue any such bin so admitted to preach, and by whose procurement? And whether haue you caused euery straunge preacher, licensed, or not licensed, to subscribe his Name together with the day when he preached: & if he were licēsed, then by whom was he licensed? And whether haue they or any other preached in your Church not being soberly & decently appareled?
            30 Item, Whether doth your Lectorer and preacher reade diuine Seruice, & administer the Sacraments in his own person, Twice euery yéere: obseruing all the Cerimonies in the booke of common prayer established?
            31 Item, Is there any in your parish, that do refuse to haue their Children baptised: or them-selues to receiue yc Communion at the bandes of your Minister, because he is no preacher. You shall present their names. And if your Minister sithence the publishing of the said booke of Canons, hath receiued any such persōs [being not of his own cure] to ye Communion, or Baptised any of their Children: you shal likewise present him.
            32 Item whether doth your Minister weare the Surplice, whilst he is saying the publicque prayers, & ministring the Sacraments? And if he be any Graduat, whether then doth he also weare vpon his surplice during yc times aforesaid, such a Hood as by the orders of his Uniuersitle is agréeable to his degree?
            33 Item, Whether doth your Minister euery Sunday and holliday before Euening-prayer, for halfe an houre or more, examine and instruct the youth and ignorant persons of his parish, in the x. commandements, Articles of beliefe, and in the Lords prayer, as also in the Catechisme, set forth in the booke of Common prayer?

And whether doe all Fathers, Mothers, Masters and Mistresses, cause their children, seruants and apprentises, to come thither to heare & to be instructed and taught therein, and those that doe not their duties herein, you shall present their names.
            34 Item, Whether hath your Ministers without license from the Archbushop, the Bushop of the Diocesse or his Chancellor, solemnized mariage betwixt any parties, the banes not being thrée seuerall sundaies or hollidaies first published in time of diuine seruice, in the seuerall Churches or Chappels, of their seueral abode according to the booke of Common prayer, & that also betwixt the houres of eight and twelue in ye fore-noone. And furthermore, whether hath your minister since the last Cannons published, solemnized any mariage betwixt any persons being vnder the age of 21. yéers, although the banes be thrice asked, before such time as the parents haue made knowne vnto him their consent thervnto, and whether hath he married any of an other Diocesse, who are they? and by what authoritie, and when?
            35. Item, Whether doth your Minister euery sunday, bid holidaies & fasting daies, as by the booke of Common prayer is appointed?
            36. Item, Whether doth your minister euery sixe monethes, denounce in his parish, all such of his Parish as doe perseuer in the sentence of excommunication, not séeking to be absolued, and whether hath he admitted into ye church any persō excōmunicat, wt-out a certificat of his absolutiō from ye ordinary or other cōpetent iudg?
            37. Item, Whether doth your Minister being a preacher, endeuor and labour dilligently, to reclaime the popish recusants, in his parish from their errors: if there be any such abiding? and whether is he painefull in visiting the sicke according to the booke of Common prayer?
            38 Item, Whether is your Parson vicar or Curat, to frequent or to be ouer-conuersant with, or a fauorer of recusants, whereby he is suspected not to be sincere in religion.
            39 Item, Whether doe you know or haue heard of any payment, Composition or agréemēt, to, or with the Bushop, Chancellor, or any inferior Officer Ecclesiastical, for suppressing or cōcealing of excōmunication, or other Ecclesiastical censure, of, or against any Recvsant? what summe of Money, or other Cōsideration hath bin received or promised? by, or to any of them in yc respect, by whom?

and with whom? and for what summe or other consideration?
            40. Item, whether is there in your Church or Chappel one parchment Register Booke, prouided for Christnings, Mariages & Burials, and whether is the same duely and exactly kept according to the Constitutions in that behalfe prouided?
            41 Item, Whether hath your minister or any other preached, baptised Childrē, solemnized Mariage, churched any woman or mininistred the holy Commvnion in any priuate house or houses, otherwise thē as by law is allowed yea or no? if yea, then where? whom? when and how often hath he offended in any of the Premisses?
            42 Item, Whether hath your minister taken vpon him to appoint any publicque or priuate Fasts, prophecies, or exercises not approued & established by Law or publique authoritie, or hath he attempted vyon any pretence eyther of possession or obsession, by fasting and prayer to cast out deuils yea or no?
            43. Item, whether hath your minister or any other person or persōs: wcin your parish vsed to méet in any priuat house or otherplace, there to consult togither, how to impeach or depraue the Booke of Common prayer, or the Doctrine or Discipline of the Church of England, if yea, then you shall present them all?
            44. Item, Whether doth your minister vse such decency & Comlinesse in his apparell, as by the 74 constitution is inioyned?
            45 Item, Whether doe you know any in your parish that hauing heretofore taken vpon him or them, the order of Priest-hoode or of a Deacon, hath since relinquished the same, and betaken himselfe in the course of his life as a lay man neglecting his vocation if yea, then you shall present his name, and the place of his abode?
            46 Item, Doth any take vpon him to teach Schoole in your parish wcout speciall licence of his ordinary? & whether doth your Schoolemaister bring his schollers to the Church to heare Diuine seruice and Sermons?
            47 Item, Whether is your minister noted or defamed to haue obteined his benefice by Symony, or reputed to be an incontinente person, a common drunkard a common gamster, or player at dice, or faulty in any other crime punishable by the Eccesiasticall censures, whereby he is offensiue and scandalous to his function or ministery.
            48 Item, Whether haue you prouided the booke of common prayer

lately set forth by his Maiesties aucthoritie, and the booke of Homylies, and whether haue you in your Church or chappell a Fonte of stone set vp in the ancient vsuall place, a conuenient and decent communion Table with a carpet of silke, or some other decente stuffe, and a faire linnen cloth to laye thereon at the Communion time, and whether is the same Table then placed in such conuenient sort wtin the Chauncel or church, as that the minister may be best heard in his prayer & Administration, & that the greater number may communicate: And whether are the ten commandements set vpon the East ende of your church or chappell, where the people may best see and reade them, and other sentences of holy scripture written on the walls likewise for that purpose?
            49 Item, Whether haue you a conuenient seate for your minister to reade Seruice in, together with a comely Pulpit set vp in a conuenient place with a decent cloth or cushion for the same: a comely large Surplice, a faire Cōmunion Cup of gold, siluer, or other pure mettle, and a couer agréeable for the same, with all other thinges and ornaments necessarie for the celebration of diuine Seruice and administration of the Sacraments?
            50 Item, Whether are your Churches or Chappels with ye Chancels thereof, and your personage or Uickeredge house and all other housing thereto belonging in good reparations, & decent and comely kept as well within as without, the seates well mainteined, a sure coffer with thrée lockes and keyes for the safe kéeping of your Register booke, your Church-yardes wel fenced and kept without abuse, if not, then through whose default & what defects are?
            51 Item, Whether haue you or your predecessors Church-wardens there suffered since the last pardō, any plaies, feasts, bāquets, Church ales, drinkings, or any other prophane vsages to be kept in your church, Chappell or church yard, or bels to be rung superstiiously vpon hollidayes or daies abrogated by Lawe.
            52 Item, How many inhabitants within your parish, men or women aboue th'age of 16 yéeres, do refuse to frequent diuine seruice established by publique authoritie of this Realme, or to receiue the holy Communion, what be their names, and of what degree state or trade of life are they, you are to present them all of both sorts?
            53 Item, Whether doe any of the inhabitants of your said parish entertaine within their house any soiorners, lodgers, or any common

resorters and guests, who refuse to frequent diuitie seruice, or receiue ye holy Communion as aforesaid, what be their names? of what quality or condition they are?
            54 Item, Whether are any of the said popish recusants of insolent behauiour not without publique offence, or dee boldly buisy themselues in seducing and withdrawing others, either abroad or in their owne families by instructing their children in popish Religion, or by refusing to entertaine any especially in place of greatest seruice or trust, but such as concurre with them in opinion of religion?
            55. Item, How long the said popish Recusantes haue obstinately abstained either from diuine Seruice, or from the Communion as is aforesaide: Whether of any long time, or onely since his Maiesties Reigne?
            56 Item, Whether is your Minister a preacher sufficiently qualified and if he be, whether doth he from time to time offer quiet and temperate conference to reclaime the said popish Recusantes from their errors, and whether they or any of them doe refuse such conference with your Minister or any other Preacher, who shall present vnto them his dilligence in that behalfe?
            57. Item, What persons aforesaid within your parish either for th'offence aforesaid, or for any other Contumacy, or crime, doe remaine excomunicat, what be their names and for what cause, and how long they haue so stoode excomunicate?
            58 Item, Whether were you ye Churchwardens and Quest men chosen by the consent of ye Minister & Parishioners: and whether haue the Churchwardens before you, giuen vp a iust accompt for their time, and deliuered to you their successors whatsoeuer money or other things of right belonging to ye Church, which was in their hands, and whether doe you and euery of you diligently sée that all the parishioners doe duely resort to their church euery sunday and holiday, and there continue the whole time of Diuine seruice, and none to walke or stande Idle, or talking in Church or Churchportch or Churchyarde during that time: and whether do al yt parishioners and their familes accordingly frequente their Parish Church, & there behaue them-selues soberly, attentiuely, & decently, al the time of Diuine seruice, yea or no? if no, then you shal present their names?
            59 Item, Whether doe all persons aboue th'age of 16 yéeres vsually

resort to heare Diuine Seruice vpon sundayes and holidayes approued, and whether hath each one of your parishioners, (being aboue th'age of 16 yéeres aforesaid) receiued the holy Communion thrice this last yéere, chiefely once at Easter in your parish church knéeling, if no, then you shall present their names which haue not so done?
            60 Item, Whether haue you a fit parish Clarke aged twenty yéers at least of honest conuersation, and sufficient for reading and writing, and whether he be paide his wages without fraude according to the most auncient custome of your parish, if not, then by whom in he so defrauded and denied? and whether he be chosen by the parson or Uicar or by whome?
            61 Item, Whether haue any in your parish béene married within the prohibited degrées, forbidden by the Lawe of God, and expressed in a certaine table published by Authoritie in Anno, 1563. if yea, then you shall present their names, and whether haue you the said Table publiquely set vp in your Church, & fastened to some conuenient place there?
            62 Itē, whether doth any heretofore diuorced kéep company with any other at Bed and at Boord? what be their names? When and where were they maried?
            63 Item, Doth your Minister vse the forme of thankes giuing to women after Child birth, and whether hath he admitted any thervnto, that was begotten with child in adultery or fornication without licence of his ordinarie, and whether haue any maried Wiues refused to come to church according to the booke of common prayer, to giue God thankes after Childe-birth, if any be faulty herein you shall present their names?
            64 Itē, whether haue you any in your parish which heretofore being popish recusants or sectuaries, haue since conformed thēselues and come to church to heare Diuine seruice and receiue the Sacraments if yea, then who they are, and how long si'thence haue they so conformed themselues, and whether doe they still remaine and abide in that conformitie?
            65 Item, What Recusant papists are there in your parish, and whether doe they or any of them keep any Schoole-maister in their house, which cōmeth not to church to heare diuine seruice & receiue the Communion? what is his name, and how long hath he taught?
            
               
66 Item, Whether haue you any in your parish to your knowledge or by common fame and report, which haue committed adulterie fornication or Incest, which haue not bin publiquely punnished to your knowledge? if yea, then with whome? Are there any which are or by common fame and Reporte are reputed and taken to be common Drunkards, Blasphemers of Gods holy name, common and vsuall Swearers, filthy speakers, Usurers, Symoniacal persons, fighters, Braulers, or Quarellers in Church or Churchyard, you shall not faile to present their names?
            67 Item, whether haue any in your parish receiuedor harbored any woman gotten with childe out of Wedlocke, and suffered them to depart again without punishment first inflicted on them by their ordinary, you shall truely present as well the partie harboring as harbored, and who is suspected to be father of her child?
            68 Item, Whether hath any person within your parish promised or payed any somme of money or other reward directly or indirectly by himselfe or any other, or committed his or her pennance for any incest, adultery, fornication, or any other Ecclesiastical crime, if so, then with whom? when? and for what? and how hath the same béene imployed?
            69 Item, Whether is your Chancelor, and euery other inferior Ecclesiasticall iudge a Maister of Artes, or Batchelor of Lawes at the least, and learned and practised in the civill and Ecclesiasticall Lawes, a man of good life and conuersation and Zealously affected in Religion?
            70 Item, Whether any person or persōs suspected or detected heretofore of incontinency, and therefore departing out of your parish for a season is now returned againe, or in what place else is he or she now abiding to your knowledge or as you haue heard? you shal not faile to present the whole truth in that behalfe?
            71 Item, Whether are there in your Parish any Wills not yet proued, or goods of the dead dying intestate left vn-administred by authoritie of the ordinarie in that behalfe? you shal not faile to present the Executors, and all others faulty and culpable therein.
            72 Item, Hath any Chanceller, Commissary, Arch-deacon, official, or any other exercising Ecclesiasticall Iuris-diction within this your Diocesse, or any Register, Apparator, or Minister belonging to the same Ecclesiasticall courts, exacted extra-ordinary

or greater fées then heretofore of late haue béene accustomed, and whether is there a table of the rates of all fées set vp in their seuerall Courts and Offices, or whether they or any of them haue taken vpon them th'office of Informers or Promotors to the courts, or any other way abused themselues in their Offices contrary to the Lawe and Cannons in that case prouided?
            73 Item, Do any, of, or within your Parish affirme, or haue they affirmed that the sacred synode of this Nation assēbled by ye Kings authoritie, is not the true church of England by Representation: or hath or doth any of your parish affirme, that no persons eyther of the Clergie or laity, that were not pertinently present in ye said late Synode, are subiect to the decrées thereof in causes Ecclesiastical, made & ratified by ye Kings supreame Aucthoritie: because they gaue not vp their voices vnto them, yée shal present their names?
            74 Item, is there any among you, that haue or doe depraue the foresaid late Synode, saying or affirming, that ye same was a company of such persons as did conspire togither against godly and religious professors of the Gospell, and that therefore both they and their procéedings in that behalfe are and ought to be despised and contemned or words to the like effect, you shall not faile to present their names?
            75 Item, What Number of Apparators hath euery seueral iudge Ecclesiastical, and wherein, and in what manner is the countrey ouer-burthened and grieued by the said Apparators?
            76 Item, Whether doe you know of any other matter of Eccle-siasticall cognisance, worthy the presentment in your iudgement aboue not expressed, which you holde fit to be reformed, and if you doe, you shall likewise present the same by vertue of your oaths.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   