
      
         
            
            
            AN EXTRACT
Tranſlated out of the French Copie, and taken
out of the Regiſters of the French Kings
Priuie Councell.
            
            
               BEtweene Iohn Potter, William Woolleſtone, Henry Morris, and Thomas Church, Engliſh Marchants, as well for themſelues,
as for the other Engliſh Marchants, trading in the towne of Rouan, appealing from the ſentence giuen by the Bayliffe
of the ſaid towne, the ſeuenth of Aprill 1598. on the one partie, and the Maſters and Wardens of the Art and Miſterie
of the Companie of the Drapers, as well in the whole ſale, as retaile, Cloth-workers, & Shearemen of the ſaid towne intimated,
on the other partie, By the King in his Councell being ſeene the ſaid ſentence, whereof appeale is made, the aduertiſements & euidences
of the ſaid parties, the decree of the ſaid Councell, by the which the examining of the ſaid appeale is referred to the ſaid Councell
of the foure and twentieth of Nouember 99. the product
                  •
               o
                  •
                of the ſaid parties, on the which the ſaid ſentence is made, Another decree
of the ſaid Councell, by the which it is ordained, that the Maſters & Wardens of the art and miſterie of the Companie of the Drapers of
the towne of Paris, ſhall bee called before the Commiſſioners in that behalfe appointed, to giue their aduiſe on the difference of the ſaid
parties, and articles by them deliuered, to the end that this being done, and their aduice ſeene, right to bee done vnto them according to
reaſon, of the ſeuenteenth of March 1600. the verball plea of the ſaid Commiſſioners contayning the ſayd aduice, the requeſt of the
Ambaſſador of the Queene of England to moderate the ſaid ſute, the meanes of the moderation of the ſaide Ambaſſador, and all that
which by the ſaid parties hath beene produced before the Commiſſioners thereunto appointed. His report being heard, The King in his
Councell hath made, and doth make voyde the appellation, and that whereof appeale is made, and in mending the Iudgement,
hath ordained, and 
                  •
               oth ordaine, that within three moneths after the ſignification which ſhall be made of this preſent decree, all ſorts of
woollen cloth which, ſhall be brought by the ſaid Engliſhmen or Strangers, white, or died, in wooll, & not otherwiſe, before entering into
this Realme, ſhal be wet & ſhrunke, not drawne out vpon the Tenters with pullies, engines, wheeles, not made of diuers ſorts of woolles,
barred, ſtriped, cockled, & filled with flocks, on paine of confiſcation, according to the ordinances. Which marchandizes being loyall, & of
ſuch condition as is aforeſaid, may bee ſolde in whole-ſale by the ſayde Engliſh or Forraine Marchants, after hauing beene duely viſited
by the ſaid Maſters and Wardens of the ſayd art and miſterie of the Companie of the Drapers and none others: which marchandizes
ſhall bee put in the halles and publike places, if there bee any, and not elſe-where. And if in caſe it ſhould bee found, that there
were no publike place, (viſitation beeing formerly made) a place ſhall bee demaunded of the Iudges of the places: and it ſhall not bee
lawfull for the ſaid Engliſh or Forraine Marchants to open their Bales, before they haue called thereunto the ſaid Maſters & Wardens
of the ſayd art and miſterie of Drapers, who alſo ſhall bee ſubiect within twice foure and twentie houres, to make the ſaide viſitation
gratis. And in caſe the ſaid Marchants doe not ſell their ſaid marchandizes in the ſame places, after the ſaid viſitation, and after three market
dayes, in the which the halles ſhall haue beene opened, and that the ſaid marchandizes ſhall haue bene expoſed to ſale, it ſhall be lawfull
for the ſaid Marchants to carrie them where they ſhall thinke good, for to make ſale of them: And touching the meaſuring of the
ſayde marchandiſes, the ſaide Councell hath ordained, and doth ordaine, that the Edict thereupon made in the yeere 1543. ſhall be
kept and obſerued, & without expences.
            
               Done in the priuie Councell of the King, holden at Paris, the one and twentieth day of Aprill,
1600.
                
               ſubſcribed thus, Des baigneaulx.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London by Simon Stafford, dwelling on
Adling hill, neere Carter-lane.
         
      
   