
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  HONI SOIT QVIMAL Y PENSE
                  royal blazon or coat of arms
               
            
            
               AT a generall aſſemblie of the Iuſtices of the Pea
                  ••
                
               Eſſex. ſſ.
               
                  〈…〉
                
               B
                     __
                  ntwood
the xiiijday of May In the ſixth yea
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊◊〉
               
ſoueraigne Lord 
                  
                     •
                  ames by the grace of God King of Eng
                  ••••
                
               
                  〈…〉
               
Ireland, defender of the Faith, &c. and of Scotland the 
                  〈…〉
                
there being preſent, 
                  
                     •
                   William 
                     〈…〉
                  
               
his Maieſties
Iuſtices of Peace of the ſaid Countie 
                  
                     〈◊◊〉
                  
               
of 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                in the ſame Countie Alehouſ-keeper, is admitted and allowed by the ſaid Iuſtices to keepe
common Alehouſe, or tipling houſe, in the houſe wherin he now dwelleth at 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
aforeſaid, and not elſewhere in the ſaid Countie. Prouided alwayes that if the ſaid 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
ſhall not well and truly obſerue performe and keepe all and ſinguler the Articles hereafter mencioned,
that then this licence ſhall preſently ceaſe and be void.
            
               The Articles.
               1 Firſt that the ſayd 
                     
                        〈◊◊〉
                     
                   ſhall at the generall Seſsions of the peace to be holden
for the ſayde County of Eſſex next after the Feaſt of Eaſter next comming after the date of
theſe preſents, or at the generall aſſembly of Iuſtices for that purpoſe, next after the ſaid Generall
Seſſions, where fiue Iuſtices at the leaſt, whereof two of the Quorum, ſhall be preſent (if he ſhall ſo long continue
his Alehouſekeeping) bring in this his Licence, there by the Iuſtices to be ſeene, & conſideration by thē to be had
whether he ſhal be found fit to ſtand or not. And if he ſhall be then found fit and allowed to continue for one whole
yeare longer: Then that he faile not yearely after at the ſaid General Seſſions of the peace, or ſuch general aſſembly
of Iuſtices, (If he ſhal ſo long cōtinue his Alehouſekeeping) to preſent this his licence to the ſaid Iuſtices to be allowed
or diſallowed, as afore ſayd.
               2 Item, that he ſhall not permit or ſuffer any playing at the cards, dice, tables, quoites, loggets, ſcales,
bowles, or any other vnlawfull game or games in his houſe, yard garden or backſide, but ſhall keepe good order
and rule in his ſayd houſe.
               3 Item, that he ſhall not harbour in his ſaid houſe, barnes, ſtables, or other where any Rogues, Vagabonds,
ſturdy beggers, Maſterles men, or other ſuſpected perſon or perſons whatſoeuer.
               4 Item, that he ſhal neither ſel nor vtter any Beere, Ale, or other victuall vpon the Sab
                     •
                  oth day, or Holiday
during the time of diuine ſeruice or Sermon be it in the forenoone or after noone.
               5 Item, that he ſhal neither dreſſe nor cauſe to be dreſſed, nor willingly ſuffer to be eaten in his ſaid houſe, any
fleſh in the time of Lent, or vpon any day now obſerued as a f
                     •
                  ſhe day.
               6 Item, that he ſhal not ſuffer any perſon or perſons other then his owne houſehold ſeruants, to ſel or vtter any
Beere, Ale, or other victuall in his ſaid houſe by deputation, or by coloure of his licence.
               In witnes wherof the Common ſeale appointed for licenſes for Alehouſekeepers in the ſaid Countie
of Eſſex is to theſe preſents ſet, Dated the day & yeare firſt aboue vvritten.
            
         
      
   