
      
         
            
            
            THE COPIE OF A LETTER SENT FROM SEA BY A GENTLEMAN, WHO WAS EMPLOYED in diſcouerie on the coaſt of Spaine by appointment of the Generals of our Engliſh Fleete, to a worſhipfull friend of his.
            Aduertiſing him of ſuch things as he came to knowledge of in the ſame diſcouerie.
            
               ·ANCHORA· SPEI·
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            Imprinted at London by Richard Field dwelling in the Blacke Friers. 1589.
         
         
            
            
            To the gentle Reader.
            
               HAuing gotten a Copie of this Letter (gentle Reader) I thought good to make thee partaker of the ſame by publishing it in print: that therby thou, and as many as vvish vvell vnto the ſtate of England, may according to our duetie thanke our God, that hath ſo mercifully deliuered vs from our proude enemies, and shevved his iudgement vpon them beyond our expectation, and further then vve could almoſt haue vvished. For of the proude Spanish Fleete appointed for our ouerthrovve, containing ſo many ships in number, ſo vvell in all reſpects furnished, that they could deſire nothing that ſeemed to be vvanting: there returned very fevve, and thoſe ſo ſore afflicted, that the moſt of their men died either before or shortly after their returne, vtterly diſapppointed of their intent, and hauing loſt the greateſt part of their prouiſion. Moreouer vve may hereby perceiue vvhat great good hope vve haue to conceiue (God giuing aſſiſtance) of the intended voyage. There is great hope they vvill ſcarce vvell brooke the comming of the Fleete, ſith they can hardly abide ſome one or tvvo of our English ships.
            
               R. F.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE COPIE OF A LETTER SENT BY A GENTLEMAN FROM SEA TO A WORSHIPFVL FRIEND OF HIS.
            
               RIGHT worſhipful hauing bene emploied by my Generals Sir Iohn Norris and Sir Frauncis Drake vpō the coaſt of Spaine for diſcouerie, and now being ſafely arriued (thanks vnto the Almightie) I thought it my duetie to acquaint your worſhip with ſuch newes as I haue learned in my voyage, hoping that as you were wont, you will excuſe my preſumption. I ſayled the fourth of Februarie laſt, and coaſting along by Biskay, at the Groine I tooke a ſhip of Biskay laden with ſtones, for the building of a fort at Vigo within the North Cape. In the which there came a marchant of Lisbone as paſſenger from Sainct Sebaſtians, whome I haue brought with me. And as concerning the laſt Fleete, he ſayth, that of all the ſhips and caruels of the Spaniſh

Fleete there are come home but nine and thirtie, whereof foure and twentie are riding in a riuer by Sainct Sebaſtians, foureteene in the Groine, and one in Lisbone, but moſt of all the men that came home died immediatly at their landing, and the two chiefe commaunders of the ſhips being ſent for to the Court, died, as it is thought of poiſon before they had paſſed two dayes iourney from Sainct Sebaſtians. Alſo the Duke of Medina is baniſhed the Court for euer and certaine cuſtomes of his confiſcate to the holy houſe. Alſo the King doth with all ſpeede fortifie the ſea coaſts, eſpecially in Portingale, and hath erected a bulwark in the market place of Lisbone. He hath made no prouiſion of ſhipping, but only a Fleete of gallies which are now in the Straights, and came downe for the defence of his owne countrey. He doth grieuouſly take the death of his men, for they were the chiefe ſouldiers of all his forces in Italie and elſe where. All theſe I haue conferred with others that haue fallen into my hands ſince, and found it to be a perfect truth. From the Groine I came to the rocke at Lisbone, where I found a barke of Plymouth and two other Pinnaces chaſed by foure Gallies and a Frenchman of warre, who

was conſorted with the gallies, who as ſoone as they ſaw my ſhip, the barke began to fight with them, & had ſhot the Frenchman twiſe through, which at the firſt diſcharging of my broade ſide, ſunke downe right in the ſea, within one quarter of an hower. The gallies made all the haſt they could to recouer Caſt Cales, being a litle within the mouth of the harbour, but we had ſo fine a gale of winde, that we made two of them carie the third betweene them, and recouered againe one Argoſie laden with Candie wines, which was the barks prize but the gallies had recouered her, but nowe ſhe is in Plymouth and eight and fortie men in her, all Greekes, except two Portingales: ſhe is come but to a reaſonable market. And as concerning our Fleete, I hope we ſhall be in Portingale within this moneth at the furtheſt, where no doubt (God ayding vs) we ſhall make a wonderfull proſperous voyage, for they tremble at the ſight of three Engliſh ſhips, and are all in a mutenie, not knowing whether it were beſt to receaue the King againe or to withſtand our power: but I thinke they wil not honour vs ſo much as to let vs winne their countrey by the ſword. Thus meeting at ſea with the Barke Beare, bound for London, and

for that I do not know how ſoone I ſhall returne, I haue thought it my duetie to aduertiſe your worſhip of theſe newes, to whom I ſend a dozen of Spaniſh blades to diſpoſe at your pleaſure, committing your worſhip to th'Almighty. 
            
               From ſea this twelfth of March. 1588.
               
               Your VVorships vvholy to commaund, T. F.
               
            
            
         
      
   