
      
         
            
            
            A PLAINE DEMONSTRATION OF THE VNLAWFVL SVCCESSION OF THE NOW EMPEROVR Ferdinand the Second, becauſe of the inceſtuous Marriage of his Parents. Tranſlated out of the Latine printed Copie.
            
            Printed at the Hage. M. D. C. XX.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
                  〈1… pages missing〉
               Vncle. But, doubtleſſe, they will ſay, that this was with the Diſpenſation, as they terme it, of the Pope Gods Vicar vpon Earth, and therefore in no wiſe to be counted an inceſtuous Marriage. We know it was permitted and that by the Pope, but by what right or authoritie wee ſee not. For ſuppoſe hee bee neuer ſo the Vicar of God, (although they ſhall neuer bee able to proue it, neither from the holy Scriptures, nor authoritie of the Fathers;) yet were it not lawfull for him to doe all things as hee liſt at his pleaſure. For who ſo doth is nothing leſſe then a Vicar, whoſe dutie it is, to frame himſelfe after the mind of his Lord, and to ſee his commands to bee put in execution, and not at his pleaſue, either to change them, or to deuiſe new.
            God, Leuit. 18. 12. 13. doth expreſly and ſimply forbid Marriage within the third Degree: but the Pope permits this to whom he liſteth. Now if he can doe it lawfully, then he hath right either of himſelfe, or from God: but not of himſelfe, becauſe hee is a Vicar, all whoſe authority depends vpon ſome other not from God, from whoſe nature it is moſt free not to contradict himſelf: now he ſhould contradict himſelfe, if hee ſhould permit that which hee hath moſt ſtraightly forbidden, yea, and that with threatning of death; we ſpeake of morall Precepts, and thoſe which of themſelues are neceſſary to obtayning of eternall Life. Wherefore, ſith the Pope hath this power neither of himſelfe nor from God, it is cleerer then the noone day, that he doth it by no right at all. This

many of the Papiſt them ſelues haue ſeene, they ſaw it, I ſay, & haue profeſſed the ſame: neither need wee to ſeeke any further examples: we haue them at hand. Iohn Fox in his Booke of Martyrs, or Engliſh Eccleſiaſticall Hiſtorie, pag. 957, col. 2. doth tell vs that the Mariage of Henry the Eight with Catharina his brother Arthurs Widow, though permitted by the Pope, was proued to bee ſimply vnlawfull, and not to bee diſpenſed with, by the Theologicall faculties at the leaſt of tenne Vniuerſities; to wit, of Orleans, Paris, Tholous, Erford, Angiew, Bononie, Padua, Oxford, Cambridge. And that the determinations of all theſe faculties, together with the iudgements of other moſt learned, both Diuines and Doctors, not onely of the Ciuill, but of the Canon Law, alſo contayned in one Volume were publiſhed in the yeare 1532. or thereabout. And that thereupon preſently followed the Diuorce and new Mariage of the King. The ſame is auouched by Nicholas Sanders a moſt bitter Papiſt, in his firſt Book of the Engliſh Schiſme, p. 58. where he ſaith thus: The King partly ſent certaine men to Pope Clement, to vndertake at Rome the cauſe of his Diuorce, (amongſt whom was Thomas Cranmer, who after was made Archbiſhop of Canterbury) partly he ſought out through all the Kingdome of France, Diuines and Lawyers, which vnder their hands and Seales, affirme that his Mariage with the ſaid Catharina, could not poſſible ſtand. And pag. 61. This infection (for ſo that foule-mouthed Fellow tearmes it) ouerſpred) not onely the Vniuerſitie of Paris, Orleans,

Angiew, Tholous, and Erford, but alſo Padua and Bononie: And p. 62. he complaines that Oxford and Cambridge adioyned themſelues to the foreſaid Vniuerſities. Lo heere we haue the Papiſts themſelues, as it were the guiltie perſons confeſſing: wee haue among the Popes Vaſſals, and his ſtout Champions, the iudgements of ſo many worthy men, & of whole Vniuerſities; Amongſt which is euen Bononia it ſelfe vnder the Popes Iuriſdiction, which together with vs doe take this power from the Pope.
            Whereupon it is plaine enough, what wee are to thinke of this Marriage of Archduke Charles with Mary, though iudged to bee lawfull by the Popes Diſpenſation; as alſo concerning their Sonne Ferdinand the Second, now Emperour: to wit, that hee is more then a Baſtard, borne of more then an Illegittimate, yea of an execrable Mariage: and that therefore neither by the Law of God or man he may poſſeſſe by Inheritance, ſo much as one foote of Land, See ye Princes of Germany (the honour and ornament of Mankinde) that you haue committed the Chriſtian World which is to be gouerned by Lawes, to him, to whom God hath not vouchſafed a beeing in this World, but contrary to all Lawes.
            Behold ye noble, yea, and meane perſons too, that ye are oppreſſed with his tyranny, whō his very Birth hath excluded out of the ſociety of honeſt men. Wey well, ye Souldiers, yee valiant hearts, that you ſpend your liues for the honour and dignity of him whom Nature hath not granted to bee borne, but with the

greateſt diſgrace. Goe to them: rather deliuer your Country the moſt flouriſhing Empire of the World, from this ignominie. Onely bee yee couragious, and the Diuine fauour ſhall be with you. For the Lord is a iealous God which puniſheth the ſinnes of Parents vpon their Children, vnto the third and fourth Generation: And he doth ſo accurſe inceſtuous luſts, that for them, he hath ſubuerted and vtterly defaced the greateſt Cities, whole Countries and Nations: as himſelfe doth witneſſe, Leuit. 18. of the Cananites: ſaying, withall theſe things (now he ſpeaks of Inceſts) are theſe Nations polluted, which I caſt out before your face. For becauſe the Land is polluted, I will puniſh the iniquitie of it therein, the Earth doth vomit out the Inhabitants. The ſame God (no doubt) in his due time will powre out the Cup of his Wrath vpon this man: and the rather, becauſe to the deteſtable wickedneſſe of his Parents, he doth adde moſt horrible crueltie, and the very Gouernment of Phalaris indeed, which the miſerable people of Auſtria haue felt, and ſtill (alas for wo) do feele, and ha
                  •
               e by their iuſt complaints, made knowne to the whole World. Vpon whom the Lord doth now ſeeme to take pitie, and to haue raiſed vp Captaines to tumble downe this Tyrant from his Throne, and together with that whole Family infamous for their monſtrous crueltie, vtterly to root out, which we craue and beſeech the ſame. One God in three Perſons, ſpeedily to performe: from whom euen to you Readers alſo wee wiſh all good ſucceſſe. Fare ye well.
            FINIS.
         
      
   