
      
         
            
            
            A
LETTER
VVRITTEN
BY
A FRENCH GENT:
of the King of BOHEMIA
his Army:
Concerning the Emperour
FERDINAND his Embaſſage
into FRANCE.
            Tranſlated out of the French Coppie.
            Printed at Fluſhing.
1620.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A
LETTER WRITTEN BY A
FRENCH GENTLEMAN, OF
THE KING OF BOHEMIA HIS ARMY,
Concerning the Emperour FERDINAND,
his Embaſſage into
FRANCE.
            NOT to meddle with (what euery man
knowes) the inſatiate Ambition of the
Houſe of AVSTRIA, in both the
braunches thereof, which all Chriſtendome
ſhortly will not bee enough to content, as hauing
long ſince prepared the way to that Fift
Monarchy, which certaine Religious Perſons
Confidents of Spaine affirme to bee as neceſſary
for the preſeruation and increaſe of the
Catholicke Religion, as is the Popes Spirituall
Monarchy. Nor to ſpeake of the Cruelties
which the Princes of this Houſe haue giuen
way to, in the Indyes, in the Low-Countries, and
in all places where they haue extended their
Dominions; nor the Deſignes or Attempts
they haue had (open or ſecret) againſt England,
Ireland, Venice, or France it ſelfe, wherein they
haue nouriſhed partialities and indeauoured
to ſuppreſſe the Lawes Salique. For as for Germany,
Bohemia, and Hungarie, (Electiue Eſtates)
who is ignorant that to perpetuate them to

themſelues, they haue ſought to make them
Hereditary and Patrimonies to their Familie?
            Not to mention alſo the ſcornefull faſhion
of the two laſt Emperours, who would neuer
ſend to France to performe office of Congratulation
or Condoling, when it is well knowne
that in their Courtes, were publicke reioycings
for the Murthers committed vpon the Perſons
of our two laſt Henryes, of famous and immortall
memory, refuſing to acknowledge the laſt
for a King or a Catholicke, till long time after
his abſolution, when they ſaw him Victorious,
Tryumphant, and Abſolute in his Gouernment;
And yet when that Great and good
Prince, was pleaſed to vſe his Credit and Mediation,
for according the difference betweene
certaine great Princes of the Empire (friends
and allyes of this Crowne,) one of the Emperour
Rodulphs principall Officers, ſpared not to
ſay, that the King of France might meddle with
the affayres of his owne Kingdome, and let others
reſt: When at that time there was on
foote a queſtion, touching a certaine litigious
Territory, which the ſaide Emperour pretended
to bee deuolued to him, and lay, otherwiſe,
very fitt for him and one of his Brothers.
Not I ſay to mention or repeate what hath fallen
ſo often vnder the Pennes and diſcourſes of
men, and whereof no man almoſt is ignorant:

I will onely ſuccinctly anſwer to the Fiue principall
reaſons, framed to induce the King to
aſſiſt the Emperour Ferdinand, now ſtript of
the Kingdomes of Bohemia, and Hungarie.
            
            
               1.
               The firſt is Religion, the ordinary pretext of
ſuch as vndertake to inuade others, or to draw
from them ayde and ſupplyes. It is true that
the hard meaſure offerd the Proteſtants of Bohemia,
by the Officers of the Emperour, (as is
apparent by the frequent Complaintes and remonſtrances
preſented by the ſaide Proteſtants
to his Imperiall Maieſty, and of late by the Apologie
and declaration Publiſhed in diuers
Languages) gaue the firſt hint and occaſion to
the laſt Combuſtion, and brought foorth the
fruites and changes that wee now beholde.
But this is not the firſt time that the Bohemians
haue in generall complained of the force
offered their Priuiledges, and Liberties; and
of the breach of the fundamentall Lawes of
their Eſtate, (which is in very deede Electiue)
and that the Imperiall branch of Auſtria, hath
endeauoured to make it Hereditary, as well as
the Empire; to the preiudice of the Imperiall
Liberties and Conſtitutions, and particularly
to that of the Golden Bull, which expreſly forbids
the perpetuating of the Succeſſion in one

and the ſame Family. In a worde then, it is a
buſines of State and not of Religion: Beſides
that, the Bohemians make it appeare (and they
thinke with ſufficient proofe) that Ferdinand
was Elected King of Bohemia by the ſurpriſe of
three or foure Officers of that Kingdome, Pentioners
and Partiſans of Spaine, without calling
thereto the aſſiſtance of the three incorporate
Prouinces, Sileſia, Morauia, and Luſatia, which
haue euer had, and ought to haue, their free
voyces and aſſents. Againe it is moſt true, that
at ſuch time as the Eſtates of the ſaide Kingdome,
expelled the Ieſuites (whome they charged
as the Authors of that miſchiefe) they
tooke into their protection, all other orders of
Church-men, who euen to this houre haue not
receiued any interruption in their Eccleſiaſticall
Functions, or in the free inioying of their
reuenues and Benefices. Beſides that, King
Frederick at his entrance, tooke a ſolemne oath
for their maintenance, and protection, and ſignified
as much to the King in his Letters, Dated
at Amberg the Twentieth of October laſt.
And queſtionleſſe if hee ſhould proceed otherwiſe,
he ſhould bee ill aduiſed, in regard that a
good and great part of that Eſtate conſiſts of
Catholickes. It is then a meere Columny to
ſay that it is a buſines of Religion, and that the
Deſigne of the Proteſtantes is to ſuppreſſe the

Catholickes. The falſhood alſo of this aſſertion
is prooued by the Suffrages, that a Prince
Catholique had in his Election to Bohemia, and
in like number as had another Prince of the Lutheran
profeſſion: each of them hauing had
ſixe Voyces: And ſince all this is matter of
Fact, the proofe or diſproofe thereof is moſt
eaſie.
            
            
               2.
               The Second reaſon alledged, is Alliance:
becauſe the Emperour Ferdinand, is by the Mother
ſide Vnckle to our Queene, whoſe Huſband
they ſay is tyed in reſpect of ſo ſtraight a
Bond to aſſiſt him: But the moſt ſtraight Bond
is of a King to his Subiectes, as of a Father to
his Children; and the ſafety of an Eſtate ſurpaſſeth
all other conſiderations. The tranſcendent
Greatnes of this Houſe hath coſt France
deare enough in our dayes, without ſeeking
farther proofe of this in other Hiſtories then in
that of the laſt League; vnleſſe we will now approoue,
what was almoſt two thouſand yeares
ſince ſaide of our Nation, That wee aſſoone
forget an Iniury, as a Benefit. This alſo is a
point of Conſideration, that the King in making
himſelfe a party for the Houſe of Auſtria,
diuideth his Subiects that are of different Religion,
before the woundes of the State bee

throughly cloſed; offendeth his Oldeſt and ſureſt
Friends and Allies; and bringeth his Kingdomes
into the danger of a Warre abroad, and
of trouble at home. For if hee imploy his forces
againſt the Palatinat for the diuerſion demaunded;
what other effects may hee expect?
Since the Palatinat during the abſence of King
Fredericke, is vnder the Protection of the Eſtates
of the vnited Prouinces, and of the Princes
of the Vnion. Againe, the King (ſhall as
in a brauery) empty his Treaſure for a buſines
farre from vs; and which concerneth not directly
nor indirectly, his Eſtate or Perſon; being
(as I haue ſaide) a matter neither of Religion
nor Conſcience. In yeelding alſo Supplyes
to one party before hee heare the other,
his Maieſty tacitly Condemneth one, and is
Guilty of that which all the Lawes of the
world and hee himſelfe forbids, in ordinary
Suites and differences, betweene party and party;
it being likely that before many dayes bee
paſt, the ſaide King Fredericke, his Friends and
Allyes, will giue his Maieſty an account of
what hath paſſed in this buſines, and acquaint
him with the cauſe and motiues of ſo great a
change and enterpriſe.
            
            
               3.
               The third inducement is the aſſiſtance and

Protection that Kings owe one another; eſpecially
ſuch as are in diſtreſſe: But let the Emperour
be pleaſed to remember how hee and
his Predeceſſors, haue euermore neglected
France; expreſly forbidden the Princes of the
Empire, Friends and Allyes of this Crowne, to
aſſiſt our Kinges of later times, in their neceſſities;
much leſſe that they haue euer ſupplyed
them with men or money: Let him remember
alſo the refuſall, hee lately made the Duke of
Neuers, of the Kings mediation, fauour, and authority,
for ſetling the Affayres of Bohemia,
when they were yet in Good tearmes; I meane
during the Life of the Emperour Mathtas, and
many monthes before this new Election. But
if the King will fauour one of the partyes (as by
reaſon of State and for diuerſion it hath beene
at other times in practice) there may be ſhewed
to his Maieſtie, halfe a hundred Letters of the
deceaſed King, and of ſome of the Kings his predeceſſors,
contayning thankes for the good &
notable ſeruices performed by the houſe of the
Prince Palatine and his Allyes, to their Perſons
and Crownes in their occaſions of need. The
inſtructions giuen to ſuch as haue bene within
theſe thirtie or fortie yeares, ſent into Germany
confirme this: Beſides, the ſtraight alliance that
King Henry the great (a moſt wiſe Prince) ſettled
betweene him and the body of the Vnion in

                  Germany, a ſmall time before his death; approued
ſince by the King now Raigning, and by
the Queene his Mother then Regent, when the
Duke of Deux Ponts came into this Kingdom to
condole the laſt Kings murthering. In like ſort
the Contracts & Obligations vpon proofe in
the Chamber of Accounts for many ſummes of
money, lent and paid before hand, by the ſaid
houſe of the Prince Palatine, his neere kindred
and Allyes, (of a part whereof France is yet a
debtor.) Theſe (I ſay) are proofes ſufficient of
what I haue ſaide, and oblige his Maieſtie to
lend his aſſiſtance rather to this then to the other
party.
            
            
               4.
               The fourth induction, is the dangerous example
of Reuoltes (for with ſuch tearmes doe
they qualifie this change, to make it the more
odyous, without diſtinguiſhing between Kingdomes
Electiue and Hereditary; Eſpecially
ſince between Electiue Kingdomes, there is difference
of Condition as all the world knowes.
And it is to bee noted, that at the Sacring and
Coronation of the Kinges of Bohemia, the King
firſt ſweares to obſerue the Lawes and Priuiledges
of the Countrey, and then the people take
the Oath of fidelitie. And at that ioyfull entry
(as it is tearmed) of Antwerp, which is the

ſolemnity of Creating and receiuing a newe
Duke of Brabant, it is deliuered in expreſſe
tearmes that hee declares himſelfe fallen from
his Right and Dignity, if hee make not good
the Articles that hee hath promiſed and ſworne
to the people. So did the deceaſed Duke of
Anion, laſt Duke of Brabant promiſe and pronounce
in the yeare, 1583. For betweene the
proceedings of the Low Countryes, and of Bohemia,
there is a great reſemblance. The enactions
and Cruelties of the Duke of Alua, were indifferently
exerciſed vpon the Proteſtants and
Catholickes, The Count of Egmont (whoſe
head hee ſtroke off) was no Hugonet: no more
then was the moſt part of ſo many thouſand other
of all Ages, Sexes, and Conditions, whom
hee brag'd, at his departure thence, that he had
made an end of by the hand of the Hangman.
And it is moſt true, that the inhumane and barbarous
courſes taken by the Count of Bucquoy,
for theſe fifteene or ſixteene Monthes, in the
Warre againſt the Bohemians, thinking with
Fire and Sword to bring them to obedience
(which is wiſdome againſt the hayre) ſerued
but to haſten the reiection of Ferdinand, and the
Election of Fredericke: Not to mention the
obſtinate denyall, made to admit or heare the
Deputies of the Eſtates of that Kingdome, and
of the Prouinces incorporate vnto it, at the

laſt aſſembly at Franckfort, when the ſaide Ferdinand
was aduaunced to the Crowne Imperiall:
And of this kinde of wiſdome, was alſo
the Refuſall made lately by the ſame Emperour
Ferdinand to his Subiectes, of the lower
Auſtria, and Stiria, who made offer to ſerue
him with their Liues and goods, in withſtanding
the Inuaſions of the Bohemians, conditionally
that hee would Confirme their Priuiledges,
and graunt them free vſe of their Religion:
It is hee himſelfe, that in the like caſe ſaide
once, That he had rather bee a Prince without
Subiects, then to haue any, of a contrary Religion
to his owne. This humour of his expreſſed
in that Language, made ſuch an Impreſſion
and apprehenſion of him in his people,
(though hee be held otherwiſe a Good
and a wiſe Prince) as it was not the leaſt reaſon
of the Alteration wee now ſee. Happy are
thoſe Princes, that hauing neede of Counſell,
are able to make choyce of Wiſe and Faithfull
Councellours, ſuch as haue no other ayme
but their Maiſters aduauntage, without regard
to their owne particuler intereſt. There
haue beene in this Houſe, Great and Famous
Princes for Valour and Vertue, but theſe of
later time haue beene ill Serued and ill aduiſed.
Witnes their Loſſes in the Low Countryes,
and now, and to come; if they againe

take not the way they haue left, of ſweetnes and
gentlenes.
            
            
               5.
               The Fift and laſt, principall reaſon is, That
the Turke will infallibly, lay holde on the occaſion
of theſe Combuſtions, to ſerue his
turne, and to aduaunce his Conqueſts, to the
hurt of Chriſtendome; which is not vnlikely?
And if hee doe it not, it is either the fault of
his little wiſdome, or of his weakneſſe; which
yet may bee auoyded by leauing this new King
in quiet Poſſeſſion, now that he is Elected, and
that without Suite or labouring of his owne,
nay without his owne Knowledge, and beeing
forcedly as it were carryed on, by the Counſell
of his Friends, to the Acceptance of this
Crowne, which hath beene ſince ſet on his
Head; accompanyed with all the Formes and
Solemnities due and Correſpondent to the
fundamentall and moſt auncient Lawes of Bohemia;
a Kingdome Free and Priuiledged if euer
any: Whereas, on the Contrary, if hee
bee moleſted; and diſpoſſeſſed; Hee will be, by
the law of Nature, and of Reaſon, inforced to
inuite his Friendes and Allyes to ayde him;
As the Princes of Germany; the Kings of Denmarke,
and Sweden; the Hans Townes, and the

Proteſtant Cantons of Switzerland, with whom
hee and ſome other Princes of the Vnion, are
Confederate for their common Defence. Not
to ſpeake of England, and the Vnited Prouinces,
whence hee cannot but receiue Powerfull
ſuccours. Not to ſpeake alſo of certaine Princes,
and Eſtates Catholicke, which holde good
Correſpondence with him: Nor of the Prince
of Tranſiluania, who offreth him his beſt meanes
and Forces.
               In the meane time, it is a falſe affirmation
that the ſaid King entertayneth Intelligence or
commerce with the Turke, hauing Friends ſo
many and ſo mighty in Chriſtendome, without
being driuen to ſeeke them elſe where with
ſo great danger. But if the Prince of Tranſiluania
Fortifie himſelfe on that ſide, (as hee hath
heretofore done) for his better ſetling in his
Principallity, at ſuch time as the Houſe of
Auſtria ſought to croſſe him, as it had donne
before, the vnfortunate Gabriel Battori: and
diſturbe him in his Poſſeſſion, it is beſide the
purpoſe and concerneth not Bohemia; nor is
in any ſort applyable to this new King. But
who knoweth not, howe the greater part of
Hungary, and of other Principalities of that
part of Chriſtendome, are in concluſion fallen
into the handes of the Common Enemy of
Chriſtendome?
               
                  
In a worde, this Buſines is the true Touchſtone
whereby to diſtinguiſh betweene good
and ill Counſells, and to diſcerne the true
French from the Spaniard, or fauourers of the
Spaniſh Party.
*⁎*
               
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   