
      
         
            
            
               
A BRIEFE AND FAMILIAR EPISTLE SHEVVING HIS MAIESTIES MOST LAWFVLL, HONOVRABLE AND IVST TITLE TO ALL HIS KINGDOMES. With an Epitaph or briefe lamentation for the late Maieſtie Royall of most famous, godly, and honourable memory: With a reioycing after ſorrow for the ſame. And laſtly a prayer for his Maieſties moſt happy ſucceſſion, and for the Queene and their children.
            
               By Robert Fletcher.
            
            Imprinted at London for Iohn Harriſon, dwelling in Pater-noſter rowe, at the ſigne of the Anchor. 1603.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFƲLL HIS EƲER good friend Marmaduke Darell Eſquier, Clarke Comptrouler of the late Queenes Maieſties houſhold, and victuler of her Nauie Royall, &c. Robert Fletcher, Yeoman Purueyor of Cariages for remooues of our ſayde late Soueraigne Lady the Queene, wiſheth a long life with continuance of thoſe vertues which God hath endued him vvith.
            
            
               SIR although my ſences were ſoaked and ouer drowned with ſorrow, for the death of our late dread Soueraigne, vnder whoſe Table I haue had (for the moſt part) my nouriſhment almoſt fortie yeares of my life paſt: and in my trauels, hearing ſome to diſpute of his Maieſties iust and moſt lawfull Title: others to mourne with me, others to reioyce with Songs, Ballads, &c. And laſtlie,

a Souldiers wiſh, Intituled to his Maieſtie, and patronized by all the Lords, &c. I could not chooſe but imitate, and therefore haue written a briefe Epiſtle to the vulgar, touching his Maieſties Title. Secondly a meane Epitaph for her late Maieſtie. Thirdly a fewe verſes of reioycing after ſorrow: And laſtly, a prayer for the King, the Queene, and their children: With a thankeſgiuing to God for ſending their Maieſties to vs, with ſuch hope of happy ſucceſsion: all which I beſeech you to patronize, with my ſelfe alſo, as your place and occaſion may affoorde, and as Iuſtice and equitie according to your wiſedome ſhall direct you. At my lodging neere Charing Croſſe, the xxiii. of Aprill. 1603.
            
               Your worſhips to be commanded as aboueſaid euer, Robert Fletcher.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A briefe and familiar Epiſtle ſhewing his Maieſties moſt Lawfull, Honourable, and iuſt Title to all his Kingdomes, &c.
            
            
               IF any will be ſo deſperate impudent, to affirme that our Sacred and moſt excellent Soueraigne now deceaſſed, was not to be naturally ſorrowed for. I am perſwaded that euerie good Chriſtian wil condemne that perſon: euen ſo euery one that now after our mourning and bootleſſe ſorrow, will not confeſſe, that our moſt excellent Soueraigne Lord and King, is not the true lineall, moſt honourable heire and lawfull ſucceſſor, he hath not reade any of our own hiſtories or Chronicles: nor doth he vnderſtand ought, but may be reckoned among the vulgar to be voyde of common ſence, for as the firſt proclamation was excellently penned touching his Maieſties moſt lawful right and lineall ſucceſſion, ſo it is not yet much aboue fifty yeres ſince a coniunct vnion was ſought to haue knit both the Realmes of England and Scotland together. Not withſtanding the neere proximitie of bloud betweene the two yong

Princes of England, Edward; of Scotland, Mary; King Henry the eight and our laſt of that name, ſought it firſt by all good and honourable meanes after his deceaſe. The like courſe was holden, as who will reade the Epiſtle exertatory written by the Duke of Sommerſet & the whole Counſell of England, vnto the nobles & commons then of Scotland, may perceiue, and conceiue what bleſſed happines, and happy bleſſednes was therein promiſed to both the nations: but it may ſerue, and that to all men of any reaſonable foreſeeing capacity, that the al-ſeeing ſpirit of the eternall Maieſty, did ſee what then was moſt meeteſt to confirme his glory and our comforts: for looke into the propagation of the Goſpel of peace, & you ſhall perceiue, that the almighty had his ocult iudgement in the ſeuerall raignes of King Henries children, viz. King Edward to beginne to build the Temple of the Lord, ſo much as ſixe yeares & od monthes could giue him leaue, amongſt many rebellions and perturbacions, moued by his people both abroade in the Realme, and among his very domeſticalls at home; Queene Mary to pull all downe againe and to plant Popery, hauing to aide her therein, the helpe of Spaine, &c. this was no doubt for the triall of Gods children in England, and confirmation of the faithfull, v. yeares, odde monethes was her Raigne, little to her owne comfort, and leſſe to her ſubiects.
            Then came the mirror of the world, our late dread ſoueraigne Elizabeth, the paterne and patroniſſe of many, yea almoſt of all the religious & godly Princes of Chriſtendome; and ſhe planted religion, ſuppreſſed, though not cleane ſupplanted ſuperſtition and idolatry, & raigned full xliiii. yeares od monethes: and howſoeuer her Maieſty might ſeeme to conſeale from vs her heire apparant, by her graue, wiſe, & honourable foreſeeing Counſell, yet you may ſee that her moſt prudent Counſell ſuruiuing her moſt gratious Maieſty did preſently proclaime this royall Gentleman to be our King and bleſſed ſubſtitute ſent of God.
            
               
Who being the graund ſonne of the eldeſt daughters ſon of King Henry the vii. and Queene Elizabeth his wife, as then the very heire to the imperiall Crowne of this land, he is alſo the intire and moſt deare ſonne of the ſame eldeſt ſiſters daughters ſonne, a moſt Godly, goodly, and noble young gentleman, borne heare in England amongſt vs, whoſe very princely preſence, my ſelfe haue ſeene and ſpoken with, at Saint Iames houſe neere Charing Croſſe: ſo that he is our lawfull, and true vndoubted King of Scotland by mother and father: of England by father and mother: of whoſe Maieſty, Magnanimity, Princely power, moſt excellent gouernment we are aſſured, by a booke written by himſelfe to the Prince his ſonne and heire apparant: & according to the Counſell contained in the ſaide booke, & directed to the moſt mighty and excelent young Prince now in Europe liuing, both for parents and for patrimonie. I doe moſt humbly beſeech almighty God, that all the ſubiects in theſe his Maieſties dominions may mediate, imitate, and teach it to poſterity.
            For thereby ſuch gouernement muſt needes enſue, both generally abroade in the common wealth, & domeſticall at home in euery mans perticuler, that vertue will be aduanced, vice vtterly ſuppreſſed, the almighty ſerued, our Kingobeied, the honorable honoured, the Cleargy reuerenced, the poore releeued, and euery degree ſo ſetled: the King reioycing in his ſubiects, the ſubiects glorying in their King, which the King of eternall glory grant vs all to be pertakers of.
            AMEN.
         
         
            
            
            An Epitaph or briefe Lamentation for the late Maieſtie Royall of moſt famous, godly, and honorable memorie, our gratious Queene Elizabeth.
            
               BEwaile our greateſt and moſt greeuous loſſe,
               all mortall wights that on the earth do tread:
               Your honour, glory, beauty, turnde to droſſe,
               your wealth, your peace, your plentie, lapt in Lead.
               Lieth mortifide, and in her Pallace plac'd,
               Whom earſt, late earſt, all earthly Princes grac'd,
            
            
               Gone is ſhe now, that was a Flower in youth,
               a Iuno, Pallas, Venus, in her age:
               A future hope, for to maintaine the trueth,
               oh want of breath hath turn'd her from the Stage
               And Kingly throne, wherein on earth was plac'd,
               Her Maieſtie, whom all the world late grac'd.
            
            
               Bewaile her death yee Muſes, and all men,
               
                  Apollo weepe, Minerua likewiſe mourne,
               All Poets now, bring each a golden Pen,
               and beautifie her hearce, each in his turne.
               Let it be knowne t'all Princes fartheſt plac'd,
               That our Eliza was before them grac'd.
            
            
               
               And I poore ſoule, that mourne with all my hart,
               For my good Queene, and Soueraigne miſtreſſe deare:
               Will ſet my Pen and ſtudy now apart,
               it to the world for euer ſhall appeare.
               That while the Lord on earth doth let me liue,
               I for the dead no line or word will giue.
            
            
               But this laſt ſeruice to my peereleſſe Prince:
               ah wretch, and is it euen the laſt indeed:
               It is the laſt, (and doth my Muſe conuince)
               ſo hath our God, and Nature both decreed.
               That this ſhould be the laſt yeare of her life:
               Doubtfull (to ſome) to haue begun our ſtrife.
            
            
               Yet ſee, the Lord did harbour in her breſt,
               which ſhe kept ſecret more then fortie yeare:
               Who ſhould ſucceed her, and continue reſt,
               amongſt her ſubiects whom ſhe held moſt deare.
               A King by birth, and neereſt to her blood:
               (Ordain'd of God) Englands aye laſting good.
            
            
               O mirror then of Maieſtie and power,
               of wiſdome and of woman-hood the beſt:
               That could conceale vntill her lateſt hower,
               that we in her ſucceſſion ſhould be bleſt.
               O Iewell rare, O Iem of greateſt price,
               Thy ſoule (with God) poſſeſſeth Paradice.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            Our late ſorrow, and our preſent ioye.
            
            
               
                  SVch mirth from moane, ſuch ioy from care,
               in Britaine ſoile was neuer ſeene:
               True Engliſh harts did all prepare,
               to mourne the loſſe of their good Queene.
               But now reioyce with harts content,
               For this good King which God hath ſent.
               Our earthly Paragon hath paſt:
               her glorious dayes, and happy raigne:
               No ſtate or ſexe can longer laſt,
               then power deuine did preordaine.
               The Sunne by courſe, doth ſet at night,
               And in the morning riſe more bright.
               Our Cynthia in the euening ſet, The Queene.
               
               or after midnight tooke her reſt:
               Dan Phoebus ſtraight did not forget, The King.
               
               to thinke his manſion muſt be bleſt.
               With glorious beames ſent from aboue,
               Deſcending downe with ardent loue.
               View then the workes of power deuine,
               whoſe heſts are iuſt, and neuer faile:
               Maintaining true diſcent and line,
               which none can croſſe or counteruaile,
               Then ſing, lament, reioyce, complaine,
               Firſt Englands loſſe, next Englands gaine.
               Firſt England hath a Lady loſt,
               a mirror to the worlds of men:
               Now found a King, and with no coſt,
               Iuſt cauſe therefore to ioye againe.
               
                  
Now King, and Queene, with daughter, ſonne:
               Haue Englands ioy, and raigne begunne,
               You trembling harts that quakte for feare;
               with watch and ward to doubt the worſt,
               Now here proclaimed euery where:
               the ioyfull newes of Iames the firſt,
               Vndoubted King, by iuſt diſcent,
               whoſe right no title can preuent.
               Moſt worthy Prince in Europe bred,
               is now our ſoueraigne Lord and King:
               Who by Gods wiſedome will be led,
               to worke our weale in euery thing.
               Religious, wiſe, of valiant minde,
               Who to ſuch ſubiectes will be kinde.
               Of Britaine Ile in briefe to ſpeake,
               that now one Monarch muſt maintaine:
               Conioyning harts muſt malice breake,
               be reconcil'd and friendes againe.
               Let euery former foughten field,
               Like ſonnes vnto their fathers yeelde.
               Like Lancaſter and Yorke in loue, 
                     
                        
                           •
                        enry 
                     
                        •
                     arle of 
                        
                           •
                        ichmond, 
                     
                        •
                     nd Eliza
                        
                           ••
                        th the 
                        •
                     aughter 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     Edward the 
                        ••
                     urth.
               
               muſt England now and Scotland ioyne:
               Such vnity God grant may prooue,
               no forraine power dare then purloyne
               One foote of ground from Britaines peace,
               But Britaines may their ground increaſe,
               For this good King then let vs pray,
               that Neſtors yeares mongſt vs he raigne,
               His Queene and Princes, alſo they,
               in like felicity maintaine,
               O gratious God, defend from thoſe,
               All forraine and domeſticke foes.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            A Praier for the King, the Queene, and their Children, with a thanks-giuing to God, for ſending to vs their Maieſties, with ſuch hope of happie ſucceſſion.
            
               O Eternall God moſt holy and bleſſed father in Ieſus Chriſt, which haſt created all things, who wilt alſo be the Iudge of all men, we thy moſt and vnworthy creatures (in the due regard of our ſinnes) do moſt humbly beſeech thee to be mercifull vnto our moſt dread Soueraigne Lord Iames the firſt: Thy moſt honourable ſeruant our King and gouernor, that as thou didſt firſt in great mercie ſend vnto this realme a Deborah to defend vs from Siſſera: a moſt bleſſed woman to redeeme vs from Roome and Romiſh religion, and the tyranny thereof formerly inflicted vpon this Church of England, and the true profeſſors of thy moſt glorious Goſpell: and more, hauing Sanctified her ſoule, and made it meete for thy moſt glorious and bleſſed preſence, we doe laude and magnifie thy holy name therefore, humbly beſeeching the ſame, to inſpire the hart of our King to looke into the ruines of the Church and common-weale of England, that as her late Maieſtie like Dauid had conceiued to build the Temple, &c. So his Maieſty like Salomon,
               
may fully finiſh and effect the ſame, that the Queene may be like Berſheba to giue counſell, like Heſter to preſerue, like Iudeth to confound Holophernus, &c. And that their ſeede and proſperity may be as Ioſiah, Hezechia, and all other good and Godly Kings in the Iſrael of God.
            And hereto O Lorde we doe giue thy deuine Maieſty moſt humble and harty thankes, in that it hath pleaſed thee to ſend vs a Prince of our Engliſh Tribe extracted from the loines of our moſt famous Kings and Queenes, not deuided from vs by ſeas, not alienated from vs by nature, nor much by the very Elimologi of our vulgar ſpeach, but principally and before all things, O gratious God: not differing from vs in religion and the trueth of thy bleſſed word, vnleſſe it be in greater meaſure of zeale, to his much greater glory and our iuſt condemnation: theſe great mercies O Lord, we doe confeſſe to haue receiued of thy mercie, grace, compaſſion, loue, and prouidence: without any merits, or deſert of ours. Nay we doe much rather O Lord confeſſe to thy farther glory & to our owne ſhame: that in regard of our wilfulnes in ſinning againſt thee after xliiii. yeres taught in thee and in the Schoole of thy deuine will and commandements, for our wants in well doing: repentance, contriſion, confeſſion, and a generall reformation of our ſelues, to haue beene giuen ouer of thee and expoſed to all the dangers and miſeries of this mortall life: which hauing preuented O Lord, we doe further praiſe thee, & pray thee, in the name and mediation of our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, as he in mercie hath taught vs ſaying: Our father, &c.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   