
      
         
            
            
               ❧An Epitaph, or funerall inſcription, vpon the godlie life and death of the Right
worſhipfull Maister William Lambe Eſquire, Founder of the new Conduit in Holborne,
&c. Deceaſed the one and twentith of April, and intumbed in S. Faiths Church
vnder Povvles, the ſixt of Maie next and immediatly follovving.
Anno. 1580. Deuiſed by Abraham Fleming.
            
               
                  ALl fleſh is graſſe, the
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   Scripture ſaith, and vadeth like a flowre,
               And nothing to be permanent, can vaunt it hath the powre.
               The faireſt and the fouleſt thing, that any man can name,
               Hath but a time to liue and die, in honour or in ſhame.
               No artificiall workemanſhip, no notable deuiſe,
               No valiant act, no noble déede, no puiſſant enterpriſe,
               But as in time triumphantly, it challengeth renowne,
               Euen ſo in time from honours hight, at laſt it tumbleth downe.
               The doubtfull ſtate of mortall man, an argument may bée,
               That nothing is perpetuall, which glanſing eie doeth sée,
               But tranſitorie, fraile, and vaine, as time demandes his fée.
               The Sunne & Moone
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   ſhall haue their chaunge, though gloriouſly they ſhine,
               The gliſtering Starres in firmament, from brightnes ſhall decline,
               The ſcattered cloudes, like winding worme, or ſcortched parchment ſcroll,
               Shall ſhrinke together, as in ſkies they are conſtraind to roll.
               Then, ſith ecleſtiall creatures ſtate, ſo alterable is,
               That vaine we count each earthlie thing, I iudge it not amis.
               We ſee the ſeaſons of the yeare, ſucceſſiuely inſue,
               Firſt nipping Winters bluſtring blaſts, with froſts as ſtiffe as glue,
               Then pleaſant Spring with colours clad, of yellow, greene, and blue:
               Next which comes ripening Summer in, and then doth follow faſt,
               Quicke Harueſt for the huſbandman, t'acquite his charges paſt,
               No time hath this prerogatiue, for euermore to laſt.
               Lo thus in circle runs the yeare, with compaſſe round about,
               And his appointed age the world, by portions weareth out.
               Count what we can moſt excellent, néedes muſt it haue an ende,
               Againſt decay there is no force, nor fortreſſe to defende.
               How
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   many Cities ſtately built, of timber, lime and ſtone,
               Are come to naught, and in their place a deſert left alone?
               Pompe maketh not perpetuall, although it beare a port,
               A Maigame I may name it well, a paſtime and a ſport,
               Whoſe glorie glides and ſlips away, whoſe pleaſure is but ſhort.
               Like Plaiers in an Enterlude, vpon a common ſtage,
               One repreſenting luſtie youth, another crooked age,
               One royall Principalitie, another Courtlie ſtate,
               One like a Iudge doth ſit on bench, another begges at gate,
               Thus counterfet they all degrées, vntill the play be donne:
               Euen ſo is man vpon the earth, ſince firſt his ſtocke begonne.
               For Adam, though he liued long, yet dead he was at laſt,
               The Patriarchs and Prophets olde, their pilgrimage haue paſt:
               Kings haue reſigned vp their crownes, and titles of their thrones,
               And many a politike Gouernour in graue hath laid his bones,
               This proue the
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   ſundrie writings ſet, on their Sepulchre ſtones.
               The wiſdome of the wiſe is vaine, the ſtrong mans ſtrength a toy,
               If they by them as inſtruments, ſéeke length of life t'enioy:
               And as for wealth, it is but winde, for riches haue no holde,
               The monied man muſt thinke to die, if once he waxeth olde.
               Lo, lo, a preſent patterne here, all you that liſt to learne,
               By viewing of this corps corrupt, what you ſhall be diſcearne.
               Sometime he was, as others be, a quicke and liuing man,
               But wounded with the dart of death, reuiue him nothing can.
               His youthfull yeares, as others haue, this good Eſquire hath had,
               And crooked age by créeping on, with weakeneſſe ſicke and ſad,
               In winding ſhéete at head and foote, faſt knit his corps hath clad.
               Rich in his life,For I haue heard it credibly reported, that he left little or nothing vndiſtributed. poore at his death, a ſteward of the Lordes,
               His talent Chriſtianly laide out, with Gods good will accordes.
               And as in th' Actes, Cornelius déedes, beare witneſſe of his faith,
               (For outwarde workes before the world, beléefe within bewraith:)
               So this religious Gentleman, a Patrone to the poore,
               In allies and in lanes abrode, at home in th'entrie doore,
               In open ſtréete, in holie Church, in many a corners crooke,
               (Where, for the poore and impotent, whom kith and kin forſooke,
               With charitable zeale inflamde, this lowelie Lambe did looke,)
               His almes he hath diſtributed, and giuen as he ſawe néede,
               Cloth for the backe, meate for the mouth, the hungrie ſoule to féede.
               As louing as a Lambe he liud, and verifide his name,
               He was an eie vnto the blind, a legge vnto the lame,
               A comfort to the comfortles, a ſuccour to the ſicke,
               A father to the fatherles, whome nipping néede did pricke,
               A huſband to the deſolate, and widowe left alone,
               A fauourer and a fréend to all, an enimie to none.
               NowPoore people ſhall ſone feele the loſſe of this Lambe by the lacke of their relief. ſuch as had his wooll to weare, lament of him the lacke,
               His fleſh did fill their bellies full, his fléeſe kept warme their backe,
               His pence and pounds preſerued them, from many a wringing wracke.
               No miſſe of mercie was in him, for iointly hart and hand,
               Were pliant to ſupplie the wantes, of many in this land.
               For this he knew, by giuing them, he lent vnto the Lord:
               His humblenes no homelines, of ſicklie ſoule abhord.
               So that I may conclude of him, as néedes conclude I muſt,
               If workes may ſimply of themſelues, make righteous men and iuſt,
               (Which I denie, for vnto faith this office is aſſinde:)
               Then is he ſanctifide from ſinne, and cleanſd in hart and minde.
               The fruites of faith which flouriſhed, in him whiles he did liue,
               His diuerſe diſtributions, and giftes which he did giue,
               The monuments which he hath left, behind him being ded,
               Are ſignes thatFor Chriſt will repay y• a thouſand fold, which is giuen to ye ſuccourles. Chriſt our Shepherd hath, vnto his ſhéepfold led,
               This louing Lambe, who like a Lambe dide méekely in his bed:
               His bodie buried in the ground, there to conſume to duſt,
               His ſoule in Abrahams boſome reſtes, in quietneſſe I truſt:
               A place allotted vnto Lamb
                     •
                  , there to poſſeſſe in peace,
               Such bleſſings as this Lambe enioyes, whoſe like the Lord increaſe,
               For Jeſus ſake the ſpotleſſe Lambe. And here my penne ſhall ceaſe.
            
            
               
                  SACRIFIZIO AGNELLO SALVAZIONE MVNDO
               
            
            
               As Euening ſhadowe ſlides,
               And Seas do varie tides,
               So all the pranking prides,
               Of worldlie glorie glides:
               Gods worde, the guide of guides,
               For euermore abides.
            
            
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧Imprinted at London by Henrie Denham, for Thomas Turner,
and are to be ſolde at his ſhop at Guild-hall gate.
            
         
      
   