
      
         
            
            
            
            
            The copie of the French Kings priuie Councells Sentence: geuen at Moulyns in Bourbonnois betwene the Lordes of Guyſe, and the Lord Admirall of Fraunce the 29. of Ianuary. 1566.
            
            Tranſlated out of French into Engliſhe, by Iohn de Hennot Normand,
                at the requeſt of certaine Gentlemen.
            ¶Imprinted at London by Iohn Day, dwelling ouer Alderſgate beneath ſaint Martins.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
            
            
               The copie of the Kinges priuie Counſailes Sentence geuen at Moulyns in Bourbonnois betwene the Lordes of Guyſe and the Lord Admirall of Fraunce, the 29. of Ianuarye, 1566. tranſlated out of Frenche into Eng
                  •
               yſhe, by Iohn de Hennot Normand at the requeſt of certaine gentlemen.
            
               THe Kinges maieſtie calling to his remembrance, diuers ſupplications preſented vnto hym ſondrye times (as it appeareth by the date of the ſayd ſupplications) by the Lordes of Guyſe and by the Ladies the Ducheſſes of Guyſe, the mother and wife to ye late Duke of Guyſe, to be permitted of his ſayd maieſtie to ſue into the courtes of Parliament againſt all thoſe which ſhall be charged and giltie, of the murther committed on the perſon of the ſaid late Duke of Guyſe, & namely agaynſt the Lord of Chaſtillon Admirall of Fraunce. And where as the rehearſing and declaring of euery worde of the ſayd ſupplications and euidences ſhould be to tedious, the tranſlatour hereof vſeth aſmuch ſhortnes as may be to let euery man vnderſtand brieflye, how the king ſpent for both

               
parties to appeare before his maieſtie, at Moulins in Bourbonnois, for to be examined vntill the triall of the truth of the cauſe ſhould be knowen, to the ende to geue a full ſentence as right reaſon and iuſtice ſhall require. Wherupon, the king aſſiſted with ye Queene his mother, and in the preſence of the princes of the kynges bloude, Lordes, Knights of hys order, &c. Whoſe names are vnderwritten.
            AFter the declarations of the parties aboue mentioned haue bene well conſidered and their cauſes well examined, the kinges maieſtie with the aduiſe of the princes, Lordes, and of his counſaile, hath declared and pronounced, the Lord of Chaſtillon Admirall of Fraunce, to be purged, clearely diſcharged and innocent of the deathe of the late Duke of Guyſe and of all charges and thinges that haue bene imputed vnto hym heretofore, or ſhould bee imputed vnto him hereafter, touching the ſaid death: Did likewyſe commaunde a perpetuall ſilence to his generall Attourney and to all other, forbidding aſwel ye ſayd parties as all other to do hereafter any ſearch or ſute one agaīſt an other: Be it by the way of lawe or other

               
wyſe, and to all iudges to take any knowledge of the ſame: And the ſayd ſoueraigne Lord hath taken the ſayd parties in his tuition and ſafegard, and enioyning them to liue louingly vnder hys obedience without ſome enterpryſe of any acte one agaynſt an other directlye or indirectlye, Declaring at this preſent to the ſaid parties, their parents and frendes, or acquaintaunce, which will be diſobedient to thys ſentence to be giltie of hys maieſties diſpleaſure as breakers of the peace and perturbatours, of the tranquilitie of the cōmon wealth and their bodies and goods confiſked, the which (for ſuch offence) he hath aſwell at this preſent as for the tyme to come vnited and incorporated, to the dominion of hys crowne. Alſo the ſaid ſoueraigne lord forbiddeth, vnder the paine aboue declared, to all perſons of what qualitie ſoeuer they be, to diſobey to thys preſent ſentence nor to put any doubt, controuerſie, and diſput to it. And willed the ſame Sentence to be ſent to all hys Courtes of Parliament, &c. for to be red openly and regiſtred to the end no man ſhoulde be ignoraunt of the ſame. Geuen in the ſaid Counſaile, to the which were preſent my Lorde the kings brother, the Lordes the Cardinall

               
of Bourbon, Prince of Counde, Duke of Montpenſier & Prince Doulphyn, Princes of the Kinges bloud, the Lordes the Dukes of Longueuille, and of Neuers, Peer of Fraunce, the Lord Duke of Montmorency alſo Péer and Conſtable of Fraunce, the Lord Chauncellor, the Lords of Vieilleuille and of Bourdillon Mareſhals of Fraunce, the Lordes of Moruillier and the byſhop of Valence, the Lordes of Cruſſell and ye Gonnort knightes of the order, the biſhop of Lymoges, the Lordes of Lanſſac of Chaulne and Baron of the Garde alſo Knightes of the order, Maiſter Chriſtofle of Thou fyrſt Preſident & Peter Seguier alſo preſident in the Court of Parliament at Parys, the Lords of Laubeſpine and of the Cazedieu, all Counſaillors in hys ſayd priuie Counſaile, and maiſter Baptiſte de Meſuill lykewyſe hys Counſaillor and aduocate in the ſayd Court of Parliament. The 29. of Ianuary. 1566. in the Caſtell of Moulyns in Bourbonnois and pronounced to the parties the laſt day of the ſame month.
            
               Signed Bourdin.
            
            
               
                  If God be on our ſide, vvho can be agaynſt vs.
                  Rom. 8.
               
            
            
            
         
      
   