
      
         
            
            A Kentiſhman of Maidſtone, his ovvne Arraignment, Confeſſion, Condemnation, and Iudgement of Himſelfe, whilſt hee lay Priſoner in the Kings Bench for the Poiſoning of Sir Thomas Ouerbury.
            
            
               
                  IAMES FRANKLIN
               
            
            
               
                  I Am Arraign'd at the black dreadfull Barre,
                  Where Sinnes (ſo red as Scarlet) Iudges are;
                  All my Inditements are my horrid Crimes,
                  Whoſe Story will affright ſucceeding Times,
                  As (now) they driue the preſent into wonder,
                  Making Men tremble, as trees ſtruck with Thunder.
                  If any askes what Euidence comes in,
                  O'tis my Conſcience, which hath euer bin
                  A thouſand witneſſes: and now it tells
                  A Tale, to caſt me to ten thouſand Hells.
                  The Iury are my Thoughts (vpright in this,)
                  They ſentence me to death for doing amiſſe:
                  Examinations more there need not then,
                  Than what's confeſt heere both to God and Men.
                  The Crier of the Court is my black Shame,
                  Which when it cals my Iury, doth proclaime
                  Vnles (as they are ſummon'd) they appeare,
                  To giue true Verdict of the Priſoner,
                  They ſhall haue heauy Fines vppon them ſet,
                  Such, as may make them dye deep in Heauens debt.
                  
                     
                        •
                      About mee round ſit Innocence and Truth,
                  As Clerkes to this high Court; and little Ruth
                  From Peoples eies is caſt vpon my face,
                  Becauſe my facts are barbarous, damn'd, and baſe.
                  The Serieants that about mee (thick) are plac't,
                  To guard me to my death, (when I am caſt)
                  Are the black ſtings my ſpeckled ſoule now feeles,
                  Which like to Furies dog me cloſe at heeles.
                  The Hangman, that attends me is Deſpaire,
                  And gnawing wormes my fellow-Priſoners are.
               
            
            
               His firſt Inditement for Murder.
               
                  THe firſt who (at this Seſſions) loud doth call me,
                  Is Murder, whoſe grim viſage doth appall me,
                  His eyes are fires, his voyce rough windes out rores,
                  And on my head the Diuine Vengeance ſcores;
                  So faſt and fearfully I ſinke to grownd,
                  And wiſh I were in twenty Oceans drownd.
                  He ſayes I haue a bloudy villaine bin,
                  And (to proue this) ripe Euidence ſteps in,
                  Brow'd like my ſelfe: Iuſtice ſo brings about,
                  That black ſinnes ſtill hunt one another out:
                  'Tis like a rotten frame ready to fall,
                  For one maine Poſt being ſhaken, puls downe all.
                  To this Indictment, (holding vp my hand,)
                  Fettered with Terrors more then Irons I ſtand,
                  And being ask'd what to the bill I ſay,
                  Guilty I cry. O dreadfull Seſſions-day!
               
            
            
               His ſecond Indictment for poyſoning.
               
                  ANother, forthwith bids me come to'th Barre,
                  (Poyſon) that Hel-borne cunning Sorcerer,
                  That windes himſelfe into a thouſand formes,
                  And when the day is brighteſt flings downe ſtormes,
                  This hath an Angels face, a Mermaids tongue,
                  And notes of much deſtruction it hath ſung.
                  This, is the Coward Sinne, which (like a Pill,)
                  When 'tis moſt gulded, is moſt ſure to kill.
                  Whether this Hel-hownd ſtrike at Morne or Night,
                  So trecherous, cloſe, and ſpeedy is his fight,
                  That Armors all-of-proofe, nor Towers of Stone,
                  Can barre his bloody Execution.
                  This Snake with the ſmooth skin hiſſ'd out my name
                  Mongſt others more, and venom'd me with ſhame
                  That rancles to the ſoule. It ſayes that I
                  (For a poore golden handfull) did defie
                  Heauen and Saluation, when I gaue conſent
                  To teare the bowels of an Innocent
                  With lingring poyſons of themſelues too ſtrong,
                  But that their working God put off ſo long;
                  That darker deeds (by this) the light may try,
                  Which now perhaps in worſer boſomes lye.
                  To this Inditement holding vp my hand,
                  (Fettered with Terrors more then Irons I ſtand▪)
                  And being askd what to the Bill I ſay,
                  Guilty I cry. O dreadfull Seſſions-Day!
               
            
            
               His third for raiſing of Spirits &c.
               
                  IN ruſhes then a heape of Accuſations,
                  For all thoſe Godleſſe damn'd Abhominations:
                  Raiſ'd by the black Art, and a Coniurers ſpelles:
                  As to call Spirits euen from the deepeſt Hells,
                  To fetch back theeues that with ſtoln goods are gone,
                  And calculate natiuities: ſuch a one
                  Credulity of fooles and women made me,
                  And to that glorious infamy betraide me.
                  A Cunning man, a Wiſe man were my ſtile,
                  When I both plaid the Foole and Knaue the while.
                  Art knew I none, nor did I euer reach
                  A bough of learnings tree; what I did teach
                  To others, or did practiſe, it was all
                  Cheating, falſe, apiſh, diabollicall.
                  To this being likewiſe ask'd, what I can ſay,
                  I guilty cry. O dreadfull Seſſions day!
                  This Diuells coate to my body made I fit,
                  Braue was the out ſide, thrid-bare was the wit.
               
            
            
               His Iudgment.
               
                  FOr theſe thick Stygian ſtreams in which th'aſt ſwō
                  
                  Thy guilt hath on the laid this bitter doome;
                  Thy loath'd life on a tree of ſhame muſt take
                  A leaue compeld by Law, er'e old age make
                  Her ſigned paſſ-port ready. Thy offence,
                  No longer can for daies on earth diſpenſe
                  Time blot thy name out of this bloody roule,
                  And ſo the Lord haue mercy on thy ſoule.
               
            
            Hee was executed the 9. of December. 1615.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               Imprinted at London for J. T.
            
         
      
   