
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧Franklins Farewell to the World,
With his Chriſtian Contrition
in Priſon, before his Death.
            FArwell vaine World whoſe comforts all are Cares,
            Whoſe gaines are loſſe, whoſe liberty are Snares:
            Whoſe Gold is Droſſe, whoſe wiſedome is meere folly,
            Whoſe wealth is woe, whoſe ſeruice is vnholly.
            Whoſe Life is Death, whoſe Ioy is Griefe and Sadnes:
            And all that's in thee is a Map of Madnes.
            Who ſo (like me) long in the world hath beene,
            And hath ſo many alterations ſeene,
            How ſome from Greatnes fall, ſome Riſe from little,
            How mans foundation ſlip'ry is and brittle,
            How Tranſitory things doe mount and fall
            At his Great pleaſure, that Created all.
            Who ſo doth note, and beare theſe things in minde;
            Shall ſee how Fortunes breath▪ like wau'ring winde
            Doth blow vp men like bladders with Ambition,
            And caſt them headlong downe to black Perdition.
            That this is true, the world may plainly ſee,
            And view a fearefull ſpectacle in mee:
            For I that had enough of fading pelfe,
            And need not want (except I would my ſelfe)
            I that had Sence, Diſcretion, Reaſon, VVit,
            And could diſcerne things fitting and vnfit,
            I whom my high Creator made a creature,
            Adorning me with guifts of Art, and Nature
            Yet of all this I made no further vſe
            But Gods, Kings, Countryes and my ſoules abuſe.
            From crime to crime ſtill plundging further in,
            With my continuall adding ſinne to ſinne.
            Till ſinne on ſinne, at laſt brought ſhame on ſhame,
            And ſhame on ſhame, paid the deſert of blame.
            My thoughts ſurmis'd th'Almighties eyes were hid,
            And that he ſaw not, what I ſecret did,
            But he (whoſe ſight eclipſeth Moone and Sun)
            Hath brought to light the deeds in darknes done;
            He in his Iuſtice, Iuſtly hath reueal'd
            My hainous faults which I had long conceal'd:
            He hath laid open my notorious crimes,
            To bee a warning to enſuing times;
            That they ſhall neuer dare to doe the like,
            Leaſt (like to me) his vengeance them doe ſtrike.
            Then let a dying friend good counſell giue,
            To all Eſtates and Sexes how they liue:
            Oh let my ending of my loathed breath
            Make all men care, to ſhun eternall death.
            And though my life hath bin polluted foule,
            Yet Iudge with charity my ſinfull ſoule;
            For were the Sinnes of all the world in me,
            Yet (with the eye of Faith) I cleerely ſee
            That Gods great mercy, like a boundles flood
            Through my bleſt Sauiour and Redeemers blood,
            Hath freely pardon'd all that I haue done,
            (By th'interceſſion of his onely Sonne,)
            So that my ſtedfaſt faith doth me perſwade,
            My peace for euer with my God is made.
            Hee that Raiſd Lazarus from out his Graue;
            He that vpon the Croſſe the Theife did ſaue,
            'Tis he alone; and onely none but hee
            Hath raiſd me vp from Death, and ſaued me.
            Yea, though I all my life time haue liu'd euill,
            A ſeruant, and a ſlaue vnto the Deuill:
            Yet heer's the Ioy that makes my courage bolde,
            My Sauiour Chriſt hath tooke me to his folde,
            Hee, true Repentance vnto me hath giu'n,
            And for me (through his merits) purchas'd Heau'n.
            Then World, Fleſh, Sathan, and grim Death auaunt,
            Doe all your worſt, my Faith you cannot daunt:
            He, that for me hath conquer'd Death and Hell,
            Hath granted me that I with him ſhall dwell.
            And though my life Eternall fire did merit,
            Yet God in mercy hath receiu'd my Spirit.
            Farwell my Countrey, by whoſe Iuſtice I,
            For mine vniuſt and bloody action dye.
            Farewell moſt Sacred and Renowned King,
            Whoſe equall Iudgement through the world doth ring:
            Whoſe zeale to Right, and whoſe Impartiall hand,
            Are the maine prop on which this State doth ſtand.
            Long may he Raigne, in his Maieſtick-ſeate,
            And as on Earth, bee made in Heau'n more great.
            Let his Poſterity, and Royall Race
            Be all Inſpir'd with the ſupernall Grace:
            And of his ſeed let vs haue Alwaies one
            To ſway the Scepter of Great Britaines Throne.
            Defend them Lord from ſoule and body harmes,
            From home-bred Traytors, and from Foreigne Armes.
            That in thy fauour they may liue and dye,
            And dye to liue with thee Immortally.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            Printed at London for Henry Goſſon.
            
         
      
   