
      
         
            
            
            
               Salutem in Chriſto.
            
            GOod men and euill delite in contraryes.
The good in ſéeking for trueth,
and maintenance therof: Euyll, in
hiding of Trueth, and oppreſſing therof:
And ſo conſequently to publiſh Trueth, is
to pleaſe the good, and to diſpleaſe the euil.
Wherfore, hearing ye amongeſt the cōmon
ſortes of men at this time: it is not certainly
knowen what is the cauſe that ye Duke
of Norffolk is newly cōmitted to ye Towre
and ſundrie others: And knowynge that
good men wil be wel ſatiſfied to vnderſtand
the truth, which euyl men wold coouer and
oppreſſe: I could not but in conſcience to
ſatiſfie the good, and bridle or ſtop the lyeng
and open ſclaunderous mouthes of the euil
and ſeditious, notifie thus much to you,
wherby you maye alſo cōmunicate ye ſame
to others, for that it is likely that falſe and
ſclaunderous reportes wil be readily made
hereof to ſerue the appetites of the euyll
diſpoſed.
            Firſt, it is not vnknowē that the Duke
of Norffolke did of late yeares ſecretly practiſe
to haue maryed wt the Scottiſh quéene
without the knowledge of the Quéenes
Maieſtie our Soueraigne Lady.
            
               
It is not alſo vn knowen yt the ſaid Scottiſh
Quéene hath ben the moſt dangerous
ennemy againſt the Quéenes Maieſtie our
Soueraigne Lady, that lyued, in that ſhée
ſought to haue the Crowne of England frō
her Maieſtie, immediatlye after Quéene
Maryes death.
            It is alſo well knowen that whan ſhe
could not get it, neyther by force nor connyng,
ſhe ſolempnly promiſed to acknowledge
her error, and to recogniſe the verye
true right to be iuſtlye in the Quéenes Maieſtie
our Soueraygne Ladye to whom the
ſame belongeth, as lawfull Daughter and
Heire to king Henry the eight her Father,
and ſo alſo by the Lawes of ye Realme perfectly
eſtabliſhed, to ſuccéede king Edward
the ſixte her Brother, and Quéene Marye
her Elder Siſter, and by the Homage of
all her Nobles, Prelates, and People as
duely acknowledged at her Coronation, as
euer any kyng of England was in any former
tyme: And in very déede, as worthye a
Prince for this Realme for her Clemencie
and goodnes in gouernmēt as euer raigned
            It is alſo knowen yt the Scottiſh Quéene
hath not yet perfourmed her promiſe, but
with fryuolous anſweares hath delayed it,

Neither is it of any force to be demaūded,
or worth the hauyng, if ſhe would yelde too
perfourme it. For neither can ſhée yt could
not gette this Realme whan ſhe ſought it
wrongfully, nor kéepe her owne whan ſhée
had it quietly, amende the Quéenes Maieſties
eſtate: whiche is fully parfect: nor yet
is any thyng that ſhe ſhould promiſe, to be
holden firme and durable: but as time ſhall
giue her cauſe to kéepe it or breake it.
            It is alſo ſaid and credibly avowed that
the Scottiſh Quéene, was ye greateſt cauſe
of the Rebellion lately in the North, wherby
ſome noble Houſes that had ſerued this
Realme, partly by themſelues, & ſpeciallye
by their Aunceſtors valiantlye againſt the
Scottes, were now by connyng practiſe of
this Scottiſh Lady beynge depriued of her
Kingdome, inticed to ouerthrow them ſelues
and their Houſes, with a multitude of
more Engliſh Subiectes than ſhée coulde
haue don by Armes in the Field, yf ſhe had
bene in poſſeſſion of her Kingdome.
            It is alſo knowen, notwithſtandynge
this, that the Quéenes Maieſtie
beynge voyde of a reuengynge Nature,
(as in all Actes hathe ſoo appeared,
that ſome ſorte of wyſe men haue noated

it a faulte for a Prince) did labour to haue
reſtored her to her Countrey (as in déede
the Quéenes Maieſtie was the cauſe of ſauinge
of her lyfe, after the murder of her
huſband) with compoſition betwixt her and
her ſonne the kyng, and yt States & people
of that Realme, therby to put ſom good end
to the Ciuill warres in the ſame.
            It is alſo knowen, that the Quéene of
Scottes did vpon the firſt apprehenſion of
the Duke of Norffolke by wrytinges to the
Quéenes Maieſtie, vtterly renownce the
Duke of Norffolke and his Maryage, with
ſome Noate that ſhe did not of her ſelfe firſt
mooue it, nor yet lyke it. And ſo did the
Duke him ſelf, after his firſt apprehenſion:
by many meſſages, and by ſpecial writing
directed to the Quéenes Maieſtie, humbly
and penitentlye acknowledge his offence
in ſéeking to mary wt the Scottiſh Quéene,
and did firmely vnder his hand and Seale
promyſe neuer to deale therin any further,
or in any other matter with that Quéene.
            And now it is certainly founde, that the
former practiſe betwixte that Quéene and
the Duke, notwithſtandyng their ſeuerall
renunciations and firme promiſes to the
contrarye, hath had continuance without

interruption by ſecret meanes of ſūdry euil
parſons, both all the tyme that the Duke
was firſt in Priſon in the Tower: and alſo
euer ſince, whan he was committed to his
owne Houſe, vntill he was nowe newlye
committed to the Tower.
            But how dangerous ſoeuer this attempt
may be iudged in them to cōtinue the ſecret
practiſe and intention to marry agaynſt the
Quéenes Maieſties wyll, and the expectacion
of all that be knowen duetyfull Subiectes
to her Maieſtie, and true friendes to
the Duke: That maye beſt appeare by the
daungerous practiſes that haue accompanied
and folowed this attempte, which Almighty
God hath maruelouſly diſcouered,
to the ſafety of her Maieſties perſon & preſeruation
of the Realme.
            It was deuiſed & determyned that a new
Rebellion ſhould be mooued néere London.
The Cittie ſhould be taken by force and
poſſeſſed: In the meane time, a nomber of
Strangers men of warre, ſhuld be brought
by Sea from the low Countreyes beyond
the Seas, to a notable Port of this Realme
méete for the purpoſe, and ſo both forces of
ennemies and Rebelles ſhould ioyne, and
than procéede to further thynges than is

expedient (as I heare) to be ſpoken off at
this tyme.
            Theſe deuiſes were not onely talked off,
put in wrytinge, and fully concluded, but
the Meſſengers were alſo ſent ouer Sea in
Lent laſt, with ſufficient Authoritie of commiſſion
and wrytinges to teſtifie the determination
of them that ſhuld be the heades
and conductors of this Rebellion, as the
ſame beynge imparted on the other ſide the
Sea, was wel accepted & allowed: and ther
of ſeuerall Letters were ſpéedilye written
to the ſaid Quéene, & to the Duke of Norffolke,
& ſpecially to that vngratious Prieſt
named the Biſſhop of Roſſe (the Inſtrument
of all the Dukes calamytie, and the
Séede man of all Treaſons againſte this
Realme) that this enterpriſe muſt be kept
ſecret, and namely from the Frenche, for
certaine reſpectes not of ſmall moment, as
is ſaid, vntill the Meſſenger ſhould poſte to
Rome to the Pope for Money, & to the king
of Spayne for order and direction for men
and Ships. The Meſſenger had his Letters
of Credit from the Scottiſh Quéene,
the Duke, and others, to the Pope, and
the Kinge of Spayne. And ſo comminge
to Rome: he retourned Letters from the
Popes gratious holynes in the beginnyng
of May to the ſaid Quéene, and to the Duke

and others. The Letter to the Duke was
in Latin, begynning, Dilecte fili, ſalutem.
But in déede the Duke might well ſaye he
ſent not Salutem but perniciem. The
Duke had them, and red them by the interceſſion
of that aforeſaid vngracious Prieſt.
The contentes in ſom parte were, that the
Pope well allowed of the enterpriſe: Hée
would write alſo to the king of Spayne to
further it, but his preſent buſynes of the
chargeahle Warres than in preparyng againſt
the Turke, was the cauſe that Money
could not then be had for that Sōmer:
And yet his vngracious Holynes after his
accuſtomed ſorte comforted them all not to
diſpaire: So it appeareth that God yet ordeyned
him eyther to be ſo zelous againſt
the Turke, whiche ſurely was a good acte,
or els his Holyneſſe Coffers are not now a
dayes ſo full of Money as his Bulles are
of Thunder clappes, ſo as the lack of money
at that time happely ſtayed the proſecution
to ful effect of this dangerous treaſon:
And ſo it is to be hoaped that by the
ſame goodneſſe of God, the miſchiefe hereafter
ment ſhall be diuerted.
            It was alſo by the deuiſors of theſe rebellions
& inuaſions determined yt the Realm
of Irelande ſhould be aſſayled at the ſame

tyme therby to weaken the Quéenes Maieſties
Forces, or to diuert them from Defence
of her ſelfe and her good Subiectes.
            Now wer it beſt to leaue wt theſe former
Braunches, for it is credibly ſaid, that this
Trée of Treaſon & Rebellion hath a nomber
of other Branches of the very lyke nature:
That is, in deuiſinge how the Scottiſh
Quéene ſhould haue ben conueyed awaye,
ſomtyme by diſguiſing, ſomtyme by
playne force, and raiſing of Rebellion: and
ſo put to lybertie, and proclaymed Quéene
of England and Scotland: but to encreaſe
the error of her Style: ſhe ſhould haue ben
proclaymed Kyng and Quéene of England
and Scotlande. It might be alſo reported
how her Sonne ſhould haue ben ſtolne
out of Scotlande, to be ſent into Spayne,
with ſuche lyke deuiſes tendyng to mooue
troubles in the Realme, that was and yet
is (thanked be God) quiet.
            And now it may be that ſome wyll ſaye,
that many of theſe thinges are doubtfull,
and percaſe wreaſted in reporte, eyther by
malyce, or by ouermuch credulitie: But
truelye in ſuche credible ſorte are all the
thynges aboue mentioned, with ſundrye
others to mée reported to bée verye true by

ſuche as haue cauſe to know them, and vſe
not to reporte vntrouthes, as I doo bouldly
auow them to be true. And yf they ſhall be
found otherwiſe, than it is lykely that ſom 
of the Quéenes Maieſties Counſell wyll
cauſe them to bee reprehended, who vpon
this my wrytinge ſhall reporte them, and
thervpon I wyll pacientlye ſuffre correction
for my haſtie Credit: for it is moſte
lykely that ſuche matters of eſtate as theſe
are, wyll not be ſuffred to be communicated
wtout reprehenſion. On the other ſide,
yf they be true, as I haue reported, and yet
not fully ynough reported, than tyme wyll
ſhortly enlarge and confirme them, whan
her Maieſtie ſhal cauſe the parties now impriſoned
to anſweare openly therto▪ by order
of her Lawes, as there is no doubt but
ſhée wyll obſerue to all maner of Subiectes
that courſe as hitherto manifeſtly & graciouſly
ſhe hath don and ſo God longe kéepe
her vnder his ſpeciall protection, as hithertoo
he hath miraculouſly, to raygne ouer vs
in peace.
            Since I wrote this, I am ye more boldened
to think all theſe thyngs true, for that
this preſent daye the Lorde Maior of this
Citie of London with a nomber of his Brethren
were at the Starre Chamber with

the Quéenes Maieſties Counſell, where I
vnderſtand by Report of ſom of them that
hard what was ſaid by the Coūſell to them
concernyng the preſent caſe of the Duke of
Norffolke that the ſubſtance of all that is
by me before reported, is verye true, with
muche more.
            
               At London the. xiij. of October. 1571.
               
Your louyng Brother in
Lawe. R. G.
            
            
         
      
   