
      
         
            
            
               THeyr dedes in effecte, my lyfe wolde haue
               Theyr wordes do pretende, my lyuynge to craue
               Theyr dedes I drede not, theyr wordes beynge ſuche
               I drede and regarde, in maner as moche.
            
            
               My lyfe is but vyle, I eſteme as lyght
               Then ſhulde I in gooddes, or lyuynge delyght
               Whom matters and dedes, nought moueth at all
               Shulde wynde and vayne wordes, his courage appall.
            
            
               Not man vnto man, can threaten I wote
               More greuous then death, the horryble lote
               And be it that death, by ſentence of man
               I ſuffre and that, well ſuffre I can.
            
            
               What ſhulde I regarde, this tranſytorie ſtate
               Regarde and thynke on, both early and late
               I muſte a newe lyfe, that euer ſhall laſte
               Subiecte to no death, no ſyckeneſſe, no waſte.
            
            
               Than welcome be death, the entrye of lyfe
               And dewe to the worlde, the ſtage of all ſtryfe
               Lyfe loſt in this wyſe, releuyth agayne
               For euer in blyſſe, to lyue without payne.
            
            
               From hence and herein, my comforte and ſtaye
               Repoſed I haue, that can not decaye
               God graunt me ſuche loſſe, that rayſeth this gayne
               God graunt me that death, ſuche lyfe to retayne.
            
            
               In meane tyme and ſpace, ſaye properly this
               I maye and in place, Vana ſalus hominis.
               
                  ☞Stephen Wynton.☜
               
            
         
         
            
            
               YOur dedes in effecte, that made your lyfe braue
               Hath cauſed your wordes, the truth to depraue
               Your dedes ye forget not, your wordes beynge ſuche
               You dryue on and drede not, all men ſe to moche.
            
            
               Your lyfe hath ben lewde, whiche ye eſteme lyght
               Of force to leaue gooddes, no thanke to go quyght
               Thoughe matters and dedes, nought moue you at all
               Let God and his threates, your ſtowtenes appall.
            
            
               For man vnto man, can nought threate ye wote
               More greuous then death, that horryble lote
               But yf ye haue death, that Iuſtyce gyue can
               Drede then your deſertes, and blame ye not man.
            
            
               Amende and repente, your ſtobourne eſtate
               That truthe hath neare tryed, but almoſte to late
               A patarne moſte popyſſhe, from fyrſte to the laſte
               As wylfull, as wyttie, whiche wante worketh waſte.
            
            
               I doubte the welcome of death, to that lyfe
               Plaſed for Popes pageantes, in ſtage of moche ſtryfe
               Lyfe loſt in this wyſe, releuyth agayne
               As he that from blyſſe, returneth to payne.
            
            
               From hence and herein, your comforte and ſtaye
               Repoſed you haue, whiche nedes muſte decaye
               If God for this loſſe, do graunt ye dewe gayne
               God ſhylde ye from death, ſuche lyfe to retayne.
            
            
               In meane and ſpace, our prayer is this
               As we maye in place, God tourne to his.
               
                  ☞H. S.☜
               
            
         
      
   