
      
         
            
            ¶A dittie
In the worthie praiſe of an high
and mightie Prince.
            WHen heapes of heauie hap, had fild my harte right full,
            And ſorrow ſet forth penſiuenes, my ioyes away to pull:
            I raunged then the woods, I romde the fields aboute,
            A thouſand ſighes I ſet at large, to ſéeke their paſſage out.
            And walkyng in a dompe, or rather in diſpaire,
            I caſt my wéeping eye a ſide, I ſaw a fielde full faire:
            And lokyng vpwarde than, I ſpied a Mount therein,
            Which Flora had euen for her life, dect as you haue not ſéen.
            Then could I not but thinke the ſame ſome ſacred place,
            Where God or Goddes ſuch did dwell, as might releue my caſe:
            I ſat me downe, for whie? Death could but ſtop my breath,
            And to a man ſo ſorrowfull, what ſweter is then death?
            No ſooner was I ſet, but ſlepe approcht mine eye,
            Wherein the Nymphes of Helicon appeared by and by.
            And ſtraight thoſe ſiſters nine, the ground of Muſicks arte,
            My thought did ſtriue who might preuaile, to eaſe my heauie harte.
            The cunning they ſhewed there, the ſubtile notes they ſoung,
            As wt a wreſt clene from my hart (my thought) the cares they wrong:
            Celeſtiall were the notes, which then (amazde) I hearde,
            Their ditties eke were wonderfull, note ye whome they preferde.
            As for thy bloud (ꝙ they) right noble we confeſſe,
            Thy pettigrée (to long for vs) the Heralds can expreſſe.
            But happie happie Duke, the ſecond chylde of Fame,
            Which (next vnto the higheſt) ſhe doth ſo recoumpt the ſame.
            And happie Thomas ones, twiſe happie Norffolke toe,
            Thriſe happie men that leade your liues, where Howard hath to doe:
            Which Howards happie daies, they praied God to encreaſe,
            Thrée times the ſpace of Natures courſe, like Nestor liue in peace.
            What age hath ſéen his like, ſo frée of purſe and toung?
            Where liues a iuſter Iuſtice now, though rare in one ſo young?
            What plaint can there be tolde, to his moſt godlie eare?
            But that he kepes the other ſtyll, the blamed ſoule to heare?
            In mekenes he more meke, then is the mekeſt Doue,
            Yet is his ſecret wiſedome ſuch, he knoweth whome to loue:
            In fréendſhip, he ſurmounts Giſippus and his Tite,
            
            All Nobles may well note his race, and thereby take their lighte.
            In peace a Salomon, in warre ſo ſtoute a Prince,
            As raigned not tyll Hector came, nor liued neuer ſince:
            Then Sceuola, more firme, which for his cuntries turne,
            His hand from arme before his foes, in fierie ſlame did burne.
            He in the pride of peace, delights in marciall ſhowe,
            Doe marke his turnoys vpon horſe, note well his vſe of bowe.
            Nay marke him yet that ſhall, note well his paynefulnes,
            No ſugred ſlepe can make him fréend to ſluggiſh Idlenes.
            What that becomes a Prince, in his good grace doth want?
            In peace, a courtier for the Courte, a ſecond Mars in camp.
            Thus ſtyll they ſoung, whoſe notes were cauſe of my reléefe,
            And I be wrapped in a Traunce, had cleane forgot my gréefe:
            And triple were my ioyes, ones, cauſe my paynes were paſt,
            And twiſe agayne, becauſe that Prince amongſt vs here is plaſt.
            I clapt my handes for ioye (alas) I wakt withall,
            And then my muſes and their ſonges, my ioyes were gone and all.
            And then retournd my gréefe, I felt a further care,
            Becauſe to ſhew what I had ſéen, did paſſe my power ſo farre:
            And that a man vnlearnd, of arte that hath no ſkyll,
            Should haue a charge ſo great as this, and could doe it ſo yll.
            Yet thus I gan to wright, I knew right well that he,
            Which due deſert did thus commend, ſhould ſhade the want in me:
            To whome I pray the Lorde, to ſend like yeares a Noye
            
            In happie health and quiet ſtate, to his and all our ioye.
            ¶FINIS. Ber. Gar.
         
      
      
         
            ¶Imprinted at London without Alderſgate
in little Britaine, by Alexander Lacy.
         
      
   