
      
         
            
               
                  
                  ¶ A very proper dittie:
                  to the tune of Lightie loue.
                  
                     
                        ¶ Leaue Lightie loue Ladies, for feare of yll name:
                        And True loue embrace ye, to purchace your Fame.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        BY force I am fixed my fancie to write,
                     Ingratitude willeth mée not to refraine:
                     Then blame me not Ladies although I indite
                     What lighty loue now amongſt you doth raigne
                     Your traces in places, wt outward alluremēts
                     Doth mooue my endeuour to be the more playne:
                     Your nicyngs and ticings, with ſundrie procurementes
                     To publiſh your lightie loue doth mée conſtrayne.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Deceite is not daintie, it coms at eche diſh,
                     Fraude goes a fiſſhyng with frendly lookes,
                     Throughe frendſhip is ſpoyled the ſeely poore fiſh,
                     That boouer and ſhouer vpon your falſe hookes,
                     With baight, you lay waight, to catch here and there,
                     Whiche cauſeth poore fiſſhes their fréedome to loſe:
                     Then loute ye, and floute ye, wherby doth appere,
                     Your lighty loue Ladies, ſtyll cloaked with gloſe.
                  
                  
                     ¶ With DIAN ſo chaſte, you ſéeme to compare,
                     When HELLENS you bée, and hang on her trayne:
                     Mée thinkes faithfull Thiſbies, be now very rare,
                     Not one CLEOPATRA, I doubt doth remayne:
                     You wincke, and you twincke, tyll Cupid haue caught,
                     And forceth through flames your Louers to ſue:
                     Your lyghtie loue Ladies, too deere they haue bought,
                     When nothyng wyll mooue you, their cauſes to rue.
                  
                  
                     ¶ I ſpeake not for ſpite, ne do I diſdayne,
                     Your beautie fayre Ladies, in any reſpect:
                     But ones Ingratitude doth mée conſtrayne,
                     As childe hurt with fire, the ſame to neglect:
                     For proouyng in louyng, I finde by good triall,
                     When Beautie had brought mée vnto her becke:
                     She ſtaying, not waying, but made a deniall,
                     And ſhe wyng her lightie loue, gaue mée the checke.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Thus fraude for frendſhip, did lodge in her breſt,
                     Suche are moſt women, that when they eſpie,
                     Their louers inflamed with ſorowes oppreſt,
                     They ſtande then with Cupid againſt their replie
                     They taunte, and they vaunte, they ſmile when they vew
                     How Cupid had caught them vnder his trayne,
                     But warned, diſcerned, the proofe is moſt true,
                     That lightie loue Ladies, amongſt you doth reigne.
                  
                  
                     ¶ It ſéemes by your doynges, that Creſſed doth ſcoole ye,
                     Penelopeys vertues are cleane out of thought:
                     Mee thinkes by your conſtantneſſe, Heleyne doth rule ye,
                     Whiche, both Greece and Troy, to ruyne hath brought:
                     No doubt, to tell out, your manyfolde driftes,
                     Would ſhew you as conſtant, as is the Sea ſande:
                     To truſte ſo vniuſt, that all is but ſhieftes,
                     With lightie loue bearyng your louers in hande.
                  
                  
                     ¶ If ARGVS were lyuyng, whoſe eyes were in number▪
                     
                     The Peacockes plume painted, as Wri;ters replie,
                     Yet Women by wiles, full ſore would him 
                           •
                        umber,
                     For all his quicke eyes, their driftes to eſpie:
                     Suche feates, with diſceates, they dayly frequent,
                     To conquere mennes mindes, their humours to feede,
                     That bouldly I may geue Arbittrement:
                     Of this your lightie loue, Ladies in déede.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Ye men that are ſubiect to Cupid his ſtrooke,
                     And therin ſeemeth to haue your delight:
                     Thinke when you ſée baight, theres hidden a hooke,
                     Whiche ſure wyll 
                           •
                        ane you, if that you do bight:
                     Suche wiles, and ſuche guiles, by women are wrought
                     That halfe their miſchefes, men cannot preuent,
                     When they are moſt pleaſant, vnto your thought,
                     Then nothyng but lightie loue, is their intent.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Conſider that poyſon doth lurke oftentyme
                     In ſhape of ſugre, to put ſome to payne:
                     And fayre wordes paynted, as Dawes can define,
                     The olde Prouerbe ſaith, doth make ſome fooles faine:
                     Be wiſe and preciſe, take warning by mée,
                     Truſt not the Crocodile, leaſt you do rue:
                     To womens faire wordes, do neuer agrée:
                     For all is but lightie loue, this is moſt true.
                  
                  
                     ¶ ANEXES ſo daintie, Example may bée,
                     Whoſe lightie loue cauſed youg IPHIS his woe,
                     His true loue was tryed by death, as you ſée,
                     Her lightie loue forced the Knight therunto:
                     For ſhame then refrayne, you Ladies therfore,
                     The Cloudes they doo vaniſh, and light doth appeare:
                     You can not diſſemble, nor hide it no more
                     Your loue is but lightie loue, this is moſt cleare.
                  
                  
                     ¶ For Troylus tried the ſame ouer well,
                     In louyng his Ladie, as Fame doth reporte:
                     And likewiſe Menander, as Stories doth tell,
                     Who ſwam the ſalt Seas, to his loue, to reſorte:
                     So true, that I rue, ſuch louers ſhould loſe
                     Their labour in ſeekyng their Ladies vnkinde:
                     Whoſe loue, thei did prooue, as the Prouerbe now goes
                     Euen very lightie loue, lodgde in their minde.
                  
                  
                     ¶ I touche no ſuche Ladies, as true loue imbrace,
                     But ſuche as to lightie loue dayly applie:
                     And none wyll be grieued, in this kinde of caſe,
                     Saue ſuche as are minded, true loue to denie:
                     Yet frendly and kindly, I ſhew you my minde,
                     Fayre Ladies I wiſh you, to vſe it no more,
                     But ſay what you liſt, thus I haue definde,
                     That lightie loue Ladies, you ought to abhore.
                  
                  
                     ¶ To truſt womens wordes, in any reſpect,
                     The danger by mée right well it is ſéene:
                     And Loue and his Lawes, who would not neglect,
                     The tryall wherof, moſte peryllous beene:
                     Pretendyng, the endyng, if I haue offended,
                     I craue of you Ladies an Anſwere againe:
                     Amende, and whats ſaid, ſhall ſoone be amended,
                     If caſe that your lightie loue, no longer do rayne.
                  
                  By Leonarde Gybſon.
                  ¶ FINIS.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ Imprinted at London, in the vpper end of Fléetlane, by Richard Ihones: and are to be ſolde at his ſhop ioyning to the Southweſt Dore of Saint Paules Church.
                  ¶*⁋
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  An Epitaph on the death of the vertuous Matrone, the Ladie Maioreſſe, late wyfe to the right Honorable Lorde,
                      (Alexander Auenet) Lord Maior of the Citie of London. Who deceaſed the vii. Daie of Iuly. 1570.
                  
                     HElpe nowe ye Muſes nyne, powre out your Noates of woe:
                  Aide me wt pitious pearcing plaints, the l
                        ••••
                      of her to ſhoe.
                  Whoſe Vertues (maugre Death,) ſhal lyue and laſt for aye:
                  As fliyng Fame in Golden Trump, doth cherefully diſplay.
                  Ye Ladyes leaue your ſportes: your Paſtymes ſet aſyde
                  To weepe this Ladies Fatall fine: Cunduictes of ſtreames prouide.
                  Caſt off your coſtly Silkes: your Iuelles nowe forſake:
                  To decke your ſelues in mournynge Weedes, now poaſtynge haſte do make:
                  Helpe now ye faythfull Wyues, to wayle this faythfull Wyfe:
                  Whoſe flowynge Vertues were not hyd, whyle ſhe enioyed lyfe,
                  As well to Frende as Foe, her Curteſie was knowne:
                  But now the Goddes haue thought it good, to clayme agayne their owne.
                  
                     LVCINA hath forgot her Chardge, the fatall Fates haue don:
                  
                     CLOTHO hath left the Rocke of lyfe: and LACHAS longe hath ſpon.
                  Theſe werie of their wonted toyle, at mightie IOVES Decree:
                  To whom the Heauens the Earth and Sea: and all thynges Subiect bee.
                  The Siſter dire, fearce ATROPOS, with ſchortchyng cuttynge Knyfe,
                  Hath ſhred the Threede that longe dyd holde, this Godly Ladies lyfe.
                  Whoſe loſſe deare Dames bewayle: and weepe with many a teare:
                  For you ſhall miſſe a Matrone graue, in daunger you to cheare.
                  Whoſe Counſell in their neede, her Neighbours could not want:
                  Her Helpe vnto the Comfortleſſe, could neuer yet bee ſcant.
                  Vnto the poore oppreſt, with Sickeneſſe, griefe and payne:
                  To miniſter and giue reliefe: her Hart was euer fayne.
                  The Poore haue loſt a Nurſe, to helpe their nedie ſtate:
                  The Ritche ſhall want a perfecte Frende: as they can well relate.
                  Thus Ritche and Poore ſhall want, her Aide at euerie neede,
                  For both Eſtates in daunger deepe: ſhe laboured to feede.
                  The Ritche with Counſelles ſwete, to cheariſh ſtyll ſhe thought:
                  The Poore by Almes and lyberall Giftes: to tender longe ſhe ſought.
                  But who ſhall haue the greateſt loſſe: I knowe is not vnknowen,
                  Her beſt beloued: the Wight whom ſhee, accompted for her owne.
                  The Lorde MAIOR whiche nowe doth rule: in LONDON noble Citie:
                  Shall want her ſight, (the greater griefe, to miſſe a Mate ſo wittie
                  A Phenyx rare, a Turtell true, ſo conſtant in her loue:
                  That Nature nedes muſt ſhowe her Force, her Huſbandes Teares to moue
                  Who for the loſſe of ſuche a Wyfe: can ſobbyng Sighes refrayne?
                  In whom ſo many Vertues dyd, continue and remayne.
                  You Damſelles deare Domeſticall, whiche in her Houſe abyde:
                  Haue cauſe to wayle, for you haue loſt a good and godly Guide.
                  Whoſe Lenytie and gentell Hart, you all haue knowen and felt:
                  For vnto you in Courteous ſorte, her Giftes ſhe euer dealt.
                  You Officers that dayly ſerue, her Lorde at euery neede:
                  Can teſtifie that you haue loſt, a Ladie kynde in deede.
                  So gentell, graue, demure and wiſe: as ye your ſelues expreſſe:
                  That needes ye muſt guſh foorth your Teares: and weepe with bytterneſſe
                  In fyne, both Ritche and Poore, haue iuſt cauſe giuen to wayle:
                  The Ritch in Counſell lacke a Frende, the Poore their Comfort fayle.
                  The Troupe of maryed Dames, whiche ſhall her Vertues knowe:
                  Haue offered cauſe, in bytter Teares, ſome tyme for to beſtowe.
                  But ſith it is the Goddes Decree, to whom all Fleſh muſt bende:
                  To take this Ladie from the earth, and bringe her dayes to ende.
                  Who can withholde that they wyll haue? who dare their wyll withſtande?
                  To vayne it were for mortall men, the cauſe to take in hande
                  Her Vertues were ſo great, that they haue thought it meete:
                  To take from hence vnto the Heauens, her Chriſtall Soule ſo ſweete.
                  Which now incloſed is, with Aungelles rownde aboute:
                  Suche hoape we haue, no other cauſe, is giuen vs for to doubt.
                  Her Corps ſhall ſhrowde in Claye, the Earth her right doth craue:
                  This Ladie yeldes her Parent too: her Tombe, her Cell and Graue.
                  From whence, no Kynge nor Keyſar can, nor Ruler bearynge ſwaye:
                  For all their Force and Puiſſaunce, once ſtarte or go awaye.
                  All Fleſſhe ſhall haue an ende: as Goddes do graunt and wyll:
                  And reape rewarde as they deſerue, hap good, or hap it yll.
                  But thoughe that Death haue done his worſte, this Dame to take awaye:
                  In ſpite of Death, her Vertues ſhall endure and laſt for aye.
                  ¶ Farewell (O Ladye Deare) the Heauens haue choſen thee
                  Receyue this VALE, I haue done: thou getteſt no more of mee.
                  Poſt Funera viuit virtus.
                  Quoth Iohn Phillip.
               
            
            
               
                  Imprinted at London by Richarde Iohnes.
               
            
         
      
   