
      
         
            
            
            TO THE PARSON, VICAR or Curate, of and to everie of them.
            BEING given to vnderstand of certaine notorious abuses within this Dioces, not reformable by ordinary courses, so that for the redresse of them I shall be constrained to vse meanes and punishments extraordinary; (Grassantibus exemplis, paenae sunt aggravandae) I have thought good to give signification of my intent in this behalfe, to see, if happely, the feare of that future punishment, may not effect that, which otherwise the example must.
            1 First therfore, whereas it is informed that notwithstanding the late Proclamatiō of our Soveraigne L. the Kings Maiestie, straightly commaunding a religious sanctification of the Sabaoth day, the same is horribly prophaned every where, by vsing vnlawfull games even in the time of divine service, and that oftentimes in the verie church-yard: by reason wherof it commeth to passe that many absent themselves from service, especially in the after-noone: I must require you to admonish your parishioners, that heereafter they take heede of prophaning either ye Saboth, church, or churchyard;

and that in repayring vnto divine service as well in the afternoone as in the fore-noone, they vse such diligence as by the law they are bound; assuring thē otherwise, to finde the vttermost extremity of that punishment which the law wil inflict.
            2 Wheras cōplaint is made that many churches & chauncells lye vnrepaired: you are to admonish thē to whom it may appertaine, with all speede convenient to repaire and amend the same or else to expect such punishment as there defects in that behalfe may seeme to deserve
            3 If you cannot finde meanes that your quarter sermons may bee duely preached, make your repaire vnto me that I may take order for the same.
            4 If already you be not sufficiently authorised, I require you, that you presume not to serve any Cure, or to preach within my Dioces, till by my selfe vnder my seale you be licensed so to doe.
            5 Whereas People are very backward in sending their childreu vnto the Minister to be catechised you shall doe well hereafter to admit none to the holy communion that have not already received the same, except they be fit to bee confirmed by the Bishop, that is, except they bee able to aunswere to all the questions of the Catechisme: And if I vnderstand you receive any that are not so qualified, you must make reckoning to aunswere for the same.
            6 Wheras many mariages claudestine and otherwise vnlawfull are daily made. & then ignorance is alleaged for excuse of the fault; you shall vnderstand, that you ought not to mary any persons but in the church, & that between the howers of 8. & 12. in the fore noone, none within the compasse of those times that are forbidden by law, none whose banes have not bin lawfully asked 3. severall holy daies, without a dispensation for the same first had vnder the hand & seale of mee.

or M. Doctor Trevor my chauncellor and none other. If you shall hereafter offend in the premises, you are to be suspended ab officio & beneficio per triennium; wherein I advise you to hope for no favour.
            7 Excommunicate persons (I vnderstand) in almost all places of this Dioces are permitted to come to divin seruice: A great and an intollerable abuse. If hereafter you with the church-wardens do not cause them to be put out of ye church. I shall cause both you and them, as also the persons that so intrude themselves to be punished for the same. Heereof therefore you shal do wel to give warning vnto your parishioners.
            8 Whereas the Cathedrall church of this Dioces, not having to the valew of 10. pro annum, omnibus oneribus deductis; is now fallen into such decay, as 500 Markes wil not repaire the same, so that it must needs in short time fall to the groūd without some extraordinary reliefe: I exhort you, that so often as you are called to any sicke persons of abilitie, especially when they shall make their Wills, you faile not to put them in minde of the necessity of the said church, & to shew them how acceptable a thing it shall be to Almighty God, to contribute toward the sustentation of his house, as also howe honorable vnto the party so contributing; in as much as there is a booke already provided, wherin the names of all such are to be registred for benefactors, as shall bestow vpon the same in any liberall proportion.
            9 Whereas I finde by continuall experience that much laude is dayly imbeziled frō the church, by reason that newe Incumbents want direction and notize of that belongeth to them: For preventing of this inconvenience in time to come, I thinke good to require you yt you procure vnder the hands of the best and most substantiall of your parish (as neere as you can) a testimoniall of the gleebe that belōgeth vnto your church, declaring the nūber of actes, the names of every parcell, and the severall meeres or boundes of the same, the saide

testimoniall to be written faire in one whole sheete of paper, (that with al the rest it may be bound vp into a booke) and to be delivered in vnto me before the feast of Easter next.
            10 Wheras many outrages are dayly committed against Preachers, & Ministers of Gods word, not only in reprochfull and contemptuous speeches, but in laying violent hands vpon them: you are to admonish your parishioners from mee, that they take heede of offending in that kind of fault (which by to much lenity in those that ought to punish it, is growen intollerable) And if you know of any such, to signifie ye same vnto mee.
            11 Whereas many hainous offences are daily committed against the lawes Ecclesiastical of his Maiesty, which being notoriously knowen in all the country, yet for feare, favour, or some other respect are never presēted in any of our Generals or Uisitatiōs: Let notize be given vnto your Wardens, Protors, and such other to whom it may appertaine, that if heereafter they be found negligent in their presentments, they shal assuredly find that punishment which by the law Ecclesiasticall is appointed vnto periured persons.
            12 Moreover that the offences aboue specified may not escape vnpunished, to the great dishonor of God, & the encrease of sinne: I shall pray you to intimate vnto mee the names of such of your neighbour-hood as are defamed for any of the saide Offences, with the quality of their crimes, that I may take order for the punishment of the same as appertaineth.
            
               Matherne. Sept. 30. 1603.
               Fr. Landaven.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   