
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧The maner and order of proceeding againſt Chriſt, by the Iudges
which held a counſell at Ieruſalem, at the inſtance of Caiphas, which was High Prieſt that ſame
yeere: And the ſentence of death pronounced agaynſt him by Pilate, then Gouerner of the Iewes,
vnder Tiberius the Romaine Emperor.
            
               1. Simon the Leper.
               WHat Lawe haue we to condemne a man that is in bondage?
            
            
               2. Rabaam.
               I knowe not wherefore the Lawes are made if they bee not obſerued and kept.
            
            
               3. Achias.
               The cauſe of the offender ought to be throughly examined before ſentence of death be gyuen
agaynſt him.
            
            
               4. Subath.
               No man ought either by the law of God or man, to be condemned ere his offence be known,
therefore tell vs wherein this man hath offended.
            
            
               5. Roſmophin.
               To what ende is the Lawe ordeined if the true meaning thereof be not kept?
            
            
               6. Phytiphares.
               That righteouſnes which mooueth ſedition amongſt the common people, is needles for the
eſtate of the Countrey.
            
            
               7. Ryphar.
               The Lawe it ſelfe condemneth no man, ſaue him that rebelleth agaynſt it, and for that cauſe
is it made. If he be a tranſgreſſo
                     •
                   let his owne offence caſte him, & not your coller or haſtines.
            
            
               8. Ioſeph of Aramathia.
               O what a ſhame is this, that in a whole Citty not one is to be founde that will defende the
innocent.
            
            
               9. Ioram.
               Wherefore ſuffer we this iuſt man to die, is it for his righteouſnes?
            
            
               10. Ehiheris.
               Although he be iuſt yet ſhall he die, becauſe the people are mooued by his words.
            
            
               11. Diarabias.
               Although we faigne outward boldnes, yet is he accuſed before the Counſell.
            
            
               12. Sareas.
               An Hypocrite is very dangerous in a common wealth, therefore let him be rooted out from
the people.
            
            
               13 Rabin
                     ••
                  
                  ▪
               
               Whether he be iuſt or vniuſt, becauſe he is againſt the maners of our forefathers, we wyll
not ſuffer him.
            
            
               14. Ioſaphat.
               Let him be bound in yron Chaynes and kept ſecretlye.
            
            
               15. Philomeus.
               If hée be neither iuſt nor vniuſt, wherefore doo we ſtay and not condemne him?
            
            
               16 Tecas.
               It were better and ſafer for vs to baniſh him the Countrey, or els ſend him vp to Caeſar.
               
            
            
               17 Meſa.
               If he be iuſt then let vs ioyne with him, but if he be vniuſt let vs roote him out.
            
            
               18 Sameth.
               Let vs agrée about him leaſt he rebell againſt vs, and if he wyll not obay vs let him bee put
to torture.
            
            
               19 Cayphas.
               All you knowe not what you ſay: it is better that one man die then all the people peryſh.
            
            
               The ſentence of Pontius Pilate, Iudge of the Iewes vnder the Emperour.
               
                  IPontius Pilate, prouoſt and Iudge in Ieruſalem, vnder the mightieſt Emperor Tiberius, (whoſe Empire the
moſt higheſt haue in kéeping) gréeting. Sitting in iudgment ſeate for loue of iuſtice, by the Sinagogue of
the Iewiſh people, is preſented before me Ieſus of Nazareth, the which with preſumptuous wordes hath named
himſelfe to be the ſonne of GOD, although he be borne of a poore mother: He hath preached himſelfe to bee the
King of the Iewes, aduauncing to deſtroy Salomons Temple, and to withdrawe the people from the moſt approued
Lawe of Moyſes. All this exactly conſidered and approued ſo, condemne we him to the Croſ
                     •
                  e with two
murtherers.
               
                  This vvas found at Vienna in a little boxe vnder the ground.
               
            
            
               To the Chriſtian Reader.
               WHen I was laſt buſie with confuting of that pernitious booke of Iohn Enghilram (called the bluddy boke)
through the murthers that haue beene committed by the Papiſtes among the Children of GOD,
ſo found I at the Printers houſe, this Pamphlet printed in Dutch, and conſidering the matter, the perſon & the
circumſtances, I would not that the Engliſh nation, being novv (God be prayſed) the moſt famous and renowmed,
both for purity of Religion, and valiantnes in Cheualry, ſhould be thereof depriued.
               Farewell in Chriſt
Ieſu our Sauiour, from my ſtudy in Canterburie, 
                     the 12. of May. 1586.
                  
Yours in the Lord Gerardus Goſſenius
Doctor in Phiſicke.
               
            
         
      
   