
      
         
            
            
            ¶ The true reporte of the forme and shape of a monstrous childe, borne at Muche Horkesleye, a village three myles from Colchester, in the Countye of Essex, the .xxi. daye of Apryll in this yeare. 1562.
            
            
               
                  O, prayse ye God and blesse his name
                  His mightye hande hath wrought the same.
               
            
            
               
            
            
               
                  THis monstrous world that monsters bredes as rife
               As men tofore it bred by natiue kinde
               By birthes that shewe corrupted natures strife
               Declares what sinnes beset the secrete minde.
            
            
               I meane not this as though deformed shape
               Were alwayes linkd with fraughted minde with vice
               But that in nature god such draughtes doth shape
               Resemblyng sinnes that so bin had in price,
            
            
               So grossest faultes brast out in bodyes forme
               And monster caused of want or to much store
               Of matter, shewes the sea of sinne: whose storme
               Oreflowes and whelmes vertues barren shore.
            
            
               Faultye alike in ebbe and eke in flowd,
               Like distaunt both from meane, both like extremnes.
               Yet greatst excesse the want of meane doth shrowde
               And want of meane excesse from vertues meanes.
            
            
               So contraryest extreames consent in sinne
               Which to be wray to blindest eyes by syght
               Beholde a calfe hath clapt about his chinne
               His chauderne reft whence nature placed it right.
            
            
               And 
                     •
                  u
                     ••
                  d driues doutfull seers to proue by speache
               Them selues not calues, and makes the fashion stale.
               In him behold by excesse from meane our breache
               And midds excesse yet want of natures shape.
            
            
               To shewe our misse beholde a guiltlesse babe
               Reft of his limmes (for such is vertues want)
               Him selfe and parentes both infamous made
               With sinful byrth: and yet a worldlyng scant.
               Feares midwyfes route: be wrayeng his parentes fault
               In want of honestye and excesse of sinne.
               Made lawfull by all lawes of man, yet halt
               Of limmes by God, scapd not the shamefull marke
            
            
               Of bastard sonne in bastard shape descryed.
               Better farre better vngyuen were his lyfe
               Than geuen so. For nature iust enuyed
               Her gyft to hym: and cropd wyth mayming knyfe
            
            
               His limmes, to wreake her spyte on parentes sinne▪
               
               Which, if she spare vnwares so many scapes
               As wycked world to breede wil neuer sinne
               Theyr liues declare theyr maims saued frō their shapes
            
            
               Scorchd in theyr mindes (o cruel priuye mayme
               That festreth styll, o vnrecured sore)
               Where thothers quiting wyth theyr bodyes shame
               Theyr parentes guilt, oft linger not theyr lyues
               In lothed shapes but naked flye to skyes.
               As this may do whose forme tofore thine eyes
               Through want thou seest, a monstrous vglye shape
               Whom frendly world to sinne doth terme a scape.
            
            
               
                  ON Tuysday being the .xxi. day of Apryll, in this yeare of our Lorde God a thousand fyue hundred thre score and two, there was borne a man childe of this maymed forme at Muche Horkesley in Essex, a village about thre myles from Colchester, betwene a naturall father and a naturall mother hauing neyther hande, foote, legge, nor arme, but on the left syde it hath a Stumpe growynge out of the shoulder, and the ende thereof is rounde, and not so long as it should go to the elbowe, and on the ryghte syde no mencion of any thing where any arme should be, but a litel stumpe of one ynche in length, also on the left buttocke there is a stumpe comming out of the length of the thygh almost to the knee, and round at the ende, and groweth something ouerthwart towardes the place where the ryght legge should be, and where the ryghte legge should be, there is no mencion of anye legge or stumpe. Also it hath a Codde and stones but no yearde, but a lytell hole for the water to issue out. Finallye it hath by estimation no tounge, by reason whereof it sucketh not, but is succoured wyth liquide substaunce put into the mouth by droppes, and nowe begynneth to feede wyth pappe beyng very well fauoured, and of good and cheareful face.
               ¶ The aforesayde Anthony Smyth of Much Horkesley husbandman and his wyfe, were both maryed to others before, and haue had dyuers chyldren, but this deformed childe is the fyrst that the sayd Anthony and his wyfe had betwene them two, it is a man chylde. This chylde was begot out of matrimony, but borne in matrimonye. And at the makynge hereof was liuing, and like to continue.
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London in Fletestrete nere to S. Dunstons church by Thomas Marshe.
         
      
   