
      
         
            
            
            
               The Groome-porters lawes
at Mawe, to be obſerued in fulfilling the
due orders of the Game.
               
               1. IF you chaunge hands, it is the loſſe of the Set,
               2. If you renounce, it is the loſſe of the Set.
               3. If you leade when your Mate ſhoulde, it is the loſſe of
that game and vied cardes.
               4. If you loſe dealing, it is the loſſe of fower cardes, but if the loſer of
the dealing deale not againe, you acquite the fower, and no gaine
to either of both parties.
               5. If you looke either on ye aſked carde, or the bottome carde, it is the
loſſe of that game and vied cardes, in whom the fault is found.
               6. If you roub (not hauing the Ace) you loſe fower, & al the vied cards
although you lay downe the ſame carde which you tooke vp.
               7. If you make out the carde when your Mate rubbeth it is the loſſe
of fower, for the roubber muſt make out the carde himſelfe.
               8. If you turne vp the Ace of Hartes you gaine fower thereby.
               9. If you turne vp the Ace of Hartes, and thereby make either partie
aboue xxvi. the contrary part muſt haue Liuings, but if the contrary
parte bee xxv. by meanes whereof Liuings ſets them out,
then is he who turned vp the Ace of Hartes to make for the Set,
ſo that he make not one Game nor the firſt Tricke, without the
conſent of both parties.
               10. The partie that aſketh a carde, may not vie any carde, before the
firſt tricke be played.
               11. You may not vie it after your card is led, but the cōtrary part may.
               12. Three cardes croſſed, no carde by any meanes giuen backe.
               13. Neither partie may giue backe his owne vied card, though none be
croſſed.
               14. You may not aſke a carde to ſet the contrary parte or your ſelfe at
Liuings or out.
               15. Prouided alwaies, that if the contrary parte bee xxiii. or aboue, by
reaſon that fower ſets the other partie behinde the Liuinges, it
ſhalbe lawfull for the partie which is behinde to aſke a carde, although
the carde ſo aſked put the other to Liuings.
               16. Prouided alſo that if you meane to lead a helpe, you may vie it vpon
your owne aſked carde, ſo as it be done before the helpe be out of
your hand, the contrary part may pledge you a card after he ſeeth
your helpe vpon the boord, ſo as it be done before his owne card
be played.
            
         
      
   