
      
         
            
            
            Another godly Letter, lately written to the ſame H H by his owne Siſter
out of the Countrey, about eighty miles from London.
            GOod brother: I bleſſe God that yet I ſee your hand writing: by which his mercy appeareth,
in ſparing you and yours, among Thowſands that fall on your right hand and
on your left, in this heauie viſitation of Gods diſpleaſure: which goodnes of his in yet
ſparing you; my hope is you eſteeme according to the worth thereof, and make that holy
uſe of the ſame which God expects, and his Miniſters every where with earneſtneſſe call
vpon vs all for: namely, to ſearch and try our hearts and waies, and to turne from all our
ſins of heart and life, and to renew our vowes of better obedience for time to come. The
further meditations of theſe moſt neceſſarie things, I commend to your moſt ſerious
thoughts, as things moſt precious and requiſite for theſe times: in which moſt weighty
buſineſſe, I as your vnfained louing ſiſter ſhall, as I am able, continually pray God to aſſiſt
you, and in the performance of that which may in this kind bee acceptable in his ſight,
in Ieſus Chriſt: As alſo that hee would, as it may ſtand with his Glory, ſpare you
in this common Viſitation: However, to ſanctifie it, both in the feare of it, or inflicting of
it: ſo as euery way his fauour may be diſcerned, to the peace and comfort of your ſoule: To
which end, the All-ſufficient protection of the Almightie in mercy and goodneſſe be euer
vouchſafed vnto you and all yours: And let my ſiſter, your wife, know in particular that
in all good wiſhes I remember her equall with your ſelfe; and muſt to you both reſt a great
debtor for much loue.
            For vs here (in the Country, where I now am) I praiſe God we are all in bodily health:
my ſelfe and company that parted from you, came hither ſafe on Saturday at three of the
clock in the morning; hauing ridden all night, in regard that we could not bee lodged at
D. where we thought to haue lyen: of which you may heare more hereafter: But beſides
our ſelues we had very good company, which made our nights trauell very pleaſant to vs.
Brother, my brothers and ſiſters here doe all wiſh you well, and pray for you and yours; eſpecially
our deare mother, who wiſheth it could bee any wayes conuenient that you and
yours, I meane your wife, were here: though indeed my fathers houſe is already very full;
howeuer, you want not our aged Parents prayers and bleſſing, which they ſend you, and
their loue to your wife; and our good mother beſeecheth you both with teares to
loue and cheriſh each other in the Lord, that whatſoeuer hand of his may befall you:
yet it may bee ſweetned by your mutuall vndergoing it with patience and comfort:
and ſo once more I beſeech the Lord to ſtabliſh your hearts in his feare: And
with you to bee good to your afflicted Citie, and purge it by this Viſitation: and prepare
vs here in C. for the like: for it is to bee feared wee may not long ſcape: Wee had here
on Wedneſday laſt the Faſt kept publikely as in London: and before, I did pertake with M.
F. in what he did priuately for preparation to the publike Exerciſes. Good brother, commend
mee to all your neighbours and friends that I know, which you thinke will accept
the ſame from mee: by name M. D. and his wife, M. L. and his, &c. Thus haue I ſeamblingly
imparted vnto you, in haſt, my mind, and how things are with vs here: Accept all
in good will, and whiles we liue let vs loue; that come life or death we may bee ſo linked
that death may not ſeparate vs: And whiles God ſpares you, let me I pray ſee your hand to
my ſelfe; which be aſſured I will take kindly: commend mee to little S. for whoſe mothers
death, and that further Viſitation I am not vnſenſible, in regard of my ſiſter your wife: but
ſhe is diſcreet; whom with your ſelfe once againe I commit to Gods mercy. Iuly 22. 1625.
            Reſting
Your true louing Siſter,
A. H.
            
         
      
   