
      
         
            
            
               
THE KINGS PROphecie: OR VVeeping Ioy.
            
            Expreſſed in a Poeme, to the Honor of Englands too great Solemnities.
            Ioſ. Hall.
            
            LONDON Printed by T. C. for Symon Waterſon.
            1603.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE KINGS PROPHECY or weeping Ioy.
            
            
               1.
               WHat Stoick could his ſteely breſt containe
               (If Zeno ſelf, or who were made beſide
               Of tougher mold) from being torne in twaine
               With the croſſe Paſſions of this wondrous tide?
               Grief at ELIZAES toomb, orecomne anone
               With greater ioy at her ſucceeded throne?
            
            
               2.
               Me ſeems the world at once doth weep & ſmile,
               Waſhing his ſmiling cheeks with weeping dew,
               Yet chearing ſtill his watered cheeks the while
               With merry wrinckles that do laughter ſhew;
               Amongſt the reſt, I can but ſmile and weepe,
               Nor can my paſſions in cloſe priſon keepe.
            
            
               
               3.
               Yet now, when Griefe and Ioy at once conſpire
               To vexe my feeble minde with aduerſe might,
               Reaſon ſuggeſts not words to my deſire,
               Nor daines no Muſe to helpe me to endite;
               So doth this ciuil ſtrife of Paſſions ſtrong,
               Both moue and marre the meaſures of my ſong.
            
            
               4.
               For long agone, when as my weaker thought
               Was but aſſaylde with change of Ioy & paine:
               I wont to finde the willing Muſe vnſought,
               And vent my numbers in a plenteous vaine,
               Whether I wiſht to write ſome loftie verſe,
               Or with ſad lines would ſtraw ſome ſable hearſe.
            
            
               
               5.
               So, when but ſingle Paſſions in the field
               Meet Reaſon ſage; ſoone as ſhe liſt aduance
               Her awful head; they needs muſt ſtoop, & yeeld
               Their rebell armes to her wiſe gouernance:
               Whence, as their mutin'drage did raſhly riſe
               Ylike by Reaſons power it cowardly dies.
            
            
               6.
               But when that Paſſions ranke arayes beſet
               Reaſon alone, without or friend, or Fere,
               Who wonders if they can the conqueſt get
               And reaue the crown her royal head did weare?
               Goe yet tumultuous lines, and tydings bring
               What Paſſion 
                     〈◊〉
                   in Reaſons ſilence ſing.
            
            
               
               7.
               Oft did I wiſh the cloſure of my light,
               Before the dawning of that fearfull day
               Which ſhould ſucceed Elizaes lateſt night,
               Sending her glorious ſoule from this ſad clay,
               Vp to a better crowne then erſt ſhe bore
               Vpon her weary browes, and Temples hoare:
            
            
               8.
               For then I fear'd to finde the frowning skie
               Cloathed in diſmall black, and dreadfull red,
               Then did I feare this earth ſhould drenched lie
               With purple ſtreames in ciuil tumults ſhed:
               
                  Caeſar & Pompey. Like when of yore in th'old Pharſalian downes,
               The two croſſe Eagles grapled for the crowne.
            
            
               
               9.
               Or when the riper Engliſh Roſes grew
               On ſundrie ſtalks, from one ſelfe roote yſprung, Lanc. & Yorke.
               
               And ſtroue ſo lōg for praiſe of fairer hew,
               That milliōs of our Sires to death were ſtung
               With thoſe ſharp thornes that grew their ſweets beſide
               Or ſuch, or worſe I ween'd ſhould now betide.
            
            
               10.
               Nor were leud hopes ought leſſer thē my dread,
               Nor leſſe their Triumphs then my plained woe,
               Triumphs, and Plaints for great Eliza dead;
               My dread, their hope for Englands ouerthrow:
               I fear'd their hopes, & waild their pleaſāt cheare,
               They triumpht in my griefes, & hop't my feare.
            
            
               
               II.
               Waiting for flames of cruell Martyrdome,
               Alreadie might I ſee the ſtakes addreſt,
               And that ſtale ſtrumpet of imperious Rome,
               
               Hie mounted on her ſeuen-headed beaſt,
               Quaffing the bloud of Saints in boules of gold,
               Whiles all the ſurplus ſtaines the guiltles mold.
            
            
               12.
               Now might I ſee thoſe ſwarmes of Locuſts ſent,
               
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   Hell's curſed off-ſpring, hyred ſlaues of Spaine,
               
               Till the world ſawe, and ſcorned their intent,
               Of a ſworne foe to make a Soueraigne;
               How could but terrour with his colde affright
               Strike my weake breſt vpon ſo ſad foreſight?
            
            
               
               13.
               Tho on that day before the world began
               
                  Eliza dyde, and with the cloſing yeare March. 25.
               
               Her dayes vpcloſde; when I the light did ban,
               And chide the Heauens that they left not there:
               And thought it wrōg (yet God that thought forefended)
               That the worlds courſe with her courſe was not ended.
            
            
               14.
               Now, not moe worlds could hire my cloſed light
               Ere but the ſetting of that Euen-ſun,
               Which late her breathing ſawe with beames ſo bright,
               And early riſing found her life for done;
               Ah moſt vnhappie wights that went beforne,
               That dyde ere this, or that are yet vnborne!
            
            
               
               15.
               Oh turned times beyond all mortall feare,
               Beyond all mortall hopes! Not till this day
               Began the fulneſſe of our bliſſe appeare;
               Which dangers dimmed erſt with freſh diſmay:
               Still euer checking ioy with ſeruile care,
               Still charging vs for Tragick times prepare.
            
            
               16.
               Falſe ſtarres, and falſer wiſards that foreſaine
               By their aſpects the ſtate of earthly things:
               How bene your bold predictions proued vaine,
               That here brake off the race of Brittiſh Kings?
               Which now alone began; when firſt we ſee
               Faire Britaine formed to a Monarchie.
            
            
               
               17.
               How did I better long agone preſage,
               (That ioyes me ſtill I did preſage ſo right)
               When in the wardſhip of my weaker age Virgils fourth Egloge tranſlated and applyed to the birth of Hen. the prince.
               
               My puiſ-ne Muſe preſumed to recite
               The vatick lines of that Cumean Dame,
               (Which Maro falſely ſung to Pollios name)
            
            
               18.
               To the deare Natals of thy princely ſonne,
               O dreadeſt Soueraigne; in whoſe timely birth
               Mee ſeem'd I ſawe this golden age begonne,
               I ſawe this wearie loade of Heauen and Earth
               Freſhly reuiu'd, rouze vp his fainting head,
               To ſee the ſweete hopes this day promiſed.
            
            
               
               19.
               And now I liue (I wiſht to liue ſo long
               Till I might ſee theſe golden dayes ſucceed,
               And ſolemne vow'd that mine eternall ſong
               Should ſound thy name vnto the future ſeed)
               I liue to ſee my hopes; ô let me liue
               Till but my vowed verſe might me ſuruiue.
            
            
               20.
               So may thy worth my lowly Muſe vpraiſe,
               So may mine hie-vp-raiſed thoughts aſpire
               That not thy Bartas ſelfe, whoſe ſacred layes
               The yeelding world doth with thy ſelfe admire,
               Shal paſſe my ſōg, which nought cā reare ſo hye,
               Saue the ſweete influence of thy gracious eye.
            
            
               
               21.
               Meane while, amongſt thoſe throngs of Poeſies
               Which now each triuial Muſe dares harſhly ſing
               This vulgar verſe ſhall feed plebeian eies,
               Nor preaſe into the preſence of my King;
               So may it ſafely praiſe his abſent name;
               That neuer preſent tongue did voyd of blame.
            
            
               22.
               Well did the wiſe Creator, when he laid
               Earth's deepe foundations, charge the watery maine,
               This Northerne world ſhould by his waues be made
               Cut frō the reſt, and yet not cut in twaine
               Diuided, that it might be bleſt alone,
               Not ſundred, for this fore-ſet vnion.
            
            
               
               23.
               For here he ment in late ſucceeding time,
               To ſeat a ſecond Paradiſe below;
               Or for compoſed temper of the Clyme,
               Or thoſe ſound blaſts the clenſing North doth blow.
               
                  Britaine compared with the olde Paradiſe Or, for he ſawe the ſinfill continent
               Should with contagious vice be ouerwent.
            
            
               24.
               
                  1 Riuers of Paradiſe. For great Euphrates and the ſwelling Nile,
               
               With Tigris ſwift; he bad the Ocean hoare
               Serue for the great moate of the greateſt Ile,
               
                  2 Word and Sacram: And waſh the ſnowy rocks of her ſteepe ſhore
               As for that tree of life faire Edens pride,
               Hee ſet it in our mids, and euery ſide.
            
            
               
               25.
               From oft attempted, oft repulſed ſpight
               More then one Angell gards our ſafer gate;
               Nought wāts of higheſt bliſſe, & ſweet'ſt delight
               That euer was attaind by mortall ſtate.
               But that giues life to all, and all exceeds
               He ſets his princely Image in his ſteed.
            
            
               26.
               His liuely Image, in whoſe awfull face
               Appeare deepe ſtamps of dreadfull maieſtie,
               Whoſe glorious beames from his diuiner grace
               Dazle the weake, and dim the bolder eye.
               Mercie ſits on his brow; and in his breſt
               Vnder his Lions paw, doth courage reſt.
            
            
               
               27.
               Deepe wiſedome doth adorne his princely head,
               Iuſtice his hand, his lips graue Eloquence,
               And that which ſeld in Princes breſt is bred,
               (The Princes greateſt praiſe, and beſt defence)
               Pureſt religion hath his heart poſſeſt.
               O Iland more then fortunate and bleſt.
            
            
               28.
               Heauens chiefeſt care, Earth's ſecond Paradiſe,
               Wonder of Times, chiefe boaſt of Natures ſtile,
               Enuy of Nations, preſident of bliſſe,
               Miſtreſſe of Kingdomes, Monarch of all Iles;
               World of this world, & heauen of earth; no leſſe
               Can ſerue to ſhadow out thine happineſſe.
            
            
               
               29.
               Thou art the worlds ſole glory, he is thine;
               Frō him thy praiſe is fetcht, the worlds frō thee,
               His from aboue; So the more famous bene
               His rareſt graces, more thy fame ſhall bee.
               The more thy fame growes on, the fairer ſhew
               His heauenly worth ſhal make to forraign view.
            
            
               30.
               Like when by night, amids the clenſed skie,
               The Suns faire ſiſter by her louely rayes
               Gathers a circled Halo vp on hie,
               Of kindly vapours that her ſpouſe did raiſe:
               Shee thus incloſ'd in her cleare ouall round,
               Doubles her light vnto the gazing ground.
            
            
               
               31.
               But for the onely bane of bleſſed ſtate
               Is ignorance of bliſſe; let mee deare Dread
               For thy diuiner Oracles relate
               The ſum of thoſe ſweet hopes that long haue fed
               Thy liegeſt Nation; Pardon thou the while
               Mine high attempt, harſh verſe, and ruder ſtile.
            
            
               32.
               And yet thriſe happy mates, whō that great king
               Endowes with equall peace: ſo more his raigne
               Aboue your hopes, eternall comfort bring
               To your late Nephewes race; as ye may daigne
               Credulous eares to my Prophetick lines,
               Truer thē thoſe were fetcht frō 
                  Delphick ſhrines.
            
            
               
               33.
               He that giues crownes (as crowns frō heau'n are sent The ſum of Bazil. Doron drawne in forme of prophecy into verſe.
               
               Not ſince the day that Iſhay's yongeſt ſon
               Roſe from the fold; hath euer yet beſprent
               With the ſweet oyle of ſacred vnction
               An holyer head: then that this preſent day
               The weight of Englands roial crown doth ſway.
            
            
               34.
               Nor can his ſubjects more him feare or loue,
               (Loyall their loue, and lowly is their feare)
               Then he ſhall loue and feare his King aboue,
               Whoſe name, place, Image, Scepter he doth bear,
               Religions ſpring, Autumne of Hereſie,
               Winter of Atheiſme his raigne ſhall bee.
            
            
               
               35.
               And thou great Rome, that to the Martian plaine
               Long ſince didſt lowly ſtoope; and leaue for lore
               Thy loftie ſeate of Hils: ſhalt once againe
               Creepe lower to the ſhade of Tybers ſhore:
               Yet lower ſhall his Arme thy ruines fell,
               Downe from thy Tyber into loweſt Hell.
            
            
               36.
               Not number ſhall, but weight his lawes cōmend;
               Which wiſely made, ſhall iuſtly be maintain'd,
               His gentle brows ſhal firſt ſeuerely bend
               And lowre at vice: whoſe courſe eftſoones reſtraind
               They ſmooth ſhal wax again; mixing by meſure
               Ounces of grace, with drams of iuſt diſpleaſure.
            
            
               
               37.
               So haue I ſeene a Morne of chearefull May
               Orecaſt with clouds to threatē ſormfull ſtoures,
               Which yet ere Noone, hath prou'd the cleareſt day:
               Whiles brighter morns haue broght vs euening ſhoures;
               His frownes ſhall fright the ill; his mercious cic
               Shall raiſe the humble ſoule of Modeſtie.
            
            
               38.
               The treble miſchiefe that was wont infeſt
               Our holy ſtate (ah me what ſtate can miſſe
               Some ſtaine of natiue ill) ſhall be redreſt
               By timely care: and now ſhall fairely riſe
               The noble name of our diuiner trade,
               From out the duſt wherein it long hath laid.
            
            
               
               39.
               Longlay it in the duſt of wrong diſdaine;
               Expoſ'd to euery raſcall Peſants ſpight:
               O times! but now, were beſt my rage containe
               Vntill I mought a ſecond Satyre write.
               But ah fond threat, as if theſe mended daies
               Would once deſerue the brand of my diſpraiſe?
            
            
               40.
               Nor ſhall the Lordly Peeres once ouerlooke
               Their humble vaſſals dwelling all below:
               Like as we ſee ſome large out-ſpreading Oke
               Ore-drop the ſilly ſhrubs that vnder grow.
               Nor noble bloud ſhall want true honors fee,
               Whiles it ſhall light on Groomes of low degree
            
            
               
               41.
               Nor now the greedy Merchant that for gaine
               Sailes to both Poles, & ſounds both Indian ſeas
               Whe his long beaten bark from forth the maine
               Vnlades her weary fraight; ſhall as he pleaſe
               Raiſe by exceſſiue rate his priuate ſtore,
               And to enrich himſelfe make thouſands poore.
            
            
               42.
               Vnder the ſafer ſhadow of his wing
               Shall exilde Aliens ſhroud their reſtleſſe head;
               And here alone ſhall forced exile bring
               Better contentment to the baniſhed
               Then home-ſmelt ſmoke; O I land kind & free
               In fauouring thoſe that once befrended thee.
            
            
               
               43.
               And for the Princes eye doth life inſpire
               To loyall breſts (like as the vernall ſunne
               Cheares the reuiued earth with friendly fires
               That luſtles lies when thoſe hote rayes are gone)
               Oft ſhall his preſence bleſſe our hungry eyes,
               To our Horizon oft this ſunne ſhall riſe.
            
            
               44.
               For ere the worlds great lamp ſhal thriſe decline
               Into his Southern ſpherc, and thriſe retyre
               Vp to the turning of his Northern line,
               Our ſecond Sunne ſhall in his earthly gyre
               Turn once to al the realms his light doth guide;
               And yet obſerue his yearly race beſide.
            
            
               
               45.
               Then ſhall my Suffolke (Englands Eden hight
               As England is the worlds) be ouer bleſt
               And ſurfet of the ioy of that deare ſight
               Whoſe pleaſing hope their harts ſo long poſſeſt
               Which his great Name did with ſuch triumph greet
               When erſt it loudly ecchoed in our ſtreet.
            
            
               46.
               And thou, renowmed Drury mongſt the reſt,
               Aboue the reſt; whether thee ſtill detaine,
               The ſnowy Alpes, or if thou thoughteſt it beſt
               To truſt thy ſpeed vnto the watery playne,
               Shalt him receiue; he thee, with ſuch ſweet grace
               As may beſeeme thy worth and noble race.
            
            
               
               47.
               The yron doores of Ianus by his hand
               Shall faſt be bard; vnleſſe ſome hoſtile might
               (If any hoſtile might dares him withſtand)
               Shall break thoſe bars; and boldly ſhall excite
               Our ſleeping Lyon; who but once awoke
               Woe to the wight that did his wrath prouoke.
            
            
               48.
               Wiſe and not wrongfull Stratagems ſhall ſpeed
               His juſteſt warre, and ſtraiter diſcipline
               Shal guide the war like troupes himſelf ſhal lead
               To doubtfull field; O let the ſhield diuine
               Protect my Lieges head; and from on hie
               Let it be girt with crownes of victorie.
            
            
               
               49.
               His frequent Court (yet feare I to fore-ſaine
               Too much of Princes courts, which ages paſt
               Haue long ſince noted with the ſecret ſtaine
               Of wanton daliance and luxurious waſt)
               His Court ſhall be a church of Saints: quite free
               From ſilth, exceſſe and ſeruile flattery.
            
            
               50.
               Hence ye falſe Paraſites, whoſe only guiſe
               Is feeding Princes eares with wrongful praiſes,
               And euer who mought hope to honor riſe,
               By what large bribes their leuder brocage raiſes.
               The Courtiers onely grace ſhal henceforth lie
               In learning, wiſedome, valour, honeſtie.
            
            
               
               51.
               O Court fit for thy King; and like to none
               But heauens Court, where nought impure may bide;
               Like as thy King reſembleth God alone,
               For ſuch on earth were vaine to ſeeke beſide.
               Well might I here his vertues rolle rehearſe,
               But them his life ſpeakes better then my verſe.
            
            
               52.
               Yet let me not thy learned Muſe omit,
               The onely credit of our ſcorned skill,
               Redoubted Liege; whoſe rarely poliſht writ
               Sauors of long ſleep in that ſacred hill;
               Looke that the Muſes all ſhall once agree,
               As thou haſt honor'd them, to honor thee.
            
            
         
      
   