
      
         
            
            
            EPICEDIVM, A Funerall Song, vpon the vertuous life, and godly death, of the right vvorſhipfull the Lady Helen Branch.
            
            Virtus ſola manet, caetera cuncta ruunt.
            LONDON Printed by Thomas Creede. 1594.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            EPICEDIVM, In obitum illustriſſimae mulieris dominae Helenae Branch, vxoris multum venerandi equitis Iohannis Branch, quondam pernobilis ciuitatis Londini Maioris perquam honorabilis.
            
               YOu that to ſhew your wits haue taken toyle, 
               In regiſtring the deeds of noble men:
               And ſought for matter in a forraine ſoyle,
               (As worthie ſubiects of your ſiluer pen)
               Whom you haue raiſ'd from darke obliuions den.
               You that haue writ of chaſte Lucretia,
               
               Whoſe death was witneſſe of her ſpotleſſe life:
               Or pend the praiſe of ſad Cornelia,
               
               Whoſe blameleſſe name hath made her fame ſo rife:
               As noble Pompeys moſt renoumed wife.
               Hither vnto your home direct your eies:
               Whereas vnthought on, much more matter lies.
            
            
               Matter that well deſerues your golden ſtile,
               And ſubſtance that will fit your ſhadowes right,
               Whereon his wits a Scholler well may file:
               Whereof a Poet needs not bluſh to write,
               When ſtrangers cau
                     ••
                  s ſhould be baniſht quite.
               And this bright Comet▪ of whoſe ſplendant raies,
               My too-vnworthie pen ſhall giue a ſight,
               A Ladie was of whoſe deſerued praiſe
               A farre more learned Artiſt ought to write:
               Leſſe wits ſhould ſpeake of ſtarres of leſſer light.
               Yet ſince their waies, by her light many finde,
               I (mongſt the reſt) may ſhew my thankfull minde.
            
            
               
               When firſt her life gaue eſſence to her light,
                She was the daughter of a worthie fire,
               And Willi
                        •
                     m Nicolſon his name it hight:
               To whom dame Fortune gaue his hearts deſire,
               Rich, and yet free from haut ambitions fire:
               Yea double rich by ſuch an ofſpring faire,
               Who from her cradle, and yoong infancie
               Gaue certaine augures of her vertues rare,
               And what a matron ſhe in time would be:
               Her ſeemely graces wrought her fathers glee.
               And for her beautie he gaue her the name
               Of her, whom Troy did make ſo much of fame.
            
            
               Only her face vnto her name was like,
               Her vertues rather ſhone like Phoebes pride,
                Or her whoſe ſhaft did raſh Acteon ſtrike,
               When from his light her ſelfe ſhe ſought to hide.
               Well might ſhe vaunt of Iudiths wit beſide,
               Nor was Pollixena ſo much admir'de
               For maydens bluſh, and ſeemely modeſtie:
               Nor faire Virginia halfe ſo much deſir'de
               For comely grace, and ciuill curteſie:
               As ſhe was praiſde of high and low degree.
               As hard it was her conſtancy to moue,
               As Cleopatra from Anthonius loue.
            
            
               And thus ſhe liu'd (whiles ſhe a mayd did liue)
               Till fathers care, and maydens ripened yeares,
               Did to a worthie man as wife her giue:
               Like taketh like, all ages ch
                     •
                  oſe their peeres,
               And now do end her parents cares, and feares:
               For as her life did make them happie deem'd,
               And as her bliſſe did make to thriue their ioyes,
               So by her loſſe they had vnhappie ſeem'd,
               And her miſhaps had fram'd their dyre annoyes:
               The husbandman his fields for corne imployes.
               And happie he, who from his happie ſeed,
               Doth reape a great grandfathers name, for meed.
            
            
               
               
                  Iohn Mynors was her louing husband cald, 
               Who bleſt her aged parents by his ſonne:
               And with three daughters more their ioyes enſtald:
               (But foule oft falles, vvhen faire is vvell begun) 
               For long theſe liu'd not but their glaſſe vvas run.
               We daily ſee vvhen Phoebus in the skie
               Is higheſt mounted, ſtraight he gins deſcend:
               And vvhen good-haps do ſit ſo vvondrous high,
               They muſt decline (although not haue an end)
               For each extreame, of force muſt paire, or mend.
               Tis better alvvaies bide calamitie,
               Then once feele, ioyes and then taſte miſerie.
            
            
               They gone, vvith them vvas gone the fathers bliſſe,
               And with his bliſſe, the mothers comfort goes:
               And vvith her comfort vvent her husbands miſſe,
               And by his miſſe, increaſt her treble vvoes.
               On vvhat vvorlds prop, may man his truſt repoſe?
               The yoonger graſſe doth vvither ere the hay,
               The ſtronger flieth, and leaues the vveake behinde,
               The childes life ere the fathers flits avvay,
               The huſband dies, ere vvife hath death aſſignde,
               Daughters ſonne, huſband dead, ſhe life doth finde.
               Yet dide her ioyes: the mirth vvhich ſhe could haue,
               Was vvith her teares, to vvaſh their thirſtie graue.
            
            
               Novv (like to her vvho drunke her huſbands duſt) 
               She for her huſband, lou'd her huſbands trade,
               A Chronicle of vvhich needs be they muſt,
               VVho by that loue full vvealthy haue bene made:
               The vvitneſſe liues, the fame then cannot fade.
               And like to them vvho do adopt ſucceſſors)
               She, for her children, did regard the poore,
               Of vvhom there liue, that may be iuſt profeſſors,
               VVho oft haue bene relieued at her doore,
               Nor this vvas all, for they haue had much more▪
               
               For Chriſt his vvill ſhe executed faithfully,
               Priſon'd, ſicke, naked, poore, ſhe gaue his legacie.
            
            
               
               And thus ſhe liu'd (whilſt widow ſhe did liue,)
               Till husbands death, and widowes dried teares
               Were almoſt out of minde, and griefe did giue
               A place vnto the courſe of ſome ſpent yeares.
               (Vnwiſe whoſe houſe doth fall and no new reares,)
                Then was ſhe grafted in a worthie ſtemme,
               And of a green-leau'd Branch the bloſſome prou'd
               To him more deare, then was the richeſt gemme:
               And ſo togither they both liu'd and lou'd,
               And ſtill her Orphanes care the mother mou'd.
               For though nor Branch, nor bloſſome frute did beare,
               Yet both in good workes alwaies fruitfull were.
            
            
               In time this Branch ſo farre abroad did ſpread,
               That ouer London it did caſt his ſhade:
               (A neaſt where many vertuous birds are bred)
               Of whom, ſome on this Branch their neaſts haue made:
               Long flouriſh may his leaues, and neuer fade.
               And though the ſtocke, the Branch, the bloſſom ſweete
               Wants ſap, is withered, and is falne away,
                Yet doth a yoong plant, ſpring vp at their feete,
               Which ſhall their greene leaues vp in ſafetie laie,
               And they vnſcattered, maugre blaſts ſhall ſtaie.
               Yea from the roote, the iuyce this plant hath gotten,
               Shall make them flouriſh, when their roote is rotten.
            
            
               The Branch being dead, the bloſſome gan to droupe,
               Like to a parcht flower in the dogdayes rage:
               The 
                     •
                  hepheard fled, toth' wolfe the lambs muſt ſtoupe,
               Youths heate being paſt, there's ſmall reſiſt in age:
               And now no comfort could her cares aſſwage.
               Yet ſtill in vertuous deeds ſhe ſpent her daies,
               Poore virgins thereof ſtill can make report,
               Thoſe naked perſons well may tell her praiſe,
               Whom ſhe hath cloathed in a ſeemely ſo
                     •
                  t:
               (Surely a treaſure laid in a ſtrongeſt 
                     •
                  o
                     •
                  t)
               But now hath death cut off her ve
                     •
                  tues prime,
                In ripened harueſt of her golden time.
            
            
               
               Her faithfull end, was like her godly life, 
               Wedn'ſday the tenth of Aprill, and no more
               It was, when as was ſeene her breaths laſt ſtrife:
               The yeare was fifteene hundreth, ninetie foure,
               And gratefull Abchurch hath her bones in ſtore. 
               You two ſtrong props that vnderſhore the vine,
               From whoſe ripe cluſters ſweeteſt Nectar flowes, 
               Whereof do drinke, the famous Muſes nine,
               Performe more full, what dutie doth impoſe,
               Bring hither Cypres ſad, ſee where it growes.
               Embalme with Mirrhe, and ſticke with Roſemarie,
               
               
                  Time is the onely hearbe which reſts for me.
            
            
               Quae te propellat (nimium propenſa)
               Cura mors? O te properans veloci
               Penna quis turbet? Dare terga cogat
               Quod medicamen?
            
            
               Aequè tu regis deruis ſuperbi
               Regias, & ſic inopum cucumas.
               Cura ſunt morti iuuenes ſeneſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
               
               Semper eadem.
            
            
               Sola poſt mortem, remanet in aeuum
               Virtus, quae nunquam peritura probis,
               Fama floreſcet, licet ipſa cumbunt
               Corpora in vrnis.
            
            
               W. Har.
            
            FINIS.





            
         
      
   