
      
         
            
            
            THE BVRNING BVSH, NOT CONSVMED
            Wherein (eyther vnder all deepe ſenſe of Wrath; or hardneſſe of Heart, one may iudge, whether he be the Childe of God, or not, &c. Chiefly receyuing ſatiſfaction concerning the Sinne against the Holy Ghoſt.
            
               Peruſed by I. D. ond diuers other Diuines.
            
            
            Iudge nothing before the time. Secret things belong vnto God.
            
            
               
                  1. Theſſ. 5.9.
               
               For God hath not appointed vs to Wrath, but to obtaine ſaluation by our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, who died for vs, that whether we wake or ſleep, we ſhould liue together with him.
            
            
               LONDON, Printed by T. C. and B. A. for Roger Iackſon, and are to be ſolde at his ſhoppe in Fleet-ſtreete, ouer againſt the great Conduite. 1616.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, M. WILLIAM TOTHIL, and M. FRANCIS DRAKE, Eſquiers, Iuſtices of the Peace, &c. and to the no leſſe religious and vertuous Gentlewomen, Mrs. KATHERINE TOTHIL, and Mrs. IOAN DRAKE, their wiues, the increaſe and perpetuitie of all Happineſſe, &c.
            
            
               Right Worſhipfull,
            
            
               AS my wandering thoughtes were muſing which way I might beſt acknowledge with perpetuall thankes, that duetie which my beſt loue

oweth vnto your many vndeſer-ued by-paſt kindeneſſes: this little Booke (then readie for the Preſſe,) did ſteppe foorth, proffering ſo to accompliſh my deſire, as that nothing (ſaue timeleſſe Time in the generall diſſolution) ſhould bee able quite to blotte out, and deface the memory of this my wiſh: which ſince it hath nowe ſo faithfully performed, I beſeeche you to accept thereof: that like vnto PHILIPS little Boy) it may put you in minde, not onely that there is a terrible endleſſe wrath prepared for wilfull, finall, impenitent ſinners: but alſo that (if need bee) it may helpe you how to ſhunne the ſame.
            Gladly it would haue ſingled foorth ſome one of you, but that the ſtrict bonds both of Nature and grace, which in loue hath ſo vnited you (as though you had but one ſoule) did ſtrictly forbid the ſame: wiſhing me rather, that (ſince ſuch a faſt Gordian knotte had

alreadie tyed your affections) I ſhould likewiſe doe my beſt to vnite you in a peece of Paper: Not that thereby I ſhould any thing adde vnto your happineſſe: (whoſe Cuppe already runneth ouer with a plentifull meaſure, preſſing downe of all bleſſings) but that thereby I might ſhewe, how farre my fainte and weake wiſhes extend: that as already vppon Earth, GOD hath buylt you a ſure Houſe vppon a Rocke, ſo alſo that you would endeauour to buylde your ſelues vppon the Rocke CHRIST IESVS: that at laſt when (at the all-ſhaking voyce of the Arch-Angell, and Trumpet of GOD, ſounding) downe-rayning Fire with floods of horrors, blowne with the tempeſtuous whyrlewinde of indignation, ſhall ouerwhelme the wicked, and ſeeme to doſſolue the whole frame of Nature: You (like his Doues) may finde a ſure ſhelter in the holes of this Rocke, vntill (Iudgement finiſhed,) with

all Saintes, you may mount with Him, to poſſeſſe for euer thoſe infinite vnſpeakeable Ioyes, the greatneſſe whereof can not bee knowne, vntill poſſeſſed.
            
               Yours in duty, much and euer bound, I. HART.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               TO ALL THOSE WHO EIther (for the preſent) Thunder-beaten with the terror of the wrath of GOD, mourne in ſecret, vnder any ſenſe of the ſame, or feele hardnes of heart, much Peace, Comfort, Softneſſe, and ſpeedy deliuerance.
            
            
               Deare Soules.
            
            
               THough I knowe aſſuredly that the plodding thoughts of both ſortes of you, to whom I now write, vſeth for the moſt part to be rapt vp; the one, with the imagination of Wraths all-ouerturning deluge which you feare, preſently to precipitate you, (as I thinke) in the eternall neuer dying furnace of all-deuouring flames: the other, with ſeeming ſubſtantiall thoughts (grounded vpon former and preſent ſtony impenitent effects) imagining your ſelues to be as ſure of reprobation, as thogh already (aſſured by ſome Angel of the Decree) Caines marke had ſealed you on the forehead, as ſheep to the ſlaughter: which now ſo tranſporteth your hopeleſſe ſoules beyond all limits of moderation, that you can lende your eares to heare no voyce, which ſoundeth not of Deſperation, becauſe eyther you

thinke it is too late, or in vaine, to vſe the meanes: or that Wraths ouerpreſſing load ſo keepeth you down in the flouds of ſorrowes, that you are not able to looke vp.
            Yet could I not chuſe but ſend vnto your view this little Treatiſe, which by (Gods prouidēce cōming into my hands) onely for your ſakes, did now ſee the light: wiſhing, that though (of all others) I was leaſt able to comfort you; yet, that therin you might finde a word in due time: which I know you ſhall, if you banniſh Carnall reaſon, Senſe, Curioſitie in prying into Gods Decree before you vſe the meanes; and that faſt rooted naturall Popery of the ſoule, which euer deſireth to finde ſomewhat in nature, ſome ſenſe, ſome feeling, ſome goodnes, wherewith to be worthy in ſome ſort, to lay holde of Chriſt.
            I ſhould exceede the limites of a ſhort Epiſtle (if I were able) to reckon vp the free proclamations of the booke of God; in all which, Chriſt in the Act of apprehending him, tyeth you vnto no condition, but freely to take and lay hold. It may be, you will obiect, that he calleth onely the weary and laden, and ſo you ſay you are not: but to leaue that queſtion, whether you bee laden or not, and who muſt be iudge, (ſince for the moſt part in temptation you belie your ſelues) who knoweth not that Chriſt in that place rather incourageth ſuch to come, then preciſely ſheweth, that onely thoſe who feele ſuch a burden, muſt,

and can come and lay holde. O that you were not thus iniurious to the peace of your ſoules, ſo much to relye vpon Senſe and feeling, ſo much debaſing the ſtrength and glorie of Faith, which many times without ſenſe (and beyond all reaſon) apprehendeth CHRIST: thus offering violence vnto his Kingdome: who thus apprehended, there followeth the ſpirit of Mourning, and Compaſſion, Feeling, and other graces.
            I wonder if the Diuell can once faſten this temptation vpon you, that you muſt haue ſuch and ſuch a meaſure of faith, feeling, and repentance, to lay holde of Chriſt, what meaſure his vnmeaſurable ſubtilty wil be contented with. Sure I am, if he may be vmpire, you may be diſſolued in teares and deſpaire, before he ſay hoe. Your ſtrongeſt let in laying hold of Chriſt (as may be ſeene by moſt of all your Obiections) ariſeth from your prying into the Decree of God, to be aſſured of your election: which becauſe you cannot finde, (iudging of your ſelues, according to your former actions, & thinking God like vnto you) you conclude all is in vaine, you knowe you are Reprobates: there is no hope: ſo entertaining all threatnings; and reiecting the Promiſes. Of which pretended knowledge, if you ſhould be examined by God (as Adam was) whence thus you knowe your ſelues to be naked Reprobates? I imagine your anſwere (with his) muſt needes bee, that Sathan hath deceyued and deluded

you ſo to thinke.
            And indeed the truth is, that the moſt part of you looke too much at the Decree of God; your meaſure of ſenſe and feeling, deſiring the aſſurance of ſaluation, as it were, at your firſt entrie into Chriſtianity: which is the glorious price and Crowne, wayting for you at the end of the race: If you ſo runne that you may obtaine.
            I knowe you would thinke him an vnreaſonable Souldier, who ſhould deſire to bee a Colonnell or a Generall the firſt yeare, which is not obtained without long ſeruice, great valour, much watching, wayting, and often hazard of life: And that your ſeruant would much diſpleaſe you, in demanding his yeeres wages before he had done a weekes worke. Iuſt ſo is your caſe, when at firſt you would bee aſſured of your Election and Saluation, before you haue done a quarter or half your work; (Nay ſomtimes ſcarſe begun the ſame) chiefly whē you refuſe the way of life, which is, to walke in the meanes, whereby onely wee attaine the aſſurance of ſaluation.
            It may bee you thinke mee a miſerable comforter, thus rather to croſſe you, then powre balme into your wounds, or bewaile your hardneſſe of Heart: but would to God you were not more iniurious then I, in robbing your ſelues of the ſtrong Tower of your ſaluation: I meane, of the way to lay holde on Chriſt for your life: For indeede ſo doe I pittie all of you,

that if my ſoule were able, and could diſſolue it ſelfe in teares for you, your ſorrowes would haue an ende: ſince I know, ſuch and ſo great is the inſupportable terrour of Gods wrath, chiefly, if hee (leading the maine battell of his forces) fight againſt you, as Ieremie ſpeaketh) in anger, in wrath, and in great indignation, that there is no creature but muſt ſinke vnder the ſame: but it is the concluſions ſome of you draw from thence, which I ayme at, and would willingly cut downe by the roote: viz: I feele no faith, therefore I haue none: I neuer had faith, therefore I ſhall neuer haue any: My former actions haue bene hypocriticall, therefore I am damned: my Feeling is loſt, therefore I ſhall neuer haue it againe: I neuer had feeling or ſenſe of Gods loue, therefore I ſhall neuer haue any: God is angry, therefore hee will neuer be appeaſed: the Sunne ſhineth not, therefore it will neuer ſhine: It is night, therefore it will neuer bee day: the heart was neuer moued, therefore it ſhall, and neuer can bee mooued: I haue thus, and thus long heard the word, and it hath not renued nor moued mee no more then a ſtone, therefore it ſhall and cannot, for ſuch a heart is immoueable: I am dead in ſinne, therefore I can neuer be aliue: God is gone, therefore hee will neuer come againe: The meanes harden mee more and more, therefore I will neuer heare no more: I cannot bring my he
                  •••
                in temper to ioyne with my voyce in prayer, the 
                  〈◊〉
                it is vaine

to bring words vnto God, offering outward ſubmiſſiue obedience: I cannot pay vnto one ten thouſand pounds which I owe him, therfore I will pay him neuer a penny: I cannot doe all I ſhould, therefore I will doe nothing: God neuer loued mee, therefore hee will neuer loue mee: I cannot repent, nor euer could, therefore I neither can nor ſhall: God in the terror of wrath appeareth my enemy, therefore hee will neuer haue mercie, &c: with a number the like abſurdities, the very naming whereof, may bee more then confutation ſufficient to any reaſonable creature not infected with the like follie.
            But ſpeake now (though I graunt vnto you all your grounds, many of which for the moſt parte, are falſe lyes) Why may not you hope to eſcape, as well as others before you? Who deliuered Dauid, Iob, Ioſeph, Moſes, Damell, &c. from daungers, terrors of ſoule, the Deuill, impriſonment, drowning, and Lyons den? but you ſay, that you are in the Furnace of his wrath. And why (with the three Children) may you not bee deliuered from this fiery furnace? GOD is the ſame ſtill (who as the Prophet ſpeaketh) euen in wrath remembers mercie: Therefore why may not your buſh burne, or (at leaſt) ſeeme to burne with fire, yet not be conſumed: ſince his mercies are ouer all his works? hee onely knowing what he hath decreed. And you, who are (for the preſent) bound vp in hardneſſe of heart, in the Name of GOD I beſeech you, let neuer

this voyce of deſperation come from you againe: (All is in vaine, there remaineth no hope:) What, is it poſſible, No hope? Is God in heauen, who is wonderfull in all his works? and doth abundantly aboue all that wee are able to thinke or ſpeake? and ſo long dare any little worme or piece of clay, (a little moate) nay not ſo much, in regard of him, who is all in all, to ſay there is no hope? Oh! there remaneth alwaies hope ſo long as we breath. For you knowe as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh: Hope that is ſeene is no hope: For how can a man hope for that which he ſeeth? ſo that hope aboue hope, is hope indeede. O hope ſtill to ſpeed as well as any hard-hearted who euer were called, as all haue beene before calling. When then after effectuall calling, you looke vpon Dauids ſecure ſleepe, and Salomons ſtrange hard-hearted declining from the wayes of God, with the wonderfull and hard-harted impietie of Manaſſeh, and Nebuchadnezzar, before calling: and the exceeding mercies of God vnto them: and diuers in our age, with (the good Thiefe) called home at the laſt houre: O learne to haue a good conceit of God. It was you know, the firſt thing that encouraged the prodigall ſonne to come home vnto his Father, becauſe he had a good conceit of him. Therefore, thinke you with him, the Heauenly Father hath receiued ſuch and ſuch exceeding ſinners into mercie. Though I haue run ryot, & ſtraied, yet haue I not gon ſo farre as they, or if I haue, yet I will ſubmit my ſelfe

vnto him, it may bee, hee will alſo be mercifull vnto mee. But what ſhall I ſay? It is God who muſt perſwade Iaphet to dwell in the Tents of Sem. It is hee who muſt caſt downe, perſwade, inlighten, drawe, inſtruct, teach, conuert, and inlarge our hearts, that wee may bee lifted vp, conſent, ſee, come, vnderſtand, bee taught, conuerted, and runne the wayes of his commandements, which that he would haſten in his own good time to doe, my fainte, fewe, colde, and weake petitions ſhall euer (to my power) beg for you.
            Onely now (for concluſion) my earneſt requeſt vnto you is, that ſince it is the cuſtom of moſt of you, either in reading the Scriptures, or anie other good booke) to reade vntil you find ſomewhat (in your iudgement) againſt you, and then cloſe the booke ſuddenly, as though nothing there did belong vnto you; that you would not ſo vſe this little enſuing Treatiſe: but rather before you Cenſure, to reade it quite through: reiecting whatſoeuer herein you find contrary either to the Word, or experience of the Faithfull: which if you ſhall doe, you ſhall bind me more then euer to remaine,
            
               Yours in the All-ſufficent, not-changing, wonderfull, EMANVEL. I. H.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            
            The Booke to the Reader, chiefly if thou be a Nicodemite.
            
            THy thoughts I know will straight inquire
            My Fathers Name with great deſire:
            Who if he pleaſe thee not, why then.
            The lines are rude, and nought the penne:
            But know thou muſt thy minde appeaſe;
            For though thou aske, I cannot eaſe
            Thy heart: therefore be thou content
            To feede on that which God hath ſent.
            And if I iumpe not with thy mind,
            Call me not therefore now vnkind,
            Who proffer thus to eaſe thy load
            Of ſorrow's on my ſhoulders broad:
            And if my lines ſeeme ſtrange and new,
            Remember how a learned lew
            Did wander, when Christ would him gaine,
            How any could be borne againe.
            Therefore though thou canſt not conceiue
            Theſe things, yet let me pray thee leaue,
            
               To ſay therefore no ſuch things are,
            Which doe ſurmount thy reaſon farre:
            But rather like a little child,
            Who is not with ſuch thoughts defil'd,
            Be thou content to paſſe that way
            Chriſt vs commaunds, though ſenſe ſay nay;
            And pray (though now thy eyes be blind)
            Him to enlighten yet thy mind
            And ſight, that thou mayeſt clear'ly ſee,
            Things yet not thought or knowne of thee;
            That with that mountaine-ſeeing man,
            Heau'ns Chariots thou may'ſt ſee and ſcan,
            And ſo confeſſe with others moe,
            Thus long, what blindnes kept thee ſo.
            But if thou be of gentle kind,
            With ſorrow's tam'd, and now not blind,
            My ſute is, though I ſtray and erre,
            (As mortals) yet thou would'ſt deferre
            Thy cenſure, to peruſe me quite,
            When, though I ſeeme not full perfite,
            Beleeue no more then doth agree
            With ſacred lore and veritie.
            Then this my paines ſhall counteruaile,
            If on my ſhame thou caſt a vaile.
         
         
            
            To the Right Worſhipfull, Maiſter William Tothil Eſquire, &c.
            SON.
            IN peace men vſe for to prouide for warre,
            Beſt Pylots doe waite for enſuing ſtorm's;
            Yea, euen this wiſedome is in ſillie worm's
            (Who though from reaſons reach they ſtray ſo farre,)
            In Summer ſtill for winter to prepare,
            So though your Sunne, Sir, now doe ſhine ſo cleare,
            That ſtorm's appeare not either farre or neare;
            Yet ſince experience hath found it ſo rare,
            To haue two heau'ns and in them both a ſtare:
            Long time without ſome croſſing gloom tonight;
            When Wraths heart gnawing fear's ſhall dim the ſight
            Of former grace, filling the minde with Care.
            Though ſtill I wiſh your mind free from ſuch fear's:
            Let this yet neere (if need be) ſtanch ſuch teares.
         
         
            
            To the right Worſhipfull, Miſtris Katherine Tothil, worthy of all reſpect.
            SON.
            HEau'n-ſhaking Wrath, pour'd out like flaming fire,
            Bending the rockes, tearing the hils aſunder,
            Toſſing the earth, and all things bringing vnder:
            Who would not from the ſame in haſte retire?
            Me thinkes I quake whil'st I the ſame admire;
            No wonder then ſuch wet their couch with teares,
            Who but in part conceiue theſe horride fear's,
            Not knowing where to ſhrowd them from his ire.
            A Fortreſſe ſtrong I know you wiſh to gaine,
            Whence ſinne and Satan you may both defie:
            Looke then in this where you your ſtate may trie,
            Freeing your ſelfe from feare of endleſſe paine:
            Much could I wiſh, but all muſt reſt in this,
            That euery thing may ſerue t' augment your bliſſe.
         
         
            
            To the Right Worſhipfull, Maiſter Francis Drake Eſquire, &c.
            
            SON.
            IF one Deuill loos'd ſo tortur-toſſe the minde,
            If Princes ire ſo vexe with thouſand cares:
            If croſſes here, ſo fill men with deſpaires:
            If ſo with tooth-ach, ſtone gowt, they are pin'd,
            If here ſterne conſcience gnawing worme ſo grind,
            What ſorrowes then in Wraths infernall caues,
            With matchleſſe might ſhall wound all Satans ſlaues?
            To blacknes, darknes, endleſſe woe confi'd?
            More, O! but when great iudgements voice ſhall ſound
            That laſt retreat, neuer to meete againe.
            Me think's I heare what ſhout's, what ſhrick's in vaine
            They bellow forth, to ſee the Saints ſo crown'd,
            Amongſt the beſt, Sir, this ſhall be your crowne,
            To mount with theſe, when thoſe ſhall be caſt downe.
         
         
            
            To the Right Worſhipfull, Miſtris Ioane Drake, worthy with the worthieſt.
            SON.
            WHilſt thoughts of flam's & not conſuming fire
            (Where tortur'd ſoul's howle, yel, crie, neuer die)
            Inflam'd with breath of Iah's deuouring ire,
            (That rents the rockes, and makes the mountaines flie)
            Did wound with feares my ſoule, yet you on hie,
            With Eagles wings I wiſh'd might mount away:
            Within the Vaile (at laſt) to dwell for aye:
            Such gnaſhing, laſhing, howling, nere to trie,
            Whil'ſt Sunne-ſhine light your face doth yet array,
            And Bridegroomes comming hath not ſhut the gate,
            That reſtleſſe cries, (which neuer came too late,)
            Might tempeſts ſtay, force heauen, and make you way.
            And (if you will beleeue me) heere I vow,
            My cenſer alwayes ſhall keepe Wrath from you.
         
         
            
            TO THE BOOKE.
            SON.
            HEnce, hence ſmal booke, thy foote ſteps ſee thou bend
            Vnto all ſuch whom Sathan luls aſleepe,
            Knocke hard rowze vp, tell them the day doth peepe
            Then vnto thoſe whoſe hearts all ſorrowes rend:
            That Wraths deluge hath meaſure, time and end,
            Tell them, and that though ſterne deuouring ire,
            Like thunders lightning ſeeme to ſet a fire,
            Their torturd ſoules, yet wiſh them but attend
            A while, vntill cloud-vaniſhde Sunſhine light
            Appeare with ioy to giue their foes the foile,
            Meane while their wounds bind vp with ba
                  ••
               me and oyle
            Wait ſtill, ſtay teares and feares with all thy might.
            And if for all this, yet thou canſt not pleaſe them,
            Weepe ſtill with them, for this perhaps may eaſe them.
         
         
            
            A Table of the Contents and ſumme of this Booke.
            
            
               
                  1 PRoofes that there is a God, pag. 6.
               
               
                  2 Proofes that the Scriptures are the Word of God. 10
               
               
                  3 Definition of God. 13
               
               
                  4 The Obiect of His Iustice and Mercy, ibidem.
               
                  5 The cauſes of the proceeding of the wrath of God 14
               
               
                  6 How God is ſaide to be angrie. 16
               
               
                  7 How to diſcerne when wrath is at hand. 19
               
               
                  8 How God bringeth about his wrath. ibidem.
               
                  9 That Hardnes of Heart (though the meanes both paſt and preſent, haue not beene effectuall) cannot argue Reprobation. 21
               
               
                  10 Signes of temptation. 25
               
               
                  11 The conditions of ſuch who are, and who are not vnder wrath, deſcribed. 27
               
               
                  12 Who they are who feele wrath, and yet are far from the ſame. 27
               
               
                  
                  13 The ſeuerall conditions of his Eſtate. 28
               
               
                  14 What a troubled ſoule in this eſtate toſſed with diuers tempeſts of wrath, muſt doe. 29
               
               
                  15 Who they are, who haue not a deepe ſenſe of wrath, and yet are farre from wrath. 29
               
               
                  16 The ſeuerall conditions of this eſtate. 30
               
               
                  17 How to know whether in hardneſſe of heart, we are vnder wrath or not. 32
               
               
                  18 Comforts for ſuch, who are not able to ſerue God, as they thinke, in ſpirit and truth. 33
               
               
                  19 Why God at firſt will not be found in the meanes. 35
               
               
                  20 Who they are who feele no wrath, and yet remaine vnder the wrath of God. 36
               
               
                  21 The ſeuerall conditions of this Eſtate. 37
               
               
                  22 How farre a Profeſſor maybee vnder this wrath. 38
               
               
                  23 Deſcription of a ſauing knowledge. 43
               
               
                  24 How to know whether or not Chriſt hath beene laid hold vpon. 45
               
               
                  25 Triall of true ſorrow. 47
               
               
                  26 The triall of ſpirituall deſires. 49
               
               
                  27 Trials whether or not one hath had feeling. 51
               
               
                  28 Difference of reſtrayning and renuing vertue of the holy ſpirit. 52
               
               
                  29 Comforts in this eſtate vnder hardnes of heart. 53
               
               
                  30 Eſſentiall markes of the renuing ſpirit. 54
               
               
                  31 Who they be, who feeling wrath, ſhall periſh in the ſame. 55
               
               
                  
                  32 What ſenſe Reprobates haue being wakened with horror. 56
               
               
                  33 Degrees how this horror commeth vnto them. 58
               
               
                  34 Difference betwixt the Elect and them in the ſenſe of wrath. ibid.
               
                  35 Behauiour of the childe of God vnder the ſenſe of wrath. 59
               
               
                  36 How neere the child of God may come vnto the wicked, in feeling of the wrath of God. 60
               
               
                  37 How to iudge of Gods ſecret fauour in ſuch an eſtate. 61
               
               
                  38 Faith muſt not be meaſured by the fruits thereof, and feeling in the time of deſertion. 62
               
               
                  39 Why and how for the preſent, one may walke in the meanes with ſmall or no comfort, and yet God be true in all his promiſes. 63
               
               
                  40 Why Nouices in Chriſtianity haue much feeling. ibid.
               
                  41 Why aged Chriſtians haue leſſe feeling then at firſt, yet ſtronger conſolation. 65
               
               
                  42 Why Gods children ſo mourne for the want of feeling. 67
               
               
                  43 Why Gods children ſo much rely vpon feeling. 68
               
               
                  44 Wherefore God giueth vnto his children ſuch a meaſure of feeling at firſt. 69
               
               
                  45 Why God delayeth to giue comfort vnto ſuch for ſo long a time. 71
               
               
                  46 The Rocke of refuge in ſuch deſertions. 73
               
               
                  
                  47 A Tentation riſing from thence refuted. p. 75
               
               
                  48 How God reuealeth himſelfe vnto the ſoule. p. 81
               
               
                  49 Triall of rue light. p. 82
               
               
                  50 Triall to know, whether the ſight of Miſerie come by the right Spirit. p. 83
               
               
                  51 Conſolations in Hardnes of heart, one as yet not hauing perceiued a change. p. 87
               
               
                  52 Conſolations againſt deſperation, though all ones lifetime he hath had no feeling. p. 91
               
               
                  53 The greatest and leaſt meaſure of feeling, the Saints haue in this life. p. 95
               
               
                  54 What the diſpoſition of the child of God is, in the leaſt meaſure of feeling, either vnder terror or ſecurity. p. 96
               
               
                  55 Why God will haue his children to feele ſtings of conſcience, and hardneſſe of heart. p. 99
               
               
                  56 Effects of former feeling in deſertion. p. 102
               
               
                  57 How fearefully the child of God, after effectuall calling may fall. p. 105
               
               
                  58 How farre the child of God may be oppreſſed with the ſenſe of wrath, yet remaining in a ſafe eſtate. p. 107
               
               
                  59 How farre hee may stray in his affections: with the cauſes of this diſorder. p. 109
               
               
                  60 Degrees, how ſinne groweth vpon the Elect. p. 110
               
               
                  61 Whether the child of God may fall into ſuch groſſe ſinnes, as wicked men doe. p. 112
               
               
                  62 A diſcouerie of the ſin againſt the holy Ghoſt. p. 113
                  
                     
                        1. What it is.
                     
                        2. Why it is ſo diuerſly named.
                     
                        
                        3. Where the chiefe reſidence thereof is.
                     
                        4. How there it may be iudged of.
                     
                        5. His principall qualitie who committeth the ſame.
                     
                        6. How many ſorts of men may commit it.
                     
                        7. Definition of this apoſtaſie.
                     
                        8. Why thus it is puniſhed?
                     
                        9. By what ſteps it mounts to the height of all impietie.
                     
                        10. How farre one choſen in the decree of God, may ſeeme to wade in this ſinne, and yet be called backe.
                     
                        11. Conſolation for poore ſoules: who imagine they committed this ſinne.
                  
               
               
                  63 Why Gods children fall into groſſe ſinnes like vnto wickedmen. p. 133
               
               
                  64 The ſtate and diſpoſition of the child of God, whileſt he ſleepeth in impenitency, with the cauſes thereof. p. 135
               
               
                  65 In this eſtate, the actions of the renewed and vnrenewed part. p. 138
               
               
                  66 How God raiſeth ſuch after their falles. p. 140
               
               
                  67 How God worketh in a more ſpeciall manner, when he lifteth them vp. p. 144
               
               
                  68. That in ſome ſort, the childe of God may fall into the ſame ſinne againe after true repentance. p. 147
               
               
                  69. Why the tempter doth thus beſet Gods children. p. 149
               
               
                  70. The meanes to withſtand this temptation. p. 150
               
               
                  71. Why God ſuffereth his children to fall againe and againe in the ſame ſinne. p. 154
               
               
                  72. What muſt comfort and ſupport the child of God, falling into the ſame ſinne againe and againe. p. 155
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A DISCOVERIE OF THE CHILD OF GOD, vnder all ſenſe of Gods moſt terrible ſeeming Anger.
            
               Scholler.
               
                  I 
                  Reioyce Sir now at length in ſo good a time to meete with you, whom I haue of a long ſeaſon ſo earneſtly deſired to conferre with: becauſe of ſome doubts which doe much diſquiet me.
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               So doe I alſo reioyce Sir to ſee my old friend; wiſhing that it would pleaſe God of his infinite mercy to make me an vnworthy inſtrument of any comfort to you, or any of his children.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What ſpeake you? Comfort Sir? I am ſo farre from being troubled, that I doubt of the foundation of Religion: and

whether there be any neede of Comfort, or any thing to be troubled for?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  Pſal. 14.1
                  This is moſt ſtrange, that any reaſonable creature ſhould doubt of that which the whole world hath vniuerſally taken as granted: what meane you in ſo ſaying, that you doubt of the foundation of all?
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  The truth is, my tortured ſoule is much perplexed whether there be a God or not.
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Whence ariſeth this tentation?
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  
                     Iſa. 28.15 Iſa. 59.15. pſal. 73.12.13.14. 1. Cor. 2.14.
                  Firſt, from great and ſtrong perſwaſions that there is none. Next, in that I ſee moſt part of the world to liue as though there were neither heauen nor hell. Laſtly, in that I ſee ſuch a ſtrange ſeeming confuſion, the good being oppreſſed, and the wicked ſcaping vnpuniſhed.
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  1. Cor. 2.14.The ſtrength of tentation, and carnall reaſon (which I perceiue to bee the ground of all you alledge)

can be no ſufficient reaſons to proue ſuch dreams. And wheras you ſay, the wicked in this life eſcape for the moſt part vnpuniſhed:
                     Iob. 15. &c. Iob. 20.5.6. It rather proues (as the Scripture ſpeaketh) that (like fatted oxen) they are reſerued to the day of ſlaughter and wrath. Yet, imagine your falſe fooliſh reaſons were true.
                     Iob. 21.16. &c. 30. What is this then which ſo troubles you? why complaine you? why doe you not then liue in peace, if there be no Deitie?
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  I cannot, for I feele within me perpetuall terrors and vexations, which bereaue me of all manner of reſt: yea ſometimes thoughts, that I am deceiued; that my Atheiſticall opinions are damnable; that there is certainly ſomewhat (I know not what) both to be loued,
                  Rom. 1.4.
                   
                  honoured, and feared.
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Then ſtriue againſt your tentations.2. Cor. 5.3. Ioh. 5.44. Ioh. 15.5.
               
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  I am not able.
               
            
            
               Minſt.
               Did not your parents traine

you vp in the foundation and knowledge of Religion?
            
            
               Sc.
               
                  They did, at which time me thought I abounded in knowledge, Faith, Loue Practiſe of all graces, thinking euery thing to be plaine and eaſie. But now (like a ſhip which hath beene a long time toſſed in the Seas without al ſight of land) I doubt whether there be any ſuch things I formerly imagined: all my former feelings, faith, repentance, loue, (in my ſenſe) are gone: In place whereof, I remaine full of all manner of doubtings, with which, though I be not ſtrucke with any extraordinary terror, yet haue I extreame diſcontentments, not reioycing in any thing.
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Certainly there muſt bee ſome cauſes of your diſcontentment; you muſt baniſh doubting and carnall reaſon: beleeue in God, and you ſhall find eaſe.
            
            
               Sch.
               
                  If there be a God, this is my infidelity, that I cannot beleeue in him, and then is my eſtate a great deale more feare full in

this,
                  
                     Rom. 1.28 
                  that all my actions haue bin hypocriticall; that now I finde my ſelfe to be giuen ouer to a hardhart, with a reprobate ſenſe; ioyned with an impoſsibilitie to fight or ſtriue for grace, or (which is more fearful) to haue no deſire to ſtriue for the ſame.
                  2. Cor. 3.5
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               Before wee paſſe any further, let vs lay this infallible foundation; that moſt certainly there is a God.
                     Pſal. 58.11.
               
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  My infidelity and doubting is ſuch, that I ſhall neuer bee fully of your minde, vnleſſe by reaſon I be conuinced of the ſame.
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               There muſt bee no diſputing,
                     Heb. 11.6 againſt receiued grounds and principles: chiefely againſt this the ground of all.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Yet as you remember, I beſeech you ſhew me ſome reaſons, prouing a Deitie, or that there is a God.
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Nature it ſelfe fully prooueth the ſame. 1. From the Creation, for if the world be without beginning ſo is it alſo without ending, and ſo it

and all therein is God, hauing made it ſelfe, which were moſt abſurd to thinke: but ſince it ſhal haue an ending (all the creatures thereof tending to corruption) hence it followeth, that it muſt needes haue a beginning, the Creator whereof, is God. 2. The excellencie of all the creatures ſhew the ſame:Gen. 1.1. pſal. 1.24.
                   ſo infinite in formes, ſhapes, colours, & diuers diſpoſitions: chiefly the ſupernaturall ſpirit of man, not ſatiate with any thing in Nature. 3. Man himſelfe, ſheweth that there is a God, for one man leadeth vs to another, vntill by degrees we come vp to the firſt. Here I aske, where he had his beginning? Eternall he was not, which his miſerable nature ſo ſubiect to alteration & change, well ſheweth, chiefly his diſſolutiō; (Eternitie & change, like light and darknes, being ſo directly contrary.) If it be ſaid, this change came by his fall; then, I ask, whence he fell? So ſtill, all we can thinke, it muſt

leade vs vnto God the Creator of all. 4. The wel ordered gouernment in the worlde: things inferiour ſeruing ſtill things ſuperiour; vntil all things ioyne in mans ſeruice; ſhewe that there is alſo ſome ſupreame power, vnto which he muſt obey. 5. The harmony of contrarie Elements, whereof all bodies do conſiſt, ſo farre from deſtroying one another, that they preſerue all and agree: prooueth a ſuperiour cauſing power. 6. The naturall inſtinct of all nations, (rather adoring ſtockes, ſtones, and beaſtes, then no Deitie at all) proueth the ſame. 7. The conſcience of all, being as it were a law againſt vs, in giuing both teſtimony, and iudgment, is a moſt ſtrong proofe: for it teſtifieth, neither to men nor Angels: neither feareth them. Therefore it muſt bee God himſelfe. Further, would not our reaſon tell vs by and by, if wee were in ſome faire built ruinous countrey or citie, that

there had ſome people dwelt: that ſome hands had built the ſame? So may we ſay of this world, when we ſee it ſo repleniſhed with ſo many goodly creatures, that ſome great power did make the ſame, & that muſt needs be God. Moreouer, the place of God, proueth that there is a God: for (as one ſaith) euery place is in regard of ſomwhat contained in the place. So the Earth is full of wormes, and ſuch like things; the ſea containeth fiſhes; faire houſes containe men & women; Hell it is the place for diuels. Heauen likewiſe muſt not bee emptie, it being the goodlieſt of all the reſt: when wee looke vpon the ſame we muſt needes ſay, that there dwelles the Lord of the countrey, there dwelles God himſelfe. Laſtly (but it were too tedious) I might adde how abundantly the Scriptures ſhewe the ſame: as alſo the euent of things contrary to reaſon: Miracles, Prophecyings, continuall mercies of

fruitfull ſeaſons, &c. Which Paul mentioneth: puniſhments in this life, with ſtrange iudgements on diuers wicked men; as Herod, &c. with the wonderfull power of the ſpirit in the experience of the faithfull. Further, (as one obſerues) that no volume hath euer bin written directly in confutation of the ſame.
            
            
               Sch.
               
                  My mind is no leſſe perplexed cō
                     cerning the authoritie of the Scriptures whether they be the word of God or not.
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               The inſufficiencie of theſe doubts may ſoone bee ſhewed vnto you. Becauſe, admit once that there is a God: then of neceſſitie it will followe that hee is King of kings; and that as ſubordinate temporarie Princes haue Lawes and ſtatutes, whereby they rule their ſtates: ſo muſt needes the ſupreame Lord of all, much more haue lawes and ſtatutes wherby to gouerne the whole world. And theſe muſt needs be the holy Scriptures.
            
            
               Scholler.
               
                  Perſwaſions are no proofes,

therfore ſhew vnto me how I may reſt aſſured that the Scriptures are the word of God.
               
            
            
               Min.
               There bee many reaſons to proue; yet none are powerfull to perſwade: vnleſſe God ioyne with the ſame by the effectuall working of his bleſſed Spirit.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  So farre as you can remember, I intreate you giue me ſatisfaction.
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               The Antiquitie, Harmony, Conſent, Sinceritie, Miracles, and Martyrs, teſtimony of the Scriptures, might be ſufficient proofes to ſatisfie any indifferent perſon: But if vnto them we adde,
                     Pſal. 119 69.101.103. 1. That great generall inward change which ſuddenly it makes in men, when but ſome plaine ſentences thereof are dropped into their hearts,
                     Pſal. 107.20. Pſal. 119.50. Ierem. 23.29. filling them with horrors, ſo that when the heart is thus wounded, no other medicine can comfort or cure the ſame; ſaue the ſame word: when all mens eloquence will not

ſerue the turne.2. Cor. 10 4. Heb. 4.12 Pſal. 19.7.8. 2. That great power it hath to caſt down all the ſtrong holds of ſinne and Sathan: when they ioyne for deſtruction of the ſoule. 3. That humble and rich pouertie thereof, that in a ſober, yet loftie ſtile, it farre ſurpaſſeth (in excellencie of Eloquence) all the beſt Orators of the world, containing therein the foundation of all ſciences: wee may reſt fully aſſured thereof. Further, our owne doubtings (when Satan and our owne corruptions would perſwade vs, that it is not Scripture) ſtrongly proue the truth thereof: for Satan is a liar,
                     Ioh. 8.44. and the father of lies: therefore, if it were forged, he would contend for maintenance thereof. As alſo wee may ſee thoſe who moſt ſtudy and practiſe the ſame, moſt holy and wiſe. Contrarily,
                     Pſal. 119.99. Pro. 1.23.24.25. &c.
                   the others moſt prophane. It were tedious to reckon vp all, how miraculouſly it hath euer beene preſerued in all ages: how truely all the Prophecies

therof haue bene and are accompliſhed,
                     Deut. 28 64.65.66 67. Iſa. 49.6. Iſa. 7. and 11. and 5
                        •
                      2. Theſ. 7.8. &c. Mat. 11.13. Ezek. 36.26. both in the reiected wandering of the Iewes, the calling of the Gentiles, Incarnation of Chriſt, comming of Antichriſt, &c. How though it were written many hundred yeeres agoe, it meeteth with all new ſinnes. How powerfully being alledged in prayer, It wraſtleth with God, Offereth violence to the kingdome, quieteth the ſoule, keepeth off iudgements, and obtaineth mercies, &c. How of all other writings,
                     Ier. 32.40. this onely is written in the heart: ſo that at the houre of death when other knowledge (wholly, or in great part) vaniſheth, this is moſt freſh in our memories, both for our owne comfort, and the inſtruction of others,Gen. 48.3. 1. King. 2.2.3. &c. as in Iacob, Dauid, &c. So that moſt certainly, the word is not from men (for our nature is contrary to it) nor from Sathan (ſeeing he raiſeth vp his inſtruments againſt it) therefore from God himſelfe.
                     Ioh. 4.24. Rom. 1.20 Pſa. 139.6
               
            
            
               
               Schol.
               
                  What is God?
                  Iſay. 66.1 Gen. 15.1 Leui. 19.2 Deut. 6.4 Matt. 28.19.
                  
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               God is a Spirit, Eternall, Infinite, Omnipotent, moſt Holy, one in Eſſence, but three in Perſons; the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghoſt.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What is the Eſſence of God?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               The Nature of God, whereby indeed, God is and doth conſiſt.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What is chiefly to be conſidered in the nature of God?
               
            
            
               Min.
               The Attributes of God.Gal. 4.8. Exo. 3.14 Reuel. 1.8
                  
               
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What properties are chiefly to be conſidered in the nature of God concerning his creatures?
               
            
            
               Min.
               Two principally.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Which be they?
               
            
            
               Min.
               1. His mercy. 2. His iuſtice.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What is the obiect of his mercy?
                  
                     Rom. 9.22 23. Eph. 2.4. 5. Tit. 33.4.5. &c. Gen. 2.18. Ezek. 18.4. Rom. 4.15.
               
            
            
               Min.
               Mans miſerie.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What is the obiect of his iuſtice?
               
            
            
               Min.
               Sinne.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What is ſinne?
               
            
            
               Min.
               The tranſgreſſion of the law.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What is the reward of ſinne?
               
            
            
               
               Minſt.
               
                  1. Ioh. 5.4 Rom. 6.23 Gen. 2.17Death, temporarie and eternall, both in ſoule and body.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  But how commeth it to paſſe, that ſinne is thus rewarded?
               
            
            
               Min.
               
                  
                     Rom 1.18. & 2.8.9.By reaſon of the Anger or Wrath of God againſt all manner of ſinne, in all manner of perſons.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Is Anger in God a paſsion, as it is in man? or may we thinke there is Anger in God?
               
            
            
               Min.
               
                  
                     Iſa. 27.4.No.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  How then muſt we conſider of the wrath of God?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               1. His moſt iuſt will, and moſt aſſured and holy decree in puniſhing ſinne,
                     Ioh. 3.36 Rom. 1.18 Hoſ. 11.9 muſt be conſidered. 2. His threatnings againſt ſinne. 3. The puniſhment of ſinne it ſelfe.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What kindleth the wrath of God?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  
                     Iſa. 64.5Sinne.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  But doe you thinke God to be in this ſort angry with all mens ſinne?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  Epheſ. 2.3 Rom. 3.23
                  Yea verily, both againſt the

ſinnes of the Elect and Reprobate.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Why ſo?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Becauſe all ſinne,Pſal. 5.4.
                   in all perſons, is directly againſt the holineſſe of his Nature.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Doe you therefore thinke that the wrath of God is kindled againſt all ſinne, in all men alike?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               No.2. Sam. 14 15.
               
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  How can that agree with the former: that God is angry with all ſinnes, and is not angry yet alike againſt all ſinnes in all mens perſons?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Becauſe that Chriſt Ieſus hath taken away that anger from the Elect,1. Theſ. 1.10. Iſa. 53. 1. Cor. 11.31. ſuffering himſelfe that which was due vnto them.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Shew me then, how God is angry againſt the Elect, and how againſt the Reprobrate?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               God is ſaid to be angry with his Elect. Firſt,Deut. 9.19. Deu. 3.26
                   when he decreeth to chaſtiſe his Sinne. Secondly, when he threatneth his ſinne. And laſtly, when

hee indeed (in mercy for a while) chaſtiſeth them for their further ſaluation.
                     Mic. 7.9.
               
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  How is God ſaid to be angry with the reprobate?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  
                     Rom. 9.14 Pſa. 78.49.When in this life (according to his former decree) hee puniſheth them with perpetuall hardneſſe of heart,
                     Reuel. 14.10.11. or any kind of iudgement: And in the life to come, powreth out the vials of his wrath and indignation vpon them for euermore.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What neceſsitie is there that the wicked ſhould be puniſhed for euer?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Becauſe they do beare their owne ſinnes, and the puniſhment due vnto them:Pſal. 2.12
                   not hauing Chriſt to free them.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  But cannot the wicked releeue themſelues?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               No.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  How ſo?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  
                     Pſa. 49.7.8.Becauſe not being able to ſatisfie the Maieſty whom they haue

offended, they muſt of neceſſity endure his wrath for euer.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What is the reaſon that their ſufferings cannot ſatisfie?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Becauſe they are but finite creatures,Pſa. 49.7. and 15.
                   not being able to ſatisfie that infinite offended Maieſty: therefore they muſt ſuffer for euermore.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What may wee learne from hence?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               That it is a terrible thing to fall into the hands of the liuing God.1. Iohn 3.16. Reu. 19.15. Reu. 5.9. Pſal. 110.12.
               
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What leſſon of comfort may we learne from it?
               
            
            
               Minſt.
               That wee are exceedingly bound to Ieſus Chriſt, who hath ſuffered this wrath for vs.
            
            
               Scho.
               
                  How may we learne to diſcerne and iudge of the greatneſſe of this wrath?
               
            
            
               Min.
               Looke firſt vpon the deſtruction of the Angels.2. Pet. 2.4 Iud. 6. Gen. 3.17 18.19. Gen. 6. 16. 2. The curſe which came vpon Adam and his poſterity for ſinne. 3. The deſtruction which came vpon the firſt world, by the floud. 4.

The burning of Sodome with fire.
                     Gen. 19.24. Iſa. 53.5.6. Mat. 25.4. Next to the ſending of Chriſt into the world, and the wrath of God powred out vpon him for our ſinnes; the euerlaſting fire prepared for Reprobate men and Angels.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  
                     Nah. 2.3.4.5.6. Deut. 32.39.40. Deut. 29.19.20. Heb. 3.12 13. Heb. 10.31.
                  What ſhould wee learne from hence?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Three things. 1. To conſider ſeriouſly of the greatneſſe of the wrath of God. 2. Not to preſume of mercy. 3. Warily to fly to and eſchew ſinne by all meanes, leaſt we fall into the hands of the liuing God.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  How may wee know when the wrath of the liuing God is comming?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  
                     Ier. 10.11 Zec. 7.11.12.13. Leuit. 26 19.20. & 26. Hag. 1.6. pſa. 78.32.33.Firſt, when the word of God wakeneth not. Next, when ſinne aboundeth in the aboundance of the word. 3. When God changeth the order and conſtitution of his Creatures. 4. When God to (waken) ſendeth light iudgements, and men are neuer a whit the better.
            
            
               
               Scho.
               
                  Which way doth God vſe to bring about his wrath?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Firſt,
                     Rom. 1.28. Deut. 28.23.24. Deut. 28.22.26.27 Ibid. 66.67. hee plagueth mens ſoules with hardneſſe of heart and ſenſleſneſſe. Next hee plagueth the creatures which ſhould be for Comforts vnto man. Then hee commeth vpon the body plaguing it with ſome ſenſible iudgement, often in this life. Further, powring out a ſenſible wrath vppon the ſoule vnto deſtruction.
                     Matt. 10.18. Laſtly hee reiecteth and caſteth both body and ſoule into torments for euer.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Who then is in the moſt dangerous eſtate?
               
            
            
               Min.
               Such who lie vnder the wrath of God, yet being ſenſleſſe of the ſame.Hoſ. 7.9 Ier. 5.3.
                  
               
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What if they be not wakened in time?
               
            
            
               Min.
               Then they muſt periſh in the ſeuere wrath of God.2. The. 1.9
               
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Now, as euer you meane to ſee the face of God, and liue in heauen for euer, ſpeake from your conſcience. May

one who hath a long time liued vnder the meanes, for the preſent ſhut vp in hardnes of heart, which hee knowes and in part feeles: neither being able to helpe or ſtriue againſt it, ſo being and liuing vnder the wrath of God; conclude therefore that he is a reprobate, which ſhall at no time, either repent or haue a ſoft heart, and muſt we beleeue the words of ſuch a praty?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               No.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  For what reaſons?
               
            
            
               Min.
               Firſt, becauſe let the party be what he can, howſoeuer hard harted or ſinfull; vntill he be called, hee is but dead, and in the ſtate of nature, like vnto others of the Saints, Peter, Paul, Dauid,
                  
                     Eph. 2.1. Iſa. 11.6. 2. Tim. 3.1.2. Re. 1.30. &c. And therefore ſince all of vs were dead in ſinnes and treſpaſſes Beares, Lyons, Wolus, Leopards, before we were tamed, haters of God, deſpitefull, proud, diſobedient to parents, without naturall affection, vnmercifull by nature, and yet haue bin raiſed from the dead; ſo may ſuch a

one be in Gods owne time. 2. Becauſe as when a King doth impriſon any one for ſome offences. As it were folly for any man to preſume to ſay: The king will neuer free ſuch a one, nor he ſhall neuer bee ſorry for his faults. Much more ſo, were it a fit of extreame madneſſe, in ſuch a hard-hearted party;
                     Deut. 9.29. Ier. 32.39. Ezec. 36.26.27. to preſume to know Gods counſell; or what in time he will work in the heart, looſing the fetters wherewith hee is bound. Since it is the Lords promiſe and couenant, to take away our ſtony hearts and giue vs fleſhy ones: as alſo the end of Chriſts comming,
                     Iſa. 43.9.11.12. to open the eyes of the blind to bring out priſoners from the priſon: and them that ſit in darknes out of the priſon houſe. 3. Becauſe God hath neither appointed any certaine manner or time of calling, ſome being brought home, at the 6.9.11. houre:Matth. 20 5.6.
                   therefore though one haue not in effectuall calling obtained a ſoft heart, at 20.30.40. or 50.

yeeres of age, he may not thence conclude reprobation. 4. None but God knowes things to come, ſeeing hee challenges this ſuper excellencie, as a proofe;
                     Iſa. 43.9.11.12. proper onely to the Deitie. 5. There is a kind of ſoftnes in that heart, which knowes and feeles the hardneſſe of the ſame, though the party deny it, yet ſure corruption diſcouers not corruption:
                     Eph. 5.13 nor nature, nature, and therefore hope remaines. 6. Becauſe, where there is diſcontent, trouble in minde, there is hope by Gods grace, repentance may come: in which eſtate (though the party plead contentation) yet when we ſee former delights vaniſh, ſometimes beloued company diſpleaſing, temptations to appeare, vnnaturall wiſhes, vnreaſonable mad deſires in them: Who will not confeſſe that heere is muddy water; which (when the ſtormes are paſt) may cleare againe?
                     Mic. 7.8.9. 7. The omnipotency and goodnes of God, to other

moſt miſerable ſinners, in pulling them ſpite of their hearts from their ſins, without any cauſe in them: as Manaſſes, Nebuchadnezzar, Saint Paul, Marie Magdalen. &c.2. Chr. 33 Da. 4.34. Act. 9.3.5 6. Mar. 16.9. May giue hope of recouerie, ſince many others in the like eſtate haue found Gods mercies exceeding great in their conuerſion. Laſtly, moſt certaine it is, we muſt not beleeue or giue credit to any who ſo affirme: for, diſtempered men are not able to iudge of diſeaſes: no more can the diſtreſſed minde of the eſtate of the ſoule, eſpecially ioyned with a blacke diuelliſh melancholly humour, which the diuell doth oftentimes abuſe, to breede cauſeleſſe feares in the heart of man.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Were it poſsible to perſwade any in ſuch an eſtate, that they are tempted?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               It is impoſſible; while the violence of the tentation remaineth.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Wherefore?
               
            
            
               
               Minſt.
               Becauſe of the ſtrength of tentation and carnall reaſon, which for that preſent hath dominion in them: for then the field is neere wonne, when the diuell is of the party diſcouered for a diuell, the temptation being layd open to reaſon and iudgement.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Yet ſhew vnto me I beſeech you, how may we iudge when one is thus tempted or not?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               There be many ſignes; but to be briefe, three principally; by their ſeruice, language, and vnnaturalneſſe.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Explaine your meaning.
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Firſt, for ſeruice; It is moſt certaine, when they are ſo ready to obey the diuell in all things, and diſobey God:
                     Rom. 6.16. to ſerue Sathan with pleaſure, and God by compulſion, pulled to good duties viollently, as by the haire of the head;2. Tim. 2.26. leauing them off quickly; in that their actions

ſhewe them to be tempted.Iudg. 12.6.
                   2. By their Shiboleth, we may iudge them to be in a ſtrong tentation, when in ſome certaine fittes ſome of them dare to affirme, That they know their hearts ſhal neuer be moued; that it is impoſſible that euer they ſhould be ſoft hearted:
                     Iſa. 58.10 11.12. that becauſe their hearts in time paſt could not be moued by any thing, therefore they ſhall and can neuer be moued.
                     Pſal. 116 11. And (which is more fearefull blaſphemie) that God cannot moue their heart, which for all the world (free from temptation) they durſt not affirme. 3. By their vnnaturalneſſe, Nature doth ſeeke by all meanes the preſeruation of Nature. Nowe when they become ſo vnnaturall, as to auoide humane ſocietie: to thinke their beſt friends their foes, to ſcoffe at Religion, becauſe they haue no hope to diſturbe and let by all meanes good duties;
                     Act. 16.16. like vnto that Maide who diſturbed Paul and

                  Silas as they were about to pray in Lydias houſe,
                     Mat. 9.24. to ſeeke out wittie arguments for the diuell againſt themſelues; to laugh at, and reiect all Gods arguments from his word: bringing nothing againſt them but carnall, fooliſh, blinde, reaſons from the diuell, to be deſperate in aggrauating ſinne beyond the mercies of God, to reiect prayer, affirming, it is to no purpoſe, to requeſt not to be prayed for, &c. If theſe be not infallible ſignes of tentation, then neuer creature was tempted.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What if the hardneſſe of heart, come after a precedent ſoftneſſe?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Then there is good hope (yea aſſurance) that in Gods good time the heart may bee ſofter then euer: the party ſo eſcaping from vnder this wrath, becauſe the gifts and calling of God are without repentance.
                     Rom. 11.29.
               
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  In howe many conditions

doe you include men in reſpect of this wrath?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               In foure.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Which are they?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Firſt, thoſe who feele deepe wrath, and yet are farre from wrath.Diuiſion. 2. Thoſe who haue not the deepe ſenſe of wrath, and yet are farre from wrath. 3. Thoſe who feele no wrath, and yet are vnder the wrath of God. 4. Thoſe who feele the wrath of God, and indeede ſhall periſh in the ſame wrath.
            
            
               Scholler.
               
                  Who are thoſe who feele  wrath, and yet are farre from the ſame?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               Thoſe who haue their conſcience wakened to ſee their ſinne,
                     Pſal. 38.2 and 77.2.3. &c.
                   and to feele the wrath of God for the ſame; which they hate, becauſe it hath offended God. They mourne for ſinne likewiſe,Pſal. 51.4.
                   not ſo much for feare of torments, as that they ſhould haue offended ſo good

a God.Ibid. v. 11
                   They deſire for reconciliation, to be at peace with God through Chriſt.Ibid. v. 12.
                   They thirſt alſo for the Spirit, to cauſe their hearts to loue that God, hungring for the grace of ſanctification. And laſtly, although they feele nothing to comfort them, yet aboue hope,Io. ca. 2.4.
                   vnder hope they waite ſtill.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What ſhould the exerciſe of the ſoule be, vnder this ſort of feeling?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Firſt, it muſt haue recourſe to God by ſtrong cries in prayer. 2. Practiſe repentance,
                     Pſal. 77.2 & 38.17 21. Pſal. 32.5. and 66. Pſal. 6.9. Pſal. 94.18.19. by powring out bitter teares vnto God. 3. Exerciſe faith in reſting vppon the promiſes of life euerlaſting through Chriſt. 4. Cleaue ſtedfaſtly to the loue of God in his mercie, grace, and goodneſſe. 5. Draw it ſelfe away from the wrath,
                     Pro. 22.3. Pſal. 7.119.49.50. as faſt as may bee, leaſt it bee deuoured thereof. 6. Feede and meditate continually vpon the promiſe of life.

And laſtly,
                     Iohn 3.14 15. hold euer the eye of the ſoule vpon Chriſt.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Who are they who haue not a  deepe ſenſe of wrath; and yet are farre from the wrath of God?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               1. Thoſe who neuer haue felt wrath, but alwayes peace. 2. Thoſe who haue felt the tentations of deſpaire and doubting; yet afterwards haue obtained peace. 3. Such who feele a hardneſſe of heart, and can haue no preſent reliefe.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Who bee they who haue neuer felt wrath but alwayes peace?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               Thoſe whom God at their firſt conuerſion hath called with much ſweetneſſe,
                     Hoſ. 2.14. Act. 16.14.15. in melting their hearts by little and little for their ſinnes. Next,
                     Act. 8.39. ſuch on whom God hath powred out a ſenſe of his loue, working in them a perſwaſion of mercy, with ioy, renuing the minde: working a ſtudy of holineſſe,

a hatred of ſinne, and a loue of righteouſneſſe.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Who be they who haue found the tentations of deſpaire and doubting; and yet thereafter haue found peace?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  
                     Act. 2.37.38. &c.
                  Thoſe whom God hath inlightned to ſee their ſinnes, and the wrath of God for them, and haue bin terrified, doubting of their ſaluation and election:
                     Act. 9.9.19. yet God afterwards ſhineth vpon their ſoules, touching them with a ſenſe of remiſſion of ſinnes, election and glorie, whereupon ariſeth that peace of God which paſſeth all vnderſtanding, and that ioy of the holy Ghoſt vnſpeakeable and glorious.1. Pet. 1.8.
               
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Who are thoſe who feele the hardneſſe of their heart, yet are not able to ſhake off the ſame?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Thoſe who haue once felt that mollifying power of the Spirit,
                     Iſa. 63.17 Pſa. 31.22. that light which draweth the ſoule to ſee it ſelfe, and it owne

wildneſſe; to ſee alſo God in the face of Ieſus Chriſt, and yet in the preſent finde a kind of deadneſſe within.
            
            
               Scholler.
               
                  How may it be knowne that one is not vnder the wrath of God in ſuch a diſpoſition?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Firſt, ſuch a one muſt looke backe vnto his former experience remembring the dayes of old,
                     Pſal 77.5 6.10. and the yeeres of ancient time: and next againe vnto his preſent diſpoſition.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What muſt the preſent diſpoſition be?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               A ſenſe of hardneſſe,
                     Pſal. 42.1.2.3. Pſal. 30.7 deadneſſe and blindneſſe. A ſad heart for the abſence of God; with a longing for his bleſſed preſence.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What muſt be the exerciſe of one in this eſtate?
               
            
            
               Minſt.
               A labouring and ſtriuing with the heart to attaine feeling.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Wherein muſt this ſtrife conſiſt?
                  
                     Pſa. 42.11.
               
            
            
               
               Miniſt.
               In a wraſtling with God, againſt the hardneſſe of the heart, in Prayer and Mourning.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  But what if one be neither able to wraſtle nor ſtriue?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Yet muſt hee ſpeake vnto God, and ſhew him the diſpoſition of the ſoule;
                     Pſal. 42.9. intreating him to helpe it for his Chriſts ſake.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What if one be not able to ſpeake for burden and trouble of ſoule?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Hee muſt grone vnto God, hold vp the hands and eyes vnto him, deſire to deſire;
                     Rom. 8.26. vſe the outward meanes (though vnwillingly and with torment) for,Conſolation for ſuch, who (as they think) are not able to ſerue God in Spirit and Trueth. Rom. 7.21
                   when we are not able to vſe our feeling, the outward meanes may eaſe.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What comfort can this afford to any one, ſince God will be worſhipped in Spirit and Trueth, which he in ſuch a caſe is not able to doe?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               It affoordeth ſingular conſolation: 1. In that wee haue a

feeling of our ſelues, and our great miſerie: Next, in that ſuch a diſpoſition is vnpleaſing vnto vs.
                     Pſa. 73.25. 3. In that we would gladly haue it made better. 4. In that we feele, there is no comfort in heauen or earth for vs, vntill God come.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  How ſhould the ſoule reſt in ſuch a hard eſtate?
               
            
            
               Min.
               1. Reſt in hope. 2. Waite.Iſa 8.17. Pſal. 16.9 and 40.1. Lam. 3.26. Cant. 1.3.
                   3. Say vnto God, Giue mee ſuch a heart as thou deſireſt Lord, and then require thou of me ſuch a heart, and ſuch a worſhip as thou deſireſt.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Wherefore doth the Lord ſuffer his cildren to haue and feele hardneſſe of heart?
               
            
            
               Minſt.
               Firſt, that ſo much the better they may vnderſtand how miſerable (by nature) they are.
                     Pſal. 121.1.2. 2. That they may ſee where only helpe is to be found. 3. That being humbled,Cant. 3.4.
                   they may not bee lifted vp with ſpirituall pride. Laſtly, that they may

much eſteeme and cheriſh the fauour of God, when he commeth in the power of the meanes.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  In ſuch extremities, at what times commeth God to the ſoule?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  
                     Cant. 3.4. Pſal. 142.3.4. Pſal. 143.6.7.Vnlooked for, when we are at the brinke of deſpaire; or elſe when we haue yeelded as ouercome, and almoſt left deſiring: or then when hee giueth an earneſt and violent deſire, which neither can nor will be ſatiate vntill he come.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Yet why ſuffereth the Lord his children (many times) to vſe all the meanes; and yet not to finde him in the meanes,
                  Why God at firſt, will not be found in the means. Pſa. 77.7. Iſa. 38.27 Ezek. 36.22. 1. Sam. 1.10.11.19 Iob. 42.7.
                   
                  before hee come thus vnlooked for?
               
            
            
               Minſt.
               That wee may know he onely commeth when hee will, nothing mouing him, but his owne good pleaſure.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What ſhould wee learne heereof?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               1. Not to conclude reprobation,

becauſe to our feeling wee find deſertion.
                     Lam. 2.31 32. Iere. 3.12 Pſa 42.11. Mic. 7.8.9. Pſal. 37. 2. Not to meaſure mercy by our preſent feeling. 3. To waite vntill he come (though we cannot feele his preſence) if it were vntill the laſt gaſpe.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What if in the meane time there be no other ſenſe but of ſtinging torments and Wrath?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Yet muſt wee make claime vnto his promiſes.Pſal. 27.13.14. Hab. 3.2. Iob. 13.15. Iſa. 28.16. Iſa. 54.7. Ier. 31.37 3. Who they are who feele no Wrath, yet remaine vnder the Wrath of God. In wrath beſeech him to remember mercie; ſaying vnto him with Iob: Lord, although thou wouldeſt ſlay vs, yet will wee truſt in thee: thus waiting vntill hee come, not being haſtie, and then in his owne good time, he will appeare to our comfort.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Who be they who feele no wrath: yet remaining vnder the heauie wrath of God?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Firſt, ſuch as haue no effectuall calling from God: 2. Such as haue neuer had any true ſenſe of

the bitterneſſe and grieuouſneſſe of ſinne.Rom. 7 9.
                   3. Such as are not mooued with the loue of the trueth, neither doe loue God, or haue had any ſenſe of his loue,
                     Iud. 10. 2. Tim. 3.5 or the earneſt of the Spirit. Laſtly, all ſuch who make a ſhewe of godlineſſe, but haue denied the power thereof.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  The ſeuerall conditions of this eſtate.
                  How diuide you thoſe who are in this eſtate?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               They are partly out of the Church, and partly in the Church.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Who be they that are out of the Church?
               
            
            
               Min.
               
                  
                     Eph. 2.12Thoſe who haue not amongſt them the profeſſion of the true God, as hee hath reuealed himſelfe in his word.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Who be they in the Church, that lye vnder the wrath, yet feele it not?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               
                  1. Cor. 15 34. 2. Theſ. 1.8.Firſt, thoſe who profeſſe without knowledge: 2. Thoſe who haue conſcience without knowledge and holineſſe. 3. Thoſe who haue attained

light, yet fight againſt their enlightning. Laſtly,
                     Heb. 6.4 5, 6. thoſe who through the cuſtome of ſinne,
                     Eph. 4.18 19. are hardned ſo, as with greedineſſe they runne forward in all outward and inward impieties:Rom. 1.28. How farre a Profeſſor may be vnder this Wrath. 2. Pet. 2.21. Luc. 8 13. and 1. Cor. 13.2.13.2. Math. 27 4. Numb. 23 
                           •
                        0. Matt. 19.
                           •
                        6. Heb. 6.4. Mar. 6.20.
                   God (for the preſent) hauing giuen them ouer to a reprobate ſenſe.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  How farre may one proceede in ſhewe of true profeſsion, and yet be vnder the wrath of God?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Firſt, hee may haue a litterall knowledge. 2. A temporall and Hiſtoricall faith; yea, and the faith of miracles. 3. He may haue a ſorrow for ſinne. 4. He may haue a deſire of heauen. 5. He may taſte of the good word of God, and of the powers of the world to come. Laſt of all, hee may haue an inward reſtraining power to curbe ſinne with an outward holineſſe.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What knowledge is that which a wicked man may haue?
               
            
            
               
               Miniſt.
               
                  
                     Rom. 2.15. & 3.20. 1. Cor. 13.2.A knowledge of ſinne, of hell, of heauen, of mercie, of wrath, and of Chriſt, and of his meritorious death, buriall, reſurrection, and ſecond comming, with all the points of Religion.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What is the reaſon that this knowledge keepeth them not from this wrath?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               
                  
                     Iſa. 29.13Becauſe it is not applyed cloſe vnto the heart, to renue the Spirit of the minde, to change the will and affections vnto the loue and obedience of Gods trueth.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What kind of knowledge call you this then?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  1. Cor. 8.1A litterall knowledge which puffeth vp, but neither humbleth nor ſanctifieth.
            
            
               Scholer.
               
                  Who hath this knowledge?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  
                     Iam. 2.19The diuels and reprobates, and ſuch who are not truely called by Gods holy Spirit.
            
            
               
               Schol.
               
                  What is the cauſe that their faith ſaueth them not?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Becauſe it is not wrought by the Spirit to apply Chriſt and all his benefits vnto iuſtification and ſanctification.
                     Gal. 2.20.
               
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What manner of ſorrow is this which wicked men may haue?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               A worldly ſorrow which cauſeth death.2. Cor. 7.10.
               
            
            
               Scholler.
               
                  Wherefore is this ſorrowe?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Not for the right cauſe,
                     Gen. 4.13. but for the terrours of conſcience, and the puniſhment of ſinne.
            
            
               Scholler.
               
                  What kinde of deſire is this which wicked men may haue of heauen?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               A naturall deſire, but not ſpirituall.
            
            
               Scholler.
               
                  Why call you it a naturall deſire?
               
            
            
               Min.
               Becauſe wicked men would be in heauen, for their owne eaſe,
                     Numb. 23 10. that

therby they might eſcape puniſhment onely.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Wherefore is ſuch a deſire naturall?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  
                     Ioh. 5.35.Becauſe therein, nature onely ſeeketh the preſeruation of Nature; and thoſe who wiſh to be in heauen, onely for their owne eaſe, to bee freed of paine, doe onely ſeeke the preſeruation of Nature.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What kind of feeling is this which wicked men may haue of the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               
                  
                     Iud. 19. 2. Tim. 3.55.Onely fretting motions, wrought by the Maieſty of the word which ouer ſhadoweth their ſoules.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What is the cauſe that this feeling is not the true feeling?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Firſt, becauſe it is not wrought by the Spirit of adoption, after that ſpeciall manner, whereby he worketh in the elect. Next, becauſe it bringeth no ſure perſwaſion

of election and glory.
                     Ioh. 4.16.17. As alſo becauſe it neither feeleth the loue of God: nor is bound cloſe vnto God by a ſecret loue. Laſtly, becauſe that kind of feeling neither ſatisfieth nor ſetleth the ſoule to repoſe in peace vpon Chriſt Ieſus.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What call you this reſtraining power which the wicked may haue to controule ſinne?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               A ſecret generall working of God, repreſſing the force of nature,1. Tim. 3.5. Mark. 6.29. but withholding his ſanctifying grace and the renuing vertu of his holy Spirit.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What call you this outward holineſſe in men wicked and peruerſe.
               
            
            
               Min.
               An outward conformitie with the law of God,
                     Mar. 7.6.7.8.9. without the inward change of minde, wil, and affection.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Since then wicked men may be vnder the wrath of God, haueing ſo many properties of chriſtian profeſſors:

Shew vnto me, how in this narrow pinch of affinitie, one may reſt aſſured that he is the child of God.
               
            
            
               Minſt.
               What is the ſpeciall thing wherin you would haue me to reſolue you of.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Firſt, I would know how to diſcerne when our knowledge may be called a ſauing knowledge?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               If our knowledge be ſpirituall, it is ſauing.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What doe you meane by that?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               
                  1 Cor. 1.4 37. Pſal. 119.97. Pſa. 40.8.Firſt, we muſt trie if our mindes bee rightly informed according to the trueth of Gods word. Next, whether our hearts loue that which wee know. Laſtly, wee muſt looke whether wee practiſe that which we know and loue,
                     Rom. 7.15.22.23.24 mourning becauſe we are not able to obey, and ſtriuing againſt our rebellion, that wee may obey that light of God which is in our minde: this is ſpirituall knowledge.
            
            
               
               Schol.
               
                  But if a man neither know, loue, nor obey, what can he then ſay of himſelfe, ſaue this; that God is greater then his conſcience; and therefore iuſtly may condemne him?
               
            
            
               Min.
               Yet if there bee a deſire to loue and yeeld obedience vnto that which one knowes; ſometimes groning in the Spirit vnto God,
                     Pſal. 119.5. Iſa. 1.9. Ion. 2.4. Pro. 1.23. ſometimes mourning and conſtantly waiting with a heauy heart, vntill ſuch time as the Lord ſhall powre forth his renuing grace: all is yet ſafe.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  VVhat warrant haue wee ſo to doe?
               
            
            
               Min.
               His owne promiſes.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Shew them I intreate you.
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Bleſſed are they which hunger and thirſt for righteouſnes,Matth. 5.6. Iſa. 30.18. Iſa. 4.3.
                   for they ſhall bee filled; whoſoeuer waiteth on mee ſhall neuer bee aſhamed: I will poure water vpon the dry

ground; and flouds vpon the thirſty ground.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Seeing that the wicked haue a certaine faith which iuſtifieth not; what manner of faith is that which bringeth ſaluation.
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  Rom 5.1.
                  That faith which is a iuſtifying before God.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  who worketh this faith.
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  Eph. 2.8.
                  The holy Spirit.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  VVhat thing is that which the ſoule apprehendeth by faith?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  
                     Act. 20.
                        •
                     1. 
                        •
                     . Tit. 2 5. and 2 8. Heb. 10. 
                        •
                     
                  Ieſus Chriſt, God and man, bleſſed for euermore, Our Mediator who was humbled vnto the death of the Croſſe for our fakes, now ſitting at the right hand of God the Father, with all the rich benefits which he hath purchaſed to be powred out vpon vs in this life,
                     Rom. 4.25 and in the life to come.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  How ſhall wee know whether as yet wee haue ſo layed ſure hould of Chriſt as to make him our owne.
               
            
            
               
               Miniſt.
               Firſt, we muſt marke, if our ſoules haue perceiued all ſufficiencie of grace to bee in him, and the God-head bodily dwelling in him.
                     Col. 2.3.9 Act. 15.11. Next, wee muſt looke if wee betake our ſelues onely vnto Chriſt Ieſus, to repoſe vpon him, looking for righteouſneſſe and life only in him.
               Then muſt wee behould what loue we haue vnto our Redeemer:
                     Io. 21.19. 1. pet. 1.8. and try whether or not wee would gladly loue him better then all the pleaſures in heauen or earth.
               Further we muſt marke if euer our ſoules, haue found ioy in beleeuing in the death and reſurrection of the Lord Ieſus. Laſtly,
                     Pſal. 42.1 2. Pſal. 51.12. looke if our hearts be allured with a louing languor to deſire for that ſenſe and feeling we once had of him; reſoluing to obey him if wee were able.
            
            
               Sc.
               
                  Seeing that you ſay the wicked haue a ſorrow for ſinn, how ſhould the Elect know that their ſorow is not the ſorrow

of wicked men?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  2. Cor. 7.10.The ſorrow of the elect is a godly ſorrow vnto life.
            
            
               Sch.
               
                  VVhy call you it a godly ſorrow?
               
            
            
               Min.
               Becauſe it is wrought by God himſelfe.
                     Phil. 2.13. Pſal. 31.4 Zach. 12.10. Pſa. 31.11. 2. Becauſe the heart breaketh not ſo much for ſhame and paine as for hauing offended ſo louing & ſo mercifull a Father, the piercing of ſo louing a Redemer, and for grieuing of the holy Spirit our Comforter.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  VVhat kind of ſorrow is the ſorrow of Gods children?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               A bitter ſorrow mingled with ſweetneſſe.
            
            
               Sch.
               
                  
                     Pſa. 30.10. Pſa. 31.7.8.
                  Are the children of God euer affected with this griefe when they are ſorrowfull?
               
            
            
               M.
               No.
            
            
               Sch.
               
                  VVhat other diſpoſition then haue Gods children in their ſorrow?
                  
                     Pſa. 38.4.5.6. Pſa. 88.31.
               
            
            
               Miniis.
               Bitterneſſe and a terror.
            
            
               Sch.
               
                  VVhence proceedeth this fearfull

eſtate to their ſenſe?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Partly from a feeling of the abſence of God,
                     Pſa. 22.1.2. Pſal. 51.3 Pſa. 32.3. and hardneſſe of their hearts, and partly in feeling the ſtings of a guiltie conſcience.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  How may one know himſelfe to be in a good eſtate vnder ſuch a diſpoſition?
                  
                     Pſal. 77.5 Pſa. 42.5. Pſ. 66.10.11.12. Pſ. 42.1.2. Pſa. 84.2. Pſa. 63.1.2. Rom. 4 18 Pſal. 119.1.147. Numb. 23 19. Lam. 3.21 Phil. 1.6. Eph. 2.1.2.3. Rom. 3.21 23.24.
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               Firſt, by his former experience that once hee did feele the ſweetneſſe of Gods fauour. Next, if in ſome meaſure (how ſmall ſoeuer) he deſire aboue all things in the earth, the wonted preſence of God. Laſtly, if he waite and hope aboue hope; that hee who hath once begunne will neuer repent him, reſoluing that though God ſhould ſlay him, yet he would truſt in him.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What may we learne from this ſort of diſpoſition?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               Firſt, that by nature wee are ſeparate from God: and God from vs. Next, that all Gods children

(vntill grace make a difference) are as hard harted as any reprobats.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Seeing the wicked (you ſay) may haue a deſire of heauen: what difference is there betwixt the deſire of the Elect and Reprobate?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               The deſire of the Reprobat, or of thoſe in the ſtate of reprobation before calling,
                     Gen. 25.32. Num. 23.10. is meerely naturall, ſuch as was Eſaws deſire of the birth right, and Balaams deſire of the death of the righteous: but the deſire of the Elect, is ſpirituall and heauenly.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  
                     Pſal. 63.6.
                  How may we know when our deſires are ſpirituall?
               
            
            
               Min.
               Firſt, by the acknowledging of that which we chiefly deſire. Next of the end wherefore we deſire it.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What is that which chiefely we muſt deſire?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               
                  
                     Eph. 3.16.17.God in Chriſt to dwell in our ſoules heere by his Spirit, to ſanctifie and quicken vs, to raiſe vs vp againe

in the great day,Phil. 3.21.
                   transforming and making our vile bodies like vnto Chriſts glorious body, to reigne with him for euer.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  For what end ſhould we deſire this?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Euen for God himſelfe the end of all.
                     Pſal. 73.25. Pſal. 116.1.
               
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  In deſiring heauen, what ſhould we chiefely reſpect?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               Not ſo much our owne eaſe,
                     Rom. 7.24. Phil. 1.21 23. as that being freed from ſinne in holineſſe and ioy with vnſpeakeable loue (as a veſſell full of glory) wee may prayſe and magnifie God for euermore.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Seeing the reprobate may haue a certaine ſort of feeling, how may we diſcerne, whether our feeling be that ſenſe which is peculiar to the Child of God or not?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               By the Spirit of adoption.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Which be the ſure markes and fruits of Adoption in vs?
               
            
            
               
               Min.
               
                  
                     Rom. 8.16 Rom. 14.7.Perſwaſion of the loue of God towards vs, of our Election, Redemption, and Glorification: ioy flowing from this feeling, with increaſe of perſwaſion, and peace which paſſeth all vnderſtanding.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Yet what if the ſoule haue no ſuch diſpoſition?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Yet muſt wee looke backe vnto what wee haue felt. Next, wee muſt ſee what wee deſire to feele, and further, what wee hope to feele.
            
            
               Scho.
               
                  How may one know whether as yet he hath euer had any feeling?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  1. Cor. 2.0. Pſa. 13.24.25. Pſa. 31.19. Pſa 36.7.8.9.Hee muſt looke, if euer, in laying ſure holde of Chriſt, his ſoule hath beene filled with a ſpirituall ſweeteneſſe aboue all the pleaſures of Nature, which in ſome meaſure hath left a ſeale and ſtampe of heauen in the ſoule, that hath thus inabled him to diſcerne betwixt an abſence and a preſence of

God; ſo that hee is alwayes ioyfull,
                     Pſa. 52.35. Pſa. 63.3. Pſa. 88.14. when hee hath any feeling of Gods loue; by the contrary euer ſad, and heauy for his abſence.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Yet ſeeing the wicked may haue an inward reſtraining vertue to curbe ſinne, and an outward conformitie with the law of God, how may it be knowne whether one hath a reſtrayning vertue onely,
                  
                     Ezek 30.31. Act. 2.37. Zech. 12.10. Ier. 31.9. Eze. ibid. Eze. 20.43. Pſa. 51.1.2. Rom. 7.24. Pſa. 42.1. Pſa. 116.1. Iſa. 29.9. 
                  or the renuing vertue of the holy Spirit?
               
            
            
               Min.
               This is moſt eaſie to diſcerne.
            
            
               Scho.
               
                  Explaine your meaning.
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               The firſt internall worke of the Spirit, is a ſight of ſinne which offends the Maieſty of God; a ſight alſo of God who hath beene offended. Next, a ſecret ſorrow proceeding from a hatred to ſinne, with a loue of that glorious offended Maieſtie prouoked; then a true deſire to be freed of ſinne, with a louing heart, and earneſt deſire to loue God for himſelfe. Further alſo, a purpoſe and reſolution

to conſecrate our ſecret thoughts, will,Heb. 2.1 Pſal. 119.37. Pſal. 39.1
                   and affections vnto his holineſſe as a liuing ſacrifice. A ſtrife alſo againſt all the pleaſures and occaſions of ſinne,
                     Gen. 6.5. Ier. 17.9. Pſal. 32.3.4. 2. Cor. 7.11. with an indeauour to keepe our thoughts and affections ſtedfaſtly vpon God and his will. Laſtly, as the minde naturally ſtrais from God, the will being peruerſe, and the affections diſordered: if there be then a ſting in the conſcience bringing true remorſe, theſe be ſignes of the operation of the true Spirit by his renuing grace.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Seeing the worke of the ſpirit is a thing ſenſible, which is felt in his renuing vertues, in the ſlaughter of ſinne, and reformation vnto newneſſe of life: what if (all this while) one feele nothing but the growth of ſinne, hardneſſe of heart, and blindnes of minde?
               
            
            
               Min.
               
                  
                     Ier. 14.30. Rom. 7.14Firſt, he muſt ſee if he be able to diſcerne his ſinne, blindneſſe and hardneſſe of heart. 2. Looke if hee

ſecretly miſlike the ſame. 3. Marke if he would willingly wiſh it remoued.Pſal. 51.22. Ibid. ver 9 Cant. 1.4.
                   4. Conſider if he haue deſire to vſe, or any way wiſh he might vſe the means, though to his feeling he is no way able to vſe the ſame.
                     Ier. 14.22 Mic. 7.8.9. Pſa. 77.9.10. Iſa. 8.47. Pſa. 44.17.18.19. La. 3.26.32.33. 5. Looke backe if at any time God formerly did euer giue him grace to beleeue in him: (for that preſent) without any ſenſe or feeling, euen when not being able to pray: in languor, patience and hope hee waited for Gods preſence. 6. Conſider if after earneſt prayer and ſorrow for ſinne, at any time hee hath found light, ioy, peace, a perſwaſion of mercy with ſome ſoftneſſe of heart, the power of ſinne abated. Laſtly, if hee find this continually before his eyes. The good which I would, I doe not,
                     Rom. 7.19 but the euill which I would not, that doe I.
            
            
               Scholler.
               
                  Declare vnto me then ſome markes of the renuing Spirit?
               
            
            
               Min.
               A loue of God and his image

for his owne cauſe, being goodneſſe and loue it ſelfe.
                     Pſa. 116.1. Pſal. 139.21. Pſa. 51.19. Then an vnfained hatred of that which offendeth God. Laſtly, a miſliking of our owne euill heart, with a true thirſt and hunger to haue it made better.
            
            
               Sc.
               
                  Can a Reprobat haue theſe markes?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               No.
            
            
               Scholler.
               
                  How ſo?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Becauſe they be the markes of Election, and are wrought by the Spirit of Adoption; which a Reprobate cannot receiue.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Who are they who feele the wrath of God, and ſhall alſo periſh in the ſame wrath?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Thoſe whom God in his iudgement wakens, giuing the conſcience ouer to find the deluge of torments:1. Theſ. 2.16. the ſting of reprobation; withdrawing from them his Spirit, either to ſeeke mercy truly, or to beleeue that there is any mercy for them, ſo deſpairing.
            
            
               
               Schol.
               
                  When doth the Lord waken ſuch wicked men to feele theſe horrors of conſcience?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Some ſooner, ſome later,
                     Gen. 4.4.13. Mat. 27.4. ſome longer before their death, as Cain; ſome againe immediatly before their death, as Iudas.
               
            
            
               Scho.
               
                  What kind of ſenſe hath a Reprobate when he is thus wakened?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Light, feeling, & perſwaſion.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What light ſeeth he?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Firſt, all his ſinnes, accuſing,
                     Iſa. 48.22. Heb. 12.29. Mat. 25.41. conuicting, condemning, and tormenting him. 2. The great God a conſuming fire to deuoure him. 3. Eternitie of paine prepared for him, and to be giuen ouer by the iudge to be tormented for euer, with the diuell and his Angels.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What feeleth the Reprobate being thus wakened?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               Firſt, that ſinne is bitter.
                     Gen. 4.13 Iſa. 30.33 2. That there is an euerlaſting wrath prepared for impenitent ſinners.

3. That the conſcience (howſoeuer for a while aſleepe in hardneſſe of heart) is capable of wrath.1. King. 21 27. 4. That it is a fearefull thing to fall into the hands of the liuing God.
                     Heb. 10.31. Mar. 9.45.46. Luke 16.24. And laſtly, that hell-torments doe take away all peace and comforts, bringing nothing but ſorrow and vnquietnes, yea, that a little looke of hell for one euill thought, is more fearefull and terrible then all the torments in the earth.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Whereof is the Reprobate perſwaded when he is thus wakened?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               
                  
                     Matt. 27.5.Firſt, that God neuer elected him, nor yet Ieſus Chriſt hath redeemed him, and that hee was neuer renued by the Spirit of grace.1. Sam. 28 15. 2. That hee ſhall neuer haue comfort in heauen or earth. 3. That there is an euerlaſting wrath prepared for him, and that hee ſhall neuer come foorth of that priſon and torment. Laſtly, that GOD and his creatures,

viſiible and inuiſible,
                     Gen. 4.14 Pro. 28.1. Elect and Reprobate, ſhall all bee his enemies, helping to aggrauate his torments.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What be the degrees, by which a Reprobate is brought vnto this torment?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Firſt, Prophaneneſſe.
                     Heb. 12.16. Rom. 2.5. Heb. 3.12 Eph. 4.19 Gen. 4.13 Mat. 22.13. 2. Impenitencie. 3. Infidelity. 4. Senſeleſneſſe and dead ſecurity. 5. A wakening by a ſenſible wrath. Laſtly, a reiection of him into euerlaſting torments.
            
            
               Scholler.
               
                  What difference is there betwixt the Elect and the Reprobate, in the ſenſe and feeling of the wrath of GOD?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               Firſt, the Reprobate hee feeleth and fretteth, at the ſame;Reuel. 
                        
                           •
                        .10. Gen. 4.24
                   Next, his torment paineth him ſo, that hee would gladly bee rid of the paine, but neuer truely repenteth him of the ſinne. 3. The waight of his torment (proceeding from a

guilty conſcience, and the ſight of God the Iudge) maketh him to deſpaire,Matt. 27.5.
                   caſt off mercy, turne his backe vpon God, and his free promiſes in Chriſt Ieſus; ſo plunging himſelfe (without recouerie) in the wrath of God.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  How doth the childe of God behaue himſelfe in the feeling of the wrath of God?
               
            
            
               Min.
               Being wakened out of the dead ſleepe of ſinfull ſecurity;Pſal. 38.3 Pſal. 31.4. Pſal. 51.7
                   Firſt, torment maketh him to lament, and ſorrowe that hee ſhould haue prouoked his GOD, thus to deale with him. Next, he thirſteth for reconciliation with God through Ieſus Chriſt. Further, he draweth neere,
                     Pſa. 119.49. laying ſure hold vpon the promiſes of the word of GOD, deſiring to feele them by experience. Yea,Gal. 6.14 Phil. 3.8.
                   more; hee ſeeth no ſaluation for him out of Chriſt crucified, and therefore renounceth himſelfe and all that is in him, cleauing onely to

Gods free mercie and loue in the Lord Ieſus. Laſtly,
                     Pſal. 71.14.15. hee giueth not ouer, but conſtantly waiteth, hanging ſtill on Gods free loue, and the trueth of his promiſes reuealed in his word.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Yet ſhew vnto me further, how neere the childe of God may come vnto the wicked in the ſenſe and feeling of the wrath of God.
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               Firſt,
                     Rom. 7.18.23.24. Pſal. 22.1. Pſal. 88.4 5. Pſ. 40.2. Pſa 38.4. Pſa 55.4.5. Gods childe will feele all his impediments ſtanding vp betwixt God and him. 2. He may haue no kind of feeling, either of the loue of God, or of his mercie, election, redemption, or of the Spirit of ſanctification. 3. Gods childe will feele for his ſinnes (in Gods abſence) in his conſcience, burning wrath, vnquietneſſe and torment. 4. When hee thinketh of God, hee may be troubled: Eternitie will daſh him, the conſcience of him alſo (at that time) may beare ſuch witneſſe againſt

him,
                     Pſal. 88.15. that altogether hee may doubt of his ſaluation, eaſily then hee may be perſwaded to deſpaire: and if at ſuch a time it were giuen vnto the ſenſe of his owne conſcience to iudge, hee would willingly ſubſcribe his owne condemnation.
            
            
               Scholler.
               
                  Declare then, what is that manner of working, by which God vſeth to heale a ſoule being thus diſeaſed?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  Ioh. 3.5.
                  Hee hath a ſecret working for that preſent vnfelt by the Patient, yet afterwards fully reuealed.
            
            
               Scholler.
               
                  But, in ſuch a narrow pinch, howe may wee iudge of that ſecret working?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               
                  
                     Pſal. 51. Luc. 15.18. 2. Cor. 7.11.Firſt, by that griefe wee haue for grieuing of our God. 2. By that deſire wee haue to bee reconciled with God (for ſtill the more grieuous that the torment is, ſo much the greater will deſire of reconciliation bee, and the hatred to

ſinne:
                     Rom. 4.18) 3. By that hope wee haue aboue hope, againſt our feeling, looking vnto Gods free promiſes, with aſſurance that hee will come, with this reſolution, that though hee delayed his comming vntill our laſt breath yet for all this, that wee would waite for him.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  When Gods children cannot feele,
                  
                     Iſa. 8.17. 
                  ſhould they meaſure their eſtate according to their feeling, beleeuing that God ſo accounteth of them, as for the preſent their conſcience witneſſeth?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               No.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Why ſo?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               Becauſe none may meaſure the fauour of God by their preſent tentations: ſeeing, feeling is a falſe Iudge?
            
            
               Scholler.
               
                  Yet when one hauing ſufficient knowledge, walketh in all the means ſo much as may be, and can for all this haue no aſſurance or feeling of remiſsion of ſinnes: is not this lamentable?
               
            
            
               
               Miniſter.
               It may bee ſo for a while, but it is with ſuch, as with thoſe who haue a bad ſtomacke: who though they cannot make vſe of their prouiſions of knowledge for the preſent,
                     Pſa. 119.
                        •
                     2. yet when their appetites returne, they find better vſe of it then euer before.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  God (we know) promiſeth to giue thoſe who delight in him their hearts deſire.
                  
                     Pſal. 37.4 
                  Yet we ſee, they haue it not alwaies in ſpirituall things, as true ioy; feeling aſſurance of his loue. &c. How doth he then fulfill his promiſe?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               
                  Pſal. 51.4It is moſt certaine, the breach is alwayes on our part; for ſuch looke aſide on other worldly matters, and not directly vppon GOD, making him their ſole delight,
                     Pſal. 104 29. ſuffering their corruptions beare ſway: and then it is iuſt with God, to take away for a time their feeling; for hee ſeeth, if ſuch had not ſometimes a dead heart, they would

haue a proud heart (which is worſt of all) therefore hee leaueth them for a time.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  But they gladly would be freed from both.
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Our hearts yet are ſo deceitfull,
                     Pſal. 119.71. that God ſees we could not eſcape the latter, but by vndergoing the former.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What then ſhould ſuch thinke of themſelues; who for ſome yeeres together, find leſſe feeling in prayer, ioy in all good duties. &c. Then in the former times, although they vſe the meanes?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               Such thinke too hardly of themſelues,Why nouices in Chriſtianitie haue much feeling. Pſa. 77.7, 8, 9.
                   oftentimes without cauſe razing the ground-worke of their Election: And calling all the pledges of Gods former fauours into queſtion: which indeede they ſhould not doe, but rather gather ſo many more as they can. For, though they thinke that they had better feelings at their firſt conuerſion,

yet it is not ſo: (if for the preſent they ſtick cloſe vnto all Gods meanes) for their firſt feelings were in a great part, rather ſuddaine paſſions then grounded comforts: but after they come to haue any true conflicts with their ſoules, the mud of the fleſh is more purged away, and all things are more ſound then at the firſt.
            
            
               Scholler.
               
                  Yet you know it is written, that the righteous in their olde age ſhall be fat and flouriſhing, bringing forth fruit:
                  
                     Pſal. 92.13.14. 
                  what ſhall ſome ſay then, or thinke of themſelues, when they find a decay in their memories, &c. Deadneſſe in their affections? &c. Though they may not call their election in queſtion; may they not feare ſome ſtrange iudgement?
               
            
            
               Min.
               
                  
                     Pſal. 44.17.18.19 20.No ſurely: for (perhaps) then they may flouriſh moſt of all in humility, holineſſe, patience, experience, and ſuch like graces, when they want thoſe ſtirring and hote affections. Neither ought we to looke for

ſuch ſtrength of memory and liuely operatiue actions of grace, in age, in ſickneſſe, in great ſorrowes and tentations; as at other times in yong yeeres free from ſuch aſſaults. Neuertheleſſe, in ſuch times God giues graces moſt fit for thoſe times; as in age, grauity, ability to giue good counſell, to ſpeake from experience, &c. So that though the aged Chriſtians haue not alwayes moſt life and feeling, and ſtirring grace: yet are they better ſeaſoned then young ſouldiers: (as the Prophet ſpeaketh.
                     Pſa. 86.1
                        •
                     .) Giue thy ſtrength vnto day ſeruant: ſo haue they a great deale more of Gods ſtrength to walke with: yea, the greateſt meaſure thereof at their moſt neede: which if wee ſhould attaine vnto too ſoone, it would make vs proud and ſecure to ſay with the rich man, Soule take thy reſt, thou haſt enough for many yeeres.
                     Luke 12.19. And therefore as Hounds doe hunt beſt

when they followe the ſent, not the ſight (for then they runne a madding, ready like to breake their neckes,) ſo aged Chriſtians, though they follow by faith, and haue leſſe feeling in ſenſe, yet doe they goe on more ſtrongly to heauen, then ſuch who runne all vpon their ſenſe.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  How commeth it then to paſſe that Gods children are ſo addicted vnto feeling? ſo mourning when they haue loſt the ſame? yea, ſo troubled, that they imagine all is gone for euer?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               Iuſt as a pricke of a pin, or ſome other diſtemper in one part of the body, doth ſo vexe vs, that wee for the preſent are ſo grieued with the ſame, that wee forget that ſtrength and health which is in the reſt of the body: ſo the feeling and ſenſe of Gods loue,Cant. 5.6.
                   being for a while loſt, doth ſo dampe with the ſorrowe thereof all other graces in the ſoule, that for the preſent wee can diſcerne

none, and ſo imagine all to bee loſt for euer.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What maketh Gods children ſo to relye vpon feeling?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               Certainly (as I thinke) becauſe they remember not that it is written,2. Cor. 5.7 we walke by faith and not by ſight: and ſo their faith being weake, by reaſon they are not well clothed with their ſpirituall armour, hauing forgot their conſolation, no maruaile they ſtagger and reele to and fro,
                     Heb. 12.5 hauing loſt the touch of that hand which had wont to guide them. So that I ſay, it muſt bee want of faith; the ſtrength whereof appeareth moſt in the leaſt meaſure of feeling.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Wherefore then doth God giue vnto his children, ſuch a meaſure of feeling at their firſt conuerſion, yet afterwards withdraweth the ſame?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Euen as we ſee we may lead a little child when he is young whither we will, with apples and ſuch like

toyes:
                     Heb. 5.13 ſo are wee (being babes in Chriſt) led by feeling at our firſt conuerſion; then we are altogether for rewards: at which time if GOD made vs not better offers then the world, we would forſake him, and cleaue vnto the ſame.Matth. 15 22.
                   But (with the woman of Canaan) to hold out in repulſes, without feeling to gather ſtrong arguments to mooue GOD, againe and againe, argues a ſtrong Faith. Againe, Chriſtians haue ordinarily more feeling at firſt, becauſe then euery thing is new vnto them, receiuing more from God then they looked for. Neither are our prayers then ſo much vnderpropt with arguments as with feelings, then we come with ſimple ſutes, thinking God loues me, and therefore hee will heare me.
                     Pſa. 116.1. (As little children vſe to come to their Parents: they bring no forcible reaſons; but I pray you Father. &c. Giue me ſuch a thing; neither doe their Parents expect any, but

are well content (yea glad) to heare them aske at firſt. But when proceſſe of time makes thoſe feelings (by vſe) not to ſeeme ſo new, and ſo not ſo ſenſible: God hiding his face; and feeling decaying; then doe they beginne to lay about them with their knowledge, to labour for ſtrong reaſons in their prayers,
                     Heb. 5.14 Exod 32.11.12. & 32.12. Pſal. 40.10.11.12. Pſa. 31.22. to ſeeke how to mooue God beſt: by his nature, promiſes, and former mercies. And then indeede (whatſoeuer wee thinke) is the beſt growth in faith and al goodnes, which after the ſtorme is paſt, Gods children can ſee and reioyce at, yea, and liue vpon the ſtore a good while after, hauing thoſe prayers which they made in their deepeſt anguiſh, as the beſt pillars of their aſſurance of Gods loue.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Why doth God for the moſt part ſo long delay to giue comfort and feeling vnto his children?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               Not like vnto ſome Phyſicians and Surgeons, who with needleſſe

delayes put their Patients to extraordinarie paines:
                     Mat. 9. & 15.23. but for their good, to make them ſpend prayers, whereby they are alway gayners: the paines whereof is but the croſſing of the fleſh, which the more it is tamed,1. Cor. 9.27. the better it is for them.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What then ſhould one doe when hee hath long attended without any comfort or feeling?
               
            
            
               Mini.
               When the ſoule would moſt willingly deſpaire (becauſe of the ſenſe of ſinne,
                     Pſa. 71.14. Iob 13.15 Iob 19.23 24.25. terrour of conſcience, and Gods abſence) then beleeue moſt, lay ſurer hold then euer vpon the promiſes of the mercy of God in Chriſt.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  How can one ſay that he beleeueth, not finding in him the fruits of Faith, which are prayer, comfort, peace, and holineſſe.
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               
                  2. Cor. 5.7 Pſa. 36.3.Faith and lacke of feeling may well ſtand together; yea, and great doubting: and hee who beleeueth

moſt, and feeleth leaſt, is hee who glorifieth God moſt: for, when we feele, wee poſſeſſe (as it were) a beginning of that which ſhall be in heauen: we liue now by faith and hope,
                     Rom. 8.24 25. not by ſight and feeling.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  But how ſhould the conſcience in the meane time reſt, ſince feeling is no competent Iudge?
               
            
            
               Mini.
               Build vpon that rocke,
                     Math. 16 18. againſt which the gates of hell cannot preuaile.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What is that?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               To ſticke cloſe vnto Chriſt, and vnto the vertue of his death and reſurrection, remembring the iuſtifying blood of Chriſt, the ſatisfying blood of Chriſt, the meritorious blood of Chriſt; the comfortable reſurrection of Chriſt Ieſus:
                     Iob 29.24. Mat. 9.13. And that hee came not to call the righteous but the ſinners vnto repentance; that he came for the ſicke and not for the whole; that he biddeth all laden

and weary ſinners come vnto him; yea and all ſuch who are a thirſt,
                     Mat. 11.28. Reu. 22.17. Iſa. 1.18. Ezek. 33.11. to come vnto the waters and drinke freely: aſſuring them that though their ſinnes were red as ſcarlet, yet that hee will make them white as the Snow: as alſo he himſelfe hath ſworne, that as he liueth, hee deſires not the death of a ſinner; but rather that hee ſhould turne from his wickedneſſe and liue: promiſing, that he will neither breake the bruiſed reed, nor quench the ſmoking flaxe,
                     Matt. 12.20. Iſa. 61.1. Mat. 10.20. Iſa. 61.1. Luk. 15.4.23. but will bind vp that which is broken, with the comforts of his Spirit; will make whole that which is wounded, with the plaiſter of his precious blood; and bring home the loſt ſheepe, reioycing alſo at the returne of the forlorne ſonne. His loue alſo couers both the multitude of ſinnes, and the ſinner, with his owne ſhining righteouſneſſe;Phil. 3.9. Eph. 2.1.
                   he alſo quickneth and raiſeth vp the dead ſoule that is ſtinking in the graue of ſinne. And (to

be ſhort) he ſaith;Rom. 9.33. Rom. 8.1.
                   He who beleeueth ſhall neuer be aſhamed, but ſhall be raiſed in that great day, with a glorious body, like vnto the moſt beautifull body of Chriſt Ieſus, and ſhall neuer be condemned, but haue euerlaſting life. This is the rocke I ſpake of,
                     Pſa. 61.2. Pſa. 27.5. Pſal. 32.7 and on this rocke muſt the ſoule anchor, when it is toſſed betwixt the ſtrong winds and deepe waues of ſinne and euerlaſting wrath. For bleſſed is he who beleeueth, though he neuer ſaw Ieſus with his eyes.
                     Ioh. 20.29 Yea ſuppoſe one neuer had any feeling of him, ſtill waiting in hope and languor,
                     L
                           •
                        . 3.24.25.26.27 31.32. and reſting vpon the loue and mercy of Chriſt Ieſus reuealed in the word; this is a ſure ground to rely vpon; that as God is trueth it ſelfe,
                     Ioh. 3.33. and 14.6. Ioſh. 23.4. 2. Tim. 1.12. ſo he will moſt certainly performe all his promiſes in his owne good time: being both mercifull and powerfull to performe whatſoeuer he promiſeth.
            
            
               Scholler.
               
                  Yet, why may not one, who

doubteth of his Election, reply? It is certaine, God is mercifull, true; and powerfull, but what is that vnto me, ſeeing that I cannot perceiue in particular, that hee hath made a promiſe vnto me?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  
                     Iſa. 43.10 11.12. Iſa. 40.13 25.26.27 28.Firſt, I would haue ſuch a party to aſſure himſelfe, that this is but a iugling deluding Sophiſtrie of the diuell, to make any to prie into the decree of God, to ſee whether his name be written there or not, before he vſe the meanes: for then this followeth, that becauſe I cannot ſee Gods decree, therefore I will vſe no meanes, all are in vaine: which temptation, if the Deuill can once ſettle, keeping ſuch parties from the meanes, then he knoweth they be ſure his owne. Next, I would wiſh them to remember,
                     Ier. 3.31.32. Gal. 3.28. that the Lord is ſo aboundantly mercifull in making of his promiſes, that hee excludeth no ſorts of perſons, neither Iewe nor Grecian, bonde, or free, high nor low, rich or poore, but

the righteouſneſſe of God through Ieſus Chriſt is in all and vpon all who beleeue:
                     Rom. 3.23 24. That there is no exception of perſons, for all haue ſinned, and are depriued of the glory of God, and are iuſtified freely by his grace, through the redemption made in Chriſt Ieſus; yea,1. Tim. 1.15. that Chriſt Ieſus came into the world to ſaue ſinners, whoſoeuer they bee, excluding no ſort, nor degree, from laying holde on life, much leſſe any particular perſon. Rather (then) muſt one gather the quite contrary arguments againſt the Deuill and carnall reaſon:Eph. 2.1.
                   And thus returne their arguments: All Gods children (for the moſt part) who in former times haue beene called and enlightned (when they were dead in ſinnes and treſpaſſes) at their departure from Sodom, were not ſo curious as at firſt to prie into Gods decree, to knowe whether their names

were written in the booke of life; before they would vſe the meanes: but they reiecting ſenſe and carnall reaſon, did by degrees vſe the meanes to their power; and ſo by the conſtant vſe of the ſame, and Gods bleſſing therewith, by little and little at length, found their eyes opened, their hearts ſoftned, the whole man in part ſanctified; ſo attaining vnto the knowledge of his decree: therefore I will alſo vſe the meanes (rather obeying God then the diuell) which though by and by they proue not effectually, yet I will waite Gods good time,
                     Iſa. 40.31 & who knoweth but at length I may ſpeed as well as others?
                     Pſa. 1 38.7. 1. Tim. 1.13. Matt. 9.13. 
                        
                           •
                        am. 4.5 and 5.8.2. Iſ. 53.4.5 Mat. 11.28. And ſo againe, though I find not my name in the free Couenant of mercy, yet ſince it excludeth none by name, I will hope ſtill, though I bee moſt ſinfull; yet Chriſt, he came into the world to ſaue ſinners, he iuſtifieth all thoſe who beleeue in him, how miſerable ſoeuer they be, yet his righteouſnes

apprehended couers all their infirmities. But ſo it is, I am a vile ſinner, laden and burdened with iniquities. Therefore I will beleeue,Phil. 3.9.
                   and my Lord will iuſtifie me; and I will draw neere vnto God, and he will eaſe me; I will apprehend and cleaue cloſe vnto his righteouſneſſe, how vile and naked ſoeuer I be of my ſelfe: and thus I ſhall eſcape in the middeſt of all tempeſts.
                     Iſa. 55.8.9.1 Pſa 8.47.8.9. Eph. 3.20 For God (if I be penitent) is more powerfull to foregiue and heale my rebellions, then I am able to prouoke his anger. Now the ground of this conſolation is the reuealed trueth of God, which is as ſure as if we did ſee him in an extraordinary manner, both feeling and hearing him ſpeake vnto the heart and eare, or rauiſhing vs in viſions, as he did to Adam, Abraham, Iſaack, Iaacob, Moſes, the Prophets and Apoſtles,
                  Act. 9.3.
                   or as vnto Paul out of heauen:
                     Mat. 5.18. for heauen and earth ſhall paſſe away, before any title of his word ſhall fall vnto the

ground.
                     Luk 
                     
                        •
                     .54 And hee who reſteth vpon this word, out and beyond his feeling, he reſteth vpon the arme of God; and as God is true, ſhall vndoubtedly find deliuerance:
                     Ioh. 3.33. but he who meaſures the promiſes of God by his feeling, and thinkes that hee beleeueth not but when he feeleth, he ſinneth grieuouſly; for hee compareth all vndoubted veritie grounded vpon God (which ſhall be performed in Gods good time,Rom. 3.4.
                  
                  
                     Heb. 10.23. Iſa. 33.6.7.8.11. as certainly as God is truth it ſelfe) with an vncertaine and vaniſhing feeling, which may faile vs, but the promiſes of God cannot. Hee therefore who meaſureth his faith by his feeling, deceiueth himſelfe; becauſe, neither is it permanent, neither haue we any warrant of the meaſure, time, or continuance thereof:
                     Iſa. 59.16.7. Iſa. 63.5. ſeeing the Lord commeth when hee will, and as he will, as he ſeeth to be moſt for his glory and our good, euen in our moſt need. And as for the chiefe grounds

of faith, there is no neede to goe vp vnto heauen to ſeeke for them, neither to digge downe vnto hell to find them out: for (as Moſes ſpeaketh) the word of truth is neere into vs, our eyes ſee it continually, our hands handle it, our eyes ſee it, our eares haue the ſame read and preached vnto vs. And hee that beleeueth in his heart (as the Scripture ſpeaketh) that Ieſus Chriſt is dead and riſen againe,
                     Rom. 10.9 confeſſing him alſo with his mouth, ſhall be ſaued.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What maner of working is that which the Lord worketh with the ſoule, when he reuealeth himſelfe vnto it?
               
            
            
               Mini.
               Firſt, he remoueth darkneſſe,Eph. 5.8. Act. 26.18. Act. 2.37 &c. terror, and that which preſſeth downe, and doubting. Next, hee powreth forth vpon the ſoule. 1. A ſenſible light 2. A perſwading light. 3. A comfortable light.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Explaine your meaning in ſo ſaying.
               
            
            
               
               Miniſter.
               I meane this,Rom. 5.5.
                   that when God worketh with the ſoule, hee will powre out the light of his Spirit vpon the ſame, ſhewing clearely vnto the party, that he loueth him, and through loue hath choſen, redeemed, and in heauen will crowne him. This light bringeth ioy vnſpeakeable and glorious.1. Pet. 1.8. Phil. 4.7. 1. Cor. 2.9.10. This light bringeth that peace of God, which paſſeth all vnderſtanding: And during this light wee feele that which the eye neuer ſaw, the eare heard, neither can enter into the heart of man to thinke of.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  How ſhould we trie in ſuch an experience, whether that light we feele be the true light or not?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               Firſt, we muſt trie how the ſoule was diſpoſed before that light came. Next, try what ſort of feeling we haue in that light. Laſtly, wee muſt marke what ſtampe it leaueth in the heart, and how we are diſpoſed after feeling.
            
            
               
               Schol.
               
                  What maner of diſpoſition ſhould be in the ſoule before that light came?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               A darkeneſſe, deadnes,
                     Eph. 21. and 5.8. Act. 2.37 Deut. 28.65.66. and ſenſleſnes, with torment, at ſometimes, doubting and terror: a ſenſible abſence of the power of the holy Ghoſt, either to comfort or ſanctifie.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Doth euery man feele this eſtate?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               No.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Who then are they who feele this miſerable eſtate of the ſoule?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               None in a manner but the children of God.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  How may one know when the ſight of his miſerie is wrought by the Spirit of God?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Becauſe it is an effect of his working.
                     Act. 2.37.
               
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Shew me that.
               
            
            
               Mini.
               It is a light which muſt ſhew vnto vs our darkeneſſe,
                     Eph. 5.13. and it is a preſence which maketh vs to feele and ſee an abſence.
            
            
               Scholler.
               
                  Yet goe on, perſwade me I

intreat a you more fully thereof.
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  Phil. 3.6.
                  Looke then firſt into the experience of the Saints of God. Saint Paul ſaw not himſelfe, vntill God called him, yea he thought himſelfe without reproofe. Next, let any one who is called looked vnto his owne experience;Rom. 7.9.
                   and he ſhall ſee there was a time when he had no feeling of that miſerable eſtate. Now when wee ſhall find a change, nature cannot be the worker therof: for Nature hath not that light to diſcouer vnto vs our miſery:Eph. 2.1. Rom. 1.
                   we are dead in ſinne by nature, and blinde alſo: howe is it then poſſible for a dead man to ſee or feele? ſo that it muſt needs be a light, ſurpaſſing a naturall light, which ſheweth vnto vs our miſerie. Againe, if it were onely nature which diſcouereth vnto vs our miſery (ſeeing Nature retaineth ſtill her owne naturall operations) what is the cauſe that there was a time when wee did neither

ſee our ſelues nor our miſery? for if the ſight of our miſerie were naturall; wee euer would haue ſeene the ſame. So becauſe it is of Grace, blind Nature could neuer ſhewe the ſame:
                     Rom. 8.26 therefore the ſight of our miſery is by the ſpeciall working of the holy Spirit.
            
            
               Scholller.
               
                  But Cain and diners other wicked men did feele their owne miſerie: howe may wee diſcerne betwixt their ſight and that of Gods children?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               The ſight which wicked men haue of themſelues, and their miſerie, it commeth after ſome euill deede done, being guilty and thus conuicted of the crime by their naturall conſcience. Next,
                     Iſa. 33.14 Gen. 4.13.14. they ſee the puniſhment and only therefore tremble. Further, their feare is for the puniſhment onely, as Cains was: as alſo they feele not with any continuance the miſerable ſtate of their

ſoule to ſtriue againſt it, to ſubdue it vnto true remorſe: neither can they ſee the wickedneſſe of their heart, or truly deſire to haue it renewed or brought vnder a heauenly ſenſe of Gods loue and fauour.
            
            
               Scho.
               
                  Shew vnto me alſo, how ſeeth the child of God his miſerable heart?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               The chiefe thing the child of God lookes into,
                     Iſa. 63.17 Pſa. 51.10. is the heart. Next, he feeleth the euill diſpoſition thereof. Further, he is grieued with the ſenſe of the ſame. Then he thirſteth to haue it made better, rather then to obtaine the whole world, and all the pleaſures thereof.
                     Gal. 3.17. There will alſo be ſtill a ſtrife (at the leaſt) in his deſire and will. Laſtly, at ſometimes Gods child will feele his heart made better then vſuall; that is,
                     Iſa. 61.10 hee will feele the hardneſſe, blindneſſe, vnquietneſſe thereof ſomewhat abated: and light, ſoftneſſe, and peace, in place thereof. So that, when the preſence of God

is in the heart. Gods childe feeleth it; when it is remooued, he diſcerneth it. For the truely wicked feele not a hard heart, neither know they what a ſoft heart meaneth. It is therfore onely peculiar to the Childe of God, to bee able to diſcerne rightly of his owne miſery and Gods mercy.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  But what if one doe ſtill feele nothing but hardnes of heart and blindneſſe of minde: as yet not being able to perceiue a change?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               Firſt, he muſt trie whether that ſenſe of hardnes he feeles be the worke of God, ſeeing there was a time, when hee had not this ſenſe: Next, marke if hee bee pleaſed with that eſtate, or rather gladly would haue it made better (if poſſibly it might bee) though it were but like vnto ſmoaking flaxe:
                     Iſa. 42.3. Mat. 5.6 Remembring that promiſe; Bleſſed are they who hunger and thirſt for

righteouſnes, for they ſhall be filled. Further, hee muſt warily marke, whether at any time he is able (how weakely ſoeuer) to ſpeake, intreat, and pray vnto God,
                     Iſa. 38.14 for mercy to haue the heart ſoftened, &c. None can make vs to pray in any meaſure, ſaue the Spirit: yea although there be but a ſigh vnto God,
                     Rom. 8.28 it is ſurely wrought by the Spirit. Then ſee, if after prayer,phil. 4.07.
                   or in prayer, hee hath euer obtained any eaſe or reſt. Laſtly though he obtaine no eaſe, yet let him looke if hee would gladly haue a ſoft heart in ſome meaſure (howſoeuer weakely relying vpon the word) hoping that God in his owne good time will come;
                     pſ. 40.1.2. therefore waiting in patience.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What learne we hence?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Firſt, that the ſight of our ſelues commeth not of our ſelues, but of God.1. Cor. 11.12. 2. That we are in a bleſſed and happy eſtate, when we haue a

ſenſe and feeling of our miſerie,Math. 5.3
                   being diſpleaſed therewith, and deſiring from our heart to haue it remooued. 3. That in ſuch an eſtate,
                     Mat. 13.16. Luc. 10.24. wee are thoſe with whom GOD is now a working, if wee be able to diſcerne betwixt a ſoft and a hard heart: betwixt the light of the Spirit and the darkneſſe of nature. 4. That when wee obtaine but ſome piece of deſire, and ſometimes ſome little grace to pray, with a little hope, repoſing vpon the word of God, that albeit to our feeling God is not neere vnto vs,Mic. 7.9.
                   yet that in his owne good time hee will come againe: ſo that as truely as I feele an abſence, deſiring his preſence, hee will as ſurely ſatisfie our deſires, letting vs feele his bleſſed preſence. Laſtly,
                     Heſ. 14.8. Iſa. 42.3. though wee bee but as bruiſed reedes and ſmoking flaxe, hauing nothing to boaſt of either of holines or feeling, as the leaſt of all Saints;

yet that God will neither breake off our longing, nor quench out deſire. And ſo that finally we are in the ſtate of grace, notwithſtanding all helliſh tentations.
            
            
               Scholler.
               
                  How ſhould wee trie whether that be the true light or not, which in the time of feeling is felt?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               If wee marke in the time of feeling, wherewith the ſoule is filled.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What then filleth the ſoule?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               An vnſpeakable power which transformeth the minde, with a ſenſible preſence of that great light,
                     Rom. 8.36 making the ſoule to exult and riſe vp in ioy, reſt in peace, and triumph in perſwaſion.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Whereof is the ſoule thus perſwaded?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               Of the loue of God vnto vs in Ieſus Chriſt, in our election and redemption; that he hath loued and giuen himſelfe for vs:Iohn 3.16
                   ſo that by

him being ſaued from condemnation,Eph. 2.4. Rom. 8.1. and 17.
                   we ſhal be crowned with him in glory for euermore.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Who worketh this perſwaſion?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               The Spirit of God, which ſearcheth the deepe things of God.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Haue not Gods children that ſenſe at all times of this perſwaſion?
                  1. Cor 2.19.
               
            
            
               Mini.
               No.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  When is it felt then?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               At ſometimes onely, or when it pleaſeth him to reueale himſelfe, for his owne glory and our comfort,
                     Iſay. 54.7.8. according to his owne good will.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Haue not all the children God a like meaſure of feeling?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               No.
            
            
               Scholler.
               
                  What if all ones life time he neuer haue felt any ſuch ſenſe as you ſpeake off; may bee therefore conclude that hee is one of thoſe, in whom the holy Spirit dwelleth not?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               That followeth not that

hee ſhould reaſon thus: I feele not, nor euer felt the ioyes of the Spirit, therefore hee is not within mee; and I ſhall neuer feele the ſame. This is a falſe concluſion. The holy Spirit may be in one (as it was in a whole Church) euen then when hee feeleth handneſſe of heart, terrours,
                     Lam. 3.18 and doubting. Was not the Spirit of GOD in thoſe Saints, who doe complaine, and demaund of GOD thus. O Lord, why haſt thou made vs to erre from thy wayes,
                  
                     Iſa 63.17. 
                  and hardened our heart from thy feare? Was not the holy Spirit alſo in the Prophet Dauid:
                  1. Sam. 27 1. Pſa. 31.22. who ſuffered the terrours of God from his youth, with doubting of his life?
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Yet declare what that ſtay is, which ſhould vphold one in ſuch a tentation?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Firſt, to looke vnto God, next vnto our owne heart.
            
            
               
               Schol.
               
                  What is to be conſidered, concerning Gods part?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Firſt,
                     Rom. 8.28 that all things (as the Scripture ſpeaketh) worke togegether for the beſt, vnto thoſe who loue God: Next, that GOD commeth when he will,
                     Mat. 10.30. chiefely in our moſt neede. 3. That God hath all the haires of our head numbred, ſo as nothing commeth to paſſe, without his gracious prouidence: and thus muſt we aſſure our ſelues, that it is his bleſſed will to hide himſelfe from vs for a little.
                     Iſa. 54.7.8. Exod. 34.6. 4. Wee muſt remember, that GOD is mercie and wiſedome it ſelfe; and that mercie moueth his Maieſtie to giue his preſence: but wiſedome directeth that preſence, as hee thinketh moſt expedient to his glory and thy good. So that he is but fooliſh, who fretteth in impatiency,2. King. 6.33. becauſe God commeth not vnto him at his pleaſure, ſeeing hee (who is wiſedome

it ſelfe) knoweth beſt his owne time. Laſtly,
                     Deut. 8.3 16. Iam. 1.2 Pſal. 40.19. we muſt remember, that Gods will in thus leauing vs, is to try whether without feeling we can in faith beleeue his promiſes, reſting and waiting patiently vpon him in humility vntill he come.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What ſhould bee conſidered concerning our owne heart?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               
                  Cant. 3.1.2. Pſal. 10.1 Pſal. 42
                  Firſt, to marke if we find a want of Gods preſence, diſcerning an abſence. 2. We muſt marke whether this abſence doe grieue vs. 3. Marke whether wee hunger and thirſt for his preſence.
                     Pſa. 84.
                        •
                     . 4. Wee muſt be ſure that either we vſe the meanes of the word and prayer, or at leaſt, haue a deſire to the ſame; ſuffering others to doe for vs, that we are not able to doe.
                     Iſa. 8.17. Iſa. 25.9. Hab. 2.3. Laſt of all, we muſt trie whether we haue reſolued to waite in hope, reſting vpon his promiſes in patience, with a conſtant deſire vntill he come.
            
            
               
               Schol.
               
                  But ſeeing the Saints of God haue not ſtill a like meaſure of feeling, ſhew (as neere as you are able) what is the greateſt meaſure of feeling they find in this life, and the leaſt meaſure they attaine vnto.
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               The greateſt meaſure is, when one is rauiſhed with an vnſpeakeable preſence of God, ſo that the ſenſes of the body are not felt,2. Cor. 12 1.2. but ouercome with that fulneſſe, which then the ſoule receiueth, as Paul was rauiſhed:
                     Reu. 1.10. Act. 10.3. or by an extaſie of reuelation and viſions, as befell vnto Peter and the Prophets: or when the preſence of God is felt in the word, either read or preached, or in prayer, that it filleth the ſoule with an vnſpeakable ioy, and a wonderfull peace of conſcience,
                     Act. 4.31. which none can vnderſtand, but hee who feeleth the ſame. Againe, the leaſt meaſure which the Saints feele, is either vnder terrour, or in the

times of peace.
               
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What is the leaſt ſenſe which the ſoule attaineth to vnder terrour?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               The eſtate of the party muſt be conſidered, if he hath beene effectually called or not.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What is the diſpoſition of the child of God vnder terrour, who hath neuer beene called, but for the preſent is a Patient in the act of calling?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Bitterneſſe, doubting, terrour in the feeling of ſinne & wrath; yet there is a kinde of weake deſire,
                     Act. 16.29.30. with a hope (although weake) raiſed by the holy Spirit to wait for better.
            
            
               Scholler.
               
                  In ſuch an eſtate how is the ſoule ſupported?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  2. Cor. 12.9.By a ſecret and powerfull preſence of God, although for the preſent it be not felt.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What is that which maintaineth this preſence?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Grace to ſeeke grace, grace to languiſh for grace,
                     Ier. 17.7. and grace to

waite in hope vntill God come.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  If the child of God haue beene called,
                  
                     Mic. 7.8.9. 
                  and haue taſted how gracious the Lord is; what is his diſpoſition vnder terrour?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               He is poſſeſſed either with a blinde terrour, or with a terrour proceeding of guiltineſſe.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What doe you call a blind terrour?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               When one is ſmitten with a confuſed feare, not knowing the cauſe, nor wherefore.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What is the diſpoſition of the child of God, in ſuch an eſtate?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               The ſoule is ſtupified,Pſal. 77.3 Lam. 3.15. Pſal. 77.5
                   daſhed, and amazed; almoſt deuoured and ſwallowed vp with the feare. Next, there remaineth a certaine memorie of the preſence of GOD once felt. Laſtly, the ſoule is ſecretly ſupported by the Spirit of God to waite; ſo that for all this it deſpaireth not finally.
            
            
               
               Schol.
               
                  But what if the feare proceed of guiltineſſe?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  1. Sam. 7.6. Hoſ. 6.1.2. Lam. 1.22. Pſal. 4.1.Firſt, God giueth grace to pray for remiſſion of ſinnes. 2. Hee melteth the heart for offending of him. 3. When we cannot ſorrowe with teares, there will be languiſhing ſighes. 4. The remembrance of by-paſt experience, yeeldeth ſome comfort. Laſtly, (though at ſome times ſcarce there be any hope felt) yet the ſoule will waite for comfort.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Shew then, what is the leaſt meaſure of feeling, which the childe of God hath in the times of his peace.
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  
                     Iſa. 63.17 Lam. 1.18.A ſenſe of the hardneſſe of his heart, which hee cannot poſſibly get ſoftened: a ſenſe of impenitencie, infidelity, blindneſſe of minde, deadneſſe of Spirit;
                     Lam. 1.13. an inhabillity to ſtriue againſt the heart, and the euill diſpoſition thereof, with any ſpirituall battell;
                     Ibid. 1.16. and 5.17.18.19. onely there may remaine ſome weake deſire of a better

diſpoſition: a ſmall kinde of diſcontentment, with the preſent eſtate of the ſoule: with nowe and then ſome heauy faint ſtollen ſighes, looking vp vnto GOD for ſome helpe.
            
            
               Sch.
               
                  What is the cauſe that God will haue his Saints to feele ſuch terrors and ſtings of conſcience?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Firſt,
                     Pſa. 51.3 that they may know that ſinne is bitter and fearefull. 2. That they may vnderſtand that God is angry againſt all ſinne,
                     Lam. 3.39. and hath treaſures of euerlaſting wrath, ready to bee powred out vpon impenitent ſinners.
                     Heb. 12.1 3. That thereby the Saints may learne to hate and deteſt ſinne ſo much the more.Iud. 23.
                   4. That they may reſolue to followe after holineſſe, ſtriuing to eſchew the garment ſpotted with the fleſh.
                     Pſa. 116.1. 5. That ſo much the more deerely they may loue Chriſt Ieſus, who hath waſhed and redeemed them from their ſins,

and that moſt terrible wrath which burneth for euermore.
            
            
               Scholler.
               
                  What is the cauſe that God will haue his Saints to feele hardneſſe of heart, and the miſerable eſtate of their ſoules?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               Firſt, to make them vnderſtand, howe barren, dead, filthy Lepers they are by Nature, through the corruption of ſinne. 2. That in this feeling of themſelues they may be humbled,
                     Pſa. 51.5 and truely acknowledge their miſerie in ſhaming and condemning themſelues;
                     Ezek. 36.31. & 20.43. that God in ſuch a ſenſible confeſſion may be glorified. 3 To make them the more gladly and ioyfully long for the comming of Chriſt. 4. That when they doe feele, they may learne to diſcerne how precious a heauenly preſence is: ſo euer thereafter, ſo much the more carefull to entertaine the ſame,Cant. 3.4.
                   and more thankfull for all manner of comforts. 5. That

the Saints may knowe and vnderſtand, that albeit they finde ſometimes GOD working within them, as indeede they doe: yet that the ſtrength of corruption is ſo great, that it quencheth theſe ſweete and holy feelings; as alſo that wee may know our weakeneſſe and infirmities to bee ſuch, 
                     ••
                  ileſt wee walke in this Tabernacle of clay, that wee are not able to retaine a conſtant ſpirituall preſence. Laſt of all,1. Cor. 13.14. Pſal. 51.13. that we may afterwards pitty and be ſo much the more merciful vnto others in the like eſtate.
            
            
               Scholler.
               
                  What may we learne heereof?
               
            
            
               Min.
               Firſt, that one ſenſe and feeling is not enough, but God in mercie muſt multiply feeling after feeling, and grace after grace. Next, that wee ſhould long to bee freed of this body of ſinne and death,Phil. 1.23
                   to bee cloathed with our heauenly

husband in glory:2. Cor. 5. 1. Cor. 13.126. there immediatly to ſee the face of God, there to feele an euerlaſting preſence without any abſence.
            
            
               Scho.
               
                  Is it poſsible, that God can be in the heart, when we feele the hardneſſe of our hearts?
               
            
            
               Min.
               It may be ſo.
            
            
               Scho.
               
                  How may that be knowne?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  Pſal. 32.3 Pſa. 38.3.
                  Firſt, by the feeling of the euill: 2. By the extreame ſorrowe, heauineſſe, and diſcontentment for that euill diſpoſition.
                     Pſa. 63.17 3. By that remaining deſire, to haue the ſoule truely touched with a ſenſible preſence of Gods holy Spirit: with a deſire to ſtriue, when we are not able to ſtriue.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What manner of ſtampe leaueth this light in the heart (being nowe departed) in the time of hardneſſe of heart?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  
                     Pſa. 61.20.Firſt, it confirmeth and ſetleth the ſoule to reſt vpon that God

whoſe preſence was once felt. Next, it maketh the ſoule ſtill bolde to draw neere vnto God. Further,
                     Pſal. 77.5 6. the memorie of that former preſence, bringeth comfort in tentation, becauſe wee haue felt ſuch light, as hath ſanctified and renewed the minde, will, and affections. Againe,
                     Pſal. 51.10. it maketh a man meruailous humble, to hate ſinne, to loue holineſſe and righteouſneſſe; to make choice of God, to bee his ſole pleaſure and delight, as poſſibly he may: to loath this preſent life,Phil. 1.23
                   and the pleaſures thereof: to long to bee diſſolued to bee with Chriſt: To walke as a ſtranger in this world: to haue his conuerſation in heauen, by faith and hope, as the heire and Sonne of God. The remaining ſtampe of this light alſo, maketh the childe of God reioyce when he ſeeeth God honored;
                     Pſal. 119.136. and contrarily, exceeding ſorrowfull, when he ſeeth him diſhonored.
            
            
               
               Scholler.
               
                  What is the cauſe that this ſmall remaining light hath or can haue ſuch a ſtampe and effectuall working?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               Becauſe this light once ſhining in the ſoule, draweth it ſo neere vnto God, and God vnto it, letting it ſee and feele clearely in that light, that it is beloued of God: which when the ſoule once by a ſtrong apprehenſion feeleth,
                     Pſa. 27.8. 1. Ioh 4.19. Rom. 5.5. it anſwereth God with a ſweete loue againe: ſo that this ſenſe of the loue of GOD once ſhed abroad in the heart, perſwading, comforting, and ſanctifying the ſame, acquainteth the ſoule with God: ſo that neither can he forſake the ſame, or it finally forſake him:
                     Ier. 32.40 remaining alwayes ſad (at leaſt) when he is grieued: ioyful when he is glorified, either in mercy or iuſtice.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Is it poſsible for the childe of God to fall into ſuch hainous preſumptuous

ſinnes, as wicked ſinners doe?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               It is poſſible.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What is the cauſe thereof?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Becauſe that the ſame vileneſſe is in the Nature of the Childe of God,1. Cor. 6.10.11. Eph. 2.3. Tit. 3.3. 2. Chr. 33 9.10. &c.
                   which is in the prophaneſt Reprobate.
            
            
               Scholler.
               
                  I grant the Child of God before hee be called effectually, may goe on for a while in as euill a courſe as any Reprobate. But can the Child of God who hath beene effectually called, fall from his feeling and holineſſe, in ſuch ſinnes as maketh the Reprobate damned for euer?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Moſt certainly he may.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  How are you able to confirme your iudgement?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               In place of light,
                     Pſal. 51.10.11. hee may be couered with darkenes: In place of feeling and perſwaſion, there may come deadnes & doubting; in place of ioy, terror: for ſoftneſſe of heart

hardneſſe; in place of holines, much prophaneneſſe.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  
                     Iob 3.11.12. Iob 6.4.9. pſa. 40.12. 1. Kin. 11.4.5.6.7.8
                  Explaine your meaning in ſo ſaying.
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               It is plaine, that there was in Iob terror and doubting. And in the Prophet Dauid, ſenſe of wrath, and grieuous feares of wrath. And in Salomon a ſtrange and fearefull declining from good, and a wonderfull practiſe of euill.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Can the child of God altogether looſe the comfort of feeling, and be oppreſſed with terror?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Yea truly, and that ſo farre, that the ſenſe of ſinne and the wrath of God, will ouer-burden the ſoule: as Dauid teſtifieth, when hee ſaith: Thy hand was heauy vpon mee day and night,
                     Pſa. 32.4. & my moiſture is turned into the drought of Sommer. And againe, There is nothing ſound in my fleſh,
                     Pſa. 38.3.4.5. becauſe of thine anger, neither is there reſt in my bones becauſe

of my ſinne; for mine iniquities are gone ouer my head, and as a mighty burden are too heauy for me. My wounds are putrified and corrupt, becauſe of my fooliſhnes. My reines are full of burning, and there is nothing ſound in my fleſh: yea hee further teſtifieth that the indignation of God lay vpon him. Againe he ſaith,
                     Pſa. 88.7.16. Thy indignation goeth ouer me; and thy feare hath cut me off.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Yet declare further, how far may the Childe of God be caſt downe (feeling of Gods abſence) being in continuall vexation by the apprehenſion of his anger, yet continuing the Child of God?
               
            
            
               Min.
               Firſt, the Child of God may be driuen to ſuch an extremity and narrow pinch, that (to his feeling) God hideth his face from him; the Lord reiecteth his ſoule,Lam 3.8.
                   and when he roareth, crying out, that he ſhutteth foorth his prayer. Next, to his

ſenſe & feeling, he will feele the God of heauen to be his enemies, pulling him in pieces, cauſing the arrowes of his quiuer to enter into his reines, filling him with bitterneſſe, and cauſing his ſoule to be farre from peace. Againe, the Childe of God, to his feeling, may through the affliction of his ſoule, be at the brinke of deſpaire, and at the point of death: yea and from his youth ſuffer terrors,
                     Pſa. 88.15. doubting of his life. Laſtly, the Child of God through the manifold tentations of his ſoule; will be ſo deiected, that when he prayeth, his ſpirit will be full of anguiſh and vexation,
                     Pſa. 77.8.9. and agony, thinking that God hath either forgotten to bee mercifull, or that hee hath ſhut vp his tender mercies in diſpleaſure: that hee hath ouerthrowne and deſtroyed him on euery ſide: that being gone,
                     Iob. 16.7.8.9.10.1
                        •
                      12. &c.
                   God hath kindled his wrath againſt him.
            
            
               
               Schol.
               
                  Can the Childe of God after he hath felt terror become ſo ſenſeleſſe, that he will bee hardened from the feare and awe of the maieſtie of God?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               He may,
                     Iſa. 63.17 as the Prophet Iſaiah teſtifieth, when hee ſaith, Why haſt thou made vs to erre from thy waies: & hardned our hearts from thy feare? as alſo experience of the Saints of God in all ages witnes the ſame.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  How farre may the Childe of God after his effectuall calling runne riotouſly in prophane looſeneſſe?
               
            
            
               Min.
               Firſt he may ſtray and fall away in his affections of loue and hatred. Secondly,Reu. 2.4. Reu. 3.15.
                   hee may looſe the reines in outward actions.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  How may the Child of God degenerate in his affections?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Firſt his loue and obedience may grow cooler vnto Chriſt Ieſus,
                     Reu. 2.4.5 his hatred likewiſe of ſinne may be diminiſhed: & the loue of righteouſnes be remoued a little; and yet

remaine the Childe of God. As we ſee in Dauid,
                  
                     Mat. 26.7. a man after Gods owne heart, and Peter, Chriſts deare Apoſtle, who thus for a while did fall away in their affections.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What are the degrees by which the Child of God commeth vnto this diſordered riot and looſeneſſe in his affectiones?
               
            
            
               Min.
               
                  
                     Iam. 1.14. Pſal. 32.3 4. Heb. 4.12 13.Firſt, he ſuffereth the preſence of God to goe foorth of his heart; and the minde to be blinded. 2. Hee leaueth off ſeriouſly either to ſeeke God, or to mourne for his abſence. 3. The vaile and ſnares of hardneſſe of heart, thus commeth vpon him. 4. The heart becommeth ſenſeleſſe and dead. 5. The party thus lying open vnto tentation vnarmed, ſinne deceiueth, with the enticements thereof defiling the affections, perſwading them to fulfill the luſts of the fleſh. 6. The ſenſe of heauen and of hell become ſtrangely decayed.

And laſtly, there may well abide a light to conuince and conuict the conſcience thus defiled, but no power to reſiſt ſinne in the act.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What ſhould wee learne from hence?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Firſt,
                     Heb. 3.12 Heb. 3.12 15. hſ. 32.9. to beware we looſe not our peace and communion with God. 2. To ſhun hardneſſe of heart, and blindneſſe of minde. 3. Not to ſuffer the conſcience to be ſenſeleſſe without feeling, but euer to retaine a ſight and ſenſe of ſinne, and the terror of Gods wrath for the ſame: with ſome meaſure of remorſe and godly ſorrow. 4. To be watchfull,
                     Heb. 5.13. that the vile bewitching pleaſures of ſin, benumme not the conſcience, making it conſent vnto ſuch abhominations: for if we ſo doe, the ſtrength of ſinne will ouercome vs; and by the righteous iudgement of God we ſhall fall into ſome great danger, which although it bring vs not to

hell,2. Sam. 12.11. ſhall be a ſtaine in the conſcience, and as a thorne in our ſide all our life long.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Is it poſsible for the Childe of God to fall into ſuch groſſe ſinnes; as thoſe who are ordained vnto deſtruction? the ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſt excepted?
               
            
            
               Mi.
               
                  2. Sam. 11.11.4.Nothing more certain: he may fall into the ſame ſins, and yet be no caſt away. Eſau a Reprobate was a fornicator:
                     Ge. 19.23 Gen. 9.21 Matt. 26.70. Gen. 4
                        •
                     .15. 
                  Dauid an Elect did commit adultery. Lot an Elect was ouertaken with drunkennes & inceſt: ſo alſo was Noah with wine, Peter an elect denied Chriſt, and Ioſeph did ſweare by the life of Pharaoh: ſo that he hath no freedome (if Gods ſpirit be abſent) more then theſe, not to fal into ſuch groſſe ſins: the ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſt excepted.A diſcouery of the ſin againſt the holy Ghoſt.
               
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What is the ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſt?
               
            
            
               Min.
               There are ſixe names giuen

vnto this great ſinne. 1. It is called,
                     Matt. 12.31. Marke. 3.29. Lu. 12.10 Heb. 6.4. Heb. 10.20. 1. Ioh. 3.16. a ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſt. 2. A blaſphemy, an impious blaſphemy, extreamely impious. 3. A ſinne that neuer ſhall be forgiuen. 4. A falling away, an Apoſtaſie. 5. A ſinne againſt knowledge and conſcience, in great light, in deſpite of the ſpirit of grace. 6. A ſinne vnto death.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Why is it ſo diuerſly named?
               
            
            
               Mi.
               Becauſe God in his word hath beene pleaſed ſo to expreſſe the ſame vnto vs: yet, if we liſt to looke more neerely into the ſame, we ſhall finde ſundry cauſes. 1. It is called,
                     Matt. 11.31. 
                  A ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſt. Not in reſpect of the ſubſtance of the holy Ghoſt, for the eſſence of the three perſons is all in one and the ſame God: nor yet in reſpect of the Perſon of the holy Ghoſt, for whatſoeuer is done againſt any one of the perſons, is done againſt all three: but it is ſayd to be done againſt the holy Spirit, becauſe done againſt the immediate

effect, worke, and office of the holy Spirit, to wit, againſt the ſhining light of the ſaid ſpirit: this light is indeed an effect of the Father and of the Son, as well as of the holy ſpirit: yet it is ſaid to be againſt the holy Ghoſt onely, becauſe it fighteth againſt a ſpeciall immediate worke of his, againſt that light and worke of grace kindled by him. 2. It is called a blaſphemy, an impious blaſphemy, extreamly wicked.
                     Ma. 3.23 Mat. 9.3. Mat. 12.32. 1. Tim. 1.13. There be diuers blaſphemies, a blaſphemy of men, a blaſphemie directly againſt the Sonne of man; a blaſphemy impious, wicked, ſuch as was Pauls blaſphemy, which becauſe (as he teſtifieth) it was not done wittingly, he was receiued into mercy, becauſe hee did it ignorantly. But this ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſt, is a blaſphemy exceeding wicked; ſurpaſſing his, becauſe it is done with extreame deſpite againſt a manifeſt conuincing light. 3. It is called

a ſinne which neuer ſhall be forgiuen not from the nature of the ſinne,
                     Luk. 12.10. as if there could bee any ſurpaſſing Gods mercy (for a finite creature is not able to commit that ſinne, which an infinit God in mercy is not more able to pardon) but it is ſaide to be irremiſſible, becauſe there is no mercy appointed for it, becauſe there is to repentance to be giuen to ſuch a one, and ſuch a one ſhall neuer beg for mercy. Yea I may further adde, that the fury of ſuch a one who committeth this ſinne, is ſo great againſt Chriſt, that ſuppoſe he might haue mercy by repentance, yet hee would not haue it. 4. It is called a falling away or an apoſtaſie; becauſe it is not only a ſimple Apoſtaſie, of a part,Heb. 6.4.
                   or for a time, nor yet an Epilepſie, or a Spirit of ſlumber, but alſo a totall,
                     Hb. 20.6 finall Apoſtaſie. 5. It is called, a ſin againſt conſcience and knowledge, with great deſpight againſt the ſpirit of

grace: there is no man but hee ſinneth againſt knowledge, & conſcience. So theſe Pillars of the Church, Peter and Dauid (before him) ſinned, with many more.Note. Yet all without deſpight: therefore take away deſpight, malice, and extreame deſpight, and ſo long,1. Ioh. 5.16. there will be no ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſt. Laſtly, it is called a ſinne vnto death, becauſe all ſorts of death doe follow it, corporall and ſpirituall, firſt and ſecond, temporall and eternall.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Where doth this greateſt ſinne chiefely make reſidence, in theſe who commit the ſame?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               In the heart and minde.
            
            
               Sch.
               
                  How may it be iudged of there?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               By ſixe properties or effects, three in the minde, and three in the heart.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Declare which be they?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               In the minde it is done againſt all ſorts of light, 1. Againſt the

generall light of all the powers of the mind. 2. Againſt the particular ſpeciall light of the conſcience. 3. Againſt the ſpirituall light, that light of the ſpirit, word and grace. Secondly, in the heart. 1. It muſt bee done willingly, with a full conſent (as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh.
                     Heb. 10.28.29.) For if wee ſinne willingly, &c. 2. There muſt be malice in it: as ver. 29. where ſuch a one is brought in deſpiting the ſpirit of grace, &c. 3. There muſt be the extreamitie of malice in the ſame; becauſe ſuch a one treadeth vnder foot the Son of God, and trampleth vnder, the blood of the New Teſtament, as if it were dogs blood: crucifying Chriſt vnto himſelfe, and making a mock of him; all which are actions of deſpite, and extreame deſperate malice.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What principall qualitie muſt he needs be endowed with, who can commit this ſinne?
               
            
            
               
               Mini.
               He muſt haue a great light and knowledge: for then it is properly ſaid to be committed, when a mans illumination is ſo great, that hee cannot bee ignorant (though he would) what he doth, and yet for all this, will wittingly and willingly of a deſperate malice, oppugne, impugne,Note. Chriſt and his Truth more and more, perſecuting the ſame with finall obſtinacy, to that end onely to withſtand & deſpit him:
                     Iob. 6.70. ſo that then they become of a diuelliſh nature, or rather very diuels: for ſtill the further one wadeth into this ſinne, (vntill the conſummation thereof) the more hee partakes both of the knowledge and malice of the diuell: As the Phariſes. &c. Of all others the worſt: for ſome there were who knew Chriſt in his cratch, ſome ſucking his mother very yong, ſome nailed on the croſſe: others againe, could not know him, no not in the greateſt light and glory

of his miracles. A 3. ſort he had to doe with; who knew him clearely by the light of the ſpirit, and of his wonderful works: & yet malitiouſly ſpake and did againſt their knowledge, blaſpheme, ſcoffe, and mocke the Sonne of God; and theſe were the Phariſes, whom falling into this blaſphemy againſt the holy Spirit, Chriſt reprooueth and threatneth.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  To how many ſorts of people is it incident to commit this ſinne?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               As I take it, to two ſorts onely.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Which be they?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               Firſt, ſuch who hauing giuen their names vnto Chriſt, taking vpon them a profeſſion of him and his truth, yet in the time of tentation doe make defection, continuing in the ſame, vntill they fall into an vniuerſall Apoſtaſie, ſo perfecting this ſinne. 2. There hath beene an other ſort, who knewe the Truth

clearly, by a generall, ſpeciall, ſpirituall, conuincing light, nor taking vppon them the profeſſion therof, nor the names of Chriſtians: who not-withſtanding that they were indued with a great light of the Truth; yet did with all theyr might in great malice impugne the ſame, perſecuting with great obſtinacie Chriſt and his members: ſuch were the Phariſies. Of the firſt ſort, who made defection, wee read of Alexander the copperſmith, Iultan the Apoſtate,
                     2. Tim. 1.
                   
                  Porphyrie, &c. Of the other as I haue ſaide were the Phariſies. For they knew that an vncleane ſpirit coulde not worke a true Miracle: ſeeing euery true Miracle muſt bee wrought by an infinite not bounded power (the whole power of Hell beeing limited) which is onely of God: therefore to aſcribe ſuch Miraculous works to Belzebub an vncleane ſpirit

(derogating the glory of the Sonne of God, and taking away the fruites and efficacy of the Spirit) was in them as vilde and pernicious a blaſphemie as could bee:
                     2. Theſſ. 2.
                   Since all the diuels in hell (their power beeing ioyned) are not able to worke one true miracle: for by them Chriſt was declared to bee the Almighty God manifeſted in our fleſh. Iuſtly then were they condemned of blaſphemy againſt the holy Spirit,Note. becauſe their ſinne had in it no infirmity: but was altogether of obſtinate, ſetled, well-aduiſed malice: whence from them this ſinne hath the name of blaſphemie; as from the firſt ſort of Profeſſours (who haue made defection) it is called Apoſtaſie.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What doe you call, or how doe you define this Apoſtaſie from the trueth?
               
            
            
               Min.
               It is not an Apoſtaſie from a naturall, morall, or ciuill trueth,

from a trueth in theſe outward things, (for which men ſo ſtriue) but it is an Apoſtaſie from a ſupernaturall trueth, from a trueth concerning our euerlaſting ſaluation, and the liuely faith in Chriſt Ieſus. 2. It is not onely a particular Apoſtaſie, from any piece or parcell of this Diuine trueth, but it is a generall Apoſtaſie, from the whole word of his trueth, which wee call the Goſpell, and conſequently, a manifeſt defection from the liuing God, who in Chriſt Ieſus was manifeſted in our nature. Neither is it a partiall defection with a part of the ſoule onely: with the minde or heart onely: but it is a totall defection of the whole ſoule: yea, not only of the whole ſoule, but alſo of the whole man, both ſoule and body. 3. It is a finall defection, a defection without recouerie,Heb. 6.
                   ſuch an Apoſtaſie as Heb. 6. is called a falling away: ſo that

whoſoeuer falleth truly into this ſin, falleth away without recouery: yet men doe not come vnto this vniuerſall Apoſtaſie all at once, but by little and little, and proceſſe of time: for firſt, they chaſe away and baniſh their whole light; they waft & make ſhipwracke of conſcience; they deſperately harden their whole hearts, vntill they become as it were incarnate diuels, Sathanized in a wonderfull manner, vntill they match Beelzebub himſelfe in their deſperate deſpite and malice: ſo that there is no ſinne which maketh a man ſo ſpitefully to deteſt Chriſt, as this ſinne; yea, with ſuch extreame hatred, that although he might, hee will receiue no benefit of his Propitiatorie and Expiatorie ſacrifice.Note.
               
            
            
               Scho.
               
                  What is the cauſe that this ſinne is ſo ſeuerely puniſhed?
               
            
            
               Mini.
               Amongſt other cauſes, becauſe it is ſo free of infirmity & ſuddaine

fits and paſſions (which other ſins are not free of) and ſo full of deſperate malitious well-aduiſed malice, ſcraping forth all light, baniſhing all conſcience, fighting againſt the heauens ſo farre, that becauſe it cannot attaine vnto Chriſt (who now in Heauen ſitteth at the right hand of the Father, in all glory) it vndertaketh to bee reuenged vppon his true members, the militant Church vpon earth: which (ſo farre as it can, it perſecuteth, oppreſſeth, and by all meanes rooteth out: ſo that it is iuſt with God in his righteous iudgement, to haue decreed, neuer to giue repentance vnto the ſame.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  By what ſteppes or degrees doeth this ſinne aſcend to the height of impiety?
               
            
            
               Min.
               By foure ſteps it aſcendes, or rather deſcends towards Hell. 1. It maketh a man doe actions againſt

knowledge and conſcience (and that without infirmity, vſuall in other ſinnes) falling from the Faith of Chriſt. Next, it maketh them to goe on forward in the ſame continually, vntill they make their partiall defection a Totall, their particular a generall, and their generall, a finall Apoſtaſie. Then, further, it maketh  a man diuelliſh, malicious, deſpitefull, to grow in malice againſt Chriſt and his members, more and more. Laſtly, if (neere finiſhed) it bee the ſinne againſt the Holy-Ghoſt indeede: It maketh a man violently breake foorth in all ſorts or fearefull and terrible perſecutions: in all kinde of blaſphemies, and groſſe viſible actuall ſinnes: all murthers, burnings, oppreſſions, Witcherafts, Sorceries, Exterpations, finally, and what not? to that end onely that it may reſiſt, oppoſe, and deſpight, and fight

againſt the power, effect, graces, and conuincing light of the Spirit.
            
            
               Scholler.
               
                  May not one who in GODS ſight and decree is choſen vnto life, ſeeme to beginne to fall into this ſinne, and yet bee called backe both from preceeding therein, and finiſhing the ſame?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               
                  2. King. 21.1.As I take it, he may: for wee know Manaſſeh, the Sonne of good Hezekiah King of Iuday, ruling in Ieruſalem, the place of Gods glory and worſhip, in the midſt of a glorious Prieſthood, many hundred yeeres olde: (whereof he could not be ignorant) did notwithſtanding abhominably ſinne, and ſeeme to goe on in the finiſhing of this ſinne for a long time; ouerturning and extinguiſhing (to his power) Gods worſhip, building againe thoſe high places which his Father had caſt downe and aboliſhed; making a Groue, and worſhipping the

whole hoaſt of heauen, building Altars (contrarie to Gods commandement) in the houſe of the Lord, and in the two vtter Courts thereof, for the whole hoaſt of heauen; cauſing his Sonnes to paſſe through the fire, giuing himſelfe to witchcraft and ſorcerie, to vſe familiar Spirits and Southſayers: ſetting vp the Image of his Groue in the houſe of the Lord: filling and cauſing Ieruſalem to ſwimme from corner to corner with innocent blood: finally, exceeding thoſe exceedings ſinnes of the Amorites, yet no caſt-away, but at length proued to be the child of GOD for all this.Ioſ. Ant. lib. 10. cap 1.
                   
                  Ioſephus alſo thus writeth of him. Hee was ſo impudent, that hee ſpared not to pollute the very Temple of God, the Citie and the whole Countrey: for making his entry in deſpite of God, he ſlew afterwards all thoſe who were vertuous men amongſt the Hebrewes, and though hee had no

want of Prophets: yet ſo it is that he killed euery day ſome: ſo that Ieruſalem was ouerflowne with blood, &c. Thus farre wee ſee one went, and was by the mercy of GOD called backe againe. Wherefore no poore Chriſtian (howſoeuer ſinfull) not comming neere the ſinnes of Manaſſeh ought not to thinke hee hath committed this ſinne: yet is it good for all to flye all ſinnes: chiefely, thoſe done with deliberation, againſt light, knowledge, and conſcience: for wee know, the further that euen Peter himſelfe went in Caiaphas Hall, hee ſwore and forſwore, denying Chriſt ſo much the more: but it was a great mercy to be called backe againe: for which, let all in their feares wiſh and pray.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What in the meane time muſt comfort & vphold poore fearefull ſoules; who imagine to haue committed this ſin, therefore forſaking all meanes?
               
            
            
               
               Miniſt.
               In my iudgement, a better information of their iudgements is of great conſequence to helpe to ſuſtaine them; for though wee yeeld for a while to all they affirme, yet if they ſay, that they could wiſh that they had not ſo ſinned, certainely  then, they haue not thus ſinned; or if they feare to bee, or fall into this  ſinne, they ſhall ſurely neuer commit this ſinne. Further, ſuch perſons muſt bee demaunded of; whether they be come vnto that deſpite againſt Chriſt, that they would  trample vpon his blood vs vpon the blood of a dogge? whether their impious blaſphemie be ſuch, that (with  the Phariſies) they doe call him Belzebub? whether thoſe forgoing propertie, of this ſinne haue beene in them: viz. a touched heart, a taſte of the powers of the word of trueth, a taſte of the powers of the world to come, to bee partaker of the Spirit

(whence all ſuch who affirme that their former actions, and ſeeming  graces, haue onely bin hypocriticall  lip-labor, are excluded from poſſibility to haue committed this ſinne) whether  they haue fallen quite away from their religion? whether they haue renounced their faith in Chriſt? Whether they haue impugned & oppreſſed the knowne trueth; yet perſiſting therein with reſolution ſtill to goe on  therein? Whether they haue fallen  againſt knowledge and conſcience?  whether there bee no infirmitie in  their falls? what long time it is ſince they haue ſo ſinned? whether or  not as yet they may bee reclaimed? Whether now they obſtinately perſecute Chriſt in all his members, ſo  farre as they are able? Whether they runne not with a high hand, in all manner of groſſe actuall ſinnes  and rebellions? Whether their wickednes be ſuch, that (vnto their power)

they draw others into the ſame exceſſe of riot with them? Whether  their diſeaſe hath bin, and is, onely in blaſphemies of the minde, and then, it is not, nor ſo long can bee this great ſinne, which burſteth forth (as is prooued) in ſtore of all manner of groſſe abominable actions? whether  if Chriſt were now amongſt vs viſibly; they would ſet to their hands, and help to crucifie him again? Whether  their temporall be turned into a final Apoſtaſie? (which is only a time for the whole Church to iudge thereof.) Finally, whether they be transformed  (in a manner) into the very diuell? So partaking of his light knowledge, malice, and diuelliſh nature: all which properties to bee in them, none but by aduice of the diuell (in the furie of a ſtrong tentation) will dare to affirme, ſo that by tha time theſe queſtions haue beene preſſed; and their contrarie, lying,

ſhifting, Sophiſticall anſweres, obiections, and euaſions refuted and diſcouered, it is likely by the grace of God and the other meanes, that the fury of the temptation will diminiſh, and their iudgements be ſomewhat enlightened: Since it is a trick of the diuell in temptation (chiefely when he is ayded by melancholly) to make our leaſt ſins our greateſt, and our indifferent ſins, the ſin againſt the holy Spirit. Therefore now to conclude this point, all ſuch poore ſinners, who either feare to haue committed, or to commit this ſin, not hauing the fore-named properties (for ſome, or a fewe of them will proue nothing) may cheere vp their faint-ding ſpirits, and lift vp their feeble falling hands & weake knees, making ſtraight ſteps vnto their feete (as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh) leaſt that which is halting be turned out of the way. For their ſin is farre, farre, farre: and not neere

this moſt fearefull extreamely impious blaſphemy, vnto which repentance is denied: farre from this finall Apoſtaſie and wilfull malicious ſin, againſt knowledge, and the conuincing, coole, well-aduiſed light of conſcience: Farre, farre, & not neere this ſinne vnto death, called, The ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſt: and therefore may, and ought boldly to vſe all the holy meanes, appointed of God to attaine the aſſurance of ſaluation.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  But to returne to our former purpoſe, how commeth it to paſſe that the children of God fall into ſuch grieuous ſinnes; grace by the holy Ghoſt being begun in them?
               
            
            
               Mi.
               Becauſe they nouriſh not the grace of God,
                     Eph. 4.29 30. but ſuffer the power of ſinne to ouer-rule them.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  After what manner doe the degrees of ſinne growe vpon the Elect?
               
            
            
               
               Miniſt.
               Firſt, the minde is blinded the will peruerted, and the affections corrupted with the deſire of the pleaſures of ſinne. 2. The graces of the holy Spirit are quenched by the entertaining of worldly luſts. 3. The inward reſtrayning grace being away,
                     Rom. 7.22.23. and ſo the heart defiled with vncleanneſſe, the members of the body (which are now become the weapons of vnrighteouſneſſe) hauing no power to reſiſt, doe yeeld and fulfill the will of the fleſh.
            
            
               Scholler.
               
                  What may wee learne from hence?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  
                     Rom. 7.7. 1. Theſ. 5.22. Iude. 23. Gen. 3.3. & 39.10.Firſt, to take good heede, and beware of the firſt motions of ſinne. Next, warily to entertaine grace, both in flying all occaſions of wickedneſſe, and entertaining all holy exerciſes; thereby preuenting hardneſſe of heart, blindneſſe of minde, and deadneſſe of Spirit.

Further,
                     Rom. 7.24.25. to haue a continuall battell againſt the vildneſſe of our inward luſts. Laſtly, although the fleſh refuſe to fight: yet to be conſtant, and neuer giue ouer ſtriuing if it were but with one ſigh vnto God, from the ſenſe and burden of corruption.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What is the diſpoſition and ſtate of the childe of God, when he ſinneth in the afore-ſaid manner?
               
            
            
               Mini.
               He is ſenſeleſſe either of the ioyes which he once felt,
                     Pſal. 51.10.11.1
                        •
                     . or of the terrours wherewith his ſoule once was pierced, becauſe hee hath quenched the Spirit. Next,
                     Reu. 3.1.2.3.4. the loue of ſinne preuaileth againſt that loue which formerly he had of God. Then the heart is hardened; in which, although there abide a memorie of wrath, yet there remaineth no terrour to be as a bridle to curbe and reſtraine ſinne.
                     Reu. 3.15 16.19. Further, there is a ſluggiſh vnwilling careleſneſſe, in performance of all ſpirituall excerciſes: he hath then

no pleaſure in prayer, reading or hearing of the word, &c. Laſt of all, thoſe ſmall ſinnes which before hee made conſcience of, he will neither account ſo much of them, nor of greater ſinnes, as before hee did of euill thoughts.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What is the cauſe heereof?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Firſt, an inward deſertion of the Spirit: Next, the tyrannie of the fleſh in the luſts of it.
            
            
               Scho.
               
                  What cauſeth the Spirit of God to withdraw himſelfe?
               
            
            
               Min.
               
                  
                     Ep. 4.30.Sinne and impenitencie.
            
            
               Scho.
               
                  What maketh the affections to be thus vile?
               
            
            
               Miniſter.
               Firſt, a diſtaſte of the meanes of Grace. 2. Pleaſure in vnrighteouſnes.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Doeth the childe of God ſinne as freely, and as ſenſeleſly, as the wicked and reprobate?
               
            
            
               Min.
               Before he be called, he may.
            
            
               Sc.
               
                  But after effectuall calling, will he

ſinne as freely and looſely without conſcience as the wicked?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               As concerning the vnrenewed part.
            
            
               Sch.
               
                  How is it poſsible that the childe of God being effectually called, can fall, ſeeing he hath the Spirit of God.
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               By reaſon of the weakenes of grace, and ſtrength of corruption.
                     Gal. 5.17 Then becauſe the child of God ſuffereth the heart to goe looſe,
                     Pro. 4.23. without laying any impoſition and burden vpon the ſame, either of terror or inward ſtrife, by holy exerciſes of the minde, or outward lawfull imployments of an ordinary calling.
            
            
               Scho.
               
                  What neceſsitie is there of this burdening the heart.
               
            
            
               Min.
               Becauſe the heart is neuer idle, but in continuall motion:
                     Matt. 15.19. Gen. 6 5. therefore when we ouercome it not with good things (it being now bent vnto all euill) or when in ſtriuing wee are not equall vnto it: It ouercommeth

vs, making vs to fall ſhamefully.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Doth the childe of God for all this ſinne ſo freely, that he eſcapeth in the meane time vnchallenged?
               
            
            
               Mini.
               
                  
                     Rom. 2.15No, for in the time of his ſinning, hee hath a reprouing accuſer within him.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What in this doth the renewed part?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               It will not ſuffer him to take his full ſwinge in him, but hee is diſpleaſed with it:
                     Eſa. 30.21. It admoniſheth, but is not hard: It oppoſeth it ſelfe, but hath no force to controle, command or reſtraine, but is ouercome by the olde flouds of filthineſſe of the vnrenewed part: And thus it lyeth as it were ſmoothered, drowned, & quenched: and ſo the Spirit commeth to be grieued.
            
            
               Scholler.
               
                  Now tell me if the child of God can fall after that hee hath receiued great comfort?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               He may, for Peter after that

he was ouerſhadowed on the Mount did fall grieuouſly, denying and forſwearing Chriſt. And alſo afterwards, when hee had receiued a farre greater meaſure of the Spirit,
                     Gal. 2.13 did not only diſſemble himſelfe, but alſo drew Barnabas in the ſame hypocriſie.
            
            
               Scholler.
               
                  Can the childe of God after that hee hath beene heauily caſt downe with terror fall againe?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               He may: ſo Ezechias,
                  
                     Iſa. 39.
                        •
                      6. 1. Chr. 2 1. after he had bin greatly terrified, did fall; ſo did Dauid in numbring the people.
            
            
               Scholler.
               
                  Why ſuffereth the Lords his Saints to fall thus?
               
            
            
               Mini.
               Firſt, to teach him that ſtandeth to take heed leaſt he fall. Secondly, to ſhew vnto the Saints their owne weakneſſe.1. Cor. 10 12. 3. To teach them to entertaine and cheriſh God carefully in their hearts. 4. To make his children earneſt in begging the grace of ſanctification (yea aboue the grace of feeling) that their election may bee

confirmed ſo much the ſurer vnto them thereby.
            
            
               Scho.
               
                  Doth the Lord ſuffer his Saints after they haue fallen, to ſleepe in ſinne?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Not alwaies, but in the end he wakeneth them.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What is the firſt thing which God worketh in them at their wakening?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  
                     Gen. 42.21.22.He worketh in them, firſt a ſight: ſecondly, a ſenſe of ſinne: laſtly, a feare of puniſhment.
            
            
               Sc.
               
                  What maner of ſight worketh he?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  2. Chr. 34 27.28.Firſt, he letteth them ſee the hainouſneſſe of their ſinnes in hauing offended ſo glorious, dreadfull and terrible a Maieſtie. Then hee aggrauateth their ſinnes ſo much the more, in that it was againſt the light of conſcience and feeling, after their effectuall calling:
                     Ier. 31.18 19. therefore the wrath of God to be ſo much the more incenſed againſt their ſinne. Laſtly, he ſheweth them to be guiltie, and by their owne confeſſions,
                     Ezek. 36.31. iudge and condemne

them to be worthy of hell fire.
            
            
               Schl.
               
                  What manner of ſenſe is that the child of God hath being thus wakened?
                  
                     Pſal. 88.2 3.4.5.6.7 8.
               
            
            
               Min.
               Firſt a ſenſible torment: Next, an abſence of the holy Spirit, and his ſinne ſtanding vp betwixt him, and the mercy of God.
            
            
               Scho.
               
                  What maner of torment is that which he feeleth?
               
            
            
               Min.
               The torture-racking conſcience drawing him before Gods tribunal, accuſing, conuicting, and condemning him, beginning to be a terrible executioner, in vexing and toſſing the ſoule, with the intollerable ſting of an vnſpeakeable wrath.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What in the meane time doth the ſoule in ſuch an eſtate?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               It ſuffereth vnder intollerable weights and burdens, doubtings,
                     Pſal 88.15.16. heauy and conflicting battels, not being able to find any iſſue.Pſal. 3.4.
                  
               
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What manner of feare is that

which the Child of God hath being wakened?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  
                     Pſa 71.9. Pſal. 143.7.A feare of eternall reiection from God. Next, a feare that his effectuall calling (which he once imagined to be good) was but counterfet. Further, a feare that the holy Spirite will neuer come againe either to comfort or ſanctifie him, in that meaſure he formerly enioyed it.
                     Pſal. 51.11. Laſtly, a feare that either his ſinne will not be forgiuen him: or at leaſt will bring ſome great ſhame and puniſhment vpon him.
            
            
               Scho.
               
                  In this eſtate what is the diſpoſition of the Child of God towards ſinne?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               
                  
                     Iob. 39.37.38. and 42.6.He wiſheth from the bottome of his heart hee had not ſo ſinned. Next, hee hath indignation at ſinne, not ſo much for the torment he feeleth, as that he hath offended ſo good and gracious a God. Yea, hee abhorreth himſelfe for his ſinne.
            
            
               
               Sch.
               
                  What learne we from this manner of wakening of Gods Saints?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Firſt, that God will not ſuffer his children to ſleepe for euer in their ſinnes. Next, that ſinne hath a moſt terrible, fearefull countenance. Laſtly,
                     Gen. 42.22. that though ſinne lurke for a while, and ſeeme pleaſant to the taſte, yet it bringeth with it the extreameſt ſorrow in the world: yea, if God but waken any for an euill thought, it prooueth more fearefull, then all the torments in the earth.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Which be the ſinnes that trouble the child of God moſt?
               
            
            
               Min.
               Thoſe ſinnes which he committeth after his effectuall calling.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  But, will the Lord ſuffer his children to lye ſtill thus vnder terror and doubting?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               No.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What, and how worketh he in his Saints, after that in this manner hee hath beaten them downe?
               
            
            
               
               Miniſt.
               
                  
                     Ier. 31.18 19. Ezek. 36.31. Za. 12.10 11.12.Firſt, he ſoftneth the heart in a bitter ſorrow, in the abundance of the Spirit of prayer and mourning, to poure out the heart before him with many teares and ſtrong cries. Next, by degrees in proceſſe of time, he poureth out, firſt a hope, then a ſenſe and perſwaſion of the remiſſion of ſinnes: clenſing the ſoule from guiltineſſe, through his moſt pretious blood, all-ſufficient merites and ſatiſfaction, being apprehended and applyed by faith, which he then increaſeth and ſtrengthneth to ſee and lay hold vpon the promiſes of life.
                     Pſal. 143.8.9.10.11. Then, hereupon he bringeth comfort, and more aſſured perſwaſion vnto the ſoule, confirming and ſetling the weary and troubled heart with the ſpirit of peace. Laſtly, he giueth the trembling ſoule a free acceſſe vnto his countenance,
                     Heb. 4.16. Rom. 8.15. Gal. 4.5.6 with boldneſſe to draw neere vnto the Throne of Grace; and crie Abba, Father. So that

marke how fearefull it was before of his dreadfull Maieſtie, and how it was perplexed in doubting of his loue, it will now find him a thouſand times more comfortable and more ſweete in powring out of his loue; and the ſenſe thereof, by the Spirit of adoption, and ioy of the holy Ghoſt.
            
            
               Sch.
               
                  What fruits bringeth this foorth.
               
            
            
               Mini.
               In reſpect of God, the child of God will loue him better then euer hee did before.
                     Pſa. 116.1.2.3.4.5 6. &c.
                   The Lord will alſo bee moſt pretious in his eyes: and the promiſe will bee as meate and drinke vnto the ſoule. Next, in regard of ſinne hee will hate and abhorre it more then euer hee did, and will bee very warie of the deceitfulneſſe thereof, that it ſnare and entice him not in the like manner againe.
                     Iob. 42.6. Further hee will abhorre himſelfe in regard of ſinne, accounting of himſelfe as of

the moſt baſe and miſerable wretch in the world. Laſtly, he will labour inſtantly,
                     Iob. 31.1. in ſeaſon and out of ſeaſon, to make a couenant with the eyes, the tongue, and all the members of the body, watching alſo diligently ouer the heart and affections that, as in former times, they riot not in licentiouſneſſe.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  Yet, I would know, whether one feeling the bitterneſſe of his ſin and mourning for the ſame, & hauing a ſenſe of the forgiueneſſe thereof, with a full purpoſe neuer to do ſo anymore by Gods grace: if yet for all this, hee can fall into the ſame ſinne againe.
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Yea certainly in ſome ſort.
            
            
               Schol
               
                  How ſo.
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Firſt, becauſe in men there is a predominant ſinne of naturall inclination, which hath more power ouer a man,
                     Heb. 12.1 then any other ſinne: which cleaueth as cloſe vnto him, as the ſkinne of his body. This ſinne for

the moſt part leadeth, and ouer-ruleth a man: well it may be that with much ſtrife, ſorrow, mourning, and with many teares hee may obtaine grace to ſee, hate, ſtriue againſt it,
                     Rom. 7.25. and in part to ſlay it, but doe what he can, hee will hardly get it altogether aboliſhed. Againe, becauſe Sathan the cruell enemie of our ſaluation, ſtill prouoketh the childe of God chiefely with the inticements of that ouer-ruling ſinne, working after this manner. Firſt, he watcheth diligently for an opportunitie to catch vs,
                     Lu. 22.31 when we are not vpon our guard, or when (being careleſſe) we thinke and footh our ſelues that we haue ſufficiently ouercome and maiſtered ſuch a ſinne, and that we ſhall not be troubled therewith any more. Then,2. Co. 2.11 hauing thus at vnawares ſurpriſed vs (wee being vnarmed and not able to reſiſt) his inticements (ayded by our inward foes) reenter into vs againe

by degrees: ſo cauſing vs to fall by little and little. For, firſt hee caſteth a faire ſmooth vaile ouer the predominant ſinne of naturall inclination, making it either (if it be poſſible) to appeare no ſinne at all,
                     Rom. 7.13 or at leaſt to be but a ſmall, light, trifling thing and not out of meaſure ſinnefull as indeede it is: after which (frailty not being able to reſiſt) the affections are defiled, inflamed and ſet a fire, with a loue to the inticing obiect of ſeeming delight: which being done (the fleſh and carnal reaſon now bearing ſway) hee neuer leaueth vntill he cauſe the Childe of God to fall into the ſame ſinne againe; vnleſſe the Lord by ſpeciall Grace ſuſtaine him.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What mooueth that cruell enemy to aſſault Gods children in that terrible manner?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               The hatred which he hath, firſt, againſt God, and then againſt

man becauſe of God. Next, becauſe aboue all things hee would gladlieſt haue one to fall away, who hath obtained Grace: for this he thinketh is his glory, to diſgrace the worke of the holy Spirit in vs; and to cauſe the name and holy religion of God to be blaſphemed: As alſo that hee may bragge (if it were poſſible) of his victory ouer the power and grace of God. And further, becauſe there is rooted in him an vnſatiable deſire of the deſtruction of all the creatures of God,2. Pet. 5.8 but eſpecially of his Elect children.
            
            
               Sc.
               
                  What leſſon ariſeth from hence?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Firſt,
                     Pſal. 97.10. Pſal. 30.22. to take no truce with ſinne, becauſe this cruell enemie entreth vnto the ſoule thereby: for dallying with ſinne is as it were a doore for him to enter in vs: the ſoule then being the place of his reſidence.
                     La. 3.40. 2. To labour diligently and narrowly to finde out all our ſinnes: chiefely

that predominant of naturall inclination. 3. We muſt labour to be in a continuall battell alwayes with all our ſinnes, giuing them no reſt, nay not ſo much as ſuffering an euill thought to enter into our minde with peace, but to ſuppreſſe, purſue and crucifie it preſently, by lifting vp the heart vnto Chriſt, & ſtriuing againſt it Fourthly, to be ſure that we repent vs of all our ſinnes, truely, as often, and ſo many as poſſibly wee can remember,
                     Pſa. 32.5. crauing for thoſe wee cannot call to minde; and as our eyes are opened, by which we ſee more and more, to be ſure we purge all out, conceale nothing from God: ſo making a cleane conſcience. 5. To be at a continuall battell with all our euill affections, preſſing them downe with a continuall remorſe and ſorrow, with faith in the obedience, merits,1. Cor. 16 13. death and reſurrection of Chriſt Ieſus. 6. To watch continually and

beware that the ſtrength of ſinne on a ſodaine inflame not ſo the powers of the ſoule,1. Cor. 16.13. that they breake out like fire in the whole man. 7. To be ſure aboue all things we continue a moſt earneſt conſtant fight againſt our predominant ſinne, being warie as we loue our life and peace, that we ſuffer not the leaſt motion thereof to enter in our ſoules, becauſe this (aboue all other ſinnes) is the traytour that will ſooneſt deceiue vs, vnder ſhew of friendſhip. For if we ſuffer the thoughts thereof to encroach vpon vs, it will paſſe our power to reſtraine the ſame; vntill (to our extreame ſorrow) it haue burſt forth in action. Further, to labour to fill the heart, both with the word,
                     Rom. 7.11 and with a ſenſe of our continuall guiltineſſe, becauſe we drinke iniquite continually,
                     Col. 3.17. like vnto water: endeauouring therefore to let the feare of God ſo poſſeſſe the ſoule, as to terrifie it from

euery little ſinne whatſoeuer, remembring alſo continually the excellencie of that euer-glorious Crowne prepared for all thoſe, who with a true (though weake) endeauour (according to grace giuen) ſtriue for the ſame,
                     Heb. 12.1 with patience, running that race which is ſet before them, leaſt with the damned they burne in hell-fire for euer.
                     Pſ. 51.17 Rom. 7.18 19. Then, to labour with all our might to keepe a broken and contrite heart, ſoft and humbled, not only for the euill we do, but alſo for that good wee ſhould haue and doe. Further, to bee familiar with God in prayer, labouring ſo to ſettle the heart, that we may be more and more acquainted with him. In which we muſt marke what our diſpoſition is before wee pray, what comfort wee haue in prayer, and how wee are diſpoſed after prayer: when if we find no comfortable preſence or ſenſe of his loue; wee muſt

looke backe vnto our former actions ſince laſt we receiued comfort, viewing what Ionas cauſeth this tempeſt:Ion. 1.8.
                   which found,
                     Tit. 2.13. wee then muſt neuer giue ouer, vntill by a ſound repentance we haue purged the heart therof. Laſtly, to endeuour (whatſoeuer the world thinke) ſtill to keepe a ſorrowfull and lowly heart,
                     Tit. 2.13. longing for his bleſſed Maieſtie vntill he come: when we feele him preſent, bleſſing him for the ſame, and diligently retayning him by faith and a good conſcience.
            
            
               Scholler.
               
                  Seeing the Lord hath all grace in his owne hand, and both biddeth vs be holy as hee is holy, and hath power to make vs holy: What is the cauſe that hee ſuffereth his deare Saints to fall ſometimes againe and againe into the ſame ſinnes which they hate, being ſorrowfull for them, and deſiring earneſtly to leaue them?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               To exerciſe their faith and

repentance,
                     Iob. 42.6. and humble them leaſt they ſhould grow proud. To make them loath this preſent life (in regard of ſinne) when they behold and feele themſelues thus ſnared againſt their wills,
                     Phil. 1.23 to long for that life where they ſhall neuer ſinne any more: but ſerue their God willingly, perfectly, and conſtantly for euer and euer.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  May any one then conclude that he is vnder the eternall terrour of Gods wrath reprobated, when he feeleth an abſence of God, a preſence of ſinne after remorſe and true for ſorrow falling into the ſame ſinne againe?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               No.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  In ſuch an extreamity, what muſt then vphold?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Three things. 1. To looke vnto that which God worketh in vs: 2. To looke diligently into the nature of God. 3. Vnto the examples of the Saints.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What ſhould be obſerued, concerning GODS working in vs?
               
            
            
               
               Miniſter.
               Firſt, that ſeeing we conſiſt of diuers contrarie parts, renewed and vnrenewed; that there may bee in the renewed a miſliking of the euill, that we may ſay with Saint Paul:
                  Rom. 7.15 Verſ. 20.
                   It is no more we, but ſinne, which reigneth in vs doing the euill.Verſ. 19.
                   So againe, The thing which I hate, that doe I, and the good thing which I would, that doe I not. Next, we muſt be ſure, that ſo often as we fall, wee muſt immediatly flye vnto GOD by repentance, to obtaine new remiſſion and pardon, not delaying the time, leaſt ere wee be aware, deadneſſe and hardneſſe of heart ſteale vpon vs, ſeeing he who is vnfit to day, ſhall be leſſe fit to morrow; remembring there-withall, leaſt Sathan (who warcheth but an opportunity to drowne the ſoule in perpetuall ſorrow) (ſuggeſt ſome lye or ſlaunder vpon the trueth of GOD: That the iuſt man (as it is written) falleth ſeuen times a

day and riſeth againe:
                     Pro. 24.16. and that when a ſinner repenteth him of his ſinnes, from the bottome of his heart,Ezek. 133. Ezek. 18.21.
                   God will put away all his iniquities out of his ſight. And further, that ſince hee himſelfe (the Law-maker) in the Goſpell hath commanded vs, to forgiue our brother not onely ſeauen times; but alſo ſeauenty times,
                     Luk. 17.3 a day; not to doubt (ſeeing hee is the perfect patterne and fountaine of mercie) but that hee will put in practiſe his owne commaundement. Further, we muſt obſerue, whether the falling into ſinne, bringeth with it a new and more mortall hatred vnto the ſame ſinne, with new exerciſes of faith; ſo that looke how faſt and often ſinne aſſaileth vs, we be as buſie labouring and thinking of new engines, with which wee may reſiſt, deſtroy, and expell the ſame; reſoluing by the grace of God neuer to giue ouer, vntill wee obtaine victory ouer it:

with a reſolution to fight conſtantly againſt it, though GOD ſhould humble vs with ſuch a croſſe vntill our laſt breath; heere trying whether yet in this extreame ſorrowfull eſtate (we haue a ſecret hope) with heauie, low, drowned, ſtollen ſighes, that God will one day in his owne good time releeue vs; we in the meane time retaining a holy humble iealouſie ouer our ſelues: altogether relying vpon GOD, and mourning as oft as wee are able for ſtrength againſt it: chiefely then, when we imagine all peace, the power and rage therof being quite ſubdued. Then alſo, we muſt marke, if our loue vnto God maketh alſo our loue vnto Chriſt Ieſus to grow bold and violent; ſo that we run vnto him with all our might, laying hold of him and his righteouſnes for our life, with a vehement loue (grounded vpon his nature) which will not be put backe with whatſoeuer

euer checkes:
                     Mat. 15.27. Cant. 8 1.2. thus crying vnto him continually for a ſenſe and feeling of the remiſſion of our ſinnes (for thoſe, vnto whom much is forgiuen, they loue much) it being vnto vs a moſt ſure token of forgiueneſſe, when our ſoules are bound vp with a ſecret ſweete loue vnto Chriſt Ieſus. Laſtly, we muſt take heede, and be ſure, that we haue this diſpoſition in vs, that becauſe we haue ſo often found God ſo exceeding good and mercifull in forgiuing vs againe and againe, that (if it were poſſible) although there were no hell, yet for the loue of God onely,Pſal. 26.3
                   we would abſtaine from ſinne and the occaſions thereof.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What ſhould we looke to in the nature of God?
               
            
            
               Min.
               
                  1. Ioh. 4.16. Ioh. 3.16. Ezek. 36.22.That he is mercy and loue it ſelfe, and through loue hath ſent Chriſt to redeeme vs: and that hee looketh not vnto our vnworthineſſe, but vnto his owne mercies. That as

the pittifull Parents tender the good of their children in all chaſtiſements:
                     Pſal. 103.13. Heb. 12.10. ſo doth God in all theſe croſſes, procure the good of his Saints. That there be more mercies in God,
                     Pſal. 145.8.9. then ſinnes in vs. That as he is able to forgiue vs one ſinne, ſo is he able to forgiue vs many hundred thouſand ſinnes,
                     Iſa. 1.18. Luk. 17.3.4. euen ſo often as he giueth vnto vs faith and repentance. For the Lord neuer beſtoweth theſe graces vpon any, whom hee alſo therewith forgiueth not.
            
            
               Schol.
               
                  What ſhould we haue regard vnto, in the examples of the Saints?
               
            
            
               Miniſt.
               Firſt, looke how they haue fallen after grace obtained. 2. Conſider how God hath freely forgiuen them. 3. Conſider that they not onely obtained mercy for themſelues, but that they alſo might be the examples of the mercy of God vnto others. Paul, he obtained mercie, that Ieſus Chriſt might ſhewe vpon him all

long-ſuffering,1. Tim. 1.16. for an example vnto all ſuch who ſhould in time to come beleeue vnto eternall life. And Abraham,
                  
                     Rom. 4.23 24. his faith was counted vnto him for righteouſnes; & it is written, not for him onely, but alſo for vs who beleeue in him, who raiſed vp Ieſus our Lord from the dead.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            A Prayer for the Diſtreſſed.
            
               O Moſt mighty, moſt glorious, eternall, iuſt, holy, omnipotent, all-ſeeing, and euer-liuing God, who art full of terrible Maieſtie in all thy workes, iuſt in all thy iudgements, yet moſt of all wonderfull in thy Chriſt: Since now it hath beene thy bleſſed will to ſend vnto thy poore diſtreſſed ſeruants this weake helpe, how to know, ſhunne, and iudge of thy wrath: Be graciouſly pleaſed alſo by the bowels of all thy tender mercies in thy Chriſt, to giue a bleſsing vnto the ſame, accompanying it with the powerfull working of thy meruailous Spirit: that thereby it may bee able to miniſter a word in due time to their wearie ſoules, effecting that for which thou haſt ſent it. And for the glory of thy

Names ſake, ſo remoue thou the darkeneſſe, blindneſſe, ignorance, obſtinacie and terrours of their minde, eyes, vnderſtanding, will, and conſcience; that the abuſed powers of their ſoules, may no more bee ſtayed by any deluding fancies, from effecting their proper functions: To effect which, O be pleaſed thou boundleſſe bottomleſſe Ocean of mercie, for Ieſus ſake to remoue from before them that vaile which is drawne before, and ſpread ouer all fleſh, that they may ſee and iudge of things inuiſible: thus attaining to haue a good conceite of thee their moſt gracious and louing God. O, ſince all Nations are as nothing before thee, and in that they are, it is becauſe thou calleſt things that are not, as though they were, (thus cauſing them to be) therfore but cal thou them, which in their owne eyes and feeling are not, and they ſhall preſently be ſomewhat: for ſo long as their abuſed fancies preſent thee vnto them as their enemie, perſwading themſelues not to belong vnto thy decree, what can they doe but runne away from thee? Therefore for thy mercies ſake in redemption, paſſe thou by all their tranſgreſsions, onely looking through the all-ſufficient merits of thy well-beloued Sonne vpon them, that thus their ſins may not ſtay

thy mercies. And giue them willing hearts to come vnto the place where thy honor dwelleth: that in thy good time the means may ſo ſoften their hard hearts (by thy mighty aſsiſting power) that they may attaine vnto the Spirit of mourning and compaſsion, thus teaching them to lay hold vpon Chriſt (that Altar of refuge) for their life. And ſince Faith and Repentance are thy gift; giue vnto them theſe graces for thy Chriſts ſake, that ſo confeſsing their ſinnes, they may call vnto thee for mercie, thy mercie by repentance; thus giuing them aſſurance of remiſsion of ſinnes, that ſo remiſsion of ſinnes may giue them aſſurance of ſaluation. And for thoſe who lye now as thunder-beaten vnder the terrour of thy wrath: O looke vpon them alſo in the multitude of tender compaſsion: heare them now ſpeedily, when their ſpirit faileth, put their teares in thy bottle, and ſecretly comfort them with thy choice conſolations, giuing them a liuely hope in expectation of their ioyfull deliuerance. In the meane time perſwade their ſoules that they are thine, that furie is not in thee, that all theſe things ſhall worke together for the beſt vnto them. And, good Lord, ſo temper thou the ſeueritie of thy iuſtice and terrors of their conſciences,

that as thou caſteſt them downe with the one hand, ſo thou wouldeſt raiſe & hold them vp by the other: as thou ſheweſt vnto them the threatnings due vnto their ſinnes (and thereby the exacting rigour of thy iuſtice) ſo open their eyes to ſee thy manifold free promiſes in Chriſt Ieſus; that they may apply the merits and vertue of his obedience, death, paſsion and blood, vnto their trembling ſoules. Oh, as thou art mighty to ſaue, ſo ſhew thy mighty power in confounding all their enemies; in wrath remembring mercie. And grant vnto them for thy Chriſts ſake, grace to be truely humbled vnder thy mighty hand, and draw neere vnto thee, that thou mayeſt raiſe them vp in thy good time: Vntill which time, giue them patience, hope, faith in thy promiſes, the Spirit of prayer, many comforters; and in the multitude of thy exceeding mercies, accept of their faint and weake grones, ſighes, deſires, wiſhes and prayers, giuing a bleſsing vnto all their endeauours. And good Lord, of thy moſt exceeding rich mercies, for Chriſts ſake, confound Sathan and all his ſuggeſtions in any of theſe thy children, by thy mighty and vnreſiſtable power: & though thou ſuffer him to tempt, yet let him neuer ouercome them. But diſcouer

thou the Tempter in his colours, that ſo (diſcerning him to be the Father of liars) they may no more beleeue his ſuggeſtions. And teach them all ſo to beleeue thee in thy word (vſing the meanes of their ſaluation) that in thy goodtime, they may finde peace of conſcience, and ioy in the holy Ghoſt. And good Lord, becauſe, if thou preſent thy ſelfe vnto them as a conſuming fire, no creature dare approach the mount of thy Holineſſe: O put off thy glittering ſword for a while, and arme thee with all thy attributes of mercie, that ſo theſe poore ſoules may with boldneſſe drawe neere vnto thy Throne, ſo confeſſing their miſerie, and giuing thee praiſe of thy glorie, that thou mayeſt reſtore vnto them their peace. And bleſſed Lord, although thou come not vntill the fourth watch, yet come at laſt, and ſuffer them neuer to depart this life, vntill thou ſay vnto their ſoules, that thou art their euerlaſting ſaluation. And in the meane time, although thou come not ſo ſoone as they call: yet vntill thou come, (leaſt Sathan deceiue them) ouerthrow, aiminiſh, and delay all his fiery temptations, that euen by this they may know thou fauoureſt them, becauſe this their enemy doth not triumph againſt them. And when thy

good ti
                  ••
                ſhall bee, though now (in their ſight ſenſe and feeling) thou ſeeme to teare and rend the mountaines before thee, in ſuch terror, as though thou eyther wert bent to deſtroy, or hadſt neuer loued them: yet appeare thou (for thy Chriſts ſake) at laſt in that ſtill and ſoft voyce, wherein thou vſeſt to ſpeake peace vnto thy children: ſo comforting them according to the dayes, wherein thou had afflicted them: that thus both the one and the other (yea all of them) may glorifie thy great name much more, by their conuerſion and conſolation, then euer formerly they diſhonored thee, in the time of their ſinnes, temptations, and former ignorance; And that onely for Ieſus Chriſts ſake thy deare Sonne, in whom alone thou art well pleaſed: To whom with thee and thy bleſſed ſpirit, be all honour, glory, power, prayſe, might, and dominion, world without end, for euer and euer, Amen.
            
         
      
   