
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  A Declaration of egregious Popiſh Impoſtures, to with-draw the harts of her Maiesties Subiects from their allegeance, and from the truth of Chriſtian Religion profeſſed in England, vnder the pretence of caſting out deuils.
                  PRACTISED BY EDMVNDS, ALIAS Weston a Ieſuit, and diuers Romiſh Prieſts his wicked aſſociates.
                  Where-vnto are annexed the Copies of the Confeſsions, and Examinations of the parties themſelues, which were pretended to be poſſeſſed, and diſpoſſeſſed, taken vpon oath before her Maiesties Commiſſioners, for cauſes Eccleſiaſticall.
                  AT LONDON Printed by Iames Roberts, dwelling in Barbican. 1603.
               
               
                  
                  
                     ❧ The Argument of the ſeuerall Chapters.
                  
                  1 THE occaſion of publiſhing theſe wonders, by the comming into light of the penned booke of Miracles.
                  2 The fit time that the Popiſh Exorciſts choſe to act theſe miracles in.
                  3 The places wherein theſe Miracles were played.
                  4 More ſpeciall conſiderations touching their choyſe of places.
                  5 The perſons, their Diſciples pretended to be poſſeſſed, and diſpoſſeſſed.
                  6 Their wayes of catching, and inueigling their Diſciples.
                  7 Their holy pretences to make their Diſciples ſure vnto them.
                  8 Their meanes, and manner of inſtructing their Schollers.
                  9 Of the ſecrets, and ſtrange operation of the holy chayre, and holy potion.
                  10 Touching the ſtrange names of their deuils.
                  11 The reaſons why ſomtime one deuil alone, ſomtimes an 100, ſometimes a thouſand are caſt out at a clap.
                  12 Of the ſecret of lodging, and couching the deuill in any part of the body that the Exorciſt pleaſe.
                  13 Of diſlodging, rowſing, and hunting the deuil by the dreadfull power of the preſence, approach, & bodily touch of a prieſt.
                  14 Of the ſtrange power of a Catholique Prieſts breath, and of the admirable fire that is in a Prieſts hands to burne the deuill.
                  15 Of the admirable power in a Prieſts gloues, his hoſe, his girdle, his ſhirts, to ſcorch the deuill.
                  16 Of the wonderfull power in a Prieſts albe, his amice, his maniple, his ſtole, to whip, and plague the deuil.
                  17 Certaine queſtions aunſwered, concerning the Church of Rome, her making, and accumulating yet more dreadfull tooles, and Engines for the deuill.
                  18 Of the dreadfull power of holy water, hallowed candell, Frankincenſe, Brimſtone, the booke of Exorciſmes, and the holy potion, to ſcald, broyle, and to ſizle the deuill.
                  19 Of the aſtoniſhable power of Nicknames, Reliques, & Aſſes eares, in afflicting, and tormenting the deuill.
                  20 Of the dreadfull power of the Croſſe, and Sacrament of the Altar to torment the deuil, and to make him roare.
                  21 Of the ſtrange formes, ſhapes, & apparitions of the deuils.
                  22 Of the admirable finall act of expelling the deuils, and of their formes in the departing.
                  23 Of the ayme, end, & mark of all this peſtilent tragaedie.
               
               
                  
                  TO THE SEDVCED Catholiques of England. *⁎*
                  
                  SEduced & diſvnited Brethren, there be two grand witches in the world, that ſeduce the ſoules of the ſimple, & lead them to perdition: Lying wonders, and Counterfeit zeale. The power of theſe two, the ſpirit of God hath most liuely expreſſed vnto vs, one in the perſon of Simon Magus the Sorcerer, who with his lying wonders had ſo bewitched the ſimple people, as they followed him with this acclamation: This man is the power of the great and mighty GOD. The other in the perſon of ſome of the Corinthians, who by the feigned zeale of the counterfeite Apostles, were bewitched, and carried from S. Paule, the true and bleſſed Apostle of our Sauiour Christ. Theſe two witching powers haue many yeeres ſince combined and vnited themſelues in the Pope of Rome, and his diſciples, who take vpon them the ſoueraigne power of our ſauiour Christ, with authority to commaund vncleane ſpirits, and to make them obey: and doe pretend ſuch a burning holy zeale vnto you, as that they regard neither the pleaſures, profits, nor preferments of this world, nay not theyr owne liberty, and liues, but doe offer them vp both as a ſacrifice for your ſoules conſolation. Theſe are mighty powers to ſway your iudgements, and affections from vs vnto them. Now if it ſhall appeare vnto you as cleere, as the light of the ſunne, that theſe powers be feigned, and counterfeite in them, and that they be in truth nothing els, ſaue the mists, and alluſions of Satan, to dimme

the ey of your vnderstanding, and bewitch your affections to doate vppon theyr impious ſuperſtition, what can you, or any ingenious ſpirits doe leſſe, then bewaile your ſeduced miſaffection vnto vs, and to account them as the grand Impoſtors, and enchaunters of your ſoules? And that this may be cleerly manifested vnto you, I beſeech you in the bowels of our bleſſed Sauiour, to let open your eares & eyes to this ſhort declaration: to peruſe and read it with a ſingle ey, and impartiall affection, and if it ſhall not moſt perspicuouſly appeare vnto you, that the Pope, and his ſpirits he ſendeth in here amongst you, do play Almighty God, his ſonne, & Saints vpon a ſtage, do make a pageant of the Church, the bleſſed Sacraments, the rites & ceremonies of religion, do cog & coine deuils, ſpirits, & ſoules departed this life, to countenance and grace, or face out their desperate abhominations, then ſtand diſvnited, and diſaffected as you doe. It is not in any man (I cōfeſſe) to feele thoſe diuine beames of burning zeale that were in S. Paule, who wiſhed himſelfe Anathema for his kinſmen according to the fleſh: yet a man of Ionas ſpirit I can eaſily name, that would most gladly be caſt into the ſea, to calme this tempeſt of oppoſition riſen here amongst vs, and of Ieremies deuotion, that doth pray for a fountaine of teares to bewaile the lamentable blindnes of his owne nation, that men as you are, borne free of an vnderstanding ſpirit, and ingenious diſpoſition, ſhould ſo baſely degenerate, as to captiuate your wits, wils, & ſpirits, to a forraine Idol Gull, compoſed of palpable fiction, and diabolicall faſcination, whoſe enchaunted chalice of heatheniſh drugs, & Lamian ſuperstition, hath the power of Circes, and Medaeas cup, to metamorphoſe men into aſſes, bayards, & ſwine. Is it not their owne brand they haue ſtamped on your forheads, that England hath beene alwayes good aſſe to the Pope?
                  Who doth not bewaile the ſely doating Indian Nation, that falls downe and performes diuine adoration to a rag of red cloth: and the beſotted Aegyptians, that kiſſed with earnest deuotion the Aſſe vppon which the Idol Iſis ſate, and the

lymphaticall priests of Baal, that launced theyr owne fleſh before an Idol of wood? Would God your bewitched dotage were not as palpable, and more lamentable then theyrs, that fall downe & adore a morſell of bread, that kiſſe & clip with religious deuotion the Popes toe, for bearing the feigned counterfeit of our Sauiour on earth: performed with the right Aegyptian gloſe, non Papae ſed Petro, non aſinae ſed deae, this honour is not to the Pope, but to S. Peter, not to the aſſe, but to Iſis. Your Popes beeing proclaimed by your owne Oracliſts to the world, one to be an Aſſe, another a Fox, another a Wolfe.
                  What people, but you, were euer ſo bewitched, as to be borne in hand, that a houſe was carried in the ayre from Paleſtina to Loretto: that a painted Image in a wall, doth worke as high miracles, as euer were performed by the eternall ſonne of God: that the prints of S. Frauncis ſtripes, the tayle of our Sauiours Aſſe, the milke of our bleſſed Lady are this day to be ſeene: and theſe graceleſſe ſaltleſſe gulleries either to be belieued, or countenaunced, by men of wit, vnderstanding, and ſpirit, ſuch as are this day many in the Romiſh Church? If you aske me the cauſe, what can it be but this, that God hath giuen them ouer to the ſpirit of illuſion, to belieue vnſauory lies, for refuſing in their pride to embrace the pure naked ſynceritie of the Gospell of Christ. He that ſits in the heauens, Almighty God, with his Angels, and Saints, do laugh theſe miſhapen monsters to ſcorne.
                  And who can but bleede in hart, to ſee you as farre bewitched on our impoſturiſing renagadoes, that come freſh frō the Popes tyring houſe, masked with the vizard of holy burning zeale. First it may pleaſe you to obſerue, that the wiſer grauer ſort of thē do keepe themſelues warme in theyr Cloyſters at home, and doe feede themſelues fat with the ſpoiles of your confuſion. Theſe lighter ſuperfluities, whom they diſgorge amongst you, how they play the Bats, and Moales, either trenching themſelues in the mines of your labyrinths at home, or masking in your gold and ſiluer abroade in the faſhion

of great Potentates, vntill Gods reuengefull arme doth vncaſe them to the view of the world, & then they ſuffer the mild ſtroke of iustice with a glorious ostentation, as you in beguiled ſimplicitie doe imagine for theyr conceited religion: but as the wiſer ſee, the ſtate did alwaies know, and is of late publiſhed in theyr own writings, for high & odious treaſons: and profeſſed by their owne Maisters, that haue made them after their own images, to be of a ſpirit of contradiction to our Gouernours and Prince: and it is wondred at by themſelues, conſidering theyr treaſonable machinations that her Highneſſe, and the ſtate, haue carried ſo milde, and mercifull an hand ouer them, & that any one of them is left aliue to libell against the admirable lenity of her Maiesties gracious proceedings. Wherein be ye well aſſured, that if the ſword of iuſtice were drawne, and inflicted according to the waight and meaſure of their detestable deſignes, that fewer of thē would come ouer, and that this couey of night-birds, would ſhrowde thēſelues warme vnder the gentle wings of theyr holy father at Rome. But admit (as you conceiue) that they died for the credit of their conceited ſuperstition: what did Lucians Peregrinus leſſe, then offer himſelfe in fire at Olimpia for the credit of his faſcination? What did Aeſculapius vppon the hill Aetna to get himſelfe a name, but cast himſelfe headlong into the burning flames? What doe the Indian-priests at this day, but ſacrifice themſelues for the countenauncing of theyr diabolicall incantation. It is no new, nor ſtrange thing for the authors, and maintainers of ſects, and factions in all kindes, to die with ſeeming ſhew of glorious reſolution. Doe but ſeriouſly recount the quality of this fugitiue generation, & ſee what pious reſolution can lodge in theyr breasts. What are they afore they goe ouer but diſcontended, ruinate, ſtigmaticall refuſe people: of a factious, ambitious, exorbitant conuerſation abroade, exploded, or cunningly diſcarded their owne Societies where they liued: and how ghostly & priestly they demeane thēſelues here amongst you at theyr returne, I referre you for demonstation to this ſhort, and perſpicuous

declaration. Wherein you may plainly ſee, if you doe not wilfully hoodwinke your owne eyes, that the holy pretended hote zeale of the fiery ſpirits from Rome, is the meer Heatheniſh iugling of Bells priests, to deuour your goods, lands, & patrimonies, the rights of your posterity, and auncient monuments of your name, to defraude your children of theyr bread, and cauſe you offer it to impure dogs, to enrich theyr owne Cloysters, Colledges, & Churches, with the ſpoyles of your deſolation, to defile your chast houſes, pollute your tender virgins, depraue, and inueigle your owne wiues lying in your boſoms, eſpecally by that poyſonable engine of hypocriticall Confeſſion, and finally to offer you vp as a pray to that Monster of Rome, the head of all vnnaturall and detestable rebellion.
                  And that this declaration might be free from the carpe, and cauill of ill-affected, or diſcompoſed ſpirits, I haue alledged nothing for materiall, or authenticall heerein, but the expreſſe words, eyther of ſome part of the Miracle booke, penned by the priests, and filed vpon Record, where it is publique to be ſeene, or els a clauſe of theyr confeſſion who were fellow actors in this impious diſſimulation. Whoſe ſeuerall confeſſions, and contestations (the parties beeing yet liuing) are heere publiſhed in print, that the world may be a witneſſe of our integrity herein. All which had beene long ere this offered to your equall conſideration, but that the Miracle-booke came but lately to hand, & the getting of foure chiefe Daemoniacks together, beſides many more aſſistants, beeing perſons of that quality and condition, was a matter of ſome paines, and trauell to effect.
                  If the forme and phraſe be distasting to ſome clowdy ſpirits, as too light, and ironicall for one of my profeſſion, let the matter be my Aduocat, that draweth me thereunto, and the manner my Apologie a little too: trusting I may be excuſed to iest at their iesting, that haue made a iest of God, and of his bleſſed Saints in heauen. If I haue wittingly falſified or feigned any thing out of that booke of wonders, God doe ſo to me, and more, for dooing them ſo much wrong: but if all

be truly, and authentically ſet downe, giue GOD his glorie, his Church her honor, your Soueraigne her allegeance, your Brethren theyr due affection, and the Pope, and his iugling companions, their deſerued detestation. And ſo I leaue you to the protector of all truth, and the reuenger of all falſhood, and hypocriticall diſſimulation.
                  
                     Yours in Chriſt S. H.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  ❀ A declaration of Popiſh impoſture in caſting out of Deuils.
                  
                     
                        CHAP. 1. ¶ The occaſion of publiſhing theſe wonders, by the comming to light of the penned booke of Miracles.
                     
                     ABout ſome three, or foure yeeres ſince, there was found in the hands of one Ma. Barnes a Popiſh Recuſant, an Engliſh Treatiſe in a written hand, fronted with this Latine ſentence, taken out of the Pſalmes, Venite, et narrabo, quanta fecit Dominus animae meae, come and I wil ſhew you, what great things the Lord hath done for my ſoule. Which treatiſe when we had peruſed vppon this holy inuitation, we found it a holie fardell of holy reliques, holy charmes, and holy conſecrated things, applied to the caſting out of many thouſands of deuils, out of ſix young perſons, 3. young men, and three proper young maides, accompliſhed by the meanes of Fa: Edmunds, alias Weston, a principall Ieſuit of his order in thoſe times, & twelue ſecular Prieſts, his reuerend aſſiſtants.
                     The names of the parties ſuppoſed to be poſſeſſed, vvere theſe, Marwood, ſeruaunt (as hath beene enformed) to Ma. Anthony Babington, Will: Trayford, attendant at that time vppon Ma: Edmund Peckham, Robert Maynie Gentleman, lately before come out of Fraunce: Sara Williams, Friſwood Williams, two ſiſters, and Anne Smith, all three meniall ſeruaunts to Maiſter Peckham aforeſaid. The names of the Actors in this holy Comedie, were theſe, Edmunds, alias Weston, rector chori, of

whō you haue heard afore, Ma: Cornelius, Ma: Dìbdale, Ma: Thomſon, Ma: Stemp, Ma: Tyrrell, Ma: Dryland, Ma: Tulice, Ma: Sherwood, Ma: Winkefield, Ma: Mud, Ma: Dakins, Ma: Ballard, and ſome other beſides, that were daily commers, and goers.
                     This play of ſacred miracles, was performed in ſundry houſes accōmodate for the feate, in the houſe of the L. Ʋaux at Hackney, of Ma: Barnes at Fulmer, of Ma: Hughes at Vxbridge, of Sir George Peckham at Denham, and of the Earle of Lincolne in Chanon Row in London. The time choſen to act, & publiſh theſe wonders, were the yeeres 85, and 86, ending with the apprehenſion, and execution of Ballard, and Babington, and the reſt of that impious conſort.
                     And becauſe the gentle Invitator of vs to come, and ſee his wonders, when wee come to ſee them, himſelfe, and his actors doe play leaſt to be ſeene, it hath beene thought meet, to ſend for him, and as many of his play-fellowes, as Tiburne will giue leaue to come, to conferre further with them, touching this myſticall play; whether the partes haue beene handled handſomlie, and cunningly, or no: what the ſcope of the Author Edmunds, and his aſſociates was in this wonderful pageant, and whether good decorum haue beene kept in acting the ſame. Wherein (I muſt tell you) ſome paines haue beene taken by ſome in authoritie, for the finding out of ſuch agents, patients, and aſſiſtants, as haue furniſhed the ſtage, and in bringing them to ſay their parts ſo perſpicuouſly on the ſtage, as that euery young child may ſee, who hee is, what hee meanes, and whether his part tends.
                     
                        Marwood, and Trayford, cannot yet be found, it is thought they are conueyed beyond ſeas, (as ſome other of theyr play-fellowes ſhould haue beene) for telling of tales. The other foure poſſeſſed haue come to light, and vppon gentle conference, haue frankly, and freely

advowed, and haue ſealed it with their voluntary oathes, taken vppon the holy Euangeliſts, that all in effect, that paſſed between them, & the Prieſtes, in this wonderous poſſeſsion, and diſpoſſeſsion, was naught elſe ſaue cloſe packing, cunning iugling, feate falſhood, and cloked diſsimulation. One of the reuerend Prieſts, who was himſelfe a principall actor in this holy legerdemaine, being examined, hath conteſted with the confeſſion of the other examinats, touching the vnfolding of this ſacred packe. All whoſe ſeuerall examinations, confeſſions, and relations, touching the beginning, proceeding, and finiſhing of this tragicall comaedie, wee haue thought meete ad verbum to publiſh in print, that all men may ſee wee haue dealt truly, and ſincerely heerein, and that all may likewiſe ſee, quanta fecit Dominus, (according to the ſaying of that Latine ſentence praefixed to the diſcourſe) how great things the Lord in his mercie dooth by courſe of times reueale, of that man of ſinne, of the myſterie of iniquitie, and of thoſe reuerend iugling Prieſts, his diſguiſed comaedians.
                     Wherein, that euery perſon may appeare in his owne proper colours, the deuill in his, and the deuils charmers in theyrs, that euery part may be conſidered, how well it hath been plaied, and what actor hath beſt deſerued the plaudite, or ſuſpendite, for his good action, and wit, venite, et narrabo, come and ſee it ſet out, in the ſacred robes out of the holy wardrop frō Rome, their holy attire, theyr holy reliques, their conſecrated creatures, theyr own ſpeech, action, & faſhion, & thus it begins.
                  
                  
                     
                        CHAP. 2. ¶ The time when the Popiſh Exorcists choſe to act theſe miracles.
                     THe Politikes maxime of vſing, and plying of time, hath beene ſo well practiſed, & plyed by his Holines of Rome, and his holy crue, as that little time hath been

loſt, wherein ſomething hath not beene attempted againſt her Maieſtie, and the kingdome, ſince her firſt comming to the crowne, to this preſent time. I will onely point, at thoſe former times, as I come along to our time of this tragedie of deuils.
                     Her Highneſſe was no ſooner come to the Crowne, but Marie then wife to the K. of Fraunce, was declared in Paris to be the lawfull Q. of England, and the armes of both her Maieſties kingdoms,ann. 1558. England, & Ireland, were commaunded to be ſet, in vaſis, et tapetibus regijs, et reliquis vtenſilibus. The popiſh Biſhops, lately before depriued in the ſecond yeere of her Maieſties raigne, purpoſed to loſe no time, when preſently after their ſaid depoſition:1559. 
                        plerique eorū excōmunicationis cenſuram, aduerſus reginam alioſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            nonullos ad hibendam cenſuerunt. It was no long time after this, whē it ſhould haue been a Canon ſet down, in the Counſell of Trent, by the inſtigation of his Holines Agents there preſent: de Elizabetha haeretica declaranda,
                        1562. if the Emperor had not interpoſed to ſtay that courſe. It was time well plyed, whē the ſame his Holines contriuing her Maieſties vtter deſtruction,1567. (as appeares in the life of Pius 5. publiſhed in Italian) and drawing the king of Spaine into the ſame, hee ſent ouer one Robert Godolphi a Florentine, vnder the colour of Merchandiſe, hether into England, to excite a rebellion, & furniſhed him with 15000. Crownes towards the ſame: by whoſe cunning perſwaſion, the Noble men in the North parts beeing riſen in Armes, forth commeth the Popes Bull, blanched with a fayre goodly face of paſtorall zeale, and loue to the Catholique religion, excōmunicating of pure deuotion (God wot) the Queenes Maieſtie, and diſcharging her ſubiects from their allegeance vnto her: beeing indeede naught els, ſaue a deuiliſh Engine, to ſtrengthen the rebellion:1569. which beeing diſſolued, and the heads thereof diſperſed, the time was plied on ſtill with conſolatorie

Letters, written from the Pope, containing matter of new comfort, and encouragement to the Duke of Norfolke, the cloſe deſigned head of that rebellion, by his intended mariage with the Scottiſh Queene. Forces were promiſed to be ſent ouer with all ſpeede from beyond ſeas, to the ayde of the ſaide Duke, vnder the leading of Vitelli, appointed to that office by name from the king of Spaine, the comming of which forces,1572. the Duke him ſelfe did ſtay, by loſing his head. And leaſt the King of Spaine ſhould quaile in his princely deſignements againſt this kingdome, in regard of his infortunate ſucceſſe, Saunders, (the Popes darling) eggs him on with a freſh aſſault, to keepe the Spaniſh Engines in worke, alledging this,1577. as his maine battery to cauſe the King to be dooing, that the whole ſtate of Chriſtendome ſtoode vpon the hote aſſayling of England.
                     Neither was it long time ere this vigilant champion had gained time againe, by obtaining of his Holineſſe, men, mony, and munition, with which hee came with open armes into Ireland, like a Furie from Hell: and in his vaine hopes had deuoured that kingdome, for the vſe of his holy Father the Pope forſooth, and for his young Maiſter the Popes Nephew. Where he breathing out his furious Ghoſt,1579. as a pledge of his wicked attempt, Parſons the Popes Minion entertaines the time, with a new coyned plot, comming into England vpon no meaner errand, then to continue the depoſing of her Maieſtie, and the ſetting vp of another Prince.1580.
                     
                     The wiſe eſpying, and circumſpect implying of the aduantage of theſe times: you ſee from what heads and fountaines of holineſſe they came, yet none of theſe is the time, that doth conſort with our casting out of deuils, we haue now in hand. Ours is the time, when his Holi: the King of Spaine, and Parſons theyr Entelechie, were plotting beyond the ſeas, for the deliuery out of priſon of the Q. of Scots, by forcible attempt. Which action,

after mature deliberation beeing caſt vpon the Duke of Guiſe, he the ſaid Duke, was thē buſily preparing his forces for England, for the ſuddaine effecting of the ſaid attempt.
                     I omit how Charles Paget played his time, in comming ſecretly into England, to ſollicite the Earle of Northumberland to diuers trecherous attempts. How Frauncis Throgmorton plyed his time at the inſtigation of Mendoza, in buſily ſounding of Hauens, for the ſafe arriuall of the Guiſian forces. How Doctor Parry plyed his time, in enforming his conſcience, for the ſuddaine, and deſperate murthering of the Queene: (for there was no time ſpared, no meanes vnaſſaied, no deuiſe vnthought vpō, no perſon vnattempted, euery one of that holy helliſh aſſociation, ſtriuing to win the garland from other, by hauing his hands ſooneſt, and deepeſt dyed in her Maieſties blood) and I come to the time when the Guiſian exploit, grewe towards the prime, and was on foote for England.
                     Which ſtratageme, beeing inſpired by the Pope into Parſons, by Parſons into Edmunds, alias Weſton, a Prouinciall of the order of Ieſuits for that time, reſiding heere in England: betweene Parſons, and whom, as betweene two Intelligences, in a ſuperior, and an inferior ſphaere, there was a mutuall communication of all matters of import, and by the ſame Edmunds beeing breathed into the breaſtes of all theyr ſubordinates, and dependants heere in the Land, it cannot be cōceiued, what a ſpirit, life, and alacritie, the whole Popiſh bodie of Traytors (halfe dead before) did ſuddainly conceiue, how euery limb, member, and ioynt of that holy bodie did beſtir it ſelfe, to be ſeruiceable to this holie deſigne. But Fa: Weston aboue all, whoſe head and hart, were ſo bigge with the Guiſian attempt, as hee thought his time come, to aduaunce the banner of Ignatius for euer heere in England, by making himſelfe, & his order

famous by ſome notable exploit: and it beeing Gods permiſſiue prouidence, that this popiſh body, cōpiled of ſo many horrible & deteſtable treaſons, ſhould be wholy inſpired from the ſpirit of his Holi: & of hell, Weston, as a limb of the ſame body, mooued with the ſame ſpirit, chooſes to eternize himſelfe from the power of hell, by caſting out deuils. Wherein hee beſtirs himſelfe ſo ſpritely, and playes ſuch a deuill-prize at the L. 
                           Ʋaux his houſe in Hackney, with ſuch a wonderfull applauſe, as Array, Parſons Ape, a runnagate Prieſt, and a notable Polypragmon heere in our ſtate, meetes with Ma: Tyrrell newly come from beyond ſeas, and vaunts with a bigge looke, that Fa: Weston had ſhewed ſuch ſoueraigne authority ouer hell, as the deuils themſelues ſhould confeſſe theyr kingdom was neere at an end. And the ſame Array, was ſo full fraught with hope, and confidence, in the Spaniſh, and Guiſian attempt then in hand, as his firſt congee was in Maiſter Tirrels eare at theyr entring into Paules, bidding him to be of good cheere, for that all things now went very well forwards.A loyall generation of Prieſtes. 
                        The King of Spaine (quoth he) is now almost in readineſſe with his forces for England, it ſtandeth vs now in hand that be Priests, to further the Catholique cauſe, as much as poſſibly in vs lyeth.
                     
                     
                        Paget, and Morgan, two principall limbs of this popiſh body, being acquainted with the aforeſaid plot, & fearing that the Guiſes attempt, by deliuering the Scottiſh Queene by open Armes, would ſparkle abroad before it were ripe, and ſo receiue a check by our Engliſh forces, before it came to the puſh, caſt about in theyr braines for a ſhorter way at home: Ballard the bloodie Prieſt is dealt withall to pricke on Babington, Tilney,
                        As is lately confeſſed by Fa: P. in his Apolog. and the reſt of that aſpiring popiſh band to attempt a deſperate truculent act, by laying violent handes vppon her Maieſties ſacred perſon. Which whilſt it was in hammering, the Catholique Prieſts, not caring by what meanes they effected theyr trecherous deſignes, ſet themſelues

on worke on all hands, with working of wonders by diſpoſſeſſing of deuils: vnto the acting of whoſe miracles, Babington and his conſorts, doe diuers times repaire to Sir George Peckhams houſe at Denham, with foure or fiue Coaches full at once. And this new tragedie of deuils had his time of riſing, and his fatall time of fall, with the true tragedie performed vpon Bab: and his complices, for theyr deteſtable treaſon. The peſtilent drift, & pernicious courſe of this deuill-worke you ſhall heare of heereafter.
                  
                  
                     
                        CHAP. 3. ¶ The places wherein theſe miracles were plaid.
                     IT hath been alwaies the ill fortune of this holy order of Exorcists, that the profeſſors of it haue been reputed errand Iuglers and Impoſtors, yea ſometimes, by the greateſt protectors of theyr owne religion. A great man told Mengus, that if there were fiftie Exorciſts at once ſtanding before him, hee ſhould deeme nine and fortie of them for no better then Impoſtors, and Mengus (as ſeemes) was afraid himſelfe ſhould haue made vp iuſt tale. Wherefore the Maiſters of the Art, haue ſo warily deuiſed theyr rules, and canons, as a man may ſee they labour to preoccupate mens minds for feare of ſuſpition, which giues the greater occaſion to ſuſpect them the more.
                     
                        Mengus his caueat of declaring places not meete for exorciſme is this: Praecauere debet Exorcista quantum poteſt,
                        Cap. 15. flag: daemon. 
                        ne abſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            graui neceſſitate exerceat hoc officium adiurandi daemones in domibus priuatis, ne detur occaſio ſcandali puſillis. His poſitiue rule for the place appointed is, Sed debet exorcizare in Eccleſia, vel in alio loco Deo dicato vel alicui ſancto. His reaſons againſt priuate houſes, and for Churches, or at leaſt conſecrated places are firſt, that beeing doone publiquely, the weaker ſort may haue no

occaſion to ſuſpect the action of fraude. 2. Tum quia in domibus priuatis, vt in pluribus, ad ſunt mulieres, quarum conſortium debet ſummopere ab exorcistis vitari, ne incidant in laqueum diaboli: that is, becauſe in priuate houſes, there are commonly ſome women, whoſe company the Exorcists ought to decline, least happilie they fall into the ſnares of the deuill. 3. Tum quia ibifiunt multa turpia, tacenda potius, quam hîc inſerenda: that is, becauſe in ſuch houſes, turpitudes be committed, meeter to be ſilenced, then heere to be named. 4. Tum quia Eccleſia propriè eſt locus deputatus vbi Euergumeni debent exorcizari: that is, becauſe the Church is properly the place appointed to that action, wherein the poſſeſſed ought to be exorciſed. And what need theſe cautious rules, to auoyde ſuſpition of iugling, turpitude, and women, if nothing were amiſſe? Auricular confeſſion, is an holie action of more priuacie, ſolitude, & familiarity with women, yet becauſe no man (vvithout reaſon) may ſuſpect, but that all is wel between a ghoſtly father, and his ghoſtly child, there be no rules made of iugling, turpitude, or women in that myſticall function. Sure all is not well in this exorciſing craft, that iugling, turpitude, and women, muſt be ſo preciſely auoided.
                     Indeed wheras in his 17. chapter fa: Mengus diſputes, that though exorciſing ought to be done in the church, yet the doores of the Church may be cloſe ſhut about them: his fatherhood giues vs iuſt cauſe to ſuſpect, that though he would ſeeme to haue it publique, touching the place, for a ſeeming ſhew of auoyding iugling, turpitude, and women, yet he can be content by ſhutting the doores, to haue it priuately done: or ſuch onely let in, as the Exorciſt beſt liketh.
                     See the practiſe heereof in the iugling Exorciſts at Paris, anno 1599, who to make a ſhew of auoyding of that, which they onely intended, iugling deceit,Page. 6. of that booke. they muſt haue theyr Minion Martha Broſſier exorciſed in a Chappell forſooth: but yet with ſuch a warie eye caſt

vpon the ſpectators, as there comming in amongſt the reſt one Mareſcot a Phyſician, a man they did not affect, Seraphin the holy Exorciſt cries out with a loude voice, if there be any heere that is incredulous, & will trouble Martha Broſſier, the deuill will carry him away in the ayre. Wherefore yee ſee it was very wiſely prouided of Mengus, to haue an eye to the doore: the like ill-fauoured accident fell out amongſt our holy crew, at theyr principall Theatre, Sir George Peckhams houſe at Denham, where for want of hauing a watch at the doore, there comes in one Ma: Hambden of Hambden, who, being one of the incredulous perſons, that F. Seraphin cō
                        plaines of afore, and eſpying theyr bungling, and vſing theſe wordes in deteſtation of theyr iugling: I ſee this dealing is abhominable:
                        See Friſwoods Cō
                           feſs: 
                        & I maruaile that the houſe ſinketh not for ſuch wickednes committed in it: and ſo departing vtterly diſcontent: this incredulous ſpectator ſo skared our holy actors with feare, that they ſlunke out of the houſe euery man his way, as a dogge that had been bitten by the tayle, and leauing theyr patients alone, gaue the deuils an otium, or leaue to play for that night.
                     Now let vs looke in a little amongſt our twelue holy Exorciſtes, or rather twelue holy diſciples, and Fa: Weston theyr holy head: who though they be not a working, yet by this time they are whetting theyr tooles: and let vs ſee, how warily they haue put in vre theyr Maiſter Mengus his canon, of chooſing a Chappell, or holy publique place to exorciſe in, for feare of ſuſpition of iugling, turpitude, and women. Firſt, it doth not appeare that they acted any of theyr wonderous diſpoſſeſſions in any Church, Chappell, or conſecrated place, as F. Mengus had appointed them: except happily they ſlipped into ſome Noble mans voide houſe in London: which houſes, in regard of theyr owners callings, being aboue reach of authority, are commonly now adayes the ſanctuaries for Popiſh treaſon, conſiſtories for plots of rebellion,

and Chappels for all Romiſh loathſome abhomination: not that the Noble men themſelues are priuie to ſuch meetings, but theyr corrupt houſe-keepers much in fault for entertayning ſuch gueſts: and yet the owners themſelues not altogether free from blame, for making no better choiſe of thoſe, to whom they commit that charge.
                     But it appeares not (as I ſaid) that they met in any chappel, or holy place at all: but the chief places of their ſolemne meetings, were the L. 
                           Ʋaux his houſe at Hackney, neere London, Maiſter Gardiners houſe at Fulmer, Ma: Hughes his houſe at 
                           Ʋxbridge, and Sir George Peckhams houſe at Denham: places very fitly accommodating theyr holy intentions. Firſt for theyr capacitie, beeing able to receiue the holy troupe, & theyr traine (for they remoued bagge, and baggage, as your wandring Players vſe to doe.) Next, for theyr ſecurity, the owners beeing truſtie tried ſure cardes, and commaunders of theyr neighbours adioyning, if any ſuſpition ſhould ariſe: and then for their ſituation, beeing remote and ſecluſe from ordinary acceſſe.
                     At the L. Vaux his houſe at Hackney, was the prime grand miracle performed, by the grand Maiſter of the craft, Fa: Weston himſelfe, vppon one Marwood, ſeruant to Babington the traytor: where a wonderful thing fell out. Fa: Weston, at the very firſt encounter with the deuill, ſtunted the deuils wits, and the deuill being once put out, could neuer hit in againe, but vntruſſes, and cries out, O me ſtultum, inſanum, et infaelicem: O fooliſh,
                        In his owne tract. vpon record. page 2. 
                        mad, and miſerable deuill that I am: which put all the whole company of ſpectators into ſuch aſtoniſhment, as there was a confuſed ſhout made of weeping, & ioy, for this foyle of the deuill. And the Epilogue was this, O Catholicam fidem, ô inſenſatos haereticos: O the Catholick faith, ô ſenceleſſe haereticks, that could neuer learne the feate, to skare a deuill from his wits.
                     
                        At Fulmer houſe there were no great miracles done, onely the groundes of theyr Art layde ſure, and a little trying of their tooles, whether their tew would holde or no.
                     At Vxbridge they lay but two or three nights at the moſt, and yet the place was graced with a punie miracle, or two. Dibdale the Prieſt had his wench ſet ſo cloſe vnto him in the way thether, (for auoyding turpitude & women) as ſhe felt her ſelfe to burne, & could hardly endure the heate of the holy man. Trayford cryes out by the way water, water, as the Frier did that by Abſolon in Chawcer was ſcalded in the toote. And thus were theyr Journalls towards Denham, where the Court ſtayed: the hangings were tricked vp, the houſes made ready, and the greateſt part of the wonders of this comaedie was performed. Their harbinger, and hoſt both, in all theſe iournies (for the owners of houſes, and theyr families, ſtill left theyr owne houſes, and made all cleere for theſe holy comaedians, as is vſed to be done towards the comming of a Court) was one Edm: Peckham; an excellent purueior for ſuch a campe; one of a very ruinate eſtate, an intemperate diſpoſition, an vncleane conuerſation, & a man ſo deeply engaged to this holy band, as that himſelfe, his wife, his concubine, and his whole familie liued wholy at their charge. This is the man that ſtil furniſhed the camp with all kind of luggage, and pleaſing prouiſion: that ſcoures the coaſts, to ſee that all be cleere, that lookes to the truſſes, and fardels, that no iugling ſticks be left out: the ſacriſt of theſe holy myſteries, playing himſelfe fiue or ſix parts in this comaedie: the harbinger, the hoſt, the ſteward, the vaunt courrier, the ſacriſt, and the Pandar. And this ſhall ſuffice touching their places in generall: more ſpeciall conſiderations of the ſame, you ſhall heare in the chapter enſuing.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        CHAP. 4. ¶ More ſpeciall conſiderations, touching their choiſe of places.
                     
                     
                        VIno vendibili non opus est hedera. Weston, in regard of his owne fame, needed nothing more then ordinarie, to commend him in this admirable ſcience: but his 12 diſciples being but punies, and newly entred by him into the ſchoole of legerdemaine, ſtoode in neede of ſome grace, and commendation, to bring themſelues into cuſtome: therefore, like wiſe retaylers, they choſe vnto themſelues places of aduantage, to aduaunce their profeſſion. Where it is to be obſerued, that whileſt the chiefe of the Popiſh holy body heere in England had their heads, harts, and hands full of practiſes of treaſon; ſome other Prieſts there were that beſtirred themſelues. as faſt in imploying all their wit, and skill, about getting into their hands huge mines, and maſſes of gold, ſiluer, and treaſure (called by the Artiſans in that myſterie Treaſure Trouvé) ſuppoſed to be hidden, in diuers houſes, woods, & plots of ground heere in England: vvhether to furniſh the heads and leaders of the conſpirators for their holy ſeruice, they had in hand againſt her Maieſtie, and the ſtate, or to enrich their owne cofers, I leaue it to coniecture.
                     For compaſſing of this treaſure, there was a conſociation betweene 3 or 4 prieſts, deuill-coniurers, and 4 diſcouerers, or ſeers, reputed to carry about with them, their familiars in rings, and glaſſes, by whoſe ſuggeſtion they came to notice of thoſe golden hoards. The names of the diſcouerers, or ſeers, were theſe: Smith, Rickston, Goodgame, and Iames Phiſwick. The names of the deuill-coniuring prieſts, for ſome reaſons I forbeare: and two of the places (amongſt many) wherein they dealt were Denham, and Fulmer.
                     
                     
                        Touching Denham the Gentleman, chiefe owner of the Manor, teſtifieth that the 4 ſeers, or impoſtors, had borne him in hand, that there was great ſtore of Treaſure Trouvè, hidden in his ſaid Manor, and appointed him a night certaine, when to digge for the ſame, which time they kept: and that himſelfe with diuers of his ſeruants being preſent, there was nothing found, but olde empty earthen pots. And concerning Fulmer, the ſame Gentleman tells vs alſo, that the impoſtors afore-ſaid, departed from his houſe to Fulmer. But the penner of theſe miracles, remembers more diſtinctly, both the yeere, moneth, and day, when they went thither. The 22 of October, anno 84. there came 3 coniurers to Fulmer, vpon a Thurſday (ſaith he) and there remained working in their Arte, vntill the Tueſday following.
                     Vpon occaſion of the practitioning of theſe coſeners, and deuill coniuring prieſts for money, was phancied a conceite, and from phancie grew rumours, and tales, amongſt the common ſort (as vpon any ſleight occaſion of ſuch matters, haue vſed to be) of ſpirits, deuils, and bug-beares, walking, and haunting thoſe places, and houſes where the coniuring had beene. Sara Williams, one of their patients, ſaith, That ſhee had not beene long at Fulmer, but ſhe heard ſay, that the houſe was troubled with ſpirits. The penner of the miracles, as if he meant to ſcare vs with the very noyſe, reports vs the manner of the Hobgoblins in a very tragicall ſtile. The whole houſe (ſaith he) was haunted in very terrible manner, molesting all that were in the ſame,
                        See the booke of miracles. Page, 26. 
                        by locking, and vnlocking of dores, tinckling amongst the fier-ſhouels, and the tonges, ratling vpon the boards, ſcraping vnder their beds, and blowing out the candels, except they were halowed. And further, that theſe ill mannered vrchins, did ſo ſvvarme about the prieſts, in ſuch troupes, and thronges, that they made them ſometimes to ſweat, as ſeemes, with the very heate of the fume, that came from the deuils noſes. Ma: Maynie
                        
a pittifull poſſeſſed, doth affirme, that within a day, or two after his comming to Denham, the maid-cooke told him, that there was great walking of ſpirits about the houſe, and that diuers had beene greatly affrighted by them. And if you will not beleeue theſe, beleeue the deuill himſelfe in his Dialogue with Dibdale,
                        Page, 25, of the book of miracles. crying in his deuils roaring voyce, that he came thither for Money, Money.
                     And if you happen to wonder, why I called theſe houſes of Denham, and Fulmer, in the beginning of this chapter, aduantagious vnto our holy impoſtors, conſidering Fa: Mengus his rule of places for exorciſing, cited before, that they muſt be conſecrated, halowed, or holy places at leaſt, you will wonder ſomewhat more, when you heare Fa: Thyraeus preſcribing, that at any hand before the holy workes of exorciſing, the ill affected party be begun, firſt, and aboue all, to purifie, and exorciſe the place, that the houſe being cleanſed from thoſe troubleſome haunting companions, that doe make men ſweate, the holy worke may proceede the more facile, and with better ſucceſſe.
                     Where by the way you are to obſerue out of learned Thyraeus his 70 Chapter De locis infestis: the whole courſe heereof, that is, of exorciſing the places. Which muſt be performed by theſe 5 holy works: Diuini auxilij imploratione: pſalmorum gradualium recitatione: lectione Euangelij: thurificatione: et concluſione. By calling vpon God, the bleſſed virgin Mary, and the Saints: by ſaying ouer the 15 graduall Pſalmes: by reading ouer the Goſpell of S. Iohn, concerning Zacchaeus climing vp into a tree: by holy fumigations: and the Epilogue of the whole worke. Theſe be the fiue holy ſcare-deuils, which our Exorciſts ſhould haue vſed, to haue driuen the deuils from the houſe. And heere I muſt needes ſhame my ſelfe, and lay open vnto you, the ſhallowneſſe of my wit, that is not able to diue into the bottom of this ſacred myſterie:

why aboue all other Goſpels, the Goſpell of S. Iohn, touching Zacchaeus climbing into a tree, ſhould haue ſuch a potency to fright a deuill out of a houſe. Whether there be any hidden antipathie between the nature of deuils, and a Sycamore tree, as was between Scaliger and a Rat: or that the deuill bare a ſpight to the tree, for helping low Zacchaeus to ſee our Sauiour paſſe by: or that the deuill had himſelfe ſome miſchance out of the tree: or that our Sauiours dinner at Zacchaeus houſe was dreſſed with the wood of that tree: or els his croſſe for haſt made of that tree, Oedipo opus est, I am at a full point. And if I ſend you to Thyraeus, to vnridle the ridle, I doubt you will laught at him, as you doe at me.
                     Howſoeuer it be, our holy Exorciſts vſed neyther that, nor any other of the fiue terrors, to flight the deuils from Fulmer, nor Denham, but were content vvith theyr companie, and fell to theyr worke. And heerein they ſhewed a part of theyr greateſt skill of legerdemaine. Firſt, this fabulous rumor of the houſes haunted with deuils, did blanch ouer, and blaze theyr Art the more of casting deuills out, and ſo brought them into credit. Secondly, if they had read the Goſpell touching Zacchaeus, and skared them away, they had wanted deuils to furniſh out the pageant. Thirdly, it bred a reuerend opinion, and an admiration in all that came to ſee wonders, at the vertue, and holineſſe of the Prieſts, that durſt walke vp and downe amongſt the thickeſt ſwarme of deuils, and neuer a deuill ſo hardy as to touch an haire of their beards. Fourthly, it ſerued their purpoſes excellent well to couer their bungling, iugling, & legerdemaine, in that the ſeruants of the houſes hauing their phancies oppreſſed with the conceit of ſpirits, and deuils haunting in euery corner of the houſe, they were ſo diſtracted with feare, as they had vſe of neither wit, nor will, to doubt, or looke into their packing.
                     And by this you ſee our punie Exorciſts, as young as

they be, ſhewed more wit, and skill, then either Mengus their Maiſter, or Thyraeus their prompter, in picking out theſe places of Hobgoblins, to make the ſtages for their Comaedy, and not offering firſt by holy fumigations, to ſcare the vrchins away. One doubt I haue more, wherein I muſt craue your gentle aſſiſtance.
                     Some curious head, more nice then needes, may pick at a moate, and aske mee two or three queſtions out of this narration. Firſt, whether a man may be a coniurer, ſorcerer, or Enchaūter; that is, enter into league, friendſhip, and familiarity with the deuill, as the prieſtes that coniured for mony at Denham did, and yet be accounted a ghoſtly Confeſſor, a reuerend father, and an holy prieſt ſtill? A ſimple doubt God wote. Syluester, Bonifacius, and ſome other Popes, haue beene errand deuill-coniurers, and yet theyr holineſſe not an halfepeny the worſe. This ſimple queſtioniſt muſt vnderſtand, that God hath tied the ſpirit of holines with ſo ſure a chaine to S. Peters chayre, as that let the Pope, or any popeling, be an Ethnick, a Turke, a Saracen, or a deuill, hee cannot auoide it, but by ſitting in that chaire he muſt weare out his holineſſe, and be holy ſtill.
                     Secondly, if he would know how it cōmeth to paſſe, that the famous Thyraeus hauing laboured, and ſweat ſo much to ſet downe all the cauſes, waies, & meanes, how wicked ſpirits doe come to haunt houſes, and hauing by the dexteritie of his wit found out twelue waies, this way of haunting houſes after coniuration, is none of his twelue: vve muſt tell him, that our Exorciſts are not of his old plodding faſhion, but of the new cut, & ſuch, as you ſhall find, (by that time you haue them a little hote in theyr worke) will ſet Mengus, Thyraeus, and Sprenger to ſchoole.
                     Thirdly, if hee tell vs by the rules of that blacke Magicke Art, concerning coniuring vp of ſpirits, that the Coniurers great art, and induſtrie, is not ſo much in raiſing

vp a ſpirit, as in commaunding him downe againe, and that if hee cannot lay him downe quiet, the Artiſt himſelfe, and all his companie, are in danger to be torne in peeces by him; and that hee is ſo violent, boyſtrous, and bigge, as that he will ruffle, rage, and hurle in the ayre, worſe then angry God Aeolus euer did, and blow downe ſteeples, trees, may-poles, and keepe a fell coyle in the world. And vppon this will be queſtioning, how it happened heere, that our haunting ſpirits at Denham, and Fulmer, rayſed by the blacke Art, did not ruffle and rage in the world, as thoſe coniured ſpirits vſe to do, but did put theyr heads in a bench-hole for a twelue month together, till theſe holy good men came to theyr work? I muſt tell him, that our haunting ſpirits were of a more mild, calme, and kinde diſpoſition, louing the companie of wenches, and holy prieſtes; and for theyr ſtaying ſo long about the houſe, as Rats about a Barne, wee ſay they did that kindly, expecting the prieſts theyr holie Maiſters to come to ſet them a worke. And ſo theſe quiddities being ſatisfied, I hope I may proceed.
                  
                  
                     
                        CHAP. 5. ¶ The perſons pretended to be poſſeſſed, and diſpoſſeſſed.
                     AFter that our holy order were reſolued of their holie wonders of caſting out deuils, & had both time and place fit for theyr purpoſe, a meane-witted man would aske the queſtion, that young Iſaac did of his father in a much holier cauſe, Loe heere are all things ready, but where is the ſacrifice? The time is heere fitting, and the places prepared, but where are the poſſeſſed parties, vpon whom theſe miracles muſt be ſhewed? The young gallant in the comaedy thought it an impoſſible matter, that his Sycophant ſhould be furniſhed at a daies warning, both with money, & a Merchant to coſen the

Baude: and his Sycophant cheeres him vp thus: conſilij, doli
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            copiam ſtructam gesto in pectore mecum. And ſo was it with our cunning Comaedians; they had a world of deuiſes, to get themſelues patients, readie coyned in their budget. Truſtie Roger the Leno,
                        Edm: Peckham. had his hookes ſo ſweetly bayted, and his ſprindges ſo artificially ſet in euery haunt, and glade, that he was alwaies ſure of either a Gudgin, or a Woodcocke, to furniſh out a ſeruice. It is a common ground with them (as with all other conſpirants, in any badde practiſe or ſcience) not to deale with any, that are not in ſome degree, or other obliged vnto them. Marwood, Ma: Anthony Babingtons man the traytor, the firſt ſubiect, whereon the grand miracle at Hackney was playd, is not now forth cōming, as I geſſe, for feare of his telling tales out of ſchoole. And if one ſhould kindly aske Fa: Weston in his eare, what is become of him, that hee might be ſpoken withall, I ſuppoſe of his modeſtie hee would ſooner bluſh, then tell. This actor played his part extempore there on the ſtage with a verie good grace; and if hee had now the good hap to be conferred with-all, I doubt not but he could, and would relate (as other his cue-fellowes haue done) how hee came to that facility in his part, who were his prompters, his directers, his teachers, and who did help him put on the deuils vizard on his face. It may ſuffice, that it is ſaid, he was Anthony Babington his man.
                     
                        Trayford the young Gentleman forſooth, was of Ma: Peckhams priuities, or priuie counſell if ye will, the Leno his owne Hypodromos, ſworne true to the Pantofle, young maiſter of the Maydens, ſeruing in the nature of a refreſher, to furbuſh ouer his maiſters brayed wares: one that couth his actions, and motions ſo readily, and expreſſed them ſo liuely in the ſceane of poſſeſſion, as Sara Williams his play-fellow,In her examination. had almoſt forgotten her part, and marred the play; ſure I am ſhe confeſſeth, that ſhe loued the young deuill too well.
                     
                        Ma: Mainie, by birth a Gentleman, by education a Catholique, one that had ſuckt frō his mother the taint of Romiſh contagion, was by her conuayed beyond Seas, ere he was 14 yeeres old, and for his deeper grounding in Popiſh ſuperſtition, being maintained 2 yeeres in the Seminarie at Rhemes, entred himſelfe into the order of the Bonhommes. But ſhortly leaft his fraternity, & came ouer into England: where his brother Ma: Iohn M. hauing married Ma. Peckhams ſiſter, & he accompanying his brother, ſomtimes to Ma. Peckhams houſe at Denham, fell eft-ſoones in acquaintance with this holie league there: and ſeeing amongſt their ſocietie no Bonhomes at al, but wares of a much lighter, and pleaſanter gloſſe, was the more eaſily allured into the holy combination, and being once entangled, could not get out againe, but of a metamorphozed Bonhomme, became an excellent deuill-comaedian:See his examin: though now ye may perceaue the Gentleman doth rue, that euer he did ſet his foote on the ſtage. This man had bonds enow about him, to make good his truſt, and fidelity to the holy aſſociation: education, religion, affiance, and beſides, to ſome kinde ſhe-deuils of that order, no vnkind affection.
                     
                        Anne Smith, attending at times vpon Miſtris Peckham (a maid when ſhe came to the league) of 18 yeeres of age, nuſled vp in the true rites, and ceremonies of the Popiſh faſcination, and ſo an affectionate proſelyte to that Mimick ſuperſtition (it being the onely religion to catch fooles, children, and women, by reaſon it is naught elſe,Ed: Peckham. ſaue a conceited pageant of Puppits, and gaudes) ſhee was firſt ſeazed vppon by olde Harpax, the Leno, graund probationer of the deuils female in the play, by the meanes of her ſiſter, one Alice Plater, his ſweet Miſtris forſooth: ſhee was directed downe to Denham, for her better inſtruction in myſterie of poſſeſſion, and thence after an acte, or hope of probation, ſhe returned

to London: whence ſhe became Stamp the Prieſts peculiar, to be conuayed againe to Denham.
                     
                     
                        Sara Williams (a mayd when ſhe came to the league borne at Denham, not aboue 15 yeeres olde, when ſhee entred theſe ſacred myſteries) an appendant to the familie of Sir George Peckham of Denham, one of a very good perſonage, fauour, and wit: ſhee was a long time managed to be brought to the lure, and for her better aduauncement in her maiſters eye, ſhee was made miſtris Peckhams chamber-mayd pardie: the pleaſing parts ſhe brought with her to the campe were much enuied, and eyed by thoſe naughty haunting deuils, that would blow out her candel, except it were hallowed. The poore wench was ſo Fayrie haunted, as ſhe durſt not goe, eſpecially to Ma: Dibdale his chamber alone.See her examina: But you ſhall heare her owne confeſſion.
                     
                        Friſwood Williams, ſiſter to Sara, (a mayde when ſhee came to the league) about 16 yeeres old: a plant of the ſame ſoyle, and a hanging to the ſame houſe, her father hauing beene Sir George Peckhams man. Shee was ſent downe to Denham vnder colour of viſiting her ſiſter Sara, whom ſhe heard to be ill at eaſe, as alſo to be helpfull to miſtris Peckham about the poſſeſſed: Vnder whom ſhee was admitted to be attendant in a place of reuerſion; who had not been long within the compaſſe of that holy circle, but ſhee was diſcouered to haue a tang of poſſeſſion. Shee kept her ſcene at her cue with her fellow play-deuils, ſo long as at the laſt ſhe got ſuch a pinch of Tom Spanner in the darke (one of the haunting crue) that the markes of it, were many dayes after to be ſeene.
                     Here you may perceiue, in what termes the patients on both ſides with their holy Maiſters ſtood, how the deuils of both kindes, hees, and ſhees, became combined together, by the cunning Leno his meanes, and were ſo farre engaged each to other, and to the whole band,

that they had as good play their parts well, and haue good cheere, good ſtore of gold, much making of, and other gentle pleaſing curteſies for their paines, as by ſtepping aſide, to ſpoyle the play, & to blot their owne reputations beſides.
                     We might now proceede towards the preſenting of ſome of our Actors vpon the ſtage, but that old doating Mengus, vppon pure ſpight to hinder our ſport, hath dropped out a dry thred-bare rule, forged in his own braine: A caueat of auoyding ſuſpition forſooth: telling vs, that we haue marred all in our holy play of deuils at firſt daſh, for taking vpō vs to exorciſe young wenches, beeing flatly againſt the Canon of that ſacred Science, which is this in his booke, Si mulier ſit, quae exorcizatur, ſit valde ſenex: We must not exorciſe a woman, except ſhe be old. To this Canon wee aunſwer, that Mengus ſpeakes like an olde worne Exorciſt, whoſe marke is out of his mouth: his rule hath many faults and infirmities in it. Firſt, it is againſt the maxime of charitie, that biddes vs doe good vnto all: and what greater good can be to a young maide, then to eaſe her of a deuill? Secondlie, we finde by experience, and the confeſſion of our young demoniacks, as you heard, that our exorciſing prieſts, be of a very hote temper, and fierie complexion, ſo as but touching the young wenches, they cry out that they burne, this were verie dangerous for an olde dry woman, leaſt ſhee ſhould take fire. Thirdly, this would much abate the credit, and cuſtome of Mengus his own profeſſion, for we find not an old woman in an age to be poſſeſſed by the deuill: the deuils of our time in this Horizon louing more tender daintie fleſh. And indeed it would be a Quaere, handſomly interlarded with Obs, and ſols, why all both Popiſh, and other deuils which begin to ſwarme prety well in theſe dayes, beare ſuch a ſpite to young Lads, but eſpecially to young girles, and maides, that they ordinarily, or not at all vexe any, but

ſuch. But I leaue that to the profound Maiſters, & profeſſors of this holy helliſh ſcience. Fourthly, Mengus ſhewed no wit in teaching this rule: for there be certain actions, motions, diſtorſions, diſlocations, writhings, tū
                        blings, and turbulent paſſions fitting a deuils part, (to make it kindly expreſſed) not to be performed but by ſuppleneſſe of ſinewes, pliableneſſe of ioynts, and nimbleneſſe of all parts, which an old body is as vnapt, and vnweldie vnto, as an old dog to a daunce. It would (I feare mee) poſe all the cunning Exorciſts, that are this day to be foūd, to teach an old corkie woman to writhe, tumble, curuet, & fetch her Morice gamboles, as Martha Broſſier did. Theſe anus decrepitae, be aſinae ad lyram to this geare: and therefore their Patron Mengus, may weare the eares himſelfe, and leaue theſe ſtagers out.
                  
                  
                     
                        CHAP. 6. ¶ Theyr waies of catching, and inueigling theyr diſciples.
                     THe gift of diſcerning of ſpirits ſpoken of by S. Paul, being (as it is ſuppoſed) ceaſed in Gods Church, it becommeth a point of higheſt difficultie in the old, and new exorciſing craft, by what meanes a man ſhall come to be certaine, whether the partie affected be poſſeſſed, or no.
                     Learned Thyraeus diſcourſeth touching the ſignes of poſſeſſion in three large chapters de doemoniacis.
                        Chap, 22.23, 24. Firſt he ſaith, that neither the confeſſion of the partie, nor his fierce behauiour, nor his brutiſh, and barbarous voice, nor his terrible countenaunce, nor the priuation almoſt of all his vitall functions, nor his diſeaſes, and pangs incurable in phyſick, nor the hauing the deuill oft in ones mouth, nor for a man to conſecrate himſelfe to the deuil, to be preſently ſnatcht away by him, nor the reuealing of ſecret matters, nor the knowledge of ſtrange

languages, nor extraordinary ſtrength, nor all the ſignes, that appeared in ſuch, as were ſpoken of in the Goſpell to be poſſeſſed, are ſufficient, and vndoubted ſignes, & rules, that the partie, in whom they appeare, is indeed poſſeſſed. And then going along, and naming other ſignes vnto vs, he puzzels himſelfe pittifully, and leaues his Reader in a wood.
                     Our late popiſh Exorciſts, haue certaine new deuiſed ſignes of their owne obſeruation, more fitting the times, and effectuall for the gracing their graceleſſe profeſſion. Theyr Empericall ſignes be theſe. 1, If the partie affected, cannot for burning abide the preſence of a Catholique prieſt. 2, If ſhee will hardly be brought to bleſſe herſelfe with the ſigne of the Croſſe. 3, If a caſket of reliques beeing brought her, ſhee turne away her face, and cry that they ſtinke. 4, If S. Iohns Goſpel being put in a Casket, and applied vnto her, ſhe rubbe, or ſcratch any part of her body, and cry it burnes, it is an euident demonſtration, that the enemie dooth lurke in that part. 5, If ſhe can hardly be brought to pronoūce theſe words, Aue Maria, the mother of GOD, and moſt hardly the Catholique Church. 6, If a Casket of reliques couered with red, doe ſeeme white vnto her. 7, If ſhee tumble, and be vexed, whē any goe to confeſſion. 8, If ſhee haue a ſhiuering at Maſſe. 9, If ſhee fleere, and laugh in a mans face.
                     But our holy Tragaedians heere had haſt of theyr ſport, and therefore they would not ſtay the trying of any ſuch curious ſignes, but tooke a ſhorter cut. Marwood, Westons patient, beeing pinched with penurie, & hunger, did lie but a night, or two, abroad in the fieldes, and beeing a melancholicke perſon, was ſcared vvith lightning, and thunder, that happened in the night, & loe,Weſton Tractat. an euident ſigne, that the man was poſſeſſed. The prieſts muſt meet about this pittifull creature. Edmunds muſt come, the holie Chaire muſt be fetcht out, the holy

budget of ſacred reliques muſt be opened, and all the enchaunting myſteries applied about the poore man.
                     Ma: Maynie had a ſpice of the Hyſterica paſſio, as ſeems from his youth, hee himſelfe termes it the Moother (as you may ſee in his confeſſion) and ſaith, that hee vvas much troubled with it in Fraunce, and that it was one of the cauſes that mooued him to leaue his holy order whereinto he was initiated, & to returne into England. For this, & for leauing the order of Bonhommes, ſee here an euident ſigne, that Maynie had a deuil: vvhatſoeuer hee did or ſpake, the deuil did, and ſpake in him: the horſe that he rid vpon to Denham, was no horſe, but the deuil: Maynie had the deuils in liuery-coates attending vpon him: and all this tragicall out-cry, for leauing his order, and a poore paſſion of the Mother, which a thouſand poore girles in England had worſe, then euer Ma: Maynie had.
                     Before I come to their women patients, I muſt tell you a tale, that I haue heard, which happily hath but too authenticall records for the nature of a tale. There was an holy man, who had more then a months minde to a daintie peece of fleſh, that was oft in his eye, and by gloſes and gifts, and Court-tricks, had as much as hee deſired. This holy man was a ſetter to an exorciſing crue, and to make his game as ſure to the holy aſſociation, as he had done vnto himſelfe, he tels his ſweet Creſſida, that himſelfe was much troubled in minde in her behalfe, and ſhould get no quiet to his conſcience, till they had both confeſſed themſelues to an holy Catholique prieſt; which when ſhe had done, the ſilly Conie was caught: ſhe was ſeazed vpon for brayed wares, and was enforced to become a priuada, and to follow the holie Campe. Heere is no morrall (gentle Reader) and therefore let vs haue no application.
                     
                        Anne Smith was ſomewhat more affected with that hyſtericall humor of the Mother, and came to London

out of Lancaſhire to her ſiſter for phyſick: where meeting with the common badger, or kiddier for deuils, Ma: Peckham, at the L: Staffords houſe in London, ſhe was marked out for the Court of poſſeſſion, and by deuiſe was ſent downe to the holy hote-houſe at Denham, where after ſhe had taſted a little of the diſcipline of the holy chaire, her heauing of the Mother proued a monſtrous ſhee-deuill, and ſhe was chaire-haunted ſo long, till ſhee was faine, for her better eaſe, to vſe ſwathing bands for three yeeres after.
                     
                        Miracle booke. Pag. 20.
                        Sara Williams, had a little paine in her ſide (and in an other place beſide) but becauſe that was not enough to diſcouer a deuill, ſhe was Cat-bitten too. That is, once ſeeking for egges, in a buſh by a Woods ſide, and a Cat leaping out of a buſh, where ſhe had lyen a-ſleepe, Sara was ſcared with the ſodaine leaping of the Cat, and did a little tremble, as perſons ſodainly moued with feare vſe to doe: Loe heere a plaine caſe, Saraes Cat was a deuill, and ſhe muſt be Cat-hunted, or Prieſt-hunted for this ſight.
                     
                        Looke her Confeſs.
                        Fidd: Williams was deuill-caught, by a very ſtrange meanes. Shee dwelling with Miſtris Peckham, and being one day in the Kitchin, wringing out a bucke of cloathes, Dibdale the Prieſt came into the Kitchin, where ſhe was a waſhing, and tapping her on the ſhoulder told her, that her Miſtres looked for her, to whom ſhe aunſwered, that ſhe had almoſt done waſhing, and then ſhe would goe.
                     Preſently after this, ſhe lifting at a tub of water, which ſtoode there ready filled, to be vſed in her waſhing, her feete ſlipped from vnder her, the Kitchin being paued, and hauing a ſhrewd fall, did hurt her hippe, with the griefe whereof, ſhe was conſtrained for 2 or 3 dayes to keepe her bed. Here begins the deuil from the Kitchin. Into her chamber comes the louing crue of pittifull deuill-catching Prieſts, they bemoane the miſhap of her

hippe forſooth, and after ſome other kinde ceremonies, they fiſh out of her at length, that ſhe had beene ſometime paſt troubled with a paine in her ſide. Ah Sir the caſe is plaine: theſe two put together, her hip, and her ſide make vp a iuſt deuill, & a monſtrous one too, compounded of two ſuch diſſimilar partes I weene. But wil you ſee how? It was the deuill that tripped vp Fidds heeles in the Kitchin, and gaue her the ſhrewd fall. And why, would you gueſſe? The wicked ſpirit could not endure her, becauſe ſhe had waſhed amongſt her buck of cloathes a catholique prieſts ſhirt. Ieſu Maria. And a worſe thing in it then ſo: but I will giue the records leaue to ſpeake it for me. I truſt you will not looke for any other, after this dangerous fall on the hippe, but that this ſhould proue a reall poſſeſſion, as in deede it did.
                     Young Trayford the ſixth patient, being a boon-companion, as ſeemes, and louing wine, and women well, (as appeares by the declaration) had enflamed his toe, and at ſome times felt a ſpice of the gowt: a plaine caſe (as the noſe on a mans face) the young man had a deuill, and muſt be coniured all ouer for his wicked toe. Now what a wofull taking are all thoſe poore creatures in, that haue about them by birth, caſualty, or miſhap any cloſe imper, ache, or other more ſecret infirmity? when a paine in a maides belly, a ſtitch in her ſide, an ache in her head, a crampe in her legge, a tinckling in her toe, (if the good Exorciſt pleaſe) muſt needes hatch a deuil, and bringforth ſuch chaire-worke, fier-worke, and deuill-worke, as you ſhall heare heereafter? And what a deliration is this in our graue, learned, and famous Colledge of auncient renowmed Phyſicians, to vndertake a long, coſtly, and painfull courſe of ſtudy in thoſe excellent worthies of learned times Galen, Hippocrates, and the reſt, and to ſpend their money, ſtrength, and ſpirits, in ſearching the treaſurie of Nature: let them caſsier

thoſe olde monuments of Ethnick prophane learning, and turne Wiſard, Seer, Exorciſt, Iugler, or Witch: let them turne ouer but one new leafe in Sprenger, Nider, Mengus, or Thyraeus, and ſee how to diſcouer a deuill in the Epilepſie, Mother, Crampe, Convulſion, Sciatica, or Gowt, and then learne a ſpell, an amulet, a periapt of a prieſt, and they ſhall get them more fame, and money in one week, then they doe now by all their painfull trauaile in a yeere.
                     It is a very poore bayte, as you may ſee by Trayfords gowtie toe, where-out our hungry Exorciſts will not, rather then faile, nibble a deuill. And if I be not much deceaued, I haue heard it credibly reported by ſome, that haue cauſe to know, that the Popes Holines himſelfe may be deuill-caught by this trick. For it is credibly auouched, that this ſweet natured Clement the 8, with vſing too much ſome ſweet ſawce, is moleſted with the gowt. Now what a Quaere would this proue, if a Lynceus Exorciſt ſhould diſcouer a deuill in his Holines toe? How would the Scotists, and Thomiſts belabour, and trick the deuill with queſtions in the Popes toe? Firſt, whether his Hol: being neceſſarily inueſted with the holy ſpirit of God, can poſſibly admit of a deuill, no. Then graunting by way of admittance, that his Hol: may be poſſeſſed, whether his reſolutions be to be taken for the Canons of Gods holy ſpirit, or the maximes of the deuill: and laſtly, if the deuill may lurk in the Popes toe, whether his wiſe, holy, ſweet babes with beards, that haue kiſſed his toe, haue kiſſed the deuill, yea or no in his toe: but my wit is too ſhallow, to ſound theſe deepe profundities: I muſt goe on, and tell you, what farther newes from Denham.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        CHAP. 7. ¶ Their holy pretences to make their Diſciples ſure vnto them.
                     YOu will wonder, that theſe viſards being ſo bare, and made all of browne paper, ſhould euer ſerue the turne to make a maske for a deuill, vntill you heare how handſomly the glew of holy church doth make it hang together, and how it is ſtitched vp with packthreed of holy deuotion. If their patients be Catholiques, whom they ſet their hooke for, a lime-twigge of a ruſh wil ſerue the turne to catch them, hold them, and faſten them to their tackling: but if their Conies be Proteſtants, and ſuch as goe to Church, then ſome holy ceremonies for good faſhion ſake, muſt be ſolemnly vſed, to combine them the neerer vnto their holy Fathers, that the band and knot may be the ſurer betweene them for vntying againe, and to bring them to lye betweene the ſweete breaſts of their holy Mother, the Romiſh Church: that the mammaday, which ſhall be giuen them, may doe them the more good.
                     Heere you are to vnderſtand, that all, or the moſt of vs Proteſtants, are forſooth in a moſt wofull caſe: for the moſt of vs already, without the helpe of either paſſion of the Mother, Sciatica, Gowte, Cat-biting, or hipping, according to the Romiſh Kalender, are plainly, & really poſſeſſed with deuils. In ſo much as the reuerend Thyraeus diſputes it very profoundly,De Daemo: Cap. 18. 
                        pro, & con. and foyles a whole chap: with this learned probleme: 
                           Ʋtrum heretici ſint verè á daemonibus obſeſſi? Whether Protestants (whom he termes Haeretiques) be truly poſſeſſed with deuills. Where firſt he ſayes for vs, that wee haue magnam coniunctionem, vel comunionem cum Daemonibus: Great fellowſhip, and neere friendſhip with the deuil. 2 Quam plurimi cum diabolo egerunt, vel ab eodem tanquam magistro

ſua dogmata acceperunt. That very many of vs haue dealt with the deuill, and haue receaued our principles of no other maister, then the deuill: And theſe reaſons, he ſayth, will eaſily perſwade ſome to thinke, we haue actually deuils in deede. But he for his part, of pure good will vnto vs, will thinke that wee are not to be accounted properly poſſeſſed. Propterea quod vera in ipſis ſigna, quae obſeſſos produnt, deſiderantur. His reaſons, that mooue him to thinke ſo well of vs, are, becauſe wee doe not tumble, wallow, foame, howle, ſcricke, and make mouthes, and mops, as the popiſh poſſeſſed vſe to doe. Loe, doth not the good man deſerue you ſhould giue him a bribe, for ſo mildly concluding his aphoriſme on your ſides, that you are not to be ſaid to be really poſſeſſed: but onely to deale, talke, make league, friendſhip, and familiarity with the deuill. But our 12 Apoſtolicall Exorciſts, and Weston their head, in their deeper in-ſight, and experience of vs Proteſtants, haue long ſince ſet olde Thyraeus to ſchoole, and bidden him turne ouer his booke to an other leafe: for they plainly ſee, teach, and auouch, that the greateſt part of vs Proteſtants, are poſſeſſed in deed. Sara Williams ſaith in her depoſition, that it was an vſuall ſaying with the Priests, that many Protestants were poſſeſſed. But Friſwood goes further, & ſayes in plaine termes, That the Priests in talking of the Protestants, haue affirmed of them in her hearing, that the greatest ſhare of them were poſſeſſed with deuils. I could wiſh, that whilſt our Exorciſts are in this good mood to ſay, and auouch, that you haue deuils: and you in your good moode, for hearing them ſo ſay, that you had ſome 12 of their holieſt Exorciſts amongſt you, and Weston their champion, to trie whether they could coniure a deuill out of you, or you coniure them, for ſaying you haue the deuil. But I pray you in the meane while help them out of their muſe, for they are ſorely perplexed, to think vpon that day, when England ſhall become Catholique againe, how the Catholiques

ſhal be peſtered with worke in caſting out deuils, by reaſon of the infinite number of vs proteſtants, that hauing deuils in vs, muſt come into theyr handling. Our hands (ſay they) ſhall then be full of chaire-worke indeed. And verily as many, as be young women, and maides, and marke in the courſe of this ſtorie the kind handling of Anne, Fid, and Sara (three proper young maids) by the Doctors of the Chayre, and withall, ſhall obſerue well the manner of the Chayre, theyr holy brimſtone, holy potion, and the reſt of that holy geere, wil (I doubt not) be much delighted with the contemplation of that day, and rather then faile, hartily both wiſh and pray, that all theyr holy works may grace Tiburne, as they haue worthily deſerued, with new holy reliques, before that day come.
                     Well, howſoeuer you like them, or theyr holy chaire, this is theyr theoreme ſure, and ſound, that the greateſt part of Proteſtants be poſſeſſed: and ſo they proceeded with Anne, Fid, and Sara. Who before they becam entangled in their holy ginnes, were proteſtant maydes, & went orderly to Church. Mary after that they, and their Leno had caught them with cat-biting, hipping, and crosbiting (as you haue heard) & that they had brought them with their Syren-ſongs to belieue, that ſome wicked ſpirit had lyen a long time lurking in theyr bellies, and theyr ſides, why then they enchaunt them a freſh with this lamentable dolefull dittie: That theyr harts doe bleede for ſorrow, to ſee them in this pittifull wofull plight, being in Satans poſſeſſion, that they burne with bowels of cō
                           miſeration, and compaſſion of theyr diſtreſſed eſtate, that they would ſpend theyr best ſpirits, and liues to doe them any good: onely one little thing is a barre, that hinders the influence of all diuine grace, and fauour vpon them, and that is theyr religion, which they must first abandon, and be reconciled to the Pope, or otherwiſe all theyr holy ceremonies are of no auaile. And heere beginnes their holy pageant to peepe

into the ſtage. Firſt, they tell Friſwood, and Sara, (as you may ſee in their confeſſions) that theyr baptiſme they had receiued in the Church of England, muſt be amended, in regard it wanted many rites, ceremonies, & ornaments, belonging to the baptiſme of the Church of Rome.
                     Heere Allen and Parſons will con you little thanke for ſo little ſetting by their reſolution in caſes for England. Their words are theſe: Ceremoniae omiſſae baptiſmi in pueris,
                        In their booke of Caſes for England. 
                        cum poſſunt commodè ſuppleri, debent, non autem id faciendum conſulimus in ijs, qui ſunt prouectioris aetatis, ne inde naſcatur ſcandalum, aut opinio, priorem baptiſmum non valuiſſe. Your Ceremonies (ſay your two Gods) may be fitly played vpon the baptiſme of children, but vpon an adultus not ſo: leaſt a conceit, or ſcandale ariſe thereby, that the former baptiſme ſhould not be of it ſelfe good. Allen and Parſon, determine Friſwood and Saras Engliſh baptiſme good enough, without your goodly ceremonies floriſhed ouer their heads, and yet you muſt be dooing in ſpight of them both. Your implements were ready for the purpoſe, and it fitted your deuill-worke better, and ſo you eſteemed not Allen or Parſons a pinne. And in good ſooth, you might aſwell haue kept theſe goodly Ceremonies in your budget, except you cleerly meant, to mocke almighty God, and to make the ſacrament naught els, ſaue a rattle for fooles, babes, and women, to make ſport withall. In my opinion, there was neuer Christmas-game performed, vvith moe apiſh, indecent, ſlouenly gawdes, then your baptiſing, and ſuper-baptiſing ceremonies are. Your puffe, your croſſe-puffe, your expuffe, your inpuffe vppon the face of a tender infant, beeing the impure ſtinking breath of a foule impure belching ſwaine, your enchaū
                        ted ſalt, your charmed greaſe, your ſorceriſed chriſme, your lothſome driuell, that you put vppon theyr eyes, eares, noſes, and lyppes, are fitting complements for

                        hynch pynch, and laugh not: coale vnder candleſticke: Frier Ruſh: and wo-penny hoe. Which are more ciuilly acted, and with leſſe foule ſoyle, and lothſome indecorum, then your ſpattring, and greaſing tricks vpon the poore infant: and yet old doting Bellarmine blurres three whole leaues of paper, in diſplaying the banner of this ridiculous trumpery, telling vs a long tale, that they came from tradition of the Church: when we can aſwel tell, as hee can his Aue Marie, from what ſniueling Pope, what drunken Frier, what Heatheniſh imitation they did all proceede.
                     But ſee theſe popiſh guegawes acted vpon Friſwood herſelfe. Firſt out comes the holy chaire, and Friſwood the new babe is placed very demurely in it, with a cloth vpon her head, and a croſſe vpon it. Then in comes the prieſt attired in an Albe, or a Cope with a candle in his hand, (or elſe he is Anathema by the Counſell of Trent) and after the performance of a whole anticke-ſute of Croſſes, hee approches very reuerently to Friſwood in the chayre. Then, as herſelfe in her confeſſion deſcribes it, he firſt charmes her in Latine, then he puts ſalt in her mouth, ſpittle vppon her eares, and eyes, and annoints her lippes and her noſe with oyle, and ſo God and Saint Frauncis ſaue the young childe: in ſteade of Friſwood, chriſtening her by the name of Frauncis, becauſe that Saint had ſuch a ſoueraigne commaund ouer the birds of the ayre, that his name for it was made communicable both to hee, and ſhee: and Sara was chriſtened by the name of Mary.
                     
                     Suppoſe now (gentle Reader) that Friſwoods Mother had come ſodainly in, and ſeene the Prieſt with his candell in his hand, and his Cope vpon his backe, buſie in his enchaunting Latine charme, and with-all had eſpied her daughter Friſwood muſled in her chaire of eſtate, with a cloath, and a Croſſe, and her other ſacred geare, I wonder what ſhe would ſodainly haue thought: whether

ſhe would not haue beene much amazed at this infernall incantation, and haue imagined that a ghoſt in ſteede of Friſwood, had beene coniured out of hell. But if ſhee had had the hart to haue ſpoken vnto Friſwood, and to haue called her by her name, and ſhe ſhould ſodainly haue ſtepped out of her enchaunted chaire, and haue ſaid, that her name had not beene Friſwood, but Frauncis, verily they would haue taken her for a ghoſt in deede, or haue feared that the Prieſt had enchaunted her out of her wits.
                     But ſtay, what haſt? For after theſe new transformed creatures had their ceremonies, and rites done vppon them, and were framed, faſhioned, and attired for their parts, and were ready for the chaire, & the ſtage, no man abroad could be admitted to either ſight, or ſpeech with them: intus res agitur, they were now myſticall creatures, and muſt attend their ſacred cloſe myſteries within. All must be mum: Clum, quoth the Carpenter, Clum quoth the Carpenters wife, and Clum quoth the Friar. You ſhall be more thoroughly confirmed by Friſwood her ſelfe, touching this poynt, who ſaith in her examination,See her examina: 
                        That neither ſhee, nor her ſister Sara did ſee either father or mother, being in the ſame Towne, all the while that they were in theyr hands: neyther would they ſuffer their father or mother to ſpeake with them, though they deſired it many times: and that her mother growing into ſome earneſtneſſe, and hard ſpeech with the Exorcists, becauſe ſhe could not be permitted to ſee her daughters, the priests did ſhake her of with angry words, ſaying, that ſhee had as much neede to be exorciſed as her daughters had. A man would now verily perſwade himſelfe, that there game was ſure ſet, and needed no more watching; and yet yee ſhall ſee a nayle, or two driuen in more, to riuet the frame more ſure.
                     After her new chriſtendome, Friſ: in her examination ſaith, that before ſhe ſhould come to receiue the ſacrament,

they told her, that ſhee must first vow, and promiſe by the vertue of that holy ſacrament, that ſhee would euer afterwards hold the religion of the Church of Rome, and neuer goe againe to any of the Protestants Churches, nor neuer reade the Engliſh ſeruice, or the Engliſh Bible, or any other Engliſh bookes written by the Protestants, in matters of religion. And this vow (as ſhee ſaith) is ordinarily made by all that are reconciled.
                  
                  
                     
                        CHAP. 8. ¶ Their meanes and manner of instructing theyr ſchollers.
                     WHen they haue brought in theyr Conies, and made them as ſure, as fleſh and blood can make them, haue enchaunted them with their compaſſionate deuotion, haue engaged them vnto their ghoſtlie Fathers, haue faſcinated them with their ſolemne incantation, haue initiated them into theyr Church by their new mock-Chriſtendome, haue confirmed them with their ſacraments, and haue bound them by vow, neuer to forſake theyr ghoſtly communion: then begin they to reade them Lectures by rote, in their ſchoole of legerdemaine, and to acquaint them with their parts, they haue in hand to play. Wherein the good cōceit of their ſcholler to apprehend her leſſon well, to carry in minde what her Maſter hath ſaid ouer, to apply it to her owne caſe, and to put it handſomly in vre, is a little required.
                     Firſt, they omit no occaſion, at all times, in all places, when they be together, & their ſchollers by their ſweet ſide, to talke of the ſtrangeneſſe of poſſeſſion, of the wonders they haue ſeene in poſſeſſion, of the many maruelous poſſeſſions they haue been at: and the Echo in all meetings is ſtill poſſeſſion. Then they tell ouer, and ouer, how wonderous ſtrangely the parties poſſeſſed, whom they haue dealt withall, haue been affected: and

they ſay ouer very treatably, particularly, and diſtinctly, the whole Catalogue of the actions, motions, paſſions, perturbations, agitations, geſtures, tumblings, diſcortions, deformations, howlings, skrikings, viſions, apparitions, changes, alterations, ſpeeches, & railings, that the parties poſſeſſed haue vſed, and practiſed in theyr ſeuerall fits.
                     Heare Sara Williams theyr ſcholler report her owne leſſon in theſe words. It was the ordinary custome of the Priestes, to be talking of ſuch, as had been poſſeſſed beyond the ſeas, and to tell the manner of theyr fits, and what they ſpake in them: alſo what vglie ſights they ſaw ſomtimes, and at other times what ioyfull ſights: and how, when reliques were applyed vnto them, the parties would roare: how they could not abide holy water, nor the ſight of the ſacrament, nor the annointed Priests of the Catholique church, nor any good thing: how they would greatly commend hereticks: how the deuills would complaine, when the Priests touched the parties, that they burnt them, and put them into an extreame heate: how ſometimes they could ſmell the Priests. Heere is her leſſon read ouer: and marke the ſcholler how well ſhe conned it, and made application thereof. By the ſaid tales, (ſaid ſhee) ſhee well perceiued, how ſhee might pleaſe them, and did frame herſelfe accordingly, at ſuch times as ſhe well perceiued, it was theyr intent that ſhe ſhould ſo doe.
                     
                     Heare Friſwood, Saras ſiſter repeate her leſſon by hart, that her good Maiſters had ſaid ouer to her, when ſhee came firſt to ſchoole.See her examina: Her words are thus. That the prieſts would be often talking in her hearing, of certaine vvomen that were poſſeſſed beyond the ſeas: how the deuill in them could not abide the holy potion, nor the burning of hallowed brimſtone, nor the applying vnto thē of holy reliques, nor the preſence, or touching of Cath: prieſts, nor holy water, nor the holy candle, nor the bleſſed ſacrament: but would ſtart at it, and ſay they burned, rage, and raile against the Priestes, & commend vpon euery occaſion thoſe, that were the Proteſtants.
                        
See how in time ſhe could her leſſon by hart, and profited in this godly ſchoole. By this meanes ſhe learned, (as ſhe ſaith) what to ſay, and doe when the prieſts had her in hand: that is, to ſtart ſometimes, when they brought reliques vnto her, to pretend that ſhe could not endure the preſence of the ſacrament. Marrie Friſwood beeing a ſcholler, not of the quickeſt apprehenſion, did not con her leſſon by hart the firſt day, (which coſt her the ſetting on in the holy chaire for her dulneſſe) but it was ſome ſix or ſeauen weekes, ere ſhe found their meaning, and then (quoth ſhee) I began to find theyr iugling, and how that my ſelfe ſaying this or that, ſpake nothing, but what I had learned of the Priests.
                     
                     Heare Anne Smith report, how ſhee learned her eue, to come into her fits. Theſe are her words. She had been told by diuers (as ſhe confeſſeth) how others had been troubled, viz: how in theyr fits they were greatly tormented: how they could not endure the prieſtes to come neere them: how when a Priest did lay his hand vppon any part of them, the ſaid partie would be ſo hote, as though it would burne thē to the bone: how the deuill in them would raile vpon the Catholiques, and greatly commend the Proteſtants: and many other ſuch things.
                     
                     Heare Ma. Maynie theyr chiefe ſcholler, relate how by degrees hee grew to his perfection in the iugling ſchoole. First (ſaith he) beeing at my L. Vaux his houſe at Hackney at dinner, in the dinner time there was much communication of the late poſſeſſion, and diſpoſſeſſion of one Marwood by certaine Prieſts, and chiefely (if I do not forget my ſelfe) by Ma. Edmunds: the tales which were told of that matter ſeemed ſtrange vnto mee, as what extraordinary ſtrength he had in his fits, how he roared like a Bull, & many other ſuch things. After this beeing at Denham, the women of the houſe came vnto me, and reported vnto me the manner of the fits of the two poſſeſſed in the houſe, deſcribing them in ſuch ſort, as I was much amazed therewith.

Then they permitted me to haue acceſſe vnto Sara Wil: whē ſhe was in her fits, and enformed mee likewiſe of the manner how ſhe, and others had been troubled: and when I had learned theyr humour, and perceiued as well by the rest, as by mine owne experience, what would content them, I framed my ſelfe accordingly.
                     
                     Loe here the Captaine of this holy ſchoole of legerdemaine tells you, what was the higheſt point to be learned in this ſchoole, and what was the perfection of a ſcholler, of the higheſt forme: to wit, to frame themſelues iumpe and fit vnto the Prieſts humors, to mop, mow, ieſt, raile, raue, roare, commend, & diſcommend, and as the prieſts would haue them, vpon fitting occaſions (according to the difference of times, places, and commers in) in all things to play the deuils accordinglie, as Ma: Maynie heere ſaith, and his other play-deuils afore. As euery ſcholler in this ſchoole had the wit, and good grace to frame himſelfe betimes, to the bent of his holy Maiſter, and to act his feates kindly, roundly, and artificially at a beck, ſo was theyr proceeding with him, or her more gentle, and mild. For if he could once read his leſſon in his Maiſters eyes and face, what needed any other hard horne-booke to beate about his head: but if he were dull, and ſlow, vnto this framing himſelfe, and muſt heere his leſſon many times ſaid ouer by hart by the Prieſt, and yet could not learne his cue, or elſe not perfectly remember his ſeuerall changes, and keyes, why then hee muſt taſt of the diſcipline of the ſchoole, to rouze vp his ſpirits better, & cauſe him entend his geare well; & that was the diſcipline of the holy chaire, (wherof ye ſhall heare anon) ſuch a diſcipline, as by that time it had been taſted ſoundly but once, or twice, I ſuppoſe the deuill himſelfe (if he could haue had the ſence of it, that theſe poore ſchollers had) would rather haue choſen, to haue roared, fomed, & wallowed, and haue turned him into all ſhapes, as the prieſts would haue him,

then euer to haue endured, the courſe of the ſame. But his chayre could not be ſpared, for many good offices, and therefore of that more at large heereafter.
                  
                  
                     
                        CHAP. 9. ¶ Of the ſecrets, and ſtrange operation of the holy Chaire, and holy Potion.
                     
                     
                        SAlue prìſca fides tripodis, ſaith the Poet to the enchanted feate at Delphos, which was ſo famous for the holy inſpiration of the God Apollo, that his Propheteſſe could giue no Oracle, except ſhee were placed ouer that ſacred ſtoole. We haue heere in hand, a more ſacred enchaunted ſeate, which was ſo potent, and of ſo various vſes, and offices, to our holy Impoſtors, as without it they could ſhew few, or no wonders, or miracles at all. And that is the bleſſed chayre, which I eft-ſoones mentioned vnto you, which ſerued them to more good purpoſes, for their holy legerdemaine, then euer the chayre, or ſword at Delphos did Apolloes prieſts. I ſhould doe you wrong, if I ſhould not firſt deſcribe this bleſſed Engine barely, and nakedly vnto you, and there repeate you the manifold commodities, and delights of the ſame.
                     You ſhal haue Fidd: and Sara the reporters of it vnto you, who by reaſon of their wofull experience, haue beſt skill to doe it.
                     
                        At the end of the first Maſſe, (ſaith Fidd: Willi:) that euer ſhe ſaw, which was ſaid by Ma: Dibdale: hee told her,
                        See her examin: 
                        that now they would make triall, what was in her. And therevpon ſhe being perfectly well, and telling Ma: Dibdale, and the rest as much, yet they would needes haue her ſit downe in a chayre, which ſhe did. Then they began to binde her with towells, whereat ſhe greatly meruailed, and was there-with cast into a great feare, as not knowing, what they meant to doe with her: being in this caſe, Ma: Dibdale began to reade

in his booke of Exorciſing: and after a good while, ſeeing no other alteration in her, then the tokens of feare, which encreaſed by reaſon of his words, and dealings, then they vrged her to drinke aboue a pinte of Sacke, and Sallet-oyle, being hallowed, and mingled with ſome kinde of ſpices: when ſhee tasted this drinke, which they termed, an holy potion, it did ſo much diſlike her, that ſhee could drinke but a little of it at once, her ſtomacke greatly loathing it, and then the Priest ſaid: all that came from the deuil, who hated nothing worſe, then that holy drinke: ſo as ſhe was held, and by very force cauſed to drinke it vp at diuers draughts. Heere-vpon ſhee grew to be very ſicke, and giddy in her head, and began to fall into a cold ſweat: verily then beleeuing, that (as the Priest ſaid) it was a wicked ſpirit, that cauſed her to be in ſuch caſe: whereas afterwards, when ſhe better had conſidered of their dealing with her, ſhee eaſily perceaued, that the drinke they gaue her was ſuch, as might haue made a horſe ſicke. This was the firſt part of the chayre-worke, and the ſecond was ſweeter then this. When her ſtomacke, head, and veines, were full of the holy drinke, then to take brimſtone, and burne it in a chafingdiſh of coales, and by force to hold downe her face ouer the fume. Which broyling with brimſtone Ma: Maynie confeſſeth he ſaw ſo butcherly practiſed vpon Sara Will: as hee had ſeene her face after it, looke more blacker, and ſwart, with the fume, then any chimney-ſweepers did.
                     
                     Now I preſent vnto your imaginations, Sara Will: ſitting bound in a chayre (as poore wench ſhee often did) with a pinte of this holy potion in her ſtomacke, working vp into her head, and out at her mouth, and her eyes, noſe, mouth, and head, ſtuffed full with the ſmoake of holy perfume, her face being held down ouer the fume, till it was all ouer, as blacke as a ſtocke, and think if you ſee not in your minde, the liuely Idaea of a poore deuill-diſtreſſed woman in deede.
                     And heere, leaſt good Father Mengus ſhould take it

in ill part, that we leaue him out of this deuilliſh worke, who had his greateſt part in preſcribing the perfume for the chayre, you ſhall firſt heare his Dos touching the bill for the holy perfume: and then I ſhall be able to giue you a perfect receite, to make an horſe poſſeſſed.
                     After his holy benediction, Page, 173. Flag: Daemon: this is his perfume. Accipiatur Sulphur, Galbanum, & caet. Take brimstone, Aſſa faetida, Galbanum, S. Iohns Wort, and Rue. All theſe things being hallowed, according to their owne proper, and peculiar benediction, must be cast vpon the fire, and the ſmoake thereof applied to the noſethrills of the poſſeſſed. Now you haue your full number of ſimples, take your whole bill, to poſſeſſe a horſe with a deuill. Take a luſty young ſtond horſe, and tye him with a big rope to a Smiths forge, take the holy potion compounded of Rue, Sacke, Drugges, and Sallet-oyle Ana more then a pinte, put it with an horne downe into the horſes throat, that done, take Brimſtone, Aſſa faetida, Galbanum, S. Iohns Wort, and Rue, burne them all together, vpon a chafing-diſh of coales, apply the ſmoake ſo long to the noſethrils of the horſe, till you haue made his face with the ſmoake, looke as blacke as the Smith: and if the horſe doe not ſnort, flyng, fome, curuet, and take on like a deuill, you may pay the Smith, for his holy drinke, and take the horſe with you for your paines. There is neither Horſe, nor Aſſe, nor Dogge, nor Ape, if he had beene vſed, as theſe poore ſeely creatures were, but would haue beene much more deuilliſhly affected then they. Neither is any man liuing (as I ſuppoſe) of that mortified patience, who would not be much moued with indignation, to heare the ſeely maides complaine of the vſage of that holy infernall crue.
                     Firſt, Fidd: Williams complaines, as ye haue heard in her relation, That it made her giddy, and cast her into a cold ſweat. 2, That it cast her into a rage, and cauſed her

to ſpeake, ſhee wist not what. 3, It did ſo intoxicate, and benum her ſences, as in one of her fits, where-into they had cast her by their holy potion, and brimstone, there were two needles thrust into her legge, by one of the Priests (whereof in an other place) and ſhe wist it not, till after ſhee had recouered her ſences. 4, For her complaining to them of their inciuill, & inhumane vſage of her by their potion and perfume: They had her to the chayre, and ſo plagued her with both, as being there-with wonderfully ſicke, ſhe fell into a ſwound. 5, It was ſo loathſome a thing to the beholders, to ſee the holy potion giuen vnto them, that diuers Gentlewomen preſent, did weepe for pitty, to ſee them goe to their geare. 6, She was ſo haunted heerewith, and grew ſo weary of her life by this meanes: as ſhee cried aloude vnto her vncle, whom ſhee heard by chaunce on the other ſide of a garden wall: O good Vncle, helpe me from hence, for I am almost killed amongst them heere already, and ſhall not liue, if I continue heere long. 7, Being grown to great weakenes, and almoſt deſperate, ſhee told the prieſts plainly, at the end of one of her fits, where-into they had caſt her, by their drinks, ſlibber-ſawces, and brimſtone, that if ſhee had a deuill in her, they had best to cast him out: For (quoth ſhe) if euer you torment me ſo againe, diſpatch me, if you list: otherwiſe I will certainly by one meanes, or other, get away from you, and will tell my friends of all your proceedings, and dealings heere, both with me, and others. Thus farre Fidd Williams: and was Sara her ſiſter, leſſe beholding to their holy potion, holy brimſtone, and the chayre? let her ſelfe tell you, who hath beſt cauſe to remember.
                     Firſt, ſhe ſaith, ſhee dooth not remember euery ſeuerall time, when they bound her in the chayre, but they troubled her very often, (praying God to forgiue them) and affirmeth, that when ſhe came to the chayre, ſhe was ſo vſed, as that euery time, if ſhe might haue had her choyſe, ſhee would rather haue choſen to haue ended her life, then to haue gone

into it. Secondly, that if at any time ſhee was past the vſe of her ſences, it was by reaſon of the holy potion, they compelled her to take. Thirdly, that ſhee fell into the paſſion of the trembling of the hart, onely vpon griefe of their bad vſage of her, & that thorough that paſſion, ſhe did diuers times ſwound. Fourthly, that they vſed their holy brimstone ſo much, as the ſtinke of it neuer went out of the chamber. Fiftlie, that foule holy potion, made ſuch an impreſſion in her phancie: and the loathſomnes of it did ſo ſticke in her mind, as yet to this day ſhe cannot endure the tast, nor ſauour of any thing that was in the ſame. In ſo much, as about three yeeres ſince, ſhe feeling a pangue of ſicknes in the Market at Oxford, ſome of her neighbours at vnawares, gaue her a little Sacke: which as ſoone as ſhe perceaued, ſhee fell to be very ſicke vpon it, and was constrained to lye there all night. The offence of the Sacke being the onely griefe that ſhe had, after ſhee was recouered of her ſaide pangue. Sixtly, they would holde her noſe, and face perforce, ſo neere ouer the ſmoake of brimstone, feathers, and ſuch other ſtinking geare, that the very paine ſhe felt, cauſed her to crie, and ſcritche very lowde, and to ſtruggle as much, as poſſibly ſhe could, till her ſtrength failed her. At one time ſhe was ſo extreamely afflicted with the ſaid drinke, that her ſences went from her, and ſhe remained in a ſwound: and after that, her head was ſo giddie with the potion, and her ſences ſo troubled with the brimstone ſmoake, as ſhe ſpake, and babled many idle fooliſh words. Seauenthly, their chaire, potion, and brimſtone perfume grew ſo hatefull to her ſiſter Fidd, and ſo vntolerable to her ſelfe, as vpon her ſiſters ſuggeſtion, ſhe attempted to runne from the houſe, and to wade through a brooke, halfe a yard deepe of water.
                     
                     Thus much Sara Williams. And did Ma: Maynie, their prime profeſſour eſcape, the chayre, the brimſtone, and the bleſſed potion? That had beene great pitty, the deuill, alias Weston, loued him much better then ſo. Of whom Ma: Maynie complaineth, That he was constrained

by him to drinke most loathſome draughts of ſuch confections, as he had ready for him. And that ſometimes they burnt ſuch abhominable ſtinking, and violent things, holding his noſe by force ouer the ſmoake, as I think (quoth he) would haue made an horſe mad. But in another place, he tells vs a ſhrewder tale of Weston, that holy deuill, touching this deuilliſh potion. God knoweth (ſaith he) whether Weſton ſuppoſed I would haue taken ſome courſe, to haue ſhortned mine owne time, as constrained by ſome ſort there-vnto, by the great weakenes, and wearines of my life. Is this an effect of your bleſſed loathſome potion, to driue Fidd, Sara, and Ma: Maynie, into a loathing of their owne liues: and to enter into a deſperate reſolution, touching ſhortning the ſame? Then holy gentle deuils, the Maiſters of this deuil-tragedy, let me aske you a queſtion, but it ſhall be in your eare, that the Catholiques, who hold you for holy ghoſtly fathers, may not heare: How many drammes of this holy potion had you giuen to the wench, that you wote of, whom you exorciſed ſo long, till ſhee fell from off a paire of ſtayres, and brake her necke, whether for telling of tales, or that you feared after-claps; it is very probable, you had filled her head full of your holy perfume.
                     
                        Anne Smith, was yet in a farre better caſe, then theſe: for ſhe confeſſeth, ſhe was ſo gently tyed, and hampered, in the holy chaire, that ſhe was compelled, for three yeeres ſpace after ſhe was releaſed, to ſwadle her body, for the very ſorenes ſhe felt of their holy hands.
                     Gentle ſpectators, we haue held you ſom-what long, ere our play begin: but now you ſee the deuils are come vpon the ſtage in their proper colours, Belzebub, alias Weston, and his 12 gracious aſſiſtants: For if the deuils themſelues ſhould haue deuiſed a deuilliſh potion, to haue intoxicated poore creatures, & cauſe them to play the deuils, they could not haue inuented a more potent potion then this. Lucian tells a tale, that the paſſengers

to hell are made to drinke a draught of a potion, that makes them to forget all they haue ſaid, or done in their life: our ſtygian Impoſtors goe farre beyond that ſtygian lake, for they haue compoſed a potion, that brings not only a priuation of wit, memory, and ſences, but makes their patients to ſcritch, tumble, and roare, like the deuils in hell. And this (good man deuill-whipper Mengus) as ſeemes, is the myſterie of your ſweet compoſe, to fume a deuill out at a mans noſe, like the ſmoake of Tobacco?
                     Whereas your preſcript is compounded of theſe delicate ſimples, Brimſtone, Aſſa faetida, Galbanum, S. Iohns Wort, and Rue; Porphyrie, & Iamblichus, men acquainted with the nature, and diſpoſition of deuils, afore your whip had ere a ſtring to it, doe affirme, that thoſe forcible violent ſauours, and ſtinking odours, are the very delicacies for deuils, and allectiues to their noſes. And that the deuill would not vouchſafe to come giue his Oracle at the ſtatua at Dodona, vntill he were wooed by theſe delicious perfumes. Thoſe deuils of that clime, are belike of an other temper, then theſe vnder your laſh, or elſe let me tell your riddle: you neuer meant (good man) to ſcare out a deuill by theſe filthy fumes, but to ſcare poore ſoules into the faſhion of deuils, by theſe peſtilent fumigations.
                  
                  
                     
                        CHAP. 10. ¶ The ſtrange names of their deuils.
                     NOw that I haue acquainted you with the names of the Maiſter, and his twelue diſciples, the names of the places wherein, and the names of the perſons vpon whom theſe wonders were ſhewed: it ſeemes not incō
                        gruent that I relate vnto you the names of the deuils, whom in this glorious pageant they did diſpoſſeſſe.

Wherein, we may call vnto Porphyrius, Proclus, Iamblicus, and Triſmegistus, the old Platonicall ſect, that conuerſed familiarly, and kept company with deuils, and deſire their help to expound vs theſe new deuils names: and to tell vs at what ſolemne feaſt, and meeting in hell, theſe deuils were dubbed, and halowed with theſe new ſtrange names. It cannot be but our holy deuill-crue had ſurely met with Menippus, proclaiming himſelfe new come out of hell: ad ſum profoundo Tartari emiſſus ſpecu: Elſe they could neuer haue beene ſo deeply ſighted, and acquainted with the Muſter-booke of hell. Or elſe it may ſeeme that our vagrant deuils heere did take theyr faſhion of new names from our wandring Ieſuits, who to diſſemble themſelues, haue alwaies three, or foure odde conceited names in their budget: or els they did ſo plague the poore deuils with theyr holy charmes, and enchaunted geare, and did ſo intoxicate them with their dreadful fumigations, as they made ſome ſo giddy-headed, that they gaue themſelues giddy names, they wiſt not what. Or elſe there is a confederation between our wandring Exorciſts, and theſe walking deuils, and they are agreed of certaine vncouth non-ſignificant names, which goe currant amongſt themſelues, as the Gipſies are of gibridge, which none but themſelues can ſpell without a paire of ſpectacles. Howſoeuer it is, it is not amiſſe that you be acquainted with theſe extrauagant names of deuils, leaſt meeting thē otherwiſe by chance, you miſtake them, for the names of Tapſters, or Iuglers.
                     Firſt then, to marſhall them in as good order, as ſuch diſorderly cattell will be brought into, you are to vnderſtand, that there were in our poſſeſſed 5. Captaines, or Cōmaunders aboue the reſt: Captaine Pippin, Marwoods deuill,See the booke of Miracles. Captaine Philpot, Trayfords deuil, Captaine Maho, Saras deuil, Captaine Modu, Maynies deuill, and Captaine Soforce, Anne Smiths deuil. Theſe were

not all of equall authoritie, & place, but ſome had more, ſome fewer vnder theyr commaund. Pippin, Marwoods deuill was a Captaine, (marry either caſſierd for ſome part of bad ſeruice hee had done, or elſe a male-content ſtanding vpon his worth) like ſome of our high Puntilios, ſcorned to ſort himſelfe with any of his ranke, and therefore like a melancholick Priuado, he affects Marwood to lie in the fields, and to gape at the Moone, and ſo of a Caeſars humor, he raignes in Marwood alone.
                     Captaine Philpot, Trayfords deuill, was a Centurion, (as himſelfe tels you) and had an hundred vnder his charge. Mary he was (as ſeemes) but a white-liuered deuill, for he was ſo haſtie to be gone out of Trayford, for feare of the Exorciſt, that hee would ſcarce giue him leaue, beeing a bed, to put on his breeches. The names of ther punie ſpirits caſt out of Trayford were theſe, Hilco, Smolkin, Hillio, Hiaclito, and Luſtie huffe-cap: this laſt ſeemes ſome ſwaggering punie deuill, dropt out of a Tinkers budget. But Hiaclito may not be ſlipped ouer without your obſeruation: for he ſcorning a great while (as the Author ſaith) to tell his name, at laſt he aunſwered moſt proudly, my name is Hiaclito, a Prince,
                        Booke of Miracles. 
                        & Monarch of the world. And beeing asked by the Exorciſt, what fellowes he had with him: hee ſaid that hee had no fellowes, but two men, and an vrchin boy. It was little beſeeming his ſtate (I wis) beeing ſo mighty a Monarch, to come into our coaſts ſo skuruily attended, except hee came to ſee faſhions in England, and ſo made himſelfe priuate till the Exorciſt reueald him: or els that he was of the new Court cut, affecting no other traine thē two craſie fellowes, and an vrchin butter-flie boy.
                     
                        Soforce, Anne Smiths poſſedent, was but a muſty deuill; there was neither mirth, nor good fellowſhip with him, affecting ſo much ſullenneſſe, as he would hardlie ſpeake. Yet as all melancholike creatures vſe to haue, he had a reſtie tricke with him. For whether Alexander the

Apothecarie had put too much Aſſa Faetida in the fumigation for the deuill, or had done the deuill ſome other ſhrewd turne with his drugges, ſure it is that Alexander the Apothecarie, riding one day towards London, to fetch more Prieſts to Denham, his horſe fell a plunging, and Alexander came downe: and returning to Denham, hee conſtantly affirmed, that it was Anne Smiths deuill, that playd the Iade with him.
                     
                        Modu, Ma: Maynies deuill, was a graund Commaunder, Muſter-maiſter ouer the Captaines of the ſeauen deadly ſinnes: Cliton, Bernon, Hilo, Motubizanto, & the reſt, himſelfe a Generall of a kind and curteous diſpoſion: ſo ſaith Sara Williams, touching this deuils acquaintance with Miſtres Plater, and her ſiſter Fid.
                     
                     
                        Booke of Miracles. page, 42.
                        Sara Williams had in her at a bare word, all the deuils in hell. The Exorciſt askes Maho, Saras deuil, what cō
                        pany he had with him, and the deuil makes no bones, but tels him in flat termes, all the deuils in hell. Heere was a goodly fat otium this meane while in hell: the poore ſoules there had good leaue to play: ſuch a day was neuer ſeene ſince hell was hell: not a doore-keeper left, but all muſt goe a maying to poore Saras houſe. It vvas not kindly done of the deuils, to leaue the poore ſoules behind, eſpecially going to make merry amongſt theyr friends. But what if the ſoules had fallen a madding, or maying as faſt, as the deuils, and had gone a roming abroade amongſt their good friends, had not this (trow we,) made a pretie peece of worke in hell?
                     And if I miſſe not my markes, this Dictator Modu ſaith, hee had beene in Sara by the ſpace of two yeeres, then ſo long hell was cleere, and had not a deuill to caſt at a mad dogge. And ſoothly I cannot much blame the deuils for ſtaying ſo long abroade, they had taken vp an Inne, much ſweeter then hell: & an hoſteſſe that wanted neither wit, nor mirth, to giue them kinde welcome.
                     Heere, if you pleaſe, you may take a ſuruay of the

whole regiment of hell: at leaſt the chiefe Leaders, and officers, as we finde them enrolled by theyr names.
                     Firſt Killico, Hob, and a third anonymos,
                        Booke of Miracles. page, 34. are booked downe for three graund Commaunders, euery one hauing vnder him 300. attendants.
                     Coronell Portirichio had with him two Captaines, & an hundred aſſiſtants, and this he affirmes to be true vppon his oath taken vpon the bleſſed ſacrament, & then you muſt belieue him: an admirable new way to make the deuil true, and cock-ſure of his word, to offer him an oath vpon the bleſſed ſacrament, and then dog with a fiddle. But the deuill is like ſome other good fellowes in the world, that will not ſweare, except he allow theyr Commiſſion that tenders him his oath: and Commiſſioners for the deuill, are onely holy Exorciſts, and then it muſt be the ſacrament of the Maſſe to, elſe I wis it is not all worth a beane.
                     
                        Frateretto, Fliberdigibbet, Hoberdidance, Tocobatto were foure deuils of the round, or Morrice, whom Sara in her fits, tuned together, in meaſure and ſweet cadence. And leaſt you ſhould conceiue, that the deuils had no muſicke in hell, eſpecially that they would goe a maying without theyr muſicke,Page cod. the Fidler comes in with his Taber, & Pipe, and a whole Morice after him, with motly viſards for theyr better grace. Theſe foure had forty aſſiſtants vnder them, as themſelues doe confeſſe.
                     
                        Luſtie Iollie Ienkin, (an other of Saras Captaine deuils names) by his name ſhould ſeeme to be foreman of the motly morrice: hee had vnder him, ſaith himſelfe, forty aſſiſtants, or rather (if I miſſe not) he had beene by ſome old Exorciſt allowed for the Maſter ſetter of Catches, or roundes, vſed to be ſung by Tinkers, as they ſit by the fire with a pot of good Ale betweene theyr legges: Hey iolly Ienkin, I ſee a knaue a drinking, et caet.
                     
                     
                        Delicat, an other Captaine, or vicenarie in Sara, hauing

vnder him twenty aſſiſtants, ſeemes by his Engliſh name to be yeoman of the Sprucery, to ſee the deuils motly viſards, after they were ſoiled with Brimſtone, and ſweat, to be bruſht vp, and kept ſweet, neate, & cleane. Theſe were the Officers, or Commaunders names, that had taken vp theyr lodging in Sara Williams, now the many, raſcality, or black-guard of hell, were God knows how many in her: for all were there tag, and ragge, cut and long-tayle, yet diuers of them it pleaſeth the holie Exorciſt to commaund theyr names to doe them ſome grace, others he lets goe out, leauing no names, but an ill ſauour behind thē. The names of ſuch as the Exorciſt thought good to fauour, were theſe, Puffe, and Purre, the two fat deuils, that had beene coniurd vp for mony, anno 84, and would not home to hell againe, till good company came for them. Luſtie Dickie, Cornerd-cappe, Nurre, Molkin, Wilkin, Helcmodion, Kellicocam. Theſe were like the Sporades in via lactea, hauing neither office, order, nor ranke; all theſe were Saras deuils.
                     
                        Maho was generall Dictator of hell: & yet for good manners ſake, hee was contented of his good nature to make ſhew, that himſelfe was vnder the check of Modu, the graund deuil in Ma: Maynie. Theſe were all in poore Sara at a chop, with theſe the poore ſoule trauailed vp and downe full two yeeres together; ſo as during thoſe two yeeres, it had beene all one to ſay, one is gone to hell, or hee is gone to Sara Williams: for ſhee poore wench had all hell in her belly. And had had it ſtill to this day for any thing we know, if it had not pleaſed Fa: Weston, and his twelue holy diſciples, to haue deliuered her of that deuil-childe. But of this you ſhall heare heereafter: now I may proceed.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        CHAP. 11. ¶ The reaſons why ſometime one deuill alone, ſometimes an 100, ſometimes a thouſand are, cast out at a clap.
                     YOu haue formerly heard of the names of the Prieſts, graund rectors of this Comaedie, and lately of the names of the deuils, their Cue-fellowes in the play: good order ſeemes to require, that I ſhould marſhall them together, as birds of a feather: but I chooſe rather to violate good method, & put my ſelfe vpon my Reader, then to offend our deuill-mastix by ſuch an vnpleaſing combination. Now becauſe ſome may wonder how it commeth to paſſe, that hell in this Iubile was broken vp, & that ſuch millions of deuils, like Herrings in a barrell, were packed vp in Sara Williams, and the reſt, and ſometimes one alone, ſometimes ſixe, ſometimes 900 were caſt out together, and yet Maho with a million of aſſiſtants left ſtill behind: this containes many myſteries, as fit to be learned, as the reſt. We will conſider theſe two heads a ſunder, for the worthines of the matter: firſt, why theſe deuils are ſaid to be ſo manie; next, why ſometimes one, ſometimes many are ſaid to be caſt out at a time.
                     In the firſt, our holy deuill-charmers haue the vantage of Tinkers, and Surgeons by much: For theſe, the one hath his certaine number of holes to mend, and the other his certaine number of ſores to ſalue, and when he hath done, except by ſome prety knack in his budget, he can multiply one hole in foure, and the other draw one ſore into ſixe, he is in danger to be out of worke: but our holy budgetters hauing to deale with deuils, in nature inuiſible, and in number innumerable, doe wiſely prouide ſo many to be packed vp in one patient together, as except hell it ſelfe be drawne dry, they can neuer

want worke.
                     
                        Sara Williams was a patient, that pleaſed their handling well, and therefore ſhee was furniſhed with all the deuils in hell at a clap; ſo as if Hercules himſelfe had beene in this hell, there had beene worke enough, both for him, and his club. The caſting a deuill out of Sara, was like the drawing of a bucket of water out of a Well, it made the deuill ſpring the quicker, and like to cutting of one of Hydraes heads, which made ſeauen more to ariſe in his place.
                     This ground muſt be well layd, and this principle wel conned by all the profeſſours of this black Art, that they be ſure of hell, and deuils cnow in the party at firſt: which being not well aduiſed of by ſome ſimple witted men of ours, late probationers in this ſcience, they were enforced for enlarging their worke, to bungle it out wofully, and to ſay that the deuils they had caſt, did rebound backe againe, and ſo made them new worke to begin againe; which by this prouiſion of thrumming in deuils at the firſt, might moſt eaſily haue been auoyded.
                     Secondly, this deuice of an huge many of deuils to be in one party, ſerued them, as a ſhelter againſt what wind or weather ſo euer. If the parties they had in handling, grew weary of their occupation, as loathing their drugs, fearing their tortures, and hating their coſenage and ſo were like to breake from them, and to tell tales out of Schoole, they had (by this deuiſe) their euaſion at hand. There were yet many deuils in the party forſooth, and it was not he, or ſhe, that ſo ſaid, but the deuill: ſo as if he ſaith any thing in opening their legerdemaine, hee ſhall be poſſeſſed as long as he liues; and then may he ſay, and ſweare what he will, for hee ſhall be no more credited, then Pippin their deuill, and that which would anger any poore ſoule at the hart, what ſo euer he doth, or ſaith, it muſt not be he, that ſo doth, or ſaith, but the deuill.
                     
                        Let poore Sara Williams giue you inſtances of this.Reade her examin: She grew ſo farre diſcontented with their holy potion, and their chayre, as ſhe begins to ſpeake bugs words, and tell them, ſhe would complaine: the prieſts had their ward-word ready: it was not Sara, but the deuill, that ſo ſpake, becauſe he could abide no Catholique prieſts.
                     She attempts to take her heeles, and runne away from them, the common voyce was, it was not Sara, but the deuill: ſhe did not runne, but was caried by the deuill. She ſmiles, and it muſt not be ſhe that ſmiles, but the deuill. She weepes, and ſhe was borne downe, that it was not her ſelfe, that wept, but the deuill: ſo as ſhe ſaid, ſhe was at her wits end, fearing (as ſeemes) ſo much as to mutter, hum, or ſpit, for feare the prieſts ſhould make it not of her owne ſpitting, but the deuils. This deuiſe is in ſteede of all the Orators in the world, to free them from imputation, and to ſecure their iugling: for ſay anie thing diſtaſting to them, and to their holy crue, ye ſhall be ſure to haue the deuill put vpon you for your labour; & they haue ſeueral ſpirits to command for their bayards, to beare their ſeuerall fardles of crimes. Tell them that they are Impoſtors, and deſerue to be branded on the foreheads with the Character noting their trade: Loe, ſay they, it is not you, but the ſpirit of malediction. Put them in minde of their deuill daliance, with Fidd, and Sara Williams: it is not you, but the ſpirit of luſt. Note their factious ambition in ſeeking ſoueraigntie, & commaund: it is not you that ſo ſpeake of them, but the ſpirit of pride: and not onely words, and ſpeeches, ſuch as they liked not well, but euen actions, motions, ieſtures, and cariage of the body, if it make any thing againſt their lewd iugling, ſhall be branded with no other ſtampe, then the deuill.
                     
                     You may ſee a prety peece of this puppet-play, (and ſo iudge of the reſt) acted betweene Ma: Maynie,
                        See Maynies confeſs. the dumbe Actor, and Weston his Interpreter.
                     
                        Ma: Maynie the Actor, comes mute vpon the ſtage, with his hands by his ſide, and his haire curled vp. Loe heere (cries Weston the Interpreter) comes vp the ſpirit of pride. Sodainly the mute Actor cries out, Ten pounds in the hundred, that voyce (cries Weston) is the voyce of the ſpirit of auarice. Maynie makes a ſcornfull face, and that is the ſpirit of Enuie. He bends, & knits his browes, and that is the ſpirit of Wrath: he yawnes, & gapes, and that is the ſpirit of Sloth. Thus Weston in Ma: Maynies face reades you the deuils, that are the ſeauen Authors of the ſeauen deadly ſinnes: and as many deuils (if he liſt) can he ſhew in any Proteſtants face at any time he pleaſes; all, or moſt of vs in his opinion, being really poſſeſſed with deuils.
                     For the ſecond point: why ſometimes, a deuill alone, ſometimes an 100, ſometimes a thouſand, are blowne out at a clap; there are two waighty reaſons attending that deuiſe. One is to aduaunce heereby the reputation of ſome man of eſpeciall note, and credite amongſt them, who muſt be their Hercules, to controle with his club the monſter maiſter-deuils of greateſt potencie, and commaund. Euery plodding prieſt could caſt out an vrchin, or boy deuill, the raſcall guard that attended Prince Hiaclito: but Modu the Generall of Styx, with his ſeauen Colonels vnder him, the ſeauen maiſters of the ſeauen deadly ſinnes, muſt be a monſter reſerued for Westons owne club, and none but his. And whereas euery fidling Exorciſt in his holy coniuration, did vſe the holy amice; Weston for the ſolemnity of the action, and his better grace, muſt come vpon the ſtage more ſolemnly adorned with the holy Albe, or an holy Cope, and other conſecrated geare. And the deuill many times of his owne good nature, or elſe vpon ſome ſpeciall acquaintance betweene him, and the prieſt, expreſly tells by whom, and by no other he will be caſt out: and then he alone muſt be gotten to come, and (to make the

deuill no lyer) he muſt gippe the Gudgin, and hit the Woodcocke on the bill, and the other ſcuruie crue of Exorciſts muſt hold him the candell. Learned Thyraeus tells vs, page, 67, de Daemon: that the foule deuill that poſſeſſed one Malachia, had vowed he would not out, till Fa: Benardine were gotten to come, who no ſooner appeared, but the deuil ſhewed himſelfe a man of his word: for hee ſlinkes cloſely away, like a dogge at the ſight of a whip.
                     A ſecond vſe they haue of this huge difference of caſting out ſometime one alone, ſometime a whole million of deuils, farre more paſſing, and precious, then the former. And that is, to grace by this drift, and to blaze the vertue of ſome new Saint, and new greene reliques, as yet not growne into credite in the world: Marie it muſt be eſpecially of ſuch a Martyr, or Saint, of whoſe vertue and ſanctitie, there is greateſt cauſe of ſuſpition abroad, whether the good man were a ſlye Iugler, or a holy man in deede. And this ſuſpitious Saint, or his caſt relique, ſhall worke you a wonder beyond God his forbid cleane.
                     It was ſufficient for the gracing of Campion amongſt the Catholiques in England, with whom he was in eſpeciall reputation, that his girdle, which came from Ieruſalem, & was worne at Tyburne, ſhould at the firſt touch of the party poſſeſſed, ſtunt the deuils wits. Where-vppon Westons acclamation to the Spectators, was this: Testes estote clariſſimi patris Campiani Martyrij, cuius hic vel minutiſſimus funiculus tantus illi faces miſerat: Beare witnes, I charge you, of the most worthy Martyrdome of good Fa: Campion, whoſe ſimple girdle hath cast the deuill into ſuch a heate. Marie for that Ignatius their founder hath many enemies in the world, and is lately called into queſtion for a graund cheater: to grace this Monſignior, and to bring him into credite, he muſt doe tranſcendent miracles, ſtrained vpon ſuch a key, as our bleſſed Sauiour,

and his holy Ap: neuer came neere. And for this purpoſe to divulge this Founders deitie, there is compoſed a Diarie of all his diabolicall (I meane hyperbolicall) wonders, done by that worthy Mountebanke, both aliue, and dead?
                     Firſt for his better credit, the deuill himſelfe proclaimes him to Fa: Baptista Peruſo for a Saint in heauen, and I truſt you will not doubt of it, ſince it comes from ſo holy an Oracle, as the deuils own mouth, and therefore I wonder the Pope doth ſo long ſtand out. At Mauriſca hee lay 8 dayes in a traunce, without all ſigne of life, ſaue the beating of his hart: in his prayer, he ſaw Almighty God, and his ſonne, ſtanding by him with his Croſſe vpon his ſhoulders, and hee heard Almighty God commend him, and his company, to the protection of his Sonne. Thus farre agree Fa: Ignatius, and the deuil.
                     At Sena the deuils durſt not looke vppon his picture, but hung theyr heads in theyr boſomes for very pure ſhame. His picture in Malacia ſcared away a deuill: his picture in paper at Madena, pinned cloſely vppon a wall, skared away a whole troupe of deuils out of foure women poſſeſſed: the bare pronouncing his name at Rome, skared out 2 legions of deuils. A peece of his coife that hee wore, heales a woman of the phrenſie: a peece of leather, that he vſed at his ſtomack, cures the plague: a peece of his hayre-cloth, purges an holy Nunne in the ſpace of a yeere, of 100. ſtones: a peece of a relique of his, cloſe ſhut in a boxe, burnes a deuill, and makes him to roare the bredth of a chamber of: a peece of a relique caſt into the ſea calmes the waues, and ſtills the windes. But the bare ſubſcription of his name in a morſel of paper paſſeth all the reſt. This written in a patch of paper, & brought vnto the partie, heales the tooth-ache, the crampe, the gowte, the Sciatica, the Leproſie, the skuruies, and beeing layd vppon the belly of a woman, that

hath endured her paine of trauaile two, three, or foure dayes, and is paſt all hope of life, takes away her paine, facilitates the birth, and recouers her life. A ſweet protecting Saint to that ſweet ſex, the ſyllables of vvhoſe name are of more potencie, and ſauing health, then the ſacred ſyllables of the bleſſed name of our euer bleſſed Sauiour was euer read to be of. Spectatum admiſſi riſum teneatis. Is it not a wonder aboue all wonders, that any man ſhould looke vpon theſe Antick wonders, without a wonderous laughter: hic nebulo magnus est, ne metuas, this foule wonder-maiſter is too full of wonders, euer to be good.
                  
                  
                     
                        CHAP. 12. ¶ Of the ſecret of lodging, and couching the deuill in any part of the body that the Exorciſt pleaſeth.
                     THe great skar-buggs of old time, as Hercules and the reſt, had a great humour (as the Poets faigne) to goe downe to Styx, and to viſit hell, to ſee Pluto, and his vglie ghoſts, and to behold the holes, and dennes, where hee lodged his blacke guard. Our holy skar-deuils, if they had liued with thē, would haue eaſed them of that paines: for they would haue ſhewed them hell, and deuils heere aboue, and haue carried them with a wet finger to their cabines and lodges: and you ſhall find very deepe, and waighty reaſons of this.
                     
                        Mercurie prince of Fairies had a rodde giuen him by Iupiter his Father, whereby he had power, not onelie to raiſe vp, and driue afore him, what ghoſts hee pleaſed, but alſo to remaund, and ſtill with the ſame rod, as many as hee liſt. The holy Romane Church hath as potently armed her twelue Worthies of hell, and Weston their Blacke prince, as euer Iupiter did arme his ſweet ſonne, giuing them a power not onely to call vp, driue, and puffe out with theyr breath, as many deuils as they

pleaſed, but alſo to controll, cap, lodge, & couch them as ſtil as a curre at the ſound of his Maiſters whippe is couched vnder a table. By that time I haue opened you the cauſes and ſecrets of this, and haue ſhewed you their ſeuerall lodges and formes, I doubt not, but you wil be able to tel me more newes from hell.
                     It is a poynt in the blacke art of deepeſt skill, and power, not to raiſe a ſpirit, but to be able to rule, and couch him ſafely and well: and in this holy infernal ſcience of caſting out deuils Thyraeus tells vs, that deuils be not all of a nature, quality, & ſiſe, ſome be watry, ſome ayrie, ſome fierie, and ſome ſauour of the earth: the watry and ayrie, doe tast of theyr element, and be eaſily mooued, the fierie, are more fierce, and the earthy, like melancholicke men, more ſullen, not eaſily controld. See this exemplified as cleerly in our patients, as the noſe on a mans chin.
                     
                        Soforce, Anne Smiths deuill, was a ſullen, and ſilent ſpirit (ſo ſhe herſelfe records him) and could hardly be gotten by all dreadful cōiurations ſo much as to ſpeake. Captaine Maho in Sara, was of a fel, & furious moode, and many times, when he was hunted vp into her body, grew there ſo vnruly, and outragious, that the Exorciſts ſeemed to feare leaſt her bowels would burſt. Then was all haſt made to get him downe againe, which ſomtime was done with good ſeeming toile, difficultie, & ſweat, that when it fel out pat, as the deuil, & the prieſt would haue it, it bred in the poore ſillie ſpectators a wonderful admiration of the dignitie of the prieſthood, and power of the Catholique Romiſh Church.
                     
                        Sara their apt ſcholler, acted this ſcene commendably well: where after a ſore skirmiſh between the Exorciſt, and the deuill, or Sara, and the Prieſt: the deuill was with much a-doe commaunded downe into her foote: but in an another ſcene ſhee hit the needles eye, where after a hote, and ſore encounter, all the ſpirits with much adoe being commaunded to goe downe into her left

foote, they did it with vehement trembling, and ſhaking of her leg, to the great admiration of many of the ſtanders by, ſeeing the power of the Catho: Romiſh Church: the partie crying that her ſhooe would not be able to hold them all: heere this act of lodging the deuil had a plaudite in the midſt of the play.
                     Secondly, who can but mate his wit with wonder, hauing no more wits then one, and ſtare out his eyes with amazement, hauing but two, to ſee the poore deuil brought into ſuch a taking, and to ſauour ſo rankly, lying at vntruſſe, that he would faine be gone out; and ſhal ſee the tyrannical dreadful power of an enchaunting Prieſt, by his remaunding might, to keepe him in ſtil in ſpight of his noſe, and to commaund him, for his more diſgrace, to take vp his lodge in a homely place, of which you ſhal heare heereafter, if it be not too foule. Would not ſome tender-harted body, in pure pittie of the deuils cry, take of the prieſt, and let the poore deuil be gone: as I haue heard of a good natured gentleman at Pariſh-garden, that cryed, take off the dog for ſhame, and let the poore Beare alone. Pittiful Hiaclito, vvould rather then his life, for pure feare of the prieſt, haue ſlunke out of Trayford behinde, but it would not be, he muſt be ſtayed vntil hee had his payment. Yea Maho himſelfe was taken downe ſo low with the deuil-ſquirting potion, that he would haue giuen all the poynts at his hoſe to be gone: and Dibdale would none, but cō
                        maunds him to his lodge, vntil the Brimſtone by ſome dreadful enchaūtment were made hote enough, to ſcald his breech ſoundly: heere this lodging-power was more dreadful to the deuil, and aſtoniſhable to the people by ods then the diſpoſſeſſing was.
                     Thirdly, this commaund to lodge would at no hand be ſpared, for by this they made ſure to haue a deuil readie at a trice at all aſſaies, to furniſh out the ſtage: whō, beeing ſafe lodged, they caried about with them from

place to place, as the Iuglers vſe to carry a Bee in a box, or an ape in a ſtring, or puppits in a pageant, to ſqueale, skip, and tumble, whereſoeuer they pitch downe theyr truſſe.
                     You ſhal heare an act of this puppet-play performed betweene a prieſt, and a wench, as it is depoſed vppon oath, for a taſt of the reſt. There was a prieſt not many yeeres ſince in Lancaſhire in the habit of a gentleman, who carried about with him (as Tynkers doe their bitches) a wench, pretended by the prieſt to be poſſeſſed: this wench at euery ſafe ſtation (where there was concourſe of ſimple people, the founders of miracles) hee preſents to play her pranks, and his faſhion was this. When it was a full Court, out brings he his Mattachina, and places her in a chayre, and then approching demurely to her, takes her by the toe, and then dialoguizes with the deuil according to his pleaſure. The end of the dialogue between the prieſt, and the deuil, is a remaund of the deuil to his lodge; which (to auoyde inquam, and inquit) I haue preſented you in both theyr perſons, ſpeaking ſweetly together.
                     
                        Pri:
                        
                           See the record.
                           I commaund thee to goe to the place appointed, and that thou doe not hurt her in thy going downe, nor make her ſicke in body, nor minde.
                        
                     
                     
                        Wo:
                        
                           Fie vpon thee, hee is in my knee.
                        
                     
                     
                        Pri:
                        
                           I commaund thee to thy place appointed, thou damned fiend.
                        
                     
                     
                        Wo:
                        
                           Oh, hee is in my great toe.
                        
                     
                     
                        Pri:
                        
                           Goe to the place appointed thou damned fiend.
                        
                     
                     
                        Wo:
                        
                           Oh, he is in my toe next to my little toe.
                        
                     
                     
                        Pri:
                        
                           Goe to the place appointed thou damned fiend.
                        
                     
                     
                        Wo:
                        
                           Oh fie vpon him, he is in the toe next the great toe.
                        
                     
                     
                        Pri:
                        
                           I commaund thee to goe into the dead of her nayle:
                        
                     
                     With that the deuil gaue a ruſh vp into the womans body, as though hee would haue torne her in peeces: then the prieſt commaunded him to goe downe damned

fiend as he was, otherwiſe his Iudge would damne him into the bottomleſſe pit of hell: and with that the woman confeſſed, that the deuill was in the place appointed. Then the prieſt charged him that he ſhould he there, till the next exorciſme to be holden by him, or ſome of his brethren.
                     
                     I doe verily ſuſpect this wonder was acted ſomewhat neere Gotham, and that the ſpectators were the poſteritie of them, that drowned the Eele: that neuer an vnhappy fellow in the company ſhewed ſo much vnhappie wit, as to offer to take a knife, and pare away the deuil, lying in the dead of the nayle, and throw him into the fire, for acting his part ſo baldly: but I nothing doubt, but the deuil-maiſter prieſt would haue had an eye to this, leaſt he, or ſome of his brethren, at the next exorciſme holden, ſhould for want of a deuil, haue ſpoiled a good play. And would not this haue ſpighted any deuil, to be thus hardly handled by a prieſt, to be turned out of his warme neſt, where hee cabined in the wench, and to be lodged at little eaſe in the edge of her nayle, next to wind, and weather, where hee muſt lye for a skout, like the Sentinel in a watch, and ſuffer euery boy to play bo-peepe with his deuilſhip, and he not able to ſtirre eyther out or in. O that Will Sommer had come to this pleaſant bargaine betweene the Exorciſt and the deuil, how handſomly would he haue belaboured them both with his bable, for playing theyr parts ſo handſomlie.
                     But this was but a pedling Exorciſt of the raſcal crue, who wandered like a chapman of ſmal wares, with a wench, and a truſſe, beeing neuer free of his companie. Our wardens of the ſcience had a little more art to lodge theyr deuils. Such an art of lodging they had, and ſome of theyr lodges ſo obſcure, and retrayte, as none but a prieſt, or a deuil could euer haue ſented it out. Some of theſe deuil-lodgers, in Sara, and Fid, without a praeface of deprecation to your modeſty I muſt not

once name, for feare of check from your chaſt eares, and a change of colour in mine inke and paper, at ſuch vncouth termes. I will onely leape ouer this kennell of turpitude, with a note of vnſauorie ſmels, and remit you to that clauſe of Sara Williams relation, who as a woman hath touched it as modeſtly, as ſhe can, giuing vs to vnderſtand, by her timorous declaration, that our holy order haue a ticket from his Hol: of Rome, to harrow hell it ſelfe, and be neuer the worſe.
                     It was wiſely cauteled by the penner of theſe ſauory miracles, in the end of his booke, why Sara being a ſeely young innocent wench of 16 yeeres, ſhould be more deuil-haunted, then any of the poſſeſſed men: there was a pad in the ſtraw, the poore man would faine haue out. But a Sceptike will make an other Quaere to our holy order to ſoile: how it comes to paſſe, that wee reade in auncient poſſeſſions of old, of moore men to be poſſeſſed, then women, and now in theſe nouell vpſtart miracles from Rome, ſtill it is the ill hap of more women to be haunted, then men. This ſore being ſalued with a little bleſſed oyle from Rome; an other doubt wil ariſe, what the cauſe is, why our holy order hauing vnder their holy hands, not onely Fid, Sara, and Anne Smith, women, but Trayford, Marwood, and Ma. Maynie, that were men, there is no mention at all of common lodging, and couching the deuil in a peculiar part of the body, but onely in the wenches.
                     Let vs goe to old Lockwood, Mengus their maiſter, & loke vpon his Canon, for couching, & lodging of the deuil, and happily we may thence pick out ſome Engliſh to this purpoſe.Mengus, Flag. Daem: In the ſeauenth formidable exorciſme of his deuil-whip: his Canon lyes thus. Si energumenus non fuerit liberatus, et tamen vrgente neceſſitate dimittenda ſit coniuratio, tunc praecipe omnibus ſpiritibus remanentibus in corpore, eos cogendo vt recedant á capite, et corde, et ſtomacho, et deſcēdant ad partes inferiores corporis.
                        
Heere you haue the Canon for lodging the deuil, that you be ſure to lodge him not in the head, nor ſtomack, but in the inferiour parts. An excellent prouiſo, teaching vs, that the deuil is of the nature of a cup of new ſtrong Sack, that cannot hurt a man, if it be kept out of his ſtomack, and head. But old Lockwood knew, what he did, in aſſigning the inferiour parts for a peculiar lodge for the deuil. This was the traynd ſent, he knew his dogges were old ſuerſ-by at this, this was the haunt they would not be halowed of. Let Sara Williams be my Interpreter for the reſt: Sometime (ſhe ſaith) they lodged the deuill in her toe, ſometime in her legge, ſometime in her knee. Sometime, &c. Let the deuil,See her exexamin: and his holy charmers make vp the reſt.
                     Fie holy Fathers fie, is this the trailed ſent you ſo greedily purſue with full crie, and open mouth? Is this the game you hunt, called gayning of ſoules? Is this the haūt you queſt on in Italy, Spain, & England? Is this the foile you ſent ſo hotely, that neither Sea, nor Land will make you at a fault, but that you call vpon it ſtill, ouer hill, & dale, through thick, and thin, and make good the chaſe through Colledges, Cloyſters, Palaces, houſes: yea euen into hell it ſelfe, & thence ſtart the deuil, and hunt him a freſh, and lodge him with Sara Williams, in ſuch muſes, conny-beries, and holes, as the poore deuil, but for your hote purſuite, would neuer haue come in? It is wel that you quit the deuil with gaining of ſome ſtore of ſoules for hell, elſe can I not eaſily ſee, how you could readily make him amends. It is high time to call of from this vnſauory trayle. A lack poore honeſt deuil, in this caſe farre more honeſt, then the prieſt, that would not downe into his lodge, without much adiuration, toyling, and ſweat: was it any meruaile, conſidering he was to be commaunded into ſo vnſeemely a lodge.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        CHAP. 13. ¶ Of diſlodging, rouzing, and hunting the deuill, by the dreadfull power of the preſence, approach, and bodily touch of a Priest.
                     THey that delight in hunting, being men of quality, and ſort, when they would entertaine their friends with that pleaſing ſport, doe vſe to haue an Hare-finder, who ſetting the Hare before, doth bring them ſpeedily to their game. The company was many times great, and the ſtrangers of note, that reſorted to ſee, & wonder at this courſing of the deuill, and it was accordingly prouided by the Hunt-maiſters of the game, that they had a deuil ready lodged againſt any ſolemne hunting day, that the ſpectators might not be delayed with tediouſnes, before they came to their paſtime. Thus all being ſeated, and ſtanding at gaze for the game, the next office was to ſtirre, and rouze the deuill, that the people might behold, how he would beſtirre himſelfe. Vnto this they haue many potent Engines, & meanes, ſome whereof had the ability both to courſe, and expell the deuill: but of the fearefull act of expelling I meane not heere to ſpeake, but onely of their various powerfull vertues of rouzing, chaſing, and chafing the deuill.
                     Theſe dreadfull ſuper-infernall powers doe flow either from the prieſts owne perſon, or his adiuncts. In his perſon we conſider his bodily preſence, & approach towards the poſſeſſed, his breath, his touch, his parts. His adiuncts are either belonging to his perſon, as his hoſe, his gloues, his girdle, his coyfe, his rags; or cōmon to his office, as holy water, holy oyle, the holy candell, hallowed brimſtone, the holy potion, Auemaries, inuocation of Saints, the holy Croſſe, the ſtole, the amice, the bleſſed Sacrament, and the corporall preſence of

our bleſſed Lady. Of theſe infernall whips, according to their ſeuerall dignities, and worth.
                     For the firſt, we are to vnderſtand, that it is otherwiſe betweene a Prieſt, and a deuill, then it is betweene an Hound, and an Hare: For an Hare, if ſhe be formed, will ſit ſure, though the Hound doe trayle neere her, and call hotly on the ſent: but the deuil ſtands in ſuch bodily feare of the preſence of a Cath: prieſt, that as ſoone as he comes in to the roome, where the poſſeſſed is, he begins ſometime to ſtartle, and if hee approach neere, he rages as he were mad. Nay, many times hee will not endure his preſence at all, (notwithſtanding we reade that the deuill is ſo bold, as he dares to come into the preſence of Almighty God) but he skuds out of the poſſeſſed, as ſoone as euer he heares but tydings of the prieſts comming.
                     
                        Gordianus the Emperour had a daughter poſſeſſed with a deuill, and hearing that they had ſent for Tryphon to come, and exorciſe the mayd,Thyrae: 181. the deuill did not endure forſooth to looke him in the face, but truſſes vp, and away, ere the holy man could come. Some ſtay till the Exorciſt be come within view, fearing (as ſeemes) coſenage, leaſt for one an other ſhould come: and as ſoone as he ſees by his noſe, that it is his good Maiſter in deede, he ſlips cloſely away, without taking any leaue. Thus did a whole legion in a young man ſerue Biſhop Arnolphus: Quae mox viſo Arnolpho epiſcapo diſceſſit,
                        Ibid: ſaith Thyraeus: no ſooner had the deuil deſcried his good face, but he was gone.
                     Some punie raſh deuil doth ſtay till the holy prieſt be come ſome-what neere, as into the chamber where the daemoniack doth abide, purpoſing, as ſeemes, to try a pluck with the prieſt, and then his hart ſodainly failing him (as Demas, when hee ſaw his enemie Clinias approach) cries out, he is tormented with the preſence of the prieſt, and ſo is fierd out of his hold, to his greater

diſgrace.
                     This is an huge vertue in a prieſt, that caſts ſo farre off: we doe not reade that the daemoniacks in the Goſpel, did euer thus skud from our Sauiour Chriſt; but that is to little purpoſe. God needed not ſo much to grace his ſonne, who by the power of his Diuinity, was able to manifeſt himſelfe, to be the power of God: but our Exorciſts being deemed in moſt places of the world, for no better then iugling mates, there is great reaſon pardy, they ſhould be graced with more gracefull miracles, then euer were accompliſhed by our Sauiour Chriſt.
                     This frighting, and tormenting power in preſence of a prieſt, is not giuen equally to al a-like, as the deuils themſelues are not all of a pitch. If he be an old ſturdy deuill, & ſtand out the prieſts preſence, then as the prieſt hath this tormenting power in more eſpeciall meaſure, and approaches in perſon neerer to the poſſeſſed, the more is the deuil in the party afflicted, and tormented. Trayfords deuil being a tough weather-beaten ſpirit, was not much moued at the preſence of Stamp the prieſt, who had this tormenting power as ſeemes but remiſſis gradibus. But when Edmunds came, and had inueſted himſelfe in his holy roabes; heare how the deuil fared, in Edmunds owne termes: Iubet ſacerdos ita vbi erat ſacris indutus vestibus, ante ſe infirmum constitui. Edmunds commanding in his ſacred geare to bring in the daemoniack, and ſet him in his preſence. And marke what followed: Hic ille toto corpore contremiſcere, et horrere, et aestuare caepit. Inſtantly began the poſſeſſed to tremble, to haue horrour, and rage thorough out his whole body. This the deuil ſuffered, at the meere preſence of Edmunds, not onely before any dreadfull Exorciſme were thundred againſt him, but before any word was ſpoken by the Ieſuit.
                     
                        Dibdale the prieſt remoues from Hackney to Fulmer
                        
in the night, and caries his trincket Sara behind him on a horſe: ſhee felt her ſelfe ſo tormented with heate, ſitting behind him, as ſhe had much adoe to be kept from falling from her ſeate.
                     Heere the obiect was neere, the power wrought the ſtronger, but you ſhall ſee this power extended it ſelfe much farther, then thus. Trayford comes behind plodding vpon a Iade, and this tormenting heate from the perſon of the prieſt reaches vnto him: hee felt ſuch an exceeding burning in his head (ſaith the Authour of the miracles) as he cryed all the way as he rode water, water, and yet we find this remoue was the 8, or 9, of Nouember, when men doe not commonly ſurfet of heat. This ſprite-tormenting vertue, is ſo top ful in the body of a prieſt, and of ſo potent an actiuity, as many times it runnes ouer, and many times iſſues from his perſon, as beames doe from the ſunne, without his owne priuitie, or ſence. And it hath not the qualities of Stygian fire alone, to ſcoreh, burne, torment, and fugate the deuil, but it hath a power Antiperiſtian beſides, to repel, and bandie backe the deuil into his kenel againe: and this without any action, motiō, or intendement of the prieſt: ſo as a prieſt may baffle a deuil ſtanding ſtone ſtil, without ſtirring hand, or moouing a foote. This befel to Hilcho, Trayfords ſneaking deuil: who finding his corner grew too hote by the bodily approch of the Exorciſt, would faine to refreſh himſelfe haue come out at Trayfords mouth, but peeping out, & finding the prieſts mouth approching ſomewhat neere, ſuddainly bolted backe againe, as a cony from a net, and was faine to ſlip out cloſely at his right eare, in the faſhion of a Mouſe. This Dibdale the prieſt neither knew, nor dreamed, that he had reuerberated the deuil with the direful power of his holy helliſh mouth, but Sara, Trayfords deuil-felow, ſaw the attempt of the deuil to come forth, ſaw his bandie backe againe, and ſaw his going out at Trayfords
                        
eare in the ſhape of a Mouſe, and diſcouered the true cauſe, why hee came not foorth, for the neereneſſe of the priests mouth, to the mouth of the poſſeſſed.
                     
                     Now if any man wil aske me, how it comes to paſſe, that any deuil could ſtay in the body of any party poſſeſſed, whom the prieſts did viſit, cōſidering this frightful ſcorching heate, that iſſuing out of the bodie of the prieſt, did ſcald, and torment the deuil, when the prieſt drew neere, and did make him to tremble, quake, and rage, as you heard in Marwoods deuil: I aunſwer, that the deuils, as you haue heard out of Thyraeus, were not all of a temper, and conſtitution alike, but ſome could endure theſe ſcorching flames of the prieſts, better then ſome. Next, the prieſts had not this hel fire all in a degree, but ſome burned the deuil neere at hand, ſome a farre off, according to the proportion of hell fire, that was in the prieſt: and thirdly the prieſts did many times by their ſoueraigne power of prieſthood, hold the deuil in by force, for his greater torment, and manifeſtation of the power of the Romiſh Cath: Church, and firſt did toaſt, and broyle him wel with theyr owne hel fire within the body of the poſſeſſed, and then did lay cart-loades of fire, and Brimſtone vppon his backe, and ſent him to be broyled 1000. yeeres in the pit of hell.
                     The Lancaſhire deuil in the wandering wench, of whom you heard afore, cries out, that hee was ſcalded, and tormented by the prieſt, and deſires hee might be gone: the prieſt tells him he ſhal not, but that he would torment him ſtil: and when he had ſo done, lodged him (as you haue heard) in a moſt dangerous deſperat place. Now it may be wondered by ſome plaine witted folkes, how the body of an holy prieſt doth catch ſuch a fire, that all the parties poſſeſſed did ſtil complaine they burned: and this burning was ſo ſore in Fid, and Sara, as the marks thereof are at this day to be ſeene.
                     
                        Theſe queſtioniſts muſt be ſent to the Cath: Church to ſchoole, to learne to beleeue, and to make no curious ſpeculations: and ſure it is without doubt, that a fell-burning heate they had in theyr bodies indeede, and the neerer they did approch to Fid, and Sara, the more they felt theyr heate: yet not to let any reaſonable man goe away vnſatisfied, wee wil take a little paines to open the caſe. True it is, that this deuil-burning heat in the prieſts, could not be any elementary fire: for that no element can effectuate beyond his owne Sphaere, and a deuill hauing in his nature no elementarie combination, it is not poſſible hee ſhould receiue from any element any ſenſible impreſſion. Much leſſe can it be in the power of any naturall innate heate, to torment a deuil, for it fits not to calor natiuus, to ſcald, or broyle at all. A caeleſtial heate leaſt of all can it be conceited, for that his influence is ſweet, and helpful, tending to generation. There is but a fourth fire left, and that is the fire of hel, which beeing diſputed, and reſolued by deepe Diuines, to be neither natural, nor mixt of elementary condition, but the coales of Gods wrath, and feareful indignation, if they cary in theyr bodies an heate, that doth vex, and torment a deuil, whereſoeuer they finde him, it can be no other, then the heat of hel: for what other fire can vexe, and torment the deuil? I would be ſorie they ſhould be concluded of ſo helliſh a diſpoſition: it is far better to take it, as Sara, and all the reſt of her fellow Comaedians doe conteſt: that all was a Stygian comedy to make ſilly people afraid. A fier indeede ſhe felt, from the ſpritly power of the Prieſt, but it was of a more gentle, & pleaſing impreſſion. And for that other part, that ſhe played, feigning that ſhe was burned, and tormented at the preſence of a Catholique prieſt: that had ſhe learned from the wiſe prompting of her skilful maiſters the prieſts, who did ſtil harpe of that ſtring in their ordinary narrations of ſtrange poſſeſsions beyond ſeas,

that the poſſeſſed could not endure the preſence of a Catholique priest, which ſhe as an apt ſcholler obſerued for her cue, and acted it as comly, and gracefully, as you haue heard. Thus much of the power of theyr bodily preſence.
                  
                  
                     
                        CHAP. 14. ¶ Of the ſtrange power of a Cath: Priests breath, and of the admirable fier that is in a Priests hands, to burne the deuill.
                     
                        PLinie in his naturall ſtorie, tells vs of certaine people, that doe anhelitu oris enecare homines: Kill men with the breath that comes from their mouthes. Scaliger recounts a whole linage of men, that could oculis faſcinare: bewitch with their eyes, though they did not touch. The Leno in the Comaedy, is noted to be of ſo ſtrong a breath, that hee had almoſt blowne downe the young gallant, that ſtoode in his way: but the Poets tell vs, that hell hath a more deadly breathing then all; ſo as if a bird doe by chaunce flie ouer the Stygian flood, ſhe is queled with the ſmell, and falls downe ſtark dead. We haue heere to acquaint you with a breathing company of prieſts, that for potency of breath, doe put downe Plinie, Scaliger, the bawde, hell, the deuill and all: For the deuill, who can wel enough endure the loathſome odours, and euaporations of hell, is not able to endure the vapour iſſuing from the mouth of a prieſt, but had rather goe to hell, then abide his ſmell.
                     Now what a monſtrous coyle would ſixe or ſeauen igniuomous prieſts keepe in hell, if they ſhould let looſe the full fury of their blaſts, as Aeolus did vpon the Sea, and diſtend their holy bellowes in conſort amongſt the poore ghoſts, were it not a plaine danger, that they were likely to puffe all the deuils out of hell? Mengus the Canoniſt for hel, giues vs a rule, that if the deuil be ſtubburne,

& wil not obey the formidable exorciſme of the prieſt, then that the prieſt ſhal os ſuum quam-proximè ad energumenum admouere: bring his mouth as neer to the poſſeſſeds mouth, as he can, and by that time the deuil hath taſted on his breath, if there be any life in him, hee wil be glad to ſtirre.
                     Heere now you ſee the reaſon, why Trayfords deuil rebounded at the dint of the Prieſts breath, and was ſo glad to get him out at Trayfords right eare like a Mouſe, rather then he would come out iump againſt the prieſts mouth. The little children were neuer ſo afrayd of hell mouth in the old plaies painted with great gang teeth, ſtaring eyes, and a foule bottle noſe, as the poore deuils are skared with the hel mouth of a prieſt.
                     Take an example from Sara Williams of the vigorouſneſſe of their breath, ſhee lay (ſaith the penner of their miracles) past all ſence in a traunce, beeing vtterly bereaued of all her ſences at once, the priest no ſooner came neere her, but ſhe diſcerned him by the ſmell. Was not this (trow you) a iolly ranke ſmel, that was able to awake a poore wench out of a traunce? Verily theſe doe out-ſmel the deuil by farre. For though the deuil hath (as is commonly reputed) a fel ranke ſmel, yet I neuer heard of any, that could diſcerne a deuil by his ſmel.
                     The like ſoueraigne ſmel is in the ſacrament of theyr Maſſe, for Sara could alwaies (ſaith our Authour) verie exactly reckon vp how many had communicated, by diſcerning them by theyr ſmell. But for this they may haue an eaſie euaſion, happily they had beene ſo deepe in the Challice, as a quick ſented man might haue ſauoured them a far off without helpe of the deuil. Their breath which is nothing, but ayre exhaled from theyr lunges, beeing as you ſee of this affrighting power ouer the deuil: what may wee deeme of the power of theyr holie hands, if they come once to be applyed to the deuil?
                     Firſt, theyr holy fingers had in them the ſame diuine

power, if not in an higher meaſure, that wee read to haue beene in our Sauiour Chriſt, with a bare touch of theyr finger without any other ceremonie vſed by our bleſſed Sauiour in like caſe, they reſtored hearing, and ſight to theyr patients beeing blind and deafe. So hath the Miracle-Maister cleerely ſet downe, that Sara being bereaued of all her ſences, as in a traunce, the Exorciſt toucheth her eares, and eyes with his finger, and ſhe ſees and heares.
                     This is but a flea-biting to that vvhich (Ignatius his great grand-childe) Edmunds exploited vvith his holy hand. Iupiter armed with his dreadful thunder, neuer made hel ſo to crack. Heare it thorough the Ieſuits own trumpet, as himſelfe hath proclaimed it to the world. Vix dum exorciſmos in choare manuſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            imponere capiti, cum ille ſtatim furere, in altum erigi, manibus pedibuſque elaborare, ſacerdotis manum depellore, omnia complere vocibus, iuramentis, maledictis blaſphemis. Edmunds had ſcarcely begun his adiuration, & layd his hand on Marwoods head, but he preſently falls into a furie, ſtretches out his body, beats with his feete, and hands, ſnatches at the prieſts hand, makes all to ring with crying, ſwearing, & blaſpheming. This vvas wel roared of a young deuil for a praeludium to the play, vppon the bare touch of Edmunds hand. But marke when the deuil grew hote with the continuing of this holy tricke, and of hell (Edmunds hand) on his head ſtill, Sacerdos officium reparat manum in capite tenens, the prieſt falls a freſh to his worke, holding ſtil his hand on the poſſeſſeds head. Now begins hel to worke. Hic nouae tragoediae, inuſitatae voces, & verba in omnium auribus inſonant. Quid non venitis, daemones (inquit) et tu Pippine (quod nomen erat infeſtantis daemonis) non vindicas? nihil opis, nihil auxilij in inferno reliqui eſt? auferte oitò miſerum, flammis tradite, ſin minus communem hanc contumeliam vos non vultis, aut non poteſtis vindicare, tum iacula, gladij, cultri confodite me, ignis, pestis, canes, malū confumite. Domus

non corruis? neque dehiſcens me vult terra abſorbere nec de caelo fulmen aliquod peſſundare? Quis hoc tolerare, quis tantum incendium pati, quis ita (vti mille vnguibus) diſcerpi vnquā viſus est? that is: Heere ſtrange tragicall exclamations filled all our eares. (Deuils why come yee not? and thou Pippin (which was the name of the tormenting deuill) doost thou not reuenge my quarrell? is there no ayde, no ſuccour left in hel? Take mee miſerable caytife, and hurle mee into the infernall flames: but if eyther you will not, or cannot right this diſgrace, then you launces, ſwords, and kniues daſh thorough me: fire, dogs, plague, miſchiefe conſume me, houſe fall vpon me, earth ſwallow mee, lightning from heauen deuoure mee: who can beare my burden? who can endure my heate? who can be thus torne in peeces, beeing rent with a thouſand nayles? Who would not think that hee heard Hercules furens, or Aiax flagellifer newly come from hell? Was euer Prometheus with his Vulture, Siſyphus with his ſtone, Ixion with his wheele in ſuch a caſe? Did euer the God-gaſtring Giants, whom Iupiter ouerwhelmed with Pelion and Oſſa, ſo complaine of theyr loade? Or Phaeton ſo bellow when he was burned with Iupiters flames, as poore Marwood heere bellowes, and roares vnder Edmunds fierie flames, and all with the onely touch of his head with his Ignatian hand? Was it not by diuine Oracle, that his maiſters name ſhould be Ignatius, when his diſciple caried ſuch an vnſupportable waight of hel fier in his hand? Will not his hand be an excellent inſtrument for Lucifer in hel, to plague, broile, and torment his infernall fiends, that hath ſuch a fiend-tormenting power heere on earth? Now here pittifull Marwood goe on in his direful notes.
                     
                        A page (inquit) manum illam cum omnibus daemonijs. Take away that dreadfull hand, in the name of all the deuils in hell. Ʋt me vexas et torques, nunquam ſine cruciatibus ſine incendio eſſe patiens? How doost thou vexe, how doost thou wring me? thou art neuer but plaguing me with torment

and fire: Then cries he out of his head, his heart, his bowels, his bones. Manum tamen non dimittit ſacerdos: Yet Edmunds would not be moued to remit his hand: but begins a new chaſe. In ſequitur manu per tergum, & cet. He purſues the deuill downe along his backe, his reines, his cloſe parts, his thighes, his legges, vſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ad talos, downe to his ankle-bone: Thence he fetches him backe againe, with a Suſurrare, downe his knee, his belly, his breaſt, his neck, and there graſpes him round about the neck, with both his holy hands, which caſt the deuil into ſo ſtrange an agonie, and paſſion: as Edmunds himſelfe breakes forth into an exclamation: Deus imortalis quanta tum ille paſſeus fuit? nec mille hominum linguas explicare poſſe existimo. Good God! into what a paſſion was he then cast? not the tongues of a thouſand men (I imagine) can expreſſe it.
                     
                     A little taſt of the inexplicable agony he giues vs by this, that the ſweat that flowed from Marwoods face, was in ſuch current ſtreames, as it was the office of one man, to ſtand, and dry them vp. Digitus Ignatij est hic: this was the finger of Ignatius deuil indeede, to teach a yong Popiſh Rakehell ſo cunningly to act, & feigne the paſſions, and agonies of the deuil; that the whole companie of ſpectators ſhal by his falſe illuſions be brought into ſuch commiſeration, and compaſſion, as they ſhal all weepe, crie, and exclaime, as loude as the counterfet deuil; and the end and plaudite of the act, muſt be this. O Catholicam fidem! O fidem Catholicam, vereé fidem, ſanctam, castam, operatricem fidē: tu daemonibus terribilis, inferno formidabilis, tibi cedunt cateruae, legiones daemonum contre miſcunt ad tuas voces, tuas voces inſuperabiles fugiunt, horrent, & te audire nolunt. That is: O the Catholique faith, O the faith Catholique, truly faith, holy, pure, powerfull faith: Thou art terrible to deuils, formidable to hell, troupes ſubmit to thee, legions of deuils doe tremble at thy voyce, they flie from thy vnreſistable commaund, they quake, and dare not abide thy ſound. Now by that time Sara, and her play-fellowes

be come vpon the ſtage, & haue told you, how they were burned, and handled likewiſe, I doubt not, but you will helpe their plaudite with an O to: O diabolicam fraudem! O fraudem diabolicam! O diros actores! O ineptos ſpectatores!
                     
                     
                        Sara was content to play the ſhe-deuil, touching your preſence, and approach, and to grace you with an Oh I burne, oh I cannot abide the preſence of a Catholique: mary when you came neerer, then in manhood you ſhould offer, or ſhe in modeſty ſuffer, as to hunt her with your holy hote hands, ſhee could in her woman-hood haue beene content you would haue forborne: but that way lay your game, and therefore there was no remedy, but you would haue your hunting ſport. Your game being by hote chaſe emboſſed, did commonly take ſoyle, and there you let him lodge, and hunted him a freſh vpon the old foyle, and counter too, which none but Curres of an impure ſent wil doe.
                     
                        Sara ſaith, you began with your fiery hands at her foot, and ſo vp all along her leg; ſo her knee, her thigh, and ſo along all parts of her body: And that you followed the chaſe ſo cloſe, that it could neither double, nor ſquat, but you were ready to pinch.
                     VVas this a fayre chaſe for holy anointed prieſts to make, eſpecially with thoſe holy hands, that had inſtantlie before celebrated the holy Maſſe, bleſſed the chalice, made (as they ſuppoſe) a new God, eleuated the Hoaſt, handled, and deuided the very body of Chriſt, to bring the ſame holy hands piping hote from the Altar to the chayre, where Sara ſate at Maſſe, to ſeize with the ſame hands vpon her toe, ſlip them vp along her legge, her knee, her thigh, and ſo along all parts of her body, till you came neere her neck, and by the way with the ſame holy hands, to handle, pinch, and gripe, where the deuil in his blacke modeſty did forbeare, till you made her crie oh: and then you to crie, O, that oh is the deuill. Now

the great deuil pinch you all for me, and that I may ſay without malignity; for I wel know he dares not: you are ſo deuil holy all ouer, head, hart, and hands, that the deuil dares not come neere you: and therefore you neede not to care a ruſh for either deuil, or hell, for you wil either with your holines make holy both the deuil, and hell, or make him crie oh, when you come there with your holy pinch.
                     
                        Fid Williams doth complaine (looke in their owne confeſſions) that with your holy hote burning hands, you did hunt the deuil counter in her too: and did toe-burne, ſhin-burne, knee-burne her, and ſo forth, till you made her crie oh: for they were the ſweet paire of your holy deuils, that were alwayes in chaſe.
                     And heere we ſee the cauſe, why Trayford was ſoone diſpatched of his deuil after a bout, or two, and was neuer deuil hunted from toe to top, with your holy hote hands: nor Ma: Maynie was neuer troubled with this pinching ſport: but Sara, and Fid ſtuck long in your fingers, or your fingers about them; and euer & anone they were at the holy chayre, and this diſlodging, courſing, and pinching, the deuil was ſtill in their Parkes. Alack, the poore ſoules had no worſe deuils, then Tray-ford and Maynie had: for Maynie had the ſoueraigne Dictator of hell in him; but their walke was faire for your courſe, their game pleaſing, their ſute hote, your ſent fuller: and therefore no meruaile, though your dogges being curres, did hunt ryot ſo often after this fallow Deare.
                     And heere I muſt remember you, that you were ſo fierie hote, and ſo ſharpe ſet vpon this game, that you forgat your Maiſters, Mengus, Thyraeus, Sprenger, Nider, and all; and did as ſchoole-boyes doe, when they haue an otium to play, giue a ſhowt, and for haſt of their ſport, caſt ſatchel, bookes, and paper, behind at their heeles. For in your graund probato, when Sara at my L. 
                           Ʋaux
                        
his houſe, was to receaue her ſolemne graund exorciſme, and ſo be quit the Court, this high day being held for her finall quietus est: where you ſhould haue had ſpeciall regard to haue dignified, and graced euery holy Engine in his due order, and place, ſeruiceable to this great worke, (as the Amice, the Albe, holy water, holy candell, the Croſſe, Brians bones, and your Ma: Mengus his formidable deuil-whip aboue the reſt) you hauing Sara your game ſet faire in her forme, for ioy, and ſhowt of your ſport, could not abſtaine, but like Lycurgus his Hound, that hauing an Hare, and a kitchin pot ſet both before him, left the Hare, and ranne to the pot, and thruſt in his head vp to the eares: ſo you hauing in your hand your Ma: Mengus his dreadfull booke of Exorciſme, entituled worthily Fustis, fuga, flagellum daemonum: the cudgel, the whip, and the flight of rhe deuil: (loe the furious force of your fierie heate) threw Mengus your deuil-whipper away, and ranne vnto Sara, and with your burning hands catched Sara by the foot, and ſo fired the deuill along, till you made him ſlip out, where on man muſt name.
                     Now a few queſtions I muſt ſoyle,See the booke of miracles. and then I wil proceede to your holy geare. 1. It may be asked, how your hands came ſo holy, as to ſhine at the top of your fingers, like vnto the ſunne. Wherin you ſhal heare a peece of a Dialogue betweene Fid, and Ma: Maynie, theyr Captaine ſcholler: who ſitting by Fid his pue-fellow, and a prieſt hard by them: did affirme, that vnto his ſight the priests finger, and thumb, did ſhine with brightnes, especially on the inner ſides: where-vnto the prieſt aunſwered, that it might well be ſo, becauſe (quoth he) they were anointed with holy oyle, when I was made priest. At which words Fid laughing, and calling Ma: Maynie diſſembling hypocrit; the prieſt ſaid, It was not Fid, but the deuill, that did ſo laugh, and rayle. Heere you ſee a plaine reaſon, how the prieſts hand comes ſhining, and holy,

& hath this pinching holy quality in it, to cauſe a wench cry oh, and hee that wil laugh at this reaſon, may hap to catch a deuil. 2, If any curious merry head wil demaund, what needs the Amice, the Albe, holy candle, holy croſſe, holy brimſtone, Brians bones, the ſacrament the croſſe, Salue Regina, S. Barbara, Mengus his deuil-whip, his deuil-club, his fray-deuil, and the reſt of that infernal rable, ſince the onely holy hands of Edmunds the Ieſuit alone, hath power alone to rouſe, hunt, chaſe, baffle, broyle, & toſte the deuil, and to make him to roare, that hel it ſelfe did quake, and tremble, skudde, and flye from his holy hand alone, more fearefully, and ghaſtfully then euer poore Mouſe did tremble, and flie from the ſight of a glaring Cat.
                     To this I aunſwer, that as all ſtarres doe not participate alike the light of the ſunne, ſo all holy prieſts doe not receiue alike the influence of this hel-tormenting fire, but as they come neerer to that Fons caloris, Origo luminis, Oculus caeli Ignatius, the fountaine of this holie-deuil-driuing heate, as his name dooth import, (as Edmunds his grand-child did) ſo are there more potent, and abundant beames of that miraculous fire communicated vnto them, able to fry, and broyle all the deuils in hell: and as they ſtand farther off from the pure raies of his hell-fiering face, ſo they are as the Moone, but ſpotted, and ſprinckled with this ſatanicall flame. 3, If this wil not content you, but you wil purſue me with queſtions ſtil, and know why Edmunds, Dibdale, and ſome other, who had the deuils plenty of this deuil-frying heat in theyr holy hands, did not diſpatch the deuil quite, and fire him out of his denne at once with theyr holy hands alone: but elongated their worke, & tooke in the Albe, the amice, holy candle, holy hoſt, and all the louſie holy wardrop to aſſiſt in the holy worke: I aunſwer, this was theyr good nature, to take in thoſe petty implements, and to doe them ſome grace, that theyr mother

holy Church, whoſe hangings they are, may thanke them for theyr labour, eſpecially conſidering they grow now adaies ſomewhat fully for want of cleane vſe. And laſtly, if they ſhould haue diſpatched haſtily, much good hūting ſport had been loſt, the pleaſure had been ſhort, the action by facility would not haue been ſo admirably eſteemed; the holy Church had loſt theyr applauſe, and the grace of the action by ſodaine quick paſſage, would haue receiued much eclipſe, and diminution. And ſo I proceed to view their holy implements.
                  
                  
                     
                        CHAP. 15. ¶ Of the admirable power in a Prieſts gloues, his hoſe, his girdle, his ſhirt, to ſcorch the deuill.
                     GEntle Reader, thou muſt not meruaile to heare thoſe ſupernaturall powers, ſpoken of before, to haue beene lodged in the bodies of holy prieſts: conſidering that as the plague doth infect, and hang in implements and garments, and the leproſie vpon walls, and beames of houſes; ſo wee finde thoſe powerful vertues, which ſhewed themſelues apparantly in the conſtitution of the Prieſts, to transfuſe themſelues, and inhaere as effectually, in the prieſts gloues, theyr hoſe, theyr girdle, their ſhirts, their ragges, their patches, yea in the water that ſome of their powerful hands had been waſhed withall. So as theſe holy companions, if they had beene metamorphoſed into Fiſhes, as Vlyſſes folowers were turned into ſwine, they would haue proued notable good Codfiſh, of whō the Fiſhermen report there is no part within them, nor without, that is bad.
                     A little I doubt mee old Thyraeus is to blame, vvho painting a whole chapter with the glorious parts, and qualities of an Exorciſt, intituling his diſcourſe De conditionibus Exorcistarum, hee is ſilent in this Maiſter-qualitie

infixed in the temper, and mould of a Prieſt, or receiued from his ſplendent vnction, that he ſhould haue this dreadful fire, to burne out a deuil, and ſo by conuiuencie doth ſmother it in his garments, and implements too. Thyraeus was of ſome watry, and earthy conſtitution, and likely dooth cantle all Exorciſts by himſelfe. Sure I am, we finde them as liuely, quick, and mightie in operation in theyr exteriour ornaments, as in theyr interiour complexion, & therefore we muſt not do them that wrong, to bury them in obliuion.
                     
                        Maho, Saras chiefe deuil, with much adoe was compelled to tel his name: and the firſt word hee ſpake, was out of Saras hand; then was one of the prieſts gloues taken, and put vppon her hand, Maho durſt not abide it,Page, 12. of the booke of miracles. but went his way ſtraight: and hee was ſo skared, as we do not finde, that euer he came there after. It ſeemes he had ſtepped thether only to grace the prieſts gloues: for you haue obſerued, that her hand was none of his ordinary haunt: or els, if he could not endure the gloue by reaſon of ſome ſenting quality, the prieſts hand had left behind him, wee may imagine the prieſt had beene vſing his hand holily, and well: when it ſauoured ſo ſtrongly that the deuil could not abide it. And now it is not without great cauſe as you may ſee, that our Catho: Gentlewomen heere in England doe hold in ſuch deere eſteeme our wandring Cath: prieſts, enriching them with guilt rapiers, hangings, girdles, Ierkins, and coyfes more beſeeming a noble man, then a iugling Impoſtor to weare, if they receiue no other poſſeſſiue kindneſſe (whereof wee all ſee they be no niggards of theyr ſtore) yet this recompence at their pleaſure they may entertaine, to haue a precious payre of prieſted gloues, ſo ſprightly perfumed, with the pure odour-ſpicing from the hands of a hote ghoſtly father, as they may vſe for a ſure preſeruatiue againſt any ſparrow-blaſting, or ſprite-blaſting of the deuil. This precious odour againſt a

deuil, that dooth continually iſſue from their annointed complexion, dooth not onely aſcend, into theyr vpper, and extend it ſelfe into theyr vtter ornaments, as into their gloues; but it deſcends alſo, and diſtils into theyr inferiour habit, and for want of a fit receptacle, is readie many times to drop out at their heeles. Dibdale Saras ghoſtly Father, had of his fatherly kindneſſe lent his ghoſtly child a payre of his old ſtockins, that happilie had ſeene 
                           Ʋenice, & Rome;
                        Page, 5, miracle booke. ſhe as a ſpiritual token of his carnall kindnes, doth weare them on her legs: ſee thys odoriferous vertue, in what exceeding meaſure, it had diſcended downe, and filled the very ſeames of Dibdales hoſe. Saras deuil had been very turbulent, and ſtirring in her body, and was to be deliuered downe to his baſer lodge, he paſſed quietly downe til he came at her knee, and comming downe hil too faſt, ſlipt ere he was aware into Saras legge, where finding himſelfe caught within the prieſts hoſe beeing on her legge, he plunges & tumbles like a Salmon taken in a net, and cries barro ho, out alas, pul off, pul off; off in all haſt with the prieſts hoſe, or els he muſt marre all, for there he could not ſtay: & all haſt was made accordingly to eaſe the poore deuil of his paine, and let him lie at his repoſe: and was not this a goodly ginne to catch a Woodcocke withall, & cauſe him to ſhoote out his long bil, and cry, O the vertue of the prieſthood, ô the power of the Catholique Church, when they ſaw with their owne eyes the hoſe haſtily ſnatched off, heard with their owne long cares Saras deuil cry oh, beheld her legge quiet, when it was bare without the houſe: & obſerued how reuerently the prieſts touched, handled, and beſtowed the hoſe, when it was of, and with what eleuation of their eyes to heauen, they finiſhed the wonder.
                     I cannot but wonder that in the heate of theyr zeale, loue, and admiration of the holineſſe of the prieſts, the ſpectators did not runne vppon them at once, as the

daughters of Scaeua the Iew, did vpon the Exorciſts; and of pure holy zeale, rend, ſnatch, and teare off all their holy apparel from off their backs, euen vnto their bare, and catch, and carrie away ſome a peece of the Prieſts coate, ſome a ragge of the amice, ſome a patch of his breeches, ſome a corner of his ſhirt, and lay them vp in an holy casket for reliques, againſt a raynie day. The prieſts themſelues, doe full deuoutly casket vp as homelie,Page, 5, ibidem. and brayed wares, as theſe God wote. Heere make you no doubt, but all more then comely haſt was made, to pull off Dibdales hoſe, that the deuil might quickly cabin in his lodge; for there was the deuils couert, where they were ſaid to rouze him, when they came to the next hunt, with their fiery holy hands, which was not long intermitted (as the wenches doe wofully complaine) the prieſts hauing a ranke itch in their fingers, to be fidling at that ſport.
                     You are next to be informed, that this deuil-killing vertue did not lye in the prieſts head onely, as the poyſon of an Adder doth; nor yet in his taile alone, as the light of a Glow-worme: but was vniuerſally diffuſed ouer all, and euery part of his body, and ſo transfuſed into all, and euery part of the apparel, that came neere his body.See Edm: practat. 
                        Campians girdle that he wore (as ſeemes) at Tiburne, (and I wonder how they miſſed the roape, that embraced his holy necke) being enritched with an outlandiſh grace, that it came from Ieruſalem, (as Fa: Edmunds tells vs,) and had there girded about the ſepulcher of our Sauiour Chriſt, ſhal tell you ſtranger newes, then Dibdales ſtockins did.
                     
                        Marwoods deuil being a ſtiffe reſty ſpirit, of kin (as ſeemes) to a malt-horſe of Ware, that wil not out of his way: had beene coniured at Hackney by Stemp, and other prieſts, by the ſpace of a moneth. Mengus his club, his whip, his ſcare-deuil, had beene many, and ſundry times aſſayed, the inuocation of the bleſſed Trinity, many

times vſed, Miſſa de ſpiritu ſancto, (Edmunds owne words) celebrata: A choiſe Maſſe of the holy Ghost had beene celebrated, dreadfull infernall Exorciſmes had been thundered abroad, Hic tamen nihil quicquam ſentire viſus est: The ſullen ſpirit, ſeemed not to care for it a ruſh. But when Edmunds came in accepto biſſino quodam funiculo, quem ipſe Edmundus Campianus ſemper ſecū gestabat, & in ſacrificijs vtebatur (quem Saluatoris ſepulchrum vinxiſſe Hieroſolymis ſolebat dicere,) hunc Sacerdos ad latus applicuit: Ad cuius contactum hic ſtatim trepidare, et conturbari coepit, dolorem
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            eius preſentia in aliam corporis partē conceſſiſſe, qua ille re perspecta energumenum eſſe manifestò deprehendit. Taking in his hand, a certaine ſilken twiſt, which Fa: Campion did alwayes cary about with him, and vſed it at the celebration of the Maſſe; and which he often ſaid, had beene at Ieruſalem, and girded our Sauiours tombe: applied the ſame gently to Marwoods ſide; at the touch whereof, he preſently began to tremble, and turmoile, and the paine of his ſide ſhifted into a new place, whereby Edmunds diſcerned, that Marwood was a Daemoniack in deede.
                     What a wonderfull Saint-maker is Tyburne by this, that in a quarter of an houre ſhall miſcreate a Saint, whoſe girdle, or twiſt (prouided it be worne by the old Saint at the gallowes) ſhal put downe at ſcaring of a deuil, Mengus his club-deuil, whip-deuil, ſcare-deuil, the Maſſe, the inuocation of God our Sauiour Chriſt, the holy Ghoſt, and all? I doe very much meruaile there were neuer ſtrange miracles performed by the wood of thoſe trees, conſidering it hath beene bleſſed by ſome of their ſacred bodies, & bedewed with their laſt ſpritefull breath, which haue power to infuſe their ſoueraigne vertue into more remote obiects, and into things of as hard, and repugnant a conſiſtence. It ſeemes they haue changed courſes with the transfuſion of miraculous vertue, imagined by their idle braines, to iſſue from our

bleſſed Sauiour, at time of his death: whoſe coates, that he wore at his bleſſed paſſion, thy leaue as bare, and naked, without any powerfull miraculous vertue at all, & beſtow all his diuine influences vpon the holy Croſſe: Contrariwiſe, theſe communicate all the riches of their miraculous graces vpon their girdles, and cloutes: and leaue nothing for the poore gallowes, to grace them withall.
                     But this holy potent girdle is not thus barely left: You ſhal heare Edmunds gracing it in an higher ſtraine. Patris etiam Camp: ſacrum illum funiculum ad latus, & os vnus ex circumstantibus admouit: quin ille iterum vehementer execratur, et detestatur omnes eiuſmodi res, ore diſcerpit, mandit dentibus, conspuit, daemoni commendat illam rem, quae tantam ei molestiam faceret, tantum excruciaret, corpori, & animae ad omnia extrema perpetienda cauſa eſſet. One of the by-ſtanders takes father Campian his ſacred girdle, and with it touches the mouth, and ſide of the poſſeſſed, he againe curſes, and deteſts all manner ſuch geare, he teares it with his mouth, bites it with his teeth, ſpits vpon it amaine; wiſhes the deuil take that ill-fauored thing, that troubled him ſo much, vexed him ſo ſore, and was the cauſe of his extreame torments, both in body, and minde.
                     Now take with you, I entreate you, a ſhort, and ſweet Dialogue, betweene the Ieſuit, and the deuil. Sed quid nam (inquit Sacerdos) peſſime daemon, fatêre veritate (non quod ego abs te, qui mendax ab initio fuisti, veritatem volo diſcere) quid isto funiculo ita torqueris, qui vel fortiſſima quae
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            mundi tam facilè contemnis? vnde ergo venit? Wicked fiend (ſaith Edmunds) come on, goe to now, & tell true (not that I deſire to learne truth of thee, that haſt beene a lyer from the beginning) what is the cauſe thou art ſo cruelly tormented with this girdle, who dooſt not care for the potenteſt thinges that are in the world? whence then proceedeth this? Thus farre Edmunds the

deuil ſenior: now heare Edmunds deuil Iunior, or Marwood, Edmunds ghoſt? Hieroſolyma (inquit) bene nouit, ad quem pertinuit; Tiburnus non ignorat (qui locus erat, vbi pater ipſe Camp: martyrio coronatus erat.) Tum Sacerdos astantes compellat: testes inquit estote, patris Camp. clariſſimi martyrij, cuius hic vel minutiſſimus funiculus, quem ipſi prius in vita nunquam viderant, tantas illi faces miſerat. Ieruſalem (quoth the deuil) knowes whoſe girdle it is. Tiburne (the place where Fa: Camp: receaued his crowne of martyrdome) is wel acquainted with it. H
                           ••
                        re Edmunds calls aloude to all the ſtanders by; beare witnes my maiſters of Fa: Campians moſt glorious martyrdom, whoſe ſmalleſt cord, which before that time, they had neuer ſeene with their eyes, hath caſt the deuil into ſuch an heate.
                     See heere three moſt graue, and authentike witneſſes of a Romiſh Saint: Ieruſalem, Tyburne, and the deuil. And the poore gulls, that held the candell to the deuil, called in for the fourth, to make vp a meſſe. Campians Saintſhip had been in a faire taking, but for the gallows, and the deuil; and would it not doe any man good, to be thus Sainted from hel?
                     And now the deuil was a Sainting, and that his hand was in, it was much ouer-ſeene of Edmunds the Preſenter, that he did not name him, Story, Felton, Sommeruile, Arden, Parrie, & Lopez, & the reſt of that Saint-Traytorly crue, whom Tiburne, and the deuil were as familiar with-all, as with S. Campian I wis; and knew as wel the cauſes, motiues, and end of their Saint-ſhips alike: the deuil himſelfe hauing beene the Author, & inſpirer to them all, and therefore no doubt but he would haue beene as kinde to them, as to S. Campian; and the more the merier, & the greater ſhout, & applauſe would haue beene of the holy Traytorly rout, that were lookers on, and the Echo the ſhriller when they cried: O Catholicam fidem! O fidem Catholicam! and if they be not

already ſainted with the deuil, (as I truſt if they be dead, God gaue them better grace,) but if they be liuing, and ſtand as lewdly affected to theſe diabolical coſenages, as heere they did, when they held the deuil, alias Edmunds the candel: it is to be hartily wiſhed, they were ſent to the Creator of the Romiſh Saints, Tiburne their Coronator, by him to be conuayed, where Gods mercy ſhal deſigne.
                     But the cloſe of this Dialogue betweene Edmunds, & the deuil, or the deuil Edmunds, and Edmunds the deuil, for he played both parts himſelfe, is the pretieſt of all. Campians dreadful girdle had ſo heat the deuil, and intoxicated his braine, as it made the deuil to cry out, as you haue heard. O me ſtultum et infelicem, qui ista dicerem! O foole, and wretch that I am, for ſaying thus much! Heere you ſee the deuil was cleane gone, and confeſſeth himſelfe to be out of his wits. And this was but an admotion, or touch of the girdle; what would this ſacred twiſt haue done, if it had girt the deuil about, as it girt our Sauiours Tomb at Ieruſalem: verily it cannot be imagined, what hel-work it wold haue wrought: the deuil had certainly become a bedlamit at the leaſt, and then his keeper would haue had ſome-what adoe; the club, and the whip, and all muſt haue walked.
                     Meane while Campians Saint-ſhip comes of a faire houſe, and hangs by a goodly three-fold threed. For the deuil heere now when he dubbed him, and proclaimed him a Saint, is in Edmunds cenſure a lier, in his own confeſſion a foole, and by imputation a deuil: and ſo he was created by a deuil, a foole, and a liar: and theſe three in one was none, but Edmunds alone, the Author, Actor, and penner of this play, who deſerues as worthily to be crowned at Tiburne, for this fooliſh, fond, impious diabolical faſcination, and to be proclaimed from hell for an infernal Saint, as euer Campian, & his complices did.
                     I haue their ſhirt behind, as the laſt ſeruice to the deuils

nunchion. Which becauſe it is not ſo cleanly, as I could wiſh, Fid (the Laundreſſe to theſe deuils incarnat) ſhal ſerue in this diſh. Fid was waſhing in miſtris Peckhams kitchin, a bucke of foule cloathes:See her examin: amongſt the which, was one of the prieſt-Exorciſts ſhirts: the deuil comes ſneaking behind her, trips vp her heeles, and pitches her on her hip, and vpon that aduantage, takes poſſeſſion of her (as it ſeemes by the ſtory,) for from that fall ſhe grew to be poſſeſſed: And wote you why the deuil playd her this vnmannerly ſneaking tricke. The Miracle-maker tels vs, it was becauſe ſhee was waſhing out a foule ſhirt of one of the prieſts, and what further matter, their examinations may with leſſe offence to your modeſty report, then my ſelfe. I proceede to their prieſtly attire.
                  
                  
                     
                        CHAP. 16. ¶ Of the wonderfull power, in a Priests Albe, his amice, his maniple, his ſtole, to whip, and plague the deuill.
                     THe Heathen, who ſaw not God, and things intelligible with a cleere eye, but with the owle-light of nature, and glimſe of theyr owne diſcourſe, did deeme of ſpirits, and deuils, that they were aëreae ſubſtantiae, of an ayrie patible ſubſtance, or els that they were the ſpirits of naughty men departed this life. According to theyr dimme conceit they had ſuperſtitious deuiſes, by ſacrifices, and charmes, placandi manes, and imperandi both; ſometime to pleaſe them, ſomtime to commaund them, as you may ſee by 
                           Ʋirgil, and other Poets, in Aeneas, and Theſeus deſcenſions into hel. Their pleaſing, and ſoothing their angry daemones was by ſacrifice: their controling, checking, and commaunding them, was by charmes, fumigations, execrations, lights, ſacred veſtments, and ſcepters of their conſecrated prieſts.
                     Our Papiſme, the corruption of the ſincere worſhip

of Chriſt, beeing naught els but a perfect apiſme, and imitation of Gentiliſme, & Hetheniſh ſuperſtition, doth naught els but play ouer all the toyes, tricks, and trumperies, of Ethnick ſuperſtition againe: eſpecially in this matter of ſcaring, tormēting, & afflicting of the deuil, not only with the body, breath, ſmel, touch, but with the ordinary apparel, as hoſe, gloues, girdle, ſhirt, & as you ſhal now hear, with the exterior ornaments of a ſacred prieſt, as his amice, his albe, his ſtole, and the like.
                     The difference betweene a Pagan, & a Popiſh prieſt, as I take it, is this, that the one doth ſeriouſly, and in good ſadneſſe perſwade himſelfe, that his halowed perſon, charmes, and conſecrate attire, as his ſcepter, his crowne, and Albe, doth awe, terrifie, and depel the deuil indeed: the other doth not in earneſt ſo thinke, or dreame, but doth know the cleane contrary, that there is neither vertue, ability, nor proportion in any of theſe gewgawes, to moue or ſtil the deuil no more, then there is in a white ſheet to ſcare a ſober man; but dooth onely of impious policie act, faſhion, and play them, ad terrorem incutiendum, & fucum faciendum populo, to gull, terrifie, and amaze the ſimple ignorant people, and by bringing them into an admiration of the power of their prieſt-hood, the ſanctitie of theyr attire, and the diuine potencie of theyr Romiſh Cath: church, by this meanes to enchaunt, & bewitch their innocent ſimple ſoules, & ſo to offer thē vp for a pray to their great Idole at Rome.
                     
                     See Tirrell, Stemp, and Thomſon, three Rectors of this deuil tragaedie doe put off theyr Romane viſards,See Tirrels exam: and Fids. & tel vs iumpe as much. It was theyr good nature, or rather Gods good grace, they ſhould deale ſo plainly with vs: but we need not be beholden to them, for this neceſſarie kindneſſe one iote: for by that time all the parts of this tragaedie haue been acted on the ſtage, you haue neuer a child of tenne yeeres, that is a looker on, but will ſee, and diſcerne their groſſe packing, rude bungling,

and palpable iugling ſo apparantlie, as hee wil dare to take the deuil by the viſard, & play with the fooles noſe, and cry: away with the prieſt, and the deuil, they haue marred a good play.
                     We are now come to their hunting, and chaſing the deuil with their holy attire. In a wel ſorted cry of hoūds, the dogs are not all of a qualitie, and ſiſe: ſome be great, ſome of a midle, ſome of a low pitch: ſome good at a hote chaſe, ſome at a cold ſent: ſome ſwift, and ſhalow, ſome ſlow and ſure: ſome deepe and hollow mouthed, ſome verie pleaſant, and merrie at traile. So is it in this conſorted kennel of hell, and in theſe direful engines, & Machines of the Romiſh Church, to rouſe, chaſe, and torment the deuil. The bodie, & hand of a ſacred prieſt, yee ſee are greater torments to the deuil, then hel. His girdle, gloues, and hoſe, they are the deuils ſcorpions, & whyps (as neereſt vnto the origen, and fountaine it ſelfe) but his exterior ornaments (though ornaments of his office, as his Amice, his Albe, his ſtole: yet beeing more remote, and ſo participating the vertue of the prieſt, but in weake degrees) be in this deuil-hunting ſport, in ſtead of little beagles to fill vp the cry; and yet by your leaue, ſometime they giue the deuil a ſhrewd pinch, and therfore they be worth the whiſtling out, and not to be left in the Popes kennel at home.
                     It is not a light argument of the ſacred power of an Amice againſt a ſpirit, that the reporter of the Miracles tells vs; that a prieſt layd it vppon Saras face to preuent illuſions: and that a ſpirit puffed at it,Pag. 32. and could not endure to let it alone. It had as ſeemes a choaking quality to ſuffocat a deuil: and indeede Lustie Dicke, that deuil, for all his luſtier parts, had endured a ſhrewd chaſe by a long exorciſme a little afore, and ſhewed himſelfe a luſtie ſtout deuil of a large winde, and laſting breath, that hee ſunke no ſooner, and nowe beeing cleane ſpent and lying at bay, it was but an hard part of the

prieſt, when he found him panting, & gaſping for ayre, after ſo hote, and ſore a chaſe, not to breathe the deuil a little, but to come vpon him with a ſuffocating Amice, to quel him out-right.
                     Now Sara tels vs, that it was ſhe her ſelfe, that puffed at the holy Amice, as beeing none of the ſweeteſt. But who was likeſt to know beſt, whether ſhee, or the deuil puffed? I hope the prieſt, who knew the deuil as readily by his puffe, as the deuil did him by his ſmel. The prieſt ſhewed a good wit in taking the deuil ſo ſoone. This holy relique lay pent for want of a grace from the deuil, and the deuil beeing brought ſo low, had nothing but a puffe, or a worſe ayre to vent vpon it.
                     The holy Stole was brought three or foure times vppon the ſtage, and ſhewed it ſelfe an Antidaemoniack of ſpecial account, manifeſting it ſelfe to be a true implement,See Edmunds tract. and hanging of the deuil-quelling church. Firſt it ſerued in the nature of a ſtop-deuil, in Fa: Edmunds own hand, who after he had belabored the deuil with his holy hands into Marwoods head, and finding his hands heauy with the maſſie waight of vertue, that was compacted in them: he took the ſacred Stole, & wound it about Marwoods neck, and ſo begirt the deuil in Marwoods head, where the deuil lay ſo pent, by the vertue iſſuing out of the bleſſed Stole, as he ſtared, fumed, & fomed, as he had beene ſtarke mad, and in the end was ſqueaſed out with pure violence, as water out of a ſquirt.
                     
                        Page, 14.The Miracle-maſter, tels vs of an heroical combat performed betweene Maho, and the prieſt, during ſeauen houres long, when Maho the deuil ſtandihg vppon his guard, would not come in. He was ſummoned by the prieſt firſt with Mengus club, then with his whip, with holy water, Salue regina, Aue maria, the great Heralds for hell. Maho ſtoode out, till the prieſt prepared him ſelfe (ſaith the Author) to afflict him with the Stole, and then he came in, and yeelded to parly, or dialogue with

the prieſt, in a milde, and temperate voyce. See the power of the Catholique Romiſh church, whoſe ſeelieſt ragge hath power to change the deuils roaring note, & to cauſe him to ſpeake, in a milde moderate key.
                     This bleſſed implement hath in it, as you ſee, a ſtinging cord for a deuil, more then Mengus whip: and how was the poore deuil then rent, battered, and torne, may we deeme: when for not telling his name, he was enioyned vntruſſe, and to take quietly fiue laſhes with the Stole, & (that which was worſt of al, & I am ſure went moſt againſt his ſtomacke, being an haughty ſpirit) was commaunded to kiſſe the rod, and to ſay ouer, with a lamentable trembling voyce 15 Aue maries, fiue for our Ladies fiue ſorrowes, fiue for her fiue ioyes, & fiue for her fiue glories. And all this the deuil moſt dutifully performed, like a dutiful obedient ſonne to his curſt holie Mother, the holy church of Rome. But heare you fellow Comaedians: heere you had like to haue ſpoiled the play, for you be laboured your Fid, your fellow ſhe-deuil, with your Stole ſo hard, as ſhe whined indeed, and in choler had like to haue pulled off her deuils vizard, and ſhewed her owne face, and to haue told the Spectators, that ſhe was Fid, your kinde fidler in deed, and no he-deuil, God wote, & that ſhe knew the time, when you would haue laboured her more kindly; for ſhe felt this ſtole-whipping, three or foure dayes after:See her exam: and had the marks of it vppon her armes longer to be ſeene. But ſhe remembred, you would finde time, and place, with kinder vſage to make her amends, therefore ſhe was content for once to beare it.
                     
                        Latet anguis in herba: a man would little ſuſpect, when he meetes with the Amice, the Stole, and the Maniple, wound vp in a little casket, that there were ſuch blacke hel-mettal within them, to excoriat, and lancinate a deuil: and it grieues me, I confeſſe, when I ſee our little children, when they haue them, how they in a natural

childiſh inſtinct, doe take thē for fit gawdes to trick vp their babies with-all: and themſelues doe put them for ſport, ſome vpon their owne fingers, ſome vpon their breaſts, ſome vpon their foreheads: and a little I muſe when I ſee it (conſidering the infuſed diuine vertue, inherent in this ſacred geare, to diſcouer, manifeſt, and torment the deuil) how it commeth to paſſe that we, & our children being in Edmunds, and the Catholiques opinions all of vs poſſeſſed, that theſe potent Engines, doe not ſhew forth their manifeſting, tormenting vertue in none of our little children, & cauſe them to tumble, foame, and ſpeake fuſtian, as they doe in theyr owne.
                     To this may be aunſwered, that we, and our children be out of their church, and ſo out of the ſphaere of the actiuitie of theſe holy Iewels: and then that this is not a ſeated fixed vertue in theſe nouels, but a mouing tranſitiue grace, that goes out, and in, in them, like a ſhittle in a Weauers loome. But Sara, and Fid doe furniſh vs with an apter, and fuller aunſwer, then both: that is, that we are not idonea ſubiecta, not fit matter for theſe deuil-powers to work vpon, till we haue been at their ſchoole, and haue learned to ſpel our horne-booke, & the Croſſe rowe with them: For they themſelues at firſt, were no more moued with an Amice, and a Stole, then they were with a diſh-clout, and a malkin, til they had taken out an holy leſſon out of the prieſts play bookes, and then they felt an heate, that they wiſt not of before.
                     It is a currant tale of Achilles, that his mother Thetis dipped him in the Sea, all but his heele, & ſo made him impenetrable againſt the point of any weapon. Our holie Exorciſts haue ſurely beene plunged in the Riuer Styx, in their holy attire: for they haue neither ſpeck of their body, nor ragge belonging vnto them, but it is hel-proofe, and deuil-proofe altogether; and that which Achilles had not, it hath beſides a power deſtructiue,

and triumphant ouer hel, and the deuil. The Prieſts poore Maniple that an ignorant Landreſſe would ſcarce haue beſtowed the wrincing vpon, put about Trayfords neck (ſaith the miracle-founder) baricadoed vp the deuil in Trayfords head, that he durſt not ſtirre, and there he ſtoode ſo diſtreſſed for want of prouant, that with a penny Mouſe-trap you might haue caught him without a bayt at Trayfords right eare.
                     Theſe prieſts ditements being ſeuerally ſo many infernal ſerpents and Scorpions, to ſting, and bite the deuil: what would you ſay, if you ſee the poore deuil enſnared in them altogether, and entangled in this ſacred geare, as Mars was in Vulcans net? How pittifully, imagine you, would he look, to ſee himſelfe ſo prieſt-bitten, as Aeſops Foxe was flie-bitten:Page. 45. and how would hee winch, skip, and curuet, hauing ſo many fiery needles in his skin at once? In this woful plight the (wonder-writer) preſents him to your view, telling you, that for encreaſe of his torment, they ſtripped Sara of her garments, and put vppon her body, all the prieſts implements at once; and then how they tricked Saraes deuil, being adorned with their prieſtly robes, let the deuil,See her exam: or Sara tell: I haue other Cod-fiſh in water, that muſt not be forgotten.
                  
                  
                     
                        CHAP. 17. Certaine questions aunſwered, concerning the Church of Rome her making, and accumulating yet more dreadfull tooles, and engines for the deuill.
                     THere is no good natured man (as I thinke) that ſhould heare of theſe various, and dreadfull whyps ſpoken of before, to be inflicted vpon the deuils backe in a fierie conſort at once, but would haue ſome feeling remorſe of the paines of the deuil, and ſay with the wofull

man, nunc non est nouae plagae locus: there is no free place left vppon the deuils skinne for any new laſh. But when this good natured man ſhal heare of the more various, and more direful not whips, but ſcorpions, ſtings, and fiery ſerpents of the holy Church: the blacke gloomie armour, embelliſhed with the thicke ſmoake, & vapour of hell; the ſwords, darts, and ſpeares of fire, pointed with griſly death, that the Church doth arme her infernall ſouldiers (the Exorciſts) withall, againſt the princedome and power of hell, hee will cry out with Marwoods tormented deuil, terra dehiſce, ne ſentiam illas plagas, earth ſwallow mee vp, before I come neere the ſcorch of thoſe flames.
                     And theſe are in a blacke row, as they ſtand in the blacke Miracle booke, holy water, holy candle, halowed frankenſence, halowed brimſtone, the potion, the croſſe, the ſacrament, Tiburne reliques: the picture of an Aſſe burnt in fire, nicknames to the deuil, the picture of our Lady, Aue Maries, ſalue Reginaes, the preſence of S. Barbara, and the preſence of our Lady: which you muſt read ouer very ſilently, leaſt the deuil hearing the names, you heare him preſently roare vppon you for feare.
                     The Poets, to ſtrike vs with a terror of the torments of Styx, doe preſent before our eyes, the three Eumenides ſiſters, the Furies, and tormentors of hell, with black vgly viſages, griſly with ſmoake, with whips of blood, and fire in theyr hands, theyr armes gored with blood: and a huge bunch of a thouſand ſnakes crawling down theyr haire. Let me preſent you an Exorciſt, armed by the Church at all poynts, to encounter hell, and the deuil, you wil laugh the Eumenides from of the ſtage. Firſt I muſt ſet him before your view (as hee is in ſhew) a thumbe-annointed prieſt, accompliſhed in his holy geare, in his albe, his amice, his maniple, and his ſtole: now imagine him as he is indeed, and as you haue heard

of him for hel: his body a piller of burning braſſe, his hands flames of fire, his gloues, his girdle, his hoſe, his ſhirt, lumps of ſea-coales of hell: his amice, his maniple, and his ſtole, ſtreamers of ſcorching ſmoke, the ſacrament of gore-blood in one hand, the croſſe of tormenting coales in the other: ſprouting out holy-water with his mouth, breathing out fire, and brimſtone at his noſtrils, euaporating frankinſence at his eyes, the picture of an aſſe burning brimly at his eares, his head crawling with dead-mens bones: the picture of our Lady flaſhing at his breaſt: nicknames of fire, and blood running vpon his backe, aue-maries, and ſalue Reginaes ſparkling downe to his heeles: what a little hel doe you imagine walking vppon the earth? And ere you ſtirre your imagination, doe but imagine him a little further, walking in our London ſtreets a little before day light, what time the Chimny-ſweepers vſe to make theyr walke, and crying in his helliſh hollow voyce, hay ye ere a deuil to driue? hay yee ere a wench to fire? hay yee ere a boy to diſpoſſeſſe? What a feare trow yee would the ſpirit be in to heare young hell thus roare, and how would he labour to get out at the parties breech, a Hiaclito did at Trayfords, before hee would dare to looke this hell-mouth on the face?
                     Heere now comes in a bundle of Quaeres, that ſteppe ouer our way, and will needes haue parlie with vs ere we go any further: firſt, whence deriue theſe fierie weapons theyr vigor, and ſtrength of goring the deuil; which you call the publique armes, and enſignes of the Church? To this I aunſwer, that theſe publique weapons of holy Church, that you haue heard, ſome haue their ſtrength, and power of themſelues, as the ſacrament, and the Croſſe: ſome of the inſtitution of holy Church, as exorciſmes, aue-maries, ſalue Reginaes, & caet. ſome from the conſeruation, and halowing of the Church to theſe potent ends, and effects: as holy water, holy candle, holy

brimſtone, holy Frankenſence, and the holy potion, nick-names, and the Aſſes eares.
                     And if heereuppon a Quaeriſt wil demaund, ad quid perditio haec? vvhat needes the holy Church to open her Armorie for hel, and muſter out her fiery weapons in ſuch troupes, and throngs, conſidering, that euery one of theyr thumb-annointed prieſts (as yee haue heard) doth at his holy vnction, receiue this heate, and fire into his hand and his body, by the oyle of his thumbe, wherby he is able with all his holy implements, that hang vppon his backe, to fire out the ſtrongeſt deuil in hel, with his owne proper hands, & his hote holy geare: as Edmunds did Marwoods deuil, and Dibdale did fire Maho out of Sara with his fiery engines: this Quaeriſt I ſee doth not wel obſerue.
                     I haue touched before, that though euery prieſt be indeed annoynted with holy oyle on his thumbe, and by that oyle doth receiue in that deuil-burning heate, that doth dilate it ſelfe through his body, garments, and all: yet becauſe euery prieſt doth not bring his thumb prepared, and qualfied alike, but ſome haue a Millers, ſome a ſouters, ſome a Coliers thumb, that wil not take in oyle wel, and then ſome ſtand remote, and a ſquint, from the ſunne of light, and miraculous heate of Fa: Ignatius, the Miracle-maiſter; it falls out, that theyr burning glaſſes doe not ſo readilie take fire, and their deuil-worke by their holy hands, & holy geare, doth not alwaies fortunatly ſucceed. Yea, it falls out many times by your leaue, that the ſubiect where-vppon they ſhould worke being indiſpoſed, as not well managed, and prepared by the prieſt (as what fire can burne where the matter is not combuſtible, and of touch) the prieſts fire is ſtriken, & no great combuſtion dooth enſue: and this ſeemes the cauſe there was ſo little fire-worke between Anne Smith, and them: and ſometime the prieſts powder it ſelfe, for want of good looking to, is danke, and then though the

ſtroke be good, no great ſparkles doe ariſe.
                     It was therefore wiſely foreſeene by the prouidence, and deepe inſight of theyr kinde Mother theyr holy Church, to prouide them copias ſuccedaneas, ſeconding and freſh ſupplies of fire-workes; that if their owne fire doe faile, they may light, and fire it againe at the Churches holy candle. Yea ſometimes they light vppon ſuch a laxe, watry, and reumaticke deuil, that hee ſquirts out the prieſts fire, the holy brimſtone, holy candle, and all: and goes laughing away. This is when they are too buſie, and imprudently apply theyr fire-worke to oppoſitely, and directly againſt the deuils ſpouting place: & then there is no way but to winde vp all their holy trinkets in a capcaſe, and to ayre them handſomly againe at the next pitch for a deuil.
                     If the Sceptick wil pry higher, & demaund, whence the Pope, & his conſiſtory doe borrow that diuine power, to conſecrate water, candle, brimſtone, Frankincenſe, potions, Exorciſmes, nick-names, and aſſes eares, and to ſublimate theyr nature, & put into them ſuch a fiery ſcorching flame, as ſhal turne thē into ſerpents, and ſcorpions, to bite and ſting the deuil, and to fire him out of his hold, as men ſmoke out a Foxe out of his burrow: theſe beeing of theyr owne nature, and in ſhew, ſilly poore ſtuffe to hold ſuch diuine facultie in them? This is a ſaucie queſtion, and deſerues to be aunſwered with ſcorne. But becauſe wee wil giue reaſon of all that proceeds from that ſacred head; wel may his holines, and his Chapter, doe as much as S. Peter did: for as for our Sauiour, and his holy Apoſtles, wee neuer read that they halowed candle, nor dealt with nick-names, and Aſſes eares, in caſting out deuils, but of Peter, by your leaue, there lies a tale, and that is this, as Thyraeus doth tel it out of one Martinus a Saint.
                     
                        Simon Magus the Sorcerer, ſent vnto Peter the Apoſtle certaine deuils in the likenes of dogges, to deuoure

the bleſſed Apoſtle S. Peter being taken on a ſuddaine, not looking for ſuch curriſh gueſts, (as beeing belike at dinner) conſecrates on a ſuddaine certaine morſels of bread, and throwes them to the dogge-deuils, and by the power of that bread, they were all put to flight. And is not this a faire tale of Simon and his hel-dogges, that would haue ſnapt vp S. Peter, but onely for a ſoppe of bread? and is it not a faire ſtrong thred to hang a whole caſtle of fire-works vpon? Martin hath a black braine, conceiting bul-beares, and black band-dogges of Saint Peter, Ergo the Pope, and his Church haue authority, and power, to conſecrate and hallow water, oyle, ſalt, wax, brimſtone, frankenſence, potions, Exorciſmes, nicknames, and aſſes eares, and to put in them a ſcorching fire to ſindge the deuils beard. Becauſe the conſequence is ſo validous, we wil looke a little into theſe holy fire-works, but very ſparingly, and curſorily, for holding you too long, in theſe vnſauory perfumes.
                  
                  
                     
                        CHAP. 18. ¶ Of the dreadfull power of holy water, halowed candell, Frankincenſe, Brimstone, the booke of Exorciſmes, and the holy potion, to ſcald, broyle, and to ſizle the deuill.
                     IF you look vpon the bare face of theſe holy Engines, you wil take them for very trifles, and toyes: but I muſt ſay vnto you in good ſadnes, as the wiſe Orator of Rome ſaid of omiſſion of like trifles in another ſence; Istis minutijs concidit reſp: Romana: the common-weale of Rome fell by omitting, and neglecting thoſe pettie thinges: ſo istis minutijs constitit Eccleſ: Romana: the Church of Rome hath beene founded, pillard, & propped vp, onely by theſe gawdes, trifles, and toyes: ſo as Anthony told Craſſus, when hee had caried a cauſe by affecting the people with his geſture, and teares, niſi pueris,

et lachrymis vſus eſſet, paenas dediſſet. But for little boyes, and he Orators fained teares, his Client had loſt the day: wee may truly, and plainly tell the Church of Rome, niſi naenijs, tricis, & puppis vſa eſſet, paenas iam diu dediſſet: If it were not for puppets, apes-faces, & gaudes, with which ſhe allures, maskes, and diſguiſes the poore ſeely people, ſhe had long ſince ſung the doleful ſong, mentioned in holy writ: Deſolatione magna deſolata est, & turpitudo eius gentibus reuelata: That is ſhe had lien cleane deſolate, & her turpitude had beene opened, to the eyes of all the world.
                     
                     It is a point of high ſapience in the Church of Rome, to chooſe, and ſelect out theſe poore baſe, and impotent Elements, as water, oyle, candel, and the reſt; for her champions, tormenters, and monſter-beaters of deuils. Firſt, for that theſe elements be obuious, eaſie, and common, ſo as deuil-Comaedy may be plaid in a chimnies end, with an halfe peny worth of coſt. Next, for that euery kitchin-maide, Hob, and Iohn, doth wel ſee, and know, that a ſpoonful of water, a curſie of oyle, and a candels end can haue of themſelues no power, and ſtrength; to ſcald, broyle, or torture a deuil: now when this good Hob, Iohn, or Siſſe ſhal bring a ſpoonful of water, a curſie of oyle, or a candels end to the prieſt, and he ſhal croſſe, bleſſe, and chaunt ouer it a few broken words: and then preſently after, Hob, Iohn, and Siſſe ſhal ſee the very ſame water, and candels end applied towards the noſe of a ſuppoſed Daemoniack wench, and then ſhal thinke, they heare the deuil to roare, fume, & tremble, is it any meruaile that the poore Conies doe wonder, and crie out. O Catholicam fidem! O fidem Catholicam! O the Catholique faith! O the power of the faith Catholique! Many deuiſes they haue to grace theſe puppets, and toyes, for the gayning, and winning this applauſe, and acclamation of the people, which is one of the chiefe ends, where-vnto the actors, and Comaedians

ayme. Firſt, it muſt be ſo acted, and handſomly conueyed, that it may ſeeme, and appeare, that as the deuil cannot abide the name, the approach, the ſight, the ſmel, the breath, the touch, the apparel, or the ornament of a Catholique prieſt (which is one of the demonſtratiue ſignes of a deuil in the party:) no more muſt the deuill abide the ſprinkling of holy water, nor the approch of an halowed candle.Booke of miracles, page. 24. This, Saras ſhe-deuil acted wel in the beginning of her part, crying. Away with holy water, holy candle, and the Croſſe, they make mine eyes ſore.
                     
                     The next grace we find of this holy element, is to allay, and mitigate the force of the deuil, and to bring the partie out of an extaſie to her ſelfe. This Sara performed very laudably to, being in a very ſtrange fit, paſt hearing, ſeeing, ſmelling, and all, after three draughts of holy-water,Page. 23. ſhe came vnto her ſelfe: and therefore the Author tels vs, that the ordinary remedies to be applied in a fit, were holy water, reliques, and the Croſſe.
                     And ſee the wonderous Antipathie betweene this ſacred element, and the deuil, if it come neere the deuils noſe, he findeth it ſtraight, firſt by the ſmel: for you muſt remember, that all this conſecrate holy geare haue one, and the ſelfe ſame ſmel; as the church, the prieſts body, his neather-ſtocks, and all: that is, ſuch a ranke ſenting ſauour,Page. 5. that as ſoone as they come neere, the deuil ſents them ſtraight, and cries out oh. So ſaith the miracle-blazer that there being ſo ſmal a drop of holy water put into Saras drinke, as no mortal man could diſcerne the taſt; as ſoone as it came neere Sara, ſhe writhed her face, and bad, Haue it away. And two glaſſes being brought her, one of conſecrate, the other common water, this ranke ſauour was ſo validous, and ſtrong, that it ſented through the glaſſe, and ſtroke her on the noſe, ſo as ſhe pointed directly to the halowed glaſſe. 2, Whereas water of it owne nature is refreſhing, and comfortable

to the eyes: your holy water, hath a piercing pernicious quality, ſo as the deuil complaines at firſt ſight, as you heare, that it makes his eyes ſore: and indeede you watered him ſo much, that you made him ſtarke blind, ſo as hee could not finde the way out of Sara, but foyled himſelfe like a beetle, where he ſhould not haue come. And the noter of theſe gay miracles ſaith, that Sara, or her deuil, became a ſprinkler too, (ſhe had been ſo long amongſt prieſts, as ſhe was entered into their holy orders) and that ſhe, or her deuil, by the pure vertue of holy water, made a deuil let goe his hold vpon Trayfords lege, where he was faſt ſeaſed,Page. 27. in the likenes of a Toade and that ſhee, or her deuil likewiſe, with a few ſprinckles of the ſame, made the deuil that came to Trayford into his chamber, in the likenes of an Ehgliſh Miniſter, and was diſſwading him from the Catholique Romiſh church, to betake him to his heeles, and for haſt to leap out at the window, without taking his leaue. I ſee your church wil entertaine he-Exorciſts, and ſhe-Exorciſts both, & Saras deuil for a neede, for an exorciſt too: and yet the poore wench, or the deuil, that by the vertue of holy water, could ſcare away two deuils from Trayford, (one in the likenes of a Miniſter, the other of a Toad:) had not the grace to beſprinckle herſelfe, but kept her deuils ſtil. Marie this was of no ill meaning, be ſure, they were reſerued for your owne fingring, kinde indigiting holy prieſts.
                     And is it not great pitty, that all this faire water ſhould be ſpoild, & tainted, with one crap of a word, dropt out Sara ſince: that all this holy water grace, was (as all the reſt) bare coggery, & deuiſed ad ornandam ſcenam, to furniſh out the play, and to bring into requeſt againe theſe old water glaſſes of the church, that for want of ſale, had ſtoode ſo long on their ſhelues, as they grew fuſty, and naught.
                     Let not good father Edmunds be diſcouraged for all

this, for he ſhal be beleeued neuer the worſe; who in his learned treatiſe, prefixed to this Diarie of miracles (touching the power, and cuſtome of the Romiſh Church, for diſpoſſeſing of deuils,) in enucleating the diuine vertues, powers, and dignities of things, conſecrated by holy Church, for commaund ouer deuils, ſets out holy water for his graund champion, to encounter all commers: telling vs that worthy memorable ſtory of Saint Macarius, for demonſtration of all: who by the onely ſprinckling of holy water did remorphize an olde woman, that had been turned into a Mare. The miracle had beene ſtronger, if ſhe had been turned into a horſe.
                     And yet I truſt you wil not ſay, but that this holy water was ſtrong enough thus: for Circes drench could doe little more, that turned 
                           Ʋlyſſes men into Swine: and yet that was faine to be taken downe, ere it could doe the feate; this onely beſprincked, did turne a Mare into a woman againe.
                     
                        Lucians oyntment I confeſſe (that he got a little of by peeping in at a creuiſe, and ſpying the Witch annoynt her body withall,) came neere the force of this forcible water of Rome. For Lucian tels vs himſelfe, that by that time hee had annointed himſelfe all ouer with that enchaunted oyle, he was turned into an Aſſe, and that hee ſo liued by the ſpace of ſix, or ſeauen yeeres in the ſhape of an Aſſe, vnder very cruell maiſters that whipped him ſore, as vnder a Gardiner, a tyle man, a Corier, and ſuch like: and that at laſt hee was metamorphoſed into the ſhape of a man by eating of Roſes. What would a little of that Aſſe-making oyle doe, if it had the good hap to be bleſſed, and ſuper-charmed by his Bleſſedneſſe at Rome?
                     Well, this holy water of Rome had as fayre a diſcent, as that Lucian oyle, for that did come from a Witch of Theſſalia, and this holy water doth come from the witch of Delphos, of whom the Roman Poet ſaith thus, Spargit

aqua captos lustrali Graia ſacerdos: whence Numa Pompilius the grand ſorcerer, & the Popes grand founder of holy trinckets tooke it: and of him the Romane Wiſard Pope Sixtus, or Pope Alexander begged it, & hath left it for an holy deuil-whippe to his deere mother Church.
                     And heere I muſt needes confeſſe a ſlippe of my memory, (as who can beare all this dreadful hel-geare in his head without a ſurcharge) that before I had recounted you the wonderful powers of this Aqua fortis to ſcald out a deuil, and make a woman of a mare, I ſhould haue acquainted you how the Miracle-minter in his miracle booke doth ſolemnly tell vs, that the deuil himſelfe did ſolemnly proclaime from hel, that there were foure dreadful deuil-ſcourges in the prieſts holy budget: holy water, halowed candle, frankenſence, and the booke of Exorciſmes: whereby you may plainly ſee, that vvith theyr intoxicating potions, they had confounded the deuils wits, and made him as wiſe as goodman Buttons boy of Waltham, who hauing beene vſed to be beaten, ſometime with birch, ſometime with apple-tree twiggs, ſometime with Willow, tells his Maiſter wiſely, that of all three apple-tree was the worſt, whereby his Maiſter knew how to ſting him the more ſoundly. And vvhat needs now any more wier-drawing, and prophaning of holy ſcripture, for the founding, & crediting of your enchaunted water? it hath the ſame warrant of his ſoueraigntie, as Campian had of his martyrdome, hel, & the deuil, ipſe dixit, who you know doth not vſe to faile.
                     But Sara Williams tels vs, that ſhe ſaid no ſuch thing, and that the prieſts themſelues, for the better gracing of thoſe foure holy ſcourges, were the deuils Heralds, and did proclaime them in her name, or the name of the deuil, and ſo put it downe in theyr Miracle-booke as the deuils owne words. As they were faine at euery turne, in her fits, pageants, and traunces, to help out the deuil

in her part beeing oft non plus, and many things falling in better extempore, to grace the play withall, then that which was meditated and ſet downe in her part. And therefore they would often ſay, and write downe, that Saras deuil ſaid thus, and ſo, where none but the prieſt-deuil himſelfe, who played three parts in one, ſomtime the prieſt, ſometimes the deuil, ſometimes the deuils prompter, or Interpeter (as the puppets haue alwaies a mimicall prolocutor to tel what they meane) ſaid one word.
                     And why might not they to keepe the ſtage ful, cog in a deuil when they liſted, as gameſters cogge in a Die: vvhen Agazarius the Ieſuit tels vs, that hee hauing brought from Rome certaine halowed, holy graines, & hauing giuen them to his holy children for their ſeuerall neceſſities and wants, they by misfortune loſt the ſaid graines, and he comforts his holy ſhriuelings, his ghoſtly good children, telling them in honeſt termes, that a little prety peble ſtone taken vp out of a gutter, would ſerue the turne euen as well, ſo it were receiued & kept, with humility, and deuotion. But our holy tragaedians were, as ſeemes, afraid, that theſe old brayed geare (holy water, halowed candle, and frankenſence) would not hold out, and play their parts wel, and therefore they thought good to cry them out of hand, as they vſe to cry Mackerels, when they are afraide of ſmelling. This feare was very needleſſe, for as you ſee holy water in this deuil-pageant hath acquit it ſelfe wel, eſpecially in the miracle of the Mare: ſo you ſhal ſee holy candle, frankincenſe, and the reſt, play theyr parts no worſe: for they were all deuil-whippes of the maker, of a ſtaight ſtocke, cleane corde, & ſure twiſt, as true and wel-knotted ſtuffe, as euer Wades myll did afford.
                     You ſhal haue holy candle play his part, in the Authour his owne phraſe and penning, for his better grace. The whole houſe at Denham, ſaith the Miracle-maker,

was ſo haunted with ſpirits, that a mayde could not carie a candle lighted in her hand, except it were halowed. No meruaile though the candles went out ſo thicke at Denham: for there the deuils kept theyr acts in tenebris ſo thicke with the poore maids, as Sara confeſſeth ſhe durſt not goe to Dibdales chamber alone, for feare of deuil-puffing, as little geſſing by his vnholy handling, he had beene an holy prieſt. Yet the baudy Poet tells them, that ſomtime a little candle-light doth not amiſſe at that deuil-worke, and therfore not amiſſe inſerted by the Author, that an halowed candel ſhould ſometime burne before the deuil.
                     But in an other paſſage, the miracle-noter tels vs, that the deuil puffed at the holy candel, as hard as he could, and could not get it out: this Sara ſaith, was puffed in by the penner, to puffe vp a part for the holy candel to play: But I am verily of opinion, that the deuil puffed indeede, and that the prieſts had a iuſt ſcantling, & ſize of the deuils breath, to know how ſtrong, and deepe the deuil was able to puffe, and when hee puffed his beſt: themſelues hauing often out-breathed, and out-puffed him, as you haue formerly heard: and therefore they knew, how to hallow a candle ſo high, and to ſuch a pitch, as the deuil with all the breath in his belly, ſhould not be able to puffe it out. And why not as eaſily, and with as good a grace, as to hallow a candel, to ſuch a ſublimitie, abſtract, & quinteſſential nature, as doth this day burne before the bleſſed ſhrine of our Lady at Arras, without waſting or diminution, without receauing any adition of matter, to feede, and preſerue the light, except nutriment onely. It was no great diſgrace to the deuils puffe, that could not blow out the holy candel, being happily ſupported, by the holy candleſtick of the prieſt.
                     But you muſt be enformed, of a farre greater foyle, ſuſtained by the deuil, at the hands of a young child, by

the vertue of this holy candel, holden in his hand. Heare the Miracliſt report it, in his owne gracious Idiome. Sara being ſet in a chaire, ſhee raged more then ere ſhee did before, especially at the preſence of an infant, holding a holy candell, crying oft with terrible voyce, and countenance, I will eate thee, but the child nothing abaſhed thereat, was brought to hold the candell to her noſe, and to put him to ſilence. O Catholicam fidem! O fidem Cathoticam! that haſt ſuch a check, and ſoueraignty ouer all the power of hell, as that thy prieſts leade about deuils after them, as men leade Beares by the noſe, or Iack an Apes in a ſtring, and endueſt thy young Infants, with ſuch heroical magnanimitie, as they dare play with the deuils noſe, and crie Iack deuill, ho deuill, blow out the candell deuill: and the poore deuil ſtands like a mute in a blacke ſanctus, with a bone in his mouth, and dares not ſpeake one word.
                     The two next deuil-ſcourges proclaimed from hel, were Frankincenſe, and the booke of Exorciſmes: the former whereof though it pleaſed you not to grace with any ſpecial miracle accompliſhed alone, hauing many new initiats to aduaunce, that ſtood you in more ſtead: yet to ſhew that your deere Mother-church did not beſtow her bleſſing vppon ſuch a iewel for naught, you gaue him his due time, order, and place, and marſhalled him very honourably according to his diſcent, ſomtime with the powerful potion, ſometime with brimſtone, ſometime wirh holy water, ſometime with holy candle, ſhewing vs by the worthines of his companion, that hee was none of the raſcal crue.
                     Indeede you needed be the leſſe careful for this, by reaſon it is alwaies of worth very ſufficient to grace, and aduaunce it ſelfe, both in regard of the antiquity, as alſo of the honourable diſcent thereof, as ſpringing from no meaner ſtemme then the three Kings of Cullen, that brought it with gold, and Mirrhe, for a preſent vnto our Sauiour Chriſt. And therefore it hath beene worth the

keeping, & eſteeme in your Mother-church euer ſince, and hath receiued her deere motherly bleſſing, by conſecration, and benediction.
                     And ſo wee find that your holy Mother hath layd her holy hands vppon gold likewiſe, and conſecrated, and bleſſed that amiable mettall to, whereby it hath had, and ſhewed as much power, ouer deuils haunting houſes, walking in Churchyeards, and ſpeaking out of images, as Frankincenſe, holy candle, and holy water haue. But little did thoſe three good Kings of Cullen know, what a powerful rich preſent they had brought vnto our Sauiour, whē they preſented him with Frankincenſe, as little deeming of fuming any deuil in theyr way, or profugating a deuil from the body of our bleſſed Sauiour. But your eyes pierced farther thē theſe 3. Kings could, (notwithſtanding it is generally accoūted they had eye-ſight enough, as comming from the head, and fountaine, of wiſedome, vnderſtanding, and wit,) and you cleerely ſaw, that the Egyptian prieſts, perfuming theyr two grand Idols, Iſis, and Oſiris, with this holy ſmoake, and hearing Tully proclaime of theyr Images at Rome, in omnibus vicis ſtatuae factae, ad eas thus & cerei, that they halowed them, and theyr Altars with frankinſence, and candle: you haue very wiſely, deuoutly, and heatheniſhly, ſmoaked your Altars, your images, your Churches, your veſtments, your reliques, your beades, your bookes, your breeches with this perfume, for feare of deuil-blaſting; and therefore you needed not vppon our deuil Theater to grace it with any new wonder.
                     The fourth feareful whip halowed out of hel, was the booke of Exorciſmes: which though Stemp the prieſt ſhewed Sara a little corner of out of his pocket, when he was new come from London to Denham, telling her he had brought her Maiſter a whip, and that Sara knew it as wel by the croſſes, & figures, as a begger knew his diſh, or an old curre a kitchin whippe by a corner of the

ſteale, it had beene ſo often thundred vpon: yet we find in our tragaedie, that this plaid not the moſt tragicall monſter-part, nor did not the greateſt wonders, and that vppon very wiſe, and important conſiderations. Firſt this booke was ſicut fortis equus, ſpatio qui ſaepe ſupremo vecit Olympia. It had playd ſo many worthy parts, and caried away the garland ſo oft, in all the Liſts, Turnaments, and Iuſts, with the deuil, that it needed no new Io paean, to be honoured with-all.
                     Secondly, it hath hanging on it all the ſeales, and ſtamps of holy popes, for many hundred yeeres, with all their potent benedictions: and it hath had the deere, and louing mothers bleſſing, with priuiledge of birthright, and priority of honour beſides, and therefore it might wel ſtand, and breath a while without any new addition, or title of aduauncement. Thirdly, it ſerued wonderous aptly, ad terrorem, et ſtuporem incutiendum populo: in ſteede of thunder, and lightning to bring Iupiter vpon the ſtage, by theſe dreadful frightful Exorciſmes, thundring, clapping, and flaſhing out the aſtoniſhing of Gods names, Iehouah, Tetragrammaton, Adonai, and the reſt: to amaze, and terrifie the poore people, and to poſſeſſe them with an expectation of ſome huge monſter-deuil to appeare. Who ſtanding at gaze, with trembling, and feare: hearing the huge thunder cracke of adiuration flie abroad, and no deuils to roare; and then ſeeing the Exorciſt, in a rage to throw away his thunder booke behind him, and hunt the deuil with his owne holy hands, and inſtantly hearing the deuil rouze out of his cabin, as a Lyon out of his denn; & bellow out with his roaring voyce, Oh, oh, oh, I burne, I burne, I ſcald, I broyle, I am tormented: This muſt needes make the poore Madge Owlets cry out, in admiration of the power of the potent prieſthood. O Catholicam fidem! O fidem Catholicam. O the Catholique faith! O the power of the faith Catholique.
                     
                     
                        Brimſtone, and the holy potion, needed no Herrauld from hell, to proclaime their potency, and might: for where ſo euer they went, they caried hel before them, both for vgly blacknes, ſmoake, ſcorching, broyling, and heate: As you may ſee in the poore ſhe-deuil Sara, that bore in her face the very Idaea of hell imprinted, & branded in her, by theſe dreadful fumigations. For the force, vſe, and application of this Engine, I referre you to the tenth chapter: not that you muſt think, that the loathſome helliſh potion of Sacke, Sallet-oyle, and Rue maſhed together, and by force poured downe into her ſtomacke a full pint at a time; did of their owne natural qualities, fume vp, and intoxicate her braine, as Tobacco, Giniper, and Henbane mingled together would doe: or that the owne vnkind fulſomnes of Sack, Oyle, and Rue, did diſtemper her ſtomacke, and enforced her to ſtraine, vomite, and crie: or the peſtilent, choaking, ſtuffing, pernicious fume of Brimſtone, filling her eyes, mouth, noſe, and ſcorching her with the coales, & fire, til ſhe looked as blacke as hel mouth; did of their owne proper force, cauſe her to crie, ſcritch, and howle: for what helliſh Butchers would euer put a poore wench to ſuch paine: but you are to imagine, that theſe loathing, intoxicating, piercing, broyling, choaking, qualities were ſuſpended in their proper ſubiects, by the ſoueraigne conſecrating power of the kinde mother church of Rome, that theſe conſecrate Engines made the poore deuil in Sara, to tremble, fume, vomit, ſtraine, ſcritch, and roare, by the pure vertue of the kind churches ſweet benediction. And hoping you wil be thus kindly affected for their ſakes, who wiſh you as wel, as they did Sara, and would vſe you as kindly, if they had you in their fingrings, as being perſwaded, that you are all, & euery each one poſſeſſed with deuils: I wil ſpend no time to entreate you, but proceede to my farther taske.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        CHAP. 19. ¶ Of the aſtoniſhable power of Nicknames, Reliques, and Aſſes eares, in afflicting, and tormenting the deuill.
                     WHen a Lyon, a Fox, and an Aſſe were met together in pilgrimage, it was much wondered at by the common-wealth of beaſts, what that conſociation meant, conſidering the diſſimilitude and diſparitie of the beaſts. So when a man ſhal meete with theſe three in a ranke, Reliques, Nicknames, and Aſſes eares, hee may perhaps muſe at this vnequall combination, but when hee ſhall vnderſtand quò iter vna capiunt, whether they bend theyr courſe ſo louingly together, and ſhal be aduertiſed, that they march hand in hand in an aequipage to ſet vpon a deuil, to afflict, torment, and caſt him out of his hold, he wil muſe much more. This gentle muſer muſt be put out of his dumpes, by taking out his firſt primer leſſon, Ignorantia cauſarum genuit admirationem; It is nothing but ignorance of cauſes, that is the mother of admiration; and therefore when we haue inſtructed this admirator in the ſecret cauſes, and principles of this vnſeemely connexion, we ſhal eaſe him of his labour, & cauſe his wonderment to ceaſe.
                     The maine ground pillar, and principle of all, is the bottomleſſe deitie of the holy Church of Rome, who as ſhe is able to make Gods of bread, Saints of deuils, and to place them in heauen, ſo is ſhe as able to change flies into Serpents, fleas into Scorpions, Nicknames into whips, Aſſes eares into ſcourges, to chaſtiſe, and chaſe away all the deuils in hel. So as that theſe two Nicknames, and Aſſes eares, are indeede but two cryſtal looking glaſſes, wherein you may behold liuely repreſented vnto you, the authority, and diuine prudence of the holy Romiſh Church: Authority in chooſing out ſuch

ſhadowes, and 
                           〈…〉
                        hilëities, to controll the principalities, and powers 
                           〈…〉
                        nes; prudence in ſelecting the baſe, and ridiculou
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                        gs of the world, to confound all the wiſedome, and policy of the deuil.
                     I am therefore in gentle, and kind wiſe, to aduiſe, and entreate you, that you vſe theſe looking glaſſes carefullie, and aright, thorough-out the whole courſe of this our admirable blacke Arte, and that you meaſure not our proceedings heerein, by the ſcale of ſence, vnderſtanding, or wit, iudging of things according to their owne nature, qualities, and formes, for ſo wee may be thought to haue dealt, not onely childiſhly, and ridiculouſly, but many times impiouſly, and blaſphemouſly to; but to eſteeme of things vſed, and imployed in this admirable ſcience, according as they are improued, ſublimate, and aduaunced by the authority of holy church of Rome, and according to the ſecrets, and myſteries of the Arte.
                     As for example, what man iudging according to wit, vnderſtanding, or ſence, can imagine that a Witch can transforme her ſelfe into the likenes of a Cat, a Mouſe, or an Hare: and that ſhee being hunted with Hounds, in the forme of an Hare, and pinched by the breech, or whipped with ſcourges, in the ſimilitude of a Cat, the ſame pinch or marke, ſhal be found in the breech of the Witch, that was before made by the Hounds in the breech of an Hare, and yet ſhal you ſee this ſenceleſſe, witleſſe, and brainleſſe conceite, verified, & made ſooth in the practiſe of our holy coniuring crue, the thing being really acted, and performed indeed.
                     Looke in Fid Williams Depoſition, and there you ſhal finde, that the whole Quier of our twelue holy prieſts, had a ſolemne aſſembly at the whipping of a Cat, and did whip the Cat ſo long in a Parlor at Denham, til ſhee vaniſhed out of their ſight; and ſending next day to Buſhie, to ſee in what caſe the Witch was, whoſe ſpirit

they had Cat-hunted ouer night, the Witch was found in child-bed, and her childe newly dead. Whereby it plainly appeares, that the whipping of the Cat, ſo it be done by Catholique prieſts, is no ieſt, nor the hunting of the Witch heere, no fabulous apprehenſion; but a good Catholique ſooth, agreeable to the maieſtie, grauitie, and wiſedome of that venerable holy Church.
                     And ſo wil you iudge likewiſe, of nicknames, & Aſſes eares, by that time I haue ſhewed how grauely, and reuerendly, the holy Church hath ſet them vpon the deuils head: and how by her ſoueraigne authority, and commaund, ſhe hath made him to weare, & beare them in ſpite of his fuming noſe. Firſt, you ſhal haue the Canon, and conſtitution, as I finde it ſet out in Mengus, the Licentiate, & authorized Maiſter for Hel; and next the practiſe of the Canon, by our 12. holy legates, according to the conſtitution of their deere mother Church.
                     The Canon for nick-naming, and rayling on the deuil,Mēgus fuſt: daemon: exorciſ: runnes thus in Mengus his fourth Exorciſme, of his dreadful deuil club. If after the Maſſe celebrated of the holy Ghost, ſigning the poſſeſſed with fiue ſignes of the Croſſe, ſprinkling him with holy water, inuocating ouer him the name of the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost, which Aue maria, and thundering out the potent Exorciſme, armed with all the dreadfull, and astoniſhable tytles of God; the deuill ſhew him ſelfe refractarie, and will not depart, nor expreſſe his name, tum ſunt in eum dicenda improperia: then you must come vpon him with as many nick-names, as you can poſſiblie deuiſe. Now if you wil learne to nick-name the deuil in print, and cum priuilegio, vnder the ſignet, and ſeale of the holy Church at Rome: take heere a meſſe of nicknames, as they are dreſſed, and ſerued in from the Popes Maiſter-Cooke, and ſcalder for hel: and let hel it ſelfe be raked, you ſhal neuer finde the like: Audi igitur inſenſate, falſe, reprobe: daemonum magister, miſerrima creatura, tentator hominum, deceptor malorum angelorum, fallax

animarū, dux haereticorū, pater mendacij, fatue, bestialis, inſipiens, ebrioſe, praedo infernalis, ſerpens iniquiſſime, lupe rapaciſſime, ſus macra, famelica, immundiſſima, bestia Scabioſa, beſtia truculentiſſima, bestia crudelis, bestia cruenta, bestia omniū beſtiarū beſtialiſſima, ſpiritus Acherontine, ſpiritus fuliginoſe, ſpiritus Tartaree: That is, Heare therfore thou ſenceleſſe falſe lewd ſpirit, maister of deuils, miſerable creature, tempter of men, deceauer of bad Angels, defrauder of ſoules, Captaine of Heretiques, father of lyes, fatuous, bestial, Ninnie, drunkard, infernall theefe, wicked ſerpent, rauening Wolfe, leane hunger-bitten impure Sow, ſeely beast, truculent beast, cruell beast, bloody beast, beast of all beasts, the most bestiall, Acherontall ſpirit, ſmoakie ſpirit, Tartareous ſpirit. Is not this pretily wel rayled of an olde Mother Church, that hath nere a tooth for age in her head; but hath liued theſe ſeauen hundred yeeres, and more, of pure milke of our Lady? Clap on heere the Canon, for the long Aſſes eares, and ſeare them to the deuils head, with a little holie fire, and brimſtone, and let vs ſee how the ſeely hunger-bitten Sowe-deuill wil looke. Hic exorcista proijciat imaginem pictam in ignem: Heere take the picture of the deuill, that you haue drawne in paper, and cast it into the fire: and what turmoyle theſe wrought in hel, our holy Exorciſts by their practiſe, are preſt to tel you.
                     Heare the Miracliſt report it, who himſelfe was an Actor. The Priest hauing placed Sara in a chayre: he cō
                           maundeth the deuill to tell his name: the deuill aunſwered Bon-iour and began to make a ſhew of ſpeaking French: the Exorcist then reuiling the deuil, and calling him Aſſe in the French tongue, he ſayd, I am no Aſſe, I will not be mocked. This was a ſober reply to the Aſſe, without much adoe. But when Maho trifled, & mocked the prieſt in Sara, and would by no dint of adiuration, be brought to tel his name, heare the Miracle-teller againe. The Exorcist ſeeing the deuill thus to trifle, and that hee would not tell his name, for abating his pride; cauſed to be drawne vppon a

peece of paper, the picture of a vice in a play, and the ſame to be burned with halowed brimstone, whereat the deuil cryed out as beeing grieuouſly tormented. No meruaile, when hee had a paire of vices eares clapt red hote to his head, with the ſoader of holy brimſtone.
                     Heere haue you both rule and practiſe of this tormenting the deuil with nicknames, and glowing eares: now we muſt a little for our benefit, obſerue the ſweet documents, that doe flow out of this nicknaming vaine. Firſt we ſee by Mengus her proloquutor, that our holy mother church beeing in her laſt breath, hath not loſt her lungs, but hath both breath, and ſtomacke at will, and dares ſpeake more luſtily, and ſwaggering-like to the deuil, then euer Michaell the Archangel durſt. For hee hauing an oppoſition, and contention with the deuil, & the deuil playing (as ſeemes) the part of our ſwaggering old Mother with rayling, and reuiling termes, durſt not reuile againe, but onely prayed GOD to rebuke the foule-mouthed fiend.
                     Secondly wee ſee, that our Catholique prieſts deuils, ſtood in more awe of Nicknames, and the paper-vice then they did of the dreadful names of our bleſſed Sauiour, or the high and aſtoniſhable titles of almightie God: whereby it is apparant, that the old, and auncient way of calling vppon the Name of Ieſus ouer the poſſeſſed, at whoſe bleſſed Name wee read the deuils in the poſſeſſed did tremble and quake, is an obſolete, antiquated way with our holy Mother-church, and not woorth the naming: and that her deuils be new vpſtart ſpirits, of the queynt cut, that ſtand vpon theyr reputation, for feare leaſt theyr fellow deuils in a quarrell ſhould take them by theyr long eares in hel.
                     It was a prety part in the old Church-playes, when the nimble Vice would skip vp nimbly like a Iacke an Apes into the deuils necke, and ride the deuil a courſe, and belabour him with his woodden dagger, til he made

him roare, wherat the people would laugh to ſee the deuil ſo vice-haunted. This action, & paſſiō had ſom ſemblance, by reaſon the deuil looked like a patible old Coridon, with a payre of hornes on his head, & a Cowes tayle at his breech; but for a deuil to be ſo vice-haunted, as that he ſhould roare, at the picture of a vice burnt in a pece of paper, eſpecially beeing without his hornes, & tayle, is a paſſion exceeding al apprehenſiō, but that our old deere mother the Romiſh church doth warrant it by Canon. Her deuils be ſurely ſome of thoſe old vice-haunted caſſiered woodden-beaten deuils, that were wont to frequent the ſtages, and haue had theyr hornes beaten of with Mengus his clubbe, and theyr tayles cut off with a ſmart laſh of his ſtinging whip, who are ſo skared with the Idaea of a vice, & a dagger, as they durſt neuer ſince looke a paper-vice in the face.
                     Or if you wil needes hunt vs into a demonſtration to let you plainly ſee, how a morſel of paper burnt, with a vices long eares, ſhould enforce a deuil to roare: remember I beſeech you Aeſops couragious Lyon, lying in the Hunters-nets, after his freſh wounds, how he roared at the nipping of ſilly ants, biting him on the bare. Was there euer Lion in our deuils caſe, before he comes to be vice-bitten with a peece of burnt paper, ſcalded all ouer with holy water, burnt with the croſſe, ſeared with Aue maries, rent with reliques, torne with the ſtole, battered with the amice, ſtung with the maniple, whipped from top to toe with exorciſmes, and beeing thus excoriated, and all ouer raw, a burning vice, with the leaſt drop of brimſtone falling vpon his bare, would make a ſtout Lionly deuil, I weene, for to roare.
                     For his ill bearing of Nicknames, I muſt needs take the deuils part: for though that I could haue wiſhed, he had borne thoſe contumelies, and indignities with a better aequanimity & grace, for that none but children, and fooles, are diſtempered with nicknames, and taunts: yet

conſidering the deuil looked into Denham houſe, as Preſtons dogge looked into his neighbours doore, of no malicious intent to eate any Christmas-pie, but to ſee how Chriſtmas went: and ſeeing a play towards, & that they wanted a deuil, was content to make one in the play, and to curuet, foame, & tumble with a very good deuils grace. Now when he was ſurbatted, or weary, and could no more woe penny ho, to be come vppon vvith ſuch ſtrange nicknames for his good-wil, as Bedlam could neuer ſpit out worſe, and be called Ninny, drunkard, ſcabby beast, beast of all beaſtes, & hungerbitten ſow, eſpecially the Exoriſts beeing pleaſed for want of better recreation, to play all Christmas games with thoſe ſowes, as laugh, and lye downe, and my ſow hath pigd, and the deuil beeing but a prompter, and candle-holder to that ſport; would haue mooued impatience in a right vvell-ſtayed deuil.
                     And withall to deale plainly with the deuils to, and to tell them of theyr ouer-ſight with their deuilſhips good leaue: it is a folly to be laughed at by ſome, and to be wondered at by many, that any deuils in hel ſhould be ſo ſtarke mad, as to come in the Exorciſts way, to appeare within his circuit, or to croſſe his walke; conſidering that Aeacus, Minos, and Radamanthus, the three Iudges of hel, be nothing ſo inexorable, nor in any part ſo cruell, tyrannicall, and tormenting ouer the deuils, as our Exorciſts are, who carry about vpon theyr backs the whole Panoplie of hel, Styx, Phlegeton, Cocytus; clubs, bats, whips, ſcourges, ſerpents, ſcorpions, brimſtone, coales, flames, beſides the bottomleſſe power, that euery Exorciſt hath, (euery one hauing (as ſeemes) a priuie key to the bottomleſſe burning pit, to let out, & in, according to theyr liking) to multiply the torments of helfire vpon any deuil, vnto immenſity of weight, and infinity in perduration: take but a little ſay of this from the parlie betweene Dibdale and the deuil.
                     
                        The deuil was a little Colli-mollie, & would not come off. Dibdale laies vpon him by his ſoueraigne cōmaund, and his priuie key to hell, 20000. yeeres torment in the deepeſt pit of hel, with fire, and brimſtone on his back, and for the multiplication of his paine, and torment which hee had in hel before, hee tels the deuil it ſhal be fifteene hundred times as much. Now then let vs make vp our audite but at geſſe, & caſt in a groſſe ſum, how many legions of deuils haue been thus ſerued by all the Exorciſts in the Romane Church, ſince theyr firſt creation, and commiſſion for hel, and what an huge heape of millions wil this make, of poore tormented deuils, ſtacked vp top-ful in hel, with twenty thouſand yeeres torment, and that fifteene hundred times doubled vpon them, and all theſe lye yelling, and grinding theyr teeth in hel, vnder this immenſity of weight of torments, and theſe innumerable chaines of darknes, that the Exorciſts haue layd vpon them.
                     And theſe theyr fellow deuils, friends, and companions, our Chriſtmas deuils heere in Sara, Fid, and Anne Smith, muſt needes know, & daily ſee, and behold with theyr eyes, and heare with theyr eares, their moſt lamentable eſtate: and for them for all this, to come out of hel, where they were fifteene hundred, and twentie thouſand times in better caſe, and to ſtand in our Exorciſts walke, and meete them at Fulmer, Hackney, or Denham, are they not iuſtly ſerued, to haue a volley of nicknames diſcharged vppon them, and to be tricked vp in the vices coate with long eares, and ſo to be ſent backe into hel to theyr fellowes, to be tormented equally with thē, and this torment of aduantage aboue all the reſt, to be mocked, flouted, and ieared at by theyr fellowes, and to be taken by the coat, & eares, for not hauing thus much wit, as by other deuils harmes, to learne to beware?
                     I come now to the third champion muſtered in this worthy ranke, with nicknames, and Aſſes eares, & that

is holy reliques, which march laſt of the three, not in regard of theyr vnworthineſſe, but in reſpect of theyr worth. For theſe three woorthies in this blacke field againſt hel, nicknames, &c. are the laſt, and final ranke, of our infernal campe, excepting the two maine Standards for all, the holy Croſſe, and the bleſſed ſacrament, which are yet to diſplay, and then you haue your Army royall for hel. And the order of our infernall battaile, is the old auncient order, obſerued by the Romans, who placed their Triarios laſt, vnto whoſe lot it neuer came to fight, till the day grew dangerous, and the victorie very doubtful. Semblably the worthieſt, and moſt approued ranke of our Triarij againſt hel, are nicknames, aſſes eares, and holy reliques, which are drawne vp into the vant-gard, and front of the battaile, at a dreadfull pinch, when holy water, holy candle, the amice, the maniple, the ſtole, exorciſmes, Auemaries, and all haue retired, and in ſome ſort haue abandoned the field: and the deuil ſtands ſtrong at ſhock, and giues not an inch of ground.
                     Theſe dreadful tormenters for hel, we haue heere in hand, are not the auncient, famous, renowmed, glorious reliques, iewelled vp in the Popes Propitiatorie at Rome (as the ſacred violl of our Ladies milke, a peece of S. Paules breeches, and chaire, the tayle of the Aſſe, whereon our Sauiour rode to Ieruſalem, and the reſt) but our reliques heere vſed for the moſt dreadful, and tyrannical tormenters of the deuil, were natiue homebred reliques, ſprung out of our ſoyle, and ſo moſt likelie to be of greateſt force, and commaund, againſt the deuils of our owne Horizon. Which (as wee finde them recorded, and aduaunced, in the golden legend booke) are the thumbs, bones, and ioynts, of the three worthy Champions ſent from his Hol: and from Hel, for fireworke heere in England, about anno 82, Cottam, Brian, and Campian: who for haynous, and vnnatural treaſons

againſt our Soueraigne, and the ſtate, were executed at Tiburne, canonized at Rome, and Sainted by the deuils owne mouth from Hel: as you haue formerly heard of Campian, and now ſhal heare of Brian in the deuils owne voyce: as the Miracle-father hath recorded it.
                     Exor: I charge thee to tell me whoſe bone this is. Deuil. It is Brians bone: hee is a Saint indeede, hee neuer came in Purgatorie. Loe heere Brian as fully ſainted from hel by the deuil, as S. Campian was: and what timorous, ſcrupulous Catholique can now make any doubt, but theſe be infernal Saints, conſidering Maho, the Prince of hel, hath heere dubbed them with his owne mouth? Now for the grace that the deuil ſhewed vnto theſe new Hel-created Saints, of the deuils owne making, and to their helliſh reliques, you may be ſure it was not meane. Let the Recorder of hel report you, who was both mouth, and Notarie, for the prieſts, & the deuils.
                     
                        By often inuocation of the bleſſed Trinitie, of our Sauiour there preſent in the bleſſed Sacrament: by often calling vpon the bleſſed virgin, with ſalue Regina: and by calling on all holy Martyrs, especially bleſſed Fa: Campian, with the rest of the Martyrs, that had ſuffered at Tiburne, and by applying of their holy reliques, vnto the afflicted body: Frateretto, Fliberdigibet, Hoberdicut, Cocabatto, with fourtie aſſiſtants, were expelled. Heere you ſee our bleſſed Sauiour, and the Trinitie, are winged out afore, in the forelorne Hope, as of little value, and account. And the dreadful kilcowes come behinde, with eſpecially Tiburne, and reliques blaſed in their banner, and theſe doe the dreadful feate vpon the deuils of the round. We neuer read in all the Miracle-booke, that the deuil trembled at the name of our bleſſed Sauiour: but Brians bone being applied (ſaith the Author) and S. Cottam being called vpon: the deuil aunſwered in a trembling quiuering voyce; thou ſhalt not haue thy prayer. And he was ſcarcely to be vnderſtoode, the poore deuil chattered his teeth ſo ſore. What

then ſhould I tel you of Campians thumble, put into Fids mouth; Brians bone pinched hard to Saras bare legge, as hard as a prieſt could hold it, the great old ruſty nayle crammed into Fids mouth, amongſt an handful of other choaking reliques, what wonders they wrought with theſe poore ſhe-deuils: how theſe made them to vomite, ſcritch, and quackle, like Geeſe that had ſwalowed downe a gagge?
                     Heare Fa: Edmunds for all: like Iulius Caeſar, the commenter of his owne worthy exploites, in his monſter-miracle, acted vpon Marwood.
                     
                     
                        Hic patris etiam Camp: corporis quaedam relìquìae mirifice vſſerunt: vt omnia omnium ſenſuum organa diſſolui ſibi, et diſſipari viderentur: modó enim oculos, modó aures, tum linguam ſibi diuelli, & abripi exclamat, inter quos etiam cruciatus inſolito vomitu, ita vt etiam viſcera de ore eijcere putaretur, vexatus est. That is: Heere certaine peeces of father Camp: body, did wonderfully burne the deuill. All the organs of all his ſences, ſeeming to be broken, and rent aſunder, crying out one while his eyes, one while his eares, one while his tongue was rent out, and rent into peeces, and beſides other excruciations, hee was tormented with ſuch a ſtrange vomite, as though he would haue ſpued out his very entralls, and guts.
                     
                     Heere the deuil was on the racke, by the vertue of Camp: relique: now heare his comming downe. Extrema tamen omnium (quae laus deo ſit) omnibus miſerantibus & prae mi ſericordia lachrymatibus, ipſo etiam, Edmunde, Edmunde, clamante, liberatus est. That is: Last of all, (thanks be to God) all of vs pittying, and weeping for remorſe, Marwood crying out, Edmunds, Edmunds, he was quit of the deuill.
                     
                     The ſound had beene harſh, and the period not worth a point; if it had runne thus: O Christe, Christe, O Saluator, Saluator. O Chriſt, ô Sauiour, but ô Edmund, ô Edmund falls with a goodlyer grace. Very wiſely ſure:

As who would ſay, that our Exorciſts euer meant to doe God, our Sauiour Chriſt, or the holy Ghoſt ſo much honour, as to cauſe any one deuil, amongſt all the deuils in hel, that they had in hammering, once to name eyther God, the Father, the Sonne, or the holy Ghoſt. Theſe (I truſt) neede no grace, nor honour from the deuil: but theſe Tiburne ſemideuils, ſainted from hel (Brian, Cottam, and Campian) were the Gods, that ſtood in need of their holy helping hand.
                     And heerein I commend their wiſedome, in choyſe of their reliques very much. Firſt, in that they tooke freſh greene new reliques, that were not antiquated, and out of date. For reliques (for oft wee ſee) worke like an Apothecaries potion, or new Ale: they haue beſt ſtrength, and verd at the firſt; and therefore Campians girdle, now like old Rubarb, begins to allay. Secondly, for that if they had brought of the olde renowmed reliques frō Rome, ſom vnſtayed body would haue made queſtion, whether they had beene Saints bones indeed, or rather the bones of dogges, Cats, or Rats, or elſe of an old Sow: eſpecially now we haue learned Agazarius holeſome rule. Thirdly, our deuils being home-deuils, and our Saints, ſainted heere from hel: it was no reaſon that forraine reliques, ſhould obtrude themſelues into others poſſeſſions, & rob them of the honour, that they worthily deſerued. But the laſt, and beſt point of their wiſedom, is this: that we ſhould haue had ſome ſcruple of the Saintſhip of Brian, Cottam, and Campian, if wee had not heard them thus ſolemnly, lowdly, and ceremoniouſly ſainted from Tiburne, hel, and the deuil.
                     Heere I had concluded this part of the Pageant, but that Sara nips me by the eare, and tells me, that I haue forgotten a ſpecial point of relique-ſeruice, and points me to her depoſition, which when I had turned my booke, and reade ouer, I pointed at her againe, and willed her to pen that point her ſelfe; and therefore thus

ſhe tels her owne tale.
                     
                        See her exam:
                        At one time (ſaith ſhe) when it began to be with me, after the manner of women, the Priests did pretend, that the deuill did rest in the most ſecret part of my body: wherevppon they deuiſed to apply the reliques vnto that place? Good God, what doe we heare? or is it but a dreame? or haue we eares to heare ſuch impious vnnatural villanie?
                     S. Campian, S. Brian, S. deuil, or ſainting deuil helpe out with this, for I am at a ſtand. Reliques to that place? It is able to poſſeſſe a man, with Marwoods fury, to crie out, terra dehiſce, infernum abſorbe. Earth gape, and hell ſwallow ſuch deuil-ſaints, ſuch deuil-reliques, ſuch deuil-prieſts and all. Was it euer heard, that any heathen durſt euer abuſe, the vileſt thing conſecrated to their Idol deuils, in ſuch execrable manner? Holy Saints, holie reliques, holy prieſts, holy deuil that made them, and moued them to this. It was no meruaile they made ſo much haſt with the deuil, to Saint their Champions, Campian, and his crue from hell, and to deifie, or hellifie their reliques; ſince they were to be applied to ſuch a diabolical ſeruice, as the deuil himſelfe without ſuch a relique, could neuer haue accompliſhed: nay, wee neuer reade, that the deuil durſt abuſe any thing conſecrated but in ſhew, to any ſo deſpicable imployment. Tiburne doth bluſh, that bare thē, the deuil doth ſhame, that made ſuch deuil-ſaints, and helliſh reliques; and yet the prieſts, the conſecrators, deuiſers, and appliers, doe ſhew their bare hel-burnt faces, without bluſhing at all. Diris deuoueo, & actores, & ſpectatores. So I proceede.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        CHAP. 20. ¶ Of the dreadfull power of the Croſſe, and Sacrament of the Altar, to torment the deuill, and to make him roare.
                     AS farre as the holy Fathers doe deeme of the Croſſe, ſo farre doe we affectionatly embrace, and eſteeme of the ſame, as an honourable, and reuerend monument in our Chriſtian profeſſion. But the common enemy of mankind, not brooking any moderation, taking aduantage, of the procliuity of our nature vnto ſuperſtition, hath ſo farre bewitched the minds of ſome, as they haue brought into the Chriſtian Church, that which Tertullian dooth ſo much proteſt againſt, in the name of all Chriſtians ſtaurolatrian, a performing of diuine honor before a peece of wood: then which the Heathen neuer did performe more before the ſtatue of Iupiter: and another branch likewiſe ſpringing frō the ſame roote, that is, ſtauropoïſan, a feigning, counterfeiting, & ſtamping of ſignes, miracles, and wonders to be done, not onely by the Croſſe, but by the expreſſion, and ſignification of the ſame: after the very ſame faſhion, that the Heathen did fabulouſly imagine, and deuiſe, ſtrange fountaines of delicacies to flow from the horne of Iupiters Goat.
                     Theſe two ſuperſtitious delirations haue made vs partly odious, partly ridiculous to the prophane Heathen people. Lucian found this doting humor betimes, in ſome Chriſtians of his time, and makes himſelfe, and the world ſport with it, as he did at the fancies, and exorbitancies of all other religions: telling vs a tale of one Eucrates, who had a ring, made of a peece of old Iron, which had ſometime beene a peece of an Iron croſſe, & that ring was an amulet againſt all malignant ſpirits. And blind Thyraeus the Ieſuit, repeats the ſame ruſtie tale of the ring, as if ſcoffing Lucian had meant nothing

but ſooth. But hee may as good cheape affoord vs the tale of Eucrates, as hee dooth the ſtory of S. Margaret: who with the bare ſigne of the Croſſe afrighted a deuil, that was comming vnto her in the forme of a great Dragon. Or that of Martian, and Iulian, who with the ſigne of the Croſſe, went vp and downe killing of ſerpents, as Hercules did Monſters: or that of the old man, who ſpying an Aſpe in the bottom of a fountaine, did front the entrance to the fountaine with ſo many ſignes of the Croſſe, as hee went downe to the bottom, filled his pot with water, and returned from the Aſpe without any harme: or that of Biſhop Sabin, who hauing poyſon mingled in his cup by an Archdeacon, who meant to make him away, ſigned himſelfe with the Croſſe, drunk off the poyſond cup, & felt not the leaſt grudging or diſtemper after the ſame. I doubt the Pope his Maiſter would hardly belieue him in this, who would giue ſome good ſtore of crownes, to be ſecured by croſſes from the danger of poyſon. I doe not ſee poyſoning any where ſo rife as in Italy, and eſpecially at Rome, where Croſſes are not dainty.
                     And what becomes of that goodly auncient Poem made, and ſung in honour of the Croſſe?
                     
                        Ista ſuos fortiores
                        Semper facit, et victores:
                        Morbos ſanat, et languores:
                        Reprimit daemonia.
                     
                     That is,

                           The Croſſe, in battaile is a ſhield,
                           Which who ſo beares, ſtill winnes the field:
                           Against diſeaſes tis a ſpell:
                           A charme against the power of hell.
                        
                     
                     It is very great reaſon they ſhould doe it diuine honour, called Latria, and ſweat, and ſpit, and clamor in theyr Sorbone for the ſame, ſince they giue it the diuine

ſupreame power of our bleſſed Sauiour. For what did our Sauiour heere on earth, or what could he do more, or what did he adorne his owne ſtyle withall to S. Iohn, ſending his diſciples vnto him, to know whether hee were Chriſt: he ſaid no more then this: Goe backe vnto Iohn, and tell him what you haue ſeene, and heard: how that the blind ſee, the lame goe, the deafe heare, and vnto the ſimple is the goſpell preached. And dooth not this bring vs plainly within compaſſe of the heathen challenge, that we be lignei dei cultores, worſhippers, and ſeruaunts to a woodden god?
                     Our deuill-comaedians, whoſe ayme was (as you ſee) by playing ouer all the trinkets, toyes, & pedlars ware of the Popes holy budget, and by gracing them vvith ſome ſeeming quality againſt the deuil, to aduaunce the credit, of the Catholique church, and to bring into admiration theyr owne perſons, and prieſtly power, that ſo they might catch the poore Gudgins, they fiſhed ſo induſtriouſly for; left out no old ceremonie, nor Engine of the Romane Church, that had any name, or reputed faculty that way: and therefore they muſtered the Church ſtandard amongſt theyr fierie troupes, but they did aduaunce, and adorne with moe miracles, their new reliques, and theyr owne proper perſons, theyr hands theyr gloues, theyr ſtockings, theyr prieſtly ornaments, as theyr amice, ſtole, maniple, and albe, then they did the old approoued coate-armour of the Church: and that vpon a right wiſe ground; in regard, that theſe did more properly, neerely, and effectually worke for the magnifying of themſelues, and theyr prieſtly authority.
                     Therefore the holy Croſſe was often preſented on the ſtage, but neuer with that acclamation, and plaudite, that their other forenamed holy implements were. The firſt honour the Miracliſt doth beſtow vppon it, is this: that it ſerued to diſcouer Sara to haue a deuil, in that ſhee could hardly be brought to ſigne herſelfe with the

ſigne of the Croſſe. Next it, holy water at a pinch, when it would not goe downe, paſt Saras mouth into her throat, but ſtucke in the way, her throat was ſigned with the croſſe, & then it ſlipped down, as eaſily as a draught of Ale. It ſeemes that holy water was old; for you ſee when it was freſh, the deuil himſelfe was not able to come within the ſmell, but leapt out at a window for haſt to be gone. Thirdly, it reſtored ſpeech to Sarah, when it was loſt. Sara could not ſpeake (ſaies the Recorder) till the prieſt had ſigned her throat with the croſſe. Sara was now a ſcholler of ſome ſtanding (as ſhee ſaith) and knew, when her cue came to ſay ouer her geare.
                     Fourthly, Sara knew a peece of the croſſe by the ſmell, and that might ſhe doe right wel, for they kept it ſo ſweet in a boxe,See her examina. (ſaith Sara) that ſhe muſt haue had a ſhrewd poſe, that ſhould not haue found it. Fiftly, it brought Sara to her ſelfe when ſhee was in a traunce, or opened her eyes when ſhee was broade awake. Yet old Edmunds beſtowes more grace vppon it alone then all theſe: for when he had hunted vp the deuil into Marwoods head with his holy hands, meaning to barricado him there, that the people might ſee him looke out at Marwoods eyes, eares, and noſe, as a priſoner doth vſe to looke out at an yron grate: hee ſignes Marwoods throat with the ſigne of the Croſſe, with this holy adiuration, hîc Christi limen eſt, hos limites ne tranſcende: this is Chriſtes owne limit, ſee that yee ſtep not ouer this line: and yet as ſeemes, for feare the deuil ſhould haue aduentured, to put his foote ouer the line, hee claps on the ſacred maniple to, & winds it about his neck, that if there were neede, the Croſſe might call to his good neighbour, to helpe ſtop the thiefe. For theſe holy hunting Engines were better managed, then our ordinary cry of hounds, that wil flie out, euery one ſtriuing to leade away the chaſe, and leaue his fellowes behind: our hunting dogges had beene managed to ſtay for each other,

that the cry might be ful, and that one might help out another at a dead fault. And thus they diſmiſſed the holy croſſe the ſtage, without any great alarum, or ſound of the common drum: Enters the holy Sacrament vppon their ſtage, deformed by theſe hell-monſters into a moſt deteſtable Idoll of the maſſe, with a farre more ſolemne grace, (worthy of a far better place, if theſe miſcreants had not playd ſo long with hel-ſmoake, that it had put out theyr eyes cleane) but they that haue playd with God, Chriſt, and the holy Ghoſt, the deuill muſt giue them leaue to play with Chriſtes bleſſed inſtitution to. I ſay they preſent it with great pompe, in regard of the thriſe glorious ſtate, impiouſly, blaſphemouſly, and chimerically conceited by them to be in royall perſon within. Such a monſtrous metamorphoſis, as Homer, Pindarus, Heſiode, nor all the fabulous Graecian wits put in a maſh durſt neuer faine, forge, or dreame of any their deſpicable gods, that any God ſhould be made of a morſell of bread.
                     This new molded maſſe-Idoll, laughed at by ſome, loathed by many, deteſted of all pious, and ingenious ſpirits, that haue not intoxicated their wits with that enchaunted Babylonian chalice; wanting witneſſe in heauen, and beeing hiſſed at on earth, muſt be brought vppon our deuil-ſtage, to be graced, honoured, and confirmed from hell. And the ſame deuil, that ſainted Campian, and Brian, muſt with the ſame blacke breath, and foule mouth, deïfie this bread-Idoll, and make it a God. And that it may be a perfect Chimaera, compounded all of fiction, and fantaſticall imagination; the ſmoake, the fire, the ſtench, the roare, hell, and the deuill muſt be cogged, feigned, and playd, to help out with this infernall, and diabolicall faſcination.
                     Would it not cauſe men, and Angels to wonder, at the deſperate boldnes of the Ethnick Romiſh Church, that ſhould dare ſo impiouſly, and blaſphemouſly to

prophane the moſt ſacred reuerend Supper of our bleſſed Sauiour, whoſe end, and Eſſence is, to be taken, receaued, & eaten, as the bread of life, the ſtrength, health, and ſweete comfort of our ſoule: all whoſe diuine energie, power, and vertue, is to the receauer onely; the promiſe of life to the worthy receauer, the menace of death to the vnworthy receauer; all matter, forme, effect, and end, directed to the receauer. To diſguiſe, difforme, and monſter-like to miſhape the nature of this thrice bleſſed communion, as to make it a Monſter-Engine of all prodigious ſignes, cogged miracles, and groſſe Heatheniſh conceited wonders, and to blaze this their helliſh impiety, before the eyes of all the world: they haue compiled a booke, containing no leſſe then foure and fortie ſeueral chapters,Tilman: De mirac: Euchariſt: treating onely De miraculis veri Sacramenti. Sci. Euchariſtiae. That is: Of the Miracles, that the venerable Sacrament of the ſacred Euchariſt hath performed: transforming the nature of the bleſſed ſupper, into a prodigious monſter of wonders. Some of the heads of which Chimaera, for a ſample of the reſt, I wil point out vnto you, Cap. 1. De praedio ab infeſtatione malignorum ſpirituum liberato, per oblationem ſacrificij corporis Chriſti. Of a Farme houſe freed from the haunting of bad ſpirits, by celebrating the Maſſe. Cap. 2. De Saxoniae Duce, qui ſub ſacrificio Miſſae vidit ſpeciem elegantis pueruli in Euchariſtia. Of a Duke of Saxonie, who at the time of the celebration of the Maſſe, ſaw the forme of an elegant young child, in the Euchariſt. Cap. 5. De quodam cuius vincula ſoluebantur tempore, quo pro illo offerebatur ſacrificium miſſae. Of one whoſe ſhackles fel off, at the time when a maſſe was ſaid for him. Cap. 6. De Baraca Nauta per ſalutarem hostiam Eucharistiae a naufragio liberato. Of one Baraca a Mariner, that by the Euchariſt eſcaped a tempeſt. Cap. 20. Quomodo Satyrus diui Ambroſij frater, Eucharistiam collo appenſam habens, in naufragiò incolumis ſeruatur. How one Satyrus,
                        
S. Ambroſe his brother was ſaued in a ſhip-wrack, by hauing the Euchariſt hanging about his necke. Cap. 29. De Euchariſtia, quae a terra ſuapte virtute ſublimata per aera ferebatur ad altare, ibidem
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            in ſpecie venuſtiſſimi pueri apparuit. Of the Euchariſt flying in the ayre vnto the Altar, and there appearing in the forme of a moſt beautiful child. Cap. 36. De hoſtia tertiô ab altari diuinitús proiecta, eo quod cimice eſſet contaminata. Of an Oaſt thrice skipping from off the Altar, by reaſon it was defiled by a little flie. Enough for a taſt, the whole tunne is of the ſame liquor, colour, and tang. And who would after this deeme Mahomet an Impoſtor, for carying the Moone in his pocket, and mounting vp, when hee was dead, thorough the ayre, vnto the roofe of a Chappell?
                     Heare our owne Miracle-monger, and his crue, how handſomly they act the maſſe-monſter from hel. Firſt, Saras deuil findes the Communicants that had beene at maſſe, by the ſmel. The Romaine Church, and her implements are of one, and the ſame perfume, that doe out-ſmel the fuming lake, ſpoken of in the Apocalips, nay hel, the deuil, & all. Next the bleſſed Sacrament, was preſented in a Pix: heere Saras deuill roared like a Bull: It ſhould haue beene: bellowed like a Cow, for hers was a ſhe deuil. Heere the real preſence is roared out by Saras deuil. Then Saras deuil was brought vnto the Altar, at the time of eleuation, and could not behold the Sacrament, for the brightnes, that ſhined about it. Heere the glorious preſence of our Sauiour in the Sacrament is ſpied out by the deuil. At an other eleuation Saras deuil could not abide to looke vpon the Sacrament, and when ſhee looked vp, ſhee could ſee nothing, but the prieſts fingers. Heere is an euident daemonſtration, that our Sauiour was there preſent, in that he made the hoaſt to vaniſh out of Saras deuils ſight.
                     When nothing would doe, the preſence of the Sacrament

made Maho tel his name, controlled him, calmed him, couched him, as quiet, and gentle, as a dogge vnder a bench, Maho Saras deuil, being commaunded to kiſſe the bleſſed Sacrament, durſt not diſobey, but kiſſed it very reuerently, as children kiſſe the rod. The deuil being commaunded to take his oath, vppon the bleſſed Sacrament, he durſt not refuſe, but ſwore very deuoutly, that he would tel his name, and be gone: and yet like a falſe rake-hel, periured himſelfe, and ſtayed ſtil: and when hee ſhould be brought to his booke againe, he ſwore he would breake his owne necke, ere he would ſweare the ſecond time, and for feare (as ſeemes) that the deuil ſhould make away himſelfe, & ſo the play be mard afore the plaudite, they let him alone.
                     Theſe are demonſtrations, by deduction from the deuil, of our Sauiour his real preſence: but wil you heare the deuil put you out of doubt, by his owne authentical aſſeueration, Dibdale the prieſt, put his finger into Saras mouth, and bid the deuil bite it, if he durſt: the deuil aunſwered, ſaith the Miracliſt, that it had touched the Lord.
                        See her exam: But Sara tels vs, now ſhe hath put off her deuils vizard, that had ſhe not ſtoode more in feare of a boxe on the eare, then of any Lord there, ſhee would haue made ſo bold, as to haue had a ſnap at the prieſt finger. Saras deuil was brought by a new commaund, to kiſſe the Sacrament more ſure: And being asked, what hee had kiſſed, he aunſwered, The body Christ, and that it had eyes in it. Heere you haue the deuils owne teſtimonie, what needes any more witnes, and yet if you wil haue it fuller: heare Saras deuil againe, when the prieſt holding him the bleſſed Sacrament, and bidding him to adore his Lord, and God: the deuil aunſwered male partly, He is thy God indeede: and if thou doe not beleeue, cut it with a knife, and thou ſhalt ſee it bleede. Was not this part wel played, to proue the eyes, the body, the blood of our Sauiour in the Sacrament, from out of hell.

Were it not great pitty, this deuil, hel, and oath, ſhould be cogged, and not a true deuil indeede? For what a great deale of labour, expence of candel, beating of braines, forging of fathers, counſels, & authorities, wreſting of Scripture, falſifying of Authors, coyning of wonders, would this one Comaedy ſpare? If you wil not beleeue, that our Sauiour is in the Sacrament, goe to Sir George Peckhams houſe at Denham, or my L. 
                           Ʋaux his houſe at Hackney, and aske the deuil, who ſaw our Sauiours eyes (as hee ſayes) with his owne eyes, touched him with his finger, kiſſed him with his mouth, and to make it paſt doubt, tooke his oath vpon the Sacrament, that it was true. Or elſe trie if the argument wil not run in better moode, and figure thus. The very ſame deuil, that Sainted Brian, and Campian at Tiburne: that proclaimed himſelfe a Dotrel, a Ninnie, and a mad foole at Hackney: that had the Aſſes eares clapt cloſe to his head at Denham: hath ſaid, roared, and ſworne ſo, therefore it is true. Or elſe thus. The ſame Edmunds, & his twelue holy diſciples, that haue feigned a deuil Tragaedies, ſorted it into actes, and ſcenes, furniſhed it with hangings, ſet vp a ſtage of forgerie, repleniſhed it with perſonated actors, adorned it with fictious deuiſes, dreames, imaginations, and ridiculous wonders, haue cogged a new hel, new deuils, new roarings, new oathes, new kiſſes to cogge our Sauiour into the Sacrament: therfore you may be cock-ſure to finde him there.
                  
                  
                     
                        CHAP. 21. ¶ Of the ſtrange formes, ſhapes, and apparitions of of the deuills.
                     IT is a queſtion moued by Scaliger: Why men of a melancholick conſtitution be more ſubiect to feares, fancies, and imagination of deuils, and witches, then other tempers be? His aunſwer is, quia ab atra bile, atri & fuliginoſi generantur

ſpiritus, qui cerebrum pingunt turbulentis phantaſmatibus, becauſe from their blacke & ſooty blood, gloomie fuliginous ſpirits do fume into their braine, which bring blacke, gloomy, and frightful images, repreſentations, and ſimilitudes in them, wherwith the vnderſtanding is troubled, and oppreſt. Men of this duskie, turbulent, and fantaſticall diſpoſition, as they are very ſtiffe in their conceit, abſolute in their owne apprehenſion, extreame violent, and peremptory in their reſolution, (which al grow from the earthy dry ſtiffeneſſe of the diſcurſiue melancholicke ſpirits, that doe poſſeſſe theyr braine) ſo are they ſo full of ſpeculations, fanſies, and imaginations of ſpirits, and deuils, and thoſe ſo Chimaericall and ſtrange, as the Philoſophers old aphoriſme is, cerebrum Melancholicum eſt ſedes daemonum, a melancholicke braine is the chaire of eſtate for the deuil. And an other aphoriſme they haue founded on experience, nullum magnum ingenium ſine dementia, there is no great wit, without ſome mixture of madneſſe. Iohn Bodin the Frenchman, is a perfect Idaea of both theſe, who beeing in his younger yeeres of a moſt piercing, quicke, ſpeculatiue wit, which grew of a light, ſtirring, and diſcurſiue melancholie in him, fell (as Hermogenes the mirror of wit did) in the midle of his age to be a pure ſot. The cauſe whereof is the cooling, and thickning of his melancholicke blood, and the ſpending, or going out of that lightſome, actiue, and ſtirring ſpirit, which the heat of blood in his youth did better maintaine.
                     This man, though during the prime of his wit he was of a moſt, pregnant, ripe, and ſubtile diſcourſe, yet his wit beeing deepe woaded with that melancholick blacke dye, had his braine veram ſedem daemonum, the theater, and ſporting houſe for deuils to daunce in: for he hath in his braine, ſuch ſtrange ſpeculations, fantaſmes, and theoremes for deuils, as a man may ſee a great deale of madnes mixed with his great wit. For he holds

that deuils may transforme themſelues into any ſhape of beaſts, or ſimilitude of men, and may eate, drinke, and conuerſe familiarly with them, and may haue the act of generation with women, as they pleaſe. And not that onely, but that a Witch by oyntments, & charmes, may transforme herſelfe into the ſhape of any beaſt, bird, or fiſh: that ſhe may flie in the ayre, that ſhe may depriue men of their generatiue power, that ſhe may transferre corne out of one field into another, and may cauſe haile, thunder, and winde at her pleaſure. And hee defends lycanthropia, and the change of 
                           Ʋlyſſes men into ſwine by the Witch Circe, to be reall, and true: and aboue all tels that vnſauory, melancholicke, ridiculous tale of an Egge, which a Witch fold to an Engliſhman, and by the ſame transformed him into an Aſſe, and made him her Market-mule three yeeres, to ride on to buy butter: and how that at laſt, ſhee remorphized him into the natiue ſhape of a man againe.
                     This mans cerebrum melancholicum, is a notable forge for our popiſh Ethnicks, to hammer a motly deuil out of. But they haue more auncient, and authenticke records for their Night-owles, then this: as namely, that canonicall ſtory in Virgill, of Creüſa, Aeneas his wife: how Aeneas, flying with Anchiſes his father, and Creüſa his wife, thorough the ſtreets on Troy, being all on a light flame, loſt his wife Creüſa in a crowde, as he poſted thorough the Citty, and how that Creüſa appeared to him in her ghoſt, as Aeneas went out at the gate, & told him that ſhe was dead, and was become one of the walking night-ghoſts, bidding him to take his father Anchiſes, and ſhift for himſelfe. This is a moſt redoubted record of the walking of womens ghoſts. And for the appearing of bad, and hurtful ſpirits in vgly, and monſtrous formes, they haue their preſident, and originall in the hiſtory of Mar: Brutus, who hauing put all his Army in a readines, for the laſt fatall fielde to be fought betwixt

him and Auguſtus, and beeing alone at his booke in the deepe, and ſilent night, ſuddainly he heares a great ruſhing in the roome, where hee ſate, and caſting vp his head, ſees a foule, ougly, monſtrous ſhaped ghoſt ſtanding afore him: and asking it angerly, Quis tu? Deus aut daemon? what art thou? a God or a deuil? The ghoſt anſwers, ſum malus tuus genius, I am thine euil angel: the Capt: askes fiercely again, & quid me vis? & what dooſt thou heere? the ghoſt ſayes, cras Philippis me videbis, to morrow I wil meet thee at the fields of Philippi: the captaine anſwers reſolutely, videbo, Ile meet thee: & ſo falls conſtantly to his booke againe, not bidding it God night. Brutus recounts this ſpectrum to Caſſius, his fellow in Armes, and Caſſius perſwades him, that it was but a dreame. But out of this, and ſuch like Heatheniſh dreames, what a world of hel-worke, deuil-worke, and Elue-worke, had we walking amongſt vs heere in England, what time that popiſh miſt had befogged the eyes of our poore people? How were our children, old women, and maides afraid to croſſe a Churchyeard, or a three-way leet, or to goe for ſpoones into the Kitchin without a candle? and no marueile. Firſt, becauſe the deuil comes from a ſmoakie blacke houſe, he, or a lewd frier was ſtill at hand, with ougly hornes on his head, fire in his mouth, a cowes tayle in his breech, eyes like a baſon, fangs like a dogge, clawes like a Beare, a skinne like a Neger, and a voyce roaring like a Lyon; then boh, or oh, in the dark was enough to make their haire ſtand vpright. And if that the bowle of curds, & creame were not duly ſet out for Robin good-fellow the Frier, & Siſſe the dairy-maide, to meete at hinch pinch, and laugh not, when the good wife was a bed, why then, either the pottage was burnt to next day in the pot, or the cheeſe would not curdle, or the butter would not come, or the ale in the fat would neuer haue good head. But if a Peeter-penny, or an houzle-egge were behind, or a patch of

tyth vnpaid to the Church (Ieſu Maria) thē ware where you walke for feare of bull-beggers, ſpirits, witches, vrchins, Elues, hags, fairies, Satyrs, Pans, Faunes, Syluans,
                        See Scots booke of Witches. 
                        Kit with the candlesticke, Tritons, Centaurs, Dwarffs, Giants, impes, Calcars, coniurers, Nymphs, changlings, ſcritchowles, Incubus the ſpurne, the mare, the man in the oake, helwayne, the fire-drake, the puckle, Tom thumbe, hobgoblin, Tom-tumbler, Boneles, and the rest: and what girle, boy, or old wiſard would be ſo hardy to ſtep ouer me threſhold in the night for an half-penny worth of muſtard amongſt this frightfull crue, without a doſen auemaries, two doſen of croſſes ſurely ſigned, and halfe a doſen Pater noſters, and the commending himſelfe to the tuition of S. Vncumber, or els our bleſſed Lady?
                     Theſe be the Popes, and his holy Legats, and thoſe of his holy miſſion, and commiſſion from hell their frightful crue, theyr black-guard, with which they work wonders, amongſt a faithleſſe, fenceleſſe generation: theſe ſhoute about them, attend them, and are of theyr guard, and trayne, whereſoeuer they goe, or walke, as Styx, Phlegeton, and the Eumenides doe guard Aeacus in hell: with theſe they worke their wonders, making Images to ſpeake, vautes to ſound, trunks to carry tales, Churchyeards to ſwarme, houſes to ruſh, rumble, and clatter with chaynes, high-waies, old graues, pittes, and woods ends to be haunted with lights, owles, and poakers; and with theſe they adrad, and gaſter ſenceleſſe old women, witleſſe children, and melancholike dottrels, out of their wits.
                     Theſe Monſter-ſwarmes his Hol: & his helly crue haue ſcraped, and raked together out of old doating heathen Hiſtoriographers, wiſardizing Augurs, impoſturizing South-ſayers, dreaming Poets, Chimaerial conceiters, & coyners of fables, ſuch as puffe vp our young gallants with bigge lookes, and bombaſt phraſes, as the booke of Lancelot du Lake, Guy of Warwicke, The Mirrour of

Knighthoode, Amadis de Gaule, and ſuch like their Legends; out of theſe they conceit their monſtrous ſhapes, vgly bug-beares, hydeous apparitions of ghoſts: out of theſe they conforme, their charmes, enchauntments, periapts, amulets, characters, waſt coates, and ſmockes of proofe, againſt hayle, thunder, lightning, biting of mad dogges, gnawing of Rats, againſt botches, biles, croſbiting, ſparrow-blaſting, Owle-hunting, and the like.
                     Out of theſe is ſhaped vs the true Idaea of a Witch, an olde weather-beaten Croane, hauing her chinne, & her knees meeting for age, walking like a bow leaning on a ſhaft, hollow eyed, vntoothed, furrowed on her face, hauing her lips trembling with the palſie, going mumbling in the ſtreetes, one that hath forgottē her pater noſter, and hath yet a ſhrewd tongue in her head, to call a drab, a drab. If ſhee haue learned of an olde wife in a chimnies end: Pax, max, fax, for a ſpel: or can ſay Sir Iohn of Grantams curſe, for the Millers Eeles, that were ſtolne: All you tbat haue ſtolne the Millers Eeles, Laudate dominum de caelis: And all they that haue conſented thereto, benedicamus domino: Why then ho, beware, looke about you my neighbours; if any of you haue a ſheepe ſicke of the giddies, or an hogge of the mumps, or an horſe of the ſtaggers, or a knauiſh boy of the ſchoole, or an idle girle of the wheele, or a young drab of the ſullens, and hath not fat enough for her porredge, nor her father, and mother, butter enough for their bread; and ſhe haue a little helpe of the Mother, Epilepſie, or Cramp, to teach her role her eyes, wrie her mouth, gnaſh her teeth, ſtartle with her body, hold her armes and hands ſtiffe, make anticke faces, girne, mow, and mop like an Ape, tumble like a Hedgehogge, and can mutter out two or three words of gibridg, as obus, bobus: and then with-all old mother Nobs hath called her by chaunce, idle young huſwife, or bid the deuil ſcratch her, then no doubt but mother Nobs is the Witch: the young girle

is Owle-blaſted, and poſſeſſed: and it goes hard, but ye ſhal haue ſome idle, adle, giddie, lymphaticall, illuminate dotrel, who being out of credite, learning, ſobriety, honeſty, and wit, wil take this holy aduantage, to raiſe the ruines of his deſperate decayed name, and for his better glory wil be-pray the iugling drab, and caſt out Mopp the deuil.
                     They that haue their braines baited, and their fancies diſtempered with the imaginations, and apprehenſions of Witches, Coniurers, and Fayries, and all that Lymphatical Chimaera: I finde to be marſhalled in one of theſe fiue rankes, children, fooles, women, cowards, ſick, or blacke, melancholicke, diſcompoſed wits. The Scythians being a warlike Nation (as Plutarch reports) neuer ſaw any viſions.
                     The frightful fancies, and fond gaſtful opinions, of all the other dotrels ariſe out of one of theſe two rootes; weakenes of wit, or vnſtayednes in religion. Horace the Heathen ſpied long agoe, that a Witch, a Wizard, and a Coniurer were but bul-beggers to ſcare fooles: writing thus to one that had ſo much wit, as to diſcerne a poled ſheepe, from a parlous beaſt.
                     
                        Somnia, terrores Magicos, miracula, ſagas,
                        Nocturnos Lemures, portenta
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            Theſſala rides.
                     
                     That is,

                           Dreames, and Magicall affrights,
                           Wonders, Witches, walking ſprights,
                           What Theſſalian Hags can doe,
                           All this ſeemes a iest to you.
                        
                     
                     And Geoffry Chaucer, who had his two eyes, wit, and learning in his head, ſpying that all theſe brainleſſe imaginations, of witchings, poſſeſſings, houſe-hanting, and the reſt, were the forgeries, coſenages, Impoſturs, and legerdemaine of craftie prieſts, and leacherous Friers, either to maske their venerie, or to enritch their purſes,

by ſelling their Pope-trumpery (as Medals, agnus dei, Bleſſed beades, holy water, halowed Croſſes, periapts, amulets, ſmocks of proofe, and ſuch) at a good rate; as who would not giue ſoundly for a Medal defenſiue againſt the deuil? writes in good plaine termes of the holy Couent of Friers thus:

                           For there as wont to walken was an Elfe,
                           
                           There walketh now the Limitor himſelfe:
                           In euery buſh, and vnder euery tree,
                           There nis none other Iucubus but hee.
                        
                     
                     Now ſee our holy Comaedians, if they haue not dreſſed their Denham deuils, after the old Romaine faſhion, fit to amaze Will Sommers with-all. Heare the graue Miracliſt, how aunciently hee attires the deuil for Sara. Shee had beene diuers times affrighted with vglie viſions. You ſhal neuer heare a prologue to a Popiſh poſſeſſion, but it begins with that ſtyle. As ſhe ſate by the fire ſomewhat late with an other mayde of the ſame houſe,
                        Seeth 
                              〈◊〉
                            beginning of her examin: 
                        being both in a readines to goe to bed, they fell into a ſlumber, and drouſing thus by the fire, there approached neere vnto them three Cats, making a terrible noyſe, and ſprawling about this young mayde, one of them leapt ouer her head, and an other crept betwixt her legges: (by Melleus, and Mengus his rules, this might be a prieſt in the likenes of a Cat: their hunt was all that way) whereat ſhee ſodainly looking behind her: (as hauing beene vſed to ſuch creeping Cats,) ſhe beheld a ſtrange huge Cat, of the bignes of a Mastiffe-dogge, ſtaring in her face, with eyes very great, and bright, to the bignes of a ſawcer. Heere is a right prieſts Hobgoblin, or Tom Spanner in the darke. And wil you heare Sara her ſelfe vncaſe you this bugge: Looke in her depoſition. Shee was looking for egges in a buſh by her Maisters houſe, and ſodainly a Cat leapt out, whereat ſhe gaue a ſtartle: and this Cat, by this prieſtly power (O Catholicam fidem) is ſodainlie Hobgoblinizd, and hath gotten a ſhape, as bigge as

a Mastiffe, and eyes as bigge as a ſawcer: O monſtrous Catholique faith, that canſt turne ordinarie Cats in a moment into Maſtiffes. You ſhal haue them rancked together, as they came from the Popes tyring-houſe: that ye may ſee, which deuil you like beſt, to ſet the Aſſes eares vpon. At ſupper the Cat afore-ſaid, was turned into a dogge, of two colours, blacke, and greene, and therewith-all, a Spaniel bayed, (and therefore Maho was certainly come.) At another time the deuill came downe the chimney, in a Winde, and blew the aſhes about the chamber:
                        Page. 20. 
                        Sometime he appeared in the likenes of a Man: ſometime of a Bright thing, that ſate vpon our Ladies image: ſometime in the likenes of an Iriſh boy, with a blacke curled head: ſometime of a great Black dogge: ſometime he came flying like a Sparrowe, with a Woodcocks bill: ſometime like a Toade, with a noſe like a Moale: ſometime like a Mouſe: ſometime like a Miniſter: ſometimes like an Ey, without a head: ſometimes like a Ruffian, with curled haire: ſomtimes like an Old man, with a long beard: and aboue all, he came in with a drumme, and ſeauen motly vizards, dauncing about the chamber. This was at the L. 
                           Ʋaux his houſe at Hackney, to conclude their holy Chriſtmaſſe, with the deuils motly mummerie.
                     And which of all theſe ſhal we chooſe to weare Mengus his Aſſes eares? The Hedge-ſparrow is furniſhed already with the Woodcocks bill: the Toade is preferd to weare the Moales noſe: the Ruffian with the curled haire, would ſwagger, the Iriſh curled pated boy, would likely runne away with them: wee had beſt reſerue them for Edmunds the Miracliſts owne wearing; for fancying, cogging, & faigning ſuch comly caſes, and faces for the deuil, wherof Sara ſaw neither hide nor haire, top, taile, nor ſhadow; except the motly vizards, which happily ſhe dreamed of in a Chriſtmaſſe night, hauing ſeene Maskers in the day, and feaſted the prieſts highly next day with this faigned relation. The reſt are all of the

deuil-prieſts owne deuiſing, and therefore he may take his Maiſter Mengus long eares, to make vp a ful ſuit.
                  
                  
                     
                        CHAP. 22. ¶ Of the admirable finall act of expelling the deuils, and of their formes in theyr departing.
                     IT is a rule in Mengus, the deuill-mastix, and Thyraeus the deuill-varniſher, that the deuill which is to be diſpoſſeſſed, muſt be commaunded to goe out in a viſible forme, & for the euidence of his departing be enioynd, to cracke a quarrie in the glaſſe window, or to blow out a candle: which beeing two ſuch ſupernaturall actions, as by a conſorted conſpirator with the Exorciſt, without the helpe of a cherry-ſtone, or the ſuddaine puffe of a wenches breath, or the ſwinge of her ſleeue, cannot cleanly be conueied, it is no maruell though they be made a demonſtration, that the deuil is ſurely gone. The penner of our deuil-tragaedy hath not forgottē to keepe good decorum in this, for hee hath fancied, and feigned diuers well ſeeming formes, and ſimilitudes, for his ſtage deuils to weare at their taking their leaue.
                     The firſt deuill that was diſſeiſed was Smolkin, Trayfords ſpirit, whom Sara eſpied (ſaith the Miracliſt) to goe out at Trayfords right eare in the forme of a Mouſe, and it made the poore wench at the fight of the Mouſe almoſt out of her wits. The next deuil diſpoſſeſſed was Hilcho at 
                           Ʋxbridge, who appeared (ſaith our Authour) to the poſſeſſed parties at his going our, like a flame of fire, and lay glowing in the fire in Trayfords ſight, till he had a new charge. The third was Haberdidance, Saras dauncing deuil: who appeared to the patient, like a whirlwind, turning round like a flame of fire, & his voyce was heard by a Cooke, as hee flew ouer the Larder. Captaine Filpot went his way in the likenes of a ſmoke, turning round, and ſo tooke his way vp into the chimney.

                        Lusty Dicke (as ſeemes) did ſlippe a button in one of his turnes aboue ground: for he went out in a foule vnſauory ſtench. Delicate, and Lusty Iolly Ienkin went out, one whirling like a ſnake, the other in a vapor not verie ſweet. Lusty Huffcappe went out in the likenes of a Cat. Killico, Hob, and the third Anonymos, all Captaines, went out in a wind. Purre went out in a little whirlewind. Frateretto in a ſmoke.
                     
                     Maiſter Maynie had in him (as you haue heard) the Maiſter-deuils of the ſeauen deadly ſinnes, and therefore his deuils went out in the forme of thoſe creatures, that haue neereſt reſemblance vnto thoſe ſinnes: as for example; the ſpirit of Pride went out in the forme of a Peacocke (forſooth) the ſpirit of Sloth in the likeneſſe of an Aſſe: the ſpirit of Enuy in the ſimilitude of a Dog: the ſpirit of Gluttony in the forme of a Woolfe. But it is to be wondered at, that Generall Maho, at the laſt, and moſt dreadfull exorciſme of all, when hee was expelled with 22000. yeeres torment layd vppon his backe, hee ſlunke out without any ſimilitude at all. And more, an ordinary Reader will wonder, that Maho, beeing Dictator of hell, is ſaid in the Legend of Miracles, and ſo noted by Sara, to haue choſen ſuch a ſtrange part in Sara for his paſſage out, as I dare not name: and yet deuils, comaedians, and their reporters may haue licence in all Courts to call all things by their name. And indeede heere lyes the wonders of all, conſidering that that nameleſſe part, the deuils port-gate in Sara, was the prieſts queſt and haunt, which they had hunted ſore, had croſſed, recroſſed, and ſurcroſſed with their holy hands, had ſacred, or ſeared vvith application of their reuerend ſtrong reliques, and other their potent holy parts, (as you haue heard poore Sara herſelfe confeſſe:) the deuill ſhould once dare to come neere that part, that had been harowed, (I would ſay halowed) and enriched with ſo many precious Iewels from Rome: but you ſhall finde

the Authour noted that part, and aſſigned it for Maho the deuils paſſage, vppon very ſage, and prudent conſideration. For they had kept ſuch reuel rout thereabouts, as they themſelues gaue out to ſuch as were ſuters to Sara, (as you reade in her depoſition) that they, and the deuil, (O fidem Catholicam!) had taken ſuch order, as marry her who would, ſhe ſhould neuer haue child.
                     
                     But to returne to our ſimilitudes, and deuil viſages againe, the Miracle-minter deales heere with theſe formes, and faces of deuils, as Soſia in Amphitryo dealt with the battaile at Teliboüs, who ranges two maine Armies, deuides them into ſquadrons, wings, and flanks, and makes them meete, and encounter, and none but himſelfe alone is vpon the ſtage. And indeed it is good decorum in a Comaedie, to giue vs emptie names for things, and to tell vs of ſtrange Monſters within, where there be none. When a man heares of theſe frightful ſimilitudes, wherein the deuils are conceited to depart, as flames, whirlewinds, ſnakes, cats, fire, and ſmoake, hee would imagine the ſpectators ſhould be much gaſtred, and skared at the going out of the deuils in theſe feareful formes, and that the chambers and roomes, where the daemoniacks and the company are, ſhould be ſhaken with the whirlewind, ſcorched with the flames, and ſoiled with brimſtone and ſmoake, and that the aſſembly ſhould tremble, to ſee the deuill whirle about in the ſimilitude of a ſnake, as a fire-dragon ſpoutes, & whirles in the ayre: but at our gentle deuils departure, there was neither ſhape ſeene, nor wind heard, nor motion felt, nor flames, nor ſmoake, nor whirling fire-ſnake perceiued at all, and therefore you muſt heedfullie obſerue, the Authours clauſe alwaies annexed, (as Amen to a maſſe) vnto the end of the ſentence: As ſeemed, or appeared to the poſſeſſed.
                     
                     So as the out-caſting of theſe vgly deuils viſards, lyes thus. The prieſts doe report often in their patients hearing,

the dreadful formes, ſimilitudes, and ſhapes, that the deuils vſe to depart in, out of thoſe poſſeſſed bodies, which they haue dealt with-all beyond Seas: and this they tell with ſo graue a countenance, pathetical termes, and accommodate action, as it leaues a very deepe impreſſion in the memory, and fancie of their actors: ſo as when it comes to their cue, to play the ſame part ouer, (as namely, when after dreadful adiuration the deuil is ſaid to goe out) then doth the Exorciſt very ſoberly aske the party, in what forme or ſimilitude, the deuil appeared vnto him at his departing: and he hauing conned his leſſon of formes, and ſhapes before from the prieſt, lights vpon ſome ſuch forme, and ſhape, as he hath receaued from the prieſt. And then the Echo is: Thanks to the bleſſed virgin, and the whole Quier of heauen. And if the Exorciſt doe ſuſpect the wit, or memory of his ſcholler, as being nothing perfect in his Kalender of formes, he wil not ſtick, to prompt him by his queſtion (being afore an Auditory of Romiſh guls, whoſe braines ſwarme with bul-beggers) as to aske him, if the deuil did not depart in ſuch, or ſuch a forme; and then the actor either for feare, or flatterie of his good maiſter dares not but ſay yea.
                     Another rule you muſt learne in a Comaedie wel acted, and conuaied for the deuil: that the daemoniacks be ſo neerely placed (yet in ſeueral roomes) each to other, that one may heare without benefit of Midas long eares, what is ſaid vnto, or by the other; and ſo the ſecond may be yare and ready, to take his cue and turne of the former, and put to a little of his owne wit, for the better gracing the wonder. Or elſe if propinquitie, and fitnes of the roomes wil not ſerue, for one to be the others Parrat, and Echo, touching the ſhape; let the ſhape be handſomly agreed of by the deuil-actors before, or elſe prouide a miſtris Plater, for an intelligencer, or intercurſitor betweene them, that may in a trice relate

to one, what the other hath done, and ſaid.
                     
                        Lusty Iolly Ienkin was conceited, & giuen out by the Exorciſt to goe out of Sara in the ſimilitude of a whirling ſnake: Marwood was in another roome, yet ſo neere as he caught the ſnake by the tayle, and cryes out, where he lay, at the dreadful ſight, adding that hee ſaw it come whirling by his window, with a wind in moſt terrible wiſe. Heare Maiſter Maynie for all report you this deuiſe, the daintieſt actor, that euer came vppon deuil-ſtage. And as I aunſwer to this poynt, ſo doe I vnto that other, as touching the deuils ſuppoſed ſimilitudes, in theyr pretended departing out of me. Eytber it is altogether falſe, and deuiſed by thēſelues, or elſe they led me to ſay ſo by theyr queſtions, as if they asked mee whether Pride did not depart from me in the likenes of a Peacock, it is very probable that I ſayd, he did, and ſo of all the rest. Or otherwiſe they tolde ſome in my hearing, that ſuch deuils did vſe to depart from ſuch, as they poſſeſſed, in ſuch kinde of formes. I pray GOD forgiue them for all theyr bad dealing with me.
                     
                     Thus you haue theſe Romiſh deuil-vizards of formes, ſimilitudes, and ſhapes of the deuils departing, layd open vnto you, by their owne ſchollers and actors, to be naught els, ſaue ſquibs, crackers, and fire-works forged out of the prieſts owne fancie: and that there was no deuil, but Edmunds, or Dibdale the Prieſt. Now let vs a little looke vpon the laſt, and moſt artificial act of this infernal Tragaedie (namely, the final diſpoſſeſſing, and extruding the deuils) by which of their ghaſtly dreadful Engines, this concluſion was beſt, and moſt cunningly performed.
                     The firſt honour of this great, and admirable act of finall diſpoſſeſſing the deuil, did by great prouidence fall vpon a little casket of reliques; wherein there falls out wonder vpon wonder. For Trayford, the poſſeſſed party, eſpying a casket of reliques in Saras hand, ſnatches them ſodainly from her, and applying the casket

to his owne, did expel Smolkin his owne Mouſe-deuil. Where the ſuper wonder is, that a man ſhould without Exorciſt, Albe, Aue marie, or Salue Regina diſpoſſeſſe himſelfe of a deuil, as wee finde Trayford did: or rather the deuil diſpoſſeſſe himſelfe. For Trayford, the poſſeſſed, was moued, ruled, and caried by the deuil, as a wheele is by a turnſpit curre, that is put into it: ſo as it was not Trayford, that ſnatched the casket, but the deuil, nor Trayford that applied them to his mouth, and expelled the deuil at his right eare, in the likenes of a Mouſe, but the deuil.
                     This doth plainly inſtruct you in theſe two excellent points: firſt, the dreadful power of reliques, when they lie pent, and packed cloſe together in a little roome, that they worke like bottle-ale, that is cloſe kept from vent, ready as ſoone as they be ſtirred to ſpout deuils, dragons, and all in a mans face: next, it reades you a plaine Lecture of the bodily feare of the deuil at the approach of an holy prieſt, who chooſes rather to make his owne ſquib, fill it with Gunne-powder, and ſetting it on fire, to burne, and blowe vp himſelfe, as Sardanapalus did, then to attend the comming of a ſcalding Catholique prieſt.
                     The next expulſion of the deuil was by holy water alone; wherein the power of the holy relique is the more aduaunced, in that it came not from the hand of any anointed prieſt, but was taken by Sara, and ſprinckled vpon the deuil, in the likenes of a Toad, and towards the deuil-minister, that came into Trayfords chamber, and they both vaniſhed away. So as by theſe powerful inſtruments a deuil may not onely diſpoſſeſſe himſelfe, (which a man muſt imagine he had neede of great help to doe) but alſo put to flight any other deuil that ſtands in his way, or wil preſume to come within his walke, without his good leaue. For elſe what reaſon had Saras deuil to be diſpleaſed at his fellow deuils comming into

                        Trayfords chamber, and to ſprinckle him away, but that it ſeemes he came rudely in, without by your leaue.
                     
                     The holy Croſſe put to flight a whole Quier of Puppets, that appeare dauncing the Morrice at the end of a gallerie; and diſſolued them ſo cleane, as there appeared neither flame, ſmoake, nor ill odor from them: and this wonder was accompliſhed by Sara, for Sara (ſaith the Miracliſt) ſigning her ſelfe with many ſignes of the Croſſe, the deuils in the likenes of Puppets, vaniſhed out of ſight.
                     
                     Heere our wonder like Amphitryos goblet, begets an other wonder ſtil. Sara by Croſſes puts to flight a whole troupe of Puppet-deuils, and yet the deuil within Sara cared not for the Croſſes one iote. Theſe (as ſeemes) were but punie vrchin ſpirits, that for want of good cheere at Denham houſe were pined, and made feeble, before the Exorciſts came thither. But Purre was a ſpirit of a tough mold, and in reaſonable good plight: hee held the Exorciſt good tacke, til at length (ſaith the Reporter) by often inuocation of our bleſſed Lady, and the whole company of heauen, with Aue maries, and other Anthemes, of our bleſſed Lady, eſpecially Salue Regina, Purre was caſt out. Here Church Anthemes, as you ſee, caried away the bucklers, in expelling the deuil. Sara, the deuils ſweet dauncing ſchoole, had choſen amongſt all the heauenly Quier S. Barbara, for her patroneſſe, and Saint: who pittying her poore Client, ſeeing all the deuils of hel in the poore wench, and Maho theyr commaunder, came downe her ſelfe from heauen, to ſhew her grace ſhe had there, and that Saints may come from heauen a deuil-hunting, if it ſtand with their good pleaſure, and aſſuming the office of an Exorciſt into her owne hands, caſts out Maho, the black Prince.
                     
                        Maho takes this as no faire play: and therefore himſelfe complaines of it in his Dialogue with Dibdale: that a woman had cast him out before,
                        Page 5. booke of Miracles. 
                        vpon her owne feastiuall day.
                     
                     
                        This is no meane office, you may be ſure, nor of little moment, and waight, when the glorious Saints of heauen come downe to diſcharge it: nay you ſhal ſee, that for the dignifying of this coniuring profeſſion, and to ſtop the mouthes of all carping obloquutors, our bleſſed Lady her ſelfe vouchſafed to grace it with her preſence in her owne proper perſon, and to come in ſtate, with a princely trayne of caeleſtial virgins attending vppon her: whom the deuil in ſcorne calls by a by-name, Saffron-bagge; Loe yonder (cries the deuil to the Exorciſt) comes Saffron-bagge, with her company of tripping-mayds, thou canst doe nothing without her. And the Miracle-maiſter ſticks not to tell vs, that ſhee played the Exorciſts part too, in helping of Sara. After a long, and painfull combat (ſaith he) Sara ſayd ſomewhat cheerefully: now our bleſſed Lady hath knowne my neede, and hath holpen me: for the deuil was gone out. And it ſhal, I truſt, be no diſparagement to our Lady in this caſe, to haue a ſimple word in ſhew matched vnto her highneſſe, which with the very ſound, pronunciation, and name had the ſame vertue in expelling a deuil, that her owne gracious preſence in proper perſon had: and that is in the Creede, neither the name of God the Father, God the Sonne, nor God the holy Ghoſt, nor the name of the virgin Mary (which as you ſee, is notwithſtanding dreadful to the deuil) but the bare naming, and pronouncing of this word Catholique alone: with the ſounding of which ſillables onely, Sara (ſayth our Author) did put to flight all her pernicious deuils. So as this word Catholique in the Creede is as deepe a deuil-coniurer, as euer Mengus was.
                     Theſe ſeueral Champions (as you ſee) doe ſeuerally triumph, and erect their ſeueral Trophies, with ſpoiles of ſeueral deuils. But it falls out ſometimes, that the graund Prince of darknes doth combine, and vnite his forces, calling to his ayde his Leaders, Colonels, and

Captaines for hel, as Hiaclito, Helcmodian, and the reſt, and pitches a maine field: ſo as his forces ſtand ſtrong againſt any one of theſe alone. Then heare the General of our ghoſtly Camp, how he marſhals his bands, & troupes, againſt the front of hel. But the bleſſed Sacrament being brought, inuocation made to our bleſſed Lady, and all the Quier of heauen, by the helpe of Aue maries, Salue Reginaes, and calling vpon the bleſſed Martyrs, and applying their holy reliques, eſpecially of Fa: Camp: Fa: Brian, and the rest, that had beene martyred at Tiburne, hell it ſelfe quailes, the deuils roare, and the Prince with all his aſſistants, and commaunders, are finally cast out. Theſe are the troupes, that preuaile againſt principalities, powers, dominions, and all the kingdome of darknes: theſe laded Maho, and Modu (the two Generals of the infernal furies) with fire, and brimſtone, and baniſhed them, for a final doome, to be tormented in the bottomleſſe pit of hell.
                     And thus cloſed vp our worthy Author his woorthy tragaedie, with the confuſion of the great Maiſter-deuils, and the conſolation of his pittifull poſſeſſed captiues, and that loude famous acclamation of the ſpectators, O Catholicam fidem! O fidem Catholicam! But the lamentable Chorus, and Nuntios of this tragaedie (Maiſter Maynie gentleman, Fid Williams, Sara Williams, Anne Smith, and Maiſter Tirrell) doe tell vs another tale, ending this deuill tragaedie, with their own teares, ſighes, exclamations, and hideous out-cries, againſt the deuill-prieſts, the coggers, coyners, mynters, and actors of this wicked lewd play. Who were not content to play Maho, and Modu, the grand deuils themſelues, to play at bo peepe with Almighty God, our bleſſed Sauiour, his holy Angels, and blſſed Saints in heauen, preſenting them on this feigned Theater, and making them to ſqueale, pype, & tumble, like puppits in a pageant after their owne impious faſhion, and to prophane, and proſtitute

the bleſſed Sacrament, making it a Pandar to their foule and monſtrous luſt, but partly by flattery, partly by feare, partly by the bond of violated chaſtitie, partly by their lothſome potions, and vnnaturall fumigations, brought them into the ſame diſſimulation with themſelues, and to act the chiefe, and principall parts in their diabolicall legerdemaine: and when they had once masked them in theyr popiſh nets, and gotten them into theyr holy ginnes, they did ſo vnmanly, ſo vnprieſtly, and ſo vnnaturally vſe them, as the deuil himſelfe, if he had beene indeed in preſence, could not haue vſed them worſe.
                     And theſe miſguiſed bewitched creatures, now of better remorſe, doe tell vs that the truſſing vp of theyr iugling ſticks, winding vp theyr Pope-budget, & packing vp their Romane pedlarie grew from another cauſe: which was, becauſe they vnderſtood by ſome of their Sentinels, that their iugling, packing, and legerdemaine did peepe out abroade in the Country, & occaſioned diuers opinions, and conſtructions of the ſame, whereby preſent danger to theyr perſons, and ſtage-robes was like to enſue. This mooued them, to let Maho the deuil ſlinke out of Sara in that homly manner as you haue heard, that they might (though vncleanlie) ridde theyr hands of him. And now I pray you obſerue how ſutably to theyr former affaires they ſorted themſelues thence.
                     It is the faſhion of vagabond players, that coaſt from Towne to Towne with a truſſe and a caſt of fiddles, to carry in theyr conſort, broken queanes, and Ganimedes, as well for their night pleaſance, as their dayes paſtime: our deuil-holy conſort at theyr breaking vp houſe at Denham, departed euery prieſt ſuted with his wench after the ſame good cuſtome.See the laſt end of Fide examin: 
                        Edmunds the Ieſuit (ſaith one of their owne couey) had for his darling Miſtris Creſſy, Anne Smith was at the diſpoſition of

Ma: Dryland, Sara Williams of Ma: Dibdale, Miſtriſſe Altham of Cornelius, and Fid Williams of Ma: Leigh. And was not this a very ſeemely Catholicke complement trow you, to ſee a Fidler and his caſe, a Tinker & his bitch, a Prieſt and his Leman, a deuil & his damme, combined ſweetly together? I truſt our deuils would neuer make ſute to goe into any herd of ſwine, ſo long as they had ſuch kinde tender cattell to poſſeſſe, diſpoſſeſſe, repoſſeſſe, and ſurpoſſeſſe at theyr pleaſure. And this in the holy dialect is called gaining of ſoules: ſcilicet for the deuill.
                  
                  
                     
                        CHAP. 23. ¶ Of the ayme, end, and marke, of all this pestilent tragaedy.
                     THe end of a Comaedie is a plaudite to the Authour, and Actors; the one for his inuention, the other for his good action: of a Tragaedie, the end is mouing of affection, and paſſion in the ſpectators. Our Daemonopoiïa, or deuil-fiction, is Tragico-comaedia, a mixture of both, as Amphitryo in Plautus is: and did by the good inuention, and cariage, obtaine both theſe ends. Firſt it had a plaudite often; O Catholicam fidem! and O that all the Protestans in England did ſee the power of the Catholick Church: and it mooued affection with expreſſion of teares. Marwood did tumble, foame, and rage ſo liuely, when hee was touched with Campians girdle, as the gulld ſpectators did weepe to ſee the iugling knaue, in ſuch a ſuppoſed plight. But our Romane Authors, Edmunds, and his holy crue (his twelue holy diſciples) the plotters of this deuil-play, had a farther and deeper end: which by this impious deuiſe they had atchieued pretie well, and that was (after the Popes dialect) the gaining of ſoules for his Holines, and for Hell, the bewitching of the poore people, with an admiration of the power of

theyr Romiſh Church, and prieſthood, by theſe cogd miracles, and wonders; and thereby robbing them of theyr fayth towards God, and theyr loyaltie to theyr Prince, and reconciling them to the Pope, the Monſter of Chriſtianitie. And for the obtayning of this maine marke and end, they vſed two chiefe ſubordinate ends. The one was to bring in the deuill on the ſtage (thorough the whole courſe of theyr tragaedie) as the father of vs all, and as the founder, protector, and fauourer of vs, and of our moſt Chriſtian profeſſion. The other, by cauſing theyr deuils to ſpeake, act, and behaue themſelues, as an hoſtile and ſworne enemy to them, and to theyr Romiſh ſuperſtition. Which the beſotted people conceiuing as the very true voyce of the deuill indeede, were brought to phancie and imagine of vs all, as of the grand children, and heires of Satan, and of hell, and to eſteeme of them, as of the children of light, and the vndoubted heires apparant to the celeſtiall kingdome of heauen. In this theyr bewitched conceit, they vvere brought to renounce theyr duty, loue, and allegeance to theyr naturall Soueraigne, and to ſweare theyr fealty and obedience, to the vnnaturall monſter of hell.
                     Vnto the atchieuing of this impious, and trecherous deſigne (namely, the reuolt of the beſotted people from their Prince, and the moſt Chriſtian Religion, by the pure profeſſion, and ſwearing theyr obedience vnto the Pope of Rome) they ſpared no perſon, no condition, no calling, no profeſſion in either our Church, or common weale, but abandond them all in theyr deuil-comaedie to the bottomleſſe pit of hell.Page, 42. And that the 7. horned Babylonian beaſt might appeare in his liuely orient colours, to be he that durſt opē his blaſphemous mouth againſt the Almightie, & his Saints, his accurſed brood heere doe that in the aſſumed feigned perſon of the deuil, which the deuil himſelfe (though a ſpirit of blaſphemie) neuer dared to doe: that is, to curſe, & blaſpheme,

(ô helliſh impietie, my hart doth tremble at the ſound) the moſt beloued, thrice-bleſſed annointed of the Lord, the ſacred perſon of our dread Soueraigne, making her no other in this deuilliſh tragaedie, then the deuils principal darling.Booke of Miracles. Page, 43. Heare the deuil, or Edmunds in the deuils perſon (who yet draweth his breath from the beames of her princely mercy, whō himſelfe accurſed to the pit of hel) in his owne dialect, if your Chriſtian eares dare to heare that, which thoſe Popiſh miſcreants dare proclaime vpon their ſtage.
                     
                        Beholde your loyall Prieſts. Page, 43.
                        Oh (cries Maho the deuil in Sara) yonder commeth Saffron-bagge (meaning our bleſſed Lady) ſhee is come to helpe thee: but ſhee cannot away with a principall perſon in this Realme, and therefore I cannot away with her. Heere the play-deuil is conceited ſo to loue the Queene, as he muſt needes hate our Lady, for not louing her Maieſtie. And to expreſſe his deuilſhips good wil (forſooth) vnto her Maieſtie: on S. Hughes day hee threatens the Exorciſt,Page, 34. See Saras examin: that he would goe ring for the Queene: and in another fit tels Dibdale in a rage, that he would goe to the Court, and complaine of him to the Queene, and cauſe his head to be ſet vpon London bridge. In another fit hee cryes out of Sara in a loude voyce, God ſaue the Queene,
                        Page, 7. 
                        and her Ministers, expreſſing his deuilſhips not onely good affection, but zealous deuotion to her Maieſtie, and her Clergie. But that which ſhewes their diabolicall impietie, and opens the treaſury of their hearts, fraught with treachery, and treaſon, they ſolemnly preſent the deuil in Sara vpon theyr ſtage, roaring out an oath touching her Maieſtie in this wiſe, by my troth ſhe is mine, and the Queene of heauen beeing called vppon, hee ſayd aloude,Page 7. ibi: 
                        another Queene is my Queene. O deteſtable Romiſh villany! et tamen viuunt, and are at this day plotting a new inuaſion to ſet vp a new Queene, who haue and doe thus deſperatly blaſpheme God, and the King.
                     
                        And is her Maieſties Court more beholden to this Romiſh helliſh Conſort, then her Maieſties ſacred perſon? Heare Modu, Maynies deuil, vaunting in his deuils voyce, vpon S. Georges day,Page, 43. that he would goe braue it out at the Court: for they were all his friends. This is the gentle quittance, your holy renegadoes doe returne you, for the fauour, or conuiuencie which they finde, in that her Maieſties Lawes are no more ſeuerely executed againſt them. They bring you home a placard from his helliſhnes at Rome, to aſſure you, that you are all in league, and amity with the deuil. For ſo the deuil, or Edmunds doth proclaime you from hel, or Rome.
                     Thoſe famous renowmed Worthies of her Maieſties priuie Counſel, whoſe bodies ſleepe in peace, and their ſoules (as I truſt) repoſe in Abrahams bleſſed boſome; how our infernal tragaedians haue diſturbed their reſt, prophaned their happy memory, violated their tombs, and called forth their ſpirits, like the Witch of Endor, making them tennis-bals, for their deuils to bandy on their ſtage; take a true view of, in the paſſage of a Dialogue betweene the Exorciſt, and the deuil.
                     
                        Yonder (cries the deuil in Sara) nodding her head towards one part of the chamber) ſtands ſuch a one (whom he had named before) full of deuils:
                        Page. 32. 
                        and Leiceſter at this preſent houre; euen now, now, vnder the right arme of that one (before mentioned) and all the Court are my friends. Then went he forward with his ſpeech, naming certaine perſons, and ſaid, that they are now gone to the deuil: and amongſt the reſt, named Bedford already departed, and that his ſoule is euen now with me in this chamber,
                        Page. 43. 
                        and ſo paſſed on his talke, and paſſed on to matters of treaſon, and therefore they are not to be mentioned. Thus farre theyr owne Recorder, in his owne ſweet termes. And were not thoſe matters of treaſon, vttered by the deuil, ſtrange matters from hel trow ye, that the penner durſt not cō
                        mit them to writing, hauing written ſo much, touching

our moſt ſacred Prince, her Court, and Counſel before, as the deuil himſelfe durſt not inſpire more into his pen? And who doth not feele this palpable legerdemaine, at his fingers ends? The deuil ſpeakes treaſon againſt the Prince, and ſtate, for the winning, and gaining of Subiects from her Maieſtie to the Pope, and making them become traytors, by his treaſonable perſwaſions; and this ſtands for good Romiſh Rhetorick, and popiſh Diuinitie, whileſt it was ſpoken, and acted by the Popes Orator the deuil: and the deuil ſhewed himſelfe an abſolute powerful ſpeaker, for his graund maiſter the Pope:See Fids & Maynies exam: enchaunting by his ſweet eloquence 500, or as their owne diſciples confeſſe vpon record, foure, or fiue thouſand ſoules in a ſhort time, whom hee wonne from the Queene, and reconciled them to the Pope by this wel acted tragaedie. And might the deuil ſpeake treaſon ſo aptly, diſtinctly, and elegantly on the ſtage, that it enchaunted the harts, and affections of the poore bewitched people, and chained them to the Pope: and is not this ſweet enchaunting treaſon to be mentioned in wryting?Page 23. 
                        Quis cauſam neſcit? You were afraid, good deuil-tragaedians, to be ſainted at Tiburne, for this ſweet enchaunting treaſon, vttered by your proloquutor the deuill: and it muſt be committed to none, but your ſworne new proſelytes, that knew how to keepe it from ſtragling abroad: whom you haue by this one ſentence of your wiſe Orator the deuil manteled in the ſame degree of horrible vnſpeakeable treaſons with your ſelues, not onely for concealing, and entertaining treaſon not to be mentioned, or ſpoken for the abhomination of it; but for yeelding themſelues, their faith, and fealty to the Pope; the true end, and ayme of all thoſe vnſpeakable treaſons. Et quis hic daemon? And who was the deuil, the brocher, herald, and perſwader of theſe vnutterable treaſons, but Weston the Ieſuit, the chiefe plotter, and the arch-impoſtor, Dibdale the prieſt, or Stemp, or

all the holy Couey of the twelue deuiliſh comaedians in their ſeueral turnes: for there was neither deuil, nor vrchin, nor Elfe, but themſelues, who did metamorphoze themſelues in euery ſcene, into the perſon, eyther of the deuil himſelfe, or of his Interpreter, and made the deuils names their Puppet, to ſqueake, pipe, and fume out what they pleaſed to inſpire. And thus,Page 43. as the deuil would haue it, by a deuiliſh inconſiderate clauſe inſerted, that the deuill ſpoke treaſons, not once to be mentioned: haue you proclaimed your ſelues, and your 5000 new adhaerents, for vnſpeakeable, vnutterable, deteſtable Traytors.
                     The eſtate of our Cleargie,Page 29. they haue adorned with a ſpecial grace: The deuill appearing vnto Trayford (ſayth the Miracliſt) in the likenes of an Engliſh Miniſter, and diſſwading him to leaue the Catholique Romiſh Church, &c. This was a ſigne (ſay they) of our eſpecial fauour with the deuil, in that he pleaſed rather to put on our habite, then the veſtments of a Catholique Romiſh Prieſt: and yet all circumſtances conſidered, this was no great fauor done vnto our profeſſion, in regard their holy geare was too hote for the deuils wearing. A ſute of purgatorie fire had beene much eaſier for the deuil, then an Albe, or veſtment of that conſecrate attire. But a greater argument of loue, and mutual good affection is the liberal commendation, which Saras deuil doth very frankly beſtow vpon our Ministers, affirming by his deuils honeſtie, that hee likes them well, and that they be much better then the Catholique Romiſh prieſts. Which the poore Ideot ſpectators tooke to be ſooth indeede, and deemed vs to be too great in the deuils bookes, euer to be good. And aboue all, General Maho being ſtraightlie charged by the Exorciſt, to tel his name, he ſtanding vpon his dictatorſhip, tels the Exorciſt plainly, that hee cannot commaund him,
                        Page 44. 
                        but that the Engliſh Miniſters may. What, and their wiues too? quoth the Exorciſt:

                        Marry thou a wife too, quoth the deuil. Loe here (good gentle Conies, that come to weare the Woodcocks bil) you heare the deuil, alias Dibdale plainly tel you, that the Engliſh Ministers, and their marrying of wiues come both out of hel, and are the deuils, alias Dibdales owne counſel to the prieſt, and ſo cannot be good. But hunting, nipping, & croſ-biting a prety wench on the bare: croſſing, recroſſing, ſurcroſſing her with prieſtly hote holy hands, per honesta, & in honesta: giuing her ſuch a Catholique cloſe pinch, that you make her crie oh, and poſſeſſing her with a ſhee deuil vppon the ſame: afterwards diſpoſſeſſing, repoſſeſſing, and ſuper-poſſeſſing her againe, til the poore wench is ſo handled amongſt you,See Saras examina: as the deuil, and you giue out, Marrie her who will, ſhe can neuer haue child: This is but his Holines owne hunt and chaſe, for his holy helliſh diſciples, in which Catholique ſport the deuil himſelfe making one, he can take no iuſt exception there-vnto.
                     After the deuils gracing our ſeueral callings by his deuilliſh commendation, he muſt needes, of his good nature, ſpeake ſomething in fauour of our religion to, eſpecially in behalfe of thoſe points, wherein we haue oppoſition with the Church of Rome.
                     
                        Page, 17.Firſt, therefore for his, and our better credit the deuil tels the prieſt, that himſelfe is an heretique, and that hereſie came first into England, in the raigne of King Henry the eight. That he teaches the Protestants, to call themſelues Catholiques:
                        Page, 23. His good deuilſhip, cauſed Sara to weepe for her father, and mother, becauſe they went to the Engliſh Churches, and tels the Exorciſt very kindly, that young children, though they want vnderstanding, must be kept from the Church: becauſe they may be plagued for ſo going, for their parents faults, that ſuffer them to goe. Heere we muſt ſuppoſe, that the deuil had taken ſo much of the prieſts bleſſed potion, (Sacke, Galbanum, and Rue) that he was Maudelen-drunke, and in his kinde drunkennes, of pure

compaſſion, and good nature, doth reueale thus much againſt himſelfe, to haue children, and good folkes ſaued: For being ſober, and in his right wits, you ſhal by and by finde him in another key.
                     Sara was tempted (forſooth) to ſay firſt that there was no Purgatory. This was a ſore temptation indeede,Page, 2. to wiſh Sara to ſay that fire was not, whereof there is not one ſparkle to be ſeene in all the booke of God: which fire the pillers of Gods Church haue alwaies held for an Heatheniſh dreame, & a Platonick fiction, whoſe coles, brands, & skorching flames haue beene purgatiues for mens purſes, houſes, & lands, & haue annihilated more mettall, and euaporated it into ſmoake, then all the conceited fire-works of our Chymicall Impoſtors haue done. And here I feare the deuils braine was a little too much heated with the ſmoke of holy brimſton, & grew ſomewhat adle, in aduiſing Sara to goe about to put this enchaunted fire out of peoples heads: for that the conceited opinion of this imaginarie fire hath brought more ſooty-ſoiled ſoules into hell, in a fancied hope of a purge after this life, which they can neuer meete withall, then any one cheating deuiſe beſides in all the Popes budget.
                     
                        Saras ſecond temptation was to ſay,Pag, 3. 
                        the priest ſaide naught in ſaying of Maſſe, A Chriſtmas temptation after the deuil was wel whitled. This was a pretty gul of your merry Chriſtmas deuil, as your ſelues had gulled & impoſtured the world. For what can be greater glee, and pleaſance to the deuil, then to behold you the Archiuglers, and Impoſtors of the world, to put downe in this craft the Sorcerers of Aegypt, the Heathen, Mahomet and all. To ſee you firſt iugle with Almighty God, and our bleſſed Sauiour, and then with all his ſaints, turning his moſt bleſſed inſtitution into a maſſe-monſter, a Chimera of puppets, & gaudes. Approching vnto the holy celebration like Bacchanall prieſts, with a ſtole, an

albe, maniple, an amice, a tunicle, and ſuch phantaſticall attire: putting vppon the bleſſed inſtitution of our Sauiour, a forraine Babylonian name of a maſse: making it a night catch, or round to be chopped vp betweene a boy & a prieſt: peruerting the nature of the holy communion, to a priuate nunchion for a prieſt alone: ſeuering thoſe two maine pillers of our ſoules comfort, the body and blood of our Sauiour, and renting them in ſunder, which God had ſo neerely conioyned: making the reuerend celebration a pageant of moppes, mowes, eleuations, crouches, and ridiculous geſticulations: euacuating the power of that perfect, and abſolute oblation of the body, and blood of our Sauiour, by a quotidian imaginarie oblation of a ſacrifice without blood: offering vp in a blaſphemous conceit the body of our Sauiour, which ſitteth for euer at the right hand of GOD, giuing it for the dead, which our Sauiour did to and for the liuing receiuers onely: and aboue all ſacriledge, and heatheniſh blaſphemie, offering vp our Sauiour vnto God his father thus; beſeeching him that he, with a mercifull pleaſant countenance,
                        See the miſſall. 
                        will behold the offering vp of his onely begotten, and liuing ſonne Christ Ieſus, and that he will accept the ſame, euen as he accepted Abels offering, and the ſacrifice of Abraham, and of Melchiſedech the high prieſt. Heereby ſacrilegiouſly making your ſelues not onelie the true Melchiſedech (an honour appropriat vnto our Sauiour; by the ſaying of the holy Ghoſt) but moſt blaſphemouſly intruding your ſelues as Mediators, not onely betweene God and man, but alſo betweene Almightie God, and his ſonne; beſeeching him to accept of the oblation of his ſonne with a pleaſant countenaunce (O helliſh blaſphemy) at your interceſſion!
                        Page. 2.
                     
                     Thirdly, Sara was tempted by the deuil to ſay, the bleſſed ſacrament was bread, and not to be adored. This was an old potent temptation indeed. The bleſſed Apoſtle was thus tempted 1500. yeeres agoe, to call it expreſlie

by the name of bread, and to will vs to remember by the breaking of it, that it was none other but bread, Platoes Idaea of an eſſence ſubſiſting in nature, without exiſtence in indiuiduall ſubſtances (long ſince hiſſed out of the ſchooles for a fantaſticall fiction) is nothing vnto this Popiſh brainſick imaginatiō: that the colour, forme, taſt, ſauour, and dimenſions of bread ſhould ſubſiſt, & exiſt reall obiects to our ſences, without the ſubſtance, & nature of bread: that all theſe ſenſible accidents ſhould be made pendulous in the ayre, like Archimedes Doue, or els ſtript from their proper ſubſtance, and adhaere to an indeterminate, vagrant, vnbounded beeing: which all the ſubtile wits of all the Eagle-eyed Schoolemen in the world, could yet neuer chriſten with a name. Theſe are the Italian Monſters, hatched of the egges of ſchoole Crocodiles; the winding ſerpentine wits of prophane vncircumciſed ſpirits, that take libertie to themſelues to deſcant vpon Almightie God, vpon his beloued ſonne, and his bleſſed inſtitution, as they deſcant vpon haecceïtie, nihileïtie, and all thoſe conceited ſchoole-tricks.
                     Our Sauiour Chriſt I ſuppoſe would haue had ſomewhat adoe, to haue inſtructed his twelue holy diſciples, at the firſt celebration of the ſupper, in this Lecture of flying formes, and vagrant ſubſtances: and if our Sauiour had told S. Peter, that the bread which he brake & gaue him, was no true bread indeed, but the accidents of bread, (who could not conceiue of leuen, that our Sauiour mentioned, but he thought of houſhold bread) it would haue cauſed him to mooue many odde queſtions, and haue troubled his braines, and hindered his deuotion much in that reuerend, and ſacred action. But our Sauiours bleſſed diſciples were but groſſa capita to our ſubtiliated, ſublimated new ſpirits of the Sorbon. The bleſſed Apoſtle Saint Iohn, did thinke hee had brought an argument of good aſſurance to the Iewes, when he beganne his Epiſtle thus; That which wee haue

ſeene with our eyes, handled with our hands, and beene conuerſant withall, the Lord of life: which if he had written, to a quirking Sorboniſt, or a ſcoffing Lucianiſt, that had his braine puffed vp with this theorie of formes, hee would ſay, the Apoſtle wrote like a good plaine Iohn a nods: for thoſe accidents of ſpeech, fauour, proportion, and feeling might be in indiuiduo vago, in a wandering Hobgoblin, that had no ſimilitude of nature vvith the Lord of life. Verily, neither this new coyne of conceited formes, nor the imagination of any Idolatrous adoration was once in theyr vnderſtanding, who receiued the bleſſed ſacrament, leaning one vppon anothers breaſt, and therefore this temptation was as auncient as the originall inſtitution, that the ſacrament was bread, & not to be adored.
                     
                     Fourthly, Sara was tempted by the deuill to thinke that our Engliſh Ministers were as good, as the priests. If the deuil had not tempted Sara to this, hee had beene much too blame: for he beeing one of their chorus, and a principal actor in their play, & ſo familiar with all their legerdemaine, did well ſee, that if hell it ſelfe had beene raked (as they ſay) and 13 of the deuils moſt deuiliſh Miniſters fetched from thence, they could not haue paſſed Weston, and his twelue deuiliſh tragaedians, in any degree. Diſſemblers, iuglers, impoſtors, players with God, his Sonne, his angels, his ſaints: deuiſers of new deuils, feigned tormentors of ſpirits, vſurpers of the key of the bottomleſſe pit, whippers, ſcourgers, batfoulers of fiends, Pandars, Ganimedaeans, enhaunſers of luſt, deflowrers of virgins, defilers of houſes, vnciuil, vnmanlie, vnnaturall venereans, offerers of theyr owne maſſe to ſuppoſed deuils, deprauers of theyr owne reliques, applying them to vnſpeakable, deteſtable, monſtrous deformities: proſtituters of all the rites, ornaments, and ceremonies of theyr Church to impure villanies: prophaners of all parts of the ſeruice, worſhip, and honour

of God: violators of tombes, ſacrilegious, blaſphemers of God, the bleſſed Trinitie, and the virgin Marie, in the perſon of a counterfet deuill: ſeducers of ſubiects, plotters, conſpirators, contriuers of bloody & deteſtable treaſons, againſt their annointed Soueraigne: it would poſe all hell to ſample them with ſuch another doſen.
                     Fiftly, Page 4. 
                        Sara was tempted by the deuil not to ſay her prayers in Latine, becauſe God had not ſo commaunded, but in Engliſh, as ſhe had learned of the Minister, in her mothers houſe: Deerely beloued brethren, the Scripture moueth vs in ſundry places, humbly to acknowledge, and confeſſe our manifold ſinnes, and wickednes: God ſaue the Queene, and her Ministers.
                     
                     Are not theſe mens faces ſorely ſcorched with the flames of hel fire, and their conſciences ſeared with thoſe hote burning coales, that dare publiſh this deſperate impietie to the world, that the confeſſion of our ſinnes, according to Gods holy wil, and fatherly admonitions in the Scripture, (which is the firſt beginning of our worſhip, and ſeruice of almighty God, appointed and eſtabliſhed in our publique forme of prayer in the Church) is the deuils temptation? Was it euer heard of before, from eyther Heatheniſt, or diuine, that the deuil did tempt any, humbly to acknowledge, and confeſſe his ſinnes, before almighty God. Which are the expreſſe words of our ſeruice booke, derided by theſe helliſh Impoſtors, and fathered vppon the deuil? What are our faith, our hope, our charity, our zeale, our worſhip of almightie God, but Phariſaical cloudes, and wandring ſtarres, accurſed of God, without true, and vnfaigned humiliation going afore? And what ſhal become of their much-commended mortification, penance, affliction, and taming of the body, to bring it into due obedience, vnder the gouernment of Gods holy ſpirit, or in what order, and ranke, ſhal wee place theſe, if deiection of minde,

and humiliation of ſpirit, the acceptable ſacrifices vnto God, be the cogniſances of the deuil? Blinde, and deſperate malice cares not, what it ſpeakes, ſo it may ſpeak. For that addition, in ſcorne and ſuperbious contempt annexed by you, vnto our publique prayer, God ſaue the Queene, wee doe glory in it, and pray vnto God, from the bottome of our harts, that wee long ſo pray. It demonſtrateth plainly to the world, with what ſpirit you are led, namely by the ſpirit of Satanical pride, and deſperate diſobedience, that dare referre that pious loyal prayer to the deuil.
                     Thus hath the deuil (forſooth) ſpoken in fauor of our Prince, her worthy Counſailors, her renowmed Courtiers, her learned Miniſters: in fauor of the Sacraments, and publique ſeruice of almighty God, eſtabliſhed in our Church: now let vs heare the ſame deuil, as you haue preſented him on the ſtage, pleading for your Church, and patronizing your heatheniſh ſuperſtition, and diabolical inuentions in the ſame. Dibdale to the deuil.Booke of Miracles page. 16. 
                        What ſayest thou to the virgin Mary? Deuil. Oh ſhee had no originall ſinne, I had not a bit of her, neither within, nor without. Heere you ſee a plaine blaſphemy of the Church of Rome, that could neuer before be warranted by Scripture, reaſon, nor auncient Father, that any (except the vnſpotted ſonne of God) ſhould be borne without original ſinne, now warranted, and ſtamped with the ſignet of the deuil for good, namely, that the virgin Mary was borne without ſinne.
                     
                     
                        Page, 15,Dibdale: What ſayest thou to Gregory the thirteenth? Deuil. Oh, he is a Saint in heauen, he neuer came in Purgatorie. This fauour the deuil beſtowes on that Pope, becauſe he had beene a bountiful founder, and benefactor, to the Engliſh renegadoes, and a moſt peſtilent deuiſer againſt the life of our Soueraigne: who for this good ſeruice, was caried on the deuils backe, as ſeemes, ouer Purgatorie into heauen.
                     
                        Dibdale. What ſayest thou to Brian? Came he into Purgatorie? Deuil. Oh no, he is a Saint in deede,
                        Page. 43. 
                        he is in heauen. This man was one of the arch-traytors, that came ouer with Parſons, and Campian, with ſpecial deſignes of treaſon from the Pope: and therefore the deuil ought him a ſpecial good turne, & could not requite him better, then to enroll him amongſt his Saints.
                     Dibdale. What ſayest thou to the bleſſed Sacramant of the Altar? Deuil. It is the very body of Christ cut it,
                        Page 17. 
                        and thou ſhalt ſee it bleede. It had beene an eaſie experiment to haue tried, whether that the deuil would haue beene true of his word: but Dibdale had an euaſion readie twined for this: and that was; Hee would not cut it, for tempting his Creator. It was no tempting of God, to aske counſel of the deuil touching the Sacrament: but it had beene a ſore temptation, to haue made proofe of the bleeding, and yet there was no man of good ſence, but would rather haue giuen credit to his eyes, if he had ſeene it to bleede, then to the deuils bare affirmation in ſo waighty a caſe. But whom ſhould the children of lyes, coggeries, and Impoſtures beleeue, if they ſhould not beleeue their father, the graund father of lyes?
                     Weſton. What ſayest thou to Campians girdle,
                        Weſtons Tractat of Marwood. 
                        whence hath it this vertue, being a ſeely twist, to afflict, intoxicate, and amaze thee? Deuil. Ieruſalem nouit, Tiburnus nouit. Ieruſalem, and Tiburne can tell you.
                     
                     Thus farre the worthie dialogue betweene Dibdale and the deuill, wherein are many points of high & prudent conſideration. If we may be ſo bold with his deuilſhips good leaue, wee would gladly aske a queſtion or two: firſt, why cutting ſhould make the ſacrament to bleed, and not breaking doe the ſame, if the body of our Sauiour be really there? For veines beeing the veſſels of blood, there is fluxe of blood cauſed as well by rupture of a veine cauſed by violence, (and for the moſt part in greater aboūdance) as by diſſection of the ſame.

And againe I imagine, that (according to theyr moſt monſtrous opinion) our Sauiour had been in the Sacrament, as the ſoule is ſaid to be in the body: that is, totus Ch: in toto ſacramento, et totus in qualibet parte ſacramenti. So as whether you cut, or breake the ſacrament after conſecration, the part that you diſtribute, doth cō
                        taine whole Chriſt, and euery part of him; then can no inciſion deuide our Sauiours body, and cauſe it to bleed, no more then cutting of an arme can deuide the ſoule. I feare his deuilſhip was too ſuddaine in this reſolution of bleeding, or els that his wits were troubled with ſmoake.
                     Secondly I wonder (conſidering the deepe wit, and policy of the deuil) how it ſtandeth with his wiſedome, to reſolue ſo cleare & eaſily on the Romiſh Catholicks ſide, all the deepeſt matters depending betweene vs and them: conſidering (as Edmunds, the deuils priuado, affirmeth) that Proteſtants be all friend to the deuil, & Catholicks his ſworne enemies. This is to weaken himſelfe and his forces, and to cauſe his friends to forſake his colours, and flie vnto his enemies; as wee find, by theſe his temerarious reſolutions, hee loſt 4 or 5000. long-bild birds at a clap. Either all is not well with the deuill in his wits, or els the prieſts had ſo ſcalded him in the breech, as hee durſt doe no other. And what a ſtrange aduantage haue the Romiſts of vs Proteſtants, that haue gotten them two heads, whereof neither can erre, a Pope, and a deuill?
                     The deuils aunſwers & reſolutions here to caſes propounded by the prieſts, are diuine Oracles, farre paſſing the old Oracles hee was wont to make in Apollos Temple at Delphos, or the Trophonian denne: for they were mixed with aequiuocation (the new Ieſuitical, and old diabolicall tricke) but theſe are cleere, direct, and plaine. Dibd: What ſayeſt thou to the Sacrament of the Altar? Deuil. It is the very body of Christ, cut it and

thou ſhalt ſee it bleede. And heerein the deuils headſhip ſurpaſſeth the Popes headſhip by farre: for the Popes head-peece may ake with ſtrong wine, ſtirring choller, or ſtrong poyſon; and his Holines muſt haue a counſel called, and he muſt be placed in his Conſiſtorian chaire (as Caiphas in the ſeate of the High prieſt) ere hee can prophecie certaine and right; and it muſt be in cauſis fū
                           damentalibus fidei to: and then he ſhal ſpeake truth whether he wil or no, like Balams Aſſe: but the deuils headſhip needes none of theſe moleſtations, ſolemnities, nor exceptions. His cenſure is in actu vltimo, ready, quick, certaine, ſound, infallible, cleere, admitting no interpretation. Who being alwaies ready at hand to cōmaund, by Mengus his whip, his club, or his deuil-bugge, or an Exorciſts holy hands, more potent then all theſe, and hauing his taile wel ſizled with brimſtone, or ſcalded ſoundly with holy water afore, what a good-yeere needs all this leuel coyle, & ſtirre, for determinations of counſels, reſolutions of Popes, allegations of Fathers, diſputations of ſubtiliſſimus, angelicis, Seraphicus doctor ex ordine minorum, that doe cramp mens wits, & turne them out of their ſockets. Ecce your ſubtiliſſimus, angeliciſſimus, Seraphiciſſimus Doctor the deuil: and tis no more then thus. Exor: Deuill, what ſayest thou to the Pope? Is hee Antichrist, or head of the Church, yea or no? Deuil. Oh no, he is the head of the Church. Exor: May hee excommunicate Princes, and diuest them from theyr crownes? De: Oh he may, he may. Exor: Hath hee the temporall ſword directly or no? and is hee Rex regum of the world, and all the Emperors, Kings, and Princes his Lieutenants, to place, and diſplace at his pleaſure? De: Oh they be all his vaſſals. Exo: May the Ieſuits (his ſpirits) in ordine ad Deum cog, lye, aequiuocate, adulterate, murther, ſtab, poyſon Chriſtian Princes, for aduauncing the Popes Monarchie, & the King of Spaine, or no? De: Oh they may doe what they list in ordine ad deum. This is a ſhort cut, tis but an Oh
                        
for a preface, and the reſt is an Oracle: and ſo all the grand caſes for either Church, or Common-wealth are diſpatched.
                     And if they want deuils in Italy, to exorciſe, and aske Oracles of: let them come but ouer into London in England: and wee haue ready for them, Darrells wife, Moores Minion, Sharpe, Skelton, Euans, Swan, & Lewis; the deuil-finders, and deuil-puffers, or deuil-prayers: and they ſhal ſtart them a deuil in a lane, as ſoone as an Hare in Waltham forreſt, that ſhal nick it with aunſwers, as dead as Westons, and Dibdales deuils did. And wee ſhal as eaſily finde them a route, rable, and ſwarme of giddy, adle, lunaticke, illuminate holy ſpectators of both ſexes, but eſpecially a Siſternity of mimpes, mops, and idle holy women, that ſhal grace Modu the deuil, with their idle holy preſence, and be as ready to cry out, at the mowing of an apiſh wench, and the lowing, or bellowing of a brainleſſe empty fellow: O the glory of God: O the power of prayer: as the Romiſh guls did troupe about Sara, Fid, and Anne Smith, and cry out at the coniuration of the Exorciſt: O the Catholique fayth! O the power of the fayth Catholique. Haec tempora, hi mores. Theſe are the times, wherein we are ſicke, and mad of Robin good fellow, and the deuil, to walke againe amongſt vs: and (I feare) the latter times, wherein lying ſignes, faigned wonders, cogged miracles, the companions of Antichriſt, ſhal preuaile with the children of pride, giddines, and misbeleefe.
                     We doe not aſſeuer, that the deuil cannot ſay a troth, or that he hath not ſome-time proclaimed the truth: we know he cried, and ſaid to our Sauiour Chriſt, We know thee, who thou art, the holy one of God: wherein he ſayd, and cried truly: but this was vpon coaction, from the mighty hand of God, and not vppon queſtioning, and dialoguizing with the deuil, which we neuer read, that eyther our Sauiour, or his holy diſciples did. Nay, wee

ſee that our Sauiour checked the deuil, ſo ſaying truly of him, and commaunded him to hold his peace, as not accepting of any witnes, or teſtimony from the deuils. If Edmunds, and his twelue deuiliſh tragaedians could in deede haue coniured a deuil: (as the deuil of deuil there was, but the cogging, coniuring knaues themſelues) that would haue giuen teſtimonie to the prayers, Sacraments, and ſeruice of God, eſtabliſhed in our Church, (as they faigned Modu their deuil to doe:) we would haue diſdained, and reiected his teſtimonie, as our Sauiour Chriſt did.
                     But ſee Westons great wit, the Author and contriuer of this deuill-ſport. When the cogge-deuill ſpeakes of vs: O that is our diſgrace, & confuſion: when he ſpeakes of the Romiſh church, and the bleeding of the Sacrament: O that is Gods oracle, and their triumphant exaltation. O deſpicable heatheniſh beggerie, to goe a begging good wordes and credit from the deuil. And loe heere (good Chriſtian Reader) plaine Gentiliſme, without welt or couer. The Gentiles beeing forſaken of God, and giuen vp into a reprobate minde, did reſort vnto theyr Oracles, to aske other counſels, and reſolutions from the deuil; and what doe our Romiſh Impoſtors leſſe, or in other ſort, then Croeſus, Alexander, Pyrrhus, and the reſt of the heathen Captaines did? Let ſome ſubtile Sorboniſt giue mee an eſſentiall difference betweene them. They asked the deuil queſtions; ſo doe our prieſts: they asked about matters of their commonweale; our prieſts doe more: they aske about matters of God, and the Church, they tooke the deuils word for a graceful diuine fauour vnto them; ſo doe our prieſts: they accounted the deuils anſwer as the oracles of God; ſo doe our prieſts: It is the body of Christ, (cries the deuill) cut it, and thou ſhalt ſee it bleede. Why now tis cock, or deuil-ſure, againſt all the Proteſtants in the world: except the difference be this: the deuill neuer aunſwered

the heathen Captaines in any matter of import, but in amphibologies and clowdes, for feare of beeing taken tripping in a lye: our Romiſh deuils, doe giue their anſwers bare-faced, without any circuition, or aequiuocation at all: and therefore our Romiſh deuils are ſure the ſonnes of theyr ſweet Sire the Pope, and the darlings of theyr deere mother the holy Church of Rome. But ô lamentable deſperation of the church of Rome! When King Saule for his diſobedience, was depriued of the good ſpirit of God, and had a bad ſpirit ſent from God, to haunt and afflict him, and that Almighty God in his heauy diſpleaſure, would neither aunſwer him by 
                           Ʋrim, Thummim, nor reuelation from heauen: he then in a deſperate mood goes to the Witch at Endor, to aske counſel of her. Quid dicis? What ſayest thou to my ſtate? The loathſome abhominations, and Ethnike Impoſtures of the Church of Rome, where-with they haue gulled, and made drunken the Kings of the Nations, being by the piercing glorious light of the Goſpel diſplayed, and vncouered to the open view of the world; and that church for her whoredome being depriued of the holy ſpirit of Almighty God, and giuen ouer to the ſpirit of darknes, giddines, and iugling deceite; hauing now neyther teſtimonie from Gods diuine Oracles, nor breathings from that heauenly cleare fountaine, nor preſence of holy Fathers, to countenance their monſtrous deformations; doe in a deſperate fury, and helliſh reſolution, reſort vnto the Oracles of the deuil, and would coniure vp from hel the Prince, and power of darknes, to be their proloquutor, and to grace them with a wonder.
                     Heare their lamentable voyce, fraught with deſpaire, quid dicis? Prince of darknes, what ſayeſt thou for our Maſſe? What ſayeſt thou for our Sacrament of the Altar? And now (good Reader) obſerue the top of helliſh reſolution, and the gulfe of diſpaire: wherein the

Romiſh church is plunged: when neither God, Angel, nor deuil, can be gotten to ſpeake for them (for heere was neither Angel, S. Mary, S. Barbara, nor deuil, nor ſpirit, in all this faigned tragaedie, as we haue let you to ſee, thorough the whole courſe of the ſame) O lamentable deſolation! Weston, and his twelue Prieſts, doe play the deuils themſelues, & all to grace from hel, (being now forſaken of heauen) their pope, their Maſſe, their Sacraments, their Medalls, their agnus Dei, their charmes, their enchauntments, their coniurations, their reliques, their helliſh ſorceries: et praeualuit hec potestas tenebrarum: This power of darknes, played by the children of darknes preuailed, to the gayning vnto his holines, and to hel, foure or fiue thouſand ſoules, and that in a very little, and ſhort time. VVhoſe heart wil not bleede for pitty, and his eyes guſh out with teares, for compaſſion, of our blinded, beſotted, bewitched poore Nation? The rather, when he ſhal caſt his eye vpon the maine worke, ſhape, and end, of all this deuilliſh deuiſe, which was this. One of the chiefe impediments, that haue hindered from time to time, the deſignments of the Pope, the King of Spaine, and their agents, againſt her Maieſtie, and this Kingdome, hath beene the want of a ſufficient number of Catholiques heere in England, to aſſiſt them: for the ſupplying whereof, his Holines hath from time to time ſet on worke all his inſtruments of hell.
                     When the Lords in the North, were to take vp armes againſt her Maieſtie, and the ſtate, the Pope denounced his Excommunication againſt her, and againſt all that ſhould take her part: and ſent his Prieſts hither, not onlie to intimate vnto thē, what the Pope had done therein; but likewiſe to ſollicite as many Catholiques, as they could, to vnite themſelues in ſtrengthening that rebellion; aſſuring them, that they were abſolued from their duty, and allegeance, and that they were bound, vnder

paine of the Popes diſpleaſure, and of incurring the like cenſure, if they ſhould refuſe ſo to doe. And Saunders is confident, that if there had beene ſufficient notice in time of the ſaid excommunication, the number of the Catholiques, that would haue taken part with the ſaid Earle, would haue beene ſo great, as that her Maieſtie, with all the forces ſhe could make, could not haue been able to haue withſtoode them.
                     At what time the ſecond attempt (as I haue touched in the beginning) by force, was in plotting betwixt the Pope, and the King of Spaine, for the ſending ouer into England of the Duke of Guiſe: (Saunders being gone about that time into Ireland, to animate, and aſſiſt the Traytor Deſmond, and likewiſe to incite, and allure her Maieſties ſubiects there, to take his part) the feare of want of ſufficient aſſiſtance heere at home, did greatly perplex them: where-vpon, about the yeere 1580, and a little after, many more prieſts (and ſome Ieſuits alſo) were ſent into this Realme, then at any time before, to labour by all meanes poſſible, for the with-drawing of her Maieſties ſubiects from their duty, and allegeance, by reconciling, & vniting their harts to her mortal enemie, the Pope. To which purpoſe, it were hard to recount their falſe, and alluring enticements, by exclaiming without all ciuil modeſty, and truth, againſt the doctrine of the Church of England, now eſtabliſhed: by deprauing her Maieſties gouernment, and the whole eſtate of the Realme, in moſt barbarous, and outragious inuectiues, and libels, and by terrifying of ſome, & peruerting of others, with ſtrange reports of the ſtrength, and preparation of the King of Spaine, and the Pope, ready to inuade this Land. About this time alſo their traffique, & merchandizing, by pardons, medals, graines, Croſſes, Agnus deies, was exceeding all meaſure, wherewith they deluded, and inueigled many of the ſimpler ſort. But all theſe deuiſes notwithſtanding, either for

that the number they laboured for, did not ſo encreaſe, as they deſired, or that the Ieſuits had an ambitious deſire, to carie away the garland from the reſt of their brethren, and companions in this ſeruice. Fa: Weston, then the Prouinciall of all the Ieſuits in England, deuiſed this helliſh trick of caſting out deuils: by the which they ſo preuailed, as they gayned in a very ſhort ſpace, foure or 5000 to be reconciled to the Pope. And ſuch was at that time the zeale, or rather fury of theſe new gayned Proſelytes, and the elder ſort of Phariſaical hypocrites, ſo kindled, and enflamed with the admiration of the diuine power, which they ſuppoſed to be in theſe prieſts, as (beſides the large contributions, which they gaue thē) no meruaile if they would haue followed them through thick, and thin, fire, and water, purgatorie, and hel, to aſſiſt any forraine, or domeſtical power againſt her Maieſtie, and her Kingdome. I wiſh, and earneſtly pray for theſe, gulled, deluded, bewitched poore ſoules, that they may now at laſt lay their hand on their harts, or that God would open their harts, to loath thoſe deſpicable Impoſtures, and returne vnto the truth: aſſuring them ſelues, that neuer any true religion, did aſſiſt, and credite it ſelfe by ſuch diabolical diſſimulation.
                     FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  THE Copies of the ſeuerall Examinations, and confeſsions of the parties pretended to be poſſeſſed, and diſpoſſeſſed by VVeston the Ieſuit, and his adherents: ſet downe word for word as they were taken vpon oath before her Maieſties Commiſſioners for cauſes Eccleſiaſticall, and are extant vppon Record in the ſame Court.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  The examination of Sara Williams, taken vpon her oath, the 24 of Aprill 1602. before the Lord Biſhop of London, Ma: Doctor Andrewes, Deane of VVestminster, Ma: Doctor Stanhop, and Ma: Doctor Mountford.
                  
                  THE beginning of the history taken with Barnes beeing read vnto this examinate,The booke of miracles extant vpon record. how ſhe began firſt to be poſſeſſed, beeing about the age of 15 or 16 yeeres, viz: how ſhee had beene diuers times ſcared with vgly viſions: how ſitting one night late by the fire, three terrible Cats ſprauled about this examinate: how one leapt ouer her head, another crept betweene her legs: how a ſtrange huge Cat as big as a Mastiffe, ſtared vppon her with eyes as big as a ſaucer: and how afterward the ſame wicked ſpirit met her in the likenes of a Cat, comming out of a hollow tree, as ſhe was ſeeking for eggs. She ſaith, that all theſe things thus written of her, are moſt falſe: and that ſhee greatly wondreth, that any man would ſo write: onely ſhe ſayth, that from a child ſhe could neuer endure the

ſight of a Cat. And that when ſhee dwelt with Maiſter Maynie at Denham, (which was about a yere before ſhe went to Miſtris Peckham) ſhee walking one day in a wood by the houſe, and looking for ſome Hennes (as ſhee remembreth) ſhee eſpyed a Cat comming out of a hedge, which did feare her greatly, and made her to tremble, and ſhake, (as ſhee often doth when ſhee is afraid) but ſhe ſayeth, that ſhe was the more ſcared then, becauſe ſhe was alone. This tale, ſhe thinketh, ſhee told firſt to her Miſtris, & afterwards to certaine Prieſts, and further ſaith, that if any Prieſt, or other Catholick hath beene the author of thoſe words, before read vnto her, they haue falſly contriued them, as ſhe thinketh, vppon the occaſion of the ſaid Cat. For ſhe denieth, that euer ſhe had been vſed, before ſhe fell into the prieſts hands, to be affrighted with any vgly viſions, or that euer any Cat (to her knowledge) did either leape ouer her head, or runne betwixt her legges, or that ſhe heard any ſuch terrible noyſe, or that ſhee euer ſaw any Cat as bigge as a maſtiffe, with eyes as broad as a ſaucer.
                  Shee ſaith, that when ſhee came to Fulmer, to dwell with Miſtris Peckham, which was about Michaelmas (as ſhe remembreth) ſhee had not beene there long before ſhe heard, that the houſe was troubled with ſpirits, ſo as euery noyſe, and thing that ſhee heard or ſaw, did feare her.
                  Shee further ſaith, that the tale read vnto her out of the ſaid booke, concerning her leauing of her ſupper, beeing greatly afraid, the 12 of October, Anno 1585, is moſt falſe:Page 20. as that ſhe perceiued beeing at ſupper a puffe of wind comming in at the doore, that ſhee ſaw a dog of two cullours, blacke and greene: that therewith a ſpaniell of the houſe bayed once: that ſhee this examinate, was then pulled by the eyes, that the thing that pulled her by the eyes, went into her mouth, and resting at her hart, burnt her intolerably: and that therevppon ſhe cast away her knife, and would

eat no more meate for that time. At the hearing of theſe things read vnto her, ſhe vſed theſe words; O Ieſus that any body ſhould report ſo of me. That which happened at that time, was as followeth.
                  She ſaith, that beeing at ſupper, here was great thunder and lightning, & that there hapning one great flaſh of lightning, and a great clap of thunder, the dogges therewith ran out of the hall barking. And herewith ſhe confeſſeth that ſhe was greatly afraid, left of her ſupper, and grew to be ſickly after it. And more then this ſhee denyeth to be true, and maruaileth that any ſhould be ſo wicked, as to write in that ſort of her.
                  She further ſaith, that after her comming to Miſtris Peckham, (GOD hauing done his part for her) diuerſe men did attempt, to offer her ſome iniury; and that amongſt the reſt, ſhe was very loth to goe into any place, where Ma: Dibdale the prieſt was, not knowing him thē to be a prieſt. Inſomuch as when her Miſtris would ſend her with water to his chamber, or vppon any other buſines, and ſhe ſhewing herſelfe vnwilling there-vnto, they told her afterward, that out of doubt it did proceed from a wicked ſpirit, that was then in her, that ſhe could not at ſuch former times well indure to be in Ma: Dibdales company, or to goe into his chamber, he beeing a prieſt, as afterwards ſhe perceiued.
                  Concerning her Miſtris mouing of her,Page. 21. to bleſſe herſelfe with the ſigne of the croſſe, shee ſaith, that when she came to dwell with her, she taught her to bleſſe her ſelfe in Latine, and at ſome words to make a croſſe on her forhead, at others on her belly, at others, firſt on one ſhoulder, and then on the other ſhoulder, and with the laſt words vpon her breaſt. This prayer, and manner of bleſſing herſelfe she ſaith, that beeing dull to learne, it was a good time before ſhee could doe it rightly. So as when her Miſtris, and Ma: Dibdale willed her to bleſſe herſelfe, and to vſe the ſignes of the croſſe, shee beeing

very euil at eaſe that night after the lightning, she could not eaſily hit vpō the words. Alſo ſhe wel remembreth, that in ſaying the Creede, ſhe ſtumbled at the word Catholicke Church. Otherwiſe she ſaith, that all theſe particulers are moſt falſe, as that ſhe could not abide M. Dibdales preſence for burning, eſpecially when he laid his hand vpon her diſeaſed place: that she should ſay, her Master had commaunded her, that ſhe ſhould not bleſſe herſelfe with the ſigne of the croſſe, or that ſhe could not indure a casket of reliques, or that shee euer ſo much as dreamed at that time that ſhe was poſſeſſed, or that the deuill was her Maister, or that shee euer ſaid, our Lady did not loue her, or that our Lady was with her, and chid her, and ſaid ſhee loued her not. Theſe things she ſaith she verily belieueth to be falſe, & that it was very euil done of them, whoſoeuer they vvere that writ them.
                  
                     Page, 22.She alſo ſaith, that thoſe things are moſt falſe, vvhich are written to haue beene vttered by her vpon the 17. of October, as that ſhe ſhould ſay that her father, mother, & friends, were in a damnable caſe by going to the Church. For at that time she this exam: was not a recuſant, nor diſliked going to the Church: or that shee affirmed that it was dangerous for little children to goe to the Church. Shee further ſaith, that about this time they began to giue her things to drinke, which she could not endure, for that she perceiued they made her ſicke, as holy water offended her becauſe it was ſalt: and at ſuch times she ſayth, that they (Ma: Dibdale, and ſuch others as were preſent) would ſay, it was not ſhe that diſliked thē, but the deuil in her.
                  
                  Further ſhe ſaith, that within about a fortnight (as she remēbreth) they preuailed with her to make her a Romiſh Catholick, and then notwithſtanding the deuil was in her, as they ſaid, yet they cauſed her to receiue the bleſſed ſacrament, as farre as ſhee remembreth.
                  
                     Page. 23.Shee further ſaith, that in the booke concerning the ſights, which are pretended that she should ſee at maſſe,

all that therein is ſet downe, is moſt falſe, as that ſhe ſhould ſee a blacke man ſtanding at the doore, and beckning at her to come away: that ſhe could hardly looke vp in the eleuation time: or that ſhee ſaw nothing then but the prieſts fingers. But she ſaith, that she doth not certainly know, whether she told them any ſuch thing, or no: confeſſing, that she did very often tell them thoſe things, which were vntrue, after she perceiued, how she could pleaſe them.
                  Alſo she ſaith, that it is likewiſe very falſe that is written of her, as that she should vppon the 30 of October ſee the likenes of a Wrenne vpon the top of the prieſts fingers.
                     Page 24. This examinat further hearing the report out of the booke how it is ſaid, that ſhe was troubled vpō
                      All Saints day, ſhe ſaith, she doth not remēber the particuler times when they bound her in the chayre, and applyed theyr reliques vnto her. But addeth that they troubled her very often, praying God to forgiue them, and ſaying, that when she came to the chayre, she was ſo vſed, as that euery time (if she might haue had her choice) she would rather haue choſen to haue ended her life, then to haue gone into it.
                  And concerning her dumbnes, and coldnes,Page 23. that ſhee could not ſpeake till they had ſigned her throat with the ſigne of the croſſe, & applyed holy reliques vnto it. She ſaith that she doth not remember any ſuch thing, but thinketh it is altogether vntrue. At the leaſt, if at any time she were paſt the vſe of her ſences, it was by reaſon of ſuch waters and drinks, as they compelled her to take: and that if she were at any time ſilent, and did afterwards ſpeake, it was not becauſe they had ſigned her throat with the ſigne of the croſſe, or applyed holy reliques vnto it, albeit she confeſſeth, that whatſoeuer shee did or ſpake, they would euer expound it, as they liſt themſelues, & ſay it was done or ſpoken by vertue of holy water, and other conſecrated things.
                  Further,Page 23, touching the report of that which is pretended

to haue beene ſeene, and ſpoken of by this examinate vpon All Soules day after dinner: she ſaith, shee is aſhamed to heare ſuch things to be written, God almighty knowing that they are very falſe. And this shee affirmeth (she ſaith) as in the ſight of Almighty God, & would ſo ſay, if all the prieſts, that were there, were here preſent. And she further affirmeth, that shee is well aduiſed, that shee neuer ſaw any deuill in the forme of a man that ſhould depart from her, when shee vſed theſe words as is pretended, Credo ſanctum eccleſiam Catholicam, Almighty God forgiue them.
                  
                     Page 24.She further ſaith, as concerning the byrd mentioned in the booke: she confeſſeth that a bird came ſuddainly flying in, whereby she was ſcared, and ſtrooke it vvith her beades, and that the bird did afterwards (beeing a Robin red-breaſt) eſcaped out, beeing on the floore at a hole in the boords, there beeing light to be ſeene, and wide lathes vnderneath vnmorterd, ſo as the bird might eaſily eſcape. But for the reſt, shee ſaith that it is moſt falſe, as that a blacke man ſhould perſwade her to breake her necke downe a paire of ſtaires, and another time to cut her owne throat with a knife, and that ſhe ſaw the forme of a rough dog vppon the communion table, or that there was any grunting in her like ſwyne, or croaking like a toade, or that ſhe euer receiued her ſight by the priests fingers, or by theyr breathing vpon her. It pittieth (she ſaith) her hart, that any, that pretend to haue any conſcience, ſhould ſo write of her.
                  
                     Page 25.Touching the report, that ſhe ſhould affirme, that one of the ſeruaunts in the houſe was ſore haunted by the enemie, (meaning as shee thinketh, Ma: Trayford) and that ſhee could neuer abide the ſight of him, becauſe of a thing that followed him, ſhe ſaith, it is vtterly vntrue, adding that shee was ſo farre from diſliking the ſight of him, as that ſhee rather thinketh, she loued him too well.
                  
                     Page, 25.Concerning the ceremonies of baptiſme mentioned, ſhe

ſaith, that the prieſts did perſwade her, that her baptiſme could not auaile her, except she alſo were partaker of their ceremonies, which were holy oyle, holy ſalt, and holy ſpittle, as she remembreth. The ſalt they put into her mouth, and with their fingers, wet eyther with ſpittle or oyle, did touch her lips, her noſe, her eyes, and her eares, as she thinketh, and in the meane time she had a Chriſome caſt ouer her head, being of halfe an ell of holland, with a croſſe in the midſt of it. At that time they changed her name from Sara to Mary, where-vnto she was the more willing, becauſe they told her, there was neuer any Saint was called Sara, & the name of Marie pleaſed her better.
                  She alſo ſaith, that neyther by the feeling or ſmelling of a Priest, ſhe eyther receaued at any time her hearing, or ſight,
                     Page, 25. Ibidem. neuer hauing beene hetherto blinde or deafe, (she thanketh God) onely she ſaith, that through their euil vſage of her, she grew to be troubled with the paſſion of the hart, becauſe she conceaued very great griefe, by theyr bad vſing of her, and that through the ſaid paſſion, she hath diuers times ſwounded. At which times vpon her recouerie, they would vſually ſay, that she receaued her ſight, and hearing, and other ſences againe, by the vertue of their reliques, and touching of her. And at that time she partly beleeued them: but ſince hauing beene diuers times troubled in that ſort, ſince she was married (as her husband knoweth) for the which she may thank the ſaid prieſts; she hath by Gods goodnes recouered her health againe, without any of the prieſts helps, wherby she now perſwadeth her ſelfe in her hart, that she was then greatly deluded by them. She further ſaith, that she wel remembreth, that Ma: Trayford one night did ſeeme ſo be greatly troubled, and afterwards did pretend to be ſodainly wel, Ma: Dibdale the prieſt hauing catched him in his armes: but she vtterly denieth, that she euer ſaw any Mouſe offering to come out of his mouth,
                     Page. 28. 
                     or after going

out at his care, or that the Priests mouth did hinder the deuill from comming out at Ma: Trayfords mouth. Theſe things, she ſaith, are all fained, and falſe, and farther addeth, that she wel remembreth, when she was with them, they would tel many things of her, which she knew to be falſe, but durſt not ſay any thing againſt them, for offending of them.
                  
                     Page, 29.Where it is ſaid, that one deuill perſwaded Ma: Trayford, to haue hanged himſelfe, and that another moued this exam: to goe out at Maſſe time, and that ſhe thereby hindered Ma: Trayfords vngracious purpoſe. Ieſus haue mercy vpon me (quoth this exam:) what wickednes is this? God is my Iudge, that it is moſt falſe.
                  Alſo, she ſaith, that it is a shameful vntruth, where it is reported of her, that ſhe by crying vpon God, and her bleſſed Lady, and by casting holy water vpon Ma: Trayford, made the deuill to leaue his hold, hauing (as the book ſaith) in the likenes of a Toad, catched him by the leg.
                  
                  
                     Page. 32.Touching the child George Peckham, ſhe confeſſeth, that one time, the prieſts holding of her hands, he did beate this Examinate with one of their Stoles, pittifully about the face, in ſuch ſort, as ſhe did not loue him euer ſince. For though the Stole could giue no great blow, yet it made her face to ſmart exceedingly. But this, ſhe ſaith, was at Denham, and denieth, that for ought ſhee knoweth, or remembreth, he euer kept the deuill from her at Vxbridge, eyther with holy water, or holy candell.
                  
                  
                     Page, 32, Ibidem.Thus much alſo of Hobberdidaunce (as it is in the booke) ſhe wel remembreth, and ſaith, that her Miſtres, as they were at worke, had told them a merry tale of Hobberdidaunce, that vſed his cunning to make a Lady laugh: which tale ſhe this examinate, doth very wel yet remember, & therfore is fully perſwaded, that when the prieſts did pretend, that the ſpirit was gone out of her, and vrged her to tel, what name it had, ſhe affirmed it to be called Hobberdidaunce.
                  
                  
                     There being reade to this examinate, out of the ſame booke, the pretended names of diuers ſpirits, which the prieſts gaue out, that they caſt out of her, and that the ſaid prieſts deliuered, whilſt they were in her, as Lustie Dick, Killico, Hob, Cornercap, Puffe, Purre, Frateretto,
                     Page. 33, 
                     Fliberdigibet, Haberdicut, Cocobatto, Maho, Kellicocam, Wilkin, Smolkin, Nur, Lustie iolly Ienkin, Portericho, Pudding of Thame, Pour-dieu, Boniour, Motubizanto, Bernon, Delicate, this exam: ſayth, that there were very ſtrange names written vpon the wals at Sir George Peckhams houſe, vnder the hangings, which they ſaid were names of ſpirits. And addeth, that ſhe perceauing ſtil, that when they ſaid it was the deuil, that ſpake in her, & that they would needes haue her from time to time, to giue it ſome name, ſhe to content them, did alwayes deuiſe one name or other, and verily thinketh, that ſhee came neere ſome-times to ſome of the names, which were written vpon the wall, becauſe ſhe had often heard them, and ſaith, that they runne then in her head. And ſhe further thinketh, that the prieſts themſelues did ſet them downe in better order, then ſhe did vtter them. But amongſt the reſt, ſhe ſaith, that the name of Maho came into her minde; for that ſhe had heard before her vncle reade the ſame out of a booke, there being a tale therein of Maho.
                  
                  The tale of Lusty Dick, mentioned in the ſaid book, ſhee ſaith, is ſet downe falſly, euen as he that made the book liſt. The Amice therin mentioned, was a cloath,Page, 33. Ibidem. that the prieſt had put ouer his head, when he went to Maſſe, which did ſignifie the cloath, where-with the Iewes did blindfold Chriſt, and ſaith, it is likely, that if they did lay it ouer her mouth, ſhe might blow it vp, leaſt it ſhould ſtop her wind. And for the other ſpeeches, ſhe ſaith, it may be, that when they vrged her to aunſwer thoſe queſtions, ſhe aunſwered, as it came in her minde accordingly. And for the ſtinke of brimſtone,

ſhe verily thinketh, it may be true, for that the chamber did ſtil ſtinke of it, they vſed it ſo much. That which is reported of her in the ſaid booke of three Captaine deuils,
                     Page, 34. 
                     that ſhould goe out of her eares, hauing euery one of them 300 with them, which this exam: ſhould haue felt, in diuers parts of her body. She ſaith, it is an abhominable vntruth, and that ſhe meruaileth, what they that ſo haue reported of her, ſhould meane, in that manner to abuſe her a poore wretch, that neuer meant them any harme. Touching that which is written of the pretended ſpirit named Puffe, as that he ſhould ſay vpon S. Hughs day,
                     Page, 34. Ibidem. 
                     he would goe ring for the Queene: She verily beleeueth, that eyther thoſe words haue beene deuiſed by the writer of the booke, or elſe that if ſhe this exam: vttered them, it was becauſe ſhe heard them ſpeaking of ringing that day, in honour of the Queene, and knew that thereby ſhe ſhould pleaſe them. For (as partly before hath beene touched) ſhe alwayes framed her ſelfe to vſe ſuch words, as ſhe thought would content the Prieſts. And where there is mention made, that ſhe ſhould ſay, that ſpirits haue been rayſed vp by a Coniurer to keepe money: She confeſſeth, it may be ſhe might vſe ſuch ſpeeches, becauſe ſhe had heard talke, that there had beene coniuring about the houſe for money. As touching that tale of the xviij. of Nouember, how Purre was cast out of her, how ſhe was bound fast in a chayre, and how the Croſſe being layd vpon her head,
                     Page, 35. 
                     did ſo burne the deuill, as that ſhee thought it would haue burnt out that part of her head, which it touched: She aunſwereth, that all of it almoſt, is eyther falſly deuiſed (as ſhe perceaueth a number of things are in the ſaid booke) or elſe that it may be that ſhe her ſelfe did then pretend ſomething of it to be true. But ſhee doth not now remember it. For ſhe ſaith, there were ſo many things done, and ſo long ſince, as ſhe thinketh, ſhe cannot remember a great part of them: onely ſhe addeth, that ſhe cannot forget her binding in a chayre manie

times. The manner whereof, was as followeth.
                  When the prieſts were purpoſed to make the wicked ſpirit to ſhew himſelfe in this exam: and to expel him (as they ſaid) they would cauſe her to be bound faſt in a chayre, and then giue vnto her a certaine drinke, which as ſhe remembreth, was a hallowed drinke, conſiſting of Oyle, Sack, Rue, and ſome other things, which are now out of her minde. But this ſhe wel remembreth, that looke what ſhe moſt diſliked, and hated, they would ſtil compel her to take, pretending that it was not ſhe, but the deuil, that diſliked it. And although ſhe knew that therein they did abuſe her, and that few women there are, that would not indeede abhorre ſuch a drinke, yet ſhe durſt not but ſeemed to yeeld vnto them, but indeed they did compel her ſtil, alledging that whatſoeuer ſhe ſaid, or did againſt it, it was the deuil that did it, and not ſhe, whereas in very deede, ſhe tooke ſuch a diſlike at that time of thoſe thing, as yet to this day she cannot endure them. In ſo much, as about three yeeres ſince, this exam: hauing a pangue of ſicknes in the Market at Oxford, ſome of her neighbours gaue her Sack at vnawares vnto her, which as ſoone as she perceaued, she fel to be very ſore ſicke vpon it, and was conſtrayned to lye there all night: the offence of the Sacke being the onelie griefe she had, after shee was recouered of her ſayd pangue.
                  At ſome times alſo they would burne brimſtone vnder her noſe, at another time feathers, and diuers ſuch loathſome ſmels, which they ſaid were hallowed, & then they would with very maine ſtrength, though she ſtrugled very much, bend her face iuſt ouer the ſmoke, which was by the burning of the ſaid brimſtone, and other things in a chafing-dish, which they would hold ſo neer her noſe, as ſometimes beſides the ſmell, the very heate would trouble her. When she was thus holden, she ſaith, that the very paine she felt, cauſed her to cry, and ſcrich

very loude, & to ſtruggle as much as poſſibly she could till her ſtrength failed her. At one time shee was ſo extreamely afflicted with the ſaid drinks and ſmoke, as that her ſences went from her, and she remained in a ſwoune as afterward it was told her: vpon her recouery, she remembreth that the prieſt ſaid, that the deuil did thē goe downe into the lower part of her body, and that commonly when her ſtrength failed her ſo, that shee could ſtruggle no longer, they would ſay, that then the deuill grew quiet. At ſuch times when she cried, they vvould ſay, it was the deuill, and not ſhee, that ſo cryed. When she was in this taking, and ſo bound in the chayre, her head beeing giddy with the ſaid drinke, and her ſences troubled with the ſmoake, she doubteth not, but she ſpake many idle and fooliſh words, which the prieſts vvould expound as they thought good, which shee doth now perceiue eſpecially by hearing thoſe things, which are written of her in the ſame booke.
                  
                     Page, 34.As touching the fit, that it is ſaid shee had vpon the 15. Nouember, she ſaith that it may well be, that shee vſed hard ſpeeches againſt the prieſts in the heate of her griefe. And she wel remēbreth that diuers times, though she was loath to diſpleaſe them, yet when they handled her ſo extreamely, shee did ſometimes vſe ſome hard words toward them, and threatned to complaine of them. And then their common ſaying was, that it was the deuill, and not ſhe that ſpake, becauſe he could not indure any Catholick prieſt. Her ſiſter Frauncis beeing then in the houſe, and ſeeing how badly shee was vſed, did diuers times perſwade this exam: to ſteale away, and goe home, and complaine hbw she had beene handled by the ſaid prieſts.
                  At one time shee was ſo vexed, as indeede shee ranne away towards a little brooke, that was not paſt halfe a yard deepe, meaning to haue runne through it, and ſo to haue eſcaped from them, thinking that they would

not haue followed her through the water. But they catched her before shee came to the brooke, for they watched her ſo diligently at all times, as they would not ſuffer her to goe out of their ſights. And their pretence was for ſo dooing, leaſt she ſhould haue made away her ſelfe: which she ſaith (she thanketh God) shee neuer intended, but onely to haue beene deliuered out of theyr hands: vvhereas she ſaith, it is very likely, that they had ſuch a watchful eye ouer her, leaſt she should eſcape, as fearing she would complaine of them. At the ſame time she ranne away as before is expreſſed, one of them that ranne after her, which was her Maiſter Ma: Peckham, (as she remembreth) gaue it out, that she was carried aboue ground, and the prieſts affirmed, that the deuil did meane at that time to haue drowned her. And it is not vnlikely this exam: ſaith, but that shee herſelfe to pleaſe them, did confeſſe aſmuch. Her pretended carying in the ayre, was made amongſt them a kinde of miracle, whereas this exam: doth know it to be a lye, and dooth perfectly remember, that she ranne indeede, as faſt as she could, but for any flying, it is a meer fable: although at that time she was content to ſooth them in it.
                  Concerning the caſting out of her of Captaine Frateretto,
                     Page 35. with all his company of euil ſpirits (as is pretended in the booke) vpon the 21 of Nouember, ſhe ſaith, that it was the ordinary cuſtome of the prieſts to be talking of ſuch, as had beene poſſeſſed beyond the ſeas, & to tell the manner of theyr fits, and what they ſpake in them: alſo what vgly ſights they ſaw ſomtimes, and at other times what ioyfull ſights, and how when reliques were applied vnto them, the parties would roare: how they could not abide holy water, nor the ſight of the ſacrament, nor the annointed prieſts of the Catholique Church, nor any good thing. But how they would greatly commend ſuch as were hereticks, & many ſuch things beſides ſhe hath heard them report, as how the

deuils would complaine that when the prieſts touched the parties, that they burnt them, and put them into an extreame heate, and how ſomtimes they could ſmel the prieſt. Theſe things (she ſaith) she now remembreth by hearing thoſe things which are written in the booke of her ſelfe, and confeſſeth that by the ſaid tales ſhee well perceiued how shee might pleaſe them, and did frame herſelfe accordingly at ſuch times, as ſhe well perceiued it was their intent, she should ſo doe.
                  Alſo shee well remembreth, that at one time they thruſt into her mouth a relique, being a peece of one of Campions bones, which they did by force, ſhee herſelfe loathing the ſame, it beeing as she thinketh againſt nature to haue a bone of a man put into ones mouth.
                  As touching the pretended trouble, that shee ſhould haue vpon the 25 of Nouember,Page 36. shee ſaith, that there were ſo many ſuch ſpeeches amongſt them, as she doth not herſelfe remember, whether any ſuch things were at that time, otherwiſe then as before shee hath confeſſed. Alſo she ſaith that it was no meruaile though they made her talke, after they had giuen her the bleſſed potion they ſpeake of. And touching her ſmiling, shee confeſſeth that when she was well, if shee did either ſmile to herſelfe, or vpon occaſion of ſome ſpeech that shee had heard, or at other times if for griefe to conſider how she was dealt withall, she ſometimes wept, as oft she did, they would ordinarily (when they thought good) ſay, it was the deuil that did ſo ſmile, or weepe: which put this examinate almoſt to her wits end, deſiring nothing more then to be rid from them. Shee alſo further ſaith, that ſhe well remembreth how one time walking in the garden with one of the prieſts, who led her by the arme, becauſe ſhe was weake, ſhe beganne to complaine vnto him of her hard vſage, and told him, that ſhee verilie thought they did her iniury, and that ſhe was not troubled with any wicked ſpirits in her more thē they were.

Whereupon he caſt his head aſide, and looking fullie vpon her face vnder her hat, What (quoth he) is this Sara, or the deuill that ſpeaketh theſe words? No, no, it is not Sara, but the deuil. And thē this examinate perceiuing ſhe could haue no other reliefe at his hands, fell a weeping, which weeping alſo he ſaid was the weeping of the euill ſpirit. By hearing of that which is written of her, ſhee ſaith ſhe remembreth theſe ſtories, which ſhee thinketh she ſhould not otherwiſe haue thought of.
                  As touching the report,Page 37. 
                     that Maho ſhould bid her pray vnto him as to a Saint, and tell her that it was but madnes to become religious, or to vſe penance towards her body: alſo that the priest ſaid nought in Maſſe: and that ſhee this examinate must pray as the Parſon taught her at her mothers, Deerely beloued brethren, the ſcripture mooueth vs in ſundry places, God ſaue the Queene & her Miniſters, that ſhee must not pray in Latine, becauſe God had not commaunded her ſo to pray. She this examinate ſaith, that shee doth not remember, that euer she vſed thoſe words, but rather thinketh they are deuiſed by him, that writ the booke. Howbeit she confeſſeth it may well be, that she did vſe them vppon ſuch occaſions as they gaue her by theyr owne ſpeeches, shee beeing alwaies ready (as shee hath ſaid before) to ſpeake & doe, as she thought might pleaſe them.
                  Furthermore, cōcerning the pretended viſion of things like puppets at the end of a gallery, she ſaith, that she verily belieueth it is all fained by the writer of the booke, or by ſome that gaue him directions ſo to write. For she ſaith, she dooth not remember any one part of it, but yet dare not vppon her oath affirme, that shee told the prieſt no ſuch thing: for it might be that shee dreamed of ſuch a matter, and that she told the prieſts of the ſaid dreame, who haue made ſuch a matter of it.
                  Againe, that which is written to haue been ſpoken by her vpon the Thurſday,
                     Page 38, as though she vnderſtood ſome

                     Latine words: shee well remembreth, that at one time the prieſts were talking of ſome ſuch things to thoſe, that were preſent, as though this examinate vnderſtood Latine, which they ſaid was the euill ſpirit in her: but she then knew, that therein they ſaid vntruly, and ſaith that shee perceiued, they made what they liſt of any thing. For the word Saffron-bag, it may be (she confeſſeth) that shee vſed it, but she doth not remember it.
                  
                     Page. 38. ibid:Likewiſe, where it is ſaid, that ſhe oft threatned to raiſe the towne, and country against the priests, and to cauſe theyr heads to be ſet on London bridge, and threatned the Exorciſt to cōplaine on him to the Queene: ſhee ſaith, that they who haue ſo written of her, may ſay what they liſt. She doth not thinke, although she was oft angry with the prieſts, that she durſt vſe ſo hard words of them, as to threaten them with hanging. And touching her roaring, it may be, if they meane, that ſhe cryed, when they had her in a chayre, or gaue her the holy potion, and burnt brimſtone vnder her noſe, that they ſay truly: but for roaring like a Bull, she ſaith it is falſe.
                  
                     Page, 39.As concerning that which is pretended to haue hapned vnto her vpon S. Barbaraes day, she verily belieueth, that the Prieſts might wiſh, that all the Proteſtants in England did know the power of the Catholicke Church: but she doth not remember that she ſaid ſo herſelfe.
                  
                     Page 45.And touching her coate that was pulled off, ſhe well remembreth, that it was a new gowne, which her mother had giuen her, being laced vpon the ſleeues: which being a good prety faire gowne, the Prieſts did pretend that ſhe was proud of it, and therefore took it from her; and putting vpon her an old gowne (ſhe knoweth not where they had it) beſtowed hers ſhee knoweth not where, but ſhe could neuer ſee it after. But that ſhe ſhould ſay her gowne was naught, and full of ſpirits: ſhe beleeueth it is vntrue, or that, if they put any of their conſecrated attire vpon her, that ſhe ſhould crie, I burne, I burne: ſhee

beleeueth that ſhe did it onely to pleaſe them, knowing that she felt no more burning, by any of their conſecrated things, then she did by the reſt of her owne apparell.
                  Likewiſe, as touching thoſe things,Page, 33. which are reported to haue beene vttered, and done by this exam: vpon the xviij. of Nouember: she ſaith, that she doth not remember any one part of the pretended viſion of a Ladie, accompanied with Gentlemen all booted, that ſhould offer her to be a Lady, if ſhe would goe with them, nor of the dogge of two colours, that ſhould terrifie this exam: from yeelding to her motion: but ſhe remembreth, that they would oftentimes bring the Pix with the ſacrament in it, for her to kiſſe, which she did alwayes very willingly, and confeſſeth, that she beleeued the Hoſt in the Pix, to be the bodie of Chriſt, and that it is therefore very likely, if any of the prieſts did aske her, what ſhe did kiſſe; that ſhe aunſwered, it was the body of Christ. But she meruaileth why they write, that the deuill ſhould ſay, it was the body of Christ: and thinketh, that the prieſts would neuer haue cauſed her to kiſſe it, if they had thought, that it had been the deuil, that then had kiſſed it, and not this examinate.
                  She remembreth,Page, 43. that she did feare the corne-chamber, (that the booke ſpeaketh of) in Sir George Peckhams houſe; becauſe the report amongſt them was, that there had beene coniuring there for money. And as touching the reſt of that long diſcourſe, which was read vnto her, how ſhe ſhould ſay, that all the Court were her friends, that the Earle of Bedfords ſoule was in hell, that the Engliſh Ministers had power to cast out deuils: she ſaith, ſhe doth not remember any part of it. But acknowledgeth, that for as much as it is ſaid in the ſaid booke, that she was conſtrained to take the holy potion, which shee ſo much deteſted, and other their ſlibber-ſawces, and that they burnt brimſtone vnder her noſe, ſhe verily thinketh,

she might vtter much tittle-tattle, that now ſhe cannot call to minde. And amongſt the reſt meruaileth, that any prieſt would write or ſay, that euer he cauſed the deuill to take an oath vpon the bleſſed Sacrament. And whereas it is reported, that now this ſpirit, and now that ſpirit went out of her; she ſaith, it might be, that they then ſaid ſo, and that she this exam: was contented they ſhould ſay, what they liſt, as now she perceaueth (as she ſaith) that they haue written.
                  She further ſaith, that whilſt she was at Denham, one Richard Maynie being there alſo, pretended himſelfe to be poſſeſſed, and the Prieſts had dealings with him. This Maynie did behaue himſelfe in the preſence of the prieſts, as though he had beene a Saint. It was meruailous to conſider, what deuotion he did pretend. One time being at Maſſe, this exam: doth wel remember, that at the eleuation time, he fel downe ſecretly backwards, and lay a while, as though he had beene in a traunce. And when he came vnto himſelfe againe, he ſaid, that the glory, which he ſaw about the Altar, did ſtrike him into that traunce. But for all his pretences, this exam: ſaith, that he was but a diſſembler, and a man but of a lewd diſpoſition. He would needes haue perſwaded this examinates ſiſter, to haue gone thence with him, in the apparel of a youth, to haue beene his boy, and to haue wayted vppon him. Hee dealt with this exam: to haue confeſſed her ſelfe vnto him, ſaying, that he had as good authority, to heare confeſſions, as any of the prieſts had. Alſo he vrged her this exam: diuers times, to haue yeelded to his carnal deſires, vſing very vnfit tricks with her. There was alſo a very proper woman, one Miſtres Plater, with whom this exam: perceaued, he had many allurements, ſhewing great tokens of extraordinarie affection towards her. By which his courſes she perceaued, that he was very wickedly bent. Of all theſe things concerning the ſaid Maynie, this exam: enformed Ma:

                     Dibdale, & told him, that out of doubt he did but counterfet all his holines, and that except he, and the reſt of the prieſts tooke heede to themſelues, he would in the end bring them to ſome trouble: where-vpon Ma: Dibdale was very ſorrie, that euer he had had any dealing with him.
                  She further ſaith, that at ſuch times, as they pretended, that she had fits, which was eyther, when she had any fit of the mother (where-with she was then troubled) or when she had beene conſtrained, to drinke their holy potion: or when she was otherwiſe euil at eaſe, by reaſon of their bad vſage of her, they would in the end (when they were weary with dealing with her) ſay, that the wicked ſpirits were gone downe into her legge, and ſometimes into her foote, and that they ſhould reſt there for that time. And againe, when they tooke her in hand the next time, they would begin ſo hunt the deuil from the foote, to bring him vpwards of purpoſe, as they ſaid, to cauſe him, when they had him in her head, to goe out of her mouth, eares, eyes, or noſe. And the manner of their hunting of him, was to folow him with their hands (as they did pretend) along all the parts of her body. At one time, when it began to be with this exam: according to the manner of women, (as ſince she hath perceaued) whereby she was much troubled, the prieſts did pretend, that the deuil did reſt in the moſt ſecret part of her hody. Where-vpon they deuiſed to apply the reliques vnto it, and gaue her ſuch ſliber-ſawces, as made her (as she was perſwaded) much worſe then otherwiſe she thinketh, she should haue beene. At ſome times they would cauſe a maid, that ſerued the Lord Vaux, to apply the reliques vnto the place: the which their dealing with her (she ſaith) she doth now loath the memory of it.
                  Furthermore, this exam: ſaith, that after she was deliuered out of the prieſts hands, and that they had no further

dealing with her, vpon pretence, that she was poſſeſſed, she hath diuers times, being in ſpeech with Ma: Yaxly a prieſt, but her eſpecial friend, ſaid vnto him to this effect: Ieſus Ma: Yaxly I meruaile, what Ma: Dibdale, & the other prieſts meant to deale with me, as they did: I am fully perſwaded, that I was neuer at any time more poſſeſſed, then they themſelues were, and yet you haue heard, how they haue vſed me. And he ſhaking his head, would wil me to be contented, ſeeing the matter was paſt, and that I ſhould trouble my head no more about it, and ſaying, that he was very ſorrie for it, and that he hoped, they had repented themſelues for dealing ſo with her. Why but would this exam: ſay, tel me I pray you Sir, what you thinke of if, whether was I poſſeſſed, or no, in your opinion. And ſtil he would giue her no other aunſwer, but ſhaking his head, wil her to be contented, ſeeing all was now paſt.
                  She further ſaith, that the firſt time that the prieſts began to haue dealing with her, one day they had giuen her certaine things to drinke, that had made her verie ſick, and being in that reſpect troubled, Ma: Stamp comming frō London, viewed with a flearing countenance this exam: in the face, and ſaid vnto her, as though he had ſpoken vnto a ſpirit within her: Ah Sirra, I haue brought a thing for you: I haue a whip in my pocket that will bridle thee. At that preſent she vnderſtoode him not, what he meant, but within a while after, hee pulled a book out of his pocket, which was of Exorciſmes, which was the whip he meant. She alſo wel remembreth, that the reſt in the houſe told Ma: Stamp, how greatly shee had beene vexed all that day, and that they ſaid, it was becauſe the ſpirit was afraid of that booke, which hee brought with him, and the deuil knew that it was comming.
                  Whilſt ſhe was in the prieſts hands at Denham, one Haines was a ſuter vnto her, and although Ma: Dibdale
                     
commaunded her in no ſort to entertaine him, yet her ſiſter bringing vnto her a blacke Iet ring from him, as a token, she put the ſame vpon her little finger, which being ſome-what too little, cauſed her finger to ſwel, as now ſhe beleeeueth: And there-vpon this exam: in her confeſſion acknowledging that shee had receiued that ring from Haines contrary to Ma: Dibdales commaundement, they ſaid it was the deuill vnder the ring, that cauſed her finger to ſwell: and wetting her finger, and making croſſes vpon it, they pulled of the ring by little and little, and ſaid, that it came of by vertue of thoſe croſſes, the deuill hauing no longer power to keepe it on.
                  This examinate alſo further remembreth, that comming towards London from Hackney in a Coach with Ma: Dibdale, shee eſpied in the way a ragged Colt, and beeing the firſt, that shee had euer ſeene ſo ragged, shee asked Ma: Dibdale, what it was? And he ſaid it was the deuill: which put this exam: into a great feare, whereas ſince she hath ſeene twenty ſuch ragged Colts, and is therefore fully perſwaded, that Ma: Dibdale did abuſe her, in ſaying the Colt she then ſaw was the deuill.
                  She alſo ſaith, that one Sherwood a prieſt, while ſhee was at Denham, and tyed in her chaire, would vſuallie pinch her by the armes, and necke, and hands, and the places thereupon remaining blew, he and the reſt would ſay, that it was the deuil that had ſo pinched her. At ſuch times as this exam: when he ſo pinched her did cōplaine of it, and reproued him for it, they would ſay it was the deuill, and not this examinate, that ſo reprooued him. Of this iniury she hath complayned to Ma: Dibdale being well, and hee would ſay vnto her, that hee was ſure Ma: Sherwood would not vſe her ſo, and that ſhe was deceiued, in that ſhe thought ſo of him.
                  She alſo further ſaith, that shee well remembreth that ſhe could neither doe nor ſay any thing, but when they

liſt, they would ſay, it was the deuill. At ſome times when ſhe was well, if companie came in, to whom they meant to ſhew any thing, they would take occaſion, to peepe in her face, & vſe ſuch fooliſh words vnto her, as might make her to laugh. And if ſhe did but ſo much as laugh vppon that occaſion, or looke away, turning her head from them, they had then enough, it was the deuil (they would ſay) that laughed in her, and then ſometimes shee muſt to the chayre, and at ſome other times, they would coniure the ſpirit, as they did pretend, commaunding him to goe downe into her body, and be quiet. And when this exam: held her peace, which was when they ſpake no more to her, then they would ſay, the ſpirit was gone downe. At theſe, and ſuch like times, when they gaue her nothing to make her ſicke, ſhe found her ſelfe no worſe, then ſhee was before, but was content to ſooth all what they ſaid.
                  Shee further ſayth, that a maide, that came from the Lord 
                        Ʋaux, was appointed at Denham to keepe this exanimate, who did alwaies tell the prieſts, what ſhee this exam: either did or ſpake, and of herſelfe would alwaies tell this exam: that it was the deuill that ſo did, or ſpake: when this exam: did very well know, that shee did, and ſpake at ſuch times, according as she was wont to doe, before she came to the prieſts hands. By reaſon of ſuch her bad dealing with this exam: ſhee this exam: did not loue her, and talking of her hard dealing with her, shee this exam: ſaid, she had thought one day to haue thruſt her downe the ſtayres. And heereof the prieſts made a great matter, but did not blame this exam: for it, becauſe (as they ſaid) it was not ſhe, but the deuil, that meant to haue thruſt her downe the ſtayres.
                  Alſo ſhe ſaith, that if at any time she did belch, as oftentimes she did by reaſon that shee was troubled with a wind in her ſtomacke, the prieſts would ſay at ſuch times, that then the ſpirit began to riſe in her. Whereas

diuers times ſince ſhe hath beene likewiſe troubled with ſuch wind in her ſtomack and rifting, and thereby perceiueth that they ſaid vntruly, when they ſaid that that wind was the deuil. But as ſhee ſaith, if they heard any croaking in her belly, (a thing whereunto many women are ſubiect, eſpecially when they are faſting) then they would make a wonderful matter of that. One time shee remembreth, that ſhee hauing the ſaid croaking in her belly, or making of herſelfe ſome ſuch noyſe in her bed, they ſaid it was the deuill that was about the bedde, that ſpake with the voyce of a Toade, and there-with they ſeemed, as though they were greatly afraid. But this examinate, though shee knew, there was no ſuch cauſe of theyr feare, if they were indeed at all afraid, as they did pretend, yet did ſhee let them alone, and ſaid nothing vnto them.
                  She further ſaith, that one night whilſt this examinate was in bedde, there was a ſcraping in the corner of the chamber about the feeling, as if it had been the ſcraping of a rat, whereupon ſome that were in the chamber ran forth, ſaying, it was an euill ſpirit, that made that noyſe. And Ma: Cornelius a prieſt beeing in the next chamber, came preſently foorth in his gowne, with his booke of Exorciſmes in his hand, & went into the corner, where the noiſe was. There he began to charge the deuil vpon paine of many torments, that he ſhould depart. Hee flung holy water vpon the walls, and vſed ſuch earneſt ſpeeches, as this exam: was very much afraid. Howbeit ſhe ſaith, ſhe well obſerued, that for all his ſpeakings, and ſprinckling of holy water, the noiſe did not ceaſe, till he had knockt with ſome thing vppon the feeling, whereby ſhe ſince hath verily thought, and ſtill dooth, that it was either a rat, or ſome ſuch thing that made the noiſe, and not the deuil.
                  She further ſaith, that ſhe neuer dreamed in the night, but ſhe did tel the prieſts of it in the morning, for it was

their commandement, that ſhe ſhould ſo doe. And ſuch her dreames ſhe hath learned by their ſpeeches, to call them viſions. Of theſe viſions they would make of thē, what they thought good. Whereas this exam: confeſſeth, that diuers of them were ſuch toyes, as came into her head being woken, and that ſhe meruailed, how they could make ſuch matters of them.
                  This exam: further ſaith, that oftentimes when ſhe was wel, & that the prieſts vpon her laughing or words, would ſay: It was not ſhe, but the deuill, ſhe did verily ſuſpect, that they did not ſay truly therein, & that ſhe was not at all poſſeſſed: marrie ſhe confeſſeth, that being young, and vnexperienced, when they came vnto her in ſo deuoute a manner, with their holy veſtures vppon them, with holy water, holy candels, and with the Pix, hauing the ſacrament in it, and prayed, as it ſeemed ſo earneſtly; ſhe did then alwayes ſuſpect, that there was ſomething amiſſe in her, as ſuppoſing, that otherwiſe they would neuer haue dealt in that ſort. But afterwards when ſhe was wel againe, ſhe had euer a great deſire to be gone from them, being verily perſwaded, that then ſhe ſhould be wel.
                  She further ſaith, that except it were at ſuch times, as by giuing her the holy potion, and burning brimſtone vnder her noſe, ſhe knew not oftentimes what either ſhe did, or ſpake. The greateſt feare, which ſhe had at other times, when they vſed their Exorciſme, was leaſt they meant thereby to coniure vp ſome ſpirit, they kept ſuch a ſtirre, and made mention of ſo many names, which they ſaid, were names of ſo many ſpirits.
                  Whereas in the afore-ſaid booke, there are a number of things reported of this exam: what ſhe ſhould doe, ſee, and ſpeake in her fits, ſhe verily thinketh, that (ſome fooliſh things of her owne deuiſe excepted) ſhe neither did ſpeake, nor pretended to ſee any thing, but in ſuch ſort, as ſhe had heard the prieſts report, that other women

beyond the Seas had done, ſeene, and ſpoken: According to which reports, ſhe this exam: being in the prieſts hands, did frame her ſelfe to doe, and ſpeake, and report ſhe ſaw this, and that, as ſhe had heard of them, that thoſe parties did, that thereby ſhee might pleaſe them.
                  Concerning the reports in the ſaid booke, that this exam: ſhould ſee vpon Christmas euen at night,
                     Page 1. 
                     after twelue of the clocke, when Maſſes doe begin, viz: great beames of lightning, to proceede from the Sacrament, as it had beene ſome beames ſhining out of a cloude: that vpon Newyeares day, ſhe ſhould ſee fire to flaſh in at the window, and a browne dogge, as big as a Bullock: that the Sonday after the Sacrament being reſerued, and lying vpon the patten, ſhe could not ſee it, for a great brightnes: and that at the ſame time, the Priest ſeemed to be cloathed in ſiluer, that ſtoode by the patten: She this exam: aunſwereth, that ſhe is perſwaded in her conſcience, they be all vntrue reports of her. For ſhe ſaith, ſhe doubteth not, but that otherwiſe ſhe ſhould haue remembred ſome of them, as wel as ſhe hath done other things in the ſaid booke. Onely she confeſſeth, that she hath heard ſuch things reported of Richard Maynie, that he should haue ſuch ſights: but ſure she is, ſhe neuer ſaw them.
                  Concerning the report of her, that ſhe ſhould ſay,
                     Page. 2. 
                     that the bleſſed Sacrament was but bread: that there was no Purgatorie: that the ſeruice in England, being in Engliſh, was as good as the other in Latine: and that ſhe ſhould commend ſome Ministers: She ſaith, that it may wel be, that ſhe hath asked ſome queſtions touching the Sacrament, Purgatorie, and the Engliſh ſeruice, and that she hath ſpoken wel of ſome Miniſters: but she is fully perſwaded, that when she demaunded ſuch queſtions, she did it of her ſelfe, to be inſtructed, and that it was not the deuil, that ſpake ſo in her. Alſo she ſaith, that when she commended ſome Miniſters, she ſaid therein truly, and

that she thinketh there are of them, as there are of the prieſts, ſome good, and ſome bad.
                  
                     Page. 3.Where it is reported of this exam: that vpon the third day of Ianuarie, ſhe ſhould ſee Christ in proper forme, when ſhe receaued the Sacrament: that ſhe found eaſe of the paine in her ſtomack, by the application of a holy relique: and that ſhe flung away her beades, ſaying to the Priests, fie on you: She ſaith, that she wel remembreth, that one offending her, she threw her beades at the party, but she denieth, that euer she receaued any eaſe, by applying of any holy reliques vnto her, for ought that she perceaued, how ſo euer the prieſts haue reported, or that she euer ſaw any ſuch thing, when she receaued the Sacrament: but thinketh that the Author of the booke hath deuiſed it of himſelfe, marrie she ſaith, it is not vnlike, that she might wel enough ſay, Fie vpon ſome of the prieſts, both becauſe there were of them, that vſed her hardly, and for that she knew wel, that they diſliked not ſuch words; becauſe they would take occaſion therby, to shew to thoſe that were preſent, that the deuil could not endure a Catholique prieſt.
                  
                     Page, 3. Ibidem,That which is reported of her, of the fourth of Ianuarie, as touching the booke of Exorciſme, she ſaith, that she knew that booke very wel, from any other, both by the Letter it ſelfe, becauſe she can reade, and by the great number of croſſes, which are in many places, a great number of them together. And no other knowledge ſhe had of any ſuch booke, although it be giuen out, that she knew the booke of Exorciſme, being lapt vp in a paper, before otherwiſe she ſaw it.
                  Where it is ſaid, that this exam: ſhould affirme there were foure ſcourges of deuils, viz: the booke of Exorciſmes, holy water, the holy candell, and hallowed Frankinſence, ſhe doth not remember, that she termed them ſcourges, but ſaith, it is like enough that she ſaid, that the deuil could abide none of them, becauſe the prieſts had told her ſo.
                  
                     As touching that, which is written of this exam:Page, 4. of the fifth of Ianuary, that being exorciſed, ſhee vſed many idle words: that ſhe prated, and ſcoffed, curſed, and ſung, called for a piper: when the Priest bad the deuill, tell him his name, he ſhould make aunſwer in her, Pudding of Thame: all which is ſaid, to haue beene ſpoken by the ſpirit in her; she ſaith, that she might ſpeake ſuch words, when her head was ſo troubled, but she doth not remember them. And for the Pudding of Thame, she ſaith, she hath oft heard it ſpoken of ieſtingly, when she was a child. And where it is ſaid, that she should affirme, that the deuil could not tarry in her legge, or foote, as he was cō
                     maunded, becauſe of her hoſe which had beene worne by a vertuous, and godly prieſt: she confeſſeth, that indeede she ware a payre of Ma: Dibdales netherſtocks, and thinketh it not to be vnlikely, that when vpon occaſion, she ſaid, that the hoſe she ware, had beene Ma: Dibdales; but that further hearing ſome of the prieſts ſay, that was the cauſe, that the deuil would not remaine in her legge, or foote; ſhe did ſay as much her ſelfe.
                  Concerning that which is written of this examinate of the 6. of Ianuary, that after conſecration,
                     Page 5. 
                     ſhee ſaw in the Challice a little head, as it were of a child: that ſhee ſhould call for dyce to play with: that ſhee ſhould ſee two at either corner of the Altar, glistering like ſiluer: that ſhee ſhould tell a tale of a Mummery, that came into the chamber, where ſhee lay: that ſhee ſcoffed at the Sacrament: that a propper man in a ſhort blacke garment, girt about him, hauing the rest of his apparrell alſo blacke, and long haire turned vp, alſo great ruffes ſtarched with blew ſtarch: that ſhee complained, that the priests hand burned her, & that his breath tormented her: ſhee ſaith ſhee remembreth no part of all theſe. What ſhe might ſpeake, when her head was troubled with their drinks, ſhe knoweth not, but ſhe dooth not remember, that euer ſhe ſaid, that ſhe ſaw ſuch a little head in a chalice, or that if ſhe had ſeene it, ſhe ſhould

euer haue forgot it.
                  
                     Page, 5. Ibidem.Whereas alſo it is ſaid of her, that there appeared vnto her in a fit the ſaid 6. of Ianuary a Mummery cōming in at the doore with a bright eye before them: a drumme ſounding, and ſixe in number with motly vizards, which daunced once about her, and ſo departed. She aunſwereth, that ſhe belieueth, that it is but a made tale by ſome of the prieſts, or that if ſhe told any ſuch her ſelfe, it was but a dreame, or ſome ſuch thing, as ſhee had before heard of amongſt them, it beeing Chriſtmas.
                  Alſo as touching the report of her, that ſhee knew a peece of the holy Croſſe by the ſmell:
                     Page 5. 
                     that a priest put his finger into her mouth, and bad the deuill bite it if hee durst, and that the deuill in this examinate ſhould aunſwer, hee durst not bite it, becauſe it had touched the Lord: ſhee ſaith ſhee well remembreth, that ſhe heard them talke, that they had a peece of the holy Croſſe, but ſhee dooth not belieue, that ſhee knew it by the ſmell, vnleſſe it had beene ſweetly kept, and that ſhe might ſmell the ſauour thereof, when it came neere her. And further ſaith, that it is not vnlike, but that ſhe refuſed to bite the prieſts finger, for if it had beene Maiſter Dibdales finger, ſhe knew he was very likely to haue giuen her a box on the eare, if ſhee had bitten it. And it might be alſo, that ſhee ſaid ſhe would not bite it, becauſe it had touched the Lord, ſhee being then wel acquainted with thoſe things: but whether she did ſo or no, she doth not now remember.
                  
                     Page 5.Whereas it is ſaid, that in one of her fits ſhe was ſenceleſſe the ſame day, vntill the bleſſed Sacrament was applyed vnto one of her eares, and that then ſhe felt a cold wind to come in at one, and a hote ayre to goe out at the other: shee anſwereth, that she remembreth no ſuch thing: as neither another report of a viſion, she should haue that night, of a whole bench of deuils. Although she confeſſeth, that as her manner was, the moſt mornings shee would tell thē one tale, or other, or els (as she ſaith) how ſhould they

haue had writing worke, but she remembreth not, whether she told them this tale or no.
                  That which is reported to haue been done by her the ſeauenth of Ianuary,Page 6. as that ſhe ſhould (as ſhe thought) let her beades fall downe to the ground, becauſe they ſeemed to burne her hand, whereas the deuill threw them directly vpon the Altar, and ſtrooke downe the corner of the Chalice: this exam: remembreth no ſuch thing, but meruaileth that the deuil durſt meddle with her beades, becauſe they were hallowed.
                  Where it is ſaid, that the ſame day, this examinate or (as they pretended) the deuill in her, was vnwilling to adore the bleſſed ſacrament, becauſe of the brightnes of it: that at the ſecond eleuation ſhe ſhould ſay, I will not be bleſſed: At Pax domini ſit ſemper vobiſcum, I will none of that: At Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccati mundi, miſerere nobis, vpon thee, and not vppon mee: At the offering of the Pax to kiſſe: it ſtinketh: when the priest ſaid, Domine non ſum dignus, and betweene the receiuing of both kinds: I will not receiue. This exam: ſaith, that the prieſts had taught her the Engliſh of the Latine words before mentioned, ſo as she verily thinketh, that shee was not vnlike to ſay as it is reported of her, when she heard thoſe Latine words. But she thinketh thoſe things falſe, that are reported of her to haue beene done by her, the 8 of Ianuary, as that ſhee ſhould talke to the Exorcist in French, whereas shee knoweth very few words in French, but ſuch as shee heard amongſt them, as Boniour, or two or three more.
                  As touching the long reports of this exam: how ſhe was handled the ninth, and tenth dayes of Ianuary, viz: amongſt many other things,Page, 10. how the deuill was remooued out of her hands by the putting on of the Exorcists gloues: how Maho the chiefe deuill (that was pretended to be in her) who had two thouſand deuils at his commaundement, had beene in England euer ſince king Henry the eyghts time: how the ſaid Maho ſhould tell Exorcist, that if he would

cut the ſacrament with his knife hee ſhould ſee it bleed: and that he the ſayd Maho, could not chooſe but be tormented at the offering of it: how Maho did first ſweare vpon the bleſſed ſacrament, and kiſſed it, and then vppon the booke of exorciſmes, and then kist that likewiſe: how this examinate was vexed, when the prieſts laboured with theyr holy hands, and by touching of her with ſacred relique, till they had brought Maho into her belly: ſhe aunſwereth with many teares, God forgiue them, that thus did abuſe me, there was neuer I thinke poore ſoule ſo dealt with. And afterwards for further aunſwer ſhe ſaith, that it appeareth by the booke, that the ſaid tenth day of Ianuary, they gaue her the holy potion, and burnt brimſtone, and Frankinſence vnder her noſe, which did ſo trouble her, as ſhee thinketh, that ſhe might ſpeake ſhe knew not what, and they likewiſe write, and report of her, as they thought good, and as ſhee perceiued they had done, by the reſt ſhe had heard read vnto her out of that booke.
                  She further ſaith, that beeing at the L. 
                        Ʋaux his houſe at Hackney, the prieſts a little before (as ſhe remembreth) that shee was exorciſed in the chayre, cauſe a woman to ſquirt ſomthing by her priuie parts into her body, which made her very ſick. She was ſo vſed once or twice more at Hackney, and once at Denham, whereby she knoweth as she ſaith, that she ſuſtained very great hurt.
                  Furthermore she ſaith, that the laſt time that shee was exorciſed at Hackney, the prieſts gaue it out, that the deuill departed out of her by her priuieſt part. And vpon her marriage ſome of them told her husband, that shee would neuer bring him any children, becauſe as they affirmed, the deuill had torne thoſe parts in ſuch ſort, as that she could not conceiue, which shee thanketh God proueth to be falſe, for shee hath had (as shee ſaith) fiue children. But shee ſaith by hearing the booke read, that is written of her, shee hath called many things to mind, and doth perceiue that shee hath beene very badly dealt

with. And further shee ſaith, that after shee once came to be vnder their hands, they vſed the matter ſo with her, as that she neuer durſt doe any thing, but what ſhe thought did pleaſe them: ſo as the longer she continued with them, the more they wrought vpon her, becauſe she had learned, what words did beſt like them, as her rayling againſt prieſts, and commending of Proteſtants, and ſpeaking of many vaine, and fooliſh words, whereof they would make what they liſt. Likewiſe she could tel how to feed them with viſions, ſaying, she had ſeene this, and that, when she had ſeene no ſuch matter, but onely ſpake to content them.
                  Beſides, in Chriſtmas time there was gaming, and mumming at the L. 
                        Ʋaux his houſe, and as she ſaith, she ſaw the mummers dreſſed with their vizards: whereby she learned to talke of ſuch things, when they ſaid, the ſpirit began to aſcend out of her foote: that is, when he began from time to time (as they ſay) to trouble her.
                  Againe, as before she ſaith, that whilſt she was at Denham, she told Ma: Dibdale, that she verily thought, she was no more poſſeſſed, then any of them were (meaning the reſt of the prieſts.) And likewiſe as she perceaued three or foure yeeres after, by Ma: Yaxleyes words, and ſhaking of his head, when she complained vnto him, how she had been dealt with, that he himſelfe did think no otherwiſe of her: ſo she this exam: as wel at other times, whilſt she was at Denham, as afterwards manie times ſtil thought, but now (as she ſaith) by hearing of the booke, they haue written of her, read, she is not onlie fully perſwaded, that she was neuer at all poſſeſſed, but ſeeth, that they haue written of her moſt abhominablie, and villanouſly, and she prayeth God to forgiue them, ſaying, that she needeth not to wiſh them worſe hurt, then hath, or wil come to them, for their falſe, and diſſembling dealing with her.
                  Whilſt this exam: was in the prieſts hands at Denham,
                     
she wel remembreth (as she ſaith) that one Ma: Babington, and diuers other Gentlemen were there. Alſo Ma: Edmunds the Ieſuit was there, or at the leaſt, ſuch a man as they called fa: Edmunds, who was a chiefe man amongſt them, and ouer the reſt (as she hath heard.) Likewiſe, she ſaith, that there were many, both men, and women, that came thither to ſee miracles (as it was giuen out,) who were daily reconciled. She alſo remembreth, that the prieſts would ſay, that thoſe who came thither, and would not be reconciled, were in great danger, whereas if they would ſubmit themſelues, and reconcile themſelues, then the deuil ſhould haue no power of them. The number, she ſaith, that vpon theſe occaſions were reconciled, was very great. It was an vſual ſaying with the prieſts, that many Proteſtants were poſſeſſed, and that if they were once reconciled, the deuil would shew himſelfe in them, and they brought her this exam: for an inſtance, ſaying, that til she was reconciled, the deuil was quiet in her. Whereas, she ſaith, she wel knoweth, that she was (she thanketh God) as free from the deuil poſſeſſing of her, til she fel into their hands, as any of the prieſts were.
                  After the prieſts gaue ouer the exorciſing of this exam: she was at their direction conuayed from place to place, for almoſt foure yeeres, and maintained for the moſt part at their charges, ſauing ſo much as she had for her paines in thoſe places, where she remained.
                  When this exam: should be married, Ma: Yaxly the prieſt told her a ſtory of Tobias ſonne, and wiſhed her, that in any wiſe, she should refraine from the company of her husband, for the firſt three nights, which counſel (she ſaith) she followed, being wholy at that time ruled by him.
                  She further ſaith, that if Ma: Dibdale had liued but a moneth longer, she this exam: had not beene heere, to haue beene now examined of this matter. For he was

purpoſed (as he ſaid) to haue ſent her beyond the Seas, that she might haue beene a Nun. And to that end he had prouided fourty pound, part whereof was in Ma: Yaxlyes hands, and part in her owne. But after Ma: Dibdales death, that which this exam: had, Ma: Yaxley tooke from her, and promiſed her husband, when she was to be married fourty pound, whereof notwithſtanding he neuer receaued aboue fiue pounds, as she thinketh.
                  Againe, she ſaith, that whilſt she was in their hands, she had ſiluer, and gold giuen her of thoſe, that came to ſee her, which she ſtil gaue to Ma: Dibdale, becauſe he perſwaded her, that she might not haue it her ſelfe, for that the deuil thereby would tempt her, & doe her hurt. When he the ſaid Dibdale was afterwards executed, this exam: had of his a purſe full of gold, which he left with her, where with Ma: Alexander a prieſt being acquainted, she this exam: by his commaundement, deliuered it vnto him.
                  She alſo ſaith, that by one Hodgskins meanes, a Purſuiuant, she was a little after Ma: Dibdales death, committed to priſon at Oxford for recuſancie, where she remained about xiiij. weekes. At what time Ma: Yaxley cauſed diuers to make earneſt ſute for her: much veniſon (as she hath heard) was beſtowed vpon the Schollers, and at the laſt ſhe was called before a Doctor, and after ſome fewe ſpeeches deliuered.
                  About nine or tenne yeares ſince, this exam: was ſent for, by two Iuſtices of the peace, Sir Anthony Cope, and Ma: Doily to be examined, partly about theſe matters of poſſeſſion. But ſhe neuer did confeſſe a word vnto them of it. At other times alſo ſhe hath beene examined, but diſcloſed nothing. When vpon theſe occaſions she was at any time in trouble, she was ſtil maintayned, and her coſts borne by the prieſts meanes. She alſo ſaith, that becauſe she would confeſſe nothing, she was very

much made of. It was ordinarie with the prieſts, to charge her in any wiſe, that if she happened at any time to be examined, she should neuer take any oath, for that was verie dangerous, and told her, that then she might ſay any thing, though it were vntrue, to excuſe her ſelfe. They alſo warned her, to be very careful, what she ſaid, and in no wiſe to confeſſe any thing, that might touch any prieſt, and doe them any harme, ſaying, that if she did, the deuil would ſurely poſſeſſe her againe: becauſe thereby she should diſhonour God, and his Prieſts, and be a ſlander to the Catholique Church. And they told her an example of a woman, that after a prieſt had diſpoſſeſſed her, she dealt amiſſe, and there-vpon the deuil came into her againe, and continued in her ſo long, as she liued. And ſo they ſaid, he would deale with her this exam: if she did, or confeſſed any thing againſt thē. But notwithſtanding she now ſaith, that shee is very glad she hath diſcharged her conſcience, and vnburdened her minde of theſe things, by telling the truth. Nothing doubting, but that Almighty God wil pardon her, in that she yeelded ſo farre, to be in ſuch ſort abuſed by them, and that heereafter the deuil shal neuer haue power, by the perſwaſion of any prieſts, or other perſons what ſo euer, to draw her to ſuch wicked courſes heereafter.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ The examination of Friſwood alias Frauncis VVilliams, taken vpon oath the ſecond of March 1598, but augmented and repeated the 17. of May 1602. before the Lord Biſhop of London, Maiſter Doctor Andrewes Deane of Weſtminſter, Ma: Doctor Stanhop, and Ma: Doctor Swale.
                  
                  SHee ſaith, that about 17 yeeres ſince, ſhee beeing then about 17 yeeres of age, ſerued on Miſtriſſe Peckham, the wife of Ma: Edmund Peckham, dwelling then at Denham in Buckingham-ſhire. This Miſtris Peckham, was the daughter of Sir Thomas Iarret in Lancaſhire.
                  
                  The cauſe of this examinats ſeruing the ſaid Miſtriſſe Peckham was, for that this exam: ſiſter Sara Williams, (that likewiſe ſerued her) was then in the hands of certaine Prieſts, who ſaid ſhe was poſſeſſed. At that time alſo one Trayford maiſter Peckhams man was there likewiſe in the ſame cafe, with this exam: ſiſter. By meanes of theſe troubles there, this examinats father, being Sir George Peckhams man, father to the ſaid Ma. Edmund, ſhee this examinate, as now ſhee verilie belieueth, was thought a meet perſon, to be entertained in the houſe, as one, who they thought, would keepe all theyr counſels, howſoeuer they ſhould deale, and practiſe with her, or any other in that place.
                  This exam. further ſaith, that as ſhe remembreth, the diſtinct time of her comming to ſerue Miſtris Peckham, was about 3 of 4 daies after, that ſhee the ſaid Miſtriſſe Peckham came frō 
                     Fulmer to Denham, withall her houſhold,

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
bringing with her the ſaid two poſſeſſed parties, as it was then pretended. Vpon this examinats firſt entertainement, many prieſts reſorted to Denham, vnder pretence to caſt the deuils out of thoſe perſons. Amongſt them all one Ma. Edmunds a Ieſuit was the chiefe, that bare the ſway, and gaue directions in thoſe matters, and Ma. Dibdale was the next, who tooke eſpeciall paines in their exorciſings. The names of other prieſt, that reſorted thether, as farre as ſhee remembreth, were theſe: Ma. Driland Ma. Midleton, Ma. Yaxley, Ma. Sherwood, Ma. Stampe, Ma. Tirréll, Ma. Thomſon, Ma. Thulice, Ma. Cornelius, Ma. Browne, Ma. Ballard, Ma. Blackman, Ma. Greene, Ma. Bruerton. There vvere beſides theſe a great number, whoſe names ſhe hath forgotten, that reſorted thether. And many, eſpecially of the younger prieſts that were lately come ouer, did not tell theyr names, at the leaſt this exam: did not know them.
                  Vppon her firſt comming to Denham, and ſo for fiue or ſixe weekes, this exam: heard much in the houſe of her ſiſter, and Ma. Trayfords fits: and it was not long after her Miſtris cōming from Fulmer, before one Marwood was brought to Denham, and then ſhortly one Ma: Richard Mainy, who both of them did pretend themſelues to be likewiſe poſſeſſed. Ma. Ballard the Prieſt brought the ſaid Marwood thether, and in his companie, there came twelue or thirteene as ſhee remembreth, viz. Ma. Babington, Ma. Tichburne, Ma. Dun, Ma. Gage, Ma. Tilny, and the moſt of the reſt that were executed with Ma. Babington, they came thether in foure or fiue Coaches.
                  When this exam: firſt came to Miſtris Peckham, ſhee had before euer vſed to goe to the Church, but then the prieſts laboured to perſwade her to the contrary. The parties that dealt with her, to that purpoſe, in the beginning, were Ma. Edmund Peckham, and one Alexander an Apothecarie, but ſince a prieſt.
                  
                     About the end of the ſaid 5 or 6 weekes, the prieſts begannne to practiſe with this exam: to make her belieue alſo that ſhe was poſſeſſed. The manner whereof was in this ſort. Shee beeing waſhing of clothes in the Kitchen at Denham, maiſter Dibdale the prieſt came in, & clapping her vpon the ſhoulder, told her that her miſtriſſe looked for her. To whom this examinate anſwered, that ſhe had almoſt done, & then ſhe would come vnto her. Preſently after this exanimate, and one of her fellowes hauing filled a tub of water, to rince theyr clothes, this exam: lifting vp the tub, her feete ſlipped from vnder her, the kitchen beeing paued, and hauing a ſhrewd fall, did hurt her hip, with the griefe whereof she was compelled to keepe her bed, for two or three dayes.
                  Heereupon maiſters Dibdale comming to this exam: told her, that it was a wicked ſpirit, that gaue her that fal, and ſaid, that the cauſe that moued the ſpirit ſo to doe, was for that shee had washed his the ſaid maiſter Dibdales ſhirt, which the wicked ſpirit tooke in euill part, becauſe he was a Catholique prieſt, to whom the deuill could not endure, that any kindnes should be ſhewed. And for that alſo the ſame his ſhirt was fouled with the ſweat, which came from him, in taking paines to exorciſe the parties, ſuppoſed to be poſſeſſed. He did alſo at the ſame time, and afterwards, likewiſe deale earneſtlie with this examinate, to perſwade her to be a Catholick, and from the time of her ſaid fall, ceaſed not to tell her, that she was poſſeſſed; and ſo did the reſt of the prieſts, that then were there. The ſaid maiſter Dibdale did vrge her to be aduiſed by him, promiſing that if ſo she would, she ſhould receiue great eaſe, and comfort therein.
                  She alſo ſaith, that vpon occaſion of ſpeech with maiſter Dibdale, of the ache of her hip, he entred into a further examination of her, if she had not before that time, felt ſome paine in her body. And shee confeſſing, that ſomtimes, she had a paine in one of her ſides; Ah quoth

he, I thought euen ſo; out of queſtion, you are poſſeſſed, and ſo haue beene for a good while, the paine you ſpeake of, proceeding from the ſaid ſpirit.
                  Thus labouring with this exam: to make her to belieue, that shee was poſſeſſed, they told her, that before they could doe her any good, she muſt needs become a Catholique; and at the length, by telling her that shee was in ſtate of damnation, and out of the Church; and that ſhe muſt belieue the articles of the Creede, whereof one was, that shee ought to belieue the Catholique Church, which was (as they ſaid) the Church of Rome, ſhee did yeeld vnto them to be reconciled, as she thinketh they terme it.
                  At the time that this exam: was thus become a Catholique, the prieſts told her, that her baptiſme receiued in the proteſtants Church muſt be amended, becauſe it wanted many ceremonies of the Catholique Church. And thereuppon they vſed ſuch things as they thought good, to make her baptiſme perfect. They caſt a white cloth ouer her head, with a croſſe vpon it, & vſing certaine words, they put ſalt into her mouth, and did annoint her lippes, her noſe, her eyes, and her eares. At that time alſo, they cauſed her to change her name, ſo as she being, when she was chriſtned, called Friſwood, from that time forward, shee hath been called Frauncis. They told her diuers tales of S. Frauncis, that he was ſo holy a man, that he might commaund the birds of the ayre to come vnto him, and that therefore his name was made common both for men, and women.
                  Shee further ſaith, that after shee had kept her bedde two or three daies, (as before is mentioned) ſhe did (notwithſtanding her ſaid hurt) follow her buſines, as wel as shee could, though she halted. This her ſo halting, the prieſts ſtill ſaid, that the deuil cauſed it, and after omitted no occaſion, to tell her of the paine in her ſide, and annointing her hip, did alwaies ſay, that it was the deuill

that lay there; till at laſt this exam: began (eſpecially after she was a Catholique) to thinke they ſaid truly, and that she was indeed poſſeſſed. Although (as now shee ſaith) shee afterwards perceiued, that shee had neuer any other trouble, after her hip was well, but now & then a paine, as she was wont to haue in her ſide, which paine doth ſtill continue, beeng a griefe of the ſpleene, as the Phyſicians tell her; for eaſe whereof, ſhee is commonlie let blood once a yeere. And for any other vexation, or griefe whilſt she was vnder the prieſts hands, shee ſayth shee had none, but ſuch as they procured, by theyr drinks, and perfumes, and other bad vſage of her.
                  Furthermore shee ſaith, that within a while after that she was a Catholique, the prieſts told her, that according to their promiſe, they would now try, to make her well, and to rid her from the wicked ſpirit. The manner whereof was as followeth. At the end of the firſt Maſſe that euer she ſaw, which was ſaid by maiſter Dibdale, he told her, that now they would make triall what was in her; and thereupon shee beeing perfectly well, and telling maiſter Dibdale, & the reſt as much, yet they would needs haue her to ſit downe in a chayre, which shee did. Then they began to binde her with towels, whereat she greatly meruailed, and was there-with caſt into a great feare, as not knowing what they meant to doe with her. Beeing in this caſe, maiſter Dibdale began to read vpon his booke of Exorciſmes, and after a good while, ſeeing no other alteration in her, then the tokens of feare, (for she cōfeſſeth the ſame increaſed by reaſon of his words, and other his dealings with her) then they vrged her to drinke aboue a pint of Sack, and Sallet-oyle, being hallowed, and mingled with ſome kind of ſpices. When she taſted this drinke, which they termed a holy potion, it did ſo much diſlike her, that shee could drinke but a little of it at once, (her ſtomacke greatly loathing of it.) And then the preſts ſaid, all that came from the deuill,

who hated nothing worſe, then that holy drinke. So as ſhe was held, and by very force, cauſed to drinke it vp, at diuers draughts. Heere-vpon (as ſhe ſaith) ſhe grew to be very ſicke, and giddie, in her head, and began to fal into a cold ſweate, verily then beleeuing, that as the prieſts ſaid, it was a wicked ſpirit, that cauſed her to be in ſuch caſe: Whereas afterwards, when ſhee better had conſidered of their dealings with her, ſhe eaſily perceaued, that the drinke they gaue her, was ſuch, as might haue made a horſe ſicke.
                  Againe, ſhe ſaith, that being thus in the prieſts hands, from a little before Chriſtmas, til two or three dayes before Whitſonday following, ſhe was often abuſed in this manner: and at ſome times when ſhe was bound, (as is before ſaid) and had drunk the holy potion ful ſore againſt her wil, they would burne brimſtone in a chafing-diſh, and hold her noſe by force ouer it: by which meanes, ſhe nothing doubteth, but that ſhe did commonly grow into ſome great outrages, & ſpake the can not tel now what.
                  There was, (as ſhe thinketh) a diſcourſe made of her fits, by ſome of the prieſts, the which, if she could heare, she ſuppoſeth, she should remember many more things then now she doth: But shee cannot forget (she ſaith) that many times, she did complaine of hard dealing, vſed towards her in her pretended fits, and how iniuriouſly they dealt with her, by giuing her that loathſome drink, and burning brimſtone vnder her noſe. Where-vnto the prieſts would commonly giue this aunſwer, eyther it was not ſhe, that ſpake, but the deuill; or otherwiſe when she was ſo wel, that they could haue no pretence, ſo to ſay, then they would bid her be contented, and tel her, that she should, by that meanes, merit heauen, & gaine a crowne of glory. And they would ſtand much vpon this laſt reaſon, in ſhewing how much this exam: had merited at Gods hands, when any by ſeeing of her in

her fits, and the Prieſts dealings with her, were reconciled.
                  She further ſaith, that the prieſts would be often talking in this exam: hearing, of certaine women, that were poſſeſſed beyond the Seas: how the deuils in them could not abide the holy potion, nor the burning of hallowed brimſtone, nor the applying vnto them of holy reliques, nor the preſence, or touching of Catholique prieſts, nor holy water, nor the holy candel, nor the bleſſed ſacrament, but would ſtart, ſay they burned, rage, & raile againſt the prieſts, & commend vpon euery occaſion thoſe, that were the ſoundeſt Proteſtants.
                  By this meanes, this exam: ſaith, for her ſelfe, (and she thinketh, she may ſafely ſo ſay for her ſiſter, and the reſt,) that she learned what to ſay, and doe, when the prieſts had her in hand: that is, to ſtart ſome times, when they brought reliques vnto her: to pretend that shee could not endure the preſence of the Sacrament, and many things beſides: as if the treatiſe of her may be gotten, wil appeare. Howbeit, she ſaith, that after ſome ſixe or ſeauen weekes, although at the firſt, she did not marke the prieſts doings, nor greatly obſerue her own, yet then she began to finde their iuglings, and how she her ſelfe, in ſaying this, or that, ſpake nothing, but what she had learned of the prieſts.
                  The chiefe reaſon that (she thinketh) moued her, not to mark them at the firſt, was the good opinion she had conceaued of them, being newly reconciled: and yet as shee ſaith, when shee ſaw before that time, into what caſe they had brought her ſiſter, she thought that they vſed her not wel, & perſwaded her to runne away from them.
                  This exam: further ſaith, that shee wel remembreth, how one time Ma: Sherwood told her, that one Ma: Bridges had gotten one of his mothers mayds with child, and bad her tel him of it, when he should come next thither,

and, that this exam: was troubled. Where-vpon she ſaith, that accordingly, as ſoone as she ſaw the ſaid Ma: Bridges, being her ſelfe in health, and no way troubled, & in the preſence of Ma: Sherwood, Goe to, quoth she, Ma: Bridges, you haue gotten your Mothers chamber-mayde with child, and make no conſcience of it. Which words were no ſooner vttered by her, but Ma: Sherwood, tooke hold of them, ſaying; Yea ſirra, canſt thou tel that, thou shalt be conſtrained to tel more anone? And thus he ſaid, pretending, it was not this exam: but the deuil, that vttered thoſe words. Heere-with Ma. Bridges was greatly amazed, and afraid, and much ſpeech was of it, as if it had been ſome great miracle.
                  The ſaid Ma. Sherwood, as this exam: ſaith, at one time, as she was tyed in the chayre, did thruſt a pinne into her ſhoulder, and ſhe there-with crying, and ſaying, what doe you? O ſaith he, heare you not the deuil, what hee ſaith? No, quoth this exam: it is not the deuil, but my ſelfe, that ſpake vnto you. But he ſtil affirming, that it was the deuil, this exam: could not be beleeued, and ſo it was reckoned amongſt them.
                  Againe shee ſaith, that in one of the fits, where-into they caſt her, by their holy potion, and brimſtone, there were two needles thruſt into her legge, by ſome of the prieſts, (as she is now perſwaded in her conſcience,) and vppon her comming to her ſences, finding a paine in the place, where the needles were, ſhe complained of it, and would haue put down her hoſe, to haue ſeene, what her legge ayled; but the prieſts would in no wiſe ſuffer that, but preſently they got holy reliques, and tyed them about her legge, affirming that the paine was procured, by the wicked ſpirit, and could not be eaſed, but by thoſe reliques. When they had ſo tyed them about her legge, they charged her in any wiſe, not to touch them; but yet notwitſtanding this exam: ſaith, that being greatly troubled with paine, & deſirous to caſe her ſelfe,

ſhe did now and then attempt to ſlacken the reliques, being tyed too hard, (as ſhe thought.) At what time the prieſts ſtil watching of her, as that ſhe could do nothing, but they would ſee her, they did blame her for touching of the reliques, bad her let them alone, and ſaid, it was the deuil that tempted her, to touch them.
                  The cuſtome of the prieſts was, as this exam: ſaith, to appoint a ſet time, when they meant to haue any ſolemne Exorciſmes, and then this exam: was one, when ſhe was in their hands, that for the moſt part, muſt goe to the chayre. After that the ſaid needles had beene in this exam: legge, from the fore-noone the one day, vntil eleuen of the clocke the next day, ſhe was brought vp into a gallerie, the Sermon being finiſhed, and a great number there preſent. At her comming in, and complaining of the ſorenes of her legge, the prieſts bad her be of good cheere, and ſaid, they would ſee if they could helpe her: Where-vpon Ma. Dibdale, (as ſhe remembreth) ſaid vnto her, Goe Frauncis, ſit downe, and put downe thy hoſe: which ſhe did, and then Ma. Stamp, another prieſt, when her hoſe was put downe, came vnto her very reuerently, and with diuers ceremonies vntyed the reliques, which were about her legge, which being taken away, he looked vpon the ſore place, and handled it gently, and in the end thruſting downe with his fingers the skin, and fleſh, where one needle ſtuck ſo, as the ſame appeared, he called vnto him thoſe that were preſent, and ſaid vnto them: See what the deuil had done, and ſo pulled it out. Then feeling her legge a little while longer, and vſing his fingers, as is before mentioned, he alſo diſcloſed the ſecond needle; which the people that were preſent beholding, were in a great maze, eſpecially to heare what Ma. Dibdale, and Ma. Stamp made of the matter: how they ſaid, it was the deuils doing, and much other ſpeech to that effect. As ſoone as the needles were taken forth, this exam: was caried

downe againe out of the gallerie, and feeling her leg very wel eaſed, it began to amend euery day more, and more, which they ſaid, was by reaſon of the holy water, where-with they waſhed her legge, when they pulled out the needles.
                  She further ſaith, that the prieſts had a cuſtome, to thruſt certaine things into the mouthes of ſuch, as they ſaid were poſſeſſed, vnder pretence of reliques. And ſhe wel remembreth, that at one time, when ſhe began to be troubled with her drink, and brimſtone, they thruſt into her mouth, ſome of the ſaid reliques: Whereof this exam: complained, and ſaid, why doe you put theſe filthie things in my mouth? Ah, quoth they: hark how the deuil cannot endure theſe holy things. Afterwards when this exam: put them out of her mouth, then they asked her what reliques they were? and ſhe told them, This is a peece of ſuch a man, and this of another. And at one time, they put into her mouth, a peece of Campions thumbe, or his finger, ſhe remembreth not whether. When this exam: at this time, and ſo likewiſe, both ſhe, and others, at other times, did name theſe reliques, and ſhewed their diſlike, to haue thē put into their mouthes, the prieſts would bidde the people that were preſent marke, how the deuil knew all holy reliques, of vvhat Martyrs they were, and how hee could not abide them: whereas this deponent ſaith, that both ſhe, and the reſt that were dealt with as ſhee was, did know all theſe reliques, that the prieſts had there, hauing the ſight of thē almoſt euerie day, and hearing the prieſts tell of whom they were. So that as ſoone as this exanimate ſaw any of them, ſhe could name them very readily, and ſay; This is ſuch a peece of Father Campian; this of Ma. Sherwin; this of maiſter Brian; this of maiſter Cottam; this of miſtris Clithero; and ſo of a great number more, which ſhe hath now forgotten.
                  At another time alſo, this examinate wel remembreth,

that the prieſts filling her mouth with reliques, they cō
                     ueyed in with them a big ruſtie naile, as ſhe is verily perſwaded in her conſcience, ſo as when they pulled out the reliques, ſhe was almoſt choked with the nayle, and much ado they had to get it out. They made her mouth there-with to bleed, and affirmed to the people, that it came out of her ſtomacke, by vertue of the ſaid reliques.
                  Againe ſhe ſaith, that beeing in ſpeech once with maiſter Dibdale concerning maiſter Richard Mainy, he told her diuers things of him, what wonderful ſights he ſaw about the Altar, and the ſacrament at Maſſe time. And further ſaid vnto her, that if ſhee would ſay, when ſhee was to be exorciſed in the chaire, at the bringing of the Pix vnto her, (as the manner was) that ſhee ſaw the bodie of Chriſt there in a great brightneſſe, ſhee ſhould by that meanes greatly glorifie God. And therevppon, as ſhe confeſſeth, ſhe ſaid as he aduiſed her, at her next exorciſing, and a great wonder was made of it.
                  Shee further ſaith, that beeing brought vp with her mother, ſhee had learned to ſing by hart certaine Geneua Pſalmes, & that being vnder the prieſts hands, when now and then forgetting her ſelfe, ſhe ſung any of them, as ſhe ſate at work, the prieſts, & ſo others in the houſe, when they heard her, would earneſtly blame her for it, and ſay one to another, Doe you not heare, how ſweetly the deuil ſingeth theſe Geneua pſalmes.
                  Alſo ſhe ſaith, that when the prieſts had drawne her to be of their Church, as is before mentioned, and that ſhee ſhould come to receaue the Sacrament, they told her, ſhe muſt firſt vow, and promiſe, by the vertue of that holy Sacrament, that ſhee would euer afterwards hold the Religion of the Church of Rome, and neuer goe againe to any of the Proteſtants Churches, nor euer reade the Engliſh Seruice, or the Engliſh Byble, or any other Engliſh books, written by the Proteſtants in matters of Religion. And this vow, ſhe ſaith, is ordinarily

made, by all that are reconciled.
                  She alſo ſaith, that ſhe hath often times heard ſome of the prieſts affirme, that it was an ordinary thing with the deuil, which was in Ma: Maynie, that when they the ſaid prieſts, haue demaunded of the deuil, (pretended to be in him) why he troubled the Catholiques with impriſonment, and many daungers, whileſt the Proteſtants liued in pleaſure: his aunſwer was, that the Proteſtants were his already, and that he troubled the Catholiques, becauſe he would draw them to himſelfe, and make thē Proteſtants if he could: adding that he would neuer haue troubled Iob as he did, if he had thought he could not haue made him to curſe God. This exam: alſo ſaith, that ſhe her ſelfe hath heard ſom of the prieſts, and (as ſhe thinketh Ma: Edmunds) aske Mainy that queſtion, and he the ſaid Mainy ſo to haue aunſwered them. Alſo ſhe ſaith, that the prieſts in talking of Proteſtants, haue affirmed of them in her hearing, that the greateſt ſhare of them were poſſeſſed, and that when England ſhould be againe, as it had beene, the deuils would then ſhew themſelues in them, and they ſhould haue theyr hands ful of chaire-worke, meaning their exorciſings, to caſt them out.
                  At one time, ſhe ſaith ſhe wel remembreth, that Ma: Greene comming from beyond the Seas, brought with him certaine graines, medals, and Agnus dei; and that ſeeing the prieſts, and others make ſo great account of them, ſhee ſaid to Ma: Greene, Good Lord, what meane you to make ſo great a-doe about theſe things? What is that waxe better then other waxe? or that bugle better then another, whereof you may buy a great number for a penny? Where-vpon Ma: Greene ſaid, it was the deuill, and not ſhe, that ſpake thoſe words. But this exam: told him againe, that ſhee ſpake thoſe words her ſelfe, and that ſhe meruailed, why they laboured ſo earneſtly, to make both her, and all others beleeue, that

whatſoeuer ſhe or they did, or ſpake, it was not ſhe, nor they, but the deuil: but he perſiſted, and ſaid, it was the deuil indeede, and not ſhe, whatſoeuer ſhee thought to the contrarie.
                  This exam: further ſaith, that one Alexander an Apothecarie, hauing brought with him from London to Denham on a time a new halter, and two blades of kniues, did leaue the ſame, vpon the gallerie floare in her Maiſters houſe. That next morning he tooke occaſion to goe with this exam: into the ſaid gallerie, where ſhe eſpying the ſaid halter, and blades, asked Ma: Alexander what they did there: Hee making the matter ſtrange, aunſwered, that he ſaw them not, though hee looked fully vpon them; ſhe her ſelfe pointing to them with her finger, where they lay within a yard of them, where they ſtoode both together. No (quoth this exam:) doe you not ſee them? and ſo taking them vp, ſaid, looke you heere: Ah (quoth he) now I ſee them indeed, but before I could not ſee them: And therefore ſaith he, I perceaue that the deuil hath layd them heere, to worke ſome miſchiefe vpon you, that are poſſeſſed.
                  Heereuppon maiſter Alexander told the prieſts what a ſtrange thing had happened, and a great ſearch vvas made in the houſe, to know how the ſaid halter & knife blades came thether: but it could not in any wiſe be found out, as it was pretended, till Ma. Mainy in his next fit ſaid, as it was reported, that the deuil layd them in the Gallery, that ſome of thoſe that were poſſeſſed, might either hang thēſelues which the halter, or kil themſelues with the blades.
                  Now this exam: further ſaith, that ſhee herſelfe did eſpy the end of the halter, in maiſter Alexanders pocket, the night before ſhee ſaw it, and the blades in the Gallery, at ſuch time as he drew out of his pocket a certaine boxe of Wafer-cakes for Maſſes. Whereby ſhee is fully perſwaded, as ſhe ſaith, that he the ſaid Alexander,
                     
was himſelfe the deuil, that layde the halter, and knife-blades in the ſaid Gallerie, and as ſhe ſaith, ſhe told maiſter Dibdale as much, when the ſearch was, how they ſhould come thether. Whereat maiſter Dibdale beeing much mooued, ſaid, it was not ſhe but the deuill, that ſpake ſo vnto him, of maiſter Alexander. And for this her report, and ſpeeches, ſhe felt, as ſhee ſaith, ſome ſmart afterwards. For within a day or two after they had her againe to the chayre, and did vſe theyr exorciſmes vvith her, the manner whereof was ſomething ſtrange vnto her.
                  They had in a readines the picture of an Aſſe, and of the deuil, and of Ma. Fox, as if hee were writing the booke of Martyrs. The Aſſe (they ſaid) reſembled this examinate; and the deuill within her (being a malicious lying ſpirit, that ſought to ſlaunder the dooings of the Catholique prieſts) betokened Ma. Fox, who (as they ſaid) had beene a malicious lyer. They had there alſo a long girdle, made of whipcord (as ſhee remembreth) it was full of knots, & termed S. Peters girdle: this girdle was hallowed, and being lapped into foure doubles, was like a whip.
                  Theſe things beeing thus readily prepared, this examinate was bound full ſore againſt her will in a chayre: They compelled her to drinke the holy potion, whereof ſhee made fiue or ſixe draughts; they burnt brimſtone vnder her noſe, and withall the ſaid three pictures one after another. They pulled off her gowne, and whipped her vppon the armes with the holy girdle, pretending that they meant thereby to hunt the deuill out of her. They gaue her fiue blowes, in remembrance of the fiue wounds of Chriſt: and ſeauen in honour of the ſeauen Sacraments, and three in memory of the bleſſed Trinitie, and ſhe knoweth not now how many more. With theſe blowes ſhee beeing conſtrained to cry out, they ſaid, it was not ſhee but the deuill within her that ſo cryed,

becauſe he was not able to endure the vertue of that holy girdle. But this examinate ſaith, that howſoeuer the deuill fared, ſhe well knoweth, that ſhee bare away the ſmart, and that her armes were blacke almoſt a moneth after with the blowes.
                  The prieſts alſo (ſhee ſaith) had another cuſtome: At the end of euery exorciſme, they would ſay that the ſpirit was gone downe, ſometimes into the foote, & ſometimes into the great toe of the partie exorciſed. And when ſtrangers came, before whom they intended to worke ſome great matters, they would bring the partie againe to the chayre, and beeing bound therein, they would begin (as they ſaid) to make the deuil ſhew himſelfe, which they did with this exam: in this ſort. The Exorciſt hauing a relique in his hand, as a bone, or ſome ſuch hard thing, would graſpe her by the legge, & aske her if ſhe felt any paine that ſeemed to prick her, & this exam: confeſſing (as the truth was) that ſhe felt a paine, (the ſaid bone, or hard thing in his hand hurting her ſhrewdly:) Ah (would the Exorciſt ſay) now he beginneth to ſtirre. Thus would the Exorciſt goe pinching of her legge twice, or thrice, before they came to her knee, and then they would wring her indeed ſo hard, as that ſhe ſhould ſometimes ſcreech, and ſometimes ſtart. And then the Exorciſt, and the reſt of the prieſts that were preſent would ſay, now the ſpirit will vp into her body, you ſhal heare more of him anon. And haſt was commonly made at ſuch times to giue vs the holy potion, which beeing ſo lothſome a drinke, diuers Gentlewomen ſeeing it giuen vnto vs, haue wept for pitty to ſee vs compelled to take it. But the prieſts would tell them that there was no remedy; for otherwiſe, except the ſtrength, and force of the wicked ſpirit were thereby abated, there was great danger, that hee would teare theyr guts, and inward parts in peeces, as hee was aſcending vpwards to goe out of them.
                  
                     This exam: ſaith, that when ſhee had wel conſidered of the prieſts-dealing with her, and how all the troubles ſhe had, was by reaſon of their intollerable drinks, perfumings, and practiſes with her, where-with her body was brought to great weakenes; ſhe grew to ſome more boldnes, and did now and then ſpeake her minde ſomwhat plainly, though it booted not: for they would ſay, it was the deuil that vttered it, whatſoeuer it was, that this exam: ſpake, if they diſliked it. She wel remembreth, that ſitting at her worke one time, and Ma: Sherwood ſitting alſo by her looking on a booke, she this exam: being very angry in her minde, to conſider how ſhe was vſed, and with him in particuler, for thruſting a pin into her shoulder, and for diuers other his hard vſages towards her, ſaid vnto him; that shee very greatly meruailed, how he, and the reſt durſt deale with her, & the reſt, as they did: adding, that if she this exam: or any other should complaine of them, they would certainly all of them be hanged. For (quoth she) how many of the Queenes ſubiects, haue you drawne from her, by theſe your practiſes heere? Heere-with Ma: Sherwood was much moued, and went to the prieſts, to acquaint them with her words. Some of them (as she hath heard) were of opinion, that it were beſt to put her away from her Miſtres: but Ma: Dibdale liked not that counſel, fearing (as she beleeueth) that shee should haue diſcloſed theyr dealings. For theſe her ſaid ſpeeches, shee was within three or foure houres very hardly entreated; Ma: Sherwood, and the other prieſts, returning vnto her, put her in minde, what she had ſaid, and told her, That it was not ſhe, but the deuill, that vttered thoſe words, and therevpon had her to the chayre, and with their holy potion, and brimſtone ſo plagued her, as being there-with wonderful ſick, ſhee fel (as she thinketh) into a ſwound.
                  Shee further ſaith, that whileſt theſe matters were in hand at Denham, there came very many thither, from

time to time. The Catholiques would bring with them ſuch of their friends, as they durſt truſt, being Proteſtants, of purpoſe, to draw them to the Romiſh Religion. And she certainly knoweth, that there was a very great number vpon thoſe occaſions reconciled; ſometimes an hundred a weeke, at the leaſt. Marrie at one time, she remembreth, that one Ma: Hampden of Hampden (as she thinketh) being brought thither, by Ma: Edward Aſhefield, now in priſon, as shee hath heard, did greatly deceaue the prieſts expectations, and put them into a great feare. The manner was, she ſaith, of thoſe who were pretended to be poſſeſſed, when any Proteſtants came in, to commend them greatly, and to raile vpon the prieſts: in ſo much as Ma: Mainy, when he ſaw Ma: Hampden, did preſently ſalute him, by the name of his fellow Iuſtice, and vſe ſuch other words vnto him, as when he heard, how they were expounded, hee was greatly diſcontented with them: and there-vpon ſpeaking aloude, ſaid thus in effect vnto him, that brought him thither (as farre as she remembreth) being her ſelfe then preſent. Cooſen Ned, I had thought you would haue brought me, where I ſhould haue ſeene ſome godlines, and not to haue heard the deuill; but this dealing I ſee is abhominable, and I meruaile, that the houſe ſinketh not, for ſuch wickednes committed in it: and ſo he departed. With theſe his ſpeeches, the prieſts were greatly amazed, & fearing the worſt, got them away for that night.
                  Furthermore, she ſaith, that perceauing many things were falſe, that the prieſts told to thoſe, that came vnto them, for the better confirming of her iudgement therein, she deuiſed (of her ſelfe) this tale. She told them, that being in bed, there came a morrice-daunce into her chamber, hauing theſe perſons in it, a man with Taber, and a Pipe, the Earle of Bedford that was dead before, (but one that the prieſts did greatly hate) and ſome other noble men alſo she named, who are now out of her

memory: all theſe she told them, after they had daunced about the table in the chamber, went out againe as they came in. When the prieſts had this by the end, they made great matters of it, termed it a viſion, and told it the Catholiques for a very truth; whereat this exam: laughed in her minde, but durſt not gaine-ſay it, and ſo it went amongſt them for a currant viſion. And ſhee thinketh in her conſcience, it was euen as true, as the reſt of their reports, both of this exam: & of the others there, that were pretended to be poſſeſſed.
                  Alſo ſhe ſaith, that there was a notable deuiſe amongſt the Prieſts, to haue it thought, that the wicked ſpirits came into this exam: and her ſiſter, by witcherie. Ma: Richard Mainy before mentioned, being the notableſt counterfeit (as she thinketh) that euer the prieſts had in their fingers, ſaid in one of his fits, or rather the deuil in him (as it was pretended) that one good-wife White of Buſhie, had bewitched this exam: and her ſaide ſiſter: This good-wife White, was commonly talked of in the Country to be a Witch: the ſaid Mainy alſo told the occaſion, how they were bewitched. There were (as it was pretended, that the deuil ſaid in Mainy) certaine cattel bewitched in Denham, ſome two or three yeeres before, which could not be eaſed, except the two ſpirits which troubled them, were ſent into two Chriſtian bodies; and there-vpon, quoth hee, to deliuer the cattel, ſhe ſent thoſe two ſpirits into this exam: ſiſter, and her ſelfe. When the prieſts heard theſe words, they ſeemed to coniure the deuil in Ma: Mainy, to bring the witches ſpirit (whereby she wrought) thither to Denham. And the night folowing this prank was played by the prieſts. They had gotten in the night a Cat amongſt them in the Parlor, which they ſaid was the witches ſpirit. About the whipping of this Cat they pretended great paines, and that they whipped her ſo long, til at the laſt ſhe vaniſhed away out of their ſight. Afterwards they

gaue it out, that out of all queſtion, the Witch, whileſt they were whipping of the Cat, was greatly vexed, and there-vppon they ſent a meſſenger to Buſhie, to ſee in what eſtate the Witch was, who at his returne reported, that when hee came to Buſhie, hee found the Witch in child-bed, and that her child was dead. When the prieſts heard this report, ſee (quoth the prieſts) to thoſe that were preſent, how it falleth out to be true that we told you, the whipping of her ſpirit in the likenes of a Cat, was the cauſe that her child died: yea (quoth this exam:) is that true? Why then you are murderers: whereat the prieſts were moued, but they knew how to aunſwer that, as they did, in ſaying, that it was not ſhe, but the deuill in her, that vttered thoſe words. Of this whipping of the Cat there was great ſpeeches, and many that beleeued them, wondred at it. The meſſenger that was ſent to Buſhie, hearing what a meruaile they made heereof, became a recuſant, being at that time a Proteſtant.
                  There was alſo another ſtrange thing, that happened at Denham, about a bird. Miſtris Peckham had a Nightingale which she kept in a Cage, wherein Ma: Dibdale tooke great delight, and would often be playing with it. This Nightingale was one night conuayed out of the Cage, & being the next morning diligently ſought for, could not be heard of, til Ma: Mainies deuil in one of his fits (as it was pretended) affirmed, that the wicked ſpirit, which was in this exam: ſiſter, had taken the bird out of the Cage, and killed it in deſpite of Ma: Dibdale. And further he told them, that the birds necke was broken, and did lie vnder a Roſemarie buſh in the Garden: where-vpon three or foure going downe, and finding the bird there, they made a great wonderment of it, whereat this exam: doth verily beleeue, that eyther Mainy had killed the bird, and laid it there himſelfe, or elſe that this exam: ſiſter did it, and had told Mainy of it; for she ſaith, that her ſiſter, & Mainy were very great.
                  
                     Alſo this exam: ſaith, that if the ſtory, she had heard hath beene written of Mainyes fits, could be got, there would appeare very many notable practiſes. Ma: Edmunds the Ieſuit was the chiefe man, that dealt with Mainy, & hath written (as she hath heard) a great booke of them. This Edmunds, as hath beene ſaid before, was a chiefe man, and therfore whereas the reſt had but their Albes on when they exorciſed any, he commonly had vpon him either a veſtment, or a cope. She wel remembreth, that the ſaid Mainy, ſitting vpon a time by one of the prieſts, affirmed, that vnto his ſight the prieſts finger, and thumbe did ſhine with brightnes, eſpecially on the inner ſides: where-vnto the Prieſt aunſwered, that it might wel ſo be, becauſe (quoth he) they were anointed with holy oyle, when I was made Prieſt. At which words, this exam: laughing, & calling Ma. Mainy a diſſembling hypocrite, the prieſt ſaid, that it was not ſhe, but the deuill, that did ſo laugh, and raile.
                  Furthermore, this examinate well remembreth, that Ma. Richard Mainy being exorciſed in the preſence of a hundred people at the leaſt, on S. Georges day in the morning, the prieſts affirmed, that ſeauen deuils did thē ſhew themſelues in him, by ſuch geſtures, and ſignes, as declared them to be the Authors of the ſeauen deadlie ſinnes. This examinate ſaith, that ſhe hath almoſt forgotten the geſtures, but ſhe will ſet them down as neere as her memory will ſerue her. The ſaid maiſter Mainy beeing bound in the chayre, did lift vp his head, looking highly, and made geſtures with his hand, as though hee were tricking vp himſelfe; whereupon the prieſts ſaid, that the ſpirit that was comming vp then, was Pride, as it appeared by the ſaid geſtures. Afterwards the ſaid Mainy beginning to gape, and ſnort, the prieſts ſaid, that the ſpirit that then roſe vp in him, was Sloth. Then hee fell to vomiting, and the prieſts ſaid, that the ſpirit that then roſe was Gluttony, and drunkennes. Againe,

he the ſaid Mainy talking df purſes, and thus much in the hundred, and of the forfeyting of this, or that leaſe, the deuil that then was riſen, the prieſts called Couetouſneſſe. And thus the prieſts and hee went through all the deadly ſinnes. The ſaid Mainy, or the deuill in him, (as was pretended) cōmending the Proteſtants for his good friends, becauſe they had all the ſaid ſeuen deadly ſinnes in them, but railing at Catholiques, for that they could not endure them, but did euer and anon cut them of by confeſſion.
                  The ſame day alſo ſhee well remembreth two things, that Ma. Mainy ſpake of, betwixt his deſcriptions of the ſaid ſeauen deadly ſinnes. Oh (quoth hee) this is a great day of pompe at the Court, I will ſtay no longer amongst you raskall prieſts, but will go thether amongst my fellowes: they all loue me there, I am theirs, and they are all mine, or to this effect. Alſo one Robert Bedell of Denham, beeing a very zealous Proteſtant, was buried the ſame day: in that forenoone there happened a ſtorme, whereuppon Mainy pretended that the deuil ſpake to this purpoſe in him, viz. Now they are about to bury Bedell, and becauſe he ſerued mee all his life time, I am ſending of him into hell. At which words many that were preſent wept, and prayed, that if it were poſſible, he might be ſaued. This matter was ſo vrged, and talked of, as afterwards they drew his wife to become a Romiſh Catholique, and ſo she died.
                  This examinate further ſaith, that one Anne Smith, about the Chriſtmas the ſame yeere, came to Denham, where ſhee had remained but a little while before the prieſts had got her into their hands, and ſaid ſhee vvas poſſeſſed. Touching this woman, a number of things hath beene written of her, as this examinate hath heard, all which this exam: ſaith, ſhe verily belieueth in her cō
                     ſcience, (as alſo of all the practiſes, & tales of the prieſts, touching both this examinate, and all the reſt with whō
                     
they dealt) that they were altogether knaueries, & meer inuentions, to deceiue the people, by procuring an admiration of theyr prieſthood, and thereby to withdraw her Maieſties ſubiects to their religion.
                  Shee well remembreth (as she ſaith) that at one time, Ma. Dibdale charged the deuill in Anne Smith (as it was pretended) to ſpeake vnto him, and aunſwer him to that which he demaunded: but notwithſtanding she held her peace. Then he commaunded her to ſpeak, in the name of the Father, the ſonne, and the holy Ghoſt, & by the vertue of the holy Sacrament; but yet ſhe was ſilent. Heerewith Ma: Dibdale growing to be more earneſt, charged her, (or the deuil that was pretended to be in her) to ſpeake to him, by the power, and vertue of his holy prieſthood, and then ſhe aunſwered him. Wherevpon this exam: being preſent ſaid to maiſter Dibdale, Why Ma. Dibdale, is there more vertue in your priesthood, then in the bleſſed Trinity, and the holy Sacrament? And hee aunſwered, that though hee were but a ſimple man, yet it pleaſed God, for the honour of his Church, to ſhew by this meanes the power of the prieſthood.
                  Againe this exam: ſaith, that after ſhe perceiued the deceit which the prieſts vſed, ſhe would rather then her life, haue gotten from them: but ſhe was ſo watched, & ſo were the reſt, (ſhe meaneth the other women) as they could by no meanes eſcape out of their fingers. Theyr pretence was, leaſt the deuil ſhould cauſe thē to drowne or kill themſelues. But this exam: is perſwaded in her conſcience, that the truth was why they kept them ſo ſtraightly, leaſt going home to their friends, they ſhould haue diſcloſed theyr diſſimulation, and falſe pretenſes, of caſting deuils out of thoſe, who were as free from them, as themſelues. This exam: and her ſiſter, did not ſee either Father, or mother, beeing in the ſame towne, all the while that they were in theyr hands; neither would they ſuffer either their father or mother to ſpeake with them,

though they deſired it many times.
                  At one time this examinate remembreth, that beeing in the Kitchen garden at Denham, ſhee heard a noyſe in her vnckles garden on the other ſide of the wall, & ſuppoſing that her vnckle might be there, ſhe cryed out as loude as ſhee could, vnckle, vnckle, who beeing there by chaunce, and hearing of her, knew her voyce, & asked her what ſhee would haue, oh (quoth ſhee) good vnckle helpe me from hence, for I am almoſt killed already amongst them heere, and ſhall not liue if I continue heere long. Vpon this occaſion, this examinats mother came to haue ſpoken with her, but ſhe could not be ſuffered. The prieſts told her that her daughters were bewitched, and poſſeſſed with wicked ſpirits, and that they were thereby caſt away, if they did not helpe them by their authority, ſaying, that therfore ſhe theyr mother might by no meanes ſpeake with them, vntill they had deliuered them from the ſaid wicked ſpirits. With this, & ſuch like aunſwers, they ſent away theyr mother diuers times weeping: howbeit ſhe ſaith, that at ſometimes her mother, not cō
                     tented with thoſe aunſwers, would grow to ſome earneſtneſſe, and hard ſpeech, becauſe ſhee could not be permitted to ſee her daughters. And then the Prieſts would ſhake her of with angry words, and tell her, that ſhee herſelfe had aſmuch neede to be exorciſed as her daughters. And at one time Miſtris Katherine that ſerued Miſtris Peckham beeing preſent, when the prieſts and her mother had ſuch ſpeeches, told her, that if the prieſts did well, they ſhould deale with her, as they did with her daughters.
                  After this exam: had beene in the prieſts hands for a fortnight or three weekes before Chriſtmas(as shee remembreth) vntill after the Aſcenſion day next enſuing, and had long perceiued their cooſening practiſes with her, and thereupon being growne to great weakeneſſe, and almoſt deſperate, shee told the prieſts plainly at the

end of one of her fits, whereinto they had caſt her by their drinks, ſlibber-ſawces, and brimſtone, that if shee had a deuill in her, they were beſt caſt him out, for (
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſhee) if euer you torment mee ſo againe (diſpatch mee if you list) otherwiſe I will certainly by one meanes or other, get away frō you, & tell my friends of all your proceedings, & dealings here both with me, & others. Heere-vpon Ma. Dibdale willed her to be content, and ſaid, that the next time they hoped to diſpoſſeſſe her altogether: and accordingly within three or foure dayes after, they had her to the chaire, and there vſing her, as they had done many times before, when ſhee came to her ſelfe againe, they told her, that now the deuil was gone, and ſhe was deliuered.
                  This exam: further ſaith, that the maner of the prieſts, was to ſay often-times, that they had caſt out this, or that deuil out of the parties: but ſtil when they liſt, they would take a ſmal occaſion to ſay, that yet there were ſome other deuils remaining within them. And this examinate ſaith, that ſhe doubteth, they would haue dealt ſo with her at that time too, but that there began to be great ſpeeches in the Country, about the prieſts doings at Denham: in ſo much, as diuers auncient Catholiques themſelues did vtterly diſlike them, and the prieſts them ſelues grew to be afraid. Howbeit, when this exam: was thus at ſome quiet, yet they would not ſuffer her to goe home to her father, and mother, but carried her vp to London, & placed her there with a ſure friend of theirs, one Miſtres White: and ſo they dealt with this exam: ſiſter, not ſuffering her to ſee her parents, almoſt for foure yeeres after, as this exam: remembreth.
                  Alſo ſhe ſaith, that when the prieſts thought good to meddle no more with her, they caried her to London, and placed her with one Miſtres Dorothie White, as hath beene ſaid, a recuſant, who then, and ſince hath beene ſo beneficiall vnto them, as that ſhee hath cleane ouerthrowne

her ſtate, and vndone her children. The cauſe why they placed her there was, (as ſhe verily thinketh) leaſt beeing amongſt her owne friends, ſhee might diſcloſe theyr bad dealings with her.
                  It was not long after this examinate came to miſtriſſe White, but that one Harrington growing into acquaintance with her, did afterwards marry her, as ſhee belieueth. The marriage was in the Marſhalſea, where after a Maſſe, one Lister a prieſt (as ſhee remembreth) then priſoner there, vſed certaine Latine words, whereby they ſaid she, and the ſame Harrington were married together. There were preſent there fiue or ſixe. After which time the ſaid Harrington liued with this examinate at times for the ſpace of about 4 or 5 yeeres, ſhee notwithſtanding continuing her ſeruice with Miſtriſſe White.
                  
                  After this examinate had kept company with the ſaid Harrington for about 4 yeres, she grew to be with child, and therevppon went firſt to her ſiſters in Oxfordſhire, and then to her parents at Denham. Beeing at Denham, she was preſented for a recuſant, and thereuppon committed to the gayle at Aleſbury. At her beeing there in priſon, Ma. Harrington wrote a Letter vnto her within three or foure daies (as she remembreth) after her commitment, the effect whereof was, that if shee were examined who was the father of her child, she should lay it vpon ſome that was gone beyond the ſeas for a ſouldier, but in no wiſe to ſay it was his: and the rather to perſwade her, he ſignified vnto her, that it was not onelie his aduiſe, but likewiſe the counſaile of Miſtris White her Miſtris, and Maiſter Blackman a prieſt.
                  With this Letter this examinate was greatly mooued, and then calling to mind how shee had beene vſed at Denham, and afterwards kept at Miſtris Whites from her friends: and remembring alſo, how the prieſts were euer wont to perſwade her, that she should neuer ſpeake

any thing as touching her poſſeſſing, or diſpoſſeſſing, that might turne to theyr diſcredite, and to the diſhonor of the Church of Rome, ſhe this examinate beganne to ſuſpect, that the religion that the prieſts profeſſed, was like vnto themſelues. But the moſt principall thing with the reſt that made her ſo to thinke, was another poynt in Ma. Harringtons Letter, wherein hee perſwaded her, that if ſhee were examined vpon her oath, it forced not, the Church did diſpence with her, ſo as ſhee might aunſwer what ſhee thought good notwithſtanding: becauſe an oath did not bind her to confeſſe any thing that might tend to the diſhonor of theyr prieſthood, or of the Catholique Church.
                  
                  When this exam: was firſt brought before the Iuſtices at Aleſbury, ſhe confeſſed that ſhe was reconciled; and ſhee is verily perſwaded, that if the ſaid Letter had not come vnto her afterwards, and mooued her, as is aforeſaid, notwithſtanding all the abuſes offred her at Denham, ſhe had cōtinued ſtill a wilfull recuſant, though it had coſt her her life. Marry vpon the occaſions before mentioned, this examinate hauing bethought herſelfe better, deſired to ſpeake with old Ma. Pigot of Doderſall, a Iuſtice of peace in Buckinghamſhire, vnto whom ſhe ſignified who was the father of her child, and that ſhe could be contented to alter her courſe of life, & goe to the Church againe, as before ſhe had done. Hereuppon Ma. Pigot tooke this exam: in his Coach with him to Sir Iohn Goodwins, where ſhe found the L. Grey, and diuers others, before whom, after ſhee had ſubmitted herſelfe, as ſhe had done to Ma. Pigot, ſhee was ſent to the Court by the L. Grey, with two of his ſeruaunts to the Lord Treaſurer. At her comming to the Court ſhe ſaith ſhee was examined of diuers matters before the Lords of the Counſell, concerning her knowledge of ſundry prieſts, and Ieſuits, and as touching one Stoughton, who was a notable ſpy, that carried ouer young maids and boyes, to be Nunnes, and prieſts, & brought

ouer Letters as occaſion ſerued, and continueth (as ſhee thinketh) the ſame trade ſtill.
                  After that this exam. had beene at the Court aboue a weeke, and examined in that ſpace three or foure times, the ſeruaunts of the ſaid L. Grey remaining there ſtill, it pleaſed the Lords of her Maieſties Counſell, to ſend her backe with them to the Lord Anderſon, & to writ theyr letter to his Lordſhip, that he ſhould ſend for this exam: father, and not onely to deale with him, to ſee that this exam: went to the Church, according as ſhe had promiſed, but alſo, that there might be no further proceeding in law againſt her, in reſpect that ſhe had beene reconciled: the which direction the Lord Anderſon did accompliſh, ſo as this exam. continued at her fathers vntill the yeere 1594.
                  After this examinate had remained thus with her father, about three or foure moneths, the ſaid Ma. Harrington came vnto her, and told her, he had beene all that while beyond the ſeas; and keeping company with her againe, as a man ought to doe with his wife, ſometimes at Denham, and ſometimes this exam: comming to him to London, hee allowed her after the rate of about 20 marks by the yeere. She likewiſe ſaith, that when maiſter Harrington ſuſpected this exam: to be with child, he put an hundred pounds into one Ma. Fits his hand to the vſe of her, and her child if ſhe had any.
                  This exam: further ſaith, that within about a yeere after that the ſaid maiſter Harrington had come from beyond the ſeas (as hee pretended) and kept companie with her as his lawfull wife, hee was apprehended for a prieſt, and firſt committed to the Towre, and then to the Marſhalſea. Beeing in priſon, this examinate had a warrant from Ma. Young to goe vnto him; and at her comming vnto him he wept, and ſaid, that if hee might for ſhame, hee would take another courſe then hee did. He cryed her mercy for the abuſe offred vnto her, and

promiſed, that if ſhe would be content, ſhe ſhould neuer want. Howbeit (as she was enformed) he told ſuch Catholiques as came vnto him, (who had vnderſtanding that this examinate did challenge him for her husband) that shee this examinate did greatly ſlaunder him, & vtterly denied that euer hee was married vnto her, or euer kept company with her as men doe with theyr wiues. Whereupon all ſuch Catholiques as heard thereof, did greatly rate this examinate for challenging of him to be her husband, and ſaid shee did belie him, and that it was the deuill that cauſed her to raiſe that ſlaunder of him, being a Catholique prieſt.
                  She further ſaith, that the ſaid Harrington being condemned, and executed the 18 of February 1593 (as ſhe remembreth) she married againe with Ralfe Dallidowne a Smith in Holborne, the 20 of Ianuary 1594 as shee thinketh. And hauing receiued herſelfe the ſaid hundred pound from Ma. Fits, her husband Dallidowne had it all, except it were ſome 6 or 7 pound, which she had ſpent before.
                  This exam: further ſaith, that many times ſince shee hath conformed her ſelfe, many prieſts haue greatly blamed her, vſing words to this effect vnto her, viz. They haue tolde her, that they wondred how shee could be brought to goe to the Engliſh church, conſidering the great power of the prieſthood, and of the holy reliques of the Church of Rome. To whom this exam: hath ſometimes aunſwered, that she was well before she came into theyr hands, and ſtill ſo continueth shee thanked God, and thereupon hath deſired them, that they would deale no more with her, but let her alone.
                  When shee hath thus aunſwered them, they haue often ſaid to her, that it was the deuill for a certaintie, that ſtill hunting of her, did perſwade her to goe to the Heretiques Church; & that if they had thought she would haue taken this courſe, they would neuer haue diſpoſſeſſed

her. To whom this examinate by way of aunſwer hath replied; A murren take you, I was well enough before you dealt with mee, and ſo haue beene euer ſince you left me.
                  Shee further ſaith, that ſince shee was firſt examined before the Lord Biſhop of London in March 1598, diuers prieſts haue vrged her greatly that shee should ſay nothing againſt the poſſeſſing, or diſpoſſeſſing vſed at Denham, either concerning her ſelfe, or any other, bidding her aunſwer, that beeing then young, ſhe had forgotten all thoſe things: and threatning of her, that if she confeſſed any thing againſt the holy prieſthood, or power of the Church in caſting out deuils, she should be burnt for an Heretique, if euer the world changed. The names of the prieſts that haue thus dealt with her, both before ſhee was called for to be examined before the Lord Biſhop of London, and ſince (at the leaſt ſome of them) are Ma. Sherwood, Ma. Gerrard, Ma. Blackman, Ma. Iohn Greene, and Ma. William Bruerton.
                  
                  This exam: alſo ſaith, that about foure yeeres ſince, it happened that her husband in a fray killed a man, whereupon ſhe was compelled to borrow ten pound of miſtris White, to be vſed in her husbands buſineſſe, certaine prieſts thought then, that they might peraduenture haue drawne this examinate vnto them againe, and ſo reſorting vnto her, namely (as she remembreth) maiſter Blackman, maiſter Greene, maiſter Wells, with two or three other prieſts, whom she knew not, they told her, that her falling from the Catholique Church was the cauſe, that the deuill had made her husband to kill the ſaid man.
                  Of late alſo ſhe ſaith, that one Perry ſeruaunt to maiſter Roper that lieth in Southampton-houſe, challenging her for that she had reuealed where her ſiſter Sara dwelt, ſaid that she played the Ferret, and ſought many mens liues, that it was pittie she liued, and that it were a

good deede to ſhoote her through with a piſtoll as ſhe goeth in the ſtreets. Howbeit this exam: ſaith, that ſhee neuer meant any Catholique in England hurt, (ſome prieſts excepted) who haue dealt hardly with her. But beeing now vpon her oath to ſpeake the truth, ſhee hopeth that no honeſt man or woman will be angry with her for diſcharging her conſcience: adding, that if it had not been ſo long ago ſince she was in the prieſts hands, ſhe could haue deliuered many moe things as touching their bad proceedings.
                  Shee further ſaith, that the prieſts at theyr departure from Denham, tooke euery one thence his woman with him; Ma: Edmunds the Ieſuit had for his darling miſtris Creſſy then a widdow, who was a daily gueſt there, and one that did contribute very much both to him, and the reſt of the prieſts: Anne Smith was at the diſpoſition of Ma. Driland: Sara Williams of maiſter Dibdale: miſtris Altham of Cornelius, and this examinate of Ma. Leigh a prieſt likewiſe.
               
               
                  
                  The examination of Anne Smith, alias Atkinſon, taken by vertue of her oath, the 12 of March, 1598.
                  SHe ſaith, that dwelling with one Ma: Bold at Boldhall in Lancaſhire, the yeere that the Earle of Leiceſter went into the Low-Countries, ſhe was ſicke of a diſeaſe called the Mother, that ſhe then hauing a ſiſter, one Alice Plater, that boorded at the La: Staffords, was ſent by her Miſtres to her ſaid ſiſter at London, the ſaid La. Stafford then lying at Iuie bridge, where ſhe remained (as ſhe ſaith) about a yeere, vſing the help of Phiſicke for the ſaid diſeaſe. She ſaith that Ma: Edmund Peckham did boord at the ſaid La. Staffords, from about the Chriſtmas that this exam: came to London, till about Eaſter following.
                  Shee ſaith further, that about three weekes before Chriſtmas next enſuing, her ſiſter being aduertiſed by the ſaid Ma: Peckham, that Sara, & Will: Trayford were poſſeſſed at his houſe, ſhe (her ſaid ſiſter) went thither, where finding the manner of their troubles, ſhe conceaued, that this examinate was likewiſe poſſeſſed, as they were.
                  There-vpon ſhe faith, that vpon the Chriſtmas euen, ſhe went to Denham vnto her ſiſter, where ſhee found Trayford, but he did not make any ſhew, as though hee were poſſeſſed, but did waite orderly vpon Ma: Peckham his Maiſter, and Sara was then gone to the L. Vaux his houſe, being caried thither by one Dibdale a prieſt.
                  After ſhe had beene at Denham about a moneth, ſhe attended vpon Miſtres Peckham, to a churching in Denham
                     
Towne; where ſhe ſaith her fore-ſaid diſeaſe did trouble her, and likewiſe being then recouered, it tooke her againe, as ſhe was going homewards, where-vpon one White a prieſt that vſed much that houſe, was ſent to London for Cornelius another prieſt, (who kept at Sir Iohn Arundells in Clarkenwell) by the meanes of her ſaid ſiſter, who told this exam: that ſhe was ſurely poſſeſſed.
                  When her ſiſter ſaid ſhe was poſſeſſed, ſhe this exam: denied it, and ſo ſhe did, when the ſaid Cornelius came vnto her. She ſaith that the ſaid Cornelius comming to Denham the ſame day at night, that hee was ſent for, brought in his company one Stamp a prieſt, Thomſon a prieſt (as she thinketh) & one Christopher Tulice a prieſt, with Miſtres Creſſey, Ma: Gardner, and his wife.
                  The day after the prieſts came vnto her, they tooke vpon them to exorciſe her from morning, till towards night, and then left her.
                  She ſaith, that beſides the diſeaſe of the Mother, ſhee grew to be ſicke, and receaued Phyſick by Doctor Griffithes preſcription at Alexander the Apothecaries hands; but not recouering her health thereby, after about two moneths, her ſaid ſiſter procured her to be ſent to Miſtris Mainy in Channon Row, with whom ſhee was to dwell about the beginning of Lent.
                  She continued with Ma: Mainy in the Earle of Lincolnes houſe in Channon Row, til after Eaſter weeke. In which time she ſaith, onely Eliza: Calthrope (as this exam: remembreth) dwelling likewiſe with Miſtres Mainy, was ſuppoſed by the prieſts to be poſſeſſed, and being there-vpon remoued to Ma: Mainyes owne houſe in Greenes Alley, there she was exorciſed, vntil she died there.
                  She further ſaith, she was preſent, when Mainy did counterfeit himſelfe, that he should die vpon the Good Friday; he the ſaid Mainy thē lying at the Earle of Lincolnes
                     
houſe, againſt which time a great number came thither, to ſee him depart.
                  The ſaid Mainy came to her Miſtres houſe (ſhe being his ſiſter) about a moneth, or fiue weekes before Eaſter; and euery Friday the ſaid Mainy did pretend himſelfe to be wonderfully tormented, and when he was recouered out of his traunce, he would vſe to ſay, he had beene in Purgatorie: and there-vpon gaue it out, that he should die on Good Friday, and goe immediatly to heauen, hauing beene already in Purgatorie.
                  Shee ſaith, that all the ſaid Lent she continued with Miſt: Mainy, she was ſtil euill at eaſe, & that the prieſts that came thither, did ſtil endeuour to perſwade her that she was poſſeſſed: ſaying, that she muſt beleeue thē therein, that she was poſſeſſed, and that they could help her, and not otherwiſe.
                  The prieſts names, as she remembreth, were Ma: Cornelius, Ma: Dryland, Ma: Tirrell, Ma: Stamp, Ma: Tulice, Ma: Ballard.
                  
                  She further ſaith, that about three weekes after Eaſter, the ſaid prieſts ſtil continuing to perſwade her, that she was poſſeſſed, and that if shee beleeued ſo, then they would helpe her: she this exam: continuing to be euill at eaſe, and hoping by their meanes to be helped, yeelded to ſay, that she thought she was poſſeſſed, therby to ſee, if ſhe might be helped; although all the while ſhe had a conceite in her ſelfe, that she was not poſſeſſed.
                  She further ſaith, that whileſt she did withſtand the prieſts ſaid perſwaſions, affirming that ſhee knew shee was not poſſeſſed, they told her, it was the deuill within her, that cauſed her ſo to ſay.
                  When shee had thus yeelded vnto them, Ma. Stamp caried her to Denham, accompanied with one Harris Ma. Mainyes man.
                  She ſaith, that about ſixteene dayes after the ſaid Eaſter,

this exam: and Eliza: Calthrope, being both ſicke, and ſuppoſed by the prieſts to be poſſeſſed, her Ma: left them both in the Earle of Lincolnes houſe, and went to Babingtons houſe the traytor in Barbican: and the third or fourth day after this exam: was caried to Denham (as afore-ſaid) where ſhee, and all the houſe were maintayned, at the common charge of the prieſts, that reſorted thither.
                  At her comming to Denham, they tooke in hand to exorciſe her, & continued that courſe with her til Whitſontide: about a fortnight after Whitſontide (as she remembreth) certaine Purſuiuants came, and ſearched the houſe, & finding there Ma: Dryland the prieſt, and other men, viz: Alexander the Apothecarie, Swythen Wells (after executed in Holborne) and Iames Stanborow, Ma: Peckhams man, they caried them to priſon, leauing this exam: and two other women in the houſe.
                  She ſaith, that the reſt of the prieſts when the Purſuiuants came, were gone with Fid, and Sara Owen, alias Frauncis, and Sara Williams, as this exam: hath been enformed.
                  It was Sonday when the Purſuiuants caried the ſaid parties to priſon; and vpon the Monday after the ſaid Drylands man caried this exam: to London, where ſhee was placed that night by Ma: Maryne, at one Alexanders houſe in a little Lane, going out of Thames ſtreete, and is (as now she is enformed) betwixt Lyons key, and Billingſgate?
                  
                  Shee continued at the ſaid Alexanders houſe about ſeauen weekes, her charges being firſt defrayed by the ſaid Ma: Maryne, and afterwards by Ma. Pownd, late priſoner at Wiſbitch, her acquaintance with Ma. Maryne grew at Denham, and with Ma. Pownd, at the ſaid Alexanders houſe.
                  Ma: Pownd, in reſpect of the charge hee was at with her at Alexanders, paying ten ſhillings a weeke for her

boord, remoued her thence to miſtris Lowes to Newington in Surrey: where remayning not paſt three or foure dayes, the ſaid Pownd carried her to his Mothers houſe, one miſtris Pownd, dwelling in the ſame Towne, where ſhe remained til Ma: Pownd was taken, which was vpon the day when bon fires were made for Babingtons apprehenſion, viz: the 15 of Iuly.
                  The ſaid miſtris Pownd was of her ſonnes Religion, where-vpon after he was apprehended, ſhe had no ioy to ſtay there, but was caried thence by one Ma: Goodmans direction vnto miſtris Leicester, dwelling in Fleetſtreete, at the figne of the dogges head in the pot: where ſhee had not remained aboue two dayes, but vppon a ſearch was taken, & committed to priſon for reeuſancie, where ſhe remained about a moneth, and then eſcaped thence.
                  In this meane while, viz: from Whitſontide before ſpecified, Dibdale, Lowe, and Adams, were apprehended, and being arraigned, this exam: was brought by maiſter Youngs meanes, whileſt ſhe was priſoner, to giue in euidence againſt them at their arraignment. The cauſe why she was brought to giue in euidence againſt them was, for that maiſter Young hearing her name, did examine her, whether she was not one that did pretend her ſelfe to be poſſeſſed at Denham, with whom Dibdale, and the reſt of the prieſts had dealt, and there-vpon examined her touching her poſſeſſion, and the deuils dealing with her: and particulerly of a peece of a knife, which the prieſts ſaid came out of her body.
                  This exam: was priſoner in Bridewell, where the ſaid Fid was likewiſe priſoner with her: where this exam: found ſuch fauour, as hauing the liberty of the priſon by maiſter Youngs appointment, and thereby being truſted with ſome keyes, ſhe, and Fid by her meanes eſcaped thence, taking with them the Matrones girle, which girle by the ſaid maiſter Pownds direction, was ſent into

                     Hampſhire, and placed with his Mother, who had a houſe in the ſaid County, and did then lie there.
                  After ſhe was eſcaped, ſhee was placed by Ma. Pownds direction firſt in Cow-lane, then by her mothers meanes with the French Embaſſadors wife, where diſliking, ſhe was by maiſters Pownds meanes placed in a poore vvomans houſe by the Marſhalſea, and then againe with his mother, and then going to the White-Lyon to ſee maiſter Pownd, with her miſtris, ſhe this exam: (whilſt they two were talking together) going to maiſter Simpſons chamber a prieſt, was againe there apprehended, and committed by maiſter Young againe to Bridewell, where ſhee remained about 21 weekes, in which time the Queene of Scots was beheaded.
                  Shee was diſcharged out of Bridewell by maiſter Secretary Walſinghams meanes, at the ſute of maiſter Dale a Merchant in Gracious-ſtreet, and then remaining with her mother a while, was placed with the ſaid La. Stafford, with whom ſhee dwelt about two yeeres, viz. till ſhe was married.
                  She ſaith, that whē firſt she fell into the prieſts hands, ſhee was about 18 yeeres of age, and that shee is verily perſwaded ſhe neuer was poſſeſſed with a wieked ſpirit, (for the which ſhee thanketh Almighty God from the bottom of her hart) but verily thinketh, that she was verie much abuſed by the ſaid prieſts, in that they did perſwade her, (as is before expreſſed) that ſhee was poſſeſſed.
                  Beſides, ſhee ſaith, that where it was giuen out by the prieſts, that a peece of a knife came out of her mouth when she was in one of her fits, she then was fully perſwaded, that they ſaid vntruly therein, although at that time, being wholely addicted to Poperie, she did reuerence them very much, & durſt not contradict them.
                  She further ſaith, that when Cornelius did firſt begin to exorciſe her, the manner thereof was this: She being

wel, and in perfect memory, and at that time not troubled with her former diſeaſe called the mother, Cornelius, and the reſt ſet her in a chayre, and bound her faſt with towells: then Colnelius hauing ended a short ſpeech, or Sermon (the effect whereof she doth not now remember) which was made before ſhee was bound in the chayre, and being in his Albe, and hauing a ſtole about his neck, began to reade his Exorciſmes, whereat this exam: doth now remember, that ſhee began greatlie to ſhiuer and quake, being then ſtrooke with a great feare, as though the deuill would greatlie torment, and teare her, becauſe they had ſo bound her.
                  Beſides ſhee ſaith (which did encreaſe her feare) ſhe had beene told by diuers, how others had beene troubled, viz: how in their fits they were greatly tormented, how they could not endure the Prieſts to come neere them: how when a prieſt did lay his hand vppon any part of them, the ſaid part would be ſo hote, as though it would burne them to the bone, how the deuil in them would raile vpon the Catholiques, & greatly commend the Proteſtants, and many other ſuch things they reported, which this exam: hath forgotten.
                  She further ſaith, that ſhe was then ſo zealous in Poperie, and had ſuch an opinion of the ſaid prieſts, that if ſhee could haue gotten vnder the Altar-cloath, with a croſſe in her mouth, & a candel in her hand, ſhe thought her ſelfe ſafe from the deuil. When ſhee was exorciſed the firſt time, and ſo afterwards being bound in the chayre, where ſhee ſeemed ſtill to be wel, notwithſtanding their Exorciſmes, then they would pretend to giue her ſomewhat, either to comfort her ſtomacke, (ſhe ſeeming to faint through feare) or to diſcloſe the deuil, which was hallowed, and was very loathſome to her to take. This hallowed medicine, as ſhe remembreth, had Rue, and oyle in it, and was vgly to behold, ſuch as ſhe thinketh they could not haue taken themſelues. Alſo

ſhe ſaith, they would burne brimſtone vnder her noſe, which shee ſaith, would greatly trouble her, and as shee ſuppoſeth, did take away her ſences from her. Thus she ſaith, they dealt with her, as ſhe ſuppoſeth, ſome fiue or ſixe times.
                  She further ſaith, that they did bind her ſo faſt at thoſe times in a chayre, as they almoſt lamed her armes, and ſo bruſed all the parts of her body, with holding, tying, and turmoyling of her, that ſhe was ſo ſore, ſhe was compelled afterwards, by the ſpace of three yeeres to ſwathe her body.
                  She further ſaith, that now ſhe prayeth God for the prieſts that be aliue, that God would forgiue them for dealing ſo with her, and is very hartily ſorie, that euer ſhe came into their company.
                  She further ſaith, that vpon Wedneſday in Whitſon-weeke, whilſt ſhee was at Denham, there came thether maiſter Saliſbury that was executed, Ma: Iohn Gerrard, and Ma: George Peckham.
                  
                  She alſo ſaith, that ſhe thanketh God ſhee neuer ſaw any thing that might terrifie her, but onely the prieſts when they were exorciſing, that ſhe neuer ſaw any viſions: and whatſoeuer they write or affirme of her touching any ſuch matter, shee affirmeth that they are all fained, and vntrue. And she addeth, that ſhe meruaileth that they should ſet downe any thing of her, that shee ſhould ſpeake in her fits, conſidering that it was giuen out, the ſpirit that was in her was a ſullen, and dumbe ſpirit, and would not therefore be brought to aunſwer the prieſts: and that the ſaid ſpirit, that was ſuppoſed to be in her, was ſuch a one, the deuil that was in Mainy (who was named Modion) did affirme, as many reported.
                  This exam: further ſaith, that ſhee being preſent by Mainy, when he was in exorciſing, after that shee the firſt time had been exorciſed by Cornelius, Ma: Edmunds
                     
the Ieſuit did aske the deuil in Mainy, whether she this exam: was poſſeſſed or not; and the deuil aunſwered that she was. Then quoth Ma: Edmunds, how chaunce he could not be brought to ſpeake this other day, when she was exorciſed? He the ſaid deuil, as she then ſuppoſed, aunſwered, that the reaſon was, becauſe the ſpirit that was in her was ſullen, and dumbe. Then they demaunding of his deuil, what was the name of the ſpirit that was in this exam: he aunſwered Soforce. And this was betwixt Chriſtmas, and Shrouetide.
                  She further ſaith, that it was a common thing amongſt them, to giue out words, as though Proteſtants were all poſſeſſed; and there-vpon the prieſts would aske ſome that were pretended to be poſſeſſed, or the deuil in them (as it was ſuppoſed) whileſt they were exorciſing them, why they did not trouble them before, whilſt they were Proteſtants. And the deuil would aunſwer, that there was no reaſon for them ſo to doe, becauſe the Proteſtants were theirs already.
                  She further ſaith, that after the time she was out of the prieſts hands, her former diſeaſe of the Mother did diuers times take her, and continued with her as before it had done, vntill being married ſhe had children. Since which time, she hath beene rid of that diſeaſe, she thanketh God.
                  She further ſaith, that shee wel remembreth the morning when Alexander the Apothecarie was to goe to London to fetch more prieſts, the day before this exam: was firſt exorciſed, his horſe prauncing, and flinging of him downe, he returned backe againe, and conſtantly affirmed, that the wicked ſpirit that was in this exam: had cauſed his horſe to fling him: whereat when this exam: laughed, he the ſaid Alexander affirmed, that it was the deuill, that laughed at him.
               
               
                  
                  The confeſsion of Ma. Anthonie Tyrrell Clerke, written with his owne hand, and auouched vpon his oath the 15 of Iune 1602.
                  DIuers interrogatories beeing propounded to this examinate, cōcerning the pretended caſting out of deuils, by maiſter Edmunds, alias Weston a Ieſuit, and certaine other Seminary prieſts, in the yeeres 1585, and 1586, at Hackney, Denham, and other places, and as touching likewiſe the occaſions, or inducements that mooued them at that time, to take ſuch matters vpon them, hee hath ſet downe his aunſwer as followeth.
                  I will firſt anſwer to the circumſtance of time, which is heere propounded vnto me. In the yeere 1584 I, & Iohn Ballard prieſt, (ſince executed with Ma. Babington, and the reſt) comming together from Rome through Burgundy, found there a great preſſe of ſouldiours, and were aduertiſed, that they were to ſerue vnder the Duke of Guiſe. When wee came to Roane, wee heard then directly, that the ſaid preparations were againſt England. The ſame yeere (as I remember) Ma. Crighton a Scottiſh Ieſuit was taken at the ſea, and after brought into England, who by occaſion of certaine writings which he had, was driuen to confeſſe at large (as I haue beene informed) what the whole plot was: and how far both the Pope, and the King of Spaine had ingaged themſelues in it. Hereof I doubt not, but that ſundry Catholiques

in England had ſufficient notice from beyond the ſeas, and eſpecially Ma. Edmunds, alias Weston the Ieſuit, who was then the chiefe, as maiſter Garnet (as I take it) is at this preſent, and therefore could not be ignorant of ſuch important matters, wherein principall men of his owne ſocietie were engaged.
                  Not long after my cōming into England in the yeere 1585, maiſter Martin Aray a prieſt, meeting with me at the end of Cheapſide, as I was turning to enter into Paules Churchyard, tooke mee by the hand, and whiſpering me in the eare, bad me be of good cheere, for that all things went now very well forward. The king of Spayne (quoth he) is now almost ready with his forces, to come into England, and we ſhall be ſure to heare ſome good newes therof very ſhortly: wherefore it ſtandeth vs now in hand that be priests, to further the Catholique cauſe, as much as poſſibly in vs lyeth, or to this effect. And this was the ſtate of that time, nouriſhed (I well perceiued) with great hope of ſome great alteration, by the meanes before expreſſed.
                  About the time of maiſter Arayes aforeſaid communication with me, maiſter Edmunds, alias Weston, had lately (as it was reported) caſt a deuill out of one Marwood: whereupon he the ſaid maiſter Aray, at the time before mentioned, did highly commend vnto mee the exorciſmes of Fa. Edmunds, ſaying that hee (the ſaid Edmunds) would make the deuils themſelues now confeſſe, that theyr kingdome was neere at an end. Vpon the pretended diſpoſſeſſion of the ſaid Marwood, ſundry other prieſts mooued thereunto (I am perſwaded) by the inſtigation of maiſter Edmunds, or for that they meant to ſhew theyr zeale in imitating of him, did take vpon them to exorciſe, and caſt deuils out of diuers perſons. viz. Sara and Friſwood Williams, William Trayford, Anne Smith, Richard Mainy, and Elizabeth Calthrop, whoſe necke was found broken at the bottome of a payre of ſtayres (as the brute went then amongſt vs.) VVhen I ſaw this

courſe, I liked it well, and was my ſelfe an Actor in it, and did well perceiue, that it was the matter whereat Ma. Aray had aymed, when he told me, that it ſtoode vs Priests in hand to further the Catholique cauſe, as much as poſſibly wee could. And indeed our proceedings therein, had for a time wonderfull ſucceſſe. I cannot in my conſcience eſteeme the number fewer, that in the compaſſe of halfe a yeere were by that meanes reconciled to the Church of Rome, then 5 hundred perſons: ſome haue ſaid three, or foure thouſand. As touching the ſeuerall manners of diſpoſſeſſing the ſaid parties, and of theyr fits, traunces, and viſions, diuers diſcourſes were penned, amongſt the which I my ſelfe did penne one. Ma. Edmunds likewiſe writ (I am perſwaded) a quire of paper of Ma. Mainyes pretended viſions. For he thought, as it ſeemed, to haue wrought ſome great matter by him, but was diſappointed very ridiculouſly, ſo as I thinke the ſaid viſion will hardly come to light. There was alſo a Treatiſe framed to proue firſt, that in former times diuers had been poſſeſſed. Secondly, that Christ hath left to his Church certaine remedies for the diſpoſſeſſing of ſuch parties. Thirdly, that in the casting out of deuils, there hath beene great vſe of application to the Daemoniacks of holy reliques. In proſecution of the firſt part, amongſt other points the Author ſheweth, that GOD permitteth ſome to be poſſeſſed, that thereby the faithleſſe Atheists may learne, that there is both a God and a deuill: and that the faith of the Catholique Church, may alſo be confirmed by the power left vnto her in casting out of deuils. In the handling of the ſecond point, hee tryumpheth against the Proteſtants, ſaying that for all theyr reformation which they talke of, to be ſo neere the order of the Primitiue Church, yet they are not able either to diſcerne, who are poſſeſſed amongst them, nor how to giue thē remedy. The third part is handled more largely, to the great aduauncement & power of Reliques. As for holy water: that S. Macarius thereby

cured a woman, who by Magicall enchauntment ſeemed to be turned into a Mare. Likewiſe, how S. Peter hallowed bread, against the aſſault of certaine deuils which were ſent by Simon Magus in the likenes of dogges, to deuoure him. For the power of prieſthood, there is an example alledged of S. Martin, how he putting his fingers into the mouth of a Daemoniacke, the deuill durst not bite him, though he bad him to bite him, if he had any power ſo to doe. There is alſo mention made of the vertue of the bleſſed ſacrament, of holy oyle, and of the bones of Saints. The vſe of all thoſe things, was very frequent in the exorciſing of the parties poſſeſſed. Inſomuch as wee omitted not the reliques and bones of Ma. Campian, Ma. Sherwin, Ma. Brian, and Ma. Cottam, to haue ſome little teſtimonie by implication from the deuill, to prooue them holy Matyrs.
                  If I be not deceiued, Ma. Edmunds alias Weston, was the Author of this booke, and the examples by him alledged, were brought of purpoſe, to giue the more credit to his, and our proceedings with the ſaid parties before mentioned. And indeed he was not therein deceiued, for wee that were prieſts, were thereby greatlie magnified by Catholiques, ſchiſmaticks, and weak proteſtants; the two former beeing confirmed in the Romane Catholicke faith, and the third ſort therevnto reconciled, as hath beene before mentioned. And that cannot be denied, but that in the courſe which wee held with the ſaid pretended Daemoniacks, many occaſions were giuen, and aptly taken, to ſcorne and deride the orders, & ſeruice now eſtabliſhed by her Maieſties lawes in the Church of England.
                  Likewiſe I muſt confeſſe, that the courſe we held, was ſo pleaſing to ſuch as ſaw it, or were informed of it by thoſe that they truſted, as it prooued very gainfull vnto vs all that were prieſts: wee had out of queſtion procured vnto our ſelues very great fauour, credit, and reputation,

ſo as it was no meruaile, if ſome young Gentlemen, as Ma. Babington, & the reſt, were allured to thoſe ſtrange attempts which they tooke in hand, by maiſter Ballard, who was an Agent amongſt vs. They ſaw, as they ſuppoſed, (for both maiſter Babington, and diuers of his company were oftentimes at the exorciſings) that we had a great commandement ouer deuils, which preuailed greatly with them, as I think. It would haue been a very ſtrange thing (I am perſwaded) that wee could not haue wrought men at that time to attempt: which was prudently foreſeene by Fa. Edmunds of purpoſe (as I am reſolued in my conſcience) to prepare the harts, & minds of Catholiques by thoſe practiſes, that when ſuch forces as were intended, ſhould haue come into England, they might haue been more readily drawn by him, and vs, to haue ioyned theyr forces with them. And this is that I can ſay concerning the occaſions, or inducements, that ſuch matters were taken in hand at the time articulated.
                  Now as touching the ſubſtance of the generall interrogatory it ſelfe, I haue peruſed the ſeuerall examinations, and confeſſions of Sara Williams, and Friſwood her ſiſter, of Anne Smith, and of Richard Mainy gentleman, and am fully perſwaded, that they haue depoſed the truth in ſuch poynts whereof they were examined, belonging to theyr pretended poſſeſſion, & diſpoſſeſſiō. The effect wherof is, that they were drawn by our cunning carriage of matters, to ſeeme as though they had beene poſſeſſed, when as in truth they were not, neither were there any of the prieſts ignorant in my cō
                     ſcience of their diſſimulation, nor the parties themſelues (as now it appeareth) of our diſſembled proceeding with them.
                  After I had beene my ſelfe firſt at one of theyr exorciſings, it was my chaunce to he that night with maiſter Thomſon a prieſt, and a great Actor in thoſe matters, at

his chamber by the Spittle: and falling into ſome conference about it, I vſed ſome ſuch words, as though I doubted, whether the party were actually, and really poſſeſſed. For I my ſelfe being not acquainted with anie plot deuiſed by Fa: Edmunds, or any other, ſpake my minde ſome-what more plainely, then I perceaued Ma: Thomſon wel liked of. His aunſwer vnto me was in effect, that he being my friend, did earnestly wiſh me to cast forth no ſuch ſpeeches, whatſoeuer I did thinke. For (quoth he) the matter is iudged to be ſo by Fa: Edmunds, and ſome others that are Priests. Beſides ſuch Catholiques, as haue beene preſent at ſuch fits, haue receaued it for a truth, that the parties are poſſeſſed. And although I for my part will not make it an article of my Creede, yet I thinke that godlie credulitie doth much good, for the furthering of the Catholique, cauſe, and for the defacing of our common enemies, and their proceedings: or to this effect. Not long after, alſo talking with Ma: Stamp, at the Lo. 
                        Ʋaux his houſe in Hackney, concerning theſe matters, and demaunding of him ſeriouſly his opinion, what he thought of them: his aunſwer was, that they were things of ſuch importance, as would further the Catholique cauſe, more then all the bookes that had beene written of late yeeres, about the controuerſies in Religion with the Protestants: with which aunſwer, I ſeemed to reſt contented, becauſe I ſaw thereby he was not willing to enter into any playner courſe with me.
                  I would not haue this my confeſſion further extended then my meaning is, I doe not take vpon me either directly or indirecty, to oppoſe my ſelfe to the three poynts of the Treatiſe before mentioned, which are ſtrengthened with ſome authorities, both of the Scriptures, and of the auncient Fathers, and Writers. How be it, as I account it preſumption to denie all thoſe Hiſtories, as touching the caſting out of deuils in the Primitiue Church ſince the Apoſtles times; ſo to beleeue all that is written thereof, I hold it a point of great madnes,

and I doubt not but the ſoundeſt Catholiques in Europe are of my opinion. For be it true that is alledged in the ſaid treatiſe of S. Ambroſe, that he neuer heard of any, that could counterfeit himſelfe to be a Daemoniack, yet later experience hath taught vs the contrary. And indeede, the artificiall skil conſidered where-vnto prieſts haue attained, it is a very eaſie matter to bring a young girle, or a youth, to doe, and ſpeake thoſe things, which the Exorciſts can readily colour, and interpret; as if it were both done, and ſpoken by deuils, that did poſſeſſe them. But yet this I wil ſay, and giue it for a rule to all Catholiques heereafter, that wil not purpoſely ſuffer themſelues to be deluded: let them but mark diligently when they are preſent at any ſuch actions, what the parties, pretended to be poſſeſſed, doe eyther act, or ſpeak, and then they shal perceaue nothing, but may very well be diſſembled, or otherwiſe vttered in great diſtemper, procured by loathſome potions, and violent fumigations. And they shal be very wel armed againſt all ſuch deceites, if euer it be their haps to heare, or read the confeſſions, and examinations of the parties before mentioned. Marrie they muſt keepe their owne counſel: For I am perſwaded, that if any shall ſeeme to be a curious beholder at ſuch times, and a mouer of queſtions, he shal not be any welcome gueſt vnto them. Heereof any may be further aduertiſed, that wil take the paines to reade a little French Treatiſe, of a Martha Broſlier. counterfeit Daemoniack at Paris, and how the Exorciſts could in no ſort endure the queſtions, & doubts, that were propounded vnto them, when they were at their work, but pretended that ſuch curioſity, and want of faith did greatly hinder them in their proceedings.
                  There will be many exceptions taken to that, which heere I haue deliuered vpon my conſcience, to proue that the ſaid parties pretended to be poſſeſſed, were not counterfeits, as that ſome things fell out, which were not

poſſible to be diſſembled. The chiefe obiection wil be as touching a peece of a knife, in length about two inches, and a halfe, which was ſaid to come out of the bodie of Anne Smith, hauing beene conuaied into her before, as it was pretended by the deuil. And to cleare the matter, the deuil was made (forſooth) to ſhew by Philoſophie, that he was able to doe ſuch a thing: for to this effect it was giuen out, that the deuil should reade vs (as I may terme it) a Lecture: I am as you know by creation a ſpirit, and haue lost no part of my knowledge, and cunning in the ſecrets of nature, and that I can diſſolue any Iron or hard matter at my pleaſure into a liquid ſubstance, and ſo I did, and poured it into her porredge, which ſhe eating, ſwallowed vp the knife in that liquid ſubstance, and the ſame being ſo in her body, I reduced it into the artificiall forme which before it had. And thus much you may beleeue (quoth the deuil) if you be but Philoſophers, or to this effect. Whervnto for aunſwer as the truth is, ſo farre forth, as I know or beleeue. Firſt as the peece of the knife came out of her mouth, without hurting of her (if it came out of her mouth at all, and that there were not a ſhift of legerdemaine vſed to make it ſeeme indeede to thoſe that were preſent, that it came out of her mouth) ſo might it be taken forth againe, hauing beene put into her mouth by the Exorciſt himſelfe, for ought I know, as ſome of the ſaid parties haue acknowledged, that the Exorciſts ſomtimes would thruſt bigge
                        ••
                      ones, and peeces of reliques into their mouthes. Amongſt the which Friſwood Williams depoſeth, that as ſhe verily beleeueth, they thruſt a ruſtie, naile into her mouth, and afterwards pretended, that it came out of her body. 2. Anne Smith hath depoſed, that she is fully perſwaded, that they haue reported vntruly of the taking of a peece of a knife out of her mouth. Howbeit, ſhee ſaith, ſhee durſt not at that time contradict them: but it is needeleſſe for mee to aunſwer this, or any ſuch like obiection. For the things

are in themſelues ſo ridiculous, as I thinke no man will be ſo mad, as to take vppon him to defend them. And when wee our ſelues that were actors in thoſe matters, thought wee had wonne our ſpurres, yet diuers auncient prieſts, as Maiſter Heywood, Maiſter Dolman, Maiſter Redman, and ſome others hearing of the courſe we held, did ſhake their heads at it, and ſhewed their great diſlike of it. Likewiſe the grauer ſort, that were then impriſoned at Wiſbich, were greatly offended there-with (as I haue beene credibly informed) and ſaid, that howſoeuer for a time wee might be admired, yet in the end wee would thereby marre all, and vtterly diſcredit both our ſelues, and our calling. Where-vpon wee the younger ſort of the Seminarie prieſts, that were then dealers herein, thought our ſelues hardly dealt with by them, and that they did but enuie at the cōmendation, which they ſaw wee daily gayned, themſelues being no actors amongſt vs. But now I ſee, that the ſaid auncient Fathers had beene acquainted of likelihood with ſuch deuiſes beyond the Seas, and were greatly greeued to haue them brought into England: notwithſtanding Ma: Edmunds, and the reſt, would needes proceede (as is before in part expreſſed,) and haue thereby to their perpetual ſhame, made them true Prophets.
                  I haue my ſelfe before confeſſed, that my pen is in the booke, that was taken with Ma: Barnes, wherein I layd together thoſe things, that Sara Williams was pretended to haue done, and ſaid in one of her fits at Hackney, the 10 of Ianuarie, ſome things whereof I ſaw, and heard my ſelfe, others I receaued by peece-meale of Maiſter Thomſon, Ma: Thulice, and others, and layd them altogether, with the beſt skill I had, to make them ſeeme ſtrange, and wonderfull. For although both my ſelfe (as I ſaid before) and ſo I thinke of the reſt, did know that all was but counterfeite, yet for as much as we perceaued, that thereby great credit did grow to the Catholique

cauſe, and great diſcredit to the Proteſtants, wee held it lawfull to doe, as we did.
                  Shortly after I had firſt conformed my ſelfe to the ſtate of the Church, eſtabliſhed heere in England, and there-vpon diſcloſed many things to the late Lo. Treaſurer, concerning ſundry very pernicious deſignments againſt her Maiſtie, and this ſtate; I fell againe to my old courſe, by the perſwaſion of ſome of my auncient acquaintance that were prieſts, hauing had ſmall time to ground my ſelfe by ſtudy, thereby to defend my ſaid conformitie. I was no ſooner come to my old byace, but they ſoone drew mee, for the good of the Catholique cauſe, to ſay that all in effect was falſe that I had before confeſſed. Although not long after, the treaſons did ſo breake forth, and were ſo fully confeſſed by Babington himſelfe, that not onely that, which I had reported was iuſtified by them to be true, but a great deale more then euer I knew, or dreamed of. Likewiſe I hauing detected in ſome part the folly of the ſaid exorciſings, it is ſcarce credible how earneſt the ſaid prieſts were with me, to avow them againe for matters of veritie. Wherevnto for the reaſon before mentioned, I did vvillingly yeeld, nothing doubting but that, if God ſhould once againe ſo draw his grace from mee, as that I ſhould become to be as then I was (that is, wholy addicted to popery, as I truſt in his mercy hee will neuer doe) I ſhould be as ready againe to deny all that now I haue affirmed vpon my oath, as I was before. For the generall conceit amongſt all the prieſts of that order is, that they may deny any thing, which beeing confeſſed doth turne to the diſhonour of the Catholique Church of Rome. Beſides, they haue other obiections that ſerue theyr turnes, as that the Magiſtrates in England are no competent Iudges, the Queene herſelfe ſtanding excommunicate, and that therefore the examinations taken before them, are of no validitie to bind the examinats, but that all that

they doe confeſſe, is tanquam coram non Iudice. A number of other ſhifts they haue, which I doe not now remember.
                  The Apoſtolicall rule is, that euill ſhall not be doone that good may come of it, but they doe not account it euill (as I verily thinke) to calumniate the Proteſtants by any deuiſe whatſoeuer, that may carry any probabilitie with it, nor make any conſcience to tell, and publiſh any vntruthes, which they thinke, beeing belieued, may aduaunce and promote ſuch poynts and matters, as they take vpon them to defend, for the honour of the church of Rome, and dignitie of their prieſthood.
                  
                     Anth: Tyrrell.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     ❧ The confeſsion of Richard Mainy Gentleman, written by himſelfe, and auouched vppon his oath the ſixt of Iune. 1602.
                  THe ſaid Richard Mainy had read vnto him ſome parts of a diſcourſe, or two, written by certaine Seminary prieſts of a pretended poſſeſſion, and diſpoſſeſſion both of himſelfe, and of certaine others, viz. one Marwood, Trayford, Sara, & Francis Williams two ſiſters, and Anne Smith. Theſe parties were ſaid to be poſſeſſed, and diſpoſſeſſed of many wicked ſpirits. The prieſts that dealt with them, were diuers, but the eſpeciall men that had Richard Mainy in hand, were Ma. Edmunds the Ieſuit, alias Weston, Cornelius, and one Dibdale, men wholy at the deuotion and direction of the ſaid Edmunds. It was in the yeeres 1585 and 1586, when theſe ſtratagems were executed. Such dealings as they had with the ſaid Mainy, were at Denham, at one Ma. Fittons, two miles from Windſore, and at the Earle of Loncolnes houſe in Channon-row, where Iohn Mainy his brother did then remaine.
                  Of theſe matters the ſaid Mainy beeing demaunded diuers queſtions, deſired that hee might haue leaue to aunſwer them after his owne faſhion, and not to be tied to the order of the ſaid demaunds, for that hee thought he could ſet downe thoſe things which hee remembred, more plainly to his owne vnderſtanding, then otherwiſe he ſhould be able, if he were bound to follow the order propounded vnto him by the ſaid demaunds. And that which he hath ſet downe is the diſcourſe following, not

much diſagreeing from the order of the interrogatories miniſtred vnto him.
                  And hath Ma. Edmunds & the reſt of the prieſts thus dealt with mee? I am very ſorry for it. It might haue beene ſufficient for them, to haue practiſed theyr purpoſes vpon me and the reſt, youthes and almoſt girles, although they had not publiſhed the ſame to the world. But of likelihood theyr glory, and our diſcredit were ſo ioyned together, as the one could not ſtand without the other. This courſe whereunto they haue therby drawne me, wil procure me great diſpleaſure (I know) amongſt my friends, and worke me much hinderance in my priuate eſtate: but what remedie? Beeing called by publique authoritie, and enforced by vertue of mine oath to deliuer the truth, I cannot ſee how with any conſcience I can deny thoſe things, which I find to be truly layd to my charge, and could neuer haue beene thought of, if their writings had neuer come to the Magiſtrats hands. The particulers which now of neceſſity I muſt deliuer, I was purpoſed to haue concealed from all men liuing, although heeretofore in generall termes I haue beene driuen to ſay ſomewhat of theſe matters.
                  About 14 yeeres ſince, the Lords of her Maieſties moſt honourable priuie Counſell, (Henry Earle of Darby being one) hauing gotten ſome notice of the pretended poſſeſſions, and diſpoſſeſſions at the places before mentioned, and that I was one of the parties that had beene dealt with, did write their letter vnto Ferdinando then Lord Strange to examine me. It ſeemeth they had beene informed that I ſhould publiſh, how I was poſſeſſed with certaine wicked ſpirits, and of them diſpoſſeſſed by ſome prieſts of the Catholique Romane Church, and that I ſhould take vpon mee in companie where I came, to iuſtifie the ſame. So as being called before the ſaid Lord Strange, he demaunded of me, whether I had giuen out ſuch ſpeeches. Hee examined mee

vpon my oath, and my aunſwer was according to the truth, as I was perſwaded in mine owne conſcience, and as farre as my memory did ſerue me: viz. that I was neuer poſſeſſed with any wicked ſpirit, nor had reported any ſuch thing; and that I was ſo farre from iuſtifying of it, that I was fully perſwaded, that in all the courſes which the prieſts tooke with me, when they pretended that I was poſſeſſed, there was nothing but deceit, falfhood, illuſions, and iuglings. This was the effect of my aunſwer at that time, if my memory doe not much faile me, and thereupon I was by his Lordſhip diſmiſſed.
                  VVith this aunſwer (I ſuppoſe) the Ieſuits were long ſince acquainted, which hath greatly already hindered me, & alienated the harts of ſome of my deereſt friends from mee. And the ſame aunſwer that I made then before his Lordſhip, I muſt now make againe to the ſubſtance of all thoſe queſtions which haue been demaunded of mee, viz. that I was neuer poſſeſſed with any wicked ſpirit, otherwiſe then all other ſinners are, but euer as free (I thanke GOD) from hauing any deuils in me, as either Ma. Edmunds himſelfe, or any other of the Prieſts that had to deale with me, for ought I know.
                  This aunſwer I thought would haue beene ſufficient to haue ſatisfied all thoſe things which are obiected againſt me, but I am vrged with ſundry particulers, and therefore I muſt of neceſſity yeeld to the cleering of my ſelfe in them, and yet no otherwiſe then the truth requireth. When I was about 13 yeeres old, I was ſent by my mothers direction to Rhemes in Fraunce, where there was then an Engliſh Seminary: the intent of my mother, and other of my friends was (as I thinke) to haue had mee to haue been a prieſt. I remained in Rhemes about two yeres, and was there maintained with my mothers exhibition & allowance. Towards the end of the ſaid two yeeres, of a childiſh curioſitie I entred into the obſeruances of certaine religious men, termed in that

country Bonhommes, or fratres minimi, and became a young probationer amongſt them. This order was deuiſed by Fraunces de Paula, who is canonized for a ſaint, of whom there is mention made in the Romane breuiary, as hauing his place appointed in the Kalender on the ſecond of Aprill. There his office & courſe of life is ſet downe, and briefly deſcribed.
                  After I had remained about a quarter of a yeere, or ſomewhat more in this probation, I was ſent by the Rector of the houſe with ſome other of my fellowes, to the houſe of the Bonhommes at Paris, where I had ſcarcely remained a quarter of a yeere but I grew weary of that profeſſion. Their rules ſeemed vnto me to be too ſtrict for me, and their diet beeing nothing but fiſh, I began to diſlike it. Beſides, I had a diſeaſe, wherewith I had been troubled before I went out of England, that tooke me there againe; and thereupon I gaue ouer that order altogether.
                  About that time, there was a proclamation publiſhed heere in England (as I was told) that all Engliſh gentlemen, and others, ſhould repaire home into theyr Country within a certaine time, vpon danger of her Maiesties diſpleaſure, and loſſe of theyr goods and lands, or to that effect. Whereuppon I was perſwaded by ſome of my friends, that ſaw my courſe of life there, hauing giuen ouer my ſtudie, to returne home againe; and the rather, for that I had ſome land left vnto mee by my father. Leauing therefore Paris, I tooke my iourny homeward by Roane towards Diepe where I tooke ſhipping, and landed at Rie. At my arriuall, the Maior offering vnto mee the oath of her Maieſties ſupremacy, I willinglie tooke it, and afterwards repayred of mine owne accord diligently to the Church, and ſeruice of God eſtabliſhed in England by her Maieſties lawes. I continued in Suſſex, Kent, and other places, from Good friday (the time of my arriuall) vntill it was towards Alhallontide
                     
following, which time I ſpent as other young Gentlemen did, with whom I fell acquainted, vntill through meere neceſſity, hauing then no part of my liuing in my hands, I was conſtrained through want to repaire to my brother Iohn Mainy at London, vpon whom I did for a while eſpecially relye.
                  I had not beene long in London, before it was my hap to dine at the L. 
                        Ʋaux his houſe with my ſaid brother, eyther at Hackney, or Hogſdon, (I doe not wel remember whether) his Lordſhip was not then at home, but the table was kept, and entertainment giuen by his ſonne, and daughter. In that dinner while there was much communication of the late poſſeſſion, and diſpoſſeſſion of one Marwood, by certaine prieſts, and chiefely (if I doe not forget my ſelfe) by Ma: Edmunds. The tales which were told of that matter, ſeemed ſtrange vnto me, as what extraordinarie ſtrength he had in his fits: how he roared like a Bull, and many other things were then mentioned, which now I haue forgotten? While my chiefe continuance was in London, I rode ſometimes with my brother to Denham, the houſe of Sir George Peckham, and in the pariſh of Denham, (he hauing married Sir George Peckhams daughters, and the whole furniture of the houſe appertayning vnto him, as part of his dowrie with his wife.) At that time alſo he kept ſeruants there, I went likewiſe ſometimes to Denham of mine owne accord, and remained there ſome two or three dayes at a time. It fell out hardly with me (as now I perceaue) that I came to London about Alhallontide before mentioned: for then there was nothing in effect in the mouthes of Catholiques, but of the caſting out of deuils. A little before there was much to doe with the ſaid Marwood, as I finde by the ſtory that is written of him, By Edmunds in Latine, extant vpon record. beginning Erat quidā inuenis, &c. Immediatly after (as alſo it is plaine by an other ſtory, which I am enformed, was taken with one Ma: Barnes) there was at

Hollantide great buſines at Fulmer with Trayford, and Sara Williams. And ſuch were then thoſe times, as now I vnderſtand, and did then partly finde by experience, that a ſmall occaſion was matter ſufficient for the prieſts to worke vppon, to charge any one that they liked to deale with, that he was poſſeſſed.
                  It ſeemeth alſo by that which is written in the ſayd booke taken with Ma: Barnes, and by ſome other tales which I haue heard, that the prieſts, or ſome for them, vnderſtanding that I tooke no courſe to be a prieſt, and how I had left the Bonhommes, & how I had been troubled with my former diſeaſe at Paris, and how after my returne, I had behaued my ſelfe youthfully amongſt other Gentlemen; gaue it out that I was ſurely poſſeſſed, and afterwards to make the ſame good, haue publiſhed in the ſame booke, the teſtimonie of the deuil himſelfe, as it is pretended; whereof anon.
                  Vpon this report I could doe nothing (as I am enformed) but it was ſaid, that the deuil did direct me in it. In ſo much as when I rode to Denham my ſelfe (as is before expreſſed) it was giuen forth, as I perceaue, that the horſe I rid vpon was a deuil, and that I had deuils attending vpon me in liuerie coates, by that which I find written, and reported of me: there was neuer young Gentleman (I think) more abuſed then I haue been.
                  After ſome time ſpent at Fulmer by the prieſts with the ſaid Trayford, and Sara Williams, they came all of them with Ma: Edmond Peckham, and his wife to Denham (as it is mentioned in the ſaid booke) & I not knowing at that time, what reports were bruted abroad of me, reſorting thither (as I was wont) fell into their ſnares, which I would ſurely haue auoyded, if poſſibly I could haue ſuſpected, that they would euer haue dealt with me, as afterwards they did.
                  At my comming thither amongſt them, I was kindly vſed, and lodged in the furtheſt part of the houſe: the

other chambers were then ſupplied with other gueſts that I knew not of, vntill a mayde in the houſe, who had beene my brothers Cooke, did tell me of them. Vpon the comming of Ma: Edmond Peckham to Denham, my brothers ſeruants departed, and left the houſe to him (as I thinke) except it were this mayd, to whom I was much beholding for her kindnes towards me. Within a day or two after this my cōming to Denham, the ſaid maid-Cooke ſignified vnto me, that there was great walking of ſpirits about the houſe, & that diuers had been greatlie affrighted by them. The firſt night that I came thither (as I remember) I was ſome-what euill at eaſe, and whether this report, that did ſome-thing aſtoniſh me, did make me worſe or no, I cannot tell: but I grew worſe, and worſe, in ſo much as my old diſeaſe at a very wicked time, did there take hold of me.
                  The diſeaſe I ſpake of, was a ſpice of the Mother, where-with I had beene troubled (as is before mentioned) before my going into Fraunce: whether I doe rightly terme it the Mother or no, I know not: but it is wel knowne to the Phyſicians in London, that be aliue, and were then of any name, that my eldeſt brother Thomas Mainy had the ſame diſeaſe, and that he died of it: and Ma: Edmond Peckham (as I haue beene credibly enformed) was likewiſe troubled with it. When I was ſick of this diſeaſe in Fraunce, a Scottiſh Doctor of Phyſick then in Paris, called it, as I remember, Vertiginem capitis. It riſeth (as he ſaid, and I haue often felt) of a wind in the bottome of the belly, and proceeding with a great ſwelling, cauſeth a very painfull collicke in the ſtomack, and an extraordinary giddines in the head. With this diſeaſe I am ſtill once in foure or fiue yeeres troubled, and I doe greatly ſuſpect that it wil end me, as it did my brother.
                  I began no ſooner to be troubled at Denham (as is before ſaid) but as now I perceaue the prieſts had that,

which they looked for. The women of the houſe (whoſe names I doe not now remember) that came to help, and attend me, told me firſt, as my brothers maid had done before, how greatly the houſe was troubled with ſpirits, and afterwards that there were two poſſeſſed in the houſe with deuils: the manner of whoſe fits they deſcribed vnto me in ſuch ſort, as I was much amazed therewith. Whether theſe women vvere required by the Prieſts to tell me theſe things or no, I know not: but ſhortly after Ma: Dibdale, and Ma: Cornelius two prieſts comming vnto me, after ſundry queſtions, and ſpeeches vſed with me, they fell to be of opinion (as it ſeemed, and ſo told me) that I was poſſeſſed with a wicked ſpirit. I ſay, (as it ſeemed) for I am fully perſwaded in my conſcience, that they knew wel enough, that neither I, nor any of the reſt before mentioned were indeede poſſeſſed: but that they did pretend ſo, to worke thereby ſuch matters, as they had propounded vnto themſelues, whereof for my part I wil no further iudge. Of this my perſwaſion I haue ſome reaſons, by that which I finde written, & depoſed by others to that purpoſe.
                  When I firſt heard them ſay, that I was poſſeſſed, I told them that I doubted not, but that they were deceaued therein. I acquainted them with the nature of my diſeaſe, and how long I had beene troubled with it: but they perſiſted in their opinion. For that time leauing me, they came ſhortly vnto me againe, and began where before they had left: then they told me what extraordinarie ſtrength I ſhewed in one of my pangues, which moued me litle. For the nature of that diſeaſe, is to cauſe ones belly to ſwel in ſuch ſort, as two or three are not able (vſing any good diſcretion) to keepe downe the wind, that ſeeketh to aſcend, as it is very wel knowne to thoſe, that haue ſeene eyther a man or woman in that fit, and as it is likely, the prieſts themſelues knew by their experience in Ma: Edmond Peckham, who was verie

oft troubled with it (as is before expreſſed.)
                  Diuers other reaſons they vſed vnto me, to cauſe me to ſuſpect the worſt of my ſelfe, and theſe as I think were ſome of them: they put me in minde of giuing ouer my ſtudy beyond the Seas, of leauing the courſe I had begun with the Bonhommes, & of my more youthfull conuerſation ſince my returne: theſe and ſuch like poynts they vſed, as arguments to conuince me, that I was poſſeſſed. But I replying for my ſelfe as I could, and telling them what a diſcredit it would be vnto me, to haue it reported of me, that I was poſſeſſed with a deuil, and how it would be a blemiſh, and a diſgrace vnto me, whileſt I liued: they made little account thereof, ſaying, that it was a leſſe diſcredit, and not ſo hurtfull for a man to haue 10000 deuils in him, then to haue committed one deadly ſinne: and to this purpoſe they alledged a place out of Saint Augustine (as farre as I remember.) Beſides they reaſoned with me, to proue it the ſafeſt way for me, to ſubmit my ſelfe to their triall, whether I were poſſeſſed or no: for that (as they ſaid) if the deuill were not in mee, I could take no hurt by theyr triall, whereas if I were poſſeſſed, it could not but be very dangerous vnto mee, that the deuill ſhould ſtill continue in me. By theſe, and ſuch like meanes they perſwaded mee, to yeeld my ſelfe to be directed by them for the triall of my eſtate. When they had me at this point, then they permitted mee to haue acceſſe vnto Sara Williams when ſhe was in her fits, and informed me likewiſe of the manner, how ſhee, and others had beene troubled.
                  This courſe held with me, they drew me to confeſſion, and to promiſe that I would goe no more to the Proteſtants Churches: affirming that they could doe me no good, vntill I was become againe a member of the Catholique Romaine Church. After I had beene at one or two of Saras fits, and ſubmitted my ſelfe (as is before expreſſed) a pangue of my olde diſeaſe taking

hold on me, Ma: Dibdale affirmed publiquely to the company, that then it was apparant, that I was poſſeſſed. Vpon my recouerie he told me, that by applying of holy reliques vnto my belly, hee had compelled the wicked ſpirit to giue me eaſe: whereas I neuer found benefit by any ſuch things, but was eaſed (as I had been at other times before, when the fit of the Mother left me) by bending of my body forward, which is a cauſe of breaking of wind, and conſequently of apparant eaſe. And heereby (as I am perſwaded) I was at that time eaſed, & not by any reliques. Within a day or two after (as I remember) they told me, that it was neceſſary for me to be exorciſed: where vnto although I was loath to yeeld, becauſe I had ſeene their manner of dealing therein eyther with Sara, or Frauncis Williams, who by this time was ſaid to be all ſo poſſeſſed, yet I had ſubmitted my ſelfe ſo farre, that now it was too late for me to draw backe. All things therefore being in a readines, and I in good health, and no wayes troubled with my diſeaſe, they bound me faſt in a chayre, and fell to their Exorciſmes with much ſolemnity, and ſhew of great deuotion. Then they vrged me to drink a very vnpleaſant potion, which troubled me greatly; in ſo much as I deſired them to vntye me, and giue me leaue to lye downe vppon my bed: but they regarded not my words, or earneſt entreaty, ſaying: It was the deuill, and not my ſelfe that deſired ſuch reſt, that ſo he might not be diſturbed in me. At other times when they had me bound in ſuch like manner, beſides the ſaid drinke, they vſed to burne brimſtone vnder my noſe, and ſome other things elſe, which vexed me exceedingly. What I did, and ſpake at thoſe times, I doe not now remember: by that which I ſee they haue written of Marwood, Trayford, of Sara, & Frauncis Williams, I doubt not but many things haue beene reported of me, which are vntrue. It is not vnlike but that when I found my ſelfe ſo entangled with them,

as that I could not rid my ſelfe from them, I did, and ſpake many things which were inconuenient, & whereof I think I ſhould be aſhamed, if I did remember them. For after I had learned their humour, and perceaued as wel by the reſt, as by mine own experience, what would content them, I framed my ſelfe accordingly.
                  Whileſt I was thus at Denham with them, I was neuer almoſt ſuffered to be quiet: but eyther I was to be exorciſed my ſelfe, or vrged to be with Sara, or her ſiſter Frauncis, or kept priuately in my chamber, and one way or other toſſed, and turmoyled by them, till at the laſt after ſundry Exorciſmes, and much further trouble procured by their drinkes, & violent fumigations, they gaue it forth, that they had caſt one deuil out of me: but with ſuch intimation, as might breede a ſuſpition that there were ſome other left in me. By this time Chriſtmas drew neere, and whether it was for that they meant to deale with Sara at Hackney, or for what other cauſe they knew beſt, they gaue me ouer for a while, and ſent me to Ma: Fittons by Windſor, where I ſuppoſe they thought I ſhould be wel looked vnto, & ready afterwards when they ſhould ſend for me.
                  I remayned at Ma: Fittons till after the end of the holy dayes (as I remember,) and being free from their vexations, did ſolace my ſelfe with merrie company, as the time, and occaſion ſerued. In ſo much as ſome gaue it out, peraduenture by the prieſts procurement, that I was ſtill poſſeſſed with a merry deuil: and others ſaid, that if I were poſſeſſed indeede, it could not otherwiſe chooſe, but that he was a deuil, that was not much troubled with melancholly, or to that effect. Of theſe reports I heard nothing my ſelfe, whileſt I was at Ma: Fittons, for if I had, they would much haue abated the edge of my mirth, which they ſpake of. But now it is meete to be conſidered, how notably they ioyned their matters together. It greeueth me much that I am conſtrained to

deale in theſe matters thus farre, but yet I ſee that if this occaſion had not fallen out, I ſhould neuer haue ſo well diſcerned their dealing with me.
                  Although they gaue it out, that they had caſt a deuil out of me (as is before mentioned) and amongſt many other reaſons had alledged, that the deuill entred into me, becauſe I gaue ouer the order of the Bonhommes, & further, becauſe ſome might peraduenture ſuſpect, that notwithſtanding all that they had either done or ſaid of me, yet all the diſeaſe that I had was but onely the Mother, now they haue a deuiſe to cleere all theſe poynts, as it is apparant in the ſaid booke ſo often before mentioned. On Monday the tenth of Ianuary, Sara Williams is pretended to haue a meruailous great fit at Hackney, and amongſt many other ſpeeches which the prieſt that exorciſed her then vſed, hee commeth at laſt to theſe: There is one (ſaith hee to the deuill as it was pretended) that hath the Mother, what ſayest thou to him? The deuill aunſwereth, that is a Mother indeed. So heereby they would makes it plaine, that it was not the Mother that I was troubled with. But the prieſt goeth forward ſaying, was there any ſpirit cast out of him? and the deuill aunſwered,) yea a little one, but to no purpoſe. So as now they haue a ſufficient teſtimonie, that I was diſpoſſeſſed of one deuill whilſt I was at Denham.
                  
                  Furthermore, it is pretended by Saras deuill, that there remaineth ſtill in mee the Prince of all other deuils, whoſe name ſhould be Modu, which gaue them matter enough to worke vpon againe with me. But yet all doubts were not cleered, and therefore the ſaid prieſt demanded this queſtion of Saras deuill: Came the prince Modu (ſaith he) into him to bring him from the houſe of S. Frauncis de Paula his order? Yea in troth (quoth the deuill.) And thus they thought they had ſufficiently iuſtified all that they had reported of him, as appeareth by the ſaid booke. But all this notwithſtanding, I am more

and more confirmed heereby, in my former opinion of their bad proceeding with mee, and the rather, becauſe (as I am informed) Sara Williams vppon her oath hath denied, that euer ſhee vſed any ſuch ſpeeches of mee, as farre as ſhe remembreth.
                  When the ſaid prieſts had diſpatched their buſines at Hackney, they then returned towards mee, vppon pretence to caſt the great Prince Modu (as I ſuppoſe) out of mee. I beeing at Ma. Fittons (as is before ſaid) it fell out that by reaſon of good company, I daunced that night ſo long, that I caſt my ſelfe into a very great ſweat, and was weary. Afterward, whether before I went to bed, or when I was in bed, I doe not well remember, I had a fit of the Mother, as I haue had before, and often times ſince vppon ſuch violent exerciſes. It happened that this night ſom of the ſaid prieſts that were at Hackney, (as I thinke) came to Ma. Fittons, who hearing of my fit, ſaid it was no meruaile, for it was confeſſed by the deuill in Sara, that I had the Prince of many deuils in me, or words to that effect. Heereuppon in the morning one Miſtris Anne More a gentlewoman, waiting vpon Miſtris Fitton came vnto me, and told mee vvith weeping eyes, which of the prieſts were come that night to the houſe, and what they had reported of mee, and how much I was deceiued, in that I thought my ſelfe to be troubled with nothing but the Mother. I aunſwered her (as if ſhe be aliue ſhe can well beare me witnes) that I knew very well, whatſoeuer they ſaid, that the Mother was the onely diſeaſe wherewith I was vexed, and that I was free (I thanked GOD) from the poſſeſſion of anie wicked ſpirit.
                  All the while they wrought vpon me before, I found no other trouble in mee, but of mine old griefe when I had it, ſauing ſuch paine as they caſt mee into by theyr drinkes and perfumes. And when they ſaid that the deuill was caſt out of mee, yet I found my ſelfe neither

better, nor worſe, which cauſed me to thinke, that thoſe things were moſt vntrue which they reported of me.
                  I was ſo confident heerein, that the better to colour (as I thinke) their future proceedings with me, they ſent to a Phyſician, one Doctor Griffith, who gaue me, as it is ſaid ſome Phyſicke. But through their information (as I am perſwaded) the concluſion amongſt them was, that there was no naturall cauſe of my diſeaſe: and ſo there was no remedy, but I muſt needes be poſſeſſed. Then it was thought meete that I ſhould be caried backe againe, whether to Denham, or to Channon-row, I doe not wel remember, but rather (as I coniecture) it was to Denham. And for as much as the report was, that the ſpirit ſuppoſed to be in me, was the Prince of all the deuils, which were in the parties poſſeſſed; Ma: Edmunds the Ieſuit, and chiefe of all the prieſts, that had to deale then in theſe actions, was thought the meeteſt man (as I ſuppoſe) to encounter with him. After that time, ſo far as I remember, none of the prieſts had to deale with me, but himſelfe, he was my ghoſtly Father, and to him (as it is giuen out) I reuealed many things.
                  When he had the managing of theſe matters with me, there was very great reſort to the place where we were, and a very extraordinarie expectation, (as I haue heard) of ſome ſtrange euent to fall out.
                  The courſe which he held with me was much more rigorous, then at any time before. When hee had me bound, if I did not frame my ſelfe in euery thing to his contentment (as ſometimes being angry with his vſage of me I thinke I did not) then he would ſay, the deuil was obſtinate in me. In which caſe ſometimes I was conſtrained by him to drinke moſt loathſome draughts of ſuch confections as he had ready for me: and ſometimes they burnt ſuch abhominable ſtinking, and violent things, holding my noſe by force ouer the ſmoake; as (I think) would make a horſe mad. No man (I ſuppoſe)

is able to endure ſuch a perfume without extreame torment. He dealt thus hardly with me, as I thinke vppon pretence that the great Prince of deuils that was in me, would not otherwiſe be tamed. I haue ſeene them ſometimes ſo perfume Sara Williams with ſuch lyke ſmoakes, as her face hath looked blacker, then euer I ſaw a chimney ſweepers. Which heates, and ſmels together with their potions, did make her to talke, & rage as if ſhe had beene mad. And the prieſts would make ſome vſe of euery thing ſhe ſaid: and ſo I thinke I may by her eſteeme of mine owne caſe, when they had made me in effect mad, no meruaile though I ſpake, & fared like a mad man.
                  Being thus dealt with, I became very weake, and ſicklie. Little meate that I tooke would endured with me aboue an houre or two, and I was at my wits end, what I ſhould doe. The beſt meanes that I could thinke of for mine owne eaſe, was to frame my ſelfe in ſuch ſort, as might be moſt agreeable to Ma: Edmunds liking: which then I began to doe with ſome extraordinarie care. I omitted no occaſion to goe to confeſſion, none ſhewed more zeale at Maſſe time, then my ſelfe: at the eleuation I pretended to ſee extraordinarie lights, as if they had beene the Sunne beames, and that the ſame did ſo aſtoniſh me, as ſometimes I would fall backwards, when I was kneeling, as though I could not endure the glittering of ſo glorious a ſight: whereas I proteſt before God, I neuer ſaw indeede any ſuch light, or was aſtoniſhed, but therein I did as I had heard the prieſts report, that both Frauncis, and Sara Williams had done before me. And I doe verily thinke, they told me the ſame to no other end, but that I my ſelfe ſhould put the ſame in practiſe. For I found my ſelfe very apt to follow ſuch examples: and doe ſuppoſe, that any being in that caſe, that I, and the reſt were, would aſſay to ſpeak, and doe as they ſhould be enformed, that others in their

eſtate had done or ſpoken.
                  Of my ſaid pretended aſtoniſhments, Ma: Edmunds would make large diſcourſes concerning the preſence of Chriſt in the Sacrament. And where it is reported of me in writing, as theſe things laſt mentioned are likewiſe, that I did pretend to ſee a gliſtering light come frō the thumbs, and fore-fingers of the prieſts at ſundry times: I confeſſe, it may be that I haue ſo affirmed, eyther for that they themſelues haue asked me, if I did ſee no ſuch thing, or elſe haue told me, that the reſt in my caſe had ſeene ſuch lights, whereby I was induced to ſay as much of my ſelfe: whereas indeede whatſoeuer I ſaid thereof, was altogether vntrue. For I neuer ſaw other lights about their thumbs or fingers, then ſuch as is ordinarie to all other mens hands, and fingers. The colour of the pretence of ſuch lights (as I remember) was, for that the prieſts thumbs, and fore-fingers are anointed with holy oyle (as I haue heard) when they are made prieſts, and becauſe they doe with them at Maſſe time handle the body of Chriſt.
                  Furthermore, I found it did well content Ma. Edmunds and the reſt of the prieſts, that I ſhould ſometimes rayle very earneſtly both againſt him, and the reſt of his fellowes then preſent, & generally againſt all prieſts. And that I ſhould on the contrary commend as earneſtly the ſeruice of the proteſtants, the Magiſtrates, the Miniſters, and the chiefeſt in authoritie. So I knew that Sara Williams, and the reſt had done, and ſo I did my ſelfe, no doubt as artificially as any of them, if not in better ſort. For wee all knew how they would expound them for theyr owne glory, in that the deuils (as they pretended) could not endure them: and to the great diſcredite of the other ſide, becauſe the deuils extolled them as theyr louing friends. And certaine it is that the Catholiques that were preſent to my vnderſtanding, did take great contentment by ſuch our ſpeeches, and their expoſitions

of them. By this my readines to doe, and ſpeake whatſoeuer I found that Ma. Edmunds liked, I eſcaped ſometimes (as I thinke) theyr lothſome drinks, and intolerable fumigations.
                  After ſome time thus ſpent with mee at Denham, (as I ſuppoſe) I was carried to the Earle of Lincolnes houſe in Channon-row, where my brother, and his wife were as I remember: I was then not paſt 16 or 17 yeeres old as farre as I can geſſe, and therefore (to ſpeake a little in mine owne excuſe) no meruaile, all circumſtances dulie conſidered, that I was drawne by the cunning practiſes of the ſaid prieſts, into theſe diſſembling courſes which now I vtterly diſlike, and deteſt. I am fully perſwaded, that there is neuer a youth in England, were he of neuer ſo ripe and pregnant a wit, but if he ſhould fall into the hands of ſuch prieſts, he would in a ſhort time be ſo bewitched by them, as that hee would be ſoone drawne to ſtoope to their lure, and doe as I did.
                  When I was going, and come to Channon-row, I was very much grieued, and in feare (as far as I remember) of theyr further proceedings with mee. For I was then brought to ſuch weakenes, as I was ſcarce able to goe alone, vnleſſe I were vpheld. We were no ſooner come thether, but that there was great concourſe of many Catho: to ſee (as I thinke) the euent of things: eſpecially becauſe Ma. Edmunds, a man of great account amongſt them, was the onely dealer in effect with me. By thoſe things which I find written, and reported of mee, and which I had otherwiſe forgotten of my ſelfe, at my comming to Channon-row, I did pretend ſome traunces, and in them to haue ſundry viſions, into which courſe I was led (as I am fully perſwaded) by ſome ſpeeches of the prieſts, whom I had oft heard talke how Sara Williams, and diuers others, had many times certaine traunces: wherein they lay as if they had beene ſenceleſſe, and in them had ſundry viſions, which vppon theyr recouerie

they did vſually tell vnto the prieſts, and diuers others, whereupon I verily thinke, that the firſt Sunday after I came to Channon-row, (as aforeſaid) I fained my ſelfe to be in a traunce, and afterwards told Ma. Edmunds many tales of my beeing all that time in Purgatory, and what I had ſeene, and indured there. I alſo told him at that time (as farre as I remember) that I perceiued by one of the viſions which I then had, how I was euery Sunday to haue the like traunces, and viſions about the ſame houres, vntill Good-friday next enſuing, and that the I ſhould depart in a traunce out of this life, and goe immediatly into heauen.
                  There are diuers things further reported of mee as touching theſe my pretended traunces, and viſions, (as that after I ſhewed my ſelfe to be recouered, I did foretell of great afflictions, and perſecutions, which ſhould happen to the Catholiques in England, and of ſundry ſuch matters) but whether they be true or no, I doe not remember. If I vſed any ſuch words, either Ma. Edmunds, or ſome of the reſt induced mee thereunto, by ſome of their leading questions, or I had heard them before ſpeake themſelues to that effect: or elſe the report is altogether falſe, and deuiſed by themſelues to ſerue theyr owne turnes: for of my ſelfe I doe not belieue that I had any apprehenſion of any ſuch matters.
                  It is written alſo of mee, how after ſome other of my pretended traunces and viſions, I vſed diuers times to fall into ſtrange exclamations, making the company to belieue, that I ſaw Chriſt himſelfe accompanied with a number of Angels in ſuch a corner of the chamber, and at other times the virgin Mary, attended with a trayne of bleſſed virgins, and that thereupon my manners was to vrge them that were preſent, to fall downe vpon their knees to worſhip them, and to pray vnto them. Theſe things I doe in ſome ſort remember, and doe partly belieue them to be true, becauſe I well remember, that vppon

my ſaid motions, and vrging of them, both Ma. Edmunds, and the reſt, did vſually lift vp their hands, now in this corner, now in that corner, and prayed vppon theyr knees, with theyr hands holden vp, as though Chriſt, and the virgine Mary had beene there indeed. Whereas I doe faithfully avow it, that I neuer ſaw any ſuch ſights, but did therein frame my ſelfe to doe as I had heard by the prieſts and others, that Sara Williams, and the reſt had done before mee. And I doe belieue that Ma. Edmunds himſelfe knew as much, and that hee did but ſeeme to worſhip, (as is before expreſſed) thereby to induce the reſt of the company ſo to doe.
                  It ſeemeth that Ma. Edmunds hath written a long diſcourſe of about a quire of paper, of all my ſaid pretended traunces and viſions, and it may be likewiſe of all the reſt of the proceedings held with me, eyther by him ſelfe, or the reſt of the prieſts: if euer that booke come to further light, ſo as any in authority doe take notice of it, I will be ready (if I be called thereunto) to giue my aunſwere truly to all the particulers, ſo farre foorth as I ſhall remember In the meane time, as touching all my pretended viſions in generall, (of my ſufferings in Purgatory, and the reſt) they were all feigned by mee, to pleaſe Fa: Edmunds, and it may be to gaine to my ſelfe a little fooliſh commendation, or admiration, becauſe I ſaw how the Catholiques that heard of them, and were preſent at many of my fond ſpeeches, did ſeeme to wonder at me.
                  VVhen Good-friday came, there was great reſort to the ſaid houſe where I was: and of my bahauiour that day, a prieſt (I perceiue) hath written at large. Of my ſelfe I ſhould haue remembred little that did happen at that time, but beeing vrged to aunſwer ſomething to that which is written of me, I will firſt ſet downe the authors owne words.
                  
                     Lying (ſaith he) that day vpō his bed, he made (as it were)

a ſolemne exhortation, and telling the Catholiques preſent, that his houre was now come, hee willed them to continue constant in their profeſſion, ſaying that they were yet to indure the brunt of many perſecutions, howbeit, they that perſeuered vnto the end, ſhould be ſaued: and ſo falling from his exhortations vnto prayer, he deſired all the company to pray with him: whereupon hee began to recite the Letanie, and they that were preſent, followed in aunſwering of him, euery perſon preſent beeing mooued to great deuotion. Thus continuing for a while, he then ſeemed to fall into a ſlumber, and after that into a traunce, which indured aboue two houres: ſo as many that were preſent, did verily belieue he would neuer haue awaked againe, but in the ſame haue giuen vp the ghost. At the last, of himſelfe hee did awake, fetching a great ſigh, and a groane, and then vſed theſe words: My time is not yet come: our bleſſed Lady hath appeared vnto me, and told mee that I muſt liue longer yet: for that God hath reſerued me for a further purpoſe to doe more good, and to tell of ſtrange wonders. With that there began to be a great muttering among the company, many greatly meruailing what this ſhould meane. Whereuppon Fa: Edmunds made an exhortation to thoſe that were preſent, and told them, that he thought it conuenient to prolong the time no longer, but to fall to exorciſing of him, whereby they ſhould perceiue, whether all were true that hee had reported vnto them, or whether it had beene the enemy that ſought to delude them.
                  
                  Thus farre the prieſt, whoſe report (I thinke) is true in ſubſtance, though peraduenture he may erre in ſome circumſtance: but my memory is not ſo good, as that I am able to controll him in any particuler, and therefore I wil let it paſſe as it goeth. The fault is not mine, that theſe things are thus publiſhed. What moued me to pretend that I ſhould die vpon Good Friday, I cannot ſet downe directly: but ſure I am the deuiſe was boyiſh, and fooliſh, and very ſutable (as I thinke) to the reſt of

my proceedings, being greatly beſotted by them, as may appeare by my whole courſe, and by their dealings with me. As farre as I can geſſe my ſimple drift therein was, that when it ſhould be apparant, that I had lyed vnto them, they would for ſhame haue then diſmiſſed me from them: for there was nothing in the world that I deſired more. But I found I was deceaued in my ſimple plot, & doe now perceaue by the ſaid prieſts words, that Ma: Edmunds was prouided, how to ſalue the matter, if the worſt fell out. God knoweth whether he ſuppoſed, that I would haue taken ſome courſe, to haue ſhortned mine owne time againſt that day, as conſtrained in ſome ſort there-vnto by the great weakenes, and indeede wearines of my life, where-vnto he, and the reſt had brought me: but I wil iudge the beſt. This onely I perceaue, that when he found my ſimple plot, he was ready to inſinuate to the Catholiques preſent, that out of doubt the report that I made of my death, was but an illuſion of Sathan; and this muſt be made manifeſt out of hand by an Exorciſme: for as the ſaid prieſt hath in writing reported (although I my ſelfe had forgotten it) being againe exorciſed in the preſence of all the company, before they departed I ſhewed no ſignes of any diſtemper, but rather of great deuotion, and piety: wherby Ma: Edmunds collected, that out of all queſtion it was Sathan in me that ſaid I ſhould die vpon Good Friday, and ſo the company departed very well ſatisfied. If he had giuen me at that time his holy potion, and perfumed my noſe with brimſtone, Aſſa faetida, and I know not what other vile ſmell (as before he had done) I ſhould not ſurely haue beene ſo quiet: but he had another drift, as wel it appeareth.
                  From the ſaid Good-friday, for ought I remember, vntill the three, and twentith of April (which was then S. Georges day) Ma: Edmunds ſuffered me to be quiet, I thinke now to gather ſome ſtrength, and imagined then

that he would neuer haue troubled me further. But it fell out that a day or two before Saint Georges day (as it ſhould ſeeme) that I had againe a fit of the Mother, where-vpon they tooke occaſion to haue me in handling againe, for as they ſaid Modu the Prince of deuils was yet in me: and now they pretended (as I remember) to do the beſt they could to caſt him out of me, that ſo I might be rid for altogether.
                  Ma: Edmunds, and the reſt dealt with me at this time very extreamely, and I muſt confeſſe that in hope to be now diſpatched, I bent my ſelfe (as farre as poſſibly I could) to faine, and affirme euery thing that I perceaued they expected at my hands. But what I then did or ſaid, if I ſhould haue beene tortured vpon the rack (had I not ſeene what was publiſhed in writing of me at that time) I could not now haue remembred ſo many particulers. After that Ma: Edmunds had exorciſed, and perfumed me (as often-times he had done before) the deuil that had lyen ſecret long in me (as the writing ſaith) began to appeare. But I wil ſet downe the effect of the ſaid prieſts reports as touching this matter.
                  
                     By commaundement of the Exorcist (which was Ma: Edmunds) the deuill in Ma: Mainy confeſſed his name to be Modu, and that he had beſides himſelfe ſeauen other ſpirits, all of them Captaines, and of the great fame. There-vpon Ma: Edmunds commaunded that euery one of the ſeauen ſhould come vp in their degrees one after another, and to declare his name by his principall quality. Then Ma: Mainy by the inſtigation of the first of the ſeauen, began to ſet his hands vnto his ſide, curled his haire, and vſed ſuch gestures, as Ma: Edmunds preſently affirmed, that that ſpirit was Pride. Heere-with he began to curſe, and banne, ſaying: What a poxe doe I heere? I wil ſtay no longer amongſt a company of raſcall Prieſts, but goe to the Court, and braue it amongſt my fellowes, the noble men there aſſembled. And then after Ma: Edmunds had ſaid, that hee ſhewed

himſelfe thereby to be the ſpirit of Pride: he went downe againe, and Ma: Mainy became very quiet, and fell to his prayers. But Ma: Mainy could not tell one word (as he reported) of any thing that had beene then ſaid, onely he affirmed, that he had all the while felt a great paine in his body. Then Ma: Edmunds did proceede againe with his Exorciſmes, and ſuddainly the ſences of Mainy were taken from him, his belly began to ſwell, and his eyes to ſtare, and ſuddainly cryed out, ten pounds in the hundred, he called for a Scriuener to make a bond, ſwearing that hee would not lend his money without a pawne. Ma: Edmunds demaunding of that deuill, whether he were the ſame that had ſpoken before, he ſaid no. But yet affirmed, that hee was a good fellow, and a companion of his, and one that bare as great rule in England as any other deuill. There could be no other talke had of this ſpirit, but of mony, bargaining, and vſury: ſo as all the company deemed this deuill to be the author of Couetouſneſſe, not expecting any instruction therein from Fa: Edmunds. After a while this deuill goeth downe as the other did. Ma. Mainy recouereth his ſences, falleth to his prayers, and ere long Ma. Edmunds beginneth againe his Exorciſmes, wherein hee had not proceeded farre, but vp commeth another ſpirit, ſinging most filthy and baudy ſongs: euery word almost that hee ſpake, was nothing but ribaldry. They that were preſent, with one voyce affirmed that deuill to be the author of Luxury. And Ma. Edmunds beeing not able to endure ſuch lewd ſpeeches, commaunded him to be ſilent, and to get him downe forthwith againe. The deuill obeyed: Ma. Mainy recouereth, falleth to his prayers, and afterwards Ma. Edmunds goeth forward with the rest. And thus he did proceed, till he had raiſed vp all the ſeauen Captaines, and compelled them to ſhew themſelues as the other had doone. Enuy was deſcribed by diſdainfull lookes, and contemptuous ſpeeches. Wrath by furious gestures, and talke as though hee would haue fought. Gluttony by vomiting: and Sloth by gaping and ſnorting,

as if hee had beene a ſleepe. Ma. Mainy at euery time recouering his ſences, and falling to prayer as he had done before. After theſe ſeauen deuils had thus ſhewed themſelues, and were againe at rest in Ma. Mainy, it ſeemed good to Ma. Edmunds to try what he could doe with Modu their prince and Captaine. He beginneth againe his exorciſmes, and continued the ſame, till after a while the ſaid Modu roſe vp againe, and asked Ma. Edmunds how hee liked his 7. Brethren before mētioned, who had appeared one after another? And furthermore hee fell a curſing, and ſaid: A pox on you all for popiſh prieſts. My fellowes the proteſtants can make very much of my ſaid Brethren, & giue them good entertainment, bidding them welcome whenſoe-they come: but you ſcuruy prieſts can neither abide them your ſelues, nor ſuffer them to be quiet whenſoeuer you are conuerſant. Heereunto Ma. Edmunds aunſwered, that they would be enemies both to him, and them all during their liues. And commaunded both him, and the rest of his companions for to depart out of Ma. Mainy, vrging them with ſuch ſeuerall adiurations, as are ſee downe to that purpoſe in the booke of Exorciſmes. Whilst he was thus proceeding with him, he required Modu by the authority of his Prieſthood, and power left by Christ in the Catholique Romane Church, to tell him truly concerning theſe viſions that appeared vnto Mainy: with that the deuill in Mainy fell out into a great laughter, ſaying that it had doone him very much good, that he had cooſened ſo many prieſts, and made all the company for to worſhip him: For (ſaith hee) all that time that you and the reſt ſeemed to pray vnto Chriſt, and vnto Saffronbag, it was I, and all my cōpany that you worſhipped. Heerewith Ma. Edmunds beeing greatly mooued, defied him, & ſaid that they had no intention of worſhipping him: and that if any wee ſo deceiued, it was of ignorance, and that his torments ſhould be the greater for ſo intolerable an illuſion. Then Ma. Edmunds began againe his exorciſmes with

great earnestnes, and all the company cried out vpon God, the bleſſed virgin, S. George, and all the company of heauen to helpe, and ſuccour them in that holy action, ſo as both that wicked Prince Modu, and all his company might be cast out of Ma: Mainy. And accordingly God heard their prayers, for ſhortly after they were all cast forth, and that in ſuch ſort as Ma: Edmunds directed them: which was, that euery deuill ſhould depart in ſome certaine forme, repreſenting either a beast, or ſome other creature, that had reſemblance of that ſinne, whereof he was the chiefe Author. Where-vpon the ſpirit of Pride departed in the forme of a Peacock. The ſpirit of Sloth in the likenes of an Aſſe: the ſpirit of Enuie in the ſimilitude of a Dog: the ſpirit of Gluttony in the forme of a Wolfe: and the other deuils had alſo in their departure their particuler likeneſſes agreeable to their natures.
                  
                  Hetherto the Author of the ſaid Treatiſe, though in ſome more words, yet to this effect. Concerning the which report, the world muſt needes beare me witnes, if euer it come to their publique view, that I haue great cauſe to blame them, for making of theſe things common, which were wrought by themſelues in priuate, ſo much to my diſcredite. My charity ſhall deſerue very great commendations as I thinke, if I doe not hereafter ſeeke to be reuenged, both vpon Ma: Edmunds, and the reſt, that haue thus dealt with me. But to the matter it ſelfe as I am required. It is very likely that vpon Saint Georges day here mentioned, I railed againſt the prieſts, and ſpake of the Court, as that time gaue occaſion. But I doe verily thinke that I vſed the ſaid ſpeeches, as being led vnto them by ſome words vttered eyther by the prieſts, or by ſome in the company, and that they had ſome farther drift then I doe know of, in appoynting that day for their dealings with me.
                  And touching my deſcribing of the ſaid ſeauen deuils by ſignes, and geſtures, ſignifying the ſeauen deadly

ſinnes. I doe wel remember that I vſed ſome ſuch like geſtures to that end, but I am perſwaded that they are heere ſet downe in farre better ſort then I did act them, as their vſuall manner was in reporting of any thing that was done eyther by me, or any of the reſt. They would make a faire tale of any thing, though it were neuer ſo ſimple, that any of vs did or ſaid. But for mine owne part, how I ſhould be able to deſcribe the ſaid ſinnes, though it were neuer ſo ſimple, I cannot directly aunſwer. This onely I think, and am perſwaded in my conſcience, that what I did therein, I was eyther led vnto it by ſome of the Prieſts instructing questions, or elſe I had beene told before, that others in my caſe had deſcribed ſuch deuils by ſuch geſtures, that did ſignifie ſuch, and ſuch ſinnes. For being not then fully xvij. yeeres of age, as I take it, I doe not thinke that any ſuch things would euer haue come into my head, if I had not beene cunningly inſtructed.
                  It ſeemeth ſtrange vnto me, when I remember diuers things concerning theſe matters, as I may ſay of my ſelf, ſo I haue beene informed concerning the reſt, that eyther had beene, or were then in my caſe. Wee were neuer ſuffered to be quiet: few nights eſcaped, but either Miſtris Peckham when ſhe was preſent, or Miſtris Plater, or ſome other of the women, where we remained, would be with vs, eyther to bring vs newes ſeuerally, what each of vs had done or ſaid apart, when we were exorciſed the day before: or elſe to tell vs ſtrange tales, which they ſaid they had heard of ſome of the prieſts, concerning diuers things which had beene done, and ſpoken by ſuch, as had beene poſſeſſed in other Countries: whether they did thus by the direction of the prieſts or no, I cannot tell, but I verily beleeue, that wee all of vs learned thereby to doe many things, which otherwiſe we ſhould neuer haue thought of. And whether I learned from them the skill I had to doe the geſtures

before mentioned, I know not, it may be I did.
                  And as I aunſwer to this point, ſo doe I vnto that other, as touching the deuils ſuppoſed ſimilitudes in their pretended departing out of me. Eyther it is altogether falſe, and deuiſed by themſelues, or elſe they led me to ſay ſo by their queſtions. As if they asked me, whether Pride did not depart from me in the likeneſſe of a Peacock, it is very probable that I ſaid he did. And ſo of all the reſt, or otherwiſe they told ſome in my hearing, that ſuch deuils did vſe to depart from ſuch, as they poſſeſſed in ſuch kinde of formes: I pray God forgiue them for all their bad dealings with me. My chiefe comfort is, that as I ſaid in the beginning, I am fully perſwaded that I was neuer poſſeſſed, and that all I did or ſpake, I did it, and ſpake it my ſelfe, being ſometimes enforced, and ſometimes induced ſo to doe, as before I haue mentioned. And alſo that the moſt of thoſe things which are written of me, are eyther vtterly falſe, or greatly altered in the telling. And that the prieſts themſelues that dealt with me, are of right to beare the blame for that which eyther I or any of the reſt ſaid or did, that might giue any iuſt cauſe of offence, eyther to her Maieſtie, or the ſtate heere in England.
                  Vpon my ſpeeches before mentioned to the Lord Strange, the prieſts, and others, eſpecially thoſe that fauour Ma: Edmunds as I thinke, did giue it out that I was ſtill poſſeſſed. And I doubt not but if at any time they vnderſtand of this my confeſſion, it wil be ſaid that now I haue many deuils in me. I had forgotten to ſet downe how I haue had a long time an ache in one of my knees, which I thinke I got whē I was a child by a cold, & how when I told the prieſts of it firſt, they vſed that for one argument to proue that I was poſſeſſed: ſaying, that it was very likely that the deuil kept about that place. Alſo I feare I ſhall be troubled with my old diſeaſe as I haue before ſaid. So as if they ſhall determine to hold on ſo

wicked a courſe, they are like to haue the ſame cauſes to ſay that I am ſtill poſſeſſed, that they had before. But I hope they wil not dare to preſume to haue any further dealing with me, and that God will deliuer me from them. And this is all I can ſay to all ſuch points, and matters as haue beene propounded vnto me.
                  
                     Richard Mainy.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
            
               
                  Errata.
                  PAge 5, line 27, for continue, reade contriue.
                  Page 16, line 6, for Rat, reade Cat.
                  Page 20, line 36, for hope, reade two.
                  Page 95, line 35, for conſeruation, reade conſecration.
                  
               
            
         
      
   