
      
         
            
            
            A DISCOVRSE OF THE SEVErall kinds and cauſes of Lightnings.
            Written by occaſion of a fearefull Lightning which on the 17. day of this inſtant Nouember, Anno Domini 1606. did in a very ſhort time burne vp the ſpire ſteeple of Blechingley in Surrey, and in the ſame melt into infinite fragments a goodly Ring of Bells.
            BY SIMON HARWARD.
            
               
                  Pſal. 145. Verſ. 17.
               
               The Lord is iuſt in all his waies, and holy in all his workes.
            
            
               THOV SHALT LABOR FOR PEACE PLENTIE
            
            LONDON Printed by Iohn Windet, and are to be ſold by Iefferey Chorlton at his ſhop neere the North dore of Pauls. 1607.
         
         
            
            
            Honoratiſsimo Domino D. HOVVARDO, Baroni de Effingham, illuſtriſsimi Comitis Notingamienſis filio et heredi domino ſuo colendiſsimo omnia proſpera & faelicia.
            
               *⁎*
            
            CVi potius munus (praeclare ac nobilis Heros)
            Hoc donare queam (ſit licet exiguum)
            Quàm tibi cuius in auxilio Blechingleienſes
            
            I am triſtes totam ſpem poſuere ſuam?
            Sperant permultos per te (domine inclite) amicos
            Tempore poſse quidem ſe reperire breui,
            Per quos campanae amiſſae ſibi reſtituantur,
            Debito vt ad templum tempore conueniant,
            Concipiant
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                preces humiles vt Rex Iacobus
            
            
               Ʋiuat, ſit ſanus, floreat, & vigeat,
            Sēper & Howardos ſolito amplectatur amore,
            Sic villa haec ſaluam ſe fore non dubitat,
            Sic Chriſtoque (vir ample) placebis, qui tibi donet
            Neſtoreos, ſanos, omni in honore, dies.
            
               Amplitudini tuae deuotiſsimus, Simon Harward.
            
         
         
            
            
            The preface to the Chriſtian Reader.
            
            
               IT is not without great cauſe pronounced by the wiſe man,Eccleſ. 9.1. 
               that no man knoweth either loue or hatred, which Saint Bernard doth expound to be ment of naturall man, that man by nature doth not know whether he be in the loue or in the hatred of god, but the ſpiritual mā doth diſcerne all things. But ſaint Hierom doth better interpret it to bee ſpoken of things vnder the Sunne, which wordes, are vſed by Solomon fiue ſeuerall tymes in the ſelfe ſame chapter. By things then vnder the Sunne, that is by the outward accidents of this life, no man can diſcerne either loue or hatred, becauſe ſorrowes, ſickneſſes, loſſes and calamities, do befal to the godly as wel as to the wicked, but the triall of our ſelues

doth conſiſt in inward graces, to wit, with what faith in God, and what loue toward God we indure the ſaid afflictions, what good vſes we make of them to our ſelues, and how in the middeſt of them all we do poſſeſſe our ſoules with patience. Sondry fearefull puniſhmentes by lightnings haue bin inflicted in many corners of this land, in this cleare light of the preaching of the goſpell, partly vpon Paules in London, and partly on other places of this realme. And the like or farre greater haue bin ſhewed, heretofore in the time of Popery and blindneſſe. The french Chronacles do teſtifie that in the year of our Lord 1534. (at which time France was ouerwhelmed with idolatry & ſuperſtition) the citie of Claraualla being ſtricken with lightning about noone dayes did ſo fiercelie burne, that in three howers ſpace their town caſtles and churches were vtterly conſumed. VVe muſt needs acknowledge that our ſinnes do deſerue a farre deeper puniſhment then did the offences of our forefathers. They were as ſeruants ſent

out in the night time, and therefore if they miſſed their way, their faults cannot be ſo heauy as ours who are as ſeruants ſent out of the cleere day light: where God giueth one talent, he expecteth the increaſe of one, but where he giueth ten talents; he doth iuſtly demand the increaſe of ten. VVhat vſes we are to make of theſe iudgements of God vnder the Sunne, I haue briefely according to the ſhortneſſe of time ſet downe in this ſmal treatiſe, which here now I do commit to thy view, & both thee and it to the good bleſſing of the Almighty. From Banſted this twentieth of Nouember An. Dom. 1606.
            
               Thine in the Lord, S.H.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A DISCOVRSE OF THE SEVERAL Kindes and Cauſes of Lightninges.
            
            
               WHen the Lord Almighty, doth any where ſhew extraordinary tokens of his iudgementes, it behoueth ſuch as neere dwellers to reſort to the place, and not only to take view of the puniſhment, but alſo to lay it deepely to their heartes. For there are ſome puniſhments, which in Greeke are called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , puniſhmentes of vengeance, there are ſome which are termed 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , puniſhments of correction, and means to draw vs to amendment of life, and ſome 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , puniſhmēts of triall, to trie our faith and patience. The conſideration whereof moued me this preſent weeke to viſite the towne of Blechingley, being a towne not onely neare vnto me, but alſo hauing ſuch inhabitants, as vnto whome for many yeeres, for ſundrie kindneſſes I am much beholden, when I came, I found their caſe to be equall (if not worſe) then the rumor or report, which was before publiſhed. I found that by the lightning (which came with the terrible thunder on Munday, being the 17. day of this inſtant Nouember, about ten of the clocke in the night) the Spire ſteeple of the ſaid Bleachingley, hauing beene lately new couered to the great charges of the parriſh

in three howers ſpace, was vtterly conſumed with fire. The ſteeple was but about twelue fadome high aboue the battlements of the ſquare ſtone worke: but it was a ſteeple ſpreading downeward very large in circumference. The ſtone worke which bare it (being alſo about twelue fadom high) is a long ſquare of one & twenty feet one ſide, and eighteene feete the other ſide. It is thought by good workemen, that two hundred loades of timber will not ſuffice for the erecting of ſuch a ſteeple, as that ſtone-worke did lately beare.
            I found alſo the belles (being before a ſweet ring, and ſo large, that the Tenor waighed twenty hundred waight) partly melted into ſuch fragmentes, as may perhappes bee melted againe, and partly burnt into ſuch cinders, or intermingled with ſuch huge heapes of cinders, as it will neuer hereafter ſerue to the former vſes thereof.
            Theſe grieuous loſſes are by diuerſe ſortes of people in ſundrie wayes interpreted. Some do account of them as a particular iudgement of God againſt the ſins of the inhabitantes of that towne of Blechingley. But I am not of their opinion, partly, becauſe, as I cannot excuſe the inhabitantes of the ſaid towne of ſundrie groſſe abuſes, ſo am I fully perſvvaded, a number of tovvnes neare adioyning to them, are in the like iniquities, nothing inferiour to them, and partly, becauſe in the extremitie of this fire vpon the church, the tovvne and tovvneſmen vvere miraculouſlie preſerued. The church ſtandeth in the Eaſt ende of the tovvne, and the vvinde (though it ſomtimes changed) yet it ſtill kept neare the vveſt point, & droue the flame frōvvard frō the houſes: A thatched barne, and certaine poore houſes neere adioyning to the Church, were ſo wonderfully preſerued, that we muſt needes confeſſe and acknowledge, that in the middeſt of iudgement there ſhined mercie. Some do deſcant vpon the day, becauſe the Bells did thus periſh in

that ſeuenteenth day of Nouember, wherein for ſo many former happie yeares they had ioyfully ſounded for the raigne of good Queene Elizabeth. But let ſuch know, that there needeth no other Bell, but onely a noble fame to ſound out the vertues of ſuch a learned and religious Queene: and that fame (maugre the deſpite of all aduerſaries) muſt and will ring out her praiſes, euen vnto the endes of the world.
            If the Bells had beene caſt in our late Queenes raigne, then might the Papiſts picke occaſion to take ſome collour of aduantage. They might ſay, that the Bels were neuer chriſtened and hallowed, as by their lawes they ſhould haue beene, and that therefore the lightning preuailed againſt them.
            But the Bels were all auncient Bels, the eldeſt man in the pariſh cannot remember the caſting of any of them, the third bell onely excepted. All the reſt, as they were framed in time of Poperie, ſo (no doubt) they had the bleſsing and baptizing at that time vſed, and were hallowed by that praier in the Maſſe booke.
            
               Omnipotens ſempiterne Deus tu hoc tintinnabulum coeleſti benedictione perfunde,
               Benedictio Campana. 
               vt ante ſonitum eius longius effugentur ignita iacula inimici, percuſsio fulminum, impetus lapidum, laeſio tempeſtatum.
            
            
               Almightie euerlaſting God, beſprinckle this bell with thy heauenly bleſsing, that at the ſound thereof, the fierie darts of the enemie, the ſtriking of lightnings, the ſtroke of thunderbolts, and hurts of tempeſts may farre be put to flight.
            
            The cauſe indeede why the lightning at this time did preuaile both againſt bels and ſteeple, was becauſe it was the good pleaſure of God, thus to ſhew his omnipotent power to ſtirre vp as wel the inhabitants of the ſaid town, as vs all, to feare him, & to giue vs ſome taſte of his iudgments, to ſummon vs all to true repentance.
            The Philoſophers Ariſtole, Plinie, Seneca, and others, do point out many naturall cauſes of lightenings, but when

they conſider the wonderfull effects thereof, they are cō
               pelled to acknowledge a diuine power, farre aboue the reach of all humane reaſō.Seneca lib. 2. Natur. quaeſt. As Seneca ſaith, Mira ſunt fulminis ſi intueri velis opera, nec quicquam dubii relinquentia, quin diuina inſit illis & occulta potentia. The operations of lightnings (if you behold them) are wonderfull, and do leaue no doubt, but that there is in them a diuine and ſecret power.
            
               Pontanus in meteorolog.
               Pontanus maketh three eſpeciall kinds of lightnings.
            Scinditque vritque & longo ſerat aera hiatu.
            One is a renting lightning, another a burning, and the third doth cut through the aire with a long diſperſing.
            The lightning which is ſcattered more generally thorough the aire, is of leſſe and weaker force, but that which is gathered into a leſſer compaſſe, is of greater ſtrength, and according to the ſeuerall effects hath ſundry diuers names giuen vnto it. One is called fulmē ſcindēs a cutting or renting lightening, becauſe by the aboundance of ſpirits and drines it is ſo ſwift in operation, that it renteth before it can inflame: of that the phophet Dauid ſpeaketh when, he ſaith The voyce of the Lord breaketh the Cedar trees,
               
                  Pſal. 29.3. 
               yea the Lord breaketh the Cedars of Libanus.
            
            An other lightening is called penetrans, a pearcing lightening, becauſe by the puritie of the flame, it pearceth thorough ſuch outward parts as haue powers of paſſage, & worketh his forces inwardly▪ of that Pontanus ſpeaketh

                  Pontanus. lib. meteor. cap▪ 
                     16
                  
                  hominemque bouemque,
                  exanimat nulla vt maneant veſtigia mortis.
                  Of man and beaſt it kils hoth kind,
                  And leaues no print of death behind.
               
            
            It pearceth thorough the outward pores of the body and ſlayeth the vitall parts within. So it killeth the child in the mothers wombe, leauing the mother ſafe: and it melteth the ſiluer in the purſe, the purſe ſuſtaining no damage. This penetrant lightening is of ſuch force, that it pearceth oftentimes bodies which can hardly be

accompted tranſpirable, as when it corrupteth wine and beare, be the veſſels neuer ſo ſtrongly made, or be the orifices thereof neuer ſo ſtrongly ſtoppedPontan. ibid.
            
            There is alſo a lightening infuſcans, which maketh blacke, but by reaſon of the ſubtillitie and thinneſſe it flieth away before it can burne, of that Pontanus ſpeaketh.
            
               Non faciem non ora hominum non corpora noris.
               The body from the foote to face,
               With blackneſſe it doth quite diſgrace.
            
            An other lightning is termed vrens, a burning lightning, It hath much earthly matter, it breaking thorough the clouds doth fall downe, and doth burne, melt or ſpoile, thoſe bodies vpon which it deſcendeth.
            Some lightnings are prodigious, ſo ſurpaſſing the reaſon of man, that no natural cauſe can be rendered therof: as Eutropius ſheweth a hiſtory of a maid of Rome, who trauayling to Apulis, was killed with lightening (no haim outwardly appearing in her body) and at the ſame inſtant her garments were alſo ſhaken off without any rent, and her horſe alſo killed, and his bridle and girthes ſhaken off without any breach. Of ſuch lightenings Pontanus writeth.
            
               
                  
                     Pontanus lib. meteorolog.
                     Nunc ipſis etiam in stabulis (mirabile dictu,
                  
                  
                     Quadripedem exoluit, pedibus quoque ferrea demit
                  
                  
                     Vincula & intacto terram quatit vngula cornu,
                  
                  
                     Illaeſus ſonipes alta ad praecepia mandit.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Oft from the horſe (O wonder great)
                  it ſhaketh of the iron locke,
                  The ſtead ſtill at the cratch doth eate,
                  and nothing harmed by the knocke.
               
            
            That lightening ſhould ſhake iron fetters from the the feet of horſes, and nothing hurt the hoofe, this doth Pontan. call a miraculous lightning.
            
               The cauſes of the greiuous harmes which are often cauſed by lightnings, are of three ſorts, the firſt iudicial, the ſecond inſtructtiue: and the third fatidicall.
            The iudiciall cauſe is, when the Lord doth by it execute vengeance vpon ſome notable offenders, as vpon blaſphemers, vpon ſorcerers, vpon ambitious men, bloudſuckers,Sabellinus & Paulus Diaconus. drunkards, adulterers, and ſuch like, Olympius an Arriau Biſhop when being at Carthage, he blaſphemed the bleſſed Trinity, he had by the iudgment of God his body ſuddenly burnt with lightning. So Sabellinus ſheweth a hiſtory of one Preſter the ſonne of Hippomanes, who blaſpheming God was ſtricken with a thunderbolt and periſhed.
            The thunderbolt cōmeth of the viſcous & ſulphurous matter of the lightning: for as the Gunners wildfires doe flame in the water, ſo lightnings (being much of the ſame nature) haue beene often ſeene to burne Fiſhers nets euen vnder the water. And as meale and water kneaded together and baked, doe grow into a hardneſſe, ſo the drie and viſcous exhalation is by force of the heate in thunder hardened into a ſtone.
            
               Zonarus tom. 2 Annalium.Another ſinne, which God doth puniſh with lightnings is Magycke and Sorcerie. As Zonaras writeth, that Anastaſius the Emperour in the yere of Chriſt 499. beeing addicted to Magycke and the Manichean hereſie, did perſecute ſuch Chriſtians as reprooued his ſinnes and wickedneſſe. But at the laſt, lightning came fearefully about his houſe called Tholotum, he crept from chāber to chamber to ſeeke where he might bee ſafeſt: but nothing would preuaile. The flaſhes in the ende ouertooke him, and he periſhed miſerably.
            
               2. Reg. cap. 1. verſ. 10.So in the ſecond Booke of the Kings, fire came down from heauen vpon the two captaines of Ahazia king of Iſrael, and vpon both their bands of man, and deſtroyed them, becauſe their Lord the King had highly diſpleaſed God, when in the time of his ſickneſſe he ſent his ſeruants

to conſult with Beelzebub the god of Ackron.
            Another ſinne plagued vſually by lightnings,Dionyſ. Halyc. lib. 1. Antiq. is Pride and Ambition. Dionyſius Halicarnaſſaeus ſheweth, that Alladius an auncient king of the Latins (who raigned before Romulus) vvas ſo prowd and ambitious, that he coū
               terfeited thundrings and lightnings about his palace, becauſe hee vvould bee eſteemed as a god amongſt his people. But at the laſt, his Palace vvas ſet on fire vvith lightning from heauen, and in the ſame he fearefully periſhed.
            So Diodorus Siculus vvriteth of a king of Clide,
               Diodor. Sic. li. 4▪
                  
                vvho cauſed himſelfe to be dravvne vp and dovvne in a Chariot, vvherein vvere deuiſes of Torches and ſquibbes counterfeiting thunders and lightnings, that ſo he might be deemed a god amongſt his ſubiects: but in the height of his ambition he was ſtricken with a thunderbolt from heauen, and came to a moſt wretched end. This then is one cauſe why lightnings doe commonly ſtrike the higheſt places, according to that of Horace,
               
                  
                     
                        Feriuntque ſummos
                     
                     
                        fulmina montes.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Lightnings ſtrike commonly
                     the hills that are moſt hie.
                  
               
            
            Not onely becauſe the higheſt places are moſt ſubiect to the iniuries of the clowdes, ſeeing euery agent doth worke moſt ſtrongly vpon his neereſt matter (as the Philoſophers giue the reaſon) and becauſe euill ſpirits dwelling in the aire,Eph. 6.12. doe moſt ſeeke to annoy Temples and Churches, which commonly are the higheſt edifices,Garcaeus lib. de Meteorolog. (as ſome Diuines doe giue the cauſe) but alſo becauſe by that example, God doth warne mankind, not to ſeeke to extoll it ſelfe by haughtines of minde. And this was ſeene by the Poet Ouid:
               
                  
                  
                     
                        Viue tibi, quantumque potes praelustria vita,
                     
                     
                        Saeuum praeluſtri fulmen ab arce venit.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Liue to thy ſelfe, and too much height auoide,
                     High towers are by lightninges moſt annoide.
                  
               
            
            An other ſin plagued with lightning is cruelty, and blood-ſhed, that ſo iudgement may be without mercy to them that ſhew no mercy. Hatto the Biſhop of Mentz when in the yeare of Chriſt 918,Iam. 2. by the inſtigation of Conrad the Emperour: he endeuoured to murther Henry Duke of Saxony, was ſuddenly ſlain with a ſtroke of lightning. For this cauſe is the Lord in the Scripture, ſo often called the Lord of hoaſtes, that is the Lorde of Armies:Malac. 1. Ierem. 5. becauſe all thinges in heauen and earth, are a part of his Armie to plague the wicked, and to fight for the godly. In the heauens he hath fire, to powre down vpon Sodom and Gomorrah: hee hath in the aire, thunderinges, lightninges and blazing ſtarres to terrifie the heartes of the wicked: he hath the earth to ſwallow vp Core, Dathan and Abiram: the ſea to drown Pharao and his Armie: Dogges to licke vp Iezabels bloud, beares to deuoure them that mocked Elizeus: the canker-worm and Caterpillar to deſtroy the fruites of the vngodly, yea there is no Creature ſo vile and baſe, but it is a part of the hoaſt of God to puniſh and deſtroy, euen the mightieſt in the world. Herod and Antiochus were two monſtrous tyrantes, yet was one of them deſtroied with lice, and the other with worms. Lightning hath but a poore and baſe beginning of exhalations, drawne vppe from the earth, yet by the power of God, being inflamed & gathering force in the aire, it is enabled to confound whatſoeuer doth exalt it ſelfe againſt God his diuine Maieſtie.
            An other ſinne which God doth puniſh with fire from Heauen, is drunkenneſſe and whoredome, as Ezechiel
               
cap. 16. doth ſhew of the deſtruction of Sodom, that it was for their fulneſſe of bread, that is exceſſe of meats and drinkes, according to the Hebrew Phraſe, and for their committing abhomination, that is, for their filthy and damnable luſtes. Concerning theſe thinges, I take not vpon me to iudge of the inhabitantes of the towne lately puniſhed: But I pray God, that euery one may now ſo iudge himſelfe, that hee be no hereafter further iudged of the Lord.
            The ſecond cauſe of the harms done by lightnings, is for inſtructions ſake, that others may learne to take heed and to feare God, and in this reſpect God dooth ſometimes puniſh his deareſt ſeruantes. In the yeare of our Sauiour, 1551. an honeſt Cittizen of Creutzburge,
               Garcaeus lib. de meteorolog. ſtanding by his table, and a dogge laying by his feete, were both of them ſuddenly ſlaine by a lightning: yet a young child which ſtood hard by his Father, was preſerued ſafe. Iob his flocke of ſeuen thouſand ſheepe & his ſeruants,Iob. 1.16. were ſuddenly deſtroyed with fire from heauen, not ſo much for the ſinnes of Iob and his familie, as to trie the faith of Iob, and to make him a ſchoolemaiſter of Patience to all poſteritie. So it falleth out in all other kindes of puniſhments:Luk. 13.1. 
               Doe you thinke (ſaith our Sauiour Chriſt) that thoſe Galileans whoſe bloud Pilate mingled with their ſacrifices, were greater ſinners then all other Galileans? I tell yon nay, but except yee amend your liues yee ſhall likewiſe periſh: or thinke yee that thoſe eighteene vpon whome the Tower of Siloam fell; were ſinners aboue all them which dwell in Ieruſalem? I tell you nay, but except ye repent, yee ſhall all likewiſe periſh.
               Ioh. 9.3. The blind man in the ninth of Saint Iohn was borne blind? neither for his owne ſinnes, nor for his parents ſinnes, but that the power of God might be ſhewed foorth vpon him.
            
            There is none ſo deſperate, but will he, nill he, ſhall by thunderinges and lightnigns receiue admonition, if not to inſtruct him to amendment of life, yet at the leaſt

wiſe to condemn him in his owne guilty conſcience: we reade of Caligula the Emperour, that in fearefull thundering
                  •
               s hee would creepe vnder beddes and into the-ſtrongeſt corners of his howſe, Whereof came this, but-that he vnderſtood there, by that there was a God in heauen, whoſe voice he did then heare, and who in the ende would aſſuredly be reuenged of his ambitious, cruel, and filthy life.
            The third chiefe cauſe of fearefull lightnings is called fatidicall, or prognoſticall,Garcaeus in Meteorol when God doth by them forewarn vs of greater calamities to fall afterward vpon vs, vnleſſe wee amend our wicked and ſinfull life.
            In the yeere of our Lorde God. 653. at Friſazium a towne of Saxony a great number both of houſes and people were deſtroyed with lightning, but there followed afterward a greeuous plague graſſant ouer the whole Country. So in the yeere 653. in the time of Conſtance the Emperour a fearefull fier fell from heauen, but ſhortly after for the ſpace of three moneths together their followed a moſt greeuous peſtilence vpon all the places adioyning.
            So in the yeare 1062. in the month of February there fell terrible lightnings vpon the Citty of Conſtance, but preſently vpon it an infectious plague did wonderfully waſt that Citty.
            God of his infinite mercy graunt vs ſuch true repentance for our ſinnes and ſuch vnfained conuerſion from our vngodly behauiour, that theſe his iudgements thus threatned vpon vs may fauourably be turned aſide. And the Lord graunt that in all his iudgements powred out vpon our neighbors wee may rather in godly wiſedome make good vſes of them to our ſelues, and in charity ſeek to relieue ſuch as be in diſtreſſē, then either by pride to inſult vpon their loſſes, or by ſhutting vp our bowells of compaſſion to augment their griefes and miſeries. Sundry are the remedies which are deſcribed by ſundry writers

againſt the daungers of lightnings, ſome of them are philoſophicall,Garc. in Mete. as when they appoint that in thunders and lightnings men ſhould either ſhoot vp ordinance into to the aire, or ring bels that by the ſtirring of the aire the cloudes may be the ſooner diſperſed 
                  •
               nd driuen away, Fot as a ſtone caſt into the water doth make firſt one circle and that circle maketh a greater vntill the greateſt of all do touch the banke or ſide, euen ſo (ſay they) the toſſing of the aire by Gunnes or belles doth affect the aire next to it and that ayre againe the ayre next to it vntill at laſt it come to the cloudes by which the thū
               derings and lightnings are made. And this they make alſo to be the cauſe why (although the lightning and thunder are in time both together) yet the lightning cōmeth ſooner to our eies, then the thunder to our eares. For the line to our ſight is a right line, but the line of ſounds beating the aire is circular, or giricall, giricall as I haue ſhewed by the aforeſaid example of the ſtone caſt into the water. So when we ſee a man hewing wood a farre off, the ſight of the ſtroke commeth to our ſight before ſound of the noice (which beateth the aire circularely) can come to our hearing. Others appoint meere Magicall, that is wicked and vngodly remedies, to wit to hang about the necke or body inchanted herbs, ſtones or iewels. Such deuiſes ſauoring of ſorceries can in no wiſe be agreeable to true Chriſtianity.
            Some haue taught that bay trees & the skins of ſeacalues are remedies againſt the dangers of lightnings. Wherevpō 
               Suetonius affirmeth, that Tiberius Ceſar would crown himſelfe with bay bows, & couer his tents with the skins of ſea calues. Vt a fulmine tutus eſſet, that he might bee ſafe from lightnings.
            The onely true remedy is firſt by true faith,Pſal. 92. v. 1, et 5. to put our full truſt in God. For (as the prophet Dauid ſaith) If wee abide vnder ſhadow of the Almighty, we ſhall not be afraid of any feares of the night, nor of the arrow that flyeth by day: and ſecondly,

by hearty repentance to remoue the cauſes of Gods heauie iudgements,Iſay. 59.1. Pſal. 112. v. 1.4. & 6. & 7. and to forſake all ſuch ſinnes as doe make a diuiſion betwixt God and vs. The Prophet Dauid pronounceth of him that delighteth in Gods commandements, and is mercifull and leudeth and will guide his words with diſcretion that he ſhall not be afraid of any euill tidings he ſhall ſurely neuer be remoued but the righteous ſhall bee had in euerlaſting remembrance.
            
            Theſe graces he grant to vs that died for vs euen Ieſus Chriſt the righteous, to whom with the father and the holy ghoſt as well for iudgements as for mercy, bee all honour, glory, praiſe, maieſty, and thankſgiuing now and for euer, Amen.
            
               
               An addition of the Author ſhewing the opinions of Philoſophers and Aſtronomers touching Thundrings and Lightnings.
               
               THe generall naturall cauſe which the Phlo-ſophers doe giue of Thunders and Lightenings is this. Firſt a viſcous vapour ioyned with a hot exhalation is lifted vp to the higheſt part of the middle region of the aire, by vertue of the Planets: then the waterie vapour by the coldneſſe both of place and of matter, is thickned into a clowd, and the exhalation (which was drawne vp with it) is ſhut within the clowd, and driuen into ſtraights.
               This hotte exhalation flying the touching of the cold clowd, doth flie into the depth of the clowd that doeth compaſſe it about, and courſeth vp and downe in the clowd, ſeeking ſome paſsage out, which when it cannot find, it maketh a way by force, and beeing kindled, by the violent motion it breaketh through the clowde. If the ſides of the hollowe clowd be thicke, and the exhalation drie and copious, then there is made both thunder and lightning: but if the clowd be thin, and the exhalation alſo rare and thin, then there is lightening without thunder.
               The thunder then commeth, when the fierie ſpirits and exhalations beeing (as it were) ſhut vp in priſon, doe by 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   wraſtle with the congealed vapours which haue impriſoned thē. The like we ſee in al moiſt bodies which haue a hot ſpirit ſo included, that it cānot get out, the Cheſnut in roſting amongſt cinders giueth a cracke, a bladder filled with aire, being violently broken maketh a noiſe. When greene wood is burned, the ſpirits burſt out with ſome little crack: but gun-powder iſſuing out of ordinance maketh afarre greater ſound. The clowdes then which do farre exceed the greatneſſe of mountaines muſt

needes giue out a more forcible roaring. Eſpecially ſeeing that in them there is added a more principall operation of the handie worke of God, whereupon thunder in the Scriptures is called the thunder of God, Pſal. 77.17. The voice of thy thunder was heard round about. And Pſal. 104.7. at the voice of thy thunder they are afraid. So Pſal. 18.13. The Lord thundred out of heauen, and the moſt higheſt gaue out his voice, hailestones and coales of fire. So Iob. 38.25. Who doth diuide the ſpowts for the raine, or the way for the lightenings of the thunder? as if he ſhould ſay: none can doe it but God alone.
               The Poet ſaw ſomewhat by naturall reaſon, when hee ſaid,

                     
                        
                           Siquoties peccant homines ſua fulmina mittat
                        
                        
                           Iupiter exiguo tempore inermis erit.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        If God ſhould with his lightning fight
                        As oft as men offend,
                        In little ſpace of time he might
                        His weapons wholy ſpend.
                     
                  
The Aſtrologers as in other pointes they vary, ſo in their predictions, by thunderings and lightnings they do greatly diſagree.Beda. 
                  Beda ſaith Tonitrua in Nouembri ſterilitatem im minere ex alto quaſi tuba praecinunt. Thunders in Nouē
                  ber do as with a trumpet ſound out from heauen to vs a dearth and ſcarcitie, and if they happen on monday, then turmas coniugum morituras & fruges paſſuras that companies of married folks ſhall dy, corne & fruite ſuffer harme
               
                  Hermes.But Hermes is of a contrary mind: He ſaith tonnitrua Nouembris frumenti largvm prouentum & hominum hilaritatem promittunt. The thunders af Nouember doe promiſe great ſtore of corne, and ioy and gladneſſe amongſt men.
               This lightning on mondy the 17. of Nouember did not onely this harme in Surry, but alſo it afflicted Suſſex and diuers other places. It was very ſtrange that at the ſame time when it fiered Bleachingley ſteeple it entered alſo

ſo into the houſe of one Stephen Lugſford of Buckſtead in Suſſex almoſt twentie miles from Bleachingley and melting the lead of his glaſſe windowes did with great violence breake through and rent in ſunder a ſtrong bricke chimney: the man is of honeſt report and zealous in religion, we muſt not therefore iudge of men by thoſe outward accidents, but commit all iudgement to God to whom it doth belong. If lightnings haue any predictions, they haue as well good as bad. The mother of Hierom Fracaſtorius (who afterward became a famous ſcholer) carrying the ſaid Hierom (when he was a yong infant) in her arms was ſtricken with lighning and ſlaine, whereas notwithſtanding the yong child was vnhurt and vntouched, and preſerued (as the ſequele ſhewed) for the greater good of the common wealth.
               
                  
                     
                        Pſal. 77. verſ. 13.
                     
                     Who is ſo great a God as our God? thou art the God that doeſt wonders, thou haſt declared thy power among the people.
                  
               
               FINIS.
            
         
      
      
         
            ERRATA.
            Fol. 3. Apulia. Sabellicus.
            Fol. 4 for 
                  •
               lid. Ibid. Salmoneus.
         
      
   