
      
         
            
            
            The crie of the poore for the death of the Right Honourable Earle of Huntington.
            To the tune of the Earle of Bedford.
            
               
            
            
               
                  O God of thy mercie remember the poore,
               And grant vs thy bleſſings thy plenty & ſtore:
               For dead is Lord Haſtinges, the more is our griefe,
               And now vp to heauen we cry for reliefe.
               
                  Then waile we, then weepe we, then mourne we ech one.
               
               
                  The good Earle of Huntington from vs is gone.
               
            
            
               To poore and to néedie, to high and to low,
               Lord Haſtinges was friendly, all people doth know:
               His gates were ſtill open the ſtraunger to féede,
               And comfort the ſuccourles alwaies in néede.
               Then waile we, &c.
            
            
               The huſbandles Widdow he euer did cherriſh,
               And Fatherles Infants he likewiſe would nouriſh:
               To weake and to ſicke▪ to lame and to blinde,
               Our good Earle of Huntington euer was kinde.
               
                  Then waile we, &c.
               
            
            
               The naked he clothed with garments from cold,
               And frankely beſtowed his ſiluer and gold:
               His purſe was ſtill open in giuing the poore,
               That alwaies came flocking to Huntingtons doore.
               
                  Then waile we, &c.
               
            
            
               His tennants that daylie repairde to his houſe,
               Was fed with his bacon, his beefe and his ſouſe:
               Their rents were not raiſed, their fines were but ſmall
               And manie poore Tennants paide nothing at all.
               
                  Then waile we, &c.
               
            
            
               Such Landlordes in England we ſeldome ſhall finde,
               That to their poore Tennants wil beare the like minde,
               Lord Haſtinges therefore is ioyfully crownde,
               With Angels in heauen where peace doth abound.
               
                  Then waile we, &c.
               
            
            
               His wiſedome ſo pleaſed the Quéene of this land,
               The ſword of true Iuſtice, ſhe put in his hand:
               Of Yorke he was Preſident, made by her Grace,
               Her lawes to maintaine and rule in her place.
               
                  Then waile we, &c.
               
            
            
               Such mercifull pittie remainde in his breſt,
               That all men had Iuſtice, and none were opreſt:
               His Office in vertue, ſo Godly he ſpent,
               That Prince and his countrie, his loſſe may lament.
               
                  Then waile we, &c.
               
            
            
               And likewiſe Lord Haſtings S. Georges true Knight,
               Did weare the goold garter of England ſo bright:
               The gift of a Prince, King Edward firſt gaue,
               A Gem for a Souldier and Counceller graue.
               
                  Then waile we, &c.
               
            
            
               His coyne was not whorded, to flouriſh in pride,
               His Kings and his Iewels, and Chaines to prouide:
               But gaue it to Souldiers, wounded in warres,
               That pike and the bullet, hath lamed with fearres.
               
                  Then waile we, &c.
               
            
            
               He built vp no Pallace, nor purchaſte no Towne,
               But gaue it to Schollers to get him renowne:
               As Oxford and Cambridge can rightly declare,
               How many poore Schollers maintained are there.
               
                  Then waile we, &c.
               
            
            
               No groues he incloſed, nor felled no woodes.
               No paſtures he paled to doe himſelfe good:
               To Commons and Countrie, he liude a good friend,
               And gaue to the néedie what God did him ſend.
               
                  Then waile we, &c.
               
            
            
               He likewiſe prouided in time of great néede:
               If England were forced with warres to procéede:
               Both men and munition, with horſes of warre,
               The proude foes of England, at all times to ſcarre.
               
                  Then waile we, &c.
               
            
            
               Our Quéene and our Countrie, hath cauſe to complaine,
               That death in his furie this Noble hath ſtaine:
               
                  Yet England reioyce we, reioyce without feare,
               Lord Haſtinges hath left a moſt Noble heire.
               
                  Then waile we, &c.
               
            
            
               A thouſand poore Widdowes for Huntingtons ſake,
               As manie poore children, their praiers will make:
               That God may long proſper his heire left behinde,
               And graunt him old Huntingtons true noble minde.
               
                  Then waile we, &c.
               
            
            
               Then pray we for Countrie, for Prince and for Peares,
               That God may indew them with moſt happie yeares:
               Lord bleſſe vs with vertue, with plentie and peace,
               And manie more ſubiects like him to increaſe.
               
                  Then waile we, then weepe we, then mourne we ech one,
               
               
                  Our good Earle of Huntington from vs is gone.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            Printed at London for VVilliam Blackvvall,
and are to be ſold at his shoppe nere
Guild-Hall gate. 1596.
         
      
   