
      
         
            
            
            THE Solace for the Souldier and Saylour: Contayning a Diſcourſe and Apologie out of the heauenly word of God, how we are to allow, and what we are to eſteeme of the valiant attempts of thoſe Noblemen and Gentlemen of England, which incurre ſo many daungers on the ſeas, to cut off or abridge the proude and haughtie power of Spayne.
            
            By Simon Harward.
            
            AT LONDON, Printed by Thomas Orwin for Thomas Wight, and are to be ſold at his ſhop at the great North-doore of S. Paules Church. 1592.
         
         
            
            
            Ad Reuerendiſsimum in Chriſto patrem D. Johannem Cantuarienſem Archiepiſcopum, totius Angliae primatem, & metropolitanum, Sereniſſimae Reginae aſecretis conſilijs, & Honoratiſs. virum D. Georgium Comitem Cumbriae, Dominum Weſtmerlandiae, &c. Nobiliſſimi garteriorum ordinis equitem autatum, Dominos ſuos colendiſſimo
                  •
               .
            
               C
               Ʋrita graſſentur? curtanta diutius Anglis
            papicolae cur tot dira pericla ferant?
            Hispanae cur ſic inuicta claſſe phalanges
            conentur Christi tradere membra neci?
            Cur pede foedi frago terram premat hostis Hybernam
            perfidus? vſque & adhuc cur noua bella paret?
            Cur mercatores, cur ſic Jnquiſitor illos
            indignis tractet turba cruenta modis,
            Quos pia, pacis amans nostra Jllustriſſima princeps
            miſit ſaepe, ſui foederis ipſa memor?
            Cur Gallos reddat rabies Hiſpana rebelles?
            cur vicinorum depopuletur agros?
            Cur malè non pereant quos & Regina Britannûm
            inſidiatores ſenſerit eſſe truces?
            
               Cur Christi ſpoliet Babylonica bellua caetum?
            cur vinum ſtupri porrigat vſque ſui?
            Cur fulcrum papae viuat? Cur proruat vltra
            in pecudes Christi ſanguinolenta cohors?
            Pe
                  •••
                bonis ergo auſpicijs ô Nobilis heros,
            perge inuicte Comes, perge bonis auibus.
            Sic charo ſine fine ſuo gaudebit alumno
            antiſtes primâs Nobilis Angligenûm,
            Qui comitem teneris hunc enutriuit in annis,
            ô faustum talis cui moderator erat.
            
               Ʋos (precor) omnipotens pariter conſeruet vtroſque
            perpetuuſque ſimul pectora iungat amor:
            Hîc multos annos alter laetetur vt altro,
            Reginae ſummè fidus vterque ſuae,
            Et post longaeuae quàm plurima gaudia vitae
            ſtelliferum tandem ſcandat vterque polum.
            
               
                  Amplitudini veſtrae deuotiſsimus, Simon Harwardus.
            
         
         
            
            The preface to the Christian Reader.
            
               THERE are three cauſes (good Chriſtian Reader) which haue prouoked & drawne mee to the publiſhing of this rude & ſlender pamphlet. The firſt, for that I haue been thereunto requeſted, by certaine godly and valiant Captaines and Ship-maſters, with whom being on the ſpaniſh ſeas, vnder the conduct of the moſt noble Earle of Cumberland, that they might with better confidence call vpon God, I laboured ſundrie times, as well by priuate conference, as alſo in my publick Sermons ſo often and ſo farre forth as my text would giue mee occaſion. The ſecond, for that ſithence my returne home I haue heard ſometimes of the obloquies and reprochful

ſpeeches of many, which haue not ſtickt to affirme, that theſe my voyages vpon the ſeas haue beene ſome blot and diſcredite to the doctrine which is or ſhall by me bee deliuered vpon the land. And thirdly, for that England hath (I doubt) many ſeditious malcontents, which being wearie of their own welfare, doe repine againſt thoſe meanes whereby our proſperitie is preſerued, as may plainely appeare, as well by their vnnatural refuſing to help their countrie, who had rather waſte great ſummes in vngodlie ſuites of lawe, then to yeelde one mite towards the maintenance of the ſouldier and the publike affaires of the common wealth; as alſo by their vnthankefull murmurings & vnkinde grudgings, which cannot affoord a good word to them that willingly vndergoe ſo many deadly dangers abroad, to procure thē peace and quietneſſe at home: for the ſatiſfying of all which parties, I haue here taken in hand, by the infallible word of the eternall God, to diſcuſſe and examine that argument now ſo much in queſtion, which howſoeuer at

the firſt it will ſeeme ſtrange, and as it were a paradox in diuinitie, yet being read with indifferent iudgement, I hope it ſhall in ſome part reſolue and remoue the ſcruples and doubts in the hearts of the weake, if not ſtop the mouthes of the wilfull and obſtinate. And thus leaſt perhappes, perceauing too large a preface to ſo compendious a treatiſe, as the Cynick Philoſopher ſawe a wide and ſtately paire of gates to a poore and beggerlie Citie, thou ſhouldſt begin to crie with him, viri Myndij claudite portas, I briefely end, referring thee to that which followeth, which as I haue penned for thy benefit, to encourage & cheere vp thoſe which muſt bee ready alwaies to endanger themſelues for thee and thine, ſo I wiſh thee to reade it with as friendly and welwilling affection. Jdib. Oct. Anno. 1592.
            
            
               
                  Thine in the Lord Simon Harward.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The Solace for the Souldier and Saylour:
            
            
               AS nothing is more comfortable to any man in whatſoeuer affayres hee beſtowe his trauaile, then to haue the teſtimonie of a good conſcience in the things that he taketh in hand: for this will be vnto him, as witneſſeth Salomon,
               
                  Prou. 15.15. Prou. 28.1. as good as a continuall feaſt, and make him bold and confident in all his exploits: ſo there cannot be a greater griefe and torment to the minde, then in conſcience to condemne that which by our attempts & deedes we make profeſsion to allow: For if our heart condemne vs,
                  Rom. 14.22. 1. Ioh. 3.20. God is aboue the heart. Therefore for the ſolace and comfort of thoſe valiant Souldiers, which doe often incurre ſo many dangers on the bluſtering ſeas, whoſe attempts I am bound euer to fauour and honour, as being eftſoones an eye-witneſſe of their noble and couragious proweſſe, I haue thought good here to ſet downe out of the heauenly word of God, the fountaine of all true ſolace, in this briefe diſcourſe and Apologie, the cauſes wherefore, the limits how farre, and the manner in

what ſort their endeuours are to be allowed, and alſo what affections they ought to carie, and what comfort and confidence they may haue in the lawfull practiſe of Militarie profeſsion. Firſt therefore generally of the lawfulnes of warre and force of armes agaynſt the profeſſed enemies of Gods truth, and then more particularly of the voyages now commonly vſed on the ſeas, agaynſt that grand vaſſall of the Pope the King of Spayne, together with the anſwere to thoſe obiections, which either the fanaticall Anabaptiſts, or the ſeditious Papiſts, Engliſh men by name, but Spanyards in heart, doe vſually make againſt thoſe valiant and noble enterpriſes, ſo behouefull and ſo beneficiall for the ſauegard and maintenance of this our Church and Chriſtian common wealth.Lawfulneſſe of Militarie profeſsion. The lawfulneſſe of Militarie profeſsion is both in the old and new teſtament ſundrie waies confirmed vnto vs. Abraham the father of the faithfull,
                  Ioh. 8.39. a man trulie mortified, & whoſe workes our Sauiour Chriſt doth propound as an example to be imitated of all the children of God, to reſkew his kinſman Lot, gaue the onſet vpon his enemies with three hundred & eighteene valiant youths, and recouered Lot with all his ſubſtance. And when he had gotten many rich priſes and ſpoyles of his aduerſaries,
                  Gen. 14.18. 
               Melchizedeck the moſt liuely type and figure of Chriſt, not onely allowed his exployt, giuing to him and his men bread and wine to comfort him, but alſo he receiued tythes of the ſayd ſpoyles, as the Prieſt of the moſt high God, which is both a comfort to all thoſe Miniſters that ſerue in time of warre, that the firſt tythes that euer were ſpoken of in the Scripture,

were payd of prizes taken in warre: and alſo it is to all other ſouldiers a very manifeſt approbation of their profeſsion, for that God accepteth the tenths of the ſpoyles obtained by them.
                  Deut. 23.18. For that moſt iuſt God which vtterly abhorreth thoſe that offer the price of an harlot,
                  Matth. 27.6. & doth expreſſely forbid the price of blood to bee caſt into Corban, that Lord would in no wiſe haue receiued the tenths of ſouldiers ſpoyles, vnles he had alſo allowed their profeſsion to be ſacred and holy. The warres which are lawfully taken in hand againſt the open enemies of the Church of God, are indeed, as they are called, not the warres of men, but the warres of the Lord himſelfe. When the Iſraelites fought againſt the mightie hoaſt of Siſara, there was a citie Meroz which would not take part with the people of God: but Deborah inſpired with the ſpirit of God, doth curſe them for that (as the Propheteſſe ſayd) they did not take the Lords part.
                  Iudg. 5.23. 
               Iehoſaphat was encouraged not to feare the multitude of his aduerſaries, for that the warres were not his, but the warres of God himſelfe: for ſo ſayd the Prophet, Feare not,2 Chro. 20.15. it is not your warres but the warres of God. What heart and conſcience Dauid caried in his warres, doth euidently appeare by that his humble thankſgiuing,
                  Pſal. 144.1. Bleſſed be the Lord my ſtrength which teacheth my hands to warre, and my fingers to fight. At the reedifying of Hieruſalem, when Sanballat and the Arabians with others, had made a curſed league agaynſt it,
                  Nehem. 4.14. & verſ. 20. 
               Nehemiah exhorted the Iewes to fight for themſelues, and for their brethren, for their wiues, and for their children, and then ſayd he, our God will fight for vs. The Lord

by his own mouth doth very apparantly allow warre, when he maketh lawes and ſtatutes for the right vſe thereof.
                  Deut. 20.2. As that when the people goe to warre, they ſhould take the Prieſt with them to vſe exhortations for the ſtrengthening of their faith, that they may be fully perſwaded that the Lord goeth with them to fight for them againſt their enemies.
                  Deut. 20.10. And further, he commandeth that before they ſet vpon their enemies with ſword and fire, they ſhould firſt offer peace: For although warre be a lawfull remedie againſt the profeſſed enemies of the Church of God, yet is it the laſt remedie,Warre the laſt remedie. and then onely to be vſed when no other meanes can preuaile. It may well be compared to the fawing off and fearing of the feſtered and rotten lims of a mans bodie, which remedies are then onely to be put in vre, when the caſe is ſo vtterly deſperate that there is no hope of doing good by any other meanes. And for this cauſe ſayth the Lord, let them firſt offer peace, and yet therewithall allowing agaynſt the rebellious and obſtinate, to deſtroy them with the edge of the ſword. When the ſouldiers came to Iohn the Baptiſt, demaunding what they ſhould doe, he ſhewed them how they ſhould liue iuſtly and louingly among themſelues, but in no caſe did he bid them to forſake their profeſsion: nay rather in flat words he allowed their vocation,
                  Luc. 3.14. when he bad them bee content with their wages. Shall the forerunner of Chriſt allow to the ſouldier his ordinarie pay, as the Apoſtle Paul ſeemeth alſo to graunt, when he maketh the demannd, Who goeth to warfare at any time at his owne coſt?1. Cor. 9.7. And doe they not alſo therewithall permit him in the

bodie of the Common wealth, to put in vre that function and office whereby he is lawfully maintained? A Chriſtiā Common wealth doth very wel reſemble the bodie of man: The head in gouernment next vnder Chriſt is the Prince and ſoueraigne Magiſtrate, the armes are the Knighthood and Chieualrie, the ſoule is the profeſsing and true embracing of the Goſpell of Chriſt, the legges are the Commons and huſbandrie, whereby the whole bodie is ſuſtained and vpholden: and euery of theſe haue their ſeuerall lawfull duties, according as the neceſsitie of the bodie ſhall require. The Centurion in Capernaum,
               
                  Luc. 7.9. Act. 10.2. and 48. and Cornelius in Caeſarea were ſouldiers and Captaines of ſeuerall bands, yet the one of them is commended to haue ſuch faith as was not to be found in Iſrael: the other is renowmed for his prayer and almes & zeale to the truth of God, both of them are receiued into the boſome of the Church of Chriſt, neither of them is any way exhorted to renounce their former vocation, neither did the outward warfare hinder, but that inwardly they both continued the faithfull ſouldiers of Ieſus Chriſt againſt ſinne and wickedneſſe.
            Yea ſay ſome,Obiection againſt pietie in Souldiers. if that holines were now in our men of warre, they were the better to be liked & allowed: but where are ſuch deuout men now to be found? what are they now but ſwearers and ruffians? what are they but theeues and robbers? ſo vngodly and ſo greedie of pray, that they ſpare neither friend nor foe, all is fiſh that commeth to the net, and whatſoeuer is gotten by them is not employed as it was by the Centurion and Cornelius, in building a Synagogue for the

maintenance of Gods ſeruice, & in relieuing the poore diſtreſſed members of the myſticall body of Chriſt, but in vpholding and frequenting moſt filthy brothell houſes and benches for Bacchus in euery corner.
            
               Reſponſ.I muſt needes confeſſe, that as in all other callings iniquitie doth more now abound then euer it did, becauſe the diuel doth now rage moſt,
                  Reuel. 12.12. knowing that he hath but a ſhort time to raygne: ſo alſo of Souldiers many horrible abuſes are committed. And yet I doubt not, but that the Lord hath ſtill amongſt them many Cornelies and Centurians his trew and faythfull ſeruants.Abuſes of war ought not to abrogate the lawful vſe thereof. But howſoeuer among the moſt part iniquitie doth now preuayle, yet the abuſes of war ought in no wiſe to abrogate the holy and lawfull vſe thereof. What bleſsing can poſsibly be more abuſed then is now the peace of the Church and common wealth? Peace hath increaſed plēty, plēty hath wrought pride, pride hath hatcht diſdayne, and diſdaine hath brought forth ſuch ſtrifes and debates, ſuch ſuites of law, ſuch quarrellings and contentions as neuer were heard of in any age before vs. Shall we therefore conclude that peace is not to bee allowed, or that peace is not the good bleſsing of God? God forbid: Let vs ſeeke rather to lament and amend our owne moſt wicked abuſe of this bountifull gift of God, and pray continually for grace, that we may hereafter vſe it more rightly to Gods glory and our comfort. So is it in Military diſcipline, what power and ſtrength we haue therein, is the holy handy worke of God, though of many it be ſhamefully abuſed, yet no abuſe ought to make vs to condemne the good and lawfull ordinance of God.

Saint Paul when hee had ſhewed the Romanes that higher powers are ordayned of God,
                  Rom. 13.2. 
               
                  Verſe. 4. he declareth that one end of their ordinance is to take vengeance on thē that doe ill, and not to beare the ſworde in vaine. The Anabaptiſts which vtterly deny al magiſtracy, affirme that the apoſtle ſpeaking higher powers doth ſignifie ſuch heathē tyrants as were thē the Romane Emperours; for them to beare the ſword to torment and puniſh others they confeſſe is a thing well ſitting and beſeeming for them: But Chriſtians muſt be all one, for them to haue or be Magiſtrates (they ſay) it is in no wiſe tollerable. If theſe phantaſticall ſpirites would conſider more deeply the doctrine of the Apoſtle, they ſhould ſee that hee alloweth Magiſtracie eſpecially amongſt Chriſtians; for he requireth ſuch rulers as vnder whome we may leade a godly and peaceable life.1. Tim. 2.2 Vnder heathen tyrants the Chriſtians may indeed liue godlily: but howe is it poſsible that they ſhould liue peaceably? The Apoſtle doth will vs to pray for ſuch Magiſtrates as vnder whome we may leade a quiet & a peaceable life, in all godlines and honeſtie: When the Apoſtle Peter ſayd to our Sauiour Chriſt, beholde here are two ſwordes, our Lord Ieſus anſwered that they were enough, allowing the hauing of them,
                  Matth. 26. but he reprooued ſuch ſtriking with them, as whereby Authority might ſeeme to be impugned. That monſtrous Pope Iulius the ſecond, who made as it were a paſtime of the blood of man, by whoſe cruell practiſes there periſhed with the dint of ſworde more then two hundred thouſand perſons,An. Dom. 1512
                he made a ieſt and mockerie at the Apoſtles carying of ſwordes: for matching

once out of Rome with his Armie, and his ſword by his ſide like a valiant Champion, in a furious rage he caſt Saint Peters key into the riuer of Tyber, crying out, as a Spaniard doth report the hiſtorie: Pues que la llaue de pedro ya no vale, valga la eſpada de pablo. Seeing that Saint Peters key will doe no good, let the ſword of Paul take place. But the holy Father, Saint Auguſtine, doth reuerently and in the feare of God make better vſe of the Apoſtles hauing a ſword, to wit, that it is lawfull for Chriſtians to beare the ſword; but that then onely we are to vſe it when we are eyther commanded or permitted by the ſuperior power ſo to doe: for theſe two limits doth hee make of the right and wrongful vſe of the ſword: He vnlawfully taketh the ſword,Auguſt. lib. 22. contr Fauſtum Manichaeum. cap. 70.
                
               Qui nulla ſuperiore & legitima poteſtate vel iubente vel concedente in ſanguinem alicuius armatur, which no ſuperiour and lawfull power eyther commanding or permitting is armed againſt another mans blood. Many there are in our time which goe not ſo farre as the Aanabaptiſts to denie and vtterly take away the ſword and Magiſtracie from Chriſtians: they will allow them to be vſed againſt malefactors at home, or agaynſt the heathen,Warre againſt the Spaniard how to be allowed. Turkes and Infidels abroad, but in no caſe againſt the Spaniard, profeſsing as they ſay, the ſame GOD with vs, holding the ſame articles of Chriſtian fayth, members of the ſame Church, partakers of the ſame baptiſme, and liuing in the ſame hope of life euerlaſting. We ſee in the holy Scripture that when Iſrael was once ſeparated from Iuda, and reuolted to Idolatry, Iuda was inioyned no otherwiſe to accompt of them and no otherwiſe to deale with them,

then with the profeſſed enemies of Gods truth.2. Chron. 19.2. 
               Iehoſaphat was reprooued of the Prophet, for that he gaue any ayde to Achas king of Iſrael againſt Ramoth Gilead: and hee was likewiſe condemned afterward for that he ioyned friendſhip with Ochoſias king of Iſrael to make ſhips to goe vnto Tharſis.
               
                  2. Chron. 20. v. vlt. 
               Amaziah hired ſuccour of Iſrael againſt the Idumeans,
               2. Chron. 25.6. but hee was willed rather to loſe the mony then to haue any thing to doe with them.2. Chron. 22.5. 
               Ochoſius was condemned for helping Ioram the ſonne of Achab againſt Hazael king of Syria. What was the cauſe that the people of Iſrael might not ſo much as bee holpen againſt the heathen? men, and therefore indeed accompted worſe then heathen? Were they not the poſteritie of Abraham after the fleſh? Did not they retaine, as well as Iuda, the name of the Church of God? Had not they the ſame law amongſt them as Iuda had, and receiued the ſame ſeale of Circumciſion with them?2. Chron. 21.13 No doubt they pretended all theſe things: but in the meane time they committed Idolatrie, and therefore they were vtterly cut off from the Church of God. Boaſt they might of vaine titles, but they were in no wiſe to bee counted the people of God: nay rather ſo long as they continued Idolaters, they were to be reputed & taken as open and manifeſt traitors againſt the high Maieſtie of the eternall God. The Lord condemneth for Idolatrie not onely the worſhipping of any heathen God, or the reſemblance therof, but alſo all ſuch viſible formes and pictures as are made, either in them or by them to worſhip the true God. When the people of Iſrael did worſhip the golden Calfe,
                  Exod. 32. they were not ſo ſottiſh &

ſenceleſſe as to thinke that the Calfe which they had made was truly God. That which they thought was this,
                  Exod. 32.4. that the honor which was done to the Calfe was done to GOD. The feaſt which they kept was called a feaſt to Iehoua, and they cryed out, theſe are thy Gods O Iſrael which brought thee out of the land of Egypt.
                  Pſal. 106.16. So Dauid ſayth, that they turned the glory of God into the ſimilitude of a Calfe that eateth hay. This was the Idolatrie of Ieroboam and the Children of Iſrael, to make viſible repreſentments to worſhip in remembrance of the true God. And this is the beſt that the popiſh rabble can make of their Idols and pictures, that they worſhip not them, but God in them Al is one and commeth to one and the ſelfe ſame poynt, and eyther of them is condemned for Idolatry, that is, high treaſon againſt the Maieſtie of God, to ſeeke to thruſt him out of his throne, and to place in his ſtead the works of their own hands. Beſides their other moſt horrible Idolatry in the Maſſe, where they erect and worſhip their wheaten God Maizim, aſcribing that to the creature which is due to the creator onely, whoſe name be bleſſed for euer and euer. Howſoeuer the Spaniards beare the name of Chriſtians, they are nothing leſſe then what they pretend, they may be in the Church, but they are not of the Church, and they are ſo much worſe then the heathen Infidels, as a rebell and traytor within the walles is more pernicious then a forraine or outward enemie: whatſoeuer puniſhment then may be inflicted on our profeſſed foes, the ſame or much greater may iuſtly be layd on them: although indeede there is no more profeſſed foe to the

kingdome of our Sauiour Chriſt, then they which by all meanes vpholde that man of ſinne,2. Theſ. 2.4. that ſonne of perdition, which doth fit in the Temple of GOD as God, boaſting himſelfe that hee is God:
                  Apoc. 17 9. that Babylonian ſtrumpet,
                  Apoc. 14.8. which ſitting on the City that hath ſeuen hilles doe giue all nations to drinke of the cup of the wrath of her fornication, which therefore beareth the name of Antichriſt, as the moſt bitter and profeſſed enemy of the kingdome of Chriſt, chalenging to himſelfe all thoſe offices which of right and duety do onely appertaine to our Sauiour Chriſt: for howe is Chriſt our only King, if the Romiſh Biſhops haue power to giue the holy Ghoſt, and to forgiue ſinnes,
                  Iohn 15.21. and ſo conſequently to create fayth and repentance, and to renew the inward man, without which graces there is no remiſſion of ſinnes?
                  Heb. 10 14. How is Chriſt our onely Prieſt, if they haue power to offer vp the body and blood of Chriſt as a ſacrifice for our ſinnes? No mortall man, no worme of the earth, no ſinfull creature, no nor yet any Angel in heauen was fit to offer vp the ſacrifice of the body of Chriſt, but one higher then the heauen of heauens, euen Ieſus Chriſt himſelfe, he was the Prieſt, he was the ſacrifice,Heb. 7. v. vlt. he offered himſelf once for all. How is Chriſt our only mediator, if they may erect ſo many new interceſſours and aduocates,1. Tim. 2.5. ioyning them in commiſsion with Chriſt,
                  Heb. 1.1. for whome Chriſt ſhed his blood?
                  Rom. 1.16. How is Chriſt our onely prophet, if they may eſtabliſh decrees and traditions to ſupplie the want of the Goſpel of Chriſt, as though they had an office appointed to make vp that perfect & abſolute, which our heauenly Prophet Ieſus Chriſt

ſhould leaue raw and vnperfect? How may they bee ſaid to holde the ſame faith with vs, which are as far from vs in euery chiefe article, as light is from darkneſſe, or Chriſt from Belial. We hold & acknowledge that our Lord Ieſus to ſatisfie the iuſtice of God, took truelie fleſh of the Virgin Marie, like vnto vs in all things,
                  Heb. 2.16. ſinne onely excepted, as the Apoſtle witneſſeth to the Hebrewes: Chriſt tooke not the nature of Angels, but he tooke the ſeede of Abraham: As if hee ſhould haue ſaid, it had bin no iuſtice that God ſhould haue puniſhed the ſinnes of man in an heauenlie or angelicall nature; but as truely as mans fleſh did ſinne, ſo truelie it was requiſite that the fleſh of man ſhould paie the puniſhment. And therefore Chriſt to anſwere that iuſtice of GOD,
                  Heb. 4.15. tooke not an angelicall, but a true naturall bodie, like vnto vs in all things, ſinne onlie excepted. And we beleeue further, that our Sauiour Chriſt,1. Cor. 15.20. Col. 1.18. as the firſt fruits of them that ſlept, and the pledge of our inheritance, roſe againe in the ſame humane nature and aſcended into heauen there to take poſſeſsion for vs, and thereby to aſſure vs, that as hee being our head is gone before, ſo we the bodie ſhall in due time follow after. What affinitie hath this our true faith in Ieſus Chriſt, with that mōſtrous doctrine of the Antichriſtian Catholikes, which attribute vnto Chriſt a phantaſticall bodie, and manie bodies, and an infinite bodie, and therefore indeede no true naturall bodie; which dooth expreſlie contradict two of the chiefeſt articles of our Chriſtian fayth, and as much as in them lyeth, vndermine and caſt downe the principall bulwark of mans ſaluation.

Moreouer we are aſſured by the holy word of GOD, that the Lord doth giue vnto vs in and through his Sonne Chriſt, full remiſsion and pardon of all our offences, both from the guilt of ſinne, and alſo from the puniſhment thereof: for the Lord in reſpect of his infinite iuſtice will not forgiue a treſpaſſe, and afterward exact the danger of it, and in reſpect of his vnſpeakeable mercy he muſt needes giue a ſound and a perfect benefite. Thus doth the worde of God teach vs, that there is no accuſation at all or any laying of any thing to the charge of Gods elect,
                  Rom. 8.33. that there is no condemnation to them that are in Chriſt Ieſus,
                  Rom. 8.1. Pſal. 32.2. that the Lord will no way impute their ſinnes vnto them, that the Lord will remember their ſinnes no more,
                  Pſal. 103.12. but caſt them from him as farre as the Eaſt is from the Weaſt,
                  Mich. 7.19. or, as the prophet ſpeaketh, binde them in a bundle & caſt thē into the bottom of the Sea. They teach that the guilt of ſin is forgiuē by Chriſt, but that the puniſhmēt therof muſt eyther be paid by ſtraight penance & afflicting our bodies here, or els after this life by the paines of Purgatorie, and therefore flatly againſt the word; that there is an accuſation, there is a condēnation, there is an imputation, & there is a remembrance of ſinne after the remiſsion thereof, then which doctrine nothing can bee more derogatorie & blaſphemous againſt the price of the blood of Chriſt, which as Saint Iohn ſaith, doth purge and clenſe vs from all our ſinnes. Furthermore,1. Iohn. 1.7. we profeſſe and are perſwaded, that as in all the whole life of a Chriſtian there ſhould be truth and fidelitie, ſo eſpecially in truces and leagues of kingdomes and common wealths: as the

ſcripture teacheth vs, that loyaltie and leagues are to be kept euen with heathen men. There was a league made betwixt the Iſraelites and the heatheniſh Gibeonits,
                  Ioſua. 9.15. aboue foure hundred and foure ſcore yeare after the league was broken, the Lord was ſo offended at it,2. Sam. 21.4. that he ſent three yeares famine, and ſeuen ſonnes of Saule were hanged vp as a token of Gods iudgement againſt truce breaking euen with heathen men.2. Reg. 25.7. Iere. 39.1. 
               Zedechias promiſed loyaltie to the heathen king the king of the Caldees, he brake his league, the wrath of God was ſo kindled againſt him, that being vanquiſhed he was compelled to flye, in the flight he was taken, his owne ſonnes were ſlaine before his face, his eyes were after thruſt out, & he was bound in chaines and led priſoner into Babylon. In truce-breaking the Lord puniſheth euen the children and ofſpring, to teſtifie his wrath and ſeuere iudgement; as the French men haue in verſe, God graunt they may haue it euer in minde.
            
               
                  Bien que le dieu du oiel ne piluit pas ſur l' heure
               
               
                  Le perfide 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſto
                        •••
                      de 
                        •
                     a
                        ••••
                      & periure,
               
               
                  Il n' eſcappe pourtant ſonire qui i'en flamme
               
               
                  Et destruit a la fin luy ſee enfans & femme.
               
               Though for a time the Lord of heauen
               doe ſpare the periur'd wight,
               Yet at the laſt on him and his
               Gods burning ire ſhall light▪
               
            
            
               K of Spayne.But this Foedifragus the Hannibal of Spayne, as he is taught and doth profeſſe, Fidem non eſſe ſeruandam cum haereticis, that whomſoeuer the Church of Rome doth condemne for heretikes, there ought no

ſaith to bee kept with them: ſo he hath ſhewed it in ſufficient proofe, both in practiſing ſecret conſpiracies againſt out whole realme, as was found out by the dealings betwixt Mendozza and Throgmorton, and alſo in his ſending of troupes of armed men to inuade Ireland, to bereaue her Maieſtie of a part of her imperiall Crowne and dignitie. And finally in caſting about to ſurpriſe and intrap the whole Fleete of the Engliſh Marchants, her Maieſties dutifull ſubiects, when they meant him no harme: but vnder the hope of the performance of his league, did traffique without feare: For I ſpeake not now of any thing that he hath done fithence he hath ſhewed himſelfe our profeſſed enemie. But (thinke they) the Biſhop of Rome may diſpence with all diſloyaltie, hee may diſpoſe Kingdomes at his pleaſure, he hath taught vs that no faith is to be kept with heretikes, this is our anchour, this is our hold.
                  Luc. 4.6. The Euangeliſt S. Luke ſetteth downe the words of the diuell to our Sauiour Chriſt, when he ſhewed him all the kingdomes of the earth and the glorie of them: All theſe (ſayd he) are mine, and I can giue them to whomſoeuer pleaſeth me, He lyed moſt blaſphemouſly, as he could not but lye, being the father of lyes and a lyer from the beginning:
                  Ioh. 8.48. ſaith the eternall wiſedome of God, By me Kings raigne,
                  Prou. 8.15. and Princes decree Iuſtice.
                  Matth. 8.28. The diuell hath not ſo much as power of ſwine, without the permiſsion of Ieſus Chriſt: And as the diuell did moſt vntruly chalenge to himſelfe the power and authoritie due to God only, to giue and diſpoſe all the kingdomes of the earth: ſo his eldeſt ſonne Antichriſt doth inherite the ſame

vntruth, he may beſtow al kingdomes as ſeemeth beſt to him, hee may giue England to the Rebels in the North, Ireland to Stukely and others, France to the Leaguers, the Indies to the Spaniards, to be made two fould worſe the children of hell then they were before, and all the kingdomes of the earth how and to whomſoeuer he pleaſeth.K. of Spayne. So alſo his grandchild the King of Spayne doth imitate very well the ſteppes of his forefathers, he may deale how he will in all kingdomes, againſt league, againſt right, and againſt truth, how and in what ſort ſoeuer pleaſeth him.
            Thus ye ſee then how the Popes children & ſworn ſouldiers in Spayne, firſt partly by their Idolatrie, and partly by their damnable hereſies, doe vtterly deface the true worſhip of God: ſecondly, they wickedly vſurpe the offices and dignities of our Meſsias, our anoynted King, Prieſt and Prophet: thirdly, they fight againſt the truth of the humane nature of Chriſt, and the veritie of his aſcenſion; the moſt noble fortreſſes of our ſaluation: fourthly, they ſeeke to obſcure and ouerwhelme the fruites, effects, and merites of the paſſion of our Sauiour Chriſt. And laſt of al, they are ſuch as in no wiſe may be truſted, being not onely workers and permitters, but euen profeſſed patrones of all trecherie, falſhood and diſloyaltie. And therefore greater ſeueritie is to be ſhewed vpon the confederates of this ſo dangerous a conſpiracie within the walles of the Church of God, then is to be vſed to any forraine foes of the heathen whatſoeuer. To beate downe this diueliſh pride and falſhood of the Antichriſtian band, all true Chriſtians which are armed with the authoritie

of the Magiſtrate,
                  Reuel. 19.15. ought to goe on couragiouſly and cheerefully to tread the Winepreſſe of the Lords wrath, as S. Iohn ſpeaketh,
                  Reu. 18.6. & 9 to reward the whore as ſhe hath rewarded others, and to let the ſmoake of her burning aſcend for euermore. But here, me thinkes, I heare ſome ſay vnto me, That Antichriſt and his confederates are to be beaten downe and deſtroyed,Of warre to be proclaimed. we make no doubt nor queſtion: but this ſhould be done in warre openly proclaimed, and not in ſuch priuie intrapping and laying in waite, and rather ſhould their whole realme be ſet on, then the Merchants ſurpriſed, which labour trulie and painfully for the reliefe of themſelues and their families. To the anſwere of which obiection we are firſt to be aduertiſed, that whatſoeuer the enemies of the grace of God doe poſſeſſe, howſoeuer they haue toyled for it and obtained it with the ſweat of their browes, yet is their poſſeſſion no better thē the poſſeſsion of brute beaſts, which as we ſee by the oxe, horſe, and mule, doe trauaile in their ſeueral kinds for that wherewith they are ſuſtained. There is no lawfull poſſeſsion indeed but where the faith of Chriſt is embraced and receiued.
                  1. Cor. 3. verſ. vlt. S. Paul ſayth, That all is ours as we are Chriſts, and Chriſt Gods. The world was made for the faithful. Howſoeuer the enemies of Chriſtian faith doe painfully trauaile in their ſeuerall trades of life, yet are their goods not ſo their owne, but that if they fall into the hands of the armie of the Lord vnder the authoritie of a lawfull Magiſtrate, it may bee ſayd of them as it was ſayd by the Pſalmiſt,
                  Pſal. 105. verſ. 44. The Lord hath brought foorth his choſen with gladneſſe, and giuen them the lands

of the heathen, and they tooke the labours of the people into their poſſeſsion. The people of Canaan might labour painfully, but the gaine and profite of their labours was the ſtrength and maintenance of their princes and rulers, as alſo now the wealth of the Spaniſh Merchant is the might and power of the King: for as the Merchant groweth more and more in wealth, ſo doth he build and fortifie his ſhip ſtronger and ſtronger, and at the laſt the King commandeth both his ſhip and him. And therfore as the people of Iſrael did then vnder Ioſua, ſo may we doe vnder our Chriſtian Magiſtrate now, euen ſo farre as God ſhall leade forth his choſen with gladneſſe, weaken the powers of the gouernours,
                  Pſal. 105.44. by taking the labours of the people into our poſſeſsion. Moreouer, there are manie things which are in no wiſe lawfull in priuate men, that are allowed and tolerated in thoſe which are armed with the authoritie of the publike Magiſtrate, againſt the profeſſed enemies of the Church of God: It is ſayd to the one,
                  Rom. 12.19. Matth. 5.39. Auenge not your ſelues: if they ſtrike thee on the one cheeke, turne to them the other alſo: It is ſayd of the other, that they are the miniſters of GOD euen for this purpoſe,
                  Rom. 13.4. to take vengeance of euil doers, and not to beare the ſword in vayne. It is commaunded the one to forget iniuries,Matth. 18. verſ. vlt. and as fully to forgiue as they hope to be forgiuen: It is enioyned the other by expreſſe words to remember the iniuries of Amalec.
               
                  Deut. 25.17. Remember (ſayth God) what Amalec did vnto thee by the way when ye were come out of Aegypt. And remember we may how the bloodie Spanyard hath fought at ſundrie times by moſt dangerous conſpiracies, to rent our nation aſunder. Remember Amalec:
               
Remember how many godlie Engliſh Merchants their Inquiſitors haue moſt cruelly tormented and ſpoyled. Remember how hardly they haue delt in euill intreating ſuch Ambaſſadours as haue been ſent from our moſt gracious Soueraigne. Remember how iniuriouſly they ſent to inuade her Maieſties Realme of Ireland. Remember how they attempted with their inuincible Nauie at once to ſwallow vs vp. Remember Amalec.
               
                  Deut. 23.20. Whereas the lawe in Deuteronomie forbiddeth the Iewes to commit any vſurie amongſt themſelues, and yet alloweth it them to bee vſed towards ſtrangers, S. Hierom doth by ſtrangers vnderſtand the publike and profeſſed enemies of the people of God. His reaſon is, for that their goods are not their owne: they vſurpe ſo long as they are deſtitute of the truth of God. The like may be ſayd of guilefull policie: It is not to be allowed in Chriſtians amongſt them ſelues, who are to vſe that ſimplicitie of Doues,
                  Matth. 10.16. which wanteth all manner of guile and harme: And be as S. Peter ſayth, Like new borne babes:1. Pet. 2.2. or rather as the Greeke word ſignifieth, like now borne babes voyd of all fraud and deceit. Yet dare I not condemne that policie of Ioſua, who beſieging Ai,
               
                  Ioſua. 8.4. placed thirtie thouſand ſtrong men behind at the Weſt ſide in a priuie ambuſh, making a ſhewe himſelfe as though hee would flye before the towneſmen of Ai, onely to intice them out, that his men who were priuilie placed behind might ſodainly oppreſſe and make hauocke of them. Neither dare I diſallow the policie of Iehu,
               2. Reg. 10. which by making a pretence that he would doe ſacrifice to Baal, did thereby aſſemble the Prieſts of Baal,
               
that he might the better at once diſpatch them: For as Hierom witneſſeth,Hieron. vt citatur decret. cauſa 22. quaeſt. 2. cap. vtilem. he had no ſo good a way with ſo little blood to take ſpeedie vengeance of Gods enemies. The Apoſtle biddeth no man to oppreſſe or defraud his brother: for the Lord is an auenger of all ſuch things.
                  Luc. 3.14. And S. Iohn the Baptiſt willeth thoſe deuout ſouldiers which came to be inſtructed of him, not to offer violence one to another: yet may we not condemne Dauid, who made a ſpoyle of the Amalechits,1. Sam. 30.26. and ſent part of the priſes which he had gotten, to the Elders of Iuda, Ramoth and Bethel, with this notable ſalutation and greeting, Ecce vobis ſpolia de inimicis Domini: Behold ye the ſpoyles of the Lords enemies.
                  Pſal. 24.1. The earth (ſayth Dauid) is the Lords, and all in the ſame contained. God is the chiefe Lord of all: we haue nothing lawfully but what we hold of him in capite. The profeſſed enemies of the Lords Church doe hold no tenure of GOD in capite, being cut off from the head Ieſus Chriſt: whatſoeuer then they enioy they poſſeſſe it as theeues and robbers: and therefore the bereauing them of it is not theft, but as Dauid doth terme it, a ſpoyle of the Lords enemie. Or if it be theft, as it pleaſeth our ſecret Papiſts to terme it, yet is it ſuch a robberie as by the mouth of the Spanyards themſelues is allowed: for they haue a verſe and common prouerbe in Spayne,
               
                  
                     Quien hurta al ladron
                  
                  
                     Cien dias gana de perdon.
                  
                  He which robs a theefe alwaies
                  Hath pardon for a hundred daies.
               
            
            
               Libr. 2. de bello vandalico.
               Procopius witneſſeth, that in Numidia in the citie of

               Tingit, in two Pillars of Marble, theſe wordes are grauen in the Phoenician tongue: Nos Mauruſij ſumus qui fugimus a facie Ioſue filij Nun praedonis, we are Moores which fled once from the face of the thiefe Ioſua the ſonne of Nun. Thus was Ioſua the true ſeruant of GOD accompted and termed a theefe when hee did lawfully conquer and take ſpoyle of the Lords enemies. But here ſome may ſay:Goods of Papiſts that liue with vs. what ſhall we eſteeme of the goods of thoſe Papiſts that liue amongſt vs? Haue they no lawfull poſſeſsion of that they haue? Is it lawfull for vs to ſpoyle and bereaue them of their poſſeſsions?Aug. lib. 22. contr. Fauſtum Manichaeum. cap. 70.
                Surely there is nothing wanting but that which Auguſtine doth name as the ground of all warres, legittma ſuperior authoritas aut iubens aut concedens, A lawful ſuperior authority either commanding or permitting. The Magiſtrate onely muſt iudge who offend of weakeneſſe, and who offend of wilfull obſtinacie, and without the Magiſtrate nothing may be done: no not ſo much as amongſt the heathen men be the ſubiects neuer ſo faithful Chriſtians, and be their Princes and gouernors neuer ſuch heathens or Infidels,
                  Rom. 13.2. it is in no caſe lawful for the ſubiect to rebell againſt his Soueraigne Prince. All ſuperior powers are ordained of God.
                  Ier. 27. v. 6, 7.8. 
               Nabuchadnezzar ſo long as hee bare rule is called the ſeruant of God: I haue giuen all theſe lands, ſaith God, to Nabuchadnezzar my ſeruant, and all nations ſhall ſerue him and his ſonnes vntil the time of his land bee come alſo. And that people that will not ſerue him I will viſit with the ſword & with famine and with peſtilence: I could neuer read that God did long proſper any rebelling againſt their Soueraigne,

but he hath often bleſſed ſtrangers when they haue ſought to deliuer their neighbours from tyranny or Idolatry.
                  Gen. 14.4. When fiue Princes who had ſworn loyaltie to Chedorlaomer as their Soueraigne and were twelue yeare ſubiect to him, did afterward rebell againſt him, they and all their power were quickly diſcomfited. But when Abraham a ſtranger came but with very ſmall might, the Lord ſent vnto him a moſt noble conqueſt.
                  Gen. 14.17. Both vnder, Chriſtian Magiſtrates, and vnder heathen, no ſubiect may riſe vp in armour without or againſt the authoritie of the Soueraigne Monarch. As for a gouernour that is elected conditionally, and onely with power to maintaine the auncient liberties and priuiledges of the Ariſtocratie of the countrie, as is the preheminence which Philip may perhaps lawfully chalenge in the low countries: if he then ſeeke againſt couenant to turne the Ariſtocratie into an abſolute Monarchie: this is vndoubtedly ſuch a tyranny, as may lawfully bee withſtoode of them which neither by conqueſt nor lawful right were deliuered into his hands; for as to ſeeke to bring in an Ariſtocraty where is an abſolute Monarchy eſtabliſhed, were manifeſt rebellion, ſo alſo to bring in a Monarchie where is an Ariſtocratie eſtabliſhed, is manifeſt tyrannie. But Ioſua, whoſe warres the inhabitants of Tingit accompted as theeueries and robberies was both an abſolute gouernour of Gods people, and a ſtranger no way in ſubiection to the Princes of Canaan: & therfore what as a priuat mā he might not do, that might he lawfully do as a publike Magiſtrate. As to giue another inſtance, it is not lawfull for priuate

men to curſe, that is,1. Pet. 3.9. Math. 5.44. to pray for the deſtruction & ſubuerſion of their enemies: bleſſe, ſayth the ſcripture, & curſe not. Yet how often doth Dauid, and no doubt lawfully, pray for the ouerthrow of the publike enemies of the common wealth of Iſrael?
                  Pſal. 83.14. Make them (ſayth he) O Lord as a wheele, and as the ſtubble before the winde,
                  Pſal. 52.11. let fire conſume them, caſt them out in the multitude of their vngodlines, for they haue rebelled againſt thee: Pay them O Lord according to their deſerts, and according to the wickedneſſe of their owne inuentions,
                  Pſal. 28.3. breake the arme of the wicked, let them be as chaffe before the winde,
                  Pſal. 10.4. and the Angel of the Lord ſcattering them:
                  Pſal. 35.5. bee not mercifull to them that offend of malicious wickednes,
                  Pſal. 59.6. with many ſuch other prayers ſome of Dauid as the Lords annointed; ſome of the people as vnder and indefence of their Magiſtrate, but all in the feare of God. And it is out of all controuerſie, that whom we may lawfully take vp weapon againſt, for their ouerthrowe, we may lawfully pray vnto God, and we may as lawfully ſeek their ſubuerſion by al ſuch meanes as may be with the leaſt blood-ſhed and ſpoyle of the people of God. Antonius Pius ſhewed a good minde when he often vſed the ſaying of Scipio, ſe malle vnum ciuem ſeruare quam mille hostes perdere: that hee had rather ſaue one Citizen, then deſtroy a thouſand enemies.
                  Ioſu. 8 4. 2. Reg. 10. If Ioſua and Iehu had not been armed with the law full authority of the ſworde, they might in no wiſe haue politicklie diſſembled with the inhabitants of Ai, or with the Prieſts of Baal: but now being placed as publike perſons for the defence of the Church of God, and going

agaynſt them, as to whome they are bound neither by league of confederacie, nor by duety of loyalty, they are no further to bewray or proclaime their intent then beſt may ſerue for the ſpeedie and ſafe accompliſhing of the lawfull conqueſt of the Lordes enemies. But (ſay ſome) the hoſtilitie and open enmitie betwixt vs and Spaine ought firſt to be proclaimed before any warres ought to be taken in hand, Was not (I pray you) that huge nauie of Spaine which came euen to make an end of vs vpon earth, a ſufficient herald openly to proclaime the hatred and hoſtilitie of the Spaniard againſt vs? And I think his ſhips and treaſure houſes doe meetly well tell him, that out fleetes and ordinance vpon the Spaniſh ſeas haue beene a reaſonable herald to proclaime to them what they are to looke for at the Engliſh mans hands. If our moſt gracious Soueraigne (whom the Lord long bleſſe & preſerue) haue vpon cauſes not knowen to vs, thought good as yet, no other way to proclaime the warre, we are not to buſie our ſelues in examining the ſayd cauſes which perhaps may priuately concerne her Maieſtie her ſelf. But as when Moſes and Iethro mette together, hauing kiſſed each other,
                  Exod. 18.8. 
               rogarunt alter alterum de proſperitate, & poſtea ingreſſi ſunt tentorium ipſius: they asked one another of their health, and ſo they went into his tent: ſo let it ſuffice vs to talke of thoſe things which concerne our ſelues and our owne poſteritie, let it ſuffice vs that for our owne warrant we haue learned by the word of God, both the cauſes of our war to be allowed as iuſt, and the manner alſo thereof confirmed as lawful: and let vs not doubt, but that as many as thus

with a reſolute heart and truſt in God proceed in theſe affayres, the Lord will ſo bleſſe and proſper their labour, as ſhall be moſt for the praiſe of his holy name, and for the quiet and peace of our Church and Common wealth.
            Many thinke that they haue condemned theſe warres ſufficiently, if they can poynt out a fewe that haue been hindered or haue ſuſtained loſſes thereby. But as we may not iudge ill of the ſacrifices and prayers which Iob made daily for his children,
                  Iob. 1.19. becauſe thoſe children were taken away by fearefull and ſodaine death: or rather as we may not condemne the voyage which the children of Iſrael made to conquer the land of Canaan,
               
                  Numb. 26.64. becauſe they ſo dropped away in the voyage, that of ſixe hundred thouſand there came but two into the land of promiſe: no more may we condemne our practiſes againſt the Idolatrous Spanyard, becauſe amongſt many, ſome haue had but heauie and hard ſucceſſe. Others affirme, that they could like of theſe warres well enough, if the aduerſaries were thereby pluckt downe: but theſe dealings (ſay they) doe not to any purpoſe weaken the enemie. I doubt not but if the Lord doe ſtill continue his holie hand ouer vs, they will bee found with the enemie ſhortly to be ſomewhat. Per lo primo colpo non cade la querria: (ſayth the Italian) An oake is not fallen downe at the firſt ſtroake. Many littles make a mickle. It is ſomething that we haue all their Merchandiſes will they nill they, as plentifully as euer we had, and more freelie from the clutches of the bloodie Inquiſitors: and ſomething it is that we doe a little diſeaſe

the enemie, and trouble his patience in his buſie prouiding for the new inuincible Nauie: and ſomething alſo it is, that we haue hereby many able and expert Souldiers and Mariners to keep the enemie occupied at home, which otherwiſe with greater danger of ſtirring vp rebellions, would attempt as he hath done to make inuaſions vpon vs here. Scipio had no better way to ſet his owne countrey Italy free from Hannibal, but to inuade the Territories of Hannibal in Affrica. He ſayd vnto the Senate,Titus Liuius in 28. ab vrbe condita. 
               Caſtra Romana potius Carthaginis portis immineant, quàm nos iterum vallum hoſtium ex moenibus noſtris videamus: Let rather our Romane Camps pitch before the gates of Carthage, then that we ſhould ſee our walles beſieged of our enemies. The very place where warre is, endureth many calamities. Affrica ſit belli ſedes, illic terror, fuga, populatio, &c. Let Affrick be the ſeate of the warre, let there be the terror, the flight, and the ſpoyling. And a little before he ſayth, Plus eſt animi inferenti periculum quàm propulſanti: In lawfull daungers there is more courage in him that ſetteth vpon the enemie, then in him that defendeth. In ſua terra cogam pugnare eum, & Carthago praemium victoriae erit: I will make Hannibal fight in his owne land, there will be ſomewhat to bee gotten, Carthage will be the price and reward of our victorie. The Senate graunted him a conuenient power, he inuaded Affrica, it came to paſſe as he expected, he remoued the forces of Hannibal out of Italy, & he did that by his policie in a ſhort time, which by all the Romane power could not be brought to paſſe at home in many yeares. I make not

this example of the heathē any ground for vs to build vpon, onely we may profitably conſider how farre the light of nature did ſhew it ſelfe for the defence of natiue ſoyle, and we may learne ſometimes wiſedome of the children of this world, who are more wiſe in their generation then the children of light.
                  Luc. 16.8. Our ground that we are to reſt vpon, is firſt the equitie of the cauſe of our warre, which I hope hath been ſufficiently declared by the word of the eternall God, and by the practiſes of ſuch Magiſtrates as the holy ſcripture doth propound vnto vs. Secondly, the power and mercie of God, who of the one is able, and of the other is willing to effect and bring to paſſe whatſoeuer we ſhall take in hand in his feare. Ioſua going againſt Idolaters had many and mightie enemies,
                  Ioſua. 11.4. 
               Iabin the King of Hazor, the King of Madon, the King of Shimron, the King of Achſaph, the Canaanits, Amorits, Heth its, Phereſits, and Iebuſits, who were ſayd to be like the ſand of the ſea ſhore innumerable: yet whē he vſed his forces and policies in the feare of God, the Lord grāted vnto him many moſt noble cōqueſts. Zerah the Ethiopian came againſt Aſa with a moſt huge armie, euen ten hundred thouſand,2. Chron. 14.9. & three hundred chariots: Aſa in compariſon had but a ſmall power, yet knowing on the one ſide the equitie of his cauſe, and on the other ſide the power and mercie of God, he cryed out and ſayd, O Lord it is nothing to thee to helpe with many, or with no power, helpe vs O Lord our God, for we reſt only vpon thee, and in thy name are we come againſt this multitude. O Lord thou art our God, let not man preuaile againſt thee. The Lord

ſent to Aſa a moſt glorious victorie, and his people droue away Sheepe and Camels and exceeding great ſpoyles.2. Chro. 14.14. The Lord ouerthrew that mightie Captaine Siſera, by the hand of a weake woman Iael the wife of Heber.
               1. Sam. 17. 
               Dauid with a ſling brayned Goliah, Samſon with a iaw bone ſlew a thouſand.
                  Iudg. 15.15. There is no power ſo ſmall but the Lord is able to ſtrengthen it ſufficiently againſt the enemies of his truth: and all helps whatſoeuer are nothing without the handie worke and bleſsing of the Lord almightie. Policies are of great force in warre: and therefore Dauid prayed eſpecially,2. Sam. 15.31. Lord I pray thee turne to fooliſhneſſe the counſaile of Achitophel. This Achitophel was ſo wiſe, ſo politike, and ſo prudent, that his counſailes were counted like the Oracles of God: yet when he vſed his policies againſt the good Prince Dauid, what became of him? he was intrapped in his owne deuiſes, and being miſerably confounded, at the laſt for want of a hangman became a hangman to himſelfe. There is no wiſedome,
                  Prou. 21.30. there is no policie, there is no counſaile againſt the Lord. So likewiſe horſes, ſhips, munitions, ordinance and ſuch like, are good helpes and ſtayes for the Common wealth, but there is no hope or confidence to be placed further in them then God ſhall follow them with his bleſsing The horſe is prepared for battaile,
                  Prou. 21.31. but the victorie commeth of God. We ſhould make the ſame vſe of the power and mercie of God,
                  Pſal. 61.3. as Dauid did when he ſayd, Thou Lord haſt bin my hope and ſtrong tower agaynſt the enemie, I will dwell in thy tabernacle for euer, and my truſt ſhall be vnder the ſhadowe of thy wings. As if he ſhould haue

ſayd, I haue had O Lord heretofore good experience of thy goodneſſe and might, I know thy loue is immutable, and thy mercie endureth for euer: therefore I will repoſe and reſt my ſelfe wholly vpon thee, who wilt neuer faile them that put their truſt in thee. If man doe helpe his neighbour, he will ſometimes vpbrayd, and ſometimes waxe wearie,
                  Iam. 1.17. Iohn 13.1. becauſe man is inconſtant and variable, but with the Lord there is no change nor ſhadowe of change: whom he loueth he loueth to the end. And therefore whatſoeuer deliuerances and benefites we haue receiued at Gods hands, we muſt make them ſo many arguments and proofes to confirme and ſtrengthen our truſt in God hereafter during life.
            Hath the Lord ſo miraculouſly diſcouered, and in a manner without any blood on our partes, and preuented ſo many and ſo dangerous conſpiracies and treaſons, which ſo treacherouſly haue been often deuiſed againſt her ſacred Maieſtie?
                  Pſal. 7.15. Did the Lord in his mercie to vs ward tumble downe the wicked headlong into the ſame pit that they digged for others, when that curſed crew had fortified themſelues to bereaue her Maieſtie of her noble Realme of Ireland? Did the Lord confound their diueliſh purpoſe when they had as it were ſet downe their ſtaffe, and caſt anker with their huge Armadoes, as it were to raigne like Kinges and Lords on our Engliſh Seas, driuing them that had ſo richly furniſht themſelues into thoſe bare and barren coaſts, where their golde and ſiluer could nothing benefit them? when by ſorceries and witcheries they haue attempted to annoy her Maieſtie hath the Lorde

ſo happily diſcouered them and ſo mightily confounded them, that as the Rebels haue had no force, ſo the Prince of rebels Lucifer himſelfe, hath had no power againſt her? Hath the Lord made a ſpeedy diſpatch of all thoſe Popes and cutte them off Pope after Pope, which by their bloody bulles and ranging reconcilers haue ſought her Graces ouerthrow, and granted her ſtill to remaine (as many good yeares may ſhee continue) a happy and triumphant Queene? Hath the Lord made our ſhips of Englād ſuch a terror to that mighty kingdome, that on their owne coaſtes and in the mouthes of their own harbours they will not come out tenne to one, vnleſſe they may haue together their whole inuincible nauy? Let vs then aſſure our ſelues, that if we can be thankful vnto him, and put our truſt wholly in his goodnes, louing his truth and liuing in his feare, he will ſtill ſo ſuccour and defend vs hereafter, that we ſhal be ſafe for euer vnder the ſhadowe of his wings.
            Another thing that did greatly comfort Dauid in his battailes againſt his enemies, was for that his enemies were alſo the enemies of God, and therefore that the Lord would moſt certainly ſubuert & ouerthrow them.2. Sam. 17.36. This made him ſay, that as hee had ſlaine the Lyon and the Beare, ſo the Philiſtine alſo ſhould ſhortly be deſtroyed, becauſe he had railed vpō the hoaſt of the liuing God.
                  Verſe. 45. And afterward, Thou (ſayth Dauid) commeſt againſt me with a ſworde, and a ſpeare, and a ſhielde; but I come againſt thee in the name of the Lord of hoaſts, the GOD of Iſrael whome thou haſt blaſphemed. Surely GOD will wound the head of

his enemies,
                  Pſa. 6
                     •
                  . ver. 21 and the hayrie ſcalpe of euery one that continueth ſtill in wickedneſſe.
            Conſider then I pray thee what enemie thou doeſt encounter with when thou goeſt againſt the Spaniard: Firſt, he is, as ye haue heard before, an Idolater, a pillar and prop of Antichriſt, an open enemie to the fayth of Chriſt and a profeſſed patron of truce breaking, falſhood and diſloyalty. He is alſo a greedy tyrant of vnſatiable couetouſnes, that ſeeketh nothing elſe but to ſwallow vp euen the whole worlde. When the Soueraigne dignity in the low countries was offered to our moſt Chriſtian Prince franckly and freely, her Grace refuſed it, being contented with thoſe kingdomes which God, and blood, and nature hath heaped vpon her: but this monſter of Spaine is neuer ſatisfied: Nauarre, Naples, the Indies, will not ſerue, but he muſt gripe in alſo the Low countries, and deuoure vp all their auncient liberties. The Lowe countries will not content him, but he muſt plucke in alſo Portugall. Portugall is nothing to him vnles he may alſo obtaine France, and then alſo he gapeth for England. But I hope that as the Larke being mounted to the higheſt doth ſodainly fall downe, and as the tyde when the water is at the furtheſt hath his recourſe backe againe: So the Lord wil now graunt to his ſwelling pride ſuch a time of downe-fall, that as ſwiftly he ſhall fal away as euer he mounted vp. He pretendeth the Catholike faith to be the ground of all his warres: but that is nothing but as the Italians ſpeake, Coprire con legiadro mantello iniquiſſimi diſſegni, with a fayre cloake to couer moſt filthy pretences. Did the Earles of Eghmont
               
and Horne finde any fauour in the Low countries for that they were Romiſh Catholikes? Were they not put to death bearing croſſes in their hands and ſhriuen of the Prieſt? Haue the Portingales now any fauour for that they profeſſe the ſame fayth with the King? No truly, they are made the miſerableſt ſlaues in al the whole world. If the poorer ſorte of them bee taken captiues abroad, he wil not giue a half-penie for their ranſome. He will part with great ſummes for a Spaniard, but with nothing at all for a Portingale. As for the Nobler and richer ſorte hee ſuffereth them to bee murdered and ſpoyled at home. Hee is content to be king of them, and to receiue the kingly reuenewes: but he will in no caſe haue any kingly care of them. He ſuffereth the Spaniards to come daylie amongſt them to abuſe their wiues and daughters, that their children may be doubtfull: and indeede doth ſeeke nothing elſe but to bring the ſame vpon them which hee hath brought vpon Naples and the Indies, and other places where he hath ſet in foote, that is, vtterly to diſpeople them, to murder and make hauock both of Nobles and Commons, and vtterly to make an ende of them, that they ſhuld be no more a people vpon earth. They pretend Religion till they can preuaile: but as ſoone as they come to beare rule, all their doings declare what was the marke that they chiefly aymed at. I know the miſcreants of the Popiſh crew doe terme the gouernmēt of our moſt gracious Soueraigne, to be bloodie & cruel, for that ſundry (as they ſay) Catholikes haue bin at ſeuerall times put to death ſince the continuance of her Maieſties raigne. But there is none, vnleſſe he bee

wilfully blind, but muſt needs confeſſe, that their abſoluing of her Maieſties ſubiects from all loyalty and alleageance, their practiſing of ſecret conſpiracies againſt the whole Realm, & their withdrawing of the obediēce of the people frō their Prince, whom God & blood, and the law hath ſet ouer thē, to giue it to a forraine prelate a Prieſt of Rome, were ſuch dangerous treaſons as might in no wiſe be ſpared. And yet of the authors and procurers of ſuch haynous trecheries, to ſome her Grace hath giuen their lands to remaine to their poſteritie: to ſome alſo their liues, when they haue deſerued a thouſand deaths, with ſuch mercy & clemencie as was neuer heard of in Prince before. Her lenitie in gouernement hath not only bin milde, but euen mildeneſſe it ſelfe: the Lord grant that her dayes may bee as the dayes of heauen, and the Lord giue grace to thoſe her rebellious ſubiects, once duely, and to their bettering to conſider the kinde and bountiful mercies of ſo louing and gracious a Soueraigne. The enemie may mutter what he will, of tyrannie & cruelty, to obſcure this her mildenes in gouernement, but the beames of her glory in this vertue doe ſhine ſo bright, that no cloud of euil ſpeeches can ouerwhelme or darken them. As the fame of Queene Elizabeth for wiſedom is ſpred as far as with it ſhe is worthy to gouern, that is, ouer the whole earth & as alſo for knowledge in all the languages of Chriſtians and good literature, ſhe is, and may be a mirror to all Princes or euer: ſo likewiſe for mercie and clemencie, ſhe is, and maugre the deſpight of all ſlaunderous ſpeeches, muſt

be renowmed ſo long as the worlde ſhall continue. But the Spaniſh Inquiſition which is drunken with the blood of GODS Saints, doth not proceede againſt rebels, but againſt thoſe that doe moſt chiefly abhorre and dereſt all rebellion and treaſon: for the obedient and dutifull Chriſtians whom they torment, doe beleeue and profeſſe, that euery ſoule ought to be ſubiect to the higher powers, euen euery ſoule, be hee Prophet,
                  Rom. 13.1. be he Patriarke, be hee Apoſtle, bee hee of what condition or vocation ſoeuer, that they ought to be ſubiect to Kings and Princes: and they deſire nothing more then that their King might bee deliuered from rebels; I meane thoſe Cardinals, and Abbots,The difference of the Engliſh gouernment, as it is now, from the Spaniſh. In the Engliſh, the rebel dieth, and the ſubiect liueth: In the Spaniſh the ſubiect dieth, and the rebel liueth. &c. which detaine the King in ſlauerie and bondage: for the popiſh Clergie in Spaine haue all, and do all; they are the King, they are the Merchant. The trauailes and paynes (as many of their mariners vpon their owne coaſt, confeſſed vnto me often) be indeed of the ſea-faring men, but the goods and wealth, of this and that Cardinal, and this and that Biſhop. They haue gotten al into their owne hand, they make what lawes ſeemeth good vnto themſelues: in a word, they doe both with King and people what them liſt. Theſe moſt certainly are rebels moſt dangerous, and if any duetiful ſubiect doe but open his mouth againſt theſe, they by and by prepare for him moſt exquiſite torments. Beſides their tyrannicall crueltie in ſeeking to oppreſſe and diſpeople all nations about them, whome our gracious Prince in al pitie and mercy doth fauourably relieue and ſuccour.
            
               It may be ſayd of the Spaniard, ſetting all countries about him on fire, as the Spaniſh ſong goeth of Nero,
               
                  
                     Mira Nero de Tarpeia
                  
                  
                     A Roma como ſe ardia
                  
                  
                     Gritos dan ninnos y vieios
                  
                  Y el de nada ſe dolia.
                  From Tarpeia Nero doth behold
                  
                     Rome hard by burnes:
                  Though cries be made of young and olde
                  He nothing mournes.
               
            
            By diſmiſsing of late many Engliſh men francke and free, he would ſeeme now to make ſhew of ſome fauour vnto England, that he doth not beare that bloodie minde againſt vs as commonly is ſurmized. But I hope wee ſhall truſt him neuer the better. Hee was a blacke diuel before, and now he is as white as that diuell that doth turne himſelfe into an Angel of light.2. Cor. 11.14. With honie is often times conueied deadly poyſon, and vnder the greeneſt hearb may lurke a hiſsing ſerpent. His imbruing his handes in the blood of thoſe that profeſſe the ſame fayth with him, doth ſufficiently admoniſh vs what we are to looke for at his hands.The reuerend father, Maſter Nowel, ſhewed one of theſe kniues to diuers Noblemen of England. The butcherly kniues which they brought with thē when they came in good earneſt to inuade England, with this poeſie grauen vpon them; An abſolution for the heretikes of England, doe tell vs plainly that the mercy which they pretend nowe, is but in ieſt, or rather in deepe diſsimulation, and that if wee come vnder

their bleſsing, wee muſt looke for no other abſolution, but cutting of throates.
            The cauſe why he ſo earneſtly ſeeketh the conqueſt of our neighbours about vs, is that thereby hee may the better worke his purpoſe vpon vs: wee are to aſſiſt them in reſpect of themſelues, or elſe were we verie vniuſt: for as ſayth the Orator, Iniustitiae duo ſunt genera,
               Tul. Offic. 1.
                
               vnum eorum qui inferunt, alterum eorum qui ab ijs quibus infertur non propulſant iniuriam. Qui non obſistit ſipoteſt iniurie, tam eſt in vitio quam ſi parētes, aut amicos, aut patriam deſerat. There are two kindes of vniuſtice, the one of them which doe iniurie, the other of them which doe not defend from iniurie. He which doth not withſtand iniurie, if he be able, is in as great a fault, as if he ſhould forſake his parents, his friends, or his own countrey: their houſes can hardly burne, but ours muſt be in danger to ſmoke: and therefore eſpecially we are to labour to preuent the ende, that is, the ſlauery and bondage which they intend to bring vpon our owne nation, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .Xenophon. It is a noble thing, ſaith Xenophon, to fight for the auoyding of bondage. And it cannot but be as noble to fight for the eſchewing the Antichriſtian yoke of popiſh Idolatrie: for howſoeuer the Spaniard would ſeem to be a defendour of the Catholike faith, let his filthy Idolatry, his peſtiferous hereſies, his truce breaking, his greedy couetouſnes, his ſwelling ambition, and his bloody cruelty be ſufficient teſtimonies to vs that his fayth is not true and Catholike, but diueliſh and Antichriſtian.
            
               Well he may make a ſhew of deuotion and of the ſeruice of God, and of liberall contribution to maintaine the Church of God: But all their offerings (as ye haue heard) are of goods wrongfully poſſeſſed, and therefore they doe but according to their owne prouerbe, Hurtan el puer as darlos pies por amor de dios, ſteale the ſwine and beſtow the feete for the loue of God: and all their outward glorious profeſsion is but to haue as their owne by word goeth of them,

                  
                     Vnnas de gato y habitas de beat
                           •
                        ,
                  
                  
                     la cruz en los pechos yel diablo en los hechos.
                  
                  The clawes of a catte and a Saints weede,
                  the croſſe on their breſt and the diuel in their deede.
               
            
            It is but an outward ſhew to cloake and couer their couetouſnes and hypocriſie: and therefore going againſt him, wee goe againſt the Lordes enemie: and we may conclude to our owne heart with the confidence of Dauid;
               
                  Pſal. 68.21. Surely GOD will wounde the head of his enemie, and the hayrie pate of him that continueth ſtill in wickedneſſe.
            The Frenchman that hath anſwered all the Maximaes gathered out of the workes of Machiauel, is in this poynt too ſhort, who concludeth generally, that there ought to be no warres againſt Gods enemies in caſes of religion, onely vpon this ground:
                  Par. 3. max. 1. pag. 346. 
               Puis que toute religion conſiste en vne approbation de certains points qui concernent le ſeruice de dieu, il eſt certain que telle approbation pend de la perſuaſion qui en eſt donnée aux hommes. Or le moyen de perſuader vne choſe a vne perſonne ce n' eſt point de prendre les armes pour le batreny de le menaſſer ains de luy remonſtrer

par bonnes raiſons & allegations, qui le puiſſent induire a perſuaſion. Seeing that all religion doth conſiſt in the allowing and yeelding to certaine poynts which concerne the worſhip of God, it is certaine that that allowing doth depend vpon the perſwading of men. Now the meane (ſayth he) to perſwade any man, is not to take vp weapons to beate him, nor to menace and threaten him, but to make demonſtration to him by ſuch reaſons and good proofes as may leade him to perſwaſion. What perſwaſion, I pray you, can be vſed with them which will not ſuffer a perſwader to liue amongſt them? who if a teacher come to them, doe put him ſtraight to the fire or ſword: or if the holy ſcriptures or any godly inſtruction be brought vnto them, they burne both the booke & the bringer, who are not content to liue vnder Antichriſt, but doe with al tyrannie and bloodſhed vphold the kingdome of Antichriſt, which are not weake but wilfull, not blind but obſtinate: which are not content themſelues to beare the marke of the beaſt,
                  Reuel. 13.17. but doe fight for the beaſt, and ſeeke to bring all nations vnder the yoke of his bondage. If the Spanyards were no otherwiſe enemies to vs thē the Indians were to them, who were moſt of them meeke and obedient, and willing to be taught and gouerned: if we ſhould then haue ſpilt the blood of ſo many infinite thouſands, as they haue done, then might the Papiſt iuſtly haue opened his mouth againſt vs, and we ſhould haue had great occaſion to feare that which now hangeth ouer them, euen the vengeance that the Prophet ſpeaketh of, one ſtone to crye againſt another,
                  Abac. 2.11.6. and one beame to crye againſt

another, woe be to him that buildeth of blood.1. Sam. 17.3 As the blaſphemie of the Philiſtine made Dauid more couragious, ſo theſe huge iniquities of the enemie ought to make vs expect the vengeance at the laſt to light the more heauier vpon him.
            Another comfort and ſolace had Dauid in all his troubles, that euen for the Churches ſake the Lord would deſtroy his enemies: and for this cauſe he ſaith,
                  Pſal. 7.6. Ariſe O Lord in thy wrath, and lift vp thy ſelf againſt the rage of mine enemies, ſo ſhall the congregation of the people compaſſe thee about: for their ſakes therefore lift vp thy ſelfe againe, the Lord ſhall iudge the people, &c. We muſt needes confeſſe, that in reſpect of the moſt part of our ſelues in the Realme of England, both by our contempt of Gods holy word, and by our vnthankfulnes for his manifold bleſsings, we are ſo farre off from being worthie to haue out enemies ſubdued vnder vs, that we haue deſerued much rather to be long agoe deliuered as a pray vnto their teeth. But we know the Lord hath his Church amongſt vs, he hath committed vnto vs his holy word and Sacraments, he hath alſo his number of his elect and choſen: and we may ſay with the Prophet Eſay, Except the Lord of hoaſts had left a remnant to vs, we had been as Sodome and Gomorrah. For that little remnant, that number of the elect which God hath amongſt vs, the Lord hath hitherto extended ſo many bleſsings vpon vs, and we hope that for their ſakes he will ſtill lift vp himſelfe againe. God promiſeth for ten good men to ſpare all Sodome.
                  Gen. 18 32. 
               Dauid had in his armie Ioab a moſt wicked manquellour, who had

moſt trecherouſly and wilfully murdered Abner the ſonne of Ner,
               1. Reg. 2.29. 2. Sam. 3.27. Generall of the armie of Iſrael, and Amaſa the ſonne of Iether, Generall of the armie of Iuda, men (as the ſcripture ſayth) better then himſelfe. This wicked Ioab was Dauids Lieuetenant of all his armie,2. Sam. 10.7. and the Lord ſent vnto him many noble victories for his good Prince Dauids ſake. We haue many Engliſh Souldiers and Mariners of moſt wicked and diſſolute life, and ſuch as in their warres haue no reſpect to the glorie of God and the benefite of his Church, but onely ſeeke to take ſomewhat together for themſelues, which they may afterward lauiſh out on prodigall riot and filthineſſe of life. And it may be ſayd of many of them as is in the Poet:

                  
                     Lucan.
                     Nulla fides piet aſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         viris qui castra ſequuntur,
                  
                  
                     Venaleſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         manus, ibi 
                           •
                        as vbi manima merces.
                  
                  No faith, no godlineſſe, no good
                  in thoſe that follow Souldiers trayne,
                  They ſet their hands to ſale for blood,
                  all's right with them that yeeldeth gayne.
               
            
            Though I ſay many of them be thus prophane and wicked, yet our hope is, that as often heretofore, ſo hereafter ſtill, for the good Princes ſake the Lord will bleſſe the labours of Ioab. Deus operatur per malos non in malis: God worketh by the euill, though not in the euill. When wicked Pharao exalted godly Ioſeph,
               
                  Gen. 41.40. 1. Reg. 18.3. when Achab maintained that good Obadiah, when Daniel was aduaunced by Nabuchadnezzar, when many Saints were in the houſe of Nero,
               
                  Phil. 4. GOD wrought by the hands of the wicked a benefite vnto his children, he wrought by the euill, but not in the

euill. Howſoeuer many Souldiers and Mariners haue not their affections ſanctified, yet thoſe that truly feare God ought not to be diſcouraged,1. Theſſ 5.11. but rather to ſtriue by their godly exhortations and good examples to reforme the imperfections of them, and to ſeeke by all meanes ſo to increaſe the number of the true repentant, that for their ſakes alſo ſome mercie may bee ſhewed to Sodome.
                  Gen. 18.32. We may lawfully enioy the ſpoyles of the Lords enemies, as did Dauid, Aſa,
               1. Sam. 30.26. 2. Chro. 14.14. and others: we may alſo lawfully deſire to maintaine our ſelues by our vocation, as Paul ſayth,1. Cor. 9.7. Who goeth at any time to warfare on his owne coſt? But our chiefeſt intent and purpoſe ought to be to promote the glorie of God, to doe good and acceptable ſeruice to our gracious Soueraigne, to procure peace vnto Sion, to break or weaken the power of Antichriſt, to turne aſide that courſe of the Indian fountaine of gold, the nurſe of all thoſe warres and troubles that are now amongſt our neighbours and confederates in France and Flanders, to take the ſworde out of the mad mans hand, and to plucke downe that luſtie Nimrod, that ſo eagerly hunteth for the kingdomes of the whole earth; which affections if we cary, then no doubt the Lorde will ſo bleſſe our labours, that liuing, we ſhall be moſt profitable mēbers of our Chriſtian common wealth: and if death doe take vs away, we are aſſured that ending our liues, either in, or for the faith of Ieſus Chriſt, we ſhall be partakers of a farre more bleſſed eſtate in the world to come, euen of that immortall crowne of glory, which Chriſt Ieſus hath prepared to al that loue

him, and to thoſe that for his ſake haue not loued their liues vnto death.
            God ſaue and preſerue our moſt noble Soueraigne Lady Queene ELIZABETH, and grant vnto her many ioyfull and happy yeares. GOD gouerne all her Maieſties moſt honourable priuie counſaile with the grace of his holy ſpirit: God preſerue amongſt vs the miniſterie of his holy worde, and continue his Goſpel and truth to vs and to our poſteritie for euermore, God defend the Realmes of England & Ireland from all daungers of their enemies, as well forraine as domeſticall: God bleſſe and proſper all her Maieſties forces and munitions, as well by ſea as by land: God conuert the hearts, or confound the practiſes of all her aduerſaries: God breake the power of Antichriſt, & giue an vtter ouerthrow vnto all his ſworn ſouldiers, and namely the Spaniard; euen GOD for his Sonne Chriſt Ieſus ſake happily and ſpeedily confound him, that he neuer may bee able to lift vp himſelfe againſt the Lord and againſt his annointed: and let all Engliſh hearts that doe feare GOD and loue his truth, euen heartily and faithfully ſay, Amen, Amen.
            
               Imperet, & viuat, regnet, vincat
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , triumphet,
               Emineat, vigeat, floreat, Eliſabeth.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A Prayer for the Souldier and Saylour in time of ſeruice.
            
            
               O Moſt mercifull God and gracious father, we humbly praiſe thy glorious name for all thy vnſpeakeable mercies, which of thy bountifull goodnes thou haſt hitherto vouchſafed to beſtow vpon vs thy poore and vnworthie ſeruants, as well on our ſoules as on our bodies: and namely, for that thou haſt not onely allotted vnto vs thus to be daylie ſuſtained by a lawfull vocation agreeable to thy bleſſed ordinance, but alſo doeſt mercifully preſerue vs in the ſame from all thoſe dangers which in thy iudgement thou mighteſt iuſtly lay vpon vs, and into which others of our brethren oftentimes haue fallen. O Lord we haue heard of, and partly ſeene and knowne of diuers whom thou haſt ſuffered to be ouerwhelmed with tempeſtuous winds in the gulfes of the outragious ſeas: others pinched with extreame famine and penurie: others taken captiues & led to moſt miſerable thraldome: others brought to their end by loathſome diſeaſes and ſundrie kindes of death. We acknowledge, O Lord, that our ſinnes are as huge as theirs, and our iniquities as grieuous. Thoſe Galilaeans whoſe blood Pilate ſpilt, and thoſe eighteene on whom the tower of Silo fell, were not greater ſinners then the reſt in Iſrael: and thoſe on whom in our time thou haſt ſhewed thy heauie iudgements, ſeeing that we haue followed them and ouertaken

them in their ſinnes, we had deſerued rather to haue been made examples vnto them then they vnto vs. But it is thy mercie, good Lord, thus to ſpare vs, & to giue vs a larger time of repentance. We confeſſe our ſelues, O bleſſed father, to be vnworthie the leaſt of all thy benefites, if we conſider our owne deſeruings: we haue ſo manifold waies tranſgreſſed thy moſt holy commandements by our vncleane thoughts, by our vngodly words, by our vnrighteous deedes, that wee are not onely become worthie to be depriued of all thy gracious benefites and bleſſings: but alſo we haue deſerued to haue all thy iudgements in full meaſure to be powred vpon vs, not onely in this world, but alſo in the world to come. But O Lord, we appeale to thy throne of mercie, beſeeching thee to looke vpon vs, not as we are in our ſelues polluted & ſtayned with ſinne and wickedneſſe: but to behold vs in the face and perſon and obedience of thy deare ſonne Ieſus Chriſt, accepting his death and paſſion as a full recompence for all our tranſgreſſions. Good Lord clothe vs with his righteouſnes, ingraft vs truely as liuely members of his bodie, and for his ſake continue all thy mercies and louing kindnes, which ſo many waies we haue taſted of from our tender youth vntil this preſent day. O Lord increaſe our faith daylie more and more: grant that we may be fully perſwaded of thine eternal election, that thou good Lord of thy infinite fauour & goodnes haſt elected and choſen vs to be ſaued before the foundation of the world was layd: giue vs that applying faith, whereby we may be aſſured that we are of the number of them for whom Chriſt dyed vpon the Croſſe: giue vs that iuſtifying faith, whereby thy ſpirit may ſpeake comfortably to our ſpirits, that all our ſinnes are forgiuen vnto vs: giue vs that ſanctifyng faith, which may bring forth all good fruites of amendement of life and true repentance. O Lord pardon our huge & grieuous ſinnes which we haue heretofore cōmitted agaynſt thy diuine Maieſtie: let our former wickednes be no hinderance to thy mercie. Lord remember not the iniquities and offences of our youth, but according to thy mercie think

vpon vs in thy great goodnes. Remember not how vnthankfull we haue been vnto thee for thy manifold preſeruations and benefites all the courſe of our life. Thou haſt been rich in mercie towards vs, but we haue been poore in thankfulnes to thee agayne. Lord pardon all our former vnthankfulnes, and make vs daylie more and more thankfull, not onely in word, but alſo in holines of life, that we neuer be found to be of the number of thoſe which confeſſe thee with their mouth, but denie thee with their workes. In all our affayres of our outward warfare, Lord grant vs grace eſpecially to be zelous in our inward combate agaynſt ſinne and wickedneſſe, that we may mortifie the roote of our carnall and corrupt affections, that we may haue the true ſtrife of the ſpirit againſt the fleſh, wraſtling agaynſt all ſinnes, but eſpecially agaynſt thoſe whereunto we finde our ſelues moſt inclined. Ayd vs good Lord eſpecially in our ſpiritual battaile againſt the world, the fleſh and the diuell: put vpon vs the ſword-girdle of truth & the breaſtplate of righteouſnes. Arme vs with the ſhield of faith, wherby we may quēch al the fierie darts of the wicked, and ſo deliuer to vs and guide in vs the ſword of thy ſpirit, that we may ouercome and triumph by the blood of the Lambe, and the word of his teſtament. And for as much as the euents of our eſtate and vocation are ſundrie and variable, O Lord we pray thee ſo gouerne vs with thy good grace, that in all our trauailes we may ioyfully ſay, Thy will be done and not ours: that neither our proſperitie doe cauſe vs to forget thee, nor aduerſitie doe prouoke vs to murmur agaynſt thee, that with contented mindes we may caſt all our care on thee: for thou careſt for vs, that in troubles we may aſſure our ſelues that thou doeſt not plague vs as a iudge, but correct vs as a father, and that in euery good ſucceſſe we may humbly acknowledge thee the author and giuer thereof, and neuer lift vp ourſelues to accompt it the worke of our owne hands. We that thus goe downe in ſhippes, and occupie our buſines in great waters, doe daylie ſee thy manifold workes and thy wonders in the deepe, how thou lifteſt vp the waues of the

ſea, and haſt made the Leuiathan to take his paſtime in them, with innumerable beaſts, as Dauid ſpeaketh, both ſmall and great. Lord graunt vs alwaies to make true vſe of theſe thy creatures, that wee may learne thereby to acknowledge thy Maieſtie, to reuerence thy power, to feare thy iudgements, and to truſt in thy mercies. Thou haſt promiſed that thoſe which crie vnto thee in their trouble, thou wilt deliuer them from their diſtreſſe,
                  Pſal. 107.30. and bring them to the hauen where they would be. Thou onely art he that commandeth both the windes and the ſeas: Lord ſo gouerne them both in theſe our attempts againſt the profeſſed enemies of thy truth, as may be moſt for the glory of thy name, for the benefit of thy Church, for the good and welfare of our natiue ſoyle, and for the ſauegard and honour of our moſt gracious Soueraigne. Bleſſe our labours, proſper our voyage, let thy enemies ſo fall before vs, as that thou maiſt haue all the praiſe, and we all the comfort. Teach our hands to warre and our fingers to fight: couer our head in the day of battaile: giue vs thy holy angels to aſsiſt vs: grant vs to be true and faithfull amongſt our ſelues, obedient to thoſe whom thou haſt placed ouer vs, & couragious againſt thy enemies: hold thy holy hand ouer vs, ſanctifie our affections, that we may not ſo much ſeeke our ſelues, as endeuour to doe that ſeruice which may be moſt agreeable to thy holy will, and moſt for the proſperous eſtate of our Prince and Countrey, whom we beſeech thee, O Lord, to bleſſe and protect now and euer. We know, O Lord, that the obtaining of victorie doth not conſiſt in number of men; it is all one with thee to ſaue with many, or with no power: in the defence of thy trueth we goe againſt the open vpholders and ſworne vaſſals of Antichriſt, good Lord let not thy aduerſaries preuaile againſt vs, let not the wicked ſay, where is now their God? Strike a terror into the enemies: let the ſhield depart from them: confound that proud and haughtie power of that Haman, that doth ſo inſolently oppoſe it ſelfe againſt the Goſpel of Ieſus Chriſt. Goe before our armie, good Lord, and be our buckler and ſhield to defend vs from all daungers

both of bodie and ſoule. Lord remember thy wonted mercies and louing kindnes which haue been euer of old, and for thy Churches ſake, euen for that remnant which thou haſt amongſt vs, let it be thy mercifull pleaſure to bleſſe our endeuours: grant vs to repoſe our truſt and confidence ſtedfaſtly vpon the experience of thy power and goodneſſe: giue vs ſuch aſſurance of faith, and ſuch continuance in true mortification, that we being thy children, and our lamps of repentance alwaies burning, death may neuer be ſodaine vnto vs: and when it ſhall be thy good will to take vs out of this vale of miſerie, be it in or out of thoſe battailes which to our profeſſion doe appertaine, we beſeech thee, O Lord, that our ſoules may ſo fight a good fight, and finiſh their courſe with ioy, that they may be partakers of the crowne of euerlaſting triumph in the world to come. Theſe and all other graces needful for vs, and for thy whole Church and euery part and member of the ſame, we craue at thy hand in the mediation of thy ſonne Ieſus Chriſt our onely Sauiour, in that prayer which he hath taught vs in his holy Goſpell. Our Father, &c.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   