
      
         
            
            
            THE DANGER OF Diſcontentment, Intreated of in a Sermon preached at Crow-hurſt in Surrey the ninth of Iuly 1598.
            
               By Simon Harward.
            
            Imprinted at London by W.W. for R. Iohnes. 1. Ian. 1599.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT VVorshipfull M. Edmunde Bowyer Eſquire, and M. Iohn Bowyer his brother, mercie and peace be multiplyed in Chriſt Ieſus.
            
               
                  FOr as much as ſome yeeres ſince (Right Worſhipfull) it pleaſed you ſo courteouſly to accept that Sermon, which at your requeſt I then publiſhed, as concerning The fruites of our repentaunce towardes God; Wherein Dauid Pſal. 1. doth place The chiefeſt bleſſedneſſe and felicitie of man: I haue thought good to adde thereunto this Sermon, which I made at the ſame Church (where you, and others, Iuſtices & Gentlemen

were aſſembled on the ninth of Iuly laſt paſt) vpon a part of the firſt Leſſon, by the order of our Church appoynted for that Sabboth, as concerning that duetifull contentment of minde, which (as good ſubiects) we owe all to our Prince and Countrey; that as in the firſt we are put in remembrance of our duetie towards the Lord of Lords, and Prince of Princes: ſo in this other, as well we which vttered and heard it, as others into whoſe handes it ſhall come to be read, may be admoniſhed of thoſe loyall affections which we ought continually to beare to our moſt gracious Soueraigne, and our eſtabliſhed Common-wealth. As I am well aſſured that theſe affections are, and haue alwayes bin throughly ſetled in your faythfull hartes; ſo I doubt not, but ye are alſo as fully deſirous, that by this ſlender labour, and by all meanes poſsible, others may be allured & drawen to the like diſpoſition. Thus hoping that you will as louingly

accept the reading and publiſhyng, as you haue already done the hearing, I commit this my ſhort Diſcourſe to your Worshippes, and you and it to the bleſſing of the Almightie. From Tondridge this .xij. of Iuly. 1598.
            
               
                  Your Worſhips aſſured in the Lord, Simon Harward.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  
                     1. Sam. 12.19.
                  
                  VVe haue added a vvickedneſſe to all our other ſinnes, in asking vs a King.
               
            
            
               WHen Nachaſh the King of the Ammonites (Right Worſhipfull and beloued in Chriſt) had now brought the inhabitantes of Iabeſh Gilead into ſo greate diſtreſſe, that onely vpon ſeauen dayes reſpite they were to yeelde vp their Citie into the enemies handes vpon a very hard condition (which was, that euery one of the Citizens ſhould haue his right eye plucked out.) The people of Iſrael, partly becauſe they ſaw Samuel their Iudge to be olde and feeble, and partly, becauſe they perceiued the ſonnes of Samuel, Ioel and Abiah, though ruling in the place and ſtead of their Father; yet not walking in the wayes and ſteps of their Father, as diſpayring to haue

any ayde or deliuerance by their Iudges, (in which ſtate of gouernment, God had for many yeeres ſo happily preſerued them) They come (with one conſent) to their Iudge, and deſire that they may haue a King.
               1. Sam. 11.12 
               Samuel when he had vſed many meanes, and many forcible argumentes to diſſwade them from this their malcontented and diſpayring minde, and ſeeing euidently that no perſwaſions could take any place in their wilfull hartes, doth now at the laſt, call vpon the Lord in the time of Wheate-harueſt, for a ſodaine and miraculous thunder and ſtorme of raine, that thereby, as it were by an other voyce of God, the people might be further certified, both how greeuouſly they had offended, and how for their offence the Lorde was highly diſpleaſed with them. When the Iſraelites ſaw apparantly that Samuel had no ſooner called vnto the Lord for that thunder and raine, but that preſently his requeſt was heard, and that in terrible manner, in the ſight and hearing of the whole people, they were aſtoniſhed: and being wonderfully ſtriken with ſodaine feare, They deſire Samuel to pray to the Lord for them, that they die not,
               
adding theſe wordes (which now I haue read) as a reaſon of their petition, and a confesſion of their deſart: For (ſay they) we haue ſinned, beſides all our other ſinnes, in aſking vs a King. What this offence was which the Prophet doth ſeeke ſo many wayes to lay open vnto them, it ſhall the better appeare if we conſider theſe two eſpeciall obſeruations.
            Firſt, the mightie prouidence, and infinite goodneſſe of God extended towardes that people, ſo many yeeres together, during the tyme of the gouernment of the Iudges. And ſecondly how ſmall & weake the occaſions were for the which they deſire to ſhake off that bleſſed gouernment: as alſo on the other ſide, what great and waighty cauſes they had to haue bin contented with that eſtate wherein God had ſo long and ſo miraculouſly protected them.
            How long the people had liued, deliuered, defended, and gouerned by Iudges, S. Auguſtine doth record it in his .18. booke de Ciuitate Dei, where he affirmeth,Aug. de Ciuitate dei, lib 18. Cap. 22: that at that time wherein Rome was buylt (which was by Romulus, in the time of Ioſias king of Iuda) the Hebrewes had bin ſeauen hundred

and eighteene yeeres in the land of Canaan; whereof (ſayth he) ſeauen & twentie appertaine to Ioſua, three hundred twentie and nine to the Iudges, and three hundred ſixtie and two to the Kinges: where he maketh three ſeuerall eſtates of Gouernment, vnder which it pleaſed God that his people Iſrael ſhould liue. The firſt was vnder Dukes, as in the dayes of Moſes and Ioſua. The ſecond was by Iudges, which differed from Ioſua, for he was appoynted a gouernour in the time of proſperitie, when Sehon the King of the Amorits and Ogge the King of Baſan were ouerthrowne and vanquiſhed: but the Iudges were firſt inaugurated and inueſted into their callinges in ſome great diſtreſſes, by the affecting of ſome notable deliuerance. Neither were they like the Dictators, aduaunced amongſt the Heathen; for they were choſen by the voyces of men, but theſe by the voyce of God him ſelfe. They were choſen out of men of greateſt accompt, and beſt furniſhed for the vndergoing of ſuch a charge: but theſe were rayſed vp miraculouſly out of the inferiour ſort, and loweſt degrees of people, and inabled extraordinarily

by the gyftes and preſence of the Almightie, as it is ſayd in the ſecond Chapter of the Iudges: The Lord rayſed vp Iudges,
               
               Iudg. 2.16.18. 
               which deliuered them out of the handes of their oppreſſours: And when the Lord did raiſe vp any Iudges, the Lord (as it is ſayd there) was with that Iudge, and did deliuer the people out of the handes of the enemies all the dayes of that Iudges life.
            
            There were alſo many differences betwixt them and the Kinges which folowed. In the Kinges, ſucceſſion of blood tooke place: in the Iudges it tooke no place. The Kings, had a greater authoritie in ruling and commaunding then the Iudges would chalenge. The affayres hauing good ſucceſſe againſt the Madianites, the people offered to Gedeon,
               Iudg 8.22. that he ſhould Reigne as king ouer them: But Gedeon anſwered, Neither will I reigne ouer you, neyther ſhall my childe reigne ouer you; but the Lord ſhall ſtill raigne ouer you. The Kinges were ſome of them holy, and ſome wicked:Heb. 11.32. Iudg. 2.18. the Iudges were all the faythfull ſeruantes of God, though ſome times erring, yet alwayes ryſing againe by repentance. The Kinges did ſome of them ſaue

the people from inuaſions, and ſome not: but the Iudges did euer deliuer them from the hands of their oppreſſours: And therefore they haue the Hebrewe name Moſhegrim,
               Iud 3 9. Sauiours, giuen vnto them, as in the thirde Chapter of the Iudges it is ſayd of Othoniel, that the Lord did ſtirre vp a Sauiour vnto the children of Iſrael. And in the ninth of Nehemias,
               Nehe 9.27. where there is mention made of the former mercies of God during the time of the Iudges: it is added, that God of his mercie gaue his people Sauiours, who ſaued them out of the handes of their aduerſaries. Some do adde hereunto, that the Iudges more then any other, were the moſt euident types and figures of that deliuerance which we haue by Chriſt, from the tyrranie of ſinne, death, and Sathan.
            A fourth kinde of gouernement, vnder which the people afterwarde liued, is mentioned by Ioſephus in the .xx. chapter of his Antiquities,
               Ioſeph Antiq. lib. 20. Cap. penult 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . After the death of theſe (to wit) Herod and Archelaus, their gouernment was Ariſtocratie, wherin the chiefe authority of the nation

was committed to the High-prieſtes.Ioſeph Antiq. lib. 14. cap. 10. Of that gouernment he maketh mention before, when he declareth how Gabinius had diuided the Kingdome into fiue parts; and ordeyned fiue Counſayles, called Synedriv: he ſheweth what enſued of it, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                They altering the gouernment, lyued in Ariſtocratie. They had then, and long before, three ſeuerall orders of their counſayles: one was an authoritie geuen to three choſen Men, who ſhould decide all cauſes in money matters. The ſecond was a councell of twentie three Iudges: they were to heare the cauſes of lyfe and death. The thirde was a councell of ſeauentie one: their office was to determine of moſt waightie matters, of the high Prieſthood, or of a whole Tribe, or of a falſe Prophet. Concerning the excellencie of euery one of theſe foure gouernmentes, and which of them ought to haue the preheminence to be moſt to be deſired amongſt Chriſtians, I holde with Caluin, 
                     Ʋaldè otioſum est,
               
               Caluin inſtitut. lib. 4 cap. 20. ſect. 8. 
               quis potiſſimus ſit politiae ſtatus a priuatis hominibus diſputari, quibus de conſtituenda aliqua republica deliberare nen licet. It is a very idle

thing, that about the beſt eſtate of gouernement, a diſputation ſhould be had amongſt priuate men, who haue no authority to conſult of ye ordering of any Common-wealth. It is a moſt ſingular token of the mightie power and prouidence of God, that ſo manie ſeuerall Nations ouer the face of the whole worlde, are vpholden and maynteined by ſo many ſeuerall ſortes of gouernementes, That Quemadmodum non niſi inaequali temperatura elementa inter ſe cohaerent, ita hae regiones ſua quadam inaequalitate optimè continentur: As in bodily eſſences, the foure elementes do cleaue togither by vnequall temperaturs, ſo as it were by a certaine inequalitie, all theſe ſeuerall countries are holden togither:
                But for euery particuler Nation, he very well requireth, that 
                  Ʋoluntas Domini ſatisfacial: The will of God ought to ſuffice euery man. Si illi Ʋiſum eſt reges, regnis praeficere, liberis ciuitatibus ſenatus aut decuriones, quoſcunque locis praefecerit in quibus degimus, nostrū est ijs nos morigeros ac obedientes praeſtare: Whether it pleaſe God to place Kinges ouer kingdomes; or to ſet Senatours, Counſailours, and Aldermen, ouer free Cities, whom ſoeuer

the Lord ſhall eſtabliſh in thoſe places wherein we liue, we ought to yeelde ſubmisſion and obedience to them.
               
            
            Some do highly aduaunce the gouernment of many, becauſe many are not ſo ſoone corrupted as one may be; euen as a great quantitie of water will not ſo ſoone putrifie, as will a ſmall portion: But theſe muſt on the other ſide conſider, that it is a great deale more hard to finde many good, then one: and it is moſt likely, that ſuch a one will prooue beſt, whom the Nobilitie of Royall blood, and Princely enſamples of predeceſſours, do inuite vnto vertue. They reſt much vpon the libertie which ought to be in man, and whereunto (they ſay) man is horne: But we ſee, that (by nature) as ſome are framed fit to commaund, ſo others are made fit to obey. It is an excellent kinde of libertie, when men being ſet free from the thraldome of their owne luſtes, do vnder the rule of ſuperiours,Tul. parad. penult. obey godly and holſome lawes. As the Oratour doth well deſcribe a Free-man, Qui legibus non propter metum paret, ſed eas ſequitur at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   colit quia id ſalutare maxime eſſe iudicat, Which doth not obey the Lawes for feare, but doth

follow them and imbrace them, becauſe he doth iudge it a thing holſome and neceſſarie for the ſafegarde of man.
                For better it is to dwell where nothing is lawfull, then to dwell where all thinges are lawful.Iudg. 2.16. The Iudges which were approoued in a kinde of Ariſtocratie, are ſayd to be rayſed vp of God.
               Pſal. 21.3. So alſo the ſame is ſayd in other places of Kinges.Prou. 8.15. The wiſedome of God doth pronounce it: By mee Kinges doe reigne:
               Dan. 2.21. 
               and Princes decree iuſtice. Daniel ſayth, that the Lord doth change times & ſeaſons:
               Iere. 27.6. 
               he taketh away Kings, and ſetteth vp Kinges. Nabuchadnezzar in reſpect of his kingdome, is called The Seruant of God: and a iudgement is threatned againſt all people which will not ſubmit their necke vnder his yoke. There is no power,
               Rom. 13.1. 
               but of God: and whoſoeuer doth reſiſt power, doth reſiſt the ordinance of God.
               1. Pet. 2.13. Of all powers, the authoritie of the King (who is named by the Apoſtle Peter ſuch a chiefe or ſupreame power as for the Lordes ſake, is to be obeyed) doth ſeeme firſt to be moſt agreeable to nature,Hieron. epiſt. 4. ad Ruſticum. as S. Ierome doth witneſſe in his. 4. Epiſtle: In apibus principes ſunt, grues

vnam ſequuntur ordine literato, Imperator vnus, Iudex vnus prouinciae, in naui vnus gubernator, in domo vnus dominus, in quamuis grandi exercitu vnius ſignum expectatur. Bees haue their chiefe gouernor. The Cranes do follow one in exquiſite order. There is one chiefe commaunder, one chiefe Iudge of a Prouince, one gouernour of all in the Shippe, one Maiſter in a houſe: In an armie be it neuer ſo great, the enſigne of one is eſpecially regarded and attended on.
                In the body of man, though the limmes and partes be many, yet they all obey one head.
            Secondly, moſt fit for the cutting off of ſeditions and rebellions: and therefore the Romains in all their extreameſt dangers had recourſe vnto this Tanquam ad anchoram ſacram, as to their ſhoote anchor, as to their laſt & beſt refuge, as Liuy witneſſeth,Liu. lib. 6. 
               Trepidi patres ad ſummum auxilium decurrunt, dictatorem dici placet, The fearefull Senators did flie to their chiefeſt ſuccour,
                (which was, to chooſe out one to haue ſupreame aucthoritie) whom it pleaſed them to cal a Dictator.
               
               Liu. lib. 22▪
                And when Hannibal preſſed the Romains Ad dictatorem dicendum

remedium iamdiu deſideratū ciuitas confugit, The Citie went to the chooſing and pronouncing of the Dictator,
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   lib. 6. 
               which was the remedie they long expected: Becauſe, as in an other place he writeth, Dictatoris edictum pro numine ſemper obſeruatum eſt, The commaundement and proclamation of the Dictator, was eſteemed to be as the voyce of God:
                there was no appealing from him.
                  
                     〈…〉
                   lib. 2. 
               Agedum dictatorem à quo prouecatio non eſt creemus: Come
                (ſayd the Conſull Appius) let vs make a Dictator,
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   lib. 6. 
               from whom it ſhall not be lawfull for any man to appeale. Tantus erat Dictatoris terror apud hoſtes vt eo creato ſtatim à moenibus diſceſserint. So great was the terrour of the Dictator, euen amongſt the enemies, that as ſone as he was created, they raiſed their ſiege and departed. Wherby appeareth playnely, that the ancient Romains as wel in warre as in peace, founde this as a ſure anchor holde againſt all ſeditions and dangers, to enioy one, ſuch a Magiſtrate, as from whom there ſhould be no appeale, and whoſe authoritie ſhould poſſeſſe, as it were, the roome of God vpon the earth. The Carians were once a wealthy and flouriſhing

people: but by ſeditions, which came by the hauing of many heads & gouernours, they were brought to ruine and vtter deſolation: wherevpon there aroſe a prouerbe,

                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  
                     Multi duces diſperdidere Cariam,
                     Homer.
                  
                  Too many Guydes vndid the countey Caria.
               
            
            When many Souldiers were mutinous, prudent Vlyſſes did repreſſe them with theſe wordes,

                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  
                     Multos imperitare malum eſt, rex vnicus eſto.
                  
                  Tis not good too many to rule, let onely be one King.
               
Which verſe (as Aemilius Probus doth teſtifie) Dion did alſo vſe when Heraclides began his faction.
            Thirdly, the gouernement of one Monarch doth ſeeme to reſemble moſt liuely the image of Gods power & maieſtie: For as in the firmament, the Sunne, Moone, and Starres, do as it were repreſent ſome image of the glory of the Eternall: So the rule of Monarches, in their ſeuerall kingdomes vpon earth, doth call to our conſiderations the gouernment and high maieſtie

of the omnipotent God. And moſt certainly at this time of the alteration of the eſtate of the Iewiſh common-wealth, the wil and purpoſe of God is in his ſeruant king Dauid,
               Pſal. 22, 3. Pſal. 2, 6. to erect an Image & type of the kingdome of Chriſt. But here (may ſome ſay) If the will of God were now in Dauid and his poſteritie, to ſet foorth a figure of the kingdom of Chriſt, how can the Iſraelites be ſaid to ſinne ſo great a ſinne, in aſking a king, when they aſked onely that, which was determined in the purpoſe of God? Why doeth the Lorde ſo puniſh their requeſt, in ſending them ſo wicked a king as was Saul,
               
                  
                     •
                  . Sam. 13 11 
                     •
                  . Sam. 15, 9. who beſides his often and wilfull difobedience againſt the cōmandement of God, did moſt cruelly murder the prieſts of God,
                  
                     •
                  . Sam. 22, 18, cauſing to bee ſlaine at one time foureſcore and fiue, which ware the linnen Ephod, if in deſiring a king, their will did concurre with the will of God? Yee are heere to obſerue, that the Iſraelites had no reſpect to the purpoſe of God, but onely they ſhewed foorth the fruites of deſpairing and malcontented affections. In the ſpoile of the goods of Iob,
               
                  
                     •
                  ob. 1.15, 17, 21. the Caldeans and Sabeans had no regarde to the will and purpoſe

of God, which was moſt iuſt and holy to examine ſharply one of his ſeruants, and to make him a ſchoolemaſter of patience to all poſteritie: their deſire was onely iniuriouſly to enrich themſelues with the ſpoyle of Iob. In the death of our ſauiour Chriſt, the high Prieſtes, Scribes, & Phariſes had no reſpect to the will of God,Act. 2.23. which was moſt mercifull and iuſt, by that all ſufficient raunſome for ſinne, to ſaue all beleeuers: their intent was onely to bee reuenged of him, whom they hated with deadly malice, Euen ſo, theſe Iſraelites haue no deſire here to obey the ſecret decree of God, in the kingdome of Dauid and of his ofſpring, to ſet out a reſemblance of the kingdome of Chriſt, but onely their purpoſe is, with a deſperat diſcontentment to ſhake off the gouernment of their good iudges Samuel, contrary to the reuealed wil of God, which had before decreed,Iud. 2.18. that Whoſoeuer was approued to be raiſed vp of God for their deliuerer, he ſhould afterward iudge Iſrael all the dayes of his life. And therefore they worthily receiue a puniſhment of their obſtinate diſobedience againſt the expreſſe commandement of God. And yet notwithſtanding

this hiſtorie doeth ſhew vs that the appointment of God was performed in Samuel,
               1. Sam 7, 41. who is ſaid, To haue iudged Iſrael all the dayes of his life. Seuen and twentie yeeres and ſeuen moneths hee had iudged,
                  
                     •
                  . Sam. 13, 2. when Saul beganne to reigne. Two yeeres was Saul king: for although he liued aboue twelue yeeres after that hee was elected king, yet foraſmuch as in the ſecond yeere hee was denounced to bee reiected of God,
                  
                     •
                  . Sam. 11, 7. his kingdome is named to be but of two yeres in continuance. And during that time alſo, ye authoritie of Samuel is not aboliſhed, for euen in theſe affaires againſt Nachaſh the Ammonite, a puniſhment was in a publique Proclamation threatened againſt euery one which would not followe Saul and Samuel,
               Act. 13.21. although in the Actes of the Apoſtles, becauſe the kingdome is the more excellent ſtate of gouernment, the whole fourtie yeeres be attributed to Saul, as the greater power and maieſtie, ſwallowing vp the leſſe. As concerning the miraculous prouidence of God extended towardes the Iſraelites during the time that Samuel was their Iudge, there neede no further teſtimonies, but that onely place in

the ſeuenth chapter of this booke,1. Sam. 7, 13▪
                wher it is ſayd, That the hand of the Lord was againſt the Philiſtines all the dayes of Samuel. The Philiſtines were the deadlieſt and fierceſt enemies that euer moleſted the Iſraelits. Seeing then that God ouerthrew their cruelleſt & mightieſt enemies, & that not once or twice, but euen al the dayes of Samuel: what a wretched ingratitude was this, that becauſe a few aduerſaries had gotten aduantage againſt one of their Cities, they ſhould therfor vnthankfully ſhake off that happie gouernment, vnder which God had graunted them ſo many triumphant victories? But what were the cauſes of this their vnkind & froward deſire of alteration? Firſt they would be liked to other nations rounde about them, as they ſay:1. Sam. 8, 5.20. 
               Make vs a King to gouerne vs, like all other nations. And afterward againe: We will be like all other Countries, a King ſhall iudge vs, and goe out before vs, and fight our battayles. Forraine gouernementes, although they be in them ſelues moſt excellent (as no doubt thoſe were which were eſtabliſhed vnder kings) are not to be drawen as enſamples to other nations

wherein another eſtate of gouernment hath alreadie taken place. Wee cannot affirme that becauſe this or that is nowe done in the common wealth of Geneua,
               
                  
                     •
                  oh. 12, 42.1. or becauſe this or that was once done in the Elderſhips and Councels of the Iewes, therefore the ſame ought to bee done in other ſeniories and aſſemblies where there is not that Ius gladij, that ciuill authoritie & power, which we ſee plainly was in them. Their Synagogues had the ordering of ciuill puniſhments,Math. 10, 17. to condemne to bee ſcourged, thoſe whom they iudged to offend:Math. 26, 47, 
                     •
                  7. they could ſend out officers with ſwords and ſtaues to apprehend Chriſt, they could examine witneſſes againſt him, and binde him and deliuer him to Pilate. And whereas when Pilate bade them take him and iudge him after their owne lawe:
                  
                     •
                  oh. 18, 31. they anſwered, That it was not lawfull for them to put any man to death. Chryſoſtome doeth one way expound it, that it may well bee meant of that kinde of death, which (to aggrauate the ſhame) they ſought eſpecially to haue executed on Chriſt. For otherwiſe they had authoritie to ſtone to death, as it may ſeeme that Steuen was condenmed by them, becauſe

as the lawe was, that the witneſſes ſhould caſt the firſt ſtone,
               Deut. 17, 7. ſo the witneſſes in the ſtoning of Stephen,
               Act. 7, 58. doe orderly lay downe their clothes at the feete of Saul. In the Chapter following, their power doth extend to draw out men,
               Act. 8, 3. 
               women and children, and to thruſt them into priſon: which authoritie Saul could put in execution at Damaſcus,
               Act. 9, 1. much more at the citie Hieruſalem.
            
            
               Tertullus their Oratour doeth acknowledge this before the gouernor Faelix when he ſayth of Paul, We tooke him,
               Act. 24.6. 
               & would haue iudged him according to our law, but that the chiefe captaine Lyſias came vpon vs, and with great violence tooke him out of our handes.
            
            The enſamples of thoſe which are chiefe gouernors in Ariſtocratie, ought not to be drawen vnto them which are ſubiects vnder a Monarchie. There is in euery dominion a ſupreame power, which the Greeks do cal call 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                the Latines Maieſtatem, the Italians Signoria, and we in England do name it by the French word Soueraintie. Whereſoeuer that chiefe authoritie doth remayne, whether it be in one

or in many, from thence muſt be deriued the ordering of all thinges, both in Church and Common-wealth.
            
               
                  
                     •
                  . Sam. 8.20Theſe Iſraelites here deſire that they might haue a King to goe before them, & to fight their battayles. Their requeſt had not diſpleaſed God, had there not been before an other forme of gouernment eſtabliſhed amongſt them: for otherwiſe of a Monarchie, that may well be ſayd which S. Auguſtine doth write againſt Fauſtus the Manichee,
               Aug. contra Faſtum Manichaeum lib. 22 cap. 75. 
               Ordo ille naturalis mortalium paci accommodatus hoc poſcit vt ſuſcipiendi belli auctoritas at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   conſilium ſit penes principem, exequendi autem iuſsa bellica miniſterium milites debeant paci ſaluti
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   communi. The naturall order moſt fit for the peace of mankind, doth require this; that the authoritie and counſell of taking Warre in hand, be in the power of the Prince: and the dutie of executing the commaundementes of Warre, is a thing that the Souldiers doe owe, for the maynteinance of the peace of the Common-wealth.
                And a litle after, 
                  Ʋir iustus ſi forte ſub rege etiam ſacrilego militet, rectè poſsit illo iubente bellare, ciuicae pacis ordinem ſeruans, cui quod iubetur vel non eſse

contra dei praeceptum certum eſt, vel vtrum ſit certum non eſt, ita vt fortaſſe reum regem faciat iniquitas imperandi, innocentem autem militem oſtendat ordo ſeruiendi. A iuſt man, if he be a Souldier vnder his King being wicked, may at his commaundement fight, keeping the order of ciuill peace with his fellow ſubiectes, when that which is commaunded is not directly againſt the word of God: or whether it be or no, it is not certainely knowne; ſo that perhappes a ſinne in commaunding may make the king guyltie, and yet the order of obeying may declare the Souldier innocent.
               
               Num. 13.3. Ioſu. 11. Ioſu. 6, 6. When God ruled his people by Moſes and Ioſua, they as Dukes and Magiſtrates, diſpoſed all thinges both in warre and peace, in ordering both Church & Common-wealth, in cauſing the people to be circumciſed, in buylding Aulters, and euery way gouerning the charge committed to them. When afterwarde he rayſed vp Iudges, he endued them not onely with warlike vertue, but that they might better alſo reforme abuſes in the Church,Iudg. 4, 4. he gaue ſometimes to the Women, as vnto Debora: ſometimes to Men, as vnto Samuel,
               1. Sam. 3, 20 the ſpirit of prophecying.

When after, he eſtabliſhed Kinges, the Scriptures do plentifully declare vnto vs what ſupremacie was graunted to them ouer all perſons,1. Chro. 13. 1. Chro. 23, 4. and in all cauſes, as well eccleſiaſticall as ciuill. Dauid armed his people with the authoritie of the ſworde, againſt all their publike enemies: he cauſed the Arke to be remooued from a priuate mans houſe: he placed the orders of the Prieſtes and Leuites,
               Pſal. 132.5. and had a principall care to finde out a ſeate for the Lordes ſeruice, an habitation for the mightie God of Iacob. Salomon depoſed the wicked Prieſt Abiathar, and placed Sadoc a better in his roome.1. Reg. 2, 35. 2. Chro. 8, 14. He eſtabliſhed the orders of the Leuites and other officers: and (leaſt any man ſhoulde thinke that Salomon did herein more then he might) it is ſaid by expreſſe wordes that this his charge of the Church was the commaundement of Dauid the man of God. Aſia armed his people againſt the enemies of Gods Church,2. Chro. 14. 2. Chro. 15.13, 16. 2. Chro. 20.3. he made a decree, that they ſhould be ſlaine which would not ſeek and worſhip the Lord God of Iſrael, hee depoſed Maacha from her regencie, becauſe of her idolatrie. Iehoſaphat ordered the warres of the houſe of

               Iuda: he ſent foorth Eliſham and Iehoram Prieſts to inſtruct the people:2. Chro. 17, 8. 2. Chro. 19.8. 2. Chro. 29.1. 2. Chro. 31.4. he placed in authority the Prieſts and chiefe nobles for the iudgement of the cauſe of the Lord. Ezechias by lawfull warre withſtood Sennacheribs vnlawfull oppreſſions. He repayred the temple, rooted out idolatrie, and appointed the courſes of the Prieſts and Leuites. Ioſias tooke order for the pulling downe of idolatrie,2. Reg. 23.4 and the execution of the prieſts of Baal. Afterward when the Romanes had conquered Iurie, for as much as there is no power but of God, S. Peter doth alſo to them attribute this ſupremacie,1. Pet. 2.13. Rom. 13, 4. calling the king a chiefe and ſupreme gouernour: and ſhewing alſo what manner of ſupremacie he hath: to wit, ſuch a chiefe power as doeth extend it ſelfe generally to the puniſhment of euill doers, and to the praiſe of them that doe well. As largely then as goeth good or euill, that is, through the obſeruation and breach of euery commaundement of either of the two tables, & throughout all nations that can bee either in the Church or commom wealth: ſo farre goeth the ſupremacie of Princes in their dominions, to ſhewe foorth their iuſtice in puniſhing,

their mercie in fauouring, and their loue in rewarding. Saint Paul ſpeaketh as well of the Romane Emperours of his time,Rom. 3, 4. as alſo of all other higher powers which are to enſue in any other age or place, that they beare not the ſworde for nought, but are the miniſters of God, to take vengeance of euill doers.
            
               1. Sam. 8, 3,The ſecond cauſe why theſe people deſire to ſhake off the gouernment of Samuel, was,1. Sam. 2, 3, 4. becauſe his ſonnes ruling in his ſteed, did receiue bribes, and peruert iudgement. Samuel doeth in this twelfth Chapter expoſtulate this matter at large with them, & is cleared ſufficiently in the conſcience, & teſtimonie of them all. The iniquities which his ſonnes committed,1. Sam. 8, 2. were not becauſe he did not preſcribe good wayes vnto them, but becauſe they did not walke in the wayes and ſteps of their father. If a man haue but a ſmall familie, he ſhall yet be abuſed by ſome: What then muſt wee thinke of thoſe higher powers, who haue ſo many vnder officers in ſo infinite places, deriuing their authoritie from them?1 Reg 2, 22 
               Salomon when hee commaunded Ioab to bee put to death for thoſe wilfull murders which hee

had before committed, ſaith, that he did thē 
               Patre ſuo Dauide inſcio, His father Dauid not knowing of it.
                So herein Samuel his children, and in all ages vnder Chriſtian Princes, many thinges are done by inferiour Magiſtrates, which come not to the knowledge of ſuperiour powers, and whereof no fault is to be imputed to them, ſeeing the offences proceede not of want of good and holſome lawes: but, for that there is not due obedience yeelded vnto them.
            The thirde cauſe,1. Sam. 8, 1. why they ſo greedily gape for alteration, was, becauſe they diſtruſted in the power and prouidence of God. They thought that the weakeneſſe of aged Samuel, was not ſufficient to deliuer them from the oppreſſion of Nachaſh the Ammonite. The puniſhment which God layde vpon their diſtruſtfull forefathers, might haue been a ſufficient warning to them,Num. 13, 3. to haue ſhewed them the greeuouſneſſe and horror of this ſinne. When Moſes had ſent of euery Tribe one, to view the land of Canaan (amongſt whom, were Ioſua, of the tribe of Ephraim; and Caleb, of the tribe of Iuda:) at their returne, many

of them gaue great reportes of the power and ſtrength of the Canaanites,
               Nū. 13, 34. that they were mightie men,Num. 14.2, 9. like Giants, and the ſonnes of Enachim: and that the Iſraelites were but as Graſhoppers in reſpect of them. The people began by and by to murmure & diſpayre, and to prepare a returne into Aegypt. Ioſua
                and Caleb did what they could to encourage the people, bidding them not to feare,Pſal. 78, 18. for (ſay they) they are but bread for vs: the Shield is departed from them: the Lord is on our ſide: But the Iſraelites were ſo farre from receiuing comfort, that they cried out one to an other, to fling ſtones agaynſt their comforters. This diſtruſting minde did ſo highly diſpleaſe God,Num. 26, 64. that they were cut off and deſtroyed with many feareful plagues, ſo that of aboue ſixe hundred thouſande of them, there came but two into the land of Promiſe. The Lord had let that people ſee by ſundry enſamples, that there is no power ſo ſmall, but that hee is able ſufficiently to ſtrengthen it againſt the enemies of his trueth. Abraham hauing but three hundred and eighteene men,Gen. 14, 14 ouerthrewe the power of fiue Kings. Samſon with a iawe

bone ſlew a thouſand. Siſera the captaine of the hoſte of Iabin king of Canaan,
               Iudg. 15, 19. was of great ſtrength, he had .900. charets of yron,Iudg 4, 13. & 22. yet was he ſlaine at the laſt by the hande of a ſilly woman. And to Samuel,
               1. Sam. 7, 13. though he were old, yet ye Lord gaue him power to his dying day, to ſubdue and keepe vnder the haughty Philiſtines. By this cōtinual experience of ye power of God, they might haue euidently ſeene, that there is no ſtrength ſo feeble, but God can plentifully inable it, for the fighting of the Lordes battayles: and thereupon they ſhould haue gathered courage and comfort, & not with ſuch wretchleſſe vnthankfulneſſe, ſtarted backe from the lyuing God. What a moſt ingratefull part was this,1. Sam. 3, 20 when Samuel had ſo long time propounded vnto them the heauenly trueth of God, and for the ſpace of aboue .xxvii. yeeres, as a moſt carefull Magiſtrate defended them from all inuaſions & oppreſſions, now in olde age to forſake him, & as weery of his gouernment, to deſire a King to be placed ouer them? Theſe Iſraelites do deale with Samuel, as afterward the ſubiectes of Dauid did with their king, at the time of the rebellion of Abſolom. Dauid had then

reigned .xxx. yeeres, & therefore was about lx. yeeres of age (for he was about .xxx. yeeres olde at the death of Saul.
               Pſal. 3.1.) How his people did cary them ſelues in Abſoloms conſpiracie, he declareth him ſelfe in his .3. Pſalme, wherin he complaineth that in that his time of neede, he found many ſo to become his enemies, that in moſt deſpitefull maner they obiected vnto him, that there was no helpe for him in his God. But theſe vnfaythful Subiectes, were like vnto the Swallowes which tary with vs in the Spring and Sommer, but in the colde of Winter doe wholly forſake vs: they were like the Doues, which ſit vpon the houſe in fayre weather: but if once a ſtorme do come, they are preſently gone: or rather they were like that curriſh kind of lazy Dogges, that will fawne vpon their maiſters by the fiers ſide, but if they ſee him goe abrode in foule weather, they are content to let him goe a lone: or like vnto curſed Vipers, ſeeing that as much as in them lyed, they ſought to rent the bowels of him of whom next vnder God they had their beeing, their ſtrength, & wealth, and whatſoeuer they poſſeſſed. The ſinne of many in theſe our dayes, is by manie

degrees more haynous and deteſtable, then was the offence of the Iſraelites in the dayes either of Dauid or of Samuel. They deſired an exchange of their gouernour: but yet they deſired to haue a King erected out of the middeſt of their brethren, according to the law in Deutronomie.
               Deut. 17.15. 
               Out of thy brethren ſhalt thou appoynt thy ſelfe a King: thou mayſt not ſet ouer thee a ſtranger, which is not thy brother. How greeuouſly then do they offende, which deſire to haue brought in vpon their Prince a forraine power, ye power of a Prieſt of Rome? How horrible is their ſinne (if there be any ſuch monſter in nature) that do gape for the inuaſion of a forreine Prince, to weaken or abrogate that authoritie, which right, and blood, and the law, hath placed ouer them? What meaſure we ſhould looke for of Strangers, the dealinges of the Spaniards in the Low-countries may be a ſufficient warning vnto vs. Their Nobles haue been murdered, their auncient inhabitants ſpoyled, or dryuch to flie their natiue ſoyle. Their famous and flouriſhyng Cities ſo oppreſſed and diſpeopled, that the graſſe doth grow in thoſe ſtreetes, which haue bin heretofore

by wealthy Citizens and Marchants ſo notably frequented and repleniſhed. Naples may likewiſe ſerue for inſtruction herein: where, when the Spaniards preuayled, they were preſently moſt miſerably plagued with many new taxes & tributes, whereof before, they neuer had mention. No man could haue a fire, but he muſt firſt pay ſixe ſhyllinges for the chimney: none permitted to eate ſundry kindes of meates, but firſt he muſt fine for them: none to kill a Fowle, but firſt ſticke vp a fether to giue warning for the Impoſt: ſo that the farmer of the Butcherie & Poultrie, receiued dayly the ſumme of three hundred Duckets. None fared the better becauſe he bare the name of a Catholick. Religion was not the thing which the hungry Souldiers reſpected: Proteſtant or Papiſt, if he were rich, and had a fleece, all was one.
            
               1. Sā. 8, 3.11.The Iſraelites found them ſelues greeued, that Samuels children receiued ſome thinges of them: But by Samuels anſwere it may appeare, that the receiptes of his ſonnes, were nothing to thoſe infinite taxes & oppreſſions which a Tyrant ſhould bring vpon them. It was well ſayd of the Poet,

                  
                  Temporibus diris igitur iuſsu
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      NeronisIuuenal. ſatyr. 10.
                  
                  Longinū, & magnos Senecae praediuitis hortos,
                  clauſit et egregias Lateranorum obſidet aedes tota cohors. &c.
                  
                     In bloody times, and in rage of Nero the tyrant
                  
                  
                     Longinus great ſubſtance, gardens of Seneca, buildinges
                     
                  
                  
                     of Laterans ſerue for fit ſpoylinges for the men armed.
                  
               
            
            
               Quintus Aurilius, when he (hauing a faire houſe in Alba) was drawen to execution in the tyrannie of Sylla, cryed out, O houſe at Alba, thou waſt the cauſe of my death! In ciuill vprores, and in inuaſions of ſtrangers, no man can chalenge any priuiledge for his integritie or profeſſion. Be they Catholiques in name (as are now the Romaniſtes) or Catholiques in deede (as are true faythful Chriſtians) be they Miniſters, be they Marchants, be they Recuſants, be they Reformers, if they be wealthy, & haue any thing to looſe, all is one. The moſt fearefull puniſhment of all, is that which Samuel doth warne them off, that when the Lord ſhal lay oppreſſion and bondage vpon them, as a plague for their diſcontentment, they ſhall cry vnto the Lord for helpe, and not be heard:1. Sam. 8.18. 
               Ye ſhall cry out (ſayth he) at that day, becauſe of the King which you haue choſen to your ſelues, and the Lord

at that day will not hearken vnto you. There are three eſpeciall dueties required in all good Subiectes in any eſtabliſhed Common-wealth, whereof euery one is wanting in theſe inconſtant Iſraelites. The firſt is in hart to be loyall to the ſupreame Gouernour.Eccl. 10.20. 
               Curſe not the King (ſayth the Wiſe man) no not in thy hart, leaſt the birdes of the ayre doe cary the voyce, and the fethered fowles bewray thee. Whatſoeuer is amiſſe in ſuperiour powers, ſeeing that (as Salomon witneſſeth) The hart of the King is in the hand of the Lord:
               Pro 21.1. it is the part of vs that are inferiors, to pray to God to renew and guyde their hartes with his principal ſpirit: but in the meane time, in no caſe, either to take vp or moue againſt them, or once in hart to wiſh for the ſubuertion of their eſtate. When Nero, Caligula, or ſuch Heathen tyrantes poſſeſſed the Scepter and Empire, yet did the Apoſtles of Chriſt Exhort euery ſoule to be ſubiect to them:
               Rom. 3.1. 1. Tim. 2.2. 
               and all prayers and ſupplications to be made to God for them.
               Baruch. 1 11 
               Pray for the life of Nabuchadnezzar king of Babilon, and for Baltaſar his ſonne, that their dayes vpon earth may be as the dayes of heauen,

that ye may long do them ſeruice, and finde fauour in their ſight.
            
            The ſecond duetie of a faythful Subiect, is in the ordering of his life, to abandon ſinne and iniquitie: for (as Salomon declareth) For the iniquitie of the people,
               Pro. 28, 2. the Prince is often changed. Theſe Iſraelites ſay, That they haue added this, deſiring of a King, to all their other wickedneſſe, as their owne conſcience accuſing them of many other enormities. Looke how odious the name traytor is to the eares; and ſo greeuous in deede ſhould ſinne be to the ſoule and ſpirite: for whoſoeuer doe by heaping ſinne vpon ſinne, draw downe a vengeance vpon the place where they inhabite, are by the ſentence of the Wiſe man, found guyltie of high treaſon againſt Prince and Countrey.
               Hoſe, 4 1. 
               There is (ſayth the Prophet) no trueth, no mercie, no knowledge of God in the land: but by ſwearing, lying, murdering, ſtealing, & whooring, they breake out; and blood toucheth blood: therefore ſhall the land mourne, and the inhabitants thereof ſhall vtterly be deſtroyed.
            
            The third duetie is in tongue alſo to carrie him ſelfe loyall and duetifull. The Law

of God is,Exod 22 28 
               Thou ſhalt not rayle vpon the Iudge
                     •
                  , neither ſpeake euill of the Ruler of the people▪
               
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 12.2. 
                     〈◊〉
                   21 6. The olde Iſraelites were ſome ſ
                  ••
               aen with Leproſies, ſome deſtroyed with Peſtilence, with fierie Serpents, & many fearefull kindes of death, becauſe they murmured againſt the Lords annoynted. Theſe Iſraelites here,1. Sam. 12.2 do tread in their ſteps, when becauſe Iabeſh Gilead their citte was in great diſtreſſe, do therefore impute the fault to the gouernment vnder Samuel. Such is the wickedneſſe of many in our age, which becauſe ſome troubles, dearth, and ſcarcity, are for a time befallen vnto, doe therefore murmure either againſt the Worde now preached, or the Gouernment now eſtabliſhed: whereas in deede the occaſion ought chiefly to be aſcribed to their owne vngodly lyues, and to there wilfull diſobedience againſt the lawes both of God and Soueraine. O (ſaith God by the pſalmiſt) that my people would haue harkened vnto my voyce:
               Pſal. 81.13. 
               For if Iſrael would haue walked in my wayes, I ſhould ſoone haue humbled their enemies, & turned my hand againſt their aduerſaries: I ſhould haue fed them with the flower of Wheate, & with Honey,

out of the ſtony Rocke would I haue ſatiſfied them.
               Ier. 44.17. 
               When the Iewes (as it is in Ieremie) cryed out that thinges were not ſo cheape and plentifull amongſt them ſince they gaue ouer baking cakes to the Queene of heauen, as they were before, when they worſhypped the hoaſt of the Skies: where, I pray you, was then ye fault? Not in the worde taught by Ieremie, but in the want of due obedience in the people to the voyce of God vttered by the Prophet. Euen ſo in theſe our dayes, the cauſe of the dearth and ſcarcitie which doth remaine amongſt vs, is not in the worde now preached, or the lawes now confirmed, but in the diſobedience of the people both to the one and to the other. As (not to vſe many inſtances) the Worde of God, and the Statutes of our moſt gracious Soueraigne, do condemne pride and exceſſe, as well in apparrell as diet, with all vnthriftie gaming, and prodigalitie of life. Now where there is no regarde to auoyde theſe ſinnes, but that ſo many runne wilfully headlong to exceede their calling, and to liue at a greater rate then their maynteinance doth extende vnto, How is it poſſible, but that thereby many

muſt needes be brought to great diſtreſſe, want, and penurie. A late writer ſpeaking of a dearth in Germanie, did yeelde this as the cauſe therof,Hulric. Hutten in aula. 
               Omnes ferè per Germaniam principes egent propter luxum et vanitatē, quibus dediti plurima invtiliter abſumunt. Vide ſue enim vt multa ſcurris, ludionibus, mimis, paraſitis ac muſicis largiuntur? Vides ne vt in aulis noctu diu
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   edatur et bibatur? vt pauimenta vino madeant? vt plus ebrij isti profundant quàm ingurgitent, plus ingurgitent quàm ferre poſsint? Tum ad aemulationem quoque dantur vestes, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   is eſt principum tumor vt quanto magis egent tanto minus egere videri velint, et idcirco nihil de pompa, nihil de apparatibus remittūt. What want we haue, muſt be imputed to our owne abuſe of Gods bleſſinges, when for the prodigall waſting of them, God doth ſhorten them, & make the heauen as iron,Leuit. 26.19. and the earth as braſſe. It muſt be laide vpon our haughtie diſobedience of the Law, and not vpon ſuch decrees, ſtatutes, and proclamations whereby the ſaid abuſes haue bin ſo often and ſo iuſtly prohibited. And yet if we would duely call to minde how wonderfully people are now multiplyed in euery part of this our realme of England

(by reaſon that although by warre we haue ſomtime loſt ſome men, & by plagues alſo the Lord hath eftſoones corrected vs gently, and as it were ſhaken the rod at vs, and beaten vs with a ſoft hand: yet we haue had no ſuch ciuill warres, and vniuerſall plagues of Peſtilence, Sweates, or other conſuming diſeaſes, which heretofore haue made waſte ouer our whole land) if I ſay, we would duely conſider the great increaſe of people now, in reſpect of that they haue bin in times paſt; and how notwithſtanding, the Lord of his bountifull goodneſſe hath from yeere to yeere, either mercifully prouided for vs within the land graunting vs ſufficient not onely to ſuſteine our ſelues, but alſo to be helpfull and comfortable vnto others; or els plentifully ſupplyed our neceſſities out of other countries, ſending vs, though peraduenture not ſo much as we haue deſired, yet infinite times more then we haue deſerued: we ſhould rather be enforced to admire and reuerence the great mercies of God, then with vnthankfull mindes to repine and grudge againſt him.Gen. 12.10. Gen. 26.2. 
               Abraham was compelled by famine to flie out of Canaan into Egypt. Iſaak dryuen to

flie to Abimilec king of the Philiſtines, and to dwell in Gerar.
               Gen. 45.2, 
               Iacob forced to ſende his Familie and Aſſes againe and againe to buy Corne of Pharaoes ſeruants. And although now through want of graine, we haue in many places endured ſome puniſhment, yet hath it been nothing ſo heauily layde on, as heretofore it hath been vpon many of our forefathers. In the yeere of our Lord God a thouſand ſixtie and nine, men were conſtrayned to eate Cattes, Dogges; yea, and mens fleſhe, in ſundry partes of this land. In the yeere one thouſand three hundred and fifteene, ſome did eate Horſe-fleſh, ſome their owne children: and in diuers places, when Priſoners came to be committed which had any fleſh vpon them, they were welcommed with plucking in peeces, and deuoured halfe aliue. Of late time, in the dayes of Queene Marie, many yet can remember how many thouſandes in this land, for want of their accuſtomed corne, were glad that they could feede vpon their bread of Ackornes. But we (although our people be now in a manner doubled or trebled aboue the number that were then) yet the Lord of his euerlaſting

mercy, doth ſtill vouchſafe to continue his goodneſſe towardes vs: Whoſe prouidence in thus ſuſteining vs is as mightie and powerfull, and in a manner the very ſame that was in the time of the Flood in the Arke of Noah: which though it were but a ſmall veſſell,Gen 6.15. the length but three hundred Cubites, the breadth but fiftie, the deapth but thirtie;Gen. 7.11. yet did the Lord in the ſame for the ſpace of about a whole yeere together (for ſo long were they toſſed vpon the waters) prouide not for Noah onely and his family, but alſo for all beaſtes, birdes,Gen. 8.13. and creeping thinges, two and two of euery kinde. How was it poſſible to any iudgement of man, that ſo ſmall a veſſell ſhould conteine roome, reliefe and ſuccour, for ſo many, and that for the ſpace of ſo large a time? And how coulde it be that thoſe beaſtes and birdes which do commonly one liue of the ſpoyle of an other, ſhould yet be all both wilde and tame togyther, ſo long a time in the Arke, and not one deuoure an other. Heere the omnipotent power of God did wonderfully ſhew foorth it ſelfe. God multiplyed their foode. God helde his holy hand ouer them. God preſerued

them one from praying vpon another, and one from hurting an other. And▪ ſo miraculous in a maner hath been, and is the prouidence of God to this our Realme of England. It is but a ſmall Arke, but a handfull in reſpect of other nations: it is with inhabiters mightily repleniſhed: yet the Lord not one yeere (as in the Arke) but from yeere to yeere, and many yeeres hath fauourably preſerued vs. And though there be many wylde beaſtes, amongſt which with malcontented mindes doe gape for an alteration, that they may wreake their malice on the Sainctes of God, which haue their willes inwardly proue, and as it were the kniues in their handes ready drawen, to cut the throates of Gods chyldren: yet the Lord doth ſo with his power put a ſnaffle in their mouth, and a hooke in their noſtrelles, that they haue not their purpoſe: The Lordes name be bleſſed therefore, and the Lord ſo bridle them euer hereafter, euen for his mercies ſake, in his ſonne Chriſt Ieſus.
            If theſe brutiſh natures had eyes to beholde, and hartes to remember, what ſingular bleſſinges the Lord hath beſtowed

on this ſmall Ilande,1. Sam. 12.24. 
               that they could (as Samuel ſpeakeeh here to the Iſralites) conſider what great thinges the Lord hath done for them, they could not but be touched with remorſe and griefe for this their viperous and haynous vnkindneſſe: whereas many other Countries about vs, either haue not the worde of God truely taught,1. Cro. 14.15. or if they haue it, they haue it eyther with warre or bloodſhed, or (which is as ill) with ioyning together Chriſt and Belial. We may in all peace and quietneſſe freely reſort to the Temple to heare the worde of God and publicke prayer in a knowen language, whereby both hart and tongue may goe together; in which reſpect euery litle Village in this realme of Englande hath a greater bleſſing, then all that large and ample region of Spayne. And whereas other Nations about vs haue continuall broyles and troubles within the land, we ſtand as it were in a gallarie, as the Greeke prouerbe is 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Extra telorum iuctum,
               Lucian. in votis. where we may beholde them (though to our griefe) bayting and renting one an others bowels: but we are free our ſelues from thoſe outragious miſchiefes. Wee

feele thoſe 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,Ariſtoph. in ambus. Plin. lib. 10 cap. 32. Plant. in paenulo. 
               Halcyonios dies, as the auncient Writers haue obſerued, that when the litle birde Halcyon, otherwyſe called Alcedo, doth buylde her neſt in the Sea bankes, be the Sea neuer ſo rigorous and ſtormie before, yet there followeth then a great calme and quietneſſe, which continueth till ſhe haue hatched her young: detering all which time, the Shipmen in the Sicilian Seas, do feare no dangers of tempeſt.
            This calme time, this milde, quiet, and peaceable time, the Lord hath graunted to vs, not for a few dayes, but for many happy yeeres togither. We enioy that ſweete bleſſing which was in Iurie and Iſrael in the time of Salomon,
               1. Reg 4.25 
               To dwell ſafely euery man vnder his owne Vine, and vnder his owne Figtree, from Dan to Beerſheba:
                from one ende of the land to the other,Deut. 8.14. euen all the dayes of Salomon. O that we were not become ſo drunkē with this our proſperitie as to forget that good Lord, which hath giuen this good Land vnto vs!Deut 32 15. O that we were not like Ieſhurun, ſpoken of in Deutronomie, like the Horſe, which being fat and well fedde,

fedde, doth ſpurne and flinge againſt his keeper, & nouriſher! O that we were not lyke the vntamed Heyfar, by reaſon of our long running in plentifull paſtures,Ier. 31.18. to forget to cary the ſweete yoke of obedience! O that we coulde make true vſe of all the benefites and bleſſinges of our heauenly Father! that the louing kindneſſe of God might leade vs to repentance:Rom. 2 4. that we could (as Samuel ſpeaketh heere to the Iſraelites) Feare the Lord, and ſerue him in trueth with all our hartes,
               1. Sam. 12.24. 
               and conſider what great thinges he hath done for vs:
               Pſal. 107.8. that we coulde Prayſe the Lord for his goodneſſe, and declare the woonders which he dayly doth for this realme of Englande:2. Sam. 12.14. Then ſhoulde the bleſſing of God ſtill remayne vppon vs, both vpon Prince and people.Pro. 16.7. Then ſhould the Lord continue his mercies in going in and out with our Armies.
               Pſal. 8.13. Then ſhould the Lord eyther make our enemies become our friendes, or throughly turne his hande againſt our aduerſaries.Rom. 13.1. Then ſhould there be amongſt vs euery ſoule duetifully ſubiect to the higher powers. Then ſhould we in all diſtreſſes, with contented mindes,

               caſt all our care on God, for he careth for vs.
               1. Pet. 5.7. Then ſhould we in hart conceiue that aſſured confidence & truſt in the goodneſſe of God, that we ſhould faythfully ſay with Dauid,
               Pſal. 118.6. 
               If the Lord be on our ſide, we neede not care what man can do vnto vs. Then ſhould the Lord long proſper,Pſam. 21.4. and euen for euer preſerue that happie Monarchie vnder which we are here ſo peaceably gouerned, and graunt vs a Kingdome of euerlaſtyng peace in the worlde to come: Which giftes & graces, the Lord of Lords, and King of all Kinges, vouchſafe to giue vnto vs, for the merites of our ſauiour Chriſt Ieſus. To whom with the Father and the holy Ghoſt, one true and euer-liuing God, for all his ineſtimable benefites beſtowed vpon vs, be all honour, glory, thankſegeuing, and prayſe, now & for euer. Amen.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   