
      
         
            
            
            ¶NEWES OVT OF the Coast of Spaine.
            The true Report of the honourable seruice for England, perfourmed by Sir FRAVNCIS DRAKE in the moneths of Aprill and May last past, 1587. vpon Cales, and also since that in the Cape S. Vincent and Cape Saker: discoursed at large with euerie seuerall exploit of their fortunate successe, according to their owne Letters, which likewise is confirmed by those that came from thence.
            
            Imprinted at London by W. How for Henry Haslop, and are to be sold at the Signe of the Gunne at the North dore of Paules, by Edward White. 1587.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONOrable Charles L. Howard, Baron of Effingham, Knight of the Honourable Order of the Garter, and high Admirall of England, Ireland, and VVales, the dominions and Isles of the same, of the Towne of Callice, and the marches thereof, of Normandy, Gascoigne, and Guines, and Captaine generall of all her Maiesties Seas and Nauie Royall; increase of honors, and happinesse to his harts desire.
            
               IT hath euer (Right-Honorable) bene an obseruatiō amongst schollers, when they intended to commit their exercises to the iudgement of others, to shroude them selues vnder the patronage of some honorable personage; but I more honoring the noble minded, thē able to expresse my good will, follow his opinion, that if he wrot of the dignity of a Crowne, dedicated his labours to a King: if of the estate, to a graue Counsellor: if of religion, to a Iudiciall Diuine: if of tillage, to the experienced Husbandman: but if of the Seas, to the learned Admirall. So I, writing of high matters, concerning the good fortune of the Seas, shrowde my selfe vnder the sailes of the L. High Admirall, whose heroical mind I know to be such, that your repute it fellonie to robbe a Souldier of his honour, and iniurie to hide what deserued honour is wonne by a Subiect to his Soueraigne: for vertue ioyned with noblenes, is a mixture of true humanitie. And because (as Dion saith) the world is a huge caue of mingled conceits,

and the multitude, as a many hedded beast, rumoring they knowe not what, and murmuring they know not whereat, some forward & wishing wel, others froward & discoraging the well minded: which made me the bolder to publish for the comfort of my countrimen, the honorable seruice of that fortunate English souldier Sir Frauncis Drake, according to such coppies as I haue compassed of the same, which I haue conferd with diuers that were eye witnesses in that expedition: in which I carry this consideration, that such as proue apostatates from the field, backsliding from their seruice, might be preferd to be field bishops, and such as haue not yet seene the honor and daunger, may be spurred forward to reape in this haruest of renowne: For when Darius king of Percia clapt Nabarzanes on the back saying, now Nabarzanes for thy country, he made way as a fier through the throng of the Macedonians, that before studied what hee were best to do and the applause of the people to the successe of that Conquering Affrican, put a double edge to his sword, and added a triple courage to his minde to dye immortall, for honor is like spice which as the more it is punned in the motter, the sweeter it smels; so honor, the more it is tossed in the mindes and mouthes of men truely, the higher it climes: In this respect am I animated to this enterprise, and this I humbly beseech your honor to countenance, that as some do▪ so all true English heartes maye reioyce, and praye for his prosperous successe, which the Almightie God direct and defend in all their proceedings.
            
               Your honors humble in all seruice H. H.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The most fortunate and honourable seruice for England, perfourmed by Sir FRAVNCIS DRAKE in CALES the 19 of Aprill, 1587. with his latest exploits in Cape S. Vincent and Cape Saker, done the 21. of May: written by a Gentleman of his companie to one of his freends, as the verie truth of this expedition and successe.
            
               
                  
                     WHen we recount the incomparable commodities daily flowing into this Realme, especially from the first foundation thereof; how can we doe lesse then spéede to the temple of the Lord to speake the praises of his name? When we obserue the infinitenes of our sinnes, and compare them with the mercies of the Lorde, then with contrition of heart, and humilitie of spirit may we say; Sure the Lord hath done great things for vs, hée hath hardened the heart of Pharao, but drowned his multitudes in the Sea: he cut off Achitophell in his pride, and preserued Dauid in his prosperitie: he hath vnto our enemies laide out a punishment, by the frowning of the heauens, by the barrennesse of the earth, and emptines of the sea: but vnto vs hath he raigned plentie, and Manna, euen in the wildernes of our wickednes: Euerie winde blowes home into our houses, the good and fortunate successe of our frendes, euerie sunne shineth to our comforts, euerie riuer floweth with increase, and euerie day brings new tidings of Englands happines, which God in mercie long and euer continue. But if we compare other Realmes with this, and withall search the memorable histories that registers the liues of our forefathers, we then may in agonie of heart burst out & say: Our vnthankfulnes doth threaten punishment, and there is no way to withstand the wrath of the iust God. Run ouer the liues of a few Romaines, and obserue their care of their common wealth, (and as thou readest, let not the life of this Englishman be forgotten which occasioneth my discourse.)

                     Caius Marius, when hee had conquered his countries enimies, & brought Rome to her height, triumphing as a goddesse ouer the world, in conclusion of euery exploit, dedicated his sacrifices to the Gods, as the authors of euerie good that had befortuned him: although in his face hée carried the countenaunce of maiestie, and by his spéech hee bred terrour to his enimie. Scipio that Affrican conquerour in all his victories, did neuer ascribe his successe to himselfe, but gaue the honour to the Gods, sacrificing his whole honour to them, and disposing himselfe for his countrie. Yet died not Scipio, without the slaunder of old Cato: nor should honour liue in anie, without the enuie of manie.
                  When Iulius Caesar had ouerrun the world (almost) with his multitudes subiecting the Gales,
                     
                        Caesars Comment. li. 4. leading Belgick captiue, terrifying Spaine by his report, and carrying Affrick at his girdle (in a manner.) Yet said he, not Caesar hath done this, but the gods: giuing the glory to the heauens, and leauing the honour to his name. So the heathen set vs downe a rule, that is to dispose our liues for our country, to ascribe our honours to God, to begin in his feare, to continue in his truth, and to end to his praise: so hath this memorable man Sir Fraunces Drake done: hee hath studied to withstand his countries enimies, labored to enrich vs by their impouerishment, and made vs strong by their weakening: his first attempt was concluded with a golden purchase, his second ended with no lesse honour, and his last seruice is now knowne to be no lesse fortunate then the prowdest Romaine whose honour Plutarch reports to the full. The Author of that mirror of Tragedies touching Brittish princes,
                        Mirror of Magistrates.
                      amongst others bringeth in Ninius, complaining that his honours were forgotten, and left vnwritten, and discoursing his life sets down how his death was only by offē
                     ding Caesar and defending his countrie, making his Catastrophe mightily to perswade other to the like honor. Then let not this seruant of our Cassibilane rest without his reward, but register his déedes, write his honours in golde, and praye for his successe 
                        •
                     he hath not incountred Caesar,
                     
yet tane away his sword: he hath not fréed his countrie, yet he defendeth it, by wounding the enimie, and breaking his speare: and in al his actions obserue but his order, and then can you not but confesse it is full of honour. The distaunce of his being hath not bred anie forgetfulnes of his frends: his letters are at large of his successe, and his exploits expressed rather by others then himselfe (sauing what in duetie he must of force set downe.
                        His loue vnto M. Foxe.
                     ) But the frendly lines full of loue that he writ to that reuerend father M. Fox showes his deuotion, and confirmes his religion, wherein amongst other matters was these wordes in effect: hartie thankes for his paines, his loue, and prayers, with an earnest request that he would continually pray for him, in that hee resolued that he sped the better for his good prayers, but all too soone for vs was the good olde father of the Church departed before his letters came, to the sorrow of the sender, bringer, and hearers.
                  His seruice and successe is séene hourely amongst vs, which because the coppies are common, and the publishing may be offensiue to some, I will trip ouer them swiftly (as the dogs of Nilus drinkes) least I fall into daunger.
                  He hauing discouered (by aduise of 2 ships of Middleborough that came from Cales, with whom we met in 40. degrées the 16. of Aprill) and by them vnderstanding that there was great prouision in Cales & there about, appointed to come for Lishbourne, he with all spéede possible did bend his force thither to cut of their power & prouision.
                  So as the 19 of Aprill an houre before Sun setting, hée entred the Harbour of Cales, and his Fléete: there checked with vs at the entring thwart the Towne 6 Gallies, but they in short time retyred vnder their fortresses.
                  There were in the Roade 60 shippes, and diuers other small shipping vnder the fortresses.
                  There fled some 20 French ships to Port Royall, & some Spaniards which could not bee hindered of the flight by reason of the shieldes.
                  There were sunke by vs at our comming in with shot

one Argozie of 1000. tunne, furnished with xxx. péeces of brasse, and richly laden.
                  There were ij. Gallies more came presently from port royall, and ij. other from S. Marie port, but all in vaine therpence of powder and shot the greatest gaine to themselues.
                  There were to the number of 38. ships vndertaken before night, and victors of the Rode, the Gallies retyring vnder the fortres.
                  Twentie hulkes Hollanders confiscated to the king, and their goods sold to the kings vse, xxiiij. of them were fired, the other sixe were at port royall laden with wines, and bread, and to be presently full laden for Lishborne.
                  
                  One Carrick of 1400. tunnes appertayning to the Marques of S. Cruse, fired.
                  Fiue great Biskeis fired, foure of them, lading & taking in of victual for the kings prouision for Lishborne, the fifth a ship of 1000. tunne bound for Lishborne, hauing in her great store of Pipes, much yron, nailes spikes, yron hoopes, and such like, fired.
                  One shattey laden with wines, of 200. and 50. tunnes for the kings prouision, which we brought to sea with vs, and discharged at sea part of her wines for the prouision of the fléete, and then fired her.
                  Thrée flie botes of about 400. tunne laden with bisket, whereof the one being of 200. tunne and vpwardes, wée halfe vnladed in the harbor and fired her, the other two are yet with vs in companie.
                  Some ten Barkes more laden with wines, reasons, figges, oyle, wheate, and such like fired.
                  By supposition xxxviij. ships and barkes fired, sunke and brought away with vs, amounting in iudgement 13000. tunne of shipping.
                  There rid in sight of vs at porte royall by estimation aboue 40. sailes besides those that fledde from Cales rode.
                  They gaue vs little ease during our abode there, with their shot from the Gallies, as also from the fortresses and

from the shore, where continually they planted newe ordinance at all places conuenient to offend, notwithstanding their ships we continually fired as the flud came thereby, to be cleared of them, which terrible fiers were pleasaunt vnto vs to behold, and mittigated the continuall burthen of trauell which lay vpon vs day and night in discharging, firing, and vnlading such prouisions, with obseruations for good and gardable defence for the enimie.
                  It pleased God by the Generall his great care and paines day and night to fynish this happye action in her Maiesties seruice in one day and two nightes, and came forth againe the fryday in the morning, with verye little losse thankes be to God.
                  Of xij. Gallies and those that came from port royall and S. Marie port, ten of them came forth after vs as it were to make some pastime with their great ordinance, at length the wind scanting, we cast about againe and stoode in for the shore, and came to an ankor within a league of Cales, where their Gallies suffered vs to ride quietly.
                  There were also three Fliebotes more at Mallegoe laden with Bisket bounde for Cales, and soe for Lishborne we vnderstand of great prouisions and forces prouided within the straights, we doubt not but as God hath begunne this worke in great happines, to the daunting of the enymye, so God will blesse this Armye in cutting daylye their forces shorter, to the great annoyance of the enimye, and to the honour of our prince and countrie.
                  We now haue had the experience of Galley fights, wherin I can assure you, that these onely foure of her Maiesties shippes, will make no account of xx. gallies, so as they were alone and not driuen to gard others.
                  There were neuer gallies had place fitter for their aduā
                     tage in fight vpon shot, they had present succour to grounde vnder the towne, which they sundry times did, we riding in a narrowe gutte the yeelding no better, in that wee were driuē to maintaine the same vntil we had discharged

and fyred the ships which could not conueniently be done but vpon the floud, therby that they might driue cleare of vs.
                  We rest now victualed with bread and drinke for sixe moneths in our shippes, and bread besides in ij. Fliebotes to maintaine a good armie thrée monethes.
                  It may séeme straunge or rather miraculous that so great an exploit, should be performed with so small losse, considering the place so conuenient, and their force so great as well appeared, from whom were shot at the least at vs ij.C. Culuering and Cannon shot, but in this, as in all other our actions heretofore (although dangerously attempted, yet most fortunately performed) our God wil, and hath alwaies made his infinite power to all papists apparant, and his name by vs his seruants vnder our blessed prince (whose life the Lord prolong) to be continually glorified.
                  
                     Your louing Cossin Thomas Fenner.
                  
               
            
            And thus hauing set downe our full action hetherunto performed as a beginning or entrance into greater matters, although this being wayed, considering the quantitie of victuall prouided, the disapointment of the same, the infinite losse in goods (besides his shippings) I can by no meanes rate it at lesse then one hundred thousand pounds in spoile, this I say considered, may be thought an honorable péece of seruice, the honour whereof we attribute to the giuer of all victories, whose name be praysed, and the credit to our generall, whose trauel and paines being so great cannot be rewarded with too much praise: his due I wish him, nam operarius mercedem meruit.
            
            
               This was the first exploit of his last voiage: the second was thus as followeth in this Letter dated May 21.
               
                  
                     Maister W. you shal vnderstand that since the departure of Captaine Crosse, we haue continued about Cape

Saker, where we landed, and the better to haue the benefite of the water, as also to ride in harborough at our pleasure, we assaulted the same Castle and thrée other strong holdes, which we tooke, some by force, and some by submission.
                     We haue taken at seuerall times of shipping, Barkes, and Caruels aboue an hundreth, laden with hoopes, gallyoares, pipe staues, timber, and other prouisions of the king of Spaines, for the furnishing of his forces intended against England, which we burned, and haue consumed all the Fisher boates and nettes thereabouts, to their great hinderance.
                     Thence we came before the Hauen of Lishbon, ancouring néere vnto Cast Cales, where the Marques of S. Cruse was with his Gallies, and séeing vs chase his ships ashore, to take and carrie away his Barkes and Caruels, was content to suffer vs there quietlie to tarrie and likewise to depart, and neuer charged vs with one Cannon shot.
                     Thus for want of time I leaue the discourse of euerie particular euent vnto Captaine Parker, who hath béene an eie witnesse, and an actor in all our seruices past.
                     
                        From Cape Saker abourd hir Maiesties good shippe the Elizabeth Bonauenture, 
                           the 21. of May 1587.
                         
                        Your louing frend F. Drake.
                     
                  
               
               And this is the last and all the seruice yet done wherof newes is come to England, béeing full of valour, daunger, and honour: a maime to the enimie, and an arme to vs, in that by their waining we waxe stronger. It hath béen euer, a custome amongst the auncient Romaines, to surname such renowned souldiers, as Scipio was called the Affrican of his conquest: Haniball the scourge of Rome: Licurgus the proppe of Athens: Alexander the fire of Persia. And to come néerer (for our owne Chronicles wants no coppie of such honors) Edmund was surnamed Ironside of his valour: William the Norman, conquerour: Edward the third, the sting to Fraunce: Henry the fift, the furrower of Gallia:

Henry the 8. the terror of his enimies. And to come yet néerer: we haue now some liuing who for their honorable seruice against the enimie, are called rash & fortunate: others forward, but vnluckie: others hot and terrible: and infinite honors are ascribed to thē, drawn forciblie by their valours out of the mouth of ye aduersarie. Amongst al which, wherein (for a subiect) is this Scipio inferiour to Haniball? who is feared for his fortunes,
                     Note this comparison
                   & honored in his seruice. I remember in the time of Edward the 3. king of England, and in the French expedition, that Edward the blacke prince (so surnamed for the blacke battails he fought in Fraunce) séeing his honorable subiect & friend the Lord Audley wounded to the death in the forefront of the seruice, of his bountie gaue to him and his heires yearely for euer 4000. crownes, whether he euer or neuer recouered. The languishing noble man accepting the gift, and learning of his Lord & general (as well as taught by nature) to bee honorable, in the presence of the Prince, gaue the same annual summe for euer to his foure Esquiers that attended on his bodie: whereof béeing reproued by the giuer, he aunswered, that in the seruice he had shown, those foure were no lesse forward to defend him, and offend the foemen, then himselfe: and béeing now robd by the enimie of a maister, he knewe it was his honour to leaue them maintenance: and wished withall, that he were as able to enrich his whole company of followers seuerally, as he did these willingly. Herewith (though lamenting his death) the Prince consented to his gift, & so will we burie him with our discourse of him. Yet héere out I obserue this, that Generals in actions of expedition, are bound by honor to reward the wel deseruing, yet is it not in the power of anie subiect to excéede the limits of his abilitie, but to reward where he is led by honour, & to content the rest as he is commanded or allowed of those that excéed him in authoritie. If we do but looke warily into ye worlds estate, we may then conclude with our Diuines: Mischiefe hath sheathed deceit, & hipocrisie draws it. And wisely was the estate of Fraunce compared to a set at Primero: & properlie

do those of Belgia figure their countrie by a woman assaulted on the foreside by a Frenchman, & entrapt with palme on the other side by a Spaniard. And in another impreasa, they figure her rent by the haire of the head by the French, disrobed by the Italian, bowelled by the Spanish, & succored by the English: in which anatomizing their widowe cuntrie, whome do they commend & submit vnto but their succorers? whome doe they rewarde with honors & riches but their souldiers? whom do they reuerence, pray for, & cleaue vnto, but their Captaines, whome the Athenians called walles of their cuntries, whom the lawlesse Scithians follow as starres, the gluttonous Persians adore as Gods, the rude Boetians run after as heads, & whom the hardie Lacedemonians reckon as comets, that blaze euer against good fortune. In Rome, what troupes of Senators, flocks of Nobles, & heards of Commons, would burst as a sea foorth the gates, to reuerence the welcome conquerour, that either brought home honor or riches? and that was the cause that encouraged the better sort to clime to vertue by honor, and enraged the worser sort to hunt after honour with a thirst of vertue. They that spare the praise, are vnworthie ye profit: a deserued commendation is a spurre to the mind, & he that obscures the honour of a souldier or a scholler, wounds Mars,
                  
                     Honors portraiture. Vertue ioined with noblenes is a mixture of true humanitie. Man in all ages.
                   & slayes Mercury. Apelles drawing the counterfeite of Honor, portraieth her, holding a starre in the one hand, & in the other a stone: meaning by this embleme, ye although noble mindes entitled with dignities should reach as high as the skies, yet ye inferior might by vertue catch of stars. And as a Noble man without vertue is like a sun beame couered with cloudes: so is a meaner man without valour like the bird Fawrus, ye hath a great voice, & almost no body. Man in all ages is maintained thus: In his cradle with milke, in his childhood with roddes, in gréene youth with shame & good discipline, in mans estate with armes, in elder age with counsaile, & last of all with a staffe till he goe sencelesse to his graue: then if thou be a child, obey thy parents; if a man, serue thy Prince, and die for thy cuntrie; if

olde, counsaile others to honour souldiers when they serue not, and to serue for honour when they enter armes. This made the wolues Nursery Romulus become both the first king and builder of Rome: This made the abiect Cirus weare the first Crowne in Persia, Iustinus the swineheard Emperour in Constantinople, Valentinus the husbandman Emperour in Rome, Telephanes the souldier king of Lidia: and this made Tarquinius Priscus a stranger borne in Corinth, the sonne of one Demaratus a banished marchant from his Country, become a king in Rome. Yea, and by this in his life he became so famous, that he enlarged the confines of Italie, amplified the wealth and state of the cuntrie, augmented the number of Senators, increased the orders of Knighthood, and left Rome so happie at his death, that the Citizens thereof would haue trauailed so farre as Corinth to spéede of so noble a Prince. Then must euerie man prease in seruice for preferment to honour, which springs of desert, and such as are not fortunate, must learn to follow and hope to finde, must leaue to enuie and grieue to slaunder, euer carrying the vpright mind of a religious subiect, that in hearing euill spoken of the good, to enter into consideration straight of the man and the matter, and so shall he sift him out, either an enimie to the Estate or the Religion, that by rumors withdraw the willing and abuse the best, to bring them in hatred of the worst, because hée knowes the common multitude is like a manie headed beast. But studie euerie man rather to looke into the daunger of such seruices (I meane in respect of their bodies that performes it) and to thanke God for the victories, to pray for their prosperitie in their enterprises, and to incourage others to their supplies, so shal God be glorified, Nobilitie be honoured and animated, the peace of the Land maintained, and all men pleased.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   