
      
         
            
            
            A DISCOVERY OF THE FRAVDVlent practiſes of IOHN DARREL Bacheler of Artes, in his proceedings CONCERNING THE PRETENDED POSSESSION and diſpoſſeſſion of William Somers at Nottingham: of Thomas Darling, the boy of Burton at Caldwall: and of Katherine Wright at Manſfield, & Whittington: and of his dealings with one Mary Couper at Nottingham, detecting in ſome ſort the deceitfull trade in theſe latter dayes of caſting out Deuils.
            We may not do euill that good may come of it.
Rom. 3.
               
            
            Dum per mendacium tenditur vt doceatur fides, id demum agitur, vt nulli habenda fides, 
Aug. ad Conſentium. Cap. 4.
            
            
               IN DOMINO CONFIDO.
               I W.
            
            LONDON Imprinted by Iohn Wolfe. 1599.
         
         
            
            
            The Epiſtle to the Reader.
            
               THe feate of iugling and deluding the people by counterfeyt miracles, hath been as auncient, as it hath beene too-currant in all nations of the world, wherein the Egyptians were growne ſo expert, that their ſect of inchanters durſt challenge God his embaſſador in working of wonders, vntill they were ſhamefully foyled at making of Lyce. As theſe were mated by a ſilly vermine, ſo the rable of Bell his prieſtes tooke as foule a fall, whoſe groſſer wits could deuiſe no better way to purchaſe an opinion of deitie to their God of flies, then by fayning, that his omnipotencie lay in infinite eating, pretending that his Godhead was able to conſume as much in a night, as two hundred men. Theſe had a publike ayme, the countenancing of falſe religion, by a face of deitie, falſly drawne vpon ſtockes and ſtones, for a priuate end of a priuate perſon. We haue a notable preſident in the Arch-iugler Symon Magus: the drift of whoſe feyned miracles in bewitching the people, was to be reputed 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                a wonderfull man, and to be pointed at with this Euge, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ; this man is the power of Almighty God. Adde vnto theſe, Numa Pompilius his feyned Nimph, Socrates his Genius, Sertorius his Hynde, Mahomets falſe conceyted Doue, we ſhall find the tract of all miracle-mongers to bend to one of theſe two endes: eyther gracing of falſe religion by this graceles feate, or the raiſing of their own greatnes

in the opinion of the people. The great Impoſtor of Rome, maiſter of this facultie, hath ſo led the world in a ſtring, by this Legerdemaine: bewitching by his counterfeyte miracles, the mindes of the ignorant, giuen to adore al, that they doe not apprehend in the weakenes of their ſenſe, as he doth now proclame by one of his Herauldes with open mouth. Nemo vnquam haereticorum miraculum edidit: none but he and his ſchollers can cogge a miracle kindlie, and hee and his Prieſtes can diſpatch a miracle as eaſily as a ſquirrell can cracke a nutte: a miracle in the bread, a miracle in the wine, a miracle in holy water, a miracle in holy oyle, a miracle in our Ladies milke, a miracle in the aſſes tayle, a miracle in Lampes, candles, beades, breeches, ragges, bones, ſtones, omnia ſtultorum & miraculorum plena, nothing done in his religion without a miracle and a Vice. And that which paſſeth all, the leaſt bone of a canonized Saint, (traitor Sainct Campion forſooth), hath more force in it ſometimes to caſt out a Legion of Deuilles, then the name of Ieſus, then prayer, faſting, inuocation of the Trinitie, Exorciſing, coniuring, and Maries reliques, Croſſe, holy water, and all. And would to God the Pope could vaunt of this tricke alone, that none but hee and his were ſeene in this miſtery: and that there were not riſen vppe amongſt vs ſchollers, not out of his ſchoole, but of his occupation as touching this point, who, (vpon what ayme, I leaue to God & their conſcience, ſuch as it is), whether vpon Symon Magus his 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , to ſeeme to be great in the peoples eyes: or the enchanters pride, to croſſe God his gouernors in the church, who profeſſe not this prettie feate: or the Bellites conceit, to grace an idoll of their owne idle braynes: or of an impious ſimplicitie, holding it lawful to lye, cogge, and fayne, ſo as it bee to a good ende, and (as their fauourites tearme it) to the glorie of God, haue taken vpon them to bee deepely ſeene in this miſterie of deuilles. And one eſpecially aboue the reſt, hath played his publike prize in this iugling ſcience, caſting out more deuils by prayer and

faſting after a good dinner, perhappes at after nooone, then wee reade that euer any of the Apoſtles at ſo full a ſeaſon did. Which being now diſcouered to be but a pure play, containing two principall parts, of a vice and a deuill, there hath beene deuiſed two miſerable ſhiftes to helpe him off the ſtage, that he might not be hiſſed at of all the world. One, that this action (like the day of iudgement acted on a ſtage) though fayned in it ſelfe, yet procured reuerence and feare in the ſimpler and looſer ſort, whileſt the imaginary Deuilles ſeemed to ſtand in ſuch awe of the worde of God: the other, that to caſt out a Deuill, is no ſuch great matter, as men make account of, being but mirandū & nō miraculum, in the nature of a wonder, and not of a miracle. The former is borrowed from a Champion of the Popes, who to vphold the ſhop of his forgeries and lies in an Apologeticall treatiſe: ſticketh not to affirme this impious rule: honeſta docendi ad pietatem nunquam poteſt eſſe ratio inhoneſta: So as a mans meaning be good and religious, it skils not, though his meanes be bad and impious. A ſingular foundation to vphold the Pope his play-houſe, and to make religion a pageant of Puppittes. It was peraduenture at the firſt, a ſuppoſed good entent to deuiſe the fearefull fire of Purgatory, the leaſt ſparkle whereof, is of more tormenting force, then all the fiers that be in the world: that men might bee more feareful, of committing ſmall ſinnes. And ſo likewiſe the painting of Almighty God like an ancient Philoſopher, with a graue long beard, and a booke in his hand, that the boyes might haue a reuerend impreſsion of his fatherlike wiſedom: voluntary pouerty whippings, pilgrimages, images, worſhipping of reliques, and adoration of the Croſſe, and the bleſſed Budget of all the Pope his pedlary & traſh, is blanched ouer with as faire a face of good intent to the glorie of God, as this iugling miſtery of caſting out deuils. Open but this creuiſe in the dore of the church, that ill may be done to any good end: you ſhal haue religion like a Homers Ilias, a fardle of fictions, & a bundle of lies. God is truth, &

will be worſhipped in ſpirit and truth: all falſhood and forgerie are of the Deuill, and as oppoſite to truth, and conſequently vnto God, as death vnto life, and darkneſſe vnto light. Saint Auſtine his reſolution is of ſo high a pitch in this point,Ad Creſcē
                  tium cap 4. as he ſaith plainly it is not lawfull to diſſemble for the ſafetie of a mans ſoule. And the heathen Philoſopher in the fourth of his Ethickes, ſpeakes better Chriſtianitie in this caſe, then our iugling diuines 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                a lie is ſimply bad, and ſimplie to be condemned.
            The ſecond ſhift is as ſilly as this is ſinfull, that to caſt out a Deuill is but a wonder, and not in the nature of a miracle in deed. What dull conceites had the rulers of the Iewes, that they could not ſee this ſlie ſillie ſhift, to depraue the miracles of our ſauiour Chriſt, and to tell the people there was no iuſt cauſe they ſhould belieue, that our Sauiour was the ſonne of God, in doing ſuch mightie miracles among them: the chiefe one whereof was caſting out Deuilles, by reaſon that action was but Mirandum & non miraculum▪
                a ſtrange thing for ſilly people to wonder at, and not a miracle to enforce them to belieue. But they not able to denie the euidence of the miracle, put it vpon Belzebub, alledging that it was done by the Prince of the Deuilles. Our Sauiour pointing at the hand that did the deed, telles them that it was no other power then the finger of Almighty God: ſecluding both the arme of nature, and helpe of the Deuill, from this diuine action. And if our Deuill-ſtingers can point out a finger equall to the finger of God, and challenge as good intereſt in it, as our Sauiour Chriſt did, or his Apoſtles, they ſhall eaſily obtain the credite of effecting a miracle. There is a place in the laſt of S. Marke, wherein they mightily pleaſe themſelues, and taking it as a rod of defence to maintaine their cauſe, it proues in handling, a ſerpent that deuoureth them vp. The words are theſe: Theſe ſigns ſhal follow thē that belieue in my name: they ſhall caſt out deuils, and ſhal ſpeake with new tongues, &

ſhall take away ſerpents, and if they ſhall drinke any deadly thing, it ſhall not hurt them, they ſhall lay their handes vppon the ſicke, and they ſhall recouer. Foelix quem faciunt &c. I doubt not but they are wiſe enough to keep themſelues warme, and to deny ioyning iſſue out of this place, but rather take example from a giddie brother of theirs, who conceyting a warrant out of theſe wordes for proofe of certaine brainſicke concluſions, that hee helde, made this his iſſue, that if hee tooke downe Rattes-bane, and it did him no hurt, that then his poſitions ſhould bee receiued as the Oracles of God: which hee doing accordingly, and for a little time, not feeling any harme to inſue, was rauiſhed with a wonderfull iollitie of this his ſtrange tryall. But his pittifull Metamorphoſis was as quick and ſtrange: for as ſoone as the poyſon came neere vnto his hart, he roared, yelled, and raged exceedingly, and in this miſerable torment ended his life. VVe will not be ſo hard taskmaiſters, as to put them to this tryall for their extraordinarie gifts, but will ſet them vp an eaſier reſt. Let them with all their iugling driue out a melancholicke ſpirite, out of any poore ſoule in Bedlame, let them lay their handes vpon thoſe that are troubled with the dropſie, ſciatike, or the gowt: let them recouer ſight to the blind, or limmes to the lame, and wee will giue eare vnto their application of that ſcripture. But if they bee vnfaithfull in thoſe leſſer mites, who will truſt them in matter of their greater treaſures? Theſe giftes are acknowledged by the fathers, to haue ſhined in the Apoſtles time, and in ſome fewe ages after the Apoſtles: but alwaies with this note, as the learned hold, in ijs qui dono miraculorum claruerunt, in ſuch as were euidently indued with the gifte of working miracles. Touching the niceneſſe of the difference betweene Mirandum & miraculum, both tearmes ſpring from one roote of wonder or maruell: an effect which a thing ſtrangely done doth procure in the minds

of the beholders, as being aboue the reach of nature and reaſon: and not onely God his ſupernaturall actes done in the lande of Egypt, are called maruailes and wonders, but one and the ſelfe acte done by the finger of God, hath diuers and ſundry names giuen it in diuers and ſundrie conſiderations. Chriſt his miracles in the 4. of Saint Iohn are generally called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , as being ſignifications of his omnipotent power. His miracle in the 5. of Luke, ſhewed vpon the man taken with the palſie, is called by the multitude that beheld it, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , becauſe it extended the compaſſe of their conceit. In the 8. of Iohn, Chriſt his deedes are called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , for their power in amazing the vnderſtanding and ſences: and ſo 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , as cauſing men to gaze: 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , as procuring wonder: 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , for the excellencie of their cauſe: and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , for their wonderfull effect: and the very ſame names that are giuen by the holy Ghoſt to the actes of Chriſt, effected by the onely finger of God, are attributed to falſe prophets in the 13. of Marke, and to Antichriſt himſelfe in the ſecond of the ſecond to the Theſſalonians, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , in all power and ſignes and wonders. And therefore, whether they iuggle vnder the colour of 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , or 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , the feate is alike, and the deceite all one. Thus much for a taſte of Deuill-driuers legerdemaine: open the curtaine, and ſee their Puppettes play.
            
               S. H.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Firſt Booke.
            
               This firſt Booke containeth the number, that are pretended to haue beene diſpoſſeſſed by M. Darrel: The occaſion that his practiſes were called in queſtion by her Maieſties Commiſsioners for cauſes eccleſiaſticall at Lambeth: The indeuours of M. Darrels friends to extoll both him and his doings: The great vncertainty of the grounds, whereupon M. Darrell, and all other caſters out of Diuels doe in theſe daies build their skill, and of the ſhifts they haue, not onely to ſet themſelues on worke, but alſo to maintaine their credites, when their iugling is called into any queſtion.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. I. The number of ſuch perſons as are ſaid to haue beene diſpoſſeſſed by M. Darrels meanes.
               
                  
                     IOhn Darrell a Batchelor of Artes, being about the age of three or foure & twentie, but then no miniſter (as hee ſaith) did take vpon him about thirteene years ſince to caſt, firſt one Diuell, and afterwards (vpon a pretended repoſſeſſion) eight Diuels, out of a maid neere ſeuenteene yeares old in Darbiſhire, named Katherine Wright.
                  M. Darrell ad art. 4. & ad 8. The hiſtorie of this feate he himſelfe writ, and gaue one copie of it to the Ladie Bowes.
               
               From the time aboue mentioned vz. 1586. till the 28. of March in the yeare 1596. M. Darrell for ought that is generally

knowne, was out of worke. Notwithſtanding (beſides the publiſhing of the ſaid hiſtorie) he omitted fewe occaſions to intimate, what he had done touching Katherine Wright. Inſomuch as growing thereby into ſome ſmal credit with the ſimpler ſort: he became very peart and proud in that reſpect. Something to this purpoſe he confeſſeth in theſe words:M. Darrell ad art. 8. 
                  Some thought that I did glorie ſomewhat too much in the action of caſting forth Diuels. The cauſe of which his glorie inlarged it ſelfe forſooth in the ſaide yeare 1596. when pretence is made that he caſt a Diuell out of a boy in Burton, called Thomas Darling, then about the age of foureteene yeares. Of this worthy acte a booke being penned by one Ieſſe Bee a Sadler in Burton, the ſame was firſt contracted by one M. Deniſon a miniſter in that countrey: and then after it had beene ſeene and allowed by M. Darrell, & M. Hilderſham, it was publiſhed in print: and was commonly ſold and called for, by this title, vz. The booke of the diſpoſſeſsing of the boy of Burton.
               
               What M. Darrell tooke vpon him after this his ſecond exploit, it may bee ſurmiſed by glorying in the firſt. But yet his name was not ſo famous, vntill the 17. of March next following, when being ſent for into Lancaſhire by one M. Starkie, vpon the report of M. Dee his Butler, who told the ſaid M. Starkie what M. Darrell had done at Burton, he diſpoſſeſſed in the ſaid M. Starkies houſe ſeuen perſons, at one clap: vz. Iohn Starkie, Anne Starkie, Margaret Hardman, Elianor Hardman, Ellen Holland, Margaret Byrom, and Iane Aſhton: which Iane is ſince fallen into the hands of certain Seminarie prieſts, and hath beene caried by them vp and downe that countrey, to ſundry recuſants houſes (as certaine idle men were wont to carry puppets) and by her cunning counterfaiting of certaine fits, & ſtaying of herſelfe by the ſecret directions of the ſaid Prieſtes,

ſhe hath gotten God knoweth what: they by ſuch lewdnes haue wonne great credit, but her Maieſties ſubiectes, haue in the meane time beene ſhamefully abuſed.
               Of the diſpoſſeſſing of the ſaid ſeuen parties, there is a booke that runneth from hand to hand, penned by M. Dicons preacher at Leigh (as M. Darrell ſaith,) and iuſtified from point to point (although very childiſhly) by one M. More, a preacher of his owne allowance: who ioyned with M. Darrell in the pretended diſpoſſeſſing of the ſaid ſeuen. Touching which booke there are added (in the end of the ſaid hiſtorie of the boy of Burton) theſe words, vz. Shortly you ſhall haue the true ſtorie come forth of thoſe ſeuen in Lancaſhire, that were poſſeſſed with vncleane ſpirits, and all ſeuen deliuered at one time by this man:
                  M. Darrell ad art. 6. meaning M. Darrell, as he himſelfe confeſſeth.
               But of all that euer M. Darrell dealt with, William Somers one of Nottingham ſuppoſed to be poſſeſſed, is the youth, by whom (as it ſeemeth) he hath wonne his ſpurs in the opinion of many, eſpecially women. He had in his hands nine of the former perſons, but two or three daies, and ſo diſpatched them: but Somers ſtucke in his fingers almoſt fiue monethes. When hee began with Katherine Wright, he dealt but rudely & (as he confeſſeth himſelfe) vnskilfully: Marry by the time that hee tooke Somers in hand at Nottingham, which was in Nouember 1597. hee was growne his crafts maiſter. Of his proceedings with the ſaid Somers, and of the ſaid Somers fits, diuers treatiſes are come abroad. M. Darrell himſelfe hath written a ſhort hiſtorie concerning that matter, and beſides that, an Apology of his own penning, for the iuſtifying of himſelf is lately come out in print: there is alſo publiſhed & printed an other booke in his behalfe: intituled, A briefe narration of the poſſeſsion, diſpoſſeſsion, & repoſſeſsion of W. Somers.
               
               
                  Laſtly, M. Darrell hauing played his tricks ſo long with William Somers, that all which the boy could doe began to grow very ſtale in Nottingham, then hee attempted to practiſe with Mary Cooper the ſiſter of Somers, and there was no remedie but ſhe muſt be poſſeſſed: and ſo he ſet a new matter on foot, which was very zealouſly followed by certaine wiues in that towne: but before it came to any perfection M. Darrell began to be diſcloſed for a diſſembler. Touching all theſe (ſauing thoſe in Lancaſhire) examinations haue beene taken, and aſwell by the confeſſions of the parties, as by diuers other circumſtances, it doth plainely appeare, that all which was done betwixt Darrell and them was meerely counterfeyted. But for as much as his greateſt peece of cunning and legerdemaine was imployed chiefly about Somers, (as hauing then learned more iugling-skill then before) and that his practiſes with that boy, were and ſtill are ſo greatly inſiſted vpon by him & his friends, that nothing will be digeſted that is ſpoken againſt them: the greateſt paines haue bene taken to find out the packing that hath beene vſed in this cauſe.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. II. The occaſion why M. Darrels dealing with Somers was called into queſtion at Lambeth.
               
                  IT is a common vſe when any men for matters of crime are called into queſtion, (and eſpecially if they are like to fal out hardly with the defendantes) to diſcredite the witneſſes, to ſlaunder the plaintifes, and to take exceptions both to the Iudges, and to their proceedinges. And hereof the courſe that M. Darrell and his

frendes haue held, may be an example: hee the ſaid M. Darrell being charged with diuerſe notable coſenages, in pretending by hypocriticall ſleightes to caſt out Deuils. The particulars to this purpoſe in euery point are not here ſo pertinent: ſome of thoſe onely, that concerne the occaſions pretended, why M. Darrell hath bene called into queſtion, and the perſons that by authority haue looked into this cauſe, and the witneſſes that haue beene produced in it, are meete to bee conſidered: For they doe argue a great combination or aſſociatiō to haue wrought ſome great worke, if they had not by fortune ſtumbled in their way.
               Some giue it out,I.B. &c. that the detecting of one Alice Freeman to be a Witch, was the occaſion through M. Freeman her kinſmans dealing, that William Somers was firſt accounted to be a counterfaite. Others of deeper inſight, ſay that the Deuill himſelfe enuying the happy eſtate of Nottingham, by meanes of M. Darrels preaching there,The written Treatiſe. did raiſe vp that ſlaunder of poſſeſſion to hinder it. There be alſo that giue it out (iuſtly as they ſay) that the firſt occaſion of mouing this euill (forſooth) againſt M. Darrell, was his threatning the iudgements of God againſt ſuch Paſtors, as let their people periſh for lacke of inſtruction.
                  The briefe Narration. And one ſeemeth to aſcribe the hard conceite held by ſome, of M. Darrel, to the want of faith, telling vs that when Lazarus was raiſed from the dead, ſome were hardned, and complayned vpon our Sauiour. The ſame fellow alſo reporteth, that it hath been giuen out by one, a great man amongſt them (meaning her Maieſties Commiſſioners for cauſes eccleſiaſticall) that ſeeing they haue taken it in hand, they will haue the credite of it: inſinuating that otherwiſe M. Darrell might long before this time haue beene diſcharged, as a man blameles and innocent in thoſe pointes whereof he was accuſed, and

to ſtrengthen this groſſe vntruth, that appertayneth, (as ſhameles as the other,) where hee ſayeth that there hath beene running to the Court, to foreſtall the Lordes and Ladyes of Honor, and to hinder the preferring of petitions in M. Darrels behalf, to the Lordes of her Maieſties Priuie Councell. Who haue troubled the Lordes and Ladies in that matter, they know beſt themſelues: but indeed ſome haue done it, peraduenture to haue had Darrels practiſes ſmothered vp, for the auoiding (forſooth) of ſuch ſlaunder, as might otherwiſe fall vpon the Miniſtery. But aboue all the reſt, that is a ſubſtantiall conceit, that M. Darrel cannot be endured, becauſe he hath ſuch a feate in caſting out Deuils as many other men want. It cannot be endured (ſayeth the author of it) that thoſe kind of men, which are accounted the of-ſcouring of the world,
                  Narration. 
                  ſhould be thought to haue ſuch intereſt in Chriſt Ieſus, as that by their prayers and faſting, hee ſhould as it were viſibly deſcend from heauen, and tread downe Sathan vnder their feet: whereas other men, who account themſelue, more learned, excellent, and wiſe, then they, do not withall their Phiſicke, Rhetoricke, pompe & primacie accompliſh the like. But God hath choſen the fooliſh thinges of the world, to confound the wiſe, and the weake thinges of the world to confound the mighty. A place indeed of ſcripture aſwell applyed, as that in the fourth of S. Mathew, Hee will giue his Angels charge ouer thee, leaſt at any time thou ſhouldeſt daſh thy foote againſt a ſtone. But to inſiſt no longer vpon theſe vanities and fooliſh ſurmiſes: the true occaſion, that moued her Maieſties ſaide Commiſſioners to intermeddle with this Impoſtor, (wherewith his confederates and companions are ſo much grieued) and to proceede therein as they haue done, was as followeth.
               
                  William Somers hauing counterfaited himſelfe to be poſſeſſed, diſpoſſeſſed, and repoſſeſſed, and held on that

courſe ſucceſſiuely, for the ſpace of about three moneths: he did at the laſt, being got out of M. Darrels hands, confeſſe and auow, that all hee had done that while, was but diſſembled: ſhewing to the Maior and Aldermen of Nottingham, how he had acted all his former fittes. Herewith M. Darrell and his friendes were greatly moued, eſpecially when they perceyued the boyes ſaid confeſſion to be ſo generally belieued, as that there beganne an hart-burning amongſt the neighbours: ſome holding with M. Darrell, and ſome againſt him.I.W▪
                   To meete therefore with this miſchiefe, and hearing (as it is ſuppoſed) that the Archdeacon of Darby had written to the L. Archbiſhoppe of Canterbury touching that matter, it was thought good to vſe ſome preuention, and to procure a Commiſſion from the L. Archbiſhop of Yorke for the examination of ſuch witneſſes, as ſhould be produced in the behalfe of M. Darrel, to proue that Somers had not diſſembled. The ſaide Commiſſion obtayned, exceptions were taken againſt it, becauſe all the Commiſſioners were addicted to M. Darrell. Therupon it was renewed,M. Euington ad artic. 34. pag. 190 Pet. Clarke then Maior. VVilliam Freeman. Nich. Shepheard. Iohn Couper. and vpon one M. Euingtons motion, ſome were made Commiſſioners to ioyne with the reſt, that were known to haue diſliked of M. Darrels proceedinges. When the time came that this ſecond Commiſſion was to be executed, (certaine perſons hauing beene examined,) Somers was brought before the Commiſſioners, who ſhortlie after his comming, fell to the acting of ſome of his fittes in their preſence, vpon a former Compact and Agreement made betwixt him and others, before he came thether.
               Herewith, al that fauored M. Darrell, began to reioyce,M. Aldridge narration. and to runne abroad into the towne, telling their friends with great ioy, that Somers was now found to haue been no diſſembler: but the reſt that had held a contrary opinion,

they were greatly rated and checked: inſomuch as when ſome of them came out of the houſe where the Commiſſioners ſate, they were not onely rated at exceedingly,Nich. Shepheard. but to one of them by the throwing of a ſtone ſome violence was offered. Thus M. Darrell and his friends triumphed for nine or ten daies, hauing by the direction of the ſaid Commiſſioners Somers amongſt them againe, who playing his old trickes denyed that hee had diſſembled. But this their ioy ended, when the ſaide dayes were expired: for Somers, by the direction of the L. Chiefe Iuſtice of the common Plees, was no ſooner gotten againe out of the handes of M. Darrell and his friendes, but of himſelf he confeſſed (as before) the whole courſe of his diſſimulation, and why he had affirmed to the ſaid Commiſſioners, that the fittes acted before them were not counterfaited.
                     I. W With this alteration M. Darrell and his adherentes were greatly troubled; the partes taking on both ſides beganne to be more violent, and the town became to be extraordinarily deuided, one rayling vpon an other, at their meeting in the ſtreets, as they were affected in that cauſe. The pulpets alſo rang of nothing but Diuels,M. Aldridge and witches: wherewith men, women, and children were ſo afrighted, as many of them durſt not ſtir in the night, nor ſo much as a ſeruant almoſt go into his mayſters celler about his buſineſſe without company. Fewe grew to be ſicke or euil at eaſe, but ſtraight way they were deemed to bee poſſeſſed. Briefly ſuch were the ſtirres in Nottingham about this matter, as it was feared the people would grow (if they were not preuented) to further quarrels and mutinies, or to ſome greater inconuenience.
               Hereof the L. Archbiſhop of Canterbury being aduertiſed by the ſaid L. Chiefe Iuſtice, and others, did thinke it in his wiſedome very neceſſarie to call for M. Darrell by

vertue of her Maieſties Commiſsion for cauſes Eccleſiaſticall, who being accordingly ſent for, appeared before him and others at Lambeth: from whence hee was committed to priſon, by reaſon of his abſurde and vntrue (but yet very confident) aſſertions: giuing thereby iuſt occaſion to ſuſpect, that he was but a counterfaite: and order was taken for the further examination of that cauſe, according to the vſuall courſe by the lawes of the Realm, in ſuch caſes prouided. The iſſue whereof was, that vpon the hearing of M. Darrell, and the depoſitions againſt him in open Court, before the Lord Archbiſhop of Canterbury, the L. Biſhop of London, the Lord Chiefe Iuſtice of her Maieſties Bench, the L. Chiefe Iuſtice of the Common Plees, M. D. Caeſar M. of the Requeſtes, M.D. Bing Deane of the Arches, and M. D. Stanhope: (the Earle of Shrewesbury and ſome other gentlemen of good note, with many others being preſent,) hee the ſaid M. Darrell, was by the full agreement of the whole Court, condemned for a counterfeyte: and together with M. More (his companion, who tooke vpon him to iuſtifie the ſaid Darrell, and had otherwiſe greatlie miſbehaued himſelfe) they were both of them depoſed from the Miniſtery, and committed to cloſe priſon, there to remaine vntill order were taken for their further puniſhment. The iuſtice of which ſentence will ſufficiently appeare by this treatiſe, inforced (as it were) to be publiſhed by the caſting out of certaine Pamphlets, which do ſo much impeach it: ſuffering none to eſcape their bitternes, that haue dealt againſt M. Darrell (but yet for the truth) in this cauſe.
               Vpon M. Darrels firſt committing, & within a while after, ſome matters beganne to break out againſt him, beſides the Confeſſion of Somers: it remayneth to note how many of his friendes were kindled, and what choler they

ſhewde by deprauing, not onely of ſuch lawful courſes as were taken to finde out the truth, but alſo of thoſe perſons that had to deale therein: notwithſtanding they were oft deſired but to ſtay themſelues, and ſuſpend their iudgements, vntill the cauſe were througly examined, heard, and determined. Diuerſe of them came vp to London, & in ſecret corners exclaimed bitterly againſt his committing to priſon, iuſtifying by many deuiſes his former actions. Thoſe who had dealt in his behalfe at Nottingham (thinking by his impriſonment themſelues to bee touched) ceaſed not to ſolicite great perſonages in his behalfe. Hard wordes were giuen out againſt ſuch as had M. Darrell in examination, and the reſt alſo of her Maieſties ſaid Commiſsion. A letter was written to the Lord Biſhoppe of London, threatning him with the authority of great perſons, who were ſaid (but falſly) to haue taken vpon them the defence of M. Darrell: and reſembling both him and another of Honor (as the author termeth them) to the two falſe Iudges that condemned guiltleſſe Suſanna, and to the Scribes and Phariſees that tooke councell together to put Chriſt to death
               
               But of that which is more worthy of reprehenſion in them, it might in ſome ſorte haue beene borne with (as the common Prouerbe ſayeth) for looſers to haue their wordes: ſo for them to haue taken their pleaſure in ſpeaking what they liſte, whileſt the matter did hang in ſuſpence, and was but in the way of triall. But now ſeeing that after long deliberation M. Darrell hath been iudged for a diſſembler (as is before expreſſed) which might haue ſatiſfied any reaſonable men: it cannot but be thought a verie outragious courſe, to continue ſuch like their bolde and rayling lewdnes, and with ſome increaſe thereof to publiſh their choller and ſtomackes

in printe, giuing forth at their pleaſures ſome other written copies containing the like ſtuffe. They that imagine Somers was not poſſeſſed,
                  The preface to M. Darrels Apologie. 
                  but did counterfaite (ſayeth the Preface) doe by conſequence deny the ſoueraignity of our Sauiour in the action. And one of the written Pamphelites: To deny the worke of the Deuils, and God in the diſpoſſeſsion of Somers, may ſeem to be after a ſort, to denye them in the Goſpel. Indeed if M. Darrels credite were as good in ſaying, that Somers was poſſeſſed, and that by his, and his fellowes meanes he was diſpoſſeſſed: as the Euangeliſtes and Apoſtles ought to bee, when they tell vs of diuerſe that were poſſeſſed in Chriſtes time, (whom our Sauiour did not onely himſelfe deliuer, but gaue power alſo to them and others to doe the like,) then their ſaid Collections were pertinent. Otherwiſe many falſe knaues from time to time, hauing deluded the people with hypocriſie, and pretence of caſting out deuils, it is a ſuggeſtion of Sathan for any to collect, that thereby the ſaide actions of our Sauiour, & his Apoſtles, are in any ſort blemiſhed: but let them rayle on.
               
                  The proceedinges againſt M. Darrell and others, (ſayeth the Author of the briefe Narration) Haue beene verie violent. And againe, being brought before the ſeate of Iuſtice, they who at the ſame time gaue gentle audience to Papiſts, Arrians, Atheiſtes, and Blaſphemers, wold not permit M. Darrell to ſpeake anie thing almoſt in his owne defence. And the Author of the Preface to M. Darrels Apologie: M. Darrell hetherto could not obtaine ſo much, as patient audience, or any iudiciall courſe of proceeding. Againe, Their proceedinges haue beene indirect, contrary to the royall commaundement of her Maieſtie, her lawes, and lawfull Liberties of her loyall Subiectes. And againe, the ſaide Narration: his Iudges became parties, pleaders, and accuſers: Againe alſo

                  M. Darrell and M. More are now impriſoned for giuing teſtimony to the truth. Again, let men beware in crediting falſe rumors againſt thoſe holy men of God, who doe now, or ſhal hereafter ſuffer in this holy cauſe. Againe, the Deuill and his Agents conſpire in one complotte, againſt this mightie worke of the Lord Ieſus. It ſeemeth ſo euidentlie to bee the finger of God, as though we our ſelues ſhould forſake it, as with Iudas to betray our Maiſter: Yea with Pharao ſet our ſelues to obſcure it: Yet the Lord if he loue vs, wil rather make the ſtones to cry and vtter it, yea the deuels themſelues to acknowledge it, then it ſhall be hid. Again, when they haue had their ſwinge but a little, they will be aſhamed of their owne folly: Againe, I would aduiſe them that ſlaunder this worke, and perſecute the ſeruants of God without cauſe, to take heed, leaſt they be found euen fighters againſt God. He that ſitteth in Heauen ſees their deuiſes, and laughes them to ſcorne, and they and all their conſpiracies, plots, ſlaunderinges, and reuilinges ſhall conſume like a ſnaile. And againe, when the Saduces, Galleniſtes, and Naturaliſtes of our time haue conſidered of the matter, wee will expect ſome new obiections. In the meane ſeaſon let him that is filthy, bee filthy ſtill: but doe Sathan what hee can, wiſedome ſhall bee iuſtified of her children.
               
               Theſe are children indeed: To what ripenes in rayling thinke you they wil grow, by the time they be men? It is true that there is a wiſedom: whoſe children by their outward appearance they may well bee accounted. Of which wiſedome S. Iames ſpeaking ſayeth. If yee haue bitter enuying &c. reioyce not, neyther bee lyers againſt the truth, for this wiſedome deſcendeth not from aboue, but is earthy, ſenſuall, and diuelliſh. And S. Iude commeth alſo as neere them: who maketh it a particular note of falſe ſeducers, to ſpeake euill of them who are in authoritie.
               
               Now as concerning the witneſſes that are vſed in this

matter: the ſaid Wiſedomes children are mightily (as it ſeemeth) offended with them, and with ſuch alſo as did examine them. The witneſſes (ſaith the Preface) that voluntarily offred to be depoſed for the truth, were repulſed: all partiall perſons that could bee thought vpon, were preſently called. Alſo the Narrator: Theſe proper Commiſsioners refuſed ſuch as were willing to iuſtifie the truth vpon their oathes, they picked out whom they liſted, and wrote what pleaſed them. And a third writeth thus to the Biſhop of London, concerning himſelfe, & others in authoritie. You condemne the guiltleſſe ſeruants of God, vpon Somers bare report onely, excepting eight or nine falſe witneſſes, who ſay, that they thinke in their conſciences, that the ſaid Somers did but counterfait. If theſe fellows words or writings deſerued any anſwere, the truth in this behalf were ſufficient to ſtop their throats: being ſo wide & open ſepulchers of falſhood and corruption. But their tongues are their owne, and of likelihood they are determined if they can (as it is in the Pſalme) to preuaile with them. Howbeit (as by the way, and a little to cleare theſe calumniations) be it obſerued, that the whole number of witneſſes produced againſt M. Darrell, being about fortie and foure: thirtie and foure of them at the leaſt, are ſuch as had ſome extraordinary liking of him, & were reputed to be his friends and fauourers. Of the ſaid fortie and foure, twelue were vſed by Maiſter Darrell himſefe, as witneſſes examined to proue Somers no diſſembler: foure of them being miniſters. Seuen came vp to London, to iuſtifie his proceedinges, and to procure him what friendſhip they could: three of them alſo being miniſters, and eight others not reckened before, are preachers or graduates. If there be ſome three or foure of the whole number, that ſuſpected more falſehood in M. Darrels proceedinges then the reſt, yet are their depoſitions,

but vnto ſome one or two pointes, and thoſe not greatly materiall. The matters of importance, whereby M. Darrels iugling is detected, are depoſed by his chiefeſt friendes: and therefore there is no ſuch cauſe of clamor, why they ſhould either bee charged with partiality, or falſhood. If they haue in any ſort offended, it may be thought to be rather in concealing ſomething that they knew, then in deuiſing of any vntruthes againſt him. And for the writers of their examinations, they were men lawfully authoriſed in that behalfe, and publike Notaries, ſworne to deale truely in ſuch cauſes. Beſides, euery of the ſaid examinations is ſubſcribed with the hand of the partie examined, and of the Commſſioners who tooke the ſame. But it is an eaſie matter to ſpeake euil, for ſuch as are of the diuiſing and ſlaundering humor: who care not what they either ſay or write, ſo they thinke it may ſerue their turne.
               Why theſe men ſhould thus be ouercarried, that nothing will content them, but that when they haue not what they would, they will thus lay about, may be a queſtion. There is mention made before of a combination or aſſociation: the intent whereof may be left at large. Some little geſſes may be made, ſo they be not inforced as concludent. M. Darrell being taken at Nottingham by ſome, for a time, to be a maruellous bugge to ſcarre the Deuill, was in the heate thereof choſen by certaine in the towne, to be their preacher, hauing otherwiſe no lawfull authority in that behalf.The writtē treatiſe. This choice, one of his friends termeth ſuch a comfortable calling, and ſo warrantable, that very fewe miniſters in our Church haue had the like. The author of the briefe Narration, to draw vs peraduenture from further dealing with M. Darrell, or at the leaſt to ſhew his humor, propoundeth in his margent this queſtion, vz. Whether a

Biſhop and Elder be all one in ſcriptures. And M. More, (as cunning as M. Darrell in dealing with Sathan) ſaith: that the faith of the Church eſtabliſhed vnder the Paſtors and Teachers &c. ſhall bring forth this fruit▪ namely, to caſt out deuils: &c. Hereunto it may be added, that many, who haue taken M. Darrels cauſe moſt to hart, haue beene noted heretofore as fauorers of the ouerworne Conſiſtorian faction. Of theſe premiſes it wold peraduenture anger them, if any ſhould collect, that in all likelihood, ſeeing neyther by learning, nor ſufficient arguments, they could heretofore preuaile, for the ſetting vp of their Presbyteriall conceits, they thought to ſupply their wantes therein, by this deuiſe of caſting out Deuilles. It were to bee wiſhed, that at the laſt they would leaue this giddines, or at the leaſt touching the matter in hand, to thinke more reuerently of thoſe that be in authoritie, and not perſiſt as yet they do, in the further iuſtification of M. Darrell, their weakenes therein being more apparant by thoſe pointes that follow.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. III. How M. Darrels friends haue ſet out the pretended diſpoſſeſsing of William Somers.
               
                  AS M. Darrels fauourers haue beene bold to ſlaunder the perſons and courſes held for the detecting of his coſenages: ſo are they very earneſt (by extolling aboue the reſt, the pretended diſpoſſeſſing of William Somers) to iuſtifie therein his courſe and proceedings with him. The briefe Narration tearmeth it, A maruellous worke of God: a glorious worke greater

then which hath ſcarcely beene heard of, eyther in our dayes, or in the dayes of our forefathers for many yeares. The truth of this worke (ſaith he) ſhall breake forth as a light, and the glory thereof as a burning lampe. And againe: it is a candle lighted by God vpon a candleſticke, in the hart & center of the land, that the beames thereof might ſhine forth, and giue light to all the Realme. And another of his friends in his ſaid written treatiſe telleth vs, that, All who loue the Lord Ieſus in ſincerity, muſt be careful to cleare & publiſh this worke, as the wonderfull worke of Chriſts owne finger. And againe: it may be iuſtly hoped, that it will proue a matter of as great conſequence, as euer any ſuch worke that the Lord gaue extraordinarily, ſince the time that he reſtored the Goſpell amongſt vs, and as profitable to all that truely profeſſe the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt.
               
               Theſe fellowes (we ſee) are maruellouſly rauiſhed with this ſuperexcellent wonder. But marke how truely one of them ſpeaketh: peraduenture againſt his will. It will proue (forſooth) to be a matter of as great conſequence, and as profitable, as euer any ſuch worke, ſince the reſtitution of the Goſpell amongſt vs. Any ſuch worke: you may belieue him. For the pretended diſpoſſeſſing of the maide of Cheſter, was nothing els but a ridiculous toy. M. Darrell himſelfe will not ſay, that Deuils are caſt out in ſuch ſort. And like to that was the caſting of a Deuill out of one Mildred, the baſe daughter of Alice Norington, at Weſtwell in Kent, in the yeare 1574. which for all the goodly pretences that were made by two miniſters, Roger Newman, & Iohn Brainford (equally to M. Darrell and M. More) was confeſſed in the end to be but a meere coſenage. Reade M. Scottes diſcourſe of witchcraft, the 7. booke, the firſt Chapter. It ſeemeth that practiſe was one of M. Darrels patternes. Such a worke alſo was the very wonderfull and ſtrange miracle of God, (as the title of the booke runneth) ſhewed vpon a

Dutchman, of the age of xxiii. yeares, which was poſſeſſed of ten Deuils, and was by Gods mightie prouidence diſpoſſeſſed of them againe, the 27. of Ianuarie, in the yeare 1572. Notwithſtanding that the Mayor of Maidſtone, Nicaſius Vanderſcheure, (the miniſter of the Dutch Church there) and Iohn Stikelbowe (the inſtrument forſooth, that caſt out the ſaid Diuell) with diuers others, did ſubſcribe that pamphlet. In this number may alſo bee ranged, the ſtrange newes out of Sommerſetſhire, Anno 1584. tearmed, a dreadfull diſcourſe of the diſpoſſeſsing of one Margaret Cooper at Ditchet, from a deuill in the likenes of a headleſſe beare. Hereunto in like manner may be added, the very ſtrange vexation of the maid of Bury: of Agnes Brigges, and Rachell Pinder in London: all of them counterfeite and lewde practiſes, reſembling or imitating the wicked deuiſes of the holy Maid of Kent: who by the inſtigation of two falſe Prieſtes, Edward Bocking, and Richard Maſons (with their aſſociates) tooke vpon her in King Henry the eights daies, to haue maruellous traunſes, to the great admiration of the whole countrey: as it appeareth very fully in the Statutes at large. An. Hen. 8.25. Cap. 12.
               
               But why doth M. Darrels friend omit the diſpoſſeſſing of Katherine Wright, the boy of Burton, & the vii. in Lancaſhire? Are not their deliuerances of as great conſequence as that of William Somers? Surely they are thought ſo: & the profite which is expected, that will inſue of all thoſe foure ſtrange works, is, the puniſhment due to ſuch lewd coſenages: that others hereafter may eſchue ſuch wicked practiſes.
               But let vs heare M. Darrels ſaid friend tell his owne tale, how the diſpoſſeſſing of Somers will proue ſo profitable: It will ſo do (ſaith he) by confounding all Atheiſts, who thinke there are no Deuils: by conuincing the Papiſts, who hold,

that our Miniſters can not diſpoſſeſſe any: by diſcouering of witches, Sathan by Somers hauing diſcloſed many: by teaching vs in Somers, that Gods prouidence reacheth euen to children: by incouraging vs to faſt & pray often, the ſame being of force to caſt out Deuils: and by the generall furtherance it giueth to the Goſpell, whileſt thereby we may learne, (ſaith M. Moore, or his companion, one M. Dicons, writing in deed of the vii. in Lancaſhire) that it is Gods word which we now preach, euen the ſword of the ſpirit which ſlayeth Sathan.
               
               It is not amiſſe, that the Papiſtes are driuen to the Deuill, to ſeeke after his teſtimonies for the confirmation of many things: As to winne a better eſtimation, & greater liking of their Sacrament of the Altar: their praying to Saintes: their fuſtie reliques: their coniured holy water: their Agnus Dei: & of their ſhauelinges, and hypocriticall Exorciſts, they beare the world in hand, that the Deuill can not indure any of them, and that he doth not therein diſſemble, (as ſeeming to be troubled with them,) per aſtutiam, through craft thereby to deceiue, but per infirmitatē, in that he is not able for their holines (indeed) to abide them. And let them comfort themſelues (ſeeing they wil not bee reclaimed) with that vncertaine diſtinction, and many other ſuch like ſtratagems of Sathan. But for miniſters of the Goſpell, or any other, (that would ſeeme to fauour it) to ſend vs to M. Darrels dealing with William Somers, for the confounding of Atheiſts, for the conuincing of Papiſts, or for our aſſurance, that the worde of God is truely preached amongeſt vs, muſt of neceſſitie bee helde by the grauer ſort, to be a meere madnes, or a frenſie at the leaſt. What the caſting out of Deuils amongſt other miracles in the ſcriptures can effect, that hath beene long ſince wrought, through the expelling of them by Chriſt himſelf, and by his Apoſtles: and their miraculous working therein

continueth ſtill the like force for the confirmation of our faith, whileſt the ſame is daily offred vnto our conſideratiō by the holy Ghoſt in the word of God. It is not here meant to diſcuſſe, what we ought to thinke touching the continuance of the power of caſting out Deuils: Howbeit for as much as M. Darrels friends do ſo oft alledge Tertullian,
                  De ſacramento ordinis. Cap. 2. 
                  S. Cyprian, S. Ambroſe, S. Auſten. S. Chryſoſtome, with Proſper, &c. it is not amiſſe to heare what Komnitius (writing againſt the Councell of Trent) ſaith of this point. Exorciſtas &c. They haue tranſformed their Exorciſts into magicall inchanters. In times paſt it was a peculiar guift to caſt diuels out of mens bodies by the voyce of man, and power of God. And the ſame guift continued in the Church, in the times of S. Cyprian, S. Ambroſe, S. Auguſtine, S. Chryſoſtome, & of Proſper: Obſeſſi in templū adducebantur, & ſaepe cōmunibus eccleſiae precibus liberabantur: The poſſeſſed were brought into the Church, and were oftentimes deliuered by the common prayers of the Church: poſteà illud donum. &c. But afterwards (ſaith he) that guift ceaſed. If M. Darrell haue againe obtained it, let him make much of it: & when he can bring vs one, whom we may know to be in deed poſſeſſed, both hee and his friendes may haue herein a fuller reſolution.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. IIII. How M. Darrell is made a fitter inſtrument to caſt out Diuels, then many other.
               
                  IT is commonly ſaid, that no excellent work is performed but by excellent men. The diſpoſſeſſing therefore of W. Somers, being a matter ſo admirable, M. Darrell muſt of neceſſity be ſome rare perſon. In which reſpect, as before they haue tolde vs, of glory, of lights, of lamps, & ſhining beams (reſēbling

belike the ſuppoſed diſpoſſeſſion of Somers, to the glory that appeared in the tranſfiguration of Chriſt, thereby to iuſtifie that lewd action) ſo are they as lauiſh, in extolling and commending of him: aſcribing vnto him many extraordinarie vertues, to couer (if it might be) his counterfaiting and coſenage. And herein they follow the beaten tract of ſuch like diuell caſters: For euery man is not fit for that miſterie. The Exorciſing Rabbins amongſt the Papiſtes doe tell vs, that in Chriſts time, there were ſome being infidels, that caſt out deuils, hauing no authoritie giuen them by Chriſt ſo to doe: our Sauiour granting that power then (they ſay) to Chriſtians onely. Now of Chriſtians, ſome were Apoſtles and Diſciples, and ſome were Lay people, as they tearmed them. Both which ſorts were made fitte perſons to caſt out diuels: the one by vertue of their calling, being eccleſiaſticall: and the other in reſpect of their holy conuerſation. The layetie had this power (they ſay) but a while, except it were vpon ſome extraordinarie occaſions. And therein they giue the chiefe place to women, naming S. Brigit, S. Katherine of Seen, S. Genouefa, and S. Anatolia: that ſexe (as it ſeemeth) hauing a generall diſpoſition, to like wel of Exorciſmes. After the Apoſtles time (they ſay) that the power of caſting out deuils, which the Apoſtles and Diſciples had, was made an eccleſiaſticall office, to bee beſtowed by the Biſhops, vpon ſuch as were termed Exorciſts: whom in our language we may call Coniurors. But it is to be obſerued, that for this aſſertion, Thyraeus the Ieſuite (an eſpeciall Author of M. Darrels,
                  De Daemoniacis. Thyreus part 3. Cap. 37. and his fauourers) hath no ſcripture for his warrant, neyther doth hee pretend any. Touching theſe Exorciſtes, as amongſt the Apoſtles there was a Iudas, the reſt of them hauing puritie of life, annexed to their guift of caſting out Deuils: ſo (they ſay) it hapneth now

that ſome Exorciſts, although they be of wicked conuerſation, may notwithſtanding, (albeit more rarely) caſt out deuils by vertue of their office, giuen them by their Biſhops: whereas generally thoſe who are fitte to vndertake that worke, muſt be alſo of an Apoſtolicall conuerſation: whereupon it commeth that the Ieſuites, and popiſh Antizans doe tell vs in good ſooth, that their Exorciſtes muſt be men of very humble ſpirites, voide of all leuitie: ſuch as are greatly inflamed with the loue of God: perſons indued with hope and aſſurance, to caſt out ſuch ſpirites as they meddle with: (of which hope and aſſurance the Apoſtles being ſometimes deſtitute, as they ſay, did attempt in vaine to caſt out one deuill:) men alſo, whoſe conſciences are not burdened with any mortall ſinne, but for pietie and innocencie of life, are perſons of eſpeciall note. And one reaſon alledged for this purpoſe, is very Logicall: Contraria Contrariis pelluntur: they ought to be as good, as the deuill is bad, that can caſt him out of his poſſeſſion: marrie men thus qualified, no maruaile though they tell vs, that Sathan cannot endure them: that the ſpirites themſelues haue complayned, how they haue bin tormēted, Sanctorū praeſentia, with the preſence of ſuch Saintes: that the deuils ſometimes haue beene glad to leaue their poſſeſſion, not daring to abide their comming vnto them: that the deuils that haue preſumed ſometimes to abide their preſence, haue beene ſo dreſſed, as they durſt neuer afterwardes returne to thoſe places againe, where they met with them: and that therefore it is not to be wondred, that when mē, who are troubled themſelues with Sathan, or haue their children, friendes, or ſeruantes ſo vexed, doe ſeeke after ſuch holy perſons, to be deliuered by them.
               Indeed our experience doth make it no wonderment, as the Ieſuite ſayeth. And herein M. Darrell hath had great

lucke: For when hee was not paſt two or three & twentie yeares old, he was ſuppoſed to be ſuch a man, as could doe ſomewhat in that art. When Katherin Wright was firſt troubled, ſhee was by one M. Bereſfordes aduice ſent to M. Darrell at Manſfield, and to one M. Beckingham, to be comforted, or cured of her infirmitie: becauſe (as he ſayeth) hee had heard M. Beckingham to bee a man of note, and M. Darrell a man of hope, for the relieuing of thoſe that were diſtreſſed in that ſorte. Thomas Darling being troubled (forſooth), ſome of his friends ſent to Witches. A cunning man was alſo procured to come vnto him, who tooke vpon him within a weeke to cure him. Afterwardes Alice Goodridge the ſuppoſed Witch, tolde them that the boy would not mend, except they ſought for helpe, ſaying, they might haue helpe inough. But at thoſe wordes, the Booke ſayeth, that the deuill ſtopped her throat, or elſe peraduenture, (the author meaneth) ſhe would haue tolde them, what kinde of helpe they ſhould ſeeke for: this is but a coniecture. The certainety hereof is, that M. Walkeden (the boyes grandfather) hearing how M. Darrell had helped Katherine Wright, procured him to come to Burton, to helpe Darling: and the reporte was before he came, that one ſhould come from Aſhbie, that would giue the boy ſuch directions, as without doing him any hurte, ſhould relieue him. When the ſeauen in Lancaſhire were troubled, M. Starkie going to M. Dee for his counſel, was aduiſed by him, to call for ſome honeſt and godly preachers, with whome he ſhould conſult. And behold how it hapened. M. Dees Butler telling them, what one M. Darrell of Aſhbie had done at Burton, M. Starkie and M. Dee reſolued vpon him, and writ their ſeuerall letters vnto him, for his repaire into Lankaſhire: howbeit in this their courſe, there was a great imperfection. For

                  Edward Hartley the Witch, did afterwards tell M. Starkey, that no one man could do his children and the reſt there any good, it was too great a worke: but there muſt be two or three at the leaſt, with feruent and hartie prayer. And here you may obſerue a little kinde of Wonder. For M. Darrell not knowing (for ought that appeareth) what the ſaide Witch had affirmed, did of his owne accorde, (after hee was ſent for by M. Dee and M. Starkie,) acquaint one M. Moore with the matter, and obtayning him to be his companion in that action, fulfilled and deuils wordes, that two at the leaſt muſt vndertake that worke. By the time that Somers had his fittes, M. Darrell was of ſome name: and beſides hauing a ſiſter in law in Nottingham, one Miſtreſſe Wallys, ſhee was not tongue-tyed, what a man her Brother was: and thereupon being vrged by certaine women, ſhe writ to M. Darrell the letter, importing (ſayeth Mrs. Gray) that the Lady Zouch, ſhe her ſelf, and diuers other Gentlewomen, requeſted him to come ouer to ſee the ſaide Somers.
               
               Hetherto it may appear, how M. Darrell hath bin ſought vnto, which argueth that he was thought by ſome to bee ſuch a man, as if he met with the diuel, he was able to curb him. But whether his giftes, and conditions be like the better ſorte of Exorciſtes, as they haue been deſcribed out of Thyraeus, that remayneth to bee declared. For hee doth not challenge any power to caſt out deuils by vertue of his miniſtery, and therefore it muſt be his Holines, or nothing, that muſt ſupport him. Vppon M. Darrels calling into queſtion, for his dealing with Somers, and the reſt, there hath bin great indeuour vſed to colour the ſame by an extraordinary cōmendation of his carriage, & conuerſation. A man would think that Thyraeus had bin peruſed, he is made ſo ſutable vnto his Exorciſtes. One Serſon an

Attorney with one Serſon a Preacher, M. Walleis and M. Small went publikely from houſe to houſe in Nottingham, to procure handes (as Small confeſſeth) vnto a certificate, or teſtimoniall, concerning his the ſaide Darrels vnſpotted behauiour. The like indeuour was alſo vſed, for the procuring of ſuch an other teſtimoniall from Aſhbie. Others in like manner of his friendes haue publiſhed in writing: that he abhorreth all kinde of counterfeyting and diſſembling: that he is not giuen to any deſire of vaine glory: that if hee had plotted anie ſuch matter as is layde to his charge, hee is not of diſpoſition to haue concealed it, &c. An other ſayeth, that he is ſo farre from coſenage or deceite, as that hee hath himſelfe beene deceyued: that hauing begunne the ſtudy of the law, he perceyued therein ſuch great corruption, as he gaue himſelfe to the ſtudy of Diuinity, that ſo hee might ſerue God, and keepe a good conſcience: that being a Minister, he preached for the triall of his guifts, hauing no eccleſiaſticall liuing: that ſuch was his integrity, as it hath not been beard of, that euer hee did labour for any Church liuing: that hee might haue had once a Perſonage, if he would but haue ſaide, I could be content to accept ſuch a thing, if it were offered me, which he durſt not do for diſpleaſing of God: that he is a man ſo farre from couetuouſnes and ambition, as if he would haue giuen a little vnderhand, hee might haue had a Benefice or two, worth fiue or ſix hundreth poundes yearely: that he is ſo farre from pride and vaine glory, as hee hath not beene knowne to diſdaine the company of any honeſt man, though neuer ſo baſe: that hee is indeede earneſt and bolde, but it is when hee hath a good cauſe, as the ſeruantes of God, Peter and Iohn, with moſt of the faithfull Martyrs of Chriſt haue beene: and that his aduerſaries hauing ſifted him, through the whole courſe of his life, can finde nothing against him. What is reported of M. Darrell, ſhall not now be confuted, his honeſty, he may be ſure will neuer hurt him: You may onely bee

aduertiſed, that his ſaide friend forgetteth himſelfe in affirming, that M. Darrels life hath been ſo ſearched into. For true it is, that diligent care was had, and commandement giuen accordingly, that touching his conuerſation, otherwiſe then appertayned directly to his pretended courſe of caſting out deuils, there ſhould not any one point be inquired into: neither was there, as by the actes in record it may appeare, and as it is ſuppoſed, M. Darrell will himſelfe confeſſe.
               But to come more directly to the point in hand. Although theſe M. Darrels ſaid pretended vertues, doe make him anſwerable to the popiſh Exorciſts: yet that forſooth is not ſufficient, but Thyraeus the Ieſuite, muſt in effect tell vs ſo. For M. Darrels ſaide friende, ſetting downe certaine reaſons, why God hath made him the ſaide Darrell, rather then many, (otherwiſe more wiſe, and learned then he) an eſpeciall inſtrument in theſe daies, for the caſting out of diuels, maketh this one, vz. in that hee is ſuch a man, as is qualified according to Thyraeus the Ieſuites ſaide rules, ſet downe by him in his Booke, de Daemoniack, Cap. 38.39. Out of which Chapters, that which Thyraeus requireth in his Exorciſtes, this man alledgeth to bee manifeſt in M. Darrell, ſauing that amongſt ſome other thinges, hee omitteth, whether M. Darrels conſcience bee burdened with anie mortall ſinne. Otherwiſe for many of the reſt, naming them, vz. that hee is a man of good reporte: one that deſpiſeth the world: not couetous: of an humble ſpirite: not ambitious: not proude: zealous of Gods glory: much giuen to prayer and to the ſeruice of God: and of an eſpeciall confidence in the Lord: theſe graces (he ſayeth) God hath beſtowed vpon M. Darrell: and therefore by Thyraeus rules, were there nothing elſe to the contrary, he might be thought to bee a well furniſhed, and verie

complete Exorciſte. But one thing is reported of M. Darrel, which paſſeth the reſt, & maketh it probable, (you may not doubt) that God hath giuen him an eſpeciall Grace aboue all other Exorciſts, now a dayes to expell deuils. For they ſay, that after a ſort, he hath forſaken houſe, landes, and all for Chriſtes ſake: which being an Apoſtolicall reſolution,A written treatiſe. why ſhould he not haue that Apoſtolicall gifte graunted vnto him? Indeede one is as true as the other. For will you know, how hee hath forſaken all to follow Chriſt? Hauing two or three houſes, and a little land in Manſfielde and elſe where, left him by his Father, he ſold the ſame, by his owne confeſſion, as dearely as he could, and ſince hath liued vppon the money, being (as one of his friendes ſayeth) fiue or ſix hundreth poundes. How the deuill in regarde of this M. Darrels Holines, could not abide his preſence, will appeare in the next Chapter. In the meane while, it may well be ſaide without offence, that if to ſell land, and liue vpon the money, be to leaue all and follow Chriſt, and a fitte note of one that can caſt out Deuils: wee ſhall not want men of that trade: many Vſurers in England will proue good Exorciſtes. But touching his honeſty, iudge thereof, when you haue peruſed this whole Treatiſe. Now his skill to caſt out Deuils, reſteth to bee a little looked into, together with his doctrine, whereupon hee doth ground it.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. V. How M. Darrell knew William Somers, and the reſt to bee poſſeſſed.
               
                  HEe that will take vppon him to caſt Deuils out of men, muſt firſt know whether they haue any in them, or elſe he may peraduenture looſe his labor. Foraſmuch therefore as M. Darrell and M. More, are the perſons of note amongſt vs, that haue entred into this courſe: it is a point of good iuſtice, that they be heard with ſome aſſiſtance of their friendes, to ſpeake for themſelues. M. More ſayeth,Page 82. That in the Apoſtles times, thoſe that had the gift of caſting out Deuils, had alſo an other praecedent gifte: firſt to diſcerne the ſpirites, which gift was called, Diſcretio Spirituum. But M. Darrell is of an other opinion, and that an abſurde one. For he affirmeth that Chriſt did not ordaine any meanes,Page 67. to know who was poſſeſſed in the Apoſtles time: but left that to bee diſcerned by the manner of their fittes. And ſo framing his iudgement accordingly, hee ſayeth, that the onely meanes, whereby now men are diſcerned to be poſſeſſed, are the ſignes which are mentioned in the Scriptures. But M. More is bolde againe herein to diſſent from him. For although he conceyueth, that the ſaid gift named Diſcretio Spirituum, is taken away, and that now it is to bee knowne in ſome ſorte, who are poſſeſſed, by the ſignes mentioned in the Scriptures: yet hee will not haue thoſe ſignes, the onelie meanes,Page 82. but addeth Prayer vnto them: ſaying, that the ſaide ſignes, and prayer are now the meanes ordayned by God,

to ſucceede, and continue in place of the other: And hee aſcribeth ſo much to prayer in this worke, as without it, hee accounteth the other parte, to bee verie vncertaine. By prayer (ſayeth hee) men that are acquainted with the ſaide ſignes, may ordinarily obtaine ſuch meaſure of Gods holy ſpirite, as that they may be able truly to diſcerne, whether the partie, in whome the ſaide ſignes doe appeare, be indeede poſſeſſed or not. A pretie matter, the gifte of diſcerning of ſpirites is left, and a meaſure of Gods ſpirite is brought vs for it. It would bee knowne what that gifte was: If not a meaſure of Gods ſpirite, to diſcern betwixt counterfeytes, and ſuch as were indeede poſſeſſed. But let that goe.
               It being obiected, that foraſmuch as very many worthy, and godly men, notwithſtanding their knowledge of the ſignes of poſſeſſion mentioned in the ſcriptures, and their earneſt and feruent prayers, haue beene verie greatly deceyued by ſundry counterfeyts, it ſeemeth probable, that he & M. Darrel might be alſo deceiued in iudging the vii. in Lancaſhire, and W. Somers to be diſpoſſeſſed: one by way of preuention anſwereth, that M. Fox, and others, might eaſily be deceyued therein by Sathan, as not hauing read (as hee ſuppoſeth,) Bodinus, Wierus, Mingus, and Thyraeus, that write of deuils, as hee himſelfe, M. Darrell, and the reſt of that Crue haue done. But M. More anſwereth after an other faſhion: ſaying, that it might bee they vſed the ſaide meanes indirectly, whereas hee and M. Darrell vſed them directly: that they were aſſured, that God gaue them power, ſo to vſe them: that ſuch their aſſurance grew from their full perſwaſion, that the ſaide parties were poſſeſſed: and that it pleaſed God to endue them with that full perſwaſion, becauſe they had vſed the ſaid meanes ſo directlie. In which his circular folly, euery point is more vncertain thē
                  
other, euen that of their full perſwaſion: becauſe it is ſuppoſed, that they dealt like a couple of coſening hypocrites, (at the leaſt one of them) making ſhew of that which was not. But what will M. Darrell ſay to theſe pointes, thus confidently ſet downe by his fellow M. More? They tend ſo much to his greater worſhip, as ten to one he will wind himſelfe one way or other within the compaſſe of them, that ſo he may therin part ſtakes with him. And yet it wil be hard for him ſo to do: For he holding (as it will appeare hereafter) that the wicked, and ſuch as are not reconciled to God, by a true iuſtifying faith, may in theſe daies (the power of doing miracles being ceaſed) caſt out diuels: eyther he muſt ſay, that they haue no meanes left them to diſcerne who are poſſeſſed (which were abſurde): or confeſſe, that the prayers of the wicked may preuaile as much to that effect (as M. More affirmed theirs did): or els leauing M. Moore to his prayers, hee is driuen to his owne hold, that the onely meanes whereby the poſſeſſed may be diſcerned, are the ſignes of poſſeſsion mentioned in the ſcriptures. Amongſt which ſignes (he inſiſting ſo much vpon them, & keeping ſo many Audits of them) it is much meruailed, why he ſtill omitteth the breaking of fetters and chaines mentioned by S. Luke. If it had appeared without all iugling, that no iron chaines or fetters could haue held either Somers, or any of the reſt, (they hauing beene faſtned with them, as the keeper of Newgate could haue vſed them) he had ſaid ſomething.
               But to proceed with M. Darrels onely meanes, being the ſignes mentioned in the ſcriptures: Of them he telleth vs there are eighteene, but in his Apologie hee nameth but ſixe of them: crying, gnaſhing of teeth, wallowing, foaming, extraordinarie and ſupernaturall ſtrength, and ſupernaturall knowledge. To the which the reſt may be added after his vnderſtanding: caſting into the fire, caſting into the

water, tearing, pyning, falling to the ground, nakednes, the partie ſtriking of himſelfe, abiding in no houſe but about graues, mountaines, and in the wilderneſſe; dumbnes, deafeneſſe, fierceneſſe, bruſing the bodie of the partie when his fitte endeth. It may be maruelled why M. Darrell and his friends, talking in their late pamphlets ſo much of the ſignes of poſſeſſion, they ſtill omit thoſe two, or at the leaſt ſpeake not of them directly, which ſerued his turne in place of iugling ſtickes, and were the principall groundes, whereupon his legerdemaine did conſiſt. The one is, that whoſoeuer is poſſeſſed, is in his fittes altogether ſenceleſſe, and depriued for the time, both of his vnderſtanding, and memorie: the other, that albeit ſuch as are poſſeſſed doe in their fittes many thinges, as if they were not poſſeſſed, and alſo make very reaſonable anſweres to ſuch queſtions as are propounded vnto them, yet it is not they, but the Deuill in them, that doth both aunſwere and doe them. But it may be they are now aſhamed of theſe pointes: for it will bee hard to find any authour amongſt the groſſeſt ſort of the popiſh Exorciſtes, or elſe where, that euer maintained theſe aſſertions. The lunatike in the ſcriptures, was in his fittes dumbe: but it can not bee ſhewed that hee wanted the reſt of his ſences. In ſome others alſo it is plaine, that Sathan did ſpeake at ſome times, as when the wicked ſpirites deſired our Sauiour, that they might go into the heard of ſwine: but it cannot be thereof inferred, that the partie poſſeſſed with thoſe ſpirits, did neuer in his fittes, ſpeake or doe any thing of himſelfe. Beſides, it is a generall poſition, that Sathan poſſeſſing ones body, hath not to doe eyther with his vnderſtanding or memory, otherwiſe then by troubling his fancy.
               But let it be ſuppoſed, that theſe two were in the number of M. Darrels eighteene onely ſignes of poſſeſſion,

mentioned in the ſcriptures: yet ſome of his owne friends will therein alſo oppoſe themſelues againſt him. For if the ſignes mentioned in the Scriptures, bee the onely means to diſcerne who are poſſeſſed: what muſt become of many other ſignes, that Mayſter Darrell and his friends doe ſo much ground themſelues vpon, as the running in Somers fleſh, of a lumpe as bigge as a Mouſe, &c. which muſt eyther vpholde their reputations, or els they are in daunger to fall to the ground? For the preuenting therefore of this inconuenience, and for the inlarging of their boundes to worke in, the author of the Briefe Narration, not contenting himſelfe with Maiſter Moores prayers, nor allowing of Maiſter Darrelles iudgement in this point, hath learned of the ſaid Ieſuite a new ſhift. Seeing (ſaith he) that men in this matter are growne more incredulous then heretofore, it hath pleaſed God, (beſides the ſignes of poſſeſsion mentioned in the Scriptures) to giue other ſignes alſo more free from cauill, to make his glorious works most apparant and certaine. And hereof he bringeth for an example one of Somers pretended fittes in theſe words: all the ſignes mentioned in the Scriptures, might more eaſily bee deluded by this conceit of counterfeyting, then this moueable ſwelling. If men were here diſpoſed to take exceptions, it might bee demaunded, when God was pleaſed to giue theſe new demonſtratiue ſignes of poſſeſſion, and vnto whom, and how he ſignified the ſame: or whether this conceit doth not proceede from ſome of the popiſh vnwritten verities? In deede hee relyeth in this deuiſe vppon Thyraeus the Ieſuite, and quoteth for it his booke De Daemoniacis. Howbeit, if hee follow him too farre, as hee hath already brought him from the Scriptures, ſo will hee quite daſh both him and Mayſter Darrell concerning their olde and newe deuiſed ſignes of poſſeſſion:

leauing them no aſſurance at all, how they may diſcerne who is poſſeſſed. For the Ieſuite is flat, that neither the confeſſion of the partie,Thyraeus part. 2. cap. 22.23.24.25. nor his wicked life, nor his fierce conuerſation, nor his barbarous and beaſtly outcries, nor his terrible countenance, nor the priuation almoſt of all his vitall functions, nor his continuall diſeaſes, and inward torments, incurable by the Phiſitions, nor the hauing of the Deuill oft in ones mouth, nor for a man to conſecrate himſelfe to Sathan: nor the ſuffering of more grieuous torments, then thoſe do indure that are in deed poſſeſſed: nor for one to ſeeke to kill himſelfe: nor for a man, giuing himſelfe to the Deuill to bee preſently ſnatched away by him: nor the reuealing of ſecrete matters: nor the knowledge of ſtrange languages, neuer learned by the partie: nor extraordinary ſtrength: nor all the ſignes, that appeared in ſuch as were poſſeſſed in the Euangeliſtes, are ſufficient & vndoubted ſignes (ſaith he) that the partie in whom they appeare is poſſeſſed.
               If therefore M. Darrell will be a right Exorciſt, after the current faſhion amongſt the Ieſuits, he muſt learne other ſignes of poſſeſſion: and Thyraeus (a man ſo oft alleadged by his friends) will not be dainty to teach him. For (ſaith he) theſe are the ſignes indeed, whereof there is no doubt, vz. when the parties that ſeeme to bee poſſeſſed, refuſe to call vppon God, or to pray to Saintes, or to pronounce the word Ieſus: or to receiue ſome prayer or Pſalme: or when they tremble, are afraid, grow impatient, or blaſpheme at the applying vnto them of the relique of any Saint, or of a picture made in waxe, called an Agnus Dei, or at the making of a croſſe vpon their foreheads, or at the bringing vnto them the ſacrament of the Altar, or when they can not abide the Prieſtes, that doe exorciſe them, or at the leaſt doe indure them very hardly. His & ſimilibus ſignis Daemones prodi dubium nullum eſt: there is no doubt (ſaith

he) but that by theſe and ſuch like ſignes the Deuils are diſcloſed: to be, it may bee added in theſe that practiſe them, either as poſſeſſing them, or at the leaſt ſeducing them. For what a ridiculous illuſion is this, to reiect vpon ſimple pretences, ſo many ſtrange ſignes of poſſeſſion? ſome of them carrying with them impoſſibilities by the courſe of nature: and to bring ſuch vnto vs, as may ſo eaſily bee counterfeyted, by euery youth or girle within an houres inſtruction.
               Here M. Darrels friends will peraduenture ſay in anger, that both he and they are as farre from theſe fooleries, as any that haue diſliked of their proceedings. Howbeit, by their leaues, they may in ſome ſorte therein bee checked. For there is pretence made to the like effect, that the Deuils that M. Darrell and M. Moore met with, could neither abide them, nor the word of God: which are two of Thyraeus infallible ſignes of poſſeſſion. When the parties that are pretended to haue beene poſſeſſed at M. Starkies houſe in Lancaſhire, did heare that they two would come vnto them, they are made to haue ſaid thus to their particular ſpirits: vz. Thou naughtie lad, thou makeſt vs ſicke, for thou knoweſt the preachers will come ſhortly, meaning (ſaith M. Moore) himſelfe and M. Darrell. Likewiſe, when they were come to the ſaid M. Starkies houſe, and that three of the ſaid parties being all of them quiet in the kitchen, & ſent for ſeuerally to come to them into the hall, they appeared no ſooner before them (as the hiſtorie reporteth) but hauing made low courteſies vnto them, they fell downe by courſe into their fits. And the third of them, comming in with both her handes cloſed to her face (not being able (as it ſeemeth) to indure the brightnes of the godly mens countenances) vttered theſe words: I am come to councell before I am called. At Nottingham alſo M. Darrell ſo vſed

the matter with Somers, as the boy being in a fitte, when M. Darrell one night left him, & crying, now he is gone: now he is gone:
                  Rob Cooper. pag. 98. 
                  now blacke coate is gone: all that were preſent (ſaith Robert Cooper) thought M. Darrell to be ſo godly a man, as that the Deuill was glad, and reioyced when he was departed. This conceite had of him, may alſo further appeare by the Ballet maker, concerning Somers deſcription in his fittes, of the ſinnes that raigned in Nottingham, whereof hereafter, who rymeth thus: But when that M. Darrell came, the Deuill was vexed with the ſame: His limbes he rackt, hee rent & tore, farre worſer then he did before. And touching the other pretended ſigne, it was an ordinarie courſe held by the keepers of the boy of Burton, that when any ſtraungers came in, that deſired to ſee him in his fits (as men deſire to ſee monſters and ſtraunge beaſtes play their trickes): then they would reade ſome parts of the Goſpell by S. Iohn: and ſtraight way (forſooth) the Deuill muſt ſhew himſelfe, by caſting the boy into ſome fitte. This reading, they tearmed, the offering of battaile or combat to Sathan. When one Phippes, a ſeruant of M. Brinſleyes, ſuppoſed himſelfe to be poſſeſſed, and that the Deuill entred into him, as hee thought in the likeneſſe of a Nitte: Maiſter Darrell perſwaded him, that hee was not poſſeſſed: becauſe (ſaith he) you receiued comfort,Brinſly. pa. 130. when you heare the word of God read, or any prayers, or godly exhortations: whereas William Somers, and others being poſſeſſed, were at ſuch times greatly troubled and tormented. Againe, M. Darrell and M. More, beginning to exhort ſome of thoſe in Lancaſhire, two of them preſently cried out mightily with outragious roaring and bellowing: & the note vpon that place ſaith thus,Hiſtory. fol. 14. 
                  though the Deuill had diſſembled & hid himſelfe in both theſe (for they had beene quiet ſundry daies) yet now the word of God findeth him out:

he can diſſemble no longer, but muſt needs ſhew himſelfe.
               
               By theſe two ſleights borowed from the popiſh Exorciſts they did greatly inueagle & ſeduce their beholders: the firſt tending to the ſetting out of themſelues, & to be had in admiration, whileſt they were ſuppoſed to be ſuch deuout men, as Sathan could not indure: & the other, vnder pretence of magnifying the ſcriptures (which ſeeke no falſhood to winne them commendation) they vſed a colour to ouerſhaddow their lewdnes, when at their pleaſures, they might thereby without leſſe ſuſpition, begin and practiſe their fittes or pageants. Aſſuredly it may well be ſuppoſed, that if this their courſe had not beene met with in time, we ſhould haue had many other pretended ſignes of poſſeſſion: one Deuill would haue beene mad at the name of the Presbyter: an other at the ſight of a miniſter that will not ſubſcribe: an other to haue ſeene men ſit or ſtand at the Communion: and ſo as it had pleaſed our good Maiſters the Exorciſts. And that this coniecture may not be thought to be a vaine collection, you ſhall ſee how ſtinted (as they tearme them) and read prayers, are notablie foyled. M. Moore telleth vs: that when a prayer was read out of prayer booke, in the hearing of thoſe that were poſſeſſed in Lancaſhire, they, that is the Deuils in them, were little moued with it: but afterwards when M. Darrell,
                  M. Moore ad art. 9. pag. 232. 
                  & he, with one M. Dicons, did ſeuerally vſe ſuch prayers, as for the preſent occaſion they conceiued: then (ſaith he) the parties, that is, the wicked ſpirits, were much more troubled, that is, troubled the parties much. See, the Deuill was tricte with their conceiued prayers, and could not abide them, therefore ſuch muſt needs be excellent prayers. As for read prayers, he careth not for them, they haue no force to trouble him, and therfore who ſhould reſpect them? But you are detained too long in this matter. When M. Darrell, with

his fellowes, and all other Exorciſtes, or Deuil driuers are agreed, & (this one poſition of theirs granted vnto them, that the Deuill may torment a man as much being without him, as within him) can make it apparant vnto vs without their groſſe and palpable forgeries: that they are able to diſcerne who is poſſeſſed: then let them tell vs, that they haue diſpoſſeſſed them.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. VI. Of M. Darrels knowledge, who ſent the Deuill into Somers, and the reſt.
               
                  IT ſeemeth to be a matter very pertinent to the dignitie of an Exorciſt, that he bee able to declare who ſent the Deuill into his patient. For men of that trade doe affirme, that ſometimes it is God, ſometimes holy men, and ſometimes witches, that do ſend them. To omit their aſſertions touching God and godly men (although they containe very ſtrange points, and interpretations, as they are propounded, and handled by the Doctors of Deuill driuing) that of witches is now moſt pertinent. For all the Deuils that M. Darrell hath hitherto incountred, were ſent by them (as it ſeemeth) into his patients. Whether witches can ſend Deuils into men or women (as many doe pretende) is a queſtion amongſt thoſe that write of ſuch matters▪ & the learneder and ſounder ſort doe hold the negatiue. Againſt whom Thyraeus oppoſeth himſelfe, & with Thyraerus M. Darrell, & that not without very pregnant reaſons, if he may be credited. For he is able to ſpecifie or deſcribe the particular

parties that ſent their ſpirites into his patientes, together with their ſeuerall names,Dar. ad artic 24. pa. 42. and in what manner the witches did ſend them. Middlecub the Familiar ſpirite of one Margaret Roper of Eckling in Darbiſhire, did by her commandement poſſeſſe Katherine Wright,
                  The Booke of Darling. 
                  Alice Goodridge of Staphen-hill in Darbyſhire, hauing a ſpirite called Minny, in the likenes of a dogge, parte colored red, and white, did ſend the ſame to torment Thomas Darling, hauing firſt taught her ſaide ſpirite, by ſtrayning her own body, and vomiting, how he ſhould handle and vex his.The ſtory. The ſeauen in Lancaſhire were, (as it ſeemeth) poſſeſſed by the meanes of one Edward Hartley, who breathed wicked ſpirites into them, (as it was ſuppoſed) by kiſsing them.
                  Dar. ad art. 6. Pa, 228. An old woman meeting William Somers vppon Blackewell-more heath, did procure her ſpirite to enter into him, or by his accepting at her handes a piece of bread and butter, and eating it. Touching this olde woman laſt mentioned, M. Darrell for a time was peremptory to the effect ſpecifyed, but ſince (there falling out a matter contrary to his expectation, wherof hereafter he now affirmeth,Darrels luſt and one of his fellowes hath printed it, that an olde woman in Worceſterſhire, did that ſtratageme, by ſending into Somers a Familiar of hers, called Lucie.
                  Mary Couper. And for Marie Couper (M. Darrels laſt patient) it was one Alice Freeman of Nottingham, that directed the deuill to poſſeſſe her: ſhee poore woman, ſuſpecting ſhee had beene with childe, till M. Darrell tolde her it was a wicked ſpirite within her, that cauſed her ſo to ſwell, would any man deſire to haue a queſtion more directly reſolued? The onely doubt is to thoſe that be ſimple men, how M. Darrell came to the knowledge of theſe thinges. And it would bee well cleared. The Ieſuiticall and popiſh Exorciſtes, that holde for this worke of Witcherie, haue but two wayes, (as it

ſeemeth) whereby they know when the ſpirites are ſent by Witches, and the one is the Confeſsion of the deuill, that is caſt out, and the other the Confeſſion of the Witches, who threw him in. And thus far M. Darrell is fully prouided to anſwere for his skill. For it was Middlecub the ſpirite (he ſayeth) that tolde him, that Margaret Roper, did ſend him into Katherine Wright: And touching Thomas Darling, Alice Goodridge confeſſed, that ſhee ſent her Minnie into him, miſtaking him for one Sherrartes boy.
               The Booke alſo of the ſeauen in Lancaſhire, doth after a ſorte inſinuate, that Edward Hartley confeſſed his ſending of ſeauen deuils into them: But how hee will ſhifte concerning Alice Freeman, and the foreſaide olde woman of Darbiſhire, and Worceſterſhire, he hath nothing as yet for ought that is knowne, but VVilliam Somers, and Marie Coupers reports, which his M. Thyraeus ſayeth, are not ſufficient, although the partyes for the iuſtifying of them, ſhould offer themſelues, ad plagas & virgas. But to helpe him herein, if men may be bold a little with the Ieſuite: why ſhould not eyther Mary Couper, or Wlliam Somers, bee aſwell belieued, in ſaying that Alice Freeman, and the ſaide olde women bewitched them, and by that meanes ſent their wicked ſpirites into them, as Middlecub, who tolde M. Darrell, that Mary Roper ſent him into Katherine Wright? For when eyther Thyraeus, or M. Darrell tell vs, that the ſpirites haue confeſſed, who ſent them: what doe they ſay in effect, but that the parties themſelues told them ſo? Neither of them both dare ſay, that the deuils, after they were caſt out, did, or doe vſe to tel any ſuch matter: but the truth is, that when by their knauery, they haue induced the parties ſuppoſed to be poſſeſſed, to ſay that ſuch or ſuch a woman bewitched them: then they tell thoſe

that are preſent, that it is not the ſaide parties, but the wicked ſpirites that ſo confeſſe who ſent them. And touching the confeſſion of the Witches themſelues, that may be left well inough to ſuch learned men, as haue written ſufficiently of it. In the meane while, let M. Darrels fooliſh conceites be further conſidered of.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. VII. Of the Cauſes pretended, why men are poſſeſſed.
               
                  AS there are pretended diuers meanes, whereby Sathan is ſent into men, and women, to poſſeſſe them: ſo are there ſundry cauſes deuiſed, why they are ſent. For example, ſometimes they ſay, they are ſent without any reſpect of the parties offences, into whome they are ſent, and ſometimes, in regard of their offences. Now of ſinnes or offences they make two ſortes: the one Mortall, and the other Veniall; the Mortall are thus recyted. Infidelity,
                  Thyraeus de Demoniacis, part. 2. cap. 30. 
                  abuſing of the Eucharist, blaſphemie, pride, luxuriouſnes, enuie, couetouſnes, perſecution of godly men, diſobedience to parentes, ſlaundering ſpeeches, contempt of religion, for one to curſe himſelfe to the deuill, to be at league with Sathan, and the contempt of the Sacrament of confirmation. The Veniall, you muſt thinke are in number many: theſe following are reckoned to be of that kinde: Idle wordes, ieſting ſpeeches, ſporting lyes, immoderate laughing, and ſuch like: For the remiſſion whereof,Gabriel Bicl. 
                  Non requiritur poenitentia proprié accepta, neque actualis, neque habitualis, neque ſacramentalis, repentance being properly taken is not neceſſarie, neither actuall, habituall, nor ſacramentall. The Biſhops bleſſing knocking on the breaſt, and a little holy water,

will rid a man of them.
               
               That the Deuill is ſent into men for mortall ſinnes, they holde it cleare: but whether for Veniall ſinnes or not, that is made a great queſtion, and Thyraeus reſolueth it. It is moſt certaine (ſayeth he) that Veniall ſinnes haue giuen Sathan occaſion to poſſeſſe men, and they are accordingly deliuered corporally vnto him, pro leuiſsimis quibuſque, delictis, for the leaſt offence that can be committed: A very hard cauſe, that men ſhould be in ſuch a plight for no greater a matter, then a little holy water will waſh away. Now, foraſmuch as the ſpirits that poſſeſſe men, haue intereſt more or leſſe in thē, (as ſome hold), according to the qualitie of the cauſes, for the which they were ſent into them: and will not therefore bee ſo eaſilie expelled, when they enter for mortall ſinnes, as for Veniall, as it is an eſpeciall parte of the Exorciſtes duty (as their rules declare), when they endeuour to caſt out the Deuill, to trauell by all the meanes they can deuiſe, that they may learne the cauſe of his entrance. And leaſt any man ſhould thinke, that therein they looſe their labours: and for the better iuſtifying of Thyraeus reſolution for Veniall ſinnes: both hee and M. Darrell (together with his friendes) doe tel vs verie pretie tales. The Ieſuite ſayeth, that the Deuill entred into one maide, becauſe ſhee was in great loue with a young man, and into an other, for that ſhee indeuored herſelfe to haue a reſemblance of Venus picture: and into an other, propter impatientiam, & durius prolatum verbum, for vttering a ſharpe worde: and into an other, becauſe with ſome greedines, ſhee did eate the leafe of a Lettice, (the deuill cleauing vnknown to her, to the nether parte of the leafe,) forgetting to bleſſe it with the ſigne of the Croſſe. But hereof there neede no more examples: the doctrine being ſo plainely ſet down, that Sathan entreth into men, for the leaſt Veniall ſinne:

Howbeit if any man deſire more, hee may bee aſſured, that their Legendes will afforde him ſtore of them: and for a new ſupply, M. Darrell, and his friendes in the meane while, will not herein be ſilent.Dar. ad art. 24, 
                  Katherine Wright (forſooth) denying ſomething to Mary Roper, the deuill by the ſaid Maries direction did poſſeſſe her. Afterwardes alſo, Sathan comming to the ſaide Katherine Wright in the likenes of a handſome man,Iohn Wig. fol. 7. that making ſuite vnto her in the way of marriage, gaue her a piece of bread, ſhee in taking the ſame at the deuils handes, and eating it, became to be repoſſeſſed. Wil. Somers had the deuill ſent into him, eyther by the old woman of Darbiſhire, becauſe he denyed at the firſt to giue her a penny, or by the olde woman of Worceſterſhire, for that he refuſed to giue her a hat-band, which ſhee much deſired. Why Mary Couper became to be poſſeſſed, the cauſe indeede is not expreſſed, except it were for dwelling in one houſe with W. Somers: it being Sathans practiſe (as M. Darrell ſaide) not to content himſelfe with one in a Family.Mary Couper. pa. 203. But Thomas Darlinges Veniall ſinne exceeded the reſt. For hee meeting Alice Goodridge in a Coppice, did let an eſcape (as the booke termeth it,) which ſhee taking to bee done in her contempt, vſed theſe wordes: Gip with a miſchiefe, and fart with a bell, I wil goe to Heauen, and thou ſhalt goe to Hell. And thereupon her Minnie entred into him. True it is, that M. Darrell (when Somers pretended himſelfe to bee in his fittes greatly tormented) did affirme, that hee was not ſo much troubled for his own ſins, as for the ſins that raigned in Nottingham. And yet then he aſcribed ſome parte of his grief, to his ſinging of wanton and filthy ſonges: he being a muſitian. For of likelihood, hee hath ſome other deuiſe: as that the Deuill may enter into a man for ſmall Veniall ſinnes: but being in him, may torment him in many reſpectes. A bird

in a lime buſh, the more ſhee ſtriueth, the faſter ſhee is. When a man is out of his way, the further hee goeth, the more hee erreth. One abſurditie granted doth bring forth many. And ſuch is M. Darrels caſe in his groundes, he hath layde to worke vpon, which hath brought him into a maze, that he cannot get out.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. VIII. Of the meanes alledged by M. Darrell, and others, whereby men are diſpoſſeſſed.
               
                  IT belongeth to thoſe that challenge the skil to caſt out deuils, to know the means how it ought to be done. He were a mad Phiſition, that would vndertake to cure a man of the palſie, or of any other diſeaſe, that neuer had learned any medicine for it. As good Phiſitions therefore haue fit remedies for their patients to helpe them: ſo you muſt thinke of our cunning Exorciſts, that they want no medicines for their poſſeſſed to eaſe them.
               The ordinary meanes ordayned to continue in the Church, for the caſting out of Deuils, M. Darrell maketh to be very ancient.M. Darr. pag. 65. &c. For he ſayeth that it hath beene in the Church, ſince the fall of Adam. Howbeit herein hee hath no great certainety. For hee confeſſeth that there is no mention in the olde Teſtament of the inſtitution of that means. And ſo of likelyhood; if other of his poſitions be true, men were poſſeſſed from time to time during the ſpace almoſt of 4000. years, God himſelf hauing ordayned no way to cure them. But in ſaying that the

ſame meanes doe continue now in the Church, that were in vſe before the comming of Chriſt: that, his maiſters the popiſh Exorciſtes, will condemne as an error in him. For one of them ſayeth: that the wayes of caſting out deuils,
                  Thyraeus par. 3. cap. 4.1. 
                  in the olde Teſtament, iam vetuſtate, ſi non alia de cauſa antiquatae ſunt & abolitae, as being growne in dotage, are now aboliſhed for their age. If you wil know, what theſe wayes were, Thyraeus telleth you, one was nomen Tetragrammaton: an other the ſmell of a certaine roote, reuealed for that purpoſe to king Salomon: the thirde, the ſmoake of the hart and liuer of a certaine fiſh being layde on the fire: and the fourth, the playing of an harpe or citterne, as though Saule had been poſſeſſed, (which the ſaide Thyraeus dare not reſolutely affirme,) and Dauids muſicke had diſpoſſeſſed him.
               But M. Darrell doth herein differ from the Ieſuite, and ſayeth: that the meanes in the olde Teſtament to caſt out Sathan, was faſting and prayer, euen the ſame that yet continueth: therein alſo differing from his fellow M. More. For whereas M. More ſayeth, that Chriſt did plainely ordaine faſting, and prayer, to bee parte of the ordinary meanes to continue in the Church, in theſe words. This kinde goeth not forth, but by prayer and faſting, thereby ſhewing the beginning of the ſaid means. M. Darrel affirmeth, that Chriſt finding that meanes to be good and godly, did in thoſe wordes but approue it, and ſo maketh it a ſecret ordinance of Chriſt to haue his continuance by way of conſequence: As Chriſt approuing it to be good, did thereby commaund it. Furthermore, whereas M. Darrell holdeth, that in the Apoſtles time, there were two ſortes or kindes of caſting out deuils, the one ordinarie, which was in the Church before the comming of Chriſt, vz. faſting and prayer, and the other extraordinarie, vz. commaunding of Sathan, to depart in the name of Chriſt: M. More ſayeth, that although

hee belieueth that Chriſt did ordaine faſting and prayer in the ſaide place of Saint Mathew, to bee parte of the ordinary meanes for caſting out Deuilles:
                  M. More pa. 80.81. 
                  yet the ſame was not a meane to caſt out Deuilles in the Apoſtles time, there being then an other extraordinarie meanes giuen vnto them: and that Chriſtes meaning was, that faſting and prayer, ſhould not be the ordinarie meanes, till after the time that the extraordinarie ſhould ceaſe. To holde with M. Darrell, that there was an ordinarie meanes to caſt out Deuils in Chriſtes time, doth derogate much from the honor of his miracles in caſting out Sathan: For the Infidelles might haue ſurmiſed, that Chriſt had done it by the ordinary meanes, hauing vſed the ſame ſecretlie without their knowledge. Moreouer, it may argue the extraordinary meanes to bee ſuperfluous: there being then an ordinary meanes, and that of ſuch facilitie, as will after appeare. There is great commendation giuen by M. Darrel, in his Apologie of certaine men, (who it ſeemeth doe fauor him,) that they are learned and reuerend, and of great wiſedome and godlines: and indeede, hee ſayeth trulie of ſome of them: howbeit it is thought, that ere it bee long, hee will bee angrie with two of the beſt of them. For one of them holdeth, (and of the other hereafter,) that by the ſaide wordes of Chriſt: Prayer and Faſting are as effectuall to cure a man,
                  I. B. page. 7▪
                   
                  that is ſicke of an ague, as to caſt out a Deuill: His wordes are theſe. I am not of their opinion, that thinke the wordes of Chriſt. Marke. 9. vz. This kind can by no meanes come forth, but by prayer and faſting, doe importe that Chriſt did ordaine faſting and prayer, as a particular meanes to caſt out Deuils, more then to procure mens deliuerance frō other afflictions.
               
               It hath beene touched before, that M. Moore accounteth prayer & faſting, but a part of the meanes that Chriſt

hath ordained for expelling of Deuils: for that he addeth in the firſt place, Faith, as it is meere he ſhould doe: although therein he diſſent from M. Darrell, as he the ſaid Moore vnderſtandeth Faith. For M. More by faith,M. Moore. pag. 79. vnderſtandeth the faith that iuſtifieth, in theſe wordes: A iuſtifying faith, hauing annexed vnto it faſting and prayer, is the ordinance of Chriſt for the caſting out of Deuils, for euer to continue in the Church. But M. Darrell, confeſſing the neceſſitie of Faith, in the ſaid ordinarie meanes, ſaith:M. Darr. pag. 66. that neyther the faith of doing miracles, nor the iuſtifying faith is therein neceſſarie: but that the temporary or hiſtoricall Faith may ſuffice. It being here obiected, that an hiſtoricall faith ſufficing, (as is before expreſſed) and that the prayer and faſting in ſuch as haue but that faith, can not pleaſe God: it will follow, that the ordinarie meanes which Chriſt hath left in his Church, for caſting out of Deuils as neceſſarie, is ſuch a meanes as is not acceptable to almighty God: M. Darrell anſwereth, that the conſequence is not good. And ſo that point lyeth: but an other may not be left a ſleepe. He ſaith, that in the ſaid place of Mat. 17.20. that the Faith there mentioned, is to be vnderſtood to be the faith of doing miracles: that the Apoſtles were reproued for their weakneſſe in that faith: and that if the ſame had beene ſtrong enough, they might haue caſt out the wicked ſpirit mentioned in that Chapter, ver. 21. without prayer or faſting: whereby it followeth (for ought that dull men can eaſily diſcerne) that M. Darrell holding (as is before mentioned) that place of ſcripture to be a ſecret ordinance, for the continuance of faſting & prayer, as the meanes to caſt out Deuils, and that therein by faith is vnderſtood the faith of doing miracles: (which if it had beene ſtrong enough in the Apoſtles, prayer and faſting had been ſuperfluous): it wil follow it is thought,

that the hiſtoricall faith will not ſerue his turne, but that it muſt be the faith of doing miracles: which muſt bee vnderſtoode for the faith that is required of neceſſitie, when there is neede to caſt out Deuils. So as if hee want that, hee may (by his owne doctrine) caſt his cappe at them.
               I omit here, that ſome of good account for their learning, do interprete the prayer and faſting mentioned in the places of S. Mathew, and S. Marke, to bee required in thoſe that are poſſeſſed with wicked ſpirites: and that the forbearing of both, was not any want in the Apoſtles. Maiſter Darrell himſelfe doth confeſſe, that the partie poſſeſſed ought to faſt and pray, if hee bee able. Wherein if Sathan hinder him, yet he ſaith, Almightie God accepteth of his will, and purpoſe ſo to do in ſteed of the deed. Furthermore, the popiſh ſort do generally require the ſaid prayer and faſting, as a preparation, in the Exorciſtes, and not as a meanes: although Thyraeus confeſſeth, that prayer is ſomething. For ſpeaking of the meanes, how the Deuill is to bee caſt out, after he hath named many, hee is content to giue ſome little roome to prayer, ſaying: Oratio quae adhibetur damnari non debet: Prayer, which is vſed in the caſting out of Deuils, muſt not bee condemned. You ſee how hardly praier commeth into the ranke of the ſaid meanes. And it is likewiſe manifeſt, what little account they make of the ſaid place in Saint Mathew, to ground themſelues vpon, for their caſting out of Deuils: (albeit they are as earneſt to make a trade and merchandiſe of it, as Maiſter Darrell) in that they doe not once mention it for that purpoſe: ſauing that they retaine the commanding of Sathan to depart in the name of Chriſt: which was the meanes that thoſe vſed (ſaith M. Darrell) which had the faith of doing miracles.
               
                  Marry beſides that, they haue a great number of waies, whereby they vexe and torment Sathan wonderfully in their expelling of him: whereof the ſcriptures are as ſilent, as they are lauiſh. For example, the ſacrament of the Altar, the merites of Saintes, the reliques of Saints, the praying to Sayntes, by ſaying their letanie: the ſprinkling of holy water, the ſigne of the croſſe: the impoſition of the prieſtes hands, the ſtole which the prieſt vſeth, being laide on the partie: the whipping of the poſſeſſed with holy whippes, and the putting of the prieſtes finger into their mouthes. Euerie one of theſe will caſt out the Deuill in a miſchiefe, (as Thyraeus by ſundry pleaſant tales, but in good ſadneſſe doth report:) their legendes being in deed full of them. Not long before, you heard that theſe fooleries were reckoned for the ſignes of poſſeſſion: and here you ſee they are (very wiſely) made the meanes to diſpoſſeſſe men. As if the Phiſitions ſhould appoint the ſignes of diſeaſes for the medicines to cure them. But ſuffer the ſaid graue Authour to proceed: for he hath many other things of ſingular vertues, to terrifie Sathan with, in this great worke: as Veſtes ſacrae (for their prieſtes vſually come to the parties in all their maſſing garmentes and attire) Coerei ardentes, hallowed candelles burning, &c. And to haue the matter done in a Church, that is a point of good importance: For ſome Deuilles, that woulde in no wiſe bee caſt out in priuate houſes, being brought to the Church, were ſtraight wayes expelled. But Mayſter Darrell very prouidently did preuent this ſuperſtitious and erronious conceite. For vpon ſome talke and conference at Nottingham, where his faſte ſhould bee helde for the diſpoſſeſſing of William Somers, and ſome deeming Saint Maryes Church there for the beſt and meeteſt place, hee woulde in no reſpect yeelde thereunto, ſaying: That if it ſhoulde

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
be kept there, there would be much attributed to the holineſſe of the place:
                  M. Shute fol. 19. M. Hallam fol. 7. Anne port. fol. 3.
                   
                  and wiſhing rather, that the place of his diſpoſſeſsion might be in the field, that ſo all people might behold it. But vpon better aduiſe, it fell out to bee in a narrow low roome.
               What effect the ſaid popiſh meanes haue to caſt out Deuils: how eaſily they expell them, and how they torment them: will haue a time to be imparted. In the meane while it is pertinent to the purpoſe, to conſider, how mightily (forſooth) the faſting and prayers appointed by M. Darrell,
                  M. Darrell. wrought in his patients. He and his wife, with two or three more, faſting and praying from morning till noone, out went the Deuill from Katherine Wright: he could no longer indure it. At the pretended diſpoſſeſſion of Darling, by meanes of the faſting of halfe a ſcore, from morning till night, and by reading certaine prayers out of the booke, intituled: The enemie of ſecuritie, (wherein they were oft interrupted, by reaſon of the boyes fittes) and by M. Darrels aſſiſtance though abſent: it is to be maruelled (by ſuch as delight in wonders) how the Deuill was afflicted: as appeareth by his wordes (forſooth) but deliuered by the boy, vz. Radulphus, Belzebub can doe no good, his head is ſtricken off with a word. Againe, we can not preuaile, let vs go out of him, and enter into ſome of thoſe here. Againe, we can not preuaile, their Church increaſeth. Againe, we can not preuaile, for they will not be holpen by witches. Brother Radulphus, we cannot preuaile: let vs go to our miſtres & torment her: I haue had a draught of her bloud to day. Againe, there is a woman earneſt at prayer, get her away: Nay quoth Iohn Alſop (a man that was preſent) with a loude voice: we can not ſpare her. Thus the boy graced Miſtreſſe Wightman his Aunt. And againe: Brother Glaſſop, wee can not preuaile, his faith is ſo ſtrong, and they faſt and pray, and a preacher prayeth as faſt as they. By

which preacher Maiſter Darrell confeſſeth, that hee thinketh the Deuill meant him. The ſame alſo is at large intreated of, in the booke of the ſeuen poſſeſſed in Lancaſhire. Maiſter Dicons the author of the hiſtorie ſaith: that whileſt he was in his ſermon, at the time of the pretended faſt for their deliueraunce, Margaret Hardman vſed theſe words, I muſt be gone, I muſt be gone: which muſt be vnderſtood to bee ſpoken by the Deuill, who was ſo pinched, that he could ſtay no longer. And againe the ſaid Margaret, (whileſt Maiſter Moore was preaching) I can not tarrie, I can not tarry: I am too hot, I am too hot: let mee go, let mee go. Of likelihood Maiſter Moore had courſed him. The ſtory alſo ſaith, that Sathan was ſo haunted by faſting & prayer, and by the word of God ſo zealouſly and powerfully applyed, as if fire had beene put into his hole to burne him out. The Deuill alſo ſaid to Elianor Hardman: You are too holy now, and haue Gods word amongst you. Margaret Hardman likewiſe being greatly affrighted, in came Maiſter Darrell & Maiſter Moore, where ſhe was ſtanding by the fire, who hauing comforted her with many godly exhortations, out goeth Sathan, ſaying: that it was too holy a place for him. It ſhold ſeeme, that when Somers was diſpoſſeſſed, as men being greatly aſtoniſhed, are therewith ſtroken into a ſilence, ſo the deuil was ſhrowdly dreſſed. He was forſooth, ſo extreamely tormented by the faſting, prayers, & preaching of Maiſter Darrell, and the reſt, as he had no leaſure to ſay what he muſt doe, or what he would doe: but rudely without taking any leaue of them, departed.
               The meanes that Maiſter Darrell and his friendes doe pretend in caſting out Deuils, are as you haue heard, faſting, prayer, and faith: an hiſtoricall faith (ſaith Maiſter Darrell,) a iuſtifying faith (ſaith Maiſter Moore). But if you marke well what they ſay, and what they did, you ſhall

find, that their preaching bare away the bell, in the diſpoſſeſſing of thoſe in Lancaſhire, and William Somers. For whileſt Somers was in hand, Maiſter Darrell, and an other occupied the day with two ſermons, and ſo likewiſe with the other: Maiſter Darrels and Maiſter Moores, and the ſaid Maiſter Dicons exhortations ſpent the moſt of that time. Now it is to bee ſuppoſed, that the reſt who were preſent, did attend to the preachers, and continued not their owne priuate prayers. Beſides, you heare indirect tearmes out of the ſaid hiſtorie of thoſe in Lancaſhire, that their powerfull preaching is annexed for a meanes to prayer and faſting. Whereunto may bee added the word of God (as the ſtorie ſaith): Which the Deuills (forſooth) could not endure to heare, but would be gone. And ſo you ſee them fall into the ſaid popiſh follies, making the ſignes of poſſeſſion the meanes and cauſes of diſpoſſeſſion. As it is alſo moſt apparant by M. Mores conceite, who thinketh prayer more neceſſarie, then the ſignes of poſſeſſion mentioned in the ſcriptures, for the true diſcerning of thoſe who are poſſeſſed. And who knoweth whether in time, the naming of the Presbyterie would not haue had the vertue of a popiſh relique, as well to caſt out a Deuill, as to diſcloſe him: and the preſence of M. Darrell, M. More, and ſuch like; as great force therein, as the popiſh prieſts, thruſting their fingers into the parties mouthes. Surely, that ſmelleth hereof, that when M. Darrell and M. Moore came into the place where Margaret Hardman was greatly troubled, the Deuill departed, and ſtayed no longer. But the point is, wee ſee theſe fellowes as ridiculous in their conceipts, touching the meanes how they ſhould caſt out Sathan, as they haue appeared in the premiſſes, and their iudgements are as well ſetled in that which followeth.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. 9. Of the ſignes whereby M. Darrell and others do diſcerne (as they ſay) when Sathan is expelled.
               
                  THe aſſuraunce that the Exorciſing impoſtors haue in theſe daies, of the Deuils departure, is anſwerable to the reſt of their vncertainties. M. Darrels ignorance maketh him (as it ſeemeth) in this point confident. He is peremptorie, that becauſe it is ſaid, in the ſcriptures: that the ſpirit of the lunatike, when he was caſt out of him,
                  M. Darrell ad art. 30. pag. 18. & ad art. 31. pag. 20. M. Darrell ad. art. 17. pag. 144. 
                  did crie and rent him ſore, and that he lay as one dead: that therefore theſe three are infallible ſignes appointed by God to know when one is diſpoſſeſſed. Nay rather then faile, he wil be content with one of them, as in his dealing with Thomas Darling hereafter will appeare. It may bee maruelled, why the authour of the briefe Narration, ſeeing how eaſily ſome lewde knaue might counterfeite theſe ſignes: that hee hath not deuiſed ſome other of greater certaintie (becauſe men are ſo dull now a dayes (forſooth) to belieue ſuch matters) as he hath done touching the ſignes of poſſeſſion. Maiſter Darell confeſſing, that in the Apoſtles times, ſome ſpirits were caſt out more eaſily then others, might in reaſon haue thought, that thoſe that went out ſo eaſily, did not ſo grieuouſly torment the parties at their caſting out, as the reſt did.
               And ſomewhat it is, that although there are diuers mentioned in the ſcriptures, to haue beene diſpoſſeſſed

by our Sauiour Chriſt and by his Apoſtles: yet it is ſaid of none but of the Lunatike, Marke 9. that when Sathan departed, the ſpirit eyther cryed, or rent him ſore, or that they lay for dead. To make therefore ſuch particularities in one, a generall rule for all, argueth greatly the weakneſſe of his iudgements.
               True it is, that he blundereth out ſometimes, ſome other ſignes for his aſſurance when Sathan departeth: and it may not be omitted, of whom hee hath learned them. The popiſh Exorciſtes,
                  Thyraeus parte 4. Cap. 52. finding no aſſurance in the ſcriptures (as it may be thought,) touching that point, haue deuiſed many more ſignes: as when the patie can abide holy reliques, and the preſence of the Exorciſtes, &c. When hee ſaith, that he is deliuered from Sathan: when the Deuill himſelfe telleth the Exorciſt, that he will be gone: and when according to the Exorciſtes commandement, he eyther putteth out ſome candle, or breaketh ſome ſuch quarrell in the glaſſe window, as he was directed to breake at his going: Alſo, the departing from the ſaid parties, of certaine liuing creatures: as of flies, ſpiders, antes, and ſuch like: the ceaſing of their former deformitie, which Sathan procured: vomiting, Cum quo ſpiritus egreſſi leguntur non rarò, ſpirits are often times vomited out: faetor grauis: the Deuils leauing behind him a great ſtinch: a great ſwelling in the part that Sathan departeth at: the caſting of them to the ground: And laſtly, Magni tumultus, & cum tumultibus damna, great noiſe, and therewith daunger: as when the Deuill going out, carieth a peece of the houſe with him.
               And now let Maiſter Darrell be heard. When William Somers had lyen a while, as though he had beene dead, & after came againe to himſelfe, Maiſter Darrell ſaid therevpon, that he was diſpoſſeſſed. His perſwaſion alſo that Darling is diſpoſſeſſed, is confirmed (as he ſaith) by the

boyes continuance ſo long well. The chiefe aſſurance,M. Darrell ad art. 17. pag. 144. that M. Darrell and M. More had, that Sathan had left Iane Aſhton, was her owne wordes, vz. when riſing from her fitte, ſhee ſaide, hee is gone, he is gone, I am well I thanke God. And hauing wept in the ſaide fitte, ſhee alſo ſaide, that then Sathan departed from her. So as here wee haue a new ſigne of Sathans going out of one, vz. the weeping of the partie. Concerning Sathans owne worde, that he would be gone, there are diuers teſtimonies (forſooth) mentioned in the 8. Chapter. The booke of the boye of Burton ſayeth, that towardes the ende of the faſt for his pretended diſpoſſeſſion, he began to heaue & lift vehementlie at his ſtomacke, and getting vp ſome fleagme and choler, ſaid (pointing with his finger, and following with his eyes) looke, looke, ſee you not the mouſe that is gone out of my mouth? and ſo pointed after it, vnto the farthest part of the parlor. And M. Darrell affirmeth, that when he did ſo vomite, and vſed thoſe wordes, that then ſpirite left him. But becauſe he will affirme nothing without good reaſon, hee ſayeth hee is confirmed in that opinion by his owne experience, in that it hath fallen out ſo with others, at the inſtant of their diſpoſſeſſion, as they haue reported. Beholde his demonſtration, vz. as they reported, and who were theſe reporters, and what did they reporte?
               
                  Margaret Byrom ſaid, that at her reuerting,The hiſtory of the vii. in Lancaſhire- after ſhe had lien as dead halfe an houre, ſhee felt the ſpirite come vp from her belly towardes her breaſt, thence to her throate, when it left her throate, it gaue her a ſore lug, and all that while a darke miſt dazeled her eyes: then ſhee felt it goe out of her mouth in the likenes of a crowes head, and ſate in the corner of the parlor, with darkenes about it for a while. Then went it with ſuch a flaſh of fire out of the window, that all the parlor ſeemed to her to bee on fire. It left behind it a ſorethroate, and a filthy ſmel, that a weeke

after her meate was vnſauery. Here wee haue the Ieſuites ſtinch. And beſides, the moſt infallible note amongſt M. Darrels three ſignes of diſpoſſeſſion, vz. lying for deade, is here confuted. For this partie was reuiued againe before Sathan was gone. Moreouer, if his poſition be true, that euery one that is poſſeſsed, is ſenſeleſſe in his fitte, then eyther it muſt bee confeſſed, that the ſaide Margaret was in no fitte when Sathan was going out of her, in that ſhee felt him: or elſe that ſhee lyed when ſhe ſo reported. But to goe forward with the reſt.
               
                  Iohn Starkie ſaide, that the deuill went out from him like a man, with a great bunch on his backe, as big as a man. Anne Starkie, that he left her like a foule vgly man with a white beard, and a great bunch on his breaſt as bigge as a mans head. Margaret Hardman, that hee departed from her like an vglie man, with a great bunch on his backe. Elianor Hardman, that hee went out of her like an vrchen, and went through a verie little hole out of the parlor. Ellen Holland, that her ſpirite was like Anne Starkies: and Iane Aſhton, that the deuill went out of her like a great breath, vglie like a toade, and round like a ball. Now vpon the credite of theſe teſtimonies, M Darrell is grown to be a man of great experience: and knew well, what the meaning was of Darlinges mouſe. But why ſhould knowledge bee mentioned in the practiſes of theſe iuglers? M. Darrel (I trow) wil not take vpō him to haue greater skill in this point, then all the great Ieſuiticall & popiſh Rabbins, who haue written much, and haue vſed great traffique in the trade of caſting forth Deuilles. Thyraeus confeſſeth plainely,Thyraeus part 4. cap. 52. that all the ſaide ſignes before mentioned, are not infallible argumentes of Sathans diſpoſſeſſion: for ſayeth hee: ſicuti pro voluntate ſua ſpiritus haec poſt ſe ſigna relinquunt: ita eadem poſſunt dare, & nihilominus in hominibus, quos aliquandiu obſederunt, ſedes ſuas retinere: as wicked

ſpirites may at their pleaſure omitte theſe ſignes, ſo they may ſhew them, and yet notwithſtanding keepe their poſſeſſion. Et de hoc nullum apud doctos dubium eſt. Beſides, hee is alſo reſolute, that there is no neceſſitie, why wicked ſpirites when they are caſt out, ſhould ſhew any ſignes at all of their departure, non raró fit, vt diſcedant nullis ſui diſceſſus poſt ſe datis ſignis. It is not ſeldome ſeene, that Sathan departeth, leauing no ſignes of his going: whereof he bringeth ſundry examples. When therefore theſe coſening merchantes, doe tell men now a dayes, that they haue caſt deuils out of any their children, ſeruantes or friends: it is hereby manifeſt, what credite their wordes do deſerue.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. X. Of M. Darrell, and M. Mores conceite: that Sathan being caſt out of one, doth preſentlie after ſeeke to repoſſeſſe him.
               
                  WHen men haue eſcaped any greate daunger: it is commonly the aduiſe of their friendes, that they ſhould take heede of the like. And in many caſes there are appointed ſoueraigne preſeruatiues. M. Darrell like a kind friend, had neuer to deale with the diſpoſſeſſing of any: but for his care therein, hee maye bee thought to haue deſerued greate commendation. For his perſwaſions to ſuch ſtill haue beene, that they ſhould vſe all diligence and circumſpection, that Sathan did not againe reenter into them. This his perſwaſion hath euer bin drawn from a poſition, which he ſtiffely holdeth, vz. that Sathan being expelled out of a man, doth ſeek preſently after to reenter into him

again: and that it is commonly a very hard matter to withſtand him, by reaſon of his ſubtelties, in alluring them by promiſes, & terrifying of them by threatninges. He had no ſooner caſt the deuill out of Katherine Wright,
                  M. Darrell ad art. 11. pa. 40. but the euill ſpirite ſeeking to reenter into her, was for one time, by his aſſiſtance reſiſted (as he himſelfe confeſſeth). And concerning Darling, he ſayeth thus: The monday after his diſpoſſeſſing, I tolde him apart, that the deuill would ſeeke to repoſſeſſe him: and therefore counſelled him to watch ouer himſelfe,Tho. Darling. pa. 72. and reſiſt him: adding theſe wordes, (as Darling reporteth,) that peraduenture hee would appeare in the likenes of a frend, and vſe all the meanes he could to perſwade him to ſome euill. Touching William Somers alſo: preſently after his pretenſe, that the boye was diſpoſſeſſed, he affirmed that for a certainety, Sathan would ſeeke to repoſſeſſe him: making that a ground for a new worke, as afterwardes is declared.
               For his ſaide opinion of Sathans ſeeking to reenter, he relyeth vpon a metaphoricall place in the ſcriptures:Mat. 12. but for his ſaid addition of Sathans promiſes, and ſimilitudes, that will not ſo eaſily be coloured. When M. Darrell & M. More were in hand with the ſeauen in Lancaſhire, and had (if you will belieue them,) diſpoſſeſſed ſix M. More tolde them, that Sathan would ſurely aſſault euery one of them, and that both diuerſe times, and by diuerſe and ſundry meanes. He will (ſayeth he) appeare vnto you in ſome likenes or other: and hee will intreate you, that hee may enter in againe, and promiſe you many goodly thinges, as golde and ſiluer, &c: And if he cannot ſo preuaile, then he will threaten you to break your necks, to caſt you into pits, &c. If it be here demanded how M. More knew, that Sathan would appeare vnto them in ſome likenes, his anſwere is, vz. for that he had beene tolde, that the Deuil ſeeking to repoſſeſſe

the boy of Burton, did appeare vnto him in ſondry likeneſſes. And concerning his knowledge, that Sathan would make ſuch promiſes vnto them: hee relyeth vpon this, vz. becauſe the nature of man is ſubiect to bee ſeduced by ſuch offers.
               If theſe childiſh anſweres remayned not in record vnder his owne hand, would any man belieue them? doth it not giue vs iuſt occaſion to thinke, that he tolde them ſuch tales of a lewde purpoſe, thereby to draw them to pretend the like? Otherwiſe would a man fearing God, being in ſuch a conflict with Sathan, (as hee pretendeth) for their diſpoſſeſſion, haue tolde them any ſuch matters vpon heare-ſay? Or doth it carry with it any ſuch conſequence, as to tell them that Sathan would allure them by promiſes, and threatninges, becauſe mens natures are ſubiect to be ſeduced by ſuch meanes?
               But what ſhould we diſpute the matter with him, or examine the force of his argumentes: ſeeing euery thing came to paſſe, as he had foretolde? Remember the ſimilitudes, that the deuill departed from them, and euen in the ſame (as the ſtory ſayeth) they ſought againe to reenter into them. Beſides, they attempted them alſo in other formes, as of a blacke Rauen, of a blacke boy,
                  The hiſtory 
                  the head bigger then the body, of a blacke rough dogge with a firebrand in his mouth, of fine white doues of a braue fellow like a Woer, of two little whelpes, that playing on the table, ran into a diſh of butter; of an Ape, of a Beare with fire in his mouth, and of an hay-ſtacke, promiſing them bagges of golde and ſiluer; and threatning them when they ſo could not preuaile, to breake their neckes, to drowne them in pittes, to hang them, to breake their backs, to throw them out of the windows: &c. euen in ſuch ſort in effect, as M. More, of likelyhoode inſpired with one of them, had before declared. What the ſtory reporteth of M. Moore, may alſo

be applyed to M. Darrell: who made great vſe of theſe ridiculous conceits, in his practiſes with Somers.
               
               Out of all queſtion, if theſe abſurde mates had gone on, they would haue proued as groſſe deluders, as any of the popiſh or Ieſuiticall Exorciſtes, if not more groſſe: For the popiſh ſort, hauing hammered this point of Sathans ſeeking to reenter into the ſame partie, out of whom hee was caſt, are ſo farre from M. Darrell, and M. Mores opinion, as ſome of them holde, that thoſe ſpirites, which are once caſt out of men, ſecundo 
                        •
                     oſdem ingredi, & vexare non poſſunt. And thoſe that relye vpon the place of S. Mathew, Cap. 12. doe onely inferre, that ſometimes Sathan doth ſo ſeeke to reenter, but not alwayes. Beſides, the Captaine or Marſhall of Deuils, (who taketh vppon him to write moſt exactly of them in this point,) reduceth all the places, whether the wicked ſpirites goe at ſuch times, into the number of ſixe, as out of one man into another: out of men into beaſtes out of men, into fayre and great houſes (whereof it commeth, that ſome houſes are haunted with ſpirits,) out of men into deſert places, and out of men into hell: pretermitting as a place more extraordinarie, the returning of Sathan, into the partie, that hee had lately poſſeſſed.
               But M. Darrell and his friendes, will peraduenture bee better prouided in this point hereafter. And it were conuenient alſo, that they furniſhed themſelues with ſome better proofes, for their tales of Mice, of Beares, and Bugges, threatning and promiſing ſuch great matters. It may be they haue ſome conceite, that the Deuilles tempting of Chriſt, will ſerue their turne: but aſſuredly for ſhame they dare neuer publiſh it.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. XI. How thoſe that tooke vpon them to caſt out Deuils, doe get themſelues worke, and of their deuiſes to couer their lewdenes.
               
                  THey that make it ſo ordinary a matter in theſe daies to caſt out deuils, doe not ſay, that it is an ordinary thing amongſt Chriſtians, for men or women to bee poſſeſſed: wherevpon it commeth to paſſe, that the trades-men in that skil, haue deuiſed many wayes to keepe themſelues in worke. It is not pertinent in this place, to ſhew how the Papiſts haue intituled their Exorciſing prieſts, to the coniuring of young infants, immediatelie before their baptiſme: becauſe although they holde, that thereby the deuill is driuen from them: yet they dare not reſolue, that euery infant when it is born, is poſſeſſed. In their exorciſing of infantes, they may pretend that they worke great matters, but except you will take their credite for payment, nothing appeareth, but blowing vpon the infantes, (thereby pretending that they blow away Sathā:) thruſting of ſalt into their mouthes, wetting their noſes and eares with ſpittle, and their annointing of them with their hallowed oyle; meere toyes, wherby their eſtimation is not much increaſed. For the beholders, ſeeing nothing in thoſe actions to bee maruayled at, are not ſo much moued with them. It ſhould ſeeme that theſe kinds of deuils (that are thus exerciſed) are but doltes, and therefore cannot ſerue theſe iuglers turnes, as being peraduenture but newly hatched, when infants are borne, and therefore ignorant, how to apply themſelues

to their contentment. They cannot cry out, or rage by their praying to Saintes, by their caſting of holy water vppon them, by their bringing vnto them of the Sacrament of the Altar, or their Agnus Dei, by their application of holy reliques, nor by their owne approaching neare vnto them, being holy catholike prieſtes. And therefore they are deuils of greater vnderſtanding, and better experience, that the Exorcistes hunt after: ſuch as are acquinted with the diuine vertue of their ſo catholike iuglings, and practiſes. It is diſputed amongſt them, whether all infantes bee poſſeſſed or not, it ſeeming an abſurditie to commaund the Deuill to come forth of them, if he were not in them. For the deciding of which doubt, it may be maruailed, if thoſe kindes of deuils be of any ſtanding, when they vſe not their infallible meanes, to know the truth therein: which are (as heretofore hath beene expreſſed,) their application of reliques, and ſo forth▪ For if they bee ſo terrible to Sathan, (as they pretend,) why ſhould he not bee compelled by the force of them to ſhew himſelfe, or his preſence, aſwell in infantes, as eyther in boyes or wenches, or any other? But as theſe deluders muſt haue (it ſeemeth) more skilful deuils, ſo muſt they alſo haue ſome elder perſons, that are more fitte to bee ſeduced by them. Otherwiſe their reputation, in that behalfe would ſoone decay, and their holy water, with the reſt of their trumpery, want that teſtimony, that is drawne from the deuils diſliking of them: which may not be endured, but proſecuted and defended with all their might and skill. Neither is this cunning appropriated onely to the Papiſtes, but extendeth it ſelfe further, there being men alſo amongſt our ſelues, who want not their Reliques and deuiſes, which theſe elder deuils muſt feare, and tremble at.
               There is a profound queſtion amongſt the Romaniſtes,

Whether all Proteſtants, whom they account heretiques, bee not poſſeſſed with wicked ſpirites. If it had fallen out, that they had ſo beene, their Exorciſtes would in ſuch ſorte haue beene ſet on worke, as they ſhould not haue beene driuen to haue ſought farre for it. But it is otherwiſe ouerruled: that (forſooth) although heretickes haue great fellowſhip and intercourſe with Deuils: Obſeſſi tamen omnes, nec poſſunt, nec debent dici: yet al of them neither may, nor ſhould he thought to be poſſeſſed: propterea quod, &c. becauſe the ſigns of poſſeſsion do not appeare in them. And they that take vpon them to caſt out Deuils amongſt our ſelues: notwithſtanding, it ſeemeth, that ſtinted prayers are very offenſiue to them, & that they are not reſolued of the difference betwixt a prieſt & a Biſhop, yet they will not ſay, that they who hold againſt them are poſſeſſed: albeit men of that humor both haue, and ſtill do dep
                     ••
                  ue them, maligne them, and ſlaunder them vpon any occaſion at their pleaſures. So as theſe Exorciſts of both kinds, for want of worke are driuen to their ſhifts: and like Tinkers walke vp and downe from place to place, ſeeking to be imployed. It is a matter of ſome difficultie to diſcouer their ſhifts, and ſleights to that purpoſe, they haue ſo many; and by their experience doe manage them ſo craftily. Diuers of them are here ſette downe, and the reſt may bee ſupplied peraduenture by ſome hereafter.
               Sometimes they make choice of ſome ſuch boyes or wenches, as they thinke are fit for their purpoſe, whome they procure by many promiſes and allurements, to keep their counſell, and to bee (as they tearme it) aduiſed by them. And theſe are commonly of the poorer ſort, either the children, or ſeruants of ſuch perſons, as the Exorciſtes doe well know, to be of their owne ſtampe, and well affected towardes them. It falleth out now and then, that

they haue ſome ſchollers of their own, whom they mean, to preferre: the popiſh ſort to ſome Seminaries, and others as they may. And there are none to theſe, they are ſo apt to worke vpon: howbeit, they can ſoone frame the other to their bent, by their cunning. When they haue any of theſe in hand, they doe inſtruct them ſo perfectly, as when they come to exorciſe them, they are in a manner ſecure: their ſchollers knowing as well what to doe, as their falſe maiſters themſelues. Theſe are not dealt with, but there muſt be a great aſſemblie gathered together, in one corner or other: all of them ſuch perſons, as they know to bee their friendes, or at the leaſt ſuch as their ſaid friendes doe bring with them, and are thought fit to bee peruerted. The company mette, the Exorciſtes doe tell them, what a worke of God they haue in hande, and after a long diſcourſe, how Sathan doth afflict the parties, and what ſtraunge thinges they ſhall ſee: the ſaid parties are brought forth, as it were a Beare to the ſtake, and being eyther bound in a chaire, or otherwiſe held faſt, they fall to their fittes, and play their prankes point by point exactly, according as they haue beene inſtructed. As if they bee of the new cutte: they crie, they wallow, they foame, and ſhew the ſignes of poſſeſsion, mentioned in the Scriptures, with ſome others. But if they bee of the olde inſtructions: then there are notable Tragedies. Out commeth the Prieſt in his maſſing attire: the hallowed candles are lightened: their reliques, with their Agnus Dei are brought forth: the holy water flieth about the chamber: their hallowed frankinſence perfumeth the place, and ſo forth. Whereupon all that are preſent, (hauing worſhipped the ſaid holy miſteries) no ſooner caſt their eies towardes the parties pretended to be poſſeſſed, but there is ſtarting, ſtrugling, and ſtriuing: they ſcriche, they raile,

they ſpit, they crie, they rage and fare, as not being able in any wiſe without daunger of preſent death, to indure the preſence of the catholique Prieſtes, and of their holy complements.
               But when theſe Exorciſtes can not worke this way (as wanting ſuch fitte ſchollers to diſſemble and collude with them) then by caſting about, they (eſpecially the popiſh iuglers) haue in readineſſe ſome other, as neede ſhall require. At their comming to the places where they know they are welcome, but cannot practiſe as before, if they finde any youth, boy or girle, that is not well at eaſe, and whoſe diſeaſe is not apparant, (as eyther an Ague, the ſmall pockes, or ſuch like, where of euery man is able to iudge) they will ſeeme to take great care of them: as being deſirous to know the cauſe of their griefe, and the meanes to helpe them. In this caſe it is ſufficient for them, if the partie bee troubled, eyther in his ſtomacke with choller or fleagme, or in his belly with gripinges or collicke, or in his head or ioyntes with aches or numneſſe: they can worke vppon it. In their ſaide pretended care for ſuch a partie (which maketh them the better welcome) they will procure ſome ordinarie things to bee giuen vnto him, and then after a while, their manner is, to admire the diſeaſe: ſaying, that for a certaintie, it is very ſtrange: that by the rules of learning, there can be no reaſon giuen of it: and ſo after much adoe, they come by degrees to ſuſpect forſooth, and then after a while, plainely to affirme, that out of all queſtion the partie is poſſeſſed. And herein our reformed Exorciſtes doe in ſome ſorte agree with them: but that which next enſueth, doth properly (for ought that appeareth) appertaine to the others.
               
                  If at their comming to any ſuch places, (the houſes of popiſh Recuſants, their moſt aſſured friends,) they finde all the houſholde well, and yet thinke it conuenient to ſhew their skill there: then obſeruing ſuch youthes as are in the houſe of eyther kind, and marking which of them is fitteſt for their purpoſe, they practiſe this deuiſe. Their manner is, when they come into any ſuch place, to vſe euery one very kindly, but eſpecially the younger ſort, whom they will take vpon them to inſtruct. In which reſpect they grow ſhortly to be familiar with them: and then in their priuate talke together, they will cunningly fiſh from them, whether at any time tofore they haue beene ſicke, or troubled, and the manner how. Here if the parties tell them, that they haue had but ſo much, as a payne once in their ſides, or any particular griefe in ſome other parte of their bodies: they haue caught the gudgin, that is, the whole matter that they fiſhed for. Then they vſe the parties much more kindly then before, and do ſeeme to haue a more eſpeciall care of their good eſtate. Marry, at the length (as men very carefull, leaſt the ſaid parties ſhould not do wel) they will beginne to ſuſpect, and giue out wordes accordingly, that the ſaid parties are not in ſo good caſe, as they looke for. They inſinuate, as though they knew by their learning, that the parties were inclining to ſuch, or ſuch a diſeaſe: naming that, whereof before cunningly they had gotten notice. Herein they proceede with ſuch craft, as they eaſily draw from the parentes, or maſters of ſuch parties, how at ſuch or ſuch a time, or about ſo long ſince, they were indeede troubled with ſuch a kinde of diſeaſe. By this meanes their credit is ſomwhat increaſed, being deemed for men of eſpeciall knowledge, in that they are able to diſcerne of ſuch matters. When they haue gotten this hold, then

they begin to deale priuately with the parties, and to ſay vnto them, that they greatly feare their ſtate of health to be in great danger: inſomuch as with little trouble (ſuch is their cunning that way) they make them in deed to ſuſpect themſelues. Then they tell them many ſtrange tales, of bugges and ſpirites: how Sathan ſeeketh to moleſt thoſe children that God loueth, by vexing them in theſe and thoſe partes, and how afterwardes he will lie hidden in them, and ſuffer them to be well for diuers monethes, and ſometimes for a yeare together. And here they adde, (but with very good tearmes) that they are afraid by the ſignes they ſee in them, that their ancient griefe did proceed from Sathans malice towardes them: and that they verily ſuppoſe, he doth ſtill lurke in them: and that notwithſtanding, in reſpect of their good will and liking towards them, they will do their beſt to make them ſound, if they will be ruled by them: not doubting but in verie ſhort time, fully to deliuer them from that their ghoſtly enemie, and reſtore them to perfect health. When they haue thus framed the children to their minds, then ordinarily they deale with the parentes, or maiſters, to the ſame effect, who finding their children or ſeruantes ſomewhat drooping, are eaſily drawne (through the good opinion they haue of the Exorciſtes) to yeeld to any courſe, which they ſhall thinke meet to be vndertaken in that behalfe.
               A man would wonder, how all this ſhould ſorte with their intents. For if there ſhould be no further apparance of Sathans poſſeſſing the ſaid parties, their friends might ſuſpect they were neuer poſſeſſed: and they in pretending to diſpoſſeſſe them, would be depriued (in all likelihood) of the glorie and fruite that thereby they gaped after. It is therefore further to be obſerued, that when they haue

prepared all parties (as is before mentioned) then they appoint a time, when (as they ſay) if the parties be poſſeſſed, they will compell the Deuill that lurketh in them (will he nill hee) to diſcouer and ſhew himſelfe. In the meane while, with great deuotion forſooth, they tell many tales of the vertue of holy reliques, and other ſuch trumperie as are before ſpecified: how wicked ſpirites haue beene conſtrained by them in ſuch caſes, to diſcloſe their lurking: how they haue tormented the parties, and how in the end they haue been caſt out. By theſe meanes, if the parties pretended to bee poſſeſſed, bee not ouer dull, they may learne ſomewhat: and for the moſt parte they do ſo. But howſoeuer, as the Exorciſtes doe vſe the matter, it much forceth not: their friends, and thoſe that heare them, are thereby prepared (they know) to admire thoſe tricks, which afterwardes they ſhall ſee. At the time appointed, many are not then called to be preſent, becauſe the Exorciſtes will firſt ſee how their geare worketh: and afterwardes they doe frame their companie accordingly. In the morning when their maſſe is ended, the Exorcistes keeping ſtill vpon them their maſſing attire, and all things being prepared (as in the other caſe before hath beene ſpecified) the partie that muſt bee dealt with, (hauing beene at the maſſe, and eyther perfectly well in deede, or troubled with ſome little ache, ſauing that the ſaid iuglers haue skarred him) is in the preſence of that aſſemblie, ſet and bounde faſt with towels in a chaire. Then the Exorciſtes ſet their holy engynes a working, they croſſe, they kneele, they pray, and come with ſuch ſolemnitie and ſhew of deuotion vnto the poore youth, that is ſo bound, as no maruaile if they ſhould fright him out of his wittes. His colour commeth and goeth: his feare is great what will become of him and therewith

beginneth ſometime to tremble, and to bee in a colde ſweate: wherewith, Ah (ſay the Exorciſtes) ſee you not how Sathan beginneth to ſhew himſelfe? This is he that worketh theſe effects: but you ſhal ſee more anone. Then they giue to the partie their holy potion, (as they tearme it) which they tell thoſe that are preſent, hath a maruellous power to plague and vexe the Deuill. Sure it is, that the operation of it is greate. It is almoſt halfe a pinte of holie Oyle, mingled with almoſt as much hallowed Sacke, hauing in them both a quantitie of the iuyce of hallowed Rue. This drinke (which an honeſt man woulde ſcarce giue to an horſe) theſe iugling knaues doe conſtraine the youth (being bound) to take at their pleaſure: wherewith hee is in a ſhort time ſo troubled and intoxicated, as his head groweth giddie: he heaueth & vomitteth, and if all this worke not, (as they would haue it) then they burne hallowed brimſtone vnder his noſe, holding his head by force ſo ouer the ſmoke, as they may bee ſure to ſtuffe him with it. By the time that this hath wrought together with the potion, the youth groweth in effect to bee beſides himſelfe: Hee raueth, he ſtrugleth, and ſheweth great ſignes of paynes and griefe. In which his fitte, you muſt thinke, that the Exorciſtes are not idle. They bring vnto him peraduenture the Sacrament of the Altar, and apply their reliques, and other trinkettes, ſtill aſcribing euery thing that the partie eyther doth or ſaith, to the Deuill: who by that meanes is compelled (as they ſay) to ſhew himſelfe. As the operation of the ſaid potion and brimſtone diminiſheth, ſo the Exorciſtes doe vſe their charmes: commaunding the Deuill to ceaſe from troubling the partie, and to lodge himſelfe for that time, for example, eyther in his foote, or his toe, and ſometimes in his toe naile.
               
               
                  And this is their firſt pageant, wherby they make it apparant (forſooth) that the parties, whom they vndertake, are poſſeſſed. When all things do fall out herein to their deſire, the people preſent greatly wondring at the matter (as little ſuſpecting the lewdnes of their ghoſtly fathers) then they appoint ſome other time for a greater concourſe, to ſee this wonderfull work of God, by his holy catholike prieſts. The parties, whom they haue before inſtructed, are not then much troubled with the ſaid potion, or brimſtone: becauſe they can ſhew their trickes ſufficiently, as compelled thereunto by vertue of the prieſtes words: & in ſhort time alſo the other, hearing what effectes they aſcribe to that drinke and ſmoke, doe frame themſelues, for the auoiding of them both, to practiſe all they heare without them: which is a meanes to procure them great eaſe. For you muſt not thinke, that when they haue ſuch a matter on foote, they giue it ouer ſuddenly. True it is, that ſometimes they will keep the poore youth in their hands, in ſpite of his head, to worke wonders with, ſometimes halfe a yeare, euen as long as they liſt themſelues.
               Againe, there is another way, whereby theſe fellowes do get themſelues more worke. It falleth out ſometimes, that diuers children, hauing heard how ſuch & ſuch haue beene thus and thus troubled, they of themſelues will begin to faine themſelues ſicke: if they bee boyes, peraduenture becauſe they would remaine from the ſchoole: if wenches, for that they would be idle, & both of them, that thereby they might be much made of, and dandled. Now, there being no apparant cauſe of ſuch their diſſembled ſickneſſe, they are driuen to counterfeite, and to fall to thoſe trickes which they haue hearde of in others: Wherein, if eyther their parentes or mayſters beginne to pittie them, then they runne on in their knaueries

aboue meaſure: but eſpecially if they beginne to wonder at them, and to deuiſe ſome remedies for them. If any of our Exorciſtes do heare of ſuch an oportunity, they will not let it eſcape, but by one means or other they wil haue occaſion, to goe to that place: where being well entertained, and of credite, the ſaid parties are pretended by them forthwith to be poſſeſſed. And here by the way, you ſhall obſerue a little wonder. It will hardly be ſhewed, that any of this ſort haue beene found, but eyther in the houſes of Recuſantes, or of ſuch as haue on the other ſide pretended ſome zeale, for they know not what reformation. Where rayling is ordinary, and euery ſleight tale (which is countenanced by a Miniſter or Prieſt of thoſe ſectes,) is made a great matter, and vrged as an argument for ſome purpoſe or other. Beſides, it falleth out amongſt vs: that they who haue taken vpon them, to haue caſt out deuils, haue ſtil been men of that humor, as being forſooth more pure then the reſt of their brethren.
               But to proceede, when theſe fellowes (as is aforeſaide) haue bred a conceite, that the parties mentioned are poſſeſſed: then they tell their friendes in their hearing, eſpecially when they are in their pretended fittes, what great experience they haue in ſuch matters. And amongſt many things, they beat into their heads, theſe falſe grounds, vz. that thoſe who are poſſeſſed, are in their fittes altogether ſenceles, and that whatſoeuer they doe or ſay, it is not they, but the deuill in them that ſpeaketh, and doth it: though it ſeeme neuer ſo apparantly otherwiſe. There hath not beene of auncient time any certaine doctrine in theſe pointes: but now they are grown into practiſe with the Exorciſtes of both ſortes, as being the beſt meanes to worke their feares by, that hetherto hath beene deuiſed amongſt ſuch kinde of counterfeites. They are comparable to the aforeſaid

holy potion and brimſtone. For the children or youthes, (as ſuch muſt be betwixt the yeares of xiiii. and xviii. or there aboutes,) hearing what theſe ſeducers doe reporte, are very apt and readie to make their aduantage of ſuch their ſpeeches: although they know very well, that they lye in ſo ſaying. Theſe groundes thus layde, then the companions goe on in ſetting out their skill. They repeate the ſignes of poſſeſſion, and how they haue ſeene theſe, and thoſe thinges done, by ſuch as were in the like caſe, not doubting (as they commonly adde,) but that the deuill in the parties, whome they haue in hand, will ſhew and doe the like in them. Which thinges and reportes the parties hearing, they fal, aſwell as they can, to the practiſe of them: as hauing thereby libertie, to doe and ſay what they liſt, and in a ſorte to worke wonders. It is alſo the cuſtome of the Exorciſtes, when they haue gotten ſuch youthes to vſe them very gently: whereby the ſaide youthes, are the rather induced, ſo to apply themſelues, as they may pleaſe them. For after a ſhort time, they eaſilie perceiue by the Exorciſtes ſpeeches, what they would haue them to acte or ſpeake: and the rather becauſe they finde themſelues, not onely to bee admired, and very much made of: but that likewiſe, the whole courſe of their former diſſimulation, is by their meanes altogether couered. When the people that are preſent at theſe and the former iuglinges, with ſuch like, (ſuſpecting no fraude,) doe beholde how euery thing commeth ſtill to paſſe, as the Exorciſtes doe foretell, and what a dexterity & boldnes they haue, in hunting and courſing of wicked ſpirites, commaunding them, coniuring and curſing them at their pleaſure: it is not much to bee maruailed, that they are caſt thereby into a wonderfull aſtoniſhment.
               If any doe ſurmiſe theſe practiſes to bee improbable,

as being much ſubiect to daunger, in that the ſaid parties, that are ſo cunningly drawne on in thoſe courſes, may vpon many occaſions detect them: they muſt know that theſe fellowes are well inough furniſhed in that behalfe. For firſt amongſt the Papiſtes, it were ſufficient to bring a man into ſuſpition of Hereſie, that ſhould but doubt that one were not poſſeſſed, if their Prieſtes affirmed the contrary. And we ſee amongſt our ſelues, how hardly it is endured, that our pretended Exorciſtes are called into queſtion, But bee it, that the worſt ſhould fall out: yet haue they ſuch rules, as if you will allow them, they are ſafe inough. For if any doe once fall into their hands, or yeeld themſelues vnto their practiſes, they can neuer bee rid from them by any meanes, ſo long as they are pleaſed to worke vpon them. Some of their ſaide rules,Thyraeus. are as followeth: vix aliquem deprehendas, &c. you ſhall ſcarſely find anie amongſt thoſe that are poſſeſſed, which hath not many wicked ſpirites in him. The vſe of which rule is very ample, and extendeth farre. For if any of their patientes, after their pretence of their diſpoſſeſſion, ſhall in remorſe of conſcience confeſſe, the knaueries and lewde dealinges of the Exorciſtes with them: then they ſay that therby it appeareth, they had many deuils in them, whereof ſome remayning vncaſt out, they continue in as euill caſe almoſt as they were before. If the ſaide confeſſion bee made ſhortly after their pretended diſpoſſeſsion, then the ſaid rule is accounted more probable. But if the parties continuing well for a longer time, as for a yeare or more, without making ſhew of any trouble, or vexation of Sathan, (whereby it may well bee thought they haue no Deuilles in them,) and then detect thoſe holy men; by an other rule, they auoide that alſo: which is, that Sathan for feare of being caſt out, will lye lurking in thoſe that

are poſſeſſed, ſhewing no ſignes thereof for a great time, and that the ſlaundering of them, (being holy Exorciſtes) is an apparant argument of Sathans continuance in them. It falleth out alſo oftentimes, that ſuch as haue beene in theſe Exorciſts handes, as they doe detect their falſe practiſes with them, ſo doe they alſo confeſſe their owne diſſimulation, acknowledging the truth in euery thing, and that they were not at all poſſeſſed. To meet therefore with this inconuenience,Flagellum Daemon. they haue this rule: Egreſsi ſolent perſuadere &c. When the deuilles are caſt out of a man, they endeuoure by all the means they can, to perſwade, that hee was neuer in them: that ſo the partie being vnthankefull to God for his deliuerance, they might the better reenter into him. And therefore there is an other rule to be obſerued (they ſay) by the Exorciſtes: Vt liberatum moueant quantum poſſint, ad credendum ſe liberatum: that they admoniſh the diſpoſſeſſed as effectually as they are able, to belieue, that being poſſeſſed, hee is deliuered, and diſpoſſeſſed: and the pretence is faire, that thereby hee may bee thankfull to God. If any man, ſuſpecting the parties that are pretended to bee poſſeſſed, to diſſemble in their fittes, ſhall offer to make ſome triall of it: that it is a point almoſt of infidelitie, and amongſt the popiſh Exorciſtes, is very dangerous, and is not well taken by ours. Howbeit, ſometimes it falleth out: that men are more bolde therein then welcome, and that they finde by many direct circumſtances, that the parties doe counterfeyte. But there are rules alſo to meete with this miſchiefe: as, that Sathan doth ſometimes permitte the parties to diſſemble, and to acte ſome looſe trickes, thereby to make the beholders belieue, that all the reſt that they doe, is likewiſe diſſembled, thereby to hinder the glorie of God in their diſpoſſeſsion: and likewiſe to conceale his owne preſence. Which latter point dependeth vppon an other rule: that forſooth the Deuill laboreth by all the means

he can, that he might not be knowne to be in thoſe he poſſeſſeth, that ſo he might auoide the power of the Exorciſtes, and continue ſtill his ſaide poſſeſsion. If a man ſhall reaſon the matter with theſe Exorciſtes, or their vpholders, and beſides the ſaide confeſſions of the parties ſhall alledge, that manie who ſaw them in their fittes, were of opinion, that they did counterfeyte: oh, (ſay they by an other rule) that is the practiſe of Sathan to ſtirre vp great diſcord and diſſention, in making ſome to deny, that the parties were poſſeſſed: and hereof we haue experience in domibus & familiis,
                  Fuga Daemonum. 
                  in houſes and families: Dummodo plures ſint in eadem domo: if there be aboue two or three in the houſe: yea, but (ſay ſome vnto them) it is well knowne, that the Deuill is skilfull in all languages, that he is able to reueale many ſecretes, and if hee were preſent in anie man to ſhew the ſame at his going out, extinguendo luminaria magna, & alia ſimilia, by blowing out great lightes, &c. And therefore how commeth it to paſſe, that they whome you tearme to bee poſſeſſed, can ſpeake neither Latine, Greeke, nor Hebrew, &c. but their owne naturall language onely, nor reueale hidden matters, nor ſhew their departure by ſuch notable ſignes? For anſwer whereunto, they haue ſondrie ſhiftes, or rules: ſome of them being generall, & others more particular, as the qualities of the ſaid obiections doe require. Firſt (ſay they,) all Deuilles are not indued with the like knowledge. Then that the Deuilles by their fall, although they loſt not their knowledge, yet they loſt poſſibilitatem illa vtendi, ſo as they cannot vſe the ſame, nor doe any thing of themſelues, but when God will permitte them. Theſe general rules thus laide, they come vnto their particular anſweres, ſaying, Quod Daemones non loquuntur Latine, Grece, &c. that the Deuilles doe not ſpeake Latine, Greeke, and other ſtraunge tongues in the poſſeſſed, becauſe God ſometimes doth

not permitte them ſo to doe. And why doth God abridge them? Vt confundatur humana curioſitas, that humaine curioſitie (ſayeth Mengus) might be confounded, which is delighted rather to heare the Deuill ſpeaking curiouſly in the poſſeſſed, then the wordes of God, vttered by their Exorciſtes. But the ſayde Mengus, hath elſe where two or three other ſhiftes, to meete with this obiection: as that the Deuils, doe verie rarely vſe ſtrange languages, ne credantur ibi adeſſe, leaſt they ſhould be thought to bee in the parties: and that the Deuils vſing the tongues of ſuch as hee poſſeſſeth, doth not eaſily ſpeake in an vnknown language: for example, to make an Italian to ſpeake French, but doth vſe his owne language: quia lingua ad vnum modum loquendi habituata, eſt illi obedientior, & ad motus illi placentes diſpoſitior: becauſe the toung that hath an habite to ſpeake but one language, is therein more obedient vnto him, and more apt to bee diſpoſed of, as it pleaſed the Deuill. And touching the reuealing of ſecretes, (as the ſinnes of the parties poſſeſſed,) and ſpeaking of high myſteries, they ſay: that if God doe giue them leaue, they know, and are able to ſpeake, and reueale great and hid matters, but doe it not, although they bee knowne to be in the ſaide parties, leaſt, in ſhewing their ſinnes, they ſhould bee brought to repentance. If ſometimes (ſayeth Mengus) they ſpeake of the great miſteries of Diuinity, vt iam audiui, as I haue heard them: nunquam vel raro interſunt iſti eurioſi, vt eorum curioſitas confundatur: yet ſuch curious men as make theſe obiections are neuer preſent, that their curioſity may be confounded.
               
               Thirdly, concerning the ſhewing of ſome great ſigne, when the Deuill departeth, that they holde it not much to be reſpected, becauſe it is no argument of the deuils preſence in the poſſeſſed: in that the wandring deuilles in the ayre at the requeſt of thoſe that are in mens bodyes, poſſunt facere illamet

ſigna, can blow out great lightes, and worke ſuch ſignes.
               
               And to an other obiection, which is made, how it commeth to paſſe, that for the moſt part ſuch as are pretended to be poſſeſſed, are eyther men of the ſimpler ſorte, or women, who may be ſtrangely afflicted, being ſubiect humoribus matricalibus, thogh they be not poſſeſſed:, they ſay that the Deuilles doe eaſier poſſeſſe men and women of light brain, then thoſe that be wiſe, ne deprehendantur ibi adeſſe, that they may not be thought to be in them, and that they vex women & maides, rather then men, for theſe two cauſes, vz. that they ſeeke to hyde themſelues, ſub nomine humerum matricalium, and becauſe women are more ſubiect to terrors, which open the paſſage for the Deuilles entrance into them.
               
               Vnto theſe and ſuch like rules, anſweres, and grounds,Fuſtis Daemonum. Cap. 6. may be added an other, whereupon all the reſt are in a ſort built, which is, that the art or exerciſe of caſting out deuilles, is moſt odious to Sathan, and that therefore hee endeuoureth by all meanes poſſible, to ſlaunder and diſcredite the Exorciſtes, being the men that he moſt abhorreth. By this rule theſe Impoſtors haue ſuch a priueledge, as nothing can eyther be ſayd or done vnto them by any: but they are preſentlie reputed for the Deuilles inſtrumentes. If they be called into queſtion for their falſhoode and iugling,Fuga Daemon. ca. 3. or brought before the Magiſtrates, or impriſoned, or proceeded againſt: all is done (they ſay) by the Deuil, or his miniſters: daemones ſuperiores mouent, the Deuilles moue the magiſtrates: illos faciunt incarcerari: the deuilles cauſe them to be impriſoned: and all is done by the deuill (forſooth) that is attempted for the finding out of their lewdnes. Their own words, when their iugling is detected, muſt ſerue for their iuſtification: becauſe they are men ſo loathſome to the deuill. If they ſay, that any is poſſeſſed, it muſt bee ſo. The

parties confeſſion touching his owne diſſimulation is nothing, if they will teſtifye for him, that he did not diſſemble. It appeareth by one of the Councels of Carthage, that it hath beene a practiſe long ſince, amongſt ſome lewde perſons, to counterfeyte themſelues to bee poſſeſſed. And Lyra writing vpon theſe wordes: The Babilonians worſhipped the Dragon,
                  Daniel 14. ſayeth: that therein they were deceyued by the Prieſtes that worſhipped him, propter quaeſtum temporalem quem inde reportabant, for their temporall profite which they reaped thereby. And euen ſo (ſayeth hee,) aliquando ſit in eccleſia maxima deceptio populi in miraculis fictis a ſacerdotibus, vel eis adhaerentibus, propter lucrum temporale: ſometimes in the Church the people are greatly deceyued through falſe miracles feyned by the Prieſtes, or by their adherents, for temporall profite. Howbeit, Mengus (an old ſeducer, hauing beene an Exorciſt, as he ſayeth, almoſt fortie yeares,) writing diuerſe bookes of the caſting out of Deuilles, as Flagellum Daemonum, a whippe for Deuilles: Fuga Daemonum, the chaſing away of Deuilles: Fuſtis Daemonum, a club to beate them downe: and likewiſe Thyraeus, with many others, hauing written vppon the ſame argument, amongſt them all, it will be hard to finde, that they euer make mention of any whome they dealt with, that did falſly pretend themſelues to bee poſſeſſed. As though they would make men to belieue, that there neither were or could be any ſuch matter: whereas like coſening companions, they doe verie well know it, to be an ordinarie thing amongſt them, eſpecially in Italy, for women to make an occupation, of pretending themſelus to be poſſeſſed. Whereof it commeth to paſſe, that in their ordinarie ſtations, and ſolemne feaſtes in Rome, they neuer want ſome of thoſe counterfeytes, who pretending

themſelues to be poſſeſſed, muſt forſoooth, by putting their heads vnder ſome Altars, or by touching ſome reliques, with ſtoles about their neckes, and ſome other trinkets, feine themſelues to be diſpoſſeſſed. By reaſon of which falſe miracles, with diuers others: as the Babilonians were induced to worſhip the Dragon, ſo are the bewitched Romaniſts, to worſhip thoſe falſe reliques, and to embrace diuers other points of Poperie.
               But for the concluſion of this point, that ſhall ſerue, which a publike perſon in authoritie once ſaid to Mengus:
                  Fuga. Daemon. ca. 11. 
                  Volo vt ſcias quod ex numero quinquaginta exorciſtarum, quadraginta nouem triſes exiſtunt: I would haue you to know (ſaith the ſaid Magiſtrate) that of fiftie Exorciſtes, nine and fortie of them are counterfeites. To whom Mengus anſwered: If I were not preſent, you would ſo iudge of me. And in deed he the ſaid Mengus might as well haue made vp the fiftie, as any of that kind then liuing.
               The end of the Firſt Booke.
            
         
         
            
            The Second Booke.
            
               This ſecond Booke intreateth of M. Darrels particular courſes held with William Somers: how hee inſtructed him at Aſhbie de la Zouch, to practiſe ſuch trickes, as he might be thought thereby to be poſſeſſed: how afterwards he dealt priuately with him at Nottingham, ſupplying his defects in that behalfe, vpon euery occaſion with new inſtructions, of ſuch his extraordinarie cunning, as in deed deceiue the people, & was ſufficient to haue drawn Somers on throughout the whole courſe of his diſsimulation, though he had neuer dealt with him before at Aſhbie, nor priuately at Nottingham.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. I. Of M. Darrels intercourſe with Somers by ſtartes at Aſhbie, from about the yeare 1592. vntill 1597. for his inſtruction, how to diſſemble himſelfe to be poſſeſſed.
               
                  MAiſter Darrell, hauing affirmed that William Somers was poſſeſſed: that he with others had diſpoſſeſſed him: & that he was repoſſeſſed: was accuſed before her Maieſties Commiſſioners, for cauſes eccleſiaſticall, Anno 1598. for a counterfeiting hypocrite, as hauing by many ſleights and falſe pretences compaſſed ſuch a conceit amongſt his fauourers, to the diſhonour of God, and great abuſe and coſenage

of ſundrie her Maieſties louing ſubiectes. And for ſome proofe of this generall imputation, he was charged with theſe particulars: vz. that hee became acquainted with William Somers, at Aſhbie de la-Zouch, about fiue or ſixe yeares paſt: that he imparted vnto him the manner of Katherine Wrights fits: that he gaue them vnto him in writing, and moued him to learne the practiſe of them: that he promiſed him, in ſo doing he ſhould not want: that he willed him, when he did practiſe the ſaid fits before any company, he ſhould make mention of his name: that afterwards Somers hauing put them in practiſe, and telling him the ſaid Darrell, that M. Brakenburie had put him away thereupon for a counterfeite, he the ſaid Darrell told him, that he had not acted his fits artificially, and did himſelfe in Aſhbie parke teach him to doe them better: that within a while after he willed Somers for his better inſtruction, to go and ſee the boy of Burton, how he vſed himſelfe in his fittes: that an other time he moued Somers, that when hee ſhould finde a fitte oportunitie, and had learned to doe the ſaide fittes cunningly, he ſhould put them in practiſe at Nottingham, and that hee promiſed Somers to come thither vnto him, and not onely aſſiſt him, but likewiſe ſaid, hee would procure his Maiſter Thomas Porter to releaſe him of his yeares, which hee knew by the boyes owne report, to bee the thing that hee chiefly deſired.
               Touching euery one of theſe particulars, M. Darrell hath beene examined, and vpon his oth hath denied them all, ſo farre forth as they doe any way concerne himſelfe: but Somers, of the age of one and twenty yeares, being depoſed, doeth iuſtifie them point by point, as it may appeare by his words following, with this alteration onely: that his examination running in the third perſon (as the

manner is) now hee ſpeaketh in his owne: for the auoiding of many needleſſe repetitions (as this examinate ſaith, &c.) which otherwiſe of neceſſitie muſt haue beene vſed: which order is likewiſe vſed in reciting the depoſitions, which are produced in this cauſe.
               
                  Somers.
                  About a quarter of a yeare before my departure (ſaith hee) from M. Thomas Grayes, (with whom I then dwelt at Langley Abbey in Leiceſterſhire) I was ſent one day, to Aſhbie de la Zouch (being foure or fiue miles diſtant) vpon ſome occaſion of buſines. At what time I with other boyes, going into an Alehouſe, found there M. Darrell, whom I little regarding, but playing the wag, and ſhrewd boy with my companions, M. Darrell departed out of the houſe, and ſtaied at the dore vntill I came forth. And then he tooke me apart, asked me my name, where I was borne, with whom I dwelt, and how I was brought vp. To whom I anſwering, as the truth was in euery point: alas (quoth M. Darrel) thou art a pretie boy, and my countreyman: I knew thy father, and am ſorie to ſee thee in ſo meane a caſe: for I was ſimply apparelled, euen as meanely almoſt as could be. He alſo then asked me, what I had to doe in the towne, and how long it would be before I had diſpatched my buſineſſe: whereunto I anſwering truely, & that I would returne that way very ſhortly, he promiſed to bring me out of the towne, & to tell me ſome thinges, wherein if I would be ruled by him, I ſhould not be driuen to go ſo barely as I did, but be able to maintain my ſelfe as long as I liued.
               
               
                  When I had diſpatched my buſineſſe, I returned homeward, & found M. Darrell not farre from the place where I left him, talking with two or three ſtrangers, about one Katherine Wright, whom he ſaid he had diſpoſſeſſed of an vncleane ſpirit. After hee had ended his cōmunication with them, he went with me along the ſtreet in my way homewards: & as we were going together, I hauing ouerheard ſome of his ſpeeches with the ſaid ſtrāgers, asked him what they ment: he anſwred me with a long ſpeech cōcerning

the poſſeſsion of Katherine Wright, and told me the manner of her fits, in ſuch ſort how the Deuill troubled her, and how he had deliuered her, as I was greatly afraid leſt M. Darrell had beene a coniurer, and would haue done me ſome hurt: which hee perceiuing (as I thinke) bad me be of good cheare, and told me there was no cauſe why I ſhould feare. For (ſaith hee) if thou wilt ſweare vnto me to keepe my counſell, I will teach thee to doe all thoſe trickes which Katherine Wright did, and many others that are more ſtraunge. Beſides (quoth he) if thou wilt ſo doe, thou ſhalt neuer want whileſt thou liueſt. Hereunto when I had agreed, he told me more particularly what the ſaid Katherine Wright did at ſeuerall times, in her fittes: as that ſhe foamed at the mouth, gnaſhed with her teeth: cryed and ſcritched, catched & ſnatched at thoſe that ſtood by her, (eſpecially at him the ſaid M. Darrell): laughed out of meaſure: fell into great ſhewes of ſadneſſe: wallowed and tumbled: caſt her ſelfe into the fire, and ſometimes into the water: would lie as though ſhe had been ſenceleſſe: and many other things M. Darrell then told me: ſaying, that I might learne to doe them very eaſily. And the better to teach me, hee did thereupon himſelfe, acte diuers of them. For gnaſhing with his teeth, he knocked his own teeth together diuers times. For foaming, he rolled his tongue in his mouth, & then put out ſome little ſpittle betwixt his lips: but ſaid, that I might ſoone learne to doe it better, by rolling a ſtone in my mouth, but eſpecially if I could get a little ſoape to vſe at ſuch times. Likewiſe he ſhewed with his hands halfe open, the manner of her ſnatching & catching, & for ſome other of her doings he ſhewed ſome other geſtures. Alſo he then told me, that for my better remembrance, he would giue me in writing, al the ſaid fits & geſtures before mē
                     tioned. And thereupon ſitting downe vpon a banke, he did write them, & deliuered them vnto me, ſaying: when thou haſt learned them, ſo as thou canſt do them perfectly, thou mayeſt put them in practiſe. He likewiſe then told me, that when I could put the ſaid

fits ſo in practiſe, as that I ſhould be iudged thereby to be poſſeſſed: I muſt name him, & then (quoth he) it is very likely, that I ſhall be ſent for: Which if it fall ſo out, then (ſaid he) thou muſt at my comming vnto thee, do all the former thinges that I haue told thee, Katherine Wright did. Vpon that occaſion, I will take vpon me to diſpoſſeſſe thee: and afterwards, if thou wilt ſtill be aduiſed by me, I will take thee my ſelfe, and maintaine thee. In the end he gaue me xij. pence, and ſo we departed.
               
               
                  Somers being here demanded, where the ſaid writing was that Maiſter Darrell deliuered vnto him, of Katherine Wrights fits: anſwereth, that after he had learned them by hart, hee did teare the paper in peeces, as M. Darrell had ſtraightly charged him. But further ſaith, that hee writ them in one of his bookes, called Sententiae pueriles: which booke, together with three others, one Mary Holding, then ſeruant with M. Gray, but ſince maried to one William Arnold, kept from him (as he was informed by ſome of M. Grayes men) in liew of eight pence, which he did owe vnto her. Alſo the ſaid Somers affirmeth, that after his former acquaintance begun with M. Darrell, & whileſt he ſtil remained with M. Gray, he met M. Darrel three or four times in Aſhbie: & once he affirmeth, that M. Darrell called him vnto him, and asked him, if as yet he had practiſed any of thoſe things, which he had ſhewed vnto him. To whom Somers anſwering, that hee had not, becauſe the time had not ſerued him thereunto: Well (quoth M. Darrell) doe them oft to thy ſelfe priuately, vntill thou ſhalt be perfect in them, & then thou maieſt practiſe them the better publikely. At other times alſo the ſaide M. Darrel did kindly ſalute him. But let him proceed in his owne perſon.
               
                  Within twelue or thirteene weekes (as I thinke) after my firſt acquaintance with M. Darrel: M. Gray placed me with one M. Anthonie Brakenburie, to keep certaine ſiluer haired Connies:

with whom after I had remained about ſixe or ſeuen weekes, (as farre as I remember) I beganne to put in practiſe ſundrie of thoſe inſtructions that M. Darrell had giuen mee. I fained my ſelfe to bee ſicke: I foamed at the mouth: I did ſometimes lie ſpeechleſſe as though I had beene dumbe: & ſo by the ſpace almoſt of a moneth I did counterfeit as wel as I could, ſuch fits as Maiſter Darrell had told mee, that Katherine Wright did practiſe. Howbeit, I was not (as it ſeemeth) at that time my craftsmaiſter. For M. Brakenburie, & M. Randall Barton his brother, being verily perſwaded that I was but a counterfeit, & that I had diſſembled al that I had done, I was turned out of ſeruice, & went home to Nottingham to my mother: with whom after I had remained about a moneth, I was bound a prentiſe for ſeuen yeares, to one Thomas Porter, a muſition in that towne. Somers being here demanded, why hee did not call for M. Darrell, whileſt he was in his fits at M. Brakenburies, according to the plotte agreed vpon betwixt him & M. Darrel, anſwereth: that if he had perceiued that he had beene thought to haue beene poſſeſſed, he wold ſo haue done: but ſeeing his diſsimulation tooke not that effect, he made no mention of him. The ſaid Somers, after he was bound prentiſe as is aforeſaid, ran twice from his maiſter: the firſt time, in regard of his maiſters hard vſage, when he had ſerued him not aboue a yeare: & the ſecond time, for the like cauſe, & for that his maiſter was not able to teach him, about a yeare & a halfe before he fel to his practiſes at Nottingham. Touching his firſt vagary, he ſaith thus. Being gone frō my maiſter, I went to Aſhby, & enquiring for M. Darrel, found him in a houſe by the ſchoole neer the Churchyard. Hauing met with him, he walked with me a long the way into the fields, & after ſome other ſpeeches, he asked me, whether I had put in practiſe any of K. Wrights fits, that he had told mee of. Whereupon I declared vnto him, what I had done at M. Brakenburies, and of the euill ſucceſſe I had there,

as before it is expreſſed: and then M. Darrell ſaid, that I had not done thoſe things which he taught me, ſo perfectly as I ſhould. Then vpon ſome other further queſtions moued by M. Darrell, I told him how I had been bound prentiſe to a Muſition: how & why I was gone from him, and how I meant to go into Worceſterſhire, to ſee if I could place my ſelf there. This my determination Maiſter Darrell did ſeeme to diſlike, wiſhing mee rather to ſee if I could get a Maiſter about Burton, or about Market Boſworth, or about Tamworth, becauſe (ſaith he) I would be glad to haue thee in ſome ſuch place neere vnto me, ſo as I might haue occaſion more conueniently now & then to ſee thee. Nay (quoth I) I may not place my ſelfe ſo neer to Nottingham, leaſt my maiſter do heare of me, & ſo get me againe home vnto him. Well then ſaid M. Darrel, doe therein as thou wilt: but remember to put the former pointes (that I haue taught thee) in practiſe, as thou canſt conueniently: and then thou ſhalt be ſure to heare of mee. And ſo he giuing me xij. pence, we departed.
               
               It may be here omitted, how Somers further beſtowed himſelfe, whileſt he was from his maiſter, and how he returned to him againe, in hope to haue his yeares bought out: ſauing that (as he ſaith) he did practiſe M. Darrels inſtructions oftentimes priuately, but had no fit oportunity to make any apparant ſhew of them, becauſe in all that time he could not ſettle himſelfe in any place. Now vpon his ſecond running from his maiſter, and after he had remained in Eſſex a good part of a yeare, till he was wearie: he returning homewards again towards Nottingham, with better hope then before, to buy out his yeares, thought it conuenient in his iourney homewards, to take Aſhby in his way, of purpoſe to ſee M. Darrel, whō he found there as he ſaith, & had dealing with him, as followeth.
               
                  Vpon my comming at that time to M. Darrel, hee asked mee where I had been: whither I was going, & whether I had attēpted

to pactiſe any of his inſtructions. To whome I anſwered according to his queſtions: and that I had had no conuenient time, otherwiſe, then when I was alone, to doe any of thoſe thinges. Then he tolde me many thinges of the boye of Burton. Whereupon, I ſhewing my ſelfe to haue a deſire to goe and ſee him: M. Darrell ſaid, I ſhould doe well in ſo doing, becauſe that ſeeing of him in his fittes, I might the better learn to do them my ſelfe afterwards. Being thus encouraged, I went to Burton, where I ſaw Thomas Darling: but perceyuing that a great number of people came likewiſe to ſee him, and fearing that ſome of them might know me, I returned to Aſhbye, not ſtaying to ſee Darling in any of his fittes. At my comming backe againe to M. Darrell, he demaunded of me, whether I had ſeen the boy in any of his fittes: and I anſwered, that I had not, for the reaſon laſt mentioned: which M. Darrell not well approuing, ſaide, that I might well inough haue ſtayed to haue ſeene ſome of them, becauſe it was not likely, that any there could haue knowne mee. Then vppon ſome further occaſion of ſpeeches betwixt vs, M. Darrell deliuered vnto me in writing, the particular fittes, which he ſaid Thomas Darling lately had, and did act the moſt of them himſelfe before me, we two being in the parke together alone, by Aſhbye. At that time alſo, M. Darrell deliuered vnto mee in writing, certain ſignes and gestures, which were to be vſed, hee ſaid, to ſignifie ſondrie kindes of ſinnes: which geſtures hee did likewiſe acte himſelfe in the place before mentioned. Which thinges thus declared and acted by M. Darrell, he would needes ſee how I could doe them, and the other alſo, which before he had taught mee. And ſo vnder a buſh in the ſaide Parke, I did act ſondrie fittes, vz. theſe to my remembrance: falling vpon the ground: mouing of my belly: foaming at my mouth: gnaſhing of my teeth: thruſting out of my tongue, and doubling of the ſame: drawing of my mouth awrye: ſtaring with mine eyes: turning my face backewardes: the making of two bunches, the one after the other in my face: lying

as though I had beene ſenſeles, with ſome others. Then M. Darrell after I had ſhewed theſe fittes, did read out of his paper, the geſtures before mentioned, to ſignifie diuerſe ſorts of ſinnes: which he himſelfe acting as he read them: I lying vpon the ground, did alſo by his direction imitate the ſame, wherein if I miſſed, M. Darrell did teach me to doe them better, and ſaide that with a little practiſe by my ſelfe, according to that which he had done, & according to his directions giuen me in writing, I would quickely learne to doe them perfectly. But he ſtraightly charged me, that for my life, I ſhould keepe theſe things ſecrete, ſaying, that if euer I bewrayed them, it might bring vs both in danger of hanging. Theſe thinges thus finiſhed, I tolde M. Darrell, that I meant to returne to Nottingham, to ſee if I could get my ſelfe releaſed from my Maiſter, and he approuing my purpoſe therein, ſaid, that when the time ſerued, I might well put all the former thinges in practiſe there with good effect: and that in ſo doing hee doubted not, to procure me a releaſe from my maiſter. He alſo told me, that he hauing a ſiſter in law in Nottingham, one Mrs. Wallys, I could no ſooner name him, when I ſhould be thought to be poſſeſſed, but that preſentlie, and the rather by his ſiſters meanes, he ſhould be ſent for to come vnto me. And ſo we departed. And thus far Somers for the proof of all the former particulars, wherewith M. Darrell is charged.
               Againſt this depoſition of Somers, there are made ſondrie exceptions. His frends, and likewiſe he himſelfe, are greatly offended, that M. Darrell being a Miniſter, his oth may not be credited before the oth of a boy. But M. Darrels oath is greatly impeached by his denying of ſondrie thinges, wherewith Somers chargeth him in ſome others of his bad dealings with him, about his pretended diſpoſſeſſion: the ſame being depoſed by diuerſe very ſufficient witneſſes. M. Darrell in his Apologie (publiſhed ſince he was condemned for a counterfeyt) doth pretend that this

was all which was laid to his charge, concerning his dealing with William Somers at Aſhbye, vz. Somers dwelt with Mr. Gray, when I dwelt at Aſhbye: therefore we two met together in the Parke, and I did inſtruct him. And there is nothing (ſayeth he) but this, beſides Somers bare oath, to ſtrengthen his accuſation. It were to be wiſhed, that for his calling ſake, he could not otherwiſe haue beene charged herein: nay rather that he might not haue beene ſo charged at all: for in ſuch a ſecret compact, the confeſſiō of Somers is of great moment, eſpecially the ſame being not ſo bare, (as M. Darrell pretendeth,) but is ſtrengthned with many ſuch circumſtances, as do argue the ſame in all likelyhoode, to be true. It is confeſſed by M. Gray, and Mrs. Gray, & by M. Darrell himſelf, that Somers dwelt with M. Gray at Langlye, within 4. or 5. miles of Aſhby de la zouch: & did run on errands, as Mary Holden the wife now of one Arnold ſaieth.
               
                  M. Darrell at one of his examinations, propounding certaine queſtions to W. Somers, touching the ſcituation of Aſhbye, the ſtanding of the Church, the ſchoole and ſuch like, did well perceiue by his anſweres vnto them, that hee had beene at Aſhbie. So as there is no impediment in that reſpect, why he might not meete M. Darrell there, as he hath depoſed.
               It is alſo confeſſed to bee true, that Somers going to dwell with Maiſter Brakenbury, left certaine bookes at Maiſter Grayes, as it may appeare by the depoſitions following. William Somers told me before the time of his pretended diſpoſſeſſion at Nottingham,T. Porter, pa. 114. Mrs. Gray pa. 161, 
                  that hee had left certaine ſchoole-bookes at Maiſter Grayes. And Mrs. Gray, when Somers went from me, he left with one Mary Holden my cook, a coople of bookes in pawne for eight pence. All that Somers depoſeth to this point in effect, appeareth to be true, ſauing that, of his writing into one of the books the particular fits,

which he ſayeth M. Darrell had deliuered vnto him. And that point was not looked into, becauſe it was found that M. Gray, and Mrs. Gray, were ſo addicted to M. Darrell in this matter, as there was little hope to trie out the truth thereof amongſt their children and ſeruantes: it being vncertain, who were fit to be examined therein: & Marie Holden affirming, that ſhee had not the bookes, although ſhee ſaid that Somers owed her two pence.
               That Somers practiſed at M. Brakenburies ſome ſuch fittes, as he had afterwardes at Nottingham, and that M. Brakenbury accounting him thereupon a diſſembler, did diſcharge him from his ſeruice, (as he the ſaid Somers hath affirmed,) is thus depoſed.
               
                  I heard it reported by ſome of my neighbours in Nottingham,T. Porter, fol. 113. 
                  that William Somers did play the lewde and counterfeyting boy, whileſt he was at M. Brakenburies, and that M. Brakenburie did ſo account of him, and thereupon did put him out of ſeruice.
               
               
                  Edm. Garland. pa. 117,And an other: I haue heard that William Somers did practiſe certaine fittes at Maiſter Brakenburies, and that M. Brakenburie finding of him as he thought, a counterfeyte, did put him away.
               
               Likewiſe a thirde: my brother Brakenbury tolde mee, that he thought Somers did diſſemble in his fittes,
                  Mrs. Gray pa. 161 
                  whileſt hee was with him, and that he would keepe him no longer.
               
               
                  M. Darrell ad. art. 9. pag. 35.And M. Darrell himſelfe confeſſeth ſome thing to this purpoſe: but obſerue how hee would couer that knauerie. I haue heard that whileſt Somers dwelt with M. Brakenbury, he was handled after a ſtrange manner.
               
               Likewiſe that Somers was bound a prentiſe with Thomas Porter ſome moneth or fiue weekes, after hee came from M. Brakenburyes, and that hee ranne twiſe from him, (as he hath depoſed,) is acknowledged to bee true, by M.

Darrell himſelfe. And ſo the ſaide Somers had ſufficient oportunitie to goe to Aſhbie, and to talke with M. Darrell at ſuch times, as vpon his oath he hath declared.
               Furthermore, that Somers in his fittes at Nottingham, & before M. Darrels comming thether, did name him the ſaide Darrel diuerſe times (according as he ſayeth M. Darrell had inſtructed him) is depoſed by Edmond Garland.
                  Ed. Garland pag. 117. 
                  Before M. Darrell was ſent for, I haue beene preſent twiſe or thriſe at ſeuerall times, when William Somers hath in his pretended fittes vſed theſe wordes: Darrel, Darrell, Darrell.
               It ſauoreth alſo of ſome thing,R. Cooper, that Robert Cooper depoſeth: how M. Darrell within eight or nine dayes after his comming to Nottingham tolde him, that if he would carefully looke to Somers, he ſhould not looſe a penny by him: which ſorteth with that depoſed by Somers: how if hee would be ruled by M. Darrell, hee ſhould not want. And the ſauour is increaſed by that which M. Darrell himſelfe confeſſeth, vz. that he was a meanes with ſome others, to haue a collection made for the reliefe of the ſaide Cooper: but indeede there were two. Againe, according to Somers wordes, touching M. Darrels promiſe, that if hee would put his inſtructions in practiſe at Nottingham, hee woulde come thether and releaſe him of his apprentiſhip, (the ſame being his chiefe deſire),M, Darrell ad art, 38, pa, 20, he the ſaid M. Darrell confeſſeth thus: I gaue my worde to Somers his maiſter, that he ſhould haue thirteene ſhillinges foure pence to releaſe him of his apprentiſhip, which afterwardes I did performe.
               
               There was ſuch kindnes betwixt M. Darrell and Somers at Nottingham, as being (it may be thoght) old frends: hee and ſome other of his adherentes entertained him with good cheare: and when afterwardes he was accuſed to haue bewitched one, M. Darrell dealt with the Maior

of Nottingham, that he might be bayled. Touching the firſt:George Richardſon fol. 20. 
                  I well remember (ſayeth a Deponent) that the boye was one night at ſupper with M. Darrell, M. Brinſley, and two Miniſters more at the ſigne of the Caſtell. And for the ſecond, (although M. Darrell deny it,) yet M. Aldridge ſayeth, that the occaſion of Somers bayling,
                  M Aldridge pa. 91. 
                  was partly in reſpect of M. Darrels and his earneſtnes with the Maior to that effect.
               
               Moreouer it toucheth M. Darrell ſomewhat neare, and doth generally argue ſuch a compact to haue beene betwixt him and Somers, in that whileſt he was at Nottingham,
                  Mary Cooper. fol. 1 he had ſecret conference with him diuerſe times. This M. Darrel denyeth, but it is thus proued. I ſaw M. Darrell often times talk with my brother alone in my fathers houſe.
               
               
                  Eli. Thomlinſon. fol. 1
                  I well remember, that William Somers did ofte come to M. Bonners houſe, whileſt M. Darrell lay there, to enquire for M. Darrell, and went to him to his chamber.
               
               
                  Anne Chrichley. fol. 1. M. Shute. fol. 19
                  I ſaw the boy William Somers come one morning to M. Darrels chamber, and (as I remember) no body with him.
               
               
                  I came one afternoone to M. Darrels lodging, and there I found M. Iohn Bereſforde, and the boy with M. Darrell. And I haue heard by good reporte, that the boy did much frequent to goe to M. Darrell at many and ſeuerall times.
               
               Againe, when Somers was fallen at iarre with M. Darrell, he the ſaid Somers did both write vnto him in a threatning ſort, and vſe to others, ſuch kind of wordes, as did argue, that there was ſome packe betwixt them, the opening whereof might much concerne M. Darrell.
               
               In his ſaide letter, he did write thus, as M. Darrell confeſſeth. All thinges that I did were counterfeyte, and I pray you let it paſſe, for the more you meddle in it, the more diſcredit it wil be for you.
                  Nich. Shep. fol, 2, And for his words to others, Nicholas Shepheard ſayeth: I being deſirous to know of Somers, what hee meant to write ſo boldly to M. Darrell, he anſwered, that M. Darrell had

beſt to let him alone, or elſe it would turne to both their diſcredites. And to the ſame effect, Iohn Cooper:
                  Io. Cooper, pag. 202 
                  Many times Somers did ſpeake very hardly of M. Darrell, wiſhing that hee had neuer knowne him.
               
               Beſides, in that M. Darrel hath turned his copy, as touching the Witch, pretended by him, to haue ſent her ſpirite into Somers, it ſitteth verie neare vnto him, whileſt he was in Nott. little ſuſpecting (as it ſeemeth) that Somers would haue diſcloſed their packing at Aſhby, or hauing not ſo throughly foreſeen what might fall out in that behalf, he was confident (as he pretended) vpō a tale told by Somers in one of his fits, of a certain old woman, that ſhe the ſaid woman had bewitched him, and been the cauſe of all his trouble. The tale was, that the Lent before his pretended fits at Nott. he met an old woman on Blackwel more-heath: that ſhe ſpake vnto him: that ſhe told him ſhe knew Katherine Wright, & that how they two wold come to Nott. vnto him, that ſhe aſked him a penny, that he ſaying he had none, ſhe affirmed he had three pence, & how except hee would giue her a penny, ſhe would breake his necke, and throw him into a colepit, (that was neare at hand): that he gaue her thereupon a penny: that ſhee gaue vnto him a peece of bread and butter, which was the ſweeteſt that euer he did eat of in his life: and that he ſaw a black cat at that time come vnto her. Thus far the tale deuiſed by Somers, as he confeſſeth as a trick of knauery in one of his fits. Howbeit M. Darrel hearing the ſame (in ſort as is before expreſſed,) confeſſeth that he affirmed for a certainty,
                  M. Darrell ad art, 6, pa, 228. 
                  or as he verily thought, that the ſaid woman was a Witch, & that it was ſhe that had bewitched the boy, & had been the cauſe of all his former trobles. Wherupon there was a general rumor ſaith M. Pare, that it was ſhe that had bewitched Somers, & none other.
                  M. Pare, 264 Howbeit al this notwithſtāding, M Darrel now finding, as it may be thoght, that he laid the cauſe of Somers pretēded

poſſeſſion to ſhort (in that he the ſaide Somers had confeſſed their packing together at Aſhbie,) doth now aſcribe the cauſe of all the boyes troubles, vnto a woman of Worceſterſhire, that thereby hee might make it ſomewhat probable, that Somers counterfeyting at M. Brakenburies, did not proceed from his inſtructions, (as the boy depoſeth:) but from the ſaid woman that had bewitched him. And thereupon,M. Darrell, hiſtory, the briefe narration now both he and his friendes doe giue it out in printe and otherwiſe, that William Somers became to be poſſeſſed by the meanes of a Witch in Worceſter, who had ſent a wicked ſpirite into him, called Lucy: and that rumor runneth therby ſtrongly amongſt ſuch as do fauour him. The tale and occaſion of it was thus.
               
                  William Somers, being playing his prankes before M. Darrell came to Nottingham, in ſuch ſorte as it beganne to be reported that he was poſſeſſed, he was vrged (as he ſayeth) at one time by ſome that were preſent, to tell how he thought, he firſt grew to be troubled. Whereupon he deuiſed this ſtory (as he confeſſeth of meere knauerie, and to maintain and ſet forward the opinion already conceyued, that he was poſſeſſed,) vz. that whileſt he dwelt with M. Brakenburie, he was bewitched as he thought by an old woman, who accōpanied him as hee was going to Bramſgroue: that he denying to giue her a hatband, which he had found in the way, ſhe threatned him: that thereupon the night following, he was frighted, and ſo began at M. Brakenburies to haue ſuch like fittes, as then hee had at Nottingham: and that in one of his ſaid fits, hee heard ſomething ſay vnto him, that vpon ſuch a day he wold leaue him, & not come to him again, til about 4. years after▪ which time (quoth Somers) being now expired, I began to be againe troubled, as now you may perceiue: but all theſe deuiſes and knaueries of the boye, will not ſerue M. Darrels
                  
turne: it being the common practiſe of ſuch iuglers, to teach the parties with whom they deale, to attribute their trouble to witches, thereby to make it more probable to the ſimpler ſort, that they are poſſeſſed. And Somers hath els where confeſſed, M. Darrels courſe held with him to that effect: and how at their firſt acquaintance, hee told him, that Katherine Wright was firſt moleſted by the meanes of a witch. Moreouer, hee had heard and read ſome part of a very ridiculous booke, concerning one M. Throgmortons children, (ſuppoſed to haue beene bewitched by a woman of Warbois) whereby he ſaith, that hee learned ſome points, and was not ignorant, as fit occaſion ſerued, to aſcribe what he liſt to witches.
               But all theſe probabilities and circumſtances M. Darrel would auoid, by inforcing diuers ſuppoſed contradictions, and impoſſibilities in Somers depoſition.
               
                  Somers affirmeth (ſaith he) that when he repaired to me to be taught,
                  M. Darrell Apolog. 
                  he came from one M. Grayes of Langly (with whom he ſaith he then dwelt) to Aſhbie, where I then dwelt, as hee affirmeth: and in a parke there we met. In which words there are foure vntruthes. Firſt, Somers doth not ſay, that euer hee repaired vnto him to bee taught, but that being with him, he was taught by him. Secondly, the times of Somers repairing to M. Darrel, were not whileſt hee dwelt with M. Gray: but afterwardes, when he was runne from his maiſter, Thomas Porter of Nottingham. For Somers onely layeth to M. Darrels charge, that on a time, when hee dwelt with M. Gray, he met him the ſaid Darrel by chance at Aſhbie, and was then firſt inſtructed by him. Thirdly, Somers doth not affirme, that M. Darrell dwelt then at Aſhbie, when he dwelt at M. Grayes, and met him (as is aforeſaid) in Aſhbie. They might meete there together, though M Darrell did not then dwell there. Fourthly,

whereas M. Darrell ſaith, (if he meane plainely) that Somers affirmeth, their meeting in the parke to haue beene whileſt he dwelt at M. Grayes: he is therein greatly deceiued. For their ſaid meeting there was little aboue a yeare, before his pretended diſpoſſeſſion at Nottingham: at what time (hauing ſeene the boy of Burton by Maiſter Darrels direction) he returned againe vnto him at Aſhbie.
               
               Furthermore, M. Darrell proceeding in the diſproofe of Somers imputations laide to his charge, he ſaith thus. Now the truth is &c. that Somers was gone from M. Graies fiue yeares before our pretended meeting: For it is nine yeares or there aboutes ſince he went from M. Graies, and but ſixe yeares ſince I went to Aſhbie. If M. Darrell meane their firſt meeting at Aſhbie, it is a palpable vntruth to ſay, that Somers was gone from M. Grayes fiue yeares before that time: if hee vnderſtand their laſt meeting in the parke, hee was gone in deede from M. Graies aboue three yeares before that time, but not fiue. But where he ſaith it is nine yeares or there aboutes, ſince Somers went from Maiſter Grayes, and but ſixe yeares ſince he went to Aſhbie: if that were true he ſaid ſomewhat. For the clearing therefore of theſe two particulars:M. Gray ad art. 1. pag. 153. M. Gray ad art. 1. pag. 161 Firſt, M. Gray and Miſtres Gray being interrogated 23. Octob. 1598. how long it was ſince Somers left their ſeruice: the one ſaith: more then ſixe yeare paſt: and the other, about ſixe yeares as they remember. But there is ſome better certainty to bolt out the truth herein. Somers was bound prentiſe (as M. Darrell confeſſeth) with Thomas Porter, about a moneth or fiue weeks after he was diſcharged of M. Brakenburies ſeruice: and Somers ſaith, that hee remained little aboue a quarter of a yeare (if ſo long) with Maiſter Brakenburie: and it will be confeſſed, that he went from M. Graies to dwell with Maiſter Brakenbury.
                  
So as if wee can find when Somers was bounde prentiſe, it will appeare how long it is ſince hee dwelt at maiſter Graies. Now the Indenture it ſelfe whereby hee was bound, is to bee ſeene amongſt the reſt of the examinations: and it beareth date the ſeuenth of May, in the 35. yeare of her Maieſtie: whereby it is manifeſt, the premiſes being true, that it is not yet ſeuen yeares ſince Somers dwelt with M. Gray, which iumpeth both with his, & his wiues depoſitions, & controlleth M. Darrels nine yeares.
               And touching that which M. Darrell affirmeth, vz. that it is but ſixe yeares ſince he went to Aſhbie: it is well he limiteth himſelf to ſixe yeares. If he had ſaid but foure, he might haue beene put in mind by a certaine token of the vntruth therein. For in the yeare 1594. now 5. yeares paſt in one of his ſermons at Aſhbie (as there is aduertiſement giuen in writing) vpon the ſeuenteenth day of Nouember (the day of the beginning of her Maieſties moſt happie raigne ouer this kingdome) falling then vpon the Sonday: he inueighed mightily againſt the people there, for ringing the bels as they do throughout all the realme, in ſignification of their ioye, and thankſgiuing vnto Almighty God, for the beginning and continuance of her Highneſſe moſt Chriſtian and bleſſed gouernment: and his zeale, or rather furie, was ſo ſeruent therein, as hee tearmed their ſaid ringing, to bee the prophaning of the Sabboth, & ſaid they were all in danger thereby of Gods heauie diſpleaſure, or to that effect. But to the point it ſelfe. Although it were true, that it is but ſixe yeares, ſince hee went to Aſhbie, yet that is not greatly materiall: for he might come to dwell there a yeare or two after his firſt acquaintance with Somers, without any contradiction to that which Somers hath depoſed. Howbeit (if the information ſince giuen bee true) he doth therein

forget himſelfe: for it is reported, that he dwelt in one Perrins houſe in Aſhbie about one yere, then in one Io. Hollands about ſixe yeares, and laſtly in William Swinſons, about a yeare and a halfe: which being laid together, doe amount to about eight yeares and a halfe. Whereunto, (if Maiſter Darrell doe not ſtill continue his familie there, but haue dwelt ſince a yeare or two at Nottingham) that time alſo ſince he departed thence, may alſo be added. So that for ought that M. Darrell doth here alleadge for himſelfe, there doth nothing appeare, but that all may be true that Somers hath depoſed, touching their ſeueral meetings together at Aſhbie.
               
               The laſt circumſtance obſerued here, for the iuſtification of Somers depoſition in this matter, is this: that as ſoone as Somers was ſuppoſed by ſome in Nottingham to bee poſſeſſed, Miſtres Wallis, according to M. Darrels former wordes (as Somers hath depoſed) did preſently ſend for Maiſter Darrell to come vnto him: which circumſtance had in this place beene omitted, but that it miniſtreth a fitte occaſion to proceed with Somers confeſſion, how hee demeaned himſelfe, after his laſt departure from M. Darrell at Aſhbie.
               
               
                  Hauing (ſaith he) thus left Maiſter Darrel, I went towards Nottingham, and comming thither, procured my father in law to deale with M. Maior, to be a meanes to my maiſter, that I might be deliuered from mine apprentiſhip. But my Mayſter would not be intreated. Whereupon I was compelled to ſtay with him againe, and ſo did, till by Maiſter Darrels meanes I was deliuered from him. During this my continuance with my Maiſter, I found my ſelfe to be as hardly vſed before, and my maintenance with him rather worſe then better. Beſides, I did better perceiue, that my Maiſter could teach me nothing, being himſelfe brought vp with a Weauer, and hauing no skill at all in

muſicke. Furthermore, I vnderſtood by his ſpeeches oftentimes, that he meant to keepe me as his apprentiſe, not onely for the reſt of the yeares that I was bound vnto him, but for the time alſo that I had beene abſent from him. Whereby, obſeruing that he meant to keepe me as his ſeruant about foure yeares to come, I confeſſe that to bee releaſed from him according as M. Darrell had promiſed me, I did beginne the courſe that M. Darrell had wiſhed me before to vndertake. And firſt, I feygned my ſelfe to haue a ſwelling in my bellie, pretending thereby to haue great paine: which my Maiſter told me was nothing els but ſome colde, that did procure the collicke, and gaue me a drinke, and ſome other things for it. Afterwards, when I pretended to haue the ſaid collicke, I did make ſhew at ſundry times of many wilde lookes and geſtures, and about a moneth or three weekes before S. Martins day laſt (as I remember) I beganne to fall more roundly to my worke, according to my former inſtructions. At one time, I making a motion in my bellie, in the preſence of one M. Euans Curate at S. Maries in Nottingham: hee, coniecturing thereby that ſome quicke thing was in my bellie began to make a doubt, as if I were poſſeſſed. This Euans dwelt next houſe to my maiſter, and comming often vnto mee, brought with him Iohn Sherrart the Clearke of Saiſter Maries, who diuers times told me of M. Throckmortons children in Huntingtonſhire how they were poſſeſſed: and hauing a printed booke thereof, hee declared to M Euans in my hearing, the manner of the fits that M. Throgmortons children had. Whereby I learned ſomething more then I knew before, and did ſtill proceed further and further in my diſsimulatinn, as M. Darrel had taught me. By which occaſion M. Euans and the ſaid Clearke grew to bee perſwaded, that I was in deed poſſeſſed, & ſent for M. Aldridge the preacher of S. Maries, to come vnto me: who refuſing twice or thrice, came at the laſt: & being greatly afraid when he ſaw me in my fits, he gaue it out for a certainty I was poſſeſſed. And then

the bruite thereof grew to bee very riſe, and many both of the towne and countrie came to ſee me. At whoſe comming I would be in my diſſembled fits, and call oft for M. Darrel: ſometimes railing againſt him, and ſometimes willing him to bee ſent for, according to our former agreement. And at one time amongſt the reſt, whileſt I was in my ſaid fits, making mention of Maiſter Darrell, Miſtres Wallis his wiues ſiſter was preſent: who being perſwaded with the reſt that I was poſſeſſed, did affirme to ſundry perſons in my hearing, that her brother, M. Darrel had deliuered nine, that had beene poſſeſſed, and ſaid that ſhe would cauſe him to be ſent for. And accordingly one Hugh Wilſon was hyred to go for him.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. II. Of M. Darrels priuate directions to Somers whileſt hee was at Nottingham with him, how he ſhould from time to time behaue himſelfe in his counterfeiting.
               
                  FOr the further ſtrengthening of the general charge exhibited againſt M. Darrel before her Maieſties ſaid commiſſioners, to proue his proceedings with Somers to haue beene meerelie counterfeited: he is further accuſed: that he finding the ſaid Somers at Nottinghā, playing & acting of certain tricks & ſignes (as they tearme them) of poſſeſſion, did by his priuate inſtructions ſo leade him on, from one diſſembling courſe to an other, as it was ſufficient to teach him in that behalfe what hee had to do, although the matter had neuer beene plotted, betwixt them before at Aſhbie. It is manifeſt, that as Somers had counterfeited certaine fits & toyiſh behauiour at M. Brakenburies: ſo he was acting the like when M. Darrell came vnto him at Nottinghā. But to omit who it was that

taught him ſo to do, it is here to be conſidered with what craft & cunning he did proceed with him. The firſt night being the 5. of Nouember that M. Darrel came to Nott. he could haue no priuate ſpeeches with the boy, by reaſon of the company that were then preſent. But the day following, he took his oportunity. Here of Somers depoſeth thus.
               
                  The next morning being Sunday,
                  
                     6. Nouem. 1597. 
                  & the 6. of Nouemb. before Church time, M. Darrel came vnto me, & told me wherein I had done wel ouer night (for the night before he had plaied his feates very artificially) & wherein I had failed, wiſhing me to acte my fits more boldly & more liuely. He alſo then ſignified vnto mee, that the next day he meant to haue a faſt, and ſaid, that then I muſt act the fits he had taught me as a hee ſhould make mention of them, promiſing that in his ſermon he would name them with ſuch leiſure, as I might haue time to acte them one after an other in order. The ſecond morning being the 7. of Nouember, alſo M. Darrel came againe vnto me, before the faſt began, and aſked me if I remembred all that I was to doe that day. To whome I anſwering, that I thought I ſhould not forget to doe them as hee expected: M. Darrell ſaid, thou muſt in deed ſhew thy ſelfe this day, as it were once for all. And then alſo he told mee this tale. The ſame morning ſaith he, that the boy of Burton, and the ſeuen in Lancaſhire were to bee brought to the places where the faſts appointed, were held for their diſpoſſeſsing, the Deuill knowing himſelfe to haue but a ſhort time of dwelling in them, did caſt them into ſundry fittes, and did trouble them more, then at any time before. In ſo much as when ſome were ſent to will their friendes to make them readie, they brought word to him the ſaide Maiſter Darrell and others, in what caſe they founde them. Whereupon (quoth Maiſter Darrell) we were driuen to ſend ſixe or ſeuen at euery ſuch time, to bring them by force to the ſaid place: which ſixe or ſeuen were very much troubled in the cariage o thē. And euen ſo ſaid M. Darrel, the like order ſhalbe

taken with thee this morning. Anone one ſhal be ſent to ſee if thou be readie: at what time thou ſhalt ſhew thy ſelfe to be much troubled in thy ſits. Vpon ſignification whereof, ſixe or ſeuen ſhall come to bring thee vpon their ſhoulders, whom thou maieſt greatly trouble in their cariage of thee, by ſtrugling with them, as others that were poſſeſſed did: and as though the Deuill had compelled thee ſo to doe, being verie loth to come to ſo godly an exerciſe. Shortly after Maiſter Darrels departure, all thinges were done accordingly. One Langford was ſent to ſee if I were readie: at whoſe comming I did make ſhew of my greateſt fits, in an vnquiet manner. Thereupon the ſaid Langforde returning to Maiſter Darrell, by and by ſeuen came to carrie me, whom (as I thinke) I did very much trouble: and whereupon it was giuen out, that I was ſo heauie in my fittes, as ſeuen were ſcarce able to carrie me.
               
               For the iuſtification of theſe particulars thus ſet downe by Somers, there are few depoſitions. Howbeit M. Darrel (notwithſtanding his general deniall before mentioned:) yet he confeſſeth ſomewhat, which tendeth to the confirmation of this his ſecond conference with Somers: I ſent (ſaith William Langford) that morning,
                  M. Darrell ad. art. 29. pag. 18. 
                  to take order for the preſent bringing of Somers to Smalles houſe, & M. Langford brought me word backe, that ſo ſoone as hee ſpake of the boyes remouing,
                  M. Darrels hiſtorie. 
                  he was preſently caſt into a ſore fit. And againe: The boy was brought by ſixe or ſeuen ſtrong men, who had all of them enough to doe, to bring him to the next conuenient and ſeemely roome, to the place of his abode: he meaneth to Smalles houſe. The faſt being ended, & Somers diſpoſſeſſed (as it was pretended) M. Darrell gaue vnto Somers inſtructions priuately, how to behaue himſelfe in a new matter, that he was to take in hand concerning his behauiour, when pretence ſhould be made, that the deuil ſought againe to repoſſeſſe him. To this effect Somers depoſeth after this manner.

                  The ſame night after my ſuppoſed deliuerance, M. Darrell came vnto me, and tolde me, that as yet my former practiſes muſt not be quite giuen ouer, ſaying, that the continuance of them would turne both to his and my great benefite. And then hee further ſignifyed vnto me, how after that Katherine Wright, the boye of Burton, and the ſeauen in Lancaſhire were diſpoſſeſſed, the Deuill did ſeeke to enter into them againe, and came for that purpoſe vnto them in diuerſe ſimilitudes, as of a Rat, a dogge, a catte, an olde man, an Ape, a toade, a mouſe, &c. Whereupon ſaide he, for a good while after, they were not perfectly well, but awaking out of their ſleepes, and at other times ſtarting, they would cry, away with that dogge, keepe away that catte, and ſo ſometimes beſides the former beaſtes ſpecifyed, they would make mention of Lyons, Dragons, Bulles, &c. And ſo quoth M. Darrell to me, thou maieſt eaſily doe. Whereunto I agreede, and did after put the ſame in practiſe, as occaſion ſerued accordingly.
               
               After that Somers had continued his new begunne practiſes about a fortnight (in which time he had played many feates vnder a couerlette,22. or 23. Nouember 1597. as afterwardes ſhall bee ſhewed,) then by M. Darrelles direction, hee fell into a new courſe, which was of the detecting of certaine perſons for Witches. I did then (ſayeth Somers) vndertake an other matter concerning certaine Witches,
                  W. Somers pag. 22. 
                  according to M. Darrels former directions. For he had tolde me before, that the boy of Burton, and the ſeauen in Lancaſhire had detected certaine Witches, and that I might do the like. Alſo he had ſaid vnto me, that when the Witches detected by them, were comming vnto the ſaide parties, whome the Deuilles ſought to repoſſeſſe: they the ſaide parties were wonderfully afflicted, vntill the ſaide Witches came vnto them, and then the Witches being come, and ſtanding by them, the ſaid parties lay ſtill, and ſo continuing till they were departed, they grew againe after the Witches were

going away to be as ſore troubled, as they were at their comming. And thus (quoth M. Darrell) thou maieſt doe as occaſion ſhall ſerue. Hereupon I beganne about the xxv. of Nouember (as I thinke) in my pretended fittes, to make mention of Witches: and likewiſe when they were brought vnto me, did pretend as though I had beene greatly vexed, vntill they came to my beds ſide: and then I lay ſtill as though I had beene a ſleepe, vntill they departed: When I did againe diſſemble my ſelfe to bee troubled as before. In theſe my pretended fittes, this was my manner, vz. Looke where mother Higget ſtandes, take her away, and ſo of diuerſe others to the number of ſix or ſeauen: as Alice Freeman, Thomas Groues, William Bend, and his wife, widdowe Boote: my Aunt Elſe: Millicent Horſeley and her ſiſter. This report of my naming of the ſaide parties for Witches, was preſentlie ſpread abroad, as to haue beene done by mee through the deuilles skill, in vſing my tongue: whereas I do conſtantlie profeſſe, that I onely named them, becauſe I had knowne them before to haue been commonly ſuſpected for Witches.
               
               About the 6. or 7. of December, Somers did growe weary of his new kinde of diſſimulation, hauing now continued as long in troubling himſelfe about Witches, as he had done before in his trickes vnder the Couerlette. And therupon contrary to M. Darrels perſwaſions gaue them all ouer, and forbare any further practiſes, til about the xiiii. of Ianuary following.14. Ianuary 1597. Somers. Hereof Somers in this ſorte. About the beginning of December, I did growe verie wearie of all my former practiſes, and thereupon did wholie leaue them, contrary to M. Darrels good liking: who endeuoured to perſwade me ſtill to continue in them. But when he coulde not preuaile with me ſo farre, although he alledged that it woulde bee an hindrance both to him and mee: and that this courſe begunne, was not hetherto finiſhed, as it ought to be: then M. Darrell gaue it out, that the Deuill would lye lurking about a man,

without troubling of him, ſometimes a moneth, ſometimes a quarter of a year, and ſometimes more. Whileſt I thus continued without making any ſhew of trouble, M. Darrell had priuate ſpeeches with me, ſometimes in his owne lodging at M. Bonners, and ſometimes walking alone in S. Maries Churchyeard. And alwaies his ſpeeches tended to this effect: that I muſt not as yet deſiſt from my former practiſes. But for any thing that he could ſay vnto me, I gaue that courſe ouer, for the ſpace of about ſix weekes.
               
               After many perſwaſions vſed by M. Darrell, that Somers would vndertake againe his former courſes: and vpon ſome other occaſions, (as afterwards it will appeare) he the ſaid Somers falling into his former fittes, M. Darrell preſentlie gaue it out, that now he was repoſſeſſed, accordingly as hee had foretold, both priuately and in his ſermons, that it would come to paſſe▪ and then gaue him further inſtructions, how in his old fits, hee ſhould behaue himſelfe after a new faſhion.W. Somers. 
                  When I had entred againe into this courſe (ſaieth Somers,) M. Darrell told me of certaine words, that as he ſaid the boy of Burton had vſed, vz. he fell and I caught him, & willed me to vſe ſome ſentences, or dark ſayings, that therby ſuch as ſhould hear me, might wonder the more at me. And accordingly, in one of my next fits, when M. Darrell was preſent, (as he was verie ſeldome abſent at ſuch times) I vttered amongſt ſome other vain ſpeeches, the words before mentioned: hee fel and I caught him. Which words I had no ſooner deliuered, but M. Darrell taking hold of them, preſentlie ſaid. O good people I pray you marke this: for it is a matter of importance, the verie ſame words the Deuill vttered in the boy of Burton: whereby you may obſerue the occaſion that the Deuill did againe repoſſeſſe him. Furthermore according to M. Darrels former aduice, I inuented and deliuered in an other of my fits theſe words: the ſaide ſtone is ſofte and the bolder, and flint is hard. Which wordes M. Darrell being preſent, did expound to this effect: vz. that by

theſe ſtones were meant the magiſtrates of Nottingham, ſignifying, that ſome of them had ſoft heartes to belieue the mightie workes of God, and that ſome of them were ſo hard hearted as they would belieue nothing, although God himſelfe ſhoulde come downe from heauen amongſt them, thereby condemning ſuch as did affirme, that I was but a diſſembler. At the ſame time alſo, I vſed theſe ſpeeches: he that runnes on the Ice, let him take heed leaſt he ſlippe: and theſe alſo, he that ſtandes on a hil, let him tumble downe, and he will be the ſooner at the bottome: which wordes M. Darrell did likewiſe expound: but I could not well heare him, by reaſon of the noyſe, which was at that time in the place where I lay, and therefore I cannot tell what ſenſe he made of them.
               
               When Somers had continued his fits again, wherby he was deemed to be repoſſeſſed about three weeks or ſomewhat more, he was verie wearie of them, and would haue giuen them ouer: but M. Darrell would not permitte him ſo to doe: but kept him in his former courſe by the ſpace of about a weeke after, vz. vntill the xxiiii. of the ſaid moneth of February, that the Maior of Nottingham, did then vpon good occaſion ſeaze him into his hands. Hereof thus Somers hath depoſed. Hauing remayned about foure weekes in this courſe, I grew againe verie wearie of it, and did refrayne ſometimes two or three daies together from my former trickes, and walked abroad as I thought meete. Hereof I aduertiſed M. Darrell priuately in his chamber, ſaying, that I was determined to giue that courſe ouer: But M. Darrell anſwered me, that I might not in any wiſe ſo doe as yet: that in ſo doing I ſhould bring them both into great danger, peraduenture of their liues: and therefore willed mee to perſiſt, promiſing that if I would be aduiſed by him, I ſhould neuer want. But all his perſwaſions notwithſtanding, I ſtill affirmed, that I would no longer continue in my former diſſimulation, and further ſaide, that if I

might not be ſuffered to be quiet & leaue it with his good liking: I was fully minded to tell all that came vnto me, from that time forward, that all I had done from my firſt pretended trouble was but diſſembled. Well, (quoth M. Darrell) if thou wilt not follow my counſell, it will be worſe for thee, and I will doe well inough with thee. But I accordinglie did keepe my promiſe. For afterwardes when ſome came to ſee me, I told them plainely in the hearing of M. Darrell, that I had diſſembled all that I had done. Whereupon M. Darrell being offended, ſaide to thoſe that hearde me, that they might not in any ſort belieue me, becauſe it was not William Somers, but the Deuill that ſo ſaide, and willed them therefore to holde me. So as I was at my wits end what I ſhoulde doe: becauſe M Darrell had got ſuch credite, as whatſoeuer hee ſaide was belieued to be true. After I had thus confeſſed my ſelfe to be a diſſembler, I was reſtrayned by M. Darrels meanes from going abroade, except two or three, ſuch as he liked, were in my company: which was the cauſe that I fell againe, for the ſpace of about a weeke vnto my former diſſimulation, vntill I had therby gotten more libertie: and then meeting with one Iohn Cooper of Nottingham, the keeper of the poore in S. Iohns, I did reueale my mind in part vnto him, telling him, that I woulde gladly remaine with him, whereby I might bee quiet at the laſt.
               
               All that hetherto hath beene ſaide, for the proofe of this ſecōd general accuſation, laid to Darrels charge, doth pend eſpecially vppon Somers owne depoſition. And in this caſe little more is to be expected. For it had been madnes in M. Darrell, if he had not taken ſuch a courſe in the inſtructing of him, as hee might bee ſure none knew but Somers: and then he doubteth not (it ſeemeth) but that if the worſt fell out, his credite would bee ſufficient to ouerweigh the boyes. Howbeit therein he hath ouerſhot himſelfe. For although the circumſtances before

mentioned in the firſt Chapter, ſhould be thought inſufficient to conuince M. Darrell of his practiſing with Somers at Aſhby. Yet manie of them together with the boyes oath are very pregnant proofes of this ſecond accuſation. For example, M. Darrels vndertaking that the boyes Father in law ſhould not looſe a penny by him, depoſed by Robert Cooper. Likewiſe his procuring of a collection for Cooper: confeſſed by himſelfe. Alſo his priuate conference ſo oft with Somers: which fower likewiſe haue depoſed. Moreouer his buying out of Somers years: acknowledged by himſelfe. Furthermore, his earneſt dealing, for the bayling of Somers, when he was charged with fellony: depoſed by M. Aldridge. Again, his entertayning of Somers at an Inne or Tauerne: as George Richardſon doth affirme. Againe, Somers threatning of M Darrell, when they were fallen out: as M. Darrell himſelfe confeſſeth. And againe, Somers his wiſhing, that he had neuer ſeen M. Darrell: as Iohn Copper depoſeth.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. III. Of M Darrels inſtructing of Somers by ſpeaking to others in his hearing, thoſe thinges which he meant that he ſhould practiſe from the fift of Nouember, when he came vnto him, vntil the ſeauenth of the ſame, being the day of his pretended diſpoſſeſſion
               
                  FOr a thirde proofe of the aforeſaide generall complaint, exhibited before her Maieſties ſaide Commiſſioners: that M. Darrel did counterfeyt with Somers concerning his pretended diſpoſſeſſiō: he the ſaid M. Darrell is charged to haue dealt with the boy at Nottingham, ſo cunningly, as that albeit he had neuer ſeene him at Aſhbie, nor dealt with him priuately

at Nottingham: (both which pointes haue been prooued in the two former Chapters): yet the courſe which hee held with him there, and with thoſe that came to ſee him in his fits, was ſo contriued, as it might eaſily informe Somers what he had to do, and did indeed blind & miſleade many of the people. Which ſecond point, vz. the ſeducing of the people, was as neceſſarie for M. Darrell to compas as the former. For otherwiſe both hee and the boy might haue diſſembled, till their heartes had aked, if no man had belieued them. This accuſation reacheth to ſuch M. Darrels laſt mentioned practiſes, from the time that hee came firſt vnto him at Nottingham, being the 5. day of Nouember, 1597. vntill about the xxiiii. of Februarie following. Howbeit, for the more perſpicuity, and in reſpect of the variety of the matters, that fell out within the compas of that time, this Chapter comprehendeth, but his cunning and ſleightes to the purpoſe here expreſſed, from the ſaid fift of Nouember, vntill the ſeauenth of the ſame, when it was pretended that Somers was diſpoſſeſſed.
               It being agreede vpon by all thoſe, who in theſe latter times doe take vpon them the chiefeſt skill in caſting out Deuilles, that it is a matter of eſpeciall great difficultie to diſcerne truly who is poſſeſſed, becauſe there haue been, daily is, and may be hereafter ſo great diſſimulation and falſhoode practiſed in that behalfe, as partlie it doth appeare in the firſt booke of this treatiſe: yet M. Darrel hauing neuer ſeen VV. Somers (as he now pretendeth), did affirme, that he the ſaide Somers was certainelie poſſeſſed by a wicked ſpirite, vpon the rude report of a ſimple man, one Hugh Wilſon, and vppon a letter receyued by Wilſon from his ſiſter in law, one Miſtreſſe Wallys.
               
               This M. Darrel cōfeſſeth in theſe words. Being certified in my ſiſters letter & by the meſſēgers further ſpeeches,
                  ad art. 9 pa. 16, 
                  of the māner of

Somers fittes, I did ſend them worde, that thoſe thinges being true, the ſaide Somers was poſſeſſed, and this I did before I ſaw Somers. And herein M. Darrell was ſo confident vpon ſo light a report, as in his iorney towardes Nottingham, (the ſaid fift of Nouember), hee tooke M. Iretons houſe in his way,M, Darrell ad art. 1 pa. 57, and tolde him (as he confeſſeth), vz. of the poſſeſſion of William Somers, that he was ſent for to come to him: that he was purpoſed to haue a faſt for his diſpoſſeſſion, and that he doubted not of good ſucceſſe, by that means to procure the boyes deliuerance.
                  Ieronimus Mingus. This M. Darrels confident bragging, being directly againſt one of his Maiſters rules, that hee doubted not of good ſucceſſe, as it argueth his ignorance: ſo the ſame being ioyned to his raſh credulitie, doth make it probable, that eyther hee had layed his plotte with the boy before, or elſe that he knew verie well, how by his counning to draw on the boy, for the ſeruing of his turn, as he himſelfe liſt. More might be collected hereof, but where other matters are ſo pregnant, it is needeleſſe to inſiſt vpon it.
               The chiefeſt meanes whereby M. Darrell did ſeduce the people, and cunningly inſtruct Somers, without ſuſpition in any that belieued him, were theſe two falſe grounds, (whereof in the firſt booke), vz. that thoſe who are poſſeſſed, haue in their fittes no vſe of their ſenſes or faculties of their mindes, and that whatſoeuer they eyther doe or ſay at ſuch times, it is not they but Sathan that doth both ſay and doe it. Whereuppon purpoſing to goe to Nottingham, hee firſt prepared his way, by laying (as he could) a grounde-worke ſutable to that which he meant to builde vpon: vz. that vppon the foreſaide bare relation of Hugh Wilſon, and before he had then ſeene Somers, he ſent word by him to Nottingham, that hee the ſaid Somers was in his fittes ſenſeles, and that all hee then did or ſpake

was done by the Deuill. Maiſter Darrell being examined hereof, denieth it. But it is depoſed by diuers witneſſes.
               
                  Maiſter Darrell, among many ſpeeches had with me, told me,
                  Hugh VVilſon fol. 3. 
                  that Somers in his fits was without reaſon, and did pronounce, that if the boy were ſo handled, as I had told him, then by the example of others, with whom (as he ſaid) he had beene, hee neyther heares (quoth he) ſees, nor feeles any thing.
               
               Hugh Wilſon, vpon his returne from M. Darrell,Anne Porter. fol. 3.
                   
                  came to my houſe, and did report, that M. Darrell ſaid, that the boy was altogether ſenceles in his fits: that it was not he, but the euill ſpirit within him, that made him ſo vnquiet.
               
               Hugh Wilſon did report at his returne,
                  Th. Porter pag. 113. 
                  that M. Darrell ſaid, that Somers in his fits had no ſence, and therefore willed that he ſhould not bee troubled at ſuch times, and that when the ſaid Somers did ſpeake or do any thing in the ſaid fittes, it was not hee the ſaid Somers, but the Deuill that ſo did, or ſpake in him.
               
               Concerning theſe two grounds of M. Darrels,
                  Rob. Cooper. pa. 106. it is not much impertinent that Robert Cooper depoſeth in this ſort, vz. The chiefe deceit which was vſed to bleare all their eyes at Nottingham, was the perſwaſion beaten into them by M. Darrell, that the boy was ſenceleſſe in all his fittes, and that when hee ſeemed to ſpeake, it was not he, but the Deuil that ſpake in him.
               
               Beſides, M. Darrell is further charged, that as hee had ſent worde to Nottingham, that Somers was poſſeſſed, be fore he had ſeene him: ſo at his comming vnto him thither, he ſaid he was poſſeſſed before hee had ſeene him in any fit:M. Darrel ad art. 1. pag. 215, eſpecially ſuch a fit as might not eaſily bee counterfeited. This M. Darrell denieth in theſe words. Comming to William Somers the 5. of Nouember, I did not then affirme William Somers to be poſſeſſed, before I had ſeene him in any ſuch fittes, as can not be counterfeited. And being here

demaunded to ſet downe what ſignes he ſaw him then acte, that he thought could not be counterfeited, hee anſwered: that he ſaw a certaine extraordinarie ſwelling in his bodie, beſide certaine ſignes mentioned in the ſcriptures. But he would not be drawne to name any of them. And it had beene good for him that hee had not mentioned the ſaid ſwelling: but confeſſed the truth plainly: for that which he hath here denied is proued directly.
               
                  Th. VVallis pag. 268
                  At M. Darrels firſt comming to the towne before hee ſaw the boy, he ſaid he was poſſeſſed.
               
               
                  When M. Darrel did firſt ſee the boy at his comming to Nottingham,
                  Th. VVallis ibid. 
                  he ſaid that he was poſſeſſed, notwithſtanding that he was not in any fitte.
               
               
                  Ro. Cooper pag. 97. Io. VViggē fol. 6
                  Vpon M. Darrels firſt comming to William Somers, he did preſently affirme vpon the ſight of the boy, that he was poſſeſſed.
               
               
                  At M. Darrels firſt going to Somers, he heard him ſay, that out of doubt the boy was poſſeſſed.
               
               
                  Tho. Porter pag. 114.
                  M. Darrell did then (vz. at his firſt comming, and before the boy had any fit) affirme to thoſe that were preſent, that William Somers was poſſeſſed.
               
               Furthermore, it was obiected againſt M. Darrell, that as he had ſent word to Nottingham, before he had ſeene the boy, that thoſe things which hee ſeemed to ſpeake in his fits, were not ſpoken by him but by the Deuill: ſo vpon his firſt comming vnto him, notwithſtanding that he the ſaid Somers did anſwere him directly: yet he the ſaid Darrell affirmed, that it was not Somers, but the deuill. M. Darrell doth confeſſe ſome part hereof: but the reſt that he denieth is ſufficiently proued.
               
                  M, Darr. ad art. 2 p. 215
                  I thought (ſaith he) that certaine wordes then ſpoken by Somers were not ſpoken by Sathan. And I was moued ſo to thinke, becauſe being perſwaded that he was poſſeſſed, and hauing read in the ſcriptures, that the deuill doth ſpeake in thoſe that are

poſſeſſed. I did thereupon ſay, that I thought it was the deuill that ſpake in Somers.
               
                  I asked of Somers the ſame night a queſtion about ſome matter of faith and principle of religion:
                  M. Darrel ad art. 3. pag. 215, 
                  whereunto Somers made a fit anſwere, but with ſuch geſtures, as I ſuppoſed the ſaid anſwer to proceed from Sathan. What follie, boldnes, and ignorance appeareth in theſe two depoſitions may eaſily be eſpied: & his falſhood alſo is as manifeſt by the depoſitions enſuing.
               
                  M. Darrell then affirmed,
                  Th. Porter pag. 114. 
                  that when Somers in his fits ſpake or did any thing, it was not he, but the deuil, that ſo did, or ſpake in him.
               
               
                  M. Darrel asked Somers that night how he did, & he anſwered, wel I thanke God. Whereunto M. Darrel replied:
                  Nich Shepard. fol. 2.
                   
                  I doubt it is not W. Somers that ſpeakes vnto me. This M. Darrell denieth.
               
               
                  M. Darrell demaunded of Somers what was his name: who anſwering, that his name was VVilliam, & ſmiling therewith:
                  Miſtres Gray ad ar, 8, pag, 163, 
                  he the ſaid M. Darrel looked very earneſtly vpon him, and then ſaid to the ſtanders by: I am afraid it is not William that ſpeaketh: whereat the boy fell a laughing againe. This alſo M. Darrell denieth.
               
               
                  The boy then lay as if he were a ſleep, & when hee awaked,
                  Mary Cooper, fo. 1.
                   M. Darrell asked him where he had beene, and he ſaid no where, but a ſleep: and then M. Darrel ſaid, I feare it is not VVilliam that ſpeaketh vnto me. This in like manner M. Darrell denyeth, as he hath done the reſt.
               Alſo M. Darrell was charged, that as he had ſaid before he came to Nottingham, that Somers was in his fits ſenceles: ſo the firſt night of his comming to the boy, he affirmed the ſame againe to many in the preſence of the ſaid boy: whereunto M. Darrel anſwered thus:M, Dar. ad art 2. pag 215.
                   
                  I do not belieue that I ſaid that night, that Somers was in his fits ſenceleſſe.
               
               
                  
                  Tho. Porter 114. & fo 3
                  Maiſter Darrel affirmed, that night that William Somers had no ſence in his fits, and ſaid to the people: I dare aſſure you that the boy doth not know what he doth in his fits.
               
               
                  Mary Cooper. fol. 1.
                  Maiſter Darrell bad that night: let the boy alone: for hee neither knowes, nor ſees any thing.
               
               The former three points firſt laid: vz. that Somers was poſſeſſed: that thoſe things which hee ſeemed to ſpeake, were ſpoken by the Deuill, and that hee was in his fittes ſenceleſſe: For as much as he deemed it not ſufficient, to perſwade thoſe that were preſent for him to affirme the ſame barely: hee alleadged his experience for them all in the boies preſence: ſaying, that Somers was troubled in like manner and ſorte to Katherine Wright, the boy of Burton,
                  M, Darr. ad art. 15 p. 17 Io. VViggē fol. 6 and the ſeuen in Lancaſhire, who had all of them beene poſſeſſed. This M. Darrel denieth: but it is depoſed.
               
                  Out of doubt the boy is poſſeſſed (quoth M. Darrel that night the boy being preſent) for my experience is ſuch, that I know it, by the example of ſeuen in Lankaſhire, the boy of Burton, & Katherine Wright, who had the like fits that this boy hath.
               
               
                  Nich Shepard. fol. 2.
                  Somers falling into a laughter that night, M. Darrel ſaid, I know this was not the voice of William Somers. And then added: this boy is as the boy of Burton was.
               
               
                  Mary Cooper, fo 1.
                  
                  M. Darrel ſaid that night (Somers being preſent) that the boy was poſſeſſed, and that he did as the boy of Burton did.
               
               
                  Ro. Cooper pag. 97.M. Darrel did that night affirme in the preſence of the boy, that diuers others that had beene poſſeſſed (naming the boy of Burton, Katherine Wright, and the ſeuen in Lankaſhire) had beene troubled euen as William Somers then was.
               
               
                  E. Garland. ad art. 9 174.
                  M. Darrel affirmed the ſame night (the boy being preſent) that William Somers was poſſeſſed in the very like manner, that Katherine Wright, the boy of Burton, and the ſeuen in Lankaſhire were poſſeſſed.
               
               
                  Maiſter Darrel affirmed then to thoſe that were preſent with

the boy, that William Somers was poſſeſſed,
                  Th, Porter pag. 114. 
                  that in his fittes he had no ſence, and that when he ſpake or did any thing in them, it was not he but the Deuill, that ſo did and ſpake in him. And this the ſaid Darrell affirmed to bee true, becauſe in his experience, others being poſſeſſed, did ſhew the like ſignes, who had no ſence in their fits: and in whom the Deuill ſpake and did as is before expreſſed.
               
               Beſides M. Darrell was charged, to haue ſpecified the ſame night in the preſence of Somers, & diuers others, the manner of ſuch fits as the poſſeſſed had in the ſcriptures, and of thoſe which were ſeene (as hee ſaid) in Katherine Wright, the boy of Burton, and the ſeuen in Lankaſhire: that in their fits they would caſt themſelues into the fire, and ſometimes into the water: that they would teare themſelues, gnaſh with their teeth, writh their necks as though their faces had ſtoode almoſt backwardes: draw their mouthes farre awrie: and lift vp their bellies.M. Darrel ad art. 13. pag. 16. Vnto all theſe particulars M. Darrell anſwereth thus: I doe belieue they are true.
               
               Againe, M. Darrell was charged, that after he had told the manner of the fits, (as laſt before he hath confeſſed) he then alſo ſaid to the perſons preſent in the hearing of Somers: that he the ſaid Somers would do the like.M. Darr. ad art. 15. pag. 17. This M. Darrell denieth: but it is depoſed.
               
                  M. Darrel hauing declared (the firſt night in the preſence of the boy) what ſtrange fittes Katherine Wright,Io. VViggen. fol. 6. 
                  the boy of Burton, and the ſeuen in Lankaſhire had, he then ſaid: vz. This boy will haue the like.
               
               
                  M. Darrell hauing named (the firſt night the boy being preſent) certaine ſignes which the poſſeſſed vſe, he further ſaid:
                  Th. Porter fol. 3. 
                  vz. If the boy be poſſeſſed you ſhall ſee ſuch ſignes in him.
               
               
                  She heard M. Darrell ſay at that time (vz. the firſt night) before Somers: If this boy be poſſeſſed,
                  Mary Cooper fol. 1 
                  hee will foame and wallow

and gnaſh, and many other ſuch like: and by and by hee did ſome of them.
               
               
                  Somers pag. 10.
                  When Mayſter Darrel had ſhewed them &c. hee ſaid that I would do them all, he was ſure, and many more before it was long. Whereuppon I knowing his meaning, beganne to put ſome of thoſe ſits in practiſe, whereby they that were confirmed in that which M. Darrell had told them of my poſſeſſing. And M. Darrel did with ſome earneſtnes confirme them therein, as hauing himſelfe (as he ſaid) good experience in ſuch matters. After that Somers for a time had practiſed ſome of thoſe fits, (whereof M. Darrel had made mention,) and ſaid hee would doe the like, to the great admiration of thoſe that were preſent, and his owne no ſmall reputation: (he but ſpeaking the word, and all things falling out accordingly) then he was charged to haue proceeded to ſome other points, and to tell them in Somers hearing, that he the ſaid Somers was not ſo much troubled for his own ſinnes,M. Darrel ad art. 16. pag. 17. as for the ſins of the people, or of the inhabitantes in Nottingham. This M. Darrell denieth: but it is ſufficiently proued.
               
                  Rob. Cooper. pag. 97
                  At that time M. Darrel affirmed (in the hearing of Somers) that he the ſaid Somers was not puniſhed ſo much for his owne ſinnes, or for the ſinnes of his parents, as for the ſinnes that raigned in Nottingham. And ſo hee affirmed of Katherine Wright, the boy of Burton, and the ſeuen in Lancaſhire.
               
                  Th. Porter, pag. 114.
                  M. Darrel made a godly exhortation to thoſe that were preſent, that euery man ſhould be careful to looke to his owne waies, becauſe otherwiſe the like iudgement of God might well enough happen vnto them. For (ſaith he, in the hearing of the boy) this boy is not ſo much troubled for his owne ſinnes, as for the ſinnes of the people.
               
               
                  Mary Cooper. fol. 1
                  M. Darrel ſaid the ſame night in Somers preſence, that the boy was very euill troubled, and out of doubt it was not for his

owne ſinnes, but for your ſinnes (meaning her, and her mother) and others.
               
               
                  M. Darrel ſaid, that out of queſtion,
                  W. Somers, pag. 12. 
                  I was not poſſeſſed eyther for mine owne ſinnes, or for the ſinnes of my father and mother onely, but for the ſinnes that rained in Nottingham.
               When M. Darrel had laid downe his conceit touching the cauſe of Somers trouble: then he was charged to haue affirmed in the preſence of the boy, that Sathan did vſe to ſhew by geſtures in thoſe that were poſſeſſed, the particular ſinnes that raigned in thoſe places where they dwelt.M. Darr. ad art. 16. pag. 17. Somers pag. 10. This M. Darrell denieth: but it is depoſed.
               M. Darrel told them that were preſent diuers tales of the boy of Burton, of Katherine Wright, how in their fittes they ſhewed by geſtures, the eſpeciall ſinnes that raigned in thoſe places where they dwelt.
               
               
                  M. Darrell then and there deliuered before Somers and the people preſent,
                  M. Berefford. fol. 9. 
                  that the deuill did vſe the partes and members of thoſe that were poſſeſſed, ſo as by ſignes and geſtures he doth often vſe to ſignifie the particular ſinnes raigning in thoſe places, where the poſſeſſed be.
               
               
                  M. Darrel ſaid (that night in the preſence of Somers) that it was a practiſe of the deuill,
                  Th. Porter pag. 114. 
                  by ſignes and diuers geſtures to ſhew the ſinnes of other men.
               
               After that M. Darrel had thus ſhewed his cunning concerning ſathans accuſtomed practiſe laſt mentioned then he was alſo further charged, to haue affirmed in the hearing of Somers, and preſence of many, that hee verily thought the deuill would doe the like in Somers, and declare by ſignes and geſtures the ſinnes of Nottingham and of others. This M. Darrell denieth, but it is depoſed.M. Darrell ad art, 17. pa. 17 Somers p. 12.
               
               
                  When M. Darrell had mentioned theſe points, hee told the parties preſent, that the deuill no doubt woulde make me to put them in practiſe.
               
               
                  
                  Rob. Cooper. pag. 97
                  Maiſter Darrel then ſaid in the preſence of the boy: that now thoſe who would not belieue the word of God, ſhould bee driuen to acknowledge and confeſſe their ſinnes by the meanes of the Deuill, who would in this boy preach vnto them their ſinnes, by ſhewing the ſame by certaine geſtures of the boyes. Wherupon the boy lying vpon a bed, began to vſe many geſtures: as of dauncing, fighting, robbing, drunkennes, whoredome, &c. as they are put put downe ſince in a ballade.
               
               
                  Th. Porter, fol. 3.
                  M. Darrel diſcourſed (that night in the preſence of Somers) of the ſinnes that raigned in the world, which the Deuill would make ſhew of.
               
               
                  Somers being an apt ſcholler for Maiſter Darrell to practiſe vpon, hearing by Maiſter Darrels ſpeeches, what he was to doe, and what was expected at his handes: did leape and skip vpon a bed, and make many ſignes and geſtures:Somers pag. 12, 
                  Wherewith (ſaith Somers) all that were preſent were much amazed: being deceiued with that errour, which Maiſter Darrel had taught them, that I though I were preſent coulde heare none of thoſe thinges, that bee had then tolde them.
               
               Of theſe geſtures though they were but very rude & groſſe: yet M. Darrell (as his manner is to make euery thing ſtraunge that Somers did) giueth them this report. Theſe thinges (ſaith he,M. Darrell Hiſtor. 
                  meaning the ſinnes that Somers had geſtured) were in ſuch liuely and orient colours painted out vnto vs, that were preſent, being to the number of ſome ſixtie, that I doe verily thinke, that it is not in the skill and power of man to doe the like. With theſe geſtures Maiſter Darrel it ſeemeth was ſo greatly delighted, as hee coulde not chuſe but giue ſome apparant ſhew thereof. For he was in this place charged by her Maieſties ſaid Commiſſioners, that whileſt Somers was acting of them, he himſelfe did expounde them very learnedly, to ſignifie this or

that ſinne that raigned in Nottingham.
                  M. Darrell ad art. 16. pa. 17. W. Somers, pag. 12. This M. Darrell denyeth. But it is depoſed.
               
                  As I did vſe any of the ſaid geſtures, oh would M. Darrell ſay, to the ſtanders by: ſee you not how he doth thus, and thus? Theſe thinges ſignifie that ſuch and ſuch ſinnes doe raigne in this towne. They alſo that were preſent hauing heard M. Darrell, would as I toſſed with my handes, and tumbled vppe and down vppon my bed, preſentlie collect and ſay: oh, hee doth ſo for this ſinne, and ſo for that ſinne, whereby it came to paſſe, that I could doe nothing in any of my fittes, eyther that night or the day after, eyther ſtirre my head, or any part of my body: looke merily, or ſadly, ſitte or lye ſpeake or be ſilent, open or ſhutte mine eyes, but ſome would ſtill make an interpretation of it: as to be done by the Deuill in me, to declare ſuch ſinnes in Nottingham, as they themſelues imagined.
               
               
                  Amongſt other collections, that M. Darrell made by ſondrie of my geſtures: ſome he ſaide the Deuill did in me, to ſignifie my owne ſinnes, as thoſe of dauncing, of Vyols and inſtrumentes, I being an apprentiſe to a Muſition. Likewiſe my turning the toppe of my toungue towardes my throate. Maiſter Darrell ſaide, that it is ſignified how I hadde vſed it to ſing filthye ſonges.
               
               
                  When Somers beganne his geſtures,
                  Ro. Cooper pag. 97. 98. M. Darrell affirmed that they were the ſignes, whereby the Deuill ſhewed the ſinnes that raigned in Nottingham, and did himſelfe interprete ſome of them, and by the courſe of his interpretation, many preſent ſeeing the geſtures which were plaine, did take vpon them likewiſe to expound them, affirming this ſigne to note ſuch a ſinne, and that ſigne ſome other ſinne. And in the end (quoth M. Darrell,) beholde did I not tell you ſo? This is the Deuill, By this courſe the people were very much amazed, as thinking the Deuill to preach ſo vnto them, and to note the ſinnes that raigned in that towne.
               
               
                  
                  T. Porter, pa. 205.
                  M. Darrell when the boy was in his fittes, and acting certaine geſtures, did interprete the ſaid geſtures, to mean and declare the ſinnes that raigned in Nottingham.
               
                  Iohn Sherrart, pa. 315
                  The firſt night that M. Darrell came, the boy acting certain geſtures, he the ſaid Darrell did interprete them, to ſignifie the ſinnes that raigned in Nottingham.
               
                  M. Bernard pa. 254.Somers did acte his dumb fitt, conſiſting of geſtures, which Maiſter Darrell did ſay, did ſignifie the ſinnes of the people, and when the boy laughed, (as he would laugh extreamely at the end of ſome of his dumbe geſtures), then Maiſter Darrell wold ſay, that it was the deuill that laughed, to ſhew the ioy that he had in regard that he had brought them to commit ſuch ſins, as thoſe geſtures ſignified.
               
               
                  Mrs. Gray, pa. 103
                  The dumbe ſhewes which Somers did expreſſe in his fittes that night, both Maiſter Darrell and all the ſtanders by did conceiue and apprehend, that the ſins raigning in Nottingham, and elſe where abroade, were repreſented vnto them very liuely: and ſo much (I thinke) was declared both by M. Darrell and others at that time.
               
               
                  Tho, Porter pag. 115.
                  I remember that the Lady Zouch, and Miſtreſſe Gray, had the moſt talke, and did eſpecially interprete ſome of the ſaid ſignes: and that when ſondrie that were preſent would aske what ſuch a thing meant that Somers did: they, the ſaid Lady Zouch, and Mrs. Gray would tell the meaning of it, what ſinne it did ſignifie.
               
               Likewiſe Maiſter Darrell himſelfe, although hee diſclameth for his parte the expounding of any of the ſaide geſtures: yet he is pleaſed to tell vs what ſins were then ſet out by Somers, in ſuch ſort, as Roſcius himſelf could not haue done it better.M. Darrell hiſtoric. 
                  This euening (ſayeth he), he acted many ſins by ſignes & geſtures, moſt liuely repreſenting & ſhaddowing, them out vnto vs: as namely brawling, quarreling, fighting, ſwearing, robbing by the high waies, picking, and cutting

of purſes, burglary, whoredome, pride in men and women, hypocriſie, ſluggiſhnes in hearing of the word, drunkennes, gluttony, alſo dancing with the toyes thereunto belonging, the manner of Anticke dancers, the games of dycing and carding, the abuſe of the Violl, with other inſtruments. At the end of ſondry of theſe, he laughed exceedingly, diuerſe times clapping his hands on his thighes for ioy: percaſe to ſhaddow out the delight, that both himſelfe, and ſinners take in their ſinnes. And at the ende of ſome of them, as killing and ſtealing, hee ſhewed howe hee brought them to the Gallowes, making a ſigne thereof.
               
               It is not vnlikely but that M. Darrell, hath made bold with his oath, in that hee denyeth to haue made then any interpretation of Somers geſtures, ſeeing that he doth not refraine in theſe words laſt mentioned, after a ſort to interprete ſome of them. Beſides, it is not likely that the womens expoſitions would haue carried ſuch credite, except M. Darrell himſelfe had beene an Actor in them. For within a Sonday or two after, they were of that account, as they were thought worthy to bee read publikely in the Church, as it is depoſed by Miſtreſſe Gray, and Edmond Garland in theſe wordes.
               
                  The next or the ſecond ſonday after,
                  Mrs. Gray pa, 164 Edm. Garland p: 175. M. Aldrige did repeate in the Church publikely the ſaid ſignes acted by Somers, with their interpretations before made of them, affirming that foraſmuch as they in Nottingham, notwithſtanding the admonitions of many godly Preachers, did ſtill continue in their ſinnes: God had ſent the Deuill to reproue them, and to make them aſhamed of their former obſtinacie.
               
               Vppon this authenticall reading of the ſaid (more then ſottiſh) fooleries, out commeth a ballade, wherin is ſupplied ſome want in M. Darrels hiſtory. Hee telleth vs that Somers did notablye ſet out by geſtures this ſinne, and that ſinne: but doth not expreſſe the manner how. Herein

therefore the Ballader hath ſhewed his skill, as you may perceiue by ſome of his rymes. He played the antike there in skornes, and flowted men in making hornes. And after that he did bewray, how men at Dyce and Cards do play. He ſhewed the manner of our Fardingales, our Buskes, and Periwigges, Masks, and Vales, and by clapping of his handes, hee ſhewed the ſtarching of our bandes. Much good matter may further bee found in the ſaide Ballade, very agreeable to the worthines of that exploite. And thus wee are come to the end of the firſt nightes worke, after M. Darrelles comming to Somers at Nottingham.
               
               The next day (being Sonday,) M. Darrell is charged, that comming to Somers towardes that night for that ſondrie perſons were then with Somers, which had not beene with him the night before,) he vſed the like ſpeeches then in their preſence, and in Somers hearing, that hee had done ouernight: vz. that hee the ſaide Somers was in his fittes ſenſeles: that the Deuill at ſuch times did ſpeake in him: that hee was troubled in ſuch manner and ſorte as the boy of Burton, Katherie Wright, and the ſeauen in Lancaſhire were vexed, when they were poſſeſſed: that hee then alſo tolde them, what kinde of fittes they had: what were the ſignes of poſſeſſion mentioned in the ſcripture, and how Somers by geſtures had ſhewed the ſinnes that raigned in Nottingham,
                  M, Darrell ad art, 24, & 26, pa, 7 with much more to the effect ſpecifyed. All theſe pointes Maister Darrell denyeth to haue beene mentioned by him that night: but the contrary is depoſed.
               
                  W. Somers p. 14. & 15
                  Vpon the Sonday in the afternoone, many reſorted to ſee me, vpon the report of thoſe thinges which had beene done ouernight. Vnto whome Maiſter Darrell repeated all that he had ſaide the night before. In the beginning of whoſe ſpeeches, I did lye as though I had beene aſleepe, and thereupon, hee telling them that

I was poſſeſſed ſaide alſo, that Katherine Wright, the boye of Burton, and the ſeauen in Lancaſhire, were in their fits altogether ſenſeles, and neither heard nor ſaw any thing, more then if they had beene eyther ſtockes or ſtones: and that hee ſaide was my caſe. He tolde them alſo what manner of fittes the ſaide parties had, and that I was poſſeſſed in the very ſame manner, that they were: alſo what geſtures the deuill had vſed in me, to ſhew the ſinnes that raigned in Nottingham: and in the end he added, that no doubt they ſhould ſee the deuill worke them again, (meaning the fittes which I had acted ouer night), before it were long. Whereupon, I (hauing lyen ſtill all this while, as though I had beene a ſleepe,) beganne to vſe all thoſe trickes, which I had done the night before, but with ſome more readines. As I did counterfeyte any of the ſaide fittes: euen ſo ſaide M. Darrell did ſuch a one, and ſuch a one: it is not the boye, but the deuill that doth them in him Theſe thinges made the people to wonder, ſeeing me doe euery thing almoſt in ſuch manner and ſorte, as M. Darrell had tolde them before, that the deuill would doe them in me.
               
               M. Darrell affirmed the next day at night,
                  Th. Porter pag. 115. 
                  (being ſonday) to thoſe that were preſent, (diuerſe being then there, which were not there the ſaturday at night before,) to the ſame effect, that he had ouernight, vz. that for a certainety. William Somers was poſſeſſed, that hee knew it by the ſignes of poſſeſſion mentioned in the ſcriptures, that hee was ſenſeles in his fittes, that when he ſpake or did anie thing in his fittes, it was not he but the deuill that ſpake and did them.
               
               M. Darrell did vppon the ſonday at night declare the ſignes of poſſeſſion in William Somers.Mrs. Gray pag. 164. Anne Porter, fol. 3.
               
               
                  On the ſonday at night in the preſence of many hearers M. Darrell did diſcourſe at large, of the ſeauen poſſeſſed in Lancaſhire, and of the boy of Burton, concerning the manner of their fittes, and ſaid that Somers had the like.
               
               
                  
                  Ro. Cooper fol. 7.
                  Vpon the ſonday at night, he heard M. Darrell diſcourſe of the ſeauen poſſeſſed in Lancaſhire, and of the boy of Burton, and ſaid that this boy did, and would vſe the like trickes that they did in flearing and laughing, and ſuch like.
               
               When M. Darrell had thus brought the people that were preſēt, into a great admiratiō of his pretēded knowledge and experience, of Sathans proceedinges with the poſſeſſed, and ſome of them to incline that Somers was indeed poſſeſſed as he affirmed: it was moreouer laide to his charge, that then appointing a faſt to be held the next day for the boyes diſpoſſeſſion, and mouing men to refrayne from the company of their wiues that night, for their better preparation againſt the ſaid faſt, he did take vpon him to foretell many thinges that would happen that day: as that they ſhould ſee verie ſtrange thinges: that Sathan would wonderfully torment the boy, and that hee doubted not, but that they ſhould perceiue by the ſignes of poſſeſſion and diſpoſſeſſion, that the boy was poſſeſſed, and that then he ſhould be deliuered from Sathan. M. Darrell denieth all the premiſes,M. Darrel ad art. 24. & 25 pag. 18, W. Somers pag. 14. ſauing, his appointing of a faſt, and mouing of men to refraine from their wiues. But the reſt is depoſed.
               M. Darrell told them that were preſent, what ſignes and tokens were ſhewed at the diſpoſſeſſing of certaine in the ſcriptures. He alſo then ſaid that the Deuill would ſhew ſtrange fittes in me, at the time of the faſt, whereby they might certainely know that I was poſseſsed, and that they ſhould further perceiue by ſure and certaine tokens that I ſhould be diſpoſſeſſed at that time, if it ſtoode with Gods glorie to haue it ſo. VVhich thing thus declared by M. Darrell, made the people verie willing (as I perceiued), to heare of the ſaid faſt.
               
               
                  Th. Porter. pag. 116.Maiſter Darrell tolde them, that the next day there ſhould be a faſte: that then they ſhould ſee, that God woulde worke great wonders if it ſtoode with his glorie: that then they ſhoulde perceiue

by the ſignes of poſſeſſion, that William Somers was indeede poſſeſſed with a wicked ſpirite, and that if it ſtoode with Gods glory to haue him diſpoſſeſſed the next day, they ſhould then perceiue that he was diſpoſſeſſed, by the ſignes likewiſe in the ſcriptures of diſpoſſeſſion.
               
               M. Darrell ſaid before the faſt,
                  Io. Wiggen fol, 6, 
                  that they ſhould ſee the boy do ſtrange things, and then named al the ſigns of the poſſeſſed in the ſcriptures.
               
               
                  M. Maior ſeeming to wonder at diuerſe ſtrange fits, which Somers had on the ſonday at night, M. Darrell ſaid,
                  Mrs, Gray pa. 164. 
                  that he had ſeen others in the like fits, and that he made no doubt, but that if they might meet together, and ioyne in prayer, they ſhould ſee him diſpoſſeſſed, except it were more for Gods glorie to haue it otherwiſe. M. Darrell did then and there ſay thus:
                  M Berefford fol. 9 
                  you ſee ſtrange thinges: but you ſhall ſee more ſtrange thinges done by this boye hereafter before his diſpoſſeſſion, if it pleaſe God.
               
               
                  I agreed to M. Darrels motion,
                  M Aldridge fol. 10 
                  to bee one of the Preachers the next day, vpon the comfort of M. Darrell: who affirmed that without doubt they ſhould ſee great good come of it.
               
               
                  M. Darrell did tell me before the faſt,
                  M, Aldred. fol. 5. 
                  that out of doubt I ſhall ſee the Deuill deale ſtrangely with the boye, and recited many particulars thereof, which I remember not. And further I making ſome doubt of the euent, and ſucceſſe of the ſaid exerciſe: the ſaid Darrell told me, that he made no doubt, but that the ſaide exerciſe would worke to good effect, in helping of the ſaid boy: and to that end he did perſwade the hearers then preſent openly to belieue the ſame.
               
               
                  M. Darrell ſaid (at that time) that out of doubt we ſhould ſee the Deuill ſtrangely deale with the boy,
                  Ro. Cooper fol. 17 
                  that wee ſhould ſee before to morrow at night, (if it ſtood with Gods glorie) that the deuill ſhould be caſt out.
               
               
                  Maiſter Darrell at the time did pronounce to all the people then preſnt,
                  Anne Porter. fol 3
                   
                  that they ſhould ſee the Boye doe many

ſtrange thinges and named them. Amongſt all which, I doe onely remember this, vz. That when the euill ſpirite went from him, hee woulde rent and teare him, and leaue him for dead.
               
               
                  Garland ad art. 17 pa. 175,M. Darrell affirmed, that the next day, they ſhould ſee Sathan wonderfullie, torment the ſaide Somers, and perceiue in him the verie true ſignes of poſſeſſion, and that alſo if it ſtoode with Gods glorie, the deliuerance of the ſaide Somers, ſhoulde be made manifeſt by the true tokens of diſpoſſeſſion.
               
               When the day of the faſte came, M. Darrel is charged to haue affirmed in his Sermon, that they ſhould euidentlie perceiue by the ſignes of poſſeſſion, that Somers was poſſeſſed, and by the ſignes of diſpoſſeſſion, that Somers ſhould be diſpoſſeſſed, if God would: and that afterwards comming to entreate of the particular ſignes of poſſeſſion, and ſo of diſpoſſeſſion, he vſed ſuch pawſes, as that the boye had leyſure to acte them in order as hee named them.
               
                  W. Somers, pag. 16.
                  Whileſt the firſt ſermon was in preaching (for there were two,) I did lye ſtill for the moſt part vpon a bed, ſauing, that now and then, I did ſtruggle a little, ſome being appointed to holde mee. But when M. Darrell beganne, then I fell to prepare my ſelfe, according to my inſtructions. After hee had proceeded a little way in his Sermon, hee did ſignifie vnto his hearers, that they ſhoulde ſee at that time ſtraunge fittes wrought by the Deuill in my perſon: whereby it woulde moſt plainely appeare that I was poſſeſſed. Not long after, Maiſter Darrell read or ſaide out of Saint Marke: Hee teared ſore, and then I pulled open my doublette, and ſnatched at the cloathes with my handes. After he reade or ſaide, and he foameth, and then I (being readily prepared) did foame at the mouth. At Maiſter Darrell named wallowing, I did tumble and wallowe on the bed, Diuerſe other kindes of fittes M. Darrell at that time did make mention of which I then did act ſeuerally, as M. Darrel

                  made mention of them. After a long time, which M. Darrel and I did ſpend in ſhewing of theſe fits (to the great aſtoniſhment of thoſe that were preſent): then hee drew neere to the time, wherein he pretended that I ſhould be diſpoſſeſſed. Hee told his hearers, that as they had ſeene mee before troubled by the Deuill with ſo many fits, and had perceiued me thereby to be poſſeſſed: ſo now (if it ſtood with the glory of God) they ſhould ſee me publikely deliuered, by thoſe ſignes which the poſſeſſed in the ſcriptures did ſhew in the time of their deliuerance. When he came to the mentioning of the ſaid ſignes, I applyed my ſelfe to imitate them accordingly. As he named the firſt ſigne, vz. the ſpirit cried: then I preſently cried. As hee named the ſecond, vz. that the ſpirit would rent him ſore: then I did as before is mentioned. And at his mentioning of the third, vz. he was as one dead: then I did preſently lie a pretie while, as though I had beene dead. Whereupon there was preſently a great noiſe in the hall, by reaſon of the people voyces, being greatly moued to ſee me ſo diſpoſſeſſed, as they thought.
               
               It falleth out in this point, that M. Darrell himſelfe doth not much diſagree from Somers.
                  M. Darrel ad art. 31. pag, 19, 
                  Proſecuting my matter (ſaith he) as my text gaue me occaſion, I made mention of fourteene ſeueral ſignes of a man poſſeſſed, partly out of my text, and partly out of other places of ſcripture: which I did, thereby to perſwade my auditorie, that Somers was poſſeſſed. And as I named thoſe ſignes, and did inſiſt vpon them, the worde and worke of God concurred together. So as Somers in his fits, or the deuill in him, did then acte ſundry of thoſe ſignes, euen as I read and inſiſted vpon them. As for example, I repeated out of my text (and he foameth) and then preſently the boy foamed: & o of the reſt. And likewiſe towards the end of my ſermon, I noted and inſiſted vpon the three ſignes of diſpoſſeſsion mentioned in the ſcriptures, and preſently the boy firſt cried, without any apparance

of life at all in him, and ſo continued almoſt one quarter of an houre.
               
               
                  Dar. hiſtoryThus farre M. Darrell vpon his oath, but in his hiſtory he is more free. There he ſaith, that he handled at that time fifteene ſignes of poſſeſsion: (but Somers lyeth there for dead onely ſome halfe quarter of an houre) that hee ſaid thus to his auditorie. Whenſoeuer one hauing an euill ſpirit, ſhall bee brought to Ieſus to be cured (which is when the meanes ſanctified thereunto is vſed) and lying there before him, ſhalbe handled in that manner as Somers is here: that is, rent ſore, crie and lie for dead, then a commandment is gone forth from Chriſt to the deuill for his departure, and accordingly he is gone forth. When therefore you ſhall ſee theſe things come to paſſe, whereof wee are told before hand, then let vs know, and be certainely aſſured, that the deuill is as truely gone out of this boy, as wee are now aſſured that he is in him. This laſt clauſe is the trueſt part of his depoſition. The one was as ſure as the other: both of them being very coſening prankes.
               But let vs heare how the people were affected. They brake forth (ſaith M. Darrell) confuſedly, and all as one man, when they ſaw Somers lie for dead, into lowde cries vnto the Lord, in his behalfe,
                  Rob. Cooper. pa. 100. 
                  as men aſtoniſhed. And Rob. Cooper ſaith thus: whē the people that were preſent ſaw and heard theſe things, they cried out moſt vehemently in the doing of them: Lord haue mercy vpō vs:
                  M Darrels hiſtorie. 
                  Lord haue mercy vpon vs: & ſo did M. Darrell with his hands lift vp as high as he could. The feare & aſtoniſhment then was exceeding great, there being none preſent (as I thinke) but that they quaked & trembled, & wept moſt bitterly. Two of the company (ſaith M. Darrel) there being preſent ſome 150. confeſſed their ſinnes with teares before vs all publikely. As it came to paſſe in the 19. of the Act. 19. ver. 17.18. & 20. euen ſo it fell out with the inhabitants of Nottingham after this worke. For

many were ſtricken with feare, & ſome came vnto me, confeſsing the ſame, and crauing mine aduice. And preſently after I had publikely vſed ſome words of exhortation vnto them (which was a weeke after the ſaid worke) they made choice of mee for their preacher: and not onely ſo, but flocked to the houſe of God, made haſt, and were ſwift to heare the word. And ſo the worde of God grew mightily in Nottingham, and preuailed.
               
               How ſuch impoſtors haue from time to time inueigled the people by ſuch falſe ſleights, it were not much to fill a whole volume. The popiſh crew of Monkes, Ieſuites & Friers could neuer haue gotten ſo much wealth & reputation, nor haue poſſeſſed the peoples minds with ſo great an opinion of them, nor haue beene able to haue drawne them to ſo great ſuperſtition and palpable errours, but by theſe and ſuch like counterfeit miracles & knaueries. And thus you haue the worthie acts of M. Darrell, from the ſaturday at euening, vntill the Monday at night next following.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. IIII. Of M. Darrels cunning inſtructing of Somers, by ſpeaking to others in his hearing of Sathans ſeeking to repoſſeſſe him, & of the acting of certaine trickes vnder a couerlet, from the ſeuenth of Nouember, vntill about the xxi. of the ſame.
               
                  THe Scope of this Chapter is ſet downe in the beginning of the former, & proceedeth with M. Darrels courſe, from the time of his pretended diſpoſſeſſing of Somers, vntill his ſuppoſed repoſſeſſion, vz. for the ſpace of aboue a moneth which was caried on ſo cunningly, as it was ſufficient to inſtruct Somers what he had to do, although they had neuer beene acquainted at Aſhbie, nor M. Darrell priuately inſtructed him at Nottingham.
               
               
                  Whereas it is agreed vpon, amongſt the chiefeſt of thoſe writers, (who take vpon them great skill concerning the caſting out of deuils); that Sathan doth ſeldome returne to ſeeke the repoſſeſſion of thoſe out of whom hee is caſt, as it further appeareth in the firſt booke: yet M. Darrell is charged, that he had no ſooner made an end of his ſermon on the day of the faſt, but that hee laide an other ground for a new coſenage, by affirming to his Auditorie, and in the hearing of Somers, that for a certainetie, Sathan would ſeeke to repoſſeſſe the ſaid Somers, and preuaile againſt him, except he were mightily withſtood by faith.M, Darr. ad art. 32. p. 20 Mayſter Darrell denieth that he vſed then any ſuch words to his auditorie, or to that effect. But it is depoſed.
               
                  VV. Somers pag. 17.
                  At the end of the Sermon, M. Darrel ſaid (as I remember) that very certainely the deuill would come againe, and enter into me, except very great care were taken to preuent him by prayer.
               
               
                  Ed. Garland fol. 4.
                  At Smalles houſe vpon Monday, (where the faſt was kept, and before M. Darrell and other preachers brought Somers backe to his maiſters) M. Darrel ſaid to the boy after the ſuppoſed diſpoſſeſsion, that the deuill would be buſier with him, then with any other: and that therefore it ſtood him vpon, to be carefull of himſelfe.
               
               
                  Tho. Porter fol. 3.
                  And when the boy was diſpoſſeſſed, M. Darrel ſaid: that now the boy was cleanſed, the deuill would returne to him againe, and bee worſe with him then before, except hee did withſtand him by faith.
               
               
                  Mrs, Gray pag, 265,
                  After M. Darrell had done his ſermon, he ſaid in the hearing of the people, that Sathan would aſſuredly ſeeke to repoſſeſſe him the (ſaid Somers,) and that without great reſiſtance by faith, and great care taken, hee would againe preuaile againſt him.
               
               
                  Ro. Cooper pag. 100.
                  When the ſaid Somers was diſpoſſeſſed (as it was pretended)

M. Darrell affirmed, that the deuill would ſeeke againe to repoſſeſſe him.
               
               Againe, M. Darrell was charged, that afterwards he affirmed alſo the ſame night, in the hearing of Somers, and diuers others: that Sathan returned the ſame night hee was diſpoſſeſſed out of certaine in Lancaſhire, and that ſo returning, he appeared vnto them in certaine ſimilitudes, as of a Rat, a Catte, a Mouſe, &c. and ſought to reenter at their mouthes: that he verily thought that Sathan would ſo deale with William Somers, except by faith hee were preuented: and that according to his the ſaid Darrels cunning inſtruction, Somers afterwards affirmed vnto him & others, that the deuill ſought the ſame night afer his pretended diſpoſſeſſion to reenter at his mouth,M, Dar. ad art. 23. pag. 17. in the likeneſſe of a Ratte. All this and euery part of it, M. Darrell denieth to haue beene vttered by him that night. Howbeit in another place, being againe examined, hee ſaith thus. At one time Somers affirmed, that Sathan did attempt to enter into him, the ſame night after he was diſpoſſeſsed,
                  M. Darrel ad art. 17 pag. 40. 
                  in the likenes of a Ratte. But that which he denieth is ſufficiently proued.
               
                  William Somers hauing ſet downe at large as much as is here obiected againſt M. Darrell (as ſpoken by M. Darrel vnto him priuately that night) ſaith:W. Somers. pag. 18. 
                  The ſame things that M. Darrel told to me, he alſo told that night to ſome others that were in the houſe (as farre as I remember). Vpon theſe inſtructions the next morning after my pretended diſpoſſeſsion, I affirmed (but falſly) to M. Darrell in the preſence of diuers, that the deuill ſought to haue reentred into me as I lay in my bed, in the forme of a Ratte, which would haue gone into my mouth, but that I ſtopped it with my hand. Then (quoth M. Darrel) to thoſe that ſtood by, I knew that ſome ſuch thing would happen: and further ſaid vnto them, that the deuill would aſſault mee many

other wayes hereafter.
               
               
                  Ed. Garland pag. 175.
                  M. Darrell the Monday at night (as I remember) affirmed to diuers in the preſence of Somers, that ſathan returned the ſame night that he was diſpoſſeſſed out of certaine in Lancaſhire vnto them againe.
               
               
                  T. Porter, pa. 116.
                  M. Darrell affirmed that night (the faſt being ended) or the next day, or within three dayes, in the preſence of Somers and others: that Sathan would out of doubt ſeeke to repoſſeſſe him: alleadging a peece of Scripture to that purpoſe: that it was his cuſtome ſo to doe: that he himſelfe had ſeene the experience of it in others, as in Katherine Wright, the boy of Burton, and the ſeuen in Lancaſhire: that he did vſe to appeare in diuers ſimilitudes, as of a Ratte, a Cat, or a mouſe, and many other likeneſses: that the Deuil ſo appearing, was vſed to allure them by faire promiſes, that he might againe reenter: and euen ſo he ſaid, he verily thought the deuil would deale with William Somers, & therefore willed him to ſtand ſtedfaſt in Chriſt, or otherwiſe the ſaid wicked ſpirit would repoſſeſſe him, and bring ſeuen worſe with him.
               
               
                  Th. Porter fol. 3.M. Darrell at his houſe after the diſpoſſeſsion, did pronounce to the boy and the people preſent, that after Katherine Wright, the boy of Burton, & the ſeuen in Lancaſhire, were diſpoſſeſſed, the deuill came vnto them againe at diuers times, in diuers likeneſſes, ſeeking to enter in againe at their mouthes, in the likenes of a Ratte, a Mouſe, a Dogge &c.
               
               
                  Ro. Cooper fol. 17.
                  M. Darrell ſaid after the ſuppoſed diſpoſſeſsion, and in the preſence of Somers, that after Katherine Wright, the boy of Burton, and the ſeuen in Lancaſhire were diſpoſſeſsed, the deuill came to them again the ſame night, and at diuers other times, in diners likeneſſes, ſeeking to enter in againe at their mouthes.
               
               
                  M. Hallam fol. 7.
                  M. Darrell ſaid, that the deuill did come to ſome of the poſſeſſed the ſame night they were diſpoſſeſſed, euen as they were ſet

at ſupper, offering to reenter them againe.
               
               Within a day or two after the pretended diſpoſſeſſion of William Somers, M. Darrell dealt with his maiſter Thomas Porter, that hee the ſaid Somers might go home to his father in lawes houſe, Robert Cooper, being a thing which he much deſired. Hereunto his maiſter did yeeld,W. Somers. pag. 18. ſo as he went to his ſaid father in lawes (as he ſaith) about the xi. of Nouember. And within a weeke after M. Darrell bought out his yeares, vpon this pretence, for that he wiſhed the boy to be of ſome other calling then a muſition, becauſe (quoth hee) in that calling, hee ſhall bee driuen to ſing many filthy ſongs.
               
               Thus William Somers hauing changed the place of his abode, it ſeemed that M. Darrell thought it neceſſarie to prepare that place as he had done the other. He was therefore charged by her Maieſties ſaid Commiſſioners, that reſorting to Somers, at Robert Coopers houſe, he affirmed to the ſaid Cooper and diuers others in the hearing of the ſaid Somers (making then no ſhew of any trouble) to the effect in euerie point, as laſtly he was charged: adding diuers other things: as that when the deuill had appeared to ſome that had beene diſpoſſeſſed in diuers ſimilitudes, they would ſometimes ſtart, and ſometimes bidde away with the Cat, that Ratte, that Dogge &c. that Sathan for a certaintie would deale with Somers as hee had dealt with the reſt: that hee would allure him by promiſes, and ſometimes draw him by threatninges: that if hee were not well looked into, he would caſt himſelfe into the fire, or to ſeeke to breake his owne necke, or by ſome other meanes to kill himſelfe, and that when Somers had put all theſe thinges in practiſe, ſauing killing himſelfe: then ſaid M. Darrell to Cooper; did I not tell you that theſe thinges would come to paſſe?
               
               Touching theſe pointes of M. Darrels foretelling that

                  Sathan would ſeeke to reenter into Somers, & what would happen in that behalfe, he the ſaid M. Darrell confeſſeth the ſubſtance of them: ſauing (that he finding what was collected by his foretelling in Somers hearing, what wold come to paſſe) his memory would not ſerue him, to ſet downe the particular times when he vſed ſuch ſpeeches.
               
                  M. Darrell ad art. 36. pag. 20.
                  Sometimes (ſaith M. Darrel) I haue told William Somers, that aſſuredly the deuill would returne, and ſeeke to reenter into him, except by faith and prayer he ſhould preuent him.
               
               
                  M. Darr. ad art. 16. pag. 37.
                  I haue told William Somers, that Sathan would ſeeke again to repoſſeſſe him, and it may be that I did alſo tell him, how the deuill did ſeeke to repoſſeſſe Thomas Darling. And hauing had talke with ſome others, I haue told them in what ſimilitude the deuill departed from ſome of the parties poſſeſſed, as they affirmed: as namely, that he went out of one in the likeneſſe of an Vrchine, and out of another in the likenes of an old man, with a crooked backe: and I haue had likewiſe communication with them, concerning the ſeeking of ſpirits to repoſſeſſe them.
               
               What M. Darrel hath not here confeſſed touching that which is in this place layed to his charge, he denieth to be true. But it is proued very particularly.
               
                  Rob. Cooper. pa. 101William Somers being brought to my houſe, M. Darrell told me that for a certainty the deuill would ſeeke to reenter into him: that the deuill had ſo dealt with the boy of Burton, & with ſeuen in Lancaſhire, & had repoſſeſſed Katherine Wright: that the deuill for a certainty would appeare to Somers in diuers likeneſses, would aſſault him with diuers promiſes, and many great thinges, and not ſo preuailing with him, would threaten him with many hurts & dangers. Theſe things M. Darrel told me in the hearing of W. Somers, being then preſent & well. He alſo at that time did further admoniſh me very earneſtly, that I ſhould not ſuffer Somers to be alone, and that he might be very carefully looked vnto. For (ſaith he) he wil otherwiſe caſt himſelf into the fire, or ſeeke to breake his owne necke, & by ſome meanes

or other kill himſelfe. And I was the rather encouraged to looke well vnto him, becauſe Maiſter Darrell tolde me, I ſhould not looſe a penny by him. Within three or foure dayes after theſe ſpeeches, Somers beganne to make ſhew as though he had beene troubled, (as M. Darrell had foretold): hee made mention of a blacke dogge that offered him gold and ginger. He ſaid that the Deuill would haue ſtopped his breath: Looke where a mouſe comes: now ſhee goes vnder me. Hee affirmed that the Deuill offered him a paire of veluet breeches and a Satten doublet: that he ſaw a rough vgly beaſt: that the Deuill appeared vnto him with a crowne on his head, and ſix more comming with him: alſo like a cocke-chicken, like a Crane, and like a Snake, like an Angell, like a Toade, like a Newte, like a ſette of violles, and Dancers, and that he ſtoode before him with a fowre-forked cappe on his head, &c. In all theſe new kindes of fittes, M. Darrell was ſeldome abſent, and in the beginning of them, he ſaide vnto me: See, did I not tell you, that all theſe things would happen? And theſe words of his foretelling of me of Somers trouble, and the other alſo of the care I ſhould haue of him: he vttered vnto me in the hearing of diuerſe. Whereuppon ſome of them ſaid, that I muſt be carefull for him indeed, leaſt otherwiſe hee might hange himſelfe, as one Richardſons wife did.
               
               Maiſter Darrel ſaid in the preſence of William Somers,Mary Cooper. fol. 1. 
                  that after Katherine Wright, the boy of Burton, and the ſeauen in Lancaſhire, were diſpoſſeſſed, the Deuill came vnto them at diuerſe times, ſeeking to reenter into them, in diuerſe likeneſſes, and that he entred into Katherine Wright, in the likenes of bread which ſhe did eate, and was again repoſſeſſed. And that the poſſeſſed in Lancaſhire, the boy of Burton, and Katherine Wright, would oftentimes on the ſodaine ſay, take away that Catte, that Ratte, that mouſe, that dogge, and that this boy (meaning Somers) would likewiſe doe ſo.
               
               I haue heared M. Darrell ſay in the preſence of the boy,
                  M. Pare, f. 4. 
                  that
                  
Katherine Wright, the boy of Burton, and the ſeauen in Lancaſhire, would many times ſay on the ſodaine: take away that cat, that ratte, that mouſe, that dogge, and after ſuch his reporte of them concluded: ſo this boy ſhall doe.
               
               
                  W. Somers, pag 20.And William Somers himſelfe. After I came to my fathers houſe, I beganne within a while to looke as though I had beene afraide: I did now and then ſtarte, and make mention of dogges, of cattes, of bulles, of lyons, and ſaying, when I ſtarted, & when I made mention of ſuch thinges, that they ſeemed to come towardes me. Afterwardes, I beganne to counterfeyte my ſelf to be much more aſſalted then before. I cryed oftentimes in my fits, pretending that the deuill ſought again to reenter into me, in the likenes of a man, a dog, a lyon, a ſnake, a toade, a newt, &c. & that he promiſed ſo he might enter into me again, to make me the wiſeſt man that euer was, and likewiſe to giue me gold, and coſtly apparrell, as veluet hoſe, and Satten doblettes. Alſo I affirmed, that the Deuill threatned me diuerſe times to hang mee, and to breake my necke. And all theſe thinges I did, according to M. Darrels inſtruction: and as he had tolde both me and others, that the boy of Burton, and the vii. in Lancaſhire had done before.
               
               After that VVilliam Somers was thus drawne on to the acting of his fittes laſt mentioned, and that M. Darrell (as he ſayeth) had renewed his two olde groundes of his want of ſenſe, and the deuilles working in him, and ceaſed not to procure euery thing hee did, to bee wondred at: hee the ſaide Somers deuiſed new trickes vnder a Couerlette, vppon this occaſion. Lying vppon his bedde with a Couerlette caſt ouer him, hee moued by chance he knew not how, ſome parte of his body, when hee was ſuppoſed to be in a fitte, and therefore ſenſeles. Whereupon hee the ſaide M. Darrell gaue it out, that it was the deuill, that made that motion vnder the couerlet: which

was ſuch an inſtruction to Somers, as hee ceaſed not to feede that error: M. Darrell ſtill moſt conſtantly affirming, to euery one that came in: how it was the deuill that ſo moued the cloathes, ſhewing himſelfe vnder them, in the formes of Kitlinges or whelpes.
               
                  Likewiſe, (ſayeth Somers) lying in my bed, I did ſometimes knocke and fillip with my fingers and toes, againſt the bedde ſides and feete: and this alſo was aſcribed by M. Darrell, as to haue beene done by the Deuill. Hereupon M. Darrell being interrogated, whether he had affirmed that Somers in ſuch his fittes was altogether ſenſeles, and that whatſoeuer hee did or ſpake, it was not hee but the deuill that did both, conſidering that then the deuill by his ſayinges, was not within Somers, but without him, hee the ſaide Maiſter Darrell confeſſeth: that he affirmed him to bee ſenſeles in the ſaide fittes, and that it was a wicked ſpirite without him,
                  M. Darrel ad art. 18. pag. 41. ad art. 5. pa 50. & ad ar, 17 pa. 39▪
                   
                  that made thoſe motions, and that the Deuill appeared vnder the ſaide Couerlette in the ſimilitudes of Kitlinges or whelpes, he himſelfe hauing ſeene, and felt them.
               
               Vppon this his anſwere, it being obiected vnto him, that Somers being troubled, and in caſe whileſt Sathan was without him, as hee had beene in the time of his pretended poſſeſſion, it ſhould thereby ſeeme, that hee was aſmuch poſſeſſed then as before,M, Darrell ad art. 17 pa. 39, his refuge for aunſwere was this: that thoſe kinde of troubles were not like any of the fittes he had in the time that he was poſſeſſed, but were of an other kinde, and different from the ſame. But it is otherwiſe depoſed.
               
                  Being oft at Somers fathers houſe during the time of his pretended diſpoſſeſſion, I haue found him doing the ſame fittes,
                  Ed. Garland pag. 201. 
                  as wallowing, tombling, ſtaring, foaming, and the reſt which I haue ſeene him before to doe, being at Porters houſe, during the time of his ſuppoſed poſſeſſion.
               
               
                  
                  M. Bernard pag. 254.
                  What time it was ſaid, that Sathan was ſeeking to reenter into Somers, I found him at his fathers houſe acting his fittes, the ſame, and after the ſame manner, that I had ſeene him acte them before at Porters, during the time of his pretended poſſeſſion.
               
               
                  Iames Alwood. pag 289.
                  A few daies after that I had heard that Somers was diſpoſſeſsed of a Deuill, I went to ſee him at his fathers houſe: where I found him doing all the ſame fittes in a ſort, and after the ſame manner altogether, that I had ſeene him doe them before, when he was at his maiſters houſe, and ſaide to be poſſeſſed: which perſwaded me more ſtronglie, that he was nothing but a counterfeyt.
               
               
                  Io. Sherrart, pag. 153
                  In the time, whileſt the deuill was ſaide to ſeeke to reenter into Somers, he had the like fittes in euerie reſpect (without any difference that I could diſcerne,) that he had before hee was diſpoſſeſſed, ſauing, for the running in his fleſh.
               
               
                  Ro. Cooper pag. 292.Somers fittes in the time of his pretended poſſeſſion, and in the time whileſt the deuill ſought to reenter, were all one, ſauing, for his foaming and wallowing, inſomuch as I tolde M. Darrell that I thought he was repoſſeſſed: but he anſwered me, that notwithſtanding the fittes were alike, yet the deuill was not in him, but aſſayling of him.
               
               Concerning the vanitie of the ſaid motions vnder the Couerlette, and M. Darrels fooliſh conceite of the Deuilles appearance in the likenes of Kitlinges or whelpes: beſides, that which Somers himſelfe before hath confeſſed, there are ſondrie depoſitions, which are ſet downe in a place hereafter more conuenient.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. V. Of M. Darrels cunning inſtructing of Somers, by ſpeaking to others in his hearing ſuch thinges, as he meant he ſhould practiſe in the detecting of witches: from about the xxi. of Nouember, vntill about the vii. of December.
               
                  AFter that Somers had played his pranks by ſtarting and rayling, and making of motions vnder a Couerlette, for the ſpace of about a fortnight: then M. Darrell brought him on to an other matter concerning the detecting of Witches: affirming in the preſence of Somers to diuerſe, that it was ordinary with thoſe that were lately diſpoſſeſſed to detect Witches, and that Somers would doe the like. Theſe thinges M. Darrell denyeth, ſaying:M. Darrell ad art, 1. pa. 49 
                  After William Somers beganne to detect ſome women for Witches, I haue affirmed at ſome time or other, that Sathan vſeth ſometimes to diſcouer by the parties poſſeſſed ſuch lewd perſons, as he had before ſtirred vp, and made inſtrumentes for the poſſeſſing of them. But I deny that euer I ſaid that Sathan vſeth in ſeeking to repoſſeſſe a man to detect any Witches.
               
               And here M. Darrell was very much plunged: for being demanded whether Sathan in ſeeking to repoſſeſſe Somers, did not by him detect certaine Witches,M. Darrel ad art. 7, pag. 58. hee aunſwereth, that for ought he could perceiue, Sathan did not ſeeke againe to repoſſeſſe Somers, during thoſe daies, wherein he detected certain for Witches. This anſwere ſeeming ſtrange, he was asked how he knew, that Sathan did not for that time ſeeke to repoſſeſſe him. Whereunto hee ſaid, that

                  he did ſo coniecture, for that VVilliam Somers did affirme no ſuch matter: adding that hee had noe other knowledge at any time, that Sathan did ſeeke to repoſſeſſe eyther him, or any of the other nine before mentioned: but their owne reportes, and ſome other outward troubles. If he had been here further preſſed, hee would no doubt haue ſtarted from this anſwere: or otherwiſe he muſt builde a monethes worke vppon this bare coniecture. But this is too farre proſecuted: conſidering that the point here obiected and denyed by him, as is before expreſſed, is ſufficiently proued by diuerſe witneſſes.Mrs. Gray, ad art. 25. pag. 165
               
               
                  I heard M. Darrel, affirme, that it was ordinary with thoſe that were lately diſpoſſeſſed to detect witches.
               
               
                  M. Aldridge pag. 88.
                  I thought that the boy by extraordinarie meanes had knowledge, that they whome he named were Witches: and I was therin confirmed by M. Darrels ſpeeches of the detection of witches, by certaine that he affirmed had beene poſſeſſed in Lancaſhire.
               
                  George Richardſon pag. 270.
                  One Mrs. Wallys and others did talke in the roome where Somers lay, of ſuch perſons as were ſuſpected to be Witches, before he the ſaid Somers did name them.
               
               
                  M. Pare, f. 4
                  I haue heard M. Darrell ſay in the preſence of the boy, that the poſſeſſed in Lancaſhire, Katherine Wright, and the boye of Burton, would often vſe theſe wordes: See, See, where the witch ſtandeth thus, and thus attired: ſee where he commeth, beholde him. And after that reporte of them concluded, ſo this boy ſhall doe.
               
               
                  Rob. Cooper, pa. 102.
                  When M. Darrell vnderſtoode that Somers had named certaine perſons to be Witches, he ſaide vnto me, that he thought he would come to this. And then he told me, that they who had been in other places ſo trobled, did ordinarily detect witches. So (ſaith he) it hath commonly hapned in Scotland. And that one M. Throckmortons children, did the like not long ſince.
               
               
                  As Somers named any to be witches, M. Darrell procured them to be ſent for, for that they might be tried by Somers, whether they were witches, yea, or nay. Wherein M. Darrel is charged with a very notable coſenage. When he had ſent for the firſt witch to be brought to Somers: hee told in the meane time to thoſe that were in the houſe, & in Somers preſence, that it was an ordinary thing, that whē witches came nigh to thoſe that were in Somers caſe, then they (in ſuch caſe) would ſcritch and cry out, & be greatly troubled, and ſo at the VVitches departure. And that they would lye quietly ſnoring, as if they were a ſleepe, when the witches ſtoode by them: and ſo he ſaid it would fall out with Somers: which comming to paſſe accordingly, as Somers hath ſet downe more particularly in the ſecond Chapter of this booke. M. Darrell was greatly admired, and the parties ſo brought vnto him, were thereupon reputed for witches, and by his perſwaſion, that Somers could not bee quiet, till they were made faſt, they were, as Somers detected them, committed to priſon. M. Darrell denyeth, that he eyther foretolde any ſuch matter, or that afterwards he euer affirmed the ſame to be an ordinary thing,
                  M. Darrel ad art. 3 pag. 50. 
                  with thoſe that had bin in Somers caſe. And he yeeldeth this reaſon for his ſaide deniall vz. for that (ſayeth he) I had neuer ſeen any ſo troubled before, (at the comming and going of Witches) but in mine experience: and namely, in Katherine VVright, ſhee was tormented and troubled onely, during the time, that the Witch was preſent by her, and remained quiet both at her comming and departure. And the like I haue heard of the ſeauen in Lancaſhire. By which his depoſition, it ſeemeth very improbable, that the pointes wherewith he is here charged ſhould bee true. For hee had neuer ſeene any troubled as Somers was, and his experience is to the contrary. But the Fox was neare driuen when

he tooke this muce, and hee ferreted out of it by verie pregnant depoſitions.
               
                  Ro. Coorper pa. 103M. Darrell hauing ſent for ſome, who were named by Somers to be Witches, he did affirme in the hearing of this examinat & diuerſe others then preſent, that whē the ſaid Witches were comming, the boy would be greatly afflicted till they came before him, and then he would lie quietly till they were gone, and afterwardes at their going away, would be greatly moleſted againe. And accordingly all thinges happened, as M. Darrell did foretel. At their comming he was vehemently tormented (as it ſeemed) when they came to the beds ſide to him, he would lye as quietly as though he had been aſleepe, and would ſometimes ſnore: but when they were going away again, then hee ſeemed to be tormented as before.
               
               
                  M. Darrell affirmed in the preſence of Somers, and diuerſe others,
                  Edm. Garland p: 176. 
                  that it was an ordinary thing, when Witches came nigh vnto one in Somers caſe: that then ſuch the partie poſſeſſed would ſcritch and cry out: but when they ſtood cloſe by him, that then he would lye quietly, ſnoring as if he were a ſleepe: and at their departure away, ſcritch and cry out again: & afterwards he ſaw Somers ſo do in all reſpectes, when diuerſe ſuſpected to be Witches were brought vnto them.
               
               
                  Mrs. Gray, pa. 156
                  I haue heard M. Darrell vpon occaſion of ſpeech ſay, that when Witches ſtoode by one poſſeſſed, the partie poſſeſſed ſhould be quiet: but at the comming in and going out of the Witches, the ſaide poſſeſſſed party ſhould be much diſquieted.
               
               
                  Mrs. Gray pa, 166
                  I haue heard M. Darrell ſay, that it was ordinary with thoſe that were in Somers caſe, when the Witches haue been brought vnto them, to be greatly vexed at their comming, & at their departure, and to lye very quietly whileſt the ſame Witches ſtoode by them.
               
               
                  M. Hallam. fol. 8Somers diſcouered his witches after this manner. Being in a fitte, he would amongſt other ſpeeches ſay, fetch mee ſuch a woman.

Now or euer ſhe came to him, he would ſeeme to be ſtrangely vexed, and more ſtrangely when ſhee approached neere vnto him. But when ſhe was with him, he was in quiet as if hee were a ſleep: but if ſhe turned her backe, then was hee troubled as before. And this was their cuſtome (that were his friendes about him) ſo ſoone as they had tried any woman detected, ſtraight way ſhe was ſent to priſon, and ſo they ſerued ſixe or ſeuen. This triall was ſufficient: Mother Boote (and ſo of the reſt) is a witch, and therefore with the reſt muſt go to priſon.
               
               
                  As Somers did name any for witches,
                  M. Aldridge pag. 88. M. Darrel procured them to be fetched out of their houſes.
               
               Somers naming ſome for witches,
                  Rob. Cooper, pa. 102. M. Darrel procured them to be ſent for, and bringing them to the boy, did afterwardes go himſelfe to ſee them put in priſon: ſaying, that the boy could not bee in quiet till they were laide faſt. And this courſe M. Darrell held vpon the boyes words: ſo as in two daies he procured to be impriſoned ſixe to ſeuen, vnder this pretence, that they were witches. Afterwardes alſo vppon the like occaſion, hee cauſed to bee apprehended, and examined, on Millicent Horſley and her ſiſter.
               
               Furthermore M. Darrel was charged, to haue growne to ſuch vanitie at that time, through the admiration had of him, eſpecially by his followers, and ſome other credulous perſons, by reaſon of the ſaid courſe which hee and Somers held for the detecting of witches: as that he affirmed, hee doubted not by Somers meanes to detect all the witches in England.
                  M. Darrell ad art. 13. pag. 52.
                   M. Darrell confeſſeth part hereof in theſe words. I finding William Somers to haue diſcouered thirteene witches at Nottingham, and afterwards: ſaid in priuate to ſome friendes of mine, that I thought Somers would bee able to diſcouer any witch, if he came where they were, or they came where he was: But he denieth the reſt, which is depoſed as followeth.
               
                  
                  M. Hallam. fol. 8
                  I heard M. Darrell ſay, that he doubted not by this meanes (vz by Somers detecting of witches) to diſcouer all the witches in England.
               Beſides, the folly of that, which M. Darrel himſelfe doth here confeſſe, might eaſily by himſelfe haue beene diſcerned; but that through the conceite had of him, he grew to be very impudent. For thoſe whome Somers had named for witches, no man could iuſtly blame.
               
                  Rob. Cooper. pa. 102M. Darrell (ſaith Robert Cooper) deſired the Maior of Nottingham, to make inquirie through the towne, if any perſon could charge any of the pretended witches. The Maior did ſo accordingly: and nothing being laid to diuers of their charges, they were all ſet at libertie vppon bonds, ſauing two. But this deuiſe of Darrels concerning the detecting of witches, is almoſt laide aſleepe. Of all the partes of the tragicall Comedie acted betweene him and Somers, there was no one Scene in it, wherein M. Darrell did with more courage & boldnes acte his part, then in this of the diſcouerie of witches. He ſendeth for them, procureth thē to be examined, carieth them before Iuſtices of peace, goeth to ſee thē impriſoned, maketh no doubt but that they are witches, and ſo beſtirreth himſelfe therein, as many thereby were greatly ſeduced,The written treatiſe. and had him in wonderfull eſtimation. One of his friends maketh this diſcouery of witches, to be one of the worthie fruites of that admirable worke of diſpoſſeſsing of Somers: telling vs, that witches are the Lordes chiefeſt enemies: that God would not haue them ſuffred to liue, and that the hiding & ſauing of theſe witches is iuſtly thought to haue beene one of the firſt and principall cauſes of ſlaundering this worke of Somers diſpoſſeſsing.
               
               But conſider how now the tide is turned. The authour of the briefe Narration, making a catalogue of all the worthy actes, that fell out betwixt M. Darrell and Somers,
                  
skippeth ouer the detection of witches, being the fruites of a fortnights worke. M. Darrell himſelfe in his Apologie in this matter is altogether ſilent, being otherwiſe very plentifull in the reſt. And this which followeth, is ſuppoſed to be the cauſe of ſuch a change.
               
                  M. Ireton, (being a man of very good parts, and yet ſomewhat ouercarried in this cauſe, being vnacquainted with the proceedings in it, & ſuſpecting no euill) is one of the men, of whom M. Darrell and his friendes haue greatly bragged. And it is true, that his credite wrought ſome inconuenience, through his facultie in belieuing thoſe things which were told him: albeit his ſpeeches ſtill did relie vppon this ſuppoſition, that if thoſe thinges which he heard were true, then thus, and thus. Beſides ſome indiſcreet oppoſition in points of learning, did make him to ſay ſomething, whereof more hold was taken, then peraduenture he meant.M. Ireton ad ar. 3. pa. This M. Ireton hauing beene examined, and particularly concerning the point in hand of detecting of witches, ſaith thus: I thinke that Somers did counterfeit thoſe fittes, wherein he tooke vpon him to diſcloſe witches, and am perſwaded, that he neuer had any skil by ſathans meanes, or otherwiſe ſo to do.
               
               By this depoſition, that deceit of Darrels is ſo daſht, as it is ſuppoſed we ſhall haue no more of it: and the rather becauſe it may be thought he was very weary of it, being diuers waies greatly plunged in it.
               
                  Somers telleth to this purpoſe one pretie tale. I cannot omit (ſaith he) how Maiſter Darrell and I had like to haue been foyled in this matter. Widdow Boote ſuſpected for a witch,
                  Somers pag. 23. 
                  being to bee brought vnto me, and I hauing notice thereof before, did ſhew my ſelfe to bee greatly troubled, both at her comming in, and at her going away, as my manner was. But vpon a cunning tricke vſed by ſome that were there preſent, I

was greatly deceiued. For after the departure of the ſaid widdow, ſhe was brought and carried backe againe into the chamber, and out, twiſe or thrice ſecretly vnder one of their cloakes, that had laid that plot as I afterwards perceiued: ſo that neither Maiſter Darrell nor I hauing vnderſtanding thereof, nor any ſuſpition of ſuch kinde of dealing, I could not put in practiſe my former trickes, but was quiet at euery ſuch her going in and comming out. Whereupon they that vſed this deuiſe, did preſently publiſh the ſame, and thereby affirmed, that out of all queſtion I was but a diſſembler.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. VI. Of M. Darrels courſe, from about the ſeuenth of December, vntill the 14. of Ianuarie, whileſt Somers refuſed to diſſemble any longer.
               
                  BY this time Somers began to be wearie of counterfeiting, hauing ſpent a moneth from the time of his pretended diſpoſſeſſion, in ſtarting & in playing his gamboiles vnder a couerlet, and in detecting of witches. And afterwardes for ought that M. Darrell could doe, he altogether refuſed to continue his diſſembling courſe any longer: and ſo made no ſhew of any of his prankes for the ſpace of fiue weekes. Howbeit, in the meane time M. Darrel for his part was not idle. For a general opinion being then conceiued, that Somers had counterfeited in al his former proceedings, partly in reſpect of ſome more apparant arguments thereof, in his trickes vnder the couerlet, and in his pretended detecting of witches, M. Darrel being greatly netled therwith, flew to the pulpit, and there rang out diuers peales with

great bitterneſſe againſt that conceite. And for as much as the opinion of Somers former diſſimulation, was the rather confirmed by his continuing well, and refraining from ſuch follies: hee the ſaid M. Darrell bent his chiefe force to perſwade his auditorie, that Sathan would lurke ſometimes about one (out of whom hee had beene caſt) ſuffring the partie to be well for a good ſpace, but that he was verily perſwaded, that Sathan would not giue him ouer, vntill in the end hee had repoſſeſſed him. Alſo he tooke vppon him to anſwere ſome ſuch treatiſes, as had beene ſet forth of particular perſons, concerning their diſſembling in ſuch caſes. With this argument of deuils hee ſo troubled his auditorie, that they grew very wearie of it, and ſome blamed him for it to his face. Theſe particulars M. Darrell doth after a ſort confeſſe ſome to be true. But the depoſitions are full enough.
               
                  I preached at Nottingham about that time ſixe or ſeuen ſermons,
                  M. Darrel ad art. 2 &c. pag. 35. 
                  vpon the 43.44.45. verſes of the 12. of Mathew (concerning ſathans returne to reenter) and in one of them I ſaid: that if any who were ſtraungers did doubt whether Somers was a counterfeit or no, I would bee glad to ſatiſfie them. But for them of Nottingham (I ſaid) that I ſcorned to confute them. which wordes being laid to his charge at that time of his examination, he did thus expound himſelfe: I ſcorned to confute them: that is, let me (meaning my ſelfe) be had in ſcorne or diſdaine, if I do confute ſo palpable an errour, In an other of my ſermons, at ſuch times as it was commonly giuen, out that Somers was a counterfeit: I did perſwade my auditorie to the contrary the beſt I could: affirming confidently, that he was no counterfeit. And both in my ſermons, and at other times I haue affirmed, that the deuill would ſeeke to repoſſeſſe Somers. What he hath not here confeſſed of the premiſes, he ſaith is vntrue. But conſider of the proofes.
               
                  
                  Somers pag. 19.
                  It ſeemed that diuers, who affirmed that I was a diſſembler, were induced ſo to thinke, becauſe they had heard of ſome, who hauing done ſuch thinges as I did, afterwardes confeſſed vppon examination, that they had altogether diſſembled. Some of them I heard my ſelfe make mention of a booke that was ſet out of a certaine maide in London, that had deceiued many by auoiding at her mouth pinnes and needles, and by doing of other verie ſtraunge thinges. Of this booke M. Darrell made mention in one of his ſermons, and did greatly blame thoſe, that becauſe ſome had diſſembled, did therefore affirme, that I was but a diſſembler. And in this point he was ſo earneſt, that after many words, for the iuſtifying of me and my doings, he ſaid, that they ſhould be condemned, who hauing ſeene the great workes of God in me, did notwithſtanding giue it out, that I was but a diſſembler. And in moſt of his ſermons he did enter into diuers diſcourſes of the deuils ſeeking to reenter into thoſe, out of whome he had beene caſt: and of bringing with him ſeuen other wicked ſpirits worſe then himſelfe.
               
               
                  M, Aldridg. fol. 89.
                  In fiue or ſixe of his ſermons concerning the ſpirits returne, M. Darrell did greatly reproue thoſe, that would not belieue that Somers had beene poſſeſſed: but gaue it out that hee had diſſembled: and likewiſe againſt thoſe, who did maintaine that he the ſaid Somers was not diſpoſſeſſed. He ſaid alſo, that for a certtaintie Sathan would repoſſeſſe Somers, except he did mightily withſtand him. He dwelt ſo long vpon that text, Mathew 12. concerning the ſpirits returne, that this examinate was much moued with it, and told him he did not well therein: affirming, that the people were cloyed with his often repeating of one thing, and much offended, in that as they ſaid, they could heare of nothing in his ſermons, but of the Deuill. But I was eſpecially moued with his often repeating of theſe words: euen ſo ſhall it bee with this wicked generation, applying them ſtill to the people of
                  
Nottingham, where I haue beene a preacher theſe twentie yeares: the people there being but as other ſuch congregations are, & as willing to heare the word of God preached, as any other in mine opinion.
               
               This M. Aldridge was then a great companion of M. Darrels, but not of his coſenage. Howbeit, when hee thought his freehold touched, he was moued with it. But what will he ſay when hee readeth the briefe Narration, wherein the Author writeth thus. Vpon Somers diſpoſſeſsion M. Darrell was retained preacher in Nottingham, that populous towne, hauing had no ſetled preacher there before this time, ſince the beginning of her Maieſties raigne. Either M. Aldridge or this companion are in daunger of an hard imputation: except it may be thus holpen: M. Aldridge is Vicar of Saint Maries in Nottingham: whereas this fellow peraduenture accounteth neither Parſons, nor Vickars, nor any that beare ſuch popiſh names, for preachers: the Doctor to be choſen by the pariſh, as M. Darrell was, is the preacher (forſooth) that muſt beare the bell.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. VII. How Somers about the xiiij. of Ianuarie fel againe to the acting of certaine fits, wherein he continued at times, till about the xxiiij. of Februarie, and how M. Darrell pretended that he was repoſſeſſed.
               
                  AFter that M. Darrell had ſpent about a moneth or fiue weekes in preaching, & reuiling of thoſe that held Somers for a counterfeit, & in dealing priuately with him, (as he ſaith) to vndertake againe his former diſſembled courſe: hee the ſaid Somers began to ſtagger, not knowing what was beſt for him to doe. For (ſaith he) by M. Darrels doctrine I well perceiued, that many did expect the Deuils aſſailing me againe, and ſo looked for my further trouble: whereby, together M. Darrels former perſwaſitions, I was the rather induced to bethinke me of my former diſsimulation, as perceiuing the ſame to tend to the iuſtifying of all my other actions: With this inducement ſome others alſo did concurre. Whereas my father in law (he ſaith) had receiued at two collections, made by M. Darrels meanes, the ſumme of twentie nobles, or thereaboutes, in reſpect of his trouble and charge, when I was in my former pretended fits: and likewiſe of ſuch as came to ſee me at thoſe times, diuers gifts in money: For as much as now by my deſiſting ſo long from my former practiſes, I felt ſome want of my former reliefe, & perceiued that my father grew very weary of me, vſing my mother very hardly, & threatning to driue both me & her, & my ſiſters out of his dores, I thought with my ſelfe, that it wold be beſt for me to enter again into my accuſtomed diſſimulatiō: that ſo my father receiuing more relief, I & my mother

might be better vſed, and furthermore, in reſpect of M. Darrels former perſwaſions, that if I would ſo doe, I ſhould neuer want.
               
               
                  Now whileſt I was thus debating with my ſelf, what I ſhoulde doe: there hapned a very ſtrange matter, which made me to reſolue with my ſelfe, to fall againe to my olde trickes. One Sterland of Swenton neare Nottingham, hauing been one day in the market at Nottingham, vpon his comming home fell ſicke of a baſtard pluriſie, as the phiſitions reported. Of this ſicknes he died, but before in his rauing he ſaid (as his wife and others affirmed) that I had troden vpon his heele, when he was laſt at the ſaid market, and that I had certainely bewitched him. Hereupon his ſaid wife charging me with fellony, before the Maior of Nottingham, I was committed to priſon, where I remained about an howre or two, vntill I was bayled by my father in law, and by my vnckle, one Randolph Milner. When I was in priſon, then not knowing what iſſue the ſaid falſe accuſation might haue, and in the reſpectes before ſpecified, I thought it the ſafeſt way for my ſelfe that I could take, to return to my old by as again of diſſimulation. Whereupon, whileſt I was in priſon, I affirmed that the deuill came vnto me in the likenes of a mouſe. And ſo about the fourteenth of Ianuarie, I beganne to pretend, as though I had beene againe vexed, being come home (after I was diſmiſſed) to my father in lawes houſe.
               
               Vpon this William Somers relapſe before mentioned, M. Darrell was charged before her maiſties ſaide Commiſſioners, that although it be accounted (amongſt thoſe who take vpon them the chiefeſt skill in caſting out deuils) to be a matter of eſpeciall difficultie to diſcerne when one is repoſſeſſed: yet he vpon the ſight of Somers in his firſt new fitte, did confidently affirme, and afterwardes preach, that for a certainety hee was repoſſeſſed, and that the former ſpirite had brought ſeauen more with him

worſe then himſelfe: blaming thoſe with great bitternes, who had before affirmed, that the boy was a couterfeyt.
               
                  M. Darrel ad art. 39 pag 20, & ad art, 3 & 5. pa. 34.
                  M. Darrell hereof confeſſeth thus much. I haue ſaide at diuerſe times that Somers was againe repoſſeſſed, and that the ſame ſpirite that was caſt out of him before, was returned againe into him, & had brought ſeauen more with him worſe then himſefe. And ſo likewiſe I haue preached.
               
               
                  W. Somers pag. 25.
                  When theſe things thus fell out, (ſayeth Somers) his falling againe to his new fittes, M. Darrell did grow to bee more and more in credite, it being commonly belieued, that I was indeed repoſſeſſed, as hee in his ſermons had foretold, that it was like to come to paſſe: which opinion M. Darrell did nouriſh aſmuch as he could, and was verie bitter vpon euery occaſion againſt thoſe, who had ſaid before that I was but a diſſembler.
               
               
                  Whileſt Somers was impriſoned, he ſaid that a mouſe began to follow him:
                  M Aldridge pa. 91 
                  and comming home to his father in lawes houſe, he caſt himſelfe vpon a truckle bed, and ſo fell preſently into a fitte. Vpon the ſight whereof M. Darrell told mee, that for a certainty he was repoſſeſſed. And afterwardes alſo, ſo affirmed in ſome of his ſermons in S. Maries publikely, blaming greatly, and alſo condemning thoſe in Nottingham, who had before affirmed, that Somers was a counterfeyte. And this hee did with very great earneſtnes and vehemencie.
               
               In this place it is to obſerued: how ſome of M. Darrels chiefe friendes haue left him after a ſort in two of the chiefeſt pointes of this whole action. One of them hauing giuen his opinion, that Somers did not diſſemble thoſe fits which he acted before the Commiſſioners, deputed from the L. Archbiſhop of Yorke: but that it was the Deuill in him, that played thoſe prankes in his body, could (it ſeemeth) be content to acknowledge, that he was poſſeſſed: but at the time of his examination, he wouls not affirme,

                  that he the ſaide Somers had beene at any time diſpoſſeſſed, although (ſayeth he) I haue heard by depoſitions and other reports,
                  I. B. pa. 137. 
                  that might induce me probablely to thinke that hee was diſpoſſeſſed. The other being a very raſh and head-ſtrong young-man, one M. Brinſley a Miniſter:I. Brinſley pa. 129, he at the time of his examination, doubteth aſmuch of Somers repoſſeſſion, as the former did of his diſpoſſeſſion. I am fully perſwaded (ſayeth hee) that William Somers was poſſeſſed with an euill ſpirite, and that he was diſpoſſeſſed: but concerning his repoſſeſſion, I am not therein ſo fully perſwaded: although I haue many reaſons to induce me ſo to thinke.
               
               Vpon M. Darrels reporte and preaching that W. Somers was repoſſeſſed, there was then greater reſort vnto him then before, M. Darrell ſtill perſwading euery one that came (as Somers ſayeth) that he the ſaid Somers was repoſſeſſed: and that he remayned in al his fittes vtterlie ſenſeleſſe.
               It might greatly be maruayled (by ſuch as haue not experience, how eaſie a matter it is, with faire pretence to ſeduce the ſimpler ſort): what eſtimation and credite M. Darrell gat by this new forgery of Somers pretended repoſſeſſion. Howbeit manie of the wiſer ſort, that were not poſſeſsed with the giddie humor of nouelties, (couered forſooth with zeale and ſighinges), did laugh this to ſcorne, as they did the reſt: & the rather, becauſe the boyes fits after his pretended repoſſeſſion, when hee was ſuppoſed to haue eight deuilles in him, were not ſo grieuous or ſtrange in ſhew, as when he had but one: which argued ſufficientlie M. Darrels vntruth, in ſaying he was repoſseſſed. That they were not then ſo grieuous and ſtrange, M. Darrell denieth it: but it is depoſed.
               
                  The moſt of thoſe thinges that Somers did at Garlandes,M Aldridge pag. 242.
                  
                  (vz. after his ſuppoſed repoſſeſſion), were meere fooleries
               
               
                  M. Bernard. fo. 13Somers latter fittes (hauing as he thought gayned ſufficient credite in his former), were more looſe and not ſo cunningly handled as the firſt were.
               
               
                  Ed. Garland pa. 197.
                  The fits which Somers had at my houſe, were not ſo ſtrange as thoſe were which he had at Porters houſe, but were more ſuſpitious and likely to be diſſembled, then other were, eyther at Porters houſe, or at Coopers houſe, after his diſpoſſeſſion.
               
               
                  R. Cooper pa. 292Somers fits in the time of his repoſſeſſion were leſſe grieuous then the other in euery reſpect. And I thinke if M. Darrell had not put the boy in mind of his foaming and gnaſhing in the ſaide time of his repoſſeſſion, he would not haue ſhewed thoſe ſignes.
               
               How Somers grew werie of this his ſaid relapſe, after he continued therein about ſix weekes, and of his wordes to Iohn Cooper, that he ſhould be quiet if he might get out of M. Darrels fingers, and be at S. Iohns: he himſelfe in the former Chapter hath made mention. So as now we are come to the xxiiii. day of Februarie, mentioned in the beginning of the third Chapter: becauſe thinges being made ſo cleare, that M. Darrell was a meere diſſembler, and a packer and contriuer in all the premiſſes: there was no great care taken to looke into his practiſes: during the time of the ſaid ſix weeks, whileſt hee was pretended to bee repoſſeſſed.
               The end of the Second Booke.
            
         
         
            
            The Thirde Booke.
            
               This Booke containeth William Somers publike confeſsion, that aſwell his pretended poſſeſsion, as his diſpoſſeſſion & repoſſeſsion & all hee had done or, pretended, touching the ſame, was counterfeyted and diſſembled, together with the oppoſition and deuiſes of M. Darrel and his frends, to diſcredite & impeach the ſame, from the time that he firſt came to S. Iohns, by the Maior of Nottinghams direction, vntill his departure thence. vz. from about the xxiiii. of Februarie, vntill Aſsiſes at Nottingham, that Lent.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. I. How Somers confeſſed his diſſimulation at S. Iohns in Nottingham, as ſoone as he was out of M. Darrels diſpoſition.
               
                  
                     COncerning the occaſion of William Somers remouing from his father in lawes houſe, to S. Iohns in Nottingham, (a place where the poore are ſet to worke,) Iohn Cooper the keeper there, depoſeth thus. Being oftentimes with William Somers, in his fittes, and diligentlie beholding the courſe of his carriage in them: I grew verie ſuſpitious that he did but diſſemble, and thereupon was well content, to haue the tuition of him, to make triall of the matter: the rather, for that the boyes keepers & friendes that were about him, were willing to pleaſe him in all his humors. This Cooper, after hee had ſignifyed to ſome
                  
                     〈4 pages missing〉
                  
                  
former preſumptions. For Cattes comming to him, he neuer ſaw any ſuch thing in his life, nor any other vaine ſuppoſed apparition. For ſhewing the ſeuerall manner of offences: he heard M. Darrell and others ſpeake of them, and of his owne fantaſie, hee deuiſed to ſhew them by demonſtration. Falling into the fire, he did voluntarily, being aſſured, that alwaies ſome bodie was neere him to catch him vp againe, before he could receiue any hurt.
               
                  Nich. Shepard, pa. 247.After that William Somers had made this confeſsion, before the Aldermen the ſame night (ſaith Nicholas Shepheard) he & I being to lie together: at our going to bed, he ſhewed vnto mee at my requeſt ſome of his trickes, in the preſence of Iohn Cooper, vz. the knocking with his toes, his motions vnder a couerlet, the writhing of his mouth, and how he thruſt his tongue backwards into his throate, with ſome others. About three or foure daies after,
                  Frances Wyrom. Henry Scot. Tho. Donnycliffe. Rob Spencer. Iohn Cooper. Nicholas Shepheard, acquainting one Fraunces Wyron with Somers diſſembled courſe: and he the ſaid Fraunces being thereupon very deſirous to ſee his trickes, the time was appointed. Somers prepared himſelfe: Foure or fiue perſons meete together: a couerlet was laid vpon the ground for the purpoſe, and ſo the boy goeth to his worke.
               
               
                  Nich. Shepard. 228.And firſt (ſaith Shepheard) he fell downe as though hee had beene in a ſwound: then hauing lyen ſo a little while, he wallowed and tumbled, he foamed at the mouth, hee gnaſhed with his teeth, he thruſt his tongue backwardes towardes his throate, and gaping, thoſe that were preſent looked into his mouth. Theſe trickes thus performed, he roſe vp, but ſtill pretending to bee in his fit, he leapt and daunced, as he did the firſt night that. M. Darrell came to him, and ſhewed the ſame geſtures, which he then alſo had vſed, and were interpreted to ſignifie the ſinnes of Nottingham. Then the company deſired him to ſhew his trickes vnder the couerlet, and hee hauing laid himſelfe downe vpon the couerlet that lay on the floore, I caſt a cloake vppon him, vnder

the which he did ſhew them: they that were preſent catching at the ſaid thing that moued vnder the ſaid cloake, being his hand, and he diuers waies preuenting them: ſometimes by clapping his hand vnder his ſide, and ſome times vnder his hamme. Laſtly, we moued him to fall into the fire: whereunto he would in no ſort yeeld: but after a while (as we were talking together) he came vnto me & told me in mine eare, that if I wold ſtand by the chimny, & be readie to catch him, he would on the ſodain fall into fire. Accordingly, (I not acquainting the reſt then preſent with our purpoſe) ſtood by the fire: and Somers ſtanding by me, hee did (ſodainly running a little backe) fall vpon his buttocks into the fire, and preſently I plucked him vp. With this his ſodaine fall into the fire, thoſe that were preſent, were greatly amazed: whereat the boy laughed, and then they demanding of him, why he would not caſt himſelfe into the fire, when they willed him: he anſwered, that if hee had ſo done, it woulde not haue ſeemed ſtraunge vnto them: whereas falling into it vppon the ſodaine, they ſaw it did amaze them. And in deed I perceiued them to be greatly affrighted therewith, as they then confeſſed, and doe yet acknowledge. At that time alſo they asked him, how he became ſo heauie as it was reported, and he willed them to come and trie him. The manner whereof was thus: He ſtanding vpon the floore, did ſhrinke himſelfe downewards, and then, firſt M. Scot, & afterwards Frauncis Wyrom, comming to lift him, and taking hold vpon the vpper part of his body, the boy clapped himſelfe cloſe vnto them, and ſeemed to bee ſo ſtrong and heauie, as they could not lift him. But Donnycliffe going vnto him, and by my direction taking him below his girdleſtead, he did lift him vp very eaſily. And then the reſt perceyuing their owne errour, did alſo lift him vp at their pleaſure, and went away fully perſwaded, that (as the boy himſelfe had confeſſed) he had in deed diſſembled in all the courſe by him formerly held.
               
                  All which hitherto is depoſed by Nicholas Shepheard,

                  is likewiſe affirmed from point to point, in effect by the depoſitions of foure of them: Henry Scot, Fraunces Wyron, Thomas Donnicliffe, and Iohn Cooper.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. II. How M. Darrel dealt with Somers, for the reuocation of his ſaid confeſsion, that he had diſſembled.
               
                  WHileſt thus ſome were deſirous to ſee the boy do his feats, and to be ſatiſfied, concerning the truth of his confeſſion, & the manner of his tricks, acted before the ſaid Aldermen of Nottingham: ſo on the other ſide, M. Darrell and his pertakers were wonderfully perplexed, how the matter might (as it ſeemeth) bee bolſtered out and ſalued: wherein, how Maiſter Darrel troubled himſelfe, it is not to bee doubted. For although he neuer had ſuſpected, that Somers would haue detected the ſecrete plottes betwixt them: yet becauſe hee had taken ſo much vppon him, and in reſpect of his pretended experience, had beene ſo reſolute in euery thing, it went to his hart: as well perceyuing, that thereby his credite in caſting out of Deuilles woulde bee altogether daſhed. Hee therefore to incounter this detection, hauing heard what Somers had confeſſed and done before the ſaide Aldermen, was charged before her Maieſties ſaide Commiſſioners, to haue gone vnto him at Saint Iohns, and to haue dealt with him very earneſtly, for the reuoking of his ſaid confeſſion: & for the iuſtifying of his former proceedings, in ſticking vnto it, that he was no counterfeite. This M. Darrell doth in effect confeſſe, in theſe wordes.

                  Once I went to William Somers, to S. Iohns, after that I vnderſtood that he had confeſſed, how in all his former dealings he had diſſembled, and laboured to make him reuoke his ſaid confeſsion, that he had diſſembled, and to affirme the contrarie.
               
               Furthermore, M. Darrell being charged,M. Darrel ad art 42. pa 21 that hee was ſo moued with William Somers at S. Iohns, when he affirmed conſtantly to his face, that all hee had done before was diſſembled: as that he pronounced him to bee in a deſperate caſe, and in the ſtate of damnation:M. Darrell ad, art. 10. pag. 51. anſwered thus: I did at that time vſe diuers ſharpe words vnto Somers, vpon the occaſion mentioned, but I did not vſe the words of damnation, or deſperatiō, or any words to that effect. But it is depoſed.
               
               Somers, hauing affirmed to M. Darrell at S. Iohns,N. Sheph. fol. 2. 
                  that he had diſſembled, he the ſaid M. Darrell told him, that he was now in worſe caſe then euer he was. For now he was poſſeſſed with legions of Deuils, and that if he continued thus, hee was in ſtate of damnation, and could not be ſaued.
               
               
                  Maiſter Darrell, vpon Somers ſaying vnto him,
                  Ioh. Cooper. fol. 21. 
                  that he diſſembled, grew impatient, and threatned him, that he was in ſtate of damnation.
               
               
                  M. Darrell, vpon the boyes affirmation of his diſſembling,
                  M. Shute. fol. 19. 
                  ſaid, thou art a lying boy, and wert poſſeſſed, diſpoſſeſſed, and art now repoſſeſſed with many Deuilles: and art in a deſperate caſe. Which I thinking to be vncharitably ſpoken, perſwaded M. Darrell to forbeare ſuch ſpeeches, and to comfort the boy by ſome good meanes.
               
               Againe, M. Darrell was charged by her Maieſties ſaid Commiſsioners, to haue ſought ſo many waies to haue withdrawn Somers from his ſaid confeſſion, & haue ſtuck vnto it, that he was poſſeſſed; as the poore boy was driuen to write vnto him, intreating him to let him alone, and to intermeddle no more in that matter, for his owne credit: and that notwithſtanding he ſtill perſiſted, vrging him as

before.Som. pag. 363. The tenor of the letter was thus. M. Darrell, my hartie commendations vnto you: This is to deſire you, that you would let me be at quiet. For whereas you ſaid that I was poſſeſſed, I was not: and for thoſe trickes that I did before you came, was through folkes ſpeeches that came to me. And thoſe which I did ſince, was through you ſpeches & others. For as you ſaid, I could not heare, I did heare all thinges, that were ſpoken, and knew all thinges that were done in the houſe, and all thinges that I did were counterfeite: and I pray you to let it paſſe: for the more you meddle in it, the more diſcredite it will bee for you: and I pray God and you,
                  M. Darrell ad art, 43, pag. 21. 
                  and all the worlde, to forgiue mee. M. Darrell hereunto anſwering, ſaith: I confeſſe that Somers did write vnto mee, to the effect here mentioned: and yet ſuch his letters notwithſtanding, I did afterwards perſwade him, that he ſhould not ſay that he had diſſembled his former fits, but confeſſe the truth: meaning thereby, that he ſhould confeſſe that hee was poſſeſſed.
               
               When M. Darrell perceiued that Somers, by no priuate meanes that he could vſe, would be drawne to follow his humour any longer, but did conſtantly perſeuer in the affirmation of his aforeſaid confeſſion: he the ſaid M. Darrel was charged, that then he ſought to worke for himſelf in the pulpit, and that ſo groſſely & ignorantly, (but yet very maliciouſly) and that he preſumed to preach: that Somers was not onely repoſſeſſed in bodie as before, but now alſo poſſeſſed in ſoule, which was worſe. And his anſwere hereunto is thus. I confeſſe, that I did both preach in one of my ſermons, and afterwardes affirmed ſo much to diuers,
                  M. Darrell ad art. 6. pag. 34. 
                  that Somers was not onely repoſſeſsed in body as before, but alſo poſſeſſed in ſoule, which was worſe. And the reaſon that moued me to ſay, that Somers was poſſeſſed in ſoule, was this: vz. Becauſe in ſaying he had in the whole courſe of his former fits diſſembled, he lyed therein grieuouſly againſt his owne conſcience, to

the diſhonor of God, & hurt of his Church. Conſider the gentle zeale of benefiting the Church, by his facultie and skill in caſting out Deuils. But wretched is his owne caſe, if lying ſhould be ſo dangerous, who hath ſo oft by the teſtimonie of ſo many witneſſes, forgotten his oth in this cauſe.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. III. How M. Darrell deuiſed two or three ſhifts, to haue auoided Somers confeſsion, that he had diſſembled.
               
                  
                     WE haue found by the premiſes in the former Chapter M. Darrelles care to haue brought Somers whileſt he was at S. Iohns from his foreſaid confeſſion, by perſwaſion and preaching. Now there commeth to bee conſidered, how, when hee could not preuaile thereby, hee deuiſed two or three ſleights, as well as he could, to couer ſo bad a matter.
               
               
                  Touching the firſt,
                  W. Somers pag. 30. 
                  whereof William Somers depoſeth thus; When my confeſsion before the ſaid Aldermen was blowen abroad, M. Darrell and ſuch as fauoured him, gaue it out, that it was not I, that had made that confeſsion, but the Deuill, and that my ſaid confeſsion was a ſure argument, that I was againe repoſſeſſed. Part hereof M. Darrell himſelfe confeſſeth: & for the reſt, an other witnes doth concurre in effect with Somers.
               
                  Somers, being at S. Iohns, & telling me and others preſent,M. Darrel ad art. 40. pag. 21. that in the former courſe of his pretended fits, he had diſſembled. I anſwered, that he lyed in ſo ſaying: and haue ſaid at ſome times, that the ſaid ſpeeches of Somers were a confirmation, that hee was againe repoſſeſſed. M. Darrell asked William Somers,
                  M. Shute. pag. 250. being at Saint Iohns, whether he had ſaid, that hee had diſſembled. To whome Somers aunſwered, what I haue ſaid, I

haue ſaid. I haue ſaid, that I haue counterfeyted, and ſo do I ſay now, the Lord forgiue me for it: & I proteſt before God, & before Iejuſ Chriſt, that I haue in this action greatly diſſembled with God and the world. Saieſt thou ſo (quoth Darrell?) But how ſhal I know that this is thou William Somers, which now ſpeakeſt vnto me: vnto whom I ſaid, that I thought that to be a vain & friuolous queſtion: for that Somers vſed his tongue & throat with other parts of his mouth, in as orderly & as naturall an habite at that inſtant, as any of vs all that were preſent could do: & M. Darrell, could yeeld no other reaſon to the contrary, but that William Somers might as wel aske of him, whether it were M. Darrell that moued the queſtion.
               
                  At the ſame time M. Darrell, proceeding with the boy asked him ſome other queſtions: as if he had diſſembled then, whether he could acte thoſe fittes againe. The boy ſaid hee could: let vs ſee quoth Darrell. The boy did diuers of them: whereupon M. Darrell, growing to be in a great chafe, breathed out his ſecond oracle: ſaying, that it was no meruaile though he could do them, conſidering that hee had more Deuils in him then before. Hereof M. Darrell hath not beene examined, becauſe it was one of the interrogatories whereunto hee refuſed to anſwere. For true it is, that after that he had beene examined diuers times about this matter, he found himſelfe ſo perplexed, as that he refuſed to be any further examined: ſaying, that his conſcience was troubled, in that he had aunſwered ſo much alreadie. Wherein hee is not greatly to be blamed. For although a lyer muſt haue a good memorie, yet by many croſſe queſtions, he may be taken ſhort, as it hath happened to him in many particulars. But to follow the purpoſe,
                  M. Shute ibid, 
                  thus M. Shute hath depoſed. M. Darrell proceeded with Somers into further queſtions. How couldſt thou foame ſo vehemently? ſend forth ſuch loud & fearfull cries? draw & extort thy

mouth to thy eares? frame thine eies ſo wide & broad? & ſo gaſtly to behold? &c. To whom Somers anſwered: I did nothing at the time and day of diſpoſſeſsion, but I can performe it, as abſolutely now. Then let vs ſee ſayeeh M. Darrell. Whereuppon Somers foamed immediately, after hee had a little prepared himſelfe thereunto, that the foame ranne downe on both the ſides of his month, and about his chinne. After that, he ſounded forth very lowde and fearefull cryes, &c. Herewith (as alſo in reſpect of ſome other ſpeeches,) M. Darrell being offended, was readie to depart the houſe: and being deſired to ſtay, and ſee the boy performe ſome other actions, he anſwered, that he would not ſtay any longer. For (quoth he) I am perſwaded, that hee can doe the like againe, in that he doth them by the ſame power, whereby hee did them before: but I will ſtand to it till death, that he was poſſeſſed, and was diſpoſſeſſed, and is now repoſſeſſed, with many deuils. And ſo for that time in great impatiencie departed.
               
                  When M. Darrell perceyued, that Somers acting of the like fittes voluntarily, that hee had done diſsemblingly, it beganne to be held more commonlie, that the boy was a counterfeyte: then thirdly, hee the ſaide Darrell, and his adherentes, turned their tale, and gaue it out; that his voluntary fittes were but toyes, and nothing like thoſe that hee had when hee was poſſeſſed. But the contrary is depoſed.
               
               The fittes which William Somers did acte,M. Shute. pa. 251. before M. Darrell at S. Iohns voluntarily, did very aptly reſemble thoſe that he had, vppon the day of his ſuppoſed diſpoſſeſsion.
               In the preſence of M. Scot, and others, William Somers,
                  Io Couper▪ pa. 295. did voluntarilie acte his fittes in like ſort, and as ſtrangelie to the ſight of them, that had ſeene him doe them before, but eſpecially, to one that was a ſtranger, they ſeemed to bee done very extraordinarily, as when it was ſaide, that hee was poſſeſſed. Howbeit, vpon the acting of them, (though indeede they differed nothing

from the former) yet I ſaide to the boy, that they were not ſo ſtrange, to ſee what the boy would ſay vnto me. To whome the ſaide boy anſwered, that now I knew them to be done voluntarilie, they might ſeeme not ſo ſtrange: but if I had not known them to haue been counterfeyted, they would then haue ſeemed as ſtrange as before.
               
                  France, Wyron pa. 276.I hauing beene preſent at Porters houſe, and at many of W. Somers fittes, in the time of his pretended poſſeſsion: theſe fittes, (meaning the voluntary fittes, which Somers had acted before him, & 4. or 5. more at S. Iohns) were as ſtrange for the manner of them, as thoſe that I had ſeene him doe in the time of his ſuppoſed poſſeſſion, and the very ſame for the kindes and qualities, and continuance of them, as thoſe were in euery reſpect. And beſides the caſting of himſelfe into the fire, being ſoda ine & vnlooked for of me (the boy hauing a little afore denyed earneſtly to acte that fitte by name) did affright and skarre me much, vntill Shephearde told me, that it was done vppon compacte betweene Somers and him. With this depoſition of Fraunces VVyron,Tho. Donnycliffe pa, 276, 
                  agreeth the depoſition of Thomas Donnycliffe, Henry Scot, and Nicholas Shepheard.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. IIII. How M. Darrell and his friends to diſcredite Somers confeſſion, did falſly reporte, that he was induced thereunto by promiſes, threatnings, and inchantments.
               
                  THe three ſleightes mentioned in the former Chapter, albeit they were of ſome force to content thoſe, who were deſirous to take any thing for paiment, yet were they not thought ſufficient, without ſome further ſtrēgthning: whereupon (as it ſeemeth) ſondry factions and ſlaunderous

deuiſes, were caſt abroad by M. Darrel and his friends, to diſcredite the boy, and all that the he had confeſſed, by ſurmiſing, and thereupon conſtantlie affirming, that Somers had beene induced there to ſpeake againſt the truth, by indirect and vnlawfull meanes.
               
                  Somers being at S. Iohns, there was a rumor caſt about the towne one euening, that the Deuill had carried him thence, and in his departure with him, had daſhed out his braines againſt a wall. This was of likelyhoode a ſimple deuiſe of M. Darrels groſſeſt friendes: but yet ſuch as it was, it wrought for the time. And thereof there are theſe depoſitions.
               
                  One euening, whileſt Somers was at S. Iohns,Nich. Shep pag. 211. 
                  two Shoemakers, vz. one Randall Triuette, and one Phillippes, hauing heard (as they ſayde) that the Deuill carrying him away, had daſhed out his braynes againſt a poſt, came running in great haſte to know if it were true.
               
               
                  I hearing of Iohn Bate of a reporte, that the Deuill had taken away William Somers, and daſhed his braynes againſt a poſte,
                  Randall Triuet. pa. 311. 
                  went downe to S. Iohns, to ſee whether it were ſo or no.
               
               Amongſt many wayes whereby men are corrupted, & induced to ſpeake falſly, allurements by fayre promiſes, haue not the leaſt force: which being very, well knowne to M. Darrell and his good friends, they thought it might carry ſome good probabilities, and ſerue for a ſhift, to giue it out: that Somers was ſo wrought and drawne on to affirme, that hee had diſſembled. But how vntrulie they haue charged him herein, the depoſitions following will declare.
               
                  William Somers depoſeth, that hee was not induced by any promiſes ſo to confeſſe, but that he did it willingly,Somers pa. 365. as being wearie of his former diſſimulation, and thinking (ſayeth he) that I could not vſe theſe wicked vices, that

I vſed bofore, but it would be ſpied, God put it into my minde to reueale the truth. Onely he addeth this, ſauing, that when the Alderman, and M. Gregory came firſt to examine him, he deſiring that he might be pardoned for his former follyes, and then affirming that hee would reueale all vnto them: they, the ſaid Aldermen and M. Gregory, promiſed to be a meanes for him to the towne in that behalfe. The men, who were chiefly ſuſpected to haue dealt with Somers (as here it is ſuppoſed) were Iohn Cooper, and Nicholas Shepheard,: whome M. Darrell procured to bee examined at Nottingham, by his owne Commiſſioners, touching that pointe: and thereunto they haue ſworne as followeth.
               
                  N. Shephea. fol. 17.
                  I neuer knew of any promiſes made to the boy, to confeſſe that hee had counterfeyted: but I remember that M. Iackſon promiſed, that if hee would declare the truth, hee would be good vnto him, and helpe him to a ſeruice in London: And Iohn Cooper thus:Io. Cooper. 19. 
                  I doe not know anie that perſwaded Somers to confeſſe himſelfe to be diſſembler.
               
               
                  pag. 343.
                  Richard Hunt, Anchor Iackſon, and William Freeman, Aldermen of Nottingham, & William Gregory Town-cleark: do affirme, that repayring to William Somers, at S. Iohns, he made this ſuite vnto them, vz. that they would be a meanes to procure the townes fauour towardes him▪ ſo that hee might not be puniſhed for any of his follyes paſt, and that he might bee ſent to London, out of that Country, to auoyd diſgrace: and then he ſayde hee would diſcloſe the ſecretes of his ſuppoſed poſſeſsion. Whereupon they promiſing him, that if they found him to deale trulie, they would be a meanes for him, as he deſired, hee ſhewed them all his trickes, together with the ſeuerall wayes, how hee did acte them: as it is before ſet downe in the firſt Chapter.
               Againe, that which ſaide of the force of promiſes,

what they are able to worke, may alſo be verifyed of threatninges: and therefore conſidering that (as they ſay,) euerie thing eeketh. M. Darrell and his adherentes haue laboured to impeach the aforeſaid confeſsion of Somers,
                  M. Darrels Apolo. by giuing it out, that he was moued thereunto by terror, and threatninges. But vpon what ſlender groundes they haue ſo done: it will partlie appeare by the depoſition of thoſe, whome M. Darrell himſelfe procured to bee examined at Nottingham: and by the Teſtimonies alſo of others.
               
                  Iohn Couper ſayeth, that Somers,
                  Io. Couper fol 16. & 17 (after his comming to S. Iohns) did pretend himſelfe, thrice within a day or two to haue certaine fittes. Whereupon the ſaide Couper, putting at one time ſondrie wiues out of the houſe, (at whoſe comming he the ſaide Somers, did fall into one of the ſaide fittes,) and then giuing him ſome wordes of correction; vz. threatning to whip him, he the ſaide Somers preſentlie roſe vp.
               
               Alſo Nicholas Shepheard confeſſeth, that in one of the boyes fittes at S. Iohns, hee threatned to haue a paire of pincers to pinch him by the toes, if hee vſed thoſe trickes: and in an other place alſo (as it is before ſpecifyed,) he ſayeth, that vpon his ſaide threatning wordes, Somers being acting certain trickes, hee the ſaide Somers gaue them ouer, and neuer vſed them afterwardes, whileſt hee was at S. Iohns. By neyther of theſe depoſitions it can be collected, that they threatned the boy, to ſay he had diſſembled, or that thereby he was induced ſo to affirm. But by M. Darrels owne rule, in that Somers being in a fitte, heard their ſaide threatning ſpeeches, and riſing vp, had no more fittes,M. Hurt. M. Iackſon. M, Freeman. M. Gregory pa. 345. whileſt hee was in that place, it ſeemeth to be apparant that he was a diſſembler.
               The ſaide M. Hurt, M. Iackſon, M. Freeman, and M Gregorie, doe further alſo teſtifie, that after William Somers had

ſhewed vnto them his fittes, with the manner of the doing of thē, he did acknowledge that all he had formerlie done, when he was ſuppoſed that he was poſſeſſed, was diſſembled, and done by himſelf voluntarily, without the aſſiſtance of any Diuell or ſpirite: which he knew to be ſo, for that he was (as he ſaide) in good and perfect memory, at the doing of euery thing: and conſtantly affirmed, that whatſoeuer hee had then confeſſed vnto them, hee had done it of his owne free will, without compulſion anie wayes.
               
               Moreouer, for a ſurcharge vnto the ſaide promiſes and threatninges, it was alſo giuen out by M. Darrell, or his adherents, that the ſaid Somers, whileſt he was at S. Iohns, was compelled through ſorcery and charmes, vſed by one Nicholas Aire or ſome others, to ſay that hee had diſſembled: inſomuch that (as it ſeemeth) ſome were examined by M. Darrels means at Nottingham, vpon that point. But nothing was proued, the conceite proceeding from a ſhifting and detracting humor.
               
                  Somers. pag. 365.
                  William Somers, when hee heard of this reporte, writte therof thus. Be it knowne vnto all men, &c. that I did confeſſe my counterfeyting voluntarily, without any witchcraft, ſorcery, oyntementes, papiſtry, or comurations, or any other vnlawfull meanes.
               
               
                  Io. Cooper fol 16.
                  Iohn Cooper depoſed ſayeth, that hee neuer knew one Nicholas Aire to haue acceſſe to the boy, whileſt he was at S. Iohns, to his knowledge. Of all likelyhood, this Ayre was ſuſpected by M. Darrell, to be eyther a Witch or a Coniurer: and then if he were with the boy at all, it was ſufficient for M. Darrell to worke vpon, and to enforce the ſaide effect of ſorcery. But the ſurmiſe of charming was pretie. One M. Gregory finding by Somers wordes, that his legges were ſo 
                     •
                  ore, that hee could not acte his trickes, hee the ſaide M. Gregory gaue direction to the boyes keepers, that

they ſhould annoint them with ſome oyle, whereby hee might be the more nimble to ſhew them. Now forſooth, this oyle was eyther charmed, or when the boye was annointed, ſome charmes were vſed: and ſo he ſaide that he had counterfeyted.
               Touching this graue point, there are theſe depoſitions. William Somers anſwered, that his legges were ſo ſore,
                  Nich. Shepard. fol. 17. 
                  he could not ſhew his trickes, and then M. Gregory commaunded, that ſome ointment might he giuen him: which I did, and the boye annointed his knees. And Iohn Cooper: It is true that there was an ointment brought to Somers, by Nicholas Shepheard,Fol. 16 
                  appointed thereunto by M. Gregory, with the which Somers was annointed, becauſe hee might bee more nimble to ſhew his trickes: But wordes of charme, I heard not at the annointing of him But hereof to much: becauſe M. Darrell (as it ſeemeth) being aſhamed of this ridiculous ſlaunder, hath in his Apologie, where he hath ſet downe the reſt, omitted this.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. V. Of M. Darrels ridiculous pretence, that Somers was induced by the Deuill in forme of a blacke dogge, and an Aſſe, to ſay hee had diſſembled.
               
                  
                     •
                  Eaſt there might be any defect aſcribed vnto the ſaid promiſes, or threatninges, or ſorcery, or charms mentioned in the former chapter, as being inſufficient to draw Somers vnto his ſaide confeſsion, the deuill is brought in by M. Darrell and his friendes, as a chiefe Actor to that effect: who appearing vnto him forſooth, firſt in the likenes of a blacke dogge, and then of an Aſſe, perſwaded him to affirme, that he had diſſembled. The beginning of this ſhifte may not be concealed.
               
                  
                  William Somers hauing affirmed before the Commiſſioners deputed from Yorke, that he had not diſſembled, was asked,Iohn Brinſley. pa, 132.
                   why he had then ſaid before, that hee had diſſembled. To whome (as the tale goeth) he made this anſwere: the blacke dogge with abagge of golde: and being able to goe no further, fell downe into an other fitte. It had been well, if hee had made an end of his anſwere, before hee ſo fell,page. 124. that ſo the ſenſe might haue beene perfect. But it forceth not. For one George Small depoſed, hath made it vppe: Who reporting his ſaide anſwere, deliuereth it thus. The boye offered twiſe or thrice to haue anſwered, before hee coulde anſwere, his winde ſeeming to bee ſtopt: but at the laſt ſayde, that hee had ſeene a blacke Dogge, which blacke Dogge, had induced him to ſay, that hee had diſſembled. The reſt that were preſent, could heare nothing (it ſeemeth,) but his ſaid abrupt ſpeech, vz, the blacke dogge with the bag of golde: but this fellow was of a quicker eare.
               
                  Somers being hereof examined, telleth vs this ſtorie. It had beene a thing of courſe with him, (as hee ſayeth) in thoſe his pretended fits, when Sathan was ſaid to ſeeke to repoſſeſſe him, to name a blacke Dog amongſt other ſimilitudes, (wherin M. Darrell had affirmed, the deuill was accuſtomed to ſeek the repoſſeſsiō of thoſe, out of whom he had been caſt,) which blacke dogge he fayned then to haue allured him with golde and faire promiſes, that hee might again reenter. The remembrance of which his former inſtruction and practiſe, cauſed him to name the ſaid blacke dogge with a bag of golde. Now for that hee had left his ſaide ſpeech imperfect, and alſo vpon ſome other occaſions, he the ſaide Somers being ſent by the ſaid commiſsioners, to one Edmond Garlandes houſe: he the ſaide Garland demanded of him, why he had affirmed whilſt he

was at S. Iohns, that he had diſſembled: ſeeing that hee had now affirmed the contrarie before the ſaid Commiſſioners. Whereunto Somers anſwering (as he ſaith) in his knauerie, told him: that being at S. Iohns, a thing did appeare vnto him, in the likenes of a blacke Dogge, and then of an Aſſe, which perſwaded him, partly by promiſes, and partly by threatnings, to ſay that he had diſſembled, and that if hee would yeeld therein, he ſhould doe any thing that he would. This tale of Somers was no ſooner vnderſtood, but it was giuen forth, that whereas there was a blacke Dogge by hap in the chamber, whileſt Somers was acting his trickes before the ſaide Commiſſioners: the ſaid blacke dogge was out of queſtion the Deuill, that had willed the boy to ſay he had diſſembled, the dogge belonging in deede to a Spurrier in Nottingham. Of this idle conceit M. Brinſley had beene a chiefe ſpreader, relying (as he ſaith) vpon the reportes of M. Ireton, and M. Leigh. Touching M. Leigh hee reporteth that he the ſaid M. Leigh, ſeeing the Dogge at the chamber dore, did thinke the dogs eyes did gloare like fire. But M. Ireton, and M. Leigh themſelues being depoſed, do teſtifie hereof as followeth.
               
                  The blacke Dogge,
                  M. Leigh. pag. 266. 
                  which was ſaid to be in the place where the Commiſsioners ſate, was a blacke Spaniel, which ſince M. Hurt hath ſhewed to me (as I verily thinke) in the market place.
               
               
                  A ſpeech or conceite was raiſed (ſaith M. Ireton) I know not how, that the ſaid blacke dogge was a Deuill:
                  M. Ireton. 336. 
                  which I thinke to be a meere toy, vnderſtanding that it was a Spurriers dogge.
               
               
                  I ſaw a blacke rough Dogge in the Chamber whileſt the boy lay in his trickes: which Dogge was one Thomas Clarkes,Iohn Cooper. 202. 
                  a Spurriar in Nottingham, and I doe thinke in my conſcience, that it was the ſame, that was about William Somers there & none other.
               
               Now M. Darrell building his Apologie vpon ſuch liesApologie.
                  
and fooleries, telleth vs this matter very grauely in this ſorte. Sathan viſiblie appearing vnto Somers (as his vſuall manner is to thoſe he poſſeſſeth) ſometimes promiſed him golde, and that he would be at hand, to doe thoſe things for him, he had done, howſoeuer he would haue him, if he would ſay he had counterfeyted: at other times Sathan alſo threatned to pull him in pieces, if he would not ſay ſo. A man would thinke by theſe confident wordes, that M. Darrell had beene preſent, and a witnes of the Deuils ſaid ſpeeches: whereas if he bee well preſſed, you ſhall find he hath nothing but the premiſes to ground vpon: beſides his great learning, wherby he affirmeth, like a coſening impoſtor, what Sathans cuſtome is in ſuch caſes.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. VI. How M. Darrell hath falſly affirmed, that William Somers was induced to ſay he had diſſembled, for feare of hanging: whereas he falling into his fittes before the Commiſsioners at Nottingham, (vpon a former compact) the feare of hanging was one of the chiefeſt cauſes, that he then affirmed, that hee had not diſſembled.
               
                  
                     IT ſhould ſeeme, that M. Darrell hath a good vaine in teaching: & that Somers had a ſtrong retentiue facultie in holding of that which hee hath learned, in that hee was ſo hardly drawne, as it is pretended, to confeſſe that he had diſſembled. For beſides that which hitherto hath beene reported, of the ſaid promiſes, threatnings, ſorcerie, charmings, and the deuill himſelfe: there is added a fixt inducement, vz. the feare of hanging: hee

being ſlaundred to haue bewitched one Stirlande to death. Whereof Maiſter Darrell telleth vs:
                  Apologie. that vndoubtedly, if hee had ſtoode to the truth, and neuer acknowledged any counterfeyting, hee had beene arraigned and ſore laide at for his life. Now the prouerbe is, life is ſweete, and who almoſt will not make a lie for the ſauing of it. Aſſuredly, this fellow through his acquaintance with Sathan, (as it ſhould ſeeme) is growne to extraordinarie and preſumptuous boldneſſe: not ſhaming to ſay any thing that may ſerue his turne.
               
               
                  For the clearing therefore of this vntruth: Somers before hath depoſed, that one cauſe why, about the foureteenth day of Ianuarie 1597. he fell againe to thoſe fittes, (whereupon Maiſter Darrel) affirmed that he was repoſſeſſed) was this, vz. The feare of ſuch daunger,M. Crouen. fol. 15. as hee otherwiſe might haue fallen into, by reaſon of the ſaid accuſation, concerning his bewitching of Stirland to death. And this depoſition of Somers, is ſtrengthened with that which M. Crauen hath hereof depoſed to this purpoſe, ſaying: that one of the reaſons which moued him to think, that Somers diſſembled, was: becauſe that after his releaſe, vz. from acting of ſuch fittes as hee ſhewed, when the Deuill was pretended to reenter into him, at the time of his detecting of witches, hee neuer had any fitte, for ought hee knew, till he was bound ouer to the Aſsizes for a witch.
               
                  Beſides, after that Somers vpon that occaſion, and ſome others, fell to his old trickes, he continued in them about ſixe weekes, & did not make his diſſimulation publikely knowne, for all that time, and till his comming to Saint Iohns.
               
                  So as it is apparant, that Somers for feare of hanging, fel again to his former by ace of diſſimulation: knowing, that thereby he ſhould be ſure to be defended and vpheld by
                  
M. Darrell and his friends, ſo farre forth as they were able themſelues, or by any other meanes that they could procure on his behalfe. It was therefore too much preſumption in M. Darrell to tell vs: that he was drawne to ſay hee had diſſembled, for feare of hanging. But what, if it was the feare of hanging, that cauſed him not onely to fall to his olde courſe of diſſimulation, (as is before expreſſed,) but likewiſe (after hee had confeſſed for the ſpace of a moneth together, that in all his former courſes he had diſſembled) to deny the ſame before M. Darrels Cōmiſsioners, and to affirme for his ſafetie that hee had not diſſembled? Surely, it will ſo fall out, if you can be content to haue the ſame by degrees, made manifeſt vnto you: as firſt why Somers fel into his fits before the ſaid Commiſſioners, and then why hauing ſo begun, he was driuen to affirme, that he had not diſſembled.
               
               
                  Somers. pag. 31.
                  Concerning the firſt, Somers depoſeth thus. It being knowne, that I was to appeare before the Commiſsioners, Nicholas Shepheard, and others moued me, that when I ſhould come before them, I ſhould ſhew ſome of my trickes in ſuch manner, and forme as I had before done them, and not riſe againe, vntill M. Mayor ſhould call me, that thereby (ſay they) it may plainely appeare to the Commiſsioners, that whatſoeuer thou haſt done before, was done of thine owne accord, and meerly counterfeited. This counſell being agreeable to M. Mayors deſire (as I was informed) I did willingly yeeld vnto it.
               
                  Iob. Cooper. fol 21.
                  Somers fell into a fit at Nottingham, before the Commiſſioners from the Lord Archbiſhop of Yorke, to the thinking of the beholders, that he was repoſſeſſed: where in truth, that very fit was determined of, about ſeuen daies before his comming before them, vz. that he ſhould fall into a fit before them, and lie in the ſame,Nich. Shepard. fol. 2. vntill M. Mayor ſhould call him: and accordingly M. Mayor was acquainted herewith.
               
                  
                  Somers told me,Nich. Shepard. fol 2 that he would fall into a fit before the Commiſsioners, and would riſe againe at M. Mayors call, but at no mans els.
               I well remember,VV. Freeman. pag. 377. that about a weeke before my Lord of Yorks Comiſsion was ſet on, Iohn Cooper or Nicholas Shepheard came to my houſe, and told me, that William Somers, when he did appeare before the Commiſsioners to be examined, he would fall downe into his fits, & lie ſtill on the ground, vntill M. Maior (being one of the Commiſsioners) ſhould bid him ariſe. And further the ſaid Cooper, or Shepheard ſaid, that they would acquaint M. Mayor with Somers purpoſe, that he might call vpon him, and bid him riſe, and ſo ſatiſfie the company of his counterfeyting.
               
                  Cooper & Shepheard being the boyes keepers at S. Iohns,Peter Clark, the Mayor, pag. 377. did acquaint me with a determination, that Somers had to fall into a fit, before vs that were Commiſsioners, and that I ſhould haue called him vp from forth the ſaid fitte: at which call hee would ariſe, ſo to ſatiſfie all men, that it was but diſſembled. Of which practiſe they acquainted me, at the leaſt a weeke before the Commiſsion was ſet on.
               
                  Now for the ſecond point, let Somers proceed: and the rather becauſe that which he ſaith is otherwiſe depoſed vnto very fully. Vpon the ſaid agreement, I appearing (ſaith Somers) before the Commiſsioners, and after ſome ſpeeches had with me (by ſome of them) fel downe, & plaid diuers of my tricks, as I was accuſtomed to doe in my pretended fits. There I continued tumbling & acting my tricks for a long time, ſtill expecting when M. Mayor would calme. Whileſt I was thus tumbling, two did pricke mee with pinnes: one in the hande, and an other in the leg: which although I felt moſt ſenſiblie, yet I endured it, becauſe I ſtill waited, that M. Mayor ſhould call me▪ but he forgetting ſo to do, and I being no longer able to continue in that ſort, I did riſe vp of my ſelfe, as I was wont to doe, in the ende of

other in my diſſembled fits. When I had thus ended theſe pranks, the Commiſsioners asked me, whether I had beene troubled with any fit, ſince I came into that place before them, or had feet any hurt done vnto mee: and I anſwered no: and after affirmed vpon other ſpeeches, that I had not diſſembled. And being here demanded why he ſo anſwered, he ſaith thus.
               
               Whileſt I was in my pretended fitte, I heard many reioycingly ſay, that now it was moſt plaine, that I was repoſſeſſed, and vtter very ſharpe words againſt thoſe, who had giuen it out, that I was but a diſſembler. Beſides, I began to ſuſpect, that either Mayſter Maiors opinion ws altered, who was fully perſwaded before (as I thought) that I had altogether diſſembled: or els that he durſt not ſpeak his mind therin, and call me, ſeeing the reſt of the Commiſsioners, and many others ſo confident in deed, that I was repoſſeſſed. Furthermore, I alſo then feared, leaſt Maiſter Markehams, and one Iaques words, with ſundry others, would proue true: who the ſame morning and ouernight had told me, that if I were found to be a diſſembler, I muſt bee hanged: Whereas (quoth Iaques) if it appeare that thou art not a counterfeite, there can no law nor Iudge hurt thee. In theſe reſpects I thought it the ſafeſt way for my ſelfe, to yeelde for that time to their humours, and to aunſwere as before is expreſſed, that I had not diſſembled.
               
                  Nich. She. pag. 210.
                  Now, for the better iuſtification of this which Somers hath depoſed: Nicholas Shepheard ſaith thus. I went to the Maior, and deſired him, to bid the boy riſe out of his fittes, ſaying, that therupon the boy would riſe. But Mayſter Maior, being (as I thinke) terrified, by reaſon of the hard ſpeeches of the Iuſtices, giuen out againſt thoſe that had ſaid the boy was a diſſembler, and by the generall clamour and ſpeech of all that were in the place, being addicted to Maiſter Darrell and his dealinges he the ſaid Maior woulde not call vpon him. And the then Maior himſelfe,
                  M. Clarke pag. 377. I muſt needes confeſſe, that I omitted

to call vpon Somers, and thereby the people growe to confirme their opinions, of the truth of his poſſeſsion,
               
                  And touching that part of Somers depoſition,
                  Nich. Shep
                        •
                     
                     pard. pag. 210. 
                  concerning M. Markeham, and one Iaques threatning words vnto him, they are iuſtified in this ſorte: The euening before William Somers appeared before the Commiſsioners, Sir Iohn Byron, and M. Robert Markeham (two of the ſaid Commiſſioners) as they were riding homewardes by S. Iohns, called for the boy: who being brought vnto them by mee, Sir Iohn Byron ſaid vnto him: art thou the boy, that doeſt thus diſquiet the Countrey? And the boy aunſwered, yea: Then (quoth Maiſter Markham) if it be proued, that thou art a counterfeit, thou deſerueſt to bee hanged. The next morning alſo, a little before the boy was ſent for to come to the Commiſsioners, one Iaques, a ſeruant of Maiſter Iohn Stanhopes (an other of the ſaide Commiſsioners) came to William Somers, & ſaid vnto him, in the hearing of me, and of Iohn Cooper, that if he were proued a counterfeite, he muſt be hanged.
               Maiſter Markham ſaid to William Somers,
                  Io. Cooper pag. 296. the night before he was to appeare before the Commiſsioners, that if he were found to be a diſſembler, he muſt bee hanged: whereby I perceyued the boy to be much terrifyed, in ſo much as he fell a weeping.
               Alſo one Iaques tolde the boy in my hearing, the morning before he was ſent for to the Commiſsioners, that if he did counterfeite, he would be hanged: & perſeuered ſo a long time in threatning ſort vnto the boy: and afterwards added, that if he were in caſe, as he was before, then he was innocent, and ſo no law nor Iudge could take holde on him, or condemne him. Diuerſe others, at the leaſt halfe an hundreth the ſame morning before he went to the ſaid Commiſsioners, vſed the like wordes of terrour to the boy.
               
                  By theſe depoſitions, if the humor then regnant in M. Darrels zealous adherents, ſo much addicted in outward

ſhew to ſet out the glory of God, doe not ſomewhat appeare, the peruſer of them may out of doubt be deemed partiall. This was threatning and terrifying in deed, able to haue ſhaken the conſtancie of a ſtronger man peraduenture then Somers was, the time and the perſons conſidered, that dealt ſo with him. It had beene good for M. Darrell, if he had omitted in his Apologie this calumniation, ſeeing that thereby he is fallen himſelfe into the ſame ſnare, which he had laid for others.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. VII. How Somers was perſwaded by threatnings, & promiſes, to haue continued his diſsimulation, after hee had beene before the Commiſsioners at Nottingham, vntill M. Darrell might againe diſpoſſeſſe him.
               
                  
                     WIlliam Somers, hauing confeſſed before the Commiſſioners at Nottingham, that he did not diſſemble, he was ſent by their authoritie (vpon the deſire of Maiſter Darrell & his friends) to one Garlands houſe. Of his being there, and of the courſe then held with him, he depoſeth in this ſort.Som. pag. 32. 
                  When I came to Garlands houſe, there was great concourſe again vnto me, and diuers perſwaſions were vſed, that I ſhould neuer ſay againe, that I had diſſembled. Alſo Miſtres Aldridge, & (as I thinke) M. Aldridge himſelfe ſaid vnto me, that now it was apparant vnto all the Commiſsioners, that I was repoſſeſſed & that if euer hereafter I ſhold affirme, that I had diſsē
                     bled: M. Maior, & the reſt of the Cōmiſsioners were certainly determined to hang me, & that they had a cōmiſsion frō the Queene

ſo to doe. Shee therefore with the reſt encouraged me to continue in the courſe that I had againe newly begunne, and promiſed me, that the next fryday after the Iudges were gone (whoſe comming was not then farre of) there ſhould be an other faſt, and that M. Darrell would then diſpoſſeſſe me againe. They alſo ſaide, that there ſhould be the ſame day a collection for me, and that then I ſhould, being diſpoſſeſſed, be placed for halfe a yeare with M. Bolton Chaplain to Sir Iohn Byron, & afterwards wait vpon one of the ſaide knightes grand children.
               
               Theſe perſwaſions added to the reaſons that cauſed Somers to ſay, he had diſſembled before the commiſſioners, moued him, as he confeſſeth, to continue his old practiſes, for the ſpace of about ten dayes: vntill the Maior of Notingham ſent for him thēce by the direction of the Lord chief Iuſtice of the common Plees. And then he confeſſed before the ſaid Maior, (the laſt day of March, 1598.Pet. Cleark. Rich. Hurt, William Freeman. page. 369.) Richarde Hurt and William Freeman, Iuſtices of the Peace, the reaſons that moued him to tell the Commiſsioners, that he had not diſſembled, and to continue his fittes at Garlandes houſe, to the effect in euery point, as is before expreſſed. Within two or three dayes after, the iudges comming to Nottingham, he the ſaide Somers, being ſent for before the L. Anderſon, confeſſed at large, how he had diſſembled: & there ſhewing his tricks before his Lordſhip, & diuers others, in ſome extraordinarie ſorte, to thoſe that had not ſeene him before: he preſentlie ſtarted vp, vppon his Lordſhips bidding of him to ariſe, and ſhewed himſelfe to bee as well, as he was before. Since which time (ſayeth Somers,) I haue beene very well, I thanke God, notwithſtanding, that M. Darrell did then,
                  W. Somers. pag. 34. 
                  and hath ſince diuerſe times affirmed, that I remaine ſtill repoſſeſſed with viii deuils, and that I am likewiſe poſſeſſed in ſoule. And I truſt that God will hereafter giue me grace, from euer conſenting againe to any

ſuch wicked courſes: hoping that God will graunt both M. Darrell and mee true repentance, for our abuſing of the world ſo notoriouſly, with ſuch, and ſo manie our vngodly practiſes.
               
               That William Somers did acte his fittes before the Lord Anderſon, and confeſſed as it is aboue mentioned, to the Maior of Nottingham, and others, after he was taken from Garlandes houſe,
                  M. Darrel ad art. 45 pag. 21. it will not be denyed. But for the reſt, concerning a pretended faſte for Somers ſecond diſpoſſeſsion, that M. Darrel maketh altogether ſtrange, as though he had neuer mentioned any ſuch matter: and Mrs. Aldridge quallifyeth her ſpeeches in ſome parte, aſwell as ſhee can. Howbeit there are depoſitions which doe argue, that to be true which Somers hath herein depoſed.
               
                  M Adridge pa. 96.
                  I heard M. Darrell affirme (ſayeth M. Aldridge) that there ſhould be a new faſt after the Aſſizes, for the diſpoſſeſſing againe of Somers.
               
                  When William Somers was firſt brought vnto my houſe, I heard ſpeeches deliuered vnto him, to this effect, vz. that now he hauing auowed the truth,
                  Ed. Garland pa. 117 
                  in ſaying that he was no diſſembler, hee ſhould ſtand ſtedfaſt vnto that truth: that there ſhould within a ſhort time, an other faſt be appointed in S. Maries: when God were ſo pleaſed, he ſhould be againe diſpoſſeſſed, and that afterwardes meanes ſhould be made to M. Bolton, that hee might be with him.
                  Fol 4. Again, I heard Mrs. Aldridge ſay to the boy, when he was at my houſe, ſent the therby the Commiſſioners, that if he would ſticke to the truth, ſhee made no doubt but to place him with M. Bolton.Mrs. Aldrid. fol. 9. And Mrs. Aldridge her ſelfe: I willed the boy to ſticke to the truth, not doubting to make meanes by ſome friendes, to place him in ſeruice with M. Bolton, Sir Iohn Byrons Chapleaine, there to waite vpon one of Sir Iohns Grandchildren.
               
               
                  M Aldridge pag. 96.
                  M. Aldridge alſo confeſſeth, that vpon Somers comming from the Commiſſioners, or very ſhortly after: he ſaide

vnto him: that now it was apparant to the Commiſſioners, and to the Maior himſelfe, that he had not before diſſembled, and that now if he ſhould hereafter (as before he had done) affirme, that hee had diſſembled, hee deſerued to bee puniſhed very ſharpely.
               
               If the Prouerbe bee true, that a man may ſee day at a little hole, what may hee then doe at a great breach? If the Aſſizes had not beene ſo neare, M. Darrell (it ſeemeth) would haue quitte his handes of Somers, as being verie weary of that matter. He was therefore (as it ſeemeth) very earneſt, both by himſelfe and his friendes, to haue had the boy continued his diſſimulation a little longer: then he might haue bin rid of him with ſome ſhew of honeſty. But it would not be: ſuch iugling will out: and not be concealed.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. VIII. Of the depoſitions taken in M. Darrells behalfe at Nottingham, and how vpon the reexamination of his own witneſſes, it falleth out: that the bodilie actions of Somers in his fitts, were not extraordinary, as they haue beene miſreported.
               
                  WE are now come to M. Darrels laſt ſhifte, wherein both he and his fellowes doe ſo greatly triumph: which is, the authority of certain depoſitions, taken before the ſaid Commiſſioners, on his behalf, at Nottingham. Somers, who knew his owne doinges beſt, ſaide hee had diſſembled, and M. Darrell affirmed that he had not diſſembled. The wiſer ſort belieued Somers, ſuch as had ſome good experience of the courſe held betwixt him and Darrell: others (not to be impeached,

ſo much for their want of wiſedome, as for their blinding the eye thereof, by their prepoſterous affections, they helde with M. Darrell. The iſſue was, it muſt be tryed by a Commiſſion, whether Somers ſaid truely, in affirming that he had diſſembled. The Commiſſion was procured, and expedited the xx. of March 1597, by theſe Commiſſioners, (if the printed Narration ſaide truely.) Iohn Thorold Eſquier, high Sheriffe, Sir Iohn Byron knight, Iohn Stanhope, Robert Markeham, Richard Perkins Eſquiers: Peter Clarke Maior of Nottingham, Miles Leigh Officiall, Iohn Ireton, Iohn Brown, Robert Euington, and Thomas Bolton, Miniſters and Preachers: men for their ſufficiencie, it is true, very meete to haue dealt in a farre greater matter. The Gentlemen are very well knowne, to be verie fitte Gouernors, and are a great ſtay in thoſe parts of the countrie where they dwell. If the examination of a matter of high treaſon had beene committed vnto them, or any other of a lower degree, concerning the good and peace of their Countrie, they had beene within the compas of their owne element, and wold no doubt with all ſufficiencie haue diſcharged themſelues therein. But the hypocriticall ſleights of falſe ſeducers, in matters that concern religion, they are of an other nature, or elſe it had beene impoſſible for Poperie to haue ſo farre preuayled: the chiefe pointes thereof hauing beene vphelde by lyes, and fayned miracles.
               The Commiſſioners that were Cleargie-men, their ouerſight was the greater, becauſe they could not be ignorant, (at the leaſt one or two of them) how the Church hath beene abuſed from time to time, for aboue theſe 800. yeares, by falſe Impoſtors, and iugling Exorciſts, who for their own glorie, profite, and other prepoſterous ends, haue taken vpon them to caſt out deuils. Howbeit ſomething

alſo may be ſaide to extenuate their ouerſight, in that none of the Miniſters had euer ſeene Somers before, in any of his fittes, nor were acquainted with ſuch courſes as were helde on from time to time, betwixt Darrell & the boy. Beſides, they had (as it ſeemeth) a good opinion of M. Darrell, and could not eaſily be led to ſuſpect more then they ſaw. And for them altogether: who almoſt being ſtrangers to that cauſe, would not haue conceyued as they did. They found M. Darrell readie furniſhed with many abettors: but no man ſhewed his face on Somers behalfe. M. Darrell, (as the Narrator reporteth) had taken the names of threeſcore perſons, who were readie to haue beene depoſed, touching the extraordinarie handling of Somers: but no one witneſſe was ſought out to be depoſed for Somers. Of the ſaid threeſcore, ſeauenteen were examined: which might very well haue ſeemed to haue beene ſufficient: conſidering that the boy did alſo concurre with them, in ſaying, that he had not diſſembled, as it hath beene before declared.
               And concerning alſo the witneſſes themſelues, much might be ſaide for their excuſe. They, hauing conceyued well of M. Darrell, could not eaſily ſuſpect any treachery in him. And to ſay the truth, thoſe grounds preſuppoſed to be true, (which M. Darrell had taught them,) vz. that whatſoeuer he did or ſpake in his fittes, it was not Somers, but the deuill that did it and ſpake it: it may rather be maruayled, that they depoſed no more, then blamed that they depoſed ſo much. For who ſeeing a man lye, in his conceite, as ſenſeleſſe as a blocke, would not admire the very ſhaking of his toe: eſpecially being perſwaded, that the Deuill made the motion. But when he ſhould ſee him leape and friſke, moue the calues of his legges, the fleſh of his thighes, thruſt out his belly, and make ſondry

ſtrange motions with his iawes, eyes and tounge: it could not bee choſen, but it muſt ſeeme terrible. Adde hereunto the weakenes of mens nature, which is ſubiect to be terrifyed with Deuilles, and wicked ſpirites, eſpecially when they ſuppoſe the ſaide ſpirites to be preſent, and in action before their eyes.
               
                  M. Aldridge pa. 87.
                  M. Aldridge being asked, why heretofore he had affirmed, that he perceyued, whileſt Somers was acting his trickes, the formes as it were of kitlings, vnder the Couerlette that lay vpon him, the ſaide Couerlette being betwixt his eyes and them, rather then the forms of whelps, of Connyes, of Rats: &c. anſwereth, I thinke my ſo affirming, did proceede of this, &c. becauſe I had heard before, that certaine Witches had ſpirites in formes of Kitlinges, and thoſe formes then came to my minde. And againe, I doe very well know, that a mans ſenſes may be deceyued. Beſides, I was then very greatly afraide, which is a great meanes to deceiue a mans ſenſes: being a mighty paſſion, that will procure many imaginations, & cauſe a man to think that which is but little, to be great, that which ſtandeth, to moue, and that to be, which is not. Wherby I confeſſe (my great feare conſidered) that I might be deceyued, in affirming many things, concerning the particularities of the ſaide Somers fittes: and I verilie thinke it may be true, that Somers affirmeth, of making certaine motions with his fingers vnder the ſaide Couerlette, and of his knocking againſt the Beddeſtocke, whileſt I was praying by his bedſide. Adde hereunto, that the ſaid witneſſes were fully perſwaded, that Somers had beene poſſeſſed, diſpoſſeſſed, and was repoſſeſſed: and that they conceyued ſome good effects wrought in Nottingham, by that which they had heard ſo oft, both in their Pulpittes, and elſe where, concerning a power left to the Church, to caſt out Deuils.
               There haue beene many lewde practiſes of late yeares

in England, thruſt forward by ſondry trayterous Exorciſtes, vnder the pretence of caſting out Deuilles: numbers of that generation, vpon ſecret intelligence flocking vnto them. Whereof, if any enquirie ſhould be made, & examinations taken, you may be ſure, you ſhould haue moſt ſtrange thinges depoſed by that crue, although all that was done, was feyned and counterfeyted. To let men therefore in ſuch caſes, and being ſo affected, runne on forwardes with their owne tales, no maruaile if they ſeeme verie admirable. But one thing concerning our witneſſes in hande, is worthie of conſideration: that the moſt of thoſe that were examined, were but ſimple perſons, and ſuch as had not beene paſt twiſe or thriſe with the boy, in all the time of his trouble. Some (hauing threeſcore ready) would haue produced his chief witneſſes firſt, but peraduenture it was thoght good policy to lay the burthē vpō the ſimpler ſort.
               Theſe pointes thus premiſed, concerning the expediting of the ſaide Commiſſion: you are now further to be aduertiſed, that ſondry of the ſaide witneſſes being reexamined by her Maieſties authority, in cauſes eccleſiaſticall, from the L. Archbiſhop of Canterbury, and others directed: haue greatly qualifyed their former depoſitions, by diuerſe and ſundry interpretations of their meaning, and as though ſome parts of their depoſitions had beene miſtaken. Inaſmuch as now, the bodily actions of Somers in his fits, which were ſuppoſed to haue been extraordinary, do appeare to haue been but ordinary, or at the leaſt, ſuch as a knauiſh expert boy might eaſily counterfeyte, in ſuch a cōpany as he had about him: and therby alſo, that which Somers hath depoſed of the ſaid ſuppoſed extraordinary motions, is in effect fully iuſtifyed:Somers pa▪ 36. 
                  concerning the extraordinary motions of my body (as they were termed,) many things

were reported of me, which I neuer did: and thoſe thinges which I did indeede, were made much more ſtrange then they were: I hauing done nothing in any of my fittes, which an other man by practiſe may not eaſily doe, without the Deuils help. The ſaid reexaminations are as followeth.
               
               
                  Whereas Thomas Hayes depoſeth, before the L. Archbiſhoppe of Yorkes Commiſſioners at Nottingham:Th Hayes, fol. 1. 
                  that he ſaw ſome thing runne out of William Somers legges into the other, and thence forthwith into his belly, ſwelling the ſame: inſomuch that the ſame was much bowned vpwarde: and when the ſame departed thence, hee ſaw it plainely in his throate, in his tounge, and in his cheeke, neare to his eare root, to the quantitie of the yolke of an egge, which he taking betweene his fingers, found the ſame to bee in ſoftnes like the yoalke of an egge. Being reexamined, he ſayeth thus. I ſaw a ſwelling in his cheeke,
                  Th. Hayes, fol. 317 
                  to the quantitie of a yoalke of an egge, and in his throat, of the ſame quantitie: further then his throate and his face, I could not, nor did ſee it: (William Somers lying in his clothes) but I ſaw a ſtirring runne down his breaſt, and into his legges, without any riſing, or quantity, that I could diſcern, ſauing in his belly, the boy at that time lying on his backe, ſomewhat bended.
               
               This ſwelling and running of ſome thing in Somers body, is one of the chiefeſt ſupernaturall actions or paſſions, (for the Apologie it ſeemeth knew not whether to call them,) that M. Darrell and the Narrator do inſiſte vpon, for the proofe that Somers was poſſeſſed. But if they were no other, then M. Hayes, vpon his laſt examination, hath depoſed: there was no greate ſtrangenes in them. It is ſuppoſed that M. Darrell will bee very angrie, to haue theſe ſupernaturall runninges ſo extenuated: Hee himſelfe hauing labored ſo much to haue them admired. But hee muſt bee content, for it is very agreeable to his

former ſucceſſe, when he would haue made them ſtrange and maruellous.M. Crauen. fol. 14. Hereof conſider what M. Crauen hath depoſed. When the Deuill was ſaid ſenſiblie to moue within Somers bodie: firſt in one legge, and then in an other, I could perceiue the legge (ſaith he) to ſhake and moue, but nothing in the legge, till Maiſter Darrell catching hold of the boyes thigh, affirmed that he had it vnder his hand, and called mee and M. Aldred to feele it likewiſe. But Somers, being vnwilling that we ſhould ſo doe, turned himſelfe violently vpon his bellie, till by force wee drew him backe, and then wee found nothing, but his gloues, or ſome ſuch things as he had in his pocket. If M. Darrell doe not here ſay, that the Deuil skipped out of the boyes thigh into his pocket, and turned himſelfe into a paire of gloues: the Deuill may rather bee thought to haue run vp and downe in his owne coſening pate, then in the boyes bodie.
               Of theſe ſwellings and runnings, Somers,
                  VV. Somers pag. 36. who ſhould know them beſt, hath thus depoſed. Whereas (ſaith hee) it hath beene reported, that I had diuers ſwellings, proceeding from my legs to other parts of my body, contrary to all courſe of humours, or winde: this I ſay, that of mine owne knowledge, & in mine owne hearing, very many falſe reports haue beene made thereof: ſome affirming, that they ſaw a thing runne in my body of the bigneſſe of a mouſe, ſome of a Ratte, ſome of a mans fiſt, and that ſometimes thoſe who were preſent, would affirme as much, of one and the ſame thing at one time, differing in their opinions, concerning that which they ſaid they did then ſee. Beſides, he likewiſe ſetteth downe, how hee did make the ſaid motions that ſeemed to runne in his bodie, in theſe words: I did moue firſt the calfe of my legge, then my knee-bone, which motion of the knee, will likewiſe make a motion or riſing in the thigh. Alſo by drawing and stopping of my mind, my bellie would ſtirre and ſhew a kinde of ſwelling. The bunch (as

they tearmed it) about my cheſt, was by the thruſting out of my breaſt. Likewiſe my ſecret ſwallowing did make the ende of my windepipe to moue, and to ſhew greater then vſually it is: Againe, by mouing of my iawes, one bunch was eaſily made in the ſide, my cheeke neere mine eare: and about the middle of my cheeke, with the ende of my tongue thruſt againſt it. Theſe motions by practiſe I woulde make very faſt, one after another: ſo as there might eaſily ſeeme to bee running in my bodie of ſome thing, from place to place: eſpecially when he was thought at thoſe times to be as ſenceleſſe, and for any motions of his owne to lye as a blocke.
               Againe, Henry Nuſſey depoſed before the ſaid Commiſſioners ſaith: that hee ſaw William Somers with his mouth wide open,
                  Hen. Nuſſey fol. 8 
                  ſpeake certaine wordes to Iohn Wiggen in Latine, which he vnderſtood not, his chappes nor teeth mouing, when he did ſo ſpeake: and that he ſaw theſe things euidently, for he came very neere to him to behold him.
               
               
                  Rich. Newton. fol. 4.Alſo, Richard Newton depoſed then of this point, after this ſort ſaith: I found Somers in one of his fittes, and heard him ſpeake plainly with a continued ſpeech, with his mouth wide open, his tongue drawne into his throat: ſo that there could bee ſeene nothing of it, but the rootes in his throate, neither lippes nor chappes mouing, and vttered this ſpeech amongst other: Ego ſum Rex,M. Darrell Apologie. ego ſum Deus. And hereupon Maiſter Darrell telleth vs this tale, relying for the moſt part of it, vpon one ſingular witneſſe. Hee ſpake (ſaith he) with his mouth wide open: yea his tongue retorted into his throat, and namely theſe wordes: Ego ſum Deus, ego ſum Rex: I am God, I am King. But let vs ſee what Nuſſey, and Newton, being reexamined,He. Nuſſey pag 323. do depoſe of theſe points: I hearde Somers (ſaith Nuſſey) ſpeake ſome words, which I vnderſtood not: but one Iohn Wiggen told me, that Somers ſaid in Latine, I am God: But I am not able to ſay, that he ſpake thoſe wordes, or any other, without the help of his tongue, neither am I able to affirme,

that his tongue was turned into his throate, at the time that hee ſpake the ſaid words. And with this reexamination of Nuſſey, agreeth the depoſition of Iohn Wiggen, in theſe words.Io. Wiggen pag. 321. Somers, in one of his ſaid fits ſaid, Ego ſum Deus, ego ſum Rex: which wordes (I thinke) he ſpake with his owne tongue, and with the mouing of his lippes, and I neuer meant to bee vnderſtoode, that Somers ſpake, hauing his mouth wide open, and his tongue turned into his throate, nor did euer at any time heare or ſee any ſuch thing in him. And touching Richard Newton, he being reexamined ſaith thus: I heard Somers ſay theſe wordes: Ego ſum Rex, ego ſum Deus: and no more words that I remember: which wordes, I thinke he could haue ſaid at any other time, when hee was well, as hauing beene at Latine ſchoole. He ſpake then after the ſame manner and faſhion, as hee ſpake them when he was well, with his tongue and lippes, and his owne voyce, ſauing that I thinke he counterfeyted his voice a little. I had heard ſay before I came, of many extraordinary and ſtraunge things to bee done by Somers, as that hee could ſpeake with his mouth wide open, without his tongue, or without mouing his tongue, which I neuer ſee him doe, nor thinke hee either did or could doe: for to my remembraunce, his lippes did then moue, and his tongue both, when he ſaid the wordes: Ego ſum Rex, ego ſum Deus.
               With theſe three depoſitions of Nuſſey, Wiggen, & Newton, as M. Darrels feined wonder is by them detected, ſo is Somers confeſſion in that behalfe fully ratified. Concerning (ſaith he) the report of my extraordinary ſpeaking,
                  Somers. pag. 38. 
                  with my mouth wide open, & my tongue drawne into my throat, neither mouing my lips, iawes or tongue: I ſay, that the moſt of theſe reports are vtterly vntrue. But I confeſſe, that I did diuers times chaunge my voice, ſpeaking ſometimes hollowly, and ſometimes more ſhrilly: and likewiſe that I haue ſpoken many wordes, my mouth being open, as any other man may doe, and alſo when my lippes ſeemed (in a manner) to bee ſhutte. But I

neuer ſpake any word, when my tongue was thruſt into my throat: onely I confeſſe that when ſometimes diuers would looke into my mouth, I did often ſodainly conuey my tongue backward, as it were, into my throat. Many are aſhamed, I belieue, of theſe their fond reports, and I hope, that in time they will vaniſh.
               
               
                  Richard Mee, fol. 13.Furthermore, one Richard Mee did depoſe before the ſaide Commiſsioners, That hee had ſeene William Somers ſtand, and turne his face directly backward, not mouing his bodie, and that his eyes were as great as beaſtes eyes, and that his tongue would be thruſt out of his head, to the bigneſſe of a Calues tongue.
               
               The ſeuerall partes of this depoſition are pretermitted by Maiſter Darrell, in his Apologie: ſauing that of turning his face backwardes, which he doth ſomewhat alter, terming it, the ſetting of his face againſt his backe. But let vs ſee what the ſaid Mee hath depoſed, vpon his reexamination. Whereas I haue beene conceyued, to ſay and ſweare, as is before expreſſed,
                  Rich. Mee pag. 325. 
                  my meaning was, and is (ſaith hee) that he the ſaid Somers turned his face a good way towards his ſhoulder, and not otherwiſe: and likewiſe my meaning was, and is, that his eyes were ſomewhat gogling out, but otherwiſe no more then ordinary. And thirdly, my meaning was, & is, that by reaſon it was candle light when I ſaw his tongue thruſt out, and by reaſon of my conceite of the ſtrangeneſſe of Somers troubles, before I ſaw him: his tongue being thruſt out, it ſeemed ſomewhat bigger, then if Somers had beene well, I ſhould haue thought it to haue beene.
               
               
                  Ione Pie. fol. 6.Againe, one Ione Pye, being depoſed before the ſaid Commiſſioners, affirmeth, that William Somers in one of his fittes, vpon the Saturday, that Maiſter Darrell came to Nottingham, vſed theſe wordes, with his mouth extraordinarily wide, and ſtrangely open, and without mouing or ſtirring his tongue or lippes, in ſpeaking any of theſe words: vz. I will vſe William Somers tongue & members for three dayes: and that

in an other fit the ſame day, ſhe ſaw his body doubled, his head between his legs. But being reexamined, ſhe ſaith thus:Ione Pie. fol. 329. 
                  I heard W. Somers ſay in the voice, he was wont to ſpeak, his mouth not being wide open, but with his lips mouing as at other times, as I then marked and ſaw, theſe words. I will vſe William Somers tongue for three daies: but I ſaw not his head between his legs, neither at that time, nor at any time after.
               
               Laſtly,W. Hunt: fol. 15. 
                  William Hunt depoſed before the ſaid Commiſſioners: that he heard a voice proceed from William Somers, lying in one of his fits, his lips being cloſe ſhut, and neither mouing his lips or iawes, to his vnderſtanding, and that hee continued ſo ſpeaking, to the ſpace of a quarter of an houre. This depoſition, though it be but ſingular, yet M. Darrell hath thruſt it into his Aplogie, but with ſome falſhood, ſaying: that he did ſpeake diſtinctly, with a continued ſpeech for a quarter of an houre, his mouth being ſhutte cloſe. I heard a voice proceede from William Somers (ſaith Hunt): hee ſpake diſtinctly with a continued ſpeech (ſaith Darrell.) But let vs heare Hunt being examined. Whereas I haue been conceiued (ſaith he) to report and affirme,
                  VV. Hunt. pag. 333. 
                  that William Somers did continue ſpeaking by the ſpace of a quarter of an houre, hauing his lippes cloſe ſhut, and neither mouing his lippes, nor his iawes: I now ſay, that many times the ſaid Somers would mumble ſome ſecrete words alone, & not ſeeme to open his mouth wide: but when hee ſpake many words together, he opened his mouth, and ſtirred his lips, as any other man doth. And when he ſeemed to mumble any words as is aforeſaid, I could not well marke, whether he ſtirred his lips, and opened his mouth, as at other times, by reaſon the ſaid Somers did ſo turne and writhe his face, as I coulde not well ſee.
               
               Theſe were the chief points, which ſeemed moſt ſtrange in the ſaid depoſitions, taken at Nottingham: whereupon

it was thought good to haue the ſaid witneſſes examined. And how they qualifie their former wordes, you ſee it apparant: neither is it to be doubted, but that if all other reports, which haue beene made touching Somers fittes, were throughly looked into, and the authors of them diſcreetly examined, now that the heat of their affections is ſomewhat cooled, the iſſue thereof would ſort and agree, with the ſecond cogitations of theſe their fellowes.
               The end of the Third Booke.
            
         
         
            
            The Fourth Booke.
            
               In this fourth Booke it will appeare, how M. Darrell made all things ſtrange that Somers did: How loath he was that any man ſhold make trial, whether he had any ſence in his fits: and how he ſhifted to excuſe the boy, when by diuers circumſtances it was ſuppoſed he diſſembled. Beſides, it is herein directly proued, contrary to M. Darrels grounds and aſſertions: that Somers in his fits had his ſences & vnderſtanding: that the caſting of himſelfe into the fire: the motions and knocking in his bed: his pretended knowledge: his ſuppoſed great ſtrength, and his skill in diuers languages, were no waies extraordinarie: Briefly, that there was no impoſsibilitie at all in the boyes fits, and that as he was accounted a diſſembler, before M. Darrelles comming to Nottingham, ſo was he ſtill reputed by diuers, all the while that Somers and he were practiſing together at Nottingham, notwithſtanding that M. Darrell could eyther do, ſay, or preach to the contrary.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. I. How Maiſter Darrell laboured from time to time, to make thoſe thinges that Somers did, (and were but very toyes) to bee thought both ſtrange and extraordinarie.
               
                  THings that bee ſtrange, doe cauſe men to wonder. If a man go to Rome, and be deſirous of nouelties, hee ſhall find ſundry Prieſts that will feed his humor.M. Attilius Serranus. They will ſhew him Chriſtes napkin, S. Inkes head, S. Andrewes arme, S. Blaſes wezand, a peece of

S. Chriſtophers arme, Saint Peters fingers, the pincers wherewith diuers Martirs were pinched, a peece of the earth where Chriſt appeared to Marie Magdalen, Saint Annes thumbe, Saint Dominckes ſtoale, a peece of Saint Paules ſtaffe, that hee walked with, Saint Peters tooth, the Table whereat Chriſt laſt ſupped, ſome of the fragments of the fiue Barly loues mentioned in the Goſpell, a peece of the chaine that Saint Iohn was bounde with: Moyſes rodde: Aarons rodde, ſome of the ſhewe-breade, the towell wherewith Chriſt wiped his Apoſtles feete: parte of the reede that Chriſt was ſtrucke with at Pilates houſe, the aſhes of Saint Iohn Baptiſt, the veſſell into the which bloode and water flowed out of Chriſtes ſide: many cloutes died with the bloud of Martirs: a ſtone of Chriſtes Sepulcher: a ſtone or peece of earth of Mount Caluarie: a ſtone or peece of earth from the place where Chriſt aſcended into heauen: the ſpunge wherein they gaue Chriſt Vinegar and gall: the cribbe that Chriſt was borne in: the thornes of the Crowne that Chriſt was crowned with: our Ladies hayre: the Chinne of Saint Iohn Baptiſtes father: ſome of Mary Magdalens hayre: a peece of the fatte of Saint Laurence: a peece of the arme, and ſome of the braynes of Saint Thomas of Canterburie, with many ſuch trinkettes.
               
               And they will vow and proteſt with great deuotion, that theſe are no fictions, nor feigned reliques: but the very things themſelues whoſe names they beare, whereby many credulous and ſuperſtitious people are drawne to admire them. It is the manner of the Mountebankes in Italie, reſembled by ſome of our Pedlers, when they open their packes, to ſet out their ware with many great wordes. Vnto which kinde of people, and ſeducing Mirabiliſtes, Maiſter Darrell in his practiſes with Somers, may well bee reſembled. When the boy ſpake, hee tolde the

people it was the deuill that vſed his voice: when hee did any thing in his fittes, hee ſayde that it was the Deuill that did it. If hee ſtirred his handes or any parte of his body as hee lay in bedde, hee affirmed the Deuill to be in bedde with him. The mouing of the boyes fingers vnder a Couerlette, hee made to bee Deuilles, in formes of Whelpes or Kitlinges: when hee ſtrugled, hee pretended, that for ſtrength hee was almoſt an other Goliath. If hee ſpake any thing, whereof thoſe that were preſent vnderſtoode not the reaſon how hee knew it: hee was ſtraight become a kinde of Prophete, and to haue ſupernaturall knowledge. Two or three wordes of Latine, which hee had learned at the ſchoole, was ſufficient to giue it out, that in his fittes, he ſpake Greeke, Hebrew, and Latine. Briefly, all that the boy did in his pretended fittes, M. Darrell would needes haue to paſſe, and exceede the naturall power of any man: and ſo muſt bee done of neceſſitie by the Deuill. Whileſt hee was thus ietting vppe and downe the place where Somers was playing his prankes, and ſetting out the boyes actions, as his chiefe Wares, with ſuch ſtrange wordes and qualities, a man may well remember the ſaide Romiſh Prieſtes in extolling their feyned Reliques, and the ſaide Mountebankes, and Pedlers, in lying and cogging, to make the beſt of their packes.
               The particulers before mentioned, haue beene partly proued already, and it will appeare to bee true more plainely hereafter: and touching ſome others, there are theſe depoſitions following.Rob. Coop. pa. 98. 
                  M. Darrell tolde thoſe that were preſent, Somers being in a fitte, that the Boyes tounge was drawne into his throate, quite out of his mouth, and taking the Candle in his handes, would needes haue the company

to looke into his mouth, (the boy lying with his mouth open) and then ſaide: ſee you not that it is ſo? what reaſon can be giuen of this? It paſſeth nature to doe any ſuch thing: with Cooper herein,Edm. Garland pa. 301 M. Hallam, fol. 7. concurreth Edmond Garland.
               
                  Vpon the Sonday at night, ſayeth M. Hallam, M. Darrell ſaide (the boy lying in his fitte,) beholde his face is it iuſt behinde him, which is moſt ſtrange: but I ſaw not the ſame ſtrangenes.
               
               
                  Rob. Coop. pa. 291.M. Darrell tolde the people preſent at Porters houſe, on the Saturday at night, when he came to Nottingham, that thoſe thinges that the boy did, paſſed the power and skill of any man to doe. With this depoſition M. Parre doth fully agree in effect,M, Par, 264 word for worde.
               Concerning the ridiculous geſtures mentioned before, that were pretended to ſignifie the ſinnes of Nottingham: M. Darrell himſelfe hath tolde vs in his hiſtory, that Somers did them in that liuely manner, that hee thinketh, that the like dumbe deſcription of ſinnes, cannot be made, by any humaine skill or power. It hath alſo before beene obſerued, how hee willed the boy to vtter ſome darke ſpeeches, whereby the people might wonder at him: eſpecially, when they heard his the ſaide Darrels profound expoſition of them.
               
                  Somers in one of his pretended fittes, did take vpon him, to expound the Articles of the Creede, which (he ſayeth) he was in ſome ſorte enabled to doe, by reaſon that almoſt euery Miniſter, that came vnto him, had in their ſpeeches with him, interpreted them diuers times vnto him. Towardes the end of the which his diſcourſe, M. Darrell came in: who being enformed thereof, and alſo of ſome errors, which had eſcaped therein, he made the matter very wonderfull: firſt obſerue what is depoſed, and then what M. Darrell ſayeth.
               
                  Th Clearke pa 31
                        •
                     ,
                  Comming one euening to Coopers houſe, Somers fell into

a fit, (as they called it) of ſqueaking, and ſcritching: and in his fiitte he beganne to repeate the Articles of the Creede, and to tel the meaning of euery Article orderly. The which his expoſition, I then thought, and doe now thinke, to haue beene made by Somers himſelfe, by the aſſiſtance of God, and not by the operation of the Deuill.
               
               Somers did expound the Creede at my houſe,
                  Rob. Coop. pa. 2
                        •
                     2. 
                  by the ſpace almoſt of an houre, Whereupon, M. Darrel then ſaide to thoſe that were preſent: that heretofore the boy had noted vnto them, the ſinnes that raigned in Nottingham, and that now they ſhould heare him deliuer vnto him, the groundes of their faith, euerie Chriſtian dutie, and other godly rules, whereby they might learne to guide their wayes: and therefore willed them to hearken vnto his ſayinges, and to practiſe the ſame.
                  M. Darrel pa, 223, But now M. Darrell would be heard. Somers (ſayeth hee) hauing made a euery glorious interpretation of the Creede, I came in, euen as hee made an end: and being informed thereof, and that ſome of the ſimple people were ſo rauiſhed by the ſaide interpretation, as they ſuppoſed it to be done by the Miniſtery of a good Angell: notwithſtanding, ſome others tolde mee of ſome errors that had eſcaped him: I anſwered them, that vndoubtedly, the ſaid glorious interpretation, had beene made by an euill ſpirite, tranſforming himſelfe into an Angell of light: adding, that thereof they might be aſſured, by his mingling of ſome errors amongſt many truthes. And againe, in his Apologie, ſpeaking of Somers ſupernaturall knowledge forſooth, he writeth thus:M. Darrell Apo, pa, 13 
                  From hence it was, that diuine-like he continued his ſpeach, in expounding the Creede for an houre together.
               
               
                  M. Darrell was not (as you haue heard) at this expoſition, and the commendation it had, did proceede from the ſimple people: and yet here he ſayeth, it was made diuine-like, and tearmeth it a very glorious interpretation. But his reaſon why hee aſcribeth the ſame vnto an euill

ſpirit is very ſtrange, and peraduenture may touch himſelf as nearely as Somers. For if amongſt many truthes by him preached, the falling vpon ſome errors, be an argument, that it was the Deuill that preached in him, the moſt of his ſermons at Nottingham, touching the poſſeſſion, diſpoſſeſſion, and repoſſeſſion of Somers, will haply bee cenſured in Nottingham, to haue proceeded from the Deuill.
               But amongſt all the reſt of Somers actions, which M. Darrell aſcribed to the deuill, there is one other that may not be pretermitted: which argueth, that he thought himſelfe to haue wonne ſuch credite, as hee might ſay any thing, were it neuer ſo abſurde, without ſuſpition of falſehoode or iugling. At ſome ſuch times, as Somers being in his fittes, called for drinke, M. Darrell would ſuffer him to haue none, affirming that it was not Somers, but the deuil that called for it. This M. Darrell denyeth, but it is depoſed in ſorte,M Darrell ad art, 3, pag. 223 Edm. Garland pa. 301 as followeth.
               William Somers asking for drinke, (ſayeth Edmond Garland) M. Darrell cauſed it to be denyed him: ſaying it was not hee, but the Deuill that asked for it.
               
               
                  Rob. Coop. pa. 229.Robert Cooper thus: I heard Thomas Porter ſay, that the boy being drye and hungry in the morning, before his diſpoſſeſſion, they durſt giue him neyther meate, nor drinke, till M. Darrell had beene firſt acquainted with it. Againe, Somers being at Porters houſe in a fitte, he ſaid he was drye, but yet durſt not drinke,
                  Rob. Coop. pa. 292. 
                  becauſe M. Darrell had tolde him, that the deuill would make him drye and hungry, and did forbid him therefore, to take any drinke or meate.
               
               Few men but M. Darrell (it is ſuppoſed) would haue ſuſpected, when the boy was drie, that the Deuill called for drinke. But it was his glory to ſhew his skill and acquaintance with Sathans practiſes, and ſtill to pretend

that the boyes actions were wonderfull. Many that were preſent, when they ſaw Somers doe his trickes, ſuppoſing that it had beene the Deuill that did them, were greately afraide. But M. Darrell was ſo ſtrong in faith (forſooth) as, ſeeming greately to diſdaine both Sathan and all his doinges, he checked him, commaunded him, and reuyled him at his pleaſure: whereby the ſimpler ſorte of people, aſcribed great vertue and holines vnto him. If the reſemblances before made of M. Darrels practiſes in this point, to Pedlers, Mountebanks, and the Reliquemongers of Rome be not ſo fitte: then as you remember, Somers and Darrell diſſembling and colluding together, thinke vpon the pretie feates, betwixt Bankes and his horſe. Indeed it was one of the greateſt wonders that hapned in thoſe actions at Nottingham, that ſo many were ſeduced by ſuch palpable fooleries.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. II. How M. Darrell would not ſuffer (as neare as hee could) any to deale with Somers in his fittes, to trie whether he were ſenſeles or diſſembled.
               
                  IF M. Darrell in his practiſes with Somers, had beene of a ſingle heart, none ſhould haue beene more carefull then he, to haue ſearched and tryed out his diſſimulation: conſidering the common opinion after a while, that he was but a counterfyte. But hee was ſo farre from that, as he bent himſelfe to the contrarie. For the chief ground that M. Darrell wrought vpon, being the opinion that Somers was ſenſeles in his fittes:

when ſome who ſuſpected him for a diſſembler, thought good vpon diuerſe occaſions to make triall of it, by touching of him, and asking of him many queſtions: M. Darrell withſtoode them, as much as he could, greatly blaming them for ſo doing, and alledging ſondry pretences in that behalfe. Herewith M. Darrell being charged, hee confeſſeth parte thereof, but much more is depoſed.
               
                  M. Darrel ad art. 5 pag. 50,
                  Whileſt Somers was in ſondrie of his fittes, diuerſe attempting to trie whether he had any ſenſe, and whether hee had diſſembled, and to that purpoſe, pricking him with pinnes, and offering violence to ſome parts of his body, I did reproue ſome, and hinder others for ſo dealing with him: affirming, that though he could not then feele them, he would afterwardes feele the hurt of it, and be ſore.
               
               And touching the asking of the boy any queſtions his ſhifte to hinder that, was a pretence, that hee helde it vnlawfull ſo to doe: becauſe in demaunding any thing of him at that time, it was to aske the deuill a queſtion: wherin the Gentleman diſagreeeth from all his authors, that write of this arte: who giue many precepts, when, how, and what they muſt charge Sathan to tell them: as who ſent him: for what cauſe: what Saintes prayer hee feared moſt: what is his name: what company he hath with him, and ſuch like. Beſides, he alſo differeth from himſelfe: for when he dealt with Katherine Wright, he had one or two pretie Dialogues with the Deuill. But it was expedient for him in this caſe,M. Darrell, ad art. 22, pa. 42. to diſlike of that courſe. I confeſſe (ſayeth he) that I charged the ſpirite to tell his name, which I did then in ignorance, being drawne thereunto by reading a little treatiſe that came to my handes, concerning the diſpoſſeſſing of one in the South Country. Furthermore, being charged to haue aſked Somers ſondry queſtions in his fittes, when hee was

growne a great man in the vnderſtanding of theſe miſteries, he anſwereth thus:M Darrell ad art, 3, pa, 215. 
                  I neuer asked any one queſtion of Somers, when I thought him to bee in a fitte, ſuppoſing that if I ſhould ſo haue done, I ſhould haue asked queſtions of the Deuill, which I account a thing vnlawfull. But true it is, that Sathan oftentimes of purpoſe to deceiue me, would ſuffer the boy lye quietly when he was in his fitte, whereby it came to paſſe, that I ſuppoſing his fitte had beene done, asked him a queſtion, whereunto Sathan hath anſwered. Here is faſt and looſe, as the Egyptian liſteth.
               
                  Some that ſtoode by (ſayeth VVilliam Somers,VV. Somers pag. 10) endeuoring to make triall, whether I was voide of ſenſe or no, did call vpon me: with whome M. Darrell was angrie, ſaying, that I heard no more then a blocke. Others would haue pinched me, but M. Darrell did prohibite them: affirming that it would make mee ſore afterward. Within a while alſo, the ſame night, vz. the 5. of Nouember, an other asking me a queſtion, I forgetting my ſelfe did anſwere him: wherewith M. Darrell was diſcontented, and blamed the partie in ſo doing, ſaying, that it was not I, but the Deuill that gaue him that anſwere.
               
               Somers many times in his fittes,
                  M. Crauen, pa, 258, 
                  would talke merilie with the by-ſtanders, and anſwere any man directly to any queſtion hee would propound: Which thing M. Darrell himſelf hath ofte reprehended in the people ſaying, that the Deuill tooke delight in ſuch vaine prattle.
               
               Somers falling to toyes and laughing in his fittes, the fift of Nouember, M. Darrell ſayde in the ende to the people,
                  M. Hunt, Fol 18, 
                  let him alone: for he is ſo full of knauerie, that there is no dealing with him.
               
               M. Darrell blamed ſuch as asked Somers any queſtions,
                  Ro. Cooper pag. 291. 
                  ſaying, it was the Deuill to whome they ſpake, and who anſwered them: though the boy did anſwere aptly and directly, to any queſtions that were propounded vnto him. Againe, diuerſe wold

adiure the boy in his fittes, or the deuill in him, (as it was pretended) to tell them how he came into him, whome M. Darrell would finde fault with, ſaying, it was the deuill, and not the boye to whome they ſpake.
               
               
                  George Richardſon fol. 20.
                  I haue asked ſome queſtions of Somers in his fittes: and M. Darrell hath anſwered, let him alone, for he neyther heareth, ſeeth, nor knoweth anie thing, whileſt he is in theſe fittes.
               
               M. Darrell hauing tolde mee that the deuill was in bed with the boy,
                  Geo, Pendleton. pa, 109 
                  and an other ſhewing me where hee was mouing vnder the Couerlette, I catched holde of him, (as it was ſuppoſed) with my left hand, and would haue pulled the cloathes off with my other hand, ſaying, in the name of God, whatſoeuer it is, I will ſee it: whereupon M. Darrell helde the cloathes downe, not ſuffering me to vncouer him, and affirming, that the boye being in his bed, and in his fittes, to vncouer him, was as much as his life was worth.
               
               
                  M. Darrel, talking with the ſaide Pendleton of the boyes knowledge,Geor. Pendleton, ibid. by reaſon of the wicked ſpirite that was within him, he the ſayde Pendleton, affirming that he had loſt ſomething by the way as he came to Nottingham, would needes know of the boy, what it was, that hee had loſt: nay quoth M. Darrell, he cannot of himſelfe anſwere any queſtions, but doth ſpeake onely that which the euill ſpirite doth put in his minde to ſpeake. This was a pretie euaſion vppon the ſodaine: but Pendleton was no way ſatisfyed with it. M. Darrell knew very well, that the boy was not able to anſwere him: and therefore he vſed that ſhifte, whereas if hee had beene indeede perſwaded that the deuill had beene in him,Pendleton, ibid, he would no doubt haue ſuffered him to haue beene put to his plunge, in anſwering the ſaide queſtion. The thing that Pendleton had loſt was his rapier. Furthermore the ſaide Pendleton, demaunding of Somers diuerſe other queſtions, and he anſwering none

of them. What (qouth he) is the boy deafe? No (ſaid Maiſter Darrell) he is not deafe, but he cannot ſpeake of himſelfe in his fittes, except the Deuill doe moue him thereunto. Shift vpon Shift.
               It being obiected to M. Darrell himſelfe, that at one time he catching at that which moued in Somers bed, and vnder the couerlet, ſaid he had hold of the wicked ſpirite: but would not doe ſo much, as turne vp the clothes to ſee what he had in hand, that thereby both he himſelfe, and others that were preſent might haue ſeene their errours: he the ſaid Darrell doth thus anſwere. At one time, taking hold of that which ſeemed to moue vnder the couerlet,
                  M Darrell ad art, 8, pag. 223. 
                  (being about a foote from the maſſe of his bodie) I did feele the ſame ſtirre and moue, as if it had been a liuing creature, but I did not turne vp the clothes, as thinking or regarding ſo to doe. The fellow was neere driuen, or at the leaſt growne verie drie in ſaying: that hee thought not, nor regarded to turne vp the clothes. In an other place he ſaith, that when they ſaw,
                  M. Darrell ad. art. 17. pag. 39. 
                  as it were, a kitling, and ſometimes three or foure running vp and downe vnder the couerlet, wherewith the boy was couered, as he lay vpon his bed, they did ſodainely caſt vp the ſaid couerlet, to ſee what was vnder it: but ſtill the ſuppoſed formes of kitlings were vaniſhed away.
               
               And is it then poſſible, that when hee had graſped one of the ſaide Kitlinges in his hand, that hee ſhould neither thinke, nor regarde to ſee and trie what hee had holde of?
               But of all the examples wherein Maiſter Darrelles courage hath appeared, there remaineth one pertinent to the point in hande, wherein hee ſhewed himſelfe a man: regarding, or waighing the preſence of fiue or ſixe Deuilles no more,M. Darrell. ad. art. 6, pag, 223. then if there had beene but ſo many Butterflyes. I very well remember (ſayth

he) that at one time whileſt ſome were buſily catching at the Deuill or ſpirits,
                  M. Darrell ad art. 6, pag, 223, 
                  vnder the couerlet where Somers lay, and had ſo done for a good ſpace, one ſaying here he is, an other, there he is, and ſo catching at them (there being fiue, ſixe or ſeuen ſpirites at that time there) I willed them to deſiſt, ſaying, they were but wicked ſpirits, that had taken vpon them certaine bodies.
               
               They were but wicked ſpirits: a matter of nothing: M. Darrels familiar acquaintances, and not to be feared. The truth was, that the boy was playing the knaue with his handes, elbowes, and knees, and other partes of his bodie vnder the couerlet: which Maiſter Darrell could not chuſe but know, and therefore did what he could to preuent his detection.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. III. How M. Darrell indeuoured to excuſe Somers when hee was taken ſhort, and did ſuch toyes, as did argue him ſufficiently to be but a counterfeit.
               
                  
                     WHen M. Darrell could not alwaies ſo preuaile, but that many vppon diuers occaſions would bee dealing with the boy in his fittes: and thereuppon perceiued by their words, that they did collect by diuers circumſtances, that he had his ſences, and ſo did diſſemble: he the ſaid Maiſter Darrell was charged by her Maieſties ſaid Commiſſioners,
                  M. Darrel ad art. 11. pag. 224. 
                  to haue laboured by all the meanes hee could with this excuſe, and that excuſe, how hee might withſtand and preuent that conceit and opinion. Somewhat to this purpoſe he himſelfe confeſſeth: but more is

depoſed. I haue at ſundry times ſaid, that Sathan in his ſubtiltie hath done in the boy ſome ſleight and trifling things, at diuers times, of purpoſe to deceiue the beholders, and to beare them in hand, that he did neuer greater thinges in him: thereby to induce them to thinke, that he was a counterfeite.
               Whileſt I was in theſe practiſes (ſaith Somers) diuers would ſnatch at the ſpirite,Somers. pag. 21. which they ſuppoſed to haue beene vnder the couerlet or clothes with me, and did thereby ſometimes catch mee by the hand, ſometimes by my foote, and ſometimes by my knee: which M. Darrell perceiuing, and that ſome did thereby imagine that it was but my knauery, hee told them that out of doubt it was the Deuill that made thoſe motions, and that he did ſometimes put my hands or feet into their hands that catched at them, of purpoſe thereby to hinder the glorie of God, which in this work he ſaid, did manifeſtly appeare. But when he was preſent, he would not ſuffer (as neere as he could) any to catch at the ſaid ſuppoſed ſpirits, nor to caſt vp the couerlet or cloathes, as otherwiſe vſually they did, to haue ſeene the Deuill, as they pretended.
               
                  When Somers and M. Darrell had beene deceiued by the ſecret bringing of widdow Boote the pretended witch into the chamber, where Somers lay in one of his fittes: whereby they not knowing thereof, Somers lay quiet, both at her comming in, and at her going out: M. Darrell greatly miſliking that practiſe when he knew of it, and perceiued that ſome thereby ſuppoſed the boy to diſſemble, did labour to perſwade thoſe that were preſent (ſaith Somers) that they ſhould not ſo thinke or ſuſpect: affirming it to be the Deuils practiſe,W. Somers pag. 23. and that Sathan woulde not of purpoſe vexe me at thoſe times as he had done before, that ſo he might (as much as lay in him) rob God of his glory, and blemiſh the great works which he did ſhew in me.
               When Somers fell to his fittes againe after Chriſtmas,Rob. Cooper. pa. 105. I ſeeing

him doe and acte certaine fooliſh toyes, was therewith diſcontented: and tolde Maiſter Darrell before diuers, that I verily thought the boy did diſſemble. And Maiſter Darrell gaue me this anſwere: that ſuch things as hee did, were but the illuſions of the Deuill, aſſuring me, that hee did not diſſemble, but was againe repoſſeſſed. And againe: Maiſter Darrel would alwaies excuſe the boy,Ro. Cooper pag. 299. if he did any thing that might be thought to be counterfeit: ſaying, that it was the Deuill that did the ſame, thereby to blemiſh the glorie of God.
               
                  M. Pare. fol. 5.Being many times and often with the boy, I obſerued in him many fooliſh and friuolous geſtures: which gaue me ſome ſparke of ſuſpition of his diſsimulation. For in all thoſe fittes, Maiſter Darrell would ſay: let him alone, it is not hee in deed, but the Deuill that doth it: and vpon the like occaſions would further affirme, that the Deuill indeuoured to darken the worke of God.
               
                  M. Pare, ibi.
                  Againe, I heard Maiſter Aldred charge the boy, to take heed that hee did not diſſemble: whereunto the boy aunſwered, that he did not diſſemble: for (ſaith he) I do not know of any ſtrange thinges that you ſay I haue done: and thereupon Maiſter Darrell ſaid: let him alone, it is not hee in deed, but the Deuill that doth it.M. pare. 265 
                  And againe, Maiſter Darrell did labour to perſwade the people, and that in his Sermons, that when the boy had done ſomething that might argue him to be a diſſembler, it was but a practiſe of the Deuill, thereby to blemiſh the glory of God.
               
                  M. Aldred. fol. 6.Maiſter Darrell hath ſaid before the boy, to ſuch as haue beene medling with him in his fits: let him alone, for it is not hee, but the Deuill, and that the Deuill would hinder the glory of God, by all the meanes he could.
               
                  M. Law: pag, 262,I telling Maiſter Darrell diuers times (ſaith M. Lowe) that if the Deuill were in Somers, I wondred that Somers could ſpeake no language but Engliſh: Maiſter Darrell anſwered me

(as hee did generally to my argument that was alleadged of the boyes counterfeyting) that the Deuill did it to hinder the glory of God in his diſpoſſeſsion.
               Being intreated by M. Euington to come to Garlands houſe,Geo, Richardſon. pag, 270. to ſee the boy in his fits, and to confirme mee that hee was not a counterfeite, becauſe I had alwayes doubted him ſo to bee: I went thither, where I found Maiſter Darrell, M. Dodde, M. Hilderſham, M. Aldridge, M. Euington, and others. At my firſt comming into the houſe, I found the boy in no fitte: but vpon ſome few ſpeeches vſed to him by the Miniſters, he preſently fell into one. In the which fitte he continued a while, and then foamed excedingly: whereat (quoth M. Darrell, and the reſt of the miniſters) marke I pray you, for this is the eſpecialleſt ſigne of his repoſſeſsion. Hereupon ſuſpecting ſomething, I laid my head cloſe to the boyes head, where I heard a kind of grating of ſomewhat betwixt his teeth, & then I told Garland the boyes keeper, that I thought ſomething was in his mouth. Whereupon Garland, taking him by the haire of the head, and I by his mouth, we ſhooke out of his mouth a peece of blacke leade, & thereupon he awaked out of his fit. Then quoth Maiſter Aldridge, Will. hadſt thou not a peece of blacke leade about thee, or in thy mouth: no quoth the boy. And vpon this the foreſaid miniſters generally concluded, that it was a practiſe of the Deuil, to throw the ſaid black leade into the boyes mouth, thereby to choke him.
               In one fit I ſaw William Somers froath at the mouth very much, ſo as the foame roaped downe into his necke:Edm. Garland. pa. 373.
                   and at one time I found a peece of blacke leade in his mouth.
               At one time I foaming (ſaith Somers) very much in my fit,W. Somers pag 33. 
                  Edm. Garland vpon ſome mans motion (as I ſuppoſe) would needes ſearch if I had any thing in my mouth: and I confeſſe, that he found there a peece of blacke leade, which I had put into my mouth, that therby I might foame in more aboundant maner.
               
                  Some other examples might be brought of M. Darrels

                  ſhifting deuiſes, to preſerue the boyes credite, or rather his owne. For this courſe was vſuall with him, inſomuch as when he was abſent, & that the boy did any thing that went a wry, his ſchollers were ſo cunning, that they were able to coyne him ſome excuſes.
               
               Edward Freeman,Ed. Freemā. pag. 299, 
                  going one morning with two or three Shoemakers to Garlands houſe, and perceiuing that whileſt he was there, Somers would not fall into any of his fits, he departed, being deſirous that the Shoemakers (who had neuer ſeene him) ſhould then ſee a fitte: and at his departure he told them, that as ſoone as he was gone, they ſhould ſee him in one.
               
                  This Freeman was one, to whome Somers before had confeſſed his counterfeiting, and therefore hee forbare his fittes whileſt he was preſent. But he was no ſooner out of the dores almoſt, when he fell to his prankes. Now at the ſaid Freemans departure, Miſtres Aldridge affirmed, that the Deuill woulde not ſhew any thing to them that did not belieue.
               
                  M. Crauen. pag. 258
                  Likewiſe when M. Crauen twitching Somers by the finger in one of his fits: he the ſaid Somers cried: Oh who is that that nips me? One Wilkinſon to excuſe the matter ſaid, that it might be the Deuill was then leauing him, when Maiſter Crauen began to nip him.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. IIII. How contrarie to M. Darrels aſſertion, Somers had his ſences & vnderſtanding in his fittes.
               
                  
                     THere is no building bee it neuer ſo ſtrong, that will long continue, if the foundation be not ſure. He is therefore accounted a very vnwiſeman, that wil build either vpon the ſands, or vppon hollow & falſe grounde. which point of good architecture or husbandry, if Maiſter Darrell had well learned, he would neuer haue ſet the frame of all his coſening practiſes, vpon that moiſt and mariſh conceit, that Somers in his fits was altogether ſenceleſſe. For beſides, that none of his fellow Deuill driuers was euer ſo abſurd, as to maintaine his poſition in that behalfe generally, his weake ground in this particular of Somers is ſhaken and ouerthrowne, by many depoſitions.
               
               The chiefe deceit to bleare all their eyes at Nottingham,
                  Rob. Cooper. pa. 106. was the perſwaſion beaten into them by M. Darrell, that Somers was ſenceles in al his fits, & that when he ſpake, it was not he, but the Deuill that ſpake in him.
               George Noble alledgeth three reaſons, why he thought Somers to haue his ſences in his fits, and conſequently,
                  Geo. Noble. pag. 278. 
                  to diſſemble in pretending the contrarie. The firſt is, becauſe (ſaid he) that Somers dancing vpon a bed, and a window being ſomewhat low, that would haue hurt him, if hee had not taken ſome heed of the ſame, he the ſaid Somers would ſtill be looking carefully at the ſaid window leaſt he ſhold chance to hit it, and ſo hurt himſelfe. Secondly, in that a Londoner being by, and bidding

him the ſaid Somers to ſerue God: he the ſaid Somers bad him get him into his countrey: and after being asked by the ſaid Londoner where that was, 
                     •
                  e bad him ſcoffingly, go looke. Thirdly, hee alſo then heard, that one ſhould bid him put vp his ſhirt, then hanging out at his knee, whileſt he was dauncing vpon his bed, and he did ſo.
               
                  Nich Shepard. pag. 205.Vpon the Sonday in the morning I went againe to ſee Somers, where after I had a while remained, & that the boy was dancing, leaping, and playing diuers trickes vpon his bed, it happening that his ſhirt hanging out of his knees, and ſpeaking of it to one Rhodes, that ſtood by me, he the ſaid Somers as he was leaping & dancing in his ſaid fit, did with his hand pul vp his ſhirt, whereby I, together with Peter Rhodes, George Noble, Iohn Rhodes, and Thomas Freeman perceiued, that the boy had ſence in that fit, contrarie to M. Darrels ſaying ouer night.
               
                  Pet. Rhodes pag. 280.Vpon the Sunday morning, after that M. Darrell came to Nottingham; I went to ſee Somers, and the houſe being full, he began his tricks, and as he was dancing and leaping, his ſhirt did hang out of his hoſe, and he put his hand in at his codpeece, & pulled it vp: and as he ran backward, he looked behind him how neere the wall was for hurting himſelfe.
               
                  M. Hallam. fol. 8.It was conſtantly receiued (ſaith M. Hallam) that Somers in his fits had neither ſence, memory, nor vnderſtanding: which he refelleth: Firſt, becauſe he anſwered directly vnto certaine queſtions when he was in his fittes, as being asked whether a certaine woman could ſee, he ſaid ſhe could: being asked how a Sow was killed, he anſwered, that a waine ranne ouer her. Secondly, for that ſtaring with his eyes (when I made as though I would haue put my fingers into them) hee the ſaid Somers winked. Thirdly, becauſe Somers lying quiet when mother Boote was brought in by me, I perceiued, that at ſuch times as Somers ſhewed himſelfe to be troubled, at the comming in of witches, hee knew of their comming before hand.
               
                  
                  M. Crauen ſetteth downe this poſition, that Somers being in his fittes, had the vſe of all his ſenſes. And hee proueth the ſame by fiue or ſixe reaſons:
                  M. Crauen. pa. 258. 
                  the ſumme whereof followeth. Firſt, becauſe Somers remembred what he ſaide in his fittes, and was afraide, which ſhewed to him to haue both memory and fancie. Secondly, for his outward ſenſes, as for ſeeing, in that I haue beene many times preſent, when the boy hath rayſed himſelfe vppon his bedde being in his fittes, to ſee who came in at the dore, and hath named them as they entred, and ieſted vpon them: alſo hee would ſpie if any children ſtoode neare the bedde, and at them eſpecially hee would many times leape and make faces, and laugh exceedingly when hee ſaw them afraide. Thirdly, touching hearing, becauſe the boy would many times talke merrily with the by-ſtanders, and anſwered any man directly to any queſtion he would propound. Fourthly, concerning ſmelling, for that a Gentlewoman comming in, who had ciuette, and ſweete powder (which yeelded indeed a ſweete ſauour) oh (ſayeth the boy in one of his fittes) what a ſweet ſmell is here? Fiftly, for his ſenſe of feeling, in that being pricked with a pin before the Commiſſioners at Nottingham into the legge, hee ſodainely plucked it vppe: and becauſe the ſame day in an other fitte, I made him to cry out with a twitch of his little finger, & he ſaide, oh what is it that nips me?
               
                  Somers in one of his fittes, whileſt I was preſent,Th. Hayes. pa. 317. did laugh exceedingly: and I demaunding of him when his fitte was ended, what moued him ſo to laugh, he told mee, it was becauſe the Deuill ſhewed him a bagge of golde, and tolde him hee would giue it him. &c. which moued mee to thinke that he vnderſtoode and remembred what hee did, or ſuffered in his fittes.
               His taunting and vſing of ſlaunderous ſpeeches (when he was in his fittes) againſt ſuch as he liked not,Edm. Garland, fol 4. might eaſily bee obſerued to proceede from his owne ordinarie lewde

inuention, beſides, many lewde and groſſe geſtures, not fit to bee mentioned. Againe, where it was ſaide, hee had no ſenſe in his fittes, I haue heard him diuerſe times being in his fittes, call many by their true names, and deſcribe others by nicknames, ſo as it appeared, hee had both ſenſe and vnderſtanding. With Garland alſo do agree in effect word for word, M. Parre, M. Aldridge, M. Aldred, and Iohn Sherrart.
               
                  M. Low. pa. 
                        •
                     62.By Somers anſwere vnto mee in theſe wordes: Ah ſirrha, you thinke I counterfeyte, I reſolued my ſelfe, that hee had ſenſe, and vnderſtanding in his fittes, as at other times alſo I had obſerued in him.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. V. Of the motions and knockinges which were heard and ſeene about Somers in his fittes, that they were done and made by himſelfe, and were not as M. Darrel hath reported, extraordinary or ſupernaturall.
               
                  
                     IN the Certificate to the L. Archbiſhop of Yorke, from the Commiſſioners at Nottingham, the knocking and motions about Somers in his bed, were certified amongſt the extraordinarie actions done by him in his fittes. M. Darrell termeth them extraordinary, and ſupernaturall actions: and in his Apologie writeth of them in this ſorte. Hereunto, adde that moſt rare accident that hapned vnder the Couerlette, where Somers lay. There were certaine thinges, ſometimes 4. or 5. at one inſtant, ſtirring and mouing vnder our hands, as if they had beene kitlinges, whelpes, or ſuch liuing creatures: the Couerlette being ſodainely caſt vppe, they

vaniſhed away, but throwne downe, they were preſently there againe.
               
                  He that once hath paſſed the limites of modeſty, doth eaſily grow in ſhort time to be impudent. What Somers himſelfe hath ſaide hereof, together with ſome other fooleries of M. Darrelles, you may peruſe in the fourth Chapter of the ſecond booke, and what is depoſed, doth here inſue.
               
               Hauing heard of many wonders,M. Hallam fol. 8. of certaine knockinges in Somers bedde, I was very deſirous carefully to obſerue the ſame: ſo as one night about twelue of the clocke, Somers being waken, I heard this noyſe ſomewhat dully, and thinking it to bee about the beddes feete, I conueyed my hand into the bedde verie ſecretly and ſoftly, and on the ſodaine laide my left hand on the boyes feete, and there felt one of his toes, ſlipping downe from the other, which was the verie knocking at that time. After which time the boye neuer vſed the like knocking in my preſence.
               For motions, I haue beene oftentimes there,M. Crauen fol. 14. when others haue ſayde, they haue felt the quantitie of a Mouſe, mouing and panting vnder their handes: but my ſelfe, though I haue often endeuoured to feele, and preſently followed the hands of them, that ſayde they felt, could notwithſtanding, neuer perceiue any thing. For the knocking, I haue alſo heard it &c. notwithſtanding, I more wondred at the boyes cunning, then at the Deuilles dancing. Again, this Deuill was of a ſtrange conſtitution, palpable to ſome, but viſible to none. And againe, I haue diſcouered the ſleighte of his iugling in many thinges: as when the noyce of foure or fiue knockes were heard together in manner of a chime, I found one of them to bee his finger thruſt vnder his thigh, as he lay vppon his backe: which thing I would haue ſhewed vnto the people, had not the boy by force of his thigh wreſted it from mee, and turned

himſelfe haſtely vppon his belly, whereuppon the Chime for that night ceaſed.
               
                  M. Barnard fol. 12For any likenes or ſhape, or motion of any bodily ſubſtance, to bee ſeene or felt aboue or vnder the Couerlette, I vtterly deny it: except it were the body or partes of the body of the boy, who lying alwayes vnder a Couerlette, might be the ſleight and nimble motion of ſome partes of his body, deceite the eyes of the beholders.
               
                  George Richardſon fol. 202,Touching the likeneſſes of Kitlinges mouing in Somers bed, I haue heard much wonder thereof, and at one time Thomas Slater being with mee, wee behelde a thing moue and rolle vnder the Couerlette, whereupon Slater catched it in his handes, and drew his dagger of purpoſe to ſtab it, and preſentlie wee turned vp the cloathes, and it was the boy
                     •
                  s foot, which I know to be true, becauſe I was preſent at the feeling and doing thereof. Again, to the tapping and rapping, I haue heard the ſame, and did vpon the hearing of it, imagine that it was the fillipping of one toe with another vpon the bed, and ſometimes with his fingers as he found occaſion, which I ſuſpecting, did at my going to bed ſecretly practiſe it. And it fell out to be ſo agreeable with that which the boy did, as my wife being in bed with mee, was on the ſodaine in greate feare, that Somers ſpirite had followed me.
               
                  Ed, Garland pagCatching on a time at that which I ſaw moue the cloathes, I got holde of it, and offering to caſt vppe the cloathes, to ſee what I had in my hand, it ſlipped from me, and I did then ſuſpect, and do now belieue it to be true, that the thing I had holde of was the boyes priuie members, and that I offering to pull vp the cloathes, he ſhrinking in his bed pulled them out of my hand, I not holding faſt,Edm. Garland. p. 301 becauſe I then ſuſpected ſo much, Againe, Somers lying at my houſe, I found him in a plaine tricke of diſſimulation, vz. he lying in a bed, and I hearing a knocking at the beds feete, ſtepped haſtely to the place, and catched the boy by the toes, which I perceyued to haue made the former knocking, and then I ſaid,

this is a counterfeyte knacke indeede: Whereat Somers laughed.
               For the knocking and tapping, I haue oft heard the ſame,Rob. Cooper. fo.. 17. & now verilie think, that it was done by the boyes own deuiſe, which I did not formerly conceiue, for that I gaue too much credite to the opinion and learning of M. Darrell.
               
               Touching the rapping about Somers bed,M Aldred fol, 6.
                   I and M. Hallam came to the beddes ſide and heard it: and afterwardes conferring together priuately M. Hallams opinion was, that it was nothing elſe, but the tapping of one of his toe nayles vppon an other.
               I haue heard ſometimes a tapping about the boyes bed,M Pare, fol, 5, which I verily thinke was eyther the fillipping of his fingers, or ſome motion with his toes. Againe, touching a matter of ſubſtance, which moued in his bed, I did once catch holde of it, and graſped it in my hand, and I doe thinke, that it was eyther his knee or his thigh.
               I ſaw a thing moue in the boyes bed, and laide my hand on it,Mary Cooper. fol, 1. but it got from me I know not how. The ſecond time I catched at it vnder the clothes, and ſomething pulled my hand very ſtraight, and held it faſt, and I thinke it was my brothers hand: for that I complayning of the hurt I had, hee fell a laughing at mee: and at that time both his handes were in the bed.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. VI. How Somers caſting himſelfe into the fire, was voluntarie, and no extraordinarie matter, as M. Darrell hath pretended.
               
                  
                     AMongſt the admirable workes of William Somers, his caſting into the fire,
                  M. Darrell, Apolo. 
                  hath no meane reputation. M. Darrell telleth vs in his Apology: that the boy being caſt into the fire, his handes ſometimes were in the fire, and that ſometimes his face did lye there a while, and yet that he was not burnt at all. Omitting ſome other reports, as of likelyhood condemned by himſelfe, vz. that lying in the fire, neither his freeze ierkin, nor his hayre touching the burning coales, were ſo much as ſindged. But Somers himſelfe, who ſhould know ſomewhat hereof, depoſeth as followeth.
               
               
                  Somers. pag. 37.As touching the reporte of my caſting into the fire, without any hurt or ſindging eyther of my hayr or apparrel, this is the truth therein. Becauſe the wordes of caſting into the fire, do ſeeme to importe much. Firſt I ſay, that the fyres in my Miſtreſſes houſe, and then afterwardes in my father in lawes, were but very ſmall, made of ſlate coales, and ſo compaſſed at the endes and foreparte with barres of iron, that except I ſhould haue thruſt my ſelfe betwixt the ſaide barres, and the wall, or haue thruſt my fingers betwixt the barres, I could not in any wiſe haue caſt my ſelfe into the fire. But I confeſſe, that M. Darrell hauing tolde me out of S. Marke, and likewiſe hauing ſtraightly warned ſuch as kept me in my ſuppoſed fits, that they ſhould bee very carefull to looke vnto me. I did caſt my ſelfe now and then into the Chimney, or

vpon the yrons or grates: but I neuer did ſo, but when there was company by, that would pull mee out preſently, and then alſo, did it with ſuch warines, as I was ſure, that rather then faile, I might helpe my ſelfe. And for the ſindging neither of my hayr nor apparrell: when I caſt my ſelfe into the fire, I had commonly eyther my hatte or cappe on, which might keepe my hayre if my head had touched the fire. And touching my apparrell, it is vntrue that it was not ſindged, for the wings and skirtes of my freeze ierkin did ſhew the contrary. For my manner was ſo to fall into the Chimney, as that ſometimes my ſhoulders onelie ſhould touch the grate, and ſometimes my buttockes onely, wherby the wings, ſhoulders, and skirtes of my ierkin, were apparantlie ſindged. But I wearing then old leatherne breeches which were greaſie, they indeed tooke little hurt. And more then this in effect, whatſoeuer is reported, I ſay it is falſe. Vnto this depoſition of Somers diuers other teſtimonies may be added. One thing amongſt others, (ſayeth M. Bernard) I ſaw William Somers acte verie fooliſhly.M. Barnard, pag. 255. Hee ſtanding by his ſiſter in the Chimney, ſodainely clapt his buttockes vpon the fire by her, hauing on a very good ſtrong payre of letherne breeches, and in his falling downe, hee did not clap himſelfe right on the fire, but reeled on the one ſide, & was ſnatched vp immediately: which I ſeeing ſo vainely done, I went away fully reſolued of the boyes villanous diſſimulations, and could neuer after bee entreated to ſee him any more. Somers at the end of one of his fittes ſodainely ſtarting vp, went backewardes to the fire,Iames Alwood pa. 289. and fell down with his ſhoulders on the fire, but no man ſtepping to him, hee tombled quickly out againe of him ſelfe. Hereunto alſo appertayneth that which is ſet downe in the firſt Chapter of the thirde Book, concerning his voluntary falling into the fire at S. Iohns, to the admiration of thoſe that were preſent, and knew not the compact betwixt him and Nicholas Shepheard.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. VII. Of Somers pretended ſtrength and weight in his fittes, that contrary to M. Darrelles and his friendes reportes, there was nothing extraordinary in them.
               
                  
                     AS touching the pretended ſtrength of Somers in his fittes, it hath bin reported & auowed: that three or foure had inough to do to hold him: that foure or fiue had much a doe to holde him: & that ſome times three, ſometimes foure, and ſometimes ſix could ſcarſely holde him.M. Darrell, Apolo. 
                  And M. Darrell enlarging the matter aboue the warrant of his authors, ſayeth: that his ſtrength was often ſuch, that ſometimes ſix men could not rule him, had much adoe to holde him, could ſcarſely holde him. Had inough to doe to holde him, (ſay his witneſſes): could not rule him, ſayeth M. Darrell. Hee hath ſo vſed his tongue to deceite, as hardly he can reporte any thing truely. Somers hath dealt ſince his examination at London much more ſincerely and particularly in this matter.
               
               
                  W. Somers pag. 39.Concerning my ſuppoſed extraordinary ſtrength, (ſayeth he) in that it is ſayde, that three or foure, fiue or ſix, and ſometimes ſeauen men vſing their whole ſtrength, were much troubled to hold or carry me, I thinke indeede that I ſeemed diuers times to be more ſtrong then I was: becauſe I often perceiued that they were greatly afraid, who tooke vppon them either to hold or carry me. Inſomuch as at ſometimes I haue ſo ſkarred ſondry with my lookes, as they haue ſtarted from me. Again, I alſo ſo ſeemed, for that they (being many that toyled themſelues about mee) much hindred one an other by pulling of me contrary wayes.

Beſides, for one of my yeares and bigneſſe, I haue a reaſonable ſtrength, and doe thinke it no great matter to trouble foure or fiue, that ſhould take vpon them to carrie me: as I did thoſe that tooke vpon them to carrie me to Smalles houſe, the morning before the faſt. It hath alſo beene reported, that when I haue ſeemed ſenceleſſe, that I haue not breathed, that my pulſe hath not moued, and that I haue beene colde, as though I had beene dead: they might as well I thinke, haue ſaid, that I was dead, and that M. Darrell hath reſtored mee to life againe. That therefore which hath beene giuen out touching my pulſe, my coldneſſe, and my not breathing, is vtterly vntrue. I confeſſe that the time of the yeare was very colde, when I did practiſe thoſe fittes, and I being for the moſt part in my doublet and hoſe, could not chuſe but be often very cold. But of theſe laſt points, as by the way: his ſuppoſed extraordinarie ſtrength is the thing in hande: whereof there are theſe ſubſequent depoſitions.
               
               Sometimes Somers woulde make ſhew of great ſtrength,Ed. Garland fol. 4.
                   when being proued by mee, it was but ordinarie according to his perſon. And againe, whereas it was reported,Edm. Gar. pag. 301, that Somers had extraordinarie ſtrength, I found him often of eaſie ſtrength, and to make ſhew of greater ſtrength then in deede he had.
               I ſaw and heard great admiration of the boyes ſtrength and waight, and ſeeing one attempting to lift him,M. Foſter fol. 18, was toſſed and ſweat much therewith, I for my ſatiſfaction indeuoured to lift him vp in his fitte, and did it very eaſily: neyther finding nor perceiuing any ſupernaturall ſtrength or waight in the ſaide boy.
               I was at Garlands houſe with the boy, where were preſent M. Darrell, M. Euington, M. Aldridge, M. Hilderſham,
                  Geor. Richardſon, fol, 20. & M. Dod, & ſome others: & there ſome one ſaid, it is giuen out that this is counterfeit, and therefore let vs ſee him that doth think ſo,

now to trie his ſtrength. Whereupon M. Euington called out me, (becauſe he heard my opinion thereof before) and bad mee trie the boyes ſtrength. And ſo ſaid, the boy was in a fitte, and preſently thruſt downe his leg as ſtiffe as might be, and I came to him & heaued at him & lifted him vp. The miniſters asked me what waight he was, & I anſwered, that I had lifted an hundred and an halfe with more eaſe in my youth: yet do I not thinke him to be of that waight. Then they bad me to bow the boyes legge: and I ſeeing how he had ſtretched it out, ſet my knee to his knee, and then bended his legge backward at my pleaſure.
               
                  M. Pare, 264.
                  Hearing of the boyes extraordinary ſtrength, I thought good to trie it: and vpon proofe, found it to bee but ordinarie: and ſo likewiſe for his waight, I could neuer perceiue it to bee extraordinarie.
               
                  Rob. Coop. pa. 291.I haue often proued the boyes ſtrength in his fittes, but neuer founde it to bee but ordinarie. And I haue oftentimes, when he hath fallen vpon the floore, taken him vp my ſelfe, and laide him vpon the bed, neuer perceiuing him either to be extraordinarily ſtrong or heauie.
               
                  Edw. Freeman. pag, 299.Towards the euening, the boy making ſhew as though he would throw himſelfe into the fire, I catched at him, and notwithſtanding the great ſtrength & waight that he was ſuppoſed to haue, vz. that foure or fiue could ſcarce ſtirre or hold him, I threw him eaſily vpon the bed, which when the boy perceiued, and that hee was in my hands, to whom he had before diſcouered his counterfeiting, he preſently cried out: Lord haue mercie vpon me, and gaue ouer his fit.
               
                  M. Hallam. fol. 8.Being with Somers one night, after his knocking had beene diſcouered, he aſſaying to heaue vp his bodie in a maruellous manner, and I indeuouring to keepe him downe, could not doe it: but looking more neerely vnto him, I eſpied that hee ſupported himſelfe with his legs & ſholders, wherfore putting my hand into the bed, & taking his legs from vnder him, he came down quickly &

with eaſe. More to this purpoſe may be ſeene in the fourth Chapter of the ſecond booke, how the boy by ſhrinking downe, and ſtanding cloſe to him that aſſaide to lift him, made ſhew of greater ſtrength, and weight then he had.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. VIII. Somers knowledge in his fits was not extraordinary, as M. Darrell and his friends haue falſly pretended: neither could hee ſpeake Greeke, Hebrew, or Latine, otherwiſe then hee had learned.
               
                  
                     THe authour of the briefe Narration, to proue that Somers had extraordinarie knowledge: and thereby to inforce that hee was poſſeſſed, the ſame his knowledge proceeding from Sathan that was within him, doth tell vs, that Somers in his fittes ſpake of things done in his abſence, at the inſtant when he ſpake them: as that (ſaith he) of the examination of Millicent Horſley, and of M. Darrels & M. Aldriges comming, vnknowne to any there preſent. Theſe examples which the Narrator alleageth, being meere vntruthes, & coſenages, M. Darrell (it ſeemeth) is in his Apologie aſhamed of them, and therefore hee omitteth them. Or if not ſo, his fault is the greater, in that he hath ſo ſet downe this matter, as though it had beene much more wonderfull, then by the ſaid examples it could bee well induced. For thus hee reporteth it: His knowledge was ſuch, that by vertue thereof, hee tolde of thoſe things which were done and ſpoken diuers miles of him, at the ſame inſtant they fell out, and foretold thinges to come. From hence alſo it was, that diuine like he continued his ſpeech, in expounding

the Creede for an howre together. Who woulde not thinke by theſe generall tearmes, that the boye had beene a kinde of Prophete? But they are (bee you ſure) a couple of falſe ſeducers, and counterfeyte companions: it being impoſſible, (if they were not madde) but that they ſhould write theſe thinges, againſt their owne conſciences, and of purpoſe for their owne reputations, to abuſe their Readers.
               
               
                  Concerning the boyes diuine-like expounding of the Creede, the truth thereof hath beene ſhewed in the firſt Chapter of this booke: and for the reſt, how ridiculous it is, that which enſueth will declare and make manifeſt. And firſt, as touching this fore-telling of M. Darrels comming to Nottingham. Beſides, that the boy vnderſtoode by Hugh Wilſon, and by other ſpeeches of diuerſe perſons, (to omit the compact betwixt them of his promiſed repaire, when Somers could ſo acte his fittes, as he ſhould be thought thereby to be poſſeſſed) that M. Darrell was ſtil expected,
                  W. Somers, pag. 9. 
                  he ſayeth thus, for his ſaide pretended extraordinarie knowledge. As M. Darrell was comming, one ouertaking him vpon Trent bridge, and ouergoing him, reported in Nottingham that M. Darrell was coming, which reporte being brought to the houſe where I lay, I heard thereof, and did alſo perceiue, that he was comming by their looking out, and by the ſpeeches of ſome others, that ranne forth to ſee him. Wherevpon I did ſay, that M. Darrell was comming: which wordes of mine, they that were preſent & heard them, tooke them (as it ſeemeth) to be miraculous, becauſe M. Darrell had ſent worde by Hugh Wilſon (but falſly) that in my fittes, I heard no more then a blocke, which conceite I did nouriſh as much as I could, during the time of all my counterfeyting. And more then this, concerning this ſuppoſed wonder of my foretelling of M. Darrels comming, I deny to be true.
               
                  
                  Now, for his ſuppoſed skill in foretelling of M. Aldridges comming vnto him,
                  Somers pa. 36. 
                  and ſo of diuers which might as wel haue beene added, I proteſt (ſaith Somers) that this is the truth which inſueth, whatſoeuer is giuen out to the contrarie. There were for the moſt part diuers in the place, where I did lye, when I was in my fits: and ſome of them would bee commonly looking out at the windowes, and as they ſaw any Preacher comming, or any other man of note, they would ſay amongeſt themſelues, one to an other, that ſuch a man, naming him, was comming. Whereby I ſtill ouer hearing them (they ſuppoſing me to heare nothing at all) I did oftentimes then ſay, that ſuch a man was comming, and likewiſe named him: which they alwaies thought through M. Darrels inſtructions, to be done by the Deuill, they ſuppoſing me to be poſſeſſed.
               
                  And thirdly, as touching the report of his skill, concerning Millicent Horſley, thus alſo Somers himſelfe doth depoſe. It hath beene giuen out, that I, hauing before named Millicent Horſley for a witch, ſhould tell the time,ibid. and the words that ſhe vttered, when ſhe was examined before one M. Parkins, a Iuſtice of the peace, and others, foure miles diſtant from Nottingham, where I then remained: the truth whereof is thus: Maiſter Darrell told my father in law, and others in my hearing, that he the ſaid Maiſter Darrell, Maiſter Aldred, and ſome others, were going to carrie Millicent Horſley (that preſent morning) to the ſaid Maiſter Parkins, to bee examined. Whereupon, I geſsing by the time of Maiſter Darrels departure, and by the diſtance of the way, and of the likelihood that ſhe would deny her ſelfe to bee a witch, ſaid to thoſe that were preſent by mee in one of my fittes, about eleuen of the clocke, that then Millicent Horſley was in examining, and that ſhe denyed her ſelfe to be a witch. Hereof when Maiſter Darrell at his returne was certified, hee accounted it a great wonder, affirming, that I had truely ſpoken, both concerning

the time, and the witches wordes. And then hee and others tooke vppon them to write diuers thinges about that matter, which I had neuer thought of: as that I had foretold, that the ſaid witch was picking of her toes, when they came to her houſe in the morning: and that ſhe denying to go with them, they were compelled to draw her forth by force: which things they alſo ſaid, were true. Howbeit, I did verie well know, that I had neuer ſpoken of them: but I was content to let them ſay what they liſt, becauſe ſuch reportes did giue the more credite to the reſt of my doinges. And whereas one Ione Pie hath depoſed before the Commiſsioners, authoriſed from the Lord Archbiſhoppe of Yorke, that I made mention of Millicent Horſleyes examination, about one of the clocke in the afternoone, I doe not thinke, that therein ſhe depoſed truely, or at the leaſt I thinke Maiſter Darrell at his returne, ſignifying, that the ſaid Millicent was in examining, about one of the clocke, did thereby make her the ſaide Ione to imagine, that it was about that time, when I had ſpoken of the ſaide Millicent Horſley.
               
               But I maruaile, why ſome other examples of my ſuppoſed wonderfull knowledge of one Bereſforde, whom I was thought neuer to haue ſeene before: notwithſtanding, that about a yeare or more then paſt, I went with the ſaid Bereſforde towards Cheſterfielde. Whereupon, when hee came vnto mee in my ſuppoſed fittes, I named vnto him certaine ſtiles in the way: and ſome other thinges, whereof wee had ſpoken, as we were going together: as that hee ſhould haue beene a ſchoolemaiſter, and that hee was going to his brother, &c. which things Maiſter Bereſforde, confeſsing to bee true, it was reckoned for a miraculous matter: the rather becauſe hee affirmed, that hee had neuer ſeene mee before, neither was it knowne to any then preſent, that I had euer beene in his companie.
               
                  Likewiſe, it might here haue beene added, how I tolde one of the Iaylors, (as I remember) of the Queenes priſon, howe much money he had in his purſe: which happened in this ſort: I deſired to borrow ſixe pence of one Henry Ball that ſtoode by me: whoe preſently ſaid to the reſt of the companie, that I had truely tolde him what money hee had in his purſe, and that hee had in deed but ſixe pence in it. Whereupon quoth one of the ſaide Iaylors (leaning vpon Henrie Balles ſhoulder by my beds head,) If hee can tell mee how much money I haue in my purſe, I ſhall then verily thinke that he hath a Deuill in him. And ſo the ſaid Iaylor telling Ball ſoftly in my hearing (whom they ſuppoſed alwaies to bee ſenceleſſe in my fittes) that hee had three ſhillinges in his purſe, and no more, he did then aske mee what money hee had in his purſe: and I tolde him he had three ſhillinges: which ſeemed to be a very ſtrange matter to all that were preſent. And thus farre Somers himſelfe, of his owne extraordinary knowledge. Now let vs heare what is depoſed of this matter.
               
               
                  Foure thinges are worthy the marking (ſaith Maiſter Crauen.) Firſt,M. Crauen, fol, 14. that the boy neuer cryed (in my hearing) at the approach of any perſon accuſed, but eyther when ſome noyſe was made about the dore, whereby he might geſſe of her comming, or elſe ſome bodie tolde aloude in the houſe, that the Witch was comming.
               Secondly, that he would raiſe his head from the pillow at the comming in of euery Witch, and be ſure to ſee her within the houſe, before hee fell (as they called it) into his ſleeping traunce.
               Thirdly, that hee cryed ſometimes, as though a Witch had beene neere at hande, when none was eyther comming, or ſent for. As once when the Conſtable ſaid, they would fetch one

                  Morris wiſe, whom he had affirmed to be a witch, hauing a familiar, in likeneſſe of a birde: vpon a noiſe of people at the dore, he cried out after his vſuall manner: which made euery man preſent to looke for the witches comming in: whereas the Conſtable vppon ſome better aduiſe, neuer went for her. Fourthly, that when a woman, accuſed for a witch, was cloſely brought in for an experiment by M. Hallam, (a miniſter of honeſt report) the boy neither cried at her comming or going, nor ſlept as he was wont whileſt ſhe ſtaied in the houſe.
               
                  M. Aldridge pa, 88.I thought that Somers had named ſome for witches by an extraordinary knowledge, being therein confirmed by Maiſter Darrels ſpeeches, of the detection of certaine witches by ſome in Lancaſhire. But now becauſe he named none for witches, but ſuch as were commonly reputed ſo before, and for that Somers ſaith, he had no other knowledge whereby he named them: I rather thinke it to be true, which the boy affirmeth, then that hee had any extraordinarie knowledge of them. And againe, at one time,M. Aldridge pag. 234. I came to Robert Coopers houſe when the boy was in a fit, & there was brought into the houſe widdow Elſe of Carleton, formerly nominated by him to be a witch, and ſent thither by M. Aldred (as I thinke.) Vpon her comming, the boy grow to increaſe in his fitte: but when ſhe came neere, and that he ſaw her, he became quiet. Whereupon I purpoſing to make triall, whether he diſſembled in that point or no, tooke the widdow Elſe away, and walked to the Church dore, (which was about thirtie yards diſtant from Coopers houſe.) And after ſome ſtay made there, I returned to the houſe againe, & brought the ſaid woman cloſe behind me: where we found the boy well & at meate. And after ſome few ſpeeches with him (as asking him if hee had any good meate, and whether I ſhould eate with him: & he anſwering yea, if it pleaſed me) I moued my bodie awrie: by meanes whereof, he viewing the woman that ſtood ſtill cloſe behind me all the while at my backe, did fall preſently into a fit.
               
                  
                  It is likewiſe proued by M. Hallams depoſition,
                  M. Hallam, fol. 8 
                  that the boy had no extraordinarie knowledge, as it was pretended. Firſt, in that when a blinde woman was taken in ſuſpition to be a Witch, he asking Somers being in a fitte, whether that Witch could ſee or no: he ſaide ſhee could: Secondly, in that when widdow Boote was brought in and out, three ſeuerall times ſecretly, he not knowing of it, neyther altred eyther at her comming in, or going out, as otherwiſe his manner was.
               
                  Now concerning Somers pretended extraordinary knowledge of diuerſe languages. M. Darrell was charged before her Maieſties ſaide Commiſſioners, that hee had very confidentlie affirmed, that the boy in ſome of his fittes, did ſpeake Latine, Greeke, and Hebrewe, in a very admirable ſorte. And he confeſſeth the ſame in effect to be true: But hee is conuinced of great ouerſight therein, by ſondrie depoſitions. What M. Darrell hath depoſed, doth here enſue: and the witneſſes to the contrary doe afterwardes follow.
               
               I haue ſaide that William Somers in ſome of his pretended fittes, did ſpeake ſome Hebrew, and Greeke,M, Darrell ad art, 12, pa, 329, being altogether ignorant in both thoſe languages: but it was verie little, that hee ſo ſpake. And in that he ſpake no more, it did proceede from the ſubteltie of Sathan, who if hee had ſpoken much in that ſorte, ſhould haue made his owne worke in Somers moſt manifeſt: and likewiſe I confeſſe, that diuerſe queſtions being propounded in Latine to Somers, he the ſaide Somers anſwered aptlie in Latine ſo long, that hee driue one ſpeaking into him in that language, to a non plus, as I belieue, being one that was no great ſcholler, although he the ſaide Somers (as I belieue) could not of himſelfe haue anſwered ſo in Latine.
               
                  The ſaide M. Darrell being here demaunded, whether he was preſent, when the boy did ſpeake eyther Hebrew,
                  M Dar. ibid. 
                  Greeke, or Latine, anſwereth, that he was not: but ſayeth,
                  
that the Greeke wordes (which he doth not remember) were deliuered vnto him in writing, by a Maiſter of Arts, one M Bernard: and the Latine wordes (which he hath alſo forgotten) by one Iohn Wiggen: And touching the Hebrew, hee ſayeth, that he hath ſo heard, but knoweth not who tolde him, nor anie thing of the certainety thereof. A man of ſuch good partes as M. Darrelles friendes do account him, would not haue publiſhed ſuch matters vppon ſo ſlender groundes. And yet if he had ſaide truly therein, his credulitie might in ſome ſorte haue excuſed him. Conſider what is hereof depoſed.
               
               
                  Io. VViggen. pa. 321Whereas it hath beene conceiued, that I ſhould reporte, that William Somers in his fittes did anſwere in Greek, and Latine, to many queſtions demaunded of him: for the ſpeaking of Greek, I remember that one Maiſter Iohn Lowe ſpake vnto him in Greeke, and he anſwered him nothing but laughed. And for his ſpeaking of Latine, my meaning was, that Somers ſaide: Ego ſum Deus, Ego ſum Rex: and ſometimes, etiam, non, &, minime, and otherwiſe, not any ſaying, or ſentence whole together.
               
                  M. Bernard, pag 401Albeit, (ſayeth M. Bernarde) that I was oftentimes with Somers in many of his fittes: yet hee did neuer ſpeake or pronounce any Hebrew, Greek, or Latine, at any time, when I was preſent. And with M. Bernard, doe agree word for word in effect, M. Crauen, and M. Hallam.
               
               
                  M. Lowe, pag. 262,I went to William Somers, of purpoſe to trie, whether hee could ſpeake, or the ſuppoſed Deuill in him, eyther Latine, Greeke, or any learned language, that I might enforme my ſelfe concerning the truth or falſhoode of his pretended poſſeſſion. Whereupon appoſing him with diuers queſtions in Greeke, and in Latine, neither he the ſaide Somers, nor the ſuppoſed Deuill in him, did anſwere one word, eyther in Greeke, or Latine, except etiam, or minime, or ſuch like, without any fitte relation to that which had

beene asked. And againe, talking with Maiſter Darrell diuerſe times about the premiſſes, and telling him,Ibid. that if the Deuill were in Somers, I wondred that he could ſpeake no languages but Engliſh: Maiſter Darrell anſwered mee, (as hee did generally to any argument that was alledged of the boyes counterfeyting) that the Deuill did it to hinder the glory of God in his diſpoſſeſſion.
               By the perſwaſion of Miſtreſſe Gray,
                  M. Leigh pa, 266, I did goe to ſee William Somers with this reſolution, that if he had (as it was reported) a Deuil in him: the Deuill hauing the vſe of his tongue, could ſpeake Latine, Greeke, or any other learned language. Whereupon, when I came vnto him, I ſpake in Latine, and asked an anſwere from him in Latine againe: but hee did not anſwere me any thing at all in Latine, but non, and nolo: which I perceyuing, tooke him for a counterfeyte, and ſo afterwardes did alwaies repute him.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. IX. There was no impoſſibility in Somers fittes, as M. Darrell and his friendes haue falſly pretended.
               
                  
                     THe generall plee of M. Darrell in his Apologie, and of the author of the briefe Narration, with the reſt of his friendes, in defence of himſelfe, and to proue that Somers did not diſſemble, is this: vz. that thoſe thinges which he did in his fittes, were impoſſible for him to haue done by any naturall or artificiall power: and that therefore there was ſome ſupernaturall cauſe of them, which was (ſayeth Maiſter Darrell) and euill ſpirite poſſeſſing him. For ſayeth hee further, if thoſe thinges moſt ſtrange,

and admirable can be done by any humaine skill, I deny not but hee may bee a counterfeyte. For the better ſatisfaction therefore of the Gentleman, it may pleaſe him to peruſe the laſt Chapter of the thirde Booke, and there to conſider, what his owne witneſſes vpon their reexamination haue depoſed, touching theſe pretended impoſſibilities, and alſo to vouchſafe the reading of theſe depoſitions following.
               
               
                  Rob. Cooper. pa. 106.Now I conſider without feare, what things the boy did in his fittes: I thinke any other of his nimblenes and capacitie may doe the like.
               
                  Nic. Shep. fol, 2,I neuer did ſee any thing that Somers did, to make mee to thinke, that it was ſupernaturall. And againe, I tolde M. Darrell, that Somers was no more poſſeſſed then I was my ſelfe: for (quoth I) I haue ſeene him doe all his fittes, and I my ſelfe can doe two more then he hath done. Why then (quoth M. Darrel) thou art poſſeſſed with a Deuill:pa. 209, to whome I anſwered, that hee lyed, and that I was as good a Chriſtian as he.
               
                  M. Crauen▪ fol 14.Notwithſtanding, all the wonders by other men ſeene, and reported, it was neuer my happe, though often there, to ſee him doe any thing, which an other boye that woulde haue endeuoured himſelfe to the like lewdenes, might not eaſily haue performed.
               
                  M. Foſter, fol. 18I was but twiſe with Somers in all his fittes, and at one of the ſame times, I well remember, that M. Aldred asked mee my opinion, touching the truth or falſhood of the boyes repoſſeſsion, wherunto I anſwered, that I ſaw nothing but it might bee counterfeyted.
               
                  George Richardſon fol. 20.I was ofte with the boy in his fittes, and could neuer ſee any thing done by him, but I could doe the like.
               
                  M Aldred, pag. 246Seeing Somers in his fittes the fift of Nouember, heauing vppe his belly, drawing his mouth towardes his eares: ſcriching &c. I departed away perſwaded that he was a counterfeyte, and

that he did nothing, but that which a boye naughtely diſpoſed might doe aſwell as he.
               Standing near to the bed where Somers lay vpon the day of his pretended diſpoſſeſsion,M Pare. pag. 264. and well noting the manner of his preſent fittes, I could not perceiue any extraordinarie thing to be done by the boy, but what any other might well haue done, although M. Darrell did then endeuour to perſwade the hearers preſent, that they were paſt the power of any naturall man to doe.
               
                  Although (ſaide M. Wallys,T. VVallys. pa. 268. 
                  brother in law to M. Darrell,) I had diuerſe times heard, that the boy did thinges paſt the naturdll power of man: yet when I ſaw them, I could not perceiue any ſuch ſtrangenes in them: and therefore I did forbeare much to viſite him.
               Seing William Somers vpon the Saturday at night (before his pretended diſpoſſeſſion,) lye on his bed, gaping, ſtrugling,Iames Alwood p. 289 and ſpurning, I obſerued that any body naughtily diſpoſed, might haue done the ſame.
               I neuer ſaw (ſayeth Richard Newton, one of M. Darrels chiefe deponentes) Somers doe any thing,Rich. Newton. but that a boye of his yeares might eaſily doe.
               
                  Whether theſe depoſitions will ſatisfie M. Darrell & his friendes, it may be doubted, they are ſo ſtrongly poſſeſſed with their owne conceites: but to anie reaſonable men, they will be ſufficient, to ſhew the vanitie of the forſaide pretended impoſſibilities.
               
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. X. How contrarie to M. Darrels and his friends aſſertions, William Somers was accounted by many in Nottingham, for a diſſembler, from the time that he beganne his practiſes there, vntill he confeſſed the ſame himſelfe.
               
                  IT hath beene falſly giuen out by M. Darrell and his friendes, that there was no ſuſpition and reporte that Somers was a counterfeyte, till about a moneth after M. Darrels comming to Nottingham, and that then, hee the ſaide Somers, hauing detected a kinſewoman of M. Freemans for a Witch, he the ſaide M. Freeman began to reporte that the boy was a counterfeyte. For the truth is, that he was deemed for a diſſembler, not onely before M. Darrels comming to Nottingham, but likewiſe aſwell whileſt M. Darrell dealt with him about his diſpoſſeſſion: as afterwardes alſo in the whole courſe of his pretended fittes, as by the depoſitions following it will appeare.
               Firſt therfore concerning the opinion held of Somers, before M. Darrels comming to Nottingham. It being obiected againſt M. Darrell before her Maieſties commiſſioners, that he was aduertiſed vpon his firſt comming thether, that he the ſaid Somers was thought by many to bee a diſſembler:M. Darrell ad. art. 1. pag. 215. he denyeth the ſame: but that is depoſed, as alſo that Somers was ſo reputed: and that hee the ſaide M. Darrell vnderſtanding thereof, laboured as much as he could to perſwade the contrary.
               
                  T. Porter, fol. 3.
                  At M. Darrels comming to my houſe (ſaith Thomas Porter) on the Saturday at night, the fift of Nouember, I told him,

that it was reported by the towneſmen, that the boy did counterfeyte: and M. Darrell in the preſence of the boye, and of manie people there preſent anſwered: I doe aſſure you, they that thinke ſo, ſhall ſee with their eyes the contrary.
               
               
                  After three or foure dayes,
                  Ro. Cooper pag. 97. 
                  that William Somers did begin to haue fittes, I did verily thinke that hee did but diſſemble: and when I could not perſwade him to deſiſt from that courſe, I did refuſe afterwardes to come to him for the ſpace of a weeke or more, vntill M. Darrell came: by whoſe wordes I was drawne to be of his opinion, vz. that the boye was poſſeſſed:
                  R. Cooper. pag. 199 
                  for the which I am now very ſory, and that I was ſo deluded. And againe, it was very generally receyued and thought, a fortnight before M. Darrels comming to Nottingham, that the boy did diſſemble.
               
               
                  M. Aldred alſo departing, vpon the fift of Nouember,M. Aldred. pa. 246. from Somers with this perſwaſion, that hee was but a counterfeyte, as before it is expreſſed in the former chapter, he further depoſeth thus. The next day (ſayeth he) I ſpake with M. Darrell, who tolde me, that the boye was no counterfeyte, but poſſeſſed with a Deuill: and that hee knew it by the ſignes in the boy, which were like to thoſe ſignes that he had found in Katherine Wright, and in the vii. in Lancaſhire. And then and there, I did change my mind of the boyes counterfeyting, relying on the report, credite, and experience of M. Darrell onely: and yet I did alwaies doubt in my hart, that he did but diſſemble.
               
               
                  Indeede it was thought by many before M. Darrels firſt comming to Somers, that the Boy did abſolutely diſſemble.
                  Edm. Garland. pa, 246,
               
               Vnto theſe depoſitions, all thoſe witneſſes may be added, who haue teſtifyed that M. Darrel, the firſt three daies that he came to Somers, endeuoured nothing more, then to perſwade the people, that Somers did not counterfeyte, but was indeed poſſeſſed, thereby to beate down the opinion of his diſſimulation: which argueth directly that he was acquainted (as Porter hath depoſed) with the ſaid opinion.
               
                  Secondly alſo, notwithſtanding M. Darrels peremptory aſſertions, and all his perſwaſions, for the firſt three dayes, and afterwardes, that hee came vnto Somers, that he the ſaide Somers did not diſſemble, but was poſſeſſed, and afterwardes aſſalted to be repoſſeſſed: yet many ſtill retayned their former opinions that hee was but a counterfeyte, as the depoſitions, following do declare.
               
                  Garland, pa. 197 & pa. 198.M. Darrel, at his firſt comming to Somers, did ſignifie to the people, that the boy did not diſſemble, and made many ſpeeches to aſſure them thereof: but yet many did ſtill holde the contrary opinion. And againe, M. Darrel in many of his ſermons, and at ſondrie other times, hath related the manner of the boyes fittes, before the diſpoſſeſſion, and at the diſpoſſeſſion: ſetting forth the manner and ſtrangenes of them, and hath blamed ſuch as would not belieue the ſame, charging them with weakenes of faith: And yet notwithſtanding, ſondrie perſons ſtill helde & affirmed, that the matter was but diſſembled.
               
               
                  T. Porter pa 198M. Darrel, at his firſt comming to Somers at my houſe, both on the Saturday, Sonday, and Munday, did ſignifie that the Boy did not diſſemble, and in thoſe times vſed many reaſons and ſpeeches to perſwade the people there preſent, to thinke ſo: but all that notwithſtanding, diuerſe perſons ſtill helde opinion, that the boy did diſſemble.
                  Porter 199 And againe, M. Darrell in many of his Sermons and other ſpeeches, after the diſpoſſeſſion, vrging that the Deuill would ſeeke to enter into the boy again, did blame thoſe that would not belieue that the boy was poſſeſſed, and diſpoſſeſſed, and charged them with vnbeliefe: and vſed many ſuch like ſpeeches: but yet all that notwithſtanding, ſondrie perſons ſtill helde opinion, that the boy did but counterfeyte.
               
               
                  Ro. Cooper pag. 200
                  When Somers was at my houſe, and made ſhew that hee ſaw the Deuill, in this forme, and that forme: and that Maiſter Darrell tolde the people, that hee ſaw the Deuill rolling vnder the couerlet, and expounded the knocking and tapping to

be the euill ſpirit: Maiſter Hallam, and ſome others began then to ſuſpect the matter to be more ſtrangely accounted of by Maiſter Darrell, then in deed it was. And from thenceforth, many began to obſerue the boyes fittes with leſſe feare, and more circumſpection: But at all times ſundrie perſons ſtill held opinion, that all was but counterfeited: whereat M. Darrell was continually much diſpleaſed. And againe, M. Darrell in ſundry of his ſermons after the ſuppoſed diſpoſſeſsion, did blame thoſe, who helde that the boy did diſſemble in his fits, both at the time of his diſpoſſeſsion, and at other times, charging them with vnbeliefe,
                  pag. 199. 
                  and deliuering ſpeeches of ſcorne and diſdaine to ſatiſfie them any further therein. But all this notwithſtanding, many ſtill held and affirmed, that it was but diſsimulation.
               
               Likewiſe Peter Rhodes, George Noble, Thomas Freeman, and Nicholas Shepheard (as it is before depoſed & mentioned) perceiuing by the boies pulling vp of his ſhirt, in one of his fits vpon the Sonday morning, after M. Darrels comming vnto him, that hee had his ſences, they went their waies with this reſolution: that for a certainty (as they thought) he was but a counterfeit.
               And thirdly, although M. Darrell,
                  M. Darrell ad. art. 3. pag. 34. when it was commonly giuen out in Nottingham, that Somers was a countererfeit, did (as he confeſſeth in his ſermons) perſwade his auditorie (the beſt he could) to the contrary, affiming confidently that hee was no counterfeie: and notwithſtanding all that hee could ſay and proteſt concerning Somers fits, when Sathan was ſeeking to repoſſeſſe him, or any thing hee did alleadge for his repoſſeſſion, eyther before or ſince: yet the generall opinion in Nottingham and thereabouts, then was & ſtill doth continue amongſt the diſcreter ſort, that he the ſaid Somers was in all his ſaid practiſes a counterfeit diſſembler.
               
                  The depoſitions to this purpoſe doe enſue. Maiſter Crauen ſaith,M. Crauen. fol. 14 that vpon the wonderfull report of the boyes poſſeſsion and diſpoſſeſsion, he could not at the firſt but thinke it to be true: which if hee had ſeene, hee ſhould not perhaps haue ſo lightly beleeued. But after his repoſſeſsion (as they called it) I ſoone chaunged (ſaith hee) mine opinion: Firſt, becauſe I neuer ſawe him doe any thing, which an other lewdly diſpoſed, might not eaſily haue performed. Secondly, for that I diſcouered the ſleight of his iugling in many thinges, vz. in playing his trickes vnder a couerlet. Thirdly, becauſe the boy ſeeming wearie of his ſeruice, did peraduenture take this courſe to bee rid of it: which I doe coniecture, becauſe that after hee was releaſed, he neuer had any fitte (for ought I know) till vpon an other diſcontentment, when he was bound ouer to the aſsiſes for a Witch.
               
               
                  M. Bernard. fol. 13.Maiſter Bernard yeeldeth in like ſorte certaine reaſons, whereby hee was induced to thinke, that Somers diſſembled. The ſumme whereof is. Firſt, becauſe hee had heard that Somers began the like fits foure or fiue yeares before. Secondly, that being a prentiſe, hee might thereby procure his libertie. Thirdly, becauſe his counterfeyting was gainefull. Fourthly, for that he being a proud boy, his pretended wonderfull fittes, did bring him great admiration, which pleaſed his humour. Fiftly, in that his latter fittes were more looſe, and not ſo cunningly handled as his firſt. And laſtly, becauſe in diſcouering of Witches, he named none but poore and baſe people, ſuch as hee thought he might bee bolde with. And againe, ſeeing the boy acte his fittes vainely and ridiculouſly,
                  M. Barnard. pag. 254. 
                  I verily thought that all his doinges were but villanies and knaueries.
               
               
                  Ed. Garland pag. 301,
                  I obſerued many fittes to bee feyned by the boy, during the time that hee was at my houſe: whereupon I held him, and

accounted him afterwardes for a counterfeite.
                  M. Leigh. pag. 266, And Maiſter Leigh: When I perceyued that the Deuill, that was pretended to bee in Somers, could ſpeake no language but Engliſh, I tooke the boy for a counterfeite, and ſo alwaies after did repute him.
               
               
                  Hauing talked with William Somers,M Aldred. pag. 96. 
                  and comparing together all thinges, which happened in the time of his ſuppoſed poſſeſsion and repoſſeſſion, and what hath beene brought to light ſince, and conſidering the preſent eſtate of the boy, and diuers particulars, whereof I haue beene now examined, I doe verily thinke and belieue in my conſcience, that they were all in Nottingham, who thought the boy to haue beene poſſeſſed, and repoſſeſſed, very much abuſed diuerſly: and that the ſaid Somers was but a diſſembler in all the courſe of his ſaid fits: and ſo conſequently, that he was neither poſſeſſed by Sathan, as it was imagined, nor diſpoſſeſſed, nor repoſſeſſed.
               
               And the boyes father in law: I doe verily thinke,
                  Rob. Coop. pa. 106. 
                  and belieue in my conſcience, that William Somers did counterfeit all that hee did: that hee was neuer poſſeſſed, diſpoſſeſſed, nor repoſſeſſed: and that Maiſter Darrell hath dealt very vngodly in all this cauſe, and eyther by compact or cunning, did draw on the ſaid boy in his diſsimulation, for what cauſe I know not, except it were for his owne eſtimation: which I doe verily ſuſpect.
               
               Theſe generall depoſitions are further ſtrengthened by ſundry particular teſtimonies, in euery Chapter almoſt of this booke: eſpecially in the fourth and fift Chapters, where it is proued, that the pretence of the boyes want of ſence in his fittes, and the knockinges and motions vnder a couerlet, were all meere fooleries and diſſembled coſenages. Beſides, although this treatiſe

hath growne to be ouer tedious: yet very many thinges haue beene omitted, which would more fully haue diſcouered Maiſter Darrels iuglinges, and vnconſcionable practiſes. It is true, that leſſe might haue beene ſufficient in ſuch a paltrie matter: ſauing that many haue beene caried ſo headlong with a preiudicate opinion of as it ſeemed fit for their better ſatisfaction, to ſet out the ſame more at large, then otherwiſe it had been conuenient.
               The end of the Fourth Booke.
            
         
         
            
            The Fift Booke.
            
               In this fift Booke are diſcouered M. DARRELS proceedings with THOMAS DARLING, commonly tearmed, the boy of BVRTON, & with one KATHERINE WRIGHT, concerning their pretended poſſeſsion and diſpoſſeſsion: and likewiſe a new courſe which he had begun at Nottingham with the ſiſter of WILLIAM SOMERS, one MARIE COOPER.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. I. How M. Darrels credit, touching his dealing with the boy of Burton, doth relie vpon a falſe & fooliſh booke, that was publiſhed of the ſaid boyes pretended poſſeſsion and diſpoſſeſſion.
               
                  
                     ONe Thomas Darling of Burton vppon Trent, beginning to bee ſickly in Februarie, 1595. did afterwardes take vppon him to diſſemble certaine tricks: wherein continuing till the weeke before Whitſontide following, he was deemed by M. Darrell to bee poſſeſſed, and the next day after (as it is pretended) was diſpoſſeſſed. From which time hee continued well, by the ſpace of about eight daies, and then being at the ſchoole, he fell againe to certaine trickes, and perſeuered in them by ſtarts two daies, whileſt it was pretented that Sathan ſought to repoſſeſſe him. But ſince hee hath left thoſe practiſes. Of this whole matter, a ſtorie was afterwardes

publiſhed in print, and is of ſuch credite with M. Darrell, and his adherents, as hee the ſaid Darrell doth account it in his Apologie a great abſurditie, to call the truth of it into any queſtion. Darling is ſaid to haue counterfeited.
                  M. Darrell Apolog. I anſwere (ſaith M. Darrell) that, that can not poſsibly be. For in the booke which is printed concerning him, it is reported &c. And againe: To ſay that Darling counterfeyted, is to deny the truth of the booke printed: which for the ſubſtance of it, hath beene offred to bee confirmed by the oathes of a great many: and is ſtill, if by authoritie they may be thereunto called. In one of his examinations he ſaith thus: I account that hiſtory to be true in ſubſtance, but I will not iuſtifie it in euery circumſtance. And being then demanded what he meant by ſubſtance, whether he thought that Darling was troubled & vexed, & had ſuch dialogues with Sathan in his fits, as the ſaid book doth report: his anſwere is, that he ſo thinketh.Ieſſe Bee. pag. 188. Concerning therfore the credit of this booke, it was penned by one Ieſſe Bee, a ſadler of Burtō, allied by mariage vnto the ſaid Darling, in this ſort: Darling hauing had many fits in my abſence, ſometimes I was informed of them by worde of mouth, from thoſe two that kept him, & ſometimes I receiued ſome ſhort notes. But for the moſt part, ſuch informations as I had, were by word of mouth, both from the ſaid keepers, & diuers others. And when I was preſent my ſelfe at his fits, I tooke the notes of his ſpeeches and other thinges which happened, which notes (when I came home) I ioyned together, as my memory would ſerue me: alwaies ſtudying rather to write them in better order, then the boy ſpake them, then in worſe: & rather binding my ſelfe to the ſence of the boyes words, then to the wordes themſelues. I alſo confeſſe, that the boyes ſpeeches were oftentimes deliuered ſo faſt one vpon another, as I not being able to write the briefe notes of them, one man would tell me one peece, and an other ſome other peece: which when I came home, I did ſtill ioyne together,

as is before expreſſed. But I am not ſure, that eyther they told mee the truth directly, or that I haue therefore written euery thing as I ſhoulde haue done. And againe,
                  Ieſſe Bee, pag. 192. I doe confeſſe that in penning the ſaide booke, I did of purpoſe ſet downe many points, to fauour and giue credit vnto Thomas Darlings pretended torments: & that in all my ſpeeches and dealings, I vſed to countenance, & make likely the boyes pretended poſſeſsion: wherein I confeſſe my ſelfe to haue beene greatly ouerſeene.
               
                  Beſides the ſaid Ieſſe Bee, being abſent from Darling, by the ſpace of a moneth, and at London, one Thomas Saunders procured the latter parte of this booke to be penned, and that in this order. He the ſaid Saunders did take ſhort notes in his tables, and when he came home, he did cauſe one Edward Wightman vpon his report to ſet them down. Alſo vppon the ſaid Ieſſe Bees returne from London, the ſchoolemaiſter of Burton tolde him ſometing, which he likewiſe thruſt into the latter ende of the booke. So as (ſaith he) all theſe pointes touching my treatiſe conſidered: there may be for ought I know, very many vntruthes in it. This booke being penned thus faithfully by Ieſſe Bee and others, was afterward abridged by one M. Deniſon,M. Deniſon 163. 
                  a miniſter, at the requeſt of M. Walkeden, Tho. Darlings grandfather. In doing wherof (ſaith M. Deniſon) after I had read two or three leaues together of the ſaid treatiſe, I did ſet down the ſum of thē as my memory wold ſerue me, leauing out many things, and adding ſomtimes of mine own according to the general ſence, as I imagined. Furthermore, being fully perſwaded by the conſtant reportes which I had heard, that thoſe thinges which were written by the boy, were in ſubſtance true: Paid in the contracting of the ſaide booke, very willingly amplifie the boyes commendation: as well in reſpect of his owne wordes, as alſo thoſe ſpeeches, which ſometimes the beholders vſed of him: and I did bende my ſelfe to make many thinges appeare more probable

then they were in the written coppie. As when I founde ſuch points, as I thought might ſeeme abſurd or repugnant one to another. I did of purpoſe leaue them out: or els amended them as well as I could. For example: where it was in the written coppie (at large) the boyes torments and afflictions in his fits were all of them no doubt meere illuſions: I iudging thoſe words to croſſe the whole intent and meaning of the booke, did of purpoſe leaue them out of my Abſtract. Againe, where it is in the ſaid written coppie, of the boyes fittes which hee had the ninth of May, vz. Wilt thou giue me whatſoeuer I will deſire of thee, if I will giue thee leaue to enter into mee againe? Auoide Sathan, thou wert in me late enough: all theſe words I purpoſedly omitted (as I think) for that they could not agree with the reſt of the diſcourſe of the boies fits before the ſuppoſed diſpoſſeſſion.
               Moreouer, by reaſon that I did ſo much truſt my memory in the contracting of this booke, I perceiue by comparing it with the written coppie, that I haue diſordred ſome of the fits, and likewiſe the circumſtance belonging vnto them, aſcribing that to one fit which did belong to another: as alſo ſome points of the boys ſuppoſed ſpeeches to ſathan are miſtaken by me, & ſome diſplaced, altering the ſence from the written coppy.
               
                  M. Deniſon ibid.
                  Beſides theſe omiſſions, alterations, & miſtakings, confeſſed by M. Deniſon him ſelfe, it further apeareth that his abſtract, falling afterwards into ſome huckſters hands, receiued ſome new additions. For ſaith he, wheras in the printed coppy in the 15. page, it is ſaid, that the partie of whom mention is there made, did vtter an oath: I do verily thinke that the ſame was added by the printer or ſome bodie els. Againe, where it is ſaid in the printed coppie, pag. 39. (ſpeaking how the boy was aſſaulted after his ſuppoſed diſpoſſeſsion) vz. here is to be noted, that howſoeuer ſathan grieuouſly aſſalted him, yet did he not once torment him, becauſe hee was not as before in him: I confeſſe that there were no ſuch wordes in the written copie, nor belieue

that I of my ſelf did adde them, but am rather of opinion, that M. Darrell when he peruſed my abſtract, hauing receyued it from M. Walkeden, did adde them.
               
                  The occaſion that the abſtract came into M. Darrels handes, was this: I hauing ſent the booke abridged,M. VValk
                        •
                     
                     den, pa 159 to haue it printed at London, (ſayeth M. Walkeden) I afterwards met vpon occaſion M. Darrell and M. Hilderſham, & telling them of the ſending of the ſayde booke to be printed, they deſired mee to ſend for it backe, that they might haue the peruſing of it before it were printed, which accordingly I did, and vpon the receipt of it backe againe, I ſent it vnto M. Darrell. And (as I thinke) both M. Darrell, & M. Hilderſham had the peruſing of it, and vpon their approbation I ſent it to London againe to bee printed. And M. Darrell himſelfe confeſſeth, that hee read, or at the leaſt did heare the ſaid Booke red ouer, before it went to the preſſe: and yet acknowledgeth vppon diuerſe occaſions,M Darrell ad art. 9. pag. 141. 
                  as hereafter ſhall appear, that ſondrie pointes in it are vntrue. Which being conſidered together with the premiſſes, it may well be thought that M. Darrell writeth falſly, when he telleth vs, that a great many would depoſe the ſaide Booke to bee true, if they might bee called thereunto by authority, and that the credite of it notwithſtanding, Darling may well inough be iudged a counterfeyte. Beſides, it is here likewiſe to bee obſerued, that for ought which hetherto hath appeared vpon any depoſition, M. Darrell did himſelfe neuer ſee Darling in aboue one fitte. So as al thoſe particulars that are grounded vpon his experience, how the deuill dealt with the boy of Burton, and wherof he made ſo oft mention, in his practiſes with Somers, do in effect all of them, depend vpon that corrupt and falſe and ridiculous treatiſe.
               
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. II. Of M. Darrels raſhnes in affirming Thomas Darling to be poſſeſſed, and of his cunning inſtructing him, how to behaue himſelfe vpon the day of his pretended diſpoſſeſſion.
               
                  WHileſt M. Darrell was inſtructing of Somers at Aſhbie by fittes, this matter of Thomas Darlings fell out at Burton, about a yeare and a halfe before Somers was ready for him. And it ſeemeth it was ſo acceptable vnto him (hauing been out of worke from the pretended diſpoſſeſſion of Katherine Wright, vz. for about nine or ten yeares,) as that hee thruſt himſelfe into it ſomewhat groſſely. For being at Burton vpon occaſion, about a moneth before the pretended diſpoſſeſſion of Darling, and before he had ſeene him in any fitte, he gaue it out, that he thought him to be poſſeſſed, vpon the bare report of one Robert Toone the boyes vnckle, concerning the manner of his troubles: not doubting (as it ſeemeth) but that (being the onely man of note in the Countrie, that had ſkill in caſting out Deuilles,) hee ſhould againe bee imployed, if hee could procure that the boye might bee thought to bee poſſeſſed. This his raſhnes being obiected vnto him, before her Maieſties ſaide Commiſſioners, he denyeth it: but the ſame is proued as followeth.
               
                  Rob. Toon pa. 171
                  About a moneth before Thomas Darlinges pretended diſpoſſeſsion, Iohn Darrell vpon the day of the common exerciſe at Burton, came with M▪
                   Hylderſham, M. More, (as I thinke) and diuerſe other Preachers vnto my houſe, to ſee the ſaid Darling:

                  but at the time of their being there, he had no fits. Whereupon I did relate vnto M. Darrell, and the reſt of the ſaide preachers, the manner of the boyes fittes: and then M. Darrell anſwered, that his opinion was, the boy was poſſeſſed. But M. Hilderſham, & M. More (as I remember) did ſay, that they were of an other opinion, and asked of M. Darrell his reaſons, why he thought the boy to be poſſeſſed. And then the Preachers ſaid, they would conferre further about the matter.
               
               Touching this conference mentioned by Toone, it ſhould ſeeme, it was had by the ſaid miniſters before their departure from his the ſaide Toones houſe, and that M. Darrell did ſo farre preuaile therein, as hee did not onely perſwade them, that the boy was poſſeſſed, but reſolued with them of a faſt to bee had at Burton for his diſpoſſeſsion: which reſolution was altered vpon a very light accident.Ieſſe Bee. pag. 188 
                  The third of May, 1596. (ſayeth Ieſſe Bee) M. Hilderſham, M. Darrell, and diuers other Miniſters (hauing kept an exerciſe that day at Burton,) came vnto Thomas Darling: vnto whom M. Hilderſham vſed ſome ſhort godly ſpeeches, the reſt being altogether ſilent, and not offering eyther then, or afterwardes to ſpeake to the boye. At this time, as it ſhould ſeeme, the miniſters had reſolued to haue helde a faſt at Burton, for the recouerie of the boy: but they altred that their determination (as I haue beene enformed eyther by goodwife Toone, or by mine owne wife,) for that (as the Miniſters thought) one being preſent, when they were with the boy, did laugh at them, wherein they were deceyued, the cauſe of the laughter being this. Whileſt M. Hylderſham was in his prayer, I did ſet my knee vpon the leg of M. Haſtinges Griſley, who thereupon ſmiling, willed me to remoue my knee, ſaying, that I did hurt him. And this was the laughter that hindred the ſaide faſt, as I was enformed.
               
               Afterwardes Darlinges friendes hauing taken diuerſe courſes in the boyes behalfe, it was reſolued that M. Darrell
                  
ſhould be ſent for, and accordingly at the requeſt of M. Walkeden, M. Darrell himſelfe confeſſeth he went to Caldwal,
                  M. Darrell ad. art. 2. pag. 39. where the boye then lay. Before whoſe comming thether there was (as it ſeemeth) great expectation, that he would worke wonders, as partly it may appeare by theſe wordes of Darling. About three or foure dayes before M. Darrels comming, I heard that one ſhould come from Aſhbye,T. Darling pa. 49. 
                  as without doing mee any hurt ſhould relieue me. It is here alſo to be noted, that the ſaide Darling depoſeth.
               
                  Darling, ad ad art. 7. pag. 120.
                  That although hee had heard it commonly ſuppoſed, that he was bewitched, and that the Witch herſelf had confeſſed as much: yet he did neuer thinke himſelfe to be poſſeſſed with a wicked ſpirite, vntill M. Darrell had ſo affirmed to his Grandfather. And true it is, that vpon the examination ſince of ſome of the boyes friends, touching his counterfeyting, ſo they might haue ſaide, that the boy was bewitched, and did not therefore diſſemble thoſe thinges hee did: for his poſſeſſion or diſpoſſeſſion, that they would not ſtande vpon.
               
                  T. Darling. pa. 71.But to proceede with M. Darrell. Being come to Caldwall, he no ſooner ſaw the boy in a fitte, but preſentlie he affirmed him to be poſſeſſed, as Thomas Darling hath depoſed, and as he himſelfe in effect hath confeſſed: ſauing (that to ſet ſome little colour vppon the matter) hee ſayeth (but vntruelie) that hee had firſt ſeene him haue three or foure fearefull fittes, before he ſo affirmed. If hee had done ſo, yet the ſame had not beene any ſufficient ground for that raſh aſſertion, as it hath beene declared in the firſt booke and fift Chapter. Now for the better perſwaſion of the boyes friendes, that he was poſſeſſed, and likewiſe that the boy might haue an example, (as it ſeemeth) to imitate, hee tolde them as hee was charged in his hearing of Katherine Wright: who hauing beene poſſeſſed, was

troubled in ſuch ſort, as he the ſaid Darling had bene troubled. This Maiſter Darrell denyeth:M Darr. ad art. 3. pag. 139. Dart. pag. 71. but hereof the boy depoſeth thus. Maiſter Darrell tolde diuers in my hearing that were then preſent, of a certaine woman, whome he affirmed to haue bene poſſeſſed, and ſaid: that ſhe in the time of her poſſeſſion had ſome ſuch fit as I had indured. He alſo at the ſame time repeated (as he was charged) in the boyes hearing, what were the ſignes, both of poſſeſſion, and diſpoſſeſſion, mentioned in the ſcriptures: whereby Darling might learne, what he was to acte and practiſe the next daye, when he was to be diſpoſſeſſed. Theſe poyntes,M. Darr. ad art. 4. & 5. pag. 139. Darling pag. 71. 
                  M. Darrell alſo denyeth: But Darling depoſeth thus vnto them: M. Darrell then alſo repeated vnto them the ſignes of poſſeſſion mentioned in the ſcriptures: as foaming at the mouth, and ſome others: and in like manner, he alſo then tolde the ſignes of diſpoſſeſſion, as that the parties would lye as though they were dead, and ſome other ſignes he then named.
               
               It being further obiected to M. Darrell,
                  M. Darrell ad art. 2. pag 14. that then mouing the boyes friendes to haue a faſt for his pretended diſpoſſeſſion: he tolde them, that that kinde of ſpirite was not caſt out, but by prayer and faſting: thereby taking vpon him to diſcerne the nature of the ſpirite, which he pretended to be in the boye: He the ſaid Darrell doth denye it. Whereuppon, being preſſed (out of the booke before mentioned, peruſed by himſelfe) that hauing appointed the faſte, and moued the parents of the boye, with the whole familie, to prepare themſelues to that holy exerciſe of faſting, and prayer, he alledged (to put by all doubtes) the wordes of Chriſt: this kinde goeth not out, but by prayer and faſting: his anſwere is, That this point is not ſet downe truely in the ſaide booke, and that he is therein iniurted.
               
               Againe, M. Darrell was charged, that hauing appointed

the ſaid faſt to be held the next day, hee foretolde to thoſe that were preſent in Darlings hearing, that they ſhould ſee the diuell caſt him into verie ſtrange fits: and that they ſhould heare the diuel ſpeake in him, whereby the ſayd boye might learne, that hee was to acte that day the fittes before mentioned: and hee the ſaide Darrell, procure to himſelfe great credite, when all thinges ſhould fall out as hee had prophecied. Whereunto hee the ſaide Darrell aunſwering,M. Darr. ad art. 4. pag. 15. confeſſeth ſomewhat: but more is depoſed. I told (ſaith hee) ſome of the companie aparte, that if the next daye in their exerciſe, they ſhould ſee the boye almoſt continually vexed, (as I ſaid I thought it would fall out,) then they ſhould bee thereby further confirmed, that the boye was poſseſsed, and incouraged to continue their exerciſe, &c. But Darling himſelfe hereof ſaith thus: Maiſter Darrell tolde my friendes in my hearing,
                  Th Darling pag. 72. 
                  that they ſhoulde ſee mee caſt into verie ſtrange fittes the next day, and namely (as I remember) that they ſhould heare the Diuell ſpeake in mee: and willed them notwithſtanding, that they ſhould not bee diſcouraged: for (ſaith hee) when you ſhall ſee theſe things,
                  M. Darr. ibidem. 
                  his deliuerance is at hand. And whereas the Booke heereof peruſed by himſelfe, ſayth, that hee foretolde them what interruptions were like to follow by the enemies rage: Hee ſayth, that this poynt, as it is ſette downe in the ſaid printed booke, is not true.
               
               When the pretended faſt for Thomas Darlings diſpoſſeſſion beganne, there are onelie named foure perſons (beſides the boye) to haue beene preſent: and when hee is ſayde to haue beene diſpoſſeſſed, there were but nine. Beſides, the boye is noted in the treatiſe penned by Ieſſe Bee, to haue had eighteene or nineteene ſore fittes that daye.
               Furthermore, whereas there was no Miniſter to

bee preſent at the ſayde faſte: Maiſter Darrell preſcribed certaine prayers to bee read out of a Booke intituled the Enemie of ſecuritie.
               
               Againe, for ought that appeareth in the ſayde Treatiſe, none read the Prayers appoynted in that Booke, but the boye himſelfe: and commonlie after hee hadde read fiue or ſixe woordes, hee fell into a fitte. Theſe poyntes conſidered, it being obiected to maiſter Darrell, that it is not likelie that the Diuell coulde bee diſpoſſeſſed, by ſuch almoſt priuate, ſlender, interrupted, and ſcambling prayers, aſſiſted with the forbearing of one meale: hee the ſayde Maiſter Darrell aunſwereth thus: Howſoeuer the prayers articulated were interrupted, yet I beleeue they were auaileable with the faſting that then was vſed. Whereby it ſhoulde ſeeme, that the Diuell, wherewith the boye was poſſeſſed, was not anye of that kinde, whereof our Sauiour ſpeaketh in the ninth of Marke, that was ſo harde to bee caſt out, but rather ſuch an one, as Thyraeus maketh mention of, that by going to the church, or by ſome little checke, might eaſilie bee ouer-ruled.
               But peraduenture maiſter Darrell in his aunſwere, hath further relation then to the faſting and prayer, that was vſed at Caldwall, where Darling was. For in the ſaid printed Booke, the Diuell forſooth, is made to haue vttered theſe wordes by the boyes tongue, in one of his fits. Brother Glaſsap we cannot preuaile, his faith is ſo ſtrong, and they faſt and pray, and a preacher praieth as faſt as they. And by the preacher maſter Darrell ſaith (as elſewhere to another purpoſe it hath beene noted) that hee beleeueth he himſelfe was intended and meant. Beſides, in

the ende of the ſaid booke, the pretended diſpoſſeſſing of the boye, ſeemeth to be chiefely aſcribed vnto M. Darrell: he had the chiefe commendation of it, inſomuch, as when the ſeuen in Lancaſhire were to be dealt with, M. Dees Butler tolde M. Starkie what a fellowe this Darrell was, and what he had bene a meanes of, at Burton.
               
               It being furthermore obiected as a fault to M. Darrell, in that hauing taken order for the ſaide faſte, and being very earneſtly intreated to be preſent the next daye at it, and like-wiſe knowing, that except he ſtayed, no Miniſter was likely to be there: Yet he woulde not be intreated, but made this anſwere, (as it is ſet downe in the ſaid booke of his owne peruſall) viz. My aſſiſtance in prayer and faſting you ſhall haue: but not my preſence: His anſwere hereunto is thus:M. Darr. ad art. 5. pag. 15. 
                  Where it is expreſſed in the printed booke, that I promiſed my aſſiſtance in prayer, and faſting: it is not true: Howbeit, being reexamined hereof, about three or foure monethes after, he made this anſwere, viz. I beleeue that I ſaid vnto them, that I would not be vnmindefull of them, and of that which they had in hand, in my prayers. But (ſaith he) being earneſtly intreated for my preſence at the faſte, I denyed the ſame, and that for theſe two reaſons: viz. for auoyding the note of vaine glory, and that the people might through mine abſence be kept from aſcribing any ſpeciall guift to me in caſting out diuels. In which his ſecond reaſon it may be obſerued: Firſt, his conceite, that the diuell the next day would be caſt out: then it appeareth that he had vſed great vauntes of the diſpoſſeſſion of Katherine Wright, or otherwiſe, why ſhould he haue ſuſpected any ſuch thing by the people? Againe, if this were not a ſhifting reaſon, how came it to paſſe, that he was preſent at the diſpoſſeſſing of the ſeuen in Lancaſhire: but eſpecially of William Somers, when his name was almoſt at the higheſt? And

touching his firſt reaſon of vaine-glory, it being obiected vnto him, that the cogitation thereof, as the caſe then ſtood, could neuer haue entred into a man of a ſingle harte, and that thereby it might be reckoned for a note of vaine-glory, for any Miniſter to be preſent in ſuch an action: his anſwere is, as followeth. Albeit, it be not in it ſelfe a note of vaine-glory, for a Miniſter to be preſent at the diſpoſſeſſing of Sathan: Yet foraſmuch as I did feare, that ſome thought that I did glory ſomewhat too much in the action of caſting forth diuels: I for mine owne parte, thought it woulde be a note of vaine-glory in me, to haue bene preſent at the faſte of Darling. At the time of this examination, hee had ſet downe parte of his former anſwere, thus: Yet, foraſmuch as in mine owne experience, I did finde that ſome thought that I did glory too much, &c. But afterwardes, vpon his repetition, he ſtrooke out theſe wordes (I did finde in mine owne experience,) and in place of them, added theſe: I did feare that ſome, &c. Howbeit, if he had bene ſo carefull to haue auoyded the note of vaine-glory (as he pretendeth,) he would neuer haue ſuffered the wordes before mentioned of the diuell, touching his praying, as faſt as they did, that were with Darling, to haue paſſed his handes, for thereby he ſeemeth ſo greedy of ſome commendation, as rather then faile, he was contended to receiue it from Sathan.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. V. Of Maiſter Darrells ſhiftes and abſurdities, concerning the pretended diſpoſſeſſing of Thomas Darling.
               
                  FOraſmuch as Maiſter Darrell holdeth this for one of his groundes, that the partie to be diſpoſſeſſed by faſting and prayer, is more tormented that day, then at any time before (Sathan knowing that he hath but a ſhort time in him) it being demaunded of him, the ſayd Darrell, how it came to paſſe that Thomas Darlings fits did grow vpon the day of his pretended diſpoſſeſſion, to be leſſe and leſſe (as it is reported in the ſaid booke which hee peruſed) this is his ſhifting anſwere: If his fits did grow leſſe towards the end of the day, as the booke reporteth, I can giue no reaſon of it, except it ſhould bee that hee was poſseſsed with two ſpirites, as the Booke doth ſeeme to inſinuate, and then it might be (I thinke) that one being gone out, his fittes might be ſomewhat the leſse troubleſome. Maiſter Darrell (we ſee) is in this poynt ful of vncertainties: as whether it bee true that the Booke reporteth: if it bee true, hee can giue no reaſon of it, except the boye had two diuels in him: and then hee is furniſhed, relying vpon that which is written in the ſaide booke, in theſe words. In the ende of one of his fits, about two of the clocke in the afternoone, he strained to caſt with great vehemencie, and got vp ſome fleagme, and choller, at which time if hee were poſſeſsed with two ſpirits (as it is probable hee was,) one of them wente out of him. Probable? it is more then probable, that theſe are more then palpable fooleryes, ſome peraduenture

wil ſay, ridiculous coſenages. But let vs ſee what became of the ſecond diuell. About ſixe of the clocke ſaith the booke, the boy being in a fit, beganne to heaue and lift vehemently at his ſtomacke, and getting vp ſome fleagme and choller, hee ſaide, (poynting with his finger, and following with his eies) looke, looke, ſee you not the mouſe that is gone out of my mouth? and ſo poynted after it vnto the furtheſt part of the parlour. Hereof Maiſter Darrell being interrogate, ſayth:M. Darr. pag. 153
                   
                  I beleeue that the ſpirite then left Darling, when getting vppe ſome fleagme and choller, he ſaid, looke, look, ſee you not the mouſe that is gone out of my mouth? And therein I am the rather confirmed by mine owne experience, in that it hath bene ſo with others at the inſtant of thir diſpoſſeſſion.
               
               It ſeemeth that Maiſter Darrell hath mette ſtill with cholericke ſpirits, which are ſo hard of diſgeſtion, as no maruaile if his patients from time to time, haue ſtrained themſelues to vomit. But vppon occaſion of his ſaide anſwere, it beeing demaunded of him howe it came to paſſe, (if hee the ſaid Darling was diſpoſſeſſed, when the mouſe went from him) that hee did not giue GOD thankes for his deliuerance, till about an houre after, as the Booke dooth reporte, hee ſayth thus: Although I beleeue that Satan wente out of the boye, when hee ſayde: Looke, where the Mouſe goeth, yet I will not define it, becauſe it may bee, that hee continued longer in him: and for his thankeſgiuing, I beleeue that hee did then giue thankes to God, when the ſpirit of God moued him therunto. This fellow, his faith is as it ſeemeth, of a ſtrange quality, that can beleeue the diuel was gone, when for ought hee knewe, he might remaine ſtill in him. Beſides, it was vſuall with Darling to giue God thanks preſently, at the end of euery fit, (Sathan remaining in him,) which maketh it the more ſtrange, that being caſt out of him he ſhould remaine ſo

vnthankefull by the ſpace of an howre. But the impoſtor will haue an anſwere for euery thing, be it neuer ſo vnlearned or fooliſh. He, the ſaid Darrel, being here further demaunded, how (he beleeuing that the boye was diſpoſſeſſed, when the ſaide mouſe went forth of him) it came to paſſe, that an howre after, he had (as the Booke reporteth) two fits or trances more? this is his anſwere: I can not giue the cauſe of it, but I thinke that Sathan being without him, might caſt him into the ſaide trances. It had bin more probable, if he had ſaid, that the boye was ſo weakened in ſtrayning to get Sathan out of his ſtomacke, as it could not be choſen, but that he ſhould afterwardes haue diuers ſore pangs and gripes.
               Moreouer, whereas it appeareth by the ſaide Booke, that Thomas Darling did not take himſelfe to be (forſoth) poſſeſſed, nor his friendes that were preſent, vntill after his laſt trance: wherein theſe wordes were heard to proceede from him: viz. My ſonne, riſe vp and walke: the euill ſpirit is gone from thee. Foraſmuch, as M. Darrell affirmeth, that the boye was diſpoſſeſſed an howre before, when the mouſe went from him, it was asked of him, who it was that vttered thoſe wordes: and he anſwered in this ſorte. I am fully perſwaded,
                  M Darrel ad art. 14. pag. 154. 
                  that the ſaide Wordes were not Darlings wordes: but were deliuered eyther by a wicked ſpirite, or by an holy Angel. Whereunto, I rather incline. It is muche, that there ſhould be ſuch an affinitie betwixt the diuell, and holy Angels, as that they ſo hardly be diſtinguiſhed. But it was well, that he rather inclineth to the holy Angel: for otherwiſe it might haue bin ſuſpected, that his patient had bin the childe of Sathan: in that the voyce ſaide: My ſonne, riſe vp and walke. If M. Darrell had conſidered better of the ſaide Booke when he peruſed it, he would haue preuented the occaſions of theſe ſhifts. For the incountering

whereof, wee finde nothing in the premiſſes of any certainety but within. Here is nothing but, within him: without him: I belieue I am the rather confirmed: it may be: I cannot giue the cauſe of it: I wil not define eyther this or that, I rather incline: If a man had beene hyred of purpoſe, to haue marred a good matter, hee could not haue managed it poſſiblie worſe: ſo skilfull a Catte is Maiſter Darrell in hunting after Darlinges mouſe.
               Againe, M. Darrell is of opinion, that the onely certaine meanes of diſcerning one to bee poſſeſſed,M. Darrell ad art. 16 pa. 144 are the ſignes mentioned in the ſcriptures, vz. the crying of the ſpirite, his renting ſore of the partie, and the ſaide parties lying as if he were dead. which ſignes becauſe they are not mentioned in the ſaid book, and for that M. Darrell himſelfe was not preſent to ſee, whether the ſaid ſignes did appeare in the boy or not, vpon the day of the faſt, it was demanded of him how he knew, or is yet aſſured, that he the ſaid boy was then, or is yet diſpoſſeſſed? and thus hee anſwereth. I am fully perſwaded that the ſignes of poſſeſſion appeared in the boy that day, and I verily think, in that the ſaid ſignes of diſpoſſeſſion are not mentioned in the ſaide Booke, it did proceed from the 
                        •
                     gnorance of thoſe that were preſent, or of the penner of it, or of both.
               
               And being afterwardes further interrogated: vppon what grounde his ſaide full perſwaſion was builte: hee aunſwereth: the reaſons that moue mee to thinke that the ſaide ſignes were ſhewed, vz. all three, or at the leaſte one of them is, for that I am fully perſwaded, that Darling is diſpoſſeſsed. And that my perſwaſion of his diſpoſſeſsion is confirmed. Firſt, by his continuance ſo long well: Secondlie, by his ſenſible perceyuing of the egreſſe of Sathan in the

likeneſſe of a mouſe, and by his very cherefull and hartie thankeſgiuing to God for his deliuerance. Note by the way, that one of theſe ſignes is ſufficient to ſhewe one to be diſpoſſeſſed: If the partie doe but crye: M. Darrell can diſcerne that the diuell is departed. It was here further obiected to M. Darrell: that Darlings continuance ſo long well, could be no certaine argument vnto him the ſaid Darrel, that the boye is yet diſpoſſeſſed, conſidering how hee helde: that Sathan may lurke in one that is poſſeſſed, without making ſignes of his being in him for a long time: as hee hath oft affirmed of William Somers. And hereunto,M, Darr. ad art. 17 pa
                        •
                      144. he ſhapeth an anſwere in theſe wordes: Sathan is contented to lye hid, whileſt according to his deſire, it goeth with the partie and others, that doe not acknowledge the worke of God in their ſaide parties diſpoſſeſſion: but doe denye and gaineſay the ſame: but in aſmuch as it falleth out otherwiſe in Darlings caſe, he iuſtifying the worke of God in his owne deliuerance, and prayſing him for the ſame, and others likewiſe prayſing God for that worke of his, and indeuoring to profite by i
                        •
                     : it cannot be, but if Sathan were in Darling, he would ſhewe himſelfe in vexing of him.
               
               You may remember what hath bene noted of theſe kindes of iuglers in the laſt chapter of the firſt booke: how by their owne rules, they ſeeke to preuent the detection of their coſenages: Somers being diſpoſſeſſed (as it was pretended) in Nouember 1597. and hauing now continued well aboue a yeare and a halfe, yet forſooth Sathan lyeth lurking in him, becauſe he hath confeſſed his diſſimulation. Nay, here wee ſee that Darlinges friends maintaining that he was diſpoſſeſſed, is made an argument that Sathan doth not lurke in him. Howbeit if Darling were at all poſſeſſed, it is very likely, for ought that hetherto M. Darrell hath ſaid, that ſo he continueth ſtill: for hee is neither

certaine when Sathan departed from him, nor hath any aſſurance, otherwiſe then by coniecture, that there appeared vpon the day of the ſaide faſte, ſo much as the ſignes of his diſpoſſeſſion. Such vnskilfull Exorciſtes deſerue no great reward.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. IIII. Of M. Darrels further practiſes with Darling to pretend, that Sathan ſought to reenter into him, and of ſome other his vntrue aſſertions, concerning the boyes fittes, and of his cunning dealing likewiſe with him, that he ſhould neuer confeſſe his diſſimulation.
               
                  THe third or fourth day after the pretended diſpoſſeſsion of Darling, (hee the ſaide Darling remayning very wel without anie ſhew of trouble) M. Darrel came to the place of his aboad: and after ſome other communication, entred cunninglie into ſpeech with him, concerning one of his ſlender grounds, vz. how it was the cuſtom of Sathan when he had beene caſt out of any, to ſeek by all his skill, that he might againe reenter: and thereunto added, that for a certainty, he would ſo deale with him, the ſaid Darling.
                  M, Darrell ad art. 10 pa. 141 This in effect M. Darrell confeſſeth in theſe wordes. The monday after the diſpoſſeſſing of Darling, I came vnto him, & told him apart out of the xii. of S. Mat. that the deuill would ſeeke to repoſſeſſe him: and therefore counſelled him to watch ouer himſelfe, and to reſiſt him. A godly pretence to couer a ſleight with. If he had put no ſuch thing into the boyes head, he had neuer dreamed of any ſuch matter.
               Againe, for the boyes further inſtruction (as it may be

iudged), when M. Darrell had beaten it into him, that the deuill would ſeeke to repoſſeſse him, he added (as he was charged) that peraduenture in ſo doing he would appear vnto him in the likenes of a friend, and vſe all the meanes hee could deuiſe to perſwade him to ſome euill, that ſo he might catch him and reenter.M, Darr. ad art 11. pa. 142. This M. Darrel denyeth: but Darling depoſeth it in theſe wordes. M. Darrell comming vnto me ſaide, that peraduenture the Deuill, in ſeeking to reenter into me, would appeare in the likenes of a friend, and vſe all the meanes he could to perſwade me to ſome euill. And about ſeauen or eight dayes after theſe ſpeeches of Maiſter Darrell, thus vſed vnto him: hee the ſaide Darling hauing continued perfectlie wel in the mean time, and being then at the ſchoole, did fall newly againe into his former courſe, and pretended himſelfe to haue that day and the next, ſeauenteene or eightteene fits, as perceyuing by M. Darrell, that if he meant not to be reckoned a diſsembler, in that hee had done before, hee muſt alſo pretend that the deuill was ſeeking to repoſseſse him.
               Vpon the ſecond day, after the vndertaking of this new diſsimulation: Sathan ſo withſtoode, (as the ſaide booke pretendeth) by the ſtrength of the boyes faith, that hee durſt aſſaile him no longer: inſomuch, as a voice was then heard, but vttered with his tongue, ſaying: the Lorde thy God hath tyed thy enemies faſt in a chayne: vnleſſe thou fall againe, hee ſhall neuer attempt thee: and thereuppon the Boye (as the Booke reporteth), was well both in minde and body, and ſo hath euer ſince remayned. This was a quicke diſpatch: too haſtie a great deale, if that which the book ſayeth be true.M. Darrell ad art. 14 pa. 143.
                   For although M Darrel affirmeth: that he verilie belieueth, that the ſaid Darling was neuer repoſſeſſed: yet there it is ſaid, that the firſt night of his pretending that Sathan was ſeeking to reenter into him, a voice

was heard from him as vttered by the Deuill, and ſaying: he fell, and I caught him. And alſo the next morning, the like words in effect are reported to haue beene vttered, as in the perſon of God: thou didſt fal, and he caught thee.
               
               Beſides his friendes ſuppoſing (as it ſeemeth by the booke) that the deuill had caught him againe: they fell againe to their prayers, for the remouing of that heauie diſpleaſure of God. And there appeareth nothing in the printed booke, whereby it might be denied, that he is not ſtil repoſſeſſed: but the ſaid words pretended to be ſpoken by the Doue, viz. the Lord thy God hath tyed thy enemie faſt in a chaine: which wordes M. Darrell aſcribed to the Deuill,
                  M. Darrell, art. 15. pa. 154. Moreouer, Ieſſe Bee comming from London, and finding the boy in theſe kinds of fits, ſaith thereof thus: I verily thought, that he was as much poſſeſſed then, as he was before, & ſtill I ſee no reaſon why I ſhould thinke otherwiſe. In deede therein he ſaith truely: for a diſſembling knauiſh boy hee was before, and ſo he then ſhewed himſelfe, by the cunning inſtruction of that Impoſtor his maiſter: to whome he was not yet ſo much beholden, in that he allowed ſuch things in the ſaid booke, as doth argue as much the certaintie of his repoſſeſſion, as of any thing els that therein is reported.
               Furthermore, whereas M. Darrell did neuer ſee Darling in any fitte but once,M Darr. ad art. 5, pa. 50 & 152. ad art. 5 & 7. and cannot ſay much of the manner of his pretended trouble, but by heareſay: yet he is confident, that in all his fittes, as well before his ſuppoſed diſpoſſeſſiō, as in thoſe that followed after: he the ſaid Darling was altogether ſenceleſſe, hauing neither memory, nor vnderſtanding of any thing he either thē did or ſpake. It ſhal not be needfull to repeate his words, becauſe he affirmeth as much of all that haue come vnder his handes: it being one of his falſe generall groundes, whereuppon

the chiefe parte of his iugling conſiſteth. The vntruth whereof (as it hath beene ſhewed in the diſcourſe of his dealing with Somers) ſo will it moſt manifeſtly appeare in the actions and proceedings of Darling: as they are ſet out in the ſaid booke, that he himſelfe approued to bee fit for the preſſe, & to bee publiſhed: and as the boy himſelfe hath confeſſed, and ſome alſo haue depoſed.
               Aboue ſixe weekes after the boy beganne his trickes, he had vpon the fifteenth of Aprill, three ſeuerall fittes in effect together: wherein he had a Dialogue or diſcourſe (as is pretended) with Sathan: which fittes being ended, the booke reporteth thus: He told them that ſtood by, that if Sathan came againe,
                  The booke pag. 10. 
                  he would aske him many queſtions, and charge him with many things: for he remēbred what he had ſpokē as well as any that was preſent. Likewiſe after ſome other dialogues had with Sathan by the boy, as it is pretended, M. Eccarſhal Parſon of Burton perſwaded him (as the book ſaith) that if Sathan ſpake to him againe, hee ſhould not anſwere him. Whereupon, he being ouerthrowne into foure ſeuerall fits, one after another, (the laſt whereof was moſt intollerable) it ſeemed by the boyes lookes and geſtures, that the euill ſpirit ſpake: but becauſe of M. Eccarſhals aduiſe, he kept a diſcontented ſilence, as afterwards he told his mother. Againe, the ſaid booke proceedeth to diuers other particulars which doe enſue: when in his fittes he was depriued of the vſe of ſpeech, he would make ſignes of praying with folded hands:
                  pag 5.
                   
                  ſometimes lifting them vppe, and ſometimes ſtriking them vppon his breaſt. And being asked if hee could remember what he did, when he made ſuch ſignes, he anſwered, that ſometimes he prayed.
               
               
                  pag 6.Againe, being asked at the end of one of his fits, wherein he did ſcritch pittifully, the reaſon thereof: he anſwered: that the paine which he endured was very grieuous, like the pricking with daggers, or stinging with Bees, which cauſed

his crying. Againe, after an other fit, hee was asked what he ſaw: he anſwered, a greene Catte: and then,
                  pa 15 
                  oh (quoth he) this hath beene a grieuous torment vnto me.
               
               Likewiſe at the end of an other fit, he ſaid,pa. 21, 
                  that a thing ſpake vnto him with a voice ſmall and ſhrill: Againe, being asked what he had ſeene in ſome other conflictes: hee anſwered, many and fearefull things, and called to mind a thing that ſpake to him. The ſame queſtion being alſo demanded of him after an other fit: he ſaid, a great Beare came roaring vpon him: Againe in his extreamitie,pag. 27. 
                  he made ſignes to the ſtanders by to pray: and himſelfe by folded hands and other geſtures, gaue teſtimonie, that the ſpirit of God was mightily labouring againſt his infirmities, &c. he ſaid, pray, pray, &c. he deſired the ſtanders by to ſing the ſixt Pſalme:
                  pag. 28. 
                  and ſo they did, he ſinging with them very cheerefully &c. he ſweat exceedingly & dryed his face, as though he had not beene in a fit. Diuers other things in the ſaid booke to this effect are here omitted: theſe being ſufficient to controll M. Darrels folly, he himſelfe iuſtifying ſo confidently the booke to be true. But if they will not ſerue him, let Darling himſelfe be heard.
               
                  In all thoſe Dialogues (ſaith the boy) wherein I did as it were diſpute and anſwere Sathan, I thinke I had my memorie,
                  Darling pag. 73.
                   
                  as I had the vſe of my tongue. Againe, I confeſſe, that in all my fittes generally, I felt my ſelfe to be inwardly ſore tormented and troubled: and as they asked me when my ſit was done, of the torments and griefe I had indured: ſo I told them more or leſſe how I was troubled.
               
               And Ieſſe Bee, the authour of the ſaid booke depoſeth:ibid. 
                  that he verily thinketh the boies ſits were meere illuſions: that the boy was very willing to fall into his fittes, becauſe thereby he might ſhew the graces of God in himſelfe, by reſiſting of Sathan, as he did in ſome of his Dialogues with the Deuill: that he thinketh that Darling, being well, did know he ſhould haue the vſe

of his memory, when he fell into his fits: that hee might haue auoided many of his ſaid fits, if he had liſted: that he did of himſelfe willingly caſt himſelfe into ſome fits, when the deuill did not inforce him thereunto: that he did willingly ſo caſt himſelfe into diuers fits of purpoſe, that when the word of God was read, thoſe who were preſent might thereby the better bee brought to thinke that the deuil could not abide it▪ & ſo haue a more due and godly regard afterwardes of it. And further (ſaith the ſaid Ieſſe Bee) I confeſſe that finding Darling ſo willing to caſt himſelfe into his fittes, I did alſo often reade vnto him for the ſame cauſe (laſt before mentioned) and vſed the wordes as they are in the booke, of prouoking him to battaile with Sathan: for thereby I well perceiued, that diuers that were preſent, and had beene before of prophane life, were very much terrified, and haue euer ſince much more regarded the word of God. Beſides, my practiſe was, when at the reading of the worde of God, Darling did ſeeme to the beholders, to haue beene caſt into a fitte by Sathan, then to deſire thoſe which were preſent carefully to marke what force the word of God had. And againe: as I ſaw occaſion, by reaſon of ſome licentious perſons then preſent, and was thereupon willing that Darling ſhould fall into any fit: I in reading would giue ſome verſe that I thought to contain ſubſtantiall matter, an eſpeciall twinge: that is, I read it more earneſtly, and with a ſharpe voyce: and then preſently the boy would fall into a fitte. This courſe he confeſſeth hee held with the boy, whileſt he the ſaid Darling continued at Burton. And the chiefe matters of the booke penned by him, doe containe the great wonders that were wrought in thoſe fittes, to ſet out (forſooth) the force and power of the word of God.
               By reaſon of ſundry the teſtimonies before mentioned, & ſome other croſſe interrogatories miniſtred to M. Darrell touching this point, hee was driuen greatly to the

wall, by mincing the matter after this ſeely ſort. I belieue (ſaith he) that Thomas Darling had not his ſences or memorie in his fittes: but I thinke that Sathan might ſo order the matter, as that hee eyther had, or might haue had his ſences in his ſaid fittes. The reaſon why I thinke he had not his ſences or memory, is for that in my experience I haue ſeene it ſo in others. But concerning Thomas Darling, I haue no certaine knowledge, whether he was alwaies without his ſences in his fittes, becauſe I haue not ſearched nor inquired into it. And thus hauing oftentimes reſolutely affirmed at Nottingham, and in ſundrie of his examinations: that the boy of Burton was ſenceles as well in ſuch fits as hee had before his pretended diſpoſſeſsion, as alſo in the other whileſt Sathan was ſeeking his reentrance: Now he confeſſeth, that he neuer ſearched nor inquired into that point, to know the truth: and beſides ſhaketh his falſe ground in that behalfe, in that he ſaith: that ſathan may ſo order the matter, as thoſe who are poſſeſſed may haue their ſences in their fits.
               Moreouer, as M. Darrel hath preſumptuouſly & falſely affirmed, that Darling was ſenceles in all his fits:M. Darrel, ad art. 4 pag. 152. ad art. 12. pag. 142. & ad art. 1.151 ſo hath he as groſſely and graceleſſely maintained, that whatſoeuer hee the ſaid Darling ſeemed to doe or ſpeake in any of his ſaid fits, it was not he but ſathan, that both did it, & ſpake it. And thus hee ſaith particularly of certaine dialogues (where it ſeemeth that ſometimes Sathan, & ſometimes the boy ſhould ſpeake):M. Darrel ad art. 1. pag. 151. Dar. ad art. 5. pag. 50. 
                  I thinke (ſaith he) that it was ſathan onely that vſed the wordes in thoſe dialogues mentioned in the ſaid booke: he the ſaid Sathan transforming himſelfe into an Angel of light, at ſuch times whē he ſeemed to ſpeak godlily. And in an other place ſpeaking of Darling & others he ſaith: that the deuill at ſuch times did vſe their members and parts of their bodies, without their knowledge or vnderſtanding. For the diſproofe of which bold vntruths, that which hath beene ſet

downe of the boyes ſences, vnderſtanding, knowledge & memorie, is very material, and much more may be added.
               
                  Darling ad art 5. pag. 108.
                  Thomas Darling, who ſhould be the fitteſt iudge in this matter depoſeth thus: I do not belieue that what I did or ſpake in my fits, was done or ſpoken alwaies by ſathan: for that diuers thinges were vttered & ſpoken by mee through the aſsiſtance of Gods ſpirit,
                  Darling ad art. 6 pag. 120. 
                  in the time of my fits. And againe, as I know at this preſent for a certainty, that I haue the ſpirit of God within mee: ſo do I with the like certaintie belieue, that in my dialogues with Sathan, when I alleadged ſundry places of ſcripture, to withſtand the temptations he aſsaulted we with: I had the ſpirit of God in me, and by that ſpirit reſiſted Sathan at thoſe times, by alleadging the ſcriptures to confound him. True it is, that hee the ſaid Darling (about a moneth, or 5. weeks after his depoſitions laſt mentioned) hauing learned as it ſeemeth, that M. Darrel was peremptory, that it was the deuil who vttered all the words in the ſaid dialogues: & being again vpon occaſion examined touching that point, he depoſeth in another ſort. viz. I beleeue (ſaith hee) that Sathan did ſpeake and vtter ſuch Godly ſpeeches, as were vſed in thoſe dialogues, & that they were not ſpoken by me, through any aſſiſtance of Gods ſpirit. This contrarietie doth ariſe from the boyes affection to Darrel, being ſo bewitched with a falſe opinion of his holines, as he ſuppoſeth he may ſay or do any thing that he would haue him. As for a further example; He the ſaid Darling,
                  Thomas Darling pag. 51. 
                  being asked whether if M. Darell and the reſt of his adherents ſhould now ſay, that they tooke all his former fits to be fooleries & deceits, & that they think he was not poſſeſſed, he wold not now think that he was not poſſeſſed: His anſwer is thus: Yes I would think that I was not at all poſſeſſed. Againe, being aſked whether if M. Darrel & the reſt of his fellowes ſhould then at that very inſtant: tell him that he had fits, and that he were at that inſtant poſſeſſed, he would at the ſame inſtant

thinke he were poſſeſſed: he ſaid yes: I would ſo belieue and thinke.
               
               The ſaid Ieſſe Bee vnderſtanding what Darling had laſtly depoſed, of the deuils vttering all that was ſpoken in the ſaid Dialogues: and that it would thereby follow that the deuill moued the ſtanders by to pray and ſing pſalmes, as it is in one of the ſaid dialogues, and that he & diuers others, when they did ſing & pray accordingly, did therein accompany Sathan, and not Thomas Darling: ſaith vpon his examination touching this point. I doe verily belieue, that whoſoeuer affirmeth, that it was the deuill that moued vs then to pray and ſing Pſalmes, he ſaith not truely,
                  Ieſſe Bee pag. 148. 
                  but doth lie in ſo affirming. Againe, both I and the reſt of the boyes friendes (as I belieue) did verily thinke and were perſwaded, that when Thomas Darling did ſeeme to vſe the godly ſpeeches mentioned in the Dialogues▪ he himſelfe did vſe them, being directed by the ſpirit of God: neither did we once imagine or ſuſpect, that the ſaid ſpeeches were vttered by Sathan: and I do ſtill belieue, that they were vttered by the aſſiſtance of Gods ſpirit, and not in any ſort by the deuill. And againe, if it bee held for a certaine ground, that whoſoeuer is poſſeſſed, is ſo far in Sathans bondage whileſt he is in his fittes, as that whatſoeuer he ſaith it is not he, but Sathan that ſpeaketh it: I do then fully belieue that Thobas Darling was not poſſeſſed, and that he ſaith vntruely, if hee affirme that he was poſſeſſed.
               
               Furthermore, wheras it appeareth by the ſaid book, that Th. Darling & all his friends were of opinion, that all the godly ſpeeches in ſhew therein mentioned, to haue beene vttered by the boy in his fits, were ſpoken by him the ſaid Darling through the aſſiſtance of Gods ſpirite: and that likewiſe the principall ſcope of the booke doeth tend to the magnifying of the boyes faith, and his wonderfull conſtancie in his combats with Sathan: M. Darrell being

demaunded why he ſuffered the ſayde booke to paſſe his hands with that great error, conſidering his owne iudgement, that all thoſe things and ſpeeches, which the boyes friendes reioyced in, proceeded from Satan: hee the ſaid Darrell aunſwereth thus: I do thinke that the boy, the Author of the Booke,
                  M. Darrell ad art 12. pag. 142. 
                  and the boyes friendes, were of ſuch mind and opinion as is here mentioned: and for the Booke, I ſuffered it to paſſe to the preſſe, hauing read it ouer at that time curſorilie: and I was then of opinion, that a great part of the ſpeeches mentioned in the ſaid dialogues, were vttered by the aſſiſtance of Gods ſpirit, or by the miniſtrie of an holie Angell. Howbeit, ſince vppon better aduiſement, as I thinke, I am perſwaded that all the ſaid ſpeeches were vttered by Sathan tranſforming himſelfe into an Angell of light. If any man will take the paines to peruſe thoſe ſpeeches, which Ieſſe Bee hath fathered vpō the boy in the ſaid dialogues: he ſhal find them to be ſuch, as will hardly be found againe in any ſtory (that euer was written) to be aſcribed to ſathan. But peraduenture M. Darrel may haue ſome conceit: that the boy being ſuppoſed to haue two deuils in him, one of thē had finiſhed the time of his torments, and ſo was become a faithfull ſpirit, ready to be tranſlated from hell into heauen, as ſome in that behalfe haue moralized.
               Laſtly, it is to be obſerued, that Darling after he had continued a while in his firſt pretended fits, many ſuppoſed & gaue it out, that he was but a diſſembler, as it may appeare by the depoſitions following.Ieſſe Bee pag. 148. 
                  Whileſt Darling was troubled, (ſaith Ieſſe Bee) many did thinke and affirme it, that he diſſembled: & one of their reaſons was, for that he did pretend that the deuil ſpake vnto him, when none els did heare him that were preſent: at which times they heard Thomas Darling pretend as though he anſwered him.
                  Edw, Baker pag. 179. And Edward Baker: I belieue (ſaith hee) that the boy did diſſemble, and I vſing theſe

wordes to his mother: I pray God he doe not diſſemble: ſhe ſaid, that I had no faith. This opinion of the boyes counterfeyting being held by many, it was feared (as it ſeemeth) leaſt he ſhould be induced by ſome meanes, at one time or other to confeſſe his diſſimulation, and therupon ſome of his friendes did encourage him to take heede thereof, and to continue conſtant in affirming, that he had beene poſſeſſed, and was diſpoſſeſſed. Some thing to this purpoſe Darling acknowledgeth in theſe wordes.Darling pa. 73 
                  I confeſſe that ſince the time of my ſuppoſed diſpoſſeſſion, my vnckle Toone tolde me, that although it ſhould be ſaide, that I had but diſſembled: yet I ſhould not be diſcouraged by their wordes. And M. Darrell being charged, that ſince the time of the pretended diſpoſseſsion of Darling, hee had cheriſhed, entertayned and lodged the boy at his houſe: and that leaſt his owne packing and diſſimulation might happen to be detected aſwell as the boyes: hee did vſe this, or the like perſwaſion in effect vnto him: vz. that hee ſhoulde continue conſtant, and not ſuffer himſelfe by any allurement to be drawne to ſay, that hee had diſſembled in his former fittes, and that he was neuer poſſeſſed with any wicked ſpirite. And his anſwere is thus:ad ar. 15. pa. 143. 
                  One night I entertayned the ſaide Darling in my houſe at Aſhbye: and the reſt he denyeth: but Darling himſelfe hath depoſed it.T. Darling. pag. 77. 
                  I haue beene with M. Darrell (ſaieth he) diuerſe times, ſometimes at Burton, once at Apleby, once at Packington at ſeuerall exerciſes: from whence I went home with M. Darrell to Aſhby, and ſupped that night with M. Hylderſham, M. Darrell, two other Miniſters, and Mrs. Ireton, at M. Hylderſhams houſe, and I did lye that night at M. Darrels. Alſo I confeſſe that Maiſter Darrell hath had ſome communication with mee, and hath willed me at ſome times that I ſhould bee conſtant, and

ſticke to the truth, meaning, that I ſhould not ſuffer my ſelfe to bee drawne to affirme that I was not poſſeſſed: but that I had diſſembled in all my ſaide fittes; and ſo conſequentlie, that God had not deliuered me from the poſſeſsion of Sathan.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. V. How Darling confeſſeth his owne diſſimulation.
               
                  
                     THomas Darling being ſent for by vertue of her Maieſties Commiſſion for cauſes eccleſiaſticall: was examined, concerning his pretended poſſeſſion, and diſpoſſeſſion, and afterwardes againe was diſmiſſed. Of which diſmiſſion, the author of the briefe Narration ſayeth thus. When they perceyued that the power of God in the boy, was ſtronger then the malice of Sathan, they let him goe. His meaning is, that the boy could not bee remoued from iuſtifying his own, and Maiſter Darrels proceedings with him. It may pleaſe you therefore to conſider, what the boye depoſed, before hee went. Inprimis, (ſayeth hee) I doe voluntarily of myſelfe confeſſe, that whatſoeuer Maiſter Darrel did ſay about my ſuppoſed poſſeſſion, or about prayer for my diſpoſſeſſion, or about my fittes before or after my diſpoſſeſſion: I did all eyther of ignorance, or to gette my ſelfe a glorie thereby. Item I confeſſe that I verily thinke, that if I may ſpeake with M. Darrell, I can perſwade him neuer to take any more ſuch courſes, nor to take vppon him any ſuch power, to be able to caſt out a deuil. Item I confeſſe, as that I think, if my Lord will deale fauourably with Maiſter Darrell, and bee good Lord vnto him, hee will of himſelfe confeſſe the truth, vz.

that hee did thinke mee neuer to haue beene poſſeſſed, and that hee will promiſe neuer to enter into any ſuch practiſe againe. Item I confeſſe, that I felt indeede at firſt ſome prickings in my legges: and that at the firſt I vomited, and was ſomewhat euill at eaſe: but as for all and ſinguler the fittes mentioned in the Booke, and the dialogues with Sathan, viz. my ſaying of ſentences out of the ſcriptures to Sathan, his ſuppoſed ſaying to mee, as alſo all thoſe ſuppoſed apparitions of a Catte, a Dragon, a Bear, Lightnings, Thundring, a Lambe, a Doue, a Woman, and ſo of all the ſeuerall viſions and torments ſette downe in the printed booke, I confeſſe they bee all vntrueths, and no credite to be giuen to them, or any of them.
               
               And again: the ſpeciall occaſion hee ſayth, that firſt drew him on more apparantly to the ſayde fictions, was this conceite put into his heade: that the Deuill coulde not abide the worde of God: that therefore when the worde of God was read, hee did willingly at the hearing of ſome eſpeciall pointes, caſt himſelfe into many fittes: that in the ſame hee vſed ſondrie godlie ſpeeches: that the Standers-by thereuppon obſerued the power of the worde: and that hauing little diſcretion, partlie for his owne praiſe, and partlie becauſe hee thought the worde of God thereby would bee better reuerenced, hee did proceede in his diſſimulaton, as in the ſaide booke is more at larged expreſſed.
               
               Being then further asked, why after his pretended diſpoſſeſſion, hee fell againe to his former courſe: his aunſwere is: that hauing hearde of Maiſter Darrel, that Sathan was accuſtomed to ſeeke to reenter into thoſe, out of whome hee had beene caſt: hee thought it meete for the better crediting of his former dealing, to take vppon him, as though Sathan had ſought to haue againe repoſſeſſed him.
               
               
                  Much more he hath ſet downe to the effect ſpecified, and hath thus ſubſcribed vnto it with his owne hand. This my confeſſion being read ouer by the L. Biſhop of London in my hearing, I doe acknowledge to be true, and this I doe affirme without feare or conſtraint, very willinglie, by the vertue of my oath taken to deliuer the truth in thoſe pointes, whereof I ſhould be examined concerning my pretended poſſeſſion. Howbeit, true it is, that within a fortnight after he was ſet at libertie, and had conferred with M. Darrell in the Gatehouſe, and with ſome others, he writ a letter to the Biſhop of London: affirming that he had beene drawne on by ſubtilties to make the ſaid confeſſion: and addeth theſe wordes: what is all this to the purpoſe? If I of frailtie ſhould ſay, that all was diſſembling, was it therefore? If I ſay that this paper is blacke, is it ſo therefore? Thoſe articles which I was ſworne vnto before, I will ſtand vnto them, and iuſtifie them: but concerning the other, I will neuer conſent vnto them: It muſt bee euen as the apte ſcholler of M. Darrels liſte: a more proude and deſperate forſworne boy, hath not lightly fallen into any mans examination. His anſweres, that he ſayeth he will iuſtifie, are thoſe which haue beene mentioned in the former Chapter: which are in effect as much as is included in this his aforeſaide voluntarie confeſsion. And this may ſuffice touching this matter, aſwell of the boye of Burtons diſſimulation, as of M. Darrels practiſes with him.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. VI. A breefe of Katherine Wrights confeſſion, touching the beginning of her diſſimulation, and of the reaſons that mooued her ſo to do.
               
                  
                     THe firſt beginning of M. Darrels glorie, did proceede from his practiſes with Katherine Wright: and hee hath enioyed the fruit therof, now about thirteen or foureteene yeares. The generall cauſe it ſelfe, touching the late attempts of caſting out diuelies, is of great importance: otherwiſe it is not vſual, that matters ſo long paſt ſhould bee ſearched into. Neither had this beene dealt with, but that Maſter Darrell hath in all his practiſes, with the reſt of his Demoniackes, ſtill inſiſted vppon his experience in the pretended diſpoſſeſſing of this poore woman. Shee therefore, the ſaide Katherine Wright, being examined, confeſſeth vppon her oath,
                  Katherine Wright. pa. 1. 
                  that which will not pleaſe Maiſter Darrell. For ſhe ſaith: That in all the courſe of her pretended poſſeſſion and diſpoſſeſſion, and of her fits both before and ſince, whatſoeuer ſhe did that ſeemde to be extraordinary, it was all diſſembled. And yeelding ſome reaſons of the beginning of this her diſsimulation, ſhee ſayth, That her father in law one Iohn Mekin, did for ſundry yeares vſe her hardly, in beating and bruſing of her verie ſore, that ſhee grewe therewith to ſome weakeneſſe, and for wante of ſleepe to bee idle-headed: that being in this caſe, and going one morning for water to a well, ſhe imagined ſhe ſaw a childe without feete, and that being therewith greatly afraide, ſhe beganne to be more and more troubled in her fancie, ſuppoſing that ſhee ſaw diuers ſhapes and apparitions.
               
                  
                  Furthermore, he affirmeth, that about the time of her foreſaid weakneſſe (ſhe being then about the age of ſeuenteene yeares) ſhee beganne to be troubled with a kinde of ſwelling in her body, occaſioned (as ſince ſhee hath learned) by ſome ſtopping of humours, not vnknowne to diuers women: that vpon ſignification vnto her father in law, & to her mother of her foreſaid ſight of the feeteleſſe childe, and what ſhapes ſhee ſaw at ſundrie times, and alſo in reſpect of her ſaid ſwelling, he her ſayd father in law made much of her: that ſhe finding this alteration in her ſaid fathers vſage towardes her, thereuppon grew to bee indifferently well, ſauing that her ſayde ſwelling would often riſe, yet ſhe did ſtill pretende to bee troubled with her former kinde of fancies and apparitions, and in her fits of ſwelling, did voluntarily make her ſelfe to ſeeme worſe then indeede ſhe was by ſcriching, caſting her armes abroade, ſtarting vp ſodainely from the place where ſhee ſate, and ſometimes by falling downe, as though ſhe had ſwouned.
               
                  And this courſe ſhee confeſſeth, ſhe hath helde from the time ſhee began it, vntill the time almoſt of this her examination, viz. about thirteene or foureteene yeares: partly becauſe ſhee was by that occaſion much made of, and for that ſhee feared, that if ſhe had ſhewed her ſelfe to haue beene perfectly well for any long ſeaſon, her father in lawe would haue fallen to his former hard vſage of her. But when ſhee was examined, ſhe profeſſed, That thenceforth ſhee would become a new woman, and leaue all her former diſsimulation.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. VII. Of Maister Darrels proceedings with Katherine VVright, for her pretended diſpoſſeſsion.
               
                  IT ſeemeth that after K. VVright had continued a while in her aforeſaid diſſimulatiō, a bruite thereof was ſpread abroad, and diuers came to ſee her. Amongſt whom,M. Beresford. pag. 9. one maſter Beresford reſorting to her, and being mooued in compaſsion towardes her, tooke her away from her fathers, & carried her home to his own houſe, becauſe, (as hee ſayth) her ſayde fathers houſe was no fitte place to giue entertainement, to any that ſhould come to helpe her. At maiſter Beresfords houſe ſhee continued about a moneth, and then (as hee ſayth) hee ſent her to Mansfielde, to be comforted or cured of her infirmitie, becauſe he had heard maiſter Beckingham to be a man of note, and maiſter Darrel, dwelling then in Mansfield, a man of hope, for the releeuing of thoſe which were diſtreſſed in that ſort. At this time maiſter Darrell was not aboue three or foure and twenty yeares old: but yong it pricketh that will bee a thorne.
               The ſayd Katherine VVright comming to Mansfielde vppon the Thurſday, Maiſter Darrell had diſpatcht the diuell out of her, by the Saturday at noone next following, and in this maner, as he himſelfe confeſſeth. Vppon the Saturday in the morning, M. Darrell accompanied with his own wife, the goodman of the houſe, named Edward Loades, & the reſt he remembreth not, vndertook this worke. He began (hee ſayth) to pray about foure of the clock in the morning, & continued in a maner til about twelue, at what time ſhe was deliuered. The praiers which he vſed,

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
were partly deſcribed, and partly conceiued by himſelf. One of the preſcribed prayers, he read out of the booke intituled The enemie of 
                        •
                     ecuritie. Being heere demaunded whether the fiue his aſſociats did continue with him all the while that he praied, he anſwered thus: It is likely that ſome did ſtay with me all the while, and that ſome of the family, viz. the houſholders, did not continue theirs al the while without departure, as haply not being ſo deuout, that they would forbeare all worldly buſineſſe to attend that holy exerciſe. By which his anſwere, it is likely, that the whole burthen for Katherine Wrights diſpoſſeſſion, did relie vpon the ſhoulders of M. Darrell and his wife. A diuell could not well be caſt out with leſſe trouble, if this had beene all: but there was another engine vſed, as Katherine Wright hath depoſed in theſe wordes.Ka. Wright page 5.
                   
                  One faſhion of Maiſter Darrell in my pretended diſpoſſeſsion at Manſfield, was to lie vppon my belly, ſaying that he would by ſo lying, preſse the diuell out of me. When this ſtrange faſhion was obiected to Maiſter Darrell: Ah (quoth hee) I looked for this, and then framed his anſwer vnto it in this ſort:M. Darr. art. 7. pag. 40. 
                  I hauing read in the ſcriptures, how Elias and Saint Paule did ſtretch themſelues along on ſome that were dead, in their recouerie to life, and being a yong ſtudent in diuinitie, not paſt foure or 25. yeares of age, I did in a blinde zeale (as I thinke) lie vppon the ſaide Katherine Wright as it is obiected. Afterwards this his ſaid anſwere being repeated (as the manner is,) he did thus amend it. viz. I did lie vpon the ſaid Katherine Wright, but not vpon her bellie, as I beleeue. This his qualification being allowed of, hee deſired about three daies after, a ſecond reuiew▪ & then for the diſcharge of his conſcience (as hee ſaide) in deliuering the trueth, hee ſetle downe his minde in this ſort: Whereas, being examined vppon the ſodaine of a fact doone twelue yeares paſt, I haue ſaid that I did the ſame, as there it is

expreſſed in a blinde zeale, meaning a fooliſh and indiſcreete imitation of the Prophet and the Apoſtle: I do now proteſt, that hauing called my ſelfe better to minde, by conferring with my wife, (who was then preſent) and by better deliberation vppon the ſame, that I verilie beleeue, I did not the ſaide fact, to the ende there ſpecified: loth for that I neuer dreamed at that time of working any myracle, neyther did looke for her deliuerance from Sathan: but ſhee being at that time verie vnrulie, I did it to keepe her downe, there being alſo at that time, another vpon ſome part of her, and vpon me, that we might the rather keepe her downe. And thus at the length you haue his perfect anſwere: wherein it is to be feared, that he hath made bolde with his oath. For whereas at the third time, hee ſaith he was taken vpon the ſodaine, when he made his firſt anſwere, that ſeemeth not to bee true, for that his ſaid lying vpon her was no ſooner mentioned vnto him, but he affirmed that hee looked for it, and had two examples readie for his excuſe therein. But the cheefe matter hee feared, that would haue beene inferred of his firſt anſwere, was this, viz. that thereby it would haue beene collected, he had a purpoſe to haue wrought a myracle, which he (forſooth) by no meanes can indure to heare of. You may tearme his caſting out of diuels, a ſtrange, a wonderfull, and a myraculous worke (as his friendes haue done in their writings, with his good liking) but not a myracle.
               Furthermore,M. Dar. ad art. 71. page. 39. as touching the effecting of this myraculous woorke, maiſter Darrell affirmeth, that although he inclined to thinke, that Katherine Wright was poſſeſſed when he tooke her in hand: yet hee was not fully perſwaded of it, till after her diſpoſſeſſion. Howebeit, Katherine Wright ſayth thus: Maiſter Darrell as ſoone as hee ſawe wee, ſaide hee was of opinion, that I was poſſeſsed of a diuell, but maſter Beckingham

thought otherwiſe: and maſter Darrell was the firſt that euer I heard ſay, that I had any diuell in me. But vppon his own ſaid ſpeeches, he being demanded why he continued ſo long in praier vpon the Saturday, being not fully perſwaded that ſhe was poſſeſſed, he anſwereth after this maner. I was then fully perſwaded that ſhe was vexed with Sathan, eyther within or without her, and knowing that faythfull prayer is the beſt meanes to withſtande ſathan, &c. I did ioyne and continue in prayer ſo long with her. But being here interrogated, that foraſmuch as praiers muſt be made without wauering, whether hee had not hope by his prayer, to deliuer her from Sathans moleſtation, whilſt hee continued therein ſo long: I do not thinke (ſayth he) I am bound to aunſwere hereunto. So as here was a diuell caſt out by chaunce. Maiſter Darrell meant ſomewhat that ſathan could not indure, and therefore hee departed.
               
                  M Darrell ad art. 10. pa. 152,
                  Moreouer, foraſmuch as Maiſter Darrel holdeth that Chriſt did ordaine faſting and prayer to be the ordinarie means to continue in the Church for caſting out diuels: and that the dutie of the partie to be diſpoſſeſſed, is to diſpoſe himſelfe before to prayer and faſting, and to performe the ſame if ſathan do not hinder him: hee being againe demanded, why he did not appoynt a faſt, as wel as vſe prayer for the diſpoſſeſſing of Katharine Wright, this is his aunſwere:M, Darr. ad art 6. pa. 40. 
                  I was not then of the opinion mentioned, and as nowe I am, and therefore I did but onely vſe prayer. But whether I my ſelf purpoſed to faſt, or aduiſed Katherine Wright ſo to do, I doe not nowe remember: but I beleeue that I did not make mention of any faſting to the reſt of the companie. This is a looſe ſhift if it bee looked into. For if hee were not then of the ſayde opinion, why doth he forget why hee purpoſed to faſt or not? hee would not bee thought at that time, to haue had anie needeleſſe purpoſe.

But bee it as hee liſt, yet there wee ſee, that Katherine Wright was diſpoſſeſſed, but not by the ordinarie meanes that Chriſt hath appoynted: and ſo he muſt bee driuen to confeſſe that he wrought a myracle.
               Againe, it beeing obiected to maiſter Darrell, by her maieſties Commiſsioners, that hee knowing the ſayde Katherine VVright to diſſemble in her pretended fits at Manſfield, had priuate cōference with her, & taught her how to order her ſelfe in the manner of her counterfeiting, wherby he incouraged her in that her lewd courſe:M. Darrell, ad art. 8. pa. 31. he doth denie it, but thereof Katherine VVright depoſeth thus. M. Darrell after his comming to mee at Manſfielde, did tell and teach mee alone,
                  Ka. Wright pag. 4. 
                  howe to vſe and order my ſelfe in my fittes.
               
               Likewiſe maiſter Darrell being charged to haue had priuate ſpeech with Katherine VVright, before her pretended diſpoſſeſsion, and in the ſame to haue tolde her, that ſhee had ſundrie diuels in her, that hee heard them ſpeak, and one of them cal another by the name of Midlecub, and diuers other names, he anſwereth thus:M. Darr. ad art. 9, p. 40, 
                  I with ſome others did heare from within her the ſaide Katherine VVright, (being in a trance) the morning of her diſpoſſeſsion, an intercourſe of certaine ſpeeches dialogue-wiſe, of which ſpeeches, I do not now remember any thing. A ſtrange matter that diuels ſhould talk togither in M. Darrels hearing, & yet that their communication vpon his firſt acquaintance with him, ſhould make no deeper impreſsion in his memory. Some others (he ſaith) heard the ſaid ſpeeches, meaning of likelihood his wife: for hauing but 5. with him,Ka. wright. pag. 4.
                   & they of the houſhold applying their worldly buſines, many could not heare them. But conſider what Kathr VVright hath hereof depoſed. M. Darr. told me once alone that I had diuels in me: and I ſaid I knew I had none: but he told me yes,

ſaying, that he heard them ſpeake in mee: that were ſtrange (quoth I) ſeeing I my ſelfe do not heare them. Why (quoth he) I heard them cal themſelues in thee, Midlecub, and other names which I cannot remember. Nowe leaſt any ſhould doubt how theſe diuels came into her, M. Darrell ſo contriued it, as they were ſente thither by one Margaret Roper, a witch.M. Dar. ad art. 24. p 42. Hereof maſter Darrell ſayth thus: When Katherine Wright came firſt to Manſfielde, I demaunded of her when and how her fittes beganne ſhe anſwered, that they began ſhortly after that ſhe had denied to giue ſomething vnto an olde woman,
                  Iohn Meekin pa 20. 
                  one Margaret Roper of Eckington. Whereuppon (ſaith Iohn Meekin, the maides Father in law, Maiſter Darrell preſently affirmed, that the ſaide Margaret was a witch, and had bewitched her. Many other thinges happened no doubte betwixt maiſter Darrell and his patient, the firſt three daies before her pretended dipoſſeſsion, but theſe are ſufficient to ſhew, how beeing but a nouice in that trade, he beſtirred himſelfe in ſo ſhort a time.
               Againe, it being obiected to maiſter Darrell, that hee did falſely pretend the ſaid Katherine Wright to be diſpoſſeſſed, in that ſhe departed from him, as ſhe came to him, and continued preſently afterwardes, when ſhe was caried backe to maiſter Berisfords, to be as ſhee was before, he anſwereth thus:M. Dar. ad art. 11. pa 40, 
                  I doe verilie beleeue that ſhe was diſpoſſeſſed, and that ſhe continued well after, for the ſpace of ſixe or eight weekes: ſauing that three or foure times, whilſt ſhee was at Mansfield, the diuell ſeeking to reenter, did trouble her a little for ſome quarter of an houre, or an howre, whom ſhe for that time did reſ
                        •
                     ſt, and I did aſsiſt her therein. And whilſt ſhee remained at maiſter Berisford
                     •
                  , ſhe was not troubled with any fit. But Katherine Wright depoſeth thus: I remember that M. Darrell ſaid he had caſt a diuell out of me, notwithſtanding that I neither perceiued nor thought any ſuch matter but

was when I parted from him in the verie ſame caſe, when that hee came to Mansfield: that is, I was ſomewhat helde with my ſwelling, and the reſt I did willingly acte of my ſelfe.
                  M. Beresford. 
                  And Maiſter Beresford. I remember that Maiſter Darrell brought Katherine Wright from Mansfielde to my houſe, and tolde me that hee had recouered her. Howbeit, I finding her ſhortly after to bee as euill as before, diſcharged my ſelfe of her, and ſent her home to her brothers houſe at Whittington. Likewiſe Thomas Wright. Maiſter Beresford tolde mee,
                  Thomas VVright, pa. 21. 
                  that my Siſter Katherine Wright hauing beene with one Maiſter Darrell, was not amended, and ſo willed mee to take her home with mee, which I did accordingly.
                  Iohn Meekin, pa. 19. 
                  And Iohn Meekin. Katherine Wright being returned to Maiſter Beresfords houſe, I came vnto her, and carefully obſerued to ſee what change was in her, and founde her after her woonted manner, according to her former fittes, nothing bettered by her beeing at Mansfield. It is to be obſerued that Katherine Wright went to Mansfielde about Eaſter, and remaining there a moneth, was carried backe againe to Maiſter Beresfords, and from thence to Thomas Wrights, about the Whitſontide after. By which conference of the time, it appeareth directly, that maiſter Darrell is herein greatly deceiued, and that Katherine Wright was not at all in anie ſort releeued by him.
               Within a fortnight or three weekes (as it ſeemeth) after Katherine Wright was with her brother at Whittington, ſhee continuing her former practiſes, maiſter Darrell was againe ſent for to come vnto her, by the direction of M. Beresford (as Thomas Wright affirmeth) and vppon his firſt ſight of her he preſently affirmed, that ſhee was repoſſeſſed. This M. Darrell confeſſeth in theſe words.M. 
                        〈…〉
                     . 
                  As ſoone as I came and ſaw her, I affirmed to thoſe that were preſent, that ſhee was againe repoſſeſſed, but I am vncertaine whether I ſo ſaid

when I was in her preſence. If there were nothing els but this to charge M. Darrell with, yet were it ſufficient to ſhew either his childiſh raſhnes, or that he is an Impoſtor: it being impoſſible for any man vpon the ſodaine to pronounce any to be repoſſeſſed, except hee had the guift of diſcerning of ſpirits, which M. More ſaith, is now aboliſhed. But according to this beginning, ſo he did proceed. Firſt he affirmed that ſhe was in her fits altogether ſenceleſſe: and that whatſoeuer ſhe either did or ſpake, it was not ſhe, but the Deuill in her that did both. Which two pointes being obiected vnto him: he anſwereth thus: I doe not belieue that I affirmed her to bee in her fittes altogether ſenceleſſe:
                  M. Darrel ad art. 17. pag. 41. 
                  but I doubt it might bee that I ſaid, that whatſoeuer ſhe either ſpake or did in her fittes, it was not ſhee but Sathan. Whether hee ſaid then ſhe was ſenceleſſe or not, it is not materiall: ſeeing hee hath ſo affirmed many hundreth times ſince: but how vntruely concerning them both, theſe depoſitions following will declare.
               
                  Ka. Wright pag. 3.M. Darrel at his comming to me to Whittington, told the ſtanders by that I was ſenceles, notwithſtanding that I well knew euery one of my acquaintance there preſent, and heard him euery word what he ſaid, and could anſwere readily & directly to any that asked any queſtions of me. It was M. Darrels maner (ſaith Th. Wright) to affirme that ſhe was ſenceles, & that it was the deuil in her that anſwered him:
                  Th. Wright pag. 21, 
                  notwithſtanding that both I & all others preſent (as I thinke) iudged that ſhe had the commandment of her owne ſences, & knew what ſhe ſpake, becauſe at all times ſhe vnderſtood any queſtions made vnto her, & would anſwere roundly and aptly to the ſame.
                  M. Bereſford. pa. 10 And M. Beresford. At the time of her ſeconde pretended diſpoſſeſsion, I and others did aske her in her fits ſome queſtions, which ſhe anſwered ſenſiblie.
               
               Furthermore, as touching the ordinarie meanes of caſting out Deuils by faſting and prayer, according to M.

                  Darrels owne rules, he being charged not to haue vſed the ſame, and yet after ſome interrupted praiers, to haue affirmed, that ſhe the ſaid Katherine Wright was againe diſpoſſeſſed: he confeſſeth, that he ſo affirmed, and for the other point ſaith thus. There was no faſt appointed:
                  M. Darrel art. 19. pag. 41. 
                  but I for my part did faſt, and I thinke I did moue Katherine Wright to do the like. How likely this is to be true (conſidering hee was not then of opinion, that faſting was neceſſarie in this caſe) may eaſily bee geſſed. The day of his owne pretended faſt was vpon the Sunday: and thereof M. Beresford depoſeth in this ſort. M. Darrell comming to my houſe, wee went together vnto Whittington vpon a Sunday after dinner. By which wordes, it ſeemeth that they dined together that day: and then Maiſter Darrels was but a curtolde faſt.
               Before M. Darrels comming to Whittington,
                  W. Sherman. pa. 25. but after it was knowne that hee ſhould come thither, there was a great bruite that a myracle ſhould be doone there: as William Sherman depoſeth: whereupon hee amongſt others repairing thither: I found (ſaith hee, as I thinke) foure or fiue hundred people gathered togither, at, and about the houſe of Thomas Wright, where the maide lay. To which effect, M. Beresford likewiſe depoſeth,M. Bereſford pa. 10. that when he and M. Darrell came to Whittington, they found a great number gathered togither, to ſee what would become of the matter. Herevppon wee may not doubt, but that M. Darrell laboured to ſhew his skil: and beſides, that which before is expreſſed, did play indeed ſundry prety tricks to moue the greater admiratiō. For whilſt he was indeuoring to diſpoſſeſſe her, he induced her by cunning ſpeeches, to lie as though ſhe were ſenceleſſe, which he tearmed a traunce. It is true that he denieth this: but thereof K. VVright depoſeth. I confeſſe that M. Darrell put me in mind to be in a trance, and

to lie as though I were ſenceleſſe after my violent fits, and that at the time of my pretended diſpoſſeſsing at Whittington, when I ſhould haue lien as though I had beene dead: I fell faſt a ſleepe, and then when I awaked,
                  Ka. wright. pag. 4.
                   
                  I heard maiſter Darrell ſay to them that ſtood by, that I had beene in a trance. Another of his feats was this, whilſt hee was thus working with her to caſt out the diuels: (for you muſt vnderſtand that the firſt had brought 7. more with him) he fel to ſhew the ſtrēgth of his faith, in daring to enter cōmunication with the ſaid ſpirits, diuers in the meane time trembling & quaking as feating ſome hurt to themſelues, when they ſhould bee caſt out. In this his great ſhew of courage, hee commanded the diuels to tell him theyr names, and one of them (forſooth) ſaying his name was Roofye: thou lyeſt (quoth M. Darrell) that name is common to all ſpirits: and then further vrging them, another (forſooth) ſayde his name was Midlecub, which M. Darrell approued to be his true name. Vnto theſe particulars M. Darrell anſwereth thus.
               
                  M. Darrell ad art. 22. pa. 42.
                  I confeſſe, that I charged the ſpirit to tel his name, (which I did then in ignorance) and that on ſpirit ſayd, his name was Roofye, in a very great voyce, and in very fierce and cruell maner, & that another ſaid his name was Midlecub. But Th. Wright depoſeth of the other circumſtances. I well remember (ſayth he) that at the time when M. Darrell charged the ſpirit to tel his name, he anſwered his name was Roofye, to whom M. Darrell ſayde,
                  Thomas VVright, pa. 23, 
                  that hee lyed, for that was a common name to all ſpirits: and then hee charged him againe to tell his name, and hee gaue diuers other names which nowe I remember not. Nowe how it came to paſſe that Katherine Wright vſed thoſe names, ſhe hath before ſignified: when M. Darrell told her at Mansfield, that he heard the ſpirits within her, tearming themſelues by thoſe names:Ka. Wright pag. 4. 
                  which names (ſaith ſhee) I remembred, when Maſter Darrell asked the ſuppoſed

diuels their names: and ſo did anſwere him in the perſon of the diuelles, according to the names that I had learned of him. Beſides, it would be conſidered what euil lucke M. Darrell hath in his depoſitions. For whereas he ſaith, that the ſpirit Roofye told his name in a very great voyce, and in verie fierce and cruel maner: William Sherman depoſeth,Wil. Sherman. p. 26. 
                  That hee heard a voyce, which hee thought to be no other, then the maides voyce, ſhe lying vnder a couering.
                  Th, wright. pa, 21, And Thomas Wright. The ſpeeches ſpoken (as Maſter Darrell ſayd) by the ſpirit, were verily taken to bee the ſpeeches of Katherine Wright, and 
                        •
                     poken by her naturall voyce and none other. Againe▪ hee played a third legerdemaine, aunſwerable to any of the former. For whilſt he was further labouring in this matter with the maid, he took vpon him to diſcern when euery of the ſaid 8. ſpirits departed: ſaying to thoſe that were preſent, there goeth our one ſpirit: and then after a while, there goeth out another ſpirite, and ſo the nimble fellow proceeded vntil as he pretended, 8. diuels were gone out of her. It may bee eaſily conceiued, in what a perplexitie the people were, whē theſe eight diuels were thought to be flying amongſt them. But let maiſter Darrell ſpeak the beſt for himſelfe. Vppon the ſunday, &c. (ſayth hee) the ſayd Katherine Wright ſhewing the ſignes of diſpoſſeſsion,
                  M, Darr. art 20. & 21, pa. 41. 
                  as renting ſore, crying lowde, and lying for dead, I affirmed, that I beleeued, that then one of the ſpirits went out of her: which ſignes appearing in her eight ſeuerall times that day, and the night following, I ſayd ſhe was poſſeſſed of eight wicked ſpirits, and was alſo diſpoſſeſsed of them. The reſt of the premiſſes hee denieth. But they are depoſed by Katherine Wright.
                  Ka Wright pa. 3. I heard (ſaith ſhe) M. Darrell affirme: there goeth out one ſpirit, there goeth out another ſpirit, and ſo till all were gone: notwithſtanding, I knewe well, or at the leaſt thought, that I had none in me.
               
               
                  Furthermore, it being obiected to M. Darrell, that vpon Katherine Wrights naming of Midlecub, as is before expreſſed, he (hauing learned of the ſaid Kather. Wright, that ſhe and one Margaret Roper of Eckington were at ſome iarre, and thereupon had affirmed to Katherine Wright, that ſhee the ſaid Margaret had bewitched her) did aske the ſaide Midlecub who ſent him thether: and the maid or Middlecub forſooth, anſwering Margaret Roper, he the ſaid M. Darrell gaue it out publikely, as hee had before priuately to the ſaid Katherine: that Margaret Roper was a Witch, and had bewitched the ſaide maide: and thereupon procured a Conſtable to cary her with him the ſaide Darrel to one M. Fouliamb a Iuſtice of the Peace, who diſliking his courſe, threatned to ſende him to the Gaole. Hereof M. Darrell confeſſeth part, and there are ſome depoſitions for the reſt.
               
                  M. Darrell, ad art. 25. pa. 43. Io. Meykin, pa. 20.
                  Vpon the occaſion mentioned (ſayeth M. Darrell) I did procure the ſaid Margaret to be carried to M. Fouliambe, who would haue ſent her to the Gaole. But Iohn Meykins thus. At M Darrels inſtigation, ſhe was carried to one M. Fouliambe a Iuſtice, and he reprouing the ſaid Darrell for accuſing the ſaid woman, told him, that if he ſo demeaned himſelfe any more, hee would ſend him to the Gaole.
                  Th. Wright pa. 20 And Thomas Wright. M. Fouliambe examining the matter, found no cauſe in any ſort to touch Margaret Roper, and forthwith diſcharged her.
               
               Againe, M. Darrell was charged to haue perſwaded Katherine Wright to ſcratch Margaret Roper the pretended Witch, till ſhee drew blood of her: ſaying, that in ſo doing ſhee ſhould be cured, and that hee accordingly procured the ſaid Margaret to bee brought vnto her, and that ſhe the ſaid Katherin did draw blood of her. Theſe points M. Darrell doth after a ſort deny, but with ſome ſhifting. Thus he ſaith.M. Darrell ad art. 25. pag 43. 
                  I verily thinke that Margaret Roper woulde

ſundry times haue cōfeſſed her ſself to haue bewitched K. Wright, but that ſtill at the inſtant, when ſhe ſhould haue deliuered thoſe words, the diuel (as I think) did ſtay her: A ſubſtantial conceit to be deliuered vpō his oath. But he proceedeth, & telleth vs, that he ſtaied her from the gaole, as he remembreth. It ſeemeth that this could not haue bin forgotten, if it had bin true. But he ſheweth this reaſon why hee ſo intreated for her, telling M. Fouliambe this tale, viz. that the ſpirit, which had affirmed, that Mar. Roper had ſent him to K. VVright,
                  ibidem. 
                  did likewiſe affirm, that if the ſaid M. Roper were brought to the ſaid Katherine, ſhe the ſaid Katherine ſhould ſmart for it: or words to that effect. M. Fouliambe is dead, ſo as this dependeth vpon M. Darrels poore credit. He could not deny but that the pretended witch was brought to K. Wright, & therefore as it ſeemeth, deuiſeth this ſhift to couer that poynt obiected vnto him in this behalf. But he goeth on further ſaying thus: Mar. Roper being brought to the ſaid Katherine,
                  M. Dar. ad art. 25. p. 43 
                  &c. ſome others, I not being amongſt them, as I beleeue, would haue had the ſaid Katherine to haue ſcratched the ſaid Margaret by the face, but as I was informed, the ſaid Katherine was not able to ſcratch her, nor did draw any bloud of her as I beleeue. This ſcratching of witches, is generally accoūted a thing vnlawfull, which cauſed M. Darrell (it may be thought) to pretend this great vncertaintie. Howbeit, though his memorie be weak, his faith we ſee is ſtrong. But K. VVright affirmed vpon her examination, that maiſter Darrell told her, as is before expreſſed, and that accordingly, when M. Darrell brought Margaret Roper vnto her, ſhe the ſayd Katherine ſcratched her, and drew bloud on her. And for the better iuſtifying of her words therein, T. VVright her brother depoſeth thus: In my hearing M. Darrell perſwaded K. VVright to ſcratch Margaret Roper, and to draw bloud of her, aſſuring her that the ſaid Margaret had bewitched her,

and that by drawing of bloud from her, ſhee ſhould bee cured. And to that purpoſe Maiſter Darrell procured the ſaide Margaret to be brought to my houſe to Katherine Wright, and accordingly ſhee the ſaid Katherine did ſcratch her by the face, and drew bloud of her. All which notwithſtanding, the ſaide Katherine receiued no eaſe thereby.
               
               Laſtly, whereas M. Darrell did pretend that then Katherine VVright was diſpoſſeſſed of eight diuels, and hath ſince ſo often bragged of his dealings with her, both at Burton & in Lancaſhire, & at Nottingham, & in euery place in effect where hee hath come, in ſo much, as ſome of his friendes thought, hee tooke too much vpon him in that behalfe: the truth is, as it appeareth by ſufficient depoſitions, that hee deliuered her no more from the ſayde eight ſpirits, then he had done before from the firſt, and that ſhe receiued no benefit at all, by his prayer and packing with her, but then left her againe as hee founde her. To this purpoſe there are theſe depoſitions:Io, Meekin pa. 19, 
                  M. Darrell continued making of a wonder and a dinne to and with her, (when he pretended to caſt out eight diuels of her) but what good hee did her thereby, I could not perceiue, neither could I finde that ſhe receiued any eaſe thereby. This I certainely knowe that M. Darrel ſpent at VVhittington ſome three daies, and that after his departure, ſhe continued as before in the ſelf ſame maner of fits, that formerly ſhe had vſed. And Th. VVright▪ I could neuer find,
                  Th. wright, pa, 24. 
                  either by mine owne iudgement or by the opinion of others that were preſent at the time of her ſaid diſpoſſeſsions, or afterwardes, that the ſayde Darrell had doone any good or eaſe vnto the ſaide Katherine, during her aboade with mee. VVhich I moſt certainly do beleeue, for that the fits which ſhe had before Darrels comming to her in my houſe, and at the time of his being with her, and likewiſe all the time after, were ſtill alike, without any change or alteration.
               
               
                  And to conclude, Katherine Wright depoſeth,Katherine Wright pa. 4.
                   that when in her pretended fittes ſhee ſcritched, ſtarted, ſtriued to ſeeme ſtrong, feyned to ſpeake in the perſon of the deuill, and to acte many ſuch trickes, ſhee did diſſemble, and counterfeyte them all, and acknowledge that in ſo doing, ſhee deſerueth to bee grieuouſly puniſhed, both by God and the Queene, and is hartily ſory, and beggeth pardon for the ſame. But M. Darrell will ſtand to it like a man, that ſhee did not counterfeyte and diſſemble: but was indeede firſt poſſeſſed by one deuill, then diſpoſſeſſed, and afterwardes repoſſeſſed with eight, and againe diſpoſſeſſed of them all:Ibidem. 
                  Katherine Wright ſayeth, that none in the world did know ſhee diſſembled, but M. Darrell, and that hee at Whittington did charge her, that what meanes ſoeuer were vſed, ſhe ſhould keepe her owne counſell and his: for if euer ſhee confeſſed her diſſembling, they were both vndone for euer. And ſhee addeth, that ſhee thinketh hee will neuer confeſſe, that he practiſed with her to diſſemble, by reaſon of the wordes he vſed vnto her. But M. Darrell will ſtart at this, and verefie her opinion. Katherine Wright depoſed, ſayeth, that ſince M. Darrels firſt dealing with her, ſhee hath continued her diſsimulation at times, till within a quarter of a yeare or thereaboutes, before this her examination, for the ſame cauſes, that firſt ſhee pretended herſelfe to be worſe then indeed ſhe was: vz. to liue at ſome eaſe, and to bee much made of: but now promiſeth and auoweth to leaue all her former practiſes, and to become a new woman, and to liue and work orderly and quietly with her mother and father, as it becommeth an honeſt poore woman to doe. But Maiſter Darrell, he (forſooth) is reſolute; that ſhee was repoſſeſſed within a ſhort time after hee had left her, and that ſo ſhee hath continued euer ſince, and ſo remayneth at this

Preſent. True it is, that if he ſhould not ſo holde, he muſt be driuen with ſhame to confeſſe, that all his dealinges with her were vaine and friuolous: which woulde very much diſcredite the reſt of his wonderfull workes.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. VIII. of M. Darrels proceedinges with Mary Cooper the ſiſter of William Somers.
               
                  THe laſt that M. Darrell had in hand to worke his skill vppon, was one Mary Cooper of Nottingham, wife of Robert Cooper the younger. This Mary remayning with her father in law, had ſeene her brother and Maiſter Darrelles dealinges with him, at her ſaide father in lawes houſe, and did herſelfe beginne to practiſe her brothers trickes: pretending to bee troubled as he was preſentlie after Chriſtmas, 1597. at what time her brother falling againe to his olde trickes, was iudged by Maiſter Darrell to be repoſſeſſed. Of which matter Maiſter Darrell in his Apologie writeth vauntingly in this ſorte. If Somers be a counterfeyte, and I haue taught him, then vndoubtedly Mary Cooper his ſiſter is ſuch, and hath alſo confederated with vs herein. For ſhee cannot onely doe ſome of his trickes, as they call them, but beſides, for a time beganne her fittes, when hee had entred his: hee in like ſorte following her, hauing their fittes by courſe. And this they did although they were in ſeuerall roomes, as I am able and offer now to proue by a multitude of witneſſes. But hereof as ſhee will cleare me, ſo it hath not hetherto beene ſaide, that ſhee hath any hand in this counterfeyte action, why then doe any charge

that vpon mee? Is it not time well beſtowed to deale with this Impoſtor? See how in effect he reaſoneth: I taught not Mary Cooper to counterfeyte: therefore I taught not Somers. And againe, if I haue taught Mary Cooper to counterfeyte, then ſhee hath confederated with mee and her brother. But becauſe M. Darrell will needes bee ſo gallant in this matter, it ſhall appeare both what may be, and hath beene laide to his charge, together with his anſweres thereunto.
               Firſt, Mary Cooper ſayeth thus:Mary Cooper. pa. 203. 
                  many times Maiſter Darrell would call me vnto him alone, I being in my fathers houſe, and tell me that he doubted, that I would proue in time to bee poſſeſſed, and therefore bad mee looke vnto it.
                  M, Darrell ad art. 1. & 2 pa. 211 Theſe pointes Maiſter Darrell doth in effect confeſſe to bee true in theſe wordes: I belieue that I haue had diuerſe times priuate ſpeeches with Mary Cooper: but ſo as I alwaies did caſt to auoide ſuſpition of incontinencie: and alſo that ſometimes or other, I haue ſaide vnto her, that as I thought, ſhee would proue to bee poſſeſſed with a wicked ſpirite. Hee was neuer charged with any ſuſpition of incontinencie, nor other crime, which did not concerne his caſting out of deuilles: ſo as therein he was too cautious.
               Howbeit in that, which here hee hath confeſſed, hee was not ſo circumſpect. For his particular ſpeeches with her were nothing elſe, but a cunning proiect to put Mary Cooper in mind, that ſhee might counterfeyt ſuch a matter, and ſo ſhe tooke it. Hereunto alſo that appertayneth, which ſhee depoſeth thus: I oftentimes heard M. Darrell ſay before my pretended euilnes, that it was the deuilles cuſtome,
                  Mary Cooper. Ibidem 
                  when he had poſſeſſed one in a Family, to ſeeke to poſſeſſe more of the ſame familie likewiſe. This, (as arguing too plainlie his cunning packing) Maiſter Darrell denyeth:

but it is ſomewhat ſtrengthned by Somers depoſition in this behalfe:Somers pag 26. 
                  Before time (ſayeth he) that I fell againe into this courſe, meaning his pretended repoſſeſſion, I heard M. Darrell tell ſome that were preſent, that except very good heed were taken, the deuill would not ceaſe with afflicting of me: but would alſo, as he thought, aſſaile ſome other in my father in lawes familie. Of which wordes, I did not then know the meaning, till afterwarde, that my ſiſter did pretend herſelfe to haue the like fittes to mind, and then I did verily ſuſpect that M. Darrell had brought my ſiſter to imitate me. But afterwardes I was out of doubt thereof: for I deſiring to vnderſtand of Maiſter Darrell, what my ſiſter ayled, hee bad me not to feare her: for (quoth he,) ſhe is but as thou art, and ſhall doe well inough.
               
               Furthermore, whileſt the ſaid Mary Cooper was meditating (as it ſeemeth) vpon Maiſter Darrels former ſpeeches, it fellout, that a childe of hers died a little before Chriſtmas: which ſhee tooke ſo heauilie, as it made her (as ſhee ſayeth) indeed and truely euill at eaſe, and ſomewhat weake: whereupon certaine women, and others in the towne, comming vnto me, tolde me (ſaieth ſhee) that I was worſe, then I knew my ſelfe to be: and that I would be as euill as my brother William was. Theſe wordes added to M. Darrelles former ſpeeches: that hee doubted, ſhee would proue to bee poſſeſſed, and that Sathan was not contente with one in a Familie, together with her experience of the ſignes of poſſeſſion; which ſhee had ſeene in her brother, and often heard of Maiſter Darrell, made her, (as ſhee ſayeth) to doe that which ſhee neuer thought to haue done: that is (as ſhee addeth) to tomble and toſſe, to talke idely, and to laugh: which laughing, I woulde ſometimes haue reſtrayned, but could not by reaſon of the peoples fooliſh ſpeeches that were preſent. This laughing and fleering ſome woulde

thinke to bee but a ſmall matter: but conſider what M. Darrell gathered of it,M. Darrell ad art. 4. pag, 211. 
                  I affirmed (ſaith he) in Mary Coopers hearing, that her laughing and fleering countenance was ſuch, as I had ſeene in others who were poſſeſſed.
               
               Againe, the ſaid Mary Cooper being thus deemed to be troubled with Sathan, it fel out, that beſides her ſaide grief and weakeneſſe, ſhe had alſo ſome ſwelling in her bodie: whereby ſhe verily thought her ſelfe to be with child. And otherwiſe whatſoeuer ſhe pretended in outwarde ſhew, ſhe neither had, ſuffred nor felt, (as ſhe hath depoſed) any thing in the worlde. Againſt her opinion of being with child, M. Darrell oppoſed himſelfe as much as he could. M. Darrell (ſaith ſhe) laboured to bring me from my perſwaſion of being with child: by often ſaying, that it was no child, but ſuch a child, as God bleſſe euery good bodie from: and ſuch a child as would ſticke by me, as all there in Nottingham ſhould ſee apparantly.
                  M. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
               
               Theſe wordes of Mary Coopers being deduced into an article (as they are here ſet downe) M. Darrell anſwering vnto it, ſaith thus: I haue at ſometimes laboured to perſwade the ſaid Mary, as it is articulated.
               
               Furthermore, notwithſtanding that the ſaid Mary Cooper hath confeſſed her diſſimulation, and the reaſon that moued her thereunto: & moreouer alſo depoſeth thus: when I ſpake any idle wordes to the beholders, I knew very well what I ſaide and did: but made ſhew to ſpeake idly: when I laughed, I knew that I laughed: and in all my pretended fittes, I heard and ſaw, and vnderſtoode as well as any preſent: and did anſwere directly to any thing that the ſtanders by demanded of me: and when M. Darrell in my pretended fits was vehement and earneſt with me, I laughed at him, and could not but laugh, if one had giuen me neuer ſo much: yet notwithſtanding M. Darrell ſaith in this ſort: I confeſſe that I affirmed, that the

ſtraunge troubles,
                  M. Darrel ad ar. 7 pa. 212. 
                  which ſhe endured, did eyther proceed from ſathan within her, or by his outward operation: that I belieue ſhe was ſenceleſſe in her fittes, and I haue ſaid, that her laughter in her fittes did proceed from the deuill: and I doe likewiſe belieue, that when ſhe ſpake, it was not ſhe but Sathan. It may hereby euidently appeare, what a garboyle this lewde Impoſtor would haue made in Nottingham, if he had not beene preuented: for vppon his ſayd ſpeeches, diuers of his adherents, ſpecially women, they beſtirred themſelues in this matter, as Mary Cooper hath depoſed.
               
                  When miſtris Gray (ſayth Mary Cooper) and the reſt of her companie came about me, ſaying and reporting, that I ſhould bee deliuered of ſome monſtrous thing, I laughed heartily at theyr folly: and this my laughing they termed my fitte, and would cry out: now Lord bleſſe her, ſhee is in a ſore fit: the which their fooliſh wondring made mee laugh more and more: and the more I laughed, the more they cryed: Lord haue mercy on her, ſhe is in a ſtrange fit. Beſides, when I had laughed till my heart was ſore at them, and ſo was faine of neceſsitie to lye ſtill, and not ſtirre, becauſe my ſtrength was ſpent with laughing, then would the whole company of women, namely Mrs. Gray, and the reſt, crie out: Lord bleſſe her, Lord ſaue her: Lord Ieſus haue mercie on her, now ſhe is in a traunce.
               
               And whereas M. Darrell in his wordes before recited out of his Apologie, doth offer to proue by a ſimilitude of witneſſes, that for a time Marie Cooper began her fits, when Somers had ended his, and that he in like ſort followed her, hauing their fits by courſe, and that this they did, although they were in ſeuerall roomes: which hee maketh a ſtrange matter, and doth thereby inſinuate, that they being in diuers rooms, could not know by any ordinary knowledge when eyther of their fittes ended, that ſo the one might begin after the other had done. Conſider what M. Aldridge doth

here depoſe. William Somers and his ſiſter (ſaith he) being troubled together, (as it is pretended) I had very much to doe with them: for I had no ſooner done with the one, but preſently I was compelled to go to the other. When I had beene a while with Somers, he would breake out of his fit, and crie vehemently vnto me: go looke to my ſiſter: and accordingly I ſtill going vnto her, found her in her fits. But here it is to bee obſerued, that there was but a thinne wall betwixt both their beds, ſo as ſhe might eaſily heare her brother when he willed me to go vnto her. Furthermore, when I had beene in like manner with the ſaid Mary, and that ſhe had continued a ſpace in her fittes, ſhe would alſo breake out of them, and crie out vnto me: go looke to my brother. And ſtill when I came vpon her motion to Somers, I found him in his fittes. Now theſe wordes, vz. go looke to my brother, go looke to my ſiſter, were ſpoken by them both ſo lowd, as that they might eaſily heare one the other. And in this caſe they both continued together (as I remember) about fiue dayes, whereby I was very much wearied and troubled. And thus this great miſterie being laid open, Mayſter Darrell needeth not to produce his multitude of witneſſes.
               Againe, it being obiected to M. Darrell, that Mary Cooper imparting vnto him, how in her dreame ſhe had ſeene certaine ſightes, which made her afraide: he laboured to perſwade her, that ſhe was in no dreame, but that ſhe ſaw ſuch things in deed, and willed her to affirme and auow, that in her fitts ſhe had had ſuch apparitions: his anſwere thereunto is as followeth. Mary Cooper hath diuers times told me, that ſundry nightes ſhe being brode awake,
                  M. Darrell ad art 8. pag. 212. 
                  and not in any dreame, hath ſeene diuerſe ſhapes appearing vnto her, as of Cattes, Dogges, &c. which I belieue were wicked ſpirits, appearing in ſuch ſhapes: and I confeſſe that I haue affirmed ſo much vnto others, but cannot depoſe that ſo I haue

affirmed vnto her: howbeit, I belieue if I haue not ſpoken ſo much vnto her, yet I haue done it to others in her hearing. But Mary Cooper depoſeth thus: The relation which I made before the iudges at the aſsiſes, of my ſeeing ſtrange ſights and apparitions, as the apparition of cattes and flames of fire, with the reſt, I had dreamed of them by night in a dreame onely: and when I had told M. Darrell what I had dreamed, he perſwaded me, that it was no dreame but a true viſion: and bad mee ſay & auowe, that I had ſeene thoſe cattes and flames of fire in deed. By this his perſwaſion I did ſo ſay & auow, and cauſed it to be belief or a truth.
               
               You heare in this depoſition ſome mention of the Iudges: whereupon it is fit to remember vnto you, what a very ſtraunge and malicious practiſe was vndertaken to haue procured the death of a poore woman, one Alice Freeman vpon pretence that ſhe was a witch. This Alice Freeman was one of thoſe whome Somers had named for witches, & is allied to M. Freeman an Alderman & Iuſtice of peace in Nottingham. This M. Freeman (as it ſeemeth) had no liking of M. Darrelles proceedings with Somers, which ſtirred vppe great hatred and malice againſt him: which becauſe M. Darrell and his adherentes could not execute vpon him: they thought they would be reuenged vpon his kinſwoman: It is ſaid (but vntruely) by ſome of M. Darrels friends, that before the detecting of Alice Freemon for a witch, it was not reported in Nottingham, that Somers was a diſſembler, thereby inferring, that the offence taken by her detection, was the cauſe that raiſed vp a ſlaunder (forſooth) of Somers diſſimulation: & therefore no maruaile, if M. Darrell & his aſſociates, were greatly inflamed therewith. Now this Alice Freeman hauing eſcaped that imputation in reſpect of Somers, for that his bewitching was one while laid vpon the Darbiſhire witch,

and afterwards vpon the Worceſterſhire witch, a practiſe was vndertaken to charge the ſaid poore woman Alice Freeman, to haue bewitched to death the childe before mentioned of this Marie Cooper: and that ſhe likewiſe was the cauſe of the ſaid Maries trouble and vexation, as hauing bewitched her in like manner. This conceite being thruſt into Marie Coopers head, ſhe charged the ſaid Alice with that fellonie: her inditement was framed at the next Aſſizes: ſhe was arraigned: M. Darrell was one amongſt diuers that gaue in euidence againſt the woman, grounding himſelfe much vppon Somers detecting of her for a witch: and matters were ſo proſecuted againſt her, as had not the Iudges in their wiſedome diſcerned ſomewhat, & rectified their courſes to a due iſſue, it is verily thought the poore woman (being founde guilty by the great enqueſt) had beene condemned to death. Of theſe particulars, there are no depoſitions (ſauing what Mary Cooper her ſelfe hath confeſſed vpon her oath). Howbeit that the ſaid Alice was ſo dealt with, it will not bee denied. But let vs heare Mary Cooper.
               
               
                  I was procured (ſaith ſhe) by Miſtris Gray, George Small and his wife, M. Power and his wife, to proſecute the matter of inditement, which I preferred againſt Alice Freeman, at the Aſsizes for a witch: and I receiued money of miſtres Gray, to pay for the bill of inditement: and likewiſe I receiued inſtructions from amongst them to frame in euidence: and they likewiſe vrged me to moue for the good behauiour againſt Alice Freeman when ſhe was acquitted. But in my conſcience I am perſwaded, and was perſwaded of the ſaid Alice Freeman, that ſhe was neuer any witch, and I did all that I attempted againſt her at the vrging of the parties aforeſaid. Beſides, as ſoone as Alice Freeman was acquitted, I went as I was willed before to

Miſtris Darrell, M. Power and his wife, & Miſtres Aldridge were met together, and ſtayed for me: and then and there M. Darrell and the reſt were earneſt with mee, to frame a petition to my Lorde Anderſon, and notwithſtanding the acquiting aforeſaid, to offer to take it vpon my oath, that the ſaid Alice Freeman had bewitched, not onely my child, (for the which before ſhe had beene indited and acquited) but alſo my ſelfe, and they framed and gaue me a petition accordingly: but my conſcience pricked me not to deliuer it.
               
               If his be true which is thus depoſed, it is but agreeable vnto the violent humours that raigne in that kinde of people. But ſure, the practiſe was fowle: and therefore it was feared (as it ſeemeth) to be detected. For after that Somers was in examination at London, the ſaid Mary had a ſhrewd caution giuen her. She depoſeth thereof in this ſorte: Maiſter Darrell (ſaith ſhe) and the reſt aboue named, meaning Mrs. Gray, Maiſter Power and his wife, and Mrs. Aldridge told me, that I muſt beware: for if any hole could be eſpied in my coate, I ſhould be ſent for to London, as my brother William was.
               
               
                  W. Somers pag. 26.This Mary Cooper hauing continued about three or foure weekes in her ſaid diſſimulation, ſhe did leaue off thoſe practiſes, as her brother ſaith, without any aſsiſtance of M. Darrell to diſpoſſeſſe her, and hath beene well euer ſince. And M. Aldridge: afterwardes ſhe grew to bee indifferently well, and ſo doth continue: onely ſhe complaineth, that ſhe hath a kind of ſtirring in her bellie. But in deede (as information is giuen) the poore woman liueth orderly and well amongſt her neighbors, and is not otherwiſe troubled, then it happeneth out vppon occaſion with other women. Onely it ſeemeth ſhe is in great feare of ſome hard meaſure to be offred vnto her, vpon the comming

to light of her examination. For thus ſhe depoſeth:Mary Cooper. pa, 204, 
                  Now that I haue from my conſcience told the truth in this matter, I ſhall be ſo pointed at, reuiled and abuſed, in the open ſtreetes of the towne, as I ſhall grow wearie of my life. For the meeting with which inconuenience, it is wiſhed and not doubted, that the Magiſtrates in Nottingham, will be carefull.
               Vnto theſe notable exploites of M. Darrels, concerning Mary Cooper, Katherine Wright, the boy of Burton, & William Somers, ſomething might bee added of his pretended diſpoſſeſſing the ſeuen, ſo often mentioned in Lancaſhire, out of one Maiſter Mores examination & confeſſion touching that matter. His ſaid examination is in the Regiſters office to her Maieſties Commiſſioners, for cauſes eccleſiaſticall: where all the reſt of the aforeſaid examinations do remaine. And if any will take the paines to peruſe it, he ſhal find, that M. Darrel and M. Mores courſe held with thoſe in Lancaſhire, was as vaine and ridiculous, as with any of the other. The authour of the Briefe Narration, after hee hath taken his pleaſure againſt the proceedinges of her Maieſties Commiſſioners, and ſuch as they deputed for the better examination of theſe cauſes, as diſdaining and ſcorning them, he writeth (iudgeing other men of likelihood by his owne corrupt conſcience) in this ſorte: What goodly ſtuffe they haue returned, time and malice will make knowne vnto vs. The ſtuffe ſuch as it is (vile in deed) his Maiſterſhippe may bee pleaſed now to peruſe: and thereby reape ſome profit, if he reade it with no greater malice then it was written.
               The gentleman concludeth this Narration (as it hath beene before mentioned) in ſome choller, when alluding to thoſe that cannot belieue Maiſter Darrels wonders, he ſaith: Let him that is filthie bee filthie ſtill: And thereunto addeth, that doe Sathan what he can, wiſedome ſhall bee

iuſtified of her children: meaning (if he apply the place with any ſence) that Maiſter Darrell and his proceedings ſhall be defended and iuſtified.
               Howbeit peraduenture, when he hath better conſidered the contents of this treatiſe, he will not be ſo peremptorie. Otherwiſe, he hath here matter ſufficient to ſhew his skill in, for the iuſtification of it.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
               The Contentes of the Firſt Booke.
               
                  THe number of ſuch perſons as are ſaide to haue beene diſpoſſeſſed by M. Darrels meanes. Chap. 1. pag. 1.
                  The occaſion why M. Darrels dealing with Somers was called into queſtion at Lambeth. Chap. 2. pag. 4.
                  How M. Darrels friendes haue ſet out the pretended diſpoſſeſsing of William Somers Chap. 3. pag. 15.
                  How M. Darrell is made a fitter inſtrument to caſt out Deuils then many other. Chap. 4. pag. 19.
                  How M. Darrell knew William Somers and the reſt to bee poſſeſſed. Chap. 5. pag. 27.
                  Of M. Darrels knowledge, who ſent the Deuill into Somers, and the reſt. Chap. 6. pag. 36.
                  Of the Cauſes pretended, why men are poſſeſſed. Chap. 7. pag. 39.
                  Of the meanes alledged by M. Darrell and others, whereby men are diſpoſſeſſed. Chap. 8. pag. 42.
                  Of the ſignes whereby M. Darrell and others do diſcerne (as they ſay) when Sathan is expelled. Chap. 9. pag. 51.
                  Of M. Darrel, and M. Mores conceite: that Sathan being caſt out of one, doth preſentlie after ſeeke to repoſſeſſe him. Chap. 10. pag. 55.
                  How thoſe that tooke vpon them to caſt out deuils, doe get themſelues worke, and of their deuiſes to couer their lewdnes. Chap. 11. pag. 59.
               
            
            
               The Contentes of the Second Booke.
               
                  Of M. Darrels intercourſe with Somers by ſtartes at Aſhbye, from about the yeare 1592. vntil 1597. for his inſtruction how to diſſemble himſelfe to be poſſeſſed. Ca. 1. pa. 78.
                  of M. Darrels priuate directions to Somers, whileſt he was at Nottingham with him, how he ſhould from time to time behaue himſelfe in his counterfeyting. Chap, 2 pag. 98.
                  
                     Of M. Darrels inſtructing of Somers by ſpeaking to others in his hearing, thoſe things which he meant that he ſhould practiſe from the 5. of Nouem. when he came vnto him, vntil the ſeauenth of the ſame, being the day of his pretended diſpoſſeſsion. Chap. 3. pag. 106.
                  Of M. Darrels cunning inſtructing of Somers, by ſpeaking to others in his hearing of Sathans ſeeking to repoſſeſſe him, and of the acting of certaine trickes vnder a couerlet, from the ſeauenth of Nouember, vntill about the xxi. of the ſame. Chap. 4. pag. 127.
                  Of M. Darrels cunning inſtructing of Somers, by ſpeaking to others in his hearing ſuch things, as he ment he ſhould practiſe in the detecting of Witches, from about the xxi. of Nouember, vntil about the vii. of December. Chap. 5. pag. 137.
                  Of M. Darrels courſe, from about the vii. of December, vntil the xiiii. of Ianuarie, whileſt Somers refuſed to diſſemble any longer. Chap. 6. pag. 144.
                  How Somers about the xiiii. of Ianuarie fell againe to the acting of certaine fits, wherin he continued at times, til about the xxiiii. of Februarie, and how M. Darrell pretended that he was repoſſeſſed. Chap. 7. pag. 148.
               
            
            
               The Contentes of the Third Booke.
               
                  How Somers confeſſed his diſſimulation at S. Iohns in Nottingham, as ſoon as hee was out of M. Darrels diſpoſition. Chap. 1. pag. 177.
                  How M. Darrell dealt with Somers, for the reuocation of his ſaid confeſsion, that he had diſſembled. Chap. 2 pag. 184.
                  How M. Darrell deuiſed two or three ſhiftes to haue auoided Somers confeſsion that he had diſſembled. Ca. 3. pag. 187.
                  How M. Darrel & his friends to diſcredite Somers confeſsion did falſly report, that he was induced therunto by promiſes, threatninges, and inchantments. Chap. 4. pag. 190.
                  How M. Darrels ridiculous pretence, that Somers was induced by the deuill in forme of a blacke dogge and an Aſſe, to ſay he had diſſembled. Chap. 5. pag. 195.
                  How M. Darrell hath falſly affirmed. that. W. Somers was induced to ſay he had diſſembled, for feare of hanging: wheras

he falling into his fits before Commiſsioners at Nottingham, (vpon a former Compact) the feare of hanging was one of the chiefeſt cauſes, that he then affirmed, that he had not diſſembled. Chap. 6. pag. 198.
                  How Somers was perſwaded by threatninges, & promiſes to haue continued his diſsimulation, after he had been before the Commiſsioners at Nottingham, vntill M. Darrel might againe diſpoſſeſſe him. Chap. 7. pag. 204
                  Of the depoſitions taken in M. Darrels behalf, at Nott. & how vpon the reexamination of his own witneſſes, it falleth out: that the bodily actions of Somers in his fits, were not extraordinary, as they haue beene miſreported. Chap. 8. pa. 207.
               
            
            
               The Contentes of the Fourth Booke.
               
                  How M. Darrell laboured from time to time, to make thoſe things that Somers did, (& were but very toys) to be thoght both ſtrange and extraordinarie. Chap. 1. pag. 219.
                  How M. Darrell would not ſuffer, (as neare as he could) anie to deale with Somers in his fittes, to trie whether hee were ſenſeles or diſſembled. Chap. 2. pag. 225.
                  How M. Darrel indeuored to excuſe Somers, when hee was taken ſhort, and did ſuch toyes as did argue him ſufficientlie to be but a counterfeyte. Chap. 3. pag. 230.
                  How contrary to M. Darrels aſſertion, Somers had his ſences and vnderſtanding in his fits. Chap. 4. pag. 235.
                  Of the motions and knockinges which were heard and ſeene about Somers in his fittes, that they were done and made by himſelf, and were not as M. Darrell hath reported, extraordinary or ſupernatural. Chap. 5. pag. 238.
                  How Somers caſting himſelfe into the fire, was voluntarie, & no extraordinarie matter, as M. Darrell hath pretended. Chap. 6. pag. 242.
                  Of Somers pretended ſtrength and weight in his fits, that cō
                     trary to M. Darrels, and his friends reports, there was nothing extraordinarie in them. Chap. 7 pag. 244.
                  Somers knowledge in his fits was not extraodinary, as M. Darrell and his friends haue falſly pretended: neither could he ſpeake Greeke, Hebrew or Latine, otherwiſe then he had learned. Chap. 8. pag. 247.
                  
                     There was no impoſſibilitie in Somers fits, as maiſter Darrell and his friends haue falſly pretended. Chap. 9. pag. 255.
                  How contrarie to M. Darrels and his friendes aſſertions. W. Somers was accounted by many in Nottingham, or a diſſembler, from the time that hee beganne his practiſes there, vntil he confeſſed the ſame himſelf. Cap. 10. pa. 258.
               
            
            
               The Contentes of the Fift Booke.
               
                  How M. Darrels credite touching his dealing with the boy of Burton, doth relie vpon a falſe and fooliſh book, that was publiſhed of the ſaid boyes pretended poſſeſsion and diſpoſſeſſion, Chap. 1. pag. 265.
                  Of M. Darrels raſhnes in affirming Thomas Darling to bee poſſeſſed, and of his cunning inſtructing him, how to behaue himſelfe vpon the day of his pretended diſpoſſeſſion. Chap. 2. pag. 270.
                  Of M. Darrels ſhiftes and abſurdities, concerning the pretended diſpoſſeſsing of Thomas Darling. Chap. 3. pag. 278.
                  Of M. Darrels further practiſes with Darling to pretend that Sathan ſought to reenter into him, & of ſome other his vntrue aſſertions, concerning the boyes fittes, and of his cunning dealing likewiſe with him, that he ſhould neuer confeſſe his diſsimulation. Chap. 4. pag. 283.
                  How Darling confeſſeth his owne diſſimulation. Ca. 5. p. 294
                  A briefe of Katherine Wrightes Confeſsion, touching the beginning of her diſsimulation, and of the reaſons that moued her ſo to doe. Chap. 6. pag. 297.
                  Of M. Darrels proceedinges with Katherine Wright, for her pretended diſpoſſeſſion. Chap. 7. pag. 299.
                  Of M. Darrels proceedinges with Mary Cooper, the ſiſter of William Somers. Chap. 8. pag. 314.
               
               FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   