
      
         
            
            
            HARWARDS
Phlebotomy:
Or,
A Treatiſe of letting of Bloud,
Fitly ſeruing, as well for an
aduertiſement and remembrance
to well minded
Chirurgians, As alſo to giue a caueat generally
to all men to beware of the manifold dangers,
which may enſue vpon raſh and
vnaduiſed letting
of Bloud.
            Comprehended in two Bookes: Written
by SIMON HARVVARD.
            Imprinted at London by F. Kingſton
for Simon Waterſon.
1601.
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧ To the Right Honourable
his ſingular good Lord, Gilbert Earle of
Shrewſbury, Baron Talbot, Lord Comin of
Badenho, Valence, and Montchency, Lord
Strange of Blanch-minſter, of Brimsfeld, Corfham,
Furniuall, Verdon, and Louctoft, Knight and
companion of the moſt noble order of the
Garter, and one of her Maiesties
moſt honorable priuie Counſell:
many ioyful and happy yeeres,
with all increaſe of
Honour.
            
               IT is a propertie (Right Honourable,
my ſingular good
Lord) naturally giuen to euery
workman and artificer,
that be his worke neuer ſo
rude and homely, yet would
he be loth that his labour
ſhould vaniſh, and periſh:
but ſeeing that it is the beſt that his abilitie can
performe, he deſireth the ſame as long as may be,
to remayne and continue vpon the earth. This
cauſe maketh alſo many to be ſo forward in publiſhing
their writings in print, that when they themſelues
are taken away by death, yet by their works
there may ſtill remaine ſome laſting record, and
remembrance of the workemen. But the eſpeciall
cauſe which hath mooued me at this time to ſet

foorth theſe my two bookes of Phlebotomy, is, the
ſincere affection and deſire that I haue to bring
ſome ſupply and helpe (if I can) vnto two very
great wants and abuſes, which I dayly perceiue
to be now too common and graſſant in ſundrie
corners of this realme. For firſt, although in Cities,
as principallie in the famous Citie of London,
the people enioy a great bleſſing of God,
in hauing ſo many worthie and expert Phiſitions
and Chirurgians ſo neerely dwelling together,
that at all times the one may be able and readie
to aduiſe, and the other alſo as willing and ſufficient
to lend a helping hand: yet in Countrie
townes, there are many nowadayes▪ which doe
practize the opening of vaynes (almoſt in euery
other Village one) and moſt of them neither haue
any learned counſaile to direct them, neither are
of themſelues ſufficiently inſtructed in the matter
which they take in hand: whereby, though many
of them do meane well, and intend all for the
beſt, yet in the euent, both to the harme of their patients,
and alſo to their owne griefe, there often inſueth
more hurt and danger, then eaſe and ſuccour.
And another as great an occaſion there is of many
detriments and hinderances to mans health, to
wit, the wilfull temeritie and raſhneſſe of ſome
ignorant people, which for euery ſmall impediment
haue recourſe preſently to letting of bloud,
and by their vnaduiſed importunitie do vrge forward
the Chirurgian, and euen greedily draw vpō
themſelues thoſe manifold inconueniences, from
which afterward they can not againe ſo eaſily be
deliuered and made free. For although on the one

ſide the benefits be moſt excellent which redound
by Phlebotomy being rightly & duly adminiſtred,
for thereby the fulneſſe of the body doth come to a
mediocrity, griefes which come by extenſion are
pacified, the ſpirits are refreſhed, & naturall heate
euented, the lims being as it were eaſed of a great
burthen, are made more quick & ready to execute
euery office, nature is inabled to concoct what is
requiſite, and to expell the vnprofitable, flowing
humours are either drawne back, or turned aſide,
from the place where they annoy, or elſe are they
diſpatched and vtterly auoyded, narrow and obſtructed
paſſages are opened; and finally, very
preſent help is brought thereby to many dangerous
infirmities: Yet on the other ſide, great alſo
are the harmes which may enſue by letting of
bloud, if the ſame be raſhly and vnconſiderately
attempted, the ſpirits and bloud are ſpent and waſted,
the naturall heate is pluckt away and diſperſed,
the principall parts are made ouercold,
and vtterly loſe their ſtrength, old age is haſtened
on, and made ſubiect to palſies, apoplexies, dropſies,
and cachexies or bad habits, many (the
bridle of choler being taken away) do in a moment
fall into moſt faint Iaundiſes, many haue
the one halfe of their hearing and ſight diminiſhed,
and the one arme and the one ſide vtterly
weakened, and many alſo are brought to an vnrecouerable
deſtruction of their health and life.
            To redreſſe in ſome part theſe moſt perillous
incidents, I haue collected out of the moſt famous
Phiſitions both auncient and moderne
this diſcourſe of Phlebotomy, which although it be

penned (as commonly Phiſick treatiſes are) in
plaine and familiar words, moſt fit for them to
whome it is principally directed; yet becauſe it
comprehendeth the handling of one of the greateſt
remedies of corporall griefes, as a learned
Phiſition commenting vpon Galen ad Glauconem
doth write,Trincauel in expla
                     •
                  . lib. 1. de arte c
                     •
                  ra
                     •
                  ua ad Glauconem. Alex. Meſſer. lib
                     •
                  . 
                     •
                  eſcop
                     •
                  s mittendi ſanguinem. 
               Venae ſectio in magnis remedijs ab omnibus
medicis ſemper habita eſt. And Meſſaria, the
chiefe Doctor and profeſſor of Padua, in a treatiſe
of Phlebotomy, dedicated to Contarenus a worthy
Senatour of Venice, ſayth, Inter medica remedia
nullum ſanguinis miſſione nobilius, nullum praestantius,
nullum tutius, and doth call it further generoſum
& praeſentaneum vitae hominis praeſidium. And
ſeeing alſo that amongſt the high cares and charges
which chiefe peeres and gouernours do beare
in common wealths, this ſeemeth not to be the
leaſt, which concerneth ſo neerely the health, the
ſtrength, and euen the life it ſelfe of ſo large a part
of the inferiour commons, I haue therefore aduentured
moſt humbly here to preſent and offer this
my firſt part of the great Phiſick remedies vnto
your Honours patronage, and fauourable protection,
not doubting but that according to your
Lordſhips accuſtomed clemencie you will vouchſafe
the ſame thereof, not ſo much reſpecting the
poore gift, as the good heart of the giuer, and according
to your prone inclinatiion vnto the truth,
and to the generall good of the commons, your
Honor will haue greater regard vnto the graue
auctorities of the auctors out of whome theſe obſeruations
are collected, then vnto the homely
phraſe and plaine method of the obſeruer and collector

thereof. The eternall God, who hath heaped
vpon your Lordſhip all thoſe degrees of honour,
vnto which your noble Progenitours haue often
heretofore bin moſt worthily aduanced, graunt
vnto your Lordſhip with the like good ſucceſſe
as they in former times haue done, many proſperous
yeares happily to inioy them, to your dayly
increaſe of honour, and to the good and glory of
our Engliſh nation, euer continuing you in the
high fauour of our moſt gratious Soueraigne, and
bleſſing you perpetually both in this world with
the loue and hartie affection of the whole
Commons, and alſo for euer with the
happie ſocietie of the Saints
in the life to come.
            
               From Tanridge in Surrey this 29. of Auguſt.
Anno. 1601.
               
               Your Honours moſt humble in all
duties to be commaunded
Simon Harward.
            
         
         
            
            The Preface, declaring the
order and contents of theſe two bookes
of Phlebotomy.
            
               BEing purpoſed and reſolued for
the more generall benefit of my
countrymen to publiſh in two engliſh
treatiſes (the firſt whereof I
do heere in title Phlebotomy: and
the other, godwilling, hereafter,
as ſoone as leyſure ſhall ſerue, Cathartice)
as compandiouſly and as orderly as doth or
ſhall lye in my power, all the chiefeſt aphoriſmes and
concluſions, which haue bin handled and written by
the moſt famous Phiſitions of all ages, as concerning
ſuch cautions and circumstances as are to be obſerued
in letting of bloud, or purging the body of man:
Although in practiſe it doth in many caſes fall out,
that purging ought to take place before the opening
of any vayne (as ſhall h
                  •
               ereafter more at large appeere
in this booke) yet for as much as bloud is the
moſt excellent and principall humour that is disperſed
in the whole body, according to that of Galen,
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,Gal. libr. 2. de temperamentis.
               
               the beſt and moſt familiar iuice in man is bloud.
I haue therefore thought good in my methode of declaring
how we muſt deale with theſe ſeuerall humours,Fuc
                     •
                  ſ. Instit. libr. 2. Brigt
                     ••
                  us in therapeutica.
to follow the example of diuers learned men
of our time, to wit, in respect of the dispoſing of them,
to giue vnto bloud the firſt place and preheminence.
Theſe two remedyes are not onely accompted the
chiefeſt amongst the kinds of euacuations, but alſo
amongst all other corporall helps preſcribed or inuented
for the curing of mans infirmities: As well
affirmeth Mercurialis,
               Hieron. Mercurial. Conſil 42. 
               Duo magnorum auxiliorum
genera reperiuntur, purgatio nempe & ſanguinis
miſſio, There are two kinds of great remedyes
found out, to wit, purging, and letting of bloud.
Theſe 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,Galen 2. Ap
                     •
                  . 29. are called great helps, becauſe they
are applyed vnto great diſeaſes, and alſo becauſe
(howſoeuer they beeing abuſed do bring the greateſt
harmes) yet beeing well and rightlie administred,
they do bring the greateſt and moſt preſent caſes and
remedyes, that euer either inwardlie or outwardlie
were deuiſed for mans health.
            This my first part of the Remedia magna in
Phiſick, I haue comprehended in two bookes, the
ſumme and contents whereof, as alſo of euery part
thereof, I haue thought it not amiſſe firſt briefely
to prefix and lay open to the view of the well willing
reader.
            The firſt booke ſhewing what Phlebotomy is, and
to what vſe it ſerueth in ſeuerall diſeaſes, conteyneth
tenne Chapters.
            The firſt, what Phlebotomy is, and of the foure
distinct kinds and vſes thereof.
            The ſecond, how letting of bloud ought to

be vſed in continuall agues, as alſo in burning feuers.
            The third, how bloud-letting may be admitted in
ſome kinds of diary agues made by obstructions.
            The fourth, how farre letting of bloud may be allowed
in intermitting agues, quotidians, tertians, and
quartaines.
            The fift, whether letting of bloud be to be admitted
in the Plague, and pestilent feuer, as alſo in the
Poxe, meaſels, and ſuch other contagious infirmities,
and when and how.
            The ſixt, how letting of bloud is to be vſed in phrenſies,
quinſies, pleuriſies, inflammations of the raynes
or wombe, and other inward inflammations, as they
are conſidered in themſelues without agues.
            The ſeauenth, in theſe dangerous inflammations aforeſayd,
whether euacuation or reuulſion be more neceſſary,
on whether ſide the vayne is to be taken for
reuulſion, and what is the meaning of Hippocrates
his rule 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , to flow rightly, or with a right
courſe.
            The eight, whether letting of bloud be to be practiſed
in cold diſeaſes, as palſies, cramps, apoplexies, and
whether it may fitly be vſed in melancholick windes,
colicks, and dropſies.
            The ninth, whether in rheumes and distillations, as
alſo in the gout and in Morbus Gallicus, any benefit
may enſue by letting of bloud.
            The tenth, whether letting of bloud be expedient
for ſuch as haue hoat liuers and cold ſtomacks, as alſo
for ſuch as haue itches and ſcabbes, and ſuch other
faults of the skinne. Further, whether it be fit for the
diſeaſe called of ſea-faring men the skuruy, and for

the cachexia, or bad habit of body: and finally, what
and how many are the drifts and ſcopes in letting of
bloud.
            The ſecond booke concerning the rules and circumſtances
which are to be obſerued, when for the preuenting
or curing of a diſeaſe any vayne is to be opened,
conteyneth likewiſe ten Chapters.
            The firſt, whether the party that is to be let bloud
haue truly that distented plenitude which is called of
Phiſitions corpus plethoricum, and how the ſeuerall
kinds of plenitude may be knowne.
            The ſecond, of the conſideration of the temperature
of the party, what it is by manner of diet, or by exerciſes,
or by place of aboad, or by custome, or by habit,
or by constitution of body.
            The third, whether the body haue neede to be prepared
before letting of bloud.
            The fourth, of the age, ſexe, and ſolubilitie of the
party, whether old men, or children, or women being
either with child, or hauing their termes, may be let
bloud. Alſo, whether any hauing bodies either too
costiue or too ſoluble, may be let bloud.
            The fift, of the ſtate and time of the diſeaſe, what
conſideration is to be bad thereof in bloud-letting, and
which we muſt regard moſt of the powers, the animal,
the naturall, or the vitall.
            The ſixt, of the time of the yeare, the time of the
constellations of the planets, and the time of the day
moſt fit for letting of bloud.
            The ſeauenth, on whether ſide the vayne is to be
taken when we let bloud to preuent diſeaſes, or to auoyd
or deriue their matter, as alſo what vayne muſt

chiefely be choſen for ſundry infirmities.
            The eight, what manner of inciſion muſt be made,
how large, how ſmall, how deepe, what quantity of bloud
may be taken, and therein of the meaning of Galens
word to let bloud ad animi deliquium.
            
            The ninth, what order muſt be taken with them that
are let bloud, as well in the act it ſelfe to preuent ſwounings,
as alſo afterward for their gouernment and
diet.
            The tenth, how defects and errors are to be ſupplyed
and mended, and how the Phiſition, and in his
abſence the Chirurgian may know by the bloud being
a little while reſerued, what courſe is further to be
taken with the patient.
            Before I enter into the diſcourſe vpon theſe ſeuerall
arguments, I muſt pray the reader firſt to giue me leaue
briefely to anſwere certaine doubts and occaſions of
offences which perhaps might ariſe vpon the publiſhing
of this treatiſe. Firſt therefore if any (becauſe I baning
heretofore committed to the preſſſe certaine Sermons,
and matters of Diuinity, do now begin to ſet
forth a Phiſick worke) do therefore gather or ſuspect
that I haue conuerted my ſtudies from the ſcriptures
vnto Galen, let him know that in this point I am vtterly
miſtaken by him, for moſt of my phiſick obſeruations
were then collected when firſt I gaue my mind
that way, which was long before I publiſhed any matter
of Diuinity: ſo that if there haue bin any alteration
or conuerſion of ſtudies, it hath bin from the peruſing
of Phiſick auctors to the reading of writers wholy theologicall.
And yet ſtill (the coniunction betwixt the
body and ſoule being ſo ne
                  •
               re, and the ſympathy ſo
great) I ſee no cauſe but that he which ſtudieth Diuinity,

may lawfully now and then ſo bestow a ſpare
houre in viewing of the remedyes ordeyned by God for
mans infirmities, that he may be able in corporall extremities
to yeeld reliefe as well particularly to himſelfe,
as in common to his good friends. If any do
thinke otherwiſe, if he be a Deuine, I pray him that
he will graunt me licence to compare ſmall enterpriſes
to thoſe which were ſo farre more noble and excellent,
and to offer to his conſideration that example
of Moſes,
               Act. 7. 22. Aug. de ciuitate dei lib. 8. cap. 38. Baſilius pag. 404. which was learned in all the wiſedome of
the Aegyptians, that is (as Auguſtine doth expound
it) in Astronomy, Geometry, Arithmetick, and ſuch
like, which knowledges, though they came ſometimes
from heathen men, yet were they the gifts of God, Qui
operatur per malos non in malis. Or to call to his
remembrance Salomon,
               Eccl. 1. 1. whome the holy Ghoſt doth
entitle with the name of Preacher: and yet God gaue
him wiſdome alſo to diſcourſe vpon philoſophicall matters
concerning beasts,1. Reg. 4. 31. birds, fiſhes, and euery ſort of
ſimples euen from the greateſt to the leaſt, from the Cedar
tree to the moſſe that groweth vpon the wall. If he
be a Phiſition, which ſuppoſeth that the ſtudy of Phiſick
can not be tolerated in them whoſe vocation is
ſpirituall, then doo I onely oppoſe againſt him the
auctoritie of the most worthie Phiſition and graue
interpretour of Plato, Marſilius Ficinus, who, becauſe
ſome did obiect agaynst him, Nonne eſt
Marſilius ſacerdos? Quid ſacerdotibus cum medecina?
Quid cum aſtrologia commercij? Ficinus
maketh an apologie for himſelfe,Marſil. Ficinus in apologia praefixa lib. 1. de ſtudioſorum ſanitate tuenda. proouing euidently,
Antiquiſſimos quondam ſacerdotes fuiſſe medicos
pariter & aſtronomos. He addeth for proofe,
quod ſanè Chaldaeorum, Perſarum, Aegyptiorum

teſtantur hiſtoriae. Ad nullum praetereà magis
quàm ad pium ſacerdotem pertinere ſingularis
charitatis officia. He concludeth, officium verè praeſtantiſſimum
eſt procul dubio, & maximè neceſſarium,
& inprimis ab hominibus exoptatum,
efficere videlicet vt ſit mens ſana in corpore ſano,
id autem tum demum praeſtare poſſumus ſi con
                  
                     •
                  ungimus
ſacerdotio medicinam.
            
            Now if there be any that ſhall thinke it ſtrange
that I do ſo often alleage the testimonies of Fernelius,
Fuchſius, Montanus, and others (as relying
much vpon them) and yet do in ſome poynts a little diſſent
from them, I wiſh them to be certified, that I haue
a reuerend opinion of thoſe writers, and am very willing
that in thoſe poſitions which are beſt determined
by them, they ſhould in no wiſe be frustrated of their
due prayſe and glory. But if others in ſome doubts
haue found out more then they, then do I chalenge
liberty as neere as I can to make choyce of the ſoundeſt,
and in theſe humaine matters to be as the Poet ſpeaketh
of himſelfe:
            
               Nullius addictus iurare in verba magiſtri.
               Horat. epiſt. libr. 1. epiſt. 1.
Where Galen doth well, I muſt needs giue him his
due commendations, and euen admire thoſe ſingular
gifts of nature which God bestowed vpon him, but
where he skoffeth (as he doth ſometimes) at Christianitie,Gal. de differentus puiſ. lib. 2. & lib. 3. de ſectis proteruis medicorum.
there I deteſt and abhorre his blasphemies,
and leaue him to the iudgement of that God, to whome
only it is knowne, whether euer before his death his
heart were better lightened with ſome beames of
ſparkles of his grace. The words of thoſe excellent
Greeke and Latin Phiſitions (vpon whoſe auctorities
and the reaſons deliuered by them theſe my aſſertions

are grounded) I haue not ſet them downe in the proper
languages of the firſt auctors, becauſe my purpoſe was,
as neere as I could, to reduce the whole matter into a
briefe and compendious treatiſe: but I haue both faithfully
Verbatim tranſlated them, and alſo in moſt places
cauſed the chiefeſt parts of their arguments and concluſions
by a ſeuerall print to be apparantly distinguiſhed,
very plainely to be diſcerned. By which distinct
forme of character, as alſo by the bookes and diſcourſes
cited in the margent, it may euidently appeere,
that howſoeuer (to put ſome difference betwixt this
my labour and an other engliſh Phlebotomy heretofore
publiſhed) I haue prefixed my name to the title of the
whole worke, yet I do not preſume to cary away the
matter as of my ſelfe, but am very deſirous that the
louing reader ſhould be ſatisfied with the iudgements
of thoſe worthie and famous writers, whoſe counſailes
and aduiſes can not (I hope) but be welcome vnto
them, which with modeſt and well affected
mindes ſhall deſire to imbrace
the truth.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The firſt booke of Harwards
Phlebotomy.
            
               The firſt Chapter.
               
                  What Phlebotomy is, and of the foure distinct kinds
and vſes thereof.
               
               
                  PHlebotomy is the letting out
of bloud by the opening of a
vayne, for the preuenting or
curing of ſome griefe or infirmitie.
I take in this place
bloud, not as it is ſimple and
pure of it ſelf, but as it is mingled
with other humours, to wit, fleame, choler,
melancholy, and the tenue ſerum, which all (as
Fernelius ſheweth) as they are conteined together
in the vaynes,Fernel method. medendi lib 2. cap. 1. & 3. are by one word vſually called by
the name of bloud. And although it ſtill fall out
that other humours are alſo by Phlebotomy euacuated
out of the whole body,Fuchſ. Inſtit. lib. 2. yet (as Fuchſius doth
proue out of Galen) it is properly the remedy of
thoſe diſeaſes, which of the ranknes of bloud haue
taken their originall. There are foure ſeuerall
ſorts and vſes of letting of bloud. The firſt is called

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,Montanus in medicin
                        •
                      vniuerſalis part. 3. 
                  euacuatio: The ſecond is called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and
of Montanus euentatio: The third 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , revulſio:
The fourth 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , deriuatio. The firſt, which

is called Euacuation, is the auoyding of that repletion
and fulneſſe whereby the body is ouercharged.
               Repletion or fulneſſe, called of the Grecians
Plethora, is an vniuerſall redounding of bloud.
It is of two ſorts, the one is called quoad vaſa,
when the vaynes and veſſels conteyning bloud,Fernel. method. medend. lib. 2. cap. 1.
haue their whole capacity fully and thoroughly
filled: and the ſecond repletion is called quoad vires,
in which the vaynes do not ſwell, and yet they
conteyne more bloud and nouriſhment then by
nature can be ordered and gouerned. In the repletion
quoad vaſa (as Montanus ſheweth) are two
dangers,Montanus medicinae vniuerſalis part. 3. firſt, leaſt by the immoderate quantity
there ſhould happen either ſuffocation, or the rupture
of ſome vayne: and ſecondly, leaſt the abundance
of bloud ſhould corrupt and putrefie. For
the auoyding of both theſe perils, it is very expedient
that in a full body a vaine ſhould be opened,
although no griefe do draw vs thereunto, but only
the meere fulneſſe.Hippocr. 1. Aph. 1. For as Hippocrates ſayth, The
full habit of the bodies of champions, if it come to the
higheſt degree of fulneſſe it is fraile and ſlippery, for it
can not contiune long in the ſame estate. The ſecond
kinde of repletion termed quoad vires, is rather to
be holpen by medicins then by letting of bloud.
For if raw and vndigeſted humours do abound in
the body, the opening of a vayne will draw out
much good bloud: but as for the bad bloud which
is gathered in the firſt vaynes about the liuer and
the middle entrals, it will draw it into the whole
body,Gal. libr. 3. 
                        〈…〉
                      t
                        ••
                     nda. as Galen doth at large demonſtrate, and
therefore euacuation by ſome purging potion
ſhall in this caſe be more fit then letting of bloud.

Yet when by the nature of the diſeaſe there is euident
danger of a corruption and putrefaction
of humours to enſue, then a little quantitie of
bloud drawen ſhall be much auaylable to anticipate
and preuent it, if alwayes regard be had how
farre the ſtrength will permit, and what humour
is eſpecially mixt together with the bloud in the
vaynes.Fernel. method. medend. lib. 2. cap. 4. For as Fernelius ſheweth, there is another
way two kinds of repletion or plethora, the one
is called pure, the other impure. Montanus maketh
alſo two, the one ſimple, and the other compound.
The pure doth conſiſt of (in a manner) an
equall portion of all the beſt iuices. The impure
is an abounding of vicious humours in the vaines.
If the plenitude come by choler, the vayne may
the more plentifully make euacuation. But if
the fulneſſe come by fleame or by melancholie,
then muſt the euacuation be made by little
and little at ſeuerall times when neceſſitie requireth,
and when the vaynes being ouer-full doe
threaten danger. How all theſe ſeuerall kindes
of plenitude ſhall be knowne, I ſhall haue occaſion
to declare more at large in the firſt Chapter
of the ſecond booke.
               
                  The firſt vſe of Phlebotomy, to wit, euacuation,
hath place not onely in pure repletions,
but alſo in all dangers of putrefaction, according
to that of Galen:Gal. therap. method. lib. 11. It is good to open a vayne
not onely in feuers called ſynochi (which haue one
continuall fit, and doe proceede of inflamed bloud)
but alſo in all other humours that ſtand in danger
of putrefaction, when the regard which is had
of age and ſtrength doth nothing prohibite. For nature
which doth dispoſe and gouerne our bodies,

being lightened, and hauing put off that which a
                     •
                  
a burthen did ouercharge her, will eaſily ouercome
the rest in ſuch ſort, that it will concoct what
is to be concocted, and expell what is to be expelled.
               The ſecond vſe of letting-bloud is called of Montanus
euentatio,
                  This 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      is called of Platerus euentilatio. wherupon he maketh a ſecōd kind
called Phlebotomia euentatiua, which is the venting
of any humour that doth boyle and bubble within
the vaines. For as the former, to wit euacuation,
hath reſpect vnto the plenitude;10. Bapt. Mont. parte 3. Medicinae vniuerſalis. ſo this 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   hath
properly a relation to the boyling and bubbling.
So (
                     •
                  ayth he) in quotidians and quartans we do
often let bloud, not becauſe there is any fulneſſe or
great multitude of ill humours, but becauſe we
would by venting take away the boyling and
bubbling thereof. This venting hath place both
whether there be any putrefaction in the humour
or no. But if our ſcope and purpoſe be only ſimply
to vent, then is it beſt to do it by letting a little
bloud, and often according to the rule of Auicenna,
Melior eſt multiplicatio numeri quàm quantitatis.
Otherwiſe if the caſe be compound that both there
be a fulneſſe and a boyling, that we muſt both euacuate
and vent, then ſhall it be moſt fit to do it at
once, and plentifully and as long as the ſtrength
will permit, as is taught at large by Galen in the
eight booke of his Methodus medendi. And in the
ſame booke ſpeaking of ſome agues that are like
to Diarian feuers, and do come of obſtructions, he
doth vſe theſe words:Gal. method. therapeut. libr. 8. 
                  That the humour may be vented
wee haue neede of the great remedy, wee muſt let
bloud the party being of ſufficient ſtrength, although
there be no ſignes of plenitude. How it ſhal be knowen

when the humours do thus boyle and haue neede
of venting, it ſha
                     •
                  l be layd open at large in the
two Chapters next following.
               The third vſe of letting bloud is called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
Revulſion: Montanus calleth it Phlebotomia diuerſina,
which is a plucking back of humours,
when they are caried from any one part of the
body into an other with force and violent courſe.
Euacuation doth reſpect the fulneſſe, Venting the bubbling
vp, and Revulſion the violent courſe of the humour.
How this revulſion muſt be made, is diſcuſſed
in the ſeauenth Chapter of this firſt booke.
               The fourth vſe of bloud-letting is called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
deriuatio; of Montanus, Phlebotomia deriuatiua,
which is a deriuing of a humour from any place
where it is ſettled and impacted, into ſome other
neere place, by which it may beſt be ouercome or
auoyded. It differeth from revulſion two eſpeciall
wayes. Firſt, revulſion is into places farre diſtant,
as Hippocrates ſheweth:Hippocr. libr. de 
                        •••
                     ium natura. pag. 245. 
                  We muſt endeuour to open a
vayne distant as farre as may be from the place where
the griefe is made or the bloud gathered, for ſo there
ſhall be no danger of a ſodaine change, and beſides the
custome being tranſlated an other way, thou ſhalt make
that there ſhall be no more flowing to the former wonted
place. But deriuation of humours is into the neereſt
places, as by which they may moſt fitly be auoyded,
according to that of Galen: Deriuation is made
into places nigh ioyning,
                  Gal. lib. 5. de c
                        ••
                      and. morb. cap. 3. 
                  but revulſion is made into places
plaine oppoſite. Againe, an other difference there
is, that revulſion is of humours now flowing, but
deriuation is of them that are already ſettled, as is
witneſſed by the ſame Author:Gal. lib. 4. method. therapeut. cap. 6. 
                  If the flowing be
ſtill caryed in his violent courſe, we muſt vſe revulſion

to draw it to the contraries, but when the humor is ſetled
and impacted in the place, then it is better to deriue
it. He giueth the reaſon of it, for the change is neerer,
and both the acceſſe and the drawing force of the
purging medicine is more readie when the place is nigh.
And what there he ſpeaketh of medicins,Gal. libr. 2. ad Glaucon. cap. 7. the ſame
he writeth of Phlebotomy. Reuulſion is the remedy
of fluxes or rheumes ſtill flowing, but deriuation is their
help when they haue taken hold of any part: but both
theſe kindes of euacuation doth Hippocrates commaund
to be done by the common vaynes. Thus much
briefely concerning the firſt queſtion, what Phlebotomy
is, and of the foure ſeuerall kinds or rather
vſes thereof.
            
            
               CHAP. 2.
               
                  How letting of bloud may be vſed in continuall agues
called ſynochi, in hote agues, and how alſo in burning
feuers.
               
               
                  BEing now to declare particularly, how
Phlebotomy is to be vſed in moſt of the
vſuall diſeaſes which cōmonly do raigne
amongſt men, ſeeing there is no kind of infirmitie
that hath more ſorts of it ſelfe ſubiect to letting of
bloud then hath the Ague, I haue thought it not
amiſſe to begin firſt with it. In the ague ſynochus,
which hath one continuall fit, ſeeing that it proceedeth
of the inflammation of bloud, needs muſt
the opening of a vayne be very fit and conuenient
for it. But there are two kinds of it. The one is called
ſynochus mitior, or ephemera extenſa, in which
only the thinner part of the bloud is kindled, it is
diſſolued very often before the fift day, it hath
the vrine ſomewhat reddiſh and thick, the pulſe

great and thick, but not euidently vnequall. And
the other is called ſynochus vehementior, wherein
the whole ſubſtance of bloud is inflamed. It carieth
manifeſt notes of crudities, to wit, vnequalnes
in the pulſe, and the vrine red and thick, and the
tongue waxeth ſomewhat rough and blackiſh.
In either of theſe ſynochi letting of bloud is requiſite,
and that as plentifully as ſtrength will permit.
If at the firſt it were omitted, it may be done in the
fourth day or in the ſeauenth day, or after the ſeauenth
day. But the beſt and ſafeſt time is euen in
the beginning of the infirmity,Fernel. method. med. lib. 2. cap. 6. as Fernelius ſayth,
It is more ſafe to let bloud when the diſeaſe approcheth,
then when it hath already taken poſſeſſion of vs, according
to the old verſe:
               
                  Aegriùs eijcitur, quàm non admittitur hospes.
               
               It is a more hard thing to caſt out a bad gueſt,
then it is at the firſt not to admit him.
               And therefore Platerus willeth vs in theſe ſynochi
ſine putredine,
                  Platerus de febribus pag. 113. wherein the bloud is not putrefied
but inflamed, to haſten the letting of bloud, not
only to vent or euentilate the bloud inflamed, but
alſo to pluck back the ſame, leaſt breaking out of
the vaines into the principall parts, it doth ſtirre
vp there moſt perilous inflammations. For Platerus
and Fontanonus be both of this opinion, that
the inflammations in the noble parts do follow
theſe ſynochi, and not go before them. And therefore
they do aduiſe in the firſt beginning to open
a vayne, and if in the firſt day it be omitted when
the ague is thought to be but an ephemera, an inflaming
of the ſpirits for one day; yet the next day
following, when it appeareth plainely that it is no
ephemera, becauſe it laſteth longer then a day, but

that it is a playne ſynochus, then let out bloud
boldly a good quantity, according to the ſtrength
of the partie; or elſe take the leſſe bloud at once,
and open the vayne either the ſame day or the
next day againe, which is the ſafeſt way for ſuch
as be weake. In this ague doth the ſecond vſe
of Phlebotomy, to wit, euentatio, or euentilatio
greatly ſhew forth his power, according to that
of Galen, writing of the hoat ague called ſynochus:
                  Gal. method. therap. libr. 9.
                  In whom ſoeuer the body in the multitude of humours
being made vnapt to vent and breath out, hath
gathered ſuch a heate that now it is come to a feuer,
the party muſt be let bloud as much as ſtrength can endure,
knowing that if this remedie be not taken, they
which are ſo affected ſhall either be ſtrangled by ſuffocations,
or ſuffer ſyncopies and very dangerous ſ
                        •
                     ounings
wholy to ouerthrow them: Montanus writing
vpon the thirtenth Canon of A
                        •
                     icenna concerning
bloud-letting,Montan. medicinae vniuerſalis part. 3. doth make three ſeuerall ſorts
of this hote ague comming of bloud inflamed, and
ſheweth in which of them bloud may beſt be let.
The firſt is called Homotona, which from the beginning
to the end doth keepe the ſame tenour. The
ſecond Epacmastica, which increaſeth more and
more vntill it come to ſtate and vigor. The third
Paracmastica, which alwayes decreaſeth. In the
firſt and the laſt he admitteth boldly to let bloud,
but in the ſecond ſparingly, leaſt ſtrength and power
fayling the diſeaſe ſhould ouercome nature.
So alſo if it be febris putrida, or ſynochus cum putredine,
a feuer wherein the humor is putrified, he
doth require a little before in the ſame booke, that
we ſhould not let bloud in any great quantity:
Becauſe where the humour is already putrified, although

though we ſhould let bloud euen till the ſtrength fayle,
yet ſhould we not auoyde the putrefaction: for putrified
bloud is become earthly, and therefore can not be expelled.
And if we let bloud in a great quantity, the putrefaction
will ſtill remaine, and the vertue and ſtrength
will be made ſo weake, that we ſhall not be able to remoue
that putrefaction which remayneth. He obiecteth
the example of Galen his practiſe, who in a
certain ſeruant hauing this ſynochus cum putredine,
did let bloud plētifully to ſwouning or fainting.
                  Gal. therap. meth. libr. 9. ad 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      vide li. z. ca. 8. But
he anſwereth to that place, that when Galen came
to that ſeruant, the humour was not fully putrified,
but only that there appeared ſome ſignes of putrefaction,
and in the ſecond day he opened a vayne. So
that when the ſignes of putrefaction did begin he
let bloud, and not when the humour was alreadie
putrified:Montan. medicinae vniuerſalis part. 3. and further, it was a feuer alwayes declining.
But he cōcludeth there, I ſay playnely that
of the feuer ſhould be with a putrefaction and a vaine
ſhould be opened, the patient ſhould be killed. The moſt
certaine ſigne to know when the ague is faulty
only by meanes of the inflammation, and when it
is faulty by the putrefaction,Trincau. in explanatione lib. 
                        •
                     . Galeni de d
                        •
                     fferenti
                        ••
                      
                     
                        •
                     ebrium. is (as Trincauel in his
explanation vpon Galen doth ſhew) by the ſyſtole
and diaſtole of the pulſes. For there is a double vſe
of the pulſe, the one for cooling of the ſpirits, and
to that doth ſerue the diaſtole, or enlarging of the
artery, for when the artery is enlarged a more cooling
ayre being drawne in, doth temper the heate
of the ſpirits. The other is that the ſmoaky vapour
(which muſt needes be engendred by the force of
heate working vpon moyſture) may be ſo let out,
that the ſpirits may be purified: and to this vſe ſerueth
ſyſtole the contraction or compreſſion of the

artery. For while the artery is drawne and preſt
togither, the hote ayre and ſmoky vapours are expelled
and auoyded. Now it muſt needes be that
betwixt theſe two contrary motions, a reſt muſt
of neceſſitie goe betweene them. When there is
neede of cooling, there the diaſtole or enlarging of
the artery is ſwifter, and the inward pawſe or reſt
is ſhorter: but where there is more neede of auoyding
moyſt and putrifyed excrements, there the
ſyſtole or contraction of the artery is ſwifter, and
the outward pawſe is ſhorter. And this later he
maketh to be the moſt certayne note to know all
putrifyed agues, in which the humours rotting,
many ſmoky vapours muſt needes be engendred,
this he calleth ſo proper, familiar, inſeparable, and
certaine a ſigne to know and diſcerne putrified agues
from others, that it neither doth nor can deceiue. An other
ſigne there is of a putrifyed ague, when exspiratio
eſt inspiratione inſignior, when the breathing
out is more euident then the breathing in, becauſe
there is more neede of exhaling putrified vapours,
then of cooling. Alex. Maſſaria pag. 134. ſheweth
ſundry cauſes why letting bloud ſhould be good
in putrified agues, firſt, it cooleth and dryeth, and
all cooling and drying things are good for putrefactions.
Againe, it is good in reſpect of the ague,
and laſt of all it helpeth much tranſpiration, by
meanes whereof it muſt needes be good to help
putrefaction.Mont. medic. vniuerſ. part. 3. When Montanus affirmeth that to
let bloud in putrified agues is to kill the patient, he
meaneth a liberall euacuating of bloud, but otherwiſe
his words before do ſhew plainely that it
may be done moderately to vent the vapours.Platerus de febribus pag. 113.
And Platerus ſheweth an other cauſe why it ought

to be done, becauſe the occaſion of putrified agues
doth lie hid in the bloud and in the branches of the
hollow vayne, together with the bloud is auoided ſome
portion of the putrified humour.
                  Fernel. in methodo general
                        •
                      de curand
                        ••
                      febribus. Of the ſame iudgemēt
is Fernelius, The opening of a vaine which may take away
both the multitude and alſo a great portion of the
putrified humour, doth greatly auayle to the curing of
the feuer.
                  Gal. method. therap. lib. 11. And an other reaſon ſheweth Galen why
this muſt be done, becauſe nature being diſburthened
of a part, ſhall the more eaſily ouercome the whole, as I
haue declared in the Chapter going before in the
firſt vſe of Phlebotomy.
               If the ague be that which is called Cauſo the burning
feuer, whoſe matter is not the heate of bloud,
but the burning of choler (and whoſe ſignes are
toſſing of the body,Hippocr. de ratione victus in acutis, ſect. 4. an vnſatiable thirſt, the toong
dry and rough either yellow or black, a nipping
about the ſtomack and liuer, yellow excrements,
the vrine very thinne and ſomething wanne, the
pulſe ſwift, thick and hard, doating, a little ſweate
about the forehead and neck, but euery where elſe
the skin very dry, and therewithall a little rough)
letting bloud may alſo well be vſed at the beginning,
but in no great quantity, only foure or fiue
ounces for venting or euentilation are ſufficient.
Auicenna in his curing of the Cauſo doth affirme,Auicennae prima quarti.
that bloud is not to be let in it, vnleſſe there doe
appeare redneſſe and thickneſſe of vrine, but that
is not Cauſo,
                  Montanus in canonem. 11. Auicennae in medicinae vniuerſalis part. 3. but rather ſynochus. Montanus ſheweth,
that the true continuall burning feuer ſeeing
that the matter which doth putrifie in it (to wit
choler) is moſt hote and moſt dry, it becommeth
in a manner altogether firy.
               
                  Hppocrates teacheth the way of curing a burningHippocr. de ratione victus in acutis, ſect. 4 pag. 382.
                  
feuer by quenching the burning heate, by
giuing water and mulſa aquoſa, but he maketh no
mention of letting of bloud, thereupon Montanus
doth conclude: that letting of bloud is not to be
permitted in a burning feuer. But I thinke Montanus
his argument in that diſputation vpon the
eleuenth Canon of Auicenna is of ſmall force. For
although Hippocrates do not preciſely commaund
in that place bloud to be let in a burning feuer,
yet he maketh it in the ſame place to be a ſigne
of the diſſolution of the diſeaſe if the patient do
bleede at the noſe: and preſently vpon it he vttereth
theſe words, At in morbis acutis ſanguinem
detrahes ſi vehemens fuerit morbus, & qui aegrotant
aetate florenti fuerint, & virium robore valuerint.
Platerus doth require in the Cauſo or burning feuer,Platerus de febribus pag. 115. & pag. 55.
that there ſhould be a liberall letting of bloud
if ſtrength do permit, becauſe he thinketh it not to
proceede of pure choler (as many other Phiſitions
haue taught) but of bloud putrified and inflamed
in the great artery, and cauſing ſo much the
more dāgerous feuer as it is kindled in the trunck
of the great artery neereſt vnto the heart. If Hippocrates
do require Phlebotomy in morbis acutis,
then muſt it needes be good in the burning feuer,
which as Trincauell declareth is maximus & acutiſſimus
morbus.
                  Trinc. de ratione curandi part. corp. affect. lib. 2. cap. 11. But ſtill in the quantity Hippocrates
his rule muſt be obſerued, to haue a due regard of
the age and ſtrength.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 3.
               
                  How bloud-letting may be admitted in agues cauſed
by obstructions, as Diaries &c.
               
               
                  
                     GAlen ſheweth,Gal. meth. med. lib. 8. cap. 4. 
                  that by obstructions ſometimes
the transpiration and vapouring out
may be intercepted, and by the obſtructions
they which haue bad humours fall
into agues, as Diaries and ſuch like, and in them
he requireth as very expedient the opening of a
vayne, firſt for venting or euentilation: for as he
ſaith, vnleſſe the bad humour be vented, it muſt needs
become putrified: and ſecondly, becauſe thoſe things
which you ſhall miniſter afterward to deliuer
from obſtructions will worke more effectually.
For it is beſt to come to deterge and looſe obstructions,
hauing firſt by bloud-letting (for he ſpeaketh there
of Phlebotomy) auoyded part of the euill humours.
For we ſeeking to deliuer the obstructions before we
haue made euacuation, it is in danger that we ſhall
imp
                        ••
                     t the obstructions more firmely then before.
How the greatneſſe of the obſtruction ſhall be
knowne, Galen ſheweth a little after in the ſame
booke,Gal. method. therapeut. libr. 8. 
                  The declaration of the quantity of the obſtruction
is made manifeſt by the ague: for vpon greater
obstructions the ague is greater, and vpon leſſe obstructions
it falleth out to be leſſe.
                  Bapt. Montan. medicinae vniuerſalis parte tertia. 
                  Montanus being fallen
into the conſideration of this place of Galen,
doth make three ſeuerall kindes of obſtructions,
and ſheweth in which of them bloud-letting
is requiſite, and in which not. The fyrſt
obſtruction is when in the pores of the skinne
in the outward parts the tranſpiration and vapouring

out is ſtayed and prohibited. The ſecond
kind of obſtruction he calleth coarctatoria,
when ſuch a multitude of humours is conteyned
within the vaynes, that the paſſage of the ſpirits
being ſtopped, they cannot paſſe thorough the
vaynes, whereby there commeth a perill of ſuffocation.
The third obſtruction is called oppilatio,
whē ſome tough matter doth ſo ſtop the conduits
and chanels of the vaynes, that neither matter nor
ſpirits can paſſe thorough them.
               In the firſt kind of obſtructions Phlebotomy is
good, becauſe by it the body is made more thin,
and humors being without the vaines in the compaſſe
of the skinne, are by bloudletting drawne
into the vaines, and ſo do paſſe away, as Montanus
doth demonſtrate out of Galen.
               
               In the ſecond kind of obſtruction letting bloud
is alſo conuenient,Gal. de ſanit. tuenda libr. 4. that the thronging together of
humours may ceaſe, and that bloud may be vented.
But in the third kind of obſtruction it were
ill done to let bloud, becauſe the thick humour
which is impacted in the firſt vaynes, is not thereby
euacuated, but rather increaſed, as the ſame
author doth proue out of the ſame fourth booke
of Galen de ſanitate tuenda. I thinke he hath reſpect
to that poſition of Galen:
                  Ibid. 
                  In a weriſome and faint
body there is little good bloud, and many raw humours,
Phlebotomies do auoyd the good bloud, but as for the
ill bloud which is gathered together in the firſt vaynes,
especially that which is about the liuer and mid bowels,
they disperſe and ſpread it throughout all the body.
How in the two laſt kinds of obſtructions the humour
muſt be prepared and made fluxible, before
we attempt any letting of bloud, it is to be declared

hereafter in the third Chapter of the ſecond
booke. But the queſtion is here only of the firſt
kind of obſtructions, when in an ague called diaria
or ephemera (which laſteth not aboue 24. howres)
by reaſon either of the conſtipation or thicknes
of the skinne the ſpirits and vapours haue loſt
their accuſtomable flowing out, whereby the ſpirits
are inflamed, whether in this ague bloud is to
be let or no? I anſwere, that according to the
iudgement of many excellent Phiſitions of our
time,Platerus de febribus pag. 286. Fuchſius de morbis medendis. lib. 4. cap. 1. Brigthus in therapeutica. this ague is beſt ouercome by cauſing kindly
ſweates, by medicins looſing obſtructions, and by
vſing fit bathes without letting of bloud. But if it
do continue more then a day, that it be now diaria
plurium dierum, or as ſome call it ephemera extenſa,
then all do agree that letting of bloud is very expedient,
for feare leaſt of an ague not putrified it
do become a ſynochus putrida, and ſo bring greater
danger. For as diaries or agues of one day do paſſe
into diaries of many dayes, vnleſſe the obſtruction
be looſed as Galen ſayth;Gal. lib. 10. method. medendi. 
                  Vnleſſe the obstruction be
cured they fall into agues of many dayes: ſo alſo the
diaries of many dayes do fall into putrified agues
and hectick feuers, vnleſſe they be in time holpen
and eaſed, as the ſame Galen ſheweth in the firſt
page of his ninth booke de methodo medendi. But
concerning letting of bloud, Galen doth in the
tenth booke generally ſet downe his iudgement
very briefely concerning all diaries cauſed by obſtructions.Gal. method. therap. lib. 10.
                  One obstruction commeth by multitude,
and an other by the quality of the humours being too
tough, or too thick. In that which commeth by multitude,
letting of bloud is the chiefeſt manner of
curing, but in that which commeth by the quality

of the humour, the vſe of the extenuating things is
beſt.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 4.
               
                  How farre letting of bloud may be allowed in intermitting
agues, quotidians, tertians, quartaines.
               
               
                  
                     MOntanus affirmeth,Mont. medicinae vniuerſalis parte. 3. that in a phlegmatick
ague, if the fleame be thick and of a glaſſy
greene colour, as it falleth out in the agues
called epialae, then in no wiſe may any vayne
be opened, becauſe although there be a great boyling,
yet we haue neede of a great heate, that the
matter may be concocted, and the paſſages opened,
and therefore he thinketh that we haue neede
rather of frictions. But if it be pituita dulcis, ſuch a
fleame as may eaſily be conuerted into bloud,
then he alloweth letting of bloud as a fit help to
remoue the obſtruction. He ſheweth in the ſame
place a little before, that the chiefeſt cauſe why we
ſometimes vſe phlebotomy in quotidians & quartaines,
is to vent the vapours.Vide finem tertiae partis medicinae vniuerſalis Mont
                        •
                     ni. 
                  It respecteth not the
multitude, but the quality, becauſe it is done only to
help the bubbling of the humour. In the tertian he
ſayth, that Phlebotomy is not neceſſary, neither
euacuatiue, becauſe there is no fulneſſe of bloud,
but only euill humours mixed with the bloud,
nor yet Euentatiue, becauſe the paroxyſmes of
the tertians continue not aboue twelue howres,
and haue a great diſtance of intermiſſion, and
therefore can not haue ſo great a boiling as ſhould
neede to be vented with ſo great a remedie as is
Phlebotomy. And as touching the quartaine, he
ſayth, that bloud-letting doth not agree vnto it of

it ſelfe as it dependeth of melancholick humour,
but per accidens, as when it commeth vpon the ſuppreſſing
of the menſtrua or haemorrhodes, or when
it commeth ratione ſanguinis adusti by meanes of
burnt bloud, then he alloweth the letting of bloud.
Platerus doth thinke that all intermitting agues
do proceede of a putrified cauſe,Platerus' de febribus pag. 151. & 154. lying hid in the
meſaraick vaynes, and therefore if any of them
could be opened, he ſuppoſeth ſome help might
come: but ſeeing thoſe meſaraick vaynes do no
where appeare at the skinne, it were beſt not only
in quartaines but alſo in tertians (if poſſibly it
may be) to cauſe a flux of y• haemorrhoids, becauſe
the haemorrhodiall vaynes are branches of y• meſaraik
vaines. He will haue no vayne to be opened
there, vnleſſe it appeare exceeding well, becauſe
a ſmall wound made there, doth bring oftentimes
great torments: but he will haue either the flux to
be procured by ſome medicine, or elſe leaches to
be applied. He alloweth not phlebotomy in exquiſite
tertians, and ſuch as are afflicted with moſt
vehement heate, by reaſon of choler inflamed,
neither doth he thinke it fit in phlegmatick agues,
in which caſes he which ſhall raſhly and vnskilfully
let bloud, ſhall not only auoid nothing of the
cauſe lying hid in the meſaraik vaynes, but alſo as
he ſayth, the matter being plucked out of the meſaraick
vaynes into the hollow vayne, he ſhall of an intermitting
ague make a continuall ague;
                  Plat. ibid. or elſe, the purer bloud,
by reaſon of emptying the branches of the hollow vayne,
being drawne out of the meſaraick vaynes, that cholerick
and putrified humour which remayneth (and
whereunto bloud was before a bridle and a meanes to
aſſwage it) will now become more fierce. Therefore he

concludeth, that in theſe kindes of agues more
harme is done by admitting Phlebotomy then by
omitting it, vnleſſe ſome grieuous ſymotome do
happen, that by the inflaming of bloud an inflammation
alſo of ſome of the inward parts be feared,
or vnleſſe there be a plethora or plenitude in the
body (which may be obſerued by the rednes and
thicknes of the vrine, and by the long continuing
of the heate after the fit, and when there is no fit)
then not in the beginning of the ague, but about
the third or fourth fit, in the day of intermiſſion,
out of that vayne of the arme that appeareth moſt
filled, it will do very well to let bloud 5. 6. 7. or 8.
oūces. In quartains it muſt be done in y• left arme,
& ſomewhat later then in tertians:Plater. Ibid. 
                  For quartaines
are at the beginning gently to be handled, leaſt a double
quartain or a triple quartain be made, and leaſt alſo the
ſtrength ſhould decay, which heere we muſt preſerue by
reaſon of the long continuance of the diſeaſe. Fuchſius
in an exquiſite tertian (which proceedeth of meere
choler,Fuchſi. de medendis morbis lib. 4. cap. 6. not mixt with any other humour) doth
proue out of Galen ad Glauconem, that neither letting
of bloud, nor vehement purging medicine
can be conueniēt for it.Brigthus in therapeutica. Doctor Bright doth thinke
requiſite that in the firſt day of intermiſſion (to
ventilate the body) 6. or 8. ounces of bloud be
taken.Fernelius in methodo generali de curandis febribus. Theſe iudgements do ſeeme to be contrary,
but yet the ſeuerall circumſtances being conſidered,
they may both be very well reconciled. For as
Fernelius ſheweth the opening of a vayne in reſpect
of it ſelfe is hurtfull to an exquiſite tertian, it
taketh away the profitable and neceſſary humour, and
leaueth behinde the impure and hurtfull. Againe, in
this kind of ague the body is wont to be very thin

and of little bloud: But the ſharp choler which is the
matter of the ague, and doth abound and boyle vnder
the hollow part of the liuer when bloud is taken away
doth waxe more fierce. Yet he alloweth there letting
of bloud in reſpect of other ſymptomes, ſuch
as are headach, beating of the temples, and heauineſſe
of the body, in corpore plethorico. In tertiana
notha, or the baſtard tertian, where choler is for
the moſt part mingled with fleame, or where choler
doth not make it ſelfe the matter of the ague,
but doth kindle other humours (which may be
knowen in that the pulſe is much leſſe,Fuchſ. de morbis medendis lib. 4. cap. 7. Brigthus in therapeut. thinner and
ſlower then the other, and the heate alſo leſſe) then
is no bloud to be taken at the beginning of the
Ague; but afterward the matter being prepared,
when the vrine doth appeare red and thick, a
vayne may be opened the day going before the
fit, and foure ounces of bloud may be taken. But
if the bloud prooue thin and ſomewhat yellowiſh,
then muſt you ſtraightway ſuppreſſe it. In the
melancholick quartaine if it come vpon the ſtaying
of any vſuall or naturall purging of bloud,
then ſtirre vp that if you can: if you can not, then
within the 14. or the 20. day let a little bloud out
of the ſaluatella, if the ſtrēgth be weake; or otherwiſe
out of the baſilica of the left arme, hauing before
giuen a clyſter. But if the quartain do come
ex atrabile of black choler, which hath fits beginning
with leſſe ſhaking, and thoſe alſo ſhorter then
the melancholick (for the melancholick continueth
24. houres) and is alſo accompanyed with a
ſharp heat and vehement thirſt, and with much
more vnquietnes then the melancholick, then
you may let bloud in the beginning foure or fiue

ounces out of the baſilica of the right arme, and
the next day after if ſtrength will permit two or
three ounces out of the ſaluatella of the left hand.
If that the black choler do proceed of burnt bloud
you may let out more then if it proceed of any other
humour.Heurnius lib. 2. method. ad pra
                        •
                     n. That learned Heurnius ſayth, Black
choler is ougly, and doth ſpring of ſome burnt humour;
but melancholy is the very melancholick iuice or the
dregs of bloud. Theſe are of a nature farre differing.
For to black choler are due thoſe things which
may pacify the fiercenes of it, as Violets, Endiue,
and ſuch like: but to melancholy are due ſuch
things as are moderately warme and opening, as
the rootes of Capers, the aperitiue rootes, and
ſuch like, alwayes adioyning to them ſuch things
as haue vim humectandi a moyſtening force. And
as in potions and medicins theſe two require a far
differing methode, ſo alſo (as you haue alreadie
heard) in the manner and time of letting of bloud.
               In the intermitting agues we muſt not haue a
bare and naked reſpect only to the feuer it ſelfe,
but we muſt heedily regard all the ſymptoms and
dangers which may enſue by the meanes of other
accidents,Trincau. in 
                        〈…〉
                      ad Glauconem. as Trincauel in his Commentary vpon
Galen ad Glauconem doth at large declare by the
example of an exquiſit tertian. An exquiſit tertian
(ſayth he) was neuer in reſpect of it ſelfe counted
amongſt great diſeaſes, and therefore Phlebotomy
doth not properly appertayne vnto it. But
in other reſpects it is not only profitable, but alſo
neceſſary, when regarding the ſtate of the body,
our ſcope and purpoſe is to preuent and auoyd
future miſchiefes.Trincau. Ibid. 
                  For often may an exquiſite tertian
paſſe either into a continuall ague, or into a burning

ague, when the body is full either of bloud or of choler.
His reaſon is becauſe bloud may by reaſon of the
multitude putrifie: and alſo choler if it be much,
and the ſtrength do grow ſo weake that it neither
can gouerne it nor expell it, it muſt needs more
and more putrifie.Hippocr. libr. de morbis. And alſo according to Hippocrates
eaſily may a tertian be conuerted into a pluriſy.
For theſe cauſes (ſaith Trincauel) the opening
of a vayne may haue place in an exquiſite tertian,Trinc. in expl. libr. 1. ad Glauconem de arte curatiua.
but that according to Auicenna muſt be vntill the
third fit. Thus in all intermitting agues, though
not in all after the ſame manner, nor in the ſame
time, nor in the ſame quantity, nor for the ſame
end and purpoſe, that axiome of Galen holdeth
firmely,Gal. therap. method. lib. 11. that not onely in continuall agues but
alſo in all other agues whatſoeuer where any humour
doth putrify, it is good to open a vayne.
You haue his words and his reaſon in the firſt
Chapter of this booke ſet downe at large in the
firſt vſe of Phlebotomy. One generall note to
know in tertians and quartaines whether any
bloud may be ſpared, is y• thinneſſe and y• yellowiſhneſſe
of the bloud. For the ſame which D. Bright
doth write in baſtard tertians,Brigt in therapeut. that if the bloud
do proue thin or yellowiſh, we muſt ſtraight ſtop.
The ſame doth Fuchſius require in quartaines,Fuchſ. de redend
                        ••
                      morbis lib. 1. cap. 8. that
if the bloud do appeare black and thick, ſuch as
is commonly in ſplenetick men, then we ſhall let
the party bleede more largely; but if the bloud doe
prooue thin and yellow, then muſt it be preſently ſtayed:
for ſuch a humour is not vnprofitable, but as well by his
ſubstance as alſo by his quality it doth amend the thick
and cold humours.
               
               
                  Alexander Maſſaria chiefe Doctor and profeſſor

of the Vniuerſity of Padua, a man of excellent
iudgement,Maſſaria de 
                        •
                     upis mit
                     
                        •
                     endi ſanguinis pag. 132. doth in his late treatiſe concerning
Phlebotomy differ from the opinions of Platerus
and Fernelius, as touching letting bloud in tertian
agues; and alloweth letting bloud ſometimes in
exquiſite tertians, and ſometimes in baſtard tertians,
alleaging the auctority of Galen,
                  Gal. lib. 1. ad Glauconem cap. 10. ſo that it be
done 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , ſtraight in the beginning, and
other things duly conſidered, as the ſtrength and
plenitude, and due preparation of the body. And
he wondereth what Auicen ſhould meane, when
he ſayth,Maſſaria pag. 91. that vpon immoderate bleeding cholerick
humours do more boyle and rage, whereby
the patients are more inflamed, whereas experience
doth teſtifie that vnſeaſonable or exceſſiue
bleeding doth bring rather dropſies and cold and
bad habits of body, then any boyling heate or inflaming.
If in tertians the cholerick humours of
the body be firſt drawne away and the bowels euacuated
by a gliſter, and a fit time choſen for the
opening of the vayne when the ſtomack is faſting
and empty, I ſee no reaſon but the ſtomack and
bowels ſhould draw back ſufficiently to keepe the
meſaraick vaynes from ſending any ſuch ſtore of
humours into the hollow vayne, as ſhould putrefy
the bloud in it or the branches thereof. And the
rather do I yeeld more to the iudgement of Maſſaria,
then of Fernelius and Platerus in this point,
becauſe the moſt learned and expert Phiſition
Heurnius doth teſtifie,Heurnius libr, de morbis cap
                        ••
                     is cap. 10. that in letting bloud in cholerick
bodies we do often auoyd more choler then
bloud, and by experience I haue found it very oft
to do much good & bring preſent help towards the
beginning of tertians, although after the fift or

ſixt fit I haue not ſeene much good to come thereof.Maſſaria pag. 133. Gal. libr. 1. ad Gauconem. cap. 11.
But in quartain agues Maſſaria cleaueth to that
of Galen, We muſt deale ſoftly and gently with quartaine
agues at the beginning, and neither vſe any ſtrong
purging nor euacuation of bloud, vnleſſe it do mightely
abound: And if to him that openeth the vayne the
bloud do appeare black and thick, ſuch as especially is
found in ſplenetick perſons, let him let bloud the more
boldly; but if it appeare yellow and thin, let him ſtraightway
ſuppreſſe it.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 5.
               
                  Whether letting of bloud be to be admitted in the plague
or pestilent feuer, as alſo in the Pox and ſuch other
contagious infirmities, and when and how.
               
               
                  
                     AVicenna in his eeuenth canon concerning
bloud-letting (as Montanus hath
deuided them) doth ſet it downe for a
rule,Mont. medie. vniuerſ. part. 3. that in what agues ſoeuer there is a
moſt vehement inflammation, there muſt be no
letting of bloud. Montanus diſcourſing vpon that
place, ſayth, that we muſt regard not ſo much what
the diſeaſe requireth, as what the ſtrength can
beare,Mont. Ibid. 
                  In respect of the diſeaſe Phlebotomy doth agree,
but not in respect of the powers. He bringeth in
an inſtance of a peſtilent feuer, and ſheweth that
bloud is not to be let in it, becauſe although of it
ſelfe in regard of the peſtilent feuer there is no
greater remedie then letting of bloud, ſeeing that
by it the body is made apt to vent and vapour out
the ſpirits, the inward heate is extinguiſhed, and
putrified bloud is euacuated: yet if bloud be let all
do dye,
                  Mont. Ibid. 
                  and therefore we muſt abſteine from Phlebotomy

in the pestilent feuer, becauſe in a moment of time the
ſtrength vtterly decayeth. Platerus ſheweth ſundry
great dangers which letting of bloud doth bring
vnto them that are infected with the plague,Platerus de febribus pag. 225. and
that little good helpe can be expected thereby.
I can not ſee how Phlebotomy can auayle to pluck that
venemous quality from the heart, or to bring it out of
the body together with the bloud, ſeeing that it is rather
procured thereby, that the infection which from outwardly
commeth into the body and doth preſently infect
the ſpirits, ſhould be drawne more deepely inward.
And moreouer the motion of nature (whereby ſtraightwayes
in the firſt inuaſion it goeth about to ſhake out
the poyſon by ſweates,
                  Plater. Ibid. 
                  by outward pustles and by botches)
may be hindred by letting of bloud, and the powers
thereby weakened, which we ought to keepe ſtrong to
expell that poyſon. It neither doth auoyd the cauſe of
the diſeaſe, neither is there any neede heere of any euentilation
of heate, ſeeing it is not heere ſo vehement.
Hereupon he concludeth, that vpon raſh and vnaduiſed
letting of bloud in plague times many mē
are killed. Yet he acknowledgeth that when the
plague hath taken hold vpon bodies which are
ſummè plethorica vel cachectica, full of bloud or of
corrupt humours whereby a feuer is kindled, then
if by opening of a vayne the plenty and putrefaction
of the bloud be taken away, all the other
ſymptomes will become more tolerable: but that
muſt be done ſparingly, and with a due regard of
the ſtrength. And if in the beginning ſtrength be decayed,
then is Phlebotomy not to be admitted, though
the fulneſſe of the vaynes doe require it: for of lusty
youthes we haue found by experience more to eſcape in
the plague time without letting of bloud then by letting

of bloud. If Phlebotomy be vſed it muſt be done rather
in respect of the feuer then of the pestilent qualitie,
ſeeing that this venome doth not conſiſt in the
bloud, but comming from outwardly doth ſodainely poſſeſſe
the heart, and we do not thinke that it can be expelled
or drawne out from it by Phlebotomy. And if
the caſe do ſo ſtand that by the meanes of the plenitude
and feuer a vayne muſt needs be opened,
then he ſheweth in what order it muſt be done.
Firſt, it muſt be done in the beginning: for vnleſſe
the vayne be opened within 24. howres of the beginning,
it will rather hinder nature then do any
good. Alſo it muſt be conſidered whether the
party be in a ſweate or no: for in no wiſe muſt the
ſweate be hindered by Phlebotomy. But after the
party hath ſweat and hath bin refreſhed with a
little meate or ſome cordiall receipt, then may a
vayne be opened howſoeuer there hath gone no
clyſter nor purging before, becauſe the time hath
not giuen leaue. Chooſe the vayne in that ſide
which is moſt grieued. If any eruption appeare about
the flanck open the ſaphena. If in the vpper
parts, then ſome vayne in the arme or hand of the
ſame ſide. If vnder the arme-hole, take the baſilica.
If about the 
                     •
                  ares, the cephalica. If in the face, open
the vayne vnder the tongue. And euer to the botches
appearing, let cupping glaſſes be faſtned, that
the poyſon may abide in the ſame place, and not
by Phlebotomy be drawne into the inward parts.
Trincauel doth accompt it very dangerous to let
bloud when pimples do outwardly appeare:Trincauel tractat. de febre pestilentiali. but
when as well by the pulſe, as by the former manner
of diet which the party hath vſed, it is found to
be expedient; then let it be done ſtraight in the beginning

before the putrefaction of the pestilent feuer be
much increaſed; and before nature do ſeeke to expell
vnto the skin.
                  Hippocr. de morbis vulgar. lib. 1. ſect. 7. Thus he prooueth out of Galen, who
commenting vpon one of Hippocrates his patients
called Crito, who dyed vpon a kind of peſtilent feuer,
he doth excuſe Hippocrates and ſayth that he
did not let him bloud, becauſe he was not ſent for
at the beginning of the diſeaſe. Which ſignifieth
that if he had bin ſent for at the beginning, a vaine
no doubt ſhould preſently haue bin opened.
               
                  Montanus in his epiſtle to Crato doth allow letting
of bloud in the ſmall pocks and ſuch other
contagious diſeaſes,Montan. in initio conſultationum medicarum. ſo that it be in the beginning
before ſignes of putrefaction appeare: but when it hath
once preuayled, then to let bloud he doth call it
a pernitious and a deadly thing. For nature is then
checked when it ſhould wholy be intentiue to expell
the venom and infection of the diſeaſe.Fuel. conſil. 67. 
                  Fernelius,
Hollerius, and Syluius, three famous and worthie
Phyſitions, conſulting about the ſweating
plague called ſudor Anglicus, did deliuer to the
Engliſh Embaſſadour the vſe of bloud-letting amongſt
the meanes to preuent the diſeaſe, in full
bodies, the bodies being firſt orderly purged: but
the diſeaſe hauing once taken hold, they aduiſed
no bloud-letting, but preſcribed good cordials to
expell from the heart the venemous infection.
But in that which is commonly called by the name
of Plague, although the body be already infected,
yet if it be corpus pletharicum (the notes whereof
are in the firſt Chapter of the booke next enſuing)
wee may be bold to begin the cure with
bloud-letting, obſeruing as neere as may be the
cautions before expreſſed, and eſpecially taking

heed (as Montanus giueth warning) that wee
chooſe the vayne as farre as we can from the principall
parts,Montanus medicinae vniuerſalis part. 3. from the heart, liuer, and braine, for
if we draw the peſtilent humour vnto them he
ſayth we ſhall kill the patient.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 6.
               
                  How letting of bloud is to be vſed in phrenſies, quinſies,
pluriſies, inflammations of the raynes or wombe, and
other inward inflammations happening often without
agues.
               
               
                  IN the phrenſy (which is a deprauing of
all the principall faculties of the braine)
cauſed by the inflammation of the filmes
thereof) Rhazes doth allow Phlebotomy in the
beginning of the diſeaſe,Heurnius de morbis caepitis cap. 10. pag. 114. but not if it be a hectick
phrenſy of any continuance. Celſus doth affirme,
that the face being red and the vaynes ſwelling,
a vayne may be opened after the fourth day, if
ſtrength be ſufficient. But if it come of a cholerick
cauſe, then it ſhould ſeeme to be ill done to let
bloud, becauſe as Heurnius obiecteth fraenum bilis
eſt ſanguis, bloud is the bridle of choler. To this
he anſwereth, Male ſanguinem ſine bile educeremus.
imo plus bilis educimus quàm ſanguinis, Hardly can
we auoyd bloud without choler, yea rather by
Phlebotomy we do bring out more choler then
bloud. And if it were done but only for deriuation
ſake, yet were it well done. But at what time muſt
this Phlebotomy be vſed? Caelius Aurelianus ſayth
that it muſt be done within three dayes of the beginning,
and not beyond, becauſe in ſuch diſeaſes

the ſtrength of the body is in perill. Aretaeus alſo
ſayth, that it ought to be done either the firſt or the
ſecond day. If the phrenſy begin after the fourth
day, then open the vayne after the ſeauenth day:
but if it do come in the ſixth or ſeauenth day, then
let no bloud, for that is a criticall phrenſey. A
                        •
                     tius
ſayth, that if the phrenſy do come with an ague
any day before the fourth day, and ſignes of plenitude
appeare, wee may well open the middle
vayne. When the phrenſy is old, letting bloud is
not ſafe. Caelius ſayth, that to let bloud after the
eight day eſt iugulare homines, is nothing but to
murder men. The quantity muſt be according to
the cauſe. If it proceede of inflamed bloud, you
may let bloud vſque ad animi deliquium, till the
heart begin to fayle. For there is a vehement inflammation,
a very ſharp feuer, and exceeding
great griefe,1. Aph. 13. & 1. Aph. 23. in which three caſes Galen alloweth
large Phlebotomy. But if the bloud be much mixed
with choler, then ſixe ounces ſhall ſuffice, or if
the party be ſtrong, tenne ounces. Aretaeus his opinion
is, that if it haue the firſt beginning from the
parts about the midriffe, then the party may bleed
more largely, becauſe thereabouts lyeth the fountayne
of bloud. What you do you muſt do at once, for
the diſeaſe doth giue no long truce. Trallianus commaundeth
the vayne of the forehead to be opened.
But that Heurnius doth condemne,Heurnius de morbis capitis cap. 10. as miniſtring
a further increaſe to the diſcaſe, eſpecially if the
phrenſy come of bloud: for both the bloud ſhould
turne his courſe into the head, and alſo the euacuation
ſhould be made by the very place affected,
which ſhould be as he thinketh very inconuenient.
The courſe which Heurnius doth beſt like

of, is this, firſt to open the midle vayne of the arme,
and after to open either the vayne of the forehead,
or the vayne vnder the tongue.
               For the Quinſie or ſquinancie, the ſwelling of
the throate,Trincau. de ratione curandi partic corp. affect. lib. 5. cap. 7. cauſing difficultie of breathing, and
hardneſſe of ſwallowing, Trincauel doth aduiſe a
ſpeedie letting of bloud; yet a gliſter being vſed
before if the diſeaſe will giue leaue: but if the diſeaſe
(as it is a very ſharp diſeaſe) will giue no ſpace,
then may we do as Hippocrates ſometime did,Hippocr. 2. de ratione victus in morbis acutis. Fuchſi. de medendis morbis lib. 2. cap. 5. that
is, firſt let bloud, & afterward miniſter the Clyſter.
Fuchſius willeth vs to open the baſilica of the arme
of the ſame ſide where the ſwelling is. But he will
haue it to be done at ſeuerall times by little and
little, and not all at once, leaſt there ſhould happen
a ſwouning, and ſo a perill of ſuffocation: and
beſides, By two ſodaine coolings and by fainting of the
heart, the matter may be caryed from the iawes vnto
the lungs, and ſo bring ineuitable danger. Yet muſt not
the inciſion be made too little, leaſt by meanes of
the narrowneſſe of the hole the good bloud ſhould be
as it were ſtrained out, and the thick part remaine within,
which is the cauſe of the griefe. If the patient be a
woman whoſe termes are ſtayed, open firſt the
ſaphena, and then the vaine vnder the tongue. For
the pleuriſy, how conuenient bloud-letting is for
it, it is a thing ſo well knowen to all men, that
there needeth no proofe thereof. But on what ſide
the vayne muſt be taken, whether on the ſame
ſide that hath the inflammation, or on the contrary
ſide, ſeeing that there is amongſt learned
Phiſitions a great controuerſie about that matter,
I haue appoynted one Chapter, to wit, the Chapter
next following, wholy for the diſcuſſing of that

queſtion. And for as much as alſo all the arguments
layd open in that diſputation do as well
concerne the inflamation of the raynes and of the
wombe, and all other inward inflammations as
the pluriſy, I haue thought it good to ſpeake no
more of the particulars heere, but rather to conclude
with that generall ſpeech of Galen. To ſpeake
briefly,
                  Gal. libro de ratione carandi per venae ſectionem. 
                  when inflammations do begin, we muſt euacuate
them by reuulſion (that is, pluck it back into the parts
furtheſt distant) but when they are of long continuance,
we muſt empty them out of the places affected, or
as neere vnto thoſe parts as we can. For at the beginning
of inflammations it is good to turne back that
which floweth, but when they haue remayned a long
time, we muſt auoyd and expell that which is impacted
and fastened in the part affected.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 7.
               
                  In theſe dangerous inflammations aforenamed, whether
euacuation or reuulſion be more neceſſary, and
what is the meaning of Hippocrates his rule 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
to worke directly, and with a right courſe of
flowing.
               
               
                  
                     PEtrus Briſſotus, and Matthaeus Curtius,
two learned Phiſitions, the one a Frenchman,
and the other an Italian, haue by
many arguments prooued, that in a pleuriſy the
vayne ought ſtill to be opened in the arme of the
ſame ſide where the griefe lyeth.Trincaeuel Conſil. pag. 971. 
                  Trincauel in his
treatiſe which he calleth rudimentum, hath vndertaken
to confute them. The firſt reaſon of Briſſo
                        •
                     us
is,Ratio prima Briſſoti. becauſe in ſuch ſharp diſeaſes, vnleſſe you help
preſently the party dyeth. And the firſt ſcope in an

inflammation is to auoyd bloud out of the place
inflamed, for the performance whereof the ſame
ſide is moſt conuenient. Trincauel anſwereth, that
when the party hath no full body, then that poſition
may well ſtand. But if there be a full body,
then he holdeth with Galen, that the ſcope and
purpoſe of the Phiſition muſt be to forbid that the
bloud ſhall not flow to the place of griefe. For the
flux of the bloud doth Galen make to be the cauſe
of the vehement inflammation.Gal. libr. 2. ad Glauc. And this ſtaying
of the flowing of bloud he thinketh may beſt be
done by euacuating, ſo that we may alſo reuell the
ſame by drawing it back to the contrary ſide. Briſſotus
againe obiecteth,Ratio ſecunda Briſſoti. that by reuulſion there is
often ſtirred vp a pleuriſy on the other ſide, vnto
which the reuulſion is made. Trincauell doth anſwere,
that doth happen by meanes of the fulneſſe
of the whole body, eſpecially of the lower parts,
when the opening of the vpper vaynes can not
auoyd ſo much as is drawne vpward out of the inferior
parts of the body: whereupon the humour
following, the motion which is made by the force
of the vayne cut, ſetling on that ſide, doth giue an
occaſion of a new inflammation. And therefore
when there is a plenitude in the whole body, eſpecially
about the lower parts of the belly, he doth
greatly commend the cuſtome practiſed for many
yeares with good ſucceſſe by the Phiſitions of
Venice, to wit in this, to open the vayne about the
knee, or about the anckle. And he ſheweth, that in
his owne experience in the ſame time that he was
writing that treatiſe, he cured an old man of 60.
yeares of age (who hauing a body verè plethoricum,
was fallen into a pluriſie) by cauſing the vayne to

be opend hard by the anckle. If Hippocrates did
ſometimes open the vayne in the arme of the ſame
ſide where the pleuriſie did lye (as Trincauel doth
make accompt he did in the curing of Anaxion the
Abderite) it was becauſe the diſeaſe was fully made,
                  Hippocr. lib. 3. epidem.
                  and the matter already flowed. But in the beginning
of the flowing of the humour, neither Hippocrates
nor Galen do allow the ſame kinde of euacuation,
which afterward-they admit when the flux is already
made.Hippocr. 6. epidem. par. 2. aph. 19. 
                  Hippocrates ſayth, If humours be caryed
into that part which they ought not, we muſt reuell
them, but if they flow the ſame way they ought, then to
open the paſſage to them according as euery one is bent.
And what his iudgement is touching this matter,
you haue it ſet downe in the end of my Chapter
laſt going before,Vide finem 
                        •
                     exti capitis huius libri & finem primi capitis. and alſo toward the end of my
firſt Chapter, where are cited the words of Galen
concerning an vlcer cauſed of a flux, that if the
flowing be vehement we muſt pluck it back into
the contrary parts, but when it doth ceaſe and reſt
ſetled in a place, then is it beſt to deriue it. Vpon
which point alſo Galen doth inferre there a generall
concluſion.Galen lib. 4. method. therap. cap. 6. 
                  It is a generall thing that when fluxes
doe begin, wee muſt vſe reuulſion; but when they are
ſetled in any affected part, then euacuate them either
from the ſame place, or from ſome other place as neere
as can be. He ſpeaketh there of purging by medicins,
but in the 13. and 14. booke of the ſame
method of healing, he requireth the ſame order
likewiſe in letting of bloud, and repeateth againe
as a generall axiome,Gal. method. therapeut. lib. 13. 
                  euer make the reuulſion to the
furtheſt parts off. So commenting vpon Hippocrates,
he biddeth vs firſt make reuulſions, and afterward
ſet vpon the contraries, to make locall euacuations

as he himſelfe doth expound it by the
example of griefe in the hinder part of the head,Gal. libr. 2. comment in 6. epidem. prop
                        •
                      finem commentar
                        •
                     . Gal. method. therapeut. lib. 13. 
                        〈◊〉
                      Inſtitut. lib. 2.
which is taken away by opening the vayne of the
forehead. And ſo in an other place, if the right leg
haue an inflammation, he appoynteth a vayne to
be opened in the left. Fuchſius hath framed ſundry
anſweres to thoſe teſtimonies of Galen in the 13.
booke of his Methodus therapeutica. Firſt he ſaith,
that his generall axiome, that reuulſion muſt be
made alwayes to places furtheſt diſtant, can in no
wiſe be wreſted vnto letting of bloud, ſeeing that
Galen doth not ſpeake there of letting of bloud,
but of purgings, vomits, cupping-glaſſes, and ſuch
like. I wonder that Fuchſius ſhould make that anſwere,
ſeeing that Galen doth not only often in the
leaues laſt going before make mention of Phlebotomy,
but alſo when he hath made this generall
precept with 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , ſemper, alwayes reuell to the furmoſt,
he ſayth in the lines next following, that he
hath ſpoken of this in his bookes of Plenitude and
Phlebotomy.Gal. method. therap. lib. 13. 
                  Theſe things are written in my bookes
of fulneſſe and bloud-letting. Secondly, Fuchſius ſaith
further, aliquando venae ſectione ad longinqua reuellimus,
ſed hoc fit in futuro morbo, ſometimes we make
reuulſion by bloud-letting into places farre diſtant,
but that is when the diſeaſe is to come. If
Fuchſius confeſſe ſo much, then he agreeth with
Auic
                        •
                     n, Montanus, Trincauell, and ſuch a
                     •
                   hold
with them. For they all do teach that reuelling into
places furthermoſt diſtant is not alwayes requiſite,
but only in the beginning, when the humour
is yet flowing, before the humour be ſetled,
antequam ſit morbus factus, before it be a diſeaſe
made, and that is indeed in futurso morbo, Thirdly,

for that place where Galen doth bid that if the one
leg haue an inflammation, we ſhould let bloud in
the other: Fuchſius anſwereth, that Galen doth
ſpeake in that place of ſcarifying, that when one
leg hath gotten an inflammation we muſt ſcarify
the other, becauſe ſcarifying doth ſtirre vp a griefe
and payne, and dolor attrahit, griefe draweth the
flux to the place ſcarifyed. But I maruaile that
Fuchſius would not take the words as Galen hath
let them downe. Galen ſpeaketh plainely in that
place not only of ſcarifying, but alſo of bloudletting,
his words are theſe:
                     
                        •
                     al. method. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  We muſt either open a
vayne, or ſcarify the places not affected, as the hand being
grieued to take the leg, or the one leg being pained,
the other.
               
               
                  Fuchſius hauing obiected the practiſe of ſome
which firſt do diminiſh the plenitude by opening
the ſaphena, or elſe the baſilica of the contrary
arme, and after do take away the reliques out of
the ſame ſide where the griefe lyeth, doth cry out
againſt this counſayle of the Arabian Phiſitions
with the ſame words that Fernelius alſo doth,
                     
                        •
                     ernel
                        •
                     in me
                     
                        ••••
                      medendi 
                        〈◊〉
                      cap. 5. 
                        〈◊〉
                      institist. 2. 
                  What
an od counſaile is this to torment the patient ſo often,
when you may with one act eaſe him of his payne? But
although theſe two were both of them famous and
learned men, yet as good Phiſitions as they doe
preſcribe the act of letting of bloud to be often repeated
either in one day or in dayes immediatly
following, and yet are in very good hope that
they doe not thereby torment the patient, but
worke much more for his eaſe.Hieron. Mercurial. conſil. 15. 
                  Mercurialis giuing
counſaile to one which in a cough did ſpit bloud,
ſayth, If the casting vp of bloud do remayne, it would
like me well that bloud ſhould often be let a little at

once out of either arme, and therewithall rubbings and
bindings applyed both to the anckles and to the knees.
Montanus who doth as much reuerence Auicenna,
                  Montan. medicinae vniuerſalis parte ſecunda, pag. 312.
as Fuchſius and Fernelius do perſecute him. For he
ſayth of him, Auicen was a moſt diuine man, a follower
of Galen, and to be preferred before all that haue
drawne their learning out of Galen: We haue Greeke
tranſlators (as he nameth there Aëtius, Paulus Aegineta,
and Oribaſius) but compare them with Auicen
and they are nothing.
                  Pag. 393. And a little after he ſayth, we
muſt know that Auicen doth neuer ſpeake any thing
but what was before approued by antiquity. This Montanus
as in other points he commendeth Auicenna,
ſo in the ſeuerall ſtates of pleuriſy he alloweth
his iudgement,Montanus medicinae vniuerſalis part. 3. 
                  that firſt bloud be drawne from the
ſaphena, then from the oppoſite vayne of the arme, and
laſt of all from the ſame ſide: The firſt taketh away the
multitude; the ſecond maketh the diuerſion, and the
third doth empty the place affected. For the diuerſion
to the contrary part Montanus doth not only alleage
the auctority of Auicenna and the Arabians,
but of Archigenes and of Aretaeus. Aretaeus is
brought in giuing his reaſon, If there ſhould be multitude
of bloud and you ſhould draw it from the ſide
where the pleuriſie is, either you muſt draw it plentifully
to fainting and ſwouning, and ſo the patient ſhould
either dye, or get an impostume in the lungs, or elſe
you muſt draw a little, and ſo choake and ſtifle the party
diſeaſed, becauſe (the plenitude being ſo great) much
more will flow then ſhall be auoyded.
                  Trincau. in rudimento in cōſil. pag. 1043. 
                  Trincauell in the
concluſion of that treatiſe which he made againſt
Briſſotus and Curtius, doth deſcribe ſeuerall conſiderations
which are to be had in the pleuriſy: If
there be a great fulneſſe of bloud, and a vehement force

of the humour ruſhing on, and that we feare moreouer
leaſt the inflammation ſhould ouermuch increaſe, then
we do attempt both a reuulſion, and alſo an euacuation
as farre off as we can, and by the contrary ſide: but if
there be no great fulneſſe of bloud, nor great force of the
flowing of humours, nor great inflammation, then there
is no neede to begin with parts farre off, becauſe leſſe
reuulſion is requiſite. So he expoundeth the meaning
of Galen, that if the knee or the feete be taken
with an inflammation, this muſt firſt be conſidered,
whether there be ſuch a fulneſſe of body as
doth alſo fill all the vpper parts, whereby there is
feared an increaſe of the ſwelling, for then we muſt
let bloud out of the vaynes of the vpper parts.
But if the repletion be not ſo great, and that it be
only in the inferior parts, then ſhall it be ſufficient
to let bloud out of the oppoſite foote. The inflammation
may be ſo little and light, that it will be enough
to open a vayne in the foote of the ſame ſide. If the teſtimonies
which Fuchſius doth alleage out of Hippocrates
and Galen be conſidered by theſe circumſtances,Fuchſius Inſtit. libr. 2.
then ſhall the two opinions be eaſily reconciled.Galen method. 
                        〈◊〉
                      lib. 13. cap. 11.
He citeth Galens auctority, when the
liuer hath begun to gather an inflammation, the
bloud is both to be plucked back, and euacuated,
by opening the inward vayne of the right arme,
becauſe it is direct vnto it, and a great way hath a
ſociety with the vayne which is called the hollow
vaine. Galen doth there ſuppoſe the caſe to be firſt,
a liuer beginning to be inflamed, and therefore yet a
light inflammation: then conſider principally whether
the whole body haue 
                        •
                     eede of euacuatiou: then conſider
the ſtrength of the patient, whether he be able to endure
to euacuate once plentifully: and whether he do ſtand

ſtrong in power, then by Phlebotomy in the right
arme reuell or take away the bloud that is caryed towards
the liuer. This doth nothing ouerthrow the
poſitions before ſet downe.Fuchſ. Instit. lib. 2. & de morbis medendis lib. 2. cap. 8. & in Apologia aduerſus Brachelium. 
                  Fuchſius euery where
doth build mightely vpon that place of Galen in
his booke of Phlebotomy: In pleuriſies the Phlebotomy
which is vſed right vpon the ſide that is payned,
doth often bring a moſt euident help: but that which is
vſed vpon the oppoſite hand, doth bring either an obſcure
help, or elſe it is long ere it come.
                  Gal. de ratione curandi per venae ſectionē. No doubt Galen
there doth meane ſuch in whom there is morbus
iam factus, the diſeaſe already ſetled, and of
them you may ſee what Galens iudgement is, if
you reade the concluſion of the ſixt Chapter of
this my treatiſe. For euer according to the ſeuerall
ſcope and drift of the Phiſition, there muſt be a ſeuerall
manner of Phlebotomy. So in the inflammations
of the wombe Galen teacheth, that in the
beginning of them,Gal. ad Glauconem therap. libr. 2. when the humour is now in
flowing, thou ſhalt diuert it, if thou open the varne in
the cubite. But if the humour be ſetled in the place,
thou ſhalt deriue it by opening the vayne in the knees
or in the anckles.
                  Gal. libr. de ratione curandi per venae ſectionem. True it is that he doth elſewhere
teach, that Phlebotomies in ye arme do ſtay womens
termes, as the letting bloud in the legs doth bring
the termes downe, but (as Galen ſheweth) in the beginning
of the inflammations of the wombe it is
not good that the termes ſhould be prouoked,Gal. method. therap. lib. 13. becauſe
they bring downe a humour to the place affected,
eſpecially in a body that is full of humours
apt to flow. When we take vpon vs to cure an inflammation
of the wombe, if there be no other intent
nor drift but to caſe the inflammation, then
may we open ſome vayne in the leg: but if we take

our ſcope and purpoſe from the flowing of the humours
to the diſeaſed part, and from the fulneſſe
of the whole body, then both to empty the plenitude,
and to pluck back the humours that are ſliding
downe, we muſt (as Galen iudgeth) attempt
it by the vaynes of the cubite.Fuchſ. Instit. 
                        •
                     ibr. 
                        •
                     . 
                  Fuchſius alleageth
alſo the counſayle of Hippocrates, who aduiſeth in
a pleuriſy to open the inward vayne of the arme of
the ſame ſide right vpon it. There is none that
doth make any queſtion but that in the pleuriſy
being a confirmed diſeaſe, and the humours hauing
already flowed, euacuation is more fit then
reuulſion, and both may be done by the neereſt
place: yea, ſuch a manner of pleuriſy it may be
(as Hippocrates ſheweth) that you can not fitly vſe
any Phlebotomy at all,Hippocr. 6. 
                        •
                     pidem. part. 3. 
                        •
                     ph. 32. his words are theſe, There
be ſome ſuch as in whome in due time bloud may be let.
But in others it is not ſo fit as in them. The impediment
is vnto them which ſpit bloud, time, the pleuriſie,
and choler.
                  Fuchſ. cōment. 
                        〈◊〉
                      6. epidem. 
                  Fuchſius in his Comment vpon that
place ſheweth, that there be three hinderances
that do ſtay them that ſpit bloud from being let
bloud, the firſt is time, being too hoat or too cold.
The other two he ioyneth together, and thinketh
that he meaneth that in the pleuriſy proceeding of
choler Phlebotomy is not conuenient,Trincauel 
                        •
                     piſt. 22. ad Alexandrum Triuellum &c. 
                  Trincauel
being by occaſion fallen into the conſideration of
that place of Hippocrates, doth ſhew that Galen
commenting vpon that place, doth ſay, that the
points concerning the time of the yeare and choler
may well be admitted, but that the exception about
the pleuriſy doth ſeeme ſomewhat hard, becauſe
if any diſeaſe (the ſtrength and age conſenting)
do require letting of bloud, the pleuriſie

doth moſt of all require it. But (he ſayth) the knot
is ſtraight by Galen looſed, to wit, that the words
of Hippocrates are thus to be vnderſtood, that alwayes
he which ſpitteth bloud muſt haue a vayne
opened, vnleſſe the ſayd ſpitting of bloud do come
of a pleuriſie, for then bloud muſt not alwayes be let,
but we muſt vſe ſuch liniments as do particularly reſpect
the pleuriſie. And afterward he ſheweth y• reaſon
why it is not neceſſary that ſuch as haue pleuriſies,
ſhould alwayes be let bloud, becauſe by experiēce
he knew one mēded of a pleuriſy without
letting of bloud, his pleuriſy being a light pleuriſy,
and voyd of all feare of plenitude. for the griefe
was but ſmall, and the bloud was caſt out by ſpitting:
now thoſe pleuriſies are moſt gentle in which bloud is
ſpit out.
                  Hippoc epide
                        •
                      lib. 6. ſect. 2. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   in Hippocrates ſignifieth directly,
and as it were in a right line: a benumming of the
thigh right on the ſame ſide, is a ſigne of the ſtone in
that kidney,
                  Gal. lib. 2. ad Glauconem cap. 7. ſo Galen doth expound it 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
it ſignifieth according to rectitude. And in
an other place he doth interpret it by the word

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , directnes.Gal. libr. 3. d. iudicys cap. 3. 
                  For a good ſigne bloud muſt flowe
directly as out of the right noſtrill, if the liuer or right
ſide be affected: and out of the left noſtrill, if the ſpleane
or the parts thereabouts be greeued.
                  In Coacis praenotionib
                        ••
                     . The contrary to

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , as Hippocrates ſayth, bloud to flow
out of the contrary ſide is an euill ſigne. Good it was
for Bion being a ſplenetick man to bleede out of
the left noſtrill, and good for Herophon after the
ſwelling of his ſpleene, to haue a kernell to riſe 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
of the ſame ſide. So the auctor of the booke de
renum affectibus. By the benumming of the thigh directly
on the ſame ſide you ſhall know which rayne is affected:
for if there be a benumming in the right thigh,

then is the ſtone in the right kidney; if in the left thigh,
then in the left kidney. This 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   hath place in the
criſis of diſeaſes, but Hippocrates doth neuer appoynt
Phlebotomies to be made of neceſſity alwayes,

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , directly vpon the ſame ſide. Fernelius
expoundeth this word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to ſignifie the
rightnes of the fibrae or vills,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ernel. lib. 2. 
                        •
                     ethod. me
                     
                        •
                     end
                        •
                     . as it were little thready
or hairy ſtrings, ſtretched out and running by the
longitude of the vaynes. But Andraeas Laurentius,
and Reuſnerus vpon Willichius,
                  Andraeas I auentius in A
                     
                        •
                     t
                        •
                     m. 
                        ••
                     uſa
                        •
                     rus in 
                        〈…〉
                     . do at large confute
that opinion. For if Fernelius do make thoſe rectae
fibrae helps for euacuation or expulſion, then doth
he not well, for the tranſuerſe fibres and not the
right do ſerue for expulſion: and if he make them
(as they are) helps of attraction, then muſt they
draw equally as well on the one ſide as the other,
becauſe they runne out equally by the length of
the vaynes on both ſides. And the like anſwere
they make to them which would haue the word to
ſignifie the continuing and ioyning together of
parts, as though all the vaynes of the right ſide
were ioyned one to and in an other amongſt
themſelues, and the vaynes of the left ſide ioyned
among themſelues, and did not rather participate
and communicate one with an other. But ſeeing
the trunke of the hollow vayne is one, the branches
thereof on both ſides are equally ioyned to
the liuer. The breaking out of bloud out of the left
noſtrill doth empty as well the right ſide as the
left, and (as Reuſnerus ſayth) he ſaw often by experience
that the diſeaſes of the ſpleane were holpen
ſometimes by opening the liuer vayne, and ſometimes
by bloud guſhing out of the right noſtrill.
And moreouer, as Andraeas Laurentius ſheweth,

there is no meeting together betwixt the vaynes
of the noſtrils and the ſpleane, and yet the ſpleane
being inflamed (as you haue heard) the bloud that
floweth out of the left noſtrill doth flow 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , directly.
And therefore that word of Hippocrates is
not to be referred to the ioyning together of the
vaynes one in an other, but to the rectitude of the
whole parts of the body,Andraeas Laurentius in anatom. 
                  quia dextra dextris & ſinistra
ſinistris ſunt 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , becauſe the right lims to
the right, and the left to the left are as it were of
one tribe or kinred, and therefore like good
neighbours do one labour to help an other. Maior
eſt vis in forti contentione obſeſſae partis quàm in venarum
ſitu, There is a greater force in the ſtrong contention
and ſtriuing of the ſide that is beſieged or
ſet vpon, then is in the ſituation of the vaines. And
a good criticall ſigne it is when that ſide that is
impugned, can expell part of that wherewith it is
ouercharged and oppreſſed. But when for any inflammation
a vayne is to be opened, we haue many
other things to be regarded beſides the conſideration
of the ſide. We muſt marke well whether
the whole body haue a fulneſſe of the vaynes:
whether the humour be flowing, or now already
flowed and ſetled: whether it doth require euacu
                  
                     •
                  tion
or reuulſion or diuerſion, and which of them

                     •
                  ore then other, and how theſe vſes of Phlebotomy
and the order thereof ſhall beſt be perfourmed,
of all which points you haue ſeene already

                     •
                  hat the beſt Phiſitions of our age haue gathered
out of the beſt Phiſitions in times paſt. Only I will
adde one obſeruation more out of Montanus, and
ſo an end of this ouertedious controuerſie.Mont. medici. vniuerſ. part. 3. 
                  Montantus
will haue in euery inflammation two things

principally to be regarded, the firſt, membrum
mandans, the member that doth ſend the humour,
and the ſecond, membrum recipiens, the member or
part that doth receiue the humour. As he giueth
his inſtance thus of the pleuriſy. Let there be (ſaith
he) one of a hoate liuer, who hath laboured in the
ſunne, hath dronken ſtrong wine, hath inflamed
his head, hath reſted ſodainely in a cold place, and
then (as it commeth commonly to paſſe) by the
cold the matter is expreſſed by the vaynes, and deſcending
by the vaynes it doth flow downe either
to the higher or lower ribs, and there followeth a
paine. Here the member ſending is the head, and
the member receiuing, the ribs. Let the place of the
inflammation be in the right ſide, where muſt we then
let bloud? He anſwereth, that ſeeing the humour is
caryed downeward, if we ſhould open the baſilica
of the ſame ſide we ſhould draw the humour more
downeward, and ſo increaſe the impoſtume and
indanger the patient. The fulneſſe is in the head, but
aboue the head there is nothing; if there were, we would
euacuate from it: Therefore either a deriuation muſt be
made to deriue the humour from the head, by opening
the vaynes which are behinde the eares, or by bleeding
at the noſe (which were excellent) or by ſtriking the
vayne vnder the tongue, or elſe we muſt follow the expert
Arabian Phiſitions, to let bloud on the contrary
ſide, that ſo by reuulſion the humour may be drawne
according to the directneſſe of the ſituation, from the
right ſide to the left. But if the pleuriſy do come of
another cauſe that the flux be not from the head,
but it be the liuer full of bloud and choler ſending humours
vnto the ribs by the aſcending vayne, becauſe
there is a plucking of the humours from the lower parts

vnto the higher, in what vayne then muſt we let bloud?
He anſwereth, not from the baſilica of the ſame right
ſide, for then we ſhall draw the humour to the place: but
(as Auicenna doth teach) either wee muſt draw it
downe by opening the ſaphena of the ſame ſide, or elſe we
muſt deale with the oppoſite ſide aboue. The reſt of
Montanus his opinion you haue ſeene before in
this Chapter, where I haue compared his iudgement
with the iudgement of others the moſt excellent
Phiſitions of our age.
            
            
               CHAP. 8.
               
                  Whether letting of bloud may be practiſed in cold diſeaſes,
as palſies, cramps, apoplexies, and whether it
may fitly be vſed in melancholick windes, colicks
and dropſies.
               
               
                  FOr the diſeaſes mentioned in this and
the two Chapters following, I purpoſe
not to ſhew the cenſures of many Phiſitions,
but only for euery infirmitie to
content my ſelfe with the auctority of
one or two of whom I make beſt reckoning, and
ſo to haſten to thoſe other points which more generally
and vniuerſally are to be conſidered in the
whole practiſe of Phlebotomy.Trincauel de ratione curadi part. corp. affect. is lib. 3. cap. 3. Although cramps,
and palſies, conuulſions, and reſolutions be cold
diſeaſes; yet Aetius, Paulus Aretaeus, and diuers do
appoint to begin the cure with letting of bloud.
Galen doth allow it,Gal. libr. 1. ad Glauconem cap. 14. but not generally & alwayes.
He only doth admit it in theſe caſes, and with theſe
conditions, Firſt, when theſe cold diſeaſes haue
their beginning by the ſuppreſſion of the termes

or hemorrhodes. Secondly, if they be with a feuer;
but then it muſt be done moderatly, & ſparingly.
Thirdly, if there be great plenty of bloud either in
the whole or in the head.Hippocr. 4. de ratione victus in morbis acutis. Trallian. lib. 1. cap. 14. Heurnius de morbis capitis cap. 25. For as Galen ſheweth and
alſo Hippocrates, by the ouermuch fulneſſe of the
vaynes there are made oftentimes epilepſies and
apoplexies. Trallianus beginneth his cure of a lethargie
by letting of bloud, if other circumſtances
do not prohibite. Heurnius in his Chapter of conuulſions
doth like well of the iudgement of Aretaeus,
to wit, that whether the cramp or conuulſion do
come of coldneſſe, or by a wound, or by vntimely birth,
the vayne in the arme is to be opened, especially if bloud
be the cauſe; or if it be ſuch a crick that the neck or body
can bend no way; or if it be an inflammation, or a wound.
Montanus alloweth Phlebotomy in epilepſies and
apoplexies when they depend of bloud,
                  Montanus medicinae vniuerſalis part. 3. but he addeth
this clauſe, hoc autem faciendum debitis temporibus
praecipue vere, this muſt be done in due time, eſpecially
in the ſpring time. For melancholick winds
cauſed by obſtructions of the liuer or ſpleane, Mercurialis
giuing aduiſe in that caſe to a Noble man
of Germany,Mercurial. conſil. 66. ſayth, firſt; you muſt thinke of letting
bloud, not that the abundance of it doth plainely ſhew
any ſuch matter, but becauſe other noble helps can
hardly be ſafely administred, vnleſſe letting of bloud
do go before. And in an other place, writing counſayle
for a woman which had fiue yeares ſuffered
the obſtruction of the ſpleene,Mercurial. conſil. 104. and was now come
to a ſchirrus, or hard ſwelling, he ſayth, I thinke it
were excellent well, that ſhe ſhould be let bloud, firſt out
of the common vayne, then out of the lienaris, and laſt
of all out of the vayne of the left foote, ſo that at thrice
there be in all taken a pound of bloud. Trincauel his

iudgement is,Trincauel conſil. 15. pro melancholia hypochondriaca. that we muſt abſtayne from bloudletting,
when the melancholick humour is diſperſed
into the vaynes of the hypochondria, and the
whole body, and that then we muſt rather purge
or procure the hemorrhodes if the party haue had
them vſually before. For the Colick, Auicen doth
forbid bloud-letting to be vſed in it. Montanus
writing vpon the ſixth Canon of Auicen,
                  Montan. medicinae vniuerſalis part. 3. giueth
the reaſon of it, becauſe the colick commeth of
ſome cold and thick matter, and phlebotomy both
doth make more cold, and alſo hath no power to
auoid the thick and groſſe cauſes of the griefe. Yet
he addeth this, But if the colick do come by the inflammation
of the colum, one of the loweſt guts, by
meanes of bloud or choler flowing to the place, in this
caſe if you let not bloud the patient will dye.
               
               For the Dropſie Trincauel teacheth, that if it
come by the ſuppreſſion of ſome vſuall flux,Trincauel de ratione curadi part. corp. aff. lib. 8. cap. 10. as the
termes, the hemorrhodes, and bleedings at noſe,
whereby (by the ſuperfluous abundance of bloud)
the naturall heate of the liuer beginneth to be
quenched, then the firſt thing in the cure muſt be
phlebotomy. But if it come of fleame, then omitting
bloud-letting, we muſt only ſeeke to purge
the fleame. He maketh there an obiection what
we muſt do if the termes be not ſuppreſſed, and yet
the vrine do appeare high coloured, whether may
we then let bloud or no,Auicenna prima quarti. ſeeing that Auicen ſayth,
that if the vrine do appeare red and thick, a vayne
muſt preſently be opened? Trincauel anſwereth,
that yet we muſt not let bloud, becauſe in this diſeaſe
that rule of Auicen doth not take place. For
the red tincture of the vrine doth not come by abundance
of bloud, but firſt, becauſe little vrine is

made in theſe diſeaſes, therefore it is the higher coloured:
for the thinne iuices of choler and bloud, from the
which doth come the colour of the vrine, being mingled
with a little moysture, do giue the greater tincture, and
make it higher coloured. And a ſecond cauſe of the
high colour in the vrine, he ſayth, may be the debility
of the raynes, which by reaſon of their weakeneſſe
being not able perfectly to ſeparate the bloud
from the excrement, do let ſome little portion of
bloud paſſe with the vrine, whereby the vrine is
dyed red. A third reaſon doth Fernelius giue why
the colour of the vrine may often deceiue, becauſe
when the choler is caſt out by the liuer, it doth not
only colour the thinne part of bloud, but maketh
the vrine alſo to looke as though the bloud were
inflamed, as he giueth an inſtance by Iaundiſes
and Dropſies,Fernelius in method
                        •
                      generall de curandis ſebribu
                        •
                     . and concludeth, They do therefore
offend, which by the vrine being of citrine colour, and
thicke, do iudge ſtraight that bloud is to be let. For
ſuch an vrine doth not come by the abundance or
by the kindling of bloud, but by the powring out
of choler out of the liuer. I will not ſpeake heere
of the razing of the ſtone in the raynes, and ſome
other occaſions that may be, that a little bloud
iſſuing, may alter mightely the colour of vrine.
This which hath already bin ſpoken, may put vs
ſufficiētly in mind in the matter of bloud-letting,
not ſo much to be led by the colour of the vrine,
as by other euident tokens which ſhall be hereafter
more at large declared. But when the vrine
doth concurre with other ſignes; then vis vnita
munita. Et quae non proſunt ſingula multa iuuant.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. 9.
               
                  Whether in rheumes and diſtillations, and alſo whether
in the Goute, and the diſeaſe called Morbus Gallicus,
any benefit may enſue by letting of bloud.
               
               
                  
                     MOntanus doth make this to be one of the
principall and generall vſes of Phlebotomy,Montanus medicinae vniuerſalis part. 3.
then to take place, When any hath
ſome notable heate of ſome member, by means of which
heate it doth eaſily receiue excrements, and ſo fall into
a diſeaſe; as if there be a heate of the raynes, there is
made the ſtone; if of the liuer, the iaundiſe; and if of the
breſt the ſalt rheume. Razes doth commend in a
rheume letting of bloud.Heurnius de morbis capitis pag. 335. But Heurnius doth reſtrayne
it with certaine limits. He will not haue it
to be vſed vnleſſe there do appeare the ſignes of
fulneſſe of bloud, as the redneſſe of the face and
eyes, and extending of the vaynes, and vnleſſe the
body & head appeare to be hote, and the rheume
ſalt, with a matter not very farre differing from
bloud; and further, vnleſſe there be ſome danger
of the inſtruments of breathing, the lungs and the
ſides; then he admitteth bloud-letting, but as he
ſaith, ſparingly, and not too much: but in a cold rheume
the ſweet mitigation of bloud is not to be taken away.
In the Goute Phlebotomy is not to be vſed, vnleſſe
great fulneſſe do of neceſſitie vrge thereunto.
There may this reaſon be giuen of it, becauſe that
thinne diſtillation, which floweth from the braine
into the ioynts, and being there thickned and ſetled
doth cauſe the gout, doth not fall downe by
any vayne,Fernel. co
                        •
                     ſil. 12. as Fernelius ſheweth in his anſwere to

the Phiſition Bucherius,
                  Aliter Montanus conſil. 132. but doth diſtill from the
brayne to the neck & ſhoulders, and from thence
to the feet partes conſecuta ſubcutaneas, hauing gotten
for paſſage the parts vnder the skinne, and becauſe
it is thinne, doth flow vnſenſibly. Bucherius
thought, that becauſe in the bloud that he ſaw
drawne out of vaynes there appeared ſometimes
phlegmatick matter to flow out with the bloud,
therefore that fleame ſlipping out of the vaynes
might be a cauſe of the goute. But Fernelius doth
confute him, and ſheweth that that which ſwimmeth
ſo whitiſh in the baſen is a kind of phlegmatick
bloud, ſuch as doth abound in the diſeaſe called
Leucophlegmatia, and that it is ſo farre from
ſliding out of the vaynes into the ioynts, that it
can not be drawne out of the vaynes by ſtrong
medicines. For that fleame which is fetched out of
the body by purgings and vomits, doth not come
from the vaynes, but it is wholy either from the
brayne, or from the ſtomack, or from the bowels. He
addeth, I thinke this to be one of the greateſt errours
of the common ſort of people, that in all diſeaſes they
place the faults of the humours no where elſe but in the
vaynes, and when the question is of humours, they vnderſtand
nothing of thoſe which do abound in other places,
but only of thoſe which are mingled with the bloud
in the vaynes. Although the cauſe and nouriſhmēt
of the gout doth not flow from the vaynes, yet if
the party haue a full body, it will be very dangerous
for him to omit letting of bloud, for that attenuating
and reſoluing diet (which by meanes of
his diſeaſe he muſt vſe) will make his plenitude the
more perilous, vnleſſe hauing firſt purged his body,
he do alſo cauſe ſome vayne to be opened. The

like reaſon doth Fernelius giue in his curing of morbus
Gallicus,
                  Fernelius de lue 
                        •
                     en
                        •
                     rca pag. 108. after that he hath aduiſed the body to
be twiſe or thrice purged, he ſayth that alſo he muſt
be let bloud as his fulneſſe ſhall require, and ſterngth
permit, for ſo not only the inward parts and whole body
ſhall be cooled, but alſo the dangers of plenitude, which
may be ſtirred vp by the vſe of attenuating and reſoluing
things, ſhall be thereby auoyded. What vayne
muſt be choſen in the gout when bloud-letting is
thus found requiſite,Gal. libro de ratione curandi per venae ſcciionem. 
                  Galen doth declare towards
the end of his booke of Phlebotomy. In the gout we
muſt open the vain
                        •
                      in the cubite, but in the falling ſickneſſe,
and in that ſwimming in the head which maketh
all things ſeeme to go round, we muſt do it rather in the
legs. But how doth this agree with that place which
I haue alleaged before out of Galen in my ſeuenth
Chapter:Gal. method. therap. lib. 13. If one leg haue an inflammation, ſcarify
and let bloud in the other. Humours do ſeeme with
greater difficulty to aſcend then deſcend, and (the
hollow vayne in the lower part of the body deuiding
his branches equally to both the legges) it
ſhould ſeeme that the legge is not only the fitteſt
place (according to ſome) 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to diuert or reuell,
but alſo the meeteſt place to make euacuation.
Fuchſius ſayth,Fuchſi instit. lib. 2. ſect. 5. cap. 5. that Galen doth commaund in
the gout to let bloud in the arme for two cauſes,
firſt, becauſe both the legs in that diſeaſe are afflicted,
though not both at once, but per vices, one
after an other: and ſecondly, becauſe in the goute
the bloud doth only offend in plenty, and is not
ſo putrified and vicious, as it is in a hoat and red
inflammation. But ſeeing the chiefeſt intent of
Phlebotomy in the gout is to euacuate the fulneſſe
of the whole body, it may therefore ſeeme eſpecially

for that cauſe moſt fit to open a vayne in the
cubite. As for the matter of the diſeaſe, it is rather
auoyded by a good fit diet, dry, and moderately
warme, and the vſe ſometimes of things that do
extenuate and reſolue, then by ſeeking to draw
out either the cauſe, or the nouriſhment thereof by
the vſe of Phlebotomy.
            
            
               CHAP. 10.
               
                  Whether letting of bloud be fit for ſuch as haue hoa
                        •
                     
liuers and cold ſtomacks, as alſo for ſuch as haue
itches and ſcabs, and ſuch other faults of the skinne.
Further, whether it be good for the diſeaſe called of
the ſeafaring men the ſcuruy, and for the cachexia
or bad habit of body: and finally, what and how many
are the drifts and ſcopes of letting of bloud.
               
               
                  
                     MOntanus in his conference had with a
Doctor called Sonzinus,
                  Montanus 
                        〈…〉
                      132. about a man
which had bin lately a ſouldier, who
was iudged by his buſy fierce practiſes,
by the redneſſe of his face, and by
the fulneſſe of the vaynes about the eyes and other
places, to haue a hoat brayne, a hoat heart, and a
hoat liuer, and by the red ſand and heate of vrine
appeared alſo to haue hoat raines: and yet hauing
ſo many parts hoa
                     •
                   had y• ſtomack cold, by meanes
of the heate of the liuer, waſting and conſuming
the fatneſſe of the cawle or ſew, which ſhould conſcrue
and keepe in the due naturall heate of the
bowels: and who alſo by theſe occaſions for want
of good concoction, had many rheumes & diſtillations,
making his body very ſoluble, by meanes

of their ſlippery deſcending, which otherwiſe in
regard of ſo many hoat parts muſt needs haue bin
very coſtiue: he ſaith, Here I would commend principally
bloud-letting to take away the heate of the liuer
and of the inferiour parts, the body being firſt gently
purged by caſſia. Yet if the infirmitie haue continued
long, and brought the body to a great weakeneſſe,
Trincauel will then in no caſe admit Phlebocomy.Trincauel conſil. 4.
For giuing his aduiſe to one which had a
boat and a dry liuer, but a moiſt ſtomack, and who
was troubled with plentifull thinne ſpitting, with
paines in the ioynts and laſſitude of the whole
body, he ſayth, In this body ſo ſpent with leaneſſe and
lingring ſickneſſe, and moreouer ſo full of crudities, I
dare not ſo much as once make mention of letting of
bloud. As for the itch, which is thought by Melinus
a learned Phiſition to be the ſame which Galen
calleth after Hippocrates,
                  Gal. deſanita te tuenda lib. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , ſpontaneae laſſitudines.
The ſame Phiſition Melinus being himſelfe
fallen into it, when the other Phiſitions about
him, and a Chirurgian (who was procured to come
by the French kings Embaſſadour) did all earneſtly
perſwade him to be let bloud, and ſhewed what
good they had done in the like caſes by bloudletting:
Melinus did refuſe to yeeld vnto it, clea
                  
                     •
                  ing
ſtedfaſtly to the iudgement of Galen, who in
this impediment of the itch and ſcabs will haue either
no bloud to be taken at all, or elſe very little,
and that rather to pluck back then to euacuate.
The common opinion of Chirurgians was, that
the more corrupt the bloud was, the greater quantitie
he might ſpare of it.Ibid. But he relyed wholy vppon
that auctority of Galen, Of theſe kinds and degrees
of ſanguiſication, ſome little differ from bloud,

ſome more, and ſome moſt of all. In thoſe which on either
ſide differ but a little from bloud, you may boldly
vſe Phlebotomy. In them which differmore, do it more
warily, but in them which are moſt departed from bloud
vſe it not at all.
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . 
                  If the good bloud be little, and the other
humour much, then abstayne from letting bloud:
but if the humour be little and the bloud plentifull, then
boldly vſe Phlebotomy. Melinus though he knew
theſe concluſions of Galen, yet becauſe the caſe
was his owne, and did ſo neerely concerne himſelfe,
he ſent a letter to Fernelius;
                  
                     
                        •
                     ernel. 
                        〈…〉
                     . 46. laying open the
whole caſe vnto him, and deſiring him that he
would declare his iudgement cōcerning this matter.
Fernelius ſub
                     ••
                  ribeth to the opinion of Melinus,
and ſheweth, that in a pure plenitude of bloud
the fulneſſe may ſafely be deminiſhed by Phlebotomy,
but in an impure plenitude that hath a cacochymia,
or vicious humour mingled with it, the
fulneſſe muſt be a little eaſed by opening a vayne
ſparingly, and by diſtances of time, and the reſt of
the impurity muſt be taken away by purging. But
then doth bloud 
                        •
                     etting moſt harme, when the ill humour
is bred (as it is moſt commonly) by the fault of the liuer
and ſtomack. For the bloud (though impure) being taken
away, a much more impure doth ſucceede. He giueth
inſtance of the iaundiſe, the cachexia, and
that kind of dropſie which maketh the fleſh ſpungie,
and the whole body to ſwell. For the iaundiſe
in a full body, it may ſometimes be vſed either
when it commeth by the ouermuch heate of the
liuer according to Montanus,
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                      30. or when it commeth
by the obſtruction of the gall according to Fuchſius.
The ca
                     •
                  hexia, or bad habit of body is perceiued
as Trincanel ſheweth by many outward ſignes,

which are commonly theſe:Trincau. de ratione curandi part. corp. affect. l. b. 11. cap. 8. 
                  the ſwelling of the face
especially vnder the eyes, the countenance and whole
body diſcoloured, a ſwelling in the belly, ſuch moyſt and
wateriſh puſſings vp of the legges and feete, that if you
preſſe in your finger it will leaue a dent or hole, the mouth
alwayes full of ſpittle, vomitings vp of ſome watery
matter, and nippings about the heart. The ſcuruy,
ſeeing (as Wierus declareth) it commeth of the obſtruction
of the ſpleene,Iohannes W
                        •
                     crus 
                        •
                     ract. de ſco
                        •
                     buto. whereby the thinner part
of melancholy is caryed vpward, and with a ſharp
corroſion doth infect the gummes, and the groſſe
                     •
                  
part thereof falling downe doth infect and ſpot
the legs. I ſhall neede to ſay no more of it then I
haue ſet downe already in the eight Chapter concerning
the obſtructions of the ſpleene, and experience
hath taught vs ſufficiently, that much eaſe
may come vnto it by the right and aduiſed vſe of
Phlebotomy.Baldwin Rouſ. in commentartolo 
                        〈◊〉
                      magni
                        •
                      lienibus Hipp. 
                  Baldwinus Rouſſaeus declareth what
vayne (in his iudgement) is moſt fit to be opened
in the ſcuruy. If the humour be not fallen downe,
he counſayleth bloud to be let out of the middle
vayne of the left arme: but if the melancholick iuice
hath already flowed downe to the hips, then open the
vayne of the knee, or of the anckle. I leaue it to the
reader to examine and meaſure this aduiſe of his,
as well by thoſe principles and grounds which I
haue diſcuſſed at large in the ſeauenth Chapter of
this preſent booke, as alſo by thoſe circumſtances
and other obſcruations, which I ſhal haue occaſion
to intreate of hereafter in the former fiue Chapters
of the booke next following.
               Thus you haue in this firſt booke the firſt ſcope
and intention of bloud-letting briefely laid open,
to wit, in what infirmities the greatneſſe of the diſcaſe

doth require a vayne to be opened. For (as
firſt Hippocrates,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ippocr. 4. de 
                        •
                     tione vict. 
                        •
                     ut. 19. and after him Galen doth declare)
there are three eſpeciall points to be marked in the
drift & purpoſe of letting of bloud.
                     
                        •
                     alen. de rati
                     
                        •
                     e curandi 
                        〈◊〉
                      venae ſect. 
                        •
                     p. 9. The firſt is called
by them the greatneſſe of the diſeaſe, whether it
be preſent or to come, whether acute, or of long
continuance,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . Epid ſect. 3. 
                        •
                     ap. 3. if it be great, dangerous, ſtrong, or
grieuous. The ſecond is a flouriſhing age, neither
too yong,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . Epid. 1. 29. nor too old, for the vndergoing of that
remedy. The third is the ſtrength of the powers of the
patient. True it is that Galen doth ſometimes name
diuers other ſcopes and intents in the matter of
Phlebotomy.
                     
                        •
                     al. method. 
                        ••
                     tedendi lib. 9. 
                        •
                     ap, vlt. In his method of healing he reckoneth
eight, There are in this opening of a vayne many
ſcopes and obſeruations, 1. The firſt, nature and temperature
of the party, 2. his manner and cuſtome, 3. his
age, 4. the place of abode, 5. the time of the yeare,
6. the constitution or the ſtate of the heauens, 7. the
affection of the diſeaſe which we haue in cure, 8. the
ſtrength of the patient.
                  Galen de rati
                     
                        •
                     ne curandi 
                        •
                     er venae ſecti
                     
                        •
                     nem cap. 6. Sometimes he nameth tenne
beſides the age, as in his treatiſe of Phlebotomy:
If in respect of age they be neither children nor old
folks, then conſider of Phlebotomy, hauing a regard eſpecially
to theſe firſt ſcopes and drifts, 1.1 
                  the quantity
and quality of the plenitude, 2.2 
                  the ſtrength or weakeneſſe
of the powers, 3.3 
                  the naturall habite of the whole
body, 4.4. 
                  and the time of the yeare, 5.5. 
                  and the region or
place of habitation, 6.6 
                  the former life, whether the party
ſo affected haue vſed a fulneſſe of meates and drinks,
and especially ſuch as are of great nouriſhment, 7.7 
                  cuſtome
or diſcontinuance, 8.8 
                  what motions and exerciſes
he hath vſed, 9.9 
                  whether he haue had heretofore
any euacuations, which are now withholden againſt
custome, 10.10 
                  and moreouer beſides all theſe, whether

the party be leane or groſſe. All theſe varieties doth
Galen bring into a briefer diuiſion, and reduce
them into two ſeuerall heads: firſt, ſuch ſcopes as
declare whether bloud be to be let or no: and ſecondly,
ſuch as ſhew what quantity of bloud is to
be taken. To the firſt, do appertayne the three generall
ſcopes of Hippocrates, and to the ſecond ſort
do belong alſo all the reſt.Galen. ibid. For ſo be the words of
Galen: Therefore by the diſeaſe, and the age, and
the powers, we know that bloud is to be let, but
the quantity of the euacuation is to
be gathered not only by theſe,
but by all the other
intentions.
               
            
         
         
            
            The ſecond booke of Harwards Phlebotomy,
concerning the rules and circumſtances
which are to be obſerued, when
for the prenenting or curing of a
diſeaſe any vayne is to be
opened.
            
               The firſt Chapter.
               
                  Whether the party that is to be let bloud haue that
d
                        ••
                     bented plenitude, which is called of Phiſitions
corpus plethoricum, and how the feuerall kindes
of plenitudes may be knowen.
               
               
                  THe principall thing (whereof conſideration
is moſt to be had in letting of
bloud) is named of moſt writers to be
magnitudo morbi, the greatneſſe of the
diſeaſe, of which I haue no purpoſe now to write,
ſeeing it is in a manner the whole matter ſubiect
of the booke already ended. When it is found by
the nature of the diſeaſe that a vayne is to be opened,
then we are next to examine the conſtitution
of the party from whom the bloud is to be taken,
and eſpecially by all ſignes and tokens exactly to
waigh whether he haue corpus vere plethoricum, a
body ouercharged with the fulneſſe of the vaynes,Gal. lib. 2. de compoſit. medica neat. ſe
                        •••
                     
                     du
                        ••
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                     .
or rather with exceſſe of humours ouer the whole
body, as Galen doth define it, Plenitude is an abundance,

or an exceſſe of humours thoroughout all the
body.
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . There are two ſorts of plenitude, the one is
called ad vaſa, in reſpect of the veſſels conteyning,
and the other ad vires,
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Gal
                        •
                     bidem in initio. in reſpect of the power, not
to be able to beare thoſe humours that are. The
plenitude quoad vaſa, is made by Galen to be of
two ſorts, the firſt he calleth ſimply a plenitude,
which he defineth to be the foure humours being proportionably
increaſed. The ſecond kinde he calleth
a plenitude, with an addition, or a plenitude compound,
when ſome other humour beſides bloud doth abound
more then it ought. Theſe I will not ſtand
vpon, becauſe I haue already deciphered them in
the firſt Chapter of the firſt booke. There remayneth
only heere to ſet downe the marks and euident
ſignes, whereby they may beſt be knowne
when the patient commeth in preſence.Brigthus in therapeut. If there be
a fulneſſe of bloud in reſpect of the vaynes and other
veſſels,Plethora ad vaſa. then the colour both of the face and
the whole body will be much enclined to red, after
any ſtrong motion the vaynes will ſwell, and the
arteryes beate, a ſweate will eaſily breake out, a
wearineſſe doth oppreſſe the body and lims, which
are loth to moue by reaſon of their owne waight,
the hand can hardly be clutched together, the
drawing breath will be very thick after exerciſes.
In the fulneſſe in reſpect of ouercharging the powers
and ſtrength theſe things do happen,Plethora ad Vires. the
motions of the body & lims are ſomewhat ſlower,
the ſleepe is heauie but troubleſome, the partie
doth often dreame that he is ouer-charged with
ſome burthen, and that he can not ſtirre himſelfe,
and he feeleth likewiſe a wearineſſe and heauines
as is in the former, but it is without thoſe full and

diſtented vaynes.Other ſignes of bloud abounding. If the bloud do particularly exceede
in theſe plenitudes, then ſome do adde moreouer
theſe signes, the pulſe thick, full and ſoft, the
laughters great, the head enclined to aches, the body
ſomewhat coſtiue, the ſpittle ſweete, the vrine
red and thick, the dreames either of colours red,
or of things amorous, and in women their termes
vſually in the firſt quarter of the moone. When
any other humour doth abound, it is called a cacochymy.Signes of choler abounding.
                  A cacochymy is an abounding of any other
humour but bloud. If choler do abound, the colour
of the face and eyes and whole body will be pale,
or yellow, or of a citrine or tawny colour, the party
will be watchfull, and of little ſleepe, griefes will
be moſt on the right ſide, vomitings will be often,
the thirſt much, and the appetite to meate faint,
the pulſe will be ſlender, hard, and ſwift, in the
mouth ſometimes a bitterneſſe, the vrine of a firy
colour, and with little ground or ſediment, the
dreames will be much of matters of fire, and the
termes vnto women happen moſt in the ſecond
quarter of the moone.Signes of fleame abounding. If fleame do abound, the
colour of the face and body will be white, the body
it ſelfe waighty, fat, ſoft, and cold, the taſt weake,
the griefes moſt about the ribs, ſtomack, or the
hinder part of the head, the pulſe ſlow, ſoft, and
weake, the vrine pale or white, ſometimes thinne,
and ſometimes thick, with much grounds or ſediment,
the ſleepe ſound and much, the dreames either
of drowning, or watery matters, and the
termes vnto women vſually in the old of the
moone.Signes of melancholy abounding. If melancholy do exceede, the colour of
the face and whole body will be browne, dusky,
and blackiſh, ſometimes equally, and ſometimes

ſomewhat beſpotted, feares will come needeleſly,
and ſorowes without cauſe, the pulſe will be hard,
the vrine will be thinne and white, and ſometimes
when melancholy doth auoyd it will be thick and
black, or black and blew, or ſomewhat greeniſh,
the ſleepe troubleſome, and full of fearefull
dreames, and the termes to women commonly after
the full. I could here rehearſe many other ſignes
(whereof Leuinus Lemnius doth make mention)
drawne from the faſhions,Leuinus I emnius in libris duobus de complexionibus. ſtudyes, and manner
of life of the party, to make tryall of euery one by
the manner of his gate, by the deuiſes of his braine,
and by the performance of his actions, but then
I ſhould (perhaps) make ſome to thinke too well
and ſome too ill of themſelues (although in deede
hardly will any thinke too ill) and I ſhould increaſe
this latter booke into a greater quantity
then is now my purpoſe to performe. Briefely, I
conclude this firſt poynt concerning the plenitudes,
with the cenſure and iudgement of Galen,
                  Gal. method. therap. lib. 13.
who when he hath brought them all to two generall
heads, When the humours are equally increaſed
they call it in Greeke plethos, or plethora, but when
the body is full of yellow or black choler, or of ſleame, or
of thinne whayiſh moystures, then they call it not plethora,
but eacochymia: He doth preſently after
ſhew how they muſt be holpen, and amongſt the
remedyes of plethora he maketh letting bloud the
principall. Plethora is cured by letting of bloud, but
for cacochymia, he maketh the chiefeſt remedy to
be purging. But cacochymia is cured by that purging
which is proper and peculiar to euery ſeuerall abounding
humour. If this cacochymia be alſo with a diſ
                  
                     •
                  ented
fulneſſe, then muſt alſo Phlebotomy be

vſed, but ſparingly only, ſo much as may eaſe the
plenitude,Fernel. conſil. 46. and rather (as Fernelius doth aduiſe) ex
interuallis detrahendo quàm vniuerſim & affatim vacuando:
ſublata plenitudine praecipiti & periculoſa, reliqua
impuritas & cacochymia purgatione eximenda
eſt. But of this already in the laſt Chapter of the
former booke.
            
            
               CHAP. 2.
               
                  Of the conſideration of the temperature of the party,
what it is by manner of dyet, or by exerciſes, or by
place of abode, or by custome and habit, or by constitution
of body.
               
               
                  IT is not without good cauſe that Fuchſius
loth require in Phlebotomy,Fuchſius instit. ſect. 5. cap. 4. that an eſpeciall
regard be had in it of the dyet
which the party hath vſed, whoſe vayne is to be
opened, for if he haue vſed much ſurfe
                     ••
                  ing, and ſo
gotten an aboundance of raw humours, he is then
not to be let bloud, as he ſecketh to prooue out of
thoſe words of Galen:
                  Gal. libr. de 
                        〈◊〉
                     . ratione per venae ſectionem. 
                  To intemperate men, winebibbers,
and gluttonous ſurfetters, thou ſhalt bring
ſmall profit either by purging, or letting bloud. Although
the purpoſe of Galen indeede is not in that
place to deny purging and letting of bloud to
them, which by ſurfetting are already filled with
raw humours (as Fuchſius doth ſeeme to apply it)
but to ſhew that it is a needleſſe enterpriſe, and a
very loſt labour to apply vnto intemperate men
theſe ſoueraigne remedyes, ſeeing that they haue
gotten ſuch a cuſtome and habite of riotouſneſſe,
that they will preſently fill themſelues againe with
all noyſome humours; for ſo doth Galen there giue

his reaſon. For they which do vſe an intemperate dyet,
do quickly gather an aboundance of raw humours, and
therefore we muſt not ſo much as endeuour to heale
them. Beſides exceſſe and ſurfeiting, a due regard
muſt be had whether the party that is to be let
bloud haue vſed (though temperatly) ſuch drinke,
and eſpecially wines, as are apt to ingender much
bloud: for in houſes of great perſonages, and in
cities where wine is much in vſe, there is farre greater
neceſſity of letting bloud, then in thoſe countrey
villages where their accuſtomed drinks are of
leſſer and weaker nouriſhment. And eſpecially ſeeing
the former liuing in eaſe and without any
great exerciſes, do ſoone gather ſtore of ſuperfluous
humours, they may therefore admit a more liberall
bleeding, but the later continually labouring
& toiling, do leaue in their bodies y• leſſe ſtore
of ſuperflu
                     ••
                  e
                     •
                  , and therefore may the leſſe endure
any plentifull Phlebotomy,Fuchſ. Instit. libr. 2. ſect. 5. cap. 4. And yet as well in
cities as in countries the temperature of the place
of abode may alſo make ſome difference. They
which haue hoat and dry habitations in ſandy
places, haue much of their naturall heate and humours
ſpene; diſcuſſed and ſcattered, and therefore
muſt bleede leſſe then they which dwell in more
cold and moyſt places, where the ſtrength of the
naturall heate is not ſo apt to be diſperſeth, prouided
alwayes, that the place be not by reaſon of
hard weather ſo extreame cold, that the bloud
ſhould be as it were cōgeaſed, for then to let bloud
would be very perillous, as likewiſe it would be
inconuenient when the conſtitution of the party
is ouer-hoat and dry, to vſe any great euacuation
by Phlebotomy.Galen. ad Glauconem 
                        •
                     herapeutic. lib. 1. cap. 13. 
                  Galen ſayth, As many as are by

nature boat and dry, they all do eaſily receiue harme by
liber all euacuations. And in that place Galen in the
words immediatly following doth ſhew that cuſtome
alſo is of great force, as to all other things,
ſo likewiſe to ſhew what perſons may beſt admit
Phlebotomy. For they which haue bin often accuſtomed
to it, do incurre more danger in omitting
of it, then they whielt
                     •
                  euer were acquainted with
it.Hippocr. 2. Aph. 50. 
                  Hippocrates doth giue it out as a general axiome,
Things accustomed though they be bad, yet do they,

                        〈…〉
                      leſſe then thoſe wherewithall we were neuer

                        〈◊〉
                     . Auice
                        ••
                     a: in his ſixteenth. Canon of
bloud letting (as Montanus hath deuided them)
doth declare three ſundrie diſpoſitions of,Montanus medicinae vntuerſalis part. 3. mans
ſtomack, which cannot permit the opening of a
vayne:Gal. therap. meth. lib. 9. firſt, if there be a great and quick ſenſibilatie
of the mouth of the ſtomack: ſecondly, if it
haue a faint debilitie and thirdly, if there be a
flux of choler flowing vnto it. For the firſt, Montanus
ſayth, of all the lims the mouth of the ſtomack
is made of quickeſt fecling, and ſharpeſt ſenſibilitie,
that thereby there might be an apprehenſion
of hunger: and being for that cauſe very ſino
                     •
                  y,
it hath great affinity and conſent with the
brayne and the heart, whereby if there be a fl
                     •
                  x of

                     〈◊〉
                   ſharpe humour vnto it, the brayne and the
heart doe ſtraight ſuffer with it, and thereupon
doth come a fainting and ſwouning. By the debilitie
of the ſtomack he meaneth not that weakeneſſe
which doth come by diſtemperature, but that
which commeth by thedo
                        •
                     ſeneſſe of the ſtomack, when
the ſtomack can not bind in it ſelfe, and gather it ſelfe
together vpon the meate. That looſeneſſe commeth
of the moyſture of it, and they which haue this imbecillitie

vpon euery light occaſion, they ſwoune
and faint away, and are therefore vnfit to be let
bloud. By the flowing of the choler to the mouth
of the ſtomack, he ſheweth what indeed doth moſt
offend the ſenſibilitie of that place, and bring not
only ſwouning, but alſo other great dangers. For
as Galen writeth,Galen. lib. 12. method. the
                        •
                     apeutices. 
                  The mouth of the ſtomack by the
quicknſſe of the ſenſe thereof doth bring both many other
ſymptomes, and alſo ſwounings. From the liuer
and the gall there are two paſſages one greater, the
other leſſe. The greater goeth downe to the gut,
which is called 
                     
                        •
                     eiunum, and the leſſe goeth to the
bottome of the ſtomack. Some haue but one of
theſe paſſages, by meanes whereof many times
cholerick men, becauſe they haue only that paſſage
which goeth to intestinum ieiunum, and want
that paſſage that ſhould go to the bottome of the
ſtomack, do neuer vomit choler. And on the other
ſide, other that are phlegmatick do vomit often
choler, becauſe they haue that paſſage which goeth
to the bottome of the ſtomack, but want the other
which ſhould go to the gut called ieiunum.
                  Montan. in Canonem 17. Auicenae. 
                  Montanus
ſayth of theſe, that infaelicitatem habent à generatione,
they are vnhappy by the manner of their
procreation and birth. Thoſe which haue the paſſage
wholy to the ſtomack, whereby choler is caryed
to the mouth of it, are knowne (as Auicen
ſayth) by this, that they haue the mouth often bitter,
and do vomit choler vpon euery ſmall cauſe,
ſuch haue porum felleum infaeliciter compoſitum, the
paſſage of the gall vnluckily made. Auicen ſheweth,
that if there be a neceſſity of letting bloud in
any that hath any of theſe impediments, the party
hath neede to be prepared and ſtrengthened before

any vayne be opened. The manner how it
muſt be done ſhall appeare in the Chapter following.
            
            
               CHAP. 3.
               
                  Whether the body haue neede to be prepared before letting
of bloud.
               
               IF the party (from whome bloud muſt needes be
taken) be found to haue a great ſenſibilitie of
the mouth of the ſtomack (which is knowne by
this, that if you offer any ſharp, ſower, or biting
thing,Montan. medicinae v
                        •
                     tuerſalis part. 3. ſuch as is the iuice of limons or pepper, he
is ſtraight offended) then before he be let bloud,
that there may be no flux of choler to the mouth
of the ſtomack, you muſt giue him a few morſels of
bread ſteeped in ſome aſtringent thing, as in the
iuice of quinces, and of ripe peares. If there be a
relaxation of the ſtomack by ouermuch humiditie
(which is knowne by this, that though the body
be emptie, yet there is no perfect right feeling of
hunger) then you muſt giue alſo of the iuice of
quinces: but if there be a coldneſſe with the humiditie,
then you muſt adde vnto it ſome ſugar, with
a little cinnamon, or ſome ſpice conuement. And
if choler do ſlow vnto the ſtomack by the vnluckineſſe
of the paſſages of the gall, then giue warme
water, and ſ
                        •
                     rupus acetoſies, and prouoke a vomit,
and when the choler is by vomit caſt out, ſtrengthen
the ſtomack with a morſell of bread, and ſo
let the vayne be opened. An other occaſion may
be of a needefull preparation, to wit, if the party
that is to be let bloud haue his bloud ouer-groſſe
and thick; for then for two or three dayes before

letting bloud,
                     
                        •
                     uch. 
                        〈◊〉
                      lib. 2. ſect. 5. Fernel. lib. 2. met
                        ••
                     d. medend
                        •
                     . cap. 14. he muſt vſe extenuating things, as
a decoction of hyſop, 
                     •
                  ep, wild maricrom, and penyriall,
in which is boyled a little white wine and
hony. Fuchſius addeth further, that bathes may be
alſo ſometimes vſed, eſpecially when bloud muſt
be let in ſome part farre from the liuer, as in the
hands, or in the feete. But in a full body and in ſuſpicion
of an inflammation, the vſe of bathings muſt be
auoyded as very pernicious.
                  Trincauel. in explaratione lib. 1. Ga
                        •
                     ca
                        •
                      ad Gla
                        ••••
                     em de arte cu
                        •
                     atiua. cap. 12. 
                  Trincauel commenting
vpon Galen, after that he hath ſhewed that bloudletting
doth not require ſo great a concoction of
humours as other euacuations do, becauſe bloud
hath no neede to be prepared for the bringing
forth, vnleſſe when it is too thick we do by bathings
or ſome other meanes make it more thin,
that it may flow more readily, yet ſometimes not
only concoction, but alſo euacuation by purging
muſt go before Phlebotomy, not in reſpect of the
bloud, but in reſpect of ſome other danger, as he
giueth an inſtance of quotidian agues, in which
there is much fleame gathered in the ſtomack, and
many crudities in the firſt vaynes, vnleſſe this
fleame be firſt digeſted, and drawne out of the ſtomack,
it may be (as he proueth out of Galen) that
whē the vaynes are emptyed by Phlebotomy,Galen de ſanit. tu
                        •
                     nda. lib. 1. they
will draw that raw fleame, and diſperſing it by other
vaynes into all the principall parts, will make
greater obſtructions then before: he concludeth,
therefore let firſt the fleame be either concocted by abſtinence,
or brought out by avomit, or auoyded by purging,
and then ma
                        •
                     ſt thou ſafely open a varne. Galen
ſayth,Galen. lib. 4. deſan
                        •
                     tate tuenda. 
                  In a faint body wherein is little good bloud and
many raw humours, Phlebotomies do auovd the good,
and as for the euill, which is conteyned especially in the

vaynes about the liuer, and mid-bowels, they do pluck
them into all the body.
                  Mont. med
                        •
                     cin. 
                        •••
                     uerſ part. 3. 
                  Montanus writing vpon the
eight Canon of Auicenna, doth diſcuſſe this matter
at large: Let vs ſuppoſe (ſayth he) that there be a
raw humour without the meſaraick vaynes, yet
Auicenna will haue vs then to abſteme from bloudletting,
for the raw humour 
                        〈◊〉
                      drawne into the inward
vaynes, and the obstruction is made greater, and the
feuer increaſed: we therefore giue firſt things that may
concoct, and not ſuch things as may distribute into the
varnes.
                  Gal. libr. 4. 
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     anitate tuenda. He alleageth the aduiſe of Galen, who preſcribeth,
that if there be any raw humours in the
meſaraick vaynes, we ſhould abſteyne from dioſpoliticum
diacalaminthum, and from bathes, becauſe
they do diſtribute into the vaynes, and that we
let only ſleepe ſuffice, and the vſe of diatrion pipereon,
becauſe that doth concoct humours, and not
diſtribute them into the vaynes. When the crudities
being concocted we come to letting bloud,
then Auicen doth there counſayle vs,Aui
                        •
                     m. Ca
                        •
                     . 8. that if the
bloud be little and naught, we muſt take but an
ounce or two, and refreſhing the patient with
ſome meate of the beſt nouriſhment, then to take
the like againe: which Montanus doth thinke to
be ye ſame 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , or tempering of humours, which
Galen doth ſo much require.Gal. lib. 9. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . med
                        •••••
                     . This 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  temperatio
humorum, is nothing elſe but by little and little

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to take away bad humours, and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
to adde and restore good humours.
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                      77. 
                  Trincauel giuing
his aduiſe about a woman who had the termes ſuppreſſed,
although he perceiued her to haue a reaſonable
full body, and to be of the fitteſt age to let
bloud in (which he accompteth to be about the
fortieth yeare) yet becauſe there was in her body

abundance of raw, groſſe, and tough humours, he
did appoynt her to abſteyne from letting bloud.
If you take away bloud, you take away the bridle of raw
matters, and make them more raw and more groſſ
                        •
                     .
He buildeth his counſayle vpon that precept of
Auicenna, Take heed that thou bring not thy patient to
either of theſe two extremities, either to haue cold humours
made raw, or to haue the hoate to be brought to
boyle and bubble. Montanus diſcourſing vpon Auicenna
his canons,Montanus in canonem. 8. doth require that not only in
raw phlegmatick matters, but alſo in aboundance
of choler, ſome auoyding of it either by vomit or
purging, ſhould go before Phlebotomy, leaſt the
bridle, to wit, bloud being gone, the fierceneſſe of
choler ſhould more increaſe. In thoſe, in whome
by reaſon of the tempering of the humour bloud
muſt be let a little at once and often, Galen doth
wiſh as well the reiterating of the purging,Galen. lib. 5. method. medendi. cap. 14
                        •
                     
                   as of the
Phlebotomy. As many as ſhall ſeeme to haue little
bloud, when you haue brought them to ſome probable
humour, you may let them bloud, and then refreſh them,
and againe you may purge them, and afterward refreſh
them, and againe you may let them bloud, especially
them whoſe whole bloud is like vicious and thick ſlime.
But he addeth preſently, but in them which are
ſtrong and full of bloud, you may begin in them with
Phlebotomy.
                  Fernelius methodo gene
                     
                        •
                     al
                        •
                      de 
                        ••
                     randis ſchribus. So ſayth Fernelius, that in the feuer ſynochus
you muſt let bloud ſtraightway in the beginning
without any purging before. But in what particular
diſeaſes you may begin with Phlebotomy
and in which not, it is ſhewed in their ſeuerall
Chapters in my other former booke.
               Concerning ſuch as do thinke that the body is
not fit for Phlebotomy, vnleſſe it be firſt cuacuated

with ſome purging receit or potion, the learned
Maſſaria doth mightely condemne them which do
neuer attempt the opening of a vayne,
                  Alex. Maſſarta
                        ••
                     d sputationibus duabus pag. 202. 
                  vnleſſe they haue
firſt once, or perhaps twiſe, or more often vſed ſome purging
medicine, which without doubt doth trouble the fit
occaſion of the remedy, and is altogether contrary to the
doctrine of Galen, who doth teach, that in the beginning
of diſeaſes one of the two remedies may be fit, to
wit, either Phlebotomy, or purging▪ but in nouiſe both
of them: So that if a man do diligently marke this kind
of healing, which now is commonly and euery where
practized, nothing can be deuiſed more filthy then it,
nothing more repugnant to the decrees of Hippocrates
and Galen.Mercurialis de mor
                        ••
                     s puero
                     
                        •
                     u. lib 1. cap. 2. pag. 50. As Mercurialis in his treatiſe concerning
the ſmall pocks and meaſels doth forbid purging
medicins to be receiued into the ſtomack at
ſuch time as nature ſhould expell the diſeaſe by
the skinne, becauſe ſuch purgations do trouble the
motion of nature, and yet at the ſame time doth
allow a clyſter of barley water one pound and a
halfe, of oyle of violets foure ounces, of butter three
ounces, of red ſugar candy one ounce, or of each of
them proportionably a leſſe quantity if it be for a
child, and doth there condemne Nicholaus Florentinus,
for that he forbiddeth the miniſtring of a
clyſter, at ſuch time as the ſayd diſeaſes do begin to
breake out:
                     
                        •
                     tercur. ibid. 
                  for (ſayth he) it is a fond thing to thinke
that the motion of nature i
                        •
                      hindered by clysters, ſeeing
that they do worke only in the bowels, and the motion of
nature is both neere the skinne, and in the vaynes, neither
do clysters ſo ouerthrow the po
                        •
                     ers that we neede
to conceiue any feare. Euen ſo, for as much as in letting
bloud, our drift is eſpecially either to caſe nature,
being ouerburdened, or to expell ſome dangerous

cauſes of putred matter, by tranſpirations,
ſweatings, euaporatings and ſuch like, very expedient
it is that we auoyd ſuch purgings, as whereby
the worke of nature may be either troubled or
weakened, and content our ſelues with a more fit
preparing, brought to paſſe by glyſters. It is a
great fault amongſt very many in England, that
they are ſo nice and ſcrupulous in receiuing of a
glyſter, as ſeeming to ſuſpect ſome danger in that,
which indeede is the moſt eaſie and harmeleſſe remedy
of all others. And as great a fault it is in many
of our countrey Surgeons, which ſo boldly do
commonly practiſe the opening of vaines, neither
hauing before any direction of learned counſaile,
neither being themſelues ſtored with thoſe things
which ſhould orderly prepare their patient therevnto.
They which do miniſter purging potions at
that time, when nature doth begin to moue, ſay
they do it becauſe nature doth moue vnperfectly,
but to them Mercurialis doth anſwere,Mercur. ibid. pag. 49. 
                  intelligere
an perfecte moueat, in initio non poſſumus, we can not
know in the beginning whether nature wil worke
perfectly or no. The ſafeſt and ſureſt way is by a
clyſter ſo to eaſe the fulneſſe and coſtiueneſſe of
the body that we do not diſeaſe the emptineſſe and
looſeneſſe of natures powers. If the impurities and
crudities be aboue in the ſtomack, then ſhall it be
requiſite before Phlebotomy to vſe ſome vomit,Maſſaria lib. deſcop. m
                        •
                     ttendiſang
                        ••
                     nem pag. 76.
as to take of the decoction of barley two or three
ounces, of oyle of ſweete almonds and oximel ſimplex
each one ounce, of oyle of dill two drams,
mingle them and giue them for a potion. Or if the
matter be groſſer and colder, take of the ſeeds of
rocket, leekes, radiſh, & broome, each the waight

of a ſhilling, of the rootes of aſarabacca and betony,
each the waight of ſixe pence, boyle theſe in
water ſo much as being well boyled will make a
good draught, and being ſtrayned diſſolue into it
two ounces of ox
                     •
                  mel ſimplex and drinke it off.
In hoater diſeaſes the former will be more conuenient.
Fit vomits and clyſters they make a preparation
ſpeedily, and do nothing trouble the work
of nature in expelling to and by the outward
parts. P
                     •
                  rgations if they be ſtrong they weaken
nature: if gentle, then are they long in working,
and hauing ſome hoate qualities in them, muſt
needes as well by their heate as by their drawing a
contrary way, trouble that worke whereunto
Phlebotomy is directed.Dionyſius Fontanonus de morborum internorum curatione lib. 4. cap. 2. 
                  Fontanonus a learned
Doctor of Mountpelier, writing of that ſynochus
or hoat cōtinuall ague, which proceedeth of bloud
inflamed in the vaynes neere vnto the heart, after
that he hath appointed to begin the cure with preſent
letting of bloud, What houre of the day ſoeuer
it be, for feare leaſt the bloud do creepe vnto the lungs,
and thereupon ſhould come an inflammation of the
lungs, or leaſt it ſhould ſlip into the bulk, and thereof
ſhould ariſe a pleuriſie, or finally leaſt it ſhould putrifie,
and ſo there ſhould be made a putred ague of a not putred,
he ſheweth after how the body muſt be made
fit for this Phlebotomy, not with a purging potion,
leaſt while the purgation is long in working, the
patient ſhould receiue harme by the aboundance of boyling
bloud, but by a clyſter made after this ſort.
Take of the foure emollitiues each one handfull,
(the foure emollitiues are,Heurnius method. ad p
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     i. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 1. pag. 6. as skilful Heurnius doth
lot them out, 1. mallowes, 2. marſh mallowes,
3. violets, or in ſtead thereof pellitory of the wall,

or mercury, 4. branck vrſine, or in ſteede thereof
beets) of endiue and lettiſe each halfe a handfull,
tenne prunes, boyle all in a reaſonable quantity
of water vntill the third part be conſumed,
then ſtrayne it, and take thereof one pound and
a halfe, diſſolue into it of caſſia newly extracted,
and red ſugar-candy each one ounce, of ſalt a little,
and you haue your clyſter. In ſtead of the pulpe or
flowers of caſſia, may be vſed diacaſſia Meſuae, or
diacatholicum Nicholai, or electuarium lenitiuum
Rhaſis, any quantity betwixt halfe an ounce and
an ounce and a halfe, according to the ſtrength of
the party: the moſt conuenient oyle to be added
to them is the oyle of violets. In ſtead of the aforeſayde
things the clyſter may be made of a little
ſoluble chicken-broth, goats-milke, and the yolke
of an egge ſtirred and mingled, and putting into
it of manna and freſh butter each an ounce firſt
melted together, theſe be the ingredients moſt fit
for the clyſters of ſuch as are to be let bloud. And
if any Surgeon by reaſon of his ſeate and place of
abode be ſo ſituated, that he ſhall be enforced
ſometimes to open a vayne before the counſayle
of a learned Phiſition may conueniently be obteyned,
let him be carefull to haue ſome prouiſion
of theſe things in ſtore, as he tendereth either the
teſtimonie of a good conſcience in reſpect of himſelfe,
or ſound and perfect health in regard of his
patient. For (as before is ſhewed) many are the
harmes and dangers which enſue, if at the time of
letting bloud there be crude and corrupt humours
in the ſtomack and bowels, preſt and ready to be
ſuckt and drawne into the vaynes now newly
emptyed by the adminiſtring of Phlebotomy.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 4.
               
                  Of the age, ſexe, ſtrength, and ſolubilitie of the party,
whether old men, or children, or women being either
with child, or hauing their termes, may be let bloud.
Alſo whether any hauing bodies either too ſoluble
or too cos
                        •
                     iue may be let bloud.
               
               
                  FOr the beginning of old age there is
no queſtion but that bloud may be let
very ſafely in it, if other things be coreſpondent.Trincauel 
                        〈◊〉
                      77.
                  Trincauel ſaith, that about
the fortieth yeare of age, that is, about the
beginning of old age, we may moſt fitly be let bloud.
But Galen doth make three degrees of old age,Galen de ſanit
                        •
                     te tue 
                        •
                     da lib. 5. in fine. the
firſt he calleth 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , ſignifying ſuch as haue a
greene and luſty old age, ſuch as are able yet to
deale in the aſtayres of the world. The ſecond he
calleth 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the middeſt of old age, more
fit for ſleepe and reſt then for toyle and labour, to
whome agreeth that of the Poet,
Vt lauit ſumpſitque cibum, det membra ſopori.
Whē waſht he hath, & food for ſuſtenāce receau'd,
His li
                     •
                  s of reſt and ſleepe, let ſeldome be bereau'd.
The third ſort he nameth 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , ſuch as are ready
to be ſent away, and haue one foote in the graue.
Although many be very much ſtricken in yeares,
yet if they fall into thoſe diſeaſes which require
bloud-letting (as ſometimes they do) then may a
vayne be opened as Trincauel ſheweth,Trincauel in rud
                        •
                     mento c
                        ••
                     tra Briſſo
                     
                        •
                     um. that in a
pleuriſie he did let an old man bloud, being threeſcore
yeares of age, and he did happily & ſpeedily
recouer: but he made choyce of the vayne of the

ankle, and had a due regard of the ſtrength of the
party.Galen lib. 5. de tuenda ſanitate. For as Galen ſayth of diet, ſo it may be ſayd
of Phlebotomy, if old men do neuer ſo little exceede
a due meaſure they take great harme, whereas yong men
though they tranſgreſſe very much, yet their harmes
are of ſhort continuance.
                  Fernel. lib. 2. methodi medendi. cap. 11. 
                  Fernelius recordeth of Razes,
that by an occaſion of a vehement pleuriſie he
did open a vayne euen in crooked old age, but the
old verſe muſt be remembred,

                     Aetatis mediae multum de ſanguine tolle,
                     ſed puer atque ſenex tollet vterque parum.
                  
                  
                     Middle age mickle,
                     Old and yong little.
                  
As for children how old they muſt be before they
can admit Phlebotomy,Platerus de 
                        •
                     ebribus pag. 105. 
                  Platerus ſayth, If they paſſe
once tenne yeares old, if danger of an inflammation
do hang ouer them, I would be bold to open a vayne.
Fernelius doth aduenture further,Fernelius methodi medendi libr. 2. cap. 11. for when he hath
ſet downe the example of Auenzoar, who with
good ſucceſſe did open a vayne in his owne ſonne
being three yeares old, he after maketh mention
of his owne practiſe, This we do commonly proue, that
in the ſixt or fift yeare of age three or foure ounces of
bloud doth end the pleuriſie and ſuch grieuous diſeaſes.
He addeth his reaſon, becauſe they do often bleede
at the noſe and finde helpe, and why ſhould not
arte imitate nature? He concludeth, There is no
age which cannot indure ſome meaſure of euacuation.
Montanus doth giue two reaſons why children
ſhould not be let bloud.Montanus medicinae 
                        •••
                     uerſalis part. 3. Firſt, becauſe bloud is as
it were the foode of children, ſeeing that thereby
they are not only nouriſhed, but alſo do grow and
increaſe. Secondly, becauſe when bloud is taken
away, one part doth ſucceede in the place of an

other, vt non fiat vacuum, becauſe there can be nothing
cleane voyd and empty, and thereby the
body is made either windy or thinne and ſpungious,
and all the powers reſolued, as there he prooueth
by the auctority of Galen.
                  Galen thera
                        •
                     . method. lib. 12. But no doubt although
Galen doe rehearle children amongſt the
number of them which are not fit to be let bloud,
as when he forbiddeth Phlebotomy to thoſe which
are apt by nature to haue the pores open as children,
                  Galen. method. therap. libr. 9.
and likewiſe when the constitution is very hoate and
dry; alſo to all which are of a thinne habit of body,
and moreouer to them which haue the mouth of the
ſtomack either troubled with a ſharp flux of choler, or
weake, or of more ſenſibilitie then it ought to be: his
purpoſe is not vtterly to condemne letting of
bloud in all theſe ſorts of people, when vpon vrgent
neceſſity they are driuen to it, but to ſhew
that it muſt be done as ſeldome as may be, as ſparingly
as may be, and alwayes carefully endeuouring
to remedy and meete with that impediment
and danger for which the prohibition was made,
and whereunto that nature is found moſt ſubiect.
For in an other place Galen alloweth Phlebotomy
in children.Galen. libr. de 
                        •
                     atione curandi per Phlebotomiam. 
                  Some Phiſitions thinke that children haue
no ſtrength, but they thinke amiſſe: we may let them
bloud if the diſeaſe be great. But Galen doth in the
ſame place except 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   yong children, and he calleth
them 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   yong children, vntill they come to
be fourteene yeares old, and vntil that age he doth
not permit their vaynes to be opened.Gal. method. medendi. lib. 11. 14. 
                  But if the
hoat ague (which he hath ſpoken of in the line before)
ſhall be in a yong child not yet fourteene yeares old, it is
not good to vſe Phlebotomy, for in ſuch warme and
moiſt bodies euery day there floweth out and vapoureth

or ſweateth out very much of the ſubstance of the body.
Hippocrates alſo doth not allow Phlebotomy in
yong children,H
                        •
                     ppocr. 1. de 
                        〈◊〉
                      victu
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      b. 45. becauſe their ſtrength is ſoone ouerthrowne.
Quickly doth the power decay in children,
by meanes of the ſtore which they haue of ſtowing
out, but it will continue ſufficient in flouriſhing age.
Many doe exclayme vpon Galen, as though his
practiſe of Pluſick were too ſtrong and violent for
the preſent eſtate of mans nature. But we ſee in
this point that Hippocrates and he are a great deale
more wary and circumſpect, and more loath to
ouercharge the ſtrength of man then many of our
late practicioners. I thinke it farre more ſafe to follow
them, then to be ſo raſh as to imitate thoſe
Spaniſh Phiſitions, of whome Maſſaria doth report,Alex. Maſſaria deſcopi
                        •
                      mitt
                        •
                     ndi ſang. pag. 55. Auer. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 7. Col. c. 3.
that they vſe to let bloud in infantibus vix annum
ſecundum aut tertium natis, in infants ſcarce
two or three yeares old: or that bold Auenzoar,
of whome Auerroes writeth, that he let his ſonne
bloud, being but three yeares old: or yet to thinke
that the experiments of Fernelius, Fuchſius,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      metho
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . 2 cap. 11. and Valeriola,
who aduentured to let bloud at fiue or
ſixe yeares old (though perhaps ſometimes they
wrought good effect) are therefore to be commonly
tried againe by vs. For the reaſon which
Fernelius doth alleage, that ſeeing that by eruptions
of bloud out of the noſe, they finde often caſe,
and therefore the Phiſition muſt imitate nature.
Maſſaria anſwereth,Maſſaria. pag. 56. that he hath often obſerued
that thoſe eruptions of bloud in children haue not
bin healthfull to them, but haue bin occaſions of
dropſies, and of bad habits of body. And for the
experiments which (as they ſay) haue often done
good, he accompteth that either they were rather

of fortune then of any good reaſon, or elſe that the
help was ſuch as whereby they were better vncured
then cured. For many may haue for a time a
mitigation of paine, for which afterward they may
be ſory for many yeares following. But if yong infants
(who vndoubtedly may ſometimes fall into
hoate agues called ſynochi, and that alſo with aboundance
of bloud) may not haue their vaynes
opened, what courſe is then to be taken with them
in thoſe feuers, which can hardly be taken away
without diminiſhing of bloud? Mercurialis doth
appoynt two helps for them,
                     
                        〈…〉
                      lib. 2. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 1. & lib. 2. ap. 2. the one by cuppings,
and the other by leaches. The leaches being applyed
aut natibus aut cruribus, they do draw out
bloud by ſo ſmall holes, that there is no danger of
waſ
                     ••
                  ng any vitall ſpirits. As for cuppings, whereas
Rafes doth defend that they may be vſed vnto
children at fiue moneths old,Caſes libr. de es
                        •
                     e. cap. 4. tuicenna 4. doct. 5. ap. 21. and Auicenna will
not haue them vſed vntill the infants be at leaſt a
yeare old. Mercurialis iudgeth it more ſafe to ſtick
to the opinion of Auicen, not to vſe them till the
children be a yeare old, and that with theſe three
conditions, firſt, that the child be full of bloud, and
of good ſtrength, ſecondly, that they be rather applyed
to the legs then to the vpper parts, becauſe
bloud drawne from the lower parts doth not ſo much
impaire the ſtrength nor waſt the ſpirits, as that which
is drawne in the vpper parts:
                  Mercurial. de 
                        〈…〉
                      2. Cap. 2. and thirdly, that there
neuer be taken aboue one ounce or two at the
moſt. In the Chapter following he addeth an other
caution, to wit, that if we ſeeke to draw bloud out
of places farre off, we apply ſuch cupping inſtruments
as haue wide and large mouthes; but if we
purpoſe to draw from neere places, then to vſe

ſuch as haue narrow mouthes, and therefore if
we apply them to the legs, they muſt haue wider
mouthes, and if to the places about the loynes the
narrower.Galen. lib. 12. method. medendi. cap. 1. 
                  Galen for old age telleth a pretty hiſtory
of a mad Phiſition which ra
                     •
                  hly did let himſelfe
bloud. Acertavne Phiſition of fifty yeares of age, being
now a ſeauennight ſick and not very ſtrong, hauing
a great paine in his head not able to ſtay vntill ſome of
his fellowes could come to him, did in the night time let
himſelfe bloud, and his paine quickly ceaſed. But a long
time after he was diſcoloured in his body, weake in
ſtrength, thinne, and without nouriſhment▪ ſo that hardly
he could recouer that habit of health which before
he had.
               
               For women being with child Montanus ſayth,Mont
                        ••
                     . medici
                        •
                     ae vniuerſal. part. 3.
that wee muſt greatly ſuſpect as well letting of
bloud, as any other euacuation in them, both in
reſpect of the nouriſhment of the woman and
child, and alſo for feare of an abortement or vntimely
birth. Eſpecially he will haue them to be auoyded
at thoſe times when there is moſt danger
of vntimely birth, that is, before the fourth moneth,
and after the ſeauenth moneth. For whereas
Hippocrates doth permit to purge women with
child, being foure moneths gone, vntill they come to
ſeauen moneths,
                  Hippocr. 4. aph. 1. 
                  but them which are yonger conceaued,
or which haue gone longer we muſt beware of dealing
with them; Galen commenting vpon that place,
doth compare the child in the mothers wombe to
the fruit of a tree, which when it is very yong is
ſoone fetched off with any wind or blaſ
                     •
                  ing, and
when it is very ripe, it is ready to fall off it ſelfe,
but in the middle time it will remayne ſtrong on
the tree againſt all ſtormes and tempeſts: So the

infant in the wombe is moſt in danger of vntimely
birth, when the woman is either in the beginning
or towards the end of her accompt.Montanus in Canon. 7. Au
                        •
                     ceanae. But Montanus
ſayth, purging bringeth more danger then phlebotomy.
Phlebotomy is then the mere dangerous if the
child be great, as is noted by Hippocrates, A woman
being with child is deliuered before her time,
                  Hippocr. 5. Aph. 30. 
                  if that be
great wherewithall ſhe is conceaued. Galen expounding
that aphoriſme, doth giue the reaſon of it,
becauſe the bigger the infant is, the larger nouriſhment
it requireth.Montan. medicinae vniuerſal. part. 3. Yet Montanus addeth, that
ſometimes women with child do receiue much
good by opening a vayne eſpecially if they be full
of bloud: he ſayth, I haue ſeene ſome ſuch women,
that if they had bin let bloud euery moneth, it would
haue bin without danger; and againe, if they had not
had ſometimes a vayne opened, they would haue bin ſo
grieuouſly ſick, that there would haue bin danger of an
vntimely birth. When ſuperfluous bloud is taken
away, the foode remayneth more holeſome for
the child. Fernelius doth more plainely oppoſe
himſelfe againſt the axiome of Hippocrates,
                  Fernelius method. medin
                        ••
                     . lib. 2. cap. 12. and yet
not in his owne words, but alleaging againſt him
this cenſure of Cornelius Celſus: Ould Phiſitions did
thinke that childhood and old age could not endure ſuch
a help as is Phlebotomy: and they were perſwaded,
that the woman which ſhould vndergo ſuch a
kind of curing, ſhould procure an vntimely birth.
But afterward experience hath ſhewed, that none of
theſe cautions are perpetuall,
                  Cornel. C
                        •
                     lſ. lib. 2. cap. 10. 
                  but that better obſeruations
are to be marked▪ vnto which the Phiſitions counſaile
is to be directed, for it skilleth not what are the
yeares of age, nor what the party doth cary in the body,
but what the ſtrength is: a ſtout boy, a ſtrong old man,

and a woman with child hauing an able body, may
ſafely this way be cured. As Montanus doth limit and
reſtrayne this liberty, appoynting it not to be vſed,
vnleſſe the woman be very full of bloud, ſo
Maſſaria doth likewiſe require,Ale
                        •
                     . Maſſaria. pag. 105. that the Phiſition
ſhould not only reſpect the preſent eſtate of a woman
being with child, but to forecaſt how ſhe ſhal
haue ſufficient nouriſhment and ſtrength to hold
out, vnto the appointed time of her deliuery.
               
               Concerning women hauing their termes, whether
they may ſecurely be let bloud, it is thus reſolued
by Montanus,
                  Montanus medi
                        ••
                     nae vniuerſalis part. 3 writing vpon the ſeauenth
canon of Auicenna concerning bloud-letting, that
if they haue them immoderately, then may they
open the vayne baſilica for diuerſion. But if moderately
and naturally, then is Phlebotomy not requiſite.
Yet he ſayth, if ſuch a woman haue a ple
                     •
                  
                  riſie
or a ſharp feuer, and be in danger that vnleſſe
the flux of bloud be eaſed by ſpitting, there ſhould
come an inflammation of the lungs, and vnleſſe
the force of the humour flowing to the breft be
ſtayed, there would be danger of a ſuffocation,
then muſt the ſaphena be opened, though the woman
haue her flowers. For coſtiueneſſe, I referre the reader
to the third Chapter of this ſecond booke, how
it muſt be corrected before Phlebotomy.Platerus de febribus pag. 113. As for
the flux of the body, Platerus doth giue a c
                     •
                  aueat
generally, that ſuch perſōs as are apt to ſwou
                     •
                  nings
ſhould not be let bloud whē they haue a dia rrhaea
or looſeneſſe of the body, becauſe the flux doth
make them more apt to ſwoune. But otherwayes,
letting of bloud is of it ſelfe good for ſuch fl
                     •
                  xts as
Auicen ſheweth in his fourth canon, and vpon it
Montanus,
                  Vt diuidit Montanus Canores med. 
                        〈◊〉
                      part. 3. becauſe there can be no vacuuin, no

voyd emptineſſe, therefore there is made an attraction
out of the whole body by ſucceſſion of
parts; one vayne draweth from an other, vntill at
the laſt it draw from the ſtomack, as the like doth
happen in hunger. Now when the vaynes haue
drawne firſt one from an other, then they from the
liuer, then the liuer from the meſaraick vaynes,
and the meſaraick vaines from the ſtomack, thereby
the moyſture being plucked away, the body is
made more bounden. And beſides that ſtimulating
and tickling choler which did before paſſe
downe, and cauſe the flux to be more violent, is by
Phlebotomy drawne back from the bowels. But
how is it then that ſo many vpon letting of bloud
do become ſtraightway looſe bodyed? Montanus
doth anſwere out of Auicen, that it is non per ſe, ſed
per accidens, not of it ſelfe, but by meanes of ſome
other accident, as of ſome timorouſneſſe and feare,
or elſe by ouermuch cooling of the body, when by
bleeding, much of the ſtrength is reſolued. Fernelius
ſayth, The raw and vndigested flux which hapneth
in a burning feuer,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      lib. 2. 
                        〈…〉
                      cap. 11. 
                  the ſtomack being diſſolued by the
drinking of cold water, doth not forbid the opening of a
vayne, but a regard muſt alwayes be had of the power.
Alexander Maſſaria doth aduiſe, that if the flux do
come of venome, or any poyſoned humour, we
ſhould not let bloud,Alex. Maſſa
                     
                        •
                     ria lib. d
                        •
                      cap
                        •
                     s 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſangu. 
                  becauſe the greateſt violence
is then offered to the powers, and the ſpirits are in danger
of ſainting.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. 5.
               
                  Of the ſtate of the diſeaſe, what conſideration muſt be
had thereof in bloud-letting, and in the examining
of the ſtrength of the party which we muſt regard
moſt, the vertue animal, or naturall or vitall.
               
               
                  WHereas euery diſeaſe hath foure ſeuerall
times, the firſt is called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , princi
                     
                        •
                     ium,
the beginning, which indureth
vntill there appeare ſome ſignes of
concoction, the ſecond 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                  vel 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , incrementum, augmentum vel aſcenſus,
the time of the increaſe ſo long as the fits or griefes
doe waxe more painefull: the third 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , vigor &
ſtatus, the vigour of the diſeaſe, when it ſtandeth in
one ſtay, and neither increaſeth nor decreaſeth:
the fourth 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , declinatio, ſo long as the diſeaſe
doth decline or decreaſe. It remayneth now to be
diſcuſſed in how many of theſe Phlebotomy may
take place, and to which of theſe it is moſt fit and
conuenient. Montanus deliuereth this for Galens
doctrine,Montan. medicin
                        ••
                      v
                        •
                     tue. la 
                        〈◊〉
                      part. 3. 
                  In letting of bloud there is no time to be attended,
but at what time ſoeuer, by reaſon of the fulneſſe
an euacuation is ſhewed to be the beſt drift, let the euacuation
be made, whether the diſeaſe be in the beginning,
or in the increaſe, or in the ſtate, ſo that there be
not vndigested meates in the ſtomack and bowels: but
he addeth a prouiſo, dummodo virtus non ſit debilis,
ſo that the vertue and powers b
                     •
                   not weake. But
for the moſt part Phlebotomy is moſt fit in the beginning
of the diſeaſe. That rule of Hippocrates,
                  Hippocr. 2. Aph. 29. 
                  In
the beginning of diſeaſes if any thing do ſeeme ſit to be

mooued, mooue it: but when the diſeaſes are at the higheſt
ſtate and vigor, it is beſt then to reſt. Galen commenting
vpon it, doth apply it to the two great remedies,
and eſpecially to Phlebotomy. The firſt
canon of Auicenna expounded by Montanus is,
A vayne is not to be opened in the day of the diſeaſes
motion, that is, when the matter of the diſeaſe doth
boyle and ſwell, and nature doth ſtriue to concoct
or expell it.Montanus 
                        〈…〉
                     . 
                  Montanus ſayth, there is duplex motus
morbi, two manner of motions of a diſeaſe, the one
particular, which conſiſteth in the fits and paroxyſines,
and the other generall or vniuerſall in
reſpect of the whole diſeaſe from the beginning
to the end, and this conteyneth the criticall dayes,
the fourth, the ſeauenth, the eleuenth, the foureteenth,
the ſeauenteenth, the twentieth, &c. Now
we muſt marke how the matter of the diſeaſe is
mooued, whether in a criticall day or not criticall,
and whether it be moued becauſe nature goeth
about to concoct it, or becauſe it is furious: If the
motion of it be furious, we muſt needs vſe euacuation.
But when the motion of the diſeaſe is ſuch that nature
doth concoct the matter, then is it a day of
reſt, and no euacuation is then to be attempted.
And that doth he make to be the meaning of Hippocrates,
that we muſt reſt when the diſeaſe is in
ſtate and vigour, hoc eſt in die motus morbi ſeupugnae
tempore, that is, in the day of the diſeaſes motion,
or the time of the ſtrife betwixt nature and it.
Some affirme that in the criticall day bloud is not
to be letten, although it prooue a day of reſt. But
Montanus doth confute them, and doth iuſtifie
that rule of Auicenna, When nature doth mooue,
mooue thou nothing, but when ſhe mooueth not, mooue

thou in the time of her motion. The time of natures
motion it the criticall day, and therefore in the criticall
day we muſt ſtirre the body. But therein the Phiſition
muſt be very wary and circumſpect, for if nature
haue moued in the fourth day (which is the declarer
of the ſeauenth) then may we not euacuate in
the ſeauenth day. And if in the ſeauenth there appeare
any motion, we muſt not mooue in the eleuenth.
But if in the criticall day nature do neither
mooue, nor ſhew ſome good token and proofe
that ſhe will mooue, then may wee indeuour to
mooue by Phiſick. Afterward vpon the twelfth
canon Montanus reprooueth them which affirme
that bloud is not to be let after the fourth day of
the ſickneſſe,Montanus in canonem Auicennae 12. Gal. method. therap. lib. 3. and prooueth out of Galen, that in
ſome infirmities a vaine may be opened a hundred
dayes after the beginning thereof. But in ſharp feuers
we let bloud only in the beginning, becauſe
after the fourth day the powers do faile, and for that
cauſe he ſayth Hippocrates doth appoynt, In ſharp
diſeaſes vſe euacuations in the beginnings.
                  Hippocr. 1. Aph. 24. 
                  Trincauel
likewiſe doth apply vnto Phlebotomy that other
axiome of Hippocrates,
                  Hippoc. 1. Aph. 22. 
                  non eſſe vacuandum in principio
niſi turge
                        ••
                      morbus, that we muſt not purge in
the beginning vnleſſe the diſeaſe be furious and
vehement.Trincauel epiſt. 22. ad Aloiſiam Criuellum Maſſaria. Gal. in fine lib. 3. com
                        •
                     ret. in 6. de morbi
                        •
                      vulg. 
                  Turgere dicuntur qui adeo concitato motu
agitantur vt prae illorum molestia agrotus non poſſit
quieſcere, quod magni morbi eſt indicium, thoſe diſeaſes
are ſayd to rage or ſwell, which are caryed with
ſuch violent motions as that the patient can take
no reſt, and qui ad excretionem festinant, which
would faine breake out. He bringeth in the example
of Galens owne practiſe, which (as he recordeth
of himſelfe) when he was ſent for vnto a man

ſick of the pleuriſie,
                     
                        〈…〉
                      3. 
                        〈◊〉
                      44. when he ſaw firſt that he auoyded
bloud by ſpitting, and ſecondly, that (as
the patient being asked did confeſſe) he felt but
little griefe on his ſide, he vſed ſome applications
to him, but would not let him bloud, becauſe it
was a moſt gentle kind of pleuriſie. But how may
the former part of that aphoriſme of Hippocrates
be applyed to Phlebotomy,
                     
                        〈…〉
                      22. 
                  Purge things concocted
and ripe, but not while they are raw? Is concoction
firſt to be expected before we can vſe Phlebotomy?
Fernelius and Fuchſius do in this poynt bitterly
inue
                     •
                  gh againſt Auicen,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      libr. 2. 
                        〈…〉
                      cap. 13. for that he forbiddeth
a vayne to be opened vnleſſe the humours be firſt
concocted.
                     
                        〈…〉
                      2. Their reaſons are eſpecially theſe, firſt,
becauſe in ſharp and violent diſeaſes, and where
there is aboundance of bloud, it muſt needs be
dangerous to deferre: ſecondly, though the diſeaſe
be not ſharp, yet may the multitude of bloud
of it ſelfe do har
                     •
                  ne, if it be not preſently eaſed:
thirdly, becauſe when ſignes of manifeſt concoction
do appeare, then (as Fernelius holdeth) we muſt
deale no more by letting bloud, but the reſt of the
cure muſt be finiſhed either by purging, or by deriuing
meanes, as in agues, by ſieges, vrines, and
ſweates, in a ripened pleuriſie by ſpitting; in inflammations
of the liuer, if they be in cauo hepatis,
by ſoluble medicins; if in gibbo hepatis, by things
diuretick, or cauſing vrine. And (the more to condemne
Auicen) Fernelius doth plainely auouch,
that letting bloud is moſt fit then when ſignes of
crudittes do appeare:He meaneth of c
                           •
                        ud▪ tates morbo
                           •
                        ae, which remain ſo long vntill the diſeaſe be ouercome. 
                  At what time ſo euer, yea if it
were the twentith day of the ſickneſſe, if ſignes of cruditie
do appeare, we may open a vayne: for we meaſure
Phlebotomy not by the number of dayes, but by the concocting

of the matter, and the diſſoluing of ſtrength: If
neither of thoſe do happen, Phlebotomy may be
vſed. Montanus interpreteth the meaning of Auicenna,
                  Montanus 
                        〈◊〉
                      Canon. 11. Au
                        ••
                     ennae.
that when he will not haue bloud to be let
before concoction, he doth ayme eſpecially at ſuch
diſeaſes in which a thick groſſe humour doth abound,
as in quotidians, and melancholick feuers,
whoſe humour being tough and raw, would be
made more rebellious if bloud were taken away.
Firſt therefore he wil haue that humour to be concocted
and euacuated, and then if it be thought
conuenient to open a vayne if the bloud be corrupt,
and in great plenty.Trincau. in explanatione lib. 1. ad Glau. cap. 12. 
                  Trincauel maketh this to
be the chiefeſt concoction that is required before
letting bloud, in reſpect of the bloud it ſelfe, to wit,
when it is too thick to make it more fluxible, as is
before in the third Chapter of this booke. There
are two kinds of concoctions, the firſt called properly

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , whē naturall heate doth turne the food
into due nouriſhment, conteyning vnder it thoſe
three ſorts or degrees of concoction mentioned
by Galen,
                  Galen libr. 4. deſanitate 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   whereof the firſt is called by him the concoction
in the ſtomack and bowels, wherein the purer
part is ſent towards the liuer to be made bloud,
and the impure is caſt out by ſiege. The ſecond,
the concoction in the vaines, wherein the moyſt whitiſh
iuice being by the meſaraick vaynes caryed to
the liuer, and by the liuer turned into bloud, is by
the vaynes and arteryes perfected and diſtributed
into all the body, in reſpect of the purer part
thereof, to wit bloud (as it conteyneth the principall
iuices) and ſeede, and the impure is by the
vaynes 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , conueyed into the bladder, and
from thence caſt out by vrine. The third, the concoction

in the fleſh, wherein the purer part of the
bloud being by the vaynes and arteryes caryed into
all the body, is by an other ſeparation in reſpect
of the purer part thereof turned into ſubſtance
and ſpirits, and the impure is caſt out by ſweate, as
Weckerus nameth three kinds of excrements appertayning
to the three degrees of concoction,Weckerus 
                        〈◊〉
                     : dotar. 
                        •
                     pecial. 
                        •
                     ag. 416.
                  excrementa primae concoctionis ſtercora; ſecundae, vrinae;
tertiae ſudores & exhalationes. Theſe three concoctions
being finiſhed, the beſt part of the nouriſhment
is aſſumilated and made one to the fleſh,
body, bloud and ſpirits of him that is to be nouriſhed.
Galen ſayth,Galen. lib. 4. deſanitate 
                        •
                     uenda. 
                  When the third concoction is ended
there is an aſſimilation made to the part that is to be
nouriſhed. Theſe concoctions and the ſeuerall degrees
thereof do all deale with that matter quae eſt
benigna & familiaris, which is good and familiar
vnto the party that hath receiued it. There is an
other kind of concoction called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,1. Epid. ſect. 2. com. 44. 4
                        •
                     . or 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
wherein naturall heate doth deale with a matter
not that is good and familiar, but ſuch as doth
cauſe diſeaſe, and doth ſeeke either to aſſimilate
ſome part of it if ſhe can, or elſe to make it either
leſſe hurtfull to the body, or more fit to be expelled.
Theſe two diſtinct kinds of concoctions when
naturall heate can not or doth not performe what
it would or ſhould, then they leaue diſtinct kinds
of crudities,2. De rat. v
                        •
                     ct. morb. acut. 44. as Galen ſheweth, ſpeaking of cholerick
crudities, as thoſe whome the Grecians call

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , whatſoeuer (ſayth he) is of pature ouercome
is called by Hippocrates concocted, and what ſoeuer
nature can not yet ouercome is called crude
and raw, as he giueth in the ſame place an inſtance
of purulent matters in inflammations, of ſpittle, of

rheumes, and of watriſh humidities (ſuch as do
paſſe out in thoſe vrines which are called vrinae
crudae) and in choler, which being raw (he ſaith) it
is yellow, ſharp, & ill ſauoring; but being concocted,
it is more pale, and not ſo ill ſmelling. As for
ſpittings and ſnot, ſuch they may be that they may
be the excrements of this later kinde of concoction,Hippocr. 2. Aph 23. acuti morbi diebu
                        •
                      14. 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
and ſuch they may be that they may be excrements
of the laſt degree of the former kinde of
concoction. How theſe ſeuerall kinds of concoctions
are to be reſpected in purging, and whether in
acute or ſharp diſeaſes we may giue minoratiue or
purging receipts before there appeare ſignes of
concoctiō of the matter of the diſeaſe, I do handle
at large in my ſecond part of the great Phiſick remedies
called Cathartice. As for Phlebotomy, ſeeing
that the chiefeſt intents thereof are to eaſe the
ouer-much fulneſſe of the body, or to pluck back
or diuert a humour from or to ſome place, we are
not ſo much to wait for the concoction of the matter
of y• diſeaſe (vnleſſe it be the ouer-much groſſeneſſe
of thick bloud) as to marke the concoction
of nouriſhment, that the firſt degree thereof be
done, and the ſecond well forward. For if we let
bloud when the ſtomack or firſt vaynes are full of
indigeſted crudities, they will paſſe into the vaines
which are emptyed and make greater obſtructions.
As violent exerciſes vpon full ſtomacks do
diſperſe and diſtribute raw humours into the body
to the much hurt of the body, ſo doth alſo Phlebotomy,
and therfore that may partly be applyed
vnto it which Galen hath written of exerciſes,Galen deſanitate 
                        〈◊〉
                      lib. 2. 
                  Then
is the beſt time when the meate before taken is perfectly
concocted and digested in respect of the two firſt concoctions.

The way to know this time is by the colour of
the vrine. A wateriſh vrine doth ſhew that the iuice
which is ſent out of the ſtomack and bowels into the
vaynes, is yet raw and vndigested. The f
                        •
                     ry, red, and
cholerick vrine ſheweth, that the iuices are long ago
conco
                        •
                     led already. That which is moderately pale, is a
ſigne of the ſecond concoction euen now finiſhed. I haue
ſhewed already in the end of the eight Chapter of
my former booke, that in many diſeaſes the colour
of the vrine may deceiue, and in what caſes it may
moſt deceiue: I neede not therfore heere to ſpeake
any more thereof, but only to poynt out thoſe other
circumſtances & ſignes, which together with
it are ioyntly to be weighed and conſidered. To
know perfectly the ſtate of the body, Galen doth
in one place ioyne with the colour of the vrine
fiue other things to be heedily regarded.Galen deſani
                     
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      4. 
                  Firſt, we
muſt ponder what diet the diſeaſed body hath lately
vſed,
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   for ſundry ſorts of meates and wines may
cauſe many alterations in the vrine. Secondly, whether
he haue bin wont naturally to abound with many
ill and vicious humours, and whether any outward
ſigns therof haue appeared by itches, puſtles, ring-wormes,
ſwellings, inflammations, and ſuch like.
Thirdly, whether any accustomed or naturall euacuations
haue lately ceaſed, as vomits, hemorrhoides, fiſtulaes,
fluxes, bleedings at y• noſe, termes, ſweats,
and ſuch like. Fourthly, whether they hauing bin accustomed
heretofore to auoyd ſuperfluities by Phiſick,
and haue of late neglected it, and not vſed ſuch purgings,
vomits, and bathes as heretofore they haue
done. Fiftly, to examine not only the vrine, but
other excrements, as egeſtions, ſpittings, ſweates,
for as he ſayth a little after, The ſweate declareth

what humour aboundeth in all the body, for it is whiter,
paler, or yellower, according as the humours
be more or leſſe phlegmatick, or cholerick, and if
the humours be pu
                     •
                  rified the ſauour of the ſweate
will greatly bewray it. But in matters that do concerne
the vaynes (as doth eſpecially Phlebotomy)
Galen will haue vs eſpecially to reſpect the vrine.
We haue no effectuall and euident ſigne to diſcerne the
ſuperfluities that are in the vaynes,
                  Gal. ib
                        •
                     dem pa
                        •
                     lo 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                  but only that which
is by vrine. If the humour be altogether crude and
raw, the vrine will be thinne and watery, and neither
haue any hypostaſis or ſediment, nor haue any cloudy
matter hanging in the 
                        〈◊〉
                      but when it is concocted,
theſe things do appeare, and beſides, ſome thinne
clowdes do ſwimme vpon the top.
                  Sic Hippoc
                        •
                     . libr. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   
                  If the thinne and
thicker parts do quickly deuide, and that the ſediment
be white and ſmooth, and in euery part equall, that
ſheweth that ſtraightway care one can ſpeake the word
nature will euercome all. If it be longer care the ſeparation
be made, longer it will be care the humours
be ouercome. But if in the vrine there be no ſeparation
at all, but that it remayne ſtill as it was made, or elſe
if it do breake it be with a bad ſediment, then is nature
weake, and hath neede of ſome other help to digeſt the
humours. Many other ſignes there are of crudities,
as the ſmall quantity of vrines, ſignifying that by
their rawneſſe they are hardly ſent out. Likewiſe
the thicknes of vrine, ſhewing abundance of raw
humours, and thereupon depriuation of concoction.
Further,Inequal
                        •
                     ie and diſtemperature of the pulles, are ſignes of morb
                           •
                        ſ
                           •
                        e crud
                           •
                        ates.
                   the ill contents in vrine, and the inequalitie
of the palſes, but theſe and many other
ſignes of diſeaſy crudities muſt not ſtay vs from
letting of bloud if the greatneſſe of the diſeaſe do
require it, and the party haue a full body, and ſufficient

ſtrength:Fernel met
                        •
                     od. lib. 
                        •
                     . method. medend
                        •
                     . cap. 13. cap. 14. but rather as Fernelius ſheweth
when ſignes of crudities are, we muſt vſe Phlebotomy
as the remedy. Only touching our food laſt
taken, let the ſtomack, bowels, and (if it may be
alſo) the meſaraick vaynes be cleared from raw
and corrupt humours, and let ſuch a time be choſen
wherein alſo the diſeaſe hath moſt quietneſſe
from the motions of the paroxyſmes. The greateſt
reſt is in the middle time of the intermiſſion or remiſſion,
for ſo ſhall we be in no danger of drawing the
inflammation into the greater vaynes (whereby
of an intermitting feuer may be made a cōtinuall)
and the powers alſo of the patient ſhall leaſt be
indangered. But ſeeing ſo often Galen and all Phiſitions
in the matter of Phlebotomy do ſtill make
their prouiſo
                     •
                  s that the powers be not diſſolued,Galen. libr. de ratione per venae ſectonem.
a queſtion may here be mooued of what powers
they do eſpecially ſpeake, and how the ſtrength of
thoſe powers ſhall be knowne. Galen deſcribeth
three powers in man,Galen. method. 
                        〈◊〉
                      lib 9. cap. 10. 
                        〈…〉
                      5. ca. 7. the firſt he calleth the naturall
or nutritiue power, that hath his fountaine in the
liuer, and conteyneth vnder it the attractiue power,
the retentiue, the expulſiue, and the fourth the alteratiue
power, which is generally to turne the nouriſhment
into ſubstance and particularly to make bloud. The ſecond
vertue or power is called the vitall power, hauing
the ſeate in the heart, giuing life to the whole
body, and conſeruing the eſſence of the vitall ſpirits.
The third he calleth the animall or rationall power,
hauing the ſeate in the brayne, and bringing
forth ſenſe, motion, and vnderſtanding. Each of
theſe three powers haue their particular inſtruments
to worke by. To the naturall power do ſerue
the vaynes, to the vitall the arteryes, and to the

animal the ſinewes. Now which of theſe powers in
letting bloud muſt moſt be reſpected? No doubt
there muſt a care be had of all,Galen. method. medendi. lib. 9. cap. 10. Gal. lib. de curatione 
                        〈…〉
                      ſectionem cap. 6. for as Galen ſayth
there, If any one of them do periſh, it muſt needs be
that all the reſt ſhall periſh alſo. And giuing precepts
of letting bloud, when he hath taught how we ſhal
try the animall power by the voluntary motions,
and the vitall by the pulſes, and the naturall by
good or bad nouriſhment, or by good and bad
colour, he concludeth generally, when theſe powers
are ſtrong, let bloud. So whereas Hippocrates doth
bid vs when diſeaſes are in the vigor to reſt,Hippocr. 2. Aph. 29. and
not to vſe phlebotomy or purging (for ſo Galen
doth expound it) Galen doth giue the reaſon there
of it, becauſe the animall power is then weake and
in danger, although the vitall and naturall be
ſtrong. Yet certaine it is that the vitall power is
that which chiefely we are to obſerue in Phlebotomy,
as he doth elſewhere at large declare, The
greateſt dignity of all is that which concerneth the actions
of the heart,
                  Galen method. 
                        〈◊〉
                      lib. 7. cap. vitimo. 
                  and of all moſt needefull to be conſidered
in them that are ſick. He doth in that place
compare the operations of the liuer and of the
brayne with the vitall powers of the heart, but he
will haue the heart to be principally reſpected. In
extreame apoplexies the animal powers are decayed,
yet becauſe the vitall powers are not extinguiſhed
Phlebotomy is allowed, and doth often
worke good effect. That is the cauſe that Galen
doth giue out that precept in his booke of Phlebotomy:Galen de 
                        •
                     aratione per venae ſectionem cap. 11.
                  In all theſe former rules thou muſt ſtill haue an
eye to the ſtrength of the party touching his pulſes. By
that word (touching his pulſes) he ſheweth both
that the vitall power is moſt to be regarded, and

alſo doth point out the meanes how we ſhall take
triall of it,Other ſignes of ſtrength ſayling, by the pulſes, are ſhewed after Chapt. 8. to wit, by the diſtemperature and the
inequalitie of the pulſes.
            
            
               CHAP. 6.
               
                  Of the time of the yeare, the time of the constellation of
the planets, and the time of the day moſt fit for letting
of bloud.
               
               
                  THe beſt time of the yeare for Phlebotomy
is knowne of all men to be the Spring, according
to that aphoriſme of Hippocrates,
                  Hippocrat. 6. 
                        〈◊〉
                      47.
                  The Spring muſt be the time of letting bloud and purging.
The Autumne is in fitneſſe the neereſt vnto
the Spring. The extremitie of the heate of ſommer
is moſt dangerous as Galen ſayth, hauing named
a little before the canicular dayes.Gal. ad Glauconem therap. lib. 1. 
                  They which are
ſinisterly euacuated in very hoate times of the yeare,
do periſh either with ſ
                        •
                     ounings, or with reſolutions.
The extreame cold alſo of the winter will not permit
Phlebotomy; or if it do, it muſt be little: Montanus
giueth the reaſon, becauſe the body is ouermuch
cooled,
                  Montanus in 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  and is alſo made ſo thinne, that the cold doth
ſtrike into the inward parts, whereby are brought diſeaſes
of very long continuance. Galen will haue them
which are vſually ſick in the ſpring time to be let
bloud in the beginning of the ſpring, but ſuch as moſt
commonly haue their ſicknes in the ſommer time
he would haue them to open a vayne in the end of
the ſpring a little before ſommer begin. The fitteſt
time for letting bloud is when the ſigne (as we call
it) or the moone is in Aries, Sagittarius, Cancer, Libra,
Scorpio, Aquarius, or Piſces, vnleſſe in any of

theſe ſignes the moone do predominate in that
place that is to be let bloud, as in Aries the head,
Taurus the neck, Gemini the ſhoulders and armes,
Cancer the breaſt, ſtomack, and ribs, Leo the heart
and back, Virgo the belly and bowels, Libra the
raynes and loynes, Scorpio the ſecrets & bladder,
Sagittarius the thigh, Capricornus the knees, Aquarius
the legs, Piſces the feete. There muſt alſo a regard
be had of the age of the party that is to be let
bloud, for to them which be growing or yong, the
firſt quarter of y• moone is moſt meete. To middle
aged people, the ſecond quarter. To the declining
age, the third quarter; and to old age the laſt quarter.
The complexion alſo muſt be reſpected. If the
party be cholerick let him bloud when the moone
is in Cancer, Scorpio, or Piſces. If phlegmatick, let
the moone be in Aries, Sagittarius, or Piſces. If melancholick,
then let the moone be in Libra, Aquarius,
or Piſces. It is ill to let bloud when the moone
is in the full or in the change, or within three dayes
either before or after. It is ill alſo when the moone
is in coniunction or oppoſition with Saturne or
Mars. Further, it is ill when the moone is in coniunction
or oppoſition with Venus or Mercury
combuſt, or in a quadrate aſpect with Saturne, Sol,
or Mars, vnleſſe the aſpect be paſſed at the leaſt
eight degrees. But it is good to let bloud when the
moone is in a trine or ſextile aſpect with Iupiter,
Sol, Venus, and Mercury, but eſpecially with Iupiter
and Venus, with whome all aſpects are good, prouided
that they be not combuſt. In caſes of extremitie
there is no ſtaying for ſignes or aſpects, for
(the neceſſitie of the diſeaſe compelling) I haue my
ſelfe opened a vayne the ſigne being in the ſame

place, and yet with good ſucceſſe. But if a man
haue liberty to make his choyce of the time, I hold
him vnwiſe that will not take it as neere as he can
agreeable to the auncient grounds and principles
of Aſtronomy. It appeareth very many wayes that
God hath giuen a power to the heauens, and an
influence to the Starres and Planets, which doe
mightily worke in the things here below, not to
induce any neceſſities, but to diſpoſe the inclinations,
ſo farre as God hath appoynted and determined.
 Conſider how all the times and temperatures
of the yeare do alter and change according
to the courſe of the ſunne, and what difference
there is betwixt the operation of Phiſick, and the
dangers of diſeaſes aſſaulting vs in the ſpring, and
ſuch other as do befall vnto vs in the canicular
dayes.  Marke the operation of the Moone in ſuch
plants as are ſet, and ſuch ſeeds as are ſowne in the
ſeuerall times of her age.  Waigh the force alſo of
the moone in thoſe which in the ſcripture are called
lunatick.Math. 4 2
                        •
                     . Ma
                        •
                     h. 17. 15. 
                  Origen doth report the iudgement of
Phiſitions, Humida moueri in capite ſecundum aliquam
compaſſionem ad lumen lunare quod humidam
habet naturam, That moyſt things are mooued in
the head according to the ſympathie of the moone
which hath a moyſt nature, but he thinketh rather
that ſome vncleane ſpirit doth obſerue the diuiſions
of the ſituations of the moone and worke by
them.Sermus lib. 1. de medic
                        •
                     na. Merc
                        •
                     r. lib. 2. de morbis puerorum cap. 3. But Serenus, and after him Mercurialis do
giue this the reaſon, becauſe they which are conceiued
or borne in the wane of the moone are
much ſubiect to the falling ſickneſſe. Howſoeuer
it is, it is ſure not without ſome cauſe that they are
called lunatick, that is mooniſh, or mooned. And

behold alſo the power of the Moone in the ordinarie
flowers of women, who are otherwiſe alſo
ſometimes too much ſubiect to that variable and
tempeſtuous planet.  See what force it hath likewiſe
in the ſea concerning the ebbings & flowings
thereof, as alſo in reſpect of cockles and diuers other
ſhell-fiſhes waxing fuller or leſſer according
to the age and proportion of the moone.  Let alſo
the experiences of mariners ſomewhat preuaile,
which finde the whole leas to be caryed by the
courſe of the firmament from the Eaſt vnto the
Weſt, whereupon they which trauaile to the weſt
Indies do better paſſe thither in one moneth, then
they can returne againe in three, beſides the trials
which they haue of their loadſtone poynting towards
the North, and their needles and compaſſes
anſwering thereunto.  In Phiſick the criticall dayes
falling out either in hard or benigne conſtitutions
of the planets, do dayly giue vnto vs abundant
teſtimonies.  In hiſtories what auctor can you almoſt
reade, but you ſhal finde therein the troubleſome
alterations which haue followed vpon great
eclipſes?  In diuinitie ſee how Iob doth attribute
vnto the Pleiades a ſweete influence to cauſe the
kindly ſpring,Iob. 38. 31. and to Orion a power to cauſe raines
and ſhowers, but ſo, that God doth looſe or hold
back the bridle at his only will and pleaſure. And
waigh thoſe words ſpoken in the creation of the
Sunne & Moone,Gen. 1. 14. let them be (ſaid God) for ſignes
and for appointed times, and for dayes, and for
yeares. I do vtterly condemne the abuſes of Aſtronomy,
as firſt when men will make them ſignes of
ſouthſaying, to foretell things to come, and ſo to
take that vnto them which is proper to God only,

as it is in the Prophet:
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      41. 23. Shew vs the things that are
to come that we may know that ye are gods. God
ſayth, I w
                     •
                  ll deſtroy the tokens of the ſ
                     •
                  othſayers,
and make the wiſe coniecturers fooles. The will of
God is free and ſoueraigne ouer all his creatures
in euery moment to order, alter, rule, and diſpoſe
them as ſeemeth beſt to his heauenly wiſedome.
Fata mouere deus, tollere fata poteſt.
We ſee in one battayle,P
                        •
                     ucerus. or in one time of peſtilēce
(God being angry with ſinne, or permitting the
Diuell to rage) many thouſands do dye at one
time, which no doubt moſt of them were borne in
diuers manners of conſtellations of planets: Weaker
natures are ſubiect to the ſtronger, and particular
cauſes are ſubiect to the generall.
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      lib. 12. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   Saint Augustine
ſayth, In the liues of them which are borne twinnes,
in their actions, caſualties, profeſſions preferments, and
in their very death there is ſo great a diuerſitie,
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  that
many meere ſtrangers are more like one to another,
then thoſe which in birth were ſeparated with a very
ſmall distance of time, and ſowen as it ſhould ſeeme by
coniunction in one and the ſelfe ſame moment. It was a
damnable opinion amongſt the Chaldaeans to
make the conſtellations of the ſtarres to be a table
of all fatall lawes▪
                   as though the whole life of man
were written therein. As Tarutius Firmianus being
skilfull in the Chaldaean ſciences, tooke vpon him
by the manner of Romulus his life and death, to calculate
what time he was borne, that becauſe he
wrought ſuch actes, and dyed in ſuch a manner,
therefore he muſt needes be borne ſuch a yeare,
and ſuch an howre. The ſuperſtitions of the Chald
                     •
                  eans
were ſuch, that they would not build a
houſe, nor attempt any iourney, nor ſo much as

put a new garment vpon them but they would
firſt haue a regard of the conſtellations and planets.
Theſe fond and wicked abuſes of aſtronomy
I do wholy reiect and diſallow. But in the vſe of
Phiſick ſeeing that a great part thereof doth concerne
the flowing and iſſuing, the ſtaying and the
paſſing away of humours, and that it is found by
the termes of women, by the fluxes and refluxes
of the ſeas, and many other wayes, that the moone
hath by the maker thereof certaine influences giuen
vnto her, much auaylable to the auoyding
and correcting of humours; I do not thinke but if
it be found by the experiences of former ages, that
at ſometimes and in ſome ſignes or aſpects her forces
are more violent then at other, we may haue
ſome conſideration thereof, and make choyce of
ſuch as are moſt meeteſt for our purpoſe, euen as
the husbandmen may alſo take ſuch times for their
grafting, ſowing, planting, and ſuch like, as by the
proofes of all nations haue appeared to be fitteſt
for the fruitfull growing and propagation thereof.
To returne now to our argument of letting bloud,
ſeeing that as I haue ſhewed the ſigne may ſometimes
ſeeme to be good, and yet by other aſpects
the ſame may be controuled, what courſe is then
to be taken when for want of good helps we can
not come to the knowledge of the aſpects? Surely
then our beſt way will be to obſerue the manner
of the weather. When the weather is ſetled to be
very dry, then are not humours apt to flow, but in
open and moyſt weather we find them very fluxible.
Fernelius ſayth, The north wind vtterly forbiddeth
letting bloud,
                  Ver
                        •
                     el. lib. 
                        〈…〉
                      cap. 11. 
                  only the ſouth wind doth beſt admit
it in the cold time of winter. The time of the day is

made by Galen,
                  Gal. de venae 
                        〈◊〉
                      ca. 14. 
                        〈…〉
                      2. ſect. 5. and out of him Fuchſius, to be the
fitteſt within an howre or thereabouts after the
party is riſen, after the yeſterdayes meate is prety
well digeſted and the body eaſed as well by ſtoole
as by making water.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      us me
                     
                        •
                      medena
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 2. cap. 13. 
                  Fernelius ſayth, in ſuffocante
pleuritide & angina quouis tempore fiat. If the diſeaſe
be an intermitting ague, I haue ſhewed in the
laſt Chapter that the fitteſt time is the middle betwixt
two fits at what time of the day ſoeuer it be,
and the party muſt a little before be dicted thereafter.
Montanus ſayth,Montanus in 
                        〈◊〉
                      de 
                        〈…〉
                      de ſtu
                     
                        ••
                     o
                        •
                     orum ſanttate 
                        〈◊〉
                      lib. 1. cap. 22. 
                  If he looke for the fit in the
morning, let bloud in the euening before. Marſilius Ficinus
will have ſchollers, who abounding with
bloud do vſe Phlebotomy to preuent diſeaſes, to
vſe it both morning & euening, but at either time
a little, foure ounces in the morning, and as many in
the euening, becauſe it is dangerous to auoyd too
much bloud at once, but of this in the eight Chapter.
            
            
               CHAP. 7.
               
                  On whether ſide the vayne is to be taken when we let
bloud to preuent diſeaſes, or to auoyd or deriue their
matter: alſo what vayne muſt chiefely be choſen
for ſundry infirmities.
               
               
                  ON what ſide the vayne muſt be taken in
great & dangerous inflammations where
there is cauſe of reuulſions, I haue ſhewed
alreadie in the ſeauenth Chapter of the former
booke. It is not denyed, but that in ſome caſes it
is requiſite that the vayne ſhould be opened in
the ſame ſide, where the inflmmation lyeth. But if
any do vrge a neceſſitie that it muſt needs be euer

on the arme of the ſame ſide.Trineauel de ratione curandi part. corp. aſſ. lib. 6. cap. 4 
                  Trincauel doth aske
one queſtion: Si in muliere ſupprimantur ſolitae purgationes
& ex ea occaſione ſuperuenerit pleuritis: Item
ſi ex retento ſanguine ex hamorrhoidibus fluente (vt
ait Hippocr. 6. epid. & in libro de humor. quod quibus
ſanguis ex haemorrhoidibius fluere ſolet, illi neque pleuritide
neque peripneumonia capiuntur) quae vena iam
ſecanda? illane quae costis affectis communicat, an potius
alia impellens particula? but of this alreadie, I
hope, ſufficiently in the Chapter aboue named.
The doubt is now on what ſide the vayne muſt be
opened when we do it to preuent diſeaſes, the old
verſe is commonly knowne:
               
                  Aestas Ver dextras, autumnus hyemſque ſinistras.
The ſpring & ſommer right ſide vains would haue,
But autumne and the winter left do craue.
               But here we muſt take heed that we vſe not too
much to let bloud on one ſide, for that thereby we
ſee many to be brought to particular palſies, and
to loſe the vſe of one eye or care, or the ſtrength of
one arme or ſide, partly becauſe the longer that
ſuperfluous humours haue found a vent in one
place, the more apt they are to haue recourſe to the
ſame place; and if they haue not their former paſſage,
they will eaſily either make obſtructions, or
breede ſome inconuenience; and partly becauſe
the letting bloud too much on one ſide, may perhaps
coole that ſide more vehemently then is requiſite.
If therefore thou haſt bin heretofore let
bloud on the one ſide, thy beſt way is the next
time to take the other ſide, and to labour by all
meanes that the humours may flow equally, and
that they may be caryed with no greater force
towards thy one ſide then thy other. When there

is neede of euacuation and deriuation and not reuulſion,
then doth Galen appoynt vs to take the
vayne alwayes on the ſame ſide.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  If the right ſide of
the wombe be grieued, auoid bloud out of the right hand
or right leg; and if the left ſide be enflamed, then take
the ſide that is right with it: for that is the meaning of
the 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  of Hippocrates, to wit, that we open the

                        〈…〉
                     
                   hepatica and lienaris directly, for they
ar
                        •
                      neereſt to the affected parts, and moſt right vpon it.
And in an other place,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  The euacuation out of the
neereſt va
                        •
                     nes and which are common to the place affected,
is both beſt and eaſieſt.
               
               As concerning what vayne is to be opened,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   this
rule is moſt generally preſcribed, that if the parts
beneath the neck be grieued, we muſt open the inward
vayne of the arme called generally in
                        •
                     erna, or
baſilica, or axili
                        •
                     ris, and more particularly if it be
in the right arme called recoraria, or hepatica, in
the left henaris, this is opened commonly on the
left ſide, if the heart, lungs, or ſpleene be affected,
and on the right ſide if the liuer or ſtomack be affected.
If the parts which be afflicted be aboue
the neck, then we open the outward vayne called
externa, or humeralis, or cephalica.
               
               The middle vayne called communis,
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   or cardiaca,
or nigra, or fun
                        •
                     : brachi
                        •
                     , or mediana, is then vſually
opened, when either one of the other doth not appeare,
or elſe when the infirmitie is as well beneath
as aboue the neck, for this vayne taketh part of
both the other. For the lower parts about the
hips, bladder, or wombe, take the vayne by the
knee, or by the anckle. The raines as they are placed
in the nuddeſt, ſo (as Fuchſius ſheweth) they
do partake with both. For if the inflammation in

the raynes be new, and that there be abudance of
bloud, then may you take the vayne in the arme:
but when it is a confirmed diſeaſe, ſuch as is called
nephritis, then open the vayne either in the knee,
or in the anckle. If any ill humour be ſetled in
thoſe parts which are betweene the raynes and the
flanck,
                     
                        〈…〉
                      9. 
                  Fernelius doth appoynt that if the party
haue corpus plethoricum, then firſt we ſhould open
the baſilica of the ſame ſide, and afterward the ſaphena.
But if the body be not plethor
                        •
                     cum, then he
ſayth the only ſaphena ſhall ſuſtice, that is, the inward
vayne of the foote, for as the outward is called
ſciatica, ſo the inward ſaphena.
               If you will not haue the bloud to come faſt and
ſpeedily, then for the cephalica you may take his
branch betwixt the thumbe and the fore-finger.
And for the baſilica you may take the vayne by
the little finger called ſaluatella, or titillaris, which
is a branch of the baſilica. For deriuation to deriue
the matter of a griefe, if it be in the fore-part
of the head, take the vayne of the fore-head; if in
the eyes, the broad vaynes at either corner; if in
the eares, the vayne vnder the eare; if in the lawes,
that which is vnder the tongue; if in the lungs, or
ſpleane, or breaſt, or heart, the inward vayne of the
left arme; if in the liuer, the right baſilica. Often
the ſame vaynes will ſerue both for reuulſion and
euacuation, as Galen ſheweth, ſpeaking of an inflammation
of the liuer.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  We muſt both pluck back
and alſo auoyd the bloud which is caryed to the liuer by
Phlebotomy, opening the inward vayne of the right
cubite, becauſe directly, and with a broad way it doth
communicate with the hollow vayne: if that do not appeare,
open the middle vayne: if that alſo 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     
be perceiued, then take the other third which remarneth.
                  Platerus de ſ
                     
                        •
                     bus pag. 114.
This ſpeech of Galen maketh me more
willing to ſubſcribe to the opinion of Platerus,
who defendeth that in letting bloud wee
muſt rather chooſe that vayne which doth moſt
ſwell with fulneſſe of matter, then to make any
difference betwixt the vaynes of the armes, ſeeing
in one place about the throat they come all from
the hollow vayne, and which vayne hath beſt relation
to the parts moſt ouercharged, the fulneſſe
thereof will ſufficiently make manifeſt.
            
            
               CHAP. 8.
               
                  What manner of inciſion muſt be made▪ how large, how
ſmall, how deepe, what quantity of bloud may be taken,
and therein of the me
                        •
                     ning of Galens word to
let bloud vnto 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , deliquium anim
                        •
                     .
               
               
                  IT is a notable aduertiſement of Hippocrates,
                  Hippocr. 
                        〈…〉
                     . 2. 33.
                  We muſt open paſſages, as the nostrils
and others, but it muſt be what we muſt, and
how we muſt, and of what ſort, and what way, and when,
and how much we muſt, as ſweats, and all other things.
This precept of circumſtances, as it appertayneth
generally to all euacuations, ſo doth it greatly take
place in the matter of Phlebotomy. I haue ſhewed
already the greater part of theſe circumſtances, it
ramayneth heere that I deſcribe only the manner
how,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . lib. 2. 
                        〈…〉
                      cap. 15. and the quantity how much. Fernelius aduiſeth
the Chirurgian to take diligent heed that he
ſtrike not either a place ſwelling with ſome windineſſe,
or an artery, or a tendon in ſtead of a vaine.
The tendones be inſtruments of moouing in the

top of the muſcles, made of ſinewes and ligatures,
and knitting them to the bones, they be harder
then ſinewes, and vet not ſo hard as ligatures. The
artery being preſſed downe will ſhew it ſelfe for a vayne;
which if it be cut,
                  He meaneth it can very hardly be hea led: ſee the beginning of the 
                        〈◊〉
                      Chapter. 
                  it will neither come together againe,
nor heale, but that part will be taken with a mortification,
and become as dead and ſenſeleſſe. He counſa
                     •
                  
                  leth
alſo the Chirurgian, that when he hath ſetled
the launcer in one hand, leauing out no more of
the end or poynt then what is ſufficient to pearce,
and hath with the other hand ſo taken hold of that
part of the body that is to be let bloud, that he
may ſtrengthen and hold ſtedfaſt the vayne with
his thumbe, then let him put forward h
                     •
                   launcer
faire and ſoftly without any haſtineſſe gently, and
no further in then is ſufficient.Fuchſius In
                        ••
                     itut. lib. 2 ſect. 5. 
                  Fuchſius willeth
that if the vayne be trembling and not conſtant
for the percing, the next place muſt be bound as
well aboue as alſo beneath: And although the
vayne be well opened, and the bloud flow freſhly,
yet in the middle of the flowing ſet your finger awhile
vpon the wound, both that the ſtrength
may be more refreſhed, and leſſe ſcattered, and
alſo that the corrupt bloud may the better be
brought out of the inward parts vnto the place
where the vayne is opened.Fernel lib. 2. methodi medendi. cap. 15 
                  Fernelius giueth one
generall rule to know what vaynes muſt be opened
a little ouerthwart and ſomewhat ſidelong,
and which muſt be opened right along the vayne.
If the vayne be in a ioynt, then let the pearcing of
it go a little ſidelong, becauſe in the moouing of
the ioynt the ſides of the inciſion if they go right
with the vayne would gape, and ſo would the
wound be the longer in growing together. But in

the head, hands, and feete if the inciſions go right
with the vayne he ſayth they heale the ſooner, becauſe
there y• ſides do ſtill cloſe together. Of what
bigneſſe the orifice of the wound muſt be, it is diſcuſſed
by Montanus writing vpon the ninth Canon
of Anicen.
                  Montanus 
                        •
                     edicinae vni
                     
                        •
                     erſal
                        ••
                      part. 3 A little hole (ſayth he) is beſt to
conſerue the ſtrength of the party, both becauſe
the moſt that then commeth out is but thinne and
wateriſh, and alſo becauſe the bloud goeth not ſo
ſpeedily out, whereby the heate and ſpirits are not
ſo ſodainely exhauſted. But a little orifice hath on
the other ſide a great diſcommoditie, in that it maketh
no euacuation of the thick and groſſe parts.
So likewiſe a great orifice hath one good benefit in
auoyding groſſe humours: but it hath an other
great danger, that by a too ſodaine and ouer-liberall
effuſion the vertues and powers may be cleane
ouerthrowne. If the bloud be ſubtile and power
weake, let the hole be little: but if the bloud be
thick and the vertue ſtrong, then let the hole be
great. Auicen teacheth, that when we let bloud to
preſerue from ſickneſſe, then muſt the orifice be
great, becauſe the powers are yet conſtant; and
likewiſe when we let bloud in the winter or cold
weather, becauſe then the coldnes of the ayre doth
keepe the ſpirits from flying too faſt out. But in
the ſommer or hoat weather, he will haue the orifice
to be narrower, becauſe the bloud is commonly
then more ſubtile, and heate doth helpe much
to dilatation & paſſage. If it fall out to be temperate
weather, then to proceede in the meane betwixt
both. The verſes of the Salerline ſchoole are
to be vnderſtood of full ſtrength and powers,
               
                  
                  Fac plagam largam medioc
                        •••
                     ter. 
                        〈…〉
                     
exeat vberius. liberiuſque cruor.
               
               
                  Make well and wide thy blow,
                  That bloud and fumes may largely flow.
               
               
                  Hippocrates ſayth,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  In places where 
                        〈◊〉
                      no danger, and
where the bloud alſo is groſſe, vſe a broader launcer, for
ſo the bloud will paſſe, otherwiſe not but take heed of
going too deepe.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  Fernelius ſheweth ſome dangers,
Vnder the inward vayne lyeth an artery, vnder the
middle a ſinew, and vnder both do lye the tendones of
the muſcles. If any of theſe be pearced, there may
enſue much griefe, and ſometimes great danger.
The cephalica may be opened with leaſt perill of
all the vaynes which appeare in the cub
                     ••
                  e. Now
for the quantity of bloud how much may be taken
at once, I haue had occaſion to declare much already
concerning that poynt, when I intreated in
my former booke of Phlebotomy in particular
diſeaſes, I meane not therefore now to ſtand much
vpon it.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  Montanus vpon the fourteenth Canon
of Auicen, doth appoynt that in old diſeaſes when
by long infirmitie the bloud is become groſſe, we
muſt take but a little bloud at once, and reiterate
the bloud-letting often, and ſtill in the meane time
to nouriſh y• patient with a good moiſtening diet.
If the bloud appeare to be whitiſh, then (as Auicen
will haue it) you muſt let out none at all, leaſt
a cachexia, or bad habit or dropſie do thereupon
enſue.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Inſti
                     
                        •••
                      2. ſect. 5. 
                  Fuchſius doth giue vnto a Chirurgian three
generall notes, whereby he ſhall geſſe when is the
fitteſt time to ſtay the bleeding, firſt, by the change
of bloud: ſecondly, by the force of flowing, waxing
more faint: and thirdly, by the change of the pulſes.
The firſt, that is the change of the bloud both

in colour and in conſiſtence, muſt then eſpecially
be attended and wayted for, when the griefe or
inflammation for which we let bloud, is neere vnto
the place where the vayne is opened.H
                        •
                     ppoc
                        •
                     . lib. 2. 
                        〈…〉
                      10. For Hippocrates
ſheweth, that in a pleuriſie the bloud
which is nigh vnto the inflammation, doth farre
differ from that which is conteyned in other parts
of the body, being by the vehement heate much
altered: ſo that if the bloud of the reſt of the body
be phlegmatick, it will be about the inflammation
red; and if the reſt be red, it will be about the inflammation
aduſt and burnt. This change of the
bloud is not alwayes to be taryed for, for it may be
that either the ſtrength is not able to indure it, or
elſe that the phlegmone is ſuch a maligne and impacted
humour, that it will hardly giue place. In
theſe caſes wee muſt ceaſe before the bloud doe
change, and the reſt is to be withdrawne by a ſecond
phlebotomy. The other note to know when
it is time to ſtay the bloud, is by the violence of the
flowing, now waxen more ſlow & feeble, for that
ſheweth that the ſtrength and powers are ready
to decay,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Iustit. lib. 2. ſect. 5. eſpecially if paleneſſe of the face, and
dazeling of the eyes do begin to draw on. But the
moſt certaine ſigne of all when we muſt ſtay the
bloud, is the changing of the pulſe: for if of thick it
become thinne, if of great it become little, if of vehemently
ſtrong it become weake and obſcure, if
of equall it become vnequall; it preſageth that the
powers are now ready to be diſſolued. The ſafeſt
way in letting bloud is, to be ſure to be within
compaſſe, what wanteth may eaſily be ſupplyed
by reiterating, but what is taken too much can not
ſo eaſily be reſtored. Heere an other doubt may

ariſe, when either for the toughneſſe of the hamour,
or for the weakenes of the party, the bloud
is let not at onc
                     •
                  , but at ſeuerall times, how neere
thoſe times ought one to ſucceede an other. Fern
                        •
                     
                     lius
ſayth,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      lib. 2. met
                        ••
                     d. med
                        •
                     ndt. 
                  In diſeaſes that vniuerſally afflict the body,
the beſt is, to let bloud twiſe in one day: but in the griefes
of particular parts, the reiterating muſt be longer deferred,
to wit, to the ſecond or third day. Ficinus counſaileth
ſuch as by ſtudyes are growne melancholick,
                     
                        〈…〉
                      ſanitate 
                        〈◊〉
                      lib. 1. cap. 22.
to be let bloud if they feele a plenitude, and he
appoynteth it to be done twi
                     •
                  e in one day in the
morning and in the co
                     •
                  ning, but at either time
ſparingly: for he ſayth, bloud is the temperer of melancholy,
the nouriſher of the ſpirits, and the treaſure of
life.
                  Mont. medicin. 
                        〈◊〉
                      part. 3. The like ſpeech hath Auicen in his third canon,
where he adui
                     ••
                  th men that are troubled with
a long lingring diſeaſe not to be too waſtfull of
their bloud, becauſe a long iourney remayneth to
them, and therefore they had neede to gather ſtore
of good ſtrength, he addeth this precept, Keepe
bloud as a pretious treaſure.
                  Galen. lib. 1. ad Glant. cap. 11. In that quartaine ague
which comm
                     •
                  th ex atra bile, and in other infirmities
comming of the like cauſe, ſeeing that the atra
bilis may come as well of bloud or fleame, as of
choler or melancholy, the black bloud ſheweth
that it proceedeth of bloud adu
                     •
                  t, and therefore a
more larger Phlebotomy is permitted vnto it then
vnto any other atra bilis, which ſhall proceede of
choler, fleame, or melancholy aduſt. But otherwiſe
the common opinion of Chirurgians (who thinke
that generally the corrupter the bloud is, the more
plentifully they may let it flow out) is vtterly condemned
by Fernelius, You muſt not when the bloud is
more impure or raw,
                  Feruel. libr. 2. method. medend. cap. 17. 
                  or is estranged and departed from

his owne nature, then take ſo much the more away,
after the manner of common bad Phiſitions: but by
how much more the humours are departed either on
this ſide, or beyond the nature of bloud, ſo much the
more ſparingly and leaſurely you muſt let that bloud
ſ
                        •
                     ow: and when it ſhall be found to be very farre from
the forme and ſhape of bloud, then muſt you altogether
ab
                        •
                     taine from Phlebotomy, for where there is
little good bloud, there muſt needs the ſtrength be
weake. The corrupt bloud doth ſeeme very fit
to be expelled (as Galen ſayth.) That which is
corrupt is againſt nature,
                  Gal. method. 
                        〈◊〉
                      lib. 9. 
                  and that ſheweth that it
ought to be taken away. The conſtitution therefore
of the bodie doth ſhew that this ought to
be our ſcope and drift, to euacuate the matter
either by Phlebotomie, or by purging, but on
the other ſide the weakeneſſe of the powers will
ſuffer neither of them. How muſt we doe then
in theſe great contrarie occaſions? Galen maketh
anſwere,Ibid. lib. 9. 
                        〈…〉
                      M. 
                  We muſt in theſe contrarie occaſions
and drifts by little and little auoyd the bad, and by
little and little restore the good, which healing of
euill humours is called of Phiſitions Epicraſis, or
good tempering of humours. Why doth Galen then
in the ſame leafe a little before in continuall agues
called ſynochi, aduiſe to let bloud 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
vntill the heart faint, as likewiſe he doth
in many great inflammations in his comment
vpon Hippocrates?
                  Hippocrat. 
                        〈◊〉
                      23. 
                        〈…〉
                      lib. 9. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . He ſheweth himſelfe the cauſe
in that place where he intreateth of agues, he
doth appoynt it to quench the vehement inflammation,
and doth meane that it ſhall be as
much as poſſibly the ſtrength can beare. Montanus
diſcourſing vpon the fifth Canon of Auicenna,
                  
ſayth,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   that Galen doth commaund ſometimes
to let bloud vſque ad ſyncopen: but I thinke
that in that poynt either he was deceiued, or elſe
that they which did commit to writing his ſpeeches
(for he wrote little himſelfe) did not well remember
his words. I reade ſometimes in Galen.
that vpon vnſeaſonable and exceſſiue letting of
bloud,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   or any other immoderate euacuation, a
ſyncope or dangerous ſwouning may enſue, but
I can no where finde that he appoynteth to let
bloud vſque ad ſyncopen, vnto a cutting off of all
the powers by ſwouning. The fainting vnto which
in ſome caſes he doth require Phlebotomie to
be extended, is called by Hippocrates and him
not ſyncope,
                     
                        〈…〉
                      239. but ſometimes 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , ſometimes

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and ſometimes 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Some doe make

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to be more particular faintings
of ſome affections and powers of the heart
and brayne, and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to ſignifie a more generall
diſſipation of the vitall ſpirits. But Galens
words do playnely ouerthrow that fond diſtinction.
For hauing named the words 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
hee addeth immediatly: 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .Gala. ad 
                        〈◊〉
                      cap. 14. 
                  Phiſitions are wont to giue both
theſe names to one thing, as they ſignifie indeede
one and the ſame matter. And that they both do
differ from ſyncope, hee doth ſhewe playnely
when he teacheth, that groſſe humours, when
by their toughneſſe they doe obſtruct, or by
their multitude oppreſſe the paſſages of tranſpirations,Gal. method. medendi lib. 12. cap. 
                        •
                     .
they cauſe ſyncopas or ſwounings.
But if thoſe groſſe humours do neither obstruct nor
oppreſſe, then they bring no ſyncopas or ſwounings,

but they bring a certaine faint
                        •
                     es, 
                        〈◊〉
                      the Grecians
call Leipoply
                     •
                  hia, or 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . The 
                     •
                  etting of bloud
euen vnto fainting, which Galen doth allow ſometimes
in great inflammations, and certaine hoat
feuers (as I haue before declared) muſt be done
very warily, and with great conſideration: for many
are the harmes and dangers which may enſue
thereby, if it be raſhly or vnaduiſedly practiſed, as
in one place Galen doth plainely and plentifully
lay open vnto vs:Galen. method. medendt. lib. 9. 
                  I ſaw two men dye in the very
hands of the Phiſitions, fainting indeed away, but neuer
recouering againe. Many although they dye not preſently,
yet afterward they come to it by the decaying of
their powers, and if they had bin euacuated without diſſoluing
the ſtrength they ſhould not haue periſhed. And
ſome alſo their powers being by immoderate euacuation
diſſolued, do fall into a long lingering diſeaſe. Others
for all their life time afterward haue then whole temperature
of their body ouer-much cooled, being neuer able
to recouer that harme which he hath gotten by auoyding
too much bloud. By which coldnes ſome haue liued
afterward ill coloured, and with bad habit of body,
and eaſily annoyed with euery ſmall thing, and others by
the ſame meanes haue bin taken with deadly diſeaſes,
dropſies, ſtreightnes of breath by ſtopping of the lights,
wea
                        ••
                     nes of liuer and ſtomack, apoplexies, and dotings.
There are many vnskilfull Surgeons which doe
thinke and defend that for the quantity of bloud,
how much may be ſpared, they neede no other obſeruation,
but to let the bloud to runne vpon their
nayle, and ſo long as they ſee it to be groſſe and
corrupt, ſo long▪ to let it flow. It they take this
courſe with ſome diſeaſes, they may vtterly ouerthrow
the ſtrength of their patient. They which

haue much corrupt bloud, haue little good; and
they which haue little good bloud, muſt needs
haue little ſtrength; and ſuch as are of weake powers,
may ſoone by a great quantity of bleeding
receiue vnrecouerable miſchiefes.Gal. de ratione curandi per venae ſectionem cap. 6. 
                  Galen ſheweth,
that when it hapneth that crude humours are gathered
in the body, a great heed muſt be taken what quantity
the ſtrength will indure. For the powers being already
diſſolued in ſuch constitutions of crude humours, are
wont by Phlebotomy to fall into ſuch extremities, as out
of which they can neuer againe be recouered. And
therefore a little after he ſheweth what in this caſe
his owne practiſe was:Gal. ibid. cap. 12. 
                  In them which haue a multitude
of raw humours I do auoyd a little bloud, and do
ſtraightway giue a little water and hony well boyled together,
with ſome extenuating thing, as hyſop, wild marierom,
and ſometimes calamint; and then I take away
a little more bloud, ſometimes the ſame day, and
ſometimes the day following, in which giuing againe
ſome of the aforeſaid medicins, I take away bloud againe,
and the third day likewiſe twiſe. Galen often
when he nameth crudities or raw humours, ſpeaketh
not of the two firſt kinds of crudities, to wit,
firſt meates vndigeſted, and ſecondly, when any
hurtfull matter doth not obey the lawes of nature,
(of which two I haue ſpoken already) but of a
third kinde of crudities,In the fift Chapter of this ſecond booke. when any thick or cold
humours do abound in the body, for ſo doth Galen
deſcribe all thoſe humours to be crude or raw
which are in the body beſides bloud,Galen lib. 4. de ſanitate tuenda cap. 4. & 1. de aliment. facul. cap. 2. of a thick or
cold ſubſtance. The more they depart from bloud
the leſſe bloud may be ſpared, and ſometimes they
depart ſo farre from bloud, as in dropſies and in
ſome agues comming of the abundance of raw humours,

that there is no place at all left for Phl
                     •
                  botomy.Maſſaria. pag. 77. Galen. 
                        〈◊〉
                      6.
If in any place Galen doth deny and forbid
letting of bloud in abundāce of corrupt humours,
(as he doth ſometimes,Aph 47. & Comme
                        •
                     t. 
                        〈◊〉
                      2. 
                        〈◊〉
                      8. & lib
                        ••
                     . de ſanitate tuenda. cap. 4. Gal. method. medend. lib. 9. cap. 11. allotting vnto them rather
purgings then phlebotomie) we muſt accompt it
to be done not in reſpect of the vicious humours,
for Phlebotomy is cōmon both to good humours
ouer-much abounding, and to ill humours ouermuch
annoying, it is as Galen and Auicen do make
it, a remedy both againſt the ſuperfluitie of bloud,
and alſo againſt the vices of bloud,Auicen. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 1. fen. 4. cap. 1
                        •
                     . Gal. 
                        〈…〉
                      per venae ſe
                        ••
                      
                     
                        •
                     
                     nem. cap. 9. but Galen doth
prohibit it only in regard of the weakenes of the
ſtrength, for ſo doth he expound himſelfe: Theſe
three ſcopes, to wit, the greatnes of the diſeaſe, the
ſtrength of the powers, and ſlouriſhing age, are ſufficient
for Phlebotom
                        •
                     : for when ſuch a multitude of raw humours

                        ••
                     gathered that it forbiddeth Phlebotomy, yet
th
                        ••
                      my former concluſion is not reprooued, for in ſuch
there is no ſtrength ſit for it.
                  Gal. ibid. cap. 13. But (as he ſayth afterward)
If theſe two ſcopes, to wit, the greatnes of the
diſeaſe, and th
                        •
                      ſtrength of the powers be preſent, there

                        〈◊〉
                      no ſuch or ſo great aboundance of raw humours, as
that it ought to forbid this remedie of Phlebotomy.
Auicen, although 
                     •
                  n ſome cholerick diſeaſes he deny
letting of bloud, and willeth it to be kept for a
treaſure, yet in firmer ſtrength in the cure of a kind
of S.Auicen. lib. 4. f
                        •
                     n. 3. tr. 1. cap. 9. & 10. 
                  Anthonies fier comming of burning citrine
choler mixed with melācholy, ſayth, Neceſſaria eſt
Phlebotomia vt vacu
                        •
                     tur ſanguis cholericus, Phlebotomy
is neceſſary that the cholerick bloud may be
au
                     •
                  yded. Galen alſo alloweth letting of bloud not
only in continuall agues comming of bloud inflamed,
but alſo in that burning feuer called Cauſo,
comming of choler putrifying in the vaynes, as

                  Maſſaria doth prooue out of the ſecond booke de
criſibus,
                  Maſſaria. pag. 82. Gal. com. in 1. aph. 23. and out of his words vpō the Aphoriſmes,
which are theſe: In moſt burning agues letting of
bloud euen vnto fainting doth ſtraightway coole the
whole habit of the body and extinguiſh the feuer, and
alſo in very many the belly is wont to be made ſoluble,
and ſweates are accustomed to flow, by which deede
ſome are altogether deliuered from their ague. And he
doth confirme it alſo by the teſtimonie of the moſt
auncient and excellent Phiſition Philotheus, who
commenting vpon the ſame Aphoriſme, vſeth
theſe words:Philotheus in Comment. in 1. Aph. 23. 
                  In whome we may let bloud euen vnto
fainting, it is manifeſt that it is in them who are ſick of
burning feuers, and yet not them all, but thoſe in whom
the powers are ſtrong. But why dowe let bloud in them
euen vnto fainting, ſeeing that burning feuers are
kindled by humours putrified? The putrefaction conteyneth
two things, to wit, the matter putrified, and the
badnes of the quality. Bloud being let euen vnto fainting,
doth both diminiſh the quantity of the matter, and
moreouer extinguiſh the ſharp and inflaming quality,
for by the fainting of the courage the body is cooled.
And finally he doth conuince the ſame by reaſon,
ſeeing that by bloud breaking out at the noſtrils,
the ſayd burning feuers are oftentimes healed.
Thoſe Phiſitions which are of opinion that in this
burning feuer bloud muſt be let only a little for euentilation
from foure to ſixe ounces, longè citra
lipothymiam,
                  Vide Brigthi therapeuticam in tractatu de cauſone. Vide bic ſupr
                        •
                      pag. 11. farre leſſe then that which doth bring
lipothymye or fainting of courage (whoſe aduiſe
is that which I haue mentioned in the ſecond
Chapter of my firſt booke) I thinke they do counſayle
it chiefely in reſpect of the weakenes of the
powers which oftentimes doth accompany this

feuer, and then they diſſent not much from Philotheus,
who doth not permit lipothymies in all, but
only in them whole vertues and powers are firme
and ſtrong. Whether the humour be more thinne
and cholerick as in cholerick agues, and in phrenzies,
or whether it be more cold or thick, as in apoplexies,
epilepſies, and lethargies, I haue ſhewed
in my firſt booke, that Phlebotomy may haue in
them a profitable vſe.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . 29. 
                  Galen (when all other Phiſitions
withſtood him) did let a woman bloud plē
                  tifully,
when the bloud came out in colour and
thicknes like to liquide pitch or tarre. In euery
opening of a vaine an eſpeciall conſideration muſt
be had what humour it is that doth moſt indanger
the diſeaſe.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . For in ſplenetick infirmities it is profitable
to auoyd well the thick melanecholick bloud,
and to ſtay it if it be thinne, becauſe the thinne
hath a good neceſſary vſe, the better to keepe the
thicker from obſtructions: but ſtill the chiefeſt reſpect
muſt be had of the ſtrength of the party. If
the bloud be not a thick black melancholick bloud
cauſing ſome melancholick diſeaſe, but otherways
corrupted, and greatly degenerating from the nature
of bloud, Phlebotomy alſo may take place,
but warily and ſparingly, and pervices, by little
and little, diminiſhing the ill and reſtoring the
good, euer aſſuring our ſelues that the leſſe ſtore
there is of bloud, the more feeble is the ſtrength,
and in no wiſe thinking that the triall of the bloud
appearing ill vpon the thumbe, may be a ſufficient
warrant to the Surgeon, to cōtinue the more boldly
the bleeding of his patient. Cold conſtitutions
may not endure much diminiſhing of bloud,Hipp. 1. 
                        •
                     p
                        •
                     . 23. and
thoſe lipothymies, which Galen and Hippocrates
                  
do allow ſometimes to coole in extreame heates,
are ſhort faintings for a time and not vtter deiections
and ouerthrowings of the ſtrength and
powers. If the bloud be loth to come, Fuchſius declareth
cheſe helps: firſt, vnlooſe a little the band:
ſecondly, let him clutch ſome thing hard in his
hand drawne together: thirdly, let him force himſelfe
to them and cough, and laſt of all bath the inciſion
with warme water. Some do accompt it the
readieſt way both to make the vayne to appeare
well, and to make the bloud iſſue well, is to lap about
the lower part of the arme from the place of
inciſion downeward a boat linnen cloth three or
foure times folded.
            
            
               CHAP. 9.
               
                  What order muſt be taken with them that are let bloud,
as well in the act it ſelfe to prouent ſ
                        •
                     ounings, as alſo
afterward for their gouernment and diet.
               
               
                  WHen the patient hath bled what is found
to be ſufficient, if there be any danger
of fainting, then muſt his body be placed
in ſuch manner as is moſt 
                     •
                  it for a perfect caſe and
reſt, ſo that no one limme or part may be put to
any labour.Mont. medici vniuerſ. part. 
                  Montanus vpon the tenth Canon of
Auctco
                        ••
                     a doth affirme, that this ſhall be beſt perfourmed
if the party be layd downe vpon a bed
with the face vpward: For all the ſinews in the body
the instruments of motion haue their beginning from
the ioynts of the back-bone, and therefore the ſinews of
him that lyeth vpon the back do reſt, and do ſuffer no
violence.
                  Fuchſius Institut. li
                        •
                      ſect. 5. ca
                        •
                     
                   
                  Fuchſius is of the ſame iudgement, Let

the patient ſo lye with his face vpward, that all the
parts of the body may leane vpon the baſis or groundworke,
to wit, the back-bone.
                  ernelius me
                     
                        •
                     od. medendi br. 2. cap. 16. 
                  Fernelius biddeth, that
if the patient begin to faint away, it will be a good
courſe to ſprinkle a little cold water into the face,
or to put vnto the noſe a cloth or peece of bread
moyſtened in wine and vineger, or by tickling the
iawes within the mouth to prouoke a vomit. But
he ſayth, Praestantiſſimum eſt aegrum prosternere, The
beſt thing is to lay the body downe all along,
meaning no doubt the ſame manner which is already
deſcribed. Though in this caſe of fainting
the party muſt be layd downe, yet muſt he not be
ſuffered immediatly to ſleepe. The Salernitane
ſchoole commendeth reſt, Omnibus apta quies, eſt
motus ſaepe nociuus, yet doth it on the other ſide forbid
ſleeping for ſixe houres after bloud-letting.
               
                  Sanguine ſubtracto ſex herij eſt vigilandum.
               
               The appointing of ſixe houres watching is thought
by many good Phiſitions to be ſomewhat more
then needeth.uchſius instit. b. 2. ſect. 5. 
                        •
                     ap. 12. 
                  Fuchſius requireth that within an
houre or two after bloud-letting the party be refreſhed
with a little foode of good nouriſhment,
and within two houres after (he ſayth) there is nothing
doth hinder but that he may ſleepe, ſo that
they which ſtand by do looke vnto it that he do
not rowle himſelfe vpon that arme in which the
vaine was opened, & that the hands do not looſen
from that place which was pearced.ernel methoi medendi. b. 2. cap. 16. 
                  Fernelius his
opinion is, that in one houre after bleeding the
party may take foode, and within two houres after
he may ſafely ſleepe.
               Further,
                     
                        •
                     uchſ. Instit. 
                        •
                     b. 2. ſect. 5. 
                        ••
                     p. 12. he that is let bloud muſt haue a great
care, that (as Fuchſius ſayth) he auoyd all ſtrong

labours and contentions both of body and of
mind for certaine dayes following, and that he vſe
for a while an exact diet, not beginning raſhly or
greedily with too much at the firſt, but increaſing
by little and little, leaſt if he fall too haſtily to a full
diet, either the naturall heate being diminiſhed be
not able to concoct it, or elſe the vaynes being
made more emptie ſhould draw into themſelues
thoſe vndigeſted crudities.Montan
                        •••
                      in Can. 17. Auicennae medicinae vniuerſalis part. 3. 
                  Montanus interpreting
the ſeuenteenth Canon of Auicen, graunteth, that
they which are of ſtrong powers, and of a hoate
ſtomack muſt be fed, becauſe their hoat body doth
conſume much nouriſhment euery day, but he
ſayth, they muſt be fed with an abiding and ſubstantiall
nouriſhment, not with that meate which is of quick
nouriſhment, becauſe ſuch foode would quickly be connerted
into fumes, and dry away. Giue vnto a countrey
labourer the fleſh of chickens, and it will ſtraightway be
reſolued and turned into fumes and choler. Auicen in
that canon doth appoynt the meate either to be
broyled vpon coales, or to be rosted ſpeedily with a quick
fire, whereby the inward moysture may not be ſo much
conſumed, for in his iudgement, Nulla caro eſt deterior
quam quae paulatim aſſatur, quia interius & exterius
exſiccatur, There is no fleſh worſe then that
which is roſted ouer-ſoftly, becauſe it hath the
moyſture dryed vp as wel inwardly as outwardly,
yet muſt it be ſufficiently either roſted or boyled:
for as Galen ſayth,Gal. lib. 4. de ſauitate tuenda cap. vlt. 
                  It is not poſſible that either bread
too little baked, or fleſh vnperfectly boyled, ſhould be well
and profitably concocted in the ſtomack. His purpoſe
is in that place to ſhew what diet a man muſt
keepe when for ſome inflammation he hath bin
let bloud. Firſt he will haue him for two or three

dayes to abſtaine from wine, and to vſe in the
meane time ſometimes ptiſane, and ſometimes
other drinks moderately cooling, or if in the third
day he take wine, it muſt be ſmall and white, vſing
for a while a diet that ſhall nouriſh good iuices,
but in no wiſe procure ouer-much heate: But
chiefely of all we muſt take heed of nouriſhing againe
too plentifully at the firſt, for they which vpon ſuch euacuations
do returne ſtraightway to their former diet,
haue their habit of body filled with raw humours, which
the whole waight of the body doth draw into it ſelfe before
they can be well digested in the ſtomack and in the
vaynes, and therefore we muſt not fill the body
haſtely after Phlebotomy, nor ouer-charge any
part with more then it may be able well to concoct,
euen as if the body be waſted and conſumed
with long abſtinence, it is not good preſently to
fill it againe too plentifully, for (as Galen ſayth
there) Many when they haue their habite of body extenuated,
vnleſſe they do afterward feede moderately,
they gather many ſuperfluities into the whole habit, and
get thereby no ſmall diſeaſes.
                  
                     
                        •
                     uchſ▪ Instit. 
                        •
                     br. 2. ſect. 5. 
                        •
                     ap. 12. 
                  Fuchſius doth ſharply
condemne the groſſe abuſe amongſt Dutch men,
which would God it were not too common amongſt
vs, together with other the dutch carowſings
and exceſſes: Deteſtable is the cuſtome of
the Germaines, which for the moſt part do neuer
feede more ſumptuouſly, nor drinke more liberally,
then immediately after bloud-letting. And
not only muſt the party that is let bloud be carefull
inwardly for his diet, but alſo outwardly he
muſt apply ſuch fomentations, cataplaſmes, and
oyntments, as are moſt fit for the griefe, for the
which his vayne was opened. For it is a fooliſh

and fond conceipt of many, who thinke that if in
pleuriſies, or other inflammations of the lungs,
liuer, raines, or other parts they once haue a vayne
opened, they neede not then to take any further
care. If there be any ſuch inflammation or impoſtume,
there muſt with Phlebotomy many outward
applications be alſo annexed.M
                        •
                     thodus generalis curandi in flammationes 
                        〈◊〉
                      apostemata. 1. 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      dolorent ſedantia. As firſt anoyntings
and plaſters made of things, called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
anodyna, which do ceaſe payne and griefe, as oyle
of camomill, oyle of dill, meale of barley, meale of
beanes, fengreek, ducks greaſe, capons greaſe, oyle
of ſweete almonds, wormewood, mingling with
them ſome cooling things, as oyle of quinces, oyle
roſet, or oleum omphacinum, vnguentum roſaceum,
or vnguentum ſantalinum. If theſe preuaile not,
then if the impoſtumation haue neede of ſuppurating
to be brought vnto matter (as it hath if the
paine being not able to be aſſwaged do increaſe
more and more, for the augmenting of the paine
ſheweth how long you muſt vſe ſuppurating
things) to help ſuppuratiō, make your cataplaſmes
or oyntments of ſuch things as they call 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,2. per 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      ſuppu
                        •
                     antia.
as oyle of lillyes, freſh butter, hogs greaſe, gooſe
greaſe, mallowes, marſh mallowes, brookelime,
wheate meale, oyle of camomill, oyle of ſweete almonds,
mirth, frankincenſe, and ſafron, or in ſtead
of theſe diachylon cum gummi Vigonis. But with
theſe, if the payne be very great, you muſt alwayes
ioyne ſome aſtringent things, as roſes, plantaine,
the meate of quinces, and the oyle of maſtick.
Whē the matter is fully ripened, which is knowne
by the decreaſing of the payne (for as Hippocrates
ſayth, 2. Aph. 47. While the matter is in ripening,
the paynes and the feuers are greater, then when it is

already ripened,)3. per 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      euelle
                        •
                     tia & extra
                        •
                     entia. then breake it by applying outwardly
ſuch things as are 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , as doues
doung, muſtard ſeed, nettle ſeed, leauen, rootes of
briony, hermodactyls, and old oyle, with a little
turpentine. And at the time of the breaking, take
inwardly ſome of a decoction made of furmiterre,
and the roots of germander, eating ſome ſalt thing
vpon it, and lying downe vpon the ſounder ſide.
Alſo at the ſame time hold in your mouth a pill
made of three parts, hiera picrae, and one part colocynthis,
to cauſe a forcible ſpitting, not 
                     •
                  wallowing
the pill, but holding it awhile in the mouth. When
it is broken (which will appeare by manifeſt ſignes
in the vrine, ſiege, or ſpittle) then vſe thoſe things
which be called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
                     
                        •
                      per 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      antem terentia. which do mundify & haue
a clenſing force, as inwardly hydromel or honyed
water, with the decoction of barley, hyſop, horehound,
chichpeaſe, licorice, and ſome red ſugarcandy
diſſolued into it: And if there be an ague,
then you muſt mingle alſo with theſe things the
foure great cold ſeeds, the ſeeds of cucumbers,
gourds, citruls, and pompions. You may apply
alſo outwardly a plaſter made of ſome of your aforeſayd
decoction, adding to it the meales of
beanes, lupins, and barley. The inflammations of
the lungs (which are knowne by a difficultie of
breathing without payne, and by a grauitie and
diſtenſion of the bulk with a cough, but without
any feeling of griefe, vnleſſe the membranes of the
lungs, being along the breſt knit to the breſt, be
inflamed) are clenſed by ſpittle, and alſo by vrine,
and by ſiege. The inflammations of the hollow
part of the liuer (which are knowne by a great
payne ſomewhat lower, and by an aptnes to vomiting

and loathing of meate, but ioyned with an
immoderate thirſt of drinke) are clenſed beſt by
the ſiege. The gibbus hepatis, or the vpper part of
the liuer bending ſomewhat compaſſe downeward,
ioyning to the midriffe, out of which the
hollow vayne doth iſſue, if it haue an impoſtume,
(which being very great will appeare to the handling,
vnleſſe the body be ouer-fat or fleſhy, or elſe
it is knowne by a payne of the right ſide reaching
vp higher towards the throate, and cauſing much
griefe in fetching breath) is clenſed beſt by vrine.
The inflammations of ye raines (which are knowne
by a payne neerer the back bone, and an aſtoniſhment
of the loynes and thighs on the ſame ſide
that the kidney is inflamed, together with ſome
vomitings, and with vrines, often, but painefull)
when they are fit for clenſing, are clenſed alſo the
ſame way, to wit, by a moderate vſe of the diuretica,
or things cauſing vrine, as the rootes of garden
parſley, Petroſelinum Macedonicum, kneeholme,
and Sperage, or electuarium Iustini, but remembring
ſtill that if there be an ague, you ioyne
with them the aforeſayd great cooling ſeeds, or
the leſſe cooling ſeeds, of lettiſe, endiue, ſcariole,
and purſlayne. If the inflammations be of the
ſpleene (which may be knowne and felt by the
ſwelling of the left hypochondrium, about the ſhort
ribs on the left ſide) and do ſuppurate (which hapneth
very ſeldome) they may clenſe the ſame way
that the liuer doth, but you may do well to adde
to the outward receipts the oyle of capers, and the
oyle of tamariske. If the inflammation be a pleuriſie
(which is knowne by a pricking payne ioyned
with the ſhortnes of breathing, and a cough and

continuall feuer, the pulſe being hard and rough
like a ſaw) you may intermix in the clenſing of it
ſuch things as doe beſt auoyd the cauſe of it. For
Galen ſheweth,Gal. libr. de constitutione artis medicae. Fuchſ. & Trall. capitibus de pleuritide. Trine. in explanatione lib. 2. Galeni de differentijs febr. lect. 44. Trine. de ratione curandi part. corp. aff. lib. 6. cap. 3. Gal. 4. de pulſibus cap. 8. & 12. 
                  Aliam pleuritidem ex ſanguine, aliam
ex bile, aliam ex pituita ortum habere, That
ſome pleuriſies do come by bloud, ſome by choler,
and ſome by fleame. Fuchſius and Trallianus make
ſome to come of melancholy, but Trincauel ſheweth,
that that muſt needs be either neuer, or very
ſeldome, becauſe melancholy is of a thick and
earthly ſubſtance, and can hardly paſſe into that
thick, ſolide and skinnie membrane, which doth
vnderbinde the ribs. He further declareth, that it
commeth moſt often of choler, according to that
aſſertion of Galen, Plerumque pleuritis fit à bilioſo
ſucco, peripneumoniae à pituitoſo, For the moſt part
a pleuriſie commeth of a cholerick humour, and
the inflammation of the lungs of a phlegmatick.
What things do beſt help the auoyding of theſe
humours, you ſhall ſee in the end of the Chapter
next following. Laſt of all, when the matter and
cauſe of impoſtumes is clenſed away, you muſt vſe

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
                     
                        •
                     . per 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      conglutinantia & cicatricem inducentia. things that doe conglutinate,
conſolidate, heale, and cicatrize, as inwardly ſugar
roſate, bole armine prepared, and a little of the
decoction of cumfrey, but outwardly oyle roſet,
oyle of myrtils, and the white of an egge, adding
ſome hypocistis, acatia, coriars ſumach, mastick,
aloe, ſarcocolla, ſanguis draconis, and frankencenſe.
It ſhall be good alſo to drinke ſome of a decoction
of vulnerary herbs, as ſanicle, bugle, ſelfeheale,
herb two pence, virga aurea, great valerian, and
padelion, ſtrayned, and againe boyled with ſome
ſugar.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 10.
               
                  How defects and errours are to be ſupplyed and amended,
and how the Phiſition, or in his abſence the Chirurgian
may know by the bloud being a little while
reſerued, what courſe is further to be taken with
the patient.
               
               
                  
                     GAlen ſheweth, that a certayne young
Phiſition (for according to the french
prouerbe, Ieunes medecins cymitieres
boſſus, vieux procureurs proces tortus,
Young Phiſitions and old aduocates, the one do
make vneeuen churchyards, and the other many
crooked actions) when he had bound the arme of
his patient,Galen▪ method. medendi. lib. 5. and by the binding an artery did appeare
high vp, he ſtrake the artery in ſtead of a
vayne, a yellowiſh bloud and thinne and hoate did
ſtraightwayes ſhoote out, and that with a certaine leaping
and skipping. Galen when hee vnderſtoode
thereby that an artery was cut, did firſt apply a fit
plaſter to ſtay the bleeding, and afterward an other
to heale the inciſion, for he defendeth there
and auoucheth by his owne experience, that a
wounded artery may be healed. Fuchſius doth interpret,
that 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which commeth out of arteryes,
to be ſanguis rubicundus & igneus, a firy red
bloud.Fernel. method. meden d
                        •
                      lib. 2. cap. 16. 
                  Fernelius thinketh, that the fitteſt plaſter
to lay vpon a wounded artery, is, to be made of
aloe, myrrh, franckencenſe, bole armine, and the
white of an egge mingled with the haire of a hare.
Galen appointeth the plaſter to remaine on foure
dayes without remoouing. And in the ſame place

doth charge eſpecially,Gal. therap. meth. lib. 5. that whatſoeuer is layd to
a wounded artery be of a very drying property.
So much doth the artery require more drying things
then the vaynes, as it is by nature of a more dry conſtitution.
If a ſinew or a muſcle be pricked,
                     
                        •
                     uchſ. Instit. lib. 2 ſect. 5. cap. 9. there
will follow an aſtoniſhment and a conuulſion
or crampe, or elſe a great payne, and ſome ſwelling,
and in this caſe Fernelius ſheweth our courſe
muſt be,Fernel. lib. 2. method. medeudi. cap. 15. not to ſuffer the wound to grow together
vntill it be firſt deliuered from the inflammation
and ſwelling, and the way not to ſuffer
it to grow together, is, to bath it with warme
oyle. After three dayes you may ſuffer it to
heale vp, putting vppon it a little turpentine
mingled with Euphorbe.Ibid. cap. 17. 
                  Fernelius immediatly
after doth ſhew,Fuchſ. instit. lib. 2. ſect. 5. cap. 11. as doth likewiſe Fuchſius, how
by the bloud hauing a little while reſted, wee
may much perceiue what humour doth moſt abound
in the patient. When the ſawcers wherein
the bloud is conteyned, haue bin ſet vp ſome
little time in a place where neither wind nor ſunne
beames may come vnto them, if the bloud be thick
and viſcous, ſuch as is the cauſe of obſtructions,
then it will ſoone congeale together, and being
touched, it will ſtick ſomewhat to the finger. If it
be long in congealing and waxing hard, then is
the bloud to be accompted very thinne: but if
when it is cold it waxe not hard at all, then
is it all together either wateriſh, or putrifyed.
Much whayiſh and yellowiſh water ſwimming
vpon or by the bloud, doth ſhew either too much
vſe of drinking, or the liuer weake, or the raynes
feeble and obſtructed. The ſpume or froth that
ſwimmeth vppon it (vnleſſe it come by the violence

of the flowing) it ſheweth the heate and
inflammation of that humour whoſe colour it
caryeth, as the red froth ſignifieth the heate of
bloud, the yellow of choler, the white of fleame,
and the blackiſh and blewiſh of melancholy.
The colour of the bloud continuing red, is a
ſigne of good and profitable bloud. If it be pale,
it ſignifyeth choler; if white, fleame; if greeniſh,
burnt choler; if of a leaden colour, pernicious
melancholy; if it be of diuers colours, then
it is ſhewed that diuers humours doe abound.
There is ſometimes a certayne fatneſſe lyke a
ſpiders webbe ſwimming vpon the bloud: If it
be in a full bodie, it ſignifyth a bloud prone
vnto fatneſſe; but if it be in a leane bodie, it commeth
of the conſuming and waſting thereof.
If the bloud doe ſmell ill (as it falleth out but
ſeldome) it is a ſigne of a very great putrefaction.
Fernelius ſheweth,Fernelius methodi medendi lib. 2. cap. 3. how in the bloud you
may behold all the foure humours, Cum ſanguis
concrenit ſerum per ſumma innatat vrinae haud
abſimile, bilis eſt tenuis & florida concreti ſanguini
                        •
                     
pars ſuprema, melancholia ſubſidet, ſanguis rubentior
& petuita pallidior media tenent: When the
bloud is congealed, there are fiue things offered
vnto our view. The tenue ſerum or whayiſh part
ſwimmeth vpon the top, much like vnto vrine.
The choler is the thinne and flouriſhing higheſt
part of the congealed bloud. The melancholy falleth
downe to the bottom. The bloud is the redder
part, and the fleame is the whiter part of that
which doth poſſeſſe the middeſt betwixt the choler
and the melancholy.Gal. lib. 2. de criſibu
                        •
                     . cap. 12. 
                  Galen ſayth, what ſoeuer
is moſt vnctuous & light in the bloud is choler

but what is moſt groſſe, and as it were dregges,
which by ouer-much heating is dryed vp, that is
melancholy.Fernel. lib. 2. method. medend
                        •
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 17. 
                  Fernelius doth aduiſe vs not only to
marke the colour and contents, but alſo when the
bloud hath ſettled awhile, to compare the little
baſins one with an other. If all be like, it is likely
that all the reſt in the body is like vnto it, and that
only the multitude did offend. For although the
bloud be neuer ſo good, yet if it be in ouer-much
plenty, it may greeue the body, offend the ſenſes,
and bring very many dangers. If all the bloud be
ill, or if the firſt be good and the laſt ill, it ſheweth
that many humours do yet remayne to be rooted
out by good diet, and by fit euacuations, or elſe if
the bloud-letting be in a great inflammation,
then the laſt bloud being worſe then the firſt,
doth often declare, that the very matter of the
diſeaſe is auoyded, and the euacuation made fully
complete. So likewiſe if the laſt bloud be better
then the firſt, it is a good ſigne of a perfect euacuation.
If the bloud be powred afterward into
warme water that the ſubſtances of it may be ſeuered
one from an other,Fernelius ibidem. it will declare much vnto
vs. The whayiſh thinne part will be ſo confounded
with the water, that you can not diſcerne
the one from the other. The thinner part of bloud
will alſo be mingled with the water; but yet ſo,
that by the colour thereof you may haue a good
iudgement of the nature of the humour. The
thicker and fibrous part of the bloud will ſhrinke
to the bottome, which ſhall be iudged to be pure
and agreeable vnto nature, if it be bright, thinne,
ſomewhat whitiſh, and cleauing well together;
but if it be thick, it declareth that the bloud in the

body is thick. If it be black or infected with any
bad colour, it ſheweth with what humour ye bloud
is oppreſſed. If it cleaue not together but do eaſily
fall aſunder, it is an argument of very great putrefaction.
When thus the humour abounding is
knowne, and therewithall a conſideration had of
the ſtate, quality, and nature of the diſeaſe, if
it be found that there is ſtill a continuance of the
payne or griefe, then muſt we either vſe thoſe
things which do gently correct the humour appearing
to abound, or elſe (if time and occaſion
require it) harken to that practiſe which Hippocrates
doth commend in many of his writings (as
Galen doth collect out of him) When humours are
increaſed with a iuſt proportion amongst themſelues,
                  Gal. in comment. 2. Aph. 8.
                  he indeuoureth to bring help by Phlebotomy, but when
ſome one humour amongst the reſt is ſuperfluous, then
doth he giue a fit medicine for the purging of it. If
Choler abounding do yet annoy the body,How to auoyd Choler. then
either delay it with ſyrupus acetoſus, ſyrupe of limons,
and ſyrupe of citrons, or with ſome brothes
or drinks wherein are boyled lettice, purſlaine,
endiue, the white flowers of water-lilly, ſorell,
ſtubwoort, and dandelion, ioyning with them
ſome ſperage and germander; or elſe purge it, either
with ſome ſimple, as Rewbarbe a dramme,
or caſſia an ounce, or manna an ounce and a halfe,
taken either in ſome of the aforeſaid broth, or in
a decoction of tamarinds and prunes, or elſe by a
compound, as ſyrupe of roſes two ounces, or ſyrupus
de cithoreo cum Rhababaro one ounce & a halfe,
or diaprunum compoſitum, or diaprunis laxatiue, or
by electuarium de ſucco roſarum, any of them a little
vnder halfe an ounce. If ſuperfluous fleame do

ſeeme ſtill to bring danger,How to anoyd fleame. then either diminiſh
it without purging, by ſyrupe of hyſop, ſyrupe of
hore hound, ſyrupe of mayden haire, oxymel ſimplex,
oxymel ſquillaticum, and by ptiſanes of barley
water, wherein are boyled ſome elicampane,
foelefoote, licorice, and anniſe ſeede, or elſe purge
it either with ſimples, as with infuſed and ſtrayned
agarick about three drams, or with colocynthis
about twentie graines, or with elaterium as much,
being well gathered light, white and bitter, or
with tithymall leaues dried and prepared, one
dramme, or elſe with ſome compound, as with
the powder of hiera picra made into pils, with the
iuice of baulme or ſage about two drams and a
halfe, or by pils de turbith, or pillulae ſtomachicae, of
either one of them about one dramme, or diacarthami
halfe an ounce. Or if the diſeaſe haue bin ſo
lingering, and the humours be become ſo tough
and clammy, that ſcammoniate things may be vſed,
you may giue of Diaphoenicum, or of electuarium
Indum maius, of either one of them about
halfe an ounce. Where I vſe the word (about) my
meaning is ſtill that in the young, or in the very
weake and feeble you muſt take a little leſſe, and
in the ſtronger ſort a little more then the quantity
here ſpecifyed, but otherwiſe vſually and commonly
to ayme, as neere as may be, to the waight
and doſis here mentioned & preſcribed.How to auoyd melancholy. If melancholy
abounding do ſeeme to aggrauate the impediment,
then either auoyd it without purging
by ſyrupes of borage and bugloſſe, ſyrupe of agrimony,
or ſyrupe of fumiterre, or by ſome broths
or drincks wherein are boyled baulme, roſemary,
and the flowers thereof, tamariske, dodder, hartstoong;

the foure cordiall flowers, to wit, of roſes,
violets, borage, and bugloſſe; alſo capers, and ceterach,
called of ſome fingerferne; or elſe purge it
either by a ſimple, as by Sene in powder one
dramme, or by Sene in decocton halfe an ounce,
or by polypody or epithyme, of either of them about
halfe an ounce, ſteeped, boyled, and wrong
out, or by black Hellebore about halfe a dramme,
or by lapis Armenius waſhed a dramme; or elſe by
ſome compound, as by diaſena Nicholai, ſomewhat
more then halfe an ounce, or confectio Hamec maior
about halfe an ounce, or ſyrupus de pomis Rondelet
                        •
                     
                  
about an ounce and a halfe.How to auoyd mixt humours. If mixt humours
do afflict the body, then either to mitigate them
compound your aforeſayd ſyrupes and decoctions,
taking one moity of one, and an other of an
other, or otherwiſe proportionably mingle them,
as the humours do more or leſſe abound, or elſe to
purge them, do the like by the forenamed purging
receipts, or take of Diacatholicum ſomewhat more
then halfe an ounce, or hiera Ruffi, the quantity of
a cheſnut diſſolued in broth, or in pills take pillulae
aggregatiuae, or pillulae de tribus, of either one of them
about a dramme. At what times theſe and ſuch
other like purgings ſhall be accompted moſt fit,
and what ſeuerall circumſtances are to be obſerued
therein, as well at the very inſtant of the miniſtring
thereof, as alſo in the preparing of the
body before, and the guiding of it after. Theſe are
poynts which I do handle at large in the Cathartice,
or ſecond part of the great Phiſick remedies
mentioned in my Preface: wherein as I haue already
gathered moſt of the chiefeſt 
                     •
                  xiomes and

aphoriſmes out of many famous Phiſitions of all
ages, concerning theſe and ſuch like queſtions appertayning
to the purging of humours, and in
ſome ſort alſo diſpoſed them; ſo do I purpoſe
alſo (godwilling) to deliuer them hereafter
to the view of the world,
as ſoone as leaſure ſhall permit
to tranſcribe, and
friends aduiſe to
publiſh.
               
                  Soli vni, trinoque deo ſit tota tributa
                  Laus, cuius coeptum dextra ſecundet opus.
               
               FINIS.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Index.
            The queſtions and matters concerning letting of
bloud haue no neede of any Index, ſeeing they
are in the Preface to the Reader gathered into
a briefe ſumme, and the Chapters poynted out
where euery particular is handled. But for as
much as many diſeaſes and griefes are touched
here by occaſion and obiter in ſundry ſeuerall
places, that one place may the better explane
an other, and ſometimes alſo ſupply, confirme,
and ſecond one an other; and moreouer that
the Booke may be more readye for the vſe
of the reader, I haue thought good to adde
alphabetically the names of the infirmities and
impediments, for which in theſe two bookes
are found many counſayles and remedies.
            
               A.
               Agues diaries Pag. 13. 4.
               Agues continuall of bloud inflamed p. 6. 70. 108.
               Agues burning p. 11. 12. 113.
               Agues epialae p. 16.
               Agues quotidians p. 65. 17. 4.
               Agues tertians exquiſite p. 16. 17. 21. 22.
               Agues tertians bastard p. 19. 22.
               Agues quartaines p. 18. 16. 21. 23. 4. 107.
               S. Anthonies fire p. 112.
               Apoplexies p. 44.
               Arteries wounded p. 103. & lib. 2. cap. 9.
            
            
               
               B.
               Bladder inſia
                     •
                  ed Pag. 100. 101.
               Bl
                     •
                  ck choler and melancholy▪ h
                     •
                  w differ p. 20. 19.
1
                     ••
                  .
               Bloud abounding how knowne p. 57. 58.
               Bloud ouergroſſe and thick p. 64. 113.
               Bloud corrupt p. 107. 108. 110. 114. See humours
corrupt and raw.
               
                  
                     •
                  urning feuer p. 11. 12. 113.
            
            
               C.
               Cacochymia p. 59. See humours corrupt.
               Cachexia p. 52. See habite bad.
               Choler abounding how knowne pag. 58. & lib. 2.
cap. 10.
               Choler abounding how auoyded and purged booke 2.
Chapt. 10.
               Choler auoyded by bloud-letting p. 22. 27. 112. 113.
               Children what to take in ſteed of letting bloud p. 73. 74.
75. 76. 78.
               Costiueneſſe how holpen by clysters p. 69. 70. 71.
               Co
                     •
                  ick p. 45.
               Concoction wanting how knowne booke 2. chap. 5.
               Conu
                     •
                  lſions p. 43.
               Continuall hoate feuer p. 6. 70. 108.
               Crudities p. 111. See raw humours.
               Crudities how knowne booke 2. chapt. 5.
            
            
               D.
               Diary feuers Pag. 13. 4.
               Dropſey p. 45. 52.
            
            
               
               E.
               Eares payned p. 101.
               Epiala feuer p. 16.
               Epilepſies p. 44.
               Eyes payned p. 10. 1
            
            
               F.
               Falling ſickneſſe p. 44.
               Feuers of ſundry kinds, See Agues.
               Fleame abounding how knowne pag. 58. and booke 2.
chapt. 10.
               Fleame abounding how auoyded and purged p. 67. 69.
and booke 2. chapt. 10.
               Fulneſſe or full habit of body p. 2. 57. 98.
               Fluxes of body p. 79. 80.
            
            
               G.
               Gall of ill constitution p. 63.
               Gout p. 47. 48. 49.
            
            
               H.
               Habite bad p. 52.
               Heart payned p. 100. 101.
               Heart fainting, See ſwounings.
               Head-ach p. 101.
               Head inflamed Pag. 42. 110.
               Hips payned p. 100.
               Humours corrupt and raw whether admit Phlebotomy
p. 51. 52. 60. 65. 66. 67. 71. 107. 108. 110.
111.
            
            
               I.
               Iaundiſe p. 52.
               Inflammations and impostumes how cured booke 2.
chapt. 9.
               
                  
Intemperancy p. 60. and booke 2. chapt. 9.
               Itches p. 51.
            
            
               K.
               Kidneys inflamed cauſing ſtone p. 39. 47. and booke 2.
chapt. 9.
               Kidneys inflamed p. 100. 101.
            
            
               L.
               Legs payned p. 28.
               Liuer hoate and ſtomack cold p. 50.
               Liuer inflamed p. 100. 101.
               Liuer inflamed in cano booke 2. chapt. 9.
               Liuer inflamed in gibbo booke 2. chapt. 9.
               Liuer full of bloud and choler cauſing pleuriſie p. 42.
100.
               Looſeneſſe of body p. 79. 80.
               Lungs inflamed p. 35. 100. 101. and booke 2. chapt. 9.
            
            
               M.
               Melancholy and black choler how differ p. 20. 19.
               Melancholy abounding how knowne p. 58. and booke 2.
chap. 10.
               Melancholy abounding how purged and auoided p. 107.
and booke 2. chap. 10.
               Melancholy windes p. 44.
               Mixt humours how purged booke 2. chapt. 10.
            
            
               N.
               Nostrils bleeding ſometimes ill p. 75. ſometimes good,
p. 39. 40. 114.
            
            
               O.
               Old and lingering diſeaſes p. 105. 107.
               Old age whether to be let bloud or no p. 72. 77.
            
            
               
               P.
               Palſies Pag. 43.
               Phrenzies p. 27.
               Plague or pestilence p. 23. 25. 26.
               Pleuriſie vpon what ſeuerall cauſes it commeth p. 42.
and booke 2. chapt. 9.
               Pleuriſie when and how let bloud in it. p. 31. 35. 37. 72.
98. 99. 106.
               Pleuriſie when not let bloud in it p. 38. 39.
               Pleuriſie how outwardly holpen booke 2. chap. 9.
               Pulſes distempered what ſignifie p. 9. 10. 11. 106. 7.
            
            
               Q.
               Quartaine feuers. p. 16. 18. 21. 23. 4. 107.
               Quinſies p. 29. 98.
               Quotidian feuers p. 65. 17. 4.
            
            
               R.
               Raynes inflamed p. 100. 101.
               Raynes inflamed cauſing ſtone p. 39. 47.
               Raw humours whether admit letting-bloud p. 51. 52.
60. 65. 66. 67. 71. 107. 108. 110. 111.
            
            
               S.
               Scabs p. 51.
               Scuruy p. 53.
               Spleane obstru
                     •
                  ted p. 44. 53. 100. 101.
               Spleane inflamed p. 39. 40. booke 2. chap. 9.
               Splenetick bloud p. 23. 113. 114.
               Spitting bloud p. 34. 38.
               Spirits inflamed p. 7. 9.
               Stone in the raynes p. 39. 101. 100.
               Squinancies p. 29. 98.
               
                  
Stomack weake and looſe Pag. 62.
               Stomack impure p. 64. 69.
               Strength fayling p. 109.
               Sweating ſickneſſe p. 26.
               Swounings p. 62. 63. 79. 109. 110.
               Suffocation p. 2. 35.
            
            
               T.
               Tertian feuer exquiſite p. 16. 17. 21. 22.
               Tertian feuer bastard p. 19. 22.
            
            
               V.
               Vomits how to be made when the ſtomack is impure or
molested with corrupt humours p. 64. 69.
               Vrines betokening crudities booke 2. chapt. 5.
               Vrines deceiuing p. 45.
            
            
               W.
               Women hauing their flowers or with child whether fit
for letting bloud p. 77. 79.
               Women with flowers ſuppreſſed p. 99.
               Wombe inflamed. p. 37. 100.
            
            
               Y
               Yellow and thinne bloud p. 21. 114.
               Yellow iaundiſe p. 52.
            
         
         
            Faults eſcaped.
            Page 2. line 22. for 1. Aph. 1. reade 1. Aph. 3.
            Page 11. line 22. for rough, reade cough.
            Page 71. line 12. for to an ounce and a halfe according,
reade, to an ounce according &c.
            Page 110. line 2. for c
                     •
                  lipſis, reade celyſis.
            
            
         
      
   