
      
         
            
               
               
AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST THE PLAGVE.
OR 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : A Salue for all ſores: Which applied and practiſed, will ſoone awaken the Lords mercy, and ſuddenly cauſe the ſtorms of his iuſt iudgements to vaniſh away.
            
            Deliuered in a Sermon, preached within the Cathedrall Church of Saint Paules, London.
            
            Iehovae liberatori.
            
               LONDON, Printed by M. Fleſher. 1625.
            
         
         
            
            
               TO THE HONOrable, & right worthy Sir Francis Wortley Knight and Baronet, Grace mercie and peace from God our Father and our Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
            
               Right Noble Sir,
            
            
               IF I may be bold to looke ſo high, I dare looke no higher, then your ſelfe in this my Dedication; were I able to bring forth a birth worthy of a higher countenance, to whom ſhould I preſent it, but vnto my gracious Lord of Pembroke, Noſtri hujus ſaeculi miraculum, I am ſure, Reipublicae ſuſtentaculum, vnto whom in ſpem veni, for earthly encouragemēts. But I neuer yet could ſo ouerweene

my owne abilities, as to think their fruits worthy of ſuch a patronage. And I muſt deale plainly with you, I am altogether timerous, (if not a little preſumptuous) to ſhrowde your Honours name in the forhead of ſuch vnliterate lines; yet ſince that not onely your Noble deſires for my good, but alſo your intenſiue & extenſiue exhibition of more then common loue, doe iuſtly challenge ſome teſtification of thankfulneſſe (without which I might rightly incurre Claudius Caeſars cenſure vpon ingratitude) therefore 
                  Ingratos reuocauit in ſeruitutem. Sueton. inſtead of a better acknowledgement, I dedicate this poore widowes mite, this formleſſe firſt borne iſſue, and in that my ſelfe, my beſt deuoted ſeruice to your noble protection. I remember what Socrates did reply to Aeſchines his ſchollar, when being poore he tooke it to heart that he was not able to gratifie him in a more ample manner, An non intelligis
               
               quam magnum munus mihi dediſti? niſi forte teipſum parui aeſtimas; Doeſt thou not know (ſaith his Maſter) how great a gift thou haſt giuen mee? belike thou accounteſt thy ſelfe little worth. Implying that hee accounted his gift (though poore) more precious than theirs who were rich; becauſe (though his gift was but very ſmall) yet he caſt in all that he had; Likewiſe it is granted that there is no proportion betweene ſuch a ſeeming ſomething, ſuch a leſſe then nothing as this, and the great loue & obſeruance which you haue condignlie merited at my hands; Yet ſeeing the Moraliſt tells mee, that where onely the qualitie of the affection and not the quantity of the preſent is to bee attended: Modicum non differt à magno, it skils not whether the preſent bee great or ſmall, ſo that your affection may alwaies reſt beyond deſert, and

gracious acceptance, farre exceeding expectation, in which hope reſting, I craue leaue for writing, and take leaue of writing: praying God to bleſſe you ſtill in this life, and to crowne you with bleſſedneſſe it ſelfe in the life to come.
            
               Your Honours
in loue and duty,
Tho: Haſtler.
            
         
         
            Ad Lectorem.
            Scripta vide; monituſ
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                caue: cupit ipſe moneri,
            Sed non morderi. Neu fallat Nominis vmbra:
            Quaerito non a quo, ſed quae ſint ſcripta: faueto.
            Mente bona ſtudui prodeſſe, fruare: Ualeto. Aug. ad Licent. Epiſt. 41.
               
            
            
               Servus tuus peripſum, & conſervus ſub ipſo,
T. H.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            AN ANTIDOTE againſt the Plague.
            
            
               Conf
                     •••…
                   out of Math. 8. 
                     ••
                  rſe 25.
               Then his Diſciples came vnto him, and awoke him, ſaying, Lord ſaue vs, wee periſh.
            
            
               CHriſt being wonderfull in his Natiuity, wonderful in his Aſcenſion, and wonderfull in his Transfiguration, is here 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , beyond admiration by his miraculous works.

In this Chapter are ſpecified 4. ſeuerall miracles firſt, the cleanſing of a leprous man, 2 the curing of a woman troubled with a feuer, 3 the healing of the Centurions ſeruant, and laſtly, the ſtrange appeaſing of the wind: & therefore this is rightly called by S. Ambroſe, Scriptura miraculoſa. the miraculous Scri
                  •••••
               . This miracle is record
                  ••
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                ſuch as are either ſicke, or troubled, or oppreſſed, or beſet wth any danger, that whatſoeuer ſtorme of aduerſity ſhall ſtrike our ſailes, or what calamitie ſoeuer ſhal befall vs, we may remember, that the bleſſed Diſciples, euen the neereſt and deareſt to our Lord Ieſus, haue taſted of the ſame whip afore vs; therefore in thē, as it were in a Chriſtall Glaſſe, we may view the common ſtate of Chriſts Church militant: It is like the Arke that floated vpon

the waters, like the Lilly, that groweth among the thorns, like the buſh that burnt, and was not conſumed, like Chriſts ſhippe, in this place, couered ouer with waues, and yet not ſuncke, praemuntur iuſti, vt preſſi clament, clamantes exaudiantur, exauditi gloriſicent Deum, ſaith Leo the firſt, the righteous are therefore preſſed with ſore afflictions, that they might cry vnto the Lord, and crying might be heard, and heard might glorifie God, peſſima neceſſitas, optima or andi magiſtra, ſaith Bernard, the ſharpeſt Bernard de pug ſpirit. perplexitie is the beſt Schoolemaſter or miſtreſſe of Prayer. When the Diſciples once perceiued, that there was 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : a mightie ſtorme, a ſhaking tempeſt, which ſtrongly had inuironed them: when the Lord had ſent forth 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , a vehement whirlewind, or as Lorinus
               
termeth it, plurium conflictū ventorum, a conflict of many winds, which all at once ſmote the ſhippe on euery part, and broght the ſwelling waues euery way vpon it, as if in an inſtant they would haue buried both ſhip and paſſengers in the ſurges: when the mercileſſe Ocean vnder them was thus billowing, the brittle ſhip about them reeling, the Mariners for feare of ſhipwracke, lamentably ſhreeking, and Chriſt their only hope and helpe in the ſterne faſt ſleeping, when this great ieopardie had euen almoſt ſeized on them all, Then his Diſciples came vnto him, and awoke him, ſaying, Lord ſaue vs, we periſh. In which words (not tying my ſelfe to tread preciſely in the exact ſteps of logicall rules) for our better inſtruction, and further light, we may obſerue foure generalls; firſt,

who procured this calme, (his Diſciples) ſecondly, of whom Diuiſion, parts 4. Quis, à quo, quid, quomodo.
                did they procure it, of Chriſt, (they came to him) thirdly, the effect of their comming, (they awoke him,) laſtly, the manner how they did awaken him, by prayer: the forme which they vſed being here expreſſed, Lord ſaue vs, we periſh. Vpon all theſe I intend to treat ſomewhat orderly and briefly, according to Gods aſſiſtance, and the times permittance. To begin with the firſt: Then his Diſciples came to him, (then) that is, when the ſea thus raged, the ſhip thus toſſed, the tacklings thus ſhattered, the paſſengers thus trembled and ſhaked, then and not afore, the Diſciples came to him: firſt, they would make tryall, whether the winds would ceaſe or decreaſe naturally, and the ſtormes calme of themſelues, but when they

ſaw all dangers increaſed in greater extremitie, and more grieuous vehemencie, when they thought themſelues paſt all hope of recouery, when they deſpaired of their owne ſafetie, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , then, when the laſt waue was ready to ſweepe them away, They came vnto him, and awoke him, ſaying, Lord ſaue vs, wee periſh. Diſcipulorum ſerotina mora, ſit Chriſtianorum maxima cura: twas an ancient Fathers obſeruation vpon this place. 1 Obſeruation.
               The Diſciples moſt dangerous delay, muſt miniſter a great caution to all Chriſtians, willing them to be wary in the timous preuention both of preſent and future euills. Time me thinkes ſhould yeeld vs (in theſe our contagious and deadly times) a ſtrong perſwaſion of a timely returne vnto the right way: wee are all out by ſinne, and therefore wee

muſt beginne againe by repentance, that wee may regaine our peace with God in time: for when the time is paſt, periit ſpes noſtra, our hope is gone, now it is time, yea time, the appointed time is come, momenti tranſitus, anni tranſitus, aeui tranſitus, once loſt, and euer loſt. Will you ſhew mercy to your ſoules, by repenting your ſinnes? Deferre not from day to day, Deterrior poſterior dies, ſaith deuout Bernard, delay is dangerous, the longer the worſe: ſay not with thy ſelfe, I will amend hereafter, for how knoweſt thou, whether hereafter thy heart ſhall be hardned, as was Pharaohs, Exod, 14, 4. or whether the grace of the Holy Ghoſt ſhall bee taken from thee as it was from Saul. 1 Sam. 16, 14. or whether thou ſhalt repent, and lament in vaine, as did Eſau, Heb. 12. 17. or whether

thou ſhalt crie peccaui too late with Iudas, Math. 27. 4. It is true, beloued, that our ſins ſhall bee pardoned whenſoeuer wee repent: but wee cannot repent, whenſoeuer we will, becauſe repentance is the gift of God, and wee haue not God at our command, but as Saint Auguſtine truly ſaith, Qui dat poenitenti veniam, non ſemper dat peccanti poenitentiam. God which alwayes pardoneth the repentant ſinner, doth not alwaies giue repentāce vnto ſinners, but as they neglected him, ſo he reiecteth them, and ſuffereth them to heape vnto themſelues wrath againſt the day of wrath.
            Strike therefore whileſt the yron is hote, make hay while the Sun ſhineth, hoyſe vp ſailes whiles the wind bloweth, time and tide tarie for no man: Behold now the accepted time, behold

now the day of ſaluation, 2 Cor. 6. 2. Now God calleth vs per beneficia, per flagella, per praedicatores, by his benefits, by his plagues and puniſhments, by his Embaſſadors, all continually wooing vs, to apply that moſt ſoueraigne medicine of repentance to theſe bitter wounds, which the ſting of ſin hath made in our ſoules. Oh! let vs not deferre, and put off this neceſſarie cure! One hath ſaid verie well: Qui veniam per poenitentiam 
               Diez. loco de poenitentia. 
               repromiſit, diem craſtinam ad poenitentiam non promiſit. He that hath promiſed to pardon vs, if wee repent, hath not promiſed vs, that to morrow wee ſhall repent. Wherefore let vs lay aſide all excuſes and delayes, leſt by little and little wee grow key cold in loue, & ruſtie in ſin: prolong not an houre, nay, not a moment, for the clouds of Gods

ance may in an inſtant ouer-caſt thy ſoule, and in ictu oculi in the twinckling of an eye, the plague tokens of the Lords wrath may take a deadly impreſſion in thy body, and then furor arma miniſtrat, his fierce anger will quickly afford him weapons, & as Lactantius ſaith, tarditatem irae, grauitate ſupplicij compenſabit, he will requite the ſlowneſſe of his wrath with the ſeueritie of his vengeance: for quanto diutiùs Deus expectat, tanto grauiùs vindicat: 
               
                  Aug. ſerm. 102 de tempore.
                how much the longer God expects and waits for our conuerſion, ſo much the more grieuouſly wil he be auenged vpon vs, if we repent nor. Serior eſſe ſolet vindicta, ſeuerior: God vſeth to come to puniſh on leaden feet, but hee payeth home with iron hands, hee will reach them far, and he will ſmite them full. And therefore to day if you

will heare his voice harden not your hearts, deferre not till the laſt gaſpe, for, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : vnſeaſonable good is not good at all, vntimely ſacrifice auaileth not, prayer, that commeth out of time, is like a meſſe of meat ſet vpon the graue when the dead is no what the better for it.
            How might I (beloued) vrge vnto you in all your weightieſt affaires the preſenteſt prenſation, and ſpeedieſt apprehenſion of the very forelocke of Time, but Cintheus aurem vellit, Time calls mee to the purſuit of my text.
            It followeth in theſe words, (his Diſciples) then his Diſciples came to him: Diſciple, is properly a Latine word, and doth ſignifie in Engliſh a Scholar, or learner: from the verbe Diſco. The originall alſo is of the ſame 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Diſco.
                expreſſion: ſo that in a generall

nification, all that profeſſed the Goſpel of Chriſt, were called his Diſciples: but more ſtrictly they onely did beare the name of his Diſciples, who were learners of his Doctrine, Profeſſors of his life & conuerſation, & Preachers of both to others: and they were of two ſorts; firſt, and of a lower order, the 70 ſent forth two and two before his face, into euery city, & place, whither he himſelf would come to preach the Goſpell, and worke miracles, as they are ſpecified by the Euangeliſt, Lu. 10. 1. who theſe 70 Diſciples were though Euſebius, Epiphanius, and others, tell vs; yet in the Goſpell their names are concealed, and Chriſt bade them reioyce, that their names were written in Heauen, Luke 10. 20.
            The other, and higher order, were the twelue Apoſtles, many times called his Diſciples, and

made knowne by their names. Mat. 10. 1. Mar. 315. Luk. 9. 1, 5. 
               Tertullian, Ierom, and other learned Diuines, ſay; herein the truth anſwered ancient types, 
                  Tertul. cont. Marci. l. 4. cap. 24. both of the twelue Patriarkes, and ſeuentie Elders, called their Sanedrim, as ſome, the 70 ſoules that came with Iacob into Aegypt: 
                  Ierom, Epiſt ad Fabi olam Manſio. 6. others, the twelue fountaines of Water, and ſeuentie Palme-trees in Elim. Who thoſe Diſciples were that came to Chriſt by Prayer in this extremitie of perill, is a queſtion, becauſe the text doth not cleare it: but out of all doubt they were Diſciples, not one, or two, but (as farre as may bee gathered) euen all the Apoſtles; and great reaſon, for as the penitent theife ſaid to his fellow, they were all in the ſame condēnation: if the Luk 23. 40 ſhip had ſuncke into the waues they had all periſhed, Lord, ſaue vs, we periſh. And therefore not

onely Peter, Iames and Iohn, though counted Pillars, and in Gal. 2. 9. Mat. 17. 1. Mar. 5. 37. many things preferred before the reſt, but all, goe to Chriſt to further the common good, and to helpe by their prayers to procure the common ſaluation. Yet take notice by the way, that as all the Diſciples came, ſo none but Diſciples came, and their comming was not tam paſſibus corporis, quam fide cordis, ſaith venerable Beda: not ſo much with the feet of their bodies, as by the faith of their hearts: hereby giuing vs to vnderſtand 2 Obſeruation.
                whoſe prayers are ſo powerfull with God to remoue both a publike and priuate calamitie, either from thēſelues or others: not the prayers of enemies to God, and alienates from the houſe of Iſrael, but of faithfull friends, fauourites and conſtant followers of our bleſſed Sauiour

The Lord heareth the praiers of the righteous, and his eares are open to their cries, he will fulfill the deſires of ſuch as feare him, he is nigh to ſuch as call on him in faith, Pſal. 145, 18. quia juxta menſuram fidei, erit menſura impetrandi, ſaith Ambroſe, becauſe the more faith we haue, the more grace wee ſhall receiue: therefore Chriſt teacheth vs to ſay Our Father, to make vs confident of obtaining, and concludeth with Amen, ſignificare indubitanter à Domino conferri, quod fide petitur, to ſignifie, that wee ſhall vndoubtedly receiue whatſoeuer we faithfully deſire, ſaith Saint Auguſtine.
            
            It was Abraham the friend of Iam 2. 23. Gen. 18. Penult. Heb. 3. 6: Exo. 32. 10. God that preuailed ſo much wth his prayer for the Sodomites. It was his faithfull ſeruant Moſes, would not let him alone, but ſtood vp in the breach, & turn'd

away Gods anger, that he could not deſtroy the people, as he ſaid Pſal: 106. 23. It was religious Ioſuah, that by his prayer commanded the Sunne and Moone to ſtand in the firmament Ioſh. 10. 12. It was feruent Elijah whoſe tongue was Froenum coeli ſaith Auſtin, the bridle of heauen; opening, and ſhutting it by Iam 5. 17. Numb. 25. 13. Pſal. 106. 30. his prayer. It was zealous Phineas, that prayed and ſo the plague ceaſed. And the Apoſtle concludeth in generall, it is the praier of the righteous man that ſo much auaileth, Iam. 5. 16. Tū
                  cor noſtrum fiduciam in oratione accepit, cum ſibi vitae prauitas nulla contradicit, therefore the godly haue confidence that God will bee anſwerable to their requeſts, becauſe they are correſpondent to his will, and then doe they ſtedfaſtly rely vpon the grant of their Petitions, when

there is no prauity of life, nor any wickedneſſe of conuerſation to contradict their profeſſion ſaith Gregory in his Morals: and therefore St. Baſil ſaith, that a prayer ſhould bee filled vp, non tam ſyllabis, quam operibus, not ſo much wth words, as wth works; becauſe God heareth not ſinners Acts 12. 7. but their beſt prayers (as the Prophet ſpeaketh) are Pſal. 109, 6 turned into ſin, and when they ſend thē vp to the Almighty for 
                  Oratio de carne pudica, de anima innocenti, de ſpiritu ſancto offerenda. Tertul. Apolog. cap, 30. a bliſſe, they double but a curſe, for vſing his ſacred name in their mouthes, and hating to be reformed: no matter therefore whether the wicked pray or no? yea all their faſting, praying, and crying, not worth a ſtraw, but oh ye meeke, ye true Diſciples, yee that haue your hearts ſprinkled from an euill conſcience, and bodies waſhed with pure water; ye Heb. 10. 11. that haue cleane hands & a pure Pſal. 24. 4.
               
heart, yee are Gods fauourites, pray for a calme; ye are the Chariots 2 king 2. 12. and horſmen of Iſrael, ſtand in the gap day and night, keepe not ſilence, and giue the Lord no reſt, till hee haue mercy on Eſay 62. 6. Sion, and hath taken his ſore plague from Ieruſalem: So much for the firſt part, viz, the perſons procuring this calme (his Diſciples.)
            
            Now ſecondly, to whom goe they? where doe they ſeeke it? (to him,) that is, to Chriſt, their Lord and Maſter. The Heatheniſh Ionah 1. 5. Mariners in Ionahs ſtorme did cry euery man to his God. In nothing were the Gentiles more ſottiſh then in this, aſcribing particular tutelar gods, to particular places: Babylon had Belus; Egypt, Iſis; Athens had Minerua; and Epheſus, Diana: The Caldeans had Baal; Sidonians Aſhteroth; Ammonits Moloch
               
or Milcom; Moabites, Chamos; Syrians, Rimmon; and Philiſtims, Dagon: Yea, the Elements had Other Countries had other gods, the Reliques whereof are recorded by Tertullian in Apol. c. 23. Angelici quia in Angelorum cultum inclinati. Ang. de bar. c. 39. Angelici vocati, quia angeles colunt. Iſidor. Origen. l. 
                  
                     •
                  . c. s.
                their ſeuerall gods, to rule ouer them: as the Heauen had Iupiter, the Aire Iuno, the Sea Neptune, & Hell Pluto: yea, for euery purpoſe & occaſion, for euery time & ſeaſon, they had one god or other to call vpon. And doe not the Antichriſtian Angelites, or Angeliques rather (for ſo doth Saint Auguſtine, and Iſidore name thoſe heretiks, that either did adore, or were inclined to the worſhip of Angels) parallel the Ethnicks in euery reſpect? nay, doe they not tranſcend them in folly, as much as their Hyperdulia to the Virgin Mary, doth their Dulia to common Saints? Surely many learned Authors will make thē confeſſe no leſſe: for what Arithmetician is ſo perfect in the

calculations of the Algebra, that I ooke Francis de Croy. G. ARTH. in his three Cōformities. cap 4, 5. he can number the infiniteneſſe of diuers Patrons, Aduocates, and tutelar Saints, whom they haue canonized, for the vſe of euerie Countrey, place, creature, and diſeaſe. Our Diſciples are better taught (Poperie was not then hatched, nor this point of invocation knowne in the Church, for the ſpace of 360 yeares together after the birth of our Sauiour) they doe not in this dangerous ſtorme and tempeſt, invocate Saint Grache, St. Barbara, Saint Alivirgo, Saint Andoche, or Saint Nicholas: no nor Noah, Moſes, or Ionah, who had beene in dangered by Seas, and waters before, but they come to Chriſt the true and only Lord of Sea, and Land, and all: whoſe Preſident muſt bee our imitation, whoſe patterne 3 Obſeruation.
                muſt be our direction, guiding

vs to call on God onely in our dayes of trouble, that hee may heare vs, and we may praiſe his moſt glorious name. Rome would make vs beleeue, that during the time of Peſtilence wee muſt pray vnto none but Saint Sebaſtian, and his ſucceſſor Saint The latter peſtilent God is worſhipped in Venice.
                
               Roche, Saints inuented to intercede againſt ſuch a deadly diſeaſe: wilfully and directly oppoſing & contradicting the cō
               mand and counſell of the Lord of Hoſtes, Pſal. 50. 15. Call on me in the day of thy trouble, & I will deliuer thee: Athanaſius hath obſerued that Dauid, 
               
                  Athan. 
                        •
                     rat. 4. cont. Arian pag. 260 though oftentimes plunged into many perplexities, and beſet with thoſe prim weapons of the Lords wrath, the ſword, famine and peſtilence, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : yet hee neuer prayed vnto any other,

but God himſelfe for his deliuerance. Could Iſis or any other God or goddeſſe haue freed Pharaohs land from thoſe ten plagues, ſent vpon them for open rebellion? ſurely then the Magicians might haue preuailed: but that Iehouah who was the Egyptians onely puniſher, was the Iſraelites onely deliuerer: and the ſame Lord, whoſe iuſtice was the reuenger of our ſinnes by this mortall diſeaſe; his all-ſufficient mercy can onely ſuccour, aide and deliuer vs. And therefore let vs all with weeping, faſting and praying, returne vnto God, and ſay with Saint Auguſtine, Cui alteri praeter 
               
                  Aug. Confeſſ. lib. 1. cap. 5. 
               te clamabimus; To whom elſe ſhould wee cry in our ſore afflictions beſides thee: and with Chryſoſtome, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ; 
                  Chryſoſt. in 1 Cor. Hom. 1. Let vs not mediate this Saint, or that

Saint, this Angell, or that Angel, but onely the name of the Lord Ieſus.
            There are three vnanſwerable Reaſons 3. reaſons why we ſhould only pray to God; firſt, becauſe hee 1. Becauſe he is onely omniſcient onely is omniſcient, that is, ſuch a one, as knoweth all things: he that heareth our prayers muſt be able to ſearch the ſecrets of our hearts, and diſcerne the inward diſpoſition of our ſoules, for the pouring out of good words, & the offering vp of externall ſighes and teares, are but the carkaſſe only of a true praier; the life there of conſiſteth in the pouring out of the very ſoule it Pſal. 62. 8. 1 Sam. 1. 13, 15. Rom. 8. 26. Rom 8. 27. ſelfe, and the ſending vp of thoſe ſecret groant of the ſpirit which cannot be vttered. But the Godhead onely ſearcheth the hearts, and onely hee knoweth what is minde of the ſpirit: he heareth in Heauen his dwelling place,

and giueth to euery man according to his wayes, for hee, euen hee onely knoweth the hearts of all the children of men, as Solamon teacheth vs in the prayer, 2 Chron. 6. 30. which hee made at the Dedication of the Temple. May not therefore Romiſh Doctors worthilie bee taxed, from whom mentall prayers are preſented to the Saints as well as vocall: and with whom they are beleeued to receiue both the one and the other.
            Me thinkes Anſelmus Laudunenſis in his interlineall Gloſſe vpon that Text, Abraham is 
               
                  Auguſtinus dicit, quia mortut neſciunt, eti am ſancti, quid agant vivi, etiam eorum ſil
                        ••
                      Gloſſ. interlineal. in Eſai. 63. 
               ignorant of vs, and Iſrael knoweth vs not, (Eſa. 63. 16.) ſhould make them bluſh for ſhame, where he noteth, that Auguſtine ſayth, that the dead, euen the Saints, doe not know what the liuing doe, no not their owne ſonnes: with whom concordeth

               Hugo de Sancto Victore, in his booke de ſpiritu & anima, 
               
                  Aug de cura pro mortuis cap. 13. 
               cap. 29. Ibi ſunt ſpiritus defunctorum, vbi non vident quaecun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   aguntur, aut eveniunt in iſta vita hominibus. The ſpirits of the dead bee there, where they doe neither ſee, nor heare the things that are done or fall out vnto men in this life. And if they are ignorant of outward acts and geſtures, then much more of inward requeſts and motions: therefore ſeeing, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , God alone ſearcheth the reines, and beholdeth the hidden things, as Athanaſius ſpeaketh; Let vs conclude this reaſon with that golden ſentence of Dauid, O thou that heareſt prayer, vnto thee Pſal 65. 2. ſhall all fleſh come.
            Secondly, we muſt call onely vpon God, becauſe hee onely is omnipotent, which can onely

helpe vs. None but the Almightie could haue deliuered Iſrael out of Egypt, that houſe of bondage and furnace of affliction: Exod. 13. 3 
               Daniel out of the Lions Dan. 6. 5, 13, 22, 28. Zach. 3. 2, 
                     
                        •
                     d 5. denne: Iehoſhua out of that long Captiuitie of the Iewes: Ioſeph out of the pit, ſlauery, and falſe ſlanders: Moſes, Ieremie, Paul and Peter out of their varietie of perſecutions and troubles: And therefore thoſe Prophets, Apoſtles, and holy men of God did cry vnto God onely, to ſaue and deliuer them.
            A third reaſon as pregnant and forcible as the two former, is obſerued by Saint Auguſtine, Quoniam creaturae exhiberemus 
               
                  Aug lib. 1. 
                     
                        •
                     ont. Max.
                
               cam ſeruitutem, quae vni tantum debetur Deo: becauſe in ſo doing we ſhould wrong our ſelues in giuing that to creatures, weh is due onely to the Creator: but why ſhould I alledge any mortall

men, when as all Chriſtians haue beene taught from God himſelfe, that no part of his worſhip is to bee communicated vnto any creature: For it is written, Math. 4. 10. Thou ſhalt worſhip the Lord thy God, and him onely ſhalt thou ſerue. But prayer is ſuch a principall part of this ſeruice, that it is vſually put for the whole, or at leaſt, as Lactantius doth moſt truly ſay, Summus colendi 
               
                  Lactant. de vero cultu. l 6. c. 25. f. 399. 
               Dei ritus eſt, exore iuſti hominis ad Deum directa laudatio: the chiefeſt part of Gods worſhip is an humble faithfull prayer and praiſes out of the mouth of a righteous man: and therefore Saint Paul ſetting downe the whole armour of a Chriſtian, putteth prayer as the chiefeſt part of all: and ſo Zanchius ſaith 
                  Zanch. in c. 6. ad Eph.
                that this is Optimum genus, ideo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   vltimo ab Apoſtolo armaturae explicatum;
               
the beſt part of all our Chriſtian weapons, and therefore laſt expreſſed by the Apoſtle, becauſe that vnleſſe Gods helpe be craued by prayer, reliqua arma parum proſunt, all the other armour will auaile vs nothing: and therefore Clemens Alexandrinus might very well conclude, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ; 
                  Clem. Alex. lib. 7. ſtromat.
                Wee doe not without cauſe honour God by prayer, and with righteouſneſſe ſend vp this beſt and holieſt ſacrifice. Wherunto learned Ignatius hath added a monon in his ſixt Epiſtle to Philadelphia, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ; haue God alone before your eyes in your praiers: and great reaſon, for to be prayed vnto, is ſo proper vnto a Deitie, that to giue it to any creature

is truly iudged ſacrilegious impietie, which robs God of his glorie, Chriſt of his office, & the agent himſelfe of ſaluation: and God himſelfe, to ſignifie no leſſe to the whole generation of Adam, hath giuen the publike place of his worſhip the denomination Eſay. 56. 7. For denominatio fit à principaliore cauſa.
                of the Houſe of Prayer.
            And therefore concerning the bleſſed Virgin, wee honor her name, wee reuerence her memoriall, and with all generations wee call her bleſſed: but to pray vnto her wee may boldly ſay with Saint Bernard, libenter certe glorioſa Uirgo tali honore carebit, The glorious Virgin is willingly content to want ſuch honour.
            Likewiſe of the bleſſed Angels and Saints, wee gladly confeſſe, that their commemoration, is like the compoſition

of the perfume, that is made by the Art of the Apothecarie; it is as ſweet as honey in all our mouthes, and more delightfull then Muſicke at a banquet of Wine: and as for the triumphant Saints, whileſt that they were concumbitants in the Church militant, wee willingly did enioy them as our fellowſouldiers, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                ſtriuing Ro. 15. 30. together with vs, and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , helping together with their 2 Cor. 1. 11. prayers to God for vs, yea, and being receiued vp vnto glorie, Honorandi ſunt propter imitationem, non adorandi propter religionem; they are to bee honoured for imitation, not to bee adored 
                  Vide Aug. lib. de quantitale anima & de moribus Eccleſ. Catholica, et Manieh lib. 1. cap. 30. for religion, ſaith Saint Auguſtine: to inuocate any of them wee haue neither precept from God, nor practice in the ancient Church, nor promiſe in Gods

word, to bee heard, and they themſelues cannot poſſibly deſerue it, neyther doe they in the leaſt manner deſire it. But if it were poſſible for them to heare ſuch vnlawfull prayers of men, they would with both hands (as wee ſay) put them from them, and labor to purge themſelues from ſuch flat Idolatry, with their ſong of obedience, Not vnto vs Lord, not vnto vs, 
               Pſal. 115. 1. 
               but to thy name be ſuch honour aſcribed.
            
            But our Romiſh Doctors, to maintaine their inuocations of celeſtiall Spirits, do cozen ſimple people now a daies, (as their predeceſſors did the Chriſtians in the Apoſtles times) vnder the Col. 2. 18. pretence of humilitie, ſaying, Uide Theod. ibid, that the God of al things was inuiſible & inacceſsible, & incomprehenſible: and therefore (as

               Theodoret teſtifieth) they counſelled their followers to procure Gods fauour by the meanes of Angels: like as the heathen Idolaters, to couer the ſhame of their neglecting of God, were wont, miſer a vti excuſatione, dicentes, 
               
                  Ambr. in Rom. cap. 1. 
               Per iſtos poſſe ire ad Deum, ſicut per Comites pervenitur ad Regem, ſaith Ambroſe, to vſe this miſerable excuſe, that by theſe they might goe to God, as by Officers we goe to the King. The very ſelfe ſame rag our Romaniſts haue borrowed from them to couer their ſuperſtition with, that the wickednes thereof might not appeare. But Saint Ambroſe hath met well with them, and ſufficiently diſcouered the vanitie of ſuch a groſſe and carnall imagination: Men (ſaith he) go to Kings by Courtiers, quia homo vti
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   eſt Rex, becauſe

the King is but a man; ad Deum autem quem nihil latet promerendum 
               
                  Copioſiùs legas apud Ambr. in Rom. cap. 1. 
               ſuffragatore non opus eſt, ſed mente devota; but as for the Lord, from whom nothing is hid, wee need no ſpokeſ man to make him fauorable vnto vs, onely there is required a deuout minde. But aboue all others, S. Chryſoſtome may ſuffice an indifferent Reader, daſhing all ſuch replies with this full anſwer, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , 
                  
                     Chryſoſt. in dimiſſion. Chananaea. Tom. 5. edit. Savig. pag. 195.
                  
                     Vide cund. Serm. 7. de poenitent. Tom. 6. edit. Savil. pag. 802. & in Pſal. 4:
                &c. God is alwayes neere (ſaith he.) If thou wilt intreat man, thou askeſt what he is adoing, and he is aſleepe, hee is not at leaſure, or the ſeruant giueth thee no anſwer: 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , but with God there is none of theſe things. Whitherſoeuer thou goeſt and calleſt, hee heareth: there is no

want of leiſure, nor a mediator, nor a ſeruant that keepeth thee off: 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ; ſay, Haue mercy vpon mee, and preſently God is with thee. For while thou art aſpeaking, ſaith hee, I will ſay, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Behold here I am (Eſay 58. 9.) but I haue beene ouer-tedious in the ſatisfaction of this point. I will conclude, and reduce all to that one queſtion of S. Paul, Rom. 10. 14. How ſhall they call vpon him in whom they haue not beleeued? Where it is manifeſt, that none muſt bee inuocated, but ſuch as muſt be beleeued in: but none muſt bee beleeued in but God alone: for, Credimus Paulo, ſed non credimus in Paulum: credimus 
               
                  Aug. tract. 29. in Iohan
                
               Petro, ſed non credimus in Petrum, Wee beleeue (ſaith S. Auſtin) Paul, but wee beleeue not in S. Paul: wee beleeue Peter,
               
but wee beleeue not in S. Peter. And therefore let vs all conclude with Origen, Soli Domino Deo; Let our prayers be offered onely to the Lord our God, who doth at all times hear vs, and will vndoubtedly deliuer vs from this deadly Peſtilence, if wee pray powerfully with a ſyncere faith and pure conſcience.
            And thus I haue vnuailed the party to whom the Diſciples came for aſſiſtance in this their dangerous caſe.
            I am in the next place to diſcouer the effect of their comming: the Text telleth vs, They awoke him. Fearfull death, of all miſeries the laſt, and the moſt terrible: againſt which an holy Father hath made this exclamation; Apud Lud. Granatenſ. Exercit. de Orat. & Medit. O Death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee? how

quickly and ſuddenly ſtealeſt thou vpon vs? how ſecret are thy paths and wayes? how vniuerſal is thy ſigniory and dominion? The mighty cannot eſcape thee, the ſtrong loſe their ſtrength before thee, the rich with their money ſhall not corrupt thee. Thou art the hammar that alwayes ſtriketh: thou art the ſword that neuer blunteth: thou art the ſnare wherein all muſt be taken: thou art the priſon wherin all muſt lye: thou art the ſea wherein all muſt periſh: thou art the paine, that all muſt ſuffer: thou art the tribute that all muſt pay. If thou commeſt but in thy naturall courſe, thou cauſeſt thoſe two amorous twins, ſoule & body to tremble and quake & at their forced ſeparation, to ſweat euen drops of anguiſh: & if thou only ſeemeſt

to offer thy vnreſiſtable atachement to any accidentally, and in a violent manner, oh thou art dreadfull beyond compariſon. This more then exceeding terror vnawares looking the Diſciples in the face, and being in all readineſſe to ſeaze on them, cauſed them ſuddenly to ſend forth a pitifull outcry to their Lord and Maſter, with ſuch clamours and vociferations, euen as if they had been at their wits end: ſo that diſpenſing with all ceremonies and complements, they iogged him, ſaith Alphonſus Salmeron, ſo long till they awakened him: and ſurely the originall importeth no leſſe, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , ſuſcitauerunt, they raiſed him vp: the ſame word is vſed in many places of Scripture, where mention is made of the resurrection, as, Deſtroy this temple and 
               Ioh. 2. 19.
               
               in three dayes I will raiſe it vp: and Many bodies of Saints which 
               Mat. 27. 52 
               ſlept aroſe: and, If Chriſt be riſen from the dead, how ſay ſome among 
               1 Cor. 15. 12. 
               you there is no reſurrection of the dead? In which and many other Texts, and ſpecially in that Chapter to the Corinthians the word of my Text is vſed, and not improperly: for what Stulte quid eſt ſomnus gelidus niſi mortis imago? Ouid. is deepe, faſt, and ſound ſleepe, but mortis imago, and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , the very image and brother of death, as the Heathen could ſay, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Homer. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , ſaith Menander, Sleep is nothing elſe but a ſhort kinde of death. Now Chriſt was in a faſt and dead ſleepe, for ſo much the word (which is here and in S. Marke vſed) ſignifieth: his 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  ligo, vere ſoperatus, aut demerſus ſomno profundo
                ſenſes were wel & faſt bound, as if hee had no operation of life; and therefore

the Diſciples are ſaid to raiſe him, as it were from the dead.
            Behold here in the Diſciples, importunitie! and in our Sauiour, opportunitie! they awaken him ſuddenly; hee awaketh ſeaſonably: they awaken him violently by reaſon of their fearfulneſſe; he awakeneth voluntarily, to giue them a ſpeedy deliuerance. And are not wee plunged into greater extremities, and more grieuous calamities then euer the Diſciples were? Yes ſurely, for our ſinnes haue provoked Bellatorem fortem, the mighty warriour, the Icr. 20. 11. Lord of Hoaſts, the righteous Iudge, to whet his ſword and Pſal. 2. 12, 13. bend his bow, and make them ready, to prepare the inſtruments of death, and arrowes to deſtroy vs: our euſtomary ſins haue forced out the Lords decree,

and haue brought forth three deadly weapons; his Ferrum. Fames. Morbus. Sword, and Famine hover ouer vs, being ready to light vpon vs, and wee are already beſet plurium conflectu febrium, with a conflict of many diſeaſes; the Angell is a darting the rightayming arrowes of the Lords wrath at euery mans doore: Gods deadly tokens, the onely markes of his diſpleaſure, and our diſobedience, are ſent forth promiſcuouſly to all ſinners, eſpecially to wilfull and obſtinate tranſgreſſors, and though thouſands fall on the one ſide, and ten thouſands on the other, and they neuer touch thee, yet ſinne will bring them home to thy heart at laſt. For, like as one that ſhooteth at a marke, ſometimes is gone, and ſometimes is ſhort, ſometimes lighteth on the right

hand, ſometimes on the left; at length hitteth the marke: ſo the Lord of Hoaſts being incenſed with the generall wickedneſſe of this Citie, ſhootes at great men beyond vs, at meane men ſhort of vs, at our friends on the right hand, at our enemies on the left; at length hitteth our ſelues. The longer his hand is in practice, the more certainly he ſtriketh.
            What, were the Diſciples in the iawes of ſuch perils? were they thus beſet with the Lords vengeance? out of all doubt they were not, and yet they being conſcious, that their ſinnes were the cauſe of this raging tempeſt, they ſpeed by feruent prayers to awaken their mercifull Sauiour: Faciamus nos ſimiliter: Beloued, let vs doe the like. Culpae comes, iuſtiſſimè poena
               
               ſemper eſt, The companions 
                  Lypſ de Conſtantia. lib. 2. cap. 16 of our ſinnes, are many plagues, which continually attend vs, like ſo many hunger-ſtarued Lions, euer gaping to deuour vs. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , and our God is fallen into a deepe ſleepe. So burdenſome, ſo grieuous, ſo weariſome haue our ſinnes beene vnto the Lord, that they haue awakened his ſlow anger, his righteous iuſtice, and lulled his long patience, his forbearing mercy faſt aſleepe. We now finde that verified which S. Auſtin long ago foretold: Tunc in te dormit Chriſtus, 
               
                  Aug. in Pſal. 56. 
               cum oblitus fueris paſſionis Chriſti, when thou forgetteſt the paſſion of Chriſt, then Chriſt ſleepeth in thee: and then (ſaith hee) nauis tuaturbatur, thy ſhip is troubled, thy heart is worthily troubled, becauſe

               excidit tibi in quem credidideris, thou forgetteſt him, on whom thou ſhouldſt beleeue: thy paſſions are great, when thou art vnmindfull of Chriſts paſſion: and then art thou vnſenſible of his paſſion, when by ſinne thou doeſt pierce thine owne ſoule, and crucifie thy Sauiour afreſh; qui ex proprio & pretioſo ſanguine, who of his owne pretious bloud made a plaiſter to cure thy feſtred wounds. Et hinc illae lachrymae, hence our ſorrowes and griefes, hence our plagues and puniſhmēts. And dearly beloued what ſhall wee doe? The beſt aduice I can giue, is that which Chriſt giueth his Spouſe in the Canticles, Chap. 6. 13. Returne, returne O Shalamite; Returne, returne that we may behold thee. I thus paraphraſe it; Returne O

my Spouſe, Daughter of Ieruſalem returne, returne to mee, returne to thy ſelfe, returne to thy former feeling of my grace, returne, that both my ſelfe, and all the Company of Angells, may ſee thee, and reioyce in thee.
            This Spouſe of Chriſt is the mother of vs all, the holy Catholique Church, in whoſe boſome wee are nouriſhed: Take wee then the aduice giuen vnto her, for an aduice vnto our ſelues. Returne wee from our euill waies, returne we from our all ſinnes, returne we vnto the Lord our God, that both hee and all the company of Angels may ſee vs, and reioyce in vs.
            Life is ſweet vnto vs, mutet 
               
                  Aug. ſerm. 1. de tempore.
                
               vitam, qui vult accipere vitam, ſaith S. Auguſtine, If we are deſirous to retaine this life, and

enioy the bleſſed life of heauen, wee muſt change our wicked life on earth. Mortificemus peccata, Chriſtum excitemus, & fidem recolamus: 
               Aug. let vs mortifie our ſinnes by vnfained Repentance, rowze vp Chriſt by a feruent and liuely prayer, and reviue Gods worſhip in a more ſyncere, diligent, deuout, and conſtant manner, and all the ſtormes of our ſore afflictions ſhall ſoone vaniſh away.
            So I proceed to the laſt part in the procuring of this calme, viz. their praiers in theſe words expreſſed; Lord ſaue vs: wee periſh. The three Euangeliſts who doe record this ſtory, vſe three ſeuerall titles attributed vnto our bleſſed Sauiour in this compendious forme of prayer: all which (though the Latine and our Engliſh expreſſe not)

are ſignificant and emphaticall in their orginall propieties. S. Markes title is, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Maſter, careſt thou not that wee periſh? The Greeke word there ſpecified ſignifieth a Teacher of letters, manners, or any art: in relation whereunto they were called Diſciples, Scholars, or Loarners. Saint Lukes title is, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Engliſhed a Defender, a preſent Helper; ſuch as in times of warre are ſworne brethren, to liue and die together, Commiles ſuccenturiatus: and in times of peace, Guardians of Infants. Shepheards haue the ſame title, who are 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Defenders of their flocks. The title in the text is, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , which importeth power, or might, anſwerable to that glorious Tetragrammaton, Iehouah,
               
which the Septuagints conſtantly tranſlate throughout the old Teſtament in this ſacred word, an eſſentiall name neuer giuen to any but onely the true God.
            The titles well weighed afford good vſe of Inſtruction, and much matter of Conſolation. In that they call him Lord, we are incouraged to pray with confidence, becauſe hee is Iehouah, all-ſufficient to deliuer vs: and in that they call him Teacher and Defender, wee are certified of the Lords willingneſſe to heare vs, and forward readineſſe to help and ſuccour vs: in that hee is their Maſter, they pray in loue; in that hee is their Lord, they pray in feare: he being their Master and Defender, they are not timidi, ouer-fearefull; hee being their Lord and Iehouah, they are not tumidi,
               
ouer-bold. The ſame Lord and Maſter is our Iehouah, and ready helper, and therefore wee likewiſe muſt pray (in this time of deadly peſtilence) firſt confidently, not deſpairing: quia irriſio Dei est, ſi quid illum ores, 
               Pellie. in Mat. 
               quod exor aturum te non certe confidas; becauſe it is a mocking of God, ſaith Pellican, to pray vnto him, and to doubt that wee ſhall not haue our requeſts: for this cauſe Chriſt tels vs, Marke 11. 14. that whatſoeuer we deſire when we pray, beleeue that wee ſhall haue it, and it ſhall be done vnto vs, eſpecially if it be petitio decentium, ſaith Damaſcen, 
               Iames 1. 6. a requeſt of ſuch things as are fit for God to giue, and vs to haue. For theſe S. Iames bids vs Aske in faith, and wauer not, and wee ſhall receiue our deſires. Secondly, becauſe their Lord is

our Iehouah, therefore we likewiſe muſt pray reuerently, not preſuming. The very conſideration of Gods greatnes ſhould moue vs to ſupplicate with all humilitie.
            
               Uarus Germinus was wont to ſay to Caeſar, Qui apud te, O Caeſar audent dicere, magnitudinem tuam ignor ant: qui non audent, humanitatem tuam neſciunt: They that dare ſpeake to thee, doe not know thy greatneſſe, they that dare not, are ignorant of thy humanitie and meeknes: I may ſay farre better, Our God is meek and lowly in heart, that we may ſpeake vnto him; but hee is ſo great in Maieſty and power, that one ought to ſpeake in all humilitie: and that not with the Gentiles, whoſe Heatheniſh faſhion was adorare ſigillaria ſuareſidendo, to worſhip

God as they ſate; but meekly kneeling vpō our knees, that we may ſhew both inward and outward humilitie. For this was the practice not onely of great ſinners, but of the holieſt Saints, thouſands of Angels do couer their faces, and Chriſt himſelfe, the Sonne of God did often vſe to fal down, to kneele, and proſtrate himſelfe vpon the ground, when hee prayed vnto his Father: Et proſtratus in terra orat Medicus, & non inclinatur 
               
                  Cypr. 2. ad Don.
                
               agrotus: And ſhall this heauenly Phyſitian kneele, and wee thinke much to ſtoope? Conſider with thy ſelfe ſaith Saint Bernard, quanta cum humilitate debet rana paupercula adorare eum: With what great humilitie ought we poore wormes of the earth to adore him? And therefore as Euſebius reporteth

of that moſt Chriſtian Conſtantine, that it was his vſuall cuſtome, euery day to ſhut vp himſelfe cloſe into ſome ſecret place of his palace, and there vpon his bended knees, and with a moſt ſubmiſſe humble voyce to make his deuout prayers and Soliloquies vnto Almighty God. Thus confidently, and thus reuerently let vs all draw neere vnto our Lord and Sauiour, and then our gratious Defender, our powerfull Iehovah will ſpeedily take from vs this our great ieopardy.
            Before I conclude, it is not amiſſe to giue you notice, that Saint Luke, to expreſſe the Diſciples zealous deuotion, ingeminateth the title giuē to Chriſt in this ſhort forme of prayer, with a double appellation, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                Maſter,

Maſter, wee periſh, O gratious defender, O powerfull Iehovah, wee are ready to bee caſt away and buried in the waues: hereby giuing vs to vnderſtand, that breuis oratio, ſifortis, penetrat calū, 
               4 Obſeruation.
                a ſhort prayer, (though but in 3 words, as was the Diſciples) ſo it be feruent is moſt powerful, 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Domine ſalua nos, Lord ſaue vs. pierceth the skies, and is accepted of the Almighty Lord.
            The prayer of the blinde men was ſhort, O Lord, Sonne of Dauid, haue mercy vpon vs, and yet preuailed, Math. 20. 31. The prayer of the Publican ſhorter, God bee mercifull to mee a ſinner; and yet as auaileable, Luke 18. 13. The prayer of the penitent Thiefe very compendious, Lord remember mee when thou commeſt into thy Kingdome, and yet moſt forcible, Luke 23. 42. The prayer of the father of the ſicke

child moſt briefe Lord help mine vnbeleefe, and yet very effectuall: Marke 9. 24. Yea, many times wee find that an earneſt ſeeking with the heart, hath preuailed without any words vttered by the tongue, as Moſes when hee cryed to God with his heart, and yet opened not his mouth; For that is moſt true which Saint Gregorie ſaith, Tanto minus quis clamat, quanto minus deſiderat, & tanto fortius coelos penetrat, quanto fortius deſiderat, the more earneſtly wee deſire any thing, the more lowdly we doe crie vnto God, and the colder is our deſire, the ſlower is our calling on him, and the harder to obtaine it of him.
            
               Luther to this purpoſe calleth prayers and ſupplications, bombardas Chriſtianorum; the Chriſtians Canons: and ſurely

beeing well charged with faith and repentance, and fired with zeale and feruencie of ſpirit, they ſhoote farre, and pierce deepe. Here therefore wee may bee informed, what is the very bane and peſts of our prayers, and what is the onely cauſe they are no more auaileable to remoue this mortall ſickneſſe: ſurely, becauſe faintneſſe, coldneſſe, and boldneſſe doe ſo much frequent our prayers. There is firſt, a faint, a fearefull, and diſtruſtfull praying amongſt vs; there is ſecondly, a cold, a formall and ſuperficiall praying with vs; and there is thirdly, a bold, a proud, and preſumptuous praying vnto dreadfull Iehouah, and this laſt is the worſt: trepida nec procedit quidem nedum aſcendit; the faint and fearefull prayer, cannot get out, much

leſſe get vp: it ſticketh ſo faſt betweene the teeth, or in the throat rather: tepida procedit, ſed in aſconſu langueſcit & defecit, the cold and formall prayer cōmeth forth faſt enough, but it cannot get vp it freeſeth (for want of ſpirit and feruor) by the way, ere it come to appeare in Gods preſence: temeraria aſcendit, ſedreſilit; the cold and preſumptuous prayer flyeth vp apace, but it is as faſt beaten backe againe, for preſenting it ſelfe ouerboldly, and ſaucily in Gods ſight: Nec tantum non obtinet gratiam, ſed meretur offenſam, and in ſtead of a bleſſing, it bringeth a curſe with it: thus farre deuout Bernard.
            
            I haue read of two ladders by which men climbe to heauen; ſeruent prayers, and crying ſinnes, the godly by the

one, and the wicked by the other. By the ſinfull Ladder did Sodome and Niniue climbe. Oh let not our ſinnes bee ſuch climbers! rather then they ſhould preſſe into the Preſence Chamber of Heauen, and grow acquainted with God, let vs keepe them downe, and here puniſh them: for Hoc nobis Deus inſevit. God hath planted this principle in euery mans heart, that ſinne muſt bee puniſhed: muſt it! by whom? Saint Auſtin tells you, aut ab ipſo homine 
               
                  Aug Enarrat. in Pſal. 58. 
               poenitente, aut à Deo vindicante, either by man repenting, or by God reuenging. Now if any notwithſtanding he remaineth impenitent, neuertheleſſe ſhall hope for mercy, let him heare what Chryſoſtome ſaith, Quomodo 
               
                  Chryſoſt. in 1 Cor. hom. 23. 
               Deum rogas, vt tibi parcat, cum tu tibi minime parcas? How canſt

thou deſire God to haue compaſſion vpon thee; when thou haſt no compaſſion vpon thy ſelfe? Aulus Gellius writes, that the Romanes ſent the Carthaginians, Haſtam & caduceum, 
               
                  Aul. Gel. l. 10. c. 27. a ſpeare and a white wand, the Enſignes of warre and peace, and offered them their choiſe: So deales the Lord with vs, vpon our repentance; he offers vs conditions of peace, and proteſteth to repent himſelfe of the euill intended, and to remoue farre from vs his iudgements already inflicted. Ergofratres puniamus peccata noſtra: therefore brethren let vs be our owne puriſhers: puniſh we our ſelues, our ſinnes, that God may haue mercy on vs: and turne this heauie plague from vs: hee cannot ſhew mercy vpon workers of iniquitie, Quaſi blandiens peccatis,
               
               aut non erudicens peccata, as if hee flattered men in their ſinnes, or had no purpoſe to root out ſin. Prorſus aut punis, aut punit, Beleeue H
                     •…
                  c Auguſtinus in loco prius citato. it either thou muſt puniſh thy ſelfe for thy ſins, or God will puniſh thee: vis non puniat punitu. Wilt thou that God ſhould not pun
                  •
               ſh thee, then puniſh thou thy ſelfe: and waſh away thy ſins with the bitter & briniſh teares of vnfained repentance, through a liuely faith in the blood of our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt: that forſaking the Ladder of our crying ſins we may climbe vp to heauen with the ladder of our feruent prayers: and hauing all brought our ſelues into the ſame danger of mortalitie; Let vs all with one accord, ſigh forth vnceſſantly, the Diſciples powerfull and importunate requeſt; Lord, ſauevs: we periſh.
            
            
               
O Lord our God the giue of all graces, the forginer of all our ſinnes, and the preſent helper and ready defender of them, that fly to thee for ſuccor: grant vnto vs wee humbly beſeech thee an vnfained remorſe for all our miſdeeds; that our heartie ropentance, may awaken thy mercy, and cauſe thy iuſtice to fall into a deepe ſleepe: So then we ſhall with all Saints for euermore ſing Helleluja. Saluation, and glory, and honor, and power vnto the Lord our God for euermore.
            Amen.
            FINIS
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Ad Lectorem.
            GRammata ſi deſint, ſi ſyllaba forte redundet,
            Si praecedenti menda ſit vllà libro:
            Ignoſcas Lector; quid enim labecula laedit?
            Et navos penna corrige quaeſo tua.
            
               Tibi in Chriſto addictiſſimus,
A. L.
            
         
      
   