
      
         
            
            
            A WATCH-WORD TO ALL religious, and true hearted Engliſh-men.
            By Sir Francis Hastings, Knight.
            
               
                  Deuter. 31. verſ. 6.
               
               Plucke vp your hearts therefore, and be ſtrong: Dread not, nor bee afraide of them: for the Lord thy God himſelfe doth goe with thee; he will not faile nor forſake thee.
            
            AT LONDON, Printed by Felix Kingston for Ralph Iackſon. 1598.
         
         
            
            
            To the Christian Reader.
            
            
               THE raging hearts of Rome and Spaine being ſet on fire, with all force and furie to ſet vpon England; I hold it the part and dutie of euery true Engliſh-man, to be prepared inwardly with loyaltie and courage, and outwardly with all neceſſarie prouiſion and furniture, as his bounden dutie is in the one, and his abilitie & purſe will reach in the other. And to this end J haue been caried in the true loyaltie of my heart to ſet my thoughts on worke, not onely how to prepare my particular ſelfe in all readines, to doe all ſeruices enioyned

and commanded to me, and to adde anything of my ſelfe, that the ſtrength of one poore man can affoord: but alſo how I might incite and prouoke others to carrie the ſame minde. To my ſelfe I haue ſet downe this law, that ſhall neuer be repealed, that for the libertie of my conſcience, the ſafetie of my deare Soueraigne, and the peaceable prosperitie of my countrie, if my wealth were millions, if I could bring thouſands of fighting hands to the field, and if my life were ten thouſand liues; wealth, ſtrength, life and all ſhall goe, to be ſpent, hazarded, and ended for my God, my Queene, and my Countrie, againſt that Antichriſt of Rome, the ambitious tyrant of Spayne, and all forren forces, and home-borne traytors whatſoeuer; elſe ſhould I

thinke my ſelfe vnworthie to liue. To ſtirre vp others, I haue preſumed to giue an attempt in theſe few leaues following: wherein if I haue erred in any part of the matter, let my want of experience excuſe me: if I haue erred in the forme, let my ignorance excuſe me: and if I haue erred both in matter and forme, yet let my faults in all be excuſed; becauſe my zeale to religion, my loyaltie to my deare Soueraigne, and my loue to my natiue Countrie, hath enforced me to make this aduenture, rather chooſing to bewray my ſimplicitie & wants, than that I would defraude my countrymen from being put in minde of matter ſo needfull for them (in my conceit) not onely to thinke of, but to be throughly reſolued in; that with confidence, boldnes, & aſſurance of

the goodnes of our cauſe, we might with heart and hand be preſt and readie to take our places, and to march on to the field, when our Soueraignes authoritie commaundeth, and there to ſet forward with a ſwift foote againſt theſe enemies of God, our Queene Elizabeth, and our Countrie, whenſoeuer they ſhall dare to ſhew their faces againſt vs.
            
               F. H.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A VVatch-word to all religious, and true hearted Engliſh-men.
            
               IF I ſhould take vpon me to enter into the enumeratiō of all the benefits and bleſsings, that from the almightie haue been powred vpon this little Iſland of England, by, and vnder the gouernment of our moſt gratious ſoueraigne Lady, Queene Elizabeth; I might both forgetfully leſſen the number too farre, and ignorantly paſſe ouer many things notable, and worthie to be obſerued, and remembred. And if I ſhould aduenture to aime at the

particular iniuries her Highneſſe hath receiued from forraine malice, and home diſloyaltie; and the particular daungers that haue followed her thereby, to the hazard of her ſafetie in perſon, and the good eſtate of her whole kingdome; I might geſſe at very many, and come ſhort of the number; & I might point at very great wrongs and dangers, and yet miſſe thoſe that bee farre greater. And therefore for the benefits we haue receiued by her moſt happie entrance to ſit in this regall ſeate, as the annoynted of God, to bee the ſoueraigne cōmander vnder him, ouer vs his people of England, I wil onely tye my ſelfe to one, as the fountaine and well-ſpring whence all the reſt (being an infinite number) doe iſſue and flow. And for

the iniuries and daungers depending thereupon, to her perſon and kingdome, I will tye my ſelfe to no number, but aime at them as I can; and they ſhall be ſuch all, as from which alſo doe ſpring whatſoeuer hath been offered, or intended againſt her ſacred perſon, and this peaceable, and flouriſhing Common-wealth.
            It is not vnknowne to many yet liuing, neither can it be altogether hidden from the yonger ſort that liue with them, what a darke miſtie clowde of ignorance (which brought in Popiſh idolatrie, and al maner of ſuperſtition) did ouer-ſhadow the whole land; whereunto was added, and wherewith was mixed all bloodie and ſauage crueltie againſt thoſe that deſired knowledge, and were any way inlightened

(by Gods grace) with a glimmering, or ſmall inſight into true religion. For though it were but only a deſire to reade vpon the holy booke of God, either the old, or new Teſtament; then Heretike was his title, hereſie was his fault; and for this was he called before the Romiſh Cleargie, to receiue their cenſure: and ſuch neuer departed from their clutches, till they had branded them to the ſlaughter. But becauſe the Romiſh ſynagogue perſecuting Chriſt in his members, may maske vnder the Iewiſh vaile perſecuting Chriſt himſelfe, who thirſting after Chriſts blood, yet would ſeeme to ſpill no blood, crying, It is not lawfull for vs to put any man to death: therefore the ciuill Magiſtrate muſt be their butcher to execute

their bloodie decree, and to the ſtake they muſt goe to be conſumed with fire. Of this their blood-thirſtie humour how many hundreds haue taſted, ſtories doe record, and many yet liuing can in parte remember.
            In theſe dark and clowdy daies, leaſt the Sunne-ſhine of knowledge ſhould diſperſe the miſts of ignorance, and giue light to the dimme of ſight, whereby they might be able to diſcouer the iugling and falſhood, which in that time of darknes they vſed; this poſition was ſet down for their Maxime, or rule infallible, that Ignorance is the mother of deuotion: And that ſacred worde of God, which was giuen from God to be a lanterne to all our feete, and a light vnto all our ſteps, was forbidden

to the lay ſort (for ſo they called them) as matter vnfit for them to looke into. By which meanes they kept them blind-fold, admitting them none other guides but themſelues, being as ſtarke blinde as beetles in all Chriſtian and true religion: and when the blind doe leade the blind, both are in hazard to fall into the ditch.
            When they thus had ſetled this blinde courſe to keepe the people from knowledge, and had deuiſed to fill their eyes with dumme ſhowes to gaze vpon, and their cares with bare ſounds of wordes, farre from their capacitie to reach vnto, or profitably vnderſtande: (much like to Caligula, who bidding many gueſts, cauſed to be ſet before them golden diſhes, and golden cups, and bad them eate.)
            
               Then they offer another poſition, that it was not for lay men to meddle with matters of religion, that belonged wholly and only (as a priuiledge) to the Prieſts; thereby making them ſecure and careles of God, and all godlines. Only if he came diligently and deuoutly to heare Maſſe, and once a yere to confeſſe his ſinnes to his ghoſtly father (how ſlenderly ſo euer his ſayde Confeſſor were furniſhed with gifts of the holie Ghoſt in himſelfe to inſtruct him) all was ſafe: and he that ſo did, was reckoned as religious a man (ſecundum vſum Sacrū) as could be wiſhed. And though he were tainted, and to bee taxed with the groſſeſt ſins, Rome, by the authoritie from their Vicar generall, had a tricke to hale thē into the rabble of their ſaints,

and ſo to canonize him; as wee haue example of Thomas Becket in Henry the thirds time, whoſe treaſons to his Prince were apparant and manifeſt: and yet after his death was he canonized a ſaint by the Pope, and an holy day was commanded for him.
            Theſe two irreligious and prophane grounds being layd, they proceed to a third, and ſet it down for a popiſh ground, that it was a dangerous and deadly ſinne for any man to diſobey the Pope, and his Cleargie, in any of their orders enioyned and commaunded. In ſuch reuerence and regarde muſt he and all his Cleargy be had, that the meaneſt Maſſe-prieſt (comming with authoritie from him) muſt bee obeyed, vnder paine of damnation; though he command

that which is blaſphemous before God in Chriſtians, or diſloyall to men in ſubiects.
            And hauing thus made an open paſſage (without ſtop) to the marke and matter he aymed at, and ſo hemmed them in, as they could not ſee which way to eſcape danger, but by them that had layd the ſnare for them; they propound vnto them a meanes of deliuerie from all daungers, (euen when they ſinned immediatly againſt God) which is, A pardon from his holines, and abſolution from his holy prieſts. But if the decrees and ordinances of their Romiſh ſynagogues were tranſgreſſed, hardly any mercie was to bee had.
            Thus haue you the blind courſe they ſought to breede vs in, by debarring

vs the cleere light of the holy written word of God, and the careleſnes they ſought to ſettle in vs of all religion, by making it a thing impertinent to vs, as though wee had no ſoules to care for; or the narrow way that leadeth to ſaluation were ſo eaſily found out, as we neede no light to guide vs, or no furniture to arme vs with defence againſt the dangers of our paſſing. And yet, Search the ſcriptures, is a watch-word to all that deſire to bee the ſeruants of God: and, Put on the whole armour of God, is a direction to all the true children of God here vpon earth: the ſeuerall parts of which furniture, and to what vſe all of it muſt ſerue vs, you ſhall eaſily finde, if you will take paines to looke into and reade the place. And further

you fee the terrour and feare they caſt vpon vs, if we offend the Pope and his Maſſing prieſts: and then the end is, our abſolution and pardon muſt come from themſelues, which mony muſt purchaſe: and ſo the beſt purſe (by their rule) did ſpeed beſt in their religion. Yet our Sauiour Chriſt telleth vs, that It is as eaſie for a Camell to goe through the eye of a needle, as for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heauen. But the fatteſt purſes are fitter for the Popiſh ſynagogue than the poore in ſpirit. And yet, Bleſſed are the poore in ſpirit (ſayth the holie Ghoſt by the Euangeliſt) for they ſhall ſee God. And, Godlines is great riches (ſayth the Apoſtle) if a man bee content with that he hath. But as it is beyond my reach to decipher and diſcloſe

all the groſſe corruptions of the Romiſh religion: ſo it is no part of my meaning to ſearch curiouſlie into thē; they are already (through Gods fauour and goodnes) by many learned, more ſufficiētly handled, diſcouered and confuted, than I can, and to their learned workes I referre you; I onely touch thoſe few, that by theſe you may ſee the blacke darknes and groſſe ignorance wee were brought into, by ſuch as ſought more their owne pompe & enriching, than to ſet vs in the right way to ſauing health and ſaluation, of which they ſought to bereaue vs.
            And hauing giuen you this taſte of thoſe miſerable times, and dangerous eſtate we were brought into by them, I haſten to put you in minde of our moſt bleſſed, and

happie deliuerance out of this ſpirituall pit, and thraldome of Poperie and ſuperſtition, whereinto we were deeply plunged: for which wee owe all dutifull and heartie thankes to our God, as the author; and all reuerence, loue, and loyalty to our moſt gracious Soueraigne Ladie Queene Elizabeth, as the inſtrument: whoſe perill and danger, before ſhe came to that abilitie to performe this holie worke amongſt vs, I may not paſſe ouer. For by Gods goodnes onely and wholly ſhe was preſerued, her life being malitiouſly, and with great cunning ſhot at by the Romiſh Cleargie, then in place of credit. For Gardiner, that moſt proude and bloodie monſter, left no corner of his wit vnſought (being wiſe enough to worke miſchiefe)

but ſet all his skill and cunning on worke to ſhorten her dayes, and to preuent her (by bloodie ſlaughter of her ſacred perſon) from euer being our Queene. And no reach of man can yeeld me a reaſon of her deliuerance, but the mightie God in power, and moſt rich God in mercie, did (beyond all expectation of popiſh malice) deliuer her from many dangers, and preſerue her, to free vs from al the moſt bitter thraldome of this Romiſh Pharaoh, & to bring vs into the ſweete and ſincere libertie of Chriſts true religion and Goſpell: euen as hee did miraculouſly preſerue Moſes (being deſtined to deſtruction) to deliuer his people of Iſraell from the miſerable taxes and torments they ſuſtayned vnder the Egyptiacall Pharaoh.
            
            
               Thus you ſee that theſe their bloodie practiſes would take no place: but that the God of Iſraell (who neuer fayleth his) hath brought this his religious handmayden, our deare Soueraigne, to the royall throne of this flouriſhing kingdome: and, by her happie entrance into this ſeate of gouernment, hath baniſhed the Popiſh ordinances and decrees, which held vs in ſlauerie of conſcience: and in ſtead of this, hath brought home vnto vs the cleere Sunne-ſhining light of his glorious Goſpell, and reſtored vs into the libertie of conſcience long wiſhed for, and often prayed for by all his Saints and children. He hath alſo eſtabliſhed a courſe of teaching by learned miniſters and paſtors, by whom the glad tydings of ſaluation

is pronounced and publiſhed to his people, her ſubiects, whereby they may be trayned vp in all true knowledge and vnderſtanding. And ſurely the moſt ſimple now may learne to poynt out the vanitie of that ſuperſtitious religion, which was ſent, and brought to vs from Rome; and may ſee and feele how ſweet the Lord Ieſus is in the voyce of his Goſpell: which is a bleſſing that many haue longed for, and haue not yet attained vnto. For this and all the reſt we owe our continuall thankes vnto God, and are bound (euery mothers ſonne of vs) to pray to him for our Soueraignes life and raigne long to continue; and with all heartie willingnes to ſhew the loyall loue of our hearts to her Maieſtie, by yeelding our

lands, goods, and liues, to be ſold, ſpent, and hazarded for her defence. For of how much more precious account the ſoule is than the body, of ſo much greater price and eſtimation ought wee to reckon this ſpirituall deliuerance out of this ſpirituall bondage, brought vpon vs by poperie and ſuperſtition, which we haue obtayned by her Maieſties moſt happy entrāce, and enioying this ſeate of gouernment; in which I pray God ſhe may long ſit, to his glorie, the quiet & profit of her people, both in ſpirituall and earthly things, and the euerlaſting comfort to her owne ſoule and conſcience.
            But when this our deare Soueraigne Ladie Queene Elizabeth was fullie poſſeſſed of this her princely place, and had receiued

the royall Diademe and Crowne, with the applauſe and liking of al true hearted Engliſhmen, both Nobles, Cleargie and Commons; (as a due by right belonging vnto her) then began Sathan to rage, and his miniſters to fret and chafe; in ſo much as euen in the firſt Parliament holden after her moſt happie coronation, Doctor Story, that blood-ſucker, who had bathed his hands in the blood of ſundrie Gods ſaints, doubted not, without bluſhing, openly in that moſt honorable Senate and Councell, to bewaile that his counſell was not followed; and that they had omitted the right courſe of ſtopping vs from ſeeing, and beholding theſe Halcyon and bleſſed daies; which he ſayd to bee, the not ſtriking at the roote when time ſerued; meaning,

the not bereauing of our deare Soueraigne of her life. A bloodie ſpeech of a bloodie traytor, who would not conteine to vtter out the poyſonfull conceiued malice of his heart to her Maieſtie, though it were when his malice could not reach (praiſed be God) to doe her the leaſt harme.
            In this arch-traytor there is offered a moſt notable obſeruation of Gods iuſtice and iudgement. For euen this Story paſſing ouer the ſeas after this, without touch, and there exerciſing his lewd wit to inuent all ſlaunders againſt her Maieſtie, and the whole ſtate; and (boyling in the bloodie malice of his heart) did burſt out into all practiſes that he could, whereby to diſturbe our peace, and to indanger her perſon; it pleaſed our God

to aſſigne the time when he ſhuld enter into an Engliſh ſhip, deuoid of all feare to bee intrapped, and without all hope in the owner of the ſhip that he ſhuld carrie home ſuch a gueſt. Yet finding (by certaine intelligence) whom he poſſeſſed, and the winde (by Gods prouidence) being proſperous to take way for England, hee hoyſed vp his ſayles, and tarrieth for no better fraught, arriueth with good ſpeede in England, and preſenteth this his merchandiſe to the honorable Lords, by whom hee was committed to the place moſt fit for him, and ſhortly after being indicted, arreigned, found guiltie, and condemned, hee receiued his iudgement at the ſeate of iuſtice, and was executed accordingly, as he had well deſerued, at Tyburne:

and ſo may they al ſpeed that wiſh to Queene Elizabeth, as he did.
            After this then commeth out the thundring Bull of excommunication againſt her Maieſtie, and her whole land, from that impious Pope Pius Quintus, wherein her Maieſtie is not allowed the title of lawfull and rightfull Queene, but is termed The pretended Queene of England; and all her ſubiects are abſolued from the oth of obedience which they had taken, and by right is due from them vnto her.
            And from this Bull bellowing out theſe monſtrous ſounds, as out of another Troian horſe, by which all Troy was betrayed) all the troubles, rebellions, and treaſons plotted againſt her Maieſtie haue proceeded. Hence the Northerne

Rebels did take their warrants and grounds, though it were before the ſetting of it vp by Felton, at the Biſhop of Londons gate by Paules Church, as ſhall appeare plainly. For by this Bull theſe Rebels thought themſelues to haue a ſtrong immunitie and freedome from all daunger, when ſuch a plackard was publiſhed frō 
               Rome: and therefore doubted not to become traytors to their Prince, betrayers of their Countrie, and to offer it for a ſpoyle to forrenners and ſtrangers. As though it were in the power of any one mortall childe of man to diſpoſe of kingdomes, to depoſe Princes, or to diſpence with ſubiects for not only diſobeying, but rebelling againſt their lawfull Soueraignes. In deed that worthie Doctor Saunders, the

Popes Legate, to comfort the Rebels of Ireland, doubteth not to defend this Bull of excommunication to be iuſt and lawfull, in his book intituled, Of the viſible Monarchie. And to prooue that this Bull was ye encourager of our two infortunate Earles, Northumberland and Westmerland, to take armes againſt their lawfull Soueraigne and liege Lady. This Saunders affirmeth that Doctor Morton was ſent to ſollicite ſuch Engliſh Noble men as he could, that Elizabeth, who then was in poſſeſſion of the Crowne, was an Heretike, and for that cauſe to haue fallen from al dominion & power, and that ſhe may be had, or reputed of them as an Ethnicke, and they are not to be cōpelled to obey her lawes and commandements.
            
               A noble embaſey and meſſage to be ſent from a Pope, very fitting for his fatherhood; and this olde doting Maſſe-prieſt was a very fit ambaſſadour for his turne, who doted ſo much vpon his Maſſe and Mattens, vpon his Dirges & Trentals, and ſuch other traſh (whereunto his corrupt heart was inclined) as he did forget how farre it was againſt the law of God, Nature, and Nations, to ſtir ſubiects to rebell againſt their rightfull Soueraigne: and he was ſo beſotted with his holy Dad, ſitting as Peters ſucceſſour in his pontiſicalibus at Rome, as neither law of God, Nature, nor Nations, could withhold him frō ſatisfying the Popes holines, in this his vnholy and moſt diuelliſh direction and errand; far contrary to our Sauiour Chriſts

direction to Peter, whom he commanded to put vp his ſword into his ſheath.
            And if it were reckoned a fault in Peter to ſtrike off the high Prieſts ſeruants care; how ſhall it not be a fault in Peters ſucceſſor to ſtrike at the head, not of a ſeruant, but of an annoynted Prince, onely becauſe ſhe wil not forſake Chriſt and obey Antichriſt.
            If Doctor Morton had neuer read ſo farre in Gods booke; or had liued ſo long as to forget that he had read; the Lord from heauen commanding this to all men on earth, that euery ſoule ſhould be ſubiect to the higher powers: for there is no power but of God; and euery power is ordeined of God: yet hee could not but remember himſelfe to bee an Engliſh man

borne, and that Queene Elizabeth was the rightfull owner, and poſſeſſer of the Crowne of England, by right of birth, by right of inheritance, and by right of ſucceſſion: and therefore by the law of Nature, and Nations, there was obedience and loyaltie due vnto her from him. But he was ſo bewitched with the Popes primacie, and ſupreme authoritie ouer kings and kingdoms, as he thought the Pope might depoſe when hee would, and diſpoſe Crownes and kingdomes vpon whom he would; as if he had quite forgotten himſelfe to be an Engliſh man.
            Whence this priuiledge ouer kings and kingdoms ſhould come vnto this proude Prieſt of Rome, I cannot finde, vnleſſe he fetcheth it from that ſpirit, that brought our

Sauiour Chriſt vnto the top of an high mountaine, ſhewing him all the kingdomes of the world, and the glorie of them, and ſayd, All theſe will I giue thee, if thou wilt fall downe and worſhip mee: hauing as much authoritie to diſpoſe of them, as Popes haue to depoſe Princes.
            But you ſee what was committed and commaunded to this doting Doctor Morton by the Pope; and how faithfully Morton performed his faithles errand, to the preiudice of his Prince, and danger of his Countrie. I wiſh with all my heart the two Earles had been more wiſe, than to be miſled by ſo wicked a meſſenger; and more loyall, than to bee miſcarried into rebellion by ſo treaſonable a meſſage. Notwithſtanding they ſo

embraced the meſſenger, and ſo farre followed the direction of the meſſage, that they fell into flat rebellion, and marched vnder the enſigne of trayterous ſubiects: for which the one receiued his condigne puniſhment, and the other eſcaped by flying, remaining a fugitiue from his Queene and countrie, and not daring to ſhew his face in his owne natiue ſoyle, for that hee had diſloyally rebelled againſt the one, and vnnaturally ſought the deſtruction of the other.
            I finde ſome bluſhing in ſome of this popiſh crew. For a Romiſh diſcourſer, in a booke publiſhed, and printed againſt the execution of Justice in England for maintenance of publike peace; ſeemeth to wiſh that Saunders and Bristow
               
(which both do defend, and maintain ye Popes Bull againſt Queene Elizabeth to bee lawfull and iuſt) had ſpared to ſpeake ſo much in defence thereof. And yet he doubteth not to affirme that theſe two learned men, of great zeale and excellencie, had their ſpeciall reaſons to doe ſo; which he will neither defend nor reproue.
            He further laboureth to ſmooth ouer this fault of theirs, by a kinde of retractation in both: the one leauing this out of his booke in his ſecond edition; and the other by ſuppreſſing to his liues end, A very learned booke made in defence of Pius Quintus his ſentence againſt her Maiestie. Marke the Epitheton he giueth to it. For he calleth it a very learned booke: ſo as neither his reproofe, nor their retracting

doth condemne the matter (which is the maine poynt) but ſome other reaſons did mooue a moderation in them, and all the reſt of our nation (to vſe his owne wordes) which was neither their condemning the ſeditious Bull, nor their approuing of her Maieſties right to the royall ſeate ſhe ſate in, which the Bull ſought to impeach both amongſt forrainers and home ſubiects.
            The ground and cauſe of the moderation ſpoken of by this Popiſh politike diſcourſer, appeareth by the ſuite made by Campion and Parſons, vnto Gregory the 13. then Pope; wherein they deſired that this Bull of excommunication might not reach to touch the Catholikes for performing obediēce to her Maieſtie, which was graunted

to them; and the very wordes of the diſpenſatiō are theſe. Where in the Bull of Pius Quintus all her ſubiects are commaunded not to obey her; and ſhe being excommunicated, and depoſed, all that doe obey her, are likewiſe innodate and accurſed: (which point is perilous to the Catholikes: For if they obey her, they are thē in the Popes curſe; and if they diſobey, they are in the Queenes daunger:) therefore the preſent Pope, to relieue them, hath altered that part of the Bull, and diſpenſed with them to obey, and ſerue her, without perill of excommunication: which dispenſation is to endure, but till that it pleaſe the Pope otherwiſe to determine. And theſe good fathers (ſo called by this popiſh diſcourſer) are iuſtified & commended, and thought

worthie of great thankes, both of the Queene, and countrie: and yet you ſee that euen in this diſpenſation, as well as in the Bull, our Soueraigne is cōtinued by this Pope excommunicated, and curſed, as farre as the hand of ſuch a curſed creature can reach; and ſo are all her true hearted ſubiects. But by this they doe diſcouer their groſſe cunning.
            This diſcourſer would faine perſwade that this was done for the Queenes good, both for the ſafetie of her perſon, and quiet of her countrie. Notwithſtanding reuerend father Saunders could, after this, bee the Popes Legate, to incite, and comfort Iriſh ſubiects to rebell againſt her Maieſtie: where, if the mightie God had not giuen a couragious heart, and a ſtrong

hand to that moſt vertuous and valiant gentleman, the noble Lord Arthur Gray, then her Highnes Deputie in that place, Saunders perſwaſion had made a ſtrong partie; and Spaniards had ſetled too ſtrong a footing for vs to recouer in haſte.
            Further to diſcouer the treacherous hearts of all theſe confederates, the conſpiracie of Babington, Barnewell, Titchborne, and the reſt iumping together in one minde, and combining together to performe one bloodie action, which was, to lay violent hands vpon Gods annoynted: whence came it, but from Rome, and Rhemes, following the impious rules of Pius Quintus in his curſed Bull? Beſides this, who ſet Parry on worke to come hither with an

impudent and ſhameles face, and here to court it; to bee one of the high Court of parliament; and to intrude himſelfe into the houſes, and to the tables of her Maieſties chiefeſt Counſellors; yea very often to her Maieſties owne preſence, and too often, & too neere, with allowance and liking; hauing with her Highnes large diſcourſes, and long conferences, but that fiſher of Rome? who fiſheth not for mens ſoules, as Peter did, to winne them to God; but after kingdomes, and ſegniories, that they may be tributarie to him, and that hee may haue authoritie to diſpoſe of them at his pleaſure. For from this, Parry came reconciled, and, forſaking his obedience to his rightfull Soueraigne, became ſubiect to him; and frō thoſe parts

he came ouer with this bloodie purpoſe to kill our dread Queene, To aſſure this, he gaue his word to ſundrie to vndertake it; he receiued the Sacrament to doe it; and he confirmed his bloodie promiſe with his hand, in a letter ſent to Rome, deſiring therein his holines allowance for the doing of this vnholy act, and crauing full remiſſion for all his ſinnes: which was performed to him by this holie Vicars commandement, in a letter ſent to him from a Cardinall in Rome, wherein his purpoſe was ſayd to be honorable, the fact meritorious before God; and kinde requitals are promiſed to him for vndertaking the matter, and for his care had in the buſines.
            Therefore notwithſtanding the fine ſmoothing of this diſcourſer,

who would beare the worlde in hand, that after this Bul publiſhed, the peaceable gouernment of our gracious Queene was not by any diſturbed; you ſhall finde it moſt falſe and vntrue. For if I ſhould ſtand to reckon vp all the ſtirres, that troubleſome, and trayterous ſpirits (as the vipers brood) would haue raiſed in the bowels of their natiue countrie, I ſhould ouerloade you with too many odious and loathſome examples.
            For what mooued Frauncis Throckmorton to enter into a new practiſe? What was the cauſe of Charles Pagets going out of England? of the two vnhappie Earles commitment? the one being arraigned, and tried by his Peeres, and (being condemned) ſpared to liue by the wonderfull

mercie of her moſt milde Maieſtie: the other preuenting his trial, by laying violent & bloody hands vpon his owne perſon: was not all this, and much more than this, to depoſe, or (ſome way or other) to diſpatch our moſt gracious and lawfull Queene? And yet, after the publiſhing of this Bull of Pius Quintus (ſayth our diſcourſer) our Catholikes (committing nothing againſt her Maieſtie, or her lawes) remained quiet, and did all acts of homage and honor vnto her. But, to proue this his owne cleering of them not to be ſo cleere, he ſayth preſently after, that the moſt part of all ſorts of Catholikes, both in England and Ireland, haue done this; onely a very few Nobles of both countries taking armes for their defence: ſo as to an excuſe of

all he addeth an accuſatiō of ſome; and, if the matter of this excuſe were liked of by himſelfe, and allowed; he muſt needes condemne theſe ſome, that were ſo raſh headed to take armes againſt their Queene, and country; and if he allowed theſe ſame in thus dooing; then his great paines taken to excuſe all Catholikes to be free from ſtirring diſloyallie, was but a Popiſh floriſh of diſſimulation.
            He proceedeth to excuſe all the preeſts, and ſtudents beyond the ſeas, and all ſuch as came ouer, and faith, that al of them ſince that cenſure of his holines (to vſe his owne words) did vſe all reuerence, and respect to her Maiestie, vttering in no preaching, ſpeech, or booke, no not at the houre of their death, and martyrdome (as he calleth it,

though hee ſhall neuer proue a traytor to be a martyr) nor euer before in any their confeſſions to the Magiſtrate, any diſloyall word againſt her Maieſtie. But for many proofes againſt this, take one for all, to diſproue him; and this one proofe being from ſuch a one; as the whole packe of them did highly reuerence, and regarde, being a Cardinall; and Cardinall Allen it was.
            This Engliſh traytor, though he were a Cardinal at Rome, hath ſent vs from thence many ſlaunderous, and ſeditious pamphlets. Amongſt the reſt he vndertaketh the defending of that falſe faithles Gentleman, Syr William Stanley, in his treaſonable parte played againſt her Maieſtie, in deliuering vp the towne of Deuenter, contrarie to

the truſt repoſed in him; and in that booke he bluſheth not to ſet downe theſe words, that, ſince her excommunication, and depoſition by the Pope, ſhe hath no iust title, or interest to her crowne, and kingdome; and that no act done by her authoritie ſince the publiſhing of that excommunication, and depoſition, hath been, or can be lawfull by the law of God, or man. And therefore that no man may lawfully ſerue her in any action, be it otherwiſe neuer ſo iust. From which he ruſheth into an earneſt perſwaſion to reuolte, to withdraw her ſubiects from her ſeruice; and to exhort them to the ſeruice of the Romiſh catholike party, and her enemies.
            Now let Maſter Diſcourſer tell me, whether this be to vtter in no

preaching, ſpeech, or booke, any diſloyall word againſt her Maieſtie? And if he will be ſilent, becauſe he dare not ſpeake the truth, to contrary, and controule his former lye; yet let all true hearted Engliſh-men tell me whether this iugling companion (the diſcourſer I meane) bee not an impudent, and ſhameles diſſembling lyar, in perſwading vs by a printed pamphlet, that all Catholikes were ſory that Saunders, and Bristow did write in allowance, and defence of the Bull, and wiſhed that ſuch an offenſiue matter had neuer been touched, (they are his owne words) and that all Catholikes, both Preests, ſtudents, and others, did conteyne themſelues from all diſloyall ſpeeches, or actions; when as Cardinall Allen, their Archprelate,

(on whoſe iudgement all the Engliſh Papiſts liuing did rely as reſolutely, as the Heathen could poſſibly vpō the Oracles ſent from their Gods) durſt, like an Archtraytor, thus villanouſly ſtuffe his booke with blaſphemous ſlanders, diueliſh perſwaſions, and impudent lyes againſt her Maieſtie.
            There is no ende of this humor in them; their practiſes are peſtilent, their perſwaſions perilous, and their platformes trayterous; and to ſerue their turne, they want not cunning to execute all: ſo violent they are in their villanies, and treaſons; and ſo ſhameles they are in their falſehood, & diſſimulation.
            I haue dwelt long in this vnſauery, and vnpleaſant argument of treacheries and treaſons, and in the enumeration of our godleſſe,

and vnnaturall traytors: wherein I haue touched many matters, and poynted out many perſons: yet could I very eaſilie adde many more: but I holde it needeleſſe, becauſe the purpoſe of my labour is onely to giue a taſte to my deare countrymen in this ſtirring world, wherein Rome, and Spaine, and Hell it ſelfe; are ſet on fire againſt our rightfull Queene, and her kingdome; that by this taſte they might ſee the brutiſh villanies of our baſtard countreymen, and might vnderſtand what iuſt cauſe there is for them to deteſt both the traytors, and treaſons. And ſurely the traytors themſelues (if God iuſtly had not blinded them) by many ſtories, and examples might knowe, that proditio placet, non proditor, though it light vpon

forreyners againſt a nation.
            We reade of Mahomet, who intending to beſiege Constantinople, a rich, but ſeditious Citizen, goeth to him, and promiſeth to procure the gates to bee ſet open for him, if hee would promiſe to giue him his daughter in mariage with a rich dowry. Mahomet agreeing, the other performed his deuiſed treaſon. And comming after to demaund his wages; It is but thy due, ſaith Mahomet; and ſo commaunded a great maſſe of treaſure to bee layed before him: But becauſe thou requireſt my daughter (ſaith hee) thou being a Chriſtian, thou muſt put off thy olde skinne, that thou maiſt be fit to company with a wife of a new, and ſtrange religion to thee; and withall commaunded him to bee

flayed, and hot imbers, and ſalte to be caſt vpon the raw fleſh, and ſo to be layed in a bed, till a new skin might growe; where he ended his miſerable life, with a iuſt and righteous puniſhment for his treaſon.
            At home, and amongſt our ſelues, Earle Edrick, to ſettle this kingdome in the handes of the Danes, ſetteth on his ſonne by ſome trayterous plot, or other, to diſpatch king Edmunde, ſurnamed Iron ſyde, out of the waye. Which hee indeede ſhortly performed, murthering the king, as hee for neceſſities ſake was ſitting in a ſecret place. The father, with good hope, but ill ſpeede, haſteth to enforme Canutus the Dane, of this exploite performed for him. But as was his worke; ſuch was his wages. Trayterous was his acte; and a

ſhamefull death was his end; euen by Canutus appoyntment, abhorring the traytor, though he got the kingdome by his treaſon. Much more ought we to be incēſed with a deteſtation of our traytors; the treaſon being againſt England; & the traytors being borne Engliſh. For in ſuch a caſe what true harted Engliſhman can brooke either? I will now haſten to thoſe, to whom the treaſon was, & is pleaſant; and that is, the ambitious Spaniard; whoſe minde is neuer quiet from aſpiring, nor neuer will be ſatisfied with leſſe than the poſſeſſing of an whole worlde of kingdomes; whoſe ambitiō hath touched vpon many dominions, & territories; & where they preuaile, and can once ſet a cōquering foote, they gouerne not in the mildenes of a rightfull

king, but rule with the crueltie of a bloodie tyrant. Examples hereof there are many; & ſundry printed bookes amongſt vs doe publiſh, and diſcouer particulars of it.
            This proud Spaniard was backed with all the ayde that poſſiblie Rome and all the Romanists could affoord him, and encouraged to go on with great hope of ſucceſſe; and offereth an inuaſion vpon this little Iſland of England; and ſtrengtheneth himſelfe to this purpoſe with as great choice of ſhipping and mē, as poſſibly he could; the ſhippes being huge, great, and ſtrong; the men, both ſouldiers and marriners, well choſen; the guides, both for land and ſea, of great skill; the furniture ſtrong, and good; the munition for powder and ſhot plentifull; the victuall

ſufficient, and ſeaſonable, and all the prouiſion fit and neceſſarie for ſuch an exployte vndertaken. And in this Nauie ſuch truſt was repoſed by Rome, by Spayne, and by our home-borne traytors, that it was called The inuincible nauie. Yet they found that it had been good counſell, that Ahab gaue to Benhadad, Let not him that girdeth himſelfe with his armour, boaſt, as he that putteth it off. For when fleſh and blood will bragge of his greatnes, glory in his ſtrēgth, and vaunt of his victories before hand; there is a God in heauen that watcheth ouer his choſen; and, whē the wicked meane moſt miſchiefe againſt his annoynted, can diſappoynt their purpoſes, and ouerthrow them in their own turne.
            So fell it out to this ambitious

               Spaniard, who promiſing to himſelfe a victorious conqueſt ouer England, was conquered himſelf, without any blow, or not many blowes ſtriken; the Lord of hoſts ſetting the boyſterous windes, and ſurging ſeas to fight againſt him; by which many of them were diſperſed and drowned: not vnlike vnto the victory of Theodoſius vpon the Alpes, for whom the ſtorie ſayth, that the great windes were ſent from God to ſight, and he had a great victorie; whereupon Claudeanus writeth theſe verſes:

                  O nimium dilecte Deo, cui militat aether,
                  Et coniurati veniunt ad claſſica venti.
               
And ſo may we ſay to our Queene in her victory againſt this boaſting proud Spaniard.
            
            
               
               O bleſt of God, for whom the skie it ſelfe doth fight,
               And boyſterous winds againſt thy foes do band to ſhew their might.
            
            He is taught hereby what it is to fight againſt God, though he thinke neuer ſo baſely of Englands ſtrength, or reſpect neuer ſo little of the abilitie thereof to encounter and reſiſt him. For was not this his ouerthrowe almoſt matchable with that, that young Ageſilaus gaue to the Arcadians? For they made warre againſt the Spartans, when Archidamus was aged, and not able to goe into the field, and he did ſend his ſonne Ageſilaus againſt them, who ouerthrew the Arcadians with ſmal loſſe, or none at al; and it was called The teareles battaile. And, with praiſe to God be it ſpoken, he had cauſe (to

his ſorrow and ſhame) to thinke that our milde & mayden Queene wanted not ſhips, mariners, and ſouldiers to encounter him; nor yet noble, and valiant conductors; to ſtop his attempt, and reſiſt his furie; and (I truſt) ſhe ſhall euer be able to man out ſhipping to maſter his malice, and to abate his pride; and I reſt aſſured of it, becauſe his, and the Popes malice to her, is not becauſe ſhe is daughter to King Henrie the 8. and ſiſter to Queene Mary; but becauſe ſhe hath baniſhed the Pope, that Antichriſt of Rome, and hath yeelded her ſelfe to the obedience of Chriſt Ieſus, in the voyce of his Goſpell.
            Hence it is, that the Pope rageth, and beſtirreth himſelfe with his curſes, and ſendeth his pupills abroade

amongſt vs, to draw chriſtians from Gods truth, to his falſe religion; and to withdraw ſubiects from obedience to their lawful Soueraigne; a worke well beſeeming Antichrist, and all his adherents. Againſt whom the heathen ſhall riſe in iudgement, and ſhall condemne them; who thought it vnhoneſt, and vnhonorable, not onely to plot, and deuiſe treaſons, but euen ſo much as to hearken to any treaſon offered them, though neuer ſo much for their benefit. For in the warre betweene Fabricius the Romaine, and Pyrrhus; the phiſition of Pyrrhus did offer for a ſumme of mony to poiſon Pyrrhus, that ſo Fabricius might get the victorie: but Fabricius was ſo farre from accepting the offer, as he ſent backe the traitour to Pyrrhus,
               
and bad him take heede how hee entertayned ſuch traytors ſo neere him. But the king of Spayne deale not ſo with the Queene our miſtres, when her poyſonfull Portingall phiſition Lopus would haue poyſoned her. For, from ſuch hopes hee taketh hearte, and hath alreadie offered to inuade vs; and hath been, and is ſtill buſied with vs in Ireland, and did carry a full purpoſe this laſt ſpring, to trye the vttermoſt of his ſtrength to get footing heere, had not her Maieſtie moſt prouidently foreſeene in her princely wiſdome how fit it was to ſpeake with him at his own home, thereby to diuert his forces from his intended inuaſion vpon vs, to defend him ſelfe; and to that end ſhee ſent out a royall nauye vnder the conduct and commaunde

of two honorable Generalls; who diuiding themſelues the one to keep the ſeas, and the other to ſet foot vpon the ſpaniards ſayle. He that deſired to land, left his honorable companion with the greateſt parte of the fleet, and himſelfe haſteth with the companies agreed vpon, to the ſhore, and with the extraordinarie forwardnes of a Generall, he ſtayed not the entrance of many before him into the towne, but to the encouragement of all, both before him and behind him, he ſhewed little to reſpect the ſafety of his own perſon; and more regarding the honour of his Soueraigne, his countrey, and himſelfe, then his owne life, hee entred the towne with a ſmall number at the firſt, and would not be daunted or driuen backe by the fiery furie of

Spaniſh ſhot, ſetled in euery houſe to annoy him: but continued his courſe, till he poſſeſſed the Market place, where he proceeded in his moſt valorous and victorious attēpt, to the winning of the towne: which done, he ioyned himſelfe to his moſt honorable companion againe, who no doubt was preſt and readie to performe what belonged vnto his place, if occaſion had been offered. And all England hath iuſt cauſe to praiſe God, for this blow of diſhonour giuen to Spayne, and for the ſafe returne of both the honorable Generals againe: who ſo ſpeedily by their diligence, ſo prouidently by their gouernment, and ſo forcibly by their courage arriued vpon his coaſt, approached an attempt, and followed it with ſuch magnanimitie, as (by the goodnes

of ye Almighty) they had moſt proſperous ſucceſſe, without any great loſſe of men, or ſhipping; & returned ſafe home, by the aſſiſtance of ye ſame God, being as ready to defend vs from inuaſion, as they haue ſhewed themſelues forward to offend him at his owne dore. And no doubt this biting blow, lately giuē him by theſe two noble Generals, hath no whit abated his anger, but incēſed him more: ſo as we are not to doubt, but that he wil no longer ſtay frō offering a reuenge vpō vs, than he can furniſh himſelfe ſtrōgly to his liking. And herein ſhall he not want the helpe of al his popiſh confederates, both forreine, and at home. For I doe not heare that the Popes holines is ſo purged frō ambition, or ſo recōciled to religion, as he meaneth not to continue his

claime for the Supremacie: or wil ceaſe to ſettle the dregs of his poyſon, and ſuperſtitious doctrine amongſt vs. I cannot conceiue that the thirſt of Parſons, and his pew-fellowes is yet quenched, from ſeeking the blood of our deare Soueraigne, and (in her) the deſtruction of vs all; the cauſe remayning ſtil, for which heretofore they haue ſought it; neither can I be perſwaded ye 
               Spaynes malice to England is yet abated, but that the Queene our miſtris, & her kingdome, is accounted with him a pray worth the enioying. Therefore I doubt nothing of ye Popes malicious forwardnes to incite it, and to adde all the ſtrength he can to it; nor of our Engliſh traytors harty diſpoſition to further it; nor of the Spaniards ambitious deſire to take it in hand, and his willingnes to do the worſt

he can. And his worſt let him doe. For the God of heauen is with vs, who is a iuſt defender of all thoſe that haue a iuſt cauſe: and as it was ſayd of Constantius:
               Et cauſa
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   valet, cauſam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   tuentibus armis:
So may we ſay of our Queene:

                  Her cauſe is better that ſhe takes in hand;
                  Her force more ſtrong, Spaynes malice to withstand.
               
            
            For whether we reſpect ye Pope, the fugitiue, and home-traytors, or the King of Spayne; our cauſe is moſt iuſt. With the Pope we ſtand for Gods ſacred and ſincere truth, againſt his ſuperſtitious and Idolatrous falſhood. With the fugitiue and home-traytor, wee ſtand for our Soueraigne, and countrie, againſt barbarous, vnnaturall, and

moſt monſtrous bloodie harted treaſons. With the ambitious King of Spayne wee ſtand for our rightfull Queene, againſt an vſurping tyrant. And therefore there is no Chriſtian heart ſo ſenceles, that wil not ſtand for God, againſt the Diuell; for Chriſt, againſt Antichriſt; for trueth, againſt falſehood: neither is there any true Engliſh heart ſo voyd of loyaltie to his Soueraigne, and loue to his countrie, but that hee will ſtand for both, againſt practiſes & plotformes of fugitiues, againſt the furie, and madnes of home-traytors; and againſt the inuading humour of a bloodie tyrant.
            Now, deare countrymen, you haue a taſte of the black darknes, that this our natiue, and naturall country was in, when the Popiſh

cleargie carryed the ſway amongſt vs; and what a bleſſed change did befall vs, when the mightie God from heauen allotted our moſte deare, and rightfull liege Lady, to be his ſoueraigne ſubſtitute, to gouerne ouer vs, his children, and her naturally borne ſubiects of England; by whoſe happy entrance into this ſeate of gouernment thoſe darke and cloudie dayes, daungerous both to ſoule and bodie, were turned into a cleare ſun-ſhyne of comfort, to all, that had any taſte, and ſauour of the wofull blindenes they were held in; or had any fence, or feeling of their countryes miſerie. And laſtly you haue heard of the manifolde daungers, that this our deare ſoueraigne, and ſupreame gouernour (vnder God) was in; both in the time of her

ſiſter, Queene Marie; the bloody purpoſes, and practiſes againſt her by the Romiſh cleargie; as alſo after ſhe was poſſeſſed of the royall authoritie, due to her in this flouriſhing kingdome, by forreine malice, and home treaſon; by which the peace of our land hath bene diſturbed, her precious lyfe miſchieuouſly, and many wayes ſhort at; and our whole countrey ſought to be runiated, and ouer-runne by inuaſion from the ambitious tyrant of Spayne. And all theſe deuiſes againſt her, and vs, were plotted at Rome; from whence that man of ſinne (the Pope I meane) hath incited and encouraged home-borne ſubiects to become rebells, in rayſing men, and carrying armes againſt their rightfull Queene; and to become bloudy traytors in conſpiring

the death of her, whoſe life is moſte precious vnto vs, and ſhould haue been moſt deare vnto them. But our neuer fayling God hath cutt the throate of all thoſe platformes, and practiſes, by diſappointing the purpoſes of all theſe rebells, and traytors; and preſeruing the life of our gratious Soueraigne Lady, beyond the reach of all policie, and wit of man: for which we can neuer be ſufficiently thankfull to this our good God, for that in the contynewing of her life, (which the Lorde ſtill long contynue) true religion, the liues of vs all, and our countries libertie, and tranquillitie is preſerued, and prolonged.
            This bloudye monſter of Rome doth not ſtay here, but hauing alreadie ſtirred vp Spaine to ſet vpon

vs both in Ireland, and in England, doth ſtill whet them on, by his vnholy prouocations, to inuade; and Spaine beeing enraged at his former ill ſucceſſe when he was here, and the ſharp blowe now giuen him, will not diſobey his holy father at Rome; nor refuſe to giue a newe attempt vpon vs, to trye whether he can ſpeede better. For Romiſh malice is not eaſilie abated; and the thirſt of a kingdome will hardly be quenched.
            To meete with this proud popiſh champion, our carefull Soueraigne, and her prouident Councel conſult daylie, and commaund daylie. They conſult of the beſt meanes to reſiſt him, and defend vs; and they commaund all thinges neceſſarie to be prouided by vs, that wee may ſtand ſtrongly for

God, for Queene, for countrie, euē for the life, and liberties of our ſelues, and all belonging to vs. It behoueth vs therefore to bee carefull in our places alſo, that as her Maieſtie, & her honorable Councell conſult, and command for the beſt; ſo we ſhould obey, and prouide for the beſt.
            It is ſayd of a learned man, that the felicitie of a Common-wealth conſiſteth in well commaunding, and well obeying. For if the commaunders doe their parts, if obedience faile, their commanding is vaine: but if well commanding be anſwered with dutifull obeying, then is religion ſafe, the Queene is ſafe, the Common-wealth is ſafe, and we are all ſafe. For Xenophon in his time ſayth, that, Quae hoc tempore habemus bona, ob nullam

aliam cauſam adepti ſumus, quàm ob praestitam obedientiam principi. So ſacred and holy a thing is obedience to Princes, before God himſelfe, who commandeth vs to obey: nay whom in this point none can diſobey, being a true Chriſtian; and ſo reuerend a thing was obedience to ſuch as knewe not God, who were drawne thereto by the light of nature, and by experience of their owne feeling the ſweete thereof. Now herein we haue an aduauntage aboue them: for wee haue both knowledge of God, who commandeth vs to obey, and him we may not diſobey; and we haue no leſſe cauſe to feele the benefit of godly and Chriſtian obedience to our Chriſtian prince, than euer had, or hath any nation of the worlde: and to ſhewe our

ſelues ſenceles of this, were to reſiſt Gods ordinance, to be ingratefull to our deare Queene, and to ſhake off all care to continue the peace and proſperitie of our countrie; and conſequently to neglect our owne priuate good.
            I hold it a ſound ground, & not to bee controlled, that euery Chriſtian ought to ſtriue to keep theſe three things ſoūd within his breaſt; his conſcience before God, his loialtie to his Prince, and his loue to his countrie. All which three for my part I account ſo neerely conioyned each to other, as they cannot iuſtly be ſeuered. For in vaine do wee ſpeake of conſcience to God, if we be ſhort in loyaltie, and obedience to her Maieſtie: in vaine doe we brag of loyaltie to her Maieſtie, if we carrie not a loue to our

countrie: and in vaine do we proteſt loue to our country, if we performe not all loue, loyaltie, and obedience to our Soueraigne, & labour not in ſome meaſure to ſatiſfie the dutie of a good conſcience to our good God.
            Our conſcience cannot but tell vs, that all obedience is due to the ſoueraigne Magiſtrate. For we are taught it out of the booke of conſcience, the holy Scriptures; which teach vs that wee muſt ſubmit our ſelues to all manner of ordinance of man, for the Lords ſake; whether it be vnto the King, as vnto the ſuperiour, &c. Our loyalty ſhould tel vs, & teach vs, that the ſafetie of her Maieſtie conſiſteth in loyall, and true obedience frō her ſubiects: for obedience proceedeth of loue; and Amor ciuiū eſt regi inexpugnabile

munimentum, ſayth Seneca. And our loue ſhould tell vs, that the Common-wealth is moſt happie, where obedience is moſt heartilie performed. For, as one ſaith verie notably, Nihil eſt, quod regnum aliquod reddat potentius, firmins, ſerenius, aut durabilius, quàm obedientia ſubditorum. Whoſoeuer therefore hath any conſcience before God, any ſparke of a loyall heart to her Maieſtie, or the leaſt ſound loue in his boſome to his countrie; he cannot but embrace this obedience, euery way in himſelfe ſeeke to expreſſe it, and with others earneſtlie labour to perſwade it.
            Notwithſtāding we haue ſome, and too great a ſumme of thoſe amongſt vs, that ſhake off this obedience, and are ſo vehemently caried

with a prepoſterous blinde zeale to popiſh Idolatrie, that the Romiſh Antichriſt challenging to bee Chriſtes Vicar vppon earth, (though it bee plaine that in ſtead of Chriſt his ſimple and naked truth, he ſetteth vp his vnchriſtian, and carnal forgeries, and vntruths) is had in more reuerence and regard, by thoſe recuſant Engliſh-borne ſubiects, than is our moſt Chriſtian, and moſt rightfull Queene Elizabeth. For although the commandemēt be giuen from God, that wee ſhould obey her: yet dare they couer and cloake their diſobedience vnder the colourable name of conſcience: whereas it is nothing els, but a vaine, and ſuperſtitious conceit, wrought in them from Rome, beſotting them with a blinde loue

of their dregges, and making them (like to the fooliſh Iſraelties) to preferre the leekes and onyons of Egypt, before the ſweete Manna, wherwith the Lord fed them from heauen. So that in them the olde verſe is fully verified:

                  Quiſquis amat ranam, ranam putat eſſe Dianam.
                  The foole that to a frog his fācy ties,
                  As faire Diana thinks it in his eies.
               
            
            Now conſcience muſt be grounded vpon knowledge; and knowledge to guide the conſciēce muſt bee fetched out of the ſacred and holie worde of GOD; the triall whereof they can no more abide, then can the owle the light.
            I note three things in this kinde of people, worthie to bee knowne and obſerued. Firſt, the hurt they continually do: ſecondly, the hurt

they would doe: and thirdly, their deepe diſſimulation. For the firſt, it would aske a large diſcourſe to diſcouer all the hurts done by thē, they are ſo many and manifold; I will onely touch ſome. My owne experience telleth me, that where the gentleman, and man of wealth refuſeth to come to the Church, and is in any ſort borne withall; there the meaner ſort receiue infection, and draw back from obedience. For,

                  A boue maiori diſcit arare minor.
                  Of elder oxe the yonger ſteere doth learne.
               
            
            If the men come to Church, and their wiues refuſe (which is a cunning tricke much practiſed of late yeres) thē is yt houſhold, both children & ſeruants, in daunger wholly to bee corrupted. And ſure it is,

that the wiues of the meaner ſort are infected greatly by them; and the night crowes perſwaſion preuaileth much; and in mint owne knowledge, within theſe three yeares, many of the meaner ſort are fallen away, and doe fall away daily:
Impunitatis ſpes, magna peccandi illecebra.
            
            Touching the hurt they would do, who doubteth but they would gladly haue vp their Maſſe againe, and baniſh the ſincere worſhip of God? Their whole catholike gouernment and religion, I am ſure, they long for. And yet, to pronounce theſe men to carrie hollow hearts to Queene Elizabeth, is thought to bee an vncharitable ſentence. But I pray you tell me, Can God and Mammon; Chriſt

and Boliall; the table of the Lord, and the table of diuels agree together? Scripture ſayth they cannot; and it becommeth vs to beleeue it, no more can the Popes authoritie, and Queene Elizabeths ſtād together: and yet muſt I beleeue that theſe men carrie loyall hearts to our Soueraigne, though they obey the Pope, and diſobey her. For my part I ſee no reaſon at all to beleeue them; and I wiſh all my countrimen to beware of them, for they are a dangerous breede; and the more dangerous, becauſe many of thē ſhew to haue a good outward ciuill carriage in ciuill matters. But let not that poſſeſſe you with too great a regarde of them: and to deliuer you from the danger of ſuch deceitfull baytes, I muſt aſſure you that this is a true

poſition, that, without the true feare of God there can bee no true religion; and vnles the religion be ſound, the face, and ſhew of ciuill honeſtie (ſeeme it neuer ſo glorious in the eyes of fleſh and blood) is but a deceitfull viſour vpon a crabtree face, couering the moſt vile, and cankered partes of a moſt deceitfull heart; and ſo I come to their diſſimulation.
            Theſe ciuill honeſt men, that vnder pretence of conſcience rebel againſt God in religion, and refuſe to yeeld a loyall obedience to their liege Lady, and Soueraigne (as in religion, and policie they ought, in her moſte iuſt, and chriſtian lawes and commaundements) ſeeme to carry a moſte lamentable reſolution lurking in their boſomes, againſt Queene, Country, & vs all,

when, they will ſeeke the life of their, and our Queene, the thraldome of their, and our countrie, and the ruine of vs all, that profeſſe the goſpell, to haue their popiſh prieſthood, and maſſing ſacrifice vp againe; and if this be conſcience, I know not what conſcience meaneth. And yet this conſcience they fetch from Rome; and, by the plaine profeſſion of them that are fledde the realme, and haue, (becauſe they thought them ſelues out of reache) ſhewed them ſelues in their colours, wee may iuſtly doubt the affection of thoſe, that remayne with vs; how demurely ſo euer they will ſhewe to behaue them ſelues. For they are of the horſeleach kinde; and ſeeme to expect when they may glut themſelues with the blood of Gods ſaints: without which they cannot

haue their Dagon vp againe.
            The Recuſants of our age cannot profeſſe, nor make greater ſhewe of loyaltie, and loue to our dread Soueraigne: neither can ſerue her outwardly with greater apparance of faithfulnes; nor can proteſt more deepely by wordes and oathes, their true and good meaning to her, than did Gardiner, Boner, and Tonstall, to her noble father, and brother; which they did confirme by printed bookes. For Gardiner he wrote his booke De vera obedientia, and Boner added his epiſtle before it; And Tonstall publiſhed a flat treatiſe againſt the Pope. But when theſe two noble Princes were called to their laſt, and euerlaſting home, and kingdome in heauen, and Queene Marie poſſeſſed the gouernement of this kingdome vpon

earth; then Gardiner did teare off his glorious viſour, and ſhewed him ſelfe in his right colours, and ſhape. For he, and his complices neuea reſted, till they had brought in the Spaniard, and had matched him in marriage with the Queene; by which they betrayed God, her, and the whole realme.
            This bloudie intention by this linck thus ſtrengthened, then commeth Gardiner out publikely in pulpit with this ſentence, Hora eſt iam nos ê ſomno ſurgere: peruerting the ſacred ſcripture moſt profanely, and blaſphemouſly to his bloodie purpoſe; and what hauock he, and Boner, and the reſt made of Gods ſaintes, and our deare brethren, and countrymean, ſtories make mention. Yea further, as before I haue ſet downe, this bloodie monſter Gardiner did put hard at

the life of our deare Soueraigne, and miſtres, by whom (next, and immediatly vnder God) wee all liue in peace, and ſafetie, both of ſoule, and body; prayſed be the almightie for her deliuerance, and long may ſhee liue, to rule and raigne ouer vs, to the waſting of poperie to the leaſt dramme of that religion (or rather ſuperſtition) amongſt vs; and to the rooting out, and vtter ruinating of all treaſons, and traytors; and let all, that truly feare God, cary loyall hartes to our deare Queene, & loue their countrey vnfeignedly, as faithfull chriſtians, loyall ſubiects, and true harted Engliſh-men, ſay Amen.
            
            As for the reſt, ſuch of them, as are to be conuerted, I wiſh them true, and ſpeedie conuerſion, with all my heart; otherwiſe, rather than Gods true religion ſhoulde bee

darkened, her Maieſties leaſt fingerake by treacherie, and treaſon; or my countrey ſuſtaine the leaſt harme by their vnnaturall practiſes, I wiſh their ſpeedie confuſion, and ouerthrow. For we may well ſay of them, as Tullie ſaide of Catiline the conſpiratour, in one of his orations, In all, or moſt of theſe happie yeres of her Maieſties moſt proſperous, & peaceable gouernement, there hath been no trayterous practiſe againſt her perſon, or our countrey, but it came alwayes from them, and by them; whome neither ſhame of their villanies, nor feare of puniſhment, nor any ſound reaſon out of Gods booke, or the rule of true chriſtian policie could withholde from purſuing their traiterous purpoſes, and practiſes. And to ſee, or heare, that the royall perſon of our Soueraigne

Ladie was in danger, was pleaſing to them; as contrariwiſe, the news of her happie eſcape, was yrkſome; ſo that, where there is onely the bare ſence of a true Engliſh heart, theſe Popiſh Recuſants cannot bewitch, or deceaue with their hypocriticall holines, or ciuill honeſtie: and ſo I leaue them.
            Now my deare countrymen, to you, whome God hath ſeaſoned with a better ſpirite of knowledge, and whoſe hearts he hath taught to honor, and loue your rightfull Soueraigne, and Queene; and whom nature it ſelfe hath inſtructed to holde your natiue ſoyle and countrey deare vnto you; and to haue a ſenſible feeling of many miſeries threatned againſt yourſelues, your wiues, & children; plucke vp your ſpirits, and bee couragious in the Lordes quarell, in the Queenes

quarell, in your countries quarell, and in your owne quarell; know, and acknowledge this common quarell of GOD, Queene, and Countrey, to be your owne quarel in deede. For in this buſie bending of diueliſh wits together to conſpire; and this ioynt-banding of huge, and ſtrong forces to execute; your ſoules are hunted after, that they may bee impriſoned in the darke dungeon of Popiſh Idolatrie (which is the ready way to prepare them for the cheines of darknes for euer:) your bodies are hunted after, to be expoſed to their ſauage, and intolerable torments; and here with your wiues to be deflowred, your daughters to be rauiſhed, your ſonnes to bee made ſlaues, and all of you to be tyed to a lingring tormenting life, or a bloody cruell death; your landes

and goods are hunted after; not for ranſomes to bee accepted for your deliuerance out of their ciuell hands, but for prayes, and rewards to the tormenting Souldier, and proude tyrannicall Spaniard.
            Let vs therefore labour to bee inſtructed daylie more and more in the knowledge of Gods trueth, that our conſciences being grounded vppon true knowledge, wee may be armed againſt all the ſubtill ſleights of Sathan, and his Romiſh inſtruments; and with courage, and with boldenes ſtand to Gods infallible, and eternall truth to our liues ende; that when the time of our diſſolution commeth, we may enioy the crowne of eternall glorie; propounded to, and prepared for all thoſe that make a bleſſed entrance into the profeſſion and practiſe of true religion;

continew therein with a chriſtian proceeding; and holde on with perſeuerance to the end.
            Let vs with all willingnes ſtraine our ſelues to our vttermoſt habilities, to fight for God, for Queene, for Countrey, and for our owne ſelues. For, what benefite ſhall we receiue of our wealth, if the rauening Spaniard catch holde on vs? And what cōfort ſhall our wealth yeelde vs, though we poſſeſſe it, if our bodies be in bondage? And what pleaſure can we take of our liues, if wee ſee our wiues, and daughters rauiſhed, and defloured, and our ſonnes tyed to perpetuall ſlauerie.
            For although the ground (in ſhewe) of the Spaniards comming to inuade vs, is his care to obay the Popes commaundement, to reduce this land to his obedience, in

taking holde of, and receauing his Romiſh religion, and gouernment; and our ſimple Recuſants rae ſo ſottiſh, and ſo bewitched with the inchauntments of Popiſh ſuperſtition, as they beleeue this to be true; and the rather, becauſe one of our Arch-runnagate traytors, ſworn to the Popes pantable, publiſhed a ſeditious pamphlet, before the laſt inuaſion, to perſwade it; yet if you will giue me leaue to call to your rememberance the maner, and meaning of his comming into England, when hee came, not as an inuader, to conquer; but as a freind, to faſten a ſtrong league of amitie by a marriage, I doubt not to diſcouer the treacherous crueltie of his hearte.
            For this marriage was ſought for, and intended alſo in ſhewe onely to ſtrengthen the hand of the

Queene of England, to bring in the Romiſh religion, and gouernement into this land; and to eſtabliſh it with continuance, with purpoſe, and meaning to adde ſtrength to all the corners of chriſtendome, to continue poperie where it was; and to bring it in, where it was not; that ſo the Archprelate of Rome might holde the ſcepters, and power of all princes, and potentates of chriſtendome in his hand, to diſpoſe at his pleaſure. But the plots, and practiſes, layed, and purſued by the Spaniſh King, had made a wofull proofe to England of a further marke ſhotte at (which was diſcouered in a letter to ſome of our nobles from a true harted Engliſhman in Spaine) had not God almightie, in his riche mercie, preuented their purpoſes, and defeated them in their determinations;

as it ſhall appeare hereafter, if I firſt remember to you that it is recorded of the Spaniard, that in diffimulation he ſurpaſſeth all nations, till he haue attained to his purpoſe; and when he can once preuaile, he goeth beyonde them all in oppreſſion, and tyrannie; alſo that he diſdayneth all other nations; and that in pride, and carnall voluptuouſnes no nation commeth neere him, and theſe bee his qualities.
            Now to proceede to laye open the right marke, that in deede hee ſhotte at, though when hee made waye to ioyne in marriage with Queene Marie, hee made ſemblance of greate conſcience to Catholike religion, and greate care to bring the whole land into the obedience thereof; and ſeemed to glorie much, when it was brought to

paſſe; as his letter to his holy father at Rome written out of England doth make ſhewe: wherein he expreſſeth what a worthie worke he had done, when he had drawen the nobles, and commons of the lande to ſubmitte them ſelues to his holynes, as their cheefe (thoſe are the very wordes) yet little did the nobles, and commons knowe what was intended towardes them by this Catholike child of Rome. For vnder this colourable name of Catholike religion, was hidden the ambitious humor of a moſt proud vſurping tyrant; whoſe reſolution was, vppon mature deliberation, and conſultation with his Machiauellian counſellers, to ſeeke, by all the poſſible kind meanes he could, to winne the principall of our nobles to affect him, and in their affection to poſſeſſe him of the

crowne, and ſo to eſtabliſh him in an abſolute power ouer poore England; & to bring this to paſſe, hee decreed to ſpare neither coſt, nor kindneſſe.
            If once hee had obtained the crowne, and regall power into his clutches, then (as in yt letter of diſcouerie is layed open,)  The Councell table muſt bee filled with his counſellers;  The hauen townes muſt be poſſeſſed with gouernours of his appointing;  Fortifications muſt be made by his direction;  & Souldiers of his owne muſt bee placed in garriſon, at places moſt apt for ſtrength to himſelfe, and annoyance to this poore nation;  Then muſt the common law of this land bee altered, by which Iuſtice is truely taught to al ſorts; the Prince to gouerne, the people to obay; the nobles to liue of their

owne, with out wronging the inferiours; the inferiours to liue vnder the nobles, with al loue, reuerence, and dutie, the riche to dwell amongſt ye poore without oppreſſion; the poore to dwell with the rich without diſorder; the offenders to bee puniſhed without partialitie; and the well diſpoſed to be defended, without reſpect of perſons. This the law of the land doth offer vnto vs, to our comfort; and from this he purpoſed to make an exchange to his Spaniſh lawes; which beeing no better than his Spaniſh Inquiſition (as in deede they are not) we could not (out of queſtion) receiue great comforte by the exchange. For the Inquiſition conuenteth without knowen cauſe; compelleth to accuſe without reaſon; condemneth without proofe; committeth to the

torture without colour; and finally neuer ceaſſeth till harte bloud bee ſucked out of ſuch, as make their wofull appearance. Which vnholy Inquiſition he did moſt ſauagely ſettle in moſt partes of his dominions; and this bloudie Inquiſition would he not haue failed to bring into our land, with all other his lawes, and ordinances ſutable to the ſame. Their intolerable taxes alſo we muſt haue been peſtered with; being ſuch (as my author reporteth, who knew them well) as England (thankes bee to God) was neuer yet acquainted with, neither, I truſt, euer ſhalbe. A taſt whereof I will giue you, as, that for euerie chimnie, and other places to make fyre in, as ouens, fornaces, ſmithes forges, and ſuch others, a french crowne was yerely payed to him. Hee had alſo

powling pence for all manner of corne, bread, beefe, mutton, capon, pigges, gooſe, hennes, ducke, chickin, butter, cheeſe, egges, apples, peares, nuttes, beere, wine, and all other thinges whatſoeuer the people feedeth vpon. Yea no farmer, yeoman, or huſbandman durſt eat a capon in his houſe, if his friende came to him. For if he did, it muſt coſt him ſixe ſhillings eight pence though the capon was not worth twelue pence and ſo ioties quoties. Theſe bee the benefites, and bleſſinges, that this Catholike kinge ſought to bring in hither by this abſolute authoritie ſought for.
            My author doth further vnfolde his treacherous purpoſe towardes this land,  by diſcouering vpon his own knowledge, and hearing, this kings intention to be, by little and little to roote out the nobilitie:

                to keepe the commons in beggerie,  and not to ſuffer one to liue heere, that was borne in twentie yeares before; but either to deſtroy them, or to make them ſlaues amongſt the Moores. The colour whereof was, becauſe they were borne out of the faith of the Catholike church of Rome: wherein he ſhewed a very conſcionable regarde of their ſoules health, and ſaluation, by killing them, before he ſought to conuert them; or by ſending them where no inſtruction was to be had for them.
            And, to make vp the full meaſure of al impietie, the faſter to ſettle his crowne vpon his head from remouing (if he had gotten it) hee layed his plotte to deſtroye out deare ſoueraigne Lady, Queene Elizabeth: hauing decreed with himſelfe, that neither ſhee nor any

of that curſed nation (ſo hee tearmed it, and yet the Popes holynes had abſolued it) ſhould gouerne England any more. But bleſſed be God, who hath bleſſed vs with the life, and raigne of our bleſſed Queene; who, (I truſt) ſhall liue to giue him ſuch a deadly blowe, as neither his curſed ſelfe, nor any of his curſed nation, (iuſtly ſo to bee called, becauſe the Pope, that curſed man of ſinne, hath bleſſed them) ſhall euer ſee the day to rule in England.
            
            Whiles this plot was layde, and the practiſe was in hand, to ſet the crowne vpon the Spaniards head, the Spaniards them ſelues did, in my authors hearing (as he reporteth) often curſe the time, that euer their kinge maryed Queene Marie, vnleſſe they might get the crowne; but if that might bee

brought to paſſe (which was ment by making of the marriage) they ſhould then do well enough. Thus you ſee yt vnder the colour of this marriage, ſaluation of ſoules ſeemed to be ſought for; but in deede deſtruction both of our bodies and ſoules was purſued: Loue to the nobles, and our whole nation, was manifeſted in ſhewe, but in ſubſtance, the ruine both of nobles, and nation was intended: Strength was ſaide to be added by this match to our kingdome; but it is apparant they ſought to ſtrengthen them ſelues, by weakening vs, and our kingdome. For without regarde of ſexe, age, or degree, all were deſtined to ſlauerie, and bondage at the leaſt; howſoeuer they eſcaped with life. To knitt vp this; If marriage (the ſtrongeſt bonde of amitie to a true religious chriſtian

heart) could not drawe the leaſt ſparke of true loue from him to this noble Queene, who ſo louingly made choice of him to be her huſband; nor the honorable acceptation of him by the nobles, could worke any ſound loue in him towardes them; nor his comming in tearmes of loue to our countrie, coulde yeeld better fruites, but to ſeeke the ruine, and deſtruction thereof; what ſhall our deare ſoueraigne Queene Elizabeth, her nobles, and all her people looke for now at his handes, cōming in open hoſtilitie, with banner diſplayed, ſhippes manned, ſwordes drawne, ordinance charged, myndes fully bent to roote out Queene, nobles, and people; and to make this flouriſhing kingdome a praie to his ambitious bloudie deſire?
            I looke for little ſoundnes from

thoſe, that are fugitiues of our nation; but I could wiſh all Engliſh home dwellers ſhould be ſo farre from all ſenceleſſe feeling of their countries miſerie (wherein their owne ſhare is, of what profeſſion ſo euer they be) as to be not onely free from treacherous combining with the enemye; but alſo forward to ſtretch forth their handes to reſiſt his force. I would haue none of Metius Suffetius his mynde amongſt vs; who beeing required by Tullus Hostilius, to ayde him in his warre againſt his enemies, he promiſed to come (becauſe he durſt not deny him) but he ſtood a loofe off, and beheld the fight, forbearing to ioyne to either partie, till he might ſee what waye the victorie would go. But Hostilius perceiuing his cunning, and falſehood, cauſed him to be drawne in

peeces with wylde horſes. You maie reade alſo in the booke of Iudges, that Meroz was curſed for not helping in the warre againſt Siſera; and Jael, for her forwardnes therein was bleſſed. And ſurely the curſe of the Almightie muſt needs light vpon al ſuch Engliſh-men, as will either by falſehood betraye their Queene, & countrie, for loue to Rome and Spayne; or bee colde in prayer to God, or faint in courage againſt the enemie, or pinching in purſe, to make all requiſite prouiſion for the defence of their Soueraigne, and countrie, againſt Rome, and Spayne. Neutralitie, in matters concerning chriſtianitie; or loyaltie, ſauoureth neither of a true hearted chriſtian, nor ſubiect. And Solon made a lawe, that in any ſtirre, or tumult, all the Citizens ſhould ſtand on one ſide, or other;

he would haue no neuters amongſt them.
            Our Soueraigne, and Countrey hath been aſſaulted many wayes; and they both (through Gods great goodnes) haue eſcaped many dangers; And ſurely it behoueth vs to know, and vnderſtand, that a danger paſt requireth hearty, and continuall thankes to be giuen to the author thereof; and a perill depending, exacteth both prayer, and prouidence. It is true, that wee all, euery mothers childe of vs, are very ſlacke both in prayer, and thankeſgiuing. Yet we are more ready to beg of God thoſe things we want, than to giue him thankes for that we haue already receaued. Notwithſtanding, as Augustine ſaith, Non eſt dignus dandis, qui non eſt gratus de datis. Wee are eaſilie intreated in ſicknes to praye for

health; in danger to pray for deliuerance; and in any aduerſitie to cry for helpe; but how ſoone ſicknes is forgotten, when health is reſtored; How eaſily dangers fall out of memorie, when deliuerance is obtained; How little aduerſitie is thought of, when helpe is once graunted; many examples doe proue. It is recorded for our learning, and warning, that tenne Lepars were clenſed by our Sauiour Christ; but onely one came backe, to giue thankes. Againe wee reade that the Iſraelites were in miſerable bondage vnder cruel Pharaoh; and whileſt the croſſe was vpon them, they cryed hard for help, and deliuerance; but being releaſed of their miſerie, and deliuered from the intolerable burdens of Egypt; they are ſo farre from being thankfull to God, that they fall to murmur

againſt God; and in ſteede of ſeruing him, that had ſaued them, they fall to Idolatrie, and falſe worſhip.
            Let this warne vs to beware we be not ſlacke in thankfulnes to our God, who hath beſtowed ſo many bleſſings and benefits vpon vs, and hath freed vs from many perils, by ſo many ſtrange deliuerances. For thankefulnes for a benefite receiued, draweth on a new bleſſing. And if euer this thankfulnes were needfull to appeare in vs, it is now, when, beyond the policie and wit of man, the life of our gracious Queene hath been ſundrie times preſerued; and in her Gods true religion, our owne liues, and our countries liberty both in ſoule and bodie prolonged. Let vs know for truth, that our God hath not boūd himſelfe to continue a God of fauour,

and defence to vs, vnles wee continue thankfull to him. Therefore with the holy Prophet Dauid let vs ſay, Benedictus Dominus, qui non dedit nos in captionem dentibus eorum. But is this enough? ſurely no. For if our thankfulnes come from a feeling heart, as it ought, it will not onely ſound in words, but will alſo ſhew it ſelf in action; and that in our continuall care, and endeuour, both by practiſe & paines to ſeeke the glorie of God, and the good of his Church. The proſperitie and welfare thereof ought to be more deare vnto vs, than our own liues. For no Common-wealth hath promiſe from God of peace, and tranquilitie, but in the flouriſhing of religion, and true beautie of the Church: and in deede herevpon the ſaluation of our ſoules, and the ſafetie of our Queene doth

depende: and it is moſt certaine, that if the Queene bee in daunger, we cannot looke to ſit ſafe.
            I finde amongſt the learned, that ſinceritie of religion, and loue of the people, are two eſpeciall props and pillers of the ſtate of a Prince. For ſincere religion teacheth to loue ſoundly; and ſound loue quencheth all ſparkes of diſloyaltie. Therfore I hold it for certaine, that religion, and the Queenes ſafetie cannot bee ſeuered. For if religion flouriſh, the Queene muſt needes be ſafe: and, if the Queene bee ſafe, religion muſt needs flouriſh: and, as I thinke them to deale vnſoundly, that ſeeke to ſettle her ſafetie, without care of religion; ſo muſt I deeme them to deale hypocritically, that ſpeake much of religion, without care of her ſafetie. For he that ſhall carrie a right and

ſound care for Queene Elizabeths ſafetie, muſt firſt loue religion, and feare GOD: according to that, which Constantius the Emperour ſayd, who (grieuing at his peoples reuolt from true religion, vpon triall that he made of them) plainly proteſted, They that will not be true to God, can neuer bee true to man. And therefore ſuch of them as had any office, he putteth them out; ſuch of them as were neere about him, he diſplaced, and freed himſelfe from the daunger of ſuch hollow-hearted ſubiects, and ſeruants.
            Religion then is the true guide to euery mans conſcience, and holdeth euery mans conſcience within the compaſſe of true obedience; and this obedience containeth euery good ſubiect within the limits of true loue and feare: and

where theſe two meete together, they make a ſweete harmonie in the heart of euery true ſubiect. For loue nouriſheth all care to pleaſe, and obey; and ſuch feare expelleth all diſpoſition to offend; and both ioyne together with a feeling conſent, to yeeld continuall thanks to the almightie, for deliuering our Soueraigne from daunger, and to pray daily and hourely to his maieſtie, that hee will in mercie protect vs ſtill.
            This perill depending, it behoueth vs to bee prouident. For as warre is denounced, and threatned from forraine parts; ſo conſpiracies lye and lurk cloſely at home in our owne boſomes. Foris they prepare; intus they conſpire, and all to giue a deadly blowe to the ſtate we liue in; and to the perſon, whom (next vnder God) wee liue

by. For I ſay it againe, and I cannot ſay it too often, theſe preparers abroade, and theſe conſpirers at home, ſhoote al at one marke: our religion they would alter, & thereby bring our conſciences into thraldome: our gouernment they would change, and thereby bring our bodies into ſlauerie: and, to effect theſe the more eaſily, the life of our ſacred Soueraigne they would ſhorten, and thereby bring all miſerie and miſchiefe vpon vs.
            Theſe bee high poynts, and of great cōſequence. For who would not rather dye, than loſe the libertie of his conſcience? Who would not depart with any thing that hee hath, to preuent the bondage of his bodie? and who would ſpare the beſt blood in his bodie (much leſſe his purſe) to redeeme all danger from his religious, louing, and

lawfull Soueraigne? I doubt not (deare countrimen) but that you are men of wiſedome, and can eaſily conceiue what daunger wee ſtand in, by that hath bin ſet down before. You are men of iudgemēt, and therefore can eaſily conſider, what furniture is fit for the ſtrengthening of vs, to preuent ſuch a danger (knowing treaſure to bee the finewes of warre) and you are men religious, louing, and loyall; and therefore will not refuſe to ſtraine your purſes farre, rather than the religion of our God, the libertie of our Countrie, and the perſon of our Soueraigne ſhall be expoſed to the deſire of Popiſh Idolaters, Spaniſh tyrannies, and bloody traytors.
            It is no time for vs now to plead pouertie; the cauſe requireth liberalitie; and we muſt bee liberall;

the life of religion, of Queene, and countrie, is at the ſtake. He that is ſicke of a dangerous diſeaſe, looketh not into his abilitie what hee can ſpare; but looketh into the neceſſitie of his caſe, what hee muſt ſpare, to worke himſelfe recouery. And in this caſe hee that would ſpare any coſt, al men would hold him a very ſauage, and vnnaturall miſer. I hope therfore being faithfull Chriſtians, loyall ſubiects, and true hearted Engliſhmen; the religion, and trueth of God, the libertie of our countrie, and the ſafetie of our Soueraigne is of greater price with vs, than ten thouſande liues; and none of vs will make dainty to ſpend the laſt drop of blood in our bodies, to ranſome any of theſe; much leſſe therefore will he ſpare to ranſacke the bottome of our purſes, to adde ſtrēgth

to preuent the danger. Peny thirſt in this caſe may bring pound perill: and (to ſpeake plainly) with what cōfort can a religious Engliſhman liue; I ſaye, a religious man: for I ſpeake not of the ſuperſtitious Papiſt, the godleſſe Atheiſt, nor the ſchiſmatical Browniſt) when he ſhall loſe the libertie of his conſcience? with what ioy ſhall a man enioy his ſubſtance, when he is brought into bondage and ſlauerie? and what ſafetie can there bee to a right Engliſhman, when Queene Elizabeth is in danger?
            Seeing then they ſeeke to bring their Popiſh Idolatrie to vs againe from Rome, wee muſt ſeeke to entertaine, and holde faſt the religion of Chriſt Ieſus ſent to vs from heauen; and ſeeing they ſeeke to tye vs againe in the chaines of ſuperſtitious

Romiſh bondage, we muſt ſeeke to holde faſt, and increaſe the libertie we enioy, in the ſinceritie of Chriſt his goſpell; ſeeing Rome, and Romanists ſeeke enuiouſly, and trayterouſly the ruine, and ouerthrow of our Queene, and countrey; wee muſt ſeeke religiouſly by obedience, and aſſiſtance, to vpholde, & maintaine the right, quiet, and proſperitie of both.
            It is not in vs, or our power, to effect this; but it becommeth vs to ſhew our forwardnes, and willingnes to effect it; our lands, goods, and liuings muſt not be reſpected, in regarde of this; all prayer, all prouidence, and all endeuour that can be, is little enough to follow, and finiſh ſo holy, and heauenly a worke; and this is our ſpeciall comfort, the Lorde himſelfe is on our ſide, for it is his owne cauſe,

who is of power ſufficiently able to defend vs; who in his mercy is forward, and willing to defend vs: and if wee can call vpon him in faith, and will walke before him in feare, and trembling, he will neuer fayle vs. For The Lord is nigh vnto all thoſe, that call vpon him in faith, and veritie.
            
            
               2. Chro. 15.The ſame, that Azariah ſaide vnto Aſah, and al Iudah, the ſame may be ſaide vnto our Soueraigne, and vnto all England; that the Lord is with her, and with vs, whileſt wee bee with him; and if wee ſeeke him, he will be found of vs; and if we forſake him, he will forſake vs. Which being vttered by this Prophet to them, they make ſpeede to turne from their euill waies; they haſte hartely to call vpon the Lord; both king and people turne; both king and people pray;

and they all ioyne in offering the ſacrifices allowed, and looked for in thoſe times, and make a couenant to ſeeke the Lord God of their fathers, with all their heart, and with all their ſoule; and a law is ſet, that whoſoeuer will not ſeeke the Lord of Iſrael, ſhal be ſlaine, whether he were ſmall or great, man or woman; and they take a ſolemne oth to performe this to the Lord with a lowd voyce, with ſhowting, with trumpets, and with cornets: and it is ſayd in the text following, that all Iudah reioyced at the oth. For they had ſworne to the Lord with all their heart, and ſought him with a whole deſire. The bleſſing alſo that followed this harkening to the Prophet, (bringing foorth ſo religious an obedience to his words) is ſet downe. For it is ſayd, The Lorde was found of them, and gaue them reſt round about. Here is a bleſſed watch-word

word from the Prophet; a bleſſed obedience both from king & people; a bleſſed comfort ſent from God; & this happie iſſue followed; namely, the ouerthrow giuen by Aſah to the Ethiopians, who was ſet vpon by Zerah of Ethiopia with an hoaſt of ten hundred thouſand, & three hundred chariots (as it is recorded in the former chapter) and it is there ſaid, that Aſah did goe out before him, and ſet his battaile; and Aſah lift vp his voyce vnto the Lord his God, and ſayd,1. Chro. 14.11. 
               O Lord, it is nothing with thee to helpe with many, or with no power: helpe vs, ô Lord our God; for we reſt on thee, and in thy name are we come againſt this multitude. O Lord, thou art our God, let not man preuaile againſt thee. And the text ſayth, that The Lord ſmote the Egyptians before Aſah, and before Iudah, and the Ethiopians fled.
            
            
               Here is a liuely paterne of our ſtate and cauſe. Aſah deſtroyeth Idolatrie, and baniſheth falſe worſhip: he is maligned by the Idolatrous Ethiopians, who ſend out forces againſt him; he prepareth, and ſetteth out againſt them; he putteth his whole and onely truſt in the Lord; he prayeth vnto him; the Lord heareth him; the Lord ſcattereth his enemies, and giueth him the victorie. Is not this the very cauſe of our liege and Soueraigne? who hath baniſhed Popiſh Idolatrie, and hath eſtabliſhed the true, and ſincere worſhip of God; and for this is maligned by the Anti-chriſtian Pope, by the ambitious King of Spayne, and by al the popiſh confederates of Chriſtendome. And did not Spayne man out a huge Nauie by ſea vpon England, as the Ethiopian did ſend out an armie by land, to ſet vpon Iudah? They prayed, and

we prayed; the Lord heard them, and the Lord heard vs: the Ethiopian armie the Lord of hoaſts diſcomforted, and the Spaniſh Nauie the Lord of hoaſts did diſperſe and ouerthrow. Vpon this victorie the Prophet Azariah warned Aſah, and all Judah; and both king and people hearkened and obeyed: and ſince our victorie, the Prophets and preachers of our time haue often warned vs; and it becommeth vs to hearken and obey: which if we do, then muſt we make the like couenant with our God that they did; ioyne in the like oth that they did, and ioy when wee haue done it, as they did. Then ſhall the ſame bleſſing bee promiſed and performed vnto vs, that was vnto them; The Lord will be found of vs, and will giue vs reſt round about vs. And if the Lord for his owne glorie, and our triall, giue a way to Rome
               
and Spayne, to ſet vpon vs againe (as they bragge, and threaten that they will) let vs beleeue with Aſah, that the Lord is of power ſufficient to ouerthrowe great and huge armies with a ſmal number; and let vs pray to him with Aſah, that he will ſtand with vs, and for vs, in the day of battaile; and then, no doubt, neither Spayne, Pope, nor Diuell ſhall haue power to preuaile againſt vs.
            I finde it recorded, that King Henrie the 8. her Maieſties moſt noble father, in the 19. yeare of his raigne, (before the Lorde had touched the eyes of his heart, and pulled away the ſcales that darkened his ſpirituall ſight) ſhewed ſuch zeale to that ſuperſtitious religion of Rome, which in the time of his blindnes he profeſſed, that vpon warre threatned, and purſued by the Emperour againſt Rome, for the ſacking thereof, he ſuffered

the Cardinall to inioyne his whole land and kingdome, that ſolemne Proceſſions, and faſts ſhould bee ſolemnelie helde (after their blind maner) for the deliuerance of Rome from his ruine intended towards it; in ſo much as this one Article ſpecially is added to their Letanie, Sancta Maria, &c. ora pro Clemente Papa.
            
            Verily I could wiſh that not onely commandements, and examples Canonicall out of the book of God, (whereof we haue plentie) ſhould of conſcience moue vs to ſuch holy exerciſes in theſe times, becauſe our ſins haue prouoked the iudgement of God; but alſo that this zeale without knowledge in a falſe religion, ſhould euen for ſhame incite, and ſtir vs vp with ſeruent zeale to ſeeke the glorie of our God; and by ſuch godly religious neceſſarie exerciſes

to humble our ſelues before ye throne of his maieſtie, to beg either releaſe of theſe troubles threatned againſt vs, and haſtening vpon vs; or his arme of aſſiſtance to defend vs from the furie, and deliuer vs from the danger.
            For if they could be drawne in a ſuperſtitious blinde zeale, to fall to their ſuperſtitious praiers for a prieſt; I ſee not how, with a good conſcience, we can be ſlacke to fall to religious and harty prayers to our God, for our Chriſtian religious Prince. If they could be ſo forward in England to fall to prayers for an Italian ſtranger; much more ought wee in England for our naturally borne Soueraigne. If they were ſo readie to pray to God for him, to whom they could not ſubiect themſelues, and continue in a true, and holie obedience to their God; much more ſhould wee

haſte to runne to powre forth our prayers to the Almightie for her, to whom wee ought to performe all obedience; vnleſſe we will ſhew our ſelues to rebell, and wage warre againſt God himſelfe.
            I will enlarge this no further, but leaue it to ye religious care of ſuch as carrie the chief place in our Church, who (I doubt not) will play Azarias part in warning our Aſah; and I aſſure my ſelfe, our Aſah will hearken to it, and her whole people will follow with willing and moſt ioyfull hearts: which God grant, that ſo this extraordinarie attempt threatned, may haue ſuch extraordinarie exerciſes of faſting and prayer, as were (with the fruite of a bleſſed ſucceſſe) vſed in the yeare 1588. when the Spanyards laſt attempted inuaſion; and thoſe not formall, but zealous; euen ſuch as may inſtruct the conſcience,

to humble the heart, to acknowledge the ſinnes committed, to meete the Lord by repentance; and then no doubt the Lorde will heare vs, and our victorie will follow.
            God giue vs repentant hearts for our ſinnes, carefull and ſincere hearts to our Soueraigne, louing hearts to our country, and charitable harts one towardes an other. No doubt then, out religion ſhal flouriſh, our Soueraigne ſhall liue long, and our countrie ſhall euer proſper, maugre the malice, and practiſes of all Tyrants and Traytors. For this ought wee all to pray; and for this all, that truly feare the Lorde, and ſincerely affect his truth, and goſpell, will daylie, and hartely pray. But for this the ſuperſtitious papiſt hath no will to pray; and the ſcorning Atheiſt knoweth not how to pray. From the malice,

and madnes of both theſe, God almightie deliuer her Maieſtie, and this flouriſhing kingdome; that God, and his truth may be wholly, and only reuerenced, and regarded; and ſuch, as oppoſe them ſelues againſt him, either by corrupting his religion, or flatly denying him, and al religion, may either by ſeueritie of lawe be corrected, and reformed, or elſe by chriſtian iuſtice be remoued from amōgſt Gods people; that our Engliſh ſoyle may not be ſtayned with blaſphemous Papiſts, or prophane Atheiſts.
            Thus hauing aduentured to make this rude collection of a matter moſt neceſſarie to be vnderſtoode, and thought of, by al true chriſtian harted Engliſh-men; I will knit it vp with this earneſt requeſt to al my countrimen, that my endeuour may be accepted, beauſe I haue vndertaken it of

loue; that my defects may be borne withall, becauſe my heart carrieth a good meaning; and that the truth of the matters herein cōteyned may receaue no diſcredit through my particular rudenes in the collecting; nor the cauſe it ſelfe (requiring a ſpeciall, and great regarde) ſtand ſubiect to any diſgrace by want of good methode in mee to diſpoſe it. This obtayned, I deſire no more, but wiſh the growing of Gods truth, and religion amongſt vs, by mightie increaſes; the prolonging of our deare Soueraignes dayes with bodily health; and home quiet, and the preſeruation of this little Iland of England from Popiſh ignorance, forraine inuaſion, and home treaſon.
            God onely can worke this; and to God onely I pray for this; and vnto God alone I commend his owne cauſe, which is, religion, the ſafetie of

his annoynted (by whome, as the meane, Religion ſtandeah with vs) and the defence of our Countrie, which, without religion, and her Maieſties ſafetie, cannot long proſper.
            
               August. in Serm. 210. de tempore.
               Non quiſquam tibi potest nocere, ſi damnato ſcelere diuinus in te germinauerit cultus.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   