
      
         
            
            THE TRIMMING
of Thomas Nashe Gentleman,
by the high-tituled patron Don
Richardo de Medico campo, Barber
Chirurgion to Trinitie Colledge
in Cambridge.
            Faber quas fecit compedes ipse gestat.
            
               LONDON,
Printed for Philip Scarlet
1597.
         
         
            
            To the Learned.
            Eme, perlege, nec te precii poenitebit.
         
         
            To the simple.
            Buy mee, read me through, and
thou wilt not repente thee of
thy cost.
         
         
            
            To the Gentle Reader.
            
               PRoface gentle Gē
               tlemen,
I am sorry I haue
no better Cates to presēt
you with: but pardon I
pray you, for this which
I haue heere prouided,
was bred in Lent, and Lent (you know) is
said of leane, because it macerates & makes
leane the bodye: if therefore this dish bee
leane and nothing answearable to your expectation,
let it suffice twas bred in Lent:
neither had it anye time wherein it might
gather anye thinge vnto it selfe to make it
more fat and delightfull. His Epistle I expected
any time these three yeares, but this
mine aunswer sine fuco loquar, though it be

not worthy to bee called the worke of
one well spent houre) I haue wrought
foorth out of the stolne houres of three
weekes: for although occasion hath been
offered euer since the Epistle hath been extant,
to answere it: yet held in suspence considering
the man and matter, whether I
should take it vpon mee or no: at last concluding
him easily answerable, I haue vndergone
it: therefore howsoeuer you see it
crept abroad Gentles, receiue it well in
worth: Your fauours happily might adde
strength vnto it, and stirre vp the faint creeping
steps to a 
                  •
               ore liuely pace: it by hard
hap being denied of the progresse, keeping
at home hath growne somewhat greater.
To tell you what the man is, and the reason
of this book, were but triuiall and superfluous,
only this, you may call it The trimming
of Thomas Nashe, wherein hee is described.
In trimming of which description,
though I haue founde out and fetcht from
the mint some few new vvordes to coulor

him, grant me pardon, I thinke them fitte
for him who is so limmed and coullored
vvith all nevv found villanie: for if they bee
etimoligisde, they no vvhit disagree from
his properties Slender labour hath suffised
to vveaue this thinne superficiall vaile
to couer his crimson Epistle, and shaddovv
it foorth vnto the vvorld. For as a garment
of too bright a color is too euil an obiect for
the eyes (as is the Sun) & is nothing gazed
after, no not of those vvho neuer savv it before:
yet nevve things are desired, because
tvvould proue pernicious to their eyes, but
once ore-clovvded and couered vvith a
lavvne vesture, through that it shines & becommeth
a lesse hurting obiect, and dravvs
the peoples sight after it: so his Epistle in it
ovvne colour beeing too 
                  •
               esplendent and
hurtfull to the readers, is laid apart & is nothing
in request, for that tvvould proue as a
burning glasse vnto their eyes, but vestured
vvith this Caule & rare-vvrought garmēt, it
loseth part of it hurting vigour, & therefore
is cald to be seene againe.
            
               
Loathed tediousnes I also eschewed as no
lesse hurtfull than too bright an obiect: the
Booke which he dedicateth to me, is so tedious,
that had I read it through, it so loathsome
would haue vvrought more on mee
both vpvvard & downvvard, then 3. drams
of pilles: his Epistle is not behinde hand, to
that I might say as said Diogenes to the men
of Minda, (vvhose gates vvere greater in analogicall
proportion then their Citie:) O
yee men of Minda, looke to your Citie, that
it flyes not out at your gates: So his booke
might well for the largenesse of the Epistle
haue flowne out at it, and surely I thinke
had his book any wings, that is, any queint
deuise flying abroad to please withall, it
would neuer haue staid till this time: therfore
I thinke it prouidently done of him
(though out of doubt the foole had no such
drift) to make the gates so bigge, that when
vve haue passed through the gates, supposing
all the Cittie to be sutable to the statelines
of them: but after we are entred, finding

our selues meerely guld, and that all the
Cittie is not worth the gates, vvee may the
more readily finde the vvay out of the
Cittie againe, the gates beeing so great:
and this remedye I founde once vvhen
I tooke my iourney into his Cittie. But
to returne, If this bee not so vvell set foorth
as you could vvish it vvere, blame mee not:
for as the Moon being naked & bare, is said
once to haue gone to her mother, and asked
of her a coat to cloath her: but she ansvvered,
there could bee no coate made fit for
her, for her instabilitie, sometime she being
in the ful, and somtime in the vvane: so hee
being a man of so great reuolution, I could
not fit him, for if I had vndertaken to speak
of one of his properties, another came into
my mind, & another follovved that, vvhich
bred confusion, making it too little for him:
therefore vvere it not too little, it might be
tvvold be fit, but hovvsoeuer, pardon (Gentlemen)
my boldnes in presenting to your
fauorable viewes this litle & cōfused coate.
            
               Yours in all curtesie, Richard L
                        •
                     chfield.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The trimming of Thomas Nashe.
            
               SIR, heere is a gentleman at the doore
would speake with you. Let him come
in. M. Nashe! welcome. What, you
would be trimd? & I cannot denie you
that fauour. Come, sit downe, Ile trim
you my selfe. How now? what makes
you sit downe so tenderly? you crintch in your buttocks
like old father Pater patriae, he that was father to a whole
countrey of bastards. Dispatch, st, boy, set the water to
the fire: but sirra, hearke in your eare, first goe prouide
me my breakfast, that I goe not fasting about him; then
goe to the Apothecarie, and fetch mee some repressiue
Antidotum to put into the bason, to keep downe the venomous
vapors that arise from his infectious excremēts:
for (I tell you) I like not his countenance, I am afraid he
labours of the venereall murre.
            Muse not (gentle Thomas) that I come so roughly vppon
you with Sit downe, without anie Dedicatorie Epistle,
which (I know) you expected; for that your Epistle
(in some wise) brought forth this small Worke: which
purposely I omitted, scorning Patronage against you.
For if (by an Epistle) I had made some Lord or Knight
my Patron, it would haue mennaged and giuen courage
to you, that (not sufficient of my selfe) I should get some
Protector to stand out with you. As in a Cocke-fight, if
the Cocke-master takes off his Cocke when they are
buckled together, it encourageth the other Cocke (deeming

his aduersarie to flye to his Master for refuge): so
that hee crowes foorth the triumph before the victorie.
Therefore forsooth, if for orders sake (that of custome
might be made a necessarie law) you would haue an Epistle,
I thought it best, respecting the subiect matter, as
neere as possibly I could to patterne it with the like Patron.
Then not knowing where to heare of some miscreant,O eloquence.
polluted with all vices both of bodie & minde:
and viewing ouer all the imprest images of men in the
memoriall cell of my braine, at last I espied your selfe
more liuely ingrauen than the rest, and as it were offring
your selfe to this purpose. Then presently I made choice
of you, that like an asse you might beare your burden, &
patronize your owne scourge, as dooth the silly hedgesparrow,
that so long fostereth vp the cuckow in her
neast, till at length she bee deuoured of her: or the Viper,
that is destroyed of her owne whelpes. All England
for a Patron. But to this sodaine ioy, (for sodaine
ioy soone ends) this crosse happened; That knowing it
to bee my duetie to gratulate my Patrone with the first
hereof,Item for you. but not knowing where to finde you, for that
you (the Worlds Citizen) are heere and there, you may
dine in this place, & goe supperlesse to bed, if you know
where to haue your bed:Wel put in you maye bee in one prison to
day, and in another to morrow: so that you haue a place
but as a fleeting incorporeall substaunce, circumscribed
with no limits, that of your owne you haue not so much
as one of Diogenes his poore cottages. You haue indeed
a terminus a quo (as we Logic
                  •
               ans speake) but no terminus
ad quem. Now sir, for the vncertaintie of your mansion
house,How hardly I leaue this common place? you hauing all the world to keepe Court in,
and being so haunted with an earthquake, that in what
house soeuer you are one daye, you are shaken out the
next, my little Booke might kill three or foure porters,

that must run vp and downe London to seeke you, and at
the last might dye it selfe for want of succour before it
comes to your hands. Yet it might bee, that in your request
you are insatiable, you will take no excuse, your
will is your reason, nay may not be admitted. Well, it
shall be yours: for your Epistles sake, haue at you with
an Epistle.
         
         
            
            To the polypragmaticall, parasitupocriticall,
and pantophainouden deconticall Puppie
Thomas Nashe, Richard Leichfield wisheth
the continuance of that he hath: that is,
that he want not the want of health, wealth,
and libertie.
            Mitto tibi Nashum
               Nashum pror
                  •
                
               N puppi hum que carentem.
            
               GOD saue you (right glossomachicall
Thomas.) The vertuous riches, wherewith
(as broad spread Fame reporteth)
you are indued, though, 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
(as saith the poet) which I confirme:
for that shee is tam fict
                     •
                   pranique tenax,
quam nuncia veri, as well saith Master William Lilly in
his Adi
                     •
                  ctina verbalia in ax. I say the report of your rich
vertues so bewitched me toward you, that I cannot but
send my poore Book to be vertuously succoured of you,
that when both yours & my frends shall see it, they may
(for your sake) vertuously accept of it. But, it may be,
you denie the Epistle, the Booke is of you, the Epistle
must be to some other. I answer, you are desirous of an
Epistle. Did not Caesar write those things himself which
himselfe did? and did not Lucius that golden Asse speak
of himself which was the Asse? & will not you (though

an Asse, yet neither golden not siluer) patronize that
which others tooke paines to write of you? Caesar and
Lucius for that shall liue for euer: and so shall you, as
long as euer you liue. Go too I say, he is an ill horse that
will not carrie his owne prouender. But chiefly I am to
tell you of one thing, which I chuse to tell you of in my
Epistle, both because of Epistles some be denuntiatorie,
as also considering that wise saying elswhere of the precise
Schoolemaster: If thy frend commit anie enormious
offence toward thee, tell him of it in an Epistle. And
truly this is a great and enormious offence, at which my
choller stands vpright, neither will I put it vp. Therefore
in sad
                  •
               es prouide your Lawier, I haue mine, it will
beare as good an action, as if you should haue come into
another mans house, and neuer say, Ho
                  •
                God be here:
that is, you wrote a foule Epistle to mee, and neuer told
me of it before: you might haue said, By your leaue sir.
I warrant you I write but this small Epistle to you, and I
tell you of it as long before as the Epistle is long. But
now I remember me, there was no hatred between vs
before, and therefore twould be prooued but chauncemedley.
Let it euen alone, it cannot be vndone, for a
thing easely done, neuer can be vndone: and a man may
quickly become a knaue, but hardly an honest man. And
thus (maleuolent Tom) I leaue thee. From my chamber
in Camb. to yourwhere cā you tell?.
            
               
                  Yours in loue vsque ad aras.That is, that wold folow thee 
                        〈◊〉
                      to the gallowes.
Rich: Lichfield.
            
         
         
            
            YOu see howe louingly I deale with you in my Epistle
and tell of your vertues, which (God forgiue
me for it) is as arra
                  •
               t a lye as euer was told: but to
leaue these parergasticall speeches and to come to your
trimming,All your parts. because I will deale roundly with you, I wil
cut you with the round cut, in which I include two cuts:
First the margent cut: Secondly the perfect cut: The
margent cut is nothing els but a preparation to the perfect
cut, wherby I might more perfectly discharge that
cut vpon you, for as in a deep standing poole, the brinks
thereof, which are not vnfitly called the margents being
pared away, we may the better see thereinto: so the
margents which fitly we may terme the brinkes of your
stinking standing poole (for it infects the eare as doth
the stinking poole the smell) being cut away, I may the
better finish this perfect cut and rid my selfe of you. To
the margent cut. When first your Epistle came into my
hands, I boldly opened it, and scaling the margents of it
I espied a seely note quasi conuersant about heads. I sayd
not a word, but turning ouer a leafe or twoo more to see
if you continued in those simple animaduersions and indeed
I saw you to bee no changling, for there I espied
barbers kn
                     •
                  cking of their fingers, & lowsie 
                     〈◊〉
                  , as foolish
as the other▪ 
               semper ide
                     •
                  
                (thought I) might be your
mot, and so you will dye: then I began to marke the
note which you adioyned to your notes that they might
be noted, there tossing and turning your booke vpside
downe, when the west end of it hapned to be vpward,
me thought your note seemed a D, ah Dunce, Dolt, Dotterell,
quoth I, well might it be a D. and for my life for
the space of twoo houres, could I not leaue rayling of
thee all in Ds.
            
            Now to the perfect cut: I cannot but admire you in

the tittle you allow me, seeing wee admire monsters as
well as vertuous men, and a foole (as oft I haue heard
Scholers dispute in mine office) as a monster: other
Barbers like not the title, it pleaseth me, and all the
Dukes in Spa
                     ••
                  
                cannot shew the like, and I thinke that
halfe a yeeres study did not bring it out of thy dunsticall
hammer-headed scalpe, but thou dost to disgrace mee,
and thinkst thy title decketh a Barber, and that a Barber
with thy title is as a rotten chamber hangd with
cloth of arras, but tis not so: alas thy reading affoords
thee not to knowe the ancient and valorous power of
Barbers.
            I could speake howe they flourished amongst
the Ab
                     ••
                  ts, a fierce, and warlike people, and by the Barbers
perpolike cunning as it were amending nature and
shaping their faces to more austeritie, they became more
victorious, as Plutarch recordeth in the life of Theseus:
and young stripplings newly fit for armes, first were
brought to Delphos, and there offered the first fruites of
their haire to Iupiter, next him the Barbers were serued
and they cut them, and were as Ioues, Vises to make
them fit for warre. They flourished before with the
Arabians, the Mysians, the Dacians, the Dalmatians,
the Macedonians, the Thracians, the Ser
                     •
                  ians, the Sarmacians,
the Valachia
                     •
                  s and the Bulgarians, as saith Pollidorus
Virgil: afterward Alexander entertained into his
campes Barbers as the spurres and whetstones of his
armies.
            
               D
                     ••
                  isius that blood-thirstie Tyrant that feared
no peeres, stoode alwaies in feare of Barbers, and
rather would haue his hayre burnt off, than happen into
the Barbers handes.
            Therefore in a Barbers shop (as Plutarche reporteth)
where some fewe were talking of the Tyrany

of the tyger Dionysius. What (said the Barber) are you
talking of King Dionysius, whome within these two or
three daies I must shaue? When Dionysius heard of this,
he gate the Barber secretly to be put to death, for feare of
after-claps. The Barbers Chaire is the verie Royall-Exchange
of newes, Barbers theNone but Barbers meddle with the head. 
               
                  •
               head of all Trades. I
could speake of their excellencie, for that a mans face
(the principall part of him) is committed onely to Barbers.
All trades adorne the life of man, but none (except
Barbers) haue the life of man in their power, and
to them they hold vp their throates readie.
            If they be happie, whom pleasure, profit and honor
make happie, then Barbers with great facilitie attaine to
happines. For pleasure, if they be abroad, they are soght
too of the best Companions, Knights and Esquires send
for them: if at home and at worke, they are in pleasing
conference; if idle, they passe that time in life-delighting
musique. For profite, a Barber hath liuing in all
parts of England: he hath money brought in as due as
rents, of those whom he neuer saw before. For honour,
Kings and ruling Monarchs, (to whom all men crouch
with cap in hand and knee on ground) onely to Barbers
sit barehead, and with bended knees. But for all this,
thou sparest not to raile on Barbers (as on all others): &
being full of botches and byles thy selfe, spuest forth thy
corruption on all others: but I nought respect it, thy
raylings rather profite mee. For (as Antisthenes was
wont to say) a man might as well learne to liue well of
his ill-willing & abusiue enemies, as of his honest frends;
of these, by following their vertues, of the others by eschuing
their actions, by seeing the effects that followed
those actions in his enemies: and as Telep
                     •
                  us (beeing
wounded, and destitute of a sauing remedie at home)
went euen to his enemies and sworne fo
                  •
               s, to get some

souerraigne medicine, so if of my friendes I could not
learne temperance, I might learne of thee by seeing
the effectes of thy cankered conuicious tongue, for
by that thou art brought into contempt, thy talking
makes thee bee accounted as a purse that cannot bee
shutte, and as an house whose doore standes alwayes
open, and as that open purse contayneth no siluer, and
in that house is nothing worthie the taking away, so
out of thy mouth proceedeth nothing but noysome
and ill-sauered vomittes of railinges: Wherefore draw
together the stringes, and locke vp the doore of thy
mouth, and before thou speakest such ill corrupted
speeches againe, let it be lifted of the hingelles, rule I
say that little and troublesome Vermin, that smal tongue
of thine, which in some is not the smallest parte of vertue,
but in thee the greatest Arte of vice, not vnlike the
Purple fish which whilest the gouernes her tongue well,
it getteth her foode and hunteth after her praye, but
when shee neglect it, it bringeth her destruction, and
she is made her selfe a pray vnto the fisher, so that in
that small parcell all vertue and vice lyes hidden, as is
recorded of Kias whom king Amasis commaunding
to sende home the best and most profitable meate
from the market, hee sent home a tongue, the king
demaunding a reason, hee answered that of a tongue
came many profitable and good speeches, and this
tongue thou hast not: Then the king sent him to
buy the woorst and most vnprofitable meate, and he
likewise bought a tongue, the king also asking the
reason of this, from nothing (sayde he) issueth worse
venome then from the tongue, and this tongue thou
hast, and this tongue cros
                  •
               e with the barre of reason, lest
thou seeme more foolish then those geese in Cilicia,
which when the flie in the night time by the hill Taurus,
               
that is possest of Eagles, are sayde to gette stones
into ther mouthes by which as by a bridle they raine
in their cryinges, and so quietly passe the greedie talentes
of the Eagles: but alas why inuect I so against
thy tongue? lingua a lingeudo, and you knowe wee
vse alwayes to like in, and so thou shouldest keepe
in thy poyson: or a ligando which is to binde, and
so thou shouldest binde vp and not disperse abroad
that ranker in thee: thy tongue doth but in dutie
vtter that which is committed vnto it,Marke this secret allegorie. and nature
hath set before it a double bull-woorke of teeth
to keepe in the vagrant wordes which straying abroade
and beeing surprised may betray the whole
cittie, and the vpper bull-woorke sometimes serues
for a percullis, which when any rascallie woorde
hauing not the watch-worde, that is, reason, shall
but enter out of the gates, is presently lette downe
and so it cuttes it of before it woorketh wracke to
the whole Castell: therefore I must of necessitie find
out another cause of thine infected speech, and now
I haue founde it, fie on thee, I smell thee, thou
hast a stinkinge breath, but a stinking breath (some
say) commeth of foule teeth, and if it bee so, wash
thy teeth Tom, for if thou wouldest drawe foorth
good and cleane wordes out of thy mouth, thou
wouldest washe thy teethe as euerie tapster that
goeth to drawe good beare will washe the potte before
hee gooeth: but it may bee the filth hath so
eaten into thy teeth that washinge cannot gette it away,
then doe as that venome-bitinge beast that
Nile-breede Crocodile, which to purge her teethe
of those shiuered reedes that are wreathed betweene
by feedinge in the water, commeth to
                  •
                the shoore,
and there gapinge, suffereth some friendly bird without

daunger to creepe into her mouth, and with
her bill to picke away the troubling reedes: so
come you but to some shoore, and Ile bee that
Trochilus,
               Trochilus Ile picke your teeth and make a cleane
mouth, or Ile picke out toungue and all, but of
this stinkinge breath I speake not. Toedet anima
sayth the Comedian,philosophy and this I meane not meaning
as hee meant, for hee meant a stinkinge
breath, but by anima I meane the forme by which
thou art, what thou art, by which also thy senses
woorke, which giueth vse to all thy faculties and
from which all thy actions proceede, and this anima
if thou termist a breath, this breath stinketh
and from this breath (as little riuers flowe from a
fountaine) all thy woordes flowe foorth and the

                  •
               ountaine beeing corrupted (as you knowe) likewise
all the lesser riuers needes must bee corrupted,
and this anima, this breath or fountayne thou must
cleanse, but howe to cleanse this breath it passeth
my cunninge to tell, for thoughe (as I am a Cirurgion)
I coulde picke your teeth, for the other
stinkinge breath, yet this I durst not meddle with,
this hath neede of a metaphisition, and lette it
suffice for mee rudely to take vppe the bucklers and
laie them downe againe,How I bewich thee with fac
                     ••
                  ditie. onely to tune the Lute,
but to leaue to the more cunning to playe thereon,
Count it enough for mee that am but an aduincte
to a Scholler, that haue nothinge of my
selfe but what I gleane vppe at the disputation of
some Schollers in myne office, let it bee sufficient
for mee (I say) onely to tell the reason of this
stinkinge breath, and to leaue to more sounde Philosophers
to determine and set downe the remedie of it,
but nowe it may bee t
                     •
                  ipsum noscis, you smell your

owne breath, and finde it to bee so intoxicated with
poyson that vnlesse you haue present helpe you are
quite vndone, you perish vtterly, and knowing me to
be a man of such excellent partes,Ha ha a rage borrowed from your owne dunghill. yea of farre better
partes then In speach bee these eight partes, are very instant
with me to vnbinde the bundell which I gathered
at disputations, and giue you some remedie for
this stinkinge breath: loe howe vertue in the friend
casteth foorth her beames euer vpon her enemie, I
am ouercome,A medicine for a stinking breath. blushingly I vndertake it, and like a
bashfull mayde refuse, yet deig
                  •
               e you that fauour,
then marke, first goe get some strong hempe, and
worke it and temper it so long together till therearise
out of it an engine which wee call Capistrum, then
carry this Capistrum to some beame that lyeth a crosse,
for none else will serue, when it must bee straynde
and the one ende of it fasten to the beame, and one
the other make a noose of as rounde a figure as you
can for the roundest figure is the most retenti
                  •
               e, let
the noose bee alwayes readie to slide, for mans
breath is slipperie, then when euerie thing is fitted,
boldly put through thy heade, then worke the Capistrum
ouer newe agayne, swinge vppe and downe
twice or thrice that it may be well strainde, and so
in short time your olde breath will be gone, dispayre
not yet man, probatum est, olde Aeson was
deade a while but reuiued agayne and liued many
a yeare after, but marke, nowe to the pynche, if
Platoes trasmigration holde, (which some menne
holde that the animae and breathes of men that bee
deade doe fleete into the bodyes of other menne
which shall l
                  •
               ue, then I holde that some breath seeing
thy younge bodie without an anima, and twould
bee harde lucke if some breath or other should not

be yet straying about for a body, their being continually
so many let loose at Tiburne, I say, some
vnbespoken vagrant breath wil goe in and possesse thy
body: nowe if this remedie helpe not surely thou art
vnrecurable, if also thy newe breath happen to be as
stinking as thy olde, thou wilt neuer haue a sweete
breath in this worlde nor then neither. And thus
much of my title.
            You knowe or at the least ought to knowe that
writers shoulde eshewe lyes as Scorpions, but your
lyes that you deuisd of one are the greatest parte of
the matter of your Epistle, as, My shoppe in the towne,
the teeth that hange out at my Windowe, my painted

                     •
                  ay-poole, with many others which fill vp roome in
the Epistle in aboundant manner, and which are nothing
else but meere lyes and fictions to yeeld the matter,
whereby I perceiue howe threede-bare thou art
wax
                  ••
               , how
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                thy inuention is, and that thy
true amplifying vaine is quite dryed vppe. Repent,
repent, I say, and leaue of thy lying which without
repentance is very haynous,Pag: 6. that one lye I make of
thee in this booke is presently washed away with repentance.
An other lye I cannot but tell you off,
which you clappe in my teeth in the very beginning
of your Epistle, which nothinge greeueth mee for
that I suppose it to bee committed of ignorance,
that is you tell mee that you come vpon mee with
but a dick
                  ••
                of Dickes, but you come vppon mee
with seuenteene or eighteene Dickes, whereby I see
thy ignorance in the Greeke tongue, thou knowest not
what a dicker is, a dicker is but ten of any thing, for it
commeth of the Greeke worde 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                which is by interpretation,de k
                     •
                  
               
Ten▪
            
            Thou 
                  〈◊〉
                that olde Tooly and I differed, I

confesse it, I am a man alone, I scorne such ragged
rent-foorth speech, yet thou mayest well praye for
the duall number, thou scabbed, scalde, lame, halting
adiectiue as thou art, in all thy guiles, thou neuer
hadest that guile as alone to get thee one crust of
breade: no, I knowe not who had a hande with you
in this seely Epistle, goe too, hee is not a minister, he
hadde but small reason for it: againe, you remember
the time when your fellowe Lusher and you lay in coleharbour
together, when you had but one payre of
breeches betweene you both, but not one penie to
blesse you both, and howe by course hee woore the
breeches one day, and went cunny-catching about for
victuals, whilest you lay in bedde, and the next day you
wore the breeches to goe begge whilest he lay in bed, for
all the worlde like two bucketes in one well, nowe suppose,
when Lusher wore the breeches, that then thou
shouldest haue beene carryed to pryson where nowe
thou art, verily I thinke thou shouldest haue escaped
prison for want of breeches, or suppose that at that
time thou shouldest haue beene hanged, I cannot but
thinke that the want of a payre of breeches woulde
haue beene better to thee then thy necke-verse, for
the hange-man would haue his breeches, no fee, no
lawe: but put case that with much adoe, by greate
extraordinarie fauour some good hang-man had done
thee this last benifitte, that thou mightest neuer troble
him agayne, and shoulde haue giuen thee thy
hanginge francke and free (as indeede happy for thee
had it bene if this good hap had hapned, for then thou
shouldst not haue liued thus miserably in this vaine and
wicked worlde) I say plainely, put case thou haddest
beene hanged, the hangman not sticking with thee
for thy breeches, then Ghacon would haue come vpon

you for his ferry-penny, fi
                  •
                out, money and breeches
as ill as a rope and butter, for if one slippe the
other holde, with him no 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                no wastage, and then
thou haddest beene in worse case then euer thou wert;
thus you see how the want of a payre of breeches might
haue been the meanes to haue made thee escape prison,
death and vtter damnation: and O thrise happy Lusher
that shouldst haue beene away with the breeches at that
happy time, but when thou wert in thy chiefest pride,
if thou hadst but lent out one payre of breeches thou
shouldst haue beene th
                  ••
                happy.
            Prayse from the praise-worthy, and hee is not
praysed whose prayser deserueth not prayse, therefore
in these places of the Epistle where thou praysest
mee, I take my selfe most to bee dispraised for
that thou the prayser art worthie no praise, for how
soeuer thou leade in a fooles paradise, like the fishe
cald a m
                  •
               ge, which is sayde to feede herselfe with
her owne snotteMucu
                     •
                   snotte. for thereof shee takes her name, thou
feadest thy-s
                  •
               lfe with self-conceite that whatsoeuer
commeth from thee is the verie quintessence of true
witte, and that all thy ribaldrie that euer thou
fe
                  ••
               st forth, exceeded in pleasing mirth, that so thou
hast imbraced true Mi
                     •
                  er
                     •
                  a, when as (God knowes)
thou art as farre deceiued as euer was poore Ixion,
that imbraced a cloude in steade of Iuno, or that
guld-god mostrous accadian Pan, who in steade
of that sweet
                  •
                Nimphe Syrinx fumpt a bunche of
reedes: yet I must confesse thou haste something,
thou art as a bundell of strawe that beeing sett on
fire consumes it selfe all in smoke, but no warmnesse
commeth from it, so thou hast no true fire in
thee, all smoother, no thing that can warme a man,
thou art as many Ciphers without an I, which they

wanting are of them selues nothing, and thou hast
much apparencie of witte which is as Ciphers, but thou
hast not this same 1, Iota is wanting to thy Ciphers,
thou hast not one iot nor title of true witte, againe,
as some souldiers that were at Cales breaking into a
shoppe for pillage, and there seeing many great sackes
readie trussed vppe, they with great ioy made hast
away with them, and so with light hartes carryed
away their heauie burdens, and when they brought
them into the streetes, opening them to see their
booties, founde in some of them nought but redde
cappes, of which afterward they made store of fires,
and in the rest nought but earthen pitchers, chaffendishes
and pispottes, and such like: so whosoeuer shall
see thee trussed vppe and in thy clothes, might
happily take thee for a wise young man, but when
thou shalt be opened, that is, when he shall see but some
worke of thine, he shall finde in thee nought but rascallitie
and meere delusions, and for this cause thou
mayest be cald the very Choroebus of our time, of whom
the prouerbe was raysde, more foole then Choroebus,
who was a seely ideot, but yet had the name of a wise
man, for he might be cald Choroebus quasi chori Phos,
the light of euery company into which hee came, so
thou hast onely the name of a wise man and that is
Nashe, O wise name, I praye let mee christen you a
newe and you shall bee called Choro
                     ••
                  us quasi chori
bos, the very bull-heade of all he ttroope of pamphleters:
thou goest about to gather iestes and to barrell
them vp into thine ale-howse index, that when occasion
shall serue thou mightest be a Democritus alwayes
to laugh thy selfe or to cause others to laugh by the
ideotisme. Thus to conclude, as Daphne chastitie was
turnd into a laurell tree, and so kept her chastitie, 
                  •
               uen

so I wish that for thy wit thou mightst bee turnd into a
                  •
               
asse, that so thou mightst keepe thy wit to thy selfe, and
not defile the world withall. But this thou scornst, and
will prooue that thou hast a good wit and thus submissiue
                  •
               y
in eloquence, to make vs beleeue thee, at the first
word thou beginst; Nature, that neuer wont to be vnequall
in her gifts, with mee hath broke her wont, and indowed
me with a dowrie aboue the rest of her children:
but euerie commoditie hath his discommoditie, and we
cannot alwaies please all; and though all my books did
not take as I wished they should, yet most of them did
take, as Piers Pe
                     •••
                  lesse, and others which I wi
                  •
               l not
name, to au
                  •
               yd suspition of vainglorie Argu that had
an hundred eyes sometime slept, or els hee had not dyed
for it: and wh
                  ••
                
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                ca
                  •
               e, 
                  •
               ee had no power to
hold ope his eyes O fine speech! By this I gather, that
thou confessest thy selfe to be Arg
                     •
                  s, and me Mercury:
and if you be Arg
                     •
                  s, hold ope your eyes with a pox to ye,
I meane yee no 
                  ••
               rme yet, yet I pipe not to you: but I
thinke it will be my lucke to be as ill a scourge to you, as
euer Mercu
                     •••
                  
                was to Argus. But if you will dispute
and prooue that you haue a good wit, awaye with your
confused bibble b
                  •
               bble binde vp your Arguments into
Syllogismes and I will answere you directly. Content
say you, and thus you begin. If my fame be spred 
                  •
               ar
abroad, & all the Countrey confirme that I haue a good
wit then tis true that I haue a good wit: But the first proposition
is true, therefore I haue a good w
                  •
               t. I answer,

                  •
               oore and illiterate Opponent, to contex no 
                  〈◊〉
                argument
against to firme a Logician as I am. A double
R
                  •
               sponse or Aunswere extempore I can affoord you.
First, though your name bee blazed abroad, it fol
                  •
               owes
not that you should haue a g
                  •
               od 
                  〈◊〉
                for as an emptie
vess
                  •
               ll wi
                  •
               l sound f
                  •
               rre that ha
                  •
               h nothing in 
                  •
               t; so you

may cracke your selfe abroad, and get to be reported the
man you are not.
            Secondly, I graunt that you are famous, and that the
Countrey reports you wise. Sententiously I aunswere,
that by a figure the Countrey is taken here for the common
rout onely: for none that can but write and read
will euer agree to it; and turba m
                     •
                  lum argumentum, as
much as to saye, the troublesome Commons assertion,
neuer goes for currant. Thus leauing no hole for you to
creepe in with a second Obiection, you betake you to
your second Argument.
            If my wit (saye you) were not excellent and vnaunswerable,
manie who are accounted to haue good wits,
(to whom I haue oft giuen perticular occasion) would
haue answered mee: but they haue not answered mee,
therefore my wit is excellent. Therefore I wyll aunswere
thee.
            I would to God thou & I were to dispute for the best
Mayorship in Spaine, faith thou mightest euen cast thy
cap at it. Doost thou not know that the Lion scornes
combate with the bace? Wise-men (though mooued)
will not worke reuenge on euerie obiect? and the more
stately oake, the more hardly set on fire? More plainly in
a similitude, the like reason is to bee gathered of the
nettles.
            Euen as the nettle keepeth her leafe cleanest, for that
no man purgeth his post-pendence (there your nose Thomas)
with it; not because they cannot, but because it
would sting them if they should, and so for that small
good turne, it would worke them a more displeasure: so
thou art suffered to be quiet, and not wrote against, not
for that thou canst not bee aunswered, but that by aunswering
thee they should but giue more fodder to thy
poison, put more casting to thy gorge; and hee that intends

to meddle with dung, must make account to defile
his fingers.
            Thus thou art quite put downe, thou art drawne drie:
me thinkes I perceiue thee wish for some Moderatour,
that should crie; Egregie Nash (or, you great asse) satisfecisti
of 
                     〈◊〉
                   tuum. And now for want of a Moderatour,
my selfe (for fault of a better) will supplye that
roome, and determine of our Disputation. And herein
it shall not bee amisse, (the Question so requiring, and
you also requiring it in that place of your Epistle, where
you lay wit to my charge) first to tell what a good wit
is. And whereas thou burthenst me to say, that much extraor
dinarie descant cannot be made of it: thou lyest. For
how vniust were mens wits, not to affoord vs extraordirie
descant of that, which giueth vs descant for euerye
thing?
            A good wit (therefore) is an affluent spirit, yeelding
inuention to praise or dispraise, or anie wayes to discourse
(with iudgement) of euerie subiecte. Mistake
me not (I pray you) and think not that I thinke all those
to haue good wits, that will talke of euerie subiect, and
haue an oa
                  •
               e (as we say) in euerie mans boate: for manie
fooles doo so, and so doost thou. These talke not
with iudgement: they be like the Fellow, who swearing
by God, and one standing by, correcting him, said;
Fie on thee how th
                  •
               n talkest. What skills it said hee, so
long as I talke of God? So I say, thou carest not how
without iudgement thou talkest on euerie thing.
            A good wit is it that maketh a man, and hee is not
a man, that hath not a good wit. The verie brutish and
sauage beasts haue wit. Oxen and Asses by theyr wit
choose out the best Pasture to feed in, and thou art no
better: for diuers men will say, and especially Northeren
men, to one that dooth anie thing vnhandsomely,

whaten a N
                  •
               sh it is, for what an asse it is, and an asse all
men know hath not a good wit.
            Thu
                  •
                (by these descriptions) the definitiue sentence
of my determination in this: Nashe, thou hast not a
good wit, thou art a 
                  ••
               lly fellow, and more silly than Syr
Thomas of Carleton, who beeing a little sicke, and the
bell 
                  •
               olling to haue him goe read Seruice, the Clarke of
the Parish going to him, and telling him that the bell
toa
                  •
               de for him, meaning to goe Read, he went presently
and made his Will, because the bell toa
                  •
               de for him: and
so doo thou, plye thee, mak
                  •
                thy Will▪ and dye betimes
before thou beest killd, for thine owne wit w
                  •
               ll kill th
                  •
               e:
and call you that a good wit that kills a man? All the
Wisemen of Greece and Gotam neuer came to the miserie
that thy good wit hath brought thee too. My
minde presageth the great confusion that thy good wit
will bring vppon thee. For as the Cammell that (come
hee into neuer so cleare a Fountaine) cannot drinke of
the Water, till hee hath royled and fowled it with his
feete: so whatsoeuer thy wit goet
                  •
                about, it first defiles
it, and so brings destruction to th
                  ••
               e owne bodie. Thy
wit, thy wit Tom, hath roddes in p
                  •
               sse for thee, twil
whip thee, tw
                  •
               ll worke thine ouerthrow twill quite destroye
thee: Acteon (as wise a man a
                  •
                you) no
wayes could escape it, for all his loue to his h
                  •
               unds,
and sw
                  •
               fe flight when he saw their felnes, but was deuoured
of his owne dogs.
            But why then (maist thou say) doo I oppose my
selfe against an Asse, seeing now I doo no more than all
could doo, for all the beasts in the field can insult and
triumph ouer the silly Asse, as well the cre
                  •
               ping Snayle
to her power as the fiercest Tyger. A sinus ascdend
                     •
                  ,
because euerie Childe can ride an asse: therefore tis rather
a reproachfull shame for mee to meddle with thee,

and by that I get more discredit 
                  •
               hen th
                  •
                two Gods
got dishonors that conspired the downe fall of one s
                  •
               ely,
weake, vnable woman. The reason is, I onely am
left to tell thee thou art an Asse, and if th
                  •
               u shouldst not
be tolde it, thou wouldst not beleeue that thou art an
Asse. There
                  •
               ore nowe at length knowe th
                  ••
               e owne
strength, and knowing that thou art but feeble and
hast no strength, blush and be ash
                  ••
               ed, and then thou
shalt see that all the Country hath seene thy ignorance,
though kept it in silence, and howe this many a yeere
thou hast g
                  •
               ld them, but they (gentle minded auditors)
still, still, expecting better tooke all in good
part whil
                  ••
                thou like a cowardly vnskilfu
                  •
               l ho
                  •
               seman
moun
                  •
               ed on a 
                  •
               ade, coru
                  •
               ttest and shewest thy Crankes
a
                  •
               ong a company of valorous famous capta
                  •
               nes whose
stir
                  •
               op thou art not worthy to holde: alight and listen
vnto me, and I euen I, that neuer till now was acquainted
with the presse, and acknowledge my sel
                  •
               e farre vnfit
for those thinges thou professest, I (I say) will read
thee a Lecture, harken, in my gibb
                  •
               idg (as thou termst
it) I wil conster thee this shorte distich which though it
wants an author wants no authoritie.
            Tha
                  •
               d
                  •
               te credi
                  •
                duxisse, sed 
                  〈◊〉
                D
                  •
               ana est,
            Namque Actoeoneu
                  •
                dat tibi Caura capu
                  •
               .
            Ingenuously thou thee compl
                  ••
               st an I
                  •
               us poo
                  •
               e to be,
            But thou art M
                  •
               das for thou art an Asse as well as be.
            Or thus.
            Some sayes Nashe is 
                  〈◊〉
               , but I say he is chast,
            For he by chacing after whores, 
                  〈◊〉
                b
                  •
               ard away hath chast.
            Otherwise.
            Who saies Nash riots day & night, about the streets doth lye.
            For he inprison day and night in fetters fast doth lye.
            Againe.
            You say I am a foole for this, and I say you say true,
            
               
Then what I say of you is true, for babes and fooles say true.
            Now I giue not euery word their litterall sence, and
by that you may see how I presume of your good wit,
to see if by allusions you can picke out the true meaning,
but I vse a more plaine demonstration and apply
it to your selfe: for if you will vnde
                  •
               stand any thing a
right, you must euer apply it to your selfe. It may bee
thou likest not these veries for that they want riming
words, and I ende both the verses with one word: no,
Tom, noe, thinke not so, bewray not so thy poetry, for
that distich is best contriued, and moste elegant that
endes both verses with one word if they import a diuers
sence: but now I see thou art no versifier, thou hast only
a prose tongue, & with that thou runst headlong in thy
writing with great premeditation had before, which any
man would suppose for the goodnes to be extempore,
and this is thy good wit: come, I say, come learne of
me, Ile teach thee howe to pot verses an houre together.
            Thou nothing doubtest (as thou say
                  •
               st) of the pratronage
& safe cond
                     •
                  ct of thy booke and indeed thou needest
not doubt for I neuer ment it harme, but alwayes wisht
it might safely passe by me: yet as I was patron to it, I
could not but read some of it, but I thinke if I had read
it through twould haue poisoned me, it stun
                  •
               e so abhominablye:
therefore all the while I was reading of it
holding my nose, fye, out said I, had I but knowne this
Cockatrice whilst twas in the shell, I would haue broken
it, it neuer should haue beene hatcht by my patronage:
but tis no matter, thy eye-beames will reflect
vpon thy selfe, and will be burning glasses to thine
owne eyes.
            And so in a fury (the countries comming downe vpon

me) I like a stout patron out of all the countries that
prest me sore, chalenged out the most valiant warrier
of them all, Mounse
                     •••
                   A
                     ••
                  x to single combate, him I ouercame,
and of him I got safe conduct, and hee hath
promised safe conduct to all commers of that race,
and moreouer, hee as an other patron hath gotten
for them all s
                  •
               fe conduct from hence to E
                     •
                  ly by
water.
            The good admonition thou giuest mee, that is, to
commence, I thankfully take and willingly would vndergoe,
had I but one with whome I might keep mine
acts.
            As for mine answere I nothing doubt, that is kept (as
I hope) with credit, but my replie is it I stand on, I can
get none to answere me, alas, thou art not able, neyther
fit, for thy want of a beard taketh away halfe the subiect
of our disputation, not that I say a beard would make
thee wise and so by that thou shouldst be fit to dispute,
but because in what Arte thou wouldst haue mee commence,
in that I would dispute with thee: therefore suppose
I should demaund of thee the reason why thou
hast so much haire on thy head, and so thinne or rather
almost none at all on thy face? thou couldst not
qu
                  •
               intly answere, because the haire on thy head is
twenty yeeres elder then that on thy beard, nor in
naturall reason, because the braine seated in the head
yeeldeth more moysture about it then any way downeward,
by which moysture haire commeth, but thou
hast too moist a braine that cannot holde and remember
these thinges, or rather thou hast too hard
and drye a braine and so these thinges were neuer
imprest into it.
            
               But this is thine answere, tis Gods wi
                  •
               l it should bee so,
thou wert neuer borne to haue a beard: tis true indeed,
thus thou mightest answere to all the arguments in the
worlde: but the want of a beard makes thee thus
colde in answering, for a beard is a signe of a strong
natural
                  •
                heate and vigour, but the true answere is, thou
seekest too many wayes to cast out thine exc
                  •
               ementes,
thou art too effeminate and so becomst like a woman
without a beard. Againe, if I should demaund of thee
why the haire of a mans head g
                  •
               oweth downeward and
not vpward, idem 
                     •
                  euolueres, this would bee th
                  •
               e answere,
because it pleaseth nature. Dost thou not know
that ha
                  ••
               e is the couer of the head? and therefore 
                  〈◊〉
                it
will couer it must lye downe, and doe not all the parts
of a man growe downeward, though the whole man
growes vpwards? And therefore the Philosophers say
that a man turned downeward is a plant, that as a plant
hath all her bowghes, branches and leaues growe vpward,
so all the partes of a man are vpwarde when hee
standeth on his head, as his 
                  •
               eete, legs, armes, nose, fingers
and the rest: but in fai
                  •
               h thou turnd vpward or
downeward art but a plant or stocke to bee ignorant
in those thinges: why I maruell of what Art thou
didst Commence Batch
                  •
               lor, if I had but the question
that thou hadst at thy Sophisters Act, I would dispute
on that: but nowe I see I cannot commence for want
of an answerer, and I scorne to keepe myne acts inteneb
                     ••
                  s
            
            In this 
                  •
               hy trimming, thou being so fit for it, I will
wo
                  •
               ke a wonder on thee, and I will holde any man a
w
                  •
               ger that I will perf
                  •
               rme 
                  •
               t, that is, wh
                  •
               lst I am w
                  •
               shing
you I will request your 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                and put my 
                  •
               cife
to 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , and sh
                  •
               u
                  •
                you qui
                  •
               e through and when
I haue done you shall not be a haire the worie, you 
                  ••
               y

make a riddle of the same if you will, but I will doe it,
and when I haue done, raising my selfe on my tiptoes,
I will so hunt thee for my pay, that thou shouldst bee in
worse case then the Beuer, who bites off his stones and
layes them in the way for the hunter: for which otherwise
he should be hunted to the death,Leaning on a 
                     •
                  est. I thinke veryly
and in my conscience, I should breake thy head and not
giue the rest againe.
            
            Thou rude wretch, thou wilt be so cosmologizd, if thou
beest catcht heere, for calling our Masters of Arte first
Stigmaticall, that is burnt with an hot Iron, didst thou
euer know any of our Masters of Arts burnt with any Irons?
then thou callest them si
                     •
                  ckanters, which is a proper
Epithite vnto thy selfe, for Sinckanter commeth of
sincke and a
                     •
                  trum a hole, and as all the puddle and filth
in the channell, still runnes all a long till it comes to a
hole or a
                     •
                  trum, and there it sinckes in: so all wickednes
and abhord villany still straying abroad and seeking for
an a
                     •
                  trum, at last it findes thee which art the very sincke
and center where it restes. And surely if thou shouldst
haue termed me so, I neuer would haue suffered it vnreuenged,
for as the T
                     •
                  rpedo being caught and layd on the
ground, striketh a torpour and numbnes into the hand
of him that doth powre but water on her: so, I doe not
thinke but that in thy Epistle thou calledst me but Dick,
which is my name contract, and other adiuncts which in
their owne nature are neither good nor bad, the very remembrance
of me stroke such a feare and numbnes into
thy ioyntes, that yet thou shakest as not dispossest of
that fearefull feauer. I will stirre thee vp and make thee
seething hot, and when thou art in thy heate, I will then
quell thee by moouing of thee more and more, as when
a pot seetheth if we lade it and mooue the liquor vp and
down, euen while it seetheth, wee shall make it quiet.

Thou little wottest of what a furious spirite I am, for I
keeping among such spirits in this place, as thou sayst,
am my selfe become a spirit, and goe about with howling
cries with my launce in my hand to tortour thee,
and must not returne home, till Ignatius-like thou shalt
be carbonadoed, and I shall carrie on my launce-point
thy bones to hang at my shop windowe, in steed of a
cronet of rotten teeth, as the trophies of my victorie:
and this shalbe done, commest thou neuer so soone into
my swinge.
            Therefore keep out of my hant, I haue a walke, thou
maist be blasted before thou commest neere my walke,Spirit walks.
if thou dost but looke backe and see mee in my walke,
thy necke will stand awry, thy mouth distorted, thy lips
vgly wrested, and thy nose hang hooke-wise. But rather
I take thee to be a spirit, for that I talking with thee
all this while, cannot haue a glance on thee.
            
               
               
But see, what art thou heere? lupus in fabula, a lop
in a chaine? Nowe sirra haue at you, th'art in my
swinge. But soft, fetterd? thou art out againe: I cannot
come neere thee, thou hast a charme about thy legges,
no man meddle with the Queenes prisoner, now therefore
let vs talke freendlye, and as Alexander sayd to
hys Father Phillip, who beeing sorely wounded in
the thigh in fight, and hardly escaping death, but could

not goe on the ground without halting, bee of good
courage father, come foorth that euery step thou sets
on the ground may put thee in minde of thy manly courage
& vertue: so say I to thee, Nashe come forth, be not
ashamed of thy selfe, stretch out thy legs that euery step
thou goest, thy shackles crying clinke, may remember &
put thee in minde of all thy goodnes and vertue: I am
glad to see thee in this prosperitie, t
                  •
               ou neuer wert so
rich as now, thou neuer h
                  •
               dst so much money as would
buy so faire a payre of fetters: in very deed thou art
beholding to thy keeper that will trust thee with so
faire a payre of fetters, neither would he if hee had thee
not by the legge: but nowe thou art in good case, thou
art no vagabond▪ now thou seruest a Master, and hast a
house to goe to, and a coutch to lye in, thou muste bee
thriuing and prouident where thou art, and twill bee a
good sauing for thee, now thou hast a c
                  •
               og at thy heele
as the prouerbe is, thou must learne of A
                     •
                  sops dog to do
as he did: that is, thou must crinch vp thy se
                  ••
               e round in
thy couch all winter time and dreame of a goodly large
chamber, faire lodgings and soft beds, and in the Summer
time thou must stretch out thy selfe, lye all abroad
snoring vpon thy couch, and thinke that silly lodging
(seeing thou feelest no cold) a stately chamber built of
free stone,Holes in the top. layd out with stately bay windowes for to
take the ayre at. But what neede I tell thee of these
thinges? thou knowest better then I howe to lye in
pryson, for what a shame were it else for thee, that
hast many a day agoe beene free of all the prysons in
London, nowe to learne thine occupation? thou art a
iourney-man long since, I doe not thinke but that
thou art able to set ope shop in that trade, for if thou we
                  •
               t
but a nouice in it, this deere yeere would quite kill
thee.
            
               But say, how dost thou for victualls, doo not they of
thy old acquaintance helpe thee? if euer thou hadst true
frend, now let him show himselfe, for a frend is tried in
aduersitie: and though the Romanes were wont to say,
that a true frend was but the salt and sauce of a banquet;
yet I say, that a true Frend to thee must be salt, sauce,
bread, and all the meate beside. But thou hast neuer a
true Frend, yet thou hast enough of those frends, that
would be sauce to thy meate; that is, if thou couldst bid
them to a supper, they would come to eate vp thy meat,
and sawce it with fine talke. But (God knowes) thou
hast no need of those frends, thou couldest bee sauce to
thine owne meate. Fie on frendship, what is become of
it? not one drop nor crum of frendship betweene them
all? A true Frend (as they say) were more necessarie than
water and fire: for vnles hee come and call for it, thou
canst not haue so much as fire and water; that is, a fire
with a cuppe of small drinke by it to nourish thy bodie.
What is become of those true Frends Damon and Pythias,
Castor and Pollux, Pylades and Orestes, N
                     •
                  sus and
Eu
                     •
                  iolus, Perithous & Theseus, whom death it selfe could
neuer seperate? Dead? Then 
                  
                     •
                  oue raise some deadly tyrant
to massacre that cancred brood of thy companions,
that leaue their iester desolate in the winter of his affliction.
I curse them with more vehemencie, because I
see some hope in thee, in that thou now seemest simply
to betake thee to the truth. For whereas thou wert wont
to cracke and brag abroad, and indeuouredst to shew,
that ther was no learning in which thou wert not expert,
and how that thou wert indowed with plentie of the liberall
Sciences; which thou knowest to be nothing so:
now thou recantest, and in simple truth saist, thou hast no
learning, no not so much as one of the liberall Sciences.
Which thou showest vnto vs by comming foorth in thy

fetters, for none of the sciences are bond-slaues, or kept
in chaines, they are called liberall quasi libers because
they make men free. If these are not sufficient motiues
for thee, happily let this moue thee, that by thy proficiencie
in philosophy since thou camst into prison, thou
hearing of Aesop that dwelt in a tub; of A
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  agora
                     •
                  , who,
In prison wrote his especiall booke Of the quadrature of
the Circle: of S
                     •
                  crates, who in prison studied Philosophy,
and wrote verses, and yet (as Cardan saith) slept sweetly,
so as Socrates gaue more light to the prison, than the
prison gaue da
                  •
               knes to Socrates: And lastly of him that
put out his owne eyes, and so eclipst himself of the sight
of the world, that he might haue a more cleere insight
into the light of nature: keep thou thy self still in prison,
eclispe thee from the sight of the world, gaze onely on
thy selfe, that so thou more cleerely, seeing thine owne
deformed nature, mightst labour to reforme it, and
bring thy selfe into light againe. But (saist thou) you are
a merry man M. Dicke, it befits not the wise to mocke
a man in miserie. In truth thou saist true T
                     ••
                  , and for
my mindes sake I would not for a shilling but that thou
hadst beene in prison, it hath made my worship so mery:
but because thou continuest my precepts that am a
Cambridge
                  •
               man, from whence all vertue flowes, and
is the very fountaine and Cunduit-head of all learning.
O heere I could praise Cambridge an houre by the
clocke.
            Therefore I say, for thy contempt of me I will call thy
keeper, and tell how th'art stolne out of prison & come
to mee to helpe thee off with thy shackles. Noe Thomas
noe, I am no pick-locke, I thanke God, I liue without
picking, though thou liuest not without lockes. But
are you gone, thou wert afraid of thy keeper, goe to the
place from whence you came, &c. with a knaues name

to you. Ha, ha, if I had but followed this matter euen
a little more, I could haue perswaded thee to liue and
dye in prison.
            Alas, I could doo anie thing with thee now, all thy
senses are so taken downe Happie (quoth I) in prison?
haplesse indeed. How happie is the owle caught fast in
a lyme-bough, when all the smaller birdes doo chatter
at her for ioye? How happie the Rat caught in a trappe,
and there dies a liuing death? How happie the tyred
hart striken of the Hunter, who runnes panting, consuming
her breath, and at last faints for want of breath?
how happie the wearied hare pursued with dogs, euer
looking when they shall teare her in peeces? and how
happie the cunny-cat
                  •
               hing weasell insnared in the Parkers
net, and hangd vpon a tree? thus happie art thou:
with the owle thou art lymed and wondred at, with the
Rat thou art sore prest, with the Hart thou art in a consumption,
with the hare thou alwaies expectest a teareing,
and with the weasell thou shalt behanged. All these
torments are in prison, a demi-hell, where (like fiends)
the prisoners crawle about in chaines, euerie one perplext
with his seuerall paine; a darksome laborynth, out
of which thou canst neuer passe, though guided by a
thred.
            O double vnhappie soule of thine, that liues so
doubly imprisoned, first in thy bodie, which is a more
stinking prison than this where thou art; then, that it accompanieth
thy bodie in this prison. Were it not sufficient
that one prison should tortor thy soule enough?
No, first because thy soule hath too deepe a hand in all
thy knaueries, tis so imprisoned and fettered to thy bodie,
that it cannot go without it Poore So
                  •
               le,Apostrophe. more miserable
than the kings daughter captiuated & long time
kept imprisoned in the Theeues houses,Apuleius at last offering

to breake away, was condemned to be sewed into the
asses bodie & there to dye; for the asses bodie was dead,
and nothing aliue in the asse (the prison) to trouble the
Maid the prisoner. But thy prison is aliue, and all the affections
in thy bodie are as stinking vermine & wormes
in it, that crawle about thee, gnawing thee, and putting
thee to miserie. She in short time was sure to die, and so
to be free againe; thou art still in dying, and hoping for
freedome, but still liuest, and this augments thy calamitie:
she should haue had her head left out to breathe into
the aire, but thou breathest into thy prison thy bodie,
that corrupts within thee, and so retournes to bee thyne
owne poyson. Thus much miserie (poore soule) thine
owne bodie affoords thee, and by being with thy bodie
in the second prison, all this is doubled. Now if thou
wouldest bee free from thy prisons, make a hoale in thy
first prison,Continuata Metaphora. breake out there, and so thou escapest both,
thou neuer canst be caught again: and by this thou shalt
crie quittance with thy bodie, that thus hath tormented
thee, and shalt leaue him buried in a perpetual dungeon.
            Here let mee giue a cut or two on thy latest bred excrements,
before I goe to the finishing of the perfect
Cut.
            A littie lumpe of lead, while it is round will lye in a
small roome, but being beaten it will spread broad, and
require a larger place to containe it; and a roape bound
fast vp, might easily be couered, but vnfolded & drawne
out at length, it hardly can bee hidden: so you (simply
considered) are of no report, but if you bee vntrust and
beaten out, & your actions all vnfolded, your name cannot
be limitted. And now you, hauing a care of your
credite▪ scorning to lie wrapt vp in obliuion the moth of
fame, haue augmented the stretcht-out line of your
deedes, by that most infamous, most dunsicall and thrice

opprobrious worke The Ile of Dogs: for which you are
greatly in request; that, as when a stone is cast into the
water, manie circles arise from it, and one succeedeth another,
that if one goeth not round, the other following
might be adioyned to it, and so make the full circle:
so, if such infinite store of your deedes are not sufficient
to purchase to you eternall shame and sorrow, there arise
from you more vnder then to helpe forward: and last of
all commeth this your last worke, which maketh all sure,
and leaueth a signe behinde it.Cropt ear
                     •
                  
                And of this your last
worke, I must needes say somewhat: for seeing that this
my first work & off-spring hath remained in my womb
beyond the time allotted, it must needs be growen greater;
and if it become a monster, it must needes be in excesse.
            O yes, O yes:A proclamation for T. Nashe. if there bee anie manner of
man, person or persons, can bring anye tidings
of Tho: Nashe Gentleman, le
                  •
               hym
come and giue knovvledge thereof, & hee
shalbe plenteously revvarded.
            Hearke you Thomas, the Crier calls you. What, a
fugitiue? how comes that to passe, that thou a man of so
good an education, & so wel backt by the Muses, shuldst
prooue a fugitiue? But alas, thy Muses brought thee to
this miserie: you and your Muses maye euen goe hang
your selues: now you may wish, that he that first put the
Muses into your head, had knockt out your hornes. But
seeing it hath so happened, call for your Thalia among
your Muses, let her play some musique, and I will dance

at your hanging? But twas prouidence in thee, to foresee
thy woe, and to labour to eschew it, if not by auerring
what you haue said, and standing too it, yet by shewing
your heeles. For as is the Prouerbe; Vbi leo
                     ••
                  na
peli
                     •
                  s insufficiens est, vulpina astutia assuenda est. If by
strong hand you cannot obtaine it, light heeles are to be
required; for one paire of legs are worth two payre of
hands. And of all the part
                  •
                of thy bodie, thy legges are
thy most trustie seruants: for in all thy life when as thou
couldest not obtaine of anie of the parts of thy bodie to
effect thy will, yet legs thou hadst to commaund for to
walke and flee whether soeuer was thy pleasure, neither
now in this extremitie doo they deceiue thee. O, how
much art thou beholding to thy legs? Bankes was not so
much beholding to his Horse, that serued to ride on, and
to doo such wonderfu'l crankes, as thou art to thy leggs,
which haue thus cunningly conuayed thee. If euerie
begger by the high wayes side (hauing his legs corrupted
and halfe destroyed with botches, byles and fistulaes)
maketh much of them, getteth stilts and creepeth easily
on them, for feare of hurting them, because they maintaine
them, and prooue better vnto them than manie
an honest Trade; then why shouldest not thou (by an
argument a malo in peius) make much of thy legs, which
by speedie carriage of thee from place to place to get
thee victualls, do not onely maintaine thy life, but also at
this time haue saued thy life, by their true seruice vnto
thee. Wherefore (these things considered) thou canst
not chuse but in all humilitie offer thy old shooes for sacrifice
to Thetis for thy swiftfeet. And twas wisely done
of that high dread Liech Apollo to appoint Pisces the
Signe to the feete, to shew that a man should be as swift
as a fish about his affaires. Nerethelesse can I accuse you
of lazines,: for all this time of your vagation, with you

I thinke the Signe hath been in Pisces. Now in this thy
flight thou art a night-bird, for the day wil bewray thee:
the Bat and the Owle be thy fellow trauellers. But to
come roundly vnto you, this cannot long continue: the
Owle sometime is snarld in the day season, and old Father
Time at length will bring you to light. Therefore,
were you as well prouided to continue your flight, as is
the beast Ephemeron, which because shee hath but one
day to liue, hath manie legs, foure wings, and all what
Nature can affoord, to giue her expedition to see about
the world for her one dayes pleasure: or as Pegasus that
winged Horse, which in swiftnes equalleth the Horses
of the Sunne, which in one naturall day perambulate all
the world: or as the beast Alce, which runneth on the
snow with such celeritie that she neuer sinketh vnto the
ground: Were you (I say) as swift as anie of these, you
shall be catcht, such is your destinie: and then your punishment
shall be doubled on you, both for your flying,
and your other villanie.
            Since that thy Ile of Dogs hath made thee thus miserable,
I cannot but account thee a Dog, and chyde and
rate thee as a Dog that hath done a fault. And yet doo
not I know why I should blame Dogs? for Can, which
signifieth a Dog, is also a most trustie Seruant; for that
Dogs are faithfull Seruants, to whome their Masters in
the night time giue in charge all their treasure. They
are at commaund to waite vpon their Masters, whether
they bend their iourney, to fight for them against their
Enemies, and to spend their liues to defend them, and to
offend their aduersaries, as we read of King Cazament:
who beeing exilde, brought with him from banishment
two hundreth Dogges, which (with wonderfull fiercenesse)
wa
                  •
               red against their resistants: in whom hee reposed
much more confidence & hope of victorie, again

to be seated in his throne, th
                  •
               n if hee had been defended
by a mightie hoast of armed men. And 
                  
                     •
                  asons dogge,
his master being dead, neuer would eate anie meate, but
with great griefe and hunger died for companie. Tycius
the Sa
                     •
                  ine had a dogge which accompanied hym to
prison, and when he was dead, he remained howling by
the carcasse: to whom when one cast meate, he laid it to
the mouth of his dead master, to reuiue him againe: and
when his corpes was throwen into the riuer Tybris, the
dogge leapt after it, so that all the people wondered at
the loue of this faithfull creature. P
                     ••
                  rhus the King going
a iourney, came by a dogge which kept the bodie of
a dead man: which when hee saw, he comaunded the
bodie to be buried, and the dogge to bee brought home
with him: this done, a few dayes after came souldiours
before the King, among whom the dogge espyed them
which killd his master, and barked incessantly at them;
sometime looking and fawning on the King, and then
barked againe. At which signe the King astonished, examined
them, and vpon light examinations they confessed
the murder, and tooke punishment for it. Further,
we read of a dogge called Capparus in Athens, which in
the night pursude a theefe that robbed a Church, & being
driuen backe with stones by the Theefe, followed
him aloofe off, but alwayes kept him in sight, and at last
came to him, and sat by him while he slept. The next
morne, so soone as euer the Sunnes golden crowne gan
to appeare, and his fierie steedes trapperd in their capparisons
set on their wonted race, the theefe fleeing, the
dogge stil kept his chase, and complaind in his language
to the passengers of the theefe. At last he was taken and
brought backe, before whom the dog came all the way
leaping and exulting for ioy, as to whome all the prayse
was due for this deed.
            
               
The Athenians decreed that for this publique good,
the dogge should be kept by publique charges, and the
care of his keeping was alwaies afterward layd vpon the
Priests. And I feare mee, and almost diuine so much,
that the verie dogges (wheresoeuer thou plaist least in
sight) will bewraye thee and bring thee to thy torture.
Againe, (among the Aegiptians) Saturne was called
Ky
                     •
                  n, because as a pregnant woman, he begat all things
of himselfe and in himselfe; and in antique time they
worshipped dogges, and had them in great account, till
on a time when Cambyses killed a man and cast hym away,
no other beast but a dog rauened in the dead carcasse.
            Lastly, to come neerer to your selfe, you shall heare
of a dogge that was an excellent Actor. In Rome there
was a Stage-player, which set out a Historie of diuers
personages, among whom there was a dogge to be poisoned
and reuiue againe; a Part of no lesse difficultie
than the king or the clowne, and was as well perfourmed:
for (at his time) he eate the poyson, and presently
(drunkard-like) stackered vp and downe, reeling backward
and forward, bending his head to the ground, as
if it were too heauie for his bodie, as his Part was; and
at last fell downe, stretcht himselfe vpon the stage, and
lay for dead. Soone after, when his Cue was spoken,
first by little and little he began to mooue himselfe, and
then stretching forth his legs, as though he awaked from
a deepesleepe, and lifting vp his head, lookt about him:
then he arose, and came to him to whom his part was he
should come: which thing (besides the great pleasure)
mooued wonderfull admiration in olde Ve
                     •
                  pasian the
Emperour there present, and in ail the other that were
spectators.
            These prettie tales of dogges might keepe mee from

chiding of thee, but thou art no such dogge; these were
all well nurtured when they were whelps, you not so:
the worme was not pluckt out from vnder your tongue,
so that you haue run mad, and bit venome euer since: for
these are the properties of a mad dog.
            First, the blacke choller which raigneth in them turneth
to madnes most commonly in the Spring-time
and in Autumne: and you though you are mad all the
yeere, yet haue shewed the signe of it especially
this last Autumne; they, alwaies run with their mouthes
open and their tongues hanging out, wee know howe
wide your mouth is, how long your tung; your mouth
is neuer shut, your tongue neuer tyed: slauer and fome
fall from their iawes as they run, and tis but slauer that
proceedeth from thy mouth: though their eyes be open,
yet they stumble on euery obiect; so though thou s
                  •
               est
who offends thee not, yet thou all offendest: they whosoeuer
are bitten with a mad dog also run mad, and they
whom thy vlcered tongue did bite, are so stirred vp by it,
that till they haue got you and wormed you, they cannot
be well: thus you may see to what misery you were
borne. Woe to the teats of thy Dam that gaue thee suck,
and woe to blind fortune, that she opened not her eyes
to see to affoord thee better fortune: and woe to the
dog-daies, for in those thou wroughtest that which now
works thy wo
                  •
               , take heede heerafter what you doe in
dog-daies. The natures secretaries record of that kinde
of goate cald Ory
                     •
                  e, that all the yeere her throate is shut,
the strings of her voice tyed, til dog-daies come, & then
that very day and houre in which the dog-starre first appeareth
(at which time dog-daies begin) shee openeth
her voyce and crieth: the like miracle these last dog-daies
haue done of thee, for what all the whole yeere
could not bring to passe, and all the Country long haue

expected, that is, thy confusion, these dog-dayes by
th
                  •
               ne owne wordes haue effected: therfore happy hadst
thou beene if thou hadst remained still in London, that
thou mightest haue bin knockt on the head with many of
thy fellowes these dog-daies, for nowe the further thou
fleest, the further thou runst into thy calamitie: there is
watch layd for you, you cannot escape; th'art in as ill a
taking as the Ha
                  •
               e, which being all the day hunted, at
last concludes to dye, for (said she) whether should I flye
to escape these dogs, if I should flye to heauen, there is
canissidus celeste:
               The dog-starre. if I should run into the sea, there is canis
p
                     •
                  scis marinus, and heere on earth millions of dogges
seeke to torment me;The dog-fish. aye me, heauen, earth and sea conspire
my tragedy: and as wofull as the Cunny which escaping
the Weasell fell into the hunters net, of which
was that pythie Epigram, Would to God the Weasell
with my bloud had sucked out my life, for nowe I am
kept a pray for the rauening dogs, and cruell-harted mā
               sits
laughing whilst my body is broken vp, and my guts
deuided into many shares: and though yet thou hast escaped
thy snares, it will not bee long ere thou beest taken
and then the'rs laughing worke for all the Country;
for though thy body were shared into infinite indiuiduals,
yet euery one could not haue his part whome
thou hast abused, for recompence for thy iniury done
vnto him.
            Nowe let mee see thy punishment for thy Isle of
dogges, tis an auncient custome in our Countrie when
wee take a dogge that hath done a fault, presently to
crop his eares, and this surely for thy fault is thy punishment,
but why (might some say) are thine eares punished
for thy tongues fault?
            
               I answere, thine eares are worthy to be punished for
not discharging their office, for whereas they should
heare before thou speakest, as they that be skilfull at the
ball, first receiue the ball before they cast it foorth againe;
and into a vessel there is first infusion before there
be effusion out of the same; the ouer pregnant dog (we
see) bringeth forth blinde puppies, and the spider that
prepares her matter and weaues her webbe together at
the same time, makes but slender worke of it, and easie
to be broken of euery flye. I say, whereas thou shouldst
first haue heard, thou first speakest, thy tongue was in
thy eares place, and for this cause thine eares are iustly
punished.
            Nature gaue thee two eares and but one tongue because
thou shouldst heare more then thou shouldest
speake but because thou hast spokē more than euer thou
heardst, thine eares shall bee taken from thee: She set
thine eyes and thine eares both of equall highnes and
alwaies open, that they might bee ready to heare and to
see, but thy tongue she put into a case that it might bee
slowe to speake; but thine eares were dull to heare, and
thy tongue too quicke of speach: Therefore thine eares
deserue their punishment: Then to bee short, to haue
thine cropt is thy punishment:Ha ha ha. What Tom, are thine
eares gone? O fine man will you buy a fine dog? Why thou
art in the fashion,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                thou art priuiledged to weare long
lockes by ancient charter, but now if the fashion were
as hot as euer twas to weare ringes in their eares, faith
thou must weare thine euen in thy tongue, because that

                  •
               osoned thee of thine eares: are thy eares so moueable?
art thou a monster? indeede all beasts haue free mouing
of their eares graunted to them, but for men I neuer
knew any but thee haue their eares mouing, and thine I
see to haue the gentle quite remoue: I thinke tis a diseased,

for I am assure tis a horible paine to bee troubled
with the mouing of the eares. I coniecture no goodnes
by this strange accident of moueable eares this yere, I
hope shortly we shall haue Ball
                  •••
               s out of it. I am afraid
I tell you by this strange signe that we shall haue a wet
winter this yere, for if it be true (which the Philosophers
affirme) that when an Asses eares hang downe toward
the ground, tis a certaine signe of raine instant, then seeing
thine eares not only hang toward the ground, but
euen drop down to the ground, how can it chuse but be
a signe of great wet at hand? and to thee it should be a
cause of perpetuall showers that should flow from thine
eyes, but thou art d
                  •
               ye, no droppe of grace from thine
eyes. It taking away of thine eares could take away thy
hearing too, twere some profit for thee, for then thou
shouldst not heare thy selfe raild on, laughed at, nor
know thy selfe to be a mocking stocke to all the Country
but there is a more plaine way made to thy hearing
organs, so that thou shalt more lightly heare thy selfe
euery where cald crop-card curre. What wilt thou giue
me if I (I am a Chirurgion) make a new paire of eares
grow out of thy head, which passeth Appolloes cunning,
that so thou maist stil liue with fame in thine own countrie,
or if I heale them as though thou neuer hadst any,
that I may goe with thee into Germanie and there shew
thee for a strange beast bred in England, with a face like
a man, with no eares, with a tung like a venomous Serpent,
and a nose like no body. The last I care not if I consented
to: if tho
                  •
                woldst liue in good order but one half
yere, but to the first that is to giue thee new eares, I neuer
wil grant thogh thou sholdst be inspired to liue orderly
al the residue of thy life, no though I had wax & al things
ready, for long a goe hast thou deserued this disgrace to
be earelesse, euer since thou beganst to write, for libels
deserue that punishment, and euery booke which yet

thou hast written is a libell, and whomsoeuer thou namest
in thy booke hath a libell made of him, thou purposing
to speake well of him; such is the malice of thy
cankerd tongue. Therefore thou deseruedst to loose
thine eares for naming the Bishop of Ely and of Lincolne,
and for writing of Christes teares ouer Ierusalem:
how darest thou take such holy matters into thy stinking
mouth, so to defile and polute them? your Dildoe &
such subiects are fit matter for you, for of those you cannot
speak amisse, the more you raile of thē the neerer you
touch the matter: but because you were not punished
for those libels, you began your olde course againe, canis
ad vomitum, you began to chew the cud of your villanie
and to bring more libels into light. But I hope this
last libell will reuenge the rest.
            We heare howe you threatned to spoile our stirring
Satirist: alas, haue thy writings such efficacie? indeed they
are poysoned, but poison will not worke on euery subiect:
and if thou shouldst but name him, so that it might
giue but any blemish to his fame, assure thy selfe to bee
met withal of troops of Scholers which wil soone make
thee be one of Terence his parasits: in wounds thou shalt
exceed Cass
                     •
                  anus which was so pittifully pinked of his
own Schollers: & now whilst I am in the hot inuectiue I
haue a message to doe to you, the townsmen of Cherrihinton
send you cōmendations, & they demaund a reson
of you why you call them clownes? they say, they neuer
offered you any wrong, wherefore if euer you come that
way, they will send all the dogs in the town after you to
pluck off your ears if they be not gone before you come.
Now I thinke it be time to remember my promise to the
readers, that is that I be not irkesome to them with
tediousnes, that so they might with good accep
                  •
               ance
digest what hetherto they haue read: therefore I will
drawe toward an end and so finish this perfect Cut.
            
               Wheras thou commendst thy Epistle to me as a garment
for a foole, and therefore that it should bee long: I
(as is thy desire) haue cut it with my scissers, layd it ope,
and according to that pattern haue made a coate for thy
selfe, but it is so short that thou shalt not neede to curtaile
it, for some fooles haue long coates for that cause
onely, that they might the better hide their folly and cover
their nakednes, which els all should see, yet I haue
made thy coate short and little, that by thy behauiour in
it thou mayst bewray to others thy simplicitie, & if I had
tooke in hand to haue made it great enough to couer al
thy folly, this is not the twentith part of stuffe that wold
haue serued, neither possibly couldst thou haue had
thy new coate against this time▪ but seeing thy garment
is dispatcht for thee, weare it and vse it well, for the fashion
of long cloathes is wearing away, & short cloaths
will shortly be in request againe, and then thou shalt be
a foole of the fashion, as soone as the proudest of them
all.
            Againe, this coate for thy body and the coole irons
for thy legges will be a most cooling sute for thee all this
Summer time, therefore make much of it, let it not bee
thy euery day sute but as the Vtopians were wont to
make them sutes of 
                  •
               eather, which lasted seuen yeeres,
in which they did all their labour, and when they went
abroad they cast on their cloakes which hid their leather
cloathes and made them seeme comely and handsome:
so if thou canst but get some old, greafie, cast sustian sute
to weare within dores, this coate will serue thee to cast
on to iet abroad in, and doe thee credit.
            Wherefore (good Tom) I exhort thee to keepe thee
(whilst thou art) in good case, thou art well apparelled,
it may bee thou presently wilt bestowe a coate
of mee, doe not so, all thy coates are threedbare

and I neede them not, though thou hast many, for
I know thou hast three or foure coates ready made (like
a saleman) for some body: then, to which soeuer thou
sowest but a patch or two cōcerning me, that coat shal
serue me: thou puttest diuers stuffe into one coate, and
this is thy vse in all thy confutations, as in this thy book
thou bringest into the partie against whom thou wr
                  ••
               est,
his brothers, which argueth (as I sayd before) want of
inuention, but it skils not, thou art priuiledged neuer to
goe from the matter, it might as well bee permitted in
thee as in the historian that promising to speake of the
faith of the Iewes, made a long tale of N
                     •
                  lus: but (as I
said) be a good husband Tom and keep thy coate to thy
selfe, thou wilt need th
                  •
               m al, and when this coate which
which I bestowe on thee shall waxe threed-bare, I will
dresse it for thee the second time and giue it thee againe.
            This I speak not to wage discord against thee, but rather
to make an end of all iarres, that as wife & husband
will brawle and be at mortall fewde al the day long, but
when boord or bed time come they are friendes againe
and louingly kisse one an other: so though hetherto we
haue disagreed and beene at oddes, yet this one coate
shall containe vs both, which thou shalt weare as the
cognisaunce of my singuler loue towards thee, that wee
liuing in mutuall loue may so dye, and at last louing like
two brothers Castor and Pollux, or the two sisters Vrs
                     •
                   maior
and Vrsa minor wee may bee carried vp to heauen
together, and there translated into two starres.
            Finally these thinges considered aright, in loue
I beseech thee (that thou maist see I am not past
grace) to suffer mee to retort thy grace, and so to end,
which my selfe will follow for you; you suing sub forma
pauperis.
            
         
         
            
            A Grace in the behalfe of Thomas Nashe.
            TO all ballet-makers, pamphleters, presse hanters,
boon pot poets, and such like, to whom these presents
shall come greeting. Wheras Tho: Nashe
the bearer heereof, borne I know not where, educated
sometime at Cambridge: where (being distracted of his
wits) he self into diuers 
                  ••
               sdemeanors, which were the
first steps that broght him to this poore-estate. As namely
in his fresh-time 
                  •
               ow he florished in all impudencie toward
Schollers, and abuse to the Townsmen; insomuch,
that to this daye the Townes-men call euerie vntoward
Scholler of whome there is great hope, a verie Nashe.
Then being Bachelor of Arte, which by great labour he
got, to she
                  •
                afterward that he was not vnworthie of it,
had a hand in a Show called Terminus & non terminus,
for which his partener in it was expelled the Colledge:
but this foresaid N
                     •
                  she played in it (as I suppose) the
Varlet of Clubs; which he acted with such naturall affection,
that all the spect
                  •
               tors tooke him to be the verie
same. Then suspecting himselfe that he should be staied
for egreg
                     •
                  e dunsus, and not attain to the next Degree, said
he had commenst enough, and so forsooke Cambridge,
being Ba
                  •
               chelor of the third yere. Then he raisd himselfe
vnto an higher C
                  •
               ime, no lesse than London could serue
him: where somewhat recouered of his wits, by the excrements
thereof (for the space of nine or ten yere) hee
hath got his belly fed and his backe cloathed. As also I
hope you are not ignoraunt how hee hath troubled the
Presse all this time, and published sundrie workes & vol
                  •
               mes,
which I take with me as humble fellow-suters to
you, that you being all in one straine (and that very low,
he in a highe-key) 
                  •
               ou would vouchsafe to take him as
your graduate Captain generall in all villanie: to which
villanie conioyn your voyces and in which villanie praye

and say together, Viuat, 
                     •••
                  iatur Nashe. To these premisses▪
that they are true, and that hee among yo
                  •
                all is
onely worthie this title, I (as head Lecturer) put too my
hand.
            
               Richard Lichfield.
            
         
         
            But Tom, thy selfe art past grace: for some of thyne
owne faction, enuying thy proficiencie and honour to
which thou aspirest, hath pocketted thy Grace. O enuie,
catterpiller to vertue! But let him know that thou
hast a Patron will sticke to thee, and that thou art gracious
in more Faculties than one, I will put vp another
Grace for thee, wherein he shall haue no voyce, and one
onely man an old frend of thine shall strike it dead.
         
         
            A Grace in the behalfe of Thomas Nashe, to the right
wo
                  •
               sh
                  •
               pfull and grand Commander of all the superrants &
sub
                  •
               ercubants of Englands great Metropolis, the Prou
                  •
               st
Marshall of London.
            FOrasmuch as Thomas Nash sundrie and oftentimes
hath been cast into manie prisons (by full authoritie)
for his mis-behauiors, and hath polluted them
all▪ so that there is not one prison in London, that is not
infected with Nashes euill: and being lately set at
libertie, rangeth vp and downe, g
                  ••
               hering poyson in euerie
place, whereby he 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               he common aire; I
am to desire you that as you tender the common good
of the weale publike, and as the vertue of your office requireth▪
which is to clense the City of all vitious and vnruly
persons, when this aboue named N
                     •
                  she shall happen
into your presinctes or dioces of your authority you
would giue him his vnction in the highest degree, and
clense vs quite of him, which you shall effect thus. Send

him not to prisons any more which are corrupted by
him already, but commit him to the Procter of the Sp
                     ••
                  tle,
where hee shall not stay long least hee breed a plague among
them also: but passe frō him to Bull, who by your
permission hauing ful power ouer him and being of such
amiable and dexterious facility in discharging his duety,
will soone knit the knot of life and death vpon him, strō
               ger
then that Gordian knot neuer to bee loosed, and by
that pritty tricke of fast and loose, will loose your Cittie
from him and him from all his infections, and will hang
him in so sweet & cleer a prospect as that it wilbe greatly
to your credit to see the great concourse thether of all
sect of people
                  •
                as first, I with my brethren the Ba
                  •
               ber-Chirurgions
of London, wil be there, because we cannot
phlebotamize him, to anatomize him and keep his bons
as a chronicle to shew many ages heereafter that sometime
liued such a man, our posteritie hauing by tradition
what he was▪ and you in some part migh: be chronicled
(as well as S. George) for destroying this serpen
                  •
               : thē
there will flock all the Cunni
                  •
                catchers of London to see
the portraiture of the arch architectour of their arte: lastly,
al the Ballad-makers of London his very enimies that
stayed his last grace, will be there to hea
                  •
               e his confession,
and out of his last words will make Epitaphes of him, &
afterward Ballads of the life and death of Thomas Nash.
Let this grace passe as soone as may bee, if not for any
perticular loue to him▪ yet as you are a Magistrate of the
Cittie, and ought to knowe what tis to prefer a publike
commodititie: 
                  〈◊〉
                this grace passe not, hee is like to bee
stayde finally till the next yeere. This head-lecturer present
him to you.
            
               Richard Lichfield.
            
         
         
            
            Thus (curteous Gentlemen) I haue brought you 
                  •
               o
the ende of his trimming, though he be not so curiously
done as he deserueth: hold mee excused, hee is the first
man that euer I cut on this fashion. And if perhaps in
this Trimming I haue cut more partes of him than are
necess
                  •
               rie, let mee heare your censures, and in my next
Cut I will not be so lauish: but as the Cu
                  •
               ate, who when
he was first instald into his Benefice, and among other
Iniunctions being inioynd (as the order is) to forewarne
his Parish of Holy-daies, that they might fast for them:
and thinking all those Holy daies which hee saw in hys
Calender written with red letters, on a time said to hys
Parishioners, You must fast next wensday for Saint Sol
in V
                     ••
                  go, which is on thursday, because he saw it in red
letters. Which moo
                  ••
               d laughter to the wise of the Parish;
who presently instructed him, that ouer what red
words soeuer he saw Fast written, those he
                  •
                should bid
Holi-dayes: so in short time he became expert in it. In
like manner, I hauing but newly taken Orders in these
affaires, if heere I haue been too prodigall in 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   snaps,
tell me of it, limit me with a Fast, and in short time you
shall see me reformed.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   