
      
         
            
            
            ¶ An expoſition of the whole eight Chapiter to the Romaines, expounded by Ihon Hedlambe, Preacher and Miniſter to the Congregation at Braughin, and ſtudent of Diuinitie in Peter houſe at Cambridge, before Maiſter Doctour Squire, and the whole Miniſterie aſſembled at the laſte Synode, holden at Ware in Lent laſte paſt 1579. Wherein is perfectly proued our iuſtification to bee by faithe onely, to the beatyng doune and ouerthrowyng of all erronious and falſe opinions to the contrarie.
            
               Seen and allowed.
            
            ¶ Imprinted at London, by Robert VValley. 1579.
            
         
         
            
            
            
               To the right woorſhipfull maiſter Thomas Meade, one of the Queenes Maisties Iuſtices of her common Plees at Weſtminſter, Ihon Hedlambe wiſheth long life, with the increaſe of godlineſſe and felicitie.
               
            
            
               THat the good and godlie order of that man of God: the right worſhip full & our godlie Archdeacon maiſter Doctor Squier, maie be knowē vnto your worſhipp, for whō I with the reſte of my brethren, and fellowe Miniſters of the Churche of God are to giue GOD moſte hartie thankes, for that it pleaſed GOD to ſende ſuche a faithfull diſtributer of his woorde to raigne ouer vs. Who bothe with godly zeale ſetteth forthe the truthe, and alſo with greate mildneſſe encourageth vs to goe foreward in the ſame: It was his good pleaſurs to appointe me, though moſte vnworthie,

at his laſte Sinode at Ware, to open as GOD would bleſſe me, and directe me at that tyme vnto my fellowe Miniſters thoſe notes, which according to my ſmall capacitie, I had collected vpon the viij. Chapiter to the Romaines, after whiche my rude diſcourſe beeyng ended, he did ſo comfort me to go foreward, as was greatly to my ioye and cō
               ſolation in the Lorde: wherefore as dutie bindeth me, praiyng the Lorde long to cōtinue this our churche of England with hym, and many ſuche faithfull Miniſters to God his glorie, and their and, our greate comfortes, not beyng able to ſpeake that he deſerueth, neither to vtter that in hym, whiche my harte doeth conceiue, I referre it to your worſhip & others, godlie and learned. Wherefore now returnyng my baiſe ſtile to write vnto your worſhip: as the diuine Philoſopher Plato (right worſhipful) did oftē tymes giue thankes to the Angell of his birthe for three thinges: firſt that he was a man, and not a beaſt: Secondly, that he

was a Grecian, & not a barbarian: thirdly, that he was borne in the daies of Socrates, whiche rhankfulneſſe that Heathen Philoſopher, euen to that God he knewe not, and that for worldly & tranſitorie thinges, hath pricked me forward (though not forgetfull, yet vnable to fulfill any part of my dueties) to be hartely thankfull to the Father of mercie, & God of all power, whom I truly knowe through Chriſte Ieſus, for that he hath created me like vnto hymſelf, ſinne onely excepted, & hath not onely brought me to the pleaſant ſpryng of the hie Helicon, but alſo hath ſent me ſuche a Mecenas, who as he is able, ſo is he willyng to further thoſe my ſtudies and labours, wherunto God hath called me. And ſeyng (right worſhipfull) that you are that fauorer of my labours in Chriſt Ieſus, for whom I am not onely to pray to God, but alſo through his aſſiſtaunce in and by my ſelf, to ſhewe ſome effectes and tokens, of my thankfull mynde and knowleging bothe with what loue you

embrace the truthe of God his woorde: and what fauour you beare to the Miniſters of the ſame, as alſo what delight you take in reading of the ſame, and mixyng the ſtudies therof, with other your labours profeſſed: I haue here ſent vnto your worſhippe a breef diſcourſe of the whole viij. Chapiter to the Romaines, whiche although I haue neither ſo well polliſhed, drawen ſuche lineamētes, nor added ſuch coulers as other both could and would haue dooen, if thei had been appointed to haue ſpoken in that place. Yet as GOD at that tyme did giue me grace and vtteraunce, and for the meaſure of that Spirite whiche he lent me, I did breefly bothe in deuidyng and expounding, ſo labour, as the ſhortneſſe of tyme wherein I had warnyng, and was to ſpeake permitted me: whiche my labours if thei be accepted and approued by your worſhip, I truſt I ſhall (God his grace aſſiſtyng me) take ſuche like or greater paines, in ſome other place of Scripture, to the building vp of the walles

of the decaied Hieruſalem, and to the beatyng doune of the kingdome of Sathan, bothe in other, and alſo in my ſelf. Thus deſiryng the God of mercie, who raiſed againe frō death, the great Shepherd of his flocke, euen Ieſus Chriſte the righteous, alwaies to preſerue and proſpere your worſhip and yours, bothe to his Churche, and alſo to this our common wealthe. Thus with due remembraunce of my bounden dueties, I ceaſe to trouble your worſhippe: from Braughin this xxj. of Maie. 1579.
            
               Your worſhipps moſte bounden in the Lorde, duryng life Ihon Hedlambe.
            
         
         
            
            ¶The Printer to the gentle Reader.
            
               WHereas it hath pleaſed God (gē
               tle reader) through his holie ſpirite, to moue and directe the author hereof, to ſet doune here for thy comfort an expoſition of the whole 8. Chapiter to the Romaines: Theſe are to deſire thee, with humilitie and diligence to read the ſame, and alſo for the better vnderſtandyng thereof, to reade ouer the eight Chapiter, not doubtyng but that in readyng hereof, thou ſhalte receiue comforte through Gods holie Spirite, praiyng vnto hym, that he will directe the hartes, myndes, and pennes of all readers and writers that all their actions maie bee to God his glorie, and to the edifiyng of the readers and hearers, whiche God graunt for his mercie ſake. Thus fare thou well in the lorde, who euer bleſſe vs. Amen.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ Octauum caput ad Romanos.
            
               IT is not (as I ſuppoſe) vnknowen vnto any of you, right worſhipfull welbeloued brethren, and felowe miniſters of Gods holie Miſteries, how and in what order the bleſſed Apoſtle S. Paule diſputeth againſt that people, whiche in his daies did vexe the Churche with the deueliſhe and abhominable doctrine of ſaluation, by their own workes and ſantification, by the vanities of mans braine: and yet I haue thought it good at this preſent breefly to open the whole methode of the ſame, bothe becauſe I feare there bee ſome here, who either haue not perfectly heard, or learned the ſame, and other that haue not diſtinctly taught it: as alſo that I maie by the aſſiſtance of Gods ſpirit and your gentle pacience, more plainly ſet open before you, the whole contents of this preſent ſcripture,

to the aduanſement of Gods truthe, to the true vnderſtandyng of his worde, and the health of all our ſoules &c.
            This whole Epiſtle maie well be deuided into twoo eſpeciall partes, the firſt is of doctrine eſpecially, I ſaie eſpecially becauſe that in the diſputation of Doctrine, he handeleth other thynges by the waie. The ſeconde of manners. And in that firſt parte whiche is doctrine he diſputeth at large of iuſtification by faythe in the firſt 8. Chapters. And the 9.10.11. Chapters he beſtoweth in the confirming of the other parte of this doctrine which is predeſtination. And in the other Chapters he onely handleth their manners. Thus you ſee the ſcope of the Apoſtle: Now lette vs conſider the Scripture whiche is reade thus &c.
            
               Reade the 8. After that the holy man of God Paule had ſatiſfied the doutefull and wauering myndes, and ouerthrowen the ſubtill and crafty reaſons of thoſe, who moſt impudently aſcribed the cauſes and meanes of their ſaluation to workes, he addeth this

               8.
               2. Principall thinges. Chapiter wherein wee are to knowe that there are conteyned twoo principall thinges. Firſt a concluſion of thoſe thinges, whiche he ſet doune in the former Chapiters. Secondely a comforte and conſolation for all thoſe who imbrace this Doctrine, and caſt from them thoſe relikes of errour. The concluſion whiche I ſpoke of contayning in it, an affirmation of the whole diſputation from the viverſe of the firſt Chapter vnto this 8 Chapter is confirmed this ſentence, without good woorkes is onely graunted ſaluation too the electe. The confirmation is in the ſeconde verſe of this Chapter, wherein the thirde verſe is expounded, a doubt as it weare of the weakneſſe and inabilitie of the Spirite, whiche is aunſwered in the ſame verſe by an argument ex aduerſis, that is contraries whiche affirming are perpetually oppoſite.
            
            That theſe thinges are onely graunted to thoſe whiche are regenerat is ſet forth in the fourth verſe ex diſſentaneis, whoſe firſt parte ſette doune in the 5. verſe, is

plainly declared of the effect following in the twoo next verſes, hauyng their owne concluſion in the 8. verſe. The ſeconde parte of the afore ſaied argument, is in the 9. verſe. Where are bothe the propoſitions of this ſyllogiſme. Who ſo is in the ſpirite hath the ſpirite: You are in the ſpirite ergo.
            
            The latter propoſition, or as it is termed the Minor or aſſumption, is confirmed by the effecte of the graftyng into Chriſte in the 10. verſe, and effectes of the ſpirite in the 11. verſe. The concluſiō of the firſte parte is in the 12. verſe, and ſet forthe by two diſagreing argumentes in the 13. verſe, the latter being proued in the 14. verſe, by an enthimeme or imperfect ſyllogiſme, whoſe propoſition is confirmed by the effectes and teſtimones of the ſpirite, in the 15. and 16. verſes. Whiche parte thus orderly ſet doune the Apoſtle directed ſtill by the ſame ſpirite, entreth into the diſpoſition and artificiall ſetting doune of the comforte, whiche the Children of God receiue by that faythe,

in whoſe aſſurance he hath ſo laboured. Which comfort he taketh not of the vaine delites, whiche carnall men wiſhe or hope for in this life. But firſt of that company, whiche we haue with Chriſte in the ende of the 17. verſe. Secondely a comparatis in the 18. verſe, thirdly of an argument a Maiori in the 19. verſe, All thinges doe looke for this comforte, muche more wee whiche God hath bleſſed with reaſon, and called to the perticipation of his mercies in Chriſt Ieſus. And this lookyng for, is contayned more largely in the 20.21.22. and 23. verſes. Fourthly of the matter of hope 24. and 25. verſes the ſpirite helping and prayer 26. and 27. Fiftly of the ende of our afflictions 28: God working the ſame, whiche hath predeſtinated vs, as 29. and 30. verſes. Sixtly of an argument a Maiori 31.32 to the whiche he anexeth a moſt excellent concluſion and affirmation, of the whole parte beginning at the 33. verſe vnto the ende. Thus you ſee deare britheren, what order I am to obſerue in the treatiſe of this Scripture,

whiche that I maie dooe too the glory of God &c.
            I tolde you that the firſte parte was a concluſion, whiche the bleſſed Apoſtle Paule added to that notable diſputation, whiche he before had handled to the beating doune, and erecting againe bothe of Iewe and Gentile, and to the repairyng in them whom God of his mercye, hath called that the Image of perfection, from whiche we fell with our forfathers, whoſe tokēs we beare, I meane original ſinne.
            
               The expoſitiō of the 1. verſe.
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , this woorde beyng without that accente whiche the Grecians call accentum graue, is a note of copulation, and proueth this to bee ioyned to ſome diſputation goyng before, and addyng theſe woordes followyng, he giueth them in ſteade of a Buckler to defende vs in that daie of battaile, when the Deuill ſhalbee readie to giue the onſet, and to ouercome vs, if wee arme not our ſelues with this armour, either to preuente his malice, or valiantly to reſiſt his force. And here the wiſedome of God by his ſeruaunt Paule
               
ioyneth three eſpeciall thinges to be marked: Firſte,Three thinges to be marked. the imperfections often incident  euen to the faithfull. Secondlie, the  greate fauour of God. Thirdly, the regeneration  of the Spirite. Whiche if wee perfectly conſider, then it ſhalbe impoſſible for Hell it ſelf to preuaile againſt vs: the imperfections are ſett doune in walkyng after the fleſhe, whiche worde fleſhe maie bee taken either for the outwarde man, the whole man, that is bodie and ſoule: or for the preſent tyme: If therefore any of the children of God doe externallie offende God, as when the Childe of God boweth hym ſelf in time of perſecution to an Idoll, or with deſire of minde, and conſent of bodie fall into any ſynne, as when God giueth vp his children to worke accordyng to their owne hartes, and ſo fall into ſome greeuous ſynne, as adulterie, ſwearyng, liyng, & ſuche like: laſtly, whē thoſe whom God hath called, liue accordyng to the courſe of the worlde, either faſhion them ſelues therevnto in their behauiour, Religion, or apparell, and thus

diſagree from the written woorde, then I ſaie thei walke after the fleſhe, and yet thei ſo ſinne, that for Chriſt his ſake theſe ſinns ſhal not be laied vnto their charges: And therefore thei flye vnto that mercie offered, and acknowledge the ſame. The ſeconde thyng that I noted, to bee Gods fauour towardes vs, whiche pardoneth and forgiueth vs, ſo that although ſynne aſſault vs, and oftentymes ſubdue vs, yet wee acknowledge our ſelues to bee free from the power of Death, and the curſſe. Thus fell Dauid in committyng adulterie with bloud,Magi. Sententiarum libro 4 diſtinctio. 16. thus fell Moſes at the waters of ſtrife in ſmityng the rocke: Thus Peter, Mary Magdalen and others whoſe falles were not to death, but to their farther confirmation. And although the blodie Papiſtes (truſtyng in the defence of a fooliſhe diſtinction of ſynnes Veniall and Mortall, and willyng in their groſſeneſſe to play and ieſte with God, ſaie that mortall ſinnes muſt paie a greate raunſome, but veniall ſynnes to bee pourged with more eaſie remedies, as with mumbling

vp and often repetition of the Lordes prayer, with ſprincklyng of holie water, or the abſolution of the Maſſe) would take awaie this place, becauſe it is ſaie thei, a paradox of the Stoickes makyng equalitie of ſynnes, yet lette vs (beloued) thus thinke, that if this were not true, that euery one ſhould dye for euer, becauſe Roma. 6.23. the rewarde of ſynne is death, Ezech. 18.2
                     •
                  
                becauſe the ſame ſoule that ſynneth ſhall dye. Yea let vs be perſwaded that all the ſynnes of the faithfull are remitted, not becauſe thei doe not deſerue death, but becauſe by the mercie of God, there is no condemnation to them that are in Chriſte Ieſus, ſo that their ſynnes are blotted out by pardon, and ſhall not bee imputed vnto them, neither dooeth this place argue equalitie of ſynnes (as thei dreamed) though it make all ſynnes worthy of condemnation, or as thei tearme it Mortall. For in deede thei them ſelues ſaie, that the ſynnes of Ezechias, Dauid, the Niniuites, Peter, and thoſe that were conuerted at Peters ſermon were all mortall, and yet ſome of

them leſſe then others: but wee ſee thoſe ſynnes not to haue been taken awaie by mans power or pollicie, but by the grace of God who called them to repentaunce. For Ezechias beyngKyng. 20.2. 
                     •
                  ſai. 38.1. afraied of the meſſage of death that he receiued, praied, weepyng, but looked into the mercies of God, and truſted. Dauid confeſſed his greate ſinne in numbryng the people, but he ſaied Sam. 24.10. Lorde take awaie the iniquitie of thy ſeruaunt. He did acknowledge the ſynne of adulterie and manſlaughter, at the reprehenſion of Nathan, and Sam. 12.13.16 caſte hym ſelf doune before the Lorde, but in ſure hope and ſtedfaſt faithe. The Niniuites troubled with the fearfull threatenynges of deſtruction 
                  
                     •
                  nas. 3.5. put on Sackeclothe, ſprinkled their heades with aſhes, and praied, hopyng that the lorde would haue mercie, and turne his ſharpe wrath from them. Yea Peter hym ſelf wept 
                  
                     •
                  at. 26.75. bitterly but ceaſed not to hope. And thoſe whiche were ſtriken at the ſermon of Peter, onely truſted in the goodneſſe of God, and therefore ſaied to the Apoſtles,
                  
                     •
                  ct. 2.37. men and

brethren what ſhall we doe.
            Now let vs come to the laſte parte of this concluſion, whiche is the regeneration of the ſpirite,2. Daungen opiniones. wherein there are twoo daungerouſe opinions to bee taken heede of, the one of thoſe ſailyng abrode in the  ſea of all vngodlineſſe, with the ſhippe of their owne filthie deſiers, without ſafe-conducte of Gods worde, promiſe vnto themſelues all maner of licentiouſneſſe, becauſe the mercy of God is freely giuen and his righteouſneſſe bountifully beſtowed vpon his elect. The other is of them  who mounting aloft with the waxed winges of their owne inuention,The family loue and ſu like. aboue the comon vſe and cuſtome of the life of gods Children, chalenge to themſelues phantaſticall Spirites of ſinceritie. But as both theſe are moſt horrible, ſo they which doe either of them wreſt the Scripture, are moſt vngodly and damnable, vnleſſe they repent. For the Apoſtle in the ſixt Chapiter of this Epiſtle, ſeing the vngodly to chalenge vnto themſelues, that liberty ſaieth, that it is proper onely to

thoſe, whiche put one the righteouſneſſe of Chriſte, and that they are regenerate in ſpirite, and haue a pledge of this regeneration in their baptiſme. But for other whiche cleaue not to Chriſte, he promiſeth the rigour of the Lawe, whiche ouerwhelmyng them with his curſſe, dooeth eaſely deſtroye them. Now as for thoſe whiche would mount alofte in their fained ſinceritie, becauſe thei ſtudie all that in them lieth to make God a lyer, we are thus to perſwade our ſelues, that to walke after the fleſhe, is not to ſeeke to putte of all the ſenſes of the fleſhe, and to flie vp into the middle heauen, or altogether to ſeparate our ſelues from the companie of the wicked, for that is impoſſible for man:Cor. 5.10. and therefore S. Paule willyng vs not to haue any companie with euill doers, ſtraite waie expoundeth hym ſelf, ſaiyng: I meane not that you ſhould not at all companie with them, for then you ſhould goe out of the worlde. And as I thinke this is the true ſenſe of this Scripture, to walke in the Spirite is to

be conuerſant in beatyng doune fleſhely luſtes, and to giue tokens of our hatered of ſinne. And therefore not yeldyng to the former opinions, to ſaie thus vnto our conſciences, I haue often fallen and ſynned greeuouſly, but the Lorde hath receiued me to grace, he hath graffed me into the cōmunion of Chriſt, he hath brought me into the fellowſhip of the Churche by Baptiſme. Therefore as long as I go on forward in faithe, although ſynne ſeeke to deale violently with me, yet ſhall I bee free from all giltineſſe and damnation, becauſe I beyng in the fleſhe, walke not after the fleſhe, yea, I abhorre all the luſtes and concupiſcence of the fleſhe.
            To the confirmation of the Grace before concluded, might be proued by good reaſons, as if a man will alledge workes, we maie thus reply, If Saluation or iuſtification be by workes, then either by perfect workes, or vnperfect, but not by vnperfect workes, for euery vnperfect worke is ſinne, and therefore, if it be by woorkes it muſt needes be by perfect workes,

whiche no man is able to worke, but only the ſonne of God, and therefore our workes be accompted vyle and of none effect. I might reaſō againſt the blindnes of the enemies of Gods truthe, but it needeth not becauſe it is here ſet doune,
                  
                     •
                  he expoſitiō 
                  
                     •
                  f the 2. verſe. that only the Spirite of God giueth all thinges, ſetteth free, and maketh bonde, giueth healthe, and ſcourgeth with ſickneſſe. For by theſe woordes the lawe of the Spirite of lyfe is vnderſtood, the bountifulneſſe and power of Gods Spirite, the power whiche bringes vs to a caſtyng awaie of the relikes of the olde Adam, and putting on of the righteouſneſſe of the newe man Chriſte, the bountifulneſſe whiche as it graunteth pardon, and aboliſheth the law of ſinne in vs, ſetting vs free from the giltineſſe of death. So it graunteth vnto vs the holineſſe of Chriſte, whiche once imputed doeth, perfectly and abſolutly finiſh the ſanctification begon in vs.
            This which is heare called the law of the Spirite of life, is that Spirite whiche is promiſed to bee poured on the ſeede of

man, becauſe man without the moiſter of this ſpirit, is as a drie Eſai. 44.3. and barren lande. Whiche Spirite alſo is promiſed to bee Ioel. 2.25. powred vpon all fleſhe, and is called the Ezech. 36.25. cleane water, whiche ſhall ſo reforme and regenerate the electe, that thei ſhalbe cleane from all filthineſſe: this is that ſpirite whiche was ſentAct. 2.4. vpon the Apoſtles and Churche of God.
            Now that this freedome is confirmed to bee doen by the woorkyng of the Spirite, and not by woorkes, let vs ſee from what ſlauerie it hath freed vs, truely not as ſome thinke, who becauſe of this freedome, ſaie that we are not bound to kepe the Lawe of God ſett doune in the tenne Commaundementes. No my brethren, that is a perilous doctrine, wherefore I praie you beware of it, for to be free from the lawe of Synne and Death, is not to liue as wee liſte, or to ſhake of the Commaundementes together with the Ceremoniall lawe, but it is thus to bee taken, that we by the grace of Gods Spirit are ſo confirmed, that the Lawe of concupiſcence

is ouercome by vs, that we be deliuered from vnder the yoke of our affections, ſo that wee hauyng rule ouer our owne will, doe ſeeke now nothyng in all our dooynges, but to ſet forthe the glorie of God, to repaire the decaied Image of our former perfection, and to referre all our worldly practizes or actions whatſoeuer, to bee ruled and ſquared by the written worde. This did Paule feele and therefore he doeth triumphe ouer ſynne, ouer concupiſcence, and affections of the old man whatſoeuer.
            
               A doubt propounded and aunſwered by the third ver. The doubt.But I tolde you that this confirmation, was more clearly ſette forthe in the thirde verſe, with a doubt there propounded, and an aunſwere followyng in the ſame. The doubt riſeth thus, it was ſaid before that the lawe of the Spirite abandoneth ſynne, and ouercommyng ſetteth vs free from Death. Here it is ſaied that the Lawe is weake, or as the Greeke woorde 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                ſignifieth impoſſible to redeeme, or to free from ſynne, ſo that it remaineth that the lawe is onely a ſhewer

of our faultes, and a condemner of our ſynnes. And leaſt any ſhould thinke that he condemned the Lawe, he ſetteth doune the cauſe of the inhabilitie or weakeneſſe, namely, the corruption of our fleſhe, as though he ſhould ſaie, the doctrine of the Lawe is able to iuſtifie, becauſe it containeth a moſte exact and perfecte rule of iuſtice, but becauſe no fleſhe cā come vnto that iuſtice, the whole force and ſtrength of the Lawe is periſhed and taken awaie: but becauſe wee ſee that our corruption maketh the Lawe of God vnprofitable vnto vs, and that though it ſhewe the waie of life, yet it is not able to keepe backe vs from runnyng headlong into deſtruction: Let vs come to the aunſweryng of this doubt by the argumente as I tolde you er aduerſis, that is of contraries whiche cannot agree:The aunſwere for the mercies preached in the Goſpell, are oppoſed or ſet againſt the ſeueritie of the Lawe, and the righteouſneſſe by the newe man, in takyng our fleſhe, to the corruption of the fleſhe of the olde Adam, whiche had

ſpoiled all mankinde of the benefite of eternall life, if it had not pleaſed God to haue ſent this preſent and onely remedie. Now that Chriſt was perfect man, wee reade that he was the ſeede of Gen. 3.15. Abraham, and afterwardes of the ſeede of Gen. 17.2. Iacob. So that then the curſſed opinion of the Manaches maie not be receiued,The error of the Manaches & Marcionits confuted. whiche would haue hym to be a phantaſticall bodie, neither as Marcion faineth a heauenly bodie, for neither in a heauenly bodie, or bare ſhewe of a manne is the bleſſyng promiſed, but in the ſeede of Abraham to come out of the loynes of Dauid, whiche Rom. 1.3. 
               Paule affirmeth that he was made of the ſeede of Dauid after the fleſhe. And in an other place Math. 2.16. that he ſprange of the Iewes, yea, and the Lorde hym ſelf called hym ſelf not onely by the name of a man, but alſo by this name the Math. 6.28. Luke. 9.58. ſoonne of Man, like vnto man in all thynges except ſynne onely whiche he wanted (not becauſe he was borne of a woman without the knowledge of a man, as ſome vainly and childiſhly thinke) but becauſe he was

ſanctified by the Spirite, that his birthe might bee pure, euen as it ſhould haue been before the fall of Adam, and in al the ſcripture theſe wordes Puritie of Christe doe note vnto vs the true Nature of man in hym: that he died onely for our ſynnes it is manifeſt, but eſpecially in that of Eſaie: 
               Eſai. 53.4.5. ſurely he hath borne our ſynnes and caried our infirmities &c. And in the laſte verſe in the ſame Chapiter, he was accompted emong the tranſgreſſours, and he bare the ſynnes of many, and that is moſte euident that 2. Cor. 5.21. Chriſt whiche knew no ſynne, is become ſynne for vs, that we might be partakers of his righteouſneſſe. And that we maie more aſſure our ſelues Paule ſetteth doune, that this was dooen in our fleſhe, whiche when wee ſee, wee maie acknowledge our nature to be partaker of his victorie.
            And that the fruites before ſet doune pertaine onely to the godly,The expoſitiō of the 4. verſe. I reaſon this out of the fourth verſe. None haue the forſaied frutes, but ſuche as fulfill the whole law, or ſuche as being ingrafted in Chriſt

are made perfecte by him. But they that chalenge the fauore of God to their owne wantonneſſe, or thinke euill of the doctrine of Saluation by faithe, doe neither fulfill the lawe (for by it they are condemned) Neither are they ingrafted but cut of from Chriſte. And that leſt the rigoure of the lawe might preuaile any more againſt them to condemnation. For the whole ſubſtance or extremitie of the lawe is in Chriſte fulfilled, that we might bee found iuſt before God. For if once ſanctification be imputed vnto vs with iuſtification, then is the whole forme of the law made perfect.The expoſitiō of the 5.6.7.8. verſes. This parte is playnlier ſet doune in the next fower verſes. Firſt of argumentes that diſagree in the matter, as to walke after the fleſhe and after the Spirite, to ſeeke for carnall and Spirituall thinges. Neither is the Apoſtle heare to bee vnderſtood as before, for he maketh not a flatt oppoſition, but hee comforteth euen the beginners in religion. For vnto whome he ſeemed to haue denyed the feloſhippe of Chriſte, becauſe they walke

not abſolutly after the ſpirite, and weare giltie to themſelues of many infirmities,What is to liue after the ſpirite and after the fleſhe. for this is to liue after the ſpirite, to giue ouer our ſelues to the gouernance of the Spirite: and againe to liue after the fleſh is too imagin too themſelues an Epicuriſme, and to giue open tokens that they are excluded from the Children of God, and haue giuen themſelues ouer to hunt after their hartes deſire, and to féede their owne affections:Writing vpon the ſame place And therefore Maiſter Caluine hath trāſlated 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                which is ſapere cogitare, that hee might more manefeſtly declare their earneſt zeale, in ſeking carnall thinges which ſhewe them to be without all hope of regeneracion.
            Now this parte is ſett out by certaine effectes of bothe as the following of the fleſhe is death,The effectes of the ſpirite and of the fleſhe. enemitie with God and diſobedience, but the following of the ſpirite is life and peace. And that to followe the wil of the fleſhe is death, the olde law declareth whiche willeth euery man too take heed of the luſtes, which bring tranſgreſſions of the law which cauſeth death.

It is enmitie with God, becauſe it cauſeth him to enter daiely into iudgement, and to ſcourge vs for the breache of his ſtatutes. It cauſeth diſobedience, becauſe it is vnwilling to bee bridled or kepte vnder, but alwaies rebelleth and ſeeketh meanes whereby to diſpleaſe God. In this wiſedome of the fleſhe walked Cain, Saule, Ahab, and all other, the wicked whiche either wilfully broke the flat commaundement, or otherwiſe moſt ſhamefully tranſgreſſed.The 8. verſe whiche is the concluſion of the former verſes. In the eight verſe I toulde you, was contayned a concluſion, of the effectes whiche ſheweth that the reaſon of the Apoſtle gathered together is this.An argumēt. Thoſe that giue themſelues vp to followe the fleſhe, and to worke vncleannes with greedineſſe cannot pleaſe God. Thoſe that liue after the fleſhe are ſuche, therefore they cannot pleaſe God.
            Seing then that this concluſion gathereth ſo well the reaſon of the firſt diſagreyng argument, whiche was to walke after the fleſhe, marke alſo how the Apoſtle propoundeth and proueth the ſecond. For

where in the ninth verſe he ſetteth doune the Propoſitions,The expoſition of the 9.10 11. verſe. I toulde you before whiche weare.
            
               They whiche are in Christe haue the Spirite. You are in hym.
            
            The concluſion is in the twelfth verſe, the coniunction of the Trinitie is ſuche, that no reaſonable man can denie the one to bee ſo anexed to the other, that wheare mercy is ſhewed in the one, there grace aboundeth by the other. The aſſumption he proueth by the effects of our graftinge into Chriſte, by whome although he acknowledgeth all thinges to come, Yet in this principally he comforteth them that beſide the benefite thei receiue and enioye in this life, euen then when their fleſhe lieth in the Grounde, (For ſo I expounde Corpus for the one parte of the body onely) their Spirite ſhall liue in peace, and the Bodie whiche as yet is not purified from corruption, ſhall receiue life by the grace giuen by him in whome they are ingrafted. An other proofe of the aſſumption is in the 11. verſe and it is of the effectes

and working of the holy Ghoſte, as if a man would ſaie, truly it is an hard thing to fleſhe and bloud to thinke a bodie burned, eaten with the foules of the Ayer, or conſumed with the ſame, to meete againe and to bee ioyned together parte to parte, and then the whole to the ſoule yet if ſuche an one whoſoeuer looke too the power of the Spirite,The power of the ſpirite. and acknowledge Ieſus Chriſte to haue riſen by the ſame Spirite, and then acknowledge him ſelfe to be a member of Chriſtes bodie he ſhall eaſely diſcerne this, and ſe that the power of the Spirite is not diminiſhed, but that it is the ſame whiche it was from the beginning, and too whome euery creature ſhall giue in accompte, and before whome euen the Sea ſhall bringe all the bodies it hath ſwallowed, the Beaſtes and foules all that they haue deuoured and eaten, and the Sonne ſhall reſtore thoſe Bodies it hath conſumed. But as this power is not denyed to Chriſte, although it be here by wordes giuen to the Father, but is made common with them bothe, ſo is this action

of the holie Ghoſt not all togeather to be referred to the laſt riſing, whiche ſhalbe doune in the twinkling of an eye, but euen to the daiely helpes that this ſpirite miniſtereth to vs, whereby he prepareth vs to bee fitte members of his Soonne Chriſte, and to bee made meete heires of his kyngdome, by the bloud of his ſonne.
            Now then the concluſion is in the 12. 
               Note here the concluſion of the 9.10.11. verſes. verſe, whiche ſheweth that wee renounce the fleſhe, when we ſuffer Gods Spirite to rule our actions, and wholie depende vppon his prouidence, and if wee doe ſo, then we are in Chriſt, that is, we liue accordyng to his will, and walke in his cō
               maundementes,Ephe. 4.30. as it is ſaied to the Epheſians, if wee liue in the Spirite, then wee walke in the Spirite. And although we ſee that this concluſion thus gathered doeth ſhewe a truthe, yet the Apoſtle proueth it by certaine diſagreyng argumentes, whiche I will touche in a woorde or twoo, becauſe the effect of them was ſett doune before.The expoſition of the 13. verſe. The firſt therefore containeth a ſharpe threatenyng againſte the

wicked, and a comfort to the godlie, this threatenyng he placeth here to bee as a pricke in their bodies, to ſtirre them vp to call for grace, and not to put their truſt in them ſelues, or to thinke that thei may be ſaued without the righteouſneſſe therof, for if thei dooe ſo, thei ſhall ſurely dye. And why? truely becauſe thei tranſgreſſe the Commaundement, and no maruell. For if a mortall Prince appoint a Lawe to bee kepte,
                  
                     •
                   ſimilitude. and decree that the breache thereof ſhalbe puniſhed with Death, if he apprehende any tranſgreſſor, he ſhall dye without mercie. And ſhall a man deale ſo with his brother, and ſhall not the Lorde deale more ſeuerely with his owne handie woorke, if it rebell and ſaie, why haſt thou doen thus and thus to me? The cō
               fort he promiſeth to all thoſe, whiche giue their indeuour to woorke the will of God and to deny the will of the fleſh, although thei cannot doe it as thei ſhould. The ſeconde proofe of his concluſion is, that thei are the ſoonnes of God,The expoſition of the 14. verſe. if ſoonnes? Then fellowe heires, and alwaie ſo directed by

the Spirite,The expoſi
                     •
                  
                  on of the 15. and 16. verſe whiche thynges he proueth in the 15. verſe by the effectes of the ſpirite, and in the 16. by the teſtimonies of the ſame ſpirite: the effectes are the ſuretie of truſte, in whiche all the faithfull beleeue, and the takyng awaie of feare and waueryng, acknowledgyng our ſelues not to come to mounte Sinai, where all thyng were terrible, and the people as ſtriken with death fell doune and cried, that the Lorde ſhould not ſpeake vnto them, where Moiſes hymſelf was afraid: but we are come to Sion to the heauenly Hieruſalem, where wee haue the Mediatour of the newe Teſtamente.A greate co
                     •
                  
                  fort of the ſpirite. And where the Spirite of God aſſuryng vs of his clemencie, cauſeth our ſpirite to cal vppon hym, and to take hym as our heauenly Father, whiche we durſt not to doe without ſuche aſſuraunce: and this is that Spirite, whoſe vniuerſall actions ſuſtain all Creatures, whoſe particular actions giue all other bleſſinges whiche are vnto vs ſeales, and pledges of euerlaſtyng life and heauenly inheritaunce.
            
               
               ¶ The ſeconde part.
               
                  THus I haue ſpoken of the firſt parte of of this Chapiter which was a concluſion, and as God hath giuen me knowledge and vtterance, I haue in ſinceritie of the worde, ſhewed the true meanyng and order of the Apoſtle, whiche I meane to doe God willyng in this laſte parte, whiche is a conſolation drawen of ſixe argumentes,Argumētes. inferryng a godlie and comfortable concluſion of this firſte parte of the doctrine of this Epiſtle.
               
                  Argument. 
                        •
                     he expoſiti
                     
                        •
                     n of the 17. 
                        •
                     erſe.The firſt argumente is drawen of the fellowſhippe wee haue with Chriſte 17. verſe, we are the ſonnes of God as he is, and beyng ſonnes we are made free partakers of our Fathers treaſures, and are appointed to haue our inheritaunce with hym, with the condition followyng, that we walke not accordyng to our owne appetite, but prepare our ſelues to bear his croſſe, whiche if we doe not, then is there

no hope for vs.A double comforte. And here wee haue a double comforte, that euen in the beginnyng  of this Croſſe, and in the ſufferyng of afflictions, we haue Chriſte to be an equall ſufferer with vs. Secondly, that as wee  now ſuffer with him, ſo ſhall we liue with hym euerlaſtyngly: Neither is this doctrine to be kepte cloſe, becauſe that ſome hereby would affirme the abilitie of workes, for we knowe that woorkes doe not ſette doune any cauſe of ſaluation, but the meanes and waies by whiche we are appointed to come thereunto.
               The ſeconde argumente is a comparatis, that is as the learned knowe,2. Argument. twoo ſimple argumentes compared together,The expoſition of the 18. verſe. to the ſettyng forthe of the one 18. verſe. He compareth thinges preſent with thinges to come, and ſetteth doune the vanitie of thynges preſent in reſpect of the others. For al the afflictions and euill dealynges of menne againſt the children of God are nothyng. Therefore I rather agree to their ſentence, that make theſe wordes a confirmation of the former cō
                  fort,

then to ſome that ſaie, thei are a maner of correction, becauſe that he lighteneth the heauineſſe of the Croſſe, in comparyng with it the greatneſſe of the glorie. And that he might the better arme the myndes of the faithfull with pacience he compteth all troubles and afflictions whatſoeuer, whiche ſodainly paſſe awaie nothyng in reſpect of the ioyes of the life to come. Where by the worde 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , whiche is futura, he meaneth aeterna, ſo that by the glorie to come, is meante the eternall glorie.
               
                  Argument.The third argumente is a Maiori, all thynges looke for the accompliſhyng of this comfort, therefore muche more man 19. The expoſition of the 19. verſe. verſe. And here wee are taught pacience, to abide the good will and pleaſure of the Lorde, becauſe there is no elimente nor any part of the worlde, whiche doeth not feele this preſent miſerie, and yet ſuffer, in hope of the reſurrection: So then euery creature doeth with reuerence, euen bareheaded and with greate diligence, craue at the handes of God to bee diſſolued,

and to receiue thoſe greate fruites and bleſſing of eternall life, after thei haue put of their corruption: but ſome will ſaie that beaſtes haue no hope, that is true, but hope is aſcribed vnto them, that wee might more earneſtly ſeeke the kyngdome of God, and with open eyes looke for the comfortes whiche ſhall neuer end, whiche are mentioned by the reuealyng of the ſonnes of God:The expoſition of the 20.21. verſe. and he ſheweth reaſons in the nexte twoo verſes of the firſte parte of this compariſon, for ſaieth he the Creatures ſuffer with vs, euen againſte the courſe of their nature, neither can thei come to their former eſtate, but ſhall ſtill dye and be corrupte, vntill the ſoonnes of God be reſtored bothe in bodie and ſoule, to that perfectiō whiche was loſt in Adā. But note firſte here,Note. that this whiche is called will, is a naturall inclination, wher by all reaſonable Creatures deſire their perfection. And here is a notable figure called Proſopopeia,
                  Proſopopeia. whereby he maketh the ſenſeleſſe creatures to labour, and to will or nill, and further to ſhewe their obedience,

and in hope to bee reſtored, for the Sunne and the Starres fulfill their courſes and ſure motions, the Ayre, the Water, yea euen the beaſt of the feelde: and all creatures doe diligently their dueties, and yet all this is in hope to putte of their olde corruption, and to bee reſtored into a better eſtate, as the children of God ſhalbee, but not to bee partakers of their ioyes. Now that wee haue ſeen our corruption to bee ſuche, that euen all creatures,The expoſition of the 22. verſe. yea the verie heauens are polluted thereby, in the nexte verſe repeatyng firſt the ſuffering of the treatures, he ſheweth the greatneſſe of the libertie, and ioyes, by a ſimilitude of a womans grownyng in childbed,A ſimilitude. whoſe ſorrowe is greate, yet when a man childe is borne, ſhe receiueth ſuche a comfort, that all her ſorrowes are forgotten. So after wee haue wallowed with ſynne, and haue polluted all creatures, yet beeyng called of God, our ſorrowes are no more fruteleſſe, then the woman whiche reioyſeth, for thei are taken awaie quite, andHebru. 10.17. verſe. our ſynnes are blotted

out. Now in the 23. The expoſition of the 23. verſe. verſe he commeth to the latter parte of the compariſon, and exhorteth by the example of theſe creatures whiche daiely wiſhe for our reuelation, to bee more circumſpect, and to looke more narrowlie vnto our ſelues, that where we are burdened with ſynne, wee maie ſighe and grone, and yet paciently looke for the mercies of God, as alſo to ſtrengthen our ſelues by the lookyng for of this bleſſedneſſe, that wee maie ſo prepare our myndes, to ouercome all preſent ſorowes and miſeries, for that we are the firſt fruites of the Spirite by Chriſte, who aſſuryng vs by the teſtimonie of his Spirite, euen in vs of our redemption, doe boldely chalenge the benefite of Gods eternall decree, whereby he electeth vs before the beginnyng of the worlde,Iohn. 3.16. Actes. 13.28. as it is in the Goſpell, and therefore ſent his ſoonne, to paie the price of our redemption, whiche cannot profite vs, except the fruites therof ſhould appeare in our heauenly renuyng and regeneration.
               
                  4. Argument.The fowerth argumente is of the nature

of Hope,The expoſition of the 24. and 25. verſe. in the 24. and 25. verſes, for this comfort is eſpecially wrought by faithe, whiche faithe maketh vs to hope aſſuredly, that after we haue finiſhed our courſe, wee ſhall attaine the croune, and therefore he ſaieth, that hope is not repoſed in thoſe thynges whiche we ſee or hā
                  dle,What hope is. but in thoſe whiche wee aſſuredly looke for, and then he ſheweth that hope is pacient, long ſufferyng: nowe this pacience ſo ſtrengtheneth vs, that in the middeſt of tribulations wee doe not diſpaire, neither thinke muche of the differryng of a benefite.Col. 3. verſe. 3. And why? Truely becauſe the health of the faithfull is hid frō them, becauſe the health of the faithfull is laied vp in hope, neither is hope at any tyme without pacience, and therefore by paciēce is the health of the faithfull made perfecte. Now leaſt that any man ſhould either faint vnder the burden of the croſſe or As the famile of loue doth chalenge. chalenge to muche to hym ſelf, if he hath been aided by the Spirite of God, he ſheweth the meanes wherby the Spirite bryngeth to this Grace, Faithe and

Hope 26.27. verſes.The expoſition of the 6. and 27. verſe. Where we learne thus muche, that the Spirite doeth euen as it were a greate burden, beare our infirmittes, whiche beeyng by the Apoſtle, put in the Plurall number, ſheweth the continuaunce of this goodneſſe, leaſt we ſhould faint when wee were after a greater meaſure afflicted. Furthermore, wee ſee a newe goodneſſe added to the former aſſiſtance of the Spirite:A newe goodneſſe. that it doeth not onely arme and ſtrengthen our infirmities, and ſeale vs vp to eternall healthe, Math. 6.9. but euen daiely putteth into our hartes and mouthes,Luke. 11.2. Ihon. 14.26. Zachar. 12.10. that forme and order of praier, by whiche wee are to craue the goodneſſe of our heauenly Father. And leaſt wee ſhould bee diſmaied, when wee praiyng after our owne phantaſies be not heard, he ſaieth in this 26. verſe, that the Spirite doeth praie for vs, that is: doeth cauſe vs to ſhake of our former negligences, and to prepare our ſelues to praier, yea, that wee maie doe this with a zeale, he doeth as it were, put into our hartes wordes and ſighthes, whiche the Father

acknowledgyng to come from his owne Spirite whiche dwelleth in vs, dooeth heare our praiers directed by that Spirite, and doeth eaſely graunte our requeſtes.
               
                  Argument.The fifte argumente, is of the ende of our afflictions 28. verſe, thus he ſaieth: ſeeyng wee our ſelues haue paſte the pikes of theſe afflictions,The expoſition of the 28. verſe. and feele a ioye in our ſpirites, wee doe not thinke, but doe knowe, and aſſuredly perſwade our ſelues, that this comforte ſo proued before, belōgeth to vs, and al thinges are ſo tempered from aboue, that, that whiche the worlde thinketh to bee hurtfull, is by the grace afore ſhewed profitable vnto vs. But how? Truely euen by the eternall purpoſe of God, who loued vs before we loued hym, yea whom we could not haue loued,Gal. 4.9. if he had not called vs. Neither is this callyng onely mente of the election, but alſo of the continuall direction of all our woorkes, whiche are moderated by the hande of God,Ephe. 1.5. and therefore it is Tim 1.9. ſhewed that all thynges (whatſoeuer) come

of his good will, power, and pleaſure.The expoſitiō of the 29. and 30. verſe. There followeth now in the 29. and 30. verſes a figure, whiche is called clymax, gradatio, whiche goeth from one woorde to an other, and adorneth all,Clymax or gradatio. whiche beginnyng with the order of our election he ſaieth, that all the afflictions of the godlie, are meanes whereby thei are made ſure to Chriſte, whiche he before proued to bee verie neceſſarie. The gradation is whom he knewe thoſe he predeſtinate, or decreed of hym ſelf, for ſo the woorde 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   maie well be tranſlated, whom he predeſtinate, thoſe he called, whom he called, thoſe he iuſtified,The dewties and rewardes of Chriſtianitie. and by all whiche he openeth the dueties and rewardes of Chriſtianitie: For if wee bee compared with Chriſte (who is the elder Soonne) then are wee alſo ſo to frame our ſelues, that wee maie bee conformable to his Image. And labouryng thus, in theſe wee knowe that with our vocation, iuſtification and glorie is ioyned, the fellowſhipp of the croſſe, whiche cannot be ſeparated.
               
                  6. Argument.The ſixt and laſte argument is a Maiori
                  
in the 32. The expoſitiō of the 32. and 33. verſe. 5. and 33. verſes, where he hauing acknowledged the infinite power and vnſpeakable mercie of God, burſteth out into theſe wordes: what ſhall we ſaie then? Shall wee euen ſeeyng the goodneſſe of God increaſte? Diſtruſt becauſe wee are wrapte in miſeries? No, but rather let vs thinke thus, God is with vs, and therefore theſe can not ouerthrowe vs. Now this is the greateſt ſtaie for a Chriſtian, to haue God with hym, but how ſhall I whiche ſee my ſelfbeſet with ſynnes, take holde of this goodneſſe? There is no good in my ſelf. I am a detter to God, and therefore dare not offer my ſelf to hym: In theſe conflictes ſaie thus to thyne owne conſciēce, God is my father, therefore I am not to doubt of his beneficence, he hath giuen Chriſte Ieſus to bee ſlaine for mine infirmities, whiche is the greateſt benefite, whiche either is, or ſhalbee: and will not he together with hym giue me all thynges, yes aſſuredly, and therefore I will in boldneſſe offer my ſelf before him, in the name of his and my

Chriſte,The concluſion with the 6. verſes folloing. and conclude with the Apoſtle in the verſes followyng, that beyng aſſured by theſe his promiſes, and grounding my faithe, yea, ſtaiyng my ſelf, that neither Hell, Deuill, perſecution, anguiſhe, thynges preſente, and thynges to come, can ſeparate me from the loue of Chriſte Ieſus, who for his mercies ſake,A praier. graunt that wee maie ſtedfaſtly beleeue his promiſes without preſumption, beare afflictions without deſperation, grounde our faithe and hope vppon his woorde without waueryng, haue true comforte in his Death without raſheneſſe, confirmed to vs by the fellowſhip wee haue with Chriſt, by hope of his mercies and all other aſſurances here ſet doune.
            
            Amen.
         
      
   