
      
         
            
            
            THE IMAGE of both Churches, after the most wonderfull and heauenly Reuelation of sainct Iohn the Euangelist, contayning a very fruitfull exposition or Paraphrase vpon the same. Wherin it is conferred vvith the other scriptures; and most auctorised histories. Compyled by Iohn Bale an exyle also in thys lyfe, for the faithfull testimony of Iesu.
            
               Goe ye out of Sodome, for the Lord will destroy that Citie.
               Gen. 19.
            
            
               Come away my people, least ye be partakers of hir sinnes.
               Apoc. 18.
            
            
               Flee from filthie Babilon, and go cleane away from the lande of the Caldees.
               Hier. 50.
            
            ¶Printed at London by Thomas East.
         
      
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  ¶ A Preface vnto the Christian Reader.
                  
                     SO highly necessary (good Christian Reader) is the knowledge of S. Iohns Apocalips or Reuelation,
                        Apoc. 22. 1. Cor. 6. Rom. 12 whether thou wilt, to him that is a true member of Christes church, as of any other booke of the sacred Byble. For in none of them all are ye faythfull diligent hearers and readers more blessed, nor more liuely so declared obseruing the contentes thereof, thē in this one booke.
                        Apoc. 1. Apoc. 22. Apoc. 4. 1. Iohn 5. Mat. 16. No wher is it more clerely specified, the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost to bee one euerlastyng God, and Iesus Christ to be the eternall sonne of that lyuing Father (which are the fyrst and chiefe groundes of our Christian faith) then here. No where is the durable kingdome and priesthoode of the sayde Iesus Christ more plentuously spred,
                        Apoc. 14. Hebr. 7. more playnly proued and more largely vttered, thē in this holy oracle. No where is the doctryne of healthe more purely taught,
                        Apoc. 1. Iohn. 7. Apoc. 21. fayth more throughly commē
                     ded, nor yet rightuousnesse more highlye rewarded, then heere. No where are heresies more earnestly condempned, blasphemous vices more vehemētly rebuked,
                        Apoc. 18. Apoc. 15. nor yet their iuste plagues more fiercelye threatened, then in this compendious worke. Herein is the true christian church (which is ye meeke

spouse of ye Lambe without spot) in hir right fashyoned colours discribed.
                        Ephe. 5. Apoc. 21. Apoc. 17. Apoc. 2. So is the proud church of hypocrites, ye rose coloured whore, the paramour of Antichrist, and the sinfull sinagoge of Sathan, in hir iuste proporcion depaynted, to ye mercifull forewarning of the Lordes electes.
                        VVhy this booke is called the Image of both churches.
                      And that is the cause why I haue here intituled thys booke, the Image of both Churches. Neyther heere spareth the holy Ghost theyr hypocrisie nor pryde, their Idolatrie nor whoredome, theyr couetousnesse, nor most cruell tyranny, with theyr other outragious myscheues. No, he toucheth them so nyghly that we should ye better know them, and be the more ware of them, that he sheweth them to be such a spirituall sorte as maketh dayly marchaundise of ye bodyes and soules of men.
                        Apoc. 11. Apoc. 18. 2. Pet. 3. Let vs neuer looke to haue a more open marke of that wicked generation, take heede of them if we lust. He that will lyue godly in Christ, and be a pacyent sufferer. He that will stande in Gods feare, & prepare him selfe to temptacyon. He that will be stronge when aduersitie shall come & auoyde all assaultes of Antichrist,2. Timo. 3. Eccle. 2. 1. Pet 5. Ephe. 6. and the diuill, let him giue him selfe wholly to the study of this prophecy.
                  Not one necessary poynt of beleife is in all the other scriptures,
                        A brief sum is this boke of the whol scriptures.
                      that is not heere also in one place or other. The very complet summe and whole knitting vp is this heauēly booke of the vnyuersall verities of the Bible. All that Moyses taught in the lawe, Dauid in

the Psalmes, and the Prophetes in theyr wrytinges concernyng Christes spyrituall kyngdome both here & aboue,
                        Luc. 24. Esay. 9. Apoc. 21. meete for thys present knowledge are heerein briefly comprehended.
                        Ephe. 4. Iohn. 16. Hebr. 2. Apoc. 18. So is hys eternall vyctory for vs, ouer sinne, death, hell, and the dyuill, with hys perpetuall cleerenesse, aucthoritie, and empyre world without ende, compendiously here expressed. Hee that knoweth not thys booke, knoweth not what the church is whereof he is a member.
                  For herein is the estate thereof from Christes ascention to the ende of the world,
                        Col. 1. Apoc. 4. Apoc 12. Apoc. 21. vnder pleasaunte figures and elegant tropes decyded, & no where els throughly but heere, the tymes alwayes respected. He that delighteth not to beholde the condition of his own citie, is therevnto no louing citizen. And after the true opinion of sainct Austen,
                        Ephe. 3. August. Apoc. 21. Hier. 50. eyther wee are citizens in the new Hierusalem with Iesus Christ, or els in the old supersticious Babylon with Antichrist ye vicar of sathā. He that with diligēce shall serch yt matter, specially in this presēt reuelatiō shal throughly perceiue the certaintie thereof.
                        Iohn. 5. Mat. 7. Consider the dignytie and worthinesse of this most precious Iewel that the Lord hath left here to our cōsolatiō. Fyrst God the eternall father gaue it vnto Christ his welbeloued sonne in our māhood.
                        Mat. 13. Rom. 15. Luce. 10. Iohn. 21. Apoc. 1. Iohn. 12. Apoc. 22. Christ now glorified committed it vnto the holy Ghost, which is here called an Angell or messenger. The holy Ghost deliuered it vnto Iohn ye peculiarly beloued disciple of Iesu.

And Iohn last of all lefte it with the vnyuersall church to theyr christian eruditiō. Mark now if any other treatise of the sacred Bible had euer so worthy a foreward setting forth.
                        Gilbertus porre
                              •
                           a. Mat. 25. Lucc. 11▪
                      This is not that it should be altogither neglected, and not looked vpon▪ No man lighteth a candle (sayth Christ) and conueyeth it vnder a bushell that men should not see therby.
                        Mat. 5. Mark. 4. Neuer was this gracious gift giuen of God to be hidden as it hath bene of longe tyme, but to be opened to all the congregations. A more necessary doctrine to the christian erudition is not in the whole scriptures; all cyrcumstaunces considered. For besides all that is afore expressed,
                        Iacobus faber super Dionisium.
                      it containeth the vniuersal troubles, persecutions and crosses, that the church suffred in the primatyue spring, what it suffreth now, and what it shall suffer in the latter tymes by the subtile satellytes of Antichrist which are ye cruell mēbers of Sathā.
                        VVhat this booke contayneth.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        VVhat it openeth to the Reader.
                     It manifesteth also what premyes, what crownes, and what glory the sayd cōgregatiō shall haue after this present conflict with the enimyes, that the promysed rewardes myght quicken the hartes of those that the tormēts feareth.
                        Dyosius Alexādrinus in chiliaste.
                      A prophecye is this Apocalips called, and is much more excellent thē all the other prophecies. Lyke as the lyght is more precious then the shadowe, the veritie then the figure, the new testament then the olde, and the gospell then the lawe, so is this holy oracle more precyous then they. That Esay, Hieremie, Ezechiell, Danyell, Oseas, with all

the other Prophets warneth afore hande to follow concerning Christ, and hys churche,
                        Robertus Tuiciensis et Haymo.
                      this mystery declareth effectually fulfilled. It is a full clerenesse to all the cronicles and most notable histories which hath bene written since Christes ascension,
                        Sebastianus mayer in prefacione.
                      opening the true natures of their ages, tymes, and seasons. He that hath store of them, and shall diligentlye serch them ouer conferring the one with the other, time with tyme, and age with age, shal perceyue most wonderfull causes. For in the text are they onely proponed in effecte, and promised to folow in their seasons, and so ratified with the other scriptures, but in the cronicles they are euidently seene by all ages fulfilled. Yet is the text a lyght to the cronycles, and not the cronicles to the text.
                  Unto sainct Iohn ye Euangelist were these
                        Gilbertus porreta in prologo Apocalipseos.
                      mysteries of the whole Trinitie reueled (as I shewed afore) such tyme as he was of the Emperour Domicianus exyled for his preaching into the yle of Pathmos at the cruell complayntes of the Idolatrous priestes and bishops, & of him so written & sent out of the same exile into ye congregations. In one day were all these marueils seene and in the same written,
                        Haymo in libro. 6. cap. 18. as witnesseth Haymo with dyuers other expositours, and as seemeth agreeable to the text (which is a great wonder) in tokē yt the Lord as Dauid reporteth hym,
                        Psal. 44. Apoc. 1. Apoc. 21. is a very swift writer, which at ye same time earnestly occupied ye hand of ye sayd Iohn Of suche a nature is ye message of this boke wt the other

contentes therof, that from no place is it sent more freely,
                        August. Bedas.
                      opened more cleerely, nor tolde foorth more boldely, than out of exyle. And this should seeme to be the cause thereof. In exyle was it first written, as a little before is mencyoned. In exyle are the powers thereof most earnestly proued of thē that hath faith.
                        
                           Rabanus et alii doctores.
                        
                        
                           Hieronimus in libro deviris illustribus.
                        
                      As appeareth yet by Iustinus the martyr. Militon the Asiane, Hireneus, Hipolytus, Victorinus, and other which were there of the first expositours in the primatiue church, and in the ende suffered for it ye death of their bodyes. And though it were than the laste booke of the Byble,
                        Franciscus Titelmannus de auetoritate Apoca.
                      and hath bene euer since fardest from knowledge & least regarded of them all, yet was it the first that receiued any mans expositiō, as a booke thought most necessary to be knowne of the Christians.
                  Into the deserte sendeth the Lorde hys church,
                        Apoc. 12. Georgius Aemilius.
                      when the filthy spirite by his spightful spiritualtie speweth out his execrable waters, throwyng the thyrd parte of the starres into the earth with his tayle. He giueth hyr two Egles wings to flye thither with,
                        Psal. 54. Iohn. 13. Luke. 4. Mat. 10. Iohn. 8.12. which are the light precepts & examples of Christ to declyne their mischieues. For he both 
                        ••
                     ed his selfe when occasions were giuen him, and commaunded hys disciples to flee from citie to citie in time of their persecutions. He prouideth hir there a resting place for iij. yeares and an halfe, which are the dayes of Helyas, Danyell, and Iohn. And all this is not that shee should there be ydle.
                        
                           •
                        . Reg. 17. Dani. 12. Apoc. 11. Flattery dwellyng

at home, and sucking there styll his mothers brestes, may neuer tell out the truth, he seeth so many daūgers on euery side, as displeasur of frindes, decaye of name, losse of goodes,
                        Flattery may neuer tell forth the truth.
                      offence of great men, punishment of body, & ieopardy of lyfe, wyth such other lyke. The forsaken wretched sort, hath the Lorde prouided alwayes to rebuke the worlde of sinne for want of true fayth, of hipocrisie,1. Cor. 1. Math. 4. Iohn. 16. for want of perfect ryghtuousnesse, & of blyndnesse, for lacke of Godly iudgement.
                  For nought is it not therfore yt he hath exiled a certen number of beleuing brethren the realme of Englande, of the which afflicted family my fayth is that I am one.
                        VVhy god exileth the faythfull brethren,
                      Where vpon I haue considered it no lesse then my bounde dutie vnder payne of damnation, to admonyshe Christes flocke by thys present reuelation of theyr perills past, and the daū
                     gers to come for contempt of the Gospell whych now reygneth there aboue all in the clergy.
                        Protestaciō of the author hereof
                     
                  
                  I am not the fyrst which hath attempted thys offyce, or taken vpon mee thys odyous enterpryse, full of rebukes and slaunders, and that maketh mee the boulder. Iustinus becomming of a prophane philosopher a perfect chrystian,
                        Franciscus Titelmannus libro. 2. de auth. apoc.
                      wrote an exposicion vpon this Apocalips, and was slayne for the veritie in the yeare from Christs incarnatyon a. C. and liiii. Melyton the Byshoppe of Sardis in Asia (which was one of the vii. congregatiōs vnto whome Iohn wrote) made also a booke of the same,
                        Hieronimus 
                              •
                           . in libro de ilustribus, viris.
                      & lyued

about the same tyme in the yeare of our lord a .c.lx. Hyreneus a discyple of Polycarpe byshope of Smyrna (which was also one of the sayde congregations) left behinde hym a commentary vpon the same booke,
                        Sebastianus meier et frā
                           ciscus Ticelmannus.
                      and suffred stronge martyrdome for the truth in the yeare of our lorde a c.lxxv. Hypolytus a byshope in Aphrica,
                        Petrus equilynus & sophronius Grecus.
                      a man of much godly wysdome and learning wrote vpon the same about the yeare of our lorde .cc. & .xx. In lyke maner Uictorinus the byshop of Pictauis about the yeare of our lorde cc & .lxx. Ticonius the Aphricane, anno. dom. ccc. &, xc. Saynct Hierome to Anatholius Anno. Dom. cccc. & .x. And saynt Austin also,
                        Ioannes tricemius de scriptoribus eccles
                              •
                           
                           
                           
                              •
                           sticus.
                      
                     Anno dom. cccc. & .xx. with dyuerse other more. Primasius byshoppe of V
                           •
                        icina wrote .v. lytle bookes vpō this Apocalyps vnto Castorius whereof this is the beginning.
                        Ambrosius 
                              •
                           usbertus.
                      
                     Tuis vir illustris et religiose castori (which volume I haue redde) and he lyued in the yeare of our Lord .cccc. & .xl.
                        Redas et Meyerus
                      
                     Aprigius byshop of Pacē in Spayne, made a notable work vpon ye same about ye yeare of our lorde .ccccc. & .xxx. So did Cassiodorus Apulus, as Petrus Equilinus calleth him, anno. dom. ccccc.lxx. & called his booke complexiones in Apocalipsim.
                  
                  So did Isidorus iunior the bishop of Hispalis in Spaine,
                     
                        Ioannes. Tritemius de scriptori hus Ecclesiasticis.
                      
                     Anno Do. DC.xxx. with all those that here foloweth. Of whom I haue sene almost so many, as haue there beginnings here registred.

                        Ex benedictinis monachis.
                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 •
                              edas presbiter Anglus. li. iii apocalipsis saneti Iohannis inqua.
                        
                        
                           Alcuinus monachus Anglus. li. i.
                        
                        
                           Haymo Hirsueldēsis Germanus,
                           
                              Petrus equilinus et Hermannus a
                                    ••
                                 edell.
                            
                           li. vii.
                        
                        
                           Legimus in ecclesiastica historia.
                        
                        
                           Strabus fuldensis Germanus, lib. i. Sicut in secularibus literis.
                        
                        
                           Rabanus maurus, Germanus, li. i.
                        
                        
                           Ambrosius Ansbertus Gallus, li, x. de illustratione afflatus.
                           
                              Ioannes Tritenuus Spanhemē
                                 
                                 
                                    •••
                                  abba
                                    •
                                 .
                           
                        
                        
                           Robertus Tuiciensis Germanus, lib. xii. Vt tu quoque venerabilis colo.
                        
                        
                           Ioachim Abbas Calaber. li. viii. Quia profunda libri huius.
                        
                        
                           Monachus quidam Cantuariensis, li. i. Legitur Genesis .xxviii. Vidit.
                        
                        
                           Easterton monachus Anglus lib. i. Posuit castra sua in medio.
                        
                     
                     
                        Ex Canonicis regularibus.
                        
                           Richardus de sancto Victore, Scotus,
                           
                              Franciscus citelmānus & Sebastianus meyer.
                            
                           libro primo.
                        
                        
                           Gaufredus Antisiodorensis, Gallus, lib. i.
                        
                     
                     
                        Ex Carthusianis monachis.
                        
                           Henricus de Hassia, Germanus, lib. i,
                        
                        
                           Dionisius Rikel Germanus, lib. i. Ecce puer meus electus.
                        
                     
                     
                        Ex sacerdotibus prophaenis.
                        
                           Ambrosius de septem tubis, li. i. Tempus autem arbitror.
                           
                              Thomas vvalde
                                    •••
                                  Ranulphus c
                                    •
                                 strensis.
                           
                        
                        
                           Berengarius Thuronensis, Gallus, lib. i.
                        
                        
                           Gilbertus porreta, Gallus. li. i. Omnes qui pi
                                 •
                               volunt viuere.
                        
                        
                           Author a centum annis, Anglus, libro. i.
                        
                        
                           
                           Ioannes Hus, Bohemus, li. i. Cum finierin
                                 •
                               testimonium.
                        
                        
                           Paulus Burgensis, Iudeus, lib. i. Licet opinio expositorum.
                           
                              Otho brunfel
                                    •
                                 ius et Conradus 
                                    ••
                                 ontorius
                           
                        
                        
                           Mathias Dorinck, Germanus. lib. i. Costasie doctor Anglus, lib. i. Ecce de scripsieam tibi triplic.
                        
                        
                           Iacobus Stralen, Germanus, lib. i. Vidit Iacob in somno schalam.
                        
                     
                     
                        Ex Carmelitanis.
                        
                           Ioannes Baconthorpe, Anglus, lib. i. Apocalipsis Iesu Christi. &c.
                        
                        
                           Ioannes Tytleshale,
                           
                              Iohannes Tritemius. Arnoldus Bostius
                            
                           Anglus. li. i. Est autem Apocalipsis, Grecus sermo.
                        
                        
                           Thomas de ylleya, Anglus li. i. Apocalipsis reuelacio dicitur.
                        
                        
                           Ioannes Barath, Hannonius, lib. i. Ego Ioannes vidi ostium.
                        
                        
                           Ioannes de Vernone, Gallus, lib. i. Nicolaus de Alsacia, Germanus, lib. i. Ioannes Bloxam, Anglus, lib. i. De apparicione septem sigillorum.
                        
                        
                           Ioannes Elyne,
                           
                              Anglorum Heliades Iohannes Balei libro. 2. 
                           Anglus, li, i. Secundum Isidorum ethimolo.
                        
                        
                           Ioannes Tilneye, Anglus, li. i. Septem ecclesijs in Asya.
                        
                        
                           Henricus Winchingham, Anglus, li. i. Apertum est templum Dei.
                        
                        
                           Ioannes Thorpe, Anglus, lib. i.
                        
                        
                           Ioannes Egidius, Gallus, lib. i. Apocalip. &c. Ioanni Euangeliste.
                        
                        
                           Ioannes Haynton, Anglus, lib. i. Beatus qui legit verba.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        Ex Augustinianis.
                        Augustinus de Auchona, Italus,Ambrosius choriolanus Nicolaus. Bertrandus lib. i.
                        Iordanes Saxo, Germanus, lib, primo. Bertrandus parayte, Tholosanus, lib, i. Augustinus de Roma, Italus. li, primo, Philippus de Mantua, Italus, li. primo. Ioannes Capgraue, Anglus, li. primo. Syluester Meoccius, Venet. lib. i, Promaiori intelligentia.
                     
                     
                        Ex dominycanis.
                        Iordanes Botergius, Germenus.Leander Bonouiensis. Antoninus Archiepiscopus. li. i. Hugo Bar chinonensis, Gaillus lib. i.
                        Asser pinguis panis eius &c.
                        Albertus Magnus Germanus lib. i. Confiteor tibi pater.
                        Stephanus Bisuntinus, Gallus lib. i. Nicolaus Gorham, Gallus li. i.
                        Bernardus de Trilia. Narbonensis, li. i.
                        Paganus Bergomensis, lumbardus. li. i.
                        Aluarus de Caturco, Tholosanus.Nicolaus Bertrandus Sebastianus me
                                 •
                              erus. lib. i.
                        Fredericus de Venecijs, Italus lib, pri,
                        Ioannes Annius, Viterbiensis li, prim.
                        Hieronymus Sauanarola, Italus, lib. i
                     
                     
                        Ex Franciscanis,
                        Alexander de Hales, Anglus, lib. primo.Titelmanus Bernardus Lutzenburgus. Io
                                 •
                              an. Tritemius.
                        
                        Helias de Hanibalis, Italus, lib primo,
                        Petrus Ioannis Cathalanus. li. primo,
                        Ioannes Walleys, Anglus, lib. primo,
                        Petrus Aureolus, Tholosanus. libro. 1.
                        Nicolaus Lyranus, Germanus. libro. ij.
                        Oportet te iterum prophetare.
                        Astesanus Astensis, Lumbardus, li. i.
                        
                           Bernardinus Senensis, Italus, li. i. Beatus qui legit et audit.
                        Theodoricus Andree. Tholosanus, lib. i.
                        Ioannes de Rupe scissa. lib. i.
                        Franciscus Titelmannus, Germanus, li. ii. Superioribus diebus eruditis.
                     
                     
                        Ex neotericis.
                        
                           Martinus Lutherus, Germanus. lib. i.
                        
                        
                           Varias prophecias inuenimus in.
                           
                              The wryters of our tyme vpon the Apocalips.
                           
                        
                        
                           Sebastianus Meyer, Bernensis. li. i.
                        
                        
                           De lib. Apocalipseos cum.
                        
                        
                           Georgius Aemilius, Germanus lib. i.
                        
                        
                           Mira quedam inest auiditas.
                        
                        
                           Franciscus Lambertus, Gallus. li. vii. Israeliti
                                 •
                               a Mose Dei lege.
                        
                        
                           Huldricus Zwinglius, Heluecius lib. i.
                        
                        
                           Ioannis Brencius, Sueuus lib. i.
                        
                        
                           Ioannes Caluinus, Gallus. li. i.
                        
                        
                           Melchior Hofman, Germanus. lib. i.
                        
                     
And many other more.
                  
                     
                        Doctors are folowed agreeing with the scriptures.
                     Of these Commentaries haue I taken both example to doe this thing, and also coū
                     sell to vnderstande the text, to none of them wholly addict, but as I perceiued them alwayes agreinge to the Scriptures. What chronographers & historianes I haue herein folowed for the tymes and ages of the christian church, besides the Scriptures, it will euidently apeare to the reader in the margēt of this volume.
                        Apoca. 8 Apoca. 11 Apoca. 14. Esay. 1. Gene. 10. Hiere. 23. I know there will be great thonderings, lyghtninges, and earthquakes at the comminge foorth thereof, for so is it here oft promised of the holy ghost.
                  
                     The boystuous tyrauntes of Sodoma with theyr great Nemroth Wynchester, and the execrable citizens of Gomorra, with theyr shorne sinered captaines, wyll sturre aboute them. Much payne haue they of long tyme taken, and many haue they cruelly burned, as was seene of late yeares in Couentrie, London, & in other places more,
                        Fabianu
                              •
                            et alij in chronicis.
                      to obscure the knowledge thereof. Who can suppose thē that they wyll now sit styll theyr mischeues made so manifest? Our worldly wyse brethren also, which are neither hote nor colde, wyll starcle a course at the matter.
                        Apoca. 
                        
                           •
                        . Eccle. 
                        
                           •
                        0. 2. Cor. 11. I know somewhat is to be suffred at theyr handes also. For they alwayes tarry theyr tymes, & wyll not wake the shrewed curre for hurting themselues.
                  Graciously hath the Lorde called them, specially now of late,
                        Gala. 1. Esa. 60. Math. 22. but his voyce is nothing regarded. His seruauntes haue they imprisoned, tormented, and slayne, hauinge his veritie in muche more contempt then afore. We loked for peace (sayth Hieremye the Prophet) and we fare not the better at all. We wayted for a tyme of health,
                        Hiere. 8. Hiere. 14▪ 
                        Psalm. 11
                           •
                        . Apoca. 13. and we fynde here nothing els but trouble. And no marucile, consideringe the beastes head that was wounded, is now healed vp againe so workemanly, as the .xiii. chapter here mē
                     cioneth. The abhominable hipocrisie,
                        Esaie. 
                        
                           •
                         
                        Math. 23▪ 
                        Apoca. 13. 2. Tim. 3. Apoca. 
                        
                           •
                        . Idolatry, pryde, & fylthinesse of those terrible termagaūts of antichrists holy household, those two horned whoremoūgers, those cōiurers

of Egipt,2. Pet. 2. Iude. 1. and lecherous locustes leapynge out of the smoke of the pitte bottomlesse, which dayly deceyueth the ignoraunt multytude wyth theyr sorceryes and charmes, must be shewed to the worlde to theyr vtter shame and confusion.
                  They knowe as dyd Balaam the sorcerer, that ouer a gorgious glittering whore euery fleshely man is inordynatly wanton,
                        Nu. 24. Iude. 1. Proue. 
                        
                           •
                        . Hier
                              •
                           . 
                        
                           •
                        . 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 6. Apoc. 2. Osce. 8. Apoc. 18. ferce, & greedy. Folowinge hys wayes therefore, they haue alwayes for lucres sake, gloriously garnished theyr holy mother, the madame of myschife, and proude sinagoge of Sathan, wyth golde, siluer, pearle, precious stone, veluets, silkes, miters, copes, crosses, cruetes, ceremonies, sensinges, blessinges, bablinges,
                        Gala. 4. Osce. 4. Ezech. 16, Psal. 102. Hiere. 6. brawlynges, processions, popetts, and such other madde mastryes (whereof the church that Christ left here behinde him knewe not one iote) to prouoke the carnal idyotes to hir whoredome in the spyryte. The Lorde hath longe suffered them of mercy,
                        Esay. 58. Psal. 54. Gene. 12. Mat. 19. Act. 5. 1. Iohn. 3. and wythhoulden from thē his rightfull hande of theyr deserued vengeaunce, yet wyll they not fall to repentaunce nor amende theyr dayly mischifes.
                  To tell them freely of theyr wycked workes by the scriptures, I haue exyled my selfe for euer from myne owne natiue countrie, kyndred, fryndes, acquaintaunce (which are the great delyghtes of this lyfe) & am well contented for Iesus Chrystes sake and for the comforte of my brethren there,

to suffer pouertie, penury, abiection, reprofe, and all that shall come besides. A commaundement the Lorde hath giuen in this booke vnto them whome hee hath called of mercye from their wretched beggeries,
                        Apoc. 18. Hier. 50. Apoc. 18. Apoc. 17. to spare no rebukes, but to powre out double vpon that bloudy 
                        •
                     awde & malicious mother of theirs. Neuer was this commaundement more effectually to be folowed then now, hys holye worde of saluation so presently set at nought, despised, and persecuted of hir madde moodie mynisters.1. Cor. 1. Rom. 1. Apoc. 18. Mat. 23. Unto heauen are hir sinnes gone vp in these latter dayes, as S. Iohn heere witnesseth, requiring vengeaunce for the innocents bloud that shee hath so cruelly shed. And the Lord hath remembred hir wickednesse accordyng to his promyse,
                        Apoc. 18. Luce. 13. as partlye hath bene seene in this realme, and in diuers other more.
                  I doubt not but within short space she shal be wholly turned ouer into the bottomlesse pit again with all hir heathenish ceremonies,
                        Apoc. 1
                           •
                        . Apoc. 9. Apoc. 14. Apoc. 18. Apoc. 21. superstitions and sorceries, and neuer return hetherwarde no more then the great mightie mylstone yt is throwne into the seas bottom, Christ so restored vnto his right spouse. Wō
                     ders wil appeare cōcerning this & such other matters, to him that shall diligently examine the scriptures & historyes alleged in ye margent. For only minister I an occasion heere vnto them of a farther serch.2. Cor. 8. Mar. 9. Luce. 11. Mat. 21. Nothing wil be hidden from him, that asketh with meekenesse, seeketh in fayth, and in prayer desyreth

the glory of the Lorde. Euident will those secrete mysteries be vnto him, whiche are priuely hidde vnto other vnder dark ambages and parables.2. Cor. 3. Esay. 6. Col. 2. Apoc. 10. Luce. 8. Though this heauenly treasure of health be vnder locke and keye of vnknowne similitudes, and so bee shutte vp from the vntowarde and wicked generation for their vnbeleuers sake, yet will it be playn ynough to the faithfull beleuers instauntlye calling vpon him which hath the key of Dauid to open vnto them the dore of his infallible verities.
                        Iacob. 1. Apoc. 3. Col. 4. Iacob. 
                        
                           •
                        . Psal. 10
                           •
                        . Ephe. 
                        
                           •
                        . They shall be sure to finde there that shall richly delyght them, and that will greatly replenishe the most wholesome desire of their 
                        •
                     oules, concerning their necessary saluation in Christ.
                  The more the figuratiue speech aboundeth heere,
                        Franciscus La
                              •
                           bertus in prefacione.
                      the more let them conferre it with the other scriptures without all honyed colours of retoricke or of crafted philosophy, specially with those which of their owne nature iointly agreeth to the same. Nothing ought heere to be sought of curiositie,
                        Georgius Aemilius in prefacione.
                      but of loue towards God, for defence of his most pure doctryne, and for auoydance of ye craftie snares of the viuel. A perfect preparation is it to a cōstant soule when the battayle is seene afore, the ende thereof knowne, and the remedies learned. Heere are we admonished afore hande of two most daungerous euils,
                        Gilbertus porreta, & Georgius Aemilius.
                      neyther to agree to those tyrantes which battayleth with the Lambe in his elect members, nor yet to obey those deceiptful bishops yt in hipocrisie vsurpeth

the churches tytles. Of suche tirryble plagues of vengeaunce as were comming towardes the Israelites,
                        Esay. 
                        
                           •
                        . Hiere, 8. 1. Mac. 
                        
                           •
                        . the Lorde euer warned them afore by his Prophets. And none was there that escaped them so cleerely, as they dyd whiche regarded those warninges, watching euermore the conclusions of them. Much lesse harme felte they of Antiochus Epiphanes that had redde Daniels prophecy afore, and marked it,1. Mac. 1. Dan. 11. 1. Mac. 6, Luc, 2. then they which knewe it not when the Tyraunte came vpon them. Through dyligent expecration in the fayth of Gods promises, receyued iust Symeon and Anna the sauiour of the world in hys tender infancie.
                  Mencion maketh the holy Ghost heere of Gog and of Magog two tirryble fierce enymies to Christes congregation,
                        Apoc, 20, Ezech, 38▪
                      and sheweth afore hande their purposed mischieues. Let vs not suppose it to be a fable,
                        Ezec, 39, Apoc, 13. Num. 23, 1. Ioh, 4, that he so earnestly telleth vs. Neyther let vs thinke but this warning is of loue, if we liste so to take it, and accept it for a trueth. Immedyately after the Apostles preaching▪ was this prophecie giuen to the Christian church (which hath bene alwayes a smal congregation) least they shoulde vnbewares at the subtile suggestions of these two enimyes,
                        VVha
                              •
                            this prophecie was giuen and to what ende.
                      throwe asyde the sinceritie of Christes Gospell. So gloryous are the pretenses of ye Romysh Pope and Mahomete,
                     
                        Ioannes Oecolāpadius in▪
                        
                      that they seeme vnto them whyche regarde not these warnings, the verye Angelles of lyghte, and theyr

churches most holy congregations, being very diuels with their filthy dregges of darkenesse. The Pope in his church hath ceremonyes without number.
                        Ier
                              •
                           miam & Danielē.
                      None ende is there of their babling prayers, their portases, beads, temples, aulters, songes, houres, belles, Images,
                        Popish ceremonies without number,
                      Organes, ornamēts, Iewels, lights, oylings, shauings, religions, disguisings, dyuersitie of feasts, cōstrained vowes, fastings, processions, and pratlings, that a man would think they wer proctours of Paradise. On ye other side Mahomet in his church is plentuous also in holy obseruations.
                        Guihelmus Tripolitanus de statusaracenorum.
                      They washe them selues oft, they frequent their temples, they pray fiue tymes in the day, they reuerently inclyne, they lye prostrate vpon the grounde, they feruently call to God, they are temperate in feedyng, not curious in theyr buyldynges,
                        Ioannes Cuspinianus de origine turcarum.
                      they abstayne from wyne, they abhorre Idolles, they hate them that are proude, and commende all sobernesse. And these vertuys haue they to appeare most innocent liuers. But vnto what ende thys holynesse leadeth, the sequele heereof declareth. Daniell 
                     
                        •
                     aketh these two but one, bycause they are both of one wicked spirite,
                        Dan. 7. Oecolāpapadius in Danielem. 
                        
                           •
                         
                        Apoc. 13. and reporteth his blasphemous mouthe to vtter presumptuous things. Sainct Iohn sayeth also that the Dragon speaketh blasphemyes against God in them both. Marke both their voyces, and ye shall fynde these sayings most true. The Pope maketh hys boast, hee is the highe priest, hee is of equall power with

                     Peter, he can not erre,
                        Ioannes Oecolāpadius in Danielem. Theodorus Bibliander in christiana consultatione.
                      he is heade and spouse of the church, and he is Christes immedyate vicar. By this braulyng boaste hee maketh men to beleue, he may constitute lawes, kepe vnder the Gospell, distribute kyngdoms, sell promocions and benifices, set vp a Purgatorie, prouyde satisfactions, make new bodyes to Christ, redeme dead mens soules, and remit sinne for money.
                  
                     Mahomete braggeth also,
                        Ioannes Oecolāpadius in Danielē.
                      that he is ye great prophet, ye promises Messias
                     ▪ ye Apostle of both testamēts, abled both by ye law & the gospel, & that he hath his name frō ye eternall throne of God. He is well contented that Christ be an holy Prophet, and a most worthie creature,
                        Ioannes Cuspinianus et Bibliander.
                      yea▪ the word of God▪ the soule of God▪ and the spirit of God, conceiued of ye holy ghost, and borne of Mary the virgin, but he will in no case graunt hym to be the sonne of God, nor that he dyed here for mans redemp
                        •
                     ion. Both these two mayntayners of mischief alloweth Moyses lawe, the Psalter,
                        Ioannes Oecolāpadius in Danielē.
                      the Prophets and the Gospell, yea, they commende them, auaunce them, sing them, reade them, honour them, and reuerently vse them in all their doyngs.
                        Theodorus Bibliander in christiana consultatione.
                      Yet will they haue their owne filthy lawes preferred aboue them, the Pope his execrable decrees, & Mahomete his wicked Alchorane, els will they murther men without measure. Thus though they outwardly appeare very vertuous (yet are they the malignaunt ministers of Sathan, denying the Lord which hath redenied them. By

these may wee measure their inferiour marchandies,
                        Mat, 23, Apoc, 13, 2, Tim, 4, Apoc, 18, Hier, 50, hauing their lyuery and marke.
                  Of these hath our louing Lord premonyshed vs in this heauenly worke of his, and graciously called vs away from their abhominations, least we shoulde bee partakers of theyr sinnes, and so receyue of their plagues. If we vnthankfully neglect it, the more daū
                     ger is ours. Let no man take the corrections of this booke to mallice.
                        A christian request of the Author
                      But if hee chaunce in it as in a cleare glasse to perceiue him selfe spotted, let him washe away the deformities, for Gods worde spareth no mans iniquytie. Read my whole Commentary, els iudge me not. In no wyse rebell I heere agaynst any princely power, or aucthoritie giuen of God, but agaynst Antichristes filthy tytles.
                        Antichristes titles are not of God,
                      The grace of our Lorde Iesus Christ bee euer more with thee (good faythfull Reader) and with all those good men that intierly hunger for his rightuousnesse, Amen.
                  Thus endeth the Preface of the Image of both Churches, out of Sainct Iohns Apocalips.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  ¶ A briefe Paraphrase or compendious Elucidacion vpon the Apocalips or Reuelation of Sainct Iohn the Euangelist, gathered out of the pure scriptures, and sincere worde of God, by Iohn Ba
                           •
                        e, an e
                        •
                     yle also in this lyfe, for the testimonye of Iesu.
                  
                     The first Chapter.
                     
                        The Texte.
                        1 The Reuelation of Iesus Christ, 2, vvhich God gaue vnto him, 3. for to shevve vnto his seruauntes the thinges vvhich must shortlye come to passe. 4. And heuen
                              •
                            and shevved by his Angell vnto his seruaunt Iohn, 5. vvhich bare recorde of the vvorde of God, and of the testimony of Iesus Christ, and of all thynges that he savve, 6. Happy is he that readeth, & they that hear the vvords of the prophecie, & keepe those things, vvhich are vvritten therein, 7. for the tyme is at hande.
                        
                           
                           The Paraphrase.
                           
                              OF Iesus Christ▪ the sonne of ye liuing God,
                                 Mat. 16. Ioan. 16. Act. 20. Mat. 28. Iohn. 5. Luce. 10. this is the wonderfull reuelation, concerning the diuers and doubtfull estate of the Christian church from the Apostles tyme to the latter ende of the world.
                           2 Which reuelation with all iudgement and power,
                                 Phil. 2. Psal. 8. Iohn. 17. 2. Cor. 2. Ephe. 5. 2. Pet. 2. Iohn. 16. Mat. 13. God the euerlasting father hath wholly giuen vnto hym, now takē vp from the earth, glorified, and set aboue all the workes of hys handes.
                           3 Euidently to declare, yea, to make manifest and knowne vnto hys true faythfull seruauntes beleuing in hys words, and walking in his wayes, the tokens, signes, & marueils, which must by hys vnchaungeable ordinaunce, shortly in this latter tyme, folow in effect, without premonishment or warning taken of the wicked sort.
                           4 And the sayd Iesus Christ sittyng

on the right hande of the maiestie of God,
                                 Mar. 16. Heb. 1. Iohn. 15. Act. 2. Iohn, 1
                                    •
                                  
                                 Luke. 
                                 
                                    ••
                                 . Iohn. 
                                 
                                    ••
                                 . and being muche more excellent then the angels, hath according to his former promise, sent forth his spirit of truth, most specially vnto his déerely beloued Apostle and peculyar dyscyple sainct Iohn the Euangelist, not only to deduce him into all knowledge and veritie, but also to manifest vnto him the secrete misteries of thinges to come.
                           5 Which Iohn hath already (as an earnest doer in his masters cause) most constantly wytnessed his eternall godhead in ye euerlasting worde,
                                 Act. 4. Iohn. 1. Psalm. 118 2. Iohn. 1. against ye Hebionites, which denied him to com in the fleshe,
                                 Iohn. 19.21 1. Iohn. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . 1. Iohn. 2. 1. Iohn. 4, and hath faithfully affirmed his naturall manhode in all that he sawe being conuersaunt with him, agaynste Carpocras and Cerinthus, which blasphemed the same in the vtter confusion of all such Antichristes.
                           6 Blessed is he (saith Saint Ihon) which after méeke prayer and godly meditacyon,
                                 Apoca. 22 Math, 7. 1. Cor. 12. 1. Peter. 4 1. Cor. 4. hauinge the gyfte of vnderstanding and grace of interpreting the scripturs, doth sincerly & faithfully

without crafte or coloure, publyshe & declare the mistycall wordes of thys heauenly prophecye.
                                 Ephe. 4. Math. 5. Luke 2. Iacobi. 2 Math. 7 Blessed are they also, which in a feruent faith hongerīg & thristinge for the rightuousnes, and with Simeon and Anna desirous of ye glorye of God, doth louingly heare and earnestly marke the wholsome words of the same sayd godly prophecye, and that will deligently applye thē selues to obserue the rules, and take the premonishementes of Godly doctrine ther in written.
                           7 For the perelous dayes are come that the disceytfull swarme of Antichrist peruertinge ye trueth,
                                 Iohn. 13. Psalm. 118 1. Cor. 1 1. Iohn. 4. 2. Thes. 2. Gala. 3. Rom. 1. 1. Tim. 4. Math. 15. shal bring the world into pernicious and dampnable errours. And ye Ieopardous time is at hande, that the wrath of god shal be declared from Heauen vpon all vngodlynesse of these seducers that with hold his trueth in vnrightuousensse, & set hi
                                 •
                               cōmaundementes at nought for their owne vile traditions.1. Tim. 4. Math. 15.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        The texte.
                        1 Ihon vnto the seuen congregacions which

are in Asia. 2. Grace be vvith you. 3. And peace from him wich is, and which vvas and which is to come. 4. & from the seuen spirites which are present before his throne, 5. and from Iesus Christe vvhich is a faythfull vvytnesse. 6. and fyrst begotten of the dead, 7. and prince ouer the kinges of the earthe, 8. Vnto him that loued vs, and vvashed vs from our sinnes in his ovvne bloud. 9. and made vs kinges and Priestes vnto God his father. 10. euen vnto him be glorye and dominion for euermore, Amen.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 Iohn the electe Apostle of Iesus Christ sendeth these greatinges to the vii. churches or christian congregations,
                                 Iohn. 13.19 which are in the land of Asia the lesse.
                                 Marc. 16.
                           
                           2 Grace (which is the mercy, fauour, and acceptacion of God) be with you.
                                 Psalm. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 8.
                           
                           3 And also peace (which is the trauquilitie of conscience in them that beleue in Christ) dwel euer among you,
                                 Ephe. 2. 
                              
                                 Rom. 8. Philip. 4. from god the father euerlasting which

is essencially in and of himselfe,
                                 Math. 6 Hiere. 7 Psal. 73. Exod. 15. Miche. 4. 1. Iohn. 5. Apoc. 3.5. and which was before the constitucion of the world, and which shall be after the worlde be finished for euer and euer without ende.
                           4 The same grace and peace agayne be vnto you from God the holy Ghost here mencioned vnder the tytle of .vij. spirites, for that he is manifolde and plentuous in gyftes.
                           5 The thyrd tyme also the same said grace and peace be vnto you from the Lorde Iesus Christ the onely sonne of God,
                                 Esa. 
                                 
                                    ••
                                 . Colo. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . Iohn. 3. Iohn. 14. Esa. 61. 1. Pet. 2. which being the eternall veritie it selfe, was in preaching his Gospell, a wytnesse therof both faythful, true, and perfect, and in no wyse could lye, that ye should the rather beleue him.
                           6 He was the fyrst of all men that euer were in this mortall nature or body of death,
                                 Colo. 1. 1. Cor. 15. Osec. 13. Act. 1. Phil. 2. 1. Tim. 2 1. Iohn. 2. recouering againe the fauour of God lost in Adam, and that with victory ouer sinne, hell, deathe, and the diuell, ascended into Heauen, and became in that fleshe glorifyed, the sonne of God, that ye should bée the bolder of him, and the rather take

him for your onely aduocate.
                           7 He is also a m
                                 •
                              ste mighty Lorde ouer the kinges, rulers,
                                 Psal. 7
                                    •
                                 . 
                              
                                 Math. 28 Iohn. 17. and magistrates of this worlde, hauing now all power geuen him in heauen & in earth,
                                 Apoc. 19. Luke. 1. Math. 2
                                    •
                                 
                               with a wryting vpon his vesture that he is Kinge of Kinges, and Lorde of Lords, and that of his kingdome ther shall be no ende, that the wicked tyrauntes should the rather feare, least they féele him a terryble iudge at the latter day.
                           8 For so much as he hath so intyrely loued vs,1. Iohn. 4.
                                    •
                                 . Esa. 53. 1. Cor. 15. 1. Tim. 2. Heb. 9. as to be smytten and woū
                              ded for our offencest, and as to geue his lyfe for our wycked wretchednes, yea for so much as he of most natural kyndenesse would be cruelly slayne to washe vs, purifie vs, and clense vs in his owne most innocent bloud,1. Pet. 1. 1. Iohn. 1. from the moste cankred vylenesse of our sinnes, to prouoke vs to loue him agayne.
                           9 For so much also as he hath made vs a liuing kingedome to god through fayth in him,
                                 Exod. 19. 
                              
                                 Abacuc. 2. and consecrate vs priestes to offer vp our bodies by a newe

Christian life as a sacrifyce holy and acceptable vnto God his euerlastinge father.
                                 Apoca. 5. Rom. 12.
                           
                           
                              
                                 Philip. 4. 2▪ 
                                 Iohn. 5. 1. Timo. 610 Unto him wyth the said father & with the holy ghost be perpetual praise glorye, power, and dominyon for euermore. Amen.
                        
                     
                     
                        The text.
                        1 Beholde, he commeth with cloudes. 2. and all eyes shall see him, 3. and they also which pearsed him. 4. And all kynredes of the earth shall vvayle. 5. Euen so, Amen.
                        6. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginninge and the ending (sayth the Lorde almightie) 7. vvhich is, & vvhich vvas, and vvhich is to come.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 Take hede for moste certayne it is though Christe in his fyrste comminge as a merciful sauiour,
                                 Zacha. 9. 2. Cor. 8. Phil, 2, Luke, 25, Iude, 1, Math, 24 apered here vpon earth poore, simple, & ignominious, yet shal he in his latter comminge appere in ye cloudes of heauen,

with maiestie, power, and glorye,
                                 Esaie, 3. Rom, 14 2, Cor, 5 Zach, 12, accō
                              panyed with the infinite hoste of angels as a rigorous iudge,
                           2 And vpon him shall all eyes looke, both man and angell shal behold him,
                                 Iohn, 19, and stande before hys terrible iudgemente seate, no creature good nor bad exempt.
                           3 Yea, th
                                 •
                              se cruell tyrauntes also shal at that houre appeare befere him, which did not only flée his moste innocente body, but also that hath euer since spightfully persecuted his faithful members vnto death for the truths sake.
                           4 And all kinredes of the earth, yt is to saye, whoremongers, glouttons,
                                 Math, 23, Deut, 32, Ephe, 5, 1, Cor, 5, Heb, 13, Sapi, 5, Luke, 25, extorcioners, ydolatours, murtherers and tyrauntes, shall bewayle them selues for the sight of him.
                           5 Whose ryghtfull iudgemente is not so heatefull vnto them, but it is as greatly desired of the faithful multitude, saying in their hartes continually. Euen so be it, Amen.
                                 Apoca, 22, Rom, 8, Ephe, 1, For they at that houre shall be wholly delyuered, gloryfyed, and sealled vp wyth

Christe for the euerlasting children of God.
                           6 I am he (sayth the Lord God almighty) which hath begun all thinges and finished the same,
                                 Apo. 21. Esay. 41 Apoca. 22. Esaye. 44. Zach. 9. Rom. 1. Gene. 17. 1. Iohn 5. Exod. 3. Miche. 5. being signifyed by Alpha (which is the first letter of ye Greke Alphabete) and Omega (which is the last) because this present reuelacion was written in Greke, and vnto thē which only knewe ye Greke tonge.
                           7 I am the same (saith the sayde Lord God euerlastinge, the father, the sonne and the holy ghoste .iii. distincte persones in one essenciall Godhede) which is essencially in and of him selfe only, which was without beginning, and begunne all thynges,
                                 Abacuc. 3. 2. Cor. 9. Nume. 23. Psalm. 138. and which shall be whithout endinge and finyshe all thinges, alone able to exhibyte all vertue, power and strength, and alone vnable to execute errours, lyes, and sinne, which is of fragilite, weaknes, and vnperfectnesse.
                        
                     
                     
                        The Texte
                        1 I Ihon your brother & companion in tribulacion, 2, and in the kingdom of pacience,

which is in Iesu Christ. 3. was in the yle of Pathmos for the word of God, and for the witnessing of Iesu Christ. 4. I was in the spirit on a Sonday. 5. and heard behynde me a great voyce, as it had bene of a trōpe, saying. 6. I am Alpha and Omega, the first & the last. 7. That thou seist write in a booke, 8. & sende it vnto the congregaciōs, which are in Asia, 9. vnto Ephesus, & vnto Smyrna, and vnto Pergamos, & vnto Thiatyra▪ 10. and vnto Sardis, & vnto Philadelphia, and vnto Laodicia.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 I the faythful wryter of this present reuelacion,
                                 Apoc. 22. Mar. 3. Mat. 5. Luc. 6. Iohn. 15. Luc. 14. called Iohn the Apostle, your naturall louing brother, so inferly caueting your soules helth as 
                                 〈…〉
                               companion of yours also in aduersitie, trouble, and persecucion, for the truthes sake.
                           2 And a partaker with you in the afflicted kingedome, and in the pacient crosse of s
                                 •
                              fferēce in Christ Iesu.
                           3 Was now of late in a certaine yle of Licia called Pathmos,
                                 Hieronymus in cathalogo scriptorum Ecclesiaticorum.
                               exiled for ye Gospel preaching, & made a vile abiect for testifying the name & word of the sayd Iesus Christ the onely 
                                 〈◊〉
                               of the world.
                           
                              4 I being thus carefully afflicted and driuen from all solase and bodily comfort, on a certayne sunday or day dedicate to the Lordes remembraunce,
                                 Luc. 24. Psal. 142. 2. Cor. 12. was in the spirit rapte, and clearly takē vp from all worldly affects (so swéetly did the Lord releue his poore persecuted seruaunt.)
                           5 And I heard certainly with mine eares a loude shirle voyce behynde mée,
                                 Math. 5. Ezech. 3. Rom. 8. Exod. 19. as I was in this swéete heauē
                              ly traunse, which was so vehement, and stoute to my iudgement, as it had bene ye noyse of a great trompe, vttering these wordes vnto mée.
                           6 I am the first and the last the originall beginner and the 
                                 〈◊〉
                               finisher of all thinges,
                                 Esai. 58. Apoc. 21. Esai. 48. Apoc. 22. vnder A
                                 •
                              pha and Omega the first and last Gréeke letters, as vnder an allegorie to bée vnderstand.
                           7 With all dilygence▪ therefore write,
                                 Exod. 17. Abac. 2. that thou shalte sée here and make a perfect registre of the same.
                           
                              2. Cor. 11. Mar. 16.8 And that done, sende it louingly vnto the vij. Christen congregatiōs, which are in ye land of Asia, cōmitted

of the Lorde, vnto thy administration in his word.
                           9 Send it vnto Ephesus, sende it vnto Smyrna, directe it vnto Pergamos, commit it vnto Thyatyra.
                           10 And vnto Sardis, & vnto Phyladelphia, and vnto Laodicia,
                                 Eusebius Cesariensi
                                       •
                                     in historia ecclesiastic. lib. 5. ca. 23. and finally by them to the .vij. Climates of the vniuersall worlde. For though it be heere to them only lymitted, yet is it to all people vnyuersally ment.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And I turned backe to see the voyce that spake to me. 2. And vvhen I vvas turned, I savve seuen golden Candelstickes. 3. And in the middest of the Cādelsticks, one lyke vnto the sonne of man, 4. Clothed vvith a lynnen garment dovvne to the grounde, 5. And gyrded about the brest vvith a golden gyrdle, 6. His head and his heyres vvere vvhyte as vahite vvoll, and as Snow.
                        7. And hys eyes vvere as a flame of fyre. 8. And hys feete lyke vnto brasse, as thoughe they brent in a fornace. 9. And hys voyce as the noyse of many vvaters. 10. And he had in his right hand vii. starres, 11.

And out of his mouth vvent a sharpe two edged svvorde. 12 And his face shone euen as the sonne in his strength.
                        
                           
                              
The Paraphrase.
                           1 And sodenly I turned back (saith sainct Iohn) ernestly to behold from whence this voyce should come,
                                 Iohn. 20. Zacha. 6. Ruth. 2. Iob. 28. Num. 8. Zach. 4. or who it should be that should speake these wordes vnto me.
                           2 And as I had turned my selfe, anon I beheld .vij. goldē Candelsticks, betokening not only the sayd vij. congregatiōs in Asia, but also ye vniversall Christianitie of ye whole world. For vij. in the scripture most cōmonly signifieth all or the whole of that it comprehendeth.
                                 Gene. 2. Hebr. 4.
                           
                           
                              3 And in the midst of the saide .vij. Candelstickes,
                                 Esai. 12. Iohel. 2. Math. 8. Phil. 2. Math. 28. Iohn. 10. 1. Iohn. 2. Act. 7. I sawe one like vnto Christ, which when he was conuersaunt here among vs, not onely called him selfe, ye sonne of man, but also appeared in shape and apparel, as the same. And this betokeneth Christ alwayes to be present and assistēt to his cōgregations, as a shepehard, and aduocate, a teacher, and a redéemer, to kepe them, helpe them, informe them, and saue them.
                           4 I sawe him clothed with a syde linnen garmēt downe to the groūde,
                                 Sapi. 18. Dan. 7. Colos. 2. Dan. 10. Eccl. 45. Esai. 66. Psal. 102. Cant. 7. Iohn. 13. 2. Thes. 3. signifying his aboundant rightuousnesse wherwith all his faithfull beleuers are in this world largely replenished.
                           5 Hee was gyrded also about the pappes with a golden gyrdle. Hys pappes are his most swéete wordes and promises replenishing our souls with most suffrane consolation and gladnesse. And they are speared vp togither fast vnto him with the shynyng cheane of charitie or loue. Which in ye whole, betokeneth that

he is of rightuousnesse & loue, fast & sure vnto vs in his word & promise.
                           6 His heade (which is his eternall Godhead) and his heares (which are his infallible verities therof procéeding) are both so purely whyte as snowe,1. Cor. 11. Cant. 1. 1. Iohn. 1. Cant. 5. Psal. 11.18. Mala. 4. Apoc. 2. in the incomprehensible mysteries of his diuyne maiestie, and so perfectly white as wooll (which is of a meaner sorte) in the lower mysteryes of our redemption.
                           
                              
                                 Hebr. 4. Apoc. 19. Luc. 22. Iohn. 19.7 Hys eyes (which are hys Godlye wisdome and knowledge) were as a burning flame of fyre, most effectual, pure and quicke in working.
                           8 And his féete (which are hys humane affections & most swéet desires of our health) were lyke vnto brasse, most beutiful,
                                 Hebr. 4. Prou. 27. Esai. 53. clean & precious to beholde, and as though they had bene proued, tryed and depured in a whot burnyng fornace. For in them was his frayle, tender, and mortall flesh, by manifolde troubles, sore vexed, persecuted, and slayne.
                           
                              
                                 Act 8. Psal. 67. Ezech. 43.9 Hys voice (which is his holy Testament or Gospel) was as the sound

or noyse of many waters.
                                 Dan. 10. Apoc. 5. Phil. 2. For many peoples of diuers and sundrie nations, kynreds, and languages, hath confessed and still doeth confesse hym God and man by the same, though the one vnderstand not the other.
                           10 And he had in his right hande (which is his mightie power) seuen starres,
                                 Psal. 117. Baruc. 3. Phil. 2. Hier. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . Prou. 3. Esai. 41. Iohn. 9. Rom. 1. Math. 5. which are not only the seuen preachers of his vij. congregations in Asia, but also all the true minysters of hys word, the worlde ouer. For them hath he in his right hand. They are vnder hys gouernaunce, wil, protection, & custodie. So long as he retayneth them, they are wyse, godly, and profitable, but if hee once throw thē forth, then are they blind, wicked, and accursed, yea, and good for nothing but to be cast out, & to be troden vnder foote. Blessed are they therfore, which fal not besides yt hād.
                           11 Out of his mouth (which is hys holy spirite) procéeded a sharpe two edged sweard. This is hys strong,
                                 Apoc. 19. Ephe. 6. Hebr. 4. Iob. 19. mightie, and quicke worde, or hys sacred scrypture, so sharpe that

it pearceth through,
                                 Math. 10. Iere. 17. Luce. 21. euen to the diuyding a sunder of the soule and the spirit, and of the Ioynts & the mary. And is a iudger of the thoughts and intentes of the harte, whom finally nothing shall be able to resist.
                           12 And his face (which is the eternitie of his Godheade,
                                 Dan. 10. Math. 27. Hebr. 1. Iohn. 6. 2. Cor. 2. 2. Cor. 1. glorified nature, and spirituall kingdome) shone euen as the cleere sonne in his most strength, whose brightnesse no creature can behold without ye pure sight of an vncorrupt faith. For the fleshly carnall man in no wise vnderstandeth thinges belonging to the spirit of god, but iudgeth them folishnesse.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And vvhen I savve him, I fell at his feete, euen as dead, 2. And he layed his right hād vpon me, saying vnto me. 3. Feare not, I am the first & the last. 4. And am a lyue, & vvas dead. 5. And behold I am a lyue for euermore. 6. And haue the keyes of Hell, & of Death. 7. Wryte therefore the thinges vvhich thou hast seene. 8. And the things vvhich are, and the thinges vvhich shalbe fulfilled hereafter. 9. And the mystery of the seuen Starres vvhich thou savvest in

my right hand. 10. And the seuen golden Candelstickes. 11. The seuen Starres are the Angells of the seuen Congregacions. 12. And the seuen Candelstickes, vvhich thou sawest, are the seuen Congregacions.
                        
                           THE PARAPHRASE.
                           1 And when I had thus séene him (sayth saint Iohn) & dilygently marked all these poyntes in him,
                                 Dan. 10. Apoc. 22. Col. 3. Rom. 12. Psal. 43. Rom. 8. Iob. 14. Psal. 137. Iacob. 4. Psal. 87. Dan. 10. Hiere. 1. Esai. 41. Math. 17. Esai. 44. Rom. 6. Iohn. 12. Apoc. 21. I fell down at his féete as one almost dead for feare. Consider in this that ye nature of the true knowledge of christ, is to throw downe & to mortifie the fleshe with his corrupte affections, and to cast vs in fear tyll his hidden misteries be throughly perceyued.
                           2 And he (sayth saint Iohn) to cō
                              fort my weaknesse, layd hys ryghte hand vpon me. He releued me with his power, grace, and helpe, when he saw me humbled before his face, and fearfully astonyed at the woonderfull brightnesse of his high misteries: And not without his worde, for he sayd vnto me.
                           3 Let not fearefulnesse ouercome

thée, nor doutfull dread oppresse thée. But take vnto thée fayth (which is the chiefe remedie in feare) & know that I am the first and the laste, the maker & the restorer of all creatures. I am he, of whō all things depēd and vnto whom all things belong.
                           4 I am now alyue, as thou séest euydently, and the very lyfe it selfe, yet was I slayne now of late, and my body dead and buryed.
                           5 Behold me therfore earnestly, for now in a gloryfied nature,
                                 Iohn. 14. 1. Cor. 15. Rom. 6. 1. Pet. 4. Hebr. 7. 1. Iohn. 2. Rom. 6. in a bodie impassyble and immortall, I am a lyue for euer & euer, readie to make interpellatiō, & to obtaine mercy for all the worldes sinnes, death hauing ouer me no more dominion.
                           6 I haue in my hands & vnder my power,
                                 Esai. 22. Apoc. 3. Math. 16. Rom. 8. Apoc. 21. 1. Iohn. 1. the keyes both of hel & death, yt neither hell nor sin, death nor ye diuil, shall be frō hēceforth able to preuayle agaynst my electes. No cōdemnation shall be vnto them that are surely grafted in me.
                           7 Take penne and incke therfore,
                                 Rom. 8. Apoc. 21. and seriously wry
                                 •
                              e ye thinges which

thou hast alreadie séene.
                           8 And note faythfully ye meruayls which are by the power of God accomplyshed,1. Iohn. 1. Iohn. 5. Luc. 21. and the wonders also which shall be fulfilled hereafter.
                           9 Marke first of all with due cyrcumspection the secrete mystery of the vij. shyning starres,
                                 Apoc. 3. Dan. 12. Act. 11. which thou sawest now of late in my right hand.
                           10 And diligently consider ye seuen golden Candelstickes also.
                                 Zach. 4. 1. Cor. 15. Dan. 12.
                           
                           11 The vij. starres in signification are the messengers of Gods word or the Apostolike preachers appointed to the vij. congregatiōs in Asia,
                                 Math. 5. Eccl. 50. 1. Pet. 2. Phil. 2. Iohn. 15. Apoc. 2. and in them to all ye world. These ought in the church, as the starres in ye firmamēt to shine in holsome doctrine, and in godly conuersatiō, and as the lightes of the world, neyther in life nor preachyng to mynistre any maner of darkenesse.
                           12 Consider also the seuen golden Candelstickes which thou sawest about me,
                                 Iohn. 8. Luc. 2. to be the sayd .vij. cōgregations. Upon whom I ought to shine, which am the lyght of the worlde.

In whose workes I oughte to appere,
                                 Par. 28. Ephe. 1. 1. Cor. 7. 1. Pet. 1. which am the clerenesse of the Gentiles. They are called here .vij. Golden Candelsticks, as most precious in value, for so much as they ar precious in the sight of God, & were also redéemed, and boughte with a great price euen with the precious bloud of the vndefiled lambe Iesus Christ.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The second Chapiter.
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 Vnto the Angell of the congregation of Ephesus vvryte. 2. These things saieth he that holdeth the seuē starres in his right hand, & vvalketh in the middest of the seuen Golden Candelstickes. 3. I knovv thy vvorkes, and thy labour, and thy pacience. 4 And howe thou canste not forbeare them, vvhich are euil. 5. And examinest them vvhich say they are Apostles, and are not. 6. And hast found them lyars. 7. And hast suffred, and hast patience, and for my names sake haste laboured, and haste not faynted. 8. Neuerthelesse I haue somevvhat against thee, for thou haste lefte the first loue.
                        
                           9 Remember therfore from vvhence thou art fallen and repent. 10. And doe the first vvorkes. 11. Or els I will come vnto thee shortly. 12. And will remoue thy Candelsticke out of his place, excepte thou repent▪ 13. But this thou hast, bicause thou hatest the deedes of the Nicolaitans. 14. Which deedes I also hate. 15. Let him that hath eares, heare vvhat the spirite saith vnto the congregations. 16. To him that ouercommeth, wil I giue to eate of the tree of lyfe, 17. vvhich is in the middest of the Paradyse of my God.
                        
                           THE PARAPHRASE.
                           MY dearely beloued seruant Iohan (sayeth the Lord Iesus) my will is that thou shalte signifie by writing vnto the messenger or preacher of the Christian congregation of Ephesus,
                                 Iohn. 19. Apoc. 1 Ephesus. Iacob. 5. Dan. 9. Luc. 19. Math. 5. Iohn. 4. Rom. 7. Phil. 1. which dwelling in this earthly mansion, is as was Daniel, ful of wholsome desires. Shée looketh for the Kingdom, shée séeketh for the glorie, shée hungreth for the rightuousnesse of God, she thursteth for the liuing waters, shée longeth for to be deliuered from this bodie of death,

shée coueteth to be dissolued, and to be with Christ, yea, feruētly she desireth to rest in the armes of hir almightie spouse.
                           2 Tell hir therefore that these sayings hath he,
                                 Apoc. 1. Math. 28. Iohn. 17. Luc. 14. Iohn. 14. Apoc. 22. which holdeth the vij. starres in his right hand, & walketh in ye middest of the vij. golden Candelstickes, which hath in his power all ministers of his worde, to retain thē or to cast thē out, & remaineth among the congregations, to beholde their actes, and reward them according to their doings.
                           3 I know thy workes (sayth hée) I perceue thy labour,
                                 Exod. 3. Hebr. 4. Math. 5. Luc. 6. Rom. 12. thy anguish, thy affliction, thy payne, for vnto me nothing can be hid. I consider also thy pacient sufferance in aduersitie, and thy troublous crosse for my wordes sake, thy constant fayth, and thy vnbroken spirite.
                           4 And I ponder thy feruent and godly zeale, wherin thou canst in no wyse forbeare thē that are wicked, and euill, but thou hatest blasphéemers, & abhorrest ye enemies of god.
                           
                              5 I much commend thée for yt thou diligētly examinest them which call them selues Apostles, and are none,
                                 Phil. 3. 1. Tim. 3. 1. Iohn. 4. 3. Iohn. 1. 2. Pet. 2. which boast thē selues to be christian teachers, and are nothing lesse.
                           6 And by thy diligent searche hast not only proued them false,2. Tim. 2. 1. Iohn. 2. 2. Cor. 11. Apoc. 1. and deceiptfull Antichristes but also yu hast expelled thē least they shuld do harm.
                           7 And though thou haste bene gréeuously vexed and persecuted of those false Prophets, yet hast thou paciently suffred, and firmly stand by ye truth for my names sake. Thou hast taken paynes, and not faynted in thy labours, so strong hath ye spirit of God bene with thée. And all these pointes in thée I greatly allow.
                           8 Yet haue I somewhat agaynst thée,
                                 Gala. 6. 1. Cor. 11. Iude. 1. Prou. 25. Gala. 5. Act. 5. Ephe. 2. Eccle. 8. Gala. 5. for so much as thou arte fallen from thy first charitie, the fruites of true faith not being so abundant and plentifull in thée as they were in the beginning of the Gospell, nor yu so effectuall in working mercy & pittie.
                           9 Call therefore to thy remembraūce, from what perfectiō thou art

fallen, and repent thy slipper weakenesse and slothfull negligence, which hath not suffered thée to perseuer in thy first calling.
                           10 And return to thy first works agayne,
                                 Psal. 50. Math. 10. Iohn. 15. Ephe. 4. Phil. 1. Math. 14. Luce. 13. Math. 21. Rom. 1. 2. Thes. 2. 1. Tim. 4. 2. Pet. 2. walking in that feruēt faith, in that godly spirite, and in yt swéete loue of thy neighbour, that thou diddest walke in before, & diminish not, but increase euermore in al goodnes
                           11 Els wil I come shortly vnto thée as a straight looker vpon thée.
                           12 And except thou repent from the hart with ful purpose of amendmēt, I will remoue thy Candelsticke out of hir place. I shall take away from thence the sincere doctrine and pure preaching of my word, & suffer mens fantastical traditions, olde womens dreames, the spirites of errour, the doctrine of diuels, the lyes of hypocrites,
                                 Apoc. 9. 1. Cor. 1. Rom. 1. Apoc. 2. Iohn. 12. Esai. 1. with all blyndnesse, darknes, abhominatiō, and idolatrie, there to remayne. For where as my word is not sincerely taught, beléeued, and obserued, but vncharitably dispised, hated, and persecuted, there shall

not my church remayne, but in hir place shal stand vp the Sinagoge of Sathan, with blyndnesse and induration. For that congregatiō is not myne, which hath not my worde. No longer is it my church, then it hath my veritie. Turne back againe therefore to Abraham, Isaac,2. Cor. 4. 1. Mac. 2. Ephe. 2. & Iacob, to the Prophetes and Apostles, and exercyse the first workes leauing all papistrie.
                           13 This warning hast thou of mée, for that thou hatest the vnséemely déeds of the Nicolaytanes,
                                 The Nicolaytanes. Act. 6. 2. Pet. 2. Iud. 1. Psal. 25. Heb. 13. so called of one Nicolas a proselitie of Antioche, and one of the vij. Deacons ordayned by the Apostles. Whose corrupte custome was among other to defile holy wedlock in making their wyues common, & in boasting them selues lawfully so to do by ye example of the sayde Nicolas.
                           14 Whose vncomely actes I hate and abhorre also,
                                 Eccle. 10. Math. 13. Mar. 4. Luce. 8. Ioan. 16. hauing matrimonye in honor, and the chamber therof vndefiled. This premonishement haue I giuen thée also, least thou in

processe of tyme shouldest fall to Apostasie, & vtterly decline frō ye truth.
                           15 Let him that hath eares (sayeth the Lord) which is iudgement and discretion in ye spirit,
                                 Mat. 5. Rom. 8. 1. Iohn. 5. diligētly heare, and earnestly marke, what the holy ghost speketh, what premonishmēts he giueth, & what reward he promiseth to the faithfull congregations.
                           16 To him yt by the spirit of Christ and by faith,
                                 Rom. 8. 1. Iohn. 5. Luc. 10. Rom. 14. Ephe. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . Ioan. 17. victoriously ouercōmeth the world, sin, hell, death, & the diuil, I wil giue to eate of the trée of lyfe to haue reioyce here in ye holy ghost, to haue comfort, peace and gladnesse in mée.
                           
                              
                                 Gene. 2. Cant. 4. Ioan. 20.17 And after this life eternall beatitude which is in the midst of the beautiful paradise, or ye triumphant church of my Lord, my God, and my celestial father, & yours also by mée.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And vnto the Angel of the congregation of Smyrna, w
                              •
                           yte, 2. These things saith he that is the first & the last, 3 which was deade and is aliue, 4. I knowe thy works, and tribulatiō, 5. And pouertie, but

thou arte rich. 6. And I knowe the blasphemie of thē which call thēselues Iewes, and are not, but are the congregation of Sathan. 7. Feare none of the things which thou shalt suffer. 8. Behold the diuill shal cast some of you into prison to tempt you, 9. And ye shal haue tribulation ten dayes. 10. Be faithfull vnto the death, 11. and I will giue thee a crowne of lyfe. 12. Let him that hath eares, heare, vvhat the spirite saith to the congregations. 13 He that ouercommeth, shall not be hurt of the secōd death.
                        
                           THE PARAPHRASE.
                           1 Apply thée also (my friend Iohn) with all festination,
                                 Smyrna. 2. Cor. 15. Eccle. 14. Math. 10. 1. Pet. 4. to write vnto the faithfull mynister of the congregacion of Smyrna, which trauaylyng in thys vayle, of myserie, as the odoriferous myrrha giueth forth the swéete smell of all good christian workes, and distrybuteth fréelye the precyous treasure of godly examples. Shée beleueth in God, shée séeketh his onely glorie,
                                 Coll. 3. 2. Tim. 4. Prou. 13. Tobi. 2. shée foloweth his word, shée rebuketh sinne with paciēce, she openeth hir hāds to ye poore, she giueth meate to ye hūgry,

drinke to the thirstie,
                                 Mat. 25. 1. Cor. 13. Phil. 2. lodging to the straunger, clothes to the naked, comfort to the sicke, and reliefe to ye prisoner. Shée is méeke, gentle, obedyent, pacient, and mercifull.
                           2 Infourme hir therfore that these things sayeth he,
                                 Apoc. 1. Act. 7. Luc. 24. Ioan. 20. 1. Pet. 2. 
                                    •
                                 . Tim. 6. Ioan. 12. Sapi. 9. which is the fyrst and the laste, the maker and redéemer, the founder and restorer of all creatures.
                           3 Which was once dead to redeme hir from eternall death, and now is alyue to restore hir to lyfe euerlasting. Let hir not doubt therefore to suffer héere lyke as hée hath suffred. For as he is now immortall & hath the ouer hande of death, so shall shée be and haue the same.
                           4 I know thy works (saith ye Lord) to spring onely of fayth,
                                 Gala. 5. Act. 14. Hebr. 10. Mat. 5. Luc. 6. and to bée fashioned according to the word of God. I perceyue thy manyfolde trybulations, how thou arte outwardly afflicted by continuall persecution of enimyes, and inwardly crucyated in conscience to beholde the damnable errours, frowardnesse, blindnes,

and vtter contempt of Gods trueth, which raigneth in the wicked.
                           5 I consider thy pouertie in the spirite, yt nothing yu estéemest ye pryde, the ryches, the vayne glorie,
                                 Math. 5. Esay. 61. Rom. 6. 1. Cor. 4. Hebre. 11. 1. Thes. 2. Tobi. 14. 1. Thes. 2. Iude. 1. Rom. 2. and the wanton desires of this worlde, yet arte thou rych, for the kingdome of heauē is thyne. For with Abraham, Iob, Moyses, and Helyas in thy hart thou séekest the only glorie of God: and with all these things most highly am I pleased,
                           6 But this pleaseth me not, yt thou for my wordes sake arte so blasphemed of vngodly hypocrites,
                                 Esai. 1. Ioan. 11. which call themselues Iewes and are not, which boast thēselues for ye peculyar people & chosē childrē of God, & are nothyng lesse, but are without fayle the cōgregatiō of Sathan, & the tyrānous rable of rauenous ruffyans.
                           7 Certayne it is that by such spyrituall tyrauntes,
                                 Esai. 1. Ioan. 15. Psal. 58. Hiere. 18. Ioan. 14. thou must sustain opprobrious rebukes with manifold afflictions and paynes. But let neyther their subtile sleights, nor their cruell snares be troublous vnto thy

mynde.
                                 Luc. 21. Math. 5. 2. Tim. 3. Phil. 3. 2. Pet. 2. Neyther doubt yu their false practises, nor yet their vengeable lyes, whō both yu must suffer, with hate, slaunder, reuylings, false witnesse, spight, shame, and vengeaūce. Considering this paciently to lyue in Christ, is to suffer persecution, and that among those belly gods nothing is more to be looked for thē the crosse of contradiction and death.
                           8 And take this for a warning afore hād.
                                 Mat. 4. Ioan. 8. Apoc. 12. Mar. 13. 1. Mac. 2. Luce. 21. Hebr. 11. Sap. 3. Iacob. 1. 1. Cor. 11. The diuil doubtlesse which is the common aduersarie, and the head capitayne of their empyre, shall with vyolence bryng some of you, not only vnder the captiuitie of cruel gouernours, but also into the thraldome of wicked lawes and damnable constitutions, yea and consequētly throw you into prison, chaynes, sorow, hunger, thirst, colde, pouertie, care, and wretchednesse, to tempte your hartes, to trie your pacience, to prooue your sufferaunce, & to trouble your faith, least ye shuld els stedfastly stand by Christes doctrine, to his glorie and profite of your brethren.
                           
                              9 But let this solase you for ye time.
                                 Apoc. 19. Hiere. 51. Sap. 3. Apoc. 2. Iob. 14. Theyr malice shall not alwayes endure. Their mischiefe will haue an ende. For though ye haue here trybulation, and suffer gréeuous persecution, he ye sure,
                                 Esai. 25. Apoc. 12. 1. Mac. 10. it shall no longer continue then .x. dayes. The terme of mans lyfe is but shorte. And that once finished, God shall wype away from him all teares, and take away all sorowes, and bodily paynes.
                           10 Perseuer therefore stedfastlye, and be strong in the spirite vnto the ende.
                                 Mat. 24. Ephe. 3. Eccle. 2. Apoc. 3. Let not faith faile thée vnto the departing from this transitorious life.
                           11 And I shall replenishe thée with the reward of faythful perseuerāce. I will giue thée the crowne of eternall lyfe, with full tranquilitie, ioye, and beatitude.
                           12 Let him yt hath eares of vnderstāding, with diligence attend, not what the Hipocrites hath fantasied for lucre,
                                 Mar. 4. 1. Thes. 4. 2. Pet. 2. Act. 1. Mat. 10. but what the holy spirite of God doth here graciously vtter vnto the christian congregations.
                           
                              
                              
                                 Prou. 4. Esai. 30. 2. Mac. 9. Apoc. 14. Psal. 115. Ezec. 33. Rom. 8.13 He that so constantly perseuereth in the trueth of God, that neyther flattering persuasion, worldely promotion, nor cruel tormēt can plucke his mynde from it, shall neuer take harme of the second death. For the death of them which truly beleueth, is precious in the sight of the Lord their God. Neither shal sinne be imputed to him that hath faith, nor yet dampnation to them, which are in Christ Iesu.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And vnto the Angell of the congregation in Pergamos vvryte. 2. This saith he vvhich hath the sharp svverd vvith the tvvo edges. 3. I knovv thy vvorkes, & vvhere thou dvvellest. Euen vvhere Sathans seat is. 4 And thou keepest my name, and haste not denyed my faith. 5. And in those dayes Antipas vvas a faithfull vvitnesse of myne, vvhich vvas slayn among you vvhere Sathan dvvelleth. 6. But I haue a fevve things against thee, 7. That thou hast there them that maynteyne the doctrine of Balaam, vvhich taught Balaac to put occasiō of sinne before the children of Israell, that they shoulde eate of the meate dedycate vnto Idols, and to commit fornication. 8.

Euen so hast thou them that maintein the doctrine of the Nicolaytans, vvhich thyng I hate. 9. But be conuerted, or els I vvill come vnto thee shortlye. 10. And vvill fight against them vvith the svverd of my mouth. 11. Let him that hath eares, heare, vvhat the spirite sayeth vnto the congregations. 12. To him that ouercommeth, vvil I giue to eate Manna that is hid. 13. And vvill giue him a vvhyte stone. 14. And in the stone a nevv name vvritten. 15. Which no man knovveth, sauyng hee that receyueth it.
                        
                           THE PARAPHRASE.
                           1 Fayle in no wyse good Iohn (sayd the sayd Lorde Iesus Christ (consequently to make known to the christian Preacher of the congregation of Pergamos,
                                 Pergamos. Colo. 3. Ephe. 2. Luc. 12. Mat. 16. Hebr. 11. which though shée remayne here beneth vpon earth, yet is she the very high building of God many times assaulted and striken of the wicked for confessing his truth, but neuer yet ouerthrowen nor vtterly distroyed. This Church is not only highe through grace, fayth, the word of God, the spirite of God, the inuincible veritie, and all other graces

and gifts of the holy ghost,
                                 Ioan. 16. Gala. 5. Psal. 78. Ephes. 6. Rom. 11. but also for the glorie of the name of god, for the strength of his power, for the secret misteries of his heauenly iudgements, & for the most constant assertion of his godly truth.
                           2 Shew hir this heauenly message from him,
                                 Apoc. 1. Hebr. 4. Ephes. 6. Mat. 10. Ioan. 16. Apoc. 19. Psal. 138. 1. Cor. 2. Hebr. 11. which hath frō his mouth procéeding a fine sweard, sharpe edged on both the sides, whereby is meant his mightie worde, so effectuall, quicke, and strong in operation, that the infallible iudgements therof doeth not only condemne, but also distroy vtterly all falsehood, filthines, lyes, lewdnesse, and wickednesse.
                           
                              
                                 Apoc. 16. 1. Cor. 1. 2. Pet. 2. Esai. 1. Phil. 2. 2. Tim. 3.3 By my euerlasting foresight (saith the Lord) I know thy christē works, and for thy faithes sake I allow thē and prayse them. I perceyue also where thou doest remayne & dwell, euen where as is the resting place of Sathan, and the verie kingdome of the diuill, whereas Gods heauenly word is oppressed, contemned, and blasphemed, of the infidels, tyrants, and hypocrites.
                           
                              4 But I much commend thée, that thou dwellyng among them,
                                 Luc. 2. Act. 4. Act. 8. and sustayning dayly persecution and rebukes, hast so strongly perseuered in the truth, yt thou hast neither denyed my name nor forsaken my fayth.
                           5 And speciallye in those terryble dayes wherein that godly preacher and faythfull witnesse of myne called Antipas,
                                 Antipas Apoc. 1. Ioan. 16. Iob. 1. Apoc. 20. among other was most cruelly murdred and slayne, yea, before your faces to put you the more in feare, least ye should still confesse my name & word, to the hindraunce of Sathans kingdome, for there hée dwelleth in déed. There is his seate, his trone, his habitacle.
                           6 Notwithstanding all these faithfull poyntes,
                                 Osee. 4. 2. Pet. 2. Iude. 1. yet haue I somewhat against thée, wherin thou art rebuke worthie.
                           7 For thou arte conuersaunt with them that contrarie to their christen profession support the execrable doctryne of yt subtile sothsayer & cursed 
                                 •
                              harmer Balaā,
                                 Nu. 22. Primasi. 9. Affrican. Nu. 24. Hier. 9. which by pestilent coūsel caused kīg Balaac to prouoke

the children of Israell to work wickednesse,
                                 Prou. 6. Psal. 88: 1. Cor. 8. Esa. 34. and so to haue the cursse of God through this occasion. He shuld set, before their eyes, the most fayre damsels of the Madianytes precyously apparelled. And they once tangled with their wanton beautie, should not only defile the lawes of theyr fathers by ye eatyng of meats dedicate to vncleane Idols, but also fall into the high displeasure of god, for committing with them most vile fornication.2. Pet. 2. 2. Tim. 4. 1. Ioan. 4. Suche vnholsome teachers are among thy people, take héede if thou list.
                           8 Thou arte also verye familiar with such vngodly Apostates & false Apostles as mayntayne the vncomely examples & teachings of the Nycolaytanes,
                                 Iude. 1. Act. 6. 1. Tim. 4. Rom. 1. which corruptyng godly maryage not only permit their own wyues to be common, but also they abashe not to defyle the wyues of other men. Whose damnable doyngs I detest and abhorre.
                           
                              
                                 Ezech. 18. Phil. 3.9 I counsell thée therefore to repent in tyme, and to bee conuerted

frō ye errors of those couetous gluttōs & rauenous lechours,1. Tim. 4. 2. Pet. 2. Baru. 6. Dan. 14. 2. Tim. 4. which cō
                              demyning holy matrimony permit all kyndes of vncleannesse, and nothing more gréedily deuour, thā that is offred vp to Idolles in their dedycations and feastes. Call backe these abuses with swéete teachings,
                                 Ephes. 4. Psal. 8. Iude. 18. 1. Pet. 2. 1. Tim. 4. exhortations, desires, and patient rebukes, els will I within a while visite thée to thy displeasure.
                           10 Yea, and I will valiauntly fight agaynst those Balaamitanes, which giue false coūsel for filthie rewards, and agaynst those Nicolaytanes that chaunge holy wedlocke for whoredome.
                                 Apoc. 19. Ephes. 6. Hier. 9. Soph. 3. Ose. 12. And with the swerde of my mouth, which is the inuincible veritie, shall I iudge them, condemne them, and vtterly distroy them with all those shauen Madyanites yt with their whorishe inuentions, paynted traditions, and ceremonyall supersticions, hath takē from me my most deare Israelytes, bought with my precious bloud. With the breath of my mouth shal I consume thée, and

bring thée to naught.
                           11 Let him that hath but one eare of iust vnderstandyng,2. Thes. 2. Iob. 4. Luc. 8. Ioan. 10. take gentle warnyng by such charitable premonishments as the holy spirite of God giueth vnto ye christen cōgregations.
                           12 To him that through constante fayth in the name & doctrine of God,
                                 Nath. 16. Hebre. 11. 1. Ioan. 5. Math. 16. Nehe. 9. Iohn. 5. Psal. 33. neither feareth the world, sin, death, hel, nor the diuil, will I giue to tast, eate, and sauer an hidden manna, a secret sweetnesse, a wisdome in the spirite, that he shall féele the goodnesse thereof, and reioyce to knowe how swéete the Lord is, and what an heauenly treasure it is to trust in him. Which manna is hid from the wyse of this world.
                           13 I will also giue him for a token of perpetuall peace and loue,
                                 Math. 11. Esai. 55. Rom. 8. yt pure and precious stone Iesus Christ, so white as ye lillie floure, innocent and cleane frō all contagious vices, to be his only & whole wisdom, rightuousnesse, light, health and redemption.
                           
                              2. Pet. 2. 1. Cor. 1.14 And in the said white stone Iesus Christ (which is also the booke of

lyfe) will I gyue him a newe name written.1. Iohn. 2. Psal. 68. Esai. 62. Iohn. 1. Ephe. 1. I shall register him for the chyld of God, and the heyre of lyfe euerlasting. For in him alone must ye be accepted, saued, and glorified.
                           15 Of this no man is certayne, but he that is taught of the spirit of God.
                                 Rom. 8. 1. Cor. 12. Galla. 4. Rom. 8. 2. Cor. 1. No man can say, Iesus is the Lorde, but in the holy ghost. By the spiryte of adoption ye cry Abba father. The onely spirit of the Lord ascertaineth your spirit that ye are the sonnes of God.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1. And vnto the Angell of the congregation of Thiatyra, vvryte. 2. This saith the sonne of God, vvhich hath his eyes lyke vnto a flame of fyre, 3. vvhose feete are lyke brasse. 4. I knovve thy vvorkes, and thy loue, and thy seruice, and thy faith, and thy pacience, and thy deeds, 5. vvhich are mo at the last then at the first. 6. Notvvithstanding, I haue a fevv things agaynst thee, 7. that thou suffrest that vvoman Iesabell (vvhich calleth hyr selfe a Prophetisse.) 8. To teache and to deceyue my seruauntes▪ to make them commytte

fornication and to eate meates offered vp vnto Idols. 9. And I gaue hir space to repent of hir fornication, and shee repented not. 10. Beholde I will caste hir into a bed. 11. And them that commit fornication with hir. 12. Into great aduersitie, excepte they turne from their deedes. 13. And I wil kil hir children with death. 14. And all the congregations shall know that I am he which sercheth the reynes and hartes. 15. And I will giue vnto euerie one of you according to your workes.
                        
                           THE PARAPHRASE.
                           
                              
                                 Thiatira. Luce. 1. Rom. 12. Ephe. 4.1 Delay not cōsequently my louing friende Iohn (sayeth the Lorde) expresly to manifest with penne, vnto the pastour of the elect congregation of Thiatyra, which is frō these low partes here a sweete smellyng sacrifice vnto God of labour and contrytion in the olde aged man and bodie of death.
                                 Eccle. 2. Gal. 5. 1. Ioan. 2. Colo 3. Rom. 12. Treno. 2. For shee detesteth the vanities of this world, shée forsaketh the fruites of the fleshe, shée renounceth the cōcupiscēce of ye eyes, shée mortifieth hir mortall mēbers, she slayeth hir sensuall affects, and rendreth vp hir selfe vnto hir Lord God as a lylyuing,

holy and acceptable offering.
                           2 Geue vnto that contrite and feruent congregacion this comfort. Tel hir that this saythe the dearely beloued and natural sonne of god,
                                 Cantic. 7. Apoc. 19. 1. Cor. 2. Hier. 17. 1. Iohn. 4. which hath his eyes of godly wysdome and knowledge so lyuely & effectuall, as a flame of fyre, yt he séeth all thinges and nothing can passe from his righteousnesse in iudgement.
                           3 Whose féete or charitable affections towardes man,
                                 Hebr. 7. Esai. 53. Hebre. 4. Psal. 181. are lyke vnto Brasse brent in a fornace. For his most innocent manhoode by his own agréement suffred here for his sake manyfolde affllictions and paines.
                           4 For so much as all thinges are open to myne eyes, and nothing can be hid from me (saith that lord) I perceue thy fruitefull workes, I sée thy neighbourly christen loue,
                                 Prou. 31. Act. 14. Iacob. 1. Luc. 6. Gala. 6. I cōsider thy liberall heart and hande to the poore, thy faythfull exhortacions, thy feruent spirit in the Lorde, thy pacient sufferaunce in aduersitie for the truethes sake, and thy other godly déedes beside.
                           
                              5 I marke it also that thou shrinkest not in them, but rather goest forward with increase. For now at the last are they more effectual & plē
                              teous then they were at the fyrst, which greatly delighteth mée.
                           
                              
                                 Phil. 1. 2. Cor. 8. Act. 11. Ose
                                       •
                                    . 6.6 Neuerthelesse yet, I haue somewhat to say against thée. For though I iudge thée much to be cōmended, yet finde I thée not without faulte.
                           7 Thou peaceably permittest without resistance that cruel woman and abhominable strūpet Iesabel,
                                 Mar. 10. Mat. 5. 
                                    •
                                 . Reg. 16. Apoc. 2. 4. Reg. 9. Apoc. 18. Dan. 8. 1. Tim. 4. 2. Thes. 2. which is the malignaunt church and Sinagoge of Sathan, which is not ashamed to boast hir selfe a prophetisse, a publisher of the truth, and maynteiner of Gods seruyce, yea & the mother of holy church hir selfe.
                           8 Under that pretence to set foorth diuilish doctrine, to aduaunce pernicious errours,2. Pet. 3. 1. Tim. 3. Hier. 3. Iude. 1. Esai. 10. and colour false lyes in hypocrisie. To the intent shee might therewith not only deceyue my faithful seruaūts, but also bring them into such trade of wyckednes, that they should not force to commit

whoredome in the spirite by fallyng vnto straunge worshippings, and to eate of Idoll offerings in consenting to wicked lawes and blasphéemous tradytions of olde dotyng Hypocrytes.
                           9 I haue giuen to that wicked congregatiō many holsome premonishments and warnings with conuenient respyte to remember hir follie,
                                 Baruc. 6. Mat. 23. Iob. 24. Treno 2. and repent hir detestable wayes of liuing, least she should perish, but she will in no wyse bee sorie, repent, nor forsake hyr accustomed Idolatrie.
                           10 Bée in certaintie therfore I wil cast hir into a bed or couch of carnall quietnesse.
                                 Ezech. 16. Ephe. 2. 2. Reg. 24. Iohn. 3. Apoc. 18. Dan. 8. Apoc. 13. Apoc. 17. She shal in this life haue peace in the flesh, libertie in vngodlynesse, obedyence of the world, and power in darkenesse, that shee shall swim in wanton pleasures, and bath hir selfe in innocent bloud, and to assist hir in the same, she shall haue subiect vnto hir the scepter, sweard, aucthoritie, and power of Prynces, Lordes, rulers, and Magystrates,

that none so hardy vnder payne of death to check hir, rebuke hir, nor ones say against hir.3 Reg. 12. 2. Pa. 21. 4. Reg. 24. Nahum. 3. Franciscus Lambertus 2. Thes. 2. Math. 25. This pleasaunt sléeping bedde had the ten trybes of Israel vnder kinge Hieroboam, Achas, Sedechias, and the other two vnder Iorā Ochosias, and such lyke tyll they were raysed of their rest & ledde captiue into Babylon. Such a delectable resting cowch hath also the greater part of the world vnder Mahomet and the Romishe Pope, and shal haue still til God roote them out, destroy them with the breath of his mouth, & throw them into the fyre euerlasting.
                           
                              
                                 Apoc. 17. Esai. 1. Apoc. 18. Hier. 7. Amos. 5. Mich. 6.11 Let them beware therefore that as hir louers hath to doe with that execrable whore, cōsenting to hir pestylent lawes and tradicions, defending as godly ordinaunces, laudable rytes, decent orders, ciuill pollycies, honest vsages, comely fashions, holy ceremonies, necessary customes, and such lyke, boinge in very déede most damnable supersticions.
                           12 For them doubtlesse wil I throw

into the anguish of a desperate cōscience here,
                                 Esai. 48. Esai. 66. & after this lyfe into the vnquietnesse of eternall dampnaciō. The wicked shal haue peace neither here nor there. Neither shall their worme dye, nor theyr fyre go out, vnlesse they decline from that wickednesse,
                                 Mar. 9. Luc. 13. Ezech. 18. Apoc. 9. Baruc. 6. renounce theyr abhominacions and cōuert to the trueth, whiles they are yet here liuing.
                           13 And as touching hir supersticious children, which frō their beginning hath euermore sucked out of hir venemous breastes all poyson and vngodlynesse, forsaking,
                                 Hier. 2. Iohn. 4. Math. 25. yea and abhorring the swéete veyne of the liuinge waters, then will I slay with death and condempnacion euerlasting prepared for the diuell and his angels.
                           14 Yea, and it shall then be euident and cléere to all cōgregacions in heauen & vnder heauen,
                                 Osee. 10. Luc. 21. Esai. 2. Sapi. 1. Hier. 17. Rom. 8. which hath béen frō ye beginning, to their vtter shame and confusion, yt I am he frō whome nothing can be hyd. They shal perceue also that I go so nigh them, that I serch out the ground of the harte,

and try the verie reynes or inward affectes, so that I knowe all theyr priuie sleightes and practises be they neuer so secrete.
                           15 And ground you vpon this surelie, I shall giue vnto euerie one of you,
                                 Deut. 5. Hier. 51. Mat. 16. Iohn
                                 ▪ 2. Osee. 4. true and false, good and badde, rightuous and vnrightuous, accordyng to your doinges. Rewardyng them with lyfe euerlasting that hath done the true workes of fayth, and them with eternall dampnatiō that hath left them vndon, to folow their owne inuentions.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1. Vnto you I saye, and vnto other of Thyatira, as many as haue not this lerning, and vvhich haue not known the deepnesse of Sathan (as they say.) 2. I will put vpon you none other burthen, 3. but that which ye haue alreadie. 4. Holde fast till I come. 5. And whosoeuer ouercommeth, and kepeth my works vnto the end, 6. to him wil I giue power ouer nations, 7. and he shall rule them with a rodde of yron, 8. and as the vesselles of a potter shal he break them to shiuers.
                        
                           9. Euen as I receiued of my father, 10. so vvill I giue hym the morning starre.
                        11. Let hym that hath eares, heare, vvhat the spirite sayeth to the congregations.
                        
                           THE PARAPHRASE.
                           1 And take this of my mouth (sayth the Lord) aforehande,2. Thes. 1. both vnto you which hath the doctryne of the spyrite,
                                 Iohn. 7. Thiatyra macedonū cyuitas.
                               and vnto other also of them that remayne at Thyatira that notable citie of ye Macedonians, so many as hath not groūded in them that godly learning of ye truth,
                                 Prou. 16. 1. Cor. 2. Dan. 2. 1. Pet. 5. Rom. 1. but a trifling doctryne of theyr owne imaginations contrarie vnto it, whereby they haue not perceyued the more then subtile craftes of that deceyuable sathan which euermore craftily cōpasseth to deuower, what though their fantasticall brayns hath giuen them so to thinke, standing much in their owne conceipt.
                           2 My mynde is to yoke you with none other law, nor to burthen you with none other traditiōs thē I haue

alredy giuen you. Neither with ceremonies,
                                 Math. 11. Mar. 7. Col. 2. Gala. 4. Luc. 27. Hebr. 10. Iohn. 15. Luc. 10. rytes, nor aūcient customs in the obseruaciō of dayes, monthes, times, nor yeares, in holy dayes, fastings, vigiles, nor sabbates, for they were but shadowes of thinges to come.
                           3 Regard only that swéete yoke and that light burthen which ye haue receued of me. Hold ye fast to the gospel of the kingdome of God, so long as ye shal continue here. And let the Pharysées leuen, with olde wyues fables, & hipocrits dreames passe by.
                           
                              
                                 Mat. 4. Mar. 8. 
                                    •
                                 . Tim. 4. Deut. 12. Act. 3. Deut. 4. Osee. 12.4 Let my godly ordinaunce suffise you. Ad nothing vnto my woords of your owne braynes, least I finde you false lyars when I shall come again to my latter iudgement, and according to righteousnesse so condempne you.
                           5 And whosoeuer is so earnestly faithfull in the word of God,1. Ioh. 5. Mat. 10. Deut. 12. Iohn. 11. that he ouercōmeth ther by his own lustes, and perfourmeth to the latter ende of his life the workes that are there commaūded to be done, & none other.
                           
                              6 To him will I geue power as to the sonne and heyre of god,
                                 Hebr. 1. Psal. 90. Mich. 7. Psalm. 2. ouer nacions or sectes of the world diuers in opinion and fayth, as ouer serpents, scorpions, adders and lyons.
                           7 That he shall not onely ouercome them with the mighty yron rodde of the inuincible veritie.
                                 Hier. 13. Sapi. 4.
                           
                           8 But also as the weake vessels of a potter, or as most vayne fantasies,
                                 Mat. 15. Rom. 14. Iohn. 6. Mar. 16. 1. Iohn. 4. confoūd their dreames, destroy their imaginacions, and bring their practises to nought, prouing their tradicions to be most vyle draffe, & moste stinking dregges of sinn, for so much as yt which is not of faith, is sinne.
                           9 And this power he shall haue in no lesse efficacie and strength, then I receued it of my heauenly father.
                           10 And besydes all this I wil fréely geue him my selfe to reward which am the cléere morning starre,
                                 Apoc. 22. Luc. 12. Iohn. 17. 1. Cor. 1. & shyninge lanterne of lyfe. So that all shal be his that is myne. My byrth, my labours, my lyfe, my passion, and death, my resurreccion and ascenciō, with all their fruites, shall be his

owne proper good.
                           11 Let him that hath reason and discretiō,1. Iohn. 2. Mat. 17. Rom. 8. 2. Tim. 4. set beastly fantasies apart, and diligently note what the holie Ghost sayeth héere in this daungerous tyme, to the deare congregations of God.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The third Chapiter.
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And vvryte vnto the Angel of the congregation of Sardis. 2. This sayeth he that hath the seuen spirites of God, 3. and the seuen starres. 4. I knovv thy vvorkes.
                        5. Thou hast a name that thou lyuest, and thou arte dead, 6. Wake, and strength the thinges vvhich remayne, 7. that are ready to dye. 8. For I haue not found thy vvorks perfect before God. 9. Remember therefore hovve thou hast receyued and hearde, 10. and hold fast, and repent. 11. If thou shalt not vvatch, 12. I vvil come on thee as a theefe, 13. and thou shalt not knovve vvhat houre I vvill come vpon thee. 14. Thou hast a fevv names in Sardis, 15. vvhich haue not defyled their garmentes, 16. and they shall vvalke vvith me in vvhite, for they are vvorthie. 17. Hee that ouercommeth

shall bee clothed in vvhyte aray, 18. and I vvill not put out his name out of the booke of lyfe, 19. and I vvill confesse his name before my father, and before his Angelles. 20. Let him that hath eares, heare, vvhat the spirit sayeth vnto the cō
                           gregations.
                        
                           THE PARAPHRASE. 1
                           
                              
                                 •
                              Hou shalte also so shortly as may conuenyently be (sayeth the Lord to his peculyar seruaunt saint Iohn) take paynes by an Epistle to admonishe the watche man or Curate of the chosen congregation of Sardis,
                                 Iohn. 21. Apoc. 1. 1. Tim. 3. Sardis. 1. Cor. 1. Mat. 10. 1. Cor. 6. 1. Iohn. 1. 1. Pet. 1. Phil. 2. which though it bee of verie slender reputation before the eyes of the wyse, riche, and strong men of thys world, yet is it precious in the sight of God, for so muche as it was prysed, bought, & redéemed, by the greatest paiment yt euer was, euē by the precious bloud of ye vndefiled lambe and immaculate sonne of God Iesus

Christ.
                                 Luc. 18. Mat. 20. Iohn. 19. Hebr. 9. Mar. 16. Rom. 1. 1. Pet. 4. Apoc. 1. Esai. 11.
                                    •
                                 
                               Hee it was yt laboured, hungred, thursted, & faynted, accordyng to the weakenesse of ye humayne nature, & finally suffred blasphemies, curses, scornes, lyes, persecutions, & rebukes with ye most paynful death of his body at the latter, to deliuer hir, make hir attonement, and restore hir agayne to the fauour of God.
                           2 Fynde the meanes that she may know (sayth the Lord Iesus) yt this is to hir ye message of admonishment or warning from him, which hath in his power to distribute at his pleasure the seuen spirits of God, or the the vnyuersall gyftes of the holye ghost.
                           3 And hath also in his right hande ye vii. starres,
                                 Apoc. 1. Mat. 28. Luc. 14. Mar. 9. Apoc. 22. 2. Pet. 2. which are the byshoppes, or preachers of all congregacions, with full authoritie & power to hold them styll or to throw them forth, to glorifie them if they be faythfull ministers of his worde, or to damne thē for euer if they be deceiuable hipocrites, and for lucre prefer theyr

owne croked inuencions.
                           4 Thou workest not so secretlye (saith yt Lord) but I know thy déedes and perceiue wher about thou goest.
                                 Exod. 2. 2. Reg. 12. Hebr. 4. For vnto me all secretes are open, cléere & manifest. When thou thinkest I doe not perceue, than sée I thée most of all.
                           5 Thou hast a name of lyfe, an outward shew of vertue & of goodnesse,
                                 Zacha. 11. Math. 7. 1. Iohn. 4. Mat. 23. Act. 13. 1. Pet. 5. Iohn. 4. 2. Tim. 4. Esai. 55. & a shyning pretēce of much holinesse, yet art thou before God a dead rotten Idol, full of hipocrisie, and falsehood. Men thinke thée a godly creature, yet art thou nothing lesse.
                           6 Awake therefore quickly frō thy more then idle imaginaciōs & fickle sophismes, and take vnto thée fayth, and spirit. Watch vpon thy cure and sée to theyr profit.
                           7 Considre yt thy wayes in the outwarde letter hath made my people weake, faint, and féeble,
                                 Ephe. 6. Hebr. 1. Iacob. 1. Apoc. 18. & left them at the very poynt of death. Strengthen thē now a newe with yt which is effectual, strong, sure, lyuely, true, and necessary, which is the sincere

veritie and faith, least thou peryshe with the wicked.
                           8 For though thou hast the godlie gifte of prophesie with the grace of vnderstanding and iudgement,1. Cor. 13. Luc. 8. Iude. 8. Esai 64. Rom 1. Num. 25. yet haue I founde thy workes vngodly, and thy doings vyle and abhominable before God my celestiall father. For thou haste bene inwardly corrupt with auaryce and ambition like as was Balaam the deceiptful Prophet and wicked soothsayer.
                           9 It becommeth the iudge to know afore what he shal iudge, which hath caused me to searche out thy carnall and myserable wayes.
                                 Iob. 10. 2. Cor. 6. Iacob. 2. Mat. 7. Psal. 18. Iacob. 1. Psal. 49. Call therfore vnto thy remembraunce, howe thou by ye singular gift of God haste receyued his word, and heard his Gospel which is the kingdome of health, at the verie mouth of his Apostles.
                           10 And for so muche as thou haste not estemed it according to the worthinesse therof, nor yet bene thankfull vnto God for such an heauenly gift, but rather swynishly troden it vnder thy féete, and currishly persecuted

his faithfull seruauntes for it, haue remorse in thy conscience,
                                 Mat. 7. Luc. 13. and once agayne set sure hands vpon it, embrace it, holde it fast, and faithfully beleue it, repēt, from the hart thy vngodly vsages past, and from hēcefoorth liue according vnto it.
                           11 If thou wilt not doe so, taking of me this gentle warning,
                                 Mar. 1. Act. 16. Mat. 24. 1. Thes. 5. 2. Pet. 3. Apoc. 16. and watch as one vncertayne of the houre of death, liuing as thou wouldest dye by and by.
                           12 I shall (as doeth the théefe in the nyght) come vpon thée vnlooked for,
                                 Luc. 21. Psal. 48. Mat. 25. Mar. 13. with death shall I distroy thée vnbewares, so shall hell and damnation swalow thée vp for euer.
                           13 And thou shalt neither know the day nor the houre, the tyme nor the mynute, yt I will thus fiercely come vpon thée, & iustly suppresse thée accordyng to thy vngodly deseruings.
                           14 And in spight of thy cruell hart, yet are there a fewe new brethren, and louers of the truth in the citie of Sardis, though theyr number bée but small, which are so déere vnto

god, yt he hath regestred theyr names in the booke of lyfe.
                           15 These hath for no painted speach, glosing promisse,
                                 Luc. 13. Prou. 10. Luc. 12. Mat. 10. Dan. 12. 2. Pet. 3. Mat. 15. Gal. 4. Phil 2. Ezech. 3. suggestiō, nor threatning, ones soyled theyr garments wt thy dyrtie ceremonies, nor defyled theyr cōuersacion with thy beggerly tradytions. In the myddest of ye wicked and froward generacion, theyr hartes are towards me & my word.
                           16 Wherfore by promisse they shal walk with me in white,
                                 Apoc. 7. Psal. 31. their faults shal neuer be imputed vnto thē, their sinnes shal be wyped cleane away, I wil cléere them & restore them to parpetual innocencie, & make them partakers with me in euerlasting felicitie & glory. For doubtlesse they are worthy, for my will forsaking theyr owne will,
                                 Iohn. 12 Luc. 10 Mat. 19 Hebr. 11 and leauinge the corrupt wayes of men to folow my sincere worde.
                           
                              
                                 Mat. 10. Apoc. 14. 1. Cor 15. Deut. 25. Apoc 2
                                    •
                                 . Ephes. 1.17 He that after this sort ouercommeth perseuering in the faith therof to the latter ende of his lyfe shall be sure of these thrée benefits. He shall be clothed with me in white apparel

made innocent and pure, incorruptible, impassible, and immortall.
                           18 I will in no wyse put his name out of the booke of lyfe, nor separate him from the predestinate number of them which shall be saued, but associate him with the rightuous▪
                           
                           19 And besides all this I will earnestly witnesse hym, confesse hym,
                                 Luc. 1
                                    •
                                 . Mat. 10. Rom. 8. and allow him by name, before my heauenly father and all his company of Angelles, for one of myne, to haue the inheritaunce with mée.
                           20 Let him that hath eares in no case be dull or slacke in hearing,
                                 Mar. 4▪ 
                                 Dan. 9. Eph
                                       •
                                    . 1▪
                               but diligently attende, and marke what the spirite of God doeth héere vtter before the congregations to theyr singular warning and comfort.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1. And vvryte vnto the Angell of the congregacion of Philadelphia. 2. This sayeth he that is holie and true, 3. vvhich hath the keye of Dauid, 4. vvhich openeth and no man shutteth, and shutteth & no man openeth. 5. I knovv thy vvorkes. 6. Beholde I haue set before thee an open dore,

and no man can shut it. 7. For thou hast 
                              •
                            little strength, & hast kept my word, 8. and hast not denyed my name. 9. Beholde I shall giue some of the congregation of Sathan, which call them selues Iewes, and are not, but doe lye. 10. Beholde I will make them that they shall come and worship before thy feete, 11. and shall knowe that I haue loued thee. 12. Bicause thou hast kept the wordes of my pacyence, therefore will I keepe thee from the houre of temptacion, 13. which will come vpon all the world, to tempte them that dwell vpon the earth 14. Beholde I come shortlye. 15. Holde that vvhich thou hast, that no man take away thy crovvne. 16. Hym that ouercommeth vvill I make a pyller in the temple of my God, 17. and he shall go no more out. 18. And I vvill vvryte vpō him, the name of my God, and the name of the citie of my God, nevve Hierusalem, 19. vvhich commeth dovvne oute of heauen fro my God. 20. And I vvill vvrite vpon him my nevv name. 21. Let him that hath eares heare, vvhat the spirite sayth vnto the congregacions.
                        
                           THE PARAPHRASE.
                           
                              
                                 Iohn. 19. 2. Cor. 10.1 Moreouer, differ in no wyse my trustie discyple Iohn (sayth the Lord Iesus) by wryting to signifye or

make mencion, to the tydings brynger, bishop,
                                 Act. 10. Philadelphia. Ephes. 5. 1. Iohn. 4. or ouerséer of the déerely beloued Churche of Phyladelphya, which as beséemeth a Christian congregation in this life, is neuer without brotherly charitie and loue, but alwayes hath a swéete compassion vpon the poore, the néedie,
                                 Esai. 58. Ezech. 18. Prou. 21. Mat. 5. Luc. 6. the symple, the desolate, the forsakē, the disdayned and myserable people of this world. Shée hath also in hir harte a wofull pittie, and a lamentable dolour, when shée séeth men wicked, vayne, blasphéemous, hatefull, beastly, ydle, couetous, supersticious, and full of other vngodlinesse.
                           2 Let this be knowne to hir first of all,
                                 Leuit. 20. 1. Reg. 2. Iohn. 14. Rom. 3. Esai. 22. Luc. 1. that these are the fauorable sayings of him which is holy of himself, and alone maketh other holy, which is only true and the veritie it selfe, without whō no truth can be had.
                           3 Which hath also in his hand and power, the keye of the house of Dauid, which is the faithfull kingdom or congregation of God.
                           4 Where as hée openeth to the
                                 Iohn. 10. Math. 16. Iohn. 16. Sap. 14.
                              
faithful beleuers by the gospel preaching, no man can speare them out of the kingdom of God by no excommunicatiō nor cursse. Where as he doeth losen from the bandes of sinne by the holy Ghost, no man can bynde to dampnation by no interdictiō nor sentence, haue he neuer so great power giuen hym. And agayne, if hée shutteth vp the kingdome from the vnfaithfull hypocrites,
                                 Iob. 12. Mala. 2. Rom. 1. 2. Thes. 2. no man can admit them to it, by blessings, remissions, nor a thousand yeares of their pardon. If he seclude them from it, no man can able them to it agayne by no auctoritie nor power.
                           
                              
                                 Mat. 6. Psal. 72. Esai. 26. Hebr. 11. Mat. 1
                                    •
                                 .5 I know (sayth that Lord) thy dooings from the verie roote, and from whence thy workes doeth spring, euen from a sincere faith in my word, wherefore they are to my mynd and pleasure.
                           6 For so much therefore as I finde thée thus grounded in fayth, be thou certayne and sure of it, I haue sette before thée an open dore, I haue illumyned thy sences, and cleared thy

vnderstandyng, to knowe the holye scriptures and perceyue the hyghe mysteries therin written,
                                 Luc. 24. Psal. 118. Mar. 4. Ephe. 1. Iohn. 16. so admittyng thée to my kingdome. And this dore can no man shut vp again. Neither shall the power of this world, nor yet the gates of hell bée able to preuayle against this opening.
                           7 And this hast thou of mée, partly for thy méekenesse.
                                 Mat. 16. Apoc. 12. Iacob. 4. Mat. 23. Apoc. 28. For where as the wicked doth séeme to them selues beautifull, strong, learned, rich, righteous, religious, and holie spirituall fathers, thou estéemest thy selfe but an abiecte of the worlde, wretched, weake, blynde, poore, sinfull, & a myserable dooer, as concernynge the fleshe.
                           8 But thou arte she that hath kept my sayings,
                                 Psal. 83. Mat. 5. Iohn. 14. Apoc. 2. Ephes. 5. Luc. 12. Act. 4. Iohn. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . and by such strength as I haue giuen thée, obserued also my lawes and commaundements. It is thou that haue stande by my trueth stedfastly, and not denyed my name in the time of troublous persecution. Wherefore thou canst in no wyse perish before mée.
                           
                              
                              
                                 Gala. 4. Apoc. 2. Apoc. 18. 
                                    •
                                 . Thes. 4. Apoc. 2.9 And as concernyng the wicked, behold howe I shall order them. I shal not only set thée cléere from the filthie traditions of that false congregatiō or sinagoge of Sathan, but I will also take a certen from thēce of the best learned, conuerting them from their errours and giuing them vnto thée. Which afore tyme called them selues Iewes or the chosen children of Abraham, and were not so in déed.
                                 Iohn. 8. Rom. 9. Gala. 4. Iohn. 14. They boasted them selues very much to be the anoynted Israelytes, the consecrate sonnes of promisse, and the holy spirituall people of God, lyke as the residue doth yet still to this houre, but they lyed full falslie. They were for that time false dissembling hypocrites,
                                 Mat. 7. Mar. 14. and cruell aduersaries to the trueth, as theyr companions are still.
                           10 Be sure that these will I so inwardly moue and effectuallye prouoke,
                                 Psal. 56. Rom. 11. Esai. 60. Apoc. 21. Ma
                                       •
                                    . 15. Iohn. 4. Act. 2. that they shall come vnto thée, to be of thy congregacion. They shal gladly submitte them selues to thy doctryne, they shall worship God not

in outward shadows with bondage, but in spirite and truth with lybertie. At thy féete, after thy holsome instructions and godly admonicions.
                           11 And where as they haue thought thée afore tyme of me to bée hated, when thou hast béene in persecutiō, they shall nowe well perceyue and know (my spirite speaking in thée, and such heauenly secrets comming from thée) that thou standest much in my loue, & art greatly in my fauour.
                                 Psal. 70. Sapi. 5. Act. 2. Iohell. 2.
                           
                           12 And for so muche as thou haste cōstantly holden and manfully stand by that word for the which I haue suffred much not only in mine own fleshe,
                                 Hier. 31. Iacob. 1. Iohn. 19. Luc. 23. 1. Cor. 12. Luc. 21. but also in thée and in other my seruauntes, for no aduersitie falling from it, I will preserue thée in the houre of temptation. Thou shalt for no violence decline from ye truth, thou shalt for no tormēt forsake the veritie. So mightie a stomake and so strong an hearte shall I giue thée for the time of thy temptations,
                                 Hier. 5. Apoc. 11. Psalm. 1. that thou shalt not be once moued.
                           13 For no doubte of it, thys fierce

temptation and cruell handeling of the boystuous Antichrists,
                                 Mat. 12. 1. Iohn. 2. 2. Pet. 2. 2. Tim. 4. Mahomet standing in the way of sinners, and the Romish Pope sitting in the most pestilent seate of errours, will come vpon all the world by execrable sects of false Prophets, lyars, hypocrytes, blasphemers and teachers of diuilish doctryne, to tempt and allure them, which dwell here vpon earth, sometyme by flattering promotiōs,
                                 Act. 20. Iude 1. Rom. 3. 
                                    •
                                 . Pet. 5. Apoc. 22. sometyme by threatnings and penalties, to renounce that veritie, and denye that word, to the vtter dampnation of their soules.
                           14 But in any wise take héede and watche in prayer,
                                 Iob. 14. Mat. 5. 1. Cor. 16. Luc. 6. for I come shortly as a righteous iudge giuing to euerie one according to their hartes inuencions. Consider the life but short in this world, & the rewarde great, if thou perseuere in thy Christen profession. Holde faste that godly fayth which thou hast taken, with hir holsome fruites.
                           15 Sticke sure to that heauenlye word which thou hast receyued, least

thou falling from it loose the crowne prepared for thée.
                                 Iacob. 1. I haue done my parte.
                                 Iohn. 17. Rom. 8. 2. Pet. 2. Mat. 21. Rom. 8. I haue chosen thée to eternall lyfe, and promised thée, inheritaunce thereof without thy deseruinges, beware now least thou loose it by apostasie, and least an other take it from thée by doing the fruites thereof.
                           16 Desire my spirite to strengthen thée that thou mayest perseuere,
                                 Ephes. 9. Mat. 10. Act. 6. Hiere 1. Ephes. 2. and stand fast. For that faithful seruaunt and mightie souldier, which continueth in that veritie to the ende, will I set vp for a stronge pillar and sure butteras in the temple of my God, which is the church or faithfull congregacion of my heauēly father, prefigured by the temple of Salomon at Hierusalem.
                           17 And so strongly will I buyld him vpon the harde rocke, that hée shall stande alwayes and neuermore bée remoued.3. Reg. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . Mar. 16. Mat. 7. Ephes. 2. Iohn. 15. 1. Cor. 3. Ecclesi. 3. Iohn. 20. No more shall hee be aforener nor a straunger, but a cytizen with the saintes, and of the houshold of God moste surely grounded vpon the foundation of the Apostles and

Prophetes.
                           18 And I shall wryte vpon him to his singular commoditie, the name of my God and father almightie, and the name of the beautiful citie of my God also,
                                 Apoc. 21. called new Hierusalem, renued in the spirit. Euermore shal he be called a seruaunt of the Lord,
                                 Rom. 1. Math. 25. Iohn. 15. 
                                    •
                                 . Cor. 6. Ephe. 2. Iacob. 1. Tit. 3. Iohn. 3. Rom. 8. an Apostle or witnesse of God, a lambe of Christes folde, a shéepe of his pasture, a braunch of his vyne, a member of his church, and impe of hys kingdome, a citizen of heauen, and an inheritour of euerlasting lyfe.
                           19 And all this commeth not from beneth, it riseth not of his good workes, merites, nor deseruings, but it commeth out of heauē from my god. It is only his goodnesse, grace, lyberalitie, forgiuenesse, pittie, & mercie.
                           20 I will also garnish him, & beautifie him with my newe name. Hée shall euermore for hys faythes sake be called the sonne of God, and ryse at the latter day in full glorie incorruptible, immortal and cleere, in perpetuall peace and concord.
                           
                              21 He that hath by the gifte of God an eare,
                                 Iohn. 1. 1. Cor. 15. Apoc. 2
                                    •
                                 . Mar. 4. Apoc. 2. Rom. 8. let him consider wherefore he hath it, and apply it to the right vse, discréetly waying what the holye Ghosts mynde is to the christian congregations in these heauēly premonishments.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And vnto the Angell of the congregation, vvhich is in Laodicia, vvrite. 2. This saith Amen, the faithful and true vvitnesse, 3. the beginning of the creatures of God. 4. I knovv thy vvorkes, that thou art neyther cold nor hote. 5. I vvould thou vvere colde or hote. 6. But bicause thou arte betvveene both, and neyther colde nor hote, 7. I vvill spevve thee out of my mouthe. 8. Bycause thou sayest thou arte rych and increased vvith goodes, and hast neede of nothing, and knovvest not hovv thou arte vvretched and myserable, poore, blynd, and naked. 10. I counsell thee to buye of mee gold tryed in the fyre, 11. that thou mayst be rich, and vvhyte raiment, that thou maiest be clothed, 12. that thy filthie nakednesse doe not appeare. 13. Anoynt thine eyes vvith eye salue, 14. that thou maist see.
                        
                           THE PARAPHRASE.
                           1 And now laste of all my deare

friend Iohn (sayeth the Lord Iesus) forget not to admonish by the hande writing also,
                                 Iohn. 19. 2. Thes. 2. Laodicia ciuitas Asie Rom. 4. Mat. 6. Luc. 11. Esai. 1. the elder of the Christen congregation which is in Laodicia, a notable Citie of the Asianes, which pretendeth to be a iust people or a companie to whom fayth is rekened for righteousnesse, and are nothing lesse. In the sight of men they appeare good, and their works séeme glorious, yet are they before God no sincere Christians, but dissemblyng hypocrites in déede.
                           2 Cause them to knowe certainely that this is the charytable warnyng of him,1. Tim. 2. Psal. 144. Iohn. 14. Apoc. 19. Apoc. 21. Eccle. 1. Iohn. 1. Iacob. 1. Phil. 2. which coueteth all things to be well, perfecte and good, and is in verie déede a witnesse faithfull and true, yea, the eternaall veritie it self, for that they shoulde giue the more creadite to his sayings.
                           3 Moreouer hee is the oryginall beginning, not only of the creatures for so much as hee was that worde by whome God created all thinges in the beginnyng, but also of the creatures of God, for so much as he becommyng

fleshe in this latter age restored them agayne to the peace and fauour of God, for y• they should euermore séeke vnto hym in theyr néede as to the verie fountayne or well spring of all goodnesse.
                           4 Thy workes are euidently open before me (sayth that Lorde) and I know them in their kynd.
                                 Mat. 11. Iohn. 4. Hebr. 4. Prou. 24. 2. Pet. 2. Gala. 3. Rom. 2. 1. Cor. 13. I sée thou arte neyther cold nor hote. Thou art neyther a full infydell, nor a full beléeuer, neyther a perfecte pagane, nor a perfect Christian. Thou arte neyther constant in the faith, nor yet all without faith. Outwardly thou arte hote, but within thou arte colde as yse. Inwardly thou abhorrest ye word of God, yet doest thou not outwardly condemne it.
                           5 I would thou were eyther colde or hote,
                                 Phil. 3. 1. Tim. 1. Gala. 2. Act. 20. Iude 1. 2. Pet. 2. Esai. 5. 1. Tim. 4▪
                               eyther a Christian or none at all, eyther a perfect louer of the veritie, or els a full hater of it, and not a dissembling hypocrite as thou arte, iudging euill good, and good euill, calling darkenesse light, and light darknesse, making sower swéete, & swéete

sower, allowing fables and lyes, and contempning the wisdome of God. None is so farre from the kingdome of heauen as is a false Christian. Much sooner is he conuerted to the trueth that is all colde or all without fayth then he that vnder the colour and pretense of Gods lawes mayntayneth errours and lyes.
                           6 For so much therefore as I fynd thée betwéene both,
                                 Mat. 3. Luc. 3. 2. Tim. 4. Iohn. 16. Luc. 18. Gala. 4. and neyther of both, halfe colde, halfe hote, and neyther fully cold nor hot, neither faithfully giuen to Gods worde nor all whole without it, but a false glosing hypocrite.
                           7 I will begin to vomet thée as a morsell out of season,
                                 Apoc. 2. Mat 25. Rom. 1. and spewe thée out of my mouth as a thing out of kynde. Thou shalte not be disgested. Neyther shall my worde allow thée, nor my promisse admitte thée to rest with Abraham Isaac,
                                 Iohn. 18. Mar. 8. Iohn. 12. Mar. 22. Mich 3. Luc. 9. Hebr. 6. and Iacob, in the kingdome of heauen. But thou shalt be throwne foorth into exteriour darknesse, where as shall be wéeping & gnashing of téeth. I will caste

thée out, detest thée, and abhorre thée. For much worse are they that abuse or dispyse the gift of God,
                                 Luc. 18 Eccle. 7 Apoc. 18. then they which neuer receyued it.
                           8 Thou pratest very sore of thy ryches, thy merytes, good déedes, and deseruings. Thou boastest thy selfe much of thy increase in goodnesse by déeds of supererogation and workes more then néede. Yea, thou arte not ashamed to thinke thy selfe so greatly to abound in learnyng, wisedome,
                                 Math. 2
                                    •
                                  
                                 Luc. 11 Iohn. 2 Soph. 
                                 
                                    •
                                  
                                 Apoc. 1
                                    •
                                  
                                 Amos. 5 Eccle. 1. rightuousnesse, and holinesse, that all hath néede of thée, and thou of none, sellyng to the wretched Idiotes of the world, thy masses, thy dyryges, thy fastings, thy memories, thy knéelings, thy crouchings, with other idle obseruations.
                           9 But thou remembrest not that thou arte wretched of thy self,
                                 Psal. 143. Prou. 14 Rom. 5. Ephe. 4 Apoc. 1
                                    •
                                 . & wicked of thyne owne nature. Thou considrest not y• thou art myserable and sinfull in thy lyfe, poore without vnderstāding & knowledge, feeble without the strength of Gods spirit, blynd without iudgement and fayth, and

naked without veritie and all good Christen workes.
                           10 I charitably therfore admonish thée to remember thy selfe. I counsel thée also as one mynding thée good, to bye of me golde tryed in the fyre. Come vnto me with faith, and aske in the feruentnesse of soule.
                                 Psal. 55. Mat. 7. Luc. 17. Iohn. 19. Psal. 18. Eccle. 23. Mala. 3. Esai. 52. Prou. 23. 1. Cor. 4. If thou be féeble harted, say: Lorde increase my fayth. Desire my heauenly word to thy comforte, with vnderstanding to perceiue it and know it. It is treasure much more precious then golde, it is sweetenesse more dulcet thē honie. And tryed it is moste pure and cleane by the holy Ghost. Thou shalt haue it without payment. Thy good harte shall only suffyse mée.
                           11 Diligently procure it that thou mayest be riche in fayth and righteousnesse, in ye merits of Iesus Christ, and in the fauour of God by them, and that thou mayest be cloathed in white rayment of innocencie & cleannesse,
                                 Apoc. 7. 2. Pet. 3. Rom. 12. not only before men, but also before God.
                           12 Be neuer without veritie, fayth,

righteousnesse and charitie, with other giftes of the holy Ghost, least the filthie nakednesse of hypocrisie, and sin,
                                 Gala. 5. 2. Cor. 5. Apoc. 17. Esai. 64. 1. Pet. 1. Psal. 31. Rom. 8. for all thy paynted colours appeare to thy confusion. Let thyne owne dyrtie merites alone, & decke thée with the precious deseruings of the sonne of God, that thou mayest haue thy sinnes wyped away, cléerely forgiuen, couered, and neuer more imputed vnto thée by him.
                           13 And to auoyde the blyndenesse, sée thou anoynt thine eyes, thy mind or affection, thy iudgement or knowledge, with the eye salue of clerenes which is Iesus Christ, the swéete smelling oyntment of health.
                           14 Consider yt he alone was borne for thée, and dyed for thée. And take him for thy only wisdome,
                                 Psal. 18. Iohn. 8. Cant. 1. Esai. 63. Act. 4. 1. Cor. 1. 1. Iohn. 
                                 
                                    ••
                                 
                                 ▪
                               satisfaction, holinesse, and redemption yt thou mayst hereafter sée. Let this precious lycour take from thine eyes all filthie corruptiō: and whatsoeuer thou shalt hereafter do in word or in déed, doe all in the name of that Lorde, gyuyng thankes vnto God the father

by him. For he is the salue that shall heale thée,
                                 Ephe. 1. Coloss. 3. Hiere. 17. and the lighte that shall cléere thée.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 As many as I loue, I rebuke and chasten, 2. Bee feruent therefore and repent. 3. Behold I stand at the doore and knock, 4. If any man heare my voice and open the doore, I vvill come in vnto him, 5. and vvil suppe vvith him, and he vvith mee, 6. To him that ouercommeth vvill I graunt, to sit on my seate, 7. euen as I ouercame and haue sitten vvith my father on his seate, 8. Let hym that hath eares, heare vvhat the spirite sayeth vnto the congregations.
                        
                           THE PARAPHRASE.
                           
                              
                                 Prou. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . Gene. 18. Hebre. 12. 1. Cor. 11. Esai. 5. Luc. 6. Rom. 1.1 So many as I loue, I rebuke earnestly, least they shoulde perish with the wicked. And those that I fauour I chastē in this life, least they should be dampned for euer. Woe is ye man that hath of me here neither chastisement nor rebuke, but is left without restraynte, wallowyng in the concupiscence

and desires of his fleshe. A great signe it is of the indignation of God, where as the other is an euident token of loue.
                           2 From henceforth therfore be feruent in the trueth.
                                 Iacob. 1. Ephe. 4. Apoc. 2. Cant. 5. Rom. 8. Earnestly embrace it, kéepe it, and follow it. Abhorre thy olde superstitions, and repent from the harte that thou haste béene so longe neyther whotte nor colde.
                           3 Beholde I stande at the doore of thy harte as one ready to helpe thy weakenesse.2. Thes. 2. Psal. 106. And I knocke at ye portall of thy conscience as one yt would gladly comfort thée, I send forth my heauenlye worde to succoure thée, lighten thée, raise thée vp, & saue thée.
                           4 If any man with a glad harte wil heare my voyce, or the true preaching of my word,
                                 Iohn. 10. Mar. 16. Iohn. 14. Gala. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . Luc. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . and opē the doore of his fayth, thankefully to receyue it, I wil come in vnto him, enduing with all spirituall delights, as rightuousnesse, peace, loue, and ioy in the holy Ghost.
                           5 Yea to hym shall I make manyfest

as to my friend the hidden misteryes of the scripture,
                                 Iohn. 15. Luc. 14. Math. 8. 
                                    •
                                 . Cor. 2. and secret coū
                              sels of my father. And he shall finallie suppe with me and with him in the eternall habitacle of God, where no harte can estéeme what hee hath prepared for them, that loue him.
                           6 That man which through ye earnest zeale of Gods trueth distroyeth hypocrisie, and ouercommeth sin, wil I admit to reigne with mée in the kingdome of my father, and graunt him to sitte with me in the seate of euerlasting peace,1. Iohn. 5. Dani. 2. Apoc. 21. 1. Cor. 6. 1. Cor. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 5. Rom. 8. as a déere member of myne owne body, declaring him a tryumphaunt conquerour in mée, ouer dampnation, hell, death, and the diuill, in a glorified nature.
                           
                              
                                 Ephes. 1. Iohn. 12. Apoc. 21. Math. 13. Phil 3. Ephes. 1.7 Euen as my selfe was before, sitting with my celestiall father in the seate of his eternitie. And to haue with mée that health, that blessyng, that ioye, that victorie, that honour, power, and glorie, that I haue.
                           8 Let him that God hath giuē eare
                                 •
                               vnto, apply them to his mynde, and marke what the spirite hath héere

spoken to the Christen cōgregatiōs, for therevpon resteth his lyfe, or his death, his saluacion or his dampnation.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The fourth Chapiter.
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 After this I looked, and behold a dore vvas open in heauen, 2. and the first voice vvhich I hearde vvas as it vvere of a Trumpet, talking vvith me, vvhich sayd. 3. Come vp hither, and I vvill shevv thee thynges, vvhich must be fulfilled hereafter. 4. And immediatly I vvas in the spirite, 5. and behold a seate vvas set in heauen, and one sat on the seate, 6. And hee that sate, vvas to looke vpon lyke vnto a Iasper stone, and a Sardine stone. 7. And there vvas a reyne bovve about the seate in sighte lyke a Smaragde. 8. And about the seate vvere .xxiiij. seates. 9. And vpon the seates .xxiiij. elders sitting, 10. clothed in vvhyte rayment, 11. and had on their heads crovvnes of golde. 12. And out of the seate proceeded lyghtnings, and thundrings, and voyces. 13. And there vvere seuen lampes of fyre burnyng before the seate, vvhich are the seuen spirits of God, 14. And before the seate there vvas a sea of glasse lyke vnto Christall. 15. And in the middest of the seate and rounde about

the seate, vvere foure beastes, 16. full of eyes before and behynde..
                        
                           THE PARAPHRASE.
1
                           After thys speciall iniunction of my Lorde and maister Iesus Christ (sayth saint Iohn) I did cast vp mine eyes towards the skye lifting vp my hart to giue thankes vnto God.
                                 Apoc. 1. Iohn. 13. Psal. 120. 1. Thes. 7. Eccle. 43. Ezech. 1. Act. 14. Luc. 24. And anon as I seriously beheld the face of the fyrmament or maiestie of Gods works, I saw a doore open in heauē. Which was a significatiō to me, that God mynded to opē certain high misteries of the scripture, & hidden secretes concerning his kingdome or church vnto me his simple seruaunt.
                           
                              
                                 Ezech. 3.2 And the first thyng that ascertained

me of the same from thēce, was a mightie great voyce as it had bene the stoute noyse of a Trompe,
                                 Psal. 28. Esai. 18. Iohn. 6. Mat. 6. Hier. 31. or the vehement blaste of an horne. The which voyce though it were fearfull vnto my fleshe (as commonly ye commaundement of God is) yet was it solatious vnto my spirite, for so much as it familiarly talked with mée, and sayde these wordes.
                           3 Come thou vp hyther. Suspende thyne owne wil, wit, studie, practise,
                                 Ephe. 5. Col. 3. Phil. 3. Gala. 5. 1. Cor. 12. Apoc. 1. and iudgement. Condempne yt thou hast of nature. Lift vp thy self aboue thy self, ascend in soule by the spirite and power of God, and I will shewe vnto thée thinges wonderfull, and such as must without fayle be fulfilled in euerie poynte hereafter by the vnuariable ordinaunce of God.
                           4 And as it had bene in a thought, I was sodenly by the Lordes power taken vp. I was in the spirit in déed, secluded frō all carnal imaginatiōs.
                           5 And anon I was ware of a beautifull seat prepared in heauen,
                                 Rom. 8. 2. Cor. 
                                 
                                    ••
                                 . Psal. 44. which moued mee to consider that before

the constitution of the world almightie God had appoynted by his spirite to raygne in his faithful church.
                                 Sapi. 9. Ephes. 1. Iohn. 14. Psal. 77. Act. 7. 2. Reg. 7. Luc. 7. 1. Cor. 6. For I sawe that one sate vpon yt seate, as vpon the beautifull throne of his glorie. No where els raigneth God but among his chosen people. Hée dwelleth not in Temples made by hand, he resteth not in houses of mās preparation. Is the kingdom of God any where els thē within man? Hath God any Temple that hee more fauoureth then mans faithfull harte?
                           6 And he that gloriously sate vpon that comely seate, was lyke by all similitude to a Iasper stone, and resembled also a precious stone called a Sardine. Betokening that his raign is durable & strong,
                                 Esai. 54. Ezech. 28. Dan. 7. Psal. 44. Dan. 4. Abacuc. 3. his power firme and invariable, his glorie cléere and precious, and that he him selfe is as the red Iasper beautifull and orient, and as the gréene Sardine, freshe, fayre, and neuer fading, that man shuld euer be desirous of him. Whose will to consider is our felicitie, and whose pleasure to folow is our perfectnesse.
                           
                              7 And there was a fayre raynbow about that glorious seate,
                                 Psal. 16. Sapi. 15. Luc. 6. The rainebow is the couenaunt. Zacha. 2. Prou. 8. 1. Reg. 3. Ezech 28. Iohn. 16. 2. Cor. 13. Phil. 4. in sighte like a smaragde or an Amarald stone. Which signifieth his perpetuall couenaunt of peace & loue to all them that haue fayth, which are so deare vnto him as is the apple of hys owne eye, or as that thing which hee desyreth most. And no lesse precious the sayde couenaunt is, then the fresh Ameralde with his amorous hew and beautifull shewe of loue, that wée should the rather couette it. For nothing is more auydyously to be desyred, then is the swéete peace of God.
                           8 And about that excéedyng fayre seate or empyre of the Lorde,
                                 The .xxiiij seates are vertues. Gala. 5. Esai. 11. were xxiiij. other meane seates appointed, which put me anon in remembraūce of charitie, pacience, stedfastnesse, loue, ioy, peace, temperance, iustice, knowledge of god, méeknesse, & other fruites of fayth, with innumerable giftes of the holie ghost, wherein the seruauntes of God hath afore tyme and still doeth continually rest.
                           
                              
                              
                                 Apoc. 5. Mat. 19. Hebr 11. Eccle. 45. Ephes 4. Mat. 19.elders, or notable auncient men sitting. Which séemeth vnto me to be Abell, and Noe, Abraham & Dauid, Moyses and Helyas, Ioseph & Iohn Baptist, the Prophets and Apostles, the Preachers & Martyrs, with such other lyke. To whom Christ promised in the regeneration to sitte with him vpon xij. seates, iudging the xij. tribes of Israel.
                                 Numbers in the scriptures. Dan. 7. Apoc. 7. These set numbers in ye scripturs of xxiiij. or of .xij. & such lyke, noteth certaintie in ye promisse of God towards them which are in themselues without number.
                           10 And the foresayd elders or men of rype discretion, were cloathed in white rayment or apparell of innocencie according to the commaundement of the holye Ghost. For their works were pure and cleane before God,
                                 Hebre. 11. Apoc. 14. rysing only of fayth, and were neuer defyled with the filthie traditions of men.
                           11 They had also vpon their heads as myghtie rulers,
                                 VVhat are mēt by the crownes.
                               and gouernours, crownes of fyne golde, in token that they had héere the gouernance

in his worde, and shall hereafter be partakers with Christ in his heauē
                              ly kingdome and glorie.
                           12 Great is the maiestie of ye trone of God, and the power muche.
                                 Ezech. 
                                 
                                    •
                                  
                                 Psal. 96. Apoc. 16. Zacha. 6. Act. 2. Iohn. 16. For from his heauenly seate into the vniuersall world procéeded lightnings, and thunderings, and voyces, which are the manyfolde and dyuers respectes of his worde. For a fearfull lightenyng it is when it rebuketh, throweth downe, and condempneth the sinner. It is a terrible thundering, when it feareth, threateneth, and commaundeth thynges contrarie to the fleshe.
                                 Psal. 118. Rom. 16. Iohn. 6. Esai. 2. Iohel. 2. And it is a solacious voyce agayne when it rayseth, reléeueth, and quickeneth the desolace conscience with comfortable promises. And full is all the scripture of these, which commeth from Syon, and the swéete worde of God whyche commeth from Hierusalem.
                           13 And there were seuen lampes of flamyng fyre burnynge before the sayde trone of God,
                                 Cant. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . Esai. 11. Zacha. 4. which are the

seuen spirites of God, or the vniuersall giftes of the holie ghost,
                                 Zacha. 3. Apoc. 5. Iohn. 15. prefigured in the scriptures by the seuen lightes of one Candelsticke, the vij. eyes of one stone, and by vij. hornes and eyes also of the lambe. These shewe light euermore before Gods sight. The church without them in no wyse can be the trone of God.
                           14 And before the sayd seate, there was as it had béene a sea of glasse,
                                 Ezech. 47. Apoc. 1. Iohn. 14. Psal. 11. Mala. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . a plentifull vnderstanding of the veritie, fyrst giuen vnto Christ by the father, and then vnto the church or cō
                              gregation by the spirite of Christ. And this sea was lyke vnto a Christall cléere, beautifull and pure, without any corruption of humaine fantasies.
                           15 In the middest of that heauenly seate,
                                 Mala. 3. Ezech. 1. Ioannes ba
                                    
                                       •
                                    othorpe. Albertus & alii. Ezech. 10. Dani. 3. & in the circuite of the same, were iiij. beastes séene, of diuers nature and shape, not signifying the iiij. greater Prophetes, nor yet the iiij. Euangelistes (as no small number of doctors hath fantasied) but rather ye vniuersall number of all faithful

beleeuers, & earnest setters foorth of the veritie in the foure quarters of the whole world. And this may be gathered by the noyse of their wings in Ezechiel by their crying of sanctus sanctus, sanctus,
                              
                                 Ezech. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . Esai. 6. Apoc. 5. Franciscus Lambertu
                                       •
                                    
                                 
                               & by their shewing of mysteries of the opened seales of the booke, as héereafter foloweth. By whom are to be vnderstande the sincere openings of Gods word, and the continuall praysing of his glorious name. These beastes are in the middest of the seate or congregation of God,
                                 Georgius aemilius. 1. Pet. 5. Ezech. 5. 1. Tim. 4. when they teach them and exhorte them to persist in the trueth. They are also in the circuite of the same, when they diligently labour to defende them from the doctryne of diuils, and errours of hypocrites.
                           16 These beastes were full of faire eyes before and behinde.
                                 Ezec. 1.1
                                    •
                                 
                                 ▪ 
                                 Iohn. 15. Math. 13. Luc. 8. Iohn. 8. Haymo. 1. Cor. 2. Iohn. 6. Iohn. 16. Which is a cléere knowledge in the mysteryes of Gods word. The sincere fauorers of Gods heauenly truth doth sée many wonderful things, and know many secrete maruels, not only concerning matters past, but also of iudgements

to come. So many eyes haue they, as they haue perceyued veryties. For they once made spirituall by fayth, discerne all things. They are taught of God. And ye holy ghost doeth lead them into all trueth.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1. And the first beast vvas lyke a Lyon. 2. The second beast lyke a Calfe, 3. and the third beast had a face lyke a man, 4. and the fourth beast vvas lyke a flying Egle. 5. And the foure beasts had eche one of them sixe vvings. 6. And round about vvithout and vvithin they vvere full of eyes. 7. And they had no rest neyther day nor night, saying: Holy, holy, holy is the Lorde God almightie, vvhich vvas, and is, & is to come. 8. And vvhen those beastes gaue glorye, and honour, and thankes to him that sate on the seate, vvhich lyueth for euer and euer. 9. The xxiiij. elders fell dovvne before him that sate on the trone, & vvorshipped him that lyueth for euer, 10. and cast their crovvnes before the trone, saying. 11. Thou art vvorthie Lord to receyue glorie and honour, and povver. 12. For thou hast created all things, and for thy vvilles sake they are and vvere created.
                        
                           
                           THE PARAPHRASE.
                           1 These iiij. beastes hath iiij. diuers exteriour similitudes,
                                 Ambrostus Ansbertus. Rom. 3. Gala. 5. Prou. 30. Prou. 28. Col. 3. Rom. 8. 2. Cor. 3. Apoc. 5. which are not els but the outward tokens, testimonyes, and signes of faith, or the fruitfull workes thereof only procéeding. For fayth is neuer without hir holesome fruites. The first beast was in similitude lyke vnto a Lyon, strong and mightie in power. And that are they which hath layde asyde the olde man of sinne with his féeble faynte workes, and conuerted them selues into ye ghostly image of Christ, which is the mightie stronge Lyon of the Trybe of Iuda, for that they myght haue the victorie ouer sinne.
                           2 The seconde beast was fashyoned lyke vnto a Calfe,
                                 Esai. 11. Exod. 2
                                    •
                                 . Gala. 5. Col. 3. Rom. 6. Rom. 12. 2. Tim. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . much vsed in the olde lawe to bée offered vp in sacryfice. And suche are they, which forsaking them selues and mortifying the corrupte lustes of theyr fleshe, doeth walke in a newe Christian lyfe, and offer vp them selues vnto God as a

lyuing sacrifice, readie to suffer all kyndes of persecution and death for his names sake.
                           
                              
                                 Eccle. 8. Hebr. 12. Rom. 8. 1. Cor. 2. 2. Cor. 10.3 The third beast had a face in fauour lyke a man, hauing reason, wit, and discrecion. And those are they which through pollicie of fayth and prudencie in the spirit, so wysely and discretely order them selues in that they goe aboute, that nothyng is against ye glorie of God, but al things worketh for the best in them.
                           4 The fourth beast was lyke vnto a flying Egle,
                                 Iob. 9. Hiere. 49. Rom. 6. Phil. 3. Col. 3. Hebre. 10. 1. Cor. 10. which buyldeth hir neast very highe in the harde rocke stone. Which are those godly persōs that liuing héere in this mortall bodie, by the counsell of the holy Ghost haue their conuersation in heauen. They séeke for those thinges which are aboue, where as Christ is sitting on the right hand of God. In whom only as in the sure rocke they buylde all their whole hope and trust.
                                 Ansbertus & Haymo. Apoc. 2. By these foure similitudes is the true congregation of God knowne from the painted sinagoge and coūterfaict

church of Sathan glorifiyng hir selfe in vaine glorie, pompe, crueltie, rape,
                                 Apoc. 1
                                    •
                                 . Gala. 5. Phil. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . simonie, lyes, hatred, sectes, murther, Idolatrie, sedition, and tirannie, with other fruites of the flesh, whose God is their bellie, and theyr ende dampnation. And though these iiij. simylitudes be diuers, yet doe they respect one congregation after Ezech. which euer more applyeth all .iiij. vnto one beast. And euerie one of the sayd iiij. beastes had .vj. winges about him.
                                 Lambertus Ezech. 1. Ezech. 10. Esay. 6. Esay. 4
                                    •
                                 . Hebr. 11. Gala. 5.
                           
                           5 The winges whereby Gods people are raysed vp vnto him, is fayth, hope, charitie, iustice, mercie, & veritie, with such other vertues as euer more accompanyeth them.
                                 Ephe. 1. Iohn. 15. Rom. 2. Tit. 2. Ezech. 1
                                    •
                                 . By these are they lifted vp vnto heauenlye thinges. By these auoyde they the common mischieues of the world. By these obtayne they a plentuous quyetnesse in God, abyding their sauiour and redéemer Iesus Christ. And wher as in Ezechiell the sayd winges appearing but iiij. are here founde sixe, we may gather this. That the gospel now published, the giftes of the holy

ghost are more high, plentifull, and open vnder christ, then afore time vnder Moyses.
                           6 Round aboute them without and within the sayde beastes were ful of eyes.
                                 Rom. 8. Iohn. 1. Ezech. 10. Psal. 4. 1. 
                                    
                                       •
                                    or 2. Apoc. 21. 3. Reg 3. Eccle▪
                                  1. The seruants of the Lord hath Godly wisdome and knowledge euery where inwardly to consider heauenly things durable, sure, and perfite, and neuer to perish. Outwardly agayne to iudge earthly things corruptible, wretched, and vaine, and shortly to be ended.
                           7 Neither day nor night could the sayde beastes cease from the praise of their Lord God,
                                 Psalm. 33. Esay. 6. Athanas
                                       •
                                    us Augustinus Fulgencius, Apoca. 1. Esay. 44. saying: Holy, holy, holy. Or blessed art thou almightye father, blessed art thou almightie sonne, blessed art thou almighty holy ghost, distinct thrée persons in trinity, and in substaunce one Lorde God almighty, which was withoute beginning, and is of him selfe onely, and shall be for euer, & euer, euerlasting. And what is this els but yt the righteous feruently eprayinge, geueth continnuall thankes vnto GOD

reioysinge amonge them selues in psalmes, in hymnes,
                                 Primasius Aph
                                       ••
                                    . Colo. 3. and in spiritusonges, praysinge hym euermore in their harts.
                           8 And when those .iiij. beastes,
                                 Robertus Tuitiensis. Esay. 11. Psalm. 118, or faithfull, feruent, sincere, and pure beleuers héere beléeuing in the flesh, gaue glory, honour, and thanks from the, iiij. quartes of the earth, in professing the verity, in teaching it vnto other, and in liuinge accordinge to the same.
                                 Esa. 6. Exod. 15. Luc. 1. And that vnto hym which sate on the seat, which is god almighty reigning ouer that congregation, which lyueth for euer and euer and hath of his kyngdome none end.
                           9 Anone stepped forth the .xxiiij. elders, or the whole, perfit,
                                 Apoca. 5. Albertus Magnus.
                               and vniuersall number of them which hath rested in the Lorde, and they with all méekenes fel down before him which sate on the throne. They submitted themselues vnto him,
                                 Psalm. 82. ackowleginge him for theyr onely Lorde. They worshipped him also with dew reuerance, & gaue high thankes vnto him, as vnto their eternal liuīg god.
                           
                              
                              
                                 Gregorius magnus. 1. Cor. 1. Tit. 3.10 Yea, finally they threwe downe their crowns before the throne of his eternal maiestie. They cōfessed their owne good workes, merites, and deseruinges to be nothyng at all. But their whole health, wisdome, knowledge, vertue, holines, rightuousnes, and redemption to be onely of his lyberall gift and vndeserued goodnesse.
                           11 And as men most highly reioysing they cryed vnto him, saying thus: It is thou (O Lord God, & most mightie creator) that is alone worthie to receyue all glory, all honour, and all thankes for that hath bene wrought,
                                 Psal. 85. 2. Mach. 1. Rom. 11. Hest. 13. in heauen, & in earth, and none other els but thou.
                           
                              
                                 Iude 9. Psal. 103. Gen. 12. Hest. 13. Eccle. 3. Ion. 1. Ephe. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 .12 For thou hast alone by thy vnsercheable wisedome created all things, and brought them foorth out of nothing. And for the onely pleasure of thy will they are now at this present tyme in substance and fashyon, and were created of thée at the beginning, not onely to be at thy commaū
                              demēt, but also to be euermore thākefull vnto thée, and to laude thée, and

prayse thée for euer.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The fift Chapter.
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And I sawe in the right hande of him that sate on the throne, a booke 2, written with in, and on the back syde. 3. sealed with seuen seales, 4. and I sawe a strong Angell preaching with a loude voyce. 5. Who is worthie to open the booke, and loose the seales thereof? 6. And no man in heauen nor in earth, neyther vnder the earth vvas able to open the booke, neyther to looke thereon. 7. And I wept much, bycause no man was found worthie to open & to read the booke, neither to looke thereon. 8. And one of the elders sayd vnto me: Weepe not. 9. Beholde, the Lyon which is of the trybe of Iuda, 10, the roote of Dauid, hath obtayned to open the booke, and to loose the seuen seales thereof. 11. And I beheld, and lo, in the middest of the seat, and of the iiij. beastes, and in the middest of the elders, 12. stoode a Lambe as though he had ben killed, 13, which had seuen hornes, 14, and seuen eyes, which are the seuen spirits of God, sent vnto all the worlde. 15. And hee came and tooke the booke out of the right hand of him that sate vpon the seat.
                        
                           
                           The Paraphrase.
                           AFter the forsayde vysion I saw (saieth saint Iohn) in the right hande,
                                 Apoca. 4. 1. Pet. 5. Esa. 6. 
                                    •
                                 . Peter. 1, Exod. 32. Esa. 8. Colo. 1. Apoca. 10. Rom. 1. Psalm. 117 or mighty power and wyll, of hym that sate on the throne with maiestye, a wonderfull Booke, in the which both man and Angell were desirous to looke.
                           This booke is Gods heauenly ordinance, contayning not onely all, that hath bene created of God visible and inuisible, but also the vniuersall contents of the holy scripture. This boke hath the mercifull Lorde prouided, that men should know him, partly by his creatures, partly by his Scriptures. This booke he hath in his right hand. For heauen he measureth with his spanne, and the whole world he comprehendeth vnder his three 
                                 •
                              ingers.
                                 Esa. 48, Esa. 40. Psalm. 4
                                    •
                                  
                                 Io
                                       •
                                    . 32. Psalm. 118▪
                               In his hande or power is the vniuersal earth; bothe hills & valleyes. At his onely wil & pleasure is the sincere vnderstanding of the scriptures, and true interpretacion of the same.
                           
                              2 This booke is written within & without.
                                 Colo. 1. Rom. 1. Math. 10. Psalm. 99, 2. Tim 3. Luke. 8, Rom 13, Iohn. 6. Gala. 4. Iohn, 1. The world cōtayneth creatures visible and inuisible, powers open & hidden, that men in thē should reade and vnderstand that there is a liuing God, and that they should acknowledge him and worship him as the Lorde and creator of all. The holy scripture hath hir figure & history, hir mistery and veritie, hir parable & plaine doctrine, her night and day, her letter and sence, her voyce and word, her flesh and spirit, her shadow and cleare light, her death and lyfe, her law and gospell, her Moyses and Christ, to bring all men also vnto the knowledge of God.
                                 Esa. 29. 1. Cor. 2. Roma. 8. 1. Cor. 1. Ioannes Bacāthorp. Nicolaus Lyranus. Albertus.
                              
                           
                           3 But that Booke is surely sealed with seauen stronge seales from the fleshlye vnderstanding of man, not hauinge the spirite of Christ, that he can neither vse the creatures of God a right, nor yet perceiue the Scriptures according to their true meanning. Muche hath the doctours fantasied of these seuen claspes or spearynges of thys booke, wythout the

aucthoritie of Gods word,
                                 Liranus. Albertus.
                               calling thē all maner of obscurities & darkenesses. Where as in verie déed they are nothing els but the strong and vnuariable decrée,
                                 Psal. 118. Prou. 8. Mat. 11. Rom. 8. Iacob. 1. Luke. 10. Mat. 13. Sapi. 1. or set diffinition of God, before the constitucion of the world, that none should be able to read rightly therin, nor know the iust meaning therof without the spirit of his sonne, and vnles it be méekly asked in faith. And this one decrée of god, so oft locketh vp these heauēly secrets frō mā, as it findeth hym carnall, couetous, wilfull, blinde, malicious, proude, and false, with such other lyke. The number of seuen doeth onely respect the opening of the seales in all ages.
                                 Ioachim. Abbas. Gen. 4. Gen. 12. 1. Reg. 16. Luk. 3. Mala. 2. 1. Cor. 9. Act. 4. Mala. 2. Mat. 5. Luk. 6. For in euery age hath God opened ye trueth vnto some Godly men by his spirite, with Abell and Enoch, with Noe and Sem, with Abraham and Iob, with Moyses and Samuel, with Dauid and Helias, with Hieremie and Daniel, with Iohn Baptist & Peter.
                           4 And I sawe (sayeth S. Iohn) a strong Angell, which betokeneth euerie faithful minister of gods word,

coueting all men to be taught of god, and sending them only vnto Christ, for they are the Angels of the Lorde of hostes. Which Angell cryed with a loude voyce, with an earnest zeale of the glorie of God, and with a feruent desire of his neighbours health.
                           5 Who is worthie to opē this booke, and to vndoo the claspes thereof?
                                 Psal. 1
                                    •
                                 . Psal. 68. Mat. 15. Ioh. 9. 1. Cor. 3. Hier. 10. As though he should say, None but he alone. Séeke him therfore that he may open it vnto you, els are yée lyke alwayes to be blynde, foolishe, and vnlearned lyers before the Lord, séeme ye neuer so wyse, eloquent, and well learned in the sight of men.
                           6 And in déede no man was founde able to doe it, neyther in heauen, nor in earth, nor vnder the earth,1. Esd. 4. Gen. 1
                                    •
                                 . Esay. 14. 2. Pet. 2. Act. 17. Iohn, 1. Act. 4. 2. Pet. 2. yet was there a diligent search made, & many did attempt it. The Angels that by apostasie fell from God, when they were in heauen wrought maistryes about it. And in the earth héere, the Philosophers among the Gentiles, the religious fathers amōg ye Iewes, the Pharisies and Scribes, the lawyers

and priests, and amōg the Christians, ye false Apostles & Antichrists, the Sophisters and Papists, ye sectes, and scoole doctors with all the worldly wyse hath craftily compassed the thing. Yea the messēgers of Sathan (whose dampnation is certayne) subtily to perswade, and fraudelently to deceiue the innocent soules,1. Iohn. 4▪ 
                                 Rom. 3. Psalm. 63, Hiere. 2
                                    •
                                 . Esa. 29. Prou. 25. 1. Cor. 1. Colo. 4. Rom. 11. Sapi. 9. haue also done their parte. But what hath folowed? After their vayne enterpryse, they haue bene so astonyed at the maiestie or sight of ye booke, that neyther were they able to open it, nor yet to looke thervpon. So high were the mysteries thereof, so vnserchable the iudgements, & so inuestigable the wayes therevnto.
                           
                              
                                 Math. 5. Esa. 63. Apoca. 1
                                    •
                                 
                                 ▪ 
                                 Eccle. 8. Iohn. 14.7 And I fell in sore wéeping (sayth Sainct Iohn) muche dolour was it to my heart to see that none was found worthie, no creature able, neyther Angell nor man, good spirit, nor diuil, to open, and to read the booke, which is cléerely to know the will of God therein, nor yet once to looke therevpon, that is sincerely to perceyue the

least veritie cōtayned therin. No creature vnderstanding could attayn vnto it. All were ignorant, all darke, all blynde.
                           8 And as I was thus mournyng one of ye elders, euen Iacob by name,
                                 Ose. 4. Sapi. 9. Isaie. 56, Gen. 49. Esa. 32. Mich. 5, 3. Esdre. 3. comforted mée with his prophecie of Iuda, Esay, Micheas, & Esdras, bearing witnesse to the same.
                           9 These with other ascertained me, that he was the Lyon of the Trybe of Iuda,
                                 Osee. 13, Iohn. 8. Heb. 11 Iohn. 12. Luke. 11. Esa. 11. Apoca. 22. Luke. 1. which should ouercome the world, & haue the victorie ouer death, and hell, for in déed they with Abraham sawe it a farre of, and much reioysed. He is the strong & inuincible Lyon that subdued the prince of this world, tooke from him the pray, and hathe deuyded the spoyle.
                           10 He is the verie roote of Dauid, the ground and originall cause of all godly promises made vnto him of deliuerance, victorie, and raygne, and alone in him are they fulfilled. Only hath he obtayned by his death,
                                 Colo. 2. Matth. 28. Ma
                                       •
                                    ci. 16, resurrection, and ascension, to make open the hydden mysteries of thys

booke, or whole ordinaunce of God, and to loose the seuen seales thereof,
                                 Luc. 24 2. Cor. 3. Iohn. 12. Ephe. 5. 
                                    •
                                 . Tim. 4. Ezech. 36. Io
                                       •
                                    el. 2, or to take away the vniuersall impediments wherby the said booke could in no case be séene, as is carnalitie, ignorance, darkenesse, blindenesse, wilfulnesse, couetousnesse, malice, hypocrisie, lyes, with such lyke. So was it afore speared by the decrée of God, that none could reade in it till he remoued the vntowardnesse from their heartes.
                           11 All this I beheld (saieth S. Iohn) and as I looked further,
                                 Esa. 12. Psalm. 21. Apoca. 4. 1. Cor. 4. Psalm. 106 Eccle. 8. Esa. 53. Hiere. 11 Esaie. 53. Iohn. 1. Exod. 12. Esa. 16. I sawe yt in the midst of the seate (which is ye vniuersall congregation of God) & of the foure beasts (which are the constaunt ministers of his worde) & also in the middest of ye auncient elders) whych hath bene ye sincere witnesses of hys veritie since the beginning.)
                           12 There stood a fayre, méeke, & most innocent Lambe, as though he had bene newly slain. I knew that Christ was this Lambe, for he was wounded for our offences, & tooke away the sinnes of ye world. He was that méek

Lambe prefigured in the law whom the faithfull fathers so earnestly desired. He was that gentle Lamb that was caried away to be slayne, and that opened not his mouth before the shearer.
                                 Acto. 8. 1. Iohn. 2. 1. Timo. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . Heb. 9. Math. 2
                                    •
                                 . Daniel. 7. Psalm. 74 This Lambe standeth vp euermore for vs before God, as our onely medyator, aduocate, peace maker, Sauiour, helper, counsellour, defender and teacher
                           13 This Lambe had seuen hornes, which betokeneth his stronge and infinit power, vertue, victory, kingdom, glory, bounteousnesse, and maiestie, with such lyke, and in the whole his vniuersall reigne.
                           14 He had also seauen eyes,
                                 Zacha. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . Esa. 11. Apoca. 1. 1. Cor. 12. Ma
                                       •
                                    ci. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 6, Ephe. 4. Matth. 28. Esa. 11. Apoca. 22. Gala. 5. Ephe. 5. 1. Cor. 12. 1. Iohn. 4. whiche are all the powers, graces, & fruites of the holy ghost, called héere the seuē spirits of God, For so much as they are the singuler gifts of him whiche is his essenciall spirit. And them he hath sent by his apostles, & other godly preachers into ye seuen climates of the erth or vniuersal world, ye people wt them to be replenished. These are wisdome, vnderstandinge, counsell,

strength, knowledge, pittie, & the fear of god. These are also loue, ioy, peace, pacience, gentlenesse, goodnes, fayth, méekenesse, long suffering, cleannes, and temperance, with diuersitie of tongues, interpretacion, prophecie, cures, healings, miracles, and iudgement of spirits.
                           15 And the sayd Lambe came foorth as one through méekenesse,
                                 Phil. 2, Ose, 13, Luke, 10, Esa, 6, Math, 1
                                    •
                                 , hauyng victorie ouer sinne, death, & hell, & hée reuerently tooke the sayd booke from the right hand of him that sate vpon the throne. Which made me anon to consider that the heauenly father had giuen vp vnto him the whole admynistration of his spirituall kingdom, with all aucthoritie & power in heauen and earth,
                                 Iohn, 5, Math, 28, Iohn, 17, Phil, 2, Math. 25, Luke. 24, Iohn, 14, Iohn, 16, Act, 2. Mat. 25, Hebr, 10, to open or to speare, to choose or to reiect, to take or to refuse, to saue or to loose, to rewarde or to dampne. For he it was that first opened the vnderstanding of men, that they might perceyue the scriptures. He it was that sent the holy spirite of God to deduce them into all veritie, and gaue them grace to instructe all

people. He it is also yt shall thorowe them into euerlasting fire, with the diuil & his Angels that resist ye same.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And when he had taken the booke, the liij. beastes and the .xxiiij. elders, 2. fel dovvn before the Lambe, hauing harpes, 3. & golden vialles full of odours (vvhich are the prayers of the Saincts) 4. & they sung a nevv song saying, 5 Thou arte vvorthie to take the booke, 6. and to open the seales therof, 7. For thou wert killed, 8. and hast redemed vs by thy bloud, out of all kinreds & tongs, and people, and nacions, 9. and hast made vs vnto our God, Kings, and priestes, 10. and vve shall reigne on the earth.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 And when he had receyued ye sayd booke of the hande of God, with full authoritie and power, the iiij. beasts, or the present protestours of the veritie, here liuing in the world,
                                 Iohn, 
                                 
                                    •
                                 , Luk, 10, Heb, 11, Sapi, 5, Iohn, 8, Ephe, 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . Iohn, 8, Heb, 11▪
                               and the xxiiij. Elders or auncient witnesses of the same, departed cleane from thys worlde, as were the olde fathers, the Patryarkes, Prophetes,

and Apostles,
                                 Act. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . Apoca. 22. méekly submitted them selues before the Lamb, much reioysinge in his triumphant victorye for them.
                           2 They fell downe before him, they praysed hym,
                                 Act
                                       •
                                    . 3. Apoca. 2
                                    •
                                 
                               they worshipped hym, they gaue thanks and recognised him for their mercifull Lorde and Sauiour, hauing in their handes harmonious harpes,
                                 Apoca. 15. Psalm. 150 Esaie. 66. Prou. 23 Luck. 10. 1. Cor. 10. Esaie. 53. Iohn. 8. Iohn. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . which there represented the melody of their faithfull soules, or the inward reioyce, that they had in faith of the eternal verytie of god. For that is the agréeable concord and swéet harmony yt he most delighteth in. And as well had they harpes that were long afore Christe, as had they that folowed hym, the effecte of hys death being equall to them both. So wel reioysed Abraham, which saw him a farre of, as did Iohn Baptist, which shewed him persent.
                           3 Each one of them had also in hys hand a golden viall full of swéete odours, whiche is a faithfull harte to God,
                                 Zach. 14. Daniel. 9. full of swéete desires and wholsome praiers, whiles they liued here.

And these vessels of prayer, or harts of the faithfull beléeuers, couetinge mercy to themselues and all other, were very precious, pleasaunt,
                                 Psalm. 61. Math. 5. Prou. 17. Psalm. 140▪ 
                                 Prou. 23. Apoca. 14. and beautifull in the sighte of the Lorde, which onely desireth the harte.
                           4 They sang also with their instruments a new songe of reioyce recording the great benefit of God.
                                 Marci. 16 Aggei. 2. Iohn, 1. Marci. 1. 1. Cor. 1. Rom. 1. 1. Cor. 5. Colos. 3. Ephe. 4. They vttered the glad tidinges of peace. They published the Gospel of Christ. They told of his comming. They declared him present & past. This songe was euer new vnto flesh & bloud. It séemed very strange, yea and folish to the children of this worlde, yet is it the power of God vnto saluation for euery one that beléeueth. Now it is also for so much as it nothing alloweth in our aged man of sinne, but alwayes calleth vpon renouation in the spirite.
                           5 This was the conclusion of that song. Thou alone swéete Lord (sayde they) art founde worthye to take the Booke to receiue power and administration of the kingdome of God.
                                 Iohn. 17. Apoca. 3. Lucke. 24.
                           
                           
                              
                              
                                 Esa. 42. Io
                                       ••
                                    . 16. Esa 53. 
                                    •
                                 . Cor. 15▪
                              6 Thou only art able to opē ye seale
                                 •
                               thereof, to take from vs all impediments of darknesse, hypocrisie, lyes, ignoraunce, wilfulnesse, blindnesse, and sinne, and to deduce vs into all godly knowledge.
                           7 For thou wert not only despised and wounded, but most cruelly slaine for our offences, whereby thou hast obtained our perpetuall peace, and attonement with god.
                           
                              1. Iohn. 2, Titum. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 , 1. Petri. 1. Esa. 56, Psalm. 105 Iohel..
                              8 Thou hast clerely redéemed vs out all spirituall bondage by ye price of thy bloude, and by the vertue of thy passion and death, thou hast gathered vs together into one kingdom of God from all the nacions of the world, and hast chosen vs out of all kinreds, languages, & peoples of the vniuersall earth.1. Peter. 2. Psalm 44. Acto. 11. Apoca 1, 1. Iohn. 5
                                    •
                                 , Thou hast made vs also pertakers with thée in thy peculyer vnction, that we are now called Christians.
                           9 Thou hast annoynted vs Kinges by the gift of true faith, to haue victory ouer sinne, death & the deuil, and cōsecrate vs priests by ye grace of thy

holy spirite,
                                 Hebr. 9. Rom. 12. Exod. 19, Deut. 17 Esa. 40 1. Pet. 2. to offer vp our selues and vndefiled sacrifice vnto our euerlasting God. So that we are now the chosen kinred, the kingely pristhoode, the holy generation, the peculyer peple, that should manifest the workes of thée, which hast called vs out of darknesse into the merueilous light.
                           10 And by the benifit of thy onely grace and goodnesse we shall raigne prosperously on the earth,
                                 Apoca. 22, 1. Iohn, 2, 1. Cor. 15 Psalm. 141. Apoca. 21. not héere wher as is sorow, care, penury, scarsnesse, and death, but our porcion shal be in the pleasant land of the lyuing, where as is the peace, ioy, tranquilitie, comfort, and life euerlasting.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And I behelde, 2. And herde the voyce of many angelles about the throne, and about the beastes, and the elders. 3. And I harde thousand thousandes, saying with a loude voyce. 4. Worthye is the Lambe that was killed, to receaue power, and riches and wisdome, and strength, and honoure, and glorye, and blessinge, 5. And all creatures, vvhiche are in Heauen, 6. And on the

earth, 7, And vnder the earth, 8, And in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I, saying, 9. Blessing, honour, glory and power, be vnto him that sitteth vpon the seate, 10. And vnto the Lambe for euee more. 11. And the fowre beastes said amen. 12. And the .xiiii. elders fell vpon their faces, 13. and vvorshipped hym that liueth for euer more.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 Furthermore saith Saint Iohn, I saw an infinit host of Angels beholding the face of the heauenly father.
                                 Daniel. 7, Math. 18. Psalm. 102. Luke. 2,
                           
                           2 I heard also the voyce of a great number of them about the throne of God, geuing laude and prayse vnto hym,
                                 Hebr. 1, Apoca. 19 Rom. 8. Tobie. 5. Iudith. 13▪ 
                                 Psalm. 90 Daniel. 7, Hebre. 12▪
                               and about the beastes and auncient elders. For they are not onely the immediate ministers of God, but also the seruantes of those men, which shall be the heyres of saluation. Where 
                                 ••
                              ould they be els than? but about them that feare the Lord, to sée to them and preserue them in all their wayes, lyke as he hath geuen them in commaundement.
                           3 And the number of them was a

thousande thousandes, or a number beyond our estimation. And they cryed with a loude voyce, signifiyng in their sort no corporall noyse, but for so much as they are but spirits, but a vehement zeale of most perfect loue and reioyce for the glory of God,
                                 Psal. 103. Luke. 2, Iohn. 20. Luke. 15. Daniel. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 , Math. 18. Esaie. 53, 1. Cor. 15. Iohn. 17, Apoca. 1 1. Tim. 6, Sap. 3, Apoca. 3. Psalm. 23. Math. 28, Ephe. 1▪
                               the victory of Christ, the redempcion, delyuerance, and helth of man. It betokeneth also their excéedinge gladnesse in the openinge of the veritie and conuertion of the sinner.
                           4 Worthy is the most méek Lamb (sayd they) which was cruelly done vnto death, and by his death ouercame the worlde, hell, death, and the deuill, to take vpon hym the title of all power, heritage, wisdom, strēgth, honour, glory, and blessing, and to be called of all creatures most mightye, most rich, most wise, most valiaunt, most worshipfull, most gloryous, and most blessed, conueniente names for the king ouer al. Yea finally to haue 
                                 •
                              he vniuersall aucthorytie in heauen and in the earth, to gouerne euery where, and al to be subiect vnto hym.
                           
                              
                              
                                 Gene. 
                                 
                                    •
                                  
                                 Psalm. 8, Psalm. 148, Ba
                                       ••
                                    ch 3. Daniel. 3, Gene. 1, Psalm. 148. Deut. 14 Hester. 1
                                    •
                                 .5 I hard also (saith saint Iohn) all the creatures that God euer created as the angeles in heauen, the sunne, the Moone, the planites, the starres, the fyrmament, the fyre, the water, the ayre.
                           6 And all that was vppon the earth, as man, beast, foule, fish, mountaines, valleys, welsprings, floudes, windes, wethers, times, trées, herbs fruits.
                           7 And al that was vnder or within the earth, as rootes, wormes, serpentes, vermine.
                           8 And all that was in the sea, or that moued in the waters, with all that are conteined in these, eche one in his kinde saying.
                           
                              
                                 Esa. 6. 1. Timo. 1 Apoca. 14. 1 Tim. 6. Apoca. 1.9 The euerlastinge God, whiche sytteth vppon the eternall throne, with power and maiestie, be euermore blessed, worshiptfull, gloryous, and almightie.
                           
                              
                                 Rom. 8. 2. Cor. 5. Apoca. 2110 And vnto the Lambe (which is his onely sonne Iesus christ) be blessing, honour, glorye, and power from him for euermore. And in this al creatures

desireth no longer to be subdued vnto the vanitie of the wicked, nor yet to serue the same. But to be wholy deliuered from the bondage of corruption, and in libertie to serue the children of God, to the glorye of of hym that made them.
                           11 To this the fowre beastes or al the true seruants of God here liuing answered Amen,
                                 Hebre. 1. or so might it be in effect, as ye haue desired.
                           12 And the .xxiiij. elders, as,
                                 Psalm. 134▪ 
                                 Ne
                                       •
                                    e. 8. Hebr. 11. Ephe 2. Apoca. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . the patriarks, the Prophetes, the Apostles, with other that hath passed this life, fell downe flat vpon their faces, they submitted them selues.
                           13 They worshipped, lauded,
                                 Apoca. 4▪ 
                                 Math▪
                                  3. 1. Iohn. 5, Esa. 65, and gloryfied him that lyueth for euer and euer, one God in thrée persons, the father, the sonne, and the holy ghost. This signified the Angels and Sainctes euermore to be ioyous as any thinge is done in the creatures to the manyfest glory of God.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The sixt Chapter.
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And I sawe vvhen the Lambe opened one of the seales, 2, and I heard one of the iiij. beastes say as it were the noyse of thunder. 3. Come, and see. 4. And I savve and behold, there was a whyte horse, 5, and he that sate on him had a bovve, 6. and a crovvne vvas giuen vnto hym, 7. and hee vvent forth cōquering, & for to ouercome.
                        
                           The Paraphrase. 1
                           COnsequently (sayeth sainct Iohn) as I was beholdyng these wonders, I sawe that the Lambe (which is the sonne of God) opened the first of the seuen seales,
                                 Iohn. 1, Apoca. 15, Luke. 4, Primacius Apher Ioachim Abbas
                               declaring the first misterie of the booke. These openings betokeneth not onely the manifestation of Gods trueth for seauen ages of the world, but also for the .vij. seuerall times, and after vij. diuers sortes from Christes death to the latter end of the world. The first seale was remoued, and the mysterie there vnder

contayned, made open, when the Apostles & disciples of Christ aboūdātly replenished with the holy Ghost,
                                 Lābertu
                                       •
                                     Act. 2. did cōstantly preach the gospel ouer the vniuersall world.
                           
                           2 And at the openyng of the sayde seale (sayeth hée) I hearde one of the beasts in shape lyke a Lion,
                                 Marci. 16 Psalm. 18. Apoca. 4. Ezech. 1. by whom are signified the strong witnesses of Gods veritie, by constancie of fayth resembling Christ the verie Lyon of the stocke of Iuda, whose voice was mightie and strong as it had bene the noyse of a thundering,
                                 Hiere. 1, Gene. 49, Psalm. 28. Acto. 2, Iohn. 1. Psalm. 33, Zachar. 6 and vehemently it sayde vnto me.
                           3 Come hither and sée, drawe nigh and be taught, beléeue and thou shalt

vnderstand.
                           4 And anon I saw euidently that there was a white horse, which signifieth the Apostles and first disciples of Christ, for why the scripture doeth so call thē.
                                 Zach. 10, Apoca. 1. Psalm. 50. Rom. 10. Act. 9. Gala. 1. These horses were white, they were made pure, rightuous, and cleane by Iesus Christ, and bare him by their preaching the worlde ouer. Such a whyte horse to the glorie of God was Paule, whan he beare the name of Christ before the Gentiles, the Kings, and the children of Israell
                           
                              
                                 Math. 2
                                    •
                                 . Act. 15. Lucke. 21. Amos. 9. Eccle. 10. Zach. 9. Psalm. 44 Iohn. 15,5 He that sate vpō this white horse (which was Christ him selfe) had in his hande a bowe, which figured the hartes of the foresayd Apostles and disciples, out of whom he fiercely sēt foorth the arrowes of his word into his chosen people. Their hearts were in his hand, for yt his verities myght the more effectually passe foorth, and the more surely lyght vppon hys elects. For without his spirit nothing could they doe.
                           6 From God the father vnto hym

was giuen a crown of magnificence, honour, worthinesse, and victorie, in his resurrection and ascention.
                           7 And when he had stomaked them by the holy Ghost,
                                 Phil. 2. Ephe. 4. Act. 2, Act. 5, Iohn, 16. 1. Iohn. 5. to shoote foorth hys word without feare, he wēt forward with them by his grace, conqueryng in them the prince of this worlde, in processe of tyme by their doctryne so to ouercome him and all his wycked armie. Were the Antichristes neuer so madde,
                                 Iohn. 16. Math. 10. Acto. 4. Act. 5. Acto. 12. 1. Cor. 15. Sap. 5, Iohn. 9. Act. 5. 1. Cor. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . Gala. 1. Iohn. 15 Iohn. 8. torment they neuer so sore, slea they neuer so fast, Christ wil ouercome them. Let them inhibit his trueth, and forbid his Gospell, take, spoyle, imprison, exyle, murther, hāg, head, drowne, & burne, yet wil Christ haue the victorie ouer them, though it otherwyse séeme to the fleshly children of darknesse. In many coūtreis, Cities, and townes, hath Gods word bene taught, where as it is now forbidden vnder the payne of death. Is Christ therefore the weaker? which chose the weake to confounde the strong? No truely.
                           It hath wrought in thē whō he hath

called, and ro
                                 •
                              ted in them whom he hath sought. So that the faithfull children of Abraham and true Isralites in no wise can perish nor be taken from Christ.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And vvhen he opened the second seale, 2. I harde the second beast say, 3. Come and see, 4, And there vvent out an other horse that vvas red. 5. And povver vvas geuen to him that sate thereon, 6. to take peace from the earth, 7, & that they shuld kil one an other. 8. And there vvas geuen vnto hym a great svvord,
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 What the estate of the Christiā churh was immediatly after the Apostels time, it is vnder misterie declared in the openinge of the seconde seale.
                                 Franciscus Lābertus. Luke. 21, 1. Iohn. 2. Act. 20. 2. Pet. 2. Gala. 5, For so soone as the sayde Apostles and fyrste Disciples of Christe were taken from the world, yea and partly in their time also, many pernicious errours did springe and increase by craftie teachers and subtile

seducers in dyuers quarters. Some coupled the lawe with the gospel, and circumcision with baptime, to bring Christian libertie into bondage. Some sayd the generall resurrection was past, to subuert ye wayes of the Lorde. Some denyed hym to come in the fleshe. Some brought in ceremonies and beggerly shadowes to yoke vs with Iewishe supersticions.2. Tim. 2. 1. Iohn. 4, 2. Iohn. 1. Gala. 4. 1. Timo. 4 Iude. 1. Gene. 9. Some forbad mariage as an vncleane thing, to bring in all abhominations and filthinesse. Some dyd inhibite meates sanctified of God, vnder colour of abstinence to set vp hypocrisie. Some called Sainct Paule an Apostata from the lawe. Some taught the Gospell carnally, denying Mathew and Iohn, and fantasied gospels vpon their owne brayne vnder the names of Peter, Andrew, Thomas, & Barthelmew, Mathias,
                                 Hebion Cerinthus, Basilides, Ex Eusebio cesari. 
                                       ••
                                    las
                                       •
                                    us Philastri. Guido et Lutzenburgus
                                 ▪
                               Thadeus, & Barnabas. And of this sorte in the Apostles tyme, was Nicolas of Antioche, Hermogenes, Hymeneus, Philetus, Alexander, Elymas, Carpocras, Cerinthus, Hebion, Helion,

with their affinytie. And after theyr tyme Basilides, Ualentinus, Heracleon, Cerdon, Merciō, Apelles, Tacianus, Menander, Montanus, and other.
                           1 In significatiō of this, the Lambe opened this second seale of the booke.
                                 Apoca. 5 Ephe. 5. Eccli. 50 Act. 13. He remoued once agayne the darke cloudes of ignorance, he replenyshed with hys grace, & strengthened with his spirite certayn of the Gréeks and Gentiles which beléeued,
                                 Histo. ecl. li. 3. ca. 30. Eusibus Cesarien. Hioronimus. Tritemius.
                               to confute the errours, & condempne the lyes of those false teachers & deceiuable Antichristes. Of this number was Ignacius, Policarpus, Theophilus, Antiochenus, Iustinus Martyr, Agrippa, Castorius, Aristides, Quadratus, Meliton, Apollenaris, Theodocion, Hyrenius, Appollonius, Melcyades, Rhodon, & diuers other. These boldely cōfessed Christ,
                                 Heb. 1
                                    •
                                 . Actu. 9 Iohn. 1 Iohn. 15▪
                               they taught his veritie, they put aside the darknes, they ministred the light, they confounded the aduersaries both wt tonge & pen.
                           
                              
                                 Apoc. 4. Exo, 29 Rom, 122 And when the Lambe had thus opened this seconde seale declaryng

the misterie thereof, I heard the second beast (saith S. Iohn) which was to my sight a calfe, signifiyng those ministers which had mortified and wholly giuen vp them selues as a sacrifice for the preaching of the same, saying also vnto mée.
                           3 Approch nigher, & looke, perceiue,
                                 Iohn, 1▪ 
                                 Psal. 44▪ 
                                 Zacha. 1▪ 
                                 Actu. 20, Mat. 16▪ 1, Iohn. 2, Iohn, 16 Math. 23 Act. 16▪ 
                                 Mat. 10 Iohn. 16 2, Pet. 
                                 
                                    •
                                  2, Cor. 
                                 
                                    ••
                                 , Iohn, 10▪ 
                                 Au
                                       ••
                                    
                                  20, and take héed, mark & beare it away.
                           4 And sodeinly I saw yt there went foorth an other horse all diuers from the first, for he was outwardly read. This horse resembleth the sayd false teachers, borne & brought vp in flesh and bloud taught of the same. Such went from the Apostles & were not of them, they cursed ye true preachers out of their sinagogs, they persecuted them from citie to citie, they accused them as ye sturrers vp of sediciō, they caused ye rulers to imprisō thē, scorge thē, & flea them, thinking therby they did God high seruyce. They turned ye grace of god into beastlines, & brought in lying sectes. These were those false bretheren & deceitfull maysters whom ye scripture calleth straūgers,

hirelings, théeues, scorners, and rauening wolues, not sparing the flock. These were those bloud thirstie doctours and puffed vp prelates, which are partakers with their fathers in the bloud of the Prophets, whose succession for a token of the same is clothed in read scarlet to this day.
                                 Iohn. 11. Math. 25. Apoca. 18 Acto. 13. 2. Tim. 4, 1. Tim. 1. Act. 19. Act. 23. Such a red horse was Barichu, which resisted Paul & Barnabas at Paphos. So was Alexander ye copper smith which did Paule much displeasure. So was Demetrius which moued sedicion against him, so was Ananias the high priest that commaunded hym to bée smitten, so was Tertullus the Oratour that accused hym to the debitie,
                                 Act. 24. 1. Iohn, 1, so was Diotrephes that sought the préeminence, and reproued Iohn.
                           5 And power was gyuen to hym that sate vpon this horse▪ By the sufferance of God to trye his electes, the wicked rulers and Prynces of thys world perswaded, and set forward by these bloudie beastes,
                                 Ezech. 23 Sapi. 3. 3. Reg. 22, Eusebius ce
                                       •
                                    ar
                                       •
                                    en. Philip. 4. hath exercysed all crueltie, fircenesse, and tyrannie.
                           6 To take from the earth the swéet

peace of God & Christiā vnitie, which made of the Iewes and Gentiles one people,
                                 Ephe. 2. Ephe. 4. Rom. 12, 1. Iohn. 2. Iohn. 18, Rom. 13. 2. Pete. 2. & knit vs altogither through fayth and baptime, as members of one bodie in Christ Iesu. This peace haue they broken, this vnitie of faith haue they torne, this coate of Christ without seame haue those souldiours deuyded, & abusing the power (which is the high ordinaunce of God) they haue mayntayned the manifold sects of diuision.
                           7 Of whome one hath kylled an other,
                                 Iosephus Platina. Baptista. Panecius
                               as in the distruction of Hierusalem the vnchristian gentile slewe the vnfaithful Iew. And now in ye church of Antichrist one Bishop poysoneth an other, one priest an other, one religious as other.
                           8 And vnto this terrible horse man was there giuen a great swerd.
                                 Iob. 34. Exo. 14. Eusebius cesarien. Hermauns contract
                                       ••
                                    
                                 
                               Lōg hath the Lord suffred those tyrantes to raygne, much mischiefe to worke, great crueltie to vse. Much was the persecution, tyrannie, and murther, vnder Nero, Domicianus, Traianus, Aurelius, Seuerus, Maximinus,

Decius, Ualerianus, Aurelianus, Dioclecianus, Maxencius, Iulianus, and such like, & muche christian bloud in their time was shedde.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And when he opened the third seale, 2. I heard the third beast say. 3. Come, and see. 4. And I beheld, and lo a black horse. 5. And he that sate on him, had a payre of Balaunces in his hand. 6. And I heard a voyce in the middest of the .iiij. beastes say. 7. A measure of wheat for a penny, 8. and three measures of barley for a penny. 6. And oyle and wyne see thou hurte not.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 Under trope or secret misterie of the thyrd seale opening,
                                 Albertus Magnus. Math. 10, Lucke. 6. Regino 
                                       •
                                    rumiensis. 
                                       •
                                    arolus 
                                       •
                                    ouillus
                               is specyfied the estate generall of the chrystian church, after the tyme of the martirs and strong witnesses of Iesu, which were most cruelly afflicted and slayne for confessing hys name and trueth. Not that the Martyres were onely and that tyme, and not afore and

after, but for so much as they did than most abound.
                           For in the Rome churche besides other, were slayne all the mynisters of the word or Byshoppes as they call them, from the tyme of Peter vnto the dayes of Siluester, to the number of xxxij. not one of them escaped. After theyr tyme as the tyrannie of rulers was stilled,
                                 Lambertus Shafnaburgensis. Carolus Bouillus.
                               and theyr gagyng crueltye pacyfyed, there arose an other fashioned sorte all diuers from the other, giuen to bodily ease and delightes of the worlde. More desirous,
                                 Sigebertus Gemblacensis.
                               were they to rest then to labour, to sléepe then to worke, to take then to giue, to bankette, then to preache, to dally then to dye.
                                 Benno Cardinalis.
                               Then stroue they among them selues for the premacy, them sought they ambiciously to raign ouer all.
                                 VVernerus Carthusiensis.
                               Not one Martyr was then among them, vnlesse hée were a stynkyng Martyr made amonge themselues.
                           But all were confessours. For preaching was layd a part, and pryde had take vp his roume. Yet were they not

long without contradiction. For then arose heresies and scismes, sectes, and deuisions, and were spred the world ouer, lyke as ye histories mencioneth. The Sabellians,
                                 A do vien nensis, et Beda. Cirillus Augustinus Ciprianus Hieronimus. Sigebertus Gemblacē
                                    sis. Vincencius Antonius
                               Arrianes, Eunomyanes, Macedonianes, Priscillyanes, Nestoryanes, and Euticyanes, then diuersly erred in faith and opynion of the Godhead. The Manichées dispysed the olde Testament. The Donatistes helde it necessarie to bée rebaptised. The Pelagianes taught that men might merit heauen without grace, with such lyke. Then Scismes were plentuous among bishops euery where. In the church of Rome were many alterations about the election, much strife, & diuision was for the Papacie, betwixt Liberius and Felix, Damasus, & Urcisinus, Bonifacius & Eulalius, Simachus and Laurencius, Bonifacius and Dyoscorus,
                                 Platina. Nauclerus et alii.
                               Constantine & Philip, Eugenius & Sisinius, Formosus & Stephanus, Sergius and Christophorus, Benedicte and Leo, Gregorie, and Iohan, with dyuers more.
                           
                              In the which some were noted of heresie, some accused of incontinency, some called insolent, some Rustical,
                                 Abbas vrspergen sis. Iacobus bergomensis. Hermannu
                                       •
                                     s
                                       •
                                    edel.
                               some rude. Some were accurssed, some deposed, some slaundered, some exiled, some poisoned, some strāgeled. Some had their eyes thrust out, some were most spitefully murthered. No colour, cautel, craft, subtiltie, nor vyolence vnsought to fulfil theyr mischieuous purpose.
                           1 The Lambe therfore opening the third seale, disclosed the mistery therof vnto Iohn.
                           2 Which heard the thyrd beast in simylitude of a man,
                                 Apoc
                                       •
                                    . 4. Rom. 8. Ambrosius Ansbertus Zacha. 6. Math. 24. 2. Peter. 2, betokenyng suche preachers as hath wysedome in the spyrite saying vnto hym.
                           3 Drawe nygh and perceiue, consider and waye.
                           4 And anon hée was ware and behelde a blacke horse, in fygure representyng the aforesayde heretiques, and vnpure mynisters, ambicious Prelates, and false teachers, full of errours, lyes, pryde, and vncleanenesse. Uppon these and suche other

rydeth Sathan the world ouer, for he is theyr mayster,
                                 Iob. 41. Iohn. 8 Hiere. 29 Iohn. 18. Lord, Kyng, and father. Such Christophers of the diuill were Phassur and Semeias in ye olde lawe, Annas & Cayphas in the new lawe, Mahomet and the Pope in our tyme, with all such prelates, priests, Moonks, doctours, and other spiritual dowsipers,
                                 Marsilius Patauinus Ioannes Hus in Apoca.
                               as setteth forthe themselues with arrogancie, pryde, pomp, glorie, & magnificence of this world, not sincerely preaching Gods word.
                           
                              
                                 Iohn, 14 Osee. 12. Proue. 11, 1. Tim. 4. 
                                    •
                                 , Iohn. 4.5 He which sate vpon that horse, or that reygneth in thys congregacion hath in his hande a deceiptfull payre of Balaunces of abhominable iudgements, waying all things according to the doctryne of errour and lyes of hypocrites, not prouing the spirites whether they be of God or no
                           6 And after this vision (I heard saith sainct Iohan) a voyce among the iiij. beastes.
                                 Apoca. 4 Math. 28 Acto. 1 No tyme hathe there bene, wherein the faithfull beléeuers and constant witnesses of the veritie in this lyfe, hath not resisted the maysters of lyes, and confounded their errours,

preseruing the vndefiled scriptures.2, Pet. 2 1. Cor. 2. In those dayes were amonge the Gréekes, Origine, Eusebius,
                                 Eusebius Cesariensis Cassiodorus. Hieronimꝰ Benadius Isidorus Tritemius
                               Athanasius, Didimus, Gregorius, Nazianzenus, Cirillus Basilius, Ioānes Chrisostomus, Hisichius, Euagrius, Ioānes Damascenus, & Theophilactus. And amonge the Latines were Tertulyane, Cypriane, Lactancius, Hilarius, Prudencius, Ambrosius, Hieronimus, Augustinus, Orosius, Sedulius, Prosper, and Beda, with such lyke.
                                 Psalm. 6
                                    •
                                  
                                 Esaie. 53 1. Tim. 6 What though all they in many poyntes haue erred to declare them selues men, and least their authoritie shuld be takē among the people, aboue ye aucthoritie of gods word.
                           7 This is the voyce whyche come from those holy beastes,
                                 Esaie. 52 Hiere. 2
                                    •
                                  
                                 Ezech. 4 Eutherius Lugdunensis VVestmerus.
                               or faythfull seruauntes of the Lorde. A measure of wheate for a penny, and thrée measures of barly for a penny also. The wheat is the new Testament, faire, pleasaunte, and swéete in the eating.
                           8 The barly is the old, more grosse, heauie, and heard of digestion, yet is theyr pryce all one. So muche

in value is the one as the other. So precious are the scriptures of the old lawe for the Christian erudicion as of the newe,
                                 Psalm. 18, 2. Tim. 3. Psalm. 118, Esa. 40. Gala. 3 Marci. 16 Rom. 3. for both they are the worde, veritie, spyrite, and promise of God. So perfect also is the one as the other, (eche grayne in hys kynde considered) as the law to cōdempne, and the Gospell to saue. So necessarie is it to the sinner to knowe hys fall, as to sée hys rayse. In that the barley is .iij. measures, and ye wheat but one, is signyfied that the old Testament containeth the lawe, Psalmes & prophecies,
                                 Origines Hieronimꝰ Rom. 1. 1. Iohn. 4. 1. Tim. 4. 1. Iohn, 5. 2. Tim. 2, Math. 4. 1. Tim. 4. and the newe the only doctrine of Christ, confessyng altogither .iij. distinct persons in one Godheade agaynst the aforesayd heretikes & erronious prelates. Whensoeuer therfore the dyuill goeth forth with hys blacke horse or deceiptfull doctours, to subuerte the wayes of the Lord with his vntrue balaunces of crafty interpretaciōs & false iudgemēts in the scriptures, attend you to thys voyce of the faythfull fathers,
                                 Psalm. 118, Iohn. 8. and stande by the trueth, whyche

is the only price of both testaments, with Christ which fulfilled the law, and commaunded vs to serche the Scriptures, and with his Apostles,
                                 Iohn. 5. Act. 2. Hebr. 9. Psalm. 4. which alledged the same. When the figure troubleth you, confer it with the verytie, and the shadow with the light.
                           9 The dulcet wine and the fragrant oyle sée thou hurte not, sayeth the sayde voyce,
                                 Deut. 12 Eccle. 4
                                    •
                                  
                                 Esa, 61, Luk, 10, Franciscus Lambertus in libro de prophecia Apoca. 22, hynder not the word of God, whiche is the swéete wine that replenished the hart with gladnesse, and the wholsome oyle that comforteth the soule in trouble. Delicious it is in aduersytie, and solacious in all weakenesse. Corrupte not the texte with false gloses, take not from vs the swéetnesse thereof, defraud, vs not of the frutefull Sauour. Let the text be whole, the sence vncorrupt, and the iudgement right. And that shall well be if nothyng be added vnto it, nor nothinge taken from it.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 An when he opened the fourth seale. 2▪ I harde the voyce of the fourth beast say. 3. Come and see, 4, And I looked, and behold a pale horse. 5. And his name that sate on him vvas death. 6. And hell follovved after him. 7. And povver vvas geuen anto them ouer the fourth part of the earth. 8. To kyll vvith svvord and vvith hunger. 9▪ And vvith death of the beastes of the earth.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 In the fowrth Seale opening is vnder secrete figure mencioned the vniuersall estate of the christen Churche after the increase of the aforesayde heretykes,
                                 Ioannes Hus in aliquot loca Apoca. VVernesus carthusian
                                       •
                                    s in fa
                                    
                                       •
                                    ciculo.
                               and the raise of the ambicious Prelates. And though the Arryanes and Eutycianes with such lyke Heretyks were than put to sylence, and all thinges pacyfyed, partlye by the publyke power, and partlye by the continuall disputations and writinges of the

faythfull Doctours, and catholyke Fathers, yet continued the Bysshops styll in their vanyties, and the Prelates in theyr pryde,
                                 
                                    Ioannes de molinis in speculo ca. 6.
                                 
                                    Carolus bouillus de septem etatibus mūdi. ca. 67.
                               whereby the trueth was blemished and the lyghte had a sore Eclips. Daylye they sought for newe promotions. Euermore they compassed to augment their dignyties. Continuall was their study to get preheminēce, to win honour, and to obtayne superiorytie, not withoute the destruction of kingdomes, the vtter decay of communalties, and vnspeakeable murther of peoples.
                           Iohn the Archebyshoppe of Constantinople contended to be the vniue
                                 •
                              sal Patriarke,
                                 Antonius sabellicus Raphael. Volatera. Paulus Diaconus Bibliande
                                       •
                                    
                                    ▪
                                 
                              
                           
                           Boniface the thirde of that name Byshoppe of Rome, tooke vpon hym to be the head Byshoppe of all the worlde, and Gods onely Uicar in earth,
                           Mahomet boasted hym selfe to be the great Prophete and messenger of GOD.
                           
                              
                              
                                 Iohn. 18. 2 Iohn. 1. Ioannes Aunius Ioannes Nauclerus
                              Thus was Christes coate withoute seame among them deuided, and his church most rufully dispersed. Thus out of ye corrupted & depraued scriptures tooke ye Iewes their Talmud, ye Saracens their Alchorane, and the Byshops their popish lawes and decrées. Then folowed innumerable sectes of perdicion vnder the romishe pope, in Europa, vnder Mahomet the false Prophet in Afryca, and vnder prester Iohn in Asia, whiche with their execrable tradicions and rules banished Christ and his pure doctrin for euer.
                                 Martinus Lutherus Sigebertus, Platina. Gregorius Odilocluniacensis Martinus Carsulanus
                               Than set they vp songe in the church with Latine seruice, bell ringing, and Organ playinge. Than builded they monasteries, auaunced Images, inuented purgatorye, not without many strange reuelacions. Than came in that ceremony, & that, as sensing of Images, Procession, and holy water, with candles, ashes, and palmes. Than were shauen crownes commaunded, holy ornaments deuised, mariage and meates inhibited, and hallowing of churches

practised. At the last crepte in the worshipping of reliques and shrines,
                                 Ranulphus Cestrensis Ioannes Stella. Odilo clun
                                       •
                                     Paulus Diaconus.
                               with holy oyle and creame, with the paschall and paxe, with feastes and dedications, with latines, masses & dirges for the dead, and many great miracles followed. Thā were kings deposed and made Moonkes, Emperours put downe and parrish priests set vp.
                                 Robertus gaguinus.
                               No gospell might then be taught, but to maintaine this ware for aduantage. Uniuersities were then builded and generall studies founded the worlde ouer, with all kindes of crafty learning to vpholde this new Christen relygyon or prestish supersticion.
                                 Hector Boetius Martinus Lut
                                       •
                                    erus Gen. 1. Luke. 12▪
                               The Antichristes thus spred and theyr kyngdome well set forwarde, the light was cléerely extincted, and darknesse ouer wente the whole worlde.
                           1 Much meruayled alwayes the poore chosen flock of christ, and were greatlye troubled in their mindes,
                                 Apoc
                                       •
                                    . 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . Daniel. 1
                                    •
                                 
                                 ▪
                               to beholde this great confusion, tyll the Lorde opened vnto them the fourth seale of his booke, in the which

all was written from the begining.
                                 Albertus Magnus. Zach. 6. Math. 6. Esa. 1. In that Seale openinge, the Lorde shewed what the head rulers of his Church were, euen very hypocrites, rightly compared vnto a pale Horse. For after their dissembling manner they shewed sad countinaunces outwardlye to appeare fastinge, and babled very much to séeme deuonte men.
                           2 And as the Lambe had opened the fowrth Seale (sayeth Saincte Iohn) I hard the voyce of the fowrth beast,
                                 Apoc. 4. Daniel. 7. Math. 4 Iohn, 1, Apoca. 1. which séemed vnto me an Egle representing those godly beléeuers that are most highly desirous of the glorye of GOD.
                           3 Come hyther sayde that voice. Note what thou shalt sée here, & enprent it well in thy minde.
                           4 And sa I looked foorth, I behelde a pale Horse,
                                 Apoca. 6. Apoca. 2 Math. 6. 1. Iohn. 3. whome I tooke for the vniuersall Synagoge of hypocrites or dissembling church of Antichriste, pale as men without health, & bleyk as men without that freshe lyfe

which is in Christ Iesu.
                           5 The name of hym which sate vpon this pale Horse was death, for their doctrine is death and dampnation.
                                 Rom, 8 Luke. 12. Math. 6 Math. 23. What bringeth hypocrisye with hym, but destruction of health? What carrieth dissimulation, but the vtter decay of lyfe? Are their last fruites any other then confusion and dyspayre.
                           6 For why hell commeth after them to swallowe in those that are taught by them.
                                 Esaie. 5. Proue. 1. Luke. 20 Apoca. 17. Roma. 3▪ 
                                 Hebre. 10. Eternall dampnation doth folow them to eate them vp for euer, whome they shall deceiue. Such is the finall rewarde of those cursed hypocrits that treadeth down Gods truth, and destroyeth his word vnder a fayned pretence of the contrarye,
                                 Luke. 11 Proue. 1
                                    •
                                 . God graunt them therefore once to open their eyes, and to consider it, that they are the Horses of death, least Hell héere after deuoure them.
                           7 Unto these gaudish hypocrites and beastly Antichristes whith are
                                 Psalm. 
                                 
                                    ••
                                 .
                              
the horse of death and carieth all to darknesse,
                                 Iohn Hus in sermonibus de antichristo. Apoca. 9. and dampnation, power is geuen (whiche is the sufferaunce of God) vpon the fourth parte of the earth. A great part of the world shall they destroy, much people by thē shal perish and be lost.
                           8 After diuers sortes shall they depriue them of the lyfe euerlastyng. Some shal they slay with the sword of their false doctrine,
                                 Apoc. 13. Chrisostomus Colos. 2. Amos. 8. Math. 15. Iohn. 6. Luke, 12. Math, 16, Luke, 3, Math, 23, Wicleus Psalm. 13. 2. Peter. 2, Math. 7 Psalm. 73, hauing a glorious shine of wisdome in supersticion and deuilishnesse Some shall they famishe for wante of GODS true worde, whiche is the bread of Chyldren, and the lyuinge foode of the soule.
                           9 Some will they also poyson with the contagious leauen of their pestilent lawes and tradicions, which are dayly ministred & taught by the vile vermine of the earth, their suffraganes, Archedecons, officials, doctors, ministers, false preachers, curates, persons, parrish priests, and religions, verye beastly both of lyfe and studye. Lorde ones delyuer

from these deceiptfull and rauenous wolues, whiche are neuer satisfied, thy poore seruants that confesse thy holy name. Amen.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And when he opened the fift seale, 2, I saw vnder the aulter, 3. The soules of them that were killed for the word of God, and for the testimony which they had,
                        4. And they cried with a loude voyce, saying 5. How long taryest thou, 6, Lord, holy and true, to iudge▪ 7. And to auenge our bloude on them that dwell on the earth? 8. And lōg white garments were geuen vnto euery one of thē. 9. And it vvas saide vnto thē. 10. That they shoulde rest for a litle season. 11. vntill the number of their felowes and brethren, 12. And of them that shoulde be killed (as they were) were fulfilled,
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 Euident it is by that hath ben séene and sayde afore in these fowre horses, what the estate of the christen church was, & is now in these latter

dayes.
                                 Zacha. 6. 1. Tim. 4. Iude. 1. Math. 15. 2. Tim. 6, Apoca. 8. Gen. 6, Esa. 1. Math, 23, Such horrible confusion hath the Antichristes made with their wicked lawes and decrées, and with their deceiptfull doctrine of errours and lies to vpholde their filthy kingdome of pryde, slouth, hypocrisie, and beastlynes, that scarcely is any thing cleane, pure, and godly. Now do they nothing but slea. None other studye haue they in these dayes, but to persecut, emprison, and famish, to burn, head and hang. Now haue they obtayned to enter the iudgement hall,
                                 Iohn. 18, Act. 5. 
                                    〈…〉
                                  19. Isa. 10. 
                                    〈…〉
                                  5, Act 20. Apoca. 18 and to syt vpon lyfe & death, without defiling of thēselues. Now may they both a accuse and iudge, both indite and condempne, & yet not soyle their consecrate handes. If any controle their customes, or say against their witchcraftes, they are ready to run ouer hym with death, whom they carye to slea both soule and bodye.
                           Neuer was this more euident, then after the time of Berengarius in the Waldeanes,
                                 Bernardus
                                       •
                                     Lurzenburgensis.
                               Publicans, and Albygeanes, of whom an hundred thowsande were slaine, an hundreth and

                              
fowre score br
                                 •
                              nt for that they wold not abiure, besides that is séene now in this age, so many poore innocentes murthered. For no where is it lawfull rightly without supersticion to confesse the name and verytie of Christ, a few Cities except,2. Tim 3. 2. Pete. 3. Iohn, 12 Sopho. 3 Apoca. 11. Daniel. 11. vnlesse men will ve torne of these wolues. And thus is it lyke still to continue to ye end of ye world, both by this prophecie, and also by the prophecye of Daniell.
                           1 This hath the Lord shewed in mistery vnto Iohn in the fift seale openinge,
                                 Sebastianus meyer in apocalipsi
                                       ••
                                    
                                 
                               by whom are ment the true Christen beléeuers at this time so well as at al other times sence Christes assension.
                           
                              
                              
                                 Iohn, 
                                 
                                    •
                                 , Math, 13, Iohn, 15, Psal. 50, Heb, 9,2 And when the Lambe opened the fift seale, or declared in figure what should be ye estate of that time to assertaine his chosen friendes therof, I saw (saieth Saincte Iohn) vnder the Aulter of God, which is Christe (vpon whom the whole sacrifice of our redempcion was offered.)
                           3 The soules or spirits of those constant beléeuers, whiche through the violent handlynge of the afore sayde false prelats and Antichristes were cruelly put to death by diuers maner of tormēts,
                                 Iohn, 16, Math. 23, Sapi, 3, Psal. 118, Apoca. 1, Iohn. 14, 1. Thes. 4 Act, 7. Acto. 17 Psal. 5
                                    •
                                 . Matth. 23. 1. Cor. 1 Phil, 1, not only for ye vndefiled word of god, but also for ye sincere testimonye of Iesu, which they had by the gift of his only spirit. Under this Aulter remaine all they which haue bin killed for that witnesse of truth. In his faith they slept and still rest now in his hope. In him now they liue for whom they once dyed. Under his shadow they dwell. Under his winges they flocke, vnder hys couerte they cloyster. He is

their comforte, kéeper and defender. With hym are they now, whose presence they euermore coueted.
                           4 In that they cried with a lowde voice,
                                 Math, 2
                                    •
                                 , Apoca. 19 Sapi. 3. Gen, 4, Leuit. 20. Psalm. 10, Prou. 6. is signified that their innocent death fercely asketh and requireth the great indignation, vengance, and terrible iudgement of GOD, vppon those tirauntes, lyke as dyd the bloude of Abell vppon that murther Cayne.
                           5 And this is their daylye crye. O Lorde God almighty,2. Peter. 2. Psalm. 25. Hiere. 17. Iohel. 2 so holy thou art that thou hatest all euill, so true and so iust that thou abhorrest al lies and peruerse doctrine, so manifest is the filthy lyfe of the spirituall antichristes that thou séest it, so euidente is their vnshamefast crueltie vpon thy seruantes, that thou knowest it. Yet doest yu leaue them vnpunished, and suffer them vncorrected. Howe long time wil it be ere thou iudge them to dampnation? What yeares wilt thou take ere thou reuenge our bloud?
                           
                              
                              
                                 Math. 25. 4. 
                                    〈◊〉
                                 . 15. Psalm. 18, Math. 12, Apoca. 11.6 Sure it is that thy lawes are holy, and thy wordes are faithfull and true. Why doest thou then permitte these proud homicides and spightfull murtherers to defyle them with their errours, and blaspheme them with their lyes: Kyllyng vp thy seruants without pittie,1. Tim. 4. Luke. 11, 
                                    •
                                  
                                 Thes. 2. Apoca. 17 Phili. 3. for holdynge with them, and reigning héere as Gods vpon earth in ambiciousnesse, vayne glory, pompe, glotony, and le
                              
                                 •
                              herye, with other abhomynable vices. Thus these beastly bellye Gods doth dayly dispise thée. They treade downe thy testimonies and shed innocent Christen bloud in despight of thée.
                           
                              
                                 Iohel. 3. Daniel. 1
                                    •
                                  
                                 Deut 32 Psalm. 78, Ezech. 5 Rom. 2.7 Looke once vpon them therefore according to thy promisse, and sée thou rewarde them according to their wickednesse. Thys reuengement doe we not aske for our scath, but for the contempt of thy truethe. Not for our harme, but for the blasphemy of thy name.
                           8 And longe white garmentes

(sayth Sainct Iohn) very large and comely were geuen vnto euery one of them. A full innocencye,
                                 Eccle. 45, Apoca. 4. Apoca. 22, Apoca. 1. Hebr. 1. Iohn. 12, Eccle. 5. perfectnesse, and cléerenesse was powred ouer them, and abundantly spred vpon them. Indued they were with an inestimable purenesse by Christe, for whose veryties sake they dyed.
                           With him they are now in peace, ioy, and swéetnesse. But whether they be in full glory afore God or no, that wyll we not temerously define. Sure we are that they be deliuered from all payne, sorrow, and care,
                                 Apoca. 7
                                    •
                                  1. Cor. 15. Rom. 8. Sap. 3. Psalm. 15. Isaie. 64. and that they clearely be assertayned so haue that glory complet both in body and soule at the latter day. More swéete is their estate for ye time, yea more delycious and pleasaunt, then all the delightes, prosperytye, and wealth that euer was yet in thys worlde.
                           9 And as they were in this swéete solace, much desirous of their bodyes delyueraunce from corruption,
                                 Rom. 8. Ephe. 3 they were requyr
                                 •
                              d by these secrete

heauenlye mocyon of Christe (as we are in this life by the outwarde word.
                                 Act. 13 Psalm. 4. 1. Thes. 4,)
                           
                              
                                 Titum. 2. Iohn, 17, Luke. 21. Apoca. 2010 Paciently to pause for a while and quietously to rest for a season.
                           11 Untill such time as the complet nūber of their cōstant fellowes and faithfull brethren.
                           12 Yea and of all those poore creatures that shoulde be kylled by these vnsaciat blud suckers for his truthes sake, like as they were afore shuld be fulfilled and wholy accomplished according to the eternall prediffinition of God.
                                 Act. 13, Psalm. 15, And so much the rather to content themselues with their peaceable and quietous estate for their brethrens sake, that it should not belonge ere their death were reuenged,
                                 Esa. 61 Iaco. 5 Apoca. 21 Roma. 8. 
                                    •
                                 , Iohn. 3 and they restored to a full tranquillitie. For nothing in comparison are the sufferinges of this time, to that glorye whiche shall be shewed vnto the chosen sort in that day. Let no man think where as Christ hath willed those soules to rest, that they

sléepe in death,
                                 Psalm. 
                                 
                                    ••
                                 . Iohn. 14, Ezech. 43, Iohn. 8. Phil. 3, 1. Iohn, 2 Apoca. 1. 1. Timo. 2, 1. Iohn. 2▪ 
                                 Iohn. 15, 2. Mach. 1
                                    •
                                  
                                 Rom. 8. Hebr. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . Iohn. 5, for they rest in hym which is lyfe. Out of hym they are not, he is their Aulter, he is theyr couert. They lyue, they decerne, and in swéetenesse they abide the latter day, and all vnder him. Their white garment of innocencie they haue onely by him. Worship him then and not them. Pray and call vpon him and not vpon them. For he is the onely meditour, and generall aduocate to God the father, so wel for them as for you. Nothyng can they doe but by hym. Their office is not to heare suters causes, nor to goe to and fro, but still to rest abyding the glad day of theyr deliuerance. It is Christes onely office to receyue all complayntes to pleate them, and to iudge them.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And I beheld when he opened the six
                              •
                            seale, 2. & lo, there was a great earth quake, 3. and the sunne was as black as a sack cloth made of heare. 4. And the moone vvaxed euen as bloud. 5. And the starres of heauen fell vnto the earth, 6. euen as a figge tree casteth from hir hir figges, vvhen it is shaken

of a mightie wynde. 7. And heauen vanyshed avvay, as a scroull vvhen it is rolled togither. 8. And all mountaynes and yles, vvere moued out of their places. 9. And the kings of the earth, and the great men and the riche men, 10. and the chiefe captaynes, and the mightie men, and euery bond man, and euerie free man, 11. hid themselues in dennes, and in rockes of the hilles, 12. and sayde to the hilles and rockes, 13. Fall on vs, 14. and hyde vs from the presence of hym that sitteth on the seate, 15. and from the vvrathe of the Lambe. 16. for the great day of hys vvrath is come. 17. And vvhō can endure it.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 Not yet is the pale horse downe nor his iniquitie ended, but still hée he rageth the world ouer.
                                 
                                    Iohn Hus in aliqnot loca apocalipseos.
                                 
                                 
                                    Wicleus de sermone domini in monte. li. 
                                    
                                       •
                                     
                                    Daniel. 8, 
                                       •
                                    
                                    ▪ 
                                    Thes. 2.
                               Still raygneth the Antichristes, with theyr hypocrisie and false doctrine, the Pope héere in Europa, and other not all vnlike vnto him in Asia and Africa. But for that Europe is only knowne vnto vs, of that will wée only dyffyne. In naming the Pope wée meane not his person, but the proude degrée or abhominacion of the papacie. The great Antychriste of Europa is the

                              
king of faces, the Prince of hipocrysie, the man of sinne, the father of errours, and the master of lyes, the Romish Pope. He is the head of the sayd pale horse,
                                 
                                    VVicle
                                          •
                                       s in supplemento trialogi.
                                 
                                 
                                    Franciscus Lambertus in commēta rijs regul
                                          •
                                        minori carum.
                                 
                               whose bodie are his Patriarkes, Cardinalles, Archebishops, Bishops, fat prebends, doctours, priestes, Abbottes, Pryors, Moonks, Chanons, Fryers, Nunnes, Pardoners, and Proctours, with all the sectes and and shorne swarme of perdicion, and with all those that consent with them in the Romish fayth, obeying theyr wicked lawes, decrées, bulles, pryuileges, decretales, rules, tradicions, tytles, pompes, degrées, blessynges, counsayles, and constitucions,

contrarie to Gods trueth. The wickednesse of these hath so darkened the blynde worlde,
                                 Sebastianus Franctertia parte chro
                                    
                                       •
                                    icarum.
                               that scarse was lefte one sparkle of the veritie, or of the true Christian fayth. No where can men dwell to greater losse of their soules health, thē vnder their abhominacions.
                           1 This know they well whome the lambe hath deliuered from their dark sinagoge,
                                 
                                    •
                                 . Cor. 6. Act. 2, Apoca. 4, 2. Cor. 4. Apoca. 18, Luke. 1. Psalm. 106 & to whom he hath in these dayes opened the sixte seale of the booke, raysing vp the spirites of many to detect by his holy worde theyr shamefull abhominations. Blessed be the name of that Lord, which hath now so mercifully vysited hys poore people from aboue, sending his word vnder ye tipe or figure of this Lambe, to open vnto them at this sixt time of darkenesse, the vj. seale of the hydden misteries of the booke. I looked yet farther (sayeth sainct Iohn) and as the Lambe Christ disclosed the sixte seale to manifest the cléernesse of his truth,
                                 Apoca. 5, Ephe. 4, Iohn. 1, Luke. 12, 
                                    •
                                 . Thes. 2 to shewe the estate of his church, anon I behelde a merueylous earthquake

arise. Most liuely was this fulfilled such tyme, as William Courteney the Archbishoppe of Caunterburie with Antichristes sinagoge of sorcerers sate in cōsistorie against Christes doctrine in Iohn Wycleue.
                                 VValde
                                       •
                                     Polidor
                                       ••
                                     lib. 20. Mark the yeare, day, and houre, and ye shall wonder at it.
                           2 The Gospell once preached, and the veritie sincerely opened,
                                 Math. 24, 1. Thes. 2. Luke. 12, Act. 4. Iohn. 16. Apoca. 2, (whose nature is to condempne their supersticions) the earthly and carnall Antychristes swell, fret, and waxe mad, they threaten, curse, and blaspheme, they runne vpon the faithfull mynisters with terror, crueltie, & fiercens, hauing at their hand the ayde of wicked princes and blynde gouernours.
                                 Aenas Silnius.
                               Such a terrible earth quake was the general counsel of Constance against Iohn Hus and Hierome of Prage, and here in Englād against the King (when he set foorth the Gospell) the sedicious rising of Lincolneshere, and the traiterous vprore of Yorkshiere, in their pylgrimage without grace, where as neyther wanted the false

counsayle of Byshoppes, the riches of Abbeyes,
                                 An experyment of our time in Englande. Aduersus has sunt scripta Morisoni
                               & benifices, nor yet ye cruell harts of priests. A thousand bowes and as many billes, beside other weapons were there among priestes and religious to one poore Testament of Christ to subdue the veritie. Yet hath the Lambe ouercomen them,
                                 Apoca. 17. 2, Cor. 1, Sebastianus meyer. VVicleuꝰ Psalm. 2, Act. 4, Luke, 2. 
                                    •
                                 . Peter. 2, and declared their great wisedome in that enterpryce foolishnesse, lyke as he did also in Germanie among them, which maintayned the same spirituall quarell. Yet is not this earth quake pacifyed, but styll they ryse vp agaynst Christ and his word, and dayly they counsayle togither to condempne his trueth, that wée should know him to be the signe of contradiction, the stumbling stone, and the rock of reproch.
                           
                              
                                 Mala. 4 Hebre. 1. 
                                    •
                                 . Iohn. 1. Eccle. 42 2. Cor. 4. Iohel. 2. 
                                    •
                                 . Mach. 1 Ephe. 4.3 The Sunne appeared so blacke as a sacke cloth made of heaire. What though Christ being the cléere sonne of ryghtuousnesse, and the shynyng Image of God, can not bée darke in him selfe, no more then can the materiall son in his owne nature, yet may his clerenesse beholdē from vs by the

mystes of false doctryne, lyke as is the sunnes brightnesse by the shadow of the cloudes. For the more men delight in ceremoniall tradicions, the blynder they are, and the lesse knowledge they haue of God. To them séemeth not Christ the fayrest amonge men, well coloured and beutifull,
                                 Psal. 44. Canti. 5. 1. Cor. 1. Hiere. 44. Baruch. 6 Iohn. 4. 1. Iohn, 3. Mich. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . and gentle as a Lambe, but ill fauored, blacke, and stubborne. And therefore they haue no mynde to hym. They rather séeke helpe, health, and light of other then of him. They think it much better to pray to dead Sainctes, and offer to Idolles, then to call vpon God 
                                 •
                              n spirite & veritie, and to helpe theyr 
                                 •
                              oore neighbour at his néede. More 
                                 •
                              leasure they haue to followe mens 
                                 •
                              reames, thē the veritie of God. For 
                                 •
                              hat is to thē blacke as ye heiry sacke doth. It is dark,
                                 Esa. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . 1. Cor. 1. Iohel. 2. Cant, 6. rough & foolishe vnto 
                                 •
                              hem, they can perceiue no beutie in 
                                 〈◊〉
                              .
                           
                              
                                 •
                               The Moone became altogither as 
                                 •
                              lud.
                                 Apoca. 1
                                    •
                                 . Math. 16 Iohn, 16. 2. Tim. 4. The church being somtime fair 
                                 •
                              s ye Mone, & taking hir light of christ, 
                                 〈◊〉
                               now waxed all carnal. Now is shée

taught onely of flesh and bloud, refusing the doctrine of God & his spirite. Now reigneth euerie where the corrupt fantasies of men, a fewe places excepte. And sure we are that neither flesh nor bloud shall obtayne the kingdome of God. Neuerthelesse yet all the world hath not peryshed in thys bloudie church.
                                 
                                    •
                                 . Cor. 15. 
                              2. Reg. 
                                 
                                    ••
                                 . Rom. 11, Gala. 4. Psal. 61. Polidorus Virgilius
                               Alwayes hath there bene some that hath had the spirite of the childrē of God, what though they haue erred sore in many thinges. Though Benedict, Bernarde, & Bruno, Alberte, Francis, and Dominicke, with many such other, were farre out of square from the rule of Christes Gospell, yet doubt I it not, but the mercie of God hath saued thē through faith for Iesus Christes sake. In the middest of false doctrine and diuilishe tradicions hee hathe preserued them lyke as hée preserued the thrée children,
                                 Ephe. 2. Rom. 8, Iohn. 18, Daniel, 3. Franciscus Lābertus, li. 2. in Apocalipsim.
                               in Daniell from the heate of the burning fornace. Though all at that tyme were bloud through cruell decrées, yet were not all men so taken afore God, for then should none haue

bene saued, none should haue possessed his heauenly kingdome.
                           5 And the starres from heauen fell downe vpon the earth.
                                 Math, 24, 1. Cor. 4. Matth. 5. Daniel, 12 1. Timo. 4 Rom. 1. The ministers of Gods word which should declare his rightuousnesse, and be the lightes of the world, were fallen from ye heauenly doctryne of Christ, and from the sincere scriptures, to worldly learnyng and earthly fantasies. Nothing can be more euident then thys,1. Timo. 6 2. Tim. 2, specially to them that hathe redde the tryfling workes of the Sophisters, sentencyoners, schoole doctours, Canonistes, and summystes. As are Dons, Dorbell, and Durande, Thomas of Aquine, Gerarde, and Gyles of Rome, Bonauenture, Bacōthorpe, and Guido, Caldrinus, Bobius, and Baldus, Panormius, Rosellus and Roxius,
                                 Ioannes Tritemi
                                       •
                                    s Arnoldus Bostius Iacobus Bergome
                                       •
                                     Agrippa▪
                                 
                               with an infinite rable of such dyrtie dottages, and filthie dregges. Besides the great heape of the foolishe sermons of Barnardyne and Uincent, Pomerij and Soccij, Mallyard and Barlet, De voragine and de Hungaria, Discipuli and Dormi

secure, Uade mecunt, and Rapiunt hinc inde, with all such beastly beggerie and lousie learning.
                           
                              1. Iohn, 2. Esa. 34. Ose. 2, Luke, 8. Primasius Ansbertus Haymo. 2▪ 
                                 Tim. 4.6 These stars hath thus myserably of a lōg tyme fallen, lyke as doth the infected figges when the figge trée is shaken of a mightie strong wynd. Foūd fickle vanities, desire of worldly promotions, feare to haue displeasure of friendes, aduersitie, vexation, and trouble, with such other blastes here, hath caused the vnprofitable instructers of the people to fall from Gods heauenly veritie vnto fables, lyes, tryfles, and most pestilent wicked errours.
                           7 So that heauen hath vanished away from them,
                                 Esa. 34, Amos. 8, Psalm. 49, Rom. 1. 2. Thes. 2. Psalm. 11, as doeth a scroule when it is rolled vp togither. True preaching of the word which is very heauen, hath bene withdrawen, the veritie hath bene closed vp. Christ hathe take his leaue, the spirite of God hath forsaken them, the sincere faith hath fayled, Christian workes hath decaied, whē their dark diuinity, dead ceremonies, & crooked customes

of their fathers hath bene in place. Nothyng hath remayned spirituall,
                                 Franciscus Lambertus Sebastianus meyer. Iohn Hus.
                               Godly, heauenly, holy, rightuous, holsome, nor worthie our christian vocacion among their solempne shadows and sacred sorceryes. If it hathe, it was neuer yet séene. And that know they full well, which hath vnfaynedly receiued Christes Gospell.
                           8 All mountaynes and yles were remoued from their places.
                                 Abacuc. 3 3. Iohn. 1, Math. 12, Wicleus in lib. de ecclesia et membris.
                               Not onely the high mynded Antichristes, but also the dyssembling hypocrites are enforced many tymes & against their willes, compelled by the open veritie and euident scriptures; to deny that afore they highlye affyrmed, and to graunt that afore they highly denyed. The Bishop of Roome was afore. Gods vicar & head of the church, hée is now neither of both. They had somtyme a purgatorie,
                                 Martinus Lutherus de tradicionibus sugiendis. Daniel. 8, Ioannes Gocchius▪
                                 
                               & nowe they haue none. Pardons are forgotten, pylgrimage is not spokē of, Faith in Christ now iustifieth without their vayne will workes. They haue put man to death for that they now affyrme, yet

are they not ashamed of that cruell murther. I hope in a while they shall out of more places, and graunt will they nill they, to more christian veryties, though theyr selues be neuer the nigher saluacion, for that they doe it not of good will, but compelled.
                           9 The Kings of the earth, more looking for theyr owne prehemynence then for the glorie of God,
                                 Psalm. 2, Esa. 1, Ioannes VVicleuꝰ in suotria logo Ioan. Hus.
                               the great men more séeking their owne pleasures, then the common wealth of the people, the ryche men oppressing the poore.
                           10 The Captaynes deceyuing the commons, the strong men ouerthrowing the weake, euerie bond seruaūt dooing vntrue seruice, and euery frée master vngodly occupying his faculty.
                           11 Hath hidde them selues in dennes of the sayd rocks & hilles.
                                 Haymo: VVesselus grouingēsis in opusculis
                               When they haue done all mischief and wrought all wickednesse, tyranny, manslaughter, rape, adultery, lechery, extorcion, Idolatry, sacrylege, wt all other abhominacions, & can doe no more, thē run they to those hipocrites,
                                 Apoca. 81, thē séeke they

vp those Antichristes. Ther must they be cōfessed,
                                 Martinus Lutherus in annotationibus. Mathei.
                               there must they hide their sinnes. They must be couered wt hys dyrty merites, & with his holy whordome. And to be prayed for, that monastery must be builded, & that prebē
                              dary or chauntery must bee founded. There must be Masses & dyrges, ther must be anuaries & bead mē.
                                 
                                    Ioannes Paleonidorus in cronicis.
                                 
                                 
                                    Erasmus in suis colloquijs.
                                 
                               He must be buried in S. Frauncis gray coate, and he in our Ladies holy habite. He must haue S. Dominikes hoode, and he sainct Augustines girdle.
                           12 And thus they cry to those earthly hils and rocks, to those filthy dunge heapes, or dennes of wylde beastes with a fearfull desperate conscience.
                           13 Fall vpon vs with such stuffe as ye haue.
                                 Esa. 1, Couer vs with your works more than néed. Pray, pray, pray, sing, sing, sing, say, say, say, ring, ring, ring.
                                 Math, 25, Luke. 20, Raciōale diuinorum.
                               Giue vs of your oyle, for our lampes are out. Helpe vs with your latyne Psalmes. Reléeue vs with your lippe labour though all be but dunge and earth. Comforte vs with Placebo.
                                 Odilo cluniacensis
                               Helpe vs with Requiem eternam.

Powre out your Trentall masses, spew out your Commendaciōs. Sing vs out of that hotte fierie Purgatorie before we come there.
                           
                              
                                 Esa. 2, Osee. 10 2, Cor. 1, 2. Pete. 3. Ephe. 4.14 Hyde vs from the fearefull presence of him that sitteth on ye thorne, whom we neuer knew to be a merciful father in all our romish medita
                              
                                 •
                              ns, and the scriptures we abhorred that so would haue taught vs.
                           15 Conuey vs clean from the wrath of the vngentle Lambe, whose doctryne we neuer fauoured, nor whose goodnesse we neuer yet trusted.
                           
                              
                                 Iohel. 2, Esa. 13 Math. 25. Mala. 3, Gala. 5 Apoca. 17.16 For the great day of his wrath is come. So certayne we are of hys terrible iudgement, as it were now in doing. So sure we be to féele him a rightuous iudge, as we are sure he liueth.
                           17 And who can bée able to endure it: who can abide it doing so muche crueltie, rape, murther, briberie, with all other abhominacions, as we haue done,
                                 Lutherus & Erasmus de confessione.
                               leauing wicked lawes behynde vs still to continue the same? Well, with you we haue left our whole rockening,

ye know our déeds. Answere you for vs then, for we dare not bée séene. If your idle merites helpe vs not, we looke for no grace at his hād. If your soules be not for ours at that day, we perish for euer and euer. For we haue not reléeued him a hungred,
                                 Esa. 58. Ezech. 18 Eccle. 7 Math. 5. Luke. 6 Act. 8. Iohn. 15, Math, 2, Apoca. 18. Luke. 21 Hebr. 10. a thirst, harbourlesse, naked, sick, and imprysoned, in hys poore bretheren, confessing his name and veritie.
                           But rather wée haue abhorred, reuiled, blaspheamed, spoyled, imprisoned, shamed, and persecuted hym vnto death in them, deuysing moste terrible torments for them. Thus is there among the wicked sort, princes and other (where as the word of God is published) not only a doubt of their ruinous fall or decay, but also a fearfull expectation of the terrible iudgements of God for cōtempt of ye same.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The .vij. Chapter.
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And after that savve I foure Angels, 2. stande on the foure corners of the earthe,

3. holding the foure wyndes of the earth. 4. that the windes shoulde not blowe on the earth, 5. neyther on the sea, 6. neyther on any tree. 7. And I savv another Angell, 8. ascend from the rysing of the sunne, 9. vvhich had th
                              •
                            seale of the lyuing God. 10. And he cryed vvith a loude voyce, 11. to the foure Angels (to vvhō povver vvas giuen to hurt the earth and the sea) 12. saying Hurte not the earth, neyther the sea, neither the trees, 13. till vvee haue sealed the seruaūts of our God in their foreheades.
                        
                           
                              
The Paraphrase.
                           MOre manifestly yet are descrybed héereafter,
                                 Apoca. 6, 2. Peter. 2, Acto. 4. 
                                    •
                                 . Cor. 2. still vnder ye mysterie of the sixte seale openynge, the Hypocrytes, Antychrystes, Tyrantes,

and cruell magistrates, forbidding the truth and condempning the word of God. After this (sayeth Sainct Iohn) I saw fowre Aungels of darknesse suffered but not sent of God. These are the aforesayde hypocrites with their false doctrine,
                                 Luke. 22. Iude. 1. 1. Tim. 4, Colos. 2. the Antichristes with their pestilent decrées and traditions, the cruell princes with their tirannous lawes, and the vngodly Maiestrates with their ignoraunce and blindnesse.
                           2 These stande vpon the fowre corners of the earth,
                                 Esa. 10▪
                               they reigne in the fowre quarters of the worlde,
                                 Esaie. 1
                                    •
                                 , 1. Tim. 4. Exod. 1, 1. Para. 9. 1. Cor. 2, with lyes in hypocrysie, errorus, in superstition, with tyrrany in power, and crueltie▪ in executinge humayne lawes.
                           3 They witholde the fowre windes of the earth.
                                 Marci. 16 Act. 4. The doctrine of the spyrite, which GOD hath sent to be blowen the worlde ouer, they withstande, resist, stop, vexe, and euermore persecute.
                           4 least it should blow vppon the

earth,
                                 Gene. 
                                 
                                    •
                                  
                                 Ihon. 16 Iaco. 1, Hebr. 13 Marke. 8, Luke. 6, which is the garden of God, dryuinge away from thence all filth and corrupcion.
                           5 Or on the sea, which is the waueryng conscience, bringing men to a quietous holde and sure stay in the Lord.
                           6 Or vpon any trée that is growing héere, which are men whom GOD hath planted on earth to fructifie in Christ to the comfort of other. Wind can be héere no fickle vanitie as the winde of this worlde is,
                                 Psalm. 134, Iacob. 1. Apoca. 12 Act. 5. Iohn. 16 Sebastianus Meyer.
                               for so much as it commeth from aboue. These furious Angels care not what crueltie they exercise to driue away this heauēly blast. They lay about them like Termagauntes, they inhibit, sequestre, banish, emprison, sley, hang, head burne, and drown the poore preachers of the verytie, the vessels of the election, and organes of the holy Ghost, and their fiercenesse hath none ende.
                                 Act. 9. Prou. 27 Hiere. 12 Math, 23, Apoca. 6. Apoca. 20, Their power in darkenesse prospereth vpon earth, and shal do till they haue fulfilled the whole measuere of

their wicked fathers, and made vp the number of Gods chosen flock vnder the aulter.
                           7 And whiles these execrable angels were yet stopping this winde, or lettinge the frée passage of the Gospell preaching, I behelde (sayeth Sainct Iohn) another Angel of a diuers nature from them,
                                 Albertus Mala. 3, Math. 11. VVestmeri collectanea. Iohn, 6 for he was the true messenger of God, betokeninge the Prophets, Apostles, and all iust preachers.
                           8 He came forth from the rising of the sunne,
                                 Mar. 16 Luke, 6 or as one taught of God in the syncere doctrine of Christe, he hath stepped forwarde to publish the same, ascending vpward from ye low spirit of méeknes to do ye godly office.
                           9 He had the seale of ye lyuing God in his hande,
                                 Ezech. 9 1. Cor. 1. Psalm. 4. which is the effectuall word of trueth in his mouth, to execute it. The true ministers of Gods verity haue power to mark his faithfull seruants vnto saluation.
                                 Ephes. 1, Psal. 44. 2. Cor. 3. Their tongs ar
                                 •
                               ye writing pens of the holy ghost, by whō ye word of god is registred in ye harts of them ye beléeue.

For faith is the very signe, whereby Gods seruantes are knowne to be the children of adoption, or of the inherytaunce promised by grace.
                           
                              
                                 Gala. 4. Ephe. 2. Hiere. 1. Math, 10, Lutherus Erasmus Occolampadius. Zuinglius
                              10 And the sayde Angell cryed with a lowde voyce, he bouldlye and with an earnest spirit vttered the verytie, fearing no worldy displeasure. This voyce against the vnbeléeuing Antichristes was neuer more earnest than now in our time, as wel in wrightings, as in preachinges. And further hath it gone by bookes wrytten, then by wordes spoken, and much more people conuerted.
                           11 An earnest message from God was thys voyce to the sayde fowre Angels of hys wrath, which were by his sufferaunce permitted cruelly to handle and to hurte hys people to their saluation and their owne damnation,
                                 Daniel. 7, Sebastianus Meyer. Sapi, 3, Franciscus Lombertus
                               which people dwelled as well vpon the sea, as vpon the land, as well in the close Ilandes as in the open countrye.
                           12 And the voice was this. Sequestre your fiercenes for a time,
                                 Apoca. 9, & in no

case presume after any cruell sorte to harme neither the earth,
                                 Robertus tuitiensis, Math. 24, Hiere. 31 Canti. 4, Psalm. 38, Hiere. 22, nor the sea, nor the growing trées. Suffer the Gospell to haue his frée course, stop not the passage of Gods worde, let the winde of his verytie blowe without impediment.
                           Though some hartes be worldlye, some conscinces wauering, and some mindes barren and vnfruitfull, yet may they repent and come to goodnes. When the séede is sowen, some falleth vpon the good earth,
                                 Luke, 8 Math. 13, Luke. 19. Math. 9, Act. 9, Canti. 4 Roma. 8. Ezcch. 9, 2. Cor. 1. Hebr, 11▪
                               & bringeth foorth fruite in abundaunce. Zacheus of a great extorcioner became a rightuous man, Mathew of a Publycan a true Apostle, and Paule of a fierce persecuter a gentle preacher.
                           13 Cease therfore from with holding the swéet blast of the Scriptures till we haue sealed vp the chosen seruants of our eternall God in theyr foreheades, or emprinted fayth in their hartes by his spirite, which is the marke of saluation, and tyll we haue tokened vp the whole number of them.
                                 
                                    〈1 paragraph〉
                                 
                               Thus to be marked vp for

the seruants of God, is not onely to beléeue after the minde of Ezechiel,
                                 Ezech. 9 Rom. 9. Math. 5. Luke. 23 Apoca. 5 but also to lament the abhominatiō, and bewayle the wickednesse that is done héere. None are of that sorte vnlesse they sorrowfully mourne to se god blasphemed, ye name of Christ disdayned, the trueth troden vnder foote, and the perfect Christen church despoyled. By the aforesayde Angell is not ment one Christen preacher alone but many,
                                 Strabus Haymo. Albertus Magnus Hier. 26. 1. Tim. 3. Actu. 4. for so much as it is héere sayde. Till we haue sealed the seruants, &c. For after that one hath begun, many doth continue it. In that hath bene spoken afore is it manifest that wexe the tirants neuer so mad and persecute they neuer so sore to stoppe Gods worde of hys course, yet canne they not so preuayle againste it, but it commeth to them whome God hath appoynted to be marked vp for his. They with all the deuils in hell cannot withholde it from them,
                                 Rom. 8. Math. 16 
                                    〈…〉
                                 
                               whom God hath prefixed to make vp his number. And though that the Antichristes and murtherers

thinketh them to be very few, by reson of their wicked lawes,
                                 Actu. 70 Sap. 3, cruel constitucions, threatnings, and terrible tormentes, yet is their number infinite lyke as here doth folow.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And I hearde the number of them which were sealed. 2. And there were sealed an hundreth and xliiii, M. of al the tribes of the Children of Israell. 3. Of the tribe of Iuda were sealed, xii. M. 4. Of the tribe of Ruben were sealed .xii. M. 5. Of the tribe of Gad were sealed .xii. M. 6. Of the tribe of Asser were sealed .xii. M. 7. Of the tribe of Neptalim were sealed .xii. M. 8. Of the tribe of Manasses were sealed tvvelue M. 9. Of the tribe of Symeon were sealed xii. M. 10 Of the tribe of Leuy were sealed .xii. M. 11. Of the tribe of Isachar were sealed .xii. M. 12 Of the tribe of Zabulon were sealed twelue thousand. 13. Of the tribe of Ioseph vvere sealed tvvelue thousande. 14. Of the tride of Beniamin vvere sealead .xii. M.
                        
                           
                           The Paraphrase.
                           
                              
                                 Apoca. 6 Iohn. 6. Rom. 8▪ 
                                 Iohn, 17, Deut. 7, 14 &, 26 Exod. 41 And I hearde (sayeth Saincte Iohn) the number of them rehearsed, whiche were sealed with the sure token of faith, and marked vp for the heauenly inheritours with Christ, not for one countrye, but for the whole world. Fyrst were the Israelites named, for so much as they were the peculiar nation, whom God fyrst chose for his owne people. Israell is mine eldest sonne, sayeth the Lorde. After them followed in course the Gentiles as the yonger Sonne, that we shoulde thereby knowe that all people,
                                 Esa. 60, Act, 10. whiche feareth god, and worketh rightuousnes, is accepted vnto him.
                           2 And there were sealed vnto the Lorde an hundred and xliij. thousandes of all the tribes of the children of Israell,
                                 Numerus signatorum
                               to haue the lyfe euerlastinge,
                                 Hebr. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 , Gene, 20 Hebr. 7. of euery tribe twelue thousande persons.
                           
                              3 Of the chosen tribe of Iuda the fourth sonne of Iacob, of whō christe descended, were sealed vnto God .xii. thousand.
                           4 Of the mighty stock of Ruben the first sonne of Iacob by Lia,1. Para. 5
                                    •
                                  
                                 Gen. 19. were marked vnto the Lord .xij. thousand.
                           5 Of the happy kindred of Gad the vij. sonne of Iacob by Zepha,
                                 Gen. 30, Nume. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . Gene. 30, Iosue. 18, were tokened vnto life .xii. thousand.
                           6 Of the blessed tribe of Asser the eight sonne of Iacob by Zepha were sealed vnto the heauenlye felowship xii. thousand.
                                 Gene. 30, Deu. 33.
                           
                           7 Of the plentuous ofspring of Neptalim the vi. sonne of Iacob by Bala,
                                 Gene. 4
                                    •
                                  
                                 Num. 32 Iudie. 18, Gene. 2
                                    •
                                 , were signed to be pertakers of ioy with christ .xii. thousande.
                           8 Of the notable parage of Manasses the eldest sonne of Ioseph in the stede of Dan, because of ye ydolatrie, were noted for the friendes of God twelue thousand
                           9 Of the humble tribe of Symeon the second sonne of Iacob by Lia, were sealed to the heauens felicitie xii. thousand.
                           
                              10 Of the sanctified successe of Leuy the thirde son of Iacob by Lia,
                                 Deut. 10 Gene, 29 were marked vnto saluation twelue thousand.
                           
                              
                                 Mala 3 Gen. 30, 
                                    •
                                 . Cor. 2, Gene. 30.11 Of the pleasant posterytie of Isachar the .ix. sonne of Iacob by Lya, were tokened to ye ioyes euerlasting xii. thousand.
                           
                              2 Thes. 1. Gene. 30 Hebr. 9,12 Of the famous tribe of Zabulon the .x. sonne of Iacob by Lya, were sealed to the kingdom heauenly .xii. thousande.
                           13 Of the rightuous stock of Iospeh the .xi. sonne of Iacob by Rachell, were sanctified to Christes inheritaunce .xii.M.
                           
                              
                                 Gene. 35 1. Peter. 3, Collectanea VVest meri. Otho brunfel
                                       •
                                    ius de tropis scripturarum.
                              14 Of the godly kindred of Beniamin the twelf sonne of Iacob by Rachel, were elected vnto the eternall herytage twelue thousande. This set number of twelue thousande for euery tribe of the Israelits, betokeneth a notable multitude in euer kindred of them, certenly appointed of God vnto saluation. And it is not to be vnderstanded vpon them that are past, but rather vpon them, whom it

shall please God to call in this latter age vnder the vi. seale opening. Whom Paule calleth the remnant which shal be saued,
                                 Rom. 11. Amos. 9 according to the election of grace. For lyke as by the fall of the Iewes Synagoge for vnthankfullye receauinge the veritie, saluation then hapened vnto the Heathen,
                                 Math, 21, 
                                    
                                       •
                                    see. 3, Apoca. 17, Rom. 11, Math. 10, Psalm. 85▪
                               so shal it now againe from their carnall church to the Iewes for the same. god hath not thrust out his people, but their conuersion shall be as is life from the dead. Thys shall the carnall synagoge of Antychristes, hypocrites, tyrauntes, and cruell maiestrates, no more perceiue at that day then they now decerne those poore creatures whom they spightfully persecute and kyll, to be the true Churche of CHRIST. When Helias thought no more true beléeuers but hym selfe left alyue,
                                 Sapī, 5, Iohn. 16. 3. Reg. 19. Roma. 13 Iude. 1, Apoca. 13. Iohn, 19. almighty God shewed him of vij. thousand more whom he knew not. If he were then ignoraunt, muche more these fowre Angels of darknesse,

which now sleyeth vp God seruants as the Iewes dyd Christ. Not for nothing hath god geuen so much knowledge in the Hebrue tongue. The Iewes muste be sealed with the worde of veritie.
                                 Franciscus Lambertus in Apocal. li. 2. part. 3 Roma. 11 Apoca. 9. They must haue the sure signe of faith. They must know and confesse Christ, whom god afore promised by the Prophetes, that twelue thousand of euery tribe may be sealed vnto saluation. For that time must the Antichrists cease. Their false interpretations of scripture,
                                 Marci. 7, 1. Tim. 4, 2. Pet. 2 Math. 8▪
                               their wicked traditions, their doctrine of deuilles, their lies in hypocresie, their errours, their stinking chastitie (whom God and his angels abhorreth and the deuill most highly alloweth) with all their other filthynesse they must lay aside. Where as afore time they haue immagined other waies of the health and rightuousnesse then by Christe,
                                 Gala 3, Rom. 10. 2 Peter. 2 Apoca. 18. Ioannes 
                                       •
                                    ecolampadius in Dani
                                       •
                                    lē.
                               as by infinit sectes of perdition, Idol worshiping, pardons, and other abhominations wtout number, they must now be compelled against their wil to resigne

them, not onely by the manifest truthe, but also by those which as yet are enemies both to them and also to the sayde veritie. I can not sée it but it worketh euen now as it did in the primatiue churche. When the Hethen perceiued the Apostles and Disciples expulsed out of Iewry for the Gospell preachinge,
                                 Eusebius Acto. 13 Rom. 11 Esa. 49 Franciscus Lambertus li 2. parte. 3 in apocalipsim.
                               for the hate they had to the Iewes they gladly receiued them, which was vnto their saluacion, though they thought nothinge lesse.
                           Not vnlyke is it in this age, but that the true prechers and learned men, compelled also by tiraunts to decline to the Saracens and Turkes, may in lyke maner be accepted of them in spight of the Romishe deuill and his Church, and so conuerte them to the true Christen faith, whiche they before abhorred.
                                 Gene. 41. Daniel. 2. Hester. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . Tobie. 1. Math. 24▪ 
                                 Luke. 19. Gala. 4. Apoca. 
                                 
                                    ••
                                 
                               Such fauour may they finde amonge them nowe, as did Ioseph, Daniel, Hester, Mardocheus, Zorababel, Nehemias, Es
                              
                                 •
                              ras, Tobias and other amonge the

infidels then. And lyke as the Iewish sinagoge did at that tyme wholly perish for reiecting Gods word, and neuer could recouer since, so may that false counterfayte churche of Antychrist come to distruction for contempnynge the same and neuer ryse vp agayne.
                           Muche is it to be feared, yf they stoppe GODS woorde as they haue begunne,
                                 Act. 4▪ 
                                 Iosephus Egesippus Mantuanꝰ The sweet wyndes may not blow for these angels of darknesse.
                               least that plague fall on them that lyghted vppon the IEWES at the Siege of Hierusalem, by the TURKE nowe, or by some other worse then he.
                           For though they suffer the Byble to be abroade in the mother tongue in BRABAND, HOLLANDE, FLAUNDERS, FRAUNCE, SPAYNE, ITALYE, and other places, yet are they styll as they were Angelles of darkenesse, Tyrauntes, Persecuters, Antichristes, and Hypocrites forbiddinge the ryght course

of it. And not withstandinge their violence, yet breaketh it foorth so, that innumerable people are dayly sealed vnto GOD.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 After this I behelde, and loe, a great multitude (vvhiche no man coulde number) 2. Of all nacions, and people, and tongues, 3. Stoode before the seate. 4. And before the Lambe, clothed vvith longe vvhite garmentes, 5. And palmes in their handes, 6. And cryed vvith aloude voyce, saying, 7. Saluation be ascribed to hym, that sytteth vppon the seate of our GOD, 8. And vnto the Lambe, 9, And all the Aungelles stoode in the compasse of the Seate, 10 And of the Elders, and of the fovvre Beastes, 11, And fell before the Seate on their faces, 12. And vvorshipped▪ GOD, sayinge, Amen.
                        13, Blessynge, and glorye, and vvisedome, and thankes, and honoure, and povver, and might be vnto our God for euermore, Amen.
                        
                           
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 After this (saith sainct Iohn) I behelde an exceeding multitude of the Gentiles or Heathen,
                                 Psalm. 1
                                    •
                                 8 Marci. 16. Osee. 1. Gene. 18, marked into the felowship of Christe, whom no man was able to number.
                           
                           2 These were of all nacions of the earth,
                                 Phil, 2 Rom, 14, Acto. 2, of al peoples of the world, and of all languages vnder heauen, Gréekes, Latines, Hebrues, Caldeans, Parthyans, Medes, Elamites, Capadocians, Asianes, Phrigian, Egiptianes, Arabianes, Syrians, Affricanes and Indians.
                           
                              3 They stoode all before ye imperyall seate of God.
                                 Psalm. 9. Lucke. 8▪ 
                                 Math. 16 Iohn, 20▪ 
                                 Esa. 5
                                    •
                                 
                               It was giuen them by the holy ghost to sée him in faith reigning in hys true church, and to take hym for theyr mercyfull Lorde and father.
                           4 They stoode also in the presence of the poore Lambe,
                                 Apoc. 6. Ephe. 1. Rom. 5, Psalm. 8
                                    •
                                 , Esa. 45. Iohn, 1, 1. Cor. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 
                               beutifully cloathed with long whyte garmentes. They beléeued Christ to be theyr only sauiour and redéemer, and were moste highly accepted before hym for that beléeues sake. They lyued purely according to his worde, & did all things of a sincere conscience, taking him for their only health and comfort.
                           By hym onely they trusted to haue their sinnes forgiuen, wherfore they were by him iustified and restored to perfect innocencie.
                           5 Palmes had they in their handes large and beutifull,
                                 Eucheriu
                                       •
                                    
                                  1. Iohn. 5. 1. Cor. 15, Hebre. 11. Psal. 113, in token of victorie ouer sinne, hell, death, & the diuill, which they haue through Christ.
                           6 And they cryed all with a loude voyce. In an earnest fayth they made this strong protestacion, saying.
                           
                              
                              
                                 Eph
                                       •
                                    . 2, 
                                    •
                                 . Cor. 4. Psalm. 3 Daniel. 7.7 No merite, health, nor goodnesse be attributed vnto vs, nor yet vnto any creature in heauen nor in earth for vs. But all our whole saluacion, lyfe, and deliuerance, be onely ascrybed vnto hym that sitteth vpon the throne of our God, reigning by hys spirite not in the false counterfayte church, but in the true christian congregacion.
                           8 And vnto the swéete Lambe Iesus Christ,
                                 Apoca. 5, Hiere. 11. Psalm. 3. Rom. 9. Isaie. 64 Apoca. 5, which alone dyed for the same. For health is onely the Lordes, so is the eternall blessyng, and neyther of our works, nor yet of our good déeds, for the best of them are defiled.
                           9 And all the Angelles or ministers of heauen,
                                 Daniel. 7. Esai. 9, Apoca. 4 Math, 1
                                    •
                                 
                               compassed the throne according to their offyce. They assisted the true faithfull church which is the seate of God.
                           10 The xxiiij. elders they compassed also, so dyd they the .iiij. beastes. For ministers they are to the saincts departed, and seruaunts to them that be yet aliue.
                           11 They fell downe flatte on theyr

faces before the throne. They méekely acknowledged them selues the creatures of God,
                                 Phili. 2 Apoca. 5 and seruaunts to hys congregacion.
                           12 And they worshipped not y• seate, but God which sate on the seat.
                                 Psal. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 0. Lambertꝰ Luke. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . Colos. 1. Daniel. 7 Apoca. 5 Most highly they magnified him and praysed him for restoring their lost number saying: So be it euermore as we shall now desire.
                           13 Euerlastyng prayse and glory, perpetuall wisedome and thankes,1. Timo. 6 Nehe. 8, 3. Esd. 9 continuall honour and poure wyth might which can not be measured, be referred vnto our eternall God of all his creatures for euer and euer, yea for all that he hath wrought in them, Amen.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And one of the elders answered, saying vnto me▪ 2. What are these which are arayed in long white garmēts, & whēce came they. 3▪ and I said vnto hī, 4. Lord thou vvottest. 5. And he sayd vnto me. 6 these are they vvhich

out of great tribulacion, 7. and made theyr garments large, 8. and made them whyte in the bloud of the Lambe. 9. Therfore are they in the presence of the seate of God, 10. and serue him day and night in his Temple. 11. And he that sitteth in the seate, will dvvell among them. 12. They shall hūger no more, neyther thurst, 13. Neyther shall the sunne light on them, 14. neither any heate. 15. For the Lambe vvhich is in the mids of the seate shall feede them, 16. and shall lead them vnto fountaynes of liuing water. 17. And God shall vvype avvay all teares from their eyes.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           
                              
                                 Haymo Ansbertus. Sebastianus meyer. Apoca. 6 Esa. 30 Math. 20, Luke. 9, 
                                    
                                       •
                                    cm. 81 And one of the auncyent elders (sayth sainct Iohan) made aunswere vnto that, whiche I was inwardlye most desirous to knowe concernyng this innumerable multytude, saying vnto me by maner of question.
                           2 What are these comely persons, which are thus beutifully apparelled in long whyte garmentes, large and fayre? And from whence came they as thou supposest.
                           3 And I as one ignoraunt of the misteries of God, of myne owne nature

without the speciall gifte of hym, answeared after this sorte.
                           4 Syr, thou wottest what they are and from whence they come, by such knowledge as the Lorde hath giuen thée.
                           5 And hée sayde agayne vnto mée thus.
                                 Iohn. 1
                                    •
                                 
                                 ▪ 1. Cor. 14, Hebre. 11 Acto. 14▪ 1. Peter. 3. Iohn. 6.
                           
                           6 These are they which come vnto Christ by fayth, out of the great trybulacion of worldly wickednes, fleshly cares, and disquieted consciences.
                           7 Abhorring the doctrine of mens inuencions, they set sure holde vpō the liuing word of the Lord. There fette they out forgiuenesse of their sinnes,
                                 Acto▪
                                  10 Psalm. 3
                                    •
                                 
                               and made their garmentes large to couer theyr olde deformities.
                           8 They washed their lyues in the sorowes of repentaunce,
                                 Act. 19, Psalm. 113 Daniel. 12 1. Peter. 1. Apoca. 22, Acto. 10 Ephe. 2. Daniel. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 
                                 ▪
                               and fashyoned theyr déedes to his swéete lawes and commaundementes. They made their garments white in the precious bloud of the Lambe, beléeuing to bée purified by the meryte of his death.
                           9 And therfore are they at this time in the presence of his maiestie, accepted,

takē, and alowed for the citizens of heauen.
                           10 They serue him day & nyght in the Temple of their soules, and they prayse his glorious name in spirite for euer more.
                           
                              
                                 Apoca. 4 Exod. 29 Iohel. 2. Esa. 49,11 The Lord that sitteth on ye throne will alwayes dwell among them, as their most mightie defendor, theyr solace, and their comforte.
                           
                              
                                 Iaco. 1, Esa. 49, Psalm. 12012 The spirit shall so refresh them, they shall no more hunger nor thirst. Though concupiscence dwel in them they shall desire none euill.
                           
                              
                                 Deut. 4. Hiere. 17.13 Neither shall the sunne so lyght on them, which is this worldes prosperitie, that they shall forget theyr Lord God at any season.
                           14 No heat shall hurt them, nor aduersitie of this worlde ouercome thē,
                                 Iohn. 15, Rom. 8. Apoca. 5. but in yt they suffer or doe, all thyngs shall worke to the best.
                           
                              
                                 Math. 18. Iohn, 14, 
                                    
                                       •
                                    ggei. 2. Acto, 4. Esa. 60.15 For the innocent Lambe Christ which is in the middest of the seat, or the cōgregacion of God by his word, shall norish, féede, & releue thē wt hys promise, shal preserue, comfort & lead

them by his spirit. Yea he shall so order them, they shall haue néede of nothyng. And if he bée their light, health, and strength, of whom should they be afrayed
                           16 He shall bring them vnto the foū
                              taynes of the lyuing waters,
                                 Psalm. 5
                                    •
                                 , Iohn. 4 Eccle 1. Iohn. 14 Apoca. 2
                                    •
                                  
                                 Iohn. 16, Acto, 5. 1. Iohn. 4 Rom. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 , Math. 5, & make them such well springs as shall flow vp into the lyfe euerlasting. His doctrine must doe it and none other, for none commeth to ye father but by him.
                           17 And God shall wype away all teares frō their eyes. Aduersitie shall be vnto them a very consolacion. No sorows shal they care for, no tormēts shall they regard, no troubles nor yet death shall they feare, but thinke in their hartes alwayes, yt the suffrings of this lyfe are nothing to the glorie to come.
                                 Gene. 4
                                    •
                                  
                                 Psalm. 21 Esaie. 63, Apoca. 1
                                    •
                                 . The aforesayde elder myght séeme to be Iacob, whose prophecie might tell Iohn, that Christ should washe his garment in wine, and hys mantel in ye blud of grapes. So might it be Dauid or Esay, which also confirmeth the same.
                           In this as in a glasse may be séene what they are afore god yt at this present

age, or vnder this sixe seale opening vnfaynedly cleueth to his word,
                                 Marke this sixt seale opening.
                               foloweth it in effect, and liueth accordyng vnto it. Fyrst they are cléere afore God,
                                 Rom. 8. Psalm. 31. Sapi. 17. Hebr. 9, Gala. 4, Iohn. 4. Math. 5, Luke. 6 Colo. 3. Hebre. 11. Psalm. 118 2. Corin. 1. and no sinne shall be imputed vnto them for their faithes sake. Consequently, they are deliuered of a troublous cōscience. The Lambe hath restored them to innocency, & God accepteth them for his children. These séeke no doctryne but the scrypture. They serue God in spirite and in no deade thinges. They hunger not for mens tradycions, they thirst not for hipocrites good works, they are well, and fully contented with the Lambe. They séeke no prosperitie, neyther care they for aduersitie. The word of God is their gyde, and therein they minde to depart. None other but such are sealed vnto god, nor none els walk before him in whyte garmentes.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The viij. Chapter.
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And when he had opened the seuenth seale, 2. there was silence in heauen about the space of halfe an houre. 3, And I savv seuen Angels, 4. standing before God. 5. And to them vvere giuen seuen Trompettes. 6. And an other Angell came, 7. and stood before the aulter, 8. hauing a golden censer▪ 9. And much of odours vvas giuen vnto hym. 10. that he should offer of the prayers of all saynctes vpon the golden aulter, 11. vvhich vvas before the seate. 12. And the smoke of the odours vvhich came of the prayers of the Sainctes ascended vp before God out of the Angelles hande. 13. And the Aungell tooke the censer, and filled it vvith fyre of the aulter, 14. and cast it into the earthe, 15. And voices were made, and thunderings, & lightnings, 16. and great earthquake. 17, And the seuen Angels vvhich had the seuē trumpets, 18, prepared them selues to blovv.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.

1
                           
                              IN the seuenth seale openyng (which is the next & the last) there was silence in heauen (saieth Sainct Iohn) by the space of halfe an houre.
                                 Esa. 32, 1. Iohn. 2. Augustinus, Luke. 2, Iohn. 14 Hiere. 51, Apoca 17. 2. Thes. 2. Apoca. 20 Esa. 32, Mich. 4 This signifieth that there shall bée in that age, that peace in the Christian churche, which Christ brought with him from heauen, and left héere with his discyples. Then shall wretched Babylon fall, then shall the bloudie beast full of blasphemous names perishe, then shal ye great Antichrist with his whole generaciō com all togither, to naught, then shall the fierce Dragon bée tyed

vp for a M. yeres. Thē shal raign peace & cōcord, ye truth shal be beloued, gods word shal be had in estimacion, & hys

seruants shall liue wtout check. Happie are they that shal sée those dayes.
                           2 This silence shall endure but half an houre space,
                                 Psalm. 125 Bedas. Apoca. 20, 1. Iohn. 2, 2. 
                                    
                                       •
                                    ara. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . Psalm. 89, Rom. 11, Hiere. 23 Luke. 15 Iohn. 10 whiche may bée the thousande yeares that are spoken of héere afore, consideryng that all the age after Christ is but the last houre, and a thousand yeares before God is but as the day that is paste. In the time of this swéete silence shall Israell be reuyued, the Iewes shall bée conuerted, the Heathen shall come in agayne. Christ will séeke vp his lost shéepe and bryng hym agayne to hys folde, that they maye appeare one flock, lyke as they haue one shepeherde.
                           3 And I sawe (sayeth sainct Iohn) seuen Angels standing before the maiestie of God,
                                 Apoca. 1. Mala. 2 Albertus Magnus Franciscus Lambertꝰ Esa. 27, Ose. 8, Hiere. 16▪
                               which signifieth ye preachers of his worde for the seuen seuerall times of the vij. seales opening, to euerie seale corresponding an Angell. For all that the preachers hath done from the beginning of the Gospell, to the tyme of this last seale opening, shall then appeare at once.
                           
                              In that day (sayeth Esay (the Trumpet shall be blowen, they that were lost shall come from the Ascirians, the scattered flocke shall come from Egypt, & worship ye Lord in Ierusalem.
                           
                              
                                 Daniel. 7, Hebr, 1, Esa. 58. Eucherius
                              4 These Angels stoode before ye presence of God, as mynisters of acceptacion, readie to execute his heauenly will and commaundement.
                           5 And to them was giuen vij. hollow trumpettes,
                                 Hiere. 23 Iohel. 2. Apoc. 6. 1. Cor. 4 the ministracion of his worde was vnto them committed. They ran not foorth vnsent, they spoke not vncommaūded. They blew their trumpettes one after an other. As the seales were opened, the misteryes they declared as came to theyr course.
                           6 And another Angell (sayeth sainct Iohn) of a much higher nature then these,
                                 Mala. 3. Esa. 64, Nume. 4 Phil. 2. came forth, yea euen the Angel of the couenaūt that was so sore longed for, came to hys holye Temple.
                           7 He stood before the aulter, he humbled him selfe, hée became man, hée tooke the shape of a seruaunt.
                           
                              8 He had in his hande a golden censer.
                                 Hebre. 9. Iohn. 4. 1. Tim. 2, 1. Iohn. 2. Psalm. 140, Gene. 15, This Lorde Iesus Christ the soueraygne messenger of our saluacion tooke it vpon him alone to be our mediatour our aduocate before God, and the onely attonemente for our sinnes.
                           9 And much incense of odours was giuen vnto hym by the great fayth of Abraham, Iohn Baptist,
                                 Hebre. 11. and of all the sanctified number.
                           10 That he shoulde offer vp vnto God so much of the prayers of all the faythfull beléeuers vpon the golden aulter or in his glorifyed nature,
                                 Hebre. 13 Ephe. 1. Apoca. 12 as was right afore him.
                           11 Which aulter is now before the throne of God.
                                 Hebr. 7 Iohh. 14, Acto. 7. 1. Iohn. 2 Act. 4, He hath an euerlasting priesthood, he is able to saue them that come vnto God by hym, and lyueth 
                                 •
                              mmortal, standing on his right hand as one euer readie to make interpel
                              
                                 •
                              acion for vs. All they consented in 
                                 •
                              ne that hée should be theyr generall 
                                 •
                              ttourney, consideryng he was their 
                                 •
                              nely sauiour and redéemer.
                           12 And the swéete smoke of the odorous

incense, which came of ye wholsome and fe
                                 •
                              uent desires of them that had fayth,
                                 Psalm. 140, Proue. 11. Hebre. 1 Rom. 8. Hebre, 9 Iohn. 14 ascended vp before God out of ye Angels hande. By his onely meryte was their fayth accepted, and for his deaths sake their works pleased God.
                           13 The sayd Angel tooke the censer, he prepared his godlie spirite.
                                 Hiere, 31 Luke. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 2 Act, 2. Iohn. 1, He filled it with fire of the aulter, whych was his eternall charitie.
                           14 And he cast it into the earth, with poure he sent it downe in clouen fyerie tounges vpon hys Apostles, of whose plentuous aboundaūce all wée haue receyued.
                           15 And as it was come down, there were noyses,
                                 Apoca. 4, Iohn▪
                                  16, Marci. 16 Iohn. 3, Esa▪
                                  1, Math. 15. 1. Tim. 6 Apoca 6, Nath. 2, Acto 4, Iohn. 11 thunderings, and fearefull lightnynges, for it rebuked the world of sinne, of rightuousnesse, and of iudgement. It reprooued the world of vnfaythfulnesse, for contempnyng the light of Gods veritie. It threatened it for supersticions, hypocrisie, and outwarde obseruacions. And vtterly it condempned it for obstinacie of corrupte interpretacions.
                           
                              
                              
                                 •
                              6 There was also a terrible earthquake as it was comen into ye world. The vngodly rulers were mooued, the ambicious prelates were vexed, 
                                 •
                              he couetous lawyers fretted, the hypocrites and priestes waxed madde, yea they are not yet quyeted to thys day. They still lye & prate, they blaspheme and accuse,
                                 Math, 5 Iohn. 15 Psalm. 73 they persecute and kill, they hange, burne, and drowne, their malice hath none ende.
                           
                              
                                 •
                              7 And the sayd vij. Angels (sayeth Iohn) which are the vniuersall preachers of Gods veritie,
                                 Luke. 9 Esa. 58 hauyng theyr vij. trumpettes or full aucthoritie giuen them of the Lord.
                           
                              
                                 •
                              8 Prepared them selues by power of the holy Ghost,
                                 Iohn. 15, Marci. 16 to execute their offices, & to blow ech one in his course.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 The first Angell blew, 2. And there was made hayle and fyre, vvhich vvere mingled vvith bloud, 4. and they vvere cast into the earth. 5. And the third part of the trees vvas brent, 6. and all greene grasse vvas brent.
                        
                           
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 The first Angell first stoode foorth, and blewe his Trumpet.
                                 The first angel. Acto. 2. Rom. 10. Iohn. 12 Act. 13. Hebr. 3. Apoca. 22, The Apostles after ye first seale opening (which was at the comming of the holy ghost) went forward with the gospell, and taught it the worlde ouer. And when they had beléeued and throughly receiued the word which were predestinate of God to bée partakers of the glorie with Christ, the residewe still blynd & obstinate, perseuered in theyr infidelitie, and so perished.
                           2 For vpon them came hayle & fyre, which were myngeled with bloude. Their wickednesse ouer went them, their stubborne stomakes sturred vp their furie,
                                 Exo. 9. Eccle. 9 Rom. 1. Sapi. 2. their fiercenesse kindled euer more and more, & theyr madnesse made them blynde.
                           
                              
                                 Iohn, 16, Acto. 4 Iudie. 1, 2. Cor. 4. Act. 7, 8.12 14.19.3 And these they coupled alwais with crueltie & murther. For when Christes disciples had preached the Gospell, the wicked sort of the Iewes and Gentiles in no case would beléeue it,

but their obstinacie so blinded them, and their malice so inflamed them, that they sought their death and procured the effusion of their blood. Ouer all the Actes of the Apostles this is euident.
                           4 And they were cast into the earth. So occuppied their earthly hartes this wilfulnesse and anger with thirstynge of innocent bloude,
                                 Ezcch. 14, Math. 23, Osee. 4, Iude. 1. Luke. 13. that all grace in them was extinguished, and all goodnesse cleane consumed.
                           5 The third part of the trées was brent, and all the gréene grasse came to nought. Though the chosen people were euer the lesser number, and the wicked the much greater (as in Zacharie) yet are they not héere so noted,
                                 Math. 7 Zacha. 13 
                              
                                 Psalm. 33, Luke. 12. for so much as in the sight of the Lord the infinite rable of infidels are nothing to the smal flock of faith.
                           Consider also that in Zacharias time, the Iewes were the people of God, which were nothing in comparison to the Gentiles. But now are the Gentiles his people, which euer

excéeded them in number. The thride part of the Trées wythered in their wickednesse were founde without fruit in the Gentiles.
                                 Osee. 11, Rom. 9. Esa. 54, 1. Iohn. 2 Act. 1
                                    •
                                 , Hiere. 2, Iohn. 4, Math 21, Luke. 11 Primas. 1, Haymo. Franciscus Lambertꝰ
                              
                           
                           6 All the Iewes which somtime were the gréene grasse by the manyfolde gifts of God, and by Christes comminge of them, were then brent vp cleane. True faith went from them, and their owne malice blinded them.
                           Though this were veryfied of them onely, which were at the first Seale openinge, and the fyrste Trumpet blowinge, yet doth it touche the bloodye Antechristes, Hypocrites, and vngodly rulers, withstanding Gods word to this present day, the poore Christians beinge gréene, and bringinge foorth fruit in pacient sufferaunce.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And the second Angell blevv, 2, And as it were a great mountaine burning with fier, 3, Was cast into the sea. And the thirde parte of the sea turned to bloude. 5, And the thirde parte of the creatures vvhich had lyfe, dyed, 6. And the thirde parte of the shippes vvere destroyed.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 The seconde Angell blew his Trumpet at the seconde Seale opening, which signifieth the preachers,
                                 The second angell. Mala. 2, Apoca. 2, Eusebius cesariens
                                       •
                                    s
                               declaringe the secrete misteries of Gods verytie immediatly after the Apostles time.
                           2 And as they were at the pleasure of the Lorde so doynge, a monstrous thinge in manner of a great mountayne burninge with fier was cast into the sea.
                           A cruell sorte of false disciples and wicked brethren arose vp frō among them,
                                 Zacha. 4▪ 1. Iohn▪
                                  2 1. Tim. 3. all earthly minded to couetusnesse,

puffed vp with pride and ambicion,2. Tim. 3. Act. 20 2▪ 
                                 Peter. 3, Esa. 17, Ezech. 6 Luke, 18 inflamed also with anger, spight & vengeāce, they boysterously entred in among the people, so mutable and fickle as the sea, which chaungeth with euery winde. These are the mountaines that swell vp thinkinge much of themselues. These are the rysing hylles that boast so much of their good workes, of whose ouerthrow by Gods word both Esay and Iohn Baptist dyd prophesie. Such fyery mountaines were Iānes and Iambres,
                                 Esa. 40 Luke. 3 2. Tim. 3, Hiere, 20 Iohn, 18. 3. Iohn. 1, Act. 19, Act. 13, 2. Tim. 4. that maliciously resisted Moyses, so were Phassur and Semeias, which vexed the Hrophet Hieremy.
                           Such burning hylles were Cayphas and Annas against Christe, Diotrephes, Herpocras, Hebion, and Cerinthus against Iohn the Euangelist, Demetrius, Bariehu, Himenius, and Alexander against Paule, with such lyke moody prelates resistinge the truth to this present day. Suche smocky mountaines of contradiction

both dayly withstande Christ in the edifying of his Christen Church,
                                 Hebre. 12 Zacha. 4 Esa. 17 Rom, 16. Apoca. 20. as rebuked Zorababel in ye building of the Iewes temple.
                           3 They sturre vp the sea, they moue the weake people, and make them blynd as Asses. In their hate they prouoke the Princes to cruelty and malice. They cause them to punishe the poore Preachers,
                                 Acto. 16 Lucke. 11. and put asyde the trueth least they should fal vnto it.
                           4 By reason of this burning hyll fallyng into ye sea, the third parte of ye water turned into blood,
                                 Exod. 7 Apoca. 17 Act. 6 Math. 10, Ioan▪
                                  16 Math. 5. 1. Ioan. 3 ye third part of ye people seduced by them became hatefull murtherers. Not only they accused GODS seruauntes, but as bloud thirsty beastes they consented to their deathes, not consyderynge that he which doth but onely hate his brother is an homicide.
                           5 The thyrde parte of the creatures, which had lyfe dyed. Of those which séemed to be faithfull amonge them,
                                 Acto. 1
                                    •
                                 . Apoca. 3. 2. Tim. 3. a great number were worse then nought. Dissembling with faith

they betraied the truth, and wrought much wickednesse.
                                 Eusebius cesariensis Eucherius
                               Many martirs were then euery where.
                           6 So that the third part of the shippes were destroyed also. Many Churches or pryuate congregations called parrishes, for feare of loosinge their goodes, and for doubt of imprisonment and death, refused the faith and fell cleane from the trueth,1. Tim. 6. and so were perished and loste. For Shippes in the scriptures betokneth them.
                                 Luke. 8, Act. 5
                                    •
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And the third Angell blevv, 2. And there fell a great Starre from Heauen, 3. Burning as it vvere a Creshet. 4. And it fell into the thirde parte of the Riuers, and into fountaines of vvaters. 5. And the name of the Sarres is called vvormvvode, 6. And the thitd part of the waters vvas turned to wormevvod. 7. And many men dyed for the vvaters, because the vvere made bitter.
                        
                           
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 When the thirde Angel blew hys Trumpet at the third scale openinge,
                                 The third angel. Daniel. 12 Iude. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 
                               there fell from heauen a great mighty Starre, burning lyke a Creshet,
                           2 As the preachers of that time opened the trueth of god,2. Tim. 4 Philastrius Brixiensis Argustinus
                               many great doctors and excellent learned men, as Arius, Macedonius, Cutices, Ualens, and such other, declined from the sincere faith, and fell to blasphemous opinions concerning the Godhead.
                           3 These séemed gloryous to the earthly minded people,
                                 Luke. 16 Osee. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 , 2, Tim. 4▪ 
                                 Iohn. 6. Apoca. 2▪ 1. Iohn. 2. 1. Tim, 4. they appeared notable and famous to the blind forsaken sort, yet was their learninge madnesse, and their doctrine fables and lyes. But this is here to be noted, that they which are true techers remaine still in heauen, they perseuer in the christen church, where as the other are fallen cleane frō thēc
                                 •
                               by apostasie, and errours, so that they are none of Christes.
                           
                              
                              2. Corin. 4. Esa. 55 2. Tim. 2 Luke. 12, 1, Cor. 2, Amos. 5.4 This starre fell into the thirde parte of the ryuers, whiche are the scriptures peruerted, and into the fountaynes of waters, whiche are Gods owne very wordes depraued. These haue the false doctours, yea pernicious heritikes infected with their errours, corrupted with their lyes, and with theyr false interpretations made them bitter and vnsauerye.
                                 Hiere. 9
                           
                           
                              
                                 Gene. 26. Primasius Bedas, Here. 2, 1. Cor. 5 Psalm. 18, Math. 15, 2. Thes. 2.5 For the name of the starre was wormewoode, whose nature is to withdraw all swéetenesse. These with their bitter heresies and their noysome doctrine destroyed the pits of Abraham, they troubled the Text, they mixed the truth wt falshod, they poysoned the waters, they tooke away the louesomnesse of them, they left them vnpure and vnperfite (not that they can be so of thē selues, but of their false workinge) they made them vnpleasant, vnprofitable, yea and most perylous vnto many.
                           
                              
                                 Hiere. 23. 2▪ 
                                 
                                    
                                       •
                                    or. 2 2. 
                                    
                                       •
                                    ete. 2. Tren. 3,6 For it followeth, When the third parte of the waters (whiche are the scriptures corrupted by them) was

turned into woormwoode, or bitternesse of errours.
                           7 Many men dyed of them. They perished by those doctrines, bicause they were made bitter. Yet were not all men cast away, for two parts were left vndefyled, and many that dronke the poysoned waters,
                                 Haymo. Ambrosius Ansber
                                       •
                                    u
                                       •
                                     Hiere. 2. Psalm. 18. 1. Tim. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . enometed them againe. Onely were they lost that retayned thē styll. The pure waters are héere doubled vnto the waters infected. For double in value is the verytie before GOD, and the true minister therof worthy double honour, where as the other are nothing at all.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And the fourth Angell blew, 2. And the third part of the Sunne vvas smitten, & the thirde parte of the Moone, & the third parte of the Starres. 3▪ So that the thirde part of them was darkened. 4. And the day was smitten. 5. That the thirde parte of it shoulde not shine, and lykewise the night. 6. And I beheld and heard an angell flying through the midst of heauen. 7. And saying with aloude voyce. 8. Wo, wo, wo, to the dwellers of the earth, 9. Because of the voices to come of the Trompetes of the three Angels, which were yet to blow.
                        
                           
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 At the fourth Seale opening the fourth Angell stoode forth and blew his Trumpet.
                                 The fourth angel. 
                                       •
                                    ath. 20, Lucke. 20 Marci. 12 Math. 28 Hieronimus▪ Rufinus. Cassianus Heraclides.
                               Neuer was the time yet so perylous but some trewe preachers hath bin in it. Were there neuer so many herisies abroad, yet haue there reigned some godlye ministers, what though they were vnknowne to the worlde. Many sincere fathers were in the desert wildernes when most mischief was in doynge amonge the cruel tiraunts which priuyly resortinge to Cities, taught them whom God had appointed to be saued.
                           Of this number was Paulus Antonius, Hilarion, Macharius, Pambo, Theonas,
                                 Baptista Mantuanus Ioannes tritemius Franciscus. Lambertus
                               Effrem, & suche lyke. And longe since their time Anastasius, Persa, Theophilactus, Fulgencius, Beda, Alcuinus, Strabus, and such other many.
                           
                              Not with standinge all that they taught and wrot was not gospell. All was not without superstition though they lyued in much purenesse of lyfe.
                           1 These blew the Trumpet as they had receiued that time.
                                 Ioannes Oeclampadius in Da
                                       •
                                    n elem. Ioannes VViclenus de antichristo 
                                       •
                                    t membres.
                               But the false Hipocrites and the Antichristes so preuayled more and more vnder Mahomet and the romish pope that 
                                 〈◊〉
                               Christianitie and spirituall holynesse was turned into supersticious sects. None was well christened that had not a moonkish disguising. None was thought spirituall, vnlesse he were shauen on the crown. Then brought thei in many new waies of saluatiō, to proue Christ but a second Sauyour, as pardons, pilgrimages, Masses and fryday fastings. Then was god able to helpe no disease, but images were sought vp euery where, saincte Iob for the pox,
                                 Platina Nancleru
                                       •
                                     Otho. Brunfelsi
                                       •
                                    us. Erasmus. Lutheru
                                       •
                                    . 
                                 
                                    •
                                 
                               Saint Roke for the pestilence, sainct Germine for the ague, saint Appolyne for the tooth ake, sainct Graciane for thrift losinge, and sainct Barbara for gonnshote.
                           
                              That Lady in that place, and that Lady in that.
                                 Ioannes Olneye C
                                       •
                                    rthusianus. Vincencius
                               This Roode héere, and that Roode there. And he that dyd miracles héere, coulde doe nothinge there. Thus was all chaunged into diuilishnesse, and their preachers for lucre confyrmed alwayes the same,2. Timo. 3 3. Reg. 18, 2. Tim. 4, whiche were many more in number then were the true messengers of God,
                           2 In this most corrupted and dolorus age,
                                 Iohn. 15, Luke. 21. Esa. 13, 2. Cor. 2. 1. Tim▪
                                  4 Treno. 4 Acto, 8. the fourth Angell blowinge his trumpet, the poore forsaken disciples shewing the trueth, the thirde parte of the sunne was smitten, so was the thirde parte of the Moone, & also the thirde part of ye stars. Good creatures they found ye third part of Gods heauenly word sore blemished by the hypocrites, the Christen Churche piteously disfigured by the antichrists and the inferioure ministers thereof, darkned by Tyraunts and cruell magistrates.
                           
                              
                                 Iohn, 12, Osee. 43 By their wicked strocke the light of GODS verytie was hydden, and appeared lesse by ye thirde part then it was afore.
                           
                              Lesse was Christ the sonne of rightuousenesse knowen,
                                 Mala. 4 Apoca. 2 Esa▪
                                  56. 2. Pet▪
                                  3. Rom. 1. lesse was the Christen Church faithfull, and lesse were the preachers godly. More ignorant was at ye time then afore, more supersticion, hipocrisie, and falshod, wherfore the third parte of them all was darkned.
                           4 At that time also by reason of them, the day was so smitten, that the thirde parte thereof shewed no clearenesse,
                                 Hiere. 6. Albertus Magnus, Ioannes VVicleus in supplimento 
                                       ••
                                    ialogi▪
                                 
                               and so was the night lykewise.
                           5 In no case might Christe shine in the Curates and religious, which 
                                 •
                              ooke themselues for the day, nor yet Christen fruits in the common people whiche were estéemed the night, Onely were their will works alowed, and their dyrty traditions thought godly.
                           The true trumpet blowers or ministers of the word,
                                 VValdenꝰ in fasculo zizanio
                                       •
                                    ū, Bedas Haymo
                               were then compelled by cruell cōmaūdements, & the 
                                 •
                              ōmons by cruell lawes enforced in 
                                 •
                              o case to medle wt ye truth, least their 
                                 •
                              bhominable doynges were espyed.

In this therefore marke, what a detestable thinge false doctrine of hypocrites is,
                                 Sebastianus Meyer.
                               for it bringeth in all darknesse an ignoraunt blindnesse, and it shadoweth vnder pretence of vertue, all wickednesse, and sinne.
                           6 And then (saith saint Iohn) I behelde an Angell,
                                 Apoca. 7 Osee. 8, Mala. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . flyinge through the middes of heauen, as it had bin an Eagle, which betokeneth certaine peculiar seruauntes of GOD, illumined with some knowledge, and lea
                                 •
                              ing an high conuersation in the church. Such were Ioachim Abbas, Cirillus of Carme, Angelus of Hierusalem,
                                 Phil. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . Bapt. 
                                 
                                    ••
                                  
                                 Mantuanus Ioannes 
                                       〈◊〉
                                     Nauc
                                       ••
                                    rus
                               Theolespherus of Cusencia, Raynhardus, and other. And since their time Petrus Iohannis, Robertus de vsecio, Iohannis de rupescissa, Arnoldus de villa noua, Hieronimus Sauonarola, with suche lyke.
                           7 These perceiuing the light of Gods veritie,
                                 Ioachim 
                                       〈◊〉
                                    . 
                                       •
                                    uper oracu
                                       •
                                    o ciril. li. Baptista Mantuanꝰ
                               and the true teachers therof dayly deminishinge, considering also the mighty increase of darknesse with a lowde voyce they cryed

earnest writings they sēt the world ouer, vnder the title of reuelation and prophecie.
                           8 Saying by the threatninges of scripture, wo, wo, wo,
                                 Zacha. 12 Ephe. 4 Apoc. 22. 2. Tim. 3, Iude. 1. 3. Reg. 10 to the inhabitours of the earth. More wickednesse is comming, more blindnes and more darknesse to the vngodly infydels and earthly minded people. It will stylll be worse and worse to the foolish ignoraunt sorte, through the errours, lyes, and abhominable superstitions of the false Antychristes and cruell Chaplaynes of Baal.
                           9 And this rebuking crye,
                                 Franciscus Lambertus
                               was because of the voyces of the other thrée Aungels were yet to blowe with the Trumpet, whose blastes they shoulde also more déepely contemne. By prophesies & scriptures,
                                 vvaldenses 1. Tim. 4. Acto. 20. 2. Tim. 3, VVicleus Math. 22 Apoca. 20. hath many godly men perceiued afore hande with Paule, the fall of faith, the increase of errours, and that diuers shoulde decline from the truth, and earnestly they haue premonished the gouernours of it.
                           
                              Yet haue they neglected the warning, and vtterly dispised them for it, leadinge the People into the depth of all errours and filthy abhominations.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The .ix. Chapter.
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And the fifte Angell blew. 2. And I sawe a Starre fall from Heauen vnto the earth. 3. And to hym vvas geuen the key of the bottomlesse pit, 4. And he opened the bottomlesse pyte. 5. And there arose a smoke of the pytte, as it were the smoke of a furnace. 6 And the sunne and the Ayre vvere darkened, by the reason of the smoke of the pyt. 7. And there came out of the smoke Locustes vppon the earth. 8 And vnto them vvas geuen povver. 9. As the Scorpions of the earth haue povver.
                        
                           
                           The Paraphrase.
                           THe fift Angell which blew his trumpet vnder the fift seale openyng of the Lambe,
                                 The fyft angell. Albertus Magnus Luke. 12 Math, 20, Act. 5. were they which had the worde of God for that age of Christes Church, and that published it to his electes. And these doeth not onely séeme to bée fewe in number, but also they appear to haue taught priuily in priuate congregacions and houses.
                           
                           2 For whē this trumpet was blowen,
                                 Esa. 14, Psalm. 13 Hiere. 6 Isaie. 24 Iohn beheld a starre fallen downe cleane from heauen into the earthe, no parte thereof reserued, neyther of

the starre in heauen, representing the spirituall church, nor yet of the earth from the starre, betokening ye worldly people. Neyther were the spiritualtie of Christes church,
                                 Ose. 4. Baruch. 6 nor yet the laytie cléere from their poysons anye where. This glittering starre or shyning multitude of prelates,
                                 Hiere 
                                 
                                    •
                                 , 1. Cor. 2, 2. Peter. 3, Math. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 5. Gala 4, 
                                    •
                                 . Tim. 4. pastours, and religious fathers, were fallen away from the doctryne of the spyrite, from the liuing word of the Lord, and from the right conuersaciō of Christ, into the earthe of their owne decrées and lawes, nothing sauouring but carnall tradicions, dumme dark ceremonies, and doctryne of diuilles, fashioning their lyues all after the same. Then soughte they vp Plato, Aueroys,
                                 Agrippa. de vanitate 
                                       •
                                    cientiarum
                               and Auicenne. Then was Aristotle thought necessarie to interprete the scriptures. Then was there an infinite rable of Sophisters & schoole doctours of reals and nominalles, of sentencioners and summistes of collyginers and Canonystes, of Scotistes, Thomistes, Olcamystes, Alberstystes, Baconystes, Anconistes.

And euerye man thought hys owne wysedome best,
                                 
                                    Erasmus sarcerius, de scolasti
                                          •
                                       ce theologie vanit
                                          ••
                                       te
                                    ▪
                                 
                                 
                                    Oecolampadius in epistolis
                                 
                               which God hath proued starke foolishenesse, all and moste ydiotishe dottage. When the blynde world supposed they had the truth by this fallen starre, they had nothyng lesse. Under the fifte seale openyng this darkenesse was not séene, but the sixte now discloseth all.
                                 Franciscus Lambertꝰ li. 3. in Apocalipsim Apoca. 6. Apoca. 20 Onely ye slayn sorte complayned that tyme desiryng theyr bloud to be reuenged, where as an answer was made them, that many more yet should bée kylled to fulfill theyr number. And it was proued true. For none in those dayes once hyssed agaynst them, but suffered death for it. Yea of Emperours and kings that offended them, some were accurssed, some deposed, some slaine, some poysoned.
                           Neyther spared they power nor yet noble blud.
                                 Ioannes Ca
                                       •
                                    ion in cronicis. Ranulphuꝰ cestrensis.
                               In Englād héer they slew King Herolde, poysoned King Iohn, and famished King Richard the ij. by their own historyes, they burned sir Roger Actō knight, sir Iohn Oldecastel, the Lord Cobham, & sir Raynolde

pecock byshop of Chychester they imprisoned to death,
                                 Fabianus Ioannes maior. Polidorus. Agrippa contra Louanienses. Zacha. 9, Prou. 1. Math. 16 Rom. 1, besides an infinite number of poore simple soules, no lawful cause known, but lyes of their owne forging. Yea and the articles that they dyed for than, they affirme nowe to bée good. But no maruayle though they dyd suche myschiefe in those dayes.
                           3 For to the starre was giuen the key of the bottomlesse pitte. After they were fallen from the wisedome of God to the corrupt dreams of men, folowyng rather the creatures then the maker of them, hée gaue them ouer vnto theyr owne imaginacions and fantasies.
                           4 Thē had they poure in darknesse, by their carnall,
                                 Luke. 22 Hebre. 13. Luke. 11 Rom. 8 Gala. 5 Apoca. 13. Daniel. 7 Iob. 1. Psalm. 106 Iaco. 5. beastly, and diuilishe diuinitie to open the well of dampnacion. For what is the wisedome of the fleshe els but death? What are theyr practises but fighting weapons against lyfe? They had licence to deceyue, and leysure to doe mischief in outward things, as had Sathan vpon the body of Iob. But no doubt ye goodnesse

of God yet preserued ye inwarde soules of many simple Iobbes for tyme of that daungerous world.
                           5 And whē they had opened ye bottomlesse pit with ye key of their false doctrine,
                                 Luke, 11. Apoca. 14▪ 
                                 Apoca. 19. 1. Tim. 4 Gala. 5, Apoca. 18 Apoca. 20 Esa. 1, there wēt vp a black filthie ayre as it had bene ye smoke of a great fornace. There arose all errours, lyes, heresies, supersticions, idolatrie, couetousnesse, pryde, incontinencie, falsehood, hypocrisie, with all other filthinesse, which are the fruits of hell, and they wēt abroad ye world ouer. Thus hath these cursed Apostates ye pope & his Chaplaynes the keyes in deed, not of heauen but of hell. They may open but they can not spear againe,
                                 Math. 16. Luke. 11, Math. 23, Luke. 10 Iohn. 10 2, Pet. 2 Math. 15. 2, Tim. 3, I
                                       •
                                    on. 14▪ 
                                 Apoca. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . Esa. 63. vnlesse they spear from heauē, as they doe alwayes. They may hurt, but they can not heale, they may distroy, but they can not help, they may well dampne, but they can not saue. For the nature of their keye is onely to make blinde, obstinate, foolyshe, harde harted, and euer more worse and worse. He onely giueth light, grace, faith, & health. He taketh away all darkenesse and

sinne, which hath the keye of Dauid.
                                 Ab
                                       •
                                    cuc. 3. 8. Cor. 15. For he alone hath trodē down the wyne presse, hauyng the whole victorie ouer death, sinne, hell, and the diuill. He hath power onely to speare vp both death and hell. The fyre of Gods wrath, they be not able to quench. The smoke of the dyuils malyce and continuall wickednesse,
                                 Apoc. 6. Sapi. 2. Gene. 3. 2 Cor. 11. Rom. 5. 2. 
                                    
                                       •
                                    essa. 2. Math. 24. 1. Tim. 4. Gala. 5. Luce. 12. they be not able to kéepe downe. Eua could not wtstād one simple suggestiō of Sathan. A smal taste of this smoke lost Adam with his whole posteritie. And now these Antichristes hath filled the world with it. For what is it els but wicked perswasions? a learning of diuilles, and a doctryne contrarie to y• doctryne of God? poysoning all, destroying all, & leading vnto hell.
                           6 The sun by this smoke was darkened,2. Cor. 2. Apoc. 19. so was the holesome ayre. The Gospell they defiled with their false interpretacions. Gods word they corrupted with their gloses, cōmentaries, and postilles. They myngled the scriptures with the dirtie dregges of their own lawes,
                                 Lutheras aduersus.
                               tradicions, and olde

rotten customes of their popishe fathers.
                                 Catherin
                                       ••
                                    
                                    ▪ Esa. 3. 2. cor. 2 Iohannes. agricola super lucā
                                    ▪
                                 
                               So that in the church no good ayre could be had, no swéete smell of the truth could be found. There was much ydoll worshipping, strange crying, and lippe labouring, sensing, fooling, & charming, crossing, mowyng, and iugling, gasing, knéeling, & knockyng, but no true Gospell preaching.
                           7 Out of this pestilent smoke came innumerable locustes,
                                 Apoca. 19 Nahum. 3. Amos. 7. VVicleus in speculo militantis ecclesie.
                               a verie monstruous vermyne and horrible to behold, créeping ouer all ye earth. These were the disguised swarme of Cardynalles, mytred Bishoppes, doctours, shauen priestes, Abbottes, Moonkes, Chanons, Fryers, Nunnes, sisters, and heremites, in read, white russet, graie, blacke, blewe, and all other colours. Of these were ye Benedictines,
                                 Sabellicus. Mantuanus Egid
                                       •
                                    us Father. Paleonid
                                       •
                                    
                                    rus.
                               the Bernardines, Gerondines, Gilbertines, Celestines, Scopetines, Grādimontensers, Camaldulensers, Cruniacensers, Premonstratensers, Carthusianes, Carmelitanes, Ambrosianes, Rhodianes, Gregorianes, Purgatoryanes, Guilhelmytes,

Iesuites, Iohannites, Hieronimites, Niniuits,
                                 Polidorus Franciscus Lambertꝰ in regulam minoritarū et alij. 2. Peter. 2, Math. 24 Acto. 20 2. Iohn, 1. Iude. 1. Esa 1, Rom. 2. Cellites, Thaborits. Templars, Hospitelers, Crucigers, Augustinianes, Dominicianes, Franciscanes, Brygydanes, Basilianes, of Iosaphats valley, and of the dark alley, and suche other, with innumerable swarmes of them euerie where. Peter prophecyed afore of thys smokie multitude, when hée gaue warnyng that there should come into the Christen church false teachers, which priuily should bring in damnable sectes, denying the Lord that bought them, and many should follow their damnable wayes, thorough whom the truth should haue ill reporte. But fewe hath marked that warning.
                           8 And vnto these noysome locustes was poure giuen,
                                 Exod. 10. Ezech. 2, Haymo. Albertus. Iob. 34. Math. 7 Hebr. 2
                                    •
                                 
                               but yet none other poure, then haue the scorpyons of the earth, whose craftie nature is fyrst to créepe softely, then gréeuouslye to sting, & last of all to venim. Thys pestilent vermine, God hath suffred for the wickednes of his people, first flatteringly to créepe, to dissemble, glose,

glose, and speak fayre,
                                 Sebastianu
                                       •
                                     meyer, in Apocal. Gregorius in li. e
                                       •
                                    alogorum. Odilo cluniacensis abbas.
                               promising prosperitie, victorie, long lyfe, and heauen, after this departing. And by such meanes gote they vnder them Emperours, Kings, gouernours, and all the world besides.
                           9 Then did they sting their consciences with terrible dreames and visions, and with fearefull reuelacions of purgatorie and of hell, to buylde them vp faire houses, and to lyue in wealth and pleasure. Fynally, they venimed their fayth with their poisoned counsayles and promyses,2. Pet. 2 Apoca. 18 Exod. 10. Deute. 28, Sebastianus 
                                       •
                                    ranck in 2. parte chronicorū
                                 
                               and so tooke they from them the true hope in Christ, making marchandise of them through couetousnesse & faire words. Thus cloistering togither like locusts they haue left nothing gréene, but all they haue withered and distroyed. No workes might then be vsed of Gods prescription, but such as were fantasied by them for aduantage, as masse founding, chaunteries building, priest singing, Image gilding, kissing of relyques, prayinge to death men, and such lyke.
                           
                              And when they were once frank and fatte,
                                 Hiere. 5, Psalm. 2 they stood vp togither proudly agaynst the Lord and his word.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And it vvas sayde vnto them that they should not hurte the grasse of the earth neither any greene thing, neyther any tree, 2. but only those men vvhich haue not the seal in their foreheades 3.
                        And to them vvas it cōmaunded, that they shuld not kil them, 4. but that they shuld be vexed fyue monethes. 5. And their payne vvas as the payne that commeth of a Scorpion, vvhen he hath stung a man. 6. And in those dayes shall men séeke death, and shall not finde it, 7. and shall desire to dye, and death shall flie from them.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 Yet were they commaunded that they should in no case hurt the grasse of the earth,
                                 Apoca▪
                                  7▪ 
                                 Prou. 11 Iohn. 6. Nume. 24. Acto. 20. Iohn. 17, neyther any gréen thing, nor trée. Though they were permytted by the sufferaunce of God to doe much mischiefe, yet could they harme none but such as wanted fayth.
                           
                              He ordayned from the beginning alwayes to saue his. Neuer could Sathan hynder the soule of Iob, onely did he vexe the outward carkasse and goods. Where as fayth is growing, true hope in Christ springing,
                                 Iob. 2. Collo. 1. Rom. 8. Gala. 5 Iohn. 18 Hiere. 15 Marci. 16 and workes of charitie fructifying, they shall doe no hurte by the promyse of God. Where the gift of the spirite aboundeth, they can in no wyse preuayle. If any hinderaunce doeth fall, it is where fayth is wanting.
                           2 For onely had they power vpon those men which had not the seale of God in their foreheades.
                                 Apoc. 7. Apoca. 19. Ephe. 5. Franciscus. Lambertus li. 3 in Apocalipsum.
                               They onely are in perill that haue not the sure fayth. And the more want they haue therof, the more is their seathe when it commeth.
                           3 Yet had those locusts in commaundement, that in no wise they shoulde kill them whom they had noyed. For the wil of God is that no wicked person should perishe, vnlesse he resisted the holy ghost, but rather to turne frō sinne and to liue.
                           4 Onely was it permytted that

they should be vexed v. moneths.
                                 Ezech. 18 Ambrosius Ansbertus Math. 23, Gala. 4, Osee. 11 Iohn. 9, Ioannes Eskius,
                               Only for their lyfe tyme were they suffered to ouer loade their poore consciences with their beggerly tradicions, to trouble them with their trumperie, to gréeue them with their curses, and to torment thē with their threatenings of their purgatorie and theyr hell. Though they blynded for want of the scripture, erred in all popishe diuilrie, and for lacke of true knowledge had not the token of fayth, yet perished they not wholly,
                                 Apoca. 7 Ioan. 3, Act. 5, Franciscus Lambertꝰ Eccle. 39, no more thē did Nicodemus and Gamaliell which were but carnal men. But their ends the Lord reserued to his own mercyfull goodnesse, for confessing ye name of Iesus Christ.
                           5 Yet were they sore vexed for the tyme, and theyr payne was as the stinging of a Scorpion, when he hath hurte a man. A prickyng of a more then halfe desperate mynde,
                                 Ephe. 4 Sapi. 17. Sapi. 17 Sebastianꝰ Meyer in Apocalip
                                    
                                       •••
                                    .
                               a feare of a wonderfully troubled conscience, yea and a great doubt of saluaciō ha
                                 •
                               they, till God shewed his mercy vpon them, opening their faint hartes and

strēgthning thē wt his inward power.
                           6 And in those dayes shall men séeke death, and yet shall not fynde it.
                                 Sapi. 16, Osee. 10 2, Tim. 3, Osee. 4, For the gréefe of their loaded consciences they shall in confessyons take counsayle of them, which is very poyson and death, yet shall God so preserue them, it shall be no death vnto them. For no dampnacion can be vnto them which are in Christ Iesu.
                                 Rom. 8 Gene. 19, Luke. 17 Loth dwelled in Sodome, yet peryshed he not with Sodome.
                           7 They shall desire to dye, and yet death shall flée from them.
                                 Apoca. 6. Marci. 9, VVicleuꝰ in libro de confessione Hiere. 2 Whē they féele the terrible gnawing of inward fearefulnesse, they shal séeke vp their stinking remedyes, and require their dyrtie merytes, which is cleane to dye from Christ, and to forsake his liuing waters for their filthie puddels of hypocrisie and diuilishnesse. Yet by the singular grace and vnspeakeable mercie of God,
                                 Hiere. 31. Ioannes Hus de antichristo. 1▪ 
                                 Pet. 1. that they séeke shall flée cleane from them, and that they haue not sought for, shall saue them, which is the onely bloud and death of Iesus Christ. Thus shal they haue

life vnlooked for,
                                 Titum. 3. Gene. 5. Psal. 85. and be taken vp with Enoch from the wickednesse of thys world, and sée the God of Gods in Sion without their deseruing.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And the similitude of the locustes, vvas lyke vnto horses prepared vnto battayle. 2, And on their heads vvere as it vvere crovvnes lyke vnto gold. 3. And their faces vvere as it had bene the faces of men. 4. And they had hayre as the hayre of vvomen. 5. And theyr teeth vvere as the teeth of Lions. 6 And they had habbergyons, as it vvere habbergions of yron. 7. And the sounde of their vvinges vvas as the sounde of charettes, 8. vvhan manie horses runne togither to battayl. 9. And they had tayles lyke vnto Scorpions, 10. and there vvere stings in their tayls. 11. And their povver vvas to hurte men fyue monethes. 12. And they had a Kynge ouer them vvhich is the Angell of the bottomlesse pitte, 13. vvhose name in the Hebrue tongue is Abadon, but in the Greeke tonge Appollyon. 14. One vvo is past, and beholde tvvo vvoes come yet after this.
                        
                           
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 And the locusts in similitude were lyke vnto horses prepared vnto battayle full of stomake, stryfe,
                                 Sapi. 16▪ 
                                 Ro
                                       ••
                                    
                                  
                                 
                                    ••
                                  
                                 VValdem
                                       ••
                                     in 
                                       〈…〉
                                    .
                               contencion, anger, and hate, rygorous in examinacions, fierce in excommunicacyons, moodie in disputacions, mad, hastie, and cruell agaynst the veritie, and euermore grudging among them selues one secte agaynst another.
                           2 Upon their heades they had counterfect crownes in maner of gold.
                                 Esa. 28. Math. 23. Iacob. 3. Luce. 22. 3. Iohn. 1. Math. 23. Luce. 20. Marci. 12. Luce. 18. Glorious names of dignitie had they, and shynyng tytles of hyghe prehemynence vndeserued. Most holy fathers, most gracious Lordes, and moste reuerende maysters commonly were they called. They made large theyr phylacteries, & set abroad their skirts, they sought the highest places in the sinagoges, and salutacions of reuerence in the stréetes.
                           They were not as other men be. The simplest holy water priest amōg them was sir at the least, which is no lesse

than Lord.2. Tim. 3, 2. Thes. 2, Psalm. 36 Esa. 14, Abdie. 1 Esaie. 28 Phil. 3 Psalm. 1, By presumptiō, pride, and ambicion, they exalted them selues aloft as the Ceader trées of Lybanus, aboue Emperours, Kings and Prynces. Yea they set their seates in heauen, & became Gods vicars to dampne and saue at their pleasure. But w
                                 •
                               be to the proude crown of thys dronken generacion, whose God is theyr belly, and whose glorie is but duste, and shal be their shame & confusion.
                           3 Their faces were not vnlyke to the faces of men.
                                 Colo. 2, Apoca. 3. Iosephus Math. 6 Luke, 11. Math, 23 Marci. 12, And outwarde pretence they had of wisedome, grace, and godlines, yet was there nothing lesse with in them. Uerie prudent, wyse, & learned they séemed in theyr commoning, discréet in behauour, and sober in their lyuing, yet were they but paynted combes full of all sinne and filthinesse. The counterfait goodnesse they shewed outwardely, was onely to be séene of the world.
                           
                              Haymo 
                                    •
                                 span 34 Hayre they had on theyr heades most lyke to the hayre of women. All wauering were theyr myndes, inconstaunt fickle and foolyshe. Theyr

harts were geuen to vncleanesse,
                                 Iude. 1. 2. Peter. 2, Rom. 1▪ 
                                 Ezech. 4 Eccle. 2
                                    •
                                 , 2. Timo. 3 Act. 20. their fleshe to voluptuous desyres and pleasures, so that in them rayned all beastly abhominations. All execrable lustes flowed in them as the water of the Occean sea.
                           5 Their téeth were as the téeth of Lyons. For they were wholy geuen to gréedinesse, rauine, fiercenesse, and cruelty, not sparing, but deuouring the flock, not sauing, but loosinge, not helpinge, but destroyinge. These were those wilde beasts that trod downe the viniarde of the Lord,
                                 Canti. 2, Psalm. 79 Math. 10. Hiere. 23. Haymo. Albertus Luke. 22 1. Tim. 1. Math. 12. Hebre. 6. those vnresonable Bores, that hath rooted vp all, and those blood thirstye woulues that hath rente the poore Lambs in péeces.
                           6 Habbergyons had they vpon them lyke Iackes of Iron mayle, which signifieth their obstinate malice, their harde frowarde stubborne hartes against the verytie of God. For wilfully they resisted it, blaspheminge the holy ghost with the Pharisées and Scribes, whose sinne shal neuer be remitted in this world

nor in none other.
                           7 And the sounde of their winges was as the stout noyse of charrettes,
                                 Ioan Husde Anatomia antichristi. VVicle
                                       ••
                                    s li. 2. de sermone dōi in monte.
                               when many horses bus
                                 •
                              le together towardes a battayle. The wings of these abhominable locustes, that set them aloft so farre aboue them selues, are their dignities, offices, ryches, liberties, Priueleges, Lawes, and such lyke, whiche boldeneth them in all thinges, be it neuer so vniust.
                           8 The noyse of these is greate, the note, the rumoure, the fame is mightye the worlde ouer, as well in Cromeles and writings as in the speache of the people. Yea vnder the title of God they bolster their wickednesse to make it the stronger. All must be Gods dignities,
                                 Sebastianus meyer in Apocalipsim. Apoc. 18. Esa. 10. Miche 3. Rom. 16. Ioan. 16. Gods seruice, Gods lawes, Gods religions, when it is stark deuillishnes. They make what lawes they lyst, they commaunde and forbid, they set vp and pluck downe, they both cursse and blesse, yea they doe all mischiefe and all in his name. Be it neuer

so vngodly, cruell, and false, yet must it forth in ye name of god. Thus mightier winges they haue then had the great Eagle in Ezechiel. Neyther could Pharo in Egipt,
                                 Ezech. 17. Exod. 5. Daniell. 3 1. Macha. 1. Deut. 8. Hiere. 51. Esa. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . VVicleuus li. 2. de sermone domini in monte.
                               nor Nabuchodonosor in Babilon, nor Antiochus in Iury do that they might do héere in christendome.
                           9 For they had tayles lyke vnto Scorpions, and there were sharpe stinges in their tayles. Theyr study, labour, and practises was euer for a false conclusion. The ende of their faire compassed crafts, was alwaies to maintaine their errours and lies.
                           10 And this had a very sharpe sting. For death was towardes them that withstoode their ginnes. Destruction of body and goods was euermore at hand
                           11 Yet was their powre only to hurt men for v. monthes space,
                                 Primasius li. 3. in apo. Iob. 2. Math. 17. Ioan Hu
                                       •
                                     de regno Antichristi. Luce. 12. Sapi. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . to harme them in this sencible lyfe, deuided in fiue partes. No power had they vpon ye soules hence departed. Then could they not hynder with all their censures, black curses, suspencions,

disgradings, interdictions, excommunications, and all such terrible thunderbolts, with Booke, Bell, and Candle. Farther extended not their violence, then vpon the poore bodies. The soules were in Gods handes, whose mercy is neuer farre of.
                           12 A King they had ouer them, which is the Angell of the bottomlesse pit,
                                 Sapi. 1. Apoca. 20 Iob▪
                                  41. Iohn. 8. Luke. 11, 2. Thess. 2 1. Tim. 3. Psalm. 17, Math. 15, Hiere. 2. for he is the head captayne of all the children of pride, the master of errours, and the father of lyes. Néedes must the diuell be their king whiles his smoky doctrine hath nourished them, fed them, and set them foorth in their coulours.
                           Sure we are that they are straungers to God, for the heauenly father neuer planted them. Well, such people, such gouernour, such swarm, such stinking leader.
                           13 The name of this their capitayne in the Hebrue tongue is Abadon,
                                 Hieronimꝰ Erasmus. Math. 4. Gene 3 Luke. 11, Math. 12 and in the Gréeke tongue Apollyon, and both signifieth a spightfull destroyer. His nature is to persuade all euill, to infect the minde, to corrupt

the hart, to plucke away faith, to make the soule blinde,
                                 Franciscus Lambertꝰ
                               to robbe man of all goodnesse, to seperate hym from God, and to dampne hym with hym selfe for euer. Wo is that wretched army that hath such a Capitaine, and that forsaken multitude, which hath such a king.
                           14 One wo is past. One cursed season of execrable blasphemy,
                                 Bedas. Haymo. Albertus Magnus
                               darknesse and deuilishnesse, vnder the fift seale opening, and the fyft trumpet blowing is at an ende. But looke to it well, for two other woes, yet shall come after this vnder the sixt and vii. as here after wyll appeare.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And the sixt Angell blewe. 2, And I hearde a voyce from the. 3. Foure corners of the golden Aulter, which is before God, 4▪ Saying to the sixt Angell, which had the Trumpet. 5. Lose the fowre Angelles, which are bounde in the greate ryuer Euphrates, 6. And the fowre Angels were losed. 7. Whiche were prepared for an howre,

for a day, for a month, & for a yeare, 8. For to slea the thirde parte of men. 9. And the number of horsemen of vvar vvere tvventy times ten thousand. 10. And I hearde the number of them. 11. And thus I savv the horses in a vison. 12. And them that sate on them, hauyng fyerye habbergions of a yalovv and brimstonie coloure.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 Consequently the sixt Angell stoode forth and triumphantly blewe his Trumpet.
                                 The sixt Angell. Bedas anglus in apocalips. Sebastianus meyer.
                               Constantly the sincere preachers of this present age hath taught Christ and hys veritie, vnder this sixt seale openinge, wherin they haue disclosed the detestable errours and shamefull abhomynacion of the other age afore.
                           2 And as this Trumpet was blowen I harde (saith saint Iohn) a swéete voyce from the fowre corners of the golden Alter whiche is before the eyes of God.3. Reg. 7. Apoca. 8. Matth. 17. Iohan. 1 Hebr. 9. Iohan. 1.
                           
                           The Alter which is most precious, most deare, and most acceptable

                              
vnto GOD the Father, is Iesus Christe full of grace and verytie. Uppon hym was offered one pleasaunt offeringe, whose aboundaunt swéetnesse hath releued all faithfull beléeuers.
                                 Colo. 2▪ 
                                 Roma. 5. 2. Cor. 5. And nothinge is accepted before GOD to this present day, vnlesse it be offered vppon hym. None Alter els alloweth he for the sacrifice of peace, neither Mary, nor Iohn, Peter nor Iames.
                           Uppon him we offer when we trust only in hym,
                                 Hebre. 9▪ 
                                 Rom. 12 Colo. 3. 1. Pet. 2, Math. 28. and also when we liue according to true faith in hym restraining our olde Adam, with his fleshly desyres.
                           
                              3 The fowre corners of this alter is the Gospell,
                                 Marci. 16. Rom. 10 Math. 16 Gala. 4. Rom. 8. which he hath left by his Apostles in the fowre quarters of the vniuersall worlde. The voyce is the ioyfull tidings or message therof. And this signifieth Christ not onely to haue his church within the dominion of Rome vnder bondage, but also in all other partes of the world in lybertie
                           All these fowre corners hath but one voyce. The Gospell euery where taught hath but one heauenly message of mercy and peace from God the father,
                                 Ephe. 1, Iohn. 16 Rom. 1 1. Cor. 15. Ihon. 14 one glad tiding of health, and saluation from Iesus Christe, and one swéete smell of the grace of God and of victory in Christ from the holy ghost.
                           4 And this one voyce commaunded the sixt Angell which had the Trumpet or the true faithfull preachers vnder the sixt seale openinge, which had the administration of the word at the onely gift of God.
                           5 To goe foorth and to lose the fowre Angelles which are bounde in the

great riuer of Euphrates. Many hath the Lord anoynted with his spirit in this age to preache delyueraunce to the captiue, to open the pryson to thē that were in bondage,
                                 Luke. 4, Esa. 61, Amos. 9, Hiere. 31, Iohn, 5, Psalm. 1
                                    ••
                                  2. Para. 7 Baruch. 6, Math. 2
                                    •
                                 
                               and to declare the acceptable yeare of health. By whose preaching he hath now vntha
                              
                                 ••
                              led the children of the dead and set them at libertie to preache his name in Syon, and to worshippe him in Hierusalem. Manye that afore were fettered with fantasies, yoked with vnaduised vowes, & ouercharged with intollerable burthens amōg Byshoppes, Priestes, Monkes, Chanons, Fryers, and Noones, are now graciously delyuered,
                                 Hebre, 9 Lutherus aduersus presendo episcopos. Franciscus Lambertꝰ in Apoca▪
                                 
                               and with a frée conscience confesseth the verytie of God,
                           6 So that many among the fowre Angels, or a great number of them that were sometime Antichristes, Hypocrites, Tyrauntes, and murthers, are now losened from Euphrates the great flood of wauering fantasies, and of the sickle pleasures of this worlde.
                           
                              For though they were sore bound in their conscience and lyfe, yet wanted they there no wanton delightes, to nourish and féederal fleshlinesse.
                                 Idē Lambertus de caulis excecacionis multorum seculorum. Acto, 4. Iohn. 8. They lacked nothing that might maintaine their pompe, vayne glory, couetousnesse, pryde, glottony, and lechery, but they had it in abundance. And though the nature of Gods worde be as of a key to open vnto them that beléeue, and to speare vnto them that beléeue not, yet is it fayde héere to open vnto both. But yet in diuers respects. For in the chosen sort it openeth to loue, in ye other it openeth to hate. The one bringeth forth hony by it wt the Bée, ye other venim with the spyder. The one is made more méeke and gentle, the other wareth more cruel and mad.
                                 Acto. 10. Iohn, 7, 2. Cor. 2. Luke. 2. 
                                    〈◊〉
                                 . 6, 2▪ 
                                 Thes. 2. Mala. 3, Apoca. 7. As Paule saith vnto some it is the sauer of life vnto lyfe, and some againe it is that sauer of death vnto death. For hard is that worde to the execrable Angelles 
                                 〈◊〉
                               children of Sathan, callinge them from Euphrates.
                           
                              They can in no wise abide it. Yet were the fowre Angels loosoned frō thence, and hath lost a great parte of theyr pleasures. Since the Gospell came in, the Antichristes hath lost the prophets of their Buls, pardons,
                                 Ioannes vvicleuꝰ in sua confessione. et in libello ad parliamentum regis.
                               confessions, pryuy tythes, ydol offerings, purgatory, masses, bell christenings, church hallowings with other loose endes. The Hypocrits hath lost their more then princely habitations, their monasteries, couents, hospitalles, preben
                                 •••
                              ies and chaunteries, with their fat féeding & warme couches, for yll gotten good will home againe. The tiraunts and murtherrers haue not now their pleasures in all poyntes as they had afore tyme, what though their cru
                                 •
                              ltie be stil as much as it was and rather more. For the people is not now to their minde as then.
                                 Franciscus. Lambertꝰ li. 3 in Apocalipsum. Otho brū
                                    felsius et alij.
                              
                           
                           And as these Angels are losoned in this quarter of ye world, so shal they be in all then other quarters, the Lorde appoyntinge theyr tymes.

One corner of the aulter hath geuen his voyce I doubt it not but the other thrée will shortly doe the same.
                           7 The fowre yll Angels were prepared (saith saint Iohn) for an houre, for a dae,
                                 Daniel. 12 Iohn. 7. for a month, and for a yéere. At no time are the Antichristes vnready to doe mischiefe, the hypocrits to deceiue, the tiraunts to persecute and kyll. Since Christes time to this day neuer ceased they,
                                 Ioachim Abbas in apocalip. Eusebius cesarienfis
                               but styll euermore they haue ben doyng. Yet hath their fiercenesse bene more and longer at one time then at an other, more vehement in some places then in some. And at this time, their continuance is some where longe, some where short. Some where is their crueltie more,
                                 Iohannes Nauclerus Iacobus bergomēsis
                               some wher lesse. Their dayes are not alwayes alike, nor their liues of one length.
                           8 Notwithstandinge for their time they shrinke not, but styll 
                                 〈◊〉
                               goe forward to slay the third part of men. None other can the tyraunt be but a Tyraunt, nor the Antichriste but an Antichriste. None other

parte can the hypocrite play but hys owne,
                                 Ioan Hus de Anatomia antichristi.
                               nor yet the spightfull murtherer. Euer séeke they to kill the innocent people. Euermore practise they to bringe out of the way,
                                 Math. 23 Iohn. 16 Sebastianus meyer. Apoca. 8, Ticonius Apher. ex primasi
                                       •
                                     & Ansberto.
                               the rightuous seruants of God, taken héere for the third part of men or in the smaller number, for so much as héere is neither bloud, nor fyre, wormwoode, nor smoke.
                           9 And the number of their horsmen, lyke vnto ye horsemen of armes in warre, was twenty times tenne thousand, or ten score thousand. An innumerable multitude haue they sent forth the world ouer, to deceiue and blinde, to destroy and kyll.
                                 Ioannes brencius. Act. 8. 2. Peter. 2 Math. 10 Daniel. 12 Horsed they are with their beastly lawes and decrées, and armed with their fierce authoritie and cruell power. And who is not now an horseman of theirs, and a cruell Saul, making hauock of Christes poore congregation? Euery where they by them and sell them, betray them and accuse them, persecute and emprison them, indite them, and burne them.
                           
                              10 And I heard the number of them (saith sainct Iohn) or knew certainly asorehand that ye truth in those daies should haue many such enimies I vnderstood it in spirit,
                                 Ambrosius Ansbertus li. 4. super apocalipsim. Haymo Apoca. 9. I beléeued it and surely marked it vp for a warninge to them that shoulde come after.
                           11 Consequently I saw the setting forth of them. I behelde in a vision the horses, frank, fat, and fearce, which were none other then the aforsayd locustes that crept out of the smoke from the bottomlesse pytt
                                 •
                              .
                           In the fift opening or blast of the Trumpet,
                                 Thomas Naogeorgꝰ in pāmachio. Ioannes vvicleuꝰ li. 2. de sermone domini in monte
                               which was the rank time of their goynge forth they were but locustes, leane, bare and néedy. In their beginning the Antichristes and hypocrites, as Byshoppes, Priestes, Monkes, Chanons and Fryers, were poore, abiecte and vntydy. But vnder the sixt they grew vnto great horses. They were so pampered with possessions, fatted with pleasures, and boldened with aucthorytie.
                           And when they were once comē into

the estimacion of the worlde, then waxed they high, heady, fierce, proud, and cruell. Then were they horses of pleasure for Princes, and worldly magistrates, to carye them at theyr owne lustes, for they were vnbrideded. No lawes had they for them.
                                 Bēno cardinalis. Ioannes Carion. Thomas vvaldenus Fabianus Polidorus li. 22. Chro.
                               The scepture, Crowne, sworde and power, might then passe none otherwise in Emperours and kings then they had fantasied.
                           A faut then done against them, could be no lesse then both heresy and treason. If they sayde but burne, then must they be both drawne, hanged, and burned, no remedye. For that that toucheth thē, toucheth the princes honour also, to make the matter more greuouse. They shoulde not els be both partners in ye vengeance of God for innocent bloud shedding. Yet hurt they not the rightuousnes in all their mischiefe,
                                 Math. 23. Luke. 1
                                    •
                                  
                                 Sapi. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 , Psal. 115 Apoca. 6 Ephe. 2. though 
                                 •
                              t so appeareth vnto thē, for so much as their death is precious in ye sight of ye Lord, and their dwelling place ye alter of god, Christ ful of rest & peace.
                           
                              12 And the men that sate on these horses had fyerye Habbergions of a yalow and brimstone coulour. The Princes and Rulers prouoked by the craftes of these false Prophetes and deceiuable teachers to ryse against Christ and his worde,
                                 Exod. 7, 3. Reg. 22, Psalm. 2 2. Tim. 3 Colo. 2. vvaldenus in fasciculo Zizaniorū
                                 
                               are armed with crueltie in vnrightuousnesse, with a false charitie, and with a counterfeit wisdome. In the examination of causes they wyll oft tymes séeme fauourable, louinge and wyse, when in effect they are nothing lesse. For moue them once with the truth, or the quick learning of the spirit, and then wyll they do as doth the Brimstone that is touched with fier. They flame out their malice,
                                 Sebastianus meyer, in Apoca. Sabellicus Platina. Blondus Carsulanus
                               they spit forth their wickednesse, and their filthye iudgementes stinketh the worlde ouer.
                           Many such swéet sauers of their politique wisdome or rather fleshly foolishnesie, haue they left behind them in the chronicles and histories that vnwholsōly sauoreth yet to this day.

And this haue they of their vnbrideled horses, their ghostly fathers,
                                 vvernerus. Cornelius Agripda
                               confessours, & coūsellers, ouer whō their selues haue neither power nor aucthoritie but as they list.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And the heades of the horses were as the heades of Lyons. 2. And out of theyr mouthes went foorth fyre and smoke, and brymstone, 3. And of these three was the thyrd parte of men killed. 4. That is to saye, of fyre, smoke, and brimstone, which proceded out of the mouthes of them. 5. For their power was in theyr mouthes, 6. and in theyr tayles. 7. For their tayles were lyke vnto Serpentes, 8. and had heades, and vvith them they did hurt. 9. And the remnaunt of men, vvhich vvere not killed by these plages, 10. repented not of the deedes of theyr handes, 11. that they shoulde not vvorship diuilles. 12. and Images of golde and siluer, & brasse and stone, and of vvoode, 13. vvhich neyther can see, neyther heare, neyther goe. 14. Also they repented not of theyr murther, and of their vvitchcrafte, 15. neyther theyr vvhoredome, neyther of their thefte.
                        
                           
                           The Paraphrase
                           1 The heades of these horses were in similitude as the heades of Lyons,
                                 Haymo. li. 2. in apocalipsi.
                               which betokeneth their proude, bold, and mightie malice against gods veritie. In the other age when they were but locustes,
                                 Ioan Hus de regno antichristi.
                               they had the faces of men, for some reason yet appeared in their lawes and dooings, though they stoode not all with Gods word. But since they grew vp in courage, and becam furious horses,
                                 vvicleuꝰ li. 2. de sermone domini in monte.
                               they haue layde away those faces and nowe takē to them fierce Lions heads. Now is there nothyng in them but open malice, crueltie, and spight. Now are they termagauntes all togither,
                                 
                                    Lambertꝰ Shafnaburgensis
                                 
                                 
                                    Sigebertus gemblacensis.
                                 
                                 
                                    Otho phrisingensis.
                                 
                               and very diuilles incarnate, where their dyrtie tradicions be not kepte. So eger they are, theyr horse men can not restraine them, their princes can not rule them in suche a matter, vnlesse they will be torne in péeces, as many of their predecessours haue béene afore tyme both Emperours, Kings, and other gouernors.
                           
                              2 For out of theyr mouthes goeth fyre, smoke, & brimstone,
                                 Isaie. 56, Math. 24 2. Peter. 2, 12. Peter. 5▪ 
                                 Ephe. 6, Gods worde they preach not, for they are become horses. Their office is now to carrie whither it shall please them, and to leade the princes at their lust. Nowe roare they lyke Lyons with theyr great grandsyr Sathā, séeking whom they may deuoure. Now breath they foorth of their execrable mouthes the hote fyre of their threatenings & curses.
                                 Iohn. 16 Acto 9, Lucke. 21 2. Tim. 3. 1, Tim. 4, Now vomet they abroad the filthie smoke of their vanities and fables. Now spew they out the stinking brimstone of their lies and errors.
                           3 So that they haue kylled with these thrée plages the third parte of men.
                                 Ioannes Hussius de regno, vita, et moribus antichristi.
                               But yet none other els than those which hath giuen creadence to their errours, beléeued their fables and feared their curses.
                           4 For none other were slaine, but they only whiche tasted of the fyre, smoke, and brimstone, that went out of their mouths. None other els were lost & depriued of the life which is in Christ Iesu, but such deuout dottrels,
                                 Collo. 3. 1. Cor. 1. Baruca. 6
                              
and worldlye wyse people as they taught and brought vp in false worshippinges.
                           5 No doubte of it but the power of these cruell beastes was most in their mouthes.
                                 Sebastianus meyer in Apoca.
                               The strength of the deceyuable teachers to begile the wretched Idiothes and blynd asses of ye world, is euermore in their spéech, in theyr sermons, confessions, and priuy counsayles. There with doe they infatuate them, blynde them, & kill them.
                           6 Much power haue they also in their tayles behinde,
                                 Iohans VVicleus de confessione Latinorum.
                               which is not onelye their hypocritish lyfe, but also theyr pestilent traditions, lawes, and customes, with these doe they sore infecte and gréeuously poyson.
                           7 Let no man thinke their noyance to be light nor their gréeuance smal,
                                 Franciscus Lambertꝰ li. 3. in opocalipsim. Otho brū
                                    felsius in loc
                                       •
                                    s communibus.
                               considering that their tayles are lyke vnto serpents, and haue heads wherwith they hurte. Not onely doth their doctryne for theyr lyfe tymes styng, venim and corrupt the sillie soules, but also their examples, constitucyons, and vsages, lefte behynde them

to be performed of other which followeth,
                                 Math. 25. 2. Tim. 3 Marci. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 
                               to the ouerlading of their cō
                              science also, doeth poyson them vnto death. They infect their beliefe, and prouoke them to trust in vain things, and are ieoperdous euery where.
                           8 Oh horrible beastes, and most cruell monsters. Noyfull are they both in the head & in the tayle,
                                 Ioannes Hus in quedā loca Apocalipseos.
                               before and behinde, comming in and going out. No where are they good, if they once appeare. Let him that will not perish shurne their company, consideryng that no man dwell with them without great perill. In their mouthes is venime, in theyr tayles is poyson.
                                 Sebastianus Meyer in Apoca.
                               Both theyr lawes and theyr lyues, theyr counsayles & their ceremonies, their holinesse and blessings, are all hypocrisie, sinne, & pestilent doctrine of diuilles. Only are the lawes of the Lord holy, true, & perfecte,1, Tim. 4. Psal. 18 Math. 5, 1. Iohn. 2. Hiere, 13 Apoca. 16 Luke. 21 conuerting the poore in spirite, and gyuing wisedome vnto children. The Antichristes and the hypocrites thus put frō their swéet Euphrates, wherin they swimmed in all plesure, welth, & ease, what

is more in this age to be loked for the terrible warre? Consider that héere in this prophecie they are no lesse thē cruell horses and vengeable beastes,
                                 Primasiꝰ 
                                       •
                                    pher. li. 3. in apocal. Franciscus Lambertꝰ li. 3. in opocalipsim.
                               hauyng before them Lyons heades with fyre, smoke, and brimstone, and behynd them serpents heads to sting, venim, and kil. Ponder this also, that they haue power to carrie the Princes & magistrates at their pleasure, for they are vnmoseled. Yea, what though some notable gouernors hath gotten victoriously of them, ye prymacie of their owne realmes, to bée the supreame, highest, & immediate heads of their clergie héere in earth vnder God (which is a wonder) yet are they scarce able to put aside one corrupte custome or dirtie ceremony of theirs.
                                 Let open experience be herein an able witnesse. Bedas. Albertus Magnus visione. 3. But all their diuilishnesse must néeds stand still vnder ye colour of laudable rites, decent vsages, & polytique orders. For whie, they are perilous beastes, and their mouthes yet open, wherin they haue both fyre, smoke, and brimstone, which are most terryble thynges, and in theyr tayles

poison, which is moste daungerous. What a fearful blast is this to them, which more feareth men then God? If your grace doe suffer this newe trade still to goe forward,
                                 Eccli. 16 Daniell. 6 Cornelius Agripda in querela super calumpnia.
                               ye shal procure yea the mallice of all reygons, the hate of all Princes, and the crueltie of all peoples. They shal inuade your realm, consume your substance, and distroy your commons, with such lyke. Where as if ye take an other way, ye shal haue their beneuolence, loue, and fauour. Thus dallie they with their heade rulers, and neyther make them faithfull, Dauids,
                                 Esa. 55, 3. Reg. 4, 2 Para. 4. Eccli. 4
                                    •
                                  
                                 Gene. 4 wise, Salomons manfull Iosaphats, valiaunt Iehues, godlie Iosiases, nor holy Ezochiases, but very fearefull & faint bartod Caines, thinking yt euery man, which commeth by ye way will kill thē. This will be the rule of this present age no doubt of it. For vnto kings hath not.
                                 Apoca. 6. Esa. 11 2. Thes. 2. Math, 22 Luc
                                       •
                                    . 12. God giuen it to subdue these beastes. Onlie is it reserued to ye victory of his liuing word. Only shall ye breath of his mouth distroy

them,
                                 Franciscus Lambertꝰ li. 2. in Apocalipsim
                               grinde them to dust, and throw them into hell fyre. Let the faithfull beléeuer therefore considering ye mischiefe of this time wherin nothing is lyke to be certayne and sure, in land, shiere, citie, towne, no, nor yet house, appointe him self to persecution, losse of goods, exyle, prison, sorow, & death, of bodie for the truthes sake, thinking that his porcyon is in the lande of the lyuing. For nowe are the perillous dayes vnder ye voice of ye sixt trompe,
                                 Psalm. 141 Daniell. 12 VVicleuꝰ & Ioannes Hussius. Gala. 6. Apoca. 7 Act. 1, Iaco. 5. these madde, fierce, ragyng beastes being abroad. Where as vnder ye seuenth, the carnal church reiected, and the Antichristes ouerthrowe, ye ryght Israell of the Iewes and Gentyles tokened with fayth, shall be pacyable restored into the possessiō of God. In the meane season let them that liue now pray, and haue theyr whole hope and comforte in the Lord.
                           9 And the remnaunt of men (sayeth Sainct Iohn) that were not kylled with these plagues,
                                 Sebastianꝰ Meyer in commentario super Apocalipsim.
                               which are they whom God hath called in this age by the true preachers, from theyr detetestable

doctrine & erronious wayes, vnto the sure knowledge of his godly veritie and Gospel.1. Peter. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 , Roma. 1. Heb. 2 2. Tim. 4, These remember not the singular benifite of God, they magnifie not his holy name for their deliueraunce from these moste daungerous plages of no lesse thē dampnacion in them selues, but remayne altogither vnthankefull.
                           10 They repente not from the hearte the déedes of theyr handes.
                                 Apoca. 2, Hebr. 12 Franciscus Lambertꝰ in Apoca. Rom. 14. 1. Cor. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 
                                 ▪
                               They haue no remorse in conscience of their olde wycked workes. No, they amende not theyr lyues, nor yet fashyon them selues to the true trade of the Gospell. But rather they are slaunderous vnto it, by vndiscréetly vsing the liberties thereof, ministring occasions of fallyng vnto the weake.
                           11 They sée the people in dyuers points of Idolatrie runne headlings to the diuill,
                                 Theodorꝰ bibliander in consualtatione▪
                                 
                               yet doe they not brotherly admonishe them by the scriptures of the daungers therof. They shewe thē not yt the worshipping of Images.
                           12 Which are made of dead things,
                                 Baru
                                       ••
                                    .
                              
                              
as gold, siluer, brasse, stone, and wood, is the very worshipping of diuils.
                                 Psalm. 95 Sapi. 15. Psalm. 113. Math. 5, Rom. 15 1. Ioan. 3, Luke. 10
                           
                           13 They tell them not that they bée sinful mens workes, and can neither see nor heare, speake nor goe. They wil be called Christian brethren, yet is it no dolour vnto them to sée their brethren perish, for whō they ought to ieoperde their lyues. They muste séeme Samaritanes, yet wil they not heale the woundes of them that are more then halfe deade, yea, is not to bée feared that for doubt of punishment and losse of their goods, they looke backe agayne towarde Sodome with Lots wyfe,
                                 Math. 13. Gene. 19, Luke. 17. Apoc. 18. Chrisostomus. Cirillus.
                               consenting to theyr abhominations? Let them not think that so doeth, but a double plague foloweth them. More worthie is he to perish ye throweth him self willingly into a perell knowing it afore,
                                 Rom. 1. Apoca. 22, thē he which neuer knew it.
                           14 Neyther repented they (sayeth Sainct Iohn) of their murther, theyr witchcraft, their whordom, nor their 
                                 ••
                              eft. They sée of their owne congregation in pouertie, penurie, prisō, and exile, & they know it is for none other

then the testimony of Iesu. Yet haue they no mynde to help them.
                                 Hiere 
                                 
                                    ••
                                 . Apoca. 1. 1 Tim. 5. Iohn. 12 Luke. 8, Act. 5, 2. Thess. 
                                 
                                    •
                                  
                                 Math. 13. No courage haue they to comfort thē. They dare not be acknowne to fauour that sorte. When any trouble commeth, they are none of them. They are wel contented to haue Christ in daliaūce, but if he put them once to payne, or aske ought of them, thē bid they him adue, they can no skill of him, they know him not, the farther of the better. Thus are they become neyther hote nor cold,
                                 Apoca. 3, 1. Iohn. 3. Iacob. 2, 1. T
                                    •
                                 m. 5. Daniel. 14▪ 
                                 Bar
                                       ••
                                    a. 6 Apoca. 17 Sebastianus Meyer
                               ready to be spewed out of the mouth of God None other are they then murtherers that succoure not their brethren. Worse are they then infidels that helpeth not ye houshold of faith. The witchcrafts of ye hipocrits they know by ye euidēt scriptures, yet will they not flée frō thē.
                           15 They know the open whordom of the babilonicall strūpet, they know hir theft and robbery, euermore spoiling God of his honour, yet wil they r
                                 •
                              nne to it, séeke it, and take parte of it with the vnfaithfull. What is hée 
                                 •
                              ls that runneth wyth a théefe,
                                 Psalm. 4▪
                              
                              
but a théefe also.
                                 Hebr. 6. Math. 2
                                    •
                                  
                                 Luke. 19 2. Peter. 2. 2. Cor. 1. Rom. 1. 2 Thes. 2. Luke. 12, Iaco. 4. Math. 12 Alacke they treade vnder their feete the precious gift of God. Lyke vnprofitable seruauntes, they hyde his godly treasure vnderneth the grounde. And lyke vnreasonable dogges they turne agayne to theyr vomete. The heauenly father of his eternall mercy, graunt such to amend▪ For a much greater plague abideth them than the other, thought it be not here named. For many stripes are due to that seruant which knoweth his Lordes will, and doeth it not, yea, to sinne against knowledge, is against the holy ghost & irremissible.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The tenth Chapter.
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And I sawe an other mightie Angel, 2. come dovvn from heauen, 3. clothed vvith a cloude, 4. and the Raynbovv vpon his head. 5. And his face, as it vvere the sun, 6. and his feete as it vvere pillers of fyre 7. And he had in his hande a little booke open. 8. And hee put his ryght foote vpon the Sea, and hys lefte foote on the earth. 9. And cryed vvith a loude voyce, as vvhen a Lyon roareth. 10.

And vvhen hee had cryed, seuen thunders spake their uoyces. And vvhē the vij. thūders had spoken theyr voyces, 12. I vvas aboute to vvright. And I hearde a voyce from heauen saying vnto mee. 13. Seale vp these thinges, vvhich the seuen thunders spake. 14. And vvryte them not.
                        
                           
                              
The Paraphrase. 1
                           IN the middest of this moste vengeable tyme,
                                 Ioan Hu
                                       •
                                     de regno antichristi. Apoca. 9. Bedas. Franciscus Lambertꝰ in apocal.
                               wherin the Antichristes & hipocrites most fiercely sturreth about them, 
                                 〈◊〉
                               vexe all the worlde with theyr 
                                 •
                              erie blastes, theyr filthie smoke, 
                                 •
                              nd theyr stinking brymstone, to restore

agayn theyr pleasaunt Euphrates, the Lorde hath sent to the comfort of his certaine peculiar and chosen learned men, moste constantlye to defende his veritie. And then, this present reuelation compareth to a strong Angell.
                           1 I sawe (saith sainct Iohn) an other mightie strong Angell come downe from heauen.
                                 Cobanus Hessus▪ Ioannes Hilten.
                               With a stoute power came thys Aungell from God to withstand the furious beastes in thys sixt age of Christes church, wherein they rage so sore. God hathe raysed some godly persons now,
                                 Melanchtō VValdenꝰ, Hiere. 1. Acto 9. 3. Esdre. 3, by whome many things are opened that afore tyme were hidde, accept it were to a fewe poore soules in corners. Cōstant are these and earnest, yea inuincible warriours by the word of God. For who can bée more strong then they which fi
                                 •
                              ht with an inuincible weapon? Which is the veritie of God. That valiaunt cōquerour hath victorie in them, which promised to giue them such mouth and wisedom as all enimyes should not bée able to resist,
                           
                              2 This Angell, or ministers signified by him,
                                 Math. 10. Luke. 21 Franciscus Lambertꝰ Iohn 20 Apoca. 8. Esa. 14. Math. 15▪
                               descende downe from heauen with Christ their maister, as messengers sent of God. The Apostates and Antichristes falleth down from heauen with theyr Captayne Lucifer, lyke starres of darkenesse. And as wicked séede not planted of God they ryse vp in the world.
                           3 This Angell was cloathed with a cloude,
                                 Petru
                                       •
                                     Berthori▪ Iohn. 15. betokening these godly supporters of the Lords truth to be compassed with many harde showers and troublous crosses of opprobrious rebukes, scornes, slaunders, lies, and open blasphemyes, to the vttermoste tryall of their weake fleshe. And this cloude hideth from the world all that is in them spirituall and godly,
                                 Math. 5▪ 
                                 Luke. 6▪ 
                                 Mala. 2. Phil. 2, Acto. 20. Iohn. 9. Iohn. 12. Iohn. 19 lyke as it did in Christ, that to many they séeme not yt they are in déed. Bicause they are dispysed of the craftie generation, and euill spoken of by the hypocrites, ye simple Idiotes and deceyued multitude doth iudge them ill doers, yea, they suppose them very heretiques, and so doeth spyghtfullye

call them. Where as in verie déede they are the Angels of God, and most high chosen messengers.
                                 Mala. 2, Acto, 4. Esa. 60. Augustinꝰ et Bedas. Eccli. 39 1. 
                                    〈◊〉
                                 . 3. Iohn. 15 The Apostles thus vsed also of ye world, were named cloudes of Esay the Prophet verie long before they preached the Gospell. What are these (sayth he) that flyeth lyke cloudes. These were and are they that euery where poureth downe the sweete dewe & rayne of the mysteries of God, and seasonably moysteneth the grounde of faythfull heartes, causing them to bryng foorth their fruites in due season.
                           4 Upon the head of this Angel was the Rainebow.
                                 Eccli. 4
                                    •
                                  
                                 Psalm. 102 Esa. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 3, Gene. 9. And in thys are they noted to be the Angels of the couenaunt, and the messengers of peace▪ For so much as the Raynebow was the signe of Gods couenaunt concerning the floud. Theyr message is that Christ is the only sauiour of ye world,
                                 Act. 4. Heb 7. Roma. 8. Gala. 4. and that none can perish beleeuing in him. No dampnation is there to them which are in Christ Iesu. No though they neuer knowe one ceremony or popish constitution of theirs.
                           
                              Though they neuer heare Masse nor goe procession,
                                 Titu
                                       •
                                    . 3. Esa. 1. vvicleuꝰ Ephe. 2. Collo. 1. Ioannes Oecolam padius in Esaiā. Rom. 4▪ 
                                 Luce. 18. though they neuer be greased, shauen, nor disguised, though they neuer haue Beades, Latine Primers, portifolyomes, nor other signes of hipocrisie, yet are they promysed to haue attonemente with God.
                           Most rightly hath this Angell the raynebow on hys head, for all the study, practise and dilligence of the faithfull ministers, is to declare the frée mercy of God, and most friendly beneuolence in Christe withoute any pointe or iote of mens deseruinges, least they shoulde perishe with the Pharysy for trustinge in their owne workes.
                           5 The face of this Angell was as the bright sun.
                                 Phil 2. Mala, 3, Iohn, 12, Rom. 2. Henricus Bullingerꝰ
                               Their outward shew is altogether Christe, whiche is the sonne of ryghtuousnesse. None other lyght shew they but hys. None other doctrine declare they but hys holy Gospell, neyther decrées, nor decretals, fathers constitutions nor Sinodals.

But them they leaue to the darke bloddy starres which are fallen from heauen.
                                 Apoca. 9 
                                    •
                                 . Iohn. 4 Onely teache they the shining charytie of God, the feruent zeale, and burninge desyre towardes mans saluation. Neyther aduance they ceremonies nor rytes, holy dayes nor offeringes, dirges nor masses,
                                 Martinus Lutherus de tradicionibus humanis. Math. 5. Esa. 1. VVicleuꝰ in trialogo 1. Thes. 4. 1, Tim. 5, purgatory nor reliques.
                           And as concerning their lyues, more GOD desyreth not of the Christian minister, then to expende hys whole study, labour, and time to the lyghtening of other. He neyther commaundeth them to be shauen, nor disguised, to be popishe Prieste nor Monke, to saye mattens nor Euensong, to fast fryday nor vigill, to abhorre maryage nor meates. Onely he wylleth them to edyfye his flock, with none other learninge then hys Godly trueth. This is theyr onely office.
                           6 The féete of this Angell were in similitude as pillers of fyer.
                                 Apoca. 
                                 
                                    •
                                  
                                 Gala. 2. 1. Tim. 3 Hiere. 1. Stronge sustentacles and sure staies hath god made ye vpholders of his true church.

Feruent affections hath he geuen them, constant stomaks,
                                 Luke. 2
                                    •
                                  3. Esd. 3. Psalm. 2
                                    •
                                  
                                 Esa. 52 Nahum. 8 Rom. 10 and so inuincible a power as no violēce can resist. Douty & stronge is the administration, where the verytie remayneth, for it bringeth with it the magestie of God O how bewtifull (saith Esay) are the feete of the Embassadours of the Lord, which bringeth ye message of peace, and the tidinges of health vnto Syon?
                           7 He had in his hand a little booke open.1. Cor. 12 Apoca. 4. Luke, 24. Esa. 35. Math. 11. Psalm. 118 Iaco. 1. Math. 7 Iohn. 14▪
                               In their administration are ye scriptures euydent and cléere, opened by the Lambe, and much godlye knowledge is receiued of other by them. Blessed be the Lorde whiche hath opened ye booke. Now may the creple stand vp, ye blind sée their way, ye poore féede & be satified. Desire therfore wt faithfull Dauid from ye very hart, to haue vnderstāding & to know ye testimonies of god. Are méekely and haue, séeke wisely and finde, knocke gently and the dore wyll be opened. Uery lyke is it that the Lorde God doth minde plentuouslye to spreade

the doctrine of his spirite in this sixt age of his churche,
                                 Act. 
                                 
                                    ••
                                  
                                 Apoca. 4. this booke beynge thus opened.
                           And that all the worlde shall receiue it, rebell the hypocrits neuer so sore.
                                 Math 24 Apoca. 7 Math. 15 Eusebius cesarien. Franciscus. Lambertꝰ in Apoca.
                               When the Gospell appeared in Christes tyme, the Iewes were the first that receiued it, after the Greks, and last of all the Latines. Now in this later time it openeth to the Latines by the administration of this mighty Angel and his affinitie, and from them is going to the Gréekes, for many of them now of late hath graciouslye receiued it, as we haue harde. And laste of all it shall returne agayne to the Iewes,
                                 Martinus Lutherus. Br
                                       •
                                    
                                    ̄felsius. Luke. 11 Math. 20 Hiere. 31 Aggei. 2 as now very apt also to receiue it. That Christes prophecye may be founde true. The last to be the fyrst, and the fyrst the last. For he that hath dispersed Israell, shall bringe him againe to his folde, as Heiremy recordeth. Thus shal the glory of God be within few yeares séene the world ouer, to the comfort of many.
                           
                              8 This Angell set his righte foote vpon the sea, and his left foote vpō the earth.
                                 Ambrosius Ansbertus Hiere. 31 Esai. 61. Marci. 16▪ 
                                 Ihon. 6, As well shall the weake people receiue this verytie as the strong, the poore as the rich, the lowe as the high, the sicke as the whole, the sinner as the rightuous, the begger, as the king, the vnlearned as the learned, the laboring man as the priest, and much rather.1. Cor. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 
                               For the right foote is towardes them. The Ile that is speared vp with the maine sea, yea,
                                 Franciscus Lambertꝰ in Apoca. Math. 24 Hiere. 31 Sebastianus meyer. in Apoca. 6▪
                               and they also which be vpon the sea, shall so well haue it as the open wide country, or as they, which dwell vpon the most pleasaunt lande. From none shall the Booke be speared. Euery where shall the trueth be open, as well by writings as wordes, and as well by bookes as preachinges. Upon both shall thys Angell treade. Both sortes of people shall be subiectes to that verytie, whiche those Godly messengers shall bringe, submitting themselues as foo
                                 •
                              s
                                 •
                              ooles vnto it.
                                 Psalm. 9
                                    •
                                 
                                 ▪ 
                                 Ioannes 
                                       〈…〉
                                    .
                               Some vngodly rulers there be both by sea and lande, both in the

Iles and the open countrye,
                                 Otho brū
                                    felsius in annotacio
                                    
                                       •
                                    ibus 
                                       •
                                    nā
                                    geliorum.
                               that wyll none of this Angell with this open Booke. In no wise will they suffer hym to set footeinge within their regions, but commaundeth vnder payne of death, that no man teach his doctrine nor heare it, that no man prynte his bookes, bye them, sell them, reade them, holde them, fauour them, nor beare them vpō hym. But al is in vayne. Let thē wax mad, swell, and fret themselues to death, yet wyll he treade vppon theyr ground. Let them persecute, fetter, stock, famish, slea, hange, head, burne,
                                 Ioa
                                       •
                                    him Abbas in Hieremi. Lutherus aduersus pseudo Episcopos.
                               drowne, yea, and bu
                                 •
                              y quicke with all other mischife and tyranny, yet will the trueth abroad.
                           9 For the Angell crieth with so loude a voyce, as the Lyon when he roareth.
                                 Apoca. 19. Herb 4▪ 
                                 Apoca. 5 Gene. 1. Math. 16. Hebr. 4. Ephe. 6 
                                    〈◊〉
                                 . 21. 1. Cor. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . So mighty and strong is the worde yt they preach, and the verytie that they shewe, as was the sharpe lyuinge worde, that Christe spake, which was the inuincible Lyon of Iuda. And so mighty is that as made both heauen and earth, so stronge as

destroyeth the power of hell, so sharp as deuideth the soule from the spirit, and the ioyntes from the marye, and so waighty as when it falleth, grindeth to powder all pryde, power, magnificence, wisedome, ryches, and vaine pollycye of this worlde, none shall be able to abyde it.
                           10 And when the Angell had cryed, and vttered this terryble noyse,
                                 Hiymo. lib, 3. in Apoca. Franciscus Lambertꝰ P
                                       •
                                    alm. 9 Rom. 1. Apoca. 7 seauen thounders spake their voyces.
                           The fearefull iudgementes of the wrath of GOD, whiche are infinite, and can neyther be numbered nor yet measured of the creatures, opened their terrible misteries, which shall at their times appoynted of hym, light vppon the children of vnbeléeue.
                           The tyrauntes,
                                 Hebr. 10 2. Para. 32 Esai. 36. which hath resisted the heauenly verytie of the Lorde, wyll once be punished as was the 
                                 •
                              ost of Senacherih kinge of Assur. Once wyll he fearefully visit theyr multitude in the thunder of hys yre.

Once shall the terrible sound of hy
                                 •
                               crack stryk the earth smothe,
                                 Iohel. 2. Soph. 2. Sebastianꝰ Meyer in Apocalip. Math. 23. Lucke. 11 Franciscus Lambertus
                               reuenging the contempt of his worde. In Italye, Spaine, Fraunce, Germany, and other christian regions, the Angell hath shewed the booke open, and roared out the voyce of the Gospell with stomacke as doth the Lyon, yet will it not be taken, but some they haue beaten for it, and some moste spightfully murthered.
                           Let them not thinke but after the lightning ye thunderclap will folow. The verytie opened, and thus dispised, most gréeuous plagues of derth, warre, or pestilence wyll shortlye fal by the great vengeaunce of God. Principles hath bene séene in some quarters,
                                 Math. 24. Luce. 21. Otho brū
                                    felsius
                               of the worlde, let them not thinke but much more is comminge, and wyll not cease tyll Chryste hath made of his enimies hys foote
                                 •
                               stoole.
                           11 And when the seuen thonders had spoken their voyces,
                                 Psal. 109 Albertus Magnus in Apoca. 7 or shewed theyr certentie that they shoulde so surely as God lyueth come to passe

at their time appoynted.
                           12 I was about (sayth Saint Iohn) to take penne and inke in hande,
                                 Robar
                                       •••
                                     Tuitiensis in apoca, Bedas Haymo. Franciscus Lutherus
                               and to wryte them I thought to register them in a booke to the admonishmēt and warning of them that shoulde folow. And anone I heard a very earnest voyce from heauen, saying vnto mée in this maner.
                           13 Seale vp those things which the seauen thunder spake, and in no wise wryte them. Register the thunders, but not the voyces. Note the figures, but vtter not the misteries till God appoynt it. It is not for all men to know the times which God hath in his power.
                           Many secret thinges hearde Paule,
                                 Acts. 1. Math. 24. 2. Cor. 12. Chrisostomus. Augustinus▪ Iohn. 16. Math. 13. Luke. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . which was lawfull for no man to vtter. The outwarde sounde of Gods secrets may be heard of all men but the inward workinge is reserued to the spirit. The Lorde alwaies with the holy ghost so informeth them inwardly, that they perceiue the effect of many thinges, the other heareth but a noyse. For so much as the voice

of gods thundrings is vnsearchable,
                                 Rom. 1
                                    •
                                  
                                 Psalm. 35. Esa. 6. and his secret iudgementes the most mighty depth, they are not open but to such as he electeth.
                           14 Therfore was Iohn commanded in no case to writ them, or to open ye secret meaning of them. That point the Lord reserueth peculyerly to him selfe,
                                 Haymo in Apoca. Psal. 67. Luke. 24. Otho Brū
                                    felsius in Euangelia
                               to open to whom, what, or how much him lusteth. Much wide ar th
                                 ••
                               which thinketh that they can of their owne wit, and industry declare such causes, vnles God openeth them by his worde or some euident signe, as he hath done in this age most plentuously to many. Lesse can we not gather of these thunders,
                                 Iohn Hus in quedam loca Apoc. Franciscus Lambertꝰ Mala. 2. whē the message of God is dispised, abused, forsaken, neclected, troden vnder foote, 
                                 〈◊〉
                               damnable lyes preferred vnto it, tha
                                 •
                               yt his wrath must folow. Somewhat hath bene séene already, much more wil appeere whē they geue ful 
                                 〈◊〉
                              
                              ▪
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And the Angel which I saw stand vpō the sea. & vpō the earth. 2. Lyft vp his hande to heauen. 3. And swore by hym that liueth for euermore. 4. Which created heauen and the things that therin are. 5. And the earth, and the thinges that are in it 
                              〈◊〉
                           , And the sea, and the thinges which are therin. 7. That there shal be no more time, but in the dayes of the voyce of the seauenth Angell. 8. When he shall begin to blow. 9. Euen the misterie of God shall be finished. 10. As he preached by his seruantes the Prophets.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 And the Angell (saieth Saincte Iohn) whom I saw in this wonderfull reuelation, thus standynge with one foote vppon the sea, an other vppon the lande, after the sorte afore named.
                           2 Lyft vp his hand towardes heauen,
                                 Ioachim Abbas in Apoca. Sebastianus meyer. in Apoca▪
                                 
                               so strōgly to affirme hys message to be true as the Lorde lyueth, and to promise it so in fallibly iust as god siteth in heauen.
                           3 What do the true preachers els

in this age, but maintaine their doctrine by the mighty word of God,
                                 Luke, 24. Actes 
                                 
                                    •
                                 
                               after the example of Christ and his Apostles which alleged the lawe, prophecies and Psalmes, to confirme their sayings with They neither alledge decrée,
                                 Martinus Lutherus in postilla. 1. Tessa. 5. 1. Iohn. 4 Psalm. 115 Psalm. 13 Hebr. 1. Gene. 1. nor decretall, constitution, nor Synodall, Legende nor fable, monks rule nor saintes lyfe, doctors nor fathers, Gregory nor Anselme, Thomas nor Dons, Plato nor Arystotle, nor such lyke filthy dregs. But they come to the verye true touchestoane with Iohn, they proue the spirits whether they be of God or no, cō
                              sidering that all men are lyers, and haue erred, one except.
                           4 He sware by him that lyueth in himselfe with incomprehencible magesty, power and glory for euermore, which in the beginning created the heauē aboue wt the inuisible things that are therin contained.
                           5 Which formed the pōderous earth beneth and the visible creatures that are therin remaining.
                                 Esai. 45. Amos. 4 Eccli. 18. Psal. 135
                           
                           6 Which fashioned the flowing seas

and the corruptible thinges that are there in continuinge.
                                 Franciscus Lambertus in Apoca.
                              
                           
                           7 With an earnest constant spirite he protested, and by the strong worde of God he affirmed, so taking hym to witnesse, that there shall be no more time, no more leasure, no more sinful occuping héere frō henceforth, but in the dayes of the voyce of the seauenth Angell. This othe is none other than a sure assercion,
                                 Ioachim abbas.
                               that all shall be finished in this seauenth age of the church. This wold not be hidden from the congregations.
                                 Sebastianꝰ Meyer Marci. 16. Math. 13. Luke. 21. 2. Pet. 2 Apoca. 2. Necessary it is that both good and badde knew it. The faithfull to be assartened that their finall redemption is at hande, to their consolation. The vnfaithfull to haue knowledge that their iudgemente is not farre of, that they may repent and be saued. Not vnlyke is this othe to the othe in Daniell of time, times, and halfe a time, whereof the time was from him to Christe.
                                 Daniel. 12 Apoca. 12. Iohannes bacōthorp in Daniel.
                               The times were the ages from Christ to the seauenth seale opening, or the seauenth trumpet blowing. The halfe time from

thence forth,
                                 Math. 24 Apoca. 8. Apoca. 12 wherin the dayes shall be shortned for the chosen sake. So much mischief shal not ye enimies d
                                 •
                               thā. Their tiranny shall be as waged.
                           8 For when the vii. Angel shall begin to blow, or the ministers of that age sincerely declare the word.
                           9 Euen the mistery of God shall be finished,
                                 Iohn. 4▪ 1. Cor. 13. Daniell. 11. Hiere. 31 and the full meaning therof fulfilled.
                           10 Like as he afore time both taught and promised,
                                 Franciscus Lambertꝰ in Apoca. Psalm. 32. Act..
                               by his peculyer chosen seruants the prophets. No time shal be after this but that, which will be of all times the ende. But when that time shall begin, we know not tyll God shall open it by his seuenth angel. Of the thing we are certaine and sure, but the time of it is euermore in gods hande. That is sealed vp in ye booke til he shal please to open it, the rightuous shall not sée til it cōmeth, but rest stil in their lot we Daniell. And the vngodly shal haue no vnderstanding then.
                                 Marci. 13, Daniel. 12 Luce. 17. Gene▪
                                  7. Gene. 19. They shall builde and plant, bye & sel, ryot & banket as in ye daies of Noe & Loth, yea they shall

geue themselues to al filthy lustes & couetuousnes,1. Thes 5. Math. 25. Iohn. 5. Apoca. 12▪ 
                                 Daniel. 12. And vnbewares shall death come vpon them, the terrible iudge shal cal them to accoumpt, and to ye euerlasting fire condemne them, thus shal their daies also be shortned, when they think nothing lesse for ye time shal be but halfe after Daniell.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And the voyce which I harde from heauen, spake vnto me againe, and sayd. 2. go & take the litle booke which is opē in the hād of the angel. 3. vvhich stādeth vpō the sea & vpō the earth. 4. And I vvent vnto the Angell and said vnto him. 5. Geue me the litle booke. And he said vnto me. 6. Take it and eate it vp, 7. And it shall make thy belly bitter. But it shall be in thy mouth as svveet as hony. 11. And I tooke the litle booke out of his hand, and did eate it vp. 10. And it vvas in my mouth as svveete as hony. 11. And as soone as I had eaten it, my belley vvas bitter 12. And he said vnto me, 13, Thou must prophecie again vnto the people. 14. And to the Heathen, and Tunges, and to manye Kinges.
                        
                           
                           The Paraphrase.
                           
                              
                                 Mala▪
                                  2 Iohn. 16 Rom. 8. Apoca. 1. Bedas et Haymo in apocal.
                              1 And the voyce (saieth sainct Iohn) which I harde afore from heauen, spake vnto me againe. Gods holy spirit touched me, moued me & compelled me. It graciously admonished me, taught me, and sayde thus vnto me.
                           2 Goe thy waies foorth Iohn, and take the lytle booke which is now open in the hand of the Angell.
                                 Ioannes 5 Acto▪
                                  17 Math. 13
                           
                           Euery man hauinge grace with Iohn is héere commaunded to haue Gods word. Christ wylled all faythfull beléeuers to searche the Scriptures to vnderstand the prophecies, and to perceiue the misteries of thē. And for the performance of hys wyll therin, he hath sent in this age this peculyer Angell,
                                 Franciscus Lambertus in Apocal· Luc. 10▪ 
                                 Apoca. 9 Otho brū
                                    felsius.
                               beside the common preachers, betokning those singuler lerned mē, whō now he hath endue
                                 •
                               with most high knowledge. Of their hands he m
                                 •
                              ndeth vs to receiue the scriptures, and not of the blasing star, nor yet of the smoky Locustes.

Their faithfull, sincere, and godly interpretacions, he willeth vs to take,
                                 Henricu
                                       •
                                     Bulling
                                       •
                                    
                                    ru
                                       •
                                    .
                               specially in bookes, for so much as in person they can in no wyse be euery where present, & for that it is a booke heere named. For by them in these dayes doeth he make open his sauing health, and in the sight of all people declareth his rightuousnesse. Let thē therefore (whose hartes God moueth to instruct other in the wayes of the Lorde) diligently peruse the labours of such,
                                 Luc. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . Esa. 40. Ioel. 2 Psal. 118 Franciscus Lambartꝰ
                                 ▪ 
                                 Ioannes. 5. 1. Ioan. 4 Math. 15. whom he hath so plentuously replenished with his spirite. But in thus dooing let them not to much depend vpō no mans person, but proue all things by ye scriptures, least they fall into errours as other hath done afore for so dooyng. Uerye lightly is he deceiued that measureth the veritie by mans iudgements. In ye search therefore of godly mysteries, not the wit nor the learning of the man is to be sought, but rather the right meaning of God working in the man.
                                 Ioannes Chrisosto. Augustinus
                              
                           
                           3 This Angell standeth vpon ye sea, and vpon the lande. As well is ye true

messenger of God for the weak as for the strong,
                                 Cyrillus. Albertus Magnus Esa. 61. Math. 11 2. Tim. 4▪ 
                                 Gala. 6. for the low as for ye high, for the poore as for the riche, for the simple as for the learned, for ye sicke as for ye whole, & for the foule as for the fayre. Yea, and rather for them than the other, hauing his right foote vpon the water.
                           4 And I (sayeth S. Iohn) obeying the voyce of the Lord,
                                 Iosue. 1
                                    •
                                 . Rom▪
                                  6, Psalm. 118 or the heauenly mocion of his spirit went vnto the Angell, and instantly desired hym to giue me that little swéete booke.
                           5 None other is this booke thē the holy scripture,
                                 Eucherius Iugduneas. Ioannes Hus in aliquot loca Apocalip. Franciscus. Lambertꝰ
                               whose openynge is a pure and right interpretation therof. This he receiueth open at his hand, which diligently readeth or heareth any sincere declaration of it by anye faithfull minister. None other is this booke fitte for, nor none other retayneth it in this age, but meeke Iohns, or men of a gentile spirit hauing the grace of God, and obeying his heauenly voice. For the wicked must euer be blinde.
                                 Hiere. 35. Ephe. 4. Sapi. 1. Wisdom shall not enter into a froward soule, nor dwel in

the body yt is giuen to sin.
                                 Hiere. 4 Math. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 
                                 ▪ 4. Esdr. Ezech. 3▪ 
                                 Haymo.
                               Iohn went to the Aungell, and receyued the booke, for hée yt will séeke shall fynde.
                           6 For ye Angel said vnto him: Take it vnto thée, & eate it vp cleane. The belly shall it make very bitter, but it will be in the mouth so swéete as hony. With good harte ought ye scriptures to be receyued of all men,
                                 Iaco. 
                                 
                                    •
                                  
                                 Iohn, 8, Psal. 118. Ephe. 4 2. Peter. 1▪ 
                                 VVicleuꝰ de ecclesia Rom. 16 Math. 6. Hebr. 11▪ 
                                 Iohn. 6. Psalm. 118 in faith deuoured, & in a pure loue disgested. In continual studie & meditacion therof, ought ech mā after his calling to perseuer, the King in his raign, the Iudge in his office, the merchaunt in his occupying, the labourer in hys worke, the maryner vpon the sea, and the bishop in his cure. Nothing but idelnesse worketh ye man, which hath it not grafted within him, though he both fast & pray. Uayne are all polycies, actes, constitucions and lawes wtout it. For it is ye life of our soules, the lanterne of our féete, the light of our passage, and rule our workes.
                           7 Bitter it is in the belly, & swéete in the mouth.
                                 Luke. 8. Apoca. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 
                                 ▪
                               When the knowledge of trueth is is once receyued, and

surely setteled in the harte,3. Reg▪
                                  1
                                    •
                                  
                                 Hire. 9. Ezch. 34. Exod. 32 Psal. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 3. Treno. 1 Luc. 19. it engendreth a spiritie of indignation, and a zeale of God, very bitter agaynst all wickednesse. It maketh vs with Ieremie to detest all vice, and with Ezechiell to abhorre all sinne. It prouoketh vs also with Moyses, Helias, Dauid, and the Prophets gréeuously to complayne of the worldes abhominations, & with Christ & his Apostles dolorously to lament the sore decaye of the wicked.
                           
                              
                                 Act. 9.8 Yet is nothing so swéet in ye mouth as it is. Nothing was to Paule so delicious,
                                 Psal. 18▪ 1, Tim. 1, Gala▪
                                  4. Math. 12, Hiere. 7 2. Cor. 11 Rom. 1. Act. 9, Gala. 2. when he once sauored it. No, nothing so pleasaūt. Neither colours of rhetorike, paintings of poets, wisedome of Philosophers, nor holy tradicions of fathers coulde then delight him. All were but darnal, tares, stubble, chaffe, filth, rust, dreames, lyes, and vnprofitable vanities. Nothyng was in his mouth than, but that delectable veritie, & that swéet Gospell of God. That tooke hée with hym as the vessel of election in many an hard iorney, and beare it foorth before the

gentiles, the kings, & the children of Israell, yea & for yt to dye he thought it than aduauntage.
                                 Phili. 
                                 
                                    •
                                  
                                 Ezech, 3. 4. Esd. 14 Acto▪
                                  1
                                    •
                                  
                                 Psal. 18 Psal. 11
                                    •
                                  
                                 Canti 
                                 
                                    •
                                 
                              
                           
                           9 And I tooke the little booke (sayth sainct Iohn) out of the Angels hande, with méeknesse I receiued the scriptures of God. I did eate it vp clean, I dygested them in faith.
                           10 And it was in my mouth so swéet as hony▪ Oh how delicious (saith Dauid) are thy sayings vnto my throte? More dulcet then honye are thy wordes Lord to my mouth.
                           11 So soone as I had eaten it (sayth Sainct Iohn) so soone as I had incorporate it in my mynde,
                                 VVestmerus de tropis scriptu. Luc. 6 Roma. 9▪ 
                                 Dani. 1
                                    •
                                 
                               & rooted it in my soule, my bellye was bitter, my harte was gréeued much to sée ye euils of the world, my spirit was troubled to see the abusions of men, and much I pittied the losse of their soules.
                           12 Yet dyd not the Angell so leaue me, but he said thus vnto me: Thou must prophecie again amōg ye people.
                           13 As thou hast receyued,2. Cor. 
                                 
                                    •
                                  
                                 Iohn. 2
                                    •
                                 
                               thou must rēder, as thou hast bene taught, thou must teach againe, least thou hyding

the treasure of thy Lord,
                                 Math, 25 
                                    •
                                 . Tim. 4. become an vnprofitable seruaunt.
                           
                              
                                 Math. 2
                                    •
                                 . Marci. 1
                                    •
                                  
                                 Acto. 9. Sapi. 6. Esa. 3814 Thou must publish the trueth to the vnbeleuers, thou must open it to people of dyuers nacions & languages, and finally manifest it to Kings of many regions, that they sée theyr people instructed in ye same. As a trū
                              pet therefore exalt thy voyce, shewe fréely the ioyfull message of saluatiō. Refuse none that will come vnto it, poore nor blynde,
                                 Lucke. 14 Math. 5. Luke. 11 Rom. 10. Esa. 5
                                    •
                                 . Apoca. 7 Hebr. 1. 
                                    •
                                 . Thessa. 2. halte nor lame. Cō
                              sider that no man lighteth a candle to hyde it, but to set it vp that men may see by it. None other are fit to prophecie, but they whiche haue deuoured the booke. They must now declare the gospell in this latter age of ye church by the appointment of the Lord. For necessarie it is that by the strength thereof, all pryde of this worlde and blasphemie agaynst God bée distroyed.
                        
                     
                  
                  ¶ In the nexte volume shall follow the reste.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  The second part of the Image of both Churches, after the most wonderfull and heauenly reuelation of Saint Iohn the Euangelist. &c.
                  Compiled by Iohn Bale.
                  
                  The same Disciple whom Iesus loued hath witnessed and written these things, and vve knovve that hys testimonie is true. Ioannes .xxj.
               
               
                  
                  
                  ¶ A small Preface vnto the Christian Reader.
                  
                     IN the first part or volume of thys worke (which cōtayneth the first .x. Chapters) are all these godlye ma
                        •
                     
                     ters of Sainct Iohns Reuelation in course comprehended. Fyrst of all is the high legacie and message of the sayde Sainct Iohn vnto the .vij. congregacions of A
                        •
                     ta, in the first Chapter mencyoned. Wherin they are also vnto vij. golden Candelstickes compared, and their preachers vnto vij. shyning starres in the right hand of Christ.
                  In the seconde and third Chapters are the sayd vij. congregacions seuerally ech one by it selfe discribed and warned, to the vniuersall premonishment of the whole Christian Church in the vij. partes or clymates of the worlde. Marke those three Chapters diligently, and ye shall perceyue that

the true Christian church is alone go
                        •
                     
                     uerned by ye preaching of gods word, an only office of Christ commaunded, and not by dead ceremonies cōmaun
                        •
                      by the Pope, of whom there is no specialtie.
                  Consider howe those preachers throughout all this booke, are compared vnto starres and Angels, their cō
                     gregacions called the right spouse of Christ. The other be assembled vnto most filthie locustes, bréeding of the smoke of ye pit bottomles, vnto hatefull byrdes, foule spirites and diuils, their church called the proude Sinagoge of Sathan, and the most execrable whore of Babilon.
                  In the iiij. Chapter is heauen made open, and the secrets therof manifested vnto ye christian beléeuer, whom Iohn also representeth thys whole booke ouer. For not only are the mysteries therof in the vniuersall church performed, but also in the particular churches of nacions, and in the pryuate consciences of men.
                  In the .v.vj. and vij. Chapters, the

Lambe Christ openeth the vij. seales of the booke of the most hidden mysteries of God, for the vij. ages of ye christian church. In the meane season are the true seruantes of God sealed vnto saluaciō, solaced in their troubles, and reléeued in their sorowes, notwithstanding, the great violence of the truthes aduersaries.
                  In the viij. and ix. Chapters, the vij. Angels blowe their trumpettes. Signifying the preachers to shewe foorth their messages appoynted of God for the vij. ages of the churche, many wonderfull plages folowing in the people for their vnbeléeues sake, they obstinately resisting it, or els vnthankefully receiuing it.
                  In the tenth Chapter commeth the mightie Angell from heauen with a booke in his hand all open, and Iohn deuoureth the same. Which betokeneth the earnest preachers of this latter age of the church, wherein the true seruauntes of God shall gréedily receiue and also digest the scriptures. Take thys for a bréefe sum of all yt is

spoken in the other volum, the residue shall follow hereafter in course.
                  In the mergent of that first parte or volume, put I many allegacions both of the scriptures and doctors▪ And there vnto was I first prouoked by this saying of Sainct Hierome in a certayne Epistle of his, ad Paulinum monachum. The Apocalips of Sainct Iohn (sayeth he) hath so many mysteries as it hath wordes, or for euerie word a mysterie whither ye will.
                  I mynded also thereby, my labours to ease the readers for search of the places, and to signify vnto them that I dyd nothing therin without aucthoritie. And vndoubtedly the gatheryng of those places was so laborious vnto me, as the making of the commentarie, which neuerthelesse I thought well bestowed for the comfort of my bretheren.
                  But two cruell enimyes haue my iust labours had in that behalfe, of whome the one hath them falsifyed, the other blasphéemed. Which hath caused me to leaue thē out in all that

héere foloweth. The Printers are the fyrst, whose headie hast, negligence, and couetousnesse commonly corrupteth all bookes. These haue both dysplased them and also chaunged theyr numbers to the truthes derogacion, what though they had at their hands ij. learned correctours which tooke all paynes possible to preserue them.
                  The other is Momus or Zoylus, yea rather one whiche playeth both partes vnder the cloake of a Christian. This cruell carper and malicious quarreller leaueth no mans worke vnrebuked, minister it neuer so much godlinesse. But lyke as rust, mothes, maggottes, cankers, catterpyllers, with other vyle vermyne corrupteth all that is to the vse of man, so doeth this enimy, to distroy both name and worke, only for the auauncement of his owne precious person.
                  His working tooles are suche vnsauerie sophismes, problemes, elēches, corolaries, quydities, subtylties, seconde intentions, intrincycall moods, wyth other prodygious sorceryes,

whom he sometime sucked out of hys mothers brestes ye vniuersitie. These hath he not yet all, as vnsauerie morselles euometed for Christ, diffyning rather with Aristotle than with Paul in his dayly disputations.
                  Of this ryall Rabi is Peter iudged a foole, and Iohn an vnlearned Idiote. Yet shall his reader finde small learning at his hande, vnlesse he take an heape of barbarous tearmes, and vnsowed togither sentences for matters of excelent learning. But surely Iohn will one day come from Ephesus to visite this proude Diotrephes, & shew him of his arrogant brags to his dyspleasure, vnlesse he leaue of in tyme. All Aristotles prouision shal not help hym.
                  Sathan vpon the pynnacle of the Temple neuer bestowed his alleged scripture more peruersely, than thys Momus interpreted certayne of my allegaciōs, nor yet farther from their right vnderstanding: But I forgiue it him wt this forewarning for this time, thoughe it bée not the fyrst lewde

poynt that he hath playd, in case that 
                        •
                     e so leaue his quareling. My second allegation vpon the Preface .1. Cor. 6 is not set there to authorise the Apocalips, as he most falsly and all contrary to my meaning hath interpreted it, but affirmeth that the Christian beléeuers are Christs members which ought of necessitie by the holy ghostes appointment to heare and to read the wordes of the sayde Booke. For I know that the epistle vnto ye Corinthians was written of Paule ten yeares at the least before Saint Iohns Apocalips. No lesse is he than a false Prophet that resisteth Ieremy rebuking Babilon for hir wickednes,
                  To much it were to answere his other quarellings, and to tedious vnto ye christian readers, and therfore I passe them ouer least I shoulde be to plenteous in aunsweringe a foole according to hys foolishnesse. Thus by these cruell handelynges of these two vngratious enemies, haue I iust occasion to leaue out the allegations

in the margent, obseruing this wholsome counsell of Christ concerning such as they be. Geue not that is holy vnto Dogs, nor yet that is precious vnto swine. For the one of his churlish nature teareth and deuoureth, the other like a swine treadeth it vnder his filthy féete. The grace of our Lorde Iesus Christ be with thée euermore (good christian Reader) and with all thē that séeketh of the scriptures the sauing health in them conteined withoute quarelling. Amen.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  The second part of the Image of both Churches, after the most wonderfull and heauenly reuelation of Saint Iohn ye Euangelist. &c. Compiled by Iohn Bale.
                  
                     The .xi. Chapter.
                     
                        VNto Iohn was deliuered after that he had thus deuoured ye booke, a réede, not vnlyke to the mete wande of sixt cubits long and a spanne, which was geuen vnto Ezechiell, nor very far different frō ye measuring lyne in Zacharie. And what is this els? but that the administratiō of Gods heauenly verytie is secretly of hym committed vnto them which hath afore receiued it, and in faith digested it, that they should therewith rightly measure, disterne & iudge all things. None other is it to prophesi again in this sixt age, but thus is to mete the Tēple, the aulter, & the worshippers therin, and to proue them in length, bredth, heigth and depth,
                     
                        
                        
                           
THE TEXT.
                        ANd than was geuen me a reede, a Lyke vnto a rod. 3. And it was sayde vnto me. 4. Arise and mete the Temple of God. 5. And the Aulter. 6. And them that vvorship therein. 7. And the Quire, vvhich is vvithin the Temple, cast out. 8. And mete it not▪ 9. For it is geuen vnto the Gentiles. 10. And the holy citie shall they tread vnder foote xlii. monthes.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 And there was geuen me (sayeth sainct Iohn) a Réede. Both receiued I the wisdome of God, and also

a mouth to vtter it. So yt my tongue became the pen of a redy writer. For so much as I abhorred iniquitie, the Lorde anointed me inwardlye with th
                                 •
                               oyle of gladnesse, & gaue me stomack to vtter his word.
                           2 The réede which god deliuered me was lyke vnto a rod. For his worde is the rod, of right order, and ye scepture of his kingdome. With this rod sprede he out the heauens, and layde foorth the firste foundation of the earth.
                           This rod of his power hath the Lord now graciously sent vs out of Sion by mē hauing his special grace as by Iohn, to haue dominion héere in the midst of his enimies.
                           3 For vnto Iohn it was sayd for this age. Arise, from vaine studi, from cares of the body, from consideration of earthly causes.
                           4 And mete the holy Temple of God, whiche is his congregation or Church: Proue all beléeues whether they be right or no. Examine their works, whether they spring of Gods

cōmaundements or of mens tradicions. And in so dooing try by the scriptures the corne from the chaffe,
                           Marke out the people of God from ye synagoge of sathan, and delay not to nourish them with the swéete fruits of the spirit,
                           5 Measure the Aulter also, which is Iesus Christ, vpon whom the full sacrifice of redemption was offered. For many false Christes are abrode in the worlde, to seduce the people, The Pope bosteth hymself for Gods owne vicar. Machomet calleth himself ye great Prophet of ye Lord. And both they to subdue the Gospell hath set vp new lawes. The Pope his detestable decrées, and Mahomet his abhominable Alchoran. Both they haue wrought such wounders and suche signes in supersticion, as might deduce into erroure (if God were not merciful) the very elect persons. The monkes saith that Christe is in the desert, the pristes saith he is in the box, but admonish my people, that in no case they beléeue it. The Chanons

saith he is here, the Fryers saieth he is there, but counsell my flock that they goe not forth. For God dwelleth in nothinge that is made with hand. In the faithfull harte is Christe onely founde. There remaineth he. That is his dwellinge place.
                           6 Therfore now last of al, measure them also that worshippe in the Temple. Consider them onely to be his people, which séeke hym in spirit and in verytie, and that worship not in outward shadowes, nor in the elements of this world, nor yet with obseruation of dayes and times. They are not his sonnes, that for the leuen of Pharises which is the doctrine of Hipocrits, forsaketh the bread of children, which is his liuing word, They are not his Lambes but vile gotes, that rather attendeth to the voice of straungers, than to the true shepheard Christ.
                           7 And therfore the quier which is within the Temple caste oute.

The prelates, priestes and religions, which are not of the common sort, seclude from Christ, from his Church, and from the company of true worshippers. Throw foorth the bond woman and hir sonne, the Rome church with the hir children, and Mahomet with his rable. For the bonde shall not inherit with the frée.
                           8 Measure not out that chaunsell of charmers, that college of Balams brethren, those marked Madianits and cursed Ismaelits. Alow thē not by the scriptures, cōmende not their counterfaict rightuousnes. Admit them not for the members of CHRIST, but iudge them to be the synagog of sathan. And speare them out of the kingdome of God, with the key of Dauid. For they are those swine, that treade pearles vnder their féete & those cruell dogs that turne agayne to deuoure men. Medle not with that quier, haue not to doe with that wicked generation.
                           9 For it is geuen vnto the Gentiles, Wholy are those Antichristes

addict to the superstitious rytes of the Heathen in their sacrifices, their ceremonies, their obseruations, their holy dayes, their vigils, fastings, prayings, knéelings, and all other vsages, contrarye to the admonishment of Christe. That they should in no wise enter into the waies of the Gentiles. Wherfore God hath detested them with his own mouth, and cleane geuen them ouer vnto their owne fylthy lusts. Mow reigne they al in their owne wisdom, thinking euermore their owne fleshly fantasies best, wholly they are become gentiles.
                           10 And the holy citie (of whom glorious thinges are spoken) they shall tread vnder foote the space of xlij. moneths. Not the earthly Hierusalem is this citie, builded of men, and made holy by ye outward obseruacions and ceremonies of ye Iewes as many expositours hath fantasied. For of yt (like as Christ prophecied) is not left one stoane standing vpon an other. But this

citie is the sure bulding of God, groū
                              ded vpon the strong foundation of the Apostles and prophets, euen vpon the hard rocke stone Iesus Christ. This is the pleasant possession, the wholsome houshold, the sure hold, and the delectable viniarde of the Lorde of hostes. This is the liuing generation of them which feareth, loueth, and seketh their Lord God in faith, spirite and verytie, and not in outward shadowes. These are the children of promis, the true ofspring of Abrahā, the chosen house of Israell, and the kingdome of the holy ghost. Pure, cleane, and holy hath Christe made this citie by none other thinge but ye onely shedding of his precious bloud.
                           11 This citie tread they vnder foote, that kéepeth downe the truth of the gospel, yt persecuteth & sleath gods peple for it, ye defeateth his worde for their owne traditions, that bringeth in the Iewish ceremonies, the Gentiles supersticions, pagans customes, & hethē vsages, yoking men wt imp
                                 •
                              rtable burthēs of false worshippings for their owne filthy 
                                 〈◊〉
                               & aduauntage.

Notwtstandinge thus must they do still by the sufferance of God, tyll the lxij. monthes be finished, whiche is not els but the time, ye times, & the half time, or the thousand, two hundred & lx. daies, in yt God shal shorten the time for his chosen sake. Thus after S. Paul also before the Lordes cōming. There must be a departing. The quier or chauncell must be cast out, yt the man of sin, the sun of perdition, & the aduersary exaltinge hymself aboue God, may be known in his colours. It may not be motē, or alowed by gods word, but reiected as that plant which ye heauenly father hath not planted, yt the mistery of iniqutye may be vttered and perceiued of thē which shal be saued. It must be geuen to ye gentiles, or addict to their supersticions, wt al lying power, signes and wonders, in all deceiuable doctrine, by ye subtile working of sathan. They must also be permitted to do al mischif in vnrightuousnes, vpō ye citizens of God, til he vtterly consūe thē wt the mighty breath of his mouth.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And I wyll geue power. 2. Vnto my two witnesses. 3. And they shall prophecie a thousand, two hundred and threescore dayes. 4. Clothed in sack clothe. 5. These are two oliue Trees. 6. And two Candlestickes. 7. Standing before the God of the earth.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 And I will geue powre saith the Lorde vnto my faithfull witnesses, and they shall prophesye a thousande two hundred and lx. dayes against those enimies to the comforte of my people. So that though my citie be troden downe by their cruel lawes of persecution to death, yet shall it not be forsaken. And though my people be ouer loaded with their heathen supersticions and blasphemous worshippinges, yet shall they not be lost nor left all wtout succour.
                           2 They shal haue my two witnesses wt thē to solace thē in their troubles, & to comfort them in their cares. Both Moyses and Christ, both the law and

the Gospell, both the Prophets and the Apostles shal stande vppon theyr side and be vpon their parte: yea, for so much time as their enimies shall vexe them, and for so much space as their aduersaries sholl trouble them Euen a thousand two hundred and thréeskore dayes, which maketh thrée yeares and an halfe, and is more thē the two and fourty monthes by iiii. skore dayes and fowre. Which signifieth yt the enimies shal not euermore kepe down his word, but their daies shall be shortned for his electe sake. The schoole Doctours with their sophestry hath fantasied the sayd two witnesses to be Enoch and Helyas, and that they should come then frō Paradice terrestre for the same purpose, because that Enoch was taken away of God, and Helias was carried hence in a fyery Charet, neither vnderstanding what Paradice is, nor yet knowing what it is to be taken from hence. Paradice is the swéete rest of God appoynted vnto them that departe hence in faith. The peculier

translations of Enoch and Helias were not only for a confirmation or strenthning of the faith of the fathers for their times, but also yt they shuld be figuers of Christes assention. And what godly wise man can geue more to the figuer than to the verytie? More were not they priuiledged frō death then was Christe, though God wold not then haue it so openly knowen, to declare his wonderfull power. Unlike is it yt god should cal witnesses frō the dead, not promising it by his word, hauing power also frō stones to raise vp Abrahās children, and to geue ye spirit of Helias to whō he pleaseth, like as he dyd to Iohn Baptist, & as he doth now to many other more in our age, as al the world may sée and heare. These witnesses are two, for so much as the truth of the Lorde in the mouth of two or thrée godly persons ought to stand.
                           3 These two witnesses or faithfuli protestours of the aforsayde two testaments hath continued with the people of god since ye death of Stéeuē, for ye more part secretly & vnknowne

to ye world. But now they are come abroade by the appointment of God, to the vtter confusion of the great aduersary and man of sin, as Paule doth call hym. And vnto them in this sixt age of the church, the Lord hath geuen the great power of his liuinge worde, or the spirit of his inuincible verytie in much more ample wise then aforetime, for the abatement of the sayd enimies or synagoge of perdition.
                           4 Clothed they shall be in sackcloth (sayth the Lord) No pomp shal appeare in their apparrell, no glorye of the world in their behauiour. Neither shall they be accompanied with a garde of ruffelynge rutters. Neyther shall they with Annas and Caiphas sit vpon life and death. Neither shal they blesse in the streate with miter, crosse and cope. Neither claim the higher seates, in side gownes, shauen crownes, and tippetes. Neyther shall their be sack Fryers, nor Franciscans, monks, Chanons, nor Hypocrits.
                           They shall not disfigure themselues

to séeme religious, nor say long prayers to appere holy, but in a sober conuersacion, auoyding superfluitie, they shall constantly witnesse the trueth of god to the vniuersall world, to his glory and their edification. For sackcloth in the scriptures is a signe of sobrietie, sadnesse and temperaunce, as in Helias and Iohn Baptist.
                           5 These witnesses are two swéete oliue trées, shedding forth the fatnes of the scriptures, and dulset sanour of the spirit. God hath so blessed them that their lyps are full of grace. He hath annoynted them with the oyle of gladnesse aboue their felowes, of Myrre, Bawme and Aloes, they delectably smell. None other thinges vtter thei but his infallible verities.
                           6 They are also two shininge Candlesticks, setting forth the light, or clearly opening of the hidden misteries of the scriptures, to the comfort of the gētiles & glory of the Israelits. They are not the light it self but only instrumēts ordeined to beare witnes of ye light. For there is but one

light for al. Only are they the vessels of electiō, as was Paule, to carrie that lyght the world ouer.
                           7 They stand in the presence of the God of the earth, or the Lorde of all, as men of moste high acceptacion before him, readie to doe his will and to fulfill his commaundement and pleasure, hauyng the oyle of hys spirite, and the light of his eternall veritie.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And if any man vvill hurt them. 2. Fyre shall proceed out of their mouthes. 3. & cō
                           sume their enimies. 4. And if any man vvill hurte them, this vvise must he bee killed. 5. These haue povver to shut heauen. 6 that it rayne not in the dayes of their prophesying, 7. and haue povver ouer vvaters to turn them to bloud 8. and to smyte the earth. 9. vvith all maner plagues, as often as they vvill.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 If any man will attempte to doe them scathe, or presumptuouslie séeketh by craftie colours, subtile reasōs, and deceiptful arguments, vpō daungers,

doubtes, doctours, old customes, and aucthoritie of fathers to hynder their office, blemishe their message, and darken their light, such fyre shall procéede out of their mouthes as shal consume their enimies.
                           2 The eternall word of the Lorde that they shall declare (which is the consuming fyre) shall vtterly distroye them. So that nothing shall be séene of that they were afore. Neyther cut shooe, nor corde, coule, nor gray cote, boote, nor blacke hood, rochet, nor scapler, myter, nor crosier, sandale, nor frocke, shauen crown, nor anointing. For all these are their enimies.
                           3 Consumed are they to their saluation that with Mathewe become of Publicans true Apostles, and with Paule of fierce persecutors, charitable teachers. Contrariwise are they consumed to their dampnatiō, which being ouercome by the manifest veritie, wilfully persist in their diuilish errours with Antiochus & Pharao, with the Scribes and Pharisies.
                           4 For it foloweth. And if any man

will hurte them, this wyse must hée be killed. Eyther must he be mortifyed from the olde Adam, and changed into a new man in Christ, or els by the sayd worde must he both be iudged and condempned for the vtter aduersarie of God, with Sathan hys auncient captayn. So must he be killed. And no death will be founde lyke vnto that death come they once to the féeling of it, though they accompt it now verie light.
                           5 For these witnesses haue power as had Helias, to shut vp heauen, that it rayne not in the dayes of their prophecying, but yet none other wyse then by the aforesayd word. For the word of God is the verie key of Dauid, which openeth the kingdome of god to them that faithfully beléeueth, and that speareth it vp also from thē which dwellith in vnfaithfulnes. For it is said, in the dayes of their prophecying. This power therefore is of the word, and not of the men. The word speareth and openeth, losoneth & bindeth, saueth, and dampneth.
                           
                              He that beléeueth sayth Christ shalbe saued, he yt beleueth not is iudged alreadie. No moysture of grace nor godly wisedō can light where sturdie frowardnesse is rooted. The dayes of their prophesying in figure is non other thē ye aforesaid tyme, times, and halfe tyme, or the thrée yéeres and vj. monethes of Helias.
                           6 In those dayes shall it not rayne vpon the wicked, they shall haue no grace to receyue the veritie. In parables and figures shal that be hidden from them, that shall bée euydent inough vnto the faithful. With eares shall they heare and not vnderstand, with eyes shall they sée, and not deserne. So blynde will their harts be. For such speake the Prophets in fygures. Christ in parables, and the Apostles in mysteries. The open truth of this reuelation shall not the wicked perceyue, till they tast the plages thereof. Such is the nature of Gods wisedom that though it be not in glorious wordes, fyne paynted termes, nor in perswasible reasons of mans

witte, but in playne simple speaking, yet can it not be knowē of the worldly wise. The swéete dewe therof wil not be receiued of them, in the aforesayde dayes of prophecie, but hée that is blynde shall be blynde still.
                           7 These witnesses haue also power ouer waters, to turne thē into bloud. When they interprete and sincerely declare ye pure verities of God, which are those holesome waters that restraineth the dampnable drynesse of the soule, that refresheth the conscyence, and clenseth the harte of the sinner, they can not choose but earnestly condempne the peruerse iudgemēts, the couetous lawes and hipocrityshe workes of the vngodly. And then is all vncleane vnto them, then is all bloudie. The Gospell which was a stumbling stone to the Iewes, & made foolishnesse vnto the Gentiles, is also now vnto them naughtie newe learning, seditious doctrine, and abhomynable heresie. Yea, & they iudge them worthie to be burned that doth teach it. Thus is it abhorred of them that

shall perishe, & neuerthelesse to them that beléeue, it is the power of God vnto saluation.
                           8 Fynallie, they haue power to smite the earthe with all maner of plagues, as ofte as they will. Uery earth are they that regard not Gods trueth, as the Lord saide vnto Adam after his offence. Earth thou art, and vnto earth shalte thou returne. Nothing they estéeme, but that which is earthly. Nothing they desire, but that is carnal. The froward creature will in no case knowe that is of the spirit. The light is hatefull vnto sore eyes. Uery painfull is bread to the mouth that is not whole. A great mote was Christ to the Iewes, as his true preachers are vnto the blynd world yet to this day. For they smite the earth.
                           9 They touch their liuing, they rebuke their falshoode, they condempne their wickednesse. They reprooue thē of sinne, of rightuousnesse, & of iudgement.
                           They force not to tell to him of theyr vnfaithfulnesse, fraud, and hipocrisiie

of their Philosophers, prelats, & religious. No greater plague is it vnto ye vngodly thē to hear of their euill dooings. No greater paine, nor yet greater punishment, then to haue theyr faultes opened, and theyr clonyng colours condempned. That fretteth them at the verie heart. Death must be sought out for such preachers. No wōder is it though this be here written for this age of the churche. For neuer were more earnest witnesses then are now, & more are lyke héereafter to follow, till the man of sinne be fully knowne, and his kingdome clearely ouerthrowen.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And whan they haue fynished theyr testimonie, 2. the beast that came out of the bottomlesse pitte, 3. shal make war against them, 4. and shall ouer come them. 5. And theyr bodyes shall lye in the streetes of the great citie, 6. which spiritually is called Sodome and Egypte, 7. where our Lorde is crucified.
                        
                           
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 And when they haue once finished their testimonie (sayeth the Lord) the beast that came out of the bottomlesse pit, shall make warre against them. No sooner shall the witnesses of gods veritie in all ages be taken from the worlde, then he hath prefixed. After none other sorte shall they bée sent hence, then he hath appoynted by hys eternall decrée. Iohn Baptist was not imprisoned, nor beheaded, tyll hée had done his office. Christ was not taken, condempned, and crucified tyll his houre was come. Paule was not put vnto death, til he had fulfilled his course.
                           2 The beast of the bottomlesse pitte is the cruel, craftie, and curssed generation of Antichriste, the Pope wyth his Bishoppes, prelates, priestes, and religious in Europa, Mahomite with his dotyng doucipers in Affrica, and so foorth in Asia & Iudia, all beastly, carnall, and wicked in their dooings.
                           
                              3 These maketh war against Gods witnesses, when they hate them, cursse them, blaspheme them, & persecute them. When they withstande them with theyr craftes, impugne them with their lyes, and vexe them with their diuilishnesse, as necessary it is they should doe. For if they haue troubled the head, they must vexe also the members. If the housholder be called Belzebub, the hosholde muste suffer the same. No better is the seruaunt then his Lord, nor the messenger, then he that sent him.
                           4 They shall also ouercome them, not with ye scriptures, but with their beggerly customs, cōstitutiōs, lawes, decrées, and traditions. They shall shall scourge them or disgarde them in their Sinagoges. They shall delyuer them vp to Iustices, debites, and rulars, making them their bochers and slaues, so washing theyr owne holy handes from the sheading of innocentes bloud.
                           5 They shall kill them also by their counsell, to fulfil the measure of their

fathers, that all rightuous bloude may light vpon them which hath ben shed vpon earth. Yet shall they not hurte their soules, but thorowe fayth they shall haue victorie both ouer thē and the diuill.
                           6 And their bodyes shall lye in the stréetes of ye great citie. In this world shall their carkasses remayne, where as they haue rule and dominion. Here shall they be iudged and condemned. At their pleasure shall it be to hange them, head them, or burne them. And though they lay no handes vpō them for soyling their consecrate fingers, yet muste it be done by their ghostly counsell, and ordred also after theyr spirituall appointment. None other is it to lye in the stréets of their great citie, then after suche lawes as they haue practysed to bée brought vnto death.
                           7 For spiritually is theyr citie called. A glorious name vsurpe they as though they were none of the world. They will be called the holy church, good ghostly fathers, godly dyuines,

and spirituall men, not consideryng of what spirite they are spirituall. They are those into whome the vncleane spirit hath entred with vij. other spirites worse than hym selfe. With the spirite of falshood, the spirit of witchcraft, the spirite of crueltie. And of these onely with such lyke are they spirituall, & of no godly spirit as their fruites declareth. And therfore the spirit of God doth iudge here this great citie not to bée called Hierusalem, but stinking Sodome, and most myserable Egypt the prophecies and other scriptures agréeing to ye same. For looke what filthinesse and abhomination was in Sodom, what Idolatrie and diuilishnesse was in Egipt, ye same is now reigning in this painted spiritualtie, & is accompted theyr great holinesse.
                           8 Among this consecrate multitude or smered sort is Christ yet crucified, as he was among the Iewes which knewe hym not, and yet boasted them selues outwardly for the peculiar

chosen people of God. Not only is Christ amonge them persecuted, scourged, punyshed, & put vnto death in his members, but also he is proued of thē an vnsuffitient Sauiour without their dayly doings. Their masses must be satisfactorie sacrifices, profyting both the quicke and the deade. And that muste men beléeue vnder payne of death and dampnatiō. Thus crucifie they Christ again, and make a mocke of hym as witnessed Paule, and yet doe they call him their Lord, not vnlyke to ye tormentours, which crowned him with thorne, and saluted him with Aue rex Iudeorum.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And some of the people, and kinreds, and tongues, and of the nations, 2. shall see their bodies iij. dayes and an half, 3. & shall not suffer theyr bodyes to be put in graues. 4. And they that dwel vpon the earth, 5. shal reioyce ouer them and be glad, 6. and shall send giftes one to an other, 7. for these two Ptophetes vexed them that dwelte on the earth.
                        
                           
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 And as they lye thus dead in the stréetes, or are contempned as heretikes, and dispised as wicked dooers, some of ye people peruerted by these enimies, some of the kinreds or sects of diuision, some of ye tonges or blasphemous bablers, and some of the nacions of all wicked workers shall be hold their bodyes thrée dayes and an halfe.
                           2 They shall from all ages abhorre them, hate them, reuyle them, and spightfully report them. In their cronicles shal they wryte them for seducers of the people, and in their stories regester them for damnable heretikes. For the iij. dayes and an half diuided into vij. values, betokeneth the vij. ages of the churche wherein they haue and shal still both persecute and blaspheme.
                           3 And these wicked sortes of people, kinreds, tonges, and nacions, or of false Iustices, priestes, Lawyers, & religious shall not suffer their bodies

to be put in graues. But be these witnesses once iudged heretikes by the clargie, and so condempned by the laitie, eyther shall their bodies be resolued into ashes by fyre, or els cō
                              sumed by the foules of the ayre. Seldome shall ye sée a knowne heretike buried amōg them, but most cōmonly burned. Examples of this hath ben lately séene here in England by Thomas Hitton. Thomas Bilney; Iohn Frith, George Bainham, William Tindale, Iohn Lambert, Roberte Barnes, William Hierome, Thomas Garade, Richard Spenser, and in Partrick Hamilton of Scotlande, with many other more. And long afore our tyme in sir Iohn old Castle, the Lorde Cobham, syr Roger Acton knighte, syr Reynold Pecoke Bishop of Chichester, mayster Iohn Ashton, syr William Thorpe, syr Willyam Sawtre, syr Richard With, sir Iohn Bale, sir William Taylour, and syr Williā white, priests wt diuers other. The body of Form
                                 •
                              sus was first takē vp by Steuē ye vj. bishop of Rome

and disgraded. After was it beheade
                                 •
                              , mangled, & throwne into the floud of Tyber by Sergius the third. Sainct Herman after .xx. years from his buriall was taken vp & burned at Ferraria in Italy by Boniface the eight. The bones of mayster Iohn 
                                 〈◊〉
                               were taken vp and burned, also the .xl. year after his death, as Walden witnesseth in his booke de Sacramentalibus. Li. ix. Capi. lxxxix. So was of late yeares in Worcester dyoces ye body of maister Williā Trace esquier, & in Londō ye body of Richard Honne merchaūt tailour. Moreouer, Iohn Colet deane of Poules in Londō also was not far from ye same for reading of Pauls Epistls by his life, had not other waightie matters been in the way. Such heretikes shall not rest in their citie, they shal not be buried among them. They shall not bée shrined, cannonised, nor allowed for Saincts, for they builded no monasteries, they set vp no chaunteries, they subdued no Princes, nor yet dyed for the liberties of holy churche. They

stood not in defence that priestes dooing Idolatrie, theft, murther, witchcrafte, whoredome, buggerie, with other abhominations should remaine vnpunyshed. But rather to the contrarie and that they should worship but one God, liue by their labours, take wyues of their owne, and teach nothing but Gods lawes.
                           4 And they that dwell vpon the earth (sayeth the Lord) or haue their felicitie here with the riche glutton, shal reioyce ouer them and be glad.
                           5 They shall clappe theyr handes when they sée godlye witnesses bée brought out of the way, They shall common, ryote and bancket, hauyng among them selues ioy without measure that the heretikes bée gone, so hatefull is the light to their eyes, and the veritie to theyr wicked hartes.
                           6 And they shall sende giftes or presentes one to an other for gladnesse, as for example. My Lord byshop hath had a sum of monye of the priestes for doing his part so wel. My

Abbot and maister doctour haue had phesan
                                 •
                              es, plouers, and par
                                 •
                               riches, pigges, geese, and capons, for disputing their matters so valyauntly. Master parson hath ben commended for scoldinge, and set Saunder smell smock our parish priest for bearynge false witnesse. Maister Fryer hath had a trentall, and father Lymitour a bushell of malt, or a cheese for playing the knaues also, and hardly my L
                                 •
                              rde chiefe iustice hath not bene without his rewarde, nor yet master Chauncelour, neither maister scribe. What made T. More for his tyme with so prodigious tirannie to persecute the truth, and since, Godsalue of Norwiche. Wartō of Bongay Hales & Baker of Kent, wt such other lyke? but Aury sacra fames, as Uirgil doth call it. Thus do they laugh and tryumph when they haue wrought mischiefe, and much it delighteth them when they haue doone vngodlye thinges.
                           7 For these two Prophetes (sayth

the Lorde) vexed them that dwell on the earth. A great trouble it is to them to haue their faults séene, a sore vexation to haue their crafts known, and an excéedinge displeasure to be put from their pleasaunt Euphrates by the preaching of such busye herytickes. Much was Herode offended with Iohn, the byshops with Christ, the prelats and religious with Paul, & a sore griefe it was to their harts, when they were rebuked their vices.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And after three dayes and an halfe. 2. The spirit of lyfe from God, entred into thē. 3. And they stoode vp vppon their feete. 4. And great feare came vppon them whiche savv them. 5. And they hearde a great voyce from heauen, saying vnto thē come vp hethere. 6. And they asscended vp into heauen in a cloude. 7. And their enimies savve thē. 8. And the same houre vvas there a great earthquake. 9 And the tenth part of the cytie fell. 10. And in the earthquake vvere slayne names of men, seauen thousande. 11, And the remnant were feared. 12. And gaue glory to God of heauen. 13. The seconde wo is past. 14. And beholde the thirde wo wyll come anone.
                        
                           
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 And after thrée dayes and an half (sayth sainct Iohn) dyd the spirit of lyfe by ye power of God enter into them. In the midest of their ioy and triumph when they thinke thēselues well quieted, the heryticks thus taken awaye, an other storme falleth vpon them much worse then the other. Many more ariseth out of their ashes to their confusion & to the chosens comfort. And the same witnesses they are againe, geuing the same testimonie, though they be not the same persons.
                           2 The same lyuinge spirit haue they, confessing the same verity, that had the other. No long time can christes congregatiō be without faithful testes, he promysing to be with them to the ende of the world.
                           3 These witnesses stood vp, vpon their féete. In the time full past is this spoken for the certenty of ye thing

though much of it be to come. For so certen is it as it were al finished, an earnest stomack shall they haue, and with much bouldnes shal they speak. The rightuous shall stande by (sayth the boke of wisdome) in great feruentnesse of spirit against them that hath extreamely handled them, and taken a way their labours, persecuted them, & blemished their doctrine.
                           4 And great feare came vpon them which saw them. When the Antichristes sée they cannot preuayle, much are they inwardly anguished; vexed, and tormented. Then doubte they their fall, than feare they theyr vtter destruction. They tremble and quake when they sée their lawes will no longer stand, nor their insurrections no longer help them, lokyng for a terrible day. With horrible feare shall they wonder (saith the aforsaid booke of wisdome) at the comminge of the sodayne health, groninge for sorowe, and mourninge for very anguish of minde, and sayinge within themselues. These be thei whom we

somtime had in derision. Unwisely, we thought their liues to be madnes, and their endes to be without honour. And now they are reckoned among ye children of god & their porciō is among ye Saincts. Therfore haue we erred from the way of trueth, and the light of rightuousnesse hath not shined vnto vs. We haue weryed our selues, in the pathes of wickednesse but the waye of the liuinge Lorde haue we not knowen.
                           5 And they harde a great voyce from heauen, saying vnto thē. Come vp hether. The Antichrist shall heare this noyse, they shall know them to be in the fauour of god, and great heuines it shal be vnto them. For this voyce is the frée electiō of god according vnto grace & not after mans deeruing. And it cōmeth frō heauen as doth all other good gifts, from the father of light. It calleth vp them that afore walked sōwhat after the flesh, and durst not for feare of punishment witnesse the verytie. It commaundeth them to arise vnto God, to be

more perfect, more spirituall, more godly, and to haue their conuersation in heauen. They attende vnto the voice, they obey it, and do after it. For it foloweth.
                           6 And they ascended vp into heauen in a cloude. By the power of God they are taken vp. From worldly affects are they chāged to the pure loue of God, and from carnall prudence to the wisdome of the spirite. In a cloude are they rapt. Compassed are they with this fleshe, the ill desires taken from them. Euery where resemble they Christe, and are dayly better and better. They cease not of their progresse, no payne can seperate them frō ye loue of Christ, til they perfectly come to ye sight of the God of Gods in the supercelestiall Sion.
                           7 And their enimies saw them. The Antichrists knoweth yt they are gods seruants, the hipocrits perceiue they haue heauenly knowledge, yea, many times thei so report them both in their wordes and writinges. In many of their Chronicles they affirme,

ye Berēgarius, Iohnnes Scotus the elder, Iohn wicleue, Iohn Husse. Hierom of Prage. Thomas Thedonensis a white fryer of Bryttaine burned in Rome, Hieronimus Sa
                                 •
                              o
                                 ••
                              rola a black fryer burned in Florēce, and diuers other more were men of most excellent wits, of most high learninge, of most godly conuersation, of a most perfit lyfe, feruent, constant, and vnmoueable in ye tyme of their death. Bylney, Baynhā, Beyféeld, Frith, Tindale, Barnes, and other, are yet reported (yea of some which to this houre hateth their opinions) to haue dyed charytably and godly. Yet beléeue they neuer ye better, thei come neuer the sooner to god. Their malice hath so blinded them, and ye cloud of ignorance so darkned their knowledg, yt still they blasphem and most cruelly persecute.
                           8 And in ye same houre (saith S. Ihon) there hapened a great earthquake. A terrible contradiction ariseth euer from the carnall synagoge, & from among the earthly minded hypocrits,

whan the veritie is taught as it was afore time in Christ, and in his Apostels, sepcially in Paul, and now of late dayes in many other poore preachers. When new witnesses arise, then wax they more mad, fierce and fell, then they were afore. Then imprison they, then punishe they, then make they actes and commaunde in payne of death no more to speake in that name. Yet do they rather lose than win, fall then ryse, disprophet, then profite.
                           9 For the tenth parte of the city fell to the grounde. Their buildinge vpon sand will in no case endure. That God hath not planted must vp by the rootes. Their holy whoryshe church (which is heere called Sodom and Egipt) is ruinously decaied, their monasteries of monkes, their houses of friers, their coleges of idle priests, with theyr Nuns, Chanons, & chantryes in many places are downe. Tythes are not as they haue bene, nor Trentals, nor other deuocions. Images are not sought, nor pardons in

confession. The people inclineth to new learning, and goeth from their olde beléeue of holy church. They y• were mōks, priests, & friers are now become gospell teachers. Such as afore were dead, standeth vp now against them boldely. This fallen part is heare the tenth, for it is the Lords by the law. It is the same shéepe that afore was loste, and nowe is brought to Christes folde. These were called away from thence by the witnesses, the other stande yet styll, and are euery daye worse and worse,
                           10 In the earthquake were slaine names of men, to the number of seuē thousād. An innumerable multitude hath ben sent out of the way by these Antichristes in their fury, but yet nothinge haue they slayne but their names. Onely haue they hurt their bodyes, vpon their soules haue they had no power, no more than had Sathan vpon the soule of Iob. Yet haue their not names perished befor god, for of him are they writen in ye booke

of lyfe. In no case are the wicked of the godly héere put to death, though some do so vnderstand it, but rather of the wicked the godlie. For they neuer retaile their wronges, but rather pray for their enimies.
                           11 And the remnaunt or residue were feared (saith saint Iohn) and gaue glory to God of heauen. Of such as were left in their earthquakes or terrible persecutions, some remayned in pryson: Some were beggered, some were exiled, some fled, some lost their estimacion and friends, and yet gaue prayse vnto God.
                           12 In all their aduersities they gloryfied the name of their heauenly father, and Lorde. Thus haue we héere what is done already, and what is it to come vnder this sixt trompet blowyng (where vnder we are now) which al belongeth to the second wo.
                           13 And these thinges once accomplished the second woe wyll be past. And then looke by and by for the third woe, for it wyll folow anone

after without faile, yea, so soone as this second woe is done.
                           14 In the later age of all shall this third woe raigne, such time as Gog and Magog most extremly shall rage. And the vninuersall iudgement shall finishe that woe, as héere after more euidently wyll appeare. But consider yt these woes are to the infideles. The faithfull feareth them not, but receiuinge the worde in a pure hart they bringe forth fruite in pacient sufferaunce.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The xij. Chapter.
                     
                        NNw foloweth in order the seuēth trumpet blowinge or the pure declaration of Christes ioyfull tydynges for the laste age of the Church vnder the seuenth seale openynge, with the wounders and maruayles that there after ensueth.
                     
                        
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And the seuenth Aungell blew. 2. And there were made great voyces in heauen. 3. Saying. The kindomes of this worlde are our Lordes and his Christes. 4. And he shall rayne for euermore. 5. And the xxiiii. elders vvhich sate before God on their seates, 6. Fell vpon their faces, and worshipped God▪ saying, 7. We geue thee thankes, Lorde God almighty, whiche art and waste, and art to come. 8. For thou hast receiued thy greate might, and hast raigned. 9. And the nation
                              •
                            were angry. 10. And thy wrath is to come. 11. And the time of the dead that they should be iudged. 12. And that thou shouldest geue rewarde vnto thy seruantes the Prophets and sayntes 13. And to them that feare thy name, small and great. 14. And shouldest distroy them which destroye the earth.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 And the seauenth Angel blewe (sayeth Sainct Iohn.)
                           
                              The seuenth sort of sincere prechers shall vtter their message accordinge to the will of God, they shall declare his pleasure as he hath appointed them. For though it be spoken heare as past and done, for the certentie of the thing, yet is it not fulfilled in effecte.
                           The word of God was without beginning, and his promyse euerlasting, yet is it not all perfourmed in his creatures but many things are yet to come.
                           2 After this blaste of the Angell were made great voyces in heauen. Many (the congregation or kingdom of God his Gospell once purely publyshed by the preachers) shall speake godly thinges to the edification of other. The simple poore weaklings, idotes, and infants shall vtter ye hydden wisdome of god to the confusion of the great wise men, and sage seniours of this world. Yea, the stones in the streat, the outcastes of the world, the forsaken people, shall wonderfully prayse the Lord.
                           
                              3 And these shal be their sayings, when they shall sée the Antichristes cōfused and not able to speake again. The kingdomes of this worlde, that were somtime wicked, cruel, and vnfaithfull, are now become the Lords, and his Christes, of his onely grace and goodnesse. Now fall they to the worde that afore thought it foolishnesse. Now cleaue they to the trueth that somtime did abhorre it. Now haue they in hand the Gospel, yt afore dyd persecute it as sedicious learning and heresy.
                           4 And in this congregation shal he raigne euermore. Continually is he with them, that in faith retaineth hys verytie. All this shall they vtter with no small reioyce. For doubtles after the seauenth seale opening, and the gospell preaching, then a peaceable time shall be, and figured it is by the halfe houre spoken of afore. For it shal not continue to the ende. Long may not the church of Christ be vnpersecuted▪ But yet this peace for the time shall 
                                 •
                              ot onely be an inward

peace in the conscience (as is alwayes among the faithful) but an outward quiet also, or a season wtou
                                 •
                               persecution abroade.
                           5 And the xxiiij. elders (saith S. Iohn) or the great number of saincts departed, whiche sitteth before God on their seats, or resteth in his swéet peace, in such graces of the spirit as he gaue them by their lyfe time, as charite, stedfastnesse, loue, ioy, peace, méekenesse, rightuousnesse, and such other lyke, fell downe flat vpon their faces.
                           6 Most humblye haue they euer submitted themselues, referryng vnto god the father the benfite of their creation, and vnto Iesus Christ hys sonne the frée gyft of their redemption. Yea, sepcialli at this time, being vnder the Antler of God, & knowyng by hys méere goodnesse the number of their brethē shortly to be fulfilled, and them selues wt thē to be at a gloryous liberty, after their gostly sorte they laud hym saying.
                           
                              7 From the verye depth of our spirituall hartes, we render vnto thée most hygh thankes Lorde god almighty, eternall Father, sonne and holy ghost, which art one essenciall God, and wast without beginninge, and shalt be without ending.
                           8 For thou hast taken vpon thée thy great might. Now haste thou shewed thy wonderful power. Euer hast thou raygned among thy people, but neuer so graciously, so plentuouslye, and so gloryouslye for our behoue.
                           9 The Heathen euermore were angry when thy truth appered. Mad were the wicked Antichristes when thy glory shyned, and their pride deminished. They freted for anger, they swelled for woodnesse, yea, they slew thy seruauntes and burned vp thy people.
                           10 But now is thy wrath towards them. Now wil thy anger break out, now wyll thy vengaunce appeare. Now shall thy terrible iudgement without mercy be declared frō heauē
                              
vpon all vngodlinesse of those cruell enimyes that withhelde thy trueth in vnrightuousnesse.
                           11 Now shortly ensueth the time of the dead, wherein they shall bée iudged some to ioye, some to heauinesse, some to glorie, some to payne.
                           12 Now approcheth the glad season wherein thou haste appoynted to reward the true seruauntes, the Prophets, & the faithfull beléeuers, made Saynctes by the onely death of thy sonne, and all them that yet feareth thy name, with eternall felicitie.
                           13 None wilt thou seclude from this thy liberall goodnesse, for no weakenesse nor pouertie. But so well the small as the great, the lowe as the high, the poore as the rich, the sicke as the whole, the vnlearned as learned shall tast of thy inestimable cléernesse.
                           14 Onely shalte thou distroye them that distroyed the earth, compellyng both it and all that therein is, not to serue thée their heauenly creator, but their owne stinking desires, lustes,

and corrupt affections, thy glorie not once estéemed nor regarded. Héerein may we coniecture, that th
                                 •
                               seuenth seale once opened and the vij. trumpet blowen, the last iudgemēt day is not farre of. Blessed is he that watcheth for the Lordes comming.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
THE TEXT.
                        1 And the temple of God was opened in heauē, 2. and there was seene in his temple, the Arke of his Testament. 3. And there followed lightnings, and voyces, and thunderinges, and earthquake, 4. and muche hayle.
                        
                           
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 And the Temple of God (sayeth S. Iohn) was opened in heauen. Euident will the godly and spirituall estate of ye true christian church séeme in those dayes, the Gospell sincerely preached. In faith shal mē séeke their liuing father, & not in dead Images, nor other corruptible things. In spyrite and veritie shall they worship him, and not in dumme ceremonyes, nor outward shadowes. Speared is Gods temple, whē his true worshipping is hid. And opened it is agayne, when yt is clearly séene. Till Christes comming in the fleshe nothing thereof appeared. With the key of Dauid opened he ye misteries therof. Wherby thorow fayth the conuersation of many is now & hath bene euer since in heauen.
                           2 This temple thus open, anon the Arke of Gods holy Testament was séene therin. Christ sheweth him self in his owne colours, when the Gospell is truly receyued, which is that

Arke, wherin all the riches of Gods couenauntes and the precious treasure of his promyse is reposed to mās behoue. And specially those by whom we are reconciled and saued. By hym are we onely brought to Gods fauor again, and graciously redéemed. Yea, all the sort of vs haue receiued of hys aboundant & ouerflowyng fulnesse. The sight of this Ark in this temple is none other, thē a cléere knowledge of him in his congregation. So ofte are his misteryes euydent, as thys temple is opened. So many tymes are they knowne as his word is truly taught.
                           3 And no smal fruit is to be thought to come thereof. For there followe
                                 •
                               lightnings, voyces, thunderings, and earthquakes, Diuers respectes hath the veritie of God, accordyng to dyuers audiēces. In maner of lightning it moueth some making of earth, heauen, and of sinners godly people. A sound or a noyse onely it is to some men, not regarding the fruites therof. To some it is an occasion of anger,

spight, and madnesse, & to some of open blasphemie against the holie ghost. For what els doeth the clergy, maliciously withstanding it, but wilfully worke against knowledge? And what doth the vndiscréete laite, blinded by them, but babble they wot not what?
                           4 And a great hayle also folowed, which betokeneth the vehement and sharpe iudgements of God towardes such enimies of his veritie. The most terrible tempests of his Ire abydeth them. The Lord shall break into the lande (sayeth the Prophet Esay) lyke a sore tempest of haile that breaketh downe strong holdes or castles. And the proude crowne of the drunken Ephraemites shall be troden vnder foote. Not only is the last age appointed to these thunderings, and earthquakes, but they began also so soone as Christ appeared in the fleshe. No sooner was the young babe borne, but Herode for madnesse soughte to slea him in his verie infancie. The Pharises & Scribes, the bishops, priestes

and Lawyers swelled at hys preaching, & neuer left till they had slaine him. And this rule with the prelates and hipocrites hath continued euer since, & stil shall doe til the latter day. Onely is there and shall be a moderation, that some time it is not so extreme as at some. For if it were alwayes alike, there shuld none be left.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And there appeared a great wonder in heauen. 2. A woman clothed vvith the Sun, 3. and the Moone vnder hyr feete, 4. and 
                              〈◊〉
                            on hir head, a crovvne of xij. starres. 5. And shee vvas vvith chylde, 6. and cryed, trauelyng in byrth, 7. And payned, readie to be deliuered.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 And there appeared (saith Sainct Iohn) a great token in heauen. For no wonder is this token héere to bée taken, as in other places of the scripture, but for a type or figure, contayning vnder misterie great things.
                           
                              A woman was séene clothed with the sonne, yea of Iohn. For to Gods onely electes is the veritie shewed to auauntage. Not Marie Christes mother is this womā, thogh many hath so fantasied in their commentaryes. But it is the true christian churche of whome Marye is a moste notable member.
                           3 This woman the church (as Salomōs canticles specifie, is fair, louely, pleasaunt, sweet, holsome, delectable, vndefiled as the M
                                 •
                              ne, excelent in clearnesse as the sunne, and glorious as an armie of men with theyr banners and stremers. This woman is bewtifully decked with ye shining sunne of rightuousnesse. None is of hir that hath not don on Iesus Christ, being renued in their hartes by faith. They are not hir childrē yt persecute gods word, no more thā was Annas and Caiphas, Ioannes and Alexander.
                           4 This woman séemed to haue the moone vnder hir féete. To the church or congregation of God are all other

creatures subiecte. All moouable things hath the Lorde subdued vnto hir. Shée is the right heire and inheritor of thē through Christ, they wt hir to be deliuered from the bondage of corruption, and to serue in libertie.
                           4 Upon hir head was also a crowne of twelue starres, which betokeneth not onely the twelue Apostles declaring the glorie of Christes kingdome immediatly after his death, but all other godly ministers of the word also, which haue don ye same euer since. Onely reygneth the true Christian churche by the worde of God, by the sincere scriptures, by the doctrine of the Apostles, and neyther supersticions nor ceremonies, neither by councelles or customes, by doctours, nor fathers, by miters nor rochetes, by tippets, nor hoods, by shauē crownes, nor side gowns, by crosses nor copes, by belles nor torches, by shrines, nor gilte Images, nor yet by xij. couples in a liuerie with golden chaines and garded coates. Hir bewtie consisteth onely in faith, and in the obseruation

of Gods holy commaundements. Hir true ministers or preachers as very chosen stars, sheweth foorth his glorie to the edification of other, and not their owne Pompe and magnificence.
                           5 And shée was as is the woman with chylde. Shée cryed traueyling in byrth, and was payned as one readie to be deliuered. With Christ is the church bigge, whē hir members are in full faith. In the harte is he euermore conceiued, & deliuered foorth suche time as he is declared vnto other. For this cause Christ called them his mother which ha
                                 •
                               faith, and therevpon did the will of his father. Of faith in the first promise yt Christ should distroy the serpent, was hée first conceiued in Adam and Eua▪ and so grewe foorth in rightuous Abell, in Seth, Enos, Enoche, Noe, Sem, Thare, Melchisedech, Abraham, and Loth. And as ye promises waxed strō
                              ger (as in Abraham, Moyses, Dauid, and the Prophets) and the people of God more in number, so waxed ye woman

bigger & bigger, til ye fulnesse of hir time was come yt she shuld be deliuered. Which was suche tyme as Christ appeared to the world, taught and was cōuersaunt here among mē. And this course hath shée kept euer since, & shall doe to ye latter day in thē 
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                               beléeue. Thus hath shée had Christ in hir wombe since the beginning.
                           6 And being full of hys heauenly spirit, shée hath cryed in ye Patriarks, and Prophetes, in the Apostles and faithfull ministers, as one traueiling in byr
                                 •
                              h. Hyr crye was the mightie and stronge declaration of Christes doctrine, the feruent zeale & desire of the glorie of God, & of all mens health in Christ. Shée traueileth euer more a new lyke as did Paule, tyll Christ be fashioned in hir christian mēbers. With all hyr strength shée laboureth that the promised séede may encrease in the faith of all men.
                           7 Fynally, shée is payned with labours, dolors, blasphemies, troubles, and terrible persecutions, and neuer is deliuered without them: Neuer

is Christ earnestly receyued, til some of hir members doeth suffer. The cō
                              stant spirite & inuincible standyng by the trueth in them, hath conuerted many.
                           And lyke as the payned woman in all hir agonies, is muche comforted by the hope of a childe, so are Gods faithfull witnesses trustyng that by their pacient and glad sufferaunce, Christ should bée receyued & rightly fashioned in many. Yea, this causeth them to reioyce in all aduersitie, and litle to estéeme their paines.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And there appeared an other vvonder in heauen, 2. for behold a greater red Dragon. 3. hauyng seuen heades, 4. and ten horns, 5. and seuen crovvns vpon his head. 6. and his tayle drue the third parte of the starres, 7. and cast them to the earth.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 After this (sayeth Saint Iohn) appeared in heauen an other token or

meruaile all dyuers from the fyrst. The true church (which is gods kingdome) was neuer yet without contradiction, nor without the craftie assaultes of enimies. Adam was not so soone created, but he was immediately assaulted of Sathan. Christ entered not so soone the worlde, but hée was by and by persecuted. The diuill goeth about lyke a roaring Lyon, séeking whom he may deuoure.
                           2 For behold there was séene a great red Dragon, betokening the saide diuill, with his whole retinue, full of deceite, crafte, mallice, poyson, pryde, and fiercenesse, to enforce the poore weaklings to consent vnto his falsehood. All red his bodie séemed, in tokē that they which are of hym, are all full of crueltie, spight, & bloude sheading, afflicting the constant beléeuers for withstanding hys assaultes. Seldom is he out of the earth, as winesseth Iob, but commonly in the company of men, impugnyng the faythfull. And no power is able to matche him, vnlesse it commeth from aboue.
                           
                              3 The sayd Dragon had vij. heads, signifying all the craftie wyles, and subtile suggestions, that he hath practised and vsed against Christ and hys word vnder all ye vij. seales opening, and the vij. trumpettes blowing. Uerie easie it is to coniecture what maner of heades they were, marking other places of the scripture. A serpēts head should séeme to be the first, considering that in the Serpent he deceyued our first parents with hys venymed craftes. This head so maliciously poysoned man, that God repented him of his creation, and distroied hys whole kinde in the floud .viij. persōs only reserued. After the floud had hée the head of a calfe for the seconde, in signification of the shamefull Idolatrie, and wicked worshippyng that then begon in Nemroth, and so continued in the Heathen. The third was the head of a Lyon, full of pryde and oppression, expressed first in the cruell reigne of the Assirians & Caldeanes, and after in the proude Bishoppes and priestes. The fourth, was a

Beares head, full of rauine and cruelnesse, betokenig the fierce kingdom of Meades and Persianes. Cōsequētly, his fift head was lyke a Leopards head of many colours, full of ficklenesse and chaungeablenesse. And that was the vncōstant raign of ye Greeks. His sixt was the head of a beast, farre vnlyke all other beastes, which signifieth the kingdome of the Romans, with their monstrous lawes more then néedeth. The seuenth is not vnlyke to a mans heade, including all carnall wisedome, with all diuilyshe polices & craftes, & this is ye very papacie here in Europa, which is ye general Antichrist of all ye whole world almost, which hath alreadie subdued and distroyed the Empyre of Rome. For he is called the Apostata & man of sinne. By this only head, is ye Dragon named ye enuious mā. The whole bodie foloweth ye heads. As the diuill is malicious, wicked, fierce, cruel, tyrannicall, false, execrable, and deceitfull, so are all his mēbers. In ye prudēce of ye flesh after him they walk in Idolatrie, hipocrisie, & all other filthinesse.

And like as afore Christes comming, these heads were in ye serpēt, in the golden calues, in ye kingdome of Babilon, in Nemroth, in Pharao, in Antiochus, & in ye Pharisies & scribes, bishops, Lawyers, & priestes, so haue they bene since his time vnder ye vij. seales opening, and the vij. trumpets blowing, after the same sort. Under the first, he had a serpēts head in the Iewes, most maliciously and subtilly withstanding Christ & his Apostles, pretēding ye zeale of God & his lawes. Under ye second, he had a calues head in ye Idolators, which slew ye constant witnesses of Christes veritie. Under the third, ye head of a proude Lyon in the bold rable of heretiks, presuming against gods word to affirm vngodly things. Under ye fourth, the head of a Beare, in ye gréedy multitude of holy hipocrites & spirituall Antichristes, which haue rauished vp ye substāce of this world, vsurping ye empire of the same. For then begone the papacie with Mahomets mischief. Under the 
                                 •
                              ift the head of a Leopard, in ye diuersitie of pestilent sectes or execrable

locustes, of whome euerie one reioyceth in his owne colour and inuention. For then dyd they sore increase. Under the sixt, the head of a best vnlyke to all other, in the tyrannie of wicked gouernours blynded and perswaded by the priestes to slea Gods seruaunts for the vpholding of their stinking generation. For then was and is yet done much murther▪ vpon such as confesse the truth. Under the seuenth or last seale opening, shal he haue yet still the heade of a man, in fleshly polices & falshoode of the Pope and his prelates, in the doctours and priestes till God vtterly shall distroy them with the breath of his mouth.
                           4 The said dragō had also x. horns or al subtil waies wherwith to impugn the féeble weake nature of man, or to prouoke him euer more to rebell against gods commaundements.
                           5 Upō his vij. heads he had vij. croūes signifying therby yt both he & his mē
                              bers hath not only possessed ye afore named vyces, but also they haue ouer the world raigned in them, and yet

doe to this day. In pride, falshood, malice, craft, crueltie, wickednesse, & all other mischies triumph they yet.
                           6 And his tayle drewe towardes hym the third part of the starres, and inconclusion threwe them downe to the earth. By worldly promociōs, lucre, fauour, and other flatteryng fantasies, hath he tangled many learned men, and plucked them cleane from Christes true Churche, and from the lyfe of the Gospell, so prouokinge them, wholy to geue themselues to the study of erronius doctrine and lying prophesies, to seduce the wordly multytude and kepe them in perpetuall blindnesse.
                           7 So that they are now cast into the earth. They are become all carnall, fylthy and vngodly in all theyr wisdome, study, and workes, in all theyr counsels, preachinges, and teachynges. Now are they the wicked Apostelles of Sathan, no longer may they shine in the firmament.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And the Dragon stoode before the womā which vvas ready to be delyuered. 2. for to deuoure her child as soone as it vvere borne 3. & she brought forth a manchild. 4. vvhich should rule all nacions vvith a rod of Iron.
                        5 And her sonne vvas taken vp vnto God, and to his seate .6. And the vvoman fled into the vvildernes .7. Where she had a place prepared of God, 8. That they shoulde feede her there .9. A thousande, tvvo hundred, and threescore dayes.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 Before the aforesayde trauailyng woman stoode this Dragon, redy to deuoure her childe, so soone as it were borne. Euermore is the deuill waiting his pray, where as the Gospell is sincerely taught, least any thereby should become the children of God.
                           2 He séeketh all crafts, polyces, & ingins, to take the word from the hart, least they beléeuing it shuld be saued. Thus sought he to deuoure christ after the letter, appoynting Herode to slea him soone after his birth. And when he sée that way wold not take, yet left he not of till the Iewes had

slayne hym. Not thus yet satisfied, he labored by ye bishops to extinguish the faith of his resurrection, least yt shuld profit vnto lyfe. Moreouer where as the Apostles and other godly men, haue geuen Christ vnto other in maner as they receued him, he hath left no cautels vnsought by his malignant members, euer since to depriue Gods people thereof.
                           3 Such a man child (saieth S. Iohn) brought this woman forth, as wt an yron rod should rule all nations. Neuer is ye true church idle, but conceiueth christ at ye gospel preching, retaineth him in faith & brīgeth him forth in teaching other ye same. No woman child is he, impotent, weake & féeble, but a manchilde, bringing wt him alwaies a stronge, mighty & inuincible spirit, wher as he is vnfainedly receued. For he is the mighty Lorde that is valiaunt in battaile.
                           4 With the yron wand of his word inuincible shal he gouerne his méeke sprited flock, yt none other lawes shal they require, with the same also shal he subdue all powers which are not

of hym, and driue them downe to the bottom of hell. For by faith onely in him is ye victory gotten ouer ye world.
                           5 This childe was also taken vp to God and vnto his throne. Where as the deuill thought to deuoure hym, and to wrap hym vp for euer vnder death, he put hym beside his purpose. Uictoryously he arose vp from death to lyfe, he ascended vnto heauen, and now sitteth vpon the right hande of God the father almightye. And where as he is nowe, there shall hys faithfull folowers, and ministers be hereafter, for yt is his, is also theirs, birth, lyfe, death, resurrection and ascention.
                           6 The woman fled after this into the wyldernesse. What els doth the iust people of God? but flye the contagiousnes, vanytie, tumult, fornication, idolatry, and filthynes of thys world? séeking God in the solytarie harte, and not in outwarde fantasies. I got me away farre of (sayeth Dauid) and remayned in the deserte, monkes, nunnes, channons, and fryers,

hath fled into monasteris, couē
                              tes, and houses, but nothinge after this sort. For in all voluptuous pleasures haue they there liued. The vnfained solytary man after Hieremy, continueth peaceably with himselfe, and hath his hart aboue.
                           7 In the sayde wildernesse had she a place prepared of God. Which is none other but Gods protection, defence, and sauegard promysed in the scriptures. That the Lorde shoulde pieserue vs as he dyd his chosen people of Israell, when he went before them in a cloude vpon the day, and in the night in a piller of fyre. Dauid boasted himselfe that God was hys refuge, and that he dwelled vnder the defence and shadow of the highest. So longe as the Lorde is my gouernour (sayth he) I can want nothing. He fedeth me, he sustaineth me I doubt no daunger, for he is wyth me. His staffe stayeth me, hys worde and promise is my whole comfort.
                           8 And there will the Lorde féede hir sayeth S. Iohn) for the space of a

thousand two hundred and thréescore dayes. None other are fed with the scriptures and promises of God, (which is the bread of children not to be geuen to dogs) but they which flyeth into the desert from the dragon, forsaking both heade and tayle, both suggestions and lawes, both customes and constitutions. For all are deuillish. None other escaped the plague of Sodome, but they whiche fled cleane from thence. Lots wyfe but looking back only towardes it agayne was turned into a salt stoane.
                           9 The numbred dayes héere are none other but the afore written time of the two witnesses, the tyme of Helias preachinge, the time of Iohns preachinge, the time of Christes preaching, or the time of the gospell preaching from Christes assencion to the latter ende of the world. That is ye very time of the féeding of his Church. And not open is this féeding here, but▪ in secret in the wildernes, among a sort vnknowne to the

worlde, hauinge the pouertie of the spirit, without sha
                                 •
                              ing, anoynting, or hypocrits apparrell. And not onely hath the Lorde thus nourished hys people in this spirituall respecte, but also in body. When they haue bene greuously handled, spoyled of their goodes, imprisoned, and exiled, graciously hath he reléeued them, and prouided for them both solace and comeforte at the handes of them whom they neuer saw afore. So that the iust hath not felt himselfe forsaken, nor his children séeking bread.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And there was a great battayle in heauen. 2. Michaell and his Angels. 3, Fought with the Dragon, and the Dragon fought and his Angels. 4. And preuayled not. 5. Nether was their place found any more in heauen. 6. And the great Dragon, that olde serpent, called the deuill and Sathanas▪ 7. was cast out. 8. Whiche deceiued all the worlde. 9. And he vvas caste into the earth, and his Angelles were cast out vvith hym also.
                        
                           
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 And there happened at that time (sayeth sainct Iohn) a great battayle in Heauen. In the Churche is euermore variaunce and strife wtout ceasinge betwixt the spirite and the flesh, the good and the bad, the faithfull and the vnfaithfull. None other is this battayle but a very contradiction, a diuersity in fayth, study, opinion, wyll, and worke, aboute the lawes or commaundements of God, and also about the lawes and tradycions of men. This battaile is waightie in cause, multitude and continuance. The cause thereof is Christe, the Gospell, faith, rightuousnesse, mans health, Gods high honour, and such other lyke on the one partie. Upon the other party the cause is, errour, hipocrisie, lyes, Idolatrye, auarice, pryde, cruelty, fylthynesse, with al such other. So great is the multitude, that none is founde out of it. None is there but are in this army.

Eyther they are good or bad, faithfull or vnfaithfull, rightuous or vnrightuous. The rightuous are of the host of Michaell, the vnrightuous are vppon the dragons side. Continued hath this battayle from the firste beginninge, and so shall styll to the latter ende. Yea, though the dragon be bound or tyed vp vnder the seauenth seale opening, that he rage not then as he hath done afore. Yet shall the spirit of wickednes, and a mind to do mischief, raigne inwardly styl in his members, for Sathan can be but a Sathan, and a Diuill a Diuill.
                           2 Michaell and his Angels fought valyauntly with the dragon. Spirituall are they whiche hath done on Christ after the minde of Paule, and spirituall is their armoure. Theyr gyrding is verytie, their brest plate rightuousnesse, their shielde a sure faith, their wepon the word of God, their helmet the hope of health, and for stedfastnesse of their féete, their shooinge the gospel. By interpretation is Michaell to say, who is as

God? or who is like vnto god? And he betokneth the constant minister & sincere teachers of the Gospell. The Angels of Michael are al they that in a sure faith cōfesseth the eternall magnificēce of God, and that none is lyke vnto hym. Contrarywise the Dragons Angels are the hipocrits, lying prophets, and erronius teachers.
                           3 These fight with the Dragon, and the Dragon and his Angelles with them. For he that is not with Christe, is against hym. With the rituous is Michael. For ministring spirits are ye Angels ordained for ye cō
                              fort of thē which shall be saued. And cōmaunded they are to wait vpō the faithfull, to preserue and defend thē. The wicked sort haue the Diuil and his chaplaines to fight for them, the rightuous haue Michael and his Angels. The wicked fighteth wt errours & lyes, the rightuous with the only verity of God.
                           4 As vengeable & as fierce as they are, yet preuaile they not, neither is their place found any more in heauē.

Faith hath the victory by the promise of god, though ye blinde world séeth it not. Ouercomē ar ye wicked whē their enterprises taketh not, & clene ouerthrowne whē theyr beggery is contēned. And neuer is ye full victory gotten, no more thē it was in christ til ye tabernacle of this body be laid aside. At yt day is ye crown gottē whom the Lord hath layde vp for ye rightuous. And lyke as there is dayly fighting, so is therin some, daily victory. Dayly ar ye angels of darknes ouerthrown, daily are they cast out of heauē, which is the true church. Daily are they cō
                              demned by the worde of God & iudged for rebels against the holy ghost, whose sin is neuer forgeuen.
                           5 No place haue they any more wt ye chosen, no electiō, nor acceptation afore god. The more light they haue had & ye more they haue tasted of the truth now forsaking it, & rebelling against it wt ye diuill, ye farther they are frō god, & ye more nigh vnto dānation. Neuer beléeued he truely, that so had receiued the word. Let none think to

be saued, vnlesse he perseuereth to the ende.
                           6 And the great Dragon, or cap
                                 •
                              
                              tayne of all the vnfaithfull sorte, that olde croked Serpent which deceiued Adam, & is called ye diuill or malycious accuser, yea, and also Sathan the most cruell aduersarye with all hys clyentes and spirituall adherentes, are certayne and sure to be cast out.
                           7 With the rightuous they shall haue no porcion for all their gloryous tytles. With the godly shall not their names be registred for all their holy vnccions. But with the prince of this worlde they shall be throwne foorth.
                           8 For he by them, and they by him hath deceiued all the world, in lying tokens and wonders, and in the operation of errours, to the vtter dampnation of all them that consenteth to their wickednesse.
                           9 And he was cast into the earth, & his Angels also were caste out with him, which is not els but that they are reserued to eternall damnation.

For seruing the creature rather than the Lorde that made all, God hath forsaken them, and geuen them, ouer to theyr owne shamefull lustes. All grace and goodnesse hath he taken from them, and in all darknesse hath he left them. Nothinge is now behinde but hell fyre, prepared for the diuill and hys Angelles. The church thus fyrste bringinge forth Christ among the Iewes, and so by their cruelty driuen out into the wild deserte of the Gentiles, hath bene there fedde of God in percecution euer since, and shall be styll tyll the tearme come out of the aforesayde thousande, two hundreth, and thrée score dayes, whose end is in ye Lords handes
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And I heard a lowde voyce whiche said. 2. In heauen is now made saluation, and strength. 3. And the kingdome become our Gods. 4. And the power his Christes. 5. For he is cast dovvne which accused them before God day and night. 6. And they ouercame him by the bloud of the Lambe.

7 And by the worde of their testimonie. 8. And they loued not their liues vnto the death. 9, Therefore reioice ye heauens, and ye that dvvell in them. 10. Wo to the inhabiters of the earth, and of the sea. 11. For the diuill is come dovvne vnto you. 12. Whiche hath great vvrath. 13. Because he knovveth that he hath but a short time.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 And I hard a mighty great voice (saith sainct Iohn) which is ye whole agremēt of all the sacred scriptures. And the voice sayd thus vnto me.
                           2 Now is there in heauen saluation, in the church is the helth of soule now that the idolatry with other abhominatiōs is thrown forth, and she cleane deliuered from their beggery. Now appereth the power of ye Lord, that his Gospell is truely preached.
                           3 Now is it become our Gods kingdome, that theyr doctrine is not of men.
                           4 Now hath it the whole strength of his anointed. Al Christs labours, merits, and deseruinges, his natiuitie, passion, resurrection, and ascencion, is

now hir owne good, Christes victory is theirs, his crown, his scepter, his seate and kingdome is theirs, Yea, the possession of his fathers right hand is theirs.
                           5 For the enimy of our brethren is throwne downe, which cruelly accused them before god day and night. The aduersarye Sathen which quarelled before the Lorde against pacient Iob, and vexed hym sore in his substaunce and flesh, neuer ceasinge to this day to trouble the rightuous with Antichristes and Tyrauntes, is now ouercome by the victory of faith, and his power greatly deminished in his members. Now is the kingdome of God increased, much people beīg vnfainedli cōuerted vnto christ.
                           6 Conquered him they haue by no Power of theyr owne, neyther merits nor works, but through ye inestimable strength whiche is in ye bloud of ye immaculate lamb Iesus Christ, & throgh ye inuīcible word of his verity which they to ye world haue testified.
                           7 In the witnesse thereof haue they

constantly suffered, & through faith in them, haue they with him obtayned victorye ouer the worlde, sinne, hell, death, and the diuill. Not theyr owne bodyes haue they spared to wyn thys conquest.
                           8 But much more haue they loued Christ and his trueth than thēselues, accounting it auantage to geue their liues for hym.
                           9 Therefore reioyce ye heauens, and al you that in them in doth dwel. Ye Angels aboue ordeined for mans comforte, ye sainctes departed from the miseries of this worlde, ye faithfull beléeuers remanyng in this life, and ye feruente fauourers of the Lordes verytie be glade that your brethren hath gotten the victory of the diuill and his Angels to the glory of Christ.
                           10 But wo vnto ye wretched inhabitāts of ye earth, & of ye sea. No small danger is towards thē yt hath heard ye voice of ye Lord, & stil yet wil folow ye course of this world, no light peril hā
                              geth ouer their heads, yt are incōstāt,

fickle, & wauerin, giuing back wt euery blast for ye pleasure of theyr flesh.
                           11 Take héede of it therefore, for vnto you that are suche, the diuill is come downe with his subtil suggestions and craftes, with his wyly cauteles and ingines. Among you doeth he remayne watchyng to haue hys pray, as he did among the children of Israell, when they were become vnfaithfull.
                           12 Tares will he sow to distroy the good séed, for his wrath is great to sée him selfe thus deiected, & his hate is excéeding beholding his kingdom decayed. Among you must he wreak his anger, for he can not harme the faithfull. Thorowe his enuye came death first into the world. If ye will escape his snares, looke ye giue no place vnto him, but in fayth resist him manfully.
                           13 He waxeth now mad, & fretteth with him selfe. He myndeth to make hauoke and to doe much mischief, bicause he knoweth yt his tyme is short. No longe season shall he haue from

hencefoorth to deceiue. The latter day he perceiueth not to be farre of wherin great torments, abydeth both hym and his. And yt maketh him so woode. That maketh hym so insaciably desirous to noye, not caring what spyght he worketh against God. And no wicked will leaueth he vnsought, to perfourme his cruell intent. Woe vnto them therefore that in these dayes taketh no héede. Woe vnto them that stumbreth in wanton pleasures, when most daunger is, and the diuill moste busie, not attending to the call & warnyng of God.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And when the Dragon saw that he was cast vnto the earth, 2. hee pursued the woman, which brought forth the man child, 3. And to the woman were giuen ij. winges of a great Egle, 4. that shee might flye into the wildernesse, 5. into hir place, where shee is norished for a tyme, tymes, and halfe a time, 6. from the presence of the Serpent. 7. And the Dragon cast out of his mouth vvater after the vvoman, as it had bene a ryuer, 8. that he might cause hir to be caught of the flood. 9. And the earth holpe the vvoman, 10. and 
                              •
                           he earth opened hir mouth, 11. and svvalovved vp the ryuer, vvhich the dragon cast out

of his mouth. 12. And the dragō vvas vvroth vvith the vvoman, 13. and vvent and made vvar vvith the remnaūt of hir seed, 14. vvhich kepe the commaundements of God. 15. and haue the testimonie of Iesus Christ, 16. and he stoode on the sea sande.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 And when the Dragon or most furious serpent the diuil, the head maister of pride, & father of lyes, saw that he was throwen downe vnto ye earth by the valiaunt hoast of God. Or such tyme as he perceyueth the Idolatrie, superstition, pompe, hypocrisie, and other abhominable filthinesse, distroied by the word of God in his malignaūt Sinagoge of proud painted prelates.
                           2 Then persecuteth he the poore woman which brought foorth the man chylde. Then vexeth he the true congregation that teacheth none other but Christ, and confesseth none other sauiour, health, and redéemer. Them doeth he torment and punishe by hys mytred Mahounds and his shauē Sodomytes, subduyng vnto them for that purpose the power of Kynges,

and might of magistrates. Then sitteth Annas in consistorie, & Cayphas in sessions vpon lyfe and death. Thē bringeth the woman hir childe foorth in payne. By the martirdom or death of godly witnesses is Christ deliuered & left here behind in the harts of many.
                           3 And vnto the woman were giuen two winges of a great Egle, or the two testaments of God, contayning the Prophecie & Gospel, with ye loue of God and our neighbour. And these mightie winges were giuen hyr that shée might flye with them into ye wildernesse. Euermore whē daūgerous persecution is, ye mēbers of Christes congregation (which are left here behynde) hath aucthoritie of ye old lawe to flée from it with Iacob, Moyses, Dauid, and Helias, of the new lawe also with Christ and his Apostles. If they pursue you in one citie (saith the Lord) flée you into an other. Not onely to saue your bodies, but to fructifie in the people. Get ye into the deserte. Teach them that were not taught a

fore. If ye can not be suffered openly to preach, instruct men priuately in houses. Play not ye sluggardes in the Lordes vineyard. Be not niggards ouer his frée treasure. But as ye haue plentuously receiued it, so liberallye distribute it againe.
                           4 From the face of the Dragō hath the woman thus power to flie into the wildernesse by the scriptures, when hir childe is deliuered and takē vp to the throne of God for the vnthankfulnesse of the people that they haue not in fayth receyued hym. And in much daūger are they left hauing the diuill & his Angels thrown down among them with their wyles and craftie snares. In much more perill are they, then they were afore.
                           5 A place hath shée in this desert appointed of God, wherein shée is nourished for a tyme for tymes, and for the halfe tyme, which is not els but his speciall protection, among them that be poore in spirit, and are iudged outcastes of the world. There is the true church nourished with the pure

word, not mixed wt the leuen of Phari
                                 •
                              ies. There is ye faithful cōgregacion at all tymes fedde, without the traditions of hipocrites. Onely are they reléeued with the veritie, and satisfyed with the liuing promises, and haue bene since ye tyme of Christ. Yea, since the time of Daniell and afore. And this féeding time of ye Lorde in secretnesse hath béene sometyme shorter, sometyme lōger, & somtime shortest of all, according to the times of persecution, and of blindnesse in the enimies.
                           6 To flée from the presence of the serpēt, haue they euermore had commaundements of the Lord, & to shun the suggestions of his Angels. Warned they haue bene in no wyse to goe foorth, when they say, Christ is héere and there, for so much as their crafts are such as would (if it were possible) deceiue the very electes.
                           7 And the Dragō (saith saint Iohn) did cast out of his mouth water after the woman. A doctrine of hypocrisie, errours, & lyes, hath alwayes passed from the sinagoge of Sathan. None other fruits hath gone from them, thē
                              
wauering superstitions, Idolatry, and Heathen ceremonies. These hath flowed foorth lyke a great ryuer. Dayly haue they augmented, and tontinually increased. Innumerable are ye comberous and vnprofitable burdens of their fantasies & dreames, wherwith they noy mens cōsciēces, drown their smal faith, & ouerload their soules.
                           8 This stinking water did the Serpent vomete out by his rauenous Antichristes, whiche are his insaciable mouth, to stoppe the passage of ye woman. He poured it foorth in abundāce that he might cause hyr to bée caught of the floud. Such is alwayes the mischieuous nature of the diuill and hys Angels. Uēgeable assaults haue they, and innumerable craftes to deceyue the innocent not knowing them. Our fyrst mother Eua was thus trapped in the beginning, & so had bene drowned with Adam hir husbād, had they not had faith in the promised séed. An innumerable multitude hath ben & ar yet to thys day, swalowed vp of this floud, and without greate dyffycultie none escapeth it. Excéeding is the

compasse, studie, and practise of thys false generation. Euermore powre they out their poisō, they dispute their matters with errours and lyes, with counsels and customes, hauing vpon their side the darkened powers.
                           9 Yet is the Lord mercifull to hys poore congregation, that they are not drowned with all this filthie floude. None of it once toucheth their harts. No parte of their faith doeth all this riff raff hinder. This durtie baggage accombreth not theyr soules. Onely are they satisfied with ye wholesome doctrine of Christs spirit. And ye earth did helpe the woman (saith S. Iohn) The carnal multitude, the wise men of this worlde, the verye reprobates from God, all drye without the true faith, dranke vp this filthie water.
                           10 They opened their mouths wide, and swalowed vp ye great riuer clean, which the Dragon caste out of hys mouth. This erronious doctrine was euermore pleasaūt vnto them. Much more haue they alwayes delighted in lyes, and olde wyues dreames than

in Gods trueth. Thereto haue they giuen theyr eares, with all auidious gréedinesse and supersticious deuocion haue they embrased them. But the liuing waters of the Lord sauoreth not in their mouthes, their owne broken ceysternes doth please them best. Better is to a swyne a filthie puddle, than a swéete runnyng water. No where will hée drinke, but where he may wallow hys carkasse. No doctrine pleaseth them, vnlesse 
                                 •
                               mayntayneth their sinne.
                           11 In drinking vp this floude, yet ease they this woman. In such multitude is Christes small flocke not myssed, not looked for, nor yet many tymes in their abhominations perceyued to be absent. So gracious to them is the Lord, that in no wyse are they harmed with those vnwholsome waters. They are not caught of that pestilent floud. It ouerwhelmeth not their faith.
                           12 And the Dragō was wroth with the woman (sayeth sainct Iohn) franticke madde is the Sinagoge of Sathan,

whan their wantō ware is forsaken, abhorred and dispised. Than frette they for anger, than swell they for woodnesse. Than whet they their téeth vpon the innocent soules, and would teare them in péeces for very spight. Than imagine they new cauteles and wyles, and therevpon procure they new lawes to be made, to trappe them in snares that they escape no way.
                           13 For the Dragon in his wrathe, made warre with the remnaunt of hyr séede, which kept the commaundements of God. All maner of wayes hath thys Serpent assayed to distroy Christes true church. The Apostles he vexed with ye Pharisies & priestes, for the first age. With false bretherne and Tyrauntes troubled he theyr successours for the secōd age. For the thyrde, with innumerable Heresies did he accomber them. For ye fourth, with dampnable sectes of Hipocrisie dyd hée oppresse them. For the fifte, brought he ye world into a damnable peace of Idolatrie & superstitiō. And

for the sixt (séeing he can not yet preuayle) hée maketh open warre vpon the remnaunt of hir séede.
                           14 Now doth his Sinagoge of Prelates, Priestes, Hypocrites, and tyrauntes, make wicked lawes against them. Now doe they persecute them for kéeping the commaundements of God, in maryage, in receiuing meats with thankes gyuing, and in not going out to séeke Christ héere & there in theyr Masses and mutterynges, in theyr outwarde colours and shadowes.
                           15 Now put they them to deathe, which haue the Testimonie of Iesus Christ, preachyng him for an onely teacher necessarie, for an onelye mediatour and aduocate, for an onely sauiour and redéemer, for our onely rightuousnes, wisdom, & health. For their war is only against thē yt kéepe Gods cōmaūdements, & that haue the witnesse of Iesu. Neither is it against bandes nor whores, agaynst murtherers nor théeues, agaynst Idolators nor Hypocrites, Sorcerers nor

Sodomites, adulterers, nor gluttōs, Idyotes nor lyers, idle priestes nor vagaboundes, Scismatikes nor traytours. None of these séek they out, non of these accuse they at their Sessiōs, but the onely readers of the Gospell, and poore fauorers of Gods trueth.
                           16 Upon the sea sande stande they euer more with theyr grande Captayne, to fight this battayle. None other lawes haue they to ground thē selues vpon, but their owne tradytions and customes, with suche fantasticall actes as they dayly make, or procure to bée made of Princes for their owne wicked purpose. And as their lawes are beggerly and weak, so is their vsurped aucthoritie, so are their proude titles also, so are theyr myters, their anointings, & pompous functions. All are sand, dust, & rotten pouder before God, not grounded vpon his worde. All are vnprofitable chaffe. Yea, their selues are a ground vnfruitfull, sandy, & vnsure, fit for the Dragō to stand vpon to fight against Christes mēbers. For they are ye very

seat of Sathan, and hys continuall dwelling place. And that he can not do by him self, he bringeth euermore to passe by them. Innumerable also are their diuilishe practices, theyr wyles, and their subtilties to vphold their master, as are ye sandes of ye sea.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The xiij. Chapter..
                     BY the monstruous, vgly, and most odious beast rysing out of the sea, with seuen heades and ten hornes, is ment the vniuersall or whole Antychrist, comprehending in him all the wickednesse, fury, falshead, frowardnesse, deceipt, lyes, craftes, slaightes, subtilties, hypocrisie, tyrannie, myschiefes, pride, and all other diuillyshnesse, of all his malicious members which hath bene sence ye beginning. The excéeding presumption of them that hate the blessed Lord (saith Dauid) aryseth day by day. Continually thine enimies growe, alwayes they increase, & euermore they prosper in this world. Not frō ye stedfast or sure

ground (which are ye Lords people) ariseth this beast, but out of the wauering sea, or frō ye fickle fellowship and moueable multitude of ye vngodly. For the wicked sorte after Esay, are ye raging sea yt can not rest, whose water fometh wt ye mire & grauel. No peace is amōg ye vngodly (saith ye Lorde) no vnitie, no charitie, nor mutuall christian loue. It pleased therfore the holy Ghost to prouoke Iohn after hys secret vision, to discribe this mightie Antichrist thus in his right colours, according to that he had séene, to the forewarning of Christes people.
                     
                        
                           
THE TEXT.
                        1 And I savve a beast ryse out of the sea, 2. hauing seuen heads & ten horns, 3. & vpon

his horns .x. crounes, 4. & vpon his heade the names of blasphemy. 5. And the beaste vvhich I savv vvas like a cat of the moūtain, 6. and his feete vvere as the feete of a Bear, 7. & his mouth as the mouth of a Liō. 8. And the Dragō gaue him, 9. his povver, 10. and seate, 11. and great aucthoritie.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 I beheld (saith sainct Iohn) an execrable beast, very odious & hatefull to looke vpō, rising out of ye rauenous roaring sea. For ye wicked auance thē selues as the gréene baye trée in vngodlines, & the sinagoge of proud hypocrites riseth vp a lofte, setting vp their Christes, as doeth the fat Cedar trées of Libanus. All beastly are they as was Elimas ye sorcerer, full of filthinesse, gile, & falshead, yea, the very whelps of ye diuil, subuerting ye waies of God. None other is this beast here discribed, thē was ye pale horse in the fourth age, ye cruel multitude of locustes in ye fift age, and the horses of incomparable woodnesse for the sixt.
                           2 Seuen heades and x. hornes had

this cruel beast not vnlike therin, to ye aforesaid red Dragō or Serpēt. For looke what pestilēt suggestions in errors & lies, & what deceiuable power in signes & wonders hath reigned in the diuil for all ages, ye same also hath reigned in ye wicked members of his beastial body, in the furious bishops, lawyers, doctors, priests, hipocrytes, & false magistrats, for their heads are their vniuersal crafts, & their hornes their tirannous aucthhrities, vsurped primacies, or malignaūt magistrats. Thy strōg mightie power Lord (saith Dauid) hath brokē ye dragōs heads in ye raging waters. Thou hast smitē in péeces ye heads of ye great Leuiathan. Inhaunce not your hornes so hye yée stifnecked Antichrists, for ye horns of the vngodly wil ye Lord pluck down, and exalt ye horns of ye rightuous, in ye house of Dauid his seruaūt. More are ye horns here in nūber thā are ye heds. For greater is ye power thā is ye suggestiō, ye vsurped aucthoritie than the craft, the Maiestie than ye error, and much more mischiefe may worke.
                           
                              3 This beast had vpon his .x. horns x. crownes, signifying his victorie, dominiō, & primacie ouer the vniuersal worlde, and that he through the wickednesse of the people, is the vnworthy captayne and prince thereof. In this onely poynt differeth the dragon from the beast, the diuell frō his mē
                              bres, or sathan from his carnal sinagoge. He had vii. crowns vpon his .vi
                                 •
                               heads. They haue .x. crowns here vpon their .x. hornes. For that he hath but in simple suggestion, they haue in double power of coactiō. Wher as he dooth but dallyingly perswade, they may enforce and compell. Where as he doth but easely moue, they may by rigorous aucthoritie cōstrain. Whan he hath propounded an errour, they may by their powre establish it for an infallible truth, & make of it a necessary article of the christian beleue, as they haue done of purgatory, pardōs, confession, saints worshipping, latin seruice hearing, & such lyke. Whā he hath once made a lye (as he is the father of all lyes) they may authorise it

for an vnwrittē veritie, lyke as they haue don many. Much more mischif
                                 •
                               may they doo, beinge his spiritual instruments than he can dooe alone, as largely appereth by their works. Neuer could sathan thā haue put Christ vnto death, had he not entred into Iudas & so betrayed him, had he not entred into ye bishops & lawiers, & so cō
                              dēned hī. Neuer had ye apostles, nor al other godly prechers sens their time, béene sent out of ye way, had not those mytred Mahomets & priests wrought still theyr olde feates.
                           4 Upon this beastes head was written the names of blasphemie against the Lord and his Christ. Which are none other than the proude glittering tytles, wherewith they garnish their vsurped authoritie, to make it séeme glorious to the world, hauinge within them contained, the great mistery of iniquitie.
                           What other els is Pope, Cardinall, Patriarke, Legate, Metropolytane, Primate, Archebyshop, Diocesane, Prothonotary, Archdeakon, Official, Chaūceller, cōmissary, Dean, prebēd,

Person, Uicar, my lorde Abbot, maister Doctor, and suche lyke, but very nams of blasphem? For offices they are not appointed by the holy goste, nor yet once mencioned in the scripturs. What other is it but abhominaton, the Pope to wryte him selfe the most holy father, the generall vicar of Christe, the supreme head of the christian church, & the only distributer of ye treasures of god? The bishops & priestes also to call them selues their churches bridgromes, sitters in gods sted, forgeuers of sinne, & our Ladies chast knights? None other are they so abusing their flock in leauing the iust office of sincere preaching vnder such vain titels, after the mind of Zacharye, but very shamful Idols in déede. Their decres, decretals cōstitucions canons, rules, statutes prouinciall & sinodall, traditions, lawes, fatherly customes, & vsages, not groūded vpon gods cōmaūdemēts, are very diuelishnes & hipocris
                                 •
                              , blasphemīg ye name of god. For why, to haue ye name of blasphemy vpō their heads, is none other thā vnder a glorious title to maītain

that thing which is blasphemous, glorifying themselues in the same. The vngodly (saith Dauid) with mocks hath disdained the Lord, & with open mouth hathe vttered wickednesse against God.
                           5 And the strange fashioned beaste (saith S. Iohn) whome I saw in this vision, was like in similitude to a cat of the mountaine, full of many coulored spots in token of inconstancy, varietie, and ficklenesse.
                           6 His féete wer as ye féete of a bear, fierce, rough, and ill fauored, in signification of crueltie, stubburnnesse, & vncleannesse.
                           7 And his mouth séemed as ye mouth of a Lion, declaring him to be full of pryde, rauin & excesse. To such beasts as here are mencioned, cōparith Daniell vnder hidden mistery, certaine mightie kingdomes of the world. As to the Lions (which here is caleld a Lion for the more crueltie now vsed thā was in those daies) ye proud kingdomes of the Assirians & Caldeans. To the beare the cruell kingedomes

of the Medes and Parthianes. And vnto the Cat of the mountaine, the vnstedfast kingedome of the Grekes. Of pryde, spoile, and rgbbery, are the Assirians & Caldeans condemned by Esaye, Nahum, and Abacuck the prophets. The Medes & Parthians held captiue ye people of god, as witnesseth Hester, Paralipomenō, & Esay. The Grekes most spightfully were bent against them vnder ye cruell king Antiochus, as in the Machabes is euident. No abhomination nor mistery of iniquitie, as Paule calleth it, was euer founde in these kingdomes, but now reigneth manifould in the detestable papacie or monstruous kingedome of Antichrist, as all the worlde may sée. No where was euer more pryde, vanitie, and cruelnesse, Idolatry, horedome, and filthinesse, hipocrisie, falsehoode, and ficklenesse, extorcion, vaineglory, & couetousnesse, sorcery, supersticion, and vnfaithfulnesse. More than all the vnfaythfull kingdomes vnder heauen, haue this sodomiticall spiritualtie defyled wt theyr

witchery ye holy temple of God, which is ye Christen church. They haue most shamefully abused gods chosen people, which are the vessels ordeyned to his glory. They haue holden his frée seruants most miserable captiue, vnder their wycked decrées and tradicions. The crueltie of Pharao Antiochus, and Caiphas, compared to theyr tyranny, is but as it were a play, dalliance, or shadow. In them is all lechery and vncleannesse, all raginge lustes and wantonnesse, all fleshly abuses and beastlinesse, no naturall order obserued. Nothing in a maner are the cruell constitutions, made against the Iewes by the suggestions, of Aman, and by Antiochus to their wicked lawes and ordinances. For they were onely againste the body, theirs are against mens soules. So that the papistical kingedome of antichrist are to be séene both the Lyon, the Beare, and the cat of the mountayne, they not onely participatinge with all vnfaythful regions, but also doubling wt thē in al abhominatiōs vnder ye Sky. The mouth they haue of a Lion, roaring

out euermore blasphemies, curses & bytternesse. The féete of a bear, signifieth their rauenous affections, rūning vnto all pernicious euills, very swift also to ye sheddīg of bloud. As Cats of ye moūtain they are spottid wt diuers fickle fātasies, in sects, obseruations, ceremonies, ryts, lawes, & customes, no wher stedfast & vniforme, but euery wher variant & foolish. And worthy they are to be forsakē of god, & to be left to ye spirit of errours & lies to their damnation, that so contēneth the veritie of god.
                           8 More ouer ye dragon (saith s. Iohn) which is sathan ye diuel, gaue ouer vnto this beast, or curssed generation of antichrist, beīg his bestial body, al his whole power, his blasphemous seate, & his mighty authoritie. To geue thē his power, is no more but to fyl thē wt crafts, subtilties, wiles, malice, fraud and deceit, and to make them apt to seduce ye simple, or to able them to all falsehood & wittie gile. To admit thē his seat is to leaue them here a kingdom of vaine glory, hipocrisie, & abhominable Idolatry.
                           
                              To graunt thē his ful authority, is to worke in thē all lying singes & wonders throughe deceiuable doctrine, strōgly to delud ye vnbeluers to their greater damnacion.
                           9 To this power of the dragon, is no power comperable vpō earih. No power is able to suppresse it, onlesse it cōmith frō aboue, & is geuen vnto vs from ye father of light; as is ye strong gyfte of faith. Thus is this great antichrist a king with sathan, ouer all the children of pryde. With Lucifer he vsurpeth the seat of God, sitting in the consciēces of men, euermore boasting himselfe to be in gods stede, seducing the people of the worlde, & finally ouercomming them by bringing them into all kindes of errour.
                           10 And as concerning the seat, lyke as Christ our lord sitteth in ye throne of God, reigninge with his eternall father in méekenesse, so sitteth he in the throne of sathan with his father the diuel, in al pride and blasphemie. As touching ye power, lyke as Christ had his power of God, so hath he his

power of the diuel. Like as Christ is full of grace and verity, and of his fulnes all they haue receiued that truly haue beleued in him, so is this antichrist full of hate, falsehed, and all other iniquite, of whose errours and lies ye vnbeleuers haue tasted. Like as ye holy spirit of Christ hath wrought in his louers the misterie of truth & goodnesse, so hath the erronius & vnclen spirit of this antichrist wrought ye mistery of his wickednes▪ in chrstes enimies, since his deathe and asscencion.
                           11 And finally as conserning authoritie like as Christ beinge man toke power of God to doo such mirakles as none els could do, so dyd he of the deuil, being his wretched body to work prodigiuos maruels & wonders in hipocrisy among the vnfaithfull multitude, by the secret fufferance of god. So that in all peruerting power supremite and authoryty, he foloweth his father sathā, yea, in euery point. For like as he depriued simple Iob, a man that feared god, of his substāce

cattell, chilldren, and seruauntes, and vexed him in his flesh with most greuouse botches, so doth this gredy Leuiathan, this malicious murtherer, the man of sinne, & body of the diuel, with his deuourig locoustes, robbe ye poore people of their sweat, labours, trauaile, and nessary liuing, sparing neither sicke nor succourlesse, poore widow nor fatherles, no goods gottē by theft, mans slaughter, extorcion, bribery, pollage, idolatry, bandry, & al other vngodlines comming to thē amisse in their priuat confessions. And (that is most to be lamented) they defile their soules with al supersticions, fals beleue, and deuilishnesse, leauing their conciences all doutfull, desperat & comfortles. Finanally to conclude, like as, in ye body of Christ dwelth ye whole fulnesse of the godhed corporally, so dwelleth their in this body of Sathan ye whole fulnesse of falshoode, crafte, sutiltye, mallice, with power to work al maner of mischife, effectually, really, substancially, and corporally.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And I sawe one of his heades as it were wounded to death. 2. & his deadly wound was healed. 3. and all the vvorld vvondered at the beast. 4. And they worshipped the Dragon vvhich gaue povver vnto the beast 5. and they vvorshipped the beast. 6. saying. 7. Who is lyke vnto the beast? 8. Who is able to vvarre vvith him?
                        
                           
                              
The Paraphrase.
                           1 And one of his heads (saith Saint Iohn) séemed vnto mée, as it had béene wounded vnto death. And it was not so indéed, for his dedly woūd was healed againe. Euident it is that in Iohns tyme, Rome the mother of all whordome hadde, subiecte vnto

hir the .vij. clymates or vniuersall parts of the world, with all their powers, gouernours, kinges, possessiōs, pōpes, false worshippinges, and such lyke. Whom some wryters suppose méete to be takē here for ye .vii. heads of this beaste. But I finde an other thing in it, the body of these .vii heads being but one, & stil cōtinuing so. For though all were at yt time vnder hir, yet is it not so now, & yet stil remayneth this beast. Therefore I doo take it for one vniuersall Antichrist (as I did afore) cōprehēding in him so well Mahomet as the Pope, so wel the raging tyrant as ye stil hipocrite, & all ye wickedly worketh ar of ye same body. The .vii. heads of ye beast, may so wel be his presumptuous doings for ye .vij ages of the church, as any thing els, & yet no preiudice done to that hath ben said afore What should ayle this woūded head here, not to signifie his supremite suppressed, his vsurped authoritie & power diminished, & his whole prodigious occupying cōdemned in this latter age of the church?

I suppose nothing more manifest, vnlesse we haue eies & will not sée. Are not now in may parts of Germany, & in England also the Popes pardons layed aside? His power put downe, his name abolished, his Purgatorye, pilgrimages, & other peltries vtterly exiled? and so lyke to be within short space in other regions also. If this be not a deadly wounding of one of the beastes heads, I think there is none. If this be not an apparent likelihood of his fall, there is none to be looked for.
                           2 But the healing againe of this mortall wound is lyke to mar all, & make the last errour worse than ye first. In many places where as the Gospell hath béene preached, the bishoppe of Rome deposed, sectes, shrynes, & sanctuaries destroyed, monasteries, priories and fryers turned ouer, remayneth still theyr poyson wt those same instrumentes wherewith they haue wrought all mischiefe. Stil cōtinueth their more then Iewish ceremonies, their priestybulous priesthoode, theyr

vowing to haue no wiues, and their sodomitical chastitie. Stil remineth their sale masses, of all abhominations the principall, their prodigious sacrifices, their sensing of of Idoles, their boyesh processions, thieir vncō
                              maunded worshippings, & their confessiōs in the eare, of all trayterie the fountayne, with many other strange obseruatiōs whom ye scripture of God knoweth not. Nothing is brought as yet to Christes instituciō & sincere ordinance, but all remaineth still as ye Antichristes left it. Nothing is tryed by gods word but by ye aūcient auctority of fathers. Now passeth all vnder theyr title. Though the olde bishops of Rome were of late yeares proued Antichristes, and their names raced out of our bookes, yet must they thus properly for old acquaintāce be called still our Fathers. If it were naught afore I thinck it is now much worse, for nowe are they become laudable cerimonies wheras before time they were but cerimonies alone. Now are they become necessary rites, godly cō
                              stituciōs, séemely vsages, & ciuill ordinances,

where as afore they had no such names. And he that disobeieth them shall not onely be iudged a fellon and worthy to be hanged by their newe forged lawes, but also condemned for a traytour against his king, though he neuer in his lyfe hindred, but rather to his power hath furthered the common wealth. To sée this also with such like put in execucion, the Bishoppes haue authoritie euery moneth in the yeare if they list, to call a cession, to hange and burne at theyr pleasure. And this is ratyfied and confirmed by acte of Parliament to stande the more in effect. If this be no healing of Antichristes wounded head, neuer is lyke to be any. Whan men shall defende frée wyll, & allow theyr popish masse to be a sacrifice satisffactory for the quick and the dead, labour they any other (thincks you) than the healing of this wound? He lykewyse that in an open audience mayntayneth our owne workes to iustifie, by Dimitte nobis, and other not rightly vnderstanded

scriptures, doth he any other than prepare a salue for the same? Nay surely. No lesse also dooth he that setteth men to open penāce at Pauls crosse, for holy water making, for processiō and sensing, wt other Popetish gauds, constrayning them to promise the anauncement of the old fayth of holy church by such fantastical fopperyes, as Bonner bishoppe of London dyd now of late, to the lawhinge game & wonderment of all the world. Alas how is the people abused? None other doo they but mock Christen Princes with flattery, that giue them olde popish titles and blasphemous names of antichrist. As to call thē most christen kinges and defenders of ye catholike faith, meaning the Popes old tradicions, to heale the head of ye beaste. This is surely none other, but with the sayde beast to receiue authoritie, seate and power of sathan. Lette them therefore take héede least they be founde the same antichristes that they haue condemned, and so throwe thēselues double vnder ye same plage.

Necessarye it is they beware what they drinke, or what titles they take vpon them at their appointmēt, least they forgetting them selues be foūde dronken by taking excesse of the Babilonish cup, and so perishe with the wicked. Marke here diligently thys word head, and ye shal well perceyue how wonderfully the story agréeth wyth the mysterie.
                           3 And all the world (sayeth Sainct Iohn) wondred at the beast. All foolishe, carnall, and worldly people, not vnderstanding the wisdome of Gods holy spirit, dependeth all vpon theyr beastly baggage, thinking all yt they doe to be godly, meritorious, and spirituall. They magnifie it, prayse it, and haue it in most hygh estimation, yea, they haue it in much more pryce than any thing that is of God. In no wyse will they from theyr olde frenesie, such is their excéeding blyndenesse. For whan they heare tell their customes shall continue, their gouernours agréeing to the same, they clap their hands for ioye, and sing Gaudeamus

with the priestes.
                           4 Yea, they worship the Dragon which gaue such power to the beast. With their hartes they reioyce trusting vpon longer continuance, whan they sée his heade restored agayne in their rulers, the godly teachers burned, and the preachers put to silence.
                           5 They worship also the beaste, so many as worshipped the Dragō. For as they which worship Christ, worship his father also, so they ye worship Antichrist, agréeing to his lawes and decrées, doth also worship the diuil, of whom he receiued his pryde. They wonder with ye Iewes yt séeketh cauilations to cōtēpne Christes doctrine, as doth ye filthie family of the dotyng dodipolles, priestes, & vnlerned lawyers. They worship with the Heathē that admitteth their power and alloweth their faces, as doeth the foolysh multitude, that neuer will be godly wyse. None other iudgement remayneth in these dayes to these wonderers and worshippers of the newlye restored head of ye beast, then did vnto

them, yt with double deuotiō agréed to ye abhominatiōs of Mahomet & ye pope.
                           6 And this will be their saying as foloweth in the text, spoken in ye time past for ye certaintie of the thing, as the maner of the scripture is.
                           7 Who is lyke vnto the beaste, in outward glittering workes, or in the externo obseruations of counterfayt religion.
                           8 Who is able to war with hir the worldly powers now so déeply maintainīg hir quarel? All seketh ye papists that they can in ye world imagine, to vpholde the glory, magnificence, and beautie of their holy whorish church, or malignaūt muster. No cautels nor craftes leaue they vnsought nor vnsearched out, to cause the people to estéeme hyr of incōparable power. No small labour tooke standyshe in hand in Whittington College, when he made his more thē foolish booke of reproch against Barnes being dead. Nor no lessē diligēce ye wise poet Iohn Hūtīgtō whē he registred in his genealogy of heritikes, wt out grace, wit,

learning ye names onely of such godly men as were the Popes enimyes, no heretike agaynst God once mentioned. No more dyd Thomas Smith, Richard Dallison, Williā Stawne, Steuē Prowet, Fryer Adriā, Quarrie the Pardoner, with suche other blynde Popish Poetes, and dyrtye metristes, when they vttered theyr shitton rymes and poesies. And sure I am that many moe be yet abroade of the same wicked zeale and spirite, to the great blasphemie both of God and his trueth, now that the beastes wounde is made whole agayne, by so many new actes, so many new titled Bishops, so fresh sale of benifices, maisterships, and dignities, spiritual offices, degrées, and aucthorities, as plētuous as euer was in Rome. And least we should be depryued of our new pleasaunt Euphrates, and so bée compelled by the word of God to follow the Monks, Chanons, Nunnes, and Fryers, in theyr banyshments.
                           We haue procured certaine actes to be made for our commoditie, and

those only to be published among the people once in a quarter, or so oft as shall please vs to blemishe all Godly preachings of the scriptures. Thus séeke we our selues and not God, our owne strength and not his, our owne glorie and not Iesus Christs. But let vs not thynke that he sléepeth with Baall the false God, knowyng the most hydden thoughtes of the harte, but that he will within shorte space sende foorth his lightnyngs and scater vs, brynging our heathenishe deuises to nought. For the kyngdome of one faith in vs, and the Pope thus manifestly in certayne points deuyded, must surely decay.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And there vvas giuē vnto him a mouth, 2. to speake great things and blasphemies. 3. And povver vvas giuen vnto him to doe, xlij. moneths. 4. And he opened his mouth vnto blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his Tabernacle, and them that dvvell in heauen, 5. And it vvas gyuen vnto him to make vvarre vvith the Sainctes, 6. and to ouercom them. 7. And povver vvas

giuen him ouer all kinreds, tongue, & nacion. 8. And all that dvvelt vpon the earth vvorshipped him, 9. vvhose names are not vvrittē in the booke of life, 10. of the lambe, 11. vvhich vvas killed from the beginning of the vvorld. 18. If any man haue an eare, let him heare, 13. he that leadeth into captiuitie, shall goe into captiuitie, 14. Hee that killeth vvith a svvearde, must be killed vvith a svvearde. 15. Heere is the patience and the faith of the sainctes.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 To this beast (saith sainct Iohn) was giuen a mouth, not of God, but of Sathan, to speake great mightie things and blasphemies. So well is this spoken of the one as the other, so many as hath done vpon the Antichrst
                                 •
                              s liuery, title, power, aucthoritie or name. When the veritie of the Lord was opened before them, they gaue no thankes for it, but became vaine in their thoughts, wherfore god gaue them ouer into a leude mynde, darkening their hartes. So that now thinking them selues wise, they appeare more foolish then afore.
                           2 Now speake they great thyngs

in their conuocations, seanes, & sermons, and all are sore blasphemyes against God & his Christ. Now must they serue God by most straite commaundement with olde Romish beggerry, though he most highly abhorreth it, & no scriptures may be reade in ye time thereof. For the scriptures must onely passe as we wil haue thē. How shuld ye beasts hed els be healed again? or howe should our church be known els to be his own Image? Oh beastly abhominatiō, & most hellish decree. Now must Christ be takē for no sauior at all wtout our deseruīgs. The supper of ye lord yt was somtime a mutual perticipatiō of Christes body and bloud, must now be a new crucifying of him, one traitour playing al parts, Iudas, Annas, Caiphas, Herode, Pylate, & the Iews. Matrimony must be iudged vncleanes though it be ye earnest institutiō of god. No popish vow may be dissolued, though it be well knowen a matter so diuilish, as hath made an hūdreth thousād Sodmites. The Eucharisti may not be receiued

in both kindes, though it be ye expresse commaundement of Christ so to bée vsed. Without the blynde bussings of a Papist, may no sinne be soluted, for that is the vpholdyng of their kyngdome, with many other lyke blasphemies. Certayne other great thyngs are vttered by thys mouth, whiche now I passe ouer, least I shoulde bée tedious to the reader. How be it, thys one great blasphemy that is spokē, I can not leaue vntouched.
                           Where as they boast them selues yet still alone to be the holy church, by the onely vertue of theyr vnctions and shauings receiued first of ye Pope, the laitie secluded. And vnder thys most falsely vsurped title, they will still be taken for the redéemers of mens soules. For they say that their masses are satisfactorie sacrifices for the quicke and the deade, iustifying, reléeuing, and sauing them both from dampnation, ex opere operato. And ouer that abhominable swarme of Antichristes, filthie ministers, make they nowe their Kyngs the heades

most blasphemouslye, onely to be by them vpholden now in all their mischiues. Truth it is that a king is the politique head, supreme gouernour, & great stay vnder God, of the people to his charge committed, and after that sort, their mighty monarke also by ye scriptures, which thei haue afore this time denied, worshippinge them for most holy saints, which haue most presumptuously rebelled in that behalf. But ouer ye whorish church of theirs (whom Christe neuer planted) is sathan the onely head, by ye holy ghosts fore iudgements héere. For to that beastly brood gaue the dragon his power, his seat, and his mighty aucthorytie. God forbid therefore that any christian prince shoulde at their false suggestions, admit so blasphemous a title. The deuill (saith Iob) is ye only head ouer all the children of pride. That voice therfore may be blasphemous, as comming from the mouth of the serpent, if it be not taken good héede to.
                           3 And power was geuen to ye beaste

to do these things for the space of xli
                                 •
                               monthes, which is the thrée yeares, & an halfe of Hilias, the time, times, & halfe time of Daniell, and the M. two hundred & lx. daies of Iohn. Not onely for this age of the church, but also for all other ages, and by other heades also, hath the mouth of this beast vttered great things in blasphemy, lies in hipocrisie, & wonders vnder a deceitful power. But as cōcerning this latter healed heade of the beast, the time therof wil be short, as herafter shal appeare in ye xvii chap.
                           4 He opened his mouth (saieth the text) in reproues against god, speking euill of his name, of his tabernacle, and of them that dwell in heauen. This is in a manner all one with yt was spoken afore in the xi. chapter of the temple, the aulter, and of them that worship in the temple, saue only that his name is héere for his temple. In token yt when his temple is blasphemed (which is his cōgregatiō) his name is blasphemed by ye same, so is his tabernacle Iesus, in whom

bodyly dwelleth the fulnes of ye Godhed, so ar also they that dwel in heauen, wherby is mēt the true church, from whom the angels are not secluded, beīg their fellow seruāts. These dwellers be they that haue their conuersation in heauen vnder an vndefiled faith, that séeke those thinges, which are aboue & not vpon earth, that worship the father in spirit & veritie, & ye perseuereth true christians to the end. Many entreth this heauē of the Lord, but all continueth not in it to the ende of their liues, the more is the pitie.
                           5 Power was also geuen vnto this beastly antichrist, to make battel wt the saints, and to ouercome them. Cō
                              tinually do they with violence vexe by their carnall policies, auctority, & lawes the sincere witnesses or preachers of the Lorde, sanctified of him throw faith in his holy word as were his apostles, lyke as did the malitius clergy of ye iewes, yea, thei did resist thē wt their more thē tirāous proclamatiōs, cōmissiōs▪ & cōmandemēts wt cruell Pharao, Aman, & Antiochus to

proue Christ in them the signe of cō
                              tradiction and stone of reproch. They seeke héere, the hunt there, and neuer leaue raging til they haue closed thē vp in prisons.
                           6 Yet are they not so contented tyl they haue ouercome them in the sight of ye blinde world, though not before God. Either shall they be compelled shamefully to recant, or if they persist in the veryty, to suffer most painfull death. By one way or other they must be ouercome, to hold the people in errour. The gardiner of winchester was not ashamed now of late (as I hard it credibly reported) to say vnto one that was accused of his malignant multitude, when he was no lē
                              ger able to withstande the manifest truth. Master Seitō we know ye are lerned, and plentuously endued with knowlege in the scriptures, yet thīk not that ye shall ouercome vs. No, no set your hart at rest, and looke neuer to haue it sayd that ye haue ouercom ye bishops, for it shal not be so. In déed it is trueth. For neither Christe nor

his Apostles did euer yet ouercome you. Their victory ouer you is not in this world, your kīgdom being here. But be ye certen & sure of it, ye shal be ouercō to your much more rebuke at ye latter day when al wrōgs & iniuries shall be reuēged, which is not farre of. Your lordly estimatiō (which may not be hindred here) wil apeare there not very precious. Yet doe ye well to hold vp a proude pecoks head as long as ye may. Lose not an inche of your height hardly, but with your gogle eyes looke vp like a man with a gard at your taile, like a sort of tormentours in a play. And with your lyinge iudgementes ouercome these beggerly vagabonds, and burn them also rather then faile, to fulfil the mesure of your holy fathers.
                           7 And authority was geuen to this beast vpon euery kinred, people, tong and nacion. For none these antchristes spare, neither high, nor low, rich nor poore, sick nor whole, learned nor vnlearned. But a iurisdiction they must haue ouer them, though it be

vsurped. Once in the yeare must they haue them in confession, to knowe which way they are bente. That salue haue they gotten in agayne, to heale vp their wounded head. Be he natiue or be he strāger, be he ruler or be he a commoner, he must obey thē no remedy, or els stande forth at the sessions with Christ among théeues. Not in on regiō, or wher as one maner of langage is vsed, haue they this auctority, but in euery land, in euery shire, in euery towne, & in euery famyly must they haue to do, corruptīg euery mans faith.
                           8 For al that dwel vpon earth must worship this beast. They must agrée to the great things, no remedy. They must blaspheme god as they do. But blessed be the Lorde none doth y• in their harts but they onely that dwel vpon the earth, that haue their felicity here, yt séeketh ye prosperitie of this world, & regardeth nōe other life thē therin is. The lābs of christs fold geueth héed to his voice, thei regard his cal, they folow his word, they wal
                                 •
                              e

in his light. Thei séeke for no holines but only in hī, neither in water nor bread, ashes nor palmes, robes nor reliques, masses nor anointings. He is their only sufficient wisdom, rightuousnes, holynes & redēptiō. His word is their liuing water, ye fode of their soules, the lantarne yt shal gyde thē, and the life that wyll not faile them. None other doctrine do they couet nor yet other precepts of liuing. Though they be héere in the earth, yet dwell thei not vpon it. No continuing citie haue they here, but they séeke vnto another of much more beauty & pleasure, not builded of mē. And for that they are ready rather to render vp their liues, then to renoūce ye verity, only they which dwel here doth worship the beast, louing themselues better then god, & their flesh better then his trueth, hauing their whole trust in the mangye merits & dirty deseruings of these beastly hipocrites, and nothing at all in his swéet promises.
                           9 And therfore are not their names written of ye lamb in the booke of life,

which lambe was slaine from the beginning of the world. Christ hath not alowed them by his word & promise. With the rightuous are they not regestred, as members of one misticall body in hym. In the similitude of hys death are they not grafted vnto hym as the braunches vnto the vine, to be partners of his resurrection. Their porcion is not in the lande of the lyuing with him. They are none of those, whom the father hath geuen hym, to participate with hym in one spirit. Predestinate they are not vnto life by hym, nor so written vp in the foreknowledge of God. Chosen they were not of the lord before ye worlds constitution, to be his vndefiled children in Christ.
                           10 He is the méeke lamb that was slaine. He alone taketh away ye sins of the world. In hym only is the life, for he is the life it self. Yet is he the life of none other, but of those yt only beleue in him.
                           11 In that he was killed from the worlds beginning, is signified, that

he dyed for all them whiche were create to be saued, and that his onely death is all their health, raise and remedy by the promise of God. For all they haue eaten of one spiritual meat and dronke of one spirituall rocke, though it came in the fleshe longe after them. He onely trode downe the head of the serpent. Since the beginning hath he bene slaine in his membres also, as manifest it is in rightuous Abell, Hieremy, Iohn Baptist, & such other like. They yt are not written of the lambe in the booke of life for the children of God are registred in the booke of death for the children of perdiciō, reserued to eternal death for their infidelytie, with the deuill & his Angels.
                           12 He that hath an eare (sayeth the text) let him take good héede. He that hath an vnderstanding, let hym be admonished, by that which foloweth héere. Or he that hath receiued the wisdome of the spirit, let hym iudge hereof according vnto it. Thus doth the holy ghost aduertise the faithfull

to consider that whatsoeuer thinges are writtē, they are writtē vnto our learning.
                           13 He yt leadeth into captiuity shall go into captiuyty. And he that killeth with a sworde, must wt a sworde be slaine. This warning geueth ye lord, take it if they lyst. For he will haue his right iudgments known. He that vexeth or aflicteth the iuste beléeuers in body by outward punishments, he shall be aflicted in the spirit with an inwarde darknes or blindnes of the soule, that he may be the more captiue to sinne and to sathan. God wyll deliuer hym vp vnto a lewde mind, and wyll geue him stronge delusion, to beléeue all maner of lyes, that he might be damned.
                           14 He that killeth the poore innocēt for his faith with the yron sword, or slaieth hym wt any other torment, wt the sword of the spirit (which is the Lords word) shall he be both iudged & condemned. The word that I haue spoken (saith Christ) shall iudge them

at the latter day. And this is in manner all one with that was saide in ye xi. chapter afore. If any mā wyl hurt them, fyre shall procéede out of their mouthes, and consume their enemies.
                           15 Neuerthelesse to the christian is persecution necessary. For héere in this lyfe is the pacience of the saints proued, and their faith required. Here was Abrahā tempted & Iob sore vexed, and both they were founde Gods true faithfull seruants. Here were the apostles contemned reioysinge yt they were found worthy for christes sake to suffer rebuke. The rightuous the lorde trieth as gold in ye furnace. He chasteneth euery seruant that he loueth, and scourgeth euery son that he receiueth. Onely is it faith that al the euils of this worlde by pacience ouercommeth, & so obtaineth ye victory. The fruit which riseth to eternal lyfe, is peaceable sufferance in faith. And that must be heare in this lyfe, where as we are vnperfect, to make vs perfect.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And I beheld an other beast. 2. comming vp out of the earth. 3. and he had two horns lyke a lamb. 4. and he spake as dyd the Dragon. 5. and he dyd all that the firste beaste could do. 6. in his presence. 7. And he caused the earth, and them which dwell therein. 8. To worship the firste beaste, vvhose deadly vvounde vvas healed. 9. And he dyd great wonders. 10. So that he made fyre come downe from heauen. 11. In the sight of mē. 12. And deceiued them that dwelt on the earth by the meanes of those signes which he had povver to doe in the sighte of the beast. 13. Saying to them that dvvelt on the earth, that they should make an image. 14. Vnto the beast, vvhich had the vvounde of a svvord and dyd liue.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 And I behelde (saieth S. Iohn in this secret reuelation of my Lord, an other beast arising out of the earth. A figure is this of al false prophets and vngoly preachers. Beastly are they euermore, vaine, carnal, and corrupt in their studies, abhominable in the

practisings of their wicked harts, not séeking God but their belleyes, not Christes glory but their owne pride and vaine glory.
                           2 From the earth they aryse, all geuen to erthly wisdome. The only affectes of this worlde doth moue them to teach, & no good zeale of ye truth. Either are they tickled with ambition, pricked with auarice, or els stirred with mallice to inuei. These are the common affects of the wicked. This goinge vp haue they from wickednesse to wickednesse, and shall haue still till the Lorde destroy them, like as haue the iust beléeuers from vertue to vertue in the spirit, till such time as they sée him face vnto face in the euerlasting Syon. From the worlds beginning hath this beast risen vp in Cayne the first murtherer in the fleshlye Children of men, in Cham the shamelesse childe of Noe, in Ismael & Esau, in Iannes & Iambres, in Balaham & Baals prophets, in the Beniamits & Bels chaplains, in Phasur & Semeias, in Iudas, Annas

and Caiphas, in Bariehu & Di
                                 •
                              
                              trephes. And now sēs their time most of all in Mahometes doctoures and the popes queristers. Yea stil they are aloft in their beastly beggerye, & will be till their mischif be finished. Who séeth not now a daies yt hath light in ye spirit, ye malignite, hipocrisy, fraud, craft, & deceit, in certen fals prophets at pauls crosse in London, & in other places els.
                           3 This beast had ii hornes like the lambe at a blush, but all counterfet 
                                 •
                               fals in very déede, for he spake as did the dragon, the hornes of Christ, are his high kingdom in the world. Only ariseth his Churche by faith in the glad tidinges and promises of god. That word is ye scepture of Christes power and ye rod of right order wheras he reigneth. None other strange sceptures are there, neither tradicions nor customes. Seuen hornes had Christ, for in him was the fulnesse of ye veritie. This beast hath but ii. and yet they are but false & coūterfet. They seme to be Christs & are not.

These are the corrupted letter of ye ii. testaments, falsly interpreted, and for a carnall purpose alleaged. And therefore it is but apparent, hipocritishe, and deceitfull, yea, and cleane repugnant to the Lordes meaning, not hauing ye iudgment of his spirit. This letter without the holy ghost is death, & nothing pertaineth vnto Christ. He is the verytie & life, this is but a fable or ficcion. His word is spirit and life, this is but a brasse pot sounding, or a lattē cādelsticke tinkling, fantastical & faint, sophisticall & slaightye. Though these séeme like Christs, yet are they none of his, but y• very horns of ye beast. For they vphold antichrists kingdom & not his, a worldly glory & not his, for his kīgdō is not of this world, no lōger ar they his words, his lawes, nor his testimonies thā they maintaine his right honour. No newly practised worshipinges aloweth he for his, but vtterly abhorrith thē al as things rawe & vnsauery.
                           4 And therefore it folowith, yt this

spake as did ye dragon. The doctrines and teachings of these false Apostles and deceitefull maisters, are lyes in hipocrisye, and the verye doctrine of deuils, vnder title of the veriti repugnaunt to the same. Not vnlyke to y• the serpent sayd vnto the woman, ye shall not dye if you eate of the forbidden fruite, but ye shall be surelye as Gods, knowing both good and euyll. They do as did sathan in the desar
                                 •
                              . Alwayes they perswade vs either of stones to make bread, or els to throw our selues downward, or els to worship the deuill. That is, to chaunge the good creatures of God from their right vse, as trées into idoles, silkes, velvets, cloth, golde, & siluer into supersticious ornamēts, chast mariage into stinking whoredome and sodomie with such lyke. To decline from the duties cōmanded of God to their idle obseruaciōs, so making his commaundements of none effect for the vaine traditions of men. And finally to fall vnto forbidden worshippings or abhominatiōs of Idolatrie, of whō
                              
they are full. And for these they haue with Sathā also their mangled scriptures to lay for thē, to proue that the help of dead saincts is necessary, their masses, merytes, & works more than néede, expedient, and the fyre of Purgatory a fearefull thing, with ye diuil & all of such fantasies. These are the prelates of Antichrists church, ye two horned mōsters or great bellyed Byshops, rightly discribed here of ye holy ghost in this two horned beast. These beastly buszards ar not ashamed both to say & write, yt in their miters they beare the figure of both Testaments, whose veritie they impugne wt tooth nayle. Uery truly they say, that they carrie the figure, for in déede it is but a shadowe they beare. Not to glorifie God, but their owne beastly bodyes wt gold, pearl, & stone, lyke Mahoūds in a playe, for hys trueth they most cruelly persecute. These are ye verye false Prophets, ye instrumēts of sathā, ye deceiuers, wolues, wagelings, Iudasses, dremers, liers, Idols, aduersaries, adders whelps, foxes distroying

the Lords vineyard, deceitful workmē, desperate shephards, blind watchmen, dum dogs, diuils incarnate, wicked séede, vnsaciate beasts, whose God is their belly, & glory their confusiō. To al these & to many other such doth the holy ghost compare them for that they haue wt their errors & lyes turned ye swéetnesse of ye scriptures into bitternesse, scarsly leauing one place therof vndefiled wt their filthy dregs.
                           5 This beast (saith S. Iohn) dyd all things yt the first beast could doe, euen before his own face. The same lying power to deceyue in hypocrisie hath this beastly brood yt ye great Antichrist hath, y• same wily craftes, & the same beastly kindes of idolatry, & so doeth vse them. The same abhominations maintain they y• world ouer, yt ye pope maintaineth at Rome, & Mahomet in Barbary, of Turkye. Yea, ye same superstitiōs & sorceries, ye same execrable traditions and beggeries. The same ceremonies haue they, that hée hath, ye same vnctions, ye same orders, & the same masses. The same idle obseruatiōs

wt vnknown cloyning, clattering, and wauling, are still vsed in Englād, like as they were vsed afore and wt no lesse blasphemy vnto God.
                           6 To doe suche things in the fyrst beasts presence, is to do them where his power & aucthoritie is raigning, or where as is the seate of Sathan, which is euery place that admitteth straunge worshipping.
                           7 Both the earth & them that dwell in the earth, compell they to worship this first Beast. Not only enforce they them to wicked Idolatry, that neuer wold know ye truth, but also many of those which haue great knowledge in the same. Oh how many are in Englād, & in other regiōs also that in these daies worketh against faith, knowledge, & the holy Ghost admitting the priestes abhominations? Rather had they to dwell still in the earthly beggerie with the blasphemie of God, than either to be out of fauour, or to loose their offices to haue their goods hindred, or to hazarde their lyues, so swéet ar these wātō worldly plesurs.

Rather had they to perishe with the sonnes of Hely & Samuel, for abusing the ordinances of ye Lord, & with Core Dathā, & Abirō for rebelling against them to sinke vnto hel, then wt Christ to take paynes in pouertie. But let not thē think to be worthy of Christ, that better loue their owne carnall commoditie, thā his heauēly veritie.
                           8 Well, the beast must they worship whose woūd is made whole. His olde rustie rules newe burnished, and his olde Romish ragges new patched by a newly confyrmed aucthoritie, must they embrase in paine of death. The Lambe shall not yet be suffred to appear. Stil for a time must these terrible termagaunts haue more worship thā God, their traditions preferred to his most pure worde. And why shuld it not be so? haue they not now a new refourmed church, in whom ye beasts woūded hed is newly restored? So lōg as it is like the popes church, it must folow his rules, and cleaue to his ordinaūces. It shall not folow Christ in 
                                 •
                              aith & in doctrine, til it appear like ye
                              
church which he left here behynd him whan he ascended. And that is not lyke to be yet.
                           9 First must there be wrought great wōders. Fyre must be compelled to come downe from heauen in the sight of men, by this two horned beast. The disciples of Antichrist with their by furked ordinaries must violētly pluck from the true Christiā church (whose reign is not of this world) the eternal word of the Lord.
                           10 Then must they take from them the consuming fyre that Christ sent downe into ye earth of mens harts, to drye vp all mallice and sinne. Yea, they must depryue them of the clouē fierie tonges, which ye holy ghost poured vpon the Apostles, to the cōfort of all ye world. The tresure yt Christ hath left here to socour vs, they must hyde vnder ye ground, and ye candle that he light vs to sée ouer the house, conuay vnderneath the bushell.
                           11 And these wōders shal they work in the presence of men. Already haue they takē in England, from ye Bibles,

the annotacions, tables, & prefaces, to performe this their dāpnable enterprise. They haue straitely forbiddē ye reading therof, for time of their Romish seruice. Som haue they burned, & some put to silence, & all in the face of the people. Yea, they raised the maides of Ipswhich and of Kent to worke wonders & maruels, & now of late ye folish Northē men to fight for their Church. What practises they haue had in yt eare, and yt eare to fetch away ye true fauorers & preachers of the Gospell at diuers times, he yt wel cōsidereth, may say yt ye holy ghost hath here rightly described them calling thē workers of wōders. The discréet cittizē of Londō master Packyngton was slain wt a gun at saynt Thomas of Acres (as they call it) not without their priuy legerdemaine. But this wt other of their miracles I intend to declare more at large, in an other tretise the Lorde lending me life. It is not long ago also, since Alexāder Seyton an excelent learned mā, wt poore master Tolwin recanted at Paules

crosse. Nor yet long a fore sens good doctor Crome was complleed to doo the same. And now last of all, to take the scripture cleane away, they haue sought out great faultes in the translation of it, & there vpon taken them awaye from ye common peoples reading. Great paines they take to put it doun, but they neuer swet yet in ye settīg vp of it. Thus mind they to work their wōders, till they haue buried it all in ye earth. They lack now but iiii. knights to hier, to kepe it down stil, yt it rise no more vp. O veri imps of hel, & lims of ye diuil, how vaine are your studies, & how wicked are your practises? I haue no doubt, but wtin shorte space God will distroy ye counsailes, & dissipate ye strength of them yt please men. Yet let no mā meruail though they do these feates for the time. For if the Gospell were taught without checke, in a whyle should nothing remain of yt generation, neither myter nor rochet, shauē croun nor anointīg, & yt know they wel inogh. For ye word of ye lord is ye breth of his mouth yt shal distroy

them, and the deuouring fyre yt shall consume them.
                           12 By ye means of these signes (saith the texte) which this beast had power to doe in ye sight of the other beast, or wher his abusiōs doth raign without checke, he deceiued them yt dwelt on the earth. Many in this age are wonderfully abused, through ye deceiptful werking of Sathan in these horned whoremōgers, but yet non other thā are earthly mynded. Of some men in déed the eyes are bleared with theyr crafts, of some mē ye weak iudgemēts blemyshed with their subtilties, for wāt of discerning ye scriptures. Some men are tangled wt doubts, some trobled wt terrour, some tormēted with feare, cōsidering yt for this new learning (as they wil haue it called) some haue ben hāged as were ye thrée poore yong men of Southfolke for the rotten roode of Douercourt. Some burned, some be headed for thinges of nought, as is knowne to all ye world. These thyngs daseth theyr wittes, and amaseth their myndes.
                           
                              And earth is ye cause of al this, were it not that they much more loued this worlds pleasures than God, it should neuer be so.
                           13 All the perswasions of Antichristes prelates and preachers hath euermore ben, and are now still vnto such earthlye inhabitantes, that they shoulde make an Image lyke vnto this beast, which is alwaies to chose such an Emperour wt other worldly gouernours as shal be for their commodytie. He must by ye worldly people be compelled to take aucthorytie, sceptur, and crowne at their hands, so sworne to maintaine their fleshly lyberties. He must also be fashioned by their wicked doctrines and false counsels in confessions, lyke them in all sustersticious lyuinge, and in the tirrānous murther of innocent Christen men. Where such an head ruler is appoynted, there is his owne figure made, and where such a Gouernour is constitute, there is his owne Image set vp. For we must consider that this reuelatiō is in all poīts

no story, specially here, as many writers haue thought it to be, in supposing an Antichrist to be borne at the latter ende of the world. But it is a mistery cōprehīding in it but one generall Antichrist for all, which hath reigned in the church in a manner since the Ascencion of Christe. And in this one poynt are al ye commentours that I haue séene, most fowly deceyued, yea, the best learned of them. I know wel if ther be ani yet to come, he shal be but a mēber of this. Againe to our purpose.
                           14 Speciallye muste they make a right Image of that beast, which had the wounde of a sword and did liue. This betokeneth that in these dayes they shall sturre about them, & leaue no cautels vnsought, nether any fals counsels vnfet from other realmes, to doe their feats with, and to fashion the Christen Gouernours to their myndes. As Winchester did the last time he was in France. After whose comming home, many great wonders

were wrought in Englande, and fyre was made to come downe from heauen. Cōsider the story afore, for the storye declareth the misterie. That wounded head now healed, must be vpholden.
                           15 He had a gréeuous wype with the sword (which is the liuing word of the Lord) when he lost his Monks, chanons, and fryers, hys purgatory, pilgrimages, and shrynes. Yet was he not all dead. For though their coules, cootes, and rochetes were of, yet had they still the same popishe hartes, and the same supersticious frowardnes, that they were wonte to haue. This might haue bin found true, if it had bin searched, when certen popish priests of maister Whartons retinue not far from Bongay in Souffolke did calk for Cromwel, & for other els, if the worlde had not chaunged to their mindes.
                           I write not this, thinking they can harme by theyr calkinge where as faith is resydent, but onely to shew, that theyr hartes are yet alyue, and

how vertuously they are occupied. Many things I cōsider at this instāt poynt, concerning Prince Edward, whō I dout not but the lord hath sent for the singuler comfort of England. Not that I temerouslye diffine any thing to come concerning hym, considering it onely in the Lords power. But I desire the saide Lorde to preserue his bringing vp from the contagious drinkes of these false Phisicians. And this is to be prayed for of all men, if ye ponder well the text & marke their wonderfull workings, where the beastes head is restored.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And he had povver to giue spirit vnto the Image of the beast. 2. And to make that the image of the beast should speake, 3. And should cause that as many as vvould not vvorship the Image of the beast should be killed. 4. And he made all, both small & great, rich and poore, free and bond. 5. To receiue a mark in their right hands, 6. Or in their foreheads. 7. And that no man might bye and sell. 8. Saue he that had the mark. 9. Or the name of the beast. 10. Either the number of his name.
                        
                           
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 For power they haue to geue spirite to the Image of the beast. It is surely geuen them of the deuil, whā they haue once fashioned out ye beasts right image, or made of an emperor a tiraunt, or set in the place of godly gouernour, a cruell murtherer vp of gods people, by flattering prayses to encourage them to al mischiefe, and by wicked counsell to prick thē forwarde to make cruell actes of murther for vpholdinge their beastly generation. The spirit that they do minister vnto Princes euermore, is not the correction of sin, the amendement of lyfe, redresse of the common wealth, prouision for the poore, nor the séeking of Gods glorye. But by flatteringe praises to vpholde thē in their euils, much after this sorte of speakinge. Your maiesties or graces are called most vertuous, moste valiant, most worthy, most wise most mighty, & best learned among al christen

potētates. Thei are al but a
                                 •
                              es, in cōparisō to your worthinesses. If it be your maiests plesure to do this or yt within youre owne dominiō, who shall be so bolde to withstande you? No, though Gods holy lawes be an hundred times against it. Sopport ye olde religion of holy church against the heriticks, & ye cannot choose but prosper in all your affaires. Let it be treason against your owne persons, according to the actes of the Emperour Sigismundus and of King Hē
                              ry the fift, if they do but once speake against hir corrupt customes. Make cruel constitutions a pace, & proclaim them abroad to shew your selues the popes liuely Images.
                           2 Our office it is to cause ye beastes Image to speake. Let therfore your voyces be heard. Be no domb idoles, but speak with bold stomaks. In his spirit make vtterance without gods word of his old romish rules. Send forth your proclamaciō to be published eueri where, cōcernīg his masses, his confessions, his ceremonies and

his whorish chastitie. Let al things be blowen forth vnder your titles, names, & auctoryties, to be obserued vnder pain of death. If other relmes report that ye abuse the duty of emperours or kinges (which is the office of god) estéeme not their sayings, but stand wel in your owne cōceits, Interpret ye scriptures at your owne lust & pleasures as your law master of Rome hath done afore your time.
                           3 Cause so many to be killed, as wil not worship the Image of ye beast, or obey such wicked lawes against the veritie of god, as hath bin made by those Emperours that were ye pops eldest sonnes, by the kings of Frāce, which were his yonger sons, or by other princes els which were ye defenders of his church, let none escap your hāds yt inueieth against our kīgdōe, but make hauok of thē on euery side as of heriticks & traytours, to proue the holy ghost true here in his foreiudgemēts. For yt is your office, not appointed of god but of sathan. And in our cōmission frō him also we

haue it to be no slake mouers of you therevnto. So hath Christ tould afore in this reuelation vnto S. Iohn the Euangelist. This is the Ghoostelye councsell yt we ye horned beasts haue in commission to geue vnto you from the mouth of the Dragon. Whē such an Image or Idoluse prince is thus vp set or constituted by authoryty (his oth once mad that he shall al waies defend thē) he may in no wise speake, but out of that spirit▪ yt their cōiurers, confessours, I should saye, haue put into him. He mai make no lauws but at their spiritual appointment, like as ye Emperour Carolus doth now in these daies. Much after this sort, became ye emperour Nero, this beastes image immediatly after Christes ascention by the subtil flaights of that spiritual sorcerer Simon Magus, at Rome to withstand ye Christen preachers Peter & Paule, as largely witnesseth Egisippus in his thirde booke de Hierosolimorū excidio, the ii. chap. This Simon Magus by flateringe praises crepte firste into his fauer,

promising him health, long life, increace of power, & enlargemēt of his empyre, with cōtinuall victory ouer his enemies, in case he would folow his counsel, vpon this became he, not only his chiefe counseller, but also ye high bishop of his soule, & conseruatour of his body, the preseruacion of his whole health and life to him committed only. All thinges after that was done by his counsell to stop the Apostles preaching, he taken for the emperours most familiar friend, and a man most profitable to the cōmon wealth of the Romans, & they soone after supprssed and put vnto moste cruel death.
                           4 And he made all (saith saint Iohn) both greate and small, rich & poore, free and bonde, to receaue a marke in their right handes, or in their foreheds. When this new raised Image of ye beast, or sworne power to Antichrist, is once raised vp or admitted by their authoritye, be he Kinge or Keyser, Prince, or other Potentate, he must stronglye defende that

sinagoge of the diuell, with whole maiestie, crowne, and scepture. By their only counsel must he thē make lawes (for they must geue him spirit) and send his commaundementes abrode yt their holy decrées be obserued. Cōmisioners and visitours must out vnder ye auctorytie, as wel to the clergy as laite. Thē must al be sworn to it and so obey it, both high & lowe, both gentleman & yeoman, both owner and farmar, both citizen & townsman, both marchant and plowman, both maister & seruant, both natiue dweller, and denison. Yea, both priestes in their colleges, monks in their abbayes, chanons in their couents, & fryers in their cloysters must after their sort do the same. This rule hath bin alwaies for the commoditie of that kingdome, where as ye powers haue bin thus by thē peruerted. Much were it to shew the manifolde examples in that behalfe. Charles ye v. now Emperour, to make this good, and to shew him selfe to be the sayd beastes Image, caused such actes to

be publyshed throughout his whole dominion against ye christen doctrine, wherin al they ar declared heritiks, scismatiques, & excōmunicats, which taketh not ye pope for S. Peters only vicare & head of the christen church, none excepted, neither king nor coruester, as there are now diuers of ye contrary opinion. The articles of ye Louanians vnder his priueledge, & the actes of the Parisians vnder the French kings auctoryty, proclaymed in this presēt yeare of our lord a M. D. xlv. wil make al this matter good.
                           5 And what is this els both in their clergy and cōmons, but to receyue a marke in theyr ryght hādes or foreheads, for in admitting those articles and actes, they graunt to obay those blasphemous doctrines yt shall both corrupte their life and fayth, both theyr workes and conscience. For in consentinge vnto errours in their faith, they spot their forheads, hauing so their cōsciences marked wt an hot iron. In ful granting also to do

them in effect, they defile their hands perfourming such workes as are vnpure before God. If they were gone quite from Christ that wrapped thē
                              selues againe in the workes of the law, appointed of god before his cō
                              ming, much more are they gon from him that tangle themselues wt such works of bōdage as he neuer knew, as are al their idle obseruations, hauing no expresse commaundements of the word of God. Onely looke we (saith Paule) in spirit to be iustified through faith, which by loue is mighty in operation.
                           6 And for them that so beleueth is this disiūctiue, or, put betwéen their handes and foreheades. For all they that outwardly kéepe these heathenish obseruations, haue not their consciences defiled with them, for their inward faiths sake, though thei performe their outwarde workes doubting the terrour of the lawes. Yet would I counsell them not therein to trust, but at the word of ye lord to goe frō it. For though Loth dwelt in Sodome,

yet at the Lordes voyce he departed from thence.
                           7 This image made also yt no man might bye or sell, saue he onely yt had the marke, or the name of the beast, or at ye leaste the nūber of his name. The actes of Iustinian ye emperour, shal make this good, so shal ye constitutions of Adelstane & Edgare, & many other kings here in englād which for ye order & cōmodity of ye clergy made many politique laws. Specialy king Inas, gouernour of the west Saxōs, which first gaue the Peter pence vnto Rome, & made him selfe a monke there. But in this spirituall generation among thēselues, is none alowed for a marchant vnlesse he come in by simony. None was made bishop, pastor nor curat, but payd for it their taxed sūms, bishops to the pope, and the priestes to the bishops, besides Item in bribes.
                           None might els be alowed to vtter to aduantage the wares of the beast, or distribute the rytes of that holy whorish church.
                           
                              8 Neyther were anye made frée of that marte, vnlesse they hadde the marke of the beast, which is not only the outwarde signe of their head, shauing and anointing of theyr fingers, but also the inwarde prynte of their consciences, receyued by profession made to that wicked monster. For lyke as true faith in Iesus Christ is the marke of a perfect christiā, so is a false beleue in popish traditions a token of Antichrists mēber By their fruits (saith christ) shal ye know thē. For the one foloweth ye rule of gods worde, the other hath counterfeit works of mens prescription.
                           9 Els must they haue the name of the beast to be called spirituall men, or the holy consecrat number, as his holy fatherhod is called.
                           10 Or at the least they must haue ye number of his name, which is a note of magnificence and worthines. Lesse can they not be called then Lords, so many as are sworn to that spiritual market. The most ragged ronnagat, and idle idoit among them, is no lesse

then a sire, which is a lord in ye latin as sir Iohn, sir Thomas, sir Williā. In the Latin onely hangeth theyr great Lordships. Amonge their vnknowne latin houres, their masses, & their diriges, lyeth their plentuous patrimony in their portasses & masse bookes. Not he that leaueth all with poore Peter, may be called from fishing, nor with Mathew from the custome house, to do these offices. But he that catcheth all with Iudas and Simon Magus must come from Symony to doe them. Not he yt is called of God as was Aaron shal haue cure of soule, but he that offreth to Corbā with Annas and Cayphas. Such a world hath it bin and is yet styll in the world abrode among them.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 Here is vvisdome. 2. Let him that hath vvit. 3. Count the number of the beast. 4. For it is the number of man. 5. And his number is six hundred, sixty, and sixe.
                        
                           
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 Here is wisdome to be had (saith sainct Iohn) Let him that hath wit, count the number of ye beast, for it is the number of man. And his number is six hundred, sixty & sixe.
                           2 For so much as Christ hath willed vs dilligentlye to searche the scriptures, & the holy ghost here doth cō
                              mit the iudgement of this secreat to the wit of man, some writers haue deducted this number out of certaine gréeke words, betokning this great antichrist, because this presēt reuelatiō was first written in ye gréeke language. As out of Antemos, which signifieth one contrary to Gods honor, out of Arnume, whiche signifieth a denier of God, & out of Teitā, which betokneth the sunne. All these 3. vocables, though they séeme diuers, yet containe they after the gréeke rules, neyther more nor lesse, than this set number. And all this may stande both with Scripture and reason.
                           
                              For he that is not with Christ, is against him, callyng that is good euill, and that is euil good, ministring darknesse for light. Such lying masters as hath brought in sectes of perdition, hath denyed the Lorde that bought them. They are not the light as they boast them selues to bée (for all they looke to bée called spirituall) but they are the fallen starres and very Apostataes from God, & Sathans transfourmyng them selues into the Angels of light, by diuers kyndes of Hipocrisie.
                           3 Some expositors leauing ye Greke, hath practised the same thing by these two latine wordes. Dic lux, cōtaining innumerable letters ye same set number. Whiche signified that they call them selues the light or men of a spirituall sorte, being nothing lesse. For they in déede are the same self darknesse, that will in no wyse receyue light, but rather persecuteth it with most spight and crueltie. After thys sorte might I bring in Diabolus incarnatus, or filius perditionis, the

diuil incarnate or ye sonne of perditiō, for both they are the names of thys beastly Antichrist by the scriptures, the one wanting in the numeral letters but .iiij. of ye number, & the other but vj. which might be supplyed in ye other letters. But among all these this word Arnume most nighly toucheth ye mystery, which is as much to say, as I deny. Euidently séemeth hée to haue the marke of ye beast, or to bée sealed with the numbed of his name, that sayth whē he heareth ye manifest veritie, I will neuer admit it whyle I haue a day to liue, it is against good order, it standeth not with laudable custome, our doctours agrée not thervnto, our holy canōs alloweth it not, it hath not ye holy fathers consente, with suche lyke. What are these els but the voyces of an Antichrist? ful of such voices was ye Popes legate Gaspar Contarene at ye laste counsayle of Rainsburgh, so was ye frantike papist Iohn Eckius, & our winchester ye winker of wiles, largely declaring thēselues, to be déeply of ye same profession and marke.
                           
                              4 But I fynde yet an other thyng in it. For it is called here the number of man, whose number lyeth all in vj. God created all things for mās commoditie in vj. dayes, & in ye seuēth rested. After this creation continued man the space of .vj. ages til the commyng of Christ, which brought with him the sabboth of the spirit. And this is signified by the greater number, which is ye vj. hūdred. For not vnlike is it to the tyme, tymes, & halfe tyme of Danyel & Iohn, & to ye yeares, moneths, & dayes of Helyas & Iohn also, as we had afore. Since Christes ascention hath the church continued by vj. other ages of much lesse tyme cō
                              prehended in the .vj. seales, in the latter end of whom we are now. And this shall conclude with suche a sabboth of peace in the fréedome of Gods worde, as hath not bene since the beginning. Sathan shall be tyed vp, and the true beléeuers shall occupye in much quietnesse, ye beast cōdempned with all hys false Prophetes. And this is the n
                                 •
                              mber of the sixt.
                           
                              But this peace shall not thus in quietnesse long continue. For longe can not Christes church be without persecution. Sathan shal be loosed againe, and the beleauings of the beast shall set vp their bristles, and persecute the Sainctes a fresh. Agayn shal they plant & builde, rauish & kepe whores, ryot and ruffle, as though they should long continue. But sodainly shall the latter iudgement day of ye Lord light vpō them vnbewares, the perpetuall Sabboth of ioye shyning to the electe flocke of Christ. And this is the least number of all, compared here vnto six. And may well be signified by the xlij. moneths afore, which is ryghtly vj. seuenthes, in the which they shall treade downe the holy citie or cōgregation of the Lord once againe. This latter accounte was founde out by a certayne vnnamed disciple of Iohn Wycleue, and I suppose it most agréeing to the truth. The second sabboth here, or libertie of Gods truth, hath had his shew in England alreadie, if ye marke it well. And whither

it wil yet appeare more open or nay, it is in the Lords handes, let vs pray and hope, for it hath great lykelihoode of a much farther appearaunce.
                           5 Since the worlds beginning hath the misterie of iniquitie wrought in Caine and in his posteritie, and so cō
                              tinued in the beastly members of Antichrist, and so shall doe still to ye latter day. Therefore is it no lesse than the number of men, six hundred sixtie and sixe. Thus is he tokened with all wickednesse, that admitteth the false fayth of this beast, and folowith the same in his liuing by the subtile perswasions of the bishops and their lying Prophets, & is sealed vp to eternall dampnacion, vnles the Lord cal him in time. Not only in England is healed the beastes wounded heade, but also in ohter certain regions. But for so much as it is most liuely don there, and this booke written in that language, I haue onely brought forth héere examples thereof in that purpose.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The xiiij. Chapter..
                     
                        IN this present chapter declareth the Lord vnto Iohn, and vnto his faithfull seruants by him, the degrée, estate, & cōdiciō of his true beléeuing church, now after he hath afore lyuely described the beastiall churche of Antichrist & of his horned spiritualitye by ye afore named ii. mōstrous beastes. And this is that his louers should know what they be which are of his houshold, & what an helper they haue of him in the midst of their aduersities, to the comfort of their soules. And though they bee heere amonge those raging tirantes in tirrible agonies & paines, persecutions & troubles, he is neuer absent from thē, nor will not be till he hath rewarded them wt vnspeakeable Ioyes.
                     
                        
                        
                           
THE TEXT.
                        1 And I looked and lo, a Lambe stoode in the mount Sion, 2. and with him an C. and xliiij. thousand, 3. hauing his fathers name written in their foreheads. 4. And I hearde a voice from heauen, 5. as the sound of many waters, 6. and as the voice of a great thūder. 7. And the voice that I hearde, was 8. as the harpers that playe vpon their harpes. 9. And they sang as it were a nevve song, 10. before the seat, 11. and before the foure beasts, 12. and the Elders, 13. And no man could learn that songe, 14. but the hundereth and xliiij. thousand, 15. vvhich vvere redeemed from the earth. 16. These are they vvhich vvere not defiled vvith vvomen, 17. for they are Virgynes. 18. These follovve the Lambe vvhither so euer he goeth.
                        
                           19. These were redeemed from men, 20. being the first fruites vnto God and to the Lambe, 21. and in their mouthes was found no guile, 22. for they are without spotte before the trone of God.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 I looked (saith Sainct Iohn) on the other side, & in a thought as it were, I behelde that a Lambe stoode vpon mount Sion. Euen ye Lambe of God Iesus Christ, that alone tooke away the sinnes of the world. Alone doeth he gouerne his faythfull church, as the onely and immediate head therof, hauing none other to assist him in that office. For who is the King ouer Siō but he? Who shall reduce Israell again to his folde but he? Only is hée with his congregation, to ayde them with his word, to bolden them with his spirite, & to strengthen them with his grace.
                           2 And with him were presente an hundreth and .xliiij. thousand, hauing his fathers name written in theyr foreheads. So many as haue in hart

receiued his word, and in faith digested his verity, are ye very children of Abraham, and are marked vp for the sonnes of god by the seale of the holy Ghost.
                           3 For power haue they geuen thē to be Gods children yt beleue in his name. And this is it to haue his name written in thir foreheads. For their faith declareth thē Gods sonnes. Let this set number be none impedimēt to the reader, to be taken here for ye vniuersall multitude of the faithful, as well of ye gentiles as of ye Iewes that beleueth, though it otherwise appeareth in the viii. Chapter of this booke. For so well is the gentle that hath faith, a perfecte Israeltie, as is the Christen Iew. Yea, much rather was Zachius for his faith iudged Abrahams childe, thā was Simon for fulfilling the workes of ye lawe. For God is not parciall. Whatsoeuer he be y• feareth him & worketh rightuousenesse, is accepted with him. And so is it ment heare. And therefor is not the difference written here as in

ye other place, but al is ioyned in one, to comprehende all vnder one. And as touching ye equall certaintie in nū
                              ber both here and there. Like as it is there certainly knowne vnto God, euen so is it here thoughe it be vnto vs both innumerable & vncertaine. Not as concerninge the number it selfe, but ye common vnderstanding thereof in ye scriptures. For if ye number of one seuenth be an infinit nūber ther, much more of many seuenthes.
                           4 And I harde a voyce frō heauen (saith S. Iohn) which is all one with the aforesaid Sion, & is the vniuersal cōgregacion of Christ, all cleare frō 
                              
                                 •
                               supersticions of men. For, from Sion commith the lawe of the Lord after Esay, and the word of God from Ierusalem.
                           5 This worde is as the noise of many waters, whan it is in ye mouthes of many diuers peoples, of diuers nacions & lāguages, one not vnderstanding an other, & yet knowing it eche people among them selues.
                           6 Uery like is it also to a great thū
                              der

cracke, mighty, fearful, and terrible to the fleshe. Uery harde is thy word Lord (sayde Christes disciples) who is able to abide it.
                           7 And ye voice yt I hard (sayth Iohn) was much after ye noyse yt ye harpers make whē they play vpō their harps. Ful of agremēt are ye holi scriptures, yea, ful of swéet hermony & concord, more precious are ye verities of the Lord than is golde, and their melody more swéet than hony.
                           8 With thē reioysed Dauid before the arke of the Lorde. In them tooke Paule a stomake, and cōfounded the Iewes at Damascus.
                           9 And swéetly they vttered wt their voyces a song that séemed all newe, before ye seat of ye Lord, before ye foure beastes, & before the auncient elders. This song is the word of the Lorde, all new both to the good and to the il. The faythfull it renueth in the spirit of their mynds, prouoking them to do on a new man in Christ. The hartes of ye vnfaithfull is so hardened yt they in disdayn and spight doth call it new

learning, as did ye ignorāt multitude at Caparnaum, and the worldly wise men of Athens.
                           10 Before ye seate of the Lord was this song vttered, which is the godly disposed multitude. For like as ye hart of an hipocrite is the very seate of sathan, so is ye harte of a faithfull man the seate of god and habytacle of the holy ghost.
                           11 Before the iiii. beasts was it opened also by this number of godly teachers, which beasts ar ye priuat cōgregatiōs of ye Lord, remaining here yet in ye flesh, in ye iiii. quarters of ye world
                           12 Finally before the elders was it songe also. For none other doctrine is it, nor Gospell of glad tidinges, than hath bin since ye beginning, nor than hath bene thankfully receiued of our old auncitors Patriarkes, ye Prophets, ye Apostles, & ye faithful fathers.
                           13 And no man could learne ye new song, but the aforesaide hundred and xliiij. thousand, which were redéemed from ye earth. Oh mighty, wonderful, yea & tirrible sentence of the Lorde.

None that take them selues for the people of God, can be accepted afore hym for the true féede of Abraham, nor for ye iust ministers of his worde, vnlesse they be tokened afore with the holy spirit of his promise, and so predestinate to the lyfe euerlasting.
                           14 None can sincerely do that godly office to the profit of other, vnlesse he be wholly taken from all fleshlye and worldly affects. No man cā come vnto me (saith Christ) vnlesse it bée giuen him of my father.
                           15 The wilfull Iewes beleued not bicause they were not the shéepe of his marke. Neither is it of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of the onely mercy of the Lord. Necessarie is it therfore yt his spirit draweth, moueth, & inclineth the hart. Els cā not ye sōg be swéet, neither in him ye singeth, nor yet in ye herer. The notes of this new sōg are gods heuēly verities, registred in the faithfull hartes.
                           16 And they that dyd signe them to the prayse of the Lord, were not defiled with women. With no straunge

doctrines, nor yet prophane worshippings is theyr faith cōtaminate, that vnfainedly haue don on Iesus Christ. Not the spousage of their soules haue they broken by no filthy traditions of men. Onely haue they with Dauyd sought the testimonyes of God, and thought none lyke vnto them. Onely dyd they cleaue to hys precyous lawes, estéeming all other but chaffe, and very whoredome in the spirite.
                           17 Therfore are they vyrgines maryed vnto Christ in faith, as were the Corinthians by Paules preachinge, whō he wished to cōtinue a chast virgin vnto Christ. Neuer is ye maydenhead of ye soule lost, till erronious doctrine be receiued frō ye messengers of Antichrist, ye Bishops & Hipocrites.
                           18 The virgins, or vncorrupted beleuers doth folow ye lambe whersoeuer he becōmeth. They go after Christ, ye beleuing his word, doth fashion their liues vnto it. Like as they folow Antichrist, ye fashion their workes to his doctrine. They walk in his steps, that forsake thē selues wt him, yt beareth

the crosse of persecutiōs wt him, or ye suffreth deth for ye truth wt him. And not they yt séeke them selues, lyuing héere in all pompe, voluptuousnesse, and Tiranny. From this place fetch the blinde papists, a great argument for their wiuelesse castity, & yt none foloweth christ but they in this muster, bicause they are vnmaried. Neyther may, Abrahā, Moises, nor Dauid, Zachary, Peter, nor Philip, walk in this number bicause they had wyues. So perillous a thing it is to haue a wife. It is greate meruayle they admit Mary Christs mother to it, bicause she had a husband. Oh ignorāt asses, & very beastly Idiotes. I think you follow Iudas which had neyther wyfe nor childe, vnlesse he had thē sitting by other mēs fyers, as many of you haue yet at this same day. What is vyrginitie before god more thā is mariage? No more thā is circumcision in comparison to vncircumcision. And yt is nothing. No more maketh ye one thā the other, to a Christian life. Only is it 
                                 •
                              aith effectually working by loue, yt
                              
the Lord requireth of vs.
                           Only respected he the faith of Mary, and not hyr virginity. They which liue in matrimony after the word of god, ar accepted afore hī for virgins, & so are named of S. Paule. An other cauillatiō they haue, that none which hath offēded afore, can be of this number. But they consider not what is spokē here afore, yt they wer redemed from the earth, & that ye spirit of ye lord hath purified their hartes throughe faith. Neither haue they grace to remember ye Christes innocency is reckened for an whole & perfecte rightuousnesse vnto them yt beléeue in him, but they must bring in such trifles, as are their owne beggerly merites.
                           19 And therefore it followeth also. These faithfull beléeuers (saith sainct Iohn) were redéemed frō men, being the first fruites to God & to ye lambe. By none other were they redemed, than by Christ. For of all ye elect nū
                              ber, he is ye only rightuousnesse, wisdom, holinesse, & redemption. From ye corrupt, blinde, & froward multitude

hath he called them, taken them, and cleared them. And of deformed sinners, hath he made thē, faire, of vile pure, of wretched, gloryous, of blinde perfectly séeing, of lyars, true sayers, of obstinate, gentle, of yll good, and of vnfruitfull, profitable. For he it is that taketh away the stony hart, and geueth a soft hart for it, so making vs Abrahams children. Thus are we redéemed from men, whan we are taken by his goodnesse from such corrupt vsages as mans nature is inclined vnto.
                           20 And for none other purpose but to be ye first fruits vnto god, as were the aulter offrings in the old lawe, in the hands of the high priestes. For so much as ye elect number ar but a few or a certaine taken out from the vniuersall multitude, and are ye porcion of the Lord (as were the said offerings) perteyning vnto Christ ye only bishop of our soules, they are his first fruits. Yea, & his owne very mistical members, and al but one offring vnto God ye father by him. For he is ye
                              
onely lambe that died for them, his owne bodye, beinge the only oblacion and sacrefice.
                           21 And in their mouthes was found no gile. For none other wordes vttered they but his p
                                 •
                              er testimonies. None other taught thei but his vndefiled lawes. None other perswaded they to be obserued of other, but his immaculate Gospel or easy burthen of Christ. No importable yokes laied they vpon mens shoulders▪ neither of cerimonies, fastīgs nor masse hearings.
                           22 For they are without spot before the throne of god. Both before them yt are faythfull and haue right iudgment in the spyrite (whiche are the very seats of God) apereth their doctrine pure, and also their life innocēt before god hīselfe. Neyther are they spotted with filthy tradicions nor yet wt vncūly examples, & as cōcerning their former sinnes, they shal not be imputed vnto them. They are remitted in Christ, and so forgotten afore god. Though this that here hath bin

spoken be concerning ye whole christen multitude and her preachers, yet doth it most specially touche the Iewes or Israelyts that shal in this latter age be conuerted vnto Christ. And so doe I counsell the reader to vnderstand it. For the mount Syon after the flesh was theirs. Not defiled are they with vnmaried women, which are the whorishe lawes and vncleane supersticions of the Gentiles, vpō none other harp haue they commonly harped but vpon ye scriptures, though it hath not bin to the pleasure of God, tyll nowe in this latter age, wherin they shall wholye turne vnto Christ.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And I savv an Angell, 2. Fly in the midst of heauen. 3. Hauing an euerlasting gospell to preach vnto them that sit and dvvell on the earth. 4. And to all nacions, kinreds and 
                              •
                           ongs, and people▪ 5. sayinge vvith a loude voyce. 6. Feare God. 7. And geue honour to him. 8. For the houre of his iudgemente is come. 9. and worship him that made heuen & earth. 10. And the sea & the fountaines of vvater.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 An other Angell sawe I (sayeth

sainct Iohn) flye in the midst of heauen. For Christ was the first angell or messenger of the euerlastinge couenaunt of the father. This angell here mencioned is none other than he that had ye seale of the lyuing god in the .vii. Chapter, and he that was clothed with a cloude in the tenth chap. And he betokneth those feruent ministers whō god hath sent in this latter time to admonishe his people to flye from the errours of antichrist, & returne to his heauenlye verities.
                           2 He flyeth in the midst of heauen. An earnest, feruent, & faithful course take they in the middest of gods congregacion (which is his heauenly kingedom here, to whom this reuelation is written) lyke as dyd Paulus, Sylas, and Barnabas, Timotheus, Titus, and Clemens, with other of the Apostles sincerely to declare his worde. Mighty stomaked are they in gods cause, both in their wordes and wrytings.
                           3 An euerlastinge Gospell had this Angel to preach vnto them that sit, &

dwell vpon the earth, and to al nations, kynreds and people. His eternal testamēt and couenant of peace hath the Lorde giuen vnto them, to preach deliuerance to the captiue, health to the wounded, lyfe to the dead, and remission to ye sinfull. Yea, to vtter that word that is stronger thā is heauen, or earth, and that shall neuer fayle hym that truely beléeueth.
                           4 The sound of this gospell muste go the world ouer, as in the apostles time. Eueri wher must it be spred to ye increase of faith. Amōg al natiōs of ye earth, among al kinreds of the Isralyts, among all languages of the world, and among all kinds of people, of what sort so euer they be, whether they sit vpon the earth or dwell vpon the earth, whether they be high or lowe, gouernours or subiects, masters or seruāts, owners or fermers. So that they sit not nor dwell not within the earth, or haue theyr felicitie here. For that is holy should not be geuen vnto dogs, nor yet pearels layed before swyne.
                           
                              5 And he cryed with a loude voyce, with a mighty feruent spirit do they beat it into the heades of men, both by wordes, writings, and al they can make to haue the feare of God, and to geue him his due honour. And this is the doctrine they teache & the counsell they geue.
                           6 Feare ye God in all that ye doe, for the first poynt of godly wisdome▪ is to dread least we offende him. Be constant in the worde, and feare no displeasure of men. For no more can they do in their anger but slea ye body, and bring it to the rest of god. No power haue thei ouer the soule, feare him only therfore, yt whē he hath destroied both, may throw thē into▪ he
                                 •
                              .
                           7 Geue honor vnto hī, worship him & serue him alone, praise him, & glorifie him aboue al. But yet after 
                                 〈◊〉
                               other sort thā he hath apoīted, which is in faith, spirite, & veritie, & not 
                                 〈◊〉
                               outward shadowes wt obseruation of tymes. He truely honoureth him that trusteth in him, ye beleueth his word, and yt in spight of all antichrists▪ cō
                              fesseth

it afore al men, after this sort therfore feare him, & worship hym nothīg douting ye assalts of enimies.
                           8 For the houre of his iudgemēt is come. At hand is it that all the antichristes and hipocrits shal by the inuincible word of god be iudged, condemned, and destroyed. From heauē shall hys wrath be declared vpon al their vngodlynes. With the spirite of his mouth shall the lorde consume them, and not longe after wyll the great day of his indignatiō toward them light sodenly vpon them.
                           9 With al faithful obsequi worship him therfore that created heauen & earth in wonderfull strēgth & beuty.
                           10 That made the sea & the fountaines of water with all that in thē doth anone, whose power is eternall, knowledge none other god but him. None other helper, redemer, nor sauior but christ: for al other christs not sēt of hī, ar but antichrists, only bow your knées vnto him, for only is hys strength euerlasting, onely obey his lawes, for only are his lawes clean.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And there folovved an other Angel saying. 2. She is fallen, she is fallen, euen Babylon that great citie. 3. For she made al nations drink of the vvine of her vvhordome.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 And there folowed an other Angell (saith S. Iohn) which betokneth an other sort of preachers, whose office is here appointed them of the holy Ghost to declare vnto the people ye certenty of the fall of the aduoutrus, cursed and malignant church of hipocrits, here figured by wretched Babilō. For though al the true prophets and preachers haue but one worde of God in their mouth, yet passeth it diuersly from them. Unto each of thē is geuen a diuers vtteraunce of the spirit to edifie. One is soft, méeke & gentle, as was Dauid, Iohn & Peter an other is boysteous, harde & vehement as was Helias, Esay & Paule, And all this worketh the selfe same one spirit. This diuersitie of techers was neuer more plentuous in the world than now in our time, figured

here by these two angels. Praysed be the Lord therefore.
                           2 And the tenour or ground of this latter sort of preachers is this. She is fallen, she is fallen, euen miserable Babylon ye great citie of whoredom, bicause she made all nacions to drink of the wrathful wyne of hir fornication. So sure is it that the execrable church of Antichrist shalbe ouerthrowen, and vtterly destroyed, as it wer now perfourmed in déede. Nothinge shalbe vnrooted out that the heauenly father hath not planted. Sooner shall heauen & earth perish, than this promisse be vnfulfilled.
                           3 For with the stinking whorishnes of hir supersticious worshippinges, hath she poysoned all nacions & peoples, vnder heauen. The great gouernours, & lerned lawiers of ye world, hathe she made in maner of beastly dronkerds, wytlesse, faythlesse, and gracelesse, by theyr prostibulous doctrine. And this shal be declared more at large in ye .xvij. cha. folowing. wheras she is more plētuously described.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        The texte.
                        1 And the third Angell followed them. 2. saying with a loude voyce. 3. If any worship the beast and his Image. 4. and receiue his marke in his forehead or on his hand. 5. the same shall drinke of the wyne of the vvrath of god. 6. vvhich is povvred in the cup of his vvrath. 7 and he shall be punished in fyre & brimstone. 8. before the holy Angels. 9. and before the Lambe.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 The thyrd Angel also (saith saint Iohn) followed thē in ye thyrd kinde of preaching of ye same selfe message, that in ye mouth of two or thrée faithful witnesses all veritie might stand.
                           2 And by this Angell are they signified that by the word of God stifly impugne theyr wicked lawes & vngodly ordinaunces, whose maner of earnest preaching is this.
                           3 If any man worship ye beast, which is ye great antichrist. And his Image which are those gouernours that taketh vpon them his blasphemous titles, names, authoritie, or defence. If any man also receiue his mark in his forehead, beléeuing theyr lawes to be

a christen doctrine, or haue the print of his seale vpō his right hand which is to fashion his outward workes after the same. The same man shall drinke of the wine of Gods wrath, which are the dregs of ye pure wyne poured in the cup of his high displeasure. He shall taste of the euerlasting damnation, that is reserued in the latter cursse or fearefull sentence of their moste terrible iudge. To worship the beast and his Image, is to accept them in conscience, and in the outward obedience, with ful consent of the hearte. For that they blasphemously pretend, without Gods authority. As the Pope for Gods vicar or forgeuer of sinnes. Mahomet for the greate Prophet of the Lord, the rulers of the earth, for the Popes elder or yonger sonnes, for moste christian Kinges, and defenders of the fayth of that holy church.
                           4 To receiue the beastes marke in their forheads and hands, is to agrée to such decrées, traditious, lawes,

                              
                                 〈1 page duplicate〉
                              
                              
                              
                                 〈1 page duplicate〉
                              
                              
constitucions, actes, & proclamations, as they vnder those titles haue made onely for theyr owne couetousnesse & pomp, and neither for the glory of god nor yet for the right maintenance of the christen common wealthe, as I haue declared afore. And also to be sworne to the same, to subscribe to it, to geue counsel or ayde to it, to maintayn it by learning, to minister in it, to execute vnder it, to accuse, punish, and put to death for it, or to think it lawfull and godly, with such lyke.
                           5 These marked worshippers that tast of the cuppe of gods indignation, of calamitie, sorow, & wretchednesse in the dayes of theyr fal here, & after the last iudgement of vnspeakeable paines and most gréeuous torments, in euerlasting fyre prepared for the diuell and his angels.
                           6 The dregges that the Lord hath powred out (sayth Dauid) shall the wicked of the earth drynke. Cleane cōtrary are these Angels to ye horned ministers of antichrist. For they maintaine ye Popes errours, these ye onely

verities of christ. They labor for the glory of their pope, these séeketh ye only honor of god. They prate yt their holy Church shall continue, th
                                 •
                              se say it shall downe with shame. They require worship to the beast and his Image, these will report it blasphemous, & ye reward therof damnation. Marke in these two sortes the preachers of our time, and iudge whiche are of god. Against both beastes in Christes quarell shall these Angels contende. Against the Pope and his bishops, Mahomet and his doctours, wyll these godlye ministers replye (whom the Lorde hath sent in this latter age for yt purpose) condemnīg by the scriptures their auctoryty, iurisdiction, & power declaring also the plagues that wyl fall vpon them for witholding the truth of God in vnrightuousnes.
                           7 For these Antichristes and their worshippers wt so many as beareth their token shall be punished in fire and brimstone, before the holy Angels, and before the Lamb. Fyre shal be kindled (saith Moyses) in the anger

of the Lorde, & shall burne vnto the bottome of Hell. Upon the vngodly (sayeth Dauid) shall he raine snares. Fyre, brimstone, storme, and tempest shall be their porcyon to drynke. The vehement indignation and mighty iudgement of God, shall light vpon them, as vpon Sodome and Egipt, and shall both deuoure them and consume them.
                           8 And this shalbe in the sighte of Aungels, which are not onely the spirites of heauē, but also the church of the faythfull. Yea, the righteous shall reioyce when he séeth the destruction, and shall washe his handes it the bloud of the wicked.
                           9 In the presence of the lambe shal it be also. For he is euermore with his flock, & shalbe vnto the end of the world, wherin he shal sit & cōdem thē
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        The Texte.
                        1 And the smoke of their torment ascendeth vp euermore. 2. And they haue no rest day nor night. 3. vvhich worship the beaste and his Image. 4. and vvhosoeuer receyueth the prynt of his name 5. here is the pacience of sayntes. 6. Here are they that keepe the commaundements. 7. and the fayth of Iesu
                              •
                           
                        
                        
                           The Paraprhase.
                           
                              1 And the smoke of their tormēt ascendeth vp euermore, as the flame of a fornace with most horible stinke for a perpetual signe of their punishmēt, like as it dyd frō Sodome & Gomor, when the Lorde ouerthrew them.
                           2 So yt they haue no rest neyther day nor night, so mani as worship ye beast & his image, receuīg ye prīt of his nam
                           3 Both in this lyfe are they cruciate with a troublous and doubtfull conscience, and also after this life wt vnspekeable paynes. For neither shal their worm dye, nor yet their fyre be quēched, all flesh abhorring thē.
                           4 Thus shal they be with the beast tormēted, which haue the spirite of ye beast. For like as al ye faithful (which hath ben from the beginning) belongeth to one misticall body in Christe, and shalbe preserued by him so doeth the wicked perteine to one misticall Antichrist, hauing al one spirit with him, and so shall with him perish.
                           5 Here is the pacience of the saynts. In this life ar their troubles no plesure is for them in this world, but

hate, rebukes, slaunders, lies, persecutions, and death of their bodyes. Their life vpon earth is continuall affliction, but gloryous is the fruite of their labours. Manifold are the misfortunes of the rightuous, but the Lord cleareth them of all.
                           6 Here are they vexed that kepe the commaundements & the fayth of Iesu. Here are they had in derision, yt behaue thēselues as ye ministrs of god in much patiēce, afflictiōs, néede, anguish, labour, stryps, imprisonment, and such lyke..
                           7 Here are they chastened of the LORDE with many sore storms, that they should not be damned with this world. Much haue they héere to suffer of enemies, that onely cleueth to ye word of god in life & doctrine.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1. And I heard a voyce from heauen saying vnto me. 2. Write. 3. Blessed are the dead, which hereafter dye in the Lord, 4 (euen so saith the spirit) that they may rest frō their labours. 5. But their vvorkes shall follovve them.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 And I heard a voyce from heauē (saith S. Iohn) saying vnto me.
                           
                              2 Wryte with penne, or marke suerly this sentence following for them that here suffer in the truthes quarell.
                           3 Blessed are ye dead, or they which are already departed, and yt also shal heereafter depart in ye Lorde. This voyce from heauen are the infallible scriptures▪ ascertaining the faith of Iohn, of the swéete rest of the saintes in the hands of God. And that their ende is not without honour, as the vain sort supposeth, but they are coū
                              ted among the dere children of God. Let thē therefore yt suffer in this age be earnestly sprited, & not feare ye tormēts of ye enimies in Christes cause.
                           4 For from hence forth (the spirit saith) that they rest frō their labours. In a wōderfull quietnesse dwel they, by the very sentence of ye holy Ghost, & shall neuer more féele of any woo. God hath clean wiped away al tears frō their eyes, all sorrowes & paynes from their bodies, the first daungers being 
                                 •
                              ast. Happy are they therefore and moste godly fortunate, that are

slaine for Christ, bicause they wil not worship the beast & his Image, nor corrupt their faith with their wicked lawes, but in a pure christian beleue departeth frō hence to ye Lord. Theyr portion is in ye land of the liuing, and their lot among the holy ones.
                           5 For certainly their works doth folow them. The promised rewarde of God for constantly standing by ye veritie, for the fruites of their christian patience, & for other exercise of theyr fayth, is euermore to their glory present with thē. Not as deserued of thē, but of Christe, in whose fayth they wrought here, & for the promise sake, that they should be gods heyres togither wt Christ. The lyuely word also which they earnestly receyued héere and so rooted in their faith, wil neuer suffer them to perishe, nor to be hurte of the second death.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And I looked, and beholde, 2. a vvhyte cloude, 3. and vpon the cloude one sitting, lyke vnto the sonne of man, 4. hauyng on his head a golden crovvn, 5. and in his hand a sharpe sickle.
                        
                           
                           
                              
The Paraphrase.
                           1 I looked yet further (saith S. Iohn) and euidently before me appeared a whyte cloude, which betokeneth the true ministers of Gods word. Whom the holy ghost calleth clouds by Esay, Dauid, Peter, & Iudas. For from thē falleth vpon the people the swéete droppes of his verities.
                           2 White they are as milk for their faith in the word, and for their christian conuersation not blotted with hipocrisie of mēs corrupted customes.
                           3 Upon this cloude was one sittyng lyke vnto ye sonne of man, whiche is verely Christ, in his glorified māhood. For euermore is he among hys true preachers, gyuyng them suche vtteraunce

and wisedome, as all theyr enymies are not able to withstande. Alwayes walketh he among the vij. candelstickes, which are his congregations as we had afore.
                           4 He had vpon his heade a golden crowne, in token of his eternall and vncorrupte kingdome, and in hys hand a sharpe sickle, which is ye sharp iudgement or rightuousnesse of hys worde, for there with shall hée reape his latter haruest. According to hys worde and promyse shall hee iudge good and euill.
                           5 This sickle receyued he of hys euerlasting father, suche tyme as hée gaue ouer vnto hym hys vniuersall iudgements. By the order of this vision should ye preachers séeme in the last age of the church, much to admonish the people of the latter day, with the commyng of Christe agayne to iudge both the quicke and the deade as is in their créede, or beléeue.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And an other Angell came out of the temple, 2. crying with a loude voyce to hym that satte on the cloude. 3. Thrust in thy sikle,

and reape, 4. for the tyme is come to reape. 5. For the corne of the earth is rype. 6. And he that satte on the cloude, 7. thrust in his sickle on the earth, 8. and the earth vvas reaped.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 And an other Angell (sayth sainct Iohn) came out of the temple, which is the congregation of fayth, consecrated as an holy temple vnto God in the bloud of the vndefiled Lambe Iesus. This Angell betokeneth those iust men, that with Symeon and Anna the doughter of Phanuell, in thys latter age are desirous of the glory of God, and of the finall redemption of man from bodily corruption.
                           2 These shal cry with a loude voice, with a feruent spirite shall they call vnto Christ, which sitteth vpon the cloude.
                           3 And thys shall bée theyr saying. Thrust in the sickle and reape. Send foorth thy lyuing word. And lyke as it hath created all things, so let it now trye and iudge all things.
                           4 For the tyme is at hand to reape. For we are those vpon whō the ends

of the world are come.
                           5 And doutlesse the corne of the earth is ripe, the worlde is at the best that it wil be. As it hath bene euer, so is it stil, altogether set vpon mischief. Let thy word therfore finish all, as it hath begon all. With ye breath of thy mouth, consume ye great Antichriste, the man of sinne, the sonne of perdicion, & the aduersarye yt hath exalted him selfe aboue God. Powre out thy indignation vpon ye kingdoms that wil neyther know thée, worship thée, nor alone call vpon thy name. Thou haste called thy haruest the end of ye world, let it now finish al in déed. Diuide ye chaffe from the corn, ye wicked from the rightuous. Gather ye wheat into thy garner, and burne the chaffe in vnquenchable fyer.
                           6 And he that sat on ye cloude thrust in his sickle on the earth, and anon the earth was reaped.
                           7 He hath sent hys mightie word, so quick in operation as fyre. Which shal not onely cōsume ye wicked generation of ye beast, but also reserue thē
                              
to eternall dampnation.
                           8 The earth shal be cleared of them as of all other filthy corruptions, and hell replenished with them, to their perpetuall care.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And an other Angell came out of the temple, 2. vvhich is in heauen, 3. hauing also a sharpe sickle.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 And an other Angel (saith S. Iohn) came out of the temple which is in heauen, or from the great number of Angels, hauing also a sharpe sickle in his hande.
                           2 This Angel betokeneth those heauenly spirites that the Lord shal send foorth to gather togyther hys chosen from the iiij. wyndes whan his tokē shall appeare in heauen. These are the reapers of the Lordes harueste. These are they that shall go foorth too gather all nations, & to seperate the goates from the Lambes, the il from the good, and shall caste them into a furnace of fire, where as shal be waylyng and gnashing of téeth.
                           
                              3 And therefore is their sickle héere named sharpe. None other is theyr sickle, but this appointed office. None other is their haruest, but this gathering togither. But these messengers shal not foorth til they haue commaū
                              dement. And therefore saith Saynct Iohn consequently.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And an other Angell came out from the aulter, 2. vvhich had povver ouer fyre, 3. and cryed vvith a loude crye vnto him that had the sharpe sickle, and sayde. 4. Thrust in thy sharpe sickle, 5. and gather the clusters of the earth, 6. for hir grapes are rype. 7. And the Angel thrust in his sickle on the earth, 8. and cut dovvn the grapes of the vineyard of the earth, 9. and cast them into the great vvynefat of the wrath of God. 10. And the vvynefat vvas troden vvithout the citie, 11, and bloud came out of the fatte, 12. euen vnto the horse bridles, 13. by the space of a thousande and sixe hundred furlongs.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 And an other Angell came out frō the aulter which had power ouer fire. This is the Lord Iesus Christ, whō Malachias calleth the Angel of the couenaunt that was longed for. Hée

is the aulter of the rightuous, & by him are they a swéet sacrifice vnto God. Els could they be but very abhomination. Till the iudgement day shall he be an Aulter of meanes making to God the father for vs. But that day once come, no longer shall he be an aulter or an aduocate, but go clean from it. He shall then become a iudge ouer al ye world, rewardyng euery one accordynge to their workes. Hitherto hath he méekly sitten vpon the cloude, and not cut with his sickle. He hath had in his hād the iudgement, and not iudged.
                           2 But now hath he power ouer fyre. By fire (which is vnder his obediēce, as are all other creatures els) shall he at that day iudge the vnyuersall worlde. And more sharpe, vehement, quicke, fierce, mighty, & tirrible shall hys sentēce be to ye wicked, thā is any fearful, flaming, or consuming wilde fire.
                           3 For with a loude voyce shal he cry vnto him yt hath the sharpe sickle. An earnest charge & cōmandement shal he giue at ye day to ye ministers of his ire, for to cast thē into exteriour darkenes, after this sort here vttered in mistery.
                           
                              4 Thrust in thy sharpe sickle, & gather the cluster of the earthli vinyard, for the grapes thereof are ripe.
                           5 Execute the vengeaunce committed vnto you, & roote out this ranke riotous generatiō of ye rauenous epicures▪
                           
                           6 For now are their mischiefes at the full. Now are they moste curious in their facions & feadinges, most couetous in their cōpassings, most vaine in their studies, & most cruell in their do
                                 •
                              inges. For with thē shal it be (saith Christ) as it was in the daies of Noe and Loth. They shal builde and bāket, ruffle and riote, bye and sell, and plant for their pleasures. And sodainly as a snare shall that terrible day light vpō thē vnbewares, as did death on the couetous iourer.
                           7 And the Angel (saith S. Iohn) thrust in his sickle on ye earth, he cutt downe the grapes of ye vineyard of the earth, and so did cast them into ye great wyne fatte of the wrath of God.
                           8 According to their commission they shall plage ye earthly minded, for here is ye time past for ye tyme cōming vsed, for the certaintie of it. With sodayne

death shal they perce thē in this world that cōtemning Christs doctrine haue folowed ye corse therof in al cōcupicēce.
                           9 And finally they shal throwe them into ye lake of misery, ye pit without water, into the stinking dregges of hell, wher as fyre and brimstone shalbe rewarded to drinke. For ye vineyarde of the earth is the carnal sinagoge of hypocrites, & the grapes therof are ye glorious glottons, & franke fedde porkelinges of ye gredy gulfe, euē ye enemies of Christes crosse, whose God is their beally, whose glory is their cōfusion, & whose end is their dānatiō for they are earthly minded. This winefat of the wrath of God is none other then his great vengaunce, to be powred vpō the vnfaithful. Or els hell prepared for ye deuill & his angels. Great, not onely for ye innumerable multitud yt it hath & shal reciue but also in yt it is insaciable.
                           10 And this winefat was trodē without ye citie. Nothing perteyneth it to ye citie (of whō famous thing are spokē) which is ye congregatiō of god, nor yet to ye good creatures of god. No, not vnto this world, which shall at that day
                                 •
                              
                              
be tried & purged by fyre. But vnder the earth shal it be, & far without thys world, secluded from the face of heauē in filthy & vnspeakeable darknesse.
                           11 For bloud wil come out of thys fate, euen vnto ye horse bridles. Wherin is expressed not only the terrour of the place, but also of ye paines therein contained. For bloud shedding & murther are things very horryble & feareful to beholde, containing in them depriuatiō of life, which is most terrible of all. The aboundance thereof betokeneth the greatnesse of the griefe in the sufferance of them. The treading downe also signifieth, that no raise towardes any reliefe is to be looked for of them yt be there. Unto them which at that day shall be in the cittie, wil be that sitteth in ye thron make all things now. All dolour, afflictiō, sorow, paine, penury, wrath, cōdempnatiō, & death, shal be past with them. Only shal they be trodē down in this winefat of gods wrath, that lyued héere lyke beastes without reason, and that wandered here lyke horses and mules in theyr owne filthy lustes.
                           
                              12 All shalbe punished there, yt was here vnbrideled, vnordred, & vngouerned after the worde & pleasure of God And therefore it is here sayd, vnto the horse bridles. Euery man shal receiue in body according to that he hath don. whether it be good or euell. They that haue wrought ye work of God in faith, shall reape according vnto it. The bridles also betokeneth ye mesure of gods iudgement, not as concerning ye tyme which is euerlasting, but concerning ye payne rightly mesured according to ye iniquity. For ye lord hath set his iudgments ouer the wicked in weight and mesure, ye stripes agreing in quātiti to ye exces of sin, so much tormēt to haue as their reioice hath ben in wikednes
                           13 The space of these terible tormēts or punishmentes of hel, is a M. and .vj. hundred furlongs. A furlong of ye Grekes is called the runne of Hercules, & it is in length an C. & .xxv. paces or steppes. And cōmōly they vsed accordīg to ye length to measure their playing places. Of whome Paule maketh mēcion to ye Corinthiās being Gréekes, by thē yt rūneth in a course, & yt proueth masteries.

In this thousande and vi. hundred furlonges here, is comprehended the whol & vniuersal course of ye wicked for ye iiii. quartars of ye world. The number of an hundred is euermore an whole complete & perfect number. And 
                                 •
                              iij. hūdred .iiij. times nūbred is .xvj. hū
                              dred which maketh this number of a thousand & vj. hūdred, ye number of iiij. respecting alwayes ye iiij. clymates of the world, which are ye common habitaciōs of sinners. In thē course they, in all wantan kindes of liuing. In thē worke they their masteris of all vngodly obseruaciōs and false worshippinges, walking in ye large or opē way which leadeth vnto death. According to ye number & mesure of this course, hath God here measured the place & punishment. Notwithstanding neuer is he without mercy. Maruelous he is in his workes & iudgemēts, which are vnsercheable. Blessed is he yt shal haue his part in the citie or congregation of the rightuous, and that shal sée ye peace vpon Israel, when the Lord shal lead forth them with the euil doers, yt hath 
                                 〈◊〉
                               them selues with their lawes.

The Lord graunt vs once to tast the prosperitye of Hierusalem. Amen.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The xv. Chapter.
                     NOt only for the common sinnes of the world doth ye Lord plague, but most of al for vnthankfulnes of al blasphemies the greatest. From that spurneth against knowlege & directly worketh against ye holy ghost. A double distruction or decay both of soule & bodye by ye righteousnesse of god must nedes followe the wilful cōtempt of his veritie manifestly shewed and openlye taught. Yet is ye Lorde so mercifull, yt hee willeth not ye dānation of a sinner.

Such cōpassiō hath he euer our manifold weakenesse, yt he premonisheth vs of hys moste terrible plagues, to call

vs backe by feare, if loue will not doe it. As here consequently in the first vysion of this present reuelatiō to Iohn, which followeth after this sort in this xv. and xvj. Chapters.
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And I saw an other signe in heuen, great and merueilous, 2. seuen Angels hauyng the seuen last plagues, 3. for in them is fulfilled the vvrath of God. 4. And I savve as it vvere a glassy sea, 5. mingled vvith fyre, 6. and thē that had gotten the victory of the beast, and of his Image, 7. and of his mark, and of the number of his name, 8. stande on the glassy sea, 9 hauing the harps of God, 10. And they sang the songe of Moyses the seruaunt of God, 11. and the songe of the Lambe, saying. 12. Great and merueilous are thy vvorkes, Lord God almightie, 13. iust and true are thy vvayes, thou king of Sainctes. 14. VVho shall not feare (O Lorde) and glorifie thy name? 15. For thou onely arte holy, 16. and all gentiles shal come and vvorship before thee, 17. for thy iudgements are made manifest.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 And I sawe (sayeth sainct Iohn) by the secret goodnes of my Lord God, yet an other tokē in heauē, great & merueilous,

straunge and wonderfull, For in the churches or congregation of God, are euermore vttered his wonderfull and déepe iudgementes, vnto them only whome his grace appoynteth, as vnto Iohn. And this is the token in mistery.
                           2 Seuen Aungels had in their hands the seuen last plagues. Some expositors haue taken these Angels for the right ministers in the .vii. ages of the christian church. Some haue thought them to be the peruerse prechers and vngodly ministers of all the sayde ages suffered of God strongly to delude the vnbeléeuers, that he wich hurteth should hurte stil, and that he wkich is in fylthines, should still be filthy. Unto euery age corresponding an Aungell, to declare the nature of those deceitefull hyrelings and lying masters. And this maketh them so to vnderstande the texte. They are here expresly noted to be in heauen. Among the congregation of God are the false Prophets, and discembling Hipocrits euermore, as the chaffe among the corne, the teares among the wheate,

and the filthy dregs, amonge the pure wine. For that kyngdome is as a net throwen into the sea and gatheringe all manner of fishes both good and bad. In all ages hath the wicked generaciō increased, to impugne the truth, and stifly s
                                 •
                               to stande vp agaynste God and his Christ, whiche is none other after their mindes, than to minister the .vii. laste plagues here. For no poyson is to the soule so pestilent, nor yet venim so noyfull, as is false doctrine. No plage can be thought more deadlie nor violent, than to depriue vs of that faith, of that veritie, & of that life whiche is in Christ Iesu, or to bring vs out of ye way which he hath appointed. And al this séemeth no smal likelyhood of the iust vnderstanding of ye text here. Yet Frances Lambert geuith a far better iudgment, calling thē ye set sentēces or vnuariable decrées of god, difining his iudgments against the wicked in his latter age of ye world, at their appointed times to be vtterred. For all these thinges are iontely to be considered.
                           
                              These Angles came not onely from heauen, which is the congregation (as they haue mencioned) but also out of the celestiall temple of the tabernacle of testimonie, which is ye omnypotente God & his Christ, as the xxi. chap. hereof declareth.
                           They are also clothed with pure whit linnen, gyrded with golden girdles, they haue golden vials deliuered vnto them by one of the iiii. beasts, and one of them commoneth with Iohn, declarynge vnto him the iudgement and fall of the great whore. Whiche ar no arguments that they are here to be taken for ill preachers, though thei here minister ye last vii. plagues. Therfore shall we iudge them here to be Gods appoynted purposes or eternally decréed pleasures, against the wilfull obstinates and indurat rebellions to the end of the world.
                           These are called the last plagues, because they fall in ye last age of ye world whō Esay, Hieremy, Oseas & Micheas calleth ye last daies, Ihō ye last hour
                                 •
                               & Paul ye ends of ye world. Seauen are

they named here in a vniuersall respecte both of the times, parsons, places and peruerse doctrins of the whole world. And also because of the .vii. seales, and the .viii. trompets, to whose iudgementes they ioyntly agrée, as in the nexte Chapter following will appeare more largely.
                           3 For in them (sayeth the text) is fulfilled the wrath of God. The indignation of the Lord is in them wholy declared. For what hate can he shewe more vnto a man, than to withdrawe him from him his grace, to leaue him to himselfe, to suffer him in his owne blinde iudgements, to geue him ouer to his owne fylthy lustes, and to sende him the operation of errour to his double damnation. A very fulfilling of Gods anger is it also to appoynte vs a false Prophete or deceiuable curate a wanton Prince, or vngodly gouernour. These therefore with such like are those plagues, in whome is déepely accomplished the displeasure of God And they are here named the last plagues, for after them shall none other be séene, the latter day finishing and

clearin all.
                           4 And I beheald (sayeth Iohn) in the same sayd vision, as it were a glassy sea, or a greate fllowing water in similitude of glasse, all myngled with fyre. None other is this sea, but the precious verity of the Lord, so cleare as glasse and so pure as christal. This sea gushed out of the harde rocke of stone, that was clouen a sonder in the desarte. When he sente forth his spirite, these waters flowed forth in abundaunce.
                           5 Most effectual and quick is this sea And therefore it is here noted and myngled with fyre, which signifyeth the holy ghost. For neuer is the verity without Gods spirite. A fierce fiery streame calleth Danyell this sea all fiery is the word Lord (sayeth Dauyd also) and therefore thy seruant loueth it. This is the fountayne of liuing water springing vp into the life euerlasting. Unto this water shoulde all they resort that are thirsty, thereof to take refreshing▪
                           
                           6 Upon this glassy sea were they séene of saynte Iohn, that had obtayned victory

of the beast, of his Image, of his mark, and of the number of his name. By whom are ment those constaunt christiās, which hath for al ages firmly affirmed the truth. For none aduersitie declining from it. Strongly haue these since the Apostles time resisted the aduersaries of God by his onelye word, persisting therin vnto the death as did Stéeuen, Iames, and Antipas wt such other his faithful witnesses. Uictory haue they gotten by faith both of the beast and his Image, both of the great Antichrist and his supporters, of the pope and of Mahomet, with their maintainers Emperours, Kings, and maigistrates, and of al thē that vsurpe their title, name, seate, aucthorytie, pompe or power.
                           7 They haue blemished likwise by the said word not only the mark of the beast, which is corrupted faith, but also the number of his name, which is the denial of God. Them haue they to their rebuke vttered, and to their confusion declared.
                           They haue proued their orders 
                                 •
                              amnable, their doctrin deuilish, their

religion, hipocrisie, & their spiritualty, playne wickednes, condemning them by the scriptures, as vngodly dissemblers denying the Lord which bought them. These are they whom the lorde tenderlye nourished, and graciouslye brought forth vpon the refreshing waters cōuerting their soules to his godly feare and loue.
                           8 These stand euermore on ye glassy sea, they set sure footing vpon ye rocke stone. Unmouably they perseuer in 
                                 •
                               truth, neuer deniyng it afore men.
                           9 And they haue in their handes the harps of god, which are deuout mind
                                 •
                               geuen all vnto godlynesse, and reioysing in spirituall things.
                           10 Harmoniously they sing the tune
                                 •
                              
                              able song of Moyses the faithfull seruant of god, and the melodious swéet
                                 •
                               song of the lamb Iesus Christ.
                           11 Of both testaments they make vtterance, declaring ye wonderful works and terrible iudgementes 
                                 •
                              ute of the olde lawe, and 
                                 •
                              ute of the Gospell of gladnesse the moste swéet
                                 •
                               mercy of the Lorde. Withoute ceasing

open they the the scriptures vnto other inwardly reioysing in spirituall Himnes, and Psalmes, hauing this euermore for the standing tenour of the song.
                           12 Inestimably greate is thy goodnes and wonderfully maruelous are thy workes Lord God almighty.
                           13 Iust are thy promyses, and moste perfitely sure thy wayes, thou gloryous King of sayntes, & gracious g
                                 •
                              ydt of the Godly beléeuers.
                           14 Who shall not euermore feare thée, a mighty Lord, who shall not alwayes in heart glorifye thy blessed name.
                           15 Thou alone art holy, iust, and perfite, for none is there good but thy selfe onely. Thou arte our our only maker, redéemer, and comforter. None other haue we for our God but thée.
                           16 No doubt of it but the time will be that al kinds of people, both Iewes and gentiles, faythfull, and Heaten, shall seeke vnto thée, and shall faythfully in verity and spirite worship before thée, acknowleging thée for their only Lord God.
                           
                              17 Because thy wonderfull iudgements that somtime were secret, are now to the world made openly knowē and manifest. Though this songe be litle and small, yet is there in contayned all veritye, that both Moyses and Christ confesseth at large. Moreouer whatsoeuer ye scriptures cōprehēdeth, either of the great omnipotency of god or of his most wonderfull works, eyther of his louing mercy, or of his benigne pittie towards man, of his glorious name or mighty power, or that he is to be magnified and feared, or how that the faithfull pertaineth only to his kingdome, or how that al people shall finally be conuerted vnto him. Al is compendiously in this briefe songe here contained, what though it be not so word by word expressed. And as cō
                              cerning yt is here last spoken, that his iudgements are made manifeste, it is to be vnderstāded of those faithful creatures whom he calleth, cleareth and iustifieth, & of none other. For vnto them onely are his heauenly veryties knowne, to whom he witsaueth to opē them. Though the other outwardely

sée the iudgments of God, yet doe they not inwardly perceiue thē, though the b
                                 •
                              st it neuer so much. For it is geuen them so to doe. They must haue eyes and not see, eares and not vnderstand.
                        
                     
                     
                        The Text.
                        1. And after that I looked 2. And behold the tēple of the tabernacle of testimonie 3. Was opē in heauē. 4 and the vii. Angels. 5. came out of the tēple. 6. vvhich had the .7. plagues. 7. Clothed in pure and bright linnen. 8, And hauing their breasts girded with golden girdles, 9. And one of the foure Beasts gaue vnto the seuen Angels. 10. Seauen golden vials. 11. ful of the vvrath of god, vvhich liueth for euermore 12 and the tēple was ful of smoke. 13. For the glory of God, and for his power. 14. And no man vvas able to enter into the temple. 15. Tyll the seauen plagues of the seuen Angels vvere fulfilled.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 And anone after that (saith S. Iohn) I loked yet more ad
                                 ••
                              sedly. And sodēly as it were, ye euerlasting tēple of ye tabernacle of witnes was opē in heauē.
                           2 A mistery this is very earnestlye to be marked, as a thīg of great waight. The Lord almightye is this eternall temple, he is ye temple not made with hands, vncreated, gloryous and ful of maiesty, cōprehending in him al thīgs & he within none againe comprehended.

He is ye Lord of all. He measureth heauen with his span, he ouer reacheth all the world wt his iii. fingers. In him we liue, we moue, and haue our beyng. The tabernacle of witnes is the lambe Iesus Christ. He is that very tabernacle of God that was here amōg men, bearing yt faithful witnes which geueth wisdom to babes. He is the propiciatory or mercy seate, wherin we are hard and forgeuen. Neither was this tabernacle of this manner building, but much more perfecte and greater. This holy tabernacle is with in ye aforesayd temple, for Christ dwelleth in ye father, and the father in him.
                           3 Open is this temple in heauen, & the tabernacle séene, whan god is known by true preaching & christs doctrine beléeued. For he came into the world, & for yt purpose was borne, to beare witnesse vnto ye truth, whō the father willed only to be hard concerning faith.
                           4 This temple and tabernacle open, or god and his worde once knowne in this latter age, the seauen Angels cō
                              meth forth. The eternall decrées of gods secret iudgemets apéereth, & are

fulfilled in their times. As Angels or messēgers of god thei haue in his eternitie theyr iust plagues in their season appointed to be exhibited.
                           5 And therfore are they sayd to come out from the temple whiche is God. Nothing hath he purposed to ye world, but he hath decréed it afore ye worldes constitution. For his purpose, minde, and pleasure, is as he is, euerlasting. And as it falleth to the world by hys assignement, it becommeth a messenger, going out of the temple. So many hath he sent out of such messēgers, as he hath fulfilled decréed purposes. And marueil not though they be here called angels, considering that it is the commō maner of the holy scriptures, euermore to call them Angels which vttereth the will, pleasure, and commaundement of God, as they doe here. After this sort are the priests called Angels, so is Aggeus the prophet, so is S. Iohn Baptist, so are Christes disciples, & also ye publique preachers.
                           9 What the plagues are that they shall shed out of their vials, will be shewed clearly in ye next chap. folowīg

one after an other.
                           7 These Angels are apparelled in pure whit linnen, bright shininge as christal and girdels about theyr brests with girded of fine golde, whiche betokneth their sincere cleannes, & their gloryous perfitnesse. For what can be more pure & precious, than the eternall decrées of the lord. What can be more perfit and glorious than his prediffined purposes? The lawes of God are vndefiled, the testimonies are true the statuts are right, the waies are suer, the commaundements are cleare, ye iudgements are godly, the words are pure and precious. Yea, the gifts that come from the father of light are euer more perfit and good.
                           8 The gyrding of their breasts, is the streight spearing vp of the secret meaning of Gods iudgementes from our carnall vnderstanding, till such time as he openeth thē vnto vs by his spirit: for it belongeth not vnto vs to deserue such secrets as the father reserueth to his owne power.
                           9 And one of the foure beastes or congregations (saith S. Iohn) delyuered

vnto the aforesayde .vii. Angels .vii. golden vials replenished wt the wrath full displeasure of God which liueth for euermore. Though the congregations be in the first chapter .vii. & in ye fourth .iiii. vnderstanded by the foure beastes, yet are they héere in this place brought all vnto one, and called one of the iiii. or els of the foure made one, for so muche as the vniuersall christian church is of one consent, one faith, one baptim, one god, and pertayneth to one Christe. For so much also as it confesseth, beléeueth and teacheth one doctrine of health. One is my doue saieth the holy ghost, one is my dearelye beloued darlyng. A beast is it here noted, as liuing in the flesh, and not yet mortified by death.
                           10 The vials of Gods wrath are the vngodly reprobates, fit onely for destruction. Golden are thei here named, because they appeare gloryous in the worldly iudgementes of men. Uerye paynted tombs are the dissembling hipocrits, within full of stinking bones. A shining name of life haue thei & yet are they inwardly dead. For all that

they do is to be séene of men.
                           11 Full of wrath are they, wherby is ment a sinfull vnderstanding, wt damnable doctrins. For very swift ar thei to al vngodlynesse. The .vi. properties haue they which the Lord hateth, and ye seuenth which he vtterly abhoreth. A proud looke, a dissembling tongue, bloudy hands, a wicked hart, féet redy vnto mischife, wayes to practise lyes, & sowings of dissenciō amōg brethren. These are geuen of the true christen congregation to the vii▪ Angels, or decréed purposes of God to be iudged as thei haue eternally diffined. For none other is their continuall prayer, but yt his wyll be fulfilled, and that his predifined intentes againste the peruerse multitude be finished at theyr conuenient times. None other is it to put into the Angels handes, the vials of gods displeasure, than thus to commit them by faithful prayer to his purposed decrées or fore set ordinaunces.
                           12 B
                                 •
                              t because that commonly whan gods iudgements begin to wax knowen all thinges are commoned & troubled,

therfore is it said here conseqently that the temple was full of smoke, by reason of the maiestie of God, and of his gloryous power. This smoke are certayne misteries, representing vnto vs the hidden maiestie of gods eternall presence. Whose brightnesse can no frayle vnderstanding abide. Not al the world could not sustaine it if all thinges were opē & playne cōcerninge it. In no wise could Moyses presently sée ye face of God, only might he be suffered to sée his backe partes, for no mā can se God & liue. Only is he sene here in this life as in a glasse, or vnder a dark speking. He appereth vnto vs here in a mistical smoke, like as he dyd to the patriarck Iacob in sléepe, to Moises in ye flaming bush, to Helias in ye horle winde, to the Apostles in fyery tōgs, & vnto Ananias in a secret visiō.
                           13 Under ye shadow of figurate locuciō is his glory for the elect persons, and faithful beléeuers knowne. The vnfaithful reprobats beholdeth ye smoke, but neither perceiue thei in it the glory of god, nor ye maiestie of his presēce. They neither con
                                 •
                              eiue his wonderfull

workes, nor yet his Godly iudgements. Their folish harts are so darkned, that though they know God, yet glorifye they him not.
                           They sée ye smoke & perceyue ye world troubled (as it is alwaies when ye verity appeareth) but neuer ye more faith nor godly knowlege haue they. But ye whiche is vnto the faithfull a rayse is vnto thē a ruine. That is vnto ye other ye power of God vnto health, is vnto them slander and folishnesse. And that is vnto ye other a sauoure of life vnto life, is vnto them a sauour of death vnto death. They remember not yt the Lord came down in fyre vnto Moises vpon Mount Synay when it smoked altogyther like a burnyng furnace, & therfore beare they away no glorified faces, or conciences depured by a true perfecte fayth.
                           14 And no man was able (saith ye text) to enter into the temple, til ye vii. deadly plages of ye .vii. Angels were wholy fulfilled. For though ye true beléeuers perceiue in ye misteries of ye scriptures, the present maiestie & mightie power of GOD, yet enter they not into full

knowledge of him, being as yet subiect vnto vanitie. For héere is there knowledge vnperfect, and their prophecying also. And therfore acknowledging their imbesilitie, and also wayting for ye reuelation of the children of God, they say with Saincte Paule. O the wonderfull déepenesse of the wisdome and knowledge of God. How incomprehē
                              sible are his iudgements, and how vnsearcheable his wayes.
                           15 And at this point shal they stil be tyl the last iudgement day finish all. For the ful entring into the temple is none other then a whole perfect or consummate knowledge of God and hys mysteries. Which can not fully be had, till that which is vnperfect be done away, the creature deliuered from bondage of corruption. And til death be swalowed vp, ye vessell of corruption becommyng incorruptible, & the mortall body becō
                              ming spiritual. The rightuous shal thā shine as doeth ye sunne in ye kingdom of their father, & glister as doth the bright stars world without end. What ye vij. plagues are, & what is their fulfilling, wil in this Chapter folowing appeare.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The xvj. Chapter.
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And I harde a great voice out of the temple, 2. saying to the seauen Angels, 3. Go your wayes, 4. povvre out your vials of vvrath vpon the earth, 5. And the first vvent, and povvred out his viall vpon the earth, 6. and there fell a noysome and a sore botch vpō the mē vvhich had the marke of the beast, 7. and vpon them that vvorshipped his Image.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           AN other great voyce hard Iohn out of ye temple. A perfect, strōg, and earnest assurance had hée of the Lord by a spirituall premonishment, that ye vnuariable decrees of his set iudgements should be fulfilled at their tymes of him appoynted. Yea, ascertained he was infallibly that they should in their due seasons come to passe. For vnto his friendes openeth he his secret counsailes alwayes, as he did in olde tyme vnto his well beloued Israell, vnto Moyses, Zachary, Ezechiell, and Daniel, with such other.
                           2 And the voice was vnto the seauen Angels vnder ye vij. seals opening, and the vij. trumpettes blowyng after this sorte. Goe your wayes foorth fulfilling

the purpose ye be ordeyned vnto. Powre out your vyalles of wrath vpon the earth.
                           3 Declare them first of all to ye world, to be the reprobate vesselles of dishonour, which of wilfulnesse cōtemneth my eternal veritie. Consequently send them into most déepe errour, that they may waxe worse and worse, and not onely to erre in them selues, but also to bring other into errour, that they may receyue the double reward therof, abyding my most fearfull iudgemēt.
                           4 And in such tyme as the Lord appointed, the first Angel went foorth vnder the first seale opening, and poured out his viall vpon ye earth. For in the first age of the church, to trye hyr as golde in the furnace, permitted ye Lord by his eternall decrée, the malicious Sinagoge of the Iewes to rage, and to doe their vngodly feats. In the which their furious madnesse, not onely dyd they persecute the Apostles and fyrst preachers of Christ from cittie to citie, but also peruerted the earthly mynded multitude, by many and diuers vngodly kindes of false doctrine in hipocrisie.

Of this sorte was Himineus & Philetus, becommyng of Saduces, false Christians, and denying the latter resurrection, whom Paul did excommunicate. So were also Phigellus & Hermogenes, bringing in agayne circumcision with certaine ceremoniall obseruacions to bleamishe the Gospell of Christ. These with suche lyke, subuerted whole houses (sayeth Paule) teaching things yt they ought not to haue taught for filthie lukers sake.
                           6 And whan they were thus by the dec
                                 ••
                              ed purpose of God shead vpon the earth, or 
                                 •
                              e
                                 •
                              te vnto their owne earthly 
                                 ••
                              astlin
                                 •
                              sse, all destitute of hys grace for cōtempning his word so graciously 
                                 〈◊〉
                              , there lighted a noysome and 
                                 〈◊〉
                               botch vpon those men whych 
                                 〈◊〉
                               marke of ye beast, or an 
                                 〈…〉
                               through their perswasiōs.
                           7 
                                 〈◊〉
                               vpon them also that worshipped his Image, or accepted them for godly that made lawes repugnaunt to his lawes. For the great headed Rabines of ye Iewes did not onely spot ye consciēces of the Israelites their own natiue cōtrie men, but also of ye Grekes

and Latines, the Asians & Romaines, compelling them for their own tradytions to make Gods commaundemēts of none effect. These hauing a pretence of godly liuing, denied the power therof. Of this sort were they which entered into houses & brought into bōdage supersticious women loaden with sin. For a more déepe vnderstāding hereof, cōfer this with ye first seale opening, and ye first trumpet blowing, and lykewise the other vj. folowing.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And the second Angell shead out his vyall, 2. vpon the sea, 3. and it turned as it vvere into the bloud, 4. of a dead man. 5. And euery liuing thing dyed in the sea.
                        
                           The Pharaphrase.
                           1 After this went foorth the seconde Angel of the second seale opening, effunding hys vyall vpon the sea. According to the decrée of God almightie for the second age of the Christian church, reigned among the Christians, deceytfull brethren, & peruerse teachers, betraying ye tru ministers & deliuerīg thē vnto deth for Iesus Christs sake, yt his life might be sene in their mortal flesh.

For in this life he proueth his electes with Abraham and Iob to saue them, & to make thē iust folowers of Christ, whom it behoo
                                 •
                              ed to suffer ere he entred into h
                                 •
                              s glory.
                           2 Upon ye sea or wauering multitude was this 
                                 ••
                              al
                                 •
                              shed. Only are the false Prophets receiued & taken of ye folishe fantastic
                                 •
                              ll, & 
                                 ••
                              ipper witted sort, as a réed shakē of euery wind Non regardeth them which hath set sure footing vpon the harde rocke Christ. Such a vial or vessel of Gods Ire was Mair ye Idon
                                 ••
                              t which made ye Talmud of the Iwes, a booke more thā .x. Bibles after Nauelerus & other Historians, ful of blasphemies & lyes condemning ye doctrine of Christ. So was Rabby, Moyses ye Egiptian, Rabina, & Rabasses wt such other cōfirming ye same.
                           3 All bloudy was this sea, ye viall once shed therevpon. Al fleshely were the people in their iudgmentes, theyr harts fulfilled wt cruelty & murther against christs true witnesses, through their peruerse prechings. Yea, in ye furious rage they thought they did God

great good seruice when they put his seruantes vnto deth.
                           4 This blood was also in a maner as the bloud of a dead mā. For dead was the doctrine that they taughte, euen the sleaing letter it selfe. Dead were also their ceremonies, their rites, and their idle obseruations.
                           So that euery liuing thing died in that bloudy sea. All they which séemed thorough glittering hipocrisie to liue, wā
                              ted ye very lyfe which is hid in Christ, and that ryseth of fayth in hys lyuing word. So did they also which depended all vpon the vayne pleasures of thys lyfe, exercising héere tyrannie both in wordes & doings. Neyther were they out of the same daunger, that fel from the veritie once knowne, nor yet they which durst not receyue it for feare of persecution, but both perished in this sea.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And the third Angell shead out his vial, 2, vpon the ryuers and fountaynes of vvaters, 3. and they turned to bloud. 4. And I heard an Angell say, 5. Lorde which arte and vvaste, 6. thou arte rightuous and holy, 7. bicause thou

hast geuen such iudgements, 8. For they shed the bloud of saintes and prophets, 9. & therfore hast thou geuen them blud to drink, for they are vvorthy, 10. and I hard an other Angel out of the aulter, 11. say, 12. Euen so Lord God almighty, 13. true & rightuous are thy iudgements.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 Next in his course went out ye third Angel, vnder ye third seale opening, & he powred out his vyal vpon the watery floudes & fountaines, & al they became very blud. By his set decrée for ye third age of the church, suffered ye Lord false heretyques to rage in al kyndes of errour, strongly to delude ye vnbeleuers.
                           2 These lighted vpon the swéet waters, by whom ar ment ye sacred scriptures refreshing the drie soules. Who soeuer drinketh (saith Christ) of ye waters yt I geue, he shal neuer be more a thirst.
                           3 Of these waters haue they defiled both the riuers and welspringes wt bloud. Both ye law and gospel, ye figure & verity, ye commaūdement & promise, the doctrine of prophets and Apostles haue they corrupted with their false interpretacions & gloses, wt frowarde

driftes and opinions, with vaine tradicions and worshippings, & with carnal wisdom and murtherings. Of this sort wer Eutices & Arrius with such other like, as in the .vii. chapter afore.
                           4 And I hard (saith saint Iohn) an Angel, betokning those sincere witnesses, to whom God had opened for that age his secret iudgementes. And this Angel sayd.
                           5 Omnipotent creator & Lord which art not only of thy selfe at this present instāt, but wart also essencially in thy selfe without beginning.
                           6 Thou heauenly Lord arte faithfull in thy wordes & holy in thy workes.
                           7 For as it appereth before our eyes, ye decrées & foreiudgemēts yt thou madest afore, are now fulfilled in effect.
                           8 For the religious murtherers yt of cruelnesse caused the bloud of thy holy saintes & Prophets, Apostles & preachers to be shed, haue now by thy iust appointment very bloude to drinke as they are most worthy.
                           9 For sleying of them whose message they contempned, they had theyr iust plague. Not only became they vain in

their thoughts, their folish hartes darkened (not vnlike to thē yt hath eares & heare not, eyes & sée not, but also there remained vnto them after this life a perpetual vengeaunce without mercy for their cruel oppressiōs as a due rewarde of their errour.
                           10 Yet an other angel hard I (saith S. Ihō) euē out of ye alter which is christ. This angel signifieth those witnesses that sometime confessed ye trueth here, and now resteth frō their labours in ye Lord. These though they be departed, affirm that the other hath sayd afore, in token yt now beyng departed they forget not that truth which they afore cōfessed, liuyng stil yet in ye same, he yt holdeth my worde (saith Christ) shall neuer tast of death.
                           11 And this is their saying in mistery or wordes comprehēding their secret confession.
                           12 Euen so Lord God almighty▪ As ye liuing beleuers saith of thée by mouth, so say we now in the spirit.
                           13 That thy decréed iudgemēts are euer more true, & thy merueilous workings rightuous. The first is called in

some translatiōs the Angell of waters, the other here reported to come from the aulter, to signify both sortes.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And the fourth Angell poured out hys vyall, 2. on the sunne. 3. And povver vvas giuē vnto him to vexe men vvith heate of fyre, 4. And the men raged in great heate, and spake euil of the name of God. 5. vvhich had povver ouer those plagues, 6. and they repented not to giue him glory.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 Consequently, by the appointment of God, the fourth Angel in the fourth seale opening, powred out his vyall of Gods wrath on the sunne. As ye Lord had eternally prefixed in ye fourth age of the Christian church. For the whole worldes punishment, was Christ sore bleamished which is ye cleare sonne of rightuousnesse. Sore did ye dissembling Antichrists in those dayes darkē ye true glory of God with their manifold sects of hypocrisie. The Pope had for hys part an innumerable swarm of shorne smered Sodomites, and Mahomete a foule flock of frantike fabillers, which wt their newlye painted religions and prodigious obseruations, made first all

the world to wonder & thā to worship Belial for Christ, taking darkenesse for light, & sin for rightuousnesse.
                           2 These being very aduersaryes vnto Christ, tooke vpō them his authority and seat, ye one boasting him self for his general vicar in earth, ye other for the great prophet of ye Lord, & so were receiued of ye execrate world. Néedes would they seme to be ye sunne, being the very shadowes of death.
                           3 Permitted was this hearsackye sunne to vex mē with heat of fyre. Sitting in the temple of God which is wt in man, with such wicked lawes as they made vnder the name of God & of Christ, they tirribly vexed, tormented, and cruciated the weake consciences of men, leauing them commonly in most painful desperation.
                           4 So yt the men raged in great heat, speaking euil of ye name of God, which had power ouer those plages. At their abhominable perswasiōs was Christe of thē not taken for a merciful sauiour and gentil redemer, but for a froward chourle & vntractable tyraunt, vnlesse he were molified by the merites and

callings vpon of other, and that could not be had without money.
                           5 Power hath the Lord ouer plages, to hold thē or remoue thē. By his rightfull iudgement, at his only pleasure he hardeneth. As the potter may he break thē, or make them vessels of dishonor.
                           6 In no wyse did this peruerted multitude repēt their wicked blasphemies to giue him glory, for all their cōfessyons, masse hearings, pilgrimages &. satisfactions without number. For they were not according to his prescription.
                           7 After none other sort wil he be plea- and glorified, than he hath by his scriptures appointed. Nothing lesse ar their fantasies than true repentance.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And the fifte Angell powred out his vyall, 2. vpon the seat of the beast, 3. & his kingdome vvaxed darke. 4. And they gnevve theyr tongues for sorrovve, 5. and blasphemed the God of heauen for sorovv, and payn of their sores, 6. and repented not of theyr deedes.
                        
                           The Pharaphrase.
                           1 In order succéedeth by ye diuine ordinaūce the fifte Angel vnder the fifte seale opening, powring out his vyal of

Gods indignation vpon the seat of the beast. After none other sorte than the Lorde had afore prediffined for mans vnfaithfulnesse sake, was the proude beastly kingdome of the papacie, & the execrable reigne of Mahomet replenished with all filthy abhominations vnder the sunne. For in the other age afore they did but créepe into the hartes of men through the glitterings of hypocrisie and dissimulate sanctitie.
                           2 But here haue they obtayned ye power, seat, and aucthoritie of the beaste, and so gotten vnto them the myghtie Monarchies of the vniuersall worlde. Here raigned they without checke in all vain glory, hautinesse, malice, pryd, murther, hipocrisie, superstitiō, Idolatry: and blasphemy of Gods name.
                           3 And therfore their kingdomes as all one in diuillishenesse, became all darke, without the light of Gods veritie, full of the stinking smoke of ye bottomlesse pitte. Than went the locusts abroad, and filled the world with ignorance and blyndnesse.
                           4 Euery where gnewe they theyr tōges for very sorow. In detracting the

veritie, muche griefe they suffered in their desperate hartes, their wormes not dying, nor their fyre quenched, the scorpiōs of ye earth stinging them also.
                           5 Spitefully they blasphemed ye omnipotent Lord of heauen for very anguish & dolour of their sores & woūds. For none other are the fruites of a desperate cōscience thā blasphemies of God, as in Cain, Iudas, and such other lyke. None other are the vtterances of an vnpenitent harte, but heauy hatefull murmurings.
                           6 And therefore it followeth yt they repented them not of their déeds. For in a cruciate or fearfully vexed conscyence can neuer dwel true repentāce. So vnquietous alwayes is the foolishe desperate mynde, as is the troubled raging sea. A wicked harte is laden with sorrowes heaping sin vpon sin, the Sinagoge of proude hipocrites hauing no health. In the fifte seale opening and trumpet blowing, is more of this mysterie declared, which agréeth much with this vyall of God, lyke as doeth the other with the other in their numbers, though not in their figures.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        The texte.
                        1. And the sixt Angell poured out his viall. 2. Vpon the great riuer of Euphrates. 3. And the water dried vp. 4. That the way of the Kings. 5. Of the east should be prepared. 6. And I saw three vncleane spirits like frogs. 7. Come out of the mouth of the dragō. 8. and out of the mouth of the beaste. 9. And out of the mouth of the false prophet. 10. For they are the spirits of deuilles. 11. Workinge miracles to goe out. 12, Vnto the kinges of the earth, & of the whole vvorld. 13. to gather thē to the battel. 14. Of the great day of god almightie. 15. Beholde I come as a thiefe. 16. Happy is he that vvatcheth. 17. And kepeth his garments. 18. Least he be found naked. 19 And men see his filthynesse. 20. And he gathered them together into a place 12 called in the Hebrue tonge, Armagedon.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 In course now followeth the sixte Angel of gods appointment, vnder the sixt seal opening, shedding out his ireful viall vpō ye great riuer Euphrats, a floud of the Assirians or of Babilon, betokening in misterye the pleasaunt possessions and wauering delights of the Papisticall cleargye, with suche lyke.
                           2 Into all filthy desires of carnal and

worldlye lustes gaue the Lorde their hartes ouer in the sixt age of the christian church for their vnbeléeues sake to doe those things which are vncumly and beastly. So that all their study, trauaile, and labour, sought to none other end, but onely to abound in them. Wholly were they geuen therevnto, and nothing to the glory of God in all their practised obseruations.
                           3 Yet were the waters therof in processe of time dryed vp. Their wealthy pompes, possessions, & pleasures (their false feats once knowne) are & shal be clearely taken away from them. For after Iesus Sirach, the plant of sinne shall be rooted out in the proud Sinagog of the wicked.
                           4 And all this shal be to prepare the way of the kinges, from the spring of the sunne.
                           Neuer shall the gouerners walke in the waies of the Lorde, nor rule according to Christes doctrine, nor yet that doctrine be apert & open, til the waters be dryed vp, not one drop remaining. So long as the priests dwell in wanton delights & vaine pleasures, either

are the princes childishe or els tyrannous, according as their déeds require.
                           5 Neuer are they kinges from the spring of the sunne, or accordinge to Christs rule, séeking Gods honour wt Dauid and Iosias. In England by the Gospell preaching haue many of these waters bene dryed vp in the suppression of monasteries, priories, couents, & fryers houses, yet are not all things brought vnto Christes clere institution. A sincere christē order can not yet beséene there, And a great cause why. For all is not yet dryed vp there. The bishops reigne still in as much vaine gloryous pompe, and with as manye Heithenish obseruacions as euer they dyd. As cruelly harted, and as bloudye mynded are they yet as euer they were afore, no mischiefe vnsought to holde in the waters. Mark how Winchester, Durham, York, London, and Lincolne woorketh, wt such other pleasantly disposed Euphratines. But be of good comfort and pray in the meane time. For the holy ghoste promiseth here they shall wither away, with all that ye heauenly father hath not plāted.

All that generation wyll the Lordes breath consume. Now is the axe layde to the roote of the trée, to hewe downe the vnfruitfull braunches, the withered reserued to vnquenchable fyer.
                           God graunt the Princes at that daye more christenly, to bestow the waters of Euphrates than they haue yet bene bestowed, noe prouision made for the poore, nor yet order set for the gospell preaching. For great part of it is now turned to the vpholdings of dise playing, maskinge, and bankatinge, yea I woulde I coulde not by iust occasions speake it, bribing, whoring, and swearing, the townes, peoples, and housshouldes, miserablye decayed, whiche wyll not one day be vnplaged, vnlesse they repent.
                           6 Furthermore I saw (sayeth saint Iohn) in the same self vision, thrée vncleane spirits one comming out of the Dragons mouth, which signifieth sathan the deuill, an other out of the beastes mouth, betokeninge the vniuersall Antichrist, and the third out of the false prophets mouth compared afore to the two horned beast. And all

they séemed in maner as frogs both in their colours and fashions.
                           7 Idolatry was that yll spirit, which first went out from the serpent, & hath continued euer since in the world vnder the colour of good works, as pilgrimage, deuocion & labour.
                           8 Errour in abhominable filthynesse was the spirit whiche came from the beastly Antichrist defilinge the whole christianitie with innumerable superstitions vnder the colour of chaste lyuing, in pristhod, sacrifices and ceremonies.
                           9 Hipocrisie was the foule spirite which issued from the false preachers, poysoning the catholyque faith with false doctrine vnder the colour of religion, pretending abstinence, prayer, and clennesse. These thrée wicked spirits are not all vnlyke to the wilde fire, smoke, and brimstone, whiche the terrible fierce horses euometed in the ix. chapter of this present prophecye. For cursed, false, and vnpure they are. Their doctrine is wickednesse, lies, & deuilishnesse, and the execrable wisdome of the flesh. In manner of frogs

are they here described for their diuersitie of coloures in ceremonyes, doctrine, & sects, for their filthy dwelling in the dyrty tradicions of men, and for crookelyng of theyr vnknowen Psalmodye and seruice, disquietynge with their ydle customes the consciences of the symple multitude.
                           10 These are the very spirites of deuyls, the ympes of sathan, workinge such signes and myracels as would deceiue the very chosen persons, and bring them into erroure yf it were so possible. But the Lorde euermore defendeth his.
                           11 A stronge power haue they by the workynge of sathan to shewe lyinge wonders & deceyuable signes amonge them that shal perish for detesting the truthe.
                           12 These shal by the permission of god be suffered to go at large, they shall strongly delude the kings of the earth, and blynde the gouernoures of the vniuersall world, making them dronken with ye cup of all abhominatiōs.
                           13 And all this shal they doe to gather them to gether by their wicked counsayles,

& to bring them in to one cruel consent of battailing against Christe and his mēbers, to receiue the penalty therof in ye great day of ye lord almighty
                           14 Most busely they gather them to battel, when they moue them to persecute the iust beléeuers with ful vngodly actes, as now most of all in our age, which god hath promised in short space to reuenge.
                           Of this wil more be spoken in ye xix. chapter folowing. Least any man knowinge the truthe shoulde tangle his owne conscience with their spirituall sorceryes for feare of princes lawes, vnder the vaine hope of repentance, in the end of their liues, it foloweth in playne sentence.
                           15 Beholde (sayeth the Lorde Iesus Christ) or earnestly take héede vnto it, for I come dangerously vnlooked for, as commonly doth ye thiefe, to thy hinderaunce if thou watch not in fayth, but lyue in superstition.
                           Though this, not without reasonable cause may be taken in a generaliti for ye last iudgmēt dai, yet is it here spokē particularly of euery mās departing.

As a premonishment, he geueth this here of loue least any man should perish without warning.
                           16 Blessed is he (saith that Lorde) which watcheth in the true christian beléeue, and liueth not in the vaine but in the sure hope of life, sealed wt the iust promises of god. For all that he doth shall prosper, and turne him to great aduantage in the concluston.
                           17 Happy is he allo that holdeth fast vnto him his garments, or workes of Gods prescription (which are ye fruits of the spirite) or that hath done on the Lord Iesus Christ, gyrdinge hym suer vnto himselfe by faith.
                           18 Least he be founde a naked hypocrit witout faith, veritye, iustice, charitie, with such lyke, or least the rightuous number at the latter day sée his filthines vncouered, and reioyce at his condemnation.
                           19 He is blessed whiche at that day shall be couered with the white garment of the Lambe, not hauinge his sinnes imputed vnto hym.
                           20 To shewe the certaintie of the aforesayde battayle. Saint Iohn saith

that the diuel gathered together those wicked rulers into a certaine place, called in ye Hebrue tonge Armagedon. The vncleane spirites that afore are named thrée of their diuers workinge in the Dragon, beaste, and false prophet are here brought into one, as all of one lying spirit, whome Christe calleth the father diuell. This one lyinge spirit whiche hath bene a murtherer from the beginning, comprehendinge in hym all vncleane spirites, like as doth the beast all Antichristes, hath combined together into one execrable zeale of fatherly tradicions, all vaineglorious and vngodly minded gouernours against God and his Christe. And this hath not bene withoute the secret permission of God, wyllynge to proue his elects by strōg suffering, that they might receiue at his hand the rewarde of stronge victorye or of his aboundant riches.
                           21 This place here called in the Hebrue Armagedon, betokneth in mistery an hyll of delectable fruites, interpreted of some for the hyll of the gospell, and is commonly taken of ye Hebreues

for that is swéet or of valew. And this without faile is the churche, whiche▪ 
                              
                                 •
                              ft times in the Scriptures is called the plentuous hyll of God, the hyll of Gods house, the hyll of mirth, the hyll of oliues, the hyll of Sion, Carmelus, and Libanus, with such other lyke. In this mounte euermore are they bene 
                                 •
                              o battaile. There slea the
                                 •
                               innocent Lambes of Christe. All their power, malice, and tirannye, is there extremely vttered at the Antichrists labour and desire, whiche are excéedingly drunken in the bloude of holye martires, whiche hath bene shed vpon the earth from the rightuous Abel vnto this day. But when the almighty setteth kings vpō the earth, it shall be cleare euen in the darknes, that the hill of Basan is Gods hill.
                        
                     
                     
                        The texte.
                        1 And the seauenth Angell poured out his vial. 2. Into the ayre, 3. And there came a great voyce out of heauen from the sate sayinge. 4. It is done. 5. And there followed voices, thunderings, and lightninges. 6, And there was a great earthquake. 7. Such as was not since mē were vpon earth. 8. So mighty an earthquake and so great. 9. And the great citie was deuyded

into three parts. 10. And the cities of the nations fell▪ 11. And great Babtlon came in remembraunce before God. 12. To geue vnto her the cup of Wine of the fiercenesse of hys wrath. 13. And euery Ile fled avvay. 14. And the mountaines vvere not founde. 15. And there fell a great haile. 16. As it had bene talents. 17. Out of heauen. 18. Vppon the men. 19. And the men blasphemed God, beause of the plague of the hayle. 20. For it vvas great, and the plague therof vvas sore.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 Fynally the seuenth Angell wente forth vnder the seuenth seale, opening as God had eternali determined, throwing out the content of his viall into the aire. For the seauenth age of the christen church by the very set purpose of God, are manye conuerted to the truth, and become with Paule the vessels of election, that afore were with Iudas the vessels of wrath vnder the great aduersary of God. Neither is it any blemishe vnto them to be called here, that they were afore, vials of wrath, consyderynge that SIMON Leprosus, beinge once healed of hys

leprosie was euer after called a leper. In case lyke Paule, after his conuersion was not ashamed to reporte himselfe both a Pharisie & also the sonne of a Pharasie.
                           2 These, by the mighty determination of Gods stronge iudgemente, are sent into the ayre. Most effectually are they lightened with the spirit of god, and prouoked stifly to stand vp against the aereall powers regning in the fickle fantasticall Antichriste and hypocrites, condempninge by Gods worde their vniuersall doctrines and deuillishnes. These powers are no lesse than diuilles, whome Christe calleth fowles of the ayre, Peter and Iohn mans aduersaries, and saint Paul the gouerners of these darknesses in spirituall wickednes.
                           3 Whiles these things are in doing, out of heauen, which is the vniuersal congregation, yea, from the verye throne of god whiche is the elect faithful number (for thei are ye only seat of God) came a voyce of reioysinge, saying after this sort.
                           4 It is done. All things are finished.

Christs glory once manifestly knowne the world is at an ende. The wicked hath done all their mischies, and the number of our brethren is fulfilled. Thus shall they preache a full deliueraunce of the captiues, & ye peaceable yere of ye Lord. This is ye silence of an halfe houre space, mencioned afore in ye viii. chapter, and the returne of this world vnto Christ in the .xii. chapter. Not that there shall in those dayes be no enemies (for the remnaunte shall styll remayne) but that they shall not then openly dare rage, persecute, and kyll, the world being at such a vniuersal quiet.
                           5 Yet shall there happen in those dayes, voyces, thunderings, and lightnings. Uoyces of swéete blessings and delectable promises to ye faithful cōgregation. Thunderings of terror to the vnfaithful multitud cōmanding thīgs contrary to ye flesh. And feareful lightnings of condemnation to there probate hipocrits and desperat obstinats.
                           6 And al from one word of the Lord, or one gospell preaching in diuerse respects, no small earthquake folowyng

vpon the same. What commocions, heuye complayn tes, fearfull tremblynges, sorowes, cryes, griefes, sighynges, waylynges, grudginges, gruntynges, gronynges, wepynges, and handes wryngyng wyl be among ye earthly minded Antichrists and hypocrits, bishops, priests, prelates, holy watter mongers, and parrish clarkes, lawiers, whores, caruers, paynters, & waxe sellers, whan their whoryshe church shal be turnedouer by iudgmēt of the sayd word is easy to coniecture.
                           7 Such a one wyll this earthquake be (saith the text) so mighty & so strōg, as neuer was yet since men were vpon the earth, or since that earthly generation first beganne. Than shall be cleane taken away the carnall church of Antichrist or the smered Sinagoge of shauelings. Neither shall the Pope with his disgysed rable any more be séene here, nor yet Mahomet with his monstrous muster.
                           8 In such wise shal their laws, sects & ceremones be destroied in those daies that no man shal be found so bolde as once to allow one of thē openly. Than

shal ye glory of Christs name shine the world ouer, he making of his enimies his footestoole.
                           9 Moreouer in this terrible earthquake the great spirituall cytie called Sodom and Egipt, or the holy whorish mother the church shall be diss
                                 •
                              uered into thrée parts, of the which two shal styll be wicked, the third cōuerted vnto godlines. Two partes shall be dispersed (saith Zachary) the thirde shall remaine to the Lorde. Of them which haue and shall go out of minsters and monasteries, colleges and couentes, churches and cloysters, parrishes, and nunneries, one sort shal inwardlye be geuen to Antichrists superstitiousnes and hipocrisie. An other sorte vpon diuers fleshly consideracions, shall faynedly fall to the Gospel. The thirde sort onely of loue towardes God and zeale of helth in their neighbors, shall vnfainedly cleaue to the scriptures.
                           Thus shal ye vngodly sorte be coupled stil wt ye godly in eueri land & prouince & be ye much greater number, yet shal they for ye time attēpt nothing against them, the truthe so strongly regning.

Neuertheles yet is it to be thought yt they shal then haue nothing to suffer, cōsidering yt it is a kingdome of sufferance. Christ to be head of that congregation suffered once incommoditie or other alwaies, so long as he was here lyuing. It shall therfore behoue them which are his misticall members, alwayes to suffer. For the seruant is no better then his Lord, nor the soldiour then his head capitayne. And to make this good, the lord sayeth in Zachary. The same third part will I leade thorow fire, and purge it as siluer or gold in the furnace. Then shall euery godly creature follow Christ in bearinge his crosse. They shall mortyfie theyr fl
                                 •
                              shly members, sleyng al fornicatiō, filthynes, 
                                 •
                              dolatry, couetousnes, pride anger, and malice.
                           They shall helpe, suffer, and forbeare one an other, hauing pittifull compassion vpon the weake, sicke, and néedy. No duty beséeminge a christian shal they leaue vndone.
                           10 Therfore this great or generall cytie thus deuided, al other perticuler

or national cities muste also fall. The blasphemous Pantheō of Rome once perishing, all other churches of ye vnfaithfull must néedes folow soone after in their course. For the foūdation takē away, yt buildyng cannot endure. So yt from thenceforth shall be no Popish sects, no supersticious ceremonies, no Hethenish obseruatiōs, nor opē Idolatry in all the world▪ But when ye remnāt of the wicked shal attempt afresh to raise vp again such abhominatiōs, the Lord shal sodainly without warning fal vpō them with his most fearfull & tirrible last iudgment.
                           11 Great Babilō the aforsaid mother of all whordom & filthinesse, shal than come in remembrance before god. He shall than consider hir abhominable blasphemye, hir pryde, crueltye, murther, & sinnes without number, waying them in righte ballance according vnto iustice.
                           12 He shal also reward hir to drinke the fierce cup of his wrath or wine of his great indignacion, which is ye perpetual death of soule. The very dregges of his Ire shal shée taste, yea vnspeakable

sorowes & paynes without ende. For none other is it to come in remembraunce before him at yt day, but to be cōdempned, & receiue punishment according to hir déedes.
                           13 Then shall euery Ile (which is a place of refuge within ye sea) flée away and not tarry. The mountaynes that are wonte to giue succour vnto them that be on the land, shal not at ye day be founde. No comforte shall shée thē haue nor sure helpe any where.
                           14 No remedy will be at that day to flée from the fearful face of the Iudge. Then will neither merites nor yet soule masses helpe, neyther blessinges nor knéelings, sacrifices nor sensings, wawlings, nor ringings, bussings nor singings, but will she nyll shée, néedes must shée abyde his heauy and tirrible sentence.
                           15 And there fell great hayle (sayeth the texte) as it had bene waightie talents. Alwayes must it be remembred that commonly the tyme paste is vsed in this hrophecie for the tyme to come, for the certayntie of the things héere spokē. This haile is none other thē the

heauy tempest or plague of ye said fearfull & tirrible iudgements of ye Lord, which shal on yt woful day fal sodaynly as a thicke hayle vpon the miserable multitude of them yt boasted thē selues to be ye holy church & vpon their wicked folowers, cōpared here vnto Babilon.
                           16 This plague is here also for none other cause lykened vnto talents, but for yt it is in wayght & measure to bée ministred vnto them by the preordination of God. So much paine and sorow is due vnto that whorish generation, as shée hath glorified hir selfe in filthy delightes, & so many punishmentes to be rewarded hir. Yea, double must shée haue according to hir workes.
                           17 Out of heauen shall this vehemēt hayle fall, from the fearful sentence of the Lord Iesus Christ, which shal than sit as a Iudge in the myddest of hys faithful congregatiō; they fitting with him as the body with the head in condempnation of the wicked.
                           18 And vpon ye men shal it light. For the great whore or ye citie called héere Babilō, is in this place to bée takē for that it comprehendeth, euen for men,

in whom also are included women by the common vsage of the scriptures.
                           19 These men shall spightfully blaspheme God bicause of ye hayle, plague, or terrour of their torments. They shall crye out of him, wishing that hée had no such power so to torment them.
                           20 For the tempest is great, and the sufferaunce thereof excéeding painfull. As the Lorde is mightie, so are hys iudgements whan they fal. Uehemēt, fierce, and strong is the Lorde (sayeth Esay) as is the tempest of hayle breaking out on euery side, & bearing down strong holdes.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The xvij. Chapter.
                     OFte hath occasions bene giuen me in this booke to speake of greate Babilon and of the execrable beast, but here is place offered to discribe them more at large.
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And there came one of the seuen Angels, vvhich had the seauen vyalles, 2. and talked vvith me, 3. saying vnto me. 4. Come I vvill shevve the iudgement, 5. of the great vvhore, 6. that sitteth vpō many vvaters, 7. vvith vvhō
                           
the Kinges of the earth haue committed vvhoredome, 8, and the inhabiters of the earth are dronken vvith the vvyne of hyr fornication. 9. And he caryed me away, 10. into the vvildernesse in the spirite.
                        
                           
                              
The Paraphrase.
                           1 After this came (sayth Saint Iohn) one of the vij. Angels or vnuariable decrées of the Lordes eternall iudgements, which had the vij. vyals of hys wrath as afore hath bene declared.
                           2 And this Angell or set purpose of God as an heauenly messenger talked with me in mysterie.
                           3 Of fauourable goodnesse in secreat maner, he ascertayned me thereby of this wonderfull iudgement héere following, to be fulfilled at the latter end of the worlde. And thus it sayde vnto mée.
                           
                              4 Come hither friende Iohn. I will shew thée in secretnesse ye tirrible iudgment of the great whore or coūterfaite church of hypocrites, as God hath appointed it. Néedes must this whore be Rome, for that which is hereafter spokē, yt she is the great citie which reigneth ouer ye kings of the earth. Euidēt it is both by ye scriptures & Cronicles, that in Iohns dayes Rome had hyr dominiō ouer all the whole world. And being infected with the abhominatiōs of all landes, rightly is shée called Babylon or citie of confusion, not onely in this reuelation but also in the first Epistle of Peter. And like as in ye scriptures ofte tymes vnder ye name of Ierusalem is ment the whole kingom of Iuda, so vnder the name of Rome here may be vnderstanded the vnyuersall worlde with all their abhominations and diuillishnesses, theyr Idolatryes, witchcraftes, sectes, superstitions, papacyes, priesthoodes, relygions, shauings, anointings, blessings, sensings, processiōs, & the diuil & all of such beggeryes. For all ye people since Christes assēcion hath this Rome infected with

hyr pestilent poisōs gathered from al Idolatrous nations such time as she held ouer them ye monarchial suppremit. And like as Babilon had ye Israelites captiue vnder a bodily tribute, so hath this Rome had ye Christians both in their bodies & soules. At ye wryting of this prophecy felt Iohn of their crueltie being exiled into Pathmos an Ile of Licia, for the faithfull testimony of Iesu. And so did I poore creature with my poore wife & children at the gatheringe of this present commentary flyinge into Germamye for the same.
                           5 No maruail though she be here called a great whore. For no wher were euer yet séene so many Idole worshipinges, so many vaine obseruatiōs, so many supersticious sects, so many errours in hipocrisie, so many false prophets, and so many prodigious kindes of filthynes, no, not in Sodom it selfe, nor yet in miserable Egipt.
                           6 This Babilonysh whore or disguised sinagoge of shorelings, sitteth vpō many waters or peoples yt are fantastical, fickle or folish.
                           
                              For none are in conscience subiect vnto hyr, that are constantly grounded in the sure doctrine of fayth, only alloweth, hir traditions the wauering witted multitude, the slipper and vnstedfast number, obeying them in theyr hartes, of feare & not of loue, so throwing them selues into a moste confuse Chaos or vawte of double dotage.
                           7 With this stinking strompet haue the mightie potentates of the vniuersall earth, ye Emperours, Kings, Princes, and other notable gouernours cō
                              mitted most shamefull whoredome in the spirite by many straunge worshippings, agréeing among them selues to hyr wickedly decréed lawes & customes. To long should we stande here in this place, if we should discribe them all seuerally in theyr colours at large as they be.
                           8 Through the craftie legerdimaine of the priests on ye one side, & ye cruel cō
                              stitutiōs of Princes on ye other side, the dwellers of ye earth or worldly minded multitude are dronken with the wyne of hyr fornication spirituall, or practised worshippings besides the prescript

rules of Gods word. Not only they which haue bene couetous, carnall, leude, & wreched hath followed theyr abhominaciōs, but also an innumerable sort of ye elect number hath beleued their lies and errors. Yea, they haue bene so dazed with theyr dotages, & so tangeled with theyr customes, that as men losing theyr wittes without all godly remembrance, reason, wisdom, discressiō, vnderstāding, iudgement, & grace, the lawes of God laid apart, the commandementes neclected and the scriptures despised, they haue not only knéeled, crossed, kissed, set vp lights, & holdē vp their hāds before rottē postes, but also called thē their fathers in heuē. Yea (I axe God mercy a thousand times) I haue ben one of thē my self. And this is to this day a principal religion of ye whorish Church, called deuout pilgrymage or holy stations of prayer, many greate pardons granted & many false promises made to alure the people therevnto.
                           9 But blessed be ye Lord, whose word in this age both admonished many as ye Angell did Iohn, and brought, them

also cleane from hir abhominatiōs, into a secret cōsideration of ye spirit, vnknowen to ye world, there both to sée hir pride and also to vnderstand hir iudgement. For it followeth in ye text, yt the Angel cōueyed Iohn away into ye wildernesse in the spirite.
                           10 In mistery here the holye Ghost declared afore what the Lorde should worke in men hauing his grace at the latter dayes of the world. Into ye wildernesse flée they with Dauid, which leauing the customed wayes of mē, after ye course of the scriptures séeke vp their Lord God in faith, worshippyng him onely in spirite and in veritie.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And I sawe a woman sit vpon, 2. a rose coloured beast, 3. full of names of blasphemy, 4. vvhich had seuen heads and ten hornes. 5. And the vvoman vvas arayed, 6. in purple and rose eolour, 7. & decked vvith golde, precious stone & pearls, 8. & had a cup of golde in hyr hand, 9. ful of abhominatiōs, 10. & filthinesse of hir vvhordom. 11. And in hir fotehead vvas a name vvrittē. 12. A mistery, 13. Great Babilō the mother of vvhoredom & abhominations of the earth, 14. And I savv the vvife dronken vvith the bloud of saints, & vvith the bloude of the vvitnesses of Iesu. 15. And vvhen I savv hir, 16. I vvondred vvith great meruayle.
                        
                           
                           The Pharaphrase.
                           1 And I sawe (saith Saint Iohn) in mistery a woman (for an whore at ye first bloush semeth only a woman) sitting vpon a rose coloured beast. This beast is ye great Antichrist that was spoken of afore, or the beastly body of ye diuil, comprehending in him Popes, Patriarkes, Cardinalles, Lega
                                 •
                              es, Bishops, Doctours, Abbotes, Priors, Pristes and Pardoners, monks, Chanons, Fri
                                 •
                              rs, Nuns, & so forth. Temporall gouernours also, as Emperors, Kings, Princes, dukes, Erles, Lords, Iustices, Deputies, Iudges, Lawyers, Maiers, Bayliues Cunstables, & so forth, leauing their owne dutied offyces as to minister rightly, to serue their abhominacions.
                           2 All rose coloured is this beast, in token of tirannous murther & blodshedding ouer those that will not agree to their diuillishnesse.
                           3 Ful of blasphemous names is this beast also, as your holines, your grace, your Lordeshippe, your fatherhoode, your mastership, your reuerēce, honor,

highnesse, worship, magnificence, goodnesse, Gods vicar, spirituall syr, ghostly father, phisition of soules, defender of faith, head of the holy church, and so foorth, besides the names of theyr properties, feates, and pagents, as procession, bishopping, anelyng, purgatorie, pylgrimage, pardon, masse, mattens, euensong, placebo, Candelmasse day, Palm sunday, Ash wednesday, holy roode day, S. Thomas day, & so forth.
                           4 This beast had vij. heads and ten hornes, signifying his vniuersal crafts and suggestions to distroy the graces and giftes of the holy Ghost, and also his falsely borrowed primacies & tyrannous aucthorities to withstand the commaundements of God.
                           5 Upon this beast sitteth a woman. For what els auaūceth or beareth out this malignant muster in their copes, crosses, oyles, myters, robes, relickes, ceremonyes, vygiles, holy dayes, blessings, sensings, and foolings, but a wā
                              ton foolish and fantasticall religion, a vayne glorious pompe, and a shinyng pretence of holynesse in superstition, (callyng it theyr holy church). Shée is

sayd here to sit vpon this bloudy beast, as to be stayed, quieted, and setled by them. Marke what labours and paines that craftie and wyly Winchester taketh with Bonner, Tonstall and other of his fashion, as hyr own sworne souldyours to holde vp thys glorious whore in hyr olde estate of romishe religion. Oh he grunteth and groneth, he sweateth & swelleth, he fretteth and belleth, he bloweth & panteth, calketh and canteth, he sturreth & neuer ceaseth, to bring his matters to passe.
                           6 In token that this hypocryticall church standeth in the murther of innocents, this womā is here gloriously apparelled in purple, as giltie of theyr deathes which hath bene slayne, and also in fresh scarlet as euermore fresh & ready to cōtinue in ye same bloudshedding. For if such tirrible slaughter wer not, ye true christiā faith shuld increase, to ye great diminishmēt of hir glory.
                           7 Shée is in lyke case florishingly decked with golde, precious stone, and pearles, not onely in hyr manyfolde kynds of ornaments, as in hyr copes, corporasses, chesibles, tunicles, stooles,

fannous and myters, but also in mysterie of counterfeite godlinesse. Many outward bragges maketh thys painted chu
                                 •
                              ch of Christ of his Gospel, and of his Apostles, signified by ye gold, precious stone, & pearles, which is but a glittering colour. For nothing myndeth shée lesse than to followe them in conuersation of lyuing.
                           8 Moreouer in hir hand which is hyr exteriour ministration, shée hath a golden cup, full of abhominations and filthinesse of hyr execrable whoredome. This cup is the false religion that she dayly ministereth, besides the chalice whō hir marchaunts most dampnably abuseth. And it contayneth all doctrine of diuils, all beastly errours and lyes, all deceiptfull power, all glytteryng workes of hipocrites, all crafty wisdō of the flesh, & subtile practises of mans witte, besides philosophy, logick, rhetorick, and sophistry, Yea, all prodigious kynds of Idolatry, fornicatiō, sodometrie, and wickednesse. Outwardely it séemeth golde, pretending the glory of God, 
                                 •
                              he holy name of Christ, ye sacred scryptures of the Byble, perpetuall

virginity of life, and al are but counterfet colours & shadows of hipocrisy in the outwarde letter and name.
                           9 Ful of abhominacions is the drink of the excreable faith of that Romish religion receiued of other, & full of filthynes also, for both retaineth ye people therof innumerable kinds of Idol worsippinges vnder the title of Gods seruice, and also their shauelinges of prodigeous beastlynes in lecherouse liuing vnder ye colour of chastity. Here were muche to be spoken of Sayncte Germayns euil, sainct Sithes key, sainct Uncombers otes, maister Iohn shornes bote, saint Gertrudes rattes, saint Iobe for ye pox, saint Fyacre for ague, saint apoline for toth ake, sainct Graciane for lost thrift, saint Walstō for good haruest, S. Cornelis for the foule euil & al other saints els almost.
                           10 Of the buggery boyes also among prelates & pristes, Gohstly fathers & religious, might much be sayde here, were it not for infecting mens eies, ears & vnderstādings. For al these noiful nocuments are ye holy frutes of ye whordom of ye holy whorish Chuche.
                           
                              11 In the forehead of this glittering whore, which is hir outward shew, is written a name, expreslye declaring what she is. By hir vngodly fruites is she knowen to ye elect seruāts of god, hauing the light of the scriptures. In their consiences appereth she none other than a pestiferous whore, by the iudgements of the same.
                           12 A very mistery is this shew to the infidels, an hiddē secret, an vnknown wonder. For they are so blinded with hyr foppryes & tangled with hir toies, that they iudge all that she doth, holy, religeous, and perfect. And al this suffereth God for their vnbeleues sake, destroyinge neuerthelesse the wysdome of the wise and prudence of the prudent in his.
                           13 Hir very name agréeing to hir fruites, is this. Great Babilō, in mischiefe far aboue ye citie of ye Chaldeās, and much more full of confusion. For shée is the originall mother, the cause, the bginnyng, the roote, ye spryng, and the fountaine of all spirituall fornications, and in a maner of all fleshly abhominations also done vpon the earth.

This is to the faithfull sort, as a written name of hir, euident, cleare, open, and manifeste. But to the vnfaithfull it is onely as a mistery, hidden, darke, obscure, and neclect. For so are the secrets that God openeth to babes, & hydeth from the wise.
                           14 And I (saith Iohn) perceiued it euidentlye in my fore vnderstandinge, that this woman the very wife of the deuill and of his beastly body (for the byssh
                                 •
                              ps are the husbandes of theyr romyshe churches) was all dronken in ye bloudy slaughter of ye Saincts, or ernest christian beléeuers and in the excéedinge tyrannous murther of the faithfull witnesses of Iesu, or sincere preachers of his word. For neither of both she spareth. Besides all Godlye wisdome is she, and forgetfull of hyr selfe, through this same blouddye dronknes, so great exces hath she takē.
                           15 And when I perceyued and sawe hir with all hir adders whelpes so beastyshe (sayth saynt Iohn) with exceading wonder I marueyled. Not only that she was thus ouerset with bloud, drinking, or outragious murthering

of inocentes, but also of hyr excéeding great abhominacions.
                           16 And most of all I wondered that the almighty God could with so much paci
                                 •
                              nce suffer hir in such mischiefe.
                        
                     
                     
                        The texte.
                        1 And the Angell sayde vnto me. 2. Wherefore merueilest thou?. 3. I wyll shew thee, the misterye of the woman, and of the beast that beareth hyr, which hath seauen heades and ten hornes. 4. The beast that thou seeste, was 5. And is not. 6. And shall ascende out of the bottomlesse pit. 7. And shall goe into perdicion. 8. And they that dvvel on the earth shal vvōder 9 (whose names are not vvrittē in the booke of lyfe from the beginninge of the vvorld). 10. vvhen they beholde the beaste that was, and is not.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 And as I was thus with my selfe marueilynge, the Angell or afore named decrée of the Lord sayde vnto me these words.
                           2 Wherfore doest thou thus maruel, thou mortall man?
                           3 For thy gentle and méeke expectation I shall shew vnto thée, the mystery of this wretched woman, and of the cruell beaste that beareth hir, whiche hath seauen heades and ten

hornes.
                           By this shalt yu know ye true churche from the 
                                 •
                              alse, ye iust preachers from the hipocrites, ye sincere doctrine from their subtile sophismes, & their lawful authority from their cruelly vsurped presumcions. For that sheweth ye Lord vnto his electes, that he will not haue knowne of all men.
                           4 The execrable beast or carnal kīgdom of Antichrist which thou hast sene here in mistery, was as concerninng his beginning in Caine first of al, & so continue forth in the fleshly children of men, in ye chaplaines of Pharao, Hieroboam, Baal and Bel, in the cruell bishopes, pristes, and lawiers with such other like til the death of Christ and so forth.
                           5 And now ye said beast is not in power and authority as he hath bene. For in Iohns time, certayn yeares before the writing of this reuelacion, was ye proud clergy of the Iewes vtterly destroyed by Titus and Uespasian, in ye terrible siege of Hierusalem.
                           Notwithstanding, yet shal this beaste rise againe in the Romishe Pope and

Mahomet and in their false prelates and doctours.
                           6 He shal assend out of the bottomles pit from the stinking denne of sathan, exalting him selfe in worship aboue al that is called God. But in ye conclsiuon he shall haue an end.
                           7 Into perdicion shal he go without fail. The Lorde shall firste vtter his wickednesse (as now in this age) and than with the spirit of his mouth consume him and destroy him. So that his high climing vp, shal at the laste be the chefe cause of his fal. Yet shal his wicked rēnaūt once again set vp their Christes, & persecute a fresh, but that shalbe no full raise vnto hym.
                           8 And the rable of reprobates, which dwel on the earth, or for earthly commodities contēneth Gods truth, shall wonder once again not without much inward reioyce, that their Churche riseth againe out of the olde hipocrisyes.
                           9 Whose names are not registred in Christe, which is the large booke of life, and hath bene both ye life & the lyght of men since the first constitucion of the mouable world.
                           
                              No, they are not numbred amōg those rightuous that shall raigne with hym in glory.
                           10 These aduersaries of God and his worde shall haue much gladnesse in their wicked hartes, whan they beholde the beast thus comminge vp agayne that was of such magnificence, and now is but a thinge of noughte, that was estéemed aboue GOD, and now is proued dampnacion. So longe is this beastly Antichriste, as he worketh the misterie of iniquitie in the reprobate vesselles, and whan he leaueth that workinge than is he no longer. Marke in this processe past the nature of GODS eternall decrée for this age of his Church. Fyrst it sheweth and than it condempneth the curssed Sinagog of the diuel. In signification whereof the true preachers of our time haue manife
                                 ••
                              ly opened hir wickednesse vnto all the worlde, wherevpon her vtter destruction must shortely follow. Watch good Christian Reader, and pray earnestly.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And here is a minde that hath vvisdome 2. The seauen heades are seuen mountaines. 3. Whereon the vvoman sitteth. 4. They are also seuen kings 5 Fiue are fallen. 6, And one is. 7. And the other is not come. 8. Whan he commeth, he must continue a space. 9. And the beast that vvas and is not, is euen the eight. 10. And is one of the seauen. 11. And shall go into destruction.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 Here is a meaning which comprehendeth wisdom. A sincere vnderstanding shal herein be requisit. Necessary it is therfore to take héed, lest yu holde the harlot and beast for that they boast them selues, to be, to thy dampnacion.
                           2 The seauen heades of the beast aforemencioned, by ye plaine diffinicion of the holy ghost are here to be taken for seuen mountaines, or ye vniuersall princly monarchies of ye .vij. climates of the world.
                           3 Upon these the woman yt Babilonish harlot Rome (from whom hathe issued all spirituall whordome) in moste proud maner sitteth, hauynge

ouer them a vnyuersall domynyon. For in Iohns time, to Rome was all the worlde subiecte. Onder whose cruell reigne was Christe done to death, so hath his faythfull members bene euer since by a new raised kingdome in the same.
                           4 These heads are also, vii, kynges or gouernours of the aforesayde monarchyes sedused by a kynds of crafty errours and dyuelysh suggestions of that beast. So that if ye marke well this place, the head with the tayle and the cause with his effecte, in these presente significacions shall no preiudice be founde to that hath bene sayd in the other, thoughe they séeme very diuers. For both the gouernours and also the landes, or the peoples subiect vnto them haue vniuersallye bene blinded by their wylye wichcrafts. And so haue the worldlye potentates with the spirituall Antichristes agréede that both they haue vsurped one malignant medlynge ouer the soules of men to corrupte their faith, the princes applyinge their powers vnto the same.
                           
                              And that causeth the holy ghost here to call them the beastes heades vnder the title of mountaines and kinges. For vnder their princely authorities haue al their mischiefes bene fulfilled to vphold this whore against Christ & his word.
                           5 Fy
                                 •
                              e of these heades are fallen from ye vniuersal monarchy of Rome. All the dominions of Affrica and Asia hath renounced the obedience of hyr Empyre. Onely cleaueth Europa vnto hyr which is the least of the thrée, and yet not all therof. When the Papacy grew, the whole Empire of the Gréekes called Constantinople, fell cleane from the Latines, and became with other diuerse Monarchies, the possession of Mahomets sect, or of the Agarenes and Turks. Of the other Empires may a like coniecture be had. Thus haue they declined from hir, not so goyng forth nor yet risinge vp vnto Christ, for onely is it sayd here, yt they were fallen.
                           6 And one head is (saith the text) at this presēt time remaining, the other head is not come as yet, but wyl come

hereafter.
                           This head remayning is the sixt, and it is that féeble Empyre that Rome nowe holdeth and haue holden since Iohns time. The power of this Empyre is 
                                 •
                              uenously deminished, and the notable fame thereof decayed betwixt the Popish prelates and the Frenchmen, a great part of the lands becomming saint Peters patrimonye. To make it a fit head of the beast to the vp holding of this whorishe churche (the authorytie thereof maintaining hyr lawes) Gregory the fift pope committed ye emperours chosing vnto vi. princes of Germany thrée of them being Archbishops. He appoynted also the King of Bohem for the seauenth, then beinge tributarye vnto hym and hys owne féede man as an odde person to waye vpon their sides if néede, place, and time should require it. Prouided alwayes that he shoulde take hys oth and receiue hys crowne Imperiall at Rome. So that now though it styll be the same in title that it was in Iohns dayes, yet is it so diuers from it through diminishmēt of power, and

so vnlyke in outwarde magnificence, as it neuer had ben the same.
                           7 The seuenth heade that is not yet come, is the papistical kingdom of our romish spiritualti, for therfore apéered nothing in Iohns time, nor yet more then v. hundred yeares after it. The Bishops of Rome (as they call them) from Péeter to Siluester, were very poore soules, simple creatures, & men not regarded but dispised of ye worlde. They were no new law makers for the more parte, but rather they gaue their whole dilligēce to sée those lawes obserued whō the holy ghost had made to their handes. Neither were they any masse saiers, soule singers, or procession goers, but as was S. Paul wt the other Apostles, simple preachers onely, and for their sincere preaching, thei suffered the death of their bodies. But after the donation of Constātine and other plentuous almses committed vnto their handes for the soccoure of the poore, they became al confessers, and toke them to their ease at home. Then was labour verye tedious vnto them preaching veri troublous & painful.

Then studied they all to please the powers peacablye to holde s
                                 •
                              yll theyr pleasaunt possessions, and by spiritual policies to increase thē more & more, the poore in a maner forgotten. Then came in that holy ceremony, and that with latine houres, seruing of saints, and praying for the deade, to prouoke men to offer to Corban. Thus crepte they vp in hypocrysie day by day, tyll such time as Iohn of Constantinople contended with Gregory of Rome for the supre
                                 •••
                              e. In the which contencion though Gregory laied for hymselfe saint. Péeters keies with many other sore arguments, and reasons, yet was he commaunded by Maurcius the Emperoure after the generall Synode to obey the saide Ihon, as the vniuersall head bishop of the whole world. Then were these holi fathers compelled to tarry a laisure, and vnder crafty coloures to wayte their pray. In processe of time when Phocas was Emperour.
                           Bonifacius the iii, a man of wil
                                 •
                               practise, perceiuing hym much to be geuen to vaine glory & couetuousnes, greatly

also to dissalow the actes of Mauricius his predecessour, thorugh flattery and mede obtained of him that ye churche of Rome should be holden from thēce forth for the head church of ye world, and he for the head bishop. Whan this was once gotten, than rose they vp so high that the Emperour became their foote stoole, and all other christian princes their waiting slaues, to ryde and run, make and marre striue and fight, slea and kill, at their commaundemēt and pleasure. Thus became the Romish Pope the seauenth Kinge, that was in Iohns time yet to come. If ye marke in the Cronicles (good Reader) thou shalt finde that Phocas the first Pope maker slew his master the Emperour Mauricius, signifiyng in mysterye the sayde Pope making to be an vtter destruction to the Empyre. The Popes name was also at that time Bonifacius, whiche is as muche to say as Bonafacies, a good face. Which betokeneth that this new raysed kingdome shoulde shew a fayre face euermore, or a shining pretēce of holynes, what mischiefe so euer it wroughte,

eyther agaynst God or man in abhominable supersticion.
                           8 And whan this seauenth Kinge commeth (sayth the text) he must continue a space, or abide a litle season. He muste haue a time by the permission of God, strongly to delude the vnbeléeuers, which wyll neither sée nor heare, reade nor yet thankfullye receiue hys worde of saluation, so graciously offered them. So corrupt are the fleshly affects of men, that much more prone they are to lies & superstitions, than to the verytie of the Lord, which is to be lamented.
                           Christe came first in the name of hys heauenlye father, but hym wyll they nor receiue. The Pope commeth in hys owne wycked name and to hym runne they by heapes. Whose continuaunce here hath bene but a time. For yet is it not a thousande yeares since the Papacy first beganne vnder Phocas, which is but as a day before God, and that day wyll he shorten by hys owne promise for his elects sake, whiche to remember is their greate comforte. And a great cause whye.

For soone after that, shal they be fully restored into the persight number of the children of God.
                           9 And the execrable beast (sayth the text) that of late daies was in auhoritie ouer al the world, yea sitting aboue God in the consiences of men, and nowe is become of no reputacion amonge men (God openinge his mischiefes) is euen the eyghte in number. And yet neuertheles is one of the vii. heades. For both is he the beastly body it selfe comprehending in him the vniuersall abhominations of all the earthlye kyngdomes. And in that poynt diuers from the seuen heades and so the .viii. in number.
                           10 And also he is one of the .vii. heades and the seauenth in numbre, in vsurpyng this proude worldly kyngdome, thus after a vayne temporall sorte. Ouer and besids all thys maye he also be called the eyght in the curssed remnant which after the peaceable silence of christen libertie (sathan loosoned) shall most cruelly persecute Christes congregation a freshe, as in the xx. chapter here following wil appeare.
                           
                              11 This beast with hys carriage, the Antichrist with hys church, or sathan wish his sinagog, shal not onely go into destructiō here by the mighty breth of Gods mouth, or the true preaching of hys Gospell, but also into dampnation euerlastinge in the ende of the worlde with the deuill and hys Angelles.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXTE.
                        1 And the ten hornes vvhich thou savvest are ten Kinges 2. VVhich haue not yet receiued the kingdome. 3. But shall receiue povver 4. As Kings. 5. At one houre vvith the Beast. 6. These haue one minde. 7. And shall, geue their povver and strength vnto the beast 8. These shall fight vvith the lambe. 9. And the Lambe shall ouercome them. 10. For he is Lorde of all Lordes. 11. And Kinge of all Kinges. 12. And they that are on his side. 13. Are called, the chosen, and faithfull.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 And the ten hornes (saith ye Angell vnto Iohn) which thou sawest here vp on the heades of this rose coloured beast, are in signification x. Kinges.

Some hath taken these ten Kings for al those Emperours of ye Latins since Charlemayn, which haue sworn them selues obediente to the Byshoppe of Rome. Some haue thought them to be those Princes which here in Europa haue aforetime bene subiecte to the Empyre of Rome. As the Kinges of England, Fraunce, Spaine, Portingale, Castele, Denmarke, Scotlande, Ungary, Boheme and Naples. But these consider not yt they be yet more in number, as Aragone, Nauerre, Cicile, Cypres, Sardine, Swethē, Pole, and such other, and are all included in the seauen heades as members of the afore rehersed Empires.
                           Neither marke they that they are aboue the heades, as hornes, and more in number then the heades, betokening a rygorus authorytie and fierce power, whiche they proudlye vsurpe ouer them euery where. Afore they were but suggestions, but héere are they earnest doers. For in euerye region hath the beastly Antichriste of Rome his Metropolitanes & Primats▪
                              
As in England are Caunterbury an
                                 •
                               York, in Fraunce, Thuronensis, and Remensis, in Spaine, Tholetanus & Terraconensis, in Portingale Hispalensis & Bracarensis, in Irelande Armachanus & Dubliniensis, in Denmarke Lundensis and Upsalensis, in Germany Coloniensis & Maguntinus, in Hungary Strigoniensis and Colocensis, in Italye Pisanus & Rauennas, in Sicyle Panormitanus & Messanences, with an infinite number of bishops, prelates, pristes, & religions, besides the fighting orders of ye Rhodes, ye Prussianes, ye Redemers of captiues, ye Aragondes, ye Georgianes caled de Alga, ye Monteseanes, ye Castilianes, ye Lusitaneanes, the Calatraneanes, & S. Iames warriours.
                           2 These had not yet at y• tyme receiued the diuillish kingdom of pestilnce vsurpacion ouer the soules of men.
                           For though in Iohns daies arose certaine Antichristes, as Hebion, Cerinthius, Diotrephes, Carpocras, and such like, yet were they nothinge to these.
                           3 But now in déede they haue receyued

the selfe same aucthoritie & power with the beast, that hée tooke afore of the Dragon, in maner of kings to rule in the heartes and consciences of men to his behoue.
                           4 For so much as theyr authoritie, is not of God lyke as is the authoritie of Kings, it is sayd here as kings, or as men counterfeyting them, in vsurping a gouernaunce not fréely giuen them of God, but of the Diuill.
                           5 All at one houre receyued they this aucthoritie with the beast. And that (I suppose) was in the great general coū
                              sayle of Laterane at Rome, gathered vnder the title to recouer Hierusalem agayne. Where as confession in ye eare was cruelly extorted of christian people vnder the payne of death & dampnation by the whole consent both of the princes, & bishops, at ye former suggestiō of Innocēt ye third, besides other wicked things. As to heare latine seruice, to go on processiō on sundayes, to pray vnto dead saints, to 
                                 •
                              orship Images, to buy masses for ye dead, to 
                                 •
                              ast the fridays, wt purgatory, pardōs, merits, & friers orders. In ye sayd coūsail became

the metropolitanes as kinges, and by ye authority threof apointed they their Stuards, Baliues, & other officers, as bishopes, curates, & parish pristes to haue euer & charge of soules, and in the sayd eare cōfession to receiue their accountes.
                           6 These counterfet kinges are al of on diuelish mind, practise, & purpose against God and his veritye.
                           7 And fully they are fixed to geue their whole power, their study, & their strength vnto ye behoofe of ye beast. Not acording to Gods mind wil they rule, but al after his wil & pleasur, agreing alwaies vnto him as mēbers to their head, to serue wickednesse after wickednes in Babilon. His Popish decres wil they seke, his diuelish decretales will they folow, his ceremonials wil they obserue, and nothing of ye sacred scriptures. What learnyng so euer they haue? what giftes of nature, fortune, or grace, al must be to ye maintenāce of his fātastical fopperis. To him ar they sworn to do him homage, to obey his laws, to kisse his féete, & for his glorious sake to persecute his gospell.
                           
                              8 And in so doing they shal fight with the lamb, which is Iesus Christ. They shal impunge his truth whē they think to doe him seruice. For that mischiefe they doe to one of his, they doe to hys owne person.
                           9 But be they neuer so dogged, yet 
                                 •
                              hal the Lambe ouercome them in his faithful members, yea, by pacient sufferaunce onely. The victory (saith S. Iohn) which ouercōmeth the worlde, is a sure christian fayth. Upon theyr 
                                 •
                              ide fighteth he which is most myghtie and strong, yea, the Lord that is valyaunt in battail. And he shall first ouercome them in this lyfe with the mightie breath of his mouth, scattering thē away as dust from the earth. And after this shall hys tirrible iudgement for euer condempne them.
                           10 For he is by the aucthoritie giuen him of his father, ye Lord of all Lords, and by his own eternall Godhead the King of all Kings, hauyng all power in heauen and in earth. He is cōstitute Iudge of the quicke and the dead, hauing alone the euerlastyng Em
                                 •
                              yre with his father and the holye Ghost,

and of his kyngdome shall neuer bée an ende.
                           11 By his permission doeth all kinges reigne, he hath their hartes in his hand and iudgeth their thoughts. Both may he giue them his spirite, and also take it from them, and of his enimyes hée shall make his footestoole. He is ye same 
                                 ••
                              one after Daniell that without any handes was cutte out of the mounte, which breaketh the Iron, the copper, the earth, the siluer, and the Golde in péeces. By whom are ment ye vniuersall kingdomes of this world.
                           12 Of this his victory are all they parteners with him, which are vpon hys syde by fayth. Most specially those true seruaunts of his, which after they are called by grace and chosen by fayth, perseuer still constant, feruent, faythfull, and sure in hys veritie to ye latter ende of theyr liues.
                           13 Not only the Lambe therfore shal 
                                 •
                              uercome the beast, but they also after the doctrine of Paule that are called and chosen in him not falling from his truth for any temptation or grief, but standing fast by it vnto the very death.

For those that the Lorde hath prefixed afore he hath called, iustified, and allowed. These auanceth not them selues with the proude, but méekly they submit theyr crownes, referring all victory to ye Lambe, as men yt could haue done nothing in y• behalf without him.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And he said vnto me. 2. The vvaters vvhich thou savvest, vvhere the vvhore sitteth, 3. are people and folke, and nations, and tongues. 4. And the ten hornes, vvhich thou savvest vpon the beast, 5. are they vvhich shall hate the vvhore, 6. and shall make hir desolate, & naked, 7. and shall eate hyr flesh, 8. and burn hyr vvith fyre. 9. For God hath put in their harts, to fulfill his vvill, 10. and to doe vvith one cō
                           sent, 11. for to giue hir kingdome vnto the beast, 12. vntil the words of God be fulfilled. 13. And the vvomā vvhich thou savvest, is the great citie, 14. vvhich reigneth ouer the king
                              •
                            of the earth.
                        
                           The Paraphrase.
                           1 And after thys long communicatiō (sayth Sainct Iohn) the afore sayd Angell sayde thus vnto me, to make vp his tale with.
                           2 The wauering waters which thou sawest héere now of late in misterye, where as the Babilonish whore sitteth vpon ye rose coloured beast, are in signification

all maner of peoples of the carnall nations, and the supersticious folke of many sundry tongues.
                           3 Not onely in one place of ye worlde ruleth this wanton religion of Antychrist, but in euery lande, in euery dominion, in euery company, among all occupacions & languages. The foolysh multitude euery where, being blynded by their subtile sorceryes, and neyther hauing fayth nor yet the feare of God before theyr eyes, as a raging flood (the banckes broken downe) runneth headlings into all blasphemy and diuillishnesse.
                           4 Moreouer the a fore named, ten hornes (sayeth the Angell) which thou by the wil of God beholdest here in spirite, vpon ye sayd beast of distructiō, are those very persōs which also shal hate the whore. Hir abhominations once knowne by the Gospel preaching, they shall abhorre hir lawes, dispise hyr authoritie, & cōtempne hir customs. They shal defeat hir of those lands & possessions which now shée vniustly holdeth.
                           5 They yt afore were hir friends shal than be hir mortall enymies, denying

hir both tribute, obedience, & seruice, so leauing hir without all comfort. Not only are these ye temporal gouernours, as the King of England, the Kyng of Denmarke, ye Duke of Saxon, ye Lādgraue of Hesse, and other Princes of Germany, with such other as wil here after followe the same principles, but also the Metropolitanes and bishops, the Doctors and Prelates. As are already Thomas Cranmere the Archebishop of Caunterbury, Hermanus de Weda the Archbishop of Coleyn, Godrick the Bishop of Hely, Barlow the bishop of Sainct Dauids, Byrde the Bishop of Chester. Thurleby bishop of Westminster, Hugh Latimer & Nicolas Shaxton of late yeares Bishop of Worcester and Salisbury, with such other lyke as will here after followe theyr trade.
                           Though they were afore the horns of the beast for defence of the whore, yet are they now fallen from him, & more shall euery day to make hir desolate of honour, and naked of rentes and possessyons.
                           6 So shal they chase that Babilonish

harlot Rome with their prechers, yt neyther shal they leaue hir couler nor yet bewty. Consider what Iohn Reuclin, Martin Luther, Erasmus, Ocolampadious, Zwinglius, Pomeran, Bucer, Capito, Melanthon, Grineus, Caluinous, Brencius, Frances Lamberte, Bullinger and such other hath don against hir alredy. Likewise here in Einglād, Bilnee, Tindale, Frith, Barnes, Cromwel, Couerdale, Turner, Gorge Ioy, Rose, Ridley, Ward, Becon, and other els leauing her neither Reliques nor Robes, sectes nor Shrynes, Abbeyes nor Priores, many more comming after them of the same sort. These shal make her so desolat yt no man shall in proses of tyme regard hir. They shall leue hir so naked, yt all the worlde shall abhorre hyr that shal loke vpon hir. Yea, in the conclusion they shal eat hyr fleshe.
                           7 Besides ye taking away of hir carnall prophites and plesuers, they shal confound hir fleshly vnderstanding of the scriptuers, & utterly consume the superfluous obseruacions of hir whorishe cerimonies.
                           
                              8 Finally with fyre shal they burne hir, in bringing vnto nought al hir abhomynable rules, customes, and kindes of idolatry. All these once plucked away by the euident worde of God, no lenger shall this harlot appere.
                           For no lenger continueth the whore, then the whoredom is in price. Take away the rites and cerimonies, the Iewels and ornaments, the Images and lightes, the Lordeshippes and fatherhodes, the aulters and masses, with the Bishops and Priestes, and what is their holye whorishe church any more? Not onely is this flesh eating and bur̄ing declared now a daies in outwarde experimentes, as in the rebellious Monkes and Priestes of Englande, and in thē that arose there in the North, specially in fryer Forest and Margarete Cheny, which were for their church cōsumed, like as were Baales chaplayns at the broke of Cison by Helyas, but also mistically in that is spoken of hir afore.
                           9 For God hath (saith the Angel) al blindenesse secluded, put it into the hartes of those and such other godlye

mē by ye infusiō of his spirit, to fulfil his decréed wil & pleasure in this behalf, as vtterly to distroy ye popish religiō or filthy abhominations of Antichrist.
                           10 He hath giuē it thē moreouer to doe these thīgs to his glory, throgh ye agréement of faith yt they haue in ye vnitie of his godly truth, to ye abolishment of all sects, false prophets, & cōiurers of egipt.
                           11 Finally by his grace he hath moued them through knowledge of his word to rēder vp hir blasphemous kingdom (whom sometime of ignorance they vsurped) vnto ye malignaunt beast again, as ye horns of his pestilent heads. After this sorte did good Latimer & Shaxton giue ouer their bishoppricks, & so haue diuers other godly men their promocions & liuings, as many more yet here after will doe.
                           12 For as they haue begonne so shall they cōtinue in diminishyng the abhominations of this whorish church, till the words and promises of God by his Apostles and Prophets, which can neuer fayle, be wholly fulfilled in effecte, and till his last iudgemēt doe finish all. But thus doe not all they which haue

done of the yoke of the Popes obedyence▪ or blotted out his name. For the greater number of them retaineth still the blasphemous obseruacions & cerimonies of hys Romish relygyon, some making new lawes of deth for ye establishmēt of ye same, as is in England ye acte of the .vj. Articles wt diuers other more. And for this remayneth here stil ye beast as receiuing the rendred kingdome of ye whore. In whom is also comprehended the wicked remnant that shal worke ye last mischiefe, whom the Lorde shall ende with his saide iudgement. This beast is not without his liuely Image still working ye same féetes yt him selfe wrought afore, though his head be greuouslye wounded in diuers quarters of the world. Neyther is he without craftye phisitions, to minister life to the same. Who euer forswore the Pope more ernestly, than did Stokislye and Samson, Gardyner and Tunstall, Wylson and fryer Wattes, with such other holy prelats, yet labour they toth and nayle to haue Babilō stil Babilō, Sodome Sodom, and Egipt Egipt.

But maruail not of ye ordinance of the Lord, which all at on time prouyded Moyses to guide his people & yet hardened Pharao against thē which sent his sonne Iesus Christ to saue them, and yet suffered ye pristes to murther him, considering he is ye potter which maketh both ye vessels of honouer and dishonour.
                           31 Brifly to conclud ye whole of thys matter (saith ye angel) ye gorious aparreled woman, or glittering church of Antichrist, which thou sawest here of late in mistery, is also in recēblance ye great citty Babilō, the mother of al ye spiritual abhominacions & Idolatries don vpon ye earth. For like as frō Sion hath ye laue cōmen forth & the word of god from Hieruselē, so hath issw
                                 •
                              d forth frō this Babilonish Rome such a false religiō into Emperours, princes, & peoples, as with filthy superstitions hath poysoned all the world.
                           14 For a kingdō she hath ouer ye kings or noble gouernours of ye earth, a false power, a vsurped authority & a seat of very pestelence. Alas for pitty that so worthy potentates shoulde bée in subiection

to so stinking an whore, to so vyle an harlot, being so ye seruaunts of sinne and captiue slaues to all wickednesse, from the whiche the Lorde once deliuer them. Amen.
                        
                     
                  
                  Thus endeth ye second part.
               
            
            
               
                  The Contentes of the seconde parte.
                  
                     THe xj. Chap. beginneth wherin Iohn measureth the Temple, the Aulter, and them that worship therein. The .ij. witnesses doe their appointed offices, the beast making warre against them and sleying them. A great Earthquake followeth, and the second woe is past.
                     The xij. Chapter beginneth wherin the seuenth Angell bloweth his trompet. In heauē appeareth a woman all cloathed with ye sun, whom the Dragon diuersly vexeth. Mychaell fighteth with the Dragon and ouercommeth him. The woman flyeth into the wildernesse and there is preserued.
                     The xiij. Chapter beginneth wherin a beast ryseth out of the sea with seuen heades and ten hornes, receyuing

authority of the Dragon. One of his heades is wounded and healed agayne. An other beast commeth out of the earth with .ii. hornes, which deceiueth the earthly dwellers, and raiseth vp an Image like vnto ye beast. In the ende is counted the number of ye beast. The .xiiij. Chapter beginneth wherin the Lambe standeth vpō ye mount Sion, and the vndefiled congregacion wt him. An Angell sheweth ye euerlasting Gospel, an other declareth ye fal of the great whore. An other is commaūded with his sikle to cut down ye grapes of the vineyard.
                     The .xv. Chap. beginneth, wherein Iohn séeth ye seuen Angels, hauing the seuen last plages of the wrath of God. On the glassy sea standeth men hauing the harpes of God, & they sing the song of Moyses, and the songe of ye lambe. The tabernacle of testymony is séene in heauen.
                     The .xvi. Chapter beginneth, where in the seuen Angels power out theyr vials of gods wrath. The first vpon ye earth. The secōd vpō ye sea. The third vpon ye riuers. The fourth vpon ye sūn.

The fift vpon the seat of ye beast. The vj. vpon ye great floud Euphrates. And the seuenth into the ayre.
                     The xvij. Chapter beginneth, wherin an Angell sheweth vnto Iohn the iudgement of the great whore, which sitteth vpon the beast. Hée discrybeth both hir and the beast at large. Finally he sheweth the meaning both of hys heades and hornes, with other great mysteries more.
                  
                  The poore persecuted church of christ, or immaculate spouse of the Lambe.
                  
                  
                     
                        Apoca. 12.
                     The Dragō was wroth with ye woman which fled into the wildernesse,

and went and made warre with the remnaunt of hir séede, which kept the commaundement of god and haue the testimone of Iesus Christ.
                  
                  The proude painted Church of the Pope, or sinfull Sinagoge of Sathan.
                  
                  
                     Apoca. 17.
                     I sawe woman sitte vpon a Rose coloured beast, full of names of blasphemye, decked with golde, precious stone, and pearles, with whom the Kinges of the earth committed whordome, and the inhabiters of the earth are dronken with the wyne of hir fornication.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  ¶THE THIRDE parte of the Image of both churches, after the most wonderfull and heauenly reuelation of saint Iehn the Euangelist. &c.
                  Compiled by Iohn Bale.
                  
                  
                     Apoca 1.
                     ¶I Ihon your brother, and companion in tribulation, and in the kingdome of pacience which is in Christe Iesu, was in the Ile of Pathmos for the worde of God.
                  
               
               
                  
                  A small Preface vnto the Christen Reader.
                  FOr so muche as this Image of both churchs, or exposition vpon S. Iohns Apocalipsis, seemed vnto me (as it came vnto the printing) to be farre to much for one volume. I thought to deuide it by equall porcions into three smal bookes, as I haue now done in deede. Of whom the firste contayneth x. Chapter, the second vii. & the third v. onely, which maketh out the whole number of the xxii. Some peraduenture wil maruel, that the smaller nūber of ye chapters should comprehend so much of that commē
                     tarie as the greater number. But if they marke in the text, the aboundinge of misteries euermore as the matter thereof aboundeth, they will soone leaue their marueiling. The nature of this reuelation is, the further it goeth, the more wonders it sheweth & openeth vnto hym that after praier shal in faith reade it and deserne it. Neuer therin are the principles well perceiued, till the conclusion thervpon folowinge doth playnely with the other scriptures conferred, declare them.
                  In these v. last chapters are the two churches (wherevpon resteth the whole argumēt of this booke) fully by all dew circumstaunces described, thē turned ouer into a moste fearefull and terrible destruction, vnder title of the olde whorish Babilon, the other obtayning a moste glorious rayse, vnder the name of the holy new Hierusalem.
                  In the xvij
                        •
                      Chapter is that execrable

churche of antichrist with hyr filthye wares and occupings painted out hereof the holye Ghost, & with hir most horrible fal in ye end, hir worldly fauours shewing gret heanies, and the seruants of God an excedyng reyse. In the .xix. Chapter is that reyoice of elect number ouer the tirryble iudgments of that whore much more highly discribed, the deth of Christes holy witnesses most plentyously reuenged, and how the Angel in no case will of Iohn be worshiped.
                  In the .xx. Chapter is ye dragon tied vp for a thousand years, the chosen sort reigning wt Christ. Gog and Magog gather thē to battayle, and are ouercōmen. The dead after that ariseth and receiueth iudgement.
                  In the xxi. Chapter is the church of the chosen or the new Hierusalem prepared to to hir spouse. That citie commeth downe from heauen, and is of the holy ghoste here, after most wonderfull circumstaunces in hir right proportion described.
                  In the xxii. Chapter, the riuer of lyuinge waters proceedeth from the throne of God.
                  Iohn sealeth vp the sayinges of this prophecy. Christ concludeth what his kingdome is, and who shall be therevnto receyued, admonishyng that vnto his worde nothing be added of men in payne of dampnation.
                  Some hatefull and vngodly blasphemers there are and euer hath bene, whiche wyll in no wise this Booke to be of equall authorytie with the other scriptures of christes

testament. But damnably wretched 
                        〈◊〉
                      are they, in the vaine imaginations of their sinful h
                        •
                     rts. The most high Theologye and secret wisdome of God the eternall father, is the blessed doctrine there of, geuen vnto hys onely sonne in our humanytie and after that of him so cōmited vnto Iohn by ye holy ghost to be distributed & taught by hym to ye vniuersal christen cōgregation, which is a most sufficient argument of the authoritie therof, what so euer mad Momus shall quarrell to the contrary. Iames Faber Stapulensis in his preface prefixed to the woorkes of Dionise the Ariopagyt, doubted neuer a deale to prefer this heauenly prophesie to all ye other writings of the other Apostles, confessing that in worthines, it farre passed them all ye due circumstances there of considered. The more nigher (saith he) the light be to the sun, the more strength it hath, and the more clernesse it ministreth vnto men. But Momus hath not yet done away the madde mistes of his monkery, nor yet the darke dregges of his sophistry, which both are great blemyshing vneo his eye sight. The wisdom of Plato, Homerus, & Cicero, auaileth nothing in this. Aristotle & Uirgil if thei were aliue, could herein do little or nothing. In estimably more maketh the poore fishers, learning to the vnderstanding of these misteryes, thē the prowd painted eloquence or far set resōs of ye philosophers. The Lord geue vs grace from the barne of his most plentuous scriptures to fetche the fat feedyng of our feble &

hungry soules, that we may by thē obtayne his strength into the lyfe euerlasting.
               
            
            
               
                  The third part of the Image of both chruches, after the most wonderfull & heauenly reuelacion of saint Iohn the Euangeliste.
                  Compiled by Ihhn Bale.
                  
                     The xviij. Chapter.
                     VNder the title of Babilon is here in this chapter folowing described the feareful iudgment of ye malignant church, with the ruinous fal of Antichrist and his kingdom, prefigured afore in Esay and Hiremye.
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And after that I savve an other angell. 2 Com dovvne frō heauen. 3. hauing great povver. 4. And the earth vvas lightned vvith his brightnes. 5, And he cried mightely vvith a strong voyce, saying. 6. She is falen she is fallen. 7 Euen greate Babilon. 8. And is become the habitacion of Deuils, 9. And the holde of al foule spirites. 10. And a cage of all vnclene and hatefull birdes. 11. For all nacions haue dronk of the vvine. 12. of the vvrath of hyr vvhordom. 13. And the kinges of the earthe haue commited fornicaciō vvith hyr. 14. And hyr marchauntes are vvaxen ryche. 15. of the abundance of hir pleasurs.
                        
                           
                           The Commentarie.
                           1 After these manifolde visions (sayeth S. Iohn) was I yet ware of an other aungel or heauenly messenger▪ of the Lord, cōmyng downe from heauen, whnch is the habitacle of God. For from aboue al goodenesse cōmeth. This Aungell betokeneth the faythfull preachers of our age, and is all one wiih the Angel that had the seale of the liuing God in the vii. Chapter, wyth him that was clothed with a cloude in the x Chapter, and with him thai procllamed the fal of Babylon in the .xiiii. chapter.
                           2 In that he is sayd here to come downe from heauen, is signified that they are sente 
                                 〈◊〉
                               God hauing great power, with constaunt feruentnesse of spyrit, strongelye to declare hys wil, to the vtter destruction of the whore For like as the father hath lyf in hym selfe, so hath his sonne Iesus, and 
                                 •
                              o hath in hym his Godlye ministers.
                           3 His power is an euerlasting power, retayninge both lyfe and death.
                           4 With the brightnes, not of this angell which was but a messēger, but of

the power that was geuen vnto him, was the vniuersal earth abundantlye lightned. Full is all ye world of ye glory of God, where as his word 
                                 〈…〉
                               his verity is once spred by y• true Godly prechers.
                           5 In this strong power cr
                                 •
                              ed he might
                                 •
                              ly & in this clere light was his earnest voice herd, vttering this sentence to the world.
                           6 She is falen clean down that was so proud, she is turned ouer that was so glorious an whore, yea, euen the great Babilō hyr self, or blasphemous church of the Hipocrites.
                           7 By the iudgement of God is 
                                 •
                              he brought to vtter confusion. Firste ha
                                 •
                               she a 
                                 •
                              al by the death of Christ, when the prince of this world was throwē forth Mark the distruction of Hierusalem, wher the church of ye Iews dyd cease, the material temple of Salamō, and clearelye ouerthrowen, not one stone vpon an other, remayning. Now shall▪she haue an other much worse by the playne 
                                 ••
                              nifestation of hys word, to the comfort of all his elects. And both are of one certenty though

the one he pa
                                 •
                              te and the other yet to come.
                           Confer with this place ye ouerthrowe of the monasteries in England, Denmarke, the free cities of Germany, & certaine other regions, & thinke that more sorowes are yet comming.
                           8 These are ye causes of hyr fall and occasions of hyr ruyne before the Lord.
                           She is become the filthy habitacion of deuils much more than before hir first fa
                                 •
                              l, for now they enter in by heaps, yea, seuen for 
                                 •
                              n afore.
                           9 Now is she the stinking hold of all vnclene spirites. For ther haue al the kinds of Idolatry their earnest maintenance, by hir spiritual occupiers the bishops, priestes and religious. There regneth Simony, Sacrilege, Usury, fraud, ambition, mallice, glotony, auaryce, pryde, filthynes, & all mischiefes beysde.
                           10 Now is she the corrupt cage of all vnclene fowles, and 
                                 •
                              atefull byrdes. For in hyr dwelleth the aduouterous Cardinals, the buggery bishops, the

prostibulous prelates and pristes, the Gomorreane monks, chanons, friers, and nonnes, an innumerable smarme of Sodomits. These dothe Esay in similitude compare vnto wild beastes, Dragons, Estriches, dansing Apes, Howlets, Meremaides, and other odible monsters. For there is mockinge and mowynge, criyng, and yellynge crossynge, and gapynge, congerynge and cloynynge, whyth manye other feates.
                           Here coulde I showe wonderfullye muche by the hystoryes of the stewes of bothe kynds at Rome, of the profits receyued thereof, that occupiyng of Winchesters rentes in England, of saynt Lewes mantil in the graye fryers of Paris, of the hollowe piller of our Lordes lengthe in Lyons, of the good Godlye father that cons
                                 •
                              uprated two hundred Nunnes in hys tyme, of the burying of infants in theyr 
                                 •
                              akes, and of manye other straunge mysteries els, were it not for losinge of the time and hinderinge mens consiences.
                           
                              11 She is fallen, she is fallen (sayt
                                 •
                               the Angell) and therfore be glad of 
                                 〈◊〉
                              . For all nacions of the worlde, a small simple number excepte (whome God hath preserued of his goodnesse) hath dronken of the wine of hir whoredome. For not geuinge thankes vnto God when causes hath bene offered, they haue fallen into moste déepe errour. They haue sought hir sorceries with deuociō, beléeued hyr doctrines, and so folowed them in effect.
                           12 And therefore they shall taste of the wrath of God, or penalties due to that aduoutry of the spirite or vice of Idolatri ministred by hir. I shal haue no pittie (sayth the Lord) vppon hyr children, for they are the children of fornication.
                           13 The mighty kinges and Potentates of the earth, not hauinge afor
                                 •
                               their eyes the loue and feare of god, haue committed with this whore moste vile filthynesse, abusinge them selues by many straunge or vncommaunded worshippings, and bynding themselues by othe to obserue hyr lawes and customs. At the examples,

doctrines, counsels, and perswasions of hyr holy whoremongers haue they broken the couenaunts of peace, battailed, oppressed, spoyled, rauished, tyrannously murthered innocents, yea, for vaine foolish causes, & more vaine titles, neither godlynesse nor honestie regarded, as though there were neither heauen nor hel, God nor accoūts to be made.
                           14 And hir mitred marchantes, hyr shorne souldiers, hir masse mongers, hyr soule sellers, and hir mart brokers waxed very riche through the sale of hir oyles, creme, salt, water, bread, orders, hallowings, houselinges, ashes, palme, waxe, frankensence, beades, crosses, candlesticks, copes, belles, organes, Images, reliques, and other pedlary wares.
                           15 And are become very wealthy in the habundaunce of hyr pleasuers. They haue gotten in vnto them pallaces and princely houses, fat pastors and parkes, medowes and warrens, riuers and pondes, villages & towns, cyties and whole prouinces, with the diuill and all els, besides other mens

wiues, daughters, mayde seruantes, and children whom they haue abhominably corrupted. What profites they haue drawen vnto them also by the sale of great bishopricks, prelacies promocions, benefices, tot quoties, pardons, pilgrymages, confessions, and purgatory, besides the yearely rents, of cathedrall churches, Abbayes, Colleges, Couents, for sutes and suche other, it were vnreasonable to tell. No pleasures are in the fardest part of the world, but they will haue plenty of them Yet can they for the time preach vnto other men contempte of the worlde, and commende both pouerty and fasting.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT
                        1 And I hard an other voiee from heauen, say. 2. Come avvay from hyr (my people). 3. That ye be not pertakers in hir sinnes. 4. Least ye receiue of hir plagues. 5. For hir sins are gone vp to heauen. 6. And the Lord hath remembred hir vvickednesse. 7. Revvard hir euen as she revvavded you, 8. & geue hir double according to hir vvorks. 9. And povvre in double to hir in the same cuppe, vvhirhe

she fylled vnto you. 10. And as much as she gloryfied her selfe▪ and lyued vvantonly. 
                              〈◊〉
                            so much poure ye in for hyr of punishment and sorrovve.
                        
                           The Commentary▪
                           
                           1 Besides all this (sayth saynt Iohn) yet heard I an other voyce frome aboue, betokening an other mouing of the spirit wherby the Godlie ministers are taught of the Lord. And this was therof y• swéete warning.
                           2 Come away my people from that wicked Babilon with Esd
                                 •
                              as, and from that stinkinge S
                                 •
                              dome with Loth. Haue no more to doe with that whorish churche. Forsake hir false religion and defiled Sacramentes. Refuse hir wanton ceremonies, detest hir supersticion, leaue hir beggerly baggage.
                           Meddle no more with those whoremongers, those Nicolaitanes, those Baalamits. Abhore their abhominable studies, manners and lyfe, repenting in heart all foolishnesse paste. Resorte vnto me (sayeth the Lorde) all you that labour and are laden, and

I shal ease you of your heauy burthēs.
                           3 Submit your selues no longer to y• yoke of the infidels, but set your selue
                                 •
                               at large, least ye be pertakers of hyr abhominable sins, & to receyue of hyr plages, which is ye great vengeaunce of god. Let it suffise you that hath ben don alredy at the plesur of the Heathē in the vnlawfull seruice of Idols. And learne frō henceforth to be more Godly wise, lest ye be damned with ye wicked. I remēber that Iohn Hildeshē in his booke in turpia pingentem, sheweth that Tailarand
                                 •
                              s Petragoric
                                 ••
                              s a french cardinal, when question was moued at his table of Apostates, commended the order of cardinals in that there was none amonge them. Unto whō Peter Thomas a Carmelyt▪ frier (which was notwithstanding within a while after ye patriark of Constantinople) made this true answer, what they be (saith he) yt goth from other orders I cannot tel, but sure I am that they which go frōyour order are saints. As by exāple, S Hierome, Petrus Dami
                              
                                 ••
                              us, Petrus de Moroue, & such other.
                           4 Besides the wholsome admonishmentes

of the scripture hath many godly m
                                 •
                              n geuen warninges of these matters, both in the primatiue church and in euery age since. Many notab
                                 ••
                               Doctours and fathers, since ye popes 
                                 〈◊〉
                               rayte, hath in their famous writinges called vpon the churches reformation. As Bertramus, Herebaldus, Ioannes Scotus Menachus, Berengarius Thuronensis, Brun
                                 •
                              , Adegauensis▪ Petrus Damianus Wateramus, Medburgensis, Bernardus, Cla
                                 •
                              euallensis, Robertus Tuiciēsis, Ioachim Abbas, Cirillus Grecus, Ioannes Salisburtensis, Gilbertus 
                                 〈◊〉
                              , Angelus Hierosolimitanus, Guilbe
                                 ••
                              nus de sancto amore, 
                                 〈◊〉
                               
                              
                                 •
                              onatus, Nicolaus Gallus, Hubertinus de Casan, Petrus Ioannis, Mar
                                 •
                              ilius Pataumus, Ioannes▪ Parys, Arnoldus de villa noua, Michael Cesenus, Guil
                                 •
                              e
                                 •
                              mus 
                                 〈◊〉
                              , nicolaus d
                                 •
                               Luca, Marcus de Florencia, Ioannes Wiccleus, Ioannes 
                                 〈◊〉
                              ; Michael de Bononia, Ioannes Hildeshē, Dātes Aligerius, Franciscus Petrarcha, Nicolaus Clemengis, Petrus de

Aliaco, Ioannes Gerson, Laurencius Ualla, Ludouicus Arelatensis, Iohannes Segobius, Thomas Redonesis Gallus, Matheus Parmarius, Dauid Bois, Dionisius, Carthustanus, Iohannes Milnerton, Iohannes▪ Go
                                 •
                              
                              chous, Iohannes▪ de We
                                 •
                              alya Wo
                                 •
                              
                              maciensis, Iohānes G
                                 •
                              yler, Iohānes Crutzer, Wessalus Groningensis▪ Eneas Syluius, Rodericus, Samorensis, Iulianus Brixiensis▪ and Hieronimus Sauonarola, besydes those that hath written in our dayes, as Iohn Reuclin, Baptista Mantuanus▪ Baptista Panecius, Iohannes Crestonus, Erasmus, Luther, and such other▪ of whom they haue condempned ye more parte for heretyques. To recyte theyr testimonyes and wrytings, it would r
                                 •
                              quyre much tyme, and therefore I passe it ouer here▪
                           
                           Onely haue I rehearsed their names (as I could doe yet many more) to put 
                                 •
                              ée in remembraunce yt God▪ hath alwayes had some in the world, which hath not in all poynts▪ cōsented to their blasphemies, though they haue not had

the lyght of this trueth so open as wée haue it now.
                           Many godly Emperours and Coūseil
                                 •
                               general haue attemted this reformacion in the church, but euermore▪ haue they foūd vngodly princes against thē, to houlde the Antichristes stil in their wickednes. Yet doubt I not but Pharao with his hoast shall perishe in the sea, and the proud Iewishe priestes in the cittie, for theyr manyfolde blasphemyes, at the tyme now appointed of the Lord.
                           5 For ye sinnes of this whore, or abhominacions without number of ye false religion, hyr stinkeing Idolatry and slaughter of Innocēts are gone vp vnto heauen against hyr, requiring the great vengeāce of God. The filthines of thē hath moued him to wrath, and kinled his displesure towards hir, putting hym in rememberaunce of his eternal decrée cōcerning hir destructyon. The greatnes of hir mischiefs hath touched heauen, and hath axed wt Sodome and Gomor the fearfull plages threatned hyr.
                           
                              6 And the merciful Lorde beholding the affliction of his people, & pittying their miserable thraldō in ye spiritual Egipt, hath cōsidered hir vngodly behauiour, wayed hir wilfull wretchednesse, and measured hir vnmerciful murther, cōmaunding his appointed ministers to execute vpō hir his iudgmentes without mercy.
                           7 Rewarde hir nowe (saith he) in euery cōdiciō as she hath rewarded you afore▪ Measure agayne vnto hir, lyke as she hath measured to you, nowe yt ye haue the iudgement seates. Crye out vpon hir as she hath cried out vpon you▪ Snare hir as she hath snared you. Destroy hir as she hath destroyed you. As she hath taken vengeaunce of you, so take you vengeaunce again
                                 •
                               of hir. Lyke as she hath afflicted you, Iudge
                                 •
                               you, and condemned you by ye lawes of mē, so scurge you hir againe, iudge hir an harlot, and condemne hir to hell by the mightie worde of God.
                           8 Sée that you giue hir two folde in punishment according to hir wicked deseruings. Where as she hath taken from you no more but the life of the

bodie, take you away from hir againe the lyfe both of bodie and soule.
                           9 Into ye same bitter cuppe of sorow
                                 •
                               that she hath filled vnto you in hir mallice, powre you in double again to hir. Where as she hath geuen you a temporal death, giue hir the death euerlasting, doubling vnto hir both ye griefes and continuance of them.
                           10 Yea, consider how greatly she hath glorified hir selfe▪ against God in blasphemous errours, in pride, in pleasures, and in wanton liuing.
                           11 And so muche let hir tast of moste terrible punishmentes, sorowfull plages, waylinges, & gnashinges of téeth. An holy priesthod hath she pretended▪ a regal dignitie hath she vsurped, and both those powers moste shamefully hath she so abused, therefore let hir haue the penalties dew vnto such presumption. Take from hir, hir plesaūt Euphrates with the spoyles and profites, wherein she hath inordinatlye delighted, and throwe hir into most
                                 •
                               depe wretchednesse here, besides that shal follow in an other worlde.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXTE.
                        1 For she sayth in hir hart, 2. I sitte, beyng

a queene, 3. & am no widovv▪ 4. and shal see no sorovv, 5. Therefor shal hir plages co
                              •
                            at on day, 6. death, and sorovv, and honger, 7. And she shal be brent with fyre, 8. For stron
                              •
                            is the Lord God, 9. vvhich shall iudge hyr.
                        
                           The commentary
                           1 For hyghlye shée standeth in hyr owne conseit as yet, boasting hyr selfe to be the great goodnesse of the earth.
                           2 I sit here in wealth, and pleasure (saith she) being a glorious quéene, yea the holy church hir self, hauing authoryty in heauen, in earth and in hel, wt power to lose and bynd, saue & damne. With me is it not as with them that are not of this world or haue no dwelling place here, for all is at my wyll and pleasure.
                           3 I am no desolate widow. The powers of this world standeth by me. The mighty princes and potentates defendeth me with the death of innocente peple. Neuer was Nero, Domicianus Traianus nor Marencius, with other cruel tirrauntes, more sure vpon my side in defence of supersticions, than they are yet still to this houre.
                           4 Therefore I can take no seathe, nor yet féele of any sorrowe, I shalbe

lady for euer. Neuer shall my seate be remoued. Neuer shall I fall, nor any m
                                 •
                              shappe light vpon me. Such are ye bold bragges of the papistes, that Peters lytle shippe may well be moued with ye tempest of heretiques, but neuer shall it be ouerthrowen, thynking therby ye whorish church shal euermore continue, and neuer come to naught.
                           5 They cōsider not how strōg ye Lamb is, against whō they dayly fight. And therfore shall ye terrible plages (which God hath appointed hir to suffer) heauily light vpon hir, and all in one day.
                           6 At once shall he powre vpon that wicked congregation, death, sorowe & hunger, lyke as he did fyre and brimstone vpon the sinfull cyties. Perpetually shall they be depriued of ye lyfe which is in Christ Iesu. Continuall wéeping and téeth gnashing shall they haue, their worme neuer dying. Still shal they inwardly famish, and neuer with felicitie be satisfied.
                           7 With vnquencheable fire shall this whore be brent with hyr whole generation of hypocrites, prepared for the diuil and his Angels.
                           
                              8 Effectual and trwe is the sentence, for mightye is the Lorde that shall iudge hir, & condemne hir by his word.
                           9 Iust is he in his promise, true in his sayings, gloryous in his works, holye, terrible, and fearefull in his iudgements against the wicked. None shall be founde able at that day to restrayne the least part of his purposed vengeance, neyther Mary throwyng in hir beades into saint Michaels balaunce, Iohn Baptist with his Lamb, Peter with his key, nor yet Paule with his long sword.
                           Though Moyses and Samuell, the chosen Prophetes of the Lorde, yea, with Noe, Daniell, and pacient Iob, should stand before hym at that day, yet should they not be ha
                                 •
                              d.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
THE TEXT.
                        1 And the kings of the earth shall be vvepe hyr, 2. and vvayle ouer hyr, 3. vvhich haue cō
                           mitted fornication, 4. and lyued vvantonlye vvith hir, 5. vvhan they shall see the smoke of hir burning, 6. and shall stand a farre of, 7. for feare of hir punishment saying. 8. Alas alas, that great citie, 9. Babilon. 10. that mightie citie. 11. For at one houre commeth thy iudgement.
                        
                           The Commentary.
                           1 Moreouer ye carnally mynded kings of the earth (sayth the aforesayde Angell) which hath for hyr pleasure abused their aucthoritie and power, shall take hyr, sodayne distruction in thys lyfe very heauily.
                           2 Yea, they shall moste sorrowfully bewayle them selues ouer hir, as men very ill contented with that ordinance of God.
                           They shall be sorie in their heartes that his worde is become so stronge agaynst hyr, that they can resist it with swerd, fyre, & halters no longer. They shal be pensyue & heauy to sée all goe to

wracke, they being no lenger able by the slaughter of innocents to vpholde hyr glittering estate.
                           3 Specially shal they be sore discontē
                              ted wt ye matter, which haue with his commited the whordom of the spyrite by many externe worshipings of drye waffer cakes, oyles roods, relyques, ladyes, Images, sculles, bones, chippes, olde ragges, showes, bootes, spurres, hattes, breches, whodes, nightcapes, and such like.
                           4 And they that haue liued wantōly with hir in folowing hir idle obseruacions in mattēses, houres, and masses, in sensinges, halowings, and font halowing, in going processions with canapye, crosse, and pyx, with banneres, stremers, and torchelight, with such other gaudes to folish for children, no godly admonishment taken of ye scripturs. For vnder ye kinges here are also to be vnderstāded those peoples, whō they haue wickedly gouerned, & constrained by theyr lawes to such abhominable vsages.
                           5 Dolorously shal these kings lamēt, whan thy shal behould ye filthy smoke

of hir burning, or whan they perceiue that she comming to the triall of the scriptures, appereth nothing but a vile stinking smoke noyful to the eyes, choking to the throte, and euermore blemishing the comfortable light. The churche of the wicked (saith Dauid) is as the dust that is blowen forth of the winde, the shadow that passeth away, the smoke that vanisheth, and ye waxe that melteth in the fyre, yea, of al fantasticall vanities the most.
                           6 A fare of shal they stand trembling at ye magesty of gods worde, 
                                 ••
                              aring to be destroyed or to lose their worldlye honours also by the same, as dyd the duke of Bauery and Brunswick with other popish princes at the last counsail of Rainsbrig. For the continuall clamor of Eckius, Cochleus, Tregarius, Sactzgerus, Pelargus, Herborne, Hos
                                 ••
                              eister, Badia, Winchester, and such other dirtye doctours of theirs is euermore, that the Gospellers would haue all things in cōmon. And therfore do these persecut them, and would not haue that church to goe downe, thynkyng that if it should once fall, they

should not long after continue.
                           7 Thus doth ye childrē of Cain which haue murthered their poore innocent brethern, fear that euery man loking vpon them would destroy them. As men forsakē of God they dispaier in them selues, loking for non other but dampnacion, now that they can haue no more masses, holy praiers nor suffrages, & complayning after this sort.
                           8 Alas alas that great cyty, that beutiful Babilō, that blessed holy mother ye church, which somtime had so many Popes pardons, so many bishoppes blessinges, so many holye stacions, so many clean remissions a Pena et culpa, so many good ghostly fathers, so many religious orders, so much holy water for spirites, and saint Iohns Gospels with ye .v. woundes and ye length of our Lord for drowning, is nowe decayed for euer.
                           9 We sorow, we sighe, we sobbe, we are sore disquieted, for pain we pante, tremble, and quake to sée our dearely beloued Babilon turned vpside down, whom we toke for a most wonderfull miracle.
                           
                              10 Oh, that cyty, that city, ye sumtime was so mighty and strong, so fayre & bewtiful, so glorious & holy, is now becom wast and desolate.
                           11 At once is the terrible iudgment of God cōmen vpon thée vnloked for. Sodenly art thow destroyed with the spirit of his mouth vnthought vpon. Alas who shall pray for vs now? who shall 
                                 •
                              inge Diriges and trentoles? who shal assoile vs of our sinnes? who shal giue vs ashes & palmes? who shal blesse vs with a spade, and sing vs out of purgatory when we are deade? If we lacke these things, we are like to want heauē. These are ye desperate complaints of the wicked.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXTE.
                        1 And the marchauntes of the earth, 2. shall vvepe and vvaile in them selues, 3. bicause no man vvill by their vvares anye more, 4. The vvares, 5. of golde, 6. and siluer, 7. and of precious stons, 8. neither of pearle, 9. and silke, 10 and raines, 11. and purple and scarlet, 12. and all thinne vvood, 13. and all maner of vessels of luery, 14. & all maner vessels of most precious vvood, 15. and of brasse, 16 and of yron 17. and of marbil, 18. and sinamon, 19. and

odours, 20. & oyntmēts, 21. & frankensence, 22. & wine, 23. & oyle, 24. and fine floure, 25. and wheat, 26. and cattell, 27. and sheepe, 28. and horses, 29. and charettes, 30. and bodyes. 31. and soules of men.
                        
                           The commentary
                           1 Now followeth in course the merchauntes of the earth, the sellers of wares in the temple, the marked muster of Mahomet and the Pope.
                           2 They shall wéepe & mourne, wayle and lament inwardly in them selues, both wringing their hands for sorow, and scratchyng theyr heades for verye anguish.
                           3 Bicause they sée all men goe from them, and none in a maner are disposed to buye their pedlary wares anye more.
                           4 As these wares are specially, which follow here in course.
                           5 They will pay no more money for the housell sippings, bottom blessings, nor for séest me and séest me not, aboue the heade and vnder of their chalices, which in many places be of fyne gold. Neyther regarde they to knéele anye more downe and to kisse their pontificall rings, which are of ye same mettal.
                           
                              6 They will be no more at coste to haue ye ayre beaten and ye Idols perfumed with their sensers at pryncipall feastes, to haue their crucifixes layde vpō horses, or to haue them solemply borne aloft in their gaddings abroade, with the religious occupyings of their paxes, cruettes, & other Iewels which be of siluer.
                           7 Neyther passe they greatly to beholde precyous stones any more in their ij. horned miters, whan they hallow their churches, giue theyr whorishe orders, and tryumphantly muster in processions.
                           8 Nor in costuous pearles in theyr copes perrours, and chysibilles, whan they bée in theyr prelately pompous sacrifices.
                           9 Men knowing ye worde of God supposeth yt their ornaments of silk wherwith they garnishe their temples and adorne their Idolles, is very blasphemous and diuillish.
                           10 They thinke also that their fayre white rochets of raynes or fine linnen cloath, their costly gray amices of calaber and cattes tayles.
                           
                              11 Theyr fresh Purple gownes whā they walke for their pleasures, & their read scarlet frockes whan they preach lyes in the Pulpit, are very superfluous and vayne.
                           12 In their thynen wood (whom some men call Algume trées, some Basill, some Corall) may be vnderstande all theyr curious buildings of Temples, Abbeys, Chappels, and Chambers. All shrines, Images, churchscooles, & pews that are well payed for. All Banner staues, Pater noster scores, and péeces of the holy crosse.
                           13 The vessels of yuory comprehendeth all their maundye dyshes, theyr offring platters, their relique chistes, their god boxes, their drinking horns, their sipping cuppes for the hiccough, their tables wherevpon are charmed their chalices and vestiments, theyr standiches, their combes, theyr muske balles, their pomaunder pottes, and their dust boxes with such other toyes.
                           14 The vessels which after some interpretours are of precious stone, or after some of most precious wood, betokeneth their costuous cuppes or cruses of

Iasper, Iacinct, Amel, and fine Beral, and theyr alabaster boxes wherwith they annointe kinges, confirme children, and minister their holy whorish orders. Their pardon masers or drinking dishes, as saint Benits bole, saint Edmonds bole, saint Giles bole, saint Blithes bole, and Westminster bole, with such other holy reliques.
                           15 Of Brasse (which contayneth latten, copper, alcumine, and other harde metals) are made all their great candlesticks, holy water kettles, lampes, desks, pyllers, butterasses, bosses, bels and many other thinges more.
                           16 Of stronge yron are the braunches made that holde vp the lightes before their false gods, the tacks that sustayne them for fallinge, the lockes that saue them from the robberye of théeues, their fyre pans, bars and poolyes, wt many other straunge ginnes besides.
                           7 With marble most commonlye paue thei their temples, & build strong p
                                 •
                              llers and arches in their great cathedrall Churches and monasteries, they make thereof also their superalities,

their tumbs, and their solemne graue stones, besides their other buildinges with frée stone, flint, ragge, and brick, comprehended in the same.
                           8 By the Sinamon is ment all maner of costly spyces wherwith they bury their Byshops and founders, lest they shoulde stinke when they translate them agayne to make them saintes for aduauntage.
                           19 By the smellynge odours, the swete herbes that they strowe abrode at theyr dedications and burials, besydes the dāmaske waters, bawmes, muskes, pomaūnder, ciuet, and other curious confections they yt bestow vpō theyr owne Precious bodyes.
                           20 The oyntmentes are such oyles as they mingle wt rose water, aloes, & spike with other mery conceits, wher with they anoynt their holy sauours & roods to make them to sweat and to smell swéete, when they are borne abrod in procession vpō their high feastfull dayes, lyke as doctor Rede vsed his olde rotten Roode at Beckles in Southfolke vppon the holye roode daye.
                           
                              21 Frankensence occupye they ofte as a necessarie thinge, in the sensyng, of their Idols, hallowinge of their paschal, coniuringe of their ploughes, besydes the blessing of their palmes, candles, ashes, and their dead mens graues with Requiescant in peace.
                           22 With wine synge they theyr masses for money, they housell ye people at Easter, they wash their aulter stones vpō maundy thursday, they fast the holy Imber dayes, besydes other banketinges all the whole yeere to kepe theyr flesh chaste.
                           23 With oyle smere they yonge infantes at baptisme & bishopping, they grease their massemongers and geue them the mark of madian, they ancle their cattell that starueth, & do many other feates els.
                           24 Fyue sloure is suche a merchandyse of theirs as far excedeth all other and was first geuen them by pope Alexander the first, thinkinge Christes institution not sufficient nor coml
                                 •
                              m vsing the common breade in that ministerie. For that ware hath brought them in their plentifull possessions,

their Lordshippes, fatte benifices, and prebendaries, with in nmerable plesures els.
                           25 Wheat haue thei of their farmes, whereof they make pardon bread and cakes to draw people to deuocion towardes them.
                           26 Cattell receiue they offered vnto their Idols by the Idiots of the countries for recouer of sondrye diseases, besides that they haue of their tithes.
                           27 Shepe haue they sometime of their owne pastures, somtime of begginge, sometime of bequestes for the dead, to cry them out of their feareful purgatorye, when they be a sléepe at midnight.
                           28 Great horses haue they for mortuaries, for offices, for fauers, giftes & rewardes, to be good Lords vnto them that they may holde still their farmes, and to haue saunder waspe their sonne and their heire a priest, or to admitte him vnto a manerly benifice, that he may be called maister person, & suche lyke.
                           29 Charets haue they also or horselitters of al manner of sorts, specially

at Rome, with foote men runninge on both sides of them, to make roome for the holy fathers.
                           Of whom some carye their owne precious bodyes, some theyr treasure, some the blessed sacramente, some holy reliques and ornamentes, some theyr whores, & some theyr bastardes.
                           30 The bodyes of men must needes be iudged to be at their pleasure, so long as christen prouinces be tributaries vnto them, princes obediēte, peoples subiect, and their lawes at their commaundement to slea and to kyll. And to make this good, who hath not in England payd his Peter peny somtime to acknowledge hymselfe a bond man of theirs at the receit of his yerely howsell.
                           Furthermore yet, besides their market muster of monkes, fryers, and priestes, they haue certayne bondmē, of whom some they sell to the Uenicians, some to the Genues, some to the Portingales, & some to ye Turks, to row in their galleis.
                           31 And laste of all to make vp their market, least any thing should escape

their hands, these vnmercifull bribers maketh marchaundise of the soules of men, to depriue Christe of his whole right, sending many vnto hell, but not one vnto heauen (vnlesse they maliciously murther thē forthe truths sake) & all for mony. After many other sortes els abuse they these good creatures of God whō the holy ghost héere nameth by course as things comprehending al other, besides, that Mahomits ministers in their sort in Barbary, Greece, and Egipt. For nothing vnder the heauens leaue thei vndefiled. Much were it to shew here by the cronicles seuerally, of what Pope they haue reieiued authorytie, power, and charge to vtter these wares to aduauntage and how they came firste from the olde Idolatrous by the large testimonies of Sapience, Esay, Daniel, Baruch, Os
                                 •
                              as, and the other prophetes. At one houre shall these marchauntes for their abhom
                                 •
                              nations be plaged, nothinge that the vaine louers of this worlde haue tro
                                 ••
                              ed in, anaylinge them nor yet healping them. For at all times in this last age of the world (whom Iohn

caleth the last houre) are the wicked reprobats condemned of God, and so reserued to ye latter sentence of ye iudge. For it foloweth in the text.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And the apples that thy soule lusted after, are departed rrom thee. 2. And all things that which vvere dainty, and had price. 3. were departed from thee 4. And thou shalt finde thē no more. 5. The marchaunts of these thinges. 6. Which vvere vvaxed riche by hir. 7. Shall stande a farre of, from hir, for feare of the punishment of hir. 8. Weping and vvayling, and saying. 9. Alas, alas, that great citie, that vvas clothed in raines and purple, and scarlet, and decked vvith gold, and precious stone & pearle. 10. For at one houre so great riches is come to nought.
                        
                           The Commentary.
                           1 And the deliclous apples (sayth ye threatnyng voyce of the holy ghost vnto thys whore) that thy wreched herte hath so sore lusted after by so mani vnsaciable desires are now departed frō thée. Men of ripe learninge and iudgement, whome thou couetedst to haue for defence of thy gloryous whoredom, thy abhominatiōs perceiued, wil no longer dwell with thée, but vtterly

leaue thée, detest thée, and abhore thée. Where as they haue afore auauanced thée to the world, now wyll they by the scriptures reproue thée to the same.
                           2 In lyke manner al those thinges which were afore time very precious and dainty vnto thée, and whom thou haddest for their goodnesse in much estimation, are now for thy lewdenesse gone a way cleane from thée, biddinge thée for euer adue. Men of sober discretion and liuing, whom thou hast afore time pretended much to fauer, as things commodious vnto thée, to the clokyng of hypocrisie, thy conditions now knowen, doe dayly more and more decline from thy dead obseruations and moste damnable supersticions. And wher as they thought thée afore verye holye and good, they suppose thee now both detestable and diuelish.
                           3 So that from henceforth the veritie open, none shall remaine wyth thée, nor defende thy knowne whoredome, but hipocrits, mens pleasures, flatterers, bablyng sophisters, hauling

canonistes, Epicures, and blasphemous Antichristes. As for menne that be godly wyse, sober, vertuous, learned, well occupied, and mynding the glory of God, wyll vtterly refuse thée, & forsake thy pestiferous wayes.
                           4 Thou shalte finde them no more vpon thy side pleating. No more shalt thou haue their sauer, nor yet their swéete smellinge. Neither shall their doctrine maintaine thy vaine ceremonies, nor yet their conuersation obserue thy crooked customes any more▪ Yea, be thou certayne and sure of this, that be thei once gone from the clean, neuer shal they agayne returne vnto thée. Only shal thy wicked remnant be beasts and bablers, fi
                                 •
                              thy workers and drounkards, as in Eckius which had thrée bastardes the same yeare yt he disputed at Lipsia against the mariage of priests, Natalis Beda, C
                                 •
                              lictoneus, Liset, Godet, Sutor, Delphus, and de quercu at Paris. Bragging Winchester, the Popes paraclet in England, that is maister of the stewes at London, and such other dirtie doungels.
                           
                              5 The busi marchauntes of these earthlye thinges afore (saith ye voyce againe vnto Iohn) which wer become very fatte, welthy and riche thorow quick sale of their wares of this whorish churche, shall at the day of hir destruction stand a farre of bewaylinge hir fall. Farre diuers are these in their markets frō the vsage of other occupiers in the worlde. For whereas they sell their wares but once, & looke no more for them againe, these sell them euery day and yet retaine them still. And where as they sell the very wares in déede, these sell no more but the sight, the sound, and the shadowe. As the looking vpon their Images, ye noyse of their bels, the spreading out of their ornaments, the shew of their Iewelles, the vse and occupyinge of their instruments, the kissing of their reliques, the winde of their lips, the spatle of their tungs, their idle pratlings, and vngodly merits. But styll they kéepe to them selues the golde, the siluer, the precious stones, the pearles, and such lyke, though they neuer cost them mony. Yea, so wolde

they doe also the learninge and good lyuing if they had them as they haue not. For none would they haue learned nor yet vertuous in the sighte of the worlde, but their owne smered Sodomits.
                           6 How and wherin these marchāts are rich it is shewed afore, and besides yt al the world doth know it.
                           7 But now in the fall certaynly of their whorish church, will they stand a farre of. They will be none of hirs, when they sée hir go downe, lest they should go downe with hir, and be punished with penury, or lest they should be drawen, hanged and quartered, as many haue bene in England.
                           8 Rather wil they holde a fayre face outwardly for aduantage, inwardlye it their harts bewaylynge hir ruine, or secretly among them selues depl
                                 •
                              
                              ring hir decay, till such time as they may be bold to play ye knaues againe, laying after this wéeping sort.
                           9 Alas, alas that notable citie, ye Babilonyshe Rome that ruled all the world, that holy church that was so beautyfully adorned with fine sylke,

purple, and scarlet in hyr copes, vestures and ornaments and was so preciously furnished with golde, precious stone and pearels, in hir chalices crosses and miters, and in all other prodigious and pompous Iewels.
                           10 Alas for hir, alas, for now at one howre in this latter age of the church by the gospell preachinge is so excéeding great riches, glory magnificence and honour of our holy mother come euen vnto nought. Yea, our manifolde prelacies are not regarded amonge them, but vtterlie contempned and despised.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And euery shippe gouernoure. 2. And all they that occupied shippes. 3, And ship me
                              •
                            vvhich vvorke in the sea. 4. Stoode a farre of. 5. And cryed. 6, vvhen they savv the smoke of hir burning, saying. 7. What citie is lyke vnto this great citie? 8. And they caste duste on on their heades. 9. And cryed vveepinge, and vvaylinge, and saide. 10. Alas, alas, that great citie, vvherein vvere made riche. 11. All that had ships in the sea. 12. By the reason of hir costlines
                              •
                           e. 13, For at one hour
                              •
                            is she made desolate.
                        
                           
                           The Commentary.
                           1 In lyke case euery ship maister, which betokneth diocesanes, bishops, and ordinaries.
                           2 And al they that occupy boats, whiries, and scutes, or sayle vpon the sea, as they which do amōg the wauering multitude are taken for parsons, vicars, and curates.
                           3 Yea, and mariners also that work in the sea, by whom are signified soule pristes, simple penitensers, and holye water mongers, dayly peruertinge y• ignoraunt heople.
                           4 All these (sayeth the voyce) will stand a farre of when they sée hir destruction. No longer wyll they stande by hir, then they féele hyr profitable and pleasaunt vnto them. Decay once the swéete profites, and they are gone away.
                           5 Yet will they turne toward her agayne, and cry out when they shal beholde the filthye smoke that shall arise of her burning.
                           6 When her wisdome appeareth foolishnesse, hir doctrine diuelishnesse,

and hir sanctitie wickednesse by the word of God shall sorrowfullye lamēt for their owne bellyes sake, sayinge thus in their desperate harts.
                           7 What citie in the worlde can be thought lyke vnto this mightye citie, either in magnificence, wealth, or power? No cilizens are more preciously apparelled, more sumptuously fed, nor more delitiouslye diered, then is the shorne nation, if ye marke well theyr fauour and feeding, their sine disguysing and lodging, their fat chéekes and great bellies with soche other lyklyhoodes els. Much rather had they to haue still the wanton commodities of this Citie, then the perpetuall pleasures of Heauen. So vndiscret, carnall, and beastlye are they in their imaginations, cares, & studies.
                           8 So sorowfull wil they be for this their generall losse, that vppon their witlesse heades, they shall cast dust in token of their inward heuines. With dispayre shal they darken their wits, & with dottage dull theyr vnderstanding. And as graciously wyll they repent as euer did Caine, Pharao, Esau

Antiochus, & Iudas their predicessors
                           9 Dolorously shall they crye in theyr mutuall murtherings, mourning for their powches, and sorowyng for theyr bellyes, and thys wyl be the tenour of their wofull tragedy.
                           10 Alas, alas that worthy citie, that royall Rome, that swéet Babilon, that holye mother of ours, in whom we were left so rich, so mighty, & so strong that all the worlde feared vs, & we felt of no sorrowes.
                           11 Specially all we that had ships in the sea, or that had Bishopprickes, benefices, and other fat liuings amonge the wauering wanderers of the light laytie, inconstaunt, fyckle and foolysh, where as GODS worde is not knowne.
                           12 We became wealthy in all maner of pleasures, by reason of hyr costly and profitable wares that those our shippes contayned, whiche are to many to be now rehearsed.
                           13 Full woe are we & heauy at the hart remembring that famous citie, for at one houre is she made desolat.

In this last age of his Churche wyll the Lord consume hir with his breth, not leauing in hir one stone vppon an other. Like as ye shadow yt passeth shal she vanish away, & lyke the dry thistle Floure, or dust that is scatered with the winde. Suche wordes (sayeth the wise man Philo) shall they speak in hell that haue sinned, besides their desperate complaynt in this lyfe. Some expsitours haue taken al these kings, marchants vnd ship gouerners for one manner of people or generation of Antichrist. And it may wel be, for so much as they are all of ye earth. None of these are they iustlye by the authorytie of God, but very tiraunts, théeues, and manquellers.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT
                        1 Reioice ouer hir thou heauen. 2. And ye holy Apostles. 3. And Prophetes. 4. For God hath geuen your iudgemente on hir. 5. And a mighty Angell tooke vp a stone lyke a great milstone. 6. And cast it into the sea, saying. 7. With such violence shall that great Citie Babilon be caste. 8. And

shall be founde no more, 9. And the voyce of harpers, and musitianes, 10. and of pipers, and trumpeters, 11. shal be heard no more in thee. 12. And no craftes man (of vvhatsoeuer crafte he be) shall be founde any more in thee, 13. And the sounde of a mille, shall be hearde no more in thee, 14. And candell light, shall be
                              •
                            no more burning in thee, 15. And the voyce of the brydegrome, and of the bryde, shall be heard no more in thee, 16. For thy merchaūts vvere the Princes of the earth, 17. and vvith thine inchauntments, vvere deceiued all nations, 1
                              •
                           . And in hyr vvas founde the bloude, 19. of the Prophets, 20. and of the saincts, 21. and of all that vvere slayne vpon the earth.
                        
                           The Commentary.
                           1 With all myrth possible (sayeth the text) reioyce thou heauē, or thou faithfull congregation of God, to sée thys aduoutrous church of Antichrist ouerthrowen. Be glad in thy hart, not that thy quarell is reuenged, but in yt the rightuousnesse of God is fulfilled, hys people being at libertie.
                           2 Haue myrth conuenient ye holy Apostles or messengers of the Lorde, with them that the Gospell hath called.
                           3 Ioye with our brethren ye aunciēt

Prophets, or godlye teachers of the olde lawe.
                           4 For your merciful God hath heard your pittious crye from vnder the aulter, and hath perfourmed vpon ye blasphemous whore the same selfe iudgement that you desired. According to your owne request hath he reuenged all your innocēt bloud, which hath bene shed vpon earth since Abell the ryghtuous. The same dampnation haue they now iustly yt they ministred vnto you vniustly. Yea double, for so muche as they haue it both in theyr bodyes and soules, where as you had it but alone in your bodyes.
                           5 And immediatly (saith S. Iohn) an Angell of great power betokening the true preachers of the latter age of the church, strōgly indued frō aboue, tooke vp a stone of exceding weight, very like in simylitude vnto a greate milstone. They shal gather vp out of Esay, Hieremy, Abacucke, & other Prophets, the mighty, & tirrible iudgemēts of ye Lord, which are the heauy stone that shall grinde his enimies into pouder.
                           6 This stone shal they cast into ye sea.

They shal publish, preach, and declare vnto the people of this worlde (which are as the mouable floud) those heauy iudgements which shal light vpō that blasphemous churche of theirs at the tyme appoynted, and thus shall they say vnto them.
                           7 So vyolent and heauy shall be the distruction of that myserable citie, that mysticall Babylon, that prostibulous church of Antichrist, with hir shorne citizens and smeared hipocrites, as is the waightie fal of an excéeding great milstone in the bottome of the sea rysing vp no more agayn, yea, so tirrible and fearefull.
                           8 With shame and confusion shall that wicked generation come downe, and neuer more be foūd hereafter, neither in the earth nor yet in heauen. Though in their painted stories they put popes, cardinals, & bishops, monks, chanōs, & shauen priests, friers, nuns, and heremites, in heauen amonge the saincts, yet are there none such nor neuer shal be. Their resting place is the bottome of the sea by the iudgements of God, vnlesse they renounce those

vaine supersticions and cleaue to the sincere verities of ye Lord. Much haue they boasted in their writinges yt their holy mother of predigious orders and disguised relygyons should euermore continue.
                           9 But be certaine and sure thou myserable church (saith the holy ghost) yt thou shalt no lēger enioy ye cōmodious pleasures of a frée cittye, all quietous without trubles. The mery noyes of them that play vpon harpes, lutes and fidels, the swéet voice of musicians yt sing with virginals, vials and chimes, the armony of them that pipe in recorders, flutes, and drums, and the shirle showt of trumpets, waits, & shawmes, shall no more be heard in thée to ye delight of men.
                           10 Neyther shal ye swéet Organs containing the melodious noyse of all maner of instruments & byrdes be plaied vpon, nor ye great belles be rong after that, nor yet ye fresh discant, prick song, counter point, and faburden be called for in thée, which art the very sinagog of Sathan.
                           11 Thy lasciuious armonye & delectable

musique much prouoking ye weake hartes of men to meddle wt thy abhominable whordom by ye wantonnes of Idolatry in that kinde, shal perish with thée for euer.
                           12 No cunning Artificer, Caruer, Paynter, nor Gilder, Embroderer, Goldsmith, nor silk worker, with such other like of what occupacion so euer they be or haue bene to thy cōmodity, shall neuer more be found so agayne. Copes, cruettes, candelstickes, miters, crosses sēsers, crismatoris, corporasses, and chalices, which for thy whorishe holines might not somtime be touched, will thā for thy sake be abhorred of all men. Neuer more shall be builded for marchāts of thi liuery & mark, palaces, tēples, abbeys, collages, couēts, chauntries, fair houses, & horcherds of plesure
                           13 The clapping noise of neyther wyndmil, horsemil, nor watermil, shal any more be heard, to ye gluttenous féeding of thy puffed vp porklings, for the maintenaunce of thine idle obseruacions & ceremonies. No more shal those idle belly gods swill vp the sweate th
                                 •
                              re, of the labouring man, nor deuour

the poore widdowe & fathereesse for strayning out a gnat.
                           14 The continual light of lampes before the high aulter, the burning cressettes at triumphes in the night, ye torches at burials & solempne processions tapers at high masses, and the candels at offeringes, shall neuermore burne in thy sinful sinagog.
                           15 No more shal the bridgrome desyre after thy folish ordenāce to be Ioyned to his wife, nor ye bride to hir lawfull husbande. No more shal that frée state of liuing be bound vnder yoke of dāpnable dremes, neyther for vowes vnaduised, nor for popish orders, nor yet for any gossiprye, but be at full lyberty as the Lord hath ordained it. No commodities, prophets, nor pleasures shalt thou haue any more of these nor yet of such like, as afore time thou haste had of them in habundance.
                           16 For thy mitred marchaunts were sumtime princes of ye earth whan they reigned in their roialty. Thy shorn shauelinges were Lordes ouer ye multytude, whan they held their priestly authority ouer ye soules & bodies of men.
                           
                              17 Yea, and with thy priuy legardemaine, with thy iugling castes, with the craftes, and inchauntmentes of thy subtile charmes were all nacions of the world deceyued.
                           With lies in hipocrisy were the great gouernours most miserably blinded, & with errours in supersticion ye cōmon people seduced. And all was to satisfye thy voluptuous affectes. Only remayneth to thée nowe the dwe rewarde of thy wickednesse, which is an euerlasting dampnacion.
                           18 All this is said here (saith the holy Ghoste) for that in this aduoutrous church is found the great slaughter of innocentes.
                           19 Gilty appereth she afore God of al the blod of the holy prophets of ye olde lawe. As were Esaye, Hieremy, Ezechiel, and Amos.
                           20 And of the sincere witnesses of the new lawe, as were Steuen, Iames, Antipas, and Paule.
                           21 Yea, and of all those Godly men yt were slaine vpon earth from rightuous Abel vnto the end of ye world for the faithfull testimony of God.

Among whom may they also be numbred, which hath in battayles, skirmyshes, and vprores at the Popes appoinment in all Christian regions bene vnmercifully murthered, for ye fulfilling of his insacyable purpose.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The xix. Chapter.
                     NOw foloweth in course the conuenyent prayse of thankesgiuing vnto God, for rightuously condempnyng the blasphemous church of Antichrist, and for graciously auenging the innocent bloud of his true seruaunts. Here are two maner of peoples to be considered, of whom the one is sorowful, the other reioyseth, & all about one matter. The fall of this malignaūt church, is to the one sorte a discomforte, to the other a heauenly comforte. The kings, the merchaunts, and the shippe gouernours of ye earth, most dolorously lamenteth ye distruction of their mad vanities. The vnregarded or forsaken number of those simple soules y• faithfully beleueth in Christ, ar highly glad of it, for his gloryes sake. About thys one decay cryeth the one sort, wo, wo, wo. The other sort singing wyfully in

their harts vnto God so oft tymes. Alleluia. So much dyffreth the one from the other, the children of darkenes frō the children of light, they yt séeke their owne glory from them that séeke the glory of god. Not vnlike is Iohan vnto Aggeus, Zacharias, & other holy prophetes, which both shewed afore of ye peoples return from ye myserable captiuity of the Babilonians, and also the réedyfying agayne of their new Hierusalem. For here hath he first shewed the distructiō & fal of ye dānable whore, the spirituall Babilon, which manye yeres hath greuously vexed the people of God, and now in this chapter their peaceable time in ye Lord. Now are ye precious vessels of God like to be restored into the temple, the great Balthasar of Rome once ouerthrowen. Now shall the swéet peace grow, the plentuous quiet increase, the pastures of the Lord waxe fat, and the mightie verity of his worde flowe like a swéet running floud.
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And after that I heard the voice, 2. of much people in heauen, 3. sainge: Alleluia, 4. Saluation,

5, & glory, 6, and honour, 7, and povver, 8, be ascribed vnto the Lord our God, 9. For true and rightuous are his iudgementes, 10. bicause he hath iudged the great vvhore, 11. vvhich did corrupt the earth vvith hir fornication, 12. and hath auenged the bloud of his seruaunts of hir hand, 13. And agayn they sayde Alleluya.
                        
                           The Commentary.
                           1 After the destructiō of that whorish Babilō (which singnyfieth the wicked church) I heard (saith Saint Iohn) in mistery, the reroysing voyce of muche people in heuen, which is that congregacion of faith wherin ye Lord resteth.
                           2 Uerye many were there amonge them which ioyously gaue thanks vnto God.
                           3 Pronouncing this Hebrue sentēce, Alleluia, which is so much to sai, as let vs together praise the Lordes name.
                           4 Only is saluacion, health, & deliueraunce of him. Unto none other it is to be ascribed, neyther in heauen nor in earth, be there neuer so godly doers.
                           5 Inestimable glorye, vnspeakble honour, incomprehencyble power, belongeth

vnto that Lord our God, so doth the dewe commendacion thereof.
                           6 He it is that only ough
                                 •
                               of vs to be praised, obeyed, and magnified.
                           7 For he alone hath ouerthrown the dragō, the beast, and ye glittring whore that deceyued all the worlde, that proude churche of stynkeynge Sodomytes.
                           8 And this hath he done for our saluacion. Referre all the prayse vnto hym as to your conquerour most worthye.
                           9 For verely moste true and perfecte is he in his merciful promises, moste rightuous and iust in his godly iudgementes, which hath bene of late most euydently séene.
                           10 Specially in that he hath iudged according to his former promis the abhominable harlot, the superstycyous church of Antichrist, the filthy famelye of spiritual whoremongers, gluttōs, & hypocrytes, yea, the execrable Sinnagog of Sathan in déede.
                           11 Which hath most miserably corrupted not ye true seruantes of God, but ye very earth, or such men as were earthly mynded, with hyr filthy fornycation

of Idolatry, superstition, & blasphemy.
                           12 That mercifull Lorde hath most rightuously auenged ye innocent bloud his faithfull seruauntes and constant witnesses, of hir wicked hande. From the tirryble crueltie, spight, and vyolence of hyr vnmercyfull ministers hath he graciously deliuered them.
                           13 Yet once againe (saith saint Iohn) did this godly minded multitude break foorth into the prayse of God, and cryed with a most ioyfull shought. Alleluya, or commēdation without end be vnto our most heauenly creator, redéemer and comfortour. Hys laude be euermore in our mouth, for thus restoring his veritie, the enimies thereof deposed.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And smoke rose vp for euermore, 2. And the xxiiij. elders, 3 and the foure beastes, 4. feldovvne, 5. and vvorshipped God that sate on the seat, 6. saying▪ Amen.
                        7. Alleluya. 8. And a voyce came out of the seate, 9. saying, 10. Prayse our Lorde God, 11. all ye that are his seruauntes, 12. and yee that feare him both small and great.
                        
                           
                           The Commentary.
                           1 And the smoke (saieth sainct Iohn) of hir abhominations, very noyful vnto ye eyes of God, wēt vp euermore into his sight prouoking him to eternall vengeaunce. A smoke ascended in hys wrath (saith Dauid) and vpon ye fyre procéeded from his mouth, which kindled the coles of hir dampnation. Thys fyre will be the tirrible sentence giuē vpon hir in his latter iudgement. For neuer ceaseth this blasphemous bloudy church in requiring the vengeaunce of God.
                           2 And the xxiiij. Elders (saith he) by whom are signified the saincts departed, as the Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and other godly witnesses.
                           3 And the iiij. beasts also betokening the faithful multitude in the, iiij. quarters of the worlde, yet liuing in this frayle nature, fell downe before the face of the Lord.
                           4 In one godly spirite, fayth, zeale, and feruent loue, did both they in their tymes, & these in this our age submit them selues vnto God, referryng alalwayes

vnto him all that they euer had eyther in faith or workes, as vnto the speciall giuer of them.
                           5 These worshipped in their ages and yet doe to this day, not things fantasied of men, but the onely euerlastyng God that euermore hath sit vpon the eternall seate of his omnipotency.
                           6 Continually saying: Amen▪ Or at his will be all things.
                           7 Saying also Alleluya, or euerlasting prayse be giuen to his name of the vniuersall Christian multitude, for rightuously iudging the great whore to drinke the bloud that shée hath shed of the holy witnesses of Iesu, or to sustain for euer the iust vēgeaūce therof.
                           8 Consequently came there out an, excéeding swéet voyce from ye eternall throne of God, which is Iesus Christ. This is that Gospell of glad tydings, which he taught whan he was here liuing among vs, being the bodily habitacle of his Godhead.
                           9 This voyce euermore is mouing vs to the onely fayth, obedience, and feare of the eternall father, comprehended in this clause following.
                           
                              10 In all your sayings and dooyngs (saith that voyce) commende alwayes that Lorde which is both my father, both my God, & your God.
                           11 Specially all you that are his faithfull seruaunts by earnestly louing and following his word.
                           12 You also that vnfaynedly feare to transgresse his lawes, and commaundements, whither ye be great or smal, high or lowe, young or olde, noble or vnnoble, rich or poore, strong or weak, whole or sicke, beautiful or deformed, wyse or vnwyse, learned or vnlearned, none to be excluded frō his praise, so that he be faithfull, charitable, pacient, and godly. For in no maner of nacion is any of him forsaken that faithfully feareth him and liueth according vnto rightuousnesse.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And I heard the voyce of much people, 2. euen as the voyce of many vvaters, 3. and as the voice of stronge thunderynges, 4. saying: Alleluya. 5. For God omnipotente raygneth, 6. Let vs be glad and reioyce, 7. and giue honour to him, 8. For the maryage of the Lambe is come, 9. and hys vvyfe made hyr selfe readye. 10. And to hyr vvas

graūted, that she should be araied vvith pure and goodly silke, 11. As for the silke it is the rightuousnesse of saintes.
                        
                           The Commentary.
                           1 After this (saith saint Iohn) I herd in mistery ye voyce of very much people, or of an innumerable multitude of men.
                           2 And it sounded vnto me euen as it had bene the flushing noyse of manye waters.
                           3 And in a maner as the fearful soūd of great thunderings. For though the praise of God be all one in the faithful nacions, yet is the vtterance thereof diuers, like as the languages are also diuers. Uery straunge and confuse are the speches one to an other wher they are not knowē. Tirrible also are they, partly for that they comprehend such a magistie, as is the glory of God, and partly bycause they are for the vtter confusion of the wicked. None other was this voyce than were the voyces afore, nor to none other ende.
                           4 For loke in what faith the Patryarkes and the fathers, the prophetes

and Apostles, the holy Martyrs and preachers, lauded God for victorie ouer theyr enimies, in the same doth nowe the faythful multitude of all regions commend hym, sayinge: Alleluya, or praise be euermore in your mouthes.
                           5 For our Lord God almightye is become a victorious conquerour, and nowe reygneth ouer all. Not onely hath he ouercomen the diuel by the doughtye death of hys sonne, but also hys proude kingdome of hipocrysie by the power of his mighty worde.
                           6 Let vs be glad (saith this voyce) and highly reioyce in our harts for this heuenlye alteration & profitable change.
                           7 Let vs giue thankes to hys omnipotente name, that withoute our deseruinges we are brought to so ioyfull a daye.
                           8 For the glorious spousage of the Lambe Iesus Christ is come. Nowe that this whore is ouerthrown, shal he be ioyned to his vndefiled church, which was afore dispersed by diuers afflictions and punishementes.
                           9 His wife which is his congregation

hath made hir selfe now ready to hir spouse. Not with copes and crosses, miters and reliques, torches and holy water. Not with chapels, and chauntries, hallowings, and sensinges, shauinges & anointinges, with such other beggerye. No, neyther with workes of supererogation, merites of masses, nor other dirtye deseruinges of our owne rightuousnes. But with a pure christian faith, & with the true rightuousnes of god which she hath of christ.
                           10 For it foloweth in the texte, yt to hir it was garnted by the singuler goodnes of God yt she should be apparyled beautifully with pure whit silke, or wt most fine raines.
                           11 None other are these faire pleasant and godly raines after the cleare diffinition of the holy ghost héere, but the pure iustificatiōs of the holy saints which haue bene since the beginning, wherof they haue bene called rightuous. Of their faith in Iesus Christ is this pure garment of innocency, clernesse, and righteousnesse. Through faith was Abraham reputed for rightuous, so was Abell, Enoche, & Noe,

Isaac, Iacob, and Ioseph, Moyses, Iosue, and Gedeon, Samuel, Dauid, and Helias, with the vniuersall number of the saints, Prophetes, and fathers. So was Zacharias, Simeon, Ioseph, & Iohn Baptist, Peter, Iames, Iohn, and Paule, Lazarus, Lucas, Agabus, and S
                                 •
                              éeuen, with all the Apostles, martirs, and other true beléeuers. Through faith (saith S. Paule) haue the saints ouercōe kingdoms, wroght rightuousnes, obtained the promises, stopped the mouthes of Lions, quenched the vyolence of fyre, wyth such like. Sence the begynning of ye world haue the true and faithfull prepared them selues vnto this heauenlye marriage, & in the resurrection of the rightuous shall it be perfectly solemnised, celebrated, and magnified, such time as they shal appeare in full glory with Christ.
                           In this latter time wyll the true christian church, when all the worlde shall confesse his name in peace, be of hir full perfect age and apte vnto this spousage.
                           
                              Now shall she in méeknes of spirit appoynt hir selfe to méete hir bridgrome in the ayre, for with a glad hart doeth she now here his voyce. At that daye shal she appeare as the beautiful bride prepared to the spouse, accompanyed with the wise maydens, the vnwyse neither hauing oyle nor light for euer reiected.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And he sayde vnto me. 2. Write. 3. Happye are they, which are called vnto the Lambes supper. 4. And he sayde vnto me. 5. These are the true sayings of God. 6. And I fell at his feete. 7. To vvorship him. 8. And he sayde vnto me. 9. See thou doe it not. 10. For I am thy fellovv seruant. 11. And one of thy brethren. 12. And of them that haue the testimonye of Iesus. 13. Worship God. 14. For the testimony of Iesus. 15. is the spirit of prophesie.
                        
                           The Commentarye.
                           1 And the Angell (sayth saint Iohn) which shewed vnto me afore, the fall of the great whore, sayde at this present time vnto me.
                           2 Seriouslye register this sentence followynge, that it may remayne to

their comforte, whiche shall followe thée.
                           3 After a most happye and fortunable sorte are they blessed, whiche hauing the wedding garmente, the pure fine raines afore named, are graciously prdestinate, called, and accepted of the heauenly father, vnto the euerlasting supper of the vndefiled Lamb Iesus Christ, there to perticipat with him the eternall refection both of soule & body. Satisfied shall I be (saieth Dauid) without end, when thy glory shal manyfestly appeare. Not of corruptible meates and drinkes shal this supper be, but of vncorruptible delightes and of pleasures that shall neuer fayle. Nothing shal be there prophane, voide or vncomely, but al things, pure, clean true, stedfast, godly, & perfect. Thē shal the méetinges be heauenly, and the clippinges wtout deformity. The bride shal at that day reioyce with hir euerlasting spouse, and the daughters of Sion shal beholde the true Salomon in full glorye, accompained with hys holye how shoulde of Angelles and Saintes.
                           
                              4 And the aforesaide Angell (sayeth S. Iohn) sayd thus vnto me.
                           5 These words whiche I last tolde thée (frinde Iohn) are not mine, but they are the true sayings of gods ow
                                 •
                               mouth. So much the rather they are to be beleued as most certayne and sure, that they are of hym whos
                                 •
                               vniuersall language is the ve
                                 •
                              itie 
                                 •
                              nfayned.
                           9 As I heard the Angell speake thus vnto me (saith saynt Iohn) I fel down by and by at hi
                                 •
                               fete flat vpon the grounde, myndynge to haue worshypped hym. So wonderfull wer the secret
                                 ••
                               of god whome he ther declared vnto me, and the misteries so ioyful vnto my soule, that in a maner I clearly forgote my selfe.
                           7 
                                 〈◊〉
                               hand I was at the poynt to haue worshipped the messēger for the Lord, and the Angell for the La
                                 •
                              be, otherwise th
                                 ••
                               did Abraham, not of ignoraunce, but of forgetfull reioysing.
                           8 But in no wise would the Angell suffer me so to doe, but gently he sayd thus vnto me.
                           9 Se thou do no such homage vnto

me a creture, as peculiarly belongeth vnto god the creator of all. So great is thy selfe, and such as thou art, I am, & so excellente a creature of God. Trueth it is that I am the aungel of the Lorde, and so are you also, so many as beare witnes of the same veritie.
                           10 And as concerninge myne owne persone, I am but thy felowe seruāt. For, he that is 
                                 •
                              hy god, is also my god, and he that is thy Lord and master is also mine. Indifferently are we bothe created for his seruauntes, and admitted for his messengers.
                           11 Of thy bretheren am I one by creation.
                           12 So am I also both a brother and felow of al them that haue the faithful testimonie of Iesus. For like as they by his godly appointment are messengers thereof to ye world, so am I now vnto thée here for the same.
                           13 worship not me therefore, which am but a creature, but worshippe thy Lord god, for sending by me this message of health vnto thée. Though Loth Iacob, Iosue, Gedion, Tobias, & other fathers of the olde law, gaue worship

vnto the Angels whom God sente vnto them in message, yet shalte thou not do so vnto me now, considerynge that at thys tyme Gods sonne hath taken the nature of man, hath raised it from death hath sette it vpon the fathers right hand, and therin hath sent from thence the spirite of reconciliation vnto men. By thys are ye become no longer in feriours vnto vs, but equall with vs infauour and dignitye. No lōger are ye strangers & foreners, but citizens of heauen and the very househould chyldren of God.
                           14 And as for the testymony of Iesus Christ, which both I vnto you, & you to ye world haue to vtter, it is ye very sprit of prophisi, & on message of helth committed vnto vs both. The true spirit of god it is that beareth witnes of Christ, both in the law & prophets (for none can saye that Iesus is the lord, but in the holy ghost) and in that spirit do we nowe make mencion also of him. This is the spirit of adoptiō wherby ye ackonwledge god for your deare father. Thys spirit assertaineth your spirit that ye are become his children

beleuing in hys name.
                           15 And in this spirit do I admonishe thée Iohn, by this presente Reuelatiō which is a Prophicy, & in thée al them that haue the same faith, to acknowledge, worshyp and confesse the sayde Iesus Christ, as we do nowe, for the onely Lord & sauiour of the world. Not only shalt thou be by the plaine manifestation of thys prophesye an Angel but also by an excellent prerogatiue of singuler grace aboue all thy felowes, a Ppophete. After the maner of this Angel dyd Paule & Barnabas vtterlye refuse to haue honour geuen them of the people at Listra. Peter would in no case suffer Cornelius the noble Centurion to worshype hym. Contrarywise the Antichrist of Rome not onely suffereth but also commaundeth straightly such homage of honour euermore to be geuen to his holy fatherhood. Yea, he is not ashamed to cō
                              straine noble Emperours to k
                                 •
                              sse hys filthy féete, kings with cappe & knée to holde hys steroppes, and the greatest princes of the world to wayte vpon his Mule.
                           
                              Great pardons hath he geuen to the worshyppinge of Idols and of olde rotten bones, threatning most terrible death vnto them that would not at his commaundement do the same. At Geneua was honorablye worshypped an Asses tayle, and at Tholosa a young boyes shoo, great in dulgences graunted vnto them both. But let not him and his mitred Mahomets thinke easely to auoyde the indignation so God whan he shal call them to accountes, wyth theyr craftye distincton of Latria Dulia, and hyperdulia, whom ye scripture knoweth not. Notwythstanding in this is not vtterly inhibited mutual reuerence betwixt man & man, for so much as Paul willeth the faithful to preuēt eche other in honor geuing. Necessary it is that they first honour God, and then for his sake that they procecute their neighbours with such christen beneuolence, as the comlines of humanity requireth. The gospel neuer forbiddeth such politike maner as norisheth mutual frendship, yet 
                                 •
                              oth it not geue them vnto Idols.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                            THE TEXT.
                        1 And I savv heauen open. 2. And beholde, a white horse. 3. And he that sate vpon him. 4. VVas called faithfull and true. 5. And in rightuousnesse did he iudge. 6. And make battell. 7. His eyes vvere a flama of fyre. 8. and on his head vvere many cro
                              •
                           vnes, 9. And he had a name vvritten. 10. That no man knevv but him selfe. 11. And he vvas clothed vvith a vesture dipt in bloud. 12. And his name is called the vvord of God.
                        
                           The Commentarye.
                           1 After this (sayeth Saint Iohn) I saw heauen open. Uery euident were the misteries of the Lorde vnto me. I perceiued that through fayth & méeknesse, great knowledge men might haue of the secrets of God. Open is heauen euermore, when gods word is

fréely taught. And closed vp it is again when that is layd aparte.
                           2 And behold a pure white horse appeared in this misterye, whiche betokneth the true ministers or perfecte preachers of the Apostles doctrine, as is mencioned afore in the sixt chapter hereof, ye godly nature of these is (as is specified in Paule) to carry the gloryous veritie of the Lorde the worlde ouer and to publishe it before the gouernours and peoples of the nations.
                           3 He that sate vpon this white horse, or assisted these preachers by his spyrite, was the eternall sonne of God, whiche hath euermore bene called in the scriptures faithful of hys promise, and true of his worde. Rightuous is Lorde (saith Dauid) in all his waies, sure of his sayings, & perfect in all his workes.
                           4 None other thing could he teache but the veritie, which was the veryty it selfe, nor yet they whiche had hys godly spirit.
                           5 Accordinge to true equitie hath he iudged, in vtterly condemning by his word ye proude sinagog of sathan, & in

exalting againe his owne méeke spirited church.
                           6 First in his owne person, as a mightie warriour did he battayle with the Diuell, and by his death o
                                 •
                              ercame him. Now by his faithfull preachers doth he rightuouslye ouerturne his kingdome by vertue of the same graciously sending them forth in this latter age vnder the 
                                 •
                              ipe of this white horse. For horses of lustty courage are his faithfull seruantes after Abacuk. Yea, and whiter are they then eyther snow or milk, by theyr true beléefe after Ieremy. I (sayth the Lord) which am the word of rightuousnesse, do valianaly battaile to saue you. For none other purpose fighteth he, but to the intent to preserue his elects.
                           7 The eyes of this horseman were as the pure flame of fire, effectuall, mighty, and cleare. And these are not, onely his godly vnderstanding, & knowledge, wherby he perceiueth, decerneth, and iudgeth clearly al thinges, but also the vniuersal graces of the holy ghost. Upon one sure stone, saith Zachary (whō Paule calleth Christ) shall be seauen

eyes, which are the seauen spirits of god. With these eyes lightneth he the herts of godly men, and kindleth their mindes to the true loue of God. Hys worde is a lanterne to their féete, & a light to their pathes. Pure is his commandement, geuing clearnesse to the sight. Open yu mine eies lord (saith Dauid) & then shal I wel perceiue ye wonderfull misteries of thy doctrine.
                           8 Upon his head (saith S. Iohn) were also many beautifull crownes, like as were before in figure vpon the heade of Iosedech the high priest in token y• christ is the high king ouer al worlds, regions and ages. For he is ye Lord of hostes, & the eternall king of glorye, he was constitute a principall gouernour our Sion, ye holy hyl of the lord. He geueth prosperitie to kings, and hath their victori in his hands. In him as in their head, haue all his elect mē
                              bers their crowns. Both wt mercy shal he crowne them and also with longe kindenesse. For Peter, hath he laid vp a crowne of incorruptible glorye, for Iohn, a crown of lif, for Paul a crown of rightuousnes, & so forth. For the whole conflict, victori, and triumphe of

the saints, is of him alone.
                           9 He had a special name written, or eternally of god his father appointed, whose excellent maiestie no creature vnderstanding was able of his owne industry to comprehende. Omnipotent was this name, maruelous, honorable holy, and terrible, Adonay, Emanuel, a name of saluation, & a name aboue al names. Yea, ye Lord was his name, or ye Lord our rightuous maker.
                           10 No man knoweth this name, saue he him selfe onely, and they to whom he hath shewed it. Neyther fleshe nor blo
                                 •
                              d, gentill nor Iewe, hipocryte nor false christian, hath rightl
                                 •
                               knowdn it. No, though they haue said, lord, lord. For none cā say ioyntly yt Iesus is the lord, but in ye holi ghost, which openeth al godly veritie. In this name is registred ye elect number of gods adoptiue childrē, whō ye world, doth not know for hys, nor neuer wil do.
                           11 And this lord was beutifully adorned wt a vesture faire & comely, but it was al dipt in blood, sō haue takē this garmēt for his rightuousnes wherin hath appeared all auengementes

ouer his enimies, Som haue supposed it to be his churche, all bloudy in his martires and constant witnesses. But vpon their side am I which haue takē it for his flesh, for that did he on as a vesture. So sore hath that vesture ben stryped, and so gréeuo
                                 •
                              slye-wounded, that from the sole of the foote to the ouermost part of ye head, was no whole place in it. This mighty capitayne is he which came from Edom and Bosra▪ his clothes be sprinkled with red. His apparell is all spotted, much lyke vnto his raiment that treadeth in the wine presse. For his mortall nature suffered most paynefull death. Alone tr
                                 •
                              de he downe ye wine presse in th
                                 •
                              se dayes, & had no mā to help him. Alone was he wounded for our offences, alone were our punishmentes laid vpō him, wt whose strips we ar now heled.
                           12 And his name (saith s. Iohn) besids yt is spoken afore, is ye eternal word of god. He is called ye word which was in ye beginning wc god, which furnished ye heuens aboue, which ordered al thīgs beneth & now last of al toke flesh, restoring, lightning, quickning, heling, & sauing

all them yt truly beleueth in him,
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And the warriours vvhich were in heauē, 2. follovved him. 3. vpon vvhyte horses, 4. clothed vvith vvhite and pure silke, 5. and out of his mouth vvent a sharpe svverd, 6. that vvith it he should smite the Heathē, 7. And he shal rule them vvith a rodde of yron, 8. and hee trode the vvine fat of the fiercenesse, 9. of the vvrath of almightie God, 10. And hath on his vesture, 11. and on his thigh, a name vvritten, 12. king of all kings, 13. & Lord of all Lords.
                        
                           The commentary
                           1 The valiaunt warryours or constant ministers which were in heauen or in the holy housholde of faith, dyd follow him in a comely order vpō faire white horses.
                           2 Accordyng to his scriptures dyd they lead their conuersation. After the rules of hys godly discipline dyd they liue. They fashioned thē selues to ye example yt was shewed thē in ye mount.
                           3 None other are these horses, then their corruptible bodyes prepared to battail. They which are of Christ doth mortifie the vices and lustes of theyr flesh, they tame their carnall affectiōs. Like perfect men they brydle their bodies to the obedience of ye spirite. So to

become ye true seruantes of rightuousnesse and no more to do seruice vnto sin. White are these horses for ye pure word of ye Lord which gouerneth thē No meruaile though these myghtie souldyers foloweth ye Lord, cōsidering he is so oft in the scriptures called the lord of hosts. A like similitude dyd the seruant of Helizens ye Prophet behold in a vision throug Gods permission in Dotham.
                           4 This army of the Lord here were appareled preciously with pure white silk or fine raynes, betokening ye pure innocensy which they haue in Christe theyr general captain. Not carnal is this armour, but euermore spirituall after ye doctrine of S. Paule. Though we walke in the flesh (saith he) yet do we not fight after a fleshly maner. For the weapons of our warre are not carnal things, but things mighty in God. Bewtifull & fayre is my welbeloued (saith the eternall Salomon) for hys soule pleaseth his Lord, and is loued agayn of him. His fauour & his mercy is vpon his holy ones, he hath a louing respect vnto his chosen number.

A notable singe of victory in the faithfull are also these white horses & vestures, for afore they ar called iustificacions of the saintes.
                           5 And out of his Godly mouth (sayth the Text) proceded forth a two edged swerd, which is the fearce iudgement of his mighty word. By this effectual swerd are the faithfull beleuers woū
                              ded vnto life, and ye vnbeleuers to the death of dampnacion. For vnto some it is the sauour of life, and vnto some againe ye sauour of death vnto death. By this swerd also shal the dead braū
                              ches be cut from the vine, and the corrupted members from ye whole body. The gotes shal be deuided from the lambes, and the euil from ye rightuous Oh, how sharp, fierce, and tirrible wil this sentence of ye lords indignaciō be at that day? Depart from me ye cursed into euerlasting fyre. Yet shall it be vnto ye faithful a perpetuall power, victory, & triumphe ouer their enymies.
                           6 Ouer & besides all this, goeth that swerd frō his eternal mouth to ye intēt he should therwt correct their Heathē, or reform
                                 •
                               thē of their heathinish life.

So that if they wil not at ye wholsome admonishmēts of his word repent and amend their olde conuersacion, yt than they should be condemned by the same for their wilful contempt. If men wil not turne (saith Dauid) he shall whet his swerde against them. He wil sharpen it as the lightening and aquite his enymies their wickedmes.
                           7 This mighty Lord shal rule them with a strong rodde of yron, which is the inuincible veritie. This is the rod of right order, the septure of the kingdome, and the wand of power, whom the Lord sent frō Sion to haue sway among our enymies. So strong is this septure, that it wil not bowe. No place wil it geue to ye contrary parte. If they will not therewith be ordred, he shall breke them in peces as ye potter doth his pot, in such maner as they neuer shal recouer agayne.
                           8 The winefat of ye great fiercenesse and sore displeasur of almighty God, shal he tred downe with power. More greuously shal they be opressed at this latter comming by his set sētence, thā they wer afore at Hierusalē by Uespasianus

and Titus. The vineyarde of the Lord of hostes was the house of Israell. This brought he out of Egipt by strong hande. Thereof looked hée to haue had grapes, and it brought hym foorth bryers and thistles. Their vines were as the wilde vines of Sodome. Bitter were their grapes as the poyson of Dragons, and as the cruel gaul of Adders. Therfore will he break the hedge, and throw downe the wal, that it may be troden vnder foote.
                           9 Great anguishe shall bée vpon the earth in his fury, and wrath vpō that people in his anger. They shall fall on the edge of the swerd and be dispersed. Both here shall they haue griefe, and also in the world to come.
                           10 This victorious horse man hath vpon his white vesture besprinckeled with bloud, which is his innocent mā
                              hood crucified.
                           11 And vpō his tender thigh (whom some call his churche, some his scriptures, as flesh of his fleshe, or spirite of his spirite) this name of magnificence written.
                           12 In both of them is it manifestlye

expressed yt he is both king of kinges, and also Lorde of Lordes, the great guide of right gouernours, and yt monarke of godly magistrates. By kings is his generation discribed of Mathew in the posteritie of Dauid, and of Luke by faithfull fathers vnto Adam which had the first promise of health. Both doth the godly actes of his natural mā
                              hood and also the holy spirite whom he left here to the comfort of all true beléeuers, declare that he is the eternall attourney of God, his Apostles & true seruaunts affyrming ye same. And these are his garmente and thigh. By hys death is our nakednesse couered, which are his misticall members. Of his spirite is our strength, which are the generation séeking the Lord of Iacob.
                           13 Both hath he giuen hym of God the high seat of Dauid his father, and also the vniuersall power in heauen and in earth, as he by whom all things were first created. For his power is an euerlasting power, and his kingdome such as shall neuer perishe. And all this is comprehended in yt he is called the sonne of the highest, and in that he

alone hath immortalitie, inhabyting the light that no man can attayne, to whom be honour and euerlasting empire, Amen. In this vesture and thigh are his titles written as to hys onely behou e, that no man shuld of presumption vsurpe them neither by supremite nor vycarage, his church and posteritie acknowledging ye same euermore.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And I savve an Angell, 2. stande in the sunne, 3. and he cryed vvith a loude voyce, 4. saying to all soules that flye by the middest vnder the heauen, 5. Come and gather your selues togither, 6. vnto the supper of the great God, 7. that ye may eate the fleshe of kynges, 8. & of high captaine, 9. & the flesh of mightie men, 10. and the flesh of horses, 11. and of them that sit on them, 12. and the flesh of all free men & bondmen, 13. both of small and great.
                        
                           The Commentary.
                           1 After this reuelation I sawe (saith sainct Iohn) a beautifull Angell, betokening not onely the Apostles but all other faithfull ministers in the word, els, hauing the Apostles spirite.
                           2 In the sunne stedfastly stoode thys Angell which signifieth Christ yt cleare sunne of rightuousnesse, ye bright morning star in the middest of the cloude,

the expresse Image of God & substance of his glory. In the strong faith of his name and word stande these worthie witnesses agaynst the whole swarme of Antichristes, not once remouyng their fote from ye rock, which is Christ also, for no persecution nor death.
                           3 These hath cryed and yet shall crye still to the worldes ende, with a mightie loude voyce or a sure constant spyrite. Earnestly shall they protest and publish vnto the fethered foules of the ayre, that flye by the middest of heauen, by whome are vnderstanded the méeke sprited multitude, made spirituall by fayth and by knowledge of heauenly misteries.
                           4 These as flying byrdes are taken vp from vnpure delightes, leauing at their tayles all corruptible thinges. They lift vp them selues aboue them selues, & haue their cōuersatiō in heauē vnfainedly. Yea, these are those gentil soules whom ye heauenly father aboū
                              dantly féedeth without theyr deseruings. Such a soule was faithfull Abraham in Mesopotamia, Moyses in Synai, Helias in Carme, Danyell

among the Lyons the children of Israel in the wildernesse, Paul in Damascus, Iohn in Pathmos, and many other more which afterward became Angels also in the sunne, or teachers in Christ. And this not onely hath ben, but shall be also stil to the worlds end the tenour of their crye.
                           5 Come you that haue receyued the veritie, from the heauy and carefull cures of this worlde and gather your selues togither into the vnitie of one faith and spirite. Knit your selues togither in christian loue whiche is the cheayne of perfection, & let the peace of God which passeth all wit kéepe your hartes and vnderstandyngs in Christ Iesu, that ye may be counted worthye your christien vocation.
                           6. And so prepare your selues as hys louinge frindes vnto the bounteous supper of the almightye God (whiche is the eternall refection of soule) that ye may be fed with his most precious delicates. Learne of the word of God what is his heauenly wyll, and folow it in your works: Flée therby from all worldly lusts, liue soberly, iustly, & godly

here, abyding his glorious aperāce.
                           7 So order your selues in liuing & doctrine; yt ye may eate ye flesh of kings, or take frō ye worldly gouernors by your godly preaching al yt is filthy & carnall.
                           8 Consume ye fierce flesh of ye captayns in plucking thē frō crueltie & mallice.
                           9 Denowre ye froward flesh of mē that be mighty in power & possessiōs, cause thē to leaue their superfluous vanities
                           10 Spare neither horses nor yet those that sit vpō them, but byte both theyr fleshes harde. Rebuke both the beastly Antichrist & ye prince yt is ruled by him.
                           11 Plucke from those belly Gods, byshops and priestes their pompes, & lecherous pleasures, & from those yt follow them in superstitions, the cruell persecuting of innocents.
                           12 See that no flesh be left vntouched, neither of frée men nor bonde men, rulers nor subiects, maisters nor seruāts: Neyther of small nor great, poore nor riche, low nor high, but be doing with thē all. Play as doth the Egles & other rauening fouls. Wher as ye sée a dead carkasse, or body without faith & spirit, thither resort ye apace.
                           
                              Tell euery man his right offyce. Exhort the kyng to be learned, and to liue in the fear of ye Lord. The prince to be wise, and the Iudge to be godly. Bid the graunde captaynes be faythfull to theyr commons, and the great rich men more mercyfull to the poore. Commaūde the carnall hypocrites no longer to dissemble, & their vndiscréets clients no longer to folow thē in darknesse. Require them no longer to ney after their neyghbours wyues lyke 
                                 •
                              ancke stoned horses, & the other no lō
                              ger to pamper them vp to all beastlye vices: Charge the gouernours to rule faithfully, & the commō people to obey louyngly. Sée that the woman obeye theyr husbandes, the chyldren theyr fathers, the seruants theyr maysters. And agayne that the men be louing to theyr wyues, gentyle to theyr chyldren, & fauourable to their seruants. Open the foure cornerde shéete as did Peter. Sley all maner of foure footed beastes of the earth, vermin, wormes, and foules of the ayre, & eat them. Rebuke them with pacience whatsoeuer they be, tyrāts, persecutors, murtherers,

glottons, Antichristes, extortioners, ribalds, Idolatours, théeues, and pluck from them their filthye and carnall customes. Ye shall eate the flesh (saith Ezechiell) of the worthyes, and drink the bloud of the princes of the land, of the wethers, of the lambs, of the gotes, and of the oxen that be al slayne at Basan.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And I savv the beast. 2. And the kings of the earth, and their warryers. 3. Gathered together. 4▪ To make battayle. 5. Against hym that sate vpon the horse. 6. And against hys souldiours. 7. And the beast was taken. 8. And with him that fals prophet 9. That tought miracles before him. 10. With vvhich he deceiued them that receiued the beasts mark. 11. And thē that worshipped his Image. 12. These both werre caste quick into a ponde 13. Of fyre burning vvith brimston. 14. And the remnaunt were slaine vvith the svvord of him that sate vpō the horse 15. Which svvord proceedeth out of his mouth. 16. And all the soules vvere stuffed vvith their flesh.
                        
                           The commentary
                           1 Anone after this I behelde (saith S. Iohn) the great horible beast that rose out of the sea, that battailed with the Saintes, and that beare the greate

whore of Babilon which is the generall Antichrist.
                           2 I saw also following him, the cruell kinges of the earth and their host of bloudy warriours, the mitered bysshops of his beastly kingdome wt their great bellied monks and priestes, the malicious tirants of the world, with their mad moodye magistrates and slaues.
                           3 These gather them selues togeather in one minde of mischiefe, & hath done since Christes assencion. They muster in aray as dyd Pharaoes host, they buskle together as dyd Cayphas hyered knights in the dark with fyre brands and weapons.
                           4 To make fierce war or very sharp battaile against the most valiant capitayne Iesus Christe, which sate vpon the aforesayde whit horse, and against mighty stomaked soldiours of his faithful army of true christiās. Neuer was the holy gospell yet sincerely taught, the glory of God proponed, and the inordinate liuings of men reprehended, but such vprore of hipocrits, and suche

tumulte of tyrantes hath followed.
                           5 The word of the Lord is alwayes of one nature, to be the marke of contradiction and rocke of reproch. Horsemen for the more parte are these, malicious warriours against Christ & his word, sturred, prouoked, and set foreward by ye beastly bishops. None other caused Herode & Pylate to put Christ vnto death but Annas & Caiphas. Non other moued Felix the president of Iury to emprison Paule, but the puffed vp prelate Ananias. Traianus ye Emperour would neuer so extremely haue persecuted ye Christian church, nor yet other cruell tyrauntes euer since; had they not béene propped forewarde by such pampred palfraies of the diuil.
                           6 Not onely agaynst Christ doe they moue this bold battail, but also against those that faithfully beleue his word, which are the déere members of hys mitticall body. No blasphemies, false myracles, lyes, nor obprobryous slaunders & rebukes spare they, to blemish thy opinion to the worlde, besides the most cruell kyndes of death. The captaine of this wicked army is that tirrible

beast whom Danyell also beheld in a vysiō, with yron téeth deuouring, and with nayles of brasse distroying, and stamping the residue vnder hys féete.
                           7 This horrible beast (saith S. Iohn) this filthy body of Antichrist, comprehending all the great aduersaries of the Lord was taken sodainly.
                           8 And with hym the false Prophet, or beast rysing out of the earth, betokening his false preachers.
                           9 Which wrought vayne myracles before him as did Iannes & Iambres the sorcerers of Egipt before Pharao, in counterfaiting Moyses and Aaron. Yea, by their trāsubstauntiaciōs, they can take from bread the substaūce, the accydents still remayning. They can hold the shadow whan ye body is gone, besides that they can doe in Purgatorie and hell by theyr sacrifices of satisfaction.
                           10 With such deceitful myracles and lying signes shall those be deceyued by them that hath by a false beleue receiued into theyr cōsciences the vnwholsome mark of ye beast, or such a corrupt

fayth as shall cause their damnacion.
                           11 And they in lyke case shalbe seduced by thē, yt hath worshipped ye beastly Image of that great Antichriste, or inclyned to any worldly potentate in the vpholdinge of hys false religion. So sealed Cayphas the hartes of the wauerynge multytude of the Iewes wyth that markynge yron of Sathan that they coulde be but hys ministers. In no case coulde they saue Iesus, but Barrabas the murtherer. Though they receiued him ioyfully not long afore into the citie with Benedictus qui venit in nomine domini, yet could they at that time but crye, Crucifige, Crucifige eum No they had powre to doe none other but to crucifie him in déede whiche is to worship the beastes Image or to folow ye wicked intēt of yt beastly generation, as their faithfull clyants doth yet still to this day.
                           12 Both these twayne (saith the text) the head and the body, the beast with hys false prophete, were cast quicke by the mighty iudgment of god into a déepe lake of most terrible fyre boylynge with stinkinge brimstone.

For vnbewares shall destruction light vpon that cursed generatiō, according to the faithfull request of Dauid, and sodenly shal they fall into their owne mischiefe.
                           13 Without warning shall the great day of ye Lordes indignation light vpon them, and bring thē to nought for euer. Hastely shall death attache thē for their wickednesse sake, and quicke shall they droppe into hel with Chore, Dathan, and Abyron. As a waightye stone or leade shall they sinke to ye bottome, and the pit shal swallowe them vp for their exceding rebellion. For like as they stode vp against Moyses. & Aaron, so hath this beastely generatiō against God and his Christ. Therfore are they here specifyed after a moste strange & terrible sort to be throwen foorth. For thrée causes may it be that they are called here quick. One is in yt their stinking remnaunt shall at that dreadfull daye bée a liue after the doctrine of Paule. An other, in that they haue wilfully, vpon a set mallyce resisted ye knowen verytie, detortinge it to their owne propre lust. If I had not

(sayth Christ) done among them such workes as neuer man did, they should be fautelesse. But they haue certienly knowen thē, yet haue they hated, both me and my father. The Paganes not beleuing, are iudged all ready, and go to hell dead, where as they knowing the will of their Lorde and not doeing it, shall after an other sort be plaged. Fyre shall they haue with heate, and brimstone with stinke. The thirde is, in that they shall haue palpable darkenesse, with weping and gnashinge of téethe, their worme neither dying nor yet their fyre going out. And lyke as ye Diuell was throwne forth at the death of Christ, and soone after that the prelates and Pharises of the Iewes, as the head with the body, so shall at that tyme Antichrist with his church, the Pope with his clergy, and Mahomete with his sectes, as ye head with the body also.
                           14 The residue (sayth saynt Iohan) as Kinges, captaynes, strong, weake, high, lowe, greate, and small, were slaine with ye sharpe two edged sword, of hym that yet to this houre sytteth

vpō ye horse, which is Christ Iesus in ye gloryfied nature of his manhode.
                           15 This mighty sworde proceded out of his reuerende mouth. For it is the stronge worde of him that lyueth for euer, and hath in it both sprit and life. Necessary it is for thē that hath bene eyther seduced by their crafts, or coacted by their threateninges, to be towched with his sword. For he that is not therby slayne from sinne & the world, shall not ryse vp to the lyfe which is in Christ. Hée that is not with hym dead from the ordinaunces of menne, but styll is ledde with tradicions, can not be clere from the cursse, nor yet be the heyre of promise. Therfore must they be slayne dead with this sword, eyther to repentaunce & amendement of life, or else by the harde iudgements of the same to eternall dampnation.
                           16 Which waye so euer it be, all the aforesayd foules, or peoples whome God hath raysed from this worlds affections, shall be fulfylled with their fleshe. Whether they be saued or dāpned they wil most highly reioyse, cōsidringe it is the pleasure of GOD.

Both wayes shall they be satisfied. I
                                 •
                               they be saued, than must they be glad, for that their number is so muche the more increased, and for ye their selues hath escaped lyke daunger. If they bée dampned, than must they reioyce also to se the right iustice of God. For the rightuous shall make mirth beholding the vengeaunce, and shall washe their handes in the bloud of the wicked, all fleshe abhorring to loke vpon them.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The xx. Chapter.
                     
                        THe laste enterprise of Sathan the common aduersary of mā, doth this chapter folowing declare, fetching an originall from the béeginning of Christes spiritull kingdōe to conclude with the whole for our necessarie instruction. As a briefe rehearsall of all that is in a maner spoken afore was this vnto Iohn, leaste hée shoulde of obliuiousnesse forget (as mannes nature is forgetful) these wō
                        derfull misteries and singuler premonishments of the Lorde, most expediēt to be knowen of his church. That she

might by them, s
                           •
                         aforehande the wily craftes of the diuell and his members, and to beware of them. Besids that to take courage, patiently to suffer their cruell persecucions. For a thing oft rehersed departeth not so soone ye memory, as yt is but once tolde. Which caused this Euangelist not onely here in this place▪ but also in his Gospell & first Epistle ofte to repeate the sayinges, least he shoulde seme fayntely to passe them ouer, and bycause ye reader shoulde the more earnestly marke them.
                     
                        
                            THE TEXT.
                        1 And I savve an Angell 2. Come dovvne from heauen 3. hauing the key of the bottō
                           lesse pyt. 4. And a great chayne in his hande 5. And he toke the Dragon, the olde serpent

(vvhyche is the Diuell and Sathanes), 6. And hee bounde hym a thousand yeares, 7. And cast hym into the bottomlesse pitte, 8. And he bounde hym, 9. and sette a seale on hym, 10. that hee should dis
                              •
                           eyue the people no more, 11. tyll the thousande yeares. vvere fulfilled, 12. And after that must he be losed 13. for a lyttle season.
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           
                           The Commentary.
                           1 IN the end of these reuelations afore rehersed (saieth S. Iohn) sawe I in a secrete vysion an Angell of most singuler bewtye; betokning Iesus Christ the Aungell of Gods eternall couenaunt.
                           2 From the high heauen aboue came this Angell downe vnto the earth, sent of the euerlasting father. For neyther spared that louing father to sende his most dere and onely sonne at the time appoynted, nor yet the obedient sonne to submit him selfe to the shape of a seruaunt and so become manne. 
                                 •
                              i
                                 •
                              
                              t
                                 •
                              riously did he ouercome both deathe and the Diuell, as appeareth by hys great miracles, resurrection and ascē
                              cion. And lyke as he came downe first of all with a p
                                 •
                              ssible meekenesse, so came he downe ater yt wyth an impassyble and inuysible mayiestie.

Sodeine was thys latter comminge downe & most maruelous to ye worlde, such tyme as he by his heauenly spirit replenished his Apostles with all necessary knowledg. And the noyse therof was hearde the worlde ouer, tuche tyme as they did preach it abrode. Sī
                              sibly was this cōming downe expressed in Saule, & olso the mighty power therof, when hée throwe him to the grounde, and sayd, Saule, Saule, why persecutest thou me?
                           3. Thys Aungell had the keye of the bottomelesse pet or power ouer hell, and a greate chayne in hys hande or full libertie to restrayne the spirituall aduersarie. For vnto him was geuen all power in heauen and in earth.
                           4 Authoritie had he to destroye him that had rule ouer death, which was than the Diuell. Though I was dead (sayth Christ) yet am I now a lyue 
                                 〈◊〉
                               euer and euer, hauing the keyes both of death and hell.
                           5 And accordinge to his authoritys (sayth saynt Iohn) he toke the fierce Dragon in hande that was wonte so maliciously to noy, that olde wily serpent

that of so long tyme hath wyth infinite craftes deceiued, which is the very diuell himselfe or malicious accuser of man, and is called Sathan, or the cruell aduersarye as he is moste worthy. For both is he a spightfull aduersarie to God, euermore withstā
                              ding his will, & also vnto man in plucking him backe frō folowing ye same.
                           6 Lyke a most valiaunt captain fell he vpō that stronge armed house watcher, & ouercame him, depriuing hym both of weapon and spoyle. He layed a snare for the outragious Behemoth, and caught him. He ringed the nose of the greate Leuiathan, and so brought him vnder. Yea, he bounde that malicious sathan and made him sure for a thousande yeares space, to make of the vessels of wrath ye vessels of mercy. This did he by his stronge worde of couenaunte, whome he made for a thousand generations. And a full perfourmaunce it is of Gods first promise for mannes behoue, that Christ should tread downe the head of the serpent. For a thousande yeares was this restraynte. Marke besides the misterie,

the tyme from the ascention of Christ vnto the dayes of Siluester the second Bishop of Rome of that name, and ye shall all finde that it was frō Christes natiuitie a complete thousande, after all the Historiographers. By such Nicromancy as he learned of a Sarazin in Spayne obtayned he the papacy, & as witnesseth Iohn Wycleaue in his booke De solutiōe sathane, in Christes vicarship he lowsoned that diuell whō Christ had afore shut vp, and sett him againe at large to deceiue a freshe. Cō
                              sider for the tyme that hée was thus bound, the constaunt saith of the christians, and the inuincible heartes of thyr martyrs, and ye shall finde them farre different from them which hath bene since. He was then so weake, so infatuate and babysh, that not onely wyse men, learned men, and stronge men, dyd set him lyghte, but also yong maydens, chyldren, and tender infantes in a maner did laugh him to scorn, & set all his subttle slaights at nought. Euidente wyll this bee to all them that shall read ye liues of ye holye martirs & sainctes of ye primatiue church.

Lyke a byrde was that croked Leuiathan in those dayes so tamed, that no man set by him at all.
                           7 For not onely was he then bound but also throwen downe with violēce into the bottomelesse pytte. For that tyme might they go safe vpon the adder and scorpion, they might tread vnder their féete both the Lyon and Dragon. Both the Diuell and his Angels might they then set at nought.
                           8 Yea, he was shutte vp, and so was double bounde. So was his power taken from him, that vpon neither side could he harme. Neyther was he able to plucke them from Christes fayeth by flatteringe prosperitie, nor yet by vrgent aduersitie. Neither could tyrā
                              nies nor herisies for that time preuail agaynst the Gospell.
                           9 Fynally he set a sure seale vpō him which was his word, will, and commaūdemēt, yt he should no more of his own presumption deceiue ye people wt errours & Idole worshipings yt beleued in him, or that were predestinat to be saued, till such time as the afore sayd thousād yeres wer fully acōplished, or

as he shoulde permit him thervnto for their vnbeleues sake.
                           10 By thys doth the holy Ghost, here assartayne vs that Christ hath so suspended the subtilties, and suppressed ye venemouse craftes of Sathan for his electes, that he can not hurt them in one heire of their head. For onely is all this spoken for the chosen number. No part hath therein the reprobate vessels, neuer was the Diuell from thē yet speared, bat hath bene in all ages with thē famyliar. Onely are the consciences of the rightuous by thys fréedome quieted, all other still left in captiuitie. This reuelation respecteth in this poynt the inwarde kingedom of Christ, or the hidden congregation of the faithfull, whom the worlde beholdeth with froward eyes, and not the blasynge Sinagoge of Antichrist whom it laugheth vpon so freshly.
                           11 None otherwyse were they for all those thousand yeares vexed of Sathā and his curssed members, but as was pacient Iob, in their outwarde substaunce & bodies. No power had he vpon their soules all that longe season.
                           
                              12 And where as it is here sayed yt after these thousand yeares Sathan must be let lose agayne for a certayne teme. Consider it to be the promise of God, which must in effect be fulfilled. Not yt he shall agayne lose him which hath once bound him for euer, vut yt he shall permit other to doe it according to his threatning promise, ye vnthankefulnesse and mallyce of wicked doers requiring none other. In ye end of these thousand yeares raigned in ye papacy at Rome the afore named Necromanser Siluester, which was both a blacke Mouncke and also a Frenchman borne. This beastly Antichriste boasting himselfe not onely to bée Christes vicar in earth, but also to be equal with him in maiesty and power, set f
                                 •
                              rst the Diuell at large by his Necromancy, which toke frō the heartes of mem the liuing worde of the Lord leste they shoulde be saued. Frō thēce forth were not the holy scriptures regarded, but olde wyues tales & Iewish fabels most highly reputed. Them came in Cannōs, Decrées, Sentences, Sinodals, Decretals, Clemētines, Exextrauagauntes

with other Popysh 
                                 •
                              awes, the gospell claene set apart. About this time ollo (as master Iohn Carion wryteth in hys cronicle) floryshed the Lordly order of cardinals, and grewe into a wonderful estimacion in ye worlde. The vniuersites were thē furnished wt learned mē, mightely to proue the Pope Christes vicar in earth, and the onely husbande and ouerséer of hys churche. General counsels were oft gathered to dyspute wt all Christendome, that none might dispence in matters of conscience, but he and they whom he should appoynte, and that he could in no wyse erre. No, though when the candle were out, he went to bed with an other mans wife, besydes that I wil not spaeke at this time. By this meanes got he an imperial seate, and might make both Emperours & kinges at his pleasure. And lykwyse depose them when he lusted. He myght distribute the kingdomes and geue the great possessions of this worlde to whom he lust
                                 •
                              d, yea to hys owne bastardes and chamberlynes as he dyd manye tymes. For

of the Diuell he hath receyued them, where as Christ did vntterly forsake them. And for so much as he was the high Priest after ye order of Sathā, be myght kepe a generall marte all hys lyfe tyme, & sell all the Bishoprickes, benefices, degrées, and offices of hys church. He might subiect the gospel to his owne interpretation, make new constitutions, release synne for mony, make euery day new Gods, and doe many other thinges els. No end was then of their gaudyshe ceremonyes, brawlynges in the temple, Singings, bels, orgayns, Images, ornamentes, lampes, candels, holy dayes, shauings, surplesses, pater nosters, cōmaunded 
                                 〈◊〉
                              , & such like, that a man woulde haue thought them Angels when they were very Diuels in dede. For the tyme that Sathan was thus sette at large by Christes onely vicar, was ther not one martyr alowed vnlesse it were for deposinge of Princes, and defending the liberties of holy churrh agaynst them, lest theyr murtherers & théeues beynge wythin sacred orders, shoulde be hanged with the secule
                                 ••
                              , Marke the condition of the tyme.
                           
                              Afore that Sathan was thus at libertie, he remained secret in the harts of euill men. Now is he abrode in theyr outward ceremonies and rites, ready to be séene of all the worlde, if pryde, pompe, hawtinesse, vaine glory, may shew him, or if hipocrisie, errour, supersticion, and all other diuellishnesse can tell wher he is. When Christ shut him vp, he toke Idolatrie from the people, the Pope hath restored it vnto thē againe in thus settinge him at large. In this is he not denied to haue bene afore this time abrode among ye wicked. For little lesse then foure hundred yeares afore the end of this thousand, began ye two Monarks of Antichristes kingedome the Pope in the West vnder Phocas the Emperour, and great Mahomet in ye East vnder Heraclius, marke it in the cronicles who so list. For afore that time was not the Pope taken for the vniuersall head of the church, nor yet for Christes vicar. And this could not haue béen vnlesse he had after some sort, béen at libertie. Euermore hath he reigned wtout restraint among the vngodly.
                           
                              But neuer so manifestly as then, hys abhominacions accouonted for holynesse in the churche. At this losinge of Sathan or very defection as Paul calleth it, openlye appeared the man of sinne, the sonne of perdicion, and the aduersarye which exaleth him selfe aboue al that beareth the name of God. Faith wared so fainte and charitie so colde, ye scarce appeared one spark of ye truth. The church becāe a peruerse generation, & hir children were very vnfaithful. Afore regned be enermore in ye world, but neuer in Christes congregation till that time. Neuer was the vniuersall church of Christ defiled with so many abhominable kindes of Idolatrye before.
                           13 But it so continued not longe. For the text saieth, he was losed but for a litle season. Immediately after perceued Berengarius the Archedecon of Angoy in Fraunce that all was well, and with Bruno the bishop impugned their realitie, Idēptitie, & naturalitie in the sacrament, to bringe it againe to Christes cleare institution. After him followed Waleranus ye bishop of

Medeburge and did the same in Germany, with many other prelates and doctours Consequently ensued ye Waldeanes and Albigeanes pretending the Apostles life & doctrine, men doubtlesse of a godly zeale and spirit, and of them the Antichrists slew more then a hundreth thousande, besides an hundreth and foure score whome they brent bycause they would neuer abiure. What Guid
                                 •
                               Bonatus, Ioannes Semeca, Guilhelmus de sancto amore, Marsilius Paduanus, Arnoldus de villa noua, Frāciscus Petrarcha, & other learned men dyd against them after that, it were very long to write. Iohn Wicleaue in Englād, & Iohn Husse in Boheme, men of excelent life & learning, with diuers other more, replyed earnestly against their transubstanciaciōs and other sorceries. Laurēcius Ualla, denyed the donation of Constantyne. Ihō Wassalus of Groning in Friesland, called the light of the world, cō
                              dempned vtterly their purgatory and pardōs. Now last of all commeth Martyne Luther, Ioannes Oecolāpadius, Huldricus Zwinglyus, Pomeranus,

Brencius, Melācthon, Bucer, Bullinger, with other sincere and godly deuynes, and they turne ouer their vniuersall kingdome. So merciful is the Lord to hys people in this latter ende of the world, that by these and such other the Antichrist is clearly vttered, and all his Hypocrisy disclosed. I doubt not but within fewe dayes, the mightie breath of his mouth (which is hys liuing Gospell) shall vtterly distroye hym with hys whole generation of shauelings, by their faythfull administration in the worde.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And I sawe seates, 2. and they satte vpon them, 3. and the iudgement was giuen vnto them. 4. And I sawe the soules of them, 5. that were beheaded for the vvitnesse of Iesus, 6. and for the vvorde of God. 7. vvhich had not vvorshiped the beast, 8. neither his Image, 9. neyther had taken his marke vpon their foreheads, 10. or on their handes, 11. And they lyued, 12. and raigned vvith Christ, 13. a thousand yeares. 14. But the other of the dead men lyued not againe, 15. till the thousande yeares vvere finished.
                        
                           
                           The Commentary.
                           1 Whiles the Dragon was thus tyed vp and throwne into the bottomles pit for a 
                                 •
                              housand yeares space, a certayne continuance of beinge, the elect had. Whose peaceable estate and condition for that time the text here following declareth, by maner of recapitulation. After the afore rehearsed vision of the serpent. I behelde (saith S. Iohn) seates prepared without number. I saw the harts of faithfull beléeuers (which are the seats of wisdōe after Stlomon) bewtifully garnished wt vertues by the preaching of yu Apostles & other godly techers. Uery peaceable & quietus were these seats. For thogh they had in the worlde on euery syde tribulation, yet had they their contciences quieted in Christ. They considered themselues partakers of the heauenly calling, and reioyced in hope of the glory of gods children.
                           2 Upon these seates sate they which are afore called that people whome Sathan should no more deceine. They setled them selues in the wisdome ye god loueth. They groūded theyr dwelling

wt discreation in his vnderstanding and knowledge. Fast dyd they cleaue to his louinge worde. And for none aduersitie woulde they moue theyr foote from the hard rock whiche is Christ. Thus sate his people in the beautifull seates of peace after Esay in the tabernacles of trust, and in a most plentuous rest, the deceuers and mockers put aparte.
                           3 And as they were thus quieted, the iudgemente or true vnderstandyng of the Lordes verytie was giuen vnto them. Their sences were opened, and great knowledge had they in the scriptures. The figures and prophesies that were hyd to other, were manifeste and open vnto them. The Dark vale was remoued from Moyses face, and the light of the laws appeared. They coulde then decerne good from euill, light from darknesse, and swéete from sower. The yoke was then taken from them, & no longer were they subiecte to straungers. Dead men perceiued the secrets of the Booke. The eyes of the blinde might sée without mist of darknesse.
                           
                              They whiche afore tyme were of an erronious spirite, had than the ryght vnderstanding, and were learned in the lawe. In their inward partes was the knowledge thereof planted of the Lord, and the truth written in theyr hartes, he becomming their God & they his people. Bycause we should not seperate the dead from the quicke, or the departed from the liuing, and so iudge them dyuers, cōsidering they both are of one God, and liue by one spirite, being of one hope and calling. The holy ghost doeth here couple them togither, as shéepe of one pasture, féeding all of one spirituall meate, and drinkyng of one spirituall rock accompanying thē, and as members of one misticall body of Christ in thys present reuelation.
                           4 I also (sayeth saint Iohn) behelde in this secrets mysterie of the spirite the innocent soules of godly men and women, that were beheaded of cruell tyrauntes for the faithfull testimony of Iesu and the constante assercyon of the true word of the Lord God. I perceyued by the scriptures that his true harted witnesses remained not in deth

with the wicked, but passed through
                                 •
                               with the rightuous from the death vnto lyfe, & had the lyfe euerlasting. They are not forgotten wyth the vngodly, but they nowe followe the lambe, and dwell where as he dwellethe. Else would Paule neuer so ernestlye haue desired to be dissolued frō this fleshe, and so to be wyth Christ.
                           5 Not onely is this here spoken of them that wer beheadded, and of none other else, thoughte it séemeth so in the letter, but of all them that hath dyed for the veritie. For than should Esaye, Ieremye, Ezechiell, Amos, Micheas, Zacharye, Steuen, and Iames the lesse, with all those that hath bene burned, strangled, quartred, drowned, stoned, crucyfied, spytted, racked, 
                                 •
                              layed, boyled, stycked, shot throughe wyth arrowes, and that hath suffrid all other terrible tormentes, be rekened to be none of that number. Beheaddyng is here taken for depriuacion of lyfe, lyke as the heade is in scripture taken sometyme for the soule, sometyme for the whole man.
                           
                              6 For standing by Christes veritie, confessinge hym God and man, dyd they loose their liues, which was in the end no losse vnto them but a profitable winning. For vnto such remaineth the crowne of lyfe, the delyghtes of Paradise, and a seate wyth god.
                           7 These worshipped not the beastlye Antichrist, the verye body of Sathan. They bowed not downe, nor yet gaue them selues to such wycked tradicions as that carnall generacion made for their beasty bellyes sake.
                           8 Neyther reuerenced they thys prodigious Image, or such vngodly princes and magistrates as (their trewe offyce set a parte) dyd counterfet hym in crueltie and diuelishnesse. But they rightlye considered with ye faithfull Machabées and apostles, that in such case it was much better to obey God than men.
                           9 Neither had they in their lyfe time taken the printe of his filthie seale vpon their foreheades, professinge in their inwarde consciences those diabolicall rules.
                           10 Nor yet on their handes, agréeyng

to vse them in the outward conuersacion of their bodyes. No yoke woulde they drawe with the infidels, thinking that Christ coulde haue no agréement with Beliall. For through faith they perceyued (as he that is of the spirite discerneth all things) that though they séemed glorious in the face of ye world, yet were they before God abhominable sacriledge. Diligētly they searched the scriptures, and beleued not all spirites, but first proued them whither they were of God or naye. By that knewe they that the homage of soule ought to be giuen to none other than to one liuing God alone, and that none other preceptes of liuing were to bée followed of them, than Christ their sauiour had taught. All other traditions of mē tooke they for straūge doctrine, & for crafti colors of diuilish deceitfulnes
                           11 Therfore whā they were thought of the wicked to be dead, they liued in all swéetnes of ye spirit, in desire of his latter commyng which shall bée to theyr double glory.
                           12 And they reygned wt Christ the pastour & high bishop of their soules, not

onely here were as they suffred wyth hym for a thousand yeres space, but also aboue where as he sitteth on the right hand of gods maiestie seat, thousand wythout end. Than raigneth the godly numbre most of all, whan they seme to ye wicked least of all to reigne, as whan they suffer persecution and death for Christ. For after none other sort reigneth hys churche here, thā he reigned afore them, whose tryumphe was greatest vpon the crosse.
                           13 The thousand yeares of ye reigne of the godly, stretcheth here no farder than the thousande years of the fall of the vngodly, Christes yeares also deducted which is the head of his congregation. For as the one kyngdome decreased, the other alwayes increased, very fewe Christian martyrs are constaunt witnesses perceiued, frō thence forth. For as it appeareth by the historye many were abiured and recāted (which was not séene in the former age) and all in a maner, a small number of the poore, except, vtterly renoū
                              ced the veritye, for the cruell behauior of the Antichristes. In these ii. sortes

afore rehersed, of them that sate vpon the seates and of them that were beheadded for the testymony of Iesu, is it to be marked, that all were not martyrs whome God alowed for his in the prymatiue churche, but that there were of both sortes. So well was he accepted that mortyfied the desires of the fleshe, and offered himselfe a lyuinge sacryfyce vnto God as hée that gaue his life for the veritie.
                           14 But the residue (sayth saint Iohn) or the other sort, called the deade men for that they were not numbred with the ryghtuous, neyther among them that sate vpon the seates, nor yet amonge them that were slayne for the witnesse of Iesu, lyued not agayne after they were once dead, tyll the thousand yeres of their death was throughly fulfilled. The time was whan they which wer dead through sin, did heare the voyce of the sonne of God. They fatihfuly beleued ye word therof, & so it reuiued in him vnto ye lyfe euerlasting, which was both ye life & light of men. Wher as ye froward con
                                 •
                              ēners of ye lyuing word, hauing their cōsciēces sealed

wt ye beasts marke, remained stil in their infidelitie, which is ye very death of ye soule, & so were by the right iudgemēt of God lost for euer. For the sin against ye holy ghost (which is a resistāce against ye manifest truth) shal neither be forgeuen in this worlde nor yet in the world to come.
                           15 A time without end doth this word till, cause this thousand here to be, after the commō vsage of the scripture. Noe sent forth a Rauen out of ye arke, whiche returned not agayne tyl the waters were dryed vp, that is to say, he neuer returned again. Ioseph knew not Mary til she had brought forth hir first borne sonne. That is to say he neuer bodely knew hir. Thou shalte not out of prison till thou hast payde ye vttermost mite .i. thou shalte neuer out. With an hundreth of suche places in the Bible.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT
                        1. This is that first resurrection. 2. Blessed and holy is he, that hath part in the first resurrection. 3. For on suche shall the seconde death haue no povver, 4. But they shall be the prists of God and of Christ. 5. And shal raign vvith him a thousand yeares.
                        
                           
                           The commentary
                           1 This is the first resurrection vnto lyfe, to ryse from sin to repentaunce, from ignoraunce to godly knowledge, and from darknesse to faith. Through the offence of one man entred sin into the world, and through sin death. Necessary it is therefore, to dye vnto sin, and to liue vnto rightuousnesse. And so to rise togither with Christ, séekyng the things which are aboue, & not vpō earth. For neuer shal they come to the seconde resurrection which is vnto the lyfe euerlasting, that will not ryse by repentaunce vnto a new lyfe in hym, which is both resurrection and lyfe.
                           2 Blessed is that man of ye Lord, yea, holy, iust, and perfect may he be reported also of all men, which hath porcion conuenient in ye first resurrection with Dauid, Magdalene, Zacheus, and Peter. Happy are they which hearing the word of God, retayneth it in theyr lyuing. For they being renued with the glad tydinges of lyfe, are depured by the spirite of Christ, sanctified and so made the habitacles of ye holy Ghost.
                           
                              3 Upon such Godly dysposed persons hath the seconde death of the soule (which is eternal dampnatiō) no maner of power nor effectual iurisdiction. For no damnation can be vnto them which are in Christ Iesu, not walking after ye fleshe. Though they haue bene great sinners, yet shall not theyr sinnes be to them imputed, but in the resurrectiō of the wrightuous shall they ryse to immortalyte, and be as the very Angels in heauen. He yt hath taken frō thē the poore of death, shall make thē sure of eternal inheretaūce wt god.
                           4 They shall surely bée the chosen priestes of God the euerlasting father and of his eternall sonne Iesus Christ whiche are of the firste resurrection. Though they be here in the flesh, yet fight they not after the flesh, but they shall folow ye gouernaunce of ye spirit, & geue ouer their bodis for a liuing sacryfice holy and acceptable vnto God.
                           5 And thus shall they reigne wt christ their merciful sauiour & redemer for ye space of ye thousād yeres afore named. None other toke they all yt longe seasō for theyr spiritual Messyas, their eternall

King, their hygh Bishop for all, their mayster, their Lorde, their gyde, their lyght, and ye shepeherde of theyr soules. None other wold they acknowledge but him for their mediatoure & attonement maker, neyther Moyses nor Samuell, Noe, Daniell, nor Iob, Iohan Baptist, Mary, nor Peter. Hée onely was vnto them all wysedome, ryghtuousnesse, holynesse, and redēption. In none other name coulde they fynde health and saluation but alone in hys. Nothing pertayneth this vnto the Popes masse sayers, for they call vpon many names wyth Ora pro nobis, and are of a far other priesthode as we haue declared afore. In christes kyngdō is none outwarde Priesthode, nor sacryfice to be made for sin. For he hath wt one oblaciō for all fully satysfied for ye sins of his electe number for euer. The office of a Christē man now is onely to offer vp himselfe by ye deniall of himselfe, and by the mortificatiō of his fleshe. In the holy supper of the Lorde (which is a mutuall participaciō of his bodi & bloud) is no new sacrifice to be made, but onely a faithfull

remembraūce to be taught of that full and perfect sacrifice that he made once for all, vnlesse we will betray him and crucifie him againe. The dutie of a minister in Christes cōgregation, is with all study and diligence to labour in the holy worde of God, be he bishop, priest, Chaplayne, Pastour, or preacher. Hys ministration is great labour & no dygnitie, payne and not pryde or arrogancie. And hauing his foode and rayment, he ought to require no more.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                            THE TEXT.
                        1 And vvhan the thousande yeares are expyred. 2. Sathan shall be loosed out of prison, 3. and shall go out, 4. to diseeiue the people, 5. vvhich ar in the foure quarters of the earth. 6. Gog & Magog, 7. to gather them togither

to battle 8 vvhose number is as the sande of the sea, 9. And they vvent vpon the plaine of the earth, 10. and compassed the tentes of the sayntes about, 11. and the beloued Citie. 12. And fyre came dovvne from God out of heauen, 13. and deuoured them, 14. And the Diuell that deceyued them, 15. vvas cast into a lake of fyre and brymstone, 26. vvhere the beast and the false Prophet vvere 17. and shall be tormented daye and nighte for euermore.
                        
                           The Commentary.
                           1 After the plentnous description of the true church of Christe, which is vnknowen to the worlde (for the glorious doughter of the eternall Kinge, is from within, sayth Dauid, now foloweth in course the pernicious kingdome of Antechrist, whan it was in ye hyghest pryde, so soone as the afore rehersed thousande yeares (sayth saynt Iohn) are fully accōplished or brought to an ende.
                           2 Sathan the common aduersarie of man shalbe loosed out of his darke pryson, and so shalbe set at large by the sufferance of God, mans wickednesse deseruing none other. A full libertie

shall he haue to do all myschiefe vpon earth, and strongely to delude the vnbeleuers for their vnbeleues sake.
                           3 He shall go fourth with all deceytefull power wherof he is full, transforming himselfe into a resemblaunce of the Angell of lyght, to deceyue the vniuersall people of the world.
                           4 Through the operation of erroure he shall cause them to giue credence vnto lies and false myracles, that they myght be dampned for refusing ye truth and consentinge to such wyckednesse. Uery crafty shall he compasse thē with gynnes of hypocrisye too blinde theyr vnfaythfull myndes, leaste the lyghte of the gospell shoulde be open vnto thē. The abhomination of desolacion shall he set vp in the holy place, to the vtter destruction of theyr fayth.
                           5 Yea, he shall séeke out this people from each, iiii. quarters of the vniuersall earth, to corrupt their consciences with all maner of supersticions.
                           6 Which people of him thus peruerted is called here in misteri, Gog & Magog which is as much to say as couered, & of reuered. For both ye graūd capitains,

and multitudes of thē depending doth these two words cōprehend, ye one couering ye diuel wt many false religiōs & the other in his sorte folowing ye same wicked cōsent. S. Augustine in his .xx. 
                                 •
                              ooke, de ciuitate dei, willeth by Gog to be signified ye glorious hipocrites of the world, & by Magog ye opē enimies of rightuousnesse pretēding ye contrary as testifieth Berrosus the Caldeane in ye first booke of his histories, & fyft chap. Gog was a mighty gouernour in the landes of Sabea and Arabia the ryche, vnder Nemroth ye great Kinge of Babilon and their ruled wyth Sabus his father in the .xviii yere of hys reigne. In the .xxxviii. chapter of Ezechiels Prophecy is he called the chiefe prynce of Mosoche & Turball, whom some expositours take for Capadoce & Spayne. But after the opinion of saint Hierom and Isidorus whych was a Spanayrde, the Hebreues doth take this Thurball for Italye, whyche is muche more agreable to this purpose. Magog was ye second sonne of Iaphet, whyche was the third sonne vnto Noe. Thys Magoge (as wytnesseth

Iosephus in the first booke of his antiquities the xj. Chapter) was the first beginner of the Magogytes, whome ye Grekes called the Scitheanes, & wée now the Tartareanes. And al ye chiefe wryters specyfieth the Turkes of thē to haue takē their first originall. Now marke thys wonderfull misterye, & consider therein both the tyme & story. So shall ye well perceiue ye holy ghost to meane none other hereby this Gog and Magoge, but the Romish Pope & Mahomete, with their blasphemous and wicked generations. Serche the Cronicles and ye shall finde that their beginninges were base, and their estate, simple before ye thousand yeares were finished. But after that they grewe vp so high by theyr fayned simplicitie and simulate holynesse, yt they became the .ii. chefe Monarkes of the earth, and so in processe ruled the vniuersall world. These are the .ij. horns or beastly kingdomes of the great Antichrist or whole bodye of the Diuell, rysyng vp by the earthly studyes and diuelysh deuises of wicked men. By ye doctrine of Aristotle, Plato, Porphirie

Auicenne, Auerois, Auenzoar, and such other, became the Romish Pope Christes vycar, and head of the vniuersall churche. Petrus Lombardus created him a newe diuinitye, so dyd Gracianus monachus a newe Cannō law of decrées to establyshe the same besydes that was done thā by Petrus Conmestor the thirde brother. For all they thrée were the chyldrē of one aduoutrous mother, as witnesseth Antoninus, Hermannus Schedel, Ioannes Textor, and diuerse other Chronographers. By the crafti cōueyaunce of Sergius a false Monke of Constantinople, and of one Mathew the Archdeacon of Antioche, was Mahomete taken for the Apostle of both testamē
                              tes, for the great Prophet of God, and for Messias among the Tartareanes and Arabies, wtth other peoples of ye East. To establish this by a pretensed religyon, and to bring it to a myghty monarchy, by the aduisement of Phinées, Abdias, Cabalchabar, Balteira, Merban, and Elgug, with other Iewes, Iacobynes, Nestorianes, and Arlyanes, they made the blasphemous

lawe of their Alchorane, as testifyeth Iohn Cuspiniane in his boke de Turcarum origine and other auctors else. Thus for the wickednesse and sinnes of the people suffered the Lorde abhominable hypocrites to haue the domynion ouer them. The two hornes are lyke the Lambes hornes at a blushe. For boeth they pretende holynesse in fastinges, in praiers, in almesse dedes, in washings, & in other holy rytes and ceremonies. That a mā seing thē (not hauing knoweledge of ye truth of god, which trieth all) wolde thinke nothing to be more pure, honest, godly, innocēt, cleane, holy, & angleycke, than are their tradicions. Both they confesse one God. Both they commende christ. Both they allowe the scriptures of both lawes. Mahomete callerh Christ the worde of God, the spirite of God, and the soule of God, the most excellēt Prophet and the worthiest among creaturs. But in no case wyll hée haue hym taken for the sonne of GOD, no more than the Pope wyll haue hym taken for a full sauyour wythout hys masses and suffrages. And

lyke as the Pope hath rysen vp by the wilye practyses of Phylosophers, Sophysters, Sentencioners and Canonystes, so hath Mahomete commen vp by the Sobellianes, Manyches, Eunomyanes, Macedonianes, Nestoreanes, and Arryanes with other heretiques. Out of whose opinyons was contriued hys Alchorane as a meane lawe betwyxt Moyses and Christ, bicause ye one (saye they) was too ful of hardnesse, the other too full of libertie. And to call vpon him both Iewes & Christianes, he admytteth after a sort both Circumcision and Baptyme graunting them lybertie to haue many wiues with other voluptuous pleasures.
                           7 Thus vnder simulate religion or pretence of Gods lawe & seruyce, these two tyrauntes, Gog and Magog, the Romysh Pope & Mahomete with their whole generatiōs of like spirite wyth thē, haue gathered thē selues together into one wicked consent against god & his christ. For vnder Gog & Magog are al they cōprehēded, whō sathā deceiued after yt he was set at larg, though these two haue not accorded in other things,

yet haue they boeth agréed in this one poynt by the Diuels entycement, to battayle agaynst the lambe. To withstande the veritie, and impugne the truth of ye Gospel, they haue bene readye euery where, in euery lande, in euery cytie, and in euerye towne. Of one cruel purpose and study to do mischyefe haue these two enymies bene in all places of the world, to persecute Christes poore congregation. This thing doth the daily practises of them both so manifestly declare, that all the worlde se it▪ well inough. These doeth Esay call that strong multitude, whose spoyle Christ shall deuyde, the smith that bloweth the colles in ye hote fyre, and the waster that destroyeth, Ezechiel doeth compare them to a raging tempest, Daniell to the King of the Northe, and Zachary to the Princes of the earth.
                           8 Whose excéeding number (saith saynct Iohn) is as the drye sande that hath bene bast vp wyth the sea, which can in no wyse be numbred. In thys full well maye it be 
                                 •
                              onsidred what a small thynge Christes flocke was in

comparison of these souldiours of Gog and Magog, after sathans going forth, & for ye tyme of their battayle. Innumerable were the sectes of the Pope with those that they brought to that false fayth and obedience. And so were the Prophetes of Mahomete with ye peruerted mulytude. Theyr power was great for the tyme, and their malice vengeable, yet were they as sande drye and vnfruitefull.
                           9 They rose vp in pryde, ryches and ryalty, and alwaies went ouer where as they sée the earth made playne and smoth, and that in euery lande compasse. Their generall iourney was all the worlde ouer towardes them that were poore in spirite, or whose l
                                 •
                              stes were mortified from the worlde
                                 •
                               Consider them for an example, whom they haue cruelly burned and slaine where as they perceiued their croked custōes throwen doune, and the streight rule of Gods worde faythfullye receyued, there persecuted they moste 
                                 •
                              ier
                                 ••
                              sy, there we
                                 •
                              ed they furious and mayde, sparing neyther swerde, fyre, gybbet, nor other torment.
                           
                              
                              
                                 〈1 page〉
                              
                              
such heretykes as woulde not beleue as holy church commaunded. Thys hath bene theyr order for the tyme of Sathans lybertie. And this haue they taken for an hygh poynt of Christan religion. For thys is that houre that Christ prophecyed of, wherein men shold think to do vnto god gret good seruice whā thei put one of his vnto deth.
                           11 Thus haue they wyth all prodigious tyranny compassed the derely beloued Citie of God, or the holy cōgregaton for whom Christ dyed, vtterly to ouerthrowe it. By all maner of craftes and diuelyshe circumuentiōs haue they gone about at that tyme (as they woulde doe yet styll) to destroye that samll remnaunte or church of ye Lord, builded without materiall stone & morter, y• swéete spouse of his with out spot or wrincle. Not onely sought they in ye enterprise to bring to naught the particular cōgregatiōs, but for as much as lay in thē, ye vniuersal church of god, thā liuing. Blessed be our lorde god, though it hath ben since ye loosing of sathā but a pore wretched neglected thing, & of no reputatiō before ye world,

yet hath it bene alwayes before hym a beloued Cytie, and hath defended it so mightely, that nothing hath peryshed of it. No not one heire of theyr heades. What the Turke wyth Mahomets host hath done for hys parte in Egipt, Gréece, Palestyne, Hierusalem, Bulgary, in ye borders of Italy & Spayne, at ye Rhodes, in ye kingdom of Hūgarye, Ludouirus ye king there rufully slaine, & nowe last of all against ye citie of Uyē, I thinke it is knowē vnto all mē. We may se by yt is here writtē of these two enimies Gog & Magog, the daily experiments confirming the same, that they are farre aboue vs in number and power being as the sādes in the sea. Most vainely are we occupied, if we assertaine our selues to haue the victorye ouer them by any other way than the Lorde hath appoynted. Let vs pray therefore vnto the Lorde for grace and than amende our liues, and the plage shall cease. Onely hath he promysed to destroy them all wyth the breath of his mouth and wyth no bodely armoure nor strength of men, as here after foloweth. Let vs in the

meane tyme giue our selues vnto feruent prayer, to compassion of our brethern, to dedes of charytie & pitty, to abstinence from synne, and to the forsaking of our owne desires. For sure we are, yt he shall shorten their dayes of mischiefe for his electes sake.
                           12 In the processe folowing must we take for the tyme past, ye tyme to come, for the clere declaration of the mistery considering euer more the vsage of ye scriptures for tymes. Whan these enimies Gog and Magog, shalbe at the hyghest in their vengeable enterprises agaynst the elect Citie or peaceable congregation of Christ, a consumyng fyre (sayth Saint Iohn) which is the eternal worde of the Lorde shall come downe fréelye out of heauen from the mouth of the great omnipotent God.
                           13 As a fearefull lyghtninge shall it fall vpō thē, and as terrible fyre shall it deuoure them, lyke as the materyall fyre, did eate vp Sodome and Gomorre, rebellions in ye desert, & the enimyes yt sought Helias. The fyre yt is kindled in the wrath of God, shall burne vnto ye bottome of hel, & cōsume

vp those terrible termagauntes.
                           14 That worde of ye lordes indignation shall with great violēce throwe the diuel that wi
                                 •
                              y serpēt, which deceiued gog & Mogog with their innumerable souldyours, into a foule stynking lake or boyling pit of wylde fyre & brimstō.
                           15 Upon the wicked (saith Dauid) shall ye lorde rayne snars. Wyld fyre, brimstone, wt tirrible storme & tēpeste, shall they haue to rewarde, for theyr etarnall punishment. Herein are to be marked & considered, both ye intollerable greuousnesse of ye paines, & also the euerlasting continuaunce of them.
                           16 In the same place of intollerable torment, were the beastly generatiōs of Antechrist & al their scholemaisters of hipocrites doctrine. Or eternallye of god were they therevnto appointed as the vngodly communaltie wyth theyr capitaine, and as the bodye and members with their wicked heade (for all readie is it done by his worde, but thā shall it folow in effect) wheras they shalbe as ye Lord hath appoynted, most sharpely afflicted wt vnspeakeable

tormentes both day and night without pause or ceasing for euer and euer without ende.
                           17 Neuer shall their fyre be quenched (sayth Esaie) no
                                 •
                               yet theyr gnawinge worme be taken from them. For all maner of griefes wherwith God vexed the wicked, may this fyre here be taken after the scriptures. For as witnesseth saint Augustine in his xx. booke and xii. chapter De ciuitate Dei, not onely is this punishmēt to be referred to the latter iudgement, but alo to the extermination of Antichristes h
                                 •
                              st by the worde of God the worlde ouer. Be the Gospell once purely taught amōg men, it will condemne all that they haue done vpon their owne presumption without the grounde of Gods veritie, be it ceremony or Sacramente, priesthode or sacryfice, reseruinge the deceiuers to his most fearefull iudgement.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And I savve a great vvhite seate, 2. & him that satte on it, 3. from vvhose face fled avvay both the earth & heauē, 4. & theyr places

was no more founde, 5. And I sawe the dead, both great and small, 6. stand before God. 7. And the bookes were opened, 8. And an other boke. vvas opened 9 vvhych is the booke of lyfe, 10. And the dead vvere iudged of those thinges, 11. vvhyche vvere vvrytten in the bookes, according to theyr deedes, 12. And the sea gaue vp hir dead, 13. vvhych vvere in hir, 14. And death▪ 15. and hell delyuered vp the dead, 16. vvhiche vvere in them, 17. and they vvere iudged euery man according to hys deades▪ 18. And death, 19▪ and hell vvere cast, 20. into the lake of fyre▪ 21. This is the second death 22. And vvhosoeuer vvas not found vvrittē in the booke of lyfe, 23. vvas caste into the lake of fyre.
                        
                           The commentary
                           1 A none after this I behelde (saith Saynt Iohan) in secrete mysterye an imperiall throne or seat of estate, faire splendaunte, and bewtyfull. None other is this than the iudgement seate of the Lorde.
                           2 Great it is, for the Maiestie and power of hym that shall syt therevpō, is of inestimable magnificence & greatnesse. Fayre and whyte, both for the celestyall cléerenesse that shall at that

houre apere with hym, and also for ye purenesse, equitie, and ryght of his vniuersal iudgementes.
                           3 From the aspect of whose fearefull countenaunce shall both the earth beneath and the other elemētes aboue flée awaye. All the creatures of his creacion shall wyth reuerence tremble & quake at his mighty aperaunce. The Sūne shall thā be darkened, ye Mone shall not giue hir lyght. The Starres shall fall downe from aboue, the powers of heauen shalbe moued. The elementes shall melte wyth heate, and the whole earth shall teare in péeces lyke a ragge.
                           4 A terryble fyre shall go before the iudge, to burne vp hys enimyes on euery syde. The places of them that lyued here supersticiously and voluptuously, shall no more after yt be founde. Neuer shall they resort agayne hither to theyr olde wantō pleasurs. Of their bewtyfull Cyties, shall not one stone be lefte vpon an other. Their proude paynted Synagoges as duste in the wynde shalbe scattred away from the earth. Neither shall the skye nor yet

the ground beneth be as it was, but both they shalbe renewed & chaunged. They shalbe deliuered from corruption, and so appere both a newe heauen, and a newe earth, according to the expectation of the creatures.
                           5 Immediatly after that (sayth saint Iohn) ye iudge thus sitting vpō ye sca
                                 •
                              e of his eternall Maiestie. I sawe styll in mysterye after the blast of the trū
                              pet, that all they which were deade, arose out of the earth. And that both hygh and lowe, great and small, good and badde, King, and begger, prelate and plough man, tirant and perscecuted innocent. Yea, the sucking babe ye died in ye cradell so well as ye aged mā.
                           6 All they séemed vnto me to stande before their generall iudge Iesus Christ, to whome the euerlasting father had giuen ouer his whole iudgementes, which there appeared as hée was in dede a verie omnipotent god. All we shall appere (sayth Paule) before the iudgement seat of Christ, that euery one of vs maye receyue according to yt he hath done, be it good or ill.
                           7 And ye bookes of reckennings (which

are the seuerall consciences of men) were open before ye iudge. That afore was hidde, will thā be manyfest, and that was secret, wyll than come to light & be disclosed. Euident it wil be vnto him who hath fulfilled the commaunded works of mercy & who hath left them vndone, their owne constences bearing witnesse to ye same. For what can be hid from him which seeth both ye inwarde reynes and the secret thoughtes of the harte? In this generall rekening yet, shall prayse with ye eternall rewarde redowne vnto them from ye mercyfull Lorde whose walking here hath bene accordinge vnto fayth. There shall they be reproued to haue bene pitiful to ye poore, hongry, thursty, nedy, naked, sicke, & in prison.
                           8 After this was an other booke opēed of a farre diuerse nature frō the other bokes, for it was ye swéet boke of lyfe, wherin be regestred al yt were predestinate to be saued, frō ye worlds beginning. And this boke is ye eternal predestinatiō of God. 9 Before ye worlds foūdatiō (saith s. Paule) ye lord predestinate vs into ye addoptiō of his childrē, through Iesus Christe. Of this booke

made Moyses mencion, whan he said, Eyther pardon thys people, or els race me out of thy booke which thou haste written. And Christ also to his seuentie disciples. Be glad (sayth he) that your names are written in heauen. Moreouer Iosue called this the booke of the ryghtuous, and Iohn here the boke with seuen claspes. This sheweh the holy ghost here vnto vs, much after the custome dayly vsed among vs. For of the most notable men and women our maner is bothe longe to remember the names, and also to speake of them as occasion giueth. So equall is thys eternall iudge, that no personage respecteth he in iudgment, neither of Emperours nor Pope, Kinge nor Byshope, Lorde nor prieste. But as he is ryghtuous of himselfe, so iudgeth he rightuously.
                           10 For they that were dead (sayeth saynt Iohan) or that had ledde their lyues here without fayth and ye spirite of Christ, were iudged of hym there, according to the thinges which were regestred in ye bokes of their cōsciēces.
                           11 That is to say, according to ye fylthy

workes wherof their desperat cō
                              ciences accused them. Onely are the wicked to be takē here for ye dead. For the rightuous shall thā haue nothinge, wherof their cōsciēce may accuse them. Neyther shall ye euill doers as witnesseth Dauid, be of coūsell with thē at ye day. They hauing ye lyfe euerlasting, shall not than be iudged, though they than appere, but shall sit with Christ in iudgement, and reioyce in the condempnation of the vngodly blasphemers. The rewarde of their vnfaythfulnesse shall thā be powred vpon thē, to their perpetuall care. At that daye shall none bée absent but all shalbe séene, eyther to honour or els to reprofe.
                           12 Neyther shall the depth of the sea, nor the darkenesse of death, nor yet hell that is bottomelesse, bée able to hide any frō the face of this iudge. For the sea (sayth saynt Iohn) that is myghty and greate, shall at that daye delyuer vp cleane hir deade, or those whome the Lorde suffered hyr to swallowe in for their outragious sinnes.
                           
                              13 Lyke as were the giauntes in the floude of Noe, ye great host of Pharao in the red sea, and such other more.
                           14 So shall gréedy death doe also, which after many strange sortes hath consumed the enimies of God. As for an example, Cain by a chaunce vnsought, Nadah and Abyn by fyre, Achan by standing, Holofernes & Saull by the swerde, Naball by excesse of wyne, Iesabell by treading of horses, Daniels accusers by the lyons, Menelaus by breaking his necke, Iudas by hanging himselfe Herod, by wormes, the children of Israell by swerd, fyre, serpentes, and soden death, and such other lyke.
                           15 Hell whych is insaciable, shall in lyke case render vp the innumerable swarme of the dead whom he wyth open mouth, hath swallowed in quicke for their abhominations.
                           16 Of whose number were Chore, Dathan and Abiron with their affinitye, the Cytyes of Sodome and Gomorre, the vncircumcised gyauntes, the ryche rourer and the ryche glotton in Luke, Symon Magus, wyth

dyuerse other. Hell hath gaped meruelouslye wyde (sayeth Esaye) and hath rauenouslye deuoured the hygh mynded, sturdye, and dysobedyent nacion.
                           The vncircumcised giauntes (sayth Ezechiell) wyth theyr weapons are gone downe to hell, whose swerdes are layed vnder theyr heades, theyr wyckednesse vpon theyr bones. Of the wycked onely is all thys spoken héere, if ye marke well the text, and in no wyse of the Godly, what though many, of them hath bene drowned in the sea, burned, béeheadded, and hanged vpon the lande, and buryed quicke in the earth.
                           17 For it foloweth also, that they were iudged of the iudge and receiued euery one accordynge to theyr deseruinges.
                           Accordynge to the fleshely fruites of theyr owne inuentions shall they bée rewarded, theyr vnfaythfulnesse iustly measured vnto them.
                           Theyr bodyes shall than take parte wyth theyr wretched soules, in the euerlastynge cursse of dampdamnacion,

ye elect numbre rewarded wyth perpetuall felicytye.
                           18 And as concerninge death it self, which is the vniuersall enimye of man, it shalbe destroyed for euer.
                           19 Hell also (whych is here taken for sinne) shall neuer more be séene amonge the creatures of God.
                           20 For both shalbe throwne into the great lake of boylinge fyre and brymstone. The victorie of death shal be swallowed vp, and hys stinge done cleane away, which is sinne. That is nowe corruptyble shall put on vncorruptiō, & that is nowe mortall, immortalitie. Thus that the Lord at ye houre make of all hys enimies hys fotestole according to his promyse by Oseas the Prophet. O death I wil be thy death. O hell I will bée thy destruction.
                           21 This tirrible appoyntmēt of the iudge (sayth saynt Iohn) is the second death, or perpetuall depriuation of ye sight of God, yea, the vtter fall from his fauour, grace, and mercy. This death is the whole vengeaunce of all innocent bloud which hath bene shed

vpon earth from iuste Abell to the last faythfull witnesse. Yea, thys sentence is ye stone yt shall grinde the enimies to pouder, the very eternall dampnation both of body and soule.
                           22 Now for a conclusion of ye whole matter, whatsoeuer he be king or Emperour, Priest or prelate, laye or religious, that shall not be founde writtē in the booke of lyfe, which is ye eternall predestination of god, for that he hath worshipped the beast and his Image, he shalbe cast by the irreuocable sentence of the iudge, into the stynking lake of fyre, perpetully there to burne with the Diuell and hys Angels. So that he which hath had no parte in the fyrst resurrection, shalbe sure to taste of this seconde death which is dampnation.
                           23 He that beléeueth not the gospell whan it is faythfully taught hym, repenting hys former lyfe, but refuseth the grace thereof, fréely offered, shall for euer be damned. Neuer shall his sin be remitted, neither in this worlde nor in the worlde to come, that reststeth the holy ghost, withstanding the

open verytie. Onely remaineth a fearfull expectatiō of iudgement vnto thē that here treadeth Christ vnder fote▪ not regarding his bloud shedding, but doeing iniury to the spirite of grace for their owne inuention.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The .xxj. Chapter.
                     In thys laste vision of Iohan, is both discribed the prosperous estate of the true church or kingdōe of Christ here, and also the perpetuall Sabboth of ye chyldren of God. All the other visions were mixte with labours, afflictions and paynes. This is full of peace, tranquilitie, and ioye, incorruption, glorie, and felycitie.
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        1 And I savve a nevve heauen, 2. & a nevve earth, 3. for the first heauen, 4. and the firste earth vvere vanished avvaye, 5. and there vvas no more sea, 6. And I Iohan savve that, 7. holy Cytie, 8. nevve, 9. Hierusalem, 10. come downe from God out of heauen, 11. prepared as a bryde, 12. garnished for hir husdande, 13. And I hearde a great voyce from the seate saying, 14, Beholde the tabernacle

of God▪ 15. is wyth men, 16. and he vvyll dvvell vvith them, 17. And they shall be hys people, 18. and God hym selfe shall be vvith them, 19. and shall be theyr God 20 And God shall vvype avvaye, 21. all teares from theyr eyes, 22. And there shal be no more death, 23. neither sorovve, 24. neyther shall there be any more payne, 25. for the olde thinges are gone.
                        
                           The Commentary.
                           1 Besides the afore rehersed reuelations, I behelde now last of all (saith saynt Iohan) that heauen was cleane altered from that it was afore and became all newe, and so was the earth also and became the same.
                           Not onely become they nowe spirituall by a true beléeue in the Gospell that afore were carnall, but also in the ende of the world shall the whole bodyes of heauen and of earthe as golde in the fornace be purged from fylthynesse by fyre goyng before the yudge, which both are nowe defiled wyth the wickednesse of the creatures.
                           
                              2 After both sortes shall they be delyuered from the corruption, here of sinne, and thereof death and dampnatyon, and so be restored vnto the glorious lybertie of Gods children.
                           3 The first heauen defiled through y• pryde of Angell, and the first earth also corrupted by the sinnefull vsage of manne, shall vanyshe cleane away and no more be séene. Not that the substaunce of them shall vtterly perysh, but that theyr nature, shape, and figure shal chaunge into a much more pure and perfect similytude. A custome it was amonge the prophetes, whan thy aduertysed the afflycted Israelytes of prosperite, peace, or renouation of the glory of God cōming towards thē to promis al things new.
                           4 Beholde (sayth the Lorde in Esay) I make you new heauens, and a new earth, and as for the olde shall neuer more be though vpon. Newe is ye true church of Christ, so are the people pertayning to the same. In no poynt are they lyke to the Popes holy orders, nor yet vnto Mahometes religion. Clere are their hartes which haue rereceiued

the verytie, from all supersticions, and theyr outwarde lyues from idell obseruations, perfect are theyr consciences, and theyr conuersacions godly. And thys in the regeneration shalbe fully accomplished. Not onely shall that which is now mortall becō immortal & ye is now corruptible, than incorrupted & as ye very Angels of the Lorde, but also the vniuersall heauen shalbe than renewed, so shall the whole face of the earth, and appere more beutyfull than now.
                           5 And from that tyme fourth shall there be no more sea, whych signifieth people vnstedfast, vaine, and fickle. Whereas the peace of Christ is surely grounded, no more is there anye troubled conscience. No more is there any diffydence, wan hope, or dispayre. Al bitternesse, sorow, & anguish is turned into swéetnes & ioy in ye holy ghost. We knowe (sayth saynt Paule) ye all thinges are taken to the best in them that loue God. Frō the Apostles (whō Christ fyrst also called from the Sea) vanished this waueringe Sea away, whan they went from the mallicious

counsell of the Bishoppes reioysinge that they were founde worthy to suffer rebuke for hys names sake. In lyke case all impediments and néedes, all daungers and doubtes, all fearefull mouings and outragings that we nowe haue of the sea, shall cease in that day of the Lorde, whan we shall beholde hym face to face. No longer shall it be subdued vnto vanitie, no more than the other creatures, but clerely depured from fylthy corruption. No more shall it be the same to sée, to being frō thens forth so claer
                                 •
                               as cristall, though it styll be the same in substaunce.
                           6 Heauen, earth, & ye sea, wyth all other creatures in mistery thus renewed, I Iohan the sonne of Zebede & the same dysciple whom Christ loued, being here in exyle for hys worde & testimony, perceyued in the saue mystery by the singular gyfte of the spirite, ye ye selfe holy cytie or congregation of the Lorde whych is worthely called the new Hierusalem of peace descended downe out of heauen from hir omnipotēt creator & God eternall.
                           
                              7 Holy is this cyty. For both is she here the vndefiled spouse of the lambe and shalbe hereafter more perfectly in ye regeneracion. Here admytteth she nothing in faithe that is prohpane and carnal, but cleaneth to his only worde. There shal she folowe his steppes in a much more pure estate, clearly delyuered from all that is ill.
                           8 Here is she newe, in that she hath here by his godly spririte done of the olde man wyth hys fylthy workes. And ther shal she also be new through hys gifte, by throwinge awaye the bodye of sinne wyth death and corrupcion.
                           9 Hierusalem is she called both here and there, or peceable city of the Lord, in that all hir cytizens are here of one faith, and ther shalbe of one glorious vnity and concorde. Here are hir dwellers citizens with ye saintes, & ye househould seruants of god. Ther shall they be both hys chyldren and heires togyther wyth Christ.
                           10 From God came she downe, and out of heauen fyrste of all.

Neyther out of flesh nor bloud hath spronge hir Christen beléeue, but frō the gracyous openinge of the father which is in heauē. That Hierusalem (saith Paul) which is frée & our mother is from aboue. She is yt Cytie, whose builder and maker is God. With none other lawes is she gouerned, but with hys eternall testament and Gospell of peace. With the constitutions of men hath she nothing to doe, be they neuer so holy and precious. For alone she dependeth on God and hys spirite.
                           11 Of hym is she prepared through ye gyft of fayth. She is clensed with the fountayne of water in the worde of lyfe to séeme a glorious congregation without blemysh or wrincle. From hir sinnes is she purely washed in his bloud.
                           12 And so garnyshed as a beutifull bryde to hir husbande with loue, ioye, peace, paciēce, méekenesse, long suffering, & other glorious fruites of ye spirit. Upon thy right hand Lorde (sayth Dauid) standeth a quene in a garmēt of most fyne golde compassed with diuersitie. But euery man, shall not se

this hir apparell, for it wilbe rather a rayment of the harte than of the outwarde body. Figured was this decking of hir at large, in the wonderfull adourning of the temple and tabernacle of God in the dayes of Moyses and Salomon, whose mysticall meting also he describeth in his cantycles. How maruelous this newe Hierusalē wyll be in the regeneration, whan shée meteth hir spouse in the ayre, and how glorious hir countinaunce wyth him, it lyeth not in vs to declare in all poyntes, considering that neyther eye hath séene, nor eare harde, neyther can the hearte coniecture what God hath there prepared for them that loue hym, but of this are we sure, yt wyth the glorye of him she shalbe replenished. Here is hir estate vnperfect, and there perfect, here mortall, there immortal, here sower, ther sweet, here harde, there pleasaunt, here paynfull, there dilectable, here Godly, there inestimable glorious.
                           13 And as Iohn had séene these wonderfull thinges, and mused much vpō them, a great voyce came vnto hym

from the seate of God, declaring the mistery thereof. I hard (sayth he) in the middest of this last reuelation, as I was in doubt what it ment, a mightie voyce from the throne of my euerlasting Lorde, saying thus vnto mée.
                           14 Beholde Ihon beholde, & marke it both for thyne owne erudicion, and also for the instruction of others. The holy tabernacle or restyng place of ye euerlastinge God of heauen, is wyth men in the worlde beneth. Not onely in that the eternall sonne of ye Lorde toke vpon him the shape of a man, callyng it the temple of hys body, but also in that the soule of euery faythfull man is become the habitacle of ye holy ghost. He that loueth me (sayth Christ) obserueth my word. In hym will both I and my father prouide vs a resting place. He that is in loue abideth in god and God dwelleth in hym.
                           15 This voice might Iohn well heare from the mouth of God in Esechiell. I will make (sayth he ther) a perpetuall couenaunt wyth man to dwell wt hym euermore.
                           My tabernacle shalbe amonge them.

So that I wyll be their God, and they shalbe my people.
                           16 For why, it foloweth here in this voyce, that he hath determined of fauourable loue & mercy to dwell with them, assisting them here in thys lyfe by hys spirite, and in the lyfe to come shall he satysfye them by his eternall presence. For here doe we sée hym in a similytude farre of, there shall wee beholde hym lyke as he is in dede, and shall eternally reioyce therein.
                           17 Here are they his people through fayth, for Israell is his heritage. There shall they be his familiar housholde through loue and he their Lord for euer. Here shall they be his chyldren, and he theyr eternall father. Ther shall they be his heyers, Christ being the right heyer for them all.
                           18 Thus God his owne selfe of hys inestimable goodnesse being presētly wt them, shall here by his grace, and therby inestymable benefites, shewe him selfe in all poyntes to be theyr moste mercyfull and louing God▪ Here doth he strongly assist thē agaynst all temptations of enimyes.
                           
                              There shall be endue them wyth full perfection and clerenesse.
                           19 So shall he be theyr god, that neither here nor yet ther shal they knowledge any other but hym alone. Hée shall so comfort them here by his spirite, and ther by his glorious presēce, that neyther shall they here forsake hym, nor there be deuyded from hym.
                           20 And thys euerlasting god shall so wype away all teares from their eyes here, that no vexacion shall make thē sorowfull, nor yet aduersitie pensyue. But all maner of slaunders and persecutions, shall they take for most suffren consolations for his names sake. For if he be wyth them, who can preuaile against them?
                           21 And after that day can no wepings be, whereas shalbe full ioye with immortalitie both of soule and body. Beholde (sayth the Lorde in Esayes prophecye) I shall make a ioyfull Hierusalem, yea, and my selfe will reioyce there with them. From thence forth shall neyther waylyng nor weping be harde in hir any more.
                           22 In hir moreouer shall be no more

death for it shallbe destroyed for euer. No more shal mennes consciences dispayre here, But haue ioye in the holy ghost. No more shal they die through sinne, but lyue vnto God by fayth. And there shall no more the rose coloured whore be dronken in the bloud of martyrs. Hir tyrauntes shalbe closed vp in the stinking lake of fyre from the slaughter of them, they than becomming immortall and impossible
                           Moreouer thā this, he that beléeueth in christ shal neuer die nor yet come into iudgement, but passe cleane frō death vnto lyfe.
                           23 Neyther shall there be any sorow nor crying any more. For all maner of displeasure of the bodye, as pouertye, sicknesse, losses, emnytie, vexacions, and yll reportes are here paciently borne of the faythfull. And ther shalbe founde nothynge to minister any suche occasions. Here is neyther age doubted, nor yet persecution feared, in them that reckeneth death aduantage, hauinge in desire wyth Paule to be hence and wyth Christ.

Nor yet shal be there where all is in ioye and peace, durable for euer.
                           24 Neyther shall there be felt any more payne. Such hath bene the constauncye of the martirs here that litle haue the tormentes greued them. Eleazarus paciently suffered all punyshmente▪ Steuen reyosed to sée heauen open. Andrewe woulde in no case be delyuered from deathe. Laurentius offred his brent fleshe to be eaten. The burnynge coles were so sweete vnto Tiburcius as the fragraunt roses. So desyrous were ye terryble tormēts vnto Uincent, as a moste pleasaunt banket. Angelus desired the people in Sicilia to esteme the tyraunt hys frynde. What ye exceding constauncy was of Iohn Husse and Hieronime of Prage, dyuers Chronycles mencyoneth. And in our tyme, George Baynham in the fyre dyd neuer complayne. Ihon Frith neuer shewed him self once greued in countenaunce. Barnes neuer moued, as hys enymyes doth report. Peter Franke in Colchester sang ioyfully to the Lorde. The thrée young men of Southfolk reioysed at ye death,

with such other many. And how farre they shalbe, from paines after this, the great daye of the Lorde shall declare.
                           25 For the olde thynges are paste, sayth the text. All that afore was tedious, heauy, and fearefull to the flesh, is nowe become easie, light, and pleasaunt, through that they haue learned of Christ. His word refresheth them in spirit, and is a swéet rest vnto their soules. And in the regeneration shall hunger, thirst, werinesse, labour, heat, colde, rayne, winde, thunder, earthquakes, with all other discommodities be taken cleane from them. Neyther shal they haue ther, néede of meat nor drinke, foode nor rayment, beddes nor buildings, féeldes nor medowes, welspringes nor riuers, gardens nor vineyardes.
                        
                     
                     
                        The Text.
                        1 And he that sate vppon the seate sayde, 2. Behold, I make all thinges nevve. 3. And he sayde vnto me. 4 Wryte. 5. for these vvordes are faythfull and true. 6. And he sayde vnto me. 7. it is done. 8. I am Alpha and

Omega, 9. the beginning and the ende, 10. I will giue to him that is a thirst, 11. of the vvel of the vvater of lyfe, free, 12. He that ouercō
                           meth, shall inherite all thynges, 13. I vvill be his God, and he shall be my sonne, 14, but the fearefull. 15. & vnbeleuing, 16. & the abhominable, 17. & murtherers, 18. and vvhoremongers, 19. and sorcerets, 20. and Idolatrs, 21. & all lyars, 22. shall haue their part in the lake, 23. that burneth With fire and brimston, 24. vvhich ys the, seconde beath.
                        
                           The commentary
                           1 And the omnypotent Lorde whych sate vpon the eternall throne concluded thus with me. Hys holy spirite of promise assertayned my spyryte by hys heauenly word, that all these thynges should be true.
                           2 Behoulde (sayth he) I wyll make all thynges freshe and newe. Heauen, earthe, the Sea, and the vnyuersall Cytye of peace, I wyll delyuer from all corrupcyon, I make all pure, cleane, holy, immortall, vncorrupt, impassible, clere, heauenly, spirituall, and glorious. Neuer more shall, they bee as they were afore whan they were yet olde. Neuer shall

be more eating nor drinking, wyuing nor 
                                 •
                              anketing, traueling, nor sléeping 
                                 •
                              or other such doeinges pertayninge to the corruptible lyfe. The rightuous shall than shyne as the red fyre sparkes. So bright as the sunne shall they be in the kingdome of theyr father.
                           3 Thus hath the Lorde here midsts meruielously described vnto Iohn, and by hym vnto vs the misticall Sabboth of his people here, & ye eternal Saboth after this lyfe ōmāding him to 
                                 〈◊〉
                               it, as foloweth. Much to & fro hath bene amōg the 
                                 〈◊〉
                               doctours & is 
                                 〈◊〉
                               to th
                                 ••
                               day, whether the saued multi
                                 ••••
                               shall reygne here vpon earth 
                                 〈◊〉
                               Christ, or aboue in heauen afte
                                 •
                               the iudgement day
                                 •
                              . Which is easy to be percei
                                 •
                              ed, if the scriptures hée tru
                                 ••
                               conferred. Therefore ser
                                 •
                              h d
                                 •
                              lygently the scriptures, for they hear
                                 •
                               witnesse of all truth. Christ hath in Math. ye they shalbe thā as ye Angels are now
                                 •
                               in heauen, whose office is hath to be h
                                 •
                              re 
                                 •
                               there. And so muche 
                                 〈…〉
                               ye they shalbe as thā all one. 
                                 〈◊〉
                               w
                                 •
                              ll shall ye earth be new as the

heauens. And nedes it must be to some purpose. Neuer woulde Esay & Pete
                                 •
                               haue said, ye rightuous
                                 •
                              sse should dwelt in thē if they shuld not occupy thē both. It is said here also ye the new Hierusalem shall come downe frō heauē. But not so that it shall not vp againe. For Christes electes shalbe whereas he is. Whan they shalbe vpō ye earth, no let nor impedimēt shal they haue to be also in heauē, both they being one. 
                                 〈…〉
                               agyltie & perfectiō shall be thā in their bodies as is now in ye glorified body of Christ; or in the spirituall nature of ye angels. Which are nowhere now the
                                 •
                               And whether they be here or ther▪ alwaies they sée God, 
                                 •
                               are 
                                 〈…〉
                               absent from him. Manye scriptures myght be brought in to declare th
                                 ••
                               mat
                                 •
                              er more at large, but it wold 
                                 〈◊〉
                               much tyme. What mutuall feloship heauenly amyte, & glorious pastyme will be betwixt them & the angels at that day it fare passeth al capacities to diffine. I coūsail 
                                 〈◊〉
                               to be curious in ye serch of high misteris 
                                 •
                              s this here is one, without the feare of God, least he ouercōmē of their exceding 
                                 〈◊〉
                              
                              
                              
                                 〈1 page〉
                              
                              
whoredom with many kinges, by many false worshippinges. This for hir méekenesse is commended of God, the other proudely boasteth hir 
                                 〈◊〉
                               through holy tradicions, merites, and deseruinges to b
                                 ••
                               a riche qu
                                 •
                              ene. With many such other.
                           4 And the Lorde (sayth saint Iohn) which worketh all thinges by his onely word and commaundement, 
                                 〈◊〉
                               thus vnto me. Emprente first in thy hart that I haue here shewe
                                 •
                               the
                                 •
                              , & than leaue it in writing to the 
                                 〈◊〉
                               of those that than folow the
                                 •
                              
                              ▪
                           
                           5 And if thou wyll k
                                 •
                              owe a reason why yu shalt thus doe, take this 
                                 〈◊〉
                               sentence with thee. I assure the so 
                                 〈◊〉
                               as I am God, y• the wordes which I haue shewed in this present Reuelatiō are effectually most faithfull and ruste. In no manner of 
                                 〈…〉
                               breake promise, nor go from ye 
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                               that I haue once spoken. Both heauen and earth shall passe ouer, but not 
                                 〈◊〉
                               of my wordes shall passe 
                                 〈◊〉
                               at theyr tymes appoynted. The worde yt goeth out of my mouth, 
                                 〈◊〉
                               not returne home again 
                                 〈…〉
                              
                              
both accomplysh my wyll, & prosper ye thing▪ I sent it for. Ned
                                 •
                              full is it therfore that all men beleue, that I shall fulfil the couenauntes here promised.
                           6 Moreouer than this, the sayd heauenly Lorde sayd thus vnto me, to put me clerely out of doubt.
                           7 It is fintshed and done already. Be thou assertayned that my worde is my dede. In ye beginning I spake but the worde, & all things were created, heauen, earth, ye lyght, the firmamēt, the Sunne, the Mone the fowles, the fishes, the beastes, and last of all man. Whatsoeuer I say therfore, ought to be beleued as nowe done in dede, be it to the rightuous or damned. For all thinges are present afore me. In tokē whereof, ye prophetes and fathers vttered their prophesies of thinges to come, in the time past for ye more part, for the sure certentie of them.
                           8 And take these my wordes so much to be the more certayne, that I which haue made those promyses, haue all thynges in my power. I am the firste and the last, fyguratly comprehended vnder Alpha & Omega ye first & the last

Gréeke letters, as a knowen 
                                 〈…〉
                               the Gréekes, vnto whome this 
                                 〈◊〉
                               was fyrst written. 
                                 〈…〉
                               God was there before me, nor 
                                 〈…〉
                               after me, I am God from euerlastyng and world without ende.
                           9 I am he that hath begon al thing
                                 •
                              
                              ▪ I am he againe that shall fynish them. I am alone & there is none other God but I. I sley, I quicke. I smi
                                 •
                              e, I heale▪ I set vp, I put downe. Through me doth kings raygne & euery mans 
                                 〈◊〉
                               is in my hande. Wherfore it is reasō y• they haue recourse vnto me.
                           10 I am that fresh fountaine that 
                                 •
                              
                              say speaketh of most hyghly necessary to them that will lyue. Uery lyberall shal he finde me, ye séeketh me in faith.
                           11 To him yt is a thyrst or desierous of rightuousnesse wil I geue to drinke of the plentuous welspring of the wholsome waters of life. And that wil I doe fréely without pryce or payment eyther of Masse or merites, dead su
                                 •
                              
                              frages or deseruinges.
                           Laye out your mony on more for 
                                 •
                              he thing ye fedeth not, spende no more trauayle about ye thing that helpeth not.

Come vnto me all you that labour and are loaden and I shall refresh you. So desirously séeke vnto me your God as ye hart séeketh to the brokes of water. For with me is the well of lyfe euerlasting. With my pleasaunt riuers shall I content your good appetytes. The water of this fountayne is the verite & swéetenesse of Christes spirit, refreshing the soule here with hope, & ther with the lyfe euerlasting. In this lyfe is felte but a tast of it, in ye world to come shall ye thirst be satisfied. Here is it but in heart springing vp toward lyfe, ther shall it be in full course and neuer fayle. Here are obtayned but small droppes of it, ther shall it be had in full plētuousnesse. The philosophers for their wisdō, ye lawiers for their lerning, & ye phisicians for their cōning loketh for gret rewards. The biers & sellers in ye tēpl, set their wares at a gret pryce, yet are they but stynking waters, & not able to restrayne ye thyrst. But this is frée wt out paimēt through christ, & cōtaineth helth in haboūdaūce. Not our good works (saith s. Augustin) but his own fregifts doth god croun in vs.

This must be sought for. For onli sha
                                 •
                               he obtaī it, ye thirstith after it. Onli shal he haue ye asketh, & he fynde yt séeketh.
                           12 He yt hath done on a christian warriour to fight against the diuel of these darkenesses, and so manfully doth his part, that by faith he ouercōmeth him, & hath ye ful victory ouer him in Christ, he shal be sure to posses al these thīgs, heauen, earth, ye new Hierusalem, the liuing waters, and to haue his ful desire in the ioyes to come. Wonderfull is this promis. No Kinge nor Emperour, priest nor prelate, Turke nor Souldane, can graūt such wages. But who shall obtayne them? None other than fighteth lawfully, workinge, accordinge to the rules and examples of fayth? Neyther he that masseth nor senseth, processioneth nor holy watereth, nor yet he yt buildeth churches. For those workes the Scripture commaundeth not.
                           13 Besides this promised rewarde, (saith the lord here) I will be his god in déede, according to my former couenant, and he shalbe vnto me as my natural sonne. So louing wil I be to him

as the mother is to the babe borne of hir body, whom she can neuer forget. So mercifull as the naturall father, y• pittieth his owne children at the very hart. Example by the vnworthy lost chylde, whome I both louingly receyued & swéetly enbraced in myne arms, Yea, I both clothed him & fedde him wt the best, as a sonne ful deare vnto me. And of this let him be sure which hath me for his father, that I shal giue him Christ to be his brother and with hym all things necessary, constituting hym my perpetual heire. This fatherly couenaunt was plaine vnto my seruant Dauid, for whom I set vp mercy 
                                 〈◊〉
                               euer.
                           14 But farre otherwise wil I doo by the other sort, which neither wyl séeke ye liuing waters or haue desyre to the scriptures, nor yet kepe ye hold I haue put them to, which is their Christian profession, but cowardly leaue it vnto the enimies, the serpent, the beast, and the false prophet. As are these which foloweth here in their course. Fyrst of all the feareful cowardes or false harted Christians.
                           
                              Whome the holy ghost calleth here afore neyther whote nor cold. At a time they beléeue, but whan any trouble cometh they go cleane frō it. These dou
                                 •
                               the losse of their goods, the hinderaūce of their names, and the harme of their bodyes, and so are they not worthy of Christ. Such were Ananyas & Saphira with many other more sence theyr tyme. These trust not in the Lord as doth Sion, which neuer remoueth.
                           15 Next are the vnfaithfull hipoccits which neither beleue the promises nor yet feare the threatnings of the Lord. These make gods commaundements of no value for their owne tradicious. With beggery ceremonies clogge they the people, & as the blynde they leade the blynde into the ditch. Neyther wil these enter into ye kingdom of god, nor yet suffer other to enter. Such were ye pharisies & saduces with our monkes, chāons, and fryers, succéeding in their wicked examples.
                           16 After them foloweth ye curssed obstinates or abhominable blasphemers, which knowinge the verite, doth not onely abhorre it, but also with moste

spightfull cruelnesse persecuteth it. These are the swine y• 
                              
                                 •
                              redeth perles in the myre, and the dogges that turn agayne to deuowre. Unpossible to be renewed to repentaunce, thus casting at their tayles the gra
                                 •
                              es of the spirit so fréely offered them. Such were Annas 
                                 •
                               Caiphas with our execrated bishoppes, suffragāes, channons, 
                                 〈◊〉
                              , 
                                 ••
                              cars, with all the priestes of ye same wicked zeale.
                           17 The vnpytefull murtherers, are also the same bloude thursty prelates▪ those Caines, & these boysterous Nemrothes that neuer will b
                                 •
                              e satisfyed wyth the slaughter of innoc
                                 •
                              ntes. No cruell Antichrist after Ihon Wy
                                 •
                              leues tyme dyd so spyghtfully persecute the veryte of Christe in Englande, as dyd Philyp Repyngedone, made than of a false brother or p
                                 •
                              riuired christan, byshoppe of Lincolne.
                           The graunde captaine of thys madde muster is the proude byshop of Rome the preposterous vycar of ye Lambe, & the vnworthy successour of Peter in that he hath not yet put vp his sword. Of the same sorte also are all those

cruell Princes, and vnmercyfull magistrates, that applyeth their auctorities, powers, and offyces vnto ye same mescheife. Such deceytfull rauenours and abhomynable bloude sheders the mercifull Lorde abhorreth euermore. Of this number was Pharao & herod, wyth innumerable tiranntes since, which to reherse in order were to long
                           18 The filt
                                 ••
                               whoremōgers are those holy spirituall Ammorites which hath consecrate themselues vnto Moloch in the fyre of fleshly concupi
                                 ••
                              ence. For euer haue they for sworne godly marryage, to make daily sacryfyce to the diuell in buggary and other carnall beastlynesse. The most highly estemed vertue of that generation, is to haue no wyues. Neuer cōmaunded I such filthy vowes (sayth the Lorde) neither came it euer in my thought, to make Iuda sinne with such abhominacion. For ye ofte breaking of their othe, profession, & vowe it is no matter, so long as they make ye rekening amonge thē
                              selues. Innumerable is the swarme of these lecherous locustes of Egipte, euery where are their fruites séene all

                              
                                 〈1 page〉
                              
                              
                              
                                 〈1 page〉
                              
                              
after Christes resurrection, to saye that his desciples had stolen hym awaye by night.
                           22 All these with such other execrable 
                                 •••
                              tes (sayth the Lord vnto Iohn) shall haue their iust porcion in the foule stinking lake, y• horrybly fometh vpward with fylthy fyre and brymstone. With the diuell and his angels shall they dwell for euer.
                           23 Thus shal ye wicked (saith Dauid) for neglectinge their Lord God be turned into hell, with perpetuall confusion. The fiery floud that shall go before the Iudge, wyll swallow them vp cleane.
                           24 And this is wythout fayle the second death, or damnacion both of soule and body. The perpetuall shame and reprofe, as Daniel calleth it, that shall neuer be recouered. Not onely the abhominable homicides, Idolatours, and whoremongers shall haue this stinking reward, but also the faynt harted hipocrits, the vnfaythfull sorcerers, and the execrable lyers with all theyr affinitie.
                        
                     
                     
                        THE TEXT.
                        
                           1. And there came vnto mee, 2. one of the seuen Angells. 3. Which hath the seuen vyalles full of the seuen last plagues. 4. And talked with me, saying.
                        5. Come hither, I vvill shew thee the bryde, the Lambes wyfe, 6. And he caryed me away in the spirit to a great & an high moūtayne.

7. And he shewed me the great citie. 8. holy Hierusalem. 9. defending out of heauen frō GOD▪ 10. hauing the brightnesse of GOD. 11. And 
                              〈…〉
                            was lyke vnto a 
                              〈◊〉
                            most 
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                            had vvalles 
                              〈◊〉
                            high 
                              〈…〉
                            had .xii. gates▪ 15 and at the gates, xii. Angells, 16. and names vvrytten. 17. vvhich are the .xii. trybes of Israell. 18. On the East part three gates. On the North syde three gates. 19. And tovvard
                              •
                            the 
                              〈…〉
                            And on the West syde three gates. 20. And the vvalle of the citie had .xii. foundacions. 21. and in them the names of the Lambes .xii. Apostles.
                        
                           
                           The Commentarye.
                           1 And as I was yet stil ioyously marueiling (saith saint Iohn) at this most friendlye communicatiō & wonderfull mistery of the Lorde.
                           2 There resorted vnto me very louingly, one of the seauen angels mencioned héere afore, which angels hath committed vnto them at the Lordes pleasure the seuen vials of his wrath contayning the seauen plagues of the world.
                           3 None other are these Angels, but the decréed purposes of God, vttering his iudgements against cursed Babylon at their times appointed, as we haue sufficiently declared in the xv. & xvi. chapters, afore. One of thē sent ye lord vnto Iohn, to describe vnto him at large ye glory of ye new Hierusalē, lyke as he did afore the confusion of Babilon. For onely was this in spirite as here after foloweth.
                           4 This angell (saith he) familiarlye communed with me. This inspired purpose of God moued my harte, my minde, my witte, reason, vnderstanding, and remembraunce, with the other

powers of soule to make mee pryuy of this secret mistery, necessary to be knowne of the faithful.
                           5 Come hither (saith it spiritually vnto me) leauinge at this time behinde thée all suche considerations as thou hast of nature. Certēly wil I manifest vnto thee, to the singuler comfort of many other, what the beutifull Bryde is, which is the vndefiled spouse of the Lambe Iesus Christ. Thou shalt wel perceiue hir by the gifte of faith, to be far different from the Rose coloured whore yt thou séest afore. Thou shalt know here, hir estate, beuty, behauer, and aparell. For that maketh God open to his louers which he hideth vnto other in parables.
                           6 Than toke he me vp in the spirite (saith Iohn) and so carried me cleane away into a mightye great and excéeding high mountaine. The contemplation of this heauenly misterye, so occupyed my minde, that clearely was I taken from the remembraunce of all worldly fantasies, & thought my selfe rapt vp with Paule vnto the thirde heauen. Sittinge solytarye alone (as

did Hieremie) I was lift vp aboue my selfe. With Enoch & Helias I thought my selfe taken from the worlde, so great was the mistery.
                           7 Anone this spirituall messenger shewed me a great godly Citie I was in remembraunce of the true congregation of God compact together in the vnitie of one perfecte Christian faith. And this was not the olde Hieru
                                 •
                              alem, builded longe ago of Melchisadech as testifieth Iosephus. For that was full of sinne, ignoraunce, and blindnesse. She slewe the Prophets, and stoned them vnto death that were sent vnto hir. She disdayned also to receiue hir owne Lorde, whā he came to hir of good loue.
                           8 But this is al of an other sort, perfit, godly, & faithfull. Yea, this is aboue all estimatiō holy. Not for ye outwarde sacrifices, which were but shadowes of thīgs to come, but for ye eternal redētiō y• came, through him which offerd him selfe vnto God ye father without spot.
                           9 Not made by mans hande was this holy Hierusalē, nor yet after this maner building. For it issued out of heauē
                              
and so came downe from God the Father of light, of whom only is all that is good and perfect. Great is this citie, not onely in that it is the possession of the great kinge of all, but also in that it is highest in dignitie before him, & spred the world ouer.
                           10 Glorious is it also, blessed, spirituall, and heauenly, hauing the inestimable brightnesse or wisdome of the omnipotent God, hir light is ye lambe Iesus Christe, and his worde the lantarne to hir very footesteps. Indued is she here with ye graces of ye spirit, and after this shall possesse these benifites of immortalitie. Lyke shall she be to hir spouse to his latter appearaunce, and shall see God as he is in déede, when she is like fashioned to his glorious similitude.
                           11 And this hir shining light or wisdome in the spirit (saieth the Angell) was like vn
                                 •
                              o a stone, most orient and precious. For more precious is the verytie than Golde in hys most purenesse.
                           12 And of all thinges in the worlde most rightly might it séeme to be compared

to a fine Iasper, resemblinge a pure Cristall in clearenesse. For not onely is it here in faith cleare as the cristall, high, incomperable, and inestimable. But also in the regeneration it will be to the eyes of the gloryfied saincts as the gréene Iaspar, most amiable, fresh, and desirous. The doctrine of the Lorde is here all pure, expelling the darknesse of errours and lies. He that foloweth me (saieth Christe) wandereth not in the darke, but shall haue the light of lyfe. And there shall neither their eies be sore, nor yet their sight bleared by any impediment, but they shall be made able to behold him face to face, being of most inestimable brightnesse.
                           13 The wals of this citie betokning the manifolde strengthes of God, were inestimable great and high, meruilous and glorious. Great is the Lorde (saieth Dauid) and mighty is his power. He compasseth his people round about from this time forth and for euer. A wall of fire is he vnto Hierusalem, & a defence of stéele vnto Iuda. Their kéeper, protector, sauiour and defender

is he, most stedfast, perfect, constaunt, and sure. Stronge is the Citie of Sion, for she sauer is both hir wall and Bulwark.
                           14 Twelue gates hath this Citie to open and to speare. Yet is ther but one opening vnto them, which is Christe. Diuers are they called, for the diuersitie of nations, peoples, languages, & kindredes. From all quarters of the world rounde about commeth people to Christes congregation, yet enter they not but through him (no man saieth he) commeth vnto the father but by me. I am the dore into ye shepfolde. He y• entreth in by me shall be saued.
                           15 Twelue angels are set at ye 
                              
                                 •
                              ntes of this citie (which are both ye Angels in déed) & the godly preachers signified by them. The angels of y• Lorde (saith Dauid) pitched their tents roūd about those y• feareth him, to preserue them. Watchmē hath he s
                                 •
                              t (saith Esay) vpō the walles of Hierusalē to preach his glorious name. So yt it is now become inexpugnable. The diuel wt his whole army cānot preuaile against it. None is he able to pluck out of his hande.
                           
                              16 Names were gloryously written ouer the gates of this citie. And none other were they but the names of the xii. tribes of the children of Israell. As are Iuda, Ruben, Gad, Aser, Neptalim, Manasse, Simeon, Leuy, Isachar, Zabulon, Ioseph and Beniamin. For this consideration were their names there in sight, and none other.
                           17 Onely was the heritage promysed vnto Abrahams séede. Onely commeth saluation from among y• Iewes. Christ was the onely séede of Abrahā, and we are now become the children of promise in him. In the scripture are their names registred. And not ye names of them alone, but of so manye els as haue brought vnto vs the true worship of God. As were Moyses, Samuel, Dauid, & Helias, Esay, Hieremy Ezechiel, and Daniel, wt ye xii. inferior prophets. Iohn Baptist, Iose
                                 •
                              h, Simeon, & such other. For ye number of xi
                                 •
                              . is a viniuersall number comprehending all.
                           18 Upon the East part of this beautyfull citie were three gates. So were thrée gates, also vpon the North side.
                           
                              19 Towardes the South were thrée gates. And on the West side iii gates, to performe vp the number of twelue. Such a Citie is the true Churche of Christ, as is spred the worlde ouer. What so euer they be that wyll approche vnto this Citie, which way so euer they come, necessary is it for thē, to enter into it through an only faith in the father, in the sonne, and in the holy ghost. Behouing is it (saith Paul) for him that wil resort vnto god faithfully to beléeue. Through faith haue we entraunce into his fauour. Baptise them that beléeue (saith Christ) in the name of the father and the sonne, and the holy ghoste. Excéedinge great is the multitude of those iuste beléeuers which hath come from these iiii. quarters of the worlde, and hath entred into this citie through this faith. Uery many shal come (saith the Lord) from the Easte and the Weste, (which includeth ye other two partes) and shall reste with Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob in the kingdome of God. From the East come the Iewes inhabiting the mid parte of the worlde.

From the iii. out quarters els, as are Asia, Aphrica, and Europa, came the Gentiles, and after this sort through one faith in the trinitie, became one citie of ye Lord hauing .xii. fayre gates. Prefygured was this in the passage of the children of Israell out of Egipt. In the wildernesse of Sinay at the Lordes commaundement, were the tribes of Iuda, Isachar, Zabulon, with their hostes of a C.lxxx. and syxe thousand and foure hundred, vpon the East side. Ruben, Simeon, and Gad with their armies of a C.li. thousand foure hundreth and fyftye, vppon the South side, Ephraim, Manasse, and Beniamin vpon the West part, with their C. and eight thousande and one hundreth. D
                                 •
                              n, Asser, and Neptalim vpon the north with their C. and lvii. thousand and six hundred also. Where as the tribe of Leuy was onely appointed to minister in the tabernacle of witnesse in the midst of the hostes, and therfore was not at that time nū
                              bered among the children of Israell.
                           20 Finally (sayth the Angel) the wal of this beautyfull Citie (whiche is the

power of God vnto saluation for them that beléeueth) hath xii. strong foundations surely couched vpon the vnmouable and hard rock Christe. For vpon hym was the Christian Churche firste grounded. Adam, Noe, Abraham, Moyses, Dauid, Helias, and Iohn Baptist, with all the other fathers & prophetes builded vppon him, though they were long before hym. For all they trusted surely in the promises that God had made them in hym. All they being vnder the cloude dyd eate of one spirytuall meate, and dronk of one spirituall rock folowing them in the flesh which was Iesus Christ. No man can lay any other foundation than is layde alredy, which is Christ Iesus.
                           21 Upon this one foundation perpetually strong and durable, were layde these twelue foundations agréeing to the same. And in them were ye names of the Lambs .xii. Apostles or faithful messengers. As Peter, Iohn, Iames, Andrew, Philip, Bartilmew, Thomas, Mathewe, Iames the lesse, Symon, Thadeus, and Mathyas. These are figured in the xii. stones yt
                              
Iosua raised vp in Galgala for a remembraunce of the dry passage of the children of Israell through Iordane. So are they signified also by the xii. other stones wher with Helias in the mount of Tarmo
                                 •
                              us made an aulter in the Lords name. The sure ground of these foundations was, that Christ is the sone of the liuing God. Upon this builded all they both in their preachyngs and writyngs. All one with this was the faith of the Prophets, which beléeued that he was the Lambe that shoulde take away the sinnes of the worlde. For they inquired the way of saluation, they serched for the sauinge health. Wherin thy proue themselues the liuing stones of this spiritual building. Thus vnto one sure grounde of faith extended the belues both of the Apostles and Prophetes. Now are ye citizens with the saintes (sayth Paule to the Ephesians) builded vpō the sure founda
                                 •
                              ion of y• Apostles & prophetes, Iesus Christ being ye fast corner stone. For this cause are ye apostles put here before ye prophets, yt we redīg thir profices shuld vnderstād thē after y• apostle doctrin, & so deduce thē both vnto christ

And for this consideration are they here called the Lambes Apostles, that they haue in all their instructions and writings vttered nothinge but that they haue receiued of his wonderfull, rich, and plentuous habundance. Besids all this, not only are these twelue héere named, to be taken for the xii. foundations and none other. For than should Paule be excluded, which laboured more then all the rest. So shuld Barnabas, Silas, Lucas, Agabus, Iudas the rightuous, Iohn that was called Marcus, with many other. But so many godly ministers are of ye sorte besids them, as hath bene of the same faith, spirit, and doctrine. For ye must consider that twelue is here a vniuersall number as in other places, and betokneth all the whole felowshipp, they be holden for the principals for that they were present with Christe.
                        
                     
                     
                        The Text.
                        1 And he that talked vvith me. 2. Had a golden rede. 3. To measure the Citie vvith all 4. And the gates there of. 5. And the vvall therof. 6. And the citie vvas built fouresquare 7. And the length vvas as large as the bredthe of it 8. And he measured the Citie vvith the reede xii. thousād furlongs 9. And the length

and the bredth 10. And the height of it vvere equall 11. And he measured the vvall therof, an hundred and xliiii. cubits. 12. After the measure of man, vvhich the Angell had.
                        
                           The Commentary.
                           1 And the Angell (saieth sainte Iohn) or set purpose of the Lord which commoned thus with mee in secrete mistery, had a measure al of Golde in his hand, in similitude of a Réede, not all vnlyke vnto them that talked with Ezechiel and Zacharie, in misterye also.
                           2 And with this golden Réede, which is the pure word of God, dyd he take measure bothe of the Citie it selfe, and of the twelue gates thereof, and also of the great mightye wall of the same.
                           3 The determinate purpose of the euerlastinge builder, measureth all thinges concerning his church, according to his vndefiled scriptures, which are the right rule of faith and the rod of right order in his kingdome.
                           What so euer they be (saieth both

Paule and Dauid) that liue according to this rule, mercy, and peace be vnto them, as vpon the Israell of God. Not onely is this measuring Réed precious in it selfe, but also as golde in the furnace it is dayly tried a fresh, through many troubelous aduersaries of them that hath vnfainedly set hands vpon it. Diuersly measureth this Réede of the spirit in ye citie, in the gates, & in the wal. For diuers are the gifts of ye holy ghost in one congregation of the Lord, vnto euery one is giuen a grace according to the mesure of faith. Some hath he constitute apostles, some prophets, some euangelists, some pastours & teachers to the necessarye edification of Christes misticall body. For here by the citie is ment the whole congregation of Gods elects, perfectly ioyned together in one true beléeue.
                           4 By the gates, the godly preachers and counselers, by whom Christ openeth vnto his kingdom.
                           5 By the wall, the mighty power which he hathe committed to the Angels or spirites of heauen to kepe thē, to the godly princes and magistrates

here to defend them, and to other true ministers to hold them still in rightuousnesse. All these must be measured. They must be brought to the touchstone. The scriptures must trye of what spirit they are. If they agrée not to this measure, they pertaine not to the citie of god. But they are that salt vnsauery that is no better worth thā to be throwne forth of men and those vnprofitable seruauntes whome the Lord shal cast into exteriour darknes.
                           6 And as concerninge the fashion of this citie, builded all foure square, all foure sides therof being of like length and bredth.
                           7 No lenger nor broder was it vpō the east side than vpon the north syde, nor vpon the south part than towards the west. But equall it was euery way towards al quarters of the world And as it was in length & bredth, so was it in height. Which signifieth not only ye perpetual stabilitie or surenesse of ye true christiā faith, the Lord euermore preseruing it, but also ye faithful beleuers of on quarter of ye world, are so hyly accepted vnto hī, as of another

So largely doth he rewarde them of y• East that truly beléeueth in Christ, as of any other quarters els, and so highly doth he estéeme them. So deere vnto him are those good Christians that dwell amonge the Sarizens, Turkes, and Iewes, as are they which dwell in the middest of Christendome. So precious that lie sick in the spittle house, as they which pray in the temple. Noe founde grace in the sight of God, whan all the worlde els were wicked. Loth was iudged rightuous in the midst of the filthy Sodomits. And so are manye yet to this day, among the Idolatrous and supersticyous papistes. Still are there Lambes among wolues, cleane wheat amonge tares, and good fishes among euill. Iob was a companion with the Dragons, Estryches. Esaye dwelt among il tonged people, Ezechiell in the middest of a froward housholde. Sayncte Paule commended the Philipyans, in y• they shone among the peruerse generation, as lights in the firmament. Neuer is God any parciall accepter of persons, but amonge all peoples, he that in his

feare worketh rightuousnesse, is accepted vnto hym, whatsoeuer he bée. Thus are they in length, bredth, and heygth, spirituall, godly and heauenly through hys worde.
                           8 Moreouer this Angell measured ye cytie wyth the golden rode, and it was in compasse .xii. thousande furlonges. Which signifieth Christes kingdome to be so large euery way, that it reacheth the whole earth ouer by his word and promis. The sonde of the Apostels preachyng hath gone out into all landes, and theyr doctryne into the endes of the world. For .xii. euermore in the scriptures is an whole perfect number, and a thousand a vniuersall summe, as we haue here noted afore. No mā ought in thys heauenly work
                                 •
                               supersticiously to obserue the numbers but rather to séeke dilygently to vnderstande the Godly misteries that they comprehend.
                           9 The greatnesse of a cytie is to bée considered to the multitude of ye dwellers therein. Than who can thynk
                                 •
                               Christes congregation small, measuringe it by the scriptures from the

first begynning of the worlde to ye latter ending. A furlonge is the eyghte parte of a myle and contayneth a hundreth and twenty fiue paces, whych is in lēgth, vi. hundreth & xxv. foote & here it betokēoth the cōtinuall course of labour and paynefull sufferaunce in the kyngdome of Christ after saynt Paul. They that ronne for the wager in this course, laboureth not for a thynge vncertaine. But for an incorruptible crowne, they holde their bodyes in subieccion to the spirite.
                           Such are the inhabitours of this citie, whose number is greate, whole, and perfect, vniuersally taken. O Israell (sayth Baruch) howe greate is the house of God? and how large is the compasse of hys possession? Exceding great is it & hath none end, highout of measure & can not be ouer reached.
                           10 The heyght of thys Cytie from the foundatyon, was all one in measure wyth the length and breadth. For euerye way was it equall and square in compasse.
                           Rounde about was it stronge, mighty, and sure, the gates of hell in no

wyse able to preuayle agaynst it. Upon euery parte faythfull, perfect and godly, séekynge those thinges onelye whych are aboue where Christ is sittyng at the rygyt hande of God. Yea, all spirituall, hygh, and heauenly are they, hauynge their daily conuersacion not here but in heauen, frō whēce they wayte for their sauioure Iesus Christ. So hygh also is the spirit that gouerneth thys congregation in rewardynge as it is eyther large in geuinge, or longe in continuall working. Neuer had Iohn séene the heyghte, bredth and length of thys wonderfull cytie for our vniuersall comfort, had he not ben raysed vp by the secret purpose of God into the mountayne of thys spirite, inestimable hyght and great.
                           11 After thys measured the Angell the wall of the cytie, and it came fully to an hundred and .xliiii. cubites, whych is .xii. tymes .xii. in number, as we had afore here in the vii. and xiiii. Chapiters. And it cōprehendeth ye whole number of ye elect multitude, only for ye vniuersall perfectnesse thereof.

A cubytte after the common sorte is in length but a foote & an half, but after the course of Geometry it is six times so much, which commeth too .ix. foote iustly. Nowe an hundreth and .xliiii. cubites wanteth after the first rekening .CC. and .ix foote of a furlonge. And after the rules of Geometrye, it passeth not .xlvi. foote more than ii. furlonges, which stretcheth nothing towardes .xii. thousande furlonges. Therefore we may not here reken ye cubytes wyth the furlonges after a worldly sorte, but we must spiritually measure them accordinge to the scriptures. So that they maye agrée togither after the meaning of ye mystery, the course with the gifte, and the workinge wyth the power. The cubyte of a man is the fore parte of hys arme wyth the hande, and it betokeneth here in mistery Iesus christ, whych is the strong arme of ye father. To whome is the arme of the Lord knowen (sayth Esaye and Iohn) or who perceyueth the power of hys worde? Such might (saieth Mary) sheweth he in hys arme, as will scatter

abrod his obstinate, enimies. That hande is he, wher with god created al things, in the beginning. In this arme hath he redemed hys people, the posteritie of Iacob and Ioseph. With thys hande preserueth he them in the life that can not fayle, whome the enymies hath marked out vnto cruell death. Through the myghty power of this arme shall most terrible feare and dred lighte vpon the wycked at the latter daye. After thys cubyte must they be measured, whych are of this spiritual building, specially they yt are the wall therof, as the Godly preachers, princes, maiestrates, and other lawefull ministers. Agréeable to his doctrine ought theyr conuersatyon to be in all poyntes. As hys true minysters should they shewe them selues in méekenesse, konwledge, longe sufferaunce, in loue vnfayned, in the worde of truth, in ye power of GOD, by the armoure of rightuousnesse, and so forth. Necessary is it for thē to do on Iesus Christ, & to walke worthely in theyr vocaciō, obseruing ye vnytie of ye spirite in ye yoke of peace. As the chosē
                              
holy, and welbeloued, of God to take vpon them a tender pyttie, kyndnesse, lowlynesse, softnesse, swifte forgiuing, wyth other fruites of the spirite, acknowledging alwaye Christs for theyr onely wysdom, rightuousnesse, and redemption, for theyr kéeper, sauer, and stronge bulwarke of defēce. Thus in this spirituall rekeninge is it to be considered, yt by the furlonges is the cytie measured, and by the cubytes the wall, the furlonges comprehendyng them that haue runne in the true course of a christiā lyfe, and the cubites them that haue iustly ministred the power of Christes worde and doctrine. Some writers haue taken the one sort here for martiers, for valiauntlye performinge their moste sharp course, and the other for them that haue peaceably rested in Christ. But I am contented here wyth my coniecture, consideringe there haue bene martiers in both the afore named degrées. And as for the vnequalnesse of length in ye furlonges & cubits, it onely respecteth ye persons, or peoples among whom the people, taught, haue

excéeded the teachers in number, y• cō
                              munalty, ye gouernours, and the flocke, the shepardes, or els the gentyls, the Iewes. Yet are they both twelue, both great, whole, perfect, & vniuersal numbers, one Hierusalem, or one perfect kingdōe of Christ. Thus doth also the xii. twelues corresponde to ye xii. thousandes, as ye Iewes to ye gētyles in one faith (though their limites were much larger, extēding to ye endes of ye world) and are made one shepefolde or flocke. Christ being one shepeherde of saluatiō to thē both.
                           12 Consequently the golden measure which ye Angell had, was much after ye measure yt man customably vseth. And this signifieth yt the word of god which measureth all thinges perteyninge to hys churche, is geuen vnto vs vnder such worldly similitudes & likilihodes, as we are beste acquainted with, for our weaknesse sake. Not onely in thys reuelation, but also in all other bookes of ye scriptures doth ye holy ghost at his appoyctment, alure vs to hys kingdōe by the example and parables of such thinges as we haue in dayly custome.

As of mountaynes, gardens, welspringes, vyneyardes, fygge trées, tabernacles, temples, buyldynges, maryages, stewards, vyrgyns, merchā
                              dise, tyllynge, haruest, talentes, pearles, nettes, suppers, shéepe, lambes, lyghte, wheate, salte, gootes, doues, serpentes, menne, keyes, lanternes, swerdes, roddes, trauelinge women, mustarde séede, beastes, and here of furlonges and cubytes, wyth such other lyke, and all to make vs to perceyue them. Nowe sée we onely by such darke simylitudes. But in the regeneratyon, whan all thynges is cleare, shall we haue néede of no such nyght shaddowes, wythout vayle or coueryng shall we then sée, and béeholde our Lorde God as he is in dede. Than shall we perfectly know lyke as we are nowe knowen of hym. Thā shal our measure be in al points, as is the Angels measure. Equal shall we be vnto them in full perfectyon, vnderstanding, and knowledge. For as the Angels of heauen shall wée than be, impassible, immortall, and glorious, & of equall number with thē.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        The Text.
                        1 And the buyldynge of the wall of it, was of Iasper, 2. and the cytie vvas of pure golde, 3. lyke vnto clere glasse, 4. And the foundacions of the vvalles and of the citie 5. were garnyshed wyth all maner of precious stones.
                        6 The first foundatyon vvas a Iasper, 7. the seconde a Saphyre, 8. the thyrde a Calcedonye, 9. the fourth a Smaragde, 10. the fifte a Sardonix, 11. the sixte a Sardeos 12. the seuenth a Chrysolyte, 13. the eyghte a Gerall, 14. the nynth a Topas, 15. the tenth a Chrisoprasos, 16. the eleuenth a Iacynte, 17. the tvvelfte an Amatist.
                        
                           The Commentarye.
                           1 The whole buyldyng, of the wall of thys citye was of Iaspar stone. Whych betokneth that in Christe it shalbe most precyous, pleasaunt, delectable, and sure. For euer shall they be newe and gréene, fresh, and lyuely, durable, and beutyfull, that perfectly beleue in hym, and shall become sure stayes or pyllers in hys holy temple. He that truely obserueth my worde (sayth Christe) shall neuer taste of death. Upon a lyuynge foundacyon

shall they be couched, and so growe vp into an holy temple in the Lord, and so together into the habytacle of God in the holy Ghost.
                           2 And thys fayre cytie it selfe was of most pure golde, so fine, beutifull and clere as most pure glas possible. With out spot or deformite is ye true church of god, hauing neither blemish nor yet wrincle, and tryed it is throughly as gold in the fornace. The clere lyght of thys cytie is Christ, which neuer dyd sinne in worde nor in dede. More precious haue his death & bloudshedinge made it than is the most pure fine gold that euer was yet sene.
                           3 A gloryous congregatiō haue he prouyded it to be, and that will appere in ye day of his visitatiō. So far shall this excell the Hierusalem that Salomon builded, as heauē exceleth ye earth. For yt was but golde within, thys is all golde throughly, both within & wt out. That was buylded by the handes of men, thys is of a much hygher workemanshyppe.
                           An vndefiled heritage is this, & shalbe chaunged frō clerenesse to clerenesse,

into the glorie of the Lord.
                           4 The strong foundations of ye wall of this worthy citie (which is ye firme faith of ye Patriarkes & Prophetes, the Appostles and other true teachers, surelye grounded vpon Christ) were beutifully adorned with all maner of precious stones, or giftes of the holy Ghost.
                           5 Diuerse were ye graces which they had receiued, and the fruites out springing from thē were also diuers & glorious. As loue, ioy, peace, paciēce, long suffering, gentelnesse, goodnesse, faithfulnesse, méekenesse, tēperaunce, and such other.
                           Nothinge fayre appeared these stones vnto this worlde, whan they were hewen, squared, and made fyt foundatiōs, by the manyfolde persecutions of tyrauntes, no more than was the greate costly stone in the bottom of Syon, vpon whome they were builded, whyche séemed so deformed as a lypper.
                           Neuertheles, yet was their death precious in ye lords syght. These are they (shall theyr aduersaryes say at ye day)

whom we sometyme thought fooles & had in much derision. But now they are counted among the children of god, and haue their porciō among ye saincts. Here might much be spoken of fayth, which diuersly wrought in Abel, Seth, and Enoch for the fyrst age. In Noe, Abraham, Moyses, Dauid, Helias, and other in their ages. In Peter, Iohn, & Iames, with all the other Apostles & syncere preachers since Christes time. But let that suffise in this behalf, that S. Paul hath written in the .xi. Chap. to the Hebrues, which is also here after comprehended vnder the mystery of the .xii. precious stones whereof the foundacions are.
                           6 In that the first foundacion is said here to be of a Iaspar or Dyamond, (Whose colour is grene) is signified that the faythe of the fyrste fathers is not yet withered awaye. Styll vnto this present daye is the example of Enos oryent, fresh, & lyuely, which firste called vpon the name of God, and of many such other more.
                           Still perseuer they grene in the liuely Scriptures and fadeth not.
                           
                              I haue earnestly prayed for thée Peter (saith Christ) that thy fayth should not fayle.
                           7 The seconde foundacion was of a Saphire, whose colour is as the Aire clere, but not very precious in sight. This betokeneth those simple soules, which though they were as Iob and Ioseph the carpentour, not precious to the worlde, yet had they their dayly conuersations in heauen.
                           8 The third was of a Calcedony, which is yet more course to looke vppon than the Saphyre, but in nature precious, mighty, and strong.
                           Of this nature were Helias and Iohn Baptiste, whose conuersacion was in the wyldernesse, rough, harde, and vnpleasaunt. Yet apeared they precious at theyr tymes appointed, mightely rebuking sinne, drawinge vnto them the chaffe as the propertie is of the Calcedony (which are the common people) but vtterly throwing forth againe or condemning the Idolatours and hipocrites.
                           The word of Helias brent lyke a cresset, and Iohn was a shining lanterne

before the Lorde.
                           9 The fourth was of a Smaragde or an Emerald, which is not onely gren
                                 •
                               of his owne nature, but he maketh all the ayre about him to seme greene also.
                           Of thys condicion was Hieremy and Paule, whych hauing the doctrine of lyfe, spared not to minister it vnto other for their eternall refreshing. These with suche other throwen into the foundation of the church, were very comfortable vnto other.
                           With the holy (saith Dauid) thou shalt be holy▪ and with the pure innocent thou shalt be both innocent and pure.
                           10 The fyfte was of a Sardonix, which is compouned of a Sardeos & an Onice, and is beneth blacke, in the middest white, and aboue reade. Such were those méeke spirited that confesseth themselues sinners wyth Dauid and Magdalene, being through fayth both pure and orient afore god.
                           Though I be blacke (sayth ye true congregatiō) yet am I fair & wel fauoured

We faint not (sayth Paule) for though our outwarde man be corrupte yet is he that is inwarde daily renewed.
                           11 The syxt is a Sardeos, which in simultitude is very lyke vnto redde earth. And such are they, as notwithstanding the great benefites of God, thinking themselues the vnworthye children of Adam, whose interpretaciō after Philo, is red earth in déede. Mary Christes mother was of thys sort, confessing hir selfe after most high benefightes, to be but an hand maide, and hir spirite onely to reioyce in god hir sauiour. So was Abraham calling himself but dust and ashes before the Lorde.
                           12 The seuēth foundatiō is of a Crisolite or Turcas, which shineth as gold, and séemeth as it should sende forth sparkes. Under thys are they comprehended, whych hauynge the wisdom of the spirite, inflameth other wyth it, prouokinge them thereby to the loue of god & their neyghbour. Thus did Moyses and Esay, Barnabas and Paule, in whome the glorye of the Lorde apeared plentiously.
                           
                              13 The eight was of a Berall, which is of a pale grene coloure, betokening those faithfull persones whych of christiā compassion hath dolorously lamented the fall of theyr brethren. Of this godly natur was Steuen which prayed for them that stoned him to death. So was afore hys tyme Samuell whych mourned for Saul, whan hée sée hym cast out of the Lordes fauour.
                           14 The nynth was of a Topaze whych hath in hym the colours of all other stones. And thys signifyeth thē, whych are with all vertues adourned. Lyke as was Daniell the man of desires, and Iohn the Euangelist which wrote thys present prophecy, whom Christ much loued. The clere workes of these and such other wolde hée to shyne vnto men, that by them the father might be glorifyed.
                           15 The tenth was of a Chrisoprasos, whose condicion is to shyne lyke gold, and yet he is gréene in sight. Suche are they whych hauing godly wysdōe, vttereth it accordinge to the tallent geuen them of the Lorde, thereby renewing the dull spirites of other vnto

heauenly things. Among this sort may Ezechiell be numbred, which saw many wonderful visions, & so may Simeō and Anna in the Gospell.
                           16 The eleuēth was of a Iacinct, which is in coloure lyke vnto water, spred ouer with bright sonne beames. And this betokeneth those that are baren from the 
                                 •
                              cience and learninge of this worlde, and yet haue knowledge from aboue. Uery Idiots appeare they in ye sight of men, and yet are they taughte of God, to disclose most wonderfull secrets. Of this sort were Oseas, Iohel, and Amos, wihch was but a poore shepard, with ye other inferiour prophets: And so were Andrew, Philip, & Thomas with the other Apostles and Disciples.
                           17 The twelft was an Amatist, purple, violet, & rose coloured. And this betokneth them that are feruent, méeke, and constaunt in the Lords truth, and that hath bene alwaies ready to shed their bloud for it. Such were the vnbrethren in ye Machabées wt their most faithfull mother. So was also Iames the more, and Antipas the faithfull

witnesse, with other disciples & martirs. None can shewe a more token of loue than he which giueth vp his lyfe for his friends. This sort dyd Christe proclaime altogether blessed, & sayde yt ye kingdom of heauen was their own. Thus signifieth these xii. foundatiōs, yt the godly ministers of Christes congregation, haue builded vpon him according to ye diuers graces which god hath geuen thē, some gold, some siluer, some precious stones. But they yt haue brought vnto this building, tīber, hay or stubble which are customes, tradicions, & dum ceremonies, or els worldly honors, riches, & voluptuous plesures, are not in this heauenly number admitted. Figured are these foundatiōs in ye precious stones which were in the brest flap of Aron yt hye priest, & in the preious decking of ye king of Tirus, necessary shal it be for him yt will more largely know ye natural properties of thē, to resort vnto Plinius in ye xxxvii. Booke of his naturall historye, or vnto Bartilmew, de proprietatibus rerū, & for ye vnderstanding of misteries, vnto S. Hierom vpon ye liiii. chap. of Esay,

or vnto Beda, Haymo, Costasy, Bacō
                              
                              
                                 •
                              horpe, Elyne, Tilney, & such other as hath written great works vpon ye apocalips. Ynough is it for vs to shew you after ye minde of S. Augustin these stones to signifie ye diuers graces of ye holy ghost. For all these thinges doth one spirit of ye Lord work, deuiding seueral gifts vnto euery mā at his pleasure which ar not wtout their preciousnes, beuty, & excellēt glory, as will appere in ye glorius day of ye childrē of god.
                        
                     
                     
                        The Text.
                        1 And the tvvelue gates vvere xii. pearles. 2. And euery gate vvas of one pearle. 3. And the streat of the citie vvas pure golde. 4. As a thorough shining glasse. 5. And I savv no temple therein, 6, For the Lorde God almightie and the Lamb is the temple of it. 7. And the citie hath no neede of the sunne, neither of the moone to lighten it. 8. For the brightnesse of God doth lighten it. 9, And the Lamb is the light of it. 10. And the people vvhich are laued shall vvalk in the light of it. 11. And the kings of the earth shall bring their glory vnto it. 12. And the gates of it shall not be shut by day. 13, For there shall be no night there. 14. And ther shal enter into it none vnclean thing. 15. Neither vvhatsoeuer vvorketh abhominatiō, or maketh lies, 16 but thei which are vvritten in the Lambes Booke of life.
                        
                           
                           The Commentary.
                           1 Consequently (saith the Angel vnto Iohn) the xii. gates or openinges into this citie, were twelue fayre pearls, For dilectable and precious is the doctrine of the gospell, whereby men doe enter into the kingdome of God on euery side, or in euery quarter & age of the world.
                           2 And euery gate by him selfe was of one pearle, like as were the foundations of one precious stone euermore in their kindes. In token that the verytie of Christ, is whole perfect, & vnbroken in it selfe, lyke as is his cote without seame. A speciall commodyty is it in cities, to haue their gates strōg and bewtifull. And so is it in the kingdome of God, that they which open vnto rightuousnesse, be more feruent in the truth and of a more sincere life thā the residue. For they shoulde be both the salte of the earth and lighte of the world▪ Though these gates be many, yet haue they but one entraunce, for eche one of them is but of one pearle.

But one mediatour is there betwene God and man, which is Iesus Christ▪ None maye come vnto the father but by hym onely. Alone is he the dore, the waye, the verytie, lyghte, & life.
                           3 And as concerning the cytie within the great strete thereof was as of pure golde, so fyne, fayre, and cleare all the bryght shining glasse, yt maye be séene through without any maner of impediment or dymnesse.
                           Thys strete is the large commynalty or the sayntes, whom the father of heauen by his power made of froward stones, the perfect children of Abrahā, whan he couched them here togyther in the verity of one christian fayth, & shall here after ioyne in such perfectiō of loue as possible can not be dissolued.
                           4 Precious are they here through fayth in Christes bloud, and there shal they be pure both in loue and lyfe incorruptible. Oure reioyse (sayth saint Paule) is not in carnall wisdome, but in the greate grace of God, in singlenesse of hart, & in a sincere fayth. Your glorye are we, euen as you are ours also in ye day of our Lord Iesus Christ.
                           
                              5 In this glorious citye sawe I no temple builded (saith Iohn) for ye Lord God almighty, which is the eternall father, and the lambe Iesus Christe which is his eternall sonne is the holy, full and perfect temple therof. None outwarde priesthoode▪ ceremonye, nor sacrifyce for fiue cōmaundeth Christes doctrine to his congregation. The golden measure of his word, which diffyneth and iudgeth all thinges necessary therevnto, appointeth no such matter. For in no tēples made wt stone dwelleth God, which wil be all in all. Only is required of them a sacrifice from the soule, which is the very temple of God. In his onely name shoulde the faithful sort, ther offer vp themselues. And therefore Christ appoynted Uespasian and Titus, to turne ouer the great temple of Hierusalem, and vtterly to destroy that priesthoode, because we should put no trust in suche thinges, nor yet be addict or bound to places. A damnable inuencion is it of Antichrist that the suffragans halloweth the sinagogs, to bringe them into al kinds of superstition.
                           
                              They constitute also a feastfull daye to the honour and worshipe therof, called the dedication, which is most abhominable wickednesse. Truthe it is yt after ye Apostles time ther were places appointod, where as the congregacion met together once in the weake, for ye hearinge of Gods word and for ye holy communion, and that was called the oratorie or house of praier. But that house was not exercysed nor coniured, crossed nor smered, blessed nor be sprinkled wyth water. Neyther was there at that time anye aulter set vp in it, & anointed with oyle & creme, to offer any newe sacrifice vpon. Consider also that ye appoinmente of this bare house withoute aulter or images, was lefte to mans ordinaunce without any exprest commaundement of Christ, that it should be thought of no reputacion. For in spirite and veritie wyll god only be worshiped. And for this cause after that Christ had dryuen the byers and sellers out of the temple, he commended none other temple vnto vs but his body, which he raysed vp in the daye of his resurection, to our behoue.
                           
                              6 God therfore, is our temple and his Christ. In them ought we to do sacryfice, and in none other. In their faith should our workes, labours, & studies be grounded only, if we couet them to profit vs. Iohn for his time could sée none other temple but this. The Lord of his tender mercye graunt vs to be Iohns in this behalfe. Iohn beheld also at the Angels demonstration, that this Citie had neither néede of Sunne nor Moone to minister light vnto it, as the olde Hierusalem had. Neither hath Christes congregation néede of mans naturall reason, nor yet of hys worldly wisdom, coniectures, nor practises, subtilties nor wiles, polices, nor witts, inuencions nor traditions. No, neither of their philosophy nor sophystrie, the decrées nor sentences of the great Lawyers & Schoolemen, which all is but darknesse and blindnesse.
                           8 For the brightnesse of God sheweth thē light sufficient. His shining verytie, his pure gospell, and his vndefiled lawes, cleareth their vnderstandings. A lanterne to their féete is hys heauenly word. Only doth that clerenesse

suffise them, whiche faith offereth vnto them.
                           9 Onely are they contented with the light they haue of the Lambe, which is the bright Sunne of rightuousnes. He is the Lamp, the Candle, and the flaming Cresset of this citie. None other admonisher haue they néede of, none other counseller nor teacher. Accursed holde they him that bringeth any other doctrine than his, though he were an Angell from heauen. For he is the only light of the world ye brightnesse euerlasting, the vndefiled myrrour of the maiestie of God and the Image of his infinite goodnesse. Whoso euer foloweth him, can in no wise walke in the darknesse. The dayes wyll come (saith the Lorde in Hieremy) that a man shall not néede to teach his neighbour or brother for they shal know me frō the highest to the lowest. I shall plante my lawe in their inwarde partes, and write it in theyr hartes.
                           10 And the people of al maner of regions which are predestinate of God to be saued, shall walke in the clearnesse

of ye light. None other wisdome, helth, rightuousnesse, and redemption shall they seke, than they finde in him. Neither shal they care for Mary nor Ihon, rodes nor reliques, hedes, nor holy water, masses, nor merites. For so shall he shyne vpon them, and his glorie apere in them that the cloudes of Antichrist and his false prophits shal take no place. So liuely shall the rightuous waxe in that faith of saluacion, that they shall become not only the children of clernesse, but also very lyghtes in the Lorde,
                           11 Morouer vnto this heauenly light shall the myghty kynges of the earth bringe their glory, magnifycence, and honour, as did the wise men of ye East, which offred rewardes vnto Chryste. They shalbe conuerted from their erroures, to a sincer, beleue in the Lord, as were in the Apostles tyme Abagarus, Egippus, and Gundoforus. And since their dayes the mighty Emperour great Constātine, Iouinian, Theodosius and diuerse other. Yea, some were so feruent in that faith, that gladly they suffred death for it. Of whose

numher were here in Englande, saint Edmound, Oswalde, Ethelbert, Edwyne and Fremonde, with a greate sorte more in other Christian regions. All kinges (saith Deuid) shall worshipe him and all paganes shal do him seruyce. Amonge these are not they to be rek
                                 •
                              ned, which leauing their kingdomes, hath made them selues monks and friers, or hath founded masses and monastaries to be praied for. For they neuer brought theire glorye to thys light. No more haue they done which hath enriched the cleargye, gluttinge them with possessiōs, and setting them vp in a glitteryng pompe. But rather haue they sought darknesse than light, blyndenesse than to be taught of god. Some haue thought them selues in our age clearly cōuerted to thys lyght. But ryghtly hath their iniquitie lyed vnto them. For nothynge haue they done lesse than broughte vnto Chryste theyr glorye. Truthe it is that they haue discharged them selues of the Pope, and to some of hys sects.
                           They haue plucked downe shrynes and Images that receaued offeringes,

and dayly worshippings, with a fewe superstitions besides, but still bringing vp whelps of the same false generation, both bishops & prists. Stil haue they to this day, the same wicked rits and ceremonies that they had afore. And when thei should bring ani thing to a right christian order, according to Christes first institution, they cannot away with it. Great is the vengeance terrible heuy and fearefull the iudgement that abideth them.
                           12 And as concerning the great gates of this Citie, which are the true vnderstandings of the Lordes verities, they shall not be shut vp by day. Hidden shall they not be to them ye walke in this light. All that Christ hath receiued of his heauenly father leaueth he manyfest and plaine vnto his faithfull leuers▪ Not only openeth he their feble vnderstandings, but also sendeth them his spirit to deduce them into al godly knowledge.
                           13 For in that citie shal be no night. No doctrine of darknesse, nor fylthye mist of mens imaginations, can haue place where Christe is euer residente

and his verytie manifest. The nighte of infidelytie is cleane gone from thē, which hath obtained the euerlastinge day. The cloudes of filthy errours abideth not, where the true sunne hath alwaies dominion. The stronge powers of hel shall not be able to preuaile, where as faith is perfect and sure. So goeth the Lorde before his true Israelits in this piller of fire, that the night is vnto them all one with the day. That is vnto other darknesse in parables, is vnto them the clere light and the euidentlye knowne misteries of Gods kingdome. In the common translation (that is dayly read in the Temple) it foloweth, that they shall bring the glory and honour of the heithen into the same citie, which is not founde in the Gréeke. And by this is it signyfyed that the apostles and other godly preachers sins their time, conuerting the gentles, haue not only brought into the christian Churche by theyr preachings many of theyr phylosophers whose glory hath bene their wisdome and learning, but also theyr princely potentates, whose honour

consisted in power, possessions, & magnificence. Of this sort was the chamberlaine of Quéene Cādace, to whom Philip declared ye prophecie. So was Cornelius the noble Centurion, which was instructed and baptised of Peter. So were also Dionisius the Areopagite. Apollo of Alexandria, and Aquila the Italiane, with diuers other whom Paul conuerted in his progresse. And after theyr dayes were of this company Iustinus the martyr, Quadratus, Aristides, Tertullyane, Origyne, Cyryll, Basyle, Iohn Crysostome, Augustyne, Hieronimie, with an infinite number els. So was Lucius the firste Christian King of this region, Philippus the Emperour, with many other great gouernours, which both builded almes houses for the poore, and made other godly prouision els. This is the precious spoile they brought out of Egypt, and the fruite they haue planted in the Lords vyneyard. As Esaye prophesied, they enioyed the strēgth of the paganes and tryumphed in theyr glory, but not in their superfluous toyes and vanities as doo the Papistes.
                           
                              14 For into this citie (saith the text) or congregation, which is from within & vnknowen to the world, shal nothing enter that is vncleane, or that after any sort defyleth. No rightuousnesse of men, which is afore God, but as the cloth stayned with mēstrue. No tradicions, merytes, nor masses, apere they neuer so holye. For all that is done besides the prescriptes of his worde, is plaine abhomination and filthinesse.
                           None that is gelded or 
                                 •
                              oacted to chastitie by papisticall vowes. None that is borne of a cōcubyne, or that maketh a new supersticious professiō. No misbegotten Moabytes, and Ammonites betokening all sectes of perdicion, are allowed of the Lorde vnto this congregacion. Onely are they accepted for Citizens thereof, which are renewed in faith by the spirit of Iesus Christ.
                           15 Whatsoeuer it be that worketh abhominacion in vncommaunded worshippings, or maketh lyes in Hipocrisie, is clerely sequestred frō this vndefiled citie. The constrayned virginitie

of priestes, which hath made so many Sodomytes, Confession vnder a stole that hath bredde so many false traytors and théeues. The two horned order of Bishops that hath hatched so many proud gluttōs and murtherers. The anoynted priesthoode ye hath so many Idolatours. The vnholy profession of monkes that hath brought forth so many stinking hypocrits, with suche other sedes of the diuell, hath héere no place at al. For nether whormongers, nor yet Ido
                                 •
                              l worshipers, nor buggerers, nor Gomoreans, nor extorcioners, nor couetuouse brybers, nor dronkardes, nor blasphemers of the Lordes word, nor cruel destroyers of innocentes can in any wise inherit the kingdome of God.
                           16 But they onely shal possesse that which are writen in the Lambs booke of lyfe, or that were predestinate ther vnto in Christ before the worlds constitution, to be holy and vnspotted in his sight. These are they whō he hath a perpetuall remembrance, whom he hath ordained of goodnes, chosē of mercy, called by the Gospell, iustified thorough

faith, & glorified in the perfourmaunce of hys commaundemēts, that they shoulde be lyke fashioned to the shape of hys sonne. Though these of frailnesse offende many tymes (as the fleshe can doe none other) yet denye they not the verytie, they abhorre not ye scriptures. But after they haue fallen they repent frō the hart, they séeke the remedyes, they hate their owne déedes, they call vnto Christ, they lament their chaunce, they honger and thyrst continually for the rightuousnesse of God, and such other like. Now as concerninge thys citye in the regeneration or Sabboth to come, all will be golde, precious stone, and pearle. Theyr glorye wyll bée perfect, their knowledge whole, and theyr iudgement in the spirite full. All wyll be there square, euen, and right, nothinge shalbe croked, rough, and frowarde. All wil be newe and precious, no maner of deformitie appearing in ye creaturs. The bewtie of ye citie will bée wonderfull, the lyght inestimable, the dwelling most quietous and pleasaunt. There shall we clerely beholde

howe myghtie, maruelous, hygh, bewtyfull, glorious, perfect, stronge, victoryous, delectable, and swéet our redemer Iesus Chryst is wyth hys father and holy Ghost. Here haue wée but a small taste thereof, but there, shall we bée fully replenyshed there wyth.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The xxii. Chapiter.
                     Styll doth thys Chapiter folowynge (whych is the laste of thys Reuelacyon) prosecute the spirituall and heauenly commodities of thys Cytie, concluding wyth most excellent admonicions and Godly warninges.
                     
                        The text.
                        1 And hee shevved me a pure ryuer. 2. of vvater of lyfe. 3. cleare as crystall. 4. proceedynge out of the seate of God, and of the lambe. 5, in the myddest of the streate of it. 6. and of eyther syde of the tyuer. 7. vvas theyr vvoode of lyfe. 8. vvhych bare tvvelue maner of fruites. 9. and gaue fruite euerye moneth. 10. and the leaues of the vvoode serued. 11. to heale people vvith all.
                        
                           The Commentary.
                           
                              1 And the Angell (saith S. Iohan) or gracious purpose of the Lord, which cōmoned with me al this time to bring me yet into a farder knowledge of his misteries shewed vnto me a most pure and commodious ryuer, whych was the wholesome water of lyfe. None other can I suppose thys ryuer to be by the serche of the scriptures, but the flowing veritie, ye worde of saluacion, or the effectuall doctryne of Christs holy spirit. That is the swéet floud of Eden which pleasaūtly floweth through Paradyse, & visiteth ye .iiii. quarters of the worlde. This is ye wholsome & dilectable water, which daily cōforteth & preserueth ye spirituall Hierusalem from all contagious maladies. This rūning flood with his ryuers on euery syde, reioyseth ye cytie of god which is the habitation of ye highest.
                           2 All full of quyckenesse is it, springing into ye lyfe euerlasting. Here is it the spirituall cōfort of gods children, ther shall it be ye enestimable glory of ye sainctes. To whō shal we go lord (saith Peter) but vnto thée? For onely haste thou the wordes of eternall lyfe.
                           
                              3 So cleare is this water as ye pure cristall that is without spotte. Much farther from corruption is the sincere worde of God, than is the fine siluer that is vii. tymes tryed in ye fyre. The lawes of the Lorde are perfect and quickneth the soule, hys testimonies are true giuing wiseome to babes. His statutes are ryght reioysing the hart. His preceptes are pure giuing sight to the eyes. And hys iudgementes are all togither rightuous.
                           4 The nature of this water is none other but euermore to clēse, euermore to reuiue, & euermore to make whole and perfect. For onely doth it issewe from the magistie of God, it procedeth out from the sempiternall throne of ye father, and so floweth forth in the plē
                              tuous haboundaunce of the lambe Iesus Christe and of his Godly spirite. With hym is the well of euerlasting lyfe. They that walke in his lyght shalbe frée from darkenesse for euer. They shall throughly enioye the haboundaunce of those thinges that his house is full of, and he shall giue them drnicke out of the ful flowing ryuer of

his eternall pleasures. I will powre cleare water vpon you (sayth the Lord in Ezechiell) and ye shalbe cleane frō all filthynesse. A new hart will I giue you. A new spirit will. I plant in you, and so clense you from all your idoles. Reioyce with Hierusalem all you that loue hir, for ye shall sucke comforte out of hir brestes, and bée satisfied. They that haue sowen in heauinesse, shall reape in perpetuall gladnesse. From the father and the sonne proceded the holy Ghost, as a clere cristall ryuer, neither created nor be gotten, to refreshe this chosen citye. So that much more vnderstanding, lyght, and knoweledge it hath, than had the olde Synagog of the Iewes which was therof but a shaddow. Yet is it incomparably farre from that shall bée in the durable lyfe to come, being as yet thereto but a figure. For as witnesseth Paul, our knowledge is now vnperfect, and our prophecying vnperfect But whan that cometh which is perfect, then that which is vnperfect shall be done away. Here is it also to be cō
                              sidred that the Lambe is equall with

God, they both hauing but one seate.
                           5 Moreouer in the middes of the golden stret of this beutifull citye, which comprehendeth the spirituall children of Abraham couched togither in the vnytie of one tryed fayth.
                           6 And vpon eyther sides of the swéet ryuer which are the .ii. Testamentes of the Lorde, was standing the moste dilectable trée of life Iesus Christ, that mediatour & father which giueth lyfe 
                                 •
                              o the worlde. Out of the stocke of Afbraham and Dauid sprang this frée a
                              
                                 •
                              er the fleshe, conceyued of the holy Ghost, & borne of Marie the virgine, which was also a golden stone of this stréete. Blessed arte thou (sayth Elizabeth) for thy beleues sake. For in thée is performed the full promise of the Lorde. This is that trée which was planted by the water side, & gaue forth fruite at his tyme appoynted. As the trée of life was sette in the middes of Paradyse at the beginninge, so is hée nowe spiritually grounded in the middest of his church, which is his gardē of pleasure. Behold (saith Christ) I am with you euery day vnto ye worlds end.
                           
                              7 Maruayll not that the trée is here called wood, for it is the custome and maner of the Hebrues to put the one for the other. Both is this trée in the myddest of the stréete and also vpon eyther sydes of the ryuer. For both is Christ knowen of his faithfull multytude, and comprehended in the scriptures. Dauid acknowledged himselfe to be a pure stone of this golden stréete, whan he sayd. My humble soule hath cleaued or fastened to the pauemente, thou quyckening me Lorde according to thy worde. So did Kinge Ezechyas whan he was reuyued agayne. And so dyd Helias whan he vnder the Iuniper trée desired to dye, with many other more. Betwene both testaments arose Christ, performing the olde, and begynning the new. He bordereth also to thys present day vpon them both, for both they beare large and plentuous witnesse of hym. Both the lawe and the Gospell, the Prophetes and Apostles, the Psalmes and all other scriptures, witnesseth throughly that he is ye promysed séede, the sonne of ye lyuing God, & the sauiour of ye worlde.
                           
                              8 If that soyle be fortunate which bryngeth forth fruites twyse in the yeare, most happye and blessed is the ground of this citie. For the liuing trée therof is neuer barren, bare, nor idle.
                           9 Not onely doth it beare .xii. maner fruites of inestimable wholesomnesse, betokening the vniuersall graces and giftes of the holy Ghoste, but also it giueth them forth euery moneth in the yeare, or euer more wyth out ceasing. Euery moneth hath there both his sō
                              mer and hys wynter. Euery life time of them, which be of this congregation, hath here both his swéete consolation in the spirite and also his hard persecution in the fleshe. Els is it not of Christs kingdom, which is the destroier of death, and ministreth lyfe at his pleasure. In this trée is the originall grounde of lyfe. He is the very lyfe of all them that liueth vnto God. In hym onely they consist, they moue, and they haue their continuall being. His branches are the holy Prophetes and Apostles, and the Euangilistes & Martyrs, wyth all other godly preachers and teachers, euermore gréene & pleasaunt

in their conuersa
                                 •
                              iō and doctrin. I am the true vyne (sayth he) and you are the braunches. He that abydeth in me and I in him, bringeth forth much fruite. Them sent Christ out as braū
                              ches, and spred wyth them the world ouer, too brynge forth frute yt should not perishe. And that euery moneth, from age to age, and from tyme to tyme continually. For styll are the true beleuers fedde wyth the Apostls fruitefull doctrine, and shalbe to the ende of the worlde. Therewith are their soules refreshed, in their greate manyfolde sorowes and labours. A singuler comfort it is vnto them to consider Gods swéete promyses, and to remember what a louinge father they haue of him through Iesus christ theyr onely mediatour and sauiour. Most haboūd
                                 •
                              untly féele they thēselues satysfied, when they are assertayned throughly by the scriptures, yt they are predestinate, called, saued, sanctified, and shalbe here after gloryfied by him. Where as contrarywyse, the desperate infidels are much discomforted, considring them selues blynded, condemned

iudged, & reproued. Twelue are these fruites here called, which is a perfect and full complete number, comprehending the vniuersall graces of the spirite, contayned in all ye whole scriptures. As are ye feare of God ye pouertie of soule, the clennesse of hart, cō
                              passion vpon ye nedy, desyre of rightuousnesse, mercy, gentilnesse, quietnesse, sufferaunce, wysdom, vnderstanding, counsayll, perseueraunce, knowledge, prudence, force, iustice, temperaūce, wt those yt Paule numbreth too ye Galathians, and innumerable vertues besides some expositours willeth this twelue to signifie ye none can be saued vnlesse he be of the xii. children of Israell in spirite, & so walke according to ye docttrine of Christes .xii. Apostles. But I am contented with that is sayd afore, being more agréeable to the text.
                           10 Such leaues had this wholsome trée as were for ye health of the people, good necessary, and medicinable. Such profitable wordes and promyses hath Christ, as are spirite and lyfe, power of saluation, and euerlastinge health. These leaues of hys can in no wyse

wyther away, and whatsoeuer he doth by them, it shall wonderfullly prosper. He sent forth hys wholsome woorde (sayth Dauid) and so healed them. He delyuered them from all euyls wherewyth they were oppressed.
                           As these wordes are sincerely taught, the benefightes of our redempcion are brought into remembraunce. So is the conscience quyeted, and ye harte made glad.
                           So reioyseth ye soule & giueth perpetuall thankes vnto God the father. Soo are the Gentyles throughlye made whole acknowledgynge Christe for theyr onely sauyour and redéemer.
                           11 Thus after Czechyell, are these fruites good to eate, and theyr leaues profitable for medicynes.
                           As the leaues are the beauty of a trée, and preserueth the fruite, so is the true preachinge of the Lordes veritie, the comelynesse of hys church and preseruacion of the same.
                           And not the oylynges, shauynges, and disguysynges, nor yet the Lordeshippes, myters, and masses.
                           
                              A lyght thynge is the worde of god written or spoken, as is the leafe also of a trée. But if his spirite worketh in it, than is it a thyng moste precious, effecttuall, and stronge, compared of Christ to a mustarde séede, which gr
                                 •
                              
                              weth into a greate trée. Aboue all thinges (sayth Zorobabel) the veritie, is most stronge. For that is the Lords eternall will, which neuer shalbe altred.
                        
                     
                     
                        The text.
                        1 And there shalbe no more curse. 2. but the seate of God and the Lambe shalbe in it. 3. and hys seruauntes shall serue hym. 4 And they shall see hys face,. 5. & his name shalbe in their foreheades. 6. And there shall be no nyght there. 7. and they neede no candell. 8. neyther lyght of the Sunne, 9. For the Lorde God giueth them lyght. 10. and they shall reygne for euermore.
                        
                           The Commentary.
                           1 And as concerning the afore named cytie, or worthy congregation of the Lorde, the curse that the earth had in the worke of Adam, shall clerely be

taken from it. Neuer more frō henceforth shall therein be any thinge that God is not pleased with. For Christ hath redemed hir from the curse of ye lawe, sustaining thereof the penaltie to make hir innocent. So that nowe there is no dampnation to them whych are in Christ Iesu, folowing the doctrine of the spirite, if painfull aduersitie, losse of goodes, detriment of fame, syckenesse, persecution of body, or any other troublous crosse happeneth, it is euermore for the best to them that are faythfull. Perfectlye shall these be taken awaye wyth all the corrupte fruites of Adam in the regeneration, whan to theyr glorye both heauen and earth shalbe blessed, all that is cursed throwen into the lake of euerlasting fyre.
                           2 And for a more sure token that thys will be true, the hygh seate of God the eternall father, and of the Lambe Iesus Christ wyth the holy Ghost, one Lorde almighty in thrée personages, shalbe contynually there in. In the house of Iacob shall hée reygne euermore and of hys kingdōe

shall be none ende. Amonge them will he fixe hys dwelling place here, which loueth hym and obserueth his cōmaundementes, and there will he not be seperated from them, but be still their eternall God.
                           3 Moreouer as hys true seruauntes, here shall they worship hym in spirite and in veritie, and so serue hym in a sincere fayth perfourming such Godly workes as he hath prescribed vnto thē, and not such as mens fantasyes hath dreamed. They shall so mortyfie their olde man, destroying the body of sinne, that no longer shall he obeye the concupiscence, nor become a captyue seruaūt vnto wickednesse here. But nowe delyuered from sinne, they shall doe on a newe man which is rightly fashyoned of God, and so become his seruaū
                              tes in rightuousnesse. And in ye world to come they shall serue him according to the knowledge that they shall haue than, which now is incomprehensible and vnspeakeable.
                           4 Hauinge the spirite of Christ, they shall here sée hys face of saluation in the myrroure of fayth, whych is to

haue knowledge of hys Godhede. And after thys lyfe they shall beholde him in glory, lyke as he is in dede, much more perfectly than dyd Iacob, which sawe hym face to face. Moreouer soo shall these hys seruauntes respect his vsage, that whatsoeuer they doe here in worde or in dede, they shall doe it with all godly feare, lowlynesse, and reuerence, alwayes thinkyng hym to beholde their dedes.
                           5 They shall also perceyue hys gloryous name to be writtē in their foreheades, or regestred in their fayth, féelyng the swéetnesse thereof to their saluatiō. Besides y• not onely shall they cōfesse God wt their mouth, but also in their outward cōuersaciō shal they dayly apere as hys faythfull seruauntes and children.
                           And as concernyng the gloryous day, by that name than shall one knowe an other to be a frée cytizen of heauen. Consyder (sayth Saynt Iohn) howe louyngly the Father doeth vse vs. Not onely here doo we beare the name of hys chyldren, but also there shall we be sure to bée his sonnes in déede.
                           
                              6 No maner of night or darcknesse of humayne doctryne, shall appere anye more in that cytie. But hauing Christ and his veritie, all vnprofitable doubtes, fantasies, errours, lyes, and false myracles, shall these citizens detest here. And after this lyfe are no suche matters to be loked for, all things thē being clere and perfect. Though they some time were darkenesse, yet are they now lyght in the Lorde, and will walke styll therein as ye children therof, tyll they come to the God of Gods in the euerlasting Syon.
                           7 There shall they haue néede of no candell or of wisdome borowed of mē.
                           8 Nor yet of ye matteryall sun which mynistreth light to ye day, by whom is ment ye high sience of philosophers cō
                              ceiued of ye creaturs aboue wtout faith. Those forē lightes may his ministeres wel vse, but truely his church nedeth thē not hauing much better than they are of christ & of his Aposils. Uery dark lights are they, wher his bright beāes once apereth, which is ye clere sunne of rightuousnes. Abhominable lyes & errours did he proue ye high learning of ye
                              
bishops & lawyers, as he doth yet their decrées & lawes, their schoole, diuinitie and sentences, their ordinarie questions and quodlibetes.
                           9 All these stinking mistes set apart, the mercifull Lorde aboue, which is the omnypotent God, giueth them a light sufficient. His eternall sonne is vnto them suche a cleare shyning cresset, as no great blast can extinguishe, nor cloude with darke shadowe blemishe. Of most tender mercy sent hée that day spring from aboue, to dyrecte their féete here in the way of his peace.
                           10 And after thys laborous pilgrymage, in the sabboth of perpetual quiet shall hée lyghten them throughlye with his most glorious presence, and with him shall they raigne for euer and euer in full felicitie and glory cō
                              tinuing. In this life beginneth ye kingdome through fayth, but there shall it be perfourmed in the perfecte sight of the godhead. The proude raigne of tyrauntes is here but for a time, the lesse it is to be feared. The méeke raign of the rightuous continueth for euer, the more it is to be sought for and desired.

The fruites that are here very harde and sower vnto them, shall there bée inestimable swéete, gentile, beautiful, perfecte, and pleasaunt, hauing theyr full rypenesse. No neede shall it be thā to run by sea and lande for the wysedome, power, and glory of Christ, for in that day shal they be with euery one present. Here haue they but little pretie beames of ye light, very small drops of the water, and a smel of the fruites a farre of. Likelihoodes, figures, & mysteries haue they only now of the beatitude to come. But there shall they be sure to haue them in full sight, tast, and sauer, and plentuously to be satisfied with them. Scarse is it here in cō
                              parison to that it shal be there, as one droppe of water to the whole sea, or as an hādful of sād is to ye whole earth.
                        
                     
                     
                        The texte.
                        1 And he sayd vnto me. 2. These sayings are faithfull and true. 3. And the Lorde God, 4. of the holy Prophets, 5. sen
                              •
                            his Angell to shev
                              •
                            vnto his seruaunts, 6. the things which shortly must be fulfilled. 7. Beholde, I come shortly. 8. Happy is he that kepeth the saying, 9. of the prophecie of this booke.
                        
                           
                           The Commentary.
                           1 In the conclusion of these most wō
                              derfull reuelations (saith sainct Iohn) the Angell that communed with mée all this time (which was the very spirite of Christ) sayde thus vnto me hys poore exyled seruaunt.
                           2 It shall become no man to dispise these wordes, nor to reiecte these sayings, whome thou hast here séene and harde since the first beginning of thys reuelation. For they are most faythfull and true, sure and perfect, & shall without faile at their appoynted times in euery iote be fulfylled, for the true churches commoditie and profit. This is here spoken for the conseruation of the hygh mysteries of thys booke, least any false Antichrist hereafter (as many such hath bene in déede) should cō
                              dempne them, depraue them, and as of none aucthoritie reporte them. As the most deare treasures of God therfore, doth the holy Ghost here wrappe them vp togither, to preserue them vnder hys power, & setteth vnto them the seale of hys owne witnesse, yt they

should euermore be taken for his. After this sort did the Prophets vse their prophecies, concluding alwayes, thus sayeth the Lorde of hostes. So did the Lord his selfe whan he sayde. Uerely verely I say vnto you, we speake that we knowe. My doctrine is not myne, but his that sent mée. Of my selfe I speak not the words that I vtter. The father dwellyng in mée, perfourmeth the workes. I am not come of my self, but he that sent me is true, with suche other lyke. Paule doth also name him selfe the Apostle of Iesus Christ. Not I commaunde this (sayth he) but the Lorde. The gospell that I preache, haue I learned of no man, but by the shewing of Iesus Christ. The Lorde that is blessed for euer knoweth that I lye not, and such like. So is the ende of this booke as was the begynnyng, sealed with many wonderfull & strong sentences of the Lorde, as his whole mynde, perfect will, and purposed decree, concernyng hys church héere in earth.
                           3 And the same Lorde God eternall (sayeth Christ vnto Iohn) which hath

diuersly afore tyme spoken in the holy Prophets and fathers, hath now laste of all sent the Angel of his euerlasting couenaunt, by him to vtter the secrets of his mynde by whom he created the world. Him hath he hither dyrected, in these latter dayes of ye world to shewe cléerely vnto his true seruauntes (of whom thou arte in these dayes princypall) those wonderfull things in mysterie, which must within shorte space effectually come to passe and be fulfilled in déede. As the manyfolde persecutions of his churche, & the prosperous raigne of the beast and his shorlings, with the glorious rayse of the one, and dampnable fall of ye other. That whan troublous crosses doe come, they may be the more ioyfully taken, cōsidering the tyme of them short, & the rewarde of their sufferaunce euerlasting.
                           4 For none other cause is God héere called the Lord God of the Prophets, but that they haue through his spirite truly beleued in him, & the same spirit declared his mynde and pleasure.
                           5 In the beginning of this reuelation was this Angell sent vnto Iohn alone,

here is he sent also vnto his other seruauntes, in token that the Lord in Iohn respecteth his congregation.
                           6 The things that must shortly follow, are his iudgements in rewarding the rightuous and condempning ye reprobates. For a thousande yeares are but as a day before him, & as the tyme that is in a maner past. Let euery man take héede (sayeth the Lorde) leaste I come vpon him vnlooked for. Let them watch in fayth, and pray in spirite and veritie, hauing theyr weddyng garmēts, with the oyle of Christian loue in their lampes.
                           7 For beholde whan I shall come eyther to the particular ende of anye man, or to the latter iugdement, I wil come sodainlye neyther the day nor yet the houre of my comming knowne afore, least men (as they are ill of nature) should dryue of till that daye to liue according to faith. Of this admonition may the faythfull sorte be glad, being here in aduersitie, consideryng their deliueraunce is at hande, & theyr crowne of immortalitie not farre of.
                           8 Happy is that man whatsoeuer he

be, high or lowe, rich or poore, learned or vnlearned, that obserueth in his cō
                              uersation and lyfe, the godly sayings contayned in the prophecie of thys present booke.
                           9 Yea, blessed is he that so receyueth the premonishments thereof, that neyther false prophet can deceyue him, nor yet any cruell Antichrist with terrour dryue him from the righte vnderstanding and followyng of Christes pure doctrine. For neyther to dogges nor swine are they here lefte, to be neglected or disdayned, but vnto his faythful seruauntes to be reuerently followed and had in remembraunce.
                        
                     
                     
                        The text.
                        1 I am Iohn, 2. which sawe these thinges, 3. and haerde them, 4. And vvhan I had hearde and seene them, 5. I fell dovvne to vvorshippe before the feete of the Angell, 6. vvhich shevved me these thinges. 7. And he sayde vnto me. 8. See thou doe it not, 9. For I am thy fellovv seruaunt, 10. and the felovv seruaunt of thy brethen the Prophetes, 11. and of them vvhich keepe the sayinges of this booke. 12. Worship God.
                        
                           
                           The Commentary.
                           1 Consequently, bicause ye shall not suppose this matter lyght (sayth sainct Iohn) as many thinketh that whiche hath not the testimony of men, besides the aucthoritie of God, I Iohan Boanerges, an earnest thunderer out of the gospell, & a stirrer vp mens hartes to the study of heauenly things. Yea a man knowne, not only to you Afianes, but also the whole Christianitie, for that Apostle whom Christ peculyarlye loued.
                           2 Euen I am the same selfe Iohan, which haue both heard these wonderfull things with myne eares, and also haue séene them through ye great goodnesse of my lord God with myne eyes, for your singular commoditie and profite.
                           3 None other matter doe I héere wryte vnto you, at the commaundement of Iesus Christ for your healthe and saluation, but such as I haue both heard and séene for the same, beleue them if ye wil. In my other writings, as are my gospell and my fyrst Epistle, whervnto I neuer subscribed, ye haue

throughly beleued mée. Giue no lesse credence now than vnto this, whervnto I subscribe my name. For so haue I done here, that ye should the rather beleue it, and receyue it as most wholesome doctrine of saluation. After thys sort did Paule adde his name to hys sayings, that they should be the more earnestly receyued.
                           4 And as concerning my parte, truly whan I had thus harde them & séene them, the wonderfull mysteryes of them so rauyshed my spirites, that I in a maner clearely forgate my selfe.
                           5 Yea, I was so farre from my right remembraunce for the vehemency of them, that I fell downe flatte to the grounde, prostrate before the féete of the Angell, mynding to giue vnto him the whole homage of my soule, which is onely due vnto God that created my soule.
                           6 And what though this Angel which had thus opened vnto me all these wō
                              derfull mys
                                 •
                              eries afore, where Iesus Christ him selfe (as I thought him no lesse in déede) yet sought I not to haue worshipped him in that similitude, cō
                              sidering

also ye God will haue no part of his honour giuen to any other than vnto himselfe onely.
                           7 Wherefore he charitably admonished me of it, and sayd thus vnto me.
                           8 In any wise beware thou doe no such homage vnto me, which apere here to thée but a creature, least therby thou offende ye Lord god. For daunger may be in such case, though the intent bée godly, if any part thereof shoulde remayn to the creature, as thou knowest wel inough. Nothing maiest thou worshippe that thy outwarde syght offreth vnto thée, for in them hath fayth no place whych is a substaunce of things vnséene. And God hath taught thée to worshipe him in no creatures, neither in breade nor wyne, man nor angell, but in spirit and veritie onely, muche lesse than to worshippe the selfe creatures, or Idols in their stede, whych is much worse.
                           9 Though I be the sonne of God and sauiour of ye world, yet am I in this office but a creature, and thy fellow seruaunt. A sent messenger from God as thou art, an opener of his godly minde

and pleasure as thou art, to sygnifie y• vnto thée, which he wolde haue thée againe to signifie vnto his people.
                           10 And in this point am I not onely thy companion, or in this message ioyned fellowe with thée (for so well is it my reuelation as thyne) but also I am a lyke companion to thy former brethrē Ezechiell, Daniell, Zacary, and such other, which had the gyft of prophecie and were prophetes in déede, as thou art now doing lyke office with them thus vttering gods mind in misteries.
                           11 Yea, farthermore, I am a fellowe seruaunt likewise and a companiō togither of all thē y• wt reuerence obserue the faithfull testymonies of this present booke or prophecy. In token wherof I toke the shappe of a seruaunt, I fulfylled the lawe, and was conuersāt among men.
                           12 So thou worshippe not me therefore, but worship thy onely Lord god. For alone shouldest thou seke him and loue him, honour him and serue hym, prayse hym, and glorifie him. None other gods shalt thou haue in my sight, saith the eternall and omnipotēt Lord.

Obserue the same rule in worshipping that I taught thée to obserue in prayer. Remember I taught thée not to pray vnto me whome thou séest, nor yet vnto any dead sainct whome thou séest not, but vnto thy lorde God whom thou hast only in beleue, saying our father which arte in heauen. I tolde thée also that God was a spirite, and that he would only be sought in spirite, and in nothing that thou séest with thyne eyes. Therefore worship God & not mée. Consider here (good reader) ye vngodly vyolence of the papistes, enforcing the simple multitude to worship a drye wafer cake, to knele vnto it, to holde vp their handes, to make theyr prayers to it, and to call it their God, making them to beleue that it is gods commaundement they shoulde so doe. Oh, abhominable Antichristes, Oh, filthie Balaamites, séeking your owne bellyes & glory to your confusiō. Way this place throughlye with the other scriptures, & be once ashamed of your beastly and blasphemous madnesse. Ye will peraduenture say, it is Christes body. But truly that is all false. For

thereof is no mutuall perticipation, where one eateth vp all. No shewyng is there of ye Lordes death til he come, where all is done in a foren language and nothing vnderstanded. Christ breathed not vpon the bread with hoo, hée, haue at all, as you doe. He only tooke it in his holy handes, and gaue thankes vnto God. The wordes of thankesgyuing he lefte not behinde him for you to 
                                 •
                              unger with, for he knew yée afore for subtile workers. He kept not that bread to him selfe, nor yet closed it vp in a boxe as you doe. But he brake it and distributed it vnto other. In lyke case the disciples did neyther worship it nor him at that season. For if they had, he would haue forbidden it them, and haue taught the same self doctrine that he sheweth here vnto Iohan. Only did they take it & eate it in his remē
                              braunce, and that was his institution. And where as it is this vsed, there is both his body and bloud receiued. But otherwise not. The breade that was lefte of this consecration or breaking, which was so holy as the other, was neyther housed nor churched, boxed

nor pixed, but remayned there styll to the housholders, to be eatē of whom soeuer lusted. Neyther doth the diuinitie of your sentēcioners as of Thomas of Aquine, Dons, Dorbel, Guido, Baconthorp, and such other, appoynt thervnto that kynde of honour that ye suffer the people to giue vnto it, but a far meaner honour called Hiperdulia. But you can wynke at such matters & suffer both them and your selues to go to the diuell for worldly lucer. Nothyng holdeth long with you, neither christes doctryne nor your owne. But that yée make now, ye marre to morowe. And that at one tyme is a lawe, at an other tyme shal be none at al. Such are your wauering wonders.
                        
                     
                     
                        The Text.
                        1 And he sayde vnto me. 2. Seale not thy sayinges of the prophecy of this booke. 3. For the tyme is at hande. 4. He that doth euill, let hym doe euill styll. 5. and he whych is filthy, let him be filthy stil. 6, & he that is rightuous let him be more rightuous 7. & he that is holy let hym be more holy. 8, And beholde, I come shortly, 9, and my revvarde vvyth me 10. to giue euery man according as his dedes shalbe

11▪ I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ende, 12. the fyrst and the last.
                        
                           The Commentary.
                           1 Consequently the Angell (saith S. Iohn) which was Iesus Christe, had these same sayings vnto me that here foloweth.
                           2 Seale not (sayth he) ye godly words contayned in ye prophecy of this booke. Close thē not vp frō the sight of other. Hide them not from those which are desirous of knowledge. For profitable they are to the congregation of God, and most highly necessary to them that shalbe saued. For both shewe they throughly the dampnation of the wicked with remedies to auoyde it, and also the saluacion of ye rightuous with meanes to obtayne it.
                           3 And thys is the cause why thou shalte not close them vp. The tyme is at hande.
                           The fulfyllyng of thē wyll shortelye apeare, and euidētly declare what they are in dede. In the meane season shall manye of theyr mystieryes bée open

vnto them yt are taught of God, though the vnfaithfull sort knoweth nothyng what they meane. They yt haue Christes spirite, can in no necessary poynte be ignoraunt. The cause why manye writers hath erred in expounding this reuelation, hath bene the ignoraunce of other scriptures, the pleasing of prelates for dignitie and lucre, and moste of all the horrible blyndnesse of soule, which long hath continued in ye world among the fleshly Hypocrites.
                           4 And as concerning those beastlye belly gods, let them wallow in theyr mischiefes. He that is euil amōg them, or frowarde and obstinate against the veritie of God, let him worke euil vpon euill, abhomination vpon abhomynation, and murther vpon murther, til he bring vpon him self the vengeaūce of all innocent bloud which hath bene shead vpon earth, to his more dampnation without remedy.
                           5 Moreouer he that is filthy in hys conuersation, be it in the spirite or otherwyse, I will take my grace from him, for ye vtter contempt of my word, and he shall be still from thence forth

more execrable and filthy. He shall do
                                 •
                               wickednesse vpon wickednesse, Idolatry, vpon Idolatry, and whoredom vpon whoredome. Yea, where as he was before but an Idolatour in hymselfe he shall become after that an Idolatour also in other, by prouokyng thē to the same, to hys double dampnatiō. And wheras he shuld paraduenture in ye world haue bene but a single whoremonger, he shalbe there an holy, spirituall, anoynted, shauen, shorne, priestly and mitered whoremonger, abusing euery mans wyfe, doughter, and seruaunt. And to make vp all to ye diuell, become a consecrate Sodomyte, offering hymselfe vp in dead sacrifices vnto Belphegor, for feare of breakynge hys vnuirgynall vowe. Farther than all thys, he shall enter into such blindnesse of ye spirite, that he wyll thynke verely to doe God an hygh pleasure whan he murthereth vp without mercy, hys innocent people which wyll not obey theyr execrable lawes, blessinges, absolutiōs, and other sorceries, for conscience sake. Consider in this the terrible and fearefull hand of the

Lorde towardes them that withholde hys truth in vnrightuousnesse, specially whā he hath giuē thē ouer & left thē to themselues. For they worke their owne dampnation, whan they thinke nothing lesse.
                           6 Contrarywyse consider hys excéeding great mercy towardes them that are godly, whom he dyuersly afflicteth in hys lyfe, least they shoulde peryshe wyth the wycked. My pleasure is it (sayth he here) that the man whych is faythfull, rightuous, and good, shall increase euer more therein, and so cō
                              tynually be ryghtuous. I shall so temper their hartes, that hath loue to my truth, that they shall loue it more and more. Yea, I shall so therin strengthen them, that for no persecution of tyraū
                              tes shall they forsake it.
                           7 So will I order the matter amōg my electes, that he which is holy, pure, and perfect, leading a lyfe accordinge to my worde, he shall perseuer in i
                                 •
                               styll, and be perfect vnto the ende, that he maye inioye the crowne thereof. Neyther shall seducing hypocrite nor yet peruertinge Antichrist, wyth all

their subtile charmes and ginnes, bée able to bringe them out of that way, whych leadeth vnto lyfe. By this we may se that the veritie preached, christ is vnto som a falling, vnto some againe a rysing vp. Unto som is his godly doctryne a swéet sauour vnto lyfe, & vnto some an ill sauour vnto death. The gospell is folyshnesse to them that shal peryshe, but vnto them that beléeue, it is such a power of god as bringeth saluation with it. The faithful by hearing it, waxeth more godly. The vndyscrete hypocrites, contemneth the grace thereof. So that the one sort is thereby made better and increased in vertue, the other is made worse and foloweth all mischiefes. In him that hath fayth shall all other graces of the spirite habounde, and in him that hath it not, shall no gift of vertue aryse to hys 
                                 •
                              owles profit.
                           8 Let mē take hede if they wil, & giue dilygent watch & attēdaunce, for truly (saith the Lorde) I will come sodenly▪ and v
                                 •
                              bewars vpon ye vnfaithful, none other warning
                                 •
                               giuen but this & such other in ye scripturs, take thē if they lust▪
                           
                           
                              9 Necessary it is ye euery man walke according to hys vocacyon, both prince and preacher. Lorde and commoner, merchande and artificer. For when I shall resort, be certayne and sure of it, my iust rewarde shall come wyth me, whych is both lyfe and death.
                           10 Let no mā reckē otherwise to finde me thā a most rightuous iudge, rendering vnto euery one at ye day according as his workes shal apeare & as his déedes shal require of rightuousnes. Neither shal sufferages nor church buylding, pigrimage, nor masse rīgin, holy orders nor yet assoiling, stande in any sted at ye day: only shal they finde mercy whych hath bene mercifull, all other perishing without mercy. No man shal there be rewarded for workes of mēs preseciption, be they neuer so holy, but for that whych hath rysen of fayth in Gods worde onely. Neither shall they haue that of deseruinges, as worke preachers hath taught, but onely of grace & fauour for Christes bloud sake. For vnprofitable seruauntes are w
                                 •
                              e of our selues, whan we haue done all that hath bene commaunded vs▪ No

better is our whole ryghtuousnesse, whan it is at the hyghest, than is the cloth that is stayned wyth menstrue, nor more pleasaunt vnto God, were it not for hym. Let no man thynke to be saued through deseruing, no more than he is iustified of deseruing. Onely is it the mercyfull fauour and frée goodnesse of hym without our mangye merytes that shall saue vs. Not our good workes (sayth saynt Augustyne) but hys owne méere gyftes doth the Lorde crowne in vs.
                           11 This hath the Lord put here in ye ende as a briefe conclusion comprehē
                              dyng his whole mynde in this reuelation, concernyng the rightuous, and vnrightuous. Beléeue this necessarye doctryne (sayth the Lorde Iesus christ) for I which haue tolde it here vnto you am vnder the mistery of Alpha & Omega the first and the last Greeke letters, the originall beginning of all thinges, and perfct ende of the same. I am that mightie worde of god though I apere now in thys nature, in whom he created all, & by whō he shall perfourme & finish al too ye end they were created for.
                           
                              12 I am the first, in that I am in one godhede equall with the Father and wyth the holy ghost. I am also the last in that I shall so continue world with out ende. I am he before whom there was neuer any god, neyther shall ther be any after me. I am onely the Lord, for I am from euerlastinge. In t
                                 •
                              ken whereof I haue tolde you both things that are past and thinges yet to come. Under this straunge Trope or similytude of Alpha and Omega (which is a common Allegory vsed of the Gréekes) is alwayes to bée vnderstanded the eternall diuinitie in Christes manhode. Whych is here (as are manye other thynges els) ofte tymes repeated, of none other purpose, but as a most necessarye cause to bée had in remembraunce.
                        
                     
                     
                        The text.
                        1 Blessed are they that doe. 2. hys cōmaundementes. 3. that their power maye be in the tree of lyfe. 4. and may enter in through the gates into the citie. 5. For without are dogges 6. and inchaunters. 7. and whoremongers. 8. and murtherers. 9. and idolators, 10▪ and vvho

soeuer loueth or maketh leasinges.
                        
                           The Commentary.
                           1 From henceforth doth the Lorde chaunge the maner of his speakynge, representyng agayne the personage of an Angell or messenger.
                           Blessed are they (sayth he) or happy afore GOD, that of a sincere fayth and Godly mynde doe dylygentlye obserue hys most iust cōmaundementes, whych is a very washyng of their defyled garmentes in the bloude of the Lambe.
                           For perfectly, pure, innocent, and cleane are they that walke faythfully accordyng to the preceptes of his heauenly doctryne.
                           Yea, dooinge on the armoure of lyght they are very clearenesse in the Lorde and the shynynge bewty of the worlde.
                           2 And as concernyng hys cōmaundemēts, gréeuous are they not, but swéet & pleasaūt, he setting hand to ye fulfilling of thē, which hath cōmaūded thē,

he ministering hys Godly spirite may make of hym that was afore vnwylling, a very willyng person, lyke as he dyd of Saule whan he chaunged hym into a Paule. He laying before their eyes the inestymable profite of the good thynges to come, wyll cause them to forget these corruptible pleasures, and alwaies to labour for them.
                           3 Happy are they afore hande, that shall mynde to doe these thinges, that their power through a true beléeue may be in the trée of lyfe, wherby they may worke them and so haue fruite of their labours. For without that trée (by whome is ment the souiour of the world) they can doo nothing thervnto. Without hys strength, grace, & spirit, doubtelesse they are al weake, wretched, and vnprofitable, haue they neuer so many holy deseruings, which faithfully desired, is neuer denyed them as all the scriptures recordeth.
                           4 Thys woulde bée sought therefore, that they may thereby enter in peaceably, wtout impedimēt through ye clere gates of pearl afore mēcioned, in to ye plesaūte citie or ye newly prepared

Hierusalem. By the which gates is none other signified here, but he alone, diuerslye opened by the Apostles doctryne. He is the onely portall of rightuousnesse, and the straight way vnto lyfe, by whom they enter in from all quarters of the worlde. None other would Dauid acknowledge in all hys godly prayses, nor yet ye Apostle Paule in his manyfolde exhortations. Whatsoeuer they be that enter in by him, be without perill euermore, and shall haue the life euerlasting. Thus is a true beleue in him and his worde with a iust following of the same, a full doing of his commaundementes without any other traditions, ordinaū
                              ces, or ceremonies.
                           5 And whilest this chosen flocke are thus entring into this citie, the cruell dogges, which barke against the veritie, and teare the true seruauntes of God, are still remayning without, appeare they neuer so spirituall & holy.
                           6 So are the subtile sorcerers, which with their holy charmes and inchaūtments, with their prophecies, reuelations, and false myracles, both blynde

the vnlearned gouernours and deceiue the prophane▪ Idiotish multitude, leading them both to the diuill.
                           7 So are the consecrate whoremongers, the defilers of all honestie, and breakers of all godly ordinaunces, as are in these dayes in the braggers out of Romish chastitie, ye bishops, priests, and religious, vnder the title of vows, mayntaynig Sodome and Gomorre.
                           8 Lykewyse in the spightfull murtherers, that of mallice and mischiefe flea the godly preachers, and other poore innocent▪ people for rebuking theyr corrupte customes are sequestred from thēce for euer.
                           9 The supersticious Idolatours of all generations the moste execrable, as masse mongers, head bablers, saint séekers, Image lighters, gadders to Cō
                              postell, Rome, Tryer, & Tholose, with all their straunge worshippinges not commaunded of God, shall haue no place there.
                           10 Brieflye to conclude the whole, what people so euer they are that delighteth in fables, lyes, and errours, not regarding ye right meaning of the

scriptures, or what holy hypocrites 
                                 •
                              o euer they be that with famed sanctitie, deceyuable wonders, and false interpretations, blemisheth the veritie of the Lorde▪ for the vpholding of they
                                 •
                               p
                                 •
                              yde, lechery, and lucre, shall enioye no fréedome within this citie. Bée yée sure of this (sayth sainct Paule in dyuers places) that no fornicatour, nor vncleane person, no couetous cloyne
                                 •
                              , deceiptfull hypocrite, lyer for aduauntage, filthy Idolatour, malicious murtherer, or such other like, can haue any inheritaunce in the kingdom of Christ and God. No porcion can they haue in the lande of the lyuing, that hath bene partakers with aduouterers & theues.
                        
                     
                     
                        The Text.
                        1 Hesus haue sent myne Angell. 2▪ to testifie vnto you these things in the congregatiō, 3. I am the roote and generation of Dauid, 4. and the bright morning starre. 5. And the spirite and the bride say, 6. Comely. And let him that heareth say also, 8. Come 9. And let hym that is a thyrst come, 10. And let whosoeuer vvill take, 11. freely of the vvater of lyfe.
                        
                           The Commentary.
                           1 Consequently if ye couer (saith the Lord) to know surely from whēce thys

doctrine doeth come, and who is ye chief authoritie thereof be you throughly ascertayned, that I Iesus Christ ye sonne of the liuing God, haue directed foorth myne Angell (which is the spirite of truth) or the holy ghost whom I promised to witnesse here manifestly vnto you, by my dere disciple Iohn these wōderfull things hereafter to chaunce in the christian congregations.
                           2 Thinke not that the contentes of this booke are either of Iohn, or yet of any other man that euer was here lyuing, for neyther hath he learned them of Prophet nor holy father, but by my onely reuelation or shewing (whiche am the eternall spouse of the church) hath he receiued them to their singular health and comforte.
                           3 And as cōcerning me without faile I am the originall roote, or grounde of saluation in Dauid after the word, and after the flesh I am of his stocke or generation. For in mée are fulfilled all promises of health that euer god made for that faythfull housholde. By mee had Dauid his beginning for I made him, and by me shall he and all other

true Israelites in him, haue for euer a glorious continuaunce, for I saued them in that fleshe.
                           4 To all them which walke after Dauids fayth, am I ye bright mornyng starre of grace, remouyng the filthye cloudes of errour. The shyning clearenesse of godly vnderstanding, finishing the darke night of ignoraunce. I bring with me the day of mercy, health, and rightuousnesse, and the Sabboth of full reconciliation to God. I giue light vnto them that sate in darkenesse, directing their féete in ye path way of peace.
                           5 For my worde is spirite and veritie, resurrection and lyfe. And where as it shyneth in the hartes of mortall men, it maketh them the children of light. To séeke vnto this necessarye light, the eternall spirite of God, the holy Ghost, dayly moueth and prouoketh by many inwarde callings vpon, saying alwayes.
                           6 Come with a sincere fayth. Drawe nygh vnto him, and be lightened, and your frayle consciences shall neuer be confounded. Resorte vnto him all you that are loaden, and he shall refreshe

you. The bryde or congregation of the Lorde thus taught, sturred, and prycked forewarde of his spirite sayth also in hyr heart euermore, with a feruent desyre. Oh, come my moste delectable spouse & lord Iesus Christ, my health, ioye, and swéetnesse. Apply that ye immortall glory of the chosen children of God, may be séene of all creatures, iniquitie cōdempned for euer. Accomplish the mariage appointed from ye worlds beginning. Permit ye prepared spouse with hir appoynted number to enter into thy eternall tabernacle of rest.
                           7 Moreouer (sayth the Lord) whatsoeuer they be that shall heare and beleue this prophecie, let them desire the consummation therof, and so conforme them selues vnto Christ & his church, saying also.
                           8 Come moste mercifull sauiour and redéemer and fulfill the godly promyses of this booke, to the eternall comforte of man. Make hast to the iudgement seat, for a full deliuerance of the whole chosen number, yt thy seruaunts may be where as thou art in perfecte glory and ioy.
                           
                              9 Fynally, let him (sayth the Lorde) that in faith is a thirst, or that hath in him a desire to be saued, hast him selfe forewarde, and come also. Let hym onely beleue. For the plentuous fountaynes of the lyuyng waters mencioned afore, are withholden from no seruaunt of God. Nothing is denyed vnto him that asketh in fayth. In prayer are all spiritual commodities graūted.
                           10 Whosoeuer therfore hath a wil
                                 •
                               conformable vnto Gods will, let hym take fréely without price or payment, without satisfaction or merite, ye pleasaunt water of the lyfe for euer, refreshing hys soule in the plentuousnesse thereof.
                           11 Of grace and fauour is saluation in Christ layde forth. Onlye is héere required but a will to séeke for it. Not that it shall so be deserued. For neyther is it of hym yt willeth, nor yet of him yt runneth. But ye gracious Lorde whiche calleth men to these waters, putteth into thē a stomake, thirst, & desire to couet them. Yea, he mynistreth strēgth to ye séeking of thē, least some of ye glory therof shuld remayn vnto their

deseruings, and not all to his mercy alone. Thus standeth the doctrine of our worke braggers voyde, which neither féedeth nor satisfieth, considering that not for our rightuous doings, but alone for his owne mercyes sake hath he saued vs.
                        
                     
                     
                        The text.
                        1 But I testifie vnto euery man that heareth the vvordes of prophecie of this booke, 2. if any man shall adde vnto these things, 3. God shall adde vnto him the plagues, 4. that are vvrittē in this booke, 5. And if any man shall mynish of the vvordes of the booke of thys prophecie, 6. God shall take avvay hys parte out of the booke of life, 7. and out of the holy citie, 8. & from the things vvhich are vvritten in this booke, 9. He vvhich testifieth these things sayeth, 10. Yea, 11. I come quickely, 12. Amen, 13. Euē so, 14. come lord Iesus, 15. The grace of our Lorde Iesus, 16. be vvith you all 17. Amen.
                        
                           The Commentary.
                           1 As my dutie is (sayeth saint Iohn) to premonish afore hande, I faithfully proteste by this my present testimony, vnto all those men that shall hereafter receyue the wordes of this wonderful

prophecy here written in thys booke, eyther by reading or hearing.
                           2 That if any of them shall presumptuously take vpon him to adde any thing thervnto, in purpose to peruert the truth, or cōtrary to ye holy ghostes meaning, as Carpocras, Hebion, Cerinthus, and other antichristes hath done with the other scriptures.
                           3 Be certayn and sure of it, that the eternall god (from whom nothing can be hid) shal adde vnto him for so doing, the most terrible and woful plages regestred afore in thys worke.
                           4 That is to say, he shall suffer him to runne in to moste déepe errours, & giue him ouer for euer into the sinne against the holy ghost, whervpon all other plages of dampnation dependeth. Ye shall put nothing (sayth the Lorde) vnto the worde that I haue giuen you, neither shall ye take any thing from it. Put thou nothinge vnto his sayinges (sayth Salomō) of thine owne imaginytion least he reproue thée for a dāpnable liar. Nothing is this against thē which by the other scriptures and histories doth expounde thys reuelacyon, to make it to theyr vnderstandynge

more playne. For than should Saynt Augustyne, saint Hierome, Isydorus, Beda, Rabanus, & dyuers other great pillars of the church be vnder these plages, for doeing that charitable office. So should also the doctrine of this booke be against it self in ye .xiii. chapter where as libertie is giuen to hym that hath writ, to count the number of the beast, & in other places els. But this is here spoken from them that corrupteth the text to mayntaine their blasphemous lyes for aduauntage, or that séeketh to blemish the right sence therof, least men should behold thē in their right colours, as ye wicked papists hath don euer since their begīning, so drownning the authoritie & maiestie thereof.
                           5 Moreouer (sayth saynt Iohn) if any mortall man shal presume to deminish the wordes contayned in the volume of this heauenly Prophecye, vnreuerently so controuling the wysdome of God.
                           6 The sayd omnypotent god, and reuenger of al vngodlinesse, shall clerely wype away his porcion out of ye booke of lyfe so that he shalbe none of theyr

number, whych are predestinated to the glory of his children.
                           7 Neyther shall such be alowed for cityzens with ye saintes in the holy cō
                              gregation of hys newe Hierusalem, nor yet be accepted for hys shousholde seruauntes enioying ye swéet cōmodyties mencioned in thys booke as pertayning to hys peculyar people.
                           8 Lyke as are the bewtyfull trée of lyfe wyth his manyfolde fruites and leaues of wholsomnesse, the swéet running ryuer of the lyuing waters, and the holy citye sufficiently discribed afore with such other els. None that contendeth for a mastry (saith Paule) shalbe crowned, vnlesse hée contende lawfully. Arrius toke away from the tenth of Iohn this setence, I & ye father are one. Photinus added this clause to ye gospell as a voyce frō the father, I giue vnto Iesu his original of Mary And both their intētes were to destroy our faith concerning christs godhede, lyke as the papystes doth also our iustificacyon in hys bloude, vnlesse we haue theyr lowsie masses & merites. A lyke adiuratiō to this, hath Hireneus

in the ende of his octonarie, requiring al them yt shal coppy out yt booke, to doo it truly as they will aunswers it béefore god their rightuous iudge. In like case doth saint Hierome before ye abreuiaciōs of Eusebius chronicle cōmaūd, that in anye wyse the veritie therof be dilygently reserued. So doth also Cyrillus ye Gréeke in ye preface of his prophecy vnto Ioachim Abbas, desiring ye writings therof in no case to be corrupted of il writers, wc diuers other
                           9 In confirmatiō of ye I haue sayd afore (saith S. Iohn) the eternall son of god which hath ratified these former things wt his mighty word, saith here also as one subscribing to it.
                           10 Yea, it is so, or els thus. Like as yu hast said (Iohn) shal these blasphemers here after finde it, ye presumeth eyther to adde, or to deminish frō these scriptures for any carnall purpose.
                           11 And to perform ye promyse of thyne I wyll not long tarry. I come by & by, to reward ye wicked wc swift dampnatiō, for not beleuing ye truth. For nowe are ye last dayes, ye endes of ye worlde, yea, the very laste houre.
                           
                              Ready is the Lord (sayth saint Peter) to iudge the quicke and dead, and the ende of all things is at hande.
                           12 Sainct Iohn hearing this of hys mercifull Lorde and sauiour lifte vp his heade and handes towardes heauen, & as one desirous of the perfourmaunce of Gods appoynted will, and of the full deliuerance of the faythfull, he sayde, Amen. Or be it fulfilled in effect. For that is the thing which my soule dayly desireth and inwardly coueteth, to the full manifestation of thy glorious kingdome.
                           13 Consequently, in the voyce of the whole congregation cryeth Iohn, as did Symeon ye iust. Yea, euen so might it be, as thou hast here promised, that thou mightest come out of hande.
                           14 Oh, come most merciful redemer & gracious Lord Iesu Christ, to iudge the vniuersall worlde. Come, come, or hie thée hether apace, to seperate the wheate from the chaffe, and ye lambes from the Goates, so bringing them into thy eternall tabernacle. Wo is mée that my banishmēt endureth so long, I dwelling in the tabernacles of the

sorowfull. My soule hath a thurstie desire for God the fountaine of lyfe. Oh, whan shall I come and beholde hys face? Lyke are we to those faythfull seruaunts, which wayte for the return of their Lorde from the wedding, very ready to open at his knocking.
                           15 The grace of our mercifull Lorde Iesus Christ (sayth saynct Iohn) wherby commeth saluation to them yt truly beléeueth, bée with you all, so many as are of that godlye expectation and desire.
                           16 Or the fauour, mercy, and acceptation of God ye father, through his blessed death, euermore preserue you in the vnitie of his godly spirite, that yée may hereafter in this holye citie, bée partakers of his gloryous heritage in the worlde to come.
                           17 Let all them say Amen vnto this, which myndeth the glory of the Lorde vnfaynedly. So be it.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A conclusion of the vvhole vvorke.
            HEre hast thou good christian reader, to thy soules consolation, from the eternall Trinitie, ye Father, the Sonne & the holy Ghost, three distincte persons in one euerlasting godhead, the vniuersall estate of the church from Christes ascencion to the ende of the world, in wonderfull mysteries discrybed, & directed vnto thee of him, by the most holy Apostle and Euangelist Saint Iohn. Wherein it is fully by all due circumstances manifested of the sayde holy Ghost, what the innocent Christian church is, with all hir iustifications & blessings, to the singular comforte of the Lords true electes, and what the proude Synagoge of Antichrist is, with hyr filthy superstitions and plagues, to their fore warning also. This is specially done here of the sayde holy ghost, yt no true beleuer should professe him selfe a citizen of this wretched world with Cain, Nemroth, & other reprobate vessels, at the execrable doctrine of men, but at the pure voyce of God with Abell and Abraham, to seeke for that heauēly heritage which is purchased for them in Christes bloud. Marke heere the condition of Iohn being in most paynefull exile, for he in misterie through all this booke representeth euery godly beleuer. By this shall ye well knowe in this reuelation the one church from the other, for the one is mayntayned by the onely preaching of Gods pure worde, the other by all kyndes of Iewishe ceremonyes and heathenish

superstitions. And by this they also differ, that Christ wold haue all of loue, Antichrist of tyrannous constraint, as euidently appeareth in Mahomete and the Pope. For that only cause are many necessary thynges here written in mysterie, that they should bee hid from the worldly wyse Hypocrites, and that ye iust or Gods meeke spirited seruaūts, should aske them of their Lorde in fayth and prayer. In the which dayly prayer, is that most worthy minister of God, Kyng Henry the eight afore all other to thée remembred, which hath so sore wounded the beast, that he may before his departure, or Prynce Edwarde after him, throw all his supersticions into the bottomlesse lake agayne (frō whence they haue commen) to ye comforte of his people. The grace and peace dyrected from God the Father & his Son Iesus Christ, with the holy Ghost, in ye beginning of this reuelatyon be vnto all them which vnfaynedly loue hys veritie. Amen.
         
         
            ¶ Printed at London by Thomas East.
            
         
      
   