
      
         
            
               
               
               ✚ Domeſtycal or houſholde Sermons, for a godly houſholder, to his children and famyly, compiled by the godlye learned man Chriſtopher Hegendorffyne, doctor, moſte neceſſarye for all faythfull houſholders: nowe fyrſte tranſlated oute of laten into Englyſſhe: ☞ ❧ ☜
            ☞ by Henry Reiginalde. ☜
            
               Anno M.D.XLVIII.
            
            
               Deuteronomi. 6.
Theſe wordes, which I commaund the thys daye, ſhall be in thy hert, and thou ſhalt ſhew them vnto thy chyldren: and ſhalte talke of them, when thou arte at home in thy houſe, and as thou walkeſt by the waye &c.
         
         
            
            
            Chriſtophorus Hegendorffyne, Doctour of ye law, to the right wiſe & excellent man lord Thomas Reiben ſenatour of Francoforte▪ by ſyde Oderam, hys ſynguler good patron, wiſſheth health.
            
               AMong all other benefytes whiche we chriſtians haue receyued of our onely ſauiour Chryſte (my eſpecyall good frende) theſe be euen the chieffeſt, that by him we are al made both kynges and prieſtes. Kynges true lye, not that we haue anye kyngdome earthly to rule, but that by chriſt we ſubdue all vices, both death, ſynne, the deuyll, and hell. For we Chriſtians be as well kynges, as Chriſt is our heade and kynge: & that bycauſe we beleue in him. Now, Chriſte is no worldely kynge, for the ſcripture ſayth. Io. 18 (The kyngdō of Chriſte is not of thys world) for he is kyng of kynges: for bycauſe he hath power ouer all thyng. And all thynges are ſubdued vnderneth his ſeat. So therfore as Chriſte is a kynge, ſo are we Chriſtian

kynges, for all that apperteyneth to Chriſte are ours. And alſo, al we chriſtyans, be Chriſtes, for chriſt and by Chriſt, For by hym we all do offer ſpirituall ſacrifyces dayly vnto God, and one prayeth for an other: and we haue power to preache goddes worde, whiche thynges S. Peter in hys firſte Epiſtle. 2. Chap. doth comprehend in a few wordes, whā he ſayth, ye are the choſen generation ye kyngly prieſthode that holye nation &c. Thys place is knowen to euerye man. And ſo we chriſtians in Chriſt, be al Priſtes. But leaſte anye tumulte or ſciſme myght ryſe amonge the Chriſtyan congregation, the Churche or thoſe to the which the Churche doth commyt ſuche aucthoritie: do choſe certeyn minyſters whiche do bothe mynyſter the Sacramentes and openly preach the worde of God, accordynge to the doctryne of S. Paul. 1. Corin. 14. when he ſayth, let all thynges be done honeſtly and in ordre, amongeſt you. Euery Chriſten man beyng father of a houſholde hath aucthorytie in his own houſe, to enſtructe and teache hys children and houſholde with

the worde of God, and of ryght he is, or ought to be a very Biſſhoppe ouer hys owne houſholde. And that that we ſaye vnto fathers of houſholdes, we wyll to be ſpoken vnto euery Chriſtian woman which is mother ouer her houſhold, for the which thynge, leſte that any might doubte in this matter, I wyll proceade a lytle further in it. Fyrſte of all, Ioſephus in the firſt boke of his Antiquites doth wryte, that Adam and hys ſonne Seth did make two tables, one of ſlate, ye other of ſtone, in the which they wryt the worde of god and hys Prophecyes, the which they did, without any doubt, that they myghte both brynge vp theyr houſhold in the worde of god, and leaue it to their poſterytie, and to to exercyſe ye offyce of a Biſſhoppe in teachynge the worde of God. Gene. Chap. 35. Moyſes doth ſhewe how▪ Iacob callynge togyther all hys houſholde, vydde make a ſhorte and a vertuoule ſcrmonde, when he ſayde. Caſte ye away ſtraunge Gods which be in the myddeſt of you &c. thys place is knowen to euerye one that readeth ſcripture.
            
               
But what nede I to bryng this or that example, as though the olde Taſtament were not full of thē, wherewith it might be eaſely proued, that a good and a vertuouſe father of a houſholde oughte to enforme all hys hole honſholde, bothe in godly doctrine and in good manners Furthermore, Deute. 11. God commaū
               ding after thys manner fathers of houſe holdes, ſayth theſe wordes euen at the fyrſte (where he ſpeaketh of the x. commaundementes) put theſemy wordes in your herte, and in your ſoule. Deute. 6. and bynde them for a ſigne vpon youre hande, that they may be as a warnynge betwene your eyes, Prouerb. 3. And ye ſhall teache them youre Chyldren, that they may talke of them, when thou ſytteſte in thy houſe: and when thou walkeſt by the way, when thou lieſt downe and when thou ryſeſt vp, yea, and thou ſhalt wryte them vppon thy dore poſtes of thy houſe, and vppon thy gaates that your dayes may be multiplyed &c. Do we not heare in this place, that god wyl that euerye good father of a houſholde ſhall teache his Chyldren and hys famyly

the commaundementes of god, and yt he ſhal take the office of a priuate Byſſhop and preacher. Euen lykewiſe, euen a lytle before. Deute. 6. God doth commaund when he ſayth. Thou ſhalt loue thy lorde God with all thy herte &c.
            And theſe wordes which I commaund the thys day, ſhalbe in thy herte & thou ſhalte ſhewe them vnto thy Chyldren, & ſhalte talke of them, when thou arte at whome in thy houſe, and as thou walkeſt by the way &c. But here ſome men wolde ſay. God dyd commaunde them vnto the Iewes, that they myght teach theyr famyly the preceptes of ye x. commaundementes, what haue Chriſtē men that be fathers of houſholds, to do with thoſe preceptes? He not Chriſten mē delyuered from all Moyſes lawe by Criſt therfore heare thou (o Chriſtian) of the Chriſtian libertie. At this tyme I do no thynge ſpeake of the abrogation of the lawe, for that euery father of a houſhold ſhoulde inſtitute and teache hys Chyldren and famyly, aſwell ye x. cōmaundemētes, as any other Chriſtian doctryne. S. Paul teacheth us playnely and manyfeſtly

in his Epiſtle to the Epheſy. 6 Chap. when he ſaith. Ye Fathers moue not your Chyldrē to wrath. But bring them vp thorowe the doctryne and enformation of the lorde.
            What meaneth it to brynge them vp in the doctryne or diſcyplyne of the lorde? truely nothyng elſe, but their Chyldren alwaye frome their tender infancy to be Chriſtianly brought vp, in thoſe thinges which our lord god wyll require at their handes. What thynges be thoſe? The x. commaundementes do ſuffycyentlye declare. Furthermore, leſte that youthe ſhoulde forgette or contempne the commaundementes of god (as euen in dede ye ſort is moſt neglygent) therfore Paul ſayth, that they ought to be admonyſſhed and warned of their gouernoures, with the admonirion of the lorde: and yt thynge to be grafted in their myndes, whiche God doth ſpeciallye requyre in them. And as we maye eaſely perceyue by the wordes of Paul, that it is ye trew part of a father of a houſhold, to brynge vp dyly gentlye his Chyldren & houſehold in the ten commaundementes. And

lette no houſeholde keper agaynſte thys thynge wynce or kycke: but lette theym brynge them vp, in fayth, hope and charytie, and in other wholeſome preceptes and doctrynes of Chriſte: that the lawe maye be as a ſcolemaiſter (As S. Paul ſayth vnto Chriſte) that is, that they beyng brought to the knowledge of their ſynne by the lawe, may prepare and ordeyne theyr ſelues to ſeke vnto Chriſte, and to his ryght herytage: for why, the law (as Paul to the Romaynes & Galathyans doth argue) doth make vs to prepare our ſelues to receyue ye grace of god, ſo yt it ſetteth before our eies our ſinnes, and putteth downe the ſtubbernes of our mynde. and maketh vs very gree die of Chriſtes doctryne. Furthermore when Chriſte (as it is ſhewed in the 5. of Marke) had delyuered a certeyne man of a deuyll, and he dyd pray Chriſt, that he wolde tarry ſtyll wyth hym. Chryſte made anſwere vnto him. Go thy waies into thyne owne houſe, vnto thy famyly and ſhew them how moche the Lorde hath done for the, and what compaſſyon he had ouer the.
            
               
Nowe, we haue herde Chriſte our onelye ſauyour commaunde alſo, that he which was delyuered by hym frome a Deuyll, ſhoulde take the office of a Biſſhop and preacher of his worde in hys houſe amonge his Chyldren and famyly, and that he ſhoulde ſet forth the gret benefyciall goodnes, which he had receiued of god: and ſo to brynge his famyly by the loue of god, to the very knoweledge of God.
            Furthermore, we maye gather oute of dyuers Epiſtles of Paule: that in hys tyme, there was both fathers of houſeholdes, and mothers of houſholdes, whiche dyd bryng vp very earneſtlye their famyly, both in the fayth of Ieſu Chriſt and alſo in other pryncypall matters of Chriſtes religion, for whi, in the Epiſtle vnto the Romayns the laſte Chapter, he doth ſalute the houſholde and faythfull church of Priſca & Aquyia (or as I may vſe his termes) the Chriſten family whiche was in the houſe of Pryſca and Aquila: for wythoute doubte, theye were informed priuyly in the fayth of Chriſt. And in the fyrſte Epiſtle to the Corynthyans

the laſte Chapter he ſaith. Aquyla & Priſcilla, with thoſe which be of ye faythefull congregation in their houſe doth ſalute you hertely in the lord. And where agayne, he calleth the houſholde faythefull Churche, the Congregation of faythfull Chyldren, men ſeruauntes and women ſeruauntes, which were in the houſe of the womā Priſcilla (whō he calleth to the Romayns Priſca) and Aquyla her houſbande.
            The ſelf ſame thynge Paul to the Colloſſians the laſte Chapter ſayth. Salute the Bretheren which are at Laodicia, & ſalute Nymphas, and the congregation which is in his houſe, where S. Ambroſe thynketh that thys Nimpha was a woman diligeut in the commaundementes of God, thys artycle in greake, Aphtae, doth reproue it, that he was no woman but a man, which did noryſſh and bryng vp his Chriſtian famyly at home in hys houſe in Chriſtian loue and godlyneſſe. The ſelfe ſame thynge dothe S. Paul exhorte Tytus. Tit. 2. That old women ſhoulde be ſoberlye aparelled, no ſlaunderers, and that they ſhoulde teache honeſte

thynges, that they myght cauſe yonge women to be ſobre &c. And here Paul wylleth alſo, yt old women ſhould inſtructe their yonge women at home in their houſe, to godlyneſſe and good manners. And alſo Paul vnto Tymothie the fyrſt Epiſtle the fourth Chapter commaundeth wydowes to learne godlyneſſe at home in their houſes, and to haue a godly famyly. And howe canne they haue a godly familie, excepte theye teache theyr houſholde dylygently and priuately in ye learnyng and erudition of Goddes word?
            To conclude, that holy man Sayncte Chriſoſtome in hys fyrſt homely in Geneſis ſaythe. When ye ſhall depart from hence from thys ſenſyble table, let there be put afore you a ſpiritual table, and let the good man of the houſe ſaye ſome of theſe wordes, whiche be here ſayde. Let the woman here. Let the ſeruantes lecne Let their aquayntaunce lerne, and let ye houſe be the Chuche of God, that the Deuyll may be dryuen away, and that our daily aduerſary may be put to flight wyth all the enemyes of our health and

let the grace of the holye ghoſte here adyde in this place, that all peace and concorde maye defende all inhabytauntes herein. &c. Theſe be the wordes of Chriſoſtome. Of the which wordes what mā can not vnderſtande, that it perteynethe to godly fathers of houſholdes, to make their houſe the churche of God, and the congregation of Chriſtiā people: and to take the office of a Biſſhop vpon them Alſo Chriſoſtome ſetteth fourth the frutes whiche ryſe of ſermonnes made at home in houſes: for bycauſe of them the deuyll is driuē awaye. As S. Peter ſaith which goeth aboute as a rorynge Lyon fekyng whome he may deuoure. And ye holy ghoſte doth reſte vpon the inhabytauntes and dwellers in the houſewhere the worde of god is taught: and the inhabytauntes and dwellers doo lyne in concorde and vnytie, and they do agree peaceably, one wyth an other. Whiche frutes verelye do eaſely brynge to thys poynte all fathers of houſholdes, that they ſhoulde dylygently inſtructe their famyly, with the worde of God in their houſes.
            
               
For we may ſee by dayly experyence, yt the deuyll goeth aboute with all his power, to make debate and ſtryfe in howſes and breaketh amitie & peace and ſoueth diſcord. And it is no doubt (yt as Chriſoſtom truly ſayth) the deuyll ye enemie of mans ſaluation, and of our hole famylye, ſekethe oure lyfe: and often tymes wolde brynge bothe the father of the houſholde, the wyfe the Children, and ye whole family to perels, onleſſe he be driuen away of godly fathers of houſholds by the ſwerde of the ſpirite, which is the worde of God. With theſe examples of holy fathers, with the preceptes of god in tyme paſte gyuen and commaunded in the olde Teſtamente, withe the commaundemente of Chriſt, which he gaue vnto hym whome he delyuered from a deuyll, and by theſe examples of fathers of houſholdes and mothers of houſholdes, whiche I haue reherſed oute of S. Paules Epiſtles.
            And where as Sainct Paul, doth requyre of olde women and widowes, we may gather eſely by the wordes of Criſoſtome, euery father of a houſhold hath

lybertie to teach his famyly at his own houſe the worde of God, and yt of ryght he is, and ought to be, the very Biſſhop of his famyly. And there is no leſſe to be thoughte of mothers of houſholdes. If there be any brother of a houſhold whiche is illyterate or vnlerned, and can not teache pryuately hys houſholde, let him hyer one, whiche in hys ſtead may lerne hys famyly, or if he can not, let hym aduygyſantly marke the ſayenges of Publycke and open ſermons, and let hym repete thoſe ſaiengs at home in hys houſe before hys famyly, aſſone as ſupper or dynete is done. Therfore I beyng perſwaded wyth thoſe arguementes of S. Paul, which I haue made relation of, ys I euer thoughte dylygently wythe my ſelfe, that it were very neceſſary to write for my chyldren and for my hole houſeholde, certeyne houſholde ſermons. In the whiche thoſe thynges whiche were requiſite to a very trew and Chriſtian relygion, myght be expounded wyth few wordes propiſe & coreſpondent for the matter, which ſermons often tymes I vſe to reade in my houſe, to mye Chyldren

in laten, to my famyly, in ye mother tonge. And do earneſtly require at their handes after my readynge, whether thei do vnderſtand theſe thynges which are rede or no, and leaſte they ſhould forget veri quycly thoſe thinges which I haue red, I do require oftentymes of theym all thynges, which in theſe ſermons be entreated of, euen as of their diſtafe and ſpyndell, which ſermons I beyng earneſtly requeſted of my eſpeciall frendes haue ſuffered to come abroad, yt by them euen other fathers of houſholdes maye be ſtyrred towarde their famyly, to teache them wel and godly. For I knowe that fathers of houſholdes be ſlacke in this thynge: and do not dylygently excecute their office commytted to them of God.
            Fyrſte I wyll leaue out ſome of my ſermons in laten, yf my fryndes ſhall think it beſte, and ſet out thoſe that be neceſſary in ye mother tonge. But vnto the (mi welbeloued Thomas) doo I dedycate theſe my pryuate ſermonnes, for that I know the to be gyuen ſtudiouſly to a perfecte godlyneſſe. And althoughe I

knowe thou haſte no nede of theſe ſermons to enſtructe thy famyly wyth, for that thou haſte attempted many godly thynges wyth the ſtudie of godly wyſdome: yet for all that ſeyeng I knowe that euery thynge which may be conducyble and profytable to obteine and get ſome godly wiſdome is moſt acceptable vnto the, I doubte not but yt thou wylte take theſe my ſermons well at worthe. For bycauſe I haue writen them to the furtheraunce of Chriſtes true relygion. Some perchaunce wyll laughe me too ſcorne, for that I wolde be taken for an earneſt lawer, and haue taken vpon me to interlace my ſelfe with holy ſcripture, whoſe laughinge to ſcorne I wyll vtterly diſpiſe, Although that I am amonge the company and the felowſhyp of lawers: yet I will not be forgetful of thoſe thynges which perteyneth to a chriſtian father of an houſhold, for this is a bleſſed ſaiynge of S. Paul: he that hathe no care of hys, and eſpeacially for hys houſholde, denyethe hys faithe, and is worſe then an infideele. This byd the wel to fare, my eſpeciall good frend.
         
      
      
         
            
            A communication of the lordes prayer, Betwene Chriſtopher and Ierome.
            Ierome.
            My welbeloued brother Chryſtoſtopher, from whence commeſt thou? Chriſtopher. I come from ye temple, my brother Ierome. Ierome. Out of ye temple? What haſt thou done there? Chriſtopher. What ſhuld I there do? I haue prayed. Ierome. Haſt thou prayed? If it pleaſed the, but for thy paines: my gentle brother, teache me homely and briefly what is prayer, & to what ende, and how, & what we ſhould pray: for although our welbeloued father, did frutefully teache vs at home, many godly thynges as concernyng prayer (as it ſemed vnto me) yet for all that I canne not tell how I ſhoulde well vnderſtand them, nor to haue thē in remembraūce. Chriſto. O brother, thou putteſte vnto me an harde matter, for thooſe thynges which thou wylleſt to know of me, they oughte not to be aſked of ſuche a rude Chylde: but of ſome doctour of dyuynitie, and hee that is learned. But for as

much as thou prayeſt me ſo ſoberlye, I wyll ſhew my ſelf vnto the as a brother, And ſo much as I bare awaie in remembraunce, frome our father and the preather of theſe thynges, which thou wilte knowe of me, I will tell it the, but thou doſte praie me in vaine, that I ſhoulde do it homely and briefly: and how ſhuld I beyng a childe do otherwyſe in ſuche graue matters, Iero. Brother I thāke the for thy gentyll and brotherly herte, but do as well as thou canſte, and Cryſt ſhal be thine aſſiſtaunce. C. Except I be diſceaued: there be foure things to be noted in this oure diſputation. The firſte is, that I will ſhewe the, what it is too praie, the ſeconde is, wherefore we ſhuld praie, the thirde is, how we ſhould praie the fourthe is, what we ſhoulde praye. Iero. Surely brother, yu arte of a good renembraunce: for by cauſe thou doſte remembre chiefly ye pryncypall thynges yt I couet in eſpeacyall to be learned in: and therfore ſhewe thy mynde, euen onlye vpon thoſe thynges. Chriſto. Well beloued brother, both my father and the preacher dyd ſaye, to praye, is to aſke

ſome what of god. Iero. Of god? What is god? Chriſto. God, as our father ſaid yf thou doſte well remembre, is all that thynge, to the whiche we haue a confydence withe all our herte, ſo that, yf we haue a confidence to ye god wyth all our herte which did create and make bothe heauen and earthe, and all thynge that therem is, and gouerneth al thynge, we haue a confydence to the trew god if we put any truſte in any other god, we are both wicked and far from the trew God Iero. I vnderſtand well yt thou ſayſte, my brother. Chriſt. Brother our father and the preacher, amonge all other thynges, had in remembraunce, Fyrſt, wherfore we ſhould pray, the firſte cauſe was yt god did commaunde vs to praye, for why, whē god did gratiouſly threten in his ſecond cōmaundement yt we ſhould not take his name in vayne, oure father ſaid, god wtout doubt willeth yt we ſhuld aſke of him in al kyndes of neceſſitie, we ſhuld praye alſo yt he wold be redy at all tymes both to rule vs & gouerne vs, for why, when god forbad yt we ſhulde take his name in vayne, our father ſayd that

we myght eaſely coniecter yt god wold require ye vſe of hys name of vs, & what vſe ſhuld we haue of his name, but to cal vpō it in all kindes of neceſſitie and eiul thinges. Ie. Surely this is a great cauſe wherfore we ſhuld pray, but doſte thou remēbre brother, what other cauſes ther be. Ch. The ſeconde cauſe wherfore we ſhoulde praye, oure father ſayde it was thys, for that yt we haue neade of manye thynges, & we are caſte euery momente into ye peryls of many euyls And ſeing all thynges ſhoulde be gyuen of God & yt we are defended of god onely, agaynſt all maner of parels of euyll, very neceſſyty (which is a mortall darth) doth compell vs to praye. Ie. nor this is no ſmall matter my brother, wherfore we ſhould pray, but yet ye therd cauſe remaineth, excepte I am diſceued. C. it is trew, and yt after ye mynd of our father ther remayneth yt God did cōſtantly promes to all thē yt did pray vnto him, he wold moſte mercifully heare thē: & it is vngodly eyther to be forgetful of yt promes or to 
                  •
               i lipend it, wherfore for yt he hath promeyſed therfor we are cōpelled euery one of vs, to pray vnto him. I. and wher hathe

godlye petitions of his faythfulll. But peraduenture thou lokeſt brother, yt fynaly I ſhoulde ſhew the what thynges we ſhoulde pray for, that is, what thynges we ſhoulde aſke of god, although I thynke that it is no nede, ſeyng that dayly thou doſte pray with me afore the table. Ie. Truely thoſe thynges I do loke for all though chiefly I pray dayly with the: but I know not how to vnderſtand thoſe thynges whiche I praye. Chriſto. Thoſe thinges which we ought to pray for, ther is no man doth ſhew better thē Chriſte hym ſelfe, for yu knoweſt, ſo dyd our father affirme. I. Trewly he did affirme it, but I pray ye repete it agayne, & compendiouſly, as yu canſt right wel. C. I wyll do at thy cōmaundement & that wt a good wyll my brother. C. The ſyxte Chap. of Matt. ſaith. Ye ſhal pray after this maner. Our father which art in heauen: halowed be thy name. Thy kyngdome come. Thy wyll be done in earth as it is in heauen. Gyue vs this daye our dayly bread. And forgyue vs our treſpaces: as we forgyue them that treſpace agaynſt vs. And ſuffer vs not to

be led into temptation. But delyuer vs from euyll. Amen. Ierome. I haue this prayer vpon my fyngers endes: yf thou wylte know it, I wyll ſay it without the boke. Ch. O brother, it is not ynough to ſaye this godly and holy prayer without the boke, excepte thou maiſt vnderſtand it, for our father did ſay, that this praier ſhall neuer come from ye bottome of the herte, vnleſſe we do well vnderſtande it, & there is no prayer thankfully taken of god, onleſſe it be drawne out of the inwarde boſome of our herte. Ie. Therfore make me that I maye vnderſtande this prayer by ſome meanes, all though I learne it not withoute the boke. Ch. I wyll go aboute to do it god wyllyng. And as thou arte wonte to do gyue thy dilygence vnto me wyth an attentyne eare. Ierome. I ſhall doo that thyng. Chriſto. In the firſt begynnynge of this praier, our father dyd affirme beneuolence almoſte to be taken of thoſe thynges which ſhal be aſked afterward for ſynce that god, not onely God, that is to ſaye, oure defender ſuccuorore

and helper, but alſo is a father, nor fathere of this man, or that man, but oure father, that is, of us all, which puttethe their truſte in Ieſus Chriſte his onelye begotten ſonne. And how can he denye vs yt thynge, the which we aſke of hym? Ierom. Surely euen in lyke caſe, ſeyng that oure yearthely fathers (bye whoſe mean we were brought into this world) can not deny vs that thynge, which we aſke of hym: moche leſſe euen that oure father celeſtial, which is father of vs all can deny vs of any thynge that we aſke which doth excell all other yearthely fathers both in goodnes & mercy. Chriſto. Surely, thou doſte gyue a godly Iudgemente of our god, my brother Ierome: euer talke thou on theſe thynges, & lette thys be thy Godly exercyſe. Therfore thou knoweſt, how with theſe wordes our father ſhould be a preparation, with a certeyne beneuolence, towardes thoſe thynges which we ſhalbe about to aſke. Iero, I knowe it very wel, but how vnderſtandeſt thou thys thynge, which is added vnto, which art in heauē. Chriſto, God truely, as thou haſte hearde of our

father, is in euery place, but peculyarly he is in heauen: and he is in celeſtial and hygh thynges. And withe theſe wordes we are called from the care of worldely thynges, for to be alwaye in contemplation, of heauenly thynges. Wherefore, Chriſte when he ſhoulde praye, did lyft vp his eyes vnto heauen. Iero. Surelye this fyrſte begynnyng doth excellently well, and therefore ſay on. Chriſto. The begynnyng of this prayer, doth gather ſeuen petitions / in the which thou haſte hearde all thoſe thynges as knitte vp euen to gither with one band, euen what ſo euer ſhoulde be eyther aſked of God, or neceſſary for vs. Iero. I haue hearde thoſe thynges whiche thou haſte ſayde, but cauſe that I may more playnely vnderſtande them. Chriſto. Fyrſt we praie let thy name be halowed, thys thynge our father did ſaie that it did ſmell ſome what of the Hebrew phraſe, and therefore it could not be vnderſtanded ſo wel of men. Ierome. Whatte doth it meane then? Chriſto. This it meaneth, that ye name of god, that euer both was, and is, holy, ſhalbe ſainctified in vs, that is (as oure 
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               
ked kynges & Princes, euen as it might be with a ſudden thunder, which at the denylles inſtigation wolde go aboute to forbyd and extyuguyſſhe the Goſpel, wt all thoſe which were earneſt profeſſours of the Goſpell, yea, and alſo that this petition dyd often tymes withſtande, that the wicked and cruell wyll (ſhall I ſay) their carnall deſyre, ſhall in no wyſe be fulfylled. Iero. How wylleſt thou that theſe wordes ſhalbe vnderſtande, euen in earthe as it is in heauen? Chriſto. Haſte thou forgotten thoſe thynges that oure father did ſay, that theſe wordes, ought thys waye to be taken, that in lyke caſe as the holy Aungels in heauen do obey his holy will, ſo in like caſe here in earth his holy wyll to be obeyed of all men, yea, and that in all maner of thynges. Iero. But gentyll brother, what do we then aſke to be gyuen vnto vs of God whyleſt we ſaye, gyue vs this daye our dayly bread? Chriſto. To be ſhorte, gentle brother, we do not onely aſke of god for bread, but we aſke for thoſe which labour dilygently, that he might preſerue vs with a ſufficiencye, yea and alſoo fortillers

of the earthe, that god wolde ſend a proſperous ſucceſſe vnto their laboures, to ſende temperateneſſe of weather, to make their grounde frute full, that the corne may growe to our ſuſtenance, we alſo do aſke here, that god maye take awaye all euyls which be wonte ether to deſtroye cornes, or choke vp cornes, as hayle, thunder, boyſterous wyndes, or elſe ſuch proper chaunces as doth apperteyne, or come by their owne nature, as wormes, or rottynge, when it dothe lye on the grounde, where vpon oure father did ſhew, that the Heathens had certen holydayes that were inſtituted to praye vnto their Goddes, for ſuche chaunces. In the ſteade of ſuch feaſtes, as I thynk wee haue come into their place certeyne (ſuperſtitious) ſupplications and prayers made vnto Amburbya, or the prayers of Amburbia. Ierom, Forſoth thoſe thynges which thou haſte ſhewed, I remembre that they were declared of our father. Chriſto. We pray for in the ſame petition that god may dryue awaye battayle: for that in tyme of warre all corne and fyldes be deſtroied, trode vnderneth

the foote and thooſe that be tyllers, be ſlayne, ſo that there muſt nedes folowe dearth of corne: to be ſhorte, we do aſke of god for all neceſſarye thynges perteynyng to our lyuing: with theſe few wordes. Iero. I vnderſtande very wel how many thynges we do aſke of god wyth theſe few wordes: but I pray the, wherfore is this worde (to day) addyd. Chriſ. (To day) our father ſayd that it was added for this purpoſe / after the mynde of S. Cypryan, that whoſoeuer wyll be ye Diſcyple of Chriſte, after the voyce of hys mayſter, he muſte forſake all thynges, and aſke hys dayly meate, and not be longe in aſkynge of his petition, the ſelfe ſame lorde ſhewyng the ſame, whiche ſayde in the, 6. Chapter of Matthe. Be not thoughtfull for to morow, ſaying, what ſhall we eate, and what ſhall we drynke, and with what ſhall we be clothed, after theſe thynges do the gentyls inquire alſoo, your heauenly father doth know, that ye haue nede of al theſe thynges. Ierom. Gentle brother, howe doſte thou vnderſtand theſe wordes, and forgyue vs our treſpaces, as we forgiue

the that treſpace agaynſt vs. Doth not god therfore forgyue vs our treſpaces for that we do forgyue them that treſpaſe agaynſt vs? Chriſto. My welbeloued Ierome, this did our father ſaye, as perchaunce thou doſte remembre, theſe wordes ought to be playnely taken, yf our faultes ſhoulde trouble our conſcyence, that we in thys thynge oughte to know as by a ſure ſigne and token that our treſpaces be forgyuen vs of God, yf we ſhall forgyue to our neyghboure his treſpaces, in the whiche he hath offended vs, for why, ſo ſayth Chriſte in ye 
               6. Chapt. of Matth. Yf you forgyue vn to men their faultes, your heauenly father ſhall forgyue you. And yf you doo not forgyue vnto mē their faultes, your heauenly father wyll not forgyue vnto you youre faultes, Iero. Alas, what a greuouſe thynge is it, to forgyue oure neyghboure his faultes, whiche hathe hurte vs by many kynde of wayes. Ch. Surely it is a greuouſe thynge as thou ſayeſt (brother) but they be greater faultes which god doth forgyue vs. Ierom. There foloweth, except I am diſceiued,

and brynge vs not into temptation. Do we in this place deſyre to be delyuered from all kynde of temptation? Chriſtop We doo notte praye heere, that we ſhoulde not be tempted, but that wee ſhoulde not be led into temptation: that is to ſaye, that we ſhoulde not be ouercome with temptation. Iero. Of what enemyes be we chiefly-tempted? Chriſt. Of three enemyes, the worlde, the fleſhe and the deuyll. Iero. How be we tempted of the worlde? Chriſt. When we ſee that other men do excell vs, eyther in ryches, learnyng, or elſe in other thynges: and do diſpyte or enuye theyr good fortune, or learnyng, or other thynges that happely chaunce vnto them. Iero. And how be we tempted of the deuyll? Chr. When the great abundaunce of our ſynnes be ſet before our eyes, and be inticed to deſperation, and we are compelled to caſte awaye the hope of goddes mercie. Furthermore, when we are ſtirred too murder, to be a parricide or kyller of our kindred / or to commit anie ſuche abhominable crimes. Ierome. And howe be we tempted of our fleſhe? Chriſt. When

we be tyſed vnto luſte, aduoutry, deflourynge of Oyrgyns, with ſuch other lyke ſynnes, the deuyll beyng our good guide and pryncypall maiſter. Iero. Doſte thou beleue that by thys prayinge we ſhall be delyuered from all theſe euylles and temptations? Chriſto. Yea ſurelye, we ſhall be delyuered, ſo often as theſe wordes be brought fourth with a liuely fayth from the inwarde bottome of our herre. Ierom. Now, remayneth the laſt petition, but delyuer vs from euyll. Ch. It remeyneth euen in dede: and our father thought that this petitiō was chiefly agaynſt the deuyll, which both farre and nere goth aboute to deuoure vs, ſo that he confyrmed it wyth theſe argumentes, for that it doth partely ſignyfye in the greake worde (apo tou ponyrou) that is to ſaye, frome euyll, partely for yt yt deuill is called by S. Paul to ye Epheſians the laſt Chapter (euyll) our father ſayde that in this prayer there was many thynges to be aſked after this fation that god wolde delyuer vs frō al euyls, that is to ſaye, frome all perylles and myſchaunces, which ſhould eyther hinder

body or ſoule, and ſo thys word (euyll) muſte be referred to the thynge, and not to the perſon. Ie. Wherfore do we put vnto (Amen) and what maner of language is it Chriſto Euen as I ſhall make vnto the an anſwere, vnto the very effect: this worde amen, is an hebrew worde, and in englyſſhe it ſignyfieth ſo be it. And our father ſayde, that it was expounded of one Aquila, for faithfully And of Saynct Ierome, it is called the ſeale of the lordes prayer. Therfor, thys worde truelye was addid vnto this prayer, that we ſhoulde not doubte, but that our prayers were herde of God, and ſo to departe, hauing that which we aſked of hym. And for this cauſe, we ſay ſo be it, as though we ſhoulde ſaye. Truely o lorde, O heauenlye father, we are ſure yu haſte hearde vs, we are ſure thou wylte graunt and gyue thoſe thynges, whych we haue deſyred of the: beholde nowe thou haſt (my welbeloued Ierom) thoſe thynges, which partely I haue in remē
               braunce, and partely I haue wryten, by the redynge of our father, and alſo by ye preachinges of our congregation, of the

lordes prayer, prayinge the, that theſe thinges, whiche I haue ſaide, that thou woldeſt dilygently call them often to remembraunce, and praie with me to god daily, then the which thinge, we can do nothinge more acceptable vnto Chriſte, yea, and alſo we can not deuyſe wyth al our ſtudyes, a thynge that is ſo profytable vnto all congregations, Ierom. my welbeloued Chriſtopher, I gyue the her tye thankes, for thys thy greate labour and I will not be neglygent in remembrynge my deutye towardes the, God ſendynge me his ayde and helpe: I ſhal vehemently indeuour my ſelf, that among my often praiers vnto my onely ſauyour, aucthor and leader Chriſt, I will not be neglygente in the reſt, praiſes be vnto our lord Ieſu Chriſt and ſauyour, ſo be it.
         
         
            
               
               
                  ✚ The fyrſte houſhold ſermon vnto their chyldren & famylie
               
                  WElbeloued chyldrē, Saynt Paule, yea God the holye ghoſte, which ſpeaketh by Paul, in hys Epiſtle to ye Epheſians the 6. Chapter Teacheth fathers, how they ſhuld both intreat their chyldren, and inſtructe thē: for thus he ſaythe. Fathers be not wyllinge to prouoke your children to angre but brynge them vp in the doctryne and cortection of the lorde. Wherefore, for that I muſte obey god the holye ghoſte which ſpeketh by Paul / I haue decreed (althoughe it ſhall be but rudely and of a groſſe wytte) to open and declare vnto you the ten commaundementes. In ye whiche both all thoſe thynges whyche god doth requyre of vs, yea, & alſo thoſe whiche belonge vnto our neyghboure, be comprehended in a cōpendious ſome Wherefore, I earneſtlye beſeche you, yt you wyll gyue me a dylygente eare. Ye

ſhall not heare of me any thynge inuented of man: but thoſe thynges whyche the deuyne maieſty by his unſpeakable goodnes towardes vs dyd drawe forth oute of the holy boſome of hys breſte. But here perchaunce ſome wold thynk theſe thynges, what apperteyne to us Chriſtians, the ten commaundementes of god? ſeyng that they were delyuered to the Iewes by Moyſes, as it doth apere in the 20. Chapter of Exodus. Firſt of all here (my welbeloued Chyldren) learne that thoſe ten commaundementes were promulgated and declared vnto vs, whiche haue taken vpon vs to be called Chriſtians, do no leſſe the obedyence, and obſeruynge of thē, apperteyne then to the Iues. For why, ſeynge that thoſe preceptes dyuinely (as I myghte ſaye) be ingrauen in our myndes, as S. Paul teacheth in the 2. Chapter to the Romayns. And ſeyng that all we do aſſente to thoſe commaundementes, euen nature leadeth vs vnto them: he ſhall be no man nor yet chriſtian which wyl nut go aboute to expreſſe them in hys workes and doyng. And although there be

many thynges in thoſe preceptes and commaundementes conteyned, whiche be impoſſible to be done by our carnall nature (for who can eyther feare god or haue a confydence in hym, by the power of hys carnall nature) yet for all that god wylleth his preceptes and cōmaundementes to be obſerued and kepte of vs, that our vntained luſtes ſhoulde be brydeled, not as in lyke caſe, and in time paſſed, ſome haue thought, yea, and alſo at this preſente many do thinke, that by them, we are iuſtifyed: that is to ſay, we are compted before god as iuſte: but yt we ſhoulde eſcape temporall punyſſhemente, for this ſayth Moyſes. Who ſo euer ſhall do theſe thynges, ſhall lyue in them. For he that kylleth no man, ſemblabely ſhall not be kylled. He that taketh not awaye his neyghbours good, ſhall not be hanged on the galow tree. What nede I to haue manye wordes? You heare (welbeloued chyldren) youre mother commaundyng your ſyſters to laboure in ſpynnyng at the rocke, not yt youre mother is broughte bye thoſe labours, to beleue that her daughters do

beſerue their lyuynge, and ſhall be iuſtyfyed therby: but that they ſhoulde be in ſtructed to leade an honeſt lyfe, and vſe them to laboure, and that they ſhoulde knowe often tymes the imbecilitie and wekenes of their ſtrengthe and nature, ſeyng yt they can not perfourme thoſe labours which are put vnto them. Euen in lyke caſe, god vnto the Iewes, yea, euen vnto vs all hath put certeyne preceptes and commaundementes not that by thoſe we ſholde obteyne euerlaſtyng lyfe: but that by thoſe we ſhould lerne to do our dutie, and then we ſhall playnly perceyue, what god doth requyre of vs: and what we owe vnto our neyghboure, and that we can not, no not the beſte performe and kepe no not the leſt and ſo we ſhoulde flee vnto Chriſte our ſauyour, which onely did obſerue and kepe all hys fathers commaundements euen to the vttermoſt iote for our ſakes, that we ſhould chalenge vnto vs, his dilygent ſtudye in obſeruyng the commaundementes of god. I haue minded my welbeloued chyldrē, to ſpeake theſe few wordes before, for that I wolde declare

vntoo you, the iudgemente of my councell, in expoundynge the commaundementes of God, and yt I wolde ſome what ſtyrre you to the obſeruynge and kepyng the commaundementes of god But now wyll I begynne with yt fyrſt commaundement.
               Thou ſhalt haue no ſtrange Goddes.
               Fyrſte of all here is to be declared, what it is to haue a god, to haue a God is nothynge elſe then to gyue confydence wyth all my herte to the very god and feare hym which dyd make heauen and earth, and all thynge that therein is Wherefore the prophetes therefore do ſpeake theſe wordes. Malachyas ſayth thus in his fyrſte Chapter. If I am the lorde where is my fere, ſaythe the Lorde of hoſtes. Eſay ſayth in the 7. Chapter If ye wyll not beleue, ye ſhall not lyue, Dauyd ſayth in the ſeconde pſalm. Bleſſed be thoſe which put their truſt in him and the C. and xxvij. pſalme. Bleſſed are all thoſe whyche fearethe the Lord, and in the 4. pſalme, do ye ſacryfyce wythe the ſacryfice of iuſtyce and hope in the

lorde. Oſias in hys 12. Chapter ſaythe. Hope alway in god. Oute of theſe ſentences whiche I haue reherſed (welbeloued chyldren) ye maye eaſely coniecture, what it is to haue ſtraunge goddes for yf there be any thynge, where vnto we haue more confydence, then the true god, that is, in the ſteade of our god. So there is many at this preſente daye (it pityeth me to remēbre) haue more truſt to tbeir goodes, then vnto the true god There are many which worſhyp theyr wyll, in the ſteade of their God. There are many to whom workes, are in ſtead of their god. For why, they fyxe theyr confidence more in them, then in the mercye of God, for Ieſus Chryſtes ſake.
               And I can not ſufficiently declare, how moch goodneſſe, both to rule yea, and alſo to leade an honeſte lyfe, is myneſtred vnto vs oute of this commaundemente For euen out of this commaundement al mageſtrates do learn that thei ſhuld alwayes feare God, and therfore they neither do nothyng, nor iudge nothyng whiche may eyther oppugne god or diſdiſpleaſe

hym. More ouer, by this commaundemente, all Magiſtrates be moued, that they ſhoulde neither truſte to their wyſdome, neyther to their worldely polyſie, but that they ſhould put their eſpeciall confydence onelye in the helpe of god in al their doyngs, for why, thus ſayth Salomon in his prouerbes the 3. Chapter. Haue thy truſte in god wyth all thyne herte, and do not leane vntoo thyne owne wyſdome, and a lytle after haue thou no truſte vnto thy wyſdome feare god and departe from euyll. This fyrſt commaundement doth this profite vs, to leade an honeſt and a perfect lyfe which doth appointe vnto all man kind how he ſhoulde be haue hym ſelfe, yea, and alſo this precepte doth require, that the ſeruaunt ſhould execute in the maiſters abſence hys buſynes and workes dilygently, & with a good wyll, for why although the maiſter is abſente, yet god is preſente, and doth ſee how dylygentely the ſeruaunt doth apply his labours, ſo in like caſe, although I am not alway wyth you (welbeloued chyldrē) yet god is preſente, wyth whoſe feare you being

ſmytten ye ſhall eſchew alway, that ye ſhall not commyt any thynge oute of ye waye, yea, & alſo ye ſhall not ſuffer your goodly and preatious tyme to be ſpent in ydleneſſe.
               God onely wyll not requyre of vs accompte for euerye ydle worde, as it appeareth in Mathew the 12. Chap. But alſo of euerye dede that we doo, wherefore my welbeloued chyldren, take hede that ye haue alwaye in remembraunce this commaundemente, yea and al way both to put your truſte in god & alſo to feare god, and ſo ſhall I truſte, yt ye ſhall haue no confydence to your owne wyt, or to any of your workes, and this ſhall ye gouerne your lyfe as becometh Chriſtian men, and now pray ye vnto Chriſt our god and ſauyour, with all your hert that ye may rule your hertes by hys holy ſpirite: and that he wold aſwel increaſe the faythe and confydence of god in you, as his fear: & that he wyll neuer ſuffer it to be baren and without fruicte.
               So be it.
            
            
               
               The ſeconde houſholde ſermon vnto theyr chyldren and famylie.
               IN the fyrſte commaundement of god (welbeloued chyldren & ſeruauntes) ye haue heard what ſted faſte herte ye oughte to haue towarde god, trewly that we ſhoulde haue confydence in hym, with all our herte and to feare hym.
               And now I thynke ye are deſyrouſe to learne, how we ſhoulde trewly worſhyp god bothe withe our mouthe, and tongue. And that thynge dothe this ſeconde commaundemente teache, thus doth god commaunde. Thou ſhalte not take the name of thy lord god in vaine. God wyll accompte hym gyltye, which taketh ye name of god in vayn. And this commaundement dothe prohybit and forbyd, that we ſhoulde abuſe the name of god, or vſe it in vayne, that thynge is, when that we ſhall eyther ſwere by the name of god, or when we ſhall put the name of god to inchauntmentes or cungeringes, or whē we ſhal for euery light cauſe vſe the name of God, for a greate

ſorte (I knowe not but that it cometh vppon ſome yll vſe) theye ſhall ſcarſe ſpeake one worde: but they ſhall place it wyth an othe. And therefore that god myght fray men from the vſe, of raſſhe and vayne ſwerynge by hys name, he threateneth that thei ſhalbe gyltie, that is, he ſhalbe punyſſhed whiche doth abuſe hys name, whiche threates, well beloued chyldren, ſhuld put you in remembraunce that you ſhoulde very earneſtly take hede, that ye take not the name of God in vayne, for it is God that giueth the threate: therfore, he wyll not ſuffer his name to be blaſphemouſely ſpoken of. Seyng that god hath forbydden that hys name ſhoulde be abuſed, we can no leſſe thynke truely, but that he hath cō
                  maunded vs to haue the ryghte vſe of his name: we vſe the name of god, rightly, yf when the honour and glory of god requireth, we ſwere by his name: as yf we ſwere by ye name of god to confyrm the verytie of the goſpel, ſo doth Paul ſwere to the Galathians ye fyrſte Chap. Whē he is aboute to proue, that he hath receyued of onely Chriſte, the Goſpell,

he ſayth, thoſe thynges that I wryte vn to you, behold before god that I lye not as Paul myght ſaye. I take wytnes of god, that all thynges be trew, the which I haue ſhewed you. And in the fyrſt Epiſtle to the Corinthyans, the 15. Chap Paul ſayth. I dye daily by our reioyſinges. Where Saincte Auguſtine alſo doth teſtifie that Paul did vſe wyth certeyne holynes to ſwere, in his 89, Epiſtle. And in this ſermon of the wordes of thapoſtle 28. Furthermore, we do vſe well the name of God, when the tyme ſhall ſo chaunce that we ſwere by the name of god in iudgement, either before a maieſtrate, or for the loue of our neighbour, that is when we call god to wytneſſe, that the matter is none otherwyſe thē we do affyrme, for why, we do make thys othe partely by the commaundement of the magiſtrate, to whom god cō
                  maundeth that we ſhoulde obey, & partly that the trewth ſhoulde not be troden vnderneth the fote, and that our neighbour ſhoulde haue neyther loſſe or hynderance of hys lyfe or goddes. Further more, we vſe the name of god well, whā
                  
we do deſyre lamentablye the name of god, eyther in all ye begynnynges of our workes, or in any peryls. Furthermore welbeloued chyldren, yf whē ye wyll go to your ſtudy: or elſe do any thynge, ſayye alwaye, god proſper all thynges wel or god ſend me good fortune, for know this of a ſuertie, that all your workes at lyke fortunately to go forwarde, yf they be begoue fyrſte wyth the name of god, yea, and alſo whē ſo euer you are going to ſleape at nyght, or when in the mornyng ye do riſe from your bed (making aſigne of the holy croſſe on youre forehead) ſay ye. In the name of the father, the ſonne, and of the holy ghoſte, for ſo both through all the day and al ye night, ye ſhall be the ſafer agaynſte all the aſſaultes of the deuyll.
               Furthermore, in perryll no man is of ſo greate ſtrength and efficaci as the name of Chriſt, for why, I my ſelf haue not a lytle experyenſed the thinge, that there hath auoyded from me many perrels and daungers, yea there hath bene many perrels which hath ſodenly chaū
                  ced vnto me / ſo that I haue cryed oute

O lorde Ieſus Chriſte helpe me, dryue away this euyll o lorde Ieſus. For the deuyll which goeth aboute to caſte vs hedlynges into many perrels, he can not heare of the name of god, or the name of Ieſus Chriſte. Therfor, the name of god beyng called on, by and by, he flyeth (in concluſion) the true vſe of the name of god is, wyllyngly to apply oure ſelfe in our prayers, that we may alſo wyllyngly giue our mynde to praiyng: and this thynge doth thys commaundement require of vs, we vſe alſo the name of god wel, yf as ſo as anye good thynge doth chaunce vnto vs. Therfore, I pray you hertely welbeloued chyldren, remembre and marke, that ye maye vſe the name of god well, for, as God wyll punyſſhe greuouſely the abuſe of hys name, ſo wt oute doubte he wyll garnyſſhe yt ryght vſyng of his name wt very excellent promyſes. And when the deuyll as Peter ſayth, ſhall go about as aroryng lyon ſekyng whō he ſhould denoure, by none other meanes, ye can make your ſelf ſafe againſt his diſceites, onles ye haue the name of god alway in youre mouthe.
            
            
               
               The thyrd howſhold ſermon vnto their Chyldren and famylye.
               THe thyrd commaundement welbeloued chyldren is, thou ſhalte halow the ſabaoth day, whiche commaundemente although it doth belong properly vnto the Iues, to whom the ſabaoth day was ſamctified, yet for all that, it doth as wel perteine vnto vs Chriſtians, For although as ſoone as Chriſt our ſauiour dyd appere vnto vs, the Sabaoth was made, the Sabaothe: Eſaie the laſt Chapter, and therfore one daye ys as holye as an other to euerye Chryſtiane, yet for all that, that order is hyghly to be prayſed that euery weke the ſeuenth daye ſhoulde be conſecrated both to god and to exercyſe holy thynges. And this is the vnderſtandynge of this commaundemente, halow thy ſabaoth daye, that is to ſaye, the other ſyxte day thou mayſt ſpende in labours both publike and priuate: but as ſone as the ſabaoth daye, and ſo thy ſeuenth daye is come, be dilygente that thou mayſte ſaynctyfy that daye, that is, thou beyng vacant from all cares and labours ſpend

thē in holy exerciſe. And whiche be thoſe holy exerciſes? truly to exerciſe thy ſelfe with prayer▪ to here the worde of god, and ſo to endeuer thy ſelfe to holy workes. And yf thou doeſt dilygently ſerch oute the meaninge of this precept, thou ſhalt perceyue none other thinges commaunded vnto vs, thē thother doth commaund vs, verelie pertelie, that we ſhold put all our truſt and confidence in god, that is to ſaye, that we ſhould loue his worde and the teacher of his worde, and as I ſhall vſe the wordes of Sayncte Paule, thoſe that laboure in the worde and doctryne. ye 
                  1. Thi. 5. be worthie of double honour, partely alſo, yt we might chiefly teache our chyldren in this daye the commaundementes of god, and that we ceaſynge from all labours, for whye this ſaboth day did thus ſignyfie to the Hebrues, the word of god myght bryng forth frutefully ſome frute as well in vs as in all our famylye or houſholde. And partely this commaundement doth commaund vs, that we ſhoulde be chaſtened wyth the feare of god, that is to ſaye, yt we ſhoulde not haue his worde in deryſion

for it is impoſſyble that he whyche feareth god with all his hert, ſhould not regarde his holy word. And that thyng that I haue ſayde of the ſabaoth day, or elſe of this our ſeuenth day. I wyll that it ſhall be mente as well of other dayes, which be ordeyned by the congregation for to read the ſtoryes of the goſpell Behold well beloued chyldrē, ye haue herd how our ſabaoth day ſhall be vſed, but (alas) it greueth me, how ſpecially this preſent tyme, and now a dayes we vſe the ſabaoth, truely when we haue ſlept almoſte mydde daye, at the laſte we awake, & come to the temple, in the whyche as ſone as ye ſermon, which we haue hearde earneſtlye preached vnto vs, is done, then we flee ſtraight way whome to dyner, and as ſone as dyner is done, we go and gaſe a broad, or elſe to banke tynge, or to daunce. I am aſhamed here to tell before you, certen thinges that be done in the ſabaoth day, ſeyng that many be aſhamed to do thē. But you welbeloued chyldren, halowe your ſabaoth day, that is to ſay, ocupie your ſelues wt godly exercyſes. In numery the fourth

boke of Moyſes the 15. Chapter. We reade, yt a certeyne man was commaunded of god to be ſtoned to death, for that he had gathered woode on the ſabaothe daye, therfore take hede that and yf you my ſuſe your ſabaoth day, god wyll punyſſhe at lengthe the breakyng of the ſabaoth daye. It is a fearefull thynge, as the aucthor of the piſtle to the Hebrnes the 15. Chap. ſaith. To fall in to the handes of ye lyuinge God.
            
            
               
               The fourth houſholde Sermon vnto theyr Chyldren and famylye.
               Very often ye haue heard of me (well beloued children) that the hole lyfe of a chriſtiā, doth ſtand in two thynges, fyrſte, that we myghte knowe what doth perteyne vnto God and then what is our dewtye towardes men. Thoſe thynges which we muſt exhybit towardes god, ye may eaſely perceyue them out of the fyrſte commaundement, whiche I wolde wyſſhe, yt you wolde beare aboute wyth you in youre mynde, and that you wolde kepe them more better then the nayles on youre fyngers, for why, they ſhall teache you in all thynges how you ſhall vſe youre ſelfe. And ye ſhall not lightly goo out of the ryghte waye, yf thou wylte folowe them euen as guydes that leade you in the ryght wave of youre lyfe, for he cannot by no maner of meanes erre, whiche hath god before his eyes, and yf he doth vnderſtande that his loue oughte to be preferred afore the loue of all creatures. Furthermore, that duetie whyche we

ought to do towarde men, the commaū
                  dementes that folow declare, ſeing that our duetie done once vnto god, there are no men whom it becomethe to imbraſe wyth a more greater loue & to do more greates honour vnto, then to our parentes: which this fourth cōmaundemente doth ſhewe of our parentes, honour thy father and mother, that it maye be well vnto the, and that thou mayſt be longe lyuynge vpon the earthe, ye haue heard (well beloued chyldren) that god dothe commaund, that we ſhould honour our parentes. To honour our parentes, not onely honourably, gentely and mekely, to ſalute their parentes, to ſpeake vnto them, and to handle them gentlye, and to put of their cappes vnto them, and to gyue them the waye, and gyue them the hygheſt place, but with all their hert not onely to loue them: but alſo to haue a feruent herte towarde them, and they beyng oppreſſed with pouertie, to helpe them, and they hauynge their health to handle them gentlye: and beyng very aged (yf nede ſhal requyre) to beare them on their ſhoulders, where ſoo euer theye

wolde go, Furthermore, what ſoo euer they ſhall commaunde, ſo that it be not wycked, none otherwiſe, then yf it were ſent from heauen, we ought to receyue it wythe all loue and feare, and once receyued, dilygently to execute it, and not to mocke them, yf eyther wythe age, or wyth any other kynde of faulte, they do dote, not cruelly to make anſwere vnto them, what tyme they do earneſtlye rebuke you. Beholdé how farre and how large the honour of parentes dothe extende, neither here we be not onely commaunded to honoure our parentes / by ye whyche ye are brought fourth here in this world, and by them be brought vp, but we are alſo commaunded to honor the parentes of our ſoule, the teachers of goddes worde and your mayſters. And alſo ſubiectes be commaūded, that they ſhould honour their magiſtrates, bothe men ſeruauntes and women ſeruauntes be commaunded to honoure both theyr mayſters, and myſtreſſes.
               To be ſhorte, in this commaundemēt both polityque lawes and houſhold laues, be ordeined and al obedyence is commaūded

towards thoſe whō by god we ought to honoure, for becauſe that we ſhoulde be the redyer, to gyue honoure vnto our parētes, god dyd annex to this commaundemente a ſerteyne pleaſaunt promys. And what is this promys, I praye the here, that it may be well with the, for it is well with vs, when all thynges chaunce accordynge vnto our mind vndoutedly, if we be in helth or yf there be mynyſtred vnto vs aboundauntly our daylye neceſſaryes, or what ſo euer we do, it doth luckelye chaunce when our mynd is voyde of all troubles, we are well ſpoken of, we are taken reuerently of all men. And trulye theſe thynges be excedyng good, which god impertyth unto thoſe, which honour their parentes. But thys is a gyfte not commonly ſene, that thoſe ſhal be partakers of a long lyfe, which haue not gyuen honor vnto their parentes, & what is more pleaſaunte then lyfe? Is not lyfe, and yt a longe life that all we couet? Let thoſe good thynges, well beloued chyldrene, ſtyre you vp, that you maye remembre your dewtie, as well towarde youre father

and mother, as alſo to the teachers of his holy worde, Maiſters. all magiſtrates, yea, euen all oure lyfe tyme, for why, you do heare, who reqyireth it of you, yt you ſhould giue honor vnto your parentes. It is neyther aungell, nor prophete, but the almightie god, lorde both of Aungell and prophete, which can not ſo eaſely forget this precepte, not onely in cholde Teſtament, but alſo in ye newe Teſtament did ſtudie furthermore to renew it: for Salamon in his prouerbes ye 30. Chapter ſaith. The eye whiche diſdeyneth the father, and diſpiſeth the cō
                  maundemente of the mother, Crowes ſhall picke it oute, beſyde the riuer, and Egles ſhall deuour it.
               Behold ye do heare here, welbeloued Chyldren, what the holy ghoſt doth require of you, trewlye that you ſhoulde giue honour vnto your parentes, yf ye do not, ye here what kynd of puniſhmēt he doth admoniſhe vs with, Eccleſiaſt. the 3. Chapter. ſaith. Who that doth honour his father, he ſhall haue delyte in hys chyldren, and he ſhall obteyne hys requeſt in that day that he dothe praye,

he that honoureth his father ſhall haue longe lyfe, and he that is obedient vnto his ſather, ſhall make hys mother glad. Honour thy father, that thou mayſte be bleſſed of god &c. Furthermore, Chriſte the ſonne of god, and our ſauyour, the xv. Chapter of Matthew. Chydynge ye Phariſes, ſaith. Wherfore do you breke the commaundemente of God for your owne traditions? For god commaunded, ſaying, honour thy father and mother, and who ſo euer curſeth father or mother, ſhal dye the death. Alſo Sainct Paul to the Epheſians the 5. Chapter, ſayth. Chyldren obey your parentes in the lorde, for that is ryghte, honoure your father and mother in the lord, whiche is the fyrſte commaundemente that hath any promes, that it may be well vnto the, and that thou mayſte lyue longe vpon the earth, yea, heare well beloued chyldren how this fourth precepte both in the olde Teſtamente, and alſo in the new is very often tymes repeted wyth out doubte, euen onely for this cauſe, yt god ſhoulde ſhew that this commaundemente ſhoulde not eſcape the remembraunce

of chyldren, and that it ſhoulde be alwayes vnto them, as the moſte neceſſaryeſt thyng perteynyng to them in the houſe, yea and alſo, euen that thyng which almyghtie god hath declared bye many examples, for why, in lyke caſe as god did curſe Cham the ſonne of Noe, for that he had no honour vnto his father. Euē in lyke caſe did he bleſſe Sem the ſonne of Noe, for that he dyd reuerently honour his father, as it dothe appeare in the ix. Chapter of Gene. And it is not vnknowen, what dyd chaunce to Abſalon, the ſecond boke of ye kynges the xviij. Chapter. For that he gaue not dewe honour vnto his father Dauid, as he ought to do. But what neade I too ſet fourth any more examples, as whoo ſhoulde ſay, that the holy ſcripture were not ful of examples, with the which god doth now ſhew, that he fauoureth thoſe which honor their parentes, & ſo to hate thoſe, which do not their duetie in honourynge their parentes.
               Theſe thynges, I thynke well beloued chyldren, ſhall kyndle you, that ye ſhould haue dewe honour vnto your patentes,

it is the fyrſte commaundement of god hauyng promes, that is not once much ſpoken of, abrode, but we fynde it very often repeted in holy ſcripture, yea and alſo by examples, wyth the whiche God ſheweth inobediente chyldren, toward their parentes, yt he wyll be auenged of thē. And in examples to the whiche he doth declare how iuſt he is of his promes, toward thoſe chyldren / whiche loue their parētes, honor thē, & obei thē.
               For that which I here ſay of parēts, yt ſelf ſame I will you to vnderſtande of maiſters, profeſſours of thy deuine word & of all Maieſtrates, for as I haue ſayd a litle before, in this commaundemente, all obedyence is commaunded toowardes euery man, our dutie once done to god the which be called to the hygheſte honoure: Ieſus Chriſte the ſone of God, graunt that that thinge, the which is required of you in this commaundement, that you earneſtly may performe it with the helpe of his ſpyryte: and that you may both mynd it, and folow it, for god is he, which worketh in you, bothe for to wyll it, and to performe it, after as it ſhall pleaſe him. to ye Philippi. 2.
               
            
            
               
               The fyfte houſholde Sermon vnto theyr Chyldren and famylye.
               YE haue hearde, well beloued chyldren, what god hath required of you now therfore heare, wherein our dutie doth apperteyn towarde other men, god ſaith thus. Thou ſhalt not kyl, whiche commaundement truely in his kind (as the Iewes do vnderſtande it) doth ſeme onely to forbyd that we ſhuld not neyther kyll our neighbour with hande nor with ſwerde.
               But Chriſte being the chief interpreter of the law, Matthew the v. Chapter It is not ynough ſayth he, yf thou kylleſte no man wyth thy hande vnleſſe alſo our herte is voyde of all angre and hatred, for why, thus ſaith Chriſte oure ſauiour. Who ſo euer is angry wyth his brother, is giltie of iudgemente, that is to ſay, he is worthy to haue that puniſhmente which he ſhoulde haue, that with his hande hath kylled any man, that is to dye, and ſemblabely, to be kylled.
               Ihon in his fyrſte Epiſtle the 3. Chapter ſayth. Euerye one that hatyth hys

brother is a manqueller, why ſo? For although he kylleth not his brother with a ſwerde, yet beyng inflamed wt hatred, in his herte, wyſſheth his neyghbour to be vtterly kylled. Nor truely thoſe onely of the which we haue ſpoken bye man quellers, but Ehriſt ſayth further▪ Who ſo euer ſhall ſaye to hys brother, Racha, ſhall be gyltye of counſell, for Racha, doth ſignyfie here, all maner of tokens, wt the which we declare our ſelues to be angry with our neighboure, as whē we wyl neyther ſee a mā, nor heare him, or when we wyll reioyce priuely, when any myſfortune is chaunced towarde our neighbour, or elſe when we do ſhew our ſelues towarde our neyghbour, that it ſhall eaſely apeare, that there can be nothyng more thankefull, nor nothyng more welcomer, then yf our neyghbour come to vtter diſtruction.
               Chriſt ſayth more ouer, who ſo euer ſhall ſaye foole, ſhall be gyltye of helle fyre: in this worde foole is comprehended, not onely externe ſygnes, but al naughtie wordes, whiche come from yt herte, that doth hurte our neyghboure.

And yf I do call any man foole vpon agood intente. I ſynne not. So paule calleth the Galathyans fooles in yt 3. Chapter. And Chriſte in the laſte Chapter of Luke, ſayth vnto his Diſcyples. O fooles, and ſlow herted to beleue, and truely we oughte not onelye here to vſe the name of fooles, but alſo greuouſely to be angry, and to ſhew al maner of ſharpneſſe, and as it were, vnmercyfulnes, for ſuche anger is a godly zeale, which is angry wyth the euyll, and not wythe the perſon, to whom he wyſſheth wyth all his herte good, for this cauſe the men of law, if they wolde take it as they ſhould take it. They ſay well, that they be the enemyes of the cauſe, and the frende of the perſon. Ye haue heard well beloued chyldren, how Chriſte hath more truely and better interpretated this commaundement againſte kyllynge thy brother, then either the Iewes in olde tyme did interpretate it, or then ſome Chriſtians at this preſente day do interpretate it after ye text. Ye do hear alſo, that although all the world is full of manquellers, yet for all that, no man wyll knowe in hym

ſelfe, yt he is a manqueller, what? What manquellers be thoſe, which do abound in ryches, and do ſuffer their neighbour to peryſſhe withe famyne, thyrſte, and cold. Trewly what is it elſe, but to giue no meate to theſe that be hungrye, too gyue no drinke to thoſe that be thyrſty, to gyue no clothes to thoſe that be naked, then (to that is in his power) to kyl his neighbour, there is no difference as the ciuile lawes do affirme, whether any man kyll, or whether he be the cauſe of death, what nede I many wordes? This commaundement doth requyre of vs yt we ſhoulde not hurt our neighbour ney ther wyth worde nor deade, but helpe hym by all meanes poſſible, with councell, and wyth the helpe both of bodye and goodes, and that we ſhoulde take no leſſe care in his cawſe, then in our owne, yea, and alſo that no man ſhoulde loke for his own, but eueri man for his neighbours, to the Philyppians the 2. Chapter. Furthermore, how wylleth God yt this commaundemente ſhoulde be vyolated of no man: for he doth not let ſcape the manqueller vnpunyſſhed, ſeing that

as well prophane hiſtories do ſhewe as deuine, but that we wyll here ouer paſſe prophane hiſtories. Did not god puniſh greauouſely Cain, for bycauſe he dydde kyll his brother Abell. Geneſes. the 4. Chapter? And did not god ſtrayghtlye punyſſhe Achab and Ieſabell, for yt they dyd kyll myſerably, Naboth, the thyrde boke of the kynges, the 21. Chap. There be examples ynoughe in ſcripture, well beloued Chyldren, pray ye vnto God, yt ye maye caſte oute of youre herte at all tymes, both angre and hatred, and diſceitefulnes towarde your neighbour and that he wolde ſuffer your handes not to be defyled withe the bloud of your neighboure, by oure Lorde Ieſus Chriſte. So be it.
            
            
               
               The ſyxte houſholde Sermon vnto theyr Chyldren and famylye.
               I Thynke, that ye are not forgetful well beloued Chyldren, that the ſyxt commaundement of almightie god, ought to be expounded to you, which is. Thou ſhalte not commit adultry, which commaundemente, although it ſeemeth to be ſpoken to thoſe whiche be knit to gyther with the bande of matrymony, yet for all that it doth alſo per teyne vnto thoſe whiche be not maried, and fyrſt it requireth of him, whom g
                     •
                  d ſhall call to haue a wyfe (for god was ye fyrſte aucthor, that we ſhoulde haue wy ues, after the ſaying of Chriſt, Matthew the 19. Chapter. Let not man ſeperate thoſe, whom god doth ioyne. And after the ſaying of Salomon in his proucrbes the 19. Chapter. God dothe gyue vs a wyſe wyfe, we muſte loue her withe all our hearte, and to be content onely with her, and to deſyre none other. Whyche commaundemente Chriſt in Matthew the 5. Chapter doth interpretate, both a gainſte the perſwations of the Iewes,

and alſo of them whiche counte theymſelues chriſtians, ye haue hearde that it was ſayde vnto the elders, thou ſhalte not commyt adultrye. But I tell you, who ſo euer loketh vpō an other mans wyfe, to luſte after her, hath commytted in his herte adultry withe her, beholde ye haue hearde (well beloued Chyldrē) that it is not Inough / if any manne do not commyt adultry with an other mannes wyfe, but & if he burne in hys herte with deſirynge of his neighbours wyfe, this precepte doth admony ſhe vs that we ſhoulde take hede as well of ye herte, as of all other thynges. For oute of the herte cometh all euyll thoughtes, adultry, fornycation, Matthew, the 15. Chapter. Furthermore, this commatindemente doth require in his kynde, that yu ſhuldeſt leab a chaſt lyfe, and flee whore dome, and that thou ſhouldeſt be cleane as well in ſoule, as body. And if thou fealeſt that thou cauſt not lyue contenente or chaſte, for this worde ought chieflye to be noted, that Chriſte ſpake, few hath this gyfte, that then he ſhoulde marry, in the whiche thou oughteſt ſo to ordre

thy lyfe, for to be contented withe thye wife, and to leaue other mens wines vntouched. To be ſhort, there is conteyned in this precepte and prohibited all maner of kyndes of luſtes, whych eyther may be done, or expreſſed with fylthy cō
                  munication, or deſyred with euyll thoughtes of the herte. And this commaundement is furthermore called to remembraunce in the holy ſcriptures. Salomon ſaith in his prouerbes. A wife ſhal make the mery, how yonge ſo euer ſhee be euen as a pleaſant Doo, or as a luſtye fawen, and therefore contente thy ſelfe alway in the loue of her, and continually ſtudy to loue her, and by and by he addeth, o my ſonne, wherefore wylte thou be ſeduced by an harlotte, and wylt imbrace a ſtraunge woman (Paule in his firſte Epiſtle to the Corinthians the 6. Chapter, ſaith) flee whoredome. And in his fyrſte Epiſtle to the Theſſalonians the 4. Chapter ſayth. This is the wyll of god, your ſainctificatiō, that ye ſhuld abſteyne from whordom, and that euerye one of you ſhuld knowe how to poſſeſſe your veſſell in ſanctifycation, and

honour. And here Paul doth often tymes exhorte men, that they ſhould loue their wynes, and that they ſhoulde loue them ſo, as Chriſte hath loued hys churche, to the Epheſians the 5. Chapter. And to the Colloſſi, the 3. Chapter. Ye men (ſaith Sainct Paul) loue your wynes, and be not ſharpe towardes theym, furthermore, for that that god wyll puniſſhe greuouſely as well formcation, as adultry, it may be confirmed as well with the open teſtymonies of holy ſcripture, as with examples of the ſame, ouer and beſides, I wyll here hold my peace of the madnes, with ye which god doth make blynde both whoremongers and adulterers. After the ſayinge of Oſeas. Fornication & wyne, doth make blynd a mans herte. And after the ſayinge of S. Paul the firſte Epiſtle to the Corinthyans the 6. Chapter. Yee can not be bothe the members of an harlot, and the mēbers of chriſt, both here & in ye world to come, excepte they do repente, they wyll be punniſſhed, as well whormongers, as adulterers. Salomon in his prouerbes ye 
                  6. chapter ſayth. Foles, when

they commyte fornication they forſake their lyfe, & bryng vpon them as wel de fourmytie as a plage, and they can neuer a voyde the ſclaunder, paule in hys fyrſte Epyſtle to the Corinthyans the 6. chapter ſayth. Be not diſceyued, neyther whoremongers nor adulteters ſhal receyue the inheritaunce of the kyngedome of heauen. To the gala, the 5. chapter, the workes of the fleſh be manyfeſt adultry, whordome vncleaneſſe, wanton neſſe &c. Who ſo euer do thoſe thyngs, they ſhall not be the in heritours of the kyngedome of Heauen, to the Hebrues the 13. Chapter. God ſhall iudge whoremongers and adulterers. Furthermore for that that god will punniſh them with greuous paynes, the fyrſte epyſtle of ſayntte Paule to the Corin. the 10. chapter. Declareth neyther let vs be defyled with adultrye, lyke as ſome of them were defyled, and ther fell in on daye 3 and twentye thouſand. The xxv. Chapter of ye 4 boke of Moyſes. Gene. the 20. and 6. Chapter. God did purpoſe to kyll Abbimeleche, for that that he wolde haue hadde to do with Iſaackes

wyfe. And for that I wolde omyt many other examples, god hath declared, that he wyll not ſuffer vnpuniſſhed aduitrye euen in onely dauyd, for that he did conſtuprate or defyle bethſabeam the wyfe of Dry, the firſte boke of the kynges the 11. Chapter. Ye haue hearde welbeloued children, both what God doth requyre of vs in this commaundemente, and alſo that he wylleth no man to vſe fraude in this precepte, ſeyng that the thought of man is prone all way to euyll at al tymes. Gene, the 6. Chapter. Therefore, we ought to pray vnto god, yt he wolde create in vs a cleane hearte, and that he wolde ſainctifie vs, that our hole ſpirite ſoule and body, may be kepte irrepre henſible in the commyng of oure lorde Ieſus Chriſte, the firſte Epyſtle to the Theſſalonyans the laſte Chapter. So be it.
            
            
               
               The ſeuenth houſhold Sermon vnto their Chyldren and famylye.
               HEre foloweth the ſeuenth commaundement of god all myghtie, wel beloued Children, whiche is, thou ſhalte not ſteale, which precepte is vnderſtanded many waies, firſt as the wordes be ſpoken, it doth prohibit, that we ſhoulde not ſteale awaye other mens goodes. Furthermore it doth commaund that in all maner of bargainynges, we ſhoulde meane trewly, and that we ſhoulde diſceyue no man, for to diſceyue any man in bargaininge or makynge any promes, we do euen as well ſteale euen as we ſhould take any thing priuely out of oure neighbours cheſte. And this precept for thoſe thinges doth admoniſhe all maner of men, of all kind of occupations, that they ſhould not ſel their marchaundice dearer then theye nede to be ſoulde, or be worthy. Finally thys precepte doth perteyne to an vnfaithfull houſholde or familye, that the maiſtet and myſtres being both abſent that utterly lyueth in Idleneſſe, or elſe

is very neglygent in their office, and ſuffereth many thynges to be loſte, often tymes vndone by their negligence, and ſo to periſhe, whiche often tymes bringethe more hurte in one yeare to ſome houſe, then other theues do to ſome mē which do ſteale eyther mony or goodes For that I wolde touche manye thynges in a fewe wordes, the meaninge of this commaundemente is, that in anye caſe we ſhould not in any maner of matter hynder oure neighbour, & althoughe we coulde dyſceyue oure neighboure with oute any punyſhmente, yet for the feare that wee beare chiefly vnto God, whiche the lawe of God doth fyrſte requyre of vs, wee muſte abſteyne frome falſe dealynge, for god, althoughe theft is neyther perceyued nor taken of the Magiſtrates, yet for all that he wyl not ſuffer thefte to be vnpunyſſhed. That thynge bothe of other examples, as of this may be perceiued, that god did commaunde one to be burned, whyche had ſtolen from one that was curſed. Ioſue 7. And god is not onely wonte to take a temporal puniſhment of theues, but alſo

and euerlaſtyng punyſhment vnleſſe they do repente, and thus doth he threaten them, for thenes & murtherers ſhall not poſſeſſe the kyngedome of heauen, ſaith S. Paule to the Corinthyans the firſte Epiſtle the 6. Chapter. And to the Epheſians the 4. Chapter, S. Paul ſaith he that hathe ſtolen, let hym ſteale noo more, let him rather labour working wt his handes, which is a good thyng that he may haue where with he mighte be liberall to the paciente that hathe neade Ieſus Chriſte graunte that wee maye bountefully fulfil this ſame precepte of almyghtie god, that and if we can not performe this our dutie in this thynge, we haue an aduocate withe the father: Ieſus Chriſt / ther is iuſte / and he is our ſatiſfaction, for oure ſynnes, notte for our ſynnes onely / but for the ſinnes of all the worlde. The firſte Epiſtle of Ihon the ſeconde Chapter. So be it.
            
            
               
               The eight houſhold ſermon vnto their children and famylie
               I thynke that ye are not forgetfull, of thys, well beloued Chyldren, that ye ſhoulde haue expounded to you this day the eyght commaundemente of god almyghtie. And this it is, Thou ſhalt bare no falſe witnes agaynſt thy neighboure, which cōmaundement as we maye coniecture eaſely of theſe wordes it doth forbyd us leſte when we ſhuld be called into iudgemente, that we ought to beare no witneſſe, eyther led withe hatred, or blynded with coueteouſneſſe of monye, and that we ſhuld not ouerpreſſe our neyghboure with falſe witneſſe, for often times our neghbour is both brought in daunger of his lyfe and beraued of his goodes by falſe witneſſes. And that god will haue this his prece
                     •
                  te ſtraightly kepte of all men it is expedyente both with many other examples, and with this one alſo that Danyell the 13 chapter doth make mention of Suſan. And this precepte onely doth not perteine vnto ye courtes of the

lawe, but alſo doth prohibyte that we ſhoulde not faine no lyes by any kynde of meanes vpon our neighboure, but as Saincte Paul to the Epheſyans the 4. Chapter, ſaith, puttynge a parte all maner of lyenge. Let euery man ſpeake the truthe to his neyghboure for becauſe we are the members of our miſticall bodyes. Furthermore, this commaundemente doth forbyde that we ſhoulde not hurte the honiſtie or eſtimation of our neyghboure, and that we ſhoulde not gyue eare vnto thoſe whiche go aboute to put out of credet the eſtimatiō of our neyghbour, for both doth offende, both he that goeth aboute to deſtaine the honeſtie of his neyghboure, and he that gyueth eare to him yt ſclaūdereth his neighboure. For and if ye ſhall heare anye ſclaūderers, welbeloued childrē, enquire freely of them, whether thoſe thynges which with a ſclaūderous tonge they do backebyte him that is abſente, they wil ſpeake before any magiſtrat, or not? And if thoſe ſclaunderers denye that they wil ſpeake before a iudge, then tell them freely to theyr face, and commaunde thē
                  
that they mai leaue to ſpeake ſo raſſhely ſuche thinges of their neighboure, and if you wyll not tell thoſe ſclaunderers after this maner, I wil ſhewe you an other waie, which ye Lorde & our ſauiour Chriſte the ſon of god doth teache vs. Mathew the 18. chapter, wheare he willeth that our brother which doth offend firſte, once or twice we ſhould brotherlye admoniſhe him, then if he wyl not heare our admonitions, he ſhoulde be takē as an Ethenicke or a Publicane. And if by chaunce ye ſhal fal into the companye of ſclaunderers, ye ſhall ſaie it doth not pertein vnto you to ſclaunder youre brother that is abſente, gyue him warning of his fault firſte and then if he ſhal contempne youre admonitions tell the congregation, yt is to ſaie, thoſe, the whiche the people haue giuen power to preache the worde of god. God doth forbid ſclaunderinge. Leuiticus. 19. Thou ſhalte not ſclaunder thy neighboure. But I ſhal come to the eight precepte: and it is to be vnderſtande briefly, partly, that we ſhoulde not oppreſſe in iudgemente our neighbour with falſe

witnes, partely, that we ſhoulde not belye our neighbour, and leſte that wee ſhoulde not defame or robbe our neighboure of his good name or fame. The almightie god gyue vs that grace that we may obſerue thys commaundemente well, thorow oure Lorde Ieſus Chryſte. So be it.
            
            
               
               The nynthe-houſholde Sermon vnto theyr Chyldren and famylye.
               WE are come now to the laſte two commaundementes of God, well beloued chyldrē, which do intreat both of cōcupiſcence, or unlawfull deſyrynge, thus doth god commaunde, Exo 20. Thou ſhalt not deſyre thy neighboures houſe, nor thou ſhalt not deſyre hys wyfe, his ſeruaunte, his hande mayden, his oxe, his afſe, or any thynge that perteineth vnto hym.
               Beholde, and marke theſe two laſte commaundementes of almyghtie God and bothe of them, as I haue ſayde a lytle before, do ſpeake of vnlawfull deſyrynge, and brieflys / this they do commaund vs, it is not ynough, not to take away other mens goodes (which thing was forbidden in the ſeuenth commaundemente) but alſo we ſhoulde not couet the goodes of our neighbour, as for an example, my neighboure hath an houſe pleaſauntely buylded, and trewly God wylleth that we ſhoulde not couet the ſelfe ſame houſe, but that we ſhoulde fauoure

our neighbour with all our herte although we haue but a lytle houſe ſcarſe to thruſte our heade in. And often tymes my neighbour hath a wyfe, whiche is of a godly beutie, and indewed wyth good manners, and ryche: I oughte to ſuffer or let my neighboure aloue wt her, although I haue a wyfe, whiche is nothynge to be compared to any neighbours wyfe.
               Althoughe this commaundemente doth ſeme properly to apperteyne vnto the Iewes, to the whiche for the hardeneſſe of their hertes, they were ſuffered to haue lycence to gyue vnto their wyues a teſtimony of deuorcemente, yfany man wolde not kepe them withe hym, which lycence they dyd greatelye abuſe, for if any man had a wyfe, whyche had a good dowrye, and fayre, an other man that coulde by any meanes, wolde bringe her into the hatred of her houſebande, and then a deuorcement made wt the firſt huſbande, did take her to wyfe and it do not ſyldome chaunce among Chriſtians, yt one doth take an others wyfe away. And ſo many in theſe dayes

do take away vnto them eyther their trew labourynge ſeruaunce or mayden, increaſynge their yearely wages. There perteyneth alſo to theſe thynges that ye beaſtes which be frutefull and ſtronge we do hate that our neighbour ſhoulde haue theym, and therefore, bye all the chraftye meanes that we can, we wyll obteyne and get them for our ſelues, to be ſhorte, theſe commaundementes wyl vs that thou ſhuldeſte not once wiſſhe thy ſelfe well, if thy neighbour ſhoulde fare the worſe. And theſe two commaundementes ſeme to be compared agaynſt couetuouſenes, for conetuouſe mē gape for, and couet all thynges, and they cannot ſuffer their pore neighbour to haue any good thyng, with a good wyll, both theſe commaundementes of almyghtye god, ye, and alſo the voice of Chriſte the ſonne of god, Luke, the 12. Chapter ſhall call you awaye from coneteouſeneſſe, when he ſaythe. Take heade of couetuouſneſſe, for bycauſe the lyfe of euerye man is not in the abundaunce of thoſe thynges which he doth poſſeſſe, the ſaying of S. Paul doth fray you from couetuouſnes

both to the Epheſians the 5. Chapter, & to the Colloſ. the 3. Chapter. Callynge it ydolatry, let this plucke you from couetuouſenes, for that that God doth abhorte it, whiche we maye perceyue in Laban, Gene, the 30. Chapter. And in Rabal the fyrſte boke of the kynges the 16. Chapter. Wherefore flee you frome this enyll, well beloued chyldren, and imbrace you godlyneſſe, and thoſe thynges which the mercy of god ſhall gyue you, take theym thankefully Godlyneſſe is a greate gayne ſay the Samcte Paule in the fyrſte Epiſtle too Tymothe the laſte Chapter, too thoſe that can be contente in their vocation, with a good wyl. For we haue brought nothynge into the worlde, and we can carye nothynge awaye. Wherefore yf we haue neceſſary lye meate and drynke and where wythe all for to couer vs, let vs ſo be contented.
               Beholde nowe hytherto I haue declared in ordre the tenne commaundementes of God vnto you, although it be but meanely, which ſeing that they

be beyonde mannes ſtrength or anye mannes power to obſerue them, & kepe them accordingly: yet let vs pray vnto the holy ghoſte, that he wolde bothe renewe and puryfie oure herte that we may not onely kepe them with our extery our doynges, but alſo with our inwarde affection & wyl. So be it.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The Declaration of our belief, called in laten, ſimbolum apostolicum.
            
            
               The firſte houſholde Sermon of god the father, and the creation of all thynges.
               
                  YE haue heard, euen of late well beloued Chyldrenne, thoſe thynges whiche god doth require of you in his x. commaundementes, yea euen of vs all, and ſeyng that thoſe thynges which he requyrethe of vs can not be performed of vs, for bycauſe of the fragilytie and weakenes of our ſtrength for Chriſte ſaith, Ihon the 7. Chapter. None of you do perform the lawe with your deades, he is onely to be knowen of vs, which giueth power, that we may do thoſe thynges, whiche of our ſelues can not be done, he is trewlye God of whome what ſo euer is neceſſary for vs to be knowen, that ſame is in oure belief comprehended, which belief, that it may be vnderſtande ſome what of youe

I wyll dilygently declare it. And for yt I wolde open to you ſome waye, vnto thoſe thynges which we nowe take in hande. I gyue you knowledg that there is one god, as it doth appeare in ye fyrſte Epiſtle to the Corinthians, the 8. Chapter, that is to ſaye, one eſſence, or ſpirituall ſubſtaunce, for god is a ſpirite. Ihon the 4. Chapter. And truely that ſame deuyne eſſence or ſpirituall ſubſtance is atributed to their perſons, God the father. God the ſonne, and God the holy ghoſte. Matthew the laſte Chapter.
               So that thoſe thre perſons be equallye euerlaſtynge, of an infynite power, of an infynite wiſedome, of an infinyte goodneſſe &c. Now trewly what god is, is ſhewed in the fyrſt begynnynge of ye beliefe, when a Chriſtian man ſayth. I beleue in God the father almyghtie maker of heuen and earth. Let vs begynne, and examyne euerye worde: a Chriſtian man ſayth. I do beleue, we do beleue trewly thoſe thynges which be not preſent before our eyes, for fayth is an argumente of thynges hoped for, and a declaration of thoſe thinges that do not

appeare, to the Hebrues the 11. Chapter we do beleue in god, and what is god? God is a ſpirituall ſubſtaunce, for god is a ſpiryt, Ihon the 4. our god is all yt thinge to the whiche we haue a confydence with all oure herte, for if we haue a confidence to the trewe god / we are in a good caſe: if we haue a confydence to a falſe god, or to mammon, or to anye other god, we do procure the euerlaſting payne of our vngodlyneſſe. Wherfore ſayth a Chriſtian man, I beleue in god, and not ſimplye, I beleue god, beholde heare Gregorie Nazyanzene, which in his fyrſte boke of the worde of god writeth, to beleue in any thing / doth properly perteyn vnto the godhead.
               To beleue therfore in god, is to beleue / and to haue aſure confidence in his deuine ſubſtaunce, and euerlaſtynge ſubſtaunce which hath neyther begynyng nor endynge. And god is the name of ye deuine maieſty. And for that that we do ſay more ouer in our beliefe, that we do beleue not onelye in god, but in god the father, it is the beclaration of a greate

fayth, for he that doth beleue god to be the father, to hym, is promyſed al thyng of god, and loketh for all thynge of god, for yf the ſonne hath a confydence that he ſhall obteyne all thynge of his yearthly father, how mothe more ought we to haue a confydence that we ſhall obteine all thynges, of god the father, for why? as Chriſte ſayth hym ſelfe, if you which be euyll, can gyue your Chyldren good gyftes, how moch more, royll the father of heauen gyue, yf ye ſhal aſke of hym? Matthew, the 6. Chapter What meaneth this, that a chriſtyan man ſaythe. I beleue in god, the father almightie? Truly nothynge elſe, then I beleue in God, and alſo in god the father, which can do all thynge that he wyll, to whome there is nothynge impoſſible. And it folweth, the maker of heauen and yearth, that is to ſaye, I beleue in god, whiche hath create heauen and yearthe, and all thynge, which eyther is ſene in heauē, or in earth whiche be the ſonne, the Moone, the ſterres innumerable, the Cloudes / the foules, the fyſſhes, and all kynde of beaſtes. And god ye father hath not brought

fourthe the yearthe naked, but garnyſſhed it with greate varyetie of all thynges, corne, flowers, graſſe, and with dyuerſe kyndes of beaſtes. And we ought not to thynke, that god hath onely once created all theſe thynges, with the word (for he ſayde, and they were made) whiche we ſee as well in heauen, as in earth and ſo leaue in creatyng of thynges, but we ought to prynte this in our remembraunce, that yet God dothe create all thynges, in euery momente, of the whyche we haue neade of, in thys preſente lyfe, for Chriſt ſayth Ihon the 5. Chapter, my father dothe worke euen at thys tyme, & I alſo. And the C. lxiiij. Pſalm. Thou openynge thy hande, all be fulfylled wyth plentyfulnes.
               And god dothe not create as yet ſoomoche, but yet for all that all thoſe thynges, whiche haue bene create frome the begynnynge, he doth dayly encreace wt hys power, yea, and alſo kepe with hys worde, and is preſente wyth all thynges that be created, for ſo god makethe the pearthe frutefull: ſendynge rayne frome heauen, and kepeth the frutefulnes therof,

leaſte thoſe whiche it bryngeth forth, ſhoulde peryſſhe wyth anye tempeſtes, but that it ſhoulde retourne to our vſe, for that thynge that I ſaye of the earth I wyll to be ſpoken alſo of other thynges.
               Wherefore, Saincte Paul ſaithe to the Colloſſians. the 3. Chapter. All thynges ſtande by hym, and in the 2. Chapter Alſo, to the Epheſians, the firſt chap. he doth after the counſels of his wyll. Mat. the 10. Two ſparowes be ſoulde for a farthynge, and one of them falleth not upon the earth, witout the heauenly father. But this article in his kinde, doth require this thinge, that we ſhould beleue in god the father, nowe if euerye man will examine him ſelfe, he ſhal perceiue in hym ſelfe alſo many good thynges that be priuate, for he ſhal perceyue that he is a man indewed with reaſon, & healthful in his body, to haue the power to giue, and to receiue, and to floriſſhe in the quickenes of his mēbres, & can go hither and thither, & hath a perfecte ſighte & can heare very wel, & to get his lyuing But who can reherſe thoſe benefites

whiche floriſſheth often tymes in one maner, I pray the, from whence do they come? forſooth euen from God, which hath created by his almyghtifulneſſe al theſe thinges, and daily doth create, and kepeth thoſe that be created, and gyueth al thinges. Therefore to beleue in God the father is to perſwade with his herte that al which thou haſte, thou haſt them of god. The firſte Epiſtle to the Corinthians the 5. Chapt. And that god hath for thy cauſe created al thinges, whiche either be in heauen or earth, and dailye doth create. And thou canſt not content thy ſelfe with theſe thinges, but he alſo gentely deliuereth the frō al euils. And doth adioine vnto the his holy Aungels that they may fight for the againſte the aſſaultes of the deuill. And he dothe all theſe thinges, for bicauſe he is thy father by his onely goodnes and mercie, and of none of thy deſeruinges. And thoumaiſt thinke to thy ſelfe that thou ſhalt haue of him all thinges, ſeing yt he is almightie. And thou cauſte wiſſhe nothinge, or thinke any thinge, but ſtraight way if it pleaſeth him, he may graunt it the.
               
                  
Let vs be thankefull, welbeloued chylbren, vnto god the father, for hys greate goodneſſe and mercye towardes vs myſerable ſynners. And let vs neuer more diſpayer, but when we haue ſo heauenlye a father, both gentell, mercyfull, and allmyghtye, which will graunte to all thoſe that doo aſke of him aboundauntlye all thynges whiche they ſhall haue nede of, for ye know yt wordes of Chriſt which I reherſed a lytle before Mathew the 6. chapter, if you therfore ſeyng that ye be euyl, do knowe to giue to your chyldrē good gyftes: how moch more youre father which is in heauen, ſhal gyue, yf youe aſke of him So be it.
            
            
               
               The Seconde houſholde ſermon of the beliefe.
               YE haue harde now welbeloued chyldren, what god the father is, & what we ought to beleue of him, the voice that he ſente from heauen do declare. Now ſeyng that Ihon in his firſt epiſtle the 2. chapter ſayth, who ſo euer denieth the ſonne, he hath not the father. And in ye laſt chapter, who ſo euer hath ye ſonne, hath lyfe, who ſo euer hath not the ſonne of god, hath not lyfe, furtheremore ye ought to knowe, what is ye ſonne of god and what we ſhulde beleue of him, ther fore it foloweth, I beleue in Ieſu Chriſt the onely ſonne of god, when I ſaye I beleue. I do not ſygnifye onelye, that I beleue, that Chriſt is the ſonne of god. Mathew the 8. chapter, for that the denyls of hell do beleue, ſaynte Iames, ye 2. Chapter. But this I will it to ſignify that I haue the ſonne of god, and that thoſe thynges which be ſpoken of the ſon of god, be turned into ye commoditie & vtilite of my doyng, and euerie priuate mans, for whye. This is my very fayth in Ieſus Chriſt, which iuſtifieth a man.

Thoſe things which truely be ſpoken of Chriſt, yt he is Ieſus, for why he maketh ſafe his people frō their ſinnes. Matth. ye 1. Chater. And that he is Chriſt, yt is the anoynted of god, yt is the Kyng & Priſt, kyng truely for yt vnto hym is gyuen al power, both in heauen & in earth, Mat. the laſt chapter, and yt he is the Pryſt for ye he offered him ſelf for our ſynnes. He brues the 6. chapter. And for yt he doth make interſeſſion for vs vntoo ye father Romayns ye 7. Chap. And beſydes thoſe do I beleue, yt the ſame Ieſus Chriſt is ye ſonne of god, & truely, ye onely ſon. For whye, one Chriſt is the onely & naturall ſonne of god: wt out begynnyng gotten of the father, as well euerlaſting, almightie / as god the father, furthermore, that Chriſte is ye verie and euerlaſtinge Son of god, and very god wt veri god the father as many other places of holy ſcripture as this which is in the firſt Epiſtle of S. Paul to ye corinthians yt 10. Chap. do wel declare. And theſe be ye wordes of S. Paul. Let vs not tempte Criſte as in lyke caſe ſome of thē did tempt hym: & they were kylled of Serpentes. Now

Moiſes ye 4. boke ye 14. Chap. ſaith. The lord ſaith. Al thoſe which haue tempted me now ten times, & haue not obeied vnto my voice: thei ſhal not ſee ye lande &c. Where ye voice of the lord, or ye Lorde of al creatures is put; which voice doth agree & is attributed to ye only euerlaſting on
                     •
                  
                  ▪ and very god. Where alſo Moyſes ſayth. The lord of al creatures, that is to ſey, he calleth him very God, the people haue tēpted me x. tymes, bye & by, Paul declareth who was yt god, which ye people did tēpt, & he declareth yt it was chriſt whiche verylie was not yet at yt tyme borne of ye virgin Mary. Wherefore, it was truely ſpoken yt Chriſt was that mā of whō Moyſes ſpake, yt he was truely God: become both Chriſt ye Son of god, wt out beginnyng, borne of ye father, & yet ſōe what deſtinct frō ye father / but of this thing we haue ſufficiently declared to you.
            
         
      
      
         
            Prynted at Ippiſwich by Ihon Oſivē
            
         
         
            Cum priuilegio ad Imprimendum ſolum.
         
         
            The reſt of the ſermons ſhalbe printed ſhortlye.
            
         
      
   