
      
         
            
            
            THE TIMES, PLACES, AND Perſons of the holie Scripture.
            Otherwiſe entituled, THE GENERALL VIEW OF THE HOLY Scriptures.
            AT LONDON, ¶ Printed by Thomas Purfoot, for Richard Ockould. 1607.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR IOHN Brograue Knight, his Maieſties Atturney generall of the Duchy of Lancaſter.
            
               RIght Worſhipfull, the written copie of this booke comming to my hands, was thought worthy the preſſe by men of good iudgement and learning, for that it might bee profitable to many, aſwell thoſe that intend the ſtudie and profeſsion of Diuinitie, as to all other good Chriſtians. The Author of the booke is vncertaine to me: but his worke manifeſteth, that he was learned, and religious: which mooued me (though with no ſmall charge) to impart the ſame to all, and to make it publike. And for that the ſame wanteth the Authors name, I thought fit it ſhould not want a Patron: neither knew I any other more worthy, to whom I might recommend the Patronage thereof, than your worſhip, in regard of that ſeruice, wherein I ſtand bound to your ſelfe, and that moſt worthy ſocietie of Greyes Inne. It may pleaſe you therefore to accept the ſame in good part. And I ſhall euer remaine yours to be commanded.
            
               Richard Ockould.
            
         
         
            
            THE AVTHORS EPISTLE TO THE CHRIſtian Reader,
            
               HAuing long purpoſed to bring into one frame, The generall view of the holy Scripture; and reſoluing the eaſe would been laying before your eyes, The Times, Places, and principall Perſons mentioned in Moſes, and ſcattered through the Prophets: Opportunitie now fitting my purpoſe, I thought it good by this Tract, to manifeſt the plainneſſe of the Truth, which all either doe, or ought to know, that would enioy eternall happineſſe, by knitting into one bodie, the ioynts of Histories: The perfect vnderſtanding whereof, giueth light to the blind, eyes to the ignorant, and iudgment to ſuch as willingly embrace the knowledge of heauenly wiſedome.
         
      
      
         
            
            A GENERALL VIEW OF THE HOLY SCRIPTVRES.
            
               
                  
                     Iehouah our God, Iehouah is one:Deut. 6.4
                     
                  
                  Deut. 6.4.
                  
               
            
            Iehouah, Is a name of great force, to driue vs to the due reuerence of Gods eternall Maieſtie: for it containeth the Wiſedome, Power, and Eternitie of God.
            
               His Wiſedome, In giuing a name vnto himſelfe anſwerable to the glorie of his Maieſtie. This name was had in great reuerence among the Iewes: they trembled to name or read it, but vſed the name Adoni, Lord. After their comming from Babel, they neuer vſed the name Iehouah, but a name of twelue Letters, containing Father, Sonne, and holy ſpirit. Iehouah hath in it the fiue Vowels, which are the ſinewes of all tongues. And as without them no tongue can be expreſſed: ſo without the true knowledge of Iehouah, no fleſh can be ſaued. It ſignifieth, Praiſe me the eternall God; it containeth in it Father, Sonne, and holy Ghoſt.
            
            
               
               His Power, In that from Iehouah all Creatures haue their breathing, and their being, which alſo in Iehouah is cloſely expreſſed. For as it conſiſteth of fiue Vowels: ſo alſo hath it two hh, which ſchollers call aſpirations, or breathings: which two aſpirations make vp the number of 7, which is the number of the Sabbath. Saint Paul, cloſely alluding to the name of Iehouah, ſayth, That from him we haue our breathing, and our being, and in Eſay 57. the Lord ſaith, The blaſting goeth forth from me and is included in the bodie: I made the breath. So often therefore as we breath, we are to remember the power and maieſty of Iehouah.
            
            
               His Eternity, Is cloſely expreſſed in theſe 3. letters

                  י
                  ו
                  ה
               
whoſe terminations are

                  
                     Iod,
                  
                  
                     
                        Ʋaw,
                  
                  
                     He,
                  
               
is a ſigne of the

                  future tenſe
                  preſen tenſe
                  preterperfect tenſe.
               
            
            
               This is made plaine in Apo. 1. who
               
                  was,
                  is,
                  will be to come.
               
            
            
               Our God.
               HErein is expreſſed the humanitie of Chriſt: for it is neither added to the Father the firſt perſon in trinitie, nor to the holy Ghoſt the third perſon; but to the Sonne the ſecond perſon, who was to become ours by taking our nature vpon him. Some hold it not to bee meant of the humanitie of Chriſt, but for a word of ſeparation of the God of the Iewes, from the gods of the Gentiles.
               To remooue ſuch abſurditie, the holy Ghoſt in Marke 13. (when there was no difference between the Iew and the Gentile) repeateth the verie wordes of Moſes, Deut. 6. The Lord our God, the Lord is one,
                  
thriſe naming God, as commaunding vs thereby to vnderſtand Father, Sonne, and holy ſpirit. For this is alwayes to bee obſerued, whatſoeuer God ſpeaketh of himſelfe, is to bee taken in the heauenlyeſt vnderſtanding that can be made of it.
            
            
               Iehouah our God, Iehouah is one.
               There be three in heauen, the

                     
                        Father,
                     
                     
                        Word, and
                     
                        holy Spirit:
                     
                  
                  And theſe Three are one, 1. Ioh. 5.7.
               THe Trinitie is heere deſcribed to be one vnited God-head, diſtinguiſhable in perſons, but vndiuidable in coeternitie, one in three, and three in one, God who created, redeemed, and ſanctified all: one onely wiſe God, who was ſhewed in the fleſh, was iuſtified in the ſpirite, was ſeene among Angels, was preached to the Gentiles, was beleeued of the world, and receiued vp in glorie, 1. Timothy. 3. Which to know, is the firſt and chiefeſt point of all ſaluation, as Iohn 17.3. This is eternall life to knowe the Father, and him whome hee hath ſent, Ieſus Chriſt; which muſt be the true vnderſtanding of the Bible, as Iohn 5.39. Search the Scriptures, and in them yee ſhall finde eternall life.
               
               Some will ſay, it is ynough to know Chriſt crucified; Pilate, Herod, and Iudas the Traytor, knewe that: yet went to eternall deſtruction. Wherefore ſaluation conſiſteth not in outward knowledge, but in renewing the ſpirit of our vnderſtanding, which ſtandeth firſt in the knowledge and feare of God, then in the knowing of our ſelues, which are the firſt two ſteppes to ſaluation: for true knowledge is the mother of godlyneſſe. And as the eye is the light of the body, ſo is vnderſtanding the light of the minde. This a man hauing truly learned, hee is to meditate of the graces of Chriſt offered vnto vs by his word.
            
         
         
            
            God hath choſen vs in Chriſt, before the foundation of the world, &c.
            
               HErein wee are to conſider the louing kindneſſe of God to exceed our deſerts, in louing vs to ſaluation before wee were. The Papiſts hold merite of ſaluation, which cannot any way hold, ſeeing God of his vnſpeakable grace hath elected vs vnto ſaluation before wee knew him.
            
            
               This miſterie of gods Election is not fully receiued of all, becauſe men take not words of ſcripture in their proper ſenſe as they are layd downe.
            
            
               Election, is the eternall counſell of God for the ſauing and reiecting of ſome before the beginning of the world. The Heathen neuer receiued comfort by this: for being told before of thinges afterward to come to paſſe, they could not knowe the reaſon, but thought that the actions of men were gouerned by the motions of ſtarres, and the courſe of nature, and not by the decree or forepurpoſe of God, who worketh euerie thing according to the counſell of his owne will, and not according to our reaſon.
            
            
               Then ſome will ſay, If God decreeth euerie thing, why puniſheth hee any thing? It is anſwered, That puniſhment commeth from God by the iuſt deſert of the ranckor of mans minde. Election is of his free grace which hee beſtoweth vpon whome he will, as he ſaith, I will haue mercie, on whome I will haue mercie.
            
               Therefore the firſt thing wee ought to knowe is our Election; the laſt is true holyneſſe.
            
            
               That this Election or louing kindneſſe of God towards vs, is of the will of God, according to the counſell of his owne will, and not drawne from him by force, by helpe of Saints, or as being by workes meritorious of the ſame, it may appeare.
            
            
               
               Eſay 43. Abraham knoweth vs not, neither is Iſrael acquainted with vs, but thou Lord art our Father and Redeemer, and of very louing kindneſſe: thou haſt redeemed vs, thy name is euerlaſting. Rom. 8.
               
                  Rom. 8.34. Eſay 43.25.
                It is Chriſt onely that maketh interceſsion for vs. Eſay 43. I am he onely, that for mine owne ſelues ſake, doe away thine offences, and forget thy ſinnes: For what haſt thou for thee to make thee righteous? Thy firſt father offended ſore, and thy rulers haue ſinned againſt mee. Thou art like to a thing of naught, thy time paſseth away like a ſhadowe. Iere. I loue thee with an euerlaſting loue: therefore by my mercy haue I drawne thee vnto mee, and Iohn 6.
               
                  Ioh. 6.44.
                No man can come to me, except the father draw him, as it is written. Eſay 54. They ſhall bee all taught of God. Eſay 26. Lord thou haſt wrought all our workes. Phil. 2. It is God that worketh in you, both the will, and alſo the deed:
                  Phil. 2.13. 2. Cor. 3.5.
                euen of his good will. 2. Cor. 3. Wee are not ſufficient of our ſelues, to thinke any thing as of our ſelues; but if wee bee able, the ſame commeth of God, which made vs able. Eſay 51.12. Yea, I euen,
                  Eſay 51.12.
                I am he that in all things giueth you conſolation.
            
               Pſal. 130. For with the Lord there is mercy,
                  Pſal. 130.7.
                and with him is plenteous redemption.
            
               1. Pet. 1. We are elect, according to the foreknowledge of God the father,
                  1. Pet. 1.2.
                through the ſanctifying of the ſpirit vnto obedience, and ſprinckling the blood of Ieſus Chriſt.
            
               Pſal. 90. Before the mountaines were brought foorth, or euer the earth and the world were made, thou art our God, from euerlaſting to euerlasting;
                  Pſal. 90.2.3
                thou turnest man vnto duſt, and ſayeſt, returne yee ſonnes of Adam.
            
               Rom. 9. Before the children were borne,
                  Rom. 9.11.
                and when they had done neither good nor euill, that the purpoſe of God might ſtand, not by workes, but by the Caller: it was ſayd, The greater ſhall ſerue the leſſer, as it is written.
            
               Mal. 3. Iacob haue I loued, Eſau haue I hated.
                  Malach. 1.2.3.
               
            
            
               Iohn 13. I know whom I haue choſen.
                  Iohn-13.18.
               
            
            
               Pſal. 135. Whatſoeuer the Lord pleaſed, that did he in heauen and in earth,
                  Pſal. 135.6.
                and in the ſea, and in all deepe places.
            
               Rom. 11. There is a remnant left according to the election of grace.
                  Rom. 11.5.6.
                If it be of grace, then it is not now of workes: for then grace is no more grace. But if it be of workes, then is it now no grace, what then? Iſrael hath not obtained that which he ſeeketh, but the election hath obtained it.
            
               2. Theſ. 2. We are bound to giue thankes alwayes to God,
                  2. Theſ. 2.13.
                becauſe that God hath from the beginning choſen vs to ſaluation, through ſanctifying of the ſpirit: and through beleeuing of the truth, to obtaine the glory of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
            
               Rom. 8. Moreouer, whom hee appointed before, them alſo hee called.
                  Rom. 8.30.
                And whom he hath called, them alſo he iuſtified: and whom he iuſtified, them hee alſo glorified.
            
               
               Now followeth the effect of Election, either in reſpect of the
               
                  Elect,
                  
                     or Reiect.
               
            
            
               And firſt for the Elect.
               
               
                  THe Elect, whome God in his mercie hath ſaued for his righteouſnes ſake, and not for their deſerts, he guideth by the grace of his holy ſpirit,
                  
                     Rom. 8.14.
                   
                  as, Rom. 8. As many as are led by the ſpirit of God, they are the Sons of God. Eſay. 43. All thoſe that are called by my name, I haue created, faſhioned, and made for my honour. Yet he leaueth them ſometimes vnto themſelues, that they may acknowledge the weaknes of their owne nature, as Noah, Lot, Iacob, Dauid, Salomon, Peter and others,
                  
                     Eſay. 5 4.7.8.10.
                   
                  but neuer ſuffereth them to fall quite away, as appeareth Eſay. 54. A little while haue I forſaken thee, but with great mercie will I take thee vp vnto me. When I was angrie with thee, I hid my face from thee, for a little ſeaſon, but through euerlaſting mercie haue I redeemed thee, ſaith the Lord thy Redeemer. The mountaines ſhall moue, and the hils ſhall fall downe, but my louing kindnes ſhall not mooue, and the bond of my peace ſhall not fall downe from thee, ſaith the lord thy mercifull louer.
               
                  
                     Pſal. 37.33.34.
                  
                  Pſalme. 37. The lord ordereth a good mans going, and maketh his way acceptable vnto himſelfe, though he fall hee ſhall not be caſt away, for the lord vpholdeth him with his hand.
               
                  
                     Pſalm. 103.10.11.
                  
                  Pſalme. 103. He dealeth not with them after their ſins, nor rewardeth them according to their wickednes; but looke how the heauen is in compariſon of the earth, ſo great is his mercie towards them that feare him, for he knoweth whereof they be made,
                     Pſal. 103.14.
                   and he remembreth that they are but duſt. He ſaueth their life from deſtruction, and crowneth them with mercie and louing kindnes.
               
                  
                     Eſay. 54.17.
                  
                  Eſay. 54. Lo, this is the heritage of the lords ſeruants, and their righteouſnes commeth of me, ſaith the lord.
               
                  The Reiect, he leaueth to their owne ſelues, hardening their hearts, that hee may haue occaſion of Iudgement againſt them. Eſay. 57.
                  
                     Eſay. 57.20.
                   They are like to the raging Sea, that cannot reſt, whoſe water fometh with the myre and grauell, for they haue no peace with God. The winde ſhall blowe them forth, and vanitie ſhall take them all away: they are like to duſt before the winde, and like to the chaffe in a ſummer floore.
               
                  
                     Pſal. 73.4.5.6
                  
                  Pſal. 73. The lord ſuffereth them to come in no perrill of death, but are lustie and stronge, they come in no daunger like other folke, neither are

they plagued like other men, and this is the cauſe that they be ſo holden with pride, and ouerwhelmed with crueltie; their eyes ſwell for fatneſse, and they doe euen what they luſt. They corrupt others, and ſpeake of wicked blaſphemie: their talking is againſt the moſt higheſt, Tuſh (ſay they) how ſhall God perceive it? is their knowledge in the moſt higheſt? Loe, theſe are the vngodly, and theſe haue riches in poſeſsion. Such were Kaine, the wicked mockers before the floode, Cham, the builders of Babel the vncleane Cities, Iſmael, Eſau, Pharaoh, Moab, Ammon, The wicked oppreſſors, Saul, Abſalom, the Kings of Iſrael, and the Kings of Babel, Antiochus, the vild Herod, Pilate, and Iudas the traitour, & many others, who brought vpon themſelues iuſt cauſe of eternall condemnation.
               
               
                  Pſal. 73. The Lord hath ſet them in ſlipperie places,
                     Pſal. 73.18.19.20.
                   and caſteth them downe and deſtroyeth them. Oh, how ſuddenly doe they conſume and periſh, and come to a fearefull end? Yea, euen like as a dreame doth hee make their image to vaniſh.
               
                  Some foliſhly diſpute, why God hath not ſaued all things, ſeeing he made all? they are anſwered, Ier. 12. The Lord is more righteous then that he ſhould be diſputed with. Ier. 18. They are in the hand of the Lord,
                     Iere. 12.1. Iere. 18.6.
                   as the clay in the hand of the potter.
               
                  Rom. 9. God maketh of one lumpe of clay, one veſsell to honor,
                     Ro. 9.21.22.
                   and another to diſhonour. What if God, willing to ſhew his wrath, and to make his power knowen, ſuffereth with long patience the veſſels of wrath appointed to deſtruction? What art thou that diſputeſt with God?
               
                  Eſay 45. It is I that created the light and the darkeneſſe,
                     Eſay 45.7.8.9.10.
                   I make peace and trouble, euen I the Lord doe all theſe things. Woe bee vnto him that ſtriueth with his maker, the potſherd with the potter, ſaith the clay to the potter, what makeſt thou? or thy worke ſerueth for nothing? Woe be vnto him that ſaith vnto his father, why begetteſt thou? and to his mother, why bearest thou? Thus ſaith the Lord, euen the holy one, and maker of Iſrael.
               
                  That their ſinne is the cauſe of their Condemnation,
                  
                  And God not the author thereof.
               
               
                  Prou. 29. The ſinne of the wicked, is their owne ſnare.
                     Prou-29.6.
                  
               
               
                  Eſay. 50. For your offences are you ſold, and becauſe of your tranſgreſsion,
                     Eſay 50.1.
                   is your mother forſaken.
               
                  Eſay. 49. Their miſdeeds haue ſeparated them from their God, and their ſinnes hath hid his face from them, that hee heareth them not. They hope in vaine things, imagining deceit, and bringing forth euill, they breed Cockatrices egges, and weaue the ſpiders webbe: who ſo eateth of their egges dieth, but if one treade vpon them, there commeth vp a Serpent: their deeds are the deeds of wickednes, & the worke of robbery is in their hands, their feet run to euil,

they make haſte to ſhed innocent blood, all their counſels are wicked: harme, and deſtruction, are in their wayes, but the way of peace they haue not knowen, in their goings there is no equity, their waies are ſo crooked, that whoſoeuer goeth therein, knoweth of no peace: and this is the cauſe. They looke for light, and loe it is darkenes. They grope like the blind vpon the wall, euen as one that hath no eyes. They roare like Beares, and mourne like Doues, looking for health, but it is farre from them; for their offences are many, and their ſinnes teſtifie against the Lord. They will not confeſse and acknowledge their ſinnes, but doe amiſse, tranſgreſse, and diſsemble againſt the Lord: and fall away from their God, vſing preſumptuous, and traiterous imaginations in their hearts, caſting away equitie, truth, and righteouſneſſe, but the Lord holdeth himſelfe by his owne power, and he ſuſtaineth him by his owne righteouſneſſe, he putteth on wrath in ſteed of clothing, and taketh iealouſie about him for a cloake, like as when a man goeth forth wrathfully to recompence his enemies, and to be auenged of his aduerſaries. But vnto Sion hee is a Redeemer, and of Iacob which turne from their wickedneſſe, he is a Sauiour, and he will giue them an euerlaſting name that ſhall not periſh.
               
                  Eſay 56. Thus ſaith the high and excellent, euen he that dwelleth in eternitie, whoſe name is the holy one, I dwell high aboue: and in the ſanctuarie, and with him alſo, that is of a contrite and humble ſpirit, doe I pitch my habitation.
               
                  
                     Pſal. 104.35.
                  
                  Pſal. 104. As for ſinners they ſhall be conſumed out of the earth, and the vngodly ſpall come to an end.
               
                  
                     Pſal. 59.12.
                  
                  Pſal. 59. For the ſinne of their mouth, and for the words of their lippes, they ſhall be taken in their pride, and why? their preaching is of curſing and lyes.
               
                  
                     Pſal. 62.4.
                  
                  Pſal. 62. Their deuiſe is onely how to put him out, whom God hath exalted, their delight is in lies, they giue good words with their mouth, but curſe with their heart: for they perſecute him whom the Lord hath ſmitten. And they talke how they may vexe him, whom he hath wounded.
               
                  
                     2. Theſ. 2.11.12.
                  
                  2. Theſ. 2. Therefore ſhall the Lord ſend them ſtrong deluſions, that all they might bee damned which beleeued not the truth, but had pleaſure in vnrighteouſneſſe, and obeyed not the Goſpel of our Lord Ieſus. With euerlaſting damnation ſhall they be puniſhed from the preſence of the Lord, and from the preſence of his power.
               
                  
                     Pſal. 51.4.
                  
                  Pſal. 51. That hee may bee iustified in his ſayings, and cleare when hee iudgeth.
            
            
               
               
                  
                     
                        EPHESIANS 1.10.
                     
                     
                        ❧ That in the fulneſſe of time, all ſhould be brought vnder one head.
                  
               
               
                  FVlneſse of time, is here taken for the time of Chriſts death, whoſe death ſhould accompliſh the Ceremonie & oblation, and breake downe the wall betweene the Iew and the Gentile, when men ſhould looke no longer for ſaluation onely from Ieruſalem, but ſhould prayſe God euery where; their hearts being aſſured, that they were members of Chriſt the head. The heathen not taking notice of this, could neuer come to ſaluation. The blind Iewes not marking this, ioyned with Chittim in the ſecond degree, (which are the Romanes) To crucifie Chriſt, the King of the most Holy; becauſe hee teſtified of himſelfe, that he was that day Starre which was to appeare, That Scepter that ſhould daſh all the ſonnes of Seth, The Ladder by whom the Angels of God aſcended and deſcended, Shiloh, Emmanuel, the Lion of the tribe of Iuda, The roote of Ieſsay, The Stone which the builders refuſed, The true Manna, That ſpirituall Rocke, that would giue waters of life, The true Bread that came downe from heauen, He vnto whom the Crowne and Diademe did belong, Michael who thought it no robberie to bee equall with God, The Stone that did punne Nebuchadnetzars Image to duſt, Palmoni the ſecret Numberer, He who waieth, numbreth and diuideth. The great ſhepheard of his ſheepe, The true Vine, from whoſe ſides doe proceed wine of euerlaſting life, He that came to doe the will of his Father.
               Iohn 4.10. He that met with the woman of Samaria at Iacobs well, to whom he promiſed euerliuing water. The Stumbling Blocke to the Iewes, The Light to the Gentiles, The Eye to the blind, And an Helpe to the lame: For that is his name, God is my ſtrength and my righteouſneſſe, &c. Wherefore he hath made them Vagabonds ouer the whole earth, and hath brought that Abhomination of Deſolation vpon them, whereby their Citie and Sanctuarie is deſtroyed: and why? becauſe they would not know the Fulneſſe of time, the day of ſaluation. The Crane, the Swallow, and the Turtle Doue doe know their time, but my people will not know the time of my comming, ſaith the Lord. Alſo our Sauiour Chriſt ſaith, Woe bee vnto you Scribes and Phariſes, Hipocrites: You can diſcerne the wind and the weather, but you know not the time of the comming of the ſon of man, which they might haue knowne from Daniel 9. Where the Angel Gabriel ſaith, 70. ſeuens, or 490. yeeres are determined for the death of Chriſt the King of the moſt Holy, to finiſh ſinne,

to reconcile iniquity, to bring in Iuſtice, to ſeale the viſion and Prophet, and to annoint the moſt Holy.
               
               By which we are conſtrained highly to eſteeme of the knowledge of the times: for they are of as great force to the vnderſtading of the Bible, as the ſtarres are in the heauens for giuing of light. No part of the Bible but conſiſteth of time, place, or perſon. If of time as one third part, then the knowledge thereof is to be embraced, and in no reſpect to be deſpiſed, as lightly regarding the vſe thereof, leſt ſtriuing for darkneſſe, we become the children of darkeneſſe, and ſo looſe the light of eternall life, as the Iewes and Romanes did, whoſe recompence hath followed. The one depriued of their earthly glory, the other aduanced to glory to be a ſtaine of eternall damnation.
            
         
         
            The Treatiſe of Time.
            
               
                  
                     IOHN 1.
                  
                  In the beginning was the word, &c.
               
            
            
               THeſe words, In the beginning, are the firſt wordes of the old Teſtament, whoſe firſt word in Hebrew is Bera, which conſiſteth, according to the Hebrews, of three letters, which cloſely containe in them Father, Sonne, & Holy Ghoſt: as ב. for Ben, which ſignifieth Son, א. for Abba, which is Father: & .ר. for Rouach Hachodeſh, which is the Holy ſpirit. Thus the Trinitie is cloſely contained in the firſt word, but in the firſt verſe is expreſſed in open words.
            
               In the beginning God made heauen and earth, and the ſpirit of God moued vpon the waters, and God ſaid, let their be light. This is expounded in Iohn 1. in theſe words. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and that word was God; ſhewing, that Word in this place is taken for the Sonne of God, by whom he made the world, as Iohn 1. By him were all things created. And Epheſ. 3. God made all things by his Sonne, who ruleth all things by his mighty power. Wherefore Chriſt in the dayes of his fleſh, choſe the trade of a Carpenter, Iohn 6. and in Eſay 43. It is ſaid, This Record you muſt beare me your ſelues, ſaith the Lord, that I am

God, and euen he I am from the beginning, I doe the worke, and who ſhall let it? Thus ſaith the Lord, the holy one our Redeemer. Wherein is diſtinctly expreſſed, Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghoſt.
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        IOHN. 1.
                     
                     
                        ❧ He was the Light, and that Light was the Life of man.
                  
               
               LIfe and Light is not here carnally meant, but ſpiritually: to which two things, Aarons Iewell of Vrim and Thummim had a full relation. Vrim ſignifieth light of the mind, Thummim perfection of vertue, which bringeth life to the ſoule.
               
                  Chriſt is the true light that lighteth euery man.Iohn 1.9. And hee that abideth in this light, hath euerlaſting life. God is light, and in him there is no darknes at all. If we walke in light, euen as he is light,1. Iohn 1.5. then haue we fellowſhip with him, and the blood of Ieſus Chriſt ſhall giue vs life, and cleanſe vs from our ſinne. We the Gentiles were darknes, but now are light in the Lord. Epheſ. 5.8. The great Schollers of the Iewes, ſpake euen in the ſame words.
               
                  Philo the Iew commenteth vpon theſe wordes, ſaying: God is the Soueraigne begetter, and next to him is the Word of God. Alſo there are two firſts: the one is Gods word, and the other is God, which is afore the Word, and the ſame word is the beginning and the end, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   of his good pleaſure, intent, or will. And in another place: Like as a Citie (ſaith he) whereof the platforme is but yet ſet downe in the mind of the builder, hath no being elſe where, but in the builder: ſo this world had no being elſe where, then in the Word of God, which ordained all things. And this is not the meaning of me only, but alſo of Moſes himſelfe. And in another place: This word (ſaith he) is Gods yonger ſonne: but as for the elder ſonne, he cannot bee comprehended but in vnderſtanding: for he it is who by prerogatiue of elderſhip abideth with the Father. And againe, The Word is the Place, the Temple, and the dwelling houſe of God, becauſe the Word is the only thing that can containe him: and to ſhew the greatnes of this word, he could skarce tell what names to giue it. Hee calleth it the booke wherin all eſſences of all things that are in the whole world, are written and printed.
               
                  The

                     
                        Perfect patterne of the word,
                     
                     
                        Day ſunne that is to be ſeene, but onely of the mind,
                     
                     
                        Prince of Angels,
                     
                     
                        Firſt borne of God,
                     
                     
                        Shepheard of his flocke,
                     
                     
                        Chiefe high Prieſt of the world,
                     
                     
                        Manna of mens ſoules,
                     
                     
                        Wiſedome of God,
                     
                     
                        Perfecting of the Higheſt,
                     
                     
                        Inſtrument whereby God created the world,
                     
                     
                        Altogether Light, God, and the Beer that is of himſelfe.
                     
                  
               
               And he ſaith further, that this Word is the expreſſe print or ſtampe of God, and euerlaſting, as God himſelfe is.
               
                  R. Azariel, calleth him Spirit, Word, and Voice: ſaying, The Spirit bringeth foorth the Word and the Voice, but not by ſpeech of the tongue, or by breathing after the maner of men: and theſe three be one Spirit, to wit, one God, one Spirit rightly liuing: bleſſed be he and his name, who liueth for euer and euer. Spirit, Word and Voice: that is to ſay, one Holy Ghoſt, and two ſpirits of that Spirit.
               
                  R. Ioſeph, ſaith thus: The Light of the ſoule of the Meſsias is the liuing God, and the liuing God is the fountaine of the liuing Waters, and the Soule of the Meſsias is the riuer or ſtreame of life: and none but the Meſsias knoweth God fully: he is the light of God, & the light of the Gentiles: and therefore, hee knoweth God, and God is knowen by him.
               
                  Mercurius Treſmegiſts.I thy God, ſaith God, am light and mind, and of more antiquitie than nature of moiſture that is iſſued from the ſhadow: And this lightſome ſpeach which proceedeth from the mind, is the Sonne of God: that which ſeeth and heareth thee, is the word of the Lord: and the mind is God the Father. Theſe differ not one from another, as for their vnion, it is the vnion of life. And this ſpeech being the workman of God, the Lord of the whole world hath chiefe power next him, & is vncreated, infinite. Proceeding from him, the commaunder of all things, which he made the perfect and naturall firſt borne ſonne of the moſt perfect.
               
                  Numenius a Pithagoriſt ſaith, The firſt God is free from all worke: but the ſecond is the maker which commaundeth heauen: and God the worker or maker (ſaith he) is the beginner of begetting, and God the good is the beginner of Being: and the ſecond is the liuely expreſſer of the firſt, as begetting is an image of Being. And in another place

he ſaith, that this worker being the Same, is knowen to all men by reaſon of the creating the world: but as for the firſt Spirit which is the Father, he is vnknowen vnto them.
               
                  Iamblichus, ſaith plainely, that God made the world by his diuine word: and the firſt God being afore the Be-er, is the Father of a firſt God whom hee begetteth, and yet neuertheleſſe abideth ſtill in the ſoleneſſe of his vnitie, which thing farre exceedeth all abilitie of vnderſtanding. This is the originall patterne of him that is called both Father to himſelfe, and ſonne to himſelfe, and is the Father of one alone and God, verily good indeed.
               
                  Aemelius the diſciple of Plotine, notwithſtanding how great an enemy he was to Chriſtians, ſpeaking of the ſecond perſon, yeeldeth to this which Saint Iohn ſpeaketh. Surely (ſaith he) this is the Word that was from euerlaſting, by whom al things that are, were made As Heraclitus ſuppoſed, and before God (ſaith he) it is the very ſame Word which that barbarous fellow auoucheth to haue bene with God at the beginning in the ordering and diſpoſing of things when they were confuſed, and to be God by whom all things were abſolutely made, and in whom they bee liuing, and of whom they haue their life and being. And that the ſame Word, clothing it ſelfe with mans fleſh, appeared a man, inſomuch that after he had bene put to death, he tooke his Godhead to him againe, and was very God, as he had bene before yer hee came downe into body, fleſh, and man.
               Another of Platoes imitators, ſpeaking to the ſame effect, ſaid, That the beginning of S. Iohns Goſpell was worthy to be written euery where in letters of gold. And the deuill himſelfe being asked of the King of Egypt, who he was that raigned before him, and who ſhould raigne after him? anſwered in theſe foure verſes.
               
                  
                     Suidas.
                  
                  Firſt God, and next the Word, and then their Sprite,
                  Which three be one, and ioyne in one all three,
                  Their force is endleſſe, get thee hence fraile wight,
                  The man of Life vnknowen, excelleth thee.
               
               Seeing then that Iewes, Philoſophers, and the Deuill, are compeld to glorifie God in their ſpeeches, making as it were large volumes of the creation of God by his word, and that the ſame Word, is his ſonne. How can they eſcape the wrath of God, for not embracing it? And againe, ſeeing they but through a miſt, did ſee a cleareneſſe of his brightneſſe. How skilfull ought we to bee (whom hee hath nourſed in his owne boſome, and comforted with the grapes of his owne vineyard, and fedde with the bread of his owne fleſh, and bathed in the

blood of his owne heart) in prouing the truth of this doctrine, againſt Iew, Turke, or Pagan.
               Let vs ſhew a word or two, what the Poets themſelues ſpeake of the Beginning.
               
                  Architas ſaith, that he accounteth no man wiſe, but him which reduceth all things to one ſelfe ſame originall. Firſt to God, who is the Beginning, Middle, and end of all things.
               
                  Empedocles hath theſe verſes.
               
                  All things that are or euer were, or ſhall hereafter bee,
                  Both man and woman, beaſt, and bird, fiſh, worme, herbe, graſſe, & tree,
                  And euery other thing, yea euen the ancient Gods each one,
                  Whom we ſo highly honour heere, come all of one alone.
               
               
                  Simplicius ſaith, Whatſoeuer is beautifull, commeth of the firſt and chiefeſt beauty. All truth cōmeth of Gods truth, & all beginnings muſt be reduced to one beginning, which muſt not be a particular beginning as the reſt are, but a beginning ſurpaſsing all other beginnings, and gathering thē all into himſelfe, yea & giuing the dignitie of beginning to all beginnings, as is conuenient for euery of their natures. Alſo one good (ſaith he) is the originall and wel-ſpring of all things. It produceth all things of it ſelfe, both the Firſt, the Middlemoſt, and the Laſt. The one goodneſſe bringeth forth many goodneſſes, the one vnitie many vnities, the one beginning many beginnings. Now as for Vnitie, Beginning, Good, and God, they all be but one thing. For God is the firſt cauſe of all, and all particular beginnings are firſt ſetled and grounded in him, he is the cauſe of cauſes, the God of gods, and the Goodneſſe of goodneſſes.
               The vnderſtanding of the ſtories of the Bible, do giue a great light to the minde of man, and the practiſe giueth life vnto euery one that embraceth them, as Deut. 8. and Mat. 4. Man liueth not by bread onely, but by euerie worde which proceedeth out of the mouth of God. The deſpiſers of Religion continue in darkenes, and light to them is death, as 1. Ioh. 2.9. Hee that ſaith he is in light, and yet hateth his brother, is in darknes, and walketh in darknes, and knoweth not whether he goeth, becauſe the darknes hath blinded his eyes. 1. Ioh. 5.11. But God hath giuen vs eternall life, and that life is in his Sonne, who laid downe his life for his ſheepe. Ioh. 10.15. Wherfore while we haue light, let vs walke and beleeue in the light, that we may be the children of the light. Ioh. 12.36.
               
               
                  
                  
                     The firſt Adam, was made of the earth, earthly, &c.
                  
                     The ſecond Adam, was made a ſoule giuing life, &c.
               
               HEre, before the compariſon betweene Adam and Chriſt, we are to conſider the creation: wherein we are to vnderſtand the creation of Heauen, Earth, and Sea, and all the hoſt of them, which doe conſiſt of wights viſible, and inuiſible. Inuiſible, as Angels; viſible, as Sunne, Moone, and Starres, fiſhes, fowles, plantes, hearbes, graſſe, Beaſts, and ſuch like, which God created, before hee created Adam by Chriſt for Adams ſake, becauſe he purpoſed not to take the nature of Angels or of any other creature, but of Adam, and that he might be knowne in his power and louing kindnes to Adam by his workes. For he fore-purpoſing to make Adam both King and Father of all the earth, would not haue his witts entangled with cares for this life, but to haue his affections ſetled on heauenly things, that hee might continue holie and blameles before him, as Mat. 6. Take no care what you ſhall eate, or what you ſhall drinke, nor yet for your bodie what rayment you ſhall put on. Behold the fowles neither ſowe nor reape, and your heauenly Father feedeth them, are ye not much better than they, how much more then ſhall hee doe the ſame for you, for hee knoweth that yee haue neede of all theſe things: but firſt ſeeke the kingdome of God, and the righteouſnes thereof, for no mans life ſtandeth in the aboundance of things which he poſseſseth.
               
            
            
               Now followeth Adams creation.
               HE was made (the ſixt day, as it is gathered, of September) of the duſt of the earth vppon Mount Moriah, which is a Mountaine adioyning to the gates of the garden of Eden, into which garden he was put to labour the earth about ſix of the cloke in the morning, as wee account, when men commonly goe to labour, as ſhould appeare by Pſal. 104. Where it is ſayd, Adam goeth forth in the morning to his labour. This is not particularly meant of Adam, but generally of all men, no doubt alluding to the time of Adams creatiō. He had dominion giuen him ouer all things, and witte like to an Angell to giue names to all beaſts, & free libertie to eat of all the trees in the garden, the tree of knowledge of good, and ill, onely excepted. As if God ſhould haue ſayd to him, (as Moſes afterwards ſayd to the children of Iſrael.) I ſet here before you life and death, eate of the one and liue, and eate of the other, and die eternally. Yet could not be content with this glorious

eſtate, but did eate of the forbidden fruit, by the perſwaſion of a woman which God framed out of Adams ribbe, and ioyned to him to be an helpe for him. Before they had continued in Paradiſe one day, as it is written Pſal: 49. Adam being in honour, continueth not a night, but is like to the beaſts that periſh, which woman was deceiued by the ſubtiltie of a Serpent, that is of the Deuill ſpeaking in a Serpent, which beaſt was fitteſt to poſſeſſe to the deceiuing of her, becauſe he excelled all other beaſts in the field in wit: For if an Aſſe had ſayd ſo much to her as did the Serpent, it is very likely ſhee would haue examined the cauſe further: but he hauing once bin an Angel of light, but not keping his firſt originall, being throwne downe from heauen, continuing his knowledge though he loſt his vertue, was not to ſeeke either for matter or oportunitie, enuying their ſtates to bring his murtherous purpoſe to paſſe, for ſo is he called the Serpent, the old Deuill, or Satan, who was a Murtherer from the beginning, but knowing the prohibition, commeth to the woman, ſaying. Yea hath God ſayd, Yee ſhall not eate of euery tree in the garden? to whome the woman anſwereth, ſaying: We may eate freely of the fruite of the Trees in the garden: but as for the Tree in the middeſt of the garden, God hath ſayd, yee ſhall not eate of it, nor touch it, leaſt happily you die. Out of which ſpeeches the Serpent beeing a ramping and a roaring Lyon, going about ſeeking how hee might deuoure her, quickly ſucketh aduantage, finding her to haue digreſſed from the words of the commaundement, adding thereto a tricke of his owne head, ſaith to the woman. Ye ſhall not die at all, but you ſhalbe as Gods knowing good and euill. In that he ſaith gods, he meaneth not the true God (for whatſoeuer hee ſpeaketh, is to be taken in the worſt meaning that can be made of it) but he meaneth you ſhalbe in the ſtate of damnation, as Deuils, which are called Princes, Gods of the world. And likely enough that he touched the fruit, becauſe that ſhee added to the Commaundement the worde touche.
               
               
                  
                  Now the woman beholding the fruit, that it was
                  
                     good to eate.
                     pleaſant to the eyes.
                     a Tree to be deſired to get knowledge.
                  
               
               
                  She
                  
                     tooke of the fruit.
                     did eate.
                     gaue alſo to her husband, and he did eat.
                  
                  Theſe 3. properties aboue, are expounded in Iohn.

                     Wantonnes of the eies.
                     Luſt of the fleſh.
                     The pride of life.
                  
               
               By reaſon of which ſinne, Adam and Eue ſeeing their owne nakednes, ſowed figge-tree leaues together, and hidde themſelues from the preſence of God, among the Trees of the garden, their ſoules beeing then in the ſtate of Damnation, with a light ſhining in darknes, but their darknes not comprehending the ſame, ſhewing thereby the weaknes of their nature, and of their poſteritie. God but a little leauing them to their ſelues, that when they had ſinned, they had rather hide themſelues in darkeneſſe, and ſeek to ſtockes and trees that haue no help in them, than to God that made them. But Dauid afterwards being clothed with the ſpirit of wiſedome & vnderſtanding, acknowledgeth the power of God to ouer-reach the compaſſe of mans vaine imagination, when he ſayth: Whether ſhall I flye from thy preſence? If I take the winges of the morning, and flye to the vttermoſt part of the world, thou art there, If I climbe vp to heauen, thou art there, If I goe downe to hell, thou art there alſo. For God who made the eye, ſhall not hee ſee all the dwellers vppon earth? who hath weighed all men in a ballance, numbring the dayes and verie haires of their heads, diuiding to euerie one their double portion according to the fore-purpoſe of his election, being a righteous Iudge, ſparing not the perſon of Adam though hee were a King, and the ſtatelieſt King that euer ſhould bee, but calleth him to account in the coole of the ſame day wherein he was created and fell, puniſheth him, though not according to the deſert of his tranſgreſsion, like a merciful Iudge that would ſaue, and as a Father that pitieth his owne childe, knowing whereof he was made, and that he was but duſt, ſayth to Adam, What haſt thou done? and leauing him to conſider of his ſinne, goeth to the woman with like tenderneſſe, ſaying, What haſt thou done? as if he ſhould haue ſayd, Oh daughter, haue I made the heauens and the hoſt thereof, that is, Angels, Sunne, Moone, and Starres, &c. to be thy ſeruants; and the earth, and all that therein is, to be obedient at thy call, breathing

into thy noſtrils life, wherby thou becameſt a liuing ſoule in the image of God, that is, in righteouſneſſe and true holyneſſe to be a temple, and a Tabernacle for the holy of the holyeſt to dwell in; and haſt thou defiled the ſame with fond luſts, regarding the wordes of the Serpent the Father of lyes, not reſpecting my power and my ſeueritie, that as I made thy body and ſoule, that I could deſtroy the ſame, whereby thou haſt purchaſed the execution of my law eſtabliſhed at thy creation, to thee and thy husband, what haſt thou done? But God hauing examined the matters, and finding them both guiltie, and the malice of the Serpent to bee the cauſe of their guiltineſſe, neuer ſtayeth iudgement, nor vouchſafeth once to reaſon the matters with him, but preſently curſeth him, and puniſheth Adam, and the woman, and curſeth for their ſakes the earth, plants, and whole courſe of nature, and made them of obedient ſeruants, rebellious enemies to Adam, and his poſteritie. And becauſe Adam was not deceiued, but the woman became into the tranſgreſsion he maketh her will ſubiect to the deſire of her husband, encreaſing her ſorrowes and her conceptions. Thus he chaſtiſeth them, but giueth them not ouer, but pronounceth to the woman a ſhort, but a pithy ſentence, That the ſeede of the woman ſhould breake the head of the Serpent. That is to ſay, I will cauſe one to be borne of the womans ſeede, which ſhall ſubdue the Deuill, and the Deuill ſhall doe his endeauour to trip vp his heeles by tempting him.
               In this beginneth a controuerſie againſt the Iewes of later times, who hold opinion, that the Meſsias or Chriſt whome wee vphold to be the mediator between Gods iuſtice, and mans ſinne, ſhall be ſome great Emperor that ſhall deliuer them from bodily oppreſsion: howbeit they cannot deny, but that by the death which God threatneth to Adam for his tranſgreſsion, Rabbi Moſes vnderſtandeth a ſpirituall death, that is to wit, the death of the ſoule wounded with ſinne, and forſaken of her life, which is God; and that by the venome of the Serpent, he meaneth ſinne it ſelfe, which ſhall ceaſe, ſaith he, vnder the Meſsias: And the Thargum of Ieruſalem ſayth thus expreſly, So long (O Serpent) as the womans children keepe the law, they kill thee: and when they ceaſe to doe ſo, thou ſtingeſt them in the heele, and haſt power to hurt them much. But whereas for their harme, there is a ſure remedie to heale it; for thine there is none: for in the laſt dayes they ſhall cruſh thee all to peeces with their heeles, by means of Chriſt their King.
               The particulars wherof Adam neglected not to examine. And the woman likewiſe, vnderſtanding from thence, duly marking & embracing the ſame, that God had a purpoſe to ſaue her, gathereth from theſe words matter inough to ſaue her, and all the world after her,

which receiue like comfort of the ſame promiſe. For ſhe rightly vnderſtood that this ſeede muſt needs be Chriſt, who muſt come and take Adams nature vppon him, who ſhould bee ſubiect to death, that hee might ouercome him that had power of death. For ſhee knew, and ſo did Adam, that if euer man, being but onely man, might work his owne redemption, himſelfe was likelyeſt to haue done it, becauſe hee was the chiefeſt of all the men that euer ſhould be in the world: but Adam being the goodlyeſt man, and not able to doe it himſelfe, he knew it muſt needs be God, who muſt appeare in the ſimilitude of Adams nature, and ſuffer death, that hee might riſe againe to ſit at the right hand of his Father to make interceſsion for all the ſonnes of Adam: They both, the man and the woman embracing this, obtayned the fauour of God, and Adam called his wife Euah, that is Life, to ſhew that whoſoeuer beleeued as ſhe beleeued, ſhould bee partakers of eternall life, as it is written. Rom. 10. Who ſo confeſseth with his mouth, and beleeueth with his heart, that Ieſus Chriſt is the Sonne of the liuing God, he ſhall be ſaued.
               
               But Adam and Euah were driuen out of Paradiſe, & Cherubins were ſet to keep the way of the tree of life, & they were clothed with skins, as it ſhuld appeare, with skins of beaſts to ſhew their beaſtlines, which God for them had ſlaine to offer for ſacrifice, to teach thē the vſe thereof: for no doubt, God would not deſtroy beaſts to haue them ſpoyled, ſeeing that Adam was not to eat any. And we ſee that Kaine and Abel offered ſacrifices, as being taught from Adam, whoſe ſacrifices were of two ſorts. Abel offred, as appeareth in ſinceritie of Religion: the other for outward ceremonie, voide of true Religion, wherefore to Abel, and his offring God had reſpect: but to Kaine, and his offring he had no regard. Wherefore Kaine being poſſeſſed with the poyſon of the Serpent, enuied Abel becauſe his workes were good, and his owne euill, and killed him: and being asked of God, why he had ſlaine his brother? in ſtead of asking pardon of God, he ſayd, that his fault was greater, than that Gods mercie could forgiue it. Againſt whom Saint Auguſtine cryeth vehemently, that by how much leſſe the mercie of God could be inferiour to the fault of Kaine, ſeeing that to forgiue is a thing proper to God; and to reuenge and puniſh, is farre eſtranged from his nature: by ſo much more great was the offence of Kaine in the words he ſayd, than in the murther he did, ſeeing that by the ſtroke of the ſword, hee tooke away but the life of his brother, but by the blaſphemie of his tongue, hee gaue death to his owne ſoule. To kill his brother, was euill done: but to deſpaire in Gods mercie, was euen a tranſgreſsion of the Deuill. For more doe we offend God to eſteeme him without mercie, than in any other ſinne we commit againſt man.

For which God curſeth him, giuing him a marke of a guiltie conſcience alwayes, accuſing him of ſinne againſt God, and inhumanitie againſt nature: Whereupon he goeth vp and downe wandring as one finding no reſt or peace, like an excommunicate perſon, from the place of true religion into the land of Nod, which ſignifieth Fugitiue.
               
               This Kaine was the eldeſt ſonne of Adam, whom he named Poſſeſsion: (for ſo doth Kaine ſignifie) as if he had gained a goodly poſſeſſion. But ſeeing what might be the comfort of ſuch poſſeſsion, hee calleth his other ſonne Abell, that is, Vanitie, to ſhewe that if a man haue neuer ſo large kingdomes or poſſeſsions, or bee neuer ſo noblie borne, as Kaine was (except the ſonne of God) it is all but vanitie, and a vexation of mind. It is not now to be vnderſtood, that Adam had now no more children but Kaine and Abell: for doubtleſſe Adam had many more, as may appeare by Kaines ſtory. For it is ſayd, that Kaine departed into the land of Nod and knew his wife, who muſt needes be Adams daughter, and married before the murther: for we are not to thinke that Adam would afterward haue beſtowed his daughter vpon a reprobate. The Holy Ghoſt nameth onely three of Adams ſonnes, Kaine, Abel, and Seth, to make a proportionable number anſwerable to the number of the letters of the words of the holy tongue, or the tongue of Adam: for vpon three letters doth euery word in the tongue conſiſt.
               
                  Kaine, to repreſent the afflictors of ſuch as in this life eſteemed the world, and the pleaſures thereof, Vanitie, which is Abell, and Seth whoſe name ſignifieth ſetled or foundation, to ſhew the aſſurance of his faith in the promiſes of God to the confirming of our faith, which was, that from him muſt come that ſeede of the woman that ſhould bruſe the head of the Serpent. This ſentence they, and we, and all the world were, and are bound to take notice of. For this we ought to know and beleeue ſo aſſuredly, that we might ſhew our ſelues ſetled vpon a ſure foundation, not vpon ſands where ſea and wind may ouerthrow vs, but vpon the Rocke Chriſt Ieſus. That our building may remaine as the mount Sion, and as the heauenly Ieruſalem which is builded foure ſquare, of three foures of precious ſtones; that howſoeuer we be toſſed with afflictions of this life, we may ſtand firme, acknowledging Iehouah to be the one true and euerlaſting God, Father, Sonne, and Holy Spirit, and that his mercy is like to eternall mountains that cannot be remoued, wherewith hee loued vs vnto ſaluation before the foundation of the world. Thus duly conſidering his power and wiſedome in the particular actions of the creation, Adams fall, the promiſe of eternall life, Adams faith, and his ſacrifices, the ſhadowes of our Redemption, The ſeuenth day, and the vſe thereof; we

ſhall ſpend our dayes in beholding our end, and neuer doe amiſſe, ſorrowing with a godly ſorrowe as Enoſh whoſe name ſignifieth Sorow, did; for as in our dayes, ſo in his, men fell from the true Religion of Adam, Seth, and other godly men which were then aliue, turning the grace of God into wantonneſſe, marrying wiues of Kaines poyſoned ſeede, reſpecting beauty and other outward guifts, rather than vertue, not remēbring their Grandmother Euah, that for beholding the beauty of one forbidden fruit, commending it to Adam for the pleaſantneſſe of the taſte, and the vnlawfull deſire that ſhee had of diuiliſh knowledge, not long before, was driuen out of Paradiſe; whoſe bleſsing of procreation, was ioyned with ſorrow of conception; whoſe innocent ſoule by breaking but one commaundement, became guiltie of eternall death, and loſt the whole glory of Paradiſe, and was driuen out into mountaines, as not worthy to enioy the benefit of the tree of life in the garden of Eden. But Enoſh being a godly man, and knowing that the fruits of worldly ſorrow, are likewiſe eternal death, & of godly ſorrow, repentance, (which word ſignifieth a changing of iudgement from ignorance to true knowledge, to the renewing of the ſpirit) nameth his ſonne Kenan, Contrite or repenting, or a looking backe into their impieties, deteſting their vaine conuerſation, to the killing of ſinne in himſelfe, and to the embracing of righteouſneſſe. For it is not onely required of a man to eſchew euill, but withall to doe good, to flee darkeneſſe if wee will enioy light, to follow the right way if wee will not erre, to auoid the mire and durt if we will be cleane and without ſpot, and forbeare to be euill if we will begin to be good: for it is not enough for a valiant man to doe what he may, but alſo he is bound to attempt nothing, but what he ought. And as repentance is the fruit of godly ſorrow, ſo thankefulneſſe to God for deliuerance from like trials, proceedeth from repentance. Therefore Kenan the Contrite nameth his ſonne Mahalaleel, my praiſe God, which none can doe effectually without a lowly mind, ſanctified firſt by grace, to the ſubduing of the fleſh. Mahalaleel knowing that ſuch fruit is required of ſuch a tree, nameth his ſonne Iared the lowly, which gifts of grace God beſtoweth vpon ſuch onely, as he accepteth vnto himſelfe, as it is written, Bleſſed is the man, vnto whom God imputeth not his ſinne, &c. So that a man hauing thus purged himſelfe from the iniquitie of wicked men, marking the rules of Gods eternall wiſedome, he ſhalbe a veſſell ſanctified vnto honour meete for the vſes of the Lord, 2. Tim. 2. Therfore Iared the lowly, nameth his ſonne Henoch, the holy.
               
               Now God commaunding all men to direct their ſteppes by the ſtraight line of his word, firſt layeth downe his will what we ought to

doe to pleaſe him, and then induceth vs thereto, not onely by hope of eternall life, but promiſeth vs in this life long and happy daies, as in the eternall lawe is expreſſed. Loue God aboue all, and thy neighbour as thy ſelfe, that thy dayes may bee longe in the Land which the Lord thy God giueth thee, &c. Henoch therefore being aſſured of the infinite mercies of God towards him and his ſeede, by faith ſtill beholding as in a glaſſe, the redemption by the Sonne of God (the ſumme of all ſaluation) nameth his ſonne Methuſhelah, long life, or Speare-death. For euen as the point of a Speare keepeth off that which would otherwiſe deſtroy: euen ſo Methuſhelah kept away the Floud a longe time from drowning the World. But becauſe men ſhould not thinke that any liueth without calamities, leaſt outward happineſſe ſhould make men to forget God; Methuſhelah hauing heard his fathers, and himſelfe alſo (being a Prophet) preach of the deſtruction of the world by the floud, calleth his ſonne Lamech, that is Stroken or Hart-wounded: which is to be vnderſtood, that in reſpect that he being neere thoſe times of dangers, many of his poſteritie were like to be drowned, not only in the floud, but eternally tormented for ioyning with the wicked mockers which deſpiſed the preaching of the Fathers. But although God throweth mens conſciences downe for a while with griefe of other mens iuſt puniſhment; yet hee rayſeth them vp againe, giuing them hope of his aſſured promiſes, and a ſweet comfort of eternall life. Lamech being thus ſtrengthned with the faith of his Fathers, ayming ſtill to the ſentence of ſaluation pronounced in Paradiſe, calleth his Sonne Noah, Reſtorer or Comforter, ſaying, This Sonne ſhall comfort vs concerning the ſorrow of our hands, and concerning the earth which the Lord hath curſed. Wherein he ſheweth, that he both looked backward to the creation, and forward to the Redemption by Chriſt the Seede of the Woman that ſhould bruſe the head of the Serpent.
               
               Thus much for the vſe of the names of the Ten Fathers before the floud in generall.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ Now follow their liues and deaths in particular, and firſt for Adam.
            
            
               There is a great doubt made of the time of the yeere of Adams creation, and of the day of his fall: and is refuſed as a thing vnprofitable to be knowen, and vnpoſsible to be proued.
            
            
               Firſt for the time of his Creation.
               
                  IT is certaine he was created in September, at the time that fruits be ripe, which is at the fall of the leafe: and that was the fitteſt time, ſeeing in the courſe of nature, there was no fitter time to expreſſe the nature of Adams fall. And as the fall of Adam being anſwerable to the fall of the leafe, becauſe by his fall death was brought vpon all: So the death of Chriſt, beeing contrarie to Adams fall, becauſe it brought life to all, the fitteſt time to reſemble this life in the courſe of nature, was the ſpring: therefore Chriſt dyed at the ſpring, to deliuer vs out of the ſpirituall priſon, when as all thinges ſhewe themſelues to bee deliuered out of this earthly priſon.
            
            
               Now for the day of Adams fall.
               IT was on fryday, the ſixt day, the day of Adams creation at the time of eating. For wee doe not reade that euer Adam did eate before he did eate of the forbidden fruit. Therefore when by the ſtorie the time of eating cannot be ſeparated in time, reaſon ſheweth vs to ioyne them in time: for Satan was a Murtherer from the beginning, and we muſt bring it from the beginning as neere as can be, not croſsing any Scripture. The ſearching of this matter is not of ſmall importance: for from the true vnderſtanding of the creation we

ſee the cleereneſſe of the Redemption, and not marking the creation aright, is the cauſe of much follie: and they that miſſe of the lawes of creation, are ſure to miſſe of the lawes of Redemption. And Moſes making mention of many times, hee would not haue omitted the time of the fall, except it had beene done preſently after the creation: thetefore Adams fall muſt needes bee layd as neere the beginning as may bee, not croſsing the ſtory. The bare narration ſheweth, that no famous action went betweene the commaundement, and the fall: and the ſhortneſſe of the time doth ſhewe the force of the aduerſarie. Beſides, it is a great ſinne to ſay, that euery man, except Chriſt, could fulfill any one point of the Lawe: for thereby wee darken the glory of Chriſt, and prooue him not to haue performed the whole lawe. If Adam had continued vntill the Sabbath in his innocencie, no doubt he would haue kept a perfect Sabbath: and if hee had kept a perfect Sabbath, hee had performed ſome part of the Lawe, and thereby beene partaker with Chriſt in the worke of our Redemption. Againe, if Adam had continued in the image of God, which is in righteouſneſſe and true holineſſe, vntill the Sabbath, hee would haue performed the ordinances of the Sabbath, which was to eate of the tree of life which was made for a Sacrament of conſeruation vnto him, and ſhould not haue needed a Redeemer. Hee did not eate of the Tree of Life: for God after his fall ſetteth Cherubims to keepe the way of the Tree of Life, leaſt Adam eating ſhould liue for euer. Whereby it appeareth, that if hee had eaten thereof before, hee had not fallen. Therefore it cannot be that Adam continued perfect vnto the Sabbath.
               And further it is written, Pſal. 49. Adam being in honour continueth not one night, but is like to the beaſts that periſh.
               
                  Cedrenus a Greeke writer ſaith, that Adam fell the ſixt day of the firſt weeke.
               Saint Auguſtine ſaith, the woman ſtreight way after her creation before ſhe accompained with Adam, became into the tranſgreſſion: otherwiſe Kaine had beene conceaued without ſinne.
               
                  Theophilact vpon Matthew ſayth, that as man was formed the ſixt day, and did eate of the tree the ſixt howre: ſo Chriſt reforming man and healing the fall, was faſtened to the tree the ſixt day, and the ſixt howre. And in the ſtorie of the creation in Geneſis preſently after the fall, Moſes ſpeaketh of the Redemption. And without wee compare the Creation with the Redemption, wee miſſe of all. For Adam to bee compared with Chriſt, is the ſumme

of all. And wherefore ſhould all the actions of the Redemption bee accompliſhed in ſuch rareneſſe, except to bee aunſwerable both to the fall, and to the time of the fall? Wherefore it is needfull wee ſhould know our thraldome, if wee will receaue comfort by the Redeemer, thus:
               Firſt, Chriſt the Reſtorer was borne of a Virgine. Why? becauſe by a Virgine deſtruction came to the world.
               
                  Chryſoſtome compareth Eue and Marie together thus: Eue beeing a Virgine, hearing the wordes of the SERPENT, and beleeuing them, brought foorth DEATH. The Virgine Marie hearing the wordes of the Angell Gabriel, and beleeuing them, brought foorth Life. Againe, why ſhould Chriſt die on the ſixt day, rather than on the fifth or fourth? And why was there darkeneſſe vntill the coole of the day, rather than till the Sunne ſetting? but to make the Redemption anſwerable to euery part of the fall, becauſe God according to the ſecret counſell of his owne will, before the foundations of the earth were laide, would make the Art of ſaluation ſo eaſie, and the harmonie of the Bible ſo tuneable, that no muſicke in the world can bee more pleaſant to the eare, than the meditation of the loue of God towards vs in Chriſt, is comfortable to the heart of man. Therefore the meditation of Adams fall, and the victorie of Chriſt, ought to bee continually in our mindes.
            
            
               
               Now compare Chriſt with Adam.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Adam
                        Chriſt
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              The firſt Adam was made a ſoule, hauing life of earth earthly, therefore by the earthly one, came—

                                    
                                       diſobedience,
                                    
                                    
                                       ſinne,
                                    
                                    
                                       iudgement,
                                    
                                    
                                       condemnation,
                                    
                                    
                                       death.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              was created on the ſixt day, and did eate of the tree the ſixt howre.
                              was made a man without a Father.
                              made not inferiour to the Angels, loſt all.
                              was tempted.
                              loſt ſaluation at the time of eating.
                              was made ruler of the world, and did not hold it.
                              did fall in the Garden.
                              his ſoule was in darkenes, from the ſixt houre vntil the ninth howre.
                              by breaking one commandement, loſt all.
                              was called to account at the ninth howre.
                              was debarred of the tree of life.
                              was driuen out of Paradiſe.
                              was the head of his Wife.
                              was a

                                    
                                       King.
                                    
                                    
                                       Prophet.
                                    
                                    
                                       Sacrificer.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              liued a thouſand yeeres wanting ſeuentie.
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              The ſecond Adam was made a ſpirit, giuing Life from heauen heauenlie, thetefore by the heauenly one, came—

                                    
                                       obedience,
                                    
                                    
                                       grace,
                                    
                                    
                                       forgiueneſse,
                                    
                                    
                                       iuſtification,
                                    
                                    
                                       life.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              reforming man & healing the fall, is faſtened to the tree the ſixt day, & the ſixt howre.
                              was made a man without a Father.
                              made lower then the Angels, is crowned with glory, and all the Angels worſhip him being man, whereby wee may know the world was made ſubiect to a man.
                              was tempted.
                              brought ſaluation to all at the time of eating.
                              was made ruler of the world, and did hold it.
                              went into a Garden to recouer Adams fall in the garden.
                              when he ſuffered, cauſed darkenes to couer the whole earth from the ſixt howre till the ninth howre.
                              by fulfilling all the commaundements, brought life to all.
                              at the ninth howre, yeeldeth vp the Ghoſt, and goeth to giue account to his Father.
                              is the true Tree of Life.
                              on that day openeth Paradiſe to the poore theefe.
                              the head of his Church.
                              was a

                                    
                                       King.
                                    
                                    
                                       Prophet.
                                    
                                    
                                       Sacrificer.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              was borne ſeuentie yeeres before foure thouſand.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  BEcauſe theſe two Tables conſiſt onely of numbers, and that numbers in the ſcripture are great helpes for the vnderſtanding of the ſame: before wee come to ſpeake of Seth, it is not amiſſe to lay downe what numbers are of moſt vſe in the Bible, namely 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 12.
               1 Expreſsing the vnion of the Godhead, and from thence the vnitie of all godly, as being members of one head Christ Ieſus, which is made plaine. Pſal. 133. Behold how good and comely a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in vnitie, &c.
               
               3 The diſtinguiſhed Trinitie, within which number many excellent things fall out▪ ſtill to put vs in minde of the vndeuidable coeternitie of Father, Sonne, and holy Spirite.
               
               
                  To ſhew that neither in eldeſt, yongeſt, or middlemoſt, but in Gods free election, ſtandeth our eternall happineſſe.
                  
                     
                        Adam
                        Kaine, Of Adam, the eldeſt extreame wicked.
                        
                           Abel, Of Adam, the eldeſt extreame wicked.
                        
                           Seth. Of Adam, the eldeſt extreame wicked.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Noah
                        
                           Iaphet, Of Noah, the youngeſt wicked.
                        
                           Sem, Of Noah, the youngeſt wicked.
                        Cham. Of Noah, the youngeſt wicked.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Terah
                        
                           Haran, Of Terah, the middlemoſt was wicked.
                        Nachor, Of Terah, the middlemoſt was wicked.
                        
                           Abram. Of Terah, the middlemoſt was wicked.
                     
                  
               
               Three Angels appeared to Abraham in his Tent.
               Three Fowers of precious ſtones were ſet in Aarons breaſt.
               Three Things reſerued in the Arke,
               Three Taken vp in the old Teſtament, and 3 in the new.
               
                  
                     The Booke of the Lawe,
                  
                  
                     The pot of Manna, and
                  
                  
                     Aarons rod that did alwaies flouriſh.
                  
               
               Three Parts was Ieruſalem diuided into.
               Three Letters the root of euerie word in the Hebrew tongue.
               Three Captiuities of the Iewes.
               Three Times was the Temple groſly poluted by the

                     
                        Babilonians,
                     
                     
                        Antiochi,
                     
                     
                        Romanes.
                     
                  
               
               Three Times a yeere were the Iewes bound to come to Ieruſalem, to giue account of their Religion.
               Three Dayes and Nights, was Ionas in the Whales belly:
               Nights and dayes was Chriſt in the graue.
               Iohns, viz.

                     
                        Iohn Baptiſt, Luk. 1.
                     
                        Iohn Euangeliſt, Mat. 4.
                     
                        Iohn Marke. Act. 12.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Iob ſaued 3

                        
                           Eliphaz.
                        
                        
                           Sophar.
                        
                        
                           Bildad.
                        
                     
                  
                  Daniel ſaued 3

                        
                           Ananias.
                        
                        
                           Azarias.
                        
                        
                           Miſhael.
                        
                     
                  
                  Noah ſaued 3

                        
                           Sem.
                        
                        
                           Cham.
                        
                        
                           Iaphet.
                        
                     
                  
               
               In the 3. ſeuenth

                     
                        Iubile, the Iewes felaway, and then Ieremie ſaid, O
                        
                           
                              earth,
                           
                           
                              earth,
                           
                           
                              earth,
                           
                        
                        Heare the word of the Lord, &c.
                     
                     The title ouer Chriſt on the croſſe, was written in 3. tongues,

                           
                              Hebrew.
                           
                           
                              Greeke.
                           
                           
                              Latine.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               Although it may not bee vrged, that all theſe Threes haue full relation to the Trinitie, ſeeing they fall not out by chaunce, wee are not to deſpiſe the pleaſant harmonie, and comfortable vſe of them, but to thinke that the wiſedome of God hath contriued ſaluation into ſuch a ſweet Art, that verie children may learne the ſame: and therefore the Scripture is called verie fitly a ſhallow water, and a deepe fountaine: ſhallow, that the Lambe may wade; and deepe, that the Elephant may ſwimme.
               
                  Foure
                  
                     Is a ſquare number, and vſuall.
                  
                  Heber the Fourth after the floud.
                  
                  Iuda the Fourth Sonne of Iacob.
                  
                     Square ſignifieth true Religion.
                  
                  
                     The Lord came in the 4000. yeare of the world.
                  
                  Moſes Fourth Son in the 4. age, was ſacrificer to the tribe of Dan.
                  
                     Times 7 Iubiles, the time of Chriſts death.
                  
                  
                     The forme of the heauenly Ieruſalem.
               
               
                  Fiue
                  
                     The Letters of Iehouah.
                  
                     The 5 Vowels, the ſinewes of all tongues.
                  
                  Chriſt feedeth 5000. with 5 Loaues.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Six
                  
                     The day of Adams creation, which number is oftentimes vſed in the ſcripture, to put vs in mind of the Creation.
                  
                  
                     Hundreth Thouſand fighting men came out of Egipt.
                  
                  
                     Hundreth yeares old was Noah at the floud.
                  
                  
                     Times 7 ſtandings had the children of Iſraell in the Wilderneſse.
                  
                  
                     Yeeres was the Land of Canaan in conquering.
                  
                  
                     Cities of refuge for one that killed a man by chaunce, and not of malice, had the Iewes to flie vnto.
                  
                  
                     Times did the children of Iſraell fall before Dauids time, in the time of the Iudges.
                  
               
               
                  Seuen
                  
                     The number of the Sabbath, which number of 7. as it is famous for the creation, ſo God continueth the ſame proportion throughout the Bible to the redemption. For as God the Father made the world in ſix daies, and reſted the ſeuenth; ſo God the Son, hauing performed his Fathers will, reſteth the ſeuenth day in the graue.
                  
                  
                     Is a yeare of Grace.
                  
                  
                     Planets in the Firmament which Plato compareth to the number of Seuen Starres in Ap. 1.
                  
                     Yeares was the Land of Canaan plagued, for that Ioſeph the beloued of the Lord, ſhould haue been ſlaine by his brother.
                  
                  
                     Stones in the Temple: Gods Seuen-fould wiſedome or prouidence in all his actions. Seuen eyes to looke vpon the building of euery ſtone in the Temple of Ieruſalem.
                  
                     Yeares the Land of Canaan was ſetled in reſt.
                  
                  
                     Yeares the Temple was in building.
                  
                  
                     Yeares Nebucadnetzer was a beaſt for deſtroying it.
                  
                  
                     Gates in the Temple before you come to the Holy of holieſt.
                  
                  
                     Braunches did the Candleſticke in the Temple ſtand vrpon, which had 42. knobbes, ſignifying the ſix dayes worke, and the Seuenth day of rest in the creation.
                  
                  
                     Moneths was the Tabernacle in building.
                  
                  
                     Iubiles was the Arke in the houſe of Ioſeph.
                  
                     Trumpeters is a great number that doe alwaies ſound Gods praiſe.
                  
               
               
                  Henoch the ſeuenth from Adam. Heber the ſeuenth from Henoch. Iſaack the ſeuenth from Heber. Moſes the ſeuenth from Abraham. Ioſua the ſeuenth from Ephraim. Elias taken vp in the ſeuenth age from Samuel. Ioram the ſeuenth from Dauid. Salomons Temple was conſecrated

in the ſeuenth moneth anſwerable to the birth of the Fathers. The ceremonie of the Feaſt of Tabernacles continued ſeuen dayes. After the comming from Egipt, it was ſeuen times ſeuen daies before the law was giuen; Seuen times ſeuen daies after Chriſts reſurrection, deſcended the holy Ghoſt. The ſtories of the Scripture goe by ſeuens. From Moſes till Chriſts death, thus: Seuen yeares the land of Canaan was in conquering. Seuen fifties for the glorie of Ioſephs houſe. Seuen ſeuenties for the houſe of Iuda. Seuen tennes for the captiuity. From the captiuitie, to the death of Chriſt, ſeuen ſeuenties. Moſes ceremonies for the moſt part were in the ſeuenth moneth. The Manna that was gathered on the ſixt day, ſerued for the ſeuenth. The ſeuenth yeare the Iewes might not plowe, ſowe, nor reape. In the end of ſeuen ſeuens was the yeare of Iubilee. In the ſeuenth ſeuen from Cyrus, the walles of Ieruſalem were built. Seuen times ſeuen Thouſand of the Iewes came from captiuitie. Ioakim endeth the ſeuenth ſeuentie with affliction. Seuen yeeres plenty. Seuen yeeres dearth in the land of Egipt, figured by ſeuen eares of corne and ſeuen kine. Noah liued ſeuen Iubilees after the flood. Seuen Thouſand in the booke of Kings mentioned, that neuer bowed their knees to Baal. Kaines houſe cut off in the ſeuenth age. How often ſhall I forgiue my brother? till ſeuen times? I ſay vntill ſeuen times ſeuenty times, alluding vnto Daniels Seuens.
               
                  
                     
                        Eight.
                     
                     The number of the perſons ſaued in the Arke.
                  
                  
                     The day of circumciſion.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Ten.
                  
                  Ten is a full number, and the higheſt of laſt of ſimple numbers. All Nations after the number of Ten beginne againe, for plaine teaching, and plaineneſſe in reckoning. Ten is the yeare of iudgement or accompt. You haue Ten woordes for the creation of the world, and Ten words for the gouernment of the whole world. The Tenth is a holy number, as in Tythes, which is giuen to vs to acknowledge our duties. In the Tenth moneth, the waters of the floude abated. Sem liued to ſee the Tenth age, a great bleſſing. Ten plagues were the Egiptians plagued with, for afflicting Sems houſe. Ten ſpyes in the Wildernes misbelieued. Ten tribes fell away at Roboams time. Daniels beaſt hath Ten hornes, which doe repreſent Ten cruell Kings. The beaſt in the Reuelation hath Ten hornes. The Pope had Ten ſtately kingdomes to aſsiſt him. Noah is the Tenth from Adam. Abraham the Tenth from Noah.
               
               
                  Twelue ſignes in the Zodiacke. Twelue monthes in the yeare. Twelue Fathers from the floude to Iacob.
                  
                     Twelue.
                   Twelue Sonnes of Iacob.
                  
Twelue Fountaines in the Wilderneſſe. Twelue ſtones in Iordan. Twelue ſtones in Aarons breaſt. Salomon had Twelue Stewards, and Dauid Twelue valiant Captaines. Salomon at Twelue yeares of age diſcided the controuerſie betweene the women for the dead Childe. Chriſt at Twelue yeares of age is founde, diſputing among the Doctors. He likewiſe ordayneth Twelue Apoſtles, and Twelue times did he appeare after his reſurection, and in the reuelation of euery Tribe is ſealed Twelue thouſand. The heauēly Ieruſalem is deſcribed to haue Twelue foundations of Twelue precious ſtones. Twelue gates, and Twelue Angels, and the names written of the Twelue Apoſtles, and through the Citie there runneth a pure riuer, and on either ſide of the riuer the Tree of Life, which beareth Twelue manner of fruites, and beareth fruite euery moneth in the yeare, and the leaues of the Tree doe ſerue to heale the Nations with.
               NOw the reaſon why God in the beginning layd downe in cloſe ſignification, and ſuch eaſy proportions, the whole ſcope of his gouernment to the worlds end, is to ſhew, that his wiſedome is infinite, and that nothing in the Scriptures doe fall out by chaunce, but by his fore-purpoſe according to the ſecret counſell of his own will, to make vs ſtill looke backe vnto the Creation.
            
            
               
                  130. Seth borne ge. 5. when Adam is 130. yeares old.
               
                  ADam was made in the Image of God, but Seth is begotten in the Image of Adam: to ſhew that whatſoeuer is borne of the fleſh is fleſh, and whatſoeuer is borne of the ſpirit is ſpirit. When Adam was 130. yeares old he begetteth Seth, being (as may be gathered) not one day more, nor one day leſſe. And the rule ſerueth for all the Ten fathers before the floud▪ The holy Ghoſt keeping an exact Cronicle of the times, beginneth at Adam, and ſo goeth forwarde, laying downe the particuler ages of the fathers vnto the floude, ſaying: when Adam is 130. yeares old, Seth is borne. Now if he had beene one day more, the number had not been perfect: if one leſſe, it had not beene exacted. We may better therefore conclude▪ that all the Ten fathers were borne on the ſixt day, that is, the day of Adams creation rather than on any other day, ſeeing it cannot well bee denyed, and that it croſſeth neither ſtory nor rule of religion.
               
                  
                  Seth, Signifieth Setled, or Foundation. He knew the Creator, and that the world ſhould be founded vpon him.
               Eſ. 58. The wicked haue no ſure foundation, but are like to the chaffe in a ſummer floore. But the Godly ſhalbe like a freſh watered Garden, and like the fountaine of water that neuer leaueth running, whoſe foundation is layd for many generations. For as a tree that hath ſure rootes, will beare many braunches: ſo to be ſetled in religion, as Seth was, many thinges will appeare to bee of ſinguler force.
            
            
               Now compare him with Chriſt, thus.
               
                  Seth.
                  
                     His name ſignifieth foundation.
                     He was begotten in the image of Adam.
                     
                  
                  Chriſt is

                     The Rocke & ſure foundation of his Church.
                     The very character of his Father.
                  
               
            
            
               105. Enoſh borne. In theſe numbers, you haue 10. multiplied by 10. and 5. which is the number of the letters of Iehouah.
               
               HIs name ſignifieth Sorowfull. Euery man is called ſorowfull Enoſh, and the Hebrew tongue ſometime calleth a man Enoſh, and ſometimes Adam: The Caldeans call a man Enoſh, but not Adam, becauſe they had not the antiquitie of the creation of the world. In Enoſh his time Religion decayed in the houſe of God, for which the floud came and drowned the world. This ſorrowe is called a godly ſorrowe, to which the Lord hath added a bleſſing, as Mat. 5. Bleſſed are they that mourne, for they ſhall receaue comfort, and Eccleſiaſtes 7. Grauitie is better than laughter, for when the countenance is heauie, the heart is reformed, but Luke 6. ſaith, Bleſsed are yee that weepe now, for yee ſhall laugh.
               
               
                  CHrist beeing ſorrowfull for the negligence of the Iewes, knowing that they ſhould bee plagued for not embracing the promiſe to Abraham, Iſaack, and Iacob, weepeth ouer Ieruſalem ſaying, O Ieruſalem, Ieruſalem, (1.) O ſight of peace! O ſight of peace! If thou hadſt knowne thoſe things, that belong to thy peace, & ſo with griefe and ſorow of heart he leaueth off, as not able to expreſſe the ſum of his ſorrow. Againe with like ſorrow he ſaith, How often would I haue gathered you together as a henne gathereth her chickens, and you would not?
               
            
            
               
               90. Kenan borne.
               
                  HIs name ſignifieth Contrite, or ſmall ſtore. Matth. 5. Bleſsed are the poore in ſpirit, for their is the kingdome of heauen.
               
                  Eſay 54. Thus ſaith the High and Excellent, euen he that dwelleth in Eternity, whoſe name is the holy one, I dwell high aboue and in the Sanctuarie, and with him alſo that is of a Contrite Spirit doe I dwell, that I may heale a troubled mind, and a Contrite heart.
               
                  Pſal. 50. An humble and Contrite heart the Lord doth not deſpiſe: therefore ſhall euery godly man prayſe the Lord without ceaſing.
            
            
               70. Mahalaleel borne. You haue in this number ten ſeuens, or ſeuen multiplied by ten, which is ſeuentie: which is the number of his natiuitie, wherein you haue a ſweet reſemblance of the creation: of which number many excellent things are to be ſpoken, which I will handle afterwards.
               THis name ſignifieth My praiſe God: Leah nameth her fourth ſonne Iuda, the Father of Shiloh, Praiſe God: for ſo doth his name likewiſe ſignifie. The vſe of this ought to be embraced of all, ſeeing it ſtretcheth to the ſaluation of all. It appeareth hereby, that the godly fathers in ancient time had wonderfull regard in naming their children. For if you doe marke the whole ſtories of the Bible, you ſhall find very few notable men, whether they were godly or wicked, but they conteine rare matter in their names.
               From Mahalaleel we are taught to prayſe God aright. Firſt, in ſinceritie of ſpirit, with ſound knowledge grounded vpon the truth of his word. Dauid knowing that prayſe giuing to God, is not only required at our hands, but alſo at euery creatures in their kind, biddeth the whole courſe of nature, praiſe the Lord. And in Pſal. 47. hee ſayth, O ſing prayſes, ſing prayſes vnto our God, O ſing prayſes, ſing prayſes vnto our King: for the Lord is high, and to be feared, He is the great king vpon all the earth, ſing prayſes therefore with vnderſtanding. Hee ſheweth vs a reaſon in the 19. Pſalme, where he ſaith, The heauens declare the glory of God, and the firmament ſheweth his handie worke: one day telleth another, and one night certifieth another, &c. Therefore let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be alway acceptable in thy ſight, O Lord my Rocke, and my Redeemer. Whereby we are taught, that the true praiſe

of God conſiſteth not onely in outward acknowledging of his works, and his iudgements (for that the wicked are oftentimes compelled to confeſſe, as Pharaoh, Nebucadnetzar, and others) but wee muſt prayſe God ſo, as that all our thankes, and all our actions may tend to the acknowledging of the Redemption by Chriſt: for ſo doth Dauid in this 19. Pſal. he beginneth with the Creation, & endeth with the Redemption. Let vs therefore with him alſo ſay, Pſal. 102. Prayſe the Lord O my ſoule, and all that is within me prayſe his holy name: which forgiueth all thy ſinne, and healeth all thine infirmities, which ſaueth thy life from deſtruction, and crowneth thee with mercie and louing kindneſſe. And Pſal. 105. O giue thankes vnto the Lord, and call vpon his holy name, tell the people what things he hath done. O let your ſongs be of him, and praiſe him, and let your talking be of all his wonderous workes. Reioyce in his holy name, let the heart of them reioyce that ſeeke the Lord, ſeeke the Lord and his strength, ſeeke his face euermore.
               
            
            
               65. Iared borne. For this number 65. it is the halfe of 130. His name ſignifieth Lowlie or meeke, he was 162. yeeres old before he married, becauſe at that time he had knowledge of the flood that it ſhould come. Therefore hee conſecrated his ſonne to God.
               HOw precious a vertue this Meekeneſſe is, and how highlie to be embraced, we may know by open experience, if we examine how God from the beginning hath gouerned the world. For God reſpecteth not the perſon of any man, that he ſhould feare him. He ouerthrew the rebellious Nimrod, and the reſt of the Nephewes of Noah, that would haue a name, and turned their ſpeech into babling. He plagued that flouting Iſmael, and quailed that doughtie Eſay. Hee drowned ſtout Pharaoh in the red ſea, and ouerthrew the iron charets of Siſera at the waters of Mageddon. He ſmote diuers nations, and ſlue mightie Kings: Sehon King of the Ammorites, and Ogg the King of Baſan, and all the kingdomes of Canaan: he foiled that proud Philiſtine, and hewed the horne of Agag in peeces. He made Ieſabel a pray for dogges, and wicked Achab to be ſlaine in the valley of Ieſreel. He made King Ioakim to be buried like an aſſe, and prophane Nebucadnetzar to eat graſſe like an oxe. He made drunken Baltaſar to tremble like a leafe, and Antiochus the vild to be deuoured of wormes: to ſhew, that he regardeth not proud lookes, or feareth the Kings diſpleaſure,

for he ſetteth vp Kings, and putteth downe Kings, as Luke 1. He looked on the low degree of his handmaid, he hath ſhewed ſtrength with his arme, he hath ſcattered the proud in the imaginations of their hearts, he hath put downe the mightie from their ſeats, and hath exalted the humble and meeke. As Ioſeph out of the dungeon, Dauid from the ſheepecoats, Daniel from the Lyons denne, Peter and Iohn from mending their nets, and made them rulers ouer mightie Nations, & teachers to the Princes of the earth. Matth. 5. Therefore bleſſed are the meeke, for they ſhall receiue the inheritance of the earth.
               
               
                  Chriſt being meeke, was ledde as a ſheepe vnto the ſlaughter, not opening his mouth.
            
            
               162. Henoch borne.
               HIs name ſignifieth Holy, or Dedicated to God. The name ſheweth his fathers affection in giuing him vnto God, anſwerable to Abraham in offering Iſaack. Henoch of Kaine was contrarie in ſignification to this Henoch; the one dedicated to God, the other to the poſſeſsions of this world. For Kaine after his curſe, wandring to the land of Nod buildeth a Citie, and calleth it after the name of his ſonne Henoch. The other Henoch, though indeed a rare man, yet was 65. yeres without any mention of his integritie, and after that his holineſſe is made manifeſt in this, that he found fauour with God. His calling was very glorious, being made a preacher, to declare ſalvation to all that would beleeue in Chriſt, and his owne actions of life to be performed in the higheſt degree of vertue. Whereby we are taught to bee holie and blameleſſe before God, not giuing our members ſubiects vnto wantonneſſe or pleaſures of this life, but eſteeming the world as though it were not, and poſſeſſe it, as though wee poſſeſt it not, putting on the new man Chriſt Ieſus, that we may be holy euen as he is holy.
               7. You haue heere the number of ſeuen, to ſhew that Henoch is the ſeuenth from Adam, for ſo is he called in the Epiſtle of Iude. He was no doubt a very rare man, ſeeing that hee is commended of the holy Ghoſt to haue walked with God, to haue his yeeres anſwerable to the dayes of the ſunne, and regiſtred to be the ſeuenth from Adam, a Sabbath keeper, for his yeeres doe agree with the number of the Sabbath. Which number of ſeuen or of the Sabbath throughout the Bible doth ſtill put vs in mind of the Creation, and ſo of the true keeping of the Sabbath. For in the beginning God made the world in ſixe dayes and reſted the ſeuenth, and hallowed and ſanctified the ſame, and commaunded it to be kept holie throughout all generations, and to reſemble

the ſame in his Creation before there was a Sabbath. He made ſeuen ſtarres in the heauens, which Philoſophers call planets, which haue force in the whole courſe of nature, which he in his wiſedome placed there, that the very heathen, and ſuch as would not take notice of the Sabbath, might haue the name thereof in their mouthes, although they made no vſe thereof in their hearts.
               65. Methuſhelah borne. His name ſignifieth Long life, or Speare death.
               
            
            
               187. Lamech borne.
               HIs name ſignifieth Striken or heart-wounded. He is called ſo in reſpect of ſome inward griefes that he ſhould beare for the afflictions of the world. You haue an other Lamech of Kaines houſe, but of contrarie nature to this Lamech. Lamech of Kaine was a ſtriker. Lamech of Seth, ſtriken: the one a Preacher of deſtruction to the world; the other an example of impietie to the world: and being 1600. yeeres after Kaine, knew Kaines ſtorie. He had two wiues it was not ſo from the beginning. Some hold, that he was the firſt that had two wiues: but doubtleſſe many others had the like, but God in one doth ſhew the manners of the reſt. Hee ſaith to his wiues, I will kill a man, &c. So that as the world began with killing, ſo it continueth in wickedneſſe and violence. The other Lamech doth make a confeſsion full of contrition, and in naming his ſonne Comforter 600. yeeres before the flood, ſheweth that he was a Prophet of verie liuely skill.
            
            
               Compare him with Chriſt.
               
                  CHriſt is both outwardly ſtriken, and inwardly wounded. Outwardly, when in the open hall he was buffetted, ſcourged, and ſpitted at, and vpon the croſſe pierced both handes, feete, and ſides: Inwardly, when hee was reuiled with blaſphemous ſpeeches at his death, and when in ſtead of drinke to comfort him, they gaue him gall and mirhe mingled together: but moſt eſpecially, when his guiltleſſe ſoule did ſuffer the torments of hell to redeeme our guiltie ſoules and bodies from the thrall of Satan, as may appeare when from his ſides iſſued water and blood.
            
            
               
               56. Adam dieth.
               THe Hebrewes deſcant very ſtraungely vpon the Arithmeticke of Adams yeares which hee liued, which were 930. Vpon a ſentence in the 24▪ of Iob. where it is ſayd, All the daies of man vpon earth, are but a ſhadow. As if he ſhould ſay, all the dayes of Adam are but Abell, for Adam in Hebrew ſignifieth earth, and Abell ſignifieth ſhadow, or vanitie: whereby we are taught, that from the earth we came, and to the earth we muſt returne, according to Ge. 3. We are alſo to vnderſtand from hence, that although God deferre his puniſhments, yet he is mindfull of his promiſes: for not one tittle or iot of his word ſhall paſſe, as appeareth in Adams death, which God before had promiſed, and was accompliſhed, though it were 930. yeares after. Wherefore, howſoeuer we be ſetled on the pleaſures of this life, or bee aduaunced to thrones of Maieſtie, as Adam was, we are to know, that it is but a Steward ſhippe beſtowed vpon vs for a ſeaſon, and that in this world wee are to looke for no abiding place: for we are but graſſe, wee are conſumed as ſmoke, our daies come to an end. A Thouſand yeares in Gods ſight, is as yeſterday: He turneth Adam to duſt, and ſaith, Returne ye ſonnes of Adam. He bringeth our yeares to an end, as it were a tale that is tould Wherefore let vs pray to God with Moſes, to teach vs to number our daies aright, that wee may apply our harts vnto wiſedome.
               
                  Adam cometh ſhort of 1000. yeares ſo much as is the dayes of mans life. Iared, Methuſhelah, and Noah ouerreached Adam in long life, becauſe of the power of the word of God. He died about mount Moriah where he was made He liued till he ſaw many kings, he himſelfe the greateſt, and vntill he had erected a ſtately gouernment, and taught them humane arts: And he was fitteſt to do it, beeing a King to commaund whome hee would, and what hee would, and hauing wit excelling all the men in the world. And as in a Princes Court, it is requiſite to haue Noble men, ſome higher, and ſome lower, and men of all degrees: ſo Adam liued vntill he might haue a ſtately Court.
               Now if a King ſhould cōmaund a Diuine to make Adams will from his ſtorie, he would make it in this ſort. O my ſonnes, gather you together, and harken vnto the words of your father Adam, the laſt that euer he ſhall ſpeake vnto you. I was voide of ſaluation, and enioyed not happineſſe, by diſobeying: which diſobediēnce I thē practiſed, whē I harkened to the perſwaſion of Heua, & did eat the forbidden fruite. I then felt the heauy iudgements of God againſt ſinne, and ſawe my nakednes, whereof I was aſhamed.

                     
                        〈…〉
                      not remooued it, by offering a bleſsing in the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of the woman. 
                        〈…〉
                      you all the dayes of my life as a father, that you may learne 
                        〈…〉
                      gouernours which reſemble fathers in behauiour. I haue inſtructed you to loue and obey their gouernement: you must know, that as my ſaluation r
                        •••
                     th vpon beliefe in the ſ
                        •
                     ede of the woman, ſo must yours.
               
               But the houſe of Kaine deſpiſing this, and killing Abel a figure of him, who by dying ſhall ouercome the power of the Serpent, will cauſe the flood to deſtroy the earth. Few ſhall embrace this doctrine: for though eight bee ſaued by the Arke, yet ſeuen onely ſhall keepe ſincerely the beliefe in this promiſe of the ſeede of the woman. My daies haue beene long with the reſt of your fathers: but the end of all fleſh is come vpon me: for out of the earth I came, and to the earth I muſt returne.
               
                  113. Henoch is taken vp. being 365. yeres old.
               HIs yeres are anſwerable to the dayes of the ſunne: 65. yeres, a yere for a day. And as the ſunne excelleth all other ſtarres in brightneſſe: ſo did his life excell all other men then aliue in the world, for vertue. He is alſo ſayd to haue walked with God, to be a preacher of righteouſneſſe, to bee taken vp.
               Theſe foure ſpeciall commendations are of equall glory: and wee may be aſſured by theſe teſtimonies▪ that his godlineſſe was very rare. The Grecians ſay, that hee left a booke behind him of his preaching. But thereby (as much as in them lyeth) they call into queſtion the truth of the Scriptures. For firſt, by this opinion they derogate from the glorie of Moſes, that he ſhould not be the firſt writer. Secondly, from the wiſedome of God, which tooke order to lay downe the liues of the fathers in ſo ſhort Arithmatique, and would thereby haue his wiſedome wonderfull to thoſe which ſhould come after: which had bene to ſmall purpoſe, if Henoch had left a booke of his preaching. But the Grecians thus being anſwered, it followeth that Henochs prophecie was againſt the wordes of the wicked, and againſt the contempt of religiō which wicked men ſhewed in not beleeuing the preaching of the flood. Saint Iude in his Epiſtle, from the circumſtances of the men and manners of the people to whom Henoch preached gathered what might be the ſumme of Henochs preaching, in this ſort: Behold, the Lord commeth, how? as at the giuing of the law, with thouſands of his Angels, to give iudgement againſt all men, & to rebuke all the vngodly among them of all their wicked deeds which they haue vngodly committed, and of all

their cruell ſpeakings which wicked ſinners haue ſpoken againſt him. Vpon which words the Grecians, not knowing the courſe of the Hebrewes, in their fained ſpeeches ſay, that Henoch left a booke of his preaching behind him.
               His taking vp, did ſhew what ſhould be the ſtate of the godly. Hee was taken vp in deſpite of the wicked, and in recompence of his own faith. Hee was taken vp 57. yeeres after Adams death, all the fathers then being aliue. And it may be the fathers did ſee him taken vp, as a figure of Chriſts aſcenſion. The wicked might then ſay, where is the appearance of the flood? For Adam is dead, and Henoch is taken vp, and all things continue as from the beginning. In that God beſtowed ſo ſhort life vpon Henoch, it ſheweth that hee would beſtow greater bleſsings of him in another kind.
            
            
               Now compare him with Chriſt.
               
                  
                     
                        Henoch
                        Chriſt
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Was a Prophet: for he prophecied of the deſtruction of the world by the flood.
                              Walked with God.
                              His dayes were as the dayes of the ſunne.
                              Was taken vp being the ſeuenth from Adam.
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Was a Prophet, and prophecied of the deſtruction of the world.
                              Did the will of his Father.
                              Is the bright ſunne of Iuſtice, whoſe dayes in the Pſalmes, are likened to the dayes of the ſunne.
                              In the Scripture, is the ſeuenth that aſcended: To wit,
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     1. The ſonne of the widow of Sarepta. 1. King. 17.
                  
                     2. The Shunamites ſonne, whom Eliſeus brought againe to life, 2. King. 4.32.
                  
                     3. The ſouldier buried by Eliſeus corps.
                  
                  
                     4. Iayrus daughter, Mat. 9.
                  
                     5. The widowes ſonne, Luke 7.
                  
                     6. Lazarus. Luke 11.
                  
                     7. Chriſt. That is,
                  
               
               
                  3. in the
                  
                     olde Teſtament
                     new Teſtament
                  
                  and the Lord was the ſeuenth.
               
               
                  1042. 168. Seth died being 912 yeeres olde.
               
            
            
               
               1056. 182. Noah borne.
               HIs name ſignifieth Comforter or Restorer. The faith of Lamech no doubt was cleare concerning ſaluation, by the ſeede of the woman, in that he named his ſonne Comforter or Reſtorer. As if he had ſaid, though for impietie, all the world be deſtroyed: yet I am aſſured that the promiſe made to Adam muſt of neceſsitie be performed, or elſe no fleſh can be ſaued. In this faith Adam, after he had tranſgreſſed by eating of the forbidden fruite, was ſaued. In this faith Abell offered vp a greater ſacrifice than Kaine. In this faith Henoch walked with God, and was no more ſeene, for he was taken vp. In this faith all the Fathers obtained eternall life. In this faith Noah became a preacher of righteouſneſſe, and an executor of true iudgement, and prepared the Arke to the ſauing of his houſhold, &c. Heb. 11.
               
               10. This ten is to ſhew that Noah is the tenth from Adam, multiply Henoch by Noah, that is the number of of the Sabbath, by the full number 10. you haue the number 70. which throughout the Bible is famous, and of great force for light in the ſtorie. In this tenth age Gods iuſtice ouer all fleſh was extended.
            
            
               Compare him with Chriſt.
               
                  
                     
                        Noah
                        Chriſt
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Was a preacher of righteouſneſſe.
                              Found grace before God.
                              Was a

                                    
                                       King.
                                    
                                    
                                       Prophet.
                                    
                                    
                                       Sacrificer.
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Was the true preacher of righteouſneſſe, Dan 9.
                              Grew in fauour with God and man. Luke 2.
                              Was a

                                    
                                       King.
                                    
                                    
                                       Prophet.
                                    
                                    
                                       Sacrificer.
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Enoſh died
                  905 yeeres old.
                  
                  
                     Kenan died being
                  
                  910 yeeres old.
                  
                  
                     Mahalaleel died being
                  
                  895 yeeres old.
                  
                  
                     Iared died
                  962 yeeres old. While hee liued there was no proclaiming of the flood, but preſently after there was.
                  
               
            
            
               
               480. 120. Yeres begin Gen. 6.
               WHerein Noah made the Arke: for ſo long was he in making it, not becauſe he could not haue made it ſooner (for God could haue commanded it to be made with a word aſwell as he made all the world) but to ſhew the patience and long ſuffering of God in ſparing his iudgements, that they who would not heare the preaching of Noah, might iuſtly be condemned.
               Many things fall out in the Bible, whoſe numbers are anſwerable to this of 120.
               120. Nations paid tribute to bring the Iewes home from captiuity.
               The gouernement of the Perſians was about 120. yeeres.
               120. Seuerall nations, that is, ſome of euery Nation, were at Ieruſalem after Chriſts reſurrection.
               The Hebrewes deſcant very ſtrangely with the letters of Iehouah, and the 120. yeeres wherein the Arke was in making, thus: Multiplie 120. by the letter ה which is 5. then you haue 600. Multiplie 600. which is Noahs age at the flood, with the letter י which is 10. then you haue 6000, The end of the world. This is the conſent of all the Hebrewes.
               Here is a doubt to be diſcuſſed, concerning the wordes ſpoken in Gen. 6. The occaſion of the doubt ariſeth thus: God ſaith in Gen. 6. My ſpirit ſhall not alwaies ſtriue with man: his daies ſhalbe 120. yeares. In Ge. 5. Noahs age is reckoned, and he is then ſaid to be 500. yeares old, and begetteth Sem, Cham, and Iapheth. when his age is reckoned againe at the floude, the ſumme is but 600. ſo that if the 6 chapter be in time after the fift, and in the fift Noah is 500. yeares old, and that afterwardes God ſaith, the daies of all fleſh ſhalbee 120. yeares; then Noah at the floude muſt be 620. yeares: for put 120. to 500. and you haue 620 but his age at the floude is but 600. Therefore ſome thinke, that either the Chronicle is falſe, or els the 20. yeares were ſhortned like as it ſhall bee in the ende of the world, leaſt els no fleſh ſhould be ſaued.
               To anſwere this doubt, we muſt obſerue that it is no reaſon in Diuinitie, that becauſe a matter commeth or is made mention of in a Chapter afterwards that the time therfore of that ſtorie or action followeth the Chapters or Actions going before: For this is but a circumſtance of method. For Moſes in penning the Scriptures vſeth this order: he layeth down things of like nature together, as Genealogies together, and ſuch like, though they differ in time, becauſe elſe hee ſhould make often repetitions of the ſame things. The obſeruation

of this, cauſed the Hebrewes to ſet downe this rule, that Moſes in penning his ſtory, doth not regard the cricumſtance of firſt and latter. To wit, he doth not ſet downe, that in the firſt place which is firſt in time, & ſo, that which is later in time afterwards: but ſometimes that which is later, in the firſt place, and that which is firſt in time, in the laſt, as the neceſſity of the narration giueth occaſion. This being thus made plaine, the doubt is eaſily diſcuſſed, for neither is Noah 620. yeares olde at the floude, neither are the yeares of the floude any thing ſhortned, but the Chronicle is altogether true. For if wee referre the 120. yeares of the floude 20. yeares before that Chapter, in which it was ſayd, Noah was 500. yeares old and begot. Sem, Cham, and Iaphet, then do we make all things agree without croſſing one another. And this of neceſſetie we muſt needs doe: for ſeing God hath layd downe the Generals in proper and plaine termes, we muſt ſo caſt the particulers, that they may make the generall true, and no way alter it. Beſides, we haue a like example, for though all the liues & deaths of the fathers before the floud, are reckoned and ſummed vp together in one chapter, we muſt not thinke that all their liues are precedent to the Chapters following: for the Chronicle ſheweth that Lamech liued fiue yeares before the floud; and Methuſhelahs death, and the beginning of the floud are very neere. Euen ſo here, this ſentence of the 120. years is to be counted before the fift chapter, wherein Noahs age is reckoned, & for the ſhortning of the daies at the end of the world, the holy Ghoſt ſaith it ſhalbe ſo. But for the ſhortning of the daies at the floud, we haue no ſuch warrant in Moſes. Therfore we are not to beleiue it.
            
            
               
                  120. Yeares begin, Ge. 6. In which the Spirit of Chriſt preached while the Arke was in making.
               VPon this ſentence there dependeth a great and waightie queſtion. Whether Chriſt deſcended into Hell in his humane ſoule? The cauſe why this queſtion is neceſſarie to be handled, is, becauſe diuers of the ancient fathers, hold the opinion of Chriſt diſcent into hell in his humane ſoule, whoſe opinions hauing been ſo ſuperſtitiouſly receiued, haue drawen others of later time into the like errours. But if men would follow the plainneſſe layd downe in the Bible,

and with humilitie ſearch it, auoiding curioſitie, they neede not trouble themſelues with the errors of the Fathers. The words of the text, 1. Pet. 3. are theſe. Christ was dead concerning the fleſh, but was quickened by the Spirit. By the which hee alſo went and preached to the ſpirits in priſon, which in times past diſobeyed, when once the long ſuffering of God abode in the daies of Noah, while the Arke was in making. Now the words whereupon this error is grounded, are theſe. Chriſt being dead as concerning the fleſh, went and preached to the ſpirits in priſon. Vpon this they gather, that the ſpirits mentioned there, are meant thoſe in hell: and went and preached, that is, after he was dead. But if we compare theſe words with the reſidue, and conſider the time when this preaching was, we ſhall ſee Saint Peter meaneth nothing leſſe, than the deſcending of Chriſts ſoule into hell. For firſt the text ſaith, Hee went and preached by the ſame ſpirit by which he was quickned. This ſpirit is of neceſsitie the Godhead. For what ſpirit was there that could looſen the ſorrowes of death that they ſhould not hold him, and raiſe Chriſt from the dead, but the Godhead of Chriſt? Then the ſoules of all men, godly or vngodlie, being immortall cannot die, and therefore this quick
                     •
                  ing cannot be meant of his humane ſoule, for it needed none. Beſides, we muſt conſider to whom Saint Peter wrote, to wit, to the Iewes. Now ſeeing Chriſt taught nothing but Moſes and the Prophets, and the Apoſtles nothing but what they learned of Chriſt; with what conſcience could Saint Peter write a ſtorie to the Iewes of the ſeuere iuſtice of God, which was neuer in Moſes? for Moſes neuer mentioneth Chriſts deſcent into hell, there to cauſe the wicked to be more tormented. Therefore ſeeing this old opinion gathered out of the workes of the fathers, and bred by them, maintaineth manifeſt abſurdities, we muſt ſeeke for another expoſition. If we conſider the old Teſtament, we ſhall find that Eliphaz in the booke of Iob, preacheth the ſame doctrine that Saint Peter doth, and therefore will ſerue for an expoſition. Eliphaz reaſoneth with Iob thus: Haſte thou, O Iob, marked the way of the world wherein wicked men haue walked, which were cut off by time, and whoſe foundation was couered with waters, which ſaid vnto God, depart from vs? And yet what could he doe more for them? he filled their houſes with good things, yet they refuſed the way of the Almightie. So Saint Peter ſpeaketh, that the ſpirit of God went in like manner as he is ſaid, to come downe at the ouerthrow of Babell by confounding their tongues and when he deſtroyed Sodome and Gomorrah, and preached in Noah, to wit, the time while the Arke was in making To whom? to the ſpirits now in priſon▪ why? becauſe they ſaid to God depart from vs, we wil none of thy wayes. Thus you ſee the words of Saint Peter made plaine.
               
                  
                  This time of 120. yeeres, Saint Peter calleth the patience and long ſuffering of God. The Iewes in a booke called Zoar, expound S. Peters words in this ſort: The Lord commeth to plague the wicked for their vnbeliefe: ſixe moneths with water, ſixe monethes with fire, hot and cold, and ſent them all to Gehenna, which is hell; Not that they meant ſo, the ſtory of the word by plaine eye-ſight controleling it, but that the anger of God was as grieuous to their ſoules, as the waters of the flood which wrinkled their bodies. Chriſt in the Goſpell compareth the flood with the end of the world for in the dayes of Noah they had rich Iubal to feaſt them, and cunning Tubalkain to delight them in building or ſuch like deuiſes, and faire Naamah that they might marry according as their eyes luſted, till the waters of the flood ouerwhelmed them: ſo ſhall it be in the end of the world. Eliphaz counſelleth Iob, that conſidering the ende of theſe men, hee ſhould bee at peace with God, before our ſubſtance be cut off, and the fire conſume the reſt of them.
            
            
               
                  Iaphet borne.
               HIs name ſignifieth Perſwaded. He was the eldeſt ſonne of Noah, whereof many ſeeme to doubt: which being examined by Scripture, will appeare moſt certaine in Gen. 5. It is ſayd, Noah being 500. yeres old, he begetteth Sem, Cham, and Iaphet. Now it is certaine, that they were not borne all at once: for the plaine ſtorie croſſeth that. In Gen. 6. Noah is ſaid to be 600. yeeres old, and the flood commeth, then he muſt needes haue a ſonne that is 100. yeeres old. It could not be Sem, for hee was but 100. yeeres olde two yeeres after the flood. Gen. 11. Neither was it Cham, for he was yonger than Sem: For Noah ſaid hee knew what his yongeſt ſonne had done. The reaſon of the doubt ariſeth, becauſe Sem is named firſt, in Gen. 5. Whom Moſes (penning the ſtorie long after) placed firſt, to ſhew that Sem was the moſt worthie, and had the prerogatiue of firſt borne, becauſe Chriſt was to come from him according to the promiſe made to Eua in Paradiſe, The ſeede of the woman, ſhall breake the head of the Serpent.
               
            
            
               
                  Sem borne.
               WHich ſignifieth Name or Renowne. Whereby we are to vnderſtand, that Noah had a wonderfull aſſurance of the promiſe in Chriſt in calling him Sem, or, as we ſay, Name. And withall we are to

ſeeke by the like faith to be renowned, that our names may be written in the booke of life. For Salomon ſaith, Pro. 22. A good name is more worth than a precious oyntment. But God will put out their names from vnder heauen, that flatter themſelues in their wickedneſſes, and whoſe roote beareth gall and wormewood, as he commaunded. Deut. 25. Put out the name of Amalecke from vnder heauen: he is the beginning of Nations, but his latter end ſhall periſh vtterly.
               
            
            
               93. Lamech died
               Fiue yeeres before the flood, being 777. yeeres olde. His name runneth vpon ſeuens. For what he wanted in long life, he had it in caſting a ſweet account. If Lamech had the age of his fathers, he might haue ſeene the flood.
            
            
               98. Methuſhelah dieth
               Being 969. yeeres old, and the ſeuenth that died after Adam, as his Father Henoch was the ſeuenth that was borne after Adam. Hee died but a few dayes before the flood, to ſhew that he being a iuſt man, kept away the flood; and lacked but 31. yeere of 1000. Now it is not to be vnderſtood that he liued full 969▪ yeeres: for hee liued but a fewe dayes of his laſt yeere. For if his yeeres be caſt, you ſhall ſee hee dieth in the yeere of the flood. Now the flood came not in the firſt moneth, becauſe Methuſhelah then liued: the tenth day of the ſecond moneth the flood came. Methuſhelah was dead before that time, his dayes were the exact rule of the flood: for ſo long as hee liued, the waters could not ouerflow the earth: he being dead, the waters might aske God whether they ſhould now worke vengeance to the wicked? No, ſaith God, Noah ſhall mourne him a moneth, as the children of Iſrael mourned Iacobs death. Afterwards, this moneth of ſorrow being ended, then they demaund of God againe, whether now the wicked ſhould be ouerwhelmed with waters? God anſwereth No, For Noah ſhall haue a Sabbath of preparation. This being finiſhed, the flood couereth the face of the earth.
               
                  Methuſhelah
                  
                     Spoile death,
                  
                  
                     or Speare death.
                  
               
               
                  Chriſt
                  
                     Died, and roſe againe, and reuiued, that he might be Lord of quicke and dead.
                  
                  
                     Suffered death, that by his death he might ouercome him that had the power of death.
                  
               
               This halfe, ſheweth that at the flood, the dayes of man were ſhortned halfe in halfe, as Pſal. 89. The Lord hath ſhortned the dayes of youth.
               
               
                  Theſe numbers are the ſumme of the yeares from the Creation to the floud, which are gathered by the particuler natiuities of the Ten Fathers before the floud.
               
                  Theſe particulers being added, they make the yeares of the world at the floude. 1656.
                  
                     Adam. 130
                  
                  
                     Seth. 105
                  
                  
                     Enoſh. 90
                  
                  
                     Kenan. 70
                  
                  
                     Mahalaleel. 65
                  
                  
                     Iared. 162
                  
                  
                     Henoch. 65
                  
                  
                     Methuſhelah. 187
                  
                  
                     Lamech. 182
                  
                  
                     Noah. 600.
                  
               
            
            
               The floud is brought vpon the olde world, &c.
               THe floude is a reſemblance of the deſtruction of the world, and was the greateſt iudgement of the world, till the world ſhalbe conſumed with fire. Therfore the ſtory of the floud doth cauſe vs to conſider of things paſt, and to haue iudgement of things to come. For in the floude are rare examples concerning waighing, numbring and diuiding. It was 40. daies in rayning: the like time in abating. God hath numbred, waighed, and diuided. The ſecond day of the ſeuenth moneth, The times do ſhew, that God doth waigh and number wonderfully all the affaires of men: but men did not then know what God would doe, becauſe he had hardned their hearts, and ſcorning Noah all his life time, they were aſhamed then to fly vnto him, but the floud came for the ſinnes of man; for the bloud of Abell came the floude and waſht them all away. Yea the waters that were vnder the earth aduanced themſelues aboue man.
               Further in this ſtorie of the floud, theſe three things are chieflye to be conſidered, the

                     
                        Arke.
                     
                     
                        Perſons that were ſaued.
                     
                     
                        Time of the continuance of the floude.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               And firſt for the Arke.
               
               THe Arke was made about mount Lebanon, where the Cedars for Salomons Temple were had, and it was ſixe ſcore yeeres in making: which time in Saint Peter is called the long ſuffering of God. The fortie yeeres in the wilderneſſe was a famous thing: but the making of the Arke was more famous, and the time thriſe ſo long: not any thing ſo famous as the Arke, except the Lords death. The proportions of height, depth, and breadth, are deſcribed Gen. 6. The heighth is the tenth part of the length. The beaſts were in the middlemoſt place; the fodder aboue, the dung beneath. And God bids vs marke the quantitie of all the beaſts of the earth, by the bulke of the Arke. There is much ſpeach taken from the Arke to the Church; but the conſequent of the one followeth not in the other.
               
                  
                     In the Arke were beaſts cleane and vncleane.
                  
                  
                     Some in the Arke did periſh.
                  
                  
                     They that were out of the Arke did periſh.
                  
                  
                     The waters did hold vp the Arke.
                  
                  
                     In the Church are faithfull and vnfaithfull.
                  
                  
                     Some in the Church do periſh.
                  
                  
                     So the Turke being out of the Church, doth periſh.
                  
                  
                     The waters doe waſh them clean away that are without
                  
               
               The toſsing vpon the waters, doth repreſent the troubles which the Church of God is to endure in this life. Againe, no man of modeſtie but may know, that it was no pleaſant life for Noah and his familie to dwell an whole yeere vpon the waters, and to abide the noiſomnes of all kindes of beaſts in the Arke, which came to the Arke at the appointment of God, to the condemnation of all the world. For it appeareth, that the verie brute beaſts had more regard to themſelues, than the wicked workers which deſpiſed the preaching of Noah, and the making of the Arke, who ſaid, where is the appearance of his comming? Euer ſince the Fathers died, all things continue in one ſtate: winter, ſummer, ſpring, harueſt &c. And while they were thus ſaying, the flood commes and waſheth away their foundation. But, ſaith Saint Peter, in this they a
                     •
                  e willingly ignorant, for euen as before the flood, they married, feaſted, builded goodlie houſes, &c. euen to the day that Noah entred into the Arke, and neuer thought the preaching of Noah true, becauſe all things continued ſtill in the ſame ſort, they thought it vnpoſsible that the waters which were beneath the valleyes could couer the higheſt mountaines fifteene cubits: and yet this

they might haue knowen, that as the waters in the Creation couered the earth till God commaunded them to goe to their channell; euen ſo againe at the commaundement of God, they could returne to couer it. Saint Peter therefore addeth, that theſe men were willinglie ignorant.
               The Arke reſted vpon mount Ararat, which is a mountaine in Armenia, and ſignifieth, Take away feare. Whereby we are to note, that whoſoeuer dwelleth vnder the defence of the moſt high, and ſhall ſay vnto the Lord, Thou art my hope, my ſtrong hold, and my God in whom I put my truſt, ſhall not be afraid for any terror by night, nor for the arrow that flyeth by day, for the pestilence that walketh in darkeneſſe, nor the ſickeneſſe that deſtroyeth in the noone day. For a thouſand ſhall fall at their right hand, & ten thouſand at their left hand, but they ſhall not be touched. With their eyes ſhall they ſee the reward of the vngodly: for the Lord is their hope, and he hath ſet his houſe of defence very high. With long life will he ſatisfie them, and through his louing kindneſſe will he ſhew them his ſaluation. Let euery one therefore ſay, The Lord is my light and my ſaluation, whom then ſhall I feare? The Lord is the ſtrength of my life, whereof then ſhould I be afraid? for in the time of trouble he ſhall hide me in his Tabernacle, and ſet me vp vpon a Rocke of Stone.
               
            
            
               Now compare Chriſt and the Arke together.
               
                  The Arke had a doore, by the which Noah and his houſhold entred in, to the ſauing of them.
                  Mount Ararat, Take away feare.
                   Chriſt Is the doore by whom we enter into the holy of holieſt, to the ſauing of our ſoules.
                  Chriſt Is that mount Ararat vpon whoſe ſhoulders if we reſt, wee need not feare what man can doe vnto vs.
               
               
                  The perſons were
                  
                     Noah
                     Iaphet
                     Sem
                     Cham
                  
                  and their wiues. Pſal. 130. The Lord hath brought my ſoule out of hell, and kept my life from them that goe downe to the pit.
            
            
               Hebrews 11. By faith Noah prepared the Arke to the ſauing of his houſhold.
               
                  NOah walked with God, therefore it is certaine, that the ſpirit of Chriſt preached by him. For Saint Peter giueth a rule: The ſpirit

of Chriſt ſpake in all the Prophets. His calling was very glorious, being made a preacher to declare ſaluation to all which would beleeue in Chriſt. How he was receiued, it is manifeſt, ſeing he preuailed with a very few: yet the word of God is not in vaine: for ſeeing they refuſed the mercie of God offered in Chriſt, it is certaine Noah would preach the iudgements of God the other part of the Goſpell, which the Latines call excommunication. The Hebrewes, The Lord commeth. The Hebrewes, and with them the Greeke Orators do vſe to faine Proſopopeia, which is a conference or communication, when they meane to expreſſe things more at full. So wee may imagine Tubalkaine to ſay, Surely Noah is an honeſt man, and payeth well for his worke, and hee hath with very great charge kept a great ſort of labourers theſe ſixe-ſcore yeeres. What ſhould he meane by this? Surely, anſwereth Iubal, I will tell you ſtrange things. Seuen of my beſt Rammes, and ſeuen of my beſt Ewes ran from my flocke right foorth to the Arke, and there they went in. And another ſtanding by, replieth, I am ſure I can tell (ſaith he) as great a meruaile as this: for comming by a wood, I ſawe a fearefull Lyon, and a fierce Lyoneſſe, and they went as gently by me as two Lambes, not offering to do me any hurt, and came to the Arke, and there were plankes ſet, and they went in. Yea (ſaith another) I ſaw a huge Beare doe the like: and ſo they might ſpeake of the reſt of the beaſts. This might driue them to an amaſedneſſe, but this could not ſaue them. And hereby it is apparant, that it is not in our power to repent when we liſt. For this is not repentance, to be ſory for our ſins: (There is no man ſo wicked but hath done ſo) There muſt alſo be a turning to God, which is neuer, except we be lightned by his ſpirit. The Lord vſeth firſt to offer mercy, which if it be contemned, he hardneth our hearts, that thereby we may be made more fit for his iudgements.
               
                  Cham was ſaued in the Arke to be a ſcourge for all the reſt. And if you marke through the Bible, you ſhall find that God dealeth in the like ſeueritie. For euery good familie hath one of Chams impietie to perſecute him.
               
                  
                     Adam had The Serpent to tempt them.
                  
                     Abell had Kaine to kill him.
                  
                     Iſaack had Iſmael to flout him.
                  
                     Iacob had Eſau to purſue him.
                  
                     Ioſeph had His owne brethren to ſell him.
                  
                     Iob had His wife and friends to reproue him.
                  
                     The Iſraelites had Pharaoh to afflict them▪
                  
               
               
                  
                  Dauid had

                     
                        Saule and
                     
                        Abſalom
                     
                  
to perſecute him.
               
                  The Iewes had the

                     
                        Babylonians,
                     
                     
                        Medes and Perſians,
                     
                     
                        Grecians,
                     
                     
                        Sirogrecians,
                     
                  
to ſubdue them.
               
                  Chriſt had the

                     
                        Iewes, and
                     
                        Romanes,
                     
                  
to crucifie him.
            
            
               
                  ❧ The time of the continuance of the Flood, is thus deſcribed.
               IN the dayes of the Flood Moſes teacheth two things: the dayes of the moneth, and the dayes of the whole yeare. For hee writeth, that the Flood began the Seuenteenth day of the Second moneth, and that the waters preuailed One Hundred and Fiftie dayes, and that the next day after One Hundred and Fiftie, was the Seuenteenth day of the Seuenth moneth. Six and Fortie dayes had paſſed before the Floud: for the Seuen and Fortie day (I meane the Seuenteenth day of the Second moneth) the Floud began. Ioyne One Hundred and Fiftie with Six and Fortie, they make plainely One hundred, Nintie, and Sixe dayes, which diuided by Thirtie, leaue Sixe exact moneths, and the Seuenteene dayes of the Seuenth Moneth, in which Moſes writeth that the Arke reſted. Hereby it is moſt euident, that in ancient time they had Thirtie dayes to a Moneth. Moreouer a moderate expounder of Moſes ſhall finde Three hundred, ſixtie and fiue dayes in the yeare of the floud, Thus: The firſt day of the Tenth Moneth, Two hundred, Seuentie and One dayes from the beginning of the yeare, the tops of the Mountaines were diſcouered▪ 
                  Noah taried yet Fortie dayes when Three hundred and Eleuen dayes were paſt: then he ſent forth a Rauen which houered a long time, hee nameth not the time, but as Seuen vpon Seuen in the Doue is expreſſed; ſo Fortie vppon Fortie is here to be vnderſtood. So then there are Three hundred, fiftie and one dayes; to which adde the fourteene laſt, in which

the Doue was twiſe ſent forth, then you haue Three hundred, ſixtie and foure dayes, after the Fourteene dayes, in which the Doue returned not. Moſes reckoneth the firſt day of the Moneth, in theſe words. In the Six hundred and One of the age of Noah, the firſt day of the firſt Moneth, the waters were dried vp. Concerning the fiue dayes, euerie ſixe yeares they make a leap Moneth, and the odde quarter of a day in One hundred and Twentie yeares, make a leape Moneth.
               Thus much for the vſe of the Fathers before the Flood.
            
         
         
            
               
                  ❧ NOW FOLLOWETH THE Fathers after the Flood, whoſe Storie containeth vnto the promiſe giuen vnto Abraham, 427 yeeres.
               
                  ❧ Some thinge will I ſpeake of the generall vſe of them both.
               
                  WE haue two ſtayes: the Fathers before the flood, and the Fathers after the flood. The ſumme of all is nothing elſe, but to know God, and him whom he hath ſent, Ieſus Chriſt. For ſurely the ſpirit of God hath in ſuch plaineſſe penned downe the Storie of the Scriptures, that all the world muſt wonder at the wiſdome of God layd downe ſo ſhortly and plainely. Before the flood, hee taught nothing but the Goſpell, adding to the doctrine thereof Kaines Murther, and Lamechs Adulterie. And after the flood we haue not Ten notable Fathers as before: for Terah the Father of Abraham fell away, and worſhipped ſtrange Gods. And ſurely, as the Sunne, Moone, and Starres, are glorious and excellent for the diſtinguiſhing of times: ſo are the numbers of the ages of the fathers, and through the Scripture for the cleareneſſe of the word. Times are generall, or particular; generall, from Adam to the flood, and from thence to Abrahams promiſe,

from thence to the comming out of Egipt, then to the building of Salomons Temple, then to the burning thereof, by the Babilonians, and then to the end of the captiuity, and from thence to the death of Chriſt. Theſe are the ſumme of all the times, the proofe of theſe is ſcattered through the Scriptures. Thus much for the two tables in generall.
            
            
               After the flood.
               
                  NOah, and Sem, be here handled againe, becauſe their ſtory continued through and after the floode.
            
            
               Compare Noah with Adam, and you ſhall ſee that Noah is another Adam.
               
                  
                     
                        Adam
                        Noah
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 was an husbandman.
                              
                              
                                 Became into tranſgreſsion by eating vnlawfully.
                              
                              
                                 And Euah after their tranſgreſsion, ſeeing their nakednes, ſowed figge tree leaues to couer them, and the very ſame words that God ſpake to Adam in Paradiſe for ruling and encreaſing, the very ſame he reneweth to Noah.
                              
                                 Had the tree of life in Paradiſe, for a ſeale of conſeruation.
                              
                              Had twoo younger Sonnes good, and the elder wicked.
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 Was an huſbandman.
                              
                              
                                 Became into tranſgreſsion by drinking vnlawfully.
                              
                              
                                 After his tranſgreſsion hauing his nakednes vncouered, is couered by Sem & Iaphet.
                              
                                 Had the rainbowe as a couenant of preſeruation.
                              
                              
                                 Had twoo eldeſt Sons good, and the younger wicked.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Kaine the eldeſt Son of Adam, was curſed.
                        
                           Cham the yongeſt Son of Noah, euen to Canaan, his youngeſt Sonne, was curſed.
                     
                  
               
               The one againſt nature, killed his brother. The other againſt humanitie vncouered his fathers nakednes.
               
                  Adam before the flood might eate no fleſh. Noah after the floode

might eat fleſh, the blood onely excepted, becauſe in the blood of euerie thing is the life, and the life of euerie thing will God require at euerie creatures hand: from the ſeueritie of which, a commandement againſt murther was giuen to Noah.
               
               The reaſon why they might eat fleſh after the flood, and not before, may be, becauſe the dayes of man being ſhortened at the flood halfe in halfe, the bodies of men were afterwards of a more weake conſtitution, and then you read firſt of planting of Vines for wine, which was added to be a helpe in digeſtion, to the ſtrengthning of the bodie, and quickning of the vitall ſpirits, as in Pſal. 104. Wine doth make the heart glad, and oyle doth cauſe a cheerefull countenance.
               
               
                  Noah was drunke, and vncouered in the midſt of his tent, and awaking from his wine, hee knew what his youngeſt Sonne had done, and ſayd, Curſed be Canaan: a ſlaue of ſlaues ſhall he be (now Noah would not curſe Cham, becauſe God bleſſed him, but hee curſed Canaan his Nephew the Sonne of Cham, who as ſome ſuppoſe derided alſo his Grandfather.) Bleſsed be the God of Sem, and God will perſwade Iaphet to dwell in the Tents of Sem. Vpon theſe three ſentences doe the chiefe Stories of the Bible depend. For whatſoeuer plagues doth befall the Egyptians, the Cananites, Ethiopians, Blackemores, Babylonians, and ſuch like, is contained within Chams curſe. Whatſoeuer bleſsing is promiſed or performed to the Iews, is comprehended within Sems bleſsing. Whatſoeuer promiſes of mercie, and ſauing health was prophecied of to the Gentiles, is vnderſtood vnder theſe words, And God will perſwade Iapheth to dwell in the Tents of Sem.
               The Prophet Noah ſpake not at randome, when he ſayd, Bleſsed be the God of Sem. But what is there ſpoken ſhort in due time, is drawne out longer, and the not regarding the bleſsing of Sem, doth make many things in the new Teſtament to be neglected.
            
            
               And firſt for Cham.
               
               HIs name ſignifieth Hote or Cholericke, and thoſe Countreys did his Sons after the confuſion of tongues poſſeſſe, namely, in Africa in the South Countrey. Cham the Prince of Affricke, the ſpreader of wickedneſſe, inhabited the fourth part of the world with his families. His houſe neuer got any victorie, but for ſome eſpeciall puniſhment to bee ſhewed vpon Sems houſe. Cham had a curſe in this world, and doubtleſſe in the world to come.
               He had foure Sonnes, the firſt Cuſh, of whome came the Ethiopians, or in our tongue, Burnt faces: the ſecond Mitzraijm, of whome the

Egyptians come, for Mitzraijm doth ſignifie Egypt. The third Put, of whome the Lybians and Blackamores come: and the fourth Canaan, of whome the Cananites come, in whome the curſe of Cham was pronounced, notwithſtanding it falleth out alſo in all his other Sonnes. And as Canaan was a ſlaue of ſlaues; ſo are they that are of the like infidelitie: ſo that oftentimes for the horrible impietie of one man, the whole Nation fareth the worſe.
               This Canaan had eleuen Sonnes, and himſelfe made the twelfe, and his Countrey was called Canaan, which once was Paradiſe. And as Paradiſe to Adam reſembled the ſtate of heauen: ſo did the land of Canaan to the Iſraelites, and the Iewes; for it was a land abounding with all good things. In Paradiſe was the tree of life: In Canaan Chriſt was borne, the true Tree of life. Adam neglecting the true ſeruice of God in Paradiſe, was driuen from thence. The Iewes neglecting their Sabbaths, and finally, the knowledge of Chriſt, were likewiſe driuen out of Canaan. But, as notwithſtanding Adams fall, ſaluation in Paradiſe was promiſed to all the world: ſo, notwithſtanding the ſin of the Iewes, Chriſt in Canaan wrought the full ſaluation of all the world.
               Theſe eleuen Sonnes of Canaan were ſetled in one ſoyle, that is, in Canaan (which is about One Hundred and Sixtie miles from North to South, and Sixtie miles from Eeaſt to Weſt. Their names are Zidon, who built Tyrus the glorie of the world for traffique of Marchandize. Heth Gebuſi, who after Sems death (as it ſhould appeare) poſſeſſed Ieruſalem: Amori Girgaſhi, of whome there were ſome left till Chriſts time, as Mat. 8.28. Hiuits, of whome Abraham bought his burying place, of whoſe kindred alſo, Eſau tooke him wiues: Arkite, Siuite, Aruadite, Zemathite, Hemathite. It is ſuppoſed they had ſo many tongues, as there were Nations: but it was no otherwiſe than our Corniſh and Northerne men differ in their tongues. Theſe were Lordes of the whole ſoyle, to plant, build, and repleniſh it againſt time to come, that the twelue Tribes of Iſrael might haue Vineyards that they neuer planted, and houſes that they neuer builded. Wherevpon Moſes ſayth. Deut. 32. When the moſt high God diuided to the Nations their inheritance, hee appointed the borders of a people according to the number of the Sonnes of Iſrael. And when God promiſeth to Abram, Geneſ. 14. that hee will giue his ſeede a Land that ſhall flowe with Milke and Honie, hee bordereth it from Egypt to the great Riuer, the Riuer Euphrates, within which borders are contained the ſeuerall Lordſhips of Canaan, and his Sonnes, namely, the Kenites, the Ken
                        •
                     ſites, the Cadmonites, the Hethites, the Phereſites, the Gyaunts, the Amorites, the Cananites,
                  
the Girgaſhites, and the Gebuſites.
               
               Becauſe Cham ſcorned his Father, who was the reſtorer of all the world, therefore his Countrey was to bee giuen to Sems Houſe, the Iewes: and they were driuen out of their Land by the Sword of Ioſhua, except ſome fewe, who were left in the Land, to bee ſpurres in the ſides, and thornes in the eyes of the Iſraelites, who were to poſſeſſe it, that when through the aboundance of wealth they grewe to forget God, they might bee chaſtened with his rodde of correction. Thus Kaines curſe is extended euen to Canaan his youngeſt Sonne, and hee is made a Seruant of Seruants to Sem, that the bleſsing to Sem might appeare, and the open curſed, ſhould ſerue the open bleſſed, although it bee Nine Hundred yeares after Noahs prophecie, to ſhewe that although God ſuffer the wicked a while, and doth deferre his puniſhments vntill the ſinne of the Ammorites come to a full ripeneſſe; that yet hee is a righteous Iudge, and ſitteth vpon a fierie throne, from whoſe preſence doth iſſue Riuers of fire, to conſume all ſuch as will not learne to knowe the ſeede of the woman, to bee able to breake the head of the Serpent, nor deſire to dwell in the Tents of Sem, acknowledging the God of Abraham, the God of Iſaach, and the God of Iacob, to bee the true God that keepeth couenant with all, whoſe garments were waſhed in wine, and his mantle in the bloud of grapes: Nor marke that Shiloh is that Emanuel, God with vs, who is that Stone that can grinde the mightieſt Gyaunt in the Land of Canaan to powder, who haue eyes, and will not ſee how God with fire from heauen conſumed their Cities, turning Lots wife into a pillar of ſalt, ouerthrewe their kinſmen, Pharaoh in the Redde Sea, and made the walles of Iericho to fall downe without violent handes. Chams houſe was not plagued for building Babel onely, but for falling from the Religion of Sem: and his poſteritie had a deadly minde againſt true Religion. And as Cham and the reſt are in Gehenna in darkeneſſe; ſo in the Scripture, they are left in darkneſſe. For there is no time of any of them mentioned when they died, but are left in darkeneſſe.
               The wicked men of Canaan would neuer yeeld to the truth, but praiſed Gods of gold, braſſe, and ſtone.
            
            
               
               Now followeth for Iaphet.
               
               HIs name ſignifieth Perſwaded. He had ſeuen Sonnes Gomer, Magog, Madai, of whome came the Meedes. Iauan, of whome the Grecians and the Romanes come: and Tubal, and Meſech, of whom the Muſcouites come. And Tiras, of whome the Thraſians come. Of theſe were the Iſles of the Gentiles diuided in their Lands.
               
                  Iaphet, hee was partaker with Sem in the action of couering their Father, but Sem had the prerogatiue of the promiſe concerning Chriſt; notwithſtanding Iaphet was the elder. And if you marke through all the Bible, you ſhall not find the firſt borne of any of Chriſts Aunceſtors to haue the promiſe pronounced to them in open termes, becauſe Chriſt the firſt begotten of his Father, would not come according to the luſt of the fleſh, or courſe of nature, but by grace. Sem in regard of that, had the glorie of God preached in his Tents, vntill the acceptable Child did come, in whome all Nations ſhould bee bleſſed. And when the glorie of Sems houſe, which were the Iewes, was extinct, Iohn was baniſhed into Patmes, and is commaunded to write to the Seuen Congregations in Aſia the leſſer (where Iaphets Sonnes were firſt ſetled, to ſo many Congregations, as Iaphet had Sonnes.) Grace and peace from him that was, and is, and which is to come, and from the ſeuen Spirits, expreſſed in Eſay, 11. which are before his throne, and from Ieſus Chriſt, which is a faithfull witneſſe, and firſt begotten of the dead, Alpha, and Omega, the firſt and the laſt, who is aliue, but was dead, and behold he liues for euer and euer, and hath the keys of hell, and of death, and giueth light and life to Iaphet the Gentile, who was in darkeneſſe, and in the ſhadowe of death, perſwading him to dwell in the Tents of Sem, to be a dweller in the ſpirituall Canaan, and a Citizen in the heauenly Salem, where there is no earthly Temple. For God almightie, and the Lambe are the Temple of it.
            
            
               Now for Sem.
               
               
                  SEm being one Hundred yeares old, begetteth Arphaxad two yeeres after the flood; ſo old was Abraham when hee begat Iſaack.
               
               He is in vertue equall with any before the flood.
               
                  This Sem was a

                     
                        King.
                     
                     
                        Prophet.
                     
                     
                        Sacrificer.
                     
                  
               
               He ſignifieth, A Name, to teach them that the ſhould looke to him in whom Sem, and the whole world ſhould be bleſſed.
               He had fiue ſonnes

                     
                        Elam.
                     
                     
                        Aſhur.
                     
                     
                        Arphaxad.
                     
                     
                        Lud.
                     
                     
                        Amram.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Elam of whom the Perſians. Aſhur of whom the Aſſyrians. Arphaxad of whom Chriſt. Amram of whom the Aramites. Lud of whom the Lidians.
               There be diuers which condemne Genealogies, warranted therby (as they affirme) by Saint Pauls Councill to Timothie: neither that they giue heed to fables and Genealogies endleſſe, which breede rather queſtions, then godly edifying by faith. Indeed ſeeing Genealogies are of great conſequence to the prouing of Chriſt to be the Meſsias: the Iewes to croſſe this, faine diuers of their owne, which S. Paul calleth endleſſe, and therefore to be auoided, as alſo tales inuented by them, whereby they corrupted the ſtory of the Scriptures. But this condemneth not the Genealogies, which the Holy Ghoſt penneth, but rather approueth them. And if we doe but croſſe the account laide downe by the heathen, we do obſcure the euidence of the Scriptures. Thus much for the anſwere of this obiection.
            
            
               100. Arphachſad borne.
               HIs name ſignifieth Healing. Some hold that the Caldeans come from him.
               CHRIST healeth all our infirmities.
               
            
            
               
                  Shelah borne.
               HIs name ſignifieth Spoyling. He was the Father of the Shelanites: When he is thirtie yeeres old, he begetteth Heber.
               
               
                  
                  Heber a repreſenter of the ſonne of God, who beginning to be thirtie yeeres old, buildeth vp the decayed walles of the Gentiles.
               Thirtie yeeres after the promiſe giuen to Abram was it before his ſeed began to be afflicted. Ioſeph being thirtie yeeres old, expoundeth Pharaohs dreame.
               
                  Heber ſignifieth Pilgrime, or ſtranger: ſo ſaith Abraham. I am a ſtranger and Pilgrime, giue me a place for money to burie my dead: So ſaith Saint Peter, repeating the ſame ſtorie. I beſeech you as Pilgrims and ſtrangers to abſtaine from fleſhly lusts, which fight againſt the ſoule. Hebers poſteritie went as ſtrangers, flitting from land to land, looking for a Citie whereof God was the builder, Heb. 11.
               
               Hereby we are taught that the world is not the end to which wee were created, but that the glory of God is the end or marke that wee ought to leuell at. For if we conſider Man and the World, in man the ſences, and in the world the ſenſible things. Man as the beholder, the world as the Theatre. Man as the gueſt, in the world the Feaſt prepared of all things conuenient for him: wee will preſently ſay, not only that they be made one for another, but alſo that in very deed the world was made for man and not man for the world. And againe, if wee conſider how the world affordeth content of pleaſures to all the ſences, but nothing ſufficient to content the minde, ſhall wee not conclude, that as the pompe of this pilgrimage cannot bee mans end, ſo can it not alſo bee his full contentation? but man by a peculiar priuiledge hath an Vnderſtanding wit, which was giuen vnto him, and Will, which he receiued franke and free: the one to knowe and diſcerne the leuell of his ende, the other, to loue and embrace it. Seeing then the hither ende of all creatures heere beneath is Man, and the furtheſt end of them is God: the neereſt and immediate end of man is to know God in the death merits of his Sonne Chriſt, and them to embrace as the ſoueraigne welfare and comfort of our ſoules, when from this handfull of earth our ſoules muſt goe to God that gaue it. And what gaineth it a man to get all the kingdomes in the world by humane policie, and want grace to ayme the end of our pilgrimage at heauen? For what elſe is the getting of this world, but a proofe of want and pouertie? And what are honour, vaine titles, and Imperiall glories, but a ſtampe of the diuels nature? Therefore, as the end of the firſt man when he was in his perfect holines▪ was to attaine vnto God, ſo the end of vs, who by regeneration are partakers of that righteouſnes, muſt tend wholly to the mortifying of our worldly affections▪ and accounting of theſe tranſitory momentaries, as though they were not. And to be ſhort, like as the ſoule is the ſhape of man, ſo is the knowledge

of God the true ſhape of mans vnderſtanding: and what deſire we but the things that are? and what can he want, which poſſeſſeth him, in whom all things are? Then let vs ſay, that as it had beene a happie caſe for Adam to haue continued ſtill in his firſt eſtate: ſo is it now for vs to returne thither againe: that is, to be ſet againe in Gods fauor, that we may one day ſee his face yet againe. And becauſe this vnſpeakeable bleſſedneſſe cannot be brought to perfection in this life ſo full of miſerie, we muſt ſo diſpoſe our life in this world, not to liue ſtill in the world, but to die in reſpect of theſe dead things, and to liue vnto God, if we intend to liue the true and euerlaſting life: for our true reſting point, is the turning againe vnto God, from whoſe fauour and fellowſhip we be departed.
               
                  Man is compoſed of bodie and ſoule, the body mortall, the ſoule immortall: now if we ſet mans felicitie in his bodie onely, we doe too great wrong both to the ſoule and to the whole man. For if it conſiſt in the bodie, it periſheth and fadeth with the body: and then what remaineth to the ſoule which ouerliueth, but wretchedneſſe? but wee looke for a felicitie which belongeth to the whole man. In the ſoule ioyned with the body, we haue three abilities, Life, Sence, Vnderſtanding. The ſoule giueth life vnto the body: and the perfection of life, is health. If our life then ſerue to no other end, than the outward things of this pilgrimage; what had the firſt man to do with any of them, who was created perfect, enioying the benefit of the whole world? and if theſe things muſt be the end of vs now after our corruption, what is more vnhappy, than man? & what is more vncapable of happines, than man? A body ſubiect to infinite diſeaſes: weake, fraile, fraught with miſeries within, wrapped in them without, alwayes vncertaine of life, euermore ſure of death, whom a worme, an herbe, a graine of duſt may kill, who if hee looked for no other happineſſe than this, were much better to be a plant, than a man. And what man is he, that feeleth not a law in himſelfe, that goes about to bridle him, which feeleth not a guiltie and accuſing conſcience in the midſt of his pleaſure? or whoſe greateſt delights leaue him not a ſting of repentance behind them? And what happineſſe can that be, whereof we bee aſhamed? Now then, ſeeing that we haue a double life, the one in this world, the other in another; the one dying, the other immortall: the firſt which is here, tending to the ſecond, as the worſe to the better: our ſeeking muſt not bee for ſuch an end, or ſuch a felicitie as dieth with vs, but for ſuch a one as maketh vs happie, quickneth vs and refreſheth vs eternally, which ſurely is not to be found in mortall things. Where is this happineſſe then to be found? In wiſedome, in religion, and in knowledge, which are not attained vnto by reaſon, but by faith. For

beliefe mounteth higher than our vnderſtanding. And a certaine Arabian proceeded ſo farre, as to ſay, that the root whereby the felicitie to come is contained vnto, is faith, and what is this faith in God, but a belieuing that our eternall happineſſe liueth in him? And what is the belieuing, but a hoping for it? And what is hope, but the deſiring of it? And what is the deſire of it, but the hauing of it? And what is the continuers beliefe of it here, but a bewraying that here we cannot enioy it? And if we haue not faith, what haue wee but ignorance? And if wee haue faith, what haue wee but a deſire and longing, conſidering that the greater our faith is, the more we deſpiſe the baſe things of this world? And the greater our deſire is, the more we hate our ſelues, and the more earneſtly do we loue God. And to be ſhort, what is bleſſedneſſe afore appointed: but we would ſee it? The way vnto felicitie, but we would enioy it? Looke then what proportion is betweene that which is preſent, and that which is to come; ſuch proportion is there betwixt the hope we haue here, and the perfection of that good which we hope to attaine vnto. It followeth then, ſeeing the world was made for man, man for the ſoule, the ſoule for the mind, the mind for God: that all our doings can haue no end to reſt vpon here but onely in the life to come, which is the beholding & true knowing of God. For who is he that would depart with any peece of his owne liking in this life, but in hope of better things? And what were it for him to looſe his life, if there were not a life more happie after this? The taking vp of that godly man Henoch out of this life, was to no other end, but to ſet him in another life void of all euill. And when we read the turmoiles of Noah, the ouerwhartings of Abraham, the perſecution of Iſaack, the baniſhment and wayfaring of Iacob, the diſtreſſes of Ioſeph, Moſes, and the reſidue of the fathers; they all ſhewe vnto vs, that they ſurely looked for a better life after this, and that there is a iudgement to come. For had they looked for no other comfort after this life, the fleſh would haue perſwaded them to haue held thē
                  ſelues in quiet here. Noah among his friends, Abrahā
                   among the Chaldees, Moſes in Pharaohs Court, Salomon in his pleaſures, &c. But they knew that their ſhoot-anker was to liue immortally vnited vnto God.
               
                  Hermes in his Poemander, ſaith, that God made man like vnto himſelfe, and he linked him to him as his ſonne: for he was beautifull and made after his owne image, and gaue him all his workes to vſe at his pleaſure, and therefore he exhorteth him to forſake his bodie to manure his ſoule, and to conſider the originall roote from whence it ſprang, which is not earthly, but heauenly. Diſcharge thy ſelfe (ſaith he) of this body, which thou beareſt about thee: for it is but a cloake of ignorance, a foundation of infection, a place of corruption, a liuing

death, a ſenſible carion, a portable graue, and a houſhold theefe: it flattereth thee becauſe it hateth thee, & it hateth thee becauſe it enuieth thee: as long as that liueth, it bereaueth thee of life, and thou haſt not a greater enemy than that. Now to what end were it for him to forſake this light, this dwelling place, & this life, if it were not for a better in an other world? therfore Chalcidius ſaith, I go home again into mine own coūtry, where my better forefathers & kinsfolks be. And a wiſe man of the Chaldeys exhorteth men, with ſpeed to returne vnto their heauenly father, & to ſeeke Paradiſe as the peculiar dwelling place of the ſoule. This is confirmed in the Goſpel, when Chriſt promiſeth the theefe that day he ſhould be with him in Paradiſe. And of Epicharin, we haue this ſaying, If thou beeſt a good man in thy heart, death can doe thee no harme: for thy ſoule ſhall liue happily in heauen. And Plato willed his ſoule to returne home to her kinred, and to her firſt originall, that is, ſaith he, to the wiſe and immortall godhead the fountaine of all goodneſſe, as called home from baniſhment into our owne natiue countrey.
               
                  Seneca ſpeaking of the Lady Martiares ſonne being dead, ſaith, he is now euerlaſting and in the beſt ſtate, bereft of this earthly baggage which was none of his, and ſet free to himſelfe: for theſe bones, theſe ſinewes, this coat of skinne, this face, and theſe ſeruiceable hands, are but fetters and priſons of the ſoule. By them the ſoule is ouerwhelmed, beaten downe, and chaſed away. It hath not a greater battell than with that maſſe of fleſh: for feare of being torne in pieces, it laboureth to returne from whence it came, where it hath ready for it an happie and euerlaſting reſt.
               We read of the Thracians, that they ſorrowed at the birth of their children, and reioyced at the death of them, becauſe they thought that which we call death, not to be a death, but rather a very happie birth. Therefore Herodotus calleth theſe people the neuer dying Getes, and the Greekes the neuer dying Thracians. For they were of opinion, that at their departure out of this world, they went to Zamolxis or Gabeleize, that is, to him that gaue them health, ſaluation, or welfare. Herocles ſaith, that the wicked would not haue their ſoules to be immortall, to the intent they might not be puniſhed for their faultes, but yet that they preuent the ſentence of their Iudge by condemning themſelues vnto death aforehand. But the godlie endure many harde thinges in the frowarde generations.
               This Heber is from the Creation the fourteenth, two ſeuens, a double Henoch. He is the fourth after the flood, as Iuda is the fourth ſonne of Iacob, of whom Chriſt came. He is the ſeuenth from Henoch,
                  
a man for rare bleſsings to be compared with Henoch, and is the ſame in force, that Henoch is, although you would thinke them cleane contrary: and ſo they are in ſignification, but in effect of diuinitie all one. For Henoch ſignifieth Dedicated to God, and Heber Pilgrime or Stranger: and he that is a ſtranger vpon earth, deſpiſing the ſtate of worldly pompe, is a Citizen with God: therefore whoſoeuer will be a true Henoch, muſt alſo be a true Heber.
               
               And if we will be holy before God, and acceptable veſſels for the vſe of his Temple, we muſt beare palme boughes in our hands, ſinging Hoſanna to the higheſt, and be eſtraunged from the vaine conuerſation of this earthly Paradiſe: ſo ſhall our names continue famous through many generations as Hebers did, & we ſhall ſpeake the praiſes of God in our owne tongue: for we will not conſent with Nimrod to the building of our owne confuſion, whereby we might be ſhaken of from the fauour of God, as he and his adherents were.
               
                  Hebers glory is further enlarged in that the Hebrew tongue taketh the name from him. The Iewes kept this ſincerely till they went into captiuitie into Babylon: but when they came from thence, they began to ſtammer; for there they learned the tongue of the Babilonians. Malachie endeth the old Teſtament and the Hebrew tongue: for though ſchollers write Hebrew, yet vpon the firſt ſight it is apparant to be the writing of man, ſo far it diffreth from the ſtile of the holy ſpirit.
               There be one thouſand, ſeuen hundreth, fifty and eight roots in the Hebrew tongue. And this is a wonderfull thing, that the bare actions of the creatures ſhould expreſſe Hebrew words: as a horſe running vpon a cauſey, the ſound of his feet is much expreſsing this noyſe, Ratſat, which in Hebrew is to run. The noyſe which birdes make by clapping their wings when they flie, is of this ſound, Gnoth, which in Hebrew ſignifieth a fowle. The Grecians cannot find out the rootes of their tongue. The Lord tooke ſuch order in penning of the olde Teſtament, that one skilfull in the Hebrew tongue, will eaſily know if there be a ſentence, or a word put in; nay, if there be but a letter added: ſo that they are very vnwiſe that perſwade others, or beleeue themſelues, that the bookes of Iudith and Tobie are Canonicall Scriptures. For they are not Hebrew, neither were they receiued at any time by the auncient Hebrewes, who were ſo perfect and ready in the text of the olde Teſtament, that they could tell how many times the letter Alpha was vſed in the Bible: ſo that to beleeue theſe bookes to be Scripture, is to croſſe the teſtimonie of the Iewes for their owne ſtory, and if they knew our opinions herein, they would condemne vs for miſsing of Religion.
               This Heber was a very happie man, and his happineſſe made

manifeſt, in that none which liued after him, came to his dayes. For he being a Prophet knew how heauy the curſe of God would be vppon the ſonnes of men for building the tower of Babell: therefore he nameth his ſonne Peleg, Diuided. The Hebrew name is halfe the abridgement of the ſtory, as it falleth out for the moſt part.
               He had alſo great cauſe of ſorrow and heauineſſe, in that thirteene families of Iocktains ſonnes to whom Heber was Grandfather, went quite away, and were farre from Ieruſalem, and being out of the fauour of God, were bereaued of ſaluation; So that Chams houſe might ſeeme to haue greater bleſsings. For they dwelt neere to Ieruſalem, and Iacobs ſonnes in Egypt married with Chams daughters. Iacob ſons called themſelues Hebrewes, becauſe the ſtory of Heber is the moſt famous of all the auncient fathers.
               Heber, a pilgrime or ſtranger. The Foxes haue holes, and the birds of the aire haue neſts; but the Son of man hath not where to hide himſelfe.
               
            
            
               1757. Peleg borne.
               HIs name ſignifieth Diuiſion. In his dayes the tongues of thoſe that built the Tower of Babell, were confounded. In the conſideration of which Story,
                  
                     
                        Time, are to be vnderſtood. Time, at or a little before Pelegs birth▪
                     
                     
                        Place, are to be vnderſtood. Place, a plaine in the land of Shinear.
                     
                     
                        Perſons are to be vnderſtood. Perſons 70. of

                           
                              Sem. 27.
                           
                           
                              Iaphet. 14.
                           
                           
                              Cham. 29.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               Theſe 70. ſpake one language, the tongue of Heber, and going from the Eaſt, they found a plaine in the land of Shinear, where they abode and made bricke in ſtead of ſtone, and ſlime in ſtead of morter, and ioyning with Nimrod ſayd, Let vs make vs a Sem, that is, a name, euen in deſpight of the bleſsing of Noah beſtowed vpon Sem. But God ſcattered them from that place, into the vpper face of all the earth, and they left off to build the Citie, therefore the name of it is called Ba-bell, (that is, Come confuſion) becauſe there the Lord confounded the language of all the earth. Babell is Babling, both in Hebrew, and in Engliſh.
               
                  As at the confuſion of tongues, there was great falling out about words, becauſe one could not vnderſtand another: ſo hitherto all the world is at variance for the vnderſtanding of the words. And as the builders of Babell fell to babling: ſo the deſpiſers of Diuinitie ſhall fall to babling. Therefore it were to be wiſhed, that euery man in the world vnderſtood the Hebrew tongue. All Nations in the earth are compelled to take notice of this ſtory, whenſoeuer they heare any man ſpeake in an other tongue which they vnderſtand not. For entring into the conſideration thereof, they are driuen preſently to examine the ſtory of the tenth of Geneſis, in which they may ſee the iuſt and ſeuere dealing of God, to ſuch as enuy the bleſsing of their brother: for going from ſinne to ſinne, they had their tongues deuided, and their dwellings ſcattered.
               It appeareth by this ſtorie, that the dealings of Cham and his ſonnes, were in the ſame kind that Kaines were.
               
                  
                     
                        Kaine after his curſe, wandring like a vagabond from the place of true Religion, into the land of Nod, which ſignifieth Fugitiue, buildeth a citie, and calleth it after the name of his ſon, Henoch.
                        Cham after his curſe, goeth wandring about from the place that Noah liued, and Sem ſacrificed at, vnto the land of Shinear, which ſignifieth Shake of, and there hee built a Citie of Confuſion.
                     
                  
               
               From which ſtory alſo we may obſerue the iudgements of God, that wherein a man offendeth, he or his ſeed is commonly puniſhed: for it is certaine that all the actions of wicked are a harmonie with Gods dealings, though in reſpect of the wicked they agree not with vertue.
               The ſonnes of Sem for ioyning with rebellious Nimrod of Cham, as it were flouting their fathers bleſsing, to furniſh vp the number of 70. made bricke for the building of the tower of Confuſion. 70, of Sems poſteritie 600. yeeres after, were forced to goe into the land of Cham, and there compelled to be bricke-makers vnder Pharaoh King of Egypt, becauſe they deſpiſed the bleſsing of Sem, and remembred not the ſtory of the 70. Families that built the tower of Babell: To ſhew, that when in proſperitie men forget God, turning his graces into wantonneſſe, and his bleſsings to fooliſh pleaſures, that hee will take his bleſsings of bread and wine and oyle from vs, & driue vs into forraine Nations amongſt Egyptian dogges, to ſeeke reliefe: whoſe ſuccour ſhalbe yokes of heauy bondage, to puniſh vs in the ſame pleaſure wherein we offended.
               
                  All the Seuentie Families doe afflict Sem for this, before he hath his full renowne, and in ſcattering of Iocktanes Sons, they are placed furtheſt off Ieruſalem of any.
               Peleg. diuided. Chriſt is Palmoni the ſecret Numberer that weigheth, numbreth, and diuideth.
               
               Vnto the building of the Tower of Babel, we haue

                     Sem,
                     
                        Name,
                     
                     Arphachſad,
                     
                        Hea
                              •
                           ing,
                     
                     Sale,
                     
                        Spoyling,
                     
                     Heber,
                     
                        Pilgrime,
                     
                     Peleg.
                     
                        Diu
                              •
                           ded.
                     
                  
Put theſe together, and you haue a ſhort ſentence. A good name like precious Oyle, ſhall heale the ſpoyling of poore ſtrangers: for God will d
                        •
                     u
                        •
                     de to euerie one accord
                        •
                     ng to his workes.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     1787. Regu. borne,
                     
                        Euill.
                     
                     1819. Sarug. borne,
                     
                        Bough or Plant.
                     
                     1849. Nachor borne,
                     
                        Drie.
                     
                     1878. Terah borne,
                     
                        Smelling.
                     
                  
               
               AN euill Plant that hath loſt his ſappe, and is become drie, being not watered with the dew of heauenly grace, can giue no good ſmell, which appeareth, in that Terah quite forgetting that euer God created, and conſumed the world and brought the deuiſes of the Sonnes of Noah his great Grandfather to open ſhame of eternall memorie, ſcattering them vp and downe like Vagabonds ouer all the earth, figuring the calamities of their later ages, the puniſhment wherof chiefely to be perfourmed in his owne kindred, became an Idolatrer, as Ioſhua. 24. Your Fathers in old time worſhipped ſtrange Gods, euen Terah the Father of Abraham, &c. But marke the euent. For euen as the Sonnes of Sem, for ioyning with the reſt, were ſcattered with the reſt: ſo the poſteritie of Terah by Abram, euen the beſt of them, namely the Iewes, were once ſcattered Vagabonds ouer all the earth, for not embracing the couenant of Abraham, Iſaack, and Iacob, but in mercie gathered together againe to the Mountaine of grace to Iacobs Well, that giueth euerliuing water to ſo many as would acknowledge Chriſt the Rocke; to the Land that flowed with Milke and Honie to Bethel, the houſe of Iehouah, where they might ſee a Ladder reaching from heauen

to earth, with Angels aſcending and deſcending; to that freſh ſpringing hill of Sion, which is watered with the dew of Hermon, from whence it runneth like the precious oyntment that ran downe from Aarons beard, to waſh away their former vncleaneſſe, and to purge their filthy leaprouſie, that they might be a ſweet ſmelling ſacrifice vnto the Lord, holy and acceptable before his Throne, hauing an high ſacrificer to enter into the Holy of Holyeſt, to make interceſsion for them, that they might be free from confuſion, and deliuered out of the bondage of the outward and ſpirituall Babel. But euen as the dog that returneth to his vomite, and the hogge to his wallowing in the mire; ſo theſe Iewes of vncircumciſed hands and hearts, forgetting all thoſe, and many more benefits of God beſtowed vpon them, crucifying Chriſt the King of glorie, the God of Sem, and not remembring their former puniſhments, are once againe ſo ſcattered ouer the face of the earth, that while the world endureth they ſhall be Vagabonds and neuer gathered together againe: To teach vs, that if God ſpared not them, nor ſuffered them to continue in their tranſgreſsions being his peculiar people; that wee are to looke for no other recompence, than they had, if we deſpiſe the knowledge of Chriſt, as they did.
               
                  Terah hath three Sons,

                     
                        Haran,
                     
                     
                        Nachor,
                     
                     
                        Abraham,
                     
                  
as

                     
                        Adam, and
                     
                        Noah,
                     
                  
had.
            
            
               
                  1996. Peleg. died, being 229. yeeres old.
               He had not halfe the yeares of his Father Heber; the moſt aged man after the flood, liued not to halfe Methuſhelahs yeres: to ſhew the curſe that came by the flood. So euery man in the world hath part of Gods curſe by the flood.
            
            
               
                  1997. Nachor died, being 148 yeares old.
                
            
            
               
                  2006. Noah died, being 950 yeares old.
               He liued after the flood, 350 yeares, that is, Seuen Fifties, or Seuen Iubilees of yeres, as many as were from conquering the Land of Canaan, to the gouernment of Samuel. Noahs whole life was a ſinging of ſaluation to the holy Lambe, ſeeing all the world drowned, and he onely ſaued. When Noah dyeth, Abram was borne. So God ſtirres vp one good man after another oftentimes.
            
            
               
               2008. Abram Borne.
               His name ſignifieth His Father, being the Tenth from Noah, another eſtabliſher of Religion, as Noah the reſtorer or comforter was the Tenth from Adam. And as in Noahs dayes hee being the Tenth from Adam, Gods Iuſtice ouer all fleſh was extended: ſo in Abram, he being the Tenth from Noah, Gods mercie to all the world is pronounced.
               When Terah is 130 yeares old, he begat: So old was Adam when he begat Seth, a foundation of Religion: Iacob a bringer of Religion into Egypt, is 130 yeares old when he ſtandeth before Pharaoh. Iehoiada the high ſacrificer, ſaueth Ioas the Kings Sonne from the malice of Athalia, which had deſtroyed all the reſt of the Kings ſeede, and dieth being 130 yeares old. While he liued, Ioas kept Religion, and worſhipped the God of his Father. After his death he fell away, and ſuffered incenſe to be offered in the groues, to whome Zacharias the Sonne of Barachias ſayd, Is this the reward of all my Fathers paines, that aſſoone as my Father is dead, you forſake the true God, and worſhip the Gods of the Nations? For which cauſe Ioas cauſed him to be ſlaine between the Altar and the Temple. So that as death is contrarie to life; and as at the birth of Seth and Abraham, the graces of God were manifeſted to the world: ſo at Iehoiadahs death the Tribe of Iuda loſt all Religion.
               It is a queſtion, howe Terah being an Idolatrer, could name Abram, Hie Father: for ſo doth the word ſignifie. He might gueſſe like a worldly man, that his Sonne Abram ſhould be likely to be rich and mightie, and ſo ſhould haue many vnder him. Howſoeuer it was, this is certaine, that God directed the tongue of this Idolatrer to ſet forth and preach his glorie, though his life had no ſhew of vertue.
               Here is another queſtion to be diſcuſsed of the age of Terah, when he begat Abram.
               
            
            
               Of Terah his age when he begat Abram.
               
               SOme will haue Abram to be borne at Terahs Seuentieth yeare, becauſe in Gen. 11. it is ſayd, Terah liued Seuentie yeares, and begat Abram, Nachor, and Haran. Whereupon they gather, that Abraham was the firſt borne, becauſe hee is put in the firſt place, and that hee was borne in that yeare of Terah, to wit, the Seuentie. But they

marke not, that Terahs Sonnes are reckoned, not according to their age, but according to their dignitie, as Gen. 5. The Sonnes of Noah, Sem, Cham, Iaphet are ſo rehearſed, that in the firſt place there is mention made of Sem, who for all that was not the firſt borne, neither could be borne in the Fiue hundreth yeare of Noah, ſith two yeares after the flood in which yeare hee begat Arphachſad, hee was but an Hundreth yeares old. Now the firſt of this opinion whome I follow, was Caluine that moſt famous Doctor of the Church of Geneua, who in his Commentaries vpon Gen. 11.27. expreſſeth it in plaine words. Him followed Beroaldus, who did much in the illuſtrating of time, and Mangoldus. This demonſtration is ſet downe, Act. 7. Abraham is ſayd to goe out of Haran after his Father Terah died. Now Terah liued Two hundred and fiue yeares. And Abram went out of Haran in the Seuentie and fiue yeare of his age: which yeeres if you ſubtract from Terahs age, there remaines One hundred and thirtie yeares, in which Abrams natiuitie falleth. The ſame may be confirmed by Sarahs age Abrams wife, who is thought to be the Daughter of Abrams Brother. Abram exceeded her no more but Ten yeeres: wherevpon it followeth, that hee was borne long after him that was both his brother, and father in law. Abram therefore was called, and began his peregrination, in the Two thouſand, Eightie, and fourth yeare of the world, the verie ſame day that his poſteritie went out of Egypt, namely, the Fifteenth of Niſan, as it is ſayd in Exod. 12.
               
               The third ioynct of this firſt time, which containeth the diuine couenant of Abraham, endeth in the yeare when the law was giuen, in which the Iſraelites by the goodneſſe of God were brought forth, and deliuered out of Egypt by many and ſtrange miracles. This containeth foure Hundred and Thirtie yeres, which is confirmed by the teſtimonie of Saint Paul, who expreſly ſayth, Gal. 3.17. That the Law began foure Hundred and Thirtie yeares after the confirming of the couenant or teſtament. And concerning the confirmation of which couenant he ſpeaketh, he expreſſeth in that which went before, namely, of that ſame which was made, when being called of God, he went out of Haran. For in verſ. 8. he cyteth the ſame promiſe, In thee ſhall all the nations of the earth be bleſsed, which Gen. 12. is rehearſed in the narration of his calling, Verſ. 3. Hetherto alſo it appertaineth, which is written Exod. 12. Verſ. 40. The peregrination of the children of Iſrael, (as learnedly and truely tranſlateth that worthy man Beroaldus) which they dwelt in Egypt, was Foure Hundred and Thirtie yeares: Which ſurely the Seuentie Interpreters ſo tranſlate, that they account the peregrination of the Fathers made in the Land of Canaan, in this dwelling.
               Neither doth the place of Gen. 15. Verſ. 13. concerning the ſeed

of Abram to be aflicted foure Hundred yeares, hinder it. For Abrahams peregrination is to be deriued from his calling, and his ſeed began to be afflicted when Iſaack the Sonne of promiſe borne fiue and twentie yeares after his calling, being a childe peraduenture of fiue yeares old, ſuffered the ſcoffings of Iſmael borne of the hand mayd: which ſurely the Apoſtle Gal. 4.29. expreſſely nameth perſecution. Adde hereunto the reſt which Iſaack and Iacob ſuffered amonge ſtrangers. Now that time wherein the Iſraelites abode in Egipt, that it is farre wide of foure Hundred yeeres, is cleerer than the light at noone day, to them which conſider that Kaath the Son of Leui went downe into Egipt, and liued One Hundred, Thirtie and Three yeares, and that his Son Amram liued one hundred, thirtie and ſeuen yeres, Exod. 6. and that Moſes his Sonne was Eightie yeares old when he went out of Egipt. All which make but Three hundred and Fiftie yeares, and if from theſe, thoſe yeares bee ſubduced, which they liued after their Sonnes were borne, the yeares remayning would be few. But theſe things Doctor Berwildus, and others haue learnedly ſet forth. Thoſe notable men, Bullinger, Phlinſpachius, Scaanger, and others agree vnto it.
               It is ſayd, that Terah being Seuentie yeares old begetteth Abram, Haran, and Nachor. The Iewes ſay, That Abraham was the eldeſt: but thereby they bring notable abſurdities: for they agree that Sara was Harans Daughter; ſhe is but Ten yeres yonger than Abram, and then Abram being elder than Haran, and yet married his daughter but Ten yeares younger than her husband. Haran muſt needes beget her at Nine yeares of age, which is impoſsible. Therefore it is certaine, that Nachor and Haran were elder than Abram. For if wee looke to Gen. 12. and conſider that Abram being Seuentie and fiue yeares old receiued the promiſe, and to Saint Stephens Oration, Act 7. by which it appeareth that Terah was dead before Abram had the promiſe, or elſe the promiſe might haue had a reference to Terah, as well as to Abram, we ſhall by good Arithmeticke, caſt Terah at the birth of Abram to be One hundred and thirtie yeares old: for take Seuentie and fiue yeres out of two hundred and fiue, which is the time that Terah liued, and there remaineth One hundred and thirtie, the age of Terah when he begat Abram. To enlarge this further.
               If Abram had beene the eldeſt, Sem would not haue giuen him the bleſsing: for then hee ſhould haue died before Sem, and men doe not giue their inheritance to their Sonnes which die in their life, but hee would rather haue kept it for Iſaack, with whom he liued Fiftie yeres. This may be made plaine by another of the ſame ſort. Rebecca being with child, and they both ſtriuing in her womb, asketh counſell what

ſhould become of her. The queſtion is of whom? Sem being dead, it is manifeſt, either of Heber, or of Abraham. Thus you may ſee, that without the knowledge of the times, wee could not auoid theſe errors.
            
            
               2018. Sara borne.
               She is thought to bee Iiſcah the daughter of Haran, and ſo ſhe is: for Abraham calleth Lot brother, which could not be but in reſpect of mariage. For Lot was the Sonne of Haran, and brother to Iiſcah. Therefore in that meaning Abram ſpeaketh truely.
               
                  Sara is the ſame in ſignification that Iiſcah is. For Sarah ſignifieth Queene, ſo doth Iiſcah, her name was afterwards called, Sarai, that is, My Queene.
               You haue a verie eaſie reckoning of the times, if you beginne at Sarahs Fifteenth yeare of age, when ſhe was fit, as it were, to be a Tabernacle for Abraham.
               
               
                  Theſe compariſons prooue the prouidence of God to be plaine, and his counſels eaſie.
                  
                     
                        
                           From Sarahs Fifteene yeares of age, to the building of Moſes Tabernacle.
                        
                        
                           480
                        
                     
                  
                  From thence to the

                        Building of Salomons Temple.
                        
                           480
                        
                        Third of Cyrus, when the proclamation went forth for building the ſecond Temple.
                        
                           480
                        
                        Gouernement of Poncius Pilate, in whoſe time Chriſt did build his ſpirituall Temple.
                        
                           480
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The promiſe is giuen to Abraham.
               
               
                  2083.That is, Chriſt is promiſed to Abraham after the fleſh, Gen. 12. Foure hundred and thirtie yeres, before the giuing 
                     •
                  f the law. The promiſe to Adam in Paradiſe,
                     430.
                   and to Sem after the flood, is here renewed to Abraham, when he is Seuentie and fiue yeares old. So many yeares old as there be Fathers of Chriſt from Adam to Ioſeph.
               
               Saint Matthew beginning at Abraham reckoneth them but Forty and two, that is, three Fourteenes, or ſix Seuens; but Saint Luke reckoning

them, bringeth them him from Adam, and ſheweth their number to bee 75. Saint Mathews meaning was to prooue him King of the Iewes, and Saint Lukes to ſhew, that he is the Seede of the woman.
               
               Seuentie fiue hath in it, Ten Seuens, and Fiue the number of the letters of Iehouah.
               
               God changeth Abrams name from Abram, to Abraham of Haman, a Multitude, becauſe in him all the Nations and multitude of the earth ſhould bee bleſſed, like vnto Noah, a new Comforter.
               Hee left his Countrey, and his Fathers houſe, and went to a Land which God would ſhew him, ſo that Saint Paul teacheth by faith. Abrahā when he was called, obeyed God, to goe into a place which he ſhould a
                        •
                     ter receiue for an inheritance, and he went out not knowing whether he went. In this faith, Moſes a high Sonne, refuſed to be called the Sonne of Pharaohs Daughter, Saint Luke teſtifieth of him Act. 7. That the God of glorie appeared to our Father Abraham, when hee was in Meſopotamia, before he dwelt in Charran, and ſayd vnto him, Get thee out of thy Country, and from thy kindred, and come into a Land that I ſhall ſhew thee. Then came he out of the Land of Chaldea, and dwelt in Charran, and from thence when his Father was dead, hee brought him into the Land of Canaan: but hee had no inheritance, in it, no not the breadth of a foote. Yet God promiſed, that hee would giue it him to poſseſſe, and to his ſeede after him, when as yet hee had no Childe. Wherefore, beleeuing in God, it was counted to him for righteouſneſse. For the promiſe to Abraham that hee ſhould bee the heire of the world, was not giuen him or his ſeede through the lawe, but through the righteouſneſſe of faith, Rom. 4. In 2. Eſdras 0. You haue there in the prayer of Nehemiah, an abridgement of all this Storie, how the Lord choſe Abram, and brought him out of Vr of the Chaldees, and called him Abraham, and found his heart faithfull, and made a couenant with him to giue his ſeed, the Land, &c.
               Saint Paul, Act. 17. reaſoneth with the men of Athens thus, You Grecians, you ſay that you are of Iapheth, and that your Countrey is Ionia; and yee are the Sonnes of the earth. Be it knowne vnto you, that God at the firſt made all mankind of one blood, to dwell on all the face of the earth, and aſsigned the ſeaſons which were ordained before, and the bonds of their habitations: for hee diuided vnto them the Land, according to the number of the Sonnes of Iſrael, Now yee heathen, your owne Poets ſay, ye are the generation of God. And we may obſerue, that in all the ceremonies of Moſes, there is a great priuiledge layd downe for the heathen. And beſides, Melchiſedech being a heathen, and greater than Abraham, and a reſembler of the Sonne of God, is a manifeſt argument that God would ſaue the Gentiles in Chriſt.
               
                  And it is added by Saint Paul, God which iuſtifieth the wicked, euen Abram being an Idolatrer. The Gentiles are no worſe, therefore they haue no cauſe to deſpaire. And where it is ſayd in this Storie of Abraham, that he forſooke his Father, and his Fathers houſe, Saint Stephen. Act. 7. ſheweth▪ that it was at the time his Father was dead▪ for otherwiſe it had beene an hard example, and Gods actions muſt bee ſo wiſely diſpoſed, that the verie heathen muſt acknowledge them to be iuſt, which they would not haue done if hee had left his Father, he being aliue.
               It is further added, that Abraham was rich▪ He was of behauior quiet: for to auoide ſtrife and contention betwixt his ſhepheards, and the ſhepheards of Lot, hee willed him to chooſe whether he would take to the right hand, or to the left. Lot chooſeth the beſt for eye-ſight, though by the cloſe counſell of God ordering his choiſe, it prooued farre contrarie.
               
                  Abraham was politique: for he had Three hundred and Eighteen ſouldiers of his owne familie, which he himſelfe had inſtructed. And thereby we may gather, that hee vſed recreation, and in curioſitie did not contemne it: for otherwiſe hee could not haue made his men ſo expert Warriours. And ſurely there is nothing diſturbeth Religion, more than curioſitie.
               He was a ſtately man, and couragious, and had authoritie of life and death: elſe hee could not haue kept ſo many in good order. His moderation appeareth alſo, in that hee ſuffered Sara to rule at home. He was politique in chooſing the night to ſet on his enemies: for ſeeing he was in the fauour of God hee was ſure hee could not walke in darkeneſſe, and it was the fitteſt time to make his enemies affraid.
            
            
               2090. Melchiſedech King of Salem, A figure of the Sonne of God, meeteth Abraham.
               
               IT is a queſtion who this Melchiſedech ſhould be. It is moſt certaine, it is Sem the Sonne of Noah. Which may be gathered from the circumſtance of the Storie, being modeſtly expounded. Heb. 7. This Melchiſedech King of Salem, who met Abraham, as he returned from the ſlaughter of the Kings, to whome alſo Abraham gaue tythes of all things, firſt is called by interpretation, King of righteouſneſſe, and after that, King of Salem, that is to ſay, King of Peace, without Father, without mother, without kindred, and hath neither beginning of daye
                        •
                     , nor end of life, but is likened to the Sonne of God.
               
               
                  He was without Father, without Mother, when Abraham met him. Fiue laſt ages aboue Abraham being dead, hee was vnknowen of his owne kindred. He had no end of life in the olde world, for he liued through the flood: and no beginning of dayes in the newe world.
               
                  Chriſt in reſpect of his Godhead had no mother, and in regard of his Manhead he had no father.
               Surely our men be very vnaduiſed, that becauſe Caluin and a fewe Grecians doe ſtacker in this opinion, whether Sem ſhould be Melchiſedech; therefore they will not admit the truth hereof, as though they ſhould bee a rule of truth vnto them. But to anſwere them: Firſt, the conſent of all the Iewes is, that Sem is Melchiſedech, and if he be not, then let vs ſee what inconueniences will follow.
               Firſt, he muſt be a godlier man than Sem that croſſeth Sems bleſsing, Bleſſed be the God of Sem. Beſides, it ſtandes not with Religion, that any man ſhould be rare in the higheſt degree, no prophecie going before it to warrant his rareneſſe. But this is the cauſe why men bee deceiued. The Grecians erre in this, and are the cauſe why others haue erred. It was not poſsible for them to know the truth thereof: for the Iewes appointed by Ptolomeus Philodelphus to tranſlate the Bible, ſeeing there was ſuch difference at the birth of men after the flood, both in compariſon with thoſe before the flood, and thoſe after; that their ſtorie might not be flouted of the Egyptians, adde of purpoſe 1500. yeares to the Fathers after the flood. For ſeeing Terah begot Abraham at 120. And becauſe Sem begot Arphacſad at 100. yeares old, to euery one where wanteth an hundred, they put an hundred: As, Arphacſad liued 3
                        •
                     . yeres, and begot Selah; they tranſlate, Arphacſad liued 135. and begot Selah, and ſo in the reſt. By which reckoning, Sem is dead before the time he ſhould meet with Abraham.
               
               Saint Ie
                        •
                     om, accquainted with the Hebrewes dealings, knew that their conſent was that Sem was Melchiſedech, and ſo he affirmeth. Beſides, it is not likely that any of Chams houſe ſhould be like to the Son of God, being a curſed generation. Againe, if it be obiected that Moſes doth not call Mel
                        •
                     hiſedech Sem, and therefore it is likely hee was not Sem: This obiection is thus anſwered. Moſes penneth his ſtorie ſhort, becauſe he knew all the Iewes were well acquainted therwith. And as for the Author to the Hebrewes, ſetting him downe to bee without father, without mother, we muſt conſider in what ſenſe and meaning he ſpeaketh: for ſeeing it is added by Moſes in Melchiſedechs ſtorie, that he was king of Salem; and it is not poſsible for a king to be borne without Father, without Mother; and it was neuer the meaning of the holy Ghoſt, to croſſe the courſe of the creation: therefore

we muſt looke for ſome other expoſition, than that which the bare litterall ſenſe will afford vpon the firſt ſight. This therefore is the Author to the Hebrew meaning: He was now to call to the Iewes minde, one who in their ſtorie was a figure of the Meſsias. Now ſeeing Chriſt the Sauiour of the world, as he was God, had no mother, and as he was man, no father; therefore to make this plaine, that is, to make Melchiſedech a figure anſwerable to this truth, he ſo ſpeaketh of him, as if hee were without Father or Mother, becauſe he reſembled the Sonne of God. Now the Author to the Hebrewes might verie ſafely vſe this kind of ſpeaking For Sem being borne before the floode, and in Abrahams time being a Grandfather of eight degrees, muſt needes be thought to Abrahams Souldiers, to bee without father, without mother, who had neither beginning of dayes, nor end of life. So that a Souldier of Abrahams campe might aske of one of Canaan, Goodman of Canaan, who is this goodlie old man with a hoarie beard? Hee would anſwere thus; Hee is called the iuſt King, and his towne is named the quiet Towne. For when all the other Kings his neighbours are at variance, he onely liueth in peace. And when Elam ouercame fiue Kings, no man offered him any violence. We haue in euery village a ſeuerall God: but he ſacrificeth to the God (as he ſaith) that made vs, and them. And marke what I ſhall tell you: When he offereth an Oxe or a Ramme to his God, which (he ſaith) made the heauens and the earth, fire commeth from heauen to conſume it: and he ſeemeth to be ſo ſtrong, that none of vs ſhall liue to ſee his dayes. In this reſpect therefore the Author to the Hebrewes affirmeth that he was without father, without mother, who hath neither beginning of dayes, nor end of life. For in proper ſence it cannot be true.
            
            
               2094. Iſmael borne.
               THe ſonne of Hagar an Egyptian, whom Sara gaue to Abraham becauſe her ſelfe was barren.
               When Iſmael was thirteene yeeres old, as Gen. 17. Abraham tooke Iſmael and euery man child among the men of his houſe, and circumciſed the fore-skin of their fleſh the ſame day as God had commaunded. Which Ceremonie of circumciſion continued vnto Chriſt: but ſince his death it is abrogated with the reſt of the ceremonies of the law, and is of no force vnto ſaluation.
               As Gal. 5. I Paul teſtifie, that if ye be circumciſed, Chriſt ſhall profite you nothing at all: for whoſoeuer is circumciſied, is bound to keepe the whole lawe. And, as many as are iuſtified by the lawe, are fallen from

grace. For in Ieſus Chriſt, neither is circumciſion any thing worth, nor vncircumciſion. But faith which worketh by loue, as Abak. 2. The iuſt ſhall liue by his faith.
               
               
                  The day of Circumciſion was the Eight day. The ſeale was anſwerable to Baptiſme. Wee haue no ſpeciall ſtorie of Eight to be compared with this, but the eight that were ſaued in the Arke. The ceremony of the day is anſwerable to the number of the perſons, and the ſeale it ſelfe anſwerable to the waters of the floode, to the which anſwereth Babtiſme which now ſaueth vs.
               
                  Iſmael had twelue ſonnes and one daughter. Iacob had twelue ſonnes and one daughter. Iſmael was anſwerable in outward bleſsings to Iſaack and Iacob, but not in ſpirituall: for hee was borne after the fleſh. And although he were the ſonne of Abraham, hee was not the ſonne of Abraham, as it is written. They are not all children, becauſe they are the ſeede of Abraham: but, In Iſaack ſhall thy Seede bee called: that is, they which are the children of the fleſh, are not the children of God; but the children of the Promiſe are counted for the Seede.
               
               In the Bible there are two Iſmaels: the one an Egyptian by the mother, the other by the Father. The one of Abraham by the mother: the other of Abraham by the Father. Both theſe were enemies to the True ſeede of Abraham. This Iſmael flowted the Promiſe in Iſaack, the other Iſmael killeth Godoliah. Hee being left a Gouernour of the ſeede of Iſaack. Iſmael was vpon euery mans head, and euery man vpon his head, ſeeing he perſecuted Iſaack.
               
            
            
               2096. Arphachſad died, being 438. yeere old. Gen. 11.
                
            
            
               2100. Iſaack borne. Gen. 21.
               
                  When Abraham is 100. yeeres olde, and Sara 90. yeeres old, according to Gen. 17.
               
               HIs name ſignifieth, Laughter. When Iſaack is promiſed, Sara Laughed: ſo did Abraham: So did Iſmael laugh at Iſaack. Theſe three laughters in Hebrew are expreſſed by one word, but there is great difference. Sara Laughed as at a thing vnlooked for. For ſhe ſaid, I am now 90. yeeres olde, and my Lord 100. ſhall I now giue my

ſelfe vnto luſt, ſeeing it ceaſeth to bee withe mee, as with other women? And the Lord ſaid, is any thing vnpoſsible with God? Abraham laughed, as reioycing thereat: for it is ſaid, Abraham beleeued in God, and it was reckoned to him for righteouſneſſe. Iſmael laughed, as flowting at Iſaack, as though he were ſuch a goodly fellow in whom the Promiſe ſhould be eſtabliſhed. You haue this ſtorie renewed againe in the New Teſtament. For the Angel Gabriel ſaith vnto Mary; For with God nothing is impoſsible. Elizabeth commeth to ſalute Mary, and ſhe ſaith, Bleſſed is ſhe that beleeueth: for thoſe things ſhalbe performed which are told thee from the Lord.
               
               It is ſayd of Abraham, that hee laughed when the Angel promiſed he ſhould haue a ſonne; thereby ſignifying his reioycing. Iſaacks life was anſwerable to this ioy: for he had no affliction in Canaan: onelie hee was driuen to goe to Abimelech King of the Philiſtims, and dwelt in Gerar where he was ſomewhat iniured.
               
                  Abraham praying for Iſmael that God would bleſſe him, he ſaith, I will make of him a mightie nation, but in Iſaack ſhall thy ſeede be called.
               
               
                  It is written, that Abraham had two ſonnes, one by a ſeruant, and one by a free woman. But he which was of the ſeruant, was after the fleſh: and he which was of the free woman, was by promiſe; which things are ſpoken by an allegorie. For theſe mothers are the two Teſtaments, the one which is Hagar of mount Sinay: For Hagar or mount Sinay, is a mountaine in Arabia, which gendreth vnto bondage, and it anſwereth to Ieruſalem which now is, and ſhee is in bondage with her children. But Ieruſalem which is aboue is free, which is the mother of vs all: for we are after the maner of Iſaack, children of the promiſe. But as then he which was after the fleſh, perſecuted him that was borne after the ſpirit: euen ſo is it now. But what ſaith the ſcripture? put out the ſeruant and her ſonne: for the ſonne of the ſeruant ſhall not bee heire with the ſonne of the free woman: then wee are not children of the ſeruant, but of the free woman. Gal. 4.
               
            
            
               2113

Iſmael, & Hagar, are expelled Abrahams houſe. Gen. 16.
               It was ſayd vnto Abraham, that his ſeede ſhould be afflicted in a land that is not theirs, 400. yeeres, and ſhould ſerue them, and they ſhould intreat them euill. Now if wee reckon the time of the abode of the children of Iſrael in Egypt, wee ſhall finde it but 215. yeeres,

for Iacob goeth into Egypt 185. yeeres after the Promiſe of the 400. yerees. So that they were not in Egypt full 400. yeeres: but they were afflicted firſt and laſt 400. yeeres, For Iſmael the Egyptian flowteth Iſaack, and beginneth the 400. yeere. And Pharaoh the Egyptian in the end of 400. yeere afflicteth the Seed of Iſaack. And as the Seede of Sem were afflicted by Cham
                  ▪ 400. yeeres; ſo afterwards about that time were they alſo afflicted by Iaphet.
               
               It may be obiected, How is Iſmael an Egyptian, ſeeing he is of Abraham? He is by the mothers ſide an Egyptian: for Hagar was of that countrey. And by this expoſition it falleth out to bee true. Wee haue for to warrant this, the like in the ſtorie of the Kings, where one being an Egyptian, is called of the Kings ſeed, becauſe one of his anceſtors married with a wife of Iuda. This ſtorie is mentioned in 1. Chro. 2. It is thus ſaid, Sheſan had no ſonnes but daughters, and Sheſan had a ſeruant an Egyptian named Iarchthange, and Sheſan gaue him his daughter to wife. In 2. King. 25. After that the King of Babell had ouerthrowne Ieruſalem, he left people in the land of Iuda to til the ground, and to exerciſe manuell trades, which were made tributaries, and he ſet Godoliah ruler ouer them.
               Then came Iſmael the ſonne of Nethaniah, to Godoliah, to Mizpah. And Godoliah ſware vnto them, that they ſhould not feare to ſerue the King: for by that meanes it ſhould bee well with them, and they ſhould dwell with them in the land. But in the ſeuenth moneth Iſmael the ſonne of Nethaniah, the ſonne of Eliſhama of the Kings Seede, came and ſlew Godoliah and he died. Heere Iſmael which was by his fathers ſide Iarchthange an Egyptian, is called of the Kings ſeed ſixteene ages after, becauſe his aunceſtor Iarchthange married one of Iuda. And ſurely it is likelie by this, that the Kings ſeede was wonderfully decayed, when as one by an Egyptian his great Grandfather, hauing onely married in Iuda, ſhould be called of the blood Royall. And without queſtion Sheſan was very wicked in deſpiſing the glory of the tribe of Iuda, which he openly ſhewed when hee married his daughter to an Egyptian. His name in Hebrew anſwereth to Iſmaels manners afterwards: for the Hebrewes affirme that Iarchthange is ſo harſh and lothſome to be pronounced, as no word of like tediouſneſſe in all the Hebrew tongue. So likewiſe Iſmaels maner
                     •
                   are as deteſtable as the earth can afford. Thus you ſee how Iſmael Abrahams ſon may rightly be called an Egyptian.
               
                  Sara reaſoneth with Abraham concerning the ſending away of Hagar and Iſmael. Shee might haue great cauſe to bee grieued at the flowting of Iſmael. For wee may imagine her to haue vſed ſuch like ſpeeches as theſe haue bin content to haue gone with you from Vr of the Chaldeans from my fathers houſe, & mine own kinred.

Beſides the tediouſneſſe of trauell, I haue ſuſteined great vexation and diſquietneſſe, by the feare which I might haue when you went to fight with the foure Kings. For my behauiour towards you, it hath alwayes bene pleaſing. My ſelfe being barren, I gaue you my maide, that yet by her I might haue children: for this, euen Hagar deſpiſeth me. It had bene better for me to let Eliazar of Damaſcus haue enioyed the bleſsing. Now God hath ſent me a ſonne; ſee how hee is flouted. Surely, if you doe mee right, and that which appertaineth to iuſtice, you muſt driue out this bondwoman and her ſonne: for this ſonne of the bondwoman ſhall not bee heire with my ſonne Iſaack. This dealing of Sara God approueth, and willeth Abraham to heare her voyce though it ſeeme grieuous to him. Heere we ſee by the mocking of Iſmael, that the wicked euer perſecute the godlie. Aſa maketh a law, that whoſoeuer will not ſeeke the Lord God of Iſrael, ſhalbe ſlaine. The wicked make as ſeuere lawes. But heere is the difference, the lawes of the godly are ſo reaſonable, that euery one may ſee preſently the equitie of them: on the contrarie, it is enough in the lawes of the wicked, that it is the Kings pleaſure, or that it ſatisfies their humors.
               To returne, we may geſſe that Iſaack was fiue yeeres old when Iſmael mocked him: for otherwiſe Iſaack could not haue perceiued it. Iſmaels flowting might be after this ſort; Is this he that ſhall haue the promiſe, in whom the Nations ſhall be bleſſed? a goodlie one, I warrant you: what continuance or ſtrength can there be in him, ſeeing at the time of his birth, his father and mother were very old, and decayed in ſtrength, and yet when he is weaned, there muſt be great feaſting and iollie cheere? If we conſider what an offence it is eſteemed, if one being a ſubiect, or otherwiſe inferiour, ſhould contumeliouſly and deſpightfully taunt and vpbraide the heire apparant to a kingdome: we will thinke this an iniurie not ſufferable. If wee obſerue the time when the children of Iſrael came out of Egypt, which was about Eaſter, and that this time of flowting, and that time, maketh 400. yeeres; we ſhall find, that this mocking was likewiſe about Eaſter.
            
            
               2126. Sale died. Gen. 11. being 514. yeeres olde.
               
                  2140.
                  IOſephus thinketh that Iſaack was appointed to be ſacrificed at 35. yeeres. Codomanus is of opinion, that Iſaack at this time was offered

being now 32. yeeres olde and three quarters, anſwerable to the death of Chriſt at his death, ſeeing his death was a figure of the death of Chriſt. There is nothing preciſely determined by the Scriptures: and therefore it is left for vs to follow which we will.
               This Iſaack, in reſpect of the commaundement of God, that he ſhould be offered vp, and the obedience of Abraham in offering him, was dead, and was reſtored to Abraham, as if he had beene riſen from the dead. He was offered on mount Moriah, a part of the mountaine of Sion, called afterwards Ieruſalem. Of this Chriſt ſpeaketh: O Ieruſalem, Ieruſalem, that thou ſawest thoſe things that concerne the peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes; therefore thou art Iebus, that is troden downe. God altereth the name of Moriah, to Ieruſalem, becauſe he would haue kept in memorie Abrahams obedience, & Sems religion, and therefore giueth it a name comprehending both: for in reſpect of Abraham, he calleth it Iire. Abraham giuing it the name Iehouah Iire, that is, in the mount will the Lord be ſeene. In reſpect of Sem he keepeth the name of Salem ſtill, and ſo it is called Iire Salem, the Sight of peace.
               
               From this ſtorie the Iewes might haue knowne the death of Chriſt, ſeeing Chriſt compareth them together, and yet by putting Chriſt to death, haue ſaued the world, though not heaped condemnation on their owne heads. For as it was prophecied, that one man muſt die for all the people: ſo they might haue thus reaſoned, We know this is the Meſsias, and that he muſt die for the ſinnes of the people, Iſaack beeing a figure, and this time wherein hee nowe is on the earth, agreeing with Daniels ſeuens. Therefore, as Abraham offered vp Iſaack, ſo let the high ſacrificer according to the lawe put him to death. But then, as Saint Peter ſpeaketh, if they had knowne this, they would not haue crucified the Lord of glorie. But as the windowes of Salomons Temple bee narrow without, and wide within: ſo Chriſt ſpeaketh of parables, that they are therefore ſpoken, that in hearing they ſhould not heare, and in ſeeing they ſhould not ſee, leaſt they ſhould repent and bee ſaued. The Authour to the Hebrewes ſayth, By faith Abraham offered vppe Iſaack; and hee that receiued the promiſe, offered his onelie begotten ſonne: to whome it was ſaide, In Iſaack ſhall thy Seede bee called: for thee conſidered that God was able to raiſe him vppe euen from the dead, from whence hee receiued him alſo after a ſorte. Chriſt in the Goſpell affirmeth, That Abraham ſawe my dayes, that is, in Iſaack, and reioyced. God ſpeaketh from heauen to Abraham in this ſorte; By my ſelfe haue I ſworne, becauſe thou haſt done this thing, and haſte not ſpared

thine onely ſonne, therefore will I ſurely bleſſe thee. In Rom. 8. Saint Paul ſpeaketh thus: What ſhall we ſay then to theſe things? If God be on our ſide, who can be againſt vs? who ſpared not his owne ſonne, but gaue him to death for vs, how ſhall he not with him giue vs all things alſo?
               
            
            
               Compare Iſaack with Chriſt.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Was not Abraham our father, iuſtified by workes when he offered his ſon Iſaack vpon the Altar? Iam. 2.
                              
                              
                                 Iſaack was bound.
                              
                              
                                 Iſaack after 3. daies was offred vp to death, and after a ſort reuiued to life.
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              God ſpared not his owne ſonne, but gaue him for vs all to death.
                              
                                 Chriſt
                                 
                                    
                                       was bound.
                                    
                                    
                                       Hauing ſuffred death, riſeth vp againe the third day to life.
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               2145. Sara died
               Being 127. yeeres old. She was buried in Canaan in the field of Machpelah, which Abraham bought of the Hittites: This place they would haue giuen Abraham freely: for they confeſſed that hee was a prince of God amongſt them, but he would buy it, becauſe they ſhould not ſay that they had made Abraham rich: wherefore we muſt know, if we will be godlie, that all our life is but a pilgrimage, and that wee are but ſtraungers, and that all our inheritance is nothing elſe but a place for buriall. The Hebrewes expound Sarahs death, a mortification and dying vnto ſinne.
               
                  Rebecca is married to Iſaack. Gen. 25. When he is 40. yeeres old.
               She is the daughter of Bethuel the ſonne of Nachor, the ſonne of Terah, and brother of Abraham, her Grandfather Nachor was an idolatrer: but her grandmother Milka is thought to bee of a good Religion, in that two of her ſonnes, Bethuel and Kemuel haue El. the mightie God, in their names. Iſaack goeth to Meſopotamia for a wife of his owne kinred: for in Canaan there were none of his kinred, and of the women of the lande he might not marrie. Iacob his ſonne likewiſe goeth to Meſopotamia to Laban
                  
the Brother of Rebecca, and there taketh him wiues of the ſame kindred.
            
            
               2158. Sem died. Gen. 11.
               This Sem was a great King, and liued Sixe Hundred yeares, as Noah before the flood. He is called Melchiſedech, the King of peace. Hee dwelt at Salem, where his name continued Sixtie and fiue ages, halfe One hundreth and thirtie, anſwerable to Seth, till that the Apoſtles receiued the holy Ghoſt after the aſcention of Chriſt. Hee is reſembled to the Sonne of God.
               
                  Sems houſe beleeued that Chriſt ſhould come, till hee came: and when he came, they denyed him, and were cut off.
            
            
               2160
Eſau, and Iacob, borne, Gen. 25.
               The firſt matter in this ſtorie to bee conſidered, is, how the two twinnes in Rebeckahs wombe, are called two nations. Malachi ſpeaking in the perſon of God, ſaith, I haue loued Iacob, and hated Eſau: So Saint Paul ſaith to the Romanes, Cap. 9. Ere they were borne, it was ſayd, The elder ſhall ſerue the younger, as it is written, Eſau haue I hated, and Iacob haue I loued.
               
               
                  ESaus deſcription is thus layd downe in the Scriptures. Firſt, that he was hayrie, that hee was of great courage, and at his birth Iacob holdeth him by the heele; God thereby ſhewing at their birth, what ſhould be the courſe of their liues afterwards. Homer maketh mention, that Vliſſes ouerthrew Aiax by ſtriking him on the leg, The Greeke tranſlators handle it ſo, and call him, Thermiſtes, that is to ſay, a Heeler.
               
               
                  Eſau was a Hunter, liuing like the Ruffians and Royſters of our time. He ſelleth his birth-right for a meſſe of pottage: for Iacob would not giue it vnto him, except Eſau would firſt ſweare to ſell him his birth right. Saith Eſau, I am contented: for it will bee ſo long ere it will be enioyed, that I, and my ſonnes Sonne ſhalbe dead firſt. So with an oath he ſold Iacob his birth-right; therefore hee was called Edom, Redde pottage.
               
               No doubt Iſaacks men knew this to bee a rare bleſsing: and ſeeing

he had deſpiſed it, they muſt needs, whenſoeuer they called him Edom, keepe his wickedneſſe in memorie: for by this ſale he deſpiſed Noah, Sem, Heber, and Abraham, and all his victories, in the faith of which bleſsing, Abraham ouercame ſo gloriouſly. This is the firſt combate by the which Iacob a Heeler ſupplanteth Eſau.
               
               The whole poſteritie of Eſau bare the name of this infidelitie: hee thought it a long time to the performance of a promiſe to be accompliſhed almoſt Foure hundred yeares after: ayming, like a prophane worldling, at the outward inheritance of the Land of Canaan, and not reſpecting the bleſsing of the ſpirituall Salem. He was the eldeſt, and extreame wicked: notwithſtanding he was the Sonne of a righteous Father, to ſhew that the ſincereſt nature of the godlyeſt men is extream wicked. Hee was to Iacob, as Kaine to Abel, and as Iſmael to Iſaack. And as in his owne perſon, he perſecuted and ſought the death of his Brother Iacob, ſo his poſteritie were continuall enemies to the ſeed of Iacob.
               
               
                  Amelech of Eſau lay in waight for the children of Iſrael, when they came out of Egipt, to deſtroy them: but God commaunded them to put out his name from vnder heauen. Wicked Haman would at once haue deſtroyed all the Iewes, but he and his ten Sonnes were hanged.
               
                  Haman was of Agag the Amalekite, of Eſau. In him is performed a prophecie in Numb. 24. Ameleck is the beginning of Nations, but his later end ſhall periſh vtterly. Herod of Edome likewiſe ſeeketh to put Chriſt the true Iſrael, to death: wherein you may ſee the malice of Eſau to continue euen till Chriſt.
               
                  Eſau was hated of God before he was borne: therefore whatſoeuer he did, it turned ſtill into a curſe vnto him; hee prepareth veniſon for his Father, and the whiles loſeth the bleſsing of eternall life: he would pleaſe his father by marrying into Abrahams ſtocke, and maryeth Iſmaels daughter; he wept for the bleſsing, but found no place of repentance, though he ſought the bleſsing with teares. In like ſort is the repentance of euerie wicked man, when he is touched with the conſcience for ſinne, he will then acknowledge his ſinne, and with teares ſhew forth for his tranſgreſsions, but through the hardnes of his hart which cannot repent, he returneth like to Eſau to his vomite againe.
               
                  IAcobs Storie will appeare the better by declaring Eſaus, euen as contraries are ſet together, that thereby euerie one may ſhewe the cleerer.
               His name ſignifieth a Suplani or Heeler, and all his life ſheweth him to be contrarie to Eſau: The one an image of all impietie; the other a mirrour of all godlyneſſe: the one a perſecutor, the other perſecuted:

the one a deſpiſer of grace, the other an embracer of vertue.
               You haue from the creation to Iacob two and Twentie Fathers, anſwerable to the Two and Twentie Letters in the Hebrew tongue. So Epiphaneus in Ankorato handleth them.
               Thus, by compariſons God maketh his dealings eaſie to bee kept in memorie. Iacob, though the Two and Twentie from Adam, yet the third Seuenth of thoſe which were borne after Adams creation.
               Now the Chronicle is ended for particular liues: for after Iacobs Storie the Scripture containes whole Stories of whole States and Kingdomes.
               
                  Noah is the Tenth from Adam: Abraham the Tenth from Noah: Iacob the Twelfe: ſo you haue the two and Twentie. The Hebrewes admire the patience of God, that Tenne whole ages God gaue them time to repent, and yet Eſay ſayth, that the Lord looked about, and ſaw that there was none good vpon the earth.
               The Seuentie Interpreters tranſlating the old Teſtament into Greek, thruſt in one Kenan, whoſe name is not in the Hebrew. If the reaſon be demaunded why they did ſo, this may be anſwered: The Seuenty Interpreters knew, that a great deale of wiſedom was contained in the compariſon between the Two and Twentie Letters of the Hebrew tongue, and the Two and Twentie Fathers. Now becauſe they enuied the Egyptians, and were loath they ſhould gaine any wiſedome by them, of purpoſe they adde Kenan, to diſturbe this proportion, and ſo they make Iacob the Three and Twentieth. Saint Luke ſetting downe the Genealogie of Chriſt, alleageth Kenan following the Genealogie, penned by the Seuentie Interpreters. For Saint Luke was to take it as he found it, and hee knewe that all the Iewes were well acquainted with the reaſon why Kenan was added. Therefore there could no danger growe in his time, though Kenan were kept ſtill in the Genealogie. Beza tranſlating the new Teſtament, leaueth him out; for the which the Ieſuits accuſe him. Now Beza, to the end ignorāt men ſhuld not ſtagger by finding him in Luke which is not in Moſes, leaueth him out: and this may Beza doe well inough: for any one may know, that Saint Luke neuer meant, that Arphachſad begat Kenan, ſeeing that he addeth, being, as men ſuppoſed, the Sonne of Arphachſad, to wit, of thoſe men that knew not the meaning of the Tranſlators. Beſides, Epiphanius being a Grecian, and being acquainted with the Greeke tranſlation, yet concludeth the Fathers vnder the number of Two and Twentie.
               
                  Iacob is called The beloued of the Lord, before he was borne: In which he is anſwerable to Dauid, whoſe name ſignifieth Beloued. And to our Sauiour Chriſt, of whome it was ſayd, This is my beloued Sonne, in whome I am well pleaſed.
               
               
                  And further, we are to note in this ſtorie, how Eſau by haſt, not willing to ſtay for the promiſe till the time appointed, felt the heauie iudgement of God. Wee haue the like example of this haſt, and the like puniſhment in Saul. Samuel annointed Saul King, and willed him to go before him to Gilgall, & to ſtay there for him 7 daies till he came. Saul tarieth 7 daies, according to the time appointed, but Samuel came not, therefore the people were ſcattered. Saul ſeeing the peoples mindes ſeuered, that he might vnite them againe, offered a burnt offering. Then came Samuel & rebuked him, ſaying, Thou haſt done fooliſhly, thy kingdom ſhal not cōtinue, the lord hath ſought him a man after his own heart. Thus you haue the like example, both for Storie, and prophecie.
               
                  ISaack is blinde, Sem, Heber, and Abraham being dead, onely Eſau, and Iacob aliue to enioy the bleſsing after Iſaacks death. Now, if we examine the ſequele, we ſhall ſee, that if Iſaack had not been blinde, he would for his part haue brought deſtruction vpon the whole earth: for hee would haue bleſſed Eſau, who vpon any occaſion would haue ſould it, and beſides, being verie wicked in deſpiſing it, would haue brought the heauy wrath of God vpon his poſterity for diſobedience. Therefore his blindneſſe was a great bleſsing, euen as Saint Paul ſpeaketh euerie thing turneth to the beſt to the children of God.
               
                  Iſaack willeth Eſau to goe and kill him ſome veniſon, that his ſoule may bleſſe him before he die. So the Prophets vſe to deſire meate before they prophecie, that being refreſhed they may be the fuller of ſpirite and cheerefulneſſe. The Hebrewes diſpute from this place, whether Iſaack was growne into pouertie. Some thinke hee was, by reaſon of the famine which fell in Canaan, & becauſe the Philiſtines kept not couenant with him, for which cauſe Sampſon afterwards taketh occaſion to plague them, and that iuſtly. Aben Ezra is of this opinion. Rebecca ſhe heareth this Commandement of Iſaack, and knowing that ſpeedineſſe in diſpatching, is oftentimes a great cauſe of aduantage, willeth Iacob to goe and fetch a Kid, that thereof ſhe might make pleaſant meat for Iſaack. Iacob is affraid, ſhe comforteth him: for ſhe had her warrant from God, that the elder ſhould ſerue the yonger, and therefore ſhee boldly aduentureth. He commeth to Iſaack, who ſuppoſeth him to bee Iacob by his voyce, but feeling the roughneſſe of his handes and necke, is perſwaded that it is Eſau, and bleſſeth him. When hee was bleſſed, in commeth Eſau with his veniſon, and prayeth his Father to bleſſe him. Iſaack was now aſtonied to thinke of this ſubtiltie. His ſpirite muſt needs be full of feare, to thinke how hee whom he would haue bleſſed, the Lord would not chooſe. Iſaack therefore ſeeing the euent, acknowledgeth the election of God in Iacob,
                  
and concludeth that he ſhall be bleſſed.
               Now here is a queſtion to be handled. When Iacob ſaith, I am thy Sonne Eſau. And Iſaac anſwereth, It is Iacobs voice. Whether Iacob doth lye or no. This anſwere of Iacobs, if we expound in the beſt ſence, is no lye: for then it is no more but a kind of ſcoffing, called Ironia. So God ſpeaketh in Gen. 3. Behold, the man is become as one of vs, to know good and euill. So Chriſt in the Goſpell commeth to his Diſciples, and finding them a ſleepe ſaith, Sleepe henceforth. Wee may anſwere it further thus: Iacob in reſpect of the purpoſe of God, which choſe him for the bleſſed, might verie well bee called the onely Sonne. Beſides, in regard of ciuill right, now hee was his eldeſt Sonne, ſeeing hee had bought the birth-right of Eſau: Whether it were a lye or no, we will leaue it to God: and wee cannot altogether condemne this anſwere, ſeeing God approoueth it by giuing Iacob the bleſsing.
               
                  Plato ſaith, When men are dead, wee cannot aske them what they meant. Therefore we muſt expound their ſpeeches, and their actions to the beſt meaning. And further, words are not alwayes to be taken in proper kinde of ſpeaking. For Abram defendeth himſelfe, that Sara was his Siſter, to wit, the Daughter of his Father, but not the daughter of his mother: Ioſeph ſweareth by the life of Pharaoh, if you take the words as they lye in proper ſence, he ſinned greatly, and was euen for his oath, the worſt of all Iacobs Sonnes. But Salmo Iirki expoundeth him thus: by the life of Pharaoh you are Spies, that is, Pharaohs life is a wormes life, which in account is no life: euen ſo are ye no Spies in truth, though you may ſeem ſo to be. So likewiſe Huſhai anſwereth Abſalom; for when Abſalom ſaw Huſhai, Dauids Counſellor, he asketh him, Is this thy kindneſſe to thy friend? Why wenteſt thou not with thy friend, meaning Dauid. Huſhai anſwereth, Nay, but whom the Lord and this people, and all the men of Iſrael choſe, his will I be, and with him will I dwell. This ſentence hath a double meaning, either that he meant to ſerue Abſalom, or King Dauid. Therefore when thinges are ſpoken doubtfully, we muſt marke how men may in wit expound them.
            
            
               2183. Abraham died. Gen. 25.
               Being One hundred, Seuentie, and fiue yeares old, He was buried in Hebron.
               
            
            
               2188. Heber died. Gen. 11.
               Being Foure hundred, Seuentie, and fiue yeares old. He was the longeſt liuer of any that was borne after the flood.
               
            
            
               
               2231. Iſmael died, being 137. yeares old.
               THe prophet Eſay, Cap. 66. prophecying of the calling of the Gentiles, nameth the two eldeſt Sonnes of Iſmael. Nebaioth and Kedar, ſaying, The Rammes of Nebaioth ſhall ſerue thee, and the ſheepe of Kedar ſhall be gathered vnto thee. Againe, hee nameth two of Abraham by Ketura, Sheba, and Seba: which two names doe alſo containe the Gentiles by Cham, and the Gentiles of Sem by Iocktan. So that vnder the names of the moſt worthy Gentiles, which are the Gentiles by Abraham, he ſheweth the calling of all the Gentiles in the world. Wherby we are taught, that Iſmaels poſteritie was not wholy rooted out of the fauour of God, as Ameleck was.
            
            
               2245. Iacob goeth to Laban. Gen. 28.
               HE goeth into the Countrey of Meſopotamia to Laban. There he ſerueth Twentie yeares. This Laban was the Sonne of Bethuell, and brother to Rebecca, and of the houſe of Nachor, the Brother of Abraham and Haran, who remained in the Land of the Chaldees after Abrahams departure. So that Laban, though of Meſopotamia, yet is neere kinſman to Iacob.
               
               
                  Iacob in this Iourney goeth ouer Iordan with his ſtaffe and skrip, as cloſely and ſecretly as hee could, that thereby Eſau might not know of his departure: for Eſau was mightie, and, as it appeareth afterwards, had a band of Foure hundred men.
               
                  Alexander Polyhiſtor writeth of this flying of Iacob for feare of his brother Eſau; of his abode in Meſopotamia, his ſeuen yeares ſeruice, his marrying with two Siſters, the number of his children, the rauiſhing of Dina, the ſlaughter of Sichem, the ſelling of Ioſeph, and of his impriſonment, his deliuerance for expounding of dreames, his authoritie in Egipt; his marrying with Putifars daughter, his two Sons by name that were borne of her, the comming of his Brethren into Egypt, the Feaſt that he made them, the Fiue parts that he gaue to Beniamin, whereof this Author intendeth to yeeld a reaſon, the comming of Iacob and his whole houſhold into Egypt, of what age euerie of them was, and how many children euerie one of them had: and ſo he bringeth vs downe from Noah to the flood, from the flood to Abraham, from Abraham to Leui, and from Leui to Moſes: notwithſtanding euer among faults in recording the times, with ſome other additions of ſmall importance. Which plainely ſhew, that he had not thoſe Hiſtories immediately out of the Bible, but out of ſome other bookes which he had ſeene elſewhere.
               
                  
                  Iacob going to Haran ſtayeth by the way all night, becauſe the Sunne was downe, and layd of the Stones of the place vnder his head, and ſlept. There hee ſeeth the Viſion of the Ladder, and when hee awaketh, hee ſaith, Surely the Lord was in this place, and I was not ware of it. Then he roſe and tooke vp the ſtones, and made a pillar, and called it Bethel: for he ſaid, This is no other, but the houſe of Iehouah, and the gate of heauen.
               
            
            
               He ſeeth a Ladder, &c.
               THis Ladder repreſenteth Chriſt: the foot on the earth, his humanitie: and the top reaching to heauen, his deity: The Angels of God aſcending and deſcending, the meditations betwixt God and vs: And the Lord ſtanding aboue vppon it, the readineſſe of the Father to receiue our prayers. This is expounded, Ioh. 1.51. Ye ſhall ſee the heauens open, and the Angels of God aſcending, and deſcending vppon the Sonne of man.
               
               In this Viſion of the Ladder, we ſee the whole meditation of Chriſt is ſhewed to Iacob. And if we duly conſider it, there could not bee a fitter ſimilitude in the whole courſe of nature, to repreſent the meditation, than the Ladder. For euen as in the Ladder, if two or three ſteps be broken, the Ladder is to no vſe, ſeeing wee can neither aſcend nor goe downe by it: euen ſo the whole meditation is ſo vnited and knit together, that by deſpiſing any one part, we bereaue our ſelues of the benefite of the whole.
               After that Iacob was come to Haran, he ſerued 7 yeres for Rachel. Laban giueth him Leah, and deceiueth him, and vſeth this excuſe, That it was not the vſe of the countrey, that the yonger ſhould be ſerued before the elder. Leah is ſaid to be contrite. Here we may ſee what it is to enioy the truth of Gods religion, and to worſhip him truly. Leah committeth a great ſin: and though God make her fruitfull, yet this euent excuſeth not the fault before cōmitted. She knew verie well, that ſhe could not enioy ſaluation by ſtaying with her Father: and wee are to make the beſt collection of the actions of the beſt women, & therfore, no doubt the zeale that ſhe had to know God, made her to venture ſo farre. No doubt, this was a great ſinne, and yet a farre greater to haue been maried to an v
                     •
                  faithfull husband: for therby there was no hope left for ſaluation. And we ſee that Chriſt chooſeth to come of Leah by Iuda, rather than of Rachel. God himſelfe onely knoweth how farre he will pardon ſo great offences.
               Then he ſerueth 7 yeres for Rachel. Leah is fruitfull: ſhee hath Reuben, and ſaith, The Lord hath looked on my tribulation. Then ſhee conceiued,

and bare Simeon, and ſaith, Becauſe the Lord heard that I was hated, therefore he hath giuen mee this Sonne. Shee conceiued againe, and bare Leui, and ſayth; Now my husband will be ioyned vnto me: therefore ſhe named him Leui, Ioyned. Then ſhe bare Iudah, and ſayd, Now will I praiſe the Lord. The heathen by the light of nature will confeſſe, that the Lord looketh on their tribulation, and helpeth them, that he heareth their hatred, and reuengeth it: but they cannot for all theſe benefites praiſe the Lord. Therefore ſhe, as a prophet, knowing that Chriſt ſhould come of Iudah, praiſeth God for ſo glorious a bleſsing. Then ſhe left bearing a time.
               
                  Rachel giueth Bilhah to Iacob: ſhe beareth Dan, Iudgement, and ſaith, God hath giuen ſentence on my ſide: afterwards, Nepthali, Wreſtling.
               
               
                  Leah doth the like, and giueth Iacob, Zilpah, who beareth Gad, a Companie, and Aſher, Happie. Leah after beareth Iſachar, Wages, or Reward: then Zabulon, God hath giuen me a goodly Dowrie: and laſt, Dina, a daughter, Iudgement. So God ſhewed Iudgement to the Sichemites for rauiſhing of her.
            
            
               2260. Fourteen yeres after, Ioſeph is borne,
               A rare man. And we commonly ſee that rare men haue great expectation before their birth. After this, Iacob like a good philoſopher enricheth himſelfe by vſing rods of diuers colours. Ioſeph in Egypt vſeth a kinde of policie to take away the lands from the people, and to bring them to the King. Theſe actions at the firſt might ſeeme vnlawfull, becauſe the cauſe is hid from vs, though afterwards, the purpoſe of God appearing, they are approoued.
            
            
               
                  Iuda borne.
               HE was the fourth Sonne of Iacob, his mother nameth him Praiſe God: whereby it appeareth, that ſhee looked for Redemption by Chriſt, reſpecting the promiſe concerning the Seede of the woman to be accompliſhed in him. It could not ſo haue appeared by naming Reuben, Simeon, or Leui. For a wiſe philoſopher might haue giuen thoſe names: but Iuda, contayning a name of heauenly comfort, ſheweth a ſpirite gouerned by the holy Ghoſt.
            
            
               
               2264. Iacob goeth from Laban. Gen. 30.
               WHere he had bene 20. yeres: two ſeuens, and a ſixe: In which number is conteined the creation, and the Sabbath. And,20. as one may gather, cloſely expreſſed 7. yeeres plentie, 7. yeeres dearth.
               As hee returned from Laban, he feared his brother Eſau: but the Angell of God met him to comfort him: therefore calleth the name of the place Mahanaim, that is, Gods hoſte. This campe of Angels is repeated in the ſong of ſongs, and applied to Chriſt as the companie of an armie. So Dauid likewiſe affirmeth, that the Angels of God doe pitch their tentes about them that feare him. When Abſalom is deſtroyed, Dauid and his campe were at Mahanaim, the place where the Angell met Iacob. Wherein we are to learne, that God ſo diſpoſeth the actions of his elect, that he regardeth their goings out, and their commings in, and marketh all their pathes, that whether they be at home with their father, or abroad among ſtrangers, they are ſhadowed vnder the defence of the moſt high, whoſe dwelling is in eternitie.
               After this, hee wraſtleth with the ſonne of God, (that is, in the likeneſſe of the ſame nature, which he afterwards tooke vpon him) vntill the breake of the day, and would not let him goe till he had bleſſed him. Therefore he called him Iſrael, a conqueror
                  ▪ This expounded in Oſeas. By his ſtrength he had power with God, to ſhew, that as hee had power with God, he ſhould preuaile with men. Then he erected an Altar, and called it Penuel: for, ſaith he, I haue ſeene God face to face.
               
               This ſtorie of Iacob is repeated in Iohn 1. Where Chriſt ſaith to Nathaniel, Beholde a true Iſraelite, in whom there is no guile. Nathaniel is called the true Iſraelite, in that he acknowledged Chriſt to be the Son of God, which he might know by caſting Daniels ſeauens.
               Afterwards hee is reconciled to his brother Eſau, and beyonde Iordan he dwelt neere Sichem, where Dina is deflowred.
               
                  
                     Er borne.
                  
                     Onan borne.
                  
                     Selah borne.
               
               
                  Er
                  & Onan Were married to Thamar and committed grieuous ſins, before God: therefore he deſtroyeth them.
            
            
               
               
                  2276. Ioſeph is ſold into Egypit when he is 17. yeeres old: ſo long was he nouriſhed at home of Iacob.
               
               
                  IOſeph dreameth that the Sunne, Moone, and eleuen ſtarres worſhipped him. Gen. 37. Meaning his father, mother, and his eleuen brethren, of whom in the creation the twelue ſignes in the Zodiacke had a full reference: ſhewing thereby, that God in his Counſell, at the creation, had a great regard to the number of the ſonnes of Iacob, which were to be borne more than 2000. yeeres after: Hee hath the like regard at the confuſion of tongues, in ſetling Canaan and his eleauen ſonnes in a ſoile, which Iacob ſonnes ſhould afterwards poſſeſſe.
               For declaring this dreame. The poyſon of the ſerpent poſſeſsing his brethrens hearts, they were moued with enuie, and ſold Ioſeph into Egypt. Iuda cauſed him to be ſold, to ſaue his life: but Iudas Iſcariot, (that is, which falleth away for reward) ſold Chriſt, to looſe his life.
               
                  Iacob deceiued his father Iſaack with a kid. Gen. 27. When Ioſeph is ſold, his brethren ſprinkle the blood of a kid vpon his partie-coloured coat, and brought it home to their father, and ſaid, a wilde beaſt had ſlaine him.
               
                  Iacob was 20. yeeres frō his Father Iſaack, & did not ſee his face.
                  
                  Ioſeph was 20. yeeres from his Father Iacob, before hee ſeeth his face.
                  
               
               
                  To ſhew, that wherein a man offendeth, therein he ſhalbe puniſhed.
               
               
                  
                     Ioſeph the ſonne of Iacob fedde Iſrael in Egypt, as putting meate into the mouth of a child.
                  
                     Ioſeph the ſonne of Iacob, taketh the child Ieſus, and his mother Mary, and fleeth into Egypt Mat. 2. And properly putteth meat into the childs mouth
               
            
            
               2280. Er and Onan died. Gen. 38.
               
                  ER and Onan, hauing committed horrible ſinne before God, are ſlaine, and no ſeed left vnto them. Then, according to the cuſtome, Thamar thought to haue had the third ſonne Selah, to haue rayſed vppe ſeede. But Iuda neglecting it, ſhee attyred

her ſelfe like a light woman, and lay in the way as Iuda ſhould goe to the ſheepe ſhearing; whom Iuda knew, and at the time ſhe bare two children Phares and Serah: for which fact, Iuda would haue burnt her. Whereby we may know, that before the law giuen by Moſes, they had the ſame equitie of iuſtice for puniſhing of ſinne, that they had afterwards.
               In Moſes Law a Magiſtrate might not be condemned vnder three witneſſes.
               
                  Thamar condemneth Iuda by three witneſſes, his

                     
                        Seale,
                     
                     
                        Bracelet,
                     
                     
                        Staffe.
                     
                  
               
               From this deede of Iuda we may vnderſtand, that the prerogatiue, That his brethren ſhould praiſe him, could not be meant of himſelfe: but herein is manifeſt the gifts of God to be of grace, and not of nature. For if Iuda had bene rare for godlineſſe, the prerogatiue of nature might ſeeme to haue cauſed Chriſt to haue come of him.
            
            
               2288. Iſaack died. Gen. 35. being 180. yeeres old.
               HEe is the longeſt liuer after Heber, and liueth longer then Abraham: To ſhew, that he was a child of Promiſe. For if Abraham begetting him when he was old, he ſhould haue died quickelie, what rare bleſsing had it beene to Abraham? And therefore, that the power of God might be ſeene, euen in the weakeneſſe of man, Iſaack hath a longer life than Abraham, or any after him. Heereuppon it may bee concluded, the booke of Tobias to bee falſe, becauſe it maketh Tobies life ſo long, and thereby ſeemeth to croſſe Iacobs bleſſing. Beſides, wee ſhall finde that in Nehemiahs time, they which came out of captiuitie doe out-liue any in the Scriptures that come after, and theſe men were accounted old. The longeſt liuer of them commeth ſhort of Iſaacks age.
            
            
               
                  Ezrom. borne. of him nothing is ſpoken.
                
            
            
               
               
                  2298. Iacob goeth into Egypt, Gen. 47. Hee is nouriſhed of Ioſeph 17. yeeres..
               
                  
                     215
                  
                  NOw for this number of 215. how is that performed Geneſis 17. where God ſaith to Abraham, Thy ſeede ſhalbe euill intreated in a land that is not theirs 400. yeeres. Seeing they continue in Egypt but 215. yeeres, they were afflicted by ſome of Egypt 400. yeeres. For Iſmael the Egyptian by Hagar mocketh Iſaack in the beginning of the 400. yeeres, and that mocking in the Scripture is called perſecution: and in the end of 400. yeeres they were afflicted vnto the comming out of Egypt, ſo that they were not in Egypt 400. yeeres, but they were afflicted firſt and laſt 400. yeeres.
               
               
                  Pſal. 105. Iſrael came into Egypt, and Iacob was a stranger in the land of Cham; to confirme the couenant that he made with Abraham, and the oath that he ſware vnto Iſaack which he appointed to Iacob for a law, & to Iſrael for an euerlaſting Teſtament, ſaying, Vnto thee will I giue the land of Canaan, the lot of your inheritance. When as yet there were but a few of them, and they strangers in the land, what time as they went from one Nation to another, and from one kingdome to annother people: hee ſuffered no man to doe them wrong, but reprooued euen Kings for their ſakes, ſaying, touch not mine anointed, and doe my Prophets no harme. Yet he called for a dearth vpon the land, and deſtroyed all the prouiſion of bread. But hee had ſent a man before them, Gen. 45. Euen Ioſeph which was ſold, to be a bondſeruant, whoſe feet were hurt in the ſtocks, and the yron entred into his ſoule vntill the time that his cauſe was knowne. The word of the Lord tried him.
            
            
               This famine ouer all the land of Canaan, may appeare to be a puniſhment on Iacobs familie, for ſelling Ioſeph into Egypt.
               
                  IAcob goeth into Egypt, and there telleth Pharaoh that he was 130. yeeres old. Though Pharaoh in his demaund meant no more than a heathen man would, to wit, to know his yeeres and the age of his life: Yet God ſo diſpoſeth Iacobs anſwere, that he ſignifieth vnto him that his comming into Egypt with ſeuentie ſoules, is anſwerable in a contrarie degree to the firſt ſcattering of the ſeuentie families at the building of the tower of Babell. In the 4
                     •
                   yeeres there came three diſcents from Iacob. Whereby it appeareth, that Iuda and Pharez
                  
could not bee much elder when they begot children, than Salomon was when hee begot Roboam, which was about twelue yeeres of age. By meanes of which ſpeedie encreaſe, there were of theſe ſeuentie in 215. yeeres, ſixe hundred thouſand fighting men, beſides women and children, godlie, and of the houſehold of faith: to ſhew, how God could performe his promiſe to Abraham, that hee would make his ſeede as the ſtarres of heauen, and as the ſand of the ſea ſhoare. Hereupon Abacuck ſaith, that the counſels of God are eternall: thereby teaching vs to marke diligently the time wherein God performeth his promiſes, which may be made familiar by examples in this ſort. It is ſaid, Gen. 3. The ſeede of the woman, ſhall breake the head of the ſerpent.
               
               This was not performed, till Chriſt tooke fleſh of the Virgin, and became man, which was 4000. yeeres wanting but 70. after the promiſe made to Adam. Satan, to trie this, tempteth Chriſt, and is ouerthrowne. Abraham goeth forth of his countrey, to embrace the promiſe, that God would giue him a land, 430. yeeres before his ſeede ſhould enioy it. But the true performance was long after, that is to ſay, in Chriſt, as Zacharias ſpeaketh. Luke 1. To performe the oath which he ſware to our Father Abraham, that would giue vs. God ſpeaketh as though it ſhould preſently fall out; but ſeeing one thouſand yeres in his ſight, are as one day, we muſt marke how his counſels are eternall. It was ſpoken in King Achaz dayes by Eſay 7.14. Beholde, a Virgin ſhall conceaue a ſonne. He nor his ſeed ſawe the performance thereof: ſo was Iſaack a figure of Chriſt, and the Lambe kept it in memorie. Daniel in his time propheſieth of 70. ſeuens, or 490. yeeres before Chriſt, the King ſhould be killed, to performe euerie viſion and prophecie.
            
            
               
                  2315. Iacob died in Egypt &c. Gen. 49.
               
               HE is brought from Egypt to Canaan, to bee buried in Hebron with Abraham and Iſaack, as a ſigne that he looked for the reſurrection and enioying of the ſpirituall Canaan. This place Caleb afterwards claimeth for an inheritance when he commeth into the lande: for it was the firſt purchaſe, and a ſignification of our pilgrimage in this life, hauing here no abiding place.
            
            
               
               Now let vs compare the iourneys of Abraham, Iacob, Iacobs ſonnes, and Chriſt together.
               
                  
                     
                        Abraham
                        Iacob
                        Iacobs ſonnes
                        Chriſt
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Was borne in Meſopotamia.
                              Hee goeth to Canaan.
                              Hee returneth to Egypt.
                              Hee dieth in Canaan.
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Was borne in Canaan.
                              Hee goeth to Meſopotamia.
                              Hee returneth to Canaan.
                              Hee goeth into Egypt.
                              Hee is brought to Canaan againe.
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Are borne in Meſopotamia.
                              They dwell in Canaan.
                              They multiplie in Egypt.
                              They returne to Canaan, and after that are carried into Babell an other Egypt.
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Is borne in Canaan.
                              Hee goeth to Egypt.
                              Hee returneth to Canaan, and there he dieth, and bringeth a new Babell, or Egypt, the Romanes on the Iewes to deſtroy them.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Ramban, an old Hebrew, maketh another compariſon in the euents, thus: Iacob himſelfe was vſed well in Egypt, but his poſteritie was plagued by the Kings which liued after him in Egypt.
               In Babylon thoſe that went into captiuitie were plagued, as Sidrack, Miſhak, Abednego: but their poſteritie found reliefe in Cyrus and Darius, conquering the Babylonians.
               Now it is neceſſary to ſpeake of the place where Iacob died.
               This place was Egypt, Chams countrey, long agoe accurſed. Where it is ſpoken in the Prophets, that in Egypt men ſpake with the tongue of Canaan, the meaning of it is thus much:

That when Chriſt ſhall come to preach, his teaching ſhall be of ſuch power, that it ſhall conuert in all countreyes (aſwell Egypt as Grecia, Barbaria, and all other the countreys of the Gentiles which knew not God) ſoules vnto God, which being conuerted, ſhall ſpeake the tongue of Canaan, that is, their tongues ſhall prayſe God for the redemption by Chriſt, which is the tongue of Canaan. This continueth yet true: for there is no countrey nor nation, where God hath not had, or hath thoſe which vnfainedly beleeue the Goſpel. Yet if it be obiected, that the tongue of Canaan was Hebrew, how then ſhall a ſimple ploughman vnderſtand it? This obiection is thus taken away. It is not neceſſarie for a ſimple ploughman or trades man to be a skilfull Hebrecian: for he may be ſaued without the knowledge of the tongue, ſeeing by the Bible tranſlated, he may learne the religion of Canaan, and that learning will teach him the tongue of Canaan. If they replie further, that the Papiſts ſay the tranſlations be corrupted, and therefore it is neceſſarie he ſhould be cunning in the originall: For anſwere to this replie made from the Papiſts argument, if any doubt of the truth of the tranſlations, he may reſort to learned preachers, which can eaſilie reſolue him. And for the Papiſts, if the controuerſie be betweene them and vs, the originall muſt determine it.
               It is ſaid, that Iacobs ſonnes were of Cham. It is not meant his twelue ſonnes, for they were borne before he came into Egypt: but that place of Scripture hath ſpeciall reference to the two ſonnes of Ioſeph, Ephraim and Manaſſes, who are reckoned to be Iacobs children. For Ioſeph marring an Egyptian by whom he had them, they by the mothers ſide are of Cham, and ſo Iacobs children in this ſenſe are of Cham.
               
               Thus much for the place.
            
            
               Now followeth his will. Gen. 49.
               
               
                  HEare yee ſonnes of Iacob, and hearken to Iſrael your father. Heere he repeateth his owne name, Iſrael, that is, mightie with God. The accompliſhment of this ſtrength was fulfilled when they came from Egypt.
               As there is no common wealth but ſtands of thoſe that be wanton, of men offer reached with choller, of Iudges, of husbandmen, of merchants, of men of trade, of warriers to defend from forraine inuaſion: ſo are Iacobs twelue ſonnes of all degrees in life.
               
                  In placing them here thus, their dignitie is regarded, and not their prerogatiue of birth: for then Reuben ſhould be firſt.
               
                  Iuda. Hath the prerogatiue, that his brethren ſhall praiſe him. Yet if we looke into his life, this could not be meant of him: for who looſer then he, who lay with his daughter Thamar? But herein is manifeſt, the gifts of God to be of grace, and not of nature For if Iuda had bin rare for godlines, then the prerogatiue of nature might ſeeme to haue cauſed Chriſt to haue come of him. Iuda his ſtorie of prayſe God, is repeated by Saint Paul. Rom. 2. Where he ſaith, Whoſe prayſe is not of men, but of God: So euery man that knoweth the birth of Chriſt, and embraceth the truth thereof with conſtancie, not turning for the loue of reward, his praiſe is of God; though the world hate him.
               
                  Ioſeph. He exceeds in vertue, and thereof hath wonderfull bleſſings: for among the thirteen Iudges, ſixe are of his tribe, by which glory his poſteritie began to deſpiſe the tribe of Iuda. For at Roboams time, they ſay, 1. King. 12. What haue we to do with the houſe of Ieſſay? What haue we to doe with the houſe of Dauid? to your tents O Iſrael, to your tents. But the Lord plagued them with a plague euer to bee kept in memorie, as the Prophet Ieremie ſaith, Iere. 7. Marke what I haue done to Siloh: which was a citie in the tribe of Ephraim. And againe, Pſal. 78. He for-ſooke the tabernacle of Siloh, euen the tent hee had pitched among them. He refuſed the Tabernacle of Ioſeph, and chooſe not the tribe of Ephraim, but chooſe the tribe of Iuda, euen the hill of Sion which he loued. Concerning the proſperitie of Ioſephs houſe. Nazianzenus noteth, that he himſelfe was more afraid of the ſubtilties of Satan in his proſperitie, then in his aduerſitie,
               
                  Nephtali. Of him this onely is ſpoken: Gen. 49. He is a Hind let goe, giuing goodlie wordes: which was performed when Barac of Nephtali, and Debora of Ephraim, ſang for the ouerthrow of Siſera at the waters of Mageddon. Iudg. 5.
               
               Now whereas you haue Abacuck to bring a meſſe of pottake to Daniel in the Lyons denne; ſome Iewe that made that, neuer meant ſo: but from that place of Abacucke, The iuſt ſhall liue by his faith, Abac. 2. faineth a compariſon, that as pottage preſerueth this naturall life from periſhing, ſo the meditating by faith on the promiſes of God in Chriſt, kept our ſoules from wauering by diſtruſt, and by that confidence Daniel was ſaued from the mouth of the Lyons.
               
                  
                  Beniamin. A Childe verie vertuous. Rachel calleth him Ben-oni, Sonne of my ſorrow, but Iſrael calleth him Beniamin, Sonne of my right hand. Moſes in Deut. 33. in his bleſsing ſaith, The beloued of the Lord ſhall dwell in ſafetie by him, and God ſhall dwell between his ſhoulders. And ſo hee did: for the Temple was afterwards built in the tribe of Beniamin. His tribe hath the firſt King, though he be the meaneſt of the Tribes. Beniamin continueth vntill the euening. When the other Tribes fell away, hee onely with Iuda at Roboams time; hee onely with Iuda in Cyrus time, ioyned for the building of the Temple. Heſter of Beniamin ſaued all Iuda from the practiſe of Haman. Paul of Beniamin was the one of the laſt builders of the ſpirituall Temple.
               
                  Dan. Moſes in his bleſsing in numbring the Tribes, leaues out Simeon. And in the Reuelation, when the Tribes are ſealed, Dan is left out. Therevpon the Grecians thinke, that Antichriſt ſhall come of the Tribe of Dan. That is not ſo: but Moſes being of Leui, in bleſsing the Tribes putteth in Leui, and ſpeaketh largely of his ſpirituall bleſsings. Ioſephs Sons are not to bee left out, becauſe they were adopted: therefore to keepe the number of Twelue, hee muſt leaue out ſome. Simeon was the fitteſt, ſeeing hee was without repentance. Leui muſt be reckoned, ſeeing his was a ſpirituall inheritance, and the Lord promiſed to be his inheritance: therefore Dan muſt be omitted. And this may be the reaſon; when the Children of Iſrael came into the Land of Canaan, the Tribe of Dan cauſeth the firſt Idolatrie, and therfore that Tribe was iuſtly plagued. And in this Tribe, Idolatrie continued vntill the remoouing of the Arke from Siloh. But yet this wee muſt vnderſtand, that though Dan is not named, yet in reſpect his tribe are Iacobs Sonnes, the Tribe is comprehended in the generall bleſsing. And Moſes concludeth, that ſeeing the eternall God is the refuge; Iſrael the Fountaine of water, ſhall dwell in ſafetie.
               
                  Iſachar. Was content to liue vnder tribute, like to an Aſſe couching downe betweene two burthens, rather than to ſeeke glorie by leading bands of men.
               
                  Reuben. He looſeth his prerogatiue, becauſe he went vp to his Fathers bed, therefore hee is light as water, hee ſhall not excell. Reuben hath one of Dauids Captaines of his Tribe: but it is preſently added therewith, Nine and Twentie better than he. Reuben ſheweth ſome compaſsion to Ioseph, and would not haue him killed, but caſt

him into ſome pit. Iudah thought that might be too long ere he would be diſpatched, and therefore ſelleth him.
               
                  Simeon, and Leui. Their wrath was fierce: yet becauſe Leui afterwardes repented, and ſhewed tender affection to Ioſeph, and was zealous in deſtroying Idolatrers, therefore he had a bleſsing in Moſes will.
               
                  Simeon neuer ſhewed any tender affection to Ioſeph, and therefore when his brethren come into Egypt, and Ioſeph accuſeth them for Spies, he keepeth Simeon in priſon till they come downe againe, as a kinde of puniſhment for his former malice. His ſinne againſt the Sichemites was exceeding great: and ſeeing he neuer ſhewed any ſigne of repentance, hee was iuſtly cut off from the hope of a bleſsing. By this wee may learne to reiect the authoritie of the booke of Iudith: Firſt, becauſe ſhe ſayd to be of the Tribe of Simeon. If wee marke this well, wee ſhall ſee how this booke cannot be ſcripture. For wee muſt note, that it is no ſmall glorie to haue the ſpirite of God penne a booke of ones actions. If there be but a ſentence ſpoken in the commendation of any in the ſcripture, it is a great weight of glorie. Now if wee looke to Iacobs will, and ſee that he hath a curſe, and not a bleſſing, and in the courſe of Scripture afterward no mention of any repentance that Simeon and his Tribe ſhewed, nor any zeale of religion expreſſed; how can this ſtand with Iacobs prophecie? nay, it cleane croſſeth it, and maketh it fruſtrate. For ſeeing Iacob as a Prophet, telleth all his Sonnes what ſhould befall them in the laſt dayes, to euerie one and his tribe; ſo long as the Kingdome of the Iewes, and their policie ſtood; and in his will maketh no mention of the booke of Iudith: We muſt by admitting this booke, accuſe the ſpirite of God of ignorance. Beſides, it is a Storie: and yet the time thereof doth not fall out within the compaſſe of any time, neither before the captiuitie, neither after, and therefore to be deſpiſed. And for my opinion I make as much account of Ouids Metamorphoſis, as of Iudith: for Plato ſayth, that in fables there is a truth reuealed ſecretly. Thus we are to thinke likewiſe of the booke of Tobie.
               
               
                  Leui, he repented when Amram of the tribe of Leui ſaued Moſes.
               
               
                  Zabulon. Was a Marchant, and delighted in Shippes. In Greeke Canaan is called Phenicia, and the men of Canaan Phenices. Ariſtotle a Thouſand yeares after Moſes, makes mention of a Riuer Tarteſus; he meant the Sea Tharſis
                  ▪ and the Phenices brought gold, & had ſuch plenty, that their anchors were thereof. No doubt he had heard of Salomons time, wherin gold and ſiluer was no more eſteemed

than ſtone. This trauelling of Iacobs Sonnes into farre Countreys, muſt needs make the heathen haue a taſt of Religion. And Moſes, he willed the heathen to reſort to the Mountain, where the Temple was built.
               
                  Aſer, Was a Farmer, to prouide pleaſures for a King. You haue in the old Teſtament little ſpoken of him: but becauſe his tribe ſhould not thinke themſelues excluded the fauour of God, you haue in the newe Teſtament Anna, that is, Grace, (a verie rare woman for godlyneſſe) the daughter of Phanuel (that is, See God,) of the happie Tribe of Aſer, for Aſer ſignifieth Happie.
               
               
                  Gad, He ſhall lead an Hoſt of men. This was performed when Reuben, Gad, and halfe Manaſses gaue a great ouerthrowe to the Hagarims, about the time that Saul was annointed King.
               Thus wee may ſee, that whatſouer is requiſite in policie for the maintenance of a common weale, you ſhall finde expreſſed in the liues and behauiours of the Sonnes of Iſrael.
            
            
               2369. Ioſeph died, Gen. 50. being One hundred and ten yeares old.
               
                  By Faith, Ioſeph when hee died hee made mention of the departing of the Children of Iſrael out of Egypt, and gaue commaundement of his bones. Heb. 11.
               
                  Now becauſe many excellent things are to bee ſaid of Ioſeph before his death when hee was in Egypt, and in the Sinay ſight no yeares layd downe; I will here handle them together.
               
               God proſpered him in Egypt in all his actions. And euen as God bleſſed Laban for Iacobs ſake, ſo hee bleſſed Ioſephs Maſter for Ioſephs ſake.
               
                  Ioſeph was a goodly perſon, and a well fauored: which commendation in the ſame words is beſtowed vpon Dauid, 1. King. 16. the ſame of Daniel, and the ſame of Chriſt. Ioſeph would not bee defiled with the fornication of Egypt. Daniel would not bee defiled with the

vncleane diet of Babell. Ioſeph expoundeth Pharaohs dreame. Daniel expoundeth Nebuchadnetzars dreame. Ioſeph was made Ruler ouer Egypt. Daniel was made Ruler ouer Babell. Ioſeph being in priſon, found fauour with the Maſter of the priſon. Daniel found fauour with the Kings Chamberlaine.
               
                  Ioſephs name was changed by Pharaoh. Daniels name was changed by Nebuchadnetzer.
               
               
                  Ioſeph was falſely accuſed. Chriſt was falſely accuſed.
               
                  Ioſeph was Thirtie yeares old when hee ſtood before Pharaoh.
               
               
                  Ieſus is baptiſed beginning to be Thirtie yeares old.
               
                  Ioſeph was in priſon betweene two theeues: the one of them was ſaued, the other condemned. Chriſt was crucified betweene Two theeues: the one of them was ſaued, the other condemned. Yet notwithſtanding all theſe bleſsings of God vpon Ioſeph (to ſhew that euen the beſt haue their infirmities) his vertues were darkened verie much in that hee marrieth an Egyptian woman. Gen. 41. which was altogether vnlawfull. For Eſau before doing the like, is blamed, and Rebecca hauing an eſpeciall care ouer Iacob, leaſt he ſhould commit the like wickedneſſe, ſendeth him to Laban to chooſe a wife of his owne kindred. Abraham had the like care for Iſaack: and Moſes afterwars forbids it by a law, thereby confirming the vnlawfulneſſe thereof. Seuen hundred yeres after, is this ſinne puniſhed in Iſrael: for Ieroboam receiueth the Religion of Egypt, and maketh two Calues, whereby all Iſrael became Idolatrers.
            
         
         
            Here beginneth Iobs Storie.
            
               Satan compaſſeth all the earth, &c.
            BEfore wee come to examine Iobs cauſe
                  •
                there may bee by the way, a queſtion diſcuſſed concerning ſucceſsion: that is to ſay, Whether ſucceſsion of Biſhops, be a neceſſarie marke of the Church? And we ſhall, if we mark the Stories of the Scripture, find that is none: for in Iobs time, where there was a viſible Sacrificer, to continue the Religion of God in outward policie? Satan hauing ouerranne the whole earth, telleth God, that hee could finde none iuſt,

or that feared God. So that thereby wee may gather, that there were verie fewe, whome the world by eye-ſight acknowledged godly.
            And to make this more plaine; wee are to obſerue, that the queſtion is not, Whether the godly in their owne hearts doe knowe who ſerue God: but, Whether there bee continually ſuch an apparance thereof, that it may appeare to eye-ſight. Since Chriſt wee haue not the like time to this, wherein Satan can bragge, he ouer-runneth the whole earth. For in Iobs time Iacob is dead: the Religion which Iobs friends hold, is condemned by God. Elihu is verie young, and Iob himſelfe condemned of his friends: therefore wee may verie well conclude, That it is no ſound Diuinitie to affirme, that it is no true Church, except the policie thereof be ſo viſible, as it may be knowne by eye-ſight.
            In the Reuleation, foure Angels ſtand on the foure Corners of the earth, holding the foure Windes of the Earth, that they ſhould not blowe neither on the earth, neither on the Sea, neither on any greene Tree. By this likewiſe wee may gather, that the godly were verie fewe, and ſcarce knowne: For the office of theſe foure Angels was, to ſtay the graces of Gods Spirite from blowing vppon, and refreſhing the ſoules of thoſe which dwelt on the earth.
            Wee ſhall ſee this cleerer, if wee obſerue the particular fallings through the Scriptures.
            In Enoſh his time, Religion decayed in the houſe of God: for the which, the flood came and drowned the world, After the flood, for their wickedneſſe which they manifeſted in building the Tower of Babell, they haue their tongues confounded, and all their families ſcattered.
            In Iobs time, none of the children of Iſrael forſook the Idols of Egypt.
            
            In the time of the Iudges, you ſhall finde a great many of fallings away, and therefore God gaue them into the hands of diuers and ſundry oppreſſors.
            In Roboams time, the ten Tribes fell away.
            In Antiochus time, Religion was ſo corrupted, that the Leuites would be Kings, and thereby became Saduces, maintaining an opinion, That after this life the bodie was no more, and concerning the ſoule, it was no more to be eſteemed, than the ſoule of a beaſt, or any other creature.
            In Chriſts time, all the Iewes were back-ſliders, except ſome few, perhaps about ſeuen Thouſand which might hold religion ſincerely, anſwerable to Elias time.
            
               After Chriſt, in Vrbanus time, all the Chriſtians fell away, and then came vp the power and authoritie of Antichriſt, for whom he made lawes. So that if wee conſider theſe things well, we ſhall finde, that the godly haue alwaies been ſo fewe, and the outward policie of true Religion ſo darkened, that it could hardly bee diſcerned. This queſtion being thus diſcuſſed, wee are to conſider the time when Iob was afflicted. And if we examine things duly, we ſhall find this time to be before Moſes. There bee ſlouthfull fellowes that ſay, the time cannot bee prooued when Iobs Storie fell out, As though, if any one ſhould write Epiſtles or Orations, a good Scholler could not eaſily from the matter find out the time wherein hee ſhould liue. In the Three and Twentie Orations made by Iob and his friends, there is mention made of the Creation, of the Flood, of Babell, and the Seuentie Families of Lot, of Sodom and his deſtruction, but nothing of the comming from Egypt: which being ſo famous a deliuerance, they would not haue omitted. For the Prophets continually rehearſe it, and doe as it were make large Commentaries thereon.
            Further, it muſt bee at ſuch a time wherein Satan had the conqueſt ouer the whole world: for ſo Satan ſayth, he had run ouer the whole world, and found none that feared God, and departed from euil: which affirmation cannot bee true, but onely when Iſrael was in Egypt: for then all the world but they, worſhipped ſtrange Gods, and of them Ezechiel ſayth, None of the Children of Iſrael forſooke their Idols of Egypt. Therefore this muſt needes bee a maruailous Victorie which Satan had gotten. Beſides, Iob himſelfe ſayth, O that God would anſwere, and trie mee. This had beene a fooliſh ſpeech, if it had beene after Moſes: for then his integritie ſhould haue beene determined by Moſes lawes. When the tongues are diuided, you haue Abraham called, and made a rare man. So when in Egypt all Religion was corrupted, you haue Moſes borne, thereby to ſhew, that when Satan thinketh hee beareth moſt ſway, the Lord in mercie will raiſe vp one to ouerthrowe his Kingdome.
            The temptations of Iob muſt needes bee about the birth of Moſes, when the lawe was made of killing the young Children, Satan poſſeſsing the hearts of the wicked, that all their care and ſtudie was bent to the ouerthrowe of the Church, and when Aaron was borne but three yeares afore, there was peace: for wee doe not read that they were faine to hide him.
            Thus much for the time.
            
               THe place where hee dwelt, was Eaſtward. The Sabeans on the one ſide, the Caldeans on the other, and Canaan on the other, and he as it were in the middeſt. This Country is called Huts. God hath in his prouidence dealt ſo ſurely, that the verie heathen (if they bee marked) will make plaine the euent of Gods promiſes. Nimrod hee goeth about to ouerthrow Sems bleſsing, and builds him a Tower, but God giueth it an ouerthrow. Afterwards Nachors Twelue Sonnes ouerrunne the land of Chuſh. Iſmaels Twelue Sonnes they doe the like. Eſau hath eleuen Dukes, and Eight Kinges, and eleuen Dukes againe, and that afore there was any King in Iſrael, as Moſes ſpeaketh, and they conquer Chuſh, and his Land. In Egypt, Chuſh his poſteritie imagine by the multitude and ſtrength of their Chariots and Horſemen, to reuenge themſelues of the Children of Iſrael: but the Lord ouer-whelmed them in the red Sea. When the Children of Iſrael are in the wilderneſſe, they of Canaan and their borders deale deſpightfully with them, and will graunt them no paſſage, thinking therby to ſtarue them in the wilderneſſe: But the Lord by Ieſus their Captaine deſtroyeth them all, euen to Canaan the youngeſt, according to the curſe of Noah, And let Canaan bee his ſeruant. When the Iewes are carried away captiue to Babylon, there Chuſh his poſteritie haue a great ſtroke, and ſeeme to ouerthrow Sems bleſsing. But God rayſed vp Cyrus of Sem, and Darius of Iaphet, to ouerthrow the Babylonians, and therby comforteth the Iewes, and prouideth for the building of the Temple.
            Thus we ſee how God is ſtill true in his promiſes, Curſed be Canaan a ſeruant of ſeruants ſhall he be. Iob, he goeth to Sems houſe for his poſſeſsions, thereby ſhewing his religion, which would not enioy earthly poſſeſsions amongeſt thoſe whome God had curſed. And wee may ſee in this, the law of nature obſerued, that euerie one is to reſort to his eldeſt brothers houſe.
            Thus much concerning the place.
            
               The next circumſtance is, of what kindred he is.
               HE is of Abraham by Keturah, for it is ſaid, that he was the richeſt of all the men of the Eaſt. This cannot be meant generally: for no doubt the kings of the eaſt exceeded him in riches. But if we take it of thoſe of Abrahams houſe by Keturah, to whome Abraham gaue gifts, and ſent them away, it is true. Beſides, hee calleth his

friends which come to comfort him, his brethren: for hee ſayth, My Brethren are like Riuers of water. This were improperly ſpoken, if he were not of Abraham; he cannot be of Eſau: for how could that then be true, that Eſau I haue hated, being likewiſe curſed for deſpiſing the promiſe, if ſo rare a man for godlineſſe and ſinceritie, and that before Moſes, ſhould be of Eſaus kindred? Ieremie ſpeaketh in his Lamentations in this wiſe. Lament. 4. Reioyce thou Edom in the Land of Huts. From hence ſome conclude, that ſeeing Huts is in the Land of Edom, and Iob of Huts; therefore he is of Eſaus kindred, and not of Abraham by Keturah. This obiection, though it may ſeeme at the firſt ſight of force; yet it is eaſily anſwered by marking the times: for many ages had paſſed betwixt Iobs age, and Ieremies prophecie. Eſaus poſteritie might at this time haue brought Huts vnder his ſubiection: but in Iobs time wee doe not reade hee had done ſo. And the ſcripture makes plaine, that Abrahams Sonnes by Keturah, went and dwelt Eaſt-ward. And conſidering Iobs Religion, which no doubt was not embraced in Eſaus houſe, we muſt needs thinke, notwithſtanding this obiection, that Iob was of Abrahams kindred.
               Thus much for the circumſtance of his kindred.
            
            
               
                  ELihu, whome God approoueth, is of Aram by Milcah, who hath Bethuel, God is riſen, the Father of Rebecca, and the Father of Aram, of whome Elihu. Theſe two names containe in them great Religion; for the reſt of Nachors Sonnes, they ſignifie nothing. Here wee ſee Saint Paules rule true: If the vnbeleeuing man will dwell with the beleeuing woman, let them not depart: for the vnbeleeuing man is ſanctified by the beleeuing woman. And I rather thinke that Milcah named theſe two, than Nachor: thereby to ſhew her faith in God, hauing obtained that prerogatiue at her husbands hand, for Nachor muſt needs learne Idolatrie from Terah his Father.
               Wee may likewiſe obſerue from Iobs kindred, what a care Abraham had, yea, euen in his old age, to teach his poſteritie the law of God, ſeeing hee inſtructed Keturah and her Sonnes. And this care God affirmeth, when hee ſayth, Gen. 18. That hee cannot keepe ſecret from Abraham his Counſels, for he will teach it his poſteritie. Therefore we ſhall find that this booke of Iob is a Commentarie on this ſentence.
            
            
               
               Now we come to the queſtion and the ſumme of the Booke.
               THe queſtion is not concerning Adams fall, or the goodneſſe and pureneſſe of workes: they doubt not of the Reſurrection, nor of the Trinitie, nor of any other points of faith: but it is only a Question of Practiſe. (that is to ſay) Whether a man which aboundeth in wealth, and being brought to pouertie, can be in fauour of God? and whether God do ſo gouern the world, that thoſe whom he loueth, he will ſuffer to ſee affliction. Iob is declared to be merueilous great, his bleſsings multiplied in his ſonnes, in his daughters, in Sheepe, Oxen, Aſſes, and Cammels. He himſelfe could not bee old: perhaps at this time ſixtie yeeres: for they ſay they had then liuing elder then his father, and after his temptation he liued 140. yeeres, and we muſt take heed we make him not to outliue Iſaack. Now all his wealth is taken from him: himſelfe in great miſerie remembreth Iacobs ſtorie going with his ſtaffe and his ſcrip ouer Iordan, and by the remembrance thereof comforteth himſelfe, and confeſſeth, Chap. 1. Naked came I out of my mothers wombe, and naked ſhall I returne thither, the Lord giueth, and the Lord taketh away, bleſsed therefore be his name. Saint Paul in the 1. Tim. cap. 6. Tels him, that godlineſſe is great riches, if a man be content with that he hath: for we brought nothing into the world, and it is certaine we can carrie nothing out. And the children of Iſrael euery yere when they came to offer, after the Prieſts had taken the basket of firſt fruits, and ſet it before the Altar of the Lord, were wont to ſay, Deu. 26. A Syrian was my father, to wit, Iacob, who went ouer Iordan with his ſtaffe, and his bagge, and after he returned into Canaan, and being readie to periſh, went downe into Egypt, and ſoiourned there with a ſmall company, and grew there vnto a nation great, mightie, and full of people.
               
               This confeſsion was not miraculous in Iob. For the heathen could ſay thus much as they cōfeſſe in their Epigrams; that naked they came out of the earth, and naked they ſhall goe thither. Sathan touched his bodie, and left him him nothing free but the fleſh of his teeth, and his tongue, that with his tongue he might by deſperation blaſpheme God. Suidas thinketh his torments endured ſeuen yeeres, by matters mentioned in his orations which likelihood could not fall out ſooner, as that euery one mocked him and fleed from him▪ Then it was a great while after that his kinſ-men heard of his temptation, yet they could come, being Dukes and great men, and dwelling farre. When

they come, they tarry ſeuen dayes without ſpeaking any word: ſo great was his griefe vpon him, that all this while it droue them into an amazedneſſe. Then they begun to diſpute with him.
               Their diſputations are true, and voide of oathes: they make mention of the Sabbath, the inueigh againſt adulterie, and other ſinnes of the ſecond table: they confute iuſtification by workes; they pray not to Saints departed, for Iobs recouerie. By their orations wee may eaſily learne to confute theſe fond opinions which Popery holdeth. His friends may ſeeme to ſtacker concerning his ſaluation, by reaſon of his rauing and ſpeaking ſo doubtfully of the truth: for the which God condemneth him after, and asketh, Iob 38. Who is he that obſcureth knowledge with many words?
               
               
                  Eliphas therefore beginneth thus: Chap. 4. Wilt thou be grieued if one aſſay to commune with thee? but who can hold himſelfe from ſpeaking? Thou thy ſelfe haſt taught many, and haſt ſtrengthened the weary hands: Thou haſt had great hope, patience, and confidence. And yet I can tell thee, thy caſe is very ill, and if thou doſt not repent, thou wilt not be ſaued. For who euer periſhed being an innocent? Indeed the roaring of the Lyon and the voyce of the Lyoneſse, and the teeth of the Lyons whelpes, are broken. You may ſee this euident by our victories againſt Chams houſe, though Nimrod ſeemed to rule like a Lyon. The Kori we haue likewiſe deſtroyed. But concerning Sems houſe, Nachor, Iſmael, Keturah, do not they floriſh? What part of them is conſumed? So you ſee the Lyon periſh for lacke of prey, and the Lyons whelpes ſcattered: but where was the vpright euer deſtroyed? And if you thinke this new doctrine, I pray you enquire of the former ages, and prepare thy ſelfe to ſearch after their fathers, for wee are but as yeſterday, and are ignorant. You ſhall ſee that the floode ouer-tooke the vngodlie. And ſo we are to thinke of them which liued wickedlie afterward. But yet God will not caſt away an vpright man, neitheir will he take the wicked by the hand. And how can you be in the fauour of God? the Saints doe not pitch their tents about you: for then the Sabeans and Caldeans had not ſpoyled your goods. The Angels do not waite on you: for then the wind had not ouerthrowne your houſe. Heere is none that careth for you: therefore you cannot bee vpright. But if you will ſeeke God, this is the way: confeſſe your ſinnes and repent: For a thing was brought vnto me ſecretly, and in the thoughts of the viſions of the night feare came vpon me, and there stoode one and I knew not his face, but I heard a voice which ſaid, Shall man bee more iust than God? or ſhall a man bee more pure than his Creator? Hee found no ſtedfastneſſe in his Angels: how much more in them which dwell in houſes of clay, whoſe foundation is in the duſt, which ſhall be

deſtroyed before the mother? And concerning affliction, it is not out of the duſt, neither doth it ſpring out of the earth. But man is borne vnto trauell, as the ſparkes flie vpward. To conclude: Bleſsed is the man whom God correcteth, therefore refuſe not thou the chaſtiſement of the Almightie: for hee maketh the wound, and bindeth it vp: and if thou wilt embrace this, this good will come of it. Thou ſhalt laugh at deſtruction; the ſtones of the field ſhall be in league with thee; and the beaſts of the field, and peace ſhall bee in thy Tabernacle: and thy ſeede ſhalbe great, and thy poſteritie as the graſse of the earth: and thou ſhalt goe to thy graue in a good full age, as a Kicke of corne commeth into the barne in due ſeaſon.
               
               
                  Iob, He anſwereth, Chap. 6. Oh that my griefe were well weighed, and my miſeries laid together! they would bee heauier than the ſand of the ſea: therefore my words are ſwallowed vp. And for my friends, this I ſay. He that is in miſerie, ought to be comforted of his neighbour: But you, my brethren, haue deceiued me as the riuers in the ſouth, which in the winter are blackiſh with yce, and when it is hote, dried vp. They that goe to Tema and Sheba waiteth for them, but they were confounded, ſo yee are like to them. You haue ſeene my fearefull plague and are afraid. Thus haue men forgotten the feare of the Almightie. Ye pretend counſell and comfort, but this is to haue me forget God. For if I be wicked, why labour I thus in vaine, yet if I waſh my ſelfe with ſnow water, and purge my hands most cleane, mine owne clothes ſhall make me filthie. I know I haue ſinned, and haue done wickedlie: but yet my faith aſsureth me, that God cannot be mine enemie, as you affirme: why then ſhould he afflict me? and for my ſtrength, is it of ſtones? or my fleſh of braſse? Now whereas you ſay, that God puniſheth the wicked, and tyrants come to destruction; who knoweth not this? For I know as much as you know, neither am I inferiour to you; yet this is not alwayes true that you ſay: for we ſee the wicked eſtabliſhed, their houſes are peaceable, and the rod of God is not vpon them. They ſend forth their children like ſheepe, and their ſons daunce, they take the Tabret and Harpe, and ſodenlie they goe downe to the graue: for they are as ſtubble before the wind, and deſtruction commeth vppon them. But yet this you must alſo know, that he deſtroyeth the perfect and the wicked. Heere perfect is not meant a life void of ſinne in the ſight of God, but for outward actions void of hypocriſie. Concerning the wiſedome of God, that it is vnſearchable, I confeſſe that likewiſe, aſwell as you. For the ſiluer hath his vaine, and the gold his place, yron is taken out of the duſt, and braſſe out of the stone: hee ſetteth a bond for darkeneſse, and the ſhadow of death. Out of the ſame earth commeth Bread, and vnder it is brimſtone found, the ſtones thereof Saphir, and the dust gold. There is a path that the fowle knoweth not, neither the crowes eyes hath ſeene, the Lyons haue not walked in it. But yet where is wiſedome? and where is the place of vnderſtanding? For which gold ſhall not be giuen of Ophir, nor the Onix, nor Zaphir.

God vnderſtandeth the way therof: for he weigheth the winds and the water by meaſure. When hee made a decree for the raine, and a way for the lightning of the thunders, then did he ſee it, and vnto man he ſaid, The feare of the Lord is wiſedome, and to depart from euill is vnderſtanding. Therefore we are not to giue rules to God ſeeing all haue like euent together. Concerning my life, I was an eye to the blind; feete to the lame; a father vnto the poore; and when I knew not the cauſe, I ſought it out diligently. I did neuer eat my morſels alone, the fatherleſse haue euer eaten with me. I haue not ſeene any periſh for want of clothing; the loynes of him haue bleſsed mee, becauſe he was warmed with the fleece of my ſheepe. I haue euer bene ſo carefull, that I would not offend the leaſt childe: my countenance hath beene ſo ſober, that I haue made a couenant with mine eyes, why then ſhould I behold a maid? But yet, Oh that I were as in times paſt, as in the dayes of my youth, when my children were round about me, when vnto me men gaue care, and waited and held their tongue at my counſell, when my words dropped vpon them as the latter raine. If I laughed on them, they beleeued it not: my countenance hath euer beene ſo graue, for my iudgement it was not changeable as the moone, neither did I flatter my ſelfe in ſecret. For my religion, I euer held this ſure, that my Redeemer liueth, and that he ſhall ſtand the laſt man vpon the earth. But I pray you marke how the caſe is altered; They that are yonger than I, mocke me, whoſe fathers I haue refuſed to ſet with the dogs of my flocke, yet now I am their ſong, and their talke: my owne ſeruants flie from me, and my wife vſeth reproch. To conclude, this is the ſumme: Oh that man might talke with God, & make anſwere to his Creator. Philo a Iew ſaith, that Dina Iacobs daughter was Iobs wife: he neuer meant ſo, but it is their manner in teaching their children, that where there be women mentioned vnmarried, they ſay they were married to ſuch whoſe wiues the Scripture mentioneth not, that ſo their children might the better remember them. Zophar & Bildads Orations were the ſame with Eliphaz, and they condemned Iob in the ſame manner. And heere we muſt obſerue in the diſcourſe of ciuile actions laid downe by Iob, that either he liued ſo, or that men ſhould liue ſo. And Moſes lawes afterward for policie are but an expreſsing of theſe.
               
                  Iobs ſpeech is ended.
            
            
               Now follow two Repliers, Elihu, and God.
               
               
                  ELihus beginning is modeſt, zealous and true. For, ſaith he, I am yong, and ye are ancient, therefore I was afraid to ſhew my opinion. For I ſaid, The dayes ſhall ſpeake, and the multitude of yeeres ſhall teach

wiſedome: and yet aged doe not alwaies vnderſtand iudgement: yet I muſt confeſſe there is a ſpirit in man, but the inſpiration of the Almightie giueth vnderſtanding. You haue condemned Iob, becauſe God hath caſt him downe. I will not iuſtifie him; Yet I will not reprooue him after your manner. I will therefore thus reprooue him.
               
               You ſaid Iob in the 13. chapter, Oh that a man might diſpute with God. Behold, I am vnto thee in Gods ſtead, and am formed of clay: and behold, my terror ſhall not feare thee. You haue ſaid, I am cleane without ſinne: he hath found occaſions againſt me, & hath put my feete in the ſtocks. But I will tell you, O Iob, ſtriue not against him: for he is greater than man: he ſpeaketh once or twice; as, THE SEEDE OF THE WOMAN, SHALL BRVSE THE HEAD OF THE SERPENT: and bleſſed be the God of Sem: & openeth their eares euen by corrections. If then there be a meſsenger, or an interpreter one of a thouſand, to ſhew man that his righteouſneſſe conſiſteth onelie in the fauour of God, that he may ſay, I haue ſinned, I haue peruerted righteouſneſſe, I haue ſuckt vp folly like water, and where I know not, teach thou me, O Lord; then ſhall he haue a reconciliation, and then ſhall his righteouſnes be restored vnto him.
               
               
                  Then God replieth out of the whirlewind, and asketh, Where is hee that obſcureth knowledge with many words? For Iob ſhould haue ſhewed the purpoſe of God in deſtroying the vpright and wicked together, and not ſpoken doubtfully of it. And God ſheweth him from the ſtory of the Creation, and the excellencie of the Creatures, his vnſpeakable wiſedome.
               Then Iob anſwereth, I am vild, I will lay my hand vpon my mouth; I know thou canſt doe all things: and I haue ſpoken things I vnderſtand not: therefore I abhorre my ſelfe, and will repent in dust and aſhes.
               
               Then the Lord accepteth Iobs faith and repentance. And as high Sacrificer, he ſacrificeth for his three friends. And God bleſſeth him more now, than at the firſt. Where it is tranſlated that Iobs wife ſhould ſay, Curſe God and die, it cannot be ſo: But the meaning is, Bleſſe God and die, flowting him as if ſhe ſhould ſay, See to what your pureneſſe and preciſeneſſe is come to, euen to bleſſe God and die. Had it not beene better for you to haue liued, and enioyed proſperity, as others? This patience of Iobs, is repeated in the Epiſtle of Saint Iames, chap. 5. In the Epiſtle to the Romanes, Saint Paul prooueth, that the Gentiles were cut off, that the Iew might come in; and now the Iewes, that the Gentiles, and concludeth out of Iob, who gaue to God firſt, that he might be recompenſed? And Aristaeus a heathen writer, making a deſcription of the ſtorie of Iob, ſaith, hee was tempted aſwell by the diuell, as by his neighbours.
               Thus much for Iobs Storie.
            
            
               
               2433. Moſes borne.
               HEe is the ſeuenth from Abraham, a new Henoch, another reſembler of the Sabbath.
               
                  Henoch walked with God, ſo did Moſes.
               
               
                  Henoch was a preacher of righteouſneſſe, ſo was Moſes.
               
               
                  Henoch was a Prophet, ſo was Moſes.
               
               At his birth hee was hidde in an Arke, and thereby ſaued from the waters. The Hebrew word is the ſame, with it whereby Noahs Arke is ſignified.
               Concerning his kinred: he was an Hebrew, of the Tribe of Leui. Philo-Iudeus calleth him a Chaldean, hauing relation to Abraham who was called out of Vr of the Chaldeans to Canaan. Diodorus Siculus calleth him an Egyptian: for he regarded the ſoile wherein he was borne, and not his familie.
               His name Moſes ſignifieth, Drawe out, as one drawne out of a poole of water. In the eighteene Pſalme, this word Moſes is vſed of Chriſt, in theſe words, My ſoule is drawne out of many waters. In the Hebrew there is a liuelie reference one to another, which cannot bee expreſſed in the Engliſh. The Grecians call him Mouſche, which is to take out of the waters, penning both to one purpoſe, the notation common to both names. If the queſtion be demanded, Whether Moſes or Mouſches be his name in right: it is certaine in the text, it is Moſes: but an expounder is free to vſe whether he will for explanation.
               
                  Pharaoh maketh a bloodie law to kill all the yong children. Wherevpon Moſes is caſt into the flags: whom Pharaohs daughter commandeth to be kept. Exod. 2. Wherein we may ſee the louing kindneſſe of Leui recompenſed with a rare bleſsing from God, ſeeing Moſes is of his Tribe. Amram ſaued him, not fearing the Kings diſpleaſure, this is confirmed in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes. By faith Moſes when he was borne, was hid of his Parents three moneths, becauſe they ſaw he was a proper child; neither feared they the Kings commandement. Exod. 1. Heb. 11.3. This ſpeciall preſeruation may ſhew that it is of grace, and not of nature, that we haue a deliuerer from Egypt.
               
                  Moſes mother is Iochebed, Leuies daughter, Aunt to Moſes father, ſiſter to his Grandfather. At his birth ſhe is 100. yeeres old: ſo we ſee a new compariſon with the birth of Iſaack, which was a child likewiſe of promiſe. This being ſtrange & not vſuall, will no doubt ſtirre vp the

people to enquire and ſearch what the end of him ſhould be, whoſe birth is ſo famous.
            
            
               
                  Iochebal ſignifieth the glory of God. Amram, High.
               THe Prouidence of God ſo diſpoſeth the tongues of the Parents, that the names of the children expreſſe the glorie of God to bee performed, afterwards by their actions.
               The Hebrewes commend Iacobs ſonnes for not giuing names after the manner of the Egyptians, while they were in Egypt. The reaſon of this may be rendred, Becauſe that in Egypt they were ill vſed, and therefore hated the Egyptians. In Babylon they were well vſed vnder the Perſians, and therefore they haue many Perſian names, and there did learne ſo the tongue of Babel, that they began to forget their owne. The vſe of this is very great againſt the Turke, for to prooue from whence he firſt came, and thereby to perſwade him to embrace the religion of his firſt Parents.
               The hatred towards Chams houſe, appeareth in Sheſan that married one of Iuda. The ſtory whereof hath beene mentioned before in the ſtorie of Iſmael the Egyptian.
               The Iewes call themſelues Hebrewes, to keepe the ſtorie of Heber in remembrance.
               
                  Concerning Moſes education, God ſo prouideth, that hee is brought vp for the ſonne of Pharaohs daughter. He is inſtructed in all the learning of the Egyptians, which was the Mathematicks, and other humane arts. The ouerflowing of Nilus compelled them to be skilfull in Aſtronomie. His Arithmeticke and Geometrie is apparant in the Tabernacle, and things therein appointed: For though God gaue him inſtructions, yet it could not be that hee ſhould performe them without taking great delight in the proportions themſelues, which could not bee without great skill in the arte. In the candleſticke the Iewes reckon fortie two peeces, ſixe ſeuens, ſo you haue in this proportion the remembrance of the Creation, and of the Sabbath, and of thoſe holy men who were ſpeciall Seuens. Baſile in his Treatiſe vppon the Creation affirmeth, that there was one, to wit, Moſes the ſeuenth from Abraham, vppon whom after a ſort the Iewes ſhould depend. God giueth likewiſe to the heathen the knowledge of theſe things, that thereby looking to the Creation, they may admire his eternall wiſedome, and worſhip him

as Creator. And Moſes himſelfe ſo layeth them downe, that a heathen by his skill in theſe arts may vnderſtand the reaſon of them. The ſumme of all is, God ſaueth the world by Christ, and vſeth all humane knowledge; as a ſeruant to teach the Redemption by Chriſt. So Saint Paul ſpeaketh in the acts, that all his doctrine was nothing but Moſes, and the Prophets; and theirs nothing but Chriſt. In that ſence likewiſe, the Greeke tongue perteineth to Chriſt.
               
                  Moſes knew that hee ſhould bee a deliuerer, and therefore ſeeing an Egyptian miſvſing an Iſraelite, hee killeth him. Afterwards hee ſeeth two Hebrewes ſtriuing together, and hee commeth to them, and telleth them, they are brethren, why then ſhould they bee at variance? They vpbraide him with the ſlaughter of the Egyptian. Hee thought, they would haue knowne him their deliuerer. But hearing that this was knowne, hee fleeth into the land of Madian. Of this Saint Paul ſpeaketh in the Epiſtle to Hebrewes cap. 11. By faith Moſes refuſed to bee called the ſonne of Pharaohs daughter, and choſe rather to ſuffer affliction with his brethren, than to enioy the pleaſures of ſinne, which last but for a ſeaſon. Thus Moſes at fortie yeeres old ſheweth himſelfe a true Chriſtian. Hee marrieth Zephora: Marie, ſhee deſpiſeth her, becauſe ſhee was of Chuſh: but indeed ſhe was of Abraham by Keturah: for Madian one of her ſonnes ouerrunneth Chuſh, and ſo inioyeth the bleſsing by being of Abraham, that Cham ſhould be a ſeruant of ſeruants to Sems poſteritie. Therefore Zephora not inferiour to Marie, Maries ſinne for deſpiſing her was very great, yea though it were of ignorance. But if ſhee knew her generation, and then through malice contemned her, her ſinne was ſo much the greater. But whether ſhee vſed her ill of malice, or ignorance, wee cannot tell: this wee may be ſure of, her ſinne was haynous in the ſight of God, therefore ſhee was a leaper.
               
                  Moſes ordeined of God to feed Iſrael, was now a ſhepheard, and kept the ſheepe of his father in lawe Iethro Duke of Madian, where Chriſt appeared to him in a flame of fire in a buſh of thornes, who afterwardes in the dayes of his fleſh hauing fulfilled Moſes, and conquered Satan, is crowned whith a crowne of thornes, euen with the ſame kinde of plant wherein hee appeared, when hee called Moſes. Cle. Alexandrius. Philo a Iewe is verie vſuall in the compariſon betweene a ſhepheard and a King. And Homer maketh King Agammenon the, ſhepheard of the people. For as ſheepe will followe headlong through the gappe which the firſt brake, though it bee euen to their periſhing: ſo is the rage

of the people ſtrengthned by errour and blindneſſe of their nature Thus you ſee the plaineſſe and ſweetneſſe for pleaſure of theſe fortie yeares.
               
                  Moſes after this, is ſent by God to Pharaoh with an Ambaſſage, which hee confirmeth by diuers miracles, whereof Pharaohs Enchaunters did ſome the like. This is applyed of Saint Paul againſt the Antichriſtian Heretickes: as Iannes and Iambres reſiſted Moſes; ſo they reſiſted the truth, but their madneſſe ſhall bee made manifeſt to all men, as theirs was. 2. Tim. 3.
            
            
               
                  Pharaoh is plagued with Ten ſeuerall Plagues.
               
                  The Firſt plague.
                  
                     The waters are turned into blood for Seuen dayes, that they might bee puniſhed for the death of the children, which Pharaoh cauſed to be drowned in the Riuer: that they might knowe, that wherein one ſinneth, therein hee ſhall be puniſhed.
                  The Second plague.
                  
                     Frogges are ouer all the Land of Egipt. The Antichriſts haue ſpirits like Frogges.
                  The Third plague.
                  
                     The duſt bringeth Lice. This the Magitians of Pharaoh could not doe; here their madneſſe is made knowne. They cry, that Moſes wrought by the finger of God. That Chriſt vſeth againſt the Egyptia call phariſees. Mat. 12. If I by the finger of God caſt out Diuels, &c.
                  
                  The Fourth plague.
                  
                     Sundrie Swarmes of diuers Vermine plague the Egiptians. So Ap. 9. the Antichriſtian Idolatrers are likened to Scorpions, & are plagued with ſtinges of Scorpions.
                  The Fifth plague.
                  
                     The Egiptians Beasts die of the Plague. So Ap. 16. the Romane beaſt both cauſeth plague, and is plagued.
                  
                  The Sixt Plague.
                  
                     Byles are vpon the Egyptians, men, and beaſts. So Ap. 16. ſore and grieuous byles are vppon thoſe that beare the name of the beaſt, and worſhip his Image.
                  The Seuenth Plague.
                  
                     Hayle and fire falleth vpon man and beaſt, and on the graſse in the field. So Ap. 18. In the riſing of the Antichriſt, is haile and fire mixed with blood, and in Ap. 16. great haile falleth vpon man, ſo that men blaſpheme God for the ſtroke of the haile.
                  The Eight Plague.
                  
                     Locuſts are ouer all Egypt. So Ap. 9. out of the ſmoke of Papiſtrie went forth Locuſts ouer all the earth.
                  The Ninth plague.
                  
                     The Egiptians were Three dayes in darkeneſse. So Ap. 16. the Kingdome of the Beaſt is made darke, and they bite their tongues for ſorrow, and blaſpheme the God of heauen, but doe not repent them of their workes.
                  The Tenth plague.
                  The Fourteenth day of Niſan in euerie houſe of the Egiptians ſome one is ſlaine. So Ap. 19. a greater ſlaughter, and more generall, ſo that all the fowles of the ayre are called to take the Carkaſſes.
                  
               
               By Faith they ordayned the Paſſeouer and the effuſion of blood, leaſt he that deſtroyed the firſt borne, ſhould touch them. Heb. 11.
               
               
                  Chriſt our Paſseouer is offered for vs, therefore let vs keepe the Feaſt. 1. Cor. 5.
               
            
         
         
            
            Now follovveth the deliuerance out of Egipt.
            
               Moſes bringeth Iſrael out of Egipt.
               2513. 
               Exod. 12.
            
               FOure hundred and thirty yeres after the promiſe giuen to Abraham, as Exod. 12.
               430. when the foure hundred and thirtie yeares were expired, euen the ſelfe-ſame day departed all the hoſt of the Lord out of the Land of Egipt.400. This foure hundred hath relation to the time that Iſmael and Hagar were expelled. Abrahams houſe for Iſmaels flowting of Iſaack. Here is the performance of Gods promiſe to Abraham, Gen. 15. Thy ſeede ſhall be in a ſtrange Land foure hundred yeares, but the people whome they ſhall be in bondage to, will I iudge, ſaith God. Which was made plaine in the ten plagues of Egipt, and in the ouerwhelming of Pharaoh, and his Chariots in the red ſea, as Exod. 14. and Pſal. 78. Maruailous things did the lord in the ſight of our Fathers in the land of Ham, euen in the field of Zoan, he diuided the Sea, and let them go through, he made the waters to ſtand on an heap, and led forth his people like ſheep, and carried them in the wilderneſse like a flocke. And Pſal. 114. When Iſrael came out of Egipt, and the houſe of Iacob from among the ſtrange people, Iudah was his Sanctuarie, and Iſrael his Dominion. The Sea ſawe that, and fledde. Iordan was driuen back: this was performed at the beginning of the Law. The Mountaines skipped like Rams, and the litle hils like yong ſheep, &c. And Pſal. 105. Egipt was glad at their departure, for they were affraid of them. And Pſa. 106. He rebuked the Red Sea, and it was dryed vp: he led his people through the deepe, as through a wilderneſse. As for thoſe that troubled them, the waters ouer-whelmed them, and there was not one of them left. Then the children of Iſrael beleeued his words, and ſange praiſe vnto him. But within a while they forgat his workes, and would not abide his counſell: but luſt came vpon them in the wilderneſse, and they tempted God in the deſert. And Pſa. 78. They forgat what he had wrought in Egipt, and his wonders in the field

of Zoan: How he led them in the day with a cloud, and all the night through with a pillar of fire. Hee claue the hard Rockes in the wilderneſse, and gaue them drinke thereof: hee brought waters out of the Stonie Rocke, ſo that it guſhed out like the Riuers. But they prouoked the most higheſt in the wilderneſſe, and tempted God in their harts, ſaying, Shall God prepare a table in the wilderneſſe? He ſmote the ſtonie Rocke indeed, and the ſtreames flowed withall: but can he giue bread alſo, or prouide fleſh for his people? wherewith the Lord was wroth, ſo hee rained downe Manna from heauen. So man did eate Angels food, for hee ſent them meat ynough. At their deſire, he brought quailes, and hee filled them with the bread of heauen, hee rayned fleſh vppon them as thicke as duſt, and feathered fowles as the ſands of the ſea, he let it fall amonge their tents, euen round about their habitation: ſo they did eat and were filled, for hee gaue them their owne deſire, they were not diſappointed of their luſt: but while the meat was in their mouths, the heauie wrath of God came vppon them, and ſlue the wealthieſt of them, and ſmote downe the choſen men that were in Iſrael. But for all this, they ſinned yet more. Againe, pſal. 106. They angred Moſes in their Tents, and Aaron the Saint of the Lord. So the earth ſwallowed vp Dathan, and couered the congregation of Abiram, and the fire was kindled in their companie, the flame burnt vp the vngodly. They made a Calfe in Horeb, and worſhipped the moulten Image. Thus they turned the glorie of God into the ſimilitude of a Calfe that eateth hay. So he ſayd, he would haue destroyed them, had not Moſes his choſen ſtand before him in the gappe, to turne away his wrathfull indignation; yea, they thought ſcorne of that pleaſant Land, and gaue no credence to his words, but murmured in their Tents, they ioyned themſelues with Baal Peor, and eat the offerings of the dead. Thus ſtill they prouoked God vnto anger with their inuentions, and the plague was great amonge them. But Phinees ſtoode vp and prayed, and the plague ceaſed, and that was counted to him for righteouſneſse throughout all poſterities for euer. They angred him alſo at the waters of ſtrife,
               Exod. 17. Numb. 20. 
               ſo that he puniſhed Moſes for their ſakes, becauſe they prouoked his ſpirite, ſo that he ſpake vnaduiſedly with his lips.
            
            
               Neuertheleſse, he thought vpon his couenant, and pitied them according to the multitude of his mercies, as appeareth, 2. Eſdr. 9, Thou cameſt downe vpon Sinay, and ſpakeſt to them from heauen, and gaueſt them right iudgements, true Lawes, good Commandements and Statutes, and declaredſt vnto them thy holy Sabbath, and commaundedſt them Precepts, Ordinances, and Lawes by the hand of Moſes thy ſeruant, and gaueſt them bread from heauen when they were hungry, and broughteſt forth water out of the Rocke for them when they were thirſtie, and promiſedſt them, that they ſhould goe in and take and poſseſſe the Land: but they were proude, and became obſtinate and heady: but God forgaue them, and was gracious and mercifull, patient, and of great goodneſse, and forſook them not, although they made a moulten Calfe, and ſaid,

Theſe are our Gods that brought vs out of the Land of Egipt, and did ſpeake blaſphemouſly, yet hee forſooke them not in the wilderneſſe according to his great mercie. Fortie yeares long made he prouiſion for them in the wilderneſſe, ſo that they lacked nothing, their clothes waxed not old, and their feete ſwelled not.
            
            In this Fortie yeares of their being in the wilderneſſe, many things are to be vnderſtood. God choſe theſe Forty, that all the world might knowe of the Redemption by Chriſt. It ſtandeth of Foure Tens.
            This time is made more famous by the Storie, wherein a ſpeciall thing is to be obſerued: that in all theſe Forty yeres you haue but three yeares ſtorie and a halfe. And thus it is caſt: One yeare is ſpent in the Tabernacle, halfe a yeare after, the Spies are ſent to view the Land. Vpon their Storie God ſweares, that they ſhall not enter into his reſt. From thence you haue no Storie, till the two laſt yeares of the conqueſt of Ob, and of Maries death. This, one would not thinke of, if the bare Storie did not compell him. For compariſon with this three yeares and a halfe, I will ſpeake more hereafter.
            You haue in the wilderneſſe the Lambe, which repreſented Chriſt; and Manna, which Chriſt expounds in Ioh. 6. I am the true bread that came from heauen. Your Fathers did eat Manna, and are dead, hee that eateth of this bread, ſhall liue for euer.
            
            The Rock, ſignified Chriſt▪ The lifting vp of the Serpent, his death; Balaam he prophecieth of Chriſt, There ſhall come a Starre from Iacob,Numb. 24. 
               and a Scepter ſhall riſe from Iſrael. Kittim and Aſſur ſhall afflict Heber, but they alſo ſhall come to deſtruction at the laſt. This prophecie begins in the ſixt yeare of Ezechias.
            
            THe time was in the Moneth Abib, which Moneth containeth part of March, and part of Aprill. The Seuentie Interpreters call it Tanda, the Moneth of greene blades: for about this time of the yeare corne beginneth to ſhew it ſelfe aboue the ground. Their yeare before this began in September, anſwerable to the Creation, which prooueth the time of Adams creation to bee then. For this Moneth is the ſeuenth Moneth, but now commaunded to bee the firſt.
            The alteration of this old yeare, by commanding the keeping of a new yeare as a remembrance of their deliuerance out of Egypt, teacheth plainely the Redemption by Chriſt, whereof this deliuerance out of Egypt was a figure. And this teacheth vs further, that Moſes Lawes had not their end only in policy, but that their chiefe ſcope was Chriſt. The paſſeouer likewiſe made this plaine: for they were to chooſe the Lambe the Tenth day of the firſt Moneth; in which Moneth they

came out of Egypt, and on the Fourteenth day hee was to bee ſlaine. The Foure dayes reſpite betwixt the chooſing and the killing, admoniſhed them, that the matter now to be perfourmed was verie weightie, and therefore they were deepely to conſider it: for now was the action and ſumme of all ſaluation in handling.
            In the ſeuenth Moneth, and the firſt day of the moneth, they had the feaſt of blowing the Trumpets. The tenth day of the ſeuenth Moneth was the feaſt of offering Sacrifices, an holy conuocation to humble them to the Lord. The Fifteenth day the feaſt of Tabernacles or Cottages, to keepe in remembrance thereby the dwelling of the children of Iſrael in boothes in the wilderneſſe. The vſe of the Paſſeouer was, to aſſure them, that God would be their defence, ſeeing, according to the promiſe made to Abraham, after Foure hundred and thirtie yeares, they were brought out of Egypt, and that Chriſt their Paſſeouer was to be offered vp in fulneſſe of time. When Chriſt was crucified, this was perfected and finiſhed: hee was crucified at Eaſter.
            The Iewes thinke, that the world ſhall end at Eaſter: for then they came out of Egypt, and then was their yeare altered. And in the ſong of ſongs this is expreſſed, Behold, the winter is paſt, the voice of the Turtle is heard in the Mountaines, the figge-tree hath brought foorth her young figges, Come, my beloued, ariſe and come away my Loue, my faire one, Cant. 2. From this place they gather the end of the world. Chriſt in the Goſpell ſeemeth to allude to this in this ſort: Behold, ſaith he, the Figge-tree and all trees, when they now ſhoore foorth, yee ſeeing them, know of your owne ſelues, that ſummer is neere; ſo likewiſe when yee ſee theſe thinges come to paſſe, knowe that the Kingdome of God is neere. Luke 22.
            There is nothing in the Bible contrary, or to confute this; And ſeeing it is yet to come, it may verie well be ſo. Chriſt was anſwerable to theſe figures: for he died at Eaſter: &, though before the Iewes would haue killed him, yet they could not lay handes on him, for his houre was not yet come. Hereby we are now occaſioned to returne to the Paſſeouer.
            The Paſcall was killed on a Fryday. Codomanus ſaith, that name ſignifieth a paſsing ouer, becauſe God that night paſsing ouer the Hebrewes, did kill the firſt borne in Egypt.
            This Paſcall was a Kidde, or a Lambe, figuring Chriſt the Lambe of God, which ſhould take away the ſinne of the world. Iohn 1.
            
            It ought to bee without blemiſh, becauſe that wee are redeemed from our vaine conuerſation giuen from our fathers, not with corruptible things, gold or ſiluer, but with the precious blood of Chriſt the

Lambe vnblemiſhed, and vnſpotted, appointed from the beginning of the world, ſhewed in the laſt times. 1. Pet. 1.18. No bone of the Lambe might bee broken. Becauſe of Chriſt no bone ſhould be broken, and when Chriſt was crucified, the theeues legges were broken, but into Chriſt his ſide a ſpeare was thruſt. Ioh 19.
            
            It was eaten in the euening, at that time the promiſe was giuen to Abraham. At that time came the Iewes from Babell: at that time Chriſt celebrated his laſt Supper.
            It was eaten of the circumciſed onely: becauſe Chriſtians ſhould bee all circumciſed in heart, for they doe eat his fleſh, and drinke his blood.
            The loynes of the bodie ſhould bee girded, becauſe the loynes of our minds ſhould be gyrded, not ſetting our mindes vppon treaſure in Raamſees, where wormes corrupt and rage; but ſhould be as men looking for their Lord, when hee ſhall returne from the marriage.
            At that time for Seuen dayes they did eat vnleauened bread, as their mindes ſhould take heed of the ſower leauen of phariſey call doctrine. Mat. 16. for a little leauen ſowreth the whole lumpe of dowe. So we muſt remooue away the old leauen, that wee may become a newe lumpe, as wee are vnleauened. Therefore let vs keepe the old feaſt not with the old leauen of wickedneſſe and maliciouſneſſe, but with the vnleauened bread of ſinceritie and truth: for Chriſt our paſchall is offered for vs, 1. Cor. 5.7.
            
            It was to be killed, and his blood ſprinkled, and to bee eaten all ſaue the fat, and the kidneys. Thereby to teach vs, that the naturall man ſauoureth not the things which are of God. This Saint Paul expounds, Heb. 9. The blood of Chriſt purge your conſciences from dead workes, to ſerue the liuing God.
            
            It was eaten with bitter hearbs: to ſhew, that ſuch is the practiſe of Religion.
            The time of this was when the Moone was at the full, and in the Spring of the yeare. This time is the pleaſure of the whole yeare: ſo is Chriſt to thoſe, who haue grace to thinke on him aright.
            The agreement of all theſe, muſt needes make a Turke, a Chriſtian: for it is impoſsible, that either by the wit of man, or by chaunce, theſe things could haue ſo come to paſſe.
            
               The Iewes had in their Paſseouer, the
               
                  Lambe,
                  Bread, and
                  
                  Wine.
               
            
            Chriſt inſtituting his laſt Supper, endeth the eating of the Lambe,

becauſe he offered vp his owne bodie, as a full bodie of all ſhadowing Sacrifices, and kept Bread and Wine to bee a remembrance hereof. Hee was the true Lambe, as hee ſaith, Ioh. 1. Behold the Lambe of God, which taketh away the ſinne of the world. So hee teſtifieth of himſelfe and altereth it, becauſe now the full and whole Sacrifice being offered vp, all Sacrifices were to ceaſe according to Dan. 9. where it is ſayd, Chriſt the King, the Holy of Holyeſt ſhalbe killed, and ſhall end the Sacrifice and Oblation, and ſeale euerie viſion and propheſie. Neither ſhall the blood of Buls or Goats any more auaile to the clenſing of ſinne: But the blood of Chriſt onely that Lambe vnſpotted, whoſe blood ſhall purge our conſciences from dead workes, to bee ſanctified by his righteouſneſſe to the ſeruing of the liuing Lord, who hath layd downe his life for his ſheepe; and being dead, raiſed himſelfe vp again, as one hauing power ouer death, hell, and victorie.
            NOw for the popes Tranſubſtantiation: beſides that it is repugnant to ſence, it cannot be ſpoken in Hebrew, and in Greeke onely by fayning and inuenting of new termes. Reall is no word, ſeeing it comprehends many things, as well as a bodie. Yet Chriſt is truely preſent to thoſe which embrace him by faith.
            It is ſayd, that this commaundement of embracing Chriſt, is the firſt: for if this were not, the other were to ſmall purpoſe.
            Now that the Iewes ſhould not be amazed at ſixe hundred and thirteene Lawes; ſeuen weekes betweene their comming out of Egypt, and the giuing of the Lawe, were allowed them for meditation. And yet as they made nothing of the Lambe; ſo Antichriſt treadeth vnder foot the ſufferings of Chriſt.
            This Commandement of thy God, they brought out of Egypt. Clemens Alexandrinus ſaith, That Egypt is a ſigne of the wicked world: therefore euerie man muſt looke by the Redeemer to bee deliuered.
            And wee muſt remember Moſes Law, You ſhall not doe after the manner of the Nations from whence ye came, nor whither you goe.
            
            
               Concerning the Ceremonie of
               
                  Sitting
                  Standing
               
               at the Paſseouer.
            
            This is the conſent of the Iewes: they of fit yeares did ſit: Thoſe which were young did ſtand, vnleſſe they were bidden to ſit. At the firſt inſtituting of the Paſſeouer the geſture was preſcribed, being fit for them, who were preſently with ſpeed to paſſe away. When it is repeated againe when they are in the Land, this action is left out.

Chriſt ſat with his Apoſtles after the manner of the wild Iriſh, on the ground. From this we may gather, that it is left to the circumſtance of time and place, and which fitteth beſt in diſcretion, the manners and comlineſſe of the Countrey. Therefore the beſt is, that which the common weale alloweth.
            Fiftie dayes after his aſcention, Chriſt ſendeth downe his ſpirit. And thereby maketh the preaching of the Goſpell, equall in maieſtie to the giuing of the Law. Concerning the day, no day is preſcribed, therefore the Church thought good to appoint the firſt Sabbath after the full moone.
            For Eaſter, mention is made of the Lords day in the 20. Actes. 1. Cor. 16. in cap. 1.
            
            
               The next thing to be handled, is the giuing of the Law.
               GOd calleth ſimple men out of Egypt, and willeth them to heare and iudge of his Lawes, and telleth them, Heare Iſrael, I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, &c.
               
               In this firſt ſentence, you haue the Goſpell taught in theſe wordes, Thy God. For by this is vnderſtood the Redemption by Chriſt. For though God in reſpect that he is Creator, is God both of the wicked and the Godlie, yet he neuer calleth himſelfe, The God of the wicked. Hitherto is all the Lawe referred. For all the propheſies in Chriſt are Yea, and Amen.
               
               This entrance to the Law by the Goſpell, is exceeding neceſſarie. For ſeeing, if we behold the infinite maieſtie of God in our weakneſſe, there is no cauſe but of trembling and feare; it pleaſeth God in the face of Thy God the Redeemer, to ſhew himſelfe fauourable and reconciled, whereby we may approch with boldneſſe. Yet this doctrine of the preaching of the Goſpell in the Law, hath beene verie much doubted of, and hath beene thought erronious.
               
                  But I will aske them. Seeing the Law comprehends all righteouſneſſe, and there is no righteouſneſſe but which is there commanded; if to beleeue in Chriſt, which is the Goſpell, is not there commanded, to doe it muſt needs be ſinne. And Saint Paul for commaunding beleife in Chriſt, had bene by law lawfully put to death, if Moſes in his law had not commaunded it. All our men which write Catechiſmes, do apply the Sabbath and the Sacraments together, & ſo againſt their wils they confeſſe that the doctrine of the Sacraments is in the Law. Saint

                  Paul, if he were demaunded this queſtion, would anſwere to this as Chriſt himſelfe doth. The Phariſees demand of Chriſt, Which is the firſt Commandement? He anſwereth them, & demandeth another queſtion, Whoſe ſonne is the Meſsias? They anſwere, Dauids; If he be Dauids ſonne, how then doth he in ſpirit call him Lord? For if he be his Lord, how is he then his ſonne? And thereupon becauſe the Iewes vnderſtood not this, he pronounceth againſt them a great many of Woes. This is yet thought doubtfull, ſeeing the Creed hath beene taken for a diſtinct and diuided thing from the Law. But if they marke, they ſhall finde the verie ſame taught in the Creed, which is taught in Heare Iſrael thy Lord thy God. For, I beleeue in God the Father Almightie, and in Ieſus Chriſt his onely ſonne our Lord, hath the very ſame ſentence with the former, Heare Iſrael I am the Lord thy God. And ſurely they little know what they teach, that doe not in ſuch reference applie the Lawe and the Goſpell together.
            
            
               God deliuereth the Law in this ſort.
               
                   I Am the Lord thy God, which with a mightie hand and ſtretched-out arme, ſhewing my wonders in the land of Egypt, haue brought thee out of bondage. It is therefore reaſon, that ſeeing I onely haue done theſe things for you, that you reuerence no Gods, but me. And ſeeing I neuer ſhewed my ſelfe in any bodily apparance, and the Creatures doe but in a ſort expreſſe my infinite power and wiſedome; it is reaſon that you ſhould not after the manner of the Nations which I deſtroy, make any image to repreſent my glory. And ſeeing that hee  hath commaunded Holineſſe, becauſe he himſelfe is Holy; therefore we muſt take heed of fooliſh and vaine calling and talking of the name of God. Now, for as much as theſe things may the better be conſidered,  hee hath appointed a day of Reſt, that thereby calling to mind the Creation, the fall, and reſtoring, we may ſanctifie the Lord in our ſoules. And hath appointed it the ſeuenth day, becauſe we ſhould  keepe in memorie how God reſted from Creating, and thereby learne that the true knowledge hereof is the Reſt, and life of the ſoule. But ſeeing theſe things cannot be done without mainteining of policie; therefore it is commanded, that their ſhould bee honour giuen  to Superiors, as to Fathers, and loue performed by them to ſubiects  as to children, which is preſerued, if Murther, Adulterie, Theft,  Falſe witneſſe, and an vniuſt deſire of th
                     •
                   which is not ours, be auoided.
               Theſe Lawes are ſo certaine and plaine, that the heart of the ſimpleſt

cannot but acknowledge them righteous. For they may ſee likewiſe how one commaundement dependeth of another, as lincks of a golden chaine. The Cabaliſts ſay, that theſe lawes were giuen to man for the ſinne of the ſerpent: that is to ſay, not for vs to accompliſh, for wee cannot attaine thereto, but to ſhew vnto vs how farre the infection of that venome hath carried vs away from that duetie which God requireth of vs: which end of the lawe is greatly enlightned into vs by the comming of the Meſsias, in that he teacheth vs that the Lawe is not ſatisfied with an outward and Phariſaicall obedience by hypocriſie, but by the vncorrupt obedience of the heart, and by the acknowledgement of our diſobedience. And Moſes and the Prophets commaunded circumciſion of heart, the offering of prayſe and obedience, and to abſtaine from vnhallowing the Sabbath day with vnrighteouſneſſe: therefore the ſeruice which God requireth by the Law is ſpirituall, as the reward which wee ought to looke for is ſpirituall.
               You are alſo to note, that there was ſeuen times ſeuen dayes after the eating of the Lambe, before the giuing of the Law. Whereby wee may know, that God careth not for ciuilitie without the knowledge of Chriſt: though the contrarie bee taught, that it is ynough, ſo wee bee ciuill in life, though our mindes neuer thinke of the eating of the Lambe. But if wee will liue godlie indeed, all our care muſt bee to eſteeme highlie of thoſe rules which concerne the teaching of the Redemption By Chriſt. For it is no commendation to liue ciuilly, though a ſinne to miſſe in conuerſation. And yet this honeſt behauiour amongſt all men, muſt not be neglected.
               Where it is ſaid, Sanctifie your ſelues, for to morrow is the Sabbath: If it bee demaunded, how the Iewes could vnderſtand this, it may thus be anſwered.
               God ſo ſpake, that a childe may vnderſtand it. For Adam fell in Paradiſe the ſixt day, and ſacrificed the ſeuenth: which is as much as Moſes ſpeaketh heere. This is the conſent of the Hebrewes.
               
                  There is a Question. Whether Ioſeph in Egypt, and the Iewes in Babylon did keepe the Sabbath? For any thing that I can finde, they did it not publiquelie. Peraduenture Ioſeph might doe it priuatlie in reſpect of his owne conſcience, but not otherwiſe. And for the keeping of the Sabbathes by the Iewes in Babylon, wee haue an expreſſe example to the contrarie.
               
                  There was a feaſt at Shuſan, which was on the Sabbath day, which feaſt the Iewes likewiſe did ſolemnize: immediately vppon that, there was a decree to deſtroy the Iewes.
               The Chaldee paraphraſt expounds it to be for the contempt of the Sabbath. Iob in his booke expounds this commaundement of honoring Father and Mother, by ſhewing how contumeliouſly thoſe did vſe him, whoſe Fathers he would not haue ſet with his dogges. Saint Paul ſheweth, that this is the firſt commaundement, that hath a promiſe annexed, ſhewing thereby, that we are to be dealt with like children, by allurements to embrace common ciuilitie: ſuch is the peruerſeneſſe of our nature. Ieremy telleth the Iewes, that if they will keep their Sabbaths, they ſhall not goe into captiuitie. He thereby meaneth, that by the true keeping of the Sabbaths, they muſt learne all religion. For they muſt remember Adams fall▪ and the reſtoring by Chriſt, and then the inſtituting of the Sabbath. Then muſt they come to Sem, and Abraham, and the promiſe, and the offering vp of Iſaack, which was a figure of the Lambe ſlaine from the beginning of the world, and ſo through the Stories of the Scripture.
               
                  The Law is vſually diuided into two Tables, the
                  
                     Firſt,
                     Second.
                  
               
               The Foure firſt Commaundements, concerning God.
               The ſixe laſt, concerning man.
               The end of the Law is Chriſt, which is excellently ſet downe in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, which Epiſtle begins in this ſort.
               
                  At ſundrie times, and in ſundry manners, God ſpake in the old time by the Prophets. As to Adam, The Seed of the woman ſhall break the head of the Serpent. To Noah, Bleſsed be the God of Sem. To Abrahā, In thy ſeed al Nations in the earth ſhall bee bleſſed, &c. And now laſt by his Sonne, whome hee hath made heire of all things, by whome hee made the world: 
                        •
                      who being the brightneſse of his glorie, and the Character of his ſubſtance, ſuſtaineth all thinges, by whome the world was made, farre aboue all Angels. For in the beginning, O Lord, thou eſtabliſhedſt the heauens: they will periſh, but thou doeſt remaine: And the Angels, they are but thy mi
                        •
                     iſtring ſpirits, for their ſakes which ſhall be heires of ſaluation.
               
               
                  Now if euerie tranſgreſsion and diſobedience receiued a iust reward, how

ſhall we eſcape if wee neglect ſo great ſaluation? It is eaſie to make triall hereof. For the world was made in the beginning to obey man, the Angels receiued damnation for deſpiſing this, and in reſpect hereof, Dauid ſayth, What is man that thou ſhouldest be mindfull of him? thou hast made him a little inferiour to the Angels, that thou mightest crowne him with glorie, and honour.
               
               And it was neceſſarie that Ieſus ſhould take vpon him the ſeede of Abraham, and ſo be made inferiour to the Angels by ſuffering death, that ſo hee might bring many Children to glorie, and through death deſtroy him that had the power of death, and by this victorie ouer the Deuill be crowned with glorie and honour, and haue all things put in ſubiection vnder his feet. And by theſe his ſufferings, hee was made like vnto his brethren, that hee might be mercifull, and a faithfull high Prieſt in things concerning God, that hee might make reconciliation for the ſinnes of the people. Moſes was a faithfull witneſſe hereof: and they that beleeued him not, but diſobeyed, were plagued in the Wilderneſſe. Therefore while it is called to day, harden not your hearts, leaſt hee ſweare, They ſhall not enter into my reſt.
               This Doctrine was further made plaine by Aaron, the Annointed of the Lord, whoſe office was to offer for his owne ſins, and the ſinnes of his brethren. But his office ceaſed. This ceaſing was figured before in Melchiſedech, bleſsing Abraham, when Leuie was yet in Abrahams loynes, and therefore aboue Abraham▪
                   for the leſſer is bleſſed of the greater, to whom Abraham gaue tythes, therefore the Iewes muſt goe to a higher Religion, than to the Lawe: and Thy God contayneth more than ceremonies.
               Wee ſhall ſee this cleare by the Tabernacle: in the which wee are not to ſpeake of the particular Ceremonies, but of thoſe cheefely which as referred to Chriſt.
               
                  In the Tabernacle there were two places
                  
                     the Holy,
                     the Holy of holieſt.
                  
               
               The Holy was called the Sanctuarie of this world, wherein were the Candleſtickes, Table of ſhew-bread, &c.
               The Holy of holyeſt did repreſent the ſtate of heauen, in which was the Arke of the Couenant of God. In which Arke there was reſerued as a memorie for all poſterities; a potte of Manna, Aarons Rodde that alwayes flouriſhed, and the Tables of the Lawe.
               
                  The Arke was couered, and the couering thereof was called the mercie-ſeat, which figured Chriſt who is our propiciatorie or mercie-ſeat to couer our iniquities. Ouer the mercie-ſeat, were the forme of two Angels, hauing relation to the Angels that kept the way to the tree of life: to ſhew, that none were worthie to come into that Holy of holieſt, but Aaron the annointed of the Lord, who likewiſe figured Chriſt both in name and office. For Aaron ſignifieth Chriſt, which in English is, Annointed: and in office, by entring once for all into the Holy of holieſt. For it was the office of the high Sacrificer, once euery yeere to enter into this Holy of holyeſt with blood. Of this Dauid ſpeaketh, Pſalme 40. When hee commeth into the world, hee ſaith, Sacrifice and burnt offering thou wouldest not haue, but a bodie haſt thou ordained. In the beginning of thy booke it is written, that I ſhould doe thy will O God. Then ſaid I, loe I come. Thus you ſee how the Redemption by Chriſt was taught by Moſes.
               
               The two reſemblances of heauen and earth, are a glaſſe for vs to behold Gods glory in. The heauens, are the heauens of God; and the earth, a beeing for man.
               In which, there be Creatures cleane and vncleane: the cleane, to repreſent the godlie: the vncleane, the wicked of conuerſation. And this rule was generall from the creation, and figured in Paradiſe by the tree of Life, and the tree of knowledge of good and euill. And as trees, and all other Creatures differ one from another: ſo doe the manners of men. And God made Beaſts, Fiſh, and Fowle, to expreſſe the affections of mens mindes, and gaue libertie to Beaſt, Fiſh, and Fowle, to eate vp one another: but to man he gaue a iuſtice among themſelues, and taught them a ciuile life by eating of cleane Beaſts, and forbiddeth groſſe behauiours in forbidding to eate vncleane Beaſts, as Hogs, and Dogges, and Conies, and Hare, and Daw, and ſuch like: to ſhew, that wee ſhould not bee like Hogs to wallowe in the mire of our vncleane conuerſation; nor like to the Dogge, to returne to our former impieties; but bee clothed with repentance, which is newneſſe of life: nor like to Conies, whoſe nature is to vndermine, but to deale faithfully with our neighbours: that ſo our conuerſation may appeare before men, as wee may glorifie our Father which is in heauen: nor like the Dawe or Crowe, which peereth with his eyes, for wee ought not to bee curious in looking to other mens faults, but ſtriue to mend our owne, as our Sauiour Chriſt teacheth in the Goſpell, Matth. 7. Thou that ſpieſt a moat in thy brothers eye, firſt pull out the beame out of thine owne; and ſo of all the reſt of vncleane Beaſts,

Fiſhes, and Fowles, ſomething in life is taught to be eſchewed, which to handle particularly were too long. For the lawfulneſſe and vnlawfulneſſe of eating them now, there is no doubt: for they were onely appointed by Moſes Lawe, to diſtinguiſh the Iew and the Gentile: but Chriſt hauing broken downe the wall of ſeperation, wee are nowe freelie to vſe any; onely the equitie of the iuſtice of the ſame lawe remaineth ſtill. For the Lawe of God is eternall.
               The cleane were ſuch as chewed the cud, and parted the hoofe, as Oxe, Sheepe, Goat, and Hart, and ſuch like: to teach vs, that wee ought alwaies to bee meditating of the wormanſhip of heauen and earth, and the Redemption by the ſonne of God: painefull in our vocation, as Oxen; meek, as ſheep; hardie as Goats vnder the croſſe of Chriſt; and ſwift to good, and ſlow to euill; that our bodies might be a cleane Tabernacle, holy and vndefiled, fit for the Holy of holieſt to enter into. So ſhould wee be clothed with Aarons white garment of perfect iuſtice, and in our boſome reteine the precious Iewell of Vrim and Thūmim, that is, Light of the knowledge of Chriſt, and perfection of vertue, to embrace the ſame.
               Thus we ſee that the Law, and all the ceremonies thereof, the Tabernacle, and all appurtenances thereof, Aarons office and his attire, are all to be applied to the Redemption by Chriſt.
               Wee are further to obſerue in the ſtory of Moſes, that Moſes on the mountaine ſawe the ſumme of all ſaluation. The knowledge of this, is of ſpeciall conſequence in diuinitie. For if Moſes left out any point of Religion, then his doctrine is a maimed doctrine, and not ſufficient to eternall life. There be ſome teachers now a dayes like to the Church of Laodicea; who though ſhee was poore, yet thought and eſteemed her ſelfe rich: Euen ſo theſe men, for knowledge in expounding of Scriptures, when as they ſeuer the new Teſtament from the old, and doe not make the one a light vnto the other. For this is the onely difference betweene Moſes, and the newe Teſtament, That the newe Teſtament is an expoſition or comment vpon Moſes. Saint Peter teacheth this plainely. 2. Pet. 1.19. Wee haue the ſure worde of the Prophets, to the which giue heede as vnto Light ſhining in darkeneſſe till the day appeareth, and that the morning starre ſhineth in your hearts. Chriſt himſelfe approoueth this Doctrine, when hee giueth his hearers a commaundement, Iohn 5. That they ſhould ſearch the Scriptures, to wit, Moſes and the Prophets, becauſe they teſtifie of me, ſayth Chriſt, and in them you hope to haue eternall life.
               
               Saint Paul in the Acts Chap. 26. layeth downe a rule how to try the

truth of his doctrine. For, ſaith he, I taught nothing but Moſes and the Prophets, that Christ ſhould die, and riſing from the dead, ſhould giue life vnto the world. The truth of this rule will be manifeſted by the particulars in this ſort. The Pope forbiddeth meats, where is this in Moſes? Indeed the ceremonie of Moſes made a diſtinction betweene Iew and Gentile, in reſpect of election: which diſtinction was to continue but a time: but now in Chriſt Ieſus, neither is circumciſion nor vncircumciſion any thing, and therefore all the Creatures of God are good, ſo they be receiued with thankeſgiuing. Therefore by this rule the Pope is a falſe Prophet, teaching a doctrine not in Moſes. This therefore is a ſound rule to trie all doctrines. Where are they taught in Moſes? So likewiſe if any Sciſme be bred, or breedeth in the Church, we ſhall by this rule be able to eſtabliſh our conſciences, if we examine it by Moſes doctrine. Now, ſeeing the new Teſtament referres it ſelfe to Moſes, wee ſhall neuer be able truelie and ſincerely to expound it, but by being skilfull and readie in Moſes. Wee ſee Mathew makes mention of Abraham, and proues Chriſt to come of him. The vſe of this will bee of no force to vs, except wee ſearch Moſes for Abrahams ſtorie, and ſee there what glorious things are ſpoken of him. Saint Paul likewiſe proouing iuſtification to bee by faith without the workes of the Lawe, bringeth for an ineuitable argument, the manner how Abraham was iuſtified. This argument will hardlie bee made plaine and certaine vnto vs, except we ſearch Moſes for Abrahams actions. The ſame Apoſtle Heb. 11. commending the excellencie and certaintie of faith, vſeth no other proofe, then a rehearſall of the actions and liues of particular men, Who by faith ſubdued kingdomes, ſtopped the mouthes of Lyons, quenched the furie of fire, deſpiſed the glory of this life, and beleeued in the ſon of God, &c. By theſe reaſons it is euident that the new Teſtament is then made plaine, when it is referred to the old. Now, though the new Teſtament ſhewes that he is come, and ſo the prophecie being fulfilled, there may ſeeme to be ſmall vſe of the old: yet we know that it is not ynough for vs to embrace a truth, but this one thing is further required, an Abilitie to proue the truth againſt all gaineſayers, that ſo wee may be able to render a reaſon of that hope that is in vs. This therefore is a ſure ground, that in Moſes is the ſumme of all ſaluation. If you demaund by what words in Moſes it may be gathered, that hee ſawe the Reuelation: I anſwere, it is prophecied in Balaams prophecie, Num. 24. That Kittim ſhall afflict Heber, but he ſhall periſhin in the end. So there, vnder the terme of Kittim, the Italians afflicting the Church of God vnto the end of the world, are ſignified: So by this wee ſee the generalitie of this rule, that Moſes ſaw the ſumme of ſaluation: for he

ſaw the fall and reſtoring of Adam, the deſtruction of the world by the flood, how the families fell away in flowting Sem, and their curſe by their ſcattering, and the calling of the heathen. I will prouoke you by a fooliſh Nation, and by thoſe who are not my people. This ſentence out of Deut. 13. Saint Paul cyteth Rom. 10. to prooue that the Gentiles likewiſe were elected, and ſhould bee called in the time appointed.
               Amongſt the Iewes, Moſes was had in ſuch reuerence, that they haue caſt all his ſentences into numbers; for whereas wee vſe figures, they vſe the Hebrew letters: and ſo exactly, that if any letter or vowell be either added or left out, they can preſently tell. Withall they are ſo perfect, that they will tell where their Prophets tooke from Moſes.
               
               By this obſeruation Sanctus Pagninus giueth a rule, that the truth of the Scriptures will neuer appeare in her right cleereneſſe, neither by the Latine tranſlation, nor by the expoſition of the Fathers: for the Latine it is not agreeable with the Hebrew. For the Fathers, becauſe the moſt of them are verie ignorant in the ſtorie, therfore many things they expound by allegories, which ſhould by ſtorie and euent be manifeſted ſo to haue come to paſſe. As, where Iacob prophecying of Iudah, Gen. 49. deſcribeth the pleaſantneſſe and fertilitie of the ſoyle by theſe circumſtances, Hee ſhall waſh his garments in wine, and his mantle in the blood of grapes: The Fathers make an Allegorie of this, and apply it to the paſsion of Chriſt, but of what force is this expoſition againſt the Turke?
            
            
               Now followeth to be handled, the ſtandings in the Wilderneſſe.
               THere were two and fortie Standings in the Wilderneſſe. Wee muſt obſerue, that it is not lawfull to frame Allegories out of our own braine: for it is ynough for vs to embrace thoſe, which the ſcripture hath laide downe.
               We muſt further note, that the plaine expounding of a ſtorie, is no allegorie. And when we ſhall finde things diuers times repeated, we muſt know that it is done to this end, that we might the better remember our owne eſtate, and therefore they are directions vnto vs. This is prooued by Saint Paul in the Epiſtle to the Corinthians, where hee calleth theſe Standings in the Wilderneſſe, a ſtampe of our owne nature. This may ſerue for an introduction into the treatiſe following. The text noteth, that where the cloude ſtood ſtill, there they pitched

their Tents. In the mention of theſe Standings in Numbers, there be ſome places rehearſed which are not repeated in the former deſcription, to wit, in Exodus. We may not gather from hence any contrarietie, but we muſt learne that thoſe places which are not repeated again, are ſome little Townes or Villages hard by, as well knowne as the other, and as it were the verie ſame, and then it is free to vſe the one or the other.
               The Standings are Two and Fortie, for compariſon with theſe, you haue Two and Fortie bowles, knobs, and flowers in the Candleſticke of the Tabernacle.
            
            
               
                  42 Of Omri Sonnes ſlaine.
42 Children deſtroyed by Beares. 42 Generations of Chriſts kindred from Abraham.
               Saint Auguſtine ſaith, that the numbers in the Scripture containe rare and excellent matters, euen the rudeſt of them. This opinion of Saint Auguſtine in this number of Two and Fortie will prooue true. For this Two and Fortie conſiſteth of ſixe Seuens, which number of Sixe, and of Seuen, keepeth in memorie the Creation. By this the Nations are compelled to admire the wiſedome of God in the Creation: for they could not thinke that it came by chaunce, that there ſhould bee iuſt Two and Fortie Standings in the Wilderneſſe, and no more. Iob ſayth of God, O thou that doeſt order all my ſteps! And if in our life we meditate on theſe Two and Fortie Standings, we will endeuour to auoid the like ſins which the Iſraelites cōmitted in the Wilderneſſe, leaſt wee be ouertaken with their puniſhments.
               The place was diuers and variable, ſometimes pleaſant, and ſometimes vnpleaſant, ſo is it with vs in our life: and in this we ſee our pilgrimage reſembled.
               If we conſider the place it ſelfe, it was the fitteſt for to teach all Nations from this ſtorie, the true Religion, ſeeing they were either borderers, or came thither. On the one ſide was Iſmael, called alſo Pharan; on the other ſide Eſau, named alſo Iumea. By it Madian, where Moſes tooke his wife. Sinay alſo, where the Lawe was giuen. Iacobs Sonnes dwelt thereabout. Arabia was neere, which Saint Paul in the Galathians calleth a mixed Nation. Na
                        •
                     ors twelue Kings thereabouts. Moab and Ammon there. This in generall for the place.
            
            
               
               Now follow the Standings.
               THe firſt Station was Rameſis, which ſignifieth Wormes. This is handled where we are admoniſhed not to lay vp our treaſure in this life, where wormes and ruſt conſume, but in heauen where theſe things annoy vs not.
               2. Station. Succhoth, Which ſignifieth poore Cottages: ſo is euerie ones ſtate in this life.
               3. Etham, Which ſignifieth Hard ground: ſo was their ſtate. The Lord there went before them by day in a pillar of a cloude to lead them the way, and in a pillar of fire in the night, to giue them light. Exod. 13.
               
               This fauourable dealing of the Lord, Eſay applyeth vniuerſally to the Church, ſaying, The Lord will make vpon euery dwelling houſe of Mount Sion, that is, vpon all the aſſemblies of it, A Cloud for the day time; and a ſmoke, and brightneſſe, and a flame of fire for the night. Eſ. 44. Ap. 10. Chriſt, the mightie Angell, hath his feet in a pillar of fire.
               4. Piahiroth, Which ſignifieth Contention. There Egypt ſtroue with Iſrael, and they murmured againſt Moſes, whereof the name was afterwards giuen to that place. They goe thorough the red Sea, the ſeuenth day of vnleauened bread, as the Iewes hold with one conſent.
               
                  By faith they paſsed through the red Sea, as by drie land, which when the Egiptians aſſayed, they were drowned. Heb. 11. Our Fathers were all vnder the cloud, and all paſſed through the Red Sea, and were all baptiſed vnto Moſes in the Sea. 1. Cor. 10.
               5. Marah, Which ſignifieth Bitterneſse. There they could find no waters to drinke, for the waters were bitter, therefore the place was called Marah, and they murmured againſt Moſes, as Saint Paul teſtifieth, Let vs not murmure, as ſome of them murmured, and were deſtroyed of the deſtroyer. 1. Cor. 10.10.
               The next is Elim, Grace. Where were Twelue Fountaines of waters, and Seuentie Palme trees. Thus we ſee that none can come to Elim, Grace, but firſt they muſt abide pouertie, and goe through hard and bitter contentions and afflictions of this life. And yet then we are not in reſt: for the next Station we come to, is Sin, Thorny. There the people murmure againſt Moſes for meat. In the euening God fedde them with Quailes, and they came to the place of Sepulches, & leaneneſſe entred into their ſoules▪ In the morning they were fed with Manna, to know that Man liueth not by bread onely,

but by euerie word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God. Deut. 8. They did all eat of the ſame ſpirituall meat. 1. Cor. 10.
               This Manna was to be gathered as euerie man had need of it. If any were reſerued till morning, it brought foorth wormes. Exod. 16.20. This, Saint Paul applyeth to the vſe of wealth. 2. Cor. 8. Let it be of equality at this time, that your aboundance fulfill their want, that their aboundance may reach to your want, that there may bee an equalitie, as it is written, He that gathered much, had not ouer-much, and hee that gathered little, had not ouer-little.
               
               The ſumme of theſe ſtandings is this, that the ſoyle being good and bad, ſheweth vs the manners of the men which liue on the earth, and with whome wee liue, at whoſe hands we muſt looke for badde dealing more than for good. This Chriſt taught in the Goſpell, when hee willed, that thoſe who would embrace him, ſhould take vp his Croſſe and follow him. After they come to Rephidim, where was no water for the people to drinke, the people murmure againſt Moſes: the place is called Tentation, according to that of Dauid. Pſal. 95. Hebr. 3. To day if you will heare my voice, harden not your hearts, as is the prouocation in the day of Temptation in the wilderneſſe. &c.
               
               
                  Moſes ſtriketh the Rocke, and the Rocke was Chriſt. 1. Cor. 10.
               
               
                  They dranke all of the ſame ſpirituall drinke, &c.
               
               Ieſus fighteth with Ameleck.
               
               
                  Moſes erecteth an Altar, and calleth it Iehouah, my Banner. Chriſt by death ouercame him that had the power of death, and wee haue an Altar, Ieſus Christ the righteous, Heb. 11.
               
               Then they come to Horeb, which had the ſoyle verie drie. But Sina, on the toppe a hole where the winde made a fearefull noyſe. But Sion was a pleaſant and fruitfull ſoyle, full of ſprings, to waſh away the blood of the beaſts that there were ſlaine. The Land of Chuſh alwaies in ſeruitude. So we, if wee looke onely to haue our liues ſauour of ciuilitie our ſoules not lightned with the knowledge by Chriſt, we ſhall bee continually in ſeruitude. And as theſe places come ſhort of the glorie of Ieruſalem: ſo the Iewes not thinking on Chriſt, haue their cogitations wandring, not finding reſt in their ſoules. Saint Paul handleth theſe two Mountaines in this ſort, Galat. 4. By the which things, another thing is meant: ſaith he, for theſe two hils are two Teſtaments, the one Agar of Mount Sinay, which gendreth vnto bondage, being a Mountaine in Arabia, and it anſwereth to Ieruſalem which now is, and ſhee is in bondage with her children: but Ieruſalem which is aboue is free, the mother of vs all. The Perſians wonder at the ſtatelineſſe of Ieruſalem, being in glorie One Thouſand yeares. Saint Paul calleth this time to Chriſt, the time of a childe vnder a Tutor. The Sonne is, Rom. 15. Whatſoeuer is written,

is written for our learning, that wee through patience might haue hope. Now ſaith Saint Paul, Theſe things are our examples, to the end wee ſhould not luſt after euill things, as ſome of them luſted, and fell in one day three and twentie Thouſand. 1. Cor. 10.
               In this place Sinay, where the Lawe was giuen, many things are to be conſidered.
               The Law was giuen, that ſinne might be knowne to abound.
               It was giuen by Angels, Deut. 33. By a Mediator, Moſes.
               
               There is one Mediator of God and man, the man Chriſt Ieſus, the Mediator of the new Teſtament. Heb. 9.
               
               It was giuen on the Lords day, in the morning, the Lord ariſing and ſhining from Pharan, with Thouſands of his Angels, with thunder, lightnings, and earth-quake.
               
                  Moſes erecteth an Altar on Twelue pillars, and hauing made a ſacrifice, doth read the Booke of the couenant, and taking the blood of Oxen and Buls, with water, purple wooll, and Iſope, doth ſprinkle the Booke, ſaying, This is the blood of the Couenant which God hath commanded for you. This is handled in the 9. to the Hebrewes: If the blood of Oxen and Bulles doth ſanctifie to cleaneneſſe of the fleſh, how much more ſhall the blood of Christ cleanſe our conſcience from dead workes, to ſerue the liuing Lord?
               
               
                  Moſes goeth vp to the Mountaine, and faſteth Fortie dayes, Exod. 32.
               
               Chriſt in the Wilderneſſe faſteth Fortie daies, Luk. 4.
               
               The people turne the glorie of God into the ſimilitude of a Calfe that eateth hay. Exod. 32.6.
               
               Be not Idolatrers, as ſome of them were, as it is written, The people ſat downe to eat and drinke, and roſe vp to play. 1. Cor. 16.
               
                  Moſes breaketh the two Tables which hee receiued from God, written with the finger of God.
               The Leuites kill three thouſand of Iſrael that had committed Idolatrie. They regarded not Father, mother, brethren, or ſiſters. This Chriſt applyeth to all men. Mat. 10. Hee that loueth Father or Mother more than me, is not worthy of mee.
               
               
                  Moſes goeth vp againe to the Mountaine with two Tables prepared of himſelfe, continueth Fortie dayes faſting, writeth the words of the former tables in theſe. This Paul handleth, 2. Cor. 3. Yee are the Epistle of Chriſt miniſtred of vs, written not with inkes, but with the ſpirite, not in Tables of ſtone, but in the Tables of hearts of fleſh.
               
               The ſecond yeare after their comming from Egypt, the Tabernacle is erected, out of which the Lord ſpeaketh in a more manifeſt gracious ſort, than at any time before he had done, to ſhew himſelfe in a ſpeciall ſort mercifull.
               
                  Chriſt his humane nature is the Tabernacle. The word became fleſh, and had his Tabernacle amonge vs, Ioh. 1. In him all fulneſſe dwelled bodily. Col.4. By grace all Christians are a Tabernacle. Eſ. 10. Ap. 21.
               A cloude ouer-ſhadowed the Tabernacle. To the Virgine Marie Gabriel ſaith, Luk. 1. The power of the highest ſhall ouer-ſhadow thee.
               
               So Moſes could not enter into the tabernacle of teſtimonie, becauſe the cloude abode therevpon, and the glorie of the Lord filled the Tabernacle. When Chriſt is glorified on the Mountaine, and a bright cloude ouer-ſhadowed him, Peter ſaid, Let vs make here three Tabernacles, one for thee, one for Moſes, and one for Elias, Mat. 17.
               The Temple of the Tabernacle of witneſſe was open, and the temple was full of the ſmoke of the glorie of God, and no man could enter into the Temple. Ap. 15.
               
               Where the cloude remained, they went forward with the Arke, Chriſt hath a white cloude vnder him. Ap. 14.
               
               Nadab, and Abihu

                     
                        are conſumed with fire for offering ſtrange fire before the Lord.
                     
                     
                        To be an example how God is a conſuming fire againſt fooliſh zeale.
                     
                  
               
               After this the children of Iſrael come to Kadesbarnes. Then there are Spies ſent out to view the Land: they are Fortie daies in viewing it. They bring word, and tell ſtrange things of the goodnes and fatneſſe of the Land, but they diſcourage the people, and feare them: for they told them of huge and great Giants the Sonnes of Anak Ioſua he anſwereth them, Let vs goe vp and poſſeſſe the Land. For if God ſhall be mercifull vnto vs, he will giue vs the Land flowing with milke and honie. Vpon this God ſweares, that they ſhall not enter into his reſt. They were for this Forty yeres in the Wildernes, Forty daies in viewing the Land. S. Paul repeateth this in the Acts 13. God ſuffered their manners in the Wilderneſſe; they wandred, to puniſh the hardneſſe of their hearts for not beleeuing. They went vp and downe, that all the world might woonder at this dealing of God, and thereby learne to feare him: for euerie ſinne fitteth the prouidence of God, and ſerues for his glorie. By this all the world might learne diuinitie. For it is ſayd of them that their ſound was heard to the end of the world. So that a man of England meeting with one that had beene about thoſe parts, might enquire, When doe thoſe people leaue their wandring? They were brought out of Egypt ſtrangely: for the ſea parted, and ſuffered them to goe through, and was a wall to them, but drowned the Egyptians which followed after.
               
                  Did you euer heare, that one ſtriking a Rocke, water ſhould come forth? Yet this is not all, for they had meat from heauen, Manna, which in Engliſh ſignifieth, What ſhall I call it? Beſides, for their apparell it neuer weareth, not ſo much as their ſhooes, their apparell groweth with their bodies. A Childe hath the ſame apparell being a man, that hee had being a Child: and the neighbours are in ſuch feare of them, as they dare not touch them. Surely their God is wonderfull, and exceedeth the Gods of other Nations. Diodorus Siculus, hee ſpeaketh of Moſes reuerently. Strabo mentioneth theſe Standings, but ſpeaketh wickedly. So doth Iuſtine. Hereby is their condemnation iuſt, and they made inexcuſable.
            
            
               2554. Moſes died, Deut. 34. being One hundred and Twenty yeres old.
               Shorter in life than his Father or Grandfather: So that ſeeing long life a great bleſsing, and he ſo excellent a man, euen by the teſtimonie of the ſcripture, it might be asked, why his life was no longer? Wee ſhall ſee, that theſe his yeares are more glorious, than if they had been longer. For this compariſon of One hundred and twentie yeares, with the One hundred and twentie yeares of the building of Noahs Arke, is of rare excellencie: and euen in this compariſon his face muſt ſo ſhine in their harts, that they could not behold him without a vaile▪
               
               By this they muſt likewiſe remember the promiſe made to Abraham to be performed, for the which he was raiſed vp. And they muſt aſcend higher, to Melchiſedech, who bleſſed Abraham, & in whom alſo the heathen receiued a bleſsing. Then they muſt goe further to the taking vp of Henoch.
               
               
                  Homer bringeth in the mother of Achilles, telling her Sonne, that there was decreed for him a double deſtinie. If he would haue a long life, it ſhould then bee obſcure: If ſhort, famous. This hee fayneth, but yet in fables there is a colour of truth.
               We are to conſider further the words of Saint Iude, vpon the death of Moſes. Yet Michael the Archangell, when hee stroue with the Deuill, and diſputed about the body of Moſes, durſt not giue rayling ſpeeches, but ſaid, The Lord rebuke thee. It may be demanded, where Saint Iude hath theſe words, ſeeing they are not expreſſely laid down in Moſes. This obiection is thus anſwered: Any Scholler may from a true ground, frame a diſputation: and it is free to vſe this kinde of amplification, or any other▪
               
               The meaning of Saint Iude is, that Iehouah the Eternall buried Moſes. In the Prophet Zacharias, you haue the like in a viſion: Iehoſua the high

ſacrificer ſtandeth before the Angell of the Lord, & Sathan at his right hand to reſiſt him: and the Lord ſayd vnto Sathan, The Lord reprooue thee, Sathan. Here the ſecond perſon Chriſt Ieſus is called Michaell, and here is the like kinde of ſpeaking. So that if wee will frame a ſpeech, we may thinke, that at Moſes death God might commaund Michael to go fetch vp the bodie of Moſes. Satan reſiſting, he forbad him, and added, The Lord rebuke thee. The meaning of Saint Iude is thus much: Thoſe which rayle on officers, haue not marked Chriſts dealing, who like a ſtately King, in one word rebuketh them.
               This expoſition the Iewes in their Talmed agree vnto▪ The end is to this purpoſe: that ſeeing it is not written by Moſes, and the holy Ghoſt cyteth not the place from whence it is taken, wee muſt diligently looke to the matter, and ſearching the ſcripture for the like Stories, we ſhall eaſily finde out the vſe and order which the holy Ghoſt vſeth in amplifications.
            
            
               
                  Moſes was a figure of Chriſt.
               
                  MOſes was caſt into the flagges, Marie the Daughter of Pharaoh ſaued him; ſo, as Marie ſaued Moſes the deliuerer; ſo the Virgine Marie ſaued Ieſus Chriſt the Redeemer.
               
                  Moſes was perſecuted of Pharaoh: Chriſt was perſecuted of Herod a new Pharaoh.
               
               
                  Moſes deliuered the people from the bondage and ſlauerie of Egypt: ſo Ieſus Chriſt hath deliuered vs from the ſpirituall bondage and Tyrannie of the ſpirituall Pharaoh Satan.
               
               
                  Moſes, when he died was buried by Chriſt. Euen ſo Ieſus Chriſt by his owne death, buried all the Ceremonies of Moſes.
               
            
            
               2555. Ioſhua ruleth Seuenteene yeares. His name was altered by Moſes to Ieſus, becauſe hee was to be a figure of Ieſus Chriſt. He with Caleb encouraged the people, when the other ten Tribes miſbeleeued when they were ſent to ſpie the Land.
               Theſe Seuenteene yeares are not ſet downe expreſſely in the Scripture; but are gathered from the circumſtance of the Storie in this ſort: From the comming out of Egypt to the building of Salomons Temple, are Foure hundred and Eightie yeares. 1. King. 6.8. All the particulars of this account, are layd downe ſaue Ioſhua his gouernment,

and they make foure hundred, ſixtie, and three; to which adde Seuenteene yeares, the time that Ioſhua ruled: you haue full Foure hundred and eightie. So you haue another Seuenteene for Iacob, and Ioſephs Seuenteene yeares.
               Thus much for the time.
            
            
               Now for his name Ieſus.
               
               
                  HOſeas the Sonne of Nun, which was to take the gouernment from Moſes, hath his name altered, and is called Ieſus in the 72. Pſalme. You haue his name repeated Ganuſhemo, (1) He ſhall increaſe. The Hebrews in their Cabala ſay, that this is the name of Chriſt, they meane nothing elſe but to keepe in memorie euerie name, wherby the glorie of the Kingdome of the Meſsias is expreſſed.
               When the Iewes come from Babell, you haue Ieſus again, the Sonne of Iehoſadach. In Ierem. 31. the Lord ſpeaketh. Behold the day commeth that I will raiſe vnto Dauid a righteous braunch, and a King ſhall raigne, and proſper. In his dayes Iuda ſhall bee ſaued, and Iſrael ſhall dwell ſafely, and this is the name whereby they ſhall call him, The Lord our righteouſneſse. In the 110. Pſalme, the Lord ſware, and will not repent, thou art a King for euer after the order of Melchiſedech, the King of righteouſneſse. In the firſt Epiſtle of Saint Iohn, it is thus expounded: If any man ſinne, wee haue an Aduocate with the Father. Ieſus Chriſt the righteous. The Seuentie Interpreters tranſlating the place of Ieremie, And this is his name, The Lord our righteouſneſſe: becauſe they knew the Egyptians could neuer vnderſtand the meaning of the Lord our righteouſneſſe, they tranſlate it thus: And he ſhall be called the Sonne of Iehoſadach, which is in ſignification Ichouah Tzedek, The Lord our righteouſneſſe: but thereby the Grecians thought hee was the Sonne of Iehoſadach.
               
               Where Saint Paul ſpeaketh, Philip. 2. That at the name of Ieſus euerie knee ſhould bow, both in heauen and in earth, We thinke that the meaning is the outward bowing of our knees, and of an externall worſhip to be giuen at the ſound of this word Ieſus. That is not ſo: but this is the meaning, That his Maieſty is ſo omnipotent, that all the creatures both in heauen and earth muſt be ſubiect to him. And this Chriſt himſelfe prooued by his miracles when the fiſhes obeyed, when the Deuils reſiſted not, when the water bare him vp, and the winde was calme at his word. Wherefore if wee admit the firſt expoſition, wee commit a groſſe errour: for ſo ſoone as wee heare Ieſus pronounced, we begin to worſhip by bending our knees, though that name be not meant

of Chriſt. As in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, it is ſayd, If Ieſus had ſetled the people in reſt, &c. Here is meant Ieſus the Sonne of Nun, and yet this Ieſus ſhall haue bowing of knees:
            
            
               Now compare Ieſus with Ieſus.
               
               
                  As
                  
                     Ieſus the Son of Nun, receiued the gouernment and law from Moſes.
                     before Ieſus, Iordan opened:
                     Ieſus cauſed the Sunne to ſtay in the firmament.
                  
               
               
                  So
                  
                     Ieſus Chriſt fulfilled all the ſame.
                     before Ieſus Chriſt, when he was baptiſed at Iordan, the heauens opened.
                     Ieſus Chriſt cauſed the ſun to be darkened in the firmament.
                  
               
            
            
               If Ieſus had ſetled the people in reſt, &c.
               
                  IEſus which ſignifieth Sauiour, with Eleaſar, who is ſurnamed Aaron, which ſignifieth Chriſt, Annointed, ſetled the Iſraelites in an earthly reſt in the outward Canaan.
               
               
                  Ieſus with Eleaſar, brought the Iewes out of the captiuitie of Babell, and ſet them in their Land againe.
               
                  Ieſus Chriſt the Annointed Sauiour, hauing in halfe a Seuen conquered Hell and Sathan, hath ſetled our mindes, and ſet vs in an heauenly reſt in the ſpirituall Canaan. So the holy Ghoſt ſpeaketh: for if Ieſus had ſetled the people in reſt, then would not Dauid after this haue ſpoken of another reſt.
               
                  Moſes giueth inſtruction to Ieſus for the Conqueſt of the Land, and goeth not thither himſelfe. So Moſes vnprofitable, except Chriſt had come and performed it.
               
                  50.THis Fiftie ſheweth, that the reckoning of the yeare of Iubilee here beginneth.
               
                  7.The Seuen ſheweth, that the people of Iſrael were ſixe yeres in conquering the Land of Canaan, and the Seuenth yeare ſetled in reſt, as the world was ſix dayes in making, and the Seuenth day appointed for reſt.
               
                  45.The Fiue and Fortie will approoue this true in the Fourteenth of Ioſua. Caleb ſaith, Fortie yeares old was I when Moſes ſent mee to ſpie the Lands.
                  
Now the people of Iſrael were Two yeares in the Wilderneſſe before the Spies were ſent. When the Land is fully conquered, hee ſayth, I am this day fiue and Fortie yeres old ſince Moſes ſent me from Cadesbarnes, to view the Land. From which fiue and Fortie, if you take away Seuen, there remaineth Thirtie and Eight, to which if you adde the other two, in which they were in the Wildernes before the Spies were ſent, you haue Fortie; ſo long they were in the Wilnerneſſe, and the other Seuen they were in conquering the Land.
               For compariſon with this Seuen, you haue Seuen Fifties for the houſe of Ioſeph: ſo Hoſeas the Prophet ſpeaketh, while Ioſeph ſpake there was great terrour. Then Seuen Seuenties to the Captiuitie, Ten Seuens the Captiuity, and Seuen Seuenties to the death of Chriſt. The proofe of this is layd downe in the 25. of Leuit. where they are cōmanded vpon their ſetling in the Land, to number vnto them ſixe yeares for tilling and plowing their ground, and the Seuenth to be a Sabbath, that is, holy vnto the Lord. And Seuen Sabbaths of yeares, thou ſhalt likewiſe number, then thou ſhalt cauſe to blowe the Trumpet of the Iubilee, and that was the next yeare after the ſeuenth Seuen. Theodoretus ſaith, Moſes prophecied, that Ieſus ſhould be Seuen yeares in conquering the Land, and thereby likewiſe expreſſeth the Iubilee, and thereby ſheweth the Fiftie yeares after they ſhould ouerthrow Chuſan. So the firſt Iubilee hath a wonderfull victorie.
               God had an eſpeciall purpoſe in his prouidence, that the land ſhould not bee conquered in one day, (which he could haue performed) becauſe from obſeruing the wonderfull order of Ieſus victories, the nations farre and neere might bee ſtirred vp to enquire after their God: and if they would not, yet hereby to bee made vnexcuſable. Suidas noteth, that hee came into a Countrey where hee found certaine blacke pillars erected, wherein this was engrauen: Ieſus the ſpoyler droue vs out of Canaan.
               
               
                  Cadmus builds Thebes while the Grecians flouriſhed, and there was continuall enmitie betweene the Athenians, and the Thebanes: and if you caſt the ages to Dauids time, you ſhall find that Ieſus draue him out likewiſe.
            
            
               
               Now followeth the diuiding of the Land; which is particularly handled in Ioſhua. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
               NOw the curſe is performed. Gen. 10. Curſed be Canaan: a ſeruant of ſeruants ſhall he be. For his poſteritie, the moſt part of them are driuen out of their Land, being repleniſhed with all good things, and Sem doth raigne our him. Seuen Nations onely were driuen out: the reſt God would not as yet vtterly roote out, but reſerued them to bee ſpurres in the ſides, and thornes in the eyes of the Iſraelites, if they ſhould at any time bee ſtout, and forget God. This conqueſt of Sems houſe vppon Canaan God purpoſed, when hee firſt ſetled them in the Land at the ſcattering of Nations, as Moſes teſtifieth, Deut. 32. When the most high God diuided to the Nations their inheritance, he appointed the borders of a people, according to the number of the Sonnes of Iſrael. Our tranſlation is faultie in that place, and thereby obſcureth the meaning of the place. For we ſay, When the most high diuided to the Nations their inheritance, hee appointed the borders of the people according to the number of the children of Iſrael: which any man knoweth to be infinite, and therfore not proper for the vnderſtanding of the text.
               For looke what Countreys Iacob gaue in his will, and deſcribed, Ieſus and Eleaſar performed in poſſeſsion to Iacobs Sonnes. By this wee may be perſwaded, that our life dependeth on the prouidence of God, and that all our wayes are numbred.
               There were in all Three hundred, Twentie, and Foure Townes, wherein the Iſraelites inhabited, and neither Bethlehem, nor Nazareth in the tribe of Iuda named, and yet they were of ſpeciall vſe, for the reuealing of the birth of the Meſsias.
               
               The reaſon may be thus rendred: God would not in plaine termes manifeſt it▪ to the end we ſhould be more diligent and careful to know thoſe things which ſo much concerne our ſaluation.
               
                  Micheas knew by Dauids birth in Bethleem, a figure of Chriſt, and by Beniamins, that Chriſt ſhould there bee borne. And ſo the Doctors of the Lawe anſwere Herod, cyting the teſtimonie of Micheas the Prophet. Eſay ſaith, hee ſawe a Nazarite, a ſprigge from the roote of Ieſſay.
               
               The Iewes, to croſſe the certaintie of Chriſt to bee the Meſsias, ſay there is no ſuch Towne. Yet God tooke ſuch order, that the heathen

ſhould beare witneſſe againg them: for it is mentioned in Plinie, and other heathen writers.
               The Leuites had allotted to them Fortie and Two Townes, and ſixe for refuge, one of euerie Seuen: thereby to ſignifie, that we muſt obſerue the like proportion, if wee will haue Religion to flouriſh.
               The reſt of the Tribes had the lot of their inheritance appointed them: ſo that euerie Tribe was diſtinct by himſelfe, and ſo obſerued vntill the comming of Chriſt, that the kindred of Chriſt might not be obſcured, but that he might be knowne to be the ſeede of Abraham; the Lion of the Tribe of Iuda; the bloſſome of the roote of Ieſsay. Concerning their poſſeſsions, Reuben was beyond Iordan, and Gad, Simeon, and Leut ſcattered amonge the Tribes. Iuda in the beſt ſoyle: for he ſhall binde his Aſſe to the Vine, and his Aſſes foale to the beſt Vine. Beniamin next Ioſeph, next him the Sonnes of the hand maides.
               Ieſus Chriſt in the daies of his fleſh in his pilgrimage, goeth through all the Tribes, as Ieſus the Conqueror, and Eleaſar the high ſacrificer had diuided them.
               He is conceiued in the tribe of Zabulon, at Nazareth.
               He is borne in Bethleem of Iuda.
               In Egypt hee goeth through the tribe of Simeon.
               
               He teacheth in the Temple, in the tribe of Beniamin.
               
               He turned water into wine at the mariage of Cana in Galile in the Tribe of Aſer.
               
               At Sichem in the Tribe of Ephraim, hee prooueth himſelfe to bee the Meſsias.
               
               At Naum in the Tribe of Nephtali, hee rayſeth Lazarus from the dead.
               In going through the tenne Cities, hee is in the Tribes of Reuben, Gad, and part of Manaſses.
               
            
            
               2570. Ioſua, or Ieſus dieth, being One hundred and Ten yeares old: anſwerable to Ioſeph, who died being One hundred and ten yeares old.
               HE was the Seuenth from Ephraim, in whom the bleſsing of Moſes concerning Ioſeph is ſweetly performed, who ſayth,
                     Deut. 33.
                   
                  His horne ſhall be like to the firſt borne Bullocke.
               
               
                  He therefore hath a Bullocke his ſcutchion, to ſhew that hee is of Ioſeph by Ephraim. Some doe muze from whence we gather to giue them armes; they may bee reſolued, if they ſearch the antiquities of Gen. cap. 49.
               
               Thus much for Ioſhua.
            
         
         
            
               ❧ Now followeth the Storie of the Iudges.
            
               THis is firſt generally to bee obſerued; That where it is ſayd, When Othoniel, Aod, or any of the reſt had ouerthrowne Chuſan, Eglon, or Siſera, or any of the oppreſſors, that the Land had reſt Fortie, or Eightie, or Twentie yeares; that the Land reſted not ſo long: for the plaine Storie croſſeth it: but the meaning is, from Ioſuas death, or from Othoniels death, or from Aods death after ſo many yeares the land had reſt, hauing been oppreſſed, by ſuch and ſuch: for the verie natiue tranſlation is, the things repeated in Eglons Storie and Aods, are the actions of foureſcore yeares, if you adde to them Othoniels Fortie yeares.
            
            In the Propheſie of Abacucke. Cap. 3. There ye haue an abridgement of all the Stories of the Iudges, and ſo continuing till Dauids death. He beginneth at the 17. verſe. For Iniquitie I ſaw the Tents of Chuſan, and the curtaines of the land of Midian did tremble. Was the Lord angrie with the Riuers? or was thy wrath againſt the floods? Meaning the ouerthrowe of Siſera, whoſe hoſt was diſcomfited at the Riuer Kyſon: and ſo proceedeth in the Chapter.
            The meaning of the Prophet is, to comfort the Iewes which now were afflicted by the neighbours about them, and aſſureth them, that they ſhall be deliuered. For afore-time they had great deliuerances from the like oppreſſors, and therefore namerh Chuſan, not that hee was that Chuſan that is mentioned in the Iudges, but being one of Chuſh his houſe, and is a Chuſan of double impietie: for by this time Abrahams Sonnes by Keturah were mixed with Cham, and thoſe afflicters which bordered on the Iewes, are here meant, as Iſmael, and Nachors Sonnes, and Edom, and Cham, &c.
            
            
               Wee are likewiſe to vnderſtand, that theſe Iudges did not rule as Kings or Magiſtrates Fortie yeares, or Twentie yeares: but the Land being for their ſinnes plagued from time to time by theſe oppreſſors, the policie did chooſe ſome eſpeciall man out of the Tribes to bee cheefe Captaine during the time of their affliction. Amongſt whom Ioſephs houſe had the chiefeſt glorie, but Iuda had the firſt prerogatiue.
            They fell away ſixe times in the time of theſe Iudges before Dauids time: and that was the cauſe, that theſe vngodly Nations had ſuch a ſtroke ouer them.
            Thus much for them in generall.
            
               2571. Othoniel of the tribe of Iuda, is the Firſt, to ſhew that they ſhould looke for their deliuerer, which ſhould end all the viſions and propheſies, and perfecteth all righteouſneſse, to bee of Iuda.
               
                  THe Three hundred, thirtie and nine,
                  
                     339.
                   
                  is the exact number of the whole time of the Iudges. The Foure hundred and Fiftie ſheweth the whole time of Iudges, with the oppreſſors yeares.
                  
                     450.
                  
               
               The Lord ſtirred vp our Sauiour to the Children of Iſrael, and hee ſaued them, euen Othoniel the Sonne of Kenar, Calebs younger brother: and the ſpirite of the Lord came vpon him, and hee iudged Iſrael, and went out to war, and the Lord deliuered Chuſan Riſhathaim King of Aram into his hand, and his hand preuailed againſt him: ſo the Land had reſt Fortie yeares, and Othoniel died. Iudg. 3.9.
               
            
            
               2603. Chuſan oppreſſeth Eight yeares.
               HIs Country was Meſopotamia. The Children of Iſrael did wickedly, that is, they dwelt amonge the vncleane Nations, that were left in the Land, and tooke their Daughters to bee their wiues, and gaue their Daughters to their Sons, and ſerued their Gods, contrarie to the commaundement of Moſes the man of God, Deut. 7.3. When you ſhall come into the Land, &c.
               
               Therefore the wrath of the Lord was kindled againſt Iſrael, and he ſould them into the hand of Chuſan, and they ſerued him Eight yeares.
            
            
               
               
                  Booz of Rahab Borne.
               
                  By faith the harlot Rahab periſhed not with them which obeyed not, when ſhee had receiued the Spies peaceably. Heb. 11.
               
                  Rahab was of Chams houſe, and yet God of his eſpeciall grace gaue her the light of his countenance, and was mercifull vnto her: becauſe ſhe beholding the impieties of the vncleane Cities of Canaan, and their reward, and the Storie of Lots wife, which no doubt was famous, the loathſome life of the Egyptians and their plagues, embraced the Couenant to Abraham, and the oath that hee ſware vnto Iſaack.
               
               The manners of theſe Egyptians are expreſſed by the woman in the Goſpell, which had her daughter poſſeſſed with a Deuill. Chriſt telleth her, that it is not lawfull to take the Childrens bread, and to caſt it to Dogges. As if Chriſt ſhould ſay, Moſes in his lawes and religion hath cut you off like Dogges, to whome precious things muſt not bee throwne, and therefore I am not in mercie to regard you. She anſwereth, It is true Lord, that wee are curſed, and by Moſes law cut off from ſaluation; and it is likewiſe true, that wee are not the Children: yet wee ſee that the little Dogs eat of the crummes which fall from the Childrens table. And Moſes himſelfe hath a law, that if any will learne the Religion of Iuda, hee ſhall be admitted: ſo that yet there is ſome hope for the Dogs. Goe thy way, ſaith Chriſt, thy faith hath ſaued thee. And no doubt, as this poore womans daughter was poſſeſſed with a Deuill in bodie: ſo the mindes of the Egyptians had many Deuils, ſeeing they were full of ſuperſtition, witchcraft, and coniuring. They worſhipped one Ammon a Deuill, yet there were many of Chams houſe ſaued. This I inferre, becauſe Rahab was of Cham. And this opinion is confirmed by her Storie, who was ſaued when Iericho was deſtroyed. Shee telleth the Spies, I knowe that the Lord hath giuen you the Land, for we haue heard how the Lord dryed vp the Redde Sea before you: for the Lord your God hee is the God in heauen aboue, and in the earth beneath; thereby ſhewing, that ſhe embraced the promiſe made to Abraham, that in his ſeede all Nations in the earth ſhould bee bleſſed. It is teſtified of both theſe women, that their faith did ſaue them.
               The Lord likewiſe in the dayes of his fleſh, went into Iericho the Citie of Rahab long agoe accurſed.
            
            
               
               
                  2610. The firſt Iubilee.
               IT hath his name from Iobal, a Horne, becauſe in the beginning of the Feaſt, trumpets of Rammes hornes were to bee blowne, and thereby the yeare was proclaimed. It was the Fiftieth yeare after the ſetling the people in the Land, as Leuit. 25. You ſhall reckon to you ſeuen Seuens of yeares, and the Fiftieth ſhall be a yeare of Iubilee, &c. And it was to be kept ſolemnely vntill the death of Chriſt. The cauſe of keeping it was, to put them in minde of the great victories which God had giuen them ouer their enemies in the Land of Canaan: ſo that by this ceremonie likewiſe, the Redemption by the conqueſt of Chriſt ouer our ſpirituall enemie, which the yeare of Iubilee ſignified, was alſo proclaymed. For if they conſidered the promiſe made to Abraham concerning this Land, and their deliuerance out of Egypt being in bondage, and how they were placed in the Land by Ieſus their Captaine; the death of Chriſt, which deliuered them from the ſnares and bondage of the Deuill, muſt needes bee made plaine vnto them.
               
                  Iobal doth ſignifie Ioyfull. In it, all Lands that were bought of any of the Tribes, was to returne to the old Poſſeſſor; then all priſoners were ſet at libertie. Figuring, that ioyfull yeare of the Lord, wherein we ſhould be freed from the bondage of Satan, wherof Eſay ſpeaketh, He ſhall heale the broken heart, and bring the gladſome tidings of the Lord: Iuſtice ſhal be the girdle of his loynes, and faithfulneſse the girdle of his reynes: then the Woolfe ſhall dwell with the Lambe, and the Leopard ſhall lye with the Kidde, and the Calfe, and the Lion, and the fatte beast, and a little Chila ſhall lead them, the ſucking Child ſhall play vppon the hole of the Aſpe, and the wayned Child ſhall lay his hand vppon the Cockatrice hole: then ſhall none hurt, nor destroy in the mountaine of mine holyneſſe: for the earth ſhall bee full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters that couer the Sea. Eſ. 11. The meaning is, that the prophane beaſts of the world, which nowe know not Chriſt, ſhall in this ioyfull yere be lightned with the brightneſſe of his glorie, and ſhall reioyce and be glad for ſo great ſaluation, and ſhall be members of one head Chriſt Ieſus, louing one another as Chriſtians, whoſe ioy is expreſſed verie largely, in the 35. of Eſay. The deſert and the Wilderneſse ſhall reioyce, and the waſt ground ſhall flouriſh as a Roſe, it ſhall flouriſh aboundantly, and ſhall greatly reioyce alſo and ioy, the glorie of Lebanon ſhall be giuen vnto it, the beautie of Charmell, and of Sharon; they ſhall ſee the glory of the Lord, and the excellencie of our God, ſtrengthen the weake hands, and comfort the feeble knees: ſay vnto them that are

fearefull, Be ſtronge, feare not, behold your God commeth, euen God with a recompence will come and ſaue you: then ſhall the eyes of the blinde be lightned, and the eares of the deafe be opened, then ſhall the lame man leape as an Hart, and the dumbe mans tongue ſhall ſinge: for in the Wilderneſse ſhall water breake out, and riuers in the deſart, and euerlaſting ioy ſhall bee vppon their heads, they ſhall obtaine ioy and gladneſſe, and ſorrow, and mourning ſhall flye away.
               
               To returne to the obſeruation of the time of the Iubilee. Moſes ſaith, You ſhall reckon to you ſeuen Seuens of yeares, and the Fiftiet
                        •
                      ſhall bee a Iubilee. Leuit. 25. Wherein wee may behold the wonderfull prouidence of God for them, ſo long as they kept his Sabbaths: for the Nine and fortieth yeare did yeeld corne for three yeares. No doubt, this muſt needs make the Nations aſtoniſhed, to ſee that the Children of Iſrael had ſuch a God, as could in one yeare giue them corne for three yeares, ſo that they ſhould neither ſowe nor reape, when themſelues had ſcarce corne with great labour for one yeare.
               
                  Amos in his prophecie findeth great fault with thoſe which hoard vp corne, and pronounceth a woe vnto them for ſo doing.
               But wee are to vnderſtand, that when the Iſraelites neglected their Sabbaths, and forgot the great benefites they had receiued, becomming Idolatrers, and polluted with the abhominations of the land into which they came; their ioy was turned into ſadneſſe, and their Iubilees vnto their deſtructiō. For in the ſeuenteenth Iubilee, they hauing deſpiſed the prouidēce of God, they haue Sedechias a moſt wicked King ſet ouer them, and in Iehoiakims time, they are carried quite away into Babylon, and there are as dead bones for Seuentie yeares, vntill the land had payd her owne Sabbaths, which they had omitted when they dwelt vpon it. Therefore wee are to note, that wee ſhall neuer keepe our religion eaſie and plaine, but by caſting the Iubilees right, which we muſt caſt to end iuſt with the death of Chriſt, or elſe howe doth Chriſt according to Daniel the 9. end the ceremonie & oblation? and the wiſedom of God hath taken ſuch order, that where the Scripture ſeemeth to leaue off to reckon, there the heathen keepe a iuſt account, nothing at all croſsing Daniels Seuens.
               For the Iubilee which the Iewes and Romanes obſerue, there is no colour of Religion in it, nor warrant in Moſes for them. Therefore we leaue them to obloquie, as not worth the handling, amongſt the reſt of their groſſe errours which they againſt Scripture fooliſhly maintaine.
            
            
               
               2611. Aod Eightie yeares.
               
                  HE was of the Tribe of Beniamin. The Children of Iſrael committed wickedneſſe in the ſight of the Lord, and the Lord ſtrengthned Eglon King of Moab, againſt Iſrael. But when they cryed vnto the Lord, hee ſtirred them vp a Sauiour. Aod the Sonne of Gera the Sonne of Beniamin, a man lame of his right hand, and the Children of Iſrael ſent a preſent by him vnto Eglon King of Moab, and Aod made a ſharpe Dagger, and carried it priuily, and when he had deliuered the Preſent, he thruſt it into him, and killed him, and they ſlue the ſame day ten Thouſand Moabites: ſo Moab was ſubdued vnder the hand of Iſrael, and the Land had rest Foureſcore yeares. Iudg. 3.
               
            
            
               2671. Eglon oppreſſeth Eighteen yeares. Iudg. 3.
                
            
            
               2691. Baracke and Deborah Fortie yeares. Baracke was of Nephtali, and Deborah of Ephraim.
               THe Children of Iſrael began againe to doe wickedly in the the ſight of the Lord when Aod was dead; and the Lord ſold them into the hand of Iabin King of Canaan, whoſe cheefe Captaine was called Siſera. Then they cryed vnto the Lord: For Siſera had Nine hundred yron Chariots, and Twentie yeares hee had vexed them. And at that time Deborah a Propheteſse the wife of Lapidoth, iudged Iſrael. And ſhee called vnto her Baracke the Sonne of Abinoam, and ſhe went with Baracke to Kedeſh againſt Siſera, and the Lord deſtroyed Siſera, and all his Chariots at the waters of Maggeddon; in the Reuelation, the ouerthrow of Antichriſt is compared to the ouerthrow of Siſera at Mageddon.
               Then ſange Deborah and Barack the ſame day, ſaying, Praiſe ye the Lord for auenging of Iſrael, &c. to the laſt verſe of the Chapter. So let thine enemies periſh, O Lord: but they that loue him, ſhall be as the Sunne when he riſeth in his might; and the Land had reſt Fortie yeares.
               
                  Here is perfourmed Gen. 49. Where Iacob bleſsing Nephtali, ſaith, Hee ſhall bee a Hinde let goe, giuing goodly words. Hee was in the purſute of Siſera, as ſwift as a Hinde, and gaue goodly words with Deborah. Iudg. 5.
            
            
               
               2711. Siſera oppreſſeth Twentie yeares. Obed of Ruth.
               
                  IN the time that the Iudges ruled, there was a dearth in the Land: and a man of Bethelem in Iuda went for to ſoiourne in the Country of Moab. The name of the man was Elimelech, and the name of his wife was Naomi, and his two Sonnes Mahlon and Chilion Ephrathites of Bethlehem: and they came into the Countrey of Moab, and continued there, and they tooke wiues of the Moabites: the name of the one was Ophrath, and the name of the other Ruth: and ſo read through the firſt and ſecond Chapters of the Booke of Ruth.
               
               We haue the like commendation of Ruth, that is ſpoken of Abraham, That ſhe left her Father and Mother, and the Land where ſhe was borne; and came into a people whome ſhee knewe not in times paſt. And withall ſhe is bleſſed in theſe words, The Lord recompence thy worke, and a full reward be giuen thee of the Lord God of Iſrael, vnder whoſe winges thou art come to truſt. Ruth. 2.
               
                  So Booz tooke Ruth, and ſhe was his wife, and the Lord gaue that ſhe conceiued a Sonne, and called his name Obed: the ſame was the Father of Ieſſay the Father of Dauid. Ruth. 4.
               In that Chriſt chooſeth to come of Rahab of Cham, & of Ruth of Moab, he purpoſed not to come into the world by the prerogatiue of nature, or, as the Iewes looked he ſhould come, in moſt tryumphant ſort: but by grace offering grace to Cham, recompencing the loue of Lot to Abraham, and opening the eyes of all the Gentiles in the world, and cauſing the dumbe Nations that knewe not that the ſeed of the woman ſhould breake the Serpents head, to ſpeake the prayſes of God in their owne tongue.
               Againe, if his Parents had been from time to time of vertuous life vnſpotted, as many of them were, the woonderfull graces of Chriſt would haue been attributed vnto the generalitie of his Fathers. But hee preuented euerie obiection that the peeuiſh vnbeleeuing Phariſees might imagine, by comming of ſuch as the Iewes held as vncleane before God.
            
            
               
               2731. Gedeon Fortie yeares. Gedeon, Baracke, Sampſon, Iephte, Dauid, Samuel, and the Prophets obtained promiſes, but receiued not the promiſe. Heb. 11.
               
               AGaine the Children of Iſrael committed wickedneſse in the ſight of the Lord, and the Lord gaue them into the hands of Madian Seuen yeares: ſo Iſrael was exceedingly impoueriſhed by the Madianites. Therefore they cryed vnto the Lord; and when they cryed, the Lord ſent a Prophet vnto them, who ſayd vnto them, Thus ſaith the Lord God of Iſrael, I haue brought you vp from Egipt, and haue brought you out of the houſe of bondage, and I ſaid vnto you, feare not the Gods of the Amorites in whoſe land you dwell: but you haue not obeyed my voice. And Gedeon of the Tribe of Ephraim, was threſhing of wheat to hide it from the Madianites. Then the Angell of the Lord appeared vnto him, and ſayd, The Lord is with thee thou valiant man. And the Lord looked vpon him, and ſayd vnto him, Goe in this thy might, and and thou ſhalt ſaue Iſrael out of the handes of the Madianites. Haue not I ſent thee?
               The multitude of the Madianites, and the Amalekites, and all they of the Eaſt, lay in the valley like Graſhoppers, and there Camels were without number, as the ſand by the ſea-ſhore. But Gedeon with three Hundred deſtroyed the Madianites, To ſhew, that victorie conſiſteth not in ſtrength of men, or multitude of Camels, but in God who giueth the Victorie. For at the ſounding of Gedeons Trumpet the enemies ranne, and cryed, and fledde, and the Lord cauſed them to kil one another. Thus was Midian brought lowe before the Children of Iſrael, ſo that they lift vp their heads no more, and the Countrey was in quietneſſe fortie yeares in the dayes of Gedeon.
               
               This Gedeon had Seuentie Sonnes begotten of his bodie, for hee had many wiues; and he had a Sonne by a Concubine, whoſe name was Abimelech.
               
               So Gedeon died in a good age, and was buried in the Sepulchre of Ioaſh, his Father in Ophrath. Read the 6, 7, and 8 Chapters of Iudges.
            
            
               
                  Madian oppreſſeth Seuen yeares.
                
            
            
               2771. Abimelech Three yeares, the Sonne of Gedeon, of the Tribe of Ephraim.
               
                  When Gedeon was dead, the children of Iſrael turned away, and went a whoring after Baalim, and made Baal Berith their God, and they remembred not the Lord their God, which had deliuered them out of the hands of all their enemies on euery ſide: neither ſhewed they mercie on the houſe of Ierubbaal, or Gedeon, according vnto all the goodnes which he had ſhewed vnto Iſraell.
               
               Then Abimelech went vnto his fathers houſe, and ſlue his brethren the ſonnes of Ierubbaal or Gedeon, about ſeauentie perſons vpon one ſtone: ſo Abimelech raigned three yeares ouer Iſrael. But God ſent an euill ſpirit betweene Abimelech and the men of Sechem: and they brake their promiſe to him, that the cruelty toward the ſeauentie perſons and their bloud might come and be laid vpon Abimelech their brother. And a certaine woman caſt a peece of a mil-ſtone vpon Abimelechs head, & brake his braine panne. And when the men of Iſrael ſaw he was dead, they departed euery one vnto his owne place. Thus God rendred the wickedneſſe of Abimelech which he did vnto his father in ſlaying his ſeauentie brethren. To ſhew that God by vntimely and miſerable death, taketh vengeance on tyrants, euen in this life. Iud. 9.
               
                  
                     2774.
                  
                  After Abimelech, there aroſe to defend Iſrael Thola of the tribe of Iſachar, and he iudged Iſrael twentie three yeares and died, and was buried in Shamir.
               
                  
                     2797
                  And after him aroſe Iair of the tribe of Manaſſes, and iudged Iſrael two and twentie yeares, and he had thirtie ſonnes that rode on Aſse-coltes, ſignifying they were men of authority. They had thirtie Cities which are called Hauoth Iair vnto this day, and are in the land of Gilead. And Iair died, and was buried in Chamon. And the children of Iſrael wrought wickednes againe in the ſight of the Lord, and ſerued Baalim and Aſhtarath, and the Gods of Aram, and the Gods of Sidon, and the Gods of Moab, and the Gods of the children of Ammon, and the Gods of the Philiſtines, and forſooke the Lord and ſerued him not.
                     2801
                   And in proceſſe of time the children of Ammon made warre with Iſrael,
                  
                     2819
                   and they ſaid vnto Iephte of the tribe of Ephraim, Come & be our Captaine: and the ſpirit of the Lord came vpon Iephte, & he went to the children of Ammon to fight againſt them, and the Lord deliuered them into his hands. Whereupon, he according to a fooliſh vow, being ouercome with blinde zeale, not conſidering whether the vow were lawfull or no, offred vp his onely daughter in ſacrifice, and Iephte iudged Iſrael ſix yeares. Iud. 11. and 12. Chap.
            
            
               
               Ieſſai borne.
               ALthough he was but an obſcure man in reſpect of worldly glory▪ yet, no doubt, he was a very godly man, and taught his ſonnes the religion of God, in that the holy Ghoſt doth ſo often repeate his name in the Scripture. In the Reuelation chap. 5. Chriſt is cal
                     •
                  ed the Lion of the tribe of Iuda, and the roote of Ieſſay. And Eſay chap. 11. prophecying of the graces of Chriſt, ſaith, There ſhal come a rodde ſorth of the ſtock of Ieſſay, and a branch ſhall growe out of his rootes: and the ſpirit of the Lord ſhall reſt vpon him, the ſpirit of wiſdome and vnderſtanding, the ſpirit of counſell and ſtrength, the ſpirit of knowledge and of the feare of God, &c. To ſhew, that as Dauid, who in diuers reſpects figured Chriſt, came out of Ieſſay, a man without dignity: ſo Chriſt ſhoulde come of a poore Carpenters houſe, as out of a dead ſtocke, as Eſay. 53.2. He ſhall growe vp before him as a branch, and as a roote out of a dry ground: he hath neither forme nor beautie: when we ſhall ſee him, there ſhalbe no forme that we ſhould deſire him.
               
               Againe, with the very ſame skorne that the Iewes deſpiſed Chriſt, vpbrayding him by the baſeneſſe of his kindred▪ 
                  Is not this the Carpenters ſonne? doe the Iſraelites obiect againſt the houſe of Iuda, when the ten Tribes ioyned with Ieroboam, 1. King. 12. ſaying, What haue wee to doe with Ieſſay? what haue we to doe with the houſe of Dauid? As if they ſhould ſay; why Ieſſay was but an husbandman, and Dauid was but a ſheepheard, we will not be ſubiect to ſo baſe kindred, nor ſuffer ſuch a foole as Roboam of their bloud to raigne ouer vs, for we be noble, and vnfitte to be gouerned by ſuch a poore ſtocke; but we will worſhip Ieroboam of the houſe of Ioſeph for he is a noble man, and diuers valiant and worthy men came of his kindred in the time of the Iudges. And ſo they indeede vtterly forſooke the houſe of Iuda, the ſtocke of Ieſſay, and walked in the waies of Ieroboam, chooſing rather for outward dignity to goe to deſtruction, than embracing vertue, depend vpon the promiſes of God, to obtaine eternall life. Therefore our Sauiour Chriſt ſaith in the Goſpell, Whoſoeuer denyeth me before men, I will denie him before my Father which is in heauen. Luke 9.
               
                  AFter Iephte. Abeſan of Bethleem of the tribe of Iuda; iudged Iſrael ſeauen yeares. He had Thirtie ſonnes, and thirtie daughters: He died,2825. and was buried at Bethleem. And after him iudged Iſrael,
                  
                     2833.
                   Elon of the tribe of Zabulon, and hee iudged Iſrael ten yeares. Tthen he died,
                  
                     2843.
                   
                  and after him Abdon of the tribe of Eph
                     •
                  aim, iudged Iſrael eight yeares, and he had 40. ſons and thirtie Nephewes that rode on ſeauentie aſse-coltes, and he died. Iud. 12.
               
                  
                  But the Children of Iſrael continued to commit wickedneſſe in the ſight of the Lord, and the Lord deliuered them into the handes of the Philistines Fortie yeares.
               
               
                  2850.
                  Then the ſpirite of the Lord came vpon Sampſon of the Tribe of Dan, and with the iawe-bone of an Aſſe, hee ſlue a Thouſand of the Philiſtines, and he iudged Iſrael Twentie yeares. The Philiſtines in reuenge of this, put out both his eyes, but the Lord ſtrengthned Sampſon againſt them, and hee ſlue at the time of his death three Thouſand more of them.
               
               Here is perfourmed Iacobs Will in Gen. 49. Where hee ſaith, Dan ſhall be a Serpent by the way, and an Adder by the path, byting the Horſe heeles, ſo that his Rider ſhall fall backeward. And in Iudg. 16. Hee ouerthroweth the houſe where the Princes of the Philiſtines were: ſo that he ſlue more at his death than in all his life: and notwithſtanding he died with them, yet hee looked for ſaluation in Chriſt, of whom he himſelfe was a figure.
            
            
               Now compare him with Chriſt.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Sampſon
                        Chriſt
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              was a Nazarite vnto God to the time of his death, and ſaued Iſrael from the handes of the Philiſtines.
                              was brought before the Princes, and mocked.
                              at his death ouercame more, than in his life.
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              was a Nazarite vnto the time of his death, and deliuered vs from the ſpiritual Philiſtins Sathan, and his Angels.
                              was brought before the Magiſtrates, and was mocked.
                              at his death ouercommeth him that had the power of death.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  The Ceremonie of the Nazarites is preſcribed in Numb. 6. They were ſuch as vowed themſelues to God, and from the vaine deſires of the world.
               
            
            
               
               2870. Heli of the Tribe of Leui, iudged Iſrael Fortie yeares.
               THis Heli had Two Sonnes, Ophni and Phineas, which were Sacrificers, and they ſinned greeuouſly againſt God, as appeareth 1. Sam. 2.12.22. And Eli in stead of putting them to death, reprooued them with tender words. So there came a man of God vnto him, and ſayd: Wherefore haue you kicked againſt my Sacrifice, and mine offering which I commanded in my Tabernacle, and honoureſt thy children aboue mee? Wherefore the Lord God of Iſrael ſayth: Behold, the dayes come that I will cut off thine arme, and the arme of thy Fathers houſe, that there ſhall not bee an old man in thy houſe, ſhall be a ſigne vnto thee, that thy Sonnes die both: for them that honour me, I will honour, and they that deſpiſe mee ſhall bee deſpiſed. 1. Sam. 2. This our Sauiour Chriſt repeateth in the Goſpell: Who ſo loueth Sonne or Daughter more than me, is not worthy of me. Mat. 10. and in the 1. Sam. 15. it is ſayd, Behold, to obey is better than ſacrifice: and to hearken, is better than the fat of Rams. For rebellion is as the ſinne of witchcraft, and tranſgreſsion is wickedneſſe and idolatrie.
               Afterwards the Arke of the Couenant of the Lord was taken from the hoſt of Iſrael by the Philiſtines, and Iſrael was ſmitten down, and there was a great ſlaughter, for there fell of Iſrael thirtie Thouſand footmen, and Hophni and Phineas died.
               And when Heli heard that the Arke was taken, he fell from his ſeat backward, and his necke was broken, and he died, for hee was an old man and heauie, and had iudged Iſrael Fortie yeares.
               So the Arke of the Lord was in the Countrey of the Philiſtines Seuen moneths. But the Lord plagued them all the time, that they kept it. So they knew not what to doe with it, but put it into a cart, and ſet a couple of young kine to to drawe it, and the Kine caried it directly to the Iſraelites, and turned neither to the right hand, nor to the left till they came at the Iſralites. This ſheweth the wonderfull impietie of the Philiſtines, in that the beaſts had more knowledge then they. Therefore the Prophet Dauid ſaith, they are like vnto horſe, and Mule that hath no vnderſtand. For they worſhipped Dagon a moulten Image. But the hand of the Lord was vpon them▪ and the Lord deſtroyed them, with Emorods, which was the cauſe they ſent away the Arke. The vſe of it is thus much, that the wicked▪ when they feele the hand of God, grudge and reiect him, whereas the godly embracing Chriſt humble themſelues, and crie for mercie.
               
               Thus much for the particuler ſtories of the Iudges.
            
            
               
               Now followeth ſomewhat againe in generall.
               IN theſe Stories we are to note, that Ioſephs Tribe hath more Iudges than Iuda, or any other Tribe. This may be the reaſon: We ſhall ſee through the courſe of the Scriptures, that the Children haue diuers times great prerogatiues in regard of their Parents Stories▪ 
                  Ioſeps mother was firſt contracted: but Iudahs Mother firſt bare Children: this wee ſhall further obſerue in things concerning outward life, and therefore in reſpect of the firſt loue of Iacob, and that Rachel was firſt contracted, it was neceſſarie that in outward bleſsings Ioſeps houſe ſhould ſeeme to ouer match Iudahs. Yet ſeeing Leahs zeale was verie feruent, the Meſsias choſeth to come of her. Othoniel the firſt Iudge was of the Tribe of Iudah, to ſhew, that they ſhould looke for their deliuerer which ſhould end all the viſions & propheſies, and perfect all righteouſneſſe, to bee of Iudah. The ſecond is Aod of Beniamin, who is called the beloued of Iſrael, and of whom Moſes prophecieth, that God ſhould reſt vpon his ſhoulders. Ioſeph gathered poyſon, where he ſhould haue gathered honie: of him Hoſeas ſpeaketh while Ephraim ſpake, there was great terrour. And thus we ſee, that none can come to the Sonne except the Father draw him, as hee himſelfe teſtifieth; for Ioſeps glorie and bleſsing was the cauſe of his ouerthrowe. This was the cauſe that in Roboams dayes the ten Tribes fell away, and deſpiſed the glorie of Iudah, compelling euerie one to his Tents, ſaying, What haue we to doe with the Sonne of Ieſſai: forgetting Booz, Salmon, Obed, and Ieſſai, who in age at the birth of their Sonnes, reſembled and kept in minde Abrahams age at the birth of Iſaacke.
               
               Thus much for the Iudges in generall.
            
            
               Now let vs returne to the Oppreſſors.
               THe firſt is Chuſan of Meſopotamia. The ſecond is Eglon of Moab. The 3. is Siſera of Canaan, the 4. Madian of Moab; then Ammon of Meſopotamias then the Philiſtins in Canaan & ſo forth in the like ſort. We may obſerue in theſe Iudges, the gentle & patient puniſhing of God, who firſt beginneth 
                     〈◊〉
                   but if thereby the wicked grow worſe and worſe, and will not be bettered, he vſeth more ſeuere corrections: for Chuſan is more milde than Eglon, Eglon more ſeuere than

                  Chuſan. But Siſera with nine Hundred Chariots wonderfull vehement in oppreſsing. We ſhall ſee, that the Moabites were leſſe heauie in afflictions towards the Children of Iſrael, than the reſt of the oppreſſors. The reaſon hereof may thus be rendred: The Moabites were of affinitie with Abrahams ſeede, and God promiſed, that whoſoeuer bleſſed Abraham, he would likewiſe bleſſe: and therefore Lot and his poſteritie had diuers bleſsings, and the memorie of this muſt in ſome ſort aſſwage their malice. Thus we ſee an art as it were in Gods puniſhments, and the order which he obſerueth, and yet the Stories containe this doctrine ſo layd downe, as if they fell out at randome.
            
            
               Now for the time of the Iudges gouernment.
               SSaint Paul in the Act. cap. 7. mentioning their Storie, ſaith, That God gaue them Iudges after a kinde of reckoning Foure hundred and Fiftie yeares: if you count the yeares of the Iudges exactly, they were but three Hundred, thirtie, and nine. Therefore Saint Paul addeth, after a kinde of reckoning, that is, as the Iewes accounted it, taking in the yeares of the oppreſſors, whoſe tyrannie amounted to one hundred and eleuen yeares: which one Hundred and eleuen yeares, being added to the three Hundred, thirtie, and nine yeares, make vp the iuſt ſumme of foure Hundred and Fiftie yeares. This kinde of reckoning Ioſephus an ancient Iew vſeth: who of ſome is thought to erre, becauſe they marke not his purpoſe in the 1. King. 6. where the Text ſayth, From the going out of Egipt to the building of the Temple, are foure Hundred and Eightie yeares. Ioſephus, as if he purpoſed to croſſe the text, ſayth, that the time was fiue Hundred, ninetie, and two yeares, we haue no warrant to thinke Ioſephus either of ſo great impietie, as to denie the truth of the Scripture; or of ſuch ignorance, as to bee vnskilfull in ſo plaine a matter, which might bee diſcuſſed by eye-ſight. Therefore if we take in the yeares of the Oppreſſors, and the yeares wherein the Egiptians were plagued, wee haue iuſt fiue Hundred, ninetie, and two yeares: ſo Saint Paul in the followeth the account of the Iewes, though in right the time of the Oppreſſors belongs not to the chronicle: this is the vſe of al, Chriſt is Palmoni the ſecret nūberer, who weigheth, numbreth, and diuideth, yea, euen the haires of our head. By theſe alſo, the Eight and twentie Iubilees are made plaine and perfect. The certentie of theſe falling out ſo iuſt, may aſſure our conſciences, that God is faithfull who hath promiſed. Dan. 9. Chriſt the King after ſeuenty Seuens ſhall be ſlain, but not for himſelfe, &c. is the full accompliſhment

hereof, and to which they are to to be referred: for ſo Othoniel the firſt Iudge of the Tribe of Iudah repreſented him, of all theſe Iudges. Saint Paul ſpeaketh, Heb. 11. By faith all theſe ſaw the Promiſe a farre off, and beleeued, and receiued it not, God prouiding a better thing for vs, that without vs they ſhould not be made perfect. To conclude, in the ninth of Eſay, the Lord bringeth in the conqueſt of the Iudges, both of Zabulon and Nephtali, and the ouerthrowe of Madian, and then how the Battell of the Warriour was with great noyſe, and with tumbling his garments in blood: but when Chriſt ſhall come to ſubdue all Nations vnto himſelfe, whome theſe Conquerours ſignified, his gouernment ſhal be with peace and righteouſneſſe, and of his Kingdome there ſhall be none end.
               Thus much for the Storie of the Iudges.
            
         
         
            
               THE NEXT VVHICH IS TO be handled, are Samuel, and Saul; and firſt for Samuel.
               
               The Seuenth Iubilee.
               
                  HEre you haue in the Seuenth Iubilee a rare man, Samuel to teach Religion,490. where God purpoſed to eſtabliſh a Kingdome.
               It may be demanded, why Chriſt did not die in the Fourth Iubilee, ſeeing it is a ſquare number, and repreſenteth the forme of the heauenly Ieruſalem? Becauſe Ioſephs houſe had not then receiued his full glorie. Why then died he not in the Seuenth Iubilee, ſeeing it is a holy number, and figureth the reſt of our ſoules?
               Becauſe the Scepter which Iacob promiſed, was not yet come to Iudah: and when he had, it muſt haue a double glory ouer Ioſeps houſe: but multiply the number of Seuen by the number foure, you haue Eight and Twentie the verie yeare of Chriſts death.
               
                  Thus you ſee in what a ſweet harmonie all the actions of God are lincked, if men will marke, and not be amazed at manifeſt truthes.
            
            
               
                  Samuel and Saul Fortie yeares.
               IN Samuels Storie we are to conſider three things.
               
                  Firſt, the time of the gouernment.
                  Secondly, the place where hee ruled.
                  Thirdly, his perſon.
               
               The time was in Seuenth Iubilee: this is a ſpeciall note, They were Seuen yeares in conquering the Land. Theodoretus applies this to this Storie that ſo in the Seuenth Iubilee they ſhould looke for ſome rare euent. In the firſt Iubilee Othoniel of the Tribe of Iuda hath a great victorie, and is the firſt Iudge, and recouereth the Kingdome. In the Seuenth Iubilee there is a great conqueſt: for Samuel recouereth the Kingdome from the Philiſtines, reſtoreth the Arke to Iuda, and erecteth the Kingdome in Iſrael: This is a wonderfull matter, and theſe times are to be noted, becauſe Saint Paul in the Acts, ſaith, That God gaue them Iudges after a kinde of reckoning Foure hundred and Fiftie yeares, vnto the time of Samuel the Prophet; which foure Hundred and Fiftie yeares wee muſt finde out by caſting the particulars. So likewiſe Daniel reckoning the death of Chriſt by ſeuentie Seuens, compelleth vs to remember the Seuentie yeares of the Captiuitie, the foure Seuens of Iubilees, and the other Seuens through the ſcripture. Theſe things hange together like a golden chaine, that euen as by breaking one linke all is diſturbed, ſo by not marking, or neglecting one, the other become hard: and by obſeruing this order, the word of God is made plaine, and eaſie to thoſe which delight in it.
               
                  Samuels time may bee compared to the newe world after the flood: for euen as in Noahs time at the flood, all good men were dead: euen ſo now none aliue of any rare bleſsing: ſo that Samuel beginneth as it were, to reuiue the world againe.
            
            
               Now for the place.
               HE was borne at Aramathia, which ſignifieth, a hye Bancke. Here is no myſterie in this. But hereby wee may remember a like Storie: for Ioſeph of Aramathia buried Chriſt, equall with Ioſeph which buried Iacob.
               
            
            
               
               Now followeth the circumſtance of his perſon.
               IN his perſon, firſt we may conſider his name; which ſignifieth I haue asked him of God. Plato bringeth in a man Theaitetes, which ſignifieth, asked of God. The heathen tooke great delight to giue names full of ſignification.
               This Samuel was of the Tribe of Leui, anſwereable for rareneſſe to Moſes. Moſes birth was verie ſtrange, his Mother being an hundred and thirtie yeares: ſo the Hebrewes caſt her age. This they cannot prooue exactly: but yet ſhe muſt be verie old, becauſe ſhe was ſiſter to Moſes Grandfather: ſo Samuels mother verie old. The ſtrangeneſſe of their birth, muſt needs cauſe thoſe which liued with them, to expect great thinges of them, and diligently to obſerue their actions. Here is yet the difference betweene Moſes and Samuel. Moſes had ſome notable of his Aunceſtors, which were not touched with any notable blemiſh. Samuel is of Chore, which familie is moſt wicked. And here is a great matter to be conſidered. Dauid and Samuels Sonnes are of one age, and yet from Leui to Samuel, you haue Seuenteene generations: and his Sonnes make one generation, which maketh Eighteene Generations: But in the Tribe of Iuda to Dauid, you haue but fiue Generations, that is to ſay, Salmon, Booz, Obed, Ieſsai, and Dauid. There is mention made in the Pſalmes of Ten pſalmes of the Sonnes of Chore: they be all pſalmes of comfort, but the Eightie and Foure pſalme is a ſpeciall one: for there he ſheweth, how God hath been fauourable vnto the Land, becauſe hee brought againe the captiuitie of Iacob, when in mercie hee forgaue their ſinnes. And this mercie will he alwayes ſhew to them that feare him, and then the Lord ſhall dwell in their Land. For mercie and truth ſhall meete righteouſneſſe and peace, becauſe truth ſhall budde out of the earth, and then righteouſneſſe ſhall looke downe from heauen. In the 87. Pſal. thus they ſpeake: The Lord loueth the gates of Sion more than all the dwellings of Iacob: for in it the Temple was built, I will thinke vpon Rahab and Babell. Behold yee Philiſtines, and they of Tyre with the Morians, loe there was hee borne. The meaning of this laſt ſentence, is thus much: The Lord will write this man & that man born in Salem by regeneration; where in the conflict betweene Moſes and Dathan, Chore and Abiram which were deſtroyed, Moſes writeth, that the Sonnes of Chore did not periſh; Wee

muſt expound this as a Prophecie, and referre it to the preſent time. For he as a Prophet ſaw, that ſome of them ſhould be godly; the perfourmance whereof appeareth in theſe daies. Hereby we may learne, that diuers wicked Fathers may haue children inheritors of ſaluation. And the heathen were not hindred for being called, becauſe of the ignorance of their Fathers, as Saint Paul prooueth in the Acts. This is a Meditation of great comfort, if it be applyed to euerie ones conſcience.
            
            
               Now let vs conſider the purpoſe of Samuel in erecting the Kingdome.
               THis will appeare the plainer, if wee looke a little backe vnto Moſes actions. Moſes ſpeaketh glorious things of Iuda: yet hee himſelfe giueth not the Land to Iuda, but leaueth it to him in a Prophecie. Ieſus of Ephraim diuideth the Land, and giueth the pleaſant ſoyle to Iuda. Samuel giueth to Iuda by annointing Dauid king: ſo we ſee how his purpoſe and practiſe fulfilleth Moſes propheſie concerning the kingdome of Iuda. All theſe things in the Scripture haue their end to the ſtrengthning of Chriſts kingdome. If one of Iuda had diuided the Land, and taken the beſt ſoyle to himſelfe, the heathen herein would haue thought it great partialitie: therefore one of Ioſeph diuideth the Land, and refuſeth to plant himſelfe in the beſt ſoyle, but giueth that glorie to Iuda.
            
            
               Now we haue diuers compariſons between Samuel and Moſes.
               
               FIrſt in their births, their Mothers being verie old.
               
                  Moſes name ſignifieth, Drawne out of the waters, and ſo ſtrangely preſerued.
               
                  Samuels name is, asked of God, and ſo ſtrangely giuen.
               
                  Moſes was brought vp in all the learning of the Egiptians.
               
                  Samuel brought vp in all ſpirituall learning.
               
                  Moſes did rule, and left not the kingdome to his poſteritie, but gaue it to Ioſeph, that ſo hee might giue it to Iuda. So Samuel giueth it not to his Sonnes, but annointeth Dauid of the Tribe of Iuda. And ſo ought Leui to rule, to teach others how to rule well; but not to leaue a kingdome to his children.
               
                  They were both Kings: ſo Moſes teſtifieth of himſelfe, when there was no King in Iſrael.
               They both made warres, and were Conquerours, and both ruled Fortie yeares. The Iewes ſay, hee ruled but thirteene yeares; but by this they labor to diſturbe the plaineneſſe of the Scriptures, which will neuer be eaſie without the true vnderſtanding of the Chronicle. Samuel bringeth the Kingdome to Iuda by teaching the religion of god, and maketh Schooles of Diuinitie, and inſtructeth them to ſearch Moſes.
               
               This continued in Eſdras time, and vnder the Antiochi; ſo that as Moſes recorded by writing Iudahs gouernment, and continuance: ſo Samuel taught it by expounding Moſes, and thereby eſtabliſhed it.
               Here I am to ſhew a ſpeciall thing.
               When Elias is to be taken vp, one telleth Elizeus, 2. King. 2. Doeſt not thou knowe that thy Maſter ſhall be taken vp from thee? If it bee demaunded how hee knewe this: it may be thought he knew this from compariſon of the ages. For as Henoch the Seuenth was taken vp, and Moſes the Seuenth was buried by God, no place remaining of his buriall: ſo nowe in this Seuenth age they were to looke for ſome rare euent, which was performed when Elias was taken vp.
               There bee that thinke, that by this kinde of teaching the Ceremonies of Moſes are reuiued. But they muſt know that the next way to aboliſh them, is to know what they are, and to what vſe they ſerue. If wee demaund the reaſon why God giueth not the gouernment to Iuda; we ſhall ſee, that it was becauſe all Iſrael followed ſtrange Gods, not regarding the glorie of Shiloh. And when as the Oxen which carried the Arke were releaſed, they went of their owne accord lowing to Iuda: and Ieremie ſaith, Marke what I haue done vnto Silo. Therefore to bring in the true worſhip of God, it was neceſſarie to erect the kingdome in Samuel of Leui: Whoſe gouernment continued Fortie yeares, thereby to teach vs, that till Religion bee well taught, it is not eaſie to eſtabliſh a good gouernment, and this will bee long in learning.
            
            
               Now followeth Sauls Storie.
               SAVL. His name ſignifieth Deſired: thereby ſhewing, that he was deſired of the people, caſting off the gouernment of God. Hee was of the Tribe of Beniamin. The prerogatiue that Beniamin hath the firſt King of his Tribe, in that he was the leaft of the Tribes,

is (no doubt) an eſpeciall fauour. If it be demaunded, why hee was of Beniamin before any of the reſt of the Tribes; this may bee the reaſon thereof: Reuben had defiled his Fathers bed: therefore it was no reaſon that hee ſhould beare ſway in the common wealth.
               
                  Simeon neuer ſhewed any ſigne of repentance, but continued in malice▪ therefore his crueltie muſt needs hinder him.
               
                  Leui was not to gouerne, but to confirme others in the gouernment.
               He muſt not be of Iuda, becauſe God did not chooſe him, but the people: for if God had choſen him, his kingdome muſt haue beene eſtabliſhed, becauſe the gifts of God are without repentance.
               For Iſachar and Zabulon, the yonger muſt not bee preferred before the elder. Then the Sonnes of the hand-maides, to wit, Dan and Nephtali by Bilha, Gad and Aſer by Zilpa, muſt not be firſt preferred.
               
                  Ioſephs pride caſt him off, for that glorie which he had in the time of the Iudges, cauſed him to deſpiſe Iuda, and therefore God ſaith, Marke what I haue done to Silo: ſo that of neceſsitie he muſt be of Beniamin.
               
               Concerning Saul, he was goodly and faire, as any of the Children of Iſrael. Thus the world regardeth onely outward reſpects: but the Lord careth onely for them that feare him, and iudgeth not as man iudgeth. It is ſayd of him, 2. Sam. 1. His ſpeare came neuer emptie home.
               
               We haue a compariſon betwixt him and Saul the Apoſtle: for both were of the Tribe of Beniamin: both perſecuted Dauid the beloued, the one for the kingdome, the other for profeſsion of the religion of Chriſt the true king of Dauids Kingdome: both end the glorie of their Tribe.
               When Saul is made King, the tribe of Reuben might ſay vnto God, O Lord, how are wee deſpiſed? for of all the Tribes we haue no glorie. Wilt thou alwaies remember iuſtice? God therefore to comfort them giueth them a conqueſt ouer the Hagarims, by the ſlaughter of whom they enrich themſelues. Aſer likewiſe might mourne, and reaſon with God, why he neuer looked on them in mercie? God therefore giueth them this comfort: Anna, that is, Grace, the Daughter of Panuel, See God, of the happie Tribe of Aſer, prophecieth at the birth of Chriſt. And ſurely if we ſincerely embrace Chriſt Ieſus, wee ſhall haue the ſpirite of grace, to ſhew vs the loue of God layd vp in Chriſt, that thereby we may enioy all happines: by this you may ſee the tribe of Aſer had a great bleſsing.
               In the Acts of the Apoſtles, Chap. 4. one Ioſes a Leuite of Cyprus ſelleth his poſſeſsion, and layeth his money at the Apoſtles feet, and he is called the Son of Conſolation, for the Leuites were ſcattered in the Land, and the Lord the God of Conſolation was their inheritance.
               Thus much for thoſe things wherein Saul might ſeeme glorious.
            
            
               
               Now for his Faults.
               HIs fault was, in that he diſobeyed the commandement of God inſparing Agag, and reſeruing the beſt of the ſpoyle vnto himſelfe. And in that he was enuious againſt Dauid, and though he ſpeaketh good things of him, and knewe he ſhould ſucceed him in the Kingdome, yet hee perſecuteth him. This is to runne headlong againſt the light of Gods truth. So the Deuill tempted Chriſt, though he knew thereby he encreaſed his damnation. Sauls puniſhment was verie great: for he is ſlaine at Eaſter by himſelfe, then vndertaking battailes when he ſhould haue celebrated the Lords feaſts. That it was at Eaſter, it may be gathered by the Witch preparing him vnleauened bread.
               
                  Ionathan the Sonne of Saul, loued Dauid as his ſoule; therefore it may be concluded, he was ſaued: for hee loued Dauid the beloued of the Lord, and therefore beleeued in Chriſt of whome Dauid was a figure. This may be prooued by the new Teſtament: for in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, Chap. 11. the Battailes of Gedeon, Baracke, Sampſon, and of others are rehearſed, of whome this is added, that they all by faith ſubdued Kingdomes, and receiued the promiſe: and in theſe Ionathan is included. This teſtimonie of the holy ſpirite is of no ſmall glorie.
               
                  Saul goeth to a Witch called Ob, which had a Hobgoblin. Herein he ſinned greatly againſt the gouernment of God layd downe in Moſes. The hid things for God, thoſe reuealed for you and your children to doe them. He fell to this wickedneſſe, becauſe hee killed thoſe which ware the Ephod, and therefore God anſwered him not by Vrim and Thummim. God ſuffereth him to take reuenge of himſelfe: for being a King, hee was the higheſt Magiſtrate, and not to be put to death by his inferiours. His poſteritie was likewiſe plagued, becauſe they kept not the Couenant with the Gibeonites, which Ioſua had made.
               Thus much for Saul.
               
            
            
               
                  Dauid, borne in Bethlehem,
               
               Which the Prophet Micheas, Cap. 5. calleth Little, becauſe it was a little Village; and little in quantitie. The Euangeliſt Math. 2. calleth it not little, becauſe it was famous in that Chriſt and Dauid were borne there.
               His name ſignifieth, The beloued of God: ſo is Chriſt called in Hoſeas,
                  
and Ezechiel, by this name, and oftentimes in the ſong of ſongs. So that after the heart of God, and this name Dauid, is all one.
               
                  Bethlehem, is as much to ſay, as the Houſe of Bread, there Dauid the Shepheard the feeder of Iſrael, was borne as a figure and token that Chriſt the great Shepheard, and true bread of life, ſhould bee borne there.
            
            
               
                  Dauid raigneth Forty yeres; Seuen yeares and a halfe in Hebron, and Thirtie two yeares and a halfe in Ieruſalem.
               HErein is a compariſon with Chriſt: for as Dauid was King proclaimed at Eaſter ouer Iuda: ſo Chriſt by his reſurrection at Eaſter, was prooued King ouer the whole world. Dauid after the death of Saul, asketh God whether hee ſhall goe? God anſwereth, To Hebron. This is not without ſpeciall obſeruation, that God ſhould commaund him to goe thether. The monuments of places are of great force to bring Stories into remembrance. For in Hebron Sara was buried, being the firſt purchaſe which Abraham made. Iſaacke and Rebecka were buried there: Iacob and Leah there: there Caleb challenged his inheritance. So that Dauid being King there, is ioyned in a kind of purchaſe with theſe Fathers, and their glorie herein matched. So the Hebrewes apply it. Hebron is called Conſociation. The Seuen yeares King, is a compariſon with the Seuen yeares of conquering the Land: ſo that looke what glorie is reaped in the conqueſt thereof, the ſame you may gather in the time of Dauids gouernement in Hebron. Further it was requiſite there ſhould be proofe of the ſufficiencie of his gouernment by gouerning Hebron, before hee ſhould rule ſo ſtately a kingdome as Ieruſalem was.
               His Two and thirtie yeares, and ſixe Moneths, haue a compariſon with Chriſts liuing on earth. He began his gouernment there exactly One thouſand yeares before Chriſt was baptized, at the verie ſame time that Chriſt began: ſo you ſee all Gods dealings caſt in a fine and ſweet proportion.
               
                  Dauid commeth of Ieſſai, in this reſpect Chriſt is called the roote of Ieſſai. The ages of Dauids Aunceſtors calleth in minde Abrahams yeares at the birth of Iſaacke, and ſo remembreth his Storie. About Seuen yeares before he was King, he fights with Goliah the Philiſtine, who came of Mitzraijm, which filled Egypt the curſed Nation of

                  Cham. Dauid is hereunto encouraged by a miracle, being made Victor ouer a Lion and a Beare, and thereupon hee concludeth: This vncircumciſed Philiſtine ſhall be as one of them. Goliah challengeth all Iſrael, and defieth them. Dauid truſting in the ſtrength of the Lord, vnarmed, onely with ſtones in his bagge, and his ſling, ſlayeth the Philiſtine. He was about this time Three and Twentie yeares old.
               This is the vſe; Looke what this Goliah, and the Philiſtines were to the ſtate of Iſrael: ſo is the Deuill and his Angels to the children of God. And as Dauid the beloued, by truſting in the beloued Sonne of God, ouercame; ſo ſhall we, if we beleeue as he did, putting on the armor of God. The ſumme in regard of the Iewes, is this: that as he, being of Iuda, ſubdued this Philiſtine; ſo likewiſe in all other battailes they ſhould couragiouſly follow him, ſeeing he of Iuda ſhould come after the fleſh, which fought for them from heauen.
               
                  Saul giueth Dauid his Daughter to wife: it hath been a receiued opinion, that the Iewes might not marrie out of their Tribes. This is onely to be vnderſtood of the heires, becauſe inheritance might not goe from one Tribe to another: but if they were not heires, they might: As we ſee Dauid of Iuda marrieth one of Beniamin.
               
            
            
               Now for his Victories.
               THe 60. and 108. Pſalme, ſpeaketh ſhortly of them in this ſort, Giliad is mine; Manaſſes is mine; Ephraim the ſtrength of my head; Iuda is my Law-giuer; Moab is my Waſhpot: ouer Edom will I caſt out my ſhooe: vppon the Philiſtines will I triumph. The meaning of it is: Chriſt will come, and ſubdue all Nations vnto himſelfe, and erect his kingdome for euer. And yet as all theſe Nations, Moab, and Ammon, and Edom ſtriue againſt Dauid; ſo will the Gentiles againſt Chriſt: And yet, why doe the Gentiles rage, and the people imagine a vaine thing? The Kings of the earth ſtand vp, and the Rulers counſell together againſt the Lord, and againſt his annointed, and yet all in vaine: for hee will bruſe them with a rodde of yron, for hee hath giuen him the ends of the world for his Dominion: therefore are the heathen fooles. In the Reuelation you haue the like ſtriuing by the Emperours againſt Chriſt: but the Mountaine is caſt into the fire. In the Acts of the Apoſtles Pontius Pilate and the reſt did that which the Lord decreed. In theſe battailes of Dauid, Saint Paules rule taketh place: the ſound of them was heard to the ends of the world. For Dauids victories being gained not in one; but being fortie yeares allotted to the accompliſhment

of them, no doubt were an aſtoniſhment vnto the nations, and by them to be greatly obſerued. Here wee haue the like compariſon of the Fortie yeares in the Wilderneſſe. Dauid referred all his actions to the building of the Temple. And if we will truly be beloued, all our actions muſt haue this end, to aduance the glorie of God in his Temple. Dauid had many enemies: ſo that the 18. Pſalme is a thankeſgiuing to God for his deliuerance from them. God would not haue his afflictions eaſie, becauſe the comfort and conſolation in ouercomming, ſhould be ſweeter: and that he being the beloued of God, and yet afflicted, men might learne to leaue to truſt to the happineſſe in this life, and thirſt after the felicitie of the world to come. Hee had enemies abrode, and enemies at home: As Adonay, Abſalom, &c. and in reſpect of this, hee maketh the 86. Pſalme.
               
               The conſideration of this, is of great vſe to euerie godly man in his priuate life. Beſides theſe, he himſelfe was his owne greateſt enemie in ſeeing Vrias wife and coueting her, and killing of Vrias. Gods purpoſe in theſe great offences of the godly, is wonderfull: vpon this he ſung the 51. Pſalme, ſhewing himſelfe to be a ſpirituall Leapour, more odious and deteſtable in the ſight of God, than the bodily leaprouſie in the ſight of men. In the pſalme there is a ſentence vſed, which Saint Paul applyeth in the new teſtament: for he ſayth, then ſhall I teach thy way vnto the wicked, and ſinners ſhall be conuerted vnto thee. And ſayth Saint Paul, God hath ſhewed mercie to me a ſinner. Theſe fallings of Dauid, are no warrant for any man to preſume to doe the like: But from hence ariſeth a wonderfull comfort to the ſinner which tranſgreſſeth by infirmitie, to hope for forgiueneſſe, that ſo hee may bee free from deſperation. If Dauid, being ſo glorious in conqueſts, and other graces, had not thus tranſgreſſed, hee would haue been too proude: but hee was therefore humbled, that hee might thereby keepe the Commaundements of the Lord.
            
            
               Now let vs conſider him in his learned affaires.
               THe whole Booke of Pſalmes are called Dauids: but there be many which are none of his, yet they are called Dauids pſalmes, becauſe

they bee in that volume. All Dauids Pſalmes haue relation to Moſes: and there is great vſe of them to expound Moſes. For as Moſes at his death bleſſeth Iuda; the ſecond pſalme expounds that bleſsing, and applyeth it to Chriſt. Moſes teacheth the Children of Iſrael to bleſſe in this ſort, Numb. 6. The Lord bleſse you and keepe you, the Lord make his face to ſhine vpon you, the Lord turne his louing countenance towards you, and graunt you his peace. Dauid in the 67. Pſalme expounds this, and telleth wherein this conſiſteth. Hee beginneth in the like order, that God would bee mercifull vnto vs, and ſhew vs the light of his countenance. This appeareth in that the earth knoweth his way, and the Nations his ſauing health, When hee iudgeth the folke righteouſly, and gouernes the Nations vpon the earth: and then ſhall the earth increaſe, therefore let the people praiſe thee, o God, yea let all the people praiſe thee: by this one you may gather all the reſt. In Moſes it is ſayd, that God did ariſe. The 68. Pſalme beginneth ſo, Let God ariſe, and his enemies ſhall be ſcattered. There he ſayth, Thou art gone vp on high, thou haſt led captiuitie captiue, and receiued gifts for men. Saint Paul expounds this of Chriſt. Epheſ. 4.
               
               Thus much for his Doctrine generally.
            
            
               
                  ABenezra an ancient Iew, mooueth a doubt concerning Dauids Organes and Inſtruments of Muſicke. It may thus bee anſwered▪ when they came from Egipt, they had Organes: and hauing one kinde, it was lawfull to haue other kindes alſo. The Prophets which knewe the Iewes ſhould be trayned vp in ceremonies, might vſe theſe to the ſame purpoſe.
               This is no warrant for the vſe of them nowe, ſeeing Ceremonies ceaſe. Concerning the eccleſiaſticall diſcipline amongſt the Iewes, we ſhall ſee, that Dauid durſt not aduenture to appoint the Sacrificers, whoſe turne ſhould be firſt, or ſecond; but they caſt lots for it, for as he was Prince & ruler ouer the people, ſo they were al Princes of the ſanctuarie, and therein equall with him. When the Leuites tooke vpon them to be Kings, they became Saduces, and Malachi calleth this time the time of the curſe. Rabbi, Leui, Ben, Gerſon ſheweth, that though the Leuites had notable victories againſt the Antiochi, yet they all died of violent deaths, becauſe they tooke the glorie from Iuda, therefore God would not hold them vnpuniſhed.
               In the 22. Pſalme, Dauid as a prophet telleth what the Scribes and phariſees would doe vnto Chriſt: and therein ſheweth likewiſe the

calling of the Gentiles. He entituleth the Pſalme, the Hart of the morning: that looke euen as the Hart is the pleaſure of the beaſts, and the morning the glorie of the day: ſo is Chriſt to the ſoules of thoſe which beleeue in him. As Dauid a great many yeares looketh to the death of Chriſt; ſo muſt wee following Saint Peters rule, look to the end of the world: that from the meditation thereof, wee may lift vp our heads, knowing that our ſaluation is at hand.
               
                  Dauid knew of theſe contumelies againſt Chriſt by the ſpirite of propheſie, but yet he muſt prooue the truth therof, & therefore imagineth the moſt outragious. And ſurely we cannot imagine greater, than that Chriſt ſhould bee as one forſaken of God. Beſides, what could bee more cruell, than to giue vinegar to drinke to thoſe which are ſicke? Dauid in his pſalmes goeth further, and compareth Melchiſedech with Chriſt, ſaying, Thou art a Prieſt for euer after the order of Melchiſedech: and from thence deſcendeth to the calling of the heathen, He ſhall ſmite in ſunder the heads ouer diuers Nations; He likewiſe in the 49. Pſal. mentioneth Adams Storie: Adam being in honour continueth not one night, but is as the beaſt that periſheth. The ſumme of all is that as Paul taught nothing but Moſes and the prophets, ſo doth hee. In that his Sonnes are wicked, wee haue to learne, that godlineſſe is no inheritance, neither doth it lineally deſcend from the Father to the Sonnes. His afflictions may teach vs, that the beſt men are not without the greateſt calamities, ſeeing there is no goodneſſe in them. And if their actions haue good ſucceſſe, it is becauſe God doth bleſſe the whole ſtate.
               Thus much for Dauids Storie.
            
            
               
                  Salomon borne.
               HIs name ſignifieth Peaceable: ſo was his Kingdome and gouernement: thereby to ſhew, that Chriſt the King, whome he repreſenteth, ſhould giue peace paſsing all vnderſtanding.
               Hee was of Dauid by Berſhabe. This blemiſh the holy Ghoſt noteth, to comfort vs in our infirmities, and to keepe vs from deſperation.
            
            
               
               
                  Salomon raigneth Fortie yeares.
               THe Grecians ſay, that Salomon was King at Twelue yeres of age. The reaſon is, becauſe mention is made of him when Thamar was defloured, and they caſt it thus; two yeares after the deflouring of Thamar, Ammon is ſlaine, for the which Abſalom flyeth to Geſhur, and there hee remaineth three yeares, afterwards hee is two yeares baniſht from the preſence of the King: then he rebelleth one yeare, and is ſlaine: after this there is a Famine for three yeares, and the Twelfth yeare Dauid dieth, and then Salomon ſucceedeth in the Kingdome.
               
                  Eupolemus ſaith, that the building of the Temple was reſerued to Salomon, who came to the Crowne at the age of Twelue yeares.
               This time hath a compariſon with Chriſt.
               
               As Salomon being Twelue yeares old, decided the controuerſie between the two women for the dead Child: Euen ſo Ieſus Chriſt much more to be admired than Salomon, at Twelue yeares of age diſputeth with the Doctors in the Temple.
               For this number of Twelue,
               You haue Twelue

                     
                        Signes.
                     
                     
                        Moneths in the yeare.
                     
                     
                        Stones in Iordan.
                     
                     
                        Loaues of bread in the Tabernacle.
                     
                     
                        Stewards of Salomons houſe.
                     
                     
                        Fountaines in the Wilderneſſe.
                     
                     
                        Apoſtles▪
                        
                     
                     
                        times 12 thouſand Chriſtians ſealed in the Reuelatiō.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chriſt telleth, that the Queene of the South came to heare the wiſedome of Salomon. But ſaith he, behold a greater than Salomon. Beſides cleane through the ſong of ſongs, you haue Chriſt and Salomon compared together, ſauing onely in the beginning, where it is ſayd, a Song of Salomons.
               
               We read in Plutarch, that it was a cuſtome amonge the Kings of old time, to put queſtions one to another, to trie the abilitie of their wits, and that a certaine praiſe was appointed to him that got the victorie; and Dius an Hiſtoriographer of the Phoenicians, rehearſeth the Riddles and Queſtions that Salomon ſent to King Hiram, ſaying, that it coſt

                  Hiram verie much, in that he could not open them, vntill at length he found a young man of Tyrus, named Abdemon, who decyphered vnto him the moſt part of them: we finde, that in the Booke of Iudges, Sampſon promiſed great rewardes to them that could declare his Riddle. Theſe haue a fit relation to the parables vttered by Chriſt to the Iewes.
            
            
               Something muſt be ſaid of the annointing of Kings.
               WE ſhall finde that Saul was annointed, becauſe hee was the firſt King: And Dauid was annointed, becauſe he was choſen by God of another tribe. And Salomon was annointed, becauſe that Abſolom and Adonay gaue a puſh for the Kingdome. And Ioas was annointed, becauſe Athalia ſought to ſet vp other. Euerie one that is a Chriſtian, is called the annnointed of the Lord, as it is in the 
                     •
                  . Pſal. Touch not mine annointed, nor doe my Prophets no harme. This is ſpoken of Abraham, Iſaacke, and Iacob, and ſo conſequently of all the faithfull.
               For annointing of Kings, it is not lawfull by imitation to reuiue it as a ceremonie, ſeeing this was neuer done but vpon ſpeciall occaſion, the ſtate requiring it, diuers hauing at that time title to the Crowne. In reſpect of policie, it is peraduenture lawfull, hauing been authoriſed by the conſent of Nations: otherwiſe not.
            
            
               Temple built foure Hundred and Eightie yeares after the Children of Iſrael came out of Egipt. 1. King. 6.
               
               THe foundation of the Temple is laide on Mount Moriah, where Adam was created, where the Fathers in ancient time ſacrificed, where Iſaack was offered, where Iehouah appeared to Dauid ſtaying the plague. 2. Chron. 3.1.
               
               As a Citie, or an houſe ſcituate vpon an hill cannot be hidden: euen ſo God would haue his people not to behid, but to be an example to all Nations.
               The Temple is twiſe as bigge as the Tabernacle, becauſe that the Temple and the Tabernacle had a relation to the number of the people. Seing therefore now the people were twiſe ſo many as then; the Temple ought to be twiſe ſo bigge. The efficient cauſe, is the commandement

and warrant of God: the inſtrumentall cauſe is Dauid: he putteth it not in practiſe, becauſe hee was a man much buſied in warres. It was begunne to be built in the Fourth yeare of the raigne of Salomon. The Cedars for it were had from Libanon, where Noahs Arke was built.
               In the vnderſtanding of the Temple, and the particulars thereof, conſiſteth the whole ſumme of Religion.
               It had Sixe Courts, and euerie Court of ſeuerall vſe, before you came to the holy of holyeſt: and euerie Court were Twelue ſteppes one aboue another. The vſe of which is, that it is no eaſie ſtudie to attaine to the depth of the knowledge of God, neither can a man attaine vnto it at the firſt as hee will, but he muſt aſcend by degrees. So were the windowes, narrowe without, and wide within: to ſhewe, that they which once had obtained the knowledge of Chriſt, embracing it with a liuely faith, doe behold his graces in a full clearer ſort, than thoſe which are without.
               For the Courts, they were thus diſtinguiſhed.
               Within the vtmoſt rayles the heathen and prophane people might ſtand, to ſee and heare: and as they were like beaſts in knowledge, ſo their place was next to the beaſts of the field.
               In the ſecond Court, the women ſtood.
               In the third Court, the Common people.
               In the fourth Court, the King did heare the Law read.
               In the fift, were the Sacrifices burnt vppon the braſen Altar.
               In the ſixt, was the golden Altar, and the Table of Shew-bread.
               In the Seuenth, was the holy of holyeſt, where was the Arke of the Couenant of Iehouah, and within it the two tables of Teſtimony▪ Into it onely might enter the high Sacrificer, and that he might doe but once a yeare: figuring Chriſt the high Sacrificer, which once for all ſhould enter into the holy of holyeſt, to make interceſsion for all the world.
               Betweene the holy, and the holy of holyeſt, there was a vaile of blew ſilke, purple, crimſon, and fine linnen, and Cherubines wrought thereon. This vaile repreſented the bodie of Chriſt, and ſhewed that none could come to the Father, but by the Sonne; and none come vnto the Sonne, except the Father draw him. When Chriſt was crucified, this vaile did teare from the toppe to the bottome, and ſhewed that by his ſuffering of death, all men then were Kings and Sacrificers, and might by their owne prayers grounded on knowledge and the feare of God, obtaine forgiueneſſe of their ſinnes.
               The dores, pillars, and ſeeling of the Temple, were couered with gold: reſembling the golden ſpirite of prophecie.
               
                  And when the Temple was built, the ſtones were ſo ſquared before they were brought, that there was neither hammer, axe, or any toole of yron heard in the Temple while it was in building: To teach the Iſraelites, that they ought to liue in peace, loue, and vnity one with another, without iarring or contention, if they would haue the vſe of Gods holy Temple. For, ſaith God, My houſe is a houſe of prayer.
               
               The Temple is a reſemblance of things in earth, reſpecting God in heauen.
               The ſumme is, Moſes to bee compared with Salomon, Salomon with Daniel, Daniel with Chriſt, Christ to be compared with all.
            
            
               In the Eleauenth yeare of Salomon, he finiſhed the Temple.
               AS the Tabernacle was 7. Months in building; ſo now the Temple was Seuen yeares in building: thirteene yeares after, Salomon builds his owne houſe.
               There be that thinke he was twentie yeares old when hee tooke vpon him to ſucceed in the Kingdome: and they caſt his yeares to be foure and Fortie when hee fell to Idolatrie. They reckon it thus: He is twentie yeares old when he is King: Foure yeres after he builds the Temple: hee is Seuen yeares in building: thirteene yeares after, he builds his owne houſe.
               Vpon this his Idolatrie there hath been a great doubt, whether he was ſaued, or not. It is without queſtiō, he was ſaued▪ but yet it was not without ſinguler reaſon, that the holy Ghoſt left it doubtfull: for if it had been eaſie for him to bee ſaued, hee had been an example of great impietie. It is promiſed him, that if he ſinne, he ſhall be chaſtiſed: but God will neuer take his mercie cleane from him.
               This cannot bee meant of ſucceſsion in the kingdome: for what comfort had it beene to him, to haue enioyed the Kingdome, and afterwardes to haue enioyed damnation? therefore it muſt needs bee meant of his eſtate after this life. Beſides, hee is called the Beloued: that may bee a reaſon to prooue his ſaluation. And in the 13. of Marke; Abraham, Iſaack, and Iacob, and the Prophets are ſayd to be in the kingdome of heauen: therefore he being a prophet, muſt needes be there. Yet falſe prophets are excepted, as Balaam and others, of whome Saint Peter giueth a rule, 2. Pet. 2. That they bring vpon themſelues ſwift damnation. Now God knowing his own wiſdome ſpeaks things wonderfull ſhort. Where it is ſayd, He worſhipped ſtrange

Gods; I haue oftentimes muzed what ſhould be the meaning of it. For I could neuer thinke, that hee could eſteeme the Idols of the heathen for Gods, conſidering he had ſuch woonderfull knowledge. But ſurely this is the meaning, that allowing his Concubines to worſhip them, ſeeing done by his commaundement, it was as his act: and this will I hold, till I be better inſtructed. For if hee had come to ſo open a folly as to worſhip them as God: this ſinne muſt needs haue been the ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſt.
            
            
               Now concerning his felicitie.
               THere is no one thing ſetteth it forth more, than the Booke of the Preacher: which Booke was made in his age, and after his repentance: yet in that he ſpeaketh coldly of repentance. He beginneth, Vanitie of vanities, all is but vanities, ſaith the Preacher. This is the ſumme of the Booke. It is amplified by the generall ſtate of all things, then by the particular. The generall thus.
               The earth ſtandeth, yet one Generation paſſeth, and another commeth, ſo there is nothing conſtant. If we conſider thinges paſt, they are the ſame which ſhall be, all things haue a time. And the Perſians called wiſe men the ſearchers of time. Moſes teacheth vs to pray to God to teach vs to number our dayes, that wee may apply our hearts to wiſedome. In all this there is nothing but for a man to bee merrie in his labor. Let vs behold the Sunne, it riſeth and ſetteth, and returnes againe to his place, and there riſing, goeth towards the South, and bendeth towards the North: he neuer continueth in one place, he cauſeth Winter and Summer, Spring time and Harueſt; the Riuers runne all into the ſea, and they ouer-flowe againe into the ſea. Of all theſe, this is the ſumme, that all things vnder the Sunne are vanitie, and affliction of ſpirite: Euen ſo is the ſtate of man. This likewiſe the creation ſheweth: for there is nothing new vnder the Sunne, either for good or badde. Euen the fineſt inuentions haue been before: but we count them new, becauſe the generation that knew them, is paſt, and ſo forgotten. So that by this wee may ſee no happpineſſe vnder the Sunne, but all is vanitie.
               Thus much for the generall.
            
            
               Now follow the particulars.
               FIrſt as concerning men, and they are in two ſorts. The firſt concerning the beſt men: then men of corrupt conuerſation. I therefore,

ſaith the Preacher, I meant to trie pleaſure alone, and wiſedome alone, and then both together.
               Concerning wiſedome, I talked with the beſt Schollers: I knew all the plants, from the loweſt ſhrubbe, to the talleſt Cedar in Libanon, and their vſe in cleanſing the leaproſie, and how thereby Chriſt was ſignified. Yet this knowledge did not ouer-reach Moſes. The nature of the fowles was familiar vnto me. If it bee asked how hee came by this knowledge, it may be anſwered; partly by education, and partly by an immediate inſpiration from God: and yet of all, this is the end, Much reading is a wearineſſe of the fleſh, and there is no end of making many bookes. So wiſe men are neuer quiet, becauſe they ſee ſo few ſaued: for crooked things ſhall not bee made ſtreight: from this I went ſaith the Preacher, and tryed pleaſure.
               
                  Goe to now, I will prooue thee with ioy, and with pleaſant things, and yet this is a vanitie. Of laughter this I ſayd, that it was madneſſe: and of ioy What is that thou doeſt? Wee may ſee hee neuer diſputes of theſe things, but ſpeakes ſhort: for the heathen by the light of nature knew thus much I went yet further, ſaith the Preacher, and ioyned pleaſure and wiſedome together. For I made great workes: I built houſes, ſet Gardens, planted vineyardes, and trees of all ſorts. I got ſeruants and maides, and had children borne in the houſe. I had great poſſeſsion of Beeues and Sheepe: and to conclude, I was great, and encreaſed aboue all that were before mee in Ieruſalem. When I beganne to looke on all theſe thinges, I beheld nothing but vanitie and vexation of ſpirit, and that there was no profite vnder the Sunne. Beſides, when I looked who ſhould after mee poſſeſſe theſe, and thought with my ſelfe. What? Roboam the foole? and then I hated all the labor wherein I had trauailed vnder the Sunne, ſeeing no man knoweth whether he ſhall be wiſe or fooliſh, which ſhall be ruler ouer my workes, and wherein I haue ſhewed my ſelfe wiſe: this is alſo a vanitie. Therefore we ſee, to all things an appointed time. A time to be borne, and a time to die; a time to loue, and a time to hate; a time of warre, and a time of peace.
               
               Thus God turneth the wheele of our life, to the end, that we ſhould not ſet our affections on theſe earthly vanities, but being riſen with Chriſt, ſeeke thoſe things which are aboue. Now that all hope of conſtancy in theſe tranſitory things might be takē away, he reproues it frō his owne perſon. For if he, being a king, and the greateſt in Iſrael, and ſuch a one, as Who is the man that will come after the King in things which hee now hath done? and yet could not finde wherein to free his heart from vexation and diſquietneſſe; ſhall any other thinke to finde quietneſſe and ſecuritie in this life? therefore of all theſe experiences, thus he concludeth, There is no profite to a man, ſeeing all his dayes are ſorrow, and his trauaile griefe, that hee eate and drinke, and delight his ſoule

with the profite of his labours, becauſe this is of the hand of God.
               
               Concerning actions; they are either without a man, or within him. Without, the moſt excellent is Iuſtice: and how is that executed? I heard the cries of the innocent, and no man comforting them, and ſawe their oppreſsion, and no man reſiſting it; therefore I counted thoſe which are dead, better than thoſe which are aliue: and yet happier that neuer was. I haue ſeen, ſaith he, a wealthy foole greedie after riches, and yet tooke no fruit of them, and this is a great vanitie. I ſaw another in a kingdom, and the hearts of the people alienated from him. I ſaw another who hath gotten wealth iuſtly, and yet his heire ſhall not inherite it, but a ſtranger ſhall deuoure his ſubſtance, this is alſo a vanitie, and a great miſerie. Now ſeeing that preſent puniſhment falleth not vpon the wicked for their ſins, therfore without feare they goe on forward without regard of wickednes: for they are ſomtimes rewarded, as though their actions had been godly. But this is the ſumme: No man can know by the outward things in life, whether he be in the fauor and loue of God, or in the hatred of his Creator. The Pope expounds this of doubtfulneſſe in faith. This cānot be the meaning: for Salomon diſputes only frō the outward actions, what a ſtranger may iudge: not what he frō his owne conſcience may aſſure himſelfe. This is the concluſion, As to the good, ſo to the ſinner it hapneth; as to the periured, ſo to him that ſaith true; their end is both a like. Yet here is the difference, that wiſedome and fooliſhneſse differ as light and darkeneſſe. Now then ſeeing nothing accords to vertue, fooles torment themſelues, euen as a dead flye marreth the Apothecaries oyntment. We muſt caſt our bread vpon the waters, doe good, though the caſe bee deſperate: for looke in what place the tree fals, there it lyes. The ſumme is, One generation paſseth, another commeth: and though one liue a Thouſand yeares, and hath reioyced in all the workes of his hands, he muſt remember the dayes of darkeneſſe, and that all that is paſt, is vanitie. Therefore ô young man, Remember thy Creator in the time of thy youth, before thy time of afflictions come: and before thy old age full of ſorow, in which thou ſhalt ſay, thou haſt no pleaſure, before the Sunne, Moone, and Starres ſeeme to the darkeneſſe, and thy hands the keepers of thy houſe doe tremble, and thy legges thy ſtronge men faile vnder thee, and thy teeth being few waxe idle, and thy eyes dimme, and thou riſe at the voice of a bird, & a Graſhopper through thy weakneſſe, be a burthen vnto thee. When thy head flouriſheth in whiteneſſe like the Almond tree: and thou doeſt goe to the earth from whence it came, and the ſpirite to God that gaue it. This is the concluſion: The wiſer Salomon was, the more he taught the people, & thoſe things which he had made; & like as a ſhepheard to the flocke, and as a nayle to faſten the ioynt; ſo are the words of the wiſe. This laſt of teaching the people knowledge, is all concerning his repentance. Seek no further, for there is no end of bookes, and much reading is but a vexation of the fleſh; but the word of God endureth for

euer: and therfore the ſumme of all wiſedome is, to feare God, and keepe his Commaundements.
               
               
                  Now I will briefely ſhew his other Bookes, as the
                  
                     Prouerbs,
                     Song of Songs.
                  
               
               THe Prouerbs for the moſt part of them, were made in his time: ſome of them gathered together in Ezechias dayes.
               The ſumme of them is, that by Allegories taken from the Cedar in Libanon to the graſſe, hee would ſhewe the wiſedome of God to bee the ſame in gouernement, that it was in the creation of the world: And therefore hee prooues the particulars hereof by the beaſts; for the Iewes being a ſimple people, could not know this by experience, and therefore from the beaſts, with which they were well acquainted, he prooues it. Goe to the Ant, behold her waies and learne to be wiſe: for ſhe hauing no guide, gouernor, nor ruler, prepareth her meat in the ſummer, & gathereth her food in the harueſt; and thus he rūneth through the courſe of nature, from thence teaching precepts of ciuile life.
            
            
               Concerning the Song of Songs.
               THe Iewes had it in ſuch reuerence and account, that afore thirtie yeares of age none of them would ſtudie it. It is a wonderfull thing, that all the particulars which the Booke containes, being taken from marriage, and handled ſo ſincerely, no blemiſh or ſpot can be found therein. The meaning and ſumme thereof, is thus much; That as in mariage we are ioyned one to the other, & haue ſeparated our ſelues from all other; ſo in our ſpirituall coniunction in the Church with Chriſt, we haue ſworne to deteſt Idolatry, & to ſerue and worſhip the true and liuing God. S. Paul to the Epheſ. Cap. 5. expounds this: Husbands, loue your wiues as Chriſt loued the Church and gaue himſelf for it, that he might make vnto himſelfe a glorious Church, not hauing ſpot or wrinkle; ſo men ought to loue their wiues, euen as the Lord doth his church: for we are members of his body, of his fleſh, and of his bones. For this cauſe ſhall a man leaue father and mother, and they two ſhall be one fleſh. This is a great ſecret; but I ſpeak of Chriſt and his Church. Thus you ſee how S. Paul prooueth and maketh plaine the one by the other; ſo doth Salomon in this Booke. The hardnes of this booke is in this, that he taketh the beſt things in the courſe of nature, & applies them to religion: this could not be done by the wit of man. All this is done, to expreſſe the vertues of Chriſt to his church. I am black, but faire, as the daughters of Ieruſalem, as the Tabernacles of Kedar, as the curtaines of Salomon. I am black, euen like thoſe which keepe flocks in Arabia, through mine owne ſinne: but being lightned by Chriſt, and hauing put on his righteouſneſse, I am faire as the daughters of Ieruſalem, and as beautifull as the curtaines of Salomon.
               
                  Then ſhe deſires: O Lord teach me, O Lord, where thou feedeſt, where thou doeſt lye in the noone day, leaſt miſsing thee to be my teacher and guide, I wander after the flockes of my companions. Chriſt maketh anſwere: If thou art ignorant, oh thou faireſt amonge women, goe and enquire of the ſhepheards: If they be falſe goe yet a ſtep higher, and this you muſt learne, that if you be riſen with Chriſt, then ſeeke thoſe things which are aboue where Chriſt ſitteth at the right hand of God.
               Other compariſons there are, as from the wilderneſſe: but by this you may learne to expound the reſt; they are hard, if we apply them to particular things: but wee muſt knowe, that theſe compariſons here vſed, are not to prooue new points of religion, but to illuſtrate and amplifie thoſe alreadie ſet downe: for grounds of Religion, whereon our ſaluation ſtands, muſt bee prooued by plaine ſtorie: for the Lord teacheth nothing in corners.
            
            
               Kings of Iuda three Hundred and Ninetie yeares before the burning of the Temple by Nebuchadnetzar.
               BEfore I handle the Kings particularly, this muſt bee vnderſtood, that now the Kingdome of Iuda was diſtinguiſhed from Iſrael. For Ieroboam of Ioſephs houſe, withdrew the hearts of ten Tribes from vnder the Scepter of Roboam of Iuda, and cauſed all Iſraell to worſhip ſtrange Gods: and therefore they had two Kingdomes, one of Iuda, the other of Iſrael. And firſt I will ſpeake of the Kings of Iuda.
            
            
               
                  Roboam Seuenteene yeares.
               HIs name ſignifieth Sauouring with the people. When Salomon was dead, his Son Roboam ſucceeded him in the Kingdome, & his wiſe men came and counſelled him to ſerue the people one day, and they would ſerue him all the dayes of his life: but hee following the counſell of his young men, ſayd vnto them, My little finger ſhall be bigger than my Fathers thigh. Therevpon the ten Tribes fell away, and rebelled againſt the kingdome of Iuda, crying, Home Iſrael to your Tents: and they made Ieroboam of the houſe of Ioſeph King ouer them: They forgot the Temple of Iuda, the promiſe made to Dauid, and the Meſsias to

come of his loynes, ſaying, What is Ieſsai? hee was but a yeoman of the houſe of Iuda. Is the houſe of Iuda better than the houſe of Ioſeph who was King ouer vs in Egypt? but Beniamin and the Leuites kept within Iuda. And in the Fift yere of Roboam, 
                        •
                     kiſacke King of Egipt, came vp & ſpoyled the Temple, & the treaſures of the kings houſe. For ſeeing they had loſt the gold of their Religion, God ſuffered them to loſe the gold of their Temple. And this is to be obſerued in the ſtate of the kings of Iuda, that in it all cōmon wealths in the world are figured. For ſome of them began well, and ended ill: ſome begunne ill, and ended well: ſome were wiſe, ſome fooliſh: ſome verie godly, ſome extreame wicked: and finally, what condition ſoeuer the ſtate of a common wealth might be of, was expreſſed in the manners of the kings of Iuda.
            
            
               
                  Abiam Three yeares.
               HE ſucceeded Roboam his Father. He wrought wickedneſſe in the ſight of the Lord, yet for Dauids ſake, God ſet him vp in Ieruſalē he had continuall warre with Ieroboam, but alwayes became victor, becauſe hee knew that the kingdome belonged to Iuda, and therefore waxed mighty: ſo that Ieroboam all his daies could recouer no ſtrength. He dyeth.
            
            
               
                  Aſa ſucceedeth him, and raigneth One and Fortie yeares.
               HE was a godly King: for he maketh a lawe. 2. Chron. 15. That whoſoeuer will not ſeeke the Lord God of Iſrael, ſhall be ſlaine, whether he be ſmall or great. It is ſaid, that in the Thirtie and ſixe yeare of his raigne came Baaſa King of Iſrael vp againſt Iuda. That is meant the Thirtie and ſix yere ſince the diuiſion of the kingdome in Ieroboams time. His fault was, that he put Hanani the Prophet in priſon, becauſe he reprooued him for making couenant with Benadad King of Aram.
               
            
            
               3889. Ioſaphat Twentie and fiue yeares.
               HE ſucceedeth his Father Aſa. His fault was in ioyning with Ahab of the houſe of Omri. In his dayes Elias was taken vp. He repenteth him of his ſinne, by ſeeing the king of Iſraell plagued, and himſelfe in danger. He hath victorie ouer the Moabites, and the Ammonites,

becauſe he ſet his hart to ſeek the Lord, and ſo he had reſt on euerie ſide. Yet in the end, he ioyned with Ahaſiah King of Iſrael, who was giuen to doe euill, and ſo he died. 1. King. 22.
               
            
            
               3110. Ioram Eight yeares.
               HE walked in the waies of the Kings of Iſrael, as the houſe of Ahab had done, and wrought euill in the eyes of the Lord. Howbeit, the Lord would not deſtroy the houſe of Dauid, becauſe hee had promiſed to giue a light to him, and to his Sonnes for euer. In his dayes Edom rebelled from vnder the hand of Iuda. Now is performed the ſaying of Iſaacke when he bleſſed Eſau. Gen. 27. But the day ſhall come that thou ſhalt looſen the yoake from off thee.
               
               He ſlew all his brethren, and the Princes of Iuda, and made high places in the Mountaines, and cauſed the Inhabitants of Ieruſalem to commit Idolatrie. So there came a writing to him from Elijah the Prophet: Becauſe thou haſt done theſe things, behold with a great plague will the Lord ſmite thy people; and thy childrē, thy wiues, & al thy ſubſtance, and thou ſhalt be in great diſeaſes in the diſeaſe of thy bowels, vntill thy bowels fall out day by day. So the lord ſtirred vp againſt Ioram, the ſpirit of the Philiſtins, & the Arabians, that were beſides the Ethiopians. Becauſe there were other Arabiās in Africa ſouthward toward Egipt, I diſtinguiſh thē. And they came vp to Iuda, and carried away all the ſubſtance that was in the Kings houſe, and his Sonnes alſo, and his wiues, ſo that there was not a Sonne left him aliue ſaue Iehaahaz the youngeſt of his Sonnes: to ſhew, that wherein a man offendeth, therein hee ſhall be puniſhed. And after all this, the Lord ſmote him in his bowels with an incurable diſeaſe, and within two yeares his guttes fell out with his diſeaſe, and he died of ſore diſeaſes, yet hee was buried in the Citie of Dauid, but not amonge the Sepulchers of the Kings. 2. Chron▪ 21.
               So that we may ſee by Gods Iudgments vpon him, that wee cannot both ioyne with the wicked, and ſerue God: neither are Gods promiſes tied to men longer than they continue in his feare, keeping his cō
                  mandements; as it is written, 1. King. 2.4. If thy Sonnes take heede to their way, that they walk before me in truth, that is, without hypocriſie, with all their hearts, and all their ſoules, thou ſhalt not, ſayd he, want one of thy poſteritie to ſit vpon the throne of Iſrael.
               
            
            
               
               3117. Ochoſias One yeare.
               
                  HE was two and Fortie yeares old when hee began to raigne. The meaning is this, He is the child of the two and Fortieth yeare, for it is two and Fortie yeares ſince the houſe of Omri came vp. Here is repeated the like ſtorie of two and Fortie yeares in the wilderneſſe. He was the Sonne of Athalia, the Daughter of Ahab of the houſe of Omri: hee walked alſo in the way of Ahab King of Iſrael; for his mother counſelled him to doe wickedly: wherefore hee did euill in the ſight of the Lord like the houſe of Achab. For they were his Counſellors after the death of his Father, to his deſtruction. Which ſheweth, that ſuch as the rulers be, ſuch are their Counſellors, and that there can neuer bee a godly Kingdome, where wicked Counſellors are ſuffered to beare ſtroke. And the deſtruction of Ochoſias came, in that hee went to Ioram the Sonne of Achab King of Iſrael, to fight againſt Hazael King of Aram at Ramoth Gilead, and against Iehu the Sonne of Nimſhi, whome the Lord had annointed to deſtroy the houſe of Achab. Therefore when Iehu executed iudgement vppon the houſe of Ahab, and found the Princes of Iuda and the Sonnes of the brethren of Ochoſias that wayted on Ochoſias, he ſlue them alſo: and hee ſought Ochoſias, and caught him where hee was hid in Samaria, and brought him to Iehu, and ſlue him, and buried him, becauſe they ſayd hee is the Sonne of Ioſaphat, which ſought the Lord with all his heart. So the houſe of Ochoſias was not able to retaine the Kingdome. This was the iuſt plague of God, becauſe he ioyned himſelfe with Gods enemies: yet God, to declare the worthineſſe of Ioſaphat his Grandfather, mooued them to giue him the honour of buriall. 2. Chron. 22.
               
            
            
               3118. Athalia Sixe yeares.
               
                  WHen ſhee heard that her Sonne Ochoſias was dead, ſhe putteth to death all the Kings ſeed of Ochoſias houſe, becauſe ſhe might by that meanes bring the Kingdome to Iſrael, and ſo haue eſtabliſhed Idolatrie. But Iehoſhabeath the daughter of the King tooke Ioaſh the Sonne of Ochoſias, and ſtole him from among the Kings Sons that ſhould be ſlaine, and put him and his Nurſe in the Bed-chamber. So Iehoſhabeath the daughter of King Ioram, the wife of Iehoida the Sacrificer, (for ſhe was the Siſter of Ochoſias) hid him from Athalia. So ſhe ſlue him not: and hee was hid with them in the houſe of God ſixe yeares, whiles Athalia raigned ouer Iuda. But after, this Iehoida cauſed Athalia to be ſlaine: to ſhew, that

who ſo ſheddeth blood, by man ſhall their blood be ſhed.
            
            
               3124. Ioas Fortie yeares.
               
                  THen they brought out the Kings Sonne, and put on him the crowne, and gaue him the teſtimonie, that is his oath, and royall apparell, and made him King, and Iehoida and his Sonnes annointed him, and ſayd, God ſaue the king. Then all the people of the Land reioyced, and the Citie was quiet, after they had ſlaine Athaliah with the ſword. For where a tyrant and an Idolatrer raigneth, there Gods religion cannot flouriſh: but the plagues of God are euer amonge ſuch people.
               This Ioas, while Iehoida liued, kept religion ſincerely: but he being dead, fell to Idolatrie. And becauſe Zacharias the Sonne of Barachias or Iehoida, reprooued him, he commaunded him to be ſlaine between the Altar, and the Temple, that ſo all the righteous blood from Abel hitherto might come vpon the Iewes and their children. Here wee may obſerue, how hard a thing in a wicked Kingdome it is, to eſcape the wrath of God, and to keepe our handes from reaching vnto wickedneſſe. And here, looke what Kaines age was for impietie, ſo was this: for ſo Chriſt ioynes them together. Mat. 23. That all the righteous blood from Abel hitherto might come vpon them. Thus Ioas forgot the kindneſse which Iehoida the father of Zacharias had done to him. And when the yeare was out, the Hoſt of Aram came vp againſt Ioas, and they came against Iuda and Ieruſalem, and deſtroyed all the Princes of the people from amonge the people, and ſent all the ſpoyle of them vnto the King of Damaſcus. Though the Armie of Aram came with a ſmall companie of men, yet the Lord deliuered a verie great Armie into their hand, becauſe they had forſaken the Lord God of their Fathers. And they gaue ſentence againſt Ioaſh: and when they were departed from him (for they left him in great diſeaſes) his owne ſeruants conſpired againſt him for the blood of the children of Iehoiada the Sacrificer, and ſlue him on his bed. And he died, and they buried him in the Citie of Dauid, but they buried him not in the Sepulchres of the Kings 2. Chron. 24.
               Saint Mathew in the Genealogie ſaith, that Ioas was not the natural Sonne of Ochoſias: for he omits three Kings in the Genealogie.
               Firſt let vs ſee, why hee omits any, and then why theſe three. It is certaine, that the Iewes wrote the Genealogies, and reduced them to ſixe Seuens, two and Fortie Fathers. Saint Mathew was to take them as hee found them, ſeeing they ſpake true. For it was ynough to tell that Chriſt was of Abraham, and Ioſeph. The reſt betwixt, are to ſhew the varietie of Gods wiſedome and prouidence. The ſix Seuens haue

in them a ſweet proportion to the creation, and that they make vp two and Fortie, they reſemble the ſtandings in the wilderneſſe, being likewiſe two and Fortie Standings.
               Now for the reaſon why Sant Mathew leaueth out three, this it is: They were verie wicked, and for their wickedneſſe were grieuouſly plagued; and therefore ſeeing the Iewes would not exceede the number of two and Fortie, they were the fitteſt to bee left out. The like example we haue in the bleſsing of Moſes: where Simeon is left out, being wicked, and the number of Twelue muſt bee obſerued. And in the Reuelation, where the Tribes are ſealed Dan is omitted, for the reaſon afore: euen ſo theſe three kings being very wicked, had violent deaths, in token of Gods curſe, and therefore the Iewes penning Chriſts Aunceſtors, might iuſtly leaue them out. To proceed; when Henocke was taken vp, there was a prophecie for the flood. In Hebers daies, Pelegs name prophecied the cōfounding of their tongues. When Elias is taken vp, there is preſently a great alteration: for Ochoſias is killed, and Athalia doth in ſixe yeares as it were, vnconquer the Land, and bring all to an vproare. Ioas the remnant of the Kings ſeede, preſerued by Iehoiada the high Sacrificer from ſlaughter, commeth vp verie weakely: thereby to ſhew vnto vs, that there is no ſtrength in man, whoſe breath is in his noſtrils.
            
            
               3161. Amaſias, Nine and Twentie yeares.
               
                  HE did vprightly in the eyes of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart: meaning, in reſpect of his predeceſſors, albeit he had his imperfections. For when the Kingdome was eſtabliſhed vnto him, he ſlue his ſeruants that had ſlain the King his Fathers, but he ſlue not their children, but did as it is written in the Lawe, and in the Booke of Moſes, Deut.24.16. Where the Lord commaunded, ſaying, The Fathers ſhall not die for the children, neither ſhall the Children die for the Fathers, but euery man ſhall die for his owne ſinne. And Amaſias aſsembled Iudah, and made warre againſt Edom, and ſmote off the children of Seir ten Thouſand, and other ten Thouſand the Children of Iudah tooke aliue, and carried them to the toppe of a Rocke, and caſt them downe from the top, and they all burſt to peeces. Now after that Amaſias was come from the ſlaughter of the Edomites, he brought the Gods of the children of Seir, and ſet them vp to be his Gods, and worſhipped them, and burned incenſe vnto them. So that inſtead of praiſe giuing to God for his victorie, he committeth groſſe Idolatry.
               
                  Now after the time that Amaſias did turne away from the Lord, they wrought treaſon againſt him in Ieruſalem, and hee fled to Lachiſh, and they

ſent after him, and ſlue him there, and he was brought vpon horſes and buried with his Fathers in the Citie of Iuda. 2. Chron. 25.
               Here you ſee a good beginning, but an ill end: and that God plagueth by thoſe means wherein men moſt truſt: to teach them, that he ſitteth vpon a fiery throne, thereby to cauſe them haue their affections ſetled only on the mercies of God, acknowledging his power, and his iuſtice: which they neglecting to embrace, God to ſhewe his iudgements hardneth their hearts to follow that which ſhall bee their owne deſtruction; as Amaſias did, who contrary to the coūſell of the Prophet of God, goeth vp againſt Ioaſh king of Iſrael. After him the kingdome of Iuda was voide Eleauen yeares.
            
            
               3201. Azarias, two and Fiftie yeares.
               HIs name was alſo called Vzzias. All is one in Hebrew, it ſignifieth Might, or Strength. In his dayes Amos the Prophet the Father of Eſay did prophecy: ſo did Oſeas the prophet. Amos beginneth to preach two yeares before the Earth-quake which was in his time.
               Azarias did vprightly in the ſight of God, according to al that Amaſias his father did, and he ſought God in the daies of Zechariah, which vnderſtood the viſions of God: and when he ſought the Lord, God made him to proſper: for he went forth and fought againſt the Philiſtins, and brake down the wall of Gath, and the wall of Iabneth, and the wall of Aſhdod, and built Cities in Aſhdod, and amonge the Philiſtines, and many valiant things did he. But when he was ſtronge, his heart was lifted vp to his deſtruction; for he tranſgreſſed againſt the Lord his God, and went into the Temple of the Lord to burne incenſe vpon the Altar of incenſe; vſurping the office of the Sacrificers, and is ſtroken with leaproſie, and therefore dwelt apart, being cut off from the houſe of the Lord, and ſo continued vnto the day of his death. From hence wee may learne what a grieuous thing it is in the ſight of God, to meddle in the office of the Sacrificers, which the Lord had forbidden. Num. 18. We may alſo learne from hence, not to forget God in our proſperitie, leaſt therby we procure our owne deſtruction.
               In Antiochus time, the Leuites who were appointed of God onely to ſacrifice and offer incenſe before him, will vſurpe into the kings ſeat and beare rule, vpon the like ſucceſſe in victories. And then God plagueth thē with a ſpirituall leaproſie more foule and filthy than that of the bodie, being from Phariſees become Saduces, denying the reſurrection, and the life of the ſoule departed from the bodie.
               This Azarias king of Iuda, ſaw the daies of Eight kings of Iſrael, wherein the word of God remaineth true, The wicked ſhall not liue out halfe their dayes.
               
            
            
               
               3253. Iotham, Sixteene yeares.
               HIs Fathers plague cauſeth him to rule indifferently well. His Sonne Achaz ſucceeding, is farre worſe.
               
                  Micheas the Prophet, teacheth in the dayes of Iotham King of Iuda.
            
            
               3268. Achaz, Sixteene yeares.
               
                  HE walked in the wayes of the Kings of Iſrael, and made moulten Images for Baalim. Moreouer he burnt incenſe in the valley of Benhinnom, and burnt his Sonnes with fire after the abhomination of the heathen, whome the Lord had caſt out before the Children of Iſrael. He ſent for helpe to Tiglah, Pilueeſer, and the reſt of the Kings of Aſhur, which was not lawfull to ſeeke helpe of Infidels. Then the Prophet Eſay prophecied: and by him God giues a propheſie: for when Ieruſalem was beſieged for the wickedneſſe of Achaz, God ſendeth Eſay to Achaz, and willeth him to aske a ſigne. Who anſwereth, hee will not tempt God, Eſay. 7. The Prophet replyeth, Is it not a ſmall thing to grieue men, but you muſt alſo grieue my God? therefore the Lord will giue you a ſigne. A Virgin ſhall conceiue, and beare a Sonne, and ſhe ſhall call his name Emanuel, God with vs. Thereby to ſhew Achaz the greatneſſe of his impietie, for ſeeking to the Nations for helpe. For ſeeing God ſpareth not his owne Sonne, but giueth him to death for vs, will not he likewiſe ſend ſtrength to Iudah? He was buried in the Citie of Ieruſalem, but not in the Sepulchres of the Kings of Iudah.
            
            
               3281. Ezechias, nine and Twentie yeres. A new Heber.
               HEre we ſee ſome recouerie of the ſtate. For in the yeare that Azarias died, Eſay ſawe the Lord ſitting in the Temple: the Seraphins ſtood vpon it, euerie one hauing ſixe winges, and one cryed to another, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hoſts. And God ſpeaketh, Ye ſhall heare me, but not vnderstand: yee ſhall ſee plainely, and not perceiue. Eſay asketh, How longe Lord? vntill the Cities be waſted, the houſe without a man, and the Land vtterly deſolate: Thereby meaning their captiuitie▪ wherein there ſhall

be tenne forſakings: in Ezecchias time two, in Manaſses one, Ioſias time one, the fift in Iehoachaz time the Sonne of Ioſias, the ſixt in Iehoiakim, the Seuenth when he rebelled after he had ſerued the King of Babell three yeares, the Eight in Ieconias time, the two laſt which makes the Tenth vnder Zedechias himſelfe being carried to Babell, his eyes put out, and his Sonnes ſlaine, and after the houſe of the Lord burnt, and all the Citie carried captiue: ſo the Lord is in his Temple beholding the actions of men, and his skirts fill the Temple, the leaſt of Gods myſteries excelling all the wiſedome of man, and the Angels proclaime Holyneſſe to God, this Eſay confeſſed: for he ſaw nothing but woe vnto himſelfe, being a man of polluted lippes, that ſo by faith in the Sonne of God, his ſinne might bee put away. In Ezechias time Eſay ſpeaketh of nine Nations plagued, which were borderers on Iudea. From this we might gather, that ſeeing their wickedneſſe was equall, they ſhould receiue the like meaſure of puniſhment. Hee goeth further, and telleth what Aſsur ſhall ſpeake, and Babell, and prophecieth of Cyrus one hundred yeares before he was borne, anſwerable to the prophecie that was of Ioſias in Ieroboams time, concerning the taking vp of the bones of the Prophets. Eſay in Ezechias dayes prophecieth of Chriſt, and ſaw the promiſe a farre off, and embraced it, and ſhewed the particulars, as if they were now perfourmed by Pilate. This would not haue mooued a prophane man: but he being a prophet knew that God was faithfull, who had promiſed. And the men in his time gathered together Salomons Prouerbs. Yet for all this we ſhall finde, that fewe were ſaued, and Chriſt ſaith, that many Kings deſired to ſee that which you ſee, and ſaw them not. Ezechias was verie deſirous to haue his poſteritie to keepe the Kingdome in the true Religion. Eſay commeth vnto him, and willeth him to ſet his houſe in a readineſse, for he ſhould die, for any thing yet reuealed. Hee wept, not for feare of death, ſeeing he had great aſſurance of Gods fauor, and thereby his ſaluation made certaine: but to remember the wickedneſſe of the Kings before, and how through their impiety Iuda was humbled, and that now hee ſhould ſleepe with his Fathers, not leauing a godly one to ſucceed him. He hath a Sonne, but it had been better, that Manaſſes his Sonne had neuer been, he was ſo wicked.
               This Ezechias committeth a grieuous offence, in ſhewing his wealth to the Embaſſadors of the king of Babell. Thereupon ſaith the prophet, becauſe thou truſtedſt not in God, but in thy wealth, therefore one of Babell ſhall come and carrie away captiue theſe excellent things, and thy Sonnes ſhall bee courtiers in the court of the king of Babell.
               He hath Fifteen yeares longer allowed for the time of his life in this

world, and hath this warranted by the courſe of the Sun going fifteen degrees backward. He knew the end and period of his life, and thereby (no doubt) had a wonderfull glorie. This is certaine, that none can tell by outward bleſsings, how farre he is in the fauour or disfauor of God: Ezechias dieth, to the end hee ſhould not ſee the euill dayes.
            
            
               3311. Manaſſes his Sonne raigneth 55. yeres, being wonderfull wicked.
               HEre the long patience of God appeared, calling men to repentance, as in the dayes of Noah, while the Arke was in preparing.
            
            
               3366. Amon his Sonne raigned Two yeares.
               
                  HE committed euill in the ſight of the Lord, as did Manaſſes his Father. For Ammon ſacrificed to all the Images which Manaſſes his Father had made, and ſerued them, and he humbled not himſelfe before the Lord, as Manaſſes his Father had humbled himſelfe: but this Ammon treſpaſſed more and more, and his Seruants conſpired againſt him, and ſlue him in his owne houſe. And the people of the Land made Ioſias King, and hee raigned One and Thirtie yeares, and hee did vprightly in the ſight of the Lord,
                  3368. 
                  and walked in the wayes of Dauid his Father, and bowed neither to the right hand, nor to the left. He taketh vp the Prophets bones, and burneth them vppon their Altars, and purged Iudah and Ieruſalem. So hee fulfilleth that prophecie: Read the 3. King. 23.16.
               
               He was verie godly at Sixteen yeares of age, at Eighteen the Booke of the Lawe is found. It is a great queſtion what Booke of the Law it was. It is certaine, that the prophets had the law to ſtudie, as Eſay, Amos, and Ezechiel. Therefore the meaning cannot be, that before this finding they had no copies of Moſes: but the truth is, Now was found the verie originall which Moſes wrote: for wicked Manaſses was the occaſion of hiding thereof. Vpon this finding and reading thereof, God ſaith, 2. Chron. 34. Becauſe thy heart did melt, and thou haſt humbled thy ſelfe before the Lord, therfore thou ſhalt be gathered vnto thy fathers, and ſhalt be put into thy graue with peace. He was ſlaine by Pharaoh Neco at Megiddo; for the Lord turned not from his fierce wrath, wherewith he was angrie againſt Iudah, becauſe of the prouocations of Manaſses: therefore hee determined to put Iudah out of his ſight. Vpon this Ieremie writes the Lamentations of his death.
               
                  In his dayes Ieremie and Sophony prophecied.
            
            
               3399. Ioakim, Eleauen yeares.
               HE would not beleeue the iudgments of God againſt Iudah and Ieruſalem pronounced by Ieremie 22. Thus ſaith the Lord againſt Ioakim, they ſhall not lament him ſaying, Ah my Brother, or ah Sister: neither ſhall they mourne for him, ſaying, ah Lord, or ah this glorie: he ſhall be buried as an Aſſe is buried, euen drawne and caſt forth without the gates of Ieruſalem. And then began Nebuchadnetzar to beſiege Ieruſalem, and Ioakim cuts Ieremies Lamentations in peeces. Therefore he was buried like an Aſſe: and here the ſucceſsion ended.
               
                  Gregorie Martin herevpon keepes a ſtirre, as if the Scriptures were not true, becauſe Saint Mathew ſaith that Ioakim begat Ieconias and his brethren, whereas in truth Ioakim died childleſſe. The Scripture is true: for this word Sonne, is taken for any kinſman, and ſo vſed in the ſcripture. He was his Vncle in proper ſence, and Sonne by ſucceſsion. Here is now the ſaying fulfilled. Ierem. 22. O earth, earth, earth, heare the word of the Lord, write Iehoiakim voide of Children.
               
               
                  Nathaniel, he ſaith of Chriſt, Ioh. 1. Thou art the King of Iſrael. The purpoſe of God in this Kingdome was this, that Chriſt ſhould bee King for euer, whoſe gouernment they in ſome ſort ſhadowed: and yet ſeeing they could not performe ciuile Iuſtice for this life, how ſhall wee, if wee truſt in our owne righteouſneſſe, appeare in the ſight of God?
            
            
               The next in order of time to be handled, is Nebuchadnetzar, and the Storie of the Captiuitie: but becauſe before I could not conueniently handle the Kings of Iſrael; before I come to the captiuitie, I will heere handle their Stories in generall termes.
               TIll Ieroboams time, Iuda ruled ouer all the Tribes: but when Salomon was dead, and Roboam ſucceedeth, the Ten tribes fall away from Iuda, and then thoſe Tribes make another Kingdome by their diuiſion, and frō this time Iſrael is a kingdom diuided; the ten Tribes bearing the name of Iſrael, and the other Tribes, Iuda and Beniamin, the Kingdome of Iudah.
               
               This diuiſion continueth vnto Ezechias time, and there endeth the ten Tribes being carried captiue by Salmanaſar.
               
            
            
               
               The Prophet Oſeas expreſſeth their ſtate in this ſort. Cap. 1.
               
               
                  GOe, take vnto thee a wife of Fornications: and hee tooke Gomer, which ſignifieth a whole bodie or multitude, the Daughter of Diblaim, which ſignifieth Barrenneſſe, which was a name of one of the ſtandings in the wilderneſſe. And ſhe conceiued and bare a Sonne, and called him Iſreel. So God calleth the whole ſtate of Iſrael, a whole bodie, as barren as the wildernes. She conceiued againe, and bare a daughter, and called her Loruhamah, not pitied. She bare againe another Sonne, and called his name Lognamj, that is, not my people.
               
               The meaning is thus much, Goe to the multitude of Iſrael, whoſe Fathers pitched their Tents in the wilderneſſe of Diblaim: and becauſe they fall to Idolatrie, worſhipping molten Calues as their fathers did in the wilderneſſe, not regarding the glorie of Shiloh, tell them, that their ſtate ſhall be as Iſrael, that is, like the ſlaughter of Iehu vpon Achab in the valley of Iſreel: and they ſhall be ſo vnpitied, that they ſhall be as though they were no people, vntill they know I am the Lord.
               Of theſe calamities, Oſeas preacheth vnto them in Ieroboams time, & telleth them vnder theſe termes, of three alterations: the one by Iehu, which he expreſſeth by his firſt Sonne Iſreel, becauſe, a little while, and I will viſite the blood of Iſreel vppon the houſe of Iehu, and will make the gouernment of the houſe of Iſrael to ceaſe: and at that day will I alſo breake the bowe of Iſrael in the valley of Ieſrell.
               The Second by his Daughter Loruhamah without mercie: For I wil no more haue pitie vpon the houſe of Iſrael, but I will vtterly take them away, which was performed in Tighath Peleſars daies without mercie.
               The Third, Lognammi, no people: for yee are not my people, therefore will I not be yours, This was performed when Salmanaſar caried them cleane away.
               It is not expreſſed of what Tribes the Kings of Iſrael were, becauſe the Lord keepeth not the wicked in remembrance. If any be mentioned, it is for ſome ſpeciall vſe in the Storie: as Iehu may be ſuppoſed to be of Gad, becauſe there is mention made, that he came from a Towne in that Tribe.
               
                  Ieroboam is of Ioſeph, and is a plague to Iſrael, when hee erected the two Calues in Dan and Bethel.
               This puniſhment Ioſeph drew vpon the Children of Iſrael by matching with the Egiptians, and his ſinne is now plagued.
               It is ſayd of Ieroboam, that he made all the Kings of Iſrael to ſinne, ſauing of Sallum and Hoſeas. Hereby we may gather, that Kings being

no Prophets, eſteeme no more of religion than Calues: and if they make Lawes for the eſtabliſhing of religion, it is but only for a colour to keepe the Kingdome ſure, and in peace. The Iewes conclude, that all the Kings of Iſrael went to deſtruction to Gehenna. Oh, but ſome ſay, we muſt not iudge, leaſt wee thereby become vncharitable. This is certaine, that the holy ſpirite teſtifieth, that they continued in the ſinnes of Ieroboam: and there is no mention of their repentance, which is not likely the holy ſpirit of God would haue left vntouched, if there had been any. Therefore ſeeing there is no ſaluation but through beleefe in Chriſt, in whome they neuer truſted, why ſhould wee hope better of them, than the ſcripture warrants?
               The cauſe of this falling away, was the pride of Ioſephs houſe deſpiſing the glorie of Iuda. There is one onely good of Iſrael. Abia the Sonne of Ieroboam: who being ſicke, by the counſell of Ieroboam, his mother enquires of Ahijah the Prophet, whether he ſhould liue or die. If ſhee had had faith, ſhe would neuer haue entred the houſe, and then the child ſhould haue liued the ordinarie courſe of life.
               In Ieſabels Story we are to note, that wicked heretiques in the Reuelation are called by the name of Ieſabel.
               
               Iſrael became Ieſabels, that is, Scattered of God, when they were caried into captiuitie, ſauing a ſcattered remnant, as corne in the field left ſtanding after the mower, here and there an Eare.
               
                  Ioſaphat loſt his ſhips, and Ioram was plagued, becauſe they ioyned in affinitie with Achab. Micheas telleth them, that they made Statutes for Omri, Mich. 6. This rule is eternall: God plagueth thoſe which ioyne with Infidels. Heere againe was repeated Ochoſias Storie, being the Childe of the two and Fortie yeares. Wee may further obſerue, that in the Seuenth King of Iſrael the Kingdome of Iuda almoſt loſt all their ſtate. Iehu he did a verie good worke in ouerthrowing Achab, Rechab of Abrahams houſe giuing him counſell; and therefore hee hath a promiſe, that the kingdome ſhall continue in his houſe for foure diſcents. This was a ſpeciall glorie, the Kings before him not continuing halfe ſo long, though this ouerthrowe was not done by faith. The fourth man of Iehus houſe, was Twentie yeres without the kingdome, and then ruled but ſixe Moneths. Now in Hoſeas time this prophecie is fulfilled, Iehu ſhall be afflicted like Achab; not becauſe his actions were ſo wicked, but becauſe he himſelfe not ſincerely godly, did them not in faith, and ſtood in feare of the neighbours about.
               In that the Kings of Iſrael haue ſo ſhort continuance, we may know that God caring not for them, they were not to looke for any quietneſſe in this life. Saint Paul handleth the ſtate of Iſrael, as Hoſeas did in the caſe of the Gentiles, where he ſaith, which ſometimes were vnpipitied,

and ſometimes no people: For this wee may likewiſe conclude, that they goe to deſtruction which beleeue not in Chriſt.
               The Kings of Iſrael in reſpect of the kingdome, ſometimes vnpitied as in Tiglahpeleſar, ſometimes no people, as in Salmanaſar, in reſpect of their ſoules, alwaies vnpitied, alwayes no people.
               In Elias Storie we haue a ſpeciall obſeruation, 1. King. 19. Elias was Fortie dayes and Fortie nights in mount Horeb, where the Law was giuen (as was Moſes) and firſt there comes a wind, but God was not in the wind: and then a fire, and God was not in the fire: and then a ſoft voice, & God was in the voice: And then God and he reaſoneth together: for Iſrael regarded not Gods wrath, neither in the wind of Iehu which ouerthrew Achabs houſe, nor in the fire of the Aſsirians: onely ſeuen Thouſand which neuer bowed their knees to Baal, heard the voice of the Lord, and feared. In the ſixt of Ezechiel, the Lord ſheweth his wonderfull tenderneſſe, in that he is ſo vnwilling to plague them, if ſo be he could by any meanes ſpare them. Now though Ieroboam had a prophecie that he ſhould be King; yet it ſtretched not to his Sonnes, nor further than himſelfe, and therefore after his death they ſhould haue yeelded the Kingdome to Iuda: for which, becauſe they did not, they were ſo notably plagued.
               This foure Hundred and ninetie, ſheweth the time from Samuels gouernement vnto this time, which are Seuentie Seuens of yeares,3401. 70. 490. or foure Hundred and ninetie yeares.
               The Seuentie ſheweth the generall time of their being in Babylon, which was prophecied in Ierem. 25. That ſo it ſhould come to paſſe, becauſe they would not keepe their Sabbaths, the Land ſhould reſt Seuentie yeares, vntill it had fulfilled it owne Sabbaths.
               Vpon this number of Seuentie, wee haue exceeding many things to be noted.
               Firſt, it is a ſweet proportion to the ſweetneſſe of mans life.
               
                  Ioſua ſendeth Twelue to ſpie and view the goodneſſe of the Land of Canaan: Tenne of thoſe doe not beleeue, and are the diſcouraging of the people, ſo that they likewiſe periſh through vnbeleefe. Vpon this, Moſes maketh the Foure-ſcore and tenth pſalme, and ſets downe as a decree the wrath of God ſhortning mans life, and ſaith, The dayes of man are Threeſcore yeares and Ten, and if one come to Foure-ſcore, then are his dayes nothing but ſorrow, ſo ſoone paſſe wee away, and are gone.
               
               Another compariſon wee haue with Adam: He liued nine Hundred and thirtie yeares, one Thouſand yeares wanting but Seuentie. The Iewes delighting to deſcant, ſay, that Adam as a Prophet ſaw that Dauid ſhould liue but Seuentie yeares, to make vp Adams Thouſand.

For vs, not one of many Thouſands come to Dauids yeares: ſo heauie is the wrath of God vppon ſinners. Solon being demaunded who were happie, tels a Storie of two, who in loue and affection to their Parents, drew their Mothers chariots to the Temple: And the God for recompence, cauſed them to die preſently.
               
                  Creſſus going further, asked him, whether he thought him happie? he anſwered, There be in a yeare three Hundred, ſixtie, and fiue daies, and in euerie day, houres and minutes, wherein our life is ſubiect to change and alteration: and therefore till all this be ended, I cannot tell whome to account bleſſed.
               This number of Seuentie, depends of Seuen and Ten: thereby we may ſtill remember the creation, and the Fathers before the flood. Vppon this there depends a prophecie. Leuit. 26. If you will not keepe my lawes, nor obſerue my Statutes, yee ſhall be in your enemies land, till the land hath payd her Sabbaths, which was fulfilled in ten Sabbaths. The ſtate of the people of the Iewes in Babylon, Ezechiel compareth to dead bones. For as it may ſeem to euerie man, that dead bones ſhall not be reuided; ſo ſhould they neuer bee deliuered. Yet hee comforteth them by the viſion, wherein God reſtored theſe bones to life; ſome reaſon they had thus to eſteeme of themſelues: for they were carried away captiue, the land of Iuda deſolate for religion, and the neighbours about them amazed. In Babylon policie they could haue none, nor any exerciſe of Religion. If they prayed, it muſt be after the manner of Daniel, in his Chamber, and ſo (no doubt) Ezra, and Salathiel, and the reſt did So that their age was euen as a dead time in the world. Beſides, God ſayth, Eſay 52. My name is euill ſpoken of, becauſe of you, amonge the heathen: ſo that one of Babylon might ſay to his neighbour, You ſee here a Nation vild, and of no account; yet they haue a hope that they ſhall be deliuered out of captiuitie after Seuentie yeares: and here is one Ieremie, which taketh a ſtone, and caſteth it into the Sea, and ſo (ſaith he) head-long ſhall Babylon bee ouerthrowne: and they haue one Daniel, who prophecieth, that the great King Nebuchadnetzar ſhall be a beaſt, that is, ſhall haue the heart of a Beaſt giuen him, becauſe hee doth not worſhip their God, but haue deſtroyed their temple. They deſpiſe to march with vs, looking ſtill for their deliuerance. This (no doubt) would cauſe them to be hated, and the name of God ill ſpoken of. From this wee may gather a deepe meditation for our owne eſtate, and to looke to our wayes, that they be the Lords wayes, and not our owne, leaſt through misbeleefe wee fall into the like ſorrowes. As Ezechiel compareth them to dead bones; ſo they themſelues were as men in graues: for ſo the 126. Pſalme ſpeaketh, When thou leddeſt captiuitie captiue, then were wee like men

that dreamed: for wee thought no more that this had come to paſſe, than the dreames which appeare from the vanitie of our thoughts. Now if wee make vſe of theſe things, by comparing our ſtate in this life with theirs in Babell, wee ſhall doe well: for may not euerie one of vs ſay with Iacob, Geneſ. 47. Our dayes are fewe and euill, and full of ſorrowe, and wee doe not attaine to the dayes of our Fathers? All the Kingdomes of the earth ſince this time, in reſpect of their policie, are called Babell. In the Reuelation the godly are admoniſhed to come out of Babell, ſeeing they are Gods people; otherwiſe they ſhall bee partakers of their plagues: and as longe as wee liue, wee ſhall bee in Babell and confuſion, our tongues ſo confounded as not able to ſpeake the myſteries of God aright: this is the caſe of euerie one of vs.
               Now the Iewes in Babylon, ſeeing they cannot reſtore policie, they perfourme outward obedience for ciuill actions, and turning their faces to Ieruſalem, the ſight of peace, they praiſe God in their ſoules; ſo we, ſeeing our caſe is no better than theirs in this life, wee muſt meditate on the Sonne of righteouſneſſe, and ſettle our affections on high, that after this life, wee may enioy the heauenly Ieruſalem, our conſcience hauing embraced that peace of God, which paſſeth all vnderſtanding, not going about to reſtore policie, but in intreating the Lord to teach vs to number our dayes, that yet ſo we may apply our ſelues vnto wiſedome. To this purpoſe the 137. Pſalme is full of comfort: for we muſt conſider there is no Land, nor no law, that can hinder vs to be godly. And though there bee wicked lawes decreed, as when Nebuchadnetzar erected the Image, and commanded a worſhipping of it; yet their end is but to trie the faith of Gods Children, that euen as Gold ſeuen times purified, is not conſumed, but made more glorious: ſo the Furnace ſeuen times more hot, ſhall not ſo much as make our garments to ſmell thereof, for God is in the middeſt of his choſen.
               Thus much for the Seuentie yeares in generall.
            
            
               Now a little for the particulars.
               IT had three captiuities: The one when Daniel was carried away. The ſecond Seuen yeres after, when Ieconias was caried away. The third, eleauen yeres after, when Sedechias was carried away: ſo they

were wholy but Fiftie yeares in captiuitie in Babel, a full Iubilee: this opinion hath been croſſed: but you ſhall ſee it muſt needs be ſo. Then it is ſayd, that captiuitie begins, when men are led captiue. Beſides, ſeeing God calleth the people of the Iewes Daniels people, and the Citie his Citie; ſhall we thinke that hee being in ſuch fauour with God, God made no account of his captiuitie, ſeeing by theſe titles giuen vnto him, it is apparant God eſteemed more of him, than of all the men in the earth? Further, if you reckon it from Iehoiakims, you then make it Seuentie ſeauen, which is more than the ſcripture warrants.
               Now for the place in Ezechiel, from the time of our captiuitie, It is certaine, the Prophet there ſpeaketh onely of the carrying away of the Kings. Ieremie telleth, that the Babylonians ſhall rule but Seuenty yeares, and they muſt be in captiuitie but to them: and therefore you muſt beginne your captiuitie from the time that Daniel was carried away: otherwiſe you will make more or leſſe than Seuentie. Now if we examine why the Iewes would not beleeue this, we ſhall finde the reaſon by a common diſeaſe amongſt our ſelues. For we all know we ſhall die, but yet there is none ſo old, but thinketh hee may liue till to morrow: euen ſo they knewe they ſhould bee ledde away captiue, but euerie one perſwaded himſelfe not in his daies, and ſo deſtruction came ſuddenly vppon them. Beſides, there was a prophecie, Habac. 1. I will worke a worke in your daies, which you will not beleeue, though one ſhould tell you. Saint Paul ſpeaketh this to the Gentiles, and applies it to Chriſt. We may marke another thing. Iſrael is carried away captiue in Hoſeas time, of whome this is not added, that hee continued in the ſinnes of Ieroboam, and by this we may gather hee was the beſt of the Kings of Iſrael. Iuda is carried captiue in Iehoiakims time, and yet Manaſses as wicked a King as he. From hence wee ſee, that Chriſt is Palmoni, who numbreth, wayeth, and diuideth, and the wicked ſhall drink vp their portion the iudgment of God, which neither the goodneſſe, nor wickedneſſe of any can hinder to cauſe to come ſooner, or later.
            
            
               Babylon the Lion. 3401. Nebuchadnetzar raigned 45. yeares.
               
                  HIs name ſignifieth, The bewayling of iudgment, or the ſorrowing of pouerty
                     •
                   
                  this was true both in himſelf, & in the Iews whom he captiued. In himſelfe, in that God being a fiery iudge, ſitting vpon a throne

exalting Kings and putting downe Kings, abaſed the high eſtate of Nebucadnetzar King of Babel, and threw him from the houſe which he had built: wherby he continued not in honour, but was made like to the beaſts that periſh, and compelled to bewaile his owne miſerie.
               
               
                  It was true in the Iewes, in that they forgetting the law of Moſes Leuit. 26. neglected their Sabbaths, erected Altars, worſhipped ſtrange Gods, and forſooke not the abhominations of the Nations whoſe land they poſſeſſed, but in groues and high places prophaned the name of the mightie God of Iacob. Whoſe ſin, ſaith the Prophet Ieremie, c. 17. is written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a Diamond, & grauen vpon the table of their hearts, and vpon the hornes of their Altars. They ſhall ſerue their enemies in the land which they know not, for they haue kindled a fire in the Lords anger, which ſhal burne for euer ſaith the Lord. For where the Lord ſaid, Take heede to your ſoules, and beare no burthen on the ſabbath day, nor bring it in by the gates of Ieruſalem, but ſanctifie the ſabbath as I commanded your fathers, they obeyed not, neither inclined their eares, but ſaid deſperately, ſurely we will walke after our owee imaginations, and doe euery man according to the ſtubbornnes of his wicked heart. Therefore thus ſaith the Lord, The Virgin of Iſrael hath done very filthily: will a man forſake the ſnowe of Lebanon, which commeth from the rocke? or ſhall the cold flowing waters that come from an other place, be forſaken? I ſhall ſcatter them with an Eaſt winde before the enemie, and I will ſhew them the backe, and not the face in the day of their deſtruction: their children ſhall be deliuered vp to famine, and they droppe away by the force of the ſword: their citie ſhall be deſolate, and an hiſsing, and they ſhall eate the fleſh of their owne children: For the Lord will viſite them according to the fruit of their workes, and kindled a fire to deuoure them round about.
               
                  For his kindred, he was of Nimrod of Chams houſe, and partaker of the ancient curſe: Gen. 10. For we doe not reade that euer he acknowledged the Redemption by Chriſt, which is the ſumme of al ſaluation, though he by puniſhments was forced to acknowledge the power of God in his iudgments. This is the caſe of all wicked. His countrie was called Babel, or Shinear: Babel ſignifying Confuſion: & Shinear, Shake off.
               
                  God gaue him a ſtroke ouer al the world: but the glory of captiuing Sems houſe was the greateſt honour, this was a wonderfull bleſsing of God, to make himſelfe knowne in Babylon, rather than among other heathen, if he had rightly embraced it: but we cannot finde that euer he came to any hope of grace. But it was a wonderfull iudgement vpon the Iewes: for God thereby ſhewed himſelfe to be better knowen in Babylon, (though but barely confeſſed Creator) than he was in Dauids kingdome at home, who neither acknowledged him Redeemer nor Creator.
               
               
                  
                  This conqueſt of Nebucadnetzar ouer the Iewes was propheſied of long before, by Ieremie, cap. 25. in theſe wordes. From the thirteenth yeare of Ioſias the ſonne of Amon King of Iudah, the word of the Lord came vnto me, and I haue ſpoken vnto you riſing earely and ſpeaking, but ye would not heare. Therefore thus ſaith the Lord of hoſtes, becauſe ye haue not heard my wordes, I will ſend and take to me all the families of the North, and Nebucadnetzar the King of Babel my ſeruant, that is, (in executing Gods iudgments) and will bring them againſt this land, and this whole land ſhall be deſolate, and theſe nations ſhall ſerue the King of Babel ſeauenty yeares. This by faith they might haue preuented, as did the Niniuites. For the Lord promiſed, if they would turne euery one from his euil way, and from the wickedneſſe of their inuentions, they ſhould dwel in the land that the Lord had giuen them and their fathers for euer and euer, and that he would not puniſh them. But in this we ſee the purpoſe of God to be eternall. He ſuffereth his choſen to be tryed and chaſtiſed with the afflictions of wicked men, that thereby the condemnation of the vngodly, may be the ſwifter againſt themſelues. This victorie which God gaue vnto the Babylonians ouer the Iewes, was not in that they in any thing deſerued the fauour of God, but to the end he might the ſharplier be auenged of them, as Ier. 25 And when theſe ſeauentie yeares are accompliſhed, I will viſite the King of Babel and that Nation, ſaith the Lord, for their iniquities, euen the land of the Chaldeans, and wil make it a perpetuall deſolation, and will bring vpon that land all my wordes which I haue pronounced againſt it: for many nations, and great Kings ſhall euen ſerue themſelues of them. Thus will I recompence them according to their deedes, and according to the workes of their owne handes. For loe, I beginne to plague the citie where my name is called vpon, and ſhould you goe free? yee ſhall not goe quite, ſaith the Lord of hosts.
               
                  When the Lord hath accompliſhed all his worke vpon mount Zion and Ieruſalem, I will viſite the fruit of the prowd King of Aſhur, and his glorious and prowd lookes, becauſe he ſaid, By the power of mine owne hand haue I done it, and by my wiſedome, becauſe I am wiſe. Shall the axe boaſt it ſelfe against him that heweth with it? or the ſaw exalt it ſelfe againſt him that moueth it? therfore ſhall the Lord ſend among his fat men leanneſſe, and vnder his glory he ſhall kindle a burning like the burning of fire, and ſhall conſume the glory of his forreſt, and of his fruitfull field▪ both ſoule and fleſh, and he ſhall be as the fainting of a Standard-bearer. For the Lord of hoſts ſhall make the conſumption, euen determined, in the middeſt of al the land. Therefore, O people of Sion, be not afraid of Aſhur, he ſhall ſmite thee with a rodde nor ſhall lift vp his ſtaffe againſt thee after the manner of Egipt. But yet a very little time; and the wrath ſhall be conſumed, and the Lord of hostes ſhall raiſe vp a ſcourge for him according to the plague of Midian in the rocke

                  Oreb, & as his ſtaffe was vpon the ſea, ſo he will lift it vp after the manner of Egipt. For behold the day of the Lord commeth, cruel, with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the land waſte, and he ſhall destroy the ſinners out of it. He will viſite the wickedneſſe of the world, and their iniquity vpon the wicked, and will cauſe the arrogancie of the prowd to ceaſe, and will caſt downe the pride of tyrants. Their children alſo ſhall be broken in peeces before their eyes, their houſes ſpoyled, and their wiues rauiſhed. For Babel, the glory of kingdomes, the beautie and pride of the Chaldeans
                  ▪ ſhalbe as the deſtruction of God in Sodom and Gomora. It ſhall not be inhabited for euer, neither ſhall it bee dwelt in from generation to generation, neither ſhall the Arabian pitch his tents there, neither ſhall the ſheepheards make their fouldes there: But Zijm ſhall lodge there, and their houſes ſhall be full of Ohim. Oſtriges ſhall dwell there, and the Satires ſhall dance there. And Iim ſhall crie in their places. Then ſhalt thou take vp this Prouerb againſt the King of Babel, & ſay, How hath the oppreſſor ceaſed, and the gold-thirſtie Babel rested! the Lord hath broken the rodde of the wicked, and the ſcepter of the Rulers, which ſmote the people with a continuall plague, and ruled the nations in wrath. The whole world doth ſing for ioy, they that ſee thee ſhall looke vpon thee and conſider thee, ſaying, Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, and that did ſhake the kingdomes? he made the world as a wilderneſſe, and deſtroyed the cities thereof, and opened not the houſe of his priſoners. All the Kings of the nations ſleepe in glory, euery one in his owne houſe: but thou art caſt out of thy graue like an abhominable branch, and like the rayment of thoſe that are ſlaine: thou ſhalt not be ioyned with them in the graue, becauſe thou haſt deſtroyed thine owne land, and ſlaine thy people: for the ſeede of the wicked ſhall not be renowned for euer. Prepare a ſlaughter for his children for the iniquitie of their fathers, let them not riſe vp and poſſeſse the land, nor fill the face of the world with enemies: for I will riſe vp againſt them, ſaith the Lord of hoſtes, and will cut off from Babel the name, and the remnant, and the ſonne, and the nephewe, ſaith the Lord, and I will make it a poſſeſsion to the Hedg-hogge, and pooles of water, and I will ſweepe it with the beeſome of deſtruction, ſaith the Lord of hostes. For the Lord hath ſworne, ſaying, like as I haue purpoſed, ſo it ſhall come to paſſe, and as I haue conſulted it ſhall ſtand, That I wil breake to peeces Aſhur in my land, and vpon my mountaines will I tread him vnderfoote, ſo that his yoke ſhall depart from my people, and his burden ſhall be taken from off their ſhoulder: for the Lord will haue compaſsion on Iacob, and will yet chooſe Iſrael, and cauſe them to reſt in their owne land, and the ſtranger (meaning the Gentiles) ſhall ioyne himſelfe vnto them, and they ſhall cleaue vnto the houſe of Iacob, and the people ſhal receiue them, and bring them to their owne place, and the houſe of Iſrael ſhall poſſeſse them in the land of the Lord, for ſeruants and hand-maides, and they ſhall take them priſoners whoſe captiues they were, and haue rule ouer their

oppreſſors: and the light of Iſrael ſhal be as a fire, and the holy one thereof as a flame, (meaning that God is a light to comfort his people, and a conſuming fire to deſtroy his enemies:) and it ſhall burne, and deuoure theſe thornes and briars in one day. And at that day ſhall the remnant of Iſrael, and ſuch as are eſcaped of the houſe of Iacob, ſtay no more vpon him that ſmote them, but ſhall ſtay vpon the Lord the holy one of Iſrael in truth, the remnant ſhall returne, euen the remnant of Iacob, vnto the mightie God. For though thy people, O Iſrael, be as the ſand of the ſea, yet ſhal the remnant of them returne, the conſumption decreed ſhall ouerflowe with righteouſneſſe: and there ſhall be a path to the remnant of his people which are left of Aſhur, like as it was vnto Iſrael, in the day that he came out of the land of Egipt. In that day alſo ſhall the great trumpe be blowne, and they ſhall come which periſhed in the land of Aſhur, and they that were chaſed into the land of Egipt, and they ſhal worſhip the Lord in the holy Mount at Ieruſalem, as it was promiſed, Leuit. 26. Then will I remember my couenant with Iacob, and my couenant with Iſaack, and my couenant alſo with Abraham will I remember, the couenant of olde, when I brought them out of Egipt, in the ſight of the heathen, that I might be their God, I am the Lord. And thou ſhalt ſay in that day, O Lord, I wil praiſe thee, though thou waſt angry with me, thy wrath is turned away, and thou comforteſt me. Behold, God is my ſaluation, I will truſt, and will not feare: for the Lord God is my ſtrength and ſong, he alſo is become my ſaluation. Therefore with ioy ſhall yee drawe waters out of the welles of ſaluation, and yee ſhall ſay in that day, Praiſe the Lord, call vpon his name, declare his works among the people, make mention of them: for his name is exalted. Sing vnto the Lord, for he hath done excellent things: this is knowne in all the world. Crie out and ſhowte, O inhabitant of Sion: for great is the holy one of Iſrael in the middeſt of thee. In that day alſo ſhall this ſong be ſung in the land of Iudah, We haue a ſtrong citie, Saluation ſhall God ſet for walles and bulwarkes. Open ye the gates, that the righteous nation which keepeth the truth may enter in. By an aſſured purpoſe wilt thou preſerue perfect peace, becauſe they truſted in thee. Truſt in the Lord for euer, for in the Lord God there is ſtrength for euermore: for hee will bring downe them that dwell on hie, the high citie will he abaſe, euen to the ground will he caſt it downe, and bring it to duſt. The way of the iuſt is righteouſnes: thou wilt make equall the righteous path of the iuſt: the wicked, O Lord, will not behold thy high hand, but they ſhall ſee it and b
                     •
                   confounded. But Lord, vnto vs thou wilt ordaine peace: for thou haſt alſo wrought all our works for vs. O Lord our God, other Lordes beſides thee haue ruled vs, but we will remember thee only and thy name. Thus we ſee, that God doth not vtterly forſake his elect, though ſometimes he leaueth them, for the triall of their faith, to their owne infirmities, but for euer deſtroyeth the wicked and vngodly.
               
               
                  
                  We haue the like ſtorie of Gods iuſtice in the affliction of Abrahams ſeede in Egypt. God tolde Abraham, that his ſeede ſhould bee euill intreated in a land that was not theirs foure hundred yeares: but the people, to whome they are in bondage too, will I iudge, ſaith the Lord, Gen. 15.
               
               
                  The afflicters both of Cham.
               
                  The afflicted both of Abraham.
               
                  It is ſaid in the 25. of Ieremies Prophecie, that the fourth yeare of Iehoiakim King of Iuda, was the firſt yeare of Nebucadnetzar King of Babel. And in the firſt of Daniel it is ſaid, In the third yeare of Iehoiakim King of Iuda, came Nebucadnetzar King of Babel vnto Ieruſalem, and beſieged it. The queſtion is, how theſe two places are reconciled the one to the other.
               
               
                  It is certaine, that it is in the third yeare accompliſhed, and in the beginning of the fourth: for though Nebucadnetzar began to raigne in the third yeare of Iehoiakims raigne; yet that yeare in Ieremie is not counted, becauſe it was almoſt expired: but in Daniel it is laid down, to make plaine the firſt yeare of the ſeauenty, which they were to bee in captiuity.
               
               
                  In the ſecond yeare after this captiuity, Nebucadnetzar ſeeth a great Image, whoſe head was of fine gold, his brest and armes of ſiluer, his belly and his thighes of braſſe, his legs of iron, and his feete, part of iron, part of clay: he beheld alſo till a ſtone was cut without hands, which ſmote the image vpon his feete that were of iron and clay, and brake them to peeces: then was the iron, the clay, the braſse, the ſiluer and the gold broken all together, that no place was found for them: and the ſtone that ſmote them, became a great mountaine, and filled the whole earth. Dan. 2.
               
               
                  Daniel ſawe ſome great beaſts come vp from the ſea: the firſt a Lyon, the ſecond a Beare, the third a Leopard, the fourth vnlike the former, with teeth of iron, and tenne hornes. Dan. 7. Theſe great beaſts which are foure, are foure Kings which ſhall take the kingdome of the Saints of the moſt high. In the thirteenth of the Reuelation, Iohn ſawe a beaſt riſe out of the ſea, hauing ſeauen heads and tenne hornes, mouthed like a Lyon, bodied like a Leopard, footed like a Beare, and the Dragon gaue him his power.
               And Daniel beheld till the thrones were ſet vp, and the Ancient of daies did ſit, whoſe garment was white as ſnowe, and the haire of his head like the pure wooll: his throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheeles as burning fire: a fiery ſtreame iſſued and came forth from before him: thouſand thouſands ministred vnto him, and tenne thouſand thouſands ſtood before him, the iudgement was ſet, and the bookes opened, the beaſts were ſlaine, and their bodies caſt into the burning fire: and behold, one like the Son of man came in the clowdes of heauen, and came to the Ancient of daies, and he gaue him dominion and honour, and a kingdome, that all people, nations, and languages

ſhould ſerue him: his kingdome ſhall neuer be deſtroyed, ſo as Reuel. 20. Iohn ſawe a great white throne, and one that ſate on it, from whoſe face flied both the earth and the heauen, and he ſawe the dead both great and ſmall ſtand before God, and the bookes were opened, and another booke was opened which was the booke of life, and the dead were iudged of thoſe thinges which were written in the bookes according to their workes, and whoſoeuer was not found written in the booke of life, was caſt into the lake of fire.
               
                  Dan. 3. Nebucadnetzar erecteth an Image, and commaundeth to worſhippe it. Sidrach, Miſhach, and Abednego refuſed. This ſheweth, that wicked lawes cannot compell godly men to doe that which God forbiddeth: for the faithfull are alwaies aſſured that God wil defend them (this is the meaning of this place) and will not feare him that can throwe the body into the fire, but ſtand in awe of him that can throwe both body and ſoule into eternall fire: ſo in Apoc. 1
                     •
                  . As many as would not worſhip the image of the beaſt, were killed.
            
            
               3409. Ioachin, three moneths.
               
                  HE was eight yeares old when he beganne to raigne, and hee ruled three monthes and ten dayes in Ieruſalem, and did euill in the ſigh of the Lord. And when the yeare was out, King Nebucadnetzar ſent and brought him to Babel, with the pretious veſſels of the houſe of the Lord.
               
               He beganne his raigne at eight yeares, and raigned ten yeares when his father was aliue, and after his fathers death, which was the eighteenth yeare of his age, he raigned alone three monthes and ten dayes. So he was brought priſoner to Babel, and Zedechias his brother (but in truth his Vncle) was made King in his ſteede, ſo he continued in priſon all the daies of Nebucadnetzar, that is, ſeauen and thirtie yeares after Nebucadnetzar had carried him captiue, vnto the firſt yeare of euill Merodach King of Babel, who ſucceeded Nebuchadnetzar. This was foretold him by the Prophet Ieremie, cap. 22. Thou that dwelleſt in Lebanon, and makeſt thy neſt in the Cedars, how beautifull ſhalt thou be, when ſorrowes come vppon thee as the ſorowes of a womā in trauaile? as I liue, ſaith the Lord, though Coniah (that is Ioachin or Ieconias) the ſonne of Iehoiachim King of Iuda were as the ſignet of my right hand, yet would I plucke thee thence, and I will giue thee into the hand of them that ſeeke thy life, and into the land of them whoſe face thou feareſt, euen into the hand of Nebucadnetzar King of Babel, and into the hand of the Chaldeans, and I will cauſe them to carry thee away & thy mother that bare thee, into another countrie where ye were not borne, and there ſhall yee die; but to the land whereunto they deſire to returne,

they ſhall not returne thither. But after the death of Nebucadnetzar, euill Merodach his ſonne did lift vp the head of Ioachin, or Ieconias King of Iudah out of the priſon, and ſpake kindely to him, and ſet his throne aboue the throne of the Kings that were with him in Babel, & changed his priſon garments, and he did continually eate meate before him all the daies of his life, and his portion was a continuall portion giuen him by the King, euery day a certaine all the daies of his life.
            
            
               3410. Zedechias, Eleauen yeares.
               
                  HIs name was firſt Mattamah: but Nebucadnetzar changed his name to Zedechiah. Hee was one and twentie yeares olde when he beganne to raigne. And he did euill in the ſight of the Lord according to all that Iehoiakim had done. Therefore the wrath of the Lord was againſt Ieruſalem and Iudah, vntill he caſt them out of his ſight. And Zedechias rebelled againſt the King of Babell: and in the ninth yeare of Zedechias raigne, the tenth month, and which day of the month, Nebucadnetzar King of Babel came, he, and all his hoſt againſt Ieruſalem, and pitched againſt it, and they built forts againſt it round about. So the citie was beſieged vnto the eleauenth yeare of King Zedechias, and the ninth month, the famine was ſo great in the citie, that there was no bread for the people of the land. So that the fourth of Ieremies Lamentations was trulie performed, that mothers did eate their owne children. So the citie was broken vp, and the King Zedechias fledde: but the armie of the Caldees purſued after him, and tooke him in the deſerts of Iericho, and all his hoſt was ſcattered from him. Then they tooke the King, and carried him vp to the King of Babel to Riblah, where they gaue iudgment vpon him: and they ſlue the ſonnes of Zadechias before his eyes, and put out the eyes of Zedechias, and bound him in chaines, and carried him to Babel.
               
               
                  Heere is performed the wordes of Ieremie the Prophet, chap. 24. I will giue Zedechias the King of Iudah, and his Princes, and the reſt of Ieruſalem, for a terrible plague to all the kingdomes of the earth, and for a reproch, and for a prouerb, for a common talke, & for a curſe in all places where I ſhall caſt them, and I will ſend the ſword, the famine, and the peſtilence among them, till they be conſumed out of the land that I gaue to them and their Fathers. And Ier. 5. For the houſe of Iſrael, and the houſe of Iudah haue grieuouſlie tranſgreſſed againſt me, ſaith the Lord: they haue denied the Lord, and ſaid, It is not he, neither ſhall the plague come vpon vs, neither ſhall wee ſee ſword, nor famine: ond the Prophets ſhall bee as winde, and the word is not in them. Wherefore thus ſaith the Lord God of hoſtes, becauſe yee ſpake

ſuch wordes, I will bring a Nation vpon you from farre, O houſe of Iſrael, which is a mighty Nation, and an ancient Nation, and a Nation whoſe language thou knoweſt not, neither vnderſtandeſt what they ſay: whoſe quiuer is an open ſepulchre, they are all very ſtrong, and they ſhall eate thine haruest, and thy bread, and they ſhall deuoure thy ſonnes and thy daughters, they ſhall eate vp thy ſheep and thy bullockes, they ſhal eate thy vines and thy figge trees, they ſhall destroy with the ſword thy fenced cities, wherein thou didſt truſt. Neuertheleſſe, ſaith the Lord, at thoſe daies I will not make a full end of you. And when you ſhall ſay: Wherefore doth the Lord theſe things vnto vs? then ſhalt thou anſwere them, Like as you haue forſaken me, and ſerued ſtrange Gods in your land: ſo ſhall yee ſerue ſtrangers in a land that is not yours. Declare this in the houſe of Iacob, and publiſh it in Iudah: for among my people are found wicked perſons, that lay waite as he that ſetteth ſnares, and as a cagefull of birdes, ſo is their houſefull of deceit: they do ouerpaſſe the deeds of the wicked, they execute no iudgment, no not the iudgment of the fatherleſſe. And ſhall not viſite for theſe things, ſaith the Lord, or ſhall not my ſoule be auenged on ſuch a Nation as this? an horrible and filthy thing is committed in the land: the Prophets propheſie lies, and the Priests receiue gifts in their hands, ard my people delight therein.
               
                  Here the crowne and kingdome is ouerthrowen according to that prophecie, I will ouerturne, ouerturne, ouerturne the kingdome, vntill he come vnto whome the crowne and diademe doth belong: meaning Chriſt. And indeede the Iewes after this time had neuer an eſtabliſhed kingdome ſeuerall to themſelues free from forraine gouernment.
               
            
            
               3414. Ezechiel prophecieth.
               
                  WHo cap. 1. ſawe the heauens open, and foure beastes (that is Angels) like a man, a lyon, an eagle, and an oxe full of eyes, and with foure winges, and aboue the firmament that was ouer their head, was the faſhion of a throne, like vnto a Saphir ſtone, and vpon the ſimilitude of the throne was by appearance as the ſimilitude of a man vpon it, and the likeneſſe of the bow that is in the clowd in the day of raine, ſo was the apparance of the light round about it: this was the apparance of the ſimilitude of the glory of the Lord. Ezechiel being in Chaldea, in a viſion is carried into Ieruſalem, and there ſeeth the glory of God as before, and ſawe horrible idolatrie. The ſimilitude of creeping things and abhominable beaſts, and all the idols of the houſe of Iſrael painted vpon a wall, whence the wrath of Chriſt kindled againſt them is thus ſignified: one from the throne of Saphir ſtone clothed with linnen, filleth his hands with coles of fire, & ſcattereth

them ouer Ieruſalem. So in the fall of the Church. Ap. 8. The Angell tooke the cenſure, and filled it with fire of the Altar, and caſt it into the earth, and there were voices, and thundrings, and earthquakes.
            
            
               3419. Temple burnt.
               
               
                  IN the Nineteenth yeare of king Nebuchadnetzar king of Babel,
                     390.
                   
                  came Nebuzaradan cheefe Steward and ſeruant of the king of Babel to Ieruſalem, and burnt the houſe of the Lord, and the kings houſe, and all the houſes of Ieruſalem. Alſo all the pillars of braſſe, the baſes, the braſen ſea did the Chaldees breake, and carried the braſſe of them to Babel. The pots alſo, and the beſomes, the inſtruments of muſick, and the incenſe aſhes, and all the veſſels of braſſe that they miniſtred in, tooke they away.
               
               
                  It is to be noted, that ſo long as the Temple ſtood, there was peace in all the earth: but it being once ouerthrowne, there was after that generall warres: the Perſians againſt the Babylonians, and the Babylonians againſt all Nations, and the Grecians againſt the Perſians. For when God once plagued his owne people, his iuſtice was extended ouer all: and as it was Seuen yeres in building: ſo Nebuchadnetzar was Seuen yeares a beaſt for deſtroying it, that is, the heart of a man, not the bodie of a man was taken from him.
               
               Megaſtenes an ancient author, writeth that Nebuchadnetzar at his return home was ſtriken with madnes, and died, crying inceſſantly to the Babilonians, that a great miſchiefe was nere them, which all the power of their Gods could not ſtay: For (quoth he) a Hafeaſſe of Perſia ſhall come & make vs thrals. The man that he ſpake of was Cyrus, who as Alexander Polihiſtor witneſſeth, builded vp the temple of Ieruſalē againe.
               
               
                  Here is performed, Iere. 20. I will make this Citie deſolate, and an hiſsing, ſo that euerie one that paſſeth by ſhall be aſtoniſhed, and hiſſe, becauſe of all the plagues thereof: for the people are all rebellious traytors: they are braſſe and yron, they all are deſtroyers. And Ierem. 7. Wherefore thus ſaith the Lord, Is this houſe become a denne of Theeues, wherevpon my name is called before your eyes? This our Sauiour Chriſt in the 21. of Mathew vſeth to the mony changers
                  ▪ Behold I ſee it, ſaith the Lord. But goe ye now to Silo, where I ſet my name at the beginning, and behold what I did to it, for the ſinnes of my people Iſrael, euen ſo will I doe to this houſe wherein alſo ye truſt, euen to the place that I gaue to you, and to your Fathers, as I haue done vnto Silo. And I will caſt you out of my ſight, as I haue cast all your brethren, euen all the children of Ephraim. For ſeeſt thou not what they doe in the Cities of Iudah, and in the ſtreetes of Ieruſalem? The children gather wood, the fathers

kindle the fire, and the women knead the dough to make Cakes to the Queene of heauen, and to powre out drinke offerings vnto other Gods, that they may prouoke mee vnto anger. Therefore thus ſaith the Lord God, Behold my anger, and my wrath ſhall be powred vpon this place vpon man, and vpon beaſt, and vpon the tree of the field, and vpon the fruite of the ground, and it ſhall burne, and not bee quenched. Ezech. 4. And behold, I will breake the ſtaffe of bread in Ieruſalem, and they ſhall eat bread by waite and with care, and they ſhall drinke water by meaſure, and with aſtoniſhment. And Ezek. 5. the third part of thee ſhall die with peſtilence, and with famine ſhall they be conſumed in the midſt of thee, and another third part ſhall fall by the ſword, and I will ſcatter the laſt third part into all the winds, and I will draw a ſword after them, ſaith the Lord, ſo thou ſhalt be a reproach and ſhame, a chaſtiſement and aſtoniſhment vnto the Nations, when I ſhall execute my iudgments. For I will ſend vpon you a famine, and beaſts, and peſtilence and blood ſhall paſse thorough thee. I the Lord haue ſpoken it.
               
                  Theſe plagues were foretold ſhould come vpon them in the Lawe of Moſes. Leuit. 26. In theſe wordes: If you will not bee reformed, but walke ſtubbornly againſt me, &c. I will appoint ouer you fearefulneſse, a conſumption, and the burning ague to conſume the eyes, and to make the heart heauie, and you ſhall ſowe your ſeede in vaine, for your enemies ſhall eat it. I will breake the pride of power, and I will make your heauen as yron, and your earth as braſſe. This was perfourmed when Elias was conſtrayned to pray for raine. Your ſtrength ſhall be ſpent in vaine, neither ſhall the Land giue her increaſe, neither ſhall the trees of the Land giue their fruit. I will alſo ſend wilde beaſts vpon you, which ſhall ſpoyle you, and deſtroy your cattell, and a ſword that ſhall auenge the quarrell of my couenant, and when yee are gathered in your Cities, I will ſend the peſtilence vpon you, and ye ſhall be deliuered into the hand of the enemie, when I ſhall breake the ſtaffe of your bread, then tenne women ſhall bake your bread in one Ouen, and they ſhall deliuer your bread againe by weight, and ye ſhall eat but not be ſatisfied, and yee ſhall eat the fleſh of your Sonnes, and the fleſh of your Daughters ſhall yee deuoure. I will make your Cities deſolate, and bring your Sanctuarie to nought.
               
                  Vpon this deſtruction Ieremie lamenteth the ſtate of Ieruſalems miſerie, and ſheweth therewith the cauſe of her puniſhments.
               
               How doth the Citie remaine ſolitarie that was full of people? ſhe is as a widowe, ſhe weepeth continually in the night, her teares run downe her cheekes: amonge all her louers ſhe hath none to comfort her. Iudah is caried away captiue becauſe of affliction, and becauſe of great ſeruitude ſhee dwelleth amonge heathen, and findeth no reſt: all her perſecutors tooke her in the ſtraights. The wayes of Sion lament, becauſe no man commeth to the ſolemne feaſts: all her gates are deſolate, her Prieſts ſigh, her Virgins are diſcomfited, and ſhee is in heauineſse, her Aduerſaries are the chiefe, and her enemies proſper: for the

Lord hath afflicted her for the multitude of her tranſgreſsions, and her children are gone into captiuitie before the enemie. And from the Daughter of Sion all her beautie is departed, her Princes are become like Harts that finde no paſture, and they are gone without ſtrength before the purſuer. Ieruſalem remembred the dayes of her affliction, and of her rebellion, and all her pleaſant things that ſhe had in times paſt, when her people fell into the hand of the enemie, and none did helpe her, the aduerſaries ſaw her, and did mocke at her Sabbaths. Ieruſalem hath greeuouſly ſinned, therefore ſhe is in deriſion: all that honoured her deſpiſe her, becauſe they haue ſeen her filthineſſe: yea, ſhee ſigheth, and turneth backward, her filthines is in her skirts, ſhe remembred not her laſt end, therefore ſhe came down wonderfully ſhe had no comforter, ſhee hath ſeen the heathen enter into her Sanctuarie, whom thou didſt command that they ſhould not enter into thy Church. Sion ſtretcheth out her hands, and there is none to cōfort her. The Lord hath appointed the enemies of Iacob round about him. Ieruſalem is as a menſtruous woman in the middeſt of them. The Lord is righteous: for I haue rebelled againſt his commaundement: Heare I pray you all people, and behold my ſorrow; my Virgins and my young men are gone into captiuitie. I called for my Louers, but they deceiued me, my prieſts and mine Elders periſhed in the Citie, while they ſought their meate to refreſh their ſoules: how hath the Lord darkened the Daughter of Sion in his wrath, and hath caſt downe from heauen vnto the earth the beautie of Iſrael, and remembred not his foot-ſtoole in the day of his wrath! The Lord hath deſtroyed all the habitations of Iacob, and not ſpared: hee hath polluted the Kingdome, and the Princes thereof, he hath deſtroyed his Tabernacle as a Garden, he hath deſtroyed his congregation: the Lord hath cauſed the feaſts and Sabbaths to bee forgotten in Sion: He hath forſaken his Altar, hee hath abhorred his Sanctuarie, he hath giuen into the hand of the enemie the walles of her Pallaces: they made a noyſe in the houſe of the Lord, as in the day of ſolemnitie: her gates are ſunke to the ground, he hath deſtroied and broken her barres, her King and her Princes are amonge the Gentiles; the lawe is no more, neither can her Prophets receiue any viſion from the Lord: all that paſse by the way clappe their hands at thee, they hiſse and wagge their head vpon the daughter Ieruſalem, ſaying, Is this the Citie that men call the perfection of beautie, and the ioy of the whole earth? thy enemies hiſse and gnaſh their teeth against thee, ſaying, Let vs deuoure it: ſurely, this is the day that wee looked for: we haue found and ſeene it. The Lord hath done that which hee purpoſed, hee hath fulfilled his word that he had determined of old.
            
            
               
               3431. Ezechiel ſeeth a Viſion of the reſtoring of the Temple.
               THe name of Ezechiels Temple is, The Lord is there. This Temple had more ſpirituall ornaments, than the firſt: for all the Nations of the earth came thither. Chriſt himſelfe taught there, a greater than Aaron.
               
               The old Temple had gold, that is, the ſpirite of prophecie, which the new Temple had not.
               All the lawes and ceremonies of the former Temple was deliuered vnto them againe anew: and Iſrael and Iudah brought all vnder one head, as in the dayes of Dauid and Salomon.
               
               
                  Ezech 40
                  In the fiue and Twentieth yeare of our being in captiuitie in the beginning of the yeare in the Tenth day of the Moneth in the Fourteenth yeare after the Citie was ſmitten, the hand of the Lord was vpon me, and brought mee into the Land of Iſrael in a diuine viſion, and ſet me vpon a verie hye Mountaine, wherevpon was as the building of a Citie. And behold, there was a man with a reede to meaſure it: So in the Ap. 21. Iohn ſayth, The Angell caried me away in the ſpirite to a great and a hye Mountaine, and he ſhewed me the great Citie holy Ieruſalem, deſcending out of heauen from God, and I ſaw no Temple therein, for the Lord God almightie and the Lambe, are the Temple of it.
               
            
            
               3446. Euilmerodach, two and Twentie yeres.
               OF him no euill is ſpoken in the Scripture: ſomething is ſpoken in his praiſe, that he entreated fauourably Ieconias King of Iudah.
               
                  Zorobabel. His name ſignifieth, Free from confuſion. This was perfourmed in him, when as hee with Ieſus the Son of Iehoſadach, Ezra. 3.2. ledde the people from Babell, which ſignifieth Confuſion, and builded the Altar of the Lord to offer burnt offerings thereon, as it is written, Exod. 23.
               
               This deliuerance was propheſied of Zorobabell, by Haggai the prophet. Cap. 2. I will take thee, O Zorobabel the Sonne of Selathiel, and make thee as a ſignet vpon my right hand.
               
            
            
               
               3469. Baltazar, Three yeares.
               HIs name ſignifieth▪ 
                  a ſearcher of treaſu
                        •••
                     . He was verie wicked, as was Nebuchadnetzar his Grandfather: blaſphemed God, and polluted his veſſels. For hee made a great banquet, and called therevnto his wiues and his Concubines, his Lords and his Nobles, and was drunke with the wine which hee dranke out of the veſſels of the houſe of the Lord, which Nebuchadnetzar had brought out from the Temple of Ieruſalem; and the ſame houre whilſt he was boaſting of himſelfe in the pride of his greatneſſe, a peece of hand writeth on the wall where hee was banqueting, Mene, Mene, Tekel, Vpharſin. At the ſight whereof his countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, ſo that the ioynts of his loynes were looſened, and his knees ſmote one againſt the other, and his Princes were aſtonied: Wherefore he ſent for all his Aſtrologians, Caldeans, and Soothſayers, to tel him the interpretation of the words, but they could not▪ then the Queene mother, to wit, Nebuchadnetzars wife, and Grandmother to Baltazar telleth the King, that there was in his Kingdome a man in whom was the ſpirite of the holy Gods, & light and vnderſtanding and wiſedome was found in him, whome Nebuchadnetzar made chiefe of the Enchaunters, Aſtrologians, Caldeans, and Soothſayers, becauſe a more excellent ſpirite, and knowledge, and vnderſtanding was found in him: for hee did expound dreames, and declare hard ſentences, and diſſolued doubts, euen Daniel, whome the King named Belteſhazter, according to the name of Nebuchadnetzars God, which hee did of purpoſe, Daniel being young, to make him forget his owne name, and thereby his Religion, if it could haue been; for Daniels name indeed contained ſinguler aſſurance of Gods mercie towards him. Daniel, God is my Iudge.
               
               
                  Then Daniel was brought before the King, and the King ſpake and ſayd vnto Daniel, Art thou that Daniel, which art of the Children of the Captiuitie of Iudah, whome my Father the King brought out of Iurie? I haue heard of thee, that the ſpirite of the holy Gods is in thee, and that light and vnderſtanding, and excellent wiſedome is found in thee. Now wiſe men, and Aſtrologians haue ben brought before me, that they ſhould read this writing, & ſhew me the interpretation, but they could not, which if thou canſt doe it, thou ſhalt bee clothed with purple, and ſhalt haue a chaine of gold, and bee the thirde ruler in my Kingdome. Then Daniel anſwered before the King, Keepe thy rewards to thy ſelfe, and giue thy gifts to another: Yet will I reade the writing vnto the King, and ſhew him the interpretation.
               
               
                  By the way, wee haue here to vnderſtand, how godly men cannot liue in a kingdome, but God will make them known to be his ſeruants: which they may knowe if they deſpiſe vnlawfull preferments, truſting to the prouidence of God. Abraham was of this Religion: hee would not bee enriched by the King of Sodome. And Moſes had rather ſuffer affliction with the Children of God, than to bee called the Sonne of Pharaohs Daughter.
               
                  Daniel before hee readeth the writing, declareth to the King his wonderfull and impious ingratitude towards God, conſidering his wonderfull worke toward his Grandfather, and ſo ſheweth that he doth not ſinne of ignorance, but of malice, and therefore cannot be forgiuen.
            
            
               
                  Daniels ſpeach is bold, yet reuerent.
               
                  O King heare thou, The moſt high God gaue vnto Nebuchadnetzar thy Father a Kingdome, and maieſtie, and honour, and glorie, and for the maieſtie that he gaue him, all people, Nations, and languages trembled, and feared before him. He put to death whom he would, and whome he would, he ſmote; he ſet vp whome hee would, and whome hee would hee put downe: but when his heart was puft vp, and his minde hardned in pride, hee was depoſed from his kingly throne, and they tooke his honour from him, and hee was driuen from the Sons of men, and his heart was made like the beaſts, and his dwelling was with the wilde Aſſes, they fed him with graſse like Oxen, and his body was weat with the deaw of heauen, till he knew that the moſt high God bare rule ouer the kingdom of men, & that he appointeth ouer it whomſoeuer hee pleaſeth. And thou his Sonne O Belſhatzer, haſt not humbled thy heart, though thou kneweſt all theſe things. But haſt lift vp thy ſelfe againſt the Lord of heauen, and they haue brought the veſſels of his houſe before thee, and thou and thy Princes, thy wiues, and thy Concubines haue drunke wine in them, and thou haſt prayſed the Gods of ſiluer, and gold, of braſſe, yron, wood, and ſtone, which neither ſee, nor heare, 
                     •
                  or vnderſtand, and the God in whoſe hand thy breath is and all thy wayes, him haſt thou not glorified.
            
            
               
               
                  ❧ Now this is the writing that he hath written.
               
                  This is the interpretation.
                  Mene, Mene,
                  Mene. God hath numbred thy kingdome, and hath finiſhed it.
                  
                  Tekel,
                  Tekel. Thou art weighed in the ballance, and art found too light.
                  
                  Vpharſin,
                  Peres. Thy Kingdome is diuided, & giuen to the Medes & Perſians.
                  
               
               
                  The ſame night was Baltaſar the King of the Caldees ſlaine: and Darius of the Medes tooke the Kingdome.
               
               Thus the head of gold is punned to duſt, and Babylon the Lion is caſt into the fire by Chriſt the fierie Iudge.
               And here endeth the glorie of the Babylonians. Now the Seuenty yeres of captiuing the Iewes is accompliſhed, and the plague & ruine of Babylon foretold by the Prophets, is now performed. For Cyrus of Sem, and Darius of Iaphet ioyne together, to ouerthrow Baltaſar of Chams houſe: here Iaphet is perſwaded to dwell with Sem, and Canaan is made a ſeruant of ſeruants to them both according to Gen. 10.
               
            
            
               Now followeth to be handled the ouerthrow of Babel, and the prophecies which concerne the ſame, and by whome the deſtruction is prophecied.
               
                  A Greeuous viſion was ſhewed vnto mee. The tranſgreſſor againſt a tranſgreſsor, and the deſtroyer againſt a deſtroyer. Goe vp Elam,
                  
                     Eſay. 21.
                   beſiege O Madat▪ 
                  By Elam, he meaneth the Perſians; & by Madai, the Meedes. This propheſie was foretold a Hundred yeares before this time. Eſay. 13. Behold, I will ſtirre vp the Medes againſt them, which ſhall not regard ſiluer, nor be deſirous of gold: their children alſo ſhalbe broken in peeces before their eyes, their houſes ſhall be ſpoyled, and their wiues rauiſhed.
               
                  Of Cyrus one Hundred yeares before hee was borne the Lord ſaid, Eſay. 44. Cyrus, thou art my ſhepheard, and he ſhall perfourme all my deſire:

ſaying alſo to Ieruſalem, Thou ſhalt be built: and to the Temple, thy foundation ſhall be ſurely layd. And Eſay. 45. Thus ſayth the Lord vnto Cyrus his annointed, whoſe right hand I haue holden to ſubdue Nations before him. Therefore I will weaken the loynes of Kings, and open the dores before him, and the gates ſhall not bee ſhut. This is verified, when Baltazar being drunke at his banquet, the watches of the Citie were left open, that Cyrus and Darius came ſuddainly vpon them.
               
               
                  It is ſayd further there, I will goe before thee, and make the crooked ſtreight: I will breake the braſen dores, and bruſt the yron barres, and I will giue thee the treaſures of darkneſse, and the thinges hid in ſecret places, that thou mayeſt know that I am the Lord which call thee by thy name, euen the God of Iſrael. For Iacob my ſeruants ſake, and Iſrael mine elect, I will euen call thee by thy name, and name thee though thou haſt not knowne me. I whoſe hands haue ſpread out the heauens, I haue euen commaunded all thine armie, I haue rayſed thee vp in righteouſneſse, and I will direct all thy wayes: thou ſhalt build my Citie, and let goe my captiues, not for price nor reward, ſaith the Lord of Hoſtes. The labour of Egipt and the marchandiſe of Ethiopia, and of the Sabeans, men of ſtature, ſhall come vnto thee, and they ſhall be thine: they ſhall follow thee, and make ſupplication vnto thee, ſaying, Surely God is in thee, and there is none other Gods beſides. And Eſay 46. For I call a bird from the Eaſt, and the man of my counſell from farre: as I haue ſpoken, ſo will I bring it to paſse: I haue purpoſed, and I will doe it. Heare me, yee ſtubborne hearted, and that are farre from iuſtice, I bring neere my iuſtice, it ſhall not be farre off: and my ſaluation ſhall not tarrie: for I will giue ſaluation in Sion, and my glorie vnto Iſrael. Theſe people here mentioned, were tributaries to the Perſians.
               
               Cyrus was a figure of Chriſt; For as Cyrus deliuered the Iewes from the bondage of Babel: ſo Ieſus Chriſt deliuered vs from the bondage of the ſpirituall Babel.
               
               Thus much for the Prophecie of the perſons who ſhould deſtroy Babylon.
            
            
               Now followeth the Prophecies of the destruction thereof.
               
                  Eſay 46.
                  BEL is bowed downe, Nebo is fallen: they are bowed downe and fallen together: for they could not rid them of their burden, and their ſoule is gone into captiuitie. And Eſay. 47. Come downe and ſitte in the duſt O Virgin daughter Bahel: ſitte on the ground: there is no throne, O Daughter

of the Caldeans, for thou ſhalt no more be called tender and delicate. Take the mill ſtones, and grinde meale, looſe thy lockes, make bare thy feete, vncouer the leg, and paſſe through the flouds. Thy filthineſſe ſhall be diſcouered, and thy ſhame ſhall be ſeene. I will take vengeance, and not meete thee as a man: meaning, that he would vſe no humanity nor pittie towardes it. Our Redeemer, the Lord of hoſtes is his name, the Holy one of Iſrael▪ Sit ſtill, and get thee into darkneſſe, O daughter of the Caldeans: for thou ſhalt no more be called the Lady of Kingdomes. I was wrath with my people, I polluted mine inheritance, and gaue them into thine hands, and thou diddeſt ſhew them no mercie, but thou laidſt the very heauie yoke vpon the ancient, and thou ſaidſt, I ſhall be a Lady for euer: ſo that thou didst not ſet thy heart to theſe things, neither didſt thou remember the latter end thereof. Therefore now heare, thou that art giuen to pleaſures, and dwelleſt careleſſe: Thou ſaiſt in thy heart, I am, and none elſe: I ſhall not ſit as a widdowe, neither ſhall know the loſſe of children: but theſe two things ſhall come to thee in one day, the loſſe of children, and widdowhood: for, the multitude of the diuinations, and for the great abundance of thine enchanters, haue cauſed thee to rebell, and thou hast ſaid in thy heart, I am, and none elſe. Stand now among thy enchanters, and in the multitude of thy ſooth-ſayers: let now the Aſtrologers, the ſtarre gaſers, and Prognosticators ſtand vp, and ſaue thee from theſe things. Behold, they ſhall be as ſtubble, they ſhall burne like fire, and ſhall not deliuer their owne liues from the power of the flame. For Babell is fallen, it is fallen: and all the images of her Gods are broken to the ground, this is the time of the Lords vengeance, he will render vnto her a recompence. Babell hath beene as a golden cuppe in the Lords hand, that made all the earth drunken, the Nations haue drunke of her wine, therefore doe the Nations rage. Babell is ſodainely fallen and deſtroyed: howle for her, bring balme for her ſore, if ſhe may be healed. We would haue cured Babell, but ſhee could not be healed. Forſake her, and let euery one goe into his own cuntrey: for her iudgment is come vp into heauen, and is lifted vp to the clowds. O thou that dwellest vpon many waters, aboundant in treaſures, thy end is come, euen the end of thy couetouſneſſe! Behold, I come vnto thee, O deſtroying mountaine, which deſtroyeſt all the earth, ſaith the Lord, and I will ſtretch out my hand vpon thee, and roll thee downe from the rockes, and will make thee a burnt mountaine. They ſhall not take of thee a ſtone for a corner, nor a ſtone for foundations, but thou ſhalt bee destroyed for euer, ſaith the Lord. A Poste ſhall runne to meete the Poste, and a Meſſenger to meete the Meſſenger, to ſhew the King of Babell how his citie is taken on a ſide therof, and that the daughter of Babel is like a threſhing floore, and the time of her threſhing is come, ſaith the Lord. The ſpoile of me, and that which was left of me, is brought vnto Babel ſhall the inhabitant of Sion ſay, and my bloud vnto the inhabitants of Caldea, ſhall Ieruſalem ſay. Therefore Babel

ſhall be as heapes, a dwelling place for Dragons, an aſtoniſhment, and an hiſsing without an inhabitant. They ſhall roare together like Lions, and yelle as the Lyons whelpes. In their heate I will make them feastes, & I will make them drunken, that they may reioyce, and ſleepe a perpetual ſleepe, and not wake, ſaith the Lord. How is Sheſhack taken! how is the glory of the whole world taken! how is Babell become an aſtoniſhment among the Nations! her cities are deſolate: the land is dry and a wilderneſſe, a land wherein no man dwelleth, neither doth the Sonne of man paſſe therby. Though Babell ſhould mount vp to the heauens, and though ſhe ſhould defend her ſtrength on high; yet from me ſhall come her deſtroyers, ſaith the Lord. For the Lord God that recompenceth, will ſurely recompence, and I wil make drunke her Princes and her Wiſemen, her Dukes and her Nobles, and they ſhall ſl
                     •
                  epe a perpetuall ſleepe, and not wake, ſaith the King, whoſe name is the Lord of hoſtes. And Ieremie tooke a great ſtone, and caſt it into Euphrates, and ſaid, Thus ſhall Babylon be ouerthrowen. Thus the word of the Lord remayneth for euer, as it is written, If any leade into captiuity, hee ſhall goe into captiuity: and if any kill with a ſword, he muſt be killed with a ſword. Ap. 13.
               
            
            
               Now compare the impieties of Rome, or miſticall Babylon, with theſe times, and you ſhall find them the very ſame, and therefore the Holy Ghoſt layeth downe her deſtruction, as the destruction of Babel.
               
               ANd Ap. 14. I ſawe an Angell flie in the middest of heauen, hauing an euerlaſting Goſpel, ſaying with with a loude voice, Feare God, and giue glory to him for the houre of his iudgment is come. And there followed an other Angel ſaying, It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon the great Citie: For ſhe made all nations to drinke of the wine of the wrath of her fornication. And I ſawe a woman ſitting vpon a ſcarlet coloured beaſt, full of names of blaſphemie, which had ſeauen heads and ten hornes, and in her forehead was a name written. A mistery Great Babylon, the mother of whoredomes and abhominations of the earth. And I ſawe the woman drunken with the bloud of Saints, and with the bloud of the Martyrs of Ieſus. And the Angell ſaid vnto me, The woman which thou ſaweſt, is the Great City which raigneth ouer the Kings of the earth. Ap. 18.
               
               
                  And after this I ſaw an other Angel come downe from heauen, and hee cryed with a loude voice, ſaying: It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon the great Ci
                     •
                  ie and is become the habitation of Deuils, and the hould of al foule ſpirits, and a cage of euery vncleane and hatefull bird. For all nations

haue drunke of the wine of her fornication, and the Kings of the earth haue committed fornication with her, and the Marchants of the earth are waxed rich of the abundance of her pleaſures. And I heard an other voice from heauen ſay, Goe out of her my people, that ye be not partakers in her ſinnes, and that ye receiue not of her plagues, for her ſinnes are come vp to heauen, and God hath remembred her iniquities. Reward her, euen as ſhe hath rewarded you, and giue her double according to her workes, and in the cup that ſhee hath filled to you, fil her the double: in aſmuch as ſhe glorified her ſelfe, and liued in pleaſure, ſo much giue ye to her torment and ſorrowe: for ſhe ſaith in her heart, I ſit being a Queene and am no widdow, and ſhall ſee no mourning. Therefore ſhal her plagues come at one day, death, and ſorrowe, and famine, and ſhe ſhal be burnt with fire: for ſtrong is the Lord God which wil condemne her. O heauen, reioyce of her, and yee holy Apoſtles and Prophets: for God hath giuen your iudgment on her. Then a mighty Angel tooke vp a ſtone, like a great milſtone, and cast it into the ſea, ſaying, With ſuch violence, ſhall the great citie Babylon be cast, and ſhal be found no more.
               
               And as the Iewes doe praiſe God after their deliuerance, ſo is it ſaid that vpon the deliuerance from this ſpirituall bondage, all Chriſtians ſhall ſay, Let vs be glad and reioyce, and worſhip God, ſaying Amen, Hallelu-iah: for our Lord God Almighty hath raigned.
               At this deliuerance out of Babell, about the euening offering, the Angell Gabriel appeareth to Daniel, and telleth him the exact houre of Chriſts death, Dan. 9. in theſe wordes. Seauenty ſeauens,
                  70. 490. (or 490) yeares are exactly decreed for the death of Chriſt the King, the moſt Holy, to finiſh ſinne, to bring in iuſtice, to reconcile iniquity, to annoint the most Holy, and to performe euery viſion and prophecie. By this key the Iewes might haue vnderſtoode the death of Chriſt the ſonne of all ſaluation.
               Theſe ſeauenty ſeauens are diſtinguiſhed into ſeauen ſeauens, and the Temple ſhall be built into ſixtie two ſeauens, wherein Religion ſhall ſeeme to be vtterly obſcured: and into one ſeauen, in the halfe of which Chriſt the King muſt be killed, not for himſelfe, but for the people, as Dan. 9. The time of the ſixtie two ſeauens is prooued out of the Grecians Storie, whome God in his ſecret wiſedome vſed though vnwittingly to themſelues) to be recorders of his truth. Theſe ſeauens of weekes I wil handle more at large at the death of Chriſt, where they are fully accompliſhed.
               Vpon the viſion of the foure Beaſts in Dan: which repreſent foure ſtately kingdomes, figured before in Nebucadnetzars image which he ſawe in his dreame, Dan. 2. ariſeth a great queſtion, Whether the fourth Beaſt containe the kingdome of the Romanes, or not. It is certaine it doth not, and thus it may be prooued.
               Of the firſt, which is the Lion, to be meant of Babylon; the Beare, to

be the kingdome of the Medes, and Perſians; and the Leopard to be Alexanders kingdome, there is no controuerſie: but then of the fourth Beaſt with ten hornes, lyeth the queſtion.
               It is ſaid that a ſtone ſhall be cut without hands, and ſhall become a great mountaine, and ſhall fill al the earth, and ſhal fal vpon the image, and punne it to duſt. This ſtone is Chriſt, vpon whoſe birth this viſion ends: for the ſtone falling vpon the feete of iron & clay, the whole image fell and was beaten to powder. If then vpon the birth of Chriſt the fourth kingdome muſt be punned to duſt, and al the beaſts be conſumed in the fire by the Ancient of daies, as Daniel 7. then the fourth kingdome cannot be the Romanes. For vntill the comming of Chriſt they were in no glory, and then were they in their chiefeſt glory: for although a little before indeede they had conquered all the world, yet the world did not conſent to pay tribute vntill Chriſts time, and therefore it could not bee ſaid a full conqueſt. For it is neuer a full conqueſt, vntill a generall conſent of tribute be graunted. If it be obiected, that it is meant of the ſecond comming of Chriſt, how is euery viſion and propheſie performed in Chriſt? and with what authority could Daniel ſpeake of the ſecond comming, before hee had mentioned the firſt? Therefore, to hold this to be meant of the Romanes, proueth Chriſt not to be yet come, nor the ceremonies of Moſes to be aboliſhed.
               Againe, the fourth Beaſt, that is, the fourth kingdome hath relation to the fourth part of the image. And by the legges of iron & clay, and thereby, as the legges of one body being twaine, are expreſſed.
               Wherefore, as the legges of contrary natures, that is, of iron and clay, being twaine, proceede out of one body: ſo the kingdome which by them is ſignified, muſt be a diuided Nation ruling one kingdome, which the Romanes were not: for Augustus Caeſar was onely Emperour: otherwiſe you darken the Romanes glory.
               Againe, it is ſaid of theſe legges (that is of this fourth kingdome) that they ſhall ſtriue by marriages, becauſe they were two Nations, that is, of Syria and Egipt, to be as one body. But as iron cleaueth not in nature with clay; no more ſhould they bee one. Whoſe ſtories if you examine in Iustine and other heathen Authors, you ſhall find they were from time to time preuented by vntimely deathes. For the wiues killed their husbands, the mothers their ſonnes, the ſonnes their mothers; ſo that they could not bring to paſſe their purpoſe. This cannot be applied to the Romanes: for they were ſtill one ſole gouernment, and vniuerſall Emperours of themſelues.
               Againe, the little horne, that is, the tenth horne of the fourth beaſt, is Antiochus the vilde, who is the laſt part of the fourth beaſt: whoſe

villanies indeede are anſwerable to the impieties of the Romanes, & therefore in the Reuelation the whole time of their gouernment is by alluſion called daies 1260. a time. 2. times and halfe a time, or 42. monthes alluding to the time of Antiochus gouernment. For as Antiochus polluted the Temple of God, changing the lawes of Moſes, forbidding that which God commanded, placing idolatry in his ſanctuary, and perſecuting ſuch as would not forſake the Religion of God: ſo the Romanes haue polluted the Temple of God, changing the lawes that Moſes teacheth, and forbiddeth that which God commandeth, compelling open idolatry, and perſecuting ſuch as will not forſake the truth of Gods Religion.
               Againe, theſe legges, meaning the fourth kingdome, are called in Dan. 11. the King of the North, and the King of the South, that is, Syria, which is North from Iudea, and Egipt which is South from Iudea: therefore not the Romanes.
               Againe, the corporation of the Romanes is deſcribed in the Reuelation to be one beaſt with ſeauen heads and ten hornes. This fourth beaſt in Daniel hath but one head and ten hornes: therefore it cannot be meant of the Romanes.
               But in truth the Romanes hauing conquered the whole world, & imbracing the impieties of the Babylonian Lyon, the cruelty of the Perſian Beare, the fiercenes of the Grecian Leopard, and the moſt tyrannicall and prophane blaſphemies of the fourth beaſt; The holy Ghoſt could not by fitter reſemblances deſcribe them, than by theſe beaſtes: therefore hee nameth them vnder the name of one monſtrous beaſt: hauing property of all the former, that is, A beaſt with ſeauen heads and ten hornes, mouthed like the Babylonian Lyon, footed like the Perſian Beare, bodyed like the Grecian Leopard, and hath ten hornes, and the blaſphemous wordes of the fourth beaſt, whoſe inhumane cruelty was ſuch, that no beaſt in the earth could be likened vnto it.
               
                  Thus much for the parts of the image, and for the foure beaſts in generall.
               
            
            
               Now followeth to be handled the Perſians Storie particularly. And firſt for Cyrus.
               
               HE deliuered the people from captiuity the ſame yeare that hee tooke Babylon, and gaue them great treaſures to build vp the Temple of Ieruſalem, whither he ſent them vnder the conduct of Zorababel.
               
               
                  2. Chro. 36. In the firſt yeare of Cyrus King of Perſia, (when the word of the Lord ſpoken by the mouth of Ieremie was finiſhed) the Lord ſtirred vp the ſpirit of Cyrus, and he made a Proclamation throughout all his kingdome, ſaying, Thus ſaith Cyrus King of Perſia, All the kingdomes of the earth hath the Lord God of heauen giuen me, and he hath commanded mee to build him an houſe in Ieruſalem, that is in Iudah. Who is among you of all his people, with whome the Lord his God is, let him goe vp, and build the houſe of the Lord God of Iſrael, he is the God which is in Ieruſalem.
               
               
                  Then the chiefe Fathers of Iudah and Beniamin, and the ſacrificers and Leuites roſe vp, with all them whoſe ſpirite God had raiſed to goe vp to build the houſe of the Lord which is in Ieruſalem.
               
               
                  Alſo Cyrus brought forth the veſſels of the houſe of the Lord which Nebucadnetzar had taken out of Ieruſalem, and counted them vnto Sheſhbatzar the Prince of Iudah whome the Caldeans called Zorobabel, and the number of the veſſels of gold and ſiluer were 5400. Sheſhbatzar brought vp all, with them of the captiuity that came vp from Babel to Ieruſalem: & the whole congregatiō of them together which came from captiuity, were 42360. beſides their ſeruants and maides, of whome were 7337. and among them 200. ſinging men and women. And certaine of the chiefe Fathers when they came to Ieruſalem, gaue after their ability vnto the treaſure of the worke 60000. drammes of gold, and 5000. peeces of ſiluer, and 100. ſacrificers garments; the ſumme of the money in our account amounts to 94493. pounds, 6. ſhillings 8. pence: for the dramme is the eight part of an ounce, and the ounce the eight part of a marke, which according to our eſtimation amounteth (allowing the French crowne for 6. ſhillings 4. pence the dramme) to 24826. poundes, 13. ſhillings 4. pence. And the peeces of ſiluer are called Minaes, and euery peece conteine 26. ſhillings 8. pence: ſo 5000. Minaes make 550000. frankes, which in our account is 69666. poundes, 13. ſhillings 4. pence.
               But the Iſraelites that were beyond the riuer in Samaria, placed there by the King of Aſhur, enuying the proſperous proceeding of the building of the Citie and Temple, cauſed it to be hindred vnto the ſecond yeare of Darius King of Perſia: But Haggai and Zachariah propheſied vnto the people, and encouraged them. So they continued in the worke: one hand on the trowell, the other on the ſword, vntill it was finiſhed. So the foundation is laid in the fourth yeare of Cyrus, as the firſt Temples foundation was laid in the fourth yeare of Salomon.
               
               This Darius is alſo called Artaxerxes which in the Perſian tongue ſignifieth, an excellent Warriour. Some thinke it was Cambyſes Darius ſonne: but Cambyſes Cyrus ſonne was neuer King, but Lieutenant in his fathers abſence.
               
                  This Darius was alſo called Aſſuerus: he was not ſupreme King, but deputie to Cyrus. For Cyrus hauing conquered the kingdome of the Medes againſt Aſtyages, left the ſaid kingdome to his brother Darius, by whoſe ayde he tooke Babylon, and tranſported the kingdome of the Babylonians to the Perſians. Two yeares after, the ſaid Darius returned into Madai, and Cyrus raigned alone in Babylon. Then he mooued warre againſt the Scythians, and marched towards them, and in the meane while left Cambyſes his ſonne King of the countrey in his abſence, according to the cuſtome of the Perſians, which was, to appoint the neereſt of the Kings bloud to be King ouer the countrie, when the King went out to fight againſt any ſtrange Nation: this is the cauſe why Cambyſes was not ſet in the ſucceſsiue order of the kingdomes. Neither is there mention of two brethren which were Magitians, which guilefully vſurped the kingdome: but their guile being known, they continued but a fewe monthes, and Darius ſonne to Hyſtaſpis was choſen King.
               
                  Xerxes the ſonne of the ſaid Darius ſucceded him, but is not heere placed in the number of the Monarchies, for that he left his kingdome to Darius Long-hand his ſonne, according to the cuſtome of the Perſians, when he went to warre againſt the Grecians. The Greeke Hiſtoriographers not reſpecting the cuſtome, number the ſaid Xerxes & Cambyſes among the ſaid Monarchies ſucceſsiuely in order, which is the cauſe that they count more yeares in the Perſian Monarchy than were: that is, 226. yeares, whereas their whole gouernment was not aboue 120. yeares, or thereabouts.
               
                  Cyrus raigned twelue yeares. And after Cyrus death, Aſsuerus Artaxerxes obtayneth the kingdome of the Perſians twelue yeares; in his third yeare beganne the Storie of Heſter. After him ſucceeded Darius Aſsirius, Eſdr. 6.22. This Darius King of Aſhur, encouraged the people in the worke of the houſe of the Lord. He is heere called King of Aſhur, becauſe he was King of the Medes, Perſians, and Aſſirians.
               After him ſucceeded Artaxerxes the godly, the ſonne of Darius Hyſtaſpis. Eſdr. 7. Neh. 2.
            
            
               2519. The Temple built in the end of the ſeauenth ſeauen.
               THE time from the firſt proclamation by Cyrus for the building of this Temple is ſeauen ſeauens, that is, Nine and fortie yeares: but being hindred vntill the third yeare,49. the exact time is but ſix & fortie

yeares according to Iohn 2. Fortie and ſix yeares was this Temple in building. The meaning is, that the Temple and walles of the Cities were now fullie reedified by Nehemiah. This nine and fortie yeares was the twentieth yeare of Artaxerxes the godly. Neh. 6.25.
               
               By the way here is to be vnderſtoode, that preſently after the building of the Temple, all propheſying fayled.
               
                  2519.The Prophets that were in theſe times after the captiuity of Babylon, were Eſdras, Nehemias, Haggai, Zacharias, and Malachi: All the other Prophets, as Eſay, Amos, Micheas, Oſeas, Ieremie, Sophonie, Obadias, Ionas, Nahum, Abacuk or Ioel, were before the captiuity; and Daniel, and Ezechiel in the captiuity.
               After him ſucceeded Xerxes the fift King of the Perſians. The time when he firſt warred with Grecia, is not certainely ſet downe.
               After him Artaxerxes Longi-manus the ſixt King of Perſia. Then Ochus Artaxerxes, Darius Nothus the ſeauenth.
               
                  Artaxerxes Memor the eighth, Arſes Artaxerxes, and then Darius the laſt King of the Perſians, conquered by Alexander, according to Dan. 10. Behold, I goe away, and the King of Grecia commeth.
               
               Here the Ramme is ouerthrowne by the goate bucke. Alexander the horne in the forhead of the Bucke ouercommeth him: as Dan: 8. I ſaw in a viſion in the Pallace of Shuſan in the Prouince of Elam, being by the riuer Vlai, a Ramme with two hornes, and the Ramme puſhed againſt the West, againſt the North, and againſt the South: ſo that no beasts might ſtand before him, nor could deliuer out of his hand, but he did what he liſted and became great. And as I conſidered, behold, a goate bucke came from the Weſt ouer the whole earth, and touched not the ground, and this Goate had a horne that appeared betweene his eyes, and he came to the Ramme that had the two hornes, and ran vnto him in his fierce rage, and he ſmote the Ramme, and brake his two hornes: and there was no power in the Ramme to ſtand against him, but he caſt him downe to the ground, and ſtamped vpon him, and there was none that could deliuer the Ramme out of his power. Therefore the Goate waxed exceeding ſtrong, and when he was at the ſtrongeſt, his great horne was broken, and for it came vp foure, that appeared towardes the foure windes of the heauen.
               
               This Ramme is the kingdome of Media and Perſia: the two hornes are to diſtinguiſh the kingdomes, and doe repreſent the Meeds & Perſians: they are alſo the Beare the armes and breſt of ſiluer.
               Here the Beare is caſt into the fire by Chriſt the fierie iudge, and the armes and breſt of the image are punned to duſt, and the Ramme that boaſted himſelfe in his ſtrength, ſtamped vnder foote.
               And heere endeth the glorie of the Perſians.
            
            
               
               IT is ſayd, Dan. 11. Behold, there ſhall stand vp three Kings in Perſia, and the Fourth ſhall be farre richer than they all. Now hee meaneth that there ſhall be but Foure Kings in Perſia, for the Plaine croſſeth but from Cambyſes who at this time raigned: there ſhould be foure Kings that ſhould bee enemies to the Iewes, that is, Cambyſes, Smerdes, Darius the Sonne of Hyſtaſpis, and Artaxerxes or Darius whome Alexander ouerthrew. This Darius was of wonderfull power, hee had in his armie Nine hundred thouſand men. Yet he was not able to withſtand Alexander the Horne in the fore-head of the Bucke. The reaſon was, he truſted in his ſtrength, and not in God. And againe God had promiſed Alexander the victorie One hundred yeares before.
               As touching their confuſed names, ye ſhall vnderſtand, that among the Perſians, Darius ſignifieth he that ſubdueth, Xerxes a Warriour. Alſo that this name Aſsuerus is drawne from the Hebrewes in ſtead of Artaxerxes. Further, that Artaxerxes was the common name of all kings of Perſia, as Pharaoh was the common name of the kings of Egypt, and Caeſar of the Romane Emperours. Therefore where ye finde many indifferently named Darius, or Artaxerxes, or both together, you muſt diligently examine the Storie, and the difficultie of vnderſtanding vnder what king that happened, which is recited in the Bookes of Eſdras, Nehemias, and Eſter, will eaſily be made plaine.
               Here the old Teſtament ends, and Malachi prophecieth of the comming of Iohn Baptiſt, vnder the name of Elias. Mal. 3. Behold, I ſend you Elias. Chriſt himſelfe expoundeth this of Iohn Baptiſt. Mat. 11. This is he of whome it is written, behold, I ſend mine Angell before thy face, which ſhall prepare thy way before thee, for all the Prophets, and the lawe prophecied vnto Iohn, and if ye will receiue it, this is Elias which was to come. He that hath eares to heare, let him heare.
               
               Here endeth alſo the Hebrew tongue. And though Schollers write Hebrew, yet vpon the firſt ſight it is apparant to be the writing of man, ſo farre it diſagreeth from the ſtile of the holy ſpirite. Now all prophecying ceaſeth. And where the old Teſtament leaueth, there the new beginneth. The old Teſtament beginnes with deſcribing the earthly habitation for man, and the tree of life. The new Teſtament ends with deſcription of the heauenly habitation of the ſoule of man, that is, the heauenly Ieruſalem, and the tree of life. The old Teſtament ends with grace, that is, Iochanan, or Iohn. The new Teſtament both begins with grace, and ends with grace, that is to ſay, with Iohn Baptiſt, and Iohn the Euangeliſt.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ Here beginneth the Kingdome of the Grecians to flouriſh.
            
               3591. Alexander the great, raigneth Twelue yeares.
               HIs name ſignifieth Conquerour. His Countrey was Macedonia, or Grecia, Iauans Countrey, that is, where Iauans Sonnes were ſcattered at the confuſion of tongues.
               He is of Iaphet by kindred. In his conqueſt ouer the whole world, there is the wonderfull loue of God to bee vnderſtood: and that is, that by his meanes the Greeke tongue, wherein the newe Teſtament was afterwards to be written, was made famous ouer all the world, that when the holy Ghoſt ſhould penne the Booke, it might bee eaſie to all. This bleſsing was to Iaphet, in recompence of his vertuous action with Sem in couering their Father. For Noah prophecied, that Sem ſhould firſt be bleſsed, and then Iaphet ſhould haue a larger glorie. This bleſsing concerning Iaphets houſe, began in the ſucceſſe of Darius of Iaphet, with Cyrus of Sem, againſt the Babylonians, enlarged now by Alexanders conqueſt, and by making the Greeke tongue famous: but moſt of all after Chriſt, when Iohn was baniſhed into Iaphets Country, to ſee the glorious forme of the heauenly Ieruſalem, and a Booke in the Greeke tongue deliuered vp to all the world containing the graces of Chriſt, and the glad tidings of the euerlaſting Goſpell. The comfort of this is vnſpeakable, being duly embraced: but eſpecially to vs of Iaphets houſe, that is, the Ilands of the ends of the earth, ſeeing by the benefite thereof, we haue the true vnderſtanding of eternall life. The vſe of this compelleth vs to ſearch the Stories of our antiquities, which wee may finde in the 10. of Geneſis.
               
               About this time Solon the wiſe flouriſhed, and made a law, that Homer the Poet, who was long before him, ſhould be read in the publike aſſemblies on holy dayes and feſtiuall dayes, as the Epiſtles and Goſpels bee read in our Churches. This Homer in a trifling argument of the warre at Troy, layeth downe all the excellencie of the Greeke tongue.
               About this time alſo, the Seuen wiſe men of Greece were famous,

and all their diſputations be vpon Homer: as Plato, Ariſtotle, and Zenophon, &c.
               
               The Grecians affirme, that Homer was tranſlated into the Indian tongue, and other languages, that ſo he might be knowne and vnderſtood of other nations alſo.
               Againe, Alexander being of great poſſeſsions, hee muſt haue many vnder-officers to belong vnto him: then he that would beare any office, or bee in any credite, muſt be skilfull in the greeke tongue. Caeſar, Seuen and Fortie yeares before Chriſt, ſpeaketh of the Denides learning greeke in England. Tullie pro Archia the poet, reaſoneth thus: Though Archias the poet be not by nature a Citizen, yet he deſerueth to bee thought ſo to bee, ſeeing by birth hee is a Grecian, and of Antiochia a populous Citie, and of great account, from whence flowed learned men, and liberall ſtudies. And if any man ſhall thinke a leſſer fruite of glorie to be reaped from greeke verſes, than from latine, hee erreth in good ſadneſſe, becauſe thoſe thinges which are written in greeke, are read almoſt into all nations: thoſe which are in latine, are contained with their owne borders, which in good ſooth are verie narrowe. Thus, by Tullies teſtimonie, the greeke tongue ſtretched ouer the whole world.
               At Auguſtus Caeſars time the latine beganne to flouriſh, and the greeke tongue ceaſed as if the holy ghoſt ſhould haue aduiſed the Grecians to haue written no more. For Plutarch and Athenaeus doe not write any new ſtorie, but either cōment on that which was written before; or abridge it. And any one skilfull in the greeke tongue, may eaſily perceiue from what notable place of Plato, Homer, or other greeke writers euerie phraſe in the newe Teſtament is deriued; and thoſe which are not there to bee found in thoſe authors, are fetched from the hebrew of the old Teſtament, from whence all the rootes of the greeke tongue are drawne. So that to the exact knowledge and vnderſtanding of the new teſtament, two things are requiſite, cunning in the greeke authors, and in the old Teſtament.
            
            
               Let vs returne to Alexander.
               He is the great Horne in the forehead of the Goat Bucke.
               Hee is alſo the Leopard: but the foure heads of the Leopard are foure Captaines, to whome after his death, his Kingdome was diuided.
               He is alſo the belly and ſides of braſſe.
               
                  Alexanders great power is broken; for when he had ouercome all the Eaſt, he thought to returne to Grecia, to ſubdue them that there

had rebelled, and ſo hee died by the way, after he had raigned twelue yeares.
               Here the bellie and ſides of braſſe are beaten to duſt by Chriſt the Stone. The Leopard is caſt into the fire by Chriſt the fierie Iudge. The great Horne is broken by Chriſt truely Palmoni, hauing ſecrets numbred, Who numbreth, wayeth, and diuideth.
               
               This ſentence doth extend to the vſe of all men in the world. For God numbreth all our wayes, and wayeth vs in the ballance of his iuſtice, but entreth not into iudgement with his ſeruants, knowing whereof they be made. He diuideth his mercie vnto vs farre beyond the compaſſe of our deſarts, whereby we crie, Abba, Father.
               
               Now after Alexanders death, the whole gouernment was diuided vnto foure of his Captaines, which are the foure heads of the Leopard. The bodie of the Leopard was himſelfe, and his entier gouernement: the winges, the ſpeedie ſpoyle that he made of the Perſians.
               
               The names of his Captaines were

                     
                        Caſsander,
                     
                     
                        Seleucus,
                     
                     
                        Antigonus,
                     
                     
                        Ptolomeus,
                     
                  
who had

                     
                        Macedonia.
                     
                     
                        Syria.
                     
                     
                        Aſia the leſſe.
                     
                     
                        Egypt.
                     
                  
               
               And in a ſhort ſpace after, the gouernement came into two heads; that is, it was ruled by Seleucus king of Syria, and Ptolomeus Lagi king of Egypt, the King of the North and the King of the South: and their gouernment, and the ſucceſsion of their gouernment are the beaſt with tenne Hornes: and the legs of yron and clay, they are alſo called Gog and Magog in Ezechiel. The whole gouernement or Kingdome is the beaſt; the tenne hornes are tenne cruell Kings that ſhall ariſe out of that kingdome, namely, Seleucus Nicator, Antiochus Soter, Antiochus Theos, Seleucus Callinicus, Seleucus Ceraunus, Antiochus the great, Seleucus Philopater, Ptolomeus Euergetes, Ptolomeus Philopater, and Antiochus Epiphanes.
               
            
            
               3620. Seleucus Nicator, one of Alexanders Succeſſors.
               
               HE held Aſia two and fortie yeares. Here beginneth the tyrannicall gouernment of the tenne Hornes, and the hardneſſe of the yron legges: for yet the legges are yron. Hee is the firſt Horne that ruſheth againſt Iudea, exacting all duties, as if he had been

their king. From this time to Antiochus Epiphanes is reckoned, one hundred thirtie and ſeuen yeares. 1, Mach. 1.11.
               
            
            
               3663. Antiochus Soter, the ſecond Horne.
               HE is made king in his fathers life. Hee falleth ſicke for loue of his Fathers wife, and afterwards marieth her, and within few yeares dyeth in recompence of that villanie.
            
            
               3663. Antiochus Theos, the third Horne.
               HE marrieth Berenice the Daughter of Ptolomeus Philadelphus king of the South or Egypt, hauing a former wife Laodice, by whome hee is poyſoned, and Berenice with all her Aſsiſtants ſlain. This is handled Dan. 11.6. And in the end of yeares, they ſhall bee ioyned together, for the Kinges Daughter of the South ſhall come to the king of the North, to make an agreement: but ſhe ſhall not retaine the power of the arme, neither ſhal he continue, nor his arme, but ſhe ſhall be deliuered to death, and they that brought her, and hee that begat her, and hee that comforted her, in theſe times. Thus it appeareth how the legges of yron and clay cleaue not together.
               This Ptolomeus Philadelphus king of Egipt, being deſirous to bee famous for Bookes, getteth a Librarie of all the bookes hee could heare of. Amongſt which, he heard of a booke that the Iewes had at Ieruſalem, which was the Bible: ſo hee ſent for Seuentie Iewes to tranſlate the booke out of hebrew into greeke, which they did in Seuentie dayes. Now they knowing that it was not of any deuotion of religion that he deſired it, but to furniſh his Librarie; they thruſt in likewiſe into the Bible diuers of their owne fables, as the ſtorie of Suſanna, of Bell & the Dragon, of Eſdras, the bookes of Tobie and Iudith, & la the bookes that we call Apocripha, becauſe they knew that God had no purpoſe to ſaue them, being Egiptian Dogs; and becauſe they would not throwe pearles to ſwine, they thruſt into the ages before the flood more yeares by a thouſand, than euer were in.
            
            
               3680. Seleucus Callinicus, the fourth Horne.
               HE ſlew his Step-mother Berenice, and her young Sonne. But out of the budde of her rootes, as Dan. 11.7. ſhall one ſtand vp in his

ſtead, (meaning, that Ptolomeus Euergetes the fift Horne, after the death of his Father Ptolomeus Philadelphus,
                  3691. ſhould ſucceede in the Kingdome, being of the ſame ſtock that Berenice was) and he ſhall come with an armie, and ſhall enter into the fortreſse of the King of the North, meaning Seleucus Callinicus to reuenge Berenice his ſiſters death. Wherfore Seleucus Callinicus Sons,3704. that is, Seleucus Ceraunus and Antiochus the Great, Dan.
                  3706. 
                  11.10. ſhall bee ſtirred vp, and ſhall aſſemble a mightie great armie; Seleucus died whiles the warres were preparing: but Antiochus the great prepared a wonderfull great armie, hee had Sixe thouſand horſemen, and Threeſcore thouſand footmen, and grew to be verie great. But the king of the North, that is, Ptolomeus Philopater the eight horne,3710. when he ſaw Antiochus the great take away ſo many of his Dominions in Syria, and that hee was alſo readie to inuade Egypt, he prepareth a great armie, and withſtandeth Antiochus the king of the North. But it did not preuaile: for not onely Antiochus came againſt him, but alſo Philip king of Macedon, and they brought a great power with them, as Dan. 11.14. And at that ſame time there ſhall many ſtand vp againſt the King of the South. Alſo the rebellious children of thy people ſhall exalt themſelues to eſtabliſh the viſion, but they ſhall fall. She here meaneth by the rebellious children, certain Iewes, which vnder the conduct of Onyas retyred with him into Egypt, vppon the falſe alleadging of a place out of Eſay 19.19. In that day ſhall the Altar of the Lord bee in the middeſt of the Land of Egypt, and a pillar by the border thereof vnto the Lord, &c. And Dan. 11. So the King of the North ſhall come, and caſt vp a mount, and take the ſtronge Citie, and the armes of the South, that is, The power of the Egyptians ſhall not reſiſt, neither his choſen people, neither ſhall there bee any ſtrength to withstand. But hee (that is Antiochus the great) ſhall come, and doe vnto him, (that is, Ptolomeus Epiphanes) what hee list, and none ſhall ſtand against him, and hee ſhall ſtand in the pleaſant Land, which by his hand ſhall be conſumed: meaning, that hee ſhall not onely afflict the Egyptians, but the Iewes alſo the people of the pleaſant Land. Againe, hee ſhall ſet his face to enter with the power of his whole Kingdome, and his confederates with him, and thus ſhall hee doe. And hee, (that is, Ptolomeus Epiphanes) ſhall giue him a Daughter of women, (that is, one Cleopatra the Daughter of Antiochus) to deſtroy her: but ſhee ſhall not stand on his ſide, neither bee for him.
               
               
                  For hee ſhall turne his face toward the forts of his owne Land, that is, for feare of the Romans hee ſhall flye to his holds. Then ſhall ſtand in his place in the glorie of the Kingdome one that ſhall rayſe taxes, (that is,3743. 
                  Seleucus Philopater ſhall ſucceed his Father Antiochus) but after

fewe dayes he ſhall be deſtroyed, neither in wrath nor in battell, (that is, not by forraine enemies or battell, but by treaſon) and in his p
                        •
                     ace ſhall ſtand vp a vilde perſon, that is, Antiochus Epiphanes,
                  3757. 
                  the little Horne of the fourth beaſt, to whome ſhall not bee giuen the honour of the kingdome, but hee ſhall come in peaceably, that is, pretending peace, and obtaine the kingdome by flatteries, according to the S. of Daniel. And out of them, that is, out of the Hornes of the Goat Bucke, there came forth a litte Horne, which waxed verie great toward the ſouth, and toward the eaſt, and toward the pleaſant Land: meaning, Antiochus, who was of a ſeruile and flattering nature, and by ſubtiltie depriueth three other that were betweene him and the Kingdome, and is called the little Horne, becauſe hee ſhould continue but a little while, and in him was found neither princely conditions, nor any other thing worthy to obtaine a kingdome.
               Hee beganne his raigne in the One hundred thirtie and ſeuenth yeare of the Grecians. 1. Mach. 1. and raigneth Twelue yeares.
               He maketh Battels againſt Ptolomeus Philometor.
               
               A prophane Schoole was erected in Ieruſalem, and in the One hundred, fortie, and three yeare of the Grecians, he ſpoyleth the Temple of Ieruſalem, and burned all the bookes of Moſes, and put to death all perſons with whom they were found: and after two yeares hee ſendeth Appolonius, and placeth a garriſon in Ieruſalem on the Fifteenth of Ciſlen, in the One hundred, fortie, and fiue yeare of the Grecians, they builded an Altar vpon the holy Altar, an abhomination of deſolation, and placeth an Idoll of Iouis Olympij in the holy Temple, as Dan. 11.38. And in the 2. Theſſ. 2. Saint Paul compareth the Antichriſt with this Idoll. Alſo Ap. 20. Saint Iohn compareth Gog and Magog with this hiſtorie, ſpeaking of the Antichriſt, as Saint Paul doth.
               
                  Antiochus by letters Patents graunteth the Iewes their owne religion, after One thouſand, two hundred, and ninetie dayes ſince the Temple was prophaned, in their One hundred, fortie, and eight yeare, the Fifteenth of their Month Xanticus, which differeth from the Iewes account, to whome the Fiue and twentie of Ciſlen or Nouember commeth before this time about One hundred eightie, and fiue dayes: and after two and fiftie dayes, in the yeare One hundred, fortie, and nine, Antiochus dyeth of a notorious ſtrange ſickneſſe, and acknowledgeth the hand of God to bee vpon him, after the Temple was prophaned One thouſand, three hundred, fortie and fiue dayes. Dan. 12.7. It ſhall tarrie for a time, two times and halfe a time, and when hee ſhall haue accompliſhed to ſcatter the power of the holy people, all theſe things, that is, all the troubles of the Iewes, ſhall be finiſhed.
               
               
                  Here it falleth out that was ſpoken, Dan. 8.25. He ſhall reſiſt the Prince of Princes, and ſhall be broken without hands.
               
               
                  3764.Here Iudas Machabeus recouereth the gouernment of Iudea from Antiochus. Thus the legges of yron and clay nothing cleauing together, by marriages are made weake, not any more treading downe the Iewes, but rather are beaten to duſt by Chriſt the Stone. The Fourth beaſt is caſt into the fire by Chriſt his fierie iudgement, the little Horne is broken: the Saints, that is, the Iewes poſſeſſe their Kingdome, Gog and Magog are ouerthrowne. The reſt of the Kings of Syria, becauſe they are not expreſſed in the Sinay ſight, and in Daniel nothing ſpoken of them, I paſſe them ouer.
               Wherefore Chriſt in the dayes of his fleſh, Ioh. 10.22. celebrateth the feaſt of this deliuerance.
               After this time God ſhaked the kingdome of Syria by Ligranes King of Armenia, vntill it came to the hands of the Romanes.
               On the Fiue and twentie of Ciſleu or Nouember, in the One hundred, fortie, and eighth yeare of the Grecians, the Altar was reſtored. 1. Mac. 4.25. And Iudas Machabeus celebrated the reſtoring of the Altar eight dayes, and maketh a decree of this to bee obſerued yearely. Chriſt celebrateth this Ioh. 10.22. The feaſt of dedication then was in Ieruſalem, and it was winter, and Ieſus walked in the Temple in Salomons porch.
               
               Here is accompliſhed Dan. 7.25. of changing the Ceremonies for a time, two times, and halfe a time: alſo of the One thouſand and three hundred dayes iuſtly compleat ſince a prophane Schoole was erected in Ieruſalem.
               The beaſt ouerthrowne, is the ſubuerſion of the kingdome of Syria.
            
            
               Kings of Leuj.
               PReſently after, vpon the ſucceſſe of Iudas Machabeus victories, after his death, the Leuites tooke vpon them kingly authoritie, contrarie to the lawe of Moſes, Exod. 28. where their office was only to attend vpon the ſacrificers of the Tabernacle and the Temple.
               Now to colour this to be lawfull, they raiſe vp diuers ſects of religion. Then came vp the Saduces and Phariſees: theſe Saduces hold, that the ſoule of man or woman dieth with the bodie, as a beaſt, denying the reſurrection. So likewiſe after Chriſt, when the Biſhops tooke vpon them imperiall authoritie, and the ſupremacie was graunted to Bonifacius by Phocas; then, to colour the lawfulneſſe thereof, they frame new ſects and hereſies in religion.
               
                  Of the reſt that ſucceede in that order vntill Herod, as Ariſtobulus, Alexander Ianneus, Alexandra, Hircanus, Ariſtobulus and Antigonus: becauſe they are not ſpoken of in Daniel, haue ſmall vſe in religion, I referre you to the reading of their Stories in the bookes of the Machabees.
            
            
               3883. Iulius Caeſar, Fiue yeares.
                
            
            
               3887. Auguſtus, Six and fiftie yeares.
               HE was Emperour of all the world, and appointeth Herod an Idumean of the kindred of Eſau, King ouer the Iewes▪ he was the firſt Aliant that raigned in Iudea.
               Now the Romanes kingdome flouriſhed ſix and fortie yeares before the Incarnation of our Lord: and here the Greeke writers ceaſed. Now the Latine tongue grew to be famous ouer the whole world. Now Daniels foure beaſts are quite conſumed, and a more monſtrous beaſt hauing property of all them, that is, with ſeauen heads and tenne hornes, ariſeth out of the earth. This beaſt is fullie handled in the Reuelation. In this place he hath not his full power giuen vnto him.
               The beaſt is Rome: the ſeauen heads are ſeauen hilles whereupon Rome ſtandeth: namely, Palatinus, Capitolinus, Auentinus, Exquilinus, Coeluis, Viminalis, and Quirinalis. The tenne hornes are ten ſeuerall kindes of gouernments, vnder which the Romanes were gouerned.
            
            
               
                  Marie, borne.
               HEr name ſignifieth Exalted. This ſhee vſeth in her ſong. Luke 1. He hath put downe the mighty from their ſeat, and hath exalted the humble and meeke. She was the naturall daughter of Eli, as Luke 3. She had a ſiſter whoſe name was Marie Cleophas, or Marie Iames; becauſe ſhe was the wife of Cleophas, and mother of Iames. She was likewiſe a very godly woman, and beſtowed great labour vpon Gods preachers, as Rom. 16.6. There was alſo Marie Magdalen the ſiſter of Lazarus and Martha, out of whome Chriſt caſt ſeauen Deuils. And ſhe followed him miniſtring to him of her ſubſtance. Shee annointed the Lord, and wiped his feete with her haire. Shee was the firſt to whome Chriſt appeared after his reſurrection.
               The Virgin Marie being told by the Angel Gabriel that ſhee ſhould conceaue a ſonne, whome ſhe ſhould call Sauiour, beleeueth that he

was that ſeede of the woman, that ſhould breake the head of the ſerpent; therefore is ſhe called Happie aboue other women. By this faith the Virgin which God made vnto Adam, is called Euah, that is, Life. By this faith all the righteous that euer were or ſhall be, are ſaued. The Papiſts attribute this power to the Virgin Marie, ſaying, Shee ſhall breake thy head, and thou ſhalt bruſe her heele: and thereupon they make an Idoll of her, offering their prayers vnto her, derogating from Chriſt his glorie; whereas they are commanded, Mat. 6. When you pray; pray vnto your Father which is in heauen.
               
               The Tabernacle did repreſent the dwelling of God with men: ſo the Virgin Marie is compared vnto the Tabernacle.
               A cloud ouerſhadowed the Tabernacle: ſo the power of the higheſt ouerſhadwed her: ſhewing that Ieſus Chriſt ſhould take fleſh, and haue his Tabernacle amongſt vs.
               She is betrothed to Ioſeph: therefore is Ioſeph called the ſonne of Ely: not that he was ſo naturally, for he was the ſonne of Iacob, anſwerable in godlineſſe to Ioſeph the ſonne of Iacob in Geneſis: ſo by ſupputation, he is the ſonne of Ely, and by nature the ſonne of Iacob.
               
               She is that Virgin of whome Eſay fore-tolde, Eſay 7. Behold, a Virgin ſhall conceaue a ſonne, and he ſhall be called Emanuel, God with vs.
               
               She goeth to her Couſin Elizabeth the wife of Zacharias, & mother of Iohn Baptiſt to Hebrō
                   the inheritance of Caleb, & ſaluteth her. And as Elizab: heard the ſalutation of Mary, the Babe, that is Iohn Baptiſt, ſprang in her womb, & Eliz: was filled with the holy Ghoſt, and ſhe cried with a loud voice, & ſaid, Bleſſed art thou among women, becauſe the fruit of thy wombe is bleſſed. Vpon this place one of the fathers of the church ſaith, that more bleſſed was the Virgin Marie for retayning the faith of Chriſt, than in conceiuing the body of Chriſt: for to haue all happines and knowledge, and not to knowe Chriſt, is neither to be happie, nor to knowe any thing. For in the true knowledge of Chriſt, that is, knowing him to be God and Man, and one Chriſt, and truely to embrace the ſame, conſiſteth the higheſt point of all ſaluation.
               Then Marie ſingeth a ſong of thankſgiuing vnto God. Luke 1.
               
               In the olde Teſtament you haue Marie a Propheteſſe the ſiſter of Aaron, who likewiſe ſingeth a ſong of thankſgiuing for the deliuerance of Iſraell out of Egipt, and for the ouerthrowe of Pharaoh in the red Sea Exod. 15. Sing yee vnto the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriouſlie: the horſe and the rider hath he ouerthrowne in the ſea. And to the ſame effect are the Virgin Maries wordes, Luke 1. Hee hath ſhewed ſtrength with his arme, he hath ſcattered the prowde in the imaginations of their hearts, &c.
               
               Notwithſtanding that Elizabeth was married to one of Leuies tribe,

yet ſhe was of the tribe of Iuda, & Maries Couſin. For the law which forbadde marriage out of their owne tribe, was onely, that the tribes ſhould not be mixt and confounded, which could not be with marriing with the Leuites: for they had no portion aſsigned to them.
               In the old Teſtament you haue Marie and Elizabeth both of one kindred, both rare for godlineſſe.
               Whereas the Papiſts hold inuocation to the Virgin Mary and to Saints, and call her the Queene of heauen, therefore greater than her ſonne Chriſt; therein they commit open blaſphemy againſt the holy Ghoſt. For, ſaith the prophet Eſay, Shall the axe boast himſelfe againſt the hewer? or the ſaw against him that vſeth it? Therefore, whoſoeuer wittingly holdeth it, there is no hope of ſaluation left for them, but a fearefull looking for iudgment.
               Our Sauiour Chriſt in the Goſpell: Mat. 20.21. When the mother of Zebedeus worſhipping him, deſired that her two ſonnes might ſit one at his right hand, and the other on his left in the kingdome of heauen, anſwered her, To ſit on my right hand or on my left, is not in mee to giue, but it ſhall be giuen vnto them for whome it is prepared of my father.
               
               Againe, his Diſciples at an other time ſaid vnto him, Behold thy mother, thy brethren and thy ſisters: to whome he anſwered, Who is my mother, my brother and my ſister? euen he that doth the will of my father which is in heauen. Whereby it appeareth, that Chriſt regarded the Virgin Mary as he was God, no more than he doth any other faithful in the world: for God hath no reſpect of perſons. And againe, he ſaith Ioh. 6. None commeth vnto me except the father drawe him. And Rom. 6. Eternal is the gift of God, not the gift of men or women departed. And Dauid ſaith Pſal. 4. It is thou Lord only that makeſt me dwell in ſafety. Againe, Chriſt being become an high Sacrificer of good thinges to come, not by the bloud of goates, or calues, but by his owne bloud hath entred once for all vnto the Holy place, and obtayned eternall redemption for vs. And for this cauſe is He the mediator of the new Testament, that through death which was for the redemption of the tranſgreſsions that were in the former Teſtament, they which were called might receiue the promiſe of eternal inheritance. For Chriſt is not entred into the holy places that are made with hands, which are ſimilitudes of the true ſanctuary; but is entred into very heauen to appeare now in the ſight of God for vs, not that he ſhould offer himſelfe often as the high Sacrificer did once euery yeare: (for then he muſt haue often ſuffered) but now in the end of the world hath he appeared once to put away ſinne by the ſacrifice of himſelfe, by the which we are ſanctified. Euery ſacrificer appeareth daily ministring, and oft times offereth one manner offering, which can neuer take away ſinnes: but this man, after he had offered one ſacrifice for ſinnes, ſitteth for euer at the right hand of God, and from hence forth tarrieth vntil he hath

made his enemies his footestoole: for with one offering hath he conſecrated for euer them that are ſanctified. Seing therefore, brethren, that by the bloud of Ieſus we may be bold to enter into the holy place, by the new and liuing way, which he hath prepared for vs through the vaile, that is, his fleſh: And ſeeing we haue a high ſacrificer ouer the houſe of God, let vs draw neere with a true heart, in aſſurance of faith, ſprinkled in our hearts from an euill conſcience, and let vs keepe the profeſsion of our hope without wauering: for he is faithfull that promiſed. Hee that deſpiſeth Moſes law, dieth without mercie vnder two or three witneſſes: of how much ſorer puniſhments, ſuppoſe ye them worthy which tread vnderfoot the Sonne of God, and counteth the bloud of the Teſtament as an vnholy thing, wherewith we are ſanctified? for we know him that hath ſaid, Vengeance is mine, I will recompence ſaith the Lord: and againe, the Lord ſhall iudge the people. Caſt not away therefore your confidence which hath great recompence of reward. For the iuſt ſhall liue by his faith. But without faith it is impoſsible to pleaſe him. For hee that commeth to God, muſt beleeue that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that ſeeke him. Let vs therefore by him, (not by the Virgin Marie or Saints) offer the ſacrifice of praiſe alwaies to God that is the fruit of the lippes which confeſſe his name. For, ſaith the Lord, I, euen I am the Lord, and beſide me there is no ſauiour. This being dulie marked, & rightly applied, is a full and large diſputation againſt any Papiſt.
            
            
               
                  Elias, Iohn Baptiſt borne.
               HIS name Iohn, ſignifieth The grace of God; Baptist was in reſpect of his office: which was, to baptize, and to preach repentance and forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, and foretold a fore-runner of the bleſſed Meſſias in Malach. 3. where it is written, Behold, I ſend my Ambaſſador to make way before him, and by and by after ſhall the Lord whome ye ſeeke, enter into his Temple: and in the next chapter, he is called Elias, by reaſon of the likeneſſe of their offices: and this text by the Iewes themſelues is vnderſtood concerning the Meſsias: and the Scribes do ſay in the Goſpel, that Elias muſt firſt come; and in another place, Art thou Chriſt, or Elias, or one of the Prophets? He was the ſonne of Zacharias, of the courſe of Abia, and his mother was Elizabeth.
               
               The Angel of the Lord ſheweth vnto Zacharias, that he is that Elias of whom Malachi foretold chap. 3. That he ſhould turne many of the children of Iſrael to their Lord God: for he ſhall goe before him in the ſpirit and power of Elias, to turne the hearts of the fathers vnto the children, and the diſobedient to the wiſdome of the iuſt men, to make readie a people prepared for the Lord. And the Angell gaue Zacharias a ſigne of this to be performed,

that is, he made him dumb vntill the child was borne. Now Elizabeths time was fulfilled that ſhe ſhould bee deliuered, and ſhe brought forth a ſonne, and on the eight day her friends came to circumciſe the babe and called him Zacharias, after the name of his Father. But his mother anſwered, he ſhall be called Iohn: and his father being dumb, tooke writing tables, and wrote, ſaying, His name is Iohn. And his mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue looſed, and he ſpake and prayſed God, and was filled with the holy Ghoſt, and propheſied, ſaying. Bleſſed bee the Lord God of Iſrael, becauſe he hath viſited and redeemed his people, and hath raiſed vp the horne of ſaluation for vs in the houſe of his ſeruant Dauid, &c. And the child grew, and waxed ſtrong in ſpirit, and was in the wilderneſſe, till the day came that he ſhould ſhew himſelfe vnto Iſrael.
               
               Here you may ſee, Zachary and Iohn were the two firſt of the new Teſtament. So in the old Teſtament, Zachary and Malachi called alſo Iochanan or Iohn, doe end the old Teſtament.
               You haue in the new Teſtament another Iohn the ſonne of Zebedeus, who with his brother Iames were called by Chriſt, as they were mending their nets, and became Apoſtles. This Iohn forbadde one to caſt out Deuils by the name of Ieſus: but Chriſt reprooued him. He was the beloued Apoſtle, on whoſe breſt Chriſt leaned. Chriſt reuealeth vnto him who ſhould betray him. He was baniſhed into the Iſle of Patmos, and hath a reuelation of the heauenly Ieruſalem and miſticall Babylon.
               There was alſo Iohn called Marke. Act. 15.37.
            
            
               3928. Ieſus is borne.
               THis name Ieſus ſignifieth A Sauiour, ſo named in his mothers wombe. A great Rabbin ſaith, that becauſe the Annointed ſhall ſaue folkes, therefore he ſhall be called Ieſus: And becauſe hee ſhall be God and Man, therefore he ſhall be called Emanuel.
               
               This is he of whome the Prophet Eſay cap. 9. foretold, ſaying, Vnto vs a childe is borne, and vnto vs a ſonne is giuen, and the gouernment is vppon his ſhoulder: and he ſhall cal his name, Wonderfull, Counſeller, the Mighty God, the euerlaſting Father, the Prince of Peace: The encreaſe of his gouernment and peace ſhall haue no end.
               
               He is alſo called The Sonne of the Virgin, Emanuel, God with vs, Eſ. 7. Shiloh the acceptable child, Gen. 49. The bright day ſtarre, Luke 3: The Seede of the woman, Gen. 3: The Phiſition to the helpleſſe: The proclaymer of the acceptable yeare of the Lord: The ſtarre and Scepter that ſhould daſh all the ſonnes of Seth, Numb. 24: The ſtone cut out of the mountaine without hands, that now filleth all the earth with his glory: euē he that ſhould

punne Nebucadnetzars image to duſt. Dan. 2: The ſprigge of the root of Ieſſaj, Eſay 11; The moſt holy; The annointed of the Father; That great Prophet;
                  Dan. 9. 
                  The Tabernacle; The Temple: The Altar; The mercie ſeate, The way that leadeth to the heauenly Ieruſalem: The truth that directeth to eternall happineſſe: The life that redeemed Adam from death: The true Iſraelite in whome there is no guile: The law-giuer of the Gentiles: The propitiatory for our ſinnes: The mediator betwixt God and man: The first begotten Sonne of the Father: The euerlaſting, our Righteouſneſſe: The great ſheepheard of his ſheepe, whome Angels worſhipped, to whom Kings brought ſweet odors as to Salomon; to whome the ſheepheards of the ends of the earth came to worſhip. He is alſo called Palmony, the ſecret Numberer, who weigheth, numbreth, and diuideth. The Meſsias, Dan. 9. The ſonne of Dauid: The Lion of the tribe of Iuda: The ſonne of man: The ſpirituall Rocke: The true bread that came from heauen: The word that created all things: The beloued of the Lord: The light and life of man: The true vine: The dwelling of God with men: Michael, who thought it no robbery to be equall with God: He to whome the Crowne and Diademe doth belong: The King of the Iewes: Alpha and Omega: The Lambe that was killed from the beginning of the world.
               
               The place where he was borne, was Bethlehem of Iudah, which the Prophet Micheas calleth Little, to be among the thouſands of Iudah: yet, ſaith the prophet, out of thee ſhall he come forth vnto me, that ſhal be the ruler of Iſrael, whoſe goings forth haue been from the beginning, and from euerlaſting. The prophet calleth it Little, becauſe, according to the cuſtome of the Iewes who diuided their countrie into thouſands, & for euery thouſand a chiefe Captaine, Bethleem was not able to make a thouſand. But S. Mathew Chap. 2. in reſpecting the greatnes of the Ruler of Iſrael that was borne there, ſaith, And thou Bethlehem art not the leaſt of the cities of Iudah.
               
               The time of his birth was in the 42. yeare of Auguſtus Caeſar, who Luc. 2. gaue a commandement, that all the world ſhould be taxed. Therfore went euery man to his owne citie, and Ioſeph went from Galile, out of a citie called Nazaret in Iudea, vnto the citie of Dauid which is called Bethleem, becauſe he was of the houſe and lineage of Dauid, to be taxed with Mary that was giuen him to wife, which was with child. And there ſhee brought forth her firſt begotten ſonne, and wrapped him in ſwadling clothes, and laid him in a cribbe, becauſe there was no roome for them in the Inne. And there were in the ſame countrie ſheepheards abiding in the field, and keeping watch by night becauſe of their flockes: & loe, the Angel of the Lord came vpon thē, and the glory of the Lord ſhone about them, and they were ſore afraide. Then the Angell ſaid, Be not afraid: for behold, I bring you tidings of great ioy that ſhall be to al people; that is, vnto you is borne this day in the citie of Dauid a

Sauiour, which is Chriſt the Lord. And ſtrait way there was with the Angell a multitude of heauenly ſouldiers, prayſing God, and ſaying, Glory be to God in the higheſt heauens, and peace in earth, and towards men good will. And theſe ſheepheards following the ſtarre, it vaniſhed away: where: fore they came to Ieruſalem, and asked, ſaying, Where is he that is borne King of the Iewes? The purpoſe of God in this was, that the Iewes, who by the Prophets might and were bound to haue knowen this by the diligence of the heathen, might bee vnexcuſable in the day of wrath. But departing from Herod, the Starre which they before had ſeene appeared vnto them, and went before them till it came & ſtood ouer the place where the Babe was, and they went into the houſe, and fell downe, and worſhiped him, and opened their treaſures, and preſented vnto him gifts, euen gold, and incenſe, and mirhe. Heere is performed, Eſay 60. They of Sheba and Seba ſhall bring forth gold and incenſe vpon mine Altar, meaning Chriſt: And I will magnifie the houſe of my glory. Theſe were the firſt fruits of the Gentiles. And theſe Gentiles alſo were of Abraham by Keturah, to whome when he died he gaue gifts, and ſent them away to the Eaſt. There was Iob found, a iuſt and perfect man, when all the world elſe had forſaken God.
               
                  And the Sheepheards returned glorifying and prayſing God for all they had heard and ſeene.
               
               
                  And after eight daies they circumciſed the child: his name was then called Ieſus, which was named of the Angell before hee was conceaued in the wombe.
               
               
                  Herod, another Pharaoh, proceeding of Eſau the old enemie to Iacob, deſtroyeth the little children; not by water, as the firſt Pharaoh did, Exod. 2. but by the ſword. Math. 2. Rachel weepeth for her children and would not be comforted, becauſe they were not; that it might be fulfilled which was ſpoken by the Prophet. Ier. 31.15.
               
               
                  Ioſeph taketh the Babe and Marie his Mother, and goeth into Egypt vntill the death of Herod, and then returneth againe, that it might bee fulfilled which was written. Oſeas 11.1. Out of Egipt haue I called my ſon.
               
               There is a great doubt of the time of the yeare of Christs birth: which becauſe it is very neceſſary to bee knowne, I thinke it not amiſſe to lay it downe in the treatiſe following.
            
            
               SAint Mathew reckoning the kindred of Chriſt, brings them down but from Abraham, to make the number of his generations Fortie two, that is, ſix ſeauens, or three fourteenes: and bringeth him alſo from Salomon, thereby to prooue him King of the Iewes. But in

reckoning the Kings to make the number anſwerable to a ſweet proportion of a former ſtorie, that is, of the two and fortie ſtandings in the wilderneſſe, and the two and fortie flowers, bowles & knobbes, of the candleſticke in the tabernacle which figured Chriſt, leaueth out three, Ioas, Amaſias, and Azarias. S. Luke reckoning his kindred, bringeth thē from Adam, and from Dauid by Nathan: thereby to prooue him to be the Seede of the woman. The number of the generations are 75 anſwerable in number to Abrahams yeares, when the promiſe concerning the ſtate of the outward Canaan, figuring the ſpiritual holy land, was giuen vnto him.
            
            
               The key of all Chronicles is taught in Luke 3. Where he compareth the age of Chriſt with the Romane Empire, whereby the writers of Chronicles are taught to compare the heathen hiſtories with the Bible, without which place they ſhould hardly haue beene compared ſo certaine as now they may.
               
                  3942.AT twelue yeares of age, Ieſus is found in the Temple diſputing among the Doctors: doubtleſſe, of the Meſsias, ſeeing therein all wiſdome ſtandeth.
               
                  12.This twelue, hath compariſon with the yeres of Salomons age when he decided the controuerſie for the dead child. But, ſaith S. Mathew, Behold a greater than Salomon.
            
            
               3956. Christ baptized.
               BEginning to be thirtie yeares olde, according to the manner of the high ſacrificer which ſhadowed Chriſt, who might not enter into that office before he was Thirtie yeares olde.
               His name Chriſt ſignifieth Annointed: ſo Aaron in Hebrew ſignifieth Annointed.
               
               
                  
                     Luke 3.
                  
                  Now in the Fifteenth yeare of Tiberius Caeſar, Pontius Pilate beeing gouernour of Iudea, and Herod being Tetrarch of Galile, and his brother Philip Tetrarch of Iturea, and of the country of the Trachonitis, and Lyſanias the Tetrarch of Abilene, when Annas and Caiphas were the high Priests, the word of God came vnto Iohn the ſonne of Zacharias in the wilderneſſe: and he came into all the coasts of Iordan, preaching the baptiſme of repentance for the remiſsion of ſins, as it was foretold Eſay 40. The voice of

a cryer in the w
                        •
                     lderneſſe is 5 Prepare the way of the Lord, make his paths ſtreight, euerie valley ſhall be filled, and euerie mountaine and hill ſhall bee brought lowe, and crooked things ſhall be made ſtreight, and the rough waies ſhall be made ſmooth, and all fleſh ſhall ſee the ſaluation of God.
               
               The people maruailed at him, thinking him to bee Chriſt: but Iohn anſwered I baptize you with water, but one ſtronger than I commeth, whoſe ſhooes latchet I am not worthy to vnlooſe, hee will baptize you with the holy ghoſt, and with fire. Thus then with many exhortations hee preached vnto the people.
               
               
                  Now it came to paſse, as all the people were baptized, Ieſus alſo is baptized at Iordan the place of paſsage, and the heauens did open: as to the paſſage of the children of Iſrael. Of this Dauid 114. Pſal: ſpeaketh, Iordan what ayleth thee that thou art turned backe? As touching the peculiar act of baptizing, it ſeemeth that the Leuites wayted for ſome ſpeciall thing vpon it, in that they asked of Iohn, How happeneth it that thou baptizeſt, if thou bee neither Chriſt, nor Elias the Prophet? After this, Iohn Baptiſt (hauing beene put in priſon for rebuking Herod the Tetrarch, for Herodias his brother Philips wife, and becauſe of an oath he made to Herodias Daughter) is beheaded. Mat. 14.
               
               
                  And Ieſus full of the holy ghoſt returneth from Iordan, and was in the wilderneſſe fortie dayes and fortie nights (as was Moſes) and was tempted of the Deuill. Luk. 4.
               At Nazareth he ſheweth out of Eſay, all the ioy of the proclamation of the ioyfull or Iubilee yeare, to bee fulfilled in him that day.
               At Nazareth alſo out of Eſay, hee ſheweth the nature of his name Christ: for that God annointed him to ſhew the glad tidings to the poore, to heale the broken in heart, to preach to the captiues libertie, and to the blinde recouerie of ſight, to proclaime (the ſhaking away of all burthens) the ioyfull yeare of the Lord, and ſheweth how that day that ſcripture was fulfilled in their eares. Now the proclaiming of the Iubilee yeare was on the Tenth day of Tiſri, euen the ſame day that the high prieſt entred into the ſanctuarie. It ſeemed therefore that he that day expounded the name and office of the Meſsias.
               
               Chriſt preacheth the word of God in euery towne: all his preachings are of the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, and of the Kingdome of heauen. His Diſciples were alwaies importune in asking him, Lord, when wilt thou ſet vp the Kingdome of Iſrael againe? in ſtead of contenting them, he anſwereth concerning the Kingdome of heauen; One of them would needes haue ſit on his right hand, and another on his left: but he anſwereth, Whoſoeuer will be greateſt, let him be leaſt.
               Hee feedeth Foure thouſand with fiue loaues and two fiſhes Eaſter being neere, but hee went not to the feaſt. This Chriſt by his power

and prouidence doth to the worlds end: which we by experience doe knowe, if wee marke the woonderfull encreaſe of the bleſsings of God.
               He teacheth of the Manna that giueth life vnto the world: alſo of the eating of his fleſh, and drinking of his blood, Eaſter being neere.
               On the Fiue and twentie of Ciſleu, Dan. 8. Chriſt celebrateth the feaſt that Iudas Machabeus ordained in memorie of the Temple renued from the idolatrie of Antiochus, and there hee teacheth, that hee is Michael (in the forme of God) that ſtandeth for his people, ſaying, My Father and I am one, and none can take my ſheepe from me.
               
               He goeth into Iericho the City of Rahab, which was accurſed by Ioſua in old time, and there ſaueth Zache, a chiefe publican, frō the curſe.
               He raiſeth Lazarus from death, (Lazarus is, my God is the helpe,) Chriſt is ſayd to loue him, Ioh. 11.3. as he loueth all that anſwere to that name, whereof in that parable, Luk. 16. Lazarus is ſet downe for any godly men. Moſes handleth this name. Exod. 2. when he calleth Sonne Eleaſar or Lazarus: for Eleaſar is the ſame in ſignification with Lazarus.
               
               Vpon this occaſion for rayſing to life the dead, for louing of thoſe who hold God their helper, the high Prieſts aſſembled the Sanedrin or high counſell, and from that day they took counſell how to kill him.
               After this, he ſuppeth in Bethani (the houſe of affliction) Sixe dayes before the Paſſeouer, where Marie with precious Nard annointeth him vnto his buriall. This is foretold in the Song of ſongs, When the King did ſit at his repaſt, my Spikenard gaue the ſmell thereof.
               
               He commeth to Ieruſalem, the people tooke palme treeboughes, and goe to meet him, ſaying, Hoſanna.
               
               It is to bee vnderſtood, that the feaſt of Tabernacles, ordayned to begin the Fifteenth of Tiſri, was ordained in token of Gods defence of the people in the cloude in the wilderneſſe, which ſignified the dwelling of the word of God in the nature of man. And whereas hee was borne the day of preparing the boughes, and then baptized; and at the feaſt of Tabernacles proclaimed himſelfe, that all ſhould come to him that thirſted to haue waters of life out of the rocke: this being not vnderſtood in the feaſt of Tabernacles, the people now performe that which was to bee done in bearing the boughes: they cryed Hoſanna, whereof thoſe boughes were called Hoſanna, ſo that in Hoſanna to the Sonne of Dauid, they meane thus much: theſe boughes we beare in the honour of the Sonne of Dauid.
               
               
                  Ieſus bewayleth Ieruſalem, becauſe it did not ſee thoſe things that touched the the peace of it: and ſheweth how it ſhall no more be Ieruſalem, but Iebus, that is, troden vnder foot: for now Melchiſedech vnder whome it was firſt called Salem, is to bee acknowledged a figure

of the Lord. Now Iſaacke offered, not offred, is knowne, whereof he was a figure which Iſaack gaue Abraham occaſion to augment that name Salem, with Iire before Salem, where the Lord will prouide for euerlaſting peace.
            
            
               3960. Ieſus Chriſt the King, the moſt holy, is betrayed by Iudas Iſcarioth, that is, which falleth away for reward.
               
                  CHriſt is crucified according to Daniel 9. Pontius Pilate being then Lieutenant of Iurie for Tiberius Caeſar then Emperour of Rome, after that he had preached three yeares and a halfe.
               For compariſon with this three yeares and an halfe, you haue Elias in praying it might not raine, and it rained not in three yeares and ſixe moneths. Our Sauiour Chriſt in the Goſpell remembreth this Storie, when he maketh compariſon with his comming to the Iewes, with that of Elias. In the dayes of Elias, ſayth Chriſt, many widdowes were in Iſrael, when the heauens were ſhut three yeares and ſixe Moneths, but vnto none was Elias ſent ſaue vnto the widdow of Sarepta.
               
               Further, the Iewes vnder Antiochus Epiphanes had the like ſtorie of three yeares and ſixe moneths, when the Idoll was ſet in the Temple of God.
               
                  Moſes layd downe a law, that when they came into the Land, what tree they planted good for meat, they ſhould the three firſt yeares hold it vncleane, and thoſe three yeares they ſhould not eat the fruit thereof. So Chriſt in the Goſpell handleth it thus in a parable: A man had a figge-tree planted in his Vineyard, and finding no fruite thereon, hee ſayd to the dreſſer of this Vineyard, Behold theſe three yeres haue I come, and ſought fruit, but I finde none: cut it downe, why keepeth it the ground barren? and hee anſwered, Lord, let it alone this yeare, till I digge it round about, and dunge it, and if then it beare not fruit, you ſhall cut it downe.
               
               We haue the like compariſon of three yeres and an halfe in the Reuelation. For all the perſecution vnder the Romane Emperours being about three hundred yeres, is alluded to this time of Chriſts preaching being called fortie and two Moneths, which makes three yeres and ſixe moneths. The Papiſts vpon this dreame, that Antichriſt when hee comes ſhall raigne but three yeares and a halfe, and therefore the Pope cannot be Antichriſt, ſeeing he hath raigned many hundred yeres. But to what purpoſe ſhould the holy ſpirite ſpeake of him ſo long before, if his tyrannie ſhould bee of no longer continuance? Beſides, ſeeing by the two and fortie moneths which are the ſame in

account with One thouſand, three hundred, and ſixtie dayes, the whole time of the tyrannie executed by the prophane Emperours is meant. It muſt needs be, that the Popes gouernment which commeth vp in their ſtead, muſt be ſignified by One thouſand, three hundred, and ſixtie daies.
               
                  236.To this Carthuſianus and Beda expound this time of One thouſand, three hundred, and ſixty dayes, to cōprehend the whole continuance of the preaching of the Goſpel to the end of the world. This their own ſide vſe for an expoſition: and ſeeing it is true, wee embrace it. It is further to bee demaunded of them, how it can bee poſsible that the Antichriſt ſhould be able in three yeares and a halfe to ſubdue all the world? Before Chriſt, this time was ſpoken in proper termes: but ſince, in a metaphor, becauſe there enſueth the like dealings.
               The Two and thirtie and a halfe, are the yeares of Chriſts gouernment vpon the earth, and haue compariſon with Dauids two and thirtie yeares, and ſixe moneths gouernment in Ieruſalem.
               
                  70.This Seuentie, is to ſhew that this is the laſt Seuen of the 70 Seuens, or Foure hundred and ninetie yeres expreſſed, Dan. 9. wherein Chriſt ſhould end the ſacrifice and oblation.490.
               
               The Fifty, is to ſhew that it is the laſt Iubilee of the eight & twenty.
               His humilitie, his life, his death, the cauſe and manner of his death, was told before by the Prophets. In Eſay, Ieremie, and Daniel.
               
               In Eſay 53. it is ſayd of him. Who will beleeue our report? and to whom is the arme of the Lord reuealed? hee hath neither forme nor beautie: when wee ſhall ſee him, there ſhall bee no fourme that wee ſhould deſire him. Hee is deſpiſed and reiected of men, hee is a man full of ſorrowes, and hath experience of infirmities. He was deſpiſed, and wee eſteemed him not; Surely he hath borne our infirmities, and carried our ſorrowes: yet we did iudge him as plagued, and ſmitten of God, and humbled; but hee was wounded for our tranſgreſsions, hee was broken for our iniquities, the chaſtiſement of our peace was vpon him, and with his ſtripes wee are healed. He was oppreſsed and afflicted, yet did hee not open his mouth. He is brought as a ſheepe to the ſlaughter, and as a ſheepe before his ſhearer is dumbe, ſo hee openeth not his mouth. Hee was taken out of priſon, and from iudgment, and who will declare his age? for he was cut out of the land of the liuing, for the tranſgreſsion of my people was he plagued. And he made his graue with the wicked, and with the rich in his death, though he had done no wickedneſſe, neither was any deceite in his mouth. By his knowledge ſhall hee iustifie many, for hee ſhall beare their iniquities. He was counted with the tranſgreſſors, and he bare the ſinne of many, and prayed for the tranſgreſſors. And againe he ſayth, Eſay 50. I gaue my backe vnto the ſmiters, and my cheekes to the nippers: I hid not my face from ſhame and ſpitting. And againe Pſal. 22. As for me I am a worme, and no

man, a verie ſcorne of men, and the out-caſt of the people. All they that ſee mee laugh me to ſcorne, they ſhoot out their lippes, and ſhake their heads, ſaying, He trusted in God, that hee would deliuer him, let him deliuer him if hee will haue him. Many Oxen are come about mee, fatte Bulles of Baſan encloſe me in on euerie ſide: they gape vpon me with their mouthes, as it were a ramping and roaring Lion. I am powred out like water, and all my bones are out of ioynt, my heart alſo in the midſt of me is euen like melting waxe. They pierced my hands and my feete, I may tell all my bones, they ſtand ſtaring and looking vpon me. They part my garments among them, and caſt lots vpon my veſture. Yea, the verie abiects came together againſt me vnawares, making mowes at me and ceaſed not. With the flatterers were buſie mockers, which gnaſhed vppon me with their teeth, they gaped on me with their mouthes, and ſayd, Fie on thee, fie on thee, we ſaw it with our eyes. They that ſit in the gate ſpeake againſt me, and the drunkards make ſong; vpon me, they gaue mee gall to eate, and when I was thirſtie, they gaue mee vinegar to drinke: they perſecute him whom thou haſt ſmitten, and they talke how they may vexe him whome thou haſt wounded. Thou haſt layd me in the loweſt pit in a place of darkeneſſe, and in the deepe. This text the Iewes haue ſtriuen with great malice to corrupt: for in ſtead of Caru, that is to ſay, they pierced; the Iewes will needs read Caari, that is, as a Lion: but the Maſſorets who regiſtred the number of the words and letters in the Bible, doe teſtifie, that in all good copies it is written, Caru, they pierce: Alſo the Seuentie Interpreters haue tranſlated into greeke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. They pierced my hands, &c. Alſo the Prophet Zacharie ſayth, I will powre out the ſpirite of grace, and mercie vpon the houſe of Dauid, and vpon the Inhabitants of Ieruſalem, and they ſhall looke vnto me whome they pierced.
               
               Chriſt ſuffered at Eaſter, to end the ceremony of the paſchall Lambe. For now the true Lambe of God, which taketh away the ſinnes of the world, is offered vp for vs.
               As of the paſchall Lambe no bone was broken; ſo of Chriſt the immaculate Lambe no bone was broken.
               As the redde Cowe in Moſes accompanied with all the people was conuayed out of the hoſt, and burned with the campe; ſo alſo was Ieſus ledde out of the Citie accompanied by the people, and crucified without the Citie.
               He went ouer the brooke Kedron, the way that Dauid fled from Abſalom.
               
               He went into a garden to pray to recouer Adams fall in the garden.
               He ſuffered on friday being the Iewes ſixt day, the day wherein Adam was created.
               He ſuffered at noone, the time when Adam diſobeyed.
               He ſuffered on the croſſe, to take the curſe vpon him.
               
                  He openeth Paradiſe to the poore theefe, out of which Adam that day was driuen.
               Two theeues were crucified with him, and hee was reckoned amonge the wicked, as Eſay foreſpake, Eſay 53.
               
               Generall darkneſſe at his death was ouer all the world from the ſixt houre vntill the ninth houre. Adams ſoule was in darkneſſe, hiding himſelfe from the preſence of God from the ſixt houre vntill the ninth houre. At the ninth houre he called on God, whoſe voice Adam could not abide.
               As Ioſeph buried his Father Iacob; ſo now Ioſeph burieth Chriſt the true Iacob.
               
               After three dayes and three nights, hee riſeth againe, as Ionas after three dayes and three nights was deliuered out of the Whales belly.
               After his reſurrection, hee appeareth twelue times, as Ioſua ſent twelue to view the Land of Canaan.
               He walked on the earth fortie dayes, as Ioſua viewed the Land fortie dayes.
               On the Fiftieth day hee ſendeth the holy Ghoſt vpon the Apoſtles: ſo after eating the Lambe, on the Fiftie day the Law was giuen.
               Now Chriſt the couragious white horſe ſhineth, and his Kingdome is eſtabliſhed, and Satan is bound for a thouſand yeares. For the preaching of Chriſt, and his Apoſtles hath opened the eyes of ſome of all the Gentiles in the world, whereby the power of Sathan is weakned, and the rage of the cruell Hornes of the beaſt of Rome, that is, the tyrannie of the perſecuting Emperors Nero, Domitian, and the reſt plagued by the hand of God. Plagues of blood, famine, and peſtilence, reſembled by horſes, red, blacke, and leane, the great beaſt alſo hauing one head cut off, lyeth dead vntill the end of the thouſand yeares, and the gracious Goſpell of Chriſt flouriſhing in Iaphets borders, (theſe be the ends of the earth) Sems houſe not regarding the peace of Ieruſalē, Iaphets Sons are perſwaded to come to his tents to fetch precious ſtones from Sion to lay the foundation of the ſpirituall Salem, to perfourme the bleſsing of Noah, Gen. 10. And God will perſwade Iaphet to dwell in the tents of Sem. The earthly Ieruſalem is now deſtroyed by the Romanes, vnder whome Chriſt was crucified, called in Dan. 9. the abhomination of deſolation; whoſe Citie, in reſpect of their impieties, is called Ap. 11. a ſpirituall Sodome, & Egipt; and therfore vnto Iohn figured by one monſtrous beaſt hauing ſeuen heads, and ten hornes, anſwearable to the number of the heads and hornes of Daniels foure beaſts; one of whoſe heads Conſtantine the great cutteth off by remoouing the imperiall ſeat of the Romane Empire to Conſtantinople, which he called new Rome, ſo that the beaſt lay wounded about three hundred

yeres, one while being ouercome by Vandals, another while by Lumbards, another while by Germanes, one while by one, and another while by another: and withall ſuch plagues lighted vpon the afflicters of the Church of God, that they in effect deſired the mountaines to fall vpon and couer them. Thus it was of no glorie vntill the end of the thouſand yeares, then Satan is let looſe, and ſuffered to goe roaring about to deceiue the hearts of the people, ſeeking like a ramping and a roaring Lion whome hee might deuoure, and hee putteth life into this dead beaſt, hauing power giuen him from God, Reuel. 13. And hee ſpake as did the Dragon, and hee did all that the firſt beaſt could doe in his preſence, and hee cauſed the earth with them that dwell therein, to worſhip the first beaſt, whoſe deadly wound was healed, and he did great wonders, ſo that hee made fire to come downe from heauen in the ſight of men, and deceiued them that dwelt on the earth, by the meanes of thoſe ſignes which hee had power to doe in the ſight of the beaſt, ſaying to them that dwell on the earth, that they ſhould make an image vnto the beaſt, which had the wound of a ſword, and did liue. And hee had power to giue a ſpirite vnto the image of the beaſt, and that the image of the beast ſhould ſpeake, and ſhould cauſe that as many as would not worſhip the image of the beaſt, ſhould bee killed. And hee cauſed all both ſmall and great, rich and poore, free and bond, to receiue a marke in their right hand, or in their foreheads: or the number of his name. Here is wit, let him that hath wiſedome count the number of the beaſt, for it is the number of a man, and his number is ſixe hundred, threeſcore, and ſixe.
               
               When Gregorie the ſeuenth forbiddeth mariages, who taketh vpon him not the forme of the former beaſt and hornes, but the ſhape of a Lambe with two hornes pretending all holyneſſe, of whome Chriſt forbad long before to take heed, ſaying, Mat. 7. Take heed of ſuch as come in ſheeps clothing, and ſay, here is Chriſt, and there is Chriſt, and to colour this Religion to be good, they ſtrengthen the throne of Sathan, they erect houſes for deuout perſons, patternes (as they ſay) of chaſtitie, good life, and all vertue, ſequeſtring themſelues from the glorie of the world, whome the holy Ghoſt compareth in Ap. 8. to Locuſts, that is, monſtrous Serpents ſprung frō the ſeed of that old ſerpent Sathan the Deuill, and are deſcribed to haue faces like men, to ſhew that they ſhould bee but priuate men; haire like women, ſignifying that they ſhould remaine in cloyſters, and ſecret places, as women; and crowns vpon their heads, declaring their imperiouſneſſe: and winges like the wheeles of chariots prepared for warre, their ſpeedineſſe to bloodſhed, and tayles like Scorpions, out of the which proceeedeth poyſon to fill the cup of the ſtrumpet which ſitteth vpon the ſcarlet colored beaſt, out of the which the Princes of the earth doe drinke, and are drunke with the abhomination of her fornications. Theſe are, as

we call them, Abbots, Monkes, and Friers, and Nunnes, which like Locuſts deſtroy the fruites of the earth, liuing by the ſweat of other mens labours, who receiue wages of the beaſt and the falſe prophet, bearing his marke in their foreheads, whoſe name is Abad
                        •
                     on, that is, Deſtruction. He is alſo called Antichriſt, that is, contrarie to Christs figured before Chriſts byrth in Antiochus the vild, the little horne: who prophaned the Temple of God, erecting the Idoll of Iouis Olympi in the temple of God, changing the lawes that Moſes gaue, ſpeaking preſumptuous words againſt the God of gods, and exalting himſelfe aboue all that is called God. But hee went to Geheana. So ſhall the Antichriſt and the beaſt be deſtroyed, according to Numbers 24, but hee ſhall periſh in the end, becauſe hee prophaneth the temple of God, changing times and ſeaſons, forbidding marriages, ſitting in the temple, exalting himſelfe aboue all, that is, called God, ſpeaking blaſphemouſly, I am God vpon earth, perſwading Gog and Magog the foure quarters of the earth to goe fight for the holy Croſſe at Ieruſalem, for which there were nine miſchieuous voiages made, to the great bloodſhed of many. And as his miſchieuous prankes were figured in Antiochus: ſo the time of his gouernment which ſhall bee to the end of the world, was in Antiochus likewiſe figured One thouſand, two hundred and ſixtie daies, two and fortie moneths, a time, two times, and halfe a time.
               Vnto this proper time of three yeres and a halfe of Antiochus rage, is the whole time of the rage of the Antiochian Antichriſt alluded, as Beda and diuers godly men doe expound the place, the ſtorie compelling them ſo to vnderſtand it. And power was giuen to him ouer all kindreds, and people, and tongues, and nations; and all that dw
                        •
                     lled on the earth worſhipped him, whoſe names are not written in the booke of life, of the Lambe which was killed from the beginning of the world, which Lambe only was found worthy to open the booke and the Seales. Ap. 5. & 6. Vnto whome thouſand thouſands cryed with a loud voice, ſaying. Worthy is the Lambe that was killed, to receaue power, and riches, and wiſedome, and ſtrength, and honour, and glorie, and bleſsing: who ſtanding vpon mount Syon, had with him One hundred fortie and foure thouſand, hauing his name and his fathers name written in their fore-heads: and they ſang the ſong of Moſes the ſeruant of God, and the ſong of the Lambe, ſaying, Great and maruailous are thy works Lord God Almightie, iust and true are thy wayes, thou King of Saints. Who ſhall not feare, O Lord, and glorify thy name? For thou onely art holy, and all Gentiles ſhall come and worſhippe before thee: for thy iudgements are made manifest. Ap. 17. & 18. Chapters. Where the woman, that maketh drunke with her fornications the Kinges of the earth, with her beaſtly corporation, is ſayd to goe into perdition;

whoſe deſtruction was figured in the fall of Babilon, and in the deſtruction of Tyrus; in Iere. 51. & Ezech. 27. For the Goſpell of ſaluation appearing againe in the world, men fall away from the throne and the beaſt, ſo that Kings eate his fleſh in denying his power, and refuſing to beare his marke; whereat both Heauens, and holy Apoſtles, and Prophets reioyce, ſaying, Halleluiah; Saluation, and glorie, and honor, and power, be aſcribed to the Lord our God, for true and righteous are his iudgements: for hee hath iudged the great whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and hath auenged the bloud of his ſeruants of her hand. And againe they ſayd, Halleluiah, and ſmoake roſe vp for euermore. And the Heauens opened, and behold, A white Horſe, and hee that ſat vpon him was faithfull, and true, and in righteouſnes doth hee iudge and make battaile: his eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many crownes, and he had a name written, that no man knewe but hee himſelfe, and hee was cloathed in a veſture dipt in bloud, and his name is called, The Word of God: and he hath on his vesture, and on his thigh a name written, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: and the beast, and the Kings of the earth, and their warriours gathered together to make battaile againſt him that ſat on the Horſe, and againſt his ſouldiers, and the beaſt was taken & with him that falſe Prophet, that is to ſay the Popes or Antichrist, that wrought miracles before him, with which he deceaued them that receaued the beaſts marke, (that is, the Popes Bulls,) and them that worſhipped his image. Theſe both ſhalbe cast into a lake of fire burning with brimstone. Hee that testifieth theſe things, ſaith: bee it I come quickly, Amen. Euen ſo come Lord Ieſus.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   