
      
         
            
            
            A
REPORTE
OF A DISCOVRSE
CONCERNING SVpreme
power in affaires of
Religion. Manifesting
That this power is a right of Regalitie, inseparably
annexed to the Soueraigntie of euery State:
and that it is a thing both extreamely dangerous,
and contrarie to the vse of all auncient Empires
and Commonwealths, to acknowledge
the same in a forraine
Prince.
            
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            
               AT LONDON
Imprinted by F. K. for Iohn Hardie, and are to be
sold by Iohn Flasket, dwelling at the signe of the blacke
Beare in Paules Church yeard. 1606.
         
         
            
            
            THE SVMMARIE.
            
               1 THe occasion of this discourse.
               2 The proposition: That supreme power
in Ecclesiasticall affaires is
a right of Soueraigntie.
               3 Soueraigne or maiesticall power must be perpetuall.
               4 Soueraigne power must also be absolute.
               5 Affaires of greatest importance are annexed
to the Soueraigne Maiestie.
               6 Nothing in a State of so great importance as is
Religion.
               7 Affaires of Religion are to be managed by those
who beare the Soueraigntie.
               8 It is dangerous for others to be depended vpon
in regard of Religion.
               9 Two policies aunciently obserued for auoyding
these dangers: To exclude externall ceremonies;
and to commit the ordering of matters
in Religion, to the Soueraigne authoritie
within the State.
               10 Instance of the first.
               11 The second practised by the Iewes.
               12 By the
Aegyptians.
               13 By diuers other people.
               14 In the Empire of Assyria.
               15 In the Empire
of Persia.
               16 In the Empire and principall
States of Greece.
               17 In the Empire of Rome vnder the gouernement
of Kings.
               18 In the popular State of the Romane Empire.
               
                  
19 In the Romane Empire vnder heathen Emperours.
               20 In the Romane Empire, vnder the first Christian
Emperours.
               21 Matters of Externall or accidentall forme in
the Church, depended altogether vpon the
first Christian Emperours.
               22 Many lawes of the first Christian Emperours
attributed vnto Popes.
               23 Matters of Faith or of Essentiall forme, ordered
by direction and authoritie of the first
Christian Emperours.
               24 The eight generall Councels called and confirmed
by Emperours.
               25 A strife betweene the Bishops of Rome and
Constantinople, whether should be greatest.
               26 Diuers Emperours fauoured the Bishops of
Constantinople.
               27 By giuing this prerogatiue to the Bishops of
Rome, the East Empire was dismembred.
               28 The absolute power of the Bishops of Rome in
Ecclesiasticall affaires, reduced the West
Empire not only to a feeble state; but to be
held in Vassalage to the Sea of Rome.
               29 By the same power the Bishops of Rome claimed
Soueraignty also, ouer diuers principall
kingdomes in Europe, and generally ouer all
States in the world.
               30 Diuers distresses by this meanes occasioned.
               31 The Conclusion.
               32 Certaine questions propounded.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            TO HIS HONORABLE
FRIEND
SIR I. P. Knight.
            
               SIr, holding my selfe beholding
vnto you, for many
kind courtesies, I cannot but
oftentimes bend and busie
my deuise, to thinke how
(in some sort) to thanke you
for the same; and if not fully
to discharge, yet freely to
acknowledge and professe my debt: to satisfie
(I say) in desire, when in deed I am not able. But,
howsoeuer in other performances I shall be weake,
yet I will not faile to leaue a large memorie of your
true habit of honestie and vertue: and in the meane
season not omit to visit you with such exercises of
penne, as the streightnes of other occasions shall
permit me leisure to contriue. For this present I haue
made choyce to present vnto you, a small enlargement
of certaine passages of speech, lately raised at
the table of N. which, being much frequented by
persons of most principall note, hath commonly the
great varietie of dishes, answered with like varietie
of discourse.
            The first part of the dinner was passed ouer in a 
sad and sober silence, our tongues seeming to giue
place to the office of our teeth; and euery man commending

the goodnesse of our fare, by close feeding
vpon the same. At the last silence was broken, and
some speeches spent in matters of conceit. In which
veine one of the companie tooke often occasion
to speake of a Terrible blow; alluding to the same
words in that letter, whereby the late practise against
his Maiestie and the whole body of the State,
was beaten out and brought into light. Hereupon
N. did breake forth into a liberall commendation
of the Lord Mounteagle, to whom the letter was
directed: affirming, that hee was a personage of
true honour and merit, for that by his felicitie and
faith, not onely the liues of many thousand particular
persons, and whatsoeuer else was deerest vnto
them, but the life also of this Empire was at that
time preserued; that his high Nobilitie, enobled
and made pretious both with curtesie and magnanimitie,
had now iustly placed him in the formost
ranke of same. He proceeded to declare, the fashion
of that hot and hatefull attempt: what faire opportunitie
was thereby opened to secure our selues, from
the fierie furie of those homebred enemies, who,
rather than wee should not bee destroyed, would
ouerwhelme vs in the ruines of the state: That seueritie
could not hereupon be interpreted crueltie;
that hereupon nothing could be interpreted to be
done in regard of religion, but onely for the necessarie
defence of our safetie.
            This speech was diuersly taken, according as affections
were diuersely disposed; some did liuelie,
some faintly, and (as it was coniectured) fainedly approue
it; none did openly oppose against it.
            From this, they fell to talke of the Bill propounded
in Parliament against Recusants; and of the Oath
of supremacie, which was appointed generally to be
taken. Of the first they did but sparingly speake, as

being a matter then handled in highest place of deliberation:
vpon the second they maintained a
longer stay. N. repeated many conueniences for
which this Oath ought generally to bee taken.
Whereto a certaine Knight replied, not directly
contradicting him, but inuoluing his intents in
such soft and nice distinctions, that hee seemed rather
to declare that he would not haue the Oath imposed
at all, then in what fashion he would haue it
imposed.
            These obscure speeches hauing bred some incertaintie,
whilest euery man rather coniectured then
assured what should be ment: and controuersies of
conu
                  •
               niencie being not alwaies easie to bee determined
by way of discourse, because all men are
apt to attribute much to their owne conceits; I
drew the question to a higher degree. Affirming,
that it seemed not onely conuenient, but necessarie
also in all grounds and reasons of State, that a
King who acknowledgeth no superiour vnder God,
should be acknowledged to haue supreame authoritie
vnder God in Ecclesiasticall affaires: That this
is a principall point of Regalitie, and therefore necessarily
annexed to the soueraigne maiestie of euery
state: That it is a hard matter if not impossible, for
any nation, either to grow or long time to continue
very great, wherein a foraine power doth hold the
regiment in Religion: That in all ancient Empires
and Common wealthes it hath been vsed, That;
            I could not finish that which I was about to speak,
being interrupted by a confused clamour of three or
foure at the table, who esteemed that which I had
said, not for a paradoxe, but for an Adoxe, or flat absurditie:
seeing many Christian countries, both lately
and at this present, haue admitted forain gouernment
in matters of religion.
            
               
By this time the Basons and Ewers were set
vpon the table, and all of vs were attentiue to the
giuing of thankes. After wee had washed, and the
cloath was taken away. N. in this sort renewed
speech.
            What hath been the vse of auncient Empires and
Common-wealths, concerning supreame gouernment
in matters pertaining to religion, I haue not (I
doe confesse) obserued: But it seemeth indeed, that
the politicall gouernment in Ecclesiasticall affaires
should be a point of Regalitie; and that it is a hard
matter, if not impossible, for any state either to grow
or long time to continue very great, wherein a forraine
power doth hold the regiment in religion. At
the least, either to grow or continue any greater, then
that forraine power shall thinke expedient.
            That which from me was openly reiected, being
allowed by N. and in the very same words by him
repeated, found good acceptance among the rest.
Whereupon I tooke occasion to say, that speech
(I perceiued) was oftentimes like vnto coine, which
passed for currant, not in regard of the mettall onely,
but chiefely in regard of the stampe that was set
vpon it.
            Nay, said N. beautifying his speech with a courteous
smile, we will also bring your mettall to the
touch. There is but one truth in religion, which is
not subiect to any humane power: but the discipline
thereof, or matters of circumstance and externall
forme, are held by our Church to depend vpon
the power of the Prince. If question be made touching
matter of substance, the same also may be determined
within the realme, by the Clergie thereof, assembled
together by authoritie of the Prince. Or if
the Clergie of any other countrie should be taken to
assistance or aduice, they come as equals, and not as

superiours. For so Eusebius
               Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 34. reporteth, that Cyprian
Bishop of Carthage did aduise with the Bishop of
Rome, concerning the affaires of the Church: and
that Dyonise of AlexandriaEuseb. lib. 6. cap. 46. & lib. 7. cap. 5. & 9. aduised in like sort
with Cornelius, Stephen and Sixtus Bishops of Rome,
without attributing vnto them either title or qualitie,
otherwise then as men of their owne order and
ranke.
            Now, I haue read many controuersies in Diuinitie
concerning this question, whereof the multitude
doth rather cloy then content; and therefore I will
not embarke you in that disputation. If you can
make proofe out of other writers, that this authoritie
in matters of religion, is a right of Regalitie, it will
follow (I suppose) that it cannot without apparant
danger depend vpon a foraine power. If also you
do manifest, that in all principall Empires and Common-wealths,
this authoritie hath bin exercised by
the chiefe in state, you may probably conclude that
it is a Regalitie. For these rights doe little varie, but
remaine in a manner the very same in all states, of
what kind soeuer they are. And although true religion
is reuealed vnto vs by God, yet religion in the
generall proceedeth from nature; in regard whereof,
there is some coherence and communitie in all
sorts of religions; as to acknowledge that there is a
God; to worship him; to worship him by oblation
and sacrifice &c. For although all nations doe not
acknowledge and worship the true God, yet there is
no nation (as Cicero
               De Nat. deo. lib. 1. saith) which doth not both
acknowledge and adore some. These generall points
which naturally, or by consent of nations are common
in religion, may well bee considered without
contending which religion in particular is true. For
this will hardly by all parties be agreed: because euery
man (as Philo saithPhil. de leg
                     ••
                  .) either by vse or by instruction

iudgeth his owne religion best. SoChrysost. in Act. homil. 33. 
               Chrysostome
affirmeth, that in all differencies of religion,
euery man will say, I say true
               Singuli dicunt, ego verum dico.. But this argument
which you haue propounded being new; this point
being not pointed at by any whom I haue seene, I
would gladly here you fortifie the same.
            The argument being new (answered I) and now
newly raysed into question, you must not engage
your expectation too farre; I shall doe much, if I
minister some matter for better iudgements to work
into forme.
            The rights of Soueraignty or of maiesty, so termed
by Cicero; and by Liuie, the rights of Empire, and of
Imperiall Maiestie; by Tacitus, sacraregni; by Aristotle,
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ; by the
Lawyers, Sacra sacrorum; sacra indiuidua; iura sublimia;
by the Feudistes, iura regalia; are nothing
else, but an absolute and perpetuall power, to exercise
the highest actions and affaires in some cretaine
state. These are the proper qualities of Soueraigne
or Maiesticall power; that it be both absolute and
 also perpetuall. If it be absolute but not perpetuall,
th
                  •
               n is it not soueraigne; for such power hath been
oftentimes committed, by the Romanes to their
Dictators, by the Lacedemonians to their Harmostes;
by many Kings to their Regents, Viceroyes
or Lieutenants. But because they haue no proprietie
of power inherent in them, but only an execution
or exercise thereof committed to their
charge, vnder limitation of time; because also it
may vpon iust cause bee reuoked within that time;
they are not accounted to haue the same in Soueraignetie.
And this holdeth true, although such
power bee committed for a very long time; as the
Athenians did to their great Archos for tenne yeres:
although it bee committed also in a most ample

manner, which the auncient Latines called optima
lege, without controlement or account; such as
had the Pontifices in Rome; or as the Cuidians euery
yeere chose 60. of their Citizens whom for this cause
they called Amimones; that is, men without imputation
or account. And lastly, although it be without
certaine limitation of time; as sometimes had the
Regents of France, created for the infancie, furie or
absence of their King; who before the law of Charles
the fifth, dispatched matters in their proper name.
            Againe, if it be perpetuall but not absolute, as either
depending vpon some other, or else giuen either 
vpon charge, or with exception and restraint,
then is it not soueraigne. For such power was giuen
by decree of Charles the fifth Emperor to the
Senate of Milan; To confirme the constitutions of the
Prince, as also to infirme and abrogate the same; to
dispence contrarie to the statutes; to make enablements,
giue prerogatiues, graunt restitutions &c. that no appeale
should be made from the Senate &c. And whatsoeuer
they should doe, should haue like force as if it were
done or decreed by the Prince.
               Non tamen possit delictorum veniam tributre, aut litteras saluiconductus reis criminū dare. 
               Yet might they not
graunt pardon for offences, or giue letters of safe conduct
vnto parties conuicted. So likewise in the ancient
forme of inaugurating the Kings of Arragon, the
great Magistrate or Iustice said thus vnto him: Wee
who are in vertue not inferiour, and in power greater
then thy selfe, create thee King; yet with this condition,
that one amongst vs shal haue more power and command
then thy selfe.
            
            I will not particularly rehearse what actions are
proper vnto soueraigne power: generally it may be 
said, that those affaires of state, which are of greatest
importance and weight, are annexed vnto the soueraigne
Maiestie, and cannot be separated from the
same. For, because some matters are of so high nature,

that vpon the ordring of them dependeth, not
onely the honour and dignitie, but the safetie also
and libertie of the people; not the florishing constitution
only, but the very life and being of the Common-wealth;
it hath been thought fit by generall
consent of Nations, that they cannot bee managed
by any other authoritie, than that wherein the soueraignetie
is setled; whether it be in one man, as in a
Monarchie; or in a few, as in an Aristocrace; or in
all, as in a popular or Democraticall gouernment.
They cannot bee vsurped, they cannot beAlex. in l. filiae qua de lib. & post. Card. Flor. & Ias. in prooem. s
                     •••
                  . Mart. l aud. in c. 1. qui feud. da. Imola. in Rub. ae 
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  b. obl
                     •
                  g. prescribed
they cannot bee distracted or aliened from the
same, they cannot be absolutely exercised by any other,
than by them who beare the supreame Maiestie.
They to whose trust a Common-weale is committed,
must order the chiefest affaires of the same:
they who are appointed for the very head of a societie,
must giue both direction and motion to the
principall actions of the whole bodie. And therfore
they are termed sacra sacrorum
               Baid. in prooem. seud., as hath been said;
and also, iura indiuidua
               Cyn. in l. si viua. c. de bo mat. Bald in auth. hoc amplius. c. de side
                     •
                   com. Ang. Bald. in l. om
                     •
                  es C. de praescript. Plat. in l. si quis decurto. Feli. in Rub de praese 10. And
                     •
                   in cap. vlt. de praeb. lib. 6. Alex. cons. 141. lib. 1. no. 2. because they are (
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               )
the firme foundation and groundworke of a state,
and can no waies be separated from the soueraigntie
thereof.
            But there is nothing in a Common-wealth of so
high nature, nothing of so important weight, as is
Religion; for this conserueth families, as Euripides
               In Bacchis: 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . testifieth, and is a most excellent ornament in a CitieEu
                     ••
                  p. 
                     〈◊〉
                   supplic. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .:
yea, Lactantius affirmeth it the onely meanes
 to knit and conserue men in mutuall societieTrast. de 
                     •
                  ra. cap. 12. re
                     ••
                  gto & 
                     •
                  imor deisolus est qui custodit hominam
inter sesoctetatc
                     •
                  .: and
that without religion the life of man would be filled
with all foolishnes, madnesse and mischiefe. So likewise
Plutarch
               Plut. contra Colot. calleth religion, the band which containeth
all societies, and the very foundation of iustice

and lawes
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .. For as a building cannot be either faire
or firme, if the foundation be not fairely and firmely
laid; so if there bee defect in this part of gouernment,
the whole frame of state will be neither seemly
nor yet sure. Sinesius saithOrat. de regno. 
               ; First let pietie be setled,
the base and piller whereupon this Statue of a kingdome
shall firmely stand
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .. Plutareh
               Plut. contra Colot. was of opinion,
that a Citie might more easily be built and not vpon
the ground, than a Common-wealth either constituted
or conserued, if you take away Religion
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .. And
therefore Numa in Liuie
               
                  
                     ••
                  u lib. 1. did first of all establish
Religion as a most effectuall thing to settle the vnskilfull
multitude
               Omntum primum rem ad multitudinem imperitam efficacissima, deorum metum inveiend
                     •
                   ratus.. Afterwards also Valerius
               Valcr. lib. 1. cap. 1. witnesseth,
that the Citie of Rome made lesse estimation of all
things than of Religion
               Om
                     •
                  ia post religi
                     ••
                  en ponenda ciuita
                     •
                   nostra duxit.. For this cause likewise Aristotle
               Arist. 7. P
                     •
                  l
                     •
                  t. cap. 8.
affirmeth, that the principall care in a Common
wealth must be concerning matters of Religion
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ..
First, for that it setleth obe
                  •
               tence and quiet within
the state; being a bridle to retaine men in order and
in awe: for so Cyrus reasoneth in Xenophon
               Xenoph. P
                     •
                  d. lib. 8. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .: If all
men should be religiously affected they would beare
themselues more iust and vpright in cariage, both among
themselues and towards him. Secondly, for that
it is an assured defence; for so Trismegast
                     •
                  s saithA
                     •
                  ud La
                     •
                  tantium 11. inst cap. 16. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .; Pietie
is a custodie and defence. Thirdly, for that it aduanceth
victories abroad: For so Cicero
               Cic orat de 
                     〈◊〉
                  . rest on non call
                     •
                  ditate 
                     •
                  word 
                     •
                  robo
                     •
                  c sed pie
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  e ac relligione omnes gentes nation
                     〈◊〉
                   super au
                     •
                  sse. aduoweth,
that, not by policie, not by power, but by pietie and religion,
the Romanes vanquished all other nations. And so
Valerius hath written:Va 
                     〈◊〉
                   lib. 1. cap. 1. Non dubitauerunt sacris imperia seraire: its sererum humanarum futura regimen existimantia, si diuinae po
                     •••••
                  ae bene atque constaater essent samelata. 
               Empires haue not thought
much to submit themselues to sacred seruice, supp
                     •
                  sing

to obtaine the rule of humane affaires, if they were we
and constantly seruiceable in diuine. Also the Poets;
               H
                     •
                  rat.
               Dis te minorem quod geris, imperas.
Generally, for that in all affaires whether publike or
priuate, it draweth our endeuours to a prosperous
euent, for the most part better found in the end,
than it can be coni
                  •
               ctured by the meanes. For so Aristotle
did acknowledgeArist. Rhet. ad Alex. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ., That God is more fauourable
and inclinable to those by whō he is most honoured.
            
            On the contrarie, it is impossible for that State to
stand, much lesse to florish and thriue, where those
two extreames of religion are highly in strength,
whereto Plutarch
               Plut. in Camillo. saith, the weakenes of man is
exceeding prone;
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . the one is vaine superstition;

                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . the other is cold carelesnesse and proud contempt.
The first Plutarch
               Plut. in Sertorio. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . doth appropriate to barbarous
people; Seneca
               Senec. epist. 124. Superstitio error insanus est, am
                     •
                  dos colit, quos colit violat. termeth it a mad error: Cicero
               Cic. 1. de siuib. superstitione qui est imbutus, quietus esse non potest. saith that it stirreth the minds of men and maketh
them vnquiet. And that it breaketh the courage and
heart, Lucretius doth in these words affirme:
Faciunt animos humiles formidine diuûm
depressos
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   premunt ad terram.
The second is called by Hermes,
               Herm. cap. 12. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               a great disease and
sicknes of the soule, making it inclinable to all actions
that are euill. From hence ariseth discord and disturbance
in the state: from hence Cicero
               Cic. 5. in Ver. omnia prospera eueniunt colentibus D
                     •
                  os, aduersa speraeatibus. saith,
great calamities are cast vpon it: which is also confirmed
by that of Horace:
               
                  Di multa neglecti dederunt,
                  Hesperiae mala luctuosae.
               
            
            For these causes Cicero
               De nat. deo li. 2. eorum imperus remp. amplificatam qui religio
                     •••
                  s paruissent. obserued, that the Common-wealth
of the Romans was most enlarged vnder
the command of them, who had religion in regard.
After him Constantine the Emperour left written,
l. 16. in qualibet. de Episc. & cle. C. Theod. that a Common-wealth is contained in order, more

by religion then by trauaile of body. And Iustinian also
professed,Nouel. 42. circa fi. that he was the more carefull about the
gouernment of the Church, because, If that be kept
in good fashion and forme, the other parts of gouernment
shall thereby be redressed
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ..
            Hereupon also it is necessarilie expedient, that
they who beare the soueraigntie of State, should
alwaies manage the affaires of religion; either by 
themselues, or by some at their appointment
within the same State; and neuer receiue direction
and rule from a foraine power. For the
Church (saith Optatus) is a part of the State: and
(as another said)Afer episc. Religio debet esse in rep. non contra. 
               Religion must bee in a Common-wealth,
and not the contrarie. Vpon which
ground Diotogenes in Stoboeus said; A perfect
King must of necessitie bee a good Commander, and
Iudge, and Priest
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . And againe: the best must bee
held in honour by the best, and that which ruleth by
him that beareth rule
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .. But Aristotle in this point
is most expresse, (For I must often cite these Authors
to giue satisfaction vnto those, who regard
more by whom a thing is spoken, then what is
said.)Arist. Polit. lib. 3. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               The King (saith hee) is ruler and directer of
those things that pertaine vnto the Gods. Whereunto
somewhat agreeth that of Iustine;
               Iustin. lib. 8. Iure ille à dijs proximus habetur, per quem deorum maiestas vindicatur. 
               he is accounted
next vnto God by whom the Maiestie of God is maintained.
            
            For, how should he be esteemed a Soueraigne,
who, in the greatest actions and affaires of the State,
acknowledgeth the iurisdiction of another greater
then himselfe? what maiestie should he be adiudged
to beare, who is vnder the authority of another man?
to reuerse his iudgements, to correct his lawes, to restraine
or constraine him at pleasure and with case?
Religion is seated within the soule and conscience of

man, and is a most potent ruler of the same. The life
(saith Plinie
               Lib. 14. nat. hist. Religione vitae constat.) consisteth in religion. If then the
consciences of a people be commanded by a stranger,
if their soules be subiect to a forraine power, if
their liues be at the seruice of an external Prince; it is
but a weake, but a dead dominion, which the naturall
Prince shall hold ouer their bodies. That Prince
whose subiects soules are in subiection to a stranger
for matters of religion, shall neither preuaile more against
his enemies, nor beare greater authoritie amongst
his owne people, then that stranger shall limit
him leaue.
            
                All men of themselues are moued with religionCic. in 5. in Verrem. omnes religione mouentur.,
but when they are also thrust on by those, who
make it their purchase (as Liuie speakethtiu lib. 4. quibus quaestui sunt capti superstitione animi.) to possesse
soules with superstition, then doe they not inconsideratly
only, but in a wild furie runne and rush
vpon most desperate aduentures. The multitude
(saith Curtius
               Curt. lib. 4. vbi vana religione capta est, melius vatibus quam ducibus suis paret.) being weake, fierce and mutable,
when it is once possessed with vaine religion, is more obedient
to their Priests, then to their Commander or
Prince.
            
            
               Diodorus Siculus
               Lib. 6. cap. 10 hath a memorable Historie
concerning this point, of the Priests of Iupiter, in
the Iland Meroe, enuironed with the riuer Niliu;
who held the people of Aethiopia in so superstitious
dependancie vpon them, that they would send to
them at pleasure, and giue in charge the slaughter of
their Kings; no man making offer either to deny or
to delay their cruell command. vntill Ergamenes, a
King of Aethiopia suddenly surprised and slew them
all, whereby both their office and authority did surcease.
            
               Florus
               Flo. 3. cap. 16. writeth that Eunus a slaue counterfeiting
a fanaticall furie, and pretending some diuine
inspiration, was able to see 60. thousand armed men

in the face of the Romans, euen in the principal time
of their policie and strength; being then hardlie able
to deliuer Sicilia frō his subiection. Iosephus reportethIoseph. 2. bel. Iud. cap. 12.
of an Aegyptian in the time of the Emperour
Claudius, who bearing himselfe to be a Prophet,
vnder that pretext adioined 30. thousand men
vnto him, in the country of Iudea; with whom he
maintained head against the forces of the Romans.
Tacitus
               Tac. 2. hist. writeth the like of Maricus, who giuing
forth that he was the God and deliuerer of Gallia,
drew 8. thousand men vnto him, with whom he attempted
against the Romane garrisons.
            One of our late writersBodin. lib. 1. reporteth, that because
in one chapter of the Alcoron, all the Musulman
Princes are forbidden to call themselues Lords, except
their Caliph or great Vicar of their Prophet
Muhamed, by colour thereof, the Mahometan
Bishops vsurped absolute soueraignety, aboue all
their Princes; disposing of principalities at their
pleasure, vnder the name and title of gouernments.
At last the Muselman Princes supposing that
Chapter not to haue been inserted by Mahamed
their Law-giuer, but by their Caliphes, for aduancing
their owne authoritie, at such time when of diuers
corrupt Alcorons they composed one, long time
after the death of Muhamed; they tooke aduantage
of a diuision among their great Bishops, when three
of them did take vpon them the title of great Caliph
together, and thereupon the Princes of Persia, the
Curdes, the Turkes, the Tartars, the Sultans of Aegypt,
the Kings of Marrocco, of Fez, of Telensin, of
Tanes, of Bugia, the people of Zenetes, and of Luntune
quitted themselues of their obeysance to the
Caliphes, and maintained Soueraigntie within their
states.
            
               Elmahel in AfricaLeo. lib. 2., hauing gained a great opinion

of sanctitie among the people of Marocco, raised
them against Abraham their King, and dispoyled
him both of his Empire and life.Leo. lib. 3. With like industrie
and art an other impostor called Chemin Mennal
stirred the people against the King of Fesse, and
constrained him by armes to yeeld vnto him the
kingdome of Temesna.
               Annal. Turc. 
               Schacoculis being of the
sect of the Persians, by pretence of piety gathered
such strength, that he tooke many Cities in Asia, ouerthrew
the Turkes forces in three great battailes,
and brought his whole Empire to a dangerous
distresse.
            How Iohn of Leiden, a Taylor by his trade, set all
Germany in vproare and in armes, by bearing himselfe
to be a principall man in religion, it scarce exceedeth
the memory of this present age. And what
practises in this kind, haue been either atchieued or
attempted in other Christian countries, I shall haue
 occasiō hereafter to touch. But for auoiding of these
and the like dangers, I find that two policies were
aunciently obserued. One consisted in excluding all
externall ceremonies and rites: the other was, in
comm
                  •
               ting the gouernment for matters of Religion,
to the soueraigne power and authoritie in the
State.
            In regard of the first, the Iewes would not conuerse
 or accompanie a man who was not of their
owne religion. Among the Grecians, Socrates and
Protagoras were condemned, Anaxagoras and Aristotle
were accused for holding opinions contrarie
to their receiued religion. Iosephus writethIoseph. lib. 2. co
                     •
                  it. sp
                     •••
                  . 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ., that
the Athenians had a seuere law against any man
who should speake a word in religion, against that
which was established by law. The Scythians put
Anacharsis to death, for performing the tites of
Bacchus after the manner of the Grecians. Liuie
               
writeth that among the Romanes, the Aediles receiued
in part of their charge,Ne qui 
                     •
                  isi Romani dij, neue alto more quam patrio colerc
                     •
                  tur. that no externall religion
or ceremony should be brought in. And to the
same purpose M. Aemilius recited a decree;Liu. lib. 15. ne quis in publico sacroue loco, nouo au
                     •
                   externo ritu sacrificaret. 
               that
no man should sacrifice in a publike or sacred place, after
a new or externall rite. How often (saith the same Liuie
               Lib. 39. quoties patrum auorumque aetate negotiu magisti, atibus datum est, vt sacra externa sicri vitarent.)
haue our fathers and ancestors giuen charge to
the Magistrates, that externall ceremonies should bee
forbidden? Maecenas in Dio
               Dio lib. 52. gaue this exhortation
and aduice to Augustus;
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                
               Obserue religion after the
fashion of your country, and compell others to do the like:
but those who bring in strange and foraine rites, hate
and correct; because they perswade many to worke alterations,
from whence conspiracies, and seditions are oftentimes
occasioned.
            
            Concerning the second point, Iustine
               Iustin lib. 36. mos est apud Iudaeos, vt cosdem reges & sacerdotes hab rent. reporteth
that it was a custome among the Iewes, to haue the
same men both Princes and Priests. This was at
sometimes true in the gouernment of the Iewes. At
other times the Kings gaue order in matters of religion,
and appointed not only inferiour Priests and
officers (as did Iosias
               2. Chron. 35. 2.) but also high Priests (as did
King Salomon
               1. Reg. 2. 25.) to execute the same. For this cause
Moses left in chargeDeut. 17. 19., that the King should reade in
the booke of the law all the daies of his life; that he might
learne to feare the Lord his God, and to keepe all the
words of that law, and those ordinances for to dee them.
For this cause also they were sacred with oyle, to declare
(saith Eusebius
               Lib. 1. Ecclesihist.) both their dutie and authoritie
in matters of religion. From hence it proceeded,
that as the Kings prooued good or euill, so the
true religion was either obserued or neglected.
From hence also Tacitus
               Lib. 3. hist. Iudaeis sacerabtij hon
                     •
                  s firmamentum potentiae erat. hath written: The honor 
of Priesthood is a great assurance of power to the Iewes.
               
The Scriptures doe further testifie, that Melchisedeen
was both King and Priest; and that Balak King of
Moab offered sacrifice together with Balaam.
            
            
                The Aegyptians from amongst whom the Iewes
were extracted, and with whom they communicated
in many ceremonies, are reported likewise by
some, to haue annexed the royall and priestly dignitie
together. Marcilius Ficinus affirmethIn praef. lib. Trismeg. out of
Plato, and Seuerus in Stob
                     ••
                  us
               Serm 41. that their custome
was to elect Priests out of their Philosophers: and
out of their Priests, whom Diodorus
               Lib. 2. cap. 3. placeth next
in dignitie to the King (as Strabo
               Strab. lib. 11. writeth of the
Priests of the Albanes) to make choice of the best
approued for their King. Wherupon Mercurius the
grand-child of that Mercurie, who was sonne to Iupiter
and Maia, being called by the Aegyptians Tenot,
by the Grecians was named Trismegistus, which
signifieth thrice greatest, because he was the greatest
Philosopher (for so is he also termed by Tertullian
               Aduers. Valent.)
the greatest Priest and the greatest King; although
Suidas coniectureth that name to be giuen him, because
he did expressely write of the Trinitie.
            
               Strabo saithStra. lib. 5., that in Aritia hee was a King who
was Priest of Diana; the same is confirmed by Suetonius
               In Calig c. 35, and mentioned by diuers Poets, namely
Ouid
               De arte amand. lib. 1..

                  Ecce suburbanae templum nemorale Dianae,
                  Parta
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      per gladios regna nocente mann.
               
And Lucane
               Lib 3.;
Qua sublime nemus Scythicae qua templa Diana.
               And Valer. FlaccusArgonant. lib. 2;
—Etsol
                     •
                   non mitis Aritia regt.
And la
                  •
               tly by Martial
               Epigram. 64. lib. 9.;

                  Qua tri
                        •
                     ne nemerosa petit, dum regna viator
                  Octauum demina marmor ab vrbe legit.
               
The like doth Hartius
               I
                     •
                   bel. Alexand. report to be obserued in the

Temple of Be
                     •
                  ona, in Cappadocia. The like also doth
Virgil
               Aeneid. 3. write of Anins:
            
            
               
                  ••
                Rex idem hominum phoebi
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               , facerdos.
            
               Diodorus Siculus
               Lib. 6. cap. 10 affirmeth, that the Priests of 
Pantheon were both Leaders in the field, and also
Iudges and arbitratours in controuersies of right.
Strabo testifiethLib. 12. that in Zela, the Priest had supreme
both dignitie and authoritie in all things.Iust. lib. 11. 
               Iustine
writeth, that Mida, sonne of Gordius King of Phrygia,
being by Orpheus entred into the orders of the
sacred and solemne mysteries of those times, filled
all Phrygia with religion: wherewith he more assured
himselfe, then hee did by armes. Tacitus
               De mor, Ger. reporteth
that among the Germanes, it was permitted
to no man to beate or bind or otherwise to punish,
but only to the Priests. Strabo saithLib. 12. that in
Cuma of Pontus the Priest did weare a Diadem twise
in the yeere, which is the ensigne of a King. Vitru
                     •
                  i
                  
                     •
                  s
               Lib. 2. cap. 8. declareth that among the Trallians, the principall
Priest had a princely Palace appointed for his
aboad. Diodorous Siculus
               Lib. 17. cap. 4. 
               Orosius
               Oros. lib. 4. cap. 6. and Pausanias
               Paus. in Baeot. siue lib. 9. doe write, that the priest of Hercules in Tyre
was apparrelled in purpure, and did weare a Diadem
vpon his head. Herodiane
               Herodian. lib. 5. writeth, that the Priest
of the Sunne among the Phoenicians, was attired in
a long garment, consisting onely of purpure and
gold; and did weare a Crowne of gold set with precious
stones; and that Heliogabalus, being Emperour
of Rome did exercise that priesthood. Ferd. Lopex
               Lib. 1. hist. Ind. cap. 14.
affirmeth, that the Kings of Malabar in East India
are Priests or Bramenes, and must die in their sacred
place, as men consecrated vnto God. And in China
there is an auncient law, that no religion bee
brought in, without allowance of the King and of
his Councell: he that violateth this law is punished
by death.
            
               
                In the first great Empire, Berosus hath left written,
that Ninus first dedicated Temples to Iupiter
Belus and Iuno his parents, and caused them to bee
honoured as Gods. Zamies Ninias his sonne exceedingly
both amplified and adorned these Temples.
Belochus with the rule of his Empire exercised also
the office of the high Priest of the same Iupiter Belus;
and for that cause the name Belochus was giuen vnto
him.
            
                The Kings of Persia, vnder whose gouernment the
second great Empire was founded, are acknowledged
by all writers to haue been inaugurated to
be the Princes of their sacred ceremoniesCic. de diuinat..
            
                In Athens and Lacedaemonia, the two eyes of
Greece, as Leptines
               Apud Arist. Rhet. 3. cap. 10. and Iustine
               Iust. lib. 5. doe rightly tearme
them; the ceremonies of their religion were ordered
by their Kings. The Athenians had their 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                or
King, as Demosthenes testifiethContra Neaeram., who was president
and chiefe directer in all their sacred ceremonies.
Xenophon saithDe Repub. Laced., that the Kings of the Spartanes or
Laced 
                  •
               monians, so soone as they were assumed to
that state of dignitie, did discharge also the office of
chiefe Priest, to the celestiall and Lacaedemonian
Iupiter. Alexander the great Monarch of Greece
did oftentimes offer sacrifice, giue order for their
kinde of religious obseruations; and at the last
commaunded diuine honours to bee done vnto
Q Curt. himselfe.
            
                Among the Romanes this was one of their ancient
royall lawes: Sacrorum omnium potestas sub regibus
est
                     •
                  : Let all sacred matters bee vnder the power of
Kings. Which law was stablished by their first King
Romulus, but seemeth also to haue been more anciently
in vse: insomuch as Seruius
               Lib. 10. Aeneid. super illud Virgilij. Vigilas ne deū gens? Aenaea? vigila. noteth, that Virgil
alwaies bringeth in Aeineas as president both in
action and drection in all offices of their religion.

Whereof Ouid
               Fast. also seemeth to make mention in
these words.
            
               Vt
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ea nunc certaest, ita rex placare
               Numina lanigerae coniuge debet ouis.
            
            After Romulus, Numa Pōpilius performed al those
sacrifices and ritesLiu. lib. 1., which afterward were committed
to y• 
               Diall Flamen. Dyonisius Halicarnassaeus
               Hali. lib. 2. and
Plutarch
               Plut. in Numa. doe affirme, that he did beare the office of
Pontifex: Liuie
               Liu. lib 1. Dec. 1. writeth, that hee committed the
same to one of the chiefe Senators named Marcius.
Of these two Kings Cicero
               Cic. lib 2. de nat. Deo. saith: Romulus auspicijs,
Numa sacris constitutis fundamenta ieccrunt Romanae
ciuitatis. The Kings succeeding performed the most
high and sacred rites of their religion; with whom as
Liuie
               Lau. 1. Decad. lib. 2. writeth, the Priests tooke often aduice, concerning
sacrifices and al sorts of ceremonies: Whereupon
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus affirmeth
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ., that they
had the principalitie or chiefest rule of sacred matters,
and of sacrifices, and that all things pertaining to diuine
worship were ordered by them.
            
            After that the Kings were cast out of state, that 
the chiefest in power had authoritie to giue order in
religion, it may appeare by the two decrees of Senate
before cited out of Liuie, for excluding the vse
of foraine ceremonies and rites: but more plainely it
appeareth in that it was decreed;Nequa Bacchamalia Romae neue in Italia essent, si quis tale sacrum solenne ac necessarium duceret, nec sine religione ac piaculo se id omit. lere posse, apud pr
                     •
                  torem vrbanum profiteretur, partor senatum consuleret: Si ei permissum esset cum in senatu centum, non minus essent, ita id sacrum fieret, dum ne plus quinque sacrificio interessent. 
               that no Bacchanalls
should be kept either at Rome or within Italie: if
any man should esteeme such sacred solomnitie to be necessarie,
and that hee could not omit it without offence
and violation of Religion, he should declare the same
to the citie Praetor, the Praetor should consult with the Senate.
If it should be permitted him when a hundred
(and no fewer) should be assembled in Senate, that solemnitie
might be performed, so that no more than fiue

should be present at the Sacrifice.
            
            And although the name of King at that time was
hatefull to the Romanes, yet they created a King
whom they called Rex Sacrificulus
               Liu. lib. 2., or Rex sacrificus
               Gell. lib. 10. cap. 15.,
to performe those offices of their religion,
which in former times were proper to their KingsFestus Pompeius lib 17..
His office was not annuall but perpetuallDio
                     •
                  . Halic. lib. 4.; which
ioyned to his high title, lest it should draw him to
dangerous attempts, they stripped him of all ciuill
authoritie. He might not beare either charge in the
armieDionys. vbi 5., or magistracie in the common wealth.Plut. Probl. cap. 63. He
might not make any oration to the people, nor deale
with them about publike affayres. His authoritie
was restrained only to religion; to offer sacrifices,
and to determine doubts, if any did arise. His person
was sacred as Seruius notethAe
                     •
                  eid. 8. super illud Virgilij. Nec no Tarquinnium ciectum Porsenna Iubebat accipere., so that neither violence
notr despight might be offered vnto him: And
yet the greatest Pontifex was preferred before himLi
                     •
                  . 1. Dec. lib. 2. D on
                     •
                  s. lib. 5. Feuestel. de sacer
                     •
                  . c. 1
                     •
                  
               ;
insomuch as in their festiuall solemnities hee was
placed next to their greatest Pontifex, aboue all the
Flaminos
               Gell. lib. 10. cap. 15.. His daughters might not be compelled
to become VestalsFea
                     •
                  stel. de sacred Rom.. His wise was called Regina sacrorum
               Festus Pomp. lib. 9.;
who euery Calendes did offer sacrifice to
Macrob. & Ouid. de 
                     •
                  ast. 
               Iuno, her head circled with a white wand of a
Pomegranate tree, called inarculum; to whom the
Vestals resorted vpon a certaine day in the yeere,
to admonish her not to neglect the solemne rites
committed to her charge.
            They erected also a Colledge of Pontifices
               Lin 1. Dec. lib. 10., First
consisting of foure, afterwards encreased to eight,
lastly by Sylla enlarged to fifteeneApp
                     •
                  an. Plut. Plin. secundus de vir. illust. cap. 75.. Their office
was both to preserue and interpret all solemnities
pertaining to their religion; to keepe a true record
and remembrance of them: to bee carefull that no
Roman ceremonie were neglected, and no externall
obseruation brought in: to determine what things

were sacred, and what prophane: to appoint what
sacrifices were to be offred, vpon what daies, in what
Temples, in what manner, and whence the charge
should bee suppliedLiu. lib. 1.; to decide doubtes concerning
funerall obsequies, performancies of vowes
and oathes, obseruation of festiuall times and such
like. If in any matter they did differ in iudgement,
that was obserued wherein the greatest part, being
three at least, did fully agree. They had also
the interpretation of the Ciuill laweCic. de legib. lib. 2., which for
many yeeres was reputed sacred among the Romanes.
They kept the Annales (as Cicero saithCic. de orat. lib. 2.)
of most memorable accidents, and atchieuments
euery yeere, which were termed Annales maximi,
as Macrobius
               Lib. 3. Saturn. ca. 2. doth write; and did set them
forth in a white table called album pontificium, out
of which it was free for any man to write them. It
was also a part of their charge to repaire the bridgesVarr. lib. 1. de ling. lat. Plut. in Numa.,
which vntil the time that Aemilius was Questor
were made of timberMarlianus in topographia vet Rom., and not fastned together
with any iron or brasseHalicar. lib. 3 & 5. Plin lib. 36. cap. 11.. These were esteemed sacred
by the Romanes, and if they were in any part
decayed, they might not be repaired but with sacrifices
& other ceremonious obseruancies. From hence
it is commonly supposed that they were called
Pontifices; but Scaeuola (as Varro
               Deling. lat. saith) did more
properly deriue that name from posse and facere, not
only in regard of their eminent authoritie, but because
the word facere in ancient Latine did signifie
to sacrifice, as Vigil speaketh:
            Cum facer em vitula.
            The principal of this Colledge was called Pontifex
Maximus; who, as Iestus Pompeius
               Lib. 11. and Valerius
Maximus
               Lib. 1. cap. 1. do write, was the greatest Iudge in their
religion. And although other priests could not
beare Empire in the armie, or office in the statePlut. Prebl. cap. 113., or

be carried vpon horsePlut. Probl. cap. 39. Gellius lib 10. cap. 15. Festus Pompeius lib. 5., or be three nights absent
from the citiePlut. d. ca. 39.; yet the same man might be Consul
or Censor, or Praetor, or Magister equitum, (the
greatest offices of that common wealth) and also
greatest Pontifex: As Liuie writeth of P. Liciunius
Crassus
               Lau. 3. Decad. lib. 8., and M. Marcellus
               
                  
                     ••
                  u. 4. Decad. lib. 3. and of diuers others.
This Pontifex Maximus was so highly honoured in
the populare state of Rome, that hee was reputed to
approach neere vnto the degree of dignitie which
the kinges held in former timesPlut. Probl. ca. 13., insomuch as L.
Florus reportethFlorus epist. lib. 47., that a fine was imposed vpon C
                     •
                  .
Tremelius Tribune of the people, for vsing vnciuill
speeches against M. Aemilius Lepidus, the greatest
Pontifex. A Sergeant was appointed to goe before
himPlut. Prebl. cap. 113., he was carried in a Coach-chaire, called Curules
sella
               Liu. Decad. 3. lib. 5., which was reputed a royall ensigne, because
Romulus vsed the like by example of the HetruscanesLiu. Decad. 1. lib. 1..
His doores were adorned with greene
LawrellPlia. lib. 15. cap. 30.; if he vndertooke any office or charge, he
was not lyable (as were other men) either to controulement
or accountHalicar. lib. 2 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ., whether to the Senate or
common people. His proper ornament was a hatApul. apol. 1.,
in token of his loftie estate. If any offender did
slie vnto him, that day hee was protected from punishmentPlut. Probl. cap. 111..
Hee was married after a speciall manner,
called confarreatio
               Boet. in top. Ciccr. lib. 2.. His wife must be of singuler
example, and he might not iterat marriage the second
timeTertul. de exhor cast. & ad vxorem l. 1.& in praescript.; he might not behold a dead bodieIoseph. antiq. 3. cap. 10.;
hee might not foyle his hands with bloodLiu. 3. Decad. lib. 10.; and
neither giue nor assist sentence of death. Hee was
chiefe not onely of the College of PontificesLiu 4. Decad. lib. 10., but
also of him that was Rex sacrorum; the Augures;
Flamines and vestale Virgins; vpon whom hee
might impose either fine or other punishment, as
the qualitie of their offences did require. All their
sacred matters whether publike or priuate did principally

depend vpon his direction. And yet this authoritie
was often borne (as hath been said) by the
highest ciuill Officers of that Common wealth: the
election of him pertained to the peopleCicer. in orat. del. Agraria. & in lib. de amic ti
                     •
                  . Halicar lib. 2. Pater c. lib. 2. Su
                     •
                  t. in N
                     •
                  rcn
                     •
                  . 
                     •
                  a. 2: and prouocation
or appeale did lie also from him to the
people. For so Linie
               Liu. 4. Decad. lib. 10. writeth that a contention did
arise, betwixt C. Seruilius the greatest Pontifex, and
L. Cornelius Dolabesta, Du
                     •
                  muir, because the
Pontifex commaunded him to abdicate his office,
that he might be inaugurated Rex sacrificus, in place
of Cornelius Dol
                     •
                  bella. This when the D
                     •
                  umuir refused
to doe, the Pontifex set a fine vpon him; for
which cause hee appealed and brought the matter
before the people. Many tribes being assembled &
the difference debated on both sides, they commanded
the Du
                     •
                  muir to bee obedient to the Pontifex▪
               
and yet they remitted his fine, in case hee should abandon
his office. In the meane time the heauens 
were couered with darke and thicke clowdes, which
brake forth into a terrible tēpest. This being taken
for ominous, the assemblie dissolued, and the authority
to inaugurate was taken from the Pontifex.
            
            The Common-wealth of y• Romans being changed
againe to the gouernment of one, the chiefest
authoritie in all affaires depended vpon the Emperours:
For soTertul. in apolog. 
               Tertullian acknowledgeth the Heathen
Emperours to be
               A Deo setuxdi, post cum primi, ante omnes & super omnes. 
               second and inferiour only to
God before all, and aboue all. Againe he saith,Tert
                     •
                  ad Scapulam. Colimus Imperatorem vt hominem à Dio secundū, solo Deo minorem. 
               Wee
worship the Emperour as a man next vnto God, and inferiour
only to God. So didEpist. Elutherij citat. inter ll. E. 1. 
               Eleutherius in those
times Bishop of Rome, write vnto Lucius King of
BritaineVos es
                     •
                  is Vicarius Dei in regno, iuxta prophetam Regium.; You are Gods Vicar within your owne
Realme, according to the Prophet Dauid.
            
            
               Augustus annexed the greatest pontificate to the
imperiall dignitie, to whom the people by the law
of Royalty transferred all their power as well in religious

as in ciuill affaires. Suetonius writethIn C. Caesare. ca. 13., that C.
Caesar was at one time greatest Pontifex, and also
Augur. Seruius
               Ad 1. 3. & 6. Aencid. testifieth, that C. Caesar being Pontifex,
M. Terrentius Varro did write vnto him a
booke, concerning their sacred and religious rites.
Againe, Suetonius
               In Galba. c. 8 affirmeth, that Galba did beare
three Priest-hoods. The same Suetonius
               In Claudio. cap. 22. saith, that
Claudius Caesar had the Priest-hood in such honorable
estimation that he neuer made choise or nomination
of 
                  〈◊〉
               , vntill he had been sworne. In regard
of this connexion of the Empire and pontificate,Tacit. Annal. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 3.
               Tacitus did write: nunc deum munere summum
pontificem su
                     •••
                  um hominum esse.
            
            The greatest pontificate was also borne by Vespasian,
Traiane, and diuers other Romane Emperors:
the Maiestie of which Emperors was esteemed most
sacred, in so much as diuine both titles & adorations
were giuen vnto them. Their Statues and Images
were sacred and adored, asTacit. lib. 14 
               Tacitus andVeg. lib. 2. c. 5 & 6. 
               Vegetius
do report; it was treason for any man either to
pul away, or to violate those who did flie vnto them;
to melt them also, and also to fell themL. qui statuas. l. non contra. bit. D. ad Iud. maiest.. Tacitus
writethTacit. lib. 3. that L. Ennius was accused of treason, for
melting the Image of the Prince: which accusation
although Tiberius did forbid to proceed, yet Suetonius
affirmethIn Tiberio. cap. 58., that he commanded one to be arraigned,
for taking the head from the statue of Augustus,
and setting another vpon the same. This
kind of accusation grew to that degree, that it was
capitall for a man, to beare the Image of the Prince
stamped in money, or engrauen in a Ring, to any vncleane
or vnseemely place. Yea, Seneca, saithDe benefic. lib. 3., that
vnder the Empire of Tiberius, a certaine noble man
was accused of treason, for mouing his hand to his
p
                  •
               iuie parts, in making vrin, when he did weare a ring
vpon 
                  〈◊〉
                finger, whereon was ingrauen the Image of

the Prince: So great was the reuerence borne vnto
them.
            Vpon this generall both authoritie and vse, for
Princes to manage diuine affaires, St. Hierom
               In Iob. cap. 1. hath
said,Priuilegium offe
                     •
                  endi primogenitis, vel maxime Regibus debebatur. 
               The priuiledge to offer sacrifice was due to the
first borne, but most of all vnto Kings.
            
            And yet in these times, the Emperours reserred
many matters pertaining to their religion, to be determined
by the Senate; partly for expedition and
ease, partly for that they would not draw all authoritie
from the senate at once. So Tacitus
               Tacit. 2. annal. writeth
of a decree of the Senate, for expelling of the ceremonies
of the Aegyptians & of the IewesDesacris ludaicis Aegyptijs
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   pellendis.. Likewise
vnder Claudius a decree of the Senate was made,
that the Pontifex should consider what ceremony of
the Aruspices should be reteinedViderent pontifices quae retinenda firmanda
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Aruspicum essent.. So Tiberius referred
to the Senate whether Christ should be receiued
among the Romane Gods, which in no case
they would consent to decree; because he had been
worshipped for God, without the publike authority
of the Empire. The like is reported to haue bin both
purposed and propounded by Hadrian; who commanded
also that Temples should be built in euerie
Citie, without any Idols. The like purpose in Alexander
Seuerus is affirmed by Lampridius
               In Seuero. to haue
been crossed, vpon assurance made vnto him, from
those who gaue answere by inspection of Entrailes,
that if Christ should be receiued for God, all men
would become Christians, and the other Temples
should be forsaken.
            But, when he that would not be worshipped with
other Gods, was both admitted and adored for God 
alone; when the Christian faith was publikely embraced
in the Romane state; religion was both aduanced
and ordered by Imperiall authoritie. For so
Socrates
               In Proaem. lib. 5. testifieth in these words: From that time

when the Emperours began to be Christians
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               , the affaires
of the Church depended vpon them; in so much as
the greatest Councels were alwaies assembled by their appointment.
So Chrysostome
               Ad Pop. Antioch. hom. 2. calleth the Emperour,
Summitatem & caput. 
               the height and head of all men in the world: and one
that hath no equall vpon earth
               Parem vllum super terram non habet.. And so did Leo the
first write to the Emperour Leo,
               Debes Imperator incunctanter aduertere, regiam potestatem tibi, non solum ad mundi regimen, sed maxime ad ecclesiae praesidium esse collatam. that royall power
was giuen him, not only for gouernment of the world,
but especially for the safegard of the Church. And so
likewise Gregorie Bishop of Rome affirmedEpist. lib. 3. ca. 100. & 103, that
power is giuen to Princes from heauen, not only ouer
Souldiers but ouer Priests. Optatus saithContra Parmen. lib. 13. super Imperatorem non est nisi solus Deus qui fecit Imperatorem.: there is
no man aboue the Emperour but only God who made the
Emperour. But this is most euidently declared, in the
answere of Demetrius Chomatenus
               In respons. O
                     ••
                  ent. in these words:
Imperator, vt communis 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  
                     ••
                  istens & nominatus. synodalibus praeest sententijs, & robur tribuit: ecclesiasticos ordines componit, & legem dat vitae politi
                     •
                  
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   corum qui altari seruiunt. 
               The Emperour being both in common estimation, and
in very truth a skilfull gouernour, is president and giueth
strength to synod all sentences; he setteth Ecclesiasticall
orders in forme, he giueth law for the life and ciuil
cariage of those who serue at the Altar. And againe:
Vt vno verbo dica, solo sacrificand
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   ininisterio, reliqua pontificalia priuilegia Imperator representat. 
               to speake in one word, the office of sacrificing only excepted,
the Emperour representeth the other priuiledges
of a Bishop. And therefore St. Augustine
               Cont Coe
                     ••
                  on. & epist. 48. & epist. 50. enu
                  •
               ighed
against the heresie of the Donatists; in that they
affirmed, that the Church ought not to vse either
lawes or any assistance from Princes. And that speech
of Donatus
               Donat. Mel
                     •
                  uit. l. 2. was iustly condemned. Quid est imperatoricum
ecclesia? What hath the Emperour to do with
the Church?
            
            Two parts in the Church may separatly be considered,
the externall forme, which consisteth in the
politicall gouernment thereof; and the essentiall
forme, consisting in the true substance and foundation

of faith. Concerning the first, we may find many 
things aunciently ordered in the Church by Christian
Emperours. For so Constantine
               nouel. 43. & 49. in princ. the great, Anastatius
               l. 18. C. de sacros. eccles. and Iustinian
               D nouel. 43. & 49. the first established order,
for expence and forme of funerals. The Emperours
Gratian, Valentinian the second, and Theodosius the
greatl. 2. C. de sacros. eccles., prohibited that any corpes should be interred
within the seates of the Apostles or Martyrs. Honorius
and Theodosius ordeined, how many Deacons
should be in the Church of Constantinople
               l. 4. C. co.; and
what immunities euery Church should enioyl. 5. C. co.. Leo
and Anthemius forbad alienation of lands pertaining
to the Churchl. 14 C. co.. Valentinian, Theodosius, and
Arcadius did prohibitel. 9. C. de episc. & cler. that any should be receiued
for a Diaconisse, who was not aged aboue fiftie
yeeres; which was afterwards confirmed by Iustinian
               nouel. 6. ca 6.. Honorius and Arcadius forbadl. 17. C. de episc. & cler., that Clerkes
should haue any thing to do with publike actions or
pleas. Iustinian addednouel. 123. ca. 10., that they should absteine
from play, and from all open spectacles and shewes.
Leo and Anthemius
               l. 29. C. de episc. & cler. enioyned Monkes and religious
persons, not to depart out of their Monasteries,
and to liue in that modesty and sincerity wherto the
imperiall lawes did bind them: and that no Clergio
man should be ordained by way of corruptionl. 30. C. co.: or
conuented in Iudgment, in a place farre distant from
his abodel. 31. C. co.. Iustinian ordainedl. 22. C. de episc. audien., that vpon a certaine
day in the weeke Bishops should go and visite
the prisons, to enquire for what cause euery prisoner
is detained, and to admonish the Magistrates, to execute
iustice. In another constitutionnouell. 3. he ordeined,
what manner of Clerkes should be ordained in the
Church; that Clerkes should not remoue themselues
from a lesse Church, to a greater; and that the rents
of the Church should be expended to godly vses
and acts. Hee appointed alsonouell. 5. the time for monasticall

profession, and the rules which Monkes
should leade. He established his ordinancenouell. 6. for the
election, life and behauiour of Bishops, and other
Ecclesiasticall persons; that they reside vpon their
charge; that they resort not to the Court, except they
be expressely called; that they celebrate not diuine
offices in any place which is not consecrated to the
seruice of God.nouell. 58. He declared what causes should
be lawfull for diuorce and separation of mariagenouell. 117.;
as Theodosius the yonger, and Valent. the third had
done before himl. 8. C. de repud.. He ordained also that the holy
Scriptures should be read in the vulgar tongue, and
appointed what translations should be in vsenouel. 146..
            It would bee both tedious and vnnecessarie to
make long stay vpon rehersall of those imperiall
lawes, which haue bin both receiued and reuerenced
for gouernment of the Church. For Iustinian professedl. 1. C. de vet. iur. enuc legu authoritas & diuinas & humanas res bene disponit.,
that by authoritie of the lawes, both diuine
and humane affaires were well ordered; and againe,
nouel 133. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               there is nothing but may be examined by authoritie of
the Emperour; for hee receiueth from God a generall
principallitie and gouernment ouer all men. The same
is acknowledge by Pope Gregorie, in his epistle to
Mauritius
               lib. 2. epist. 100 Ad hoc potestas super omnes homines dominorū meorū pictati coesitus data est, &c.: To this end is power ouer all persons giuen
from heauen vnto my Lord, for assistance of good men,
and enlargement of the way to heauen. Whereupon
Espencaeus saithEspenc. com. in Tit. 3. digres. 10. Gregorius magnus agno se
                     •
                  bat, Imperatoribus conc
                     •
                  ssum esse dominari sacerdotibus.; that Gregorie the great did ingeniouslie
acknowledge a soueraignetie in Emperours
ouer priests. So Balsamon
               Bals. in Concil Chalced. cap. 12. hath said, that the Emperours
had power to appoint patriarchall seas, according
to the power giuen them from aboue. Whereto
doth that of Isodore agreec. Principes 23. q. 5.; Princes of the world haue
their authoritie and power in the Church, that the ecclesiasticall
discipline should bee held in strength; that they
who will not obserue it by admonition of the priest, should
be constrained by force of the Magistrate. Yea, diuers

of the papall decrees, for ordering of Ecclesiasticall 
affaires, were lawes made by Christian Emperours;
of which lawes many are yet extant in the Codex of
Theodosius. The Canon Iudicantem
               13. q. 5., expressing the
office of a Iudge in cognisance of causes, attributed
by Gratian to Pope Eleutherius, was made by the
Emperor Constantine
               l. 1. C. de Iudic. in C. Theod.. The Canon, si quis Iratus
               2. q. 3. de poe. di. 1.,
attributed to Pope Fabian, against accusers, is a law
of the same Emperour Constantine, in the Codex of
Theodosius. The Canons which goe vnder the names
of the same Fabian
               3. q. 6. c. 1., of Sixtus
               3. q. 6. c. 16. & 17. & 2. q. 8. c. 4., and of Hadrian
               2. q. 3. c. 3.,
concerning the same subiect, are found to bee made
by Gratian the sonne of Valentinian the first. The decrees
of Pope Caius
               c. Episcopis. 3. q. 5., and of Pope Iohn
               c. reintegranda. q. e., for restitution
of Church goods, taken from Bishops, when
they were forced from their sea, are the Edictes of the
same Emperour Gratian. The Canon qui ratione
               3. q. 9.
attributed to Pope Damasus, for order in accusations,
is comprised in Theodosius Code, vnder the name
of the same Emperour. The Canon nullus
               2. q. 7., vnder
the name of Pelagius was made by the Emperours
Honorius and Arcadius. The Canon quisquis
               2. q. 8., vnder
the name of Eutychian, was promulged by the
Emperours Honorius and Theodosius. The Canon
consanguineos
               35. q. 6., for separation of marriage contracted
within the prohibited degrees of consanguinity,
is a constitution of the Emperour Constantine the
great. The Canon Priuiligia
               25. q. 2., for confirmation of
the priuiledges of the Church, vnder the name of
Anacletus, is a constitution of the Emperours Theodosius
and Valentinian. In a word, the volume of decrees
is filled with diuers constitutions of Christian
Emperours, either assumed by Popes, or attributed
vnto them, without expressing either the name or
authoritie of the Emperours. And touching the rest,

Pope Honorius
               c. 1. ext. de iu
                     •
                  am calum. acknowledged, that it was by decree
of the Emperour Iustinian
               Imperator Iustinianus decreuit, vt canones patrū vim legum habere oporteat., that the Canons of
th
                  •
                Fathers should haue the force of lawes.
            Now, when any difference did arise in matters of
faith; when any great schisme or disturbance was
maintained in the church; the Emperours did vse to
assemble their Bishops in common Councell, and
 those things that were by them decreed, were afterwards
confirmed by Imperiall constitution. So Nicephorus
               Niceph. lib 8. cap. 14.
and Eusebius
               Euseb. lib. 2. de vita Constantini. doe write, that Constantine
the great, hauing imployed Hosius Bishop of Corduba,
for composing the difference betwixt Alexander
Bishop of Alexandria, and Arrius; wherewith the
 Church was exceedingly disturbed; and perceiuing
his good purpose thereby nothing aduanced; assembled
by his authority the Councel of Nice in Bithynia,
which he honored with his presence, and defrayed
the charge of 308. Bishops that were called
to that Councell. Of whom Eustachius Bishop of
Antioch, or rather (as the Canon law affirmethc. futuram. 12. q. 1.)
Constantine himselfe was presidentConstantinus praesid
                     ••
                  s sa
                     •
                  
                  ctae synodo, quae apud 
                     〈◊〉
                   congregata est.. The forme of
faith agreed vpon in this Councell, was presently
confirmed by Constantine, and both imparted and
imposed vpon others, who had not bin present; and
charge giuen vnder paine of death, that none should
secretly preserue any of the bookes of Arrius from
the fireSocrat. lib. 1. cap. 6.. Afterwards the same faith was both declared
and confirmed by constitution of the Emperours
Gratian, Valentinian and Theodosius
               l. 2. C. de sum. trin..
            The generall Councel of Constantinople was assembled
against the heresie of Macedonius, by Theodosius
               Niceph. lib. 12 ca. 10.
the great. The Bishops assembled in this
Councel wrote thus in humble maner vnto the Emperour
Theodosius;
               Obsecramus clementiam tuam, vt, quemadmodum literis h
                     •
                  norasti ecclesiam, quibus nos con
                     •
                  ocasti, ita sinalem conclusionem nostrorum decretorii corrobores sententia tua & sigillo. 
               We beseech your Maiestie, that as
you haue honored the Church, by your letters, wherewith

you haue called vs together, so it may please you to confirme
the finall conclusion of our decrees with your sentence,
and with your seale.
            
            The generall Councell of Ephesus was assembled
by authoritie of Theodosius the yongerNiceph. lib. 14. ca. 34. against the
heresie of Nestorius. The decrees of this Councell,
together with the decrees of the Councell of Nice,
containing the profession of Christian Faith, was
confirmed by a constitution of Theodosius and Valentinian
               l. 3. C. desum. trin., whereby also the writings of Nestorius
are condemned to the fire.
            The fourth generall Councell was appointed by
authoritie of the Emperour Martian
               Euagr. lib. 1. ca. 2., first to be
held at Nice, afterwards vpon certaine occasions it
was assembled at Chalcedon. In this Councel, Euagrius
               Lib. 2. cap. 4.
writeth, that both the Bishops and temporall
Iudges did oftentimes suspend their decrees in
this sort; Vnto vs it seemeth right
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ., if it shall also like
our most vertuous and godly Lord the Emperour. And
in the end it is thus concluded;Vid. d. conc. Chalc. 
               all our doings being
referred to the Emperours Maiestie. Lastly, the decrees
of this Councell touching Christian Faith, were
confirmed by a publike constitution of the same
Emperour Martian
               l. 4. C. de sum. trin..
            The fifth oecumenicall Councell was assembled by
Iustinian the first3. vol concil.; and the sixth by Constantine
the third; both of them in the Citie of Constantinople.
The last of these Councels Constantine subscribed,
after that he had commaunded that ten Bishops of
the East, and ten of the West should repaire to his
Court, and open to him the decrees of the Councell:
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               That he might consider (saith Sozomenus) whether
they were agreed according to the Scriptures, and
that he might further determine and conclude what
were best to be done.
            
            In briefe, Cardinall Cusanus
               Cus. de conc. l. 3. ca. 16. doth acknowledge

that he did euermore findSciendum est quod in vniuersalibus octo concilus semper inuen
                     •
                  o imperatores, & Iudices suos, cum senatu primatum hab
                     •
                  isse., that the Emperours and
their Iudges, with the Senate, had the primacie, and
office of presidence in the eight generall Councels. In regard
whereof Odoacer
               Conc. Ro. 3. did in this sort expostulate
with Pope Symachus, and the Clergie of Rome.Miramur quicquam tentatum fuisse sine nobis; nam viuente nostro presbytero sine nobis nihil tentari oportuit. 
               We
marueile that any thing hath been attempted without
vs; for without vs nothing should haue been done, our
Priest being aliue. In like manner Nicephorus
               Niceph. in praesat. ad Emanuel. did
write to the Emperour Emanuel Paleologus;
               Tu es dux professionis fidei nostrae &c. 
               You
are the captaine of the profession of our faith, you haue
reformed the Temple of God from Marchants and exchangers
of the heauenly doctrine, and from heretickes,
by the word of God.
            
            During this time, a stiffe strife did arise betwixt
the Bishops of Rome, and the Bishops of Constantinople
(as did once among the Disciples of ChristMarc. 9. 35. Luc. 9. 46.)
whether of them should be greatest. In the Councell
of Nice it had been decreedCan. 8., that the first place
should be giuen to the Sea of Rome, the second to
Alexandria, and the third to Antioch: for the Citie
 of Constantinople at that time was not built, neither
was Hierusalem then a patriarchall Sea. But after that
Constantinople was aduanced to be the head of the
Empire, the Bishop thereof did claime prerogatiue
before all the rest; affirming, as Platina,
               Plat
                     •
                  n vita 
                     〈◊〉
                   3. and out of
himSabel. Aencid. 8. lib. 6. Sabellicus doe write, that where the head of
the Empire was, there also should be the principall
Sea. The Bishop of Rome answered, that the Citie of
Rome, from whence a colonie was brought to Constantinople,
was in right to be esteemed the head of
the Empire: for the Graecians did vse to stile their
Prince 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Emperour of the Romans:
and they themselues were also called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                Romans.
            
                In this contention Platina
               In vita Bonifacij 3. affirmeth; that diuers
Emperours fauoured the Bishops of Constantinople.
In the Councell of ChalcedonCan. 28. it was decreed,

that the Church of Constantinople should
stand in one degree of dignitie, and enioy equall priuiledge
with the Church of Rome. The same equalitie
was also decreed in the second Councell of ConstantinopleIn trip. hist. lib. 9. cap. 13.,
and confirmed by constitution of Honorius
and Theodosius
               l. 6. C. de sacros. eccles. 
                     •
                  vnic. C. de priuil. vrb. Const. lib. 11.. By a constitution of Leo and
Athemius
               l. decernimus C. de sacros. eccles., the Bishop of Constantinople is declared
to haue precedence of place
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . before all others:
which law was alleadged by Photius
               Nomoca. tit. 1. cap. 5. to confirme
the primacie of the Patriarch of Constantinoplel. Constantino▪ p
                     •
                  litana 24 C. de sacros. eccl..
Iustinian declarethConstantinopolitana ecclesia omniū aliarum est caput. that the Church of Constanti
                  •
               nople
was the head of all other Churches. Which
constitution is omitted in some editions of Iustinians
Code. Mauritius
               Platin. in vita Gregor
                     ••
                   1. admonished Gregorie the first,
to beare obedience to Iohn Bishop of Constantinople.
            Afterwards, Pope Gregorie the third, with much
adoe (as Platina writeth) obtained of Phocas▪
                Emperour,
or rather (as Zonoras and P. Diaconus
               In vit. Pho
                     ••
                  . do discribe
him) the wilde, drunken, bloodie, adulterous
tyrant of Constantinople, that the Sea of Rome 
should be the chiefe of all other Churches. But this
was an errour in the Emperours of Constantinople;
first, to settle so great dignitie and prerogatiue in a
place, far distant from the principal seat and strength
of the Empire. Secondly, to permit affaires of so
high nature to depend vpon direction of any one
within their Empire. For, by this meanes the Bishops
of Rome did steale into such strength with the common
people, that by their Interdictions only, they
were of power to withdraw them from paying tribute,
and bearing alleagance to the Emperours of
Constantinople: vpon occasion, that Leo surnamed
Iconomachus, had caused the Images of Saints to be
taken downe. Finally, they pulled the west-part of
the Empire from their subiection, and left the residue,

with that mortall maime, to be a pray to the
barbarous infidels.
            
                The west Empire flourished for a time, first in
France, and afterwards in Germanie; and the most
apparant cause whereby it was broken and beaten
downe, was the absolute & vnlimited power, which
the Bishops of Rome challenged, principally in Ecclesiasticall
affaires, and consequently in all. For, by
entitling themselues the Vicars of Iesus Christ; the
Spouse of the Church; the Soueraigne Bishop, and
Prince of all others; the Maisters and Lords of all
the world; (for these are the titles which Innocent
the third, Boniface the eight, Clement the fifth and
diuers others haue assumed) by exempting also both
the persons and goods of all the Clergie, frō secular
subiection; and by binding all men to their obedience,
in matters which concerne the soule; they haue
alwaies been able to stirre vp, not onlie weightie
warres against the Emperours, but also most stiffe
and vnnatural rebellions. Which disordered demeanour
Carion accounteth the only cause,Car. lib. 4. sceleribus pontificum hoc imperium languesactum est. Luit prand. lib. 6. ca. 6. Cuspinian & Theodo. de Nihem. in vita Otho 3. that brought
the Empire to a feeble state.
            So Iohn the third combined with Berengar the
third, aud Adalbar his sonne, who pretended themselues
to be Kings of Italy, to make head against the
Emperour Otho the great. Pope Iohn the eighteenth
made league with Crescentius, and mutined the people
against the Emperour Otho the third. Benedict. 9.
to stay Henrie the blacke from entering into Italy,
stirred Peter King of Hungarie to beare himselfe for
Emperour; to whom he sent a crowne with this inscription.
            
               Petra dedit Romam Petro, tibi Papa coronam.
Gregorie the seuenth, who was the first that enterprised
to cause himselfe to be elected and consecrated,
without the consent and against the pleasure of the

Emperour; and who set forth a decree, whereby he
excommunicated all those who should affirme, that
either the consent or knowledge of the Emperour
was herein necessarie; opposed against the Emperour
Henrie the fourth, first Rodulph Duke of Suauie,
giuing charge to the Archbishops of Men
                  •
               s and of
Collen to consecrate him Emperour: to whom also
he sent a crowne with this inscription.
            Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema Rudolpho.
            Afterwards, weary of nothing so much as of quiet,
he stirred Ecbert Marquis of Saxonie against the
same Emperour. Galasius the twelfth raised against
Henrie the fifth Emperour, the most part of his subiects,
and especially the Archbishop of Ments;
whom he so strongly seconded with the Normanes
that were in Sicilie, that the Emperour was constrained
to quit his quarrell, and to yeeld the collation
of Bishoprickes to the Pope. Innocent the second
raised against Lothaire the twelfth, Roger the Norman,
whom he inuested in the Duchie of Pouille,
which the Emperour claimed to be a fiffe of the Empire.
At the last the contention was composed by
mediation of S. Bernard, who then liued, and was
with the Emperour; wherein the Pope sped so well,
that he was ioyned with the Emperour in holding
Bauier. The same Innocent the second raised Guelphus
Duke of Bauier against Conrade the third, whom
hee aided with monie and all other conuenient
meanes.Bart. in tract. de Gaelph. & Gib. This warre was so villanouslie cruell, that it
giue beginning to the two factions of the Guelphes,
who tooke their name from this Duke of Bauier;
and of the Gibelins, so called of Wi
                  •
               bling, which
was the place where the Emperour Conrade had bin
brought vp.
            Against Fredericke Bar
                     •
                  arossa, who succeeded Conrade,

Hadrian the fourth raised them of Milan, and
the other Lumbards; Alexander the third stirred the
Dukes of Saxon and of Austrich, aiding them with
all his power to intertaine disquiet in Almaine. Pope
Celestine the third excōmunicated Henrie the sixth
Emperour, the successour and sonne of Fredericke
Barbarossa; and depriued him of all his dignities:
making this the meanes to auoide him out of
Italie into Almaine. Against Philip, brother vnto
Henerie the sixth, Pope Innocent the third caused
Otho Duke of Saxonie to be elected Emperour; whereby
the Empire was embroiled with a bloodie warre.
Against Fredericke the second, Pope Honorins the
third raised the Lumbards in rebellion, adioyning
the Sic
                     •
                  ians to the side, and the greatest part of the
other Italians. All these troubles were so tempestuous,
that the Emperour Radulph of Haspurge could
neuer be perswaded to passe the Alpes for his coronation;
affirming, that Italie was the denne of the
Lion, whereof the entrance was faire, but the issue
fearefull.
            
               Clement the fifth armed and opposed Rebert
King of Sicilie against the Emperour Henrie the
seuenth; because hee would not doe homage and
sweare faith to the Sea of Rome: and in the end caused
him to bee empoisoned by a Iacob
                  •
               e, in giuing
him the sacred host. What troubles had Lewes of
Bauier against Frederick of Austrich, who was elected
Emperour at the same time with him, by the faction
of Pope Iohn the 22? The same troubles were continued
by Pope Clement the sixth, who caused Charles
the fourth King of Boheme, to be elected Emperour;
and yet he could not enioy the Empire vntill after
the decease of Lewes. This Charles was a weake
Prine, both in counsaile and courage; who in fauour

of the Popes did extreamely both enfeeble and abase
the Empire of Rome. Nauclerus writeth,Gen. 46. that
he entred the citie of Rome on foote, in derision
whereof a certaine Senatour began a speech which
he made to the people with these words: Ecce Rex
tuus venit tibi mansuetus; Petrarch, who liued at
that time, did also write betweene scorne and
disdaine of this deiection of the imperiall Ma
                  •
               estie.
            I omit the tragedies which Eugenius the fourth
raised against the Emperour Sigismond, principally
to impeach the Councell of Basil. I omit that which
Paul the second did to chase Frederick the third out
of Italie. Generally they alwaies endeauoured to
endomage the Emperors; not onely as hating them,
(for so Gu
                     •
                  cc
                     •
                  ardine
               Guice. in comment. polit. saith y• it grew into a proue
                  •
               b;
It is proper to the Church to hate the Caesars) but as
fearing to be endomaged by them. In the end, partly
by opposing enemies, and partly by raysing rebellions
against the Emperours, the Popes haue bin able
to expell their gouernment out of Italy. Whereof
our countrie man Sanderi
               Sand. lib. 4. de clau. Dauid. Stupenda res, & supra quam dici potest admiranda, vt cum pot
                     •
                  utissi
                  
                     •
                  i qu
                     •
                   que imp
                     •
                  . 
                     〈◊〉
                   per al
                     •
                  quot saecula ownem suam vim in exterminandis ex vrbe Roma ponti
                     •
                  icibus Romanis, frustra explicuissent; nun
                     •
                   è contrari
                     •
                  , pontifices Romani abs
                     •
                   vlia vi, Romanos Imperatores ex ar
                     ••
                   Imperij semou
                     •
                  runt; palat
                     •
                  s Caesarum alque ad
                     •
                  o tota vrbe in su
                     ••
                   potestatem conuersa. in this sort hath written:
It is a thing more admirable then can be vtte
                     •
                  ed,
and able to make a man astonished, that when the most
puissant Emperours did for many ages display all their
forces to no purpose, for driuing the Roman Bishops from
the citie of Rome; now to the contrarie, the Roman Bishops
without any power, haue remoued the Roman Emperours
from the tower of the Empire, and made themselues
Lords of the Palaces of Caesars, and turned the
whole citie into their proper power.
            
            This is true (Master Sanders) which you haue said;
but neither is it worthie of any wonder, neither i
                  •
                it
all that which the Popes haue done. What maruaile
is it that most puissant Emperours could never
preuaile against the Bishops of Rome, when their

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
owne subiects were persuaded, that they drew their
swordes against heauen, and made offer (like those
Giants of whom the Poets write) to scale the skies,
and to pull God out of his throne? Where subiects
haue bin of other opiniō, there Princes haue preuailed
against many Popes. Againe, what necessity had
the Popes to vse force of armes, when the consciences
of men were vnder their commaund? whilest
this rule held good, cloisters and Colledges were in
stead of Castles vnto them; and religious persons
were in steed of many armies. These were their
garrisons, these their soldiers; these quelled the courage
of all their enemies, by thundring forth threats
against those who disobeyed them; not of death,
which might be peraduenture either contemned or
else auoyded; but of damnation, which as it is most
terrible, so was it held for this cause vnauoydable.
For so Boniface the eight decreed,In extrauag. vnam sanctam. Porto subesse Rom Pont▪ omnem humanam creaturam declaramus, dicimus, diffiaimus & pronuntiamus omnino esse de necessitate salutis. that vpon necessitie
of saluation all men must be subiect to the Bishop
of Rome. These forces were plāted within euery
state, and by these might any state be supplanted:
            By these meanes the Bishops of Rome were easily
able, not onelie to driue the Romane Emperours
from the chiefe tower and seate of the Empire, but
also, making one wrong the cause of another, to reduce
them to a very low degree, both of power and
of authoritie within Almaine; and to hold them as
no better then vassalls to their Sea.Tibi d
                     •
                  mina. 63 dist. c. 
                     •
                  enerab
                     •
                  lem. de elect. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . in c licet. n. 8. de so. comp. For, after that
eight Emperours had been excōmunicate by Popes;
Namely, Frederick the first, Frederick the second. Philip,
Conrade, Othe the fourth, Lawes of Bauaria, Henri
                     •
                  
               
the fourth, and Henri
                     •
                  
                the fifth, (which was occasion
enough for their subiects to reuolt, and for other
Princes to inuade) the succeding Emperours, partly

vnwilling, but principally vnable to sustaine so sad
and heauie blowes, submitted themselues to the papall
power; renounced the right, which by long custome
they claimed, in election of the Pope and of
other Bishops. And to the contrarie, the Emperour
Charles the fourth, acknowledged by his letters
Patents,Incip. post pedum oscula. that although he was elected Emperour
by the Princes, yet hee was to bee confirmed by the
Pope, and to receiue the Imperial crowne from him.
Whereupon Pope Pius the fifth, did sharpely rebuke
the Emperour Ferdinand by his Legat, for neglecting
to receiue of him the Imperial Crowne; neither
would he admit the Emperours excuse, but had proceeded
by excommunication to compel him, had he
not by entreaty of the French King, and of King Philip
of Spaine the Emperours kinseman, been otherwise
appeased.
            In the forme of the coronation of the Emperours,
which was approued by the Emperour Charles the
fourth, and is kept in the Vaticane at Rome, many
seruile ceremonies are contained. As, that the Emperour
supplieth the office of a subdeacon, in ministring
to the Pope when he saith Masse; and that after
diume seruice he holdeth the stirtop, whilest the
Pope mounteth to horse; and for a certaine space
leadeth his horse by the bridle. Adde heereto the
kissing of the Popes feete, as Charles the fifth did, at
Bononia, at Rome, and last of all at Marsielles in Prouence,
in the presence of diuers other great Princes:
adde their humb
                  •
               e subscriptions to the Pope; I kisse
the hands and feete of your holinesse: adde that they
must seeke the Pope for receiuing the Imperiall
crowne, whereforuer he shall be; and follow him if
he chance to remoue: with diuers like tokens and
testimonies of de
                  •
               ection of the Maiesty of that State,

and subiection thereof to the Sea of Rome. For further
declaration whereof,Pan. c. causam. qui fil. fi. le. &c. solita. de ma. & ob. c nou
                     ••
                  . de 
                     〈◊〉
                  . &c. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . n. 8. des
                     •
                   comp. & in c. 
                     •
                  . n. 2. 3. 4. depro bat. during the life of the Emperour,
the Popes challenge to be his Iudge; and the
Emperiall feate being void, they claime the exercise
of Imperiall power, and haue giuen inuestitures and
receiued fealtie, of those who held of the Empire; as
of Iohn and Luchi
                     •
                  , Vicounts of Milane.Anno 1341. For which
cause the Canonists also (who set vp these strings to
the highest strame) doe maintaine opinion, that the
Emperour cannot resigne his Imperiall dignitie to
any other then the Pope: and that it is a streine of
heresieFeli. in c. firmissime, n. 1. de haeret., not to beleeue that the Emperor is subiect
to the Pope: and that the Emperour is but the Popes
MinisterMolina. tract. 2. de Iust. disput. 29., to vse his sword only at his becke. Lastlie,
Pope Clement the fifth, expressely declared
by decreeCle. Romani de Iurc
                     •••
                  ., that the oath which the Emperour maketh
to the Pope, is no other then an oath of fealtie.
            
                Neither hath it been against the Empire only, that
the Popes haue had this power to preuaile, but against
diuers other Christian countries; in so much as
they haue claimed to hold, either as feudataries or as
trubutaties to their Sea, the kingdomes of Naples,
Sicilie, Hierusalem, Sardinia, Corsica, Arragon, Portugale,
Nauarre, Ireland, England, Scotland, Poland,
Hungarie. to which Cuiacius
               Cuia
                     •
                   c. 7. de Imp. adioyneth the kingdome
of France, which Pope Boniface the eight, declared
to be deuolued to the Church, for the contempt
and disobedience of King Philip the faire. And
Pope Alexander the sixt in diuiding the late discouered
parts of the world, betweene the Kings of Castile
and Portugale, expressely reserued to his Sea,
the Iurisdiction and soueraignety of them, by consent
of both Kings; who from that time became his
vassals, of all the purchases and conquests which before

they had atchieued, or intended to enterprise in
times to ensue. Generally, they do challenge temporall
soueraigntie in all countriesPan. in c. fi. de Baptism.; habitually at
the least; which at pleasure they may produce into
actPan. in c. 1. de so. comp. & in c. 1. de probat., whereby the subiects of any State may haue
recourse vnto themPan. in c. si duobus de appell.; to some complaint or suite against
their PrincePan. in c. 1. de prob. n. 2. & 3. & n. 6.; to be relieued or protected by
them, and to receiue priuiledges and immunities at
their handsPan. in c. per vencrabilem. n. 1. qui fil su
                     •
                  t legitti.. Whereby also they may iudge the
actions of Princes; and vpon such cause as they shal
thinke meet, punish, excommunicate, de priue them,
denounce publike warre against themPan. in d. c. per vencrabilem. & in c sicut. n. 12. de iureiur. & in c. & sinecesse. de do. inter vir. & vx. Pius 5. in bulla.: free their
subiects from subiection vnto them. As Pope Pius
the first, not only absolued the subiects of England
from their alleagance to the late Queene Elizabeth,
but commanded them also to turn
                  •
                traytours, and
take armes against her. After which Bull few yeeres
passed without some notable attempt, either against
her person, or against the State.
            It would be very redious to giue but a light touch;
to all the desperate distresses that hereupon haue bin
occasioned, in diuers foraine countries; which out of
their Annal; may be furnished with ease. And the sequell 
now sheweth, that the chiefe encrease and establishment
of the Turkish Empire, hath proceeded
from the outragious warres, which by this meanes
haue been occasioned among the Christians; which
made Europe on all sides to bath her limmes in the
blood of her children. Against our owne State we
cannot be ignorant, what heretofore hath bin acted;
especially vnder the raigne of King Iohn. What hath
been lately, what freshly, what is daily attempted, it
cannot possiblie escape the memorie of those that
liue in this present age: and for helpe of those who
are to succeed, report there of shall be made at large,

in a historie Intended for the times lately passed,
and now presently running. The accumulating
of these examples in this place, would be a matter
of some labour, for cleering that which hath litle
doubt.
            Thus much in substance, but somwhat more briefly
deliuered: it seemed that there was not any man
in that presence, who, either in replie or in supplie,
had not somewhat to say. That only was a hinderāce
to the discharging of their minds, which is pleasantly
said to haue dissolued the Parliament of women;
because they could not agree to speake one at once.
Many shewed themselues so impatient of silence;
and they who vpon aduisement could haue said
least, were vpon the suddaine most franke and forward
in words. At the last, that which was the cause
that no man could haue free libertie of speech, did
driue them all into a dumbe dumpe: which opportunity
was forthwith apprehended by a thick Theologian,
whose formall attire, countenance and cariage,
was a good supplie to other defects. And so, hauing
composed himselfe to al complements of grauitie
and grace, he began his speech after the set and
solemne manner of those disputers, who, contenting
themselues with commendation of memorie,
doe more diligently endeuour to repeate then to reply.
            
                You haue declared vnto vs (said he) that the proper
qualities of the rights of Maiestie are, to be both
perpetuall, and also absolute; as neither depending
vpon any other, nor yet held either vpon charge, or
with exception and restraint. That these rights cōsist
in managing affaires of highest nature, which cannot
be separated from the soueraigne power; because
vpon the guiding of them, all the fortunes of a

State do follow. That nothing is of so high nature in
a State, as is religion: and that therefore the ordering
thereof is annexed, as a right of Maiestie, to the
soueraigne power; whether it be setled in a King, or
in the Nobilitie, or in the people
                  •
                For, seeing religion
commandeth the conscience, and holdeth the soule
in subiection, if supremac
                  ••
                therin be acknowledged
to be in a forren Prince, the sinewes of domesticall
soueraigntie are cut in s
                  •
               nder. You haue brought
certaine examples of dangerous consequence, when
either strangers or subiects haue bin followed for religion.
You shewed y• for auoiding the like dangers,
two policies were anciently obserued; one consisted
in excluding external ceremonies & rites; the other,
in setling the gouernment for matters in religion, in
the supreame power and authority in the State. That
this last was practised among the Iewes, Aegyptians
& in diuers other countries. In the foure great Monarchies
also, of Assyria, of Persia, of Graecia, and of
Rome. Of Rome (you say) first, vnder the gouernment
of Kings; secondly, in the popular state; thirdly,
vnder Heathen Emperours; and lastly, (for a good
space) vnder Christian Emperors; who in matters of
circumstance and of external forme in religion, both
vsed, and were acknowledged to haue supreame authoritie:
of whose lawes, diuers were afterwards either
assumed by Popes, or attributed vnto them.
Concerning matters of substance, and of internall
forme, they assembled generall Councels; wherein
they held the Primacie; and confirmed the acts of
them by Imperiall decree. You declared also, that
when Constantinople was aduanced to be the head
of the Empire, a stiffe strife did arise betwixt the Bishops
of Constantinople and of Rome, whether
should be greatest; that diuers Emperours fauoured

the Church of Constantinople; but at the last, Pope
Boniface obtained of the Emperour Phocas, that the
Sea of Rome should be the chiefe of all other Churches.
This you account an errour in gouernment; to
settle a power of so high qualitie, in a place farre distant
from the principall strength of the Empire. For
hereby the Bishops of Rome did grow to such greatnesse,
that they drew the west part of the Emp
                  ••
               e to
reuolt; and left the residue for a pray to the ba
                  •
               barous
Infidels. Lastly you haue shewed, that the Bishops
of Rome, aduancing their authoritie by degrees,
haue been of power, to reduce the west Empire
to a feeble state; and to hold, not the Emperour
alone, but all the chiefe Kings in Europe, either as
vassals or as tributaries to their Sea. Generally, that
they haue challenged Soueraigne iurisdiction ouer
all Kingdomes and Common-wealthes in the
world: whereby they haue cast diuers countries, and
among others this Realme of England into desperate
distresses.
            Now, before answere should be offred to all these
seuerall points, I would think it fit, (vnder the leaue
of better Iudgements) to take some reasonable respite
to aduise vpon them; because questions of this
high nature, are not alwaies the same which sodainly
they seeme: and he bewrayeth too great opinion
of his owne sufficiencie, who presently will vndertake
a controuersie of this weight. But, if Christ
hath committed supreame power in religion to the
Sea of Rome, then is no place left to these rules and
reasons of state.
            Nay (answered N.) I haue protested before, that
we haue neither leasure nor lust to engulphe our
selues in such an Ocean. If Christ hath committed to
the sea of Rome! This is a large supposall indeed; and

that which will neuer settle in the opinion of many,
who are otherwise firmely affected to the doctrine
of the Church of Rome. Yea, I am assuredly perswaded,
that the violence of ambition hath pulled many
Bishops of Rome from their owne iudgement, in
making cla
                  •
               me to that authoritie which they neuer
had either title to hold, or abilitie to rule. For diuers
of them being sodainely borne out of a low retired
state; namely, from some Cloister or heremitage,
into an vnknowne Sea of absolute authoritie,
they were ouerswayed therewith, like a small boate
with too large a saile: And being men for the most
part, spent in age, vntrained in experience, and neither
by nature nor by education of abilitie, to conceiue
the bounds and degrees of great affaires, they
tooke to themselues a licentious libertie; supposing
it reasonable, yea altogether necessarie, that all the
Kings and Princes of the earth, who hold their estate
immediately from heauen, who receiue their power
from the hand of God, should be subiect to the pleasure,
the passions, the fierie furie; the ignorance, the
errors, the malice, of one haughtie and humerous
man, whose weaknes is subiect (as it hath bin plainelie
declared by their liues) to all immoderate motions
of humanitie. And al this vpon no other ground
but because Christ said to S. Peter; Thou art Peter,
               Matth. 16.
               and vpon this rock will I build my Church &c. But what
is this to Supremacie? what is this to the Bishop of
Rome? diuers questions must be cleered before this
will serue the one or the other.
            For, first it is but weakely assured, that S. Peter euer 
was at Rome. Many reasons are alleaged against
it; and many authorities are brought for it. But it
often happeneth that the common consent of writers
is like vnto a flocke of fowles; as one flieth all

doe follow. Secondly, it is lesse assured that euer he
was Bishop of Rome. For, being an Apostle, his
charge was generall;Matth. 28. 
               goe teach all nations; and therefore
not to be, as a Bishop, either limited or settled
in any one particular place. Or if we wil say, that either
by appointment or by choise, some part of this
generall charge was apportioned to S. Peter; then
this seemeth, or rather is most assured to haue been
Iudea, by that which S. Paul hath written: that, the
Gospell of Circumcision was committed vnto Peter,
               Galath. 2. 7. as
the Gospell of the vncircumcision was vnto him. And
therefore we find in Scripture,Act. 23. 11. that S. Paul was expressely
sent to Rome; but that S. Peter was euer
at Rome, we hold it by tradition. This is further
confirmed by the long aboade which S. Peter made
in Iudea, and by the short stay which is possible
he could haue made at Rome, euen by computation
of them who best fauoured the dignitie of that
Sea.
            With that he called for Onuphrius, and out of him
read vnto vs, that S. Peter liued after the death of
Christ 34. yeeres, 3. monethes and odde daies; that
the first nine yeeres he remained in Iudea; that in the
tenth yeere after Christs Passion, in the end of the second
yeere of the Empire of Claudius, he departed
from Iudea for feare of Agrippa, from whose imprisonment
hee had been deliuered by an angell;Act. 12. that
after he had trauailed preaching through many coū
               tries,
he came to Rome, and there contended with
Simon Magus: That after foure yeeres, Agrippa
being dead, for feare of whom he 
                  •
               orsooke Iudaea, he
returned to Ierusalem, and was there present at the
Councell of the Apostles, wherein circumcision was
abrogated: That after this he remained seuen yeeres
at Antioch; that in the beginning of the Empire, of

               Nero he returned to Rome, and from thence trauailed
almost thorough all the parts of Europe: that
comming againe to Rome in the last yeere of Nero,
S. Paul and he were there martyred.
            
               To this agreeth that which Ireneus saith;
               Iren. de bares. lib. 3. cap. 5. Fundātes beati Apostoli Petrus & Paulus Romanam ecclesiam, adminish and
                     ••
                   ecclesiae 
                     •
                  p
                     •
                  sc
                     •
                  patum tradidcrunt l
                     •
                  no. The
blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, laying the foundation
of the Church of Rome, committed to Linus the
Bishopricke, or charge of administration of that
Church.
            Now, said he, the third question is, whether by
these words, Thou art Peter, &c. Christ gaue vnto S.
Peter any speciall power or Iurisdiction, either spirituall
or secular, more then vnto the residue of the
Apostles; where he did exercise; when make claime
to any such power; by which of the Apostles it was
acknowledged; by what ancient father of the Church
aduowed. For diuers testimonies of S. Paul do beare
against it:Aug
                     •
                  tract. 50. ad cap. 12 lo. Cypr. in tract. de simpli
                     •
                  cler. S. Augustine, S. Cyprian and others of
principall authoritie in the Church doe expressely
denie it. Whereas the Scripture giueth so large
and plaine testimonie, both for the title and authoritie
of Kings, as it seemeth no greater can be added
thereunto.
            The fourth question may bee, whether any power
was giuen vnto S. Peter, as Bishop of Rome: (which
before the ascension of Christ hee could not bee) otherwise,
how falleth it, that the same should bee rather
fixed in the Church of Rome, then in any of
those Churches, where it is manifest by the scriptures
that he remained many yeeres, imploying himselfe
in the exercise of his charge?
            Fiftly, what assurance can we haue, that the power
which is said to be committed to S. Peter, was to be
transmitted entirely to any of his successors in place,
who are so farre from being mentioned, as it is nothing

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
probable that euer they were ment. For, as
Matthias was not the worse for succeeding vnto Iudas
in place; so is not any man the better, onely for
his locall succession to S. Peter.
            
            Lastly, seeing the promises of God are with exception;
if we continue in obedience to his wil: and
therefore, although all the land of Canaan was expresly
promised to Abraham and to his seede for an
euerlasting possession,Gen. 17. 8. yet was the posteritie of Abraham,
for their disobedience, first cast out of the
greatest part thereof, and afterwards dispossessed of
all.2. Sam. 7. 16. Psal. 89. 36. And although the kingdome of Israel was expresly
promised to Dauid and to his seede for euer,
yet the succession was broken off, by reason of their
sinnes.Apoc. 2. Againe, seeing the Church of Ephesus, although
furnished with many excellent vertues, was
threatned notwithstanding, that the candlesticke
should bee remoued out of his place, onely for that
their first loue was abated. If wee should suppose
(supposall is free) that expresse promise was made
to S. Peter, and to his successours the Bishops of
Rome, that they should represent the authoritie of
Christ vpon earth; it will be a hard piece to perswade
men, who haue not abandoned their owne iudgement,
that this power was not long since either expired
or reuoked, by reasō of the dissolute disorders,
the irregular outrages and impieties, which haue bin
ordinarie in that Sea. Marc
                     •
                  lline sacrificed vnto Idols;
Liberius was an A
                  •
               ian; another a Nestorian;
Anastasius the second embraced the errour of Acatius.
Sabinian was a man of base behauiour, and altogether
opposite to the vertues of S. Gregorie▪ Constantine
the second procured himselfe to be elected
by corruption and force. Ioan the eighth, was a woman
and a harlot. Romanus, Theodorus, Iohn the

tenth, and Christopher, were infamous for seditions,
symonie, lust, and other base abuses in life. Iohn 11.
the bastard of Pope Sergius, was elected by fauour of
Theodora his mistrisse. Iohn the 13. was accused of
many vile villanies before the Emperour Otho the
great. Boniface the 7. attained his place by corruption,
and maintained it by sacrilege. Siluester the
second, was a Magician, and came to his dignitie by
couenanting with the diuell. Benedict the 10. was
compelled to quit his place, because of his Symony.
Boniface the 8. was aduanced like a Foxe, reigned
like a Lion, and died like a dogge. What? shall we
say, that all these were the oracles of heauen? the
heads of the Church? the guides and grounds of religion?
the successors of S. Peter? the Vica
                  •
               s generall
of Iesus Christ? wil worldly Princes endure such,
who are not only vnseruiceable vnto them, but dishonorable,
but rebellious, for their liefetenants? And
seeing good life is a sruite of faith, seeing faith is expressed
by actions of life, shall we say that these men
who liued in this sort, could neither erre nor faile
in faith? Alas, how then would they haue liued, if
they could haue erred or failed in faith?
            I will not digge deep into this dunghill; I will not
speak of the heresies of Iohn the 23. of the scandalous
deportments of Eugenius the 4. of the Incests, Sorceries,
poysonings, & cutthroat cruelties of Alexander
the 6. of the couetousnes, the cruelties, the periuries,
the blasphemies, the adulteries, the Sodometries, the
disdainfull pride, the cunning dissimulatiō, and other
infamous behauior of diuers other Bishops of Rome.
I will not speake of the two monsters lately hatched
within that Sea, to the broad blemish of religion, to
the vtter ouerthrow of ciuill societie: the one aequiuocation;
the other par
                  •
               icide of Princes, & raising

rebellions for the cause of religion. In one word to
the point of our purpose, as Christ denied the Iewes
to be the children of Abraham,
               Ioh. 8. 39. because they did
not the workes of Abraham; and as S. Paul said, that
the children,Rom. 4. 16. & 9. 7. Galat. 3. 7. not of the flesh, but of the faith of Abraham,
were to bee accounted his seede: in regard
whereof, S. Iohn also said, that many affirmed themselues
to be Iewes,Reuel. 2. 9. who were not: so we may safely
defend, that the true succession of S. Peter, and of the
other Apostles consisteth, not in comming after thē
in place, but in holding their doctrine, and imitating
their godlines in life. This (saith Gregorie Nazianzene)
(and not succession in place) is in proper
sense to bee taken for succession.
               De laudibus Athanas
                     •
                  , 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                
               For to expresse the
same iudgement and mind, is to possesse the very same
Chaire; the difference of Sea, is the difference in opinion,
for doctrine and for life. This is a succession in
truth and indeed; that is only a succession in name. Strato
                     •
                  les
published in the citie of Athens, that whatsoeuer
the tyrant Demetrius should ordaine, the same
was to be esteemed holy before God, and iust before
men. When Cambyses was desirous to espouse his
Sister, the fact was iustified by this law of the Persians;
The King may do what soeuer he please. Doubtlesse,
(said he) many Bishops of Rome in claiming
Hyperbolicall power, to beare through Diabolicall
dristes, haue bin rather successors to these men, then
vnto any of the Apostles.
            To conclude, with answere vnto those who can
find a difference betweene the Pope and the Pope;
betweene the Pope as being a man, and the Pope as
being Bishop of Rome; betweene the Pope in his
Consistory, and the Pope in his Palace, or among his
Souldiers in the field;Fulg. collectan. lib. 6. betweene the Imperiall and
Pontificall Pope; I will tell you what Fulgosius, he

that was throwen out of state in Liguria, reported of
a certaine Archbish
                  •
               p of Colen. As this Archbishop
being also Duke of Colen, passed through a small Village
in Germanie, with so great a trame of armed
men (according to the fashion of that people) that it
neerly approched the greatnes of an armie; a certain
countrie fellow brake forth into a loude laughter
against him. And being therefore presented before
the Archbishop, hee boldly said, that hee could not
refraine both to laugh and to admire, considering
the great pouertie, the great humilitie, wherein the
Apostles passed the trauailes of this life, that they
who carrie themselues for the Apostles successours,
should thus plunge themselues both in plentie and
in pride. Simple fellow, said the Archbishop, I doe
now beare the state and presence of a Duke; I represent
an Archbishop when I am within the church.
At this speech, the fellow did 
                  •
               ise into a more broad
and bolde laughter. And being demaunded the
cause thereof, I pray you, said hee, whilest this Duke
ruineth the Church, both by action and example,
how is the Bishop in the meane time busied; and
when this Duke for this cause shall goe to the diuell,
what shall then become of the Bishop?
            There was not any amongs vs, who did not countenance
this conceit with a smile. And this had put
a period to our discourse, had not one maintained it
with further speech; that he would gladly heare these
questions so fullie followed, as then hee saw them
fairely laid. Assirming, that thereby he supposed it
would appeate, that it is impossible to find a worke
of so great waight, as is the supremacie of the Bishop
of Rome, vpon so weake and feeble a foundation.
But this will require (said hee) both the leasure and
labour of some excellent Diuine.
            
               
True (answered N.) and yet many of these questions
haue a mixture of humanitie: a mixture also
both of the Ciuill and Canon law. And I haue often
maruailed (with that he cast a side countenance vpon
me) by what meanes it falleth, when in other
countries the professers of these lawes are most accomplished
schollers, and fittest for matters of mixt
professions; that in England only, either they are
not so, or are not so (at leastwise) reputed.
            I was forward to haue answered. But it appeared
that the intent of N. was, by crossing into this question
to cut off the other. For, refer
                  •
               ing this point to
a more priuate conference between him and me, he
fell into varietie of other talke. So, the time being
well spent, after some ceremonies of
curtesie, all of vs withdrew, whither
our particular occasions
did leade.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            Errata.
            Pag. 9. lin. 5. reade Synesius. pag. 10. in marg. read 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               ▪
p. 11. in marg. 
                  •
               . read 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . ibid 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . p. 16. l. 30. read Dianae. p. 17.
lin. 21. read Diodorus. p. 21. lin. 10. read Virgil. ibid. lin. 13. read
Festus. p. 25. lin. 15. read ceremonies. p. 31. in marg. 
                  •
               . read 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
p. 33. lin. 10. read Constantinople. 
               
                  •
                pag. 38. in marg. reade c. tibi
domin
                  •
               .
            
         
      
   