
      
         
            
            
            A
TREATISE
OF VNION
OF
The two Realmes of ENGLAND
and SCOTLAND.
            
               By I. H.
            AT LONDON
Imprinted by F. K. for C. B. and are to be sold at his
shop in Pauls Church-yard at the signe of
the Swanne. 1604.
            
               
               This treatise
consisteth
of two parts,

                     A commendation
of
Vnion,

                           General, Chap. 1.
                           Particular,
of the two
Realmes of
England
and Scotland,
wherin
is considered,
the

                                 Vtilitie,
viz.

                                       The extinguishing
of wars,
betweene the
two Nations,
whereby

                                             1. Our victories haue been
hindered.
                                             2. Inuasions haue been occasioned.
                                             3. The borders betweene
both Realmes haue alwaies
been laid waste.
                                             4. The inner partes haue
been often distressed.
                                          
                                       
                                       Enlargement
of Dominion
from whence
will proceede

                                             1. The Dignitie and repatation
of the State.
                                             2. 
                                                   •
                                                ssurance of Defence.
                                             3. Strength to enterprise.
                                             4. Ease in sustaining the
publike charge of affaires.

                                                   Cap. 2.
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 Necessitie, Cap. 3.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     The means
vvhereby
this Vnion
may be assuredly
effected,
and
this consisteth
in two
poynts,

                           1. By incorporating both people
into one politicke body:
and this is done, by binding
them together with the same
Lawes, (particular customes
alwaies reserued) which are
the very nerues of a politicke
bodie, Chap. 4. Here two opinions
are considered.

                                 1. That the Lawes of England since the
time of Brutus, were neuer changed,
which is fabulous.
                                 2. That change of
Lawes traineth
many disorders
with it: But this
faileth in two
cases,

                                       1. Where
the change
is not
great.
                                       2. Where
it is not
suddaine,
but in
time, and
by degrees.

                                             Cap. 5.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     2. By knitting their
minds in one contentment
and desire,
Chap. 6.
Herein two circumstances
are principally
considered,

                           Equalitie in

                                 Libertie and Priuiledge
                                 Capacity of office & charge

                                       Cap. 7:
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           Conformitie
or Similitude,
Cap. 8. especially
in

                                 Habite and behauiour, Cap. 9.
                                 Language, Cap. 10.
                                 Name,
Cap. 11.
wherein
is further
considered.

                                       VVhat common name is
most fit, and whether the
like change in name hath
been vsuall or 
                                             •
                                          . Cap. 12.
                                       Certaine
obiections,
concerning

                                             Matters of State
inward, or matters
of Lawe.
Cap. 13.
                                             Matters of State
forrein, or matters
of entercourse,
Cap. 14.
                                             Matters of honor
and reputation.
Cap. 15.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            The Preface.
            
               
                  I
                Am not ignorant, how aduenturous
it is to entermeddle in those controuersies,
wherein the minds of men being
stiffened in conceite, and possessed with
preiudice of opinion, they esteeme a man
in that degree learned or vnlearned,
wise or weake, according as hee doth either iump or iarre
with them in iudgement. But in these high controuersies of
state, it is dangerous also for a priuate man to deale; partly,
for that he may be assured not to escape the blowes of
them, whose enuious disposition cannot looke right vpon
any thing, nor endure the burthen of another mans deseruing
well; but especially, for that diuers times he engageth
his safetie vpon vncertaine euents, wherein his hazards do
very farre surmount his hopes.
            And yet, because in ciuill differences we cannot but hold
such for enemies, as, either through negligence, which is ill,
or through feare, which is worse, stand in shew of Neuters,
expecting the issue with an idle eye; for that it often happeneth,
that by withdrawing our selues in the beginning of
dissentions, we are afterwards able to affoord no other either
comfort or reliefe, but to mourne with the rest in the
publike miserie; I haue aduised, and thereupon aduentured
to thrust my selfe into the common throng: being rather
assured than in hope, that howsoeuer I be both priuate and
meane,Opera 
                     ••
                  nesti 
                     〈…〉
                  . yet the paines of an honest Citizen is neuer vnprofitable.
            And hereof I haue the more reason to presume, for that

I finde not my selfe caried by any peeuish humor of discontentment,
which will ruinate so many as it doth rule; nor
by any seruill desire of pleasing or flattering, which I haue
alwaies esteemed more base than begging; nor by any false
and foolish ouerweening, whereby many doe conceiue that
nothing can be well either determined or done, except they
haue a finger in it: but first, for loue to the good of the state,
whereto we are by all true rules most neerely tied; and next,
in dutie toward his Maiestie, to whom we are not onely in
conscience but in necessitie bound to bee loyall. Touching
whom, it concerneth vs also to consider, in what state of reputation
he shall stand, and how others will be encouraged
to vse insolencie against him; (the thoughts of men aduancing
by degrees) if in his first purposes, hauing reason
and equitie concurring with his power, he shall not finde the
meanes to preuaile.
            It behoueth vs to be, as resolute and constant for the
good of the state, so wise in discerning what is good; otherwise
we are not resolute but rash, and our constancie is no
other than an ill grounded obstinacie. It behoueth vs againe,
not to be more wittie to frame feares, than wise to
iudge them, assuring our selues, that those things which
seeme dangerous and are not, doe daily decline and deminish
by degrees; and that those counsailes which proceede,
not from iudgement well grounded, but from some distemperature
of affection, after they haue a little throwne vp
their fume and fire, doe sodainly dissolue, and vanish as
vaine. Lastly it behoueth vs to foresee, that a time may
come, which will manifest how profitable it might be, not to
haue been negligent in things which seemed to be small: for
that oftentimes vpon matters appearing of little weight,
things of great consequence doe depend.
         
      
      
         
            A TREATISE
OF VNION.
         
            CHAP. I. A commendation of Vnion in generall.
            
               I Will not write generally of the nature
of vnion, whereof diuers haue
diuersly made discourse. And concerning
the excellencie thereof, I
know not what neede there is to
adde any thing to that which S.
Augustine saith:Lib. de Parad so. not onely that it representeth vnto
vs the soule of man, which is a most pure and simple
substance, not distracted by communicating it selfe
to euery part of the bodie; but also that it is the very
image of God, who both perfectly containeth,Lib. de quaest. vet. & noutest. and
infinitely exceedeth the excellencies and perfections
of all creatures; who being the only true one, loueth
this similitude of himselfe in all his creatures. And
of this point the Philosophers also seemed to haue
attained a taste:In som. Scip. for Macrobius referreth perfect vnion
onely vnto God, terming it the beginning and
end of all things, being altogether free from beginning,
chaunge or end. The more ancient Philosophers
haue likewise held, that from vnitie, which

they call 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , all things doe proceede, and are againe
resolued into the same.In Princ. lib. De
                     •
                  itis senten
                     •••
                  sq
                     •
                  e Philos. Of which opinion Laertius
writeth that Musaeus of Athens the sonne of Eumolpus
was author, who liued long before the time of
Homer: but afterward it was renued and followed
by Pythagoras,
               Plut lib. de dogmat. Philos. as Plutarch, Alexander and Laertius doe
report; who added thereunto, that vnitie is the originall
of good,Alexan succession. Philos. Laer. de vit. Philo lib. 8. H
                     •
                  er. 1. co co
                     •
                  tra Iouin. C. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 32. di. 1. Desan. tu. lib. 6 and dualitie of euill. And this opinion
was maintained also by S. Hierome, whose sentence is
to this purpose repeated in the Canonicall decrees,
but vnder the title and name of S. Ambrose. Hereupon
Homer doth often call good 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ; and the affection
to doe good 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : applying the terme 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                to vexation
and trouble. Hereupon Galen also the Prince of
Physitions writeth, that the best in euery kind is one,
but the vicious or defectiue are many. Plato produceth
all things from oneIn Timaeo.; measureth all things by
oneIn Philebo.: and reduceth all things into oneIn Epinomide.. And generally
all true testimonies doe agree, that the greatest
perfection of glory, beautie, stabilitie or strength,
is either occasioned by vnion, or therein found.
         
         
            CHAP. II. More particularly of the Vnion of the two Realmes of England
and Scotland: and first of the vtilitie thereof.
            
               BVt to descend into particular consideration,
touching the vnion of these two Realmes
of England and Scotland, the benefits which
are presented thereby are so many and manifest, that
the chiefest impugners thereof are not able, euen in
the greatest tempest of their iudgement, directly to

denie them, onely they seeke either in silence or generalities
to passe them ouer, or els by propounding
many difficulties, to qualifie our wils from pursuing
them by desire. For, whereas there are two respects
which combine and knit people together, the one a
vehement feare, either in preuenting or in remouing
of some euill; the other (which is the weaker) an vrgent
hope and desire, in attaining of some good:
both these doe present themselues most liuely vnto
vs; and from these two principall respects, two principall
benefits doe infallibly ensue. The first is, the
extinguishing of warres betweene the two nations:
the second is, the enlargement both of dominion
and power.
            Touching the first, it alwaies falleth, that the breaking 
of one countrey into diuers principalities, is an
assured ground of miserie and warre, by reason of the
diuersitie both of the interest and of the ends of
those that possesse it: neither is there any meanes to
reduce the same into conditions of quiet, but by restoring
it againe to the state of Vnion. This meanes
hath in a short course of time altogether appeased
the cruell and inueterate, not onely butcheries but
hate, betweene the English and the Welsh; and I
am not assured whether the want of this hath made
all other appliancies, whether of clemencie, or of iustice,
or of armes, if not vnprofitable, yet insufficient,
to represse the riotous rebellions of Ireland. And
how great haue been the miseries and mischiefes,
which haue heretofore proceeded from the warres
betweene England and Scotland, it may euidently appeare,
by seuerall consideration of the effects thereof.
            
               
First therefore the course of our conquests, especially
in France,
               Victories hindred. hath by this meanes been often interrupted.
For to this end the French haue alwaies
held correspondencie with Scotland, as the only way
to diuert the enterprises of the English against them.
So that if this gap bee closed past their entrance, wee
haue taken from them their surest defence.Inuasions occasioned. Secondly,
opportunities haue bin opened to forreine inuasion;
the people of both Realmes being hereby
weakened, the store and treasure wasted, matters of
themselues sufficient to beate open their gates to any
one that would attempt vpon them. And in truth, it
was vpon no other aduantage that the Saxons, and
after them the Danes found so easie entrance into
this Realme: calamities lamentable euen for strangers
to heare of, much more for those wretches to
endure, vpon whose neckes the law of destinie had
laid so hard and heauie a yoke. Thirdly, by meanes
of these warres,Confines laid waste. the confines of both nations haue
continually been held vnder the cruell calamitie of
the sword; they haue bin a nurserie of rapines, robberies
and murthers; they haue bin not only vnprofitable,
but very chargeable to the State, by continual
maintenance of many garrisons.Inner parts distressed. Lastly, the inner
parts of both Realmes haue been often pierced, and
made a wretched spectacle to all eyes of humanitie
and pitie: wherein notwithstanding the English
stood vpon the disaduantage, in that they fought against
them who had least to lose.
            
                Now, for the largenes of the benefit of enlargement
of dominion, wee are chiefly to consider both
the nature and abilities, as well of the countrie which
shall be ioyned vnto vs, as of the people which possesse

it. The countrey is if not plentifull, yet sufficient
to furnish, not onely the necessities, but the moderate
pleasures of this life: wherein, whosoeuer is
brought vp and bred, hee will neuer be grieued to abide.
The people are, great in multitude, resolute in
minde, for seruice apt, in faith assured, in wils tr
                  •
               etable,
moderate in hopes, bearing one common desire
to commit their liues to any aduenture, not only
for the safetie, but for the glorie of their state: and
generally their conditions so well furnished, as they
did neuer better than now flourish in all mortall felicities.
By addition of such both people and place,
many particular benefits will inseparably ensue.
            And first, it will bee a greater increase of dignitie
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
and reputation to the common state, than our highest
thoughts can easily imagine. For, that which is
more generall, is more generous also and honorable
as Decius teacheth vs; for that it compriseth 
                  〈◊〉
               
particulars within it: which is aduowed also by that
which Baldus saith; that by reason of vniuersalitie a
thing may be esteemed of greater worth. Hereto agreeth
that sentence of Salomon; The honour of a King
is in the multitude of people. And therefore the Scripture
reporteth it as a great part of his glorie; that he
reigned ouer all kingdomes from the riuer (Euphrates) to
the land of the Philistims,
               1. 
                     〈…〉
                   24. 
               and vnto the border of Egypt;
and in all the region on the other side the riuer.
            
            And if in our hearts may be any desires more violent
than of glorie, there are other effects of this encrease
of dominion and power, more mightie to
moue vs, or at the least more necessarie. For hereby
also our defence will bee the more assured;Defence. because
against the forces and felicities of these two Nations,

it will be so hard, as almost impossible, either for forreine
enemie or domestical rebell to haue power to
preuaile. And whereas heretofore the ports of either
nation haue been so many gates for inuasion of the
other; the borders also betweene them haue been a
place of assured retreit to the rebels of both countries,
in case their enterprises did not succeede: these
passages being now closed, all secret supportance
withdrawne, and both people knit in a common defence,
it will not onely frustrate the end, but cut off
the hope of any such attempts.
            Further,Enterprise. wee shall be strengthened hereby in any
forreine enterprise, whensoeuer time shall cut out occasions
fauourable to our desires. Whereas in a people
rather confederated than vnited, is seldom seene,
either a conformitie in will, or a ioynt readinesse in
power, whether to pursue resolutely the fauour of
fortune, or constantlie to resist the stormes of distresse:
because in such enterprises as are occasioned
by diuersitie of interest, and draw with them diuersitie
of ends; disdaines, distrusts, and all kinde of disorders
are easily kindled.
            Lastly,Ease. both our libertie and our plentie by this
meanes will encrease; and we shall with farre greater
both alacritie and ease sustaine the defraiments of
publike affaires. For generally, in small principalities,
the people are more wronged in person and wrung
in purse; their estates are more neerely raked and
gleaned; they haue lesse aduantage both by trafficke
and trade, then they who liue in large dominions.
And this will be the accomplishment of our felicitie,
if by our euill either fortune or aduice, we suffer
not the occasion to be lost.
         
         
            
            CHAP. III.Of the necessitie of this Vnion, and by what meanes it may
be perfected.
            
               I Will not further enlarge vpon these seuerall
benefits; partly because I addresse not my
speech to such sicke iudgements, as esteeme
nothing sound which doth not beare a beautifull
shew; partly because they appeare vnto me so certaine
and plaine, that I holde it not reasonable to
stand and dispute them: but chiefely for that this
vtilitie of vnion is seconded also with a kinde of necessitie;
which is mightie to bend those minds that
are inuincible against all other meanes. For, if people
reduced vnder one gouernment be not therein
vnited; if they be set together, and not into one;
they are like sand without lime, subiect to dissipation
by euery winde: they are like vnto stones, heaped,
but not compacted together, easily seuered by their
proper weight. Hereupon Liuie saith: Tolle vnitatem,
& omnes imperij contextus in multas partes dissident:
Take away vnitie and all the frame of the Empire will separate
into many parts. Which is also confirmed by that
saying of Christ; A kingdome deuided cannot continue.
So that if any man, either blinded by aduerse and
peruerse destinie, or else caried, whether by feare,
the vnderminer of all determinations, or by enuie,
the rebell to all reason, shall now make offer, directly
or by circumstance to oppose against this Vnion,
and to encounter the benefits thereof with priuate
respects; we haue iust cause, not onely to deny him

audience, but to beare a hard opinion of him; as
not knowing to what ends his thoughts are disposed.
            It remaineth onely that wee consider, by what
meanes these benefits may be best assured; that is,
by what meanes both nations may bee reduced to
an inseparable imbracement. To this purpose we
are to respect the two parts of perfect Vnion of diuers
states; The first is, by incorporating the people
into one politicke body; the second, by knitting
their minds in one contentment and desire: euen
according to that which Sant Paul saith:Pphes. 4. 
               one body,
and one spirit. Of these two parts of Vnion, the first
may bee termed of law, and the second of loue;
whereof I will speake now in order, so briefly as I
may not be obscure; and so fully as the auoyding
of tediousnes will permit.
         
         
            CHAP. IIII. Of the bodily Vnion, or Vnion by law.
            
               THe bodily or politicke Vnion is no other
thing, but the collecting of both people vnder
one common gouernment and commaund,
and the ioyning of them in obedience vnto
one head. For these two points of commaunding
and obeying are the very soule of a commonwealth,
the absolute offices of ciuill societie, the onely
obiects of a perfect stateseman: for as without
commaund there is no direction, so without obedience
there is no strength: as direction needeth
strength, so is strength vnprofitable without direction.

Of the first of these two Seneca speaketh:De Clem. lib. 1 Istud est vinculum, per quod resp. cohaeret; ille spiritus vitalis. quem haec tot mili
                     •
                  trabunt; nihil ipsa per se futura nisi o
                     •
                  us & sraeda, si m
                     ••
                  s illa imperij subtrahatur. 
               This
is the band of coherence in a common-wealth; this is the
vitall spirit which these so many thousands doe breath;
who would become nothing by themselues but a burthen
and a pray, if this soule of command be taken from them:
Of the second Liuie:
               Lib. 3. Vires imperij in conssersu obedientium sunt. 
               The strength of the Empire consisteth
in consent of those that obey: Sophocles of both:

                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               There is no greater euill than want of gouernment: but
obedience of Subiects saueth many liues. These are the
two legges to support, the two armes both to feede
and defend the common-wealth: if one of these be
taken away, both doe perish, the vnitie of state dissolueth,
Idemque dominandi finis erit, qui parendi fuerit:
and there will be (saith Seneca) the same period of ruling
which shall be of obeying.
            
            But, because there is no forme of gouernment
now but by lawes; because lawes are the instrument
and meane both of obedience and rule; if followeth,
that there is no firme connexion in one forme
of gouernment, that there is not one entire and vndeuided
subiection and commaund, where the people
are not bound together by one common law.
But as, how cunningly soeuer a painter layeth on
his colours to make two bordes seeme one, yet if
they be not made firme in the ioynts, they will alwaies
remaine, and in short time appeare to be two:
so, whatsoeuer apparances are vsed to make two
states seeme one, if they haue not one communitie
of lawes, they remaine notwithstanding, and vpon
small occasions will shew themselues disioynted,Lib 10. Eiusdem iuris esse del ent qui sub todem rege victu
                     •
                  i sunt.
euen in the noblest and strongest limmes of gouernment.
Hereupon Curtius saith: They ought to be of
one law, who are to liue vnder one King. And Tacitus
               
lkewise affirmeth,Quicquid est authoritatis crebris destiuitur contradictionibus. that vpon such diuersities: All authoritie
is ouerthrowne by continuall contradicting. And
this is manifest by that which happened in the infancie
of the popular state of Rome, when the Senate
made lawes for themselues,Theoph. iust. de iur. gent. nat. & ciu. § Plcbiscitum. which they called Senatus
consulta: and againe, the common people made
lawes for themselues, which they termed Plebiscita:
but herewith they were diuided in companie, which
was more daungerous vnto them, than the inuasions
of their best appointed enemies. Neither could
those disorders be ranged into any tolerable forme,
vntill by the law Hortensia, the lawes of both were
extended equallie vnto all. Afterward for auoyding
the like inconueniences, the Romanes permitted

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , proprietie of lawes, to no prouince which
they did absolutely subdue; but reduced them vnder
gouernment of the Romane lawes. According
to which example King Iohn also planted in Ireland
the lawes which were then the lawes of this realme.
            And this made the Vnion of all the kingdomes of
Spaine, and likewise of little Britaine with France both
more easie, and also more sure, because they had
commonly receiued the same ciuill lawes. For lawes
are the common bandes of all cities and societies of
men; the very ligaments and nerues of euery politicke
body: and therefore in those countries that are
ruled by different lawes, though other differences
may be quieted, composed they cannot be. This is
plainely confirmed by that which Cicero saith:
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Pa
                     •••
                  . lus 
                     〈…〉
                   In supplie. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                
               Law
and equitie are the bands of cities: whereto that of Euripides
is agreeable in sense.
            
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
            
            
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            
               
This is that which holdeth cities together,
            When men doe well obserue the Lawes.
         
         
            CHAP. V. Whether all change of Lawes be daungerous
to a State.
            
               THIS streine peraduenture will sound
harsh vnto many, in whose eares suspition
doth sit, to beate backe the creadit of
any kinde whether of perswasion or
proofe. From these I expect two principall obiections.
The first is, that the lawes of England were neuer
changed since the time of Brutus; not onely in
the peaceable state of the realme, but not by any of
the seuerall conquerors thereof: not by the Normanes,
Danes, Saxones; no not by the Romanes,
who vsually changed the laws of all other countries
which they brought vnder the sway of their sword:
but that in all other changes, whether of inhabitants,
or of state, the lawes doe still remaine the same,
which Brutus compiled out of the Troian lawes;
and therefore it is not fit they should in any point be
altered. I will not now spend time vpon this opinion;
partly because it is not commonly receiued,
but especially for that I haue in a particular treatise
examined at large, the parts and proofes of this assertion.
Not as derogating any thing from the true
dignitie of the common law; but as esteeming hyperbolicall
praises now out of season; as neuer sutable
but with artlesse times.
            The second obiection will bee, that change of

lawes alwaies traineth so many disorders, as are sufficient
to shake the whole frame of a state, if not to
dissolue it. Tacitus saith:
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . 
               In all affaires the prouision of
former 
                     〈◊〉
                   is best, and euery conn
                     ••
                  sion is a change to the
worse. Whereupon Valerius hath written:
                  
                     〈…〉
                   Se
                     •
                   answere to Dol. man. p. g. 23. 
               Euen in
least things wee must not alter the least point of auncient
custome. This may be further fortified by the great
care and seueritie which many nations haue vsed;
and most especially the Spartanes, Athenians, Epidaurians,

                     ••
                  rians and Scythians, as well to preuent as to
punish al attempts of innouation; as taking the same,
either for a cause or presage of some confusion.
            For my part, I doe vtterly condemne either light
or often alterations of lawes; knowing that so reuerent
respect is borne to antiquitie, that auncient
lawes are oftentimes of force without helpe of magistrates
to maintaine themselues: but new lawes
are so farre from this grauitie and grace, that many
times they draw the residue into contempt. The plant
thriueth not (saith Seneca) which is often remoued.
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . For
who can stand long that will not stand still? but
euery day change the forme of their gouernment,
as lightly as they doe the fashion of their garments?
yea, it is a rule of policie generally approued in that
state which hath long florished vnder one kinde of
gouernment,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . Senc. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Lib. 2. not to admit alteration, although it
beareth a faire face of profit. And this was the counsaile
which Dio reporteth that Augustus gaue in the
Senate of Rome:
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               Keepe the lawes which you haue strongly;
change not any of them, for those things that abide in
the same state, although they be worse, are more profitable
than those that are alwaies changed, although in apparance

they seeme better: Which was also the opinion of
Alcibiades in Thucidides;
               Thucid. lib. 6. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               that those men remaine most
safe, who are gouerned by their present customes and lawes
without change, although the
                     •
                   be worse.
            
            And yet on the other side, I am as farre from allowing
a strict and seuere tenacitie of lawes; which
(being another extreame) is many times more either
hurtfull or vnprofitable, than the light change of
them. For who will commend the counsaile of the
Epidaurians, who for feare of attracting innouation,
interdicted their people from all forreine both
trauaile and trade? or that of the Locrians, who to
keepe their lawes both from change and encrease,
erected an vse, that whosoeuer would haue a new
law established, hee should propound the same, his
necke girt in a halter, that if it were not esteemed necessarie,
his law and life might end together. Sometimes
entire alteration of gouernment is necessarie.
For so Plutarch writeth,In Pomp. that Cratippus declared to
Pompey, being cast into flight, and complaining of
the prouidence of his Gods, that the peruerse state
of Rome stood in great necessitie of the gouernment
of one man:Annal. 1. and so Tacitus likewise reporteth, that
certaine wisemen discoursing of the life of Augustus
after his death, affirmed rightly, that there was no other
meanes to appease the disorders of the state, but
by reducing it vnder the principalitie of one. But
the change of some particular lawes is many times
grounded vpon so great respects, that all nations do
vsually vary them, as occasions doe alter: and sometimes
as Tacitus saith;Hist. 1. Necet priscus rigor & 
                     〈…〉
                  . 
               Old rigour and too great seueritie
is hurtfull vnto vs, because we are not able to match. Neither
is any inconuenience by such particular change

of lawes either feared or felt, if two circumstances
be therein obserued. One, that the change bee not
great; the other, that it be not sudden, but at leisure
and by degrees.
            Now, to reduce the lawes of England and Scotland
into one bodie, it seemeth the change will not bee
great. First, for that customes and priuiledges of particular
places are not to be impeached; for these are
diuers in euery nation, without any notable inconuenience,
so that conformitie be held in one common
law. Secondly, the fundamentall lawes (as they
are termed) of both kingdomes and Crownes doe
well agree. In other lawes of gouernment they hold
good conformitie, as hauing heretofore bin vnder
one scepter; but now by long seuerance the lawes
of either nation are like a shooe worne long vpon
one foote, and thereby made rather vnseemely than
vnseruiceable for the other. Of these lawes, they that
are diuers but not contrarie, may still be retained and
communicated to both people:
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . for so Alexander
said, that his great Empire could not aptly be gouerned,
but by deliuering to the Persians some lawes
and customes of the Macedonians, and by receiuing
likewise some things from them: and euen so among
the Romanes, those lawes which the common
people made onely for themselues, and those
also which the Senators had made, onely to binde
themselues, were by the law Hortensia made common
vnto all. So then, the change shall be onely
where the lawes are contrarie; which will not bee
either great or vnprofitable, if it be not laid only vpon
the lawes of one people, but indifferently diuided
betweene them both.
            
               
Examples are obuious of the like commission of
lawes: but I will insist onely vpon one; which is
most memorable, and most properly concerneth
both our countrey and our case. When King Edward
surnamed the Confessor was aduanced to the
Crowne, he found the realme gouerned by three different
lawes; the West-saxon law, the Mercian law,
and the Dane law. Out of these three lawes, partly
moderated, and partly supplied, hee composed one
bodie of law, commonly called S. Edwards lawes:
which were of so great equitie, that when they were
abrogated by the Conquerour, and the Crowne fell
into controuersie betweene Mawd the Empresse and
King Stephen, the people alwaies inclined to fauour
that part, who put them in fairest hope of restitution
of those lawes. And afterwards in many ciuill contentions,
the greatest demaund of the people appeareth
to haue been, the restitution of King Edwards
lawes.
            And yet these alterations are most safely wrought
in some meane course and compasse of time;Ad Attic. lib. 11 Epist. 19. Dio. 52. and as
Cicero saith: Et quam minimo sonitu orbis ille in rep. conuertatur:
That this circle may bee turned in the state,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               without any great sound. And so Dio writeth, that
Augustus did not presently put all things in practise
which were decreed: Fearing that he should erre, if he
would suddenly apply men vnto them; but some things hee
redressed presently, and the rest afterwards: vpon which
manner of proceeding Tacitus also reporteth of him,
that he did by degrees aduance himselfe and draw the offices
both of lawes and Magistrates into his hands.
               l
                     •
                  s
                     •
                  gere pa
                     •
                  
                  la
                     ••
                  m, 
                     〈…〉
                   s
                     •
                  tr
                     •
                  h
                     ••
                  e. For, as
in a naturall bodie, no sudden change is without
some perill; so in a politike bodie it is so much the

greater, as there are more humours to receiue a hurtfull
impression. And in this regard the proceeding of
Alaricus King of the Gothes is fullie to be equalled,C
                     •
                  ia. Ap ad R
                     •
                  n
                     •
                  onem.
if not preferred before that of Augustus. For Alaricus
finding the Romanes in other points tractable,
but vnwilling to bee gouerned by the lawes of the
Gothes, hee permitted them the vse of the Romane
lawes, but by interpretation in a short space he drew
them, to beare the same sense with the lawes of the
Gothes.
            For, if it be true that Zenophon saith:2. P
                     •
                  ri. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               It is easier to
rule all other creatures than man: and which Seneca affirmeth;De clem. lib. 1. Nullum animal morosiu
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , nullum ma
                     •
                  ori artetractandum.
               No liuing creature is of harder conditions, none
to be handled with greater arte: If it be true also which
Liuie saith:Excellentibus ingeniis 
                     •
                  tius d
                     ••
                  fuerit ars qua ciuem regant, quam qua 
                     〈◊〉
                   superent. 
               Excellent wits shall sooner faile in the arte to
gouerne subiects, than to vanquish enemies: it followeth,
that oftentimes a people may be ruled, more fitly by
following, than by striuing or opposing: euen as nature
driueth not violently at any effect, but enfoulding
her ends in the desires of her creatures, hath her
purposes pursued, not as hers, but as their owne.
And as the Sunne is continually carried with the
sway of the first moueable Sphere, and yet performeth
his proper motion in a contrarie course: so a
Prince may oftentimes yeeld to the violent mindes
of the multitude,Ad Lentul. ep. 9 Si recta portum tenere nequea
                     •
                  , idipsum mutata velificatione assequi. and yet effect his owne purposes
and desires; euen as Cicero counsailed: When wee cannot
beare into the hauen with a full and faire winde, to doe
the same by changing saile.
            
         
         
            
            CHAP. VI. Of vnion of mindes or of loue.
            
               I Wil proceed now to the vnion of minds,
without which the bodily vnion is of
little strength, either for present vse, or
for continuance. For all forced gouernments
are both weake and momentany, because they
leaue out the will of man, without which it is impossible
there should be either any firme or long coherence.
For although other creatures may be enforced
beyond their wils, yet the will of man is not subiect
to constraint; because it a waies followeth the
direction of reason; (though sometimes darkened
or abused by a
                  ••
               ections) which hauing a most high
and eminent libertie, it must bee perswaded and not
inforced: the vnderstanding must first be wrought
and wonne, and that is the onely meanes to bring the
will into obedience.
            This vnion of will and of minde Seneca termeth,De Clem. lib. 1. cap. 4.
the common band of states, the vitall spirit, the very
soule and life of an Empire: Rege incolumi mens omnibus
vna. And herein the first Christians were commended,Act. 4. 32.
for that they were of one heart and soule;
that is, retained one minde, will and desire. This
vnion S. Paul calleth, the band of peace:
               Ephes. 4. 3. and therefore
desired in his prayer for the Romanes;Rom. 15. 5. 
               that they might
be like minded:
               1 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 1. 10. and requested the Corinthians, to knit
together in one minde and iudgement:Ephes. 4. 3. The Ephesians
also; to keepe the vnitie of spirit in the band of
peace:Phil. 2. 2. 3. 17. 4. 2. and likewise the Philippians; to minde one

thing, and to proceede by one rule. And with him
agreeth S.1. Pet. 3. 8. 
               Peter also, in exhorting vs all to bee of one
minde.
            But this vnion of mindes betweene the English
and the Scots is not to bee esteemed a matter which
may easily be effected; by reason of the great differences
which haue been betweene them. For in old
enmities it is hard to establish both a present and perfect
reconciliation; because either suspition, or contempt,
or desire of reuenge are proper and assured
meanes, either alwaies to continue, or readily to renue
the ancient hate. And yet this will prooue most
easie and plaine, if industrie be applied to the opportunitie
present. And the rather, for that it hath pleased
God to open the way to this Vnion in such a
time as there is almost no memorie of any warre betweene
the two nations: insomuch as the long peace
which hath now continued more than fiftie yeeres,
and the mutuall offices which in the meane time
haue been shewed, haue now either worne out, or at
least much weakned the hate, which in former times,
by reason of continuall warre, was almost growne to
be naturall. Onely some circumstances must be considered,
without which it is alwaies hard, and whereby
it is neuer impossible, to worke the willes and desires
of diuers people into one. These circumstances
may bee reduced to two principall heads: the first is
equalitie; the second, conformitie or similitude in
all things whereby any notable difference should be
maintained or made.
         
         
            
            CHAP. VII. Of Equitie.
            
               I Doe not speake of Arithmeticall equalitie,
which is equall in the thing, giuing
to all alike; but not in the persons (as is
Geometricall) allowing vnto euery man
according to his due: I speake not of equalitie in
degree, or in estate, for that were the greatest inequalitie
that could bee; but in libertie and priuiledge,
(which is the maine supporter of peace) and in capacitie
both of office and charge. That as the Sunne
riseth and shineth to all alike, so the law should comprehend
all in one equall and vnpartiall equitie. Of
this equalitie Plato saith;De legib. li. 
                     •
                  . 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               Equalitie maketh friendship,
and is the very mother of friendship: which he citeth as
an old saying of Pythagoras, and doth exceedingly
both allow and commend the same.Polit. 5. cap. 1. & 2. 
               Aristotle doth
esteeme inequalitie the ground of suspition; which
the16. q. 7. l. cum oportet C. de bo. quae lib. law also accounteth the fewell of discord: but
of equalitie he saith;Ethic. 8. ca. 6. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . In Phoeniss. 
               All these friendships are by equalitie.
And to the same purpose Euripides hath written;

                  —
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
               
            
            Equalitie bindeth friends to friends, cities to cities, and
confederates to confederates. For equalitie is law to men.
But the lesse is alway enemie to the greater, and forthwith
entreth into hate.
            
               
               Hereto agreeth that of Theognis:
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
            
            
               Omnes hisese venerantur, amantque vicis
                     •
                  im,
               Vicini, aequa 
                     •
                  is viribus, atque s
                     •
                  ncs.
            
            Among the Latine writers Seneca, saith:All these beare reuerence one to others, equall neighbours, and aged persons. 
               Equalitie
is the principall part of equitie.
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . And this right is 
                  •
               ermed
by Cicer
                     •
                  par: as being equall vnto all, and proceeding
from nature, and held in vse by common
consent whereby it is often familiar vnto men (as
Tacitus saith) To make other mens aduantag
                     •
                   as gri
                     •
                  
                  u
                     •
                  
is vnto them, as their proper iniuri
                     •
                  s. And his was
one principall meane, whereby the Romane state
receiued both continuance and 
                  〈◊〉
               ; because
the people did so easily impart the libertie
                  •
                of their
citie almost vnto all.A
                     ••
                  t Platarch. in ag
                     •
                  l. For Epaminondas 
               
                  〈◊〉
                that peace
is then firme, when equalitie is observed: according
to which sentence Liuie writeth,Lib. 8. that when the
Romanes demaunded of the Embassadours of the
Princrnates, whether peace should bee durable if it
were graunted vnto them, they returned answere;
that it should bee perpetuall if the conditions were
equall, otherwise for so long time as their necessitie
should indure. For let vs not bel
                  •
               eue that any people
will beare vnequall conditions, any longer time
than necessitie doth continue. To these I will adde
that which Saint Ambrose saith:De Offic. lib. 1. V
                     ••
                  im as p
                     ••
                  es paribus maxime 
                     〈◊〉
                  . In P
                     •
                  adro. lib. de les. Patria
                     •
                   c. cap 2. 
                     〈◊〉
                   aequalis gratia &c. 
               We see that equals doe
best ioy together: which sentence seemeth to be taken
out of Plato, and is by him in another place in this
sort confirmed: Let them be ioyned in equall fauour who
are ioyned in equall nature. What doe you maruaile if strife
rise among brethren for house & for ground, when because
of a coate the children of holy Iacob did burne in enuie?
            
            
               
Hereupon the law doth alwaies incline to maintaine
equalitie among brethren, in case of succession;
and that whether we respect the pretorianL. 1. C. vnde lib. l. si post. §. si. d. de bon. 
                     〈…〉
                  ., or
ciuill lawL. inter fil
                     •
                  os. C. 
                     〈…〉
                  ., or else the imperiall constitutionsI. pen. C. com. d
                     •
                  u. l. vlt. C. com. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . iudi
                     •
                  . C de collat. per to tot. t
                     •
                  t.. And
Baldus noteth, that all statutes which admit children
vnequally to succeede, are against naturall equitieIn d. l. inter filios..
Generally, not onely the interpreters, but the authors
also of the ciuill law, doe so fauour equalitie
among brethren, that for this cause they extend or
restraine the disposition of a testatorI. Cum Pater. § cuictis D. de l
                     •
                  g. 2. l. vlt. C. com. vtr. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . & ibidem Dd.; insomuch as
sometimes that is intended to be comprised in a legacie
which otherwise should notL. Quaesuu. §. sed & ipse. D. de fund. instr.: and a doubtfull
word shall also receiue a forced constructionFranc. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . in l. filiabus. D. leg. 1. Bald. Angel. Sali. in l. in testamento. C. de test. mili.. Further,
the priuileges that are graunted to those testaments
which parents make among their children,
doe then take place, when the testator doth equally
dispose among them.Ro. con. 179. Phil. Dec. in l. 1 in 2. no. C. vnde lib. & cons. 349. & 361.. And when many testaments
are extant of such nature, that is adiudged of force
which doth equally disposePau. ca. in Auth hoc inter. C. de te
                     ••
                  a. Pau. Paris. cons. 24 lib. 2.. And in conflict and
opposition of opinions that is to be followed, which
maintaineth equalitie among brethrenSoct. in rep. l. cum. mus. D. de cond. & 
                     〈◊〉
                  . & co
                     •
                  s. 1
                     •
                  8. libr. 3. Marcia pater ipsius. con. 4. ia si.. In a word,
brothers doe so neerely affect equalitie, that thereupon
was formed an ancient Greek prouerbe; 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
whereby is signified that brothers will goe so
neere in departing the goods of their auncester, that
they will not leaue a few figges vndeuided. Of this
prouerbe Martiall writeth.
            
               Calliodorus habet censum, quis nescit? equestrem,
               Sexte, sed & fratrem Calliodorus habet;
               Quadraginta secat, qui di
                     •
                  it 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               Vno credis equo posse sedere duos?
            
            So that it is little maruaile which other authors
doe report,Epi
                     •
                  r. lib. 
                     •
                  . a
                     •
                   Calliodorum.. that Charicles and Antiochus two brothers

in Pontus, when they deuided their fathers
goods, caused a siluer cup to be cut in the middest,
because neither should haue any more than the
other.In Pyrrho. From hence also was taken that tragicall exclamation
which Plutarch vseth but borrowed out
of Euripides.
               In Phvniss.
            
            
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            And yet howsoeuer capacitie of offices or preferments
should be equall to both people,To deuide this house with a sharpe iron. a moderation
must be vsed for a time, that either nation bee
gouerned by officers of the same: otherwise the aduantages
and aduancements of the one, would
worke both grieuance and preiudice to the other.
For first, no people will easily disgest, that more
should bee attributed within their state to others,
either in trust or in authoritie than vnto them: secondly,
they are not the most fit, either to counsaile
or contriue the affaires of a state, who are but newly
acquainted with the gouernment thereof; euen as
Cicero said Ad consilium de rep. dandum caput esse, nosse
rempublicam:
               
                  
                     •
                  . De orat. 
               To giue aduise in affaires of a commonwealth,
it is a principall point, to haue knowledg of the
same. Officers and employments of state are in the
hands of the King as graines, to make the ballances
equall; and must not promiscuously be bestowed,
vntill by benefit of time, the band of Vnion bee
made fast and indissoluble. For as things in nature
excellent ripe not hastily, so common-wealths least
of all; which rise not to the period of their perfection
in many ages, mouing leasurely, and by insensible
degrees: and the more slowly they doe
rise, the more surely for the most part do they stand.
In a small compasse of time, how little distastefull it

will be, that the men of one nation should beare
office and authoritie in the other, wee haue a faire
example by them of Wales; who, so farre from enuie,
as without any note; doe many times enioy
very high places of preferment in England. And I
make little doubt but that this respect hath dazled
the iudgment of some persons, by whom whatsoeuer
is pretended, either against the whole Vnion,
or against any part of the perfection thereof, the surmise
is (as men entred into suspition are prone, both
to interpret and coniecture all things to the worst)
that all the sweete of the land will hereby be drawne
from the auncient inhabitants of the same. Hereof
all laboring in one common doubt, and one increasing
the feare of another, they minister occasion
of bouldnesse vnto such, who suppose, by aduanceing
popular aduise, to raise some reputation to themselues.
But it cannot bee coniectured that a King,
ripe in age, full of experience, holding much of himselfe,
yet not reiecting the aduise of others, will giue
so confused forme to these affaires; and that he will
kindle such a fire of emulation, betweene both people,
as cannot but cast forth daungerous sparkes.
         
         
            CHAP. VIII. Of conformitie or similitude.
            
               ANother principall meanes of affection and
good will is similitude or likenesse; which
is the fittest reconciler and surest knitter of
minds, the mother of all faithfull familiaritie
and friendship; and the more true and perfect

the similitude is, the more firme is the friendship
which thereupon doth arise. To this purpose Siracides
saith:Ca. 13. 16, 17. 
               Euery beast loueth his like, and euery man
loueth his like. All flesh will resort to their like; and euery
man will accompanie such as are like himselfe: Which
seemeth to be more briefly comprised in that speech
of Melanthus in Homer.
               Odiss. lib. 17.
            
            
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            Of which sentence Plato maketh mention;Alwaies God guideth like vnto like. and addeth
thereto,In 
                     〈◊〉
                   & in 
                     〈◊〉
                   & de 
                     〈◊〉
                   li 6. Deleg. lib. 8. that euery thing doth necessarily loue,
and naturally both incline and adhere to that whereto
it is like. Againe he affirmeth, that a friend is one
like vnto a mans selfe; and that therefore dissimilitude
maketh friendship hard, rough and easie to be
changed.Ethic. lib. 8. Wherein he is also followed by Arist
                     •
                  tle,
who accounteth friendship a kinde of similitude;
from whence the common saying did proceede;

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : Like vnto like: to which purpose he
citeth also a saying of Empedocles; 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ;
Like desireth the like. And generally he concludeth
thus: Likenesse seemeth to be the ground of friendship.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
            
            
               Alcinous, one of Platoes followers saith, that friendship
is nothing else but a mutuall goodwill, whereby
we equall others to our selues;Iab. de duct. Plat. ca. 32. which equalitie
is neither begun nor held but by similitude. Chalcidius,
another of the same schoole deliuereth as an
opinion of Pythagoras,
               In comment. in 
                     〈◊〉
                   P
                     •
                  at. ad Osum. that nothing is comprehended
but by the like; and to that purpose he alleageth
certaine verses of Empedocles.
            
            
               Cicero,
               In 1. Cicero D. de P
                     •
                  n. se pro. Aul. Cl
                     •
                  ento. in that oration which Triphonius, one of
the authors of the ciuill law doth cite, vseth these
words; Hoc fere scitis omnes, qu intā vim habeat ad coniungendas
amicitias studiorū ac naturae similitudo; This

all of you do know, of what fo
                     •
                  ce is similitude of studies and
of nature, to ioyne friendship. Againe he writeth:De amic. 
                     〈…〉
                  . 
               Nothing
doth so allure and draw to anything, as similitude
doth to friendship. Hereto agreeth also that of Plinie:
               Iah. 4. Epist. ad Fandanum. E
                     •
                  t ad connectend
                     •
                  s animos vel t
                     ••
                  atissinium vinculum similitudo. 
               Similitude is a most firme band, to knit and fasten minds
together.
               Iab. 7. rei rust. 
               Columella accounteth this band to be naturall:
So doth Symmachus
               Sym. in Epist.: And Plinie, an excellent
interpreter of nature, doth teach,Lib. 56. ca. 42. that insensible
creatures which haue no similitude by nature, as
stone and wood, iron and clay, are neuer firmely
ioyned together. All this is confirmed by expresse
sentence of the Canon lawC. Nerui. §. quod melius. 13 di. c. transmissam. de elect.. This the auncient wisemen
did also shadow, by the fable of an earthen pot,
which refused to ioyne in helpe with a brasse pot in
laboring against the streame: and again by the fable
of a fuller, who denied that he could dwell in one
house with a Colier. This did the poets also signifie,
when they fained Narcissus to be in loue with his
image. For what is more like vnto vs then our owne
image? and whosoeuer loueth another man, what
else doth he loue but his owne image in him?
            From hence it proceedeth,I. cum qui. C. de Ep. & Cle. c. inter solicitudines. de pur. ca. c. clericus di. 81. c. peruenit. 2. q. 7. c. di dici. 1. q. 7. that a man is iudged
like vnto those, with whom he holdeth familiaritie
and friendship. And Angelus saith,Ang. in auth. de mona. §. cogitandum. that a witnesse
deposeth well, when he testifieth that a man is good
or euill, because he seeth him conuerse with men of
good or euill fame and report. Which is also confirmed
by Baldus
               Bald. in l. dat. C. qui acca. 
                     •
                  po. and by the Glossographer
               Glo. in 
                     •
                  cum oportet. de acc. & in c. definimus 18. q. 2., and generally
by all interpreters both of the Canon and Ciuill
law. To whose sentence we may adde that which
Cice hath most elegantly written:De offic li. 2. Facillim: aut
                     •
                  m & in meliorem partem cognoscuntur adolescentes. &c. 
               Yong men are
most easily knowne, and for the better part, who ioyne themselues
to men famous, and wise, and of good aduise for the

common wealth: with whom if they be often conuersant,
they raise an opinion among the people, that they will be
like vnto those whom they chose to imitate. Suetonius reporteth
of Claudius Caesar,
               In Claud. that by conuersing with
base men, to his old note of negligence and sloath,
he added the infamie of drunkennes and dicing.
Plinie speaking of a certaine yong man saith: He liueth
with Spurma,
               Epist. lib. 4. ad Falconem. Viuit cum Spurma, viuit, &c. 
               he liueth with Antonie, hereby you may
coniecture how his youth is reformed, seeing he is so loued
of graue old men. For that is a most true saying: 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               :
Euery man is like vnto
those,
               Ad Cleomacham, & ad Nesum. 
               in whose companie he doth delight. Libanius Antiochenus
in like manner writeth: Wee are commonly
esteemed like vnto those who are ioyned with vs in friendship
and societie.
               Ad Demetriadem. Here hence. S. Hierome aduiseth Demetriades,
to haue alwaies graue women in her companie:
because the qualitie and disposition of women
is commonly iudged, by the behauior of those
that doe either accompanie or attend them. And
therfore Baldus doth not vnfitly put Iudges in mind
that they enquire with what persons he did vsually
conuerse,In tract. quaestio. who is accused of any crime. Which before
him Albert.
               Tract. de mases. tit de praes. & ind. d
                     •
                  bit. & tit. de qu. & tor. 
               Gand. did thinke worthie to be often
giuen in aduise.
            So then, seeing likenesse is a great cause of liking
and of loue, it followeth, that to make a perfect Vnion
and amitie betweene two diuers nations, all differences
must be remooued, and both people reduced
to one common conformitie; and that especially
in three things. First, in habit and behauiour; secondly
in language; thirdly in name.
         
         
            
            CHAP. IX. Of conformitie in habite and behauiour.
            
               COncerning habite and attire,Lib. 4. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                
               Herodian writeth,
that Antoninus, to make the Germanes
assured vnto him, would often apparell
himselfe after their fashion: wearing a cassocke according
to their vse embroidered with siluer, and
putting vpon his head a peruque of yealow haire, cut
after the Germane manner: wherein the Barbarians
taking pleasure, they did thereupon exceedingly affect
him. For the same cause when hee went into
Thracia and Macedonia, he suted himselfe in Macedonian
attire.Herod. lib. 4. And this hee did (very like) in imitation
of Alexander the Great, who, as well to vanquish
the affections of the Persians,Q. Curt. lib. 3. as hee had subdued
their power, accommodated himselfe to the
fashion of their attire. For Antoninus did ambitiously
aspire to the imitation of Alexander: to whose vertues
hee either supposed himselfe, or would bee
thought, to haue attained so neere, that he caused
diuers ridiculous pictures to bee made,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . hauing one
bodie and two faces; one representing Alexander,
and the other himselfe.
            In ancient times in Rome, and afterward in Constantinople,
certaine games of running were vsed,
with Chariot and vpon horse; which continuing
vntill the time of Phocas the Emperour, the runners
began to cloathe themselues in different colours;
some in greene, and some in gray. The common
people which beheld these games began to be diuided

in affection, some applauding the one colour,
and some the other: hereupon was kindled, first emul
                  •
               tion,
and then 
                  •
               n
                  •
               ie, watch did use by degrees to
such violence and extremitie. that the games ceasing,
the colours were for a long time maintained; and
infinite murthers were thereupon committed in Syria,
Egypt, Graecia, and diuers other prouinces, which
the Emperours by their letters were not able to represse.
Hereupon so many lawes haue been occasioned
against liueries and badges, the mischiefs whereof
were most famous with vs, in the late badges of
the white Rose and the red. And for this cause I doe
not onely allow but commend the policie of King
William of Normandie, by whom (as most industrious
Master Stow hath noted) the English were compelled
to imitate the Normanes, in habite of apparell,
shauing of their beards, seruice at the table, and all
other outward gestures; as supposing by outward
similitude to drawe both people to similitude in
mindes.D. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 41. §. si. 
               Gratian aduiseth, to conforme our selues in
the fashion of attire, with those with whom wee doe
conuerse: affirming that whosoeuer doth otherwise,
either hee is intemperate, or else superstitious. The
Glossographer
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                also aduertiseth, that for the manner of
our apparell, we respect the custome of the countrey
wherein we do abide. And in this he is seconded by
Panormitane, Benedict, Caprea
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               , Speculator
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                
               and Baldus
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               :
by S. Thomas also
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               , and Astensanus
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               : and lastly by
S. Hierome
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               , who commendeth Nepotianus for obseruing
this rule.
            As for conformitie in behauiour and manner of
life, Iosephus writeth
                  
                     〈…〉
                  ., that it is the chiefest meanes to
cause concord and agreement in a citie. Herodian
               
declareth, that when Antoninus desired the daughter
of Artabanus,
               Hero. li. 4. King of Parthia in mariage, and therewith
an association to bee made betweene the two
Empires;
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . 
               Artabanus returned answere, that there
could bee no true concord betweene them, as neither
agreeing in language and differing both in apparell,
and in their manners and customes of life.
Our late trauailers doe report, that the inhabitants of
the Iland Iapan hold immortall and mercilesse variance
with the people of China:
               I0. Hui
                     •
                  h
                     •
                  n Van 
                     〈◊〉
                  . lib. 1. ca. 26 and the rather to
manifest the same, they differ from them in all the
ceremonies of their behauiour. As namely, where
the men of China vse the courtesie of salutation by
vncouering the head, they of Iapan doe the like by
putting off their shooes: where the men of China
stand vp in giuing entertainment, they of Iapan sit
themselues downe. And vpon the same desire of
difference, they vse all meanes to haue their teeth
and haire blacke; they sit in house with cloakes vpon
their shoulders, and lay them aside when they go
abroad; their daughters and maid-seruants goe before
their women, and their men-seruants come behinde.
By which and diuers other contrarieties in
behauiour, the opposition of their mindes is mightely
maintained.De doctrina Christ. lib. 3. For this cause S. Augustine aduiseth
vs, that in transitorie matters wee separate not from
the custome of those, with whom wee liue. And againe,
by the authoritie of S. Ambrose, he concludeth
it to be conuenient, that into what place soeuer wee
come, we applie our selues to the fashions thereof;
if we will not be offensiue to any man,Si cuiquam ne
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   esse scandal
                     •
                  m 
                     〈◊〉
                   quam tibl. nor haue any
man offensiue vnto vs.
         
         
            
            CHAP. X. Of conformitie in language.
            
               COnformitie of language and of speech, was
very generall vnder the Empire of Rome:
which, whether it were enforced by the
Romanes, vpon the prouinces which they did
subdue, or whether the people did voluntarily fall
into it,19. De ciuit. many make a question. S. Augustine accounteth
it the fact of the imperious Citie; which word
imperious, whether hee vsed in the best sense, for bearing
rule, or in the worst, for sharpe and seuere, it is
not materiall: for many things are seuere, which are
not vniust, which are not vnprofitable. Assuredly,
this change of speech is no waies contrarie to naturall
equitie; because one language doth no more
proceede from nature than another. It may seeme
hard (I grant) to impose a change of language vpon
any people; but it seemeth more hard, to be ioyned
with men of a strange tongue: such as are vnto vs
the Spaniards and French. This doth God threaten
as a plague to those that obey not his commandements:
The Lord shall bring a nation vpon thee,
               Deut. 28. 49. 
               whose
tongue thou shalt not vnderstand. And againe, by the
Prophet Ieremie hee menaced the Iewes,ler. 5. 15. that hee
would bring a nation vpon them, whose language they
knew not, neither vnderstood what they did say. Likewise
he threatneth by the Prophet Esay,
               Esa. 28. 11. that with a stamm
                  •
               ring
tongue, and in a strange language he will
speake vnto his people. And to the contrarie, it is reputed
by the Prophet Dauid,
               Ps
                     •
                  l 
                     •
                  . 114. as a great blessing and

benefit of God, that the Iewes were brought from among
a people of a strange language. And howsoeuer
S. Augustine termeth Rome Imperious, for changing
of languages,Ianguarum diuersitas 
                     •
                  ominem alienat ab homine. yet otherwhere he saith; Diuersitie
of tongues maketh one man a stranger to another. For,
as Philo
               Phi. de sp. le. witnesseth, societie of men is maintained by
speech, as being the interpreter or rather expresser
of the minde: to which purpose he hath wrote many
things, in his book which is intituled of the confusion
of tongues. To these I will adioyne the oracle
of Philosophie, Plato, who doth truly determine
those to be Barbarians, who in the manner both of
their language and life hold no communitie or resemblance
together.
            But all these differences doe little concerne the
case in question. They are rather considerable in regard
of the Irish, touching whom, the report is both
constant and of credit, that being Henry the eighth
if not endeauoured, yet purposed to reduce them, to
one forme both of habit and language with the English:
But if we compare together the English and
the Scots, in regard of habit (as Sosia said in Plautus)
non lac lacti magis est simile; milke is not liker to milke
than one of them is to the other.
               In amphit. Concerning behauior
and manner of life, we may truly say of both people
as Aristotle said of the Persians;Pic. 10. & Ph. 31. 
               We cannot possibly
change their hearts, except we also change their heauen.
Fo
                  •
                they are both of one climate, not onely annexed
entirely together, but separated from all the
world besides, which ioyned with daily societie and
commerce, will necessarily maintaine conformitie
in conditions. And as for language, euen in Zetland,
and in the most distant ilands inhabited by Scots,

English preachers are well vnderstoode of the common
people: so that it seemeth, that if the two nations
were reduced vnder one common name, there
should remaine betweene them very little generall,
either note of difference, or prouocation of dislike.
         
         
            CHAP. XI. Of conformitie in name.
            
               FOr, that the bearing of one name doth both
cause and increase affection and fauour, it
may appeare by a case which Papinian doth
forme;In Leum silius. § pater. D. de l. g. 2. wherein a certaine testator deuiseth the greatest
portion of his estate to Sempronius his nephew,
for the honor of his name: because (as Accursius
there noteth) Sempronius did beare the testators
name. Laertius in like sort writeth, that Lycon
Astianax, a cerraine philosopher, in his testament
among other things disposed thus. Whatsoeuer I haue
in the citie or in Aegina, I doe principally giue to Lycon
my brother; because he beareth my name.
            
            When Iunius Brutus had expelled the gouernment
of Kings out of Rome, being stirred thereto, as
well vpon hatred as desire to be chiefe, two respects
which lead men easily into desperat aduentures,
Liuie writeth,Lib. 1. that hee banished Tarquinus Collatinus,
who had been husband to Lucrece, and was his
fellow Consull, as one that had been very forward
in aduancing the enterprise: and this hee did for
no other cause, but for that he bare the same name
with Tarquinus Superbus the expelled King.
            Vpon variances which began betweene Frederick
               
the second Emperor, and Pope Gregorie the
ninth, all Italy except Venice, was deuided into the
two factions of Guelphes and Gebelines. Afterward
when the contentions ceased betweene the Emperors
and the Popes, these factions continued, or rather
encreased, without any other foundation, either
of suspition or of hate, (most mightie passions to
driue on disordered thoughts) but onely for diuersitie
of name. Hereupon many insolences, many
murthers and parricides were daily committed.
Neither was the crueltie discharged vpon the persons
of men onely, but houses were ruined, townes
were ransacked, fields were wasted, all extremities
were pursued with a greater heate of hate, than if it
had been against infidels or traytors. And to so high
a pitch did this enmitie rise, that they could not endure
any conformitie; not in ensignes, not in colours,
not in fashion of their apparell; in disports, in
feasts, in the manner of their going, riding, speaking,
feeding, and generally in all things they affected a
difference.
            The like cruelties haue been exercised betweene
diuers families of Italy, France, England, Scotland, and
many other Christian countries: the beginning
whereof hath commonly risen vpon some priuate
either interest or reuenge; but growing into faction,
they haue been prosecuted and continued either
onely or principally vpon difference in name. Hereupon
Dio writeth, that Maecenas counsailed Augustus,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Dio. lib. 52. Hail. lib. 2. that it was the fairest meanes to cut off emulation
and hate, not to permit vaine names, or any
other thing that might hold men in difference. And
so D. Haillan noteth that to make a perfect reconcilement

betweene the Dukes of Burgundie and
Orleans, in the time of Lewes the cleuenth, the factious
names of Burguignion and Orleannois were taken
away. So likewise the Adorni and Fregosi, two
families in Genoa, after they had wearied and almost
wasted themselues with mutuall cruelties, left
their old names, as the onely meanes both to draw
on and holde their reconcilement. And this did S.
Paul in good time foresee, when he blamed the Corinthians
for diuiding in name; some holding of
Paul, some of Apollos, and some of Cephas.
            
            Seeing then that the bearing of one name is a
meane to knit men in affection and friendship; seeing
also that difference in name doth often mainteine
men in diuision of mind; what shall we say of
them, who more contemning the benefit of Vnion,
than examining the parts and circumstances thereof,
doe openly obiect, that they see neither vrgent
necessitie, nor euident vtilitie in comprehending the
English and the Scots vnder one common name?
that they finde no griefe in their present state, and
can foresee no aduancement to a better condition
by this change? Shall we say that their iudgment is
captiuated by affection? I cannot, I dare not, I will
not hold that opinion of them. I rather feare that
some euill destinie driueth them on. For it is an ordinarie
thing, that when any hard aduenture approcheth,
it blindeth the eyes of men that they cannot
discerne, it bindeth their hands that they cannot
helpe, making them oftentimes both contriuers and
executioners of their owne mishap. Assuredly, in
regard of amitie there is manifest profit in communitie
of name; in regard of perfect Vnion it seemeth

necessarie.§. Si. quis in nomine Inst. de l
                     •
                  gat. For seeing (as Iustinian saith) names doe
serue to discerne and distinguish one thing from
another; it is a rule commonly receiued, that one
thing should not principally beare two diuers
names.Re
                     •
                   eadem non d
                     •••
                  t diuerso romine cons
                     ••
                  l. Hereupon Baldus concludeth, that vpon diuersitie
of names we are to presume diuersitie of bodies:
For euery thing is to be distinguished by the proper
name.
               Res enim singulae singulis sunt nominibus distinguendae. §. Alio. inst. qu
                     •
                  b mod. test. in firm.
            
            So then the bodily Vnion (as it seemeth) is not
perfect, where there is a seuerance and distinction
in name: much lesse can two people be perfectly
knit in affection and will, so long as they stand deuided
in those names, whereby one of them hath
lately been very odious to the other. So long as they
stand deuided in those names of hostilitie and hate,
not hauing any common name to comprise them
both, euery small accident (as it often happeneth)
may be an occasion to sort them into sides: and the
combining of them otherwise vnder one dominion,
may proue to be like an vnperfect cure, whose
fore may afterward more dangerously breake forth.
         
         
            CHAP. XII. What common name is most fit to comprehend the English
and the Scots: and whether the like change of name
hath been vsuall or no.
            
               BVt no common name can be so fit to comprise
as well the people as the countries of
England and Scotland, as is the name of Britaine.
First, for that it hath been heretofore the auncient
common name of all the inhabitants within

this Ile:L. si. vnus. §. pactus. D. de pact. & ib. Bar. and a thing may easily bee reduced to the
first condition and state.
            Secondly, for that since this part of the Iland was
called England, by appointment of King Egbert, yet
was not the name of Britaine altogether cast off; but
was often applied, as well to the kingdome as to the
inhabitants, and by them willingly acknowledged,
and sometimes assumed. King Alfred was intituled,
Gouernor of the Christians of all Britaine. King
Eldred did write himselfe Magnae Britanniae temporale
gerens Imperium. King Edgar was stiled Monarch of
all Britaine. King Henry the second was intituled
King of all Britaine, Duke of Gaescoine, Guienne and
Normandie. King Iohn had his coyne stamped with
this inscription: Iohannes Rex Britonum; Iohn King of
Britaines. And generally in all ages, but chiefly since
learning began last to lift vp the head, the best writers
of all nations haue termed the inhabitants of
this realme, as well Britaines as English.
            
            Thirdly, for that howsoeuer the parts of this
Iland haue changed name, one part being called
England, another Scotland, and the third Wales; yet
the whole Iland, from before the inuasion of the
Romanes vntill this present time, hath alwaies held
the name of Britaine,
               In L. Alc
                     •
                  and
                     •••
                   n. 2. C. de decu. & cor. fil. Assamptio specialis nomi
                     ••
                  s non extinguit nomen generale. according to that which Bartolus
teacheth; By assuming a speciall name, the generall
name is not extinguished. So that it seemeth reasonable,
that as by seuerance of the soueraigntie of the
whole Iland, the kingdomes thereof grew into difference
of name; so the same kingdomes being now
drawne into one, it now beare the name of the
whole Iland againe. And that especially for two respects.
The first is a ground of the ciuill law: Nomina

debent esse consequentia rebus;
               §. Est & aliud inst. de dona. L. decernimus. C. de ep. & cl
                     •
                  . L. 1. C de effic. paef vrb. L. defenso
                     •
                  is. C. defens. ciuit. 
               Names must follow the
nature of things. The second is a custome commonly
receiued whereof Bartolus maketh mention:Bar. in L. falsi. §. 1. D. de 
                     •
                  al
                     •
                  . 
               Quando
quis mutat statum, semper mutatio nominis fit; Change
of state is alwaies accompanied with change of name.
            
            
               And chiefly in this change of state, when diuers
kingdomes are contracted into one, the change of
name doth vsually ensue: and that without distinction,
whether the Vnion hath growne by conquest,
or by mariage, or by blood, or else by mutuall confederation
and consent.
               De consu. ad Alb. 6. 
               Hereupon Seneca saith:
Assiduus humani generis discursus est, quotidie aliquid in
tam magno orbe mutatur noua vrbium fundamenta iaciuntur;
noua gentium nomina, extinctis nominibus prioribus,
aut in accessionem validioris conuersis oriuntur:
Mankind is in continuall motion, euery day something is
changed in this great world; new foundations of cities are
laid, new names of nations are raised, the first names being
extinguished, or else made an addition to a greater.
            So Tacitus writeth,De mor. Germ. 1 that diuers people beyond the
Rhene, ioyning together vpon occasion of enterprise,
left their auncient names, and were called Germanes,
being a new name of their owne inuention.
               Nomine à s
                     •
                  ipsis inuento. The
same people are now also called Almans; not vpon
any conquest, but either because of their courage
and strength, or else (which I esteeme more probable)
because they were a confluence of all sorts of
people.
            Those Germanes who bordered vpon the Ocean
betweene the mouthes of the riuers Elbe and Rhene,
where the Chauci, and the Cananifates were placed
by Tacitus, ioyning together in armes to recouer
their libertie against the Romanes,Belli Goth. li. 1. 
               Precopius writeth,

that vpon euent of diuers victories they changed
name, and called themselues Franci, which in the
Germane language signifieth free men. Whereto
agreeth that which Tacitus saith, in describing their
first victorie against the Romanes:
                  
                     •
                   Magna per Italias Galli
                  
                     ••••
                   fama, 
                     〈◊〉
                   lib
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   celebrantur. 
               They are honored
with great fame through Germanie and Gallia for authors
of libertie. These French in course and compasse of
time seated themselues in Gallia, and gaue name to
the kingdome of that place. But after the death of
Clodoueus the first, this kingdome of France was deuided
among his foure sonnes; whereupon new
titles were erected: Childebert being King of Paris,
Clodomir of Orleans, Clotair of Soissons, and Theodoric
a bastard being King of Metz. After the death of
Clotharius, the like deuision was made among his
sons, none of them being entituled King of France.
Both these diuisions were vnited againe by right of
blood; whereupon these particular titles did cease,
and were changed into the auncient and generall
name of France.
            
            In Italy, Aeneas hauing attained a state by mariage,
and collecting diuers people into one;Lib. 1. Omnes eodem nomine & 
                     •
                  odem iure Latines vocauit. 
               Liuie
saith; He ioyned them in one law, and called them by one
name, Latines. Afterward, when the Romanes and
the Sabines did knit together into one people, it was
vnder one common name, Quirites.
            
            The countrie of Spaine by meanes of diuers conquests,
of the Gothes, Vandals, and Moores, was devided
into many seuerall kingdomes, not one of
them bearing the name of Spaine. These being vnited
againe, part by conquest, and part by inheritance,
Charles the fifth comprehended them all vnder
the auncient and generall name of Spaine.
            
            
               
I omit the Agarens, who changed their name and
would be called Saracens, as bearing themselues descended
from Sara the free-woman, and not from
the bond-woman Hagar. I omit the Heluetians, who
now by confederation are called Suitzers, which
name was occasioned by the little village Suitz; for
that the inhabitants thereof were the first attempters
of popular libertie. I omit many other both voluntarie
and casuall changes of name, and will conclude
this matter with one example of our owne
nation.
            When Egbert King of the West-Saxons had
brought the Heptarchie of the Saxons vnder one
scepter, he changed not the names of the subdued
kingdomes onely, he respected not that he was possessed
of the kingdomes of West-Saxons and of Sussex
by right of blood; whereof the first had continued
in the progenic of Cerdicius (from whom he
was descended) about 300. yeares, the other had
been annexed thereto almost 200 yeares before: but
changed the names as well of them as of the rest into
one common name of England. So that if we free
our minds from rashnesse and dulnesse, the two
plagues of iudging right; if wee esteeme these and
the like proceedings by their naked nature and not
by apparances onely and shifts, we shall cleerely discerne,
that it is so farre from wanting example, that
there is scarce any example to the contrarie, that
diuers people haue perfectly and for long continuance
combined together, whether by conquest, confederation,
or right of blood, but it hath been vnder
one common name. But howsoeuer the tried truth
doth stand, it cannot be made so plainely to appeare,

but an itching tongue may rub against it. To men
fearefull or suspicious all fancies and coniectures
seeme matters of truth; and words doe easily slide
into minds that are enclined to beleeue.
         
         
            CHAP. XIII. Of certaine obiections concerning matters of state inward,
or matters of law.
            
               BVt, because wee haue eares as well as
tongues, and the lightest reasons will
seeme to weigh greatly, if nothing bee
put in the ballance against them, let vs
consider what other obiections are made against this
Vnion of name, and whether they be worthie either
of yeelding or of answering. It is said, that this alteration
of name will ineuitably and infallibly draw
on an erection of a new kingdome or state, and a dissolution
and extinguishment of the old; and that
no explanation limitation or reseruation can cleere
or auoyde that inconueniencie, but it will be full of
repugnancie or ambiguitie, and subiect to much varietie
and danger of construction. That diuers speciall
and seuerall confusions incongruities and mischiefes
will necessarily and incidently follow in the
present time. As in sommoning of Parliaments and
recitall of the acts of Parliament. In the seales of the
kingdome. In the great offices of the kingdome. In
the lawes, customes, liberties, and priuileges of the
kingdome. In the residence and holding of such
courtes as follow the Kings person, which by the
generalitie of name may be held in Scotland. In the

seuerall and reciproque oathes, the one of his Maiestie
at his coronation, which is neuer iterated; the other
in the oathes of alleageance homage or obedience,
made and renued from time to time by the
subiects. All which acts instruments and formes of
gouernment, with a multitude of other formes of records,
writs, pleadings, and instruments of a meaner
nature runne now in the name of England, and vpon
the change would bee drawne into incertaintie and
question.
            In truth this is much, if there bee much truth in it.
But, for my part, I wil not take vpon me, either to determine
or dispute what the law of the realme is, cō
               cerning
either this generall point of erection of a
new state by alteration of name, or the particular inconueniences
which for the present will ensue; referring
my selfe herein to the learned Iudges and
professors of the same. Yet, vnder the fauour and
leaue of their iudgements, I will propound only two
or three doubts, which will serue much to the cleering
of this question; protesting therewith, that I
beare herein rather a desire to be satisfied, than a purpose
to contend.
            The first is, how wee may bee assured, that by the
common lawes of England the change of name doth
infallibly inferre, an erection of a new kingdom, and
a dissolution of the old. For, the Common law is
commonly taken for the common custome of the
realme: and therefore in making proofe thereof we
vsually heare alleaged, either Iudgements and presidents
in cases of the same nature, or else arguments
drawne from cases somewhat like. But this case in
question hath not hitherto been thus determined

by the common lawes of England; because the name
of a kingdome hath not bin changed since our common
lawes were therein planted. Or if it were changed
by King Henry the second, and by King Iohn,
who stiled themselues Kings of Britaine, then was it
without dissolution of the state. As for arguments à



similibus, I doe not see of what force they can be in
case of the Crowne; because by the lawes of this
realme, the Crowne is not touched, much lesse ruled
and ordred either by generall termes or by implication;
neither doth any act concerne the same, if expresse
mention be not thereof made. Againe, if the
change of name doth infallibly inferre the erection
of a new kingdome, it seemeth that the King hath
power by vertue of his Proclamation to dissolue the
whole state and erect a new. Lastly, the little alteration
which ensued the change of the Kings title in
Ireland, maketh this point more questionable and
suspect.
            The second doubt is concerning one of the principall
inconueniences which are alleaged, namely
an euasion from the reciproque oathes betweene the
King and the people. For, seeing oathes doe altogether
concerne the soule and conscience, and therfore
are vnderstood and ruled onely by the lawes of religion;
I doe not see how they should receiue construction
from any nice point of positiue law.
            The third is, how all these inconueniences should
be, either so certaine, or of such nature and qualitie,
that no prouision can cleere or auoide them. What?
shall we suspect either the weaknesse of lawes, or the
weake wisedome of the state? Shall we suspect either
the wisedome of the state in making of lawes, or the

iustice thereof in maintaining them? Are lawes now
of force to hold these matters in forme, and shal they
not hereafter be able to doe the like? Are there any
such inward difficulties which lawes and policies
cannot combat and ouercome? For my part I think
(and thinke that I thinke true) that the wisedome of
the state is farre aboue these or any other inward incommodities:
especially in a Monarchie, where ciuill
matters are easily redressed, by reason of the supreme
authoritie of the Prince. Neither must wee
looke to enioy any notable benefit without some
difficulty and inconuenience. When did the cloudes
make flourishing fields, without trouble of moisture?
when did the Sunne yeeld plentifull haruest, without
annoyance of heate? Such is the weaknesse of
man, that it cannot beare either good or euill simply,
without temperature or allay.
            And yet (me thinke) although all other meanes to
cleere these inconueniences should bee perplexed
and hard, it should bee not difficult and direct to auoide
the same, by changing the Common law in
that point onely; and by new decree to establish, that
the change of name in the King should not draw on
an erection of a new kingdome, and a dissolution of
the old; and that whatsoeuer hath been done or
spoken by the one name, should be receiued by the
other. And this I doe the rather hold not to bee vnreasonable,
for that then the Common law should
herein agree with the Canon and Ciuill lawes; the
substance of which lawes (although they be often
abased by abuse) is the common practise of all the
world.
            Concerning the Canon law Panormitane witnesseth:

               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                
               The Canons attribute no force vnto names.
               Pan. tit. de 
                     〈◊〉
                   qui al. nom. Id. in. li. intern. in si The
Ciuill law is herein more plentifull and plaine: for
although it be true which Bartolus saith;
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                
               Change of
name doth vsually follow change of state; yet it holdeth
not in conuersion, that change of name doth likewise
draw with it change of state, but it is plainly decided
to the contrary;
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                
               Although the name be changed,
yet doth the condition thereby receiue no change. And this
did Dioclesian & Maximinian
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   nom. Nallo ex hoc preiud cio futura. by their imperiall constitution
decree, or rather they declared it to haue
been often decreed before, that as names were freely
imposed at the first, so the change of them is not
dangerous, if it be done without deceit. And therefore
they that are free may lawfully change name, as it hath
been often ordained, without any preiudice thereby to themselues.
The reason hereof is plaine: first in nature; because
by change of accidents the substance doth not
changeMutatio in non substantialibus, non d
                     •
                  
                  tur nouum constitucre. Decia. 5. pr. 4.: secondly in law, because names are imposed
at pleasure and doe serue for signification of
things only§. Si quis in nomine. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . de leg. 
                     〈◊〉
                   D. si. cer. pet. l. 6. D. de reb. 
                     〈◊〉
                  ., which, so as they may be vnderstood,
it is little materiall what either name or meanes
bee therein vsed. It sufficeth onely that they bee
knowne, whether by one name, or by another, or by
any description or demonstration, which are equiualent
to a name. And sometimes it happeneth (as
Cicero saith
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . b. 1. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . & epist. lib. 9. ad 
                     〈◊〉
                   Patum.) that things are better vnderstood by other
names, than by their owne. Hereupon the interpreters
of the Ciuill law do agreeGlo. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . & 
                     〈…〉
                   D. fol. 
                     〈…〉
                   n
                     •
                  min
                     •
                  us, pert
                     ••
                  bus relin suitur., that so long as
there is no question of the bodie, we are not to haue
regard to the name; and that disputation about
names, is to bee left vnto them who are obstinately
contentious.
            And this either declaration or chaunge of this

point of Common law, would not bee much vnlike
to that which was done in the beginning of Queene
Maries reigne. For, because in many ages before the
inuasion of the Normans, the souereigntie of state
had not been borne by a woman, some curious conceites,
hauing learned doubts out of leasure, brought
into question, whether the lawes which had passed
before vnder the name of King, should then bee of
force vnder the name of Queene. Whereupon a declaration
was made;2. Mar. 2. Par. 1. 
               that whatsoeuer statute or law doth
appoint, that the King of this realme shall or may haue, execute
and doe, as King, or doth giue any commoditie to the
King, or doth appoint any punishment of offenders, against
the dignitie of the King, the same, the Queene, being supreme
gouernesse, may by the same authoritie likewise haue,
exercise, execute, correct and doe, to all intents.
            
            By this meanes also another doubt may be sufficiently
secured, and that is, a possibilitie of alienation
of the Crowne of England to the line of Scotland in
case his Maiesties line should determine: for that, being
a new erected kingdom it must goe in the nature
of a purchase to y• next heire of his Maiesties fathers
side. Which, besides that it is against the naturall order
of succession, which is obserued by all nations, in
questions for discent of Crownes; besides that it is
contrary to the Ciuill lawes, whereby the law of nations
is chiefly declared; besides that the peculiar law
of England in this point, if it be cleere frō question, is
neither hard nor incōuenient to be changed, seemeth
also so vnlike to come to passe, that it appeareth a
vaine thing to busie our thoughts with feare of it.
But to men setled in suspition, doubts doe daily multiplie;
and nothing is considered and cast, nothing

nourished with more sweete delight than difficulties
and dangers. All those inconueniences are set in
view, which ielousie or feare can any waies stirre vp,
which suffereth not them to see, much lesse to expect
or hope for those benefits, whereof in reason
they might stand assured. In their mindes lie vanquished
that forwardnesse and force which men in
counsaile should especially expresse; and whatsoeuer
their trauailing thoughts doe suspect, the same
doe they most certainly expect.
         
         
            CHAP. XIIII. Of other obiections concerning matter of state forreine, or
matter of entercourse.
            
               THe obiections which concerne matter of
contract or commerce with other Princes
and Common-wealths, are more easie
to be answered; because they are not
ruled by the peculiar law of any countrey, but by
the common law of Nations.Bald. 1. cons. 263. 372. 2. 14. 3. 218. 5. 188. 352. Alc. 3. cons. 36. 5. 12. 18. 105. 8. 49. 54. For so doe Baldus and
Alciate affirme, that contracts betweene Princes are
not stricti iuris, but bonae fidei; that they do altogether
reiect scrupulous interpretations, and are not to bee
taken, either in rigorous or strict termes, or els in subtill
sense of positiue law, (vnder which colour wee
doe often erre) but according to the law of Nations,
according to naturall equitie, boni viri arbitrio, according
to a good mans conscience, according to plaine
and direct meaning, according to right and vpright
iudgement: that they are farre from all fine fetches
and streines, much more from malice and plaine deceit:

that they intend no subtiltie, but simplicitie,
which Baldus saith,Bald. L. 5. de iust. is the best interpreter of the law
of nations. For the law of nations obserueth onely
the simple truth;Bar. C. de his qui in pit. lo. ord su. Ceph. cons. 713. the simple truth onely is followed
by good and faithfull meaning:Ceph. cons. 10. and no interpretation
in this case is taken for good, which doth not
sound well to common mens eares. This same is by
diuers others also very largely affirmed.Dec. cons. 4. 147 Hott. cons. 15. Decian. 3. cons. 11. chas. ca. p. 5. 10. 27. 
               Decius, Hottoman,
Decianus and Chassaneus doe write, that all
contracts with princes and common-wealthes are
bonae fidei.
               c. Iurisgentium. dist. 1. Cic. 1. de offic. & 2. de orat. The Canon law forteth contracts of
leagues, of truce and of peace, as pertaining to the
law of nations. Cicero saith, that equitie is the obiect
of Foecial law; that it pertaineth to lawyers to weigh
words and syllables, and not to the professors of militarie
simplicitie, which is so many waies fauored
by the law.Tac. Agric. Alci. 5. consil. 40. 
                     •
                   Guic. 5. Sleid. 19. It is free and secure (saith Tacitus, and
after him Alciate) and farre from the cunning practises
of courts of Plea. And therefore Guicciardine
and Sleidan doe worthely blame Charles the fifth,
and Lewes King of France, because they brought interpretations
of words, and of contracts, which were
more fit for Lawyers, than for a Prince.
            So then, by these opinions thus grounded it cannot
hold true, that vpon change of name, leagues,
treaties, forren freedomes of trade and trafficke, forren
contracts may bee drawne into question, and
made subiect to quarrell and cauillation: which is
further expressely denied by Panormitane in these
words.In C. tuanos. n. 3 de spons. 
               Contrahens in propria persona, efficaciter obligatur,
licet mutauerit sibi nomen; & est ratio, quia nomina
sunt inuenta significandorum hominum gratia. Sed ex
quo constat de corpore non est curandum de nomine. He

that contracteth in his proper person is effectually bound,
although he shall change his name: the reason is, because
names were inuented to signifie men. But where the body
is certaine, we must not haue regard to the name. And
Vlpian,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   D. de conlia
                     •
                  . 
                     〈◊〉
                  . one of the authors of the Ciuill law in like
manner aduoweth: If we disagree about the name, but
the body is certaine, there is no doubt but the contract
holdeth good.
            
            And therefore if any Prince shall vse pretence of
change in name, as a leap from his contract, whether
of consederation or commerce, hee exposeth
himselfe thereby both to the hatred and reuenge of
other Princes, as one that violateth the law of nations.
His fact shall be no more either allowed or followed,
than was that of Pericles;
               
                  
                     •
                  ront. 4. ca. 7. who, hauing passed
a promise of safetie to his enemies, Si ferrum deponerent,
slew them for that they had iron buttons vpon
their caslocks. Or that of the Plataeenses; who,Thucid. lib. 2. hauing
couenanted to restore certaine prisoners, deliuered
them slaine. Or that of Alexander,
               Diod. 17. Polye. 4. At. 4. 
                     •
                  lut. Ale
                     •
                  . Lon. who, hauing
conditioned safe departure to certaine souldiers
which had held a citie against him, slew them when
they were a little vpon their way. Or that of the Romanes;
who,V
                     •
                  len. Max. 7. ca. 
                     •
                  . hauing couenanted that they should
take halfe the ships of Antioc
                     •
                  us, brake all his ships in
pieces, and tooke halfe of euery ship. Or that of
those Romanes; who,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                being discharged by Anniball
vpon oath to returne, if other captiues should not
be deliuered for them, supposed themselues to be
free of their saith, for that presently after they were
departed out of the camp, they returned againe, as
hauing forgotten to take something with them.Stro. 
                     •
                  . Poly. 6. 7. 
                     〈…〉
                  . Or
that of Agnon, Cleomenes, and of the Thracians; who,

hauing made a surcease of armes for certaine daies,
attempted hostilitie against their enemies in the
night.Polye. 6. Or that of the Graecians; who, hauing bound
themselues for deliuerie of ships, deliuered them
without ruthers, oares or sailes. Or that of the Locrians;
who, hauing contracted perpetuall peace, so
long as they should tread vpon that earth, and beare
those heads vpon their shoulders, shaking forth
some earth which they had priuily put within their
shooes, and casting away those heads of onions,
which they had laid vpon their shoulders, they
brake sodainly into warre against those who by this
abuse had been made secure.Herod. 4. Polye. 7. Or that of Ariandes and
the Persians; who, hauing couena
                  •
               ed friendship so
long as that earth should stand, by sincking the earth
whereupon they stood, which had been of purpose
made hollow before, they did beare themselues discharged
of their oath.Pont. li. de. V. O. Or that of the Perusini in
Italy; who, hauing made peace with the Pope so
long as they should beare de vite in their bodies,
which word in the Italian language signifieth
both life, and vine, hauing cast away certaine vinebranches
which they did beare secretely in their bosomes,
they surprised the Pope with vnexpected
armes.
            These and the like subtill and sophisticall sleights
haue alwaies been equalled to flat falsehood and violation
of faith; they haue alwaies been esteemed
beneath the degree of any base rayling or reproch.
And whosoeuer doth vse such auoydances and
shifts, they are neuer to be held assured in faith; because
they will not want one euasion or other, when
occasion shall serue for their aduantage. But (as I

said before) in contracts of this high nature,Bald. 5. cons. 305. it is both
dishonourable and vniust not onely to inferre fraudulent
interpretations, but to inforce contentiōs vpon
any strict poynts of law,3. Cons. 102. which (as Decianus saith)
in fauourable contracts are neuer regarded: because
by too much subtiltie they doe often ouerthrow the
truth of meaning.Dec. 3. con. 84. For, nothing is more contrarie
vnto truth, than ouer sharpe subtiltie vpon words.
            Of no lesse truth can it be that the Kings precedence
before other Christian kings (which is gouerned
by antiquitie of kingdomes and not by greatnesse)
may by this change of lawes be endaungered,
and place turned last, because it is the newest. For, by
the common law of nations (the equitie whereof is
held to be most liuely expressed in the Ciuill law)
so long as the people doe remaine the same, and
loose no point of their libertie and honor, there can
be no inward change, whether of name, of seate, of
title, or of forme of gouernment, whereby the dignitie
of their state may be endaungered. Of name I
haue sufficiently written before. And concerning
change of state, it was the same Empire whose principall
seate was at Rome, and at Constantinople, and at
Rauenna, and at Prage. And although it looseth in
one part and gaineth on the other; although it be
remoued thereby out of the originall seate, yet doth
it remaine the same Empire.L. 64. D. de euict. Euen as a field remaineth
the same which looseth vpon one part by alluuion
of waters, and winneth vpon the other: or as
it remaineth the same sea, which leaueth one part of
earth, and possesseth another: or as it remaineth the
same riuer which doth altogether change the channell.
            
               
For change of title we haue an eui
                  •
               ent example
in the countrie of Bohemia. For, when that forme of
election of the Germaine Emperor was established
which is yet in vse, the Duke of Bohemia had authoritie
to giue his voyce, in case the other sixe Electors
should be equally deuided. Afterward, the Duke
was aduanced to the title of a King; which was held
no such alteration in that state, that his priuiledg
should be thereby either renewed or lost.
            The greatest doubt is concerning change in
forme of gouernment; because vpon change in
forme,L. 9. §. si quis. D. ad exhib. the substance is alwaies esteemed diuers. But
this is not true in accidentall formes; it is true in that
thing onely whereof the substantiall forme doth
perish. When the Kings were expelled out of Rome,
the Monarchicall forme of that gouernment did
change, and thereupon the Monarchicall Empire of
Rome did cease; but the Empire of Rome did not
therefore cease. The Romane Empire did alwaies
remaine, although the gouernment thereof was
sometimes regal, sometimes popular, and sometimes
mixt: although the soueraigntie was transferred,
from Kings to Consuls, and from Consuls to Emperors;
and although these Emperours did hold,
sometimes by succession, and sometimes by election;
and that sometimes of the souldiers, and sometimes
of the Senate, and now of the seuen Electors.
The forme of gouernment which was accidentall,
did change; but the substantiall forme of Empire
did remaine.
            But then doth a kingdome or Empire dissolue,
when it loseth the libertie; and then is a state newly

erected, when it beginneth to bee held free, either
from subiection or dependancie vpon any other. Of
the first Vlpian speaketh:L. 209. D. de in. reg. 
               Seruitutem mortalitati comparamus;
We compare seruitude vnto death. Of the second
Modestinus:
               L. 4. D. de ca. mi. 
               Eo die incipit statum habere, cum manumittitur;
State and libertie begin together. So did all
those kingdomes and common-wealths cease, saith
Decianus,
               Dec. 3. con. 19. which were oppressed by the armes of the
Romanes: and so were those states newlie erected,
which could free themselues from that subiection.
            And in truth by no other meanes a state can bee
said to perish or cease, according to the law of Nations,
but either by yeelding it selfe into subiection,
or else by being possessed with the power and armes
of externall enemies. But this faileth againe in three
cases.Arg. l. 1. de flu. & l. 1. de riu. Alc. 5. cons. 69. First, when any part is retained free. For that
kingdome or Empire ceaseth not, whereof any parcell
is held at libertie; because the least part of a
kingdome (either for hope of restitution, or for some
other fauourable respect) doth conserue both the
name and right of the whole: euen as the right of a
Colledge or of an Vniuersitie may be retained in
one,Bald. in Prooem. D. & l. 9. de leg
                     •
                  . 
                     •
                  . 
                     •
                  an. Ca. l. 22. de leg. 1. although in one it cannot be erected. Another
is, if a kingdome be ouerrunne and spoyled by enemies,
but they depart againe, not holding the same
in their possession and power. For this is as if a field
should be surrounded with waters,Inst. de rer. diu. which in short
time falling away, leaueth it in the same condition
and state as it was before.
                  
                     •
                  lin. lib. 2. cap. 103. And so the riuers Niger
and Tigris doe remaine the same, although they run
many miles vnder ground. The third is, when the

Victorer pretendeth title to the state, and intendeth
onely to reigne as King.
         
         
            CHAP. XV. Of other obiections which concerne honour
and reputation.
            
               NOw, the last sort of obiections which concerne
honour and reputation, are full of
very emptie easinesse: and seeme to serue
rather for shew, than for strength; to supplie
number, but nothing at all to encrease weight.
These are, that by this change, the glorie and good
acceptance of the English name and nation, will be
in forreine parts obscured: that no worldly thing is
deerer to men than their name, as we see in great families,
that men disinherit their daughters to continue
their name; much more in states, where the
name hath been famous and honourable: that the
contracted name of Britaine, will bring into obliuion
the names of England and Scotland: that whereas
England in the stile is now placed before Scotland, in
the name of Britaine, that degree of prioritie and
precedence will bee lost: and that the change of
name will be harsh in the popular opinion, and vnpleasing
to the countrey.
            Of all these obiections, the more I think, the lesse
I know what to thinke. For as I can suspect nothing
lesse than want of iudgement in those that cast these
inconueniences, so doe they appeare vnto me neither
so certaine, nor of such qualitie, that for auoyding

of them wee should omit an aduantage, both
present, and of great consequence and weight. Although
the 7. kingdomes of the Saxons were comprised
vnder the name of England, yet their seuerall
names do still, & are still like to remaine: and can we
imagine that the names of England and of Scotland,
both more famous and of longer continuance, will
suddenly be either worne out or obscured? Cannot
the name be altered, but it must also be forgotten?
Or can wee account the name of Britaine either so
new or so harsh, which hath continued to bee the
name, generally of the whole Iland, but more specially
of the parts of England and Wales, euer since before
the inuasion of the Romanes? Or shall we contend
for generall precedence with them, with whom
we intend, or at least pretend desire to be one? Can
prioritie and vnitie stand together? Some (I grant)
vpon fond affection to their name haue disinherited
their daughters; but they were neuer allowed therein,
by any well grounded opinion. S. Augustine saith,
If any man disinheriteth his daughter and maketh another
his heire,
               Alium quaerat consultorem, non Augustinum. 
               let him seeke what Counsailer he can, he shall
neuer be aduised thereto by Augustine. Assuredly, I feare
that it is with vs, as with some good women, who are
often sick, forsooth, but in faith they cannot well tell
where. Our fancies runne, that something will be amisse;
but neither can it be well discerned by others,
neither is it fully perhaps resolued by our selues.
Things of greatest suretie breede many doubts in
mindes that are determined to beleeue the contrary;
whereas, in matters of this nature, all points are not
alwaies cast into question which may possibly happen;

for that many inconueniences are in imagination
onely; many are, either dissolued by time, or by
industrie auoided: much lesse are we bound to listen
vnto those, who confounding feare with discretion,
or else couering some corrupt conceit vnder the
name of foresight and preuention, doe stretch their
thoughts beyond probabilitie, and make all doubtfull
accidents as if they were certaine.Liu. c. lib. 22. 
               Agendo audendoque
res Romana creuit, non his segnibus consilijs, quae timidi
cauta vocant: By doing and by daring (saith Liuie)
the affaires of Rome tooke encrease; not by these dull and
heauie counsailes which timorous men doe terme warie. A
wit too curious in casting of doubts for the most part
hurteth; and hee that omitteth an opportunitie present
vpon supposed dangers (if they be not both certaine
and also neere) shall neuer aduance his owne
aduantage.
            King Henry the seuenth aimed at this Vnion, when
he married his eldest daughter Margaret into Scotland.
King Henry the eight and all the chiefe Nobilitie
of the realme expressely desired it, when they laboured
to haue a mariage knit betweene Edward and
Mary, the two yong Princes of both the kingdoms.
In solliciting this mariage, the English made offer to
communicate to the Scots the liberties and priuileges
of their state, and to be ioyned with them in the
common name of Britaine; as appeareth by a letter
of the Duke of Somerset yet extant. For not obtaining
this mariage, they led an Armie into Scotland,
and ioyned fight with the Scots in Muscelborough
fields. These attempts not succeeding; our euill fortune
hauing frustrated these good endeuours; loe

here, our felicitie now offereth vs to kisse her cheeks;
our wish, loe here; and that which lately neither by
amitie nor by armes we were able to effect, loe here,
is freelie presented vnto vs. Seeing therefore our
good fortune hath now concurred with the good
fauour and inclination of men, in opening this opportunitie
vnto vs, shall wee deale so farre against all
good office and expectation, as not to seeme content
with our blisse? Shall wee all shut, or rather pull out
our eyes, because a few doe not seeme to see? Or
shall we, like some men, when a great good happeneth
vnto them, thinke our selues in a dreame, and
not haue power to taste our good? Shall wee burie
benefits with suspitions? Shall wee labour, with
counsailes fearefull and broken to obscure, or with
dregges of doubts and iealousies to defile our owne
glorie? Must we be entreated (like mad men) to be
good to our selues?
            I feare nothing lesse in vs, than such want of wisedome;
I feare nothing lesse, than that in mindes so
well instructed,Pessimum veri affectus venenum sua cuique vtilitas. Ta. Histo. particular respects (the bane, as Tacitus
speaketh, of true affection) should not be farre inferiour
to the consideration of common greatnesse
and glorie. Onely I wish by way of warning, that we
bee not too much amazed at euerie accidentall
change, fearing wee know not what, like a Deere,
which then looketh most about when he commeth
to the best feede. Or that we be not more regardfull
of light harmes that are but in shew, than mindfull
to foresee, least with losse of assured benefits, great
dangers also resolue into effects; least by obstinate
confirmation of our first aduice such firebrands of

faction bee kindled amongst vs, as cannot be quenched
but in the bloud of the state. It is good to ioyne
action to opportunitie. Time is thankfull to such as
will apprehend it, and fauoureth them with occasions
conuenient: but it was not vnfitly portrayed
by Lycippus, with Hindes feete, and Eagles wings,
hairie before, and smooth behinde; in token that if
it be not taken when it comes, it cannot bee ouertaken
when it is gone. Fortune is seruiceable to those
that are forward: but they that are either carelesse
or slow when aduantage is offered, doe seldome
manage their affaires to an honourable issue.
            For this cause confidence for the most part is lesse
hurtfull to affaires, than faint feare, which vnder the
faire names of foresight and preuention, looseth many
benefits, which either our owne felicitie, or the
industrie of other men presenteth vnto vs. It beareth
shew of slow and sober warinesse; but it is often
supported with the insolencie and rashnesse of
turbulent spirits, which partly by incapacitie, and
partly by particular respects, hold all things in confusion.
For timorousnesse and insolencie are commonly
ioyned in the same subiect. It is not foresight
but feare to prouide beyond probabilitie: but to
cast many inconueniences, either contemptible,
or but in shew, doth sauour of some other passion
of worse nature.
            I will not proceede to charge any man with artificiall
doubling, first in casting forth a light labour
for Vnion, and then in disposing and dispersing these
obiections against it: I will not (howsoeuer prouoked)
either aggrauate or apply the qualitie of this

dealing. But againe I will aduise (for I thinke it not
vnfit to be repeated) that wee shew not our selues
too subtill in suspitions; making our owne fantasies
the true measure of all our actions. That by moderation
of mind we rather seeke encrease of friends,
than by new attempts to procure daily new enemies;
by reason whereof in the end we must be, either
masters of all, or scourged by all: and
which of these is likest to happen it
may be easily coniectured, if we
be not set to deceiue
our selues.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   