
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  An Expostulation
or complaynte
agaynste the
blasphemyes of a franticke
papyst of Hamshyre.
Cōpiled by Iohan
Bale.
                  
                     Mathew .xxiii
Wvo be vnto you Scribes and
Pharises, Hypocrites, that shut
vp the kingdom of heauē before
men. For neyther go ye in youre
selues, neyther suffer you anye
other to enter.
               
            
            Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum
solum. Per septēnium.
         
         
            
            
            ¶To the ryght hygh and
myghtie Prynce, Iohā Duke of
Northumberlande, Lorde greate Maistre
of the Kinges most honourable housholde,
and Lorde presydent of his Maiestyes
most honourable preuye Counsell,
hys most humble and faythfull seruaunt
Iohan Bale wysheth the
fauour of god, encrease of honour,
longe lyfe, and prosperouse
helthe both
of soule and
bodye.
            
               COnsyderyng
in your noble
grace (moste
Honourable
Duke) the
same mightie
feruent, & religiouse
zele in
Gods cause,Zele.
whych I afore
tyme by
readynge the scriptures haue dylygently
marked in Moyses the seruaunt of
God, I haue vrgently bene moued vndre
God and our kynge to seke your earnest
ayde for the same. The rage at thys
presēt is horryble and fearce, whych the

stought sturdy satellytes of Antichrist in
dyuerse partes of ye realme, chefely within
Hamshire.Hamshire, do blustre abroade in their
mad furyes to blemyshe the Euāgelycal
veryte of the Lorde now reuelated. An
intollerable grefe it is to their vncircumcysed
hartes, to beholde the glytterynge
toyes of superstycyouse ydolatry and hipocritycall
papystrye remoued frō thys
earthe of Englande, by the kynges wurthie
maiestie and hys most honourable
counsell,Relygyon. and Gods true relygyon again
restored. That oure sayde seconde & most
valeaūt Iosias, hath thus pourged hys
Iuda (hys Englande I meane) frō the
abhomynable buggeryes and ydolatries
of the great Baal Peor of Rome, earnestly
sekynge for the true God of Dauid
hys forefather,ii. Paaral. xxxiiii. to the most lyuely example
of all other prynces, their vngratyouse
and noughtie eyes are not a lyttle
offended. That hys ymages, rellyckes,
roodes, torches, candels, copes, ashes,
palmes, waxe, water, oyle, creame, and
holy bread, that hys bulles, bedes, belles,Toyes.
bablinges, masses, purgatory, processions,
confessyons, exorcysmes, hallowynges,
shauynges, gresynges, sensyngs,
slauerynges, slumberynges, and a great
sort of Popysh toyes more, are bānyshed
hens, in conscyence they are dysquyeted.
            Not all vnlyke to the grosse wytted

Gergesytes, they wolde gladly ye Christ
were sumwhat further of.Mat. viii. Yea, they earnestly
wyshe, that he wolde peaceably departe
from their coastes, least he went about
it, to drowne their swyne for euer,
whome they all contrarye to gods ordynaunce,
haue so frankely in al beastlynesse
maynteyned. They can not awaye
with the precyouse lyght of Christes holi
Gospell, their eyes are so sore.Ihon. iii. Neyther
maye they broke it, to knowe their saluatyon
alone to be reposed in Christ Iesu,Colloss. iii.
so blynde are their folyshe hartes. Neyther
maye they abyde it, that God is only
to be worshypped in sprete and veryte,
so superstycyously minded are they.Ihon. iiii. But
darkenesse they iudge lyght, & the lyght
very darkenesse. That is swete,Esay. v. they
thynke sower, & that is good they deme euyll.
Suche are now a dayes ye peruerse
and frowarde iudgementes of men vngodly.
The most christen reformacyon of
thys churche of Englande,Mockers. whych is to
other natyons a most wurthie spectacle,
so they very turkyshely deryde & mocke.
At the dayly suppressyons of their blasphemouse
and beastly papystryes,Nume. xxi they
create, they frowne, they grynde their
tethe, and for anger wexe wode. With ye
carnall Israelytes they hate & abhorre
the celestyall Manna of Christes Gospell,i. Iohn. ii.
because it neyther nurrysheth the

lust of the fleshe, neyther fedeth the concupyscence
of the eyes, nor yet mainteyneth
the pryde of thys lyfe.Nume. xi. To the greasy
fatt pottes of Egipte, wold they gladly
returne agayne, and become subiectes
vnder the great Romish Pharao, so that
they myght be fedde with his olde stynkynge
cucumbers, melons, lekes, onyons,
and garlyke, whych are hys vnprofytable
tradycyons.
            Malycyously and rebellyously do thei
now resyst the manyfest truthe of Gods
wurde,Rebelles. and wyll by no maner of meanes
consent therunto, although their owne
conscyences both accuseth and condemneth
them for it. And all is bicause they
wyll heare of no repentaunce, neyther
yet agre to amendemēt of their most wicked
liues.Papystes, They bragge they boast, they
dreme, thei dote, thei fume they face, thei
grunte they grudge, they iangle they iest
they mocke they mowe, they scoffe they
scorne, they ruffle they rage, wyth daggerand
with fyste, and all to stoppe the
swete blastes of the scriptures,Apo. vii. least they
shulde clearly blowe awaye their old Romysh
sorceryes, as duste from the face of
thys earthe. Neyther is it any great wō
               dre
vnto vs,Psalme▪ i. to beholde these terryble turmoylynges
of the deuils furyouse members,
for those Romysh Pharisees leuen▪
               Luke. xii.
consyderynge he is that roarynge Lyon

whych busyly seketh whome he maye deuoure.i. Peter. v. Genesi. iii. Iob. ii. Exody. vii. Psa. lxxvii
He fraudolētly deceiued our first
mother Eue Greuously he afflycted the
pacyent mā Iob. He made Pharaos sorcerers
to withstande both Moyses & Aaron.
Dauid ryght sore complayneth of
vexatyons by wicked angels. Who was
a more cruell aduersary to Iesus Iosedech
in reparynge the temple,Zach. iii. than was
Sathan? And though he preuayled not
in hys .iii. temptatyons agaynst Christ
our redemer,Math. iiii. yet procured he hys owne
dysciple Iudas trayterouslye to betraye
hym,Ihon. xviii the clergye of the Iewes malycyously
to accuse hym, and the Romish magistrates
most wrongefully to condēpne
hym. Saynt Paule geueth vs good warnynge,ii. Cor. xi.
that Sathan to deceyue vs, can
transforme hym selfe into the Angel of
lyght. and telleth vs also, that we must
alwayes haue sumwhat a do with ye minysters
of darkenesse.Ephesi. vi.
            
            In the prymatyue churche,Idolles▪
                when the
wurshyppynge of Idolles ones ceased,
at the prechynges of the Apostles and other
vertuouse fathers. The prestes whiche
had lyued by those Idolatryes, prouoked
both the prynces and commō people
to persecute them to deathe,Priestes. making
them to beleue, that it was neuer a mery
worlde sens they were suffered to preach
This hath both Eusebins in Ecclesiastica

historia, and also Tertulianus in Apologetico.
Thus haue the wholsō wyndes
of heauenly doctryne, bene alwayes disturbed,Apoca. vii.
letted and stopped, & theyr lyuely
vapours oppressed. First by Sathan ye
deuyll, then by the Iewysh and Popysh
clergye, then by superstycyouse monkes
and sophystycall scole doctours, & nowe
last of all by vnlearned loyterers and desperate
ruffyanes, as he of whom I haue
written thys treatise folowynge,Braban. is one.
Of thys latter sort, are some become farmers
of benefyces, some blynde brokers
in ye lawe, some scribes, some pharysees,
some flatterers for fauer, some lyngerers
for lucre, some cloynars for aduauntage
menpleasers, and make shyftes. These
gyue the preachers most vncōly reportes
to deface their godly preachynges,
                  
                     •
                  aplers. and
most odyble names, to brynge them in cō
               tempte
of the people. Their croked counsels,
persuasyons, illusyons, prouocacyons,
and promyses of ayde in wythstandynge
the mynysters, are suche, for a welthie
lyuynge in ydelnesse, that the truth
of the Lorde can take no place▪ These
are as were Elymas the sorcerer, Hymeneus,Actes. xiii. i. Timo. i. ii. Timo. ii. ii▪ Tim. iiii
Philetus, and Alexander the copper
smythe, enemyes of all truthe, withstanders
of all ryghtousnesse, and chyldren
of ye deuyl. Men of corrupt myndes
resysters of the veryte, and lewde as cō
               cernynge

faythe ii. Tim. iii. And al these
are set a wurke by the popes late masmō
               gers,
by olde pylgrymage goers,Styngers. by crafty
Cathedralystes, mynster men, and collygeners,
lokinge yet for a daye of mayntenaunce
in their olde sorceryes.
            And as for our partes, we are not so ignoraunt
of the rules of Christes relygyon,
but we knowe that hys flocke of true
beleuers,Beleuers. hath had alwaies their wolues
Math x. their blasphemers, persecuters,
and slaunderers, that they myght bryng
fourth godly frutes in pacyēt sufferaūce
For loke what the threshynge flaile dothLuke. viii.
to the corne (S. Gregory saith) the fyery
fornace to the golde,Gregorye. and the polishinge
fyle to the yron, the same doth aduersyte
to the ryghtouse man, for it maketh hym
perfyght. Wicked persons are in all places
to be tollerate of priuate men (I say
not maye) because there canne be no Abel,Abel.
vnles he be vexed of some maliciouse
Cain. We ought therfor of congruēce very
paciently to suffre them, but yet not
in all pointes to holde our peace. We are
not bounde altogyther to beare them in
their mischefes No,Christ. Christe neuer ded so
neither yet the Prophetes afore him, nor
his Apostles after him. But wyth stomacke
(as occasiō gaue it) they inueihed
against them, and mightely reproued thē
If any man hurte the witnesses of God

(S. Iohan saith)Iohan. he must be kylled. Apo.
xi. Either must he be consumed of the rite
that cometh out of their mouthes,Esay. xi Heb. iiii▪
                or els
by the .ii. edged swerd of the sprete, which
both are the wurde of God. For in their
handes haue they swerdes (saith Dauid)
that are sharpe on both sides. Psa. Cxlix.
manfully to stande vp, for faythe, for
truthe, for religion, for obedience to kinges,
for iust beleuers, and for the glory of
the liuinge God,Sharpe against the manifest enemies
of all godlinesse. And with ye double
sharpenesse of those swerdes, shall
they eyther conuert them or dampne thē.
Care not (saith. S. Paule) for the hate of
your aduersaries, for vnto them is it a token
of perdicion, and to you a most manifest
signe of saluacion. Phi. i. Doubt thē
not (saith Esaye) neither feare them at
all,Christ. but prayse the Lord of hostes, let him
be your feare & drede, for he is the stone yt
they stomble at, and the rocke that they
fall vpon. Esa. viii. for no confusion can
come vpon them that put their full trust
in God. Dan. iii.
            Now is there nothynge els behynd
(most honourable Duke) but that your
excellent grace vndre god and our kingeId ducem,
set to your fauourable hāde, with the rest
of his most honourable counsell. If Abbas
Ioachim, Nicolas Lyra, Iohā Tylneye,
and other of our latter expositours

hath taken great Constantine the Emprour,Constantinus.
for that other angell in. S. Iohās
reuelacion, which ascended from the risynge
of the sunne for that age. Apoca.
vii. Sebastianus Meyer and Conradus
Pellicanus not all dyssentynge from the
same, because he had than brought the
christen churche to a quyetnesse, all foren
tyrannies suppressed. What shall let me
to thinke as much of our present Constā
               tine,
kinge Edward the .vi. for our time?Edwarde vi. Kynge.
consyderynge that the hande of God is
not yet abbreuiated? Esa. lix. He cōmeth
as wele from the rysinge of the sunne, as
he ded. He hathe as wele hys autoryte of
God, and is now a christen Magistrate.
as he was than. So wele is he kynge of
thys realme, and a Brytayn borne,A Kyng. as he
was. As wele is he gyuen to good letters
and careth for the christen relygyon, as
he ded.Godly. As wele hath he set Christes gospell
at lyberte, from the daunger of tyrauntes,
and by proclamacion commaū
               ded
it frely to be preached, as he ded So
wele hath he made a generall desturctiō
of supersticiouse Idolles and other abhominations,
as ded he. As Constantynes
face in all hys coynes of Golde and
syluer was erected towardes heauen, by
report of Eusebius in vit a Constantini,Libro. ii▪
               
so is the vysage of hys harte eleuated vn
to God in all hys daylye studies & princelye

procedynges, if the good frutes maye
shewe what the tree is. Than maye oure
most vertuouse and godly king Edward
the .vi.Angell. for thys age so wele resemble that
good angel of God, as mighte our great
Constantyne for that age.
            Consyderynge therfor (ryght wurthie
and excellēt Duke) that he hath by that
hygh offyce,Apoca. vii. the seale of the lyuynge god
and is declared a prynce of power by hys
lyuely wurde. Roma .xiii. to make all his
subiectes the true seruauntes of God by
the Gospell, lete the malyciouse rable of
Antichristes ruffyanes, by your myghtie
admynystracyon vnder hym be forbydden
any more to noye. Apo. vii.Restraynt. Lete thē
be restrayned from doynge suche vyolēce
rauyne, and excesse, as they haue done
now of late to Christes mynysters in Hā
               shire.
Lete them be inhybyted of dagger
drawynge, and of fyste lyftynge in the open
stretes, whan no man hath ones offē
               ded
thē. Lete them leaue their pullynges
by the bearde and bosom in the presence
of people,Violence. starynge like wylde oxen, whā
no euyl at all is ment to thē. Lete thē no
longer bragge afore the iustyces in the open
sessyons, of castinge their gloue and
of wagynge battayle, vncorrected, whan
nothynge is eyther done,
                  
                     •
                  agynge. sayde, or yet
thought agaynst thē. Lete them be wele
stayed from ragynge and raylynge, oblocutynge

and slaunderynge, withoute
cause reasonable, for vpholdyng the wicked
tradycyons of Antichrist. Permyt
them no longer to counsell in corners,Councell. to
haue wycked persuasyons, and to drawe
people after them. Lete them from hensfourth
be charged vnder payne of sore ponyshment,
not lycēcyously to do all their
lewde lykynges, as they haue done hertofore,
lyke men that are lawles.Desyre▪
                We desyre
not the euyll of thys frowarde sort,
but their good. We couete not their losse
but their winning, not their vtter destruccion,
as they do ours, but their spedye amendement,
if such angels of reprobacyon
as they are maye amende, whych I
scarsely beleue. Chefely our request is,Request▪
                to
lyue in peace by them as in Esaye is promysed,
that the Lambe shuld dwell with
the Wolf, the Gote lye by the Leopard,
the Cowe fede with the Beare,Peace. the Bullocke
company with the Lion, the Child
playe with the Serpent, and yet none of
them shulde hurte the other. Esa. xi.
            Hys angelicall voice hath bene hearde
al ready by most earnest proclamacyons,A voyce.
ouerall hys domynyons of Englande,
Wales, and Irelande, as was the loude
voyce of great Constantyne ouer Aegipt
Grece, Persye, Asye, and Italy, by most
straight commaundementes, that Christ
shulde be wurshypped, hys holy Gospell

preached, the mynysters therof both prouyded
for and honoured, and all Idoll
worshyppynges to be vtterly abolyshed.
Lete it now therfor be obeyed of all subiectes
without contradyctyon,Obediēce, no wylde
wytted ruffyane permytted from hens
fourth so stubbernely to withstande it.
Commaunde thys gentyll west winde to
haue styll hys plesaunt passage & frindely
fre course without anye restraynt orApoca. vii.
cruell impedymente of those angels of
darkenesse, that the earth, sea, and trees
maye wholsomly be refreshed therwith.
Gracyously suffre (as ye haue done hitherto)
all sortes of people to haue knowledge
df the Gospell.Verytye Lete the veryte of
God, so sounde in the eares of all men,
that they may be marked with the sprete
of Christe, and neuer denye hym for any
vexacyon. Thys poore Expostulacyon,
am I your poore oratour, so muche
the boldar to dedycate to your hyghnesse
that I haue alwayes knowne the same
a moste myghtye,Experiēce. zelouse, and ardente
supporter, maynteyner, and defender of
Goddes lyuely wurde. Ryghte humbly
besechynge your excellente grace, to accepte
the small gyfte thereof, as the simple
presente of that poore seruaunte of
yours, whyche hathe alwayes borne
bothe you and all yours a most faythful
harte. The eternall father of our Lorde

Iesus Christe, whose inuyncyble veriteVerytye
your grace hathe hytherto most feruently
fauoured, vouchsafe prosperously to
preserue the same, with my ladyes grace
your most faythfull spouse, and all
your vertuouse and godly chyldren,
in contynuall helthe
and increase of honour,
to the glorye of hys
holy name.
Amen.
            
               iii. Reg. xl.
               If Israel (sayth the Lord) shall hold vpon
other goddes, and worship them. I wyl
cast hym out of my syght, and he shall be a
Prouerbe, and a fable amonge the nacions
And they that passe by shall maruel therof,
and shall hysse at hym.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶An Expostulation or
complaint agaynst the blasphemyes
of a frantyke papist of
Hamshire. Compiled by
Iohan Bale.
            
               
                  DAniel the mā
of desyres, &
Iohan Boauerges
or the
sonne of thō
                  dre,
bryngeth
me to remembraunce
of a
mouth that
vttered blasphemyes.A mouthe.
               
               Thys mouthe (sayth Daniel) spake presūptuouse
thynges. And hys horne (whych is ye
power that maynteyneth hym) made battayle
agaynst the sayntes, yea, and gote the
vyctory of them, tyll suche time as they had
the kyngedome in possessyon. Dan. vii. To
the Beast (sayth .S. Iohan)Dani. vii. was gyuen a
mouthe, that spake great thynges and blasphemyes.
And he opened that mouthe in
blasphemye agaynst God to blaspheme his
name, and hys tabernacle, and thē yt dwell
in heauen. And power was gyuen hym to
make warre with the sayntes, and to ouercome
them. Apoca. xiii.Apo. xiii. Not only is thys to

be verifyed vpon the Romysh Antichrist &
hys synneful synagoge of spiritual calcars
but also vpon suche pratlynge papystes as
are hys dayly maynteyners. For cōsequētly
it foloweth in the same reuelacyon of.Apoca, xvi. S
Iohan. And I sawe (sayth he) thre vncleane
spretes, lyke frogges come out of ye mouthe
of the dragon, and out of the mouthe of the
beast, and out of the mouthe of the false prophete,
and they are spretes of deuels. Apo.A Papyst.
xvi. Lo sir, the false prophete, whych is the
wycked papyst, is so wele touched here, as
is eyther the Beast or the Dragon.
               Now to thys frantyck papyst thā, whych
on the .xxix. daye of Decembre last past,Conuenticles. in
the house of a gentylman of hys affynyte
within Hamshire, beynge in the full heate
of hys frenesye, brast out into thys vnreuerent,
blasphemouse▪ and cōteptuouse talke
of the Kinges Maiestie and of hys mooste
godly procedynges.Blasphemy Alas poore chyld (sayd
he) vnknowne is it to hym, what actes are
made now a dayes. But whan he cometh
ones of age, he wyll se an other rule, and
hange vp an hondred of suche heretyke
knaues. Meanynge the preachers of our
tyme, and their maynteyners by lyke. For
at the same season he had most spyghtfully
rayled of one of thē, beynge absent,A rayler▪
                   whych

neuer in hys lyfe ded hym dysple asure, nether
in dede nor in wurd, that he was able
to burden hym wyth. The fyrst part of this
blasphemouse clause toucheth the kynges
hyghnes, the second hys honourable Coū
                  sell,
& the thyrd,Marke i
                        •
                     . the true ministers of Gods
wurde. By the fyrst is Gods name blasphemed,
by the second is his tabernacle yll spoken
of, and by the thyrd are they that dwell
in heauen contempned. But thys pernycyouse
poyson haue thys wycked papyst sucked
out of the vngraciouse pappes of hys
mother the synnefull synagoge of Rome,
whose deuylyshe nature hathe it alwayes
bene, to despyse those kinges yt are not her
mainteyners, to cōdēpne those magistrates
yt wyll not become her slaues,Cōdicions & to kill those
preachers that impugne her Idolatryes.
               Concernyng the fyrst. In that thys frantycke
papyst wyth poluted mouthe,A Chylde. reporteth
the kinges maiestie to be a poore Child,
he blasphemeth the name of God. For ther
is no power (S. Paule saythe) but it is of
God. And who so euer abuseth the power,
abuseth the ordinaunce of God to hys dāpnacion,
Rom. xiii.Take hede Beare no wicked hart to
thy kyng (sayth Salomon) neyther reporte
any euyl of the gouernours in thy malycyouse
anger. For if thou do, the birdes of the

ayre wyll discouer thy wickednes, Eccls. x
Double is the blasphemye of this furiouse
papyst against the kynges highnes, in that
he hath disdainously called him both poore
and a Childe, in contempt of his most christen
procedynges. Poore is as much to say
as contēptuouse,Poore. abiect, wretched, forsaken
myserable, or of such byrth as is nothynge
estemed. And so is it taken in diuers places
of the scriptures, whych all are farre vnsemyng
the maiestie of a kynge.A kyng. And wele is
it knowen to all the world, that neyther nature
for her parte, nor yet fortune for her
part, hath so left hym, hys hyghnes beynge
the naturall sonne of so noble a kyng as his
father was. Neyther is he destitute, but on
euerye syde most habundauntlye replenyshed
with the most graciouse giftes of god,Learned.
specially wyth all kindes of good learning
far aboue all hys progenytours, kynges of
thys imperiall regyon.
               Childishnes in a kyng, is reproued by ye
mouth of God, & giuen many times of him
to ye people as a cursse,Esay. iii. plage, or scourge for
their vnfaithful nes. I shal giue you childrē
(saith the Lord) to be your princes, & babes
shal haue rule ouer you. Esa. iii. That is, ye
shal haue for your disobediēce in neglectīg
my lawes & cōmaundemētes, mē to your

gouernours, that are dyssolute, rashe, wanton,
and carelesse, yea men vnexpert and vnexercysed
in pryncely affayres,Vnwyse. and men
whych wyll not regarde your cōmē welthe
but folow their owne lustes. Wo be to such
a land (sayth Salomon) as hath so chyldysh
rulers, and whose princes are early at their
bankettes. Eccls. x, These be those rulars
whose lyues are wanton, actes lycencyouse
and iudgementes babyshe, wherby theyr
commen welthes in the end,Ruyne, are brought to
confusyon. Yea, S. Hierome sayth, yt these
are suche worldly gouernours, as neglectynge
Gods holy preceptes, do set vp the
vayne tradycyons of men synnefull. And
though all these chyldysh wayes be detestable
in a kynge yet is not the chyldehode of
youthe in him to be reproued. For so might
kynge Iosias haue bene reproued,Iosias. whych
began to reigne in the .viii. yeare of hys age
iiii, Regum, xxii. and kynge Dauid discommended,Dauid.
for being the yongest of his brethrē
i. Reg, xvii, whose prayses are neuertheles
habundaunt in the scriptures,Ioas. Ioas beyng
but .vii. yeares old was a kyng also, and for
the tyme of his youth pleased God, what
though in hys age he ded otherwyse.ii. Par. xxiii
               
               In England here, kyng Hēry the, vi, was
but .viii. yeares old, king Hēry the third, ix,

yeares olde, and kynge Edwarde the third
scarse, xv. yeares of age,iii. Kynges when they were
crowned kynges, yet was there neuer chronycle
writer, nor yet honest, faythfull, and obedient
subiect, that euer called them poore
chyldren. But with reuerence and honour,
euen from the first daye of their reignes,
toke them alwayes for whole and persyght
kynges, lyke as the sacred Bible holdeth of
the afore named kinges,Iosias. Ioas & godly Iosias,
in the .vii. and .viii, yeares of their ages,
iiii, Re. xi, et. ii. Pa. xxxiiii. What shuld this
franctyck papyst here meane than, so blasphemously
to report our most noble & wurthie
kinge Edwarde ye .vi. in the, xv. yeare of
hys age, and, v, yeare of his reigne, wtout al
honour and reuerēce, but that he hath done
on ye vnshamefast face of hys whorysh mother,Babylon,
the monstruouse madame of Rome
whych is full of the names of basphemye,
Apo. xvii. Hym hath our eternal God most
graciously gyuē vnto vs in the latter age of
his noble father, not without euydent miracle,
and wyll preserue hym, no doubt, to his
owne glorye and welthe of thys realme, in
spyght of all hys popysh enemyes, if we be
not vnthākefull.Educacion. Hys wurthie educaciō in liberall
letters & godly vertues, & hys naturall
aptenesse in retaynyug the same, plēteously

declareth him to be no pore child, but
a manifest Salomō in princely wisdō. Hys
sober admonicions, & open exāples of godlines,
at this day sheweth him, mindfully to
prefer yt welth of his cōmēs, as wele gostly
as bodyly,Relygyon, aboue all forē
                  ▪ matters. Marke
what his maiestie hath done already in religiō,
in abolishing the most shameful idolatries
of Antichrist, besides his other actes
for publyque affayres, & ye shal find at this
day, no christen prynce lyke to hym.
               Now foloweth the secōd part of the blasphemouse
sētēce of this frātick papist, whiche
is,Blasphemy yt the actes put fourth now a dayes,
are vnknown to the kyng, & yt he wyl chāge
them whan he cometh of age. Thys not only
toucheth ye kinges wurthie maiestie, whiche
is gods hygh minister, in iudginge him
chyldysh, mutable, & inconstaūt, but also it
pearceth hys most honorable coūsel, which
are vnder him,Ioseph. as was Ioseph in Aegipt, ye
staies of his people. Ecc .xlix. as cōsentinge
to ye same, So is Gods tabernacle by him
blasphemed. For if yt tabernacle of God be
wt meane men, as, S, Iohā sayth, it is. Apo,
xxi. Moch more with the coūcel of a christē
king, which is gods high magestrate, & thei
his assistētes. They yt despise yt rulers (saith
the Apostle Iude) & speake euil of thē which
are in autoryte,Rulers. shal suffre yt vengaūce of eternall

fyre. Whan Michael yt archangell
stroue agaynst the deuyll,Sathan. & disputed about
the body of Moyses, he durst geue no rayling
sētence, but sayd. The Lord rebuke the,
But such (as is here this pratlynge papyst)
speake euyll of those thynges whych they
knowe not. And what thynges they knowe
naturally, as beastes which are wtout reasō
they corrupt in thē selues. Wo be vnto thē,
for they haue folowed ye way of Cain,Cain. & are
vtterly giuē to ye errour of Balaā for lucres
sake, and shal perish in the treason of Core.Iude .i,
               
               If Christ be in the middes, whē .ii. or, iii.
pryuate men be collected in his name, as he
saith, he is, Mat. xviii. much more amōge ye
faithful coūsel of so vertuouse & Christen a
king,Councell. Who cā thā deny them to be the tabernacle
of God? specially whā they wyth all
endeuer possyble, haue sought and yet daily
seketh, clerly to bānysh out of thys christen
realme, the manyfolde abhomynacyons of
Antichrist, or idolatryes without nombre.
Which he by his smoky locustes,Locustes, ye mōkes
and shauen prestes, hathe craftely planted
here, contynually from tyme to tyme, euer
sens the dayes of that wycked Emproure
Phocas.Phocas, Who can denye them (I saye yet
ones agayne) to be yt seyd tabernacle or chosen
māsyon of God, eyther that cōgregaciō
amonge whome he dwelleth by promesse.

Luke, x, et. Ioan. xiiii, Whan they so earnestly
labour, to place here in Englād, the
true relygyō agayne, aud to set vp hys true
worshippinges, as in the primatiue church
of the faythfull Bryttayues,Brytans. fyrste planted
by them ihat were hyther sente by Christes
Apostles,Asia. aud fashyoned after the perfight
rules of the .vii. churches in Asia, the filthy
corrupcions of those Romysh Idolatours,
in the power of hys wurde taken from vs.
If God doothe not dwell wyth them, that
thus dayly seketh hys glory, wyth whome
doth he dwell? Than hath thys arrogaunt
papyst wyth poluted mouthe,Blasphemy blasphemed
the tabernacle of God, iu reportyng them,
nowe to make actes wythoute the kynges
knowledge, concernyng relygyon, or els at
thys day to buylde that hereafter they wyl
breake. And thys that enemy hathe done to
brynge them in hate of the commen people,
as though not regardynge hys Maiestye,
they now went about not to establysh thē,
but deceyue them in the same.A Beast, Suche is the
mad frenesy of so brutysh a beast.
               But vnworthy are suche reprobate vessels
of so godly Magistrates. Of thys are
we certayne & sure,The Councell. so many as haue Gods
knowledge, roare those ragynge raylers
what them lusteth to the contrarye, wyth

lyes after theyr leude lykynges, that had it
not bene in the feare of God & theyr kinges
true obedyence agaynst the wycked Antichrist,
they coulde neuer haue propounded
so godly lawes. And hauyng God presently
assistent vnto thē, as all they haue which
seketh hys only glory,Gods honour. they can not be so far
to hys heauenly wyll contrariouse, as their
vyle report is, in the quarel of that horrible
monster. No, they are no suche wauerynge
reedes, as for a Christen commen welthe,
are thys yeare of one mynde, and the nexte
yeare wyll be of an other. No truly, it standeth
not so wyth the vnchaungeable wysdome
of Christes sprete,Constaun
                        •
                     
                   wherin they haue
earnestly wrought, for tyme of the prosperouse
raygne of our present Iosias. Theyr
foūdaciō haue they set vpō so sure a rocke,
euen vpon Gods wurd, that neither winde
nor water, stormy tempest, nor wether, can
ouerthrowe it, Math. vii,Strong. Neyther shall the
great gates of hell, nor yet the stronge power
of Sathan, euer preuayle agaynste it.
Math, xvi, Neyther yet the deuyls vnholy
vycar at Rome, wyth all hys curssynges &
cuniurynges, calkynges and coblynges,
brawlynges and bablinges, massinges and
mutterynges, Images and Idolles, pardons
and purgatory, with the deuil and all

of hys other sorceryes,Sorceries, whych these graceles
papistes cōtynually gapeth for yet ones
agayne, as the hongry hownde for the carreine,
& the ful fed sowe for her puddel. But
as Baldad the Suhyte sayd vnto pacyent
Iob. The hypocrites hope shall come to
nought, Hys confydence shall be destroyed
for he trusteth in a spyders webbe.Baldad. Iob. viii
The sober abydynge of the ryghtouse (saith
Salomou) shal turn him to much gladnes,
but ye hope of yt vngodly shal perysh. pro, x.
               The thirde or last part of that most wycked
sentence, whych thys malygnaunt papyst
with blasphemouse mouthe hath vttered,Blasphemi
is thys, that when the kynge cometh to
age, he will hang vp an hūdred of such here
tyke knaues, meanynge the true preachers
of our tyme. As wele in reproche of men
godly, obseruynge the Gospell, as in contempt
of ye true ministers of Gods wurd,Poyson.
haue thys furyouse enemye & sonne of Beli
aloute vometed that poyson, whyche hathe
longe tyme lyen boylynge in hys papystycall
stomack. Neyther hath he abashed in ye
heate of that frenesye and forgetfulnesse of
reason, to abuse the christen modestie of our
godly and innocent kynge, in iudgyng him
acompanyon herafter, with the most cruel
tyrauntes of the worlde, Antiochus, Herode,

Caiphas, Nero,Tirauntes Domycyane, Traiane,
& hys bloudthurstie father of Rome,
whych in their wycked tymes, malycyously
murthered vp the true witnesses of God
And thus are they whych dwell in heauen,
most spightfully of this brutish babler blasphemed,
as is towched in the texte of .S.
Iohan.A babler. Apoca. xiii. In manye places of the
holy scripture, is the congregatyon of the
faythfull called heauen, or the kyngedome
of heauen, chefely in the prophecyes and ye
parables of Christe, for so muche as God
is inuysybly the inhabytour, ouersear,Heauen. and
gouernour therof, Math. xiii. et. xxv. Who
then can denye the true preachers, whych
are the dystributers of Gods mysteryes, to
be dwellers in the same.
               Saynt Paul is not all behind, in boasting
him self to be one of them, which also was a
preacher, Our cōuersaciō (sayth he) wher so
euer we remain,A preacher is in heauē, frō whens we
loke for ye sauyour. Phil. iii, If ye be rysen agayne
with Christe, seke the thinges whych
are aboue, wher he sytteth on ye right hād of
god, Set your affectyō on thynges yt are in
heauē, & not on tryfles whych are here on ye
earthe. Col, iii. These are they, which in the
houshold of god,what he is are ye profitable buylders
the fyshers of men, the feaders of the flock,

the salte of the earth, the light of the world,
the clowdes full of moysture, the starres,
lanternes, and candelstyckes, yt stewardes,
searchers, and releuers, the kepers of the
vyneyearde, planters, tyllers, sowers, and
repers of the Lordes haruest,Helpers. yea the helpers
of Christe, & vpholders of his church.
All these names & offyces do the holy ghost
giue them, and a great sort more in the scriptures,
reportynge them also wurthie of double
honour, whan they labour in the wurde
i. Timoth .v. In sprete and veryte teach thei
our heauenly father to be wurshipped.Shadows. Ioh
iiii. and not in the beggerlye shaddowes of
mennes tradycyons. They haue the holye
angels for their fellowe seruauntes and brethreue,
for hauynge the noble testimonye of
Iesu in their mouthes. Apoc. xix. These are
no heretyke knaues than, neyther yet wurthie
to be hanged, as thys Popysh scismatyck
do both iudge them and wishe them,A Papyst. in
the hastie sprete of his whote stomacked mother.
So hath he them blasphemed yt dwelle
in heauen, whych is the cōgregaciō of god.
               If they were hanged for teachynge the
truthe of God and impugnyng falfe relygyon,Hangynge
they shulde haue the same rewarde
for wele doynge that their maistre Iesus
Christe had afore them, For he for that verytees

sake, was most spyghtfully, shamefully,
and contemptuously hanged vp betwyn,
ii, theues, in the cōmen place of their
executyons, as though he had bene a greate
malefactour, so whote was the malyce of
the holye clergie than against him, Diuerse
of hys Apostles for maynteynyuge his doctryne,Apostles
come to the same hygh promocyon of
hangynge, specyally Peter, Andrew, Bartylmew,
Philyp, and Simon, as the historyanes
of them hath written, because they
shulde seme no better then was Christ their
maister. Amonge their disciples the nombre
so excedeth of them that were hanged for ye
testimony of Iesu, that it wold axe to much
tyme to rehearce them.Disciples. And this vyle kinde
of hangynge, was no dishonoure to them.
How shulde it now then become a dyshonour
to these, in the same iust quarel? As the
cause made that contēptuouse death in thē
gloryouse, so shulde it also do now in these
men, in the syght of the Lorde & his electes,
Psal. Cxv, But thys syghte is not gyuen to
suche reprobate vessels,Syght. as is thys furiouse
papist, whose malice hath vtterli made him
blynd. Sap. ii. Yea, so frantyckly and beastly
blyude, that he shameth not to attrybute
vnto our most godly and vertuouse kynge,
that kynde of tyranny, whych is of al other

the most wycked & blasphemouse. But far
other is the gentyll nature of our religiouse
Iosias▪
                  Iosias, whych hath already ouerthrowne
the hyll aulters, brokē in peces the Idolles,
destroyed the relygyouse buggery, restored
the boke of the Lorde, set vp hys true wurshppyynges,
and kept suche a passouer to yt
Lorde as neuer was afore, iiii. Reg. xxiii, et
ii.Apoynted. Paral, xxxiiii. Of God is he appoynted
to turne ye people agayne, & to take away al
the abhominaciōs of the vngodly. Ec. xlix.
               Breuely to conclude the matter. These
iii. blasphemyes, whych thys malycyouse
papyst in one wycked sentence here vttered
are those .iii.iii. Spretes vnclene spretes, ye like frogges
came out of the monthe of ye false Prophet,
Apoca, xvi. And they are not all vnlyke to
the wylde fyre, smoke, & brymstone, whych
the terryble horses, or fat pampered vp locustes
of Antichrist e
                     ••
                  me
                     •
                  ed, Apo. ix, for
fearce,Locustes. noyfull, and stynkynge are they, yea
furyouse, erronyouse, and full of infamye,
accordynge to the sygnifycatyons of wylde
fyre, smoke, and brymstone. Not only hath
it spronge of the doctryne of deuyls, so blasphemously
to abuse the maiestie and power
of a kinge,Abuse, the estate of his honourable coū
                  sell,
and the godly offyce of hys preachers,
in iudgynge them chyldyshe, inconstaunte,

and heretycall, but also it hath rysen of errour
in the hipocresie of yt Romysh Bishop
Whan the iust man Simeon both beheld &
wurshypped the maiestie of Gods sonne in
ye little babe Iesu,Simeon. he called not him a poore
chylde, but the sauer of the worlde, ye syght
of the gētyles, & the glory of Israel, Luc, ii,
A faythfull true subiect wyll reuerētly respect
in a kyng, not what he is of nature,A kyng. but
rather what he is of gods election and ordinaūce.
Rom, xiii, Neyther is he for his tendre
youthe to be contēpned, hauynge gods
knowledge, as he hath in wōdrefull habundaūce.
Christ Iesus gaue thākes to his heauenly
father, bicause he had hydden godly
wysdome from the wyse and prudent, & geuen
it vnto babes.Wysdome Math. xi. whan Prophecye
(saythe Salomon) is in the lyppes of a
kynge, hys mouthe shall not go wronge in
iudgemente. Prouer. xvi.
            
            
               ¶He is proued a Papist.
               
                  THat it may apere to ye reader, yt
thys maliciouse fellowe is not
here called a papyst wythoute
iust cause, I wyl declare what a
Papyst is, and by what frutes he is chefelye
knowne.A Papyst. A Papyst is he that in lyfe
and doctryne maynteyneth the Romyshe
Popes dyuelish tradycyōs, contempnynge

the pure testamente and Gospell of Iesus
Christe. As we saye in the vnyuersyte, that
he is a Platonyst, Ciceronyst, Scotyst, or
Thomyst, that defendeth the doctryne of
Plato,Doctrine. Cicero, Scotus, or Thomas against
them that holdeth not the same. Thys frantyck
fellowe is of the same kynde of doyng
Ergo he is a wycked and an obstynate papyst.
Wycked, for so muche as he dishonoureth
god, and obstynate, because he dysobeyeth
hys kynge.Frutes. The Minor, whych is the
seconde part of thys argument, is proued
true by hys cursed frutes. For a false Prophete,
or popysh hypocryte whether ye wyl
is alwayes knowne by hys wycked frutes
Christe sayth. Math, vii, et Luce. vi. In, ii.
specyall poyntes shall ye knowe a ranke papyst,
whych he hath firste of hys father the
great Antichrist of Rome, and than of hys
mother hys malignaunt synagoge. For the
naturall chylde foloweth father & mother.
And these are they breuely, as afore is touched,ii. Pointes
He blasphemeth God, and contempneth
the christen magistrates. Of thys are
euydent examples, in the Chronicles of our
christen nacyons, yea, innumerable, specyally
of thys realme of Englande.
               Daniel ones prophecyed of that vnshā
                  fast
faced vsurper,The Pope that he arrogantly shuld

stande vp agaynst the Prynce of Prynces,
(whych is God in his Christe) and yet in ye
ende shulde be destroyed wythoute hande,
Dan, viii, Saint Paule calleth hym Gods
great aduersary, the wycked one, the man
of synne, and the sonne of perdycyon, reportynge
of hym, that he shulde exalte hys fylthie
seate here iu earthe aboue god, and hys
dongyshe decrees aboue Gods set ordynaunce,
to the vtter dampnacyon of thousandes,
for not beleuynge the truth, ii. Thes
ii. Saynt Iohan in hys reuelatyon,Thess. ii. calleth
the churche of that aduersarye, great Babylon
the mother of all whoredome and abhomynacyons
done vpon the earthe, yea such
a fylthie whore, as hath both subdued to her
obedyence the kynges of the earthe, and also
made them dronke with the wyne of her
fornycacyon,Apo, xvii. Apo, xvii. If yefynde in thys
frantyck fellowe, these naturall condicyōs,
naturally planted, what els cā ye iudge him
but a naturall chylde of that father and mother,
and so an obstynate papyst? The propyrtie
whych he hath of that vnhappye father
and mother, is to blaspheme God, and
in that he hath shewed hymselfe plenteouse
First by a chaplayne whych popyshly mynystred
in hys hyred benefyce.Thre knaueryes. Secōdly by
conueyaunce of certen ymages in hope of a

change; And thirdlye in iudgyng it a fowle
heresye to write any thynge in reproche of
the Byshopp of Rome.
               Concernynge the first, Vpon the, xx, day
of September last past, I was (as he wele
knoweth) at seruyce there,A Prieste. to beholde the
workemanly conueyaunce of hym and that
popysh chaplayn of his, and to know what
wholsome frutes I shulde fynde after that
tyme, of their .ii. plantinges. Such an other
ape of Antichriste as that prest was, neuer
sawe. I afore in my lyfe, for he coulde not
reade a Psalme, neyther yet speake Englyshe,
beynge an allyen, an Armoricall or
frenche Britayne.Cōuaiaūce And to excuse hys most
beastly ignoraunce, his own self was cōpel
led, I being ther presēt, to slauer out ye .ii. lessōs
of ye Byble, with no small stutting & stā
                  beryng, turnyng his arse to the people after
the old popysh maner, to helpe forward the
kynges most godly procedynges. More apysh
toyes & gawdysh feates,Feates. could neuer
a dysarde in England haue plaied (I think)
than that apysh prest shewed there at the cō
                  munyon.
He turned and tossed, lurked and
lowted, snored and smirted, gaped and gasped,
kneled and knocked, loked and lycked,
with both his thombes at hys eares & other
tryckes more, that he made me, xx, tymes to

remembre wylle Somer,Wyl Sommer. Yet of them both,
that prest semed yt more foole a great deale
And to amende the matter, he had than a
new shauen crowne, which I rebuked him
for, By thys I proue hys maistre,iii, vertues a mocker
of God, a deceyuer of the people, and a contempner
of the kynges iust procedynges.
               Concernyng the second, which is ye craftie
conueyaunce of certen ymages in hope
of a change.Images. In that poynt hath he also notable
folowed both father and mother, to be
proued a naturall papyst. For God hath he
blasphemed in sekynge to vphold ydolatry,
and the kynge hath he contempned in so derydyng
hys most godly ordynaunce. The
kynge hath commaunded, and that by acte
of hys parlement, that all yma es shulde,An Acte
not only be remoued out of the churches of
Englande and Irelande, but also that they
shulde be defaced, mangled, and vtterly de
destroyed for theyr abhomynacyons. How
is thys wurthie commauudement obeyed,
whan they are so subtylly conuayed, and so
craftely retayned aloft in the belfreye or steple,
and neyther deformed nor yet altered?
Parauenture he wyll saye, that he was neuer
of counsell in that propre poynt of conueyaunce.Suttle foxe
Wherin he doth lye most falsely
For who is more of counsell in a noughtie

matter, thā he that knoweth it, and yet wynketh
at the doynge therof? The abolyshyng
of ydolles, is a churche matter, and chefely
perteyneth to religyon. If it had touched either
offeringes or tithes, I doubt it not, but
he woulde haue stande fourth for the chefe
head of the parryshe, and no man so hardie
to haue medled afore him therin.Chefehead Why was
he not then of counsell in thys reckenynge.
He remayned as maistre and heade of that
churche, by the space of more thā, ii. yeares
after. Wolde not hys syght serue hym to se
so fowle a blot, in so long tyme space? Well
sir, whan thys matter came ones to a tryall
afore the iustyces at wynchestre sessyons, a
man that had bene dead more thā, ii, yeares
afore, was able to discharge him of that horrible
contempt of Gods wurd,Cōueiaūce and hys kinges
procedinges. So workemanly doth one
hounde of yt race lycke an other in this age.
               Concerninge the thirde, that it is a great
heresie,Heresy. to write ought in reporche of the Bishopp
of Rome, In the weke afore Christmas
last past, as he chaūced to be in ye house
of the forseyd gentylmau af hys owne affynyte,
where he myght alwayes be bolde to
do hys lewde feates, hys accustomed frenesie
came sodenly vpon him. In yt heat wherof,
he most shamefully reuyled a seruaūt of

that house calling hym heretyke aud knaue,
because he had begonne to studie a parte in
suche a Comedie,A Comedy as myghtely rebuked the
abhomynacyons and fowle fylthie occupienges
of the Bishopp of Rome, Moreouer
he requyred hym, in hys own stought name
to do a lewde massage, whych was to call
the compiler of that Comedie, both heretike
and knaue, concludynge that it was a boke
of most perniciouse heresie, That boke was
imprynted about .vi. yeares a go, and hath
bene abroad euer sens,Abroade. to be both seane and
iudged of men, what it cōtayneth. And thys
is the name therof. A Comedie concerning.
iii. lawes, of nature, Moyses, & Christ. etc,
Therin is it largely declared, how yt faythe
lesse Antichrist of Rome with his clergye,
hath bene a blemysher, darkener, confounder,
and poysener,Lawes. of all wholsom lawes.
And that wyth ydolatricall Sodometrie he
hath defyled nature, by ambytyouse Auarice
he hath made Gods commaundemēts
of non effecte, and with hypocrytycall doctryne
peruerted Christes moste holye Gospell.
Thys is wele knowne to al men. How
commeth than an heresye, thus to report or
wryte? By lyke this fonde fellaw, hath learned
of Lanfrancus and fryre Walden,Lālfrācus. Walden, that
he is only an heretyke, whych in doctryne

dyssenteth from the synagoge of Rome,Guido, Or els
of fryre Guido in hys boke De heresibus,
that he is a most perniciouse heretyke,
whych sayth, that the Romysh pope is not
heade of the christen churche, neyther maye
make lawes for the christyanyte, But he neuer
yet marked the wurdes of Athanasius,athanasius
that they are the most wycked sorte of heretykes,
whyche persecuteth Christes true
seruauntes.
               Other argumentes are there els, to
proue thys wycked fellawe, a natural child
of that father & mother, & so a most spyghtfull
Papyst. In the tyme that stought Steuen
Gardyner was Byshopp of Wynchestre,Steuen. Gardiner.
and made hauocke of Christes poore
stocke, no mā was so madde as thys madde
fellawe, to searche and to seke, to accuse,
to reuyle to shame, and to brynge menne
in daunger of deathe, for their Christen beleues
sake.A Sawle. No where was anye sessyons
wythin Hamshire, but he was alwayes
there agaynst them, conducted by yt prestes,
pratynge and scoldynge, stuttinge and stam
berynge, with frothe yssuynge out on both
sydes of hys mouthe for anger. The supersticyouse
Nonnes of Wynchestre,Nonnes. dysobeyenge
both the Byshopp and hys chaunceller

concernynge their apparell, and vtterly
contempning the preachinges that are now
had their daily resortes to him, and became
as flickering culuers about hys house. The
preachers of Gods wurde there, were nothynge
els wyth hym, as he fat on the ale bē
                  ches,
but heretykes & knaues, vagaboūdes,
traiters, apostataes, & runnegates,A bloud▪
                   wt bloud
and soule, that he wold laye hys dagger on
their faces. No mā knoweth this to be more
true then I do, vpon whome he not only bestowed
these vncomelye names, and that a
great sort of tymes, but also in yt opē streate
at Wynchestre, cōming sodenly out of an
house of purpose vpon me,A Ruffyan he sette hys one
hande vpon my Bearde and bosome, and
hys other hande sometyme on hys Dagger
and sometyme bent it ouer my heade, as
thoughe he wolde haue buffetted me on the
face, wyth suche madde exclamacions as I
neuer hearde of man of Bedlem, besydes
the vnreasonable spoyle that he had made
afore that of my house,A spoyle, Yet neuer in my life
ded I offende hym, to my knowledge, neyther
in my dede nor my wurde.
               Not thus yet satled in all thys ragynge
furye,A beast. he procured the clarke of my parrish
of bishops Stoke a man yt knoweth not his

A. B. C. & .ii. more as vnlearned and popish
as he was, to indyghte me at Wynchestre
sessions, for not hallowing the funte at the
baptyme of a Childe, wyth candel lyghte,
salt, oyle, creame, and waxe droppinges, as
in the popysh tyme, notwythstandyng the
kynges inhybycion concernynge all suche
papystycall beggeryes. He caused them to
report there, to the rediculouseRydiculus wondermēt
of all men learned, that I should haue sayd
than, that the wurd of God was hallowed
ynough alredy, But that Gods wurd at any
tyme should be prophane and nede hallowyng,
or els that it hath bene hallowed,
it is their blasphemouse and beastly opynion,
and not myne.Foolysh, I thynke a more folysh &
vnlearned a sentence, was neuer vttered of
any man. Se how depely the Lord hath permytted
these papystes to spew fourth their
owne rydyculouse shame. Yet was it not so
doltish and brutish, but it toke place there,
and was wele allowed. They that could do
nothynge in matters of truthe for the kyng
at the sessyons afore,Sessions. coulde in the popes secrete
quarell at that sessions, for falshehode
fynde me wurthy an indightment, & wurkmanly
made it out. And it wanted no circū
                  staunce
that myght be deuysed to aggrauat
the matter. For there was I called an obstynate

persone, a sedycyouse fellowe, a trobler
of thys whole realme, a prophaner of
of the sacramentes,Slaunders a deprauer of the kynges
boke, a slaunderer of hys procedinges,
an abhominable example gyuer, & a contēpner
of the kynge and hys crowne. Al the papystes
of England, had neuer at that bench
so muche layed agaynst thē, And all for pretermyttynge
yt one poynte of olde papistrie
If thys conueyaunceCōuaiaūce be not sūwhat wurth
I report me. Well, he hath made his boast,
that for doynge of suche feates, he can lacke
no lyuyng. Twētie prestes within Hāshire,
(he saithe) wyll rather giue me vp their personages
and profyghtes, vpon a small pensyon,
than I shulde be without a dwellinge
house. And he yt shall seke hym at thys day
shall fynde him tabernacled in one of their
personages,Found out what though he hath protested
by othe, that he wyll be no longer a papyst.
               Thus haue I set out thys frantyck papystA Papyst.
in hys owne lyuely colours, agreynge
to hys most maliciouse frutes, to make him
knowne to others, and to cause hys other
companyons to be a shamed of hys lewde
lunitick waies. If he be not a papist, which
with poluted mouth, in defence of papistrie
blasphemeth the kynges Maiestie, his honourable
counsell, & the preachers of gods

wurd, signified by Gods name, Gods tabernacle,
and thē that dwell in heauē, who
is a wicked papist? If he be not a false prophet,
that euometeth such .iii. filthy frogges
at ones, as this busy babler hath done here
in one blasphemouse sētence, who is a false
prophet? If he be not a malignaunt mēbre
of Antichrist, that so malicyously and madlye
defendeth hys noughtye quarell, wyth
pratlynges and scoldynges, stuttynges and
stamberynges,Antichrist. supportynge supersticiouse
Noōnes and other Idolaters in theyr open
Idolatries, conteptuouslye reuylynge the
preachers wyth dagger in hande or fyst on
theyr faces, besides indightmentes, I wold
fayne knowe who were a member of Antichist?
Thau shall it be no slaundre to thys
frātyck fellow, to be called a papyst, a false
prophete, and a malycyouse lymme of Antichrist,iii. Persōs
but a most manifest truth, consideryng
he hath played al those franticke partes
at tymes so stoutlye. None other is the
tree that bryngeth sowre crabbes, than a
crabbe tree, neyther yet the yll manne that
wurketh wyckednesse, but a wycked fellawe.
The eternall God chaunge the hatefull
hartes of suche papystycall enemyes,God graūt
as thys is one, and send them more gentyll
myndes in obeying hys heauenlye truthe,

that they may at the latter becom of so headye
and malycyouse Saules, moste
gentyll and pacient Paules,
to the glorye of his most
holye name,
Amen.
               ☞Thus endeth the Expostulacion or
complaynt against the blasphemyes
of a franticke papist
of Hāshyre,
Compiled by
Iohā Bale
Finis.
            
         
         
            
            ¶The .xxiii. Psalme of Dauid.
called: Dixit insipiens.
            FOoles that true fayth yet neuer hod,
            Sayth in theyr hartes, ther is no God
            Fylthie they are, in theyr practyse.
            Of them not one, is godly wyse.
            From heauen the Lord on man dyd looke,
            To knowe what wayes, he vndertooke▪
            
            All they were vayne, and weut astraye,
            Not one he found, in the ryght waye.
            In hart and tunge, haue they deceyte,
            Their lips throw forth, a poisened baite
            their minds ar mad, their mouthes ar wod
            And swyft they be, in sheddyng blood,
            So blynde they are, no truth they knowe,
            No feare of God, in them wyll growe,
            How can that cruell sort be good?
            Of gods dere flock, which suck yt blood
            On hym ryghtly, shall they not call,
            Dispayre wyll so, theyr hartes appall,
            At all tymes God, is wyth the iust,
            Because they put, in hym theyr trust,
            Who shall therfore, from Syon geue,
            That helth which hāgeth, in our beleue
            Whan God shal take from hys the sma
                  •
               
            
            Than wyl Iacob, reioyce in hart.
            Prayse to God.
         
         
            
            ¶The .Cxxx. Psalme of
Dauid, called. De profundis.
            To God thus faithfull Dauid songe,
Hys depe and dayly cates amonge.
            FRom faith of soule and hartes reioyce,
            I call to the, Lorde heare my voyce.
            Thyne eares (good Lord) enclyned be,
            Vnto the poore complaynt of me.
            If thou shuldest waye our wyckednesse,
            Who can abyde thy ryghtousuesse?
            Bicause I fynde all helpe in the,
            I doubte no fearce extremyte.
            In my Lorde God is al my trust,
            To walke as hys wurde hath dyscust,
            The churche for her contynuaunce.
            Hopeth in the Lordes good gouernaūce.
            For in the Lorde great mercye is,
            And full redemptyon after thys,
            He wyll redeme all Israel,
            From deuyll and death, frō synne & hell.
            ¶Prayse to God.
         
      
      
         
            
               
Imprynted at
London by Ihon Daye,
dwellyng ouer Aldersgate
beneth Saynte Martyns,
and are to be soulde at the shope by the
litle Condite in Chepesyde.
            
         
      
   