
      
         
            
            
            THE
FIRST PART
OF
THE LIFE AND
raigne of King Henrie
the IIII.
            
            Extending to the end of the first
yeare of his raigne.
            
               Written by I. H.
            Imprinted at London by Iohn Woolfe, and
are to be solde at his shop in Popes head Alley,
neere to the Exchange. 1599.
         
         
            
            
            Illustrissimo & honoratissimo Roberto
Comiti Essexiae & Ewe, Comiti
Marescallo Angliae, Vicecomiti Herefordiae
& Bourchier: Baroni Ferrariis de Chartley,
Domino Bourchier & Louein: Regiae Maiestati Hyppocomo:
Machinarum bellicarum praefecto: Academiae Cantabrigiensis▪
Cancellario: ordinis Georgiani Equiti aurato:
Serenissimae Domino Reginae a sanctioribus consilijs:
Domino meo plurimum obseruando.
            
               ΑΡίσῳ καὶ γενναιοτάτῳ: optimo & Nobilissimo
(inquit Euripides) ex qua
sententia tu primus ac solus fere occurrebas
(illustrissime comes) cuius
nomē si Henrici nostri fronte radiaret, ipse & laetior
& tutior in vulgus pr
                  •
               diret. Magnus si quidem
es, & presenti iudicio, & futuri temporis expectatione:
in quo, veluti recuperasse nunc oculos, caeca
prius fortuna videri potest; Dum cumulare honoribus
eum gestit, qui omnibus virtutibus est insignitus.
Hunc igitur si laeta fronte excipere digneris,
sub nominis tui vmbra (tanquam sub Aiacis
clipio Teucer ille Homericus) tutissime latebit.
Deus opt. max. celsitudinem tuam nobis, reique
publicae diu seruet incolumem: quo nos vz. tam fide
quam armis potenti tua dextra defensi, vltique,
diutina cum securitate tum gloria perfruamur.
            
               Honori tuo deditissimus.
I. HAYVVARDE.
            
         
         
            
            Faultes escaped in the Printing
            
               
                  
                     Page.
                     Line.
                     Fault.
                     Read.
                  
                  
                     11
                     23
                     played
                     plyed
                  
                  
                     15
                     13
                     pleaseth
                     please
                  
                  
                     16
                     20
                     present
                     presents
                  
                  
                     19
                     22
                     sport
                     sort
                  
                  
                     19
                     24
                     tempored
                     tempered
                  
                  
                     37
                     10
                     weedlesse
                     needelesse
                  
                  
                     41
                     18
                     cause
                     fame
                  
                  
                     43
                     13
                     too
                     two
                  
                  
                     44
                     13
                     in reporting
                     to reporting
                  
                  
                     53
                     08
                     moued
                     enforced
                  
                  
                     55
                     04
                     this
                     his
                  
                  
                     55
                     05
                     chalenged
                     chalenging
                  
                  
                     57
                     27
                     else
                     or else
                  
                  
                     65
                     20
                     carried
                     carry
                  
                  
                     70
                     13
                     lenety
                     leuity
                  
                  
                     71
                     35
                     Bush
                     Bushie
                  
                  
                     75
                     05
                     officers of so long
                     offers of so large
                  
                  
                     75
                     12
                     Castell Trim
                     Castell of Trim
                  
                  
                     75
                     32
                     of the one,
                     by the one,
                  
                  
                     77
                     32
                     at men
                     to men
                  
                  
                     79
                     25
                     increased
                     incensed
                  
                  
                     86
                     13
                     Thirminges
                     Thirninges
                  
                  
                     86
                     15
                     Lophane
                     Lopham
                  
                  
                     88
                     32
                     confessed
                     confused
                  
                  
                     100
                     10
                     taking
                     raking
                  
                  
                     102
                     30
                     or violence
                     or conceale violence
                  
                  
                     107
                     35
                     is no more
                     it is no more
                  
                  
                     127
                     06
                     resistance
                     assistance
                  
                  
                     127
                     27
                     Redding
                     Reading
                  
                  
                     130
                     24
                     he had
                     that he had
                  
                  
                     131
                     05
                     hardly
                     shortly
                  
                  
                     131
                     24
                     was not
                     he was not
                  
                  
                     131
                     27
                     bloud
                     bould
                  
                  
                     148
                     21
                     reteyned
                     he reteyned
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            A. P. to the Reader.
            
               AMong all sortes of humane
writers, there is none that
haue done more profit, or
deserued greater prayse,
then they who haue committed
to faithfull records
of Histories, eyther the gouernment
of mighty states,
or the liues and actes of famous
men: for by describing
the order and passages
of these two, and what euents
hath followed what counsailes, they haue set foorth
vnto vs, not onely precepts, but liuely patterns, both for priuate
directions and for affayres of state: whereby in shorte
time young men may be instructed, and ould men more fullie
furnished with experience then the longest age of man
can affoorde. And therefore Cicero reporteth that L. Lucullus,
when he went from Rome to make warre against Mithridates,
was altogether vnskilfull in Militarie seruices:
yet in the time of his Nauigation he so exercised himselfe
what with conference, and what with reading of histories,
that when hee came into Asia, by the iudgement and
confession of that great King, hee was preferred before all
the commaunders that were before him. Heerevppon
when Alexander Seuerus did deliberate of anye weightie
matter, hee would especiallye take aduise of men

skilfull in histories, and not without good cause: for if
(as Afranius saith) experience hath begot Wisedome,
and Memory as a mother hath brought it foorth; who are
to be better accompted then they whose memory is as it
were a rich storehouse, of the experiences not of one age
or Country, but of all times and of all nations. And therefore
it is no great maruaile that Zenobia, who after the death
of her husband Odonatus tooke vpon her the state, not onely
insulted vpon the Romaines, but held the Arabians, the
Saricenes, the Armenians, and other fierce and intractible
people, in such obedience, that although shee were both a
woman and a Barbarian, yet they neuer stirred against her:
for she had perfectly red the Romaine history in Greeke,
and also had herselfe abridged the Alexandrian and all the
Orientall histories, whereby she attained the highest pitch
both of Wisedome and authority: for examples are of
greater force to stir vnto vertue, then bare preceptes, insomuch
as Cicero said that nothing could be taught well without
example. Therfore the Lacaedemoians (as Plutarch writeth)
did vse vpon feastiuall dayes to present vnto theyr Sons
certayne drunken slaues whom they called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : that by
view of the vice they might learne to auoyde it, and Hismenias
the Thebane, would shew to his Schollers musitians
of all sortes good and bad, instructing them to followe the
one and not the other. And this is that which the Apologily
telleth of a certaine Country woman, who being hard fauoured,
and fearing least shee should bring foorth children
like her selfe, got many faire and beautifull Pyctures,
which shee did dayly and steedfastly beholde: the
meaning whereof it, that by setting before vs the actes and
liues of excellent men, it is the readiest way to fashion our
qualities according to the same.
            Heereupon Cicero doeth rightly call history the witnesse
of times, the light of truth, the life of memory, and the

messenger of antiquity. Heereby wee are armed against
all the rage and rashnesse of Fortune: and heereby wee
may seeme (in regarde of the knowledge of thinges)
to haue trauelled in all Countryes, to haue liued in all ages,
and to haue been conuersant in all affayres. Neyther is
that the least benefit of history, that it preserueth eternally,
both the glory of good men, and shame of euill. Some Philosophers
doe deny, that glory is to be desired: for vertue
(say they) is a reward vnto it selfe, and must not be respected
for the vaine and titulare blastes of glory: yet in wryting
these things, they affect that especially, which they
especially depraue. And indeed there is no man hath so
horny hartstringes, (as Persius speaketh) who is not tickled
with some pleasure of praise: againe there is no man of so
flinty a forehead, who is not touched with some feare of
infamy and shame. Doe we thinke that the valiant souldier
thinketh no toyle too tough, but boldly aduentureth the
hazard of all happes, because he is weary of his life? death
commeth by nature to all men alike, onely with difference of
memory with posterity.
            And I would thinke that Citties at the first were builded,
lawes made, and many thinges inuented for the vse of
men, chiefly for desire of glory: which humour except the
old gouernours of common wealths, had thought necessary,
they would neuer haue fostered it as they did, with Garlandes,
statues, trophies and triumphes, in which notwithstanding
it is but temporary and short; but in histories of
worth it is onely perpetual. This Cicero perceiuing he dealt
with Luceius to commit his actions to the monuments of his
writings: and Plinie the yonger did wish that he might bee
mentioned in the histories of Cornelius Tacitus, because he
did foresee that they should neuer decay.
            But these are such as are not led away with a lust, eyther
to flatter or to deface, whereby the creadite of historie
is quite ouerthrowne. Yet the endeuour to curry fauour

is more easily disliked, as bearing with it an open note of
seruility, and therefore Alexander when he heard Aristobulus
read many things that he had written of him farre aboue
truth, as he was sayling the floud Hidaspis, he threw
the booke into the Riuer, and sayd that hee was almost
mooued to send Aristobulus after for his seruile dealing:
but enuious carping carieth a counterfeite shew of liberty,
and thereby findeth the better acceptance.
            And since I am entred into this point, it may seeme
not impertinent to write of the stile of a history, what beginning,
what continuance, and what meane is to be vsed
in all matter; what thinges are to bee suppressed, what
lightly touched, and what to be treated at large: how creadit
may be won, and suspition avoyded: what is to bee obserued
in the order of times, and discription of places and
other such circumstances of weight; what liberty a writer
may vse in framing speeches, and in declaring the causes,
counsailes and euentes of thinges done: how farre he must
bend himselfe to profit: and when and how he may play
vpon pleasure, but this were too large a field to enter into:
therefore least I should run into the fault of the Mindians,
who made their gates wider then their towne, I will here
close vp; onely wishing that all our English histories were
drawne out of the drosse of rude and barbarous English:
that by pleasure in reading them, the
profit in knowing them, myght
more easily bee attayned.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE
FIRST PARTE
OF THE LIFE AND
RAIGNE OF KING
Henry the fourth,
Extending to the end of the first
yeere of his raigne.
            
               THe noble and victorious
Prince, king Edward the third, had
his fortunate gift of a long & prosperous
raigne ouer this realme of England;
much strengthned and adorned,
by natures supply of seuen goodlye
sonnes. Edward his eldest sonne,
prince of Wales, commonly called
the Blacke Prince: William of Hatfield: Lyonel, Duke of
Clarence: Iohn of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster: Edmund of
Langley, Duke of Yorke: Thomas of Woodstocke, Duke of
Gloucester: and William of Windsore. These sonnes, during
the life of their renowmed Father, were such ornaments
and such stayes to his estate, as it seemed no greater could be
annexed thereunto. For neither armies, nor strong holdes
are so great defences to a prince, as the multitude of children:

Fortes may decay, and forces decrease, and both decline and
fall away, eyther by varietie of fortune, or inconstancie of
mens desires: but a mans owne bloud cleaueth close vnto
him; not so much in the blisses of prosperitie, which are equally
imparted to others, as in the crosses of calamity, which
touch none so neere, as those that are neerest by nature. But
in succeeding times they became in their ofspring▪ the seminarie
of diuision and discord, to the vtter ruine of their families,
and great wast and weakning of the whole Realme:
for they that haue equall dignitie of birth and bloud, can
hardly stoope to termes of soueraigntie, but vpon euery offer
of occasion wil aspire to indure, rather no equall then any
superiour, and for the most part, the hatred of those that are
neerest in kinde, is most dispitefull & deadly if it once breake
forth. The feare of this humor caused Remulus, to embrewe
the foundations of the Cittie and Empire of Rome, with the
bloud of his brother Remus. According to which example,
the tyrants of Turkie, those butchers of Sathan, doe commonly
at this day beginne their raigne, with the death and
slaughter of all their brethren.
            Prince Edward, the thunderbolt of warre in his time, dyed
during the life of his father. And although, he was cut off
in the middle course, and principall strength of his age, yet in
respect of honour and fame he liued with the longest, hauing
in all parts fulfilled the measure of true Nobili
                  •
               e He left behinde
him a young some called Richard, who after the death
of King Edward, was Crowned King in his steade, and afterward
died childe-lesse.
            
               William of Hatfield king Edwards second sonne, dyed also
without issue, leauing no other memorie of his name, but the
mention onely.
            Li
                  •••
               ll Duke of Clarence, the third sonne of King Edward,
was a man of comely personage, of speach and pace
stately, in other qualities of a middle temperature, neither to
bee admired nor contemned, as rather voide of ill partes,

then furnished with good. He had issue Philip his only daughter,
who was ioyned in marriage to Edmunde Mortimer,
Earle of March: Who in the Parliament holden in the eight
yeare of the Reigne of King Richard, was in the right of his
wife, declared heire apparant to the Crowne, in case the
King should die without children but not many yeares after
hee dyed, leauing issue by the said Philip, Roger Mortimer
Earle of March. This Roger was slaine in the rude and tumultuous
warres of Ireland, and had issue Edmund Anne, and
Elienor. Edmund and Elienor dyed without issue. Anne was
married to Richard Earle of Cambridge, sonne to Edmund
of L
                     •
                  ngley Duke of Yorke, the fift sonne of King Edward. Of
these two, came Richard 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                Duke of Yorke who
by the right 
                  ••
               uolued to him from his mother, made open
claime to the Crowne of England, (which was then possessed
by the family of Lancaster) first by law, in the Parliament
holden the thirtieth yeare of the Raigne of King Henrie the
sixt: where either by right or by fauour, his cause had such
furtherance, that after King Henrie should die, the Crowne
was entayled to him, and to the heires of his bloud for euer.
But the Duke impatient to linger in hope, chose rather to endure
any daunger then such delay: Whereupon he entred
into armes soone after, against King Henrie in the fielde. But
being carried further by courage, then by force hee coulde
beare through, hee was slaine at the battaile of Wakefield,
and left his title to Edward his eldest sonne: who with inuincible
persistance did prosecute the enterprise, and after great
varietie of fortune at the last atchieued it.
            
               Iohn of Gaun
                  •
                Duke of Lancaster, the fourth Sonne of
King Edward the third, was a man of high and hardie spirite,
but his fortune was many times not answerable, either to his
force or to his forecast. He had two sonnes, Henrie Earle of
Derby (of whome I purpose chiefly to treate) and Iohn Earle
of Somerset. This Iohn was Father to Iohn Duke of Somerset,

who had issue Margaret, Countesse of Richmond, mother
to the noble Prince, Henrie the seuenth.
            
               Henrie Plantagenet Earle of Derby, was likwise by his mother
Bla
                     •
                  ch extracted from the bloud of Kngs, being discended
from Edmund the second sonne of King Henrie the third:
by which line: the D
                  •
               chie of Lancaster did 
                  ••
               cre
                  •
               e vnto his
house. Hee was a man of meane stature, well proportioned,
and formally compact: of good strength and agilitie of body,
skilfull in armes, and of a ready dispatch: ioyntly shewing
himselfe both earnest and aduised in all his actions. Hee was
quicke and present in conceite, forward in attempt, couragious
in execution, and most times fortunate in euent. There
was no great place of imployment and charge, which hee
would not rather affect for glorie, then refuse either for peril,
or for paines; and in seruice hee often prooued himselfe not
onely a skilfull commaunder by giuing directions: but also a
good Souldier in vsing his weapon, aduenturing further in
person sometimes, then policie would permit: his expences
were liberall and honourable, yet not exceeding the measure
of his receiptes, he was verie courteous and familiar respectiuely
towards all men, whereby hee procured great reputation
and regarde, especially with those of the meaner
sort: for high humilities take such deepe roote in the mindes
of the multitude, that they are more strongly drawne by vnprofitable
curtesies▪ then by 
                  〈◊〉
                benefits. In all the changes
of his estate, he was almost one and the same man: in aduersitie
neuer daunted, in prosperitie neuer secure: reteining
still his maiestie in the one, and his mildnes in the other: neither
did the continuance of his Raigne bring him to a proude
port and stately esteeming of himselfe, but in his latter yeares
he remained so gentle & faire in cariage, that therby chiefely
hee did weare out the hatred that was borne him, for the
death of King Richard. He could not lightly be drawne into
any cause, & was stiffe & constant in a good: Yet more easie

to be either corrupted or abused by flattering speeches, then
to be terrified by threats. To some men he seemed too greedie
of glorie, making small difference of the meanes whereby
he attained it: and indeede this humour in noble minds is
most hardly ouer-ruled, and oftentimes it draweth euen the

                  〈…〉
               . But before I proceede any further in describing
either the qualities, or actes of this Earle, I must write something
of the Raigne of King Richard the second, his cosin germaine:
so farre forth as the follies of the one, were either ca
                  •
               
               fer
or furtherances of the fortunes of the other.
            
               Richard sonne to Edward Prince of Wales, a little before
deceased, was, after the death of King Edward the thirde;
Crowned King ouer this Realme of England, in the eleuenth
yeare of his age▪ at which yeares the minde of man is like to
the po
                  ••
               teis earth, apt to bee wrought into any fashion, and
which way so euer it hardneth by custome, it will sooner
breake then bend from the same. Now the gouernaunce of
the King at the first was comitted to certaine Bishops, Earles,

                  〈◊〉
               , and Iustices. But either vppon 
                  〈…〉
               
the King, or negligence to discharge their dutie▪ 
               
                  〈…〉
               
was more ready with pleasant 
                  〈◊〉
                to delight 
                  〈◊〉
                then
with profitable counsaile to doe him good▪ for smooth and
pleasing speaches neede small endeauour, and alwaies findeth
fauour: whereas to aduise that which is meete, is a point
of some paines, and many times
                  •
                thanklesse office. Herr
                  •
               
vpon two daungerous euils did 
                  〈…〉
                In, and
priuate respects did passe vnder publike 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            In the thirde yeare of his Raigne; it was thought meete
that this charge should be committed to one man, to auoide
thereby the vnnecessarie wast of the treasure of the Realme,
by allowing yearely stipend vnto many. So by the whole
consent of the nobilitie and commons assembled together
in Parliament, this office was deputed to Lord Thomas
Beauchampe, Earle of Warwicke, and a competent pension
was assigned him, out of the Kings Eschequer for his paines.

But the King being now plunged in pleasure, did i
                  •••
               deratly
bend himselfe to the fauouring and aduansing of certaine
persons, which were both reproueable in life, and generally
abhorred in all the Realme, and this was the cause of
two great inconueniences: for many yong noble-men and
braue Courtiers, hauing a nimble eye to the 
                  〈…〉
               
and dislikes of the King, gave ouer themselues, to a dissolute
and dishonestlise, which findeth some followers when it findeth
deth no furtherancers, much more when it doth flourish and
thriue: the King also by fauouring these, was himselfe little
fauoured and loued of many: for it is oftentimes a daungerous
to a Prince, to haue euil and odious adherents, as to bee
euill and odious himselfe. The names of these men were
Alexander Ne
                     •
                  ill, Archbishop of Yorke▪ 
               Robert Ve
                     •••
                  , Earle
of Oxford: Michael 
                     〈◊〉
                  , afterwards Earle of Suffolke:
Robert Tri
                     •
                  iliane, Lord chiefe Iustice, Nicholas Brambre Alderman
of London; and certaine others, of no eminencie
either by birth or desert, but obsequious and pliable to
the Kings youthfull humour. These were highly in credit
with the King: these were alwaies next vnto him, both in
companie and counsell: by these he ordered his priuate actions:
by these he managed his affaires of state: he spared neither
the dignitie nor death of any man; whose auctho
                  ••
               ie and
life withstoode their preferment. In so much as in the fifth
yeare of his Raigne, he remooued Sir Richard Seroop
                     •
                  , from
being Lord Chauncellor of England (to which office he was
by aucthoritie of Parliament appointed) because hee refused
to set the great Seale, to the graunt of certaine lands, which
had wantonly passed from the King: alleaging for his denial,
the great debts of the King, and small demerites of the parties,
vpon whome the King might cast away and confirme,
but spend in good order he could not: aduertising him also
to haue respect, that ryote did not deceiue him vnder the
tearme and shewe of liberalitie: and that gifts well ordered
procure not so much loue, as placed without descretion, they

stirre 
                  〈◊〉
               . This Chancellor was a man of notable integrit
                  •
               
and diligence in his office, not scornfully turning away from
the ragged coat of a poore suppliant, or pale face of a fickely
& feeble 
                  〈…〉
               , holding vp their simple soiled billes
of complaint, not yet smothering 
                  〈…〉
                with partiall

                  〈◊〉
                of 
                  〈◊〉
                mighty▪ but being alike to
all, he was 
                  〈◊〉
                disliked of 
                  〈…〉
               .
            In the eight yeere of this 
                  〈◊〉
               , the destruction of
the duke of Lancaster was extended likewise vpon the like
dislike: the plot was layed by Iustice 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , offences were
deuised, appello
                  •
               s appointed, and pe
                  •
               res named; 
                  •
               e should
haue bene put vnder 
                  〈◊〉
               , and foorthwith 
                  ••••
               igned,
condemned, and executed▪ But the duke vpon 
                  〈◊〉
                intelligence
of these continuances, fled to his castle at Pomfret,
and there made preparation for his defence against the
king. So this matter began to grow to a head of diuision,
which the common people at that time very busily desired
and sought: but the kings mother trauelling 
                  〈◊〉
                betweene
the king and the duke (notwithstanding shee was
both 
                  〈…〉
               ) 
                  〈◊〉
                them both to are con
               
                  ••
               lement:
the king, with regard of the dangerous and discontend
times: the duke with respect of his duty and faith:
and so partly by her entreaty and aduise, partly by their inclination
bending to the 
                  〈◊〉
                course, all apparancy of displeasure
on the one part▪ and a 
                  〈◊〉
                on the other, was for
that time layed aside.
            The same yere Michael D
                     •
                  lapoole was made Clancellour
of England, and created earle of Suffolke: and Robert Veer
                     •
                  
               
earle of Oxford was created Marquesse of Dubline, being
the first man within this realme that was e
                  •
               obled with that

                  〈◊〉
               . But 
                  〈◊〉
                they grew in honour, sordid they 
                  〈◊〉
                hate: for
many noble men did infinitely stomacke their vndeserued
aduancements, and with these the fauour of the people generally
went: but the kings intemperate affection was peremptory,

               
                  〈…〉
                not regarding 
                  〈…〉
                could not
resist it.
            The yeere next following, Robert Veere the new Marques
was created duke of Ireland. This yere the Knights and burgesses
of 
                  〈◊〉
                put vp many: complaints against the
Earle of suffolke, vpon which they 
                  〈…〉
                his 
                  〈…〉
               
triall: namely 
                  〈◊〉
                he 
                  〈…〉
                the 
                  〈◊〉
                in taking of him
to farme all the profits 
                  〈…〉
                crowne thow wantonly
he wasted the treasure of the land in 
                  〈◊〉
                liberalitie,
and vnnecessary charges: how deepe he had diued into the
kings debt: how carelesse and 
                  〈…〉
               
in his office: how greatly he had 
                  〈◊〉
                deceived and 
                  〈◊〉
                the king
in 
                  〈◊〉
                dealing and 
                  〈◊〉
                particularly 
                  〈◊〉
               :
with diuers other 
                  〈…〉
                dishonor and dishonesty,
both in priuate actions and in office. This 
                  〈◊〉
                was a
merchants sonne in London, and growing mighty on the
sudden, he could not gouerne himselfe in the change: but

                  〈◊〉
                lay 
                  〈…〉
                of his minde, which
were suppressed and 
                  〈…〉
               
rulle
                  ••
               ng 
                  〈◊〉
               , with 
                  〈…〉
                he made 
                  〈◊〉
                of
his 
                  〈…〉
               . Yet the king was willing, either secretly
to dissemble, or openly to 
                  〈◊〉
                these 
                  〈◊〉
               : and so passed
them ouer with a short audience (as his maner was in
matters of 
                  〈◊〉
                weight) 
                  〈…〉
               
with the complaint. Afterwards, a 
                  〈…〉
               
but answere was made that this needed not; since the kings
wants might be furnished with the debts which were owing
him from his Chancellour: neither was it to any purpose, so
long as the 
                  〈…〉
                ordered by such 
                  〈◊〉
                as before
it had beene▪ 
               
                  〈…〉
                was like: 
                  〈…〉
                the
matter against the 
                  〈…〉
               , and
the king perswaded 
                  〈…〉
                honourable not safe
to beare him out, that to priuate men it was sufficient if themselues

abstaine from wrong, but a prince must prouide that
none do wrong vnder him: for by mainteining, or wincking
at the vices of his officers, he maketh them his owne, and shal
surely be charged therewith when first occasion doth serue
against him. At the last, vpon instant importunity of both
houses, the king did consent, that a commission should goe
forth to certaine noble men, giuing them authority to heare
and determine all matters which were obiected against the
L. Chancellour: and then was a Subsidie graunted, with excepti
                  •
               n,
that the money should be expended by the Lords,
to the benefit and behalfe of the realme. The king did further
demaund, that the heires of Charles Bl
                     •
                  ys, who made
claime to the duchy of Britaine, should be sold to the French
men for thirty thousand marks, and the money granted to the
duke of Ireland, for recouery of those possessions which the
king had giuen him in Ireland: this was likewise assented vnto,
vpon condition, that before Easter then next ensuing, the
duke should depart into Ireland, and there remaine: at so
high a price did they value the riddance of him out of the
realme.
            The charge of the Subsidie money was committed to Richard
earle of Arundell, Commissioners for the earle of Suffolke,
were appointed, Thomas duke of Glocester the kings
vncle, and the sayd earle of Arundell: but during the time of
their proceeding, the king kept all off, in places farre distant:
either to manifest thereby the dissent of his minde, or to auoid
the griefe which his neerenesse would increase. And
now was the Chancellour left vnto himselfe, to answere to
those demeanures, wherein he made the kings blinde fauour
his priuiledge and protection, supposing neuer to see the
same either altered or ouer-ruled. In the end, being conuict
of many crimes and abuses, he was deposed from his office,
his goods were confiscated to the kings Exchequer, & himselfe
was adiudged woorthy of death: Yet was execution
submitted to the kings pleasure, and vnder sureties he was

permitted to goe at large. At the same time Iohn F
                     ••
                  rd
                     •
                  
               
Bishop of Duresme, another of the Kings dainties, was remoued
also from being Lord Treasorer of England, he was
a man of little depth, either in learning or wisedome, but
one that had the Arte of seeming, in making the best shewe
of whatsoeuer he spake or did: and rising from meane estate
to so high a pitch of honour, hee exercised the more excessiuely
his ryote, auarice and ambition, not able to moderate
the lustes and desires which former want had kindled.
            When this businesse was blowne ouer, the King 
                  ••
               turned
againe to London, and did presently receiue the Earle
of Suffolke, with the Duke of Ireland, and the Archbishop
of Yorke, to greater grace and familiaritie then at any time
before. These Triumuirs did not cease to stirre vp the Kings
stomake against those Noble men, whose speciall excellencie
had made matter of fame and regarde: partly for the disgraces
which they had receiued, partly vpon malicious emulation,
to see the other so fauoured, and themselues so odious,
and that their priuate choller and ambition might
beare some shewe of publike respect, they suggested vnto
the King, that he was but halfe, yea not halfe a King in his
owne Realme, but rather the shadow and picture of a King:
for if we respect (sayd they) matters of state, you beare the
sword, but they sway it, you haue the shewe, but they the
authority of a Prince, vsing your name as a colour and countenance
to their proceedings, and your person as a cypher,
to make them great, and be your selfe nothing. Looke to the
dutie of your subiectes, and it is at their deuotion: so that
you can neither commaunde nor demaunde any thing, but
with such exceptions and limitations as they please to impose,
come now to your priuate actions: your liberalitie (the
greatest vertue in a prince) is restrained, your expences measured,
and your affections confined, to frowne and fauour as
they doe prescribe. What Ward is so much vnder gouernment
of his Gardian? Wherein will they next, or can they

more abridge you? Except they should take from you the
place, as they haue done the power of a Prince: and in this
we thinke, they may iusty be feared, hauing so great might
ioyned with so great aspiring mindes. For power is neuer
safe when it doth exceede: & ambition is like the Crocodile,
which groweth so long as he liueth; or like the Iuie, which
fastning on the foote of the tallest Tower, by small, yet continuall
rising, at length will climbe aboue the toppe, it is already
growne from a sparke to a flame, from a twigge to a
tree, and high time it is that the encrease were stayed: oftentimes
such ouer-ruling of Princes haue proceeded to their
ouerthrowing, and such cutting them short hath turned to
cutting them off, their mindes are suspicious, their power
daungerous, and therefore the opportunitie must bee preuented.
            The Kings owne weaknesse made him apprehensiue, and
framed his mind to a vaine, and needlesse feare: but chiefely
he was moued at the remoouing of his Chauncellour and
Treasorer out of their offices, and of the Duke of Ireland out
of the Realme, supposing it a restraint to his princely power,
that he might not absolutly and in things giue or forgiue as
his pleasure serued. When these pr
                  ••
               ie incensers perceiued
the Kings humour once sharpned, they so played him with
plau
                  •
               ible perswasions, that (although he was naturally of no
cruell disposition, as wanting courage) yet they drew him to
many violent and 
                  ••
               direct courses, partly vpon negligence
to search out the truth, partly vpon delight to bee flattered
and smothly vsed, neither did they long deferre their deuises:
and first it was appointed, that the Duke of Gloucester
and certaine others of that part, should be inuited to a supper
within London, & there suddainely surprised and made
away. Sir Nicholas Brambre, who the yere before had beene
Mayor of London, and in whome abundance of wealth supplyed
the want of honest qualities, was a busie agent in this
butcherly businesse: but Richard Extone the Mayor of the

Cittie that yeare, discouered the practise by whome the
Duke was warned both to auoide the present perill, and afterwards
to be warie of the like.
            The yeare next following, Richared Earle of Arundel, and
Thomas Mowbraye Earle of Notingham, had the conduct
of a Nauie committed to their charge: in this viage they
tooke aboue a hundred sayle of the enemies ships, fraughted
with Wines, and well appointed for fight: they also relieued
and fortified Brest, and tooke two fortes which the Frenchmen
had raised against it. The Earles so behaued themselues
in this seruice, that they grew to a verie great estimation,
both for curtesie among their Souldiers, and for courage against
their enemies; & their actions were the more famous,
by reason of the infortunate insufficiencie of other Cōmanders,
by whose either rashnesse or cowardise many good
Souldiers were dayly defeated, and euery yeare made notorious
by one losse or other. Yet notwithstanding all their
good labour and lucke, they were at there turne, entertained
by the King, with great straungnes, both of countenance
and speech. Who was so vnable to dissemble his dispight,
that he could hardly deferre it, vntill the heate of the
honour and loue which they had wonne, were somewhat
abated. So much are men more inclinable to reuenge displeasure
then rewarde desert: for it is troublesome to bee
gratefull, and many times chargeable: but reuenge is pleasant,
and preferred before gaine.
            About the same time, Robert Duke of Ireland forsooke
the companie of his lawfull wife, whose mother Lady Isabel
was daughter to King Edward the third, and in steede of her
he tooke vnto him a base Bohemian, a Tauerners daughter.
The King little regarded this indignitie done vnto his cosin,
and in so great confusion of the state, let it passe vnreprooued,
as ouershadowed with greater vices, but the Duke of
Gloucester her vncle, tooke it in high disdaine, as iniurious
to the royall bloud, and did attend vpon occasion to worke

reuenge, this was not secrete from the Duke of Irelande,
who likewise bent al his deuises to bring the Duke of Gloucester
to his ouerthrow. The Duke of Gloucester did prosecute
this enmitie, openly and manlike: the Duke of Ireland
closely, and therefore the more daungerously. The Duke of
Gloucester was greater in bloud, the Duke of Ireland in fauour:
he being Vncle to the King, this bearing himselfe as
the Kings fellow. The Duke of Gloucester pretended for the
state, the Duke of Ireland for the King: and much priuate
mallice did passe vnder these publike shewes: but in opposition
of such equall powers, there is many times final difference
in harme.
            And now was Easter past, the tearme affigned to Duke
Robert Veere for his departure into Ireland: and least his
stay might breede some stirre within the Realme, hee still
busied himselfe in preparation for his iournie, and at last (although
it were long) made a solemne shew ofsetting forth.
The King went in great state to accompanie him to his shipping;
and the Earle of Suffolke, with Iustice Trisiliane, and
the residue of that faction, either for fauour followed, or for
feare durst not stay hehinde. So they passed together into
Wales, and (whether vpon leuitie the Kings mind changed,
or whether it was so contriued at the first to drawe themselues
more seperate from the Lords) there the Dukes iornie
was at an ende. Then they entred into counsell, which
way the Lords might best be suppressed: many deuises were
deepely debated, all pleased without respect either of danger
of disgrace: but few stoode with likelyhoode of euent
to their desires, and therefore none was finally concluded.
After long time thus friuolously spent, they left Wales, and
came to the Castle of Notingham, where the King caused
the high Shirifes of all the Shires in the Realme to be called
before him, and demaunded of them, what strength they
could make on his part against the Lordes, if neede shoulde
require: their answere was, that the common people did so

fauour the Lords, and were so well resolued of their loue &
loyaltie towards the King, that it was not in their power to
rayse any great power against them. Then they were commaunded,
that no Knights nor burgesses should afterwards
bee chosen to any Parliament, but those whome it pleased
the King to appoint; whereto they said, that it was a harde
matter in those times of Iealousie and suspition▪ to bereaue
the people of their auncient libertie in choosing Knightes
and Burgesses for the Parliament, some few other matters
being either vnreasonably required, or obtained to small
end, the Sherifs were licensed to depart. Then were assembled
Robert Trisilian, chiefe Iustice of the Kings Bench, Rob
                     •
                  rt
Belk
                     ••
                  pe, chiefe Iustice of the Common Pleas, Iohn Holte,
Roger Stilthorpe, William Burgh, Knights and Iustices also
of the Common Pleas▪, men learned in one rule chiefely,
without difference of truth of falshoode, to please those in
highest place, entituling that wisedome, which indeed was
but basenesse and feeblenes of minde; these were charged
by the King vpon their faith and legrance, to make true &
full answere to those questions following.
            1 First, whether the Statute ordinance and commission, made
and set forth the last Parliament (whereby was ment the commission
aganst Michael Delapoole Duke of Suffolke) did derogate
from the royall prerogatiue of the King.
            2 Item, they who procured the said Statute &c. to bee made▪
and set forth, 
                  •
               ow are they to be punished?
            3 Item, how are they to be punished, who prouoked the King
to consent to the premises?
            4 Item, what punishment haue they deserued who compelled
the King to consent to the said statute &c.
            5 Item, how are they to be punished, who resisted or letted the
King in exercising his royall power, by remitting any penalties or
debts whatsoeu
                  •
               r▪
            
            6 Item, when a Parliament is assembled, and the affaires of

the Realme, and the cause of assembling the Parliament, by the
Kings commaundement declared, and common
                  •
                Articles limited
by the King, vpon which, the Lordes and commons in the said Parliament
should proceed: if the Lords & commons will proceed vpon
other Articles, and not vpon the Articles limitted by the King,
vntill the King hath first giuen answere to the Articles propounded
by them, notwithstanding that the contrarie were enioyned by
the King▪ whether in this case the King ought to ha
                  •
               e the rule of
the Parliament, and so to order the fact▪ that the Lordes and
commons should first proceede vpon the Articles limitted by the
King, or that they should first haue answere of the King, vpon the
Articles propounded by them, 
                  •
               efore they proceede any further?
            7 Item, whether may the King when he pleaseth dissolue the
Parliament, and commaunde the Lordes and commons to depart▪
or no?
            8 Item, since the King may a
                  •
                his pleasure remoue any of his
Officers and Iustices, and punish them for their offences: Whether
may the Lordes and commons without the Kings will, accuse his
Officers and Iustices in Parliament for their offences, yea▪ or no?
            9 Item, what punishment haue they deserued, who 
                  〈◊〉
                in
Parliament, that the Statute whereby King Edward Carnaruane
was deposed, should be brought forth, by view whereof, the
new Statute ordinance and commission aforesaid were framed?
            10 Item, whether the iudgement giuen in the last Parliament
holden at Westminster, against Michael Delapoole Duke of
Suffolke, was erronious and reuocable, yea, or no?
            These questions or rather quarrelles were drawne by
Iohn Blake, a Counceller at the Law, by direction of Iustice
Trisilian, whilest the King made his stay in Wales: to the
which the Iustices afore-named, some in discharge of their
owne malice, and some to satisfie the mindes of other, made
answere as followeth.
            To the first, that they did derogate from the prerogatiue
of the King, because they were against his will.
            
               
To the second and third: that they are to be punished by
death, except it pleaseth the king to pardon them.
            To the fourth and fifth: that they are worthy to be punished
as traitours.
            To the sixth: that whosoeuer resisteth the kings rule in
that point, deserueth to be punished as a traitour.
            To the seuenth: that the king may at his pleasure dissolue
the Parliament, and whosoeuer shall afterwards proceed, against
the kings minde, as in a Parliament, he is worthy to be
punished as a traitour.
            To the eighth: that they can not, and whosoeuer doeth
the contrary, he deserueth to be punished as a traitour.
            To the ninth: that aswell the motioner as also the bringer
of the sayd statute to the Parliament, are worthy to be punished
as traitours.
            To the tenth, they answered: that the said iudgement seemed
to them erronious and reuocable in euery part. In witnesse
whereof, the iustices aforesayd, with Iohn Locktone, the
kings sergeant at law, haue subscribed and set their seales to these
present, &c.
            
            When these bloody sentences of death and treason, were
vnder generall & large termes thus fastened vpon the lords,
the king supposed his attempts against them, whether by violence,
or by couler of law sufficiently warranted: but his
power both wayes, as it was terrible against weake resistance,
so against such mighty defendants it was of small
force to effect that which he so much affected. Yet he did
not omit his best indeuour: and first, accounting the lordes
as condemned persons, he made diuision of their lands and
goods among those that he fauououred. Then he waged
souldiers to be in a treadinesse for his assistance, and sent the
earle of Northumberland to arrest the earle of Arundell, at
his castle in Reygate, where he then lay. But the earle of Arundell,
either vpon aduertisement, or suspition of the kings
minde, band
                  •
               d himselfe so strong, that when the earle of

Northumberland came vnto him, he dissembled his intent,
and left his purpose vnperformed. Thus were these proceedings
of the king, as now in counsell, so afterwards in euent,
not much vnlike that which the Fable telleth of a certaine
hunter, who first solde the skinne of the beare, and then went
about to take her: but when he came within the forrest, either
by vnskilfulnesse or misaduenture, he not onely missed
his pray, but fell himselfe into danger of the beast.
            The duke of Gloucester hauing secret intelligence of the
kings displeasure and of his drift, sent the bishop of London
to perswade the king to entertaine a more fauourable opinion
of him: making faith to the bishop with a solemne
oath, that he neuer entended any thing to the preiudice of
the king, either in person or state. The Bishop not vnskilfull
to ioyne profitable perswasion with honest, declared to the
king that his displeasure against the Lords was not groūded
vpon iust desert, but either vpon false suggestions of their enemies,
or erronious mistaking a
                  •
                some of their actions: how
desirous they were of his grace and fauour: how faithfull and
forward they promised to persist in all dutifull seruice: how
honourable this agreement would be to the king: how profitable
to the realme: and how daungerous to both, these
troubles might encrease. The king seemed to giue good
eare & credit to the bishops speech: but Michael Delapoole,
a turbulent man, and against quiet counsell obstinately contentious,
standing then by the king, soone stiffened his minde
against all impression of friendship. Heereupon contention
did arise betweene the Bishop and the Earle, and brake
forth violently into heat of words. The Earle applied to the
Lordes those obiections wherewith great men are vsually
charged: sparing no spight of speech, and vsing all arte to
aggrauate matters against them. The bishop replied that
the Earle was thus fiercely bent, not vpon his owne necessity,
nor loue to the king: but onely to satisfie his bloody and
ambitious humour, wherein he was so immoderate, that rather

then the lords should not be destroyed, he would ouerwhelme
them with the ruines of the state, for tumults might
in deed be raised by men of little courage, but must be maintained
with the hazzard, and ended with the losse of the most
valiant: that neither his counsell in this matter was to be followed,
being the principall firebrand of the disturbance,
not his complaints against any man to be any thing regarded,
being himselfe a condemned person, and one that held
both his life and honour at the pleasure of the king. At these
words the king was exceedingly wroth, and charged the bishop
with menacing & threats to auoid his presence. When
the duke of Glocester had knowledge heereof, he signified
the daunger to the earles of Arundell, Warwicke, and Derbie,
aduising them to take armes, and vnite themselues for
their common defence: for in so doubtfull and suspected
peace, open warre was the onely hope of safety. These three
Earles were the chiefest strength to the side, but the Duke
bare the most stroke, because he was most bolde, and his
greatnesse almost obscured the names of the rest. On the other
side, the king thinking separate dealing the onely way
to weaken a confederacy, endeuoured to preuent the lordes
in ioyning of their forces: and to that end he sent a strength
of men with charge, either to set vpon the earle of Arundell
where he did lie, or to intercept him in his passage towardes
the Duke. But the Earle had traueiled all the night before
their comming, and so happily escaped to Haringey parke,
where he found the Duke and the other Earles with a sufficient
company, as well to make attempt, as to stand vpon
resistance.
            When the king heard hereof, he was disturbed and distracted
in minde, being now in choise either to relent or to
resist, whereof he much disdained the one, and distrusted the
other. His followers also were diuided in counsell: some
fretting at the disgrace, and some fainting at the daunger.
The Archbishop of York perswaded the king, that occasion

was now offered to shew himselfe a King indeed, if he would
muster a royall armie, and by maine might beat downe
the boldnesse of this presumption. NIHIL DICTV FACILIVS,
sayd another: This is more readily deuised, thē done:
the army against vs is mighty, and the commanders are great
men, both for courage and skill, and greatly fauoured of the
common people: whereby that which is accompted so ready
pay, may chaunce to prooue a desperate debt. Therefore
it were better with some yeelding to enter into conditions
of quiet, then by standing vpon high points of honour to hazard
the issue of a battaile, wherein the King cannot winne
without his weakning, not loose without daunger of his vndoing.
There was then in presence, a certaine olde Knight,
called Sir Hugh Linne, a good Souldier, but a very mad-cap,
& one that liued chiefely vpon the liberalitie of noble men;
by vaine iestes affecting the grace of a pleasant conceite: of
him the King demaunded in mirth, what he thought best to
be done? Sir Hugh swore, swownes, and snayles, let vs set vpon
them, and kill euery man and mothers childe; and so we
shall make riddaunce of the best friendes you haue in the
Realme, this giddie answere more weighed with the King,
then if it had beene spoken in graue and sober sport: and thus
it often happeneth, that wisedome is the more sweetly swallowed,
when it is tempored with folly, and earnest is the lesse
offensiue, if it bee deliuered in iest. In the end, the deuise of
raysing armes was laide aside, not as displeasing (being so
agreable to former proceedings) but as despayring to preuaile
thereby; and the Archbishop of Canterburie, with the
Bishop of Ely being Lord Chaunceller, were sent vnto the
Lordes, to vnderstand the cause of their assemblie: answere
was made, that it was for the safetie of themselues; the honour
of the King; and the ouerthrow of them which sought
the ouerthrow of both. At the last it was concluded by mediation
of the Bishops, that the Lordes should come before
the King at Westminster, vpon promise of his protection, and

there haue audience concerning their griefes: the Bishop of
Ely also making priuat faith, that he would discouer any danger
that he could discrie, a little before the time they should
come, the Bishoppe of Ely sent word, of an awaite that was
purposed to be layed for them, at a place called the Mewes,
neere London; aduising thē either to make stay, or to come
prepared: but rather to make stay, least further prouocation
might make reconcilement more hard, hereupon they came
not at the time appointed, and the King maruailing at their
failance, enquired the cause of the Bishop of Ely: who aunswered,
that the Lords found want of true meaning, & that
they neither did, nor durst repose assuraunce in the Kings
word, which they saw to bee vsed as a meanes to entrape
them, the King made the matter verie strange vnto him, affirming
with an oath that hee was free from deceite, both in
consent and knowledge: and in a great rage, he commaunded
the Sherifes of London to goe to the place, and slay all
those whome they found there in a waite. Whether this was
but a countenance of his, or whether he was not priuie to the
practise, it is not assuredly knowne, and in deede, the matter
was not false, but the place mistaken: for Sir Thomas Triuet,
and Sir Nicholas Brambre had assembled many armed men
at Westminster, with direction to assault the Lordes at their
best aduantage: but perceiuing their deceite to be discouered,
they dissolued the companie, and sent them secretely away
to London.
            Then the Lordes, vpon new faith for their securitie, came
to the King at Westminster, and yet in faith they brought securitie
with them, such troupes of men, as in a place where
they were so entirely fauoured, was able to defend them, in
any suddaine tumult or daunger: the King vpon their comming
entred into Westminster Hall, apparelled in his royall
robes: and when he was placed in his seate, and had composed
himselfe to maiestie and state, the Bishop of Ely Lord
Chaunceller, made a long Oration to the Lordes in the

Kings name. Wherein he declared, the heinousnesse of their
offence, the greatnesse of their perill, how easie a matter it
had beene for the King to haue leuied a power sufficient to
distroy them; and yet for the generall spare of his subiectes
bloud, and in particular fauour to the Duke and other Lords,
he made choyse to encounter and ouercome them, rather by
friendship then by force: and therefore was willing, not only
to pardon their ryote, but also to heare their griefes, and in
a peaceable and quiet manner to redresse them. The Lordes
alleaged for causes of their taking armes, first the necessitie
of their owne defence! secondly, the loue both of the King
and of the Realme, whose fame and fortune did dayly decline,
by meanes of certaine traytors, who liued onely by the
dishonours of the one, and decayes of the other, those whom
they challenged for traytors, were Robert Veere Duke of
Ireland, Alexander Neuill Archbishop of Yorke, Michaell
Delapoole Earle of Suffolke, Robert Trisiliane Lord chiefe Iustice,
Sir Nichol
                     •
                  s Brambre, and certaine others, somewhat
secreter, but nothing better: and to iustifie this appeale, they
threw downe their gloues, and offered themselues to the triall
by combate. The king replied, that often times the causes
of actions being good, yet, if the meanes want moderation
and iudgement, the euents proue pernicious: and therefore,
though these complaints were true, yet were these courses
not tollerable, which did beare an open face of rebellion, and
by licentiousnesse of the multitude, might soone haue sorted
to such an end: for it is more easie to raise the people, then
to rule them: whose furie once stirred, will commonly be discharged
some wayes. But (sayd he) since we haue broken
this broile, we will not by combatting giue occasion of a
new: but at the next parliament (which he appointed should
begin the third day of February then next ensuing) as well
you,Crastino purificationis. as they, shall be present, and iustice indifferently done
vnto all. In the meane time, he tooke all parties into his protection,
that none should endanger or endammage another:

desiring the Lordes to beare in minde, that as princes must
not rule without limitation, so subiectes must vse a meane in
their libertie. Then he caused the duke and the Earles, which
all this time kneeled before him, to arise, and went with them
into his priuate Chamber, where they talked a while, and
drunke familiarly together, & afterwards, with a most friendly
farwell he licenced them to depart. They of the contrarie
faction were not present at this meeting, and if they had, it
was thought, that the presence of the King should little haue
protected them.
            This act of the King was diuers waies taken: some iudged
him fearefull: others moderate, rather in sparing the bloud
of his subiectes. The Lordes were verie ioyfull of his goodwill
and fauour, which as by base or bad meanes they would
not seeke, so being well gotten, they did highly esteeme. Yet
they thought it the safest course, not to seperate themselues,
suspecting the mutabilitie of the King, and the malice of
their enemies, of whome they knewe neither where they
were, nor what they did entend: and being men of great
wealth, and great power, and greatly bent to hurtfull practises,
they were feared not without a cause: for the Duke of
Ireland, either by setting on, or sufferance of the King, was
all this time mustering of Souldiours out of Cheshire and
Wales, where hee gathered an armie both for number, and
goodnesse of men sufficient, if another had beene generall,
to haue maintained the side.
            When the Lordes were aduertised hereof, they deuided
themselues, & beset all the waies by which the Duke should
passe to London; determining to encounter him, before he
did increase his power, and countenance his actions with
the puissance or name of the King. At the last he was met by
the Earle of Derby, at a place called Babbelake neere to
Burforde: and there the Earle put his men in array, resoluing
with great boldnesse to hazard the battaile, his Souldiers also
were ful of courage and hart, disliking nothing more then

delay, as a loosing of time, and a hinderance to the victorie:
but the Duke, being a man not fit for action, yet mutinous,
and more apt to stirre strife, then able to stint it: vpon newes
of an enemie would presently haue fled. There was then in
the armie as a principall Commaunder, one Sir Thomas Molineux,
Constable of Cheshire, a man of great wealth, and
of good proofe in seruice, vpon whose leading all that countrie
did depend: he perswaded the Duke, that this was but a
part of the forces that were against them, and led onely by
the Earle of Derby, a man of no speciall name (at that time)
among the Lordes, and if they could not beare through that
resistance, it was but in vaine to attempt any great atchiuement
by armes. Hereupon the Duke stayed his steps, but his
faint spirits were mooued by this speech, rather to desire victory
then to hope it: his souldiers also were dul, silent, & sad,
and such as were readier to interpret, then execute the captaines
commandement. So they ioyned battell, but scarse
ten ounces of bloud was lost on both sides, before the duke
of Ireland set spurres to his horse, and forsooke the field.
His souldiers seeing this, threw away their vnfortunate weapons,
more for indignation then for feare, ruffling their
rancks, and yeelding to the Earle the honour of the field.
Sir Thomas Molineux in flying away, was forced to take a
Riuer which was neere, and as he was comming foorth againe,
a certaine Knight whose name was Sir Thomas Mortimer,
pulled off his helmet, and stabbed him into the braines
with his dagger. The rest submitted themselues to the discretion
of the victorours, making them lords ouer their life,
and death: but their yeelding was no sooner offered, then
it was accepted, the Earle presently commaunding that
none should be harmed, but those that did make resistance,
or beare armour: the Souldiours also being willing to
shew fauour towardes their countreymen, as ledde into
this action, partly vpon simplicitie, partly to accompany
these which came vpon feare. Then the Gentlemen were

still reteined in the Earles company, the common souldiers
were dispoiled of their armour onely, and so returned
againe to their peaceable businesse at home. And this was
the first acte whereby reputation did rise to the side, and the
greatnes began, whereunto the Earle afterwards attained.
            The Duke of Ireland, at the beginning of his flight, was
desirous to haue passed the riuer which ranne by: and comming
to a bridge, he found the same broken: from thence
he posted to another bridge, which he found guarded with
Archers. At the last, his fearefulnesse being feared away (as
nothing maketh men more desperate vpon a doubtfull danger,
then feare of that which is certaine) he aduentured to
take the streame; in the midst wherof, he forsooke his horse,
and swam to the other side, and so by benefit of the night escaped,
and fled into Scotland: and shortly afterpassed the
seas into Flanders, and from thence traueiled into France:
where the continuall gall of his griefe soone brought his loathed
life to an end. His horse was taken with his brest-plate,
his helmet and his gauntlets, whereupon it was generally
supposed that he was drowned; and (as in great vncerteineties
it often happeneth) some affirmed that they sawe his
death, which men either glad to heare, or not curious to
search, did easily beleeue: whether this were thus contriued
of purpose, or fell so out by chance, it was a great meanes of
his escape, by staying the pursute after him, which otherwise
had bene made. His coach also was taken, and certaine
of the Kings letters found, wherein he desired the Duke to
come to London with all the power and speede hee could
make, and he would be ready to die in his defence; so vnskilfull
was he in matters of gouernment, that to pleasure a
few, he regarded not the discontentment of all the rest.
            The Earle of Suffolke, vpon this accident, shaued his
beard, and in base and disguised attire fled to Calice, and either
for feare, or for shame, neuer after returned into England:
he was a cruell spoiler, and a carelesse spender, in war

contemptible, in peace in supportable, an enemie to all cousaile
of others and in his owne conceite obstinatly contentious;
of a good wit, and ready speach, both which hee abused,
to the cunning commending of himselfe, and crafty deprauing
of others: he was lesse loued but better heard of
the King then the Duke of Ireland: the more hurtful man
& the more hateful: the Duke beeing charged with no great
fault: but onely the Kings excessiue fauour; in their course
of good and bad fortune, both of them were famous alike.
Also the Archbishop of Yorke, Iustice Trisiliane, and others
of that faction, ran euery man, like connies to their couerte:
Yea the king betooke himselfe to the Tower of London, and
there made prouision for his winter aboade; hauing all his
courses now crossed, first rashnesse in taking armes, and afterwards
by cowardise in maintaining them.
            The Earle of Darby signified this successe to his associates
by letters, yet without any vaūting or enlarging tearms:
his speaches also were moderate, rather exstenuating his fact
then extolling it: but by stopping his fame, it much increased
when men esteemed his high thoughtes by his lowely
wordes, and his conceite in great exploites, by his contempt
of this. Then the Lords met, and marched together towards
London, whether they came vpon S. Stephens day, hauing
almost forty thousand men in their armie, & first they shewed
themselues in battaile array, in the fieldes neare vnto
the Tower, within the viewe of the King: afterwardes, they
tooke vp their lodging in the suburbes, the Maior and aldermen
of the citty came forth, and gaue liberall allowance,
of victuall to the souldiers, offering vnto the Lordes entertainment
within the Citty, but they did not accept it.
            Now this discord seemed to draw to a dangerous distraction
of the common-wealth; the vanquished parte being ful
of malice, and the conquerors of presumption: the one wanting
power, the other right to command and rule. The Archbishop
of Canterbury, and certaine others of the neutrality,

fearing the sequele, perswaded the king to come to a treaty
with the lordes: but he made shewe of very light regarde of
all these dealings; let them stay (saide hee) vntill they haue
wearied themselues with maintaining this multitude, and
then I will talke further with them. When the lordes vnderstood
the drift of his deuise they beset the thames, & all other
passages, and protested that they woulde not departe vntill
they had talked with him to his face. The king hauing neyther
strength to resist, nor scope to scape, consēted to a treaty,
and to that end desired the lordes to come to him into the
Tower: but they refused that place of meeting, vpon feare of
false measure, vntill the king permitted them to search as diligently,
and come as strongly as they thought it meete. So
they came vnto the King well guarded, and after a fewe
colde kindnesses, and strange salutations, they laide before
him, his proceedings against them at Nottingham; his letters
which he sent to the duke of Ireland contrary to his worde,
for the raysing of armes against them: his agreement with
the French King, for the yeelding vp of Callice and other
strong holdes which he possessed in those parts: with diuers
other pointes of dishonourable dealing and negligent gouernment.
What should the King then haue said or done?
all these matters were so euident and so euill, that there was
no place left either for deniall or defence. Therefore ingenuously,
first with silence and patience, afterwardes with
teares he confessed his errors. And certainely the stiffe stomack
of the lordes relented more to these luke warme drops
then they would haue done to his cannon shot.
            Then it was agreed, that the next day the King shoulde
meet with them at westminster, and there treat further, both
of these, and other necessarie affaires of the realme. So the
Duke, and the rest of the lords departed except the earle of
Darby, who stayed supper with the king, and all that time
stayed him in his promised purpose: but when hee was also
gone, some of the secrete counsailers, or corrupters rather,

and abusers of the King, whistled him in the eare, that his going
to Westminster was neither seemely nor safe, and would
cause not onely to his person present danger and contempt,
but also both abasement and abridgement to his authority
afterwards. The Kings minde was soone changed; but the
Lords being now stirred, and feeling the Kings hand weake
to gouerne the bridle, became the more vehement, and
sent him worde, that if hee did ieofaile with them, and not
come according to appointment, they would chuse another
King, who shoulde haue his nobility in better regard. This
peremptorie message so terrified the King, that he not onely
went to Westminster, but suffered the Lords to doe there
euen what they woulde. So they caused him much against
his liking, to remooue out of the courte, Alexander Neuill,
Archbishop of Yorke, Iohn Foorde, Bishop of Durisme, Frier
Thomas Rushoke, Bishop of Chichester, the kings Confessor:
Likewise they remoued the Lord Souch, the Lord Haringworth,
Lord Burnell, Lord Beaumonte, Sir Albred Vecre, Sir
Baldewine Bereford, Sir Richard Alderburie, Sir Iohn Worth,
Sir Thomas Clifford, & Sir Iohn Louell, taking suerties for their appearāce at the next Parliament. Also certaine Ladies were
expelled the Court, and put vnder suerties: to wit, the Lady
Mowen, the Lady Moling, and the Lady Ponings, which
was the wife of Sir Iohn Woorth. Furthermore, they arested
Simon Burlye, William Elinghame, Iohn Salisburie, Thomas
Triuet, Iames Berneis, Nicholas Dagworth, and Nicholas
Brambre Knights, Richard Clifforde, Iohn Lincolne, and
Richard Motford, Clearkes, Iohn Beauchampe the Kings
Steward, Nicholas Lake, Deane of the Kings Chappell: and
Iohn Blake counceller at the Law, all these were committed
to diuers Prisons, where they were forth-comming, but not
comming foorth, vntill the Parliament next following.
            After the feast of the Purification,1388▪
                the Parliament began
at London, and yet the King vsed many meanes, either to
dash or deferre the same) to which the Lordes came, attended

with the number and strength of a full armie: vpon colour,
to represse any ryote that might happen to arise: but
in truth, that by this terrour, they might draw the whole manage
of affaires vnto themselues. This assembly continued
vntill Whitsontide next following, with verie great feare of
some men, and hope of others, and expectation of all. Herein
was Iustice Trisiliane, by counsaile of the Lordes, against
the Kings minde, condemned to bee drawne and hanged:
which iudgement was presently executed vpon him: the
like sentence and execution passed vpon Sir Nicholas Brambre,
Sir Iohn Salisburie, Sir Iames Barneis, Iohn Beauchampe,
the Kings steward, and Iohn Blake Esquire, who had framed
the Articles which were exhibited against the Lordes at
Nottingham. Also the Iustices who gaue their iudgement
concerning those Articles, Robert Belk
                     •
                  ape, Iohn Holte, Roger
Fulthorpe, and William Burghe, were condemned to perpetuall
exile: and yet they did not interpose themselues, but
intermeddle by constraint. Sir Simon Burlye was also beheaded,
who was keeper of Douer Castle, and had conspired
to deliuer the same vnto the Frenchmen: hee was infinitely
haughtie and proude, equall to the meanest in virtue and
wisedome, but in brauerie and traine inferiour to no Duke
Diuers other were either put to death, or banished, and,
some (as it happeneth when the reyne of furie is at large)
without any great cause. The Earle of Derby furthered no
mans death; but laboured verie instantly for the life and libertie
of many, in so much as hoat speeches did arise betweene
the Duke of Gloucester and him: whereby he purchased
a fauourable opinion among those of the contrarie
part, hauing caused the death of no man, but onely in the
fielde. Then was an oath exacted of the King, to stand to the
gouernment of the Lordes: and also an oath was taken of all
the Subiects within the Realme, to be true and faithfull vnto
the King. The king in taking this oath of the Lordes, bewrayed
his inward conceite by his open countenance, looking

pleasantly on those he fauoured, and angerly on those
whome hee hated; by which vntimely discouery, hee made
them more heedefull, and himselfe more hatefull: which
were occasions afterwarde, both to preuente the reuenge,
which he much desired, and to procure the mischiefs which
hee little feared. Lastly, a subsidie was graunted: and to the
King comming as it were to a capitulation with the lordes,
hee to haue the name of a King, and they the authority and
maiesty, the contention for that time ceased.
            All this was done in the xj. yeere of the kings reigne, he
being yet vnder age,1389 and in gouernement of others. But the
yeere following, he beganne to take vpon him more liberty
and rule: and vpon extreame disdaine, that both his pleasure
and his power were by the Lords thus restrained, he did
euer after beare a hard minde against them. And first he assembled
them in the Councell chamber, and there demanded,
of what yeeres they tooke him to be: they answered,
that he was somewhat aboue one and twenty: then (sayd
he) I am of lawfull age to haue the regiment in mine owne
hand, and therefore you doe me wrong to holde me still vnder
gouernement, as though the condition of a king were
harder then of a subiect. This the Lords were neither willing
to grant, nor able to denie, and therefore they either kept silence,
or spake little to the purpose. Well (sayd the king)
since I am no longer an Infant, I heere renounce your rule,
and take vpon me such free administration of the Realme,
as the Kings thereof, my predecessours heeretofore haue
lawfully vsed. Then presently he began his Phaetons flourish,
and commaunded the Bishop of Elie being L. Chancellour
to resigne his seale; which the king receiued, and put
vp, and therewith departed out of the chamber: but soone
after he returned againe, and deliuered the same to William
Wickham bishop of Winchester, constituting him L. Chancellour
thereby. Many other officers he likewise deposed,
and placed new in their roome; partly to manifest his authority,

and partly to satisfie his displeasure. Also he remooued
the Duke of Gloucester, the Earle of Warwicke, and many
others from his Priuy councell, and tooke those in their places,
which more regarded the humour of the King, but lesse
his honour.
            Soone after, it was suggested to the King, that the Duke
of Gloucester was gathering of forces against him; but vpon
examination there was found not onely no trueth, but
no shew or colour of any such matter. The Duke would not
quietly haue disgested the raysing of these reportes: but the
King, whether vpon a generall delight, to be tickled in the
eares with such tales, or vpon particular desire to haue some
quarell against the Duke, charged him to silence.
            In the 13. yeare of the Raigne of King Richard, the Citizens
of Genua desired his ayde,1390. against the Barbarians of Afrike,
who with dayly incursions, infested and spoyled all the
Sea coasts & Ilands of Italy, and Fraunce, which fronted vppon
thē. The King sent a choyse companie of Souldiers, ynder
the cōduct of Henrie Earle of Derby; who behaued himselfe
in this charge with great integritie & courage, inciting
his men, the good by prayse, the bad by example rather then
reproofe, as more ready to commend the vertues of the one,
then to vpbraide the vices of the other. And first hee passed
into Fraunce, and there ioyned himselfe to certaine French
forces, appointed likewise for this seruice: then with might
and minds vnited, they sayled together into Afrike. At their
arriuall, the Barbarians were ready in armes, to keepe them
from landing: but the Earle commaunded his Archers to
breake through and make passage, dispising the enemie,
whome he knew to be weake, and vnskilfull in seruice, and
not to haue that aduantage in place, which hee had in men:
the Frenchmen also sharply set in & seconded the English:
and so whilest both companies contended, the one to be accompted
a helpe, & the other to seeme to neede no help, the
enemies were forced to flie, and leaue the shoare vnto the

Christians. In this conflict, three Dukes of the Barbarians
and aboue three hundred Souldiers were slaine, and in the
flight, fower Dukes were taken, and a great, yet vncertaine
number of common people. Then the Christians marched
directly towards Tunis, the head Cittie of that Countrie▪ this
they besieged, & in short time tooke, chiefely by the prowes
of the English souldiers, who first scaled the Wals, and reared
thereon the Earles banner. When they were entred the
Towne, the Englishmen bent their endeuour, to the housing
of their enemies, and beating downe of such as made
resistance, but the Frenchmen straight waies turned to their
lasciuious pleasures: so that there was presented a spectacle,
both pitiful and shamelesse: in one place butchering of men,
in another ryoting with women: here streames of bloud, &
heapes of slaughtered bodies, hard by dissolute and licentious
wantonnesses in some, all the miseries of a cruell warre,
and the loosenesse of a secure peace. Here were slaine and
taken aboue fower thousand Barbarians: the Kings brother
also was slaine: but the King himselfe fled into the Castle,
which was strongly scited, and well fortified and furnished
with men. The Christians laide siege to this Castle the space
of fiue weekes, during which time, they lost many of their
men, yet not by sword, but by sickenesse: the Barbarians also
were distressed with want of victuall, hauing but litle prouision,
and many vnprofitable mouthes to consume it: herevpon
they sent vnto the Christians, to desire peace, offering
them a great summe of money, to depart out of their countrie:
this the Christians accepted, vpon condition, that they
might also freely carry with them, all their pray and prisoners;
and that the Barbarians should from thenceforth surcease
from making spoyle, vpon any of the coastes of Italy,
or Fraunce. Thus had this voyage a prosperous and speedie
end: the onely seruice (as I suppose) which the English and
Frenchmen performed together, without iotte of iarre. And
yet the Earle abused not the fortune of this successe, to vaine

vaunting, or brauing in words, but moderately im
                  •
               arted to
the rest, the honour of the exployt: so by valyan
                  •
               y performing
his charge, and sparingly speaking thereof, his glorie
encreased, without bit of enuie.
            In the fifteenth and sixteenth yeres of the reigne of King
Richard,
               1392 certaine causes of discontentment did grow, betweene
the King and the Londoners,1393 which set the fauour
of the one, and the faith of the other, at great separation and
distance: One was, for that the King would haue borrowed
of them a thousand poundes: which they feeling much; and
fearing more the Kings daily exactions, did not onely deny,
but euill intreated a certaine Lumbard, who offered to lay
out the money.
            Another griefe was thus occasioned: One of the Bishop
of Salisburies seruants, named Romane, meeting in Fleetstreet
with a Bakers man, bearing horse-bread, tooke a loafe
out of his basket: and by rude demaund of the one, and
rough denial of the other, chollar so kindled betwixt thē, that
Romane brake the Bakers head. Heereupon the neighbors
came forth, and would haue arrested this Bishops lusty yeoman:
but he escaped, and fled to the Bishops house. The
Constable followed peaceably, and demaunded a quiet deliuery
of the offendour: but the Bishops men shut the gates
against him, that no man could come neere. Then much
people flocked together, threatening to breake open the
gates, and fire the house, vnlesse Romane were brought forth
vnto them: What (sayd they) are the Bishops men priuiledged?
or is his house a sanctuary? or will he protect those
whom he ought to punish? if we may be shuffled off in this
sort, not onely our streets, but our shoppes and our houses
shall neuer be free from violence and wrong. This we will
not endure: we can not: it standeth not vs in hand. Heerewith
they approched the gates, and began to vse violence:
but the Maior and Shiriffes of the Citty, vpon aduerti
                  •
               ement
of this tumult, came amongst them, crying out, that it was

not courage, but out-rage which they shewed: wherby
they would procure, both daunger to themselues and displeasure
against the whole Citty; that although wrong had
beene receiued, yet they were not the men, nor this the
meanes to redresse the same: So partly by their perswasions,
partly by their presence and authoritie, they repressed the
riote, and sent euery man away, with streight charge to
keep the peace. Here was yet no great harme done, and the
quarrell might haue bene quieted without more adoe, had
not the Bishop stirred therein, and kindled the coales of vnkindnesse
a fresh. For the Londoners at that time, were not
onely suspected secretly, but openly noted to bee fauourers
and followers of wickliffes opinions: for which cause, they
were much maliced of the Bishoppes; and many of their actions
interpreted, to proceed from another minde, and tend
to a worse ende, then was outwardly borne in countenance
and shew: and some matters of chaunce, were taken as done
of purpose. Therefore the Bishop of Salisburie called Iohn
Waltham, who was also treasurour of England, made a grieuous
complaint of this attempt, to Thomas Arundle Archbishop
of Yorke, and Lord Chauncellour; affirming, that if vpon
euery light pretence, the citezens might be suffered in
this sorte to insult vpon the bishoppes, without punishment,
without reproofe and blame, they woulde bring into hazzard,
not onely the dignity and state: but the libertie also of
the whole Church: did they not lately take vppon them the
punishment of adulteries, and other crimes appertaining to
ecle
                  •
               iasticall iurisdiction? maliciously alleaging, that the bishops
and their officers, either beeing infamous for those vices
themselues, did wincke at the same in others: or else by
couetous comm
                  •
               tation, did rather set them to sale, then care
fully represse them. Did they not rudely and 
                  •
               n
                  •
               euerently
breake open the doores vpon the Archbishop of Canterburie,
and interrupte his proceedings against Iohn Astone, an
open follower of wickliffe? and doe we think that this is the

last indignity that they will offer? no surely, nor yet the least:
and if this boldnesse be not beaten downe, our authority will
fall into open contempt and scorne, and bee made a common
foote-ball, for euery base citizen to spurne at. Herevpon
they went together to the King, and so incensed his displeasure
against the Londoners, (beeing prepared thereto
by former prouocations) that hee was in the minde to make
spoyle of the citty, and vtterly to destroy it. But beeing perswaded
to some more moderation in reuenge, first hee caused
the 
                  〈◊〉
                and Shiriffes, and many of the chiefe citizens
to be apprehended, and committed to diuers seuerall prisons:
then hee c
                  •
               zed all the liberties of the citty into his
handes, and ordained, that no Mayor shoulde any more bee
elected, but that the King shoulde at his pleasure appointe
a Warden and gouernon
                  •
                ouer the citty. This office was
first committed to Sir Edward Darlington, who for his gentlenesse
towardes the citizens, was shortly after remouoed,
and Sir Baldwine Radington placed in his roome. Also the
King was induced, or rather seduced by the Archbishop of
Yorke Lord Chauncellour, to remooue the Tearmes and
Courtes: to witte, the Chauncery, the Exchequer, the kings
bench, the hamper, and the common pleas, from London,
to bee kept at Yorke, where the same continued from midsommer,
in the yeare 1393. vntill Christmasse next following,
to the great hinderance and decay of the citty of London.
At the last, the King vpon earnest intreaty of the Duke
of Lancaster, and the Duke of Gloucester, called the Londoners
before him at Windsore: where (hauing first terrified
them with the presence and shewe of a greate number
of armed men) hee caused all the priuiledges of the citty,
both olde and newe, to be brought forth, whereof he restored
some, and restrained the rest: yet the Londoners were
not fully receiued to fauour; neither recouered they at that
time, either the person or dignity of their Mayor. Shortly
after, the King went to London: at whose comming, the citizens

changed all their griefe into gladnesse (as the common
forte is without measure in both) entertayning him
with such ioyfull triumphes and rich presentes, as if it had
beene the day of his coronation. They supposed with these
great curtesies and costs to haue satissied his displeasure; but
they sound themselues farre deceiued: for they were not fully
restoa
                  •
               ed to their liberties againe, vntill they had made
fine, to pay vnto the King ten thousand poundes. Thus did
the Londoners manifest in themselues, a strange diuersity
of disposition, both licenciously to committe offe
                  •
               ee, and
paciently to endure punnishment: hauing rashnesse and
rage so tempered with obedience, that they were easily
punnished, who coulde not possibly bee ruled. Yet fot
this cause, so soone as first occasion did serue against the
King, they shewed themselues, either his earnest enimies, or
faint friends.
            King Richard in the nineteene yeare of his reigne, passed
the seas to Calice: the French king also came downe
to Arde: betweene which two Townes, a place was appointed,
and tentes erected for both the kings to meete.
After large expenses on both fides, and great honour done
by the one king to the other: a surcease of armes was concluded
betweene them for thirtie yeares: and king Richard
tooke to wife Lady Isabell, the French Kings daughter, being
not aboue seuen or eight yeeres olde. The Duke of
Gloucester was so offended; both with this friendship, and
assinitie, that he lost all manner of patience: exclaiming,
that it was more meete to be in armes, then in amitie with
the French-men, who beeing inferiour to the English in
courage, did alwayes ouer-reach them in craft, and being
too weake for warre, did many times preuaile by peace:
that now they had got into their handes many Townes and
Holdes, appertaining to the crowne of England, they were
willing to conclude a peace, to exclude the King thereby
from his possessions: but whensoeuer occasion shoulde

change for their aduantage, they would be then as ready to
start from the friendshippe, as at that present they were to
strike it: that the French Kings daughter, being but a child,
was very vnmeet for the marriage of King Richard, as well
for disparitie of age, as for that the King had no issue by
his first wife, and was not like to haue any by this, except
(perhappes) in his olde and withered yeeres. When the
Duke saw, that with these motiues he did nothing preuaile,
he suborned the Londoners, to make petition to the King,
that se
                  ••
               g there was peace with France, he would release
them of the Subsidie which they had graunted to him in
regard of those war
                  •
               es. This suite was instantly followed,
and much perplexed the King, vntill the Duke of Lancaster
declare to the people, that the King had beene at the
charge and dispense of three hundred thousand poundes
in his voyage into France, for the procuring of this peace:
whereupon they were pacified, and desisted from their
demaund.
            The yeere following, Guido Earle of S. Pauls, was sent
into England by Charles King of Fraunce,1397 to visit and salute
in his name, King Richard, and Queene Isabell his
wife, the French Kings daughter. To this Earle, the King did
relate, with what feruencie the Duke of Gloucester contended,
to make disturbance of the peace betweene England
and France: how, because his minde was not therein
followed, hee mooued the people to seditious attempts,
bending himselfe wholly to maintaine discord and disqui
               
                  •
               t,
rather in his owne countrey, then not at all. He further
reported, what stiffe strifes in formert
                  ••
               es, the Duke had
stirred: which, howsoeuer they were done, yet as they
were declared, they sounded very odious and hard. When
the Earle heard this, he presently answered, that the Duke
was too daungerous a subiect to be permitted to liue: that
greatnesse was neuer safe, if it grow excess
                  •
               ue and bolde:
that the King must not affect the vaine commendation of

clemency, with his owne perill: and that it touched him,
both in honour to reuenge the disgraces which he had receiued,
and in policy to preuent the daungers which he had
cause to feare. These words of sharpened the Kings displeasure,
that from thencefoorth he busied his braines in no
one thing more, then how to bring the Duke to his end.
Now he began to pry more narrowly into his demeanour:
to watch his words: to obserue actions: adn alwayes to interpret
them to the woorst▪ framing himselfe to many vaine
and weedlesse feare
                  •
                Often times he would complaine of
him to the Duke of La
                  •
               ster, and the Duke of Yorke, how
fierce and violent he was in his speeches, and crosse to him
in all matters. The Dukes would make answere, that the
Duke of Gloucester their brother, was in deed, more hoat
and vehement then they did commend: yet his fiercenesse
was ioyned with faithfulnesse, and his crosnesse proceeded
from a care, least the Common-wealth should decrease either
in honour or in possessions: and therefore the King had
neither need to feare, nor cause to disslike.
            About that time, the Dukes of Lancaster and of Yorke
withdrewe themselues from the court, to their priuate houses:
the duke of Gloucester also went to ly at Plashey, neere
Chelmessorde in Essex: vpon aduantage of which seperation,
the King stoode distracted in minde, betweene feare to
differ, and shame to auow the destruction of the Duke, least
he might happily bee disapointed by the one, or dishonoured
by the other. Hereupon he entred into counsaile with
Iohn Holland, Earle of Huntington, his halfe brother: and
Thomas Mowbray, Earle of Notingham, howe the Duke of
Gloucester might be suppressed or oppressed rather, the cruclty
which was but wauering in the King, yea wanting by
nature, was soone confirmed by euill aduise: and being once
inclined to bloud, he did not faile, either of example of
                  •
               ewd
action to followe, or direction of cruell counsaile what to
doe: so the plotte was contriued, and according thereto, the

King and the Earle of No
                  •
               tingham rod
                  •
                together into Essex,
as though it were to disporte themselues in hunting: when
they were in the middest of the Forrest, the Earle made stay,
and the King passed forth with a smal and vnsuspicious company
to the Duke, lying at Plashey: there he stayed dinner:
and then pretending occasion of present returne, he desired
the Duke to accompany him to London, the faire entreatie
of a Prince, is a most forceable commaunde: therefore
the Duke supposing that onely to bee intended in deede,
which was pretended in shewe, 
                  〈◊〉
                to horse-backe with
the King, taking such small attendance, as vpon the sudden
could be in a readinesse, and appointing the rest to come after
him to London. So they rode together, vsing much familiar
talke by the way, vntill they came neere the place of
await: then the King put his horse forwarde, and the Duke
comming behinde, was suddenly intercepted and stayed,
crying aloud, and calling to the King for his helpe: the King
continued his iourney, as though he had not heard, and the
Duke was violently carried to the Thames, and there shipped
in a vessell layed for the purpose, and from thence conueyed
ouer to Calice.
            When the King came to London, he caused the Earle of
Warwicke also to be arrested and sent to prison, the same
day that hee had inuited him to dinner, and shewed good
countenance, and promised to be gracious Lord vnto him.
Vpon the like dissembled shewe, the Earle of Arundell, and
his sonne, and certaine others were arrested also, and committed
to prison in the Ile of Wight.
            The common people, vpon the apprehending of these
three noble men, whome they chiefely, and almost onely
fauoured, were in a great confusion and tumult; and there
wanted but a head to drawe them to sedition: euery man
sorrowed, murmured, and threatned, and daring no further,
stood waiting for one to leade them the way: all being
readie to followe that, which any one was loath to beginne.

The Duke of Lancaster and of Yorke gathered a strong armie,
and came therewith to London, where they were readily
receiued by the citizens, although the King had commaunded
the contrarie: but this seemed to be done, rather
for garde to themselues, then regarde to any others.
            The king all this time, kept at a village called Helhame,
within foure miles of London, hauing aboute him a great
power of armed men, which he had gathered out of Cheshire
and Wales: and to paci
                  •••
                the common people, hee
caused to be proclaimed, that the Lordes were not apprehended
vpon olde displeasures, but for offences lately committed,
for which they should be appealed by order of law,
and receiue open triall, in the Parliament next following:
the like message was sent to the Duke of Lancaster, and the
Duke of Yorke, lying at London: to whome the King made
faith, for the safetie of their persons, and indemnitie of their
goods, and that nothing should be attempted without their
priuitie and aduise: all this was as rashly belieued, as it was
craftely giuen out: whereupon the Dukes dissembled their
feares, and dissolued their forces, and remained in expectancie
what would ensue.
            A little before the feast of Saint Michael, the Parliament
began at London, wherein Sir Iohn Bushie, Sir William Bagot,
and Sir He
                     •
                  rie Greene, were principall agents for the
Kings purpose. These were then in all the credite and authoritie
with the King, and his chiefest Schoole-masters both
of crueltie and deceite: they were proude, arrogant, and
ambitious, and vppon confidence of the Kings fauour, professed
enemies to men of auncient Nobilitie; to the ende▪
that being lately start vp, they might become more famous
by maintaining contention with great persons. And first,
by their importunate trauaile, all the Charters of pardon,
graunted by the King, were in this Perliament annulled
and reuoked. Then the prelates did constitute Sir Henrie
Percie their procurator, and departed the house, because

they might not be present in iudgement of bloud. Lastly,
the Earle of Arundell, and the Earle of Warwicke were arraigned;
and for the same offences, for which they had bene
pardoned (namely for encroaching to themselues royall
power in iudging to death Simon Burlye, Iohn Berneis and
others, without the Kings consent) were condemned to be
hanged, drawne, and quarter
                  •
               d: but the King so moderated
the seueritie of this sentence, that the Earle of Arundell
was onely he headed, and the Earle of Warwicke committed
to perpetuall imprisonment in the Ile of Man.
            
            The Duke of Gloucester, was so greatly fauoured, that
it was thought a point both of policie and peace, notto bring
him to his open answere, but to put him to death secreately:
so he was strangled vnder a fether bedde at Calice by the
Earle of Notingham, being then Earle Marshall: which
death, howsoeuer he deserued; yet dying as he did, not called,
not heard, he died as guiltlesse.
            In this same Parliament, Thomas Arundell Archbishop
of Caunterburie was also accused, for executing the commision
against Michaell Delapoole, Earle of Suffolke: for
which cause, his temporalties were seazed; his lands and
goods forfeited, as well in vse, as in possession: and himselfe
was adiudged to exile, & charged to depart the realme,
within sixe weekes then next ensuing. So hee went into
Fraunce, where afterwardes, he became a principall meane
of the reuolt which followed. Also the Lord Cobham was
exiled into the Ile of Gernsey: and Sir Reinolde Cobham was
condemned to death, not for entring into any attempt against
the King, but because he was appointed by the Lords
to be one of his gouernours, and of his counsaile, in the 11.
yeare of his raigne:
            Now the King falsely supposing, that he was free from
all daungers, and that the humour against him, was cleane
purged and spent, conceiued more secreate contentment,
then he would openly bewraye; as more able to dissemble

his ioy, then conceale his feare: being so blinded and bewitched,
with continuall custome of flatteries, that hee perceiued
not, that the state of a Prince is neuer stablished by
cruelty and crafce. On the other side, the common people
were much dismayed, hauing nowe lost those whome they
accompted their onely helpes, and their onely hopes, both
for their priuate affaires, and for supporting the state: and because
these mishapes hapned vnto them, for maintaining a
cause of common dislike, the peoples stomacke was stirred
thereby to much hate and hearte-burning against the King.
And to make their deathes the more odious, the Earle of Arundell
was reputed a martyr, and pilgrimages were dayly
made to the place of his buriall: the rumour also was current,
but without either authour or grounde, that this his head was miraculously
fastened againe to his body: this whilest all men
affirmed, and no man knewe, the King caused the corpes
to bee taken vp, and viewed, ten daies after it was interred:
and finding the cause to be fabulous, hee caused the ground
to be paued where the Earle was layde, and all mention of
his buriall to be taken away, forbidding publickly and such
speaches of him afterwardes to bee vsed: but this restrainte
raysed the more: and they, who if it had beene lawefull,
woulde haue saide nothing, beeing once forbidden coulde
not forbeare to talke. It was also constantly reported, that
the King was much disquieted in his dreames with the
Earle, who did often seeme to appeare vnto him, in so terrible
and truculent manner, that breaking his fearefull, sleepe
he would curse the time that euer he knew him.
            In the one and twenty yeare of the raigne of K. Richard,
               1398
               Henry Earle of Darby, was created Duke of Herforde: at
which time the King created foure other Dukes: to wit,
Duke of Aumerle, who was before Earle of Rutland: Duke
of Southrey, who was before Earle of Kent: Duke of Excester,
who was before Earle of Huntington: and Duke of
Norfolke, who was before Earle of Notingham. This

degree of honour long time after, the conquest of the No
                  •
               
               mans
(whose chiefest rulers had no higher title) was accompted
too great for a subiect to beare: the fourme of the
common-wealth, beeing framed by the victors, farre from
equallity of all, and yet the King excepted without eminencie
of any. At the length King Edward the third created his
eldest Sonne Edward Duke of Cornewale, and made this
honour hereditary, conferring it vnto many: since which
time, diuerse princes of this lande, haue bene either put, or
kept, or hazarded from their estate, by men of that quallity
and degree. The King likewise created the Countesse of
Norfolke, Duchesse of Norfolke: the Earle of Sommerset,
Marquesse of Sommerset: the Lorde Spencer Earle of
Gloucester, the Lorde Neuill, Earle of Westmerland: the
Lorde Scroupe, Earle of Wiltshire: and the Lord Thomas
Darcy his steward, Earle of Worcester. Among these; hee
made diuision of a great parte of the landes of the Duke of
Gloucester, and of the Earles of Arundell and warwicke:
supposing by this double liberality, of honour and possessions:
to haue purchased to himselfe most firme friendships,
but bought friendes for the most parte, are seldome, either
satisfied, or sure: and like certaine Rauens in Arabia, so long
as they are ful, doe yeeld a pleasant voyce: but being empty,
doe make a horrible crie.
            Now the Duke of Hereford, raysed his desires, together
with his dignities, and either vpon disdaine, at the vndeserued
fauour and aduancement of some persons about the
King
                  •
                or vpon dislike, that the King was so dishonourably,
both abused, and abased by them: or else (perhaps) vppon
desire, to manifest his owne sufficiencie in matters of controwlement
and direction: being in familiar discourse with
Thomas Mowbraye Duke of Norfolke, he brake into complaint,
how the King regarded not the noble princes of his
bloud, and Peeres of the Realme, and by extreamities vsed
to some, discouraged the rest from entermedling in any

publique affaires: how in steade of these, hee was wholy gouerned
by certaine new-found and new-fangled fauorites,
vulgare in birth, corrupt in qualities, hauing no sufficiencie
either of conncell for peace, or of courage for warre; who
being of all men the most vnhonest, and the most vnable,
with hatefulnesse of the one, and contempt of the other,
were generally dispised in all the Realme: that hereby: Frst
the honour of the Kings person was much blemished, for vngrate
and vngracious adherentes, are alway the way to hatred
and contempt: Secondly, the safetie of his state might
bee endaungered; for extraordinarie fauour to men apparently
of weake or bad desert, doeth breede insolencie in
them, and discontentment in others, too daungerous humours
in a common-wealth: Thirdly, the dignitie of the
Realme was much empaired: whose fortune and valour, being
guided by the ill chaunce of such vnluckie leaders: stood
neuer in the like termes of doubt and distresse; so that matters
of peace, were tumultuous and vncertaine, and archiuements
of warre, were neuer brought to honourable conclufion:
that Alexander Se
                     ••••
                  s would haue smoaked such
sellers of smoake; that Xerxes would haue pulled their skin
ouer their eares; and high time it was, that the King should
looke vnto them: for the nobilitie grew out of hart, the commons
out of hope, and all the people fell to a discontented
murmuring. And this he said, (as he said) not for any grudge,
but for griefe and goodwill: and therefore desired the Duke
who was one of the priuie councell, and well heard with
the King, to discouer vnto him these deformities and daungers,
that by repayring the one, hee might happily repell
the other.
            These wordes procured to the Duke of Hereforde, both
great offence, and great glorye: at the deliuerie whereof,
the Duke of Northfolke made shewe of good liking, and
promise of sincere dealing. And in deede, if they had bin
as faithfully reported by him, and by the King as friendlie

taken, as they were faithfully and friendlie meant, many
mischiefes might haue bene auoyded: but both of these did
faile: for the Duke of Norffolke, although in former times
he had taken parte with the Lordes, yet afterwardes, being
desirous be accompted, rather among the great men, then
the good, he made sale of his honour, to maintaine his pleasure,
and continue himselfe in grace with the King; to which
he was altogether enthralled; insomuch, that the murthering
of the Duke of Gloucester, and the execution of the
Earle of Arundell, was to his charge especially committed,
and supposing vpon this occ
                  ••
               aon to make a free-hold of his
princes fauour, he grieuously aggrauated these speeches in
in reporting them, and yet cunningly to: with many lyes
intermixing some truethes, or making the trueth much
more then it was. Againe, the King not enduring the search
of his soares, did bend his minde, rather to punish the boldnes,
then examine the trueth of these reproofes: his eares
being so distemspered with continuance of flatterie, that he
accompted all sharpe that was sounde, and liked onely that,
which was presently pleasant, and afterwards hurtfull. Thus
we may dayly obserue, that no strange accident doth at any
time happen, but it is by some meanes foreshewed, or foretould:
but because these warnings are often-times eyther
not marked, or misconstrued, or els contemned, the euents
are accompted ineuitable, and the admonitions vaine.
            The King being in this sort touched by the one Duke,
and tickled by the other, was not resolued vpon the suddaine,
what to doe: therefore he assembled his councell, and
called the two Dukes before him, and demaunded of the
Duke of Norfolke, if hee would openly auouch that which
he had suggested in secreate. The Duke seeing it was now
no time for him, either to shrinke or shuftle in his tale, with
a bolde and confident courage, repeated all that before hee
had reported. But the Duke of Hereforde could not bee
borne downe by countenance, where his cause was good:

and therefore after a short silence, whereby hee seemed, rather
amazed at the strangenesse of this matter, then abashed
at the guilt, he made low obeisance to the King, and greatly
both thanked and commended him, that hee had not giuen
hastie creadite, to matters of such tender touch, as his
griefe might haue borne out the blame of rashnesse in reuenge;
desiring him to continue yet a while, the respite of
his displeasure, and to reserue his iudgment free for indifferent
audience. Then he declared in order, what speech had
passed from him, vpon what occasion, and to what end: all
the rest he stoutely denyed, affirming that it was falsely
surmised by his aduersary, eyther vpon malice to picke a
quarrell, or vpon sycophancie to picke a thanke, and that
thereupon he was vntrue, vniuste, a forger of slaunderous
and seditious lies, whereby he treacherously indeuoured to
seduce the King to destroy the Nobility, and to raise disturbance
within the realme: and this he offered to proue vpon
him (if the King would permit) by the stroake of a speare,
and by dint of sword. The Duke of Norfolks stomacke not
vsed to beare scorne, could not disgest these tearmes of disgrace:
whereupon hee stifly stood to his first imputation:
and for maintenance thereof, he accepted, and also desited
the combat. The King would some other wayes haue quieted
this contention, but the Dukes would agree to no other
kinde of agreement: and thereupon threw downe their
gloues one against the other, for gages. The King seeing
their obstinacy, graunted them the battell, and assigned the
place at the City of Couentry, in the moneth of August then
next insuing: where in the meane time, he caused a sumptuous
Theater, and lists royall to be prepared.
            At the day of combat, the two Dukes came, well banded
with Noblemen and Gentlemen of their linage. The Duke
of Aumerle, for that day hie constable, and the Duke of Surrey
for the same time and action, high Marshall of England,
entred into the lists, with a great troope of men apparelled in

silke sendale, embroidred with siluer, euery man hauing a
tipped staffe to keepe the field in order. About the time of
prime, the Duke of Hereford came to the barriers of the lists,
mounted vpon a white courser, barbed with blew & greene
veluet, embroidred gorgiously with Swans and Anti
                  •
               ops of
Gold-smiths worke, anned at all points, & his sword drawen
in his hand. The Constable and Marshall came to the barriers,
and demaunded of him, who hee was. He answered: I
am Henry duke of Hereford, and am come to do my deuoire
against Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolke, as a traitour to
God, the King, the Realme, and me. Then he sware vpon
the Euangelists, that his quarrell was right, & vpon that point
desired to enter the lists, then he put vp his sword, pulled
downe his beauier, made a crosse on his forehead, and with
speare in hand, entred into the lists, and there lighted from
his horse, & sate downe in a charge of greene veluet, which
was set in a trauerse of greene & blew veluet at the one end
of the listes: and so expected the comming of his enemic.
Soone after, King Richard entred the field with great pomp,
both in brauery and traine: he had in his company, the Earle
of S. Paule, who came purposely out of Fraunce to see this
combat tried: he was attended with all the noble Peeres of
the Realme, and guarded with tenne thousand men in
armes, for feare of any sudden or intended tumult.
            When hee was placed on his stage, which was verie curiously
and richly set forth, a King at armes made proclamation
in the name of the King, and of the high Constable, and
of the Marshall, that no man except such as were appointed
to order and Marshall the fielde, shoulde touch any parte of
the listes, vpon paine of death. This proclamation beeing
e
                  •
               ded, another herrald cryed. Behold her?, Henry of Lancaster,
Duke of Hereford, appellant, who is entred into the
listes royall, to doe this deuoire, against Thomas Mowbray,
Duke of Norfolke defendant, vpon paine to be accompted
false and recreant. The Duke of Norfolke was houering on

horsebacke at the entry of the listes, his horse being barbed
with crimson veluet, embroadered 
                  •
               itchly with lions of siluer,
and mulberie trees, and when he had made his oath, before
the Constable and Marshall, that his quarrell was iust
and true, he entred the fielde boldly, crying aloud God aide
him that hath the right, then hee lighted from his horse, and
satte downe in a chaire of Crimson veluet, curtained aboute
with red and white damaske, and placed at the other ende
of the listes. The Lord Marshall viewed both their speares,
to see that they were of equall length: the one speare he caried
himselfe to the Duke of Hereford, and sent the other to
the Duke of Norfolke by a Knight, This done, a Herrald
proclaimed, that the trauerses and chaires of the combatants
should be remoued, commaunding them in the Kings
name, to mount on horsebacke, and adresse themselues to
the encounter, the Dukes were quickly horsed, and closed
their beauiers, and cast their speares into the restes. Then the
trumpetes sounded, and the Duke of Hereforde set forth towards
his enimy, about fixe or seauen paces: but before the
Duke of Norfolke began to put forewarde, the King cast
downe his warder, and the Herralds cried, ho: then the King
caused the Dukes speares to be taken from them, and commaunded
them to forsake their horses, and returne againe to
their chaires: where they remained; aboue two long houres,
whilst the King deliberated with his counsaile what was fittest
to be done. At last, the Herralds cryed silence: and Sir
Iohn Borcy a secretary of state with a loude voice, read the
sentence and determination of the King and his counsaile
out of a long roule: wherein was contained, that Henry of
Lancaster Duke of Hereford, appellant, and Thomas Mowbray
Duke of Norfolke, defendant, had honourably appeared
that day within the lists royall, and declared themselues
valiant and hardy champions; being not onely ready, but
forward and desirous to darrein the battel: but because this
was a matter of great consequence & import, the King with

the aduise of his Councell, thought it meet to take the same
into his owne hands: and thereupon had decreed, that H
                     •
                  nrie
Duke of Hereford, because he had displeased the King,
and for diuers other considerations, should within 15. dayes
next following, depart out of the Realme, and not to returne
during the terme often yeeres, without the Kings especiall
licence, vpon paine of death,
            When this iudgement was heard, a confused noyse was
raysed among the people, some lamenting eyther the deserte,
or the iniurie of the Duke of Hereforde, whom they
exceedingly fauoured: others laughing at the conceite of
the King: first in causing, and afterwardes in frustrating so
great an expectation: wherein he seemed to doe not much
vnlike Caligula; who lying in Fraunce with a great armie
nere the sea shoare, gaue the signe of battell, set his men in aray,
marched foorth as if it had bene to some great piece of
seruice, & suddenly commanded them all together cockles.
            Then the Herralds cryed againe, ô yes: and the secretarie
did reade on, how the King had likewise otdayned,
that Thomas Moubraie Duke of Northfolke, because he had
sowen sedition, by words whereof he could make no proofe,
should auoide the realme of England, and neuer returne againe,
vpon paine of death: and that the King would take
the profites and reuenues of his landes, vntill he had receiued
such summes of money as the Duke had taken vp, for
wages of the garison of Calice, which was still vnpaide: and
that the King prohibited, vpon paine of his grieuous displeasure,
that any man should make suite or entreatie to him, on
the behalfe of eyther of these two Dukes.
            These sentences being in this sort pronounced, the King
called the two exiles before him, and tooke of them an oth,
that they should not conuerse together in foraine regions,
nor one willingly come in place where the other was: fearing
(as it was like) least their common discontentment
should draw them, first to reconcilement, and afterward to

reuenge. But this policie was ouer weake for this purpose:
for oathes are commonly spurned aside, when they lye in
the way, either to honour or 
                  •
               euenge: and if their vnited
forces was much to be regarded, the
                  •
                seperate are powers was
not altogether to bee con
                  •••
               ed. Therefore the later
plin
               
                  •••
                of this Realme, haue with more 
                  〈◊〉
               , wholy abolished
the vse of abiuration and 
                  〈◊〉
               : and doe either by death
extinguish the power, or by pardon alter the will of great offenders,
from entring into desperite and daungerous attempts:
which men in 
                  〈◊〉
                and disgrace, haue more vehemencie
to begin, and more 
                  〈◊〉
                to continue. When
the 
                  〈◊〉
                had once so enclosed the Romaine legions
within certaine streig
                  •
               , that they left them neither space
to fight, nor way to flie: but without force enforced them
to yeelde: they sent to Hre
                     •••
                  us Pontius, an aged ruler of
their state, for his aduise, what were best for them to doe:
his answere was, that the Romaines should be permitted to
depart, without any 
                  〈◊〉
                losse, orscorne. This pleased not
such as 
                  〈◊〉
               , 
                  •••
               her couetous for spoy
                  •
               e, 
                  〈…〉
                for blood 
                  •
               
and therefore they sent vnto him the second time: who then
returned answere, that the Romanes should bee put to the
sworde, and not one man suffered to escape. The contrarietie
of these two counsailes, brought the olde man into suspition
of dotage: but he comming in person to the campe,
maintained both to be good: the first whereof (which hee
thought best) would by vnexspected fauour, prouoke the
Romanes to a perpetuall friendship: the second would deferre
the warres for many yeares, wherein the enemies
should hardly recouer strength: third counsaile, there was
none that safely might be followes Yes (said the Samnites)
to graunt them their liues, yet with such conditions of spoyle
and shame, as the lawes of victorie doe lay vpon them. This
is the way (answered Heren
                     •
                  ius) which neither winneth
friends, nor weakeneth enemies: but will much encrease
the fury against vs, & nothing diminish the force. And euen

so, in matters of more particularity, than course of punishment
is out of course, which doth neither reclaime the mind
of men, nor restraine the might from mischieuous endeuors.
But againe to our purpose.
            The Duke of Norfolke, hauing now got a fall, where he
thought to take his rest, repented his enterprise, and vtterly
condemned his light conceite of the Kings lightnesse, and so
with extreame griefe and anguish of minde, he departed out
of the Realme into Almaine, and from thence trauelled to
Venice; where through violence of thought and discontentment,
in short time he ended his dayes. This sentence of banishment
was giuen against him the same day of the yeere
wherein the Duke of Gloucester by his wicked meanes was
strangled to death at Calice.
            The Duke of Hereford tooke his leaue of the King at Eltham,
who there stroke away foure yeres of his banishment
& euen offred himselfe to be sawned vpon & thanked, for so
odious a benefit. And this info
                  •
               inate aduenture he neither
bate put 
                  •
               aingloriusly, not yet tooke impatiētly: but in the
midst of his misery, retained still his reputation and honour;
shewing no signe of sorow or submines in his countenance,
nor letting fall any intemperate and vnseemely word. The
people as he departed, by heap
                  •
                flocked about him, some to
see, and some to salute him: lamenting his departure in such
sort, as though their onely light and delight did then forsake
them: not sparing to exclaime, that it was against the law of
armes, against the custome of the Realme, and against all
right whatsoeuer, that he should exiled, who had done his
honourable endeuour for the maintenance of his appeale.
This affection was the more exce
                  •••
               e, for that the duke was
driuen into exile by occasion of his liberall speeches against
the most hateful persons in all Realme: & being the onely
noble man then aliue, of the popular faction, the loue was
wholly accumulated vpon him▪ which was before deuided
among the rest. And thus the Duke leauing England, tooke

shipping, and passed the Seat to Galice, & from thence went
into Fraunce: where hee was honourably entertained by
Charles the French King, and found such fauour, that hee
should haue taken to wife, the onely daughter of Iohn Duke
Berrie, vnckle to the King of Fraunce, but King Richard
                     •
                  
               
fearing the sequel, if the fauor which was borne to the Duke
of Hereford within the Realme, should be strengthned with
so great affinitie in Fraunce, cast such stops in the way, that
the marriage did not proceede.
            This yeare the Lawrell trees withered, almost throughout
the Realme, and afterwardes against all expectation, recouered
life & flourished againe. The same yeare, in Christmasse
holy-daies, a deepe ryuer which rumneth betweene
Snedlistorie and Hareswood, neere to Bedford, suddainely
stayed the streame: so that for three miles in length, the channell
was left drie, and no course of water did hinder passage
on foot. This was afterwards interpreted too presage, the reuolt
of the people, & the deuision which happened the yeare
following: to these wee may adde certaine other prodegies,
either forged in that fabulous age, or happening commonly
and of course, are then onely noted, when any notable accident
doth ensue. When K. Richard brought his first wife
out of Beame, she had no sooner set foote within this land,
but such a tempest did forthwith arise as had not bene seene
many yeares before: whereby diuers ships within the hauen
were quashed to peeces, but especially, and first of all, the
ship wherin the Queene was casried, this was the rather obserued,
because such stiffe 
                  ••
               ormes were likewise stirring:
when the King brought his second wife out of France: wherin
many ships perished, and a great part of the Kings fardage
was lost. At New castle vpon Tine, as two shipwrites were
squaring a piece of Timber, whersoeuer they hewed, bloud
issued forth in great aboundance. At one of the Kings p
                  •
               llaces,
flies swarmed so thicke, that they obscured the ayre:
these fought together most fiercely, so that sackfuls lay 
                  •
               eau

vpon the ground; and this continued so long, that scarce the
third part of them (as it was thought) remained aliue, many
like accidents are recorded of that time; but I wil maintaine
neither the truth of them, nor what they did portend: being
a matter wherein most men are rather superstitious, then not
credulous, and doe oftentimes repute common occurrences
to be ominous, when any strange euent doth ensue. Yet as I
am loath to auouch any vaine and trifling matter, so dare I
not detract all truth frō things anciently reported; although
done in an age wherein was some delight in lying; many do
suppose, that those things which are fatally allotted, though
they neuer be auoided, yet sometimes are foreshewen: not
so much that we may preuent them, as that wee shuold prepare
ourselues against them.
            In the two and twenty yeare of the raigne of K. Richard,
Iothn of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster died, and was buried, on
the north-side of the high alter, of the Cathedrall Church of
S. Paule in London, hee was a man aduised and warie in his
passages of life, liking better safe courses with reason, then
happy by chaunce: of his owne glory, he was neither negligent,
nor ambitiously careful: towards the King hee caried
himselfe in tearms honourable inough for a moderat prince,
and yet not so plausible as a vaine man would desire; whereby
there neuer happened to him any extraordinary matter,
either in preiudice, or preferment. After his death, the Duchy
of Lancaster did in right deuolue to the Duke of Hereforde,
his eldest son: but the King (as the nature of man is inclinable,
to hate those whome hee hath harmed) seazed all
the landes and goodes which appertained to the Duke of
Lancaster, into his owne handes; and determined to perpetuate
the banishment of Duke Henry his sonne: reuoking the
letters pattēts, which were graunted to him at his departure:
whereby his generall atturneis were enabled to prosecute
his causes and sue liuerie of any inheritance; which during
his exile, might fall vnto him, his homage being respited for

a reasonable fine. The king supposed his estate more safe, by
the weaknesse and want of the Duke, whome he had nowe
in some iealousie and doubte? but these violent dealinges
were meanes rather to prouoake his mischiefes, then to preuent
them; for by iniurious suppressing of the Dukes greatnesse,
he greatly augmented the same.
            
               Edmund Duke of Yorke, the Kings onely vncle which
remained aliue, had hetherto moued his patience, to endure
many things against his liking: but nowe either in disdaine
of this indignity, or in distrust both of his owne safety, and of
the common tranquillity of the realme, hee retired himselfe
with the Duke of Aumerle his son, to his house at Langley:
supposing priuatnes to bee the best defence, both from danger
and blame, where neither the King had iudgement to
discerne, nor any about him had, either hearte or honesty to
admonish what was done amisse; where an honourable
fame was held suspected, and a good life more in hazard thē
a bad: protesting that none of these practises, were either
deuised by his counsaile, or done by his consent.
            At this time, the whole frame of the state was much shaken,
and matters of great weight and moment, did hang by
a very slender thred. The King was plunged in pleasure and
sloath: after whose example, others also (as men doe commonly
conforme their mindes according to the princes disposition)
gaue ouer themselues to dilicacie and ease: whereby
cowardise crepte in, and shipwracke was made, both of
manhood and glorie. The chiefest affaires of state, had bene
ordered for a long time, according to priuate respects, wherby
the common-wealth lost both the fatte, and the fauour,
and seemed not at seasons and by degrees, but with a maine
course, and at once to ruinate and fall. The north parts were
many times canuased, and by small, yet often losses, almost
consumed by the Scots: who had there taken many townes
and castles, and defaced all the countrey with slaughter and
spoile. Likewise the south partes were often-times wasted

by the Frenchmen: and in Fraunce many strong holds were
lost. It was also constantly affirmed, that the King made agreement
to deliuer vnto the King of Fraunce, the possossion
of Callice, and of other townes which hee helde in those
parts; but the performance there of was resisted by the lords
whether this were true or surmised probably, as agreeable
to the Kings loose gouernment, I cannot certainely affirme.
As for Ireland, which in the time of K. Edward the third was
kept in order and awe, by acquainting the people with religion
and ciuility, and drawing them to delight in the plenty
and pleasures of well reclaymed countries; whereby it yeelded
to the kings coffers, thirty thousand pounds euery yeare:
it was then suffered to runne into waste, and the people by
rudenesse became intractible: so that the houlding thereof
charged the King, with the yearely dispence of thirty thousand
markes. Many succours had bene sent into these seuerall
countries; but scatteringly, and dropping, and neuer so
many at once, as to furnish the warres fully. The King made
some expeditions in his owne person, with greate preparation
and charge: but beeing once out of credite, whatsoeuer
fell out well, was attributed to others; misfortunes were
inputed onely to him. If any thing were happily atchieued
by some of the nobility, it was by the Kings base hearted parasites,
to whom millitary vertue was altogether vnpleasant
so extinuated, or depraued, or enuied, that it was seldome
rewarded, so much as with countenance and thankes: yea
sometimes it procured suspicion and danger; the King being
informed by a cunning kinde of enemies, commenders, that
to be a discreet and valiant commander in the fielde, was a
vertue peculiar to a Prince: and that it was a perillous point,
to haue the name of a man of priuate estate, famous for the
same in euery mans mouth. Hereupon, fewe sought to rise
by vertue and val
                  •
               e, the readier way was, to please the pleasant
humour of the Prince. Likewise matters of peace, were
managed by
                  •
               men of weakest sufficiency, by whose counsell

either ignorant or corrupt, the destruction of the best harted
nobility, was many times attempted, & at the last wrought.
The profits and reuenues of the crowne were said to bee let
to farme, the King making himselfe landlord of this realme,
and challenged no great priuiledge by his reigne, but onely
a dissolute and vncontrouled life. Great summes of mony
were yearly, rather exacted from the subiects, then by them
voluntarily graunted: whereof no good did ensue, but the
maintenance of the Kings priuate delightes, & the aduancement
of his hatefull fauorites. To these he was somewhat aboue
his power liberall: for which cause, he was faine to borrow,
begge, and extort in other places: but he purchased not
so much loue by the one, as hate by the other. Besides the
ordinary tearmes of tenthes and fiftenthes, which were m
                  ••
               ny times paid double in one yeare, diuers newe imposition
                  •
               
were by him deuised & put in vse: sometimes exacting xii. d.
of euery person throughout the realme: sometimes of euery
religious man and woman vi. s. viii. d. and of euery secular
priest asmuch, and of euerie lay person maried or sole,
xii. d. Vnder the fauourable tearme of beneuolence; hee wiped
away from the people such heapes of money, as were litle
answerable to that free and friendly name. He borrowed
in all places of the realme great summes of money vpon his
priuy seales, so that no man of worth could escape his loane:
but he seldome, and to few, returned payment againe.
            This present yeare, he sent certaine Bishops, and other
personages of honour, to all the shires & corporations within
the realme, to declare vnto the people the Kings heauie
displeasure against them, for that they had bin abetters and
complices of the Duke of Gloucester, and of the Earles of
Arundell and Warwicke: and that the King was minded to make a roade vppon them, as common enemies, excepte
they would acknowledge their offence, and submit themselues
to his mercie and grace. Hereupon, all the men of
worth in euery shire and Towne corporate, made their acknowledgment

& submission in writing vnder their scales;
& afterwardes were faine to graunt vnto the King, such importable
summes of money, to purchase againe his fauour, as
the land being already greatly impouerished, they were
hardly able to endure. Then were exacted of thē strange &
vnaccustomed oathes, which were put likewise in writing,
vnder their seales. They were also cōpelled to set their hands
and scales to blancke chartes; wherein the King might afterwardes
cause to be written what he would; so that all the
wealth of the realme was in a manner at his deuotion and
pleasure. These and such like violences, were far wide from
the moderate gouernement of K. Henrie the second: whoe
maintaining great warres, and obteyning a larger dominion,
then perteyned at any other time to this realme of England,
neuer demaunded subsidie of his subiectes: and yet his treasure
after his death, was founde to be nine hundred thousand
poundes, besides his Iewels, and his plate.
            In this sort the King bearing a heauie hand vpon his subiects,
and they againe a heauie hart against him, and being
withall a Prince weake in action, and not of valure sufficient
to beare out his vices by might, the people at length resolued
to reuolt, and rather to runne into the hazard of a ruinous
rebellion, then to endure safetie ioyned with slauerie:
so they attended occasion, which shortly after was thus offered.
The King receiued letters of aduertisement out of Ireland
(which being priueledged from other venimous beasts
hath alwaies beene pestered with traytors) how the Barbarous
Irish had cut in pieces his garrison, and slaine Roger Mortimer
Earle of Marsh, (who had beene declared heire
apparent to the Crowne) exercising all the crueltie in wasting
of the country, which wrath and rage of victorie could
incite a Barbarous people to practise. This losse being great
in it selfe, the hard affection of the people did much augmēt
by report: wherupon the King deliberated, whether it were
requisite that hee should vnder-take the warre in person, or

commit it to cōmanders of lower degree? Some perswaded
him, that wholly to subdue Ireland, stoode neither with pollicie,
nor yet almost with possibilitie: for if it were fully and
quietly possessed, some gouernour might hap to growe to
that greatnesse, as to make himselfe absolute Lord thereof,
and therfore it was better to hold it certaine by weake enemies,
then suspected by mightie friendes, and yet by what
meanes should those bogges & those woods bee ouercome,
which are more impregnable, then the walled Townes of
other countries? Then if the purpose were, onely to represse
the sauage people, the war was of no such weight, as should
draw the King to stand in the fielde: and therefore he might
stay in the west partes of England, and from thence make
shew of the princely puissance and state; neither venturing
his person without cause, and ready at hand if neede should
require. Others were of opinion, that to subdue and replenish
Ireland, was a matter neither of difficultie nor daunger:
but both profitable and honourable to the King, and to God
very acceptable. For if credite might bee giuen to auncient
histories, this realme of England was once as insuperable
with bogs and woods, as Ireland was then: but the Romane
conquerors kept not their presidiarie Souldiers in idle garrison,
whereby many times the minde grew mutinous, and
the body diseased, and both vnable for the labour and hardnesse
of the field: but they held as well them, as the subdued.
Britaines continually exercised, either in building of townes
in places of best aduantage; or in making of high waies: else
in drayning and pauing of bogs: by which meanes the countrie
was made fruitfull and habitable, and the people learned
the good maners, not rudely to repulse the flattering assaults
of pleasure; preferring subiection with plentie, before beggerly
and miserable libertie. That the same Romaines also
kept many larger countries in quiet obedience, (so long as
they were quiet among themselues) without either feare or
danger of any gouernours: first by deuiding them into smal

prouinces: Secondly by constituting in euery prouince diuers
officers, as Lieutenants and procurators, whereof one
was able to restraine the other; the first hauing power ouer
the bodies of the subiects, the second ouer their goods: thirdly,
by changing these officers euery yeare; which was too
short a time to establish a soueraigntie: Lastly, by retaining
at Rome, their wiues and children, and whole priuate estate,
as pledges for their true demeanure. That the daunger was
rather to bee feared, least a weake enemie whilest hee was
cuntemned, should gather strength and be able to stand vppon
termes of withstandi
                  •
               g: example hereof, happened whē
the Romaines ouercame this Iland; for many Britanes who
vpon no cōditious would abide bōdage, withdrew thēselues
into the Northparts of the land, & by maintaining their auncient
custome of painting their bodies, were called of the
Romanes, Picti: these were neglected along time, and held
in scorne, as neither of force, nor of number to bee thought
worthy the name of enimies: but afterwardes they confederated
themselues with other people, and so sharply assaulted
the subdued Britaines, that being vnable to resist, & the Romanes
shrincking from thē, they were constrained to desire
helpe of the Saxons: and so betweene their enimies & their,
aides (being set as it were betwixt the beetle and the block)
they lost the possession of the best part of their land. That it
was a pittifull pollicy for assurance of peace, to lay all waste
as a wildernes, and to haue dominion ouer trees and beasts,
and not ouer men. That hereby the King did loose the reuenue
of a fruitfull countrie, & the benefit of wealthy subiects,
which are the surest treasure that a Prince can haue. That
hereby also the maiesty of his estate was much impaired: for
(as Salomō saith) The honour of a king cōsisteth in the multitude
of subiectes. That the country being vnfurnished of people,
was open to al opportunity of forraine enimies. That if none
of these respectes would moue: yet the King was bounde in
duty, to reduce those sauages to the true worshippe of God,

who did then either prophanely contemne him, or superstiti
                  •
               usly
serue him.
            These reasons so weighed with the King, that he gathered
a mighty armie, determining to goe in person into Ireland,
& to pacifie the country before his returne: but al his prouision
was at the charge of the subi
                  •
               cts: and wheras in time of
sedition, a wise Prince will least grieue his people. As seeming
to stand in some sort at their curtesie, & hauing to imploy
their bodies beside; the King in peace no stoarer for
war, was forced to offend, when hee should haue bene most
carefull to win fauour. So about Whitsontide, he set forth
on his voyage with many men, and fewe soldiours; being a
dissolute and vntrained company, and out of all compasse of
obedience, hee caried with him his whole treasure, and all
the goods and auncient Iewels appertaining to the crowne.
In his company went the Duke of Aumerle, and the Duke
of Exceter, and diuers other noble men, and many Bishops,
and the Abbot of Westminster. He also tooke with him the
sonnes of the Duke of Gloucester, and of the Duke of Hereford;
whose fauourours he chiefly feared.
            When hee came to Bristowe, hee was put into suspicion,
(whether vpon some liklyhood, or meere mallice) that Henry
Percy Earle of Northumberland and certaine others, entended
some disloyall enterprise against him: and for that
cause did not folow him into Ireland, but had fastned friendship
with the king of Scots, vpon purpose to retire thēselues
into his country, if their attempts should faile. Hereupon the
king sent message that the earle should forthwith come vnto
him with all the power that he could conueniently make.
The earle returned answere, that it was vnnecessary in respect
of that seruice, to draw men from such distant places;
for the Irish rebels were neither so many nor so mighty, but
the King had strength at hand sufficient to suppresse them:
that it was also daungerous to disfurnish the North-parts of
their forces, and to offer opportunity to the Scottish borderers,

who were alwayes vncertaine friends in their extremities,
and assured enemies vpon aduantage. The King seeing
his commaundement in these termes both contemned and
controulled, would not stand to reason the matter with the
Earle, neither had he the reason to defer reuenge vntill hee
had full power to worke it: but presently in the violence of
his fury, caused the Earle and his confederates to be proclaimed
traitors, and all their lands and goods to be seized to his
vse. The Earle tooke grieuously this disgrace, and determined
to cure & close vp his harme with the disturbance of the
common state. And thus the King hauing feathered these
arrowes against his owne brest, passed foorth in his iourney
into Ireland.
            This expedition at the first proceeded and succeeded exceedingly
well, and the king obtained many victories, euen
without battell, as leading his men to a slaughter rather then
to a fight: for the sauage Irish were not vnder one gouernement,
but were deuided into many partialities and factions,
and seldome did two or three parts ioyne their common
strenth and study together: so whilest one by one did fight,
all of them were either subdued or slaine. But these newes
little reioyced the common people, they lusted not to listen
thereto: their common talke was to recount their common
grieuances, to lay them together, & aggrauate them by construction:
euery man more abounding in complaints then
he did in miseries. Also the noblemen (the principall obiect
of cruelty) began to discourse both their priuate dangers, &
the deformities of the state: and vpon opportunity of the
Kings absence, some of them did conspire to cut off that authority
which would not be confined, & to cast it vpon some
other, who was most like to repaire that which K. Richard
had ruined: or if (sayde they) our power shall come short of
so good a purpose, yet will we sell him both our liues & lands
with glory in the field, which with certainty in peace we can
not enioy. The onely man vpon whom all men resolued, was

               Henry duke of Hereford (whom since the death of his father
they called duke of Lancaster) not at his own motion or desire,
but because he was generally esteemed meet: as being
of the royall bloud, and next by discent frō males to the succession
of the crowne: one that had made honorable proofe
of his vertues and valure: the onely man of note that remained
aliue, of those that before had stood in armes against the
King, for the behoofe of the Common-wealth: for which
cause he was deeply touched at that time both in honor and
in state. This attempt pleased as possible to proue, and of necessity
to be followed: whereupon they secretly dispatched
their letters to the Duke, solliciting his speedy returne into
England, & declaring that aswel for the benefit of the realm,
as for their owne particular safety, they were forced to vse
force against King Richard: that if it would please him to
make the head, they would furnish him the body of an able
army, to expell the King from his vnfortunate gouernment,
and to settle the possession of the Crowne in him, who was
more apt and able to sustaine the same: that they would not
prouide him a base multitude only, & they themselues helpe
in bare wishes & aduise, but would also adioyne their hands
and thei
                  •
                liues; so that the peril should be common to all, the
glory only his, if fortune fauored the enterprise. These letters
were conueyed by men crafty and bolde, yet of sure credit,
and inward in trust with the Duke: who passing into France,
first associated vnto thē 
               Thomas Arundell late Archbishop
of Canterburie, & at that time (whether deseruedly or without
cause) an exile in France: then they trauailed by seuerall
waies, and in counterfeit attire to Parris, where all met at the
house of one Clugney, where the Duke thē soiourned, After
some courtesies of course, with welcome on the one side, &
thankes on the other, and ioy of both: the Archbishop of
Canterburie hauing obtained of the Duke priuacie and silence,
made vnto him a solemne oration in these words, or to
this sence following.
            
               
We are sent vnto you (right high and noble Prince) from
the chiefe Lords and states of our land, not to seeke reuenge
against our King vpon priuate iniury and displeasure: nor vpon
a desperate discontentment to set the state on fire: nor
to procure the ambitious aduancement of any perticular person:
but to open vnto you the deformities and decaies of our
broken estate, and to desire your aide, in staying the ruinous
downfall of the same. The remembrance of the honourable
reputation that our countrie hath borne, and the noble actes
which it hath atchiued, doth nothing els, but make the basenes
more bitter vnto vs, wherinto it is new fallen. Our victorious
armes haue heretofore bene famous and memorable,
not onely within the bownds of our Ocean sea, and in the
Ilands adioyning vnto vs; but also in France, in Spaine, and
in other parts of Europe, yea in Asia and in Affricke, against
the infidels and Barbarians: so that all Christian Princes haue
bene either glad to imbrace our friendship, or loath to prouoke
vs to hostility. But nowe the rude Scots, whose spirits
we haue so many times broken, and brought on their knees,
doe scornfully insult vppon vs: the naked and fugitiue Irish,
haue shaken of our shackles, and glutted themselues vppon
vs, with massachres & spoiles: with these we dayly fight, not
for glory, but to liue: insomuch as we are become a pitty to
our friends, and a verie ieast to our most base and contemptible
enemies. In deed the King hath both sent and led great
armies into these countries, but in such sort, that they haue
much wasted the realme with their maintenance; but neither
reuenged nor relieued it with their armes: and no meruaile,
for all our diligent and discreete leaders (the verie sinewes
of the field) are either put to death, or banished, or els
lie buried in obscurity and disgrace: and the marshalling of
all affaires is committed (without any respect of sufficiency
or desert) to the counsaile & conduct of those, who can best
apply themselues to the Kings youthfull delightes. Among
these, auncient nobility is accompted a vaine ieast, wealth,

and vertue are the ready meanes to bring to destruction.
            It grieues me to speake, but it helpeth not, to hide that
which euery man seeth: our auncestors liued in the highest
pitch and perfection of libertie; but we of seruilitie, being in
the nature, not of subiectes, but of abiectes, and flat slaues;
not to one intractable Prince onely, but to many proude &
disdainefull fauorites; not alwaies the same, but euer new; &
no sooner haue we satisfied some, but fresh hungrie masters
are straight waies set vpon vs, who haue more endamaged
vs by extortion and bribes, then the enemy hath done by the
sword. What vnusuall kindes of exactio
                  •
               are dayly put in
practise? without either measure or end, and oftentimes with
out neede: or if any be, it proceedeth rather vpon ryotus expenses,
then any necessary or honourable charge: and great
summes of money are pulled and pilled from good subiects,
to be throwne away amongst vnprofitable vnthriftes. And if
any man openeth his mouth against these extorted taxations,
then either by feined imputation of capital crimes, or by
smal matters aggrauated, or else by open crueltie and force,
his life or libertie is forthwith hazarded. I were too tedious,
too odious, too friuolus to put you in mind of particular examples,
as though your owne estate, & the lamentable losse
of your vncle, & other noble friends, could be forgotten: yea,
I suppose that there is no man of qualitie within the Realme,
who either in his owne person, or in his neere friends, doeth
not plainly perceiue, that no man enioyeth the safegard of
his goods, and suerty of his body; but rich men in the one, &
great men in the other are continually endaungered. This
then is our case; but what is our remedy? we haue endured, &
we haue entreated: but our pacience hath drawne on more
heauie burthens, and our complaints procured more bitter
blowes: by the one our liuings, and our liues by the other are
dayly deuoured. And therfore we are now cōpelled to shake
off our shoulders this importable yoke, and submit our selues
to the soueraigntie of some more moderate and worthy person:

not so much for the griefe of our miseries which are past
nor for the paine of our present distresses, as for feare of such
daungers as are most like to ensue, for the King hath cut away
the chiefe of the nobilitie, and the commons hee hath
pared to the quicke, and still hee harrieth vs as a conquered
countrie: whereby we are layd bare to the hauocke of al our
enemies, & vtterly disabled, not onely to recouer that which
is lost, but also to retaine euen that which is left. But to whom
should we complaine? what succour, whose ayde should we
desire? you are the onely man, who in right should, and in
wisedome can, and in goodnesse will (we hope) relieue vs.
For you are neerest to the King in bloud, and therfore ought
to haue the rule of that which his weakenesse cannot wielde.
Your yeares are wel stayed from the light conceits of youth,
and so spent, that all your actions haue made proofe of abilitie
in gouernment of greatest charge: nothing past, needeth
excuse, and feare is vaine for any thing to come. The paines
and perils which heretofore you haue vndertaken for the benefite
of your countrie, putteth vs also in good hope, that in
these extremities you will not forsake vs: wee are all as in a
ship that is ready to sinke, as in a house that is ready to fall, &
doe most humbly craue and call for your helpe; now or else
neuer shew your selfe in fauour of your countrymen, to free vs, to free your selfe, to free the whole state from these daungers
and decayes, by taking into your hands the scepter and
diademe of the Realme, and reducing againe the gouernement
thereof to a princely freedome; in combining the soueraigntie
of one, with the libertie of all. Omit not this occasion:
to set forth to the view of the world, as in a large field, &
at free scope your vertue and courage, by relieuing miserable
wretches from their oppressors: which action hath beene
so highly honoured, that many heathen men for the same,
haue beene accompted as Gods. This we are constrained to
offer and entreate: this is both honorable for you to accept,
and easie to be performed: and so much the more, in that no

Prince, by any people haue bene desired with greater affection,
nor shall be with more dutie obeyed.
            The Duke entertained this speach, with great moderation
of mind, shewing himselfe neither disturbed thereat, nor
excessiue in ioy. His aunswere concerning the King, was respectiue
and wel tempered; rather lamenting his weakenes
then blaming his malice. Concerning himselfe hee spake so
modestly, that he seemed rather worthy of a kingdome, then
desirous. The life (quoth he) which hitherto I haue led, hath
alwaies bene free from ambitious attempts: and the stayednesse
of my yeares, hath now setled my mind from aspiring
thoughts: and experience of former dangers hath bred in me
a warie regard in such weightie proceedings, for to cast a
King out of state, is an enterprise not hastely to bee resolued
vpon, nor easily effected: but suppose that matter not impossible,
and perhaps not hard, yet the rarenesse of the like precedents,
will make the action seeme iniurious to most men:
and he that shal attaine a kingdome vpon opinion of desert,
doth charge himselfe with great expectation, and how honourably
soeuer hee carried himselfe, shall neuer want his
deadly enuiers: besides this, in ciuill dissentions the faith of
the whole people is fleeting, and daunger is to bee doubted
from euery particular person: so that it is possible that al may
fall away, and impossible to beware of euery one. Therefore
I could rather wish, to spend the course of my yeares which
yet remaine, in this obscure, yet safe and certaine state, then
to thrust my selfe vpon the pikes of those perils, which being
once entred into, are daungerous to follow, & deadly to forsake:
for in priuate attempts, a man may step and stope when
he please: but he that aymeth at a kingdome, hath no middle
course betwene the life of a Prince, & the death of a traytor.
            The Archbishop hearing this, did as vainly persist in importuning
the duke, as he vainly seemed vnwilling & strāge.
The state (sayd he) wherein now you stand, is not so safe and
certaine as you doe conceiue. In deed, by reiecting our request

you shal auoid certaine dignity, and therewith vncertaine
& contingent dangers; but you shal procure most certaine
destruction both to your selfe and vs. For this secret can
not be kept long secret from the king: and euen good princes
are nice in points of soueraignty, & beare a nimble eare
to the touch of that string: and it more hurteth a subiect to
be esteemed worthy of the kingdome, then it will profit him
to haue refused the offer. What then will he do, who putteth
the chiefest surety of his reigne in the basenesse & barenesse
of his subiects? whose head being possessed with eternall ielousy,
maketh euery presumption a proofe, and euery light
surmise a strong suspition against them. Surely since the generall
fauour & loue which the people beareth you, hath bereaued
you of your liberty, this their generall desire will not
leaue your life vntouched. As for vs, if we either faint in our
intent, or faile in the enterprise, actum est: we shalbe as lambs
among lions: and no conquest can be so cruell as the Kings
reigne will be ouer vs. Certainely we haue gone too far, for
to go backe; and the time is past, when you for ambition, &
we for enuy might seeme to attempt against the King: the
attainment of the kingdome must now be a sanctuary & refuge
for vs both. The like examples are not rare (as you affirme)
nor long since put in practise, nor far hence to be fetched.
The kings of Denmarke and of Sweueland, are oftentimes
banished by their subiects; oftentimes imprisoned &
put to their fine: The princes of Germany, about an hundred
yeres past, deposed Adulphus the Emperour: and are now in
hand to depose their emperor Wences
                     •
                  aus. The earle of Flanders
was a while since driuen out of his Dominion by his
owne people, for vsurping greater power then appertained
to his estate. The auncient Britaines chased away their
owne King Carecious, for the lewdnesse of his life, and cruelty
of his rule. In the time of the Saxon H
                     •
                  ptarchic, Bernredus
King of Mercia, for his pride and stoutnes towardes his people,
was by them deposed. Likewise Aldredus & Ethelbertus
               
Kinges of Northumberland, were for their disorders expelled
by their subiects. Since the victorie of the Normaines,
the Lords endeauoured to expell King Henry the third, but
they were not able: yet were they able to depose King Edward
the second, and to constitute his young sonne Edward
King in his steade: these are not all, and yet enough to cleare
this action of rarenesse in other countries; & noueltie in our.
The difficulty indeede is somewhat, because the excellencie
is great: but they that are affraide of euery bush, shall neuer
take the bird: & your selfe had once some triall hereof, when
without battaile, without bloud or blowes, you had the King
at such a lift, as he held his Crowne at your courtesie, euen at
that time when his grieuances were, neither for greatnes nor
continuance, so intollerable as now they are growne: and by
reason of his tender yeres, not out of al compasse, both of excuse
for the fault, and of hope for an amendement. And as
concerning the lawfulnesse.
            Nay (said the Duke) where necessity doth enforce, it is superfluous
to vse speach, either of easinesse, or of lawfulnesse:
necessitie will beate thorow brasen Walles: and can be limited
by no lawes. I haue felt verie deeply my part in these calamities,
and I would you knew with what griefe I haue beheld
your: for what other reward haue I receiued, of all my
trauailes and seruices, but the death of my vncle and dearest
friends, my owne banishment, the imprisonmeut of my children,
and losse of my inheritance? and what haue beene returned
to you, for your bloud so often shed in his vnfortunate
warres, but continuall tributes, scourges, gallowes, and slauerie?
I haue made sufficient proofe, both of pacience in my
owne miseries, and of pittie in your: remedy them hither to
I could not: If now I can, I will not refuse to sustain that part,
which yonr importunitie doth impose vpon me, if we preuaile,
we shall recouer againe our libertie: if wee loose, our
state shall be no worse thē now it is: and since we must needs
perish, either deseruingly or without cause, it is more honorable

to put our selues vpon 
                  •
               he aduenture eyther to winne
our liues, or to dye for deserte: and although our liues were
safe, which in deede are not, yet to abandon the state, ane
sleepe still in this slauerie; were a poynt of negligence and
sloath. It remaineth then, that we vse both secrecie and celeritie,
laying hold vpon the oportunitie which the Kings absence
hath now presented vnto vs: for in al enterprises which
neuer are commended before they bee atchieued, delayes
are daungerous; and more safe it is to be founde in action,
then in counsaile: for they that deliberate onely to rebell,
haue rebelled already.
            So the messengers departed into England, to declare the
Dukes acceptance, and to make preparation against his arriuall,
both of armour, and of subiection, and desire to obey.
Presently after their departure, the Duke signified to Charles
king of Fraunce, that he had a desire to goe into Brittaine, 
                  •
               o
visite Iohn Duke of Brittaine, his friend and kinsman. The
King suspecting no further fetch, sent letters of commendation
in his fauour, to the Duke of Brittaine: but if he had
surmised any dangerous drift against King Richard, who not
long before, had taken his daughter to wife; in stead of letters
of safe-conducte, he would haue founde lettes to haue
kept him safe from disturbing his sonne in lawes estate.
            Assoone as the Duke was come into Brittaine, he waged
certaine souldiours, and presently departed to Calice, and so
committed to sea for England; giuing forth, that the onely
cause of his voyage, was to recouer the Duchie of Lanchaster,
and the rest of his lawfull inheritance, which the King
wrongfully deteyned from him. In his companie was Thomas
Arundell the Archbishop of Canterburie, and Thomas
the sonne & heire of Richard late earle of Arundell, who was
very yong, and had a little before escaped out of prison, and
fled into France to the Duke. The residue of his attendants
were very few, not exceeding the number of fifteen lances:
so that it is hard to esteeme whether it was greater maruaile,

either that he durst attempt, or that he did preuaile with so
smal a company: but his chiefest cōfidence was in the fauour
& assistance of the people within the realme. So he did beare
with England, yet not in a streight course, but floated along
the shoare, making head sometimes to one coast, and sometimes
to another, to discouer what forces were in a readines,
either to resist or to receiue him.
            As he was in this sort houering on the seas, L. Edmund
duke of Yorke, the kings vncle, to whom the king had committed
the custody of the Realme during the time of his absence,
called vnto him Edmūd Stafford bishop of Chichester,
L. Ghancellour, & W. Scroupe earle of Wiltshire, L. Treasurour
of the Realme, also, Sir Iohn Bushie, Sir Henry Greene, Sir
William Bagot, Sir Iohn Russell, and certain others of the kings
Priuy councell; and entred into deliberation what was best
to be done. At the last it was concluded, deceitfully by some,
vnskilfully by others, and by all perniciously for the king; to
leaue the sea coasts, and to leaue London, the very walles &
castle of the Realme, and to goe to S. Albons, there to gather
strength sufficient to encounter with the duke. It is most certaine
that the dukes side was not any wayes more furthered,
then by this dissembling and deceiuable dealing: for open
hostility and armes, may openly and by armes be resisted:
but priuy practises, as they are hardly espied, so are they seldome
auoided. And thus by this meanes the duke landed about
the feast of Saiud Martin, without let or resistance, at
Rauenspur in Houldernesse, as most writers affirme.
            Presently after his ariual, there resorted to him Lord Henrie
Pearcie Earle of Northumberland, and Lord Henry his son
Earle of Westmerland, Lorde Radulph Neuill, Lorde Rose,
Lord Willoughby, & many other personages of honor, whose
company encreased reputation to the cause, and was a great
couutenance and strength to the Dukes further purposes.
And first they tooke of him an oath, that hee should neither
procure nor permit any bodily harme to be done vnto King

               Richard; whereupon they bound themselues vpon their honours
to prosecute all extremities against his mischieuous
counsailers. And this was one step further then that which
the Duke pretended at the first, when hee tooke shipping at
Callice, which was only the recouery of his inheritance: but
that was as yet not determined, nor treated, and of some perhaps
not thought vpon; which afterwardes it did ensue: and
so was that place easily insinuated into by degrees, which
with maine and direct violence would hardlier haue bin obtained.
Then the common people desperate vpon newe desires,
and without head, head-long to matters of innouation,
flocked very fast to these noble men, the better sort for loue
to the common-wealth, some vpon a wanton lenetie, and
vaine desire of change, others in regard of their own
                  •
                distressed
and decayed estate, who setting their chiefe hopes and
deuises vppon a generall disturbance, were then most safe
when the common state was most vnsure. So betweene the
one and the other, the multitude did in short time increase
to the number of threescore thousand able soldiours.
            The Duke finding this fauour not onely to exceed his expectation,
but euen aboue his wish, he thought it best to followe
the current whilst the streame was most strong, knowing
right well, that if fortune be followed, as the first doe fall
out, the rest will commonly succeede. Therefore cutting of
vnnecessary delaies, with al possible celerity hee hastned towardes
London: to the end that possessing himselfe thereof
as the chiefe place within the realme, both for strength and
store, he might there make the seat of the warre. In this iourney
no signe nor shew of hostility appeared, but all the way
as he passed, the men of chiefest quallity and power adioyned
themselues vnto him, some vpon heat of affection, some
for feare, others vpon hope of rewarde after victorie; euerie
one vpon causes dislike, with like ardent desire contending,
least any should seeme more foreward then they: In euerie
place also where he made stay, rich gifts and pleasant deuises

were presented vnto him, with large supply both of force
and prouision: far aboue his neede: and the common people
which for their greatnesse take no care of publique affaires,
and are in least daunger by reason of their basenes, with
shoutes and acclamations gaue their applause; extolling the
Duke, as the onely man of courage, and saluting him Kiug;
but spending many contumelious tearmes vppon King Richard,
and deprauing him, as a simple and sluggish man, a
dastard, a meycocke, and one altogether vnworthy to beare
rule; shewing themselues as much without reason in rayling
vpon the one, as they were in flattering the other. Againe,
the Duke for his part was not negligent to vncouer the head
to bowe the body, to stretch forth the hand to euery meane
person, and to vse all other complements of popular behauiour,
wherewith the mindes of the common multitude are
much delighted and drawen; taking that to bee courtesie,
which the seuerer sort accompt abasement. When h
                  •
                came
to the citty, he was there likewise very richly and royally entertained,
with processions and pageantes, and diuers other
triumphant deuises & shewes; the standings in all the streets,
where he passed were taken vp to behold him; and the vnable
multitude, who otherwise could not, yet by their good
wordes, wishes, and wils, did testify vnto him their louing affections:
neither did there appeare in any man at that time,
any memory of faith and alleagiance towards King Richard,
but (as in seditions it alwaies hapneth) as the most swayed all
did go.
            On the contrarie side, the Duke of Yorke with the rest of
his 
                  •
               ounsaile, fell to mustering of men at S. Albones, for the
King: but as the people out of diuers quarters were called
thither, many of thē protested, that they would doe nothing
to the harme and preiudice of the Duke of Lancaster, who
they said was vniustly expelled, first from his country, and afterwardes
from his inheritance. Then W. Scroupe Earle of
Wiltshire L. Treasorer, Sir I. Bush, Sir W. Bagot, and Sir Henrie

Greene, perceiuing the stiffe resolution of the people forsooke
the duke of Yorke, and the L. Chanceller, and fled towards
Bristow; intending to passe the seas into Ireland to the
king. These foure were they vpon whom the common fame
went, that they had taken of the king his realm to farme: who
were so odious vnto the people, that their presence turned away
the harts of many subiects; yea it was thought, that more
for displeasure against them, then against the king, the reuolt
was made. For being the onely men of credit and authority
with the King, vnder false colour of obedience they wholly
gouerned both the realme & him; to many mischiefs corrupting
his mind, & in many abusing his name, either against his
wil, or without his knowledge, insomuch as he was innocent
of much harme which passed vnder his commandement: but
the patiēce of the people could not endure that two or three
should rule al; not by reason they were sufficient, but because
they were in fauour: and the King in that he permitted them
whom he might haue bridled, or was ignorant of that which
he should haue knowen, by tolerating and wincking at their
faults, made them his owne, & opened therby the way to his
destruction. So often times it falleth out to be as dangerous
to a prince to haue hurtfull and hatefull officers in place and
seruices of weight, as to be hurtfull and hatefull himselfe.
            The Duke of Yorke either amazed at this sodain change,
or fearing his aduenture if he should proceede in resistance,
gaue ouer the cause, and preferred present security, before
duty with daunger; giuing most men occasion to misdeeme
by his dealing, that he secretly fauored the dukes enterprise;
likewise all the other counsailers of that side, either openly
declared for the Duke or secretly wished him wel: & abandoning
all priuate direction & aduice, adioyned themselues
to the cōmon course, presuming thereby of greater safety.
            Duke Henry in the meane time being at London, entred
into deliberation with his friends, what way were best to be
followed. At the last, hauing considered the forwardnesse of

the people, the greatnes of the perill whereinto they had already
plunged, & the kings irreconcilable nature, wherof he
made proofe against the duke of Gloucester, & the earles of
Arundel & of Warwicke: they finally resolued to expel him
from his dignity, & to constitute duke Henry king in his sted:
and to that end open war was denounced against the King,
and against all his partakers, as enemies to the quiet and prospenty
of the realme; and pardon also promised to all those
that would submit themselues to follow the present course,
otherwise to look for no fauour, but all extremities. None of
the nobility durst openly oppose himselfe to these designes:
some vnwilling to play all their state at a cast; kept thēselues
at liberty, to be directed by successe of further euent: others
consented coldly, and in tearmes of doubtfull construction,
with intent to interpret them afterwards, as occasion should
change: but the most parte did directly and resolutely enter
into the cause, and made their fortunes common with the
Duke, in daunger of the attempt, but not in honour: among
whome, the Duke standing vp, vsed speach to this purpose.
            I am returned here as you see, at your procurement, and
by your agreement haue entred into armes for the common
liberty: wee haue hitherto prosperously proceeded, but in
what tearmes we now stand, I am altogether vncertaine. A
priuate man I am loath to be accompted, being designed to
be King by you; and a Prince I cannot be esteemed, whilst another
is in possession of the kingdome. Also your name is in
suspence, whether to be tearmed rebels or subiects, vntil you
haue made manifest that your allegeance was bound rather
to the state of the realme then the person of the Prince. Now
you are the men who haue both caused this doubtfulnes and
must cleare the same; your parts still remaineth to be performed;
your vertue & valure must adde strength to the goodnesse
of this action. We haue already attempted so farre, that
all hope of pardon is extinct; so that if wee shoulde shrincke
back, & breake of the enterprise, no mercy is to be expected

but butchery and gibbets, and all extremities if wee driue of
& delay the accomplishment thereof, we shall loose the opportunity
which now is offred, and open to our enimies occasion
of aduantage. For the peoples bloud is vp now on our
side, and nothing is wanting but our owne diligence & care:
let vs not therefore trifle out the time of doing, in talking &
deliberating: it is best striking whilst the yron is hoate: let vs
set forth roundly, and possesse our selues with speed of al the
parts of the realme: and so we shall bee able either to keepe
out our concurrent, or els to entertaine him litle to his liking.
So troups of men were sent into euery quarter of the realme,
to secure them for making strength on the part of King Richard:
but the people in all places as men broken with many
burthens, did easily entertaine the first commer, and were
not curious to fide with the strōger. The Duke pursued those
of the Kings priuy counsaile, which fled away from the duke
of Yorke; bearing himselfe with great cheere and courage,
as confident in the cause, and secure of the euent. When he
came at Bristow he found the castle fortified against him; but
in short time he forced it, and tooke therein Sir Iohn Bushy,
Sir Henrie Greene, & W. Scroupe, L. Treasurer, a ioyfull pray
to the commō people: who (fearing that if execution should
bee deferred, petitions for pardon might happen to preuaile,
and so their cruelties and iniuries should bee canswered with
the vaine title and commendation of elemency) did violently
require them vnto death, no respite could be obteined, no
defence admitted, no answere heard: yea their humble and
submisse intreaty was interpreted to argue a weake & broken
courage vpon a guilty conscience, which more incensed
the rage of the people, crying out that they were traitours,
bloud-suckers, theeues, and what other heinous tearmes insulting
fury did put into their mouthes: at which clamorous
and importunant instance, the day following they were beheaded.
Sir William Bagot came not with them to Bristowe,
but turned to Chester: and the pursuit being made after the

most, he alone escaped into Ireland. This execution, partly
because it pleased the people, and partly because it excluded
all hope of the Kings pardon, caused them to cleaue more
closely to the Duke; which greatly encreased, both his glory,
& his hope; hauing officers of so long aide, & need of so litle.
            In the meane time this newes of the Dukes arriuall and of
other occurrences, part true, part false, and part enlarged by
circumstance (as fame groweth in the going) was blowen ouer
to the King, being then entangled with other broyles in
Ireland, at the receipt whereof, hee caused th
                  ••
               nnes of the
Duke of Gloucester, and of the Duke of Lancaster to be imprisoned
in the strong Castle Trim, which is in Ireland, & for
dispatch to returne into England, left many matters vnfinished,
and most of his prouision behind, hasting and shufling
vp, as present necessitie did enforce. So being both vnskilfull
and vnfortunate himselfe, & de
                  •
               oide of good direction; with
more haste then good hap he tooke shipping, with the Duke
of Aumerle, Exceter, & Surrie, the Bishops of London, Lincolne,
and Caerliele, and many other men of qualitie: and
crossing the seas, landed at Milford hauen in Wales, in which
conntrimen he alwaies reposed his chiefest suretie & trust,
but then he saw contrarie to his expectatiō, that as wel there
as in all other places, the people by plumps flocked to the
Duke, & fled from him: yea they that came with him began
for to wauer, no man encouraging them to be constant, but
many to reuolt. This suddaine chaunge not looked for, not
thought vpon, disturbed all the Kings deuises, & made him
irresolute what hee should doe: on the one side hee saw his
cause and quarell to bee right, and his conscience (he saide)
cleare from any bad demerite: on the other side hee saw the
great strength of his enemies, and the whole power of the
realme bent against him: & being more abashed of the one,
then emboldned by the other, he stoode perplexed in vncertaine
termes, either where to stay, or whether to stirre, hauing
neither skill nor resolution himselfe in cases of difficultie, and

noxious to hurtfull and vnfaithfull counsaile. Some aduised
him to march forward, and pierce deeper into the land, before
his owne forces fell from him: affirming, that valure is
seconded by fortune: that this courage of his, would confirme
the constancie of his souldiours: and his presence put
the people in remembrance of their faith: that in all places
he should finde some, who for fauour, or for hire, or else
for duetie, would adheare vnto him: whereby hee should
soone gather strength sufficient to ioyne issue with his enemie
in the f
                  •
               de. Others perswaded him to retire againe into
Ireland, & then if succour failed him in England, to wage
souldiours out of other countries. But the King being no man
of action in militarie affaires, reiected both the counsailes, as
neyther venturous enough with the one, nor warie enough
with the other: and taking a middle course (which in cases
of exremitie of all is the worst) he determined to make staye
in Wales, and there to attende to what head this humour
would rise.
            The Duke vpon aduertisement that the King was landed
in Wales, remoued with a strong armie from Bristowe towardes
Chester, vsing the first oportunitie against him, and
which in deede was the fittest, When L. Thomas Percie Earle
of Worcester, and steward of the Kings houshold, heard of
the Dukes approach, he brake forth into shewe of that displeasure,
which before hee had conceiued against the King,
for proclayming his brother; the Earle of Northumberlande
traytour, and thereupon openly in the hall, in the presence of
the Kings seruants, he brake his white rodde, the ensigne of
his office, and forthwith departed to the Duke, willing euery
man to shift for himselfe in time: by which acte he lost reputation,
both with the haters & fouourers of King Richard;
being accompted of the one a corrupter, of the other a forsaker
and betrayer of the King. After this example, almost
all the rest, more fearefull then faithfull scattered themselues
euery one his way: and they who in the Kings flourishing

time, would haue contended to bee foremost, now in his declining
estate equally draw backe, and like swallowes, forsooke
that house in the winter of fortunes boysterous blasts,
where they did nothing but feede & foyle in the summer of
her sweete sunne-shine. And thus betweene faint souldiers
and false friends, the King was abandoned and forsaken, and
left almost vnto himselfe: looke on he might, but let it, hee
could not, as not of force to punish that, which he neuer forced
to preuent: his only remedy was pacience: (a cold comfort)
his only reuenge was complaint: (a weake weapon) betweene
which two, his bitternesse did in this manner breake
from him.
            And doe these also (said he) forsake me? doth their faith &
my fortune end together? wel, if I had forsaken them in time
I had not beene forsaken of others, who once loued me better,
and now are able to harme me more. But now I see the
blindnesse of my iudgement: I plainely see, that there is no
friendship in flatterie, nor treacherie in plaine truth: and I
would I had as much time to reforme this errour, as I am like
to haue to repent it, but they would not suffer me to be wise
when I might, and now they haue made me wretched they
runne from me: they could bee the causes, but they will not
be companions of my miseries: such attendants are Crowes
to a carcasse, which flocke together, not to defend, but to deuour
it, and no sooner haue they layd the bones bare, but
straight-wayes they are gone.
            Thus the King hauing lost both the feare and loue of his
subiects, disturbed and distracted in thoughts, without comfort
councell or courage, remained still in Wales, as a stranger
at home, as an exile in his owne kingdome, not daring to
goe to London, nor any man desirous to come to him, shifting
still from place to place, and (as it fals out at men distressed
& amazed) fearing all things, but most disliking the present.
The Duke continually pursued him with a mightie armie:
but the Kings companie was too small to doe any thing

by force, & yet too great to remaine in secrete: neither were
they in any sort assured vnto him, but such as shame and reuerence
retained a while; bands of small countenance, with
men fearefull of danger, & carelesse of credite. At the length
he came to the Castle of Conweye; and there being vtterly
destitute both of helpe and hope, he stoode deuided in mind
what way to bend his course, all his followers weare more
ready to impugne the opinions of other, thē to giue direction
themselues, as seeing better what to shunne then what to
follow: and as it alwaies chanceth in desperate causes, that
way was commonly preferred, wherof the opportunitie was
already past. Some aduised him, that it was thē time to think,
rather of sauing his life, then recouering his estate. You see
(said they) how greatly & how wholly your subiects are set
against you: it is but in vaine to looke for a suddaine change,
or without a chaunge to hope that your purposes may preuaile,
giue place for a time to the currant of this furie; let it
haue the full sway; and when it is at the highest pitch, it will
turne againe; and then you shall haue the tide as strong on
your side, as it is now against you. This motiō or rather commotion
of the people, is violent and against nature: & therefore
(as a stone forced vpward) is most stronge at the beginning,
and the further it passeth the more it weakneth, vntil at
last it returne to the naturall course againe. Therefore giue
a little space, for the bad to draw backe, for the good to put forward:
treasons preuaile on the suddaine: but good counsailes
gather forces by leasure. You haue example in your
noble progenitor King Henry the third, against whome the
Lords set vp Lewes the French kings sonne: conditions were
concluded, and faith was made that he should be their King:
but this purpose lasted not the pulling on: for before they had
possessed him of the kingdom, they ioyned togither in armes
against him, & were as fierce to driue him out of the realme,
as they had beene found to draw him in. The like alteration
may you likewise not onely hope, but assuredly expect: for

the mindes of men are constant in nothing but inconstancie,
and perseuer onely in chaunge, in dislike of things present
they desire new, wherwith they rest not long contented, but
are many times glutted euen with the first sight. And indeed
how can they long endure the raigne of him, who attaining
the kingdome onely by their fauour and might, shall holde
the same in a manner, at their courtesie and will? for euerie
vnpleasant commaund, shall be deemed ingratitude: euerie
suit reiected, shal charge him with vnkindnesse: Yea if honor
be not offered, they will be discontented: and vppon any occasion
of displeasure, thinke thēselues as able to displace him,
as they were to set him vp: therefore you may for a time, returne
againe into Ireland; or else passe the seas to your Father
in lawe, the king of Fraunce: you may assure your selfe
of his assistance, to set vpon your side, and recouer your losses.
Times haue their turnes, and fortune her course too and
fro like the sea, & magnanimitie is shewen by enduring, &
not relinquishing when she doth crosse, onely loose no point
of courage, and keepe your person at large: reseruing your
selfe to that good hope, which neuer dieth whilst life endure.
            Others, who were enemies to all counsaile, whereof themselues
were not authors, perswaded the King, that the nobilitie
and commons of the realme had attempted so farre, that
they would rather dye, then desist; not so much for hatred to
you, as for feare to themselues; hauing so deadly increased
your displeasure against them. For it is a hard matter to forgiue,
and impossible to forget those iniuries and indignities
which they haue offered. And to omit what some princes
haue done, what all will promise to doe, they will soone find
fresh and bleeding examples what you are like to doe. The
Duke of Gloucester and the Earles of Arundell and of Warwicke
did rise in armes against you, not to remoue you from
your crowne: but to remoue certaine persons frō your companie;
an action more displeasing then preiudiciall vnto you:
at the last, a friendship was made, and charters of free pardon

graunted vnto them: but what followed? was euer the
breach perfectly made vp? did displeasure dye? or was it only
dissembled? ah, it grieueth vs to thinke, how the present
want of their liues, hath fully reuenged their deathes: for
if they had liued, their countenance and authority woulde
easily haue staied these stirs; and the manner of their deaths
doth strike an obstinate persistance into all your enemies. As
for refuge to forren Princes, you shall surely receiue of them
entertainment and allowance, and yet may growe burdensome,
and at last perhaps faile: but it is very hard to draw any
Prince into so dangerous a quarrell: and more harde by
that meanes to preuaile: or if you should, it is to bee feared
that the victorers will hold to themselues the benefit of their
conquest, and not yeeld it ouer vnto you. Few countries but
haue bin vnder pretence of ayde by forrenners subdued: and
this was the only cause which first drew the Saxons into this
land: who so assisted the Britaines against their enemies,
that themselues could not be resisted from possessing they
                  •
               
kingdome. Yet we doe not altogither condemne the helpe
of straungers, in cases of extremity; but doe account it a remedy,
least to be trusted, and last of all to bee tried. What
then if first you should procure a treaty, to see in what terms
the people stand against you? It may be that vpon some conditions
they will submit themselues vnto you, as heretofore
they haue done. Or if they wil needs deforce you from your
kingdome, yet if an honourable maintenance may bee assured,
what shall you lose thereby? What shall you lack? You
haue no childe to be disinherited; the chiefest motiue which
maketh men so greedy to get, and so carefull to keepe. And
as for your selfe, you shall be remoued from a steepe & sli
                  ••
               
pery hill, to a smooth and pleasant plaine; from tempest
                  ••
               us
seas, to a calme hauen; from daungerous trauaile to secure
rest: & if there be no solace without safety, no felicity without
firmnesse; you shall find the priuate life not only more
sweete, but more high and happy then your princely state.

The tallest trees are weakest in the toppes; in widest fieldes are
greatest tempests; and enuy alwaies aimeth at loftiest marks: so
that to be placed on high, is a false felicity, and a true misery; in
shew a rule, but indeed a subiection to all the subiects; hauing
least stay to stand, and most danger in the fall: and therefore if
you come downe safely, you are therein priuileged aboue many
other. But you shal lose (you will say) the credit & the countenance
of a King: so you shal the cares; and so you shall the casualties.
The crown & sceptar are things most weighty to weld:
if a Prince be good, he is laden with labour; if euill, with infamy
and reproch: i
                  •
                either with perils: on euery side he is beset with
dangerous rocks, with deadly gulfes, & continually tossed with
strong and sturdy tempests: so that to be freed frō these feares,
is to be esteemed an escape, and not a losse. This did the stoick
Philosopher perecue, who seeing Dionysius 
               
                  •
               it, merily & freely
conceited in the theater, beeing a little before expelled his
kingdom; greatly condemned the error of his people who had
banished him to such liberty, & so preferred him by his punisliment.
These are the dreames of philosophers (you will say) who
vsually contemne and depraue honor, & yet neuer lie from honourable
mens tables. Let passe then Philosophers: go to vaine
and sottish men. Seleuchus being a King was wont to say, that if
a man knew with what cares the diadē was clogged, he would
not take it vp, although it lay in the street. You will say peraduenture,
that like the boatman, he looked one way, and pulled
another; or like the lapwing, he cried most whē he was furthest
from his nest, vainly dispraising that which hee was loathest to
loos
                  •
               
               ▪ What say you then to Antiochus? whome when the Romanes
had dispoiled of al Asia, he sent vnto them great thanks,
that they had rid him of infinit & importable cares, and set him
at a moderate quiet: you will say that he made a vertue of his
necessity. Well then, we are some what neere your cace: & they
that cannot frame their wils to this wisedome, let them thanke
their enimies for enforcing them to it. But what say you to Di
                     •
                  
                  clesian?
who did voluntarily relinqusht, not a small and corner
kingdōe, but the greatest empire that the world did euer beare

and found so sweet contentmēt in that exchange, that when he
was importuned by the senate, to resume his estate, hee vtterly
reiected their suite. But what need we trauell in externe histories,
for those examples, whereof we haue so large supply in our
owne? the ancient Saxon Kings; Kingilsus, Ina, Ceolulphus, Eadbertus,
Ethelredus, Kēredus, Offa, Sebbi, & Sigebertus did of their
owne accord laye downe their diadems and scepters, and betake
thēselues to solitary & religious liues. Now many Princes
haue helde their estate with better fortune, but none did euer
with greater honor leaue it, then you should at this present: for
others haue abādoned their rule, either for desire of ease, or for
auoidance of dangers, or vpon some sluggish and superstitious
deuotiō: but you for loue to your country, shall forbeare to seek
your vttermost remedy, in setting vp a most cruel war: wherein
much English bloud should be spilt, & the realme depriued
of many worthy armies. Let others be repotted to forsake their
kingdoms, when they had no longer pleasure to hold thē: but
your praise shall be for giuing ouer, when it is greatest benefit
vnto the people: and the more hope you haue to preuaile, if
you list to contend, the greater commendations will it be to
yeeld as being rather voluntary then by constraint.
            The king cōmended the courage of the first, but this last coū
               sell
best agreed with his faint & feeble spirit, more yeelding to
feare then forward in hope; apt by the one to despaire, vnable
by the other to holde out in any hard aduenture, preferring alwayes
abiect and base safety, before hazard with honour. Yet
were many ready to reply, that al speech of conditions & yeelding
was both dishonorable & also dangerous: for euen in hardest
haps, said they, a noble nature wil not presently relinquish;
but first endeuor either by courage to repell the danger, or by
wisdome to decline it: and why should you so litle esteem your
glory and fame, as without battel, or blow striken▪ to bind your
hands, & yeeld vp your weapons, & put your selfe vpon miserable
mercy: or if the honor of your noble house doth nothing
moue you, yet let danger & despaire at least arme you to boldnesse:
for neither the duke nor his friends will be so confident

as to thinke themselues safe, so long as you shall remaine (although
in priuate state) aliue. Indeed you may assure your self
that faire words wil be giuen, & large offers made: but the performance
shal cōsist in the courtesy of the conqueror: and nothing
will be thought vnlawfull to him that hath power. King
Edward the second was too heauy to be indured, euē of his own
sonne: and many haue vsed violence to themselues, rather thē
they would fall into the power of their concurrents: and do not
you expect more fauor or greater fortune thē other haue foūd:
let neuer that senselesnes possesse your mind, to imagine that a
prince may liue safely in priuate estate: for in this case there is
no meane betweene Caesar & nothing, betweene the highest
honor & the deadliest downfall. Therfore omit neither all nor
any one meanes vnassayed, to maintaine your side by armes:
no greater harme can happen at the hardest, then that which
willingly you run into: you can but die if you be vanquished, &
die you shall if you do yeeld: but by the one you shall end your
life with glory, by the other, with shame & perpetuall reproch.
And although you do now esteeme equally of both, yet when
you shall see your selfe pent in prison, in dayly feare and expectancy
of a bloudy messenger; you shall then perceiue a difference
in death, and find the weaknesse and fault of the counsell
which you are about to follow. Many like speeches were with
great vehemēcy often repeated, but the kings eares were stopped
against all impression of manhood: and as he was vnable to
gouerne himselfe in his prosperous estate, so was he much lesse
sufficient to wind out of these intricate troubles. Therfore perceiuing
himselfe so straitly beset, that he could hardly either escape
away, or shift any longer, he desired speech with Tho. Arundel
archbish. of Cant. & L. Hen. Percy earle of Northumb. of
whom, the one he had banished, the other he had proclaimed
traitor not long before. These two came vnto him, & the king
vpon short cōference, vnderstanding what stiffe stomacks they
bare against him, was cōtent not to demand that which he saw
he could not obtaine: & thereupon agreed that he would relinquish
his estate, vpō condition that an honorable liuing might

be assigned him, & life promised to 8. such persons as he would
name: the greatest number whom aduersity did not alter. This
was then both readily & faithfully promised by the Archbish.
and the earle, & afterward solemnly ratified by the duke. The
king ceased not to intreat submisly, & promise largely, and (as
the nature is of men perplexed with feare) aboue his ability, &
without measure, the earle incouraged him, and declared that
the Duke before he had obtained any aide, secured by his oath
the safety of the kings person. Then the king desired to talke
with the duke, which was likewise promised; & so the archbish.
& the earle departed, & the king remoued to the castle of Flint,
about 8. miles distant from Chester, to which place the Duke
came to him. Here the coutenances & words of both were noted,
by them that were present: the king seemed abiect & base:
the duke neither iusulting nor relenting, but comforting and
promising friendly. The king repeated many benefits & kindnesses
that he had shewed: how in former time he had spared
the dukes owne life, & lately his sonnes: in regard where of he
desired him, with such submisnes as was agreeable rather with
his necessity then his honour: that he would shew some pitie,
where he had receiued such pleasure: and permit him to enioy
his life, with such priuate maintenance as was cōuenient for his
estate. The duke put h
                  •
               m in good comfort, promising him assuredly,
that he would prouide for his safety: for which he suffered
himselfe to be solemnly thanked, & thought it not much
to haue it accounted a great benefit. Indeed from that time the
king was kept safe and sure enough, from hindring any of the
dukes purposes, neither could it so easily haue bene discerned
what had beue best for him to do, as that this which he did was
the very worst: for the same night he was brought by the duke
and his army to Chester, and from thence secretly conueyed to
the Tower of London, there to be kept safe vntill the Parliament,
which was appointed shortly after to be holden.
            Thus the King yeal ded himselfe, the 20. day of August, being
the 47. day after the Dukes arriuall: so that his iournyes
considered, from Houldernesse in the North to London: from

thence to Bristowe, & so into Wales, & backe againe to Chesten
a man shal not easily trauaile ouer the land in shorter time
then he conquered it. So frienly was fortune vnto him, that hee
eyther found or made a readie passage through al hinderances
and lets: & it seemed that he needed onely, to open his armes,
to meete and receiue her, as she offered her selfe vnto him. All
the Kings treasure & Iewels, with his horses, and all his fardage
came to the Dukes hands; and many that were in his companie,
were afterwards also despoyled by the souldiours of Northumberland
and Wales.
            Some writers affirme, that the King did not yeald himselfe,
but was forelaied & taken, as he was secretly passing frō Flint
to Chester: but the authoritie of others who liued in that time,
eyther in the plaine viewe, or certaine intelligence of these affaires,
who for their place could not but knowe, and for their
professiō would not but deliuer the very truth, hath drawne me
to follow their report: which I find also receiued by some late
wrighters, of as great deapth in iudgement and choice, as any
(without exception) that this age hath brought forth.
            As the King was carried towards London, certaine citizens
conspired to lay themselues in a wait by the way, and sodainly
to slay him; partly for priuate grieuances, & partly for the cruelty
that he had vsed towards the whole citty: but the Maior vpon
intelligence preuented the practise, and rode forth in person
with a cōuenient company, to conduct him safely vnto the
tower. Shortly after the duke came to Londō in solemn estate,
and sent forth summons in the Kings name, for a Parlament to
be holden at Westminster, the last day of Septēber in the same
yeare: in the meane time he deliberated with his kindred and
kind friends, cōcerning the order of his proceedings. The duke
of Yorke (who a litle before had bene gouernour of the realm
for the king & thē was the chiefest directer of the duke) thoght
it best that K. Richard should both voluntarily resigne, & also
solemnly be deposed, by consent of all the states of the realme:
for resignation only would be imputed to feare, and depriuati
               
                  ••
                to
force; whereof the one is alwaies pitied, and the other enuied;

but if both concurre, and his desire be combined with his
desart, being willing to forsake that which he is adiudged worthy
to forgo; then shall it appeare, that he neither is expelled his
kingdom by meere constraint, nor leaueth it without iust cause
This aduice pleased the rest, and for executing therof vpon the
day of S. Michaeil (which was the day before the parlament
should begin) there assembled at the Tower. Thomas Arundell
archbish. of Canturbury, Richard Scroupe archbish. of Yorke,
Iohn bishop of Hereford, Henry duke of Lancaster, Henry earle
of Northumberland, Radulph Earle of Westmerland, L. Hugh
Burnell, L. Thomas Berkley, L. Rose, L. Willoughby, L. Abergeiny,
the Abbat of Westminster, the Prior of Canterbury, Willam
Thirminges, and Iohn Makeham, Chiefe Iustices, Thomas St
                     •
                  ke,
and Iohn Burbacke, Doctours of Law. T. Herpingham, and T.
Gray knights, W. Ferby, and Dionise Lophane publike Notaries,
and diuers others either not noted, or not remembred. When
all were set in their places, King Richard was brought foorth,
apparelled in his royall to be, the diademe on his head, and the
scepter in his hand; and was placed amongst them in a chaire
of estate. Neuer was prince so gorgeous, with lesse glory and
greater griefe: to whom it was not disgrace sufficient, to lose
both the honour and ornaments of a king, but he must openly
to his greater scorne, renounce the one, and deliuer the other,
After a little pause and expectation, the king arose from his
seat, and spake to the assembly these words, or the very like in
effect.
            I assure my selfe that some at this present, and many hereafter,
will accompt my case lamentable; either that I hane deserued
this deiection, if it be iust; or if it be wrongfull, that I could
not auoide it. Indeede I doe confesse, that many times I haue
shewed my selfe both lesse prouident, and lesse painfull for the
benefite of the common-wealth, then I should, or might, or intended
to doe hereafter; and haue in many actions, more respected
the satisfying of my owne particular humour, then either
iustice to some priuate persons, or the common good of al yet
I did not at any time, either omit dutie or cōmit grieuance,

vpon natural dulnesse or set malice; but partly by abuse of corrupt
councellers, partly by errour of my youthfull iudgement.
And now the remembrance of these ouer-sights, is so vnpleasant
to no man, as to my selfe: and the rather because I haue no
meanes left, either to recompence the iniuries which I haue
done, or to testifie to the world my reformed affections, which
experience and stayednesse of yeares had already corrected,
& would dayly haue framed to more perfection. But whether
all the imputations wherewith I am charged be true, either in
substance, or in such qualitie as they are layd; or whether being
true, they be so heinous, as to inforce these extremities, or whether
any other Prince, especially in the heate of youth, and in
the space of two and twentie yeares (the time of my vnfortunate
raigne) doth, not sometimes either for aduantage, or vppon
displeasure, in as deepe maner grieue some particular subiect;
I will not now examine: it helpeth not to vse defence,
neither booteth it to make complaint: there is left no place
for the one, nor pitie for the other: and therefore I referre it
to the iudgement of God, and your lesse distempered considerations.
            I accuse no man, I blame no fortune, I complaine of nothing:
I haue no pleasure in such vaine and needlesse comforts:
and if I listed to haue stood vpon tearmes, I know I haue
great fauourers abroad, and some friends (I hope) at home,
who would haue beene ready, yea forward on my behalfe, to
set vp a bloudy and doubtfull warre: but I esteeme not my
dignitie at so high a price, as the hazard of so great valure,
the spilling of so much English bloud, and the spoile and
waste of so flourishing a Realme, as thereby might haue bene
occasioned. Therefore that the Common-wealth may rather
rise by my fall, then I stand by the ruine thereof. I willingly
yeeld to your desires; and am heere come to dispossesse my
selfe of all publike authority and title, and to make it free and
lawfull for you to create for your King, Henric Duke of Lancaster
my cousin germaine, whom I know to be as worthie to

take that place as I see you willing to giue it to him.
            Then he read openly and distinctly the forme of his cession,
wherein he did declare, that he had discharged his subiectes,
from their oathes of fealtie and homage, and all other oathes
whatsoeuer; and of his owne will & free motion, did abdicate,
the title, dignitie, and aucthoritie of a King: and rendred vp the
possession of the Realme, with the vse and title thereof, and all
the rights thereunto appertaining. To this the King subscribed
and was sworne: and then hee deliuered with his owne hands
the Crowne, the Septer, and the Robe to the Duke of Lancaster;
wishing vnto him more happinesse therewith then had euer
happened vnto himselfe. Then he did constiture the Archbishop
of Yorke, and the Bishop of Hereford his procurators,
to intimate and declare this his resignation to all the states of
the realme, which should be assembled together in Parliament▪
Lastly, he gaue all his riches and goods, to the summe of thee
hundred thousand pounds in coyne, besides his Iewels & plate,
for satisfaction of the iniuryes that hee had done, desiring the
Duke, & al the rest that were present seuerally by their names,
not altogether to forget that he had beene their King, nor yet
too much to thinke vpon the same; but to retaine of him amoderate
remembrance; and in recompence of the ease that hee
had done them by his voluntarie yeelding, to permit him to
liue safely, in a priuate and obscure life: with the sweetenesse
wherof he was so possessed, that frō theneforth he would preferre
it, before any preferment in the world. All this was deliuered
and done by the King, with voyce and countenance so
agreeable to his present beauinesse, that there was no man to
vnmindefull of humane instabilitie, which was not in some
measure moued thereat: insomuch as a fewe secrete teares
melted from the eyes of many that were present, in whose
mindes a confessed and obscure alteration alreadie g
                  •
               nne
to beginne. So pro
                  •
               e and inclinable are mento pitie miserie,
although they haue procured it, and to enuie prosperitie,
euen that which they haue raysed.
            
               
Vpon Munday next following the Parlament began at
Westminster; and the Archbishop of Yorke and the Bishop
of Hereford (the Kings Atturneys for this purpose) declared
openly to the states there assembled, the Kings voluntarie resignation;
and demaunded whether they would assent and
agree therevnto? the Barons of the realme by seuerall and
particular consent, the commons with one generall voyce,
did expreslye accept and admit the same. Then it was
thought meet that certaine defects and misdemeanures concerning
matters of gouernment, should be obiected against
the King: for which he should be adi
                  •
               dged as vnworthy, as
he seemed vnwilling to reteine the kingdome. To this purpose
certaine articles were engrossed, and openly read: in
which was conteyned, how vnprofitable the King had bin to
the realme; how vniust and grieuous to the subiectes; contrarie
both to his honour, and to his oath. The chiefest of
which articles are these that follow.
            1 FIrst that King Richard did wastefully spend the treasure
of the realme, and had giuen the possessions of the
crowne, to men vnworthy, by reason whereof, new charges
were dayly laide on the neckes of the poore comminaltie.
            2 Item, where diuers Lords as well spirituall as temporall,
were appointed by the high court of Parlament, to commune
and treate of matters concerning the state of the
realme, and the commonwealth of the same, they being busied
about the same commission, he with others of his affinitie
went about to impeache them of treason.
            3 Item, that by force and menace, he compelled the Iustices
of the realme at Shrewsburie, to condiscend to his opinion
for the destruction of the said Lords: Insomuch as he
began to raise warre, against Iohn Duke of Lancaster, Thomas
Earle of Arundell, Richard Earle of Warwicke, & other
Lords contrarie to his honor and promise.
            4 Item, that he caused his vnckle the Duke of Gloucester,

to be arrested without lawe, and sent him to Calice, and
there without iudgement murthered him: and although the
Earle of Arundell vpon his arraignement, pleaded his charter
of pardon, he could not be heard, but was in most vile
and shamefull manner sodainly put to death.
            5 Item, he assembled certaine Lancashire and Cheshire
men, to the intent to make ware on the foresaid Lords,
and suffered them to robbe and spoile, without correction
or reproofe.
            6 Item, that although the king flatteringly and with great
dissimulation, made proclamation throughout the realme,
that the Lords aforenamed were not attached for any crime
of treason, but onely for extortions and oppressions doone
within the realme, yet he laide to them in the Parlament rebellion
and manifest treason.
            7 Item, he hath compelled diuers of the said Lords seruants
by menace, to make great fines & extreame paiments,
to their vtter vndooing: and notwithstanding his pardon to
to them graunted, he made them fine a new.
            8 Item, where diuers were appointed to common of the
estate of the realme; and the commonwealth of the same, the
king caused all the roules & records to be kept frō them, contrary
to his promise made in parlament, to his opē dishonor.
            9 Item, 
                  •
               e vncharitably commaunded, that no man vpon
paine of losse of life and goods, should once entreate him for
the returne of Henrie now duke of Lancaster.
            10 Item, where the realme is houlden of God, and not of
the Pope, or any other Prince, the said King Richard, after he
had obteyned diuers acts of Parlament, for his owne peculiar
profit and pleasure, then he procured Bulles and extreame
censures from Rome, to compell all men streitly to keepe
the same, contrary to the honour and auncient priuiledges
of this realme.
            11 Item, although the Duke of Lancaster had done his
deuoyre against Thomas Duke of Northfolke, in proofe of

his quarrell, yet the said king without reason or ground banished
him the realme for ten yeares, contrarie to all equitie.
            12 Item, before the Dukes departure, he vnder his broad
Scale, licenced him to make atturneys, to prosecute and defend
his causes: the said king after his departure, would suffer
none atturney to appeare for him, but did with his at his
pleasure.
            13 Item, the said king put out diuers Shiriffes lawfully
elected, and put in their roomes diuers others of his owne
minions, subuerting the lawe, contrarie to his oath and honour.
            14 Item, he borowed great summes of money, and
bound himselfe vnder his letters patents for the repayment
of the same, and yet not one peny paide.
            15 Item, he taxed men at the will of him and his vnhappie
counsaile, and the same treasure spent in folly, not paying
poore men for their vittaile and viand.
            16 Item, he said that the lawes of the realme were in his
head, and sometimes in his brest: by reason of which phantasticall
opinion, he destroyed noble men, and impouerished
the poore commons.
            17 Item, the parlament setting and enacting diuers notable
statutes, for the profit and aduancement of the commonwealth,
he by his priuie friends and solicitours, caused to
be enacted, that no acte then enacted should be more preiudiciall
to him, then it was to his predecessours: thorow which
prouiso, he did often as he list, and not as the lawe ment.
            18 Item, for to serue his purpose, he would suffer the
Shiriffes of the shires, to remaine aboue one yeare or two in
their office.
            19 Item, at the summons of parlament, when the Knights
and Burgesses should be elect, and the election had fully proceeded,
he put out diuers persons elected, and put in others in
their places, to serue his will and appetite.
            20 Item, he had priuie espials in euery shire, to heare

who had of him any communication, and if he communed
of his lafciuious liuing, and outragious dooing, he straightwayes
was apprehended, and made a grieuous fine.
            21 Item, the spiritualtie alledged against him, that he at
his going into Ireland, exacted many notable summes of
money, beside Plate and Iewels, without lawe ot custome,
contrary to his oath taken at his coronation.
            22 Item, when diuers Lordes and Iustices were sworne
to say the trueth, of diuers things to them committed in
charge, both for the honor of the realme, and profit of the
king, the said king so menaced them with sore threatnings,
that no man would or durst say the right.
            23 Item, that without the assent of the Nobilitie, he caryed
the Iewels and Place, and treasure, ouer the sea into Ireland;
to the great impouerishing of the realme; and all the
good recordes of the common wealth against his extortions,
he caused priuily to be embeaseled and caryed away.
            24 Item, in all leagues and letters to be concluded and
sent to the sea of Rome and other regions, his writing was
so subtill and darke, that no other Prince durst once beleeue
him, nor yet his owne subiects.
            25 Item, he most tyranouslie and vnprincely said, that
the liues and goods of all his subiects, were in the Princes
hands, and at his disposition.
            26 Item, that he contrarie to the great Charter of England,
caused diuers lustie men to appeale diuers olde men,
vpon matters determinable at the common law, in the court
Marciall, because that in that court is no triall but onely by
battaile: whereby the sayd aged persons fearing the sequell
of the matter, submitted themselues to his mercie, whom he
fined and ransomed vnreasonably at his pleasure.
            27 Item, he craftily deuised certaine priuie oathes, contrarie
to lawe, and caused diuers of his subiects, first to be
sworne to obserue the same, and after bound them in bands
for surer keeping the same, to the great vndooing of many

honest men.
            28 Item, where the Chancellour according to lawe,
would in no wise graunt a prohibition to a certaine person,
the king graunted it vnto the same person vnder his priuie

                  •
               eale, with great threatnings if it should be disobeyed.
            29 Item, he banished the Bishop of Canterburie, without
cause or iudgement, and kept him in the Parlament
Chamber with men of armes.
            30 Item, the bishops goods he graunted to his successor,
vpon condition that he should maintaine all his statutes
made at Shrewsburie Anno. 21. and the statutes made Anno
22. at Couentree.
            31 Item, vppon the accusation of the Archbishop, the
king craftily perswaded the said Bishop to make no answer,
for he would be his warrant, and aduised him not to come
to the Parlament; and so without answere he was condemned
and exiled, and his goods seazed. Foure other Articles
were laide, which particularlie did concerne the said
Archhishop, by whose dooing chiefly the king was vtterlie
vndone.
            Then was demaunded of the Nobilitie and commons of
the realme, what they iudged both of the trueth and desert
of these articles? who all agreed that the crimes were notorious,
and that king Richard was worthie for the same to be
deposed from his princely dignitie. The noble men gaue
their voyces, part corrupted by fauour, part awed by feare:
and the commons are commonly like a flocke of Cranes, as
one dooth flye, all will follow. Herevpon Commissioners
were appointed by both the houses; who pronounced sentence
of deposition against king Richard, in manner and
forme as followeth.
            In the name of God Amen. VVe Iohn Bishop of S. Asses,
I. Abbote of Glastenburie, Thom. Earle of Gloucester, Thom.
Lord Berkley, Thom. Erpinghame, Thom. Graye Knights:
Will. Thirninge Iustice, Commissioners for the matters hereafter

specified, by the Lords spirituall and temporall of the realme
of England, and the Commons of the said realme, representing
all the states of the saide Kingdome, specially deputed, sitting in
seate of iudgement, and considering the manifold periuries, and
cruelties, and many other crimes and offerces by Richard late
King of the saide realme, committed and doone, contrarie to
good gouernement in the realmes and dominions aforesaide, during
the time of his reigne: also considering the articles which
were openly 
                  •••
               bibited and red before the said states, which were
so publicke, notorious, manifest, and famous, that they could nor
can by no auoydance and shift be concealed: also considering the
confession of the saide King, acknowledging and reputing and
truly vpon his certaine knowledge iudging himselfe to haue
been and to be altogether insufficient and vnskilfull, for the rule
and gouernment of the realmes and Dominions aforesaid and of
any parts of them, and not vnworthy to be deposed, for the notorious
demerites, by the said Richard first acknowledged, and afterward
by his will and mandate, before the said states published,
and to them opened and declared in the English tongue. Vpon
these and other matters which were done concerning the same
busines, before the said States and vs, by the diligent place, name
and authority to vs in this part committed, in aboundance and
for a cautele we pronounce, decree and declare, the saide Richard,
to haue beene and to be vnprofitable and vnable, and altogether
insufficient and vnworthie for the rule and gouernement
of the said realmes, and of the dominions, rights and parts
of them: and in regarde and respect of the premises, worthily to
be deposed from all kinglie dignitie and honour (if any such dignitie
and honour remaineth in him) and for the like cautele wee
doe depose him by our sentence definitiue in this writing: inhibiting
from hencefoorth expressely, all and singular Lords, Archbishops,
Bishops, Prelates, Dukes, Marquesses and Earles, Barons,
Knights, Vassalles, and all other persons whatsoeuer, of the
saide realmes and dominions, and other places to the said realmes
and dominions appertaining, the subiects and liege people of the
same, and euery of them, that from henceforth none obey, or intend

to obey the foresaid Richard, as king or Lord of the realmes
and dominions aforesaid.
            Then the same Commissioners were by the consent and
suffrages of both houses, constituted procurators, ioyntlye
and seuerally for all the states of the realme; to resigne and
surrender vnto King Richard, for them and all other homagers
of the realme, all the homages and fealties which were
both due and doone vnto him; as King and Soueraigne, and
also to declare vnto him al the premises, concerning his deposition.
Now Henrie Duke of Lancaster, that he might be
reputed, or reported at the least, not to attaine the kingdom
by intrusion and wrong, was counsailed by his friends, to
pretend some lawfull challenge and claime therevnto: and
being in power, it was no sooner aduised what was to
bee doone, but it was presently deuised how to doe it. So a
title was drawne from Edmund, sonne to King Henrie the
third, whom they surnamed Crowch backe: affirming that
he was the eldest sonne of King Henrie, and that for his deformitie,
he was put from his right of succession in the kingdome;
which was for that cause giuen to his yonger brother,
King Edward the third: to this Edmund the Duke was
next of bloud by his mother Blanche, sole daughter and
heyre to Henrie the first Duke of Lancaster, and sonne to the
saide Edmund. This cunning conceit was perceiued of all
men; but seeming not to perceiue it, was a point of friendship
in some, and of obedience in the rest: therfore the kingdome
of England being then thought vacant, both by the
resignation, and also by the deposition of King Richard:
Duke Henrie arose from his seate, and standing in the view
of the Lords, crossed himselfe on the forehead, and on the
brest, and spake as followeth.
            In the name of God Amen: 
                  〈◊〉
                
               Henrie of Lancaster, claime
the realme of England, & 
                  ••••
               owne, with all the appurtenances,

                  〈…〉
                of the bloud royall, comming
from that good Lord K. Henrie the third, and through the right

that God of this grace hath sent mee, with the helpe of my kindred
and of my friendes, to recouer the same: Which kingdome
was in point to be vndoone, for default of good gouernment and
due iustice.
            After these wordes, it was demaunded in both houses,
of the Nobility & of the commons which were assembled,
whether they did consent that the Duke should raigne? Who
all with one voyce, acknowledged and accepted him for
their King: then the Archbishop of Canterbury tooke him
by the hand, and placed him in the throane of estate, the
Archbishoppe of Yorke assisting him, and all the assemblie
testifying their owne ioy, and wishing his. Then the Archbishop
made an oration, and tooke for his theame, this place
of Scripture: See; this is the man whom I spake to thee of, this
same shall raigne ouer my people. 1. Reg. 9. 17. After all this
he was proclaimed King of England, and of Fraunce, and
Lord of Ireland: and the common people which is voide of
cares, not searching into sequels, but without difference of
right or wrong inclinable to follow those that are mighty,
with shoutes and clamours gaue their applause, not all vpon
iudgement, or faithfull meaning, but most onely vpon a receiued
custome to flatter the Prince whatsoeuer he be. Yet
least the heate of this humour should allay by delay, it was
foorthwith proclaimed in the great Hall, that vpon the 13.
day of September next ensuing, the Coronation of the King
should be celebrated at Westminster. These matters being
thus dispatched, the King proclaimed, arose from his seate,
and went to White Hall: where he spent the rest of the day
in royall feasting, and all other complementes of ioy: notwithstanding
there appeared in him no token of statelynesse
or pride, nor any change in so great a change.
            Vpon Wednesday next following, the procurators, before
mentioned, went to the presence of King Richard, being
within the Tower; and declared vnto him the admission
of his resignation, and also the order and forme of his deposition:

and in the name of all the states of the realme, did
surrender the homage and fealty which had been due vnto
him; so that no man from thence foorth would beare to
him faith and obedience, as to their King The King answered
that he nothing reguarded these titulare circumstances,
but contented himselfe with hope, that his cousen would be
gracious Lord, and good friend vnto him.
            So vpon the 13. day of October, which was the day of
the translation of Edward the Confessour, the Duke was
with all accustomed solemnities, by the Archbishoppe of
Canterbury, sacred, annointed and Crowned King at Westminster,
by the name of king Henry the fourth: vpon the
very same day, wherein the yeere before, he had been banished
the Realme. Hee was annoynted with an oyle,
which a certaine religious man gaue vnto Henry the first
Duke of Lancaster (Grandfather to the King by the mothers
side) when he serued in the warres of King Edward
the third, beyond the seas; together with this Prophesie,
that the Kinges which should be annoynted therewith,
should bee the champions of the Church. Duke Henry
deliuered this oyle in a golden violl to Prince Edward, the
eldest sonne of King Edward the third; who locked vp the
same in a barred chest within the Tower, with intent to be
annoynted therewith, when he should bee crowned King:
but the Prince dying before his Father, it remained there,
eyther not remembred, or not regarded, vntill this present
yeere; wherein the King, being vpon his voyage into
Ireland, and making diligent search for the iewels and
monumentes of his progenitours, found this Violl and
Prophesie: and vnderstanding the secret, was desirous
to be anoynted againe with that oyle: but the Archbishop
of Canterbury perswaded him, that both the fact
was vnlawfull, and the precedent vnseene, that a King
should bee anoynted twice: whereupon he brake of that
purpose, and tooke the Violl with him into Ireland: and

when hee yeelded himselfe at Flint, the Archbishoppe of
Canterburye demaunded it of him agayne and dyd receaue
and reserue the same, vntill the coronation of
King Henrie; who was the first King of this realme, that was
anoynted therewith.
            I am not purposed to discourse, eyther of the authoritye,
or of the certaintye of these prophesies: but wee
may easily obserue, that the greatest part of them, eyther
altogether fayled, or were fulfilled in another sence,
then as they were commonly construed and taken. During
the raigne of King Henrie the fourth, execution by
fire was first put in practise within this Realme, for
controuersies in poyntes of religion: in any other extraordinarye
mattter, hee did as much make the Church
champion, as shew himselfe a champion of the Church:
but afterwardes his successours were entytuled Defenders
of the fayth: and howe in action they veryfied the
same, I referre to remembraunce and reporte of later
times.
            Now it had beene considered, that the tytle which
was deriued to King Henrie, from Edmund, whome
they surnamed Crouchbacke, would bee taken but for
a blynde and idle iest: for that it was notorious that the
sayd Edmund, was neyther eldest sonne to King Henry
the thyrd (as it was plainely declared by an acte of Parlament)
nor yet a misshapen and deformed person: but
a goodly Gentleman, and valiant commaunder in the
field, and so fauoured of the King his Father, that hee
gaue him both the heritages and honours of S
                     ••
                  one
Mountfort
Earle of Leicester, of Ferrare Earle of Darby,
and of Iohn Barron of Monmuthe, who to theyr
owne ruine and destruction, had desplaied seditious ensignes
against the King. And further to aduaunce him to
the marriage of Blanch Queene of Nauerne, he created him
the first Earle of Lancaster, and gaue vnto him the county,

Castle, and towne of Lancaster, with the Forrestes of Wiresdale,
Lounsdale, Newcastle beneath Linne, the Manner,
Castle and Forrest of Pickering, the Manner of Scaleby,
the towne of Gomecester, of Huntendone, &c. with many
large priuiledges, and high titles of homour.
            Therefore King Henry vpon the day of his Coronation,
caused to be proclaimed, that he claymed the Kingdome of
England, first by right of conquest: Secondly because King
Richard had resigned his estate, and designed him for his
successour: Lastly, because he was of the bloud royall, and
next heyre male vnto King Richard.
            
            
               Haeres malus indeed (quoth Edmund Mortimer Earle of
March vnto his secret friends) and so is the Pirate to the
Marchant, when hee despoyleth him of all that hee hath.
This Edmund was sonne to Roger Mortimer who was not
long before slaine in Ireland, and had been openly declared
heyre apparent to the Crowne, in case King Richard
should dye without issue; as descended by his Mother Philip,
from Lionell Duke of Clarence, who was elder brother
to Iohn Duke of Lancaster, King Henries Father: and therfore
the sayd Edmund thought himselfe, and indeed was,
neerer heyre male to the succession of the Crowne, then
he that by colour of right clayming it, carried it by dynt
of force.
            But such was the condition of the tyme, that hee
supposed it was vaine, for him to stirre, where King Richard
could not stand: Whereupon he dessembled, eyther that
he saw his wrong, or that hee regarde it; and chose rather
to suppresse his title for a time, then by vntimely opposing
himselfe, to haue it oppressed and depressed for euer:
to this ende hee withdrewe himselfe farre from London,
to his Lordshippe of Wigmore, in the West partes of the
realme: and there setled himselfe to a priuate and close life:
Idlenes and vacancy from publike affaires, he accompted a
vertue, and a deepe point of wisedome to meddle with

nothing, whereof no man was chargeable to yeelde a reckoning.
In reuenues he was meane, in apparell moderate,
in company and traine not excessiue, (yet in all these honourable
and according to his degree) so that they which esteemed
men by outward appearance only, could see in him no
great shew, eyther of wit and courage in his minde to be
feared, or of wealth and honour in his estate to be enuyed.
And thus whilest a greater enemy was feared, he passed vnregarded;
making himselfe safe by contempt, where nothing
was so daungerous as a good opinion; and raking vp
those coales in obscuritie for a time, which shortly after set
all the realme on fire.
            King Henrie presently after his coronation, created his eldest
sonne Lord Henrie, being then about xiii. yeares of age,
Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornewall, and Earle of Chester,
and soone after he created him also Duke of Aquitaine. Afterwards
it was enacted, by consent of all the states of the
realme, assembled together in the Parlament, that the inheritance
of the Crownes and Realmes of England and of
Fraunce, aud of all the dominions to them apperteyning,
should be vnited and remaine in the person of King Henrie,
and in the heires of his body lawfully begotten: and
that Prince Henrie his eldest sonne, should be his heyre
apparant, and successour in the premisses: and if he should
dye without lawfull issue, then they were entayled to his
other sonnes successiuely in order, and to the heyres of their
bodyes lawfully begotten.
            The inheritance of the Kingdome being in this sorte settled
in King Henrie and in his line, it was mooued in the
Parlament what should be doone with King Richard. The
Bishop of Caerliel, who was a man learned and wise, and
one that alwayes vsed both libertie and constancie in a
good cause; in his secret iudgement did neuer giue allowance
to these proceedings: yet dissembled his dislike, vntill
he might to some purpose declare it: therefore now being

in place to be heard of all, and by order of the house) to be
interrupred by none, he rose vp and with a bould and present
spirit, vttered his minde as followeth.
            This question (right Honourable Lordes) concerneth
a matter of great consequence and weight: the determining
whereof will assuredly procure, eyther safe quiet, or daungerous
disturbance, both to our particular consciences, and
also to the common state. Therefore before you resolue
vppon it, I pray you call to your considerations these two
things: First, whether King Richard be sufficiently deposed
or no: Secondly, whether King Henrie be with good
iudgement, or iustice chosen in his place. For the first point
we are first to examine, whether a king, being lawfully and
fully instituted by any iust title, may vppon imputation, eyther
of negligence, or of tyrannie, be deposed by his subiects:
Secondly, what King Richard hath omitted in the one, or
committed in the other, for which he should deserue so heauie
iudgement. I will not speake what may be doone in
a popular state, or in a consular; in which although one beareth
the name and honour of a Prince, yet he hath not supreme
power of Maiestie; but in the one, the people haue
the highest empire; in the other, the Nobilitie, and chiefe
men of estate; in neyther, the Prince. Of the first sorte
was the common wealth of the Lacedaemonians, who after
the forme of gouernement which Licurgus framed, oftentimes
fined, oftentimes fettered their Kings, and sometimes
condemned them to death: such were also in Caesars
time, the petit Kings of euery Citie in Fraunce; who
were many times arreigned vppon life and death, and (as
Ambiorix Prince of the Leodienses confessed) had no
greater power ouer the people, then the people had ouer
them. Of the second condition were the Romaine Emperours
at the first;Tranquil in caligula. Tacitus, in proaemio. of whome some, namely Nero and
Maximinus were openly condemned, others were sodainlie

surprised by iudgement, and authoritye of the Senate:
and such are nowe the Emperours of Germany, whom
the other Princes by their Aristocraticall power, doe not
onely restrayne, but sometimes also remooue from
theyr imperiall state: such are also the Kinges of Denmarke,
and Sweueland, who are many times by the nobilitye
deiected, eyther into pryson, or into exile: such
likewise are the Dukes of Venice, and of some other free
states in Italy: and the chiefest cause for which Lewes
Earle of Flanders was lately expelled from his place, was
for drawing to himselfe cognisance in matters of life and
death, which high power neuer pertayned to his dignitie.
            In these and such like gouernmentes, the Prince hath
not regall rightes, but is himselfe subiect to that power
which is greater then his, whether it be in the Nobility or in
the common people. But if the Soueraigne Maiesty be in the
Prince, as it was in the three first Empires, and in the Kingdomes
of Iudea and Israell; and is now in the kingdomes of
England, Fraunce, Spaine, Scotland, Muscouia, Turky, Tartaria,
Persia, Aethiopia, and almost all the Kingdomes of
Asia and Africke: although for his vices he bee vnprofitable
to the subiectes, yea hurtfull, yea intollerable: yet can
they lawfully neyther harme his person, nor hazard his power,
whether by iudgement, or els by force: for neyther
one, nor all Magistrates haue any authority ouer the Prince,
from whome all authority is deriued, and whose onely
presence doeth silence, and suspend all inferiour iurisdiction
and power. As for force, what subiecte can attempt,
or assist, or counsaile, or violence against hys
Prince, and not incurre the high and heynous crime of
treason?
            It is a common saying, thought is free: free indeede
from punishment of secular lawes, except by worde or

deed it breake foorth into action: Yet the secret thoughts
against the sacred maiesty of a Prince, without attempt,
without endeuour, haue beene adiudged worthy of death:
and some who in auriculer confession, haue discouered their
treacherous deuises against the person of their Prince, haue
afterwardes beene executed for the same. All lawes doe
exempt a madde man from punishment: because theyr
actions are not gouerned by theyr will and purpose: and
the will of man being set aside, all his doings are indifferent;
neyther can the body offend without a corrupt
or erronious minde: yet if a mad man draw hys sword vpon
his King, it hath bin adiudged to deserue death. And least
any man should surmise that Princes, for the maintenance
of theyr owne safety and soueraignety, are the onely authors
of these iudgementes; let vs a little consider the patternes
and preceptes of holy Scripture. Nabuchadnezzer
King of Assiria wasted all Palestine with fire and swoord,
oppugned Hierusalem a long time, and at the last expugned
it: slue the King: burnt the Temple: tooke away
the holy vesselles and treasure: the rest hee permitted to
the cruelty and spoyle of his vnmercifull soldiers: who defiled
all places with rape and slaughter, and ruinated to the
ground that flourishing Citty: after the glut of this bloudy
butchery, the people which remayned, he led Captiue
into Chaldaea: and there erected his golden Image, and
commaunded that they which refused to worship it, should
bee cast into a fierye furnace.
            What crueltye, what iniustice, what impiety is comparable
to this? and yet God calleth Nabuchadnezzer
his seruant, and promiseth him hyre and wages for his
seruice:Ierem. 25. 9. Ezech. 29. 18. and the Prophetes Ieremiah and Baruch dyd
wryte vnto the Iewes to praye for the lyfe of him,
and of Baltasar hys Sonne,Ierm 29. 7. Baruch, 1. 11. that theyr dayes myght
bee vppon earth as the dayes of Heauen: and Ezechtel
               
with bitter termes abhorreth the disloyalty of Zedechia, because
he reuolted from Nabuchadnezzer, whose homager
and tributary he was. What snall we say of Saul? did he not
put all the Priestes to execution, because one of them did relieue
holy and harmelesse Dauid: did he not violently persecute
that his most faithfull seruant and dutiful Sonne in laws
during which pursuite, he fell twice into the power of Dauid;
who did not onely spare, but also protect the King, and reprooued
the preto
                  •
               an souldiers for their negligent watch,
and was touched in heart for cutting away the lappe of his
garment: and afterwards caused the messenger to be slaine,
who vpon request and for pitty, had lent his hand (as he said)
to help forward the voluntary death of that sacred King. As
for the contrary examples: as that of Iehu
who slue Iehoram and Ahazia,
               So did D
                        •
                     mitian put to death Epaphroditus, Neroes libertine, because he helped Neroe (although in loue) to kill himselfe. So did Seuerus kill all the killers of Pertinax his prodecessour: and likwise Vitellius did put to death all the murtherers of Gal
                        •
                     a. Theophilus Emperour of Grecia caused all those to be slaine, who had made his Father Emperour, by killing Leo Armenius: And Alexander the great put to cruell execution, those that had slaine Darius, his mighty and mortall enemy. Kings
of Israell and Iuda: they were done by
expresse oracle & reuelation from God,
and are no more set downe for our imitation,
then the robbing of the Aegyptians,
or any other perticuler and priuiledged
commaundement, but in the generall
precept, which all men must ordinarily
follow, not onely our actions, but
our speeches also, & our very thoughtes
are strictly charged with duety and obedience
vnto Princes, whether they be good or euill, the law
of God ordaineth:Deut. 17. 12. Psal, 105. 
               that he which doth presumptuously against
the ruler of the people shall dye: and the Prophet Dauid forbiddeth,Exod. 22. 28. Act. 23. 5.
to touch the Lords annointed. Thou shalt not (saith
the Lord) rayle vpon the iudges, neither speake euill against the
ruler of the people.
               Rom. 13. 1. 13. Tit. 3. 1. And the Apostles do demaund further that
euen our thoughtes and soules bee obedient to higher
powers.1 Pet, 2. 13, 14. 17. And least any should imagine that they meant
of good Princes onely,1. Tim. 2, 2. they speake generally of all; and further

to take away all doubt, they make expresse mention of
the euill. For the power and authoritie of wicked princes is
the ordinance of god; and therfore Christ told Pilate,Rom. 1
                     •
                   2. Iohn. 19. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . that the
power which he had was giuen him from aboue; and the
Prophet Esay calleth Cyrus, being a prophane and hea
                  ••
               en
Prince,Cap. 
                     •
                  5. 1. the Lords anoynted. For God stirreth vp the spirit
euen of wicked Princes to doe his will;2. Chro. 36. 22. and (as Iehoshaphat
sayd to his rulers) they execute not the iudgement of man,
but of the Lord:2. Chron. 19. 6. in regard whereof Dauid calleth them
Gods;Psal. 28. because they haue their rule and authority immedyatly
from God: which if they abuse, they are not to bee adiudged
by theyr subiects, for no power within theyr dominionis
superior to theirs: but God reserueth them to the
sorest tryall:Sap. 6. 
               Horribly and sodainly (saith the Wiseman) will
the Lord appeare vnto them, and a hard iudgement shall they
haue.
            
            The law of God commaundeth, that the Childe should
be put to death, for any contumely done vnto the parents:
but what if the Father be a robber? if a murtherer? if for all
excesse of villanyes, odious and execrable both to God and
man? surely he deserueth the highest degree of punishment,
and yet must not the Sonne lift vp his hand against
him, for no offence is so great as to be punished by parricide:
but our country is dearer vnto vs then our parentes: and
the Prince is pater patriae,
               Quintil in declam. the Father of our Country: and
therefore more sacred and deere vnto vs, then our parentes
by nature,Cic. offic. lib. 1. and must not be violated, how imperious, how
impious soeuer hee bee: doth he commaund or demaund,
our persons or our purses, we must not shunne for the one,
nor shrinke for the other:Nehem. 9. 37. for (as Nehemiah saith) Kinges
haue dominion ouer the bodyes and ouer the cattle of their subiectes,
at their pleasure. Doth he enioyne those actions which
are contrary to the lawes of God? we must neyther wholy
obey, nor violently resist, but with a constant courage submit
our selues to all manner of punishment, and shewe our

subiection by enduring, and not performing: yea the
Church hath declared it to bee an heresie,Alphons. a cast in lib. de haeresi in verb. Tyrannus. Dominie. to holde that
a Prince may be slaine or deposed by his subiectes, for
any disorder or default, eyther in life, or else in gouernment,
there will be faultes so long as there are men: and
as wee endure with patience a barren yeere,Soto lib. 5. de iust. et iur. q. 1. artic. 3. if it happen
and vnseasonable weather, and such other defectes of
nature, so must wee tollerate the imperfections of rulers,
and quietlye expecte, eyther reformation, or else a
change.
            But alas good king Richard, what such cruelty? what
such impiety hath he euer committed? examine rightly those
imputations which are layde against him, without any
false circumstance of aggrauation, and you shall finde
nothing obiected, eyther of any truth, or of great moment.
It may bee that many errours and ouersightes haue
escaped him, yet none so grieuous to be termed tyranny;
as proceeding rather from vnexperienced ignorance,
or corrupt counsaile, then from any naturall and wilfull
mallice. Oh, howe shall the world bee pestered with tirantes,
if subiectes may rebell vppon euery pretence of
tyranny? howe many good Princes shall daylye bee
suppressed by those, by whome they ought to bee supported?
if they leauy a subsedy, or any other texation,
it shall be claymed oppression: if they put any to death
for trayterous attemptes against theyr persons, it shall be
exclaymed cruelty: if they doe any thing against the
lust and liking of the people, it shall bee proclaymed tyrannie.
            But let it be, that without authority in vs, or desert in
him, king Richard must be deposed: yet what right had the
Duke of Lancaster to the Crowne? or what reason haue
wee without his right to giue it to him? if hee make title as
heyre vnto king Richard, then must he yet stay vntill king
Richards death; for no man can succeed as heyre to one that

liueth. But it is well knowne to all men, who are not eyther
wilfully blinde or grosely ignorant, that there are some now
aliue, lineally descended from Lionell Duke of Clarence,
whose ofspring was by iudgement of the high Court of Parlament
holden the viii. yeere of the raigne of King Richard,
declared next successour to the Crowne, in case King Richard
should dye without issue. Concerning the tytle from
Edmund Crouchbacke, I will passe it ouer, seeing the authors
thereof are become ashamed of so absurde abuse, both of
theyr owne knowledge, and our credulity, and therefore all
the clayme is now made, by right of conquest; by the cession
and graunt of King Richard; and by the generall consent
of all the people. It is a bad wooll that can take no colour:
but what conquest can a subiecte pretend against his Soueraigne,
where the warre is insurrection, and the victory high
and heynous treason? as for the resignation which king Richard
made, being a pent prisoner for the same cause; it is
an acte exacted by force: and therefore of no force and
validity to binde him: and seeing that by the lawes of this
land, the king alone cannot alienate, the auncient iewels
and ornaments pertaining to the Crowne, surely hee cannot
giue away the Crowne it selfe, and therewithall the
kingdome.
            Neyther haue we any custome, that the people at pleasure
should electe theyr king: but they are alwayes bound vnto
him, who by right of bloud is next successour, much lesse
can they confirme and make good that title, which is before
by violence vsurped: for nothing can then be freely doone,
when liberty is once restrained by feare. So did Scilla by
terrour of his legions, obtayne the lawe of Velleia to bee
made, whereby hee was created dictator for fourescore
yeeres: and by like impression of feare, Caesar caused the law
Seruia to be promulged, by which he was made perpetuall
dictator: but both these lawes were afterwardes adiudged
void. As for the deposing of king. Edward the 2. is no more

to be vrged, then the poysoning of King Iohn, or the murdering
of any other good and lawfull Prince: we must liue
according to lawes, and not to examples: and yet the kingdome
was not then taken from the lawfull successour. But if
we looke backe to times lately past, we shall finde that these
titles were more stronge in King Stephen, then they are
in the Duke of Lancaster: for king Henry the first being at
large liberty, neyther restrained in body, nor constrained in
minde, had appointed him to succeed: (as it was vppon
good credite, certainly affirmed.) The people assented to
this designement; and thereupon without feare, and without
force, he was anoynted King, and obtained full possession
of the realme. Yet Henry (Sonne of the Earle of Aniowe)
hauing a neerer right by his mother to the Crowne,
(notwithstanding his father was a stranger & himselfe borne
beyond the seas) raysed such rough warres vppon King Stephen,
that there was noe end of spoyling the goods and spilling
the bloud of the vnhappy people, besides the ruynes
and deformities of many Citties and holdes; vntill his lawful
inheritance was to him assured. It terrifieth me to remember
how many florishing Empires, and Kingdomes haue bin
by meanes of such contentions eyther torne in peeces with
detestiue diuision, or subdued to forren Princes, vnder pretence
of assistaunce and ayde: and I neede not repeate howe
sore this realme hath heertofore beene shaken with these
seuerall mischieues: and yet neyther the examples of other
countries nor the miseries of our own, are sufficient to make
vs to beware.
            O English men, worse bewitched then the foolish Galathians;
our vnstayed mindes and restlesse resolutions, doe
nothing els but hunt after our owne harmes: no people
haue more hatred abroad and none lesse quiet at home: in
other countries the swoord of inuasion hath been shaken against
vs: in our owne land, the fire of insurrection hath bin
kindled amongs vs: & what are these innouasions, but whetstones

to sharpen the one, and bellowes to blowe vp the other?
            Certainely I feare that the same will happen vnto vs
which Aesope fableth to haue been fallen vnto the Frogges;
who beeing desirous to haue a King, a beame was giuen
vnto them: the first fall whereof did put them in some
feare, but when they saw it lye still in the streame, they insulted
thereon with great contempt, and desired a king of
quicker courage: then was sent vnto them a Storke, which
stalking among them with stately steps, continually deuoured
them. The mildenesse of king Richard hath bred in vs this
scorne, interpreting it to be cowardise and dulnes of nature:
the next heyre is likewise reiected: I will not say that wyth
greater courage we shall finde greater cruelty; but if eyther
of these shall heerafter be able to set vp theyr side, and bring
the matter to tryall by armes, I do assuredly say, that which
part soeuer shall carry the fortune of the field, the people
both wayes must goe to wracke. And thus haue I declared
my minde concerning this question, in more wordes then
your wisedome, yet fewer then the weight of the cause doth
require: and doe boldly conclude, that wee haue neyther
power nor policy, eyther to depose king Richard, or to elect
Duke Henrie in his place; that king Richard remaineth still
our Soueraigne Prince, and therefore it is not lawfull for vs
to giue iudgement vpon him; that the Duke whom you call
king, hath more offended against the king and the relame,
then the king hath done, eyther against him or vs; for being
banished the realme for ten yeeres by the king and his counsaile
(amongst whome his owne Father was chiefe) and
sworne not to returne againe without speciall lycense:
he hath not onely violated his oath, but with impious armes
disturbed the quiet of the land, and dispossessed the Kyng
from his royall estate, and now demaundeth iudgement against
his person, without offence proued, or defence heard:
if this iniury, and this periury doth nothing moue vs, yet let

both our priuate and common dangers somwhat withdraw
vs from these violent proceedings.
            This speach was diuerslie taken, as men were diuersly affected
betweene feare, hope, and shame: yet the most parte
did make shew for king Henrie, and therevpon the Bishop
was presently attached by the Earle Marshall, and committed
to prison in the Abbey of S. Albones. Whose counsaile
and coniecture then contemned, was afterwardes better
thought vpon; partly in the life time of king Henrie, during
whose raigne, almost no yeare passed without great slaughters
and executions: but more especially in the times succeeding,
when within the space of xxxvi. yeares, twelue set battailes
vpon this quarrell were fought within the realme by
English men only: and more then foure score Princes of the
royall bloud slaine one by another.
            Then it was concluded, that king Richard should be kept
in a large prison, with all manner of Princely maintenance:
and if any persons should conspire, to reare warre for his deliuerance,
that he should be the first man who should suffer
death for that attempt. Then the Actes of the Parlament
holden at Westminster, in the xi. yeare of King Richard, were
reuiued; and the Parlament houlden the xxi. yeare of king
Richard was wholy repealed: and they who were attainted
by that Parlament, were restored againe to their fame and
honour, and to their landes without suing lyuerie, and to
such goods whereof the King was not answered; except the
rents and issues which had beene receiued out of their lands
in the meane time. Herevpon Richard Earle of Warwicke
was deliuered out of prison, and the Earle of Arundelles
sonne recouered his inheritance: many others also that were
banished or imprisoned by King Richard, were then fullye
restored againe, to their Countrie, libertie, and estate.
            It was further prouided, that none of those which came
in ayde of King Henrie against King Richard, should for

that cause be impeached or troubled. Also the King gaue
to the Earle of Westmerland the Countie of Richmond;
and to the Earle of Northumberland he gaue the Ile of Man,
to be houlden of him by the seruice of bearing the sworde,
wherewith he entred into England. Diuers other of his followers
he aduaunced to offices of highest place and charge,
some vpon iudgement and for desert, but most part to win
fauour, and perhappes proiecting a plot for friends, if times
should change: for in many actions men take more care
to preuent reuenge, then to leade an innocent and harmlesse
life.
            It was further agreed, that the procurers of the death and
murther of Thomas late Duke of Gloucester, should be searched
out and seuerelie punished. And iudgement was giuen
against the appellants of the Earle of Warwicke and the
Earle of Arundell, that the Dukes of Aumerle, Sussex, and
Exceter, the Marquesse of Dorset, and the Earle of Gloucester
who were present, should loose their degree of honour
for them and their heyres: that they should likewise loose all
the Castles, Mannors, Lordshippes, &c. then in their hands
which sometimes apperteined to those whom they did appeale,
and that all the letters patents and charters which they
had concerning the same, should be surrendred into the Chā
               cerie,
and there be cancelled: that for all other their Castles,
Mannors, Lordships, possessions, and liberties, they should be
at the grace and mercie of the King: that they should giue
no liueries, nor keepe any retinue of men, but onely such
officers as were meerelie necessarie for their degree: that if
any of them should adhere to Richard the deposed King, in
giuing him ayde or encouragement, against the iudgement
of his deposition, then he should incurre the paines and forfeitures
of high treason. And because it was a clamorous
complaint among the common people, that many officers
had committed greeuo
                  •
               s extoruons and wrongs, eyther by
the open maintenance or secret con
                  •
               itiuence of these Lords:

First those officers were remo
                  •
               ued, and that corruption taken
away with integritie, which briberie h
                  •
               d wrought, in
placing (for money) men of b
                  •
               d qualitie, in high degrees of
office and seruice: then proclamations were made, that if
any man had been oppressed by these Lords, or by any officers
vnder them, he should prooue his complaint, and receiue
recompence. It was made a question whether it was
not meete that these noble men should be put to death: the
importunitie of the people, and the perswasion of many great
men drew that way, but policie was against it, and especially
the opinion of clemencie, which seemed needfull to the setling
of a new risen state.
            In this parlament also the Lorde Fitzwater appealed the
sayd Duke of Aumerle, sonne to the Duke of Yorke, vpon
points of high treason: likewise the Lord Morley appealed
Iohn Montacute Earle of Salisburie, and moe then twentie
other appeilants waged battaile; but the king purposing to
laye the foundation of his realme by fauour and not by force,
gaue pardon and restitution alike to all, vppon sureties and
band for their alleageance: and in a sweet and moderate oration,
he admonished, and as it were intreated the one part,
that ould griefes and grudges should not be renued, but buried
together with the memorie of former times; wherein
men were forced to doe many things against their mindes:
the other part he desired to be more regardfull of their actions
afterward, and for the time past, rather to forget that euer
they were in fault, then to remember that they were pardoned.
No punishment was laide vppon any, saue onely the
Earle of Salisburie and the Lord Morley, who had beene in
especiall grace and fauour with King Richard: these two
were committed to prison, but at the sute of their friends
they were soone released: the rest the King receiued freelye
to fauour, but most especially the Duke of Aumerle, and the
Duke of Excester, Lord Gouernour of Calice. The Duke of
Aumerle was cousen germane to both the kings: Iohn Holland
               
Duke of Exce
                  •••
               , was halfe brother to King Richard, and
brother in lawe to King Henrie; whose sister, the Lady Elizabeth
he had taken to wise. The greatest matter that was
enforced against them, was their loyaltie vnto King Richard:
(a grieuous crime among rebels) because they did not onlie
stomacke and storme at his deiection, but stirre also more
then others, and assaye to raise forces on his behalfe. The
Dukes bouldly confessed the accusation, that they were indeed
vnfortunately faithfull to King Richard: but as those
who once are false, doe seldome afterwards prooue soundly
firme, so they that haue shewed themselues true to one prince
may the better be trusted by any other. The King did rather
admit this as a defence, then remit it as a fault: affirming,
that such examples were not to be misliked of Princes: so he
entred with them into great termes of friendship, and put
them in place neerest his person, endeauouring by courtesie
and liberalitie, to make them fast and faithful vnto him: this
fact was diuerslie enterpreted, according to mens seueral dispositions,
some admiring the kings moderation, others disliking
and disallowing his confidence; and indeed although
these meanes haue to this purpose preuailed with some, yet
the common course may mooue vs commonly to coniecture,
that there is little assurance in reconciled enemies: whose
affections (for the most part) are like vnto Glasse, which
beeing once cracked, can neuer bee made otherwise then
crazed and vnsound.
            Furthermore, to qualifie all preiudice and hard opinion
which other princes might chaunce to conceiue, King Henrie
dispatched Embassadours to diuers countries neere vnto
him, to make it knowne by what title, and by what fauour
and desire of all the people he atteyned the kingdome. To
the court of Rome hee sent Iohn 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                Bishop of Hereford,
Sir Iohn Cheyney Knight, and Iohn Cheyney Esquire:
into Fraunce hee sent Waker Shirlowe Bishop of Durham,
and Lord Thomas Pearcy, Earle of Worcester: into Spaine

he sent Iohn Treuor Bishop of S. Assaph
                  ••
               , and 
                  〈◊〉
                
               William
Parr
                     •
                  : and into Almaine he sent the Bishop of Bangor, and
certaine other. Most of these Princes (as in a matter which
little concerned eyther their honour or their harme) seemed
eyther not to regarde what was doone, or easely to bee
perswaded that all was doone well. But Charles King of
Fraunce, was so distempe
                  •
               ed at this dishonourable dealing
with his sonne in lawe King Richard, that by violence of his
passion, he fell into his oulde panges of phrensie: and at the
last by helpe of Phisicke returning to the sobrietie of his
sences, he purposed to make sharpe warre vpon that disloyall
people (as he termed them) for this iniurie against their
lawfull and harmlesse Prince. Many noble men of Fraunce
shewed themselues verye forwarde to enter into the seruice,
but especially the Earle of Saint Paule, who had maryed
King Richards halfe Sister. So letters of defiance were
sent into England, and great preparation was made for the
warre.
            Likewise the newes of these nouelties much abashed
the Aquitanes (who were at that time vnder the English
subiection) and plunged their thoughts in great perplexities.
Some were greiued at the infamous blemish of the
English nation, who had disteyned their honour with the
spot of such disloyall dealing: others feared the spoyle of
their goods, and oppression of their liberties by the Frenchmen;
against whose violence they suspected that the realme
of England, beeing distracted into ciuill factions, eyther
would not attend, or should not be able to beare them out:
but the Citizens of Burdeaux were chiefely anguished in
respect of King Richard, partlie fretting at his iniurie, and
partlie lamenting his infortunitie; because he was borne
and brought vppe within theyr Cittie. And thus in the
violence, some of they
                  •
                anger, some of theyr griefe, and
some of their feare, in this sort they did generally complaine.
            
               
O good God (sayd they) where is the world become?
saintes are turned to Serpents, and Doues into diuels. The
English nation which hath been accompted fierce onely against
theyr 
                  •
               oes, and alwayes faithfull to their friends; are
now become both fierce and faith lesse against their lawfull
and louing Prince, and haue most barbarouslie betrayed
him. Who would euer haue thought that Christians, that
ciuill people, that any men, would 
                  〈◊〉
                haue violated all religion▪
all lawes, and all honest and orderlie demeanure?
And although the heauens blush at the view▪ and the ear
                  ••
                sweat as the burthen of 
                  〈…〉
               , and all man proclaime
and exclaime open shame and confusion against
them▪ yet they neither feele the horrour, nor shrinke at the
shame, nor feare the reuenge▪ but stand vpon tearmes, some
of defence for the lawfulnesse of their dealing, and some of
excuse for the necessitie. Well let them be able to blinde

                  〈◊〉
                worlde, and to resist 
                  〈…〉
               ; yet shall they neuer
be able to escape

                  〈…〉
                desire to be
powred vpon them. Alas good King Richard, thy nature
was too gentle, and they gouernement too milde for so stiffe
and stubborne a people: what King wil euer repose any trust
in such 
                  〈…〉
                them with lawes
as theeues are with 
                  〈◊〉
               ? What 
                  〈◊〉
                hee 
                  〈◊〉
                can
recouer theyr credite? What time wyll bee sufficient to
blotte out this blemish? What other action could they
haue doone, more ioyfull to theyr enemyes, more woefull
to theyr friendes, and more shamefull to themselues?
Oh corruption of times? Oh conditions of
men.
            The Frenchmen were nothing discontented at this discontentment
of the Aquitanes; supposing that opportunitie
was then offered, to get into theyr possession the
Duchie of Guian▪ if eyther power or pollicie were thereto
applyed Herevpon Lawe▪
                Duke of Burbea came downe

to Angiers, who from thence sent many messengers to the
chiefe cities of Guian, and by faire speeches and large promises,
solicited the people to change alleageance: on the
contrarie side, sir Robert Knowles Lieutenant of Guian, endeuoured
with all diligence to represse the 
                  〈◊〉
               , to staye
the doubtfull, to confirme the good▪ and to 
                  〈◊〉
                all in order
and obedience: but he profited very little, whether by
the weakenesse of his owne arme, or stiffe necke of the people
it is not certainely assured. Neither did the Duke of Burbone
much preuaile▪ when it was considered 
                  〈…〉
               
the yoake of Fraunce was aboue the English subiection:
for all men were well acquainted with what tributes and

                  〈◊〉
                the Frenchmen were charged, hauing in euerye
countrie Lieutenants and Treasurours assigned, the one to
drawe the bloud, the other the substance of the slauish subiects,
whose crueltie and couetousnesse laide holde without
exception vppon all, the 
                  〈…〉
               
other vndooing by lawe. Thus stood the

                  〈…〉
               
which the winde driueth one way, and the 
                  〈◊〉
                another: desirous
they were to displease the English, but 
                  〈◊〉
                to endanger
and vndoe themselues.
            Vppon aduertisment whereof, King 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                sent into
Guian the Lord Thomas Percie Earle of Worcester, whom
he knew to bee faithfull vnto him, and expert in matters
of charge, hauing in his companie a strong and seruiceable
band of Souldiers: who not by vnseasonable exprobating
their fault, but by reason conuincing it, 
                  〈◊〉
               
with his wisdome and credite so perswaded, and partlye
with his authoritie and forces so terrified the wauering
people, that he wanne them to his opinion, and confirmed
them in their alleageance; the grauer sorte with respect of
dutie and faith, the rest with regarde and 
                  〈◊〉
                of daunger.
Them hee receiued oathes of obedience vnto King

                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , and planted 
                  〈◊〉
                strong garison in pla
                  •
               es of

chiefe import, without molestation if they remained quiet,
and yet of force to represse them if they should rebell. This
done, he returned againe into England, where he shewed
an excellent example of moderation, in seeming rather
to haue found then to haue made the Aquitanes duetifull
subiectes.
            No sooner could this stir be stinted, but another more
daungerous and desperate did foorthwith arise: for diuerse
noble men who eyther had dissembled, or did repent the
furtherance that they vsed to the aduauncement of King
Henrie did conspire together to compasse his destruction:
the hystories of that time doe vary, concerning the causes of
this conspiracy; whether it were for fauour to King Richard,
as the nature of man is inclinable to beholde sodaine misfortune
with a pittifull eye; or for enuy to King Henrie, as
commonly wee can 
                  〈◊〉
                excessiue forr
                  ••
               e, no where so
little as in those that haue beene in equall degree with our

                  〈◊〉
                or whether vpon dishonours receiued in the late

                  〈◊〉
               , or vpon 
                  〈◊〉
                to see others goe before them
in the Princes fauour many sought to reuenge theyr vniust
anger with lewde disloyaltye: likewise it is not assuredly
knowne by what meanes the workers thereof were drawne
together, and the secret deuises of some 
                  〈◊〉
                to the
rest: whether one of them did perswade another to enter
into the action, or whether all were induced by the same
vnconstant disposition and light account of faith: which
being once falsed to King Richard, was afterwardes vppon
euery light discontentment, lyttle respected to any:
but concerning these matters, the most current report
is this.
            There was at that time an Abbot of Westminster, one
that applyed his studies, not as the most part, to cloake
idlenesse and slouth vnder the glorious tytle of religion, but
to enable himselfe for counsaile and direction in publique
affayres: who for the generall opinion of his wisedome

and integritie, was in good fauour and credit with King Richard,
and did accompany him in his last voyage into Ireland.
            This Abbot called to his remembrance, a speach which
hee heard once fall from King Henrie, when hee was but
Earle of Derbie, and not yet come to any great stayednesse,
eyther in yeares or iudgement; that Princes had too little,
and religious men too much.
            At that time the riches of the church were growne so
great, that many began to looke vpon them with an enuious
eye; but least couetousnesse should shew it selfe with
open face, policie was pretended, and the excesse thought
daungerous, both to the King and also to the 
                  〈◊〉
               ; as verie
like to cause want to the one, and 
                  〈◊〉
                in the
other.
            Heerevpon many billes had beene put vppe in the parlaments
houlden in the reigne of King Richard, that 
                  〈◊〉
               
might be made to represse the increase of religious possessions:
namely, that inquisition and redresse might be had
against such religious persons, as vnder the licence to purchase
ten pounds yearlie, did purchase foure score, or a hundred
pounds: and also against such religious persons as caused
their villaines, to take to their wiues free women inheritable,
whereby the landes came to those religious mens
hands: yea it was mooued in open Parlament, that the
king should seaze into his hands, all the temporall liuings
of religious houses, as beeing rather a burthen then a benefite
vnto religion.
            Vppon these and the like petitions, the Archbishop of
Canterburie, and the Archbishop of Yorke, for themselues
and the Cleargie of their Prouinces; were oftentimes compelled
to make their solemne protestations in open Parlament,
that if any thing were attempted in restraint of
the libertie of the Church, they would in no wise assent,
but vtterlie withstand the same: the which their protestations

they required to be enrouled.
            So partly vpon loue to King Richard, and partly vpon
feare, least King Henry would bee as ready to inuade,
as hee was to enueigh against the richesse of religious
houses: this Abbot was the first man that blew the coales,
and put fewell to the fire of this confederacy. And first
hee obserued a farre off, then hee searched more neerely
and narrowly (and yet warely too) howe the myndes
of certaine Noble men were affected, or rather infected
agaynst King Henrie; tempering his speeches in such
sorte, that if matters sorted to his minde, hee myght
take them vpon him, if his co
                  ••
               ses were crossed, he might
cleerely disclayme them: at last hee inuited to his house
vppon a daye, in Michaelmas terme, those whome hee
had sounded to bee moste sound for his purpose: the
chiefe of whome were such as in the Parlament before
had in some sorte beene touched in reputation, although
by pardon and reconcilement the harme did seeme to
bee closed vp: theyr names were Iohn Holland Duke of
Exceter, of whome: mention hath beene made before,
Thomas Holland his brothers Sonne, Duke of Surrey, Edward
Duke of Aumerle, Iohn Montacute Earle of Salisbury,
Hugh Spencer Earle of Glocester, Iohn Bishoppe of
Caerliele, Sir Thomas Biunt, and Magdalen one of King
Richards Chappell, who in all poyntes both of feature and
fauour, so neerely resembled King Richard, that the
Lordes dissembled afterwardes that hee was King Richard
indeed.
            These and some others were highly feasted by the Abbot:
and after dinner they withdrewe themselues, into
a secret Chamber to counsaile: heere the Duke of Exceter,
who was moste hotly bent eyther to restore, or to
reuenge the cause of his deposed brother, declared vnto
the rest, the alleageance that they had sworne vnto King
Richard: the honours and 
                  〈◊〉
                whereunto they

were by him aduaunced: that therefore they were bounde
both in conscience by the one, and in kindnesse by the other,
to take his part against all men: that king Henry contrary
to both, had dispoyled him of his royall dignity, and
vniustly possessed himselfe thereof, whilest they stood looking
on, and shewed neyther the obedience of subiectes,
nor loue of friendes, as though they were men who knewe
to doe any thing, better then to defend, and if neede were
to dye for theyr lawfull Prince and louing patron: that king
Henrie by violent inuading, or fraudulent insinuating himelse,
into the kingdome of his naturall and leige Prince,
was but a tyrant, and vsurper, and such a one as it was lawfull
for any man, by any meanes to throw downe, without
respect whether he were a good man or euill, for it is lawfull
for no man, vpon pretence and shewe of goodnesse to
draw soueraignty vnto himselfe: that the lawes and examples
of best gouerned common wealthes, did not onely
permit this action but highly honoured it with statues and
garlandes, and tytles of nobility, and also rewarded it with
all the wealth of the suppressed tyrant: that this enterprize
would be very profitable, and almost necessarie to the common
wealth, by extinguishing those warres which the Scots
menaced, the Frenchmen prepared, and the Welshmen had
already begun vpon this occasion and quarrell: that he did
not distrust but it might be accomplished by open armes,
but he thought it more sure for them, and for the common
wealth more safe, to put first in proofe some secret policie:
and to that purpose he deuised, that a solemne Iustes should
be challenged, to be kept at Oxforde, in Christmasse holydayes,
betweene him and twentie on his part, and the Earle
of Salisburie and twentie on his part, to which king Henrie
should be inuited: and when he was most intentiue in regarding
their militarie disport, he should sodainlie be surprized
by men which without suspition might at that time be assembled,
both for number and preparation sufficient for the

exployt, and thereby King Richard presently bee restored,
both to his liberty, and to his state.
            This deuise was no sooner vttered, then allowed and applauded
of the rest of the confederates: and so resoluing
vpon the enterprize, they tooke an oath vpon the Euangelistes,
the one to be true and secret to the other, euen to
the houre and point of death: the Lords also made an Indenture
sextipartite wherein they bound themselues, to doe
their best assay, for the death of the one king and deliuerance
of the other: this they sealed and subscribed, and deliuered
to euery Lord a counter pane of the same: and further
they concluded what forces should be gathered, by whome,
howe they should be ordred and placed, and to whose trust
the execution should be committed.
            When all thinges were thus contriued, and theyr hungry
ambitious mindes were well filled with the vaine winds
of hope and desire: the Duke of Exceter came to the king
at Windsore, and desired him for the loue that he bare to
the noble feares of Cheualry, that he would vouchsafe to
honour with his presence the martiall exercise, that was appointed
betweene him and the Earle of Salisbury, and to
be the iudge of theyr performances if any controuersie
should arise.
            The king supposing that to be intended indeed, which
was pretended in shew, easily yeelded to his request. The
Duke supposing his purpose now halfe performed, departed
to his house, and so did the other confederates: where
they busily bestirred themselues, in raysing men, and preparing
horse and armour for the accomplishment of thys
acte.
            When the Dutchesse of Exceter, king Henries Sister,
perceiued the drift of the deuise, and saw that the Duke was
vppon his iourney: alas good Lady howe was shee distracted
in minde, with a sharpe conflicte of her conceiptes?

one waye she was mooued with nature towardes her brother;
another waye shee was more strongly stirred, with
loue towards her Lord and husband; and both wayes shee
was deuided in dutie. And what (sayd shee) is this loue
then against nature? or about it? shall I bee vndutifull to
my Prince? or is no dutie comparable to the dutie of a
wife? heigh ho: in what perplexities (wretched woman)
am I plunged, to see my two deerest friends in this case of
extremitie, that (it is doubtfull which but) certainlie one
must be ruined by the other. Heerewith such a shower of
teares streamed downe her cheekes, that it drowned her
speech, and stopped the passage of further complaint: which
when the Duke espyed, hee stepped vnto her, and seazing
softlie vppon her hand, vsed these wordes. What Besse? is
it kindnesse to me or kindred to your brother that thus hath
set your eyes on floate? Content your selfe woman, for
whatsoeuer the euent shall be, it cannot bee euill to you, nor
worse to me then now it is. For if my purpose preuaile, and
my brother bee restored againe to his crowne, both of vs
shall be sure neuer to decline: if it bee preuented, and your
brother continue still in his estate, no harme shall be doone
vnto you, and I shall be then sure of that distruction which
I doe now continually dread: the feare whereof in expecting,
is a greater torment then the paine in suffering.
When hee had thus saide, hee kissed her, and so leauing
her to the torture of a thousand thornie thoughts, he tooke
his iorney towards Oxforde, with a great company both of
Archers and Horsemen. There he sound all the rest of his
complices, well armed and banded, except onely the Duke
of Aumerle.
            The King also hearing that both the Challengers and
defendants were in a readinesse, determined the daye following
to ride to Oxforde, according to his promise and
appointment.
            
               
Now the confederates much maruailed at the stay of the
Duke of Aumerle, some onely blamed his slacknesse, others
began to suspect it, euery man coniectured as he was diuersly
affected betweene confidence and feare: and in this confusion
of opinions, they sent vnto him in poste, to knowe the
certaine truth. Before the messenger came to the Duke, hee
was departed from Westminster towards Oxford, not the
direct way, but went first to see his Father the Duke of York,
and carried with him his counterpane of the Indenture of
confederacy. As they sate at dinner, the Father espied it in
his bosome, and demaunded what it was? the Sonne humbly
craued pardon, and said that it nothing touched him, by
S. George (quoth the Father) but I will see it: and so whether
vpon a precedent iealosie, or some present cause of suspition,
he tooke it away from him by force. When he perceiued
the contents, he sodainely arose from the table, & with
great fi
                  •
               rcenesse both of countenance and speech, vttered to
his Sonne these wordes.
            I see traytor, that idlenesse hath made thee so wanton
and mutinous that thou playest with thy faith, as children
doe with stickes: thou hast been once already faithlesse to
King Richard, & now again art false to King Henrie, so that
the like fish Sepia, thou troublest all the waters wherin thou
liuest. Thou knowest that in open Parlament I became
suertie and pledge for thy alleageance, both in bodye and
goods: and can neither thy dutie, nor my desert restreine
thee, from seeking my destruction? in faith, but I will rather
helpe forwarde thine. With that hee commaunded
his Horses to bee made readie, and presentlye tooke
his iorneye towardes Windsore, where the King then
laye.
            The Duke of Aumerle had no time eyther to consulte
with his friends, or to consider with himselfe what was
best to bee doone: but taking aduise vppon the sodaine,

he mounted likewise on horsebacke, and posted towardes
Windsore another way. It was no neede to force him forwarde,
his youthfull bloud, and his sodaine daunger were
in steed of two winges, to keep his horse in Pegasus pace:
so that he came to Windsore, & was alighted at the Castell,
before his stiffe aged Father could come neere. Then hee
entred the gates, and caused them to be surely locked, and
tooke the Keyes into his owne hands, pretending some secret
cause for which he would deliuer them vnto the King.
When he came in presence, he kneeled downe and humblie
craued of the King mercie and forgiuenesse. The king
demaunded for what offence? Then with a confused voice,
and sad countenance, casting downe his eyes as altogether
abashed, partly with feare of his daunger, and partly with
shame of his discredit; he declared vnto the King all the
manner of the conspiracie. The King seemed neither rashlie
to beleeue, nor negligentlie to distrust the Dukes report;
neyther stood it with pollicie to enterteine the discouerie
with any hard and violent vsage: therefore with gracious
speeches he comforted the Duke, and if this bee true, sayd
he, we pardon you: if it be feined, at your extreame perrill
be it.
            By this time the Duke of Yorke was rapping at the Castle
gates, and being admitted to the Kings presence, he deliuered
to him the endenture of confederacie, which hee
had taken from his sonne. When the King had redde it,
and was thereby perswaded of the trueth of the matter, he
was not a little disquieted in minde, complaining of the vnconstant
disposition of those men, whom neyther crueltie
(he said) could make firme to King Richard, nor clemencie
to him; but vppon dislike of euery present gouernment, they
were desirous of any change. So being possessed with deeper
thoughts then to gaze vppon games, he layde his iorney
aside, and determined to attend at Windsor, what course

his enemies would take, and which waye they would set
forward: knowing right well that in ciuill tumults, and aduised
patience, and opportunitie well taken, are the onely weapons
of aduantage; and that it is a speciall point of wisdome,
to make benefit of the enemyes follie. In the meane
time he directed his letters to the Earle of Northumberland
his high Constable, and to the Earle of Cumberland his high
Marshall, and to others his most assured friends, concerning
these sodaine and vnexpected accidents.
            The confederates all this time hearing nothing of the
Duke of Aumerle, and seeing no preparation for the Kings
comming, were out of doubt that theyr treason was betraied.
And now considering that once before they had beene
pardoned, the guilt of this their rebellion, excluded them
from all hope of further mercie: wherevpon they became
desperate, and so resolued to prosecute that by open armes,
wherein their priuie practises had 
                  •
               ailed. And first they apparrelled
Magdalen (a man very like to King Richard both
in stature and countenance, and of yeares not disagreeable)
in princely attire; and gaue foorth that hee was King Richard,
and that eyther by fauour or negligence of his keepers,
he was escaped out of prison, and desired the faith and
ayde of his louing subiects. Then they determined to dispatche
messengers to Charles King of Fraunce, to desire his
helpe and assistance on the behalfe of his sonne in lawe, if
need should require.
            The common people, which commonlie are soone changeable,
and on the sodaine as prone to pittie as they were before
excessiuely cruell, most earnestlie wished the enlargement
of King Richard, and earnestly wishing, did easely beleeue
it: in which imaginarie conceit, being otherwise men
of no deepe search, the presence of Magdalene most stronglie
confirmed them: and so eyther vpon ignorance of truth,
or delight in trouble, they ioyned themselues in great troops

to the Lords: desiring nothing more then to be the meanes
whereby King Richard should be restored, as in a manner resuming
their first affections and humors towards him. Then
the Lords of this association with great force, but with greater
fame, as the manner is of matters vnknowne, aduanced
forward in battaile arraye towards Windsore, against King
Henrie, as against an enemie of the common state; hauing in
theyr company aboue fortie thousand armed men. The
King vpon intelligence of theyr approache, secretlye with a
few horse, the next Sunday night after Newyeres day, departed
from Windsore to the Tower of London, and the same
night before it was daye, the confederates came to the Castle
of Windsore: where missing their expected praye, they
stood doubtfull and deuided in opinions, which waye to
bend their course. Some aduised them with all speede to
follow the King to London, and not to leaue him any leaue
and libertie, to vnite an armie against them: that Winter
was no let but in idle and peaceable times: that in ciuill
discentions nothing is more safe then speede, and greater
aduantage alwayes groweth by dispatching then deferring:
that whilest some were in feare, some in doubt, and some ignorant,
the Citie, yea the realme might easilye be possessed:
and that many armies whose furie at the first rush could not
be resisted, by delayes did weare out, and waste to nothing.
Others who would seeme to bee considerate and wise, but
in verye deede were noe better then dastardes, perswaded
rather to set King Richard first at libertie; for if their
counterfeiting should be discouered before they possessed
themselues of his person, the people vndoubtedly would
fall from them to the certaine confusion of them all. Herevppon
they gaue ouer the pursuite, and retired to Colebrooke,
and there delayed out the time of dooing, in deliberating,
beeing neyther courogiouslye quicke, nor considerately
stayed, but faintlie and fearefullye shrincking

backe: and when they once beganne to relent, they decreased
euery daye more and more both in power and in
hope.
            King Henrie the next morning after hee was come to
the Tower, sent to the Maior of the Citie to put Souldiours
in armes for his resistance, who presentlye presented
vnto him three thousand Archers, and three thousand
bill men, besides those that were appointed for defence
of the Citie. The King spent vpon him many good speeches,
and liberally loaded him with promises and thanks;
and soone after he issued out of London, with twentie thousand
tall men, and came to Hounslowe Heath, abiding
there, and as it were da
                  •
               ing his enemyes to ioyne issue
in the field: contemning theyr disorderlye multitude, as a
vayne terrour of names without forces. But the confederates
eyther for feare of the Kings power, or for distrust
of theyr owne, or else lingring, perhappes, after some succour
out of Fraunce, refused the encounter, and doubtfull
it is whether they shewed greater courage in setting
vp the danger, or cowardise in declining it when it was presented
vnto them.
            So they departed from Colebrooke to Sunnings, a place
neere Redding, where Queene Isabell, King Richardes
wife did then abyde: to whom vppon the plaine trueth
before declared, fame had falslye descanted, that King
Richard was escaped out of prison, and did lye at Pomfret
with a hundred thousand armed men; and that King
Henrie for feare of him, was fledde with his children
and friendes to the Tower of London. All which was
as lightlye beleeued, as it was vainlye toulde: wherevppon
shee defaced King Henries armes, and plucked
away his cognisance from those his seruants that attended
vppon her; and hauing in some sorte satisfied her womannish
anger, with this harmelesse spight, she and the

Lordes departed together first to Wallingforde, and from
thence to Abington, stirring the people by the waye to take
armour, and to rise in ayde of king Richard, who was (saide
they) and is, and should be their Prince.
            At the last they came to Chichester, and there the Lordes
tooke theyr lodgings, the Duke of Surrey and the Earle of
Salisburie in one Inne; the Duke of Exceter and the Earle
of Gloucester in another; and all the hoast encamped in the
fields. But the Bayliffe of the towne, suspecting all this
countenance to be but the vaine flashe of a false fire, did in
the night with about foure score Archers, beset and set vpon
the house where the Duke of Surrey and the Earle of Salisburie
laye: who were men but of weake resistance by nature,
but being put vpon necessitie, shewed great manhood
and persistance in defending themselues against the townsmen.
The Duke of Exceter and the Earle of Gloucester being
in another Inne, were not able by force to rescue their
associates; wherevpon a certaine Priest of their companye
set diuers houses in the towne on fire, supposing thereby to
diuert the townsmen from theyr assault, to the sauing of their
houses and of their goods: but this fire greatly inflamed
their furie, and made them more obstinate in their attempt;
crying out that they would neuer labour to rescue their losses,
but to reuenge them; and that with the bloud of the
Lordes, those flames should be quenched. Then there arose
confused clamours and noyses, all the towne being in an vproare
and in armes, shooting fiercelie and running vpon the
Lords with a rashe and desperate rage; not caring to loose
many, wherof they had many to spare.
            When the Earle of Exceter and they that were with him
perceiued the force of the assaylants daungerouslie to encrease,
and that it was impossible for a few to susteine the
furie of so many so obstinately bent: they fledde out of the
backe side towards the campe, intending to bring the whole

army to the rescue: but the soldiers hauing heard a tumu
                  ••
               ,
and seeing fire within the towne, supposed that the King
was entred with all his puisance: whereupon being strooke
with a sodaine and false feare, and wanting a commaunder
of courage to confirme them, they ran away, and dispearsed
themselues without measure; and so whilest euery man
endeuoured to saue himselfe, all were brought to theyr confusion.
            Thus the Duke of Surrey, and the Earle of Salisbury, & the
Lords & Gentlemen which were in their company, were left
to defend themselues against the townsemen as they coulde
who manfully maintained the fight with great bloudshed
of theyr enemies, from midnight vntill three of the clocke
the next day in the after noone: at the last, being inferiour
both in number and fortune, the Duke and the Earle were
wounded to death and taken, and the same euening theyr
heades were stricken off and sent to London: there were
also taken Sir Bennet Shelley, Sir B
                     ••
                  nard Brokas, Sir Thomas
Blunt, and 28. other Lordes, Knights and Gentlemen, who
were sent to Oxford, where the King then lay, and there
were put to execution.
            The Duke of Exceter when he found the army dispersed
and fled, fled likewise with Sir Iohn Shelley into Essex, lamenting
the certaine destruction which his rashnesse had
procured to himselfe, and to his friends, but moste especially
to King Richard; if not as a party, yet as a cause of this vnhappy
tumult; many times he did attempt to haue escaped
by sea into Fraunce, but he was alwayes driuen backe by
distresse of weather; and so wandring and lurking in secret
places, hee was at the last attached as hee sat at supper
in a certaine friendes house, and led to Plashy, and there
shortly after beheaded: so that a man might probably con
               
                  •
               ecture
that the death of the Duke of Glocester was then
brought in reckoning, who by his counsell and contryuance

chiefly, in the same place had been apprehended. An
excellent example for all those which measure their actions
eyther by their pleasure, or by their power: that reuenge
of iniurious dealing, although it be prolonged, yet
doth neuer faile, but commeth surely although perhappes,
slowly. This duke was a man of high parentage, of a franke
minde, and wealth answerable thereunto: openly praise
                  •
               , worthy,
but his secret actions were hardly spoken of: he was
of consent to all his brothers vices, and of counsaile to many,
yet somewhat the more close and vigilant man: and
not so much partaker of his prosperity, as violently carried
with the current of his misery.
            The Earle of Gloucester fled towardes Wales but was
forelayed and taken, and beheaded at Bristow: Magdalen
                     •
                  
               
the counterfeite of King Richard; flying into Scotland, was
apprehended and brought to the Tower, and afterward hanged
and quartred, with W. Ferby another of King Richards
Chapleines. Diuerse other Lordes and Knights and Gentlemen;
and a great number of meane and base persons
were in other places put to death; insomuch as the King
though otherwise of a very temperate and intreatible nature,
seemed to shew too hard and haughty dealing in reuenging
his owne iniury, or rather maintaining the iniury
he had done: the heads of the chiefe conspiratours, were
pitched vpon poles, and set ouer London Bridge: in all other
partes of the realme a spectacle both lamentable and
vgly was presented to the view and terrour of others: bodies
hewen in peeces, heads and quarter of vnfortunate dismēbred
wretches putrif
                  •
               ing aboue ground: not al for desert,
but many to satisfy either the mallice or want of King Henrie
                     •
                  
               
friends, insomuch as many graue men openly gaue forth,
that in short time there would be cause to wish King Richard
again as being more tollerable to endure the cruelty of one,
then of many, and to liue where nothing, then where any

thing might be permitted.
            The Abbot of Westminster in whose house and in whose
head this confederacy began, hearing of these aduentures,
as he was going betweene his monastery and his mansion,
fell sodainly into a palsie, and hardly after without speech
ended his life; and although in this enterprize fortune gaue
policy the check, and by a strange accedent which wisdome
could not foresee, ouerturned the deuise, yet is it certainely
affirmed that this Abbot first stirred the stone, which rowling
a long, was like to haue turned king Henry out of his
seate. The bishop of Caerliel, was condemned vpon this treason,
but the extreamity of his feare, and griefe, closed vp his
daies, and preuented the violence and shame of publicke execution.
And now king Richard after he had abdicated his
dignity, did but short time enioy that sweet security, which
he did vainely expect, and first all his goods which hee did
giue in satisfaction of the iniuries that hee had done, were
brought to deuision and share amongst his enemies: shortly
after he was remooued from the Tower, to the Castle of
Leedes in Kent, and from thence to Pomfret, to the ende
that by often changing hee might eyther more secretly bee
dispatched, or more vncertainly found: heere being kept
in streight prison, both innocent & ignorant of this offence,
was notwithstanding made a party in the punishment. For
King Henry perceiuing that the Lords so far preuailed with
their late strategeme, that if their stomacke had bin answerable
to their strength, & their bloud beginning had not ended
in faintnes and sloath, they might haue driuen him to a
hard hazard; caused King Richard to be put to death: intending
to make sure, that no man should cloake open rebellion,
vnder the colour of following sides, nor countenance his
cōspiracy, either with the person or name of K. Richard: whether
hee did expressely commaund his death, or no, it is a
question, out of question he shewed some liking and desire

to the action, and gaue allowance thereto when it was
doone.
            The most current report at that time went, that hee was
princely serued euery day at the Table, with aboundance of
costlie meates, according to the order prescribed by Parlament,
but was not suffered to tast or touche any one of them;
and so perished of famine; being tormented with the presence
of that, whereof hee dyed for want, but such horrible
and vnnaturall crueltie, both against a King and a kinseman,
should not proceed from King Henrie (me thinke) a man of
a moderate and milde disposition, not yet from any other
minde which is not altogether both sauage in humanitie,
and in religion prophane. One wrighter who would seeme
to haue the perfect intelligence of these affayres, maketh report,
that King Henrie sitting at his table, sad and pensiue,
with a deepe sigh brake foorth into these wordes: Haue I
no faithfull friend that will deliuer me of him, whose life will
breed destruction to me and disturbance to the realme, and
whose death will bee a safetie and quiet to both? for how
can I be free from feare, so long as the cause of my daunger
dooth continue? and what securitie, what hope shall
we haue of peace, vnlesse the seede of sedition be vtterly rooted
out?
            Vppon this speech a certaine Knight called Sir Pierce of
Extone, presently departed from the Court, accompanyed
with eyght tall men, and came to Pomfrete, and there commaunded,
that the Esquire who was accustomed to sewe,
and take the assaye before King Richard, should no more vse
that manner of seruice: and let him (quoth he) now eate wel,
for he shall not eate long. King Richard sate downe to dinner,
and was serued without courtesie or assaye, whereat he
merueyled, and demaunded of the Esquire, why he did not
his dutie? the Esquire answered, that he was otherwise commaunded
by Sir Pierce of Extone, who was latelye come

from King Henry. The King beeing somewhat mooued at
this acte and answere, tooke the caruing knife in his hand,
and strucke the Esquire therewith lightly on the head, saying,
the deuill take Henry of Lancaster and thee together:
with that Sir Pierce entred the chamber, with eight men in
harneys, euery one hauing a byll in his hand: Wherevpon
King Richard perceiuing their drift and his owne daunger,
put the table from him, and stepping stoutlye to the formost
man, wrested the bill out of his hand, wherewith (although
vnarmed and alone) he manfully defended himselfe a good
space, and slew sowre of his assailants. Sir Pierce lept to the
chaire where king Richard was wonte to sit, whilest the rest
chased him about the chamber. At the last being forced towards
the place where Sir Pierce was, he with a stroake of
his Pollax felled him to the ground: and foorthwith he was
miserably rid out of his miserable life. It is saide that at
the pointe of his death, hee gathered some spirit, and
with a fainte and feeble voyce, groaned foorth these
wordes.
            My great grandfather King Edward the second, was in
this manner deposed, imprisoned, and murthered; by which
meanes my grandfather king Edward the third obteyned
possession of the crowne; and now is the punishment of that
in
                  ••
               trie powred vpon his next successour. Well, this is right
for mee to suffer, but not for you to doe: your King for a
time may ioye at my death, and enioye his desire; but let
him qualifie his pleasures with expectation of the like iustice:
for God who measureth all our actions by the malice
of our mindes, will not suffer this violence vnreuenged.
            Whether these words proceeded from a distempered desire,
or from the iudgement of his foresight, they were not
altogether idle and vaine. For Sir Pierce expecting great
fauour and rewards for his vngracious seruice, was frustrated

of both, and not onely missed that countenance for which he
hoped, but lost that which before he had: so odious are vices
euen where they are profitable.
            Heerevpon hee grew at the first discontented, and afterwardes
mightely turmoyled and tormented in conscience,
and raging against himselfe would often exclaime,
that to pleasure one vnthankefull person, he had made both
himselfe and his posteritie, hatefull and infamous to all the
world.
            King Henrie with great discontentment and disquiet
held the kingdome during his life: and so did his sonne
King Henrie the fifth: in whose time by continuall warres
against the Frenchmen, the malice of the humour was otherwise
exercised and spent. But his second successour King
Henry the sixth was dispossessed thereof, and together with
his young sonne Henry imprisoned and put to death, eyther
by the commaundement or con
                  •
               iuence of King Edward the
fourth.
            And hee also escaped not free; for hee dyed not without
many 
                  〈…〉
                suspicions of poison
                  •
                and after his
death his two sonnes were disinherited, imprisoned, and
butchered by their cruell Vnckle the Duke of Gloucester,
who beeing a tyrant and vsurper, was lawfully slaine in the
field; and so in his person (hauing no issue) the tragedie
did end. Which are most rare and excellent examples both
of comfort to them that are oppressed, and of terrour to violent
dealers; that God in his secret iudgement dooth not
alwayes so certainely prouide for our safetie, as reuenge our
iniuries and harmes: and that all our vniust actions haue a
daye of payment, and many times by waye of retaliation,
euen in the same manner and measure wherein they
were committed.
            And thus was King Richard brought to his death, by
violence and force as all wrighters agree, although all

agree not vppon the manner of the violence▪ Hee was
a man of personage rather well proportioned then tall of
great beautie, and grace, and comlinesse in presence; hee
was of a good strength, and no abiect spirit; but the one
by ease▪ the other by flatterie were much abased. He deserued
many friends, but found fewe, because hee sought
them more by liberalitye, then vertuous dealing. He 
                  〈◊〉
               
merueilous 
                  〈◊〉
                in all his actions, which may verye
well bee 
                  〈◊〉
                to his negligence and sloath; for hee
that is not prouident can seldome prosper, but by his
loosenesse, will loose▪ whatsoeuer fortune, or other mens

                  〈…〉
                hee was driuen
is such distresse, that 
                  〈…〉
               , it as a benefite to bee
disburdened of his royall dignitie, for which other men
will not sticke; to put theyr goods, and liues, and soules in
hazarde.
            Hee liued three and thirtie yeares, and reigned two and
twentie. His dead body was embaulmed, and 
                  〈…〉
               
couered with Lead all saue his face, and carryed 
                  〈…〉
               
and in all the chiefe places by the, waye, his face
was 
                  〈…〉
               , that by viewe thereof no
doubt should bee made concerning his death. At London
hee had a solemne obsequie kept in the Cathedrall Church
of Saint Paul
                     •
                  , the King beeing present, and all the chiefe

                  〈…〉
               
            
            Then hee was conueyed to Langley Abbey in Bucking,
ham shire, about 
                  〈…〉
                myle from London, and there
obscurely 
                  〈◊〉
                by the Bishop of Chester, the Abbot of
S. Albones, and the Abbot of Waltham, without presence
of noble men, without co
                  •••
               uence of the common people,
and without the charge of a dinner for celebrating the

                  〈…〉
                but afterward on the commaundement of King Henry
the fifth, his body was taken vp, and remooued to Westminster,
and honourably entombed amongst his auncesters,

with Queene Anne his wife, in expiation (as it is like) of his
Fathers violent and vnfaithfull dealing. So hee whose life
was alwaies tumultuous and vnquiet, could not readily finde
rest for his bones, euen after death. It was not amisse in regard
of the common wealth that he was dead; yet they who
caused his death had small reason to reckon it among theyr
good deedes.
            And thus doe these and the like accidents dayly happen
to such Princes as will be absolute in power, resolute in will,
and dissolute in life.
            This yeere Hunfrey the sonne and heyre of the Duke of
Gloucester, dyed of the plague? as he returned out of Ireland
where King Richard had 
                  〈◊〉
                him prisoner; and shortly after
the Duchesse his mother with violence of griefe ended her
daye
                  •
                this yeere also dyed Thomas Mo
                     •
                  bray the exiled duke
of Norfolke, whose death would much haue been lamented,
if he had not furthered so many lamentable deaths: but he
ouerliued his honour, & saw himselfe accounted a person infamed
and of no estimation. Likewise about this 
                  〈…〉
               
Duke of Brittaine deceased, who had taken to wife Mary
daughter to King Edward the third, and by her had no issue,
but by Ioan his second wife he left behinde him three sons,
Iohn, Richard & Arthur: this Ioan was afterwards maried to
K. Henrie, as hereafter shall appeare. Also this yeere Edmund
Duke of Yorke departed this life, his honour not stayrred,
his fame not touched: he was a man very circumspect and
wary in his cariage; not carelesse of a good fame, nor greedy
after a great: of other mens wealth not desirous, liberall of
his owne, and of the common sparing: he did not by obstinate
opposing himselfe against the current of the time, rashly
hasten, eyther his fame or his fall, but by moderation attayned
safely that degree of praise, and honour, which others
aspiring vnto by desperate courses, wanne with ambitious
death, without any other profit at all; He left behinde him

two noble sonnes, expresse resemblencers of his integritie:
Edward, who succeeded in his dignitie, and before was called
Duke of Aumerle, and Richard Earle of Cambridge.
Edward, in the change of the state, neither constantlye kept
his fidelitie, nor stoutlie maintained his treason. Richard
tooke to wife the daughter and heyre of Roger Mortimer,
whose mother Phillip was sole daughter and heyre to Lionell
Duke of Clarence, the third sonne of King Edward the
thyrd, by which title and discent, his posteritie claimed the
Crowne and kingdome of this realme from the successours
of King Henrie, as heereafter more at large shall be declared.
            
               Charles King of Fraunce lost no time all this while in making
preparation to inuade England: and to that end had
now raysed an armie royall, which was brought downe into
Picardie, and in a readinesse to haue beene transported. But
it is verye like that this hast for the deliuerance of King Richard
did the more hasten his death: vppon newes whereof
the Frenchmen perceiuing their purpose for his restitution to
be to no purpose, gaue ouer the enterprise; some being grieued
that the occasion was lost of making spoile of so plentifull
a countrie, others being well content to be discharged of
that hope together with the hazard whervpon it depended.
Shortlie after the French King sent a solemne Embassage into
England, to treate, or rather intreate, that Lady Isabell
his daughter, who had bin espoused to King Richard, might
with her dowrie bee restored to him againe. King Henrie
most honourablie receiued these Embassadours, and gaue in
answere, that he would speedelie send his Commissioners to
Calice, which should fullye commune and conclude with
them, both of this and other weightie affayres concerning
both the realmes.
            Not long after he sent Edward Duke of Yorke, and Henrie
Earle of Northumberland to Calice: Also the French

King sent the Duke of Burbone and certaine others to Bulleine.
These Commissioners did often meete, sometimes at
one place, and sometimes at another: the Frenchmen especially
required, that Lady Isabell should be restored, shewing
that King Charles her Father had giuen in charge, that
this before all matters, and without this nothing should be
concluded. On the other side the Englishmen desired that
she might be married to Henry Prince of Wales King Henries
eldest Sonne, a man answerable to her in equall degree
both of bloud and of yeeres: but the French King denyed
that he would any more ioyne affinity with the English nation,
whose aliance had once so vnfortunately succeeded: thē
they entred into speech of a perpetuall peace, but heereto
the Frenchmen would not agree. In the end it was concluded
that Lady Isabell should be deliuered to King Charles
her Father but without Dower; because the marriage betweene
King Richard and her, was neuer consummate: by
reason wherof she was not dowable by the very treaty of the
marriage. Also the surcease of armes which foure yeeres before
had beene made with King Richard for the terme of
30 yeeres, was continued and confirmed for the time then
vnexpyred. Some authors affirme that a newe truce was
taken, but these also are at diffierence: for some report
that it was during the life of both the Kinges, others that
it was but for a short time, which hath the more apparaunce
of truth, by reason of the open hostilitye which
the yeere following did breake foorth betweene the two
realmes.
            Shortly after King Henrie sent the Lady Isabell vnder
the conducte of Lorde Thomas Pearcy Earle of Worcester,
in royall estate to Calice: she was accompanied with a great
troupe of honourable personages, both men and women;
and carried with her all the Iewelles and plate which shee
brought into England, with a great surple sage of rich giftes

bestowed vpon her by the king: at Calice she was receiued
by the Earle of S. Paule, Leiuetenant for the French king
in Picardy, and by him was conducted to king Charles her
Father, who afterwardes gaue her in marriage to Cbarles,
sonne to Lewes Duke of Orleance: and so was eyther rest
or respite of wars procured in Fraunce, whilest neerer stirres
might be brought to some stay.
            For within the realme, the fire and fury of the late sedition
was scarcely quenched and quiet, but (that the common
wealth should not cease to be torne by multiplying of
diuisions, one streight succeeding another) the Welshmen,
vpon aduantage of the doubtfull and vnsetled estate of king
Henrie, resolued to breake and make a defection; before eyther
the king could ground his authority, or the people
frame themselues to a new obedience: and hauing learned
that common causes must be maintained by concord, they
sought by assemblyes to establish an association, and to set
vp theyr owne principality againe.
            To this purpose they created for theyr Prince, Owen
Glendor an Esquire of Wales, a factious person, and apt to
set vp diuision and strife: and although hee was of no
great state in birth; yet was hee great and stately in stomacke:
of an aspiring spirit, and in wit somewhat aboue
the ordynarie of that vntrayned people: boulde, craftie,
actiue, and as he listed to bend his minde, mischieuous
or industrious in equall degree, in desires immoderate,
and rashlye aduenturous, in his young yeeres hee was
brought vp to the studye of the Common Lawe of the
Realme, at London: and when he came to mans estate,
besides a naturall fiercenesse and hatred to the English
name, hee was particularlye incensed by a priuate suite,
for certayne landes in controuersie, betweene the Lord
Gray of Ruthen and him; wherein his tytle was ouerthrowen;
and being a man by nature not of the myldest,

by this prouocation he was made sauadge and rough; determining
eyther to repayre or to reuenge his losse, by setting
the whole state on fire. Also his expence and liberalitie had
been too excessiue for a great man to endure, which brought
him to barenesse too base for a meane man to beare: and
therefore he must of necessitie doe and dare somewhat, and
more daunger there was in soft and quiet dealing, then in
hazarding rashlie. Heerewith opportunitie was then likewise
presented: for troublesome times are most fit for great
attempts, and some likelyhood there was, whilest the King
and the Lordes were hard at variance, that harme might easelie
be wrought to them both. Vpon these causes his desire
was founded, and vppon these troubles his hope. But that
his aspiring and ambitious humour might beare some shew
of honest meaning, he pretented to his countrymen the recouerie
of theyr free estate, the desire whereof was so naturally
sweete, that euen wilde Birdes will rather liue hardlye
at large in the ayre, then bee daintily dyeted by others in a
Cage: and opportunitie was at that time fitlie offered, or
else neuer to be expected, to rid them of theyr thraldome,
falselie and coulourablie intituled a peace; whilest the one
Kings power was waining, and the other not yet fullye
wexen, and eyther of them grew weake by wasting the other:
neither was there any difference which of them should
preuayle, sith the warre touched both alike, insomuch as the
ouerthrow would ruine the one, and the victorie the other:
So hee exhorted them to take courage and armes: and first
to kill all the English within their territories, for libertie
and Lordes could not endure together: then to resume their
auncient customes and lawes, whereby more then armes,
commonwealths are established and enlarged: so should
they bee a people vncorrupt, without admi
                  •
               tion of forreine
manners or bloud; and so should they forget seruitude,
and eyther liue at libertie, or else perhaps, bee Lordes

ouer other.
            Heerevppon many flocked vnto him, the best for loue of
libertie, the basest of desire of bootie and spoile, insomuch
as in short time hee became commaunder of competent
forces to stand openly in the fielde. And being desirous to
make some proofe of his prowesse, hee sharply set vppon his
ould aduersarie Reignold Lorde Grey of Ruthen, whose
possessions he wasted and spoyled, slew many of his men,
and tooke himselfe prisoner; yet gaue him faire and friendlie
enterteinment, and promised him releasment, if he would
take his daughter to wife. This hee desired, not so much for
neede of his abilitie or ayde, as supposing that the name and
countenance of a Lorde, would giue reputation to the house
that was then but in rising: But the Lorde Greye at the first
did not so much refuse as scorne the offer: affirming that he
was no warde, to haue his marriage obtruded vppon him.
Well (sayde Owen Glendore) although you bee not my
warde▪ yet are you in my warde: and the suing of your liuerie
will cost double the marriage money that elsewhere you
shall procure. The Lord Grey being not very riche to discharge
his ransome, and seeing no other meanes of his deliuerance,
at the last accepted the condition, and tooke the
damosell to wife; notwithstanding his deceitfull Father in
lawe trifled out the time of his enlargement vntyll hee
dyed.
            The Welshmen being confident vppon this successe, began
to breake into the borders of Hereford shire, and to
make spoyle and pray of the Countrey: against whom Lord
Edmund Mortimer Earle of Marche, who for feare of King
Henrie had withdrawne himselfe (as hath been declared) to
Wiggmore Castle, assembled all the Gentlemen of the
Countrye, and meeting with the Welshmen, they ioyned
together a sharpe and cruell conflict: not in forme of a loose
skirmish, but standing still and maintaining their place, they

endeauoured with maine might to breake and beare downe
one another. The courage and resolution of both sides was
a like, but the Welshmen were superiour both for number
and direction: for they were conducted by one knowne leader,
who with his presence euery where assisted at neede, enflaming
his Soldiours, some with shame and reproofe, others
with praise and encouragement, all with hope and large
promises: but the Englishmen had no certaine generall, but
many confused commaunders, yea, euery man was a commaunder
to himselfe▪ pressing forward or drawing backe, as
his owne courage or feare did mooue him. Insomuch as no
doubt they had taken a great blowe that day by theyr ill gouerned
bouldnesse, had not Owen Glendor presently vppon
the breaking vp of the field, ceased to pursue the execution,
and shewed himselfe more able to get a victorie, then skilfull
to vse it. But euen to his side the victorie had cost bloud,
and many of those which remayned, were eyther wounded
or wearie: the night was neere also, and they were in their
enemyes countrie; by which meanes our men had libertie
to retire rather then runne away, no man being hoat to follow
the chase. They lost of their company about a thousand
men, who sould their liues at such a price, that when
manhood had doone the hardest against them, certaine
mannish, or rather deuilish women, whose malice is immortall,
exercised a vaine reuenge vppon their dead bodyes;
in cutting off theyr priuie partes and theyr noses, whereof
the one they stuffed into theyr mouthes, and pressed the
other betweene their buttocks; and would not suffer their
mangled carcasses to be committed to the earth, vntill they
were redeemed with a great summe of money. By which
cruell couetuousnesse, the faction lost reputation and credite
with the moderate sorte of their owne people; suspecting
that it was not libertie but licentiousnesse, which
was desired: and that subiection to such vnhumaine

mindes would bee more insupportable then anye bondage.
            In this conflict the Earle of Marche was taken prisoner
and fettered with chaines, and cast into a deepe and vile
dungeon. The King was solicited by many noble men, to
vse some meanes for his deliuerance; but hee would not
heare on that eare; hee could rather haue wished him and
his two sisters in heauen, for then the onely blemish to his
title had beene out of the way: and no man can tell whether
this mischaunce did not preserue him from a greater mischiefe.
            
               Owen Glendor by the prosperous successe of his actions,
was growne now more harde to be dealt with, and hautelie
minded, and stood euen vppon termes of equalitie with the
King: wherevpon he proceeded further to inuade the Marches
of Wales on the West side of Seuerne; where he burnt
many villages and townes, slew much people, and returned
with great prey, and praises of his adherents. Thus he ceased
not this yeere to infest the borderers on euery side, amongst
whom he found so weake resistance, that he seemed to exercise
rather a spoile then a warre. For King Henrie was then
detained with his chiefest forces in another more dangerous
seruice, which besides these former vexations and hazards,
this first yeere of his reigne happened vnto him.
            For the Scottes knowing that changes were times most
apte for attempt, and vppon aduantage of the absence of all
the chiefe English borderers, partly by occasion of the Parlament,
and partlie by reason of the plague which was very
grieuous that yeere in the North partes of the realme: they
made a roade into the countrey of Northumberland, and
there committed great hauocke and harme. Also on a certaine
night they sodainly set vppon the Castle of Werke, the
captain wherof sir Thomas Gray, was then one of the knights
of the Parlament: & hauing slaine the watch partly a sleepe,

partlye amased with feare, they brake in and surprised the
place: which they held a while, and at the last spoyled and
ruined and then departed. Whilest further harmes were
feared this passed with light regarde. But when great perrils
were past, as if noe woorse misfortune could haue befallen,
then was it much sorrowed and lamented. And in
reuenge thereof, the Englishmen inuaded and spoyled certaine
Ilandes of Orkney: and so the losse was in some sorte
repayred: yet (as in reprisals of warre it commonlye falleth
out) neyther against those particular persons which
committed the harme, nor for those which suffred it: but
one for another were both recompenced and reuenged.
Againe the Scottes set foorth a fleete, vnder the conduct
of Sir Robert Logon, with direction to attempt as occasion
should be offered: his first purpose was against our Fishermen;
but before hee came to any action, he was encountred
by certaine English ships, and the greatest part of his fleete
taken. Thus peace still continuing betweene both the
realmes, a kinde of theeuish hostilitie was dayly practised,
which afterwardes brake out into open warre vppon this
occasion.
            
               George of Dunbarre Earle of the Marches of Scotland,
had betrothed Elisabeth his daughter to Dauid, the sonne
and heyre apparant of Robert King of Scottes, and in regardc
of that marriage to bee shortlie celebrated and finished, hee
deliuered into the Kings hands a great summe of money
for his Daughters dowrie. But Archibalde Earle Dowglasse
disdayning that the Earle of Marches bloud should be
preferred before his, so wrought with King Robert, that
Prince Dauid his sonne refused the Earle of Marches
Daughter, and tooke to wife Mariell Daughter to the
Earle Dowglasse: Earle George not vsed to offers of disgrace,
could hardlye enforce his pacience to endure this
scorne: and first hee demaunded restitution of his money,

not so much for care to obteyne as for desire to pieke an occasion
of breaking his alleageance. The King would make
to him neyther payment nor promise, but trifled him off
with many 
                  〈◊〉
                and vaire delayes▪ Whcrevppon hee
fled with all his; familie into England to 
                  〈◊〉
                earle of
Northumberland, intending with open disloyaltie both to
reuenge his indignitie, and recouer his losse. The Englishmen
with open armes enterteyned the opportunitie; with
whose helpe and assistance the Earle made diuerse incursions
into Scotland, where he burnt many 
                  〈◊〉
               , and 
                  〈◊〉
               
much people and daylye purchased with his sworde▪ great
aboundance of 
                  〈◊〉
                and spolle.
            Heerevppon King Robert depriued the Earle of his honour,
seazed all his goods and possessions, and wrote vnto
King Henry, as hee would haue the much betweene them
any longer to continue; eyther to deliuer vnto him the
Earle of Marche and other 
                  •
               aytours to his person and state
or else to banish them the realm of England▪ King Henrye
perceiuing such iarres to iogger betweene the two realmes,
that the peace was already as it were out of ioynts, determined
not to loose the benefit of the discontented subiects of
his enemie: wherevppon hee returned aunswer to the Heralde
of Scotland, that hee was neyther wearie of, peace not
fearefull of warres, and ready as occasion should change, eyther
to holde me one, or hazard the other▪ but the worde of
a Prince was of great weight; and therefore sithe hee had
graunted a safe conduct to the Earle of Marche and his
companie, it were an impeachment to his honour, without
iust cause to violate the same. Vppon this answere the King
of Scottes did presently proclaime open warre against the
King of England, with bloud, fire, and sworde.
            King Henry thought it policie, rather to begin the warre
in his enemies countrie, then to expect it in his owne: because
the land which is the 
                  〈◊〉
                of the warre, dooth commonly

furnish both sides with necessarie supply; the friend
by contribution, and the enemie by spoyle. Therefore sending
certaine troopes of horsemen before him, both to espie
and to induce an vncertaine terrour vppon the enemie, hee
entred into Scotland with a puissant armie; wherewith hee
burnt many Villages and Townes, cast downe diuerse Castles,
and ruined a great part of the Townes of Edenborough
and Lith, sparing nothing but Churches and religious houses:
so that in all places as he passed, the spectacle was ouglie
and grislie which hee left behind him; bodyes torne in peeces,
mangled and putrified limmes, the ayre infected with
stincke, the ground imbrued with corruption and bloud,
the countrie wasted, the Grasse and Corne troden downe
and spoyled; insomuch as a man would haue sayde that
warre is an exercise not of manhood, but of inhumanitie.
They that fledde before the armie, filled all places with
feare and terrour, extolling aboue truthe the English foreces,
to deminish thereby their shame in running from
them.
            In the end of September the King besieged the Castle
of Maydens in Edenborough; wherein were Dauid Duke
of Rothsaye Prince of the realme, and Archibald
                     •
                  
                Earle
Dowglasle; the inconstancie of the one, and ambition of
the other, were principall causes of all this warre.
            During this siege, Robert Duke of Albonye, who was
appointed gouernour of the Realme, because the King
was sicke and vnable to rule, sent an Herauld vnto Henrie;
assuring him vppon his honour, that if hee would
abyde but sixe dayes at the most, hee would giue him
battaile; and eyther remooue the siege, or loose his
life.
            The King was well pleased with these tidings, and rewarded
the Herauld with a gowne of silke and a chaine of
gould, and promised him in the worde of a Prince, to abide

there and expect the gouernour, during the tyme by him
prefixed.
            The sixe dayes passed, almoste sixe tymes ouer and
no more newes was heard of the Gouernour, eyther
by presence or by messenger. Winter came on, and
victuaile fayled, the Country was colde and fruitelesse,
and it rayned euery day in great aboundance: so that
partly by hunger, partlye by distemperature of the weather,
the Soldiers began to dye of the Flixe; it is verie
like that these accidentes stayed the Gouernour from
performing his promise, for pollicy was against it, to hazard
his men in the fielde, when winter and want, two
forceable foes, had giuen the charge vpon his enemyes:
certaine it is, that they mooued the King to remooue his
fiege, and to depart out of Scotland, without any battaile
or skirmish offred.
            Both the Wardens of the Marches were all this time in
Scotland with the King: vpon which aduantage the Scots
did breake into Northumberland, and burnt certaine townes
in Bamborough shire. The English men were speedilie
vp in armes; but the Scottes more speedily made theyr
returne, or else no doubt they had been met with and encountered.
            Agayne when King Henry had discharged his armie,
the Scottes beeing desirous not so much of lyfe as of reuenge,
made a sodayne roade into England, vnder the
conduct of Sir Thomas Halsbarton of Dirleton, and Sir
Patricke Hebburne of Hales: but all the harme which
they wrought dyd rather waken then weaken the Englishmen:
and they themselues were somewhat encouraged,
but nothing enryched, by that whych they
got.
            Not long after, Sir Patricke Hebburne, beeing lifted vp
in desire and hope, resolued to vndertake a greater

enterprise: the people, which are 
                  〈…〉
                by prosporous
successe, in great companies resorted to him; but hee
was loath to haue more fellowes in the spoyle, then hee
thought should neede in the daunger: therefore with a competent
armie of the men of Loughdeane, he inuaded a Northumberland,
where hee made great spoile, and loaded his
Souldiours with prisoners and pray. There was no question
made what perill might bee in the returne▪ Therefore they
marched loosene and 
                  〈…〉
               , as in a place of great securitie,
not keeping themselues to their ensignes and order:
but the Earle of Northumberlands Vice-warden, and order
Gentlemen of the borders in good arraye, set vppon them at
a towne in Northumberland called 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪ The scottes
rallied as well as the soddainnesse did serue, and valliantlie receiued
the charge; so that the battaile was sharpe and 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
and continued a good time, with great mortalitie. In the
ende the enemyes ranckes grew thinne, as being rather confusedly
shuffled together, then orderly and firmlie compacted:
and when the Vice-warden 
                  〈◊〉
                them weake in the
shock, and yeelding vnder his hand, with a companie which
purposel
                  •
               e reteyned about him for sodaine disp
                  •
               tene
                  •
                and
chaunces of warre, he flercely charged and disordered them.
Sir Patricke Hebburne being cleane destitute both of counsaile
and courage, ranne vp and downe from one place to
another, commaunding many things, and presently forbidding
them againe; and the lesse of force his directions
were, the oftener did hee change them: anone (as it happeneth
in lost and desperate cases) euerye man became a
commaunder, and none a putter in execution: so the ranket
loosed and brake, and could not bee reunited, the victor
hoatly pursuing the aduantage. Then might you haue 
                  〈◊〉
               
a grieuous spectacle, pursuing, killing, wounding and taking,
and killing those that were taken, when better were offered:
euery where weapons, and dead bodyes, and mangled lim
                  •
               ,

laye scattered: and sometimes in those that were slaine, appeared
at their death both anger and valure. Sir Patricke
Hebburne thought of nothing lesse then eyther fleeing or
yeelding, but thrusting among the thickest of his enemyes,
honourably ended his life. Many other of his linage, and
the flower of all Loughdeane were likewise slaine. There

                  〈…〉
               
side no great number was slaine; and those
of no great seruice and degree. And
with these troubles the first
yeere of King Henrie the
fourth ended.
(⸫)
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            LONDON.
Printed by Iohn VVolfe, and are
to be sold at his shop in Popes
head alley, neere the
Exchange.
1599.
            
         
      
   