
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ AN AETHIOpian Hiſtorie written in Greeke by Helidorus: very vvittie and pleaſaunt, Engliſhed by Thomas Vnderdoune.
            With the Argumente of euery Booke, ſette before the whole VVoorke.
            Jmprinted at London, by Henrie VVykes, for Fraunces Goldocke, dwellinge in Powles Churcheyarde, at the ſigne of the greene Dragon.
         
         
            
            
            
               TO THE RIGHT HOnorable Edward Deuiere, Lord Boulbecke, Earle of Oxenford, Lord greate Chamberlayne of Englande: Thomas Vnderdowne, wiſheth longe and bleſſed life, with encreaſe of Honour.
            
            
               
                  AS they ſomewhat be more preciſe, than I (righte Honorable Earle) whiche woulde haue noble menne, and ſuche as beare ſway, and rule in the weale Publike, to be in all manner of Sciences greate Artiſtes, and altogether Bookiſhe: ſo doo I farre diſſent from them, that woulde contrarily haue them vtterly vnlettered, and flatte idiotes: for the Bookiſhe man buſily attendinge his owne ſtudy, cannot carefully yenough tender the ſtate. For ſuche is the propertie of knowledge, that it breadeth a contempt of all other thinges in reſpect of it ſelfe. As for the ignorant, it is moſte euident and plaine, that he can haue no manner of Gouernance, or ſkill of Regiment in his heade. The Greekes in all manner of knowledge, and Learninge,

did farre ſurmounte the Romanes, but the Romanes in adminiſtringe their ſtate, in warlike factes, and in common ſenſe were muche their Superiours: for the Greekes were wedded to theire learninge alone, the Romanes content with a mediocritie, applied them ſelues to greater thinges. I doo not denie, but that in many matters, I meane matters of learninge, a Noble man ought to haue a ſight: but to be to muche addicted that waye, I thinke is not good. Now of all knowledge fitte for a Noble Gentelman, I ſuppoſe the knowledge of Hiſtories is moſte ſeeminge. For furtheringe whereof, I haue Engliſhed a paſsing fine, and wittie Hiſtorie, written in Greeke by Heliodorus, and for righte good cauſe conſecrated the ſame to your Honorable Lordſhippe. For ſuch vertues be in your Honour, ſo hautie courage ioined with great ſkill, ſuche ſufficiency in learning, ſo good nature, and common ſenſe, that in your Honour is, I thinke, expreſſed the right patterne of a Noble Gentelman, whiche in my head I haue conceiued. It nothinge did diſmay me, or for that I was not knowen to your Honour, neither maye it ſeeme any raſhe attempte for that cauſe. For ſuche is the force of vertue, that ſhee maketh vs to loue, not onely our owne Countrie men by ſight vnknowen, but alſo Straungers,

whiche by Lande and Sea be ſeuered from vs. Therefore I beſeeche your Honour, fauourably to accepte this my ſmall trauaile in tranſlatinge Heliodorus, whome, if I haue ſo well tranſlated as he is woorthy, I am perſwaded, that your Honour will like very well of. Sure I am that of other tranſlatours he hath benne dedicated to mighty Kinges, and Princes. Therefore accept my good will (Honorable Earle) and if opportunitie ſhall ſerue hereafter, there ſhall greater thinges appeare vnder your Honours name. Almighty God geue you increaſe of Honour, and keepe, and defende, you for euer and euer.
            
               Your Honours moſte humble to commaunde,
Thomas Vnderdowne.
            
         
         
            
            
               The Contentes of the firſte Booke.
               
In it is declared the takinge of Theagenes and Cariclia, by Thiamis Captaine of the Theeues of Aegipte, and how they were brought into their Countrie, whiche is called the Paſture, where, in Thiamis his houſe they fell acquainted with Cnemon a Grecian, who telleth an excellent tale of his eſtate. After this is declared the takinge of Thyamis by Mitranes, and the burninge of the Ilande, and this did Nauſicles by a greate ſumme of monye, procure Mitranes Captayne of the watches to doo, becauſe Thermutes one of Thiamis his men, had taken from him a Louer of his named Thiſbe, whiche he brought from Athens.
            
            
               The Contentes of the Seconde Booke.
In this ſeconde Booke is contained the councelles of Theagenes and Cariclia, and the iourney of Cnemon, and Thermutes to ſeeke Thiamis. And howe by compoſition Cnemon came to Chemmis, where he mette with Calaſiris very ſorowfull, who telleth him a notable tale of his owne ill happe, and annexeth thereto the beginninge of the ſtory of the whole Booke, howe Caricles came by Cariclia, and howe Theagenes was ſente out of Theſſalia, to perfourme the Funerall of Pirrhus, Achilles his Sonne.
            
               The Contentes of the Thirde Booke.
In the thirde Booke is contained the maner of the Funeralles, and howe Theagenes fell in Loue with Cariclia, and ſhee with him, and the moane that Caricles made for her to Calaſiris.
            
            
               The Contentes of the Fourthe Booke.
In this fourthe Booke, is contayned the victory of Theagenes againſte Ormenes, and how by councell of Calaſiris he tooke Cariclia away, and what adoo was thereaboute in Delphi.
            
            
               
               The Contentes of the fifthe Booke.
In this fifthe Booke is conteined the ſeperation of Theagenes and Cariclia, and howe that Nauſicles the Merchante gotte her of Mitranes in ſteede of Thyſbe, and after he had brought her to his houſe, he deſired Calaſiris to tell him the Story of her and Theagenes, who proſequuteth it ſo farre, vntill he commeth to the great Slaughter, wherof mention is made in the firſte Booke.
            
               The Contentes of the ſixte Booke.
The ſixte Booke conteineth the Marriage of Cnemon to Nauſiclia, Nauſicles Daughter, and the viage of Calaſiris and Cariclia to ſeeke Theagenes at Beſſa: where they heare of an olde woman, that the Inhabitantes therof had ſlaine Mitranes, and reſcued Thiamis and Theagenes, and were gonne with them to Memphis, to helpe Thiamis to recouer againe his Prieſtehoode. The ſame olde woman that tolde them this tale, was a VVitche, and ſhewed before them parte of her cunninge by raiſinge againe her owne Sonne: and after, in their ſighte, receiued ſuche ende, as all her former life had deſerued.
            
               The Contentes of the ſeuenth Booke.
In the ſeuenthe Booke is ſette foorthe the Battaile betweene the twoo Brethren, Thiamis and Petoſiris for the Prieſthoode, and howe the ende was made betweene them by theire Father Calaſiris. At this Battaile Cariclia founde her Theagenes againe. Arſace falleth in loue with Theagenes, and is almoſte madde for deſire towarde him. Calaſiris dyeth, and his Sonne Thiamis ſucceedeth him. Achemenes is Eſpouſed to Cariclia: but he is defeated of the Marriage by Theagenes.
            
            
               The Contentes of the eighte Booke.
This Booke conteineth the warre, and cauſe thereof betweene Hidaſpes Kinge of Aethiopia, and Oroondates Lieutenante of Aegypte. Alſo the complainte that Achemenes
               
made to Oroondates of Arſace, with a commendation of Cariclia, and Theagenes to him: who ſendeth for them Bagoas, one of his Eunuches. But before he came, Theagenes was ſore tormented becauſe he would not conſent to Arſaces vnlawful deſire. Cariclia alſo becauſe ſhee was thought to hinder Arſaces pourpoſe, ſhould haue bene priuily poyſoned by Cybele, Arſaces Bawde: but the miſchiefe fell vpon her ſelfe. Mary Cariclia was accuſed therefore, and ſhould haue benne burned, but is woonderfully deliuered by vertue of a Pretious ſtoane called Pantarbe. Then commeth Bagoas, and taketh them away: for ſorrowe wherof, Arſace hangeth her ſelfe. After this, Bagoas, and they fall into the Foreriders of the Aethiopian Army, and are taken Priſoners, and carried to Hidaspes.
            
            
               The Contentes of the ninthe Booke.
This Booke conteineth the ſiege of Syene, in which was Oroondates, and the drowninge of the Countrye rounde about it by Hydaſpes, and the curteſie ſhewed to them which were in it when the Towne was geuen vp: then the falſhed of Oroondates by ſtealinge ſuddainely away to Elyphantina. After this is deſcribed the great Battaile betwene Hydaſpes and Oroondates, in whiche, Oroondates was ouercomme, and taken priſoner, and yet in the ende pardoned. After this Hydaſpes viewethe the Priſoners, and diſpoſeth them diuerſly.
            
               The Contentes of the tenth Booke.
This laſte Booke declareth howe Hydaſpes was receiued into his owne Countrie, and the manner of the Sacrifices whiche he did: then the acknowledginge of Cariclia to be his Daughter, and the enterteining of the ſtrange Embaſſadours, with certaine Actiue feates of Theagenes. After this is Theagenes aſſured to Cariclia by Hydaſpes, and they are made Prieſtes, he the Sunnes, and ſhee the Moones, and doo Sacrifice. Then goe they to Meroe, where the ſecreter thinges apperteininge to the Marriage are finiſhed.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            The Aethiopian Hiſtory of Heliodorus.
            
            
               The firſte Booke.
               
                  
                     AS ſoone as the daye appeared, and the Sunne began to ſhine on the toppes of the Hilles, Menne, whoſe cuſtome was to liue by rapine and violence, ranne to the toppe of a Hil that ſtrecheth towarde the mouth of Nylus, called Heracleot: where ſtanding a while, they vewed the Sea vnderneath them, and when they had looked a good ſeaſon a farre of into the ſame, and coulde ſée nothinge that might put them in hope of praie, they caſte there eies ſomewhat neare the ſhoare: where as a ſhippe, tied with Cables to the maine lāde, laie at roade, without ſaylers, and full fraughted: whiche thinge, they who were a farre of might eaſilie coniecture: for the burden cauſed the ſhippe to draw water within the bourdes of the decke. But on the ſhoare euery place was full of men, ſome quite deade, ſome halfe dead, ſome whoſe bodies yet panted, & plainely declared that there had benne a battell fought of late. But there coulde be ſéene no ſignes or tokens of any iuſt quarell, but there ſéemed to be an ill and vnluckie banket, and thoſe that remained, obtained ſuch ende. For the tables were furniſhed with delicate diſhes, ſome whereof laie in the handes of thoſe that were ſlaine, beinge in ſtéede of weapons to ſome of them in the battaile, ſo ſuddenly begunne. Other couered ſuche as crope vnder them to hide them ſelues, as they thought. Beſides the cuppes were ouerthrowen and fell out of the handes, either of them that dranke, or thoſe, who had in ſteade of ſtones vſed them. For that ſuddaine miſchiefe wrought newe deuiſes, and taught

them in ſteade of weapons, to vſe there pottes. Of thoſe who lay there, one was wounded with an Axe, an other was hurte with the ſhelles of Fiſhes, whereof on the ſhoore there was great plētie: another was all to cruſhed with a leuer, many burnte with fire, and the reſte by diuerſe other meanes, but moſt of all were ſlaine with arrowes. To be briefe, God ſhewed, a wonderfull ſight in ſo ſhorte time, bruynge bloud with wine, ioyninge battayle with banketting, minglinge indifferently ſlaughters with drinkinges, and killing with quaffinges, prouidinge ſuche a ſight for the Théeues of Egypte to pauſe at. For they when they had geuen theſe thinges the lookinge on a good while from the Hill, coulde not vnderſtande what that ſight meante, for aſmuch as they ſawe ſome ſlaine there, but the Conquerours coulde they ſée no where, a manifeſt Ʋictorie but no ſpoiles taken away a ſhippe without Mariners onely, but as concerninge other thinges vntouched, as if ſhée had bene kepte with a garde of many men, and laie at roade in a ſaulfe Harboure. But for all that they knewe not what that thing meante, yet they had reſpecte to their Lucre and gaine. When therefore they had determined that them ſelues were the Ʋictors, they drewe neare vnto the ſame: and not beynge now farre from the ſhippe, & thoſe that were ſlaine, they ſawe a ſight more perplexed then the reſte a greate deale. A maide endued with excellent beawtie, whiche alſo might be ſuppoſed a Goddeſſe, ſatte vpon a Rocke, who ſéemed not a littell to be gréeued with that preſent miſchance, but for all that of excellent courage: ſhe had a garlande of Lawrell on her head, a Quiuer on her backe, and in her lefte hande a Bowe, leaninge vpon her Thighe with her other hande, and lookinge downewarde, without mouinge of her head, beholdinge a certaine yonge Man a good waie of, the whiche was ſore wounded, and ſéemed to lifte vp him ſelfe, as if he had be wakened out of a deade ſléepe almoſte of deathe it ſelfe?

yet was he in this caſe of Singuler beawtie, and for all that his chéekes were be ſprinkled with bloud, his whitenes did appeare ſo muche the more. He was conſtrained for gréefe to wéepe, yet cauſed he the maide to looke ſtedfaſtly vpon him, and theſe thinges muſte they néedes ſée becauſe they ſawe her. But as ſoone as he came to him ſelfe a littel, he vttered theſe woordes very faintly. And arte thou ſafe in déede my ſwéete harte, ꝙ he? or els haſte thou with thy death by any miſchaunce augmented this ſlaughter? thou canſt not, no not by deathe be ſeperated from me. But of the fruition of thy ſighte and thy life, dothe al mine eſtate depende. Yea in you (anſweared the Maide) doth my whole Fortune conſiſte, whether I ſhall liue or die, and for this cauſe, you ſée (ſhewinge a knife in her hande) this was hitherto ready. But onely for your recouering was reſtrained, and as ſoone as ſhe had ſaide thus, ſhée lepte from the ſtoane, & they who weare on the Hill, as well for wonder, as alſo for the feare they had, as if they had benne ſtriken with lightninge, ranne euery man to hide them in the buſſhes there beſide. For ſhe ſéemed to them a thinge of greater price, and more heauenly, when ſhée ſtoode vprighte, and her Arrowes with the ſudden mouinge of her bodie, gaue a claſhe on her ſhoulders, her apparell wrought with Goulde gliſtered againſte the Sunne, and her heare vnder her Garlande, blowen aboute with the winde, couered a greate parte of her backe. The Théeues were greatly afraide of theſe thinges, the rather for that they vnderſtoode not what that ſhould meane which they ſawe. Some of them ſaide in déede that it was a Goddeſſe and Diana, other ſaide it was Iſis, whiche was honored there: but ſome of them ſaide it was ſome Prieſte of the Goddes, that repleniſhed with diuine furie had made the greate ſlaughter whiche there appeared, and thus euery man gaue his verdite, becauſe they knew not the trothe. But ſhée haſtely runninge to the yonge man, embraced him, wepte

for ſorrowe, kiſſed him, and made pitifull moane, beinge very carefull for his ſauftie, whiche thinge when the Egyptians had ſéene, they turned there opinions: And are theſe, ſaide they, the woorkes of a Goddeſſe? woulde a Goddeſſe kiſſe a dead man with ſuche compaſſion? they determined therefore with them ſelues, that it was beſt to take harte of grace, and goe knowe what the matter was in déede. When they had therefore encouraged eche other a little, they ranne downe, and founde the Mayde buſie in dreſſinge the younge mannes woundes, and cominge behinde her ſodainely ſtoode ſtill, and durſte neither ſpeake nor doo any thing more for there liues. Whē ſhée harde the ſounde of ſomewhat aboute her, and their ſhadowes before her eies, ſhée lifted her ſelfe vp a litle, and looked backe, but ſtouped againe ſtraight, no whitte abaſhed to ſée the Théeues in harnes, but applied her ſelfe onely to binde vp his woundes that lay before her. Sutche is the force of earneſt deſire and true loue, it deſpiſeth all outwarde chaunces, be thei pleaſant or otherwiſe, onely beholdinge that whiche it loueth, and thereaboute beſtoweth all diligence and trauell. But when the Théeues paſſed by, and ſtoode before her, and ſéemed that they would enterpriſe ſomewhat, ſhée lifted her ſelf vp againe, and beholdinge them blacke coloured, & euell fauoured, ſaid, if (ꝙ ſhée) you be the Spirites of thoſe who are ſlaine here, you trouble vs wrongfully, for moſte of you were ſlaine with yo
                     ••
                   owne handes. As for vs, if we flewe any, we did it 
                     〈◊〉
                   in our owne defence, to repelle the violence whiche was profered to my Virginitie, but if you be men aliue, it ſéemeth you are Théeues, as maie be déemed by the time you come in, you maie doo vs a pleaſure to ridde vs from theſe preſente miſeries, and by deathe to finiſhe this our vnhappie Tragedie. Thus did ſhée ſorrowfully lamente, but they not vnderſtandinge what ſhée ſaide, leafte them there, accountinge their owne inūrmitie, a ſufficient garde to kéepe them,

and haſted to the Shippe, and brought out that whiche was in the ſame: euery man bearinge out as muche as he could of Gould, Siluer, Precious ſtoanes, and Silke, not regarding other thinges whereof therein was great ſtoare. And when they thought, they had enough, and there was ſuche plentye as mighte ſéeme to ſatiſfie the Théeues deſire, layinge their praye on the ſhoare, fell to diuiſion of the ſame, not accordinge to the woorthe and value of that they had, but contented them ſelues with equalitie of waight. As for the yonge Man & the Mayde, thei would take order for them afterward. In the meane time an other companie of Théeues, wherof twoo Horſemen were Captaines, came towarde them: whiche thing as ſoone as thoſe ſawe that had benne there before, not of courage to ſturre againſt thē, ranne away as faſt as thei could, without taking with thē any parte of the Praye, that they might geue their enemie no occaſion to purſue them. For they were in number but tenne, and thoſe who came vppon them, were thrée times as many. And nowe was the Mayde a priſoner againe, but yet, not in durance at all. The Robbers, although they haſted to the ſpoyle: yet partely, bicauſe they knewe not what thoſe thinges ſignified whiche they ſawe, and partely alſo for feare ſtaied them ſelues a while, thinkinge that the former ſlaughter had benne made, by the Théeues that had benne there before. But when they behelde the Mayde, though ſtraungly, yet ſéemely apparailled, whiche deſpiſed thoſe daungers that hanged ouer her head, as though they had benne none, and altogeather imployed her trauell, to eaſe the yonge Mans woundes, & tooke his gréefe as heauily as her owne ſorowe, they were not onely ſtroken with her beawtie and hawtines of minde, but wonderfully moued with the cumlines of the wounded Mans perſon. Suche was the ſéemelines of his countenance, and taleneſſe of his ſtature, euen as he laye along afore them. For by this time was he a little amended,

and his perſonage had recouered his olde handſomeneſſe againe. At length after they had behelde them a good while, and he drewe neare who was theire Maiſter, he laide hande on the Mayde, and bad her ariſe and folowe him. Shée, although ſhée vnderſtoode not what he ſaide, yet coniecturinge what he willed her to doo, drewe the yonge Man with her, otherwiſe ſhée woulde not onely not departe from him, but pointinge with a knife to her harte, threatned that ſhée woulde kill her ſelfe, if they carried them not bothe togeathers. Which thinge, when the Maiſter partly by her talke, but more plainely by her geſture, vnderſtoode, hoping alſo to vſe his further helpe in great affaires if he might recouer his health againe, alighted himſelf from his Horſe, & cōmaunded his hraneſbearer likewiſe ſo to doo, & ſette his priſoners on them, Commaundinge the reſt when they had gathered vp the praye to folowe them, him ſelfe like a lackie ranne by theire ſide and ſtaied them vpright, if by meanes of their infirmitie they were in daunger to fal. Surely this déede was not without muche glorie, for he, who was their Maiſter, waited vppon them, and he who tooke them priſoners, was contente to ſerue them. Suche is the appearance of very Nobilitie, and the force of cumlines, which canne ſubdue the diſpoſition of Théeues, and bringe vnder the wilde and ſauage. When they had gone aboute a ſixtene furlonges, by the Sea ſide, they turned downe ſtraight to the foote of the Hill, and left the Sea, on their right hande. And hauing gone ouer the toppe of the ſaid Hill, they haſted to a Poole that laye on the other ſide thereof, the maner whereof was thus. The whole place is called the Paſture of the Egyptians, about the whiche is a lowe Valeye, which receiueth certaine exundations of Nylus, by meanes whereof it becommeth a Poole, and is in the midſte very deape, aboute the brimmes whereof are mariſhes, or ſennes. For looke, as the ſhoare is to the Sea, ſuche is the fennes to euery greate Poole. In

that place haue the Théeues of Egypte, howe many ſo euer they bée, their common Wealthe. And for as much as there is but a litle land without the water, ſome liue in ſmal Cotages, other in Boates, that they vſe as wel for theire houſe, as alſo for paſſage ouer the Poole. In theſe doo theire women ſerue them, and if néede require, be alſo brought to bedde. When a Childe is borne firſte, they let him ſucke his mothers milke awhyle: but after thei féede him with Fiſhes taken in the Lake, and roſted in the hoate Sunne. And when they perceiue that he beginnes to goe, they tie a corde about his legges, and ſu
                     •
                  
                  him but onely to goe aboute the Boate, teachinge him euen at the firſt after a new faſhion to goe by a haulter. And thus what rudeſbie ſo euer is borne and bred in the Poole, accounteth the ſame his countrie, and a ſufficient defence, for the ſaftie of Théeues. And for that cauſe all ſuche people come thether very faſte, for they all doo vſe the water in ſtéede of a wall. Moreouer the great plenty of Réede that groweth there in the moorie grounde, is in manner as good as a Bulwarke vnto them. For by deuiſinge many crooked: & comberous waies, thorough which the paſſages to them by ofte vſe are very eaſy, but to others harde, they haue made it a ſure defence, that by no ſodeine inuaſion they maye be endamaged. And thus muche as touchinge the Lake, and thoſe Roges that inhabite the ſame. About the ſunne ſetting commeth home theire Captaine with all his retinew. Then tooke they the yonge couple frō their Horſes, and laide their praye aboorde. Certaine Boates, and the reſte of the Robbers that taried at home whiche was a greate ſorte, ranne to méete the Captaine from out euery parte of the Fenne, and welcomed him as if he had benne theire Kinge. But when they conſidered the multitude of the ſpoyles that they had wonne, and ſawe the beawtie of the Mayde to be ſo heauenly a thinge, they geaſſed that their companions had robbed ſome Churche, & that they had brought

awaie the Prieſte of the Goddes, or rather the liuely picture of the Goddeſſe her ſelfe. And this they coniectured to the Mayde, bicauſe they knewe not what had benne donne. And therefore they gratulated theire Captaine in hartie wiſe, for his valiante exploite, and ſo brought him into his owne houſe, whiche was an Ilande, farre from the reſte, ſeparated to his onely vſe, and a fewe other, who moſte commonly vſed to kéepe him company. Whither after he was broughte, he commaunded the other to departe euery man to his owne houſe, charginge them the nexte daie all to wayte vppon him. Him ſelfe with a fewe other that taried with him, after they had made a ſhorte ſupper, deliuered the yonge folkes to the cuſtodie, of a Grecian (whome he had taken a fewe daies before, that he might be their Interpreter) lettinge them haue a corner of his owne houſe, not farre from his lodginge, with commaundemente, as wel diligently to ſée the wounded yonge Man, as curiouſly to looke to the Mayde, that ſhée by no meanes ſhoulde be anoyed. But he, what with his former trauel the daie before, and alſo with care of his preſent affaires, fell a fléepe. And when al was whiſt in the mariſhe, and euery man at reſte, the Maide tooke that occaſion, and abſence of men, to be a fyt time, to lament and waile, and the rather for that in the night, ſhée coulde neither ſée or heare any thinge, that might comforte her, but contrariewiſe moue her to ſorowe: when therefore with her ſelfe ſecretely ſhée had wailed alone (for ſhée was by the Captaines commaundement ſeparated from companie, and layde in a ſimple bedde,) and wept very bitterly. Apollo (ſaide ſhée) howe much more gréeuous puniſhement doeſt thou take of vs then wée haue deſerued. Haſt thou not benne ſufficiently reuenged on vs, with that, that is paſte? For as much as wée are farre from our friendes and kinſfolkes, and that we were taken by Pyrates, and ſubiecte to ſixe hundred daungers more by Sea, but that nowe againe we

muſte on the lande fall into the handes of Théeues and Robbers? beſide who knoweth wither any thinge worſe is like to light vppon vs? when wilt thou make an ende? if in deathe, that ſhalbe voide of Iniurie. Oh that deathe woulde like me well: but rather then any man ſhoulde filthely knowe me, whiche Theagenes neuer did, truely with halter I woulde ende my life, referringe my ſelfe pure and chaſte (as hitherto I haue donne) euen vnto deathe, and thereby gaine a bewtifull Epitaphe for my ſinguler Virginitie, and no Iudge ſhalbe ſo cruell as thou. While ſhée ſpake thus, Theagenes willed her to be contente, and ſaide: Mine owne deare harte and onely ioye Eariclea, ſeaſe youre mourninge, I knowe you haue iuſte cauſe to complaine, but in youre thus dooinge, you diſpleaſe God a greate deale more then you thinke, neither haue wée néede to prouoke God to wrathe, but rather to praye for that whiche is mightier, muſte with Praiers, and not with accuſacion be appeaſed. You geue me in déede good Counſell (ꝙ ſhée) but I praye thée tell me howe you fare: Better (ſaide he) then I did yeſternight, ſince this yonge man trimmed my woūdes, wherby the burninge heate of them is wel cooled. Yea (ꝙ he who had the charge to looke to them) in the morning you ſhal ſée they ſhalbe in better caſe, for I wil prouide ſuche an hearbe for you, that within thrée dreſſinges ſhal heale vp your wounde. And this I haue proued trewe by experience, for if any that were vnder this Capitaine ſince I was taken priſoner, in any conflict happened to be wounded, he neuer néeded many daies to be cured. For that I am greatly moued with your eſtate, you néede not maruell at al, for you ſéeme to be in as ill caſe as I, & I haue the more compaſſion on you for that you be Grecians, becauſe alſo I my ſelfe am a Grecian borne. A Grecian, Oh immortal God, cried they out ſodenly for ioie, a Grecian in déede bothe tongue & countrie. Hereafter we truſt to haue ſome reſpite from our miſhaps. But what muſt

wée calle you, ſaide Theagenes? Cnemon anſweared he. Of what parte of Greece ſaide Theagenes? Of Athens anſweared he. And howe came you here, ſaide Theagenes? Peace I praie you (ꝙ he) & aſke me that queſtiō no more, let vs leaue that to ſuch as write Tragedies. Neither at this time woulde I gladly encreaſe your ſorrowes, with repeting mine, beſides that, the night is ſo farre ſpent, that the reſte would not ſerue to tell you the ſame, and wée haue greate néede to take reſte, and ſléepe after our greate trauel. But when they would not ceaſe, but were ſtil very inſtant to haue me tel the ſame, accompting it a greate comforte, to heare any man haue as ill lucke as they had them ſelues, Cnemon beganne in this ſorte. My Fathers name was Ariſtippus, he was borne inCnemon his excellent tale. 
                  Athens, one of the vpper Senate, as riche as any Comoner in the Cittie, he, after the deceaſe of my Mother applied his minde to Marrie againe, thinkinge it an vnreaſonable thinge for me, his onely Sonnes ſake, ſtill to be of an vncertaine and doubtful minde. He dothe therfore bringe home a little woman ſomewhat fine, but paſſinge malicious, named Demeneta, as ſoone as ſhée was Maried, ſhée reclaimed my Father al to her owne lure, & made him doo what ſhée liſte, entiſing the olde Man with her bewtie, & was very curiouſe in many other pointes, for if any woman euer knew how to make a man madde of her, ſhée was better ſkilled in that Arte, then any man woulde thinke, but eſpecially when my Father wente foorthe, ſhée would be ſorrowfull, and renne to him when he came home, and blame him mutche for his longe tarriynge, and not ſticke to tell him, that ſhée woulde haue died, if he had taried neuer ſo little longer: At euery woorde woulde ſhée imbrace him, and moiſte her kiſſes with teares, with whiche meanes my Father was ſo bewitched, that he neuer was well, but when he either had her in his Armes, or els looked vppon her: aboue all other, ſhée woulde haue mée in her ſighte, as if I hadde

benne her owne Sonne, by this meanes alſo makinge Ariſtippus to loue her the better. Sometimes would ſhée kiſſe me, oftentimes woulde ſhée wiſhe, that ſhée might paſtime her ſelfe with me, whereof I was well content,His honeſt diſpoſition. miſtruſtinge nothinge leſſe, then that ſhée wente about, maruelinge alſo that ſhée bare ſutche a Motherly affection towarde me. But when ſhée came to me more wantonly, and that her kiſſes were more hote then beſéemed an honeſt woman, and her countenance paſſed modeſtie, then many thinges cauſed me to ſuſpecte her, therefore I conueyed my ſelfe awaie, & woulde nothinge regarde her faire woordes. I will lette other thinges paſſe, whiche would be to longe to tell, by what meanes ſhée wente aboute to winne me, what profers ſhée made, howe ſometime ſhee would call me her Prety boye, ſometime her Sweete harte, then her Heyre, after, her owne Life, laſte of all to theſe her faire names, would ſhée adde many intiſementes with eſpeciall conſideration what I liked beſte: ſo that in graue affaires ſhée woulde behaue her ſelfe like my Mother, but if ſhée liſte to dally, then would ſhée manifeſtly declare her loue. At lengthe ſuche a chance befell, when Pallas highe feaſte called Quinquatria
                  The Athenians feaſte called Quinquatria. was celebrated, on whiche the Athenians were accuſtomed to conſecrate a ſhippe by lande, and I (for I was not then ſixtene yéeres olde) had Songe the vſuall Hymne of her praiſe, and donne other Ceremonies, and Kites due to the ſame, euē as I was attyred in my robes. & my Crowne on my head, I came home, ſhée, as ſoone as ſhée eſpied me, was by and by diſtraught of her wittes, and not able with pollicie to couer her loue any lenger, but for very deſire ranne to me, and tooke me in her Armes, and ſaide, Oh my younge Hippolitus, and my deare Theſeus? In what caſe was I then thinke you, who euen nowe am a ſhamed to tell you the ſame. That nighte my Father ſupped in the Caſtell, and as it often

happeneth in ſuche companie, and publique reſort, he determined to lie there all night: that night ſhée came to me, and ſtriued to haue an vnlawful thinge at my hand. But I with all my powre withſtoode her, and regarded, neither her flatteringe woordes, nor faire promiſes, no, nor her threateninges, wherefore, fetching a ſighe fromDemeneta inuentethe howe to greeue Cnemon. the bottom of her harte, for that time departed, but within twoo nightes after, like a miſchieuous queane ſhée ſought all meanes poſſible to enterrupte me. And firſte of all, ſhée kepte her bedde, and when my Father came home, and aſked her how ſhe fared, made him anſweare, that ſhée was ſicke, but when he was very importunate, and deſirous to knowe what ſhée ailed, The goodly yonge man (ſaide ſhée) that loued me ſo well, Sonne to vs bothe, whome I (the Goddes knowe) loued a greate deale better then you, when he perceiued by certaine tokens that I was greate with childe by you, whiche thinge I conceaued from you (vntill I knewe the certeintic my ſelfe) and waytinge for youre abſence, when I counſailed him, as my manner was, and perſwaded him to leaue hauntinge of Harlottes, and too much drinkinge (whiche thinges I knewe well ynoughe. But woulde neuer tell you of them, leaſte thereby I ſhoulde incurre the cruell ſuſpicion of a Stepmother with you) while I ſaie, I talked with him of theſe things alone, no more but he and I, leaſte he ſhoulde be aſhamed, I will not tell the worſe, for I am abaſhed ſo to doo, nor in what manner he reuiled bothe you and me, laſtely ſpurned me on the belly, and hath cauſed me to be in ſuche caſe as ye ſée. As ſoone as he hearde this, he ſaide nothinge, norAriſtippus 
                        •
                     rathe againſt Cnemon. aſked me no queſtions, neither gaue me leaue to ſpeake for my ſelfe, but perſwadinge him ſelfe, that ſhée, who loued me ſo well, woulde by no meanes belie me, as ſoone as he founde me in a certaine corner of the houſe, boxed me with his fiſtes, and callinge his ſeruantes togeather,

ſcourged me with roddes, and woulde not ſuffer me to knowe (whiche al menne doo) why I was cruelly beten, when his anger was wel cooled, and he came to him ſelfe againe, I ſaide to him, Father, yet nowe at length I pray you tell mée, why I haue had thus many ſtripes, wherewith he much more incenſed, Oh cleanly deſembler (ſaide he) he would know his owne miſdéede of me, he wente in againe to Demeneta, but ſhée not content with this, deuiſedVVeemēs wrath neuer hath ende. ſuche another ſhifte againſte me. Shée had a mayde called Thisbe, which could playe wel on the Virginalles, and was otherwiſe faire, and a very propre wenche. Her ſhe made calle for me, and commaunded her to loue me, & by and by ſhée did ſo in déede, and where ſhée refuſed, oftentimes attemptinge her before, nowe allured me with countenaunce, beckes, and many other ſignes. Nowe was I ſomewhat prowde, for that of a ſudden I was becomme bewtiful, and in déede on a night, when ſhée came to my bedde, thought no ſcorne to make her roome, ſhée liked her interteinement ſo well, that ſhée came againe, and continually haunted my bedde, at length, when I gaue her counſel to vſe circumſpection in this mater, and take héede that hir Miſters found her not with me. Cnemon (ſayde ſhée) you ſéeme to be too ſimple, if you counte it a daungerous mater, for me beinge a bonde mayde, bought with money, to be taken a bedde with you, what pouniſhement thinke you her woorthy, that profeſſinge her ſelfe a frée woman, and lawfully married to a huſbande, and yet plaieth the naughty packe? Peace (ꝙ I) I cannnot beléeue that. Yes (ſaide ſhée) if you wil, I wil deliuer the Adoulteroure to you, euen in the déede dooinge. If you wil ſo doo (ꝙ I) you ſhal doo me a pleaſure. With al my hart (ſaid ſhe) not onely for your owne ſake, who haue benne iniured by hir tofore, but for mine alſo, who for that ſhée hathe me in Ielouſie, am vſed of her very extremely: wherefore, if thou be a man, apprehende him. I promiſed her I would ſo doo, and ſhée for that time

wente her waie, aboute thrée nightes after, ſhée came, & waked me out of my ſléepe, that an Adulter was come in, and that my Father vppon occaſion ſuddainely was gonne into the countrie, and he accordinge to the appointmente, was gonne to bedde to Demeneta, therefore it was erpediente for me to haſte me to be reuenged, and put on my ſwoorde, that the knaue mighte not eſcape. I did ſo, and takinge my ſworde in my hande, followed thoſe whiche carried a candle before, and wente to the beddechamber. When I came neare the doore, and perceiued the glimeringe of a candle through the ſliuers, and the doores lockte. Very angrie as I was, brake vp the doores, and ranne in crieinge out, where is thatCnemon decei
                     
                        •
                     ed by Thiſbe. ſame villaine, the woorthie louer of this chaſte Dame▪ Whiche when I had ſayde, I came to the bedde in minde to ſlea them bothe, but there with my Father, (O God) leapte out of the bedde, and fallinge on his knées, before me, ſaide, my Sonne, haue pittie vpon thy Father, ſpare his white heares, that hath brought thée vp. Wée haue donne thée wronge in déede, yet not ſo greate that therefore with deathe, thou ſhouldeſte be reuenged on me. Géeue not ſo much to thy wrathe, neither by thy Fathers bloude imbrewe thy handes, this with muche more ſpake my Father, humbly vpon his knées, deſiringe me to ſaue his life. But as I had ben ſtriken with a thonder boulte, ſtoode ſtill amaſed, and looked rounde aboute after Thisbe, who had, I knowe not howe, conueied her ſelfe awaie, neither had one woorde to ſaie, neither coulde I tel, what was beſte to doo, and in this caſe my ſworde fel out of my handes, which Demeneta ſtraight way caught vp, & my Father then out of daunger, laied handes vponCnemon bound
                        •
                     . me, and commaunded me to be bounde. Demeneta in the meane while many waies mouinge, and ſetting him on, did I not tell you this before (cried ſhée) that it was beſte to looke to the princokes: which woulde no doubt if time ſerued attempt ſomewhat. I looked in her face, and perceiued

her minde well yenough. And he anſweared, you tolde me in déede, but I beléeued you not. And thus was I in bondes, and he would not géeue me leaue to tel him, how the mater was handled. As ſoone as it was date, he brought me bounde, as I was, before the people, and ſtrewinge aſſhes on his heade, ſaide, I brought not vp my Sonne (Yée menne of Athens) to ſée him come to this ende, but truſtinge he would be a ſtaffe to ſtaie mine age vpon. As ſoone as he was borne, I brought him vp gentlemanlike,Ariſtippus Or
                        •
                     
                     tion againſt his sonne Cnemon. and ſet him to ſchoole, and when I had well placed him amonge our kinſfolkes, and written him in the number of other yonge menne, his equalles, and accordinge to the lawes of this Cittie, made him one of our Citizens: Laſtly, I leade not a very quiet life for his ſake, he hath not onely forgotten al theſe thinges, but alſo diuerſly iniured me, & beaten this woman, who accordinge to our Lawe is my ſecond wife. At length he came to me by night with a ſworde in his bande, and was no further from beinge a parricide, but that Fortune hindred him, & by a ſuddaine feare, his ſworde fel out of his hande, I flie to you, and tell you thereof. And althoughe by the Lawe I might with mine owne hande ſlea him, yet I woulde not: therefore remit I my whole cauſe to your diſcretion, thinking that I ſhal doo better, if I pouniſhe my Sonne, rather by publike Lawe, then priuate bloudeſhedde: and therewithall he weapt, ſo did Demeneta alſo, and fained her ſelfe to be very ſorrowfull for my miſhap. Callinge me an vnhappy Creature, as truely ſhée mighte, beinge in daunger to die before my naturall time, whome euill ſprites had ſturred againſt my Parentes. Not onely did ſhée ſo much outwardly lament, as ſhée teſtified the ſame with her teares, and as though her accuſation had benne true, with wéeping ſhée confirmed the ſame. And when I craued licence to ſpeake for my ſelf, the Scribe came to me, & propounded this ſtreight queſtiō. Whether I came to my Father, or not, wt a ſworde in my hand, I did (ꝙ I).

But I wil tell you, how therewith euery man cried out, & ſaied, that I ought not to ſpeake for my ſelf: wherefore,
                     
                        •
                     ewe friendes in extremitie. ſome iudged me woorthy to be ſtoned to death, other to be hanged, and ſome to be caſte hedlonge into the dungeon. Al this while that they weare conſultinge of my puniſhment, I cried out, oh my cruell ſtepmother, alas for my Stepmothers ſake, am I thus troubled, my Stepmother killeth me without Iudgemente, and many marked my woordes very well, and beganne to ſuſpecte as it was in déede, but for al that, at that time, could I not be hearde, ſuche was the tumult, and noyſe of the people, and when the voyces were reckned, thoſe, who condemned me to die, were a thouſande ſeuen hundred, whereof the one halfe woulde haue me ſtoned, the other caſte into the dungeon, the other, of whome was aboute a thouſande creditinge ſomewhat the ſuſpicion that they had conceiued of my Stepmother, gaue ſentence that I ſhoulde be banniſhed for euer, yet thoſe preuailed, for although they were fewer then the whole number of the reſte, yet foraſmuche as the other voices differed, ſeuerally compared with euery one alone, a thouſande was the greater number, and thus was I banniſhed from my Fathers houſe, & Natiue countrie. And for al that, yet was not Demeneta vnpouniſhed, but howe, you ſhal hereafter knowe. Now wée muſte fall to ſléepe, for it is farre in the nighte, & you haue néede to take a great deale of eaſe. Nay ſaide Theagenes, you ſhall more greue vs, if you telle vs not howe this miſchiefous woman was pouniſhed. Sith you wil néedes knowe, then ſaide Cnemon, geue eare, I in ſuche caſe as I was, after I was abſolued, came to the hauen,He telleth foorth and findinge a ſhippe ready to departe, ſayled to Egnia, for I knewe I had ſome kinneſfolkes there by my mothers ſide, when I arriued there and had founde thoſe I ſought for, at the firſte, I liued pleaſantly ynough there, aboute a twentie daies after, runninge aboute as I was woonte to doo, I walked downe to the hauen, and beholde

a barke was within kenninge. I ſtaied there a little, and deuiſed with my ſelfe whence that barke ſhoulde come, and what manner of people ſhould be in her. The bridge was ſcante wel placed, when one leapte out, and ranne, & imbraced me (his name was Charias, one of my companions,) and ſaide Cnemon, I bringe thee mery tidinges,Charias bringeth Cnemon 
                        〈◊〉
                      of Demencias Death. nowe arte thou wel reuenged vpon thine Enimie, Demeneta is deade. Charias ſayde, welcome, but why doo you not tell me theſe ioyfull newes, but paſſe ouer them, as if they were not needefull to be knowen, I praye tell me the manner of this reuenge. Surely I feare mutche that ſhée died not as other folkes doo, neither eſcaped ſhee ſuche deathe, as well ſhee had deſerued. Iuſtice quothThough Iuſtice deferreth longe, yet ſhee ſtriketh ſoare at laſte. 
                  Charias, hathe not vtterly foreſaken vs, accordinge to Heſiodus minde. But althoughe ſhée wincke a while vpon the miſdéedes of menne, and prolonge the Reuenge a good ſeaſon, yet althoughe ſhée caſteth a terrible eye vpon ſutche offendours, who alſo hathe taken iuſte pouniſhemente of the miſcheiuous Demeneta, neither was any thinge either ſaide or donne, whereto by Thisbe, for our olde acquaintaunce, I was not made priuie. After thine vnhappy Father had procured thineAriſtippus is ſorowful for the loſſe of his Sonne. vniuſt banniſhement, repentinge of that he had donne, conueied him ſelfe to a certaine ſolitarie manoure of his, from the companie of menne into the countrie, and there liued eatinge, (as the Prouerbe ſaithe) his owne harte out. But ſhée ſtraight waie became madde almoſte, andDemeneta loued Cnemon better when he was gonne▪
                   with more hotte deſire loued thée abſente, neither at any time ſeaſed ſhée from ſorrowe, although ſhee lamented thy chaunce, but rather in déede her owne miſhappe, (and oh Cnemon, by pretie Boye, daie and nighte woulde ſhée crie) callinge thée her owne life, in ſo muche, that when wéemen, or her acquaintance came to viſit, and comforte her, they wondred greately, that ſhée a Stepmother, ſhoulde beare ſutche motherly affection towarde thée, but ſhée woulde make them aunſweare,

that it was a greater griefe to her, then, that by any comfortable woordes it might be aſſwaged, and that fewe of them knewe what a coreſey it was to her hart, and when ſhée came againe to her ſelfe, ſhée woulde muche accuſeDemeneta accuſeth Thiſbe. 
                  Thisbe, in that ſhée had not ſerued her well: Oh howe ready arte thou (woulde ſhée ſaie) to doo miſchiefe, who haſte not nowe helped me in my loue, but rather cauſed me to loſe, in the turninge of an hande, my moſte ioye, neither grauntedſt thou me any time to chaunge my minde: and therewith gaue manifeſte tokens, that ſhée woulde doo her ſomme harme. Shée perceſuinge her to be very wrothe, and almoſte ouercomme with ſorrowe, & prepared to doo ſomme greate miſchiefe to her, beinge ſet on, aſwel with angre, as loue, determined to preuēt her, and by beguilinge her, to prouide for her owne ſafetie. Wherefore ſhée entred in to her, and ſaide, what a doo is this Miſters? And why doo you accuſe thus your mayde, for my parte I haue alwaies heretofore donne, and euen now alſo did as you commaunded me. If any thing happened not accordinge to your minde, you muſte aſcribe that to Fortune, and if nowe alſo you will commaunde me to diuiſe ſomme remedy for your preſent ſorrow, you ſhall eaſily perceiue, you ſhall not wante my good will. What remedy (replied ſhe) is there poſſible to be founde, ſéeinge he, who canne doo the ſame, is by diſtance of place ſeparated from me, and the vnhoped for lenitie of thoſe, that gaue ſentence of him, hathe killed me? For if he had benne ſtoaned, then alſo in one, had benne quenched, & deade the blaſinge flames of my burninge deſire. For that, whoſe hope is paſte, is taken from the harte, & that whiche is looked for no more, cauſeth gréeued mindes to intermit all manner of ſorrowe. Nowe me thinketh I ſéeTokens of a guilty conſciēce him, and in his banniſhement heare him, how he caſteth in my téethe the vniuſt guiles, that I enſnared him with, as a thinge ſhamefully donne, ſo that I bluſſhe to ſpeake to him: ſommetime me thinketh, he commes towarde me,

and I ſhall enioye him: ſommetime I determined to goe towarde him, in what coaſte of the worlde ſo euer he be. Theiſe thinges ſette me on fire: theiſe thinges made me madde. But, oh yée Goddes, I haue as I deſerue, for why did I not rather with good wil ſpeake to winne him, then by crafte to compell him? Why did I not rather humbly praye him, then like an enimie perſecute him? He woulde not take me at the firſte, and by good reaſon, for I was an other mannes. He feared to defile his Fathers bedde, but happely either by time he might be allured to be more gentill vnto me. But I rude, and cruell, as thoughe I loued no man, and had authoritie to compell him, bicauſe he obeyed me not at the firſte, and for that he deſpiſed Demeneta, whom in bewtie he farre excelled, haue committed an heynous crime, but O my Thisbe,
                  Thiſbe with like crafte deceiueth her Miſiers, as before ſhee had Cnemon. what remedie is that, whiche thou wouldeſte me, or what is eaſy? Miſters (ꝙ ſhée) many menne thinke that Cnemon is gonne out of the Cittie, and Lande of Athens, as he was iudged to doo. But I knowe well ynoughe, who haue ſearched all thinges narrowely for your ſake, that he kéepethe him ſelfe ſecretely in a certaine place, before the Cittie. You haue hearde of one Arſmoe I knowe well, ſhée that plaiethe ſo well on the Virginalles, with her he liethe, for the Mayde after his miſerie tooke him in, promiſed to goe awaie with him, and kéepeth him at her houſe, vntill ſhée canne prouide all thinges ready for her iourney. Oh happy Arſmoe (ſayde Demeneta) bothe for the former acquaintaunce which ſhée had with Cnemon, and for the banniſhment, whiche ſhée ſhall haue with him: but what doo theiſe thinges touche vs muche. Miſters, ſayde ſhée, I will ſaie, I loue Cnemon, and wil deſire Arſmoe, with whom I haue benne well acquainted a greate while, by reaſon of my arte, that ſhée woulde in her ſtéede ſuffer me to lie with him one nighte. Whiche if I ſhall obtaine,

it ſhalbe youres, and he ſhall thinke you to be Arſmoe, and in her place ſhal you be with him: and I will prouide for that alſo, that when he hathe drunke a little, he ſhal goe to bedde, and if you gette that you deſire, then ſhall it be beſte for you to géeue ouer your loue. For in many the firſte experimente hathe quenched ſuche earneſt deſire, for the ſéede of loue, wherewith wée proſecute any thinge, is to haue ynough thereof, but if this deſire ſhall then alſo remaine (whiche God forbidde) then ſhall wée make (as the Prouerbe ſaithe) a newe viage, and ſpeake a newe waie: in the meane time, let vs apply that whiche the preſente oportunitie permitteth. Demeneta allowed, and prayſed this well, and praied her not to ſlake this determination at all. Shée craued of hir Miſters but one daie to bringe this aboute, ſhée went to Arſmoe, and aſked her if ſhée knewe not Teledemus, ſhée aunſweared, yes. Lette vs haue a chamber I praie you quoth ſhe, for I haue promiſed him this night, that he ſhall come firſte, and I will followe as ſoone as I haue brought my Miſters to bedde. This donne, ſhée wente to Ariſtippus into the countrie, and ſaide to him thus, Maiſter, I come to you, to accuſe my ſelfe, and ready toThiſ
                        •
                     e accuſeth Demene
                        •
                     a to her Maiſter Areſtippus. take ſuche pouniſhemente at your hande, as your diſcretion ſhall thinke good. By me haue you loſte yours Sonne, not willinge in déede ſo to doo, yet of truthe an healper to the ſame. For when I perceiued, my Miſters liued not well, but was iniurious to your bedde, fearinge not onely my ſelfe, if the mater came to lighte by any other, for kéepinge her counſell, ſhoulde haue ſome ſhrewde tourne, but eſpecially ſorrowefull for your miſhappe, whoe for louinge youre wife ſo interely, ſhoulde haue ſuche recompence, daringe not my ſelfe, came one nighte, that no man ſhoulde knowe thereof, and ſecretely made you priuie to the ſame, tolde to my yonge Maiſter, that there was one,

who vſed to plaie the harlot with my Miſtris, he thinking that then there had bene one with her in bedde (for he was vexed before by her, as you knowe wel ynoughs) takinge his ſwoorde in his hande very angrie, and not eſtéeminge that I ſaide: then there was none, but thinkinge that I had repented me of bewraieinge the ſame, ranne like a madde mā to your beddes ſide, what folowed you knowe, now is the time that you maie cleare your ſelfe of your Sonne, though he be in banniſhement, and maie take reuenge on vs bothe, who haue donne you wronge. I wil ſhewe you this night, Demeneta (whiche maketh the mater a greate deale more heynous) lieinge with her Friende in an other mans houſe without the Cittie. If, ſaide Ariſtippus, thou wilte ſhewe me this, I I will make thée frée, and my ſelfe ſhould reuiue againe, if I were reuenged of mine enemie. I haue benne greued aboute the ſame in my conſcience a greate while, yet for all that, though I ſuſpected no leſſe, becauſe I coulde not conuince it by manifeſt proufes, I helde me content. But what muſte I doo. You knowe (ꝙ ſhée) the Garden wherein remaineth a monument of the Epicures, thitherThe Monumente of the Epicures. come a litle before night, and tarry for me, when ſhée had ſaide this, ſhée returned, and comming againe to Demeneta, make ready your ſelfe, ſaide ſhée, you muſte be fine, all that I promiſed you is donne. Shée apparelled her ſelfe, and did as Thisbe commaunded her, and when the eueninge was come, ſhée carried her to the place, as was appointed. When they came neare the houſe, ſhée willed her to ſtaie a while, and went in her ſelfe before, and deſtred Arſmoe to goo aſide into another houſe, and lette al thinges be quiet, for ſhée ſaide, the yonge man was ſomewhat ſhamefaſte, beinge but of late inured with Venus ſportes. Shée was ſoone perſwaded. Where returninge, tooke Demeneta, and brought her in, & laied her in bedde, and toke the candle awaie (leaſte you ſhould knowe her, who were then in Egma) and willed her to take her pleaſure

and ſaie nothinge, and I (ſhée ſaide) will fetche this younge man in to you, for he is makinge merry hereby. Thus ſhée wente foorthe, and founde Ariſtippus at the place appointed, and willed him all the waie as he came to binde the Adulterer faſte, he followed her, and when they were come to the houſe, he ranne into the chamber, and findinge the bedde by Moone light, I haue thée (ſaideDemeneta is taken. he) O thou muche hated of the Goddes: While he ſpake thus, Thisbe ranne to the doores, and made them geue as greate a craſhe as ſhée coulde, and cried out, O wonderfull thinge, the Adulterer is fledde, Maiſter take héede you be not deceiued againe. Peace (ꝙ he) and be of good cheare, I haue this wicked, & miſcheiuous woman: which I moſte deſired, and thus after he had taken her. brought her towarde the Cittie. But ſhée wayinge with her ſelfe (as is like) in what caſe ſhée was, the beguilinge of her exſpectation, the ſhamefulnes of her offence, the puniſhement decreed by the Lawes, moreouer vexinge her ſelfe becauſe ſhée was taken in ſuche ſorte, but eſpecially takinge in heauily, that ſhée was thus deluded, and flouted, when ſhée came to the pitte, which is in the compaſſe of the place where Platoes ſchoole was, you know it I am ſure, where the Noble men, and Captaines doo celebrate the honour of ſuch as are deceaſed, after the manner of our Countrie, ſodenly pullinge her ſelfe out of the Olde mans handes, leapte hedlonge into the ſame, andDementas Deathe, woorſe then her former Life. ſuche an vnhappy ende had that miſcheiuous woman. Then ſaide Ariſtippus, in déede thy pouniſhemente hath preuented the Lawes. The nexte daie he declared the whole matter to the people, and ſcante hauinge obtained pardon for that déede, he wente to diuers of his frendes, and deuiſed with them, by what meanes he mighte obtaine leaue for you to come home againe. Whether he haue donne any thinge or no, I cannot tell, for as you ſée, before any thinge coulde be finiſhed, I ſayled thither aboute certaine buſines of mine owne.

Notwithſtandinge you ought to be in good comforte, that the people will conſente eaſily to your returne, and that your Father ſhortely will come to ſéeke you, and fetche you home againe. Thus muche Charias tolde me. What followed, and howe I came hither, requireth both longer talke, and time to tell: and therewithal he wept. So did the ſtraungers alſo vnder colour of his calamitie, but in déede for the remembraunce of their owne miſhappes: and they had not ſeaſed from wéepinge, if ſléepe in a manner flyinge vnto them, for greate deſire, had not aſſwaged theire teares. And thus they fell a ſléepe. But Thyamis (for ſo was the Maiſter of the Théeues called) when they had paſſed the greateſt parte of the night quietly, was after troubled with certaine dreames, & therewith ſodainely awaked, for aboute the time, that CockesTwo
                        •
                      reaſons why the Cockes crowe. crowe, whether it be for that (as men ſaie) they Naturally perceiue the conuerſion of the Sunne, when he approcheth neare to vs, & ſo are moued to ſalute that God, or elles, for too muche heate, or deſire of meate, by theire crowinge, thei geue ſuche, as dwel with them warninge to riſe to their woorke, ſuch a Viſion ſente from God, appeared vnto him. As he entred into Iſis Church at Memphis
                  Memphis Dreame. in his owne Cittie, he thought that al was on fire, & that the Altar filled with al kinde of beaſtes, did ſwimme with bloude, & that the Churche porche, the Churchyarde, and euery place thereaboute, were filled with the noyſe, and tumulte of menne: and that when he came into the Priuieſt place of the Church, the Goddes mette him, and gaue Cariclia into his handes, and ſaid, Thyamis, I committe this Maide vnto thy fidelitie, yet hauing, thou ſhale not haue her, but ſhalte be vniuſte, and kill a ſtronger, yet ſhall not be killed. After he ſawe this, he was troubled in his minde, caſtinge this waie and that waie, how that whiche was foreſhewed vnto him, might be taken, at length, beinge weary of beatinge his braines thereaboutes, he drewe the meaninge thereof to his owne will.

And conſtrued it thus. Thou hauinge, ſhalte not haueHis Interpretation thereof. her, that is a wife, not a mayde, any longer. By that thou ſhalte kill, he coniectured to be meante, thou ſhalte breake her limmes, whereof for all that Cariclea ſhoulde not die, and thus did he Interprete his dreame, followinge therein his owne luſte, and deſire. As ſoone, as the daie appeared, he commaunded the chiefe of thoſe, who were vnder his iuriſdiction, to come vnto him, & charged them to bringe foorthe theire Praie, whiche by a grauer name, he termed their ſpoiles: and callinge for Cnemon, willed him alſo to bringe thoſe with him, who were committed to his cuſtodie, as they were thus carried, oh (ſaide they) what ſhall become of vs? and therewith they deſired Cnemon, if by any meanes he mighte, that he woulde healpe them. He promiſed ſo to doo, and badde them be of good cheare, affirminge that theire Captaine was not altogether barbarouſly diſpoſed, but had in him ſome Gentlenes, and Courteſie, as one that was come of a noble ſtocke, but by neceſſitie compelled to followe ſuche trade of life. After they were brought thither, & the reſte of the company made haſte alſo, and Thyamis was ſette in a hier place, then the reſte in the Ilande whiche he appoincted the place of theire méetinge, and had commaunded Cnemon (for he vnderſtoode by this time the Egyptian tongue perfectly, but Thyamis was not very well ſkilled in the Greeke) to interprete what he ſaide to the Priſoners: my mates (ꝙ he) of what minde I haueThe Oration of Thyamis, to his mates. ben euer towarde you, you know very wel. For I (as you can beare me witnes) as though I were the Sonne of the Prieſte of Memphis, fruſtrate of the Prieſtely honour, for that my yonger brother by crafte beguiled me of the ſame, when I fledde to you, the better to reuenge my wronge, and recouer mine Aunciente eſtate, by all your voices, made youre Captaine, haue hitherto liued with you, and not geuen any ſpecial honour to my ſelfe, more then to any of the common ſorte. But whether

monye were to be deuided, I euer loued equalitie, or priſonersThe dewtie of a good Captaine. ſolde, I alwaies brought the ſumme foorth to you, accomptinge it the office of him, that wil rule well, to doo moſte him ſelfe, and take equal parte of that is gotten, as others of the priſoners doo, ſuche as were ſtronge, I euer Iudged to you, and the feble ſorte I ſolde to make money of: I neuer did wronge to wemen, for ſuche as were of good Parentage, I ſuffered to departe, either redéemed with monie, or els, for pittie of theire ill happe, and ſuche as were of inferiour cōdition, whom not onely the Lawe of Armes made priſoners, but alſo theire continuall vſe had taught to ſerue: I diſtributed to euery one of you, to doo you ſeruice. At this time, of al the ſpoiles, I craue, oneThyamis deſireth to haue Cariclia for his ſhare, to make her his wife. thing onely of you, this ſtraunge Maide, whom although I might géeue vnto my ſelfe, I thought▪ I ſhould doo better to take her with al your conſentes. For it is a fooliſhe thinge, by conſtraininge a Captiue, to ſéeme to doo any thinge contrary to his frendes pleaſure. Wherefore, I craue this good tourne at youre handes, not for nought, but rewardinge you againe in ſuche ſorte, that of all the other bootie, I will haue no parte at all, for ſéeinge the Prophetical ſorte of men, deſpiſeth the common ſorte of wemen, I haue decreed to make her my companion, not for pleaſure ſo muche, as to haue iſſue by her: and therefore am contente to rehearſe to you the cauſes that moue me thus to doo. Firſte, ſhée ſéemeth to be of a good Parentage, whiche a man maie eaſily gheaſſe by the Ritches founde aboute her. Secondely, for that ſhée is nothinge broken with theſe aduerſities, but euen nowe alſo of a hawtie ſtomake againſte Fortune. Laſtly, I ſée ſhée is of an excellente nature, and good diſpoſition by diuers argumentes: for ſhée doothe not onely paſſe all other in bewtie, and modeſtie of countenaunce, but alſo moueth all ſuche as looke vppon her, to a certaine kinde of grauitie, and ſhall ſhée not therefore leaue behinde her, a woorthie eſtimation of her ſelfe? and whiche is

eſpecially aboue all that is ſpoken, to be conſidered, ſhée ſéemeth to be the Prieſt of ſomme Goddeſſe. For euen in her aduerſitie, ſhée accompteth it an intollerable, and heynous offence, to leaue of her ſacred ſtoole, and Lawrel garlande. Can there be therefore any Marriage (oh you that be preſente) more méete, then that a man beinge a Prophete ſhoulde Martie one conſecrated to ſomme God? All they that were preſente approued his ſaieinges, and praied the Goddes to géeue him ioye of his Marriage. Whiche thinge, when he hearde, he ſaide to them againe, I thanke you all, but in mine opinion, it ſhall not be amiſſe, if aboute this matter wée enquire the Maydes minde, for if I liſte to vſe mine owne authoritie, my will were ſufficiente, becauſe it is a néedeleſſe thinge to aſke theire good will, whome a man maie conſtraine. But in this caſe, ſéeinge wée intreate of a lawefull Marriage, it is conuenient to be donne with bothe conſentes: and ſo turninge his talke to them, aſked the Mayde howe ſhée liked that, whiche was propoundedThyamis aſketh Cariclia her opinion, and cō
                     ſente to the Marriage. as touchinge her Marriage, & therewithal willed them to declare what they were, and where they were borne. But ſhée caſtinge her eies to the grounde, firſte, after a good ſeaſon lifted vp her head, as though ſhée had premeditated ſomewhat, and therewithall looking vpon Thyamis, and with the brightnes of her bewtie, abaſſhed him more then euer ſhée did before (for by the inwarde cogitation of her minde, her chéekes became more redde then accuſtomably they were, and her eies were very earneſtlyCariclias anſweare. bente vpon him) ſpake thus by Cnemon her Interpreter. It were more méete, that my brother Theagenes here ſhoulde haue tolde this tale, for mine opinion is, that aThe duetie of a woman in the preſence of 
                        •
                     enne. woman ought to kéepe ſilence, and a man emongeſt men ſhoulde make anſweare. But ſéeinge you haue geuen me leaue to ſpeake, it is an eſpeciall token of your courteſie, that you rather meane by perſwaſion to attempte that, whiche is iuſte, then by force to compell: and the rather,

becauſe that which hath benne ſpoken, moſt touched me, I am conſtrained to paſſe theſe bondes: I preſcribed my ſelfe, to anſweare to the Victors queſtion in ſo greate an aſſembly of men. We were borne in Ionia, and are come of a Noble houſe of Epheſus. When wée came to the age of fouretiene yéeres, by the Lawe (whiche calleth ſuche to the office of Prieſthoode) I was made Prieſte, to Diana, & this my brother to Apollo. But for aſmuche as this honour laſted but for a yéere, and oure time was expired, we prepared to goo to Deles with our ſacred attyre, and there to make certaine Plaies, and to géeue ouer our Prieſthoode, according to the manner of our Aunceſters. And for this cauſe was our Shippe loden with Golde, Siluer, goodly Apparel, and other neceſſaries, aſmuch as were ſufficient for the expences of the ſame, and to make the people a publike feaſte: & thus we loſed out of the Hauen, but our Parentes for that they were olde, and feared the daungerouſnes of the viage, taried at home: but many of the other Citezens ſome in our ſhippe, ſomme other in ſhippes of theire owne, came to accompanie vs. After we had ended the greateſt parte of our viage, a tempeſt ſuddainely aroſe, and a vehement winde, with feareful blaſtes, mouing great waues of the Sea, cauſed vs to leaue our determined Iourney, and the gouernour ouercomen with the greatnes of the daunger, gaue ouer the gouernement, & within a while after, comminge out of the Hulke, committed the rule thereof to Fortune. Then were wée driuen with the winde ſeuen daies, and ſeuen nightes, at laſte, wée were caſte vpon the ſhoore, where in you founde vs, and ſawe the greate ſlaughter in which place the Marriners, as wée were bankettinge, for ioye vnlooked, for deliuery, aſſaulted vs, and for our ritches ſought to deſtroie vs, but they were all ſlaine, not without the deſtruction of oure Fréendes, and acquaintaunce, and wée onely miſerable Creatures (which woulde God had not happened) obtained the Victorie.

But ſéeinge it is thus, we haue good cauſe in this pointe, to accompte our ſelues happy, bicauſe ſomme God hathe brought vs into your handes, where thoſe who feared deathe, haue nowe ſpace to thinke on Marriage. Whiche ſurely I wil not refuſe. For, that the Captaine ſhould beCariclia ſeemeth to conſent, but taketh a delaie finely. iudged woorthy the Victors bedde, doothe not onely paſſe all other felicitie, but that a Priſtes Sonne ſhal marrie a woman cōſecrated to the Goddes, ſéemeth not to be done without the ſingular forefight, and prouidence of God. I therefore craue but one thing onely, at thy hand Thyamis, ſuffer me firſte, as ſoone as I ſhal come to my Cittie, or any place where is an Altare, or Church ſacred to Appollo, to ſurrendre mine office, and the tokens thereof. This might be donne very commodiouſly at Memphis,
                  Shee appointeth the place of her Marriage. when you haue recouered ye honour of your Prieſthoode, for by that meanes it ſhould come to paſſe, that Marriage ioined with Victorie, & after good lucke celebrated, ſhalbe muche more merie. But whither this muſte be donne before, or after, I leaue it to your diſcretion: onely my requeſt is, that I may fulfil the Rites of my Countrie, before I knowe that you wil hereunto agrée, who haue ben brought vp from your childehoode, aboute holy Offices, & thinke alſo very well, & reuerently of the Goddes. With this ſhée made an ende of ſpeaking, and beganne bitterly to wéepe. All they, who were preſente, praiſed her, and willed, that it ſhould be donne euen ſo, & for their partes, they promiſed theire ready aide, to doo what ſo euer he woulde. Thyamis alſo partely willinge, partely againſtThyamis is ſcante contente to driue of the mater ſo longe. his will, conſented thereunto. For the more deſire that he had towarde Cariclia, he accompted that ſame houre wherein theſe thinges were a dooinge, to be an infinite time. Againe he was pleaſed with her Oration, as it had benne with ſomme Meremaydes ſonge, and was enforced to conſente to her, and therewithall he thought vpon his dreame, ſuppoſing that he ſhould be Married at Memphis. This donne, hauing firſt deuided their bootie,

and takinge ſomme of the beſte Iuelles, whiche of theire owne accorde they gaue him, he ſuffered euery man to departe, with further commaundemente to be ready the tenth daie after, to goe towarde Memphis. He let the Greekes haue the Tabernacle that they had before: And with them was Cnemon, not as a Kéeper nowe, but as a companion, and Thyamis furniſhed them with as good victuall, as there might be gotten. Whereof alſo Theagenes, for his ſiſters ſake, had part. He determined not toSight oftentimes moueth a man to doo ſommewhat contrarie to good tēperance, and therefore Thyamis ſhunned this ſight. looke vpon Cariclia very ofte, that her bewtie mighte not moue his hotte deſire, to doo ſomewhat contrarie to that, which by common counſell was Decreed, as was before rehearſed. And for theſe cauſes, Thyamis would not looke vpon the Mayde, thinkinge it an vnpoſſible thinge, that a man ſhoulde bothe looke vpon a faire Mayde, and kéepe him ſelf within the bondes of temperance. But Cnemon after euery man was quickly diſpatched, and were crept into theire corners, which they had in the Mariſhe, went to ſéeke the Herbe, whiche the daie before he promiſed Theagenes. At this time Theagenes hauinge gotten fit oportunitie, weapt & cried out, ſpeakinge neuer a woordeTheagenes is offended with Cariclias Oration. to Cariclia, but without ſeaſing called vpon the Goddes. And when ſhée aſked him whither after his accuſtomed manner he deplored the common miſhappe, or had any newe gréefe befallen him: what (ꝙ he) can be more newe, or contrarie to equitie, then to breake an othe, and finall agréemente? Cariclia hathe forgotten me, and is content to marrie another man. God defende, ſaide the Mayde: IHer wittie anſweare to him. praie you be not more gréeuous vnto me, then the miſeries I haue already, neither miſdéeme any thinge, by my talke applied to the time, and perhappes to ſomme pourpoſe, ſeinge you haue before by many argumentes, tried howe I am affected towarde you. Excepte perchaunce, the contrarie maie happen, and that you ſooner chaunge your minde, then I wil departe from any the leſte iote of my promiſe. For I am contente, and take in good parte

all theiſe calamities, but that I ſhall not liue chaſtely, and temperatly, there ſhalbe no torment, that maie conſtraine me. In one thinge onely I know, I haue not ruled my ſelf, that is, in the loue that I haue borne to you, from the beginninge, but notwithſtandinge it is bothe lawfull, and honeſte: for I like not your Louer, but at the firſte concludinge marriage with you, haue committed my ſelfe to you, and haue liued chaſtely without copulation hitherto, not without refuſinge you oftentimes, proferinge me ſuch thinges, and haue waited for occaſion to be married, if any where it might lawfully be donne, whiche thinge, at the firſte, was decreed bitwéene vs, and aboue al thinges, by othe eſtabliſhed. Beſide this, conſider how vaine you are, if you ſuppoſe, that I eſtéeme more of a Barbarous fellowe, then a Grecian of a théefe, then of him, whome with my harte I loue. What did thoſe thinges then meane, ſaid Theagenes, which in that goodly companie were of you openly rehearſed? For in yt you fained me to be your Brother, it was a very wiſe diuiſe, whiche cauſed Thyamis to be farre from the Ialouſie of our loue, and made vs to be togeather ſafely. I perceiued alſo to what ende that tended, whiche you ſaide of Ionia, and of wandringe aboute Delos. For they were ſhadowes which might eaſily couer the truth, and deceiue in déede the Auditours. But ſo readily toTheagenes is not al ſatisfied with the anſweare. approue the marriage, and openly to conclude the ſame, and to appointe the time, therefore what that ſhoulde ſignifie, neither coulde I gheſſe, neither woulde I. But I wiſhed that the Earthe mighte haue clouen, and ſwallowed me vp, rather then that I ſhoulde haue ſéene ſuche an ende of the trauelles, and hope that for your ſake ICariclia taketh in very good parte his doubtfulnes of her ſtedfaſtneſſe. vndertooke. Herewithall Cariclia embraced Theagenes, and kiſſed him a thouſande times, and bemoyſtinge his face with her teares, oh in howe good parte, ſaide ſhée, doo I take theſe feares, that for my ſake you ſuſtaine? For hereby you declare, that you quayle not

in your loue towarde me, althoughe many miſeries depende thereupon. But knowe for a truthe Theagenes, that at this time wée had not talked togeather, If I had not made him ſuch a promiſe. For drawinge backe with labouringe a contrarie waie, doothe muche kindell the force of vehemente deſire: Whereas in yéeldinge talke,The propertie of a gentle anſweare, in yeeldinge talke. and applieinge the ſame to the mouinge of his wil, hathe quieted his burning loue, & with the pleaſantneſſe of my promiſe, hathe broughte on ſléepe to his haſtie appetite. For rude Louers at the firſte, thinke that they muſte laboure to haue a promiſe, & after are of quieter mindes, ſtill houeringe in hope, and truſtinge, that at lengthe,Procraſtination is ſommetime profitable. they ſhall enioye that, whiche was promiſed. All whiche thinges I foreſéeinge, by my preſent talke, committed my ſelfe to him, commendinge that, whiche ſhall followe, to the Goddes, and the Angell, that at the firſte hathe obteyned the tuicion of our loue. Oftentimes the ſpace of a daie, or twoo hathe benne very healthefull, and brought thinges to happy paſſe, whiche before by no deuice coulde any man bringe to proſperous ende: Wherefore I alſo at this time haue preferred this inuention before all other, ponderinge with vncertaintie, that which is moſte ſure. Wée muſte therefore (ſwéete loue) vſe this policie wiſely, and kéepe it ſecretely, not onely from all other, but alſo from Cnemon too. For although he ſéeme to fauoure oure eſtate, and is a Grecian, yet beinge at this time a priſoner, will perhappes, if occaſion ſerue, be ready to doo the Captaine a good turne. For neither this time of friendeſhippe, neither Countriemanſhippe, is a ſufficiente pledge to vs of his fidelitie, and truthe: Wherefore if at any time by ſuſpicion, he geather any thinge touchinge oure eſtate, at the firſte wée muſte denie it. For that manner of a lie is tollerable whicheWhat lie is beſte to be borne withall. profitethe the Inuentoure, and hurtethe not the hearer. While Cariclia ſpake theſe thinges, and many ſuche

other to this pourpoſe: Cnemon ranne in haſtly, and declaring a great perturbation by his countenance. Theagenes (ꝙ he) I bringe you this Herbe, wherewith I praye you dreſſe your owne woundes. But I feare me, you muſt prepare your ſelf, to receiue other as great woūdes, & trauelles as theſe. But he aſked of him, what the mater was, and deſired him to telle it more plainely. The time (aunſweared he) will not ſuffer me: for it is to be feared, leſte wée ſhoulde féele the ſtripes before, I coulde tel you the circumſtances. But followe me quickly, and Cariclia alſo, and thus he carried them bothe to Thyamis. Whom when he founde ſcouring of his Helmet, and ſharpening the pointe of his Speare, in good time (ſaide he) are you in hande with your Armour, put them on quickely your ſelfe, and commaunde the other to doo the like. ForCnemon telleth Thyamis of their Enimies at hande. ſuche a companie of enimies is at hande as I neuer ſawe before, and are ſo neare vs, that I ſtandinge on the toppe of the nexte Hille, ſawe them, and for that cauſe came runninge as faſte I coulde to tel you of their comminge, and haue moreouer by the waie as I came, commaunded ſuche as I ſawe, to be in a readineſſe. Thyamis, when he he hearde this, looked vp, and aſked where Cariclia was, as though he he had benne more carefull for her, then for him ſelfe. Whome when Cnemon had ſhewed to him, ſtandinge at the doore, carrie her alone (ꝙ he) into theCariclia carried to be keapte in the Theeues Denne, where their treaſure was. Denne, where our treaſures are ſafely keapte, ſo that none ſée her. And leauinge her charely there, couered her face with a muffler as the manner is, and came quickely againe. As for the warre, let me alone with it. He bad his Shielde bearer bringe his offeringe, that after ſacrifice donne to the Goddes, they might beginne the battell: Cnemon did as he was commaunded, and carried Cariclia awaie diuerſly lamentinge, and ofte lookinge backe vnto Theagenes, and at the length, put her into the Denne. This was no naturall woorke, as many areThe propertie of that Denne.
                  
bothe in, & vnder the Earthe: but deuiſed by the witte of Théeues, that followed nature, and digged out by their handes very artificially, to kéepe theire ſpoyles. And it was made after this ſorte. It had a very narrowe mouthe, and was ſhut with priuie doores, ſo that euen the Threſhoulde was in ſtéede of a gate when néede required: and woulde open and ſhut very eaſily: the inner part was countermined with diuers ouerthwart waies, the whiche ſommetime woulde runne alonge by them ſelues a greate waye, ſommetime, they woulde be entangled like the rootes of trées, but in the ende, they all leadde to one plaine place, whiche receiued a little lighte out of the mariſhes at a little lofte in the toppe, when Cnemon was well experienſed in that place, and had put Cariclia into the ſame, and comforted her many wayes, but eſpecially in that he promiſed her, that he with Theagenes, at nighte woulde comme vnto her, and that he would not ſuffer him to ſtrike one ſtroke in the battaile, but priuelie conueyed him out of the ſame, he lefte her, who ſpake not one woorde, but was ſtriken with that miſchiefe, as if it had benne with deathe, in that ſhée was depriued of Theagenes, whome ſhée loued as her owne ſoule, and wente foorthe, and in ſhuttinge of the outmoſt doore, he weapte a little, not onely for that of force he was conſtrained ſo to doo, but for her ſake alſo, in aſmuche as almoſte he had buried her quicke, and committed the ioyfulleſt name in the worlde, Cariclia, to night, and darkeneſſe. This donne, he ranne backe to Thyamis, whome he founde very deſirous to fighte with Theagenes, well armed, and makinge thoſe that were with him, almoſte madde with his earneſt Oracion, for as he ſtoode in the middeſt of them, he ſayde thus, my mates,The Oration of Thyamis to his companions. I ſée not to what ende it ſhoulde tende, to vſe many woordes in exhorting you, who néede no incouragement at all, but euer haue accoumpted warre, the pleaſanteſt

life: eſpecially, for that the ſuddaine approchinge of our enimies will not permitte vs to vſe many woordes, for ſéeinge our enimies doo nowe violently aſſaulte vs, if wée ſhoulde not with like courrage propulſe theire violence, it were altogeather a pointe of thoſe, that in like caſe, were voyde of Counſell, and at theire wittes ende. Sithe therefore wée knowe, wée fight not for our wiues, and children, whiche onely in ſomme were ynoughe to make them plucke vp theire hartes, (although in déede they are not of greate valewe, and wée ſhall haue all that whiche the Conquerours doo gaine, if wée gette the victorie) but for our owne liues, & ſafetie, for warre amonge Théeues, is neither taken vp with truce, nor ended withHowe VVarre with Theeues is ended. league, but it muſte néedes be, that the Victours ſhall liue, thoſe who are ouercommed muſte die, let vs euen with our hartes, and handes haſte to méete our cruell enimies. When he had ſayde thus, he looked aboute for his Shielde bearer, and called him by name, Thermutes, but when he coulde not ſée him any where, gréeuouſly threatninge him, he ranne as faſte as he coulde to the landinge place. For by this time was the battell begonne, and a man mighte ſée thoſe that dwelled a farre▪ euen in outer coaſte of the Fenne come into theire enimies handes, for they, who came vpon them, burned vp the Boates, and Cotages of ſuche, as either were ſlaine, or els fledde out of the Battaile, whoſe eyes alſo were daſeled with the greate, and intollerable brightneſſe of the fire, that burned vp the Kéedes, whereof there was greate plentie, and theirs cares filled with the greate noyſe, and tumulte, ſo that now a man might bothe ſée, and heare the whole manner of the ſkirmiſhe, thoſe who dwelled there, mainteininge the Battaile with all theire power, and ſtrengthe, and theire enimies beinge more in number, and takinge them at a ſuddaine, killed ſomme of them on the earthe,

other ſomme they drowned in the Poole with Boates, and houſes too, of all, whiche, aſwell of thoſe that fought by lande, and lake, did kill, and were killed, as alſo of thoſe, who were beſette with Fiere, and Water, aroſe a marueilous ſounde in the Ayre, whiche when Thyamis ſawe, he remembred his dreame, wherein he ſawe Iſis, and her Churche filled with fiere, and deade menne, and ſuppoſinge thereby to be meante, that whiche he nowe had ſéene, geathered thereof a contrarie interpretation to that he made before, that hauinge, thou ſhalt not haue Cariclia, as taken awaie by Warre, and that he ſhoulde kill, and not wounde her, that is, with his ſworde, & not with Carnall copulation. At lengthe railinge on the Goddes, as though ſhée had beguiled him, and thinkinge it not méete, that any other ſhoulde enioye Cariclia, commaundinge his men to kéepe their places, and mainteine the Battaile as longe as thei might: him ſelf fighting in euery parte of the Ilande, and diuers times making priuie erruptions, out of euery quarter vpon his enimies, thinkinge it alſo to be good, if that waie he could preuaile againſte them, him ſelfe as though he wente to ſeeke for Thermutis, & doo certaine Sacrifices to his priuie Goddes, ſufferinge no man to goe with him, in haſte wente to the Caue. Surely a barbarous nature cannot eaſily be withdrawen, or turned from that, that he hathe once determined. And if the Barbarous people be once in diſpaire of theire owne ſafetie, they haue a cuſtome to kill all thoſe, by whome they ſette muche, and whoſe companie they deſire after deathe, or els woulde kéepe them from the violence, and wronge of theire enimies. For that ſame cauſe alſo Thyamis, forgettinge all that he had to doo, beinge incloſed with his enimies armie, as if he had benne caughte in a Nette, almoſte enraged with loue, gelouſie, & anger, after he came in haſte to the Caue, goeinge into the ſame, crieing with a loude voice,

and ſpeakinge many thinges in the Egyptian tongue, as ſoone as he hearde one ſpeake Greeke to him aboute the entrie of the Caue, & was conducted to her by her voyce, he laied his lefte hande vpon her heade, & with his ſworde thruſte her through the body a little beneath the pappes, and after this ſorrowfull ſorte, that woman geuinge vp her laſte, and ghoſtly grone, was ſlaine. But he, after he came out, and had ſhut the doore, and caſte a little grauell thereon, with teares, ſaide, theſe eſpouſalles haſt thou at my hande: and comminge to his Boates, founde a greate many ready to runne theire waie, as ſoone as they laide eies on theire Enimies, & Thermites alſo comminge to doo ſacrifice, chidinge him ſharpely, for that he had offered the moſte acceptable offeringe already, went with him into a Boate, and had an other to rowe them, for the Boates that they vſe in the pooles, will carrie no more, beinge but rudely hewed out of the whole Trée. Theagenes alſo, & Cnemon tooke an other Boate, ſo did all the reſte. After they had gonne a little from the Ilande, and rather rowinge aboute the bankes then venturing into the Déepe, they ſtaied their Ores, & ſette theire Boates a fronte, as thoughe they woulde haue receiued theire enimies face to face. After this prouiſion, goeinge forewarde a little, but not mindinge to abide the mouinge of the Waters, as ſoone as they ſawe theire enimies, fledde, and woulde not abyde the firſte Clamor, and Noiſe of the battel. Theagenes alſo, and Cnemon, but not for feare, by little, and little withdrewe them ſelues, onely Thyamis accompted it a ſhame to flie, and not in minde to liue after Cariclia, thruſt himThe deſcription of theire Battaile. ſelfe into the thickeſt preſſe of his Enimies, and as ſoone as they were comme to blowes, one cried out, this is Thyamis, let euery man doo his beſte to take him aliue, and therewithall they compaſſed him aboute, and helde him encloſed as a ringe, in the middeſte of them.

And fought againſte them ſtoutely, and to ſée howe he wounded ſomme, and killed other ſomme, it was a woorthy ſighte. For of ſo greate a number there was none, that either drewe his ſwoorde againſte him, or elles caſte any darte, but euery man laboured to take him aliue, he fought againſte them a greate while, but at length, he loſte his ſpeare, by reaſon that many fell on him at ones, he loſte alſo his Harneſbearer, who had donne him very good ſeruice, for he beinge deadly wounded (as might be gheaſſed) deſpairinge of his ſafetie, lepte into the poole, and with muche adoo did ſwimme to lande, in as muche as no man remembred to purſue him. And now had they taken Thyamis, and with him thought, that they had gotten the whole victorie: and although they had loſte ſo many of theire companions, yet in aſmuche as they had him in theire handes (by whome they were ſlaine) they had a greater ioye thereby, then ſorrowe for all theireThe nature of a Theefe. deade Frendes, and Kinſfolkes. Suche is the nature of Théeues, that eſtéeme more monie then theire owne liues, and make much of the name of frendſhippe, and affinitie, ſo farre as Lucre, and gaine ſhall extende. Which might eaſily be gathered by theſe, for they were thoſe, who at the Mounte of Nilus called Heracleot, fledde for feare of Thyamis, and his Companions, and were no leſſe gréeued for the loſſe of other mennes goodes, then if they had benne their owne, and therefore tooke vp aſwel all ſuche as were theire houſholdfrendes, as alſo thoſe that dwelled neare aboute them, promiſinge them equall parte of theire bootie, and that they woulde be Conductors, and Captaines to guide them thereunto. Nowe why they tooke Thyamis priſoner, this was the cauſe. HeVVhy Thyamis is taken aliue. had a Brother called Petoſiris at Memphis, who contrarie to the manner and ordinaunce of the Countrie (in as muche as he was a yonger Brother) had by crafte beguiled him of the Prieſthoode. And hearinge nowe that his Brother was become a Captaine of certaine Robbers,

and fearinge, leaſte that if he gatte good occaſion he woulde retourne, and manifeſtly detecte his ſubtle dealinge, and beſide this, conſideringe the voice of many people, that ſuppoſed he had ſlaine him, becauſe he coulde no where be ſéene, he promiſed a greate Summe of monie, and other goodes, to thoſe who woulde take and bringe him aliue. Wherewith the Théeues beinge allured, no not in the middeſt of their warre, forgettinge theire gaine, after one knewe him, with the deathe ofThyamis throughe the deathe of many of his enemies, is taken aliue. many of them, tooke him aliue, and carried him to lande, and placed the one halfe of them, as a garde aboute him, caſtinge into his téethe diuerſly the curteſie that they vſed towarde him, (although in déede he miſliked woorſe theire bandes, then deathe it ſelfe) and the reſte wente to ſearche the Ilande, in hope to finde other Treaſures that they ſought for. But after they had gonne ouer the ſame, and had lefte nothinge, either vntouched, or vnſearched that was there, and had founde nothinge of that they hoped for, excepte a fewe thinges of littell valewe, if oughte was lefte aboute the mouthe of the Caue, while they conueyed the reſte into the grounde, ſettinge fire on the Tabernacles, when it drewe towarde night, and that they might tarry no longer in the Ilande, for feare they ſhoulde falle into the handes of thoſe, that eſcaped out of the Battaile, retourned to their owne Companie.
               Here ended the Firſte Booke.
               
            
            
               
               The Seconde Booke.
               
                  AND thus was the Ilande with fire and flame deſtroyed, Theagenes, and Cnemon, as longe as the Sunne ſhined vpon the earthe, knewe not of this miſchiefe: for the brightnes of the fire, by reaſon of the Sunne beames in the daie time, is muche dimmed. But after the Sunne was ſette, and the nighte drewe on, and the fire without impediment mighte be ſéene a farre of, they ſomme what couragious, came out of the Poole, and perceiued the whole Ilande to be on fire. Then Theagenes
                  Theagenes thinkinge Cariclia to be brent, lamenteth. beatinge his heade, and tearinge his heare, ſaide: Farewel (ꝙ he) this daie my life, let here, al feare, dangers, cares, hope, and loue, haue ende, and be diſſolued, Cariclia is deade, Theagenes is deſtroyed, in vaine was I vnhappy man afraide, and contente to betake my ſelfe to flighte, whiche no man would haue donne, reſeruinge my ſelfe to thée my ſwéete harte. Suerly (my Ioye) I will liue no longer, ſith thou arte deade, not accordinge to the common courſe of nature, whiche is a gréeuous thinge, & cōtrary to thine opinion, & not with theſe handes, which was thy whole deſire. With fire (alas wretche that I am) arte thou conſumed, & in ſtéede of lightes at thy Mariage, hathe God ordeined ſuche lightes for thée? The braueſt bewty in the worlde is loſte, ſo that no token of ſuch ſingulare faireneſſe remaineth in the deade bodie. Oh marueilous crueltie, & vnſpeakeable wrathe of the Goddes. I haue no leaue to geue her my laſt imbracinges, I am depriued of my laſt kiſſes. While he ſpake thus, & looked aboute for his ſwoorde, Cnemon rebuked him, ſaiyng, andCnemon comforteth Theagenes. what meaneth this Theagenes, ſaide he? why doo you thus bewaile her yt is aliue, Cariclia is ſafe, feare not. Cnemon (ſaide he) you may telle madde men, & children this tale. Surely you haue deſerued death, for hinderinge me from

ſo pleaſante deathe. Therewithall Cnemon ſware to him, and tolde him altogeather the commaundemente of Thyamis, how he placed her there, the nature of the ſame Denne, and howe that it was not to be feared, that the fyre coulde comme to her, beinge broken, and put backe by ſixe hundred Crankes. Theagenes beganne to comme to him ſelfe againe, when he hearde this, and haſted to the Ilande, and thought in his minde, that he was in the ſame already, and made the Denne his chamber, not knowinge the ſorrowes whereunto he ſhould falle. Thither they were caried therefore with muche adoo, themſelues plaieinge the watermen, for he, who rowed them, with the noyſe of the firſte conflicte, as it had benne with a Leuer, was ſtriken ouer boorde into the lake, thei were therefore carried awaie hither and thither, aſwel for that they were bothe ignorant in rowinge, and not placinge the Ores equally, as alſo for that they had a contrarie winde: But for all that, the readines of theire willes, gotte the victory of theire Ignoraunce in that Arte. When therefore with muche adoo, they were arriued in the Ilande, they ranne to the Tabernakle as faſte as thei coulde, which alſo they founde burned, & could not know it, but onely by the manner of the place, for there coulde nothinge be ſéene, but the greate ſtoane, whiche was the Threſholde, and couer alſo of the Caue, for a vehemente winde blowinge the fire vpon the cottages whiche were made onely of ſlender Reede, and ſuche as grewe on the Mariſhe bankes, burned them vp euery where, & made them almoſt equall with the grounde, but when the violent fire ſlaked, and was turned into Aſſhes, whiche alſo was driuen awaie by a blaſte of winde, and that whiche remained, beinge but a little, was quenched, and graunted them frée paſſage, they came to the Caue, the Poſtes thereof and the Réedes, they alſo founde halfe burnte, and openinge the doore, Cnemon leadinge the waie, they ranne downe apace. But after they had gonne a little

waie, Cnemon ſuddainely cried out, O Iupiter, what meaneth this? wée are vndonne: Cariclia is ſlaine. And therewith he caſte his lighte to the grounde, and put it out, and holdinge his handes before his face, fell on his knées, and lamented. But Theagenes as though by violenceTheagenes bewaileth a dead body, and thought it had benne Cariclia. one had thruſt him downe, fell on the deade body, and helde the ſame in his Armes a greate while without mouinge. Cnemon therefore perceiuinge that he was vtterly ouercomme with ſorrowe, and fearinge leaſte he ſhould doo him ſomme harme, tooke his ſwoorde out of his ſcabbarde, and ranne out to lighte his Linke againe. In the meane time Theagenes Tragecally, and with muche ſorrowe lamented: And oh greife intollerable, oh manifolde miſchiefes, ſente from ye Goddes, ſaide he. What inſaciable fuery ſo muche rageth ſtill to haue vs deſtroied? who hath banniſhed vs out of our Countrie, caſte vs to dangers by Seas, perilles by Pirates, and hath often deliuered vs into the handes of Robbers, and ſpoyled vs of al our Treaſures? onely one comforte wée had, which is nowe taken from vs, Cariclia is deade, and by enimies hande (my onely Iote) is ſlaine: while ſhée no doubte defended her Chaſtitie, and reſerued her ſelfe vnto me, ſhée unhappy creature is deade, and neither had ſhée by her bewtie any pleaſure, neither any commoditie. But oh my ſwéete hart, ſpeake to me laſtly, as thou werte wont to doo, and if there be any life in thée, commaunde me to doo ſommewhat. Alas thou doeſt holde thy peace, that goodly mouthe of thine, out of the whiche procéeded ſo heauenly talke, is ſtopped, darkeneſſe hath poſſeſſed her, who bare the ſtarre of bewtie, and the laſte ende of all hath nowe gotten the beſte Miniſter that belonged to any Temple of the Goddes. Theſe eies of thine, that with paſſinge fayreneſſe looked vpon all men, are nowe without ſighte, which he, who killed thée, ſawe not, I am ſure. But by what name ſhall I calle thée? my Spouſe? thou werte neuer Eſpouſed my wife? thou werte not

Married, what ſhall I therefore calle thée, or howe ſhall I laſtly ſpeake vnto thée, ſhall I calle thée by thy moſt delectable name of all names, Cariclia? Oh Cariclia heare me, thou haſte a faithfull louer, and ſhalt ere it be longe, recouer me, for I will out of hande, with mine owne deathe perfourme a deadly Sacrifice to thée, & with mine owne bloude will I offer a frendly offeringe vnto thée, and this rude Denne ſhalbe a Sepulchre for vs bothe. It ſhalbe lawful for vs, after deathe, to enioie either other, whiche while wée liued, the Goddes would not graunte. As ſoone as he had ſpoken thus, he ſet his hāde, as thoughTheagenes woulde haue ſlaine himſelfe. he would haue drawen out his ſwoorde, whiche when he founde not, O Cnemon ſaide he, howe haſte thou hurte me, and eſpecially iniured Cariclia, depriued now againe of moſt delectable company: while he ſpake thus, through the hollowe holes of the Caue, there was a voice hearde, that called Theagenes, he hearde it well, & was nothinge afraide, & O ſwéete Soule, pardon me, ſaide he: by this it manifeſtly appereth, that thou arte yet aboue the earth, partely for that with violence expulſed out of ſuche a body, thou canſt not departe without greife, partely for that, not yet buried, thou arte chaſed awaie of infernall Spirites. And when Cnemon came in with a lighte in his hande: the ſame voice was hearde againe, callinge Theagenes. O Goddes, ſaide Cnemon, is not this Cariclias voice? Suerly Theagenes, I thinke that ſhée is yet ſaued. Wilte not thou yet leaue, ſaide Theagenes, ſo ofte to deceiue, and beguile me? In déede, ſaide Cnemon, I deceiue you, and am my ſelfe deceiued, if this be not Cariclia that lieth here. And there withal, he ſtreight waie turned her face vpwarde, which, as ſoone as he ſawe, you Goddes (ſaide he) whiche be the Authours of al wonders, what ſtrange ſighte is this? I ſée here Thisbes face, and therewith he lepte backe, and without mouinge any whitte, ſtoode quakinge in a greate admiration. Therewithal Theagenes came ſome what to him ſelfe, & began

to conceiue ſomme better hope in his minde, & comforted Cnemon, whoſe harte nowe failed him, and deſired him in all haſte to carrie him to Cariclia. A while after, when Cnemon came ſommewhat to him ſelfe againe, he looked more aduiſedly on her. It was Thisbe in déede, and knew alſo the Swoorde that laie by her, by the Hiltes to be Thyamis his, whiche he for angre, and haſte lefte in the wounde. Laſte of all, he ſawe a little ſcrowle hange at her breaſte, whiche he tooke awaie, and would faine haue readde it, but Theagenes would not lette him, but laie on him very earneſtly, ſaieinge, lette vs firſte receiue my ſwéete harte, leaſte euen nowe alſo ſomme God beguile vs: as for theſe thinges, wée maie know them hereafter. Cnemon was contente, and ſo takinge the Letter in his hande, and the Swoorde alſo, wente in to Cariclia, who crepinge bothe on handes, and féete to the light, ranne to Theagenes, & hanged aboute his necke, nowe Theagenes
                  The ioye of Theagenes, and Cariclia. thou arte reſtoared to me againe, ſaide ſhée. Thou liueſt mine owne Cariclia, ꝙ he, oftentimes. At length they fell ſuddainely to the grounde, holdinge either other in their Armes, without vtteringe any woorde, except a little murmuringe, and it lacked but a litle, that they were not bothe deade. For many times too muche gladnes isToo muche mirthe oftentimes tourneth to woe. turned to ſorrowe, and immoderate pleaſure hath ingendred gréefe, whereof our ſelues are the cauſes. As alſo theſe preſerued cōtrary to their hope, and opinion, were in perill, vntill Cnemon takinge a little water in his handes, ſprinkled it on their faces, and rubbinge their noſtrelles, cauſed them to comme to them ſelues againe. When they perceiued that they were ſo familiarly embraced, and on grounde, they ſtarte vp ſuddainely, and bluſhed (but eſpecially Cariclia) becauſe of Cnemon, who had ſéene theſe thinges, and deſired him to pardon them. He ſmilinge a little, and willinge to turne their mindes to ſome mirthe, In mine opinion (ſaide he) or any mans elles, who hath before wraſtled with loue, and hath pleaſantly

yéelded thereunto ineuitable chance therof moderately, theſe thinges are muche prayſe woorthie. But Theagenes, I could by no meanes commende that, wherof I alſo was aſhamed, when I ſawe you ſhamefully embrace a ſtrange woman, and one to whome you were bounde, by no bonde of fréendſhippe, for al that I boldely affirmed, your deareſt frende was aliue, & ſafe. Cnemon (ꝙ Theagenes) accuſe me not to Cariclia, whome in an others body I bewailed, thinkinge her who was ſlaine, to haue benne this wenche? But foraſmuche as the good will of God hath nowe declared, that I was in ſo doinge beguiled, remēber I praie you, your owne cowardenes, in aſmuche as firſte you deplored my caſe, in the ſuddaine knowledge of her, who laie there, and though you had a ſwoorde by your ſide, yet you like a ſtoute, and valiant warrioure, were afraide of a woman, and ſhée deade, noleſſe then if the Goddes had benne in preſence. Hereat they ſmiled a little, but not without teares, as it happeneth to men in ſuche miſerie. After Cariclia had ſtaied a little, and ſcratchinge her chéeke vnder her eare, I iudge (ſaide ſhée) her happy, who ſoeuer ſhée was, whom Theagenes lamented, and kiſſed alſo, as Cnemon reporteth, but excepte you thinke that I am in Ialoufie, I woulde gladly knowe, what happy woman that was, for whiche were woorthy Theagenes teares. If you can tell me, and by what erroure you kiſſed her in ſtéede of me. Suerly (ſaid? he) you wil wonder at it greatly, for Cnemon ſaith it was that cunninge Player of the Harpe, whiche was Thisbe, the deuiſer of the wyles againſt him, and Demeneta. Herewith Cariclia afraide, aſked him, how is it like, that ſhée ſhould come out of ye middeſt of Greece (as of ſet pourpoſe) into the fartheſt parte of Egypte? or howe is it poſſible, that when we came hither wée ſawe her not? As touching this, ſaide Cnemon, I haue nothing to ſaie. But thus much I hearde of her. After that, Demeneta preuented with her crafte, had caſte her ſelfe into the ditche,

and my Father had opened the mater to the people, he, at the firſte obteined pardon, and was altogeather buſied that he might gette leaue of the people to reſtoare me againe, and make preparation to ſéeke me. Thisbe noweThiſbe is no
                        •
                      becomme an Harlot, and is hated of Arſm. bicauſe of his buſines, hauinge little to doo, and banketting without care cōtinually, ſet, as it were at ſale, both her ſelfe, and her arte: and in aſmuche as ſhée paſſed Arſmoe in grace, & cunning play, bothe in quicke fingering, and alſo ſwéete ſinginge to her Intrumente, ſhée perceiued not that ſhe gotte thereby woorſhip, enuie, and emulation, conioyned with ſinguler indignation: chiefely for that ſhée was beloued of a certaine Marchaunt of Mancratia, named Nanſicles, who deſpiſed Arſmoe, with whom he accōpanied before, for al that while ſhée ſonge, her chéekes ſwelled, and were vnſéemely, with ſtaringe eies, almoſt leauinge their accuſtomed place. Wherefore Arſmoe ſwellinge with anger, and emulation, came to Demenetas kinſfolkes, and tolde them the whole maner of the whiles that Thisbe vſed againſte her, whereof ſomme ſhée ſuſpected, and Thisbe had tolde her other ſome, for the familiar acquaintance which was bitwéene them. When therefore Demenetas kinſfolkes came togeather to haue my Father condemned, and had procured the moſt eloquente Oratours, with greate Summes of mony to accuſe him, they ſaide, that Demeneta was killed without Iudgement, and not conuicted, and that the Adulterie was pretended to colour the murther, and therefore they required to haue the Adulterer either quicke, or deade, or at leſte, to knowe his name. Laſte of all, that Thisbe might be brought to examination, which when my Father had promiſed, & coulde not perfourme, (for ſhe had prouided that before the daie of Iudgemente was aſſigned, and wente her waie with the Marchaunt, as they had appointed) the people takinge the mater in euill parte, Iudged him not the killer, in as muche as he had tolde the mater plainely as it was donne, but he helped

to the death of Demeneta, and mine vniuſte banniſhmente,Ariſtippus banniſhed from Athens. exiled him out of his Countrie, and confiſcated al his goodes, and this commoditie gotte he by his ſeconde Marriage. But the moſte wicked Thisbe, who is ſlaine in my ſight, ſayled from Athens for that cauſe. And thus muche ouely coulde I knowe, whiche Anticles tolde me in Egma, with whom I ſayled twice into Aegypt of purpoſe, if I might finde her in Mancratia, to bring her backe to Athens, and-deliuer my Father from ſuche ſuſpitions, and accuſations, as were laide againſt him, and take reuenge of her, for all the miſchieues that ſhée did vnto vs: and hereof in your preſence I make enquirie. Nowe as touchinge the cauſe of my comminge hither, the manner thereof, and the daungers that I ſuffered in this ſpace, you ſhal hereafter knowe. But howe, and by whom Thisbe was ſlaine in this Denne, wée ſhall haue néede perhappes of ſome Oracle to tel vs. Neuertheleſſe, if you will, let vs looke vpon the Letter whiche wée founde in her boſome: it maie be, that wée ſhall learne ſommewhat beſide this in it. They were content, and he openinge it, beganne to reade as foloweth. To Cnemon my Maiſter,Thiſbies Letter to Cnemon. 
                  Thisbe his enimie and reuenger. Firſte I tel you, of the deathe of Demeneta, whiche for your ſake I deuiſed againſte her, the manner howe I brought it to paſſe, if you doo Ranſome me, I wil tell you betwixte vs twoo. Vnderſtande, that I was taken by one of the ThéeuesHowe Thiſle came into that Ilande. that are of this crewe, and haue benne here tenne daies already: he ſaithe, that he is the Captaines Harneſbearer, but he will not géeue me leaue ſo muche as to looke abroade, and thus he pouniſhed me, as he ſaithe, for the loue he hathe towarde me, but as farre as I can geather, it is leſte ſomme man els ſhould take mée from him. Yet for all that by the benefite of the ſame God, I ſawe you (my Maiſter) yeſterdaie, and knewe you, and haue therefore ſente this Letter to you by an olde woman my bedfellowe, charginge her to deliuer▪ it to a bewtifull yonge

man beinge a Grecian, & the Captaines friende. Redéeme me, I praie thée, out of the handes of the Théefe, and entertaine your Handmaide, and if you will preſerue her, knowing this firſt, that when ſo euer I offended againſt you, I was conſtrained to doo it, but in that I reuenged you of your enimie, I did it of mine owne frée will, but if your anger be ſo gréeuous againſte me, that it will not be aſſwaged, vſe it towarde me as you ſhall thinke good: ſo that I maie be in your hande, I care not if I die, for I couet muche better to be ſlaine of your handes, and to be buried after the manner of the Greekes, then to leade a life more gréeuous then deathe, or els to ſuſteine ſucheBarbarous Loue woorſe then hatred. Barbarous Loue, as is more intollerable, thē the hatred of Athens. And thus ſpake Thisbe in her Letter. But Cnemon ſaide, Thisbe, as reaſon is, thou arte ſlaine, and thy ſelfe art meſſenger to tell vs of thy miſeries, making declaration of them by thine owne deathe. Thus hathe the Reuenger (as now maie it appeare) driuing thée ouer all the worlde, not withdrawen her ſcourge, before ſhée made me, whom thou haſte iniuried, although liuinge in Aegypte, to be ye beholder of thy pouniſhment. But what miſchiefe was that, whiche thou diddeſt deuiſe againſte me, as by thy Letters it maie appeare, whiche Fortune woulde not let thée bringe to ende? Verily, euen nowe alſo I muche miſtruſte thée, and am in great doubte, leſte the death of Demeneta be but a tale, and that, bothe they beguiled me, who tolde me of the ſame, and that thou art come by Sea out of Greece, to make in Aegypte another Tragedy of mée. Will you not leaue (ſaide Theagenes) to be too valiant, and feare the Shadowes, & Spirites, of deade folkes? For you cannot obiecte and ſaie, that ſhée hather either beguiled me, or deceiued my ſight, ſéeinge that I haue no parte in this plaie. But be ſure Cnemon, that this body is deade, and therefore, haue you no cauſe to doubte. But who did you this good turne in killinge her, or how ſhée was brought hither, or when I, my ſelfe

am in greate maruill. As for the reſte (ſaide Cnemon) I cannot tell. But ſurely Thyamis ſlewe her, as by the ſworde whiche laie by her beinge deade, wée maie gheſſe.Thyamis his worde. For I knowe it to be his, by the Hilt of Iuory, wherein is an Aegle grauen. Tell me therfore, ſaide Theagenes, how, when, & wherefore he killed her. How can I tel you, aunſweared Cnemon? For this Caue hathe not made me a Soothſaier, as doothe Apolloes Churche, or thoſe that enter into Trophonius Denne, which rapte with DiuineTrophynus Denne. furie, doo proficie. When Theagenes, and Cariclia hearde this, ſuddainely lamentinge, O Pitho, O Delphi, cried they: wherewith Cnemon was abaſhed, and wiſte not what they had conceiued by the name of Pitho: and thus were they occupied. But Thermutis, Thyamis Harneſbearer, after he beinge wounded, had eſcaped the battail, and ſailed to lande: when nighte came, he gotte a looſe Boate, and haſted to goe to the Iland, & Thisbe whom heThiſbe taken by Thermutis. tooke a fewe daies before frō 
                  Manſicles a Marchant, in a narrowe waie, at the ſide of the Hill. But after the broile began, and the enimies approched, when Thyamis ſente him to fetche the Sacrifice to the Goddes, he deſiringe to place her without the daunger of weapons, and to kéepe her for him ſelfe in ſafety, put her priuily into the Caue, and for haſte lefte her but in the entrie thereof. In which place, as ſhée at the firſt was lefte, partly for feare of the preſent perilles, partly for that ſhée knew not the waiesThyamis killed her in ſteede of Cariclia. that wente into the bottome of the Caue. Thyamis finding her in ſtéede of Cariclia, ſlewe her. To her therefore Thermutis made haſte, after he eſcaped out of the battaile, & as ſoone as he was landed in the Ilande, he ranne to the Tabernacles, where beſide aſſhes he founde nothinge. But findinge at length the mouthe of the Caue by the ſtoane, and the reade, if any were left, on fiere, he ranne downe in great haſte, and called Thisbe by name: whom after he founde deade, and ſtandinge a good while without mouinge, in a greate ſtudie: at length, hearinge

out of the inner partes of the Caue, a certaine noyſe, and ſounde, (for Theagenes, and Cnemon were yet in talke) he ſtraight déemed that they had ſlaine her, was therefore much troubled in his mind, & could not wel tel what to doo: For the Barbarous angre, and fearceneſſe whiche is naturally grafted in Théeues, kindled the more, for that he was nowe beguiled of his loue, moued him to ſet vpon them whome he déemed to be, the Authours of that murther, but for that he neither had armour nor weapō, he was conſtrained whither he would, or no, to be quiet: he thought it good therfore, not to come vpon them, as an enimie at the firſte, but if he could get any Armour, then to ſet on them after. When he had thus determined, he came to Theagenes, and loked about with eies frowning, and terribly bent, ſo that with his contenance he plainely bewraied the inwarde cogitation of his minde. They ſéeinge a man comme in vppon them ſuddainely, ſoare wounded, naked, and with a blouddy face, behaued not them ſelues all alike, but Cariclia ranne into a corner of the Caue, fearinge perhappes, to looke vpon a man ſo deformed, and naked. Cnemon ſéeinge Thermutes contrary to his expectation, and knowinge him well, miſtruſtinge that he woulde enterpriſe ſommewhat, helde his peace, and ſtepped backe. But that ſight did not ſo muche feare Theagenes, as moue him to wrath, who drewe his ſword, and made as though he woulde ſtrike him, if he ſturred, and bad him ſtande, or els (ꝙ he) thou ſhalte knowe the price of thy comminge, and the cauſe is, for that I knowe thée not, nor why thou commeſt. Thermutis came neare him, and ſpake him faire, hauinge rather reſpecte to the preſente time, then for that he was accuſtomed ſo to doo, and deſired Cnemon to be his friende, and ſayde, that he had deſerued to be holpen at his hande, bicauſe he neuer had donne him wronge, and had ben his companion the daie before, and that he came to them as to his friendes. Cnemon was moued with his woordes, and comming to

him, helped him vp, for he helde Theagenes by the knées, and enquired of him where Thyamis was, he tolde him euery thinge, howe he fought with his enimies, howe he wente into the thickeſt preſſe of them, and neither feared his owne ſafetie, nor their healche, howe he ſlewe euery man that came within his reache, but him ſelfe was garded and compaſſed about, and ſtraight charge giuen, that euery man ſhoulde for beare Thyamis. But what became of him at length, he coulde not tell, & I gréenouſly wounded, (ꝙ he) ſwomme to lande, and at this time am comme into the Caue to ſeeke Thisbe. And there with they aſked him, what he had to doo with Thisbe, or howe he came by her. Thermutis then tolde them alſo, howe he tooke her from certaine Merchantes, and howe he loued her wonderfully, and keapt her priuily in his owne Tabernacle, and before the comming of the enimies, put her into this Caue, and that he now founde her ſtaine, by ſome, whom he knewe not, but he woulde be gladde to vnderſtande, why, and for what occaſion it was donne. Cnemon herewith deſirous to deliuer him ſelfe, quickly from all ſuſpition. Thyamis killed her, ſaide he, & therewith for proufe he ſhewed him the ſworde whiche they founde by her, when ſhée was ſlaine, which as ſoone as Thermutis ſawe blouddy, and almoſte warme with the late ſlaughter, and knew that it was Thyamis ſworde in déede, fetching a great ſighe from the bottome of his hart, not knowing what was donne further, wente out of the Denne, and ſayde neuer a woorde, and comminge to the deade body, and laieinge his heade on her breaſte, O Thisbe, ſaide he ofte, but nothinge els, repeatinge the name onely, and within a while his ſences faylinge him, he fell on ſléepe, Theagenes, Cariclia, and Cnemon, beganne to thinke of their owne buſineſſe, and ſéemed as thoughe they woulde conſulte thereof: but their manifolde miſeries paſſed the greateneſſe of their calamities preſente, and the vncertainetie of that whiche was to come, did hinder & darken

the reaſonable parte of the minde, ſo that they looked one vpon an other, and euery one looked what his fellowe woulde ſaie, as touchinge their preſent ſtate, after this, their hope faylinge them, they woulde caſte their eies to the grounde, and with ſorrowfull ſighes, and gréeuous mourninges lift them vp againe, at length Cnemon laied him ſelfe on the grounde, Theagenes ſatte downe on a ſtoane, and Cariclia leaned on him, and ſtriued a great while to ouercomme fléepe, for deſire to conſider ſommewhat of theire preſente affaires, but they with ſorrowe and labour much abated, although againſt their willes, were conſtrained to obey nature, and out of their greate heauineſſe they fell into a pleaſant ſléepe. Thus was the reaſonable parte of the minde, of force conſtrained, to agrée with the affection of the body. But after they had ſlumbred a while, ſo that their eies were yet ſcante ſhut, Cariclia, who laie there with them, had a marueilous dreame, & this it was ſhée thought. A man with a rougheCariclias dreame. head, terrible ſcowlinge eyes, and bloudy handes, pulled out one of her eyes, herewith ſhée ſuddianely cried out, faieinge, that ſhée had loſte one of her eyes, & called for Theagenes, who ſtraight was at hande, and did bewaile her harme, as if in his ſléepe he had felt the ſame. But ſhe put her hande to her face, and felte euery where for that eye, which was loſte, and as ſoone as ſhe knewe it was a dreame, it is a dreame Theagenes, ſaide ſhée, I haue mine eie, come hither and feare not: Theagenes was herewith well pleaſed, and as méete is, (ꝙ he) you haue your eyes as bright as Sunne beames: But what ailed you, or why were you ſo afraide? An ill fauoured frowarde fellowe (ꝙ ſhée) nothinge fearing your inuincible ſtrength, came to me as I leaned on your knées, with a ſworde in his hande, in ſuche ſorte, that verily I thought he had pluckt out my right eye. And I woulde to God (ſaide ſhée) it had ben ſo in déede, rather then appeared to me in my ſléepe. God defende (ſaide he) and ſende vs better lucke, I wiſhe

it, ſaide ſhée, bicauſe it were better for me to looſe botheCariclias expoſition of her dreame. mine eies, then to be ſorrowful for the loſſe of you. Surely I am ſoare afraide, leſte you be mente by this dreame, whom I eſtéeme as mine eye, my life, and al my ritches. Not ſo, ſaide Cnemon, (for he hearde al, beinge waked at the firſte crie of Cariclia) it ſéemeth to me, yt your dreame ſhoulde meane an other thinge, & therefore tell me whether your Parentes be aliue, ſhée ſayde yea, if euer they were aliue. Then Iudge ſayde he, that your Father isCnemons expoſition of Cartclias dreame, VVhy our Parentes be likened to a praier of eies, deade, and that I geather by this, for as muche as wée knowe that our Parentes be the cauſe, and Authoures of our life, and that wée ſée the light of daie. Wherefore by good reaſon, dreames doo liken our Father, & Mother to a payre of eyes, for as muche as they be the cauſe aſwell of the ſight, as of that maie be ſéene. This is much, ſaide Cariclia, but God graunte that this be rather true, then the other, and that your interpretation preuaile, & I be called the falſe Prophete. Theſe thinges ſhal thus come to paſſe, no doubt ſayde Cnemon, & therefore you muſt be tontent there with, but wée in déede ſéeme to dreame trifling thus longe about dreames and fanſies, without any conſideration of our owne buſineſſe, & the rather ſéeinge that this Aegyptian (he meant Thermutis) is abſent and be wayleth his breathleſſe Loue. Theagenes anſweared him, and ſaide, Cnemon, for as muche as ſome God hathe ioyned you to vs, & made you partaker of our calamities. Let vs heare your aduice firſt, for you are ſkilled in theſe Countries, and vnderſtande their tongue well, and wée are not ſo méete to conſult of that which is neceſſary, for yt wée are drowned with greater dangers. Cnemon therfore muſing a litle, ſpake thus. Which of vs is in greater miſerie, I cannot tel, for I am ſure that God hathe layde calamities ynough vpon my backe alſo: But for that you bid me, as the elder, to geue mine aduiſe as touching theCnemons aduice as touching their preſent affaires. preſent caſe, this is my minde, This Ilande as you ſée, is deſerte, & hathe no man in it, but vs; moreouer of Siluer,

and Gould, & Precious apparel, here is great ſtoare. For of ſuche thinges Thyamis, & his companions, haue taken much, as wel from vs, as alſo from others, & hath layed it here, but as for Corne, & other thinges whereby our life may be maintained, there is not one whitte. Wée are in daunger therfore if we tarrie here longe, either to periſh for foode, or with the returne of our enimies, or of thoſe who haue benne of this felowſhip, if they come to fetche this monie, whereof they all knowe. If any of theſe thinges happen, it ſhall not be poſſible for vs to eſcape without deathe, or if they deale more fréendly with vs, wée ſhalbe ſubiecte to their reprochful dealing, & ſcornful behauiours. For ſeinge that theſe Heardſmenne be alwaiesA good Captaine cauſeth diſordered people to liue orderly. faithleſſe, now are they moſte, for that thei wante a Captaine, & Ruler, that may conſtraine them to be moderate, wée muſt therefore leaue and forſake this Iland, no leſſe then harmefull ſnares, or a very pryſon in déede. And firſte diſpatche awaie Thermutis, vnder pretence to enquire, and ſéeke to know ſome certainetie of Thyamis. Then ſhall wée conſulte more ſafely togeather, & thinke of thoſe thinges that are néedefull. And if this were not, yet it is a pointe of wiſedome, to put out of our company a man by nature vnconſtant, indued with rude and vncurteous maners, whiche els miſtruſteth ſomewhat of vs for Thisbes ſake, and will not reſte, till he haue (if occaſion ſerue) by fraude beguiled vs. They allowed his ſaieinge well, and thought it good to doo euen ſo: wherefore they wente to the entrie of the Caue (for they perceiued it was daie by this time) and waked Thermutis very drowſie with ſléepe, and when they had declared to him the likelihoode of their Counſell, and had eaſily perſwaded him, beinge a fickle felowe, and had caſte Thisbe
                  Neceſſitas plus poſſe quàm pietas ſolet, Seneca. into a litle pitte, and as muche duſte on her, as was to be founde aboute the Tabernacle, and donne to her as Religiouſly as the time woulde ſuffer, and with teares, and wéepinges, in ſtéede of all other Ceremonies buried her,

they ſente Thermutis aboute the pretended buſines, as was decreed, but he, after he had gone a little waie, returned againe, and ſaide, that he woulde not goe alone, neither raſhly obiecte him ſelfe to ſo preſente a daunger, as to be a ſpie, excepte Cnemon mighte goo with him. Whiche thing when Theagenes perceiued, that Cnemon did detracte (for when he harde what the Aegyptian ſaid, he ſéemed to be muche troubled in his minde, and ſore afraide) ſaide to him. Thou arte able to géeue good Councell, but thy harte faileth thée, which thinge I haue bothe at other times well perceiued, but eſpecially nowe. But plucke vp your ſprytes, and take a good harte to you, for at this time it ſéemeth neceſſarte to conſent, and goo with him, that he conceiue no ſuſpicion of our determined flight (for there is no daunger for him that is armed, and hath a ſwoorde, to goo with one vtterly Vnarmed) and then if occaſion ſerue, to ſlippe from him, and come to vs into ſome Village hereby, whiche wée will agrée vpon. Cnemon was contente, and appointed a certaine towneChemmis a Towne of Aegypte by Nylus. called Chemmis, very Ritche, and wel peopled, Cytuated on a Hill vpon the banke of Nylus, that it maie thereby be the better defended, frō the inuaſion of the heardmen. And it was to it after they were ouer the lake, almoſte an hundred furlonges, and they ſhould goo right foorthe. It wilbe harde, ſaide Theagenes, eſpecially for Cariclia, who hath not benne accuſtomed to goo any longe iourneies. But for all that, we will goo, and counterfeite our ſelues to be beggers, & ſuche as goo aboute with certaine Iuglinge caſtes to gette our liuinge. That wilbe well (ſaide Cnemon) for you be very euill fauoured people, but moſte Cariclia, whoſe eie was lately pulled out, wherefore me thinketh, you wil not onely aſke péeces of breade, but Couerletes, and Caldrons. Hereat they ſmyled a little, ſo that their laughter moued but there lippes onely. When therefore with Othe they had confirmed that, which was determined, and had taken the Goddes

to witneſſe, that they woulde neuer by their willes forſake one an other, they wente eche of them aboute their decreed buſines. Cnemon therefore, and Thermutis, hauinge in the morninge early paſſed ouer the lake, tooke their iournie through a thicke woodde, wherein it was harde to finde any waie. Thermutis wente before, for ſo Cnemon woulde haue it, pretendinge the cunninge he had in that harde paſſage, and willinge him to leade the waie: but in déede rather prouiding for his owne ſafetie, and preparing a iuſt opportunitie to geue him the ſlippe. After they had gonne a good waie, they eſpied a flocke of ſhéepe, and after thoſe, who kepte them were fledde, and crepte into the thicke woodde harde by, they killed one of the fayreſt Rames, that wente before the flocke, and roſtinge him at a fire, which the Shepherdes had made, did eate of ye fleaſh without tarying, before it was thoroughly roſte, becauſe their bellies were maruelouſly pinched with hunger. Like Woulues therefore, or Cormorantes they deuoured euery parte, though it were but a litle baked againſte the fire, ſo that while they did eate it, the bloude ranne aboute their téeth. But after they had filled their bellies, and quenched their thirſte with Milke, they wente forwarde, and now was it time for Cnemon to put his deuiſe in practiſe. When they had therefore gone vp a little Hill (vnder which, Thermutis ſaide, was the Village, and in it Thyamis, beinge taken in the Battaile, was either kepte Priſoner, or ſlaine, as he coniectured) Cnemon made an excuſe that his bellie was troubled with too much meate, and by reaſon of the Milke, he had a painefull laſke, therefore he deſired Thermutis to goo ſoftely afore, and he woulde by and by ouertake him. Thus did he ones or twiſe, or thrée times, ſo that nowe he ſéemed to deale truely, affirminge that he had muche adoo to ouertake him, after he had thus acquainted the Aegyptian, at laſte, without his knowlege, he taried behinde, and as faſte as he coulde canne downe the hill, into

a very thicke woodde. But he when he came to the toppe of the hill, ſatte him downe on a ſtoane to reſte him, tarriynge till night came, in whiche they appointed to goo into the village, to heare in what ſtate Thyamis was, and therewithall he looked aboute for Cnemon, to whom if he came after him, he deuiſed to doo ſome harme. For he had not yet lefte his conceiued opinion, that he ſlewe Thisbe, and therefore he bethought him ſelfe, how he might kill him againe, and afterwarde he was with a certaine madneſſe moued to ſet vpon Theagenes. But when Cnemon appeared not, and it was nowe farre on the night, he fell a ſléepe, and with the biting of an Aſpe, hauinge gotten like deathe to all his paſſed life, by the Ladies of deſtinies pleaſure perhappes, he ſlepte his traſon and laſte ſléepe. But Cnemon after he had forſakenThermutis is ſlaine. 
                  Thermutis, lefte not runninge, till darke night reſtrained his violente courſe, ſo that in that place where the night ouertooke him, he hidde him ſelfe, and laide as many leaues as he coulde vpon him. Vnder whiche he liynge, was muche troubled, and ſlepte but little, ſuppoſinge euery noyſe, and blaſte of winde, and wagginge of eche leafe to be Thermutis, and if at any time ſléepe ouercame him, he thought that he fledde, and looked backe for him, that purſued him not. And when he had luſte to ſléepe, he woulde refraine, for that he woulde not ſléepe longer, then néede required. Laſte of all, he ſéemed to be angry with the night, and thought that it was longer then any other was. As ſoone as with greate deſire he ſawe the daie, firſte he cut of ſo muche of his heare, as he had let growe, that he might be like vnto the Théeues, toWhy the Theeues lette their heare growe. Longe heare dothe becomme 
                        ••
                     uers well. the intent, that thoſe who mette him, ſhould not trouble, nor ſuſpecte him. For the Théeues beſide other thinges that they doo, whereby they maie ſéeme more fearefull, let their heare growe ſo longe that al men lothe it, which they ſhake hanginge on their ſhoulders, knowinge very well, that longe heare maketh them more acceptable,

whiche are in Loue, but Théeues more terrible. When therefore Cnemon had cutte of ſo muche of his heare, as woulde make him ſéeme the more trimme, and not be thought one of the Théeues, he made haſte to goo to Chemmis, where he appointed to méete with Theagenes. And beinge now come to Nylus, and ready to paſſe ouer, he ſpied an Olde man walkinge on the banke, vp and downe, who ſéemed to communicate ſomme of his cogitations with the fludde, he had longe heare after a holy faciō, but a very white, & roughe bearde ſomewhat lōge, his Cloke and other Apparell like a Grecian. Cnemon therefore ſtaied a little, but when the Olde man paſſed vp and downe diuerſe times, and ſéemed not to ſée anyThought maketh a man in maner blinde, yea and deafe, and doumbe too. man by him (he was in ſuche a muſe, & ſure cogitation) he came before him, and ſaide, al Hayle Sir, I cannot, ꝙ he, for that Fortune will not ſo. Whereat Cnemon marueiled, and ſaide, are you a Greeke? or what Countrie man els? Neither a Greeke anſweared he, nor any other Countrieman, but of this Countrie, an Aegyptian. How then happeneth it, ſaide Cnemon, that in your apparaile you imitate the Greekes. My miſeries, ſayde he, haueMiſeries make a man ſommetimes change his apparaile. changed this handſome apparayle for others. Cnemon maruailed that any man coulde trimme & decke him ſelfe for any miſhappes, and faine woulde haue knowen the cauſe or manner thereof. You cauſe me, ſaide the Olde man, to remember many troubles, and doo alſo moue by them a wonderfull grudginge againſte your ſelfe: but whether be you goinge, or from whence come you, or how happeth it that you ſpeake Greeke in Aegypte? That were a merie ieſte in déede, ſaide Cnemon, in as much as you firſt aſked me, & wil tel me no part of your eſtate, yet you woulde know of me, mine. I am well pleaſed (ꝙ the Olde man) for that you ſéeme to be a Grecian, and ſome Fortune as I gheſſe, hath trāſformed you into an other Figure alſo. Beſide that you ſo earneſtly deſire to heare in what ſtate I am. Surely my gréefe deſireth to be vttered,

& if I had not happened on you, I thinke I ſhouldeIt is a greate paine to concele any miſhappe longe. haue tolde it to theſe Réedes accordinge to the tale. Lette vs therefore leaue theſe bankes of Nylus, and Nylus it ſelfe too, neither is the border of this banke fitte, to tell a longe tale in, ſithe that it is ſubiecte to the vehemente heate of the Southe Sunne. Let vs therefore goo to the village that wée ſée ouer againſt vs, if you haue no greater buſineſſe, there ſhall you be my geſte, not in mine owne houſe, but in a very good mans, who hath entertained me in aduerſitie: In his houſe ſhall you heare all my Fortune, if you will, and in like manner you ſhall tell me yours. Contente, ſaide Cnemon. For if I had not mette with you, I muſte haue gonne to this village, to tarrie by appointment for ſome of my companions, they tooke a Boate then (wherof there was great ſtoare, ready to tranſporte any man for hyre) and came into the Towne, and ſo into the houſe, wherein this Olde man was hoſted, the good man of the houſe was not at home, but his daughter now Marriageable, & the other Maides: as many as were at home entertained them very courteouſly, & intreated the Olde man, as he had benne their Father. For ſo I thinke their Maiſter had commaunded. One waſhed their legges, and ſweapte the duſte from vnder their féete, another made their bedde, and prouided a ſofte lodginge for them, an other brought in the potte, and made a fire, another couered the Table, & ſette wheatē breade thereon, & diuers other kindes of fruytes. Whereat Cnemon maruailed, & ſaide, Father, perhapsIupiter hoſpitalis. wée are comme into Iupiter hoſpitalis houſe, wée are ſo muche regarded, and that with ſo good minde. Not into Iupiter ſaide he, but into ſuche a mans as knoweth Iupiter hoſpitalis, and the Patrone of ſuche as be in aduerſitie well. For, ſometime he leadeth his life in trauaile, & Marchandiſe, and hath ſéene many Citties, and knoweth the manners and facions of diuers Nations. For which cauſe, it is like, that he entertained me into his houſe,

wandring & trauelinge a fewe daies agoo, aboute as alſo he hath donne, & many moe others. What trauell, Father, ſaide Cnemon is it, which you ſpeake of. I am, ſaide 
                     •
                  e, in this place, berefte of my Children, and knowe the miſdooers wel, but cannot be reuenged: wherfore I with waylinge bewéepe my ſorrowe, like a Byrde whoſe neſtA pretye ſimilitude. a Dragon pulleth downe, and deuoureth her yonge before her face, and is afraide to come nighe, neither can ſhée flie awaie: at ſuche controuerſie is loue, and ſorrowe in her, but makinge greate noyſe, flieth aboute the miſerable ſtéepe, and powreth in vaine her Motherlike, and humble teares into thoſe cruell eares, who haue of Nature benne taught no mercie. Will you therefore, ſaide Cnemon, tell me, howe and when you had this cruell happe? Hereafter, ſaide he, I wil. Now it is time to lookeHomer calleth the bellie pernitious. to our bellies, to whiche Homer hauinge reſpecte not without good conſideration, called it pernitious, for that in compariſon thereof al thinges els were counted little woorthe. But firſte, accordinge to the wiſedome of theCalaſiris will not forgette to doo Sacrifice to the Goddes, for any trauaile, and this is euery good mannes duety alſo. Calaſiris Sacrio ficeth to Theagenes, and Cariclia. 
                  Aegyptians, let vs doo ſacrifice to the immortal Goddes, for nothinge ſhall euer cauſe me to breake this cuſtome. Neither ſhall any greife be ſo greate, whiche ſhall cauſe me to put the remembrance, and ſeruice of God out of my minde: when he had ſaide thus, he powred a litle cleane water out of a viall, and ſaide, I doo Sacrifice to the Goddes of this Countrie, & to the Goddes of Greece, to Apollo of Delphos, and beſide, to Theagenes, and Cariclia, good and honeſt Creatures, for as muche as I make theſe Goddes alſo: and therewithal he wepte, as though he woulde doo an other Sacrifice to them beſide, with ſorowfull teares. When Cnemon hearde this, he was abaſhed, and looked earneſtly on the Olde man rounde aboute.Theagenes, and Cariclia, Calaſiris children without a Mother. What ſaie you (ꝙ he) be Theagenes, and Cariclia your children in déede? They are my children, ſaide he, borne without a Mother. For the Goddes haue made them my children by chance, and cauſed me to be ſorowfull

for them, ſo that I haue a naturall affection of minde towarde them, by which they haue eſtéemed me as their Father, and ſo called me alſo. But I pray you tel me how you knewe them. I doo not onely know them, ſaide Cnemon, but tell you that they be ſafe and in good healthe. O Apollo, and the reſte of the Goddes, ſaide he, tell me in what Countrie they be, and I will call you then my Sauiour, and make equall accoumpte of you as with the Goddes. What rewarde, ſaide he, wil you geue mée? At this time, ſaide he, thankes, which a wiſe man coumptethA wiſe man coūpteth thākes a greate rewarde. a goodly rewarde. And if yee comme into my Countrie, whiche the Goddes tell me ſhalbe ſhortely, you ſhal haue greate ritches. You promiſe me, ſaide he, that whiche is to come, and very vncertaine, and maie yet preſentely ſufficiently recompence me. If you ſée any thinge preſente tell me. For I ſo muche deſire that, that I coulde be content to looſe ſome part of my bodie, and yet thinke that I am not maymed of any member, but haue euery iointe whole. I require this (ſaide he) that you woulde voucheſafe to tell me of them, of whence they are, who be their Parentes, and what Fortune they haue had, thou ſhalte haue, anſweared he, a greate rewarde, and ſuche a one as to it nothinge maye be comparable. Although you had aſked all the Treaſure in the worlde. But lette vs nowe eate ſome meate. For bothe of vs as well you to heare, as I to tell ſhall haue néede of longer time. When they had eaten Nuttes, Figges, Palmes newe gathered, and ſuche other fruite, as the Olde man was accuſtomed to féede on, (for his conſcience made no difference of meates) they dranke, he water, and Cnemon wine, after a little whyle, then Cnemon ſaide, Father, howe well Bacchus is pleaſed with Tales, andBacchus pleaſed with mery Songes, and Tales. banquetinge Songes, you knowe well inoughe. Wherefore nowe alſo ſéeinge he hathe chalenged me to himſelfe, he moueth me to deſire to heare ſomewhat, and conſtraineth me to craue my promiſed rewarde, & nowe

it is time for you to make prouiſion to plaie this commodie as on a ſtage, as the Prouerbe is. You ſhall heare it, ſayde he, and woulde to God, that thriftie Manſicles had ben here, whom I haue ofte by diuers delaies deluded, very deſirous to heare this tale. After Cnemon hearde Manſicles name, he aſked where he was then. He is gonne, ꝙ the olde man, on huntinge. What manner of hunting, ſaide he? Of wilde beaſtes very cruel, which be called in déede menne, and Heardmen, but liue by theft, & can hardely be entrapped, for that they vſe bypatches, and Caues in the Mariſhie grounde. Whereof doothe he accuſe them ſaide he? Of the taking awaie of a Leman of his, whiche he broughte from Athens, whome he called Thisbe. Lorde God, ſaide Cnemon, and therewithal ſuddainely helde his peace, as though he would ſaie no more, and when the olde man aſked him, what he ailed, Cnemon willinge to bringe him to other matters, ſaide, I marueile how, or with what armie emboldened, he durſt ſet vpō them. He anſweared, Groondates is made DeputieGroondates Deputie of Aegypt. of Aegypte, by the greate Kinge, by whoſe commanndemente Mitranes Captaine of the Watche is made Gouernour of this Towne. Mancliſes hired him for a great ſumme of mony, and with great companie of Horſemen, and footemen conducted him againſte them. He taketh in very ill parte the loſſe of that mannes Mayde, not ſo muche for that ſhée was his friende, and plaied well on inſtrumentes, but muche more, bicauſe he was in minde to carrie her to the Kinge of Aethiopia, as he ſayde, that ſhée might be his Wiues drinking goſſippe, & Familiare after the manner of the Greekes, as though he were depriuedThe VViues of Greece haue their drinking
                        •
                      Goſsippes. therefore of a greate ſumme of mony, whiche he hoped to haue for her, he maketh all prouiſion poſſible to recouer her againe. My ſelfe willed, and exhorted him ſo to doo, ſuppoſinge, that he by ſome chance might happe to finde my children, and helpe me to them againe. Wée haue talked ynough, ſaide Cnemon, nowe cuttinge him

of thoſe of the Heardmen, Captaines, and of the Kinges them ſelues. It wanted but litle, that you had not with your talke turned my minde an other waie, you haue added this glaunce, nothinge apperteininge to Bacchus, as the Prouerbe is. Wherefore returne your talke to that you promiſed. For I haue founde you like Protheus of Pharos, not turninge your ſelfe into diuers Figures, as he did, but attemptinge to bringe me from my pourpoſe. You ſhall knowe, ſaide the olde man. But firſte I wil tel you of my ſelfe, not beguilinge you in my tale, as you thinke: but propoundinge ſuch talke as ſhalbe true, & wel agréeinge to that whiche foloweth. The Cittie whereinCalaſiris borne at Memphis, he telleth him all his whole life paſſed. I was borne, is called Memphis, my Fathers name, and mine alſo is Calaſiris. As touching my trade of life, I am now a Vacabonde, who was not longe before a Prieſte, I had a Wife by the ordinaunce of the Cittie, but loſt her by the Lawe of Nature. After ſhée had paſſed out of this body in to an other reſte, I liued a while without any miſerie, delighting my ſelf with twoo Sonnes that I had by her. Not many yéeres after, the courſe of Heauen preſcribed by deſtinie, doothe chaunge all our eſtate, and Saturne
                  Saturne an vnlucky Planete, and neuer good. caſte his eye into our houſe, makinge the chaunge ſtill worſe and worſe, without any hope of auoidinge the ſame, onely foreſighte, as in ſuche matters is common, was my gaine, which muche abated the violence, & heate of theſe miſaduentures. For thoſe miſeries (my Sonne)VVhat miſteries be tollerable, and what vntollerable. The beginnings of Calaſiris his euil lucke. Rhodopis, a Harlot. that came on thée ſuddainely be vntollerable, but ſuch as are foreſéene, are borne with more equall minde. For the minde being occupied with feare, is abaſhed of thoſe, and taketh them heauily, but cuſtome by reaſon maketh theſe more familiare, ſuche a thinge happened vnto me. A woman of Thrace, of ripe yéeres, and except Cariclia the faireſt in worlde, whoſe name was Rhodopis, I knowe not whence, nor how by the ill lucke of her Louers, leauinge her Countrie, trauailed ouer all Aegypte, and came in very wanton wiſe, to Memphis, with a greate ſorte of

Maydes, and Seruantes waytinge on her, very perfitly inſtructed in all venerious entiſementes, and wanton behauiour, ſo that it was poſſible for none that looked on her, not to be entangled with her loue, of ſuche an vnauoidable force, was the Whooriſhe allurement, that procéeded from her eies. Shée entred into Iſis Temple ofte, whoſe Prieſt I was, and woorſhipped the Goddes daily, and offered diuers Sacrifices, and giftes, whiche coſte many Talentes, (I am aſhamed to tell it; yet I wil) withCalaſiris falleth in loue with Rhodopis. often beholdinge her, ſhée ouercame me, and that temperance alſo, whiche in al my life, with greate ſtudie I had conſerued. A great while, I withſtoode the eies of my body with ye inwarde eyes of my minde, yet at laſte, ouercome with this affection of loue, as thoſe who are heauy loden, I was conſtrained to yéelde. When therefore I vnderſtoode that a woman ſhoulde be the beginninge of all the ill lucke, whiche the Goddes had appointed me, of whiche I was not ignorant before, and perceiued that by Fatall deſtinie, it was ſo decreed, & that the God, whoſe turne was then to rule, woulde plaie that parte: I determined not to diſhoneſt the Prieſtehoode, in whiche from my youthe I had benne brought vp, neither to defile the Churches, and ſecrete places of the Temples of the Goddes, and to auoide that, whiche was by deſtinie decreed, not for dooinge the déede (whiche God forebid) but to pouniſhe my deſire with conuenient pouniſhment, as in my minde I determined, whiche by reaſon rulinge in that Iudgemente, I banniſhed my ſelfe, and vnhappyCalaſiris banniſhed him ſelfe. name foreſooke my Countrie, as well to yéelde to the neceſſitie of the Ladies of deſtinie, & geue them leaue to determine of vs what they would, as alſo to leaue the curſed Rhodopis. For I was afraide, my geſt, leſte if he, who then had Dominon, ſhould violently enter into the Cittie, & I ſhould be forced to doo ſome viler thinge. But the chiefe cauſe, aboue all other, that banniſhed me, were my Sonnes, for the ſecrete wiſedome, that I had of the

Goddes, foreſhewed to me, that they ſhoulde fighte a blouddy battaile bitwéene them ſelues, that I might therefore remoue ſuche a cruell ſpectacle from mine eyes (which I thinke the Sonne him ſelfe would not beholde) and to acquite theſe fatherly eyes, of the ſighte of my Sonnes death, I went my way to preuent theſe thinges, pretendinge as though I woulde goe to greate Thebes, to ſée my elder Sonne, who was then with his Grandfather, his name was Thyamis. Cnemon ſtarted when he hearde the name of Thymis, yet he kepte his counſell, as well as he coulde, the better to heare that whiche folowed: but he tolde on, as foloweth. I omitte that whiche happened to me by the waie (yonge man) for it nothinge apperteineth to that, you aſke for. But when I hearde that there was a certaine Cittie of Greece Sacred to Apollo, whiche was a Temple of the Goddes, & a Colledge of Wiſe, and farre from the troublous reſort of the common people, I wente thither, thinking that Cittie which was dedicated to Holineſſe, & Ceremonies, to be a méete place for a man beinge a Prophete to reſorte vnto. SoCalafiris iourney to Delphi. when I had ſailed by ye coaſte of Creſsye, & was arriued at Cirrhus, I went in haſte out of my ſhippe to the Towne, whither after I was comme, I felt a certaine Diuine Odore bréeth vpon me. So that for many cauſes I accoūpted that Cittie a méete place for me to abide in, the leſte wherof was not the natural ſighte of the ſame. For as itThe ſituation of Delphi. were a naturall defenſe, or Tower, Pernaſſus reacheth ouer it, incloſinge the Cittie, as it were with a Walle with his twoo toppes. You ſaie very wel (ꝙ Cnemon) and like one in déede who had taſted of Pithos Sprite, for I remēber that my Father tolde me, yt ſighte of the Tower was ſuche, when the Athenians ſente him to the Councel of Thamphictiones. Are you then an Athenian Sonne, ſaide he? Yea ſir, ſaide Cnemon. What is your name? Cnemon, anſweared he. How came you hither? You ſhall heare that hereafter, nowe tell on your tale. Contente,

quoth he. I wente into the Cittie, and prayſed it mucheThe pleaſant commodities of Delphi. in my minde, for the places of exerciſe there, and the pleaſant fieldes, and the ſpringes, with the fountaine of Caſtalius, this donne, I wente to the Temple. For the report of the people, that ſaide, the Prophetes would geue anſweare, preſently moued me ſo to doo, as ſoone as I had gonne into the Churche, and ſaide my praiers, and madeApolloes anſweare to Calaſiris. a certaine ſecrete requeſt to the God, Pythias anſweared me thus.
               
                  To ſhunne the deſtinies ſure decree thou takeſt all this toyle:
                  And therefore leauſt the fruitfull coaſt of Nilus fertile ſoyle.
                  Haue a good harte, for I will geue the blakiſhe fieldes againe:
                  Of Aegypte vnto thee, till then, our friende thou ſhalt remaine.
               
               As ſoone as the Oracle had geuen me this anſweare, I tell grouelinge on the Aultar, & deſired him in al thinges to be my good God. But a greate ſorte of thoſe that ſtoode by me, praiſed the God muche, for geuinge me ſuche an anſweare at my firſte comminge. Euery man talked of Fortune, and behelde me, and ſaide, that I was the welcommeſt man to the God, that euer came there, but one Licurgus of Sparta, wherefore when I deſired to dwellLicurgus which gaue Lawes to the Lacedemonians. in the Churcheyearde, they gaue me leaue, and decreed, that I ſhoulde be nouriſhed of their common charges. To be ſhorte, I wanted no good thinge. For there I inquired the cauſes, and manner of the Sacrifices, whiche were very diuers, and many, that as wel the menne that inhabite there, as alſo ſtrangers make, or els. I conferred with Philoſophers, vnto whiche Cittie no final number of ſuche menne comme, ſo that the Cittie is in manner a ſtudie dedicated to Propheſies vnder the God, who is Captaine of the Muſes. And at the firſte there were diuersPretie Heatheniſh queſtions. queſtions, as touchinge many matters moued

among vs. For ſome would aſke after what ſort wée Aegyptians honoured our Gods, an other, why diuers coū
                  tries woorſhipped diuers kindes of Beaſtes, & what they could ſay of euery of them, other inquired of the maner, & forme of the buildingꝭ called Pyramides, many of their framinge of inſtrumentes, and their diuers tunes. At a woorde, they lefte nothinge that apperteined to Aegypt, vnſearched. For the Grecians eares are wonderfully delited with tales of Aegypte. At laſte, certaine of the ciuileſt ſort, fel in talke of Nylus, and aſked me whence were his heades, and what ſpeciall propertie it had aboue other Riuers, and why it alone of all others in Summer did riſe. I tolde them what I knewe, and was written in the Holy Bookes, and was lawful onely for the Prieſtes to knowe. Howe that the heade thereof was in the hieſt partes of Aethiopia, and formoſte boundes of all Libia, at the ende of the Eaſte Clime, and beginninge of the South. It floweth in the ſummer, not as ſome thinke, by reaſon of contrarie blaſtes of the Windes, called Eteſtie (as ſome thinke) but for that thoſe ſame windes blowing out of the North, gather together, & driue al the cloudes of the Ayre into the South (about the middel of the ſummer) till they come to the burning Line, where their violence is abated, for the vncredible heate thereaboutes, ſo that al the moyſture, whiche was before geathered togeather, and congeled, Melthethe, and is reſolued into aboūdance of water, wherwith Nilus waxeth proude, and wil be a Riuer no longer, but runneth ouer his bankes, & couereth Aegypte with his waters, as with a Sea, and maketh the grounde very fruitefull. Wherefore it miniſtreth ſweete waters to drinke, as is like, for that they come from Heauen, & is pleaſant to be touched, not now ſo hoate, as at the firſte, yet is it luke warme, as one that ſpringeth in ſuch a place. For which cauſe of that ſtoude, and none other, ariſe no Vapors, for if there ſhould, then were it like that it receiued his encreaſe of ſnowe reſolued,

of whiche opinion ſome learned men of the Greekes
                  He confuteth the opinion of certaine Greeke Philoſophers, that thought the increaſe ther had proceeded of the reſolution of Snowe. Caricles Apolloes Prieste. haue ben, as I talked of theſe matters in this ſort Apolloes Preiſt, called Caricles, my familiare friende, ſaid vnto me. It is very well ſaide you, &, I my ſelfe am of your opiniō alſo, for I haue harde the Prieſtes of Aegypt that inhabite about Nilus, ſaie ſo alſo. And haue you ben there then Caricles, ꝙ I? I haue, quoth he, Calaſiris. What miſchance draue you thether? I aſked him then. The ill lucke that I had at home, ſaide he, whiche for al that turned to my great felicitie. I wondred at that, and thought it coulde not be ſo. You will not marueile (ꝙ he) if you heare the whole proceſſe of the matter, whiche you ſhall doo when you pleaſe. Then (ꝙ I) tel me nowe, for I am wel pleaſed you ſhould ſo doo. Caricles then, when he had let the people depart, ſaid, know, that for a certaine cauſe I haue deſired a greate while, that you mighte be made priuie to mine eſtate. A longe time after I was maried,Caricles telleth Calaſiris al his estate. I had no Children: yet at lengthe, when I was olde, and had made earneſte Praiers to God, I had a Daughter, the whiche, God foreſhewed me, ſhoulde be borne in an il time. For al that, ſhée became mariageable, and I prouided her a Huſbande of one of her Suiters (for ſhée had many) whiche in my iudgemente, was the moſte honeſteſtHe was perhaps of Themiſtocles opinion, who rather choſe for his Daughter, a man without Monie, then Monie without a man. man. The firſte nighte that ſhee, vnhappy wenche, laie with her Huſbande, died, either with a Thunderbolte, or els, for that by negligent handelinge, her bedde was ſet on fire. And thus the Marriage Songe, not yet ended, was tourned to mourninge: and ſhée was carried out of her Bridebedde, into her Graue: and the Tapers that gaue her lighte at her Wedding, did nowe ſerue to kindle her Funeral Fire. Biſide this vnhappy fortune, God gaue me an other Tragicall miſſehappe, in that he tooke the Mother from me, beinge too ſorrowful for the Deathe of her Daughter. I therefore (not able to beare this greate pouniſhmente at any Goddes hande, did not kil my ſelfe, in obeieinge their Preceptes, who are occupied

aboute Holy controuerſies, and affirme it not to beIt is not lawfull for a man to kil him ſelfe. But of ſight out of minde commonly. lawful, but) leafte my Countrie priuily, & fledde far from the ſorrowes I fcalte at home: for the quicke remēbrance of the minde, is greately holpen, to forgeate euilles paſſed, if it be obſcured, and darkened by tourninge of the eies from the ſame. After I had trauailed ouer many Countries, at length I came into your Aegypte, and into the Cittie Catadupi, to ſée the Sluces of Nilus. And thus,Catadupi a Cittie of Aegypte. my frende, I haue tolde you the manner of my trauaile into thoſe places. But I deſire, that you ſhoulde knowe the principal cauſe, why I tel you this tale. As I walked aboute in the Cittie, as my leaſure ſerued, and did buie ſutche thinges, as are very ſcarce in Greece (for newe by continuance of time, hauinge wel digeſted my ſorrowes, I haſted to returne into my Countrie) there came a ſobre man to me, and ſutche a one, as by countenance, appeared to be wiſe, that had lately paſſed his youtheful yéeres, of coloure blacke, and ſaluted me, and ſaide, that he woulde talke with me aboute a certaine matter (not ſpeakinge Greeke very wel). And when he ſawe, that I was willinge to goe with him, he brought me into a certaine Temple, and by and by, ſaide, I ſawe you buie certaine Hearbes, and Rootes that growe in India, and Ethiopia. If you wil buie ſuch thinges of me, in good faith, & without guile, I wil ſhewe you them with al my harte. That I wil, ꝙ I, ſhewe me thē I praie you. With that he tooke a little bagge from vnder his arme, and ſhewed me certaine precious ſtoones of wonderfull price. For there were Margarites among them as bigge as a little nutte, perfite rounde, and Smaragdis, and Hiachinthes, they were in coloure as the gréene Graſſe, and ſhined very bright. Theſe were like the Sea banke, that lieth vnder a harde rocke, which maketh all that is vnderneath to be like Purple coloure. At fewe woordes, their mingled, and diuers ſhining colour, delighted and pleaſed the eies wonderfully, whiche as ſoone as I ſawe. You muſt ſéeke

other Chapmen (ꝙ I) good Sir, for I, & al my ritches are ſcant able to buie one of the ſtoones that I ſée. Why ſaide he, if you be not able to buie thē, yet are you able to take them, if they be géeuen you. I am able, ſaide I, to receiue them in déede, but I knowe not what you meane ſo to mocke me. I mocke you not, ꝙ he, but meane good faithe, & I ſweare by the God of this Churche, that I will geue you al theſe thinges, if you wil take them, beſide an other gifte, whiche farre excelleth them all. I laughed when I heard this, he aſked me why I laughed. Becauſe, ꝙ I, it is a thinge to be laughed at: ſéeinge you promiſe me thinges of ſo greate price, and yet aſſure me to géeue me more. Truſte me, ſaide he: but ſweare that you will vſe this gifte well, and as I ſhall teache you. I maruailed what he meante, and ſtayed a while, yet in hope of thoſe greater rewardes, I tooke an Othe. After I had ſworne, as he willed me, he brought me to his Lodginge, and ſhewed me a Mayde of excellente bewtie, which he ſaide, was but ſeuen yéere Olde, me thought ſhée was almoſte Marriageable, ſuche grace dothe excellente bewtie geueWhat excellēt bewtie with taleneſſe of ſtature, maketh a womā ſeemely. to the taleneſſe of Stature. I ſtoode in a maſe, aſwell for that I knewe not what he meante, as alſo for the vnſaciable deſire I had to looke vpon her. Then ſpake he thus to me. Sir, the Mother of this Mayde, whiche you ſée, for a certaine cauſe, that you ſhal knowe hereafter, laide her foorthe, wrapped in ſuche Apparell as is commonly vſedCariclia layde foorthe, and committed to Fortune. That it is not lawfull to lette one die without ſuccoure, is a precepte of the Gymnoſophiſis. for ſuche pourpoſes, committinge her to the doubtfulneſſe of Fortune. And I by channce findinge her, tooke her vp, for it is not lawful to deſpiſe and neglecte a ſoule in daunger, after it hath once entered into an Humayne bodie. For this is one of the VViſe mens preceptes, that are with vs, to be, whoſe Scholer my ſelfe was once iudged woorthy. Beſides that euen in the Infantes eies there appeared ſome wonderfull thinge, ſhée behelde me with ſuche a ſteadie, and amiable countenaunce, as I looked vpon her. With her was alſo founde this bagge of

precious ſtoanes whiche I ſhewed you of late, and a Silken clothe wrought with letters in her Mother tongue, wherein was her whole eſtate contained, her Mother asCariclias estate written in her Faſcia. Siſimithres findinge Cariclia, prouideth for her bringing vp I gheſſe procuringe the ſame. Whiche after I had redde, I knew whence, and what ſhée was, and ſo I carried her into the Countrie farre from the Cittie, and deliuered her to certaine Shepeheardes to be broughte vp, with charge that they ſhould tel no man. As for thoſe thinges that were founde with her, I detained with my ſelfe, leaſte for them, the Maide ſhoulde be brought into any daunger. And thus at the firſte this matter was concealed: But after, in proceſſe of time, the Mayde growinge on, and becominge more fayre, then other wemen were (for bewtie in mine opinion cannot be concealed, thoughBewtie cannot be hidde. it were vnder the grounde, but woulde thence alſo appeare) fearinge leaſte her eſtate ſhould be knowen, and ſo ſhée killed, and I brought in trouble therefore, I ſewed, that I might be ſente in Ambaſſadge, to ye Deputie of Aegypte, and obtained, wherefore I come, and bringe her with me, deſirous to ſette her buſines in good order. And now muſte I vtter to him the cauſe of mine Ambaſſadge, for he hath appointed this daie for the hearingeCariclia deliuered to Caricles. of me. As touching the Mayde, I commende her to you, and the Goddes, who haue hitherto conſerued her, vpon ſuch conditions, as you are bounde by Othe to perfourme. That is, that you wil vſe her as a Frée woman, and marrye her to a Frée man, as you receiue her at my hande, or rather of her Mother, who hathe ſo leafte her. I hope that you wil perfourme al thinges whereof we haue commoned, aſwel by credite of your othe, as alſo by truſt ye I haue in your maners, whiche I haue by many daies experienced to be very Greekiſhe in déede. Thus much I had to ſay to you, before I executed my cōmiſſion, as concerninge mine Ambaſſadge: as for other ſecreſies belonging to the maide, I wil tel you them to morow in more ample wiſe, if you wil mete with me about Iſis temple. I

did as he requeſted, and caried the maide muffled to mine owne houſe, and vſed her very honorably that daie, comfortinge her with many faire meanes, & gaue God greateCaricles calleth Cariclia his owne Daughter ofte, and named her after his owne name. thankes for her, from that time hitherto, accoumpting, & meaning her my daughter. The next daie, I went to Iſis Temple, as I had appointed with the ſtranger, and after I had walked there a greate while alone, and ſawe him not, I wente to the Deputies houſe, & inquired whether any man ſawe the Legate of Ethiopia. The one tolde me, that he was gonne, or rather dryuen homeward, the laſt day before Sunne ſette, for that the Deputie thretned toSiſimithers his Ambaſſadge. kyll hym, if preſently he departed not. I aſked him the cauſe, for that, quoth he, by his Ambaſſadge he willed him not to meddle with ye mines, out of which, the Smaradges were digged, as thoſe yt appertained to Ethiopia, I came home againe, much greued, like one that had had ſome greate miſhap, becauſe I coulde not knowe any thynge as touchynge the mayde, neither whence ſhée was, or who were her Parentes. Maruaile not thereat, ſaide Cnemon, interpretinge him, for I my ſelfe take it heauily, that I cannot knowe it nowe: yet perhaps I ſhal knowe it hereafter. You ſhal in déede, ſaide Calaſiris. But nowe wil I telle you, what Caricles ſaide more. After I came into my houſe (quoth he) the maide came foorth to méete me, but ſaide nothinge, bicauſe ſhée coulde not yet ſpeake Greeke: yet ſhée tooke me by the hande, and made me good chéere with her countenance. I marueiled, that euen as good Grayehoundes doo fawne vpon euery one, though they haue but litle acquaintance with them, ſo ſhée quickly perceiued my good wil towarde her, and did imbrace me, as if I had benne her Father. I determined therefore, not to tarry longer in Catadupi, leſte ſome ſpite of the Goddes ſhoulde depriue me of my other Daughter too, and ſo comminge by Boate dawne alonge Nilus, to the Sea, I gotte a Shippe, & ſailed home, & now in this my Daughter with me, this Daughter, I ſaie,

ſurnamed alſo by my name, for whoſe ſake, I leade ſcant a quiet life. And beſide other thinges, wherein ſhée isCariclia not onely paſsinge be wtifull, but very witty alſo. better then I could wiſhe, ſhée learned the Greke tongue in ſo ſhorte ſpace, & came to perfite age with ſuche ſpéede, as if ſhée had benne a péereleſſe branche, and ſo farre paſſed al other in excellente bewtie, that al mennes eies, as wel ſtrangers, as Greekes, were ſet on her. To be ſhorte, wherſoeuer ſhe was, either in the Tēples, or at Publike exerciſes, or in the places of Commō reſort, ſhée tourned al mens mindes, and countenaunces vnto her, as if ſhée had benne the Image of ſomme God, lately framed. And althoughe ſhée be ſuche a one, yet ſhée gréeueth me ſoare. Shée hathe bidden Marriage farewel, and determine theCaricilia not willinge to Marrie. to liue a Maiden ſtil, and ſo becomming Dianas ſeruant, for the moſte parte, appliethe her ſelfe to huntinge, and doothe practiſe ſhootinge. For my parte, I ſet litle by my life, who hoped to marrye her to my Nephew, my Siſters Sonne, a courteous younge man, wel mannered, and faire ſpoken, but I can, neither by praier, nor promiſe, nor force of Argumente perſwade her thereto: but that whiche greueth me moſte, is that (as the Prouerbe ſaithe) ſhée vſethe mine owne Fethers againſte me, and addethe greate experience, and many reaſons to proue that ſhée hath choſen the beſte kinde of life, commending Virginitie with immortal praiſe, and placing it in Heauen by the Goddes, callethe it immaculate, vnſpotted, and vncorrupted: as for Loue, Venus diſporte, and euery Ceremonie, that apperteineth to Marriage, ſhée vtterly diſpraiſethe. In this matter I require your helpe, and therfore nowe I hauinge good occaſion, whiche hathe in a manner profered it ſelfe to me, vſe a longer tale, then néede requirethe. Doo thus muche for me, good Calaſiris, vſe ſomme pointe of your wiſedome, though it be by Inchantemente, to perſwade her, either by woorde, or déede, to knowe her owne nature, and to conſider, that ſhée is borne of a woman. This you can doo, if you wil. For ſhée

diſdaineth not to talke with men, for that ſhée hath bene commonly brought vp amonge them. And ſhée dwelleth in the ſame houſe with you, here I meane within the circuite and compaſſe of this Temple. Deſpiſe not mine humble Prayers, and ſuffer me not to liue in mine age without children, and comforte, and hope of any to ſuccéede me: This I beſéech you to doo for Apolloes ſake, and all the Goddes of your owne Countrie. I wepte when I harde this, Cnemon, becauſe he him ſelfe not without teares thus humbly beſought me, and promiſed to doo what I coulde for him in this pointe. While wée yet talked of theſe matters, one came to vs in haſte, and tolde vs that the Captaine of the Aenians ambaſſadge, was at the gate, and made prouiſion, and therefore deſired the Prieſte to come awaie, and beginne the Sacrifice. I aſked Caricles what thoſe Aenians were, and what holyAenians a people of Theſſalia fetche their petigree from Deucalion. How farre the Aenians Countrye goeth their chiefe Citie is Hipala, The maner of the Aenians ſacrifice to Pirrhus, Pithius Agon. The Captaine of this legation is of Achilles race his name is Theagenes. meſſage theirs was, and what ſacrifice they made. The Aenians, ſaide he, is the nobleſt parte of Theſſalia, and right Gréeke, whiche fetche theire petigrée from Deucalion, and ſtretch to the borders of Malia, their chiefe Cittie is Hipala, ſo called, as they ſaie, becauſe it is Miſtres, and ruler of the reſte, but as other thinke for that it is cituate vnder the Hill Oeta. This Sacrifice the Aenians ſende to Pirrhus Achilles ſonne euery fourthe yéere, at ſuche time as the feaſte Agon is kepte to Apollo (whiche is now as you knowe) for here was he killed at the very Aultars of Apollo, by guile of Oreſtes Agamemnons Sonne: This meſſage is donne more honorably then any of the reſte, becauſe the Captaine ſaithe, he is one of Achilles line. By chaunce I mette with him too daies agoo, and there ſemeth verily to appeare in him ſomewhat woorthy thoſe that come of Achilles bloude, ſuche is the comelineſſe of his perſon, and talenes of ſtature, that it may eaſily proue he was borne of ſomme Goddeſſe. I marueiled how they beinge Aenians, did ſaie they came of Achilles bloude, becauſe the Egyptian Poete Homer
                  
ſafeth, that he was borne in Phthia. The yonge man,A prety diſcourſe of Achilles Countrie with the argumentes, that the Aenians haue to proue that they are of Achilles bloud, the chiefe whereof is this Sacrifice. and the reſte of the Aenians, ſaie plainely that he is their progenitoure, and that Thetis was maried to Peleus out of Malia, & that in olde time Phthia was there aboutes, and that who ſo euer beſide them doo chalenge the noble man for his valiaunt actes, ſaie vntruely. For his parte, he proueth him ſelfe to be of Achilles bloude by an other reaſon: for that Meneſthius his Grandfather, who was the Sonne of Sperchius, and Polidora Peleus daughter, which went with Achilles amonge the noble Captaines to Troye, and becauſe he was his Kinſman, was one of the chiefeſt Captaines of the Mirmidones. And although he him ſelfe be very neare on euery ſide to Achilles, and ioyne him to the Aenians, yet he accoumpteth theſe funeralles to Pirrhus, for a moſte aſſured proufe, whiche all the Theſſalians (as he ſaith) haue graunted to them, bearinge them witneſſe that they be the nexte of his bloude. I enuy them not Caricles (ꝙ I) whether, they chalenge this to them ſelues vntruely, or it be ſo in déede. But I praie you, ſende for yt Captaine in, for I deſire muche to ſée him. Caricles was content: Therewith entered in aThe deſcription of a very comely man. yonge man of Achilles courage in déede, who in countenaunce, and ſtomake appeared no leſſe, with a ſtreight necke, hie forehedded, with his heare in comely ſorte rebendinge downe, his noſe, and noſthrilles wide inoughe to take breathe, whiche is a token of courage & ſtrength, his eies not very greye, but greye and blacke, whiche made him looke ſomewhat fiercely, & yet very amiably, not muche vnlike the Sea, whiche is newe calmed after a boyſterous tempeſt. After he had ſaluted vs, as the maner was, and we him againe, it is time, ſaide he, to doo Sacrifice to the God, that wée may finiſhe the Noble mans rightes, & the pompe thereto belonginge by times: let it be ſo, ſaide Caricles, and as he roſe, he tolde me ſoftly, you ſhall ſée Cariclia to daie, if you haue not ſéene her before, for ſhée muſte be at the pompe and Funeralles of

                  Neoptolemus by cuſtome. I had ſéene the maide before, Cnemon, and done Sacrifice with her, and ſhée woulde enquire of me, of our holy cuſtomes and ordinances. Yet I ſaide nothinge to him, waytinge to ſée what woulde come hereof, and ſo we wente to the Temple bothe togeather. For all thinges that belonged to the Sacrifices, were made readie by the Theſſalians. Aſſoone as we came to the Aulter, and the yonge man beganne to doo the Sacrifice, hauinge leaue firſte of the Prieſte. Phthia ſaide thus:
               
                  Yee men of Delphi ſinge of her,Apollo his Anſweare, as touchinge Theagenes and Cariclia. and Goddes ofſpringe prayſe:
                  VVho nowe in grace beginnes to growe, but fame ſhal ende her daies.
                  VVho leauinge theſe my Temples here, and paſsinge ſurginge ſtreames:
                  Shall come at length to Countrie ſcortche, with Phebus blaſinge beames.
                  VVhere they as recompences due, that vertues rare doo gaine:
                  In time to come ere it belonge, white Miters ſhal obtaine.
               
               After the God had ſaide thus, thoſe that ſtoode by caſte many doubtes, but knewe not what that anſweare ſhoulde meane. Euery man had his ſeuerall expoſition, & as he deſired ſo he coniectured, yet coulde none attaine to the true meaninge thereof, for Oracles and dreames are for the moſte parte vnderſtoode, when they be come to paſſe. And although the menne of Delphos were in amaze, for that was ſaide, yet they haſted to goo to this gorgeous ſolemnitie, not caringe to make any diligent enquirie of the anſweare whiche was geuen.
               Here endeth the Seconde Booke.
               
            
            
               
               The Thirde Booke.
               
                  AFter the Pompe and Funerall was ended: Nay Father (ꝙ Cnemon, interruptinge him) it is not donne yet, ſeinge your talke hath not made me alſo a looker thereon. But you ſlippe from me, who deſire, wonderfully to beholde the whole order thereof, no leſſe then one (who as the Prouerbe is) came after a feaſt, in as mutche as you haue but opened the Theater, and ſtraight ſhutte it vp againe. Cnemon (ſaide Calaſiris) I woulde not trouble you with ſuche impertinent matters as you doo nowe deſire, but would haue brought you to the principall pointes of my tale, and that, whiche you deſired at firſte. But becauſe you deſire by the waie to be a looker hereupon, hereby you declare your ſelfe to be an Athenian, I will briefly declare to you the brauerie thereof, as wel for it ſelfe, becauſe it is famous, as alſo for certaine thinges that happened thereat. The Hecatombe
                  The maner of the Sacrifice. wente before, & ſuche menne as were but lately entered into the Holy Miniſterie, leadde the ſame: eche one had a white garment knitte aboute them, their right hande, and arme with their breaſt naked, and a Polaxe therein. All the Oxen were blacke, but very luſtie, wagginge their heades, and liftinge them vp a little, they had euen hornes, parte whereof was gilded, other hadHecatombe is a kinde of Sacrifice, wherein were a hundred beaſtes of one kinde ſlaine, as a hundred oxen, Sheepe, Swine, or Goates. Garlandes of flowers, vpon them their legges were ſomewhat crooked, & their throtes hanged beneath their knées, and there were ſo many as woulde make a iuſte Hecatombe in déede. After theſe folowed a greate ſorte of other offeringes, & euery kinde of beaſtes was leadde by it ſelfe in order alone, with an inſtrumente that appointed when & with what they ſhoulde beginne. Theſe beaſtes, and their leaders did certaine virgines of Theſſalia ſtandinge in a ringe, with their heare looſe aboute

their eares, intertayne. The Maides were deuided into twoo companies, thoſe who were in the firſte, carried flowers and fruite. The other caried in baſkettes other fine knackes, and perfumes, and filled all the place with pleaſant odor: they caried not theſe thinges in their handes, but on their heades, for that they helde their handes forwarde & backwarde, that they might the more eaſily bothe goe and daunce. They receiued their Songe of an other cōpanie, for it was the duetie of theſe to ſinge the whole Hymne. In the Songe was Thetis prayſed, and Peleus, then their Sonne, and after his, after theſe Cnemon: what Cnemon (ꝙ Cnemon? Now Father yée take from me the pleaſanteſt parte of this tale, as though you woulde make me a beholder onely of that, that was done in this Royalite, & not a hearer alſo. You ſhal heare it, ſaid Calaſiris, ſéeing it pleaſeth you, this was ye Songe.The ſonge that the Theſſalia
                        ••
                      Virgins ſonge in the honour of Thetis, and Peleus, Achilles▪ and Pirrhus.
               
               
                  O Nereus God in ſurginge Seas,
                  we prayſe thy Daughter deare:
                  VVhom Peleus at commaundemente,
                  of Joue did make his feare.
                  Thou arte our Lady, 
                        Ʋenus braue,
                  in Sea a glimſinge Starre:
                  VVho, thee Achilles, did bringe foorthe,
                  a very Mars in VVarre.
                  And Captaine good vnto the Greekes,
                  
                  thy glorie ſcales the ſkyes:
                  To thee did thy redheaded VVife,
                  cauſe Pirrhus rough to riſe.
                  The Troians vtter ouerthrowe,
                  but ſtaie to Greekiſhe hoſte:
                  Be thou good Pirrhus vnto vs,
                  a fauourable ghoſte.
                  VVho here in graue intombed lieſt,
                  in Phebus ſacred grounde:
                  Bowe downe thine eare, to t'holy Limmes,
                  that we to thee doo ſounde.
                  
                     And this our Cittie ſuffer not,
                  in any feare to bee:
                  Of thee, and Thetis is our ſonge,
                  
                     Thetis al hayle to thee.
               
               Thus was the ſonge made: Cnemon, as farre as I remember, and there was ſo good order in the ſonge, & the meaſure of their dauncinge, agreed ſo wel to the ſounde of the inſtrument, that the eies neglected that thei ſawe, in compariſon of that they hearde, & thoſe that ſtoode by, would folowe the Maides that paſſed on, as though they had benne conſtrained with the pleaſantneſſe of theire ſonge, vntill the luſty youthes with their Captaine appeared, the ſight whereof was better, then al that they had ſéene before. The whole nūber of theſe youthes was fiftie, whiche was deuided into twiſe fiue & twentie, in a manner garded their Captaine, who rode in the middeſt of them. Their Bootes wrought with Purple Lether,The Aenians apparell. were foulded finely alitle aboue their ancles. Their clokes were buttened with Buttons of Golde before their breaſtes, and were laide on with rownde blewe Buttons, downe vnto the nethermoſte hemme. Their Horſes came all out of Theſſalia, whiche alſo ſhewed by their pleaſaunt countenaunces, the good Paſturage of their Countrie. They fomed on their brideles as though they thought ſcorne, of ſuch as rode on thē, yet they turned very readily as theire Riders woulde haue them. Their Sadels, and the reſte of their Harneſſe was ſo beſet with Siluer, and Golde, that in this point the yonge menne ſéemed to ſtriue who ſhoulde be braueſt. But, Cnemon, thoſe who were preſent, did ſo deſpiſe, and paſſe theſe menne thus apparailed, and looke on the Captaine Theagenes (on whom was my care) that all, whiche ſhewedTheagenes his cloke with what was wrought thereon. before very bright, was nowe darkened, as it had benne with ſome paſſinge lightninge. Suche brightneſſe did his ſight bringe vnto vs, in as muche as he was on Horſebacke alſo, with a Speare of Aſhe, pointed with

ſtéele in his hande, he had no Helmet on: but was bare headed. His cloke was of Purple wrought with Golde, wherein was the battaile of the Centaures, and Lapithes: on the Button of his cloke, was Pallas pictured, bearing a Shilde before her breaſte wherein was Gorgons head. The comelineſſe, and commendation of that which was donne, was ſommewhat increaſed by the eaſy blowinge of the winde. Whiche moued his heare about his necke, parting it before his forehead, and made his cloke waue, and the nether partes thereof to couer the backe, & buttockes of his Horſe. You woulde haue ſaide, that hisTheagenes his Horſe. Horſe did knowe the bewtie of his Maiſter, and that he beinge very faire him ſelfe, did beare a paſſinge ſéemely man, he rained ſo, and with priked vp eares, he toſſed his heade, and rowled his eies fiercely, and praunſed, & leapte in ſo fine ſorte. When he had the raines a litle at will, he woulde ſet forewarde couragiouſly, and turne about on bothe ſides, & beate the grounde with the tippes of his houfes lightly, and moderate his fierceneſſe, with the pleaſantneſſe of his Pace. Eche man was amazed thereat, and gaue the yonge man the principal praiſe, as wel for his courage, as alſo for bewtie, and comelineſſe of perſonage. At a woorde the common ſorte of women,VVhat the common ſorte of weemen did to Theagenes, and their opinion of him. and ſuche as coulde not moderate theire affections, caſte Apples, & Floures vpon him, by that meanes, as might be geaſſed, ſéekinge to get his fauoure. For they were al of this opinion, that there could be no humaine ſhape, whiche coulde ſurmounte the ſéemelineſſe of Theagenes. But after that Aurora, with roſiall fingers, as ſaithe Homer, appeared, and the bewtifull, and wiſe Cariclia, came out of Dianas Temple. Then I perceiued thatTheagenes beginneth to loue Cariclia. 
                  Theagenes coulde be conquered, but ſo farre conquered, as the natural ſéemelineſſe of womans bewtie hath the more, and greater force at firſt to bringe vnder. For ſhée was carried in a Chariot, drawen with a yoke of whiteHowe Cariclia was attyred. Oxen, ſhée had on a purple Gowne downe to her foote,

ſpangled with Golde. Shée was girded with a girdel, in making wherof, the woorkeman beſtowed al his craft, in yt he neuer made the like before, nor hable to frame ſuchCariclias Girdell. an other after. For he tied twoo Dragons tayles behinde her backe, bitwéene her ſhoulders, bringing further their contrarie neckes vnder her pappes, with an artificiall knotte, ſufferinge bothe theire heades to hange downe after it was faſtened aboute her. You woulde haue ſaide that the Serpentes, did not ſéeme to créepe, but crepte in déede. They were not feareful with their terrible lookes, but ſéemed as though they had ben wantonly a ſléepe. As touchinge their matter, they were Golde, but in colour blewe. For the Golde by arte, was made blacke, that blacke, and blewe, might in déede repreſente the ſharpeneſſe, and diuerſitie of ſcales, and ſuche was the Maides Girdel. Her heare was neither al bounde vp, nor al looſe: but the moſte parte thereof that grewe behinde, hanged ouer her ſhoulders, that whiche grewe from the crowne of her head downewarde to her forehead, being yealowe coloured, was crowned with a Garlande of yonge Lawrell, whiche did not ſuffer the whole to be blowen more then was ſéemely with the vehemencie of the winde. In her leafte hande ſhee bare a gilted Bowe, and a quiuer of Arowes hanged on her right ſhoulder, and in her other hande ſhée bare a Taper burning, and although ſhe were ſo attyred, yet there came greater lighte from her eies, then from the Taper. Thoſe ſame are Theagenes, and Cariclia in déede, ſaide Cnemon. Calaſiris thinkinge that he had ſpied them ſomewhere, aſked him, and where be they? ſhewe me them for Goddes ſake. Me thought, Father (ꝙ he) I ſawe them, beinge not here, you haue deſcribed them ſo wel, and as I my ſelfe remember wel,Menne and wemen happy▪ if they were like Theagenes, and Cariclia. I haue ſéene them. I cannot tell, quoth he, whether you ſawe them ſo attyred, as at that time al Greece, and the ſonne him ſelfe did ſée them. So faire and ſo happie, were they as menne had felicitie yenough, if they were like

him, and wéemen if they were like her. For they counted it an immortal thinge to be ſuche a couple. Although the people of that Coūtrie rather praiſed the yong man, and the Theſſalians, the Maide, bothe praiſing that wonderfully whiche they neuer ſawe before. For a newe countenance, and ſeldome ſéene doothe more moue the minde, then that wherewith wée are dayly acquainted. But oh delectable deceite, O acceptable opinion, howe dideſt thou comfort me, Cnemon, whē I hoped that thou haddeſt ſéene my deare Childrē, & wouldeſt haue ſhewed me them? But thou goeſt aboute vtterly to deceiue me. For whereas you promiſed me at the firſte, that they would come by & by, and had for rewarde of ſo dooinge, obteined of me this tale of them, yet cannot you ſhews me them, although the eueninge approche, & it be darke night. Be contente, quothe he, and feare not, for they wil come without doubt. Perhaps there is ſome let, that they come not ſo ſoone as was appointed betwixte vs, otherwiſe, If they were here, I woulde not ſhewe you thē, before I had the whole Hier that you promiſed me. Wherefore, if you deſire to ſée them in haſte, perfourme that you promiſed, and make an ende of your vnperfite tale. I, quoth he, am very vnwillinge to doo that whiche bringeth me in minde of that whiche gréeueth me much, and I ſuppoſed that you had benne weary of this my ſo longe pratlinge. But ſéeinge you be ſo deſirous to heare, and can neuer be wearied with a good tale, goe too, let vs procéede where wée lefte. Yet firſte let vs light a Candel,Calaſiris was very ſuperſtitious. and doo Sacrifice to the Gods, that gouerne in the night, that hauing perfourmed the accuſtomable Ceremonies, wée maie lie quietly, and tel forewarde our tale. He ſaide thus, and foorthwith a Mayde brought in a Candel lighted, and he finiſhed his Sacrifice, and called vpon diuers of the Goddes, but eſpecially vpon Mercurie, and deſired to haue ſome happy dreame that night, & that his derely beloued children, mighte appeare vnto him in his ſléepe,

he praied humbly, when he had thus donne, he ſaide, after that the yonge menne had gonne thrée times aboute Neoptolemus his Sepulture, in their brauerie on horſebacke, the Wéemen cried out pitiouſly, and the Menne made a ſtrange noyſe. Therewithall ſuddainely all the Oxen, Rammes, and Goates, were killed, as if they had benne ſlaine at one ſtroke: laſte of all, when the Aultare beinge of wonderful greatneſſe had ſixe hundred clouen logges laide vpon it, & all manner of lawful offeringes were added thereunto, they made requeſt, that Apolloes Prieſte might beginne the Sacrifice. Caricles ſaide, thatThe manner of the Sacrifice with the ductie of the Prieſte of Apollo, and the 
                        ••
                     ians Captaine of their holy Embaſſadge the Sacrifice in déede apperteined vnto him, but the Captaine of this Holy Legation, ſhould take the Taper of her, that was Preſident of thoſe Ceremonies, and ſet the Aultar on fire, for ſo was the Coūtrie faſcion. This he ſaide, and did Sacrifice, and Theagenes tooke the Taper. Surely, Cnemon, that the minde is a heauenly thinge, and of grete affinitie with the ſuperiour nature, wée maie knowe by the déedes, and woorkes thereof. For they looked one vpō an other, as though the minde knew firſte that, whiche was like to it ſelfe, and did approche neare to that, whiche bothe in excellencie, and Dignitie was of affinitie to it. At the firſte therefore they ſtoode ſtill ſuddainely, as though they had benne amazed. And ſhée deliuered her Taper with a conſtant countenaunce, and he likewiſe receiued it, and viewed one an otherThe ſundrie countenaunces, and behauiours of Louers. with ſo ſtedie eyes, as if either had ſéene, and knowen other before, and nowe coulde not call to remembraunce where. This donne, they ſmiled alitle, but ſo that it coulde ſcantly be perceiued by their countenaunce. Afterwarde as though they were aſhamed of that they did, they bluſhed: within a while after, when this affection, as I thinke, had griped theire hartes, they became pale. At a woorde, ſixe hundred countenaunces appeared in theire faces in ſhorte time, and the changinge of all kinde of coloure, and the rowlinge of their eies, plainely

betokened the troubles in theire minde. The people yt were preſente, as maie be gheaſſed, perceiued not this, bicauſe euery one thoughte of diuerſe matters, neither Caricles, who at that time, repeted the vſuall Prayer. Onely I did nothinge, but marke the yonge Couple, after that the Oracle ſpake of Theagenes, dooinge Sacrifice in the Temple, and by coniecture of their names, was moued to ſuſpecte that, whiche after ſhoulde come to paſſe, yet I knewe nothinge exquiſitly, of that whiche was ſignified in the later parte of the anſweare. But after that at length, and as it were by force, Theagenes was withdrawen from the Mayde, and with his Taper ſet fire on the Aultare, the Pompe was broken vp, and the Theſſalians wente to bankettinge, & al the other people wente euery man to his owne houſe. Cariclia alſo puttinge on a white cloke, with a fewe of her familiars, wente into her owne Chamber, whiche was within the compaſſe of the Temple. For ſhée dwelled not with her ſuppoſed Father, but altogeather ſeparated her ſelfe from him, that ſhée might not be diſſuaded from her pourpoſe. I beinge nowe made more curious, by reaſon of that I had harde, and ſéene, came to méete Caricles of ſet pourpoſe. Who aſked me, ſawe you Cariclia, my ioye, and the honoure of the people of Delphos? This was not the firſte time (quoth I) but I ſawe her before, as ofte as the people reſorted to the Temple, not as one that ſtoode a farre of, as the Prouerbe is, but ſhée hath donne Sacrifice togeather with me, and if ſhée doubted of any pointe, either of Diuine, or humaine matters, ſhée woulde aſke me, and I tolde her. Howe liked you her at this time, quoth he? Did ſhée ſet foorthe this braue ſight any whitte? Mary Sir Caricles (quoth I) you ſéeme to aſke me, whether the Moone doo excéede any whitte the the leſſer Starres. They prayſed, ſaide he, the Theſſalian yonge man, geuing him the ſeconde place after her, yea and the thirde too, quoth I. But in déede they acknowleged

your Danghter to be the principall ſhewe, yea and the very eye of the Pompe. Caricles was well pleaſed with this (and I beganne nowe to drawe to the pourpoſe, eſpecially deſiringe that he woulde be of good harte, and doubte nothinge) who ſmilinge alitle ſayde, I goe to her nowe, and if it pleaſe you, goe with me, and let vs ſée, whether this greate companie hathe benne any thinge noyſome vnto her. I was very glad of this requeſte, yet I made as though, I had other buſineſſe to doo: but was contente to leaue that, and goe with him. After wée came where ſhée was, and had gonne into her chamber, wée founde her ſicke on her bedde, and coulde take no reſte, and all her eyes bedewedCariclia in Loue. with lowe droppes. After her Father was come in, and ſhée (as was her manner) had imbraced him, he aſked her what ſhée ayled. Sée made him anſweare, that her heade did ake, and that ſhée woulde fayne ſléepe if ſhée might. Caricles mutche gréeued with this, wente out of her chamber with me, and commaunded the Maydes, to make as litle noyſe as mighte be, and after he came before his owne houſe, he ſayde. What ſhoulde this meane good Calaſiris? What diſeaſe hathe my deare Daughter? Maruell not, quoth I, if ſhée hauinge ſhewed her ſelfe in ſutche a companie, hathe benne ſpied by ſomme ſpitefull eye. He ſmiled at this, and ſayde in ieſtinge wiſe, you then doo beléeue, as menne commonly doo, that there is Witchcrafte. Yée mary, quoth I, and verily, as I thinke there is any thinge true, and that for this cauſe. The ayreCalaſiris proueth by diuerſe reaſons that there is witchinge. whiche is aboute vs on euery ſide, enteringe into vs by our eies, noſthrilles, mouthe, and other Pores, cariynge with it ſuche outwarde qualities as it is indewed withal, dooth in graffe alike infection in them, who haue receiued it. For whiche cauſe when a man hath enuiouſly looked vpon any excellente thinge, foorthwith he hath filled the ayre with that Peſtilent qualitie, and

ſente forthe alſo that poiſoned breathe to that whiche is neare at hande. That ſame ayre beinge a ſclender and ſubtile thinge, perſeth euen to the boanes, and very marowe, and by that meanes hath enuy benne cauſe to many of that diſeaſe, whiche wée call by a proper name Bewitchinge. Conſider that alſo Caricles, how many haue gotten ſore eies, and the plague, though they neither touched thoſe that had ſuche diſeaſes, nor eate at their table, nor laie in their beddes, but onely by beinge in the ſame ayre: as well as any thing els. Let loue be an argument,The ayre is infectious. or proufe of this, who taketh his beginning & occaſion of that whiche is ſéene, & ſo as if it were ſome preuy paſſiō, by the cies is ſuffered to enter into the harte. And this is like to be true. For ſeinge of al our other Pores, & ſenſes, ſighte is capable of moſte mutations, and the hoteſt: it muſte néedes receiue ſuche infections as are about it, & with a hote ſpirite, entertaine the changes of Loue. Yf néede be, I will bringe, for examples ſake, ſome reaſon out of the holy Bookes, gathered of the conſideration of Nature. Charadrius healeth thoſe that haue theThe byrde Charadrius, if one that hath the Kinges euill ſee her, healeth him that is ſo diſeaſed, but dieth thereof her ſelf. The Nature of the ſerpent 
                        ••
                     
                     ſiliſcus. Kinges euill, whiche birde flieth awaie, as ſoone as any that hath this diſcaſe, hath ſpied her, & turneth her taile towarde him, ſhutteth her eies. Not (as ſome ſay) becauſe ſhée would not helpe him, but that in lookinke vpon him, ſhée draweth that euill diſeaſe vnto her by nature, and therefore ſhée declineth ſuche ſight as a preſente perill. And perhaps you haue hearde how the Serpēt Baſiliſcus with his onely breathe and looke, dothe drie vp and corrupte, all that it paſſeth by: and it is no maruell if ſome doo bewitche, ſuche as they holde moſte déere, and wiſhe beſte vnto, for ſeinge they be enuious by nature, thei doo not what they woulde, but what by nature they are appointed. After he had ſtaied a little at this, he ſaide, you haue diſcuſſed this doubte right wiſely, and with very probable argumentes. I woulde to God that ſhée might once féele what affection and loue meaneth: Then would

I not thinke that ſhée were ſicke, but in moſte perfite healthe, and you knowe that I haue craued your healpe to bringe this aboute. But now nothinge leſſe then this is to be feared, to haue happened to her, who hateth her bedde, and will be wonne with no Loue, but ſhée rather ſemeth to be bewitched in déede: and I doubte not, but you will vndoo this witchcrafte, for the friendſhippe whiche is betwixte vs, and to ſhewe vs ſome pointe of your ſingular wiſedome, I promiſed him if I coulde perceiue her gréefe, to healpe her what I coulde. And while wée yet talked of their matters, one came to vs in haſt, and ſaide: Good ſirs, you make ſuche tariance, as if you ſhould come to a battaile, or ſkyrmiſhe, and not to a banket: The maker whereof, is the excellent Theagenes, and great Neoptolemus the preſident at the ſame. Come thether, neither let the Banket through your defaulte, be continewed till nighte, ſeinge none, but you, are awaie. This felowe (ꝙ Caricles to me in mine eare) biddeth vs with a cudgil in his hand. O what a lofty felow Bacchus is, if he be well waſhed. But let vs goo, for it is to be doubted, leaſt if wée tarrie, he wil driue vs forward. You ieſt, ſaide I, yet I am pleaſed, let vs goo in déede. When wée came, Theagenes placed Caricles beſide him ſelfe, and honoured me alſo ſomewhat for his ſake. Why doo I trouble you nowe, with tellinge how the Maydes daunced, and what inſtrumentes were there, and howe the yonge youthes daunced the daunce called Pyrricha in armoure, & others, whiche Theagenes had mingled with fine and delicate meates, orderinge his banket, as if it had benne but a Drinkinge, but that whiche is néedefull for you to heare, and pleaſaunt for one to tel, was thus, Theagenes ſette a mery countenance on the matter, and ſtrained him ſelfe wonderfully that he might intertaineCalaſiris eſpieth that Theagenes was in Loue. his gheaſtes courteouſly, & make them good chéere. But I perceiued whereto his minde was bente, by the rowlinge of his eyes, and ſuddaine ſighinge without cauſe.

Sometimes he was ſadde, and in a muſe, ſtreightway, as though he knewe his owne faulte, and woulde correcte him ſelfe, he would be merie: to be ſhorte, he changed his countenaunce a thouſande waies. For the minde as welDronken men and Louers in a maner like. of a louer, as of a dronken man is flexible, and can tarie in no certaine ſtate, as though they bothe ſwimmed in a moiſte affection. And for that cauſe a Louer wil ſoone be dronke, and a dronken man ſoone in Loue. Afterward by his ſorowfull gapinge, and careful countenance, al thoſe who were there, ſawe that he was not well. So Caricles alſo perceiuinge that, ſaide to me ſoftely. What meaneth this varietie? Some enuious eie hath looked vpon him alſo. Me thinketh that Cariclia, and he, haue one diſeaſe: They haue one, & the ſame in déede, by Iſis ſaid I, and not without cauſe, in as muche as in this royaltie nexte to her, he was the fayreſt perſon. Thus talked we. But after the cuppes ſhould goo about, Theagenes dranke to euery man, although againſte his will, for courteſies ſake. When he came to me, I ſaide, that I thanked him for his gentel proferre, but dranke not. Thinkinge that I had deſpiſed him, he looked vpon me angerly, and with burninge eies. Whiche aſſoone as Caricles perceiued, he ſaide, this man drinketh no wine, nor eateth of the fleaſhe of any liuinge thinge. He aſked, why? He is,Iſis Prieſles drinke no wine, neither eate they the fleaſhe of any liuing thing. ꝙ he, an Aegyptian, borne at Memphis, and Iſis Prieſte. When Theagenes perceiued that I was an Aegyptian, and a Prieſte, he conceiued a woonderfull pleaſure, and ſtretched him ſelfe for ioye, as thoſe, who haue founde ſome greate treaſure, and called for water, and after he had dronke a good draught, he ſaide, Right wiſe man, I haue dronke to you of that whiche you like beſte, and I praie you, let this table make a laſting league of Amitie betwéene vs. Let it doo ſo woorthy Theageanes, ꝙ I, for I haue a good while deſired the ſame, and ſo receiuinge it at his hande, did drinke, and with ſuche talke wée made an ende of the banquet, and went euery one to his owne

lodgynge. But Theagenes imbraced me very louingly, and with diuerſe kiſſes, bothe oftener, and more familiarely then our former acquaintance ſuffered. After I came home, I ſleapte not the firſte parte of the nighte, thinkinge diuerſly of the yonge couple, and diligently ſtudied, what the later ende of the Oracle ſhould meane.Apollo and Diana, ſente to deliuer Theagenes and Cariclia, to Calaſiris in his dreame. When it was midnight, I ſawe Apollo, and Diana, as I thought (if I thought, and it was not rather ſo in déede) and he deliuered Theagenes to me, and ſhée Cariclia, and callinge me by my name, it is time, ſaide they, that you retourne into your Countrie, for ſo the Ladies of deſtinie, commaunde you. Goo therefore hence thy ſelfe, and take theſe with thée, and loue them as thine owne Children, and bringe them out of Egypte, whether, and howe it ſhall pleaſe the Goddes. When they had ſaide thus, they wente away, and gaue a token, that it was not a dreame whiche I ſawe, but a thinge donne in déede. I vnderſtoode all the reſte as I had ſéene it, but into what Countrie, or to what people thei ſhould be caried, I could not tell. You wil tell me hereafter Father (ꝙ Cnemon) if you know your ſelfe, but howe ſaide you, the Goddes were ſhewed to you, not in your ſleape, but manifeſtly appeared? Euen ſo my Sonne (ꝙ he) as wiſe Homer in aA rule of Homer, howe to know the Gods: expounded by Calaſiris. maner by a Riddle did notifie, mary many doo lette the hardnes of the ſayinge paſſe, as he ſaithe ſomewhere.
               
                  His feete and thighes behinde, by goeinge eaſily I knewe:
                  The Goddes alſo may be eſpied, and knowen, this is trewe.
               
               And I my ſelfe ſéeme to be one of that ſorte (ſaide Cnemon) & perhaps to reproue me, you Calaſiris, haue made mention of theſe Verſes, the woordes whereof I well remember, ſince the time I firſte learned them, but that there is Diuinitie conteined in them, I knowe not. Calaſiris ſtaied at this a little, and made him ready to tell him the ſecrete meaninge of them, and ſaide. The Gods,

                  Cnemon, and other heauenly powers, comminge too, and goinge frō vs, doo chāge them ſelues ſeldome into ye likeneſſe of other Creatures, but cōmonly into men, that we ſuppoſing, by the likeneſſe of the Figure, that we ſawe, was a dreame, maie ſo be beguiled. So although the rude, and prophane people knowe them not, yet can they not eſcape a wiſe man, but he will know them, either by their eies, in that they looke ſtedfaſtly, and neuer ſhutte their eie liddes, but beſte by their gate, in that they moue not their feete, neither ſette one foote before an other, but are caried with violence of the ayre, rather ſlidinge through, then ſtridinge ouer the windes. WhereforeHowe the Egyptians make the images of their Goddes. the Aegyptians make the Images of the Goddes, with their féete ioyned togeather and not ſeperable aſonder. Whiche thinge the ſkilfull Homer, like an Egyptian, and one well inſtructed in the holy doctrine, ſecretely, & cloſely ſignified in his Verſes, leauinge it to the vnderſtandinge of ſuche as coulde attaine thereto. Of Pallas he ſpeaketh thus:
Alſo her terrible eies did gliſter as ſhee looked.
And of Neptune thus:
His feete and thighes, by goinge eaſily, I knewe.
As though he ſwimmed in his gate, for thus muſte you take it, by goinge eaſily, not as ſome beinge deceiued, haue thought eaſily I knewe. You haue well inſtructed me in theſe thinges, ꝙ Cnemon. But in that you oft call Homer an Egyptian, I can not beléeue that, and therfore am in muche maruell aboute it. I praie you, diſcuſſe this doubte alſo. Although Cnemon, it be nothinge neare toA prety diſcourſe, whereby Calaſiris proueth Homer to be an Egyptian. Thebes a Citie of Egypte. our pourpoſe, to talke of ſuche thinges, yet I will briefly tell you. Homer by reporte of diuers men, is aſcribed vnto diuers Countries, and in déede, to a man of good courage, no Countrie comes amiſſe But to tel the troth, he was our Countryman, an Egyptian, borne at Thebes, which hath an hundred gates, as of him ſelfe a man may know, and his Father a Prieſte, as ſome thinke, and not

Mercury as is falſely fained. His Father was ſuppoſed to be a Prieſte, becauſe as he celebrated certaine Sacrifices in the Temple with his wife, who by chaunce ſlepte there, the God laie with her, and ingendred Homer, who had aboute him a token of vnlawfull generation, for on bothe his thighes there grewe from his byrthe a greate deale of heare. Wherof as he traueled, as wel in Greece, as in other Countries, and made his Poeme, he gained his name. He him ſelfe neither woulde tell his name, nor his Countrie, nor kinred: therefore thoſe, who knewe that qualitie of his bodie, gaue him a name thereof. To what ende, Father ſaide Cnemon, would he not tell hisVVhy Homer concealed his Countrie. Countrie? Either (ꝙ he) becauſe he was aſhamed of his baniſhmente, for he was driuen out of his Countrie by his Father, at what time, hauinge paſſed the age of fourtene yéeres, he ſhould haue ben numbred amonge thoſe, that were conſecrated, for that by the marke on his body, he was knowen to be a baſtarde, or els for policie, that while he concealed his owne Countrie, he might lawfully ſaie, that he was borne euery where. You ſéeme to diſcuſſe theſe thinges very well and wiſely, ſaide Cnemon, gatheringe your coniecture of his Verſe, whiche is ſtuffed with all pleaſure, and delectation, righte Egypt like, whiche no doubte ſhoulde not ſo farre haue paſſed all other, if he had not had ſome heauenly foundation. But after (as Homer did) you perceiued that thei were Gods, tel me, Calafiris, what folowed. Surely, Cnemon, ſuche thinges as wente before, I ſlepte little, deuiſed muche, and fell into ſuche cogitations, as liketh the night well. I was very gladde in hope to finde ſuche thinges as I thought vpon, and alſo looked for returne into my Countrie. Yet was I ſorowfull that Caricles ſhoulde looſe his Daughter. I bethought me, howe I mighte carrie the yonge folkes with me, and ſome meanes was to be deuiſed howe to gette awaie. Then was I troubled as touchinge our flight, howe wée might doo that priuely, and

whether wée ſhould directe it, whither by Sea, or Lande. While I laie thus, a thouſād thoughts aroſe in my head, and I ſlepte no more that night. And it was ſcante daie, when one knocked at my doore, and I hearde a boye call, my man aſked who called, and what he woulde haue? who anſweared, that Theagenes ye Theſſalian was there. I was gladde of thoſe tidinges, and badde him be called in, thinkinge that this beginninge did profer it ſelfe, that I might learne, how to bringe to paſſe, that whiche I was aboute. For I gheaſſed that he came to craue my healpe to obtaine his Loue, becauſe he heard that I was an Egyptian, and a Prieſte. So affected (as I thinke) as many be, who ſuppoſe the wiſedome that the Egyptians haue, to be one, & the ſame, but are deceiued. For thereofTwoo kindes of wiſedome are profeſſed of the Egyptians, and what they be. is one kinde common, and (as I maye terme it) crepinge on the grounde, which miniſtereth Signes, and is occupied about dead bodies, vſing Hearbes, and addicted to inchauntmentes, neither tendinge it ſelfe, nor bringinge ſuche as vſe it, to any good ende, but is ofte deceiued by the owne practiſes, ſometimes ſhewinge terrible, & vile tokens, that is to ſaie, viſions of ſuche thinges, as are not, as though they were, and beguileth menne of ſuche thinges as they looked for, a deuiſer of miſchieues, and miniſter of all fowle, and loſte pleaſures. The other, my Sonne, which is the true wiſedome, and from whence the other conterfaite hath degenerated, whiche wée Prieſtes, and holy men doo practiſe from our youthe, is conuerſante with heauenly thinges, liueth with the Goddes, and is partaker of better Nature, conſideringe the mouinge of the Starres, and countinge it a vantage to knowe thinges to come, farre remoued from theſe earthly euils, and directeth all thinges, to the honeſtie, and commoditie of menne. By whiche, I alſo lefte my Countrie for a time, if by any meanes I could auoide ſuch things, as I tolde you of before, yt were foreſhewed vnto me, & the battaile betwéene my ſonnes.

But lette vs committe theſe thinges as well to the other Gods, as alſo to the Ladies of deſtinie, in whoſe power it conſiſteth, whether they ſhall doo this or not, who as well decreed my baniſhment, for ſuche thinges as I gathered before, as alſo that I ſhoulde finde Cariclia, howe that happened, you ſhall knowe by that which folowed. After Theagenes was come in, and badde me good morowe, and I had ſaluted him againe, I ſette him on my bedde beſide me, and aſked him, what earneſt matter draue you hether to me thus early? After he had ſtroked his face a little, I am in great daunger, ꝙ he, and I am aſhamed to tell you howe. I thought it then a fitte time to gloſe with him, and to gheaſſe at that, whiche I knewe well inough. Therefore lookinge vpon him cherefully, I ſaide, although you be aſhamed to tell me, yet nothinge can be hidde from my Wiſedome, and theCalaſiris maketh as though he were a ſouthſayer to Theagenes, and ſo r
                        •
                     
                     uinge at the cauſe of his cominge, happeneth to glaunce ſome what neare the marke. Theagenes pained the more becauſe he was neuer in Loue before. VVherby may be gathered that the firſte Loue pincheth 
                        ••
                      ſ
                        ••
                     . knowledge of the Goddes. And after I had lifted vp my ſelfe a little, and made as though I woulde haue caſte ſome accounte with my fingers, and ſpredde my heare aboute mine eares, like one that woulde haue Propheſied, I ſaide, my Sonne thou arte in Loue, he ſtarted at that woorde, and when I had added, with Cariclia, then he ſuppoſinge that I had knowen it of God, miſſed but a little, that he had not fallen downe and woorſhipped me. Whiche when I would not lette him doo, he came to me, and kiſſed my heade ofte, and gaue God thankes that his hope had not fayled him, and prayed me hartely that I woulde ſaue him: For he ſhoulde not liue if he had not healpe, & that preſently: ſo greate was the miſchéefe that he had, and ſo vehemently did his harte burne, the rather for that he neuer was in Loue before. For he ſware vnto me many othes, that he neuer had to doo with woman, & that he vtterly refuſed Mariage and Loue, if any were profered him, vntil Cariclias bewtie had ouercomen him. Not bicauſe he was chaſte of nature, or coulde not doo like other menne, but bicauſe till then, he neuer ſawe

woman woorthy to be loued: & as he ſaid thus, he wepte,Theagenes is in loue aginſte his will. in token that by force, and againſte his will, he was ſubdued by the Mayde. I tooke him vp, and comforted him, and ſayde, be of good chéere, for ſéeinge you haue come to me for helpe, ſhe ſhal not be ſtronger then my wiſedome, in déede ſhée is ſtoute, and will hardly be made to loue, vtterly deſpiſinge loue, and maie iudge, if ſhée but heare them named, but for your ſake, wée muſt trie al meanes. Arte can breake nature, onely you muſte be bolde, andArte can breake nature. of neceſſitie, doo what ſo euer I commaunde you. He promiſed to doo al that I would wil him, and thus, while he was praying, and beſéechinge me, and for my paines, promiſed to géeue me al that euer he had: One came from Caricles, and ſaide, Sir, Caricles deſireth you, to come to him. He is in Apollóes Churche hereby, and prayeth to God, for that he hath benne troubled, I knowe not how, by certaine dreames. Therewithall I roſe, and when I had ſent Theagenes awaie, & was come into the Church, I founde Caricles ſittinge in a ſtalle very ſadde, and ſorowfull. I came to him, and why be you ſo ſadde, ꝙ I▪ He anſweared, why ſhoulde I not▪ Séeinge that diuerſe viſions in my ſléepe, haue troubled me, & my Daughter, as I heare, is very ſicke, and ſleapte neuer a winke this nighte? For my parte, although for diuerſe cauſes her diſeaſe gréeueth me, yet the greateſt is, for that to morowe is a daie ordained for ſporte, & the cuſtome is thatIt was Cariclias duety to holde the Garlande bicauſe ſhe was Prieste. ſhée, whiche is entred into theſe holy Orders, ſhoulde holde the Garlande to thoſe that runne in armoure, and ouerſée that paſtime, one of theſe twoo thinges muſte néedes happē, that either her abſence muſt breake of this longe accuſtomed Order, or els by comminge againſte her will, ſhée ſhalbe more ſicke. Wherefore if before you could not, yet now helpe her, and doo vs this good turne, whiche ſhal wel beſéeme our friendſhip, and deſerue good at Gods hande. I knowe that it is eaſy for you, if you will, euen to heale one (as you ſaie) bewitched. For i
                     •
                   is

not impoſſible for ſuche holy Prieſtes, to bringe woonderfulCaricles thought that Calaſiris coulde doo wonders belike. thinges to paſſe. I tolde him, that I had eſtéemed lightly of it til then, bringing him alſo into a vaine opinion, and nowe I craued libertie, but one daie, that I might make ſome medicine for her. At this preſent, ſaide I, let vs goe to the Mayde, to conſider of her more diligently, and to comforte her as much as wée maie. And I would alſo yt you, Caricles, ſhoulde haue ſome talke of me with the Mayde, and by your commendation bringe me into better credite with her, that ſhée beinge more familiare with me, maie the boldelier ſuffer me to heale her. Contente, ſaide he. After wée came to Cariclia, to what ende ſhoulde wée make many woordes? Shée was altogether vanquiſhed by affection, & the bewtie of her colour, was gonne out of her face, & the heate therof, was quenched with teares, as if it had ben with water, yet when ſhée ſawe vs come in, ſhée framed her ſelfe, and wente aboute to call againe, her accuſtomed countenaunce. Caricles imbracinge her, and makinge much of her, leauing no kinde of courteſie, my Childe, my déere Daughter, ꝙ he, wilte thou not tell thy Father, what thy diſeaſe is? And ſéeinge thou arte ouer looked, doeſt thou holde thy peace, like one that had donne wronge, and not benne iniuried thy ſelfe by thoſe eyes, which haue ſo vnluckely looked vpon thée? But haue yu a good harte. This wiſe mā
                  Caricles commendeth Calaſiris to Cariclia. 
                  Calaſiris, is requeſted by me, to finde ſome remedie for thée, whiche he can wel perfourme, for he is as excellente as any man els, in heauenly knowledge, as one by profeſſion, a Prieſte, and that, whiche is the beſte my very friende. Wherefore you ſhall doo very well, if you ſuffer him without any impedimente, to vſe for your healthe, either any inchauntment, or what els ſo euer he will, for as muche, as otherwiſe you are wel pleaſed with the familiaritie, and companie of ſuch wiſe men. Cariclia ſaideCariclia loued the companie of wiſe menne. nothing, but by countenaunce made as though ſhée were well pleaſed with the councel he gaue her, to ſuffer me

to deale with her. When theſe thinges were thus ordered, wée wente our waie, and Caricles alwaie put me in minde, that I ſhoulde haue regarde to my promiſe, and bethinke me, howe I might make her haue a fanſie to mariage, and a deſire of menne. I therewith made him very gladde, when I tolde him, that within ſhort time, I woulde ſatiſfie his minde.
               Here endeth the Thirde Booke.
               
            
            
               The Fourthe Booke.
               
                  THE nexte daie Apolloes games did ende, but youthful diſportes beganne, Cupide (in mine opinion) moderatour, and Arbiter thereof, beinge in ful determination,Cupid fully determined to trie all that he was hable to doo, with Theagenes, and Cariclia. The manner of their diſportes. to declare his force, in moſt ample wiſe, by theſe twoo Champions, whiche he had ſet togeather. Sutche was the ſight. All Greece looked on, and Thamphictiones ſate in Iudgemente. After all other diſportes were ſumptuouſly finiſhed, as Runninge, Wraſtlinge, fight with Plommetes; at laſte, the Crier by Proclamation, called theſe in, that ſhoulde runne in Armour. And therewithall Cariclia gliſtered at the race ende. For ſhée came, althoughe againſte her will, for the cuſtomes ſake partely, but rather, in my iudgemente, vpon hope to ſée Theagenes ſomewhere: in her lefte hand, ſhée had a burning Taper, and in the other hand, a branche of Palme, and as ſoone, as ſhée appeared, euery man looked vpon her, but I cannot tell, whether any ſawe her beforeA Louer is quicke eied. 
                  Theagenes, for a Louer is very ready to ſpie. That,

with Loue whereof he is detained. But he, beſide, that after he knewe what ſhould be donne, thought vpon nothinge, but to ſée her. Wherefore he coulde not keepe his owne councell: but ſaide ſecretly to me (for he ſatte nexte me of pourpoſe). That ſame is Cariclia, but I badde him be quiet. After the Proclamation was ended, there came foorthe one of goodly Perſonage, and of greate courage, like whom in honour was none in ye whole companie, who in many courſes before, had wonne the Garlande: mary then there was none to contende with him, for that as I thinke, none durſte be ſo bolde. The Thamphictiones therefore let him goe. For by the Lawe he maie not haue the Crowne, that hathe not ventured forHe is not rewarded that ventureth not. the ſame. Yet he made requeſte, that chalenge mighte be made againſt all menne. The Iudges gaue commaundement, that it ſhould be ſo, the Crier called for ſome man, to runne with that other. Theagenes ſaide to me, This mā calleth for me. For me, ꝙ I, what meane you by that? It ſhalbe ſo, Father (quoth he). For none but I, if I be in preſence, and looke on, ſhall receiue rewarde of Victorie at Cariclias hande. Doo you neither care for, nor eſtéeme the ſhame that enſueth, if you be ouercommed, ſayde I. What man, ſaide he, wil looke on Cariclia, and appreche to her ſo haſtily, that he can get before me? To whome 
                     •
                  an her eies, geue like Winges, as to me, and cauſe him flie ſo faſte. Knowe you not, that Painters make LoueVVhy Cupide is pointed with twoo winges. Theagenes light footed. with twoo Winges, declaringe, as by a Riddel, the nimbleneſſe of thoſe that be in Loue? And if I muſte néedes boaſte, beſide that I ſaide already, hetherto neuer any man vaunted, that he out ranne me. When he had ſaide thus, he leapte foorth, & went downe, declared his name, and Countrie, and wente to the leaſte ende, and when he had put on his Armoure, he ſtoode at the place appointed, pantinge for great deſire he had to runne, and was very vnwillinge, and bad much adoo to tarrie the ſounde of the Trumpet. It was a goodly ſight, and woorthy to

be looked on, muche like that, wherin Homer bringeth in Achilles, as he ranne at Scamander, al Greece was muche moued at this déede, which fel contrarie to their expectation, and wiſhed the Victorie to Theagenes, as hartily, as if euery man had runne him ſelfe. For the comelines ofComlineſſe of Perſonage getteth the good will of menne. Perſonage, is of great force to get the good will of men. Cariclia alſo was moued out of meaſure, and I ſawe it, by reaſon I looked vpon her a greate while, and eſpied howe her countenaunce changed diuerſly. For after the Crier had in al mens hearinge, named thoſe that ſhould runne. Ormenus, an Archadian, and Theagenes a Theſſalian, they lefte theire ſtandinges, and finiſhed theire race, as faſte almoſte as menne coulde looke after them, there coulde not the Mayde be quiet any more, but her body was moued, and her féete leapte for ioye, as though her minde had benne with Theagenes, and helpte him in his race. All thoſe that looked on, waited to what ende this woulde come, and were very careful. But I aboueCalafiris taketh Theagenes for his Sonne. the reſt, who had now determined with my ſelf, to haue like care of him, as if he had ben my ſonne. No maruell, ſaide Cnemon, if thoſe that were there, and ſawe him, were carefull: nowe I my ſelfe am afraide for Theagenes, and therefore if he get the price, I praye you tell me ſo muche the ſooner, after they had runne the middel of the race, Cnemon turned him a litle about, and frowninge vpon Ormenus, lifted vp his Shilde alofte, and ſtretched out his necke, and with face faſte fixed vpon Cariclia, at laſte he got to the race ende, and ſtarte ſo far before, that the Archadian was many yardes behinde, whiche quantitie of grounde was after meaſured. This donne, he ranne to Cariclia, & of pourpoſe fel in her lappe, as though he coulde not ſtaye him ſelfe, and when he hadTheagenes got the Garlande for runninge. taken the Garlande, I ſawe wel yenough, that he kiſſed her hande. O happy turne, that he got the Victorie, and kiſſed her too. But what then? Thou canſt not onely be ſatiſfied with hearinge this tale, neither eaſily ouercommed

by ſléepe, and although a great part of the night be paſte, yet thou watcheſt, and art not wery of ſo longeCnemon blameth Homer for ſaieinge that a man might be wery of Loue. A man can not be wery to heare the Loue of Theganes, and Cariclia a whole yeare. a tale. I blame Homer (Father ſayde he) for that he ſayd, a man might as well be wery of Loue, as of any thinge els. Whereof in mine opinion, a man can not be wery neither if he be in Loue him ſelf, or heare of others Loue. And if any man talke of the Loue of Theagenes, and Cariclia, who is ſo ſtony or harde harted, that he would not conceiue delight therein, although he ſhoulde heare nothinge els a whole yéere. Wherefore goe forewarde with your tale. Theagenes, Cnemon, was crowned, and proclaimed Victor, and brought backe with all mennes ioyfull gratulations. Nowe was Cariclia quite vanquiſhed, and bounde to Loue more, then ſhée was before. When ſhée had ſéene Theagenes the ſeconde time. For the mutuall ſight of Louers, is a remembrance, andMutual ſight of louers is a renewinge of Loue. renewinge of Loue, & dooth as much inflame the minde, as fire when it is put to any drie mater. After ſhée came home, ſhée abode a like night to the other, or a woorſe. I alſo ſleapt but litle, for conſideringe, whether we ſhould goe to councell our flight, and into what Countrie God woulde haue the yonge couple carried, and I coniectured that wée muſte take oure voiage by Sea, by the Oracle where it ſayde.
And ſaylinge ſurginge ſtreames: Shal come at length to Countrie ſcortche, VVith burninge Phebus beames.
But whether they ſhoulde be conueied, I coulde finde but one waie to knowe, if I coulde by any meanes gette the faſcia whiche was laide out with Cariclia, wherein Caricles ſaide, that he hearde ſaie, all the Maydes eſtate was notified. For I thought it was like that, by it I ſhoulde knowe the Maydes Parentes, and Countrie, whiche I beganne already to ſuſpecte, and perhaps alſo whither the Ladies of deſtinie woulde ſende thē. When I came the next morning very early to Cariclia, I founde

all her kinſfolkes wéepinge, & Caricles, as muche as any other: when I came in, what a doo is here, ſaide I? My Daughters diſeaſe (anſweared he) waxeth woorſe, and woorſe, and ſhée hath had a woorſe night of this, then ſhée had any yet. Get you hence, ꝙ I, and al the reſte auoide, and let one ſet me a thréefooted ſtoole here, and a litle Lawrell with fire, and frankenſenſe. And let none come in to trouble me before I call, Caricles willed the ſame, and it was donne. Nowe, hauing gotten good occaſion, I began to playe my Pagent, as if I had benne on a ſtage, and burned Frankenſenſe, & mumbled with my lippes, and layde Lawrell on her, from toppe to toe, & at length when I had drowſily, or olde wiſelike gaped, and plaide the foole a greate while with my ſelfe, and the Mayde, I made an ende. Shée, while I was thus dooinge, wagged her heade ofte, and ſmiled, and tolde me, that I was deceiued, and knew not her gréefe. Therewith I ſat neare her, and ſaide, my Daughter be of good chéere, thy gréefe is common, and eaſy to be healed, without doubte, thou art ouer looked, not onely when you were at the Pompe, but more when you were ouerſeer at the race, whiche was runne in Armoure. And he that hathe thus looked on you, I thinke, is Theagenes, for I perceiued wel, that he ofte behelde you, and caſt many wanton lookes at you. Whether he did ſo, or not, ſaide ſhée, well fare he. But what Countryman is he, or of what Line is he deſcēded? For I ſawe many woonder muche at him. You hearde that he was a Theſſalian, by the Crier that vttered his name, and he fetcheth his petygrée from Achilles, and in my iudgemente, he maye doo ſo by good reaſon, who dooA prety commē
                     dation of Theas genes for courteſie, with a nippe to Achilles for his ar
                        •
                     ogācie, and pride déeme no leſſe by his tale ſtature, and comly Perſonage, which manifeſtly confirme Achilles bloude. Sauing that he is not ſo arrogant, & prowde as he was, but dooth moderate, & aſſuage the hautineſſe & fierceneſſe of his minde, with cōmendable courteſie, which thinge ſéeinge it is ſo, although he haue an enuious eye, & with his lookes hath

bewitched you, yet hath he him ſelfe more payne, then he hath cauſed you to haue. O Father. ꝙ ſhée, I thanke you, that you be ſorowfull for our miſhappe, but why doo you ſpeake euil without cauſe of him, who hathe donne vs no harme. For I am not bewitched, but haue, as I gheaſſe, ſome other infirmitie. Then Daughter, ſaide I, why doo you conceale it, and not franckely vtter it, that wée maie with more eaſe finde remedy thereto. Am not I in age, yea rather in good wil your Father? Is not your Father familiarly acquainted with me? Are wée not of one profeſſion? Tell me your diſeaſe, I will kéepe your councell: yea, & if you wil, I wil be bounde by othe to you ſo to doo. Speake boldly, & ſuffer not your infirmitie to increaſe by ſilence. For euery gréefe, which is ſoone knowen, can eaſilyTo muche lingringe maketh diſeaſes vncurable. be cured: but that whiche by long time hathe gotten ſtrength is almoſt vncurable: for ſilence dooth much ſuccour any diſeaſe, but that which is vttered, maie by comfort eaſily be remedied. With this ſhée ſtaied a litle, & declared by her countenance many changes of her minde, & ſayd, let me alone to daye, & you ſhal knowe it hereafter, if you knowe it not before, bicauſe you woulde haue vs thinke, that you are a Southeſaier. Therewith I roſe, and departed, geuinge her leaue to moderate the baſhfulneſſe of her minde. Then Caricles mette me, and haue you any good newes to tell me, quoth he? All ſhalbe wel, ſaide I, for to morow ſhée ſhalbe healed of her infirmitie. When I had ſayde thus, I made haſte to be gonne, that he might aſke me no moe queſtions. After I was gonne a litle from the houſe, I ſpyed Theagenes walkinge about the Church, and the Cloyſters, reaſoning with him ſelfe, as though he had yenough, if he ſawe but Cariclias
                  Theagenes glad to ſee the houſe of Cariclia. houſe. I turned a litle aſide, & paſſed by, as I had not ſéene him. He ſawe me, & ſayde, God ſpéede you, & tarrie I praie you, for I waited for you. I turned ſuddainly aboute, & ſayd, is this bewtiful Theagenes, ſurely, I ſawe him not. How is he bewtifull, ſaide he, that doothe not pleaſe Cariclia?

I ſette a face on it, as if I had benne angrie, and ſaide, will not you leaue to ſpeake euill of me and my ſkill, by whiche ſhée is intrapped and conſtrained to loue you, and dothe deſire to ſée you, as one that is better then her ſelfe. What ſaie you Father, ſaide he? Dothe Cariclia deſire to ſée me? why doo you not then carrie me to her? and therewith he ranne foorth. But I caught him by the clocke, and ſaide, ſtande ſtill here, although you be very light footed, for you muſte not handle this matter as if it were a praye, or eaſie for euery man that liſte to gette the ſame? But it muſt be donne with great Counſell, and performed with no ſmall prouiſion. Know you not that her Father is the Nobleſt man in Delphis? DooAmonge the Delphiās, death is ordained to ſuche as ſteale awaie any Mayde. you not remember that the Lawes appointe deathe a rewarde to ſuche? The matter were not greate, ꝙ he, if I died, after I had my will of Cariclia. But if you thinke it good, lette vs goo to her Father, and deſire her of him to be my wife, for I am woorthy yenough to be Caricles kinſman. Wée ſhall not preuaile, ſaide I, not becauſe he can finde any faulte in you, but for that he hath promiſed her, in Mariage to his Siſters Sonne. He ſhall repent it, ſaide he, who ſo euer he be, for while I liue, there ſhall no other wedde Cariclia, this hande of mine is not yet ſo benummed, neither my ſwoorde ſo blunte. Be contente, ſaide I, wée ſhall haue no néede of any of theſe thinges, be onely ruled by me, and doo as I commaunde you, for this time departe, and take héede you be not ſpied to talke with me ofte, but when you come, come priuely, and alone: He wente his waie very ſadde. Caricles mette me the nexte daie, and aſſoone as he ſawe me, he ranne to me and kiſſed my head oftentimes, continually criynge of ſuche force is your wiſedome, ſuche is our Fréendſhip. Thou haſte brought a great buſineſſe to paſſe, ſhée is taken now, that was harde to be wonne, and ſhée that was before inuincible is nowe ſubdued: Cariclia is in Loue. I beganne to wagge my heade at this, and knitte my

browes, and yet proudely, and ſaide there was no doubt, but that ſhée ſhould not be able to abide the firſt aſſaulte, when as yet I haue donne no greater thinge to her. But tel me, Caricles, how you perceiued that ſhée was in loue? When I had gotten very truſty Phiſitions, as you gaueHowe Caricles perceiued. that Cariclia was in loue. me Counſell, I brought them to her, and promiſed them all the ritches I had, if they coulde cure her. As ſoone as they came into her, they aſked what her diſeaſe was, and where her paine helde her. Shée turned her face from them, & repeted with a lowde voice, this Verſe of Homer.
                  
                     Achilles is the braueſt man, of al the Greekiſhe rowte.
Aceſtinus a wiſe man (perhappes you knowe him) tookeAcestinus a Phiſition. her wriſte in his hande, although againſte her will, and ſéemed to iudge her diſeaſe, by the beatinge of her pulſe, whiche declareth (as I gheaſſe) the ſtate of the harte: after he had felte her pulſe a good while, and had looked oft vpon euery parte of her, he ſaide, Caricles, you haue brought vs hither in vaine, for Phiſicke can doo her noPhiſicke can doo Cariclia no good. good. O God, ſaide I, why ſaie you ſo, muſte my Daughter die without all hope of recouerie? Make not ſuche adoo, ſaide he, but heare me, and ſo when wée were in a corner, that neither the Maide, nor any other could heare vs: he ſaide. Our Arte dothe profeſſe the curinge of diſtemperedA prety diſcourſe of phiſicke, where, and when it auaileth. bodies, & not principally of the diſeaſed minde, but then when it is afflicted with the bodie, ſo that when that is healed, then is it alſo cured. The Mayde in déede is diſeaſed, but not in bodie, for no humour aboundeth, the head ache gréeueth her not, no ague burneth her, nor any parte or parcelles of her body, is gréeued: accoumpt this, and nothinge els to be true. I hartely prayed him, if he perceiued any thing by her, to vtter it to me. Dothe not the Mayde know (ꝙ he) that Loue is an affection andVVhat loue is, and the qualities thereof. manifeſt gréefe of the minde? Doo you not ſée that her eies be ſwollen, and looketh euery waie, and is pale in her face, but findeth no faulte with her harte? beſide this ſhée raueth, and vttereth what ſo euer cometh into her

minde, & watcheth without cauſe. At a woorde ſhée hath ſodainely loſte the moiſture of her bodie, and iuſte amplitude thereof. You muſt, Caricles, if it be poſſible, finde her out a man: and when he had ſaide thus, he departed. I come in haſte to you my Sauiour and God, whom both I and ſhée doo acknowledge, to be onely hable to doo vs a good turne. For when I deſired her ofte, and diuerſe waies beſought her, to tell me what ſhée ailed, ſhée made me this anſweare, that ſhée knewe not what diſeaſe ſhée had, mary ſhée knew that none could healpe her, but Calaſiris, and therefore, ſhée deſired me to call you to her. Whereby I chiefely gheaſſed, that your wiſedome had brought her vnder: Can you (ſaide I to him) tell as well whome ſhée loueth, as that ſhée is in Loue? No by Apollo, ſaide he. For how, or by what meanes ſhould I know that. Mary I woulde aboue all thinges, that ſhée loued Alcamenes, my Siſters Sonne, whom, as muche as lieth in me, I haue appointed to be her Huſbande. You maie (ſaide I) trie and bring him in, and ſhewe him to her. He liked my Counſell well, and wente his waie. When he mette me the nexte time, in the middle of the Towne, where greate reſorte was, you ſhall heare ſaide he a pitifull thinge, my Daughter ſéemeth to be out of her wittes, ſuche a ſtrange infirmitie hath ſhée. I brought in Alcamenes as you badde me, and ſhewed him her very freaſhly apparailed, ſhée (as though ſhée had ſéene Gorgons
                  Cariclia madde almoste at the ſighte of Alcamenes. head, or ſome more fearefull thinge) cried with a lowde voice, and turned her countenance to the other parte of the chamber, and put her hande to her throte in ſtéede of an halter, and threatned, that ſhée woulde kille her ſelfe, & bounde it with an Othe too, if wée diſpatched not our ſelues out of the chamber quickely. Wée wente from her in leſſe while then ſhée ſpake the woordes, for what ſhoulde wée doo, ſeinge ſo fearefull a ſighte? Nowe I come to beſéeche you againe, that you will neither ſuffer her to periſhe, nor me to be fruſtrate of my pourpoſe.

O Caricles, ſaide I, you ſaide truely that your Daughter was madde: for ſhée is moued with the multitude, that I haue burdened her with, whiche are not of the leaſt, but ſuche as ſhould force her to doo, that whiche ſhée abhorred, as well by nature, as determination of minde. But I ſuppoſe that ſome God taketh an him to hinder this buſineſſe, and to ſtriue with my miniſters. Wherefore it is time that you ſhewe me her ſafetie, whiche you ſaide, was founde with her, with the other Iewels. I am afraide, leaſte that be inchanted, and wrought with ſuch thinges, as doo nowe exaſperate her minde, by reaſon, that ſomme Enimie had ordeined this for her as ſoone as ſhée was borne, that ſhée ſhoulde be eſtraunged from all loue, and die without Iſſue. He allowed, that I ſaide, & within a while after, he brought me the ſame, wherein were Aethiopian Letters, not common, but ſuche as the Princes vſe, whiche are like the Letters that the Aegyptians vſe in theire Holy affaires, as I readde it ouer, I founde ſuche thinges written therein. Perſina, QuéeneThe contentes of Cariclias faſcia, whiche declareth who are her Parentes, and the cauſe of her expoſition. of the Aethiopians to her Daughter onely, in ſorrowe, by what name ſo euer ſhée ſhalbe called, doothe write in haſte this Lamentation conteined herein, as her laſte gifte. I was aſtonied, Cnemon, when I hearde Perſinas name: yet I readde that whiche folowed, whiche was thus: My Daughter, the Sunne beinge Authoure of our ſtocke, is witneſſe, that for no miſdéede, I haue caſte thée foorthe, and concealed thée from thy Father Hydaſpes ſighte: yet my Daughter, I would haue my ſelfe excuſed to thée, if thou happen to liue, and to him, who ſhal finde thée, if God procure any, and to al menne, and therefore I declare the cauſe of thy Expoſition. The greateſt ofThe Aethiopians Goddes are the Sunne, Bacchus, Perſeus, Andromeda, and Memnon. al our Goddes, are the Sunne, and Bacchus: The nobleſt nexte to theſe, are Perſeus, Andromeda, and Memnon, after them. Thoſe, who haue by Succeſſion edified, and finiſhed the Kinges Palaice, haue portraied there many thinges that they did: as for the dwellinge houſes, and

Galleries, they haue ſette diuerſe Images, and Noble actes of theires in them: but all the bedde chambers are garniſhed with Pictures, containinge the Loue of Perſeus, and Andromeda, in one of them, after Hidaſpes had benne Married to me tenne yéeres, and wée had neuer a childe, wée happened to reſte after dinner in the Sūmer, for that wée were heauy a fléepe, at which time your Father had to doo with mée, ſwearinge that by a dreame he was commaunded ſo to doo, and I by and by perceiued my ſelfe with Childe. All the time after vntill I was deliuered, was kepte Holy, & Sacrifices of thankes geuinge were offered to the Goddes, for that the Kinge hoped to haue one nowe to ſuccéede him in his Kingdome. But thou werte borne white, whiche colour is ſtrange amonge the Ethiopians, I knewe the reaſon, becauſe IVVhy Perſina beinge blake, brought foorthe a white Daughter. looked vpon the picture of Andromeda naked, while my Huſbande had to doo with me (for then he firſte brought her from the rocke, had by miſhappe ingendred preſently a thinge like to her) yet I determined to ridde my ſelfe of ſhamefull deathe (countinge it certaine that thy colour woulde procure me to be accuſed of Adulterie, and that none woulde beléeue me, when I tolde them the cauſe) and to committe thée to the vnſtableneſſe of Fortune, whiche is a great deale rather to be wiſhed, then preſent deathe, or to be called a baſtarde. And tellinge my Huſband that thou werte ſtraight dead, I haue priuely laide thée forthe, with the greateſt Kitches that I had, for a rewarde to him that ſhall finde thée, and take thée vp. And beſides that, I haue furniſhed thée with other thinges, I haue wrapped thée in this blankette, wherein is conteined the ſumme of bothe our Eſtates, whiche I haue written with teares, and bloude that I haue ſhedde for thée, by reaſon that I bare thée, and fell into muche ſorrowe for thée, at one and the ſame time. But ô my ſwéete Childe, and but for a ſmall while my Daughter, if thou liue, remember thy Noble parentage, and loue

Chaſtitie, whiche is the Character and marke of womanlyChaſtitie is the token of womanly vertue. vertue, and Princely minde, & folowe thy Parentes, by keepinge the ſame. Aboue all thinges remember that thou ſéeke for a certaine Kinge, amonge the Iewelles that are aboute thée, whiche thy Father gaue me, when wée were firſte made ſure, in the hoope whereof is a Princely poſie, the ſtoane is a Pantarbe, of ſecréete vertue, conſecrated in the place where it is ſette. Theſe thinges haue I ſaide to thée, inuentinge my writinge to this vſe, ſithe that God had taken from me the Habilitie to tell thée them to thy face, whiche as they maie be voide of no effecte with litle laboure, ſo may they be profitable hereafter. For no man knoweth the vncertainetie ofFortune is vncertaine. Fortune. To be ſhorte, that I haue written, if thou liue, ſhalbe tokens to thée (my bewtifull Daughter in vaine, whiche by thy bewtie procureſt my blame) of thy birthe. But if thou die, whiche God graunt I neuer heare, they ſhal ſerue to burie thée. After I had redde this, Cnemon, I knewe what ſhée was, and marueiled greatly at the gouernance of the Goddes, and was full of pleaſure and ſorrowe, and altogeather newely affected, wéepinge and laughinge at ones, my minde nowe became gladde for the knowinge of that whereof I was ignorant before, and for remembringe that whiche was anſweared by the Oracle, but very muche troubled for that which was to come, and had greate pitie and compaſſion of the lifeMans Life vnſtable. of man, as a thinge very vnſtable and weake, and bendinge euery waie, whiche I knewe them firſte by the happe of Cariclia. For I thought of many thinges, of what Parentes ſhée was come, whoſe Childe ſhée was thought to be, howe farre ſhée was from her Countrie, and was now called Daughter by a falſe name, whereas ſhée had loſte her naturall Countrie ſoyle, and royall bloude of Aethiopia. To make fewe woordes, I was a greate while in ſtudie, for that I had good cauſe to haue pitie, and bewaile her ſtate paſſed, and yet durſt not commende

that whiche was to come, vntill pluckinge vp my harte, I concluded, that nowe it was not good to delaie the matter, but with ſpéede to execute that I had begone. And when I came to Cariclia, I founde her alone, altogeather weried with loue, and ſtriuinge to withſtande her fancie. Mary her body was muche afflicted, by reaſon that it yéelded to her infirmitie, and ſhée was not hable with any force to withſtande the violence thereof. After I had then farre put them awaie, who were with her, and gaue them charge that they ſhoulde make no noyſe, in maner as if I had made ſome Prayers and inuocations aboute the Mayde, I ſaide to her. Now is the time come Cariclia, (for ſo you promiſed yeſterdaie) to tell me your griefe, & not to conceale it any longer from a man that loueth you hartely, and alſo can knowe it though you holde your tongue: ſhée tooke me by the hand and kiſſed it, and therewithal ſhée wepte. And ſaide: wiſe Calaſiris, graunte me this fauour firſte, ſuffer me to holdeSilence pleaſeth vnhappy people well. my peace & be vnhappie, in as muche as you (will ſéeme to) knowe my diſeaſe all readie, and to account auoyded ignominie, my gaine, by concealinge that whiche to ſuffer is euill, but to vtter woorſe. Although mine increaſinge diſeaſe dothe muche gréeue mée, yet that gréeueth me more, that at the firſte I ouercame it not, but am yéelded vnto Loue, whiche by hearinge onely dothe defileThe name of Loue diſgraceth virginitie. the honorable name of Virginitie. With that I comforted her, and ſaide. My Daughter you doo wel, for twoo cauſes, to conceale your eſtate: For I haue no néede to knowe that againe, whiche by my ſkill I knewe before.VVemen ſhoulde not diſcouer their owne loue. Many weemen and Maydes of noble race, haue benne in Loue before Cariclia. And not without cauſe you bluſhe to vtter that, whiche it becometh wéemen to keepe ſecrete. But bicauſe thou haſte ones taſted of Loue, and Theagenes hath ſubdewed thée (for thus am I by diuine inſpiration informed) know that neither thou arte alone, nor the firſt that hath benne thus affected, but many other Noble wemen, and many Maidens (if you conſider other thinges) very chaſte haue

taſted hereof as well as you. For Loue is the greateſt of the Goddes, and is ſaide alſo ſometime to ouercome the Goddes them ſelues. But nowe conſider howe preſently you may beſte order your buſineſſe, in as much as at the firſte, not to be in Loue, is a kinde of happineſſe, but whē you are taken, to vſe it moderately, it is a pointGood Counſel for Louers, how they ſhal vſe their loue well. of excellente wiſedome, which thinge you may well doo, if you wil beléeue me, by puttinge awaie the filthy name of luſte, and imbracinge the lawfull bande of weddinge, and turninge your diſeaſe into Matrimonie. After I had ſaide thus, Cnemon, ſhée was in a great ſwelte, and it was euident that ſhée was gladde of that ſhée hearde, and greately in feare, and muche troubled for that ſhée hoped: at length ſhée waxed redde, to thinke in what maner ſhée was taken. After ſhée had ſtayed a while: Father, ſaide ſhée, you doo tell me of Mariage, and bidde me imbrace that, as thought it were plaine that either my Father woulde be contente therewith, or mine enemy, ſéeke that. As for the yonge man, ſaide I, it is out of doubte. For he is more in Loue then you, beinge moued with like meanes ſo to doo, by reaſon that bothe your mindes (as is like) at the firſte ſight knewe others excellencie, and fell into like affection, and I my ſelfe haue made his Loue the more, to doo you a pleaſure. But he that is ſuppoſed to be your Father, prouideth you an other Huſbande, Alcamenes whome you knowe well yenough. Lette him (ꝙ ſhée) rather ſéeke to late him in his graue, then Marry him to me. Either Theagenes ſhallCariclia wil haue Theagenes or none. haue me, or that whiche is deſtinied to all men ſhall receiue me. But I prayeyou, tell me how you knowe that Caricles is not my Father in déede, but ſuppoſed ſo to be. By this faſcia (ſaide I) and therewithal I ſhewed it her: Where had you that, or howe came you by it, ſaide ſhée? for after he had receiued me in Egypte, of him who brought me vp, he brought me hither I knowe not, how, and tooke that from me, and keapte it in a Cheſte, that by

continuance of time it might not be ſpoyled. Howe I came by it (ſaide I) you ſhall heare afterwarde. But tell me preſently, if you can tel, what is contayned therein: when ſhée tolde me that ſhée coulde not tell, it declareth (ſaide I) your Parentes, your Countrie, and all your Fortune. At laſte for that ſhée requeſted, that I woulde tell her what I knewe, I tolde her al, readinge it woorde by woorde, and interpretinge it to her. After ſhée knewe her ſelfe, and had taken ſtomake vnto her, ſhée drewe more neare her owne Petigrée, and ſaide, what muſte wée doo? Then beganne I to tell her plainely all our deuiſe, and made her priuie to euery pointe. I, my Daughter (ſaide I) haue gonne into Ethiopia, to learne ſome of theie wiſedome, and was well acquainted with Perſina.
                  The Kinges Courte of Aethiopia is a place, whereunto is greate reſorte of wiſe menne, and therein are they wel cheriſhed. For the Kinges Courte is a place for all wiſe men to reſorte vnto. Mary I had a little prayſe the more, by reaſon that I ioyned bothe the wiſedome of Egypte, and Ethiopia togeather, whiche made me of more credite a greate deale. After ſhée vnderſtoode that I woulde returne into my Countrie, ſhée tolde me all your affayres, bindinge me by Othe firſte, to kéepe it ſecrete, and ſayde moreouer that ſhée durſte not tell it to the Wiſe men of that Countrie, and ſhée deſired me to aſke the Goddes, firſte whether after your expoſition, you liued: then in what Countrie you were. For ſhée coulde heare of none ſuche in Ethiopia, although ſhée had made thereof diligent inquirie. I learned all of the Goddes, bothe that you were aliue, & where you leadde your life. Then ſhéePerſina requireth Calaſiris to ſeeke Cariclia, and bringe her home againe. beſought me, that I woulde ſéeke you out, and will you to returne into your Countrie. For, ſhée ſaide, that ſhée liued without iſſue and Children, by meanes of the great ſorrowe ſhée conceiued for your ſake, and that ſhée was nowe ready to confeſſe no leſſe to your Father, if you at any time came to light, and that ſhée knewe he woulde be perſwaded, as well for that he had experience of her, by longe continuaunce of time, as alſo for great ioye and

deſire that he ſhould haue by one to ſuccéede him contrary to his expectation. Thus muche ſhée ſaide, and deſiredThe wiſemen in olde time▪ might not breake their Othe, if they had ſworne by the Sunne. me to doo it, by the Othe that I had ſworne by the Sunne, whiche may not be violated of any of the Wiſe men. I came hether to perfourme the Othe, and made, although I tooke not this viage for this cauſe onely, yet I accounted it by the will of the Goddes, an aduantage gotten in my longe iourney. I haue benne buſie aboute this longe, and haue lefte no conuenient ſeruice vndone to you, yet I tolde you not the matter, waitinge for iuſte opportunitie, and to gette the Faſcia alſo by ſomme meanes to make dewe proufe of that I woulde ſaie. Wherefore you maye, if you wilbe ruled, and goo awaye with vs (before you ſuffer any thinge by violence whiche you woulde not, of Caricles, who prouideth very buſily to matche you with Alcamenes) recouer your Kinred, your Countrie, and Parentes, and dwell with Theagenes, who is ready to folowe vs into what Countrie ſo euer wée wil, and to reigne with your déere lone, that is contente to change his natural, and princely life, for our ſtrange, and vncertaine ſtate, if we ſhal geue credite, not onely to the Gods, and other thinges, but alſo to the Oracle of Apollo. And with that, I brought the Oracle into her remembrance, and declared to her, what it meante, whiche Cariclia knewe before, in as muche as it was in euery mannes mouthe. Shée ſtarte backe a litle at this: and after ſaide, Father, ſéeinge you ſaie, the Goddes woulde haue it ſo, and I beleue no leſſe. What muſte wée doo? You muſte (quoth I) make as though you were content with Alcamenes Marriage. That is, ſaid ſhée, very muche, and ſcante allowable, to preferre any man onely in promiſe before Theagenes? But Father, for as muche as I haue geuen my ſelfe into the handes of the Goddes and you, tel me the ende of this tale, andA woman is beſte at a ſuddaine attempte. howe it maie be vndonne, before it be brought to effecte. You ſhal knowe (ſaide I). Many thinges tolde before

hand to woomen, haue greately hindered the mater in hande: whiche beinge ſuddainely put in practiſe, are by them more boldely atcheiued for the moſte parte. Onely folowe my counſel, as wel nowe, as at other times, and be contente to allowe the marriage, whiche Caricles wil prouide for you, who wil doo nothinge without my counſel, and helpe. Shée made promiſe ſo to doo: and I wente my waie, and leafte her wéepinge. I ſcantly was gone out of her Chamber, but I ſawe Caricles, very ſadde, and ful of ſorrowe. Ah good Sir (ſaide I) when you ſhoulde folowe me, and reioice, and doo Sacrifice of thankeſgeuing to the Goddes, for that you haue gotten, that which before you deſired, Cariclia, at length by muche ſkil, and manifolde wiſedome, made content to take a Huſbande, then are you ſadde, and heauie, and can ſcante refraine from teares, but I knowe not why. Why ſhoulde I not (ſaide he)? ſéeinge it ſhal come to paſſe, that the thinges, whiche I holde deareſt in my life, ſhal be carried into ſomme other Countrie, if we maie geue credite, as wel to the Dreame that I had this nighte, as to others, wherein, me thought, that an Egle, let flie out of Apolloes
                  Caricles dreame. hande, came downe, and tooke my Daughter out of mine armes, and carried her into, I knowe not, what far Countrie, whiche was full of blacke, and ougly ſhadowes. At a woorde, I coulde not tel what he did with her, by reaſon that the infinite diſtance of place tooke awaieGreat diſtance of place, taketh awaie the ſight of our eies. the ſighte of mine eies. As ſoone as he had ſaide thus, I knewe whereto his dreame tended▪ But that I might withdrawe him from this deſpaire of minde, and bringe him farre from ſuſpition of that whiche ſhoulde comme to paſſe, I ſaide, Sir Prieſte, you ſéeme not toCalaſiris ſubtile expoſition thereof. déeme arighte of this Viſion, in as much as it for ſheweth to you, the marriage of your Daughter, and dooth ſecretly ſignifie by the Egle, that ſhée ſhal haue an Huſbande, and that this ſhalbe ſo, Apollo wil bring her an Huſband with his own hande, yet you ſéeme to be angry, and conſtrue

your Dreame woorſe, then it is meante. Wherefore, Caricles, let vs be mery, and addicte our ſelues to the wil of the Goddes, labouringe euery waie the better to perſuade the Maide. He aſked me what was beſte to be donne, that the Maide mighte be more obediente. If (ꝙ I) you haue any pretious thinge in ſtoare, or apparell wrought with Golde, or any Iewel of price, bringe them to her, as Tokens from her Spouſe, & appeaſe her with giftes: For Gold, & Pretious Stoanes are woonderfully eſtéemed with woomen. You muſt prouide other thinges for this Solemnitie alſo, and this Mariage muſte be diſpatched preſently, while her deſire thereto, whiche is wroughte by Arte againſte her wil, is ſtable, and vnchanged. After Caricles had ſaide, thinke that I wil omit nothinge whiche I can doo, he wente home, and for ioie, as ſoone as I had leafte talkinge with him, he made haſteCaricles geueth Cariclia al the Iewelles that her Mother gaue her at the time of her Expoſitiō. ſo to doo. And he did in déede, as I perceiued afterward, that whiche I commaunded him, without delaie, in bringinge, as wel the coſtly Garmente, as alſo the Iewesl of Aethiopia, which Perſina laide foorthe with Cariclia, that ſhée mighte knowe what ſhée was, as thoughe they had benne Tokens from Alcamenes. Then mette I with Theagenes, and aſked him where thoſe were, who were the Dooers of the Roialtie aforſaide. The Maides (quoth he) are gonne awaie before, that thei maie take the eaſier iournies: and the yonge menne wil tarry no longer, but make much adoo, and greate prouiſion to returne to their Conntrie. When I knewe this, I tolde him what he ſhould both ſaie to them, and doo him ſelfe, and gaue him charge, that he ſhould waite vntil I gaue him a Token, what he ſhoulde doo. And ſo I leafte him, and wente to the Temple of Apollo, to praie the God, that he woulde inſtructe me as concerninge my flighte with the yongeGod is ready to helpe thoſe that woorke by his will. couple. But the God was quicker then any man would thinke, who helpeth thoſe that doo their buſineſſe, accordinge to his wil, although he be not called vpon, oftentimes

preuentinge theire praiers with the readineſſe of his good wil: as euen then it happened, that he preuented my queſtion with the anſweare, and did in déede declare his helpe, and pleaſure. For as much as a certaine voice ſtaied me as I wente by, to a Propheteſſe, and was very careful for the perfourmance of that I determined: whiche ſaide, you maie make haſte when the ſtrangers calle you, who at that time, with the noyſe of Shames, made a Banquette in the honoure of Hercules. I wente not ſo faſte after I hearde this, for I might not goe paſte when God had called me. After I had with Frankenſence perfumed, & offered water, they ſéemed to woonder at the coſte of my Oblations: yet for al that, they deſired me to take parte of theire Banquette. I did ſo, & after I ſate downe on a Benche whiche they had ſtrewed with Myrte, & Lawrel for ſtrangers, and had eaten ſuch meate as I was accuſtomed to doo, I ſaid vnto thē, good felowes, I thanke you for my goo chéere. But I am vtterly ignorante of your Demeanour: wherefore it is time that ye tel me, what ye are, and whence ye comme. For it is an vnſéemely, and very rude thinge, that thoſe, who haue donne Sacrifice, and Banquetted togeather, and made holy meate at the beginninge of their friendeſhip, ſhould departe without either knowinge others affaires. Then they tolde me, that they were Merchauntes of Tyros in Phoenicia, and that they ſailed to Carthage in Aphrique, with a Shippe fraughted with Merchandyſe of India, Aethiopia, and Phoenicia: At this time we make a BanquetteThe Tyrians do Sacrifice to Hercules, for a victory that one of their companions had. to Hercules of Tyros, for a Victorie which we haue gotten, in as muche as this yonge man, pointing to him that ſate before me, gotte the beſte game at Wraſtlinge: whereby he hathe proued, that a Tyrian maie gette the Victorie in the middeſt of the Greekes. For he, after wée had ſayled paſte Malea, and by force of Tempeſte were conſtrained to lande at the Ilande of the people of Cephalem, ſware vnto vs by this our Countrie God, that

in his ſléepe it was tolde him, he ſhoulde obtaine the Victory in theſe ſportes of Apollo. And when he had perſwaded vs to turne from our intended courſe, and lande here, he made proufe by déede, that his Prophecie was true. So that nowe he is denounced a famous Conquerour, that was but late a Marchante, who alſo as a thankes geuinge for his victorie, dothe this Sacrifice to the God, who was his Conductor. And to morowe if the winde ſerue, wée will leaue this coaſte. Haue you determined this in déede ſaide I? Yea verily anſweared they: you ſhall then if you pleaſe; haue my company: For I haue a viage into Sicilia for a certaine cauſe, and you ſailynge into Aphryke, muſte paſſe by it. You ſhall be welcome (ꝙ they) if you will: for wée ſuppoſe wée ſhal want no commoditie, if wée haue with vs a Wiſe man, and a Grecian, and ſuche a one as by experience may be proued, that he is wel beloued of the Goddes. I would (ſaide I to them) if you will graunte me but one daie, to make my prouiſion. You ſhall haue to morrowe (ꝙ they) on condition that aboute night you wilbe at the Sea. For wée commonly ſayle by night, for that the windes that come then from the earthe, doo calmely fill our ſayles. I made bargayne that I woulde doo ſo, bindinge them firſte by Othe, that they ſhould not departe before their promiſed time was expired. And ſo I lefte them there, yet pipinge and dauncinge, after the manner of the Aſſyrans, ſometime leapinge alofte, ſometime bendinge their bodyes downewarde, and like ſuche as were inſpired with ſome God, writhinge them ſelues. Then wente I to Cariclia, and founde her holdinge in her lappe the Iewels whiche Caricles gaue her, and earneſtly vewed them. After I wente to Theagenes, and when I had tolde them bothe what they ſhoulde doo, and when I wente to mine owneThe manner of the takinge away of Cariclia. lodgyng, diligently conſideringe of that which ſhould be done. The nexte daie thus did thei. About midnight whē al the Cittie was faſte aſléepe, a crewe of armed yonge

men came to the houſe of Cariclia, the Captayne of this amorous warre was Theagenes, who taught his youthes after their braue Pompe to plaie the Souldiers. They ſuddainely made thoſe afrayde, which perceiued a little, with their greate clamour & claſſhynge of their armour, ſo that with greate lighte they brake into her houſe, liftinge the doore aſide eaſily, for that it was prouided before, it ſhoulde not be very harde barred, and tooke her awaie wel prepared, for that ſhée knew hereof before, and with good will ſuffered this aſſaulte, and caried a greate deale of ſtuffe ſuche as the Mayde commaunded them, away alſo. After they came out of the houſe, they ſounded a warlike crie, and made a terrible noyſe with their Harneſſe, and ſo paſſed through the Cittie, and caſte the Inhabitantes thereof into a woonderful feare, by reaſon that they had choſen the night for none other pourpoſe, but that they might be the more feared. So that Pernaſſus gaue an Eccho backe to their noyſe. After they were gone out of the Cittie, as faſte as they coulde, they hied them on Horſebacke into the Mountaines of Locrus and Oeta. But Theagenes and Cariclia, as was before concluded, foreſooke the Theſſalians, and came to me priuily, and fell bothe in greate feare at my féete, and ſtill cried, ſaue vs Father. Cariclia ſaide no more, but helde downe her heade, as though ſhée were aſhamed of that ſhée had donne. But Theagenes ſaide more. Calaſiris ſaue vs beinge Strangers, and banniſhed our Countries, depriued of all our Friendes, that amonge them all wée might winne our ſelues. Saue our bodies hereafter committed to Fortune, whiche alſo are made bonde to chaſte Loue. Saue vs by our owne accorde banniſhed, yet glad thereof, and ſuche as haue ſette all their ſauegarde on you. I was moued herewith, and after I had wepte, rather with my harte, then mine eies, ſo that the yonge folkes perceiued it not, yet it eaſed my griefe, I comforted and imboldened them. At a woorde I badde them

hope for a luckie ende, in that this matter was begonne by the will and Counſell of the Goddes. As for me (ꝙ I) I will goo and diſpatche the reſte of our buſineſſe. But tarry you me in this place, and take diligent héede that no man eſpie you. When I had ſaide thus, I went backe, but Cariclia caught me by the coate, and helde me faſte,An example of paſsinge Chaſtitie. and ſayde: What Father, this beginninge is vniuſte or rather Trayterous, if you will departe, and leaue me alone with Theagenes, and will not conſider howe vnméete a man, a Louer is to be a kéeper, if that be in his power to enioye whiche he loueth, and wante ſuche as may make him aſhamed thereof. For, I thinke, that he is rather incenſed, when he ſeeth, that which he deſireth, without any defenſe before his face. Wherefore I will not let you departe before, as well for the time preſent, but rather for that whiche is to come: I maie be ſure by Theagenes Othe, that he ſhall not fleaſhly haue to doo with me, vntill I haue recouered my Countrie, and Parentes, or if the Goddes be not content herewith, at leaſt vntill I by mine owne frée will be content he ſhall Marrie me. Otherwiſe neuer. After I harde what ſhée had ſaide, I woondered and was determined it ſhould be ſo, and made a little fire vpon an Aultare, and burned Incenſe. Theagenes ſware, ſayinge that he had wronge, for that the faithe which he had determined in his minde to kéepe, was taken away by reaſon of an Othe, and that he coulde not prayſe that will, whiche was forced by aTheagenes thinketh pacience par force, ſcant woorthy prayſe. greater power, yet for all that he tooke his Othe, by Apollo of Delphos, and Diana, by Venus her ſelfe, and all Lawes, that he woulde doo all thinges in ſuche ſorte, as Cariclia would haue him. This and many other thinges they concluded betwéene them ſelues, callinge the Gods witneſſes thereto. I comminge as faſte as I could to Caricles, founde all his houſe on a hurlyburly, and ſory becauſe the Miniſters were now come to him, and had tolde him of the takinge awaie of the Mayde, and the Citizens

came by heapes & ſtoode rounde about him, while he ſorowed, at a woorde, what for ignorance of that was done, & wante of counſell for that was to come, they were at their wittes endes. There beganne I with my bigge voyce to thunder, and ſaye: Yée vnhappy people, howeCalaſiris diſſembled Oratiō. longe will ye ſitte ſtill, dombe like ſtockes, as though your courage were alſo taken awaie with ill Fortune? Why doo you not in Armoure purſue your enemies? wil you not take, and puniſhe them, who haue donne you this wronge? It is in vaine perhappes (ſayde Caricles) to ſtriue any longer with this preſent Fortune. For I vnderſtande perfitely, that I am thus puniſhed for the anger of the Goddes, whiche was foreſhewed me, ſince I wente in an vnlucky time, into the priuie Chappell, and ſawe there that whiche was not lawfull to be ſéene, that therefore I ſhould loſe, that I ſette moſte ſtoare by. But there is no impediment (as the Prouerbe is) that ſhoulde let vs to fight with the Goddes, if wée knewe whom to purſue, or him, who hath donne vs this miſchiefe. That is (ſayde I) Theagenes the Theſſalian, & the yonge men, whiche were with him, whom you prayſed ſo muche, and made my friende. And ſo you maie yet finde ſome man in the Cittie, who hath till this time ſtayed here: wherefore ariſe, & call the people to Councell: ſo was it donne. The Captaines appointed a méetinge, by Trumpet proclayminge the ſame in the Cittie, the people ſtraight came together, the Theater was made a Courte by night. Caricles came foorth, and fallinge ſuddainely awéepinge, beganne to ſaie thus: Perhappes ye (menneCaricles pitifull Oration, aboute the takinge away of Cariclia. of Delphi) ſuppoſe, conſideringe the greatneſſe of my miſeries, that I come hither, and haue gathered this multitude of people, to vtter mine owne miſhappes vnto you. But it is not ſo: For although I ſuffer ofte ſuch thinges as may be compared with deathe it ſelfe, and at this preſent time my houſe is deſolate, and deſtroyed by the Goddes, ſolitary, and robbed of thoſe that I helde moſte

déere, in whoes companie, and pleaſant behauiour I contented my ſelfe: yet the common fruſtration, and vaine hope of al, doothe comforte me alitle, and cauſeth me to ſuffer, who promiſeth to finde my Daughter againe, whiche thinge in déede maie be donne: but the Cittie moueth me more, which I deſire, and looke ſhalbe Victorious firſte, and take reuenge of thoſe, that haue wronged it. Excepte theſe Theſſalian youthes haue taken awaie our loftie courages, and iuſte wrathe whiche wée ſhoulde receiue for our Countrie, and Countrie Goddes. For, that whiche is moſte intollerable, a fewe dauncinge Boyes, ſente about a Sacred meſſage, doo depart after they haue waſted the moſt Noble Cittie of Greece, and haue taken out of Apolloes Churche, the moſte Pretious Iewell thereof, Cariclia, which alſo was my Life. O implacable and too obſtinate anger of God, towarde vs: Firſte (as you al knowe) it killed my natural Daughter at the daie of her Marriage, and her Mother alſo with the griefe that ſhée tooke for her Deathe, and banniſhed me from my Natiue Countrie. But all this was tollerable after I had founde Cariclia: Cariclia was my life, my hope, and ſtaie of my ſtocke: Cariclia onely was my comforte, and, as I maie terme her, mine increaſe: whiche alſo this miſerie (what ſo euer it be, that nowe came vpon me) hathe taken from me. Neither hathe it donne this ſimply, or by chaunce, but as it accuſtomably triumphethe ouer me with moſte crueltie, it hathe taken her euen almoſt fromHegeſias Oration, as touchinge the purſuite of thoſe, who tooke away Cariclia. Occaſion is of moſ
                        ••
                      force in VVarre. her Huſbande, in as muche as the daie of Wedding was already ſpreadde abroade amonge you all. As he ſpake thus, and fel quite from the mater into ſorrowinge, Hegeſias the Captaine, badde him be contente, and get him awaie: and ſaid, you that be here, Caricles ſhal haue time yenoughe to lamente hereafter. But let vs not be drowned with his ſorrowe, nor carried awaie vnaduiſedly with his teares, as with a greate ſtreame of water, letting paſſe al due occaſion, whiche as it is in al thinges, ſo

in Warre it is of moſt force. For nowe if wée purſue as ſoone as wée ſhal diminiſhe this Companie, there is ſome hope that we ſhal ouertake our enimies, which now trauel without care, for that they knowe we be vnprouided. But if wée ſtil lamentinge, or rather wailinge like wéemen, ſhal geue them longer time, that they eſcape, with our tarryinge, we ſhal deſerue nothinge, but to be ſcorned, and that of the yonge menne them ſelues: whiche, I ſaie, ought to be hanged as ſoone as they be taken, and ſomme of them ignominiouſly dealt withal, ſo that their pouniſhmente alſo redounde to theire Families. This maie eaſily be donne, if wée ſhal moue the Theſſalians to diſpleaſure againſte theſe that be fledde, and their poſteritie, by forbiddinge thē to doo any more this Holy Legation, and due Funeralles of the Noble man, whiche wée had decreed, ſhoulde be donne of the coſte of the common Treaſurie. After all this was prayſed of the people,The Theſſalians are forbidden by common Councell, to doo Sacrifice to Pirrhus, for the takinge awaye of Cariclia. This is when the ſteede is ſiolen. to ſhutte the ſtable doore. and by theire Decrée eſtabliſhed: Let this alſo, ſaide the Captaine, if it pleaſe you, be ratified by your voices, that the wooman, who hathe the charge of the Sacrifices, be ſhewed no more to them that runne in Armoure. For, as I can coniecture, thereof hath growen the beginning of this impietie in Theagenes, who alſo thought (as maie be denied) of this Rape, euer ſithence he firſte ſawe her. For it is good hereafter to take awaie the occaſion of ſuch like attempte. After this was graunted by the voices, and handes of al that were preſent, Hegeſias gaue them a Token to goe foorthe, and gaue a ſigne of Warre with a Trumpette, ſo that the Theater was diſſolued into Warre, and euery man ranne haſtily out of the Councel to Battaile, not onely the ſtronge men, and ſuch as were able to weare Armoure, but boyes alſo, and ſtriplinges without order, durſte be partakers of that voiage, by theire readineſſe greately augmentinge the number of luſtie menne of that time. many woomen alſo behaued themſelues more ſtoutely, then their nature permitted,

euery one takinge vp for a Weapon, that whiche came nexte to hande, and folowed in vaine: who, for that they miſſed of theire pourpoſe, perceiued wel the infirmitie of theire kinde. You might then haue ſéene olde men ſtriue with age, and in a manner the minde drawinge their bodies, and for greate and ardente deſire to fighte, obiected weakeneſſe, as a ſhame to it. So greate griefe tooke the Cittie for the Rape of Cariclia, and prepared them ſelues ſuddainely to the purſuinge, as if they had had but one minde, and would not looke for daie.
               Here endeth the Fourthe Booke.
               
            
            
               The Fifthe Booke.
               
                  THus therefore was the Cittie of Delphi occupied, but what they did in the ende, I knewe not, ſauinge that their purſuet gaue me good occaſion to conueye my ſelfe awaye. So I tooke the yonge folkes with me to the Sea, and put them into the ſhippe of Phenices, whiche was by and by ready to departe. For as ſoone as the morning beganne to appeare, the Phoenicians which promiſed to tarry for me a day and a night, thought now that they ſhould not breake the Othe whiche they ſware to me. When wée came they entertained vs very ioyfully, and forthwith they launched out into the déepe, with Ores firſt, then, after a calme gale blewe from the earth, the waues quietly came vnder our ſhippe, and in a manner ſmiled vpon her, & ſuffered her to goo with full ſaile. And thus wée paſſed with our ſhippe, the coaſt of Cyrrha,
                  
and Pernaſſus with his hie toppes, and the Rockes of Actolia, and Calidonia, & by the time that it was Sunne ſetting, wée diſcouered the Ilandes, as well by Figure, as name Acute, and the Zacynthian Sea. But (in an vnhappy time) why doo I tell this? why doo I forgette my ſelfe, & you, & continewe my tale, bringyng you hereafter in very déede to the Sea? Here let vs leaue ye reſte of our talke, & ſléepe a litle. For although thou, Cnemon, be nothinge weary to heare, and ſtifly ſtriue with ſleape, yet I thinke that now you begin to quaile, in that I haue continued my talke farre on the night. And beſides this, my Sonne, bothe age dothe burden me, & the remembraunce of my miſeries diſſoluinge my minde, dothe driue me to ſléepe. Doo ſo Father, ſaide Cnemon, not as though I willed you to make an ende, for that as I thinke, I could not doo, though you would tel it many daies & nightes togeather, with ſuche ſingular pleaſantnes, & excellent ſuauitie is it ſeaſoned. But me thinketh I heare ſome noiſe & buſineſſe aboute the houſe, & haue benne troubled alitle therefore, but forced my ſelfe to kéepe ſilence, for ye great deſire I had to heare your tale. I hearde it not, ſayde Calaſiris, either for that age maketh mine eares ſomewhatAge beſide other diſcommodities maketh menne harde of beatinge. dull, & harde (for age bréedeth many infirmities, bothe in ye other partes, but chiefly in the eares) or els for that my minde wholy was occupied about my tale. I thinke, Nauſicles ye owner of this houſe is come. But ô yée Gods, how hath he ſpedde? As I deſired (ſaide Nauſicles) ſtepping in ſuddainely to them. For I knew wel inough, good Calaſiris, that you were carefull of my buſineſſe, & almoſt traueled with me in your minde. But I perceiue your good will towarde me, by diuerſe courteſies ſhewed me, bathe at other times, and alſo by this, whereof I heare you talkinge here. But what Straunger is this? He is a Grecian, ſaid Calaſiris, you ſhal heare more of him hereafter. But tell you vs quickly what good lucke you haue had, that wée may reioyce with you. You ſhall heare to morrowe

ſaide Nauſicles, as now be content to knowe that I haue gotten a better Thisbe: for I haue néede to ſléepe a little, to abate my griefe whiche I haue gotten, as wel by my iourney, as other cogitations. This ſaide, he went his waie to doo as he had ſaide. But Cnemon was muche abaſhed whē he hearde Thisbes name, and turned al his cogitations to the time paſte, with muche and continual ſorrowe tormentinge him ſelfe all the reſte of the night, ſo that Calaſiris though he were faſte a ſléepe, perceiued it, who ſittinge vp a little, and leaninge on his elbowe, aſked what he lacked, and why he was ſo diſquieted, as if he were almoſte madde. Haue I not good cauſe (ſayde Cnemon to him) to be madde, ſeinge I heare that Thisbe is aliue. What is this Thisbe (ꝙ Calaſiris) or how doo you know her, by hearinge her name, and are ſo gréeued that ſhée is aliue? You ſhal heare the reſte (ꝙ Cnemon) when I tell you mine eſtate. But her I ſawe ſlaine with theſe eies, and with mine owne handes, I buried her with the Heardmen. Sléepe, ſayde Calaſiris, and wée ſhall knowe how this goeth ere longe. I maye not (ꝙ he) but lie you ſtill and ſturre not: For my parte I know not whether I can liue, excepte I goo for the ſecretely, and make diligent inquirie, how Nauſicles is deceiued, and howe onely with the Egyptians, ſuche as were deade, reuiue againe. Calaſiris ſmiled a little at this, and ſo fell a ſléepe. Cnemon wente out of the chamber, and reſtrained him ſelfe muche, as is like one would doo that is in the darke, and in an vnacquainted houſe: but he tooke all in good parte, for feare of Thisbe, being deſirous in haſte to ridde him ſelfe out of this doubte: till at lengthe with muche adoo, after he had gonne vp and downe oft in one place, as if he had benne in diuerſe, he hearde a woman like a Nightingale in the Springe, dolefully lamentinge, and with ſorrowfull tunes, ſo that by her mourninge (as if one had taken him by the hande) he was brought to her chamber, and layinge his eare to the doore, hearde her yet

complayninge in this ſorte. I poore wretch ſuppoſed,Cariclias pitifull complainte, beinge ſeperated from Theagenes. that I had benne deliuered out of the handes of théeues, and eſcaped deathe, whiche I alway looked for, and that I ſhould after haue lead, though a ſtrange & baniſht life, with my déereſt friende, yet ſuche a one, as in his companie, ſhould haue benne moſte delectable, for there is nothinge ſo troubleſome and grieuous to me, whiche is not tollerable with him. But nowe the God who hath had charge of our buſineſſe from the beginninge, and hath graunted vs but ſmall pleaſure, not yet ſatiſfied, hath deceiued vs againe. I thought that I had eſcaped bondage, but now I ſerue againe, and am kepte in pryſon: I was in an Iland and darke place before, this preſent ſtate is like too it, or rather, to ſaye the trothe, woorſe, becauſe he, who bothe coulde and woulde by comforte abate theſe ſorowes, is violently ſeperated & taken from me. A denne of Théeues the daye before was mine Inne, and what was that habitation, but a very Hel, or woorſe place? yet my déere Louer beinge with me, made it eaſie to be ſuffered. There he lamented me aliue, and ſhedde teares for me, beinge (as he thought) dead, and bewayled me as if I had benne ſlaine, nowe am I depriued of all this: he is gonne, who was partaker of my calamities, and who would haue deuided them, as though it had benne a burden. And I alone am forſaken, a pryſoner, and by many waies to be lamented, am obiected to the arbiterment of cruell Fortune. And doo reteyne my life onely, for that I hope my moſte déere friende is aliue. But ô my harte, where art thou? or what Fortune haſte thou? arte thou alſo alas bounde, whiche haſte a frée minde, not able to abide any ſeruage, but of Loue? well, doo nothinge but ſaue thy life, to the intent thou mayſt once beholde thy Thisbe againe: for ſo ſhalte thou call me, whether thou wilt or not. Cnemon coulde abide no longer, after he hearde this, too heare the reſte: though he gheaſſed by the beginninge ſomewhat els, yet by that he hearde in the

ende, concludinge that it was Thisbe, wanted but litleThe name of Thiſbe, troubleth Cnemon ſore. that he ſounded not at the gate. But after he had ouercommed that paſſion with muche adoo, for feare leaſt he ſhould be ſpied of any man (for nowe the Cockes crewe the ſeconde time) he ranne backe ſlumblinge, ſometime hurtinge his toes againſt the ſelles, ſometimes hittinge his head againſt the walles and doore poſtes. When he came to his lodginge after muche trauell, he fell into the bedde, and all his body trembled, and his téeth chattered ſore: and he had perhappes benne in extreame perill, if Calaſiris, had not perceiued it, and comforted him, and brought him to him ſelfe againe. After he was reuiued a little, he aſked of him the matter. I am vndonne (ꝙ he) for that moſt wicked Thisbe is aliue in déede: and therewithall he ſounded againe: and Calaſiris had much adoo to call him agayne, and comforte him. Surely ſome God plainely ſcorned Cnemon, becauſe (as otherwiſe, for the moſt parte it maketh a ieſte, or toie of humaine affayres: ſo nowe it woulde not ſuffer him peaceably without diſquietneſſe, to enioye that whiche was moſt pleaſant and welcome to him, but that whiche ſhortely after woulde make him very ioyfull, was nowe turned into ſorrowe) either for that it ſhewed then the nature, and cuſtome of it ſelfe, or els becauſe the Nature of man can not take true ioye as ſhould be. Wherefore Cnemon ſtedde from that, whiche he then ſhould moſte haue deſired, & ſuppoſed that to be fearefull, whiche was moſte delectable to him. For the woman that wepte was not Thisbe, but Cariclia. For thus it was: after Thiamis came into his Enimies hande aliue, and was kepte Pryſoner, the Ilande was ſette on fire, and the Heardemen, who inhabited it, were fledde, Cnemon, and Thermutis, Thiamis Shielde Bearer, in the morninge rewed ouer the Lake, to ſpie in what caſe theire Captaine was with their Enimies: the manner of their iourney was ſuch as is declared before. Then were Theagenes, and Cariclia
                  
leafte in the Denne alone, who accoumpted the prolonginge of their calamities a ſingulare benefite, that was the firſte time that euer they were by them ſelues, and deliuered from al that mighte trouble them. Wherefore they conſidered of theire eſtate, not forgettinge to kiſſe and imbrace eche other, ſo that they foregat all that they had to doo, & ſtoode either in others armes a greate while, as if they had benne made one Body, contente yet to ſatiſfie them ſelues with Chaſte Loue, temperatinge their affection with teares, and clenly kiſſes. For Cariclia, if at any time ſhée perceiued Theagenes to paſſe the boundes of ſéemelineſſe, and deale with her ouer want only, would rebuke him by tellinge him of his Othe: and he woulde ſuffer him ſelfe to be refourmed with litle laboure, and brought againe to temperateneſſe, in as much as he wasCariclia more in Loue, then Theagenes. in Loue inferiour to her, but in pleaſure he far ſurmounted. But at length, though it were longe firſte, thei remembred what they had to doo, and by force were conſtrained to contente them ſelues, and then Theagenes beganne to ſpeake thus: That we, Cariclia, maie enioie one an other, and attaine vnto that, whiche we haue preferred before al other thinges, and for whiche we haue ſuſteined al our troubles, bothe wée doo wiſhe, & the Goddes of Greece graunte. But for as muche, as wel becauſe al worldly thinges are vnſtable, and incline diuerſe waies, and wée haue borne muche, and hope for many thinges, wée muſt nowe haſte vs to Chemmis, as wee haue concluded with Cnemon, as alſo bicauſe wée knowe not what fortune wée ſhal haue, & wée haue (as it ſéemeth) a greate, and woonderful deale of grounde to paſſe, before wée can comme to the Lande whiche wée hope for: Let vs diuiſeA very wiſe deuiſe of Theagenes. certaine Tokens, whereby wée beinge one in others ſighte, maie knowe our ſecretes: and if it happen vs to be Seawinded, wée maie in abſence ſéeke one an other.The commoditie of a watchwoorde. For a watche woorde of friendes, which is keapte in hope to finde, is a greate eaſemente of longe trauel. Cariclia
                  
praiſed his diuiſe, and they agreed, if they were ſeperated, that Theagenes ſhoulde write, Pithicus: Cariclia, Pithies vpon al famous Churches, Pictures, Monumentes, and greate Stoanes in Croſſe waies, whether they were gonne the right hande waie, or the lefte: to what Cittie, Village, or Countrie: and laſtely, that thei ſhould declare the very daie, and houre. And if they might, it ſhoulde be ſufficiente one to ſée the other. For they thoughte no time ſhoulde be hable to put out of theire mindes ſuche Loue: yet for the better aſſurance, Cariclia woulde ſhewe her Fathers Kinge, whiche was laide out with her, and Theagenes a Scarre in his Thighe, that a wilde Bore gaue him. It was further concluded betwéene them, that in ſtéede of woordes, ſhée ſhoulde beare a Taper, and he a Branche of Palme. To confirme this, they imbraced eche other, and wepte, powringe out their teares in ſtéede of Sacrifice (as I gheaſſe), and for an Othe, they vſed many kiſſes. After theſe thinges were thus ordered, they came out af the Caue, without touching any of the Treaſures whiche were laied vp there. For they coumpted thoſe goodes vncleane, whiche were gotten by Robberies: but that which they brought with them from Delphi, and that the Théeues had taken from them, that they gathered togeather, and carried with them: And Cariclia chaunged her Apparaile, and put it into a litle Packe with the Coppie of their Vowe, and her Garland, and Sacred Garmente: and that it might be more priuie, they laied the reſte of their woorſte ſtuffe vpon it. As for her Bowe, and Quiuer, ſhée gaue them to Theagenes to beare, whiche was a paſſinge pleaſante burthen to him, ſéeinge they were the proper Weapons of the God, who had the power ouer him. As ſoone as they came neare to the Lake, and were aboute to take Boate, they ſpied a bande of Armed men rowinge ouer to the Ilande. Theyfore abaſſhed at that terrible ſighte, ſtoode a great while aſtonied, as though with the greatneſſe of their ſorrowe

whiche they conceiued of the vnſtableneſſe of Fortune, which ſo raged ſtill againſt them, that they had loſt their ſences: yet at length whē they were ready to arriue, who comming towarde them, Cariclia deſired to retire backe, and créepe into ſome corner of the Denne, and there hide them ſelues, and therewithall ſhée ranne her waie. But Theagenes cauſed her to abide, and ſaide how longe ſhal wée flée the fate that foloweth vs euery where? Let vs yéelde to Fortune, and withſtande no longer the violēce which is ready to aſſaulte vs, for what els ſhal we gaine, but fruiteleſſe trauell, and a baniſhed life, and from time to time, be ſcorned of the Goddes? Doo you not ſee howe they ioine the Robberies of the Pyrates to our baniſhment, and goe aboute with greate diligence and trauell to bringe vs into greater daungers, by Lande, then earſt wée haue founde by Sea? not longe agoo they made afraie aboute vs: within a little after, they broughte Théeues vnto vs, ere while thei made vs priſoners, then lefte they vs alone, but at libertie, and made vs beléeue wée might goo whither wée woulde, then ſtreight haue they brought vs into the handes of ſuche as ſhall kill vs. This warre for their diſporte haue thei made againſt vs, making as it were, a Comedie of our affayres. Why then doo not wée breake of this Tragical Poeme of theirs, and yéelde vs to thoſe that wil kill vs? leaſt perhappes if they meane to make an intollerable ende of our Tragedy, we be forced to kill our ſelues. Cariclia allowed not al that he ſaide, mary ſhée thought that he iuſtly accuſed Fortune, but not that it was any pointe of wiſedome, to yéelde them ſelues willingly into their enimies handes, for they were not ſure that they would kil them as ſoone as they had them, neither had they to doo with ſo gentle and friendly a God, that woulde make a quicke ende of their miſeries, but woulde perhappes reſerue them to a further bondage. Which thinge, then what death ſhould it not be more gréeuous? If wée geue our ſelues to the

iniuries of barbarous people, wée ſhal be ſo vnwoorthely handled, as I am lothe to gheaſſe. Whiche thinge by all meanes, and as longe as wée can, let vs auoide: meaſuringe our hope of time to comme, with experience of that whiche is paſte, howe wée haue benne diuerſly preſerued at ſuche time as is not credible. After Theagenes had ſaide, Let vs doo as you wil: ſhée wente before, and he folowed her, as if he had benne tied to her. Yet for al their haſte, they came not to the Denne before their Enimies: but while they looked on them that wente before them, they wiſte not that with an other bande whiche came into the Ilande at an other place, they were compaſſed, and encloſed. Wherewithal they ſore abaſſhed, ſtoode ſtil, & Cariclia ranne vnder Theagenes arme, that if ſhée muſt néedes die, ſhée woulde die in Theagenes handes. One of thoſe, who were landed, wente aboute to ſhoote at them, but after the yonge folkes had looked vpon them, theire hartes failed, & their righte handes quaked. For the veryThe propertie of bewtifull perſonages. barbarous handes (as may appeare) doo feare the bewtiful perſonages, and a right cruell eye will be made gentell with a lowly looke. As ſoone as thei had taken them. they carried them to the Captayne, greatly deſiringe to carry the fayreſt of the ſpoiles to him at the firſt: & thei brought nothinge els, for although they had compaſſed the Iland with their Armoure, as with a nette rounde aboute, and had ſearched it from one parte to another, yet could they finde nothinge, for all that was in the Ilande, was burned in the former ſkirmiſhe, ſauinge the Denne onely whiche no man knewe. And thus were they brought to the Generall of ye warre: his name was Mytranes, whom Groondates had made Captayne of the watches: This Groondates was deputie of Egypte in the greate Kinges behalfe, who beinge hyred with a greate ſumme of money, by Nauſicles, as is aforeſaide, to ſéeke Thisbe, came into the Ilande. After Theagenes, and Cariclia were brought almoſte into their ſighte, Nauſicles by a crafty

deuiſe, Marchauntlike ſtepped foorthe, and cried with aA Merchaunt like, that is to ſaie, a crafty deuiſe vſed by Nauſicles, to get Cariclia, in ſteede of Thiſbe. greate voice, this is that Thisbe, of whom I was robbed by the miſchieuous Heardmen, nowe doo I recouer her againe, Mytranes, by benefite of you, and fauour of the Goddes, then he caught Cariclia, and fayned him ſelfe to be very gladde, and whiſpered in Greeke to her priuily in her eare, that none who were by, might heare him, that ſhée ſhoulde ſaie, her name was Thisbe, if ſhée deſired to eſcape daunger. And his policie tooke effect, for Cariclia, when ſhée hearde him ſpeake Greeke, thought that he wente aboute ſomewhat for her commoditie, and ordred her ſelfe as he deſired: and when Mytranes aſked what her name was, ſhée ſaide, Thisbe. Then he ranne andCariclia ſaithe her name is Thiſbe. kiſſed Mytranes, and cōmendinge his Fortune, made the barbarous man prowde, for that he had not onely atchyued many other warres well, but had brought alſo this to proſperous end, he prowde of his praiſe, and thinking by the falſe name, that it was ſo in déede. Although him ſelfe was taken with her bewty, whiche appeared in her ſimple apparell, as if the brightneſſe of the Moone ſhould ſhine out of a Cloude, yet becauſe the vnconſtancie of his minde, was ouerraught with the quickneſſe of the crafte, and all time to repent was taken from him. Nowe ſhéeNauſicles receiueth of Mytranes Cariclia, whom he beguileth, by a flatteringe praiſe. Theagenes and Cariclia ſeperated. is recouered (ꝙ he) take her with you ſeing ſhée is yours. And when he had ſaide thus, he deliuered her to him, ſtill lookinge backe vpon her, and plainely declaringe that it was againſte his will, and for the money that he had receiued before, that he ſuffred her to departe. As for this yonge man (pointinge to Theagenes) whatſoeuer he be, he ſhall be our pray, and goe with vs, and be kepte diligently to be ſente to Babylon, becauſe the comelineſſe of his body is ſuche, that he may waite at the Kinges table. This ſayde, they rowed ouer the water, and departinge one from an other, Nauſicles hauinge Cariclia, came to Chemmis. But Mytranes goinge to vewe other Townes vnder his Iuriſdiction, without delaye ſente Theagenes
                  
with Letters to Groondates, who was then at Memphis in this wiſe indyted.
               
                  Mytranes the Captaine to Groondates the Lieutenant.Theagenes is ſente to Groondates. I haue ſente vnto you a yonge man of Greece too good to ſerue me, and méete onely to waite in the ſighte of our God, the greate Kinge geuinge you leaue to preſent ſuch an excellente gifte to him, who is Maiſter to vs bothe, as the Kinges Courte hitherto neuer ſawe, neither yet ſhal hereafter. This was the Contentes of his Letter. But Calaſiris, and Cnemon hopinge to knowe that they were ignorante of, came to Nauſicles before daie, and aſked him howe he had ſpedde. Then Nauſicles tolde him all: howe they came to the Ilande, and founde it deſerte, and no man therein to méete them: howe he had craftily be guiled Mytranes, & had gotten a certaine Mayde which was there, in ſtéede of Thisbe: and that he had ſpedde better in gettinge of her, then if he had founde Thisbe. For there was no ſmall difference betwéene them, but as was betwixte God, and Man, and that there was no bewtie ſo excellente, that might ſtaine hers, and that it was not poſſible to ſet foorth the ſame iuſtly by woordes, for that he mighte ſhewe her before them. When they hearde this, they beganne to ſurmiſe the thing as it was in déede, and praied him inſtantly to bidde her comme in ſtraight waie: for they knewe, that it was not poſſible, by woordes to expreſſe Cariclias bewtie. After ſhée was broughte in, and Nauſicles (becauſe ſhée caſte her eies to the grounde, & had muffled all her face, ſaue her browes) beganne to comforte her, and badde her be of good chéere. Shée looked vp a litle, & contrarye to her expectation, ſhée ſawe, & was ſéene: ſo that they al thrée began to crie out, & howle ſuddainely, as if there had benne a token geuen them when they ſhould haue begonne: & you might haue hearde often theſe woordes, ô my Father, ô my Daughter Cariclia in déede, and not Cnemons Thisbe. Nauſicles for woonderinge, had almoſt forgotten him ſelfe, & was aſtonied

when he ſawe Calaſiris imbrace Cariclia, and not refrayne from teares, and knewe not what that ſuddaine acquaintaunce, as if it had benne in a Comedy, ment, vntill Calaſiris had kiſſed him, & ſaide thus: The Goddes geue you (good man) ſo muche as maye content your deſire and will, who haue ſaued my Daughter whiche I neuer looked for, and cauſed me to beholde the déereſt thinge that I mighte poſſible ſée. But ô my Daughter, where haſte thou lefte Theagenes? ſhée cried out when he aſked her that queſtion, & after ſhée had ſtaied a while, ſhée anſweared, he that deliuered me to this man, leadeth him away pryſoner. Calaſiris then beſought Nauſicles, to tell him what he knew of Theagenes, who it was that had taken him, and whither he woulde carry him. Nauſicles tolde them all, after he perceiued, that theſe were they, of whom the olde man had talked ſo oft with him, and to finde them, had ledde a wanderinge life in great ſorrowe. He ſayde moreouer that they ſhould gette little there, but the knowledge of him beinge poore and néedy folkes, for as muche as it were a greate matter, if Mytranes would be content to lette him goe for a greate ſumme of Money. I haue Money (ſaide Cariclia ſoftely to Calaſiris) promiſe him as muche as you wil, for I haue aboute me the Iewelles, whiche you know of. Calaſiris was gladde hereof, but fearinge leaſt Nauſicles ſhoulde ſuſpect what Cariclias profer was, he ſaide, good Nauſicles,
                  A wiſe man is neuer poore. a wiſe man neuer wanteth, but dothe meaſure his Riches by his will, receiuinge ſo muche of his betters, as he déemeth woorthy to aſke. Wherefore tell me onely where he is that kepeth Theagenes, and Gods gracious liberality will not lette vs wante, but will géeue vs ſoPerſians and Merchantes, are alike conctous. muche, as well may content the couetous minde of the Perſian. Nauſicles ſmiled at this, and ſaide: Then ſhall you make me beléeue, that you can ſuddainely, as it were with ſome deuiſe be made Riche, when you haue payed me the raunſom for this your Daughter, for you knowe

that aſwell Merchauntes, as Perſians, labour to gette money. I know it well, ſaide Calaſiris, and you ſhal haue money, but why doo you make ſuch haſte, and beſide that you pretermitte no kinde of courteſie towarde vs, you alſo of your owne accorde, approue and allowe the reſtitution of my Daughter. I ſhoulde firſte haue requeſted this at your hande. I am pleaſed (ꝙ Nauſicles) and if it pleaſe you, come and praie to the Goddes (for I will doo Sacrifice) and craue that you maye haue goodes to geue me. Ieſte not, neither be of ſo littel faithe (ꝙ Calaſiris to him) but goe and prepare the Sacrifice, and when all thinges is ready, wée wil come. They did ſo, & within a while came one from Nauſicles that called them, & badde thē make haſte. They (for by this time thei had concluded what to doo) wente foorthe wyefully. Calaſiris, and Cnemon wente with Nauſicles, and the other geſtes, for he made a Publique Sacrifice. But Cariclia wente with Nauſicles Daughter, and other woomen whiche comforted her diuerſly, but had muche adoo to perſwade her to goe with them: and I know not, whether euer ſhée would haue ben perſwaded, if vnder pretence of the Sacrifice, ſhée had not determined to praie for Theagenes. After they came to Mercuries Temple (for Nauſicles made hisMercurie the God of Merchauntes. Sacrifice to him, as the God that had moſte care of Merchauntes, and honoured him more then the reſte) and the Offeringe was begonne, Calaſiris looked a litle vpon the Intrailes, and by the diuerſe chaunges of his countenance, declared the pleaſure, and paines of that whiche was to comme. And while the fire yet burned on the Aultare, he thruſte in his hande, and made as though he pulled out of the fire, that whiche he helde in his handeThe deſcription of the Ringe, that Calaſiris gaue Nauſicles to redeeme Cariclia. before, and ſaide: This price of Cariclias redemption, the Goddes profer thée, Nauſicles, by me. And therewith he deliuered him a Princely Ringe, a paſſinge Heauenly thinge: as touchinge the Hoope, it was of Iuory, wherein was ſet a bright Amethyſt of Aethiopia, as greate as a

Maydens eie, in bewtte farre better, then thoſe of Iberia, or Britayne. For thoſe haue but an ill colour, which ſhine not at all, but are like to the Roſe budde at the firſte, whiche after with the heate of the Sunne waxe perfite redde. But the Ethiopian Amethyſt, hath a perfect Orient colour, & ſhineth through out, and if you turne him aboute, as you holde him, he caſteth foorthe a Golden beame, whiche dothe not hurte or dimme the ſighte, but maketh it muche better and clearer, and he hath a naturall vertue, more then the Weſterne ſtoanes: for it hath not his name without effecte, but will not lette him be dronke in déede, that weareth him, but kepeth him fober at all feaſtes: and of this qualitie is euery Amethyſt, of India, and Ethiopia. But that ſtoane whiche Calaſiris gaue Nauſicles, did paſſe theſe farre: For there was a Picture grauen in it, repreſentinge certaine beaſtes, which was donne in this ſorte. A boye ſittinge not vpon a very hie Hill to looke aboute him, kepte Shéepe, appointing his flocke their ſeuerall paſtures with his pipe, they ſéemed to be ruled, and tarry at their féedinge, accordingly as he ſounded his inſtrument. A man would haue ſaide that thei had Golden fléeſes, not by reaſon of the woorkemanſhip, but for that the Amethyſt ſhyninge with his redneſſe vpon their backes, made them ſhewe ſo fayre. There were grauen yonge Lambes leapinge vp and downe, and ſome by heapes wente vp the Rocke, other ſome daunced rounde aboute the Shéepherde, ſo that the toppe of the Rocke was made a Shepeherdes diſporte. Other ſkipped in the flame of the Amethyſt, as if thei had benne in the Sunne, who with the tippes of their féete, ſcraped the ſtoane. Many of the yonger forte beinge of greater courage, ſéemed as though they woulde goe out of the compaſſe, but were letted by the woorkemanſhip, whiche ſet a pale of Golde in manner of a wall, aboute the Rocke and them, and it was a Rocke in déede and not a counterfeite, for when the woorkeman had wrought

the Golde aboute the outer parte of the Stoane for that pourpoſe, he ſhewed that very liuely whiche he deſired, thinkinge it to no pourpoſe, to counterfeite one Stoane in an other. Suche a one was the Ringe. Nauſicles, moued with the ſtraungeneſſe of the thinge, but more with the value thereof: eſtéeminge the Ringe of more price, then al the goodes he had beſide, ſpake thus: Good Calaſiris, I did but ieſte: and where I aſked ſomewhat for the Ranſome of your Daughter, it was but woordes: for I determined to let you haue her for nothinge. But forThe giftes of the Goddes ought not to be refuſed. as muche as the giftes of the Goddes are not to be refuſed (as you ſaie), I take this Stoane ſente from Heauen, perſwadinge my ſelfe, that this was ſente from the God that is moſte beneficial to me, according as he is woonte, and hathe geuen this to you, through fire, as maie yet be ſéene by the flaminge thereof. Otherwiſe I déeme thatVVhat gaine is beſte. vantage to be beſte, which without damage of the geuer, doothe enriche him that receiueth it. After he had ſaide this, and made an ende of the Offeringe, he wente to méete with the reſte, placing the woomen by them ſelues in an inner parte of the Temple, and the menne in the porche. After they had eaten yenough, and the Cuppes were ſette on the Table, the menne called vpon Bacchus with an offeringe, and ſonge the Songe accuſtomably vſed, when menne goe aborde their ſhippes, and the wéemen daunced after a ditty made in the honour of Ceres. But now when the banquette waxed ſomewhat warme, and eche man after his ſorte ſolaced him ſelfe, Nauſicles holdinge in his hande a glaſſe of cleare water, ſaide: I drinke to you in water, good Calaſiris, and if it wil pleaſe you, to beginne to vs the tale whiche wée ſore deſire to heare, it ſhalbe more pleaſant to vs, then all the Cuppes on this borde. For you heare howe the woomen nowe be at leaſure, and haue well banqueted them ſelues, beginne to Daunce: but your trauell, if it pleaſe you to make reporte of it to vs, ſhall ſhorten woonderfully well

our feaſte, and be more pleaſant to vs, then any daunce or inſtrument. The tellinge whereof, for as muche as you haue (as you knowe differed diuerſly, for that your miſchaunces ouerwhelmed you) you can reſerue to no better time then this, becauſe your Daughter, one of your Children is well, and your Sonne by the Goddes helpe ſhalbe recouered by and by, if you anger me not againe, by driuinge it of any longer. Gods bleſſinge on your harte (ꝙ Cnemon to Nauſicles) catchinge holde of his talke, who for all that you haue brought to this feaſt, all manner of Muſicall inſtrumentes, doo ſette light by them, and geue the ruder ſorte leaue to heare them, but you your ſelfe are deſirous to heare ſecrete affayres, and ſuche as are ſeaſoned with ſingular mirthe, and me thinketh you well vnderſtande the Nature of the Goddes, who ioyne Mercury, and Bacchus togeather, and adde pleaſauntneſſe of ſpeache to the fineſſe of your banquet. Wherefore although I haue for iuſte cauſe marueiled at the other ſumptuouſneſſe of the Sacrifice, yet I knowe not whether a man maye by any meane pleaſe Mercury better, then to talke at his feaſtes, whiche thinge is his Badge aboue all other. Calaſiris was content, as well to doo Cnemon a pleaſure, as alſo for that he would curry fauour with Nauſicles, for that whiche ſhould enſewe, he tolde them all, briefely repetinge the principall pointes of that whiche he had tolde Cnemon before, and of purpoſe paſſinge ouer with ſilence, that whiche he thought was to little purpoſe for Nauſicles to knowe, but that whiche had not yet benne tolde, and did depende vpon that whiche wente before, he tolde in this ſorte. After they were aborde in the ſhippe of Phoenicia, and were gonne from Delphi, they ſayled as they would wiſhe at the firſte, & had very proſperous winde. But when they came into the Calidonian Sea, they were greatly troubled, becauſe thei had happened into a Sea, whiche of hisThe Calidonian Sea is very trouble ſome. owne nature, was very diſquiet & troubleſome. Cnemon
                  
deſired him that he would not paſſe ouer this, but tell it, if he knew any reaſon of the ragynge of the ſame, in that place. The Ionian Sea (ꝙ he) beinge reſtrayned of hisVVhy the Calidonian Sea, is ſo troubleſome. great breadth, and in a manner brought into ſtraightes, fallinge into the coaſte of Criſa, and haſtinge to come into the Sea called Egeum, is ſtopped by Iſthmus in Peloponneſus, ſo perhappes by the prouidence of God is the Hill placed there, leaſt by the violence of the water, it ſhould ouerflowe the lande on the contrary coaſte. And for as muche as from hence the water beaten backe (as may be by reaſon) is reſtrained of his courſe, rather about this Sea, thē in any other parte, becauſe that which yet floweth, falleth into that, whiche nowe by Iſthmus was made to returne, ſo that the water is much troubled & very boiſterous, by reaſon of the continuall concourſe of the waues, in all the Ebbes and Floudes: whiche opinion of his, after all theſe who were preſent prayſed, and affirmed to be trewe. Calaſiris tolde on his tale, ſaying: After wée had paſſed the Sea, and had loſte the ſight of the Acute Ilandes, wée thought that wée diſcouered a Mountaine of Zacynthus, in manner of a darke cloude before our eyes, and therewith the Maiſter badde ſtrike ſome of the Sailes, and when we aſked him why, he abated them, and wente more eaſily, ſeinge that the ſhippe had a very good gale of winde, becauſe (ſaide he) if we wente with full ſaile aboute the firſte watche wée ſhould ariue at the Ilande, and ſo were it to be doubted, leaſte in the darke, wée runne vpon ſome Rockes whereof are there greate ſtoore, and thoſe very hie. It is therefore wiſedome to lie all night in the Sea, and take the winde in ſuche proportion, as ſhal ſerue to bringe vs thither to lande in the morninge. Thus ſaide the Maiſter, Mary wée did not ſo Nauſicles, but euen with the riſinge of the Sunne, wée caſt Ancore. The inhabitauntes of the ſame Iland, whiche dwelt aboute the Hauen, whiche was not farre from the Cittie, came by heapes to looke vpon vs (as

if it had benne ſome ſtraunge ſighte) in greate woonder (as might ſéeme) to ſée the handſomneſſe of that greate Shippe, whiche was builte very faire, accordinge to her height, and ſaide that the induſtry, and excellent woorkemanſhip of the Phoenicians, might be knowen by that, and that wée had woonderfull good lucke, that made ſo good a viage in the winter, aboute the time the Pleiades
                  Pleiades, vuluckie Starres to Marriners. were reddy to ſette. All our company, ere the tacklinges and ſayles were in good order, lefte the Shippe, & wente aboute their Merchandiſe, to the Citty Zacynthus. But I (becauſe I hearde by chaunce, of the Maiſter, that they would winter there) wente to ſéeke me ſome Inne about the ſhore, eſche wing the Shippe, for that it was vnméete by reaſon of the rudeneſſe of the Marriners, and the Cittie, for that it was not conuenient for the flight of the yonge couple. After I had gonne a little way, I ſawe an Olde man which was a Fiſher, that ſatte mendinge his broken nettes, before his doore. I came to him, and ſaide good man God ſaue you, and tell me I pray, where a man may gette lodginge? He anſweared me: It was rente aboute a promontory hereby, beinge lette ſlippe vpon a rocke, whiche they ſawe not. I aſke not that ꝙ I, but you ſhal ſhewe vs great curteſie, if either you your ſelfe wilbe our Hoſte, or elles ſhewe vs ſome other Inne. He anſweared, not I, for I was not aborde with them: God defende that Tyrrhenus ſhoulde doo ſo muche amiſſe, or haue ſuche a ſpite though he be Olde, but it was my Sonnes defaulte, who knowinge nothinge of the rockes here in the Sea, caſte their nettes where thei ſhould not. At length when with muche adoo, I perceiued that he was ſomewhat harde of hearinge, I ſpake alowde to him and ſaide: God ſpéede you Sir, and I praye you, tell vs where wée may haue an Inne, you are welcome ſaide he againe, and if it pleaſe you abide with me, except you be any of thoſe, that ſéeke for the houſes wherein are many beddes, and haue ſome greate trayne after you. I haue

(ꝙ I) but two children, and I am the thirde my ſelfe, you are a good company (ꝙ he) you ſhall finde one more of vs, for I haue twoo Sonnes that dwell with me (for mine eldeſt Sonnes are Married, and kéepe houſes them ſelues) & the fourth is a Nurſe for my children, becauſe their Mother died but a while agoe, wherefore good man come on and doubte not, but wée will be gladde of you, who are a man which ſéeme to be ſome Gentleman euen by your talke. I did ſo, and ſhortly after I came withCalaſiris with his children lodge with Tyrrhenus. 
                  Theagenes and Cariclia, and Tyrrhenus intertained vs gladly, and lette vs haue the warmer parte of the houſe. Truely we were very wel at the firſte, and had good leaſure, to conferre whole dayes togeather, and when wée ſhould ſléepe, Cariclia wente to bedde with the Nurſe, in one place by her ſelfe, and I with Theagenes laye in another. Tyrrhenus and his Children in a parlour alſo alone tooke their reſte. Wée did eate at one Table all, and ſuche thinges as were néedefull, wée prouided of our owne coſte, beſide Fiſhe whiche Tyrrhenus tooke in the Sea, as he woulde ſommetime fiſhe alone: ſommetime wée woulde helpe him at leaſure. For he had all manner of waies to fiſhe, and for all ſeaſons, and the place was well ſtoared, and very conueniente to caſte Nettes: ſo that many woulde aſcribe that gayne whiche they got by their Arte to the benefite of Fortune. But there wasOnce vnhappy, and euer vnhappy. The Merchaunt with whome Calaſiris ſayled falleth in Loue with Cariclia. That is a commm practiſe whiche Louers vſe. none other remedie, but as the Prouerbe is, once vnhappy, and euer vnhappy. Cariclias bewtie, euen in this ſolitary place, was not without great broyle: for that Merchaunte of Tyre, which was denounced Victor at Delphi in the games of Apollo, called Pithia, with whom wée ſailed, came to me alone, and was very importunate, and gréeuous vnto me: beſéechinge me, as if I had benne her Father, that I woulde geue her him to wife. He talked much of him ſelfe, partely by telling of his Noble ſtocke, partely by ſhewinge vs of his riches, and that the Hulke wherein wée ſailed, was his owne, and that the greater

parte of the Merchandiſe therein, as Golde, Pretious Stoanes of great valewe, and Sylke was his aboue the reſte: and he added alſo his late obteined Victorie, as no ſmall increaſe of his honoure and name, and a thouſande thinges beſide theſe. But I alleged for my ſelfe, our preſente pouertie, and that I woulde neuer marrye my Daughter to one that dwelte in a ſtraunge Countrie, ſo farre from Egypte. Leaue this talke, Father (ꝙ he) for I will accoumpte the Mayde a Dowrie woorthe many Talentes, and all the ritches in the worlde. As for my Countrie I will chaunge it for yours, and wil turne my pourpoſed viage to Carthage, and goe with you whither ſo euer you will. When I ſawe that the Phoenician woulde not geue ouer his determination, and pourpoſe, I determined with faire woordes to driue of the matter, leaſte he ſhoulde attempte any thinge forceibly againſte vs, and promiſed that I woulde fulfill al his deſire when I came into Egypte. When I had by this meanes pacified him, God laied one miſchiefe vpon an other, as the Prouerbe is. For Tyrrhenus not many daies after, when he had carried me into a ſecrete place, on a croked ſhore, ſaide thus to me: Calaſiris, I ſweare by Neptune, and all other Goddes of the Sea, that I haue loued you, as if you had benne mine owne Brother, and youre children, as if they had benne mine alſo. I will tell you a thinge whiche is woorkinge againſte you, very gréeuous, and painefull to you: but ſuche as is not lawful for me to conceale, for that wée dwel bothe in one houſe, and it apperteineth altogeather for you to knowe it. There is a Pyrate which waiteth vpon the Hulke of Phoenicia, whiche lieth ſecrete vnder the ſide of this Promontory, and ſendeth out Spies daily to enquire when this Ship will goe foorthe.: wherefore looke to your ſelfe, and take héede what you doo, for as muche as this ſhamefuul facte, vſuall to them, is enterpriſed for you, or rather for your Daughter. The Goddes (ꝙ I to him) geue you ſuche

thankes for theſe tidinges, as you deſerue. But Tyrrhenus, howe vnderſtoode you theſe thinges? By reaſon of my Crafte I am acquainted with them (ſaide he): and when I bring them victualles, I haue more of them then any men els. Therefore when I drewe my Pottes about the falle of yonder Hill, the Maiſter Pyrate came to me, and aſked, whither I hearde when the Phoenitians would leaue their harboure. When I perceiued the ſuttleneſſe of his talke, In faithe Trachynus (ꝙ I) I can tell you no certaintie: but I ſuppoſe that at the beginninge of the nexte Spring, they wil ſaile. Wil the Mayde then ſaile with them (ꝙ he) whiche lieth at your houſe? I cannot tell (ꝙ I). But why doo you aſke that? Becauſe (ꝙ he) I loue her in ſuche ſorte, that I am ſcante in my wittes, yet I neuer ſawe her but ones, and I knowe not, whether I euer ſawe ſo faire a wooman before: yet I haue taken many priſoners, and ſomme of them very bewtifull. That I mighte the better cauſe him to tell me all his counſell priuely, I ſaide vnto him: What néede you to fighte with the Phoenicians, & not rather without Bloud fetche her out of my houſe before they goe aborde. He anſweared me, that Théeues did vſe gentleneſſe, andTheeues vſe courteſie to their acquaintaunce. courtefie to ſuche as they were acquainted with. I leaue that therefore for your ſake, leaſte my ſo dooinge ſhoulde bringe you into trouble: in as much as the geaſtes which you interteined, would be required againe at your hand. Alſo I deſire to haue twoo thinges at ones: the Riches in the Shippe, and the Marriage of the Mayde: one whereof I muſte néedes lacke, if I attempte this by Lande, and beſide it were very dangerous, if any ſuch thing ſhould be enterpriſed ſo neare the Cittie, leaſte the Rape would be perceiued, and purſute made after. When I had muche commended him for his wiſedome, I leafte him there, and am come to tell you of the Waites which theſe paſtegraces haue laide for you, deſiringe you hartely to deuiſe diligently howe you maie ſaue you, and yours. I

wente from him very heauie after I hearde this, and thoughte vpon many thinges, vntill the Merchante by chaunce mette me: and fallinge in talke about theſe matters, gaue me a prety beginninge of a wiſe deuiſe. For I concealinge what I liſte, of that Tyrrhenus had told me, opened vnto him onely this: That a man thereaboutes, whom he was not hable to withſtande, wente aboute violentely to take the Mayde from me. But I (ꝙ I) had rather marry her to you, both for that knowledge which I haue had of you, and alſo for your wealthe: but eſpecially for that you promiſed to dwel with vs in our Countrie, if you haue her. Wherefore if you deſire to haue her, let vs ſaile hence quickely, before wée be preuented, and haue had ſomme extremitie ſhewed vs. He was woonderfully gladde when he hearde this, and ſaide: Father, this is well deuiſed, and therewithall he came and kiſſed me, and aſked when I woulde commaunde him to departe. Although (ꝙ I) it be vnſeaſonable nowe, yet I would haue you to get you into ſomme other Porte, that wée maie auoide the guiles prepared againſte vs, and there abide for better time. Therefore (ꝙ I) if you will be ruled by me, at the beginninge of the nexte night wée woulde departe. And he, when he had promiſed ſo to doo, wente his waie. I came home, but tolde nothinge of this to Tyrrhenus: mary to my Children I ſaide it was behoouefull for vs to goe aborde in the eueninge. And although thei marueiled at the ſuddaineneſſe thereof, & aſked the mater, yet I draue them of, ſaying, that I would tell them afterwarde, and that there was no remedie nowe, if wée woulde doo well. After wée had eaten a slender Supper, and were gonne to bedde, an Olde manVliſſes appeareth to Calaſiris and rebuketh him for not dooinge Sacrifice to him, appeared to me in my ſléepe, whoſe Body was dried vp, yet he had a Diſſhe tied to his Girdle, who ſéemed in his youthe to haue benne a talle man: he had a Hatte on his heade, and ſéemed by his countenaunce, that he had bene a wiſe, and ſubtile man: mary he halted a litle, as if he

had gotten ſomme Wounde in his Thighe: who, after he came neare me, ſmiled a litle with an angry countenaunce, and ſaide: You good man, alone of all that haue ſailed by Cephalene, and looked vpon my houſe, and accoumpted it a great matter to knowe my renoume, haue had no reſpecte to me, but haue ſette ſo lighte by me, that you woulde not ſpeake to me, whiche euery man doothe, for all I dwelt ſo neare you, but you ſhall ere longe be puniſhed for this, and ſhall haue like perilles as I had, & fall into your enemies hande, as wel by Lande as Seas. As for the Mayde that thou carrieſt with thée, ſpeake to her, & gréete her in my Wiues name, becauſe ſhée eſtéemeth more of her Virginitie, thē any thinge in ye world, wherfore ſhée ſhal haue a luckie ende. I ſtarted for feare of this Viſion, and when Theagenes aſked me what I ayled, wée had (ꝙ I) almoſte forgotten the goinge of the ſhippe out of the Hauen, for when I waked, I was ſore troubled with thinkinge thereof. Wherefore gather vp your ſtuffe, and I will call Cariclia, who as ſoone as I gaue her warninge came. When Tyrrhenus wiſt of this he aroſe alſo, and aſked what wée meant to doo. What ſo euer it be (ꝙ I) that wée doo at this time, it is by your aduiſe: wée goe aboute to eſcape from them, that awayte vs with miſchiefe, and the Goddes kéepe you in ſafety, who hath plaied the right honeſt man with vs. One good turne I praie doo vs at partinge, goe ouer into Ithaca, & doo Sacrifice for vs to Vlyſſes, and praye him to appeaſe his wrathe towardes vs, for that as he hath tolde me to night in my ſléepe, he is greately offended, as if he had benne diſpiſed and ſet at naught. He promiſed he would ſo doo, and conducted vs to our ſhippe, and wepte woonderfully, and prayed to God that he would graunte vs a proſperous viage, accordinge to our hartes deſire. To be ſhorte, by daie wée were in the middeſt of the Sea, but the Marriners at the firſte were greatly againſte it, yet at length thei were perſwaded by the Merchant of Tyre,
                  
becauſe he tolde them that they fledde certaine Pyrates that purſued thē, of whiche he had warninge. He meanteMany times Ieſtes turned to good earneſt as did his now. to tell them this for a tale, and knewe not that he ſayde truthe. But the windes and weather were ſore againſt vs, ſo that the Sea was very rough, and wée in a greate tempeſt, very neare to be caſt awaie, yet at length when wée had loſte halfe our rudder, and broken the moſt parte of our ſayle yardes, wée arriued in a certaine Harboure of Crete. We thought it good therefore to tarry there certaine daies, aſwell to repayre our ſhippe, as alſo to eaſe our ſelues. When theſe thinges were donne, it was apointed that wée ſhoulde ſayle, the firſte Mondaie after the chaunge of the Moone, we were carried into the déepe Seas, with the Eaſterly winde, a daye and a night, and our Maiſter directed our Hulke to the coaſt of Aphrique. For he ſaide that if the winde blewe, and wée kepte a ſtraight courſe, wée might paſſe the mayne Sea, and he made all haſte poſſible to come to the mayne Lande, or into ſome Hauen, for the Barke whiche he ſawe out of the pupe was a Pyrate. For euer ſithence wée looſed frō the promontory of Crete, he followeth vs, and neuer declineth one iote from our courſe, but purſueth our ſhippe, as if it went our viage with vs: for I haue perceiued this diuerſe times, when I turned aboute of purpoſe our ſhip from his right courſe, that hath alſo turned. When he had ſaide this, ſome were moued, and exhorted the reſte to make them ready to defenſe, but ſome made lighte thereof. Sayinge that the ſhorter ſhippes might well ouertake ſuche as are greater, for that thei know by more experience the certainety of theire waye. While theſe things were diſputed on, vpon bothe partes, it was that time of the daie, that the Huſbandman dothe vnyoke his Oxen from the ploughe, and the vehement winde began to waxe caulme, ſo that within a little while it was almoſt downe, & blewe ſoftly to no purpoſe on our ſailes, whereby it rather huffed them together, then made any

way for our ſhippe. At length it ceaſed quite, as if at the Sunne ſettinge it had appointed to leaue blowinge, or rather (that I may ſpeake more truely) to doo them which followed vs a good turne, for thei that were in the Barke as longe as wée had winde, were farre behind our ſhippe whiche was ful fraughted, as is good reaſon, for that our greater ſayles receiued more winde. But after the Seas were caulme, and wée of force conſtrained to rowe, the darke came vpon vs ſooner then a man would thinke, in as muche (as I thinke) euery one of them rowed, and ſo made the light barke whiche was more fitte for that purpoſe, goe the faſter. When they drewe ſomewhat néere, one of the menne of Zacynthus which came aborde with vs cried out. This is a Pyrates ſhippe, mates, I knowe Trachinus barke: al y• Hulke was moued at theſe newes, & in a calme weather had it a great tempeſt, euery parte thereof was filled with great noiſe, lamenting, and runninge vp and downe, ſomme ranne into the nether partes of the Shippe: ſomme ſtoode vpon the Hatches, and exhorted one an other to fighte: ſomme were of opinion, that it was beſte to goe into the Cocke Boate, and be gonne. Vntill (before they determined any thing) the preſente ſkirmiſhe appeaſed their adoo, for that euery man muſt néedes by that time méete one in Harneis. I, & Cariclia hung about Theagenes, who deſired ſore to fight, & coulde ſcante make him geue ouer. Shée ſaide to him, that ſhée woulde not be parted from him by Deathe, but that ſhée would, with the ſame Swoorde, & like wounde, abide ſuche happe, as he felte. But I, after I perceiued that it was Trachinus, whiche came on, thoughte vpon ſommewhat whiche mighte doo vs good afterwarde, whiche in déede tooke effecte: for as ſoone as the Pyrates were comme, they wente aboute vs, without caſtinge any Dartes at vs, ſo tryinge, if by any meanes they mighte take the Hulke without battaile: mary they rowed rounde aboute vs, and woulde ſuffer the Shippe to

goe no further. So that they were like, as if they had beſieged vs, and deſired to take our Shippe vpon certaine Conditions, and ſaide: Why be you ſo madde (you vnhappy folkes) why attempte you to ſturre againſte ſuche inuincible ſtrengthe, and that whiche farre ſurmounteth yours: thereby to purchaſe youre certaine Deſtruction? Yet wée vſe you friendely, and geue you leaue to take your Cocke, and ſaue your liues, if you will. Theiſe Conditions they propounded. But they, who were in the Hulke, as longe as they were without daunger, and the Battaile was without bloude, were very ſtoute, and ſaide plainely, that they would not departe. But when one of the Pyrates bolder then the reſte, ſtepte aborde,VVarres are made with ſlaughter and blondſhedde. and with his ſwoorde flewe al them that he mette, and taughte them, that Warres were accuſtomably made with Slaughter, and Deathe. Then the Phoenicians repented them of theire ſo dooinge: and fallinge flatte on theire faces, praied them of mercie, for that they woulde doo what they would haue them. They, for al that they were nowe gredy to kill (for the ſighte of Bloude is aThe ſight of bloude, maketh menne egar to fighte. greate mouing to the minde): yet by commaundement of Trachinus, contrary to al hope, they ſpared them. Surely their Conditions were hainous, & for al the coūterfeited name of Peace, it was cruell Warre in déede by reaſon of the Truce which was propounded to them, more tollerable then the Battaile it ſelfe. For ſtraighte commaundemente was geuen, that euery man ſhoulde goe out of the Shippe with one ſute of Apparell onely, and that he ſhoulde die that brake the ſame. It ſéemeth, thatMen ſette more by their liues, then any thinge els. men ſette more by theire liues, then any thinge els: for which alſo, the Phoenicians without al hope of the goodes in the Shippe, as if they had loſte nothinge, but rather made a good Market, got out of the Ship, euery man deſiringe to ſaue him ſelfe firſte. After wée alſo were there ready to obey theire Decrée, Trachinus takinge vp Cariclia, ſaide vnto her: This Warre nothinge belongethe to

thée, my Déere, but hathe benne enterpriſed for thy ſake, and I haue folowed you euer ſince you ſayled from Zacynthus: onely for you haue I aduentured theſe perilles by Sea. Wherefore feare not, but be of good comforte, and knowe, that you ſhal be Ladye of al theſe with me. Thus he ſaide. But ſhée (for it is a pointe of wiſedomeIt is wiſedome to haue reſpect of time. to haue reſpecte to time, and to turne al to the beſte (very diſcretely, beinge greatly chéered with mine aduice, and what I had tolde her, as touchinge theſe preſente miſhappes, with a countenance ſo ſéemely, as woulde haue allured any man, ſaide, I geue the Goddes thankes, who haue geuen you a harte to deale more gently with vs, then the reſte. But if you will haue me to be bolde in déede, and to tarrye, ſhewe me this for a token of youre good wil: ſaue this my Brother, and my Father, and commaunde them not out of the Shippe alſo: for if theſe be from me, there is no waie to ſaue me aliue. And when ſhée had ſaide thus, ſhée felle at his knées, and helde him faſte. Trachinus was wel pleaſed with her ſo holding, and deferred his promiſe of pourpoſe. At length moued with her teares to compaſſion, was by her countenance forced to fulfil her wil, after he had taken vp the Mayde, ſaide thus: I geue this your Brother to you with all my harte: for I ſée he is a yong man of ſtoute courage, which maie doo vs good ſeruice. As for the Olde man, whiche is but a chargeable burthen without profite, let him tarrye onely for your pleaſure. While theſe thinges were ſayinge, and dooinge, the Sunne came out of his courſe, to his ſettinge, and made that ſpace betwéene the daie, and the nighte darke: the Sea, either changinge by reaſon of the time, or els by the wil of Fortune, beganne to waxe roughe, and a man mighte heare a greate noyſe of the Windes ariſinge, whoſe greate and valiante Blaſtes ſuddainely muche abaſſhed the Pyrates, by reaſon that they al had lefte the Barke, and were buſie in the Hulke aboute ſpoylinge of the Merchandiſe therein, and knewe

not howe to vſe the greatneſſe of the ſame. WhereforeA prety deſcriptiō of a ſhippe in a tempeſt, in which are none but vnſkilfull Marriners. euery parte was ordered of euery man vnaduiſedly, ſo that eche of them beganne to practiſe that, whiche he had neuer donne before: ſomme ſtroke the Sailes on heapes: other intangled the Ropes without ſkill: one ignorante felowe tooke the Rudder in hande: an other as wiſe as he was in the Foreſhip. The greateſt thinge that brought vs into perill, was not the Tempeſte, which was not yet very greate, but the vnſkilfulneſſe of the Maiſter, who as longe as he coulde ſée any lighte of the daie, ſtoode to it, but when it was darke gaue ouer his charge. When therefore they were in daunger of drowninge, and almoſte ſunke, ſomme of the Pyrates woulde haue gonne into their owne Barke againe, but they helde thē ſelues contente, beinge diſappointed of theire pourpoſe by the force of the Tempeſte: and Trachinus counſel, who perſwaded them that they ſhoulde haue ſixe hundred ſuche litle Barkes, if they keapte the Hulke and the Kitches therein whole: and at laſte he cutte of the Rope whereby it was tied to the Hulke, ſaieinge, that it woulde bringe them into an other Tempeſte: wherefore it was beſte to woorke wiſely to be ſafe afterwarde, for it was a ſuſpitiousIt is wiſedome to foreſee. matter to ariue in any place with twoo Shippes, ſeinge it muſte néedes comme to paſſe, that inquirye muſt be made of thoſe that ſailed in the one. And he ſéemed to ſpeake probably, and by dooinge that one thinge, to approue his deuiſe in twoo matters. They had but litle remedie when the Barke was gonne, neither were they out of peril, but toſſed with continual Waues without ceaſinge: ſo that they loſte many partes of their Shippe, vntil after that nighte aboute the Sunne ſettinge of the nexte daie, they landed by chaunce at a certaine Mouthe of a Hauen of Nilus, called Heracliote in Egypte againſte our willes, vnhappy creatures. Somme were gladde thereof, but wée wer very ſorrowful, and accoumpted the benefite of our health that wée had of the Sea, a great reproche:

in as muche as it enuied vs a Deathe withoutIt is better to die with honour then liue with ſhame. al iniurie, and committed vs to lande, whiche was more ſorrowful then it: in as much as nowe wée were ſubiecte vtterly to the Pyrates, that they might doo with vs their will, whiche mighte eaſily be gheaſſed by that whiche thoſe Villaines attempted before they came aſhore. For by reaſon that they ſaide they woulde doo Sacrifice to Neptune, to geue him thankes for theire ſafetie, they broughte alande Wine of Tyre, and many ſuche thinges els out of the Shippe, and ſente ſomme of their mates to the Borders adioining to buie cattel with a greate deale of Money, and gaue them charge to paie what ſo euer was aſked at the firſte woorde. After ſo dooinge, they ſtraight waie returned, and brought with them a whole Hearde of Swine and Shéepe, and they whiche tarried behinde, had made the fiers, and fleaed the beaſtes appoited for the Sacrifice: they wente to theire Feaſte, Trachinus tooke me aſide, ſo that none mighte heare, and ſaid to me: Father, I am determined to take thy DaughterTrachinus would Marrie Cariclia out of hande. to wife, and marry her this daie, ſo that I pourpoſe to ioine this pleaſante Solemnitie with the Sacrifice of the Goddes. Wherefore leaſte you in the Feaſte (if you hearde not of this before) ſhould be any thinge ſadde: but that you mighte tell youre Daughter hereof, and cauſe her to be of a chéereful courage, I thoughte it good to tell you my minde, not for that I néede your conſente, for I haue Abſolute power to doo what I liſte. But bicauſe I accoumpte it more luckie, and ſéemely alſo, if the BrideIt is a good ſight at a Brydale, to ſee the Bride mery. more chéerefully prepare her ſelfe, beinge admoniſhed thereof firſte by her Father. I praiſed his opinion, and made as though I had benne gladde, and gaue thankes to the Goddes that they had appointed my Maiſter to be my Daughters Huſbande. And when I was gonne, I beganne to thinke on that whiche was to comme, and came to him againe, and beſought him, that that whiche was newe begonne, mighte be donne more ſolemnely,

and that he would appointe the Hulke to be the Maydes Bedchamber, and geue commaundemente that no man might goe in and trouble her, that ſhée migt prouide that whiche was méete to furniſhe, and ſette foorthe a Bride by leaſure. For it were il ordered, if ſhée, whiche is of a good ſtocke, and very ritche, and (that whiche is greateſt) ſhalbe Trachinus wife, ſhoulde not be made ſo handſome as ſhée might be, althoughe time and place wil not geue her leaue to be very trimme. Trachinus was very glad of this, and promiſed it ſhoulde be ſo with all his harte: and therewith he gaue charge, that all ſuche thinges as they ſhoulde haue néede of, ſhoulde be carried out, and that after none ſhoulde comme neare the Shippe. They did as he commaunded them: they brought out Tables, Cuppes, Carpettes, Cloathes of Arrace, Woorkes of Sidon, and Tyre, & other ſuche thinges, as were expediente to the furniture of a feaſt: eche one brought out of ye Ship thinges vpon their ſhoulders, without reſpecte or order, ſuche as diuerſe men with greate trauel, and thryftie vſage had gathered togeather: but now Fortune had prepared them to ſerue their Prodigal Banquette. But I tooke Theagenes with me, and when we came to Cariclia, and founde her wéepinge, ſaide, Daughter, this is no newes to you: marry I knowe not, whether it be for your olde il fortune, or any newe miſhhappe. For bothe (ꝙ ſhée), but aboue al thinges, for that which I am afraid of, which is the hated good wil of Trachinus, which time, as is like, procureth for ſuch ſucceſſe, as is not looked for,Succeſſe not looked for, dothe make menne doo otherwiſe often times then els they would doo. is accuſtomed to moue menne to doo il. But Trachinus, and his Loue whiche I hate ſo muche, ſhal be ſorrowful, which I wil preuente with Deathe. And to thinke that I ſhoulde be deuided from you and Theagenes before the ende (if that came to paſſe) cauſed me to be thus heauie. You thinke (ꝙ I) in déede as it is: for Trachinus, after the Sacrifice, meaneth to chaunge the Banquette into his, and your Bridall, and made me (as I had bene your Father)

priuie thereto, who knewe before his vnreaſonable loue that he bare to you, by Communication that I had with Tyrrhenus in Zacynthus, but I did not tell you thereof, leaſte you ſhoulde haue benne diſcouraged for feare of thoſe miſhappes, ſeinge alſo that we might haue auoided his ſnares. But my Children, ſéeinge God wil not let this comme to paſſe, and that wée are nowe in extreme perill, attempte ſomme woonderful, and courragious enterpriſe to withſtande this increaſinge euill, whereby wée ſhal liue fréely euer after, if wee haue good lucke: or els accoumpte it aduantage if wée ſaile, to die Chaſtely, and like menne. After they promiſed to doo what I woulde commaunde them, and I had taughte them what was beſte to doo, I leafte them makinge ſuch prouiſion as was requiſite, and came to that Pyrate, which was chiefe next Trachinus (whoſe name I thinke, was Pelorus) and ſaide, that I had a thinge to lel him for his profite. He was ready. And after I had broughteThe crafty deuiſe of Calaſiris to hinder the Marriage of Trachinus and Cariclia, wherby all the Pyrates are ſlaine. him where none mighte heare, I ſaide: Geue eare my Sonne ſhortely, for the ſhorteneſſe of the time will not ſuffer me to be very longe: my Daughter is in loue with thée, as ouercomme with the better man: marry ſhée ſuſpecteth that the Archepyrate maketh this Banquette to marrye her, for he ſéemed to meane ſomme ſuche thinge, when he gaue her commaundemente to decke her ſelfe ſomewhat finely. Wherefore conſider howe you maie vndoo that, and haue her your ſelfe. For ſhée ſaithe, ſhée wil rather die, then marrye Trachinus. Then ſaide he, be of good chéere: for in as muche as I haue benne aſwell minded that waie, as the Mayde, I deſired to haue ſome occaſion, and meane profered to take that mater in hand a good while agoe. Wherefore Trachinus ſhal ſuffer me to marry her of his owne frée wil, or els he ſhal haue but a ſoary Marriage, by ſufferinge that at my hande, that he hathe wel deſerued. I haſted backe for feare of ſuſpition, when I hearde him ſaie thus, and comminge to my

Children comforted them, and tolde them howe my deuiſe tooke good effect: Within a littell after we wente to Supper. Then I, when I ſawe them well whitled with wine, and wantonly bent, whiſpered Pelorus in the eare (for I ſatte nexte him of purpoſe) and ſayde, haue you ſéene howe the Mayde is dreſſed? He anſweared me no: But you may ꝙ I nowe, if you goe priuely to the ſhippe, for you knowe Trachinus hath geuen contrary commaundement, you ſhal ſée Diana her ſelfe ſitte there: but ſo behaue your ſelfe, that you be not ouer bolde to behold her, leaſt you purchaſe deathe to you bothe. He tarried not, but as if he had ſome very earneſt buſineſſe, aroſe & came priuily into the Hulke, and when he ſawe Cariclia were a Crowne of Lawrell on her head, and gliſter in her Garment garniſhed with Golde, (for ſhée had put on the holy apparell whiche ſhée brought from Delphi, to be a furniture either to her Victory, or els bewtie to her buriall) & ſuche other thinges aboute her, as might beſéeme a Marriage well, was ſet on fire (as was like he woulde be) with that ſight, in as muche as deſire and emulation pricked him forwarde, and it was euident by his countenaunce when he returned, that he intended to doo ſome miſchieuous thinge, for ere he was well ſette downe, he ſaide, why haue not I the rewarde dewe to him that firſt 
                     •
                  ourded the enemies ſhippe? Becauſe, ſaide Trachinus, yet you haue not aſked it, neither is that which wée haue gotten diuided. Then I wil haue ꝙ he, the Mayde which is taken pryſoner. But when Trachinus had ſaide, beſide her take what you will. Pelorus beganne to ſaie, then dooA Lawe of the Pyrates. you diſanull and abrogate the Lawe of Pyrates, whiche geueth him, which firſte entreth the enimies ſhippe, and hath for all his mates aduentured him ſelfe to the moſte daungerous parte of the ſkirmiſhe, leaue to choſe what liketh him beſte. I breake not good Sir, ſayde Trachinus, this, but I leaue to another whiche willeth that place beAnother Lawe or decree. geuen to the Captaines. For my parte I loue the Mayde

woonderfully well, and meane to take her to my wife. And I ſaye plainely it is reaſon that I choſe before you, and if you doo not as the Lawe willes you, you ſhall repent it with a blowe of this potte. Then ſaide Pelorus to thoſe that were by, you ſée what is the rewarde of our trauell? ſo ſhall any of you hereafter be put beſide your due. What els might any man ſée there Nauſicles? you might haue compared thoſe men ſo ſuddainely, moued to the Sea: ſo blinde and fooliſhe a quarell drawe them to ſo greate a broyle, beinge with Wine and anger almoſte made ſtarke madde. Some tooke this mans parte, ſome his, one ſorte would haue the honour geuen to the Capitaine, an other ſaide that the lawe and ordinance might not be broken. At length Trachinus bente him ſelfe toThe Pyrates fal together by the eares, and are al ſlaine with mutuall woundes. caſte a potte at Pelorus, but he preuented him (for he was prouided before) and thruſt his Dagger to his harte, and there laye he wounded to deathe. Betwéene the reſte was a cruell battell, for as they mette they ſpared not them ſelues, ſome to reuenge the Capitaine, other to defende Pelorus his right, ſo that they wayled al a like, and fought with Battes, Stoanes, Pottes and Tables. But I wente a greate way of, and from the toppe of a little Hill looked vpon them out of all daunger. Neither was Theagenes and Cariclia, frée from this warre, in as much as they dooinge as was agreed vpon, he came with a ſwoorde, and ioyninge to one ſide, behaued him ſelfe as if he had benne diſtraught, ſhée when ſhe ſawe the battel begonne, ſhotte out of the ſhippe in ſuch ſorte as ſhée neuer miſſed one, & ſpared none but Theagenes, ſhée ſhotte into no one parte of the Battayle, but him ſhée hilte, that ſhée firſt ſpied, for that ſhée was not ſéene, but did eaſily ſée her enemies through the fire, ſo that they knewe not what miſhappe that was, but ſome ſuppoſed it a plagueTheagenes and Pelorus, fighte hande to hande for Cariclia. ſentefrom Heauen, vntil euery man was ſlaine, & Theagenes onely lefte fighting hande to hande with Pelorus, a ſtoute man, and practized in many Murthers. Now could

                  Cariclias ſhootinge doo no more ſeruice, ſhée was ſory that ſhée could not helpe him, and afrayde leaſte ſhée ſhoulde looſe him, now they twoo were come to hande blowes: but at length Pelorus was not hable to ſtande againſte him, for though that Cariclia with her déede, could healpe him no more, yet with her woorde ſhée comforted him, crying out: Nowe my harte plaie the man, then was Theagenes farre too good for Pelorus, as though her voyce had made him ſtronge, and bolde, and declared what was the rewarde of that battayle. For then he plucked vp his harte, whiche was ſore wounded before, and leapt neare Pelorus, and with his ſwoorde ſtroke a full blowe at his head, but miſſed thereof, for that he auoyded the blowe a little, but he cutte his arme from his ſhoulder, & therewith he fledde, & Theagenes purſued him, what followed I cannot tell but that he returned againe, and I ſawe him not, for that I tarried on the Hill, and durſte not be oner bolde to walke in the nighte in a place ſo full of enimies, but Cariclia eſpied him wel yenoughe, for I perceiued when it was day, that he laie like a deade man, and ſhée ſate by him, and wepte, and declared that ſhée would kil her ſelfe, but ſhée helde her hande for a litle hope that ſhée had of his life. But I vnhappy man, could not ſpeake to them, nor know the trothe, nor comforte their calamitie before that as greate miſhappes by Lande, as theſe were by Sea, happened to vs without any delaie. For as ſoone as I ſawe the daie appeare, and was comminge downe the Hill, I ſpied a companie of Théeues of Egypt, runne from a Mountaine whiche ſtretcheth that waye by ſéeminge, and by this time had taken the yonge couple, and within a while after carried them awaie, and what ſo euer els they coulde out of the Shippe. I ſpake to no pourpoſe a farre of, and bewailed my Forture, and theirs in vaine, for that I coulde not defende them, neither thought I it beſte to comme emong them, for that I would reſerue my ſelfe, in hope to helpe them afterward.

So I tarried behinde, for that by reaſon of mine age I was not ſo wel hable as the Théeues to runne downeThe firſte booke declareth howe they were handled afterward the beginninge and proceſſe whereof, orderly foloweth, vntill the beginninge of Calaſiris tale almost in the ende of the ſeconde Booke. VVine maketh men apte to weepe. the ſtéepe, and comberſomme places, but nowe haue I vſed your heple, Nauſicles, and the fauoure of the Goddes in recouery of my Daughter, though I did nothing therto els, but wéepe and lamente abundantly. And then he wepte him ſelfe, and they alſo who were preſente: to be ſhorte, the Banquette was turned into ſuche wéepinge, as was mingled with a kinde of pleaſure (for Wine in a manner maketh men ready to teares) ſo longe, til Nauſicles comforted Calaſiris, and ſaide: Father, hereafter be merry, & of good chéere, for that you haue recouerd youre Daughter, and after one nighte onely you ſhal ſée youre Sonne alſo. For in the morninge wée will talke with Mytranes, and doo al that we can to Ranſome good Theagenes. I woulde with all my harte, ſaide Calaſiris. But nowe it is time to make an ende of our Banquette. Let vs remember God, and conioine to our Offeringe a Thankeſgeuinge for her deliuery. After this, the Offeringe was carried aboute, and ſo the Banquette ended. Calaſiris looked for Cariclia, and when he founde her not emonge the company that wente out, at the laſte with muche adoo, by the tellinge of a wooman, he ſawe her holdinge the féete of the Image, and either for the lengthe of her Praiers, or greateneſſe of her ſorrowe, ſhée was fallen into a ſounde ſléepe. So that he wepte a litle, and praied the God humbly to graunt her better ſucceſſe, and ſo ſoftly he awaked her, and broughte her into a Chamber, ſore aſhamed belike, that ſléepe at vnwares had ſo ouercommed her. Thus ſhée laied to ſléepe in a place, where onely woomen comme with Nauſicles Daughter, for the moſte parte wakinge, thoughte vpon her cares, and that whiche after was like to enſue.
               Here endeth the Fifthe Booke.
               
            
            
               
               The Sixte Booke.
               
                  WHen Calaſiris and Cnemon, had taken their eaſe, and ſlepte in the mennes chamber, & the reſte of the night was paſſed more ſlowely then they deſired, yet ſooner then they thought, becauſe the greateſt parte thereof was conſumed in the Banquette, and long tale, of whiche they coulde not be weary, it was ſo pleaſant, not lookinge for daye, they came to Nauſicles, & beſought him, that he woulde tell them out of hande, where he thought Theagenes was, and bringe them thither. He was content, and they went together, Cariclia beſought them muche that ſhée might goe with them, but ſhée was forced to tarry behinde, becauſe Nauſicles tolde her, they neither woulde goe farre, and that they woulde ſafe returne againe, & bringe Theagenes alſo. Thus they lefte her waueringe betwene ſorrowe for their departinge, and ioye for hope of that ſhée deſired. They were no ſooner out of the Village, and paſte the bankes of Nilus, but they ſawe a Crocodyle, which crept frō the right ſide to the other, and diued vnder the water, as faſte as it coulde. The other were nothinge moued with the ſight becauſe it was ordinary, ſauinge that Calaſiris propheſied,Calaſiris foreſheweth an impediment in the iourney by the creepinge of a Crocodyle. that it ſignified how they ſhould haue ſome lette in their iourney: but Cnemon was woonderfully afrayde of that ſight, although he ſawe it not perfectly, but a glimſinge thereof, ſo that he wanted but little, but that he would haue runne backe. Therewith ſpake Calaſiris, after he ſawe Nauſicles laughe and ſaide, Cnemon, I thought that you had benne onely afraide by nighte, for the noiſe and darkeneſſe thereof, but you are ouer hardy euen by daie as maye appeare, that are not afraide of names alone, but of ſuche thinges alſo as are common, and euery man knoweth, and are not to be regarded.

What Goddes name, or heauēly Creature is it, that this good man cannot abide, ſaide Nauſicles? Nay, if it were a God, or any heauenly Creature, ſaide Calaſiris, then had I nothinge to ſaie, but it is an humaine name, and that whiche is more to be marueiled at, not any mans whiche hath benne famous for his renoumed Actes, but a womans, and ſhée dead (as he ſaieth) if à man maye be bolde to ſpeake it. For yeſternight when you brought me home Cariclia ſafe from the Heardmen: he hearinge this name that I talke of, I knowe not why, nor wherefore, woulde not ſuffer me to ſléepe any whitte, beinge ready ſtill to die for feare, ſo that I had muche a doo to call him againe, and if I thought that I ſhoulde not gréeue him, nor make him afraide, I would name it nowe alſo, that you might laughe the more, and therewithall he named Thisbe. When Nauſicles hearde this, he laughed no more, but was very ſadde, and ſtoode in a ſtudy a greate while, muſinge in his minde what Cnemon had to doo with Thisbe, or how ſhée harmed him in any ſorte. Then beganne Cnemon to laughe woonderfully for ioye and ſaide: you ſée good Calaſiris, of what force this Name is, and that it dothe not onely abaſhe and feare me, but our good friende Nauſicles alſo: for it hath brought him to a woonderful change of his chéere. As for me now I laugh becauſe I knowe ſhée is not aliue, but luſty Nauſicles laughed other menne to ſcorne not longe agoe. Make an ende, Cnemon, ſaide Nauſicles, for you haue taken reuēge inough of me nowe. But I praie you tel me by the Gods of Hoſpitalitie and friendſhippe, and by the mirthe and chéere, whiche with eſpeciall good will (in mine opinion) you haue had in mine houſe, what meane you by Thisbes name, whether you knowe whence ſhée was in déede, or doo it to feare me, or els haue deuiſed it as a ieſte againſt me. Then ſpake Calaſiris, now it behooueth you to tell vs of your Fortune, Cnemon, whiche, for al that you oftentimes promiſed to communicate with me, you haue

by diuerſe ſhiftes driuen of. But nowe you maye doo it very well, bothe to pleaſure Nauſicles, and alſo to take awaie with your talke the wearineſſe of our iourneye. Cnemon did ſo, and tolde them al briefly, which he before had tolde to Theagenes and Cariclia, that he was borne in Athens, and Ariſtippus was his Fathers name, and Demeneta was his Mother in lawe. He tolde them alſo of the wicked Loue whiche Demeneta bare to him, and how that when ſhée coulde not come to her purpoſe, ſhée awaited him with crafty ſleightes by meanes of Thisbe, who was ſuborned by her ſo to doo. He added the manner alſo, and then that he was baniſhed his Countrie by the people, ſo puniſhinge him, as if he had benne a Paricide, and that Charias firſte one of his companions tolde him lyinge in Egina, that Demeneta was dead, and the manner of her death, being alſo beguiled by Thisbe her ſelfe. After this that Anticles tolde him, how his Father was brought into miſerie, by confiſcatinge of his goodes, forAriſtippus vndonne by meanes of his ſeconde wife. that Demenetas kinſfolkes gathered them ſelues togeather to condemne him, and brought the people in ſuſpection that he had donne that Murther. Then how Thisbe fledde from Athens with a Louer of hers, whiche was a Merchant of Naucratia. Laſte of al he reherſed, how thatNaucratia a Cittie in Egypt. he with Anticles ſailed into Egypte to ſéeke Thisbe, that if by happe they coulde finde her, they woulde bringe her backe to Athens, and deliuer his Father from that ſlaunder, and take reuenge of her, and after he had fallen into diuerſe miſhappes by the waie, at length he was taken by Pyrates, then after he had eſcaped by a meane, he arriued againe in Egypt, and was taken of the Heardmen, and there fell acquainted with Theagenes and Cariclia. And thereto he added Thisbes deathe, and other thinges in order, vntil he came to that whiche Calaſiris, and Nauſicles knewe well yenough. This tale ended, Nauſicles had ſixe hundred thoughtes in his minde, ſometime thinkinge to tell them of Thisbe and him ſelfe, and yet determininge

to deferre it a while. At laſt with muche adoo he helde his tongue, partly for that he thought it beſte ſo to doo, partely alſo for that an other chaunce ſtayed him. For after they had gonne about ſeuen miles and a halfe, & were almoſte at the towne, where Mytranes dwelled, they mette one whom Nauſicles knewe well, and aſked him whither he wēt ſo faſte. Doo you aſke (ꝙ he) whither I goe, Nauſicles? as though you knewe not what I haue to doo at this time? all that I doo tendeth to one ende, to doo the commandementes of Iſias of Chemmis. For her I till my Lande, for her I ſéeke and prouide all thinges, for her I wake night and daie, refuſinge nothinge (although thereby I gayne nothinge but griefe and ſorrow for my paines) that the ſame Iſias commaundeth me: andPhoenicopterus a byrde. I am in haſte to carry this birde Phoenicopterus, whiche vſeth aboute Nylus, as my déere Miſtris hath bidden me. O howe eaſie a Louer haue you gotten, ſaide Nauſicles,
                  Nauſicles frend had a gentle Louer. VVhence the Phoenix commeth. and howe light be her commaundementes, in that ſhée badde you gette her a Phoenicopterus, and not rather a Phoenix it ſelfe, whiche Byrde commeth to vs euen from the Ethiopians, and men of Inde. Shée (ꝙ he) againe maketh but a ieſte of me and my trauelles: but tell me now whither and where aboutes you goe? When they had tolde him, to Mytranes. You looſe your labour (ꝙ he) for Mytranes is not here nowe, but this night with his Armie, is gonne againſte Heardemen the inhabitantes of Beſſa. For they with their Capitaine Thiamis, haue taken away & kéept a yongeman, whiche he ſente to Memphis to Oroondates. From thence to be carried to the greate Kinge for a preſent. When he had ſayde thus, he wente his waie, ſayinge I muſte in haſte to Iſias, who euen nowe perhappes with her angry eies looketh aboute for me, leaſt this longe tariynge, be any impediment to me in my Loue: for ſhée is too politike to accuſe and finde faulte with me without cauſe. When they hearde this, they were amaſed, and ſtoode ſtill a great while without

ſaying any woorde, for that they were diſappointed contrary to their exſpectation, vntill at length Nauſicles cō
                  forted and chéered them, ſayinge that they ought not, for beinge a little diſappointed, whiche ſhall not be longe to diſpayre of al that they haue in hande. But now it is beſt to returne to Chemmis, and there to conſulte of the matter, and goe to ſéeke Theagenes with better prouiſion, whether he be with the Heardmen or els whereſoeuer, and to haue good comforte to finde him euery where. For wée maie not thinke this is donne without the prouidence of God, that wée mette with one of our acquaintance, who by that he tolde vs, hath ledde vs as it were by the hande thither, where wée maie ſéeke Theagenes, and hath taught vs the waie to the place where the Heardmen dwell, as to a certaine place of ſpéede. When he had ſaide this, he eaſily perſwaded thē, for as I thinke they gathered a farther hope by that whiche was tolde them. And Cnemon alſo by him ſelfe comforted Calaſiris, and badde him be of good chéere, for that Thiamis woulde vſe Theagenes well. So it pleaſed them to returne: when they were come home, they foūde Cariclia in the doore, lookinge for them into euery coaſte, who ſeinge not Theagenes with them, tooke vp a pitifull crie, & ſaide: Are you comme home alone as yée wente hence Father? Without doubte (as I may gheaſſe) Theagenes is deade. Wherefore I pray you by al the Goddes, if you haue any thinge to ſaie tell me, and increaſe not my ſorrowe with prolonginge the reherſall thereof. Surely it is a pointeIt is a pointe of courteſie to tell a miſchaunce quickely. of curteſie, to tell a miſhappe quickly, as that which cauſeth the minde to be ready to reſiſt the greatneſſe of the euill, and ſoone maketh it weary of the griefe. Then Cnemon with much adoo, breakinge of her ſorrow: ſaide, for ſhame Cariclia what faſcion is this? you are alwaies ready in a manner to iudge the woorſte, but that falſely, in whiche pointe you doo well. For Theagenes is, and by grace of the Goddes ſhall be well: and therewith he tolde

her briefly how, and with whome. To that ſayde Calaſiris, it ſéemeth by this that you haue ſaide, Cnemon, that you were neuer in Loue, for then ſhoulde you know for certaintie that thinges wherein is no daunger at all, are fearefull to Louers, and they truſte nothinge but theireLouers truſte nothinge but their owne eyes. owne cies, in that whiche they beſte like, and would faineſt haue, the abſence of whiche bréedeth feare and heanineſſe in the hartes, that be entangled with ſuch deſire. Another cauſe is that either moſte déere to other haue perſwaded them ſelues, that they will neuer be parted, except ſome great impediment procure their ſeperation. Wherefore Cnemon wée pardon Cariclia, who loueth perfectly in déede, and lette vs goe in and conſulte of that wée haue to doo. This ſaide, he tooke Cariclia by the hand, and with a certaine Fatherly obſeruaunce, he brought her into the houſe. Nauſicles willinge to refreſhe them after their cares, and alſo goinge aboute ſomme other thinge, ordeined a more ſumptuous Banquette then he was wonte to doo, & placed them alone with his Daughter, deckinge her in more braue and coſtly ſorte then before. And after they were well ſuffiſed with the feaſte as he thought, he ſpake thus to them: My gheaſtes (the Goddes are witneſſes of that I ſaie) your preſence is veryNauſicles Oration tendinge to this end, to haue Cnemon marrie his Daughter. acceptable to me, if you would liue here alwaies, and take all that is mine (though I eſtéeme it neuer ſo well) for your owne. And for as muche as I accoumpt you no Straungers, but as my Louers and trewe Friendes, henceforwarde it ſhall be no burthen that I beſtowe vpon you: And alſo I will be ready as longe as I tarry with you, to craue of my friendes to doo for you, what ſo euer they can in all matters. But you your ſelues know, that my trade of life ſtandeth by Merchaundiſe, and this I vſe and practiſe as if it were a Farme. Now therfore ſeinge that the Eaſterly windes blowe very commodiouſly, ſo that they make the Sea eaſie to be ſayled, and promiſe good ſpéede to Merchauntes, and my buſineſſe doo

call me as it were a Trumpette into Greece, you ſhal doo very well if you tell me your minde, that I may order my buſineſſe to ſuche ende as I may pleaſure you. After this Calaſiris pauſinge a while, ſaide: Nauſicles, God ſend you a good viage, and Mercury who geueth the gaine, & Neptune geuinge quiet paſſage, beare you company, and be your Guides, and make euery Hauen a good Harbour to you, and euery Cittie eaſie for you to trade in, and deſirous of Merchauntes, becauſe you haue intertained vs ſo friendly while we haue benne with you, and now wée minde to departe, doo ſuffer vs to goe ſo gently, obſeruinge in euery pointe the Lawes of Hoſpitalitie, and Friendſhippe. As for vs although it grieue vs greatly to departe from you and your houſe, whiche you haue cauſed vs to take for our owne, yet wée muſt néedes goe ſéeke thoſe whom wée holde moſte déere, and this is Cariclias determination and mine. Mary what Cnemon is minded to doo, and whether he will trauell with vs to doo vs pleaſure, or hath appointed to doo any thinge els, lette him ſaie him ſelfe. Cnemon was willinge to anſweare this, and as he was aboute to ſpeake, he ſighed ſore, and the teares whiche trickled ſuddainely downe his chéekes ſtopped his tongue, vntil at length comming to him ſelfe againe, he ſaide with a ſorrowfull voice, Oh humaineNo eſtate is ſtable in this worlde. eſtate moſte vnſtable, and full of all manner of changes, what ſtoare of miſhappes haſte thou ſhewed as well in me, as many other. Thou haſte depriued me of my Kinſfolkes and Fathers houſe, thou haſte banniſhed me from my Countrie, and Natiue Cittie, whiche I accompt moſt déere, thou haſte brought me into Egypt, and (that I leaue to ſpeake of many miſhappes by the way) haſte brought me into the handes of the Théeues called Heardmen, and there ſhewed me a little hope of good Fortune, by acquaintinge me with menne, who though they were in miſery, yet were they Greekes, with whom I thought to liue all the reſte of my life. But thou ſéemeſt to take this

from me againe: whither ſhal I turne my ſelfe? or what ſhall I doo? ſhal I leaue Cariclia who hath not yet founde Theagenes? that is vntollerable and may not be donne: ſhal I goe with her to ſéeke him: if wée were ſure to findeTo what ende paines ſhoulde be taken. him, it were well donne to take paynes in hope of a happy ende, but if that whiche is to come be vncertaine, and wée happe to fall into greater ſorrowe, no man can tell where my trauell ſhall ende. But what if I craue pardon of you and the Goddes of friendſhippe, and nowe at length make mention of returninge into my Countrie and Family? Seinge that Nauſicles in ſo good time (by the prouidence of the Goddes as I thinke) ſaithe that he will ſayle into Greece, leaſt if my Father die in mine abſence our houſe be left without an heyre. For although ITo leaue Iſſue to ſucceede is a thinge ſpecially to be deſired. ſhal liue in penury, yet that there ſhould be ſomme lefte of our ſtocke by me, is a thinge very honeſt, & for it ſelfe to be deſired. But oh Cariclia I would be excuſed to you eſpecially, and I craue pardon at your hande, and praye you to ſhewe me thus muche fauour, lette me goe with you to Beſſa, and I will deſire Nauſicles to tarry for me a little while, although he make great haſte. And if I deliuer you there to Theagenes, let me be counted one, that hath wel kepte that he deliuered to me. Whereby I may haue better hope alſo to ſpéede well afterwarde, ſéeinge wée parted ſo well: But if we fayle of him there (whiche God forbidde) laye no faulte in me; for that I leaue you not alone, but with Calaſiris your good Father, who alſo will ſée to you very well. Cariclia perceiued by many Signes, that Cnemon was in Loue with Nauſicles Daughter (for a Louers eye is very quicke to eſpie anOne Louer can ſoone eſpie an other that is like affected. other who is like affected) and that alſo Nauſicles wente aboute (by that whiche he ſpake) to make a marriage, entiſed Cnemon diuerſly, iudgeinge him alſo to be no méete Companion for their company, and woulde breade ſuſpition alſo, made him anſweare: Doo as it pleaſeth you, and I geue you hartie thankes for that you haue

donne to vs already, and confeſſe my ſelfe to be in youre debte. As for the time to comme, it is not néedeful that you ſhould haue any care of our buſineſſe, nor be in daū
                  ger in other mennes matters againſte your will. But God ſende you well to recouer your Countrie, Cittie, and houſe, and make not light of Nauſicles, nor of the profer he maketh. As for me, and Calaſiris wée wil contende ſo longe with al that whiche ſhal happen to vs, vntil wée ſhal finde an ende of our trauel, and althoughe no man beare vs felwſhippe, yet I truſte the Goddes wil be our companions. With this ſpake Nauſicles, The Goddes ſende Cariclia her hartes deſire, and beare her companye as ſhée hathe praied, and graunte that ſhée maie recouer her Kinſfolkes, in as much as ſhée is of ſo noble courage, and excellente wiſedome: and to you, Cnemon, be no longer ſorrowful for that you cannot carry Thisbe with you to Athens, for that you haue me, who haue carried her from thence ſo craftely, for I am that Merchante ofThiſbe was carried from Athens by Nauſicles. 
                  Naucratia, Thisbes Louer: and if you will be ruled by mine aduice, you ſhal gaine a greate Summe of Money, and recouer your Countrie, and Houſe very wel by my conducte, and if you liſte to take a wife, you ſhal haue my Daughter Nauſiclia, and a greate Dowrie with her, and I wil thinke, that ſhée hathe ſo muche, as ſhée maye looke for at your hande, becauſe I knowe of what Kinred, and Houſe you be comme. Cnemon made no ſtaie at this, but tooke that whiche before he deſired, and was nowe perſwaded contrary to his expectation, and ſaide: Al that you promiſe me, I accepte with al my harte. And therwithal he gaue him his hande, and Nauſicles affianced,Cnemon marrieth Nauſiclia, Nauſicles Daughter. and deliuered his Daughter to him: and commaundinge the Songe vſually ſonge at Marriages to be ſonge, beganne to daunce firſt him ſelfe, for makinge ſo ſuddaine a marriage of that prepared Banquette. Al the reſte celebrated the marriage with dauncinge, and ſinginge, ſo that al the Houſe was lighted with ſuche Candles as are

vſed at Weddinges. But Cariclia, departinge from the reſte, wente into her Chamber, and boltinge the Doore, becauſe that none ſhoulde trouble her, vntied, and caſte abroade her Heare, as if ſhée had benne in a rage, and cuttinge her Apparel, ſaide: Wel, let vs alſo daunce inThe ſorrowe that Cariclia was in, at Cnemō his Mariage, with a plaine prouſe of her excellent good nature. the honour of the God, who hathe care ouer vs in ſuche ſorte, as our eſtate requireth: Lette vs ſinge teares vnto him, and daunce with Lamentations: Let the darkeneſſe reſounde of the obſcure nighte, (nowe this Candle is out) be iudge of that I meane to doo: what a Houſe hathe it made for our ſake? what a marriage Bedde hathe it prepared for vs? The God that hathe charge of me, hath me nowe alone, and without my Huſbande. Alas wretch that I am, I meane him, that by name onely is my Huſbande. Cnemon daunceth, and is married: Theagenes is abroade, and perhappes a Priſoner, and in Holde, and if he be aliue, Fortune is ſommewhat gentle: Nauſiclia hathe a Huſbande, and is ſeperated from me, who vntill this nighte laſte paſte, laie with me, onely Cariclia is alone, and forſaken of al. I am not for al this offended with her Fortune (ô ye Goddes, and Heauenly Powers) but praie that they maie haue their hartes deſire: but at our Fortune, that ye be not ſo fauourable vnto vs, as to them: You haue drawen our acte of ſuche a lengthe, as it now paſſeth al ſenſe. But why doo I complaine of the miſeries which the Gods ſende vs: let the reſt alſo be fulfilled vntil they be pleaſed. But ô Theagenes, ô care onely pleaſante to me, if thou be dead, & I heare thereof (which God grante I neuer doo) I wil deferre no time to be with thée, for this time I offer this Funerals to thée (& therewithal ſhée pulled of her Heare, & laied it on her bedde) & poure out theſe Libations out of ye eies which thou loueſt ſo déerely (& then ſhee moyſted her Bed with her teares). But if thou be wel (as thou of good righte oughteſt to be) come & ſléepe with me, appearinge to me in thy ſhape: yet ſpare me, ſpare me thine owne Mayde, I ſaie, and vſe me

not after the guiſe of married folkes, and haue not to doo with me, no not in my ſléepe: beholde I imbrace thée, and thinke that thou arte here and lookeſt vpon mée. And as ſhée had ſpoken thus, ſhée caſte her ſelfe grouelinge on her Bedde, and ſore ſighinge, and pitifully mourninge ſhée claſped her armes harde togeather, vntil a certaine amaſedneſſe, and dazeling, caſte as it were a miſte before her, vnderſtandinge parte of the minde, and brought her aſléepe, and helde her til it was lighte daie. Wherfore Calaſiris marueiled that he ſaw her not as he was woont to doo, in ſearchinge for her, came to her Chamber, where knockinge ſommewhat harde, and callinge alowde, Cariclia, waked her at lengthe. Shée was abaſſhed at that ſuddaine calle, and came as ſhée was attyred, and vnbolted the doore to lette in the Olde man. Who ſéeinge her Heare diſordered, and her Garmentes cutte before her breaſte with her eies ful of water, vnderſtoode the cauſe: and when he had broughte her to her Bedde againe, and had cauſed her to attyre her ſelfe, & caſt a Cloke vpō her, he ſaide: for ſhame, Cariclia, what arraye is this? why doo you vexe your ſelfe ſo ſore without ceaſing? why yéelde you to all chaunces without reaſon? Surely nowe I knowe you not, whom till nowe I euer knewe to be of excellente courage, and very modeſt. Wil not you leaueVVhat it is to be mortall. of from this woonderful madneſſe? Wil you not thinke that you are borne mortal: that is to ſaie, an vnſteadye thinge, bendinge for euery light occaſion ſundrie waies? Haue pitie on vs, my Daughter, I ſaie, haue pitie, if not for your own ſake, yet for Theagenes cauſe, who deſireth to liue with none, but you, and accoumpteth it a vantage that you are aliue. Cariclia bluſſhed when ſhée hearde him ſpeake thus: and after ſhée had held her peace a great while, and Calaſiris deſired her to geue him ſomme anſweare, ſhée ſaide: Father, you haue good cauſe to chide, but perhappes I deſerue pardon, for neither any common, or ſtraunge deſire hathe forced me, vnhappy Creature,

to doo this, but pure, aud chaſte Loue that I beare to a man (although he neuer touched me) & yt is Theagenes, who maketh me thus ſadde becauſe he is not here with me, & I am the more afraide alſo, for that I cānot knowe whether he be aliue or not. As touchinge this matter ſaide Calaſiris, be of good chéere, and thinke that he is aliue, and one whom the Goddes haue appointed to liue with you: if wée muſte geue any credite to that whiche the Oracle hath foreſhewed vs. Wée muſte alſo beléeue him, who tolde vs yeſterdaie that Thyamis tooke him pryſoner, as he was carried towarde Memphis, and if he be taken without doubte he is wel, for as muche as there hath benne acquaintaunce and familiaritie betwixte thē before. Wherefore wée ought not to ſtaie but goe to Beſſa and ſéeke, you for Theagenes, and I for my Sonne, for you haue heard ere now that Thyamis is my Sonne.Thyamis was Calaſiris Sonne. Then was Cariclia in great thought, and ſaide: If Thyamis be your Sonne in déede, then are wée in woorſe caſe then euer wée were. Calaſiris marueiled hereat, and aſked her why. You know (ꝙ ſhee) howe I became priſoner to the Heardmen, where the vnhappy bewty with whiche I am indewed, forced Thyamis to Loue me: and it is to be feared leaſt if he finde vs, as we make inquiry, and ſée me, remembringe that I am ſhée who dalied and draue of with diuerſe diſceiptfull promiſes, the Mariage whiche he meante to make with me, that he wil take me, and by force compell me to finiſhe the ſame. God defende ſayde Calaſiris, that the vehemency of his luſte ſhould be ſuche, that the ſame ſhould diſdaine his Fathers countenaunce, and not repreſſe his licencious deſire, if any ſuch moue him. But for all that, why cannot you inuent ſome deuiſe to delude that whiche you ſtande ſo in doubte of? for you are very diligent, and crafty alſo to make ſhiftes and delaies againſt them, that ſéeke to haue you. Cariclia was ſommewhat mery with theſe woordes, and anſweared, whether you ſpeake this in earneſt or in ieſte

lette it paſſe for this time. But I will tell you the waye that Theagenes and I deuiſed, but Fortune woulde not let vs put it in practiſe becauſe it was very good. For when neceſſitie forced vs to leaue the Iland of ye Heardmen, it pleaſed vs to change our apparell, and wander aboute in the Villages, and good Townes ragged like beggers. Wherfore if it pleaſe you, lette vs counterfeite this habite and playe the beggers, ſo ſhall wée not be ſoThe commodities of beggery▪ Pouertie is rather pitied, then enuied. Straungers buie deerely. muche in daunger of thoſe who would our harme. For in ſuche a caſe by pouerty wée ſhalbe more ſafe: for commonly it is rather pittied then enuied, and thus ſhal wée gette our dayly ſuſtenaunce more eaſily. For al thinges are more déerely ſolde to Straungers whiche haue néede to buie and knowe not the manner of the Country, but will be fréely geuen to ſuche as begge. Calaſiris praiſed her deuiſe, & made haſte to be gonne: therefore the nexte day after they came to Nauſicles and Cnemon, and tolde them when thy were determined to departe, thei ſet forwarde (but tooke no Horſe with them, though one were profered them) nor ſuffered any man to beare them company, ſaue that Nauſicles and Cnemon, and the reſte of the houſe broughte them on theire waye. Nauſiclia alſo wente with them, crauinge ſo muche of her Father, for that the Loue ſhée bare to Cariclia, was more then her late Marriage permitted. And when they had accompanied them almoſt thrée quarters of a mile, eche one accordinge to their kinde, tooke theire laſte leaue and farewel and ſhooke handes, and after thei had ſhedde a great many of teares, and prayed that the partinge mighte be lucky to them, and Cnemon craued pardon, for that he wente not with them, by reaſon of his newe Mariage, and had tolde them that if he coulde gette occaſion he would followe them, they lefte either other, and theſe wente to Chemmis, but Calaſiris & Cariclia, turned them ſelues into beggers habite, and put on ſuche ill fauoured clowtes as they had prouided before for that pourpoſe.

This donne, Cariclia defowled her face with durte, and ſoote, and tied a parte of her Faſcia that was foule about her heade, fufferinge it to hange ilfauouredly ouer her eies in ſtéede of a Bonnegrace: ſhée had moreouer a ſcrip vnder her arme, as though ſhée would put péeces of bread and broken meate therein, but in déede to carry the holy Veſture whiche ſhée brought from Delphi, her Crowne and the reſte of the remembraunces whiche her Mother layde foorthe with her. Calaſiris carried Cariclias quiuer wrapped in a torne and naughty péece of leather, the wronge ende downe warde on his ſhoulders, as if it had benne ſome other thinge, and he vſed her Bowe (whiche as ſoone as it was vnbent ſtoode very ſtraight) for a ſtaffe leaninge very heauily thereon: and if happily they mette any man, of pourpoſe he would make his backe more croked then his age required, and be lame of one legge, and ſometime be ledde of Cariclia by the hande. When they could play this parte well, and had ieſted one at another, and beſought the God that had their affaires in charge, that he would be content with that whiche was paſt, and ſuffer their euill lucke to procéede no farther, they went to Beſſa, where hopinge to finde Theagenes and Thyamis, they failed of theire pourpoſe: for comminge neare to Beſſa aboute the Sunne ſettinge, they behelde a great ſlaughter of men lately made, of whom the moſte were Perſians, which might eaſily be knowen by their armour, and a fewe of thoſe that dwelled there alſo: ſo that they might coniecture that there had benne a battaile, but thei knew not what ye parties were that had foughten it: vntil at length by raunginge about the deade bodies, & lookinge if perhaps any of their friendes were there ſlaine:Feare maketh menne iudge the worſte. (for hartes whiche be in feare, and careful for that they loue beſte, oftentimes doo déeme the woorſte.) At laſte they ſawe an Olde wooman whiche laie vpon a deade body of one of thoſe Countrie men, and wayled woonderfully. They determined therefore if they mighte, to

enquire ſommewhat of her: and ſo comminge to her, at the firſte wente aboute to comforte her, and appeaſe her greate ſorrowe. Whiche when ſhée accepted, they aſked for whom ſhée lamented, and what Battaile had benne there: Calaſiris talkinge to her in the Egyptian tongue, ſhée tolde them al in fewe woordes, that ſhée ſorrowed for her Sonne, and came of pourpoſe to thoſe deade bodyes, that ſomme armed man mighte runne on her, and kill her, and in the meane time ſhée woulde doo ſuche Kites to her Sonne, as ſhée was hable with teares & lamētations. As touching the battaile ſhée told them thus: There was a ſtrange yonge man carried to Memphis, of goodly ſtature, and excellente bewtie to Oroondates the greateA great battaile aboute Theagenes to reſeue him frō Mytranes. Kinges Deputie, he was ſente from Mytranes the Captaine of the Watches for a great Preſent, as they ſaide: him did our men that dwel in this Towne (ſhewing thē a Towne harde by) ſaie, was theirs: whether it were ſo in déede, or they made it a colour for them, I knowe not. When Mytranes hearde this, beinge angry (and good cauſe why) he conducted his Army hither twoo daies agoe, and the people of this Towne are very warlike, and liue euer by ſpoylinge, and ſette not a ſtrawe by Deathe, and haue therefore taken from me, as wel as other woomen at other times our Huſbandes and Children. When our menne knewe certainely of his comminge, they placed their Ambuſhmente in places conueniente for this pourpoſe: and when their Enemies came emonge them, they eaſily ſubdued them: ſomme with Banners diſplaide comminge before them: and other breaking out of ye Ambuſhment with greate clamour ſet on the Perſians backes. So Mytranes was ſlaine as heMitranes ſlaine. fought with the foremoſt, & almoſte al the reſte alſo, for yt thei being incloſed, had no way to flée, & a fewe of our people alſo. Of whom, by the great wrath of God my Sonne was one, who had a woūde in his breaſte with a Perſian Darte, as you ſée: and for him thus ſlaine, doo I, vnhappy

Creature, ſorrowe: & ſhal I feare to doo the like hereafter for him yt is yet aliue, becauſe yeſterday he went with the reſte againſt the Inhabitantes of Memphis? Calaſiris aſked her why they tooke vpon them that viage. And the Olde wooman anſweared, that ſhée heard her Sonne ſaie which was aliue, that they knewe wel yenough, that becauſe ye Kinges Souldiers, & their Captaine were ſlaine, that they ſhoulde be, for that they had donne, not in any ſmall perill, but in daunger of al that they had: for that the Prince Oroondates, who lieth at Memphis, hath very greate power with him, who as ſoone as he ſhal be certified hereof, wil come and compaſſe this Towne aboute at the firſte, and reuenge this iniury with the deſtruction of al the Inhabitauntes of the ſame: and are therefore determined, ſeinge that they are once in ſo greate daunger, to redéeme theire greate attempte with a greater if
                     In extremitie deſperation may ſtande for a ſingular vertue. Vna ſalus victis nullam ſperare ſalutem: Virgilius. they maie, and to take Oroondates vnprouided: ſuppoſing that if they maie comme on the ſuddaine▪ either they ſhal kill him if he be at Memphis, or if he be not there (as reporte goeth) that he is buſied in the Aethiopian warre, that they ſhal the ſooner force the Citie to yéelde, for that it is without ſuche as maie defende the ſame, and ſo they ſhal be ſafe afterwarde: and moreouer to doo their Captaine Thiamis ſeruice in recoueringe the Office of the Prieſthoode, whiche his yonger Brother by violence holdeth from him vniuſtly: but if al theire hope faile them, then are they determined valiauntly to die, and not to comme into the Perſians handes to be ſcorned, and tormented of them. But for as much as you be ſtraungers, wither goe you? To the Towne, ſaide Calaſiris. It is not good (ꝙ ſhée) for that you be not knowen, and comme at ſuche vnlawful time to be emong them that are lefte. If you will voucheſaue to entertaine vs, ſaide Calaſiris, wée hope wée ſhalbe ſafe. I cannot ſaide ſhée nowe, for I muſte doo certaine nighte Sacrifices. But if you can 
                     •
                  arry, as perhappes there is no remedie, but you muſte

whether you wil or not, gette you into ſomme place beſide theſe deade bodyes, to paſſe this nighte, and in the morninge I promiſe you I wil entertaine you, and be your warrante. Thus ſhée ſaide. Calaſiris told Cariclia al, and tooke her with him, and wente their waie. And hauinge gonne a litle paſte thoſe bodies, they chaunced vpon a litle Hil: there he laide him downe with her Quiuer vnder his heade. But Cariclia fate vpon her ſcrippe in ſtéede of a ſtoole: at that time the Moone aroſe, and with her brighteneſſe lightened al thinges, for ſhée was nowe thrée daies paſte the full. Calaſiris beinge otherwiſe an Olde man, and weary of his trauel fel faſte aſléepe: mary Cariclia by reaſon of the cares that troubled her, ſlept not that night, but behelde a wicked & abominable facte, yet ſuch as the woomen of that Countrie commonly vſe: for ye Olde wooman thinking that ſhée had nowe gotten a timeA very prety deſcription of an olde woman▪ Sorceres playinge her pagent. wherin ſhée ſhould neither be ſéene, nor troubled of any, firſte digged a Pitte, then made ſhée a fire on bothe ſides thereof, and in the middes ſhée laide her Sonnes bodye, and takinge an Earthen Potte from a thrée footed ſtoole, whiche ſtoode thereby, poured Hony into the Pitte: out of an other ſhée poured Milke, and ſo did ſhée out of the thirde, as though ſhée had donne ſomme Sacrifice: Laſte of al ſhée caſte a lumpe of Dowe hardened with the fire whiche was made like a man, and had on a Crownè of Lawrel, & the trée called Bdellium into the Pitte. ThisThe tree called Bdellium.
                   donne, ſhée tooke vp a Swoorde that laie emonge the dead mennes Shieldes, and behauinge her ſelfe, as if ſhée had benne in ſuch fury, as the Prieſtes of Bacchus commonly are, ſaid many Praiers to the Moone in ſtrange tearmes: then did ſhée cutte her Arme, and with a braunche of Lawrel ſhée beſprinkeled the fire with her Bloude: and dooinge many monſterous and ſtraunge thinges beſide theſe, at lengthe bowinge her ſelfe downe to the deade Body of her Sonne, and ſaieinge ſommewhat to him in his eare, awaked him, and by force of her Witchecraftes,

made him ſtande vp ſuddainely. Cariclia, who hitherto had not looked on her without greate feare, then trembled, and was vtterly diſcomforted with that woonderful ſighte, ſo that ſhée awaked Calaſiris, and cauſed him alſo to beholde ye ſame. They could not be ſéene in a darke corner, but they ſawe eaſily what they did in the lighte by the fire, and hearde alſo what ſhée ſaide, for that they were not far of, and the Olde woman ſpake very plaine to the Bodye. The queſtion was this: Whether her Sonnes Brother whiche was yet aliue ſhoulde returne ſafe, or no? The Bodye made no anſweare, but with noddinge gaue his Mother a doubteful hope of good ſucceſſe according to her minde, and ſo fel groueling downe againe: but ſhée turned the face vpwarde, and ceaſſed not to aſke that queſtion, and with more earneſt enforcementes (bilike ſpeakinge many thinges in his eare againe, and leapinge with a Swoorde in her hande, ſometime to the Pitte: ſommetime to the fire, made it ſtande vprighte againe, and aſked the ſame queſtion, compellinge him not to anſweare by noddes and beckes, but plainely by mouthe to the queſtion ſhée aſked. WhileThe Prieſtes of Egypte, though they were Heathen dealte not with Sorcerie. this was in dooinge, Cariclia praied Calaſiris that they mighte goe neare, and aſke the Olde Woman ſomme tidinges of Theagenes: but he woulde not, ſaieinge, that that ſighte was wicked, but there was no remedie but they muſte néedes be contente with it: for it becommeth not the Prieſtes, either to take delighte, or be preſente where ſuche thinges are dooinge. But they oughte by Sacrifices, and lawful Praiers enquire, not by ſhameful Sorceries, whiche are conuerſante aboute the Earthe, and deade Creatures, of whiche ſorte is the Egyptians practiſe, whiche chaunce at this time hathe cauſed vs to ſée. While he ſpake thus, the deade Bodye ſpake very terribly with a hollowe voice, as if it had comme out of a déepe Caue, ſaieinge: Mother, at the firſte I ſpared thée, and ſuffered thée to ſinne woonderfully againſte the nature

of man, and breake the Lawes whiche the Ladies ofSorcerie is a thinge againſte nature. Deſtinie haue appointed, in attemptinge to make thoſe thinges moue, whiche by nature are vnmoueable. For euen the deade men haue a reuerence as muche as they maye to theire Parentes. But for as much as thou breakeſtDeade menne he ſaithe, reuerence theire parentes. this, and procedeſt in thy wicked and ſhameful déede, whiche at the firſte thou haſte begonne, and arte not contente that a deade Bodye ſtande vp, but wilte compel him to ſpeake alſo, nothinge regardinge my Burial,The Heathen Philoſophers were of opiniō that the Soules of menne whoſe bodies were not buried, ſhoulde not come into the felowſhippe of other their felowes. and wilte not ſuffer me to comme into the company of other Soules, whiche thou arte bounde to doo for priuate friendſhippes ſake. Heare now that whiche before I was afraide to tel thée: Neither ſhal thy Sonne comme ſafe home, nor thy ſelfe eſcape deathe with Swoorde. But in as muche as thou haſte ſpente thy life in ſuche wicked déedes, thou ſhalte haue ſhortely violent deathe, appointed for all ſuche. Who haſte benne coutente, not onely to doo theſe ſo ſecrete and hidden Myſteries alone, but in the ſighte of other alſo: ſo that thereby thou bewraieſt, and ſetteſt foorthe to them the ſtate of the deade, whereof one is a Prieſte, and is therefore ſo muche the better, for he knoweth, ſuche is his wiſedome, that ſuche thinges ſhoulde not be blaſed abroade, but kepte in ſecrete, and is alſo wel beloued of the Goddes, and he ſhal, if he make ſpéede, agrée his Sonnes, who are ready armed to fighte a bloudy Battaile hande to hande. But the other which is ſo muche woorſe, is a Mayde, and looketh vpon that thou dooeſt to me, and heareth al that thou ſaieſt, a wooman farre in loue, who traueleth al the worlde ouer, almoſte for her Louers ſake, with whom after infinite trauelles, and ſixe hundred daungers, in the furtheſt parte of the worlde, ſhée ſhal liue in proſperitie, and Kinges eſtate. The Body fel downe when he had ſaide thus: but the Olde wooman perceiuing that they were ſtraungers that looked vpon her, armed as ſhée was with the Swoorde in her hande, like a woodde wooman ſoughte for

them, and raunged rounde aboute emonge the dead Bodyes, thinkinge that they had benne there, meaninge that if ſhée coulde finde them, to ridde them out of theire liues, as crafty folkes, and ſuche, who by their lookinge on her, cauſed her to haue ſo il ſucceſſe in her Witchecrafte. Vntil at length ſéekinge ſommewhat negligently, for anger emonge thoſe, a trunchion of a Speare thatThe VVitche had ſuche death as all her former life well deſerued. ſtoode vp, ſtroke her through the belly: and thus died ſhée, fulfillinge ſtraighe waie by dewe deſerte the ſaieinge whiche her Sonne propheſied to her before.
               Here endeth the Sixte Booke.
               
            
            
               The Seuenth Booke.
               
                  
                     CAlaſiris and Cariclia, after they had ſcaped ſuche a ſcouringe, as well to gette them out of the preſent daunger, as alſo haſtinge for that was ſhewed them, to Memphis, ſette forwarde apace, and they came to the Cittie, as thoſe things were adooinge, whiche the deade man, that his Mother called vp foretolde them. For they who were at Memphis, had ſhutte the gates a little before Thyamis came with his Army from Beſſa, for that they had warninge of his comminge, by a Souldiar that ſerued vnder Mytranes, & had ſcaped from the Battaile at Beſſa. Then Thyamis commaunded his Souldiers, at a parte of the walle to laye aſide their Armoure, and after their continuall trauell to take ſome eaſe, and he determined to laie ſiege to the Cittie. The Townes menne

whiche were before afrayde of a great Army, when they ſawe there were ſo fewe from the walles, diſpiſinge thē, by and by gathered the fewe Archers, and Horſemenne whiche were lefte in Garriſon in the Towne, and the reſte of the Citizens alſo tooke ſuche weapons as came to their handes, and determined to goe foorthe, & fight with them, againſte the will of a wiſe and noble man in the Towne, who ſaide that although it happened the deputy to be at the Warre in Ethiopia, yet the matter ought to be brought before Arſace his wife, that the Souldiers whiche were in the Cittie might be the rediar to defende the ſame. And becauſe he ſéemed to ſpeake well, they wente all to the Kinges Pallaice, wherein the Deputies lodge in the Kinges abſence. Arſace was a bewtifullArſace Oroondates wife, Siſter to the great Kinge of Perſia. woman, and of tale ſtature, & ſinguler wiſedome to doo any thinge, and of a ſtoute ſtomake for the Nobleneſſe of her birthe, as is like would be in her, that is Siſter to the great Kinge, yet for her vnlawful and diſſolute luſte ſhée was not without reprehenſion and blame. And beſide other factes, ſhée was in a manner parte of the cauſe of Thyamis banniſhmente, when he was conſtrained to forſake Memphis. For preſently after Calaſiris wente priuily from Memphis, for that whiche was tolde him by the Goddes of his Sonnes, and coulde not be founde, ſo that it was thought he was deade, Thyamis as his elderThyamis made Prieste after the departure of Calaſiris his Father. Sonne, was called to the Office of Prieſthoode, and as he was dooinge ſacrifice, publikely at his firſt entry into Iſis Churche, Arſace ſeinge him to be a proper yongue man, and of good age, for that he was the handſomeſt man in that company, & beſt attyred, caſte many wanton lookes and diſhoneſt countenaunces at him. Whiche Thyamis regarded no whitte, bothe for that he was of nature very honeſt, and well inſtructed from a childe: and perhappes that whiche ſhée did was further fetched, then that he perceiued it, or he thought perhappes ſhée did it for ſome other pourpoſe, for that he was altogeather buſted

aboute his Sacrifices. But his brother Petoſiris,
                  Petoſiris dothe play an vnbrotherly parte with Thyamis, and by meanes of Arſaces wā
                     ton lookes, procureth his vniuſt baniſhment. who before enuied that his Brother ſhoulde be Prieſte, and had wel marked Arſaces allurementes, tooke her vnlawful intiſementes for a good occaſion to endamage his Brother. Wherefore he came to Oroondates ſecretely, and tolde him not onely her deſire, but that Thyamis alſo had made the matche with her, adding that very falſely. He ſuffered him ſelfe eaſily to be perſwaded for ſuſpition that he had conceiued of Arſace, yet he moleſted her not, either for that he could not manifeſtly conuince her, or els thought it beſte to conceale, and wincke at it for reuerence and honour that he bare to the Bloud Royall. But he tolde Thyamis plainely & neuer ceaſed, to threaten to kill him, vntill he put him to exile, and placed his Brother Petoſiris in his roume: but this was donne before. At that time when the whole multitude came on heapes to her houſe, and certified her of the comminge of theyr enemies, and beſought her that ſhée woulde géeue commaundement, that the Souldiers ſhould be in a readineſſe, anſweared that ſhée would not lightly ſo doo, for becauſe ſhée knewe not of what force her enimies were, nor what they were, nor whence they came, nor for what occaſion. It was therefore beſte firſte to goe on the walles, and ſée all their ordinaunces, and then prouide ſuch thinges as ſhalbe thought cōuenient. They thought ſhée ſaide wel, and wente euery man to the walles, thereArſace inquireth the cauſe why the people of Beſſa comme in armoure to Memphis. by Arſaces commaundement was a tente of purple ſilke garniſhed with Golde pitched, and ſhée her ſelfe very coſtly arrayed, came and ſatte in a hie ſeate, with her Garde about her gliſteringe in gilte armoure, ſhée helde out her Mace in token of a peaceable Parlamente, and commaūded the Captaines of their enimies to approche neare to the Walles. After Theagenes and Thyamis elected of the Army, came all armed ſaue theire heades, and ſtoode vnder the wall, the Heraulte at Armes ſaide vnto them: Arſace wife of Oroondates, chiefe Deputie,

and Siſter to the greate Kinge aſketh what you are, what your meaninge is, and wherefore you are ſo bolde to comme hither. They anſweared, that they were ofThiamis declareth the cauſe of his comminge. 
                  Beſſa, but of him ſelfe ſpake Thiamis what he was, and that wronged his Brother Petoſiris and Oroondates, and depriued craftily of his Prieſtehoode, was broughte to be reſtoared againe by the Beſsians, and if he mighte recouer the Prieſtes Office, then ſhoulde it be Peace, and the people of Beſſa returne home againe without any more harme dooinge. If not, he meante to committe the matter to the iudgemente of Warre, and force of Armes, and that Arſace had good cauſe, if ſhée remembred that whiche was paſte, to take reuenge of Petoſiris for the falſehedde he practiſed againſte her, and the vntrue occaſions that he laied againſte her to Oroondates, whereby he broughte her into ſuſpition of vile and vnlawful dealinge with her Huſbande, and cauſed him to be banniſhed by his ſubtile and craftie meanes. All the Cittie of Memphis was troubled with theſe woordes. When they knewe Thiamis, and the cauſe of his banniſhmente, whiche when he was banniſhed, none of them knewe, and denied al that he had ſaide to be trewe: but Arſace of al other was moſte troubled, ſo that a whole ſtorme of thoughtes in a manner ouerwhelmed her, for ſhée was ſoare incenſed againſte Petoſiris, and callinge to minde that whiche was paſte, deuiſed with her ſelfe howe ſhée mighte be reuenged. Then beholdinge Thiamis, and after him Theagenes, was diuerſly affected to them both, to the one by callinge to minde her olde loue: but in the other ſhée founde occaſion of newe, and that more earneſt loue, ſo that thoſe that ſtoode by her mighte wel perceiue the troubleſome carefulneſſe of her minde: yet for al this, when ſhée had pawſed a while, and came to her ſelfe, not muche vnlike one who is recouered of the Holy Euil, ſhée ſaide thus: Good menne, ſurely you were not wel deuiſed to take this Warre in hande, for you haue

nowe brought as well al the people of Beſſa, as alſo yourArſace dothe anſweare This amis. ſelues beinge youthfull yonge menne, and therewithall bewtifull, & of good parentage (as may be gheaſſed) into apparent perill for the Théeues quarrell, in as muche as if wée woulde fight with you, you were not hable to ſuſtaine the firſte aſſaulte of our force. For the greate Kinges eſtate is not brought to ſo lowe an ebbe, but that you may be incloſed of the leauinges of the Army, which is behinde him in the Cittie (though the Deputie him ſelfe be away) but in mine opinion the whole powers on bothe ſides néede not to be troubled, and it is better, ſeinge that the quarrell is priuate and not common, that it be priuately ended, and ſo be finiſhed as the Goddes ſhal appointe. I thinke it reaſon therefore, and I géeue commaundement too, that al the menne of Memphis be quiet, and that they ſturre not without occaſion, and that theyArſace ſentence betwene Thiamis and Petoſiris, as touchinge the Prieſthoode. whoſe is the quarrell aboute the Prieſthoode, fight for it hande to hande, on condition that the Conquerour haue the ſame. When Arſace had ſaide thus, al the Memphites ſhouted woonderſfirisly and praiſed her aduiſe, for that they beganne to ſuſpect the miſchieuous attempt of Petoſiris, and euery man was gladde to laie the imminent and preſent daunger, whiche was before their eies, on an other mans backe. But the people of Beſſa were not content with that order, neither woulde they venture their Captaine ſo daungerouſly, vntill Thyamis perſwaded them, telling them that Petoſiris was but féeble, and vnſkilful to fight, and that he ſhoulde haue a greate aduantage in the Battaile by reaſon of his practiſe. So thought Arſace alſo as may be déemed, and therfore ordained the battaile to be betwéene them twoo, that ſhée mighte haue her deſire without ſuſpicion, and be reuenged of Petoſiris ſufficiently, if he fought with his Brother Thyamis, who was the better man a greate deale. There a man might ſée that donne, as ſoone as ſhée had commaunded it, and Thyamis with all his might haſted to doo what ſhée

had denounced, and tooke the reſte of his Armoure that he wanted, with a chéerefull countenaunce, and Theagenes comforted him diuerſly, and ſette on his head piece, wherein was a very fayre plume of feathers, gliſteringe by reaſon it was well gilted, and faſtened the reſt of his Armour ſurely about him. But Petoſiris was thruſt out of the gates by violence, to fulfill that whiche was commaunded, though he vſed many prayers to intreate that he might not fight, and he tooke weapons in hande ſore againſt his will. When Thyamis ſawe him, he ſaide, doo you not ſée good Theagenes, how Petoſiris quaketh for feare? I ſee it well anſweared he: but how will you doo with this you haue taken in hande? for he is not a plaine enimy, but your naturall Brother, that you muſte fight with all. You ſaie well (ꝙ he) and as I my ſelfe thought: by the grace of God I meane to ouercome him, and notAn excellent example of Brotherly nature in Thiamis, wherby is plainely declared the force againſt his wil, cauſed him to folowe his former trade of lyfe. Nothinge is certaine in this worlde. to kill him. For God defende that my wrath and indignation ſhould procéede ſo farre, that I ſhoulde with the bloude and ſlaughter of my naturall Brother, either reuenge iniuries paſte or purchaſe honour to comme. You ſpeake like a noble man, ſaide Theagenes, and one that wel vnderſtandeth the force of Nature, but what will you haue me doo? He anſweared: there is no doubte of this battaile ſo that it maye be deſpiſed: yet for as muche as the varietie of humayne Fortune, bringeth many thinges to paſſe cōtrary to our exſpectation oftentimes, if I gette the victory you ſhal enter into the Cittie, and liue in equall authoritie with me, but if any thinge otherwiſe then wée hope for, happen to me, then ſhal you be Captaine of theſe Robbers of Beſſa, who loue you well, and ſo liue vntill God haue appointed ſome better ende for your affayres. When theſe thinges were ordred thus, they with wéepinge eies imbraced and kiſſed either other. And Theagenes as he was ſette downe to ſée what would happen, and gaue Arſace leaue, though he knewe not ſo muche to take pleaſure in lookinge vpon

him, and to vewe him rounde aboute, and ſuffer her eies to take ſuche pleaſure as ſhée wiſhed. But Thyamis
                  The Battaile betwene Thiamis and Petoſiris. wente to Petoſiris, who tarried not to ſtrike one blowe with him, but as ſoone as he ſawe him come towarde him he turned to the gates, and woulde haue gonne into the Cittie agayne: but he loſt his labour, for that thoſe who kepte the gates woulde not lette him in, and they that were on euery parte of the walle whereto he drewe, exhorted one another not to healpe him: he therefore caſte away his weapons and fledde as faſte as he could aboute the Cittie. Theagenes alſo ranne for feare of Thiamis, & ſtaied not but ſawe all that was donne, marry he was not armed, leaſte menne would thinke that he meante to helpe Thiamis, but laide his Shielde, and his Speare at that ſide of the walle where Arſace ſatte, geuinge her leaue in his abſence to looke vpon them, and he folowed them. And yet was not Petoſiris taken, nor very farre before, but almoſt ouergotten, and ſo farre before, as a man maie gheaſſe, one vnarmed able to outrunne an other in Armoure, and by this time had they runne once or twiſe about the walles: But as they ranne the thirde time, Thiamis bente his ſpeare againſte his Brothers backe, and commaunded him to abide, or els he ſhoulde haue a blowe, in the ſight of the whole Cittie who looked vpon them, and was iudge of that controuerſie, either a God, or ſome manner of Fortune whiche gouetneth humayne affayres, by a newe deuiſe augmented that, that was donne, and in a manner beganne a newe Tragedy like the other, and made Calaſiris a felow of their courſe,Calaſiris commeth to the Battaile of his 
                        〈◊〉
                     . and a beholder of the vnhappy battayle of his Children for life and deathe, at the ſame daie and hower, as if it had benne deuiſed of ſette purpoſe before. Who although he ſuffered muche, and attempted many waies, and in a maner banniſhed, gotte him ſelfe into a ſtraunge lande to auoyde that cruell ſight, yet ouercomed by deſtinie, he was cōpelled to ſée that, whereof the Goddes by Oracle

gaue him warninge before. So that he ſéeinge this chaſe and purſuite a farre of, knewe that they were his Children, by tokens that were diuerſe times foreſhewed him, wherfore he rāne faſter then his age permitted, & enforced him ſelfe to cutte of the ende of the Battaile whiche was like to enſue. After he came neare & ranne with thē, he cried out oftentimes, my Sonnes what rage is this? Why are you ſo madde? But they knewe not their Father, for that he was yet in his beggers wéede, and their mindes were altogeather on theire courſe, ſo that they wente by him as by one that had ben out of his wittes. Somme of them, who were on the walles, muſed that he ſpared not him ſelfe, but ranne euer betwéene theire Swoordes: other laughed him to ſcorne, as though he had benne madde. But the Olde man perceiuinge that he could not be knowen by reaſon of his vile Apparel, caſte of his Ragges whiche were vpon his Garmentes, and the ſtaffe alſo that he had in his hande, and fel to intreatinge them, and ſaide with teares: My Sonnes, beholde, I am Calaſiris, I am your Father, make an ende here, and refraine the rage which il happe hath raiſed betwixt you, in as muche as you haue a Father, and owne obedience to him. Then beganne they to quaile, and fallinge downe at theire Fathers féete, imbraced him, and with ſtedfaſte eies looked vpon him, not perfectly knowinge him: but when they perceiued it was no viſion, but him ſelfe in déede, there aroſe diuers, yea and contrarye thoughtes in their mindes. They were gladde of theire Father, whiche contrary to their expectation was aliue, but were angry, and ſoare aſhamed of the caſe he founde them in, and they were in doubte alſo of that whiche after ſhoulde befall. And while they of the Cittie marueiled at this that was donne, and neither ſaide, nor did any thinge, but ſtoode in a manner like doumbe Pictures, becauſe they knewe not what it meante. An other acte was interlaced in the tragedie. Cariclia, as ſhée folowed

                  Calaſiris, ſpied Theagenes a farre of (for a Louers eie isA Louers eie is quicke of ſight. quicke of ſighte ſo that oftentimes though it be a greate waie of, yet wil it iudge a likelihoode by mouinge, or habite, or geſture, and that behinde) and as if ſhe had benne ſtriken with his viſage, ranne to him like a madde wooman, and hanginge by her Armes aboute his necke, ſaide nothinge, but ſaluted him with certaine pitieful Lamentations. He ſéeinge her fowle face, (belike of pourpoſe beblacked) and her Arparel vile, and al torne, ſuppoſinge her to be one of the makeſhiftes of the Cittie, and a vacabonde, caſte her of, & put her awaie, and at lengthe gaue her a blowe on the eare, for that ſhée troubled him in ſéeinge Calaſiris. Then ſpake ſhée to him ſoftly, Pithius, haue you quite foregotten this Taper? Theagenes was ſtriken with that woorde, as if he had benne pearſed with a Darte, and by Tokens agreed on betwéene them, knewe the Taper, and lookinge ſtedfaſtly vpon her, eſpied her bewty ſhining like the Sunne appearing through the Clowdes, caſte his Armes aboute her necke. To be ſhorte, al that parte of the wall where Arſace ſate (whichArſace in Ialouſie of Cariclia. was ſoare ſwollen, and coulde not without greate ialoſie looke vpon Cariclia) was ful of ſuche woonderful affections, as is commonly repreſented in Comedies. The wicked Battaile betwéene the twoo Brothers was ended, and that whiche menne thoughte ſhoulde be finiſhed with Bloude, had of a Tragical beginninge a Comical endinge. A Father ſawe his Sonnes in Armoure one againſte the other hande to hande, came to that pointe, that almoſte before his eies he ſawe his Childrens Deathe, made him ſelfe their louedaie and peace:Calaſiris agreeth his Sonnes. who coulde not eſcape the neceſſitie of Deſtinie, but ſéemed to vſe Fortunes greate fauoure, for that he came in dewe time to that whiche was determined before. The Sonnes recouered theire Father after tenne yéeres abſence, and adourned him with the furniture of the Prieſtehoode, who, aboute the ſame had almoſte benne

the cauſe of a Bloudy ſtrife, and ſo broughte him home. But emonge al the reſte, Theagenes and Cariclia whiche plaied the Louers partes in this Comedie, were moſte talked of, and for that they had founde eche other, contrary to theire hope, made the Cittie to looke vpon them more then al other ſightes whiche were there to be ſéene: for great companies of euery age came out at the Gates into the open fieldes, & ſuche as were youthful, & newely comme to mannes eſtate, came to Theagenes: ſuche as were of riper yéeres, menne growen in déede, drewe to Thiamis, for that they alſo by reaſon of their age knewe him wel: but the Maydenly ſorte, who now thought vpō Huſbandes, flocked aboute Cariclia: but the Old menne, and ſuche as were of the Holyer kinde, ſtoode aboute Calaſiris: and thus was there made a ſuddaine Sacred Pompe and brauerye. After Thiamis had ſente backe the people of Beſſa, & geuen them thankes for the paines they tooke in his quarrel, with promiſe that at the nexte full Moone he woulde ſende them a thouſande Oxen, a thouſande Shéepe, and tenne groates a péece in Money, he ſuffered his Father as he went, for eaſe, to leane vpon his ſhoulders, who nowe for his ſuddaine ioie beganne to ware féeble, and very fainte. Petoſiris did the like on the other ſide: & thus was the Olde man brought into Iſis Temple with Tapers lighted, and with greate ioie, and many Inſtrumentes of Muſike, ſo that the luſty youthes beganne alſo to daunce. Beſide theſe, Arſace alſo was not behinde, but with her traine folowed in braue wiſe, and offered greate giftes of Golde in Iſis Temple, vnder pretence to doo as other did in the Cittie, but in déede her eies were alwaies vpon Theagenes, and ſhée looked more on him then any other, and was not very honeſtly minded towarde him. And when Theagenes ledde Cariclia by the hande, and put the thruſt aſide that ſhée might take no harme, Arſace conceiued a woonderful Ialouſie. But Calaſiris after he came into the inner parte

of the Temple, fell vpon his face, and helde the féete of the Image faſt, and laie ſo, ſo longe that he was almoſte deade: ſo that he had muche adoo to riſe when they called vpon him, who ſtoode by. And when he had donne Sacrifice to the Goddes, and perfourmed his vowes, takinge the Crowne of the Prieſthoode from his owne heade, he Crowned therewith his Sonne Thiamis, tellinge theCalaſiris maketh his Sonne Thiamis Prieſte. people that he was Olde, and ſawe that he ſhoulde not liue longe, and that his eldeſt Sonne ought to ſuccéede him by the Lawe, and that he had all thinges requiſite, bothe to body and minde, ſufficient to vſe the ſame. After the people had by a greate ſhoute declared, that they approued yt whiche he did, he wente him ſelf to a certaine parte of the Church, which is appointed for the Prieſtes, and remained there with his Sonnes, and Theagenes quickly. Al the other people wente euery man to his owne houſe. Arſace alſo departed with muche adoo, but ſhée returned diuers times, and vſed as it were great diligence aboute the ſeruice of the Goddes, yet ſhée wente awaie at lengthe, turninge her ſelfe as longe as ſhée mighte to Theagenes. As ſoone as ſhée came into the Palaice, ſhée wente ſtraighte waye to her Bedde, and caſte her ſelfe thereon attyred as ſhée was without ſpeakinge any woorde, beinge a wooman otherwiſe very laciuiouſly bente, but then eſpecially enflamed when ſhée had ſéene Theagenes excellente bewtie, whiche farre paſſedArſace almoſte madde with Loue to warde Theagenes. al that euer ſhée had ſéene before. So laie ſhée al that nighte toſſinge her bodye from one ſide to an other, ſoare lamentinge: ſommetime woulde ſhée riſe vp: ſommetime leane vpon her Elbowe: ſommetime woulde ſhée caſte her Cloathes almoſte al from her: then woulde ſhée ſuddainely fal into her Bedde againe: ſommetime woulde ſhée calle her Mayde, and without biddinge her doo any thinge, ſende her awaie againe. To be ſhorte, loue had made her madde, and none ſhoulde haue knowen why, if and Olde wooman called Cibele, her Chamberleine, and

Bawde had not comme into her Chamber: for ſhée might wel perceiue al that was donne, by reaſon of a Candle that burnte, and made Arſaces face more vehement alſo, ſaieinge: Miſtreſſe, for ſhame what adoo is this? DotheCibele Arſaces Chamberlaine and Bawde, doth comforte her, and promiſeth to ſubdue Theagen
                        •
                     s. any newe, or ſtraunge diſeaſe paine you? Hathe the ſighte of any man troubled my Darlinge? What man is ſo prowde, and madde, that wil not be entangled with your bewtie, and accoumpte it a paſſinge bleſſed eſtate to lie, and haue to doo with you, but wil deſpiſe your deſire and wil? Tel me, my déere Daughter, for there is no man ſo ſtoany harted, but he ſhal be made to yéelde with our flatteringe allurmentes. Tel me quickely, and you ſhal haue your hartes deſire, as in effecte, I thinke you haue oftentimes proued before now. Theſe woordes, and many moe like theſe, did this Olde queane ſpeake, vſinge diuers flatteringe faſſhions, more to make her confeſſe her paine, who after ſhée had ſtaied a while, ſaide thus: I am ſoarer wounded nowe Mother, then euer I was before, and for that I haue vſed your readye healpe many times in like caſes: yet I doubte whether nowe you ſhal haue ſuche like happy ſucceſſe. The Battaile whiche this daie was like to haue benne foughten before the Walles, to al other men was vnbloudy, & concluded in peace: but to me it is the beginning of a woorſe warre, who haue a wounde, whereby I am like to looſe, no one Lymme, or Member, but my witte, and ſenſes, becauſe it ſhewed vnto me in an ill time the ſtraunge yonge man, who in the time that the twoo Brothers foughte, ranne by Thiamis. You knowe wel yenough Mother, of whom I ſpake. For there is no ſmal difference betweene his bewtie, and other mennes, whiche it (as it had benne the Sunne) dimmed, ſo that any wilde, and ſauage Creature whiche coulde not be inamourdd, of comely perſonage, mighte perceiue the ſame. Wherefore youre manifolde wiſedome muſt néedes perceiue it. Therefore déere Mother, ſéeinge you knowe my griefe, it is time for you to

put in practiſe all manner of meanes, all Olde woomens deuiſes, and flatteringes, if you wil haue your ſcholer to liue, for there is none other way to kéepe me aliue but to enioye him. I know the yonge man well, ſaide the oldeA deſcription of Theagenes. wooman: he was broade breſted, and large betwéene the ſhoulders, ſtraight necked & comely, taler then the reſte, and at a woorde to make an ende, he paſſed farre all other menne: his eies were a little fiery, ſo that he looked very louingly, and couragiouſly alſo, it was he whoſe heare was ſmothe commed, and had but a little yonge yellowe bearde: to whom a ſtraunge wooman, marry not fowle, but paſſinge impudent, as might be thought, ranne ſuddainely and caſte her armes about him, & helde him faſte and woulde not goe from him: Doo you not meane this man Miſtreſſe? Yes euen this, Mother anſweared ſhée, and you haue donne very well to bringe to my remembrance that impudent queane, who hath kepte her bewty ſecrete at home, & painted her ſelfe, ſo that ſhée is prowde thereof, yet is ſhée but of the common ſorte, but ſure ſhée is muche more happy then I, that hath gotten ſuch a Louer. The Olde wooman ſmiled at this a litle, and ſaide: Miſtreſſe take a good harte, and be no longer ſorrowfull, the Stranger counteth her bewtiful but for this day, but if I can bringe it to paſſe that he haue the fruition of you and your bewtie, he will chaunge Golde for Braſſe, as the Prouerbe is, and ſette naught by the Harlotte which now maketh ſo muche of her ſelfe. If you doo this my déere Cibele (ꝙ ſhée) you ſhal heale twoo woundes in me at once, Ialouſie and Loue, deliueringe me of the one, and ſatiſfiynge me with the other. Lette me care and thinke vpon this, ſaide ſhée, but it is your parte, to chéere your ſelfe, and take your eaſe nowe, and diſpaire not, before wée beginne, but liue in hope. Shée ſaide thus, and tooke the Candell awaie, and ſhutte the chamber doore. Shée ſcant ſpied the day, but ſhe called one of the Kinges Enuches, & a Mayde with her, to whom ſhée gaue a fewe

ſmall cakes, and other thinges neceſſary to doo Sacrifice, and wente to Iſis Temple. When ſhée came to the doore, and ſaide that ſhée muſte doo Sacrifice for Arſace her Miſtreſſe, who was troubled this nighte with certayne Dreames, and appeaſe the Goddes. One of the Sextens would not lette her in, but ſente her awaie, tellinge her that the Churche was full of ſorrowe: for that Calaſiris the Prieſte, after he came home from his longe iourney, made a ſumptuous feaſte, and endeuoured him ſelfe to be more merry and ioconde then euer he was, and after the feaſte Sacrificed, and made his earneſt prayers to the Goddes, and tolde his Sonnes that they had ſéene their Father till that time, and geuen them charge of twoo yange Greekes that came with him, that they ſhoulde doo what they were hable for them, wente to bedde. Then either for the excéedingneſſe of his ioye, his pores waxed ouer wide, by reaſō that his body with age was infebled, wantinge of a ſuddaine his dewe ſtrength, or by grauntCalaſiris death. of the Goddes of whom he craued this, aboute the Cocke crowinge was founde deade, for his Sonnes watched al that nighte withe him for cauſes he tolde them before. And nowe haue wée ſente for the reſte of this Prieſtely crewe in the Cittie to doo his Deathe Rites accordinge to the Countrie manner. Wherefore you muſte nowe departe, for it is not lawful for any man to enter into the Temple, nor to kil any thinge theſe ſeuen daies, but for thoſe who are Prieſtes. Howe ſhal theſe ſtraungers then paſſe this time (ꝙ Cibele). The newe Priſte Thiamis hathe commaunded a Houſe to be dreſſed for them without the Temple, and you maie 
                     ••
                  e them geue place to this Ordinaunce, by goeinge out of the Temple for this time. Cibele taking this for a good occaſion to gette them a waie, and to make it the beginninge of her pollicie, ſaide: Then good Sexten you may doo the ſtraungers, and vs preſentely a very good turne, but eſpecially Arſace the great Kinges Siſter, for you knowe howe great

fauour ſhée beareth to Greekes, and howe courteouſly ſhée entertaineth ſtraungers. Wherefore tel them by Thiamis Commaundemente that their Lodginge is prepared in our Palaice. The Sexten did ſo, ſuſpectinge nothing leſſe, then that Cibele went aboute, but he thought that he ſhoulde doo the ſtraungers a greate pleaſure, if he by his meanes mighte procure theire Lodginge in the Princes Courte, and doo them, which requeſted the ſame, a good turne, without harme or peril to any. And when he came to Theagenes and Cariclia, who were very ſorrowful, and wepte pitiefully, he ſaide: You doo not as beſéemeth you, nor as the Manners, and Ordinaunces of our Countrie beare, eſpecially ſéeinge you haue had commaundemente that you ſhoulde not mourne. That you be waile the Prieſte, for whoſe departure hence, our Diuinitie bidde the you to be gladde, and reioice, as one, who hathe gained a better eſtate, and quieter reſte. But you deſerue pardon, who haue loſte, as you ſaie, a Father, and a Patrone, and one, in whom was al your comforte: yet ought you not altogeather deſpaire, for Thiamis (as is to be ſéene) hath ſuccéeded him, not onely in the Office of Prieſtehoode, but in good wil towarde you alſo, and hath geuen eſpecial charge for your welfare. Wherfore your Lodginge is prepared in the beſte ſorte, and ſo as maie beſéeme menne of higher eſtate then you, and that of this Countrie alſo, and not ſtraungers, and ſuch, who are nowe at as narrowe pinche, and lowe ebbe as maie be déemed. Therefore folowe this wooman (ſhewinge them Cibele) and make accoumpte of her, as Mother to you bothe, and be contente with her entertainemente.Theagenes and Cariclia, are conueyed into Arſaces houſe, by Cibeles crafty meanes. Thus muche ſaide he: and Theagenes did ſo, either for that he was ouerwhelmed with the ſkorne of thoſe thinges, which happed to him contrary to his hope, or els for that in ſuche cauſe he was contente to take any lodginge in good parte. I thinke he would haue taken héede to him ſelfe, if he had ſuſpected what tragicall, and

intollerable thinges, that lodginge woulde haue procured them, to their great harme. But then the Fortune whiche gouerned their affayres, when it had refreſhed them well a fewe howers, and geuen them leaue to be merry one daie, ſuddainely ioyued thereto heauy and terrible thinges, and brought them into their enimies hande, in manner as if they ſhoulde haue yéelded them ſelues to be bounde. Makinge them pryſoners vnder colour of courteous intertainement, without any knowledge of that whiche ſhoulde happe to them afterwarde. Suche folly and in manner blindneſſe, dothe the wanderinge life caſte before theire eies, who trauell throughThe diſcommodities of a wandringe life. ſtraunge and vnknowen Countries. When they came vnto the Deputies houſe, and wente through the ſumptuous entries, whiche were greater & higher, then might beſéeme any priuate mans eſtate, furniſhed with the Princes garde, and the other Courtly route, the whole Pallaice woondred and was troubled, ſeinge theire preſent Fortune ſo farre to excell. Yet for al that they followed Cibele, who comforted them many waies, and badde them be of good chéere, & promiſed that they ſhould haue excellente good lucke. At length when ſhée had brought them into a parlour wherein dwelt an olde woomen, whiche was farre from the noiſe of the Courte, ſittinge by them alone without more company, ſaide thus, my Children I knowe that you take this griefe and ſorrowe wherein you be nowe, of the deathe of the Prieſte Calaſiris, whom for good cauſe you honoured as your Father. Mary it is requiſite that beſide this you tell me what you be, and of whence, for that you be Grecians I vnderſtande, and it may appeare alſo by that whiche is in you, that you be of good Parentage: for ſo comelyComely 
                        〈…〉
                     . countenaunce and elegant bewty, is a manifeſt token of hie bloude: but I pray you, tell me of what Country in Greece, and Cittie you be, and how you happened to trauell hither, for that I deſire to heare the ſame for your

commoditie, and may certifie my Miſtreſſe Arſace therof alſo, who is Siſter of the greate Kinge, and wife of Oroondates chiefe Deputie, a Louer of Greekes, & al handſomneſſe, and very liberall to ſtraungers, to the intent you may come into her ſight, in ſuche Honorable ſorte as your eſtate ſhal require: You ſhal tel it to a wooman who is not vtterly your enimie: for I my ſelfe am a Grecian borne in Lesbos, ſurnamed of the Cittie wherein I was borne, brought hither Captiue, yet haue I had better Fortune here, then in mine owne Countrie. For I ſerue my Miſtreſſe in all matters, ſo that without me ſhée doth nothinge but breathe, and liue: I am her minde, I am her eares, to be ſhorte, I am all: to bringe her acquainted with good and honeſt menne. Theagenes comparinge that whiche Cibele ſaide, with that whiche Arſace did the daie before, and thinkinge howe wantonly with ſteady eies, continually ſhée behelde him, ſo that her beckes declared ſcante a chaſte minde, whereby he gathered, ſmall good would enſewe, and now beinge ready to ſaie ſomewhat to the Olde wooman, Cariclia ſaide ſoftely to him in his eare, in your talke remember your Siſter I praie. After he perceiued what ſhée meante by that ſhée ſaide to him, he gaue ſuche anſweare. Mother, you know that we be Greekes already: Then knowe this further, that wée be Brother and Siſter, who takinge our viage to ſéeke our Parentes, taken priſoners by Pyrates, haue had woorſe lucke then they, by fallinge into crueller mens handes. Whereafter wée were robbed of all our ritches (which was muche) ſcante wée eſcapinge with our liues, by the good will of God mette with the noble Calaſiris, came with him hither, in minde to paſſe ye reſte of our life here, but now are (as ye ſée) foreſaken of al men, & lefte quite alone, & haue loſte him, who ſéemed, & was in déede a Father to vs, with our other Parentes, & ſuche is our eſtate. As for the courteous, and gentle entertainement whiche wée haue at your hande, wée geue you therfore

very harty thankes, and you ſhal doo vs more pleaſure, if you procure vs a dwellinge alone from other company, deferringe the courteſie whereof you talked. But now that is to acquainte vs with Arſace, and neuer bringe a ſtraunge, banniſhed, and reſtleſſe life into ſo excellente hie Fortune: for you knowe wel yenoughe that friendſhippe, and acquaintaunce ought to be betwéene ſuche asbetweene whō acquaintaunce oughte to be. are of one condition. When he had ſaide thus, Cibele coulde not rule her ſelfe, but gaue manifeſt tokens by the chéerefulneſſe of her countenaunce, that ſhée was very gladde to heare the names of Brother, and Siſter, thinkinge then ſurely that Cariclia ſhould be no impediment to Arſaces diſportes, and ſaide: O bewtiful yonge man, you wil not ſaie thus of Arſace, when you haue tried her faſhions, for ſhée is conformable to al Fortune, and is readier to healpe them, who vnwoorthy to theire eſtate haue had miſhappe. And althoughe ſhée be a Perſian, yet in her nature ſhée imitateth the Greekes, much reioicinge in thoſe, who comme from thence, and is woonderfully delighted with their companye, and manners. Wherefore be you of good chéere, for that you ſhal be adourned with al honoure that maie happen to a man, and youre Siſter ſhalbe of her familiare, and neare acquaintaunce: but I muſte tel her too what be your names. After ſhée had hearde them ſaie, Theagenes and Cariclia, ſhée badde them tarry there a while, and ſhée ranne to Arſace, geuinge charge to the doore kéeper, which alſo was an Olde woman, that ſhée ſhoulde let no man comme in, nor ſuffer the yonge folkes to goe any whither abroade, no ſaid ſhée, not if your Sonne Achamenes comme: for he wente out a litle while after you were gonne to the Churche to dreſſe his eie, whiche yet is ſommewhat ſoare. No (ꝙ ſhée) not if he comme, but locke the doore, and kéeping the Baye with you, ſaie I haue carried it awaie. And ſo it happened. For Cibele was ſcante gonne foorthe, ſo ſoone as that they beinge alone miniſtred to Theagenes and

Cariclia good time to lamente, and remember their olde ill happes, ſo that they both in manner with one minde, yea and almoſte with the ſame woordes bewayled eche other, oft cried ſhée, ô Theagenes: ô Cariclia, oft ſaide he. What Fortune haue wée (ꝙ he)? In what caſe are wée (ſaide ſhee)? And at euery woorde they imbraced ehch other: and when they had wepte a while, then fel they to kiſſinge againe. Laſte of al, when they thoughte vpon Calaſiris, they bewayled him with teares: but eſpectally Cariclia, becauſe by longer ſpace of time ſhée had tried his loue, and good wil towarde her. Wherefore with teares ſhée cried out, ô good Calaſiris: for I am berefte of a delectableCariclias lamē
                     tation, for the death of Calaſiris. name, ſo that I maie not calle him Father, in as muche as God hath euery way cutte from me that name. I know not the Father that begotte me: him, who made me his Childe by Adoption, alas I haue betraied. Moreouer I haue loſte him, who tooke charge of me, and hathe ſaued, and nouriſhed me hitherto, and the crewe of Prieſtes wil not ſuffer me to wéepe ouer his deade Body as is accuſtomably donne in Burialles. But ſure my Nourſe and Sauiour, I wil alſo call thée Father, though God ſaie nay, yet will I as I maie, and where I maye offer to thée of my teares & doo they deathe rightes with my lockes. And therewith ſhée pulled of a great handful of her heare, but Theagenes appeaſed her, and helde her handes ſoftely, yet ſhée lamented neuertheleſſe, ſayinge: To what ende ſhal wée liue any longer? after what hope ſhal wée looke? He that conducted vs through ſtraunge Landes, was the ſtaie of our errour, and our guide into our Countrie, the knowledge of our Parentes, our comforte in aduerſities, the eaſe of our ill Fortune, the Ancore of al our affaires, Calaſiris is dead, and hath lefte vs twoo, a miſerable payre in a ſtraunge Lande, not knowinge what is beſte to doo. Hereafter euery Iorney by Lande, euery viage by water through ignorance is cutte of: a graue and courteous, an olde & wiſe heade, in déede

and is gonne, who neuer made ende to doo for vs. As ſhée in this, or ſuche like ſorte lamented, and Theagenes concealed his own griefe, the rather thereby to cauſe Cariclias ſorrowe to abate, came Achemenes, and findinge the Gate locked, aſked of the Porter what adoo is here? And when he knewe it was his Mothers déede, he came neare the doores, and conſideringe of the cauſe therof in his minde, he hearde Cariclia lamente: and bowinge down him ſelfe, looked in by certaine riftes in the iointes of the doore, & ſawe al that was donne. And then he aſked her that kepte the doore againe, who were within? Shée anſweared, that ſhée knewe of no more but that there were twoo ſtraungers, belike a man, and a mayde which his Mother broughte in a while agoe. Then he knéeled downe againe, to ſée if he mighte more perfitely knowe them. Of Cariclia he was neuer the neare, yet he marueiled at her excellente bewtie, and conſidered what a manner a one ſhée would be, if ſhée were not in ſuche ſorrowe,Achemenes, Sonne of Cibele, falleth in Loue with Cariclia. and heauineſſe, and with this woonderinge he priuely fel in loue with her: but he thought he ſhould know Theagenes, if he coulde calle him to minde. While Achemenes was thinkinge hereupon, Cibele returned after ſhée had tolde al howe ſhée had handled her ſelfe about the yonge folkes, and called her oft vnhappy for her good Fortune, who had brought ſo much to paſſe by chaūce, as by ſixe hundred deuiſes, one would ſcante haue thought, coulde be donne, that nowe ſhée mighte haue her Louer in the Houſe with her. And when ſhée had with many ſuche woordes ſette Arſace on fire, ſhée coulde ſcante rule her, ſhée was in ſuche haſte to ſée him: yet ſhée cauſed her to be contente, for that ſhée woulde not haue him ſée her while her eies were ſwolne for lacke of ſléepe, but a daye after, when ſhée had recouered her olde bewtie againe. Thus, when ſhée had made her merry, and ful of hope that ſhée ſhould haue her hartes deſire, and had taken order with her what was beſte to doo, and howe ſhée ſhould

entertaine the ſtraūgers. As ſoone as ſhée came downe, ſhée ſaide to her Sonne, why be you ſo inquiſitiue: tel me what ſtraungers be thoſe within, and of what Countrie? It is not for you to know (ſaide Cibele): but conceale that whiche you knowe, and tel it to no man, neither be much emonge the ſtraungers, for ſo hathe our Miſtreſſe geuen charge. So he departed as his Mother badde him, and déemed that Theagenes was kept to ſerue Arſaces turne by nighte. And as he wente, he ſaide thus to him ſelfe: Is not this he, whom Mytranes Captaine of the Watch, deliuered to me, to be carried to Oroondates, and from him to be ſente to the greate Kinge, that the people of Beſſa tooke from me, at what time I was in daunger of my life, ſo that I almoſt alone of al that carried him, eſcaped with my life? or doo mine eies beguile me. But I am wel yenoughe nowe, and ſée as I was woonte to doo. Moreouer I heare that Thiamis is comme a daie, or twoo agoe, and in a Combat with his Brother, recouered the Prieſtes Office againe. It is he, but I maie not ſaie ſo muche nowe, but wil marke howe our Miſtreſſe is affected towarde theſe geaſtes. Thus he talked with him ſelfe: and Cibele wente in to them, and perceiued well what they had done, by reaſō that their eies were yet ful of water, for al that they went aboute, when they heard the doore open, to trimme them ſelues, and counterfeited theire woonted guiſe. Wherfore ſhée cried out, and ſaide: My déere Children, why wéepe you out of ſeaſon, when ye ſhoulde reioice, and thanke your good Fortune, for that Arſace thinketh to doo al the good to you ſhée can deuiſe, and is contente, that to morrowe you ſhal comme into her preſence, and in the meane time ſhe weth you al manner of courteſie, and gentleneſſe. Wherefore you muſte leaue of theſe fooliſhe, and Childiſhe teares, and looke vp, and decke your ſelues, and in euery pointe doo as Arſace woulde haue you. The remembraunce of Calaſiris Deathe (ꝙ Theagenes) cauſed vs to wéepe, who haue

loſte the fatherly affection whiche was in him towarde vs. Theſe be toies (ꝙ the Olde wooman) Calaſiris, and what ſo euer fained Father els, who hath geuen place to the common Lawe of nature, and age: by one wooman ſhalt thou haue Rule, Ritches, Daliaunce, & the fruites of a floriſhinge youthe, at a woorde thinke it to be your Fortune, and woorſhip Arſace. Onely be ruled by me, how you ſhal come into her preſence, ſeinge ſhée hath geuen ſuche commaundement, and howe you muſt vſe her, if ſhée bidde you doo ought: for her ſtomacke is greate (as you knowe) hie and Princely, augmented by youthfull age, and excellent bewty, whiche wil not haue a naye, if it make any requeſt. Theagenes ſtaied hereat, & thought within himſelfe, that in this talke was contained ſomewhat that was very beaſtely, and not to be admitted. Within a while after came certaine Eunuches, whicheTheagenes and Cariclia, were ſerued very cortuouſly at the firſte, but their ſweete meate had ſower ſauce in the ende. Theagenes is ſente for to Arſace. brought in plate of Golde, meate from the Princes Table, whiche paſſed al manner of coſte and ſumptuouſnes, and when they had ſaide, that their Lady had ſente them this firſt intertainement for Honours ſake, and ſette it on the Table, they departed. They, leaſt they ſhoulde not doo their dutie, taſted a little of that which was ſette before them, and this was donne at night, & ordinarily euery daie after. The nexte daie aboute one a clocke, the ſame Eunuches came to Theagenes, and ſaide: Right happy man, our Miſtreſſe hath ſente for you, and wée are commaunded to bringe you to her preſence: Wherefore goe and enioye that happineſſe, which ſhée voutchſaueth to very fewe, and at ſeldome times. He ſtaied a while, but at length as if he had bene violently drawen, he roſe againſt his wil, and ſaide vnto them: is her commaundemente that you bringe me alone, or that this my Siſter ſhal goe with me alſo? You muſt goe alone, ſaide they, & ſhée ſhall goe alone alſo another time: Mary nowe there are certaine noble men of Perſia with her, and it is a cuſtome to talke with men by them ſelues, & with woomen

alone at another time. Then Theagenes ſtouped downe, and ſaide ſoftely to Cariclia, ſure this is neither honeſt dealinge, nor without great ſuſpition. Shée anſweared him, that there was no gaineſayinge, but that he muſte goe and make ſuche countenaunce, as if he woulde doo all her will: This donne he followed them, and when they taught him howe he ſhould ſpeake to her, and that it was the cuſtome that ſuch as went in to her, ſhould fal downe and woorſhippe her, he gaue them no anſweare. When he came in and ſawe her ſittinge in her Chaire of Eſtate, clothed in Purple and clothe of Golde, glorious with iolly Iewelles, and her coſtly Bonnet, finely attired and decked, with her Garde aboute her, and the chiefe Magiſtrates of the Perſians by her, he was not abaſhed a whit but rather the more incouraged againſt the Perſian brauerie, as though he had quite forgotten that, whereof he talked with Cariclia as touchinge Reuerence, and woorſhippinge, ſo that he neither bowed knée, nor fell downe to her, but holdinge vp bis heade alofte, ſaide: Arſace of Royall bloude, God ſaue thée: whereat when thoſe who were preſente, were offended, and grudged againſt him as one raſhe and ouerbolde, in that he had not woorſhipped her, Arſace ſmiled a little, and anſweared for him thus: pardon him as one ignorant of our cuſtomes, and a ſtraunger borne in Greece, who by reaſon of the ſoyle deſpiſeth our pompe: and therewithall ſhée put of her Bonnette, ſore againſte their willes that ſtoode by, for ſo doo the Perſians, to render Salute to thoſe who firſte ſaluted them. And when ſhée had bidden him to be of good chéere, by an interpreter (for although ſhée vnderſtoode, yet could ſhée not ſpeake the Greeke tongue) and willed him to ſpeake if he wanted any thinge, and he ſhoulde haue it. Shée ſent him backe againe, commaundinge her Eunuches, and Garde to wayte vpon him: there Achemenes ſeing him againe, called him better to his remembraunce, for al that he iudged the cauſe of the ouer greate

Honour he had, yet he ſaide nothinge, but determined to doo that whiche firſte he intended. Arſace made a ſumptuous Banquette to the Magiſtrates of Perſia, vnder colour to Honour them as ſhée was wonte to doo, but in déede for ioie that ſhée had talked with Theagenes. To whome ſhée ſente not onely parte of her meate as ſhée was wonte to doo, but Carpettes & Coueringes of ſundry colours, wrought in Sidon and Lydia: ſhée ſente alſo to waite vpon them a boye for him, and a Mayde for Cariclia, whiche were borne in Ionia, and aboute foureteine yéeres of age. Shée deſired Cibele hartely to make haſte and out of hande to doo what ſhée entended, becauſe ſhée coulde tarry no longer, who before lefte no waie vnſearched, but tried Theagenes minde by all manner of meanes: Marry ſhée did not tell him Arſaces minde plainely, but by diuerſe biewaies and circumſtaunces ſhée meante to make him vnderſtande the ſame, by tellinge him her Miſtreſſe good will to him, not onely commendinge her ſhape and bewty that all menne ſawe, but ſhée tolde him alſo of that whiche was vnder her Apparell, by certaine reaſonable occaſiōs, then praiſed ſhée her manners, for that thei were amiable, and nothing coye, & that ſhée had greate delighte in fine, and hable yonge menne. The drifte of al her talke was to perceiue if he had any pleaſure in Venus diſportes. Theagenes commended her good will that ſhée bare to the Greekes, and her friendely faſhion, and els what ſo euer ſhée talked of, and further for the ſame gaue her hartie thankes: but he paſſed ouer that which conteined any diſhoneſt thing, as thoughe he vnderſtoode it not at the firſte. Wherefore the Olde wooman was ſoare grieued, and nipped at the harte, for that ſhée thoughte he vnderſtoode what ſhée meante, but vtterly deſpiſed, and ſette at naughte al that ſhée did: ſhée knewe moreouer that Arſace woulde abide no longer, but beganne euen now to be angry, and tell her plainely ſhée coulde not rule her ſelfe: wherefore

ſhée craued of her the perfourmonce of her promiſe, which Cibele had deferred by diuers delaies: ſommetime ſaieinge that thoughe the yonge man woulde, yet he was afraide: ſommetime that one, or other miſchaunce fell in the waie: and nowe, becauſe fiue, or ſixe daies were paſt, and Arſace had called for Cariclia ones or twiſe, and vſed her honourably to doo Theagenes a pleaſure, ſhée was forced to ſpeake more plainely to Theagenes, and tel him of her loue without circumſtances, with promiſe that he ſhoulde haue ſixe hundred good turnes, if he woulde conſente: addinge moreouer, for ſhame what lingringeAfter Cibele had by many circumſtances vttered the Loue that Arſace bare towarde Theagenes, and he woulde not vnderſtande the ſame ſhee was forced plainely to tell the ſame with a ſhameleſſe Oration, wherein ſhe declareth the properties of ſuche like Laſciuious woomē paſsinge finely. is this? Or what may be ſo farre from Venus delightes, as ſo faire a yonge man, and of good age to refuſe to lye with a wooman like him ſelfe, that dieth for his loue, and doothe not rather coumpte it a vauntage to haue to doo with her, eſpecially for that he néede to feare nothinge, and becauſe her Huſbande is out of the waie, and I, who broughte her vp, prouide the ſame for him, and kéepe all her counſelles, be they neuer ſo ſecrete, and to you, for that you haue neither Spouſe, nor Wife to lette you, whiche alſo many menne that haue ben in theire wittes haue contemned, for that they knewe they ſhoulde doo no harme at home, and ſhoulde doo them ſelues good by gayninge greate Ritches, and coumptinge the fruite of this pleaſure alſo a good rewade. At lengthe ſhée interlaced certaine threates in her ta
                     •
                  ke, ſaieinge: Gentlewoomen, and ſuche as longe for men, wil not be appeaſed, but conceiue greate diſpleaſure when they are cruelly deceiued, and wil pouniſhe the ſtubborne, as if they had donne thē greate wronge, and that not without cauſe. Moreouer, conſider of her that ſhée is a Perſian borne, and of the Bloude Royall, as you confeſſed, and of greate power, and authoritie, ſo that ſhée maie prefer to honour, whom ſhée will, and pouniſhe ſuche as withſtande her pleaſure without controlment. As for you, you are a ſtraunger, alone without any to healpe you. Wherefore partely

ſpare your ſelfe, partely fauour her: Surely ſhée is woorthy that you ſhoulde haue regarde to her, who is ſo furiouſly inflamed with your Loue, which ſhee of right ought to reioice at, & ſtande in doubt of the wrathe whiche procéedeth of Loue, and beware of the reuenge whiche followeth like contempt. I haue knowen many who haue repented afterwarde ſuche a ſtomake as this. I haue greater experience in theſe Venerious affaires then you: This white head that you ſée, hath benne at many ſuche Banquettes, but I neuer knew any ſo violent, and vncureable as you. At laſte ſhée ſpake to Cariclia (for ſhée was neceſſarily compelled to ſaie this in her preſence) my Daughter perſwade this thy Brother alſo, whom I know not how to terme. This wilbe for your auaile too, you ſhall not be loued the weight of a heare the leſſe of her therefore, you ſhal haue Ritches yenough, & ſhée will prouide to marry you wealthely, whiche thinges are to be wiſhed for of thoſe, who be in happy eſtate, and not of ſtraungers, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   as preſently are in great pouertie. Cariclia looked vpon her frowningly, and with burninge eies, ſaide: It were to be wiſhed alſo, and were very wel too for euery bodie, that good Arſace had no ſuche infirmitie, but if ſhée haue, to vſe it diſcretely. But ſéeinge that ſuche a humaine chaunce hathe happened vnto her, and ſhée is ouercommed as you ſaie, I woulde counſel Theagenes my ſelfe, not to refuſe the facte, if he maie doo it without daunger, leaſt that his déede through folly may bréede him harme, and her no good, if this come to lighte, and the Deputie happe to know of ſo ſhameful a thinge. Cibele leapte for ioye when ſhee hearde this, and imbracinge & kiſſinge Cariclia, ſaide: My Daughter, thou doeſt very well, that thou haſte pittie vpon a wooman like thy ſelfe, and ſéekeſt for the ſafety of thy Brother: but thou needeſt not doubt hereof, for that the Sunne (as the Prouerbe is) ſhal not know thereof. Lette me alone for this time, ſayde Theagenes, and geue me leaue to conſider

hereupon: and herewith Cibele wente out, and as ſoone as ſhée was gonne Cariclia ſaide thus: Theagenes God geueth vs ſuche ſucceſſe wherein is more aduerſitie harbored, then our outwarde felicitie can conteruaile: which thinge ſeinge it is ſo, it is the pointe of wiſe menne to turne their il happes as muche as they maie, to better, whether therfore you be in minde to doo this déede or not I cannot tell: Although I would not be greatly againſt it, if there were no other waie to preſerue vs, but if you doo déeme that a filthy acte (as honeſty and duety would you ſhould) whiche is requeſted of you, faine your ſelfe to be contented, and with fayre woordes féeding the barbarous woomans deſire, cutte of the ſame with delayes, and lette her liue in hope, leaſte in her rage ſhée put ſome cruell deuiſe in practiſe againſte vs. For it is like by the grace of God, that ſpace of time may prouide ſome remedyIalouſie▪ a naturall diſeaſe to woomen, troubleth Cariclia a little. for this: but in any wiſe Theagenes, beware that you fall not out of your conſideration into the filthineſſe of the facte. Theagenes ſmiled hereat a little, and ſaide: I perceiue you are not without Ialouſie, woomens natural diſeaſe, no not in aduerſitie, but be ſure I cannot faine any ſuche thinge: for to ſaie and doo vnhoneſt thinges, are bothe almoſte alike diſhoneſt. And that Arſace may be out of hope to obtaine, bringeth an other commoditie with it, that ſhée wil ceaſe to trouble vs any more. If I muſt ſuffer any thinge, as well Fortune, as alſo the conſtant opinion of my minde, haue inured me ere now many times to take what ſo euer ſhal happen. Then thinke, ꝙ Cariclia, that ſo you ſhall bringe vs into greate miſchiefe, and therewith ſhée helde her tongue. While they conſidered of theſe matters, Cibele wente to Arſace, and incouraged her to looke for better ſucceſſe, and that Theagenes was contente, whiche donne, ſhée came into the parlour alone, and ſaide nothinge that night, but exhorted Cariclia diuerſe waies, whom at the firſte ſhée made her beddefellowe to healpe her in this caſe, and in the

morninge ſhée aſked Theagenes what he meante to doo? He gaue her a plaine deniall, & willed her neuer to looke for any ſuche thing at his hande. With which anſweare ſhée wente heau
                     ••
                  y to Arſace, where ſhée made reporte of Theagenes ſtouteneſſe. Arſace commaunded to breake his necke, and wente into her Chamber, and vexed her ſelfe cruelly on her Bedde. The Olde wooman Cibele was no ſooner in the Parlour, but her Sonne Achemenes ſéeinge her ſadde, and wéepinge, aſked her: Mother, what miſhap is befallen? Are there any il newes come? Are there any il tidinges comme from the Campe? Haue our enimies in this warre the vpper hande of our Lorde Oroondates? And many ſuche queſtions he moued. Tuſhe (ꝙ ſhée) thy pratinge is to no effecte. This ſaide, ſhée made haſte to be gonne, but he woulde not let her alone, but wente after her, and takinge her by the hande, beſoughte her, that ſhée woulde tel her Sonne the cauſe of her griefe. Then ſhée tooke him by the hande, and leadde him aſide into a parte of the Orchyarde, & ſaide: I woulde neuer haue declared mine owne, & my Miſtreſſe harmes to any other man. But ſéeinge ſhée is in perill, and I in daunger of my life (for I knowe, that Arſaces maddeneſſe wil fall in my necke): I am conſtrained to tel you, if happily you can helpe her any thinge, who conceiued, and bare you into the worlde, and nouriſhed you with theſe Breaſtes. Our Miſtreſſe doth loue the yonge man which is in our Houſe, not with tollerable, or vſual Loue, but ſo that ſhée is almoſte madde therewith: about whom, ſhée, & I hopinge to ſpéede wel as wée would, loſte our labour: hence came al courteſies, & manifold good wil toward ye ſtraūgers. But now ſéeing the yonge man like a foole, and cruel felowe whiche wil not be ruled, hathe refuſed to doo as wée woulde haue him. I thinke ſhée wil not liue, and I looke to be ſlaine, and in this caſe are wée nowe. If then thou cauſte helpe me any thinge, doo it: if not, yet when thy Mother is deade, ſée that her Deathe

Kites be duely finiſhed. What rewarde ſhal I haue Mother (ſaide he) for I haue no leaſure to boaſte my ſelfe, or with longe circumſtances to promiſe you any helpe, ſéeinge you be in ſuche, and ſo deſperate a caſe. Looke for what ſo euer you wil, for ſhée hathe made you her chiefe Cuppe bearer for my ſake already, and if thou haue any higher Office in thy heade, tel me. As for the Ritches that thou ſhal haue in recompence, if thou ſaue her, vnhappy Creature, of them ſhalbe no number. Mother, (ꝙ he) I perceiued as muche a good while agoe, but I ſaide nothinge, and looked euer what would comme of it. But I care for no honour, nor regarde any Ritches, but if ſhée wil geue me the Mayde whiche is called Theagenes Siſter to wife, ſhée ſhal haue her hartes deſire. For Mother, I loue that Mayde without meaſure. Wherefore ſeinge our Miſtreſſe knoweth by her owne caſe, what kinde and how great a griefe loue is, ſhée hath good cauſe to healpe him who is ſicke of that diſeaſe alſo, ſeinge furtherLoue is a miſchieuous thing. he promiſeth her ſo good lucke. Haue no doubt, ſaide Cibele for our Miſtreſſe wil requite you without delaie, when you ſhal haue donne thus muche for her, and ſaued her in ſuche diſtreſſe: Beſide perhappes wée maie perſwade the Mayde our ſelues, to doo this without troublinge her, but tell me howe you will healpe her. I will not tel you (ſaide he) before I haue a promiſe confirmed by the Othe of our Lady: as for you til then ſaie nothing to the Maide, leaſt you marre our markette againſt your will. For I ſée well that ſhée hath a lofty ſtomacke alſo. Shée promiſed that he ſhould haue his deſire, & therewith ſhée wente into the chamber to Arſace, and fallinge vpon her knées, badde her be of good chéere, for by the grace of God all ſhalbe well, onely ſende for my Sonne Achemenes to come to you. Lette him be called (ꝙ Arſace) if you meane not to deceiue me againe. Achemenes
                  Arſace ſweareth to geue Cariclia in Mariage to Achemenes, in recōpence wherof he proueth Theagenes to be her bondeman. came in, and when Cibele had tolde her al the mater, Arſace ſware by expreſſe woordes, that he ſhoulde haue

his deſtre, as touching the Marriage of Theagenes ſiſter. Then ſaide Achemenes, lette Theagenes hencefoorthe be quiet, becauſe for al that he is your bonde man, yet he behaueth him ſelfe ſo ſtubbernly againſte his Miſtreſſe. How ſaie you this, ſaide Arſace? Then Achemenes tolde her all, that Theagenes was taken priſoner by order of Warre, that Mytranes ſente him to Oroondates, from him to be conueyed to the greate Kinge, that he him ſelfe as he carried him, by meanes of the comminge of the inhabitantes of Beſſa, and Thiamis loſte him, that he hardly eſcaped with his life: laſtly beſide all this he ſhewed Mytranes owne letters to Arſace readily: and if there were néede of any more proufe, he woulde haue Thiamis for a witneſſe. Arſace came ſomewhat to her ſelfe when ſhée hearde this, and made no delaie but came out of her Chamber, and ſittinge in the ſeate where ſhée was woont to heare and giue Iudgemente vpon matters, ſhée commaunded Theagenes to be brought before her. As ſoone as he came, ſhée aſked him if he knew Achemenes whiche ſtoode by him. He ſaide yea. Were you not once his pryſoner, ꝙ ſhée? Theagenes confeſſed that he was. Then are you our bonde man, ſaide ſhée, wherefore you ſhall doo as becommeth a lowly ſeruaunt, and be ruled by my will whither you will or no. As for your Siſter I haue betrothed her to Achemenes, who is chiefe about vs, as wel for his Mothers ſake, as alſo for his owne good will and behauiour towarde vs, ſo longe delayinge the Mariage, vntil we maie gette ſuch thinges, as are néedeful againſt that daie to make a ſumptuous feaſte. Theagenes was hitte with theſe woordes, as with a grieuous wounde, yet he woulde not contrary her, but woulde auoide her force, as a man would ſhunne the violent aſſault of ſome wilde Beaſte, and ſaide: Lady, the Goddes be thanked, for that in as muche as wée are wel borne, in our aduerſitie it is our good happe to be bounde to none but you, who haue ſhewed vnto vs Strangers and Aliens borne,

ſo greate humanitie and good wil. But my Siſter for all that ſhée is not pryſoner nor bonde, yet ſhal ſhee be ready to doo you ſeruice as ſhall pleaſe you, wherefore tell vs what you will haue her to doo with reaſon. Lette her (ꝙ Arſace) be one of our waiters at our Table, and learne to ſerue our Cuppes of Achemenes, that ſhée may be inured before to ſerue at the Princes Table. This donne they wente out, Theagenes was very heauie, and deuiſed of that whiche he had to doo, but Achemenes laughed, and ſcorned him with ſuche like woordes. Loe you who were but lately ſo prowde and loftye, and bare your heade ſo highe, that you ſéemed to be frée alone, and thoughte ſcorne to ſubmit your ſelfe and woorſhippe Arſace, what kinde of felowe are you nowe: ſurely if you ſtoupe not now, you ſhal be taught with Fiſtes to know your duetie. Arſace, when ſhée had ſente al other from her, ſaide to Cibele: Nowe Cibele he hathe no moe excuſes, wherefore tel this prowde felowe, that if he wil be ruled by vs, and doo our wil, he ſhal be made fée, and haue plentie of al thinges: but if wil be ſtil in contrary minde, and deſpiſe his Louer, he ſhal vnderſtande that his Miſtreſſe is angry, and be made the vileſt ſlaue of al other, and be tormented with all manner of pouniſhementes. Cibele came and tolde Arſaces Commaundemente, and added of her owne, what ſhée thought was auaileable to perſwade him. Theagenes deſired her to ſtaie a while, and tooke Cariclia alone, and ſaide thus: Nowe are wée quite vndonne, Cariclia, euery Cable (as is the Prouerbe) is broken, euery Ancore of hope is loſte, nowe are wée no longer with frée names in miſerie, but are bonde againe: (and therewith he tolde her howe) nowe are wée ſubiectes to the reprochful ſcoffes, and tormētes of the Barbariens, ſo that either wée muſte doo as they wil haue vs, in whoſe handes wée are, or els ſhal wée be numbred emonge the condemned perſonnes: yet this were tollerable, if Arſace had not promiſed (whiche is the moſte grieuous

thinge of al) to marry you to Achemenes, Cibeles Sonne. And it is plaine, that either that ſhall not be donne at all, or I wil not ſée it donne, ſo longe as life wil geue me leaue, with Swoorde, and Armour to withſtand the ſame. But what ſhall wée doo? Or what waie ſhall wée deuiſe to breake of my abominable facte with Arſace, and youre ſhameful marriage with Achemenes? You maie (ꝙ Cariclia) in approuinge the one, diſanull the other whiche toucheth me. Be contente (ꝙ he). God defende that the anger of any Heauenly minde ſhoulde be ſo vehemente againſte vs, that I, who had neuer to doo with Cariclia, ſhould inceſteouſly meddle with an other.Neceſsitie deuiſ
                        •
                     th many ſhiftes. But I thinke I haue founde a good remedie preſently: ſurely neceſſarye is a Deuiſoure of al manner of ſhiftes. And therewithal he wente aſide to Cibele, and ſaide: Tel your Miſtreſſe that I woulde ſpeake with her alone, ſo that no man mighte heare. The Olde wooman thinking this to be that they looked for, and that Theagenes would nowe doo what they woulde haue him, wente haſtely to Arſace, and receiued Comnaundemente to bringe him after Supper, whiche ſhée did. For after ſhée had charged thoſe, who were neare at hande to be ſtil, and let her Miſtreſſe take her caſe, without ſturringe aboute the Chamber. Shée conueied in Theagenes priuily, for euery place was very darke, ſo that one mighte woorke ſecretely yenough, and there was no lighte but a Candle in her Chamber. When ſhée had thus donne, ſhée would haue ſhrunke away, but Theagenes ſtaied her, and ſaide? Miſtres, for this time let Cibele be here, for I know that ſhée is very truſty to kéepe Councel. And then he tookeTheagenes his talke with Arſace, whereby is the Mariage of Cariclia and Achemenes broken o
                        •
                     . 
                  Arſace by the hande, and ſpake thus: Miſtres, I prolonged not the dooinge of that you commaunded me becauſe I woulde anger you, but that I mighte prouide ſecuritie for my facte. And nowe ſéeinge that Fortune by very good lucke hathe made me your ſeruaunte, I am the more readyer to doo your wil in al pointes. But firſte I muſt

pray you to graunt me one thinge, in ſtéede of the great, and manifolde benefites that you haue promiſed me: Breake of the marriage of Cariclia and Achemenes. ForIt is not meete that a wooman of good parentage, ſhoulde be Married to a bonde ſlaue. (that I ſaie no more) it is no reaſon that a wooman of very highe Parentage ſhoulde be matched with a vile, and bonde ſlaue: els I ſweare to you by the Sunne, the faireſt of al the Goddes, & by al the reſt of the Goddes alſo, that I wil neuer doo what you woulde haue me, and before Cariclia ſuſtaine any violence, you ſhal ſée me ſlay my ſelfe. Arſace anſweared him, thinke not, but that I will doo what I maie to pleaſure you, as one who is ready to deliuer her ſelfe into your handes. But I haue promiſed by Othe to marrye youre Siſter to Achemenes. It is wel then (ꝙ he). Marrye my Siſter if you liſte: but her, whom I loue, and is my Spouſe, yea and my wife, I knowe you wil not marry: neither if you woulde, maye you. What meane you by this (ſaide ſhée). I meame the trothe (anſweared he), for Cariclia is not my Siſter, but my Spouſe. A manifeſt token whereof, you ſhal haue when you pleaſe, if you liſte to make a Bridal for vs. This nipte her, when ſhée hearde that Cariclia was his wife, ſo that ſhée fel into a greate ialouſie: yet for al that ſhée ſaid, you ſhal haue your deſire, & wée wil appeaſe Achemenes with an other wife. And I wil perfourme my promiſe (ſaid Theagenes) when this is vndonne. And thē he bent him ſelf downe to kiſſe her hande, but in ſtéede of her hande, ſhée kiſſed him with her mouthe. And ſo Theagenes wente out with a kiſſe of hers: but he kiſſed her not againe. And as ſoone as he gotte leaſure, he tolde Cariclia all, who hearde ſommewhat that made her ialous alſo. He added moreouer the ſtraunge ende that his promiſe tended vnto, and howe by that thinge alone he had wroughte many feates. Achemenes Weddinge was defeated, and a delaie was founde for Arſaces luſte. But that whiche was the chiefe of all, was that Achemenes woulde ſette all on a broyle, beinge offended, as

wel for that he was beguiled of that he hoped for, as alſo becauſe he ſawe me in better fauoure with Arſace, then him ſelfe: for he ſhal knowe of all this by his Mother, in as muche as I foreſawe that ſhée ſhould be there to heare that I ſaide, bothe becauſe I woulde haue her tel Achemenes this, and haue her a Witneſſe alſo of the familiarity wihiche in onely woordes paſſed betwéene vs: for although it were yenough before God to haue a cleare conſcience,An excellente ſentence. yet it is honeſty for a man to leade his life ſo, (whiche laſteth here but a litle while) that men may haue ſuche opinion too. He tolde her moreouer, that it was to be thoughte Achemenes woulde be reuenged of Arſace, beinge a ſlaue borne (for it is almoſte ſéene euery where, that that whiche is vnder Obedience, is contrarye to that which hath Authoritie ouer it) and wronged beſide, and beguiled of an Othe, ſéeinge other better eſtéemed then him ſelfe, whoſe minde is guiltie of al miſchiefe, and ill behaueour, and néedeeth to be taughte to woorke no manner of Knauery, as many menne beinge angry haue attempted the like, and ſéeinge he hathe a iuſte quaurell whereupon to ſéeke reuenge. The nexte daie after he had tolde Cariclia theſe thinges, and exhorted her yet to haue a litle hope, he was leadde of Achemenes to waite at her Table, for ſo Arſace commaunded him to doo. For that pourpoſe ſhée ſent him coſtly Apparell, a Chaine and Bracelettes of Golde, and other ritche Iewelles: parte whereof willingely, parte againſte his will he putte on. And when Achemenes beganne to teache him howe he ſhoulde ſerue her the Cuppe, he ranne to a Table by, whereon ſtoode muche Plate, and takinge a Pretious Glaſſe in his hande, ſaide: I néede not to be taughte, but I wil of mine owne heade ſerue my Miſtres, withoutTheagenes geueth Achemenes a cruell nippe. ſuche curioſitie in theſe ſo eaſie matters. As for you, Fortunes fauour cauſed you to knowe ſuche thinges, but nature, and time can teache me what I haue to doo. And then he powred in Wine ſoftly, and holdinge the

Glaſſe finely with the tippes of his fingers, goeinge with a ſéemely, and fitte paſe, deliuered it to Arſace: and this draught ſette her more on fire then ſhée was before, becauſe ſhee drinkinge, and lookinge vpon Theagenes at one time, ſupped more of his Loue, then of the Wine, neither did ſhée drinke that quite of, that was filled, but in greate ſleighte, in a manner ſhée drunke to Theagenes, and leafte him a litle. On the other ſide Achemenes was offended too, & moued, as wel with Anger, as Emulation, ſo that Arſace perceiued it, for that he ſo ſcornefully looked vpon him, and whiſpered ſommewhat to thoſe whiche ſtoode by. When Dinner was donne, Theagenes ſaide: Miſtres, I praie you graunte me this my firſte requeſte, let none but me weare this Towel in ſeruinge at your Table. Arſace was contente. And when he wente out as he was woonte to doo, Achemenes wente out with him too, and taunted him ſoare for his too muche diligence, and tolde him that ſuche raſheneſſe was very childiſhe, and that their Miſtres at the firſte winked at this facte becauſe he was a ſtraunger, & knew no faſhion: But if you continewe and be ſo ſtubberne ſtill, (ſaide he) you ſhal not pleaſe her longe: And that he counſelled him as a friende, and one that ſhoulde be his Kinſman ſhortly, and muche more like this he ſaide: but he paſſed by him as though he hearde him not, but looked ſtill downe to the grounde, vntill Cibele came by chance, and wente to haue her Miſtreſſe to ſléepe in the after noone. And ſeinge her Sonne ſadde aſked what he ayled, he anſweared this Straunge yonker, is honoured aboue me, bothe yeſterdaie, and to daie, who for a ſhewe of fineſſe is commaunded now alone, to be her Cupbearer: and biddinge vs who are her chiefe Seruitours farewel, he raught her the Glaſſe, and ſtoode nexte the Princes body, ſo that our Honour, whiche is but an Honour by name, is vtterly deſpiſed. And that were not ſo ill, that he ſhoulde be more honoured and better preferred, and be more

priuie then wée, who by too péeuiſhe reaſon doo kéepe his Counſell, and healpe him therein, but this ought by no meanes to be ſuffered, that he ſhoulde vſe vs, who are Seruitours, and his companions in the waie of honeſty in ſuch ſorte, without checke or taunte: but wée wil finde an other time to talke of theſe matters. Now Mother I would faine ſée my wife Cariclia, if by lookinge vpon her I maie ſomewhat abate this griefe of my minde. What wife Sonne, ſaide Cibele? You ſéeme to chafe at trifles and knowe not the greateſt matters. Now ſhalte thou not marry Cariclia. What ſaie you Mother (ꝙ he) am I not woorthy to Marry her, who is my fellowe Seruant? Why ſo I pray you? For our too good will and vnlawful ſeruice towarde Arſace, anſweared ſhée. For although we ſette more by her, then our owne eaſe, and preferred her deſire before our owne liues, in doinge all that wée coulde to pleaſure her. Yet as ſoone as this gentle and goodly Louer of hers, came into her chamber, the ſight of him did ſo muche perſwade her, that it made her breake the Othe ſhée ſware, and cauſed her to aſſure Cariclia to him, tellinge her that ſhée was not his Siſter, but his ſpouſe. Did ſhée then promiſe him this Mother (ꝙ he)? Yea Sonne, anſweared Cibele, ſhée promiſed him this, while I was by and hearde it, and meaneth within theſe fewe daies to make their weddinge in ſumptuous ſorte, and wil marry thée to ſome other. Achemenes was very ſorrowful for theſe tidinges, & wringinge his handes, he ſaide thus: I wil make this a ſorrowful weddinge to them all. Onely healpe me to prolonge the ſame for a while, and if any man aſke for me, ſaie I am ſore ſicke in the Countrie. And dothe this Gentleman cal his Siſter his wife? as though it might not be vnderſtoode, that he doothe it for none other pourpoſe, but to diſanull that whiche was graunted me by promiſe, as though it were not his Siſter but his wife, if he imbrace, colle, and kiſſe her as now he doothe, yea although he lie with her, I and

the Goddes whoſe Religion is violated by breakinge of an Othe, wil ſée to this wel yenough. This ſaide, anger and Ialouſie, Loue and fruſtration of that he looked for, ſette him on ſuche fire (al whiche thinges were ſufficientVVhat anger Ialouſie, Loue, &c. woulde make a mā doo. to trouble an other man, though no barbarous fellowe) that without waying reaſonably what he meante to doo, but likinge his deuiſe at the firſt, he leapte vpon a Horſe of Armenia, whiche the Deputie kepte for Royalties and braue ſightes, as ſoone as he could conueniently get him, and wente to Oroondates, who then was muſtringe his Army againſt the Ethiopian, and makinge al manner of prouiſion, as wel of menne and weapons, as alſo other thinges neceſſary for the Warre.
               Here endeth the Seuenth Booke.
               
            
            
               The Eight Booke.
               
                  FOr the Kinge of Ethiopia, when he had beguiled Oroondates, and obtayned halfe of that, they contended for, and wanne the Cittie Philae, whiche alwaies is eaſie to be conquered, by his ſpéedy comminge vpon them, draue him to greate wante, ſo that for the moſte parte he inforced him to trauaile in haſte, & withoutPhaeil, Siene, Eliphantina, are Citties in Egypte. order. For the Cittie Philae, is Cituated vpon the bankes of Nilus, a little aboue the leſſer ſluces, aboute twelue mile & a halfe from Siene, and Eliphantina. This Cittie becauſe the outlawes of Egypte tooke and inhabited it, cauſed the Ethiopians, and Egyptians, to contende

aboute the ſame. The Ethiopians will haue the borders of Ethiopia to ſtretche vnto the ſluces, and the Egyptians chalenge Philae, becauſe their Outlawes inhabited the ſame, as if it had benne wonne by warre. And becauſe that Cittie cōtinually was now vnder the one, and then ſtreight vnder the other, and would be theirs who firſte came and conquered it, at that time therein was a Garriſon of Egyptians, and Perſians. The Kinge of Ethiopia required to haue Philae, and the Mines out of whiche were digged the pretious ſtoones called Smaragdi, of Oroondates,
                  Smaragdi. and hauinge made ſuche requeſt as is ſaide before, and coulde not obtayne, he commaunded his Legates to goe a few daies iourney before, and he folowed him ſelfe well prouided of all manner of furniture, as if he woulde haue made ſomme other Warre, but he tolde no man whiche waie he woulde bende the ſtrength of his Army. After he ſuppoſed that his Embaſſadours were paſte Philae, and had filled the Inhabitauntes with ſecuritie, and carefulneſſe, for that they bruted abroade that they wente with Commiſſion to conclude a Peace, and amitie. He came ſuddainely vpon them, and caſt outA wiſe policie whereby Hydaſpes tooke Philae. the Garriſon whiche was not hable to ſuſteine the force of their enimies, & the Engins where with their Walles were battered aboue twoo or thrée daies, and ſo tooke the Cittie, and did no manner of wronge to any of the Inhabitauntes thereof. For by reaſon of theſe newes, Achemenes founde Oroondates ſoare troubled, beinge by this time certified of all that happened by one who fledde from thence, but he troubled him a greate deale more, becauſe he came ſo ſuddainely, and vnſentefor. Wherefore he aſked him foorthewith, whether any miſchaunce was befallen Arſace, and the reſt of his Family at home. He anſweare that there was, but he woulde tell him in councell. When euery man els was departed, he tolde him howe Theagenes was taken Priſoner of Mytranes, and ſente to him, ſo to be conueied to the greate Kinge, if

he thoughte it good: for the yonge man was woorthy to beArchamenes dothe accuſe Arſace to her huſbande Oroondates. placed in the Courte, and to waite at the Kinges owne Table. Then how he was reſcued by the Inhabitaūtes of Beſſa, who alſo ſlewe Mytranes, and after that came to Memphis, and thereto he added Thiamis eſtate. Laſte of all he tolde him of Arſaces loue towarde Theagenes, and howe he was brought to the Kinges Lodging, with the honour which ſhée gaue him in token of her good wil, and al the ſeruice he did, and howe that yet there was no harme donne, by reaſon that the yonge man withſtoode, and woulde not: Mary it was to be doubted that by continuaunce of time, or violence he might be forced, if ſomme man did not the ſooner fetche him from Memphis, and ſo cutte of al the reſte of Arſaces loue. And for that cauſe he came priuily to tel him ſpéedily thereof, for that his loue to his Maiſter was ſuche, that it coulde not conceale what he knewe to be contrarye to his pleaſure. When he had angred Oroondates with this tale, and he was nowe thorowly chafed, and in wil to be reuenged, he kindled in him a newe deſire, by talkinge of Cariclia, commendinge her highely, prayſinge woonderfully her bewtie and comelineſſe, as ſhée wel deſerued, ſaieinge: that there neuer was ſéene ſuche a one before, nor might not be ſuche an other after. Accoumpte (ꝙ he) all youre Concubines, not onely thoſe that are at Memphis, but thoſe alſo whiche folowe you here, not to be woorthe a Ruſhe, in compariſon of her. He tolde him many other thinges beſide this: truſtinge that although Oroondates had to doo with Caricha, yet within a while after he ſhoulde haue her to wife, when he required her in recompence of this talke. By this time was the Deputie ſoare moued, beinge wrapped as wel in the ſnares of anger, as deſire. So that without delaie he called for Bagoas,
                  Oroondates ſendeth Bagoas, to 
                        〈…〉
                      Theagenes and Cariclia to him. one of his Eunuches, whiche was in greateſt Authoritie, and beſt truſted of him, and deliuered to him fiftie Horſemen, and ſent him to Memphis, with Commaundement

to bringe Theagenes and Cariclia, where ſo euer he firſte might ſée them, to him: He wrote a letter to Arſace beſide in this manner.
               
                  
                     Oroondates to Arſace.
                  
                  His Letters to Arſace.
               
               Sende Theagenes and Cariclia Brother and Siſter, beinge the Kinges pryſoners to me, to be conueied to the Kinge: and ſende them willingly, becauſe whither you wil or not, they ſhal be taken from you, and I will credite Achemenes.
               
               To Euphrates chiefe Eunuche at Memphis,
                  His Letters to Euphrates. he wrote thus.
               Of the negligent ordering of my houſe, you ſhal hereafter giue accompt. At this time deliuer to Bagoas the twoo Grecian Priſoners, to be brought to me, whither Arſace be content therewith or not: without excuſe lette them be deliuered, els knowe that I haue commaunded to bringe thée alſo in bondes, that thou maieſt be put out of thine office. Bagoas wente aboute his buſineſſe, & had his Letters ſealed with the Deputies one Signet, that thoſe who were at Memphis ſhoulde the better credite them, and deliuer to him the yonge folkes. Oroondates alſo wente him ſelfe to warre againſte the Ethiopians, Achemenes was commaunded to folowe him too, and certaine menne were priuily ſette to kéepe him (he thinkinge nothing leſſe) vntil that was proued trewe, which he had ſhewed him. And at this time theſe thinges were donne at Memphis. Preſently after Achemenes was gonne, and Thiamis was full Prieſte, and therefore the chiefe of that Cittie, and had perfourmed what ſo euer appertained to the burial of Calaſiris within the appointed daies, he remembred to make enquiry after Theagenes, and Cariclia, becauſe nowe it was lawfull for the Prieſtes by theire owne ordinaunces to deale with Straungers. After he had made diligent ſearche euery where for them, he hearde that they were lodged in the Princes Courte, wherefore he 
                     〈◊〉
                   to Arſace in haſte,

and aſked for them, as though for many cauſes they appertainedThiamis deſireth to haue Theagenes and Cariclia, to prouide for them as his Father commaunded him. to him, but eſpecially for that his Father Calaſiris, with the laſte woordes he ſpake, commaunded him to prouide for their liuinge, & defend them from wronge. And that he gaue her thankes, for ſo curteouſly intertaininge them, thoſe few daies, wherein it was not lawfull for any, but ſuche as were in orders to be in the Church. Mary nowe he deſired to haue them him ſelfe againe. Arſace anſweared him thus: I maruaile that for all you with your owne woordes commended vs, for our humanitie and gentleneſſe, that yée wil condemne vs ſtraight againe, of diſcurteſie and inciuilitie, whileſt you would haue vs ſéeme, that either wée can not, or wil not prouide for ſtraungers, and doo for them as reaſon ſhall require. I meane not ſo ſaide Thiamis: for I know that they ſhal fare better here with you then at my houſe, if thei would abide, but ſeinge they be of good Parentage, and haue benne diuerſly tormented with Fortune, and preſentlyThough a man do trauell all the daies of his youthe, yet he deſireth to draw homewarde at length. Therefore home hath no felowe. are from their Natiue Countrie: they care for nothinge ſo muche as to recouer their Friendes, and gette home againe. Wherein that I ſhould healpe them, my Father hath leafte me his heire, who haue alſo beſide this further cauſes of amitie with them. You doo wel ſaide Arſace that you leaue brawlinge, and pleade equitie: which ſhal be ſo muche the more on our ſide, by howe muche to Rule is of greater force, then fondely to prouide for. Thiamis wondred at this, and ſaide, haue you rule ouer them? how I praie you? By martiall Lawe (ꝙ ſhe) which maketh priſoners bonde ſeruantes. Then perceiued Thiamis that ſhée ſpake of Mytranes, and ſaide: But there isThe properties of warre and peace. no Warre, Arſace, but Peace at this time. The propertie in déede of the one, bringeth into Bondage: but the other maketh frée. The one is a Tyrannous wil: the other a Princely decrée. At a woorde Warre, and Peace ought not to be ſcanned by theire names, but by the meaninge, and intente of thoſe who haue to doo therein. Wherfore

you ſhal make a better definition of Equitie, if you conſente to this. So ſhal neither honeſty, nor profitableneſſe come in queſtion. For what honeſty is it for you, or what gaine to ſaie vnreaſonably, that you wil withhold from me theſe ſtraungers. Arſace could rule her ſelfe no longer, but that chaunced vnto her, whiche is common to all Louers, ſo longe as they thinke they are not ſpied, theyArſace denieth the deliuery of the priſoners to Thiamis, and in ſo doinge dothe declare the property of diſcloſed Louers. bluſhe, but when they are perceiued, they are paſte all ſhame. The ſecrete Louer is not very haſty, but he that is taken with the manner is made more bolde. As her guilty minde accuſed her, who thinkinge that Thiamis ſuſpected ſommewhat, ſet not a Ruſhe by the Prieſte, nor the Honoure of his Prieſtehoode, but caſtinge of all woomanly ſhamefaſtneſſe, ſaide: You ſhal not be pardoned, neither for that you did to Mytranes, but there wil be a time, when Oroondates wil take reuenge of them, who 
                     •
                  lewe him, and thoſe alſo who were with them. As for theſe, I wil not parte with them, who preſently are my ſeruanntes, and within a ſhorte ſpace muſte be ſente to my Brother the greate Kinge, accordinge to the Perſian cuſtome. Wherefore plaie the Oratour as longe as ye liſte, and define Iuſtice, Honeſty, and Vtilitie, you looſe your labour, becauſe he who hath power ouer an other, néedeth none of theſe, but meaſureth eche of them as he thinketh good, and gette you ſtraight out of our Courte, and that willingly, leaſte if you deale vnaduiſedly, you be forced to departe ſpite of your Téeth. Then wente Thiamis a waie callinge the Goddes to witneſſe, & ſaide nothinge els, but that theſe thinges woulde not come to good ende, yet he thought to tell this to the Cittie, and craue the ayde thereof herein. When Arſace had ſaide, I care not for your Office (for Loue careth onely for that whiche maye healpe to geite that it deſireth) ſhée wente into her chamber, whither ſendinge for Cibele, ſhée deuiſed of that they had to doo. For by this time ſhée began to ſuſpect that Achemenes was gonne to Oroondates becauſe

he came not into ſight. And Cibele if at any time ſhée aſked for him made diuerſe and ſundry excuſes, to perſwade her any thinge rather, then that he was gonne to Oroondates: for al that ſhée was not beleued alwaies, but nowe for the continuaunce of time ſhée loſte her credite quite. Then ſpake Arſace, and ſaide: Cibele, what ſhal wée now doo? what waie maie be deuiſed to ridde me out of all theſe perilles that I am in? my Loue relenteth no whitte, but is rather greater and greater, as though the yonge man by his obſtinateneſſe gaue me occaſion thereof, who is cruel and wil not be ruled, and was more gentell before then nowe: then he comforted me with fayre promiſes, but now he openly refuſeth to doo any requeſt, and I am grieued the more for feare leaſt he haue hearde of Achemenes, that whiche I ſuſpect, and therefore is the rather afrayde to doo it. Surely Achemenes angreth me aboue all other thinges, who is gonne to Oroondates, and is like either to perſwade him, or els tell him a woonderful tale. But lette me onely ſée Oroondates, I know he will not be hable to abide one flatteringeVVhat woomen whiche dwell togeather with menne be hable to doo. welcome, or the leaſt teare of Arſaces cies. For woomens eies and ſuch as dwel in one houſe togeather, be of great force to perſwade menne. But this grieueth me moſte, if happely I be accuſed, yea and puniſhed before I haue reioyced Theagenes, if Oroondates heare any thinge hereof. Wherefore Cibele now turne euery ſtoane, deuiſe al maner of meanes, ſeinge you know that wée are brought into extremitie. And thinke ſithe I deſpaire of my ſelfe, that I will ſpare no other: For thou ſhalt haue the firſte cōmoditie that ariſeth of thy Sonnes attemptes, wherof how thou ſhouldeſt be ignoraunt, I cannot ſurmiſe. Cibele anſweared: as touchinge my Sonne, and my fidelitie to you Miſtreſſe, you ſhall know in the ende that you are deceiued. And further for that you ſo ſlackly handel your owne Loue, there is no cauſe why you ſhould blame other, that are blameleſſe: for you commaunde him not

as a Miſtreſſe, but flatter him like a Seruaunt, whiche perhappes was well donne at the firſt, when wée déemed him to be of a weake and youthfull courage. But nowCibeles vnhappy Councell to Arſace againſte. Theagenes. becauſe he ſtandeth ſo ſtifly againſt his Louer, lette him trie and knowe you for his Miſtreſſe, and with whippes and tormentes be gladde to yéelde to your pleaſure: for yonge men regarde not, when they be prayed, but when they be forced then beginne they to ſtoupe. Wherefore this alſo with paine will doo that whiche before he was gently handled, he woulde not. You ſéeme to ſaie well (ꝙ Arſace) but how can I abide with mine eies to ſée that body of his ſcourged or otherwiſe to be tormented? Shée anſweared againe: You are too pitifull as though a little payne wil not make him better aduiſed, and you with his little griefe ſhall haue al your deſire. But you néede not with your eies ſée what ſhalbe donne to him, but deliuer him to Euphrates and commaund him to pouniſhe him as it were for ſomme other offence, ſo ſhall you not ſée thatVVhat the eye ſeeth not, the harte rueth not. whiche will put you to paine (for it is nothinge ſo grieuous to heare of an ill chance as with eies to ſée the ſame) & if wée perceiue that he relente and chaunge his minde, wée may deliuer him from his paine. Arſace was contente to be perſwaded, and ſente for Euphrates the chiefe Eunuche, and commaunded him to doo as they had deuiſed. He, as well for that he was in Ielouſie as al Eunuches
                  All Eunuches are by nature Ialous. are, as alſo for other thinges that he ſawe & ſurmiſed, was offended with Theagenes, by and by laid him in Irons, and tormented him with Honger and Stripes, beinge incloſed in a darke houſe. And when Theagenes who knew the cauſe hereof wel enough, but would ſéeme to be ignorant, aſked him why he was thus handled, he would geue him no anſweare: But euery daie augmented his paines, and tormented him more then either Arſace would, or had commaunded, and neuer ſuffered any man to goe in to him but Cibele, for ſo had he cōmaundement. Shée came to him very ofte, & made as though ſhée

had brought him meate priuely, as if ſhe had benne ſoary for his miſhap by reaſon of the acquaintaunce which ſhée had with him, but in déede to ſée if he relented any whitte for theſe paines, & howe he was preſently minded. But he plaied the man a greate deale more, & withſtoode them moſte of al then, & ſuffered his Body to be afflicted: but by reaſon of his Chaſtitie, he tooke a lofty ſtomake to him, & reioiced, & gloried in that Fortune, becauſe though his greateſt parte was tormented, yet his beſte, & moſte noble parte was wel pleaſed, & for that he now had occaſion to declare what good wil he bare to Cariclia. He thought it wēt very wel with him, if ſhée might but know therof, and ſtil would cal her his ioie, his harte, and life. Which when Cibele ſawe, althoughe ſhée, contrarye to Arſaces minde (which was, that he ſhould be but litle pouniſhed, vntil he relented, and not tormented to Deathe) had broughte Euphrates woorde to augmente his pouniſhmente, and ſo coulde preuaile no whitte, but was quite without hope, and ſhée beganne nowe by experience to perceiue in what miſeries he was: sommetimes ſhée was afraide of Oroondates, if Achemenes tolde him hereof: ſommetime leaſte Arſace, if her loue were perceiued, woulde kil her ſelfe, ſhée determined to labour contrary to al that was like to fall vpon her, and with ſomme paſſinge miſchiefe, either to execute Arſaces pleaſure, and ſo to auoide her preſente perill, or els to take aware all that mighte make oughte againſte her, by killinge of them all. And in that minde ſhée went in to Arſace, and ſaide: Miſtreſſe, wée looſe our labour. For that obſtinate felowe relenteth no whitte, but is more wilful, and hath Cariclia alwaies in his mouthe, and comforteth him ſelfe with her name, as if it were the deareſt thinge in the worlde to him. Wherefore if it pleaſe you, let vs as the Prouerbe ſaithe, caſte our laſte Ancore, and ſéeke ſomme meanes to take her awaye, whiche is ſo greate a lette to vs. For if he ſhal knowe that ſhée is deade, it is like that

he wil chaunge his minde, when he ſhal be out of al hope of her loue. Arſace was ready to beleue her, for that through her woordes, the Ialouſie that ſhée was in a good while before, was nowe by anger increaſed, and ſaide: You geue me good counſel, I wil take vpon me to commaūde this ſtop to be remoued. Who wil doo your Commaundemente in this pointe (ꝙ Cibele)? For althoughe you haue al thinges in your handes, yet the Lawes will not let you kil one without the iudgemente of the Perſian Magiſtrates. You ſhall haue néede therefore to take greate héede howe you accuſe the Mayde, and then it is doubteful whether wée ſhall be hable to proue that which wée laie to her charge. But if you ſhal thinke it good (for I am ready to doo any thing for your ſake) I wil diſpatchCibele goeth aboute to poyſon. Cariclia. this matter with poyſon, and by meanes of a ſubtile Cuppe, ridde our Aduerſary of her life. Arſace allowed her deuiſe, and badde her put it in practiſe, and ſhée went aboute it foorthe withal. And when ſhée founde Cariclia wéepinge, and makinge greate moane, and did nothinge but deuiſe many waies to die (for by this time ſhée perceiued in what caſe Theagenes was, althoughe Cibele at the firſt had by diuers ſubtill meanes deluded her, and made ſundrye excuſes, for that ſhée ſawe him not as ſhée was woont to doo), ſhe ſaide: vnhappy Creature wilt thou not yet leaue to pine thy ſelfe, and conſume awaie to no pourpoſe? Beholde, Theagenes ſhal be ſette at libertye this nighte, and comme to thée, for our Miſtreſſe, who for a certaine offence that he committed in ſeruing her, was angred, & commaunded him to Warde, & hathe promiſed this day (partely at my requeſt) to ſet him at libertie, & to celebrate a ſumptuous Feaſte accordinge to the cuſtome of this Countrie. Wherefore ariſe, and be mercy, and at lengthe yet eate ſommewhat with vs. Howe ſhould I beleue you (ſaide Cariclia)? For your continual lieinge hathe ſo ofte beguiled me, that I cannot geue credite to any thinge that you ſaie. Then ſaide Cibele, I ſweare

vnto you by al the Goddes, that al your buſineſſe ſhal be diſpatched this daie in ſuche ſorte, that you ſhall neuer néede to take more care hereafter, if you kil not your ſelfe before, by refraininge thus many daies without meate. Wherefore eate ſomme bitte of that whiche is prouided at this time. Cariclia was contente with muche adoo, neuertheleſſe ſhée doubted that ſhée woulde decieue her as oft as ſhée had donne before, but becauſe of her Othe ſhée partely agreed, and was gladde to take holde of that whiche was promiſed: for the minde dothe quickly geueVVee ſoone beleue what wee woulde haue come to paſſe. Cibele dothe fall into the pitte, that ſhee digged for Cariclia, whereby wee maie ſee that euill Councell is worſte to him that geueth it. The propertie of poyſon. credite to that whiche it earneſtly deſireth. So they ſat downe togeather, and did eate. And as Aura ſerued thē of drinke, Cibele becked to her that ſhée ſhoulde bringe firſte to Cariclia the poyſoned Cuppe, and after her ſhée dranke her ſelfe of an other Cuppe. Shée had ſcante dronke it of, but ſhée beganne to ſwell, and was cruelly tormented within: wherfore ſhée powred out that which was lefte, on the grounde, and looked cruelly vpon the Mayde. Cariclia was abaſſhed, and ſoare troubled with this, and beganne to ſtaie her vprighte. So were al the reſte that were there. For a Cuppe impoyſoned is ſwifter then any Arrowe, and is of force ſufficiente to kill one that is yonge and luſtie. But then when it was in an Olde, and drie Body, it creapte into the principall partes of her, ſooner then any man coulde tell the tale. Thus was the Olde wooman conſumed, and all her members were with the pinchinge of the Poyſon diſſolued, and quite without life, and all her Body was very blacke. But verily I thinke that her crafty minde was more miſcheiuous, then the Poyſon was, in as muche as Cibele now yéelding vp her Ghoſte, foregot not her ſubtill deuiſes, but partely by Signes, partely by vnperfite woordes, and dieinge ſpeache, ſhée ſignified that Cariclia was ſhée who had poyſoned her. So the Olde wooman died, and Cariclia was bounde, and broughte ſtraighte waie to Arſace, who aſked her, whether ſhée had prouided

that Poyſon, and threatened to tormente her on the Racke, if ſhée would not confeſſe the trothe. Nowe was Cariclia a ſtraunge ſight to thoſe that looked vpō her, for ſhée was not ſadde, nor bare any coūtenance that might argue a fainte harte, but came ſmilinge before her, and made an accompt of that ſhée had in hande, either for that ſhée paſſed not of that ſlaunder becauſe ſhée was giltleſſe, or els for that if Theagenes were not aliue, ſhée woulde alſo die, and eſtéemed it a vantage to take vpon her a déede whiche other menne had donne. And ſaide: Iolly Dame, if Theagenes be aliue, I ſaie that I am not guilty of this murther. But if he haue miſcarried through thy miſchieuous attemptes, thou ſhalte néede no tormentes to make me confeſſe the facte. I am ſhée who hath killed thy Nourſe, that hath brought thée vp ſo wel, and taught thée ſo muche good, kill me out of hande: for I coulde doo Theagenes no greater pleaſure, who by good right hath reſiſted thy wicked deuiſes. Theſe woordes made Arſace madde, and when ſhée had commaunded her to be beaten, ſhée ſaide carry this queane away bounde as ſhée is, & ſhewe her to her goodly Louer, who is in like plite, and when you haue bounde her hande and foote, commit her to Euphrates alſo to be kepte vntill to morrowe, to be condemned to deathe by the Perſian Magiſtrates. As ſhée was ledde away, the Mayde who was Cibeles cuppe bearer (ſhée was one of the Ionians, whiche at the firſte was willed to waite vpon them) whither it were for good will whiche ſhée bare to Cariclia, by reaſon of the acquaintaunce and familiarity whiche ſhée had with her, or moued by the wil of God, wepte and lamented pitifully, & ſaide: ô vnhappy wooman whiche is without al faulte. They who were by woondred at her, and compelled her to tell plainely what ſhée meante. Then ſhée confeſſed how ſhée her ſelfe gaue Cibele that poyſon, and had receiued it afore of her to giue it to Cariclia. But ſhée either tro
                     ••••
                  d with the ſtraungneſſe of the facte, or els called

haſtely vpon by Cibele, who badde her bringe the firſte cuppe to Cariclia, chaunged the pottes, and gaue the Old wooman that wherein the Poyſon was. So ſhee was carried forthwith to Arſace, and was very gladde if Cariclia mighte be excuſed of this facte, for euen the very Barbarous people haue pittie vpon a Gentle and Noble countenaunce. And although the Mayde ſaide the ſame to her, yet ſhée preuailed nothinge, but Arſace commaunded her alſo, as helpinge and conſentinge thereto, to be put in priſon, and kepte to Iudgement. The Perſian Magiſtrates in whoſe handes it was to determine controuerſies, and puniſhe offences as touchinge the weale publike, were ſente for in haſte to ſitte in iudgement the nexte daie. Aud when they were come, and ſatte, Arſace accuſed her for poyſoninge her Nourſe, declaring al that had happened, and woulde ofte moyſte her woordes with teares, becauſe ſhée was ſpoyled of her, whome ſhée accompted more déere then any other thinge, and aboue all other loued her beſte: ſhée tooke moreouer the Iudges to witneſſe howe ſhée had intertayned Cariclia beinge a ſtraunger, and ſhewed her all manner of courteſie, and was nowe thus wronged in ſtéede of thankes, which ſhée had well deſerued. To be ſhorte Arſace layde ſore accuſations againſte her, but Cariclia made no Anſweare, but confeſſed the facte againe, and ſaide that ſhée gaue her the poiſon, and moreouer ſhée added, that ſhée would haue poyſoned Arſace alſo, if ſhée had not benne preuented, and many other thinges els, and euer among would ſhée directly raile vpon Arſace. For after ſhée had benne the night paſte with Theagenes in pryſon, and conferred with him of al other affaires too and fro, and had concluded that if néede were ſhée ſhould willingly die any manner of death, whereto ſhée ſhould be condemned, and to departe out of a life ful of troubles, and endleſſe trauels, and cruell Fortune, and belike had geuen him his laſte farewell louingly, and taken the Iewels that were laide

foorthe with her, whiche ſhée was euer accuſtomably wonte to beare priuily of pourpoſe, and tied them at that time about her in a bagge, to the intent that they ſhould furniſhe her Buriall, ſhée confeſſed euery accuſation that was laide againſte her, and refuſed no manner of death, and rehearſed her ſelfe many thinges alſo, whereof ſhée was not accuſed. Wherefore the Iudges made no delaie, but had almoſte adiudged her to a more cruell and Perſianlike deathe, yet becauſe they were moued with her countenaunce a little, and yonge ſurpaſſinge bewty,Cariclia is condemned to the fire. they condemned her to be burned with fire. Then was ſhée had awaie preſently with the Executioners, and carried a little without the Cittie, al the while ſhée was lead foorthe, one made a crie, that ſhée ſhould die for poiſoning one, wherefore a great company more followed them out of the Cittie. Some whereof ſawe her as ſhée was lead, other hearde thereof by reporte, whiche quickely flewe ouer al the Cittie, and ſo haſted thereto. Arſace came alſo, and ſawe that whiche happened from the walle: for ſhée thought it a paine, if ſhée ſatiſfied not her ſelfe, with ſéeinge her die. When the Executioners had laide a greate deale of woode togeather, & put fire thereto, that now it beganne to flame, Cariclia praied them who lead her, to geue her a little leaue, & promiſed that ſhée would goe into the fire alone, whiche graunted, ſhée ſaide with a lowde voice: ô Sunne, and Earthe, and all you bleſſedCariclies prayer. Creatures, that are aboue and vnder the Earthe, whiche ſée and take reuenge of all wicked woorkers. You are witneſſes that I am not guilty of that whereof I am accuſed, and that I am willinge to die, for the intollerable griefes of minde whiche burthen me, voucheſafe to take me into your handes gently. And in all haſte take reuenge of this ſhameleſſe Arſace, who hath defiled her ſelfe with ſo many filthie factes, and is a Harlotte, and dothe all this to robbe me of my Huſbande. When ſhée had ſaide thus, euery man that was there ſaide ſomewhat

to that ſhée had ſpoken: wherefore ſome woulde haue the Executiō ſtaied til an other time of iudgement, and ſomme were ready to take her awaie: ſhée preuentinge them all, wente into the middeſt of the fire, and ſtoode there a good while without harme, & the fire wenteThe fire woulde not touche Cariclia. euery waye aboute her, and woulde not approche néere her, ſo it hurte her not, but gaue place when ſhée came thereinto, by meanes whereof ſhée was with the lighte that was aboute her, made fayrer, and woondred at the more, by reaſon of her bewty, ſo that in a manner ſhée was married in a firy chamber. Shée wente ſometime into this ſide, ſometime into that, maruelinge what it meante, and haſted to be deade, but it preuailed not, for that the fire alwaie gaue place, and as it were fledde frō her: the Tormentours ceaſed not but layde on more woode and réede (Arſace with threatninge countenance charginge them ſo to doo) to make it burne more vehemently: But it did no good, ſaue that it troubled the Cittie more, whiche ſuppoſinge that ſhée had healpe from Heauen, cried out the wooman is cleane, the wooman is not guiltie, wherefore they came to the fire, and put aſide the Tormentours. The firſte that ſo did, was Thiamis (for by this time he was comme, beinge admoniſhed of that whiche was donne, by the greate brute in the Cittie) and he encouraged the people to healpe her, and beinge in wil to deliuer her, they durſte not comme neare the fire, but willed her to comme foorthe. For ſhée that had benne in the fire without harme, if ſhée liſte to comme out thereof, néede feare nothinge. Which when Cariclia ſawe and hearde, thinkinge alſo her ſelfe that God had preſerued her, thoughte it beſte not to be vnthankeful to him, nor to ſette lighte of that benefite, but leapte out of the fire. Wherewith the people, what for ioie, and woonder gaue a greate ſhoute, and thanked the Goddes for the ſame. But Arſace not wel in her wittes, ſkipte from the walles, and came out at a Poſterne with

a greate company of her Garde, and other Noble men of Perſia, and laied handes vpon Cariclia her
                     •
                  elfe, and lookinge frowardely vpon the people, ſaide: Are you not aſhamed to goe aboute to deliuer a graceleſſe wooman, a Witche, and a Murtherer, taken with the deede dooinge, and confeſſinge the ſame from her deſerued paine? Seeinge that in your ſo healpinge ſuche a wicked queane, you ſtriue againſte the Lawes of Perſia, and againſte the Kinge him ſelfe, his Deputies, Nobles, and Iudges alſo. Perhappes you be deceiued, for that ſhée burned not this daye, and therefore you aſcribe that hap to the Gods. Wil you not be wiſer, and vnderſtande that this is a greater proufe of her Witchcraft, who hathe ſuch ſloare of ſleightes, that ſhee can withſtande the ſtrengthe of the fire? Comme you to morrowe into the Councel houſe, if you wil, for it ſhalbe by al your conſentes: there ſhall you heare that ſhee will confeſſe the ſame, and ſhall be conuinced by ſuche of her felowes, as are priuie thereto, and I keepe in Priſon. And therewithal ſhée carried her awaie, holdinge her by the necke, and commaunded her Garde to make her roume. But ſomme of them were angry, and in minde to withſtande: other gaue ouer, becauſe they were ſomewhat blinded with the tale of poyſoninge, but moſte for feare of Arſace, and her authority. Then was Cariclia deliuered to Euphrates againe to be kepte to a newe Iudgemente, and had more yrons laide vpon her. The greateſt comforte that ſhée had in this aduerſitie, was that ſhée had time to telle Theagenes of her affayres, for this was Arſaces inuention too, to put them to the more paine, that the yonge Creatures beinge in one place priſoners, might behold either othersA Louer is more greeued at his friendes harme then his owne. tormentes, and griefes, for ſhée knewe wel yenough that a Louer is more grieued at his friendes paine, then his owne diſeaſe. But they coumpted this a comforte, and to be pained alike they thoughte it a vauntage, and if either had leſſe tormētes then the other, eche ſuppoſed him

ſelfe vanquiſhed, and as it were more fainte, and weake in loue. For nowe was it lawful for them to be togeather, & encourage eche other to take in goodly wiſe what fortune ſo euer came, and refuſe no perill whiche ſhoulde enſue of their vnfained Chaſtitie, and ſtedfaſte Faithe. After they had continued their talke of ſuch matters, as is likely they woulde talke of (who neuer hoped to talke togeather againe) til it was night, and had ſatiſfied them ſelues as wel as they mighte: at laſte they fell into communicatiō of the Myracle which happened about the fire. Theagenes referred the benefite therof to Gods goodnes, who had ſaued her being guiltleſſe from Arſaces vniuſte ſclaunder. But Cariclia ſéemed to doubte thereof. For (ꝙ ſhée) this ſtraunge kinde of deliuery maie be thought in déede to procéede of God. But ſtill to be afflicted with ſuche miſeries, and tormentes without al meaſure, is rather a token of thoſe who are plagued by God, and are like to fall into greater ineonueniences: excepte there be ſome more hiddē miſtery which caſteth into extreame peril, & when al hope is paſte, findeth a remedy. When ſhée had ſaide thus, & Theagenes willed her to take all in good parte, and be of a godlier minde, ſhée cried out alowd, the Goddes be fauourable to vs. Nowe I remember what a Dreame, or Viſion I had this laſte nighte, but had forgotten it before, I know not howe. It was a true verſe, and noble Calaſiris expounded the ſame to me. The meaninge whereof was thus:
               
                  By vertue of Pantarbe, let feareVVhy the Fire touched not Cariclia.
                  
                  of fire remoued be:
                  An eaſie thinge to pearſe it is,
                  though els right ſtraunge to ſee.
               
               
                  Theagenes alſo when he hearde this, was moued like thoſe who haue ſome Diuine ſpirite, and gaue as great a leape as his Bandes would let him, & ſaide: The Goddes in déede be good to vs: for I alſo am made a Poete by remembringe an anſweare whiche ſomme like ſpirite gaue

me, whether it were Calaſiris, or any other of the Gods in Calaſiris fourme, who ſéemed to ſaie thus to me:
               
                  Tomorrowe ſhalte thou with the Mayde,
                  eſcape Arſaces bande:
                  And ſoone be brought with her into
                  the Aethiopian lande.
               
               As for me I can wel gheaſſe wherto this Oracle tēdeth. The Lande of Aethiopia ſéemeth to be that which is vnder the grounde. With the Mayde, that is to dwel with Proſerpina. And the eſcapinge of Arſaces bande, to be a Departure of the Soule from the Body. But what ſhould your Verſe meane, wherin is ſo many contraries? For Pantarbe ſignifieth al feareful, and yet it woulde not haue you be afraide of the fire. Then ſaide Cariclia: My déere harte Theagenes, our continual calamttie maketh you take al of the woorſte. For commonly menne applie theire minde to that whiche accuſtomably happeneth. But I thinke that this anſweare ſéemeth to foreſhewe better lucke then you ſuppoſe. So that I perhaps ſhal be the Mayde, with whom you haue a promiſe that you ſhal recouer my Countrie Aethiopia: when you ſhal be deliuered out of Arſaces bandes. But howe that ſame ſhal be donne, wée knowe not, neither is it incredible, but it is poſſible for the Goddes to doo it, and let them ſée thereto who geue vs theſe anſweares: for as touchinge that whiche was foreſhewed of me, it is fulfilled as you your ſelfe knowe, and I liue of whom there was no hope at all, and I, who then carried mine owne ſaftie aboute me, was ignorante thereof: but nowe me thinkes I vnderſtande it. For whereas at all times before, I carried with me the tokens that my Mother laide foorthe with me. At that time, aboue al other, when I looked for my laſte Iudgemente, I priuily tied them aboute me, that if I were ſaued, they might finde me ſuch thinges as were neceſſary for me to liue by: but if I miſcarried, that they ſhoulde be my laſte Ornamentes, and dewe Furniture

to my Burial. Emonge theſe, Theagenes, whiche are Iewels of a greate valewe, and very Pretious Stoanes of India, and Ethiopia, there is a Ringe whiche my Father gaue vnto my Mother, when he was enſured to her, wherein is ſet a ſtoane called Pantarbe, and aboute it are certaine holy Letters written, to be ſhorte that Ringe hath ſomme heauenly vertue whiche withſtandeth fire, geuinge them grace that haue the ſame, neuer to be endamaged with it, whiche alſo perhappes by the will of the Goddes hath preſerued me. Thus maie I thinke becauſe Calaſiris told me the ſame was written in my Faſcia, wherein at this time is the reſte of my ſtuffe wrapped. This is probable and like to be trewe (ꝙ Theagenes) becauſe of your deliuery. But what other Pantarbe ſhal wée haue to ayde vs out of the nexte daies daunger? for the moſte wicked Arſace dothe not promiſe immortality for auoydinge the fire (whiche I woulde to God mighte happen) but deuiſeth in the meane time ſome other newe and ſtraunge pouniſhment. And I would to God that ſhée woulde condemne vs bothe at once to one kinde of death, verily I would not call that death, but a reſt from al our troubles. Be of good comforte, ꝙ Cariclia, we haue another Pantarbe, this promiſe which was made vs this night paſte, and if wée truſt in God, either wée ſhal haue more pleaſure if wée be ſaued, or die with better mindes if neede require. Thus were thefe occupied, ſometimes lamentinge and be wailinge more either for others, then for their owne eſtate, ſometime woulde they take their laſte leaue, and make newe promiſe, and ſweare by the Goddes and theire preſente Fortune, that they woulde holde their Faithe in Loue inuiolable to the deathe. Bagoas
                  Bagoas commeth to Memphis, and taketh away Theagenes and Cariclia. and the fiftie Horſemen which were ſent with him, came to Memphis late in the night, when al were a ſléepe and when he had waked them, who laye neare the gate ſoftely, & tolde them what thei were, and were knowen, they wente into the gates al togeather in haſte. There

                  Bagoas lefte his Horſemen incloſinge the Deputies lodginge rounde about withthem, that they might be ready at defenſe, if any man would with ſtande them. Him ſelf wente out by a certaine Poſterne, which the other knew not, and hauinge with ſmal adoo broken downe a ſlender doore, and tolde him who dwelled thereby what he was, and commaunded him to make no noiſe, he wente to Euphrates, knowinge the waie readily by continuall vſe before, and yet the Moone ſhoone a little. Whome findinge him in his bedde he awaked, and as he made a noiſe, and aſked who was there, he badde him peace: Sayinge, it is I, bidde one bringe a candell hither: Then he called a boye which waited vpon him, and badde him light a candell, and awake no man els, when the boye was come, and had ſette the candell in the Candelſticke, Euphrates ſaide: what newes that you come ſo ſuddainely and not looked for? I néede not, anſweared he, vſe many woordes, but reade theſe Letters, and marke this Seale, and vnderſtande that it is Oroondates that geueth this charge, and thinke that it is good to fulfill the contentes of them. As ſoone as Euphrates had reade bothe the Letters, he ſaide: Arſace wil be ſorrowfull, & at this time is in great peril, by reaſon that ſée hath had an ague, which I thinke the Goddes haue ſente her yeſterdaie, and now is ſhée in a burninge heate, ſo that wée haue ſmall comforte of her life, I would not deliuer this Letter vnto her, though ſhe would aſke for it, who rather would die her ſelfe, and kil al vs too, before ſhée would deliuer theſe yonge folkes to you, and know that you come in due time, and take them with you, and healpe them all that you maie: haue pitie vpon them who are pitiful and vnhappy, and haue benne afflicted sixe hundred waies fore againſt my wil, but Arſace gaue commaundement. Marry they are (as maye appeare by them) of a good ſtocke, and as I by experience haue ſéene very modeſt in al pointes, and ſo he leade him to the pryſon. When Bagoas ſawe the yonge priſoners

though they were pined awaye with tormentes, yet he woondred at their tale ſtature and excellent bewty, they were troubled a little, becauſe they thought that Bagoas came at ſuche vntimely ſeaſon by nighte, to geue them their laſte and deadly iudgement, yet they tooke harte vnto them, and looked chéerefully as though thei cared for nothinge, and gaue them who were there, manifeſte tokens that they were very gladde thereof. When Euphrates came neare, and ſette to his handes to take away the ſtockes, whereunto their bandes were tied. Theagenes cried out: ô goodly Arſace, ſhée thinketh to hide herThe eye of Iuſtice doth bringe to lighte euill deedes, be they neuer ſo cloſely donne. miſchieuous déedes by night and darkeneſſe, but the eye of Iuſtice is quicke to reproue, and will bringe to lighte all wicked déedes, be they neuer ſo cloſely and priuily donne: but doo you as you are commaunded, and whether it be Fire, Water, or Swoorde, that is appointed for vs, lette vs bothe togeather, and at one time, haue one manner of deathe. Cariclia made the ſame peticion too. Wherefore the Eunuches wepte (for they partely vnderſtoode what they ſaide) & brought them out with bandes and all. When they were out of the Deputies houſe, Euphrates tarried behinde, and Bagoas with the Horſemen that came with him, tooke many of their Irons, and leaft them no moe but ſo many as mighte kéepe them ſafely, & not annoye or hurte them, and ſette them vpon Horſes, and goinge rounde aboute them, wente as faſte as they could to Thebes. When they had ridden all the nighte after, and till thrée a clocke at after noone the nexte daye and neuer alighted, and then not hable to abide the heate of the Sunne, as is like in the middeſt of the Sommer in Egypt, and hauinge a wil to ſléepe, but moſt for that they ſawe Cariclia wery of ridinge, they meante to ride ſomewhat aſide, to eaſe them ſelfes, and bayte their Horſes, and lette the Maid: reſte. There was a little Hill vpon the banke of Nilus, aboute the whiche the water wente, not kéepinge his ſtraighte courſe, but was turned in

manner halfe round, ſo that it made the place like a little Ilande, that whiche was thus compaſſed with the water, was full of ranke Graſſe, by reaſon that it was ſo néere the water, ſo that it was very good for Cattel, and Horſe to féede in: it was ſhadowed moreouer with trées of Perſia, and greate Figge trées, and ſuche other as doo commonly growe aboute Nylus. There Bagoas, and his company alighted, and vſed the trées in ſtéede of a Tente, and did eate meate him ſelfe, and gaue Theagenes, and Cariclia ſomme too, who at the firſte woulde eate none, ſayeinge: It was néedeleſſe for them to eate, whiche ſhoulde by and by be ſlaine, but that he compelled them in a manner, and perſwaded them as well as he coulde, that there was no ſuche matter, and be tolde them that they ſhoulde be carried to Oroondates, and not be killed. When the heate of the daie was paſte, and the Sunne ſhined on theire ſide, and out of the Weaſte, there came one on horſbacke to Bagoas, who for haſt that he made, panted him ſelfe, and his Horſe had ſweatte ſo muche, that he coulde ſcante ſitte vpon him. And when he had ſaide ſommewhat to Bagoas ſecretely, he made no more haſte, but helde downe his heade a litle, and as it were muſed at that which was tolde him, and after ſaide: Straungers, be of good chéere, you are reuenged of youre enimie, Arſace is deade, who when ſhée hearde that you were gonne, hanged her ſelfe, preuentinge of her owneArſace hanged her ſelfe, after ſhee hearde that Theagene
                        •
                      and Cariclia were gonn
                        •
                     . will, Deathe, whiche neceſſarily ſhould haue enſued. For ſhée coulde not haue eſcaped Oroondates, and the Kinge without pouniſhmente, but either ſhée ſhoulde haue ben put to deathe, or continual ſhame al her life after. Suche woorde doth Euphrates ſende by this meſſenger. Wherfore be merry, becauſe I knowe wel yenoughe you haue hurte no body, and ſhée that hurte you is deade. Thus ſaide Bagoas to them, not ſpeakinge Greeke very well, but lettinge many falſe phraſes eſcape him, yet he ſtaied not, but tolde them, for that he was partely gladde him

ſelfe, becauſe he was ſcante contente with Arſaces frowardeneſſe: who while ſhee liued, plaied the Tyrant, and alſo to cheere, and comforte the yonge folkes. For he hoped that Oroondates woulde accepte well of his paines, (whiche was a harde matter) if he coulde keepe the yonge man well, whoſe comelineſſe woulde ſtaine al the other Courtiers: and the Mayde of ſuche ſingulare bewtie, to be his wife after Arſaces deathe. Theagenes, and Cariclia were very gladde theſe newes & thanked the mighty Goddes, and Iuſtice therefore. For then they thoughte they ſhoulde haue no more paine, though they had neuerVVhat ſome would doo to be reuenged of theire enimies. ſo ill lucke, ſéeinge that their mortall enimie was deade. So great a pleaſure haue ſomme thought it were to die, ſo that they mighte die with theire enimies deſtruction. When it drewe towarde nighte, and the heate beganne to abate, ſo that it was better to trauaile in, they ſet forwarde, and roade al that euening, and the night, and the nexte morninge, makinge the more haſte to take Oroondates at Thebes, if they might, but they loſte their lobour. For after that one of the Hoſte met him, & tolde him that the Deputie was not at Thebes, but that he was ſente to take vp al ye Souldiers that were in wages, though they were any where in Garriſon, & bring them to Siene, whither he willed them to goe: for all was in trouble, and hurly burly, and it was to be doubted that the Citie was taken, by reaſon that the Deputie came too late, and the Aethiopian Army vſed ſuche celeritie, that it was thereCelerity is a principall vertue in warre. before any newes came, that it was comminge. Bagoas leafte his intended iourney to Thebes, and wente to Syene. And beinge nowe almoſte there, he fell into the Aethiopian Scoute, a valiaunte crewe of luſty Souldiers, that were ſent before to ſpie the Countrie, that the great Army haue ſafe paſſaſſe, who at that time, as wel becauſe of the nighte, as alſo for that they were not very ſkilfull of the Countrie (for ſo they had commiſſion to laie theire Ambuſhment where ſo euer they ſawe any commodious

place) hidde them ſelues vnder certaine Buſhes for their owne defenſe, and the better to grieue their enimies too, and ſlepte not. Early in the morning, when thei hearde Bagoas, and the other Horſemenne ride by, and ſawe that they were but a fewe, they ſuffered them to ride on, and when they knewe certainely that none folowed them, they brake out with a greate noyſe, and purſued them. Bagoas, and the other Horſemenne that were with him, beinge amazed, as wel with their ſuddaine crie, as alſo for that they knewe them to be Aethiopians, by their colour, and them ſelues not hable to withſtande the number (for they were a thouſande ſente to ſcanne the Countrie, in lighte Harneis) tarried not ſo muche, as to looke them in the faces, but fledde, not ſo faſte at the firſte, as they mighte, becauſe they woulde not haue their enimies thinke that they would flée in haſte. Theſe chaſed them, and ſente out aboute twoo hundred of the people called Trogloditae. The Trogloditae are a people of Aethiopia
                  VVhat people the Trogloditae are, and the māners of their Countrie. that liue in Huſbandrie. They boorde vpon the Arabians. They were very fwifte of Nature, and practiſe the ſame from their youthe. They neuer weare heauy Armoure, but vſe Slinges in battaile, and ſuddainely inuade their enimies, and ſo indamage them. If they perceiue that they be too weake, they flée: theire enimies neuer purſue them, for that they knowe they are ouer ſwifte, and will hide them ſelues in euery corner. Thus theſe ouertooke the Horſemenne, beinge them ſelues on foote, and wounded them in caſting out of their Slinges. But when thei returned vpon them, they would not abide by it, but fled backe by litle and litle to their felowes: whiche when the Perſians perceiued, they deſpiſed them becauſe they were no moe: wherefore thei chaſed thē as faſte as they might, and when they had folowed them a litle, then roade they forewarde againe with as muche ſpéede as they coulde, and ſpurred their Horſes, and gaue them all the Raines at will. By whiche meanes ſomme eſcaped, and fledde

vnto a Hill that ſtandeth by Nylus, vnder the which they couered thē ſelues that their enimies might not ſée them: But Bagoas was taken becauſe his Horſe ſtumbled, and he fel, and hurte his legge that he coulde not ſturre it. Theagenes alſo, and Cariclia were taken priſoners, whoTheagenes, and Cariclia are taken priſoners of the Aethiopian foreriders. thought it ſhame to foreſake Bagoas, whoſe good wil they had tried towarde them already, and hoped to finde more at his hande afterwarde, and therefore tarried by him, partely for that they coulde not flée, but eſpecially as I thinke, willinge to yéelde them ſelues to them. Then Theagenes ſaide to Cariclia, Thus is our Dreame comme to paſſe: theſe be the Aethiopians, in whoſe Land it is our Deſtinie to comme. I am determined therefore to yéelde to them, and commit our ſelues rather to doubtful Fortune with them, then to preſente peril with Oroondates. Cariclia vnderſtoode al the matter, which was now ledde thereto by Deſtinye, as if ſhée had benne taken by the hande, and conceiued better hope in her minde, ſuppoſing thoſe who tooke them, rather to be theire friendes, then enimies, yet ſhée tolde nothing to Theagenes of that ſhée thought, but ſaid: ſhée was wel content. When the Aethiopians were comme to them, they knewe Bagoas to be an Eunuche by his face, but made further inquiry what theſe ſhoulde be, becauſe they ſawe them bounde, and without Harneys, of an Egyptian of theire owne company, and an other who coulde ſpeake the Perſian languge, thinkinge that they ſhoulde vnderſtande either bothe, or one of them at the leaſte. For Eſpialles, and Foreriders are taught of neceſſitie to haue ſuch with them as can ſpeake the language of the Inhatauntes, and theire enimies, that they maye the better vnderſtande that, whereaboute they are ſente. After Theagenes, who by continuance of time had learned the Egyptian tongue a litle, and coulde anſweare to a ſhorte queſtion, had told them that he was the chiefeſt ſeruaunte aboute the Perſian Deputy, and them ſelues Greekes, taken priſoners

firſt by the Perſians, but now through better Fortune of the Aethiopians, they determined to ſaue their liues, and take them priſoners, and make a preſente of theire firſte praye to theire Kinge, of the chiefeſt Iuell his Perſian enimie had. For Eunuches are in the Courtes of Perſia
                  In what eſtimation Eunuches are in the Court of Perſia. eies, and eares too, who becauſe they neither haue Children, nor Kinſfolkes, to whom their mindes mighte be bente, they depende onely vpon him who hath committed him ſelfe to them, and they thought that the twoo yonge folkes woulde be a goodly preſent to waite vpon theire Kinge, and a grace to his Courte. And thus they ſette them vpon Horſes, and ſo carried them awaie, becauſe els he beinge wounded, & theſe hindred with their bandes, could not goe ſo faſte as they. Surely that which was donne, was like a Prologue of a Comedy, ſtraungers beinge pryſoners, who a litle before were afrayde ſtill of deathe that they ſawe before their eies, were not now carried any more Captiue, but garded with a number of ſuche, as ſhould within a ſhorte time become theirIn what caſe Theagenes, and Cariclia were. Subiectes, and in ſuche caſe were they.
               Here endeth the Eight Booke.
               
            
            
               The Ninthe Booke.
               
                  BY this time was Siene beſieged rounde aboute,Siene beſieged by Hydaſpes, and the feates of Armes wrought before the ſame. and incloſed with the Aethiopian Army, as if a man would haue ſet nettes about it. For Oroondates when he hearde that the Aethiopians were at hande, and that they lefte Cataractae, & came to Siene, gotte into the Towne before them a little, and cloſed vp

the gates, and when he had planted his Slinges, and other Ordinaunce vpon the walles, he waited to ſée what they would doo. Hidaſpes Kinge of Aethiopia, hearinge a great waie of that the Perſians were entred into Siene, by his ſpies, and for all that he vſed the ſame celeritie in their purſuite, by whiche he was in hope, he ſhould haue benne before them, yet came ſhorte, lodged his Army before the Cittie rounde about without any Skirmiſhe, as if he ſhould haue ſitten at a playe, & filled all their Countrie with thrée ſcore hundred thouſande men and Cattel, ſo that they draue them into a ſtreight corner. ThereTheagenes, and Cariclia preſented to Hidaſpes. his eſpialles findinge him, preſented their pryſoners, be tooke great pleaſure to looke vpon the yonge couple, and had good affection to them in his minde, as thoſe that ſhoulde be his owne Children afterwarde, although he knewe not ſo muche, but eſpecially he accompted it good lucke that they were bounde. And ſaide: Loo at the firſt the Goddes deliuer our enimies to vs in bandes, and ſeinge that theſe be the firſte pryſoners, they ſhalbe kepte to the ende of the warre, to be Sacrificed at our Triūphe to the Goddes, accordinge to the olde cuſtome of the Aethiopians. After he had rewarded his Spies, he ſente them and the priſoners to their impedimentes, and ſette a company to kéepe them, whiche could well ſpeake their language, and gaue them ſtreight commaundement to looke well vnto them, and let them fare of the beſte, and kéepe them from al manner of vncleanneſſe, as thinges appointed for Sacrifice ought to be kepte, and that their bandes ſhould be chaunged, and haue Chaines of Golde for them. For wherefore ſo euer Iron ſerueth in otherGolde ſerueth for ſuche vſes in Aethiopia. as Iron doth in other Countries. Countries, Golde ſerueth in Aethiopia, and they did as they were commaunded. When they tooke of their former Chaines, and without doinge any thinge els put them in comforte, that they ſhould liue more at eaſe, and fitted for them fetters of Golde. Theagenes laughed, & ſaide: Good Lorde whence commeth this trimme change?

truely Fortune flattereth vs woonderfully, wée chaunge Iron for Golde, and in pryſon wée are enritched, ſo that wée be more woorthe in our Bandes. Cariclia ſmiled too, and woulde haue him of an other minde, and therefore brought him in remembrance of that whiche the Goddes had foreſhewed vnto them, and ſo put him into better hope. But Hidaſpes him ſelfe aſſaulted Siene, and where as he thought before, that with his greate Hoſte at the firſte approche he ſhould haue ouerthrowen the Towne, Walles & all, he had almoſt benne then repulſed of them that kepte the ſame, who dallied not, but valiantly withſtoode their enimies force, and railed on them ſpitefully, to anger them the more. He very wrothe that they were fully determined to indure to the ende, and had not ſtraighte yéelded them ſelues to him, thought it good not to trifle the time with his Army, and doo nothinge, nor to laie ſuche a ſiege whereby ſomme mighte eſcape, and ſomme be taken, but vtterly in ſhorte ſpace to ſpoyle the Towne. Wherefore he diuiſed ſuche a piece of woorke, he parted the compaſſe aboute the walles emonge his Souldiers, and to euery tenne men he appointed tenne yardes, the length, and bredth thereof was very greate, and commaunded them to make a Ditche: ſome digged, other carried the grytte away, and ſomme therewith did raiſe vp a Counter wall againſte that whiche was beſieged. No man durſte comme out of the Towne, becauſe of the greate Army, to hinder, or let the woorke that it mighte not be made rounde about the Towne, and their Slinges, and other Engins ſerued to no pourpoſe, becauſe they ſawe that the ſpace betwéene the twoo walles was ſo greate, that they who made the Ditche, were without their daunger. When they had ſoone diſpatched this, by reaſon of the greate number of the labourers, he beganne ſuch an other thinge. He lefte betwixte the twoo endes of the Ditche, the breadthe of one hundred foote whiche he ditched euen vnto Nylus, bringinge the ſame

ſtill from the lower grounde to that whiche was higher, and more harde. A man mighte haue likened that woorke to a longe wall, becauſe it kepte equally an hundred foote in breadthe, and was ſo longe as the grounde whiche is betwéene Nylus and Siene. When he had brought this to the bankes of Nylus, he turned the water into his Riuer, which in falling from a higher place into that whiche is lower, and out of the woonderful breadth of Nylus into a narrowe Riuer wrought by hande, made a greate noyſe; as wel at the entry thereinto, as alſo in the Ditche when it was in, ſo that they mighte heare it, that were a greate waie of. Whiche when they who were in Siene ſawe, and vnderſtoode into what daunger they were broughte, becauſe he meante by ſo compaſſing them aboute, to drowne theire Towne, ſo that none of them mighte flée, for that they were ſo incloſed with the Walles as wel by Lande, as Water, and that they could not be aſſured: thoughe they aboade within they made a good ſhifte, as the time would ſuffer to ſaue them ſelues. Firſte, when the gates, and the boorde woorke aboute them failed, they laied vpon it Plaiſter, and Pitche to make it the ſurer, and they vnderpropped their walles that they might ſtande the ſtronger. Somme brought earth thereto, and ſome ſtoanes, many brought olde timber, and euery man that whiche was next hande: no man was vnoccupied, but woomen and children, yea and Olde men too laboured harde. For daunger of deathe refuſed the ayde neither of any age, nor kinde. The ſturdier yonge menne, and thoſe that were in wages, were ſette to make a little Countermine that ſhoulde ſtretche to theire enimies Fortreſſe, the manner whereof was thus: They digged a Pitte almoſte fiue yardes righte downe harde by the wall, and there laied a ſure Foundation. Then digged they forewarde ſtraighte to their enemies Bulwarkes by Torche lighte, and thoſe that came after in order, cōueied the grytte from thoſe that went before,

and carried it into a certaine parte of the Cittie, where their Gardeins were. And this did they for this pourpoſe, that if the water came into that place whiche was without earthe, it mighte haue a waie to breake out, and fall awaie. But this calamitie preuented the readineſſe of the Cittizens. For Nylus hauinge nowe paſſed the longe Ditche fell very faſte into the rounde Riuer, and flowinge euery where ouer the Bankes, drowned al the ſpace betwéene the twoo walles, and made it like a ſtandinge Poole. And thus was Siene made an Ilande, and a Cittie whiche ſtandeth in the middeſt of a Countrie was compaſſed about with water, and beaten vpon ſoare with the waues of Nylus. The wall of the Towne withſtoode the force of the water but one daie. But as ſoone as the water increaſed, and waxed hie, ſo that it ſonke into the grounde, by reaſon that it was blacke, and fruitful, and wéeted ſommewhat deepe, and tooke the Foundation of the wall, ſo that the weighte aboue beganne to ſhake, and doo as thoughe it woulde fall in euery place, where the ſoftneſſe of the earthe cauſed it to ſhrinke, in ſuche ſorte that al their prouiſion trembled, and the warders vpon the wall were afraide of drowninge, and by that time that it was nighte, a parte of the wall where the Towers ſtoode, fell downe, not ſo that the fall was leſſe then the water, nor hable to receiue the ſame, but that it was fiue yardes higher, ſo that almoſt it put them all in feare of drowninge. Wherefore there aroſe a pitiful crie of al manner of folkes that were in the Cittie,Siene a paterne of a miſerable beſieged Cittie. ſo that their enimies mighte heare it, who lifte vp theire handes to Heauen, and called to the Goddes for healpe, whiche was all theire hope that was leafte, and humbly beſoughte Oroondates to ſende Meſſengers to Hydaſpes to intreate of Peace. He was content, now beinge made the ſeruaunte of Fortune, were he neuer ſo loathe. But howe he ſhoulde ſende to his enimies, becauſe the waters wente rounde aboute him, he coulde not tell, but as neceſſitie

taughte him. For when he had written what he woulde, and tied it to a ſtoane, with Slinge he caſte the ſame in ſtéede of a Meſſenger to his enimies, by that meanes ſente his humble praiers ouer the Sea. But he loſte his labour, for that the ſtrength of the Slinge could not ouerreach the lengthe of that ſpace, but fell into the water before it came to them. He caſte againe in like ſorte, and was deceiued: ſo did al the Archers, like ſuch as contended to ſhoote at ſomme marke, & laboured to ſhoote beyonde the drowned grounde. Laſte of al they helde vp theire handes to their enimies that ſtoode on their Fortreſſes, who had good game at their miſcries, and declared by ſignes as well as they coulde, what thoſe throwes meante: ſommetime they helde vp theire handes before them, like ſuch as craued mercy: ſommetime would they holde them behinde their backes, in token that they were ready to receiue Bandes, and becomme theire bondmen. Hidaſpes perceiued that they deſired healthe, and was ready to graunte it them. For the enimie that yéeldeth, dothe make, and in a manner force a Noble man to be gentle. But becauſe he had no ready waie thereto preſently, he determined to trie them better. There were certaine Boates whiche he ſuffered to comme out of Nylus into his Ditche, & there he withhelde them. When he had choſen tenne of the neweſt of them, and furniſhed them with Archers, and other armed Souldiers, & tolde them what they ſhould ſaie, he ſent them to the Perſians. They rowed ouer in good order, that if theire enimies would doo any thinge that they looked not for, they might be ready to fighte. Truely this was a ſtraunge ſighte, that a Ship ſhoulde ſayle from wall to wall, and a Marriner ſhoulde practiſe his ſkill in the middeſt of the drye lande, & a Beate be rowed where the Plowe was woont to woorke. And although the toile of warre euer deuiſethIn warre be newe diuiſes alwaies. newe thinges, yet then inuented it the ſtraungeſt thing, when it made thoſe that were in Shippes fighte with thē
                  
that ſtoode vpon the walles, and ioined twoo Armes by Sea, and Lande togeather. Thoſe that were vpon the walles ſéeinge the Boates ful of armed men driue neare to that parte where the wall was fallen downe, beinge men amazed, and ful of feare for their preſent daungers, ſuſpected them who came for theire ſafetie (becauſe in extremitie,In extremitie euery thinge is fearefull. all that happeneth is feared, and ſuſpected) and ſo caſte ſtoanes, and ſhotte toward the Shippes. In ſuch ſorte deale men that are in a deſperate caſe, accoumpting euery ſmall protractinge of their life, a vauntage. Mary in their caſtinge they ſo directed theire handes that they woulde not hurte them, but forebidde them the Lande. The Aethiopians alſo ſhot, but more certainely, and as men that vnderſtoode not the Perſians minde, and killed them by twoo or thrée at ones, ſo that ſomme of them ſuddainely wounded, fel ouer the walles headlonge into the water. And the ſkirmiſhe had ben woorſe while the one ſpared, and did but defende them from land, and the Aethiopians foughte very angerly, if a certaine Olde Gentleman of Siene had not comme and ſpoken thus to them on the walles: O madde men, and too much amazed withA wiſe Oration of a Gentilman of Siene. youre miſeries, doo wée nowe kéepe them of, whom wée humbly praied to helpe vs before, ſéeinge that they come to vs contrary to all hope? who if they come friendely, and bringe vs Peace, they ſhalbe our ſauiours: but if thei meane to deale like enimies, they may with litle labour be ſlaine when they be landed: but what ſhall we be the better when wée haue ſlaine theſe, ſéeinge that ſo blacke a clowde hangeth ouer our heades bothe by Water, and Lande? why doo wée not rather let them comme in, that we may vnderſtand what they haue to ſay? Euery man thought that he ſaide wel. The Deputy alſo commended his deuiſe. Wherefore euery man wente vp and downe, and laide his Weapons aparte. When that ſpace betwéene the Towers was without Defendantes, and the people gaue them a token with a Banner that thei were

contente that they ſhoulde lande, the Aethiopians came neare, and as it were preached out of their ſhippes to theThe Oration of Hidaſpes Souldiers beſieged in Siene, wherein Hidaſpes is commended for all the vertues requiſite or needefull for a Kinge. beſieged cōpany thus: Ye Perſians, and men of Siene that be here, Hidaſpes, Kinge of the Eaſte, and Weaſt Aethiopians, and at this time yours alſo, knoweth bothe howe to ouercome his enimies, & is ready of nature to graunte mercy to thē that hūbly aſke it, iudging that to be ye vertue of his Souldiers manhoode, but this his owne praiſe and honoure procéedinge from courteſie. And althoughe he haue your liues in his hande, either to graunte it you, or take it awaye: yet becauſe you humble your ſelues to him, he willeth you not to be in feare, and he wil not him ſelfe, but geueth you leaue to appointe what conditions you wil to be deliuered from this peril: for he is not minded to deale Tyrantlike with you according to his owne will, but gouerneth mannes eſtate with mercie without enuie. The people of Siene made anſweare, that they cōmitted them ſelues, their children, and wiues to him, to doo with them as he ſhoulde thinke good, and that they would render vp the Cittie alſo if they might liue, which nowe was in a deſperate caſe, and vtterly loſte, excepte the Goddes, and Hidaſpes doo preuente the Ruinous decaie. As for Oroondates, he anſweared that he would departe from all that for whiche the warre beganne, andThe folie of Oroondates. that he would let him haue the Citie Philae, and the Smaradge Mines, but he made requeſte that he woulde not deale hardely with him, nor cauſe him to yéeld him ſelf, & his Army. But if Hidaſpes woulde kéepe all the pointes of courteſie, he ſhoulde geue him leaue to departe quietly with his Souldiers to Eliphantina, whiche ſhoulde doo him no damage, nor lifte vp any weapon againſte him, els he had as lieue die nowe as to liue any longer, and be condemned by his Kinge for betrayinge his Army: and perhappes that alſo woulde be woorſe, for that nowe he ſhoulde haue but a ſimple and vſual death, then he ſhould haply haue newe tormentes deuiſed for him. When he

had ſaide thus, they deſired them to take into their company twoo Perſians, vnder pretence that they ſhoulde goe to Eliphantina, and if they would yéelde that were in the Towne, he woulde doo the like without further delaie. With this anſweare the Legates departed, and tooke the twoo Perſians with them, & recoumpted to Hidaſpes howe they had ſaide. Who after he had ſmiled a litle, & much blamed Oroondates for his great fooliſhneſſe, that he beinge a man not in his owne power, but in an other mans either to liue or die, would argue of any conditions, ſaid: It were very fondly donne, to deſtroye ſuche a number for one mannes madneſſe, and ſo he let thoſe departe to Eliphantina that Oroondates ſente, as thoughe he cared not if they made what prouiſion they could to withſtand him. But of his owne men he appointed ſome to make a Damme at the entrance of Nylus, into his Ditche, and other ſome to turne the water an other waie, that ſo the water (if there came no more in) mighte be the ſooner auoided out of the ſpace betwéene Siene, and them, and the harder to trauell in. They beganne the woorke a litle as they were commaunded, and woulde haue procéeded the nexte daie, but then they could doo no more becauſe of the nighte that came vpon them. Moreouer they that were in the Cittie ſoughte al meanes they coulde to ſaue them ſelues, and were all comforted with this health that was promiſed them vnlooked for. And thoſe that made the Mine vnderneathe the grounde, drewe ſomewhat neare to the enimies Ditche: whiche thinge they gheaſſed, becauſe they tooke the meaſure of the ſpace with a Line: other ſet proppes to ſtaie vp the walles, which thinge they mighte eaſily doo, becauſe of the Stoanes when the wall fell inwarde. Yet when they had donne all that they coulde, and thought them ſelues in ſaftie, they were not a litle troubled, but about midnight a great parte of that the Aethiopians beganne to digge before night (whether it were becauſe the grounde was looſe, and not thicke yenough

where the Damme was made, and ſo the foundatiō was throughly wetted: or els by reaſon that the workemen lefte ſome empty place in the grounde, and therefore it decaied, or whither the water came into that place, where was not grytte yenough layed, when the woorkemen were gone, and ſo the Damme was broken, by reaſon that water did increaſe and ſwell, or whether a man may iudge it the prouidence of God, brake & made ſuche a noyſe, which ſo abaſhed them, that they knew not what was hapned, but bothe ye 
                  Aethiopians, & Sienians thought that the moſte parte of the Walles was fallen downe. They whiche were in the Tentes, kepte thē ſelues cloſe, becauſe they were wel, & thought thei ſhould know what it was in the Morning. But the Citezins wente rounde aboute vpon the walles, & ſeinge that all was wel there, they thought that their enimies had had ſome miſhappe, vntil ye morninge tooke a waie al this doubt, & the breache was eſpied, & the water ſuddainely auoided. Thē did the Aethiopiās Damme vp the entrie of their ditche, & made fludde gates of woodde, & layde many thouſand loades of earthe therein, whiche they fetched as well from the lande, as by water in their boates, and thus wente the water awaie at length, yet could neither of them come to the other: for the earth was couered with a thicke inued, and vnder that whiche ſéemed to be drie at the toppe, there was muche wetneſſe, whiche as well deceiued men as Horſes. So they paſſed their time twoo or thrée daies, and in token of peace the people of Siene ſette open their gates, and the Aethiopians laide a ſide theire Armoure. And ſo was there a truce, yet came they not togeather, neither was there kepte watche and warde, with either of them. But they that were in the Cittie gaue themNiloa a feaſte that the Egyptians keepe in the honour of Nylus. ſelues to paſtime & pleaſure, for then it hapned that the hieſt feaſt that the Egyptians haue fel, which is kept holy aboute midſomer, at what time the Floudde encreaſde, and it is honoured more then al other for this cauſe, The

                  Egyptians faine Nylus to be a God, and the greateſt of al▪
                  VVhy Nilus is in ſuche honour with the Egiptians. Gods, equal to Heauē, becauſe he watereth their Countrie without Clowdes, or Raine that commeth out of the Apre, and thus dothe he euery yéere without faile, as wel as if it ſhoulde raine. And this is the common ſortes opinion. But the cauſe why they gaue him ſo Diuine honoure is, becauſe they thinke that the mixture of moyſte, and drie is the eſpecial cauſe of the beginninge, and continuaunce of mannes life (as for the other Elementes, they depende vpon theſe, and are where ſo euer theſe be) and they deeme that moiſture procéedeth from Nylus, and driues from the Earthe: but this euery man knoweth alſo. Mary their Diuines ſaie, that the Earthe is Iſis, and Nylus, Oſiris, geuinge to either a newe name. Therefore the Goddeſſe is very deſirous of his companie, and reioiſeth when he is with her, but lowreth when he is abſent, as if ſome vnhappy blaſte by lightninge had touched her. This tale haue the ſkilful men in Natures ſecretes diuiſed, becauſe as I thinke, they woulde not make prophane perſonnes priuie of the ſecreſies conteined therein: but they inſtructe thoſe that are deſirous to knowe theſe priuities in their veſtery by Candell lighte. And lette this ſuffiſe to be ſpoken at this time, by the leaue of the Gods, as for the greate ſecretes they ſhall not be reueled for reuerence ſake. Nowe let vs procéede with that whiche was donne aboute Siene orderly. When the feaſt of Nylus was come, the inhabitantes fel to killing of Beaſtes, and to doo Sacrifice, and for al that their bodies were buſied with theire preſente perilles, yet theire mindes, as muche as they might were godly diſpoſed. Oroondates waytinge his time, when the Sienians were faſte a ſléepe after theire feaſtinge, conueyed his Army priuily out, for he had ſecretely geuen the Perſians warninge before, at what howre and whiche gate he woulde goe foorthe, Euery decurion was charged to leaue all their Horſes and other Cattell behinde, that they mighte not trouble

them in their way, nor make a noyſe whereby that they did ſhould be diſcouered, but euery man to take his Armoure, and a Boorde, or Planke vnder his arme. When they were comme togeather, as he had commaunded, he caſte the boordes that euery man carried ouerthwart the Oſe, and laide them in ſuche ſorte that one touched another, and ſo conducted ouer his Army with little paine and great ſpéede, as if there had benne a bridge, for that they who came after, deliuered theire boordes to them that wente before. When he came toOroondates ſubtile eſcape from Siene to Elephantina. lande, he went priuily by the Aethiopians, who ſuſpected nothinge leſſe, nor kepte watche any longer, but ſleapte ſoundly, as faſt as his breathe woulde geue him leaue, & wente to Eliphantina, and was lette in by & by, for that the twoo Perſians whiche were ſente from Siene (as was appointed) wayted for his comminge euery nighte, and when they hearde theire watche woorde, they ſette open the gates. When it was daye the people of Siene firſte knew of this eſcape, ſuſpectinge the ſame for that euery man miſſed the Perſian that was Lodged in his houſe, and coulde not heare of them, and by the bridge whiche they ſawe before the Towne. Then was the Cittie in great feare againe, and looked for grieuous puniſhment, for this ſeconde iniury, becauſe they had ſhewed them ſelues ſo vnfaithfull, to let the Perſians eſcape, after they had founde ſuche clemency at the Aethiopians handes. Wherefore they determined euery man to goe out of the Cittie, and yéelde them ſelues to the Aethiopians, and by Othe to confirme their ignoraunce, if happely they may mooue them to pitie. When all of euery age were come togeather, and had taken bowes in their handes, to declare their lowlineſſe and humilitie, and with Tapers burninge carried all their Goddes, and holy Images in tooken of peace, were come ouer that brydge to the Aethiopians, they fell vpon their knées and ſate a farre of, gaue all at once a ſorrowfull & lamentable crie, crauinge

in humble ſorte the forgeueneſſe of their offence: and toA pitifull ſighte. obteine it the rather, they laied their Infantes before them, ſufferinge them to goe whither they woulde, ſo aſſwaginge the wrathe of the Aethiopians with their age, whiche was without ſuſpition and blame. Thoſe children for feare ranne from theire Parentes and Nources with a woonderful crie: ſomme crepte in the waie whiche wente towarde the Aethiopians Hoſte: other laie, and cried whiche coulde not ſpeake perfitely, and would haue made any man to take compaſſion vpon them, becauſe Fortune euen in them printed out an humble eſtate. When Hidaſpes ſawe this, he thoughte that they craued mercye in more earneſt ſorte then they did before, and therefore ſente one to knowe what they woulde haue, and howe it happened that they ranne out alone, and not the Perſians with them? They tolde him all, the Perſians Flight, their Innocency, the Hie Feaſte of the Coū
                  trie, and howe that they priuily ſlipte awaie while they were buſie in the ſeruice of their God, and when thei had banqueted, and were fallen aſléepe. Whereas perhappes if they had ſente them without Armour they ſhoulde not haue ben hable to haue ſtaied them beinge armed. When Hidaſpes hearde this, he ſuſpected (as the trothe was in déede) that Oroondates would doo ſommewhat to entrap, and hurte him. Wherfore he ſent onely for the Prieſtes, & when he had woorſhipped the Goddes of greateſt price, he aſked them if they coulde infourme him of any thinge that they meante to doo, and whither they were gonne, and where in was their greateſt truſte. They anſweared that they knewe nothinge certainely: mary they déemed that he was gonne to Eliphantina, where the chiefe ſtrengthe of his Armye laie, and that Oroondates beſte truſte was in his Barde Horſes. When they had ſaide thus, thei deſired him to goe into ye Towne as his owne, and to take from them all his diſpleaſure. But Hidaſpes would not enter into it at that time, yet he ſente thither

twoo Troupes of Armed men, to ſée whether there were any guile as he ſuſpected, if not that they ſhoulde be a Garriſon to defende the Cittie, this donne he ſent away the people of Siene with gentle promiſes, and went him ſelfe forwarde with his Army, either to receiue the Perſians if they ſet vpon him, or if they would not, to charge them. He had ſcante ſette his menne in araye, but his Spialles gaue him warninge, that the Perſians were cominge in Battayle raye with Banners diſplaied. Oroondates muſtred a great Army at Eliphantina, but when he ſawe that the Aethiopians were ſo néere, and he looked not for them ſo ſoone, he was forced to take Siene with a fewe Souldiers, where he encloſed on euery ſide, for all that he ſued for ſaftie, and obteined it accordinge to Hidaſpes promiſe, yet was he the falſeſt man aliue, who cauſed twoo Perſians to goe ouer with the Aethiopians, vnder coloure that they ſhoulde enquire, and know howe they of Eliphantina would make peace with Hidaſpes, but in déede to vnderſtand whether they made them ſelues ready to Battaile, if he by any meanes could eſcape, whiche fraudulente, and guilefull deuiſe he put then in practiſe. And when he founde them well prouided, he leadde them foorthe ſtraighte, and protracted no time til he came to his enimies, puttinge all his hope in celeritie, if he mighte take his enimies vnprouided. By this time either Armye had fighte of other, and he tooke the fielde firſte with al the Perſian brauery, ſo that it gliſtered with theire ſiluer and gilte Armoure, as if all the place had benne on fire. For then the Sunne aroſe, and ſhining vpon the Perſians, gaue ſuch a wonderful brightneſſe from their complet Harneys, that it rebounded vpon thoſe that were a greate waie of. In the right winge of his Army he placed the Medes, and Perſians that dwelledThe order of Oroondates his armie. not farre of, in the Forfrunte whereof wente thoſe that were ſurely armed, & the Archers that were lightly Harneſſed came behinde them, that they might ſhoote the

better, beinge defended by them. In his left winge were the Egyptians, and Aphricanes placed, and Slingers and Archers with them too, & them he charged ofte to breake out, and aſſaile the ſide of their enimies Battayle. Him ſelfe was in the middeſt of his maine Battaile, ſittinge in a Chariote very brauely encloſed therewith rounde about, for his better ſafety, before whom were his barde Horſemen, vpon truſte of whome he ventured to ioyne with his enimies. For this is a valiaunt crue, and is ſet before the other Army, as if it were a walle that might not be battred. They are armed thus: A picked felloweHowe the Perſian Horſeman is armed. of greate ſtrength putteth vpon him an Helmet accordinge, whiche is as ſitte for him, as if he ſhould put on a Viſarde in a Maſke: this couereth all his head downe to his ſhoulders, ſauinge that there be holes left for him to looke out at, in his right hande is a greate ſtaffe, bigger then a Speare, with his lefte hande he ruleth his Horſe, by his ſide hangeth a Swoorde, and all his body is couered with a Iacke. And a Iacke is made thus: with piecesHowe a Iacke is made. of Braſſe, and Iron, as bigge as the palme of a mans hande, they make a coate as it were of ſeales, layinge the ende and ſides of eche of theſe vpon other (ſo that the neithermoſt parte of one, goeth ouer the toppe of the other) and ſo they ſowe them togeather, and this lieth vpon euery parte of the body without any adoo: it compaſſeth euery iointe, and neuer letteth a man either to ſtraine out his limmes, or drawe them in, for it hath ſ
                     •
                  éeues, and reacheth from the necke downe to the knées, ſauing that neceſſitie forſeeth that it be cut of betwixte the thighes, as one ſhould ſitte vpon his Horſe: and ſuche is a Iacke, whiche beateth of all Dartes, and kéepeth of all manner of blowes. Ouer there legges to their knées, they pull on a Boate whiche is tied to their Iacke. Like vnto this doo they arme theire Horſes too: aboute his legges they tie Bootes, and couer his heade with Frontales of ſ
                     •
                  éele, from his backe downe beneath his belly hangeth a clothe

with diuerſe wreathes of Iron, which dothe bothe Arme him, & by reaſon of the ſpace that is betwéene it hindreth not his courſe at all. Beinge thus appointed, and in a manner throwen into his Armoure, he ſitteth vpon his Horſe, mary he leapeth not vp him ſelfe, but other helpe him, he is ſo combred with the waight of his Armoure. And when the time of Battayle commeth, he geueth his Horſe the Raines, and ſpurreth him with his heeles, and ſo faſte as he can, he rideth vpon his enimies like a man made of Iron, or an Image faſhioned with hammers. His great ſtaffe at the fore end is tied to his Horſe necke with a corde, and the hinder ende is made faſte to the buttockes of the Horſe, ſo that in the conflicte it flieth not backe, but helpeth the Horſemans hande, which doth but guide the ſame arighte, and by that meanes geueth the greater blowe, ſo that it rūneth through euery man that it hittes, and oftentimes it beareth through too menne at one blowe. With ſuche a Troupe of Horſemenne, & the Perſian Army thus appointed, the Deputie ſet forwarde toward his enimies, leauinge the fludde euer behinde him, foreſeinge, becauſe he was farre inferiour to the Aethiopian in number, that the water ſhoulde be in ſtéede of a Wall to him, that he might not be compaſſed aboute with his enimies. Likewiſe Hidaſpes broughteHowe Hidaſpes ordered his Army. on his Army, and placed the Souldiers that came from Moroe, beinge very cunninge in fightinge hand to hand againſte the Perſians, and Medes in his enimies righte winge. He ſet moreouer againſt them, who were in hisTrogloditae a people of Aethiopia. enimies lefte winge the Trogloditae, whiche came from that Countrie where the Cinamon groweth, being light harniſhed Souldiers, and excellente ſwifte of foote, and cunninge Archers. But againſte the middell warde, whiche he hearde was the ſtrongeſt, he ſet him ſelfe andBlemmies and Seres, are people of Aethiopia alſo. his Elephantes, with Towres on their backes, and the Souldiers that came from the people called Blemmies, & Seres: whome he inſtructed what they ſhoulde doo when

they came to fight. When the token was geuen in the Perſian Army with Trumpette, but in the Aethiopian with Drumme and Timbrell, Oroondates ſet forwarde as faſte as he could, but Hidaſpes at firſt went as ſoftely as poſſible he might, by this meane prouidinge that the Elephantes ſhoulde not be farre from thoſe that ſhoulde reſcue and defende them, and that the Horſemen in the middell of his enimies Army, ſhould be tired before they came to ſtrokes, as ſoone as they were within daunger of ſhotte, and the Blemmies perceiued that the Horſemen were haſty to comme vpon them, did as Hidaſpes commaunded, and leauing the Seres to ſée to the Elephantes, they ranne a greate waie before their fellowes towarde the Horſemen, that thoſe who ſawe them woulde haue thought they had benne madde, that beyng ſo fewe, durſt incounter with ſo many, and ſo well Armed. Herewithal the Perſians ſpurred their Horſes faſter then they did before, taking their boldeneſſe in manner for a vantage, and thought without more adoo at the firſte daſhe to diſpatche them. Then the Blemmies when they were almoſt come to hande ſtrookes, and in a maner ſtocke vpon their Speares, ſuddainely all at once fell downe & crepte vnder the Horſes, and knéelinge with one knée vpon the grounde layed their heades & ſhoulders vnder the Horſes without any harme, ſauinge that they were troden a little with their féete: But they did a wonderful ſtraūgeA notable facte of the Blemmies. thinge, for contrary to all mens opinion, they wounded the Horſes, and thruſt them in the bellies, as they paſte by them, wherwith a great ſort fel downe by reaſon that their Horſes for griefe would be ruled no lōger, & ſo caſt them. Whom as thei laie on heapes, the Blemmies wounded vnder ye thighes, for ye 
                  Perſian Horſeman is not hable to ſturre, if he wante his Horſe. They whiche eſcaped with their Horſes whole, fel into the Seres handes. They as ſoone as their enimies came neare ſtepte behinde the Elephantes, as behinde a greate Tower, and moſte ſure

Couerte. There was a greate ſlaughter, ſo that theire Horſemen were almoſte all ſlaine. For their Horſes beinge afraide of the greateneſſe, and ſtraunge ſighte of Elephantes ſhewed to them on the ſuddaine, ſome turned backe, other ranne aſide, and cauſed the maine Battaile to breake theire Araye ſtraighte. They who were vpon the Elephantes, becauſe euery Towre had ſixe men in itſo that on euery ſide, twoo fought ſaue behinde, ſhot ſo continually, and ſo ſtraighte as thoughe they had ſhot at ſomme marke out of their Towers, and as if they had benne in ſomme ſteady Caſ
                     •
                  le, ſo that the thickeneſſe of their Arrowes was like a Clowde to the Perſians: eſpecially for that the Aethiopians makinge theire enimies eies theire marke, as thoughe they foughte not alike for life, but contended whether were the better Archers, did ſo hit theire marke, that thoſe who were ſtriken ranne here and there with the Arrowes, as if they had benne Pipes in their eies. If any of them came againſte theire willes out of the Araye becauſe their Horſes woulde not be ruled, they fel emong the Elephantes, where they died there being ouerthrowen of the Elephantes, and troden vnder their féete, or els killed of the Blemmies, and Seres who ranne out vpon them, as if they laie at receip
                     •
                  e behinde the Elephantes, & wounded ſome with Arrowes, and other they killed when their Horſes caſt them to the grounde. To be ſhorte, who ſo euer eſcaped, did nothing woorthy talke, nor hurte the Elephantes any whit, for that the Beaſte is couered with Iron when he commeth to Battaile, & if he were not, he hathe of Nature ſo hardeThe Elephant is almoſt inuulnerable. a ſcale ouer his body, that no Speare can enter therinto. Laſtly, when all that remained aliue were put to flight, the Deputie with ſhame yenough foreſooke his Chariot, and got him on Horſebacke and fled, and the Egyptians, and Aphricanes who were in the lefte wing
                     •
                   knewe nothing hereof, but fought manfully, and tooke more hurte a greate deale then they did: mary they bore it out valiantly.

For the Souldiers of the Countrie out of whiche the Cinamon commeth, being ſet againſte them, charged them ſoare, and draue them to ſuche ſhiftes, that they knewe not what to doo, becauſe when they ſet vpon them then woulde they flée, and runninge a greate waie before, would turne their Bowes behinde them, and ſhoote as they fledde: but if they fledde, then woulde they purſue them neare, and either with Slinges, or litle Arrowes impoyſoned with Dragons bloud anoye thē greiuouſly, for euery one of them hathe a rounde Wrythe vpon hisHowe the Trogloditae weare their Arrowes. head, in which their Arrowes are ſet in order, they turne the feathers towarde their heades, and ſuffer the Arrow heades to hange out like the beames of the Sunne, then in ſkirmiſhe doo they take out their Arrowes as readily as if they had a Quiuer, and leapinge and daunſinge in and out. Satyre like them ſelues, beinge vnarmed, ſhoote at theire enimies, and haue no Iron heades vpon theire ſhaftes. For they take a bone out of the Dragons backe,VVhereof the Trogloditae make their Arrowes. whereof they make theire Arrowes an ell longe. This donne, as wel as they can, they ſharpen the ſame, and make a naturall head thereof, ſo called perhaps ye boanes that comme out of Greece. The Egyptians mainteined the Battaile, and kepte their order a greate while, and receiued the ſhot vpon their ſhieldes, either for that they be of nature greate ſufferers, and make their boaſte (notThe Egyptians care not for deathe. ſo profitable, as arrogante) that they care not for deathe, or els fearing to be pouniſhed if they ſhrunke from their Standardes. But after they hearde that the Horſemen which was the chiefe ſtrength, and greateſt hope of their battaile, were put to ſlighte, and the Deputy gonne, and that the Meades, and Perſians which were the beſt Souldiers had donne no notable feate, but a litle damage to the men of Meroe, againſte whom they were placed, and receiued a great deale more, and that euery man els was fledde, they beganne to leaue fightinge, and turne theire backes too. Hidaſpes ſéeinge this not able Ʋictory out of

his Tower, as wel as if he had ben on the top of an highHidaſpes dothe gette the victory, and Oroondates flieth. Hill, he ſente Heraultes to them that folowed the chaſe, not to kil any moe, but take as many as they could aliue: and aboue all other, Oroondates, whiche was donne. For the Aethiopians drawinge their maine battailes alonge, yet ſo that their Aray was very thicke, turned ye winges rounde aboute, and ſo encloſed the Perſian Armye, and lefte no place for them to flée, but through the Riuer: into the which when many fell, and were in greate daunger emong the Chariottes, and other multitude of men, thē perceiued they that that policie whiche the Deputie vſed in the conducte of his Army, was very fooliſhe, and to no pourpoſe, becauſe at the firſte when he feared leaſt his enimies ſhoulde beſet him rounde aboute, and therefore ſo leadde his Army, that Nylus was euer at their backes, he marked not that he left no place for him ſelfe wherby he mighte flée. There was he him ſelfe taken, at ſucheAchemenes woulde kill Oroondates, but is ſlaine him ſelfe by an Aethiopian who taketh him pryſoner. time as Achemenes Cibeles Sonne (who by this time hearde what newes were at Memphis) wente aboute in that broyle to kill him ſelfe (for he repented that he tolde any thinge of Arſace nowe) ſéeinge that all argumentes whereby he mighte proue the ſame, were taken awaye, and yet was deceiued, and had not geuen him a deadly wounde, but he him ſelfe ſtraight paied for it, being ſtroken through with an Arrow of an Aethipian, who knew the Deputie, and deſired to ſaue him as the charge was geuen, and was offended that any man in flight from his enimies, ſhould ſo ſhamefully ſet vpō his owne felowes, and take that oportunitie which fortune profered, a time to be reuenged of his priuate aduerſary. When he was brought by him that had taken him priſoner, & Hidaſpes ſawe him ready to ſownde, and ſoare blodyed, whiche he cauſed to be ſtinted ſtraighte with ſuche thinges as were prouided therefore, becauſe he determined to ſaue him, if he mighte, he comforted him thus: I graunte you youre life with al my harte, for it is a greate praiſe to ſubdewe

the enimie in the fielde, as longe as he withſtandeth byThe eſpeciall prayſe of a notable Captaine. manhoode, but when he is ouercomme, with liberalitie. But what was the matter that you were ſo falſe? I was falſe to you, anſweared he, but trewe to mine owne Prince. Then (ꝙ Hidaſpes) what pouniſhmente thinkeA prety cōmunication betwene Hidaspes and Oroōdates. you that you haue deſerued, ſeing that you are ouercome? Suche as my Prince oughte to take (ꝙ he) of any of your Captaines, that had kepte their allegeance to you. Truly (ſaide he) he woulde commende him, and ſende him awaie highly rewarded, if he be a true Kinge, and not a Tyrante, and is deſirous that other men by his example ſhoulde doo the like. But Sir (ſaide Hidaſpes) you ſaie that you be faithful, but will not confeſſe that you plaied the foole in aduenturinge to matche ſo many ſcore thouſandes. He anſweared: I did not fooliſhly perhaps ſeingeThe nature of a cruell and tyrannous Kinge. I conſidered my Princes nature, who doth more pouniſh the cowardly Souldier, then rewarde the valiaunt man. I determined therfore to ioine with you, & doo ſome woonderful thinge contrary to the opinion of men, as the like occaſion of well doinge dothe oft happen in warre, or if IIn warre oft is occaſion profered of well doinge. hapned to eſcape, that I might haue a good excuſe, becauſe I remitted nothinge that I ought to haue donne. When Hidaſpes hearde him ſaye thus, he prayſed him greatly, and ſente him to Siene, and gaue the Chirurgians charge to looke very well to him. Him ſelfe alſo entred the Towne, with certaine picked men of his Armie, and all the menne of what ſorte or age ſoeuer they were, of the Cittie mette him, and caſte vpon him & his Armie, Garlandes and Flowers, ſuche as grewe aboute Nylus, and commended him greately for his notable Victory. As ſoone as he came into the Towne, ridinge vpon an ElephantGood Kinges haue euer had their firſte and greateſt care to ſerue God well. in ſtéede of a Charriot, he buſied his minde aboute the ſeruice of the Goddes, and ſacred thinges, and aſked of the Driginall of the feaſtes of Nylus, and if they could ſhe we him any ſtraunge thinge woorthy to be looked on. They ſhewed him a déepe well, whiche ſhewed the manner

of Nylus, like vnto that at Memphis made of hewedVVhat ſightes the people of Siene ſhewed Hidaſpes. frée ſtoone, wherein were lines drawen an ell one from an other, into the whiche the water of Nilus brought vnder the earthe by a ſpringe, and fallinge into theſe lines, declareth to the Inhabitauntes the Ebbes and Fluddes of Nylus, by the number of the Figures, whiche bare or couered, doo plainely tell the riſinge and fallinge of the water thereof. They ſhewed him alſo the ſtrykes of Dialles, whiche made no ſhadowe, becauſe the Sunne aboute Midſomer at Siene, goinge directly ouer the pointe thereof geueth no ſhadowe, and by the like reaſon it ſhineth vpon the water whiche is in the bottome of theire welles. Hidaſpes maruailed not at this as a thinge ſtraunge to him, for he ſawe the like at Meroe: but when they talked of theire feaſte, and prayſed Nylus woonderfully callinge him the ſumme, and Author of al fruitefulneſſe, the vpholder of the vpper Egypte, and Father and maker of ye inferiour, which bringeth euery yéere a newe inued thether, whereof the Grecians call it Nylus, and telleth them the courſe of the yéere, by flowing in Sommer, and ebbinge in Autume, and the Flowres whiche growe in it in the ſpring time, and the broode of the Crocodiles, and ſaide that Nilus was nothinge els but the yéere. Whiche opinion alſo the name approued, for if you deuide the Letters contained therein into vnities, if thei be put togeather will make thrée hundred ſixtie and fiue, and ſo many there be daies in the yéere. To be ſhorte when they added thereunto ye properties of the flowers, and beaſtes that bréede thereaboute. Hidaſpes ſaide, This tale doth not only belonge to Egypte, but Aethiopia alſo. And ſéeing that Aethiopia bringeth this FloudNylus runneth through Aethiopia, before it commeth into Egypte. to you, whether it be a God as you thinke, or a mingle mangle of al other Flouddes, you haue good cauſe to honour that whiche is the Mother of your God. Wée doo ſo ſaide the Prieſtes, as wel for other cauſes, as that it hath geuen vs a preſeruour and a God, When Hidaſpes tolde

them that they ought to prayſe reaſonably, he entred into Siene, and ſolaced him ſelfe in the other parte of the daye in Banquetinge with the chiefe Lordes of Aethiopia, and the Prieſtes of Siene, he gaue leaue to his Army to doo ſo too. There were great heardes of beaſtes, flockes of Shéepe, many Goates, and Swine, whereof the Sienians gaue ſome to the Armie, and ſome they ſolde. The next daie after Hidaſpes ſittinge in his Royall Throne, deuided to his Army, the Cattel, Horſes, and al the other booty, as well that whiche he had in the Towne, as that he wonne in the fielde, accordinge as euery man had deſerued. When he was come to him that tooke Oroondates, Hidaſpes ſaide to him, aſke what thon wilte for thy labour. He anſweared: I néede aſke nothinge ô Kinge, but will be contente with that I haue, if you be pleaſed there with, whiche I tooke from Oroondates, and ſaued him according to your commaundement: and therewith ſhewed him the Deputies Dagger ſette with pretious ſtoanes of great valewe, and woonderful much woorthe, ſo that ſomme of thoſe that ſtoode by, cried out it was too muche for a pryuate man, and a Iewell more fitte for the Kinge? Thereat Hidaſpes ſmiled a litle, and ſaide: what can be more méete for a Kinge, then that I ſhoulde be of ſuche courage of minde, that I am not mooued with his couetouſneſſe but deſpiſe the ſame? beſide the Lawe of Armes geueth the victor leaue to take what ſo euer he findeth aboute his pryſoners body, wherefore wée geue him leaue to kéepe that, whiche he might haue concealed and wée neuer the wiſer. After him came they who tooke Theagenes, and Cariclia, and ſaide: ô Kinge our booty is not Golde, nor precious ſtoanes, whiche is little woorthe in Aethiopia, & are caſte aboute by heapes in the Kinges Palaice, but wée bringe you a yonge Man, and a Mayde, Brother and Siſter borne in Greece, whiche except your grace, are the taleſt and fayreſt Creatures in the world, wherefore wée craue, that wée may be partakers alſo of

your large liberality and bounty: well remembred ſaide Hidaſpes, for when you brought them to me, then I looked vpon them ſleightly: wherefore let ſome man bringe them hither ſtreight, and the other pryſoners alſo. They were brought out of hande, for that one ranne foorthe to the impedimentes without the walles, and tolde the kéepers, that they ſhoulde bringe them to the Kinge foorthwith. They aſked one of their kéepers whole Father was a Greeke, whither they ſhould be carried. He anſwered, that Kinge Hidaſpes would ſée them, and therewith as ſoone they hearde Hidaſpes named, they cried out, the Goddes be our comforte, becauſe till then they were afraide, leaſte any other had Reigned. Then ſaide Theagenes ſoftely to Cariclia, now my harte you ſhall tell the Kinge of our affayres, ſéeinge Hidaſpes reigneth, whomGreat matters may not be ſleightly handled, and here is a paſſinge wittie conference betweene Theagenes and Cariclia. you haue told me oft was your Father. Cariclia anſweared, My déere, great buſineſſe muſt be donne with great circumſpectiō. For it is neceſſary that the endes of thoſe thinges muſt be donne with many circumſtances, whoſe beginninges the Gods woulde haue very troubleſome, & it is méete not to detect that in a moment, whiche hath benne longe a woorkinge, eſpecially for that the heade and principall pointe, whereupon this buſineſſe and inuention depēdeth, I meane my Mother Perſina is away, whom by the fauour of the Goddes wée heare is aliue alſo. But if he geue vs away to any man, ſhall he not cutte of all occaſion, how wée ſhall come into Aethiopia, ſaide Theagenes? You néede not feare that, anſweared Cariclia, for wée haue hearde diuerſe times ere nowe of our kéepers, that wée are keapte to be Sacrificed to the Gods of Meroe, wherefore you néede not doubt that either wée ſhalbe geuen away, or killed before wée come there, ſeing wée be conſecrated to the Goddes, whiche thinge godlyGood men will not breake a vowe to God. menne cannot vndoo, but if wée through this our woonderful mirthe in hope to ſpéede wel, doo without conſideration tell our eſtate, ſeinge that they be not here, who

may know and beare witneſſe thereof. It is to be feared leaſte through our negligence, and that woorthely, wée ſhal incenſe him that heareth vs, and make him angry, who will perhaps alſo make a mocke of it, that wée beinge priſoners, and appointed to ſerue, wil be ſo bolde to ſaie that wée are the Kinges children, and haue no probable, but fondly deuiſed Argumentes to prooue the ſame. But the tokens, ſaide Theagenes, whiche I knowe youTo whom tokens are tokens. receiued and kéepe about you, will make for vs, and declare that we vſe no frawde nor falſehoode. Tokens ſaid Cariclia, are tokens to them that knowe them, and gaue me them, but to thoſe that knowe them not, and cannot vnderſtand the whole matter, they are but a vaine treaſure, & perhaps would make them lay thefte & robbery to our charge. And put the caſe that Hidaſpes know ſome of them who ſhal perſwade him that Perſina gaue me them,It is by nature decreed that euery Creature hathe a marueilous loue to that whiche is ingendred of it ſelfe: and this appeareth moſte in mankinde. as a Mother to her Daughter? The ſureſt token, Theagenes, that cannot be denied, is a Motherly nature, by whiche it commeth to paſſe, that that whiche dothe ingender, is pitiefully affected by ſome ſecrete of nature towarde that which is ingendred. Shal we then neglecte theſe thinges whiche maie make al the reſte ſéeme true? As they thus talked of theſe thinges, they were almoſte come into the Kinges preſēce, & Bagoas alſo was brought with them. As ſoone as the Kinge ſawe them ſtande before him, he lifted him ſelfe vp a litle from his Throane, and when he had ſaide: The Goddes be merciful to me, he ſate downe againe, and was in a ſtudye. When the Noble men of Perſia aſked him what he ailed, he made anſweare: I thoughte this laſte nighte, that I had aHidaſpes dreame. Daughter, which ſuddainely was growen to ſuche a ſtature as this wooman is of, and though I tooke no regarde to my dreame before, yet now by the bewtie of this mayd whiche is like her, I remember it againe. Thoſe who were about him, ſaide that it was a fantaſie of the mind, whiche oftentimes woulde foreſhewe thinges to come.

But for that time he made no accoumpte of it, but aſked them what they were, and of what Countrie borne. Caricha helde her peace, & Theagenes ſpake, that they were Brother, and Siſter borne in Greece. O Noble Greece (ſaide he) who doſte at other times bringe foorth good, and honeſt Creatures, and at this time haſte prouided vs of good Offeringes to doo Sacrifice for our Victorye. But why had I not a Sonne alſo in my Dreame? (ſaide he ſmilingly to them that were by) for as muche as reaſon woulde that I ſhould haue ſeene this yonge mans figure firſte before the Maydes. After this he turned his talke to Cariclia, and ſpeakinge Greeke (whiche tongue is in price with the Gymnoſophiſtae, & Princes of Aethiopia) ſaide: Thou Mayde, why dooſte thou holde thy peace, and not anſweare to my queſtion? Cariclia anſweared: At the Aultares of the Goddes (to whom wée vnderſtande that wée are kepte to be ſacrificed, you ſhal know me, and my Parentes. In what Countrie be they (ſaid Hidaſpes to her againe?) They be here (ꝙ ſhée) and ſhalbe preſente alſo when we ſhalbe offered. Thereat Hidaſpes ſmiled, and ſaid: Surely this Daughter borne to me in my ſléepe dreames, that her Parentes ſhalbe cōueied out of Greece into the middeſt of Meroe. Therefore let theſe be carried awaie, and kepte as well as they haue benne hitherto, to ſet foorthe, and adourne our Sacrifice. But what is he that ſtandeth by them ſo like an Eunuche? One of the men that ſtoode by, anſweared that he was an Eunuche in déede, whoſe name was Bagoas. Let him goe with theſe alſo, not as a Sacrifice him ſelfe, but to ſée to this other Mayde ordeined to be offered, that ſhée may be kept chaſt vntil the time comme that ſhée ſhal be offered. For Eunuches are very ialous, and therfore be appointed to take héede that other doo not that, which they them ſelues are not hable to doo. When he had ſaide thus, he looked vpon al the other Priſoners whiche came orderly, and tolde them, ſomme whereof, ſuche as ſéemed were borne to be

ſlaues, he gaue awaye, but ſuche as were of good Parentage, he let god fréely, ſauinge that he commaunded ten yonge men choſen out of all the reſte, & as many maydes to be carried with Theagenes for that pourpoſe, when he had anſweared euery man that had neede of him. Laſt of all he ſpake to Oroondates, who was brought to him in aHidaſpes his equal minde and great 
                        •
                     lemencie to Oroondates, and he is alſo a perfitte paterne of all vertues whiche beſeme a Kinge. Chariot, ſayinge: For as muche as I haue obteined that aboute which wée made this warre, I am not minded as many are. I abuſe not fortune to deſire to get more then other men haue, neither wil I make me a great Empire, becauſe I haue gotten this Victory, but am content with thoſe boundes, and markes whiche Nature made at the firſte, whiche parte Aethiopia from Egypte by the ſluces, wherein I obſerue equitie, and returne, for as muche as I haue gotten that I came downe for. As for thee, if thou liue, be Deputy of as much as thou haſte ben before, and tel the Kinge of Perſia that thy Brother Hidaſpes hathe with hande ouercome thée, but through the moderation of his minde hathe releaſed to thée, al that was thine, and is deſirous to kéepe the amity whiche is betwixt thée, and him (of whiche thinge he maketh greateſt accoumpte of any thinge that is in the worlde emong men) and wilnot refuſe to fighte againe, if thou ſhalte attempte any thing hereafter. As for theſe people of Siene I releaſe to them the tributes that they were woont to paye for ten yéeres, & charge, & commaunde you to doo the ſame. After he had ſaide thus, as wel the Citizens, as the Souldiers that were by thanked him, and clapped their handes ſo lowd that the noyſe mighte be hearde a greate way of. But Oroondates helde vp his handes, and layinge them acroſſe, fell downe and woorſhipped him, whiche thinge the Perſians are neuer woont to doo to any ſtraunge Kinge, & ſaid: Yée that be preſente, me thinketh that I breake not the cuſtome of my Country to my Kinge, if I adore him who hathe geuen me a Deputiſhip, neither doo I any euil, if I doo this to the tuſteſt man in the worlde, who might haue

ſlaine me: he hathe graunted me life throughe his ſingulare courteſie, and although he might haue ceaſed all into his owne hande, yet hathe he geuen me my Deputyſhip againe. Wherefore I promiſe bothe the Aethiopians, & Perſians if I liue, that I wil kéepe longe peace, and continuall amitie, and perfourme to the Sienians that whiche I am commaunded. But if any thinge otherwiſe then well happen to me, the Goddes rewarde Hidaſpes, and his Houſe, and al his Poſteritye for the goodneſſe he hath ſhewed to me.
               Here endeth the Ninth Booke.
               
            
            
               The Tenth Booke.
               
                  THus let this ſuffice to be ſpoken of that whiche was donne aboute Siene, which after it was come into ſo great a daunger, by the clemencie, & equitie of one man, ſodenly receiued ſo good a turne. This donne, Hidaſpes ſente a greate parte of his Armye before, and wente him ſelfe into Aethiopia, and the people of Siene, & other Perſians folowed him a great way, and praiſed him much & made many Supplications for his good, and proſperous healthe. Firſt he tooke his iourney on the bankes of Nylus, and ſuche other places as were neare vnto the ſame. After he came to Cataractae, and had donne Sacrifice to Nylus, and the other Goddes of that Countrie, he turned aſide, and wente throughe the middeſt of the Countrie. When he came to Philae, he gaue his Army leaue to reſt, and refreſhed them ſelues twoo daies. There againe he

ſente awaye a greate number of his meaneſt Souldiers, but tarried him ſelfe to fortifie the walles, & place therin a Garriſon. This donne, he choſe twoo Horſmen which ſhould ride in poſte before him, and in certaine Townes, and Villages chaunge their Horſes, with Letters to Meroe to certifie thē of his Victory. To the wiſe men which are called Gymnoſophiſtae, and are of the Kinges Councell he wrote thus:
               To the Diuine Councell Hidaſpes ſendeth gréetinge.
               I certifie you of the Victory whiche I had of the Perſians,
                  Hidaſpes Letters to the Coū
                     ſailours of Meroe. yet I make not any great accoūpt of the ſucceſſe that I had in ſpéedinge ſo well, becauſe I conſider the chaunges, and vnſtableneſſe of fortune, but ſalute, & commend by my Letters the Prieſtehoode, whiche as at all times, ſo hathe it very wel at this time tolde me trothe. Therefore I praie you, and as I maye commaunde you, to come into the place appointed, that with youre preſence you may make the Sacrifice more acceptable to all the people of Aethiopia.
               
               And to his wife Perſina thus:
               Vnderſtande that wée haue wonne the fielde, and thatHidaspes Letter to his wife Perſina. toucheth you moſte neare, are in good healthe. Wherfore make ſomme ſumptuous prouiſion to doo Sacrifice of thankeſgeuinge to the Goddes, and when you haue ſhewed the wiſe men our Letters, and exhorted them to be preſente, make haſte to be in the fielde before the Cittie, which is conſecrated to our Gods, the Sunne, the Moone, and Bacchus. When Perſina had readde this Letter, ſhée ſaide: Surely this was my dreame that I had this night,Perſinas dreame I thought that I was with childe, and broughte foorthe a Daughter which was mariageable preſently, & I gheaſſe that my ſorrowe in trauell betokened the Battaile, and my Daughter the Victory. Wherefore goe into the Cittie, and tell them of theſe ioiful newes. The Poſtes did as ſhée commaunded them, and with Garlandes of the

hearbe Lotos, that groweth by Nylus, vpon their heades, and braunches of Palme in their handes which they ſhaked, and ſhewed in the chiefe places of the Cittie, vpon greate Horſes, made reporte of the Victory, and if they had ſaide nothinge els there to, their geſture, and the habite of their bodies, would haue declared the ſame. Therfore all Meroe was ſuddainely full of ioy, and the people flocked togeather, and Sacrificed day and night in euery Family, Streate, and Tribe, and went oft to the Churches, and were not ſo gladde of the victory, as that Hidaſpes was well, becauſe that man had by equitie andHidaſpes very wel beloued of his Subiectes. courteous vſage of his Subiectes, ſo wonne the hartes of them, that they loued him as their Father. Perſina after ſhee had prepared great droues of Oxen, & Horſes, and many Shéepe, Quailes, and Griphes, with all manner of other liuinge thinges, and ſente them before into the ſacred fielde, that of euery one kinde of them mighte be a iuſte Hecatombe, & ſuche as were lefte ſhould ſerue for that publike feaſte, ſhée went to the Gymnoſophiſtae, whiche dwell in the groue of Pan, and gaue them Hidaſpes letters, and praied them to fulfill the Kinges requeſt in that behalfe, & doo her a pleaſure, and be an Ornament by their preſence to the Sacrifice. They willed her to ſtaie a while, and went them ſelues into the Temple to praie, and aſke Counſell at the Goddes, what was beſte to doo, and retourned by and by. And Siſimithres whiche was chiefe of the Kinges Councel, ſaide: wée wil come, Perſina, for the Gods commaund vs ſo to doo: Mary they foreſhewe that there ſhal be a ſturre and buſineſſe in the Sacrifice, but it ſhal haue a very good and delectable ende, becauſe that deſtiny ſhal without your trauaile bringe to light a member of your body, and parte of the Kingdome which was loſte. All terrible thinges, ſaide Perſina, ſhall haue the better ſucceſſe, if you be by: And I wil ſende you woorde, when I heare that Hidaſpes is almoſte come: you néede not (ꝙ Siſimitres) ſende vs any

woorde when he will come, for to morrowe morninge wil he be here, and ſo ſhall you haue knowledge by his letters anon. And it happened ſo in déede: for as ſoone as Perſina was departed, and almoſte come home to the Kinges Palaice, a poſt gaue her Letters from the Kinge that tolde her that he would be there the next daie. Then by and by the Contentes of theſe Letters were notified in the Towne, and the menne onely were commaunded to méete them, but the woomen might not goe out of the Cittie, becauſe that the Sacrifice ſhould not be deſiled by any meanes, in as muche as at that time they Sacrificed to the cleanlieſt Goddes, the Sunne, and Moone, & therefore might no woomen be preſent, but the Prieſte of the Moone alone, whiche was Perſina, for that the Kinge is the Sunnes Prieſte, and the Quéene the Moones, by the cuſtome of the Countrie. Cariclia alſo ſhould be there, not as a looker on, but a Sacrifice to the Moone. ThenNilus, Aſaſoba, and Aſtabora flouddes of Aethiopia beſide Meroe. was there greate adoo in the Cittie, ſo that the menne woulde not tarry till daie, but laboured all the night, to goe ouer the floudde Aſtabora, ſome by the Bridge, other that dwelled a farre of in Boates that were made of Réedes, whereof many growe there on the bankes ſides: the boates be very ſwifte as wel for the mater that they be made of, as alſo for their burden, for they neuer carry aboue twoo or thrée perſons, for the Réede is cut into twoo partes, and of either will they make a Boate. Meroe isMeroe. the chiefe Cittie of Aethiopia, in manner of an Ilande thrée cornerd, about the which Nylus, Aſtabora, and Aſaſoba doo runne. At the heade is Nylus, and that is deuided into twoo partes: the other twoo flouddes runne on bothe ſides one by an other, and méete at length, and fall bothe into Nylus, by reaſon of the greateneſſe thereof, whiche is ſuche that almoſte it maketh the Iland imitate the mayne lande (for it is thrée hundred thréeſcore andThe length and breadth of the Iland wherein Meroe is. fiuetene mile longe, and ſixeſcore and fiue broade). It ingendreth beaſtes of woonderfull greatneſſe of al kindes,

but eſpecially Elephantes, & as there growe trées without the trauaile of men, ſo dothe it bringe foorthe muche other fruite. For beſide that, there are Palme trées of greate height, whiche beare ſtoare of Palmes, there isVVheate and other fruite of Aethiopia. Corne and Wheate of ſuche taleneſſe, that it will hide a man on Horſebacke alwaies, and ſometimes though he ſate vpon a Camele, and it bringeth foorthe ſo muche that thei reape thrée hundred times ſo much as thei ſowe, & the Réede that growes there, is ſuche as wée ſpake of before: ſo that al that nighte was beſtowed in paſſinge ouer the Riuers: whiche donne, they went to méete Hidaſpes, and receiued him with greate ſhoutes and clamours, as if he had ben a God, and thoſe went a great way before. Whē he was almoſt comme into the ſacred fielde, the Gymnoſophiſtes came, and gaue him their handes, and welcommed him with kiſſes. When theſe had donne, Perſina met him in the Church Porche. When they had made an end of their praiers, and thankeſgeuinge for his Victory, and ſafe returne, they made them ready to the publike Sacrifice, and he ſate in a Tabernacle made ready before for that pourpoſe: that ſame was made of foure Réedes, newlyThe Reedes of Aethiopia are great belike. cut downe, foure ſquare, ſo that at euery corner ſtoode a Réede to ſtaie it vp in ſtéede of a Piller, the toppe was made rounde, and couered with diuers bowes, the faireſt whereof were braunches broken from the Palme trées. In an other Tabernacle harde by this vpon places aboue were ſet the Images of that Country Gods, and the Pictures of Noble men, eſpecially of Memnon, Perſeus, and Andromeda whom the Kinges of Aethiopia ſuppoſe to be the Authours of their ſtocke. In other ſeates beneath ſate the Gymnoſophiſtae, & had in a manner their Goddes ouer their heades: aboute theſe ſtoode a crue of Souldiers round, which with their ſhieldes before them kepte backe the multitude, and reſerued a place in the middeſt for the Sacrificers without al tumulte or diſeaſe. As ſoone as Hidaſpes had in fewe woordes declared to the people his

Victory, & what he had donne els luckely for the Common Wealthe, he commaunded them who had to doo with the Holy affayres to beginne theire Sacrifice. There wereThe manner of there Sacrifice. thrée Aultars made, twoo which apperteined to the Sunne and Moone were ſet togeather: the thirde that was Bacchus, was erected a good waie of, to him they ſacrificed all manner of liuing thinges, becauſe that his power is wel knowen, as I ſuppoſe, and pleaſeth all. Vpon the other Aultars to the Sunne were offered yonge white Horſes, and to the Moone, a Yoke of Oxen, by reaſon that they helpe them in theire Huſbandrye, not farre from thence. While theſe thinges were in dooinge, there was a ſuddaine vncertaine voice heard (as is like would be emong ſuche a multitude) whiche cried: Let the Sacrifice whiche our Countrie accuſtometh to doo, be now made for al our ſafties, then let the firſte fruites that were gotten in the warre be offered. Hidaſpes perceiued that they called for Humaine Sacrifices, whiche are woonte to be offered of thoſe that are taken in ſtraunge warres, and beckened with hande, and tolde them that he woulde by and by doo what they required: and therewith he commaunded the priſoners appointed for ye pourpoſe to be brought foorthe, emong whom came Theagenes, and Cariclia not bounde, but garded aboute with men: all the other were heauie, and good reaſon why, ſauinge Theagenes, and Cariclia ſmiled, and wente with a chéerefull countenaunce, and alwaye looked vpon Perſina, ſo that ſhée alſo was moued therewith, and ſoare ſighinge ſaide: O Huſbande, what a maide haue you appointed to be ſacrificed? I know not whether euer I ſawe ſo fayre a Creature? what a ſtoute ſtomake: what a bewtifull viſage hath ſhée? with howe couragious a harte beareth ſhée this Fortune? how doth ſhée moue my minde, by reaſon of her flowringe age? If the Daughter that I had by you, which was ſo euil loſte, had liued, ſhée woulde haue ben almoſte as olde as ſhée. But Huſbande, I would to God ye might deliuer her by

ſome meanes from this perill, ſurely I ſhould haue great comforte if ſhée ſerued at my Table & wayted vpon me. Perhappes alſo the vnhappy Creature is a Greeke for neuer was there ſuche a face in Egypt. Shée is a Greeke anſweared he in déede, borne of Father & Mother, whom ſhée hath promiſed to ſhewe at this time, but I am ſure ſhée ſhall neuer be able to doo that. But that ſhée ſhoulde be deliuered from this Sacrifice it is not poſſible, though I woulde, and yet am I moued ſomewhat too with the Mayde, and haue compaſſion vpon her: You knowe that the Lawe requireth a man to be offered to the Sunne, and a wooman to the Moone, and becauſe ſhée was broughte me firſte and ordeined for this purpoſe, the people would be content with no excuſe, onely one healpe there is, if ſhée be founde not to be a cleane Mayde, without medlinge with man, when ſhée ſhal goe to the fire, ſeing that the Lawe willeth that ſhée be as well cleane alſo, that is offered to the Moone, as he that is Sacrificed to the Sunne, as for Bacchus it made no greate matter. But take héede that if ſhée be founde to haue accompanied with men, it be no honeſty to take her into your houſe. Then ſaide Perſina, let her be founde to haue donne that,Captiuitie, VVarre, &c. maketh many euill deedes▪ to be pardonned. ſo ſhée may be ſaued: Captiuitie, Warre, and baniſhed life, ſo farre from her owne Coūtrie, excuſeth her though ſhée haue donne any ſuche thinge, whoſe bewty is ſufficient to make her to be forced. While ſhée ſpake thus, and wept, but would not haue them that were by to perceiue ſo muche, Hidaſpes commaunded fire to be brought, then were the yonge Children gathered togeather, and theThe maner how the Aethiopians tried the Virginitie of the yonge men and Maydes appointed to be Sacrificed. Prieſtes (which onely may touche it without any harme) brought it out of the Churche, and ſet it in the middeſt, and badde al the pryſoners treade vpon it. All thoſe that trode vpon it were burned in the ſoles of their féete, and were not hable to abide it any while, there were ſpittes of Golde laide to the fire, whiche was wrought to ſuche purpoſe, that it would burne euery vnchaſte perſon, and

him that was forſworne, but ſuche as had liued otherwiſe, might treade vpon it and haue no harme. Wherefore they appointed theſe to Bacchus and other Goddes, ſauinge twoo or thrée Maydes of Greece, whiche were founde to haue kepte theire Virginitie. After Theagenes alſo put his foote to the fire, and was founde a Maide, there was great wonderinge, bothe for that he beinge ſo tale and bewtifull, as alſo becauſe he was ſo yonge and luſty, and had neuer to doo with any wooman, and ſo he was appointed to be offered to the Sunne. Then ſpake he ſoftely to Cariclia, and ſaide: Is Sacrificinge the rewarde of ſuch as liue cleanly in Aethiopia, and ſhal they be ſlaine, that kéepe their Virginitie? But Cariclia why doo you not nowe manifeſt your ſelfe? What other time doo you looke for hereafter? will you tarry till one come to cutte our throtes? vtter I praie you, and tell your eſtate, perhappes when you are knowen you ſhall ſaue me, if not, yet you with out doubt ſhalbe out of daunger, whiche thinge when I ſée, I ſhalbe better content to die. When ſhée had anſweared him, that her time was nowe at hande, and that the whole eſtate of her Fortune was ſette vpon ſixe and ſeuen, ſhée tarried not, till they commaunded her, that had charge of that matter, but put vpon her the holy Garment, that ſhée brought from Delphi, whiche ſhée alwaye carried in a little Fardell aboute her, wrought with Golde, & other coſtly Iuelles, And when ſhée had caſt her heare abroade, like one taken with Diuine fury, ranne and leapte into the fire, & ſtoode there a greate while without harme, and her bewty then appeared a greate deale more, ſo that euery man looked vpō her, and by reaſon of her ſtoole thought her more like a Goddeſſe, then a mortall wooman. Thereat was euery man amazed, and muttered ſoare, but nothing they ſaide plainely, and woondred beſide all other thinges that ſhée beinge more bewtiful then any mortall wooman, and in her beſte youth had not loſte her virginitie: ſo that diuers

in the company were ſorrowfull that ſhée was fitte to be offered, and woulde if they wiſte howe, gladly haue deliuered her, for al that they were very ſuperſtitious. But Perſina aboue al other was moſte ſorrowful, ſo that ſhée ſaide to Hidaſpes, howe vnhappy is this wenche, whiche boaſteth ſo muche of her virginitie at ſuch vnreaſnnable time, and muſte die for all this praiſe, But Huſbande, howe ſhal wée doo with her? He anſweared, you trouble me in vaine, and for naught take you pitie vpon her that cannot be ſaued, but hath benne kepte from the beginninge (as may be gheaſſed) for the excellency of her Nature to the Goddes alone. Then ſpake he to the Gymnoſophiſtes, and ſaide: Right wiſe menne ſéeinge that all thinges are ready, why doo you not begin to doo this Sacrifice? God defende (ſaide Siſimithres in Greeke, that the people might not heare it) for wée haue defiled bothe our eies, and our eares too muche with this that is donne already. As for vs wée will goe aſide into the Churche, for wée our ſelues miſlike, and ſuppoſe that the Goddes doo not allowe ſuche abominable Sacrifice, as is donne with menne and woomen, and I would to God that wée might alſo diſalowe and fordoo all the other Sacrifices,VVhat Sacrifice the Goddes like beſte. whiche are made with ſlaughter, for as muche as in our opinion that ſufficeth which is donne with Prayers & other ſwéete ſauours. But tarry you (for there is no doubt but the King muſt néedes be there to appeaſe the people) and doo this vncleane Sacrifice, becauſe of the Olde cuſtomes and Decrées of Aethiopia, that muſte néedes be donne, yet ſo that you ſhal haue néede to purge your ſelfe afterwarde, and ſhall ſcante be hable to doo it, I thinke that this Sacrifice ſhal not come to any good ende, for diuerſe cauſes, but eſpecially for that God hathe tolde me ſo, & becauſe the fire ſtandeth aboute theſe Straungers, and ſignifieth that there is ſomme God that defendeth them. When he had ſaide thus, he and the reſte that ſate by him aroſe, and went their waie. Then Cariclia leapt

out of the fire, and ranne to Siſimithres, and fell flatte at his knées (in ſpite of the Officers, whiche woulde haue ſtaied her, becauſe they thought that her humilitie was for nothing els, but to craue that ſhée might not die) and ſaide: Moſte wiſe menne ſtay a while, for I haue a cauſe to pleade with the Kinge and Quéene, and muſte haue Iudgemente thereon, and I heare that you onely geue ſentence vpon ſuche Noble perſons. Wherefore abide, and be you iudges of this plea of life and deathe, for you ſhall knowe, that it is neither poſſible, nor iuſte to offer me to the Goddes. They hearde what ſhée ſaide gladly, and ſpake to the Kinge, ſayinge: Heare you ô Kinge this appeale, and what this Straunger requireth? Hidaſpes ſmiled a little, & ſaide, what iudgement maye this be? or what haue I to doo with her? by what meanes ſhould I come in her daunger? That which ſhée wil ſaie (ꝙ Siſimithres) ſhal declare. But (ꝙ Hidaſpes) take héede, leaſte this that you doo, be no iudgement, but plaine wronge. If I that am Kinge, ſhal ſtande to pleade with a priſoner. Siſimithres anſweared, equitie, and iuſticeSiſimithres defineth Iuſtice excellently well with all the duties and pointes thereof. haue no reſpecte of honour, and eſtate, but he, ſpéedeth beſte, that bringeth beſte reaſons. Hidaſpes ſaide: The Lawe geueth you leaue to determine the controuerſies betwéene the Kinge and his Subiectes, not with Aliens and ſtraungers. Siſimithres anſweared: wiſe, and diſcrete menne doo not meaſure iuſte thinges by countenaunces, and outwarde appearannce, but rather with equitie. Wel (ꝙ Hidaſpes) let her ſpeake, ſéeinge it is Siſimithres pleaſure, but it is manifeſt yt ſhée wil ſpeake nothing to pourpoſe, but ſome ſooliſhe deuiſed thing, as ſuch as are in extreame peril are commonly woont to doo. Cariclia, though els ſhee were of a very bolde ſpirit, for hope of her deliuery out of theſe daungers, whiche ſhée truſted would come to paſſe, then was ſhée paſſinge merry when ſhée hearde Siſimithres name, for that was he that firſte tooke her, and gaue her to Caricles a tenne yéeres paſte

when he was ſente Embaſſadoure to Oroondates aboute the Smaradge Mines, and at that time he was one of the Gymnoſophiſtae, and chiefe of al the reſte. Then knewe not Cariclia him by his face, becauſe ſhée was ſeperated from him very yonge, and but ſeuen yéeres olde, mary ſhée remembred his name, and was the gladder for that, becauſe ſhée truſted that he would be her Aduocate, and healpe her to be knowen. Therefore ſhee helde her handes vp to Heauen, and ſaide alowde that all mighte heare: O Sunne, the fonnder of my Anceſtours petygrée, and yée other Goddes, & Noble men, you ſhall beare me witneſſe that I ſaie nothinge but truthe, and healpe me in this place, to which I wil bringe due proufe: and there beginne. Doo you commaunde, ô Kinge, ſtraungers, or this Countrie menne to be offered? Straungers (ꝙ he). Then is it time (ſaide ſhée) that you ſéeke other to be Sacrificed, for you ſhall finde me to be one of this Countrie borne, and youre Subiecte. He marueiled at this, and ſaide ſhée lied. Softe (ꝙ Cariclia) you woonder at ſmall thinges, there be greater maters then this, for I am not only one of this Countrie borne, but of the Bloud Roial. Hidaſpes deſpiſed her woordes, & turned away as though they had ben to no pourpoſe. Then (ꝙ ſhée) Father, leaue of thus to deſpiſe, & refuſe your owne Daughter. Therwith the Kinge not onely deſpiſed her, but waxed very wrothe, accoumpting that iudgemente a greate ſcorne, & intollerable wronge, & ſaide: Siſimithres, & the reſte, how longe ſhal ſhée abuſe my ouer great pacience? Is not the mayde ſtarke mad? who of ſingulare boldeneſſe with lies ſéeketh t auoide deathe, and ſaith ſhée is my Daughter, as if it were in a Comedy, and this but of a deſperate minde, and fonde deuiſed matter? For my parte (as you knowe) I neuer had ſo good lucke, as to haue a Childe, onely ones it was tolde me that I had one, but I loſte her by and by. Wherefore lette me carrye her awaye that ſhée delaye the Sacrifice no longer. No man

ſhall carrye me awaye, Cariclia ſayde, excepte the Iudges commaunde, and you youre ſelfe are iudged nowe and doo not iudge, nor determine. Perhaps ô King the Lawe ſuffereth you to kill Straungers, but neither this Lawe, nor the Lawe of nature will, that you kill your owne Children, for the Goddes ſhal proue this daie that you are my Father, though you ſay naie. Euery controuerſie in Lawe ô Kinge ſtandeth vpō twoo pointes eſpecially, that is to ſaie, proofe by writinges, and confirmation by witneſſes. I wil bringe bothe to proue thatBy Writinges and witneſſes is euery controuerſie is Lawe determined. I am your Daughter, for a witneſſe I will bringe none of common ſorte, but him ſelfe the Iudge, for the Iudges opinion maketh greatly on his ſide that pleadeth any matter: And I will laie before you a writinge whiche ſhal tell you bothe mine and your eſtate. As ſoone as ſhée had ſaide this, ſhée tooke her Faſcia, that ſhée carried aboute her, and vnfoulded it, and gaue it to Perſina. As ſoone as ſhée ſawe it, ſhée was ſtraight ſo amaſed that ſhe coulde ſaie neuer a woorde, and looked a great while vpō that whiche was written therein, and the mayde togeather, ſo that for feare ſhée trembled, and ſweate ſore, and was gladde of that ſhée ſawe, mary ſhée was muche troubled with the ſuddainneſſe of the chaunce, which hapned in ſuche ſorte as no man would beleue it. Beſide this ſhée feared if it were opened, leaſte Hidaſpes would ſuſpecte ſomewhat, and be too light of beliefe, or angry and perhappes pouniſhe her, in ſo much that Hidaſpes ſeing her ſo amazed, ſaide: Wooman what meaneth this? Dothe ought contained in this writinge, thus trouble thée? O Kinge, my Lorde and Huſbande (ꝙ ſhée) I haue nothinge to ſaie thereto, but take it and reade it your ſelfe, the ſame ſhal teache you well yenough: and as ſoone as ſhée had geuen it him, ſhée ſatte downe againe very ſadde. When Hidaſpes had it, & had called the Gymnoſophiſtae to reade it with him, he ranne ouer the ſame, and marueiled muche thereat him ſelfe, and perceiued well that

                  Siſimithres was abaſhed, and that ſixe hūdred thoughtes aroſe in his minde, ſo that he looked oft vpon the Faſcia, and oft vpon the Mayde: When he had readde all, & was throughly inſtructed aſwel of her expoſition, as the cauſe thereof, he ſaide: I knowe well that I had a Daughter, whiche for all that it was tolde me ſhée was deade, and Perſina ſaide ſo her ſelfe alſo to me, yet now I know that ſhée was ſente abreade to ſéeke her Fortune. But who was he that tooke her vp, ſaued her, and nouriſhed her thus, or who was he that carried her into Egypte? Was he taken with her? to be ſhorte, howe may I knowe that this is ſhe, and whether that which was caſte foorthe be not deade, and ſome man when he hapned to finde this, would abuſe his good lucke, and geue them to this Maide, and make her playe this parte, and ſo ſcorne the greate deſire that wée haue, to haue a Childe, by ſuborninge ſome chaungelinge, and couloringe the truthe with this Faſcia. To this Siſimithres anſweared, I can reſolue you of your firſte doubte: for I am he that tooke her vp, and kepte her ſecretely, and carried her into Egypt, when you ſente me Embaſſadour thither. You knowe well yenough that wée maie not lie. And I knowe this Faſcia, whiche is written with the letters of the Kinges of Aethiopia: Wherefore wée néede not doubte, that it was deuiſed any where els, and you haue good cauſe to know it, becauſe it is written with Perſinas hande. But there were other tokens alſo that I gaue to him, who receiued her of me, whiche was a Greeke, and by ſéeminge a good and honeſt man: I haue them alſo ſaide Cariclia, and ſo ſhewed them the Iuelles, with which ſight Perſina was more aſtonied then ſhée was before. And when Hidaſpes aſked her what they were? and whether ſhée knewe any of them? Gaue him none other anſweare, but that ſhée knew them, mary it was better to make further triall of theſe thinges at home. Then was Hidaſpes troubled againe, and almoſt beſide him ſelfe: but Cariclia ſaide theſe

tokens my Mother gaue me, but this Kinge is yours, & then ſhée ſhewed him the Pantarbe. Hidaſpes knewe it, for he gaue it to Perſina, when he was betrothed to her, and ſaide: theſe tokens be very good and mine owne, but yet I know not that you haue them as my Daughter, & haue not come by them by any other meanes. For to omitte other thinges your colour is ſtrange, and the like is not ſéene in Aethiopia. Shée was white too (ſaide Siſimithres) that I brought vp, and the terme of yéeres dothe well agrée with the age of this Mayde, for that the time of the expoſition was ſeuentiene yéeres agone, and ſhée is ſeuentiene yéeres olde, more her eies wil prooue no leſſe, and all the habite of her bodie is like her that I ſawe at that time. Siſimithres (ꝙ Hidaſpes) you haue ſaide very well, & rather haue defended this cauſe as an Aduocate, then ſatte vpon it in Iudgement: but beware that while you goe aboute to take awaye parte of this doubte, you charge not my wife with a very harde matter. How is it poſſible by reaſon, that ſeinge wée be bothe Aethiopians ſhoulde begette a white Childe? Siſimithres then looked aſide vpon him, and ſmilinge ſcornefully, ſaide: I cannot tell what ayleth you, that you preſently be thus affected, that you obiecte this Patrocinie to me as a facte woorthy blame, whiche I thinke I ought not to neglect. For wéeVVho is the beſte Iudge. call him the beſte iudge whiche is a Patrone and defender of equitie: but why doo I not rather defende you then the Mayde? ſeinge that I haue proued you to be a Father by the healpe of the Goddes. And ſhould I now deſpiſe her, whom I haue kepte for you from her Cradell? But thinke as you will of vs, wée paſſe not a pointe. For wéeSo ought all good menne to liue. liue not to pleaſe other menne, but ſéeke to contente our owne conſciences, with onely honeſty, and mere equitie. As touchinge your queſtion of her colour, the Faſcia anſweareth you, that Perſina conceiued ſuche a Figure by looking vpon Andromeda, when you had to doo with her: if you deſire to be fully ſatiſfied herein, and be made to

beleue without denial, the Picture is at hande, looke vpō 
                  Andromeda, who is as wel expreſſed in the Mayde, as in the Picture without any difference. This ſaide: the Officers brought the Image whiche was carried awaye before, and when they had ſet it by Cariclia, there was ſuch a ſhoute amonge the people, by reaſon that thoſe who were neare, tolde them that were a farre of, and coulde not heare what was donne, that for ioye they wiſte not what to doo. So that Hidaſpes alſo coulde not diſtruſte any longer, but ſtoode a greate while, what for ioye and woonderinge, ſtill and ſturred not. Yet (ꝙ Siſimithres) wée wante one pointe, ſtrippe vp your ſléeue Mayde, for there was a blacke ſpotte aboue your Elbowe: it is no ſhame to be ſtripped for triall of your parentes & kinred. Cariclia vncouered her lefte arme, & aboute it there was in a manner a mole, muche like to the ſtrakes, that Elephantes haue. Perſina coulde rule her ſelfe no longer,Cariclia knowē to be Hidaſpes his Daughter. but ſuddainely wente out of her Throne, imbraced her and wepte, and for the excéedingneſſe of her ioye, whiche ſhée could not conceale, ſhée made a certaine muttering, and ſhée wanted but little, to haue fallen with Cariclia. Hidaſpes had pitie vpon the wooman, when he ſawe her lamente ſo, & him ſelfe was like affected in his minde too, but he kept teares out of his eies, as if thei had ben made of Iron or Horne, & ſo looked vpon that which was done. And although his minde was moued as well with a Fatherly affection, as with a manly courage, ſo that he was drawen bothe waies, yet he was at length ouercomed ofNature ouercō
                     meth all things nature, whiche ouercommeth al thinges, & did not onely ſuffer him ſelfe to be perſwaded that he was a Father, but was alſo affected like a Father: ſo that when he ſawe Perſina fel with her Daughter, he tooke her vp, imbraced Cariclia, and with teares, as with an offeringe, made a Fatherly League with her. Yet did he not foreget what he had to doo, but ſtoode ſtill a while and looked vpon the people, whiche were affected like him, and throughe ioie,

and pitie wepte to ſée that ſtraunge hap, and woulde not heare the cries whiche commaunded ſilence. Wherefore he ſtretched out his hande, & bad them be ſtill. And whenAll this Oratiō of Hidaſpes, declareth what is the duety of a good Kinge. he had appeaſed them, he ſaide: Yée that be preſente, the Goddes contrary to all hope, haue declared that I am a Father, as you both heare & ſée, & that this is my Daughter it is proued by many argumentes: yet doo Iowe ſuch good wil to you, and my Countrie, that without regarde either to the ſucceſſion of my Bloude, or ioye that I haue to be called a Father, whiche all by her are like to enſue, am ready to offer her to the Goddes for your behoofe: and although I ſée you wéepe, and are affected like men, and haue pity vpon the vntimely age of the Maide appointed to die, & to ſee me without al hope of ſucceſſion hereafter: yet muſt I néedes, though you ſay nay, perfourme the cuſtome of our Countrie, and rather haue regarde to the Soulelike vtilitie, then my priuate profite. Surely I knowe not, whether it be the Goddes wil to geue her to me, and take her away againe at one time (as they did at the firſt when ſhée was borne, and now are like to doo after ſhée is founde) but I leaue that to be ſcanned by youre diſcretion: for I cannot determine whether they woulde haue her ſacrificed, whom they haue banniſhed into the furtheſt parte of the world, and by a woonderful chaunce brought to me againe like a priſoner. Which thinge ſéeinge it falleth out thus, thoughe I haue not ſlaine her as an enimie, nor indamaged her ſince ſhée was priſoner, yet nowe I know that ſhée is my Daughter, I wil make a Sacrifice of her, if you deſire it, without more adoo: neither wil I yéelde to affection, whiche in an other Father perhaps deſerued pardon, not be abaſhed, nor deſire you to be good to me, and graunt me this fauour that ye Lawe of nature requireth, in ſparing her for my fanſie, becauſe wée may appeaſe the Goddes ſome other waye, but euen as you haue ben like affected as I, and as ſorrowfull for my miſhaps as your owne: ſo wil I make more accoumpt

of your Weale Publike, thē mine owne priuate commoditie, without any reſpecte at all to this miſerie, neither will I ſet by ſorrowful Perſinas teares, who hath now at this time ſéene her firſt childe, and is a Mother, & ſhal by and by be ſpoyled thereof. Wherefore if you will, leaue your wéepinge, and fruiteleſſe pityinge of me, and let vs goe to our Sacrifice. Now to thée my Daughter (for firſt & laſte wil I cal thée by this pleaſant name) whoſe bewty is péereleſſe to no pourpoſe, and haſt found thy Parentes in vaine, which haſte in an ill time happened vpon thine owne Country, woorſe to thée then any ſtraunge Lande, who haſte ben ſafe in other Countries, but arte in daunger of deathe in thine owne, trouble not my minde with ſorrowful wéeping: but if euer thou diddeſt ſhew thy ſelf to be of ſtoute courage, and Princely minde, now plucke vp thy harte, and folow thy Father, who cannot prouide a marriage for thée, not bringe thée to bedde in any coſtly Bowers, but make thée ready for Sacrifice, and beare before thée, not ſuche Tapers as are vſed at Bridalles, but appointed for Sacrifice, & is in wil to make an offeringe of thine vnſpeakeable bewty: & you Gods beare with me, if affection hathe cauſed me to ſpeake any thinge ſcante godly, or religiouſly, who haue both called her my daughter, and am readye to take her life awaye. When he had ſaide thus, he tooke Cariclia by the hande, and made as thoughe he woulde haue carried her to the fire vpon the Aultars aboue, and deſired them to let the woordes that he ſpake take ſuch roote in their mindes, that they would ſuffer him to doo as he ſaide. The whole multitude of the Aethiopians was moued with this that he ſaide, & would not ſuffer him to leade Cariclia one foote farther, but cried out ſuddainely alowde, ſaue the Mayde, ſaue the BloudeTokens that the people loued their Kinge well. Royall, ſaue her whom the Goddes will haue ſaued, wée thanke you, you haue donne to vs ſo muche as the Lawe requireth, wée acknowledge you for our good Kinge, acknowledge your ſelfe to be a Father, the Gods foregeue

vs this offence, you ſhal more diſpleaſe them if you withſtand their wil: let no man be ſo bold as to kil her, whom they haue preſerued: you that are ye Father of the people abroad, be Father in your owne houſe at home alſo. And ſixe hundred thinges like theſe ſpake they to him. Laſte of al to declare that they would not let him in déede, theyThe people will not lette Cariclia be Sacrificed. ſtepte before him, and woulde not ſuffer him to goe forewarde, but deſired him to appeaſe the Goddes with ſome other Sacrifice. Hidaſpes was content with all his harte to yéelde in this matter, and without muche adoo to beare this wiſhed inforcemente, and gaue the people leaue to wiſhe him ioy of his good lucke that he had, whom he ſaw to be very ioiful, thinkinge that anon they woulde make an ende of their owne accorde. But he ſtanding neare to Cariclia, ſaide: Déere Daughter, that thou arte my child, bothe by tokēs is proued, & wiſe Siſimithres beareth witneſſe, but aboue al, the fauour of the Gods hath declared. But what felowe is this, that was taken with thee, and is nowe at the Aultare ready to be ſacrificed, or howe did you cal him your Brother when you were broughte into my preſence at Siene firſt? For I thinke that he ſhal not be proued my Sonne too. For Perſina had no more but you at one time. Cariclia bluſhed, & caſte downe her eies, and ſaide: I tolde you an vntroth in that I ſaide he was my Brother, but neceſſity forced me to make that excuſe. But what he is in déede, he can tell you better then I: for he is a man, & therefore wil not be afraide to ſpeake more boldely then I that am a wooman. Hidaſpes not perceiuinge what ſhée meant, ſaide: My Daughter, pardon me, becauſe I haue cauſed thée to bluſhe in aſkinge thée a queſtion, whereto a mayde oughte not anſweare. But ſitte you in the Tabernacle with your Mother, who will be more gladde of you nowe, then when you were borne of her, and whereas ſhée is ill at eaſe, comfort her with your preſence, and tel her your affayres. I wil ſée to the Sacrifice, and ſéeke out ſomme other mayde, if there be any

to be found, that in your ſtéede may be ſacrificed with the yonge man. Cariclia almoſte cried out, when ſhée heardeCariclia by many circumſtances declareth her Loue, but her Father vnderſtandeth her not. that the yonge man ſhoulde be Sacrificed: yet (becauſe it was beſt) with muche adoo ſhée concealed her madde affection, and touched the marke againe almoſte, and ſaide: Sir, you ſhal not néede to ſéeke any other wooman, ſéeing the people haue remitted throughe me that parte of the Sacrifice. But if any require it, you ſhal not onely ſéeke an other wooman, but an other man too: if you doo not, thē muſte you Sacrifice none other but me with him. God forbid (ſaide he). But why ſaie you ſo? Shée anſweared, becauſe that the Goddes haue appointed that I muſte bothe liue, and die with this man. Hidaſpes not yet perceiuing the effect of the matter, ſaide: Daughter, I praiſe this your courteſie, in that you haue pity vpō this Greeke ſtraunger, and your felowe, with whom in your iourney you haue fallen acquainted, and deſire to ſaue him. But he cannot be deliuered from this offeringe. For neither pitie, nor Religion will admitte that the cuſtome of our Country be al broken as concerning the makinge of ſacrifice for victory: beſide this the people wil not be content, which ſcant was moued by the goodnes of the Gods to pitie thée. Then ſaide Cariclia, ô Kinge, for perhaps I may not cal you Father, if the gentleneſſe of the Goddes hathe ſaued my body, lette the ſame gentleneſſe alſo ſaue my harte, who is my harte. Theſe Goddes whiche haue by fatal deſtiny appointed this doo knowe very wel. But if this wil not be graunted, and that the ſlaughter of this ſtraunger muſt néedes adourne this Offeringe. Graunt me one requeſte, let me kill the Sacrifice, and I will get me a name of ſtouteneſſe emong the Aethiopians, with a Swoorde whiche ſhal be the greateſt thinge, and déereſt that euer you ſhall be hable to geue me. Hidaſpes was troubled with this, & ſaide: I vnderſtande not what this contrarietie in your minde meaneth: who euen nowe did goe aboute to defende, and ſaue the ſtraunger, and nowe

would with your owne hande kil him, as if he were your mortall enimy: neither doo I ſée what honeſtie or glory can be in this facte, for one of your age: but put caſe there were, yet maye you not by the Lawe, for this is onely lawfull for the Prieſtes of the Sunne, and Moone, and that not to all, but to the man that hath a wife, and the wife that hath a Huſbande. Seinge it is ſo your Virginitie wil not lette you haue your requeſt, whiche whereupon it ſhould growe, I cannot tell. Truely ſaide Cariclia to Perſina in her eare, that néede not to lette me, for if you wilbe content Mother, there is one that can ſupply that name wel yenough. Wée will be content ſaide Perſina merily, and God willinge wée wil Marry thée to ſuche a one, as wée ſhal thinke woorthy bothe for you and vs. Cariclia ſpake more plainely, you néede not chooſe him that is chooſen already, and as ſhée was aboute to ſaie ſommewhat more openly (for the preſent perill that ſhée ſawe Theagenes in before her face imboldened her, and made her laie aſide her Maydenly ſhamefaſtneſſe). Hidaſpes would heare her no longer, but ſaide ô yée Gods, howe ſéeme you to mingle euill thinges, and good togeather to vs, that you may leſſen one waie or other this vnlooked for felicity of mine, in as much as you haue geuen me a Daughter, that I thought not vpon, but haue made her in manner madde: for ſhal wée not iudge her fooliſh, that ſpeake too fonde thinges? Shée called him her Brother that was not ſo. When ſhée was aſked what this ſtraunger was, ſhée anſweared, ſhée knew him not: then ſought ſhée to ſaue him as her Friende, whom ſhée knew not: whiche when it was denied her, ſhée beſought me that ſhée might kill him as her moſte enimy. When this coulde not be graunted her, becauſe it was lawfull for none to doo it, but ſuche a one as had a Huſbande, ſhée ſaide that ſhée was Married, and named not to whome. How can ſhée haue a Huſbande, whom the fire declared had neuer to doo with her? excepte this doo erre in her

alone, which is the ſureſt rule that the Aethiopians haue, and neuer yet was proued contrary, and would geue her grace, when ſhée trode vpon it, to be vnburned though ſhee had loſte her Maydenhead. At fewe woordes I neuer ſawe any but ſhée, that made the ſame mā her friend, and enimy in one minute of an hower, and fained to haue a Brother, and Huſbande, whiche neuer was ſo. Wherefore wife goe you into the Tabernacle, and ſée if you can bringe her to her wittes againe, whiche is either made madde of the God that commeth to this Sacrifice, or els is beſide her ſelfe with too muche ioye, for the good lucke that ſhée looked not for. And I will goe anſweare the Embaſſadours which came from diuerſe Countries, and receiue ſuche thinges, as they bringe to welcome me home after my Victory, vntil they haue founde out an other to be killed in her place, whom I haue appointed for that pourpoſe. As ſoone as he had ſaide thus, he ſatte in a hie Chaire, not farre from the Tabernacle, and commaunded the Legates to come, and let him ſée what they brought, Harmonias the Herault aſked him whether all ſhoulde comme togeather, or orderly euery Nation by it ſelfe. Lette euery one comme orderly (ꝙ he) that I may honour euery man as he deſerues. Therefore (ꝙ the Heraulte) ſhal Meroebus your Brothers Sonne come firſt,Meroebus a yonge Kinge, to whom Cariclia was after promiſed to wife. who came euen nowe, but he tarrieth till the Souldiers that be aboute vs doo make him roume. Thou dolte (ꝙ Hidaſpes) why diddeſt not thou tell me of him preſently? ſeeing thou knoweſt that he was no Legate, but a King, and my Brothers Sonne that deceaſed but late, whom I haue placed in his Throne, and by adoption haue made mine owne heyre too? All this I kn
                     •
                  we ô Kinge, ſaide Harmonias, but I thought it beſte to tarry a time, for if a Heraulte, haue néede to doo any thinge eſpecially he ought to tarry and waite for opportunitie of time. Pardon me therefore I beſeche you, if I durſt not be ſo bolde as to breake of the pleaſant talke, that you had with the

Quéenes. Let him come therefore now ſaide the Kinge. He wente as he was commaunded, and came by and by againe with his charge. Then came Meroebus, a tale & proper yonge man, at that time comminge to mans eſtate, for he was ſeuentiene yéeres olde, and hier then all other that were there, and had a comely crewe of goodly fellowes that wayted vpon him, and the Aethiopian Army with greate admiration and reuerence, made him ready waie. Neither did Hidaſpes tarry in his ſeate, but aroſe to welcome him, and imbraced him with a Fatherly affection, and ſette him beſide him, and takinge him by the right hande, ſaide: My Sonne you come in good time, you ſhall beſide celebration of this ſolemne Sacrifice, with me for my Victory, be Royally Married. For our Goddes and the Founders of our ſtocke, and the other Heauenly perſonages, haue prouided me of a Daughter belike whiche ſhal be your wife: The ſecreſies whereof you ſhal know hereafter, at this time if you haue ought to doo with the people vnder youre dominion tell me. Meroebus when he hearde of a wife, what for ioye and ſhame, coulde not hide him ſelfe ſo in his blacke colour, but that men mighte perceiue that he bluſhed, and after he had ſtaied a while, he ſaide thus: Father the other Legates that come, wil geue you of the beſte, and moſt pretious thinges that growe in there Countries: but I becauſe you haue ben valiant in Battaile, & declared your excellente manhoode in noble Exploytes, haue thought itMeroebus preſenteth Hidaſpes with a Champion. good to geue you a like gift hereunto, and therfore I geue you a man ſo wel practiſed in bloudſheadde, and warre, that there can none be founde whiche dareth to haue to doo with him: in wraſtlinge, and fighte with plummettes of Leade, and in all manner of other exerciſes ſo ſturdy, that no man is hable to withſtande his ſtrengthe. Therwith he badde the man come foorthe. He ſtepte out, and fell downe before Hidaſpes, and was of ſuche ſtature, beinge a man of the olde makinge, that when he ſtouped to

kiſſe the Kinges knée, he was as highe almoſte as thoſe that ſtoode aboute him. This donne, he tarried not til he was commaunded, but put of his apparel, and ſtoode naked, and made a chalenge againſte al that woulde come, either with weapon, or with hande. After the Kinge ſawe that none woulde come foorth, though he had made diuers proclamations, he ſaid: You ſhal haue a gifte of vs like youre ſelfe. And then he commaunded to fetche an olde Elephante, which was very greate. When the beaſt was broughte, he receiued it gladly, and the people ſuddainely fel in a greate laughter beinge wel pleaſed with the Kinges ciuilitie: mary after they had laughed, and ieſted yenough, it ſéemed they were aſhamed of their facte. After him came the Embaſſadoures that the Seres ſente,The Seres geue Hidaſpes twoo garmentes of very ſtraunge worke. and brought to him twoo garmentes, one Purple, and an other White, the yarne whereof was ſpunne of the Spiders that bréede in their Country. After theſe giftes were receiued, and they had deſired the Kinge that ſuche of their Countrie men as were condemned in his priſon might be deliuered, and had obteined their ſute, the EmbaſſadoursVVhat the Embaſſadours of happy Arabia gaue. of Arabia foelix came and offered to him odoriferous leaues, bothe of Oliues, & Cinamon, and other ſwéete ſauours that growe in Arabia, woorthe many talentes, ſo that euery place was ful of ſwéete odours. After theſe came they of Trogloditis, and broughte Golde,VVhat the Trogloditae gaue, and the Blemmies. and a couple of Gryphes with Bridles of Golde on their heades. Then came the Bleminges which carried bowes, and arrowes made of Dragons boanes, and ſaide: Wée bringe you, ô Kinge, ſuch giftes as are not in value equal to the other, yet was there good accoumpte made of them (as you can ſaie your ſelfe) at the floudde in Battaile againſt the Perſians. They are (ꝙ Hidaſpes) more woorth then other of greater price, for theſe are the cauſe why the other are brought vs: and then he badde them tel him what they requeſted. When they deſired to haue theire tribute abated, he releaſed them of all fourtiene yéeres.

This donne, when all were come that had any Meſſage to doo, and were as well, or better rewarded then theire giftes deſerued. Laſte there came the Legates of theThe Axiomitae geue Hidaſpes a ſtraunge beaſt whiche is here deſcribed, and of the faſcion of his body, called Cameloperdalis. 
                  Axiomitae, who paied no tributes, but were his Confederates, and in League with him, wherefore they reioiced with him for his proſperous, and luckye viage, and broughte him giftes too, and emonge other a beaſte of woonderful and rare nature, as bigge as a Camel, whoſe colour was ſpotted, and vpon his ſkinne there was like ſcales, his latter parte was very lowe, and Lionlike, but his ſhoulders, foreféete, and breſte, were far beyonde the proportion of his other members: his necke was ſlender, and though the reſte of his body was greate, yet was his throate very ſmall, his heade was in faſcion like a Camels heade, but it was not paſte twiſe ſo bigge, as the Lybian Oſtriches heade, wherein he rowled his eies terribly, as if there had benne in them ſomme redde leade: His gate was neuer changed, but wente not like no beaſte either of the earthe or water, but he moued his legges on either ſide bothe at ones, ſo that he moued his right legges, and lefte legges, not in order, nor one after an other, but all his halfe body, with either of them: He was ſo tame and gentell to be dealte with all by vſe, that he would be ruled of his kéeper with a litle coarde, and rather followe his will, then the line he was tied in: as ſoone as the beaſte was brought in ſight, al the people were afraide, and ſuddainely called it of the faſcion and principal partes of his body Cameloperdalis, and it made a greate araye in al the place aboute the whiche the men ſtoode. For ſuche a chaunce befell, at the Aultare of the Moone ſtoode twoo Bullockes, and at the Aultare of the Sunne, foure white Horſes to be Sacrificed: when the Monſtrous and ſtraunge beaſte came in ſight, they were as ſore troubled, and afraide as if they had ſéene a ſprite, and one of the Bulles, whiche as might be thought ſawe the beaſte alone, & twoo Horſes brake out of their handes

that helde them, and ranne aboute as faſte as they coulde, mary they coulde not breake out of the compaſſe of the Armie, becauſe the Souldiers with their ſhieldes had made, as it were a wall rounde, but they ranne here and there, and ouerthrewe all that ſtoode in their waie, were it veſſel or any thinge els, ſo that there was a great ſhoute, as well of thoſe to whome they came for feare, as alſo for ioye and pleaſure that other had to ſée them ouerrunne their mates, and treade them vnder their féete. Wherefore Perſina and Cariclia, coulde not be quiet in there Tabernacle, but commaunded to drawe the Curtaine aſide, and looked vpon that, that befel. There Theagenes either moued with his owne manly courage, orA wonderfull actiue feate of Theagenes. els ſturred forwarde with ſtrengthe ſente him of God, when he ſawe his kéepers that attended vpon him, diſperſed here and there, with the tumulte ſtarte vp ſuddainely (for before he knéeled at the Aultare, and looked euery minute to be ſlayne) and tooke vp a clefte ſticke, whereof there laye a greate many vpon the Aultare, and leapte vpon one of the Horſes that was broken looſe, and holdinge him by the mane in ſtéede of a bridell, and with his héeles, and the clefte ſticke makinge him to goe: followed the Bulle, at the firſte euery man thought that Theagenes woulde haue benne gonne, and therefore incouraged one an other that they would not lette him goe out of compaſſe of the Souldiers. But by that he did after, they ſawe he did it not for feare, nor to auoide the Sacrifiſinge: for when he had ouertaken the Bull, in very ſhorte time, he tooke him by the tayle, and draue him forwarde of pourpoſe, to wery him in making him runne faſter, whiche way ſo euer he wente, he followed after him, and with greate ſkill ſo tooke héede to his ſhorte turnes, that they hurte him not. After he had acquainted the Bull with this, he rode at his ſide, ſo neare that their ſkinnes touched, and theire breathes and ſweatte were mingled togeather, & he made them kéepe ſo equall

a courſe too, that thoſe who were a farre of, déemed that they had benne made but one, & cōmended Theagenes to the Heauens, that had ſo ſtraungely yoked a Horſe and a Bull togeather. And vpon this looked al the people: but when Cariclia ſaw it, ſhée trembled & quaked, becauſe ſhée knew not what he meant, and was as ſore afraide of his hurte, if he ſhoulde by ill hap haue a fall, as if ſhée ſhould haue ben ſlaine her ſelfe, ſo that Perſina eſpied it, & ſaide: Daughter, what lackeſt thou? Thou ſéemeſt to be in euery daūger that this ſtraūger is in. Truely I my ſelfe alſo am ſommewhat moued with him, and I haue pity of his youthe, and I wiſhe that he might be ſaued from this daunger, and not be ſacrificed, ſo that the ſeruice of the Goddes might not be altogeather vnperfite, and neglected of vs. That is a ieſte in déede (ſaid Cariclia) to wiſhe that he mighte not die for that cauſe that he mighte not liue. But Mother, if you maye ſaue the man, you doo me a pleaſure. Perſina not ſuſpectinge the trothe, but that ſhée was a litle in loue with him, ſaide: Although he may not be ſaued, yet be not afraide to tell thy Mother what acquaintaunce thou haſte with him, why thou ſhouldeſt be ſo careful for him, though in déede this be a youthfull motion, and ſeante conuenient for a mayde? A MotherlyThe property of a Motherly nature. nature knoweth how to conceale her Daughters facte, and alſo one wooman an others eſcape, becauſe perhaps they are like affected. When Cariclia had very ſorrowfully wepte, ſhée ſaide: In this pointe aboue all other I am vnhappy, becauſe when I ſpeake to thoſe that are very diſcrete, and quicke witted they vnderſtande me not, and when I tel them my calamities, they thinke I touch them not: nowe am I forced to tel the plaine trothe, and hereafter to accuſe my ſelfe openly. As ſhée had ſaide thus, and was aboute to tell her the matter truely, ſhée was ſtopped by a greate crie of the people againe. For Theagenes, after he had lette the Horſe runne as faſte as he coulde, ſo longe till his breaſte was equall with the

Bulles heade, he let him goe at libertie, and fell vpon the Bulles heade betwéene his hornes, and caſte his armes aboute his heade like a Garlande, and claſped his fingers on his forehead before, and let the reſte of his body hange downe by the righte ſhoulder of him, ſo that the Bull in goinge hurte him a litle. After Theagenes perceiued that he was weary with the greate burthen, and his muſcules were fainte with too muche trauell, and that he came before the place where Hidaſpes ſate, he turned him ſelfe before, and ſet his féete before the Bull, who beatte vpon his houfes ſtill, and ſo tripped him. He beinge let of his courſe, and ouercomme with the ſtreangthe of the yonge man, fell downe vpon his heade and ſhoulders, ſo that his hornes ſtucke ſo faſte in the grounde, that he coulde not moue his heade, and his féete ſtoode vpwarde, with whiche he ſprauled in vaine a greate while, and by his féebleueſſe declared that he was ouercomme. Theagenes laye vpon him, and with his leafte hande helde him downe, but lifted his right hande vp to Heauen, and looked merily vpon Hidaſpes, and al that were there els, who laughed, and were much delighted with that ſight, and they hearde that the Bull with his lowinge declared the famouſneſſe of the Victory, as wel as if it had benne declared with a Trumpet. On the other ſide was a great ſhoute of the people, that ſaide plainely nothinge that one coulde vndeſtande to his praiſe, but with their wide throtes, and gapinge mouthes (as in like aſſemblies doth oft happen) thei ſéemed to extol him to the Heauens with one conſente. Then by commaundemente of Hidaſpes the Officers ranne, and ſomme broughte Theagenes to him, other tied Ropes aboute the Bulles hornes, and tooke vp the Horſe, & leadde them to the Aultars againe. And as Hidaſpes was aboute to ſaie ſomewhat to Theagenes, the people bothe delited with the yonge man, and ſingularly minded to him, euer ſince they ſawe him firſt, and alſo maruailinge at his ſtrength, but rather for ſpite

they had at Meroebus Aethiopian Champion, cried with one voice, let this fellow be matched with Meroebus mā, let him that receiued the Eliphant haue to doo with him yt ouercame the Bull. And becauſe they were very inſtant Hidaſpes was content: Wherefore the Aethiopian was brought foorth ſtraight, who looked cruelly rounde about him, and went on his tiptoes ſtretchinge him ſelfe, & ſhakinge his Armes very arrogantly. When he was come neare, Hidaſpes ſaide to Theagenes in Greeke, ſtraunger the people willeth that you ſhal haue to doo with this fellowe. I am pleaſed to doo as they wil haue me ſaide Theagenes: But in what ſort muſt wée be matched? in wraſtlinge ꝙ Hidaſpes. Why ſhall wée not rather fight with Swoordes (ꝙ he) that either I may doo ſome excellent fact, or els with death if I be ſlayne content Cariclia, who hitherto hath concealed our eſtate, or rather geuen me my laſte farewell. What you meane (ꝙ Hidaſpes) to talke of Cariclia I know not, but you muſte wraſtle, & not fighte with weapon, becauſe it is not lawfull to ſée any bloude ſhedde before the Sacrifice be donne. Then Theagenes perceiued that Hidaſpes doubted leaſt he ſhould be ſlaine, and ſaide: you doo well to kéepe me for the Goddes, and they ſhal haue reſpect to my buſineſſe. And then he tookeTheagenes wraſtleth with Meroebus his man, and ouercommeth him. duſte, and caſte it vpon his armes and ſhoulders that were yet ſweaty with the chaſinge of the Bull, and ſhaked that of, that it ſtocke not faſte to his body, and then ſtretched foorthe his handes, and tooke ſome footinge, and bente his legges a litle, and ſtouped lowe, at a woorde all partes of his body were ready, ſo that he ſtoode, and with greate deſire awayted for the aduantage at the cloſe. The Aethiopian ſeing this laughed irefully, and triumphed ſcornefully vpon him: and ranne ſuddainely vpon him, and with his elbowe hit Theagenes in the necke, as ſore as if he had ſiriken him with a leauer, & then drewe backe, and laughed againe at his owne fooliſhe conceite.

But Theagenes like a man alway frō his cradel brought vp in wraſtlinge, and throughly inſtructed in Mercuries Arte, thought it good to geue place at firſte, & take ſome triall of his aduerſaries ſtrength, and not to withſtande ſo rude a violence, but with Arte to delude the ſame. Therefore he ſtouped lower, and made ſemblaunce as though he had benne very ſorrowful, and layde his other ſide to receiue the nexte blowe. And when the Aethiopian came vpon him againe, he made as though he would haue fallen flatte vpon his face: But as ſoone as the Aethiopian beganne to deſpiſe him, and was incouraged well, and came vnaduiſedly the thirde time, and lifted vp his arme againe to take holde of him, and puttinge his right arme vnder his leafte ſide, and by liftinge vp his hande, ouerthrewe him on a heape, and caſtinge him ſelfe vnder his arme pittes, gryped this gorbelly with muche adoo, and forced him with his héeles to fall on his knées, and then leapte on his backe, and claſpinge his féete about his priuie partes, made him ſtreatche out his legges, wherewith he did ſtaie vp him ſelfe, and pulled his armes ouer his heade behinde him, and layde his belly flatte vpon the earthe. For this facte the people gaue a greater ſhoute then they did before, and the Kinge him ſelfe coulde ſtaie no longer, but ſtarte from his ſeate, and ſayde: ô hatefull neceſſitie, what a man are wée forced to kill by our Lawe? and when he had called him vnto him, he ſaide: Yonge man there lacketh nothinge, but that thou be Crowned before the Sacrifice: Surely this thy famous, and notable Victory, but vnprofitable, and not continuall to thée, deſerueth a Crowne. But for as muche as I cannot deliuer thée from this preſente perill though I woulde, yet will I doo all that I may for thée, without breache of the Lawes. And therwith he put a Crowne of Golde vpon Theagenes heade, and diuers men did ſée him wéepe. Theagenes ſaide, then

I require you to let me obteine this requeſt at your hand accordinge as you haue promiſed. If there be no waie to eſcape this murtheringe, commaunde me to be killed by the hande of her that is found your Daughter to day. Hidaſpes was bytten with this woorde, and conſidered Cariclias requeſte, whiche was like this, yet he iudged it no greate matter to ſcanne it narrowly at that time, and ſaide: Straunger, I bad thée aſke that whiche might be graunted, and I promiſed to perfourme it: beſide, the Lawe preciſely willeth, that ſhée that killeth the Sacrifice ſhould haue a Huſbande. Shée hath a Huſbande too, ſaide Theagenes. This man is madde, ſaide Hidaſpes, and beſide him ſelfe, and one that hathe geuen ouer him ſelfe to deathe. The fire declareth that ſhée is a Mayde vnmarried, and neuer had to doo with man, excepte you meane this Meroebus (I cannot tell howe you ſhoulde come by knowledge thereof) whiche is not yet her Huſbande, but I haue promiſed her to him. Neither is he like to be, ſaide Theagenes, if I knowe Cariclias minde, and if you will beleue me as a Sacrifice. Good ſir, ſaide Meroebus, no Sacrifices that be aliue, but ſuche as be killed, and cut vp doo with their intralles tell the Southſayers what ſhal enſue. Wherefore Father you ſaide wel that this ſtraunge marchante was madde, and ſpake nothinge to any pourpoſe. Therefore if you will, let one carry him to the Aultare, and when you haue diſpatched your other matter that you haue in hande, then may you goe aboute the Sacrifice. Then was Theagenes carried as commaundement was geuen. But Cariclia, who was comforted a litle becauſe of his victory, and hoped for better lucke. But when ſhée ſawe him leadde away, was then in ſorrow againe, and Perſina comforted her diuers waies, and tolde her that he mighte happen to be ſaued, if ſhée woulde tell her the reſte more plainely. Cariclia ſéeinge the time would permit her to driue of no longer,

told the chiefe, and principal pointes to her. That while Hidaſpes aſked if there were any moe who had ought to ſaie. Hermonias anſweared, here are no moe bue the people of Siene, which with other preſentes brought Letters from Oroondates, and they came but euen nowe. When Hidaſpes gaue them leaue to come to him, they deliuered the Letters, which he opended, and readde, the contentes whereof were:
               To Hidaſpes the gentle, and fortunate Kinge of the Aethiopians, Oroondates the greate Kinges Deputie ſendeth gréetinge.
               Foraſmuche as when you ouercame me in Battaile,Oroondates letters to Hidaſpes. but more in lofty courage of mind, you gaue me a whole Deputiſhip of youre owne courteſie, I ſhall thinke it no marueile if you perfourme a ſmal requiſte nowe. There was a certaine mayde who in carriage from Memphis happened to fal into youre handes by chaunce of warre, and it was tolde me, of ſuche as were with her, and eſcaped out of your daunger, that you commaunded her to be carried captiue into Aethiopia, this wenche I deſire you to ſende me, bothe for her owne ſake, but moſte for her Fathers, for whom I woulde ſée her ſafe kepte, he hath trauailed farre for her, and in this trauell he was taken priſoner in this time of warre by my Souldiers, whiche laye in Garriſon in Eliphantina, whom I ſpied, when I tooke the vewe of thoſe that eſcaped out of the Battayle, and he deſired that he might be ſente to your Clemency: You haue him ſuche a man emong the reſt of the Ambaſſadours, as may with his manners alone declare that he is a Gentleman, and woorthy onely with his behauiour to obtaine his deſire at your hande. Sende him backe againe to me ô Kinge, mery, who is not called onely, but hath bene ere now a Father too: when he had reade this, he aſked which of theſe is this y• ſeketh for his Daughter.

They ſhewed him a certaine Old man, to whom he ſaid:Caricles commeth into Aethiopia to ſeeke Cariclia. ſtraunger I will doo any thinge at Oroondates requeſt, but I commaunded tenne onely to be brought hither, & for as muche as one of them is knowen not to be thine, looke vpon all the reſte, if thou canſt finde her take her with thée. The Old man fell downe and kiſſed his féete, & after he had looked vpon them al, as they were brought before him, and founde her not whom he ſought he was very ſadde, and ſaide none of theſe ô Kinge is ſhée. You know (ꝙ Hidaſpes) there is no wante of good will in me, if you finde her not that you ſéeke for, blame Fortune. For I geue you leaue to looke that neither hers is any other beſide theſe, nor in the Tentes: when the Olde man had bente his browes and wepte, he lifte vp his face, and looked rounde about him, and ſuddainely ranne foorth as though he had benne madde. And when he came to the Aultare he did winde his cloke rounde like a rope (for he had a cloke on then by chaunce) & caſt it about Theagenes necke, and cried that all men might heare: I haue founde thée mine enimy, I haue gotten thée thou miſchieuous & accurſed fellowe: And although the Officers would haue ſtaied him, and plucked him from him, he hanged ſo faſte vpon him, that he obtained leaue to bring him before Hidaſpes, and the Councell. And there he ſpake thus: This man, ô Kinge, is he who like a Théefe hath taken my Daughter from me, this is he who hath made my houſe deſolate, & without any childe, he hath taken my harte euen from the Aultars of Apollo. And nowe he ſitteth at the Aultars of the Goddes like a good and deuoute man. Al that were there were moued with that whiche he did, Mary thei vnderſtoode not his woordes, but they maruailed at his woorke. And when Hidaſpes badde him tell plainely what he meante: The Old man (that was Caricles) concealed the truthe of Cariclia, fearinge leaſt if ſhée were dead by the waye, that he ſhoulde haue muche adoo

with her trewe Parentes. But he tolde that briefely that was little hurtefull in this ſorte: I had a Daughter,Caricles telleth Hidaſpes howe Cariclia came out of Greece. 
                  ô Kinge, if you had ſéene howe wiſe, and faire with all, ſhée had benne, you woulde haue thought that I had good cauſe to ſaie as I doo: Shée leade her life in Virginitie, & was one of Dianas Prieſtes, whiche is honoured at Delphi: That Mayde this iolly Theſſalian, hath ſtolen out of Apolloes Churche: as he came beinge Captaine of a holy Ambaſſage to Delphi my Natiue Cittie there to celebrate a certaine Feaſte. Wherefore it may well be déemed that he hathe offended alſo againſte you, for that he hathe diſpleaſed youre God Apollo (whiche is all one with the Sunne) and defiled his Temple. Furthermore a falſe Prieſte of Memphis was his companion in perfourmance of this his ſhameful, and heinous facte. After I had benne in Theſſalia, and required to haue this felowe, and they were all contente to deliuer him to me as a common plague of their Countrie, where ſo euer he were founde. I wente to Memphis, whiche I déemed to be a place whither Calaſiris woulde goe, for diuers cauſes. When I came thither, I founde him deade, as well he had deſerued, and was tolde by his Sonne Thyamis, of all that belonged to my Daughter: how that ſhée was ſente to Siene to Oroondates, where not findinge Oroondates (for I came thither too). At Eliphantina I was taken priſoner, and ſtaied: from whence I came at this preſente in humble ſorte to ſéeke my Daughter, and you ſhall doo me (vnhappy man) a good turne, and a déede wel beſéeminge a Kinge, if you will accepte the Deputies requeſte made in my behalfe. And then he helde his peace, and wepte bitterly to confirme that he ſaide. Hidaſpes turned to Theagenes, and what ſaie you to this (ꝙ he?) Theagenes anſweared, all that he hathe laide againſte me in this accuſation, is true: I am the thiefe, the vniuſt man, and the Robber. As touching him, yet haue I done

you a good turne. Therefore ſaide Hidaſpes, reſtoare that whiche is not your owne, that becauſe ye are vowed to the Goddes ye maye be a cleane, and glorious Sacrifice, and not ſéeme to be pouniſhed for your offence. NayVVho ought by Iuſtice to make reſtitution of a wronge. (ꝙ Theagenes) not he that did the wronge, but he that hathe the commodity of it, ought by iuſtice to make reſtitution. Saeinge therefore you haue her, reſtoare her, for it is Cariclia, whom he alſo will confeſſe to be youre Daughter. No man coulde rule him ſelfe any longer, but they were diſordred in euery place. Siſimithres, who had withhelde him ſelfe a good while, for all that he knew the whole matter that was in handlinge, till it were boulted out, whiche by litle and litle came to lighte, then he came to them, and imbraced Caricles, and ſaide: Your Adoptiue Daughter, which I ones deliuered you, is wel founde, and knowen to be theire Daughter, whom you know your ſelfe well yenough. Cariclia alſo ranne out of the Tabernacle like a madde wooman, without regard what became of her kinde and age, and fell at Caricles féete, and ſaide: O Father, no leſſe déere to me, then thoſe that begat me, take what reuenge you wil of me, without any regarde to the excuſe, whiche ſomme man might alleage that it was the Goddes will, and theire dooinge. Perſina on the other ſide kiſſed Hidaſpes, and ſaide: Huſband, iudge that all this is ſo, and be ſure that this yonge Greeke is youre Daughters Huſbande. The people in an other place reioiced, and almoſte daunced for ioie, and with one conſente were all gladde of that whiche was donne: mary all they vnderſtoode not, but gathered the moſte parte of Cariclia. Perhappes alſo they were ſturred to vnderſtande the trothe by inſpiration of the Gods, whoſe will it was that this ſhoulde fall out woonderfully, as in a Comedy. Surely they made very contrarye thinges agrée, and ioined ſorrowe and mirthe, teares and laughter togeather, and tourned fearefull, and terrible

thinges into a ioyfull Banquette in the ende, many that wepte beganne to laughe, and ſuche as were ſorrowfull to reioice, when they founde that they ſoughte not for, and loſte that they hoped to finde, and to be ſhorte the cruell ſlaughters whiche were looked for euery moment, were turned into holy Sacrifice. Then ſaide Hidaſpes to Siſimithres: Right wiſe man what muſte wée doo? to refuſe the Sacrifice of the Gods is a wicked acte, but to offer them whiche they haue prouided for vs is the duety of deuaute men: wée muſte therefore bethinke vs what is beſte to doo. Whereto Siſimithres anſweared not in Greeke, but in the Aethiopian tongue, that all mightToo muche ioye blindeth the wiſeſt men oftentimes. vnderſtande him, thus: Through too muche pleaſure, ô Kinge, the wiſeſt menne are oftentimes blinded, you mighte haue perceiued at the firſte that the Goddes liked not the Sacrifice whiche was ordeined, who haue nowe euery waie declared that happy Cariclia is your Daughter euen at the very Aulters, and haue brought him, that brought her vp, out of the middeſt of Greece, as it had benne of pourpoſe: They haue feared and troubled the Horſes and Bullockes too, that ſtoode before the Aultars, whereby they declared that the greater Sacrifices, whiche haue benne vſed emonge our Aunceſters ſhoulde nowe ceaſe, and be vſed no more. And beſide, declared this yonge Greeke to be the Maydes Huſbande, whiche may be the ende and concluſion of this Comedie. Lette vs therefore ſuffer theſe diuine Miracles to ſinke in our mindes, and be healpers of theire will, and doo more acceptable Sacrifices to them, and leaue murtheringe of menne, and woomen for euer hereafter. After Siſimithres had ſaide thus ſo lowde that all mighte heare him. Hidaſpes who vnderſtoode alſo the tonge wherein he ſpake, tooke vp Theagenes and Cariclia, and ſayde: Séeinge that theſe thinges benne thus appointed by the wil and pleaſure of the Goddes, I thinke (howe ſéemeth it

to you that be here alſo) that it is not good to ſtriue againſte them: Wherefore before them who haue preordained this, and you alſo whiche ſéeme with your conſente to followe their fates and deſtintes, I wiſhe thatTheagenes and Cariclia, are married by conſente of Hydaſpes, and are made Prieſtes, he the Sunnes, and ſhee the Moones. theſe twoo may increaſe and growe in wedlocke, and geue them leaue to reioyce either other, that they maye engender and haue Children. And if you ſhall thinke it good lette this decrée be confirmed with Sacrifice, and lette vs fall to woorſhippinge of the Goddes. The Army conſented thereto, and with clappinge their handes gaue a Signe that they were contented with the matche. Hidaſpes then came to the Aulters, and ready to beginne Sacrifice, ſaide thus: O Sunne our Lorde, and Lady Moone, for as muche as Theagenes, and Cariclia are declared to be Man and Wife by your good willes, I am ſure you will accepte of theire Offeringes, and ſuffer them to doo Sacrifice to you. This ſaide, he tooke of his owne Miter, and Perſinas, which were the notes of their Prieſthoode, and ſette one vpon Theagenes head, whiche was his owne, and the other vpon Cariclias that was Perſinas. When this was donne, Caricles remembred him ſelfe of the Oracles anſweare at Delphi, and ſawe that fulfilled in déede, whiche was promiſed before of the Goddes. Whiche was, that after they fledde from Delphi, they ſhoulde come at lengthe to Countrie ſcortche, with burninge Phebus beames:
                  The Prophecy in the ende of the ſeconde Booke fulfilled.
               
               
                  VVhere they as recompences dewe,
                  that vertue rare doo gaine:
                  In time to come ere it be longe,
                  white Miters ſhall obtaine.
               
               Thus after they had on theſe white Miters, and were made Prieſtes by the voice, and opinion of Hidaſpes, aud had donne Sacrifice very well, they roade in Chariottes drawen with Horſes, Hidaſpes and Cariclia in one, Siſimithres and Caricles in an other, and Perſina
                  
with Cariclia in the thirde, but theirs was drawen with twoo white Oxen to Meroe with greate ioie, and melody of Inſtrumentes of Muſike, to accompliſhe the ſecreter affayres of Wedlocke in the Cittie for more ſolemnities ſake.
               Thus endeth the Aethiopian Hiſtory of Theagenes and Cariclia, the Authour whereof is Heliodorus of Emeſos a Cittie in Phoenicia, Sonne of Theodofius, whiche fetcheth his Petigrée from the ſame.
               The ende of the tenthe and laſte Booke of Heliodorus Aethiopian Hiſtory.
               
               
            
         
      
   