
      
         
            
            
            A.j.
            
            
            A Letter Written by the King of Nauarre vnto the French King concerning his innocencie, againſt the ſclaunders of his aduerſaries. Truely tranſlated out of French. Anno 1585.
            
            1585.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A Letter written by the King of NAVARRE vnto the French King, concerning his innocencie, againſt the ſlaunders of his aduerſaries. Truely tranſlated out of French. 1585.
            
               
                  MY Lord,
            
            ſo ſoone as the auctors of theſe newe troubles had made ſome ſhewe of the purpoſed effects of their bad mindes toward your Highneſſe, it pleaſed your Maieſtie in writing to impart vnto mee that opinion which iuſtly your ſelfe had conceiued of their entents, which was, that notwithſtāding whatſoeuer their pretences, your ſelfe were not ignoraunt how they practiſed againſt your perſon and Crowne, alſo that they ſought to grow mightie by your decay and detriment, as men that purpoſed the totall ruine and vtter ſubuertion of your eſtate.

Theſe my Lord, were the very effect of the wordes of your Letters wherewith your Maieſtie vouchſafed to honor me, as acknowledging the vniō of my hap with yours, expreſſely adding, that they endeuoured my ouerthrowe together with yours. Myne, I ſay, my Lorde, the which, depending vpon you as it doth, thei can hardly cōpaſſe without yours. In reſpect hereof it pleaſed your Maieſtie alſo to commaunde your Gouernors, general Liutenants, Baylifes, Stewardes, and all other your Officers to withſtande them as Rebelles and perturbers of the Common quiet. Your Maieſties declarations alſo were herevpon ſent vnto all your Courts of Parliamēt, and in the ſame ratefied, whereby they were pronounced Traytors, whereof haue enſued ſundrie ſolemne decrees, and vpon the ſayd decrees diuers executions of great importaunce in many partes of this Realme, which remaine as preſidents as well of their rebellion and conſpiracie againſt your eſtate, as alſo of that iudgement which

your Maieſtie, your Counſaile, & your Courtes of Parliament had aſſeſſed of their purpoſes.
            All this notwithſtanding, it pleaſed your Maieſtie according to your naturall clemencie, to thinke good by gentle meanes to reduce them to their dueties, and therevpon vouchſafing to honor me with your Letters, you therein commaunded me with pacience to ſuffer all, whereby your ſelfe might haue the better leyſure to enter into conſideration of them and their purpoſes, to the ende to giue to your Subiects to vnderſtande how farre the very cauſes of their deuiſes did differ from their publiſhed pretences: alleadging that although your ſelfe were not ignoraunt thereof, yet that it was requiſite to open the ſame to your people, whom vnder the fayned ſhewe of Religion, they ſought to withdraw frō their dueties. Your Maieſtie my Lord, are to call to mind with what pacience at your commaundement I haue hetherto borne and obeyed: notwithſtanding,

according to your wiſedome and equitie you are not ignoraunt by how iuſt occaſions I haue alwaies bene prouoked and my pacience mooued, eſpecially ſeeing my ſelfe chalenged as partie by your Maieſties enemies, who openly haue declared that they ſought only my ouerthrowe, ſo that although I plainly found my ſelf to be the ſcope of their attempts and enterpriſes, yet in reſpect of that reuerence which euermore I haue endeuoured to ſhewe to your commaundements I durſt not once ſtirre againſt them, no notwithſtāding I dayly beheld them marching before my face, yea almoſt within my reach, in Armes againſt your Maieſtie, in ſtomacke againſt my ſelfe, euermore attēpting againſt either ſome Townes within my gouernment, either ſome of my houſes, or els againſt my owne perſon, and yet occaſion ſo fitly ſeruing I might neither doe your Maieſtie any ſeruice requiſite, or my ſelfe bee reuenged according as reaſon & nature did require. Your onely will my Lord, haue

I accepted for reaſon, and your commaundement for lawe: My nature and duetie haue I ſtrained and forced, yea almoſt my reputation and credite vnder your precepts, and that the rather my Lord in reſpect that your Maieſtie ſtill honoring mee with your Letters, did in the ſame promiſe to be as mindfull of my intereſt as of your owne: as alſo that you would not graunt or cō
               diſcend vnto any thing that might bee preiudiciall to your Edict of peace, which you purpoſed to be irreuocable, yea and that in and according to the ſame you would protect and defend all your Subiects indifferently: all which promiſes your Maieſty haue from time to time reiterated in all your Letters, which beeing of your owne handwriting I do reſerue, as alſo you haue promiſed the ſame to the Lords of Cleruant and Chaſſincourt, with other my agents reſiant about your perſon, as alſo haue the Queene your Mother as well by word of mouth as by Letters.
            When therefore my Lord I heard it

reported that your Maieſtie had on the ſuddeine concluded peace with thoſe that haue rebelled againſt your ſeruice, vpon cōdition: that your edict be broken: your loyall ſubiectes baniſhed: the conſpirators armed: yea armed with your forces and authoritie againſt your moſt obedient and faithfull ſubiectes: euen againſt my ſelfe, who haue that honour to bee of your Maieſties blood, and allyed vnto you, who euer ſince I ſuppoſed my ſelfe to haue any place in your good fauour and liking, could neuer bee found to haue departed therefro, except by too much pacience, ſufferance, and duetifull obedience: whē this I ſay came to my knowledge, I leaue it to your Maieſties conſideration to thinke in what perplexitie I might remayne, either wherein I might repoſe any further hope, except in diſpayre.
            In that declaration which on my behalfe was exhibited vnto your Maieſty, I haue motioned the moſt equall and reaſonable conditions that might bee

deuiſed for the furtherance of common & generall quiet, for your ſecuritie, & for the reliefe of al your ſubiects▪ 
               Viz. If their quarell bee for Religion, (howbeit, notwithſtanding whatſoeuer Buckler they make of the ſame, yet it is the fartheſt from their thoughts) I haue referred my ſelfe to a free Counſayle: If for aſſurances (which certeinly they haue no reaſon to demaund) I haue offered to reſigne my gouernement, together with what ſoeuer my Fortreſſes or houldes, vpon condition that them ſelues will doe the like, and that to the end no way to prolong the ſtaye of quietneſſe throughout this Realme: If it bee my ſelfe that they ſhoote at, either if vnder pretence and colour of mee they pretend to trouble the whole land, to the ende your Maieſtie may no longer be troubled thereabout, I haue craued that this quarell might be decided betweene them and mee, yea for the cutting off of common calamities euen betweene their perſons and myne. To be briefe, I haue

beyond all ſhew of reaſon, and contrary to all naturall ſence, yeelding to whatſoeuer your Maieſties commaundemēts proceeded farther then duetie could binde, and, notwithſtanding the inequalitie of our degrees and callings, haue ſtooped and become equall with my inferiors, to the end with my blood to redeeme ſo many miſchifes. Yea I haue abaſed my ſelfe to thoſe parſons whome your Maieſtie haue pronounced Rebelles.
            If therefore my miſhappe bee ſuch (which I wil not yet beleeue) that your Maieſtie haue proceeded ſo farre, as notwithſtanding all theſe my concluſions and ſubmiſsions, to cōclude ſuch a treatie, and thereby to infringe your Edictes, and to arme your Rebelles againſt your eſtate, againſt your blood, yea and againſt your parſon, I can not but hartely lament and bewaile your Maieſties condition, eſpecially ſeeing your highneſſe through contempt of my faithful ſeruice, forced to vtter ſubuerſion of your eſtate, togither with

the conſideration of the calamities of your realme, the end whereof we are in vaine to looke or hope for, except in the totall ruyne of the ſame: For that all the world doth knowe by twentie yeres proofe and more, that their pretence is a vaine attempt, and their building a manifeſt ſubuerſion.
            In the meane tyme I will comfort my ſelfe in my innocencie, integritie and affectiō to your Maieſtie and your eſtate: alſo in that it hath not beene long of me, that with my owne perill I haue not preuented this ſhipwarcke: but aboue all, I will ground my conſolation vpon the Lord God, the protector of my ſinceritie and loyaltie, who in this neceſsitie will not forſake mee, but rather will encreaſe my courage & multiply my meanes againſt all my ennemies, who are yours.
            And my Lord, I beſeech hym to enſpire you with good counſayle, and in all your affayres to aſsiſt you with his ſtrength. Alſo that he wil vouchſafe me his grace during lyfe, to yeeld vnto you

my bounden ſeruice as I deſire: alſo to preſerue your Maieſtie.
            
               
                  At Bergerac. 
                  
                     Julij. 21. 1585.
               
            
            
         
      
   