
      
         
            
            
            A MARVELL, Deciphered.
            
               ET INVENTA EST PERIIT
            
            AT LONDON, Printed by Robert Robinſon, for Iohn VVinnington, at the golden Tunne neere to S. Dunſtones Church in Fleete-ſtreete. 1589.
         
         
            
            
            To the Right Honorable, my very good Lord: Henrie Carey, Baron of Hunſdon: Knight of the moſt noble Order of the Garter: Lorde Chamberlaine of her Maieſties moſt Honorable Houſhold: Lord Gouernour of Barwicke: Lord Warden of the Eaſt Marches for an anempſt Scotland: Lord Lieftenant of Suffolke and Norfolke: Captaine of her Maieſties Gentlemen Penſioners, and one of hir Highnes moſt Honourable priuie Counſell.
            
               RIght Honorable, where as mention is made in the twelfth Chapter of the Reuelation of ſaint Iohn, of a great wonder in Heauen, namely, A woman clothed with the Sun, hauing the Moone vnder hir feete, and vpon hir head a Crowne of twelue Starres, &c. A wonder of

no ſmall maruell amongſt men; that was ſaide to bee a wonder in heauen containing ſome ſtrange miſterie, wherein the nature of the Sunne is not vnaptly to be conſidered, being a moſt goodly creature of God, and glorious in the ornament of heauen, and no leſſe beneficiall to all creatures of the earth, wherein alſo wee may beholde, not by any prepoſterous compariſon of the creature, with the Creator, but by naturall coniecture with more effectuall motions in part to diſcerne; the glorious omnipotency and maruelous mercies in the mightie Maiestie of the Creator of all beautie and benefites: namely, in and by Jeſus Chriſt the true Sonne that lighteneth all the worlde. Jn and by whom wee receiue ſo infinite, ſo great and ineffable bleſſinges, both for body and ſoule, as alſo in this world and in the world to come: vnto whom the naturall Sunne with his good gifts doth yeelde obedience as tributarie for his creation. Wherein we are ſo impotent duely to expreſſe or diſcerne the aboundance of his beneuolence: that wee are conſtrained with griefe of minde, to complaine of this carnall Carkaſſe ſo dull and vnapt to performe the ſame, as a weak and feeble poſt, that falleth

al to ſhiuers, vnder the burden of ſome weightie frame. By whoſe moſt pure and holie lawe, hee hath left vs, the more to moue our vnaptnes in ſome proportion according to our capacities, to conceiue of his moſt mercifull liberalitie, in heauen and earth, both now & euermore. Which holy law in generall conſtruction of Chriſtians, is truelie ſaid to be the aparel of the church: that doth inueſt hir ſelfe with the deuine and immaculate Lawe of Chriſt the ſonne of God. And whereby the chriſtian Church is indued with ſounde knowledge to know God aright: and to liue in concord and amiable affection with all men. Which may be ſaide to be the peace of God which paſſeth all vnderſtanding, containing the moſt perfect harmonie of heauenlie concorde, as alſo yeelding aspiring mindes vnto inexplicable bleſſinges: namely, to be deliuered from the terrible and the moſt cruell and ineſtimable calamities and bondage of Sathan: to bee made a citizen of Heauen, of the fellowſhip of Angels, with moſt ſingular delight to beholde the glorious Maieſty and preſence of God, to poſſeſſe ioyes vnſpeakeable, that the eies of man did neuer ſee, or his eares hath euer hearde, either may bee contained

within the thoughts of his heart. By which corporatiō & number of the christiā Church, the heauens ſhall be adorned: & the glory of God moſt magnificētly magnified. The glorious & heauenly apparell aforeſaid, not by outward apparāce vnto the eies of carnall men, but by the eies of a deuine mind is to be diſcerned: and in ſuch wiſe to be conſidered as that which containeth all in all: for ſo much as it may not be truely ſaid, that there is any true felicitie to be obtained by man, or to men; or true honour vnto God, but that in and by this ſaide lawe, is founde out, inioyed, and performed. Which holy lawe ſo much preuailed within the ſpace of fiue or ſixe hundred yeares after Christes incarnation, that the whole knowen Nations of the earth imbraced the ſame, vntill Sathan had begotten Antichriſt his eldeſt Sonne, who doubting ſome preuention of his fathers patrimony, obtained the true ſtampe of his fathers phiſiognomie, which is murder; to giue moſt certain testimonie by what ſpirit he is gouerned alſo conſeruing vnto himſelf the very image of his own guilefull father, contriuing deceit, to beguile the diuell himſelf (if it were poſſible) by a ſuppoſed holines & religion, although

counterfeit and moſt falſe. Neuertheleſſe, the very cloake and couer of the moſt infernall drench of deadly poiſon, ſo ſhadowed with the vehement ſpirite of hipocriſie, the guilefull enemie to all vertue, which the Christian estate both greedily and generally ſwallowed and deuoured in the darkned daies of the Goſpel of Chriſt Jeſus, to the cruell ouerthrow of all true Religion: with the whole frame of all the ineffable bleſſings aforeſaid: And wherewithall by the power of a doubled ſpirite receiued from Sathan, in the Temple of the euerliuing God, he both forged and placed a newe vnknowen and a Monstruous god, neuer ſeene or heard of before the comming of Antichriſt, a preſumption neuer contained in the heart or thought of any perſon whatſoeuer, namely to increaſe and to eſtabliſh a new God, but in the man of ſinne; the ſon of perdition: which infernal inuention ſtretcheth it ſelfe beyond all his other wickedneſſe leauing nothing vndone that was to bee done, either to the blaſphemy & diſhonor of God, or execrable crueltie againſt the whole generation of men: reſpecting either the generality, in which number not one eſcapeth: or the horrour and the greatnes

of the euill in which hee that eſcapeth beſt cheape loſeth body and ſoule. Ʋpon conſideration, viewe and newes of which curſed new god, with ſcorneful deriſion: All Jewes, Turkes, Mores, Sarazins, all Mahomatists and Jndian Idolaters, are fled as men hunted with a Monster from their ſaluation. Before the inuention of which wretched god the greateſt portion of all theſe Nations aforeſaid, confeſsed Chriſt to bee their onely ſaluation: and doubtleſſe otherwiſe the whole Nations of the earth, had beene ſubmitted vnder the obedience of the goſpell of Jeſus Chriſt, but nowe by Gods permiſſion, when it may iustly be ſaide, that this ſaide Church of Chriſt the ſonne of God, by the malice of Sathan, is brought vnto hir laſt decay, and left as deſolate but onely in an angle of the world, the engin of man being vtterly incapable of all remedie or reliefe for the ſame.
            Euen then: Time, reuealer of hidden ſecrets, deliuereth demonstration that God himſelfe hath erected the woman mentioned in the twelfth chapter of the Reuelation of ſaint Iohn, that nowe at this instant by Gods great fauour, ſtandeth clothed with the Sunne the right and moſt true veſture

of the Church, namely, the moſt pure and holy lawe of Chriſt Ieſus the Sonne of God, who with a moſt principall portion of fortitude, confirmed with an aſſured confidence in hir Chriſt and God, as a maine piller erected by deuine prouidence, to beare the weightie frame of reparation of this decaied and deſolate Church of God aforeſaide, proceeding with a minde vnappaulled to the daungerous defence of the ſame, againſt all the enemies of Europe whatſoeuer, and as by a circle of the Sun, beeing placed, by deuine ordinaunce as a King amongeſt the Planets, yeelding light and life vnto all ſignes and Starres of Heauen, euen ſo that woman, which is ſaid to bee the Reuelation of ſaint Iohn to bee adorned with the ſhining vesture of the Sunne, from the brightnes of which garment many Nations hath receiued, doth and ſhall receiue: both light and life vnto their great and eternall comfort, and hauing the Moone according to the Text, placed vnder her feete, with great obedience to yeelde aſſistance with all her force and influences, in ſtrange enterpriſes by Sea to bee atchieued and right happily finiſhed: and vpon hir heade, that Royall ſhining Crowne of twelue

Starres. In all obſcure and difficult cauſes to conduct with a fatall faith, in moſt certaine, true and cleare direction: vpon which infallible foundation, as an Archtector to aduaunce the moſt difficult, deuine and inexpungnable fortification for warfare, that euer was ſeene or hearde: not after the carnall man of fleſh, but mightie through God, to caſt downe holds, casting downe imaginations, and euery light thing, that is exalted againſt the knowledge of God: and bringing into captiuitie euerie thought to the obedience of Chriſt. This ſaid ſpirituall warfare, ſo ſufficiently furniſhed with ſuch deuine armour and munition, yeelding moſt certaine hope of aſſured victorie.
            Yet neuertheleſſe, Sathan which neuer ceaſeth his enuious inuaſions againſt the children of God, is nowe conſtrained, to furniſh his agent and eldeſt ſonne Antichriſt: not according vnto his accuſtomed manner, to deceiue the Nations with a ſlumbring potion of lethargie; plauſible both to the deceiuer and the deceiued, but with the inuention of othes: engines to inuade the houſhold of faith, namely, fire, ſword, treaſon and poiſon and ſuch other ſtraunge and vngodly tooles, wherewith hee

hath made ſufficient proofe of his counterfeit holines, and whereby hee hath made bloudie hauocke of infinite noble and holie perſons and hath daungered the ſtate of ſundrie and many Countries, Kinges and Kingdomes, the onely euident reaſons and arguments to defende his deſperate estate, to vnderprop his decaious kingdome. But God himſelfe hauing care of his owne cauſes, prouiding at his owne pleaſure ſafetie and conſolation for his elect in all their proceedinges, and alſo for ſeruice and defence of that ſacred perſon inuested with the Sunne aforeſaide. Certaine engines as yet vnknowen vnto the world, for ouerthrow of an hundred thouſand of his enemies vpon land: and to confounde a thouſande Saile of Ships if they ariue within a mile of anie Shoare of England, as alſo for doubling of anie Cape, or forland Rocke, or ſandie banke, either to purſue, or to eſcape being ouercharged with enemies, to enforce a Shippe to make waie at Sea againſt both winde and tide.
            Theſe ſtraunge matters right Honorable, J thought conuenient (enforced by your Honors receiued fauour) conſtrained in longing deſire by ſome laudable meanes, and in ſome portion to expreſse

my duetifull ſeruice vnto your Nobleneſse, to preſent my humble ſute vnto your Honour, both for my ſelfe and the matter; that wee may iointlie bee receiued into your Honours fauourable protection, whereby the worke it ſelfe may obtaine generall and friendly entertainement, and the testimoniall and ornament of my commendation and behauiour, by your Honors good liking no little aduancement: Crauing with all humblenes that deſire to doe well may bee mine excuſe, for all defectes that herein may appeare: And J your Honors poore Orator ſhall nowe and alwaies pray vnto the euerliuing God, to illuſtrate your Nobleneſſe with great encreaſe and with euerlasting felicitie.
            
               Your Honors moſt duetifull Orator, E. H.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A NOTE OF ſtrange things mentioned of a Woman conteined in the 12. Chapter of the Reuelation of Saint Iohn.
            
               
                  Text. 
               
               
                  
                     AND there appeared a great wonder in heauen, a woman clothed with the Sunne and the Moone vnder hir feete and vpon hir head a crowne of xii. ſtarres;
               
               Not to be doubted what womā before all the kings or perſons whatſoeuer vpon earth frō the firſt publiſhing of this propheſie vnto this day hath beene moſt apparātly clothed with the ſon namely Ieſus Chriſt.  A woman to bee clothed with the Sunne, is a maruell both miſticall and deuine conteyning ſome glorious effect, and the miſticall diſcription of the true Church of God, deſcribed in the forme of a woman, which is naturall to procreation, to bee clothed with the Sunne, is to put on or to be inueſted with Chriſt Ieſus the ſonne of God and to be endued with his deuine ſpirit. So as if there be anie ſacred woman, that notablie to the wonder of the worlde by the mightie power of the ſpirite of God, without abaſhment of ſo dangerous an enterpriſe hath aduaunced the glorious Goſpell of Chriſt, protected and defended peoples and countries

that haue profeſſed the ſame, to the perilous haſarde in the eies of men of her perſon and eſtate, contrarie to all humaine pollicie and hath vowed to thadmiration of men, and in deſpite of Sathan and his agent Antichriſt with all there adherents to performe the ſame, manifeſtile diſcouering to be beautified with the veſture, and apparell of the ſunne. That ſame woman whatſoeuer, may aptlie be applied without figure to accompliſh this propheſie.
            
               
                  And the Moone vnder hir feete.
               
               Not to bee doubted what womā before all others whatſoeuer as a ſubſtitute vnder God hath brought forth ſo great and diuine light in time of ſo great darkeneſſe: either for whō the moone by hir force and influence hath brought more deſtruction to hir enimies either vnto hir enterpriſes at ſea better ſucceſſe. The Moone that receiueth light from the Sunne, as a ſubſtitute, to giue light in time of darkenes, whoſe nature is to giue increaſe to growing things, & ruler of marin cauſes and of nature inconſtant, ſo as if by deuine ordinance, there be any woman that as a ſubſtitute from God and his Chriſt, that with zeale, ſtrength and power, in the dayes of ignorant darkenes, hath reuealed, and made to ſhine, with great and comfortable brightnes, the holie miſteries, and ſecrets of God in flowing abundance, ſo as countries, and nations, haue beene lightned therewith, and vnto whome the Lord of heauen and earth hath giuen power to performe maruels at ſea & in contempt of inconſtancie holdeth the Moone, with hir inconſtant dealing vnder hir feete, confirmed with mortall hatred to all vnſound and variable proceeding doctrine and religion, that ſame woman effecteth this propheſie.
            
               
                  Text. 
               
               
                  And vpon hir head a crowne of twelue ſtarres.
               
               Not to bee doubted who it is that with immortal glorie ſtandeth crowned with the bright doctrine of the twelue Apoſtles. If there bee anie notable woman, that hath made knowne vnto the worlde. To haue beautified hir head with

the moſt ſinguler holie and bright doctrine of the twelue Apoſtles, and Prophets, all which ſpeake but one thing in effect. And hath garniſhed hir ſenſes with vehement care to imploy this proceeding, to manifeſt the brightnes of the ſame to all nations may aptlie be ſaide to be crowned with twelue glorious ſtarres, both in life, and death, yelding immortall glorie. Such a woman effectuallie effecteth this prophecie.
            
               
                  Text. 
               
               
                  And ſhe was with Childe, and cried traueling in birth and was pained readie to be deliuered;
               
               Not to bee doubted who aboue all others traueileth to bring foorth this child Ieſus. So as if there bee anie woman that with an ardent & an holy deſire, traueileth with zeale, coſt and danger, and with power inforceth the birth of the childe, and the Lorde Ieſus which is his ſacred worde, and the Image of himſelfe, and her vehement deſire made knowen by lawes, aduertiſments, and proclamations, to all nations farre beyonde the reach of all crying, diſcouering hir paine, and readines to haue the ſame deliuered and publiſhed to all creatures, That God may be glorified effectually. Such a woman effecteth this propheſie.
            
               
                  Text. 
               
               
                  And the dragon ſtoode before the woman which was readie to bee deliuered to deuoure hir childe when ſhee had brought it forth;
               
               Not to bee doubted what woman or what child the Dragon hath ſought to deuoure. If there be any woman of ſuch worthines wboſe holy indeuors in deuine procreation of the child Ieſus, with hir zeale, in true religion & aduauncement of his holie word, the verie Image, of himſelfe with readie power and ſtrength, for & in the aſſiſtance, comfort, and mightie defence of all perſons, and countries, that profeſſe the ſame, which from the firſt time ſhee began to bring

foorth this childe, hath beene mightilie reſiſted & withſtoode by the Dragon and his aſſiſtances, in all notable apparance to deſtroy this childe: namely, the worde of God, and in the firſt birth of the profeſſours of the ſame, to pull them vp by the rootes. This and ſuch a wowan, may ſeeme, and be ſaid, to effect this prophecie.
            
               
                  Text. 
               
               
                  And ſhee brought forth a man childe, which ſhould rule all Nations with a rodde of yron.
               
               Not to bee doubted what woman or what child the dragon hath ſought to deuoure, This man childe is Chriſt Ieſus our Sauiour, which by his hypocriticall aduerſarie Antichriſt, hath beene obſcured, & after a manner buried, and made vnknowen many hundred yeres from the knowledge of the worldly multitude. So as if there be any woman, to whom God hath giuen ſpeciall grace, not onely to bringe to light, but alſo to defende the ſacred worde, and glorious Goſpel of the childe, and Lord Ieſus, ſo as in apparance ſhee hath brought foorth with great care and induſtry, and ſhal to the no ſmall griefe of hir enemies, deliuer the ſame to the Nations of the earth. For this man childe Ieſus with his rodde of yron, namely, by his abſolute power, ſhal grinde his enimies to powder, and breake them in pieces like a Potters veſſel: an aſſured comfort to all faithfull in Chriſt that their redeemer, ruleth with ſuch ſpeciall power to protect them, as alſo to chaſtiſe their enemies. Such a woman may effectually be ſaid to effect this prophecie.
            
               
                  Text. 
               
               
                  And hir ſonne was taken vp vnto God, and to his throne.
               
               Not to bee doubted who againſt all reſiſtance, doth Not to be doubted, but that when the red Dragon, deſcribed in the ſaid Chapter, with his ſeuen heads, tenne hornes, and vpon his heade ſeuen Crownes,

hath diſgorged all his venome, with moſt bloudie crueltie: with his ſeuen heades, practiſed all their ſubtil deuiſes, in wicked inuentions: his ten hornes, their force, and violence, to performe ſlaughter & ſhedding of bloud: his ſeauen Crowned heades enlarged all their aucthoritie, to accompliſh theſe euils aforeſaide:Not to bee doubted that any perſon hath more cauſe to ioye then that woman which is made an Inſtrument to bring foorth a child that was taken vp vnto God namely the worde of God. yet it ſhall no further preuaile: then earthly and ſinfull power, may preuaile againſt the mightie and infinite power of God: which from heauen doth ſcorne and deride all their proceedings: for ſo much as he is taken vp vnto God, and his power is from aboue. And by confuſion of this ſaide bloudie beaſt, God hath determined; to glorie in his holy name. And as the Virgin Marie, iuſtlie and rightlie reioiced for that by election, ſhe before all women naturally did bring forth, the Lord, and Sauiour of the worlde: euen ſo that woman, which aboue all women, hath to this daie ſince the firſt publication of this prophecie, beene adopted by Gods mercie, to reuiue his honour and glorie: and thereby doth accept to ſaie to be hir Sonne; in hir portion hath iuſi cauſe to ſaie; Magnificat anima mea Deus. And to reioice aboue all other women, liuing, and none like vnto ſuch a woman to effect this prophecie.
            
               
                  Text. 
               
               
                  And the woman fled into the wildernes, where ſhe hath a place prepared of God, that they ſhoulde feede hir there:
               
               Not to bee doubted for what woman, God by his ſo manie deliuerances hath prouided ſafety for a fixed time, which ſhal not be altered by anie power whatſoeuer. 
               a thouſand two hundreth and three ſcore daies. As Chriſte ſundrie times frequented the wildernes, to bee deliuered from his enemies, as alſo to commit his temptations to God, by contemplatiō and praier, ſo God himſelfe as the Text ſaith; hath prepared a

place for this woman in the wildernes, a ſolitarie & a rare haunt of perſons, where by appointment ſhe ſhall flie, and neſtle hirſelfe; by hir repoſed confidence in the boſome of the higheſt, a place of aſſured quietnes, as alſo farre in the vtter parts of the world, vnder the North Pole, where it is ſaid, by the mightie multitude of men; dwelling on the heart heart of the earth. That the inhabitants of that wildernes: are groſſe, wilde and barbarous, but it hath pleaſed the higheſt, that there ſhe ſhall bee fed and ſecurelie prouided, and defended, a time fixed, and ſet downe which ſhall not be remoued by anie power of enemies whatſoeuer: ſo as if there be anie woman; that appeareth ſo placed and ſecurelie defended; That ſame woman in all reſemblance moſt properly ſeemeth to fulfill this prophecie.
            
               
                  Text. 
               
               
                  And when the Dragon ſawe that hee was caſt into the earth, he perſecuted the woman which had brought foorth the man childe;
               
               Not to bee doubted what woman hath bene perſecuted by the dragon, and his Antichriſt ſince he was depriued of al habitation in heauenly mindes & caſt into the hart of earthlie rebrobate by the reuelation of the child Ieſus. That is, when the Dragon, the Diuell ſaw himſelfe, and his Angels; which is Antichriſt & his reprobates: by the almightie Michael Chriſt & his Angels, the godlie Magiſtrates & profeſſors of his Goſpell, to be caſt into the earth: that is to ſaie, all his droſſe of ſuperſtition, idolatrie, and all his other filthines, of religion deciphered, & made knowne to all perſons (thonly reprobates excepted) into whoſe earthlie hearts, he is caſt; as it were into the earth: for that he is depriued of all habitation in heauenlie mindes, ſo as if there be anie woman that by a receiued grace, hath, or nowe liueth ſince the firſt publiſhing of this propheſie, which with a manifeſt zeale, coſt and danger, hath trauailed

to bringe foorth this man childe Chriſt Ieſus, notoriouſlie in the ſight of the worlde: which is to ſaie, confeſſed, publiſhed and aduaunced his holie lawes, his ſacred worde, and moſt glorious Goſpel, hir onelie beautie and ſaluation. To the great and moſt diſcomfortable griefe of Antichriſt, who forced therewith hath nowe according to the ſecond Pſalme of King Dauid.
            
               
                  Text. 
               
               
                  Conuented,
                the Kings and Rulers, of the earth againſt the Lorde and his annointed, but hee that dwelleth in heauen ſhall laugh them to ſcorne, and then he ſhall ſpeake to them in his wrath, and vexe them in his ſore diſpleaſure, becauſe they are not learned to ſerue the Lord in feare, and ſhall be forced to kiſſe the ſonne, left in his anger, they periſh from the right waie, if his wrath bee kindled, for to him ſhall bee giuen the Heathen for inheritaunce, and the vttermoſt parts of the earth for his poſſeſſion, and bleſſed are all they that put their truſt in him.
            Which miſterie at this inſtant beginneth to worke, and from henceforth bee accompliſhed, by which feminine inſtrument: this foreſaid Dragon and his Antichriſt, with all their adherents, are, and muſt be throwne downe, confounded, and are now entered into ſo great a fume, and pelting chafe, as at this daie is moſt apparant, againſt this woman. Who may be ſaid to effect this prophecie.
            
               
                  Text. 
               
               
                  But to the woman was giuen the winges of a great Aegle, that ſhe might flie into the wildernes, into hir place where ſhe is nouriſhed, for a time, and times, and halfe a time, from the preſence of the Serpent.
               
               Not to bee doubted what woman by the mighty wings of the great Aegle, namely the two teſtamēts whereby ſhe is taught rdſolutely to repoſe in the boſome of the Higheſt, which is hir prepared place for aſſured defence. Theſe winges ſignifying

not onelie ſome aſſured, and ſtraunge deliuerance, by the mightie power of Gods prouidence, againſt the malice of Sathan and his agent Antichriſt, his chiefe Factor; this womans faith, beeing ſupported by the two Teſtamentes of the great & onelie God of heauen and earth: as it were by the wings of a great Aegle, whereby ſhe is ſafelie carried, directed and lifted vp in minde, farre from the common tracke, of this wretched worlde: the more aptlie to be exerciſed, and to direct her contemplatiō & functiō, in the cauſes of hir Chriſt, & God: & the more quietly with a repoſed & reſolute confidence, in the boſome of the higheſt, which is hir aſſured and prepared place ſafely, to endure, all brunts of Antichriſt: hir cancred, hateful and murdering enimie. Such a woman exactly may be ſaide to effect this propheſie.
            
               
                  Text. 
               
               
                  And the Serpent caſt out of his mouth, water after the woman like a floude, that he might cauſe hir to be carried away of the floude.
               
               Not to bee doubted againſt what woman the dragon & his Antichriſt hath throwne out ſo manie Flouds of deuiſes for hir deſtruction. So as King Dauid compared all his troubles and daungers to great flouds of waters, ſo here is ſaide that the Serpent ſhoulde caſt out as it were a riuer of water after this woman, that ſhee might bee carried away with the floude. That is to ſay, out of his lying, blaſphemous and damned mouth, hee ſhall diſgorge floudes of falſe accuſations, of hereſie, of falſe vſurpation of a Kingdome, of abſoluing ſubiects from obedience, of practiſing conſpiracies, of poyſonings, of diuers ſortes of violent murders, of curſes, by booke, bell, and Candle, and an ocean Sea of many more contriued miſchiefes: deuiſing by all his naturall and curſed

meanes of lies, deceit, and murder, to perſecute, & to extinguiſh this woman, his moſt apparant enemie, from the face of the earth. A notorious diſcouerie, by what ſpirit this Antichriſt is gouerned: ſo as is there bee any ſuch woman, vppon whom this Serpent and his Antichriſt, notoriouſly haue imployed ſo many euils, onely for the Goſpel of Ieſus Chriſt. That ſame woman may ſafely be ſaid to effect this prophecie.
            
               
                  Text. 
               
               
                  And the earth holpe the woman, and the earth opened hir mouth, and ſwallowed vp the floude, which the Dragon caſt out of his mouth;
               
               Not to bee doubted for what woman God hath taken order that the earth and his other creature ſhould ſtand foorth for hir defence. At the Lordes will: all his creatures, ſhall be forced to preſerue his elect, as nowe the earth ſhall open hir mouth, to aſſiſt thoſe that loue him: in which cauſe, if the God of all power, had not taken order, that the earth ſhoulde ſwallow vp that Riuer, which is the multitude of earthly creatures, being taught from God, to digeſt theſe cruell and falſe accuſations, with a minde of true knowledge and faithfull obedience, which otherwiſe impoſſible, to haue eſcaped this whirlpoole of confuſion: which diuers Kings, and Emperours, in times paſt, could not by any meanes eſcape: which at this preſent, the Lords good grace and fauour, hath made ſtarke drie, and without effect: Nowe if there be any woman vpon earth that hath founde, and receiued this fauour from God. That woman may be ſaid, to effect this propheſie.
            
               
                  Text. 
               
               
                  And the Dragon was wroth with the woman, & went & made war, with the remnant of hir ſeed, which keep the cō
                     mandements of God, & haue the teſtimonie of Ieſus Chriſt.
               
               Here the text it ſelfe maketh cleere expoſition of this wrath & war of this ſaide beaſt againſt this ſaid woman and hir ſeede namely the keeping of the commandements of God & for the teſtimony of Ieſus Chriſt for which cauſes howe many temptations this woman hath indured and infinit ſeede and people, haue & muſt ſuffer diſtruction. Here the Dragon is ſaid to continue his wrath, not

only againſt the woman, but alſo maketh war with hir ſeede, the cauſe is here alſo manifeſted: namely, for keeping, the commandements of God, and for the teſtimonie of Ieſus Chriſt, our onely meane, & ſaluation, and our moſt ſpeciall cauſe, to glorifie God, and wherefore we are chiefly borne. But ſuch and ſo great is the impiety, and impudency of Antichriſt: which is mounted vpon the higheſt degree of ll wickednes & abhomination: Who procureth a ſo gret ſlaughter, for ſo holy, & ſo deuine a cauſe: namely, the aduancemēt of the glory of god, which hee himſelfe, and all other creatures, whatſoeuer, ſhould holde in moſt eſpeciall, and ſingular reuerence. But yet to ſpeake the trueth, and to giue him his right: we muſt needes confeſſe, to haue receiued this much fauour at his handes: who nowe, and at this inſtant, hath giuen foorth, a moſt plaine and cleare expoſition of this prophecie, to all perſons that are not obdurate, dull, or incenſate.
            
               
                  Text. 
               
               
                  And went and made warre.
               
               Which number if by anie poſſible means might be regiſtred that hath beene murdered in field or towne onely for the teſtimonie of Ieſus Chriſt, it would oppres all honeſt mindes with moſt dolefull and deadly griefe, but alas for remedie how, where and by what meanes may wee finde ſlaughtred Chriſtian bloud ſufficient, which onely & none other may ſatisfie this moſt cruel vnſatiable monſter expreſſing moſt cleerelie to be Sathans moſt truſtie & cheefe executioner to performe all maner his cruelties againſt God, & man, vnſpeakeable, but bleſſed are all they and a thouſande times happie whoſe courage is not daunted, to reſiſt to fight and to deſtroy this horible monſtrous beaſt: And loue not their liues vnto the death. That is to ſay, hee hunteth and maketh inquiſition for bloude, for of his owne venemous nature, hee hath no remiſſion but ſeeketh continually deſtruction, and alwaies without iuſt cauſe, enforceth occaſion of ſlaughtet, for he hath no delight in the peace of GOD, but alſo maketh warre with the remnaunt of hir ſeede. That is, againſt all profeſſours of the ſacred worde of GOD, whether in Fraunce, Flaunders, or elſewhere: that by hir example, or protection haue boldly, diſcouered the fruits of their faith in the commaundementes of God, and the

teſtimony of Ieſus Chriſte. Wherein lyeth all the quarrels, and the true cauſe of all this bloudie broyle ſeriouſly to be noted: the profeſſours whereof, muſt all be ſlaine (without exception) if they doe not forſake their aſſured ſaluation in Chriſte, and fall downe vnto the beaſt, to their vtter deſtruction both of body and ſoule. And foraſmuch as from the beginning of this propheſie there neuer appeared ſo great a conuention, and gathering together of Kings, Princes, and Rulers, for the ſubuerſion and ſlaughter of true Chriſtians, and the Chriſtian eſtate (as at this preſent) but as concerning the reſt, for what offences ſoeuer, they ſhall haue both his peace and bleſſing, and his plaine and full remiſſion for all their ſinnes, be it either periury, buggery, treaſon, murder, and all other ſuch trifling ſinnes; they are not to ſtand in any doubt of his good fauour, and bleſſing. Now if any ſuch notable woman, vpon whome, all theſe aforeſaide practiſes, conſpiracies, and many more euils, & miſchiefes, haue beene notoriouſly inflicted. That ſame woman, without exception, reſpecting hir ſexe, hir eſtate, hir ſcituation, hir profeſſion, hir proceedings, the condition of hir enemies, their practiſes, their executions, their counterfeite holy aſſemblies, and the true cauſe of all their dealing, meaning, and quarrels effectually examined, and in a worde to be finiſhed. What concluſion of peace might be doubted, if ſhe renounce Chriſt, and admit popery; This

woman where, or whatſoeuer, beyond all other, that hath liued vppon earth vnto this day: moſt neerely, and fully performeth this prophecie: neither any other to be expected, that more effectually ſhall accompliſh the ſame; And yet I dare not to name any perſon, either preſume to confeſſe any expoſition, of ſo rare, and ſecrete miſtery of God; but forſomuch as the Angell hath ſaide, it ſhall be reuealed in the latter daies in his time appointed; except, they ſhoulde bee written in vaine, ſome one perſon although not ſpeciall by Gods fauour, who is all, in all, with his good ſpirite ſhall giue ablenes to performe the ſame. And thus with all humblenes, I beſeech your good Honour of your fauour, not onely to accept the reading of theſe premiſſes: but alſo, that deſire to doe well, may bee mine excuſe, for all defectes, that heerein may appeare.
            FINIS.
            
               Edward Hellwis.
            
            
         
      
   