
      
         
            
            
            The Order of Ceremonies obſerued in the annointing and Coronation of the moſt Chriſtian King of France & Nauarre, HENRY the IIII. of that name, celebrated in our Lady Church, in the Cittie of Chartres vppon Sonday the 27. of February 1594.
            Faithfully tranſlated out of the French coppy printed at Roan, by commaundement of the ſaid Lord. by E.A.
            
            LONDON Imprinted by Iohn Windet, and are to be ſold by Iohn Flaſket, at the great North doore of Paules.
         
         
            
            
            The Printer to the Reader.
            
               FRendly Reader, this diſcourſe of the annointing and coronation of the King was written by a notable perſonage, who was aſsiſtant at the ſaid ceremony, one that gathered it at the handes of thoſe that were chiefe Actors therein, which neuertheleſſe he would not commit to the preſſe before he had ſhewed and imparted it vnto them. Whatſoeuer other diſcourſes of this argument that may peraduenture come to thy handes are falſe, counterfait, and raſhly publiſhed, but this is true, perfect and written at leyſure, with all order requiſite. Thus much I thought good to giue thee to vnderſtand, leaſt otherwiſe, where thou ſeekeſt for trueth, thou mighteſt be abuſed with falſehood. Farewell.
         
      
      
         
            
            The order of ceremonies obſerued in the annointing and coronation of the moſt Chriſtian King of Fraunce and Nauarre, Henry the IIII. of that name, celebrated in our Lady Church, in the Citie of Chartres vpon Sonday the 27. of February 1594.
            
               ALmighty God who giueth and preſerueth all Scepters and Crownes, and diſpoſeth of them as ſemeth beſt to his pleaſure, who in his hands holdeth the hartes of kings, hauing miraculouſly guided and aduaunced the king to the lawfull ſucceſsion of this Monarchy &c. which was ſtill quarrelled at, and challenged by certaine rebelles, ſupported by the capitall and auncient ennemies of France, &c. He was entreated, deſired and aduiſed by the Princes of his bloud, the Officers of his Crowne, the Lordes of his Counſel, and the moſt notable perſonages of his Courts of Parliament to frame himſelfe to his annointing, in like manner as other kinges his predeceſſors haue allwayes vſed to procéede to their annointing and coronation, ſoone after their comming to the Crowne: which ſaid annointing is the token of their Royalty and of the publike approbation of the French nation.
            His Maieſty therefore reſolued to be annoynted, and could haue wiſhed that the ſaid ceremony might haue béene perfourmed in the Church of Rheims, the rather for that of long time, the kinges haue neuer béene other where annoynted but there, albeit they bée no way tyed or bound to the ſayd Church, either to the Archbiſhop of Rheims, as many examples and reaſons doo euidently teſtifie. And his Maieſtie, who ſeeketh to preſerue all the auncient and laudable cuſtomes of his predeceſſors, and the Realme, could haue beene contented not to breake this, in caſe the Rebells that poſſeſſe the ſame towne, would together therewith, haue giuen him oportunity to haue béene there annoynted and crowned. Héerevppon for the effecting of the reſolution of his annoynting, it was aduiſed

and determined, that in as much as Rheims was ſtill enclined to perſiſt in her rebellion, the ſame ſhould be perfourmed at our Lady Church in Chartres, a Church famous throughout the whole Realme, as alſo in diuers partes of Chriſtendome: the towne béeing ſituated in place commodious, and as it were in the nauell of thoſe partes of the Realme, from whence his Maieſtie had called the Princes, Lordes, and principall perſonages of his Courtes of Parliament, to be aſſiſtant at this ſolemne ceremony.
            The preparatiues for all thinges neceſſary to the ſayd annoynting, béeing ſet forward in the ſayd towne and Church, his Maieſty arriued there, vppon Thurſday the ſeauentéenth of February laſt, without any triumphant entry, which the French kinges doo vſe to make, at the towne where they are to bee annoynted, the day before the ſolemnization thereof: but in reſpect that at the reduction of the ſayd towne into his Maieſties obedience, he had already there made his entry, as alſo that ſince he hath many times gone thether, and there ſoiourned a long tyme together, he now néeded not to doo it agayne.
            Vppon Saterday the nynetéenth of the ſayd moneth, the Holy Voyalt, (ſo tearmed there) preciouſly preſerued in the Abbay of Marmouſtier néere the citty of Tours, euer ſence that miraculouſly it wrought Saint Martins health, was brought to the citty of Chartres, béeing thether conducted, from the auncient dwelling place thereof, by the Lord of Souure, Gouernour and the Kinges Lieuetenant Generall in the land and Duchy of Tourayne, accompanyed with foure Fryers of the ſayd Abbay, who had the cuſtody thereof, And béeing arriued at Chartres, it was there with great ceremony, carried by one of the ſayd Fryers, from the gate of the towne, to Saint Peters Abbay, béeing attended by the Clergy, and a great number of people, the ſtréetes béeing all the way hanged, in honor and reuerence of ſo precious a rellike.
            From the day of his Maieſties arriuall, vntill Saterday the ſixe and twentieth of the ſayd moneth, they finiſhed all the preparatiues for the ceremonies of the annoynting, before begunne. Thether was brought the Imperiall cloſe Crowne, the middle Crowne, the Royall Scepter, the hand of Iuſtice, the cloake

Royall, the Shirt, the Sandalls, the Spurres, the Swoord, the Tunicle, and the Dalmatike, with all other the ornamentes Royall, all which were to bée new made, as fayre and ritch as might bée, by reaſon that the fellonious minds of the rebelles had molten, defaced, & waſted the others, which time out of minde had bene reſerued in the Church of S. Dennis in France to ſerue for the kings annoynting. Howbeit by this particular and ſo execrable a déede, they haue declared that they meant to root out as well the tokens, markes, and ornaments of royalty, as the effect and name thereof. And as moſt accurſedly they found meanes to murther the ſacred perſon and Maieſty of him that before held it, ſo haue they ſence his death diuerſly attempted the like againſt the perſon of him that now holdeth it.
            Vppon Saterday the ſixeteenth of the ſayde moneth about eight of the clocke at night, the king came to the ſayd Church of our Lady, there to doo his deuotions and to be ſhriuen, he would haue heard Euenſong according to the auncient cuſtome, as other kinges did vſe to heare them in the Church appoynted for their annoynting vpon the Eeue, if the rule of the holy time of Lent could ſo haue permitted: After his prayers deuoutly made, he entred into his Oratory, erected vnder a tent of twoo fadome and a halfe ſquare of purple damaſke, with a border aboue of violet veluet, ſet full of Fleure de Luces, and there was ſhriuen by hys Confeſſor Monſieur Benedict, Curate of Saint Euſtace in Paris, and nominated biſhop of Troy. After ſhrift, hee returned to his lodging in the Biſhop of Chartres Pallace.
            Furthermore foraſmuch as all the Carpets, Tapiſtry for clothes of Eſtate, for Chayres, Pillowes, Cuſhions and other like kept to ſerue at the ceremony of the kinges annoyntinges, had likewiſe bene ſtollen, pilfered, and purloyned by the rebells, as were the ornaments royall, they were driuen to make new, not ſo ſtately as the former, but ſuch as the ſhortneſſe of tyme, and tyme it ſelfe could permit.
            Firſt the Quier of the ſayd Church, was all decked and hanged with ritch Tapiſtry.
            All before the ſayd Aultar vnto the ſtepp whereupon ſtood the

Holy water ſtocke, was couered with Carpets and aboue and néere to the ſaid high Aulter was ſet and placed the Chaire wherein the Biſhop of Chartres, then ſubrogated in ſtéede of the Archbiſhop Duke of Rheims, firſt Péere Eccleſiaſticall was to execute, being couered with a rich Carpet. Where, note that hence foorth throughout this diſcourſe, we will terme the ſaid Lorde Biſhop of Chartres Archbiſhop of Rheims, in reſpect that he tooke his place and executed his Office.
            Ouer againſt the ſaid Chaire, ſome nine or tenne foote behinde, was erected a high Cloth of eſtate of halfe a foote déepe, and two fadome and a halfe ſquare, couered with ritch Tapiſtrye, where was placed an other Chaire richly adorned and couered with a Cloth of eſtate: Alſo betwéene the Kinges Chaire and the Archbiſhops was placed an oratorie Deſke couered with Cloth of ſiluer all Damaſked with red leaues, and two Cuſhions of the ſame, whereof the loweſt was ſome fiue quarters long, to ſerue both for his Maieſtie and for the ſaid Lord Archbiſhop, when hee lyeth groueling with his Maieſtie during the Letanie according as by the ceremonie is expedient and hereafter ſhall be ſhewed.
            Behind the King was there placed a ſtoole couered with blew Satten pouldered with flowers de Luce, whereupon ſhould ſit (as afterward he did) hee that ſupplyed the place of Conſtable: And about ſome thrée foote behinde that, was there an other ſtoole adorned as the former, for the Lord Chaunceler. And againe ſome thrée foote behinde that was there an other ſeate ſo couered for the Lords great maſter, great Chamberline, and chiefe Gentleman of the Chamber. And thus were they afterward placed as hereafter ſhall be ſhewed.
            On the right ſide of the high Aulter was there a great ſeate couered with Carpets, whereupon were ſet the Péeres Eccleſiaſticall, except the Archbiſhop of Rheims, who was to be ſometimes at the Aulter, ſometimes elſewhere, according as by the ceremonies to execute.
            Behinde the ſaide Péeres Eccleſiaſticall vpon an other ſeate were placed other Clergie men who were not to bee imployed about the miſterie of the anointing, and behind vpon an other forme,

the Counſellers that were of the law, the preſidents and Counſellers of the Courte of Parliament, tranſlated to Tours, whome the King had ſent for to aſſiſt this ceremony.
            In the Biſhops and ordinaries ſeates on the right ſide of the Aulter were placed the Secretaries of eſtate.
            Betwéene the foreſaid formes and the Biſhops ſeate ſtoode the Singing men of the Kings Chappell, among whome were alſo ſome of his Chamber, ready to ſing as time ſhould require.
            On the left ſide of the high Aulter ſtoode an other long forme, furniſhed as that on the right ſide for the Péeres laye.
            Behinde the ſame vpon a little forme cloſe to the Pauillion of the oratorie ſat the Venetian Ambaſſador alone, being the onely Ambaſſadour reſident about his Maieſtie. And in the ſame rowe vpon an other forme ſat the Lord Duke of Montbaſon ſonne to the Lord Prince of Guemene, the Lord of O, and the Lord of Requelaure. The firſt being appointed after the Communion to receiue the Kings Crowne, and to carrie it before him into the hall of the pallace Royal, where the dinner was to be kept: The ſecond to eaſe the King at the offering, at the Communion and at his departure from Church of the Scepter Royall: The third likewiſe of the hand of Iuſtice.
            Behind that forme vpon two other formes ſat certaine knights of the holy Ghoſt with other Lords as well of other callings as of the Counſell.
            There were alſo round about the quiere ſcaffolds whereto they aſcended on the out ſide by fower paire of Timber ſtaires.
            Vpon neereſt on the right hand were placed the Ladies, Princeſſes, Ladies of the Court and ſundry Lords, Gentlemen and Gentlewemen.
            On the ſaide ſide néere the Princeſſes ſtoode my Maiſters of the great Counſell and of the Treaſury, with other notable parſonages that then were in the towne both men and women, who were thether admitted by the Captaine of the Guard and the Maſters of the ceremonies.
            In the other Galleries and almoſt vp to the higheſt Glaſſe windowes both in the quire and body of the Church, ſtoode ſuch others

as could thruſt in or finde any place.
            At the end néere to the Tribunal were placed the hundred Gentlemen.
            On the ſtage of the quire vnder the Crucifix was erected and placed his Maieſties throne Royall in manner following. In the middeſt of the ſaide ſtage was made a platforme of ſeauen or eight foote long and fiue foote broad, whereto from the ſaid ſtage they aſcended by fower ſteppes, vpon this platforme ſtoode the Kinges Chaire in ſuch ſorte that being ſet, ſuch as were in the quire might ſée him from the ſtomacke vpward and ſuch as were in the body from the waſt vpward as indéede they did when he was gone vp and ſet. Ouer it was there a Cloth of eſtate of Violet veluet, pouldered with flower de Luces of Golde.
            Before the ſaid Chaire was placed an oratorie Deſke vnder the which and vpon the playne of the ſaide ſtage was there a ſeate prouided for him that ſupplyed the Conſtables roome.
            At the right hand vpon the platforme was erected a ſeate for the Lord great Chamberline, and at the left hand vpon the firſt and loweſt ſtep of the ſaid platforme was a place for the chiefe Gentlemen of the Chamber. Before his Maieſtie vpon the flat of the ſaide ſtage at the right ſide was the ſeate prepared for Lord Chaunceler, and the left ſide for the Lord great Maiſter, all who ſhall hereafter be called by their names and Offices. At the Kings right hand néer to the rayle of the ſaide ſtage that looketh into the body of the Church were ſeates for the Péeres Eccleſiaſticall, and at the left hand for the Péeres lay. And all the throne, ſeates, footepaſes and ſides of the ſaid ſtage were decked with rich Tapiſtry.
            And betwéene the barre of the ſaid rayle of the ſtage, and the ſeates prouided for the ſaid Péeres ſtoode ſome of the hundred Gentlemen.
            At the end of the ſaid ſtage on the Kings right hand was erected an other Aulter, whereon to ſing Maſſe before his Maieſtie.
            To aſcend to the ſaid throne there was in the quire two Timber ſtaires, one on the right hand, an other on the left of the high Aulter, furniſhed on each ſide with rayles, pillers and barres all hanged with Tapiſtry and Carpets.
            
               Vpon Sunday the ſeauen and twentie of Februarie being the day of ye ceremony of anointing. the Lord of Rhodes, great Maiſter of the ceremonies, together with the Lord of Surenne, ſteward ordinary of the Kings houſe, came to the Church at thrée of the clocke in the morning to take order for all things neceſſarie: Alſo the Lord of Chaſteau-vieup, Captaine of the Scottiſh guard for the Kings body, came ſoone after to prouide againſt the diſorder and preſſe of ſuch as ſought to get into the Church, and vnto the ſcaffoldes, and to place euery one according to the preſcribed order, or as the beſt knew the deſert of their parſons.
            About ſixe of the clocke in the morning the King ſent fower young Lords, Barrons to the Abbie of S. Peter, where was kept the holy Vyall that was brought from Marmouſtier, to deſire the aforenamed Friers of Marmouſtier that kept it, to bring it into our Lady Church, thereout to take of the holy Oyle, which was to be imployed vpon the annointing of his Maieſtie. Which fower Barrons according to the cuſtome obſerued about the ceremonie of the holy Vyall in the Church of S. Remy of Rheims did binde them ſelues to reſtore it in the ſaid Abbay of S. Peter, and to the ſaide Friers after the end of the annointing: As alſo the Lord of Souur had before bound him ſelfe to the Abbot and Friers of S. Peter for the reſtitution thereof. Theſe fower Barrons were the Earle of Lauſun, eldeſt ſonne to the Earle of Lauſun of the houſe of Caument: The Earle of Dinan, ſecond ſonne to the Lord of Pienner Duke of Hallioin. The Earle of Cheuerny, eldeſt ſonne to the Earle of Cheuerny, Chaunceler of Fraunce, and the Lord Barron of Termes, younger brother to the Lord of Bellegard, great Eſquire of Fraunce.
            Theſe fower at the Kings commaundement departed from the pallace Royall with their Eſquires and Gentlemen, each of them hauing borne before him vpon the end of the ſpeare the banner of his armes in perfect coullours leading with them a white Hacnie, whereupon ſhould ride the Frier that was to carry and recarry, and indéede did carry and recarrie the ſaid holy Vyall, with a Canapie of white Dammaſke, which ſtill ſhould bee carried ouer the ſaide Frier both going from the Abbay, and returning after the end

of the annointing. Then the ſaid Frier accompanyed with the ſaid fower Barrons departed from the ſaid Abbay with a Cannapie borné ouer him by fower Friers apparelled in white Albes, all the ſtréetes from the ſaid Abbay of S. Pere to the great Church were hanged, and the people with great reſpect and deuotion reuerenced the ſaid holy Vyall.
            Soone after the departure of the fower Barrons, departed alſo from the pallace Royall the ſix Péeres lay, thrée Dukes, and thrée Earles, apparelled in Tunicles of Cloth of ſiluer Dammaſked with redde leaues, comming almoſt to the midde legge, and vpon the ſame a cloke or ſhort gowne of Cloth Searge dyed Violet vpon Scarlet, open vpon the right ſhoulder with a round coller turned downe with the garniſh, and turning downe Furred with powdered ermins.
            Euery of the thrée Dukes had vpon his head his Ducall hat of golde, and euery Earle his Circle of golde.
            Howbeit in as much as of theſe thrée Dukes and thrée Counties auncient Péeres lay, repreſented by theſe ſixe, fiue of the Payryes are annexed to the Crowne, and the Countie of Flaunders is out, the French Kings hath ſince this annexion vouchſafed to repreſent the ſix Péeres and Payries by ſo many Princes and Lords attendant about their parſons. And thoſe that at this ceremonie of annointing, repreſenting the ſaide ſix dignities are theſe that follow.
            The Prince of Condy, repreſenting the Duke of Burgondy Deane of the Péeres.
            The Countie of Soyſſais, repreſenting the Duke of Normandie.
            The Duke of Montpenſier, repreſenting the Duke of Aquitaine.
            The Lord of Lupembourg, repreſenting the Countie of Tholouze.
            The Duke of Rays Marſhall of France repreſenting the Countie of Flaunders.
            The Duke of Vantadon, repreſenting the Countie of Champagne.
            
               The ſixe Péeres lay, thus apparelled and cloathed, came to the Church about ſeauen of the clocke in the morning, and entring into the Quier, hauing perfourmed theyr due reuerences, came to the high Aultar, where was the Archbiſhop of Rheims, accompanyed wyth the other fiue Péeres Eccleſiaſticall, who were come a little before wyth theyr Myters vppon theyr heades, and great Coapes, ſitting already on the right ſide of the ſayd Aultar, vppon the two large ſeates before mentioned, in order following.
            The fiue Péeres Eccleſiaſticall alwayes aſsiſtant at the kings annoynting, or in whoſe abſence, or when any of the Seas bée voyd, the kinges doo ſurrogate others, as theſe.
            The Biſhop Duke of Laon.
            The Biſhop Duke of Langres.
            The Biſhop County of Beauuais.
            The Biſhop County of Chaalous.
            The Biſhop County of Noyen.
            And becauſe the Biſhops of Laon, Langres, Beauuais, and Noyen were not preſent, alſo that the Biſhop of Chaulous who was in the city of Chartres was ſo ſicke, that hee could not aſsiſt at the ſayd ceremony, there to take his place, The Kings pleaſure was, that theſe fiue dignities ſhould bee repreſented by fiue other Biſhops, that then were at the Court, namely theſe.
            The Biſhop of Nantes, repreſenting the Biſhop D. of Laon.
            The Biſhop of Digne, repreſenting the Biſhop D. of Langres
            The Biſhop of Mailleſais, repreſenting the Biſhop County of Beauuais.
            The Biſhop of Orleans, repreſenting the Biſhop County of Chaalons.
            The Biſhop of Angiers, repreſenting the Biſhop County of Noyon.
            The ſayd eleuen Péeres béeing thus ſett, and the ſayd Lord Archbiſhop of Rheims making the twelfth, ſitting in his chayre with his backe to the Aultar. They altogether, according to the cuſtome, did appoint the Biſhops of Nantes and Mailleſais repreſenting the Biſhop of Laon and Beauuois, who with the Relliques of Saintes hanging at their neckes, and accompanyed with

the Cannons, Vicars, and Chaplens of the ſayd Church, the two Croſſes, the Holy water, and the Encenſers goyng before them, and accompanyed with the ſayd Lord of Surenne, came proceſsionally into his Maieſties outward chamber. In the ſayd chamber was prepared a bed, wherevppon the king was layed cloathed in a ſhirt of holland, ſlit before and behind to the end thereby to receiue the holy oyntment, and therevppon a dublet of crimſon ſatten for the ſame cauſe likewiſe ſlit before and behinde, and a gowne of cloth of ſiluer, with ſléeues comming to the mid legge.
            And when the ſayd Lordes Biſhops of Laon and Langres came into the ſight of his Maieſty, the Biſhop of Laon ſayd the prayer following.
            
               Oremus. Omnipotens ſempiterne Deus &c.
            
            This prayer ended and doone, the ſayd Lord Biſhop of Laon on the right ſide, and hée of Langres on the left ſide, reuerently and kiſsing theyr handes, lifted the king from his bed, and proceſſionally brought him to the Church in order following.
            Firſt marched the Lord of Surenne, who cauſed the Archers of the great Prouoſt to march firſt.
            Then the Clergy that had accompanied the ſayd two Prelats Péeres.
            The Switzers of the kinges guard.
            The Trumpets.
            The Herehaults.
            The Knights of the holy ghoſt.
            The Vſhers of the kinges chamber, with their maces.
            The Archers of the Guardes in manner of a hedge.
            The Scottes néere to the kinges perſon.
            Then marched before the king, the Lord of Matignon, Mareſhall of France, repreſenting the Conſtable, cloathed in a tunicle of cloth of ſiluer, damasked with violet: the cloke and circle vpon his head like to one of the Péeres Counties lay, bearing in his right hand a naked ſword the point vpward.
            After the ſayd Lord Conſtable, marched alone the Lord County of Cheuerny Chauncelor of Fraunce, apparelled in a tunicle of red Crimſon veluet, comming downe to the féete, with a cloake

or halfe gowne, foulded and furred with Ermines, two limbes of the ſame, each ſhoulder couered with gold lace: and the morter of cloth of Gold vpon his head.
            After him marched the Lord County of Saint Paul, repreſenting the Lord Great Maſter, with his ſtaffe vpright in his right hand, on the right ſide of hym, the Lord Duke of Longueuille, Great Chamberlayne, and on the left ſide, the Lord of Bellegard great Eſquier, and taking his place as chiefe Gentleman of the Chamber, all thrée apparelled in tunicles and cloakes as Péeres lay. The Duke of Longueuill hauing vppon his head his Ducall hat, as a Duke Péere, the other twoo with circles as County Peeres, and two limbes vppon their cloakes.
            In the meane tyme after the aforenamed prayer, the Cannons and ſinging men ſung the Reſponſ. following:
            
               Reſponſorium. Ecce mitto Angelum meum &c.
            
            Then the Clergy ſtaying a little at the Church doore, the Lord Biſhop of Beauuais ſayd the prayer following:
            
               Oremus. Deus qui ſcis humanum genus &c.
            
            The mayer done, the Cannons entring into the Church, and comming into the Quier doore, ſung this Antheme:
            
               Antiphona: Domine in virtute tua laetabitur Rex &c.
            
            The Antiphony ended, and the king béeing come before the high Aultar, he was by the foreſayd Biſhops, preſented to the ſayd Archbiſhop, who then began to ſay the prayer following.
            
               Oremus. Omnipotens Deus caeleſtium &c.
            
            This prayer as alſo the kinges béeing ended, hee was by the ſayd Biſhops of Laon and Beauuais, brought to hys chayre prepared as is aforeſayd, ouer againſt the Archbiſhops chayre. At his right hand ſtood the Lord of Chaſteau-vieux, Captayne of the Scottiſh guard of the kings body with the ſaid Scotts néere to his Ma. perſon. At his left hand was the L. of Praſlaine captaine of the French Guard, and two foote before the king, at his right hand ſtood, the Lord of Chauigny, Captaine of one of the Companies of a hundred Gentlemen, and at the left, the Lord of Ramtouillet the Captayne of the other, and the ſayd hundred Gentlemen confuſedly néere vnto theyr Captaines.
            
               Behinde the king ſate the ſayd Lord Conſtable without any ſword: for, comming toward the high Aultar, hée had deliuered the ſwoord into the handes of one of his Eſquiers, to the end to take vp that which ſerued for the myſtery of the Coronation, as ſhall heereafter be ſhewed: The Lord Chauncelor behind him, both vppon the ſtoole afore deſcribed, Alſo behinde the ſayd Lord Chauncelor vppon an other ſeat, ſate the Lord Great Maſter, and the Lord High Chamberlayne in the middeſt, and the chiefe Gentleman of his Chamber.
            The aforeſayd prayers béeing ended, and taryeng the comming of the holy Vyoll, the Archbiſhop gaue Holy water to hys Maieſty, and to the ſayd Lordes Péeres both Spirituall and Temporall, and then the Quier beegan to ſing the Thirdes.
            Vnderſtanding that the Holy Vyoll came, the ſayd Lord Archbiſhop pontifically apparelled, came in Proceſsion to méete it, béeing accompanyed wyth certayne Prelates and Cannons of hys Church, both the Croſſes marching béefore him vnto the great Porch of the church, and ſo it was brought into the Chappell of Vandoſme, where the ſayd Lord Archbiſhop tooke it and brought it vp into the Quier, and at the receyuing thereof, was ſung this Antheme.
            
               O precioſum munus, O precioſa gemma, cuius viſibili & inuiſibili dono, inuiſibilia percipimus.
            
            
               Verſus. Inueni Dauid ſeruum meum &c.
            
            
               Reſponſio. Oleo ſancto vnxi cum &c.
            
            
               Oremus. Omnipotens ſempiterne Deus &c.
            
            Then came the aforeſayd four Barons into the Quier, each bringing in his hand, the Staffe with the Banner of his Armes, and ſate downe in the Cannons ſeates, on the left hand.
            This doone the Lord Archbiſhop went into the Veſtry

prouided for him behind the High Aultar, there to put on his Pontificall habites, as it were to ſing Maſſe, aſsiſted by the Abbot of Saint Genouieue of Paris, and the Deane of his Church of Chartres, the Deane to reade the Epiſtle, & the Abbot the Goſpel, with twelue Canons in the habite of Deacons and Subdeacons, then returning to the High Aultar, the king roſe out of hys chayre to doo him honor, and the king ſitting downe agayne, the Archbiſhop came to hym to make his requeſtes, and to take hys Oathes and promiſes, in the name of all the Churches to him ſubiect as followeth.
            
               A nobis perdonari petimus &c.
            
            
               The kinges aunſweare and Promiſe.
            
            
               Promitto vobis & perdono &c.
            
            After that his Maieſty had made this Promiſe, and taken this Oath, the ſayd Biſhops of Laon and Beaunais, lifted him out of his chayre, then as hee ſo ſtood, they asked the people and aſsiſtants, whether they accepted him for their king, and hauing as it were taken the conſent of the people and the whole aſsiſtance, the ſayd Lord Archbiſhop cauſed hym to take the Oath to the Realme, with his hand vppon the Goſpels, which, after his promiſe he kiſſed in this manner.
            The kinges Promiſe and Oath.
            
               Haec populo Chriſtiano &c.
            
            After this Oath and promiſe béeing made, the ſayd Lord Archbiſhop went toward the habits and ornaments Royall, which as is aforeſayd, were prepared and layde vpon the Aultar, before whome the king was brought by the Biſhops of Laon and Beauuais, and there by the chiefe Gentleman of his chamber, hee was vncloathed of

his ſhort gowne of cloth of ſiluer with ſléeues, and ſtanding in his ſatten dubblet, the ſayd Lord Archbiſhop ſayd ouer him, this that followeth.
            
               Verſus. Adiutorium &c.
            
            
               Oremus. Deus inenarrabilis author mundi &c.
            
            This prayer ended, the Lord great Chamberlaine put him on his bootes or ſandalls afore mentioned, and the Lord Prince of Conty, kéeping the ſtate of the Duke of Burgondy, put him on his ſpurres, and preſently tooke them off againe.
            Then did the Archbiſhop bleſſe the Sword within the ſcabbard in this manner.
            
               Oremus. Exaudi quaeſumus Domine praeces noſtras &c.
            
            This prayer ended, the ſayd Lord Archbiſhop girt on the kinges ſword, and ſtraight vngirt it agayne, and toke it naked into his hand, leauing the ſcabbard vppon the Aultar, and holding it naked, ſayd the prayer following, deliuering the ſaid ſword into the kinges hand, who in all humility receiued it, and held it vpright with the point vpward, vntill the end of the prayer and Antheme following
            
               Oremus. Accipe hunc gladium.
            
            Then was ſung this Antheme.
            
               Comfortare & eſto vi
                     •
                   &c.
            
            
               Oremus. Deus qui prudentia tua &c.
            
            The king hauing kiſſed the Sword, with all humility offered it, and layd it vppon the Aultar, and immediately the ſayd L. Archbiſhop tooke it, and returned it into the kinges hand, béeing vppon his knees, who immediately deliuered it to the Lord Conſtable, who alwayes carried it naked before him, throughout all other actes that were doone, and all dinner time, the ſayd Lord Archbiſhop procéeding in the prayer ouer the ſayd Lord ſtill knéeling.
            
               Oremus. Proſpice omnipotens &c.
            
            
               Another bleſsing.
            
               Oremus. Benedic Domine &c.
            
            
               Oremus. Deus pater aeterne &c.
            
            The ſayd prayers béeing ended, the Archbiſhop turned to the High Aultar, to prepare the holy Oyntment in manner and forme following.
            He tooke a plate of gold, wherevppon hee layd the holy Creſme, ſo much as was requiſite for the annointing of a Biſhop. Then out of the ſayd Holy Vyoll with a golden néedle, he tooke the quantity of a peaze of the Holy Oyle, which with his finger he mixed with the ſaid holy Creſme
            While the ſayd Archbiſhop thus prepared the holy oyntment, the Chanter of the Church began the Reſpon. following, which the kinges Chapell did proſecute.
            
               Reſponſorium. Super gentem Francorum inclitam, ſimul cum rege ſuo nobili, Chriſtus Oleo exultationis &c.
            
            
               Verſus. Emitte ſpiritum tuum Domine & creabuntur.
            
            
               Reſponſorium. Et renouabis faciem terrae.
            
            
               Oremus. Deus a nobis &c.
            
            After this prayer, the king came to the Deske of hys Oratory, and the Archbiſhop with him, there to tende to their deuout contemplations, during the which, the ſayd Prelats began the Letany, and the Quier aunſweared, as followeth.
            
               Letania. The Prelates began. Kyrie Eleyſon.
            
            Heere the King did ariſe and the Archbiſhop likewiſe, who turning to the ſayd Lord, and holding hys Croſſe in his hand, ſung the thrée verſes following, the Quier aunſwearing him.
            
               Vt hunc praeſentem &c.
            
            This verſe thriſe repeated, and aunſweared by the Quier, the ſayd Lord Archbiſhop returned to his Deske

néere to the King and the Biſhops procéeded in the reſt of the Letany as followeth.
            
               Vt regibus & principibus &c.
            
            The Letany being ended, the King and the Biſhops fell groueling vppon the earth, and the ſayd Archbiſhop ſtanding vp with a loud voyce ſayd.
            
               Pater noſter &c.
            
            Then the Archbiſhop ſayd theſe prayers following ouer the king before he annoynted him, and ſate as if hée ſhould haue conſecrated a Biſhop.
            
               Te inuocamus &c.
            
            After the prayers the Lord Archbiſhop, holding the plate wherevpon lay the holy oyntment, began to annoynt his Maieſty.
            Firſt vpon the Crowne of his Head.
            Secondly hauing put off his dubblet and ſhirt, vppon the breſt.
            Thirdly betwéene the two ſhoulders.
            Fourthly vpon the right ſhoulder.
            Fifthly vpon the left ſhoulder.
            Sixtly in the bowing of the right arme.
            Seauenthly in the bowing of the left arme.
            And at euer̄y of the ſayd annoyntinges the ſaid Archbiſhop ſayd.
            
               Vngo te in Regem &c.
            
            And they all aunſweared Amen.
            
            And during theſe annoyntinges the ſinging men ſung this Antheme.
            
               Antiphona. Vnxerunt Salomonem Regem.
            
            After which Antheme, the ſayd Lord Archbiſhop ſayd the prayer following.
            
               Oremus. Chriſte perunge hunc Regem.
            
            The prayers ſayd & ended, the Lord Archbiſhop wyth the Prelates aſsiſtant, tooke him vp and cloſed the ſlittes

of the dubblet and of the ſhirt: and then the Lord great Chamberlaine deliuered to the king the garmentes that he was to weare aboue the ſayd dubblet: that is to ſay, the tunicle, or the ſame which repreſenteth a Subdeacon. The Dalmatike, or the ſame that repreſenteth a Deacon, and the cloke Royall, repreſenting the Chaſuble.
            The king being thus cloathed, the Archbiſhop tooke agayne the plate whereuppon lay the holy oyntment, and layd ſome vpon the palme of the kinges right hand, for the right annoynting. Then in the palme of the left hand for the ninth annointing, ſaying:
            
               Vngantur manus iſtae de oleo &c.
            
            The kinges handes thus annointed and hallowed, hée layeth them cloſe vppon his breſt, and then deliuereth him a payre of hallowed gloues, wherin he putteth his hands, and this is the bleſsing of the gloues.
            
               Oremus. Omnipotens creator qui homini &c.
            
            The ſaid Lord Archbiſhop hauing bleſſed the ſayd gloues, and putting them vpon the kings handes, ſayth:
            
               Circunda domine manus &c.
            
            Then the ſaid Lord Archbiſhop bleſſed the Ring, and ſaid as followeth.
            
               Oremus. Deus totius creaturae &c.
            
            After this bleſsing, the ſayd Lord Archbiſhop put on the Ring, wherewith the king marrieth the Realme, vpon the fourth finger of his right hand, ſaying:
            
               Accipe anulum ſignaculum &c.
            
            This prayer ſayd, the Lord Archbiſhop tooke the Scepter Royall from the Aultar, and put it into the kings right hand, ſaying:
            The deliuery of the Scepter. Accipe ſceptrum regiae poteſtatis &c.
            
            Immediately the ſayd Lord Archbiſhop deliuered hym the hand of Iuſtice into his left hand, ſaying:
            
               
               Accipe virgam virtutis &c.
            
            All thinges thus ended, the Lord Chauncelor ſtanding againſt the Aultar, and turning his face to the king and the aſsiſtants, with a loud voyce called the twelue Péeres according to their orders and dignities. Firſt beginning with the lay, as followeth.
            My Lord Prince of Conty, who ſerue for the Duke of Burgundy, preſent your ſelfe in this action.
            My Lord County of Soyſons, who ſerue for the D. of Normandy, preſent your ſelfe.
            My Lord Duke of Montpenſier, who ſerue for the D. of Aquitaine, preſent your ſelfe.
            My Lord of Luxenburg, who ſerue for the County of Tholouſe, preſent your ſelfe.
            My Lord Duke of Rayz, who ſerue for the County of Flaunders, preſent your ſelfe.
            My Lord Duke of Vantadour, who ſerue for the County of Champaigne, preſent your ſelfe.
            As for the Péeres Eccleſiaſticall, they were likewiſe called according to the former preſcript, and according to their callinges, both of the repreſenters and of the repreſented.
            The ſayd conuocation ended, the Archbiſhop did riſe out of his chayre, and turned to the High Aultar, from whence hée tooke the cloſe Crowne, and held it ouer the kinges head, without touching the ſame, whereto immediately all the Péeres both temporall and ſpirituall ſet their handes to ſupporte it, and the ſaide Archbiſhop ſayd thus:
            
               Coronet te Deus corona gloriae. &c.
            
            This prayer ended, the ſayd Archbiſhop ſet and placed the Crowne vpon the Kinges head, ſtill ſtaying it with his left hand, whereto all the other Péeres likewiſe ſet their handes, and the Archbiſhop ſaid the prayer following
            
               
               Accipe coronam regni &c.
            
            After the coronation, he ſayd this prayer.
            
               Oremus. Deus perpetuitabis &c.
            
            The bleſsing, Extendet omnipotens &c.
            
            The ſecond bleſsing ouer the king.
            
               Benedic domine &c.
            
            All theſe prayers finiſhed and ended, the ſaid Archbiſhop tooke the king by the ſléeue of his right arme, and the ſayd Lord ſtill held in his handes the Scepter, and the Hand of Iuſtice: and the ſaid Péeres both temporall and Spirituall, were round about the ſaid Lord, and as much as in them lay, did put their handes to the Crowne: Before him marched the Lord Conſtable, with the Sworde naked in his hand: then the Lord Chauncelor alone: then the Lord Great Maſter, on his right hand the Lord great Chamberlaine, and on his left, the chiefe Gentleman of his chamber.
            Then did the Archbiſhop bring the king to his throne and High Seate, prepared vpon the ſtage as is aforeſayd, the traine of whoſe cloke royall was carried by the Lord of Saint Luke: and as the king was aboue, and his back turned to the body of the church, the ſaid Archbiſhop ſtill holding of him, ſaid as followeth.
            
               Sta & retine a modo ſtatum quem huc vſque &c.
            
            Then the ſaid Archbiſhop holding the king by the hand cauſed him to ſit downe, ſaying:
            
               In hoc regni ſolio confirmet te &c.
            
            This prayer ended and the king being ſet in his throne the ſaid Archbiſhop tooke off his Mitre, and after great reuerence and honor by him done to his Maieſty, he kiſſed him, and then ſayd.
            
               Vinat rex in aeternum &c,
            
            After him all the other Péeres kiſſed him, the Péeres Eccleſiaſticall firſt beginning, ſaying thus.
            
               
               Viuat Rex in aeternum &c.
            
            Then the people gaue a great ſhout, crying, God ſaue the king: and immediately the Harguebuzes ſhot off, and after them the great Ordinance, and the Trumpets, cornets, hautbois, drommes and other inſtruments ſounded, and the ſaid Lord Archbiſhop began.
            
               Te Deum laudamus, béeing accompanied with the Organs and other Muſicke.
            During all this ioy and acclamation, the Herrauldes cryed a Largeſſe, wherevppon were caſt foorth a great number of péeces of Gold and Siluer, ſome mony currant, others coyned purpoſely and marked with the kings picture.
            After the ſayd Lord Archbiſhop had inthronized the king in his ſeat royall, and perfourmed euery thing as aforeſaid, he went downe and returned to the high Aultar, there to ſolemnize the High Maſſe, and in the meane time, was the kings Ordinary low Maſſe ſaid at the Aultar prouided vpon the ſtage, at the right hand as is aforeſayd, the Scepter and Hand of Iuſtice béeing layd vpright at each ſide of the ſayd Lords Oratory Deske: And when they came to the Goſpell of the High Maſſe his Maieſty aroſe, and the Prince of Conty, repreſenting the Duke of Burgundy, tooke off his crowne and ſet it vpon the cuſſion that lay vpon the ſayd Deske or leaning pew.
            Here we are to note that ſo often as the king returned neuer ſo little to the body of the church, the people béeing an infinite number, cryed, God ſaue the King. And the church rung with theyr cries, and with Harguebuze ſhot.
            Vpon the top of the ſtayre, on the right hand, deſcending toward the Quier, vpon the firſt ſtep, ſtood vpright and bare head, the Lord of Rhodes, Great Maſter of the ceremonies, with a ſtaffe in his hand, bending downeward: vppon the left ſtayre ſtood the Lord of Surenne

with his ſtaffe downe.
            Vpon both the ſtayres from ſtep to ſtep ſtoode the Harroulds bareheaded in their coates of Armes: And lower vpon the ſtaire on the right hand ſtoode the Lord County of Mauleurier captaine of the garde of Suitzers.
            The Deane of our Lady Church of Chartres red the Epiſtle, and the Abbot of Saint Genoueſe of Paris read the Goſpell, which doone, the Harrouldes firſt came downe from the two ſtaires, then the Lord of Rhodes, after him the Archbiſhop Patriarcke of Bourges, the Kings great Amner, apparelled in his pontificals of Violet coullour, attended vpon by diuers notable Clergie men, came to the Aulter, where the foreſaid Abbot tooke the booke of the Goſpels and carried it from the ſaid Aulter vp to the ſtage betwéene his hands, the ſaid Archbiſhop of Bourges ſtill following him. In this order and with al this braue ceremonie they all aſcended vnto the ſtage, and there the ſaide Lord of Bourges cauſed the King to kiſſe the ſaid Goſpells. Which doone, the ſaid Archbiſhoppe of Burges with other Clergie men aforeſaide came downe the ſtaires the ſame way they went vp, and in like ceremony as before returned the booke of Goſpels to the Aulter, where the Abbot ſtill remained by the Lord Archbiſhop of Rheims to ſerue him as a Deacon, and the ſaide Archbiſhop of Bourges returning vp ſat him downe néere the King in the accuſtomed place of the great Amner.
            When they came to the offertorie, four Lorde, knights of the holy Ghoſt, who during the whole ceremonie aforeſaid had ſit vpon the right ſide in the Cannons ſeates, departed from their places in manner following.
            The firſt, who was the Lord of Sourdis carried the wine in a veſſell of golde, chaſed.
            The ſecond, Lord of Souure who carried a ſiluer loafe vpon a Cuiſhion.
            
               The third, Lord of Antragues carried a loafe of golde vpon a Cuſhion.
            The fowrth Lord Countie of Eſcars carried a rich Purſe, garniſhed with thirtene peeces of gold, hauing the Kings ſtampe and portraiture, euery of them waying fiue and twentie Crownes, which purſe lay vpon a Cuſhion.
            Before theſe fower Lords marched ſeauen kinghts at armes and Harroulds, who not omitting any of the reuerences requiſite in ſuch a caſe, aſcended euen to the Kings throne, and being come thether, returned againe in order following.
            Firſt marched the ſeauen Harrouldes, and with them two Huſhers of the Kinges Chamber, with their Maces, next the fower Lords carriers of the offerings. After them, the Lord Chaunceler, the Lord Maiſter and Lord Counſtable bearing the ſword naked in his hand. Then came the King enuironed with all his Péeres, bearing the Scepter in his right hand, and the hand of Iuſtice in the left: And there remained at the ſaid throne as it were to kéepe it, the Lord great Chamberline and the chiefe Gentleman of the Chamber. The King thus accompanied, being come to the high Aulter, the Harroulds and Huſhers, then the Lord Counſtable, Chaunceler, and great Maiſter tooke ſides and made way for the Lords of O, and Roquelord, who very reuerently to eaſe his Maieſtie, tooke at the Kings hands, the one the Scepter, the other the hand of Iuſtice. Then the Lord Countie of Eſcars, who carried the purſe after a low reuerence, deliuered it into the Kings hands to offer: The like did the Lord of Antragues with the loafe of golde, alſo the Lorde of Souure with the ſilver loafe & the Lord of Sourdis with the veſſell of wine.
            The offering in this manner ended, and the King taking

againe the Scepter and the hand of Iuſtice, returned to his throne and high ſeate, accompanyed as before, the quire ſinging God ſaue the King, and the fower Lordes that carried the offerings returned to the ſeates wher they ſat before.
            The Maſſe being ended vnto Pax Domini, before the Archbiſhop of Rheims had ended it ſaid ouer the King and people this prayer following.
            
               Benedicat tibi Dominus &c.
            
            The ſaid Lord Archbiſhop procéeding and hauing ſung Pax Domini, the Archbiſhop of Bourges, great Amner with the Clergie aforeſaid, and the Kinges amners, the Lord great Maiſter of the ceremonies and the Harroulde, went to the Aulter and taking the Pax at the Archbiſhop of Rheims hand, kiſſed him on the chéeke. That done, he returned vp to the Kings ſeate and throne, and preſented him the Pax and after the King had kiſſed it, al the Péeres firſt the Eccleſiaſticall, then the lay did the like.
            In the meane time the Archbiſhop of Rheims, procéeding in the office, bleſſed the banner Royall, ſaying as followeth.
            
               Inclina Domine aurem tuam, &c.
            
            Heere followeth the Collect or firſt prayer ſaide at Maſſe vpon the day of this ſolemnitie.
            
               Collecta. Quaeſumus omnipotens Deus &c.
            
            The ſecond prayer, ſaide in ſcrete.
            
               Munera quaeſumus Domine, &c.
            
            The laſt prayer of the Maſſe, or paſt Communion.
            
               Poſt Communio. Haec Domine, &c. Oratio ſalutari, &c.
            
            The Maſſe thus ended the ſaide Lord of Rheims leauing vpon the Aulter, tarieth vntill the other Péeres both Eccleſiaſticall and lay, brought downe the King to the Aulter. The King being come thether, entered into his

pauillion afore mentioned, there to reconcile him ſelfe, with his confeſſor aforeſaid, then comming forth againe, he knéeled downe before the high Aulter, and hauing ſaide the Confiteor, and receiued abſolution, which was giuen him by the ſaid Archbiſhop doing the office. The Prince of Condy took of his Crowne, and the other Péeres lay tooke off the attire off his head, and he receiued the precious body of our Lord, vnder both formes of bread and wine in great deuotion and perfect humilitie, and then tooke againe his great Crowne.
            This done the ſaid Lord Archbiſhop of Rheims tooke of that Crowne and ſet him on a lighter and meaner, and then was the great Crowne deliuered to the Duke of Montbaſon, who was to carry it before the King to his pallace and he carryed it vpon a rich Cuſhion.
            The Scepter was deliuered to the Lord of O, and the hand of Iuſtice to the Lord of Requelore. Then the King thus arayed in his garments Royall, accompanyed with the foreſaid Péeres, in like ceremony and order as he came to Church returned to his pallace.
            The people with great acclamation and ſignes of ioy, cryed, God ſaue the King, the Cannons and ſmall ſhotte played their parts, the trumpets, drumms and other inſtruments ſounded and played, and at the ſame inſtant was the holy Vyall brought out of the Church and returned to the Abbay of Saint Pere in like ceremony as it came before to our Lady Church.
            The King being returned to his pallace tooke his Chamber, where hee ſtayed a good while, and ſhifted him ſelfe into an other ſhert, deliuering that to his great amner to vſe according to the cuſtome of that ſhert. Then he came into the great hall of the pallace, at the vpper end whereof hung a high Cloth of eſtate of ſome ſix fadome and a halfe ſquare and thrée foote déepe, and vnder

the ſame a Table nine foote long, whereon the King did eate.
            On the right hand ſtoode an other Table and on the left an other. At that on the right hand ſat the Lord Péeres Eccleſiaſticall in their Copes and Miters, and at that on the left the Peeres lay in their Péeres attire. Somewhat beneath ſat the Ambaſſadours of England and Venice, the Lord Chanceler, the officers of the Crowne and they that had carried the honours.
            The Lord Counſtable all the while ſtoode at the end of the Kings Table, with the ſword naked and vpright in his hand.
            The Countie of Saint Paul ſerued as great Maiſter, bearing his Staffe vp.
            The Lord of Rohan as pantler.
            The Countie of Sauuerre as taſter.
            The Countie of Torigny as caruer.
            The Gentlemen of the Chamber carried the meate, euery courſe being accompanied with trumpets, cornets and haultbois, and the Harroulds and ſtewards of the houſholde marching before the Lord great Maiſter with his ſtaffe downe.
            Betwéene the Seruice the Muſicke ſung.
            Grace was ſung in Muſicke in manner as the late King cauſed to bee ſaide before him, and then euery man with drew himſelfe.
            At night his Maieſtie ſupped in feaſt Royall.
            At his Table vnder the Cloth of eſtate ſat Madam his ſiſter, with a diſtaunce betwéene him and her.
            On the right hand was the Lady Princeſſe of Conde, the Lady Dutcheſſe of Niuernois and her daughter the Lady of Neuers.
            On the left beneath Madam ſat the Lady Princeſſe of Condy, the Lady of Rohan and the Lady of Raiz.
            
               The Lord Countie of Soiſſons kept his eſtate of great Maiſters.
            The Lord Prince of Condy ſerued as high pantler and carried the firſt diſh.
            The Duke of Longueuill as high taſter.
            The Lord of Rohan as caruer.
            To Madam ſerued the Lord Countye of Mauleurier as pantler.
            The Lord of Mirepoix as taſter.
            The Countie of Lude as caruer.
            At euery ſeruice the trumpets, cornets & drummes did ſound, and the Harroulds and Stewards marched before the Lord great Maiſter, to whom the Lord of Gois of Tillet preſented the Towell. The ſaide Lord great Maiſter deliuered it to Madam the Kings ſiſter, who as already ſet, but ſhe aroſe from her ſeate and deliuered it to his Maieſtie, to waſh his hands.
            After ſupper grace was ſung in Muſicke, and then the King withdrew him to his Chamber, accompanied with Madam, his ſiſter, the Dukes, Ducheſſes, Princes, Princeſſes, Lords and Ladies that were aſſiſtant at ſupper, and hauing ſtayed there halfe an hower Madam deſired to depart, whom the King accompanied to the great Chamber doore, and then euery one withdrew to their reſt.
            The next morning on Munday the twentie eight & laſt of Februarie, the King would take the coller and order of the holy Ghoſt according to the purport of the Statutes of the ſaid order founded and made by the late King Henry the third.
            The ſame day at thrée of the clocke in the afternoone he went to our Lady Church in like ceremonie as by the Statute is ordained, cauſing his officers to go before him, then the prelats, commanders and knights of the ſame order, apparelled in their long robes and their great collers

about their neckes, and after Compline ended the Lorde Biſhop of Chartres in this ceremonie alſo retaining the place and calling of the Archbiſhop of Rheims cauſed him to take the Oath required and appointed by the ſaide Statute. After the ſaid Oath taken vpon the booke of the holy Euangeliſts which the Lord Chaunceler of the order did holde, the Lord of Rhodes put vpon him the great robe of the ſaid order and the ſaide Lord of Chartres the coller.
            This done hee went and ſat downe in the Chaire of eſtate where all the ſaid Prelats, knights, commaunders and officers one after another kiſſed his hands.
            This ceremony ended, his Maieſtie returned to his pallace cauſing the aforenamed to march before him in like ceremony and pompe as they came. God giue his Maieſtie grace to plant peace in his Realme and parſon and long to enioy the ſame, Amen.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   