
      
         
            
            
            A
Declaration
and Proteſtation, publiſhed
by the King of Nauarre, the L. Prince of
Conde, and the L. Duke of Montmorency, concerning
the peace concluded with the houſe of Lorrayn,
the Captaines and chiefe aucthors of the
league, to the preiudice of the
houſe of Fraunce.
            
            Alſo two Letters written by the ſayd King of Nauarre.
The one to the Parliament, the other to the
Maiſters of Sorbonne.
            
            More an Epiſtle written by Philipp de Morney
to the French King:
            Hereunto, for the playner declaration of the innocencie
of the ſayd Princes, are inſerted the Articles agreed
vpon betweene the King and the
Lordes of Guyze.
            
            All faithfully tranſlated out of French,
            
            Imprinted at London for
Edward Aggas.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The Declaration
and Proteſtation.
            
               IT is not vnknowne to
all men, and they may
ſoone call to minde in
what eſtate the affaires
of this Realme ſtoode,
and of what minde the
King was, when the
houſe of Lorrayn vnder the title of a Holy
league began to raiſe Wars againſt his Maieſtie
& to trouble the quiet eſtate of this
Realme. For through Gods grace Peace
began to take roote in the depth of mens
hearts, and thence to expell all hartburning
and miſtruſt: Iuſtice vnder the wings
thereof gathered ſtrength by the exerci
                  •
               e
of lawes: Religion on both parts crept into
credite in mens conſciences, whence the
licencious libertie of warres had almoſt
expelled it: Nobilitie grewe into familiaritie
& gaue ouer partialities and factiōs:
The Cōmons after ſo many miſchiefes and
calamities, began to enioye the fruites of

their labours, and through ſuch good order
as the King had taken, were in poſsibilitie
ſpeedely to bee freed from the pillage
and inſolencie of the Souldier. To be
brief, the miſeries and calamities incident
to warres grewe into obliuion, and were
almoſt buried vnder the commodities of
peace, which was mightily proſecuted and
daylie cheriſhed through the Kings wiſedome,
to whom nothing was in ſuch recommendation
as the continuaunce and
eſtabliſhing of the ſame. For if on either
ſide there remained any ſcarre of the auncient
miſeries, which the peace (that yet
had not beene of ſo long continuaunce or
force as the warre) could not cleerely deface,
the King, who had both noted the
miſchiefe and founde out the remedie,
through that dayly care that he tooke for
the affayres of his Realme, was ſurely entred
ſuch a path as would not onely haue
ended the calamities of this Realme, but
alſo in ſhort tyme haue reſtored her to
her auncient dignitie, proſperitie, and
brightneſſe. But this neceſſarie path that
ſhould haue led al things to wealth, quiet,
and eaſe, is now broken vp and diſturbed

by the houſe of Lorrayn, who are vtterly
vnpatient and not able to abide the tranquilitie
and peace of this Realme, as finding
the ſame repugnant to their purpoſes,
which they knowe them ſelues vtterly
vnable to compaſſe by the proſperitie, but
rather through the confuſion, ruine and
ſubertion of this eſtate.
            It is needleſſe here to rehearſe ſuch their
purpoſes as by the effects are ſufficiently
diſcouered: For it may be euidently knowen
to all men what the pretences and
practiſes of thoſe of that houſe haue bene
as alſo what meanes they haue from time
to time vſed, eſpecially ſince the raigne of
Francis the ſecond, for the contriuing of
their deuiſes: which, to be brief, do tēd to
the extinguiſhing of the houſe of Fraunce,
and intruding of thē ſelues into the place
thereof. And for the eaſier atteyning to
ſuch their drifts and enterpriſes, how they
haue ſought to ſet deuiſion in the Realm,
to nouriſh troubles, to weaken the power
of the Nobilitie by the loſſe and ſhedding
of their bloud, to abaſe vnder ſundry pretēces
the credite & auctoritie of the Princes.
In the meane time themſelues to take

weapon in hand, to gayne partakers, to ouerthrowe
all that ſtand in their way, and
finally ſo farre as in them lieth, to encroch
the ſtrength and power of this Realm into
their own hands. This courſe haue they
euer ſince the raigne of Frances the ſecōd
taken, ſtill gathering ground by little and
litle and employing euery occaſion. They
layd to the Princes of the bloud that they
had practized againſt the perſon of the
young Prince, and vnder pretence thereof
procured the apprehēding and detaining
of the chiefe Princes of the bloud, ſequeſtring
the reſt from about his Maieſtie, &
bringing into miſlike the moſt auncient
and faithfull officers of the Crowne, yea
euen then, had not God preuented them,
they had ſet foote vpon the very throte of
this eſtate. This being moſt manifeſt, can
not be attributed other then to their ambicious
practizes: For at that time no
Prince in Fraunce openly did profeſſe any
other then the Catholicke Romiſh Religion,
neither was there any ſuch queſtion
of controuerſie in Religion, which as yet
was not much ſpoken of in this Realme▪
No, the quarrell which the houſe of Lorrayne
               
then had and yet hath againſt the
houſe of Fraunce, tended vnder ſhadow of
the King to raigne, vntill fitter oportunitie,
the whiles, vnder his auctoritie and by
his power to rid their hands of the chiefe
Princes of the bloud, who were any ſtumbling
blockes in their way, and of the officers
of the Crowne, as thoſe that could
not brooke their vſurped auctoritie.
            Vpon theſe and ſuch like beginnings we
are to iudge of their actions enſuing: according
to theſe originalles muſt we conſider
of the effectes, that ſince they haue
endeuoured to diſguize to the ende diuerſly
to procure them fauour, as ſoone
after they did, & ſtil they endeuour to do:
but the nature of water is neuer better
knowne then at the Spring while it is yet
pure and vnmingled, as likewiſe all humaine
actions are naturally diſcerned at
their firſt beginnings, before the inconueniences
that wee finde haue gathered any
ſleights, and learned to vſe any cloked diſſimulation.
This alſo was the reaſon that
moued thē, immediatly vpon the deceaſe
of King Francis, vnder whoſe name they
ruled, becauſe he had married the Scottiſh

Queene their niece, finding themſelues
thereby excluded from all meanes of gouernement,
to alter their former pretēce:
For when they perceyued that the generall
eſtates lawfully ſummoned and aſſembled
did call them to accoumpt for their
adminiſtrations and dealings, they began
to cloke their ambition with the vayle of
earneſt zeale to the Catholick Romiſh religion.
They, who but fower daies before
had put the Germain Princes in ſuch hope
of ioyning with them in the confeſsion of
Auſbourg, beginning with the murder of
many perſons of all ſortes, ages and kinds
at Vaſſy, did violate the lawes and infringe
the peace and publicke tranquilitie of the
Realme, for the continuaunce whereof,
the ſaid general eſtates had found it expedient
to graunt the exercize of both Religions,
and to the ſame end had publiſhed
a ſolemne edict verefied in all the Courtes
of Parliament: which could not bee attributed
to force, feare, or other vnlawfull
purſuite, but onely to the ſole conſideration
of the benefite & tranquilitie of this
eſtate: With armes during the Kings minoritie
they ſeazed vpon his perſon together

with the Queene his mother, who in
wiſedome had conſented to the ſayed edict,
and through iuſt feare of their forces, was
compelled (not without manifold reclayming
the aide of the Princes of the bloud
againſt their tyrannie) to yeeld and in the
ende to auctorize them for her patrons.
All this they did to the ende to entangle
the Princes youth in mallice, hatred and
warres againſt his owne bloud, therby to
weaken the Realme, and to lay it open to
their inuaſions, & to drawe to themſelues
both the auctoritie and force, (which indeede
they brought to paſſe) ſo liuing and
raigning in and among armes, which, as
opportunitie ſhould ſerue, they might abuſe
to their owne pretences. This foundation
did they lay ſo firme, that for the
ſpace of theſe 25. yeres this Realme hath
flowed with ciuill warres, vnder the ſupport
whereof they haue exercized their
mallice, ſatiſfied their reuenging affectiōs,
and laboured their ambition with the
price of the King and his eſtate, yea, euen
with the price (through their accurſed &
execrable counſayles) of the honour of the
French nation, vnto whom are imputed

al the miſchiefes and calamities that thorowe
the counſayle of this fatall houſe of
Lorrayne hath beene contriued, vntill the
King now raigning by his wiſedome foūd
out that the zeale of Religion by thē publiſhed
as a ſhield, was but a pretence: that
the true ſpirite of Religion, whereof him
ſelfe hath more apprehenſion and feeling
then they, doth not perſwade or counſaile
the violation of publick lawes, the breach
of oath, or the tainting of a whole eſtate
with bloud and murder: ſo that he perceiued
that vndoubtedly it was but a practiſe
to climbe higher: for the preuenting
whereof it was requiſite to ende the troubles
of his Realme by an equal and indifferent
peace conuenient for the preſent
time, referring to God (who only raigneth
in the conſciences) all operation in the
hearts of his ſubiects, for the reuniting &
bringing them all to one Religion.
            Howbeit this peace being made, not by
force, but of the Kings meere motion and
free conſent, which alſo in reſpect thereof
he would haue called his peace: this famely
could not brooke it, as men that could
neuer finde any peace in peace, and therfore

did continually croſſe it by al meanes
and ſubtilties poſsible, yea, they procured
their partakers by all kinde of iniuries,
violences and wrōgfull attempts to driue
the profeſſors of the Religiō into diſpaire
and impatiencie, & to force them to take
armes, whereby the King might iuſtly leauie
warre againſt them. Againe, on the other
ſide they ſollicited the ſayd profeſſors
of Religion to ioyne with them, alleadging
the benefite of the Commonwealth,
and promiſing them libertie of religion
vnder whatſoeuer cautions or aſſurances
that they could deſire, leauing no
deuice or pollicie vnpractiſed, that might
returne this eſtate into trouble, as knowing
that the quiet and peace of the land
fighteth againſt & ouerthroweth all their
deuiſes and purpoſes. Finally, finding the
King more and more reſolued to maintaine
peace, and the profeſſors of the Religion
crauing nothing more hartely thē
quietnes vnder the benefite of the edicts.
Eſpecially my Lord the Duke of Anieowe
deceaſed, and the King without iſſue, whō
by an imagination, which cannot ſpring
but out of deſire, they aſſure themſelues

to out li
                  •
               e, and vnto whome, as all men
knowe, they haue preſcribed and limited
but a ſhort time, they reſolued to riſe in
armes and to ſeaze vpon their Maieſties
perſons (had they not beene diſcouered)
togither with the moſt part of the Realm,
ſo to bee the better prouided againſt the
time of their imagined alteration: Alſo
for the drawing of the greater number of
partakers to this conſpiracie, they haue
publiſhed ſundrie titles and pretences, as
true the one as the other, therby to accomodate
them ſelues to the diuers mindes
and ſeuerall affections of men, ſtil cloking
their poyſon and venome vnder a gorgeous
title of a counter poyſon, the rather
to abuſe and confirme their adherents.
The pretences and titles publiſhed are
theſe. The Common wealth: The diſcharge
of the third estate: The reintegration of the
Nobilitie in their pristinate dignitie: The reeſtabliſhing
of the Church in her liberties and
priuiledges: The ſuppreſſion of certaine perſons
Whom the King hath exalied: The restitution
of ſuch as they pretend to haue beene euill en
                  
                     〈…〉
                   and hardly dealt with: The nominatiō
of a Catholick Romiſh ſucceſſor to the Crowne,

for the defence of the Romiſh Church: The extirpation
of hereſie and rooting out of thoſe whō
they pretend to be heretickes.
            
            All theſe things haue they promiſed to
bring to paſſe before they ceaſe, and yet
how they haue accompliſhed it, I leaue to
all mens conſideration. The true cauſe yet
remaineth vnſpoken of, & is the ſame that
only hath already produced ſome effects.
Viz. To be armed to the end to preſcribe lawes
to the King vnder colour of rooting out of Heretikes:
and to make away the chiefe Princes of
the blood, and ſuch as are their principall ſtumblingblockes:
that is, thoſe that profeſſe the religion
wherein they were borne and bread vp, ſo
the eaſelier to attaine to the reſt, and this hath
the King very well marked, euen from the
beginning of their broyles hetherto: For
in ſundry his Letters to the King of Nauarre
he hath confeſſed, that he knoweth
well enough that this their zeale of Religion
is but a pretence: & that their drifts
do tend againſt his own perſon, his houſe,
and eſtate.
            And in the meane time, becauſe vnder
this pretence they had abuſed many of his
ſubiects, he requireth the ſaid king of Nauarre
               
to haue pacience, vntil he might euidently
diſcipher the colors from the cauſes,
and the pretences from the purpoſes,
aſſuring him that hee findeth the enterpriſe
directly againſt him ſelfe, and ſo the
offence to appertaine properly vnto him.
Moreouer, vpon the ſame iudgement and
foreſight his Maieſtie hath by his expreſſe
Letters, commaunded al gouernours and
Lieutenants generall, in their Prouinces
and perticuler chardges, to aſſaile their
troopes, and hath proclaimed and declared
them Rebels, Traytors, perturbers of
cōmon peace, and enemies to the Eſtate:
Vpon the verfication of theſe his Maieſties
commaundements in all the Courts
of Parliament, there haue enſued many
decrees, yea ſome haue bene executed, beſides
that the like meſſages haue bin ſent
to all Princes allied and confederat to the
Crowne, with expreſſe commaundement
to his Maieſties Embaſſadours, to direct
their ſpeeches conformably thereunto,
Viz. That his Maieſtie findeth by the effectes
as well paſt as preſent, and vnderſtandeth
by the demeanurs and teſtimonies
aforeſayde, that the inſurrection of

thoſe of this houſe, notwithſtāding whatſoeuer
their pretences, is one of the fruits
of their firſt attempts, that is, of their conſpiracie
to roote out the houſe of France,
whereof none neede to plead ignoraunce
that liſt but to looke backe vnto, and call
to minde their behauiours theſe 25. yeres
and more, and at once to conſider well
of the ſame.
            At the ſame time alſo that his Maieſtie
proclaymed them Rebels, he reuiued the
publication of his Edict of pacification
throughout all partes of his Realme, as a
teſtimony to al, but chiefly to thoſe of the
Religion, that hee in no wiſe ment to encline
to the demaunds of theſe men, but
did rather condemne them, for that they
ſought to aboliſh the ſayde Religion by
force of armes, his Maieſtie knowing that
to be no meet or lawfull meane, as alſo by
ſundry letters he aſſured the King of Nauarre
that he would do nothing preiudiciall
either to the ſayed Edict or him, whoſe
cauſe he acknowledged to be his owne.
            All the premiſſes notwithſtanding, it ſo
fell out, that vpon a ſudden a peace was
concluded with thoſe of this famely and

league, wherof proceeded an Edict, wherby
the former Edict of pacification, ſo deliberatly
confirmed, & ſo ſolemnly ſworne
vnto by their Maieſties: the Princes of his
blood: all the Courtes of Parliament: and
the chiefe Lords & officers of the crowne,
which alſo had bene ſo freſhly reiterated
and again confirmed, was now vtterly reuoked,
all exerciſe of religion vnder paine
of death prohibited: all profeſſors thereof
condemned within the tearme of ſixe
months to depart the realme: the townes
for aſſurance, which likewiſe of his owne
accord, and for diuers conſiderations concerning
the welth and quiet of his eſtate,
he had proroged to thoſe of the ſaid religion,
they ſhould now ſpeedely habādon,
to the ende to buy peace at the hands of
the ſayed Rebels & traitors, ſo proclaymed
and acknowledged by his Maieſtie, with
the hinderance of his neereſt kinſemen:
and, which is worſe, the weapons committed
to the hands of thoſe men, to the end
to put the ſame in execution, a matter vtterly
repugnant to all lawes, which doe
meerly forbid the execution of any decree
to be committed to the aduerſe partie,

nay more, that he ſhal not aſsiſt thereat,
notwithſtanding it were to maintaine
the execution of Iuſtice.
            Hereupon therefore doth the King of
Nauarre deſire all good Frenche men in
France to conſider what cauſe he hath, to
to lament. In their publike proteſtations,
the conſpirators oppoſed themſelues directly
againſt him, and yet he▪ to the ende
to ſatiſfie the Kings minde, and to auoyde
all occaſion of the peoples oppreſsion, remained
peaceable, and neuer would arme
himſelfe, although he ſee them in armes
round about him. He ſee the Kings mind
enclined to peace, and that euil and ruine
which they openly procured him, might
haue mooued him by all meanes to croſſe
them▪ & yet for the benefite of the realme
he offered to the king ſome entrie to quietneſſe
by the declaration which expreſſely
he publiſhed, yea ſuch as he truſteth all
Chriſtiandome will allowe of, and the verieſt
barbarous nation would haue aceapted of.
            They ſpake of the rooting out of hereſie,
and the Chriſtian authors fought againſt
it with generall Counſels: he ſubmitted

himſelfe to a counſayle, and declared
himſelfe to be ready to be enſtructed
therby and to yeeld thereto. They craued
reformation and alteration in ſome matters
of eſtate: ſuch controuerſies and differents
are by the auncient ſtatutes of the
land to bee determined by the generall eſtates,
to the aſſembly whereof, whenſoeuer
it ſhould pleaſe the King to ſummon
them, hee offered to referre, and ſubmit
himſelfe. They requeſted that the King of
Nauarre and the profeſſors of the Religion
ſhould immediatly habandon and
depart the Townes of aſſurance, notwithſtanding
the Kings prorogation of the
tenour of the ſame to them graunted: for
the eſchuing of al miſtruſt he offered without
delay to yeeld thē, yea, which is more,
to diſpoſſeſſe himſelfe and to render into
the Kings handes, both he and the Lorde
Prince of Conde, al gouernments that they
holde within this Realme, conditionally,
that the others might doe the like, notwithſtanding
ſuch inequalitie as all men
may eaſely perceiue: for it is not meete to
make ſtraungers equall with the houſhold
children. Moreouer, if there were any further

controuerſie, the deciſion whereof
might touch or any way concerne him, for
the exempting of the King (whoſe perſon
would be too deare a price to this Realm)
from all daunger and care therof, the ſayd
King of Nauarre beſought his Maieſtie
not to miſlike the determining of any
ſuch quarrell, either by his power againſt
theirs, either els, for the preuenting of
publicke calamitie, by his perſon againſt
the Duke of Guyze, or by more to more,
as he ſhould think good, within the realm
or without, in whatſoeuer place of free
acceſſe: adding moreouer that if his Maieſtie
could conceiue any more conueniēt
remedie for the pacifying of the eſtate of
the Realme, the ſayed King of Nauarre
woulde gladly yeelde thereto and not to
ſpare his life therein, moſt humbly withal
beſeeching his Maieſtie ſo farre to honor
him as to let him vnderſtande the ſame.
Howbeit, nothing reſpecting all theſe his
ſo reaſonable offers, thei haue in the mean
time proceeded to a treaty of peace, to
the great preiudice of the eſtate and houſe
of Fraunce, yea, of the King himſelfe. A
peace, to ſpeake indifferently, vnwoorthy

any ſuch title, as beeing to bee rather accompted
a ſummons of warre, yea, & vnleſſe
God of his great mercie doe preuent
it, ſuch a warre as will be an entry into the
ruine and ſubuertion of the whole eſtate.
A peace made with ſtraūgers for the rooting
out of the home borne childrē: with
Traytors for the ſpoyle of the obedient
Subiects: with conſpirators, to the end to
commit to their hands the ſworde againſt
himſelfe, to abuſe at their pleaſures. A
peace that hath not ſo much as the taſt of
any thing appertayning to peace; A black
peace▪ A wofull and funerall peace, and of
an vnfortunate aſpect: A peace which the
King ſigned not but with a quaking and
ſhiuering hand: A peace whereto the Princes
of his bloud and Peers of this Realm,
yea, the moſt Catholicke, haue refuſed to
ſweare, as being the decree of their deaths
and the ſmall ouerthrowe of the eſtate,
which moreouer procureth no comforte
either to the Countrey or Townes, but
hath filled all the good Frenchmen of this
Realme with horror, and reioyced onely
thoſe that nouriſh them ſelues and feede
vpō their deaths. A peace to ſay the troth,

which the ſayd Lord King of Nauarre acknowledgeth
not to be imputed vnto the
King, a courteous and iuſt Prince, from
whoſe nature the ſame is too odious, neither
to the Queene his mother, who in al
her indeuours haue ſought no other but
the tranquilitie of the Realme: but partly
to the daſtardlineſſe of ſome of the Kings
Counſayle, and partly to the trecherie of
other ſome, who are either ſeruants or of
kindred and alliaunce with thoſe of this
league, who alſo, as it is ſufficiently knowen,
in the beginning leſſened and deminiſhed
the miſchiefe, propounding it vnto
him to be eaſely appeaſed, leaſt he ſhould
haue prouided remedies neceſſary there
againſt. But afterward euen at once when
they ſee the power of the league waxe
great, did ſo enlarge it to his view that he
was eaſely perſwaded that himſelfe might
ſoone be by them oppreſſed if ſpeedily he
ſatiſfied not their mindes: and for ſuch
perſons it is well knowne that a number
of them which vnder colour of her ſeruice
accompanied the Queene, did aduertiſe
thoſe of the league of her chiefe ſecretes:
ſome h
                  •
               ld their conuenticles ſo ſoone as

they came foorth of his Chamber, what
counſayle they ſhoulde giue him: other
ſome to the end to aſtoniſh him, diſciphered
vnto him ſuch armies to the ſuccours
of the league, as neuer appeared, nor had
any other ſubſtance then ayre. Theſe were
the counſailes whereby the King was turned
from vſing his neereſt kindred, who
would not haue ſpared the ſhedding of
their bloud for his quiet, and who had
both will and oportunitie, and now for
recompence are ſold to the ſtraunger, and
ſo farre as may be, payment is made with
their bloud and liues. Vpon theſe counſayles
hath hee refuſed the offers of his
princely Neighbours, the loyall confederates
of the Crowne, while by meanes of
the league the Spaniſh coyne trotted thorowe
out Fraunce, and found entrie into
the Townes, into the Counſayle, yea, into
the priuieſt parte thereof. Finally, and all
men knowe it, the King was deluded by
thoſe to whom be had as great occaſion
to commit himſelfe, if benefites receiued
might amend mens mindes. And the ſayd
Lorde King of Nauarre fully aſſureth him
ſelfe that though by their 
                  〈◊〉
                and

violence they haue bene able to arme his
armes againſt him, yet at the leaſt his
ſobbes, ſighes, deſires and vowes ſhal fight
in his quarrell, which he hath well founde
& cannot poſsibly forget to be his owne.
            The ſaid Lord King of Nauarre hopeth
that the moſt parte of men of iudgement
in this Realm, eſpecially ſuch as haue had
neereſt familiaritie with their actions or
beene intangled therein, haue beene able
to enter into conſideration of the depth
of the entents of thoſe of the league, and
therefore he wil ſo farre aſſure himſelfe of
thē, that they will not ſo blemiſh their honors
as to beare armes againſt the houſe
of Fraunce, vnder the ſhadow of this edict,
as alſo they ſhould proceede too farre againſt
their own knowledge if they ſhould
but thinke to haue taken them vnder the
ſaid pretences, yea, were it for the aſſurāce
of their Religion.
            Thoſe of this league alleadged diuers
pretences, as they dealt in one ſo it is like
they doe and will doe in the reſt.
            Of this Common wealth whereof they
made ſo great boaſt and which had prouoked
ſundry, euen of the Nobilitie, ſuch

as were fartheſt from ambition, and leaſt
partakers of the corruptiō of theſe times,
in this edict there is no worde of it, euen
the firſt day thereof they gaue it ouer.
            Concerning the diſcharge of the third
eſtate which they promiſed, in this treatie
there is no mention thereof, but contrariwiſe
by this peace it hath begun to bee
ſurcharged and more and more brought
into ruyne. For, where in their declarations
they promiſed that their Souldiers
ſhould liue in order and pay all men, it is
well knowne that during all the troubles
of this Realme there haue beene none
more vnruly or diſordered in all ſortes, as
likewiſe that which they proteſted that
they would not attempt againſt the kings
Townes, or therein place any Garriſon
without the conſent or liking of the Inhabitants,
hath beene no whit better obſerued
by ſuch as haue ſeazed vpon the
ſame. For in ſome by force, in others that
voluntarily receiued them, vnder colour
of good meaning they haue built Citadelles
and brought in Garriſons.
            The Nobilitie haue had no better amends:
for in this treaty whom haue they

prouided for but themſelues, or thoſe of
their houſe? either whom haue they reſtored
to the dignities wherof they pretended
them to be vnworthely depriued? To
bee briefe, all their doings haue ſtretched
only to the parting & deuiding of France
to thoſe of their famely according to their
platforme layd for the atchieuing thereof
in time to come, cauſing by this peace the
gouernement of ſundry Townes of importaunce
and Prouinces both vpon the
frontiers and in the hart of the Realme to
bee committed to them, wherevpon the
Nobilitie of this Realme is to conſider
what aduauncement they maye expect at
their hands when 24. Princes of Lorrayne
muſt be contented and ſatiſfied before any
of them may by their meanes attaine
to any dignitie.
            As for the due promotions vnto Eccleſiaſtical
functions and dignities, they haue
in this Edict had no more reſpect (witneſſe
the Biſhoprick of Authum, wherunto
the D. of Mayne hath by force promoted
his Sonne in Law) then to the prerogatiues,
franchizes and liberties therof,
notwithſtanding, that ſeeking to take a

pretence for Religion, the ſame ſhoulde
haue bene a principall article and of greateſt
recommendation. But contrariwiſe,
entring into information of their liues, it
will bee found that they haue ranſomed
the Prieſts & clergie, prophaned the Monaſteries,
embeſeled the Chalices & Croſſes,
with all other the Churche goods, all
haue bene to them Wars, euen in making
their peace. To the ende to be paide their
expences, folowing the ſteppes of the late
Cardinal of Lorrayn their vnkle, they haue
propounded and extorted a promeſſe to
alienate Rentes to the value of 100000.
Crownes, and to procure the Popes conſent
thereto. Prouided alwayes, that the
ſaid coyne may be employed in the reemburſing
of them: Beſides it is euidēt to all
mē that in any matter touching the three
Eſtates, without inſtance or purſuit they
diſcharged themſelues at the beginning
of the Parley of this peace.
            Touching the great fauour about the
King, whereof they complaine of ſome
gentlemen whome they tearme in their
Declaration (The bloodſuckers of the people)
whom alſo they ſay they wil abaſe and reduce

into order, it is moſt manifeſt that
they haue moſt vildly in all ſortes ſought
their amitie, that they haue gone about
to buy the ſame by remitting into their
hands the townes of their gouernments,
which by Warres they had ſeaſed vpon &
takē away: but to their great ſhame thoſe
men haue taught them the path to Generoſitie
and courage, by giuing them to vnderſtand
that they regarded not their amitie
further then the commodity of this
Realme did require.
            With the Cardinall of Bourbon, whome
they had brought into the field vpon promeſſe
of procuring him that right which
they perſwaded him he might pretend to
the Crowne, they haue played the ſame
partes according to their vſuall maner,
which is to drawe euery mans intereſt
into their owne particular profite: For
hauyng hym once entangled among
them, they made ſo ſmale accompt of his
imagined right, that comming to parley
with the Queene, they were euen aſhamed
to open their mouthes therein: But in
cace there were any greeuous queſtion, or
any difficult or thorny point, they vſed

him as an inſtrument. It was my Lord the
Cordinall that motioned it, and ſo reſerued
them ſelues ſtil to mollefie matters, to appeaſe
parties, and to wreſt all the thanks
and profit of the treatie vnto themſelues.
            In the meane time one principal point,
whereupon they layde the foundation of
the Catholique Romiſh Religion, was to
prouide that the King ſhould name a ſucceſſor
that profeſſed the ſame, and vnder
that pretence (as alſo vnder the former
cōcerning the comon wealth) they drew
to their faction many of the Nobilitie,
which thought they had bene in earneſt,
but their pretence was onely to atchieue
that point which by this peace they haue
obtayned, which was the ſame onely that
they were ſo earneſt for, viz. to ſeaſe vpon
the Frontiers and Kayes of the Realme,
which had bene kept, euen from the late
Monſier, alſo vnder ſhadowe of Religion
to haue weapon in hand, ſo to become arbitrators
of the counſayles▪ to preſcribe
Lawes to the king during his life: to make
away the Princes of his blood, and loyall
ſeruants of the houſe of France, and after
his deceaſe, which they imagine to bee at

hand, violētly to vſurpe this poore eſtate.
            To thinke they either can, or doe ſuppoſe
them ſelues able to compaſſe the
rooting out of Religion, the proofe that
for theſe 25. yeeres or more they haue
made is quite repugnaunt thereto. Our
Kings haue not ſpared them ſelues either
by pollicies of peace or rigors of Warres.
The authors of this league haue employed
both force and craft. The name League
hath nothing encreaſed their meanes:
hath not bred vp any new ſouldiers in the
Realme, neither hath made them greater
Captaines then afore they were, ſtill it is
Fraunce part whereof, yea the beſt part wil
not helpe to ſpoyle and deſtroy Fraunce.
It is euen the houſe of Fraunce which the
houſe of Lorrayn doth aſſayle, for their
pretences are ſufficiently reuealed to all
men. This it is that will ſtrengthē the K. of
Nauarre with the auncient officers of the
Crowne, with the Princes of the blood.
with the wiſhes of the King, with ye ſighes
and ſobbes of all good Frenchmen without
reſpect of Religion, and ſo much diminiſh
& weaken the enemy. Beſides that
it is no longer to any purpoſe herein, as

againſt the ould Albigeois, to imagine the
publication of a croyſade, for there is not
one Towne of France that conſenteth to
this partie. There is no member, no part
of the body, no there is not ſcarce any
one ſynew but complaineth hereof. Neither
is it Fraunce onely that hath proſecuted
this reformation in Religion, but it
hath bene a cōmon motion in all Eſtates
and nations of our Europe: Hole kingdomes
haue ſequeſtred them ſelues from
the Pope. Empires haue bene more then
halfe touched, ſcarce is there any eſtate,
but haue ſtirred herein (as all men know
and doe graunt) and feeling it can plainly
find out and eſchue their owne ruine by
that of their neighbours.
            On the other ſide, there is no Prince in
Europe of whatſoeuer Religion, but thinketh
it ſtraunge to pretend the excluding
of a Prince without audience or teaching,
no other treſpaſſe againſt the lawes of the
Countrey committed, from an eſtate or
ſucceſsion vnto him due. But in Hiſtories
it is euident, what the effects of an ambicious
or enuious paſsion can compaſſe, euen
vpon the leaſt occaſion to the vrging

of an hereſie, as for example. Philipp the
fayre was denounced an heretick for that
he would not hold this Realm in homage
of the Pope, and ſo was cut off from the
Church: but ſuch Popes both before and
ſince as haue pretended more modeſtie,
and were not led by the like paſsion haue
held an other opinion and otherwiſe decided
it. A counſayle muſt order all, and
who ſo eſchueth a counſaile, eſchueth the
light, and refuſeth reaſon, as ſhewing himſelfe
to ſeeke darkneſſe, and to vſe the title
of Religion in vaine.
            In the meane time, ſuch is the miſchief,
the King our Soueraigne, partly through
the violence and conſpiracie of his enemies,
and partly by the mallice and colluſion
of ſome of his Counſailors hath bene
forced and brought to conclude a peace,
whereof vndoubtedly, without ſpeedy remedie,
will enſue his owne ouerthrowe,
the deſtruction of the houſe of Fraunce
and the ſubuertion of this eſtate. Wherefore
the King of Nauarre, as firſt Prince of
the bloud & chiefe Peere of this Realme,
the Lorde Prince of Conde his Couſine a
Prince and Peere of Fraunce, and the Lord

Duke of Montmorency a Peere of Fraunce
and the chiefe Officer of the Crowne, together
with the Lordes, Knights, Gentlemen,
Prouinces, Townes and Communalties
as well of the one as of the other Religion,
vnited for the preſeruation of this
eſtate, doe proteſt and declare as enſueth.
            Firſt that their entent neither is, neither
euer was other then to ſee the King well
ſerued and duetifully obeyed of all men,
euery one in his place according to his
calling and eſtate, and themſelues to become
an example to all, which was to bee
ſeene in theſe late dealings. Namely, that
their deſire tēdeth only to ſee the Realme
peaceable and quiet, as it was in a good
forwardneſſe at the beginning of theſe
broyles, and to the ſame end haue withall
their heartes endeuoured them ſelues againſt
ſuch as ſought to moleſt the proſperitie
of the King and Eſtate, and to the
like entent will willingly employ whatſoeuer
they are able in life or goods.
            Alſo becauſe heretofore there haue bin
ſundry meanes propounded vnto the
King, whether for deciding the controuerſies
in Religion, or of the Eſtate, which

his enemies vſed for a pretence, either 
                  〈◊〉
               
for ending ſuch quarrelles as particulerly
they pretended againſt the Princes of
Fraunce, among whome the King of Nauarre
hath the peeminence: the ſayd King
of Nauarre, doth moſt humbly deſire his
Maieſtie to call to minde the aforeſaid offers
conteyned in his declaration, bearing
date the 10. of Iune 1585. which he ſent
to his Maieſtie, writtē and ſigned with his
owne hand. Alſo if himſelfe haue conceiued,
or there be to him any other motion
made for the contentation of his Maieſtie
and the wealth of the Realme, the ſayde
Lord King of Nauarre would craue to vnderſtand
thereof and accompteth himſelf
happy, in cace it bee ſuch as before God
and man hee may accommodate himſelfe
vnto.
            But perticulerly, becauſe theſe of the
league, to the ende to finde opportunitie
preſently to aſſault him, haue for their argument
thought good to require the deliuerie
of the Townes of aſſuraunce, and
vpon refuſall thereof, with open force to
ſet vpon him, hee doth moſt humbly beſeech
his Maieſtie to remember that in

               December laſt, Anno 1584. it peaſed him
during the full peace voluntarily to graūt
the prorogation therūof at the humble petitions
to him made in the behalfe of his
ſubiects: that then he ſo thought it moſt
conuenient for the peace of the Realme▪
that ſince by meere force of armes and vpon
leſſe occaſiō he hath graūted greater
and more Townes to thoſe of the league,
who riſe againſt his perſon, againſt his
houſe and againſt his eſtate, as being content
not onely to leaue to them ſuch as
they haue ſeazed vpō, but alſo hath giuen
them others, yea more then in two yeeres
Wars with proſperous ſucceſſe they could
haue gotten: wherevpon the ſayde Lorde
King of Nauarre, as alſo al other the good
ſubiects and ſeruaunts of this eſtate haue
occaſion to deſire the King to graunt thē
new aſſurāces againſt thoſe of the league,
and that the rather becauſe thoſe men
haue in their hands the chiefe frontiers as
well on the Sea coaſts as on the lād, wherby
to draw the ſtraunger into the Realm.
All which notwithſtanding, the ſayd Lord
King of Nauarre once againe offereth to
diſpoſſeſſe himſelfe of the ſayd Townes of

aſſuraunce vnto him by his Maieſties free
conſent proroged, conditionally that the
ſayd houſe of Lorrayne and other their adherents
of the league doe likewiſe effectually
departe from thoſe that they holde:
That all weapons may be layd aſide: That
the ſtraungers bee returned, and themſelues
withdrawne into their owne houſes.
            That if notwithſtanding ſo reaſonable
offers any forces do march againſt the K.
of Nauarre, the Lord Prince of Conde, and
the Lord Duke of Montmorency, or any
of them or their adherents, they do moſt
hūbly require his Maieſtie not to miſlike
that they follow the counſaile both of nature
and neceſsitie, which do teach to repell
force by force, either that they employ
whatſoeuer their frends or meanes
therein, and the rather becauſe now they
are not to fight in Guyen for Guyen, in
Languedock for Languedock, in Daulphine,
Prouince and other places for the eſtate of
the ſayd Lo. K. of Nauarre, the Lo▪ Prince,
or the Lord Duke of Montmorency, but
vndoubtedly for the Eſtate and libertie of
the King hymſelfe, with the Queene his
Mother: for the preſeruatiō of the lawes,

and for the defence of the Eſtate, as alſo
they are aſſured (which encreaſeth their
courage) that though the enemy hath
proceeded ſo farre as to ſeaze vppon his
Maieſties Weapons, yet he hath kept and
reſerued his harte for them.
            They pray the Queene the Kings Mother,
to call againe to mynd how thoſe of
that famely entreated her, when vnder K.
Frances the ſecond her Sonne, they ruled
all, as alſo what from time to time ſhe noted
in them, touching the driftes of their
ambition. Euen ſhe, who was the firſt that
to the Kings her children diſplayed them
for ſuch as they are. But chiefly that ſhee,
who hath wonne to her ſelfe the name of
Mother of the Realme, would not now leaue
an opinion in the hearts of the poſteritie
of the leading of the ſame to ruine, by deliuering
it into the handes of ſtraungers,
by enfringing the publicke peace for the
contēting of the particuler deſires of the
publicke enemie, and forcing her neareſt
and moſt obediēt ſubiects to encurre the
paine due to the Rebelles and perturbers
of the eſtate: Whereas at the leaſt there
might be ſome generall peace concluded

vpon, if in her wiſedome ſhe iudgeth it expedient
for the peace of this eſtate to aboliſh
and pardon their offences.
            The ſaid Lo. K. of Nauarre, Lord Prince
of Conde, and Lord Duke of Montmorency,
do adiure the Lords Princes of the blood,
earneſtly to cōſider that the ſame importeth
their houſe and blood: The Peeres &
principall officers of this Realme, that it
cōcerneth the oth and duetie which they
haue taken and owe to the Crowne: All
Parliaments, that it toucheth the foundamental
lawes of this eſtate whereof them
ſelues are the preſeruers and guardians.
Generally, all eſtates and degrees of this
Realme that it tendeth to the ſubuertion
and confuſion of their famelies: For who
can euer aſſure himſelfe of a particuler
quiet in a publicke vprore, of a calme in a
tempeſtious Sea, of a certaine eſtate in an
alteration of all eſtates, or of a priuate aſſuraunce
in an vniuerſall ſpoyle. Alſo all
Princes and eſtates our neighbours being
likewiſe in league and alliaunce with this
eſtate to aſsiſt them in their vndertaken
defence, and not to ſuffer ſuch a conſpiracie
to take effect, in reſpect of the conſequence

wherinto it might draw all eſtates
Chriſtian.
            They do declare before God who ſeeth
their hearts and before men whom they
choſe Iudges of their actions, that they
doe bewaile the Kings eſtate, who abroad
is beſieged and at home entangled by and
in the practiſes of his enemies: that their
weapons are vowed onely to his libertie
and ſeruice, and would to GOD he had,
vouchſafed to haue employed their affections,
for ſo could they ſoone haue deliuered
him out of all theſe perplexities.
            Concerning Religion, the ſayd Lordes
King of Nauarre and Prince of Conde, doe
from their hearts and on their faith and
honor declare that they entende not any
way to moleſt the Catholicks or preiudice
their Religion which they doe profeſſe, as
being alwaies of opinion that the conſcience
ought to be free, and as concerning
their owne that they are readie to ſubmit
themſelues to a Counſayle. That they doe
accept of all good and true Frenchmen,
both temporall and ſpirituall, and of al 
                  〈◊〉
               
without acception or exeption of
Religion: equally taking into their protection

and ſafegarde, them, their conſciences,
honors and dignities, their goods,
liues and famelies, to the ende, ſo farre as
in them ſhall lye, to warrant and defende
them againſt all oppreſsion and violence.
            They doe exhort each one particulerly
according to his habilitie and calling, in
token what they are, to draw to them, to
ſuccour and aſsiſt thē againſt thoſe of this
league, whom the King hath opēly declared
attēpters againſt his perſon, Crowne
and eſtate. To the ende alſo to take from
them all doubt and miſtruſt, the Lorde
Duke of Montmorency, whoſe Religion
was neuer miſtruſted, & whoſe wiſedome
as ſufficiently knowne to bee ſuch as can
well finde the entents of the ſayd Lordes
King of Nauarre and Prince of Conde, ſhall
bee their loadeſman and ſerue them as a
guyde. Hee being a Peere of Fraunce and
chief officer of the Crowne, to whom belongeth
the firſt place in leading of the
armies. Beſides, that through Gods grace
they haue already the aſsiſtance and companie
of a good number of Catholicke
Lordes, Knights, Captaines and Gentlemen,
ſuch as haue found out and perceiued

their good right, together with the
neceſsitie of their defence.
            As for the Captaines of the league and
thoſe who to the ſame entent ſhall ſticke
vnto them, the ſayd Lordes King of Nauarre,
Prince of Conde, and Duke of Montmorency,
do declare & acknowledge them
to bee enemies to the King, the houſe of
Fraunce, and the weale of this eſtate, euen
ſuch as the King hath alreadie declared
them, and as his Courtes of Parliament in
the verification of his letters haue aduouched
them. Alſo according to the tenour
and contents of the ſayd letters, together
with the Kings commaundements therein
conteyned, they will with their whole
power proſecute warre againſt thē and by
all meanes procure the rooting of them
out.
            Howbeit, for aſmuch as diuers there are
that by the pretences of the league maye
haue been deceiued and abuſed, ſo many
of them as ſhall within the ſpace of this
preſent yere departe therefro and withdrawe
them ſelues to them, or into their
owne, they will admit & receiue into their
protection and ſafegarde as before, meaning

that conformably to his Maieſties
former ordenances they ſhal in no wiſe be
moleſted or called into queſtion for hauing
beene ſeduced by the perſwaſions of
thoſe of the league aforeſayd.
            The ſayd Lords King of Nauarre, Prince
of Conde, and Duke of Montmorency, doe
deſire al thoſe that ſhoote not at the ſame
mark with the leaguers which thei ſhould
ſufficiently know, and yet doe remaine in
their holdes, armies or troopes, to withdrawe
and get thence ſo ſoone as conueniently
they may, leaſt to their great grief
they ſhould not be able to diſcerne them
from the reſt, for that they intend not to
make ſuch partakers of the like payne as
are not comprehended in the ſame crime.
            Further, in aſmuch as the ſayde Lorde
King of Nauarre, Lord Prince of Conde, &
Lord Duke of Montmorency, do ſufficiently
acknowledge all Warre to bee one of
Gods ſcourges, but eſpecially domeſticall
Warre, wherein the poore innocent people
are in greateſt daunger, whoſe calamities
and miſeries they doe euen alreadie
bewayle, they doe withall their hearts beſeech
the almightie to open his mercifull

prouidence ouer the miſerable eſtate of
this Realme and people, to the ende the
miſchiefes may by ſome meanes bee turned
awaye, either els preuented through
ſome good peace: that it may alſo pleaſe
him to touch the harts and open the eyes
of the King and of the Queene his mother,
that they may conceiue the neceſſarie
                  〈…〉
               
meanes for the ſame: alſo to mollefie
the hardneſſe & obſtinatie & to ſuppreſſe
the ambition of thoſe of this league, making
them capable of better counſayle, &
ſuch as may bee more conuenient to the
quiet of this eſtate. If otherwiſe, and that
their prayers can not auayle or obtaine
this ſucceſſe▪ yet doe they hartely deſire euery
oue to iudge whether there were euer
defence more naturall, more neceſſarie,
or more iuſt. Alſo to lay the blame and
caſt the curſe vpon ſuch as haue brought
them into this extremitie, and left them
no other choyce but either the rooting
out of the houſe of Fraunce together with
the ſubuertion of the eſtate, or els a lawfull
and neceſſary defence. Conſequently,
they aſſure themſelues that God wil bleſſe
the right, and bring vpon the authors of

this league, the very ringleaders of our calamities,
that deſtruction which they purpoſe
againſt the King, his famelie and eſtate.
            
               
                  Giuen at S. Paule of 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  ,  
                     the 10. of
Auguſt 1585.
                
               
                  Signed Henry.
Henry of Bourbon.
Montmorency.
            
         
         
            
            A Letter written by the
King of NAVARRE to the preſidents
and Members of the Court of
Parliament for the French
King at Paris.
            
               MY Maſters, of all things pa
                  ••
               ed
ſence the laſt broyles, I craue no
other iudges then your ſelues:
For you may haue ſeene howe
many wayes the 
                  〈…〉
               mies of this Eſtate
and myne haue tempted my pacience:
neither can you bee ignorant what ſway
the reſpect of the King and weale of this
Eſtate haue borne in mee, whereby I
haue bene detained in my iuſt griefe. In
the meane time it hath ſo fallen out (and
I am aſſured your ſelues do all know what
wrong I doe herein ſuſteine) that the enemies
of the King and Realme are aucthorized
and and armed againſt mee. Whereon
it muſt neceſſarily enſue that my patience
and obedience muſt beare the pennance
of their rebellion, and the ſtranger
be rewarded with the goods of the houſehold
ſeruant, the ſeruant with thoſe of the
home borne child. It is in trueth a matter
vnto me very hard, but I haue God for my
protector, Fraunce for my iudge, your

ſelues for my witneſſes and my Lorde the
King (for I can not doubt thereof) for the
allower of my ſinceritie. I bewaile the miſhap
of this eſtate: But God knoweth in
whom the fault is, and can there lay the
puniſhmēt. I moane the calamities of the
people: but it is euidēt who, euen of pleaſure,
brake the peace, and how neceſarily
I am forced to take heed to my ſelfe. It is
in vaine to report to you what conditions
I haue propounded, you haue ſeene them
and can tell whether they deſerue to bee
looked vpon. I haue therefore no more to
ſay, but to require you, euen by the oath
that you owe vnto Fraunce, with your authoritie
to withſtand the cōſpiracie which
you ſee doth tend to the ſubuerſion therof,
or at the leaſt aſsiſt not with your authoritie
ſo pernitious a practiſe: euen with
your vowes fauour thoſe that purpoſe to
employ their liues for the preuenting of
ſuch miſery and ouerthrow of this Eſtate.
I deſire and craue no more of you, but the
iudgement of your owne conſciences. If
my cauſe bee iuſt, I deſire you to allowe
thereof, if wrongfull, determine my ma
               
                  ••
               ers
what you ſhal think in duetie for the

weale of this eſtate. God I take to witneſſe
that I am and haue beene faithfull to the
King: that I loue Fraunce: that I honour
ſuch verteous perſons as doe defend it, &
that I bewayle the miſerie and calamitie
which I ſee ready to take hould of all Eſtates.
I beſeech him to aſsiſt you with his
grace, you whome alwayes I haue accompted
the Pillars of this Realme, to the end
that in theſe broyles you may (as many
tymes heretofore) reape the commendation
of the ſuſteyning and vnderpropping
of the body of this eſtate: and I truſt that
he will giue me grace ſo to ſerue the King
my Lord, alſo to bee ſo well ſerued of all
good French men, louers of his Crowne,
that ſhortly I may preſent to his view the
end of his enemies and quiet of his Subiectes,
for the compaſsing whereof I will
not ſpare either my bloud or life Wherevpon
my maſters I ende, praying God to
haue you in his holy grace & protection.
            
               From Mont de Marſan this 11.
of October. 1585.
                
               Your moſt
affectionate and aſſured frend.
Henry.
            
         
         
            
            A Letter from the King
of Nauarre to the Maſters of the
Facultie of Deuinitie in the Colledge
of Sorbonne.
            MY Maiſters, vnto you I haue recourſe
for matters now in queſtiō,
as vnto thoſe whoſe particuler profeſsion
tēdeth to prouide that the Church
encurre or ſuffer no detriment. You haue
conſidered theſe late broyles of thoſe of
the houſe of Guyze founded vpon many
and very diuers pretences, but finally reduced
and al formed into one: namely, to
reſtore the Catholick Church to her perfection,
and to that ende, to roote out me
and all other whom they pretende to bee
heretickes: To which purpoſe, ſuch hath
beene their force and violence, there haue
enſued an edict almoſt to their mindes.
Now I will not doubt but through your
wiſedomes you doe knowe that they purpoſe
an other matter then they ſpeake of.
That is, vnder the ſhadowe of Religion to
haue weapon in hande wherewith to oppreſſe
the chiefe of the houſe of Fraunce▪
               
and ſo to prepare the way to the vſurping

of this eſtate. But I pray you euen in theſe
matters of Religion iudge whether they
or I haue opened the better waye to reunite
the Church and to take awaye the
ſciſme which ſo long haue troubled vs.
            I haue bene brought vp in a Religion
which I think holy and true, neither need
there any teſtimonie whether in hart I do
profeſſe the ſame. For otherwiſe I could
haue eſchued ſo many miſchiefes as I haue
beene forced to ſuffer, wherein naturally
man can cōceiue no great delight I could
otherwiſe alſo haue purchaſed the Kings
fauour, and loue of his people, which next
after Gods fauour I accompt moſt profitable
and requiſite for me. The caſe being
ſuch, it is ouer hard and ſo I ſuppoſe your
ſelues will thinke, to deſire that without
any other forme or order I ſhould forſake
my Religion & force both my conſcience
and ſoule: yea, if I ſhould bee ſo wretched
as in ſuch ſort to offend, your ſelues might
iuſtly miſtruſt me in all other matters. Me
that ſhoulde ſayle in that which in the
iudgement of my owne ſoule I thinke to
be my duetie to God, a matter that reaſonably
none can require at my hands. This

is it that as I thinke I haue voluntarily offered
and which daylie I doe ſtill offer:
Namely, to bee inſtructed in a free & lawfull
Counſell, wherein the controuerſies
of religion may be thorowly dobated and
decided, & ſo to yeeld to whatſoeuer ſhall
be determined. A way, as your ſelues are
not ignorant, at all times practiſed in the
Church in like caſes, and that by the wiſeſt
Kings and Emperours in the world:
A way, whereunto you my Maiſters haue
often counſayled the Kings predeceſſors,
and whereby you haue alwaies bene able
to maintaine the priuiledges and rightes
of the French Church againſt many vſurpations:
To bee briefe, ſuch a waye as the
Church in her greateſt force neuer refuſed
for reducing into her boſome euen
meane perſons, yea, ſometimes one man
onely. And therfore much leſſe ought ſhe
now to reiect or flee from the ſame, now I
ſay, when it ſtandeth vpon millions of ſoules,
vpon whole Tounes and large Prouinces,
vpon an infinite number of qualified
perſons, euen of the chiefe Princes of the
blood & neereſt to the Crowne, who can
not eaſely bee forced, neither rooted out

without ſubuertion of the eſtate, and yet
being by reaſon perſwaded to chaunge,
may be a cauſe of firme peace in this land,
of a ſtedfaſt revniō of ye Catholick church,
with the foreiudgement of their perſons
and of a more happy worlde, not to this
Realme only, which were an ineſtimable
gayne, but alſo to all Chriſtendome and
Europe, which neceſſarily muſt haue ſome
feeling of the miſeries and calamities of
ſo puiſſant an eſtate. This my Maiſters, is
the offer that I haue made to the King my
Lord, which now I doe repeate vnto you,
and whereof I call you to witneſſe among
all to whom it may appertaine, to the end
it may be manifeſt both to thoſe that now
liue and to the poſteritie, that I was not
the cauſe of diſquiet in this eſtate, either
any hinderance that the Church was not
reduced into her former vnion, peace and
tranquilitie.
            Where as it is obiected againſt me that
I am an hereticke, you are to ſhewe vnto
the world & of you haue I learned it, that
there is great difference betwixt hereſie
and error. That al that hold an hereſie are
not neuertheleſſe heretickes. That heretickes

are they who doe proceede either
vpon ambition or obſtinacie, wherof neither
can haue place in me whom no man
euer went about to teach, and whom contrariwiſe
they haue by all meanes endeuoured
to caſt of, alleadging no other reaſon
then a ſtrong ambition. Beſides that
I haue renounced the large path to that
greatneſſe that by the Catholicke Romiſh
Religion lay open vnto me, and haue taken
the contrary way, viz. the way of perſecution
and contempt, conſtantly perſeuering
in that which vſually is called and
I doe accompt reformed.
            But admit it were ſo. It is againſt error
and hereſie that the Church calleth Cō
               ſailes,
and conſultations are houlden to
cure the diſeaſed, the Surgeon vſeth neither
Iron nor fire, but where his plaiſters
are to weake. It it an euident argument
of paſsion, when they begin conuerſion
with ſubuerſion, and inſtruction with deſtruction:
With rooting out and Warre,
when they ſhould begin with brotherly
admonition and gentleneſſe.
            Neither is is enough to alledge the holding
of the Counſaile of Trent, wherein

was condemned the religion which I profeſſe,
and they tearme Hereſie: you all my
my Maſters doe knowe what maner of
Counſaile that was, neither did you euer
allowe thereof, yea, there againſt haue the
whole Eſtate, Cleargie and Parliaments of
this Realme often proteſted. You knowe
alſo that in caſe it had beene lawfully called
and holden, yet had that bene no preiudice
to the ſummoning of an other. Eſpecially
ſith it concerneth the ſaluation
and reeſtabliſhment of ſuch perſons and
ſo great an eſtate. Cōtrariwiſe, I am giuen
to vnderſtand that in the generall Counſaile
holden at Baſill, it was ordeined that
from ten yere to ten yere there ſhould be
a Counſaile holden, to the ende to cut off
ſuch errors as might ſpring in the church.
Much more needfull then were it for the
rooting out ſuch as alreadie are growne
vp.
            Iudge now therfore my Maiſters which
of vs is in the right, whether of vs in this
caſe is moſt to bee reſpected, either who
propoūdeth
the meeteſt remedie for this
eſtate. The ſtraūger craueth that the home
borne childe bee caſt out vnder colour of

hereſie. Euen the ſtraūger who long haue
practiſed to haue his roome. Mee, truely
notwithſtāding farre vnequall with them,
vpon whoſe behauiours they can take no
hold. I neither haue nor doe deſire but to
haue my cauſe heard: by a Counſaile to be
taught the beſt way: to doe better if I be
better inſtructed. Which then will you
iudge moſt right, either what neede the
whole Realme to bee kindled herewith?
For who doubteth whether you will ſooner
chooſe, either ciuill Warre or a Counſaile?
either the ſubuertion of the one half
of this eſtate by the other, or rather the
reunion of both partes of this Realme into
one, which vndoubtedly wil be of great
conſequence to all Chriſtiandome.
            Now therfore, I doe finally declare vnto
you that I craue and am ready to yeeld
to a Counſaile: that I am readie to hearkē
to the Church therein. And therefore can
you not accompt me either an Ethnicke
or Publicane. I doe moreouer giue you to

                  〈◊〉
               , that in default of a generall Counſalle
for the pacifying of matters I do not
refuſe a nationall, which often hath bene
practiſed in this Realme, yea, and that by

your owne counſaile and conſent. But if
notwithſtanding any theſe my offers and
requeſt, they doe contrary to all order of
the Church proceed by baniſhmēts, murders,
and other rigorous barbarouſneſſe,
I am reſolued to oppoſe my ſelfe in my
iuſt defence againſt ſuch horrible baniſhments
and violences. And the curſe be vpon
thoſe that doe trouble this eſtate vnder
the falſe pretence of the Church. You
therefore doe I call to witneſſe of the reaſonable
conditions whereto I ſubmit my
ſelfe. Alſo God for my defender, who is able
to debate my right againſt my aduerſ
                  •
               ries,
and I beſeech him my Maiſters, to
haue you in his holy protection.
            
               From Mont de Marſan this
11. of October. 1585.
                
               Your
affectionate and aſſured frend.
Henry.
            
         
         
            
            An Epiſtle to the
King.
            SIr, great Captaines, Kings, and Emperours
in olde time ſought to take
their ſurnames of thoſe Countries,
that they cōquered. And ſo came the ſurnames
of African, Aſian. &c. Your predeceſſors,
who wanted no conqueſtes wherby
to bee famous among the poſteritie,
choſe for them ſelues and you, and left as
an inheritance the ſurname Moſt Chriſtian,
therein ſeeking to declare to al men,
that the true honour of man conſiſteth in
being truely Chriſtian, and the very triūph
of Princes whom God hath eſtabliſhed ouer
man reſteth in the defence and aduancement
of Chriſtian religion. Wherevpon
I agree with thoſe that ſay that your
Maieſties ſcope ſhould tend to revnite the
Church, a worke meet for you, a labour
incident to your Diademe, yea ſuch a labour
as you ought to haue in no leſſe ielouſie
then your eſtate. But it may be that
in the meanes we may ſomewhat differ,
wherein your Maieſties iudgement ouerruling

both you are to chooſe the moſt
expedient.
            They propound the reſtoring of the
Church to her perfection by armes: but
who can better iudge of the vnprofitableneſſe
of armes in matter of Religion then
your Maieſtie, who hauing ſo fortunatly
vſed thē againſt thoſe whom by al meanes
they endeuour to ouerthrowe, could neuertheleſſe
in the end reape no other profit
thereby, then to learne that the happieſt
ſucceſſe auaileth not againſt the conſcience.
Alſo that weapons haue no more
force ouer the ſoule, then the Surgeans
Raſer ouer the mans vnderſtanding and
affections that guideth it.
            The remedies ought to haue an▪ Analogie
and proportion correſpondent to the
miſchiefes and diſeaſes. Feare naturally ouercommeth
the body, ſound maſtereth
the eare, and reaſon ruleth the ſoule, bnt
to vſe force againſt the ſoule, it worketh
as ſmale effect as reaſon ouer the eare, or
ſound ouer the maſſe of a mans body.
            Armes therfore are a meanes not to revnite
the Church, but to ſubuert the ſtate
of the Realme, not to inſtruct or conuert,

but to ſubuert & deſtroy, and as nothing
in this world can breede miſchief, but it
muſt alſo feele part thereof, ſo the deſtruction
of the one ſide will coſt the ouerthrow
of the other. The ruine and rooting
out of thoſe of the religion (howe eaſy ſo
euer it be accompted) wil proue to be the
confuſion and deſolation of the whole Eſtate.
            Theſe great Catholickes that haue endeuoured
to compell you to force your
ſubiects: who with open force haue required
your Maieſtie by force to reduce your
ſubiects into the Romiſh Church, I would
fayne learne what they hope for, whether
more power, of better ſucceſſe then your
Maieſtie? They commaunded ouer your
armies, armed with your will, depending
vpon your aucthoritie, guyded with your
good hap, and fauoured with your owne
preſence, and your preſence I accompt a
great parte of the ſtrength of a mightie
armie. If your will bee not preſent, as vndoubtedly
it can not bee, who ſeeth not
thoſe willes that depend therof very cold
and quailing? But eſpecially ſith your perſon
can not bee ſafe among their armies,

who doth not euidently ſee that the gre
                  ••
               
body of this armie, how groſe or ſtrong
ſoeuer, will ſhortly ſhrincke aſunder by
peecemeale, in that it is not holden together
with any reſpect of your Maieſtie, or
kept in awe with your preſence. The child
naturally beareth at the fathers handes,
and how good ſoeuer his cauſe be, is neuertheleſſe
content to ſhunne the ſtripes,
to hold his hand before him, or to get out
of the way vntill the choller bee ouer. In
the ſeruaunt or ſtraunger, he ſhall finde as
much ſtomacke and force as may counteruaile
all reuerence, yea, ſometime indignation
wil double: and that is it which
naturally is to be expected of a Prince, the
firſt of your blood, whom ſeruaunts and
ſtraungers doe endeuour to exclude out
of your famelie with a million of your naturall
Subiectes, brought vp vnder your
wing and vnder the clemencie of your
commaundements, whom I ſay the ſtraū
               gers
would make you roote out and driue
to ſeeke forraine Countries. Whereof to
be brief, ſuch a diſpaire may ſpring as may
teach great indignities and indignations,
and ſo conſequently the moſt extreame

Counſailes that diſpayre can conceiue or
bring forth.
            In olde time the lawes condemned in
great fines ſuch Carpenters as, to drawe a
man to enterprize a building, deceiptfully
perſwaded him that the charges would
be but ſmall, and yet that tended to building,
the greateſt commoditie whereof
redounded to the benefite of the Maiſter
of the houſe, and to the ornament of the
Common wealth. What paine then may
be ſufficient for thoſe who to the ende to
ſtirre vp your Maieſtie to the deſtruction
of your Realme, are not aſhamed to auow
the enterprize to be very eaſie. An enterprize
whereof the loſſe will redounde to
you, the miſerie to vs, and the benefite to
themſelues.
            Let vs therefore here ſpeake of reuniting,
not of ſubuerting. The miſchiefes
now in queſtion are auncient, and our elders
knewe the remedies for the ſame:
which remedies are the ſafeſt, ſo as we ſhal
not neede theſe practitioners coroſiues,
that haue repleniſhed all Fraunce with
murders, mournings, funeralles and lamentations,
and yet the diſeaſe they crye

out of, and the deuiſion that they complaine
of, is now in worſe caſe then eue
                  •
               
before.
            Diſſentions in Religion moleſted the
Primitiue Church, ſundry hereſies were
foſtered among the people: yea, euen Emperours
the defenders the Church were
infected with them. The hiſtories of ſuch
are plentifull. The Fathers found that hereſie
was an opinion, that al opinion conſiſted
in the head, and that it was a falſe Image
of reaſon which could not be defaſed
or raſed out but with the preſence of
reaſon it ſelfe. They did therefore gather
Counſayles, they called a ſufficient number
of people out of all places, euery one
quietly propounded his opinion, in the
ende opinion gaue place to knowledge,
likelihoode to trueth, and Sophiſtrie to
reaſon.
            Let vs not thinke Chriſtian Religion ſo
darck, but that trueth may be found out,
where a Counſaile hath her aſſured principles,
ſtedfaſt maximees, inuiolable conſequences

                  〈…〉
                 reaſon her ſelf which
if it be ſufficiēnt to decide the difficulties in
lawes, can well determine thoſe in deuinitie,

and that the better, becauſe it is the
lawe of one GOD which admitteth no
contrarieties, neither can beare any Antinomy,
but mans lawes doe often ſuffer either
the inequalitie of the Lawmakers among
themſelues, or of one onely.
            To be briefe, it is a manifeſt iniurie to
this law which is called the true light, to
beleue that it can not light or leade men,
yea which is worſe, to perſwade that without
fire it can not ſhine, that ſuch as they
pretend to be darkeneſſe, muſt be burned
rather then produced into the daylight,
either to take this light from vnder the
Tubbe.
            Some will ſhewe you that there ſhall
neede no Counſaile, that we muſt followe
the Church, and ſhe can neuer erre.
            Bookes are ſufficiently furniſhed with
replications therevpon: the olde and new
Teſtament are full of the great errors of
Gods people: It was the Chuch and the
Counſaile of Hieruſalem that condemned
Ieſus Chriſt and his Apoſtles: It was therefore
the Church that condemned her ſaluation.
And S. Paule telleth vs that Antechriſt
ſhall ſit in the very Church of God.

What is there thē but perdition worſhipped
in ye Church? Theſe are but ſubtelties
whereby to eſchewe a Counſaile. Man is
darke, & the Church an aſſembly of men,
the Church therefore is a miſty and darck
body, and hath no light in it but frō God,
and is no farther, then it gathereth light
at Gods worde, thence therefore take it.
The Church may at euery ſtraine ſtumble,
and therfore we ſee our forefathers from
worlde to worlde grone after reformation,
and therefore alſo did the counſaile
of Baſill decree, that from 10. yeres
to 10. yeres a Counſaile ſhould be called,
to the ende to cut of ſuch errors as might
ſpring vp in the Church.
            But ſome will reply and ſay, they haue
already holden one Counſaile againſt the
doctrine now in queſtion. Admit it be ſo,
yet were it to ſoone to giue ouer well doing.
The auncient fathers were not ſo ſone
weary againſt thoſe of their time, againſt
the Arrians, who were heard in their diſputations
with all libertie, yet being condemned
in three counſailes they were not
debarred the forth. But if we may be weary
of reiterating the ſelfe ſame remedies,

how much rather of retourning to warre
which ſo often hath bene practiſed in
vaine: to warre, whoſe beſt ſucceſſe is
more daungerous and hurtfull then euen
the worſt of any Counſayle: or how much
more expedient were it to call an other
Counſaile, rather then to hazard a battel:
to loſe a conference to ſome purpoſe, or
to ſhed ſo much blood in vaine.
            The truth is, that vpon the very differents
nowe in queſtion, there haue bene
two Counſailes holden. The firſt through
the diligence of the Emperour Sigiſmund
at Constance, where contrarie to publike
faith the diſputers of the one parte, Iohn
Hus and Hierom of Prague were burned
quick, and then followed a decree, that
there was no faith to be kept with Heretikes,
a monſtrous decree, and the cauſe of
all diſorder and exceſſe ſince fallen out in
Chriſtendome.
            The other at Trent in the chiefe heate of
the French troubles, where by the iudgement
of the former decree coulde bee
no ſafe appearance. Where alſo your Embaſſadors
might not bee heard in their
Chriſtian propoſitions for the quietneſſe

of the Church. And where they proteſted
nullitie againſt the actes of the Counſaile
which ſince all your Courts of Parliament
haue confirmed and reiected the ſaid acts,
yea euen Sorbonne it ſelf, notwithſtanding
whatſoeuer inſtance the Pope hath from
time to time made. Thinke therefore ſir,
whether they haue cauſe to alleadge the
fore iudgements of theſe Counſailes: and
iudge whether theſe two Counſailes may
debarys of al hope of goodneſſe or fruite
that might ſpring out of one free & lawfull
Counſaile, called vnder your auctoritie.
The difficultie reſteth onely vpon one
poinct, and that is that the Pope of late
daies hath encroched to himſelfe the authoritie
of calling of Counſailes, which
before belonged to the Emperours: for
by al hiſtories it appeareth that thei haue
ſummoned the moſt famous. And now
becauſe he feareth the reformation of the
abuſes of the Popes Court, and eſpecially
the queſtion ſo often harped at. viz. Whether
the Pope be aboue or vnder the Counſaile,
whereof there are contrarie decrees, it is
manifeſt that he will ſo fair as in him lieth
auoyde the calling of any, but principally

at the ſuite and requeſt of the French
Church, which alwaies haue auowed him
to b
                  •
                vnder the Counſaile. And for example,
for the aſſembling of the Counſ
                  •
               ile of
Constance the Emperour, Sig
                     •
                  ſ
                     〈…〉
                  und was
to traualle frō ſtate to ſtate, to ſolli
                  〈…〉
               
all Princes, becauſe the Popes ſtriuing
among themſelues, would not ſtoop
to a Counſaile, and there it was decreed
that the Pope ſhould bee ſubiect to the
Counſaile. Since againe for the calling of
the Counſaile of Trent, it is well knowne
what protections were faine to be made,
what practiſes the Pope wrought among
all Christian Princes, wherby to ſhift it of.
What adoe there was to keepe them together
after they were aſſembled, & what

                  〈…〉
                the Popes vſed to the ende to
yeeld it vnprofitable to the Church, but
commodious to them ſelues▪ where alſo,
contrary to the former, they cauſed it to
bee determined that the Pope was aboue
the Counſaile.
            Hereby they your Maieſtie haue a barre

                  〈…〉
                the Pope & ſhut vp his mouth
whereby he dare no more preſume to ſollicite
you to the overthrowe of the eſtate,

euen he that ſhall haue refuſed the lawfull
meanes to reunite & reſtore the Church.
Beſides, in ſuch a neceſſitie of your eſtate
and during ſuch the Popes default, the
Kings your predeceſſors by the counſaile
of your Cleargie, yea, of your Colledge of
Sorbonne, haue long ſince trode you a faire
path: namely, by your owne auctoritie, for
want of a generall, to ſummon a national
Counſaile within this Realme. A courſe
taken by the moſt Chriſtian Kings, yea, euen
the deuouteſt among the moſt Chriſtian,
to the great benefite of the Church
and eſtate. For na
                  •
               ionall Counſailes being
well ordered, and proceeding of the Princes
zeale haue often done more good thē
the generall, bribed and laboured by the
Church of Rome, as hiſtories doe teſtifie.
For if you tarrie vntill the Pope prouide,
paraduēture it wil be ſo late, & your eſtate
alreadie being in combuſtion, that it were
requiſite to make more ſpeede.
            If any man alleadge that this aſſembly
will bee in vaine, alſo that in ſuch contentions,
were it but for honour, neither ſide
will giue place to reaſon, euery one defending
his part to the ende: alſo that it will

bee hard to agree vpon Iudges and ſuch
like, wherein vndoubtedly I can ſee no
great difficultie, I aunſwere, that God will
bleſſe your Maieſties holy zeale and earneſt
affection to the peace of ſo many
conſciences: alſo that hee will heare the
ſobbes and cryes of ſo much people who
of ſuch a conuocation doe attende their
weale & the quiet of their ſoules, beſides
that God by his Prophet ſaid not in vaine
that the raine neuer falleth from heauen
without fruit, either his holy worde vpon
earth without ſome notable effect: But
admit matters ſhould growe to that paſſe,
yet dare I aſſure my ſelf to motion to your
Maieſtie a meane that ſhall ſatiſfie & agree
both parties, yea ſuch a one, as any reaſonable
man that willingly would not bee
deceiued, may thereby eaſely diſcerne the
trueth from falſhoode and falſe doctrine
from true. And therefore, if the eye of your
Maieſties reaſon bee free from blemiſh,
there is no doubt but your ſelfe ſhal both
finde and knowe the trueth: for trueth wil
ſhine forth and lighten you and naturally
is cleare enough to ſpread it ſelfe abroad.
Onely God giue vs grace to leaue all our

paſſions at the threſhold of the doore and
to enter in in a ful deſire to ſee & finde the
trueth, as being freed from all particuler▪
intereſt except of our ſoules.
            Conſider Sir what contentation your
ſelf in your life time ſhal reape, & what honor
with the poſteritie you ſhall atchieue▪
if in your daies and through your wiſdom
and exaple, you maye determine a Sciſme
of ſo many yeres continuaunce, and procure
throughout all Chriſtendom the ſinging
of that ſong of the Angles, Glory be
to God on high, and in earth peace. When in
this duetie you haue preuēted the Popes▪
Emperours, and Catholick Kings, yea euen
exeded your moſt Chriſtian forerunners,
therein ſhewing your ſelfe in deede
moſt Chriſtian for your ſelf, Chriſtian for
France & Chriſtian for the whole church.
            God I take to witneſſe, that from my
harte I doe write vnto you al that I ſeeke▪
which is, to ſee in our time the Church
pourged, and the Temple ſwept, to the
end we may be conuerſant togither. All
men doe agree and long haue, that there
are abuſes among vs. Let them be taken
away and cleanſed, and let vs not ſet our

ſelues againſt our ſelues, neither let vs
ſearch ſtarting holes to our loſſe, or ſhewe
our ſelues ſkilfull contrary to our ſaluation
Way
                  •
               ing for this benefite at your Maieſties
hand, let vs one beare with another
in modeſtie & gentleneſſe, ſuffering your
Edicts of Peace to rule, and mens conſciences
to be in reſt, and as for thoſe which
in the meane tyme doe counſaile to ſurceaſe
or forbid the exerciſe of the ſoule,
they ſhewe them ſelues to haue no great
feeling of their owne, ſith thei ſuppoſe the
ſoules can liue without their action or
foode: yea, thoſe that thinke it ſo eaſie a
matter for others to neglect the ſeruing
of GOD according to their conſciences,
doe by that lawe which they preſcribe to
others, ſufficiently ſhew what them ſelues
are. viz. of themſelues cōtemners of God,
deuoyde of Religion and Conſcience.
            Sir, your Maieſtie are to excuſe my boldneſſe.
In great inconueniences great men
haue not deſpiſed the meaneſt voices. The
barking of one Dog hath preſerued many
a houſe from ſpoyle, and the gagling of
one Gooſe was ſufficient to keep the Capitoll.
Duetie and daunger muſt iuſtefie

my preſumption Duetie, for it were an offence
in daunger to hold my peace. Daunger
alſo, for it is plaine deceipt in ſeeing
to ſeeme not to ſee. I beſeech ſir, the Creator
with his holy ſpirite to aſsiſt your Maieſtie,
to giue you the ſame for counſayle
and conduct, and after ſo many trauayles
to ſee his Realme floriſh in yours, to proſper
vnder his, to his glorie, your praiſe,
and the peace of your people. So be it.
            
               Your moſt humble and moſt obedient
ſeruaunt and ſubiect.
P. D. M.
            
         
         
            
            A Declaration of the Articles
agreed vpon betwene the
King and the houſe of Guyze and
their adherents: commonly
called. The holy League.
            
               THE Princes, Officers of the
Crowne, Lordes, Gentlemen,
townes, comminalties, & other
the Catholikes of this Realme
vnited, being the King moſt humble ſubiectes
and ſeruants, vnderſtandihg by the
Queene, that his Maieſties entent is to
embrace the cauſe of Religion, as being
holy and iuſt, and to roote out all hereſies
out of this Realme, prayſing God for inſpiring
him with ſo good & holy a mynd,
do moſt humbly beſeech him to aſsiſt thē,
and the Queene to continue her wonted
affection to whatſoeuer concerneth the
benefite and preſeruation of the ſtate, to
the ende to prouide for the ſame.
            They doe therefore deſire his Maieſtie
to ſet forth an Edict which may be perpetuall
and irreuocable, wherby all exercize
of the newe Religion may bee aboliſhed,
and the Miniſters expelled the Realme.
            
               
Alſo, in aſmuch as libertie of conſcience
tollerated among ſubiectes maye breede
much contempt and 
                  〈◊〉
                againſt
the ſeruice of God: It may be enioyned to
all his ſubiectes of whatſoeuer calling or
condition to profeſſe the Catholick Apoſtolike
and Romiſh Religion within 
                  〈…〉
               
after the publiſhing thereof,
otherwiſe to departe the Realme, and no
way to ſell or diſpoſe of their goodes, 
                  〈◊〉
               
the ſame to remaine to their Catholicke
heires in direct line, if they haue any, p
                  〈…〉
               
               ing
the iuſt valewe and eſtimate of the 
                  •
               owerth
part of the ſayd goodes: But if their
heires be other then in 
                  〈◊〉
                collaterall▪ the
to pay the eſtimate of the third parte, according
to the valewation that ſhall be
                  •
               
made by the Commiſsioners thereunto
appointed: and the money hereof ariſing
to be committed into the handes of certaine
perſons thereto deputed to bee employed
vpon the execution of this enterprize.
            That all Heretickes of whatſoeuer ſtate
or condition may be declared, according
to the Canonicall Sanctions, perpetually
incapable of all publicke charges, offices,

eſtates and dignities, and thoſe that now
haue any to be forced to forgoe & reſigne
the ſame vnto Catholicke perſons ſuch as
are capable, and not to keepe them, notwithſtanding
they would abiure their error,
except for the ſpace of three yeres after
the ſayd abiuration they continewe in
Catholicke life, ſo as there may be no further
doubt of fayned repentaunce or diſſimulation.
            That his Maieſtie declare▪ al whatſoeuer
haue bene done by the Catholick Princes
and Lordes and all other as well particuler
perſons, as Tounes and Communalties
that haue taken their partes, and ſuc
                  〈◊〉
               oured
and fauoured them, either in the ſeazing
vpon Townes, fetching of Coyne out
of his receiptes, taking vp of victualles
and Munition, or leauying of Souldiers
either within the Realme or without, and
generally all whatſoeuer haue bene done,
wrought or delt in vntill this preſent touching
the effect and execution of the premiſes,
notwithſtanding the ſame bee not
particulerly ſpecified or expreſſed, to haue
beene done for his ſeruice, with the aſſuraunce
of Religion, to the preſeruation

whereof he acknowledgeth himſelf to b
                  •
               
bound, both as a moſt Chriſtian King, and
alſo by that ſolemne oath that hee tooke
at his annoynting.
            To the ende the Catholiques may not
quaile or reenter into any feare, iudging
the ſequel hereof by others that are already
paſt, that is, that this enterprize ſhould
be but couldly proſecuted, and finally determined
by ſome other Edict contrary
to this, by meanes whereof there were no
other fruict to be hoped for thē the common
miſchiefe and domages enſuing of
Warre. They do moſt humbly beſeech his
Maieſtie to ordeyne that this ſayde Edict
may preſently bee publiſhed without any
reſtriction or qualification vppon the ſecrete
recordes or otherwiſe.
            It may alſo pleaſe his Maieſtie with the
Peeres and other officers of the Crowne
to aſsiſt the publication therof in the Parliament
of Paris, and the ſame being read,
to declare that as a moſt Chriſtian King,
being bound aſwell by the othe that hee
toooke at his Coronation, as alſo by that
zeale which alwayes hee hath borne to
the ſeruice of GOD, togither with the

requeſt and ſupplication to him made by
the generall eſtates of his Realme aſſembled
at Bloys, he hath conſideratly & with
great deliberation by the aduice of the
Queene his mother, the Princes of his
blood and other Peeres, Princes of France,
Officers of the Crowne, and many other
notable perſons of his Counſayle made
the ſayd Edict. That he ſweareth and proteſteth
inuiolably to obſerue and cauſe to
be kept the ſame, and neuer to permit it
to be infringed, promiſing hereafter in any
wiſe not to make any other repugnant
or derogatory hereunto in whole or in
part, alſo that if any ſuch ſhould be made,
his entent and meaning to be, that no regard
be had therof, as being directly contrary
to the ſeruice of God, wherto he acknowledgeth
him ſelfe and his ſubiects to
owe the chiefe duety, and to be principally
and eſpecially bounden.
            That he ſhall likewiſe cauſe all Princes,
Peeres of Fraunce, officers of the Crowne,
Knightes of the holy Ghoſt, Counſaylers
of Eſtate, Gouernors, and Lieutenants generall
of his Prouinces, Preſidentes and
Counſailers of his ſoueraigne Courtes, all

Bayliffes, Sen
                  〈…〉
               ſehals, and other his Officers,
all Maiors and Sherifes, alſo all bodies
& comminalties of townes, to ſweare
to the ſame. And all the ſayde othes and
cautions aforeſayd to be ſet in order, and
committed to the regiſters of the Roules
of the Courtes of Parliament, to the end
                  •
               
to haue recourſe thereto as neede ſhall require.
            Further, to the ende to ſhewe foorth a
more euident teſtimonie that hee entendeth
to keepe his ſayd Edict, and according
to the tenour thereof to procure the
moring out of hereſies out of this Realm:
It may pleaſe him, if it be not very contrarie
and preiudicial to his eſtate, to giue ouer
the protection of the Towne of 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
that to the great griefe of his Catholickes
hee hath taken vpon him, becauſe
that out of that ſpring do ſlowe al hereſie
throughout Chriſtendome, and therfore
ſo long as the ſayd protection remaineth
in force, his ſayd ſubiects cannot but feare
that this enfectious diſeaſe will neuer bee
cured.
            Alſo becauſe the ſayd Edict will bee to
no purpoſe if in euery point▪ without remiſsion

it be not put in execution, which
cannot be brought to paſſe without force,
becauſe thoſe of the newe Religion doe
ſhew no token that they purpoſe to yeeld
their doe obedience, it may pleaſe his Maieſtie
to employe that power which they
haue made of people to him moſt affectionate,
and his faithfull ſubiects▪ ſuch as will
hazard themſelues in the execution of his
cōmaundements, and therevpon do moſt
humbly deſire him to declare his entent.
            As for the meanes to compaſſe the ſaid
expedition, the aduerſaries being weake
and withdrawne into one corner of the
Realme, all the reſt remayning very duetifull
and zealous to the Catholicke Religion,
they preſume that his Maieſtie is reſolued
to put too his laſt helping hand &
not to returne to the former counſayles,
which haue▪ but nouriſhed and encreaſed
the miſchiefes: that al his good Catholick
ſubiects will aſsiſt and ayde him to their abilities.
That to the ſame effect (prouided
that the money bee not otherwiſe employed)
the Cleargie can finde in their hearts
voluntarily to graunt the ſale of their tē
               poralties
to a reaſonable valewe, conſidering

what great charges aforetime they
haue bene at. Alſo that our holy Father
the Pope will not ſticke to permit and
auctorize the ſame.
            Moreouer▪ they know that his Maieſtie
is not without other good and able meanes,
but it is not for them more particulerly
to enter into the ſearch thereof, beſides
that they haue beene ſo ſmally employed
in matters of his treaſurie, notwithſtanding
ſome of them bee honored
with the chiefe places and principall charges
of this Realme, who are thereto mere
winterlings.
            For their owne partes, together with
their liues which they will venture in ſo
holy and neceſſary an enterprize, they do
alſo offer whatſouer their meanes or habilities
and vpon their credits to aduance
the pay and enterteynment of
and to be content to take it vp againe in
the ſpace of one whole yere▪ conditionally
that it may pleaſe his Maieſtie to giue thē
aſſurance thereof, alſo to giue his word to
to the Captaines of the ſtraungers that
ſhall receiue it vpon their caution, that ſo
they may bee aſſured and haue good and

ſufficient aſsignation of the ſaid paiment,
and ſatiſfaction within the time limitted,
as alſo of that which alreadie they haue
aduaunced towarde the chardges of this
warre which is leuyed for his ſeruice, for
it is for the preſeruation of the Catholick
Religion, whereto his Maieſtie as a moſt
Chriſtian King hath alwayes ſhewed himſelfe
moſt affectionate.
            Moreouer, as he hath teſtified his zeale
and pietie to the honour and ſeruice of
of God in this enterpriſe, ſo it may pleaſe
him, ſhewing hym ſelfe a good father to
his ſubiectes, to eaſe them. And although
the effect of this good will can not bee ſo
ready by reaſon of thoſe expenſes whereinto
through this war he ſhal be forced to
enter, yet in ye meane time that he would
diſcharge them of the leauy of the country
vpon the ſault of the newe encreaſe
and impoſition of Wine, alſo of the impoſition
of Cloth, which his ſayde Maieſtie
had already purpoſed vpon the petitions
vnto hym diuers times made by his ſubiectes,
to aboliſh and take away. More-ouer
it may pleaſe hym to cauſe the verball
Proces of the Cōmiſsioners by him lately

deputed throughout the Prouinces,
which doe conteine the complaintes of euery
one togither with the remedied for
the preuēting & ceaſing of the miſchiefs,
to be peruſed and conſidered vpon, ſo ſhal
his ſubiectes pray to God for his proſperitie
and greatneſſe, and them ſelues perticule
                  •
               ly
ſhall not tend to any other, but
with heart and affection to yeelde to him
that moſt humble ſeruice which they doe
owe.
            They doe alſo moſt humbly beſeech his
Maieſtie, in conſideration of thoſe perils
whereof vntill the execution of this Edict
they ſhall dayly bee in danger by reaſon
of former enmities which thoſe of the
new religion do beare them, and are now
greatly increaſed through this their reſolution
vnder his Maieſties authoritie to
ayde and aſsiſt the Catholike Religion in
this Realme, wherevpon their lines doe
depend, and themſelues are as it were miſerably
thereto conioyned, to graunt vnto
them the meanes of aſſurance hereafter
enſuing, wherby they may liue in ſafety
and out of daunger, yeelding to him all
obedience as his moſt humble ſubiects.
            
               
Firſt, that it may be lawful for them, in
eace the execution of this Edict ſhould be
giuen ouer, or thoſe of the newe Religion
ſhould work any enterpriſe againſt them,
to call to their ayde the Catholicke Suitzers,
to whome it may be lawfull to doe
that ſeruice whereto they ſhall be required,
touching the obſeruation of the Edict
onely, and to no other purpoſe: ſo as
by their ſo doing, they ſhall not enfringe
their alliances with the Crowne, this Edict
beeing made for the ſafegard and
greatneſſe of the eſtate thereof.
            That all Gouernors & Lieutenants general
of the Prouinces, alſo al other particuler
gouernors & Captaines of Townes,
Holdes and Fortreſſes that haue followed
this partie may be maint
                  •
               ined and defended
in their gouernments, charges and eſtates,
alſo in thoſe Holdes that preſently
they haue and poſſeſſe and not to be put
from the ſame.
            That ſuch Townes as haue taken their
partes may remaine in libertie as before
the warres without any Garriſons placed
in them.
            Becauſe alſo the Lord Cardinal of Bourbon
               
hath no place of aſſurance and ſafetie,
and that he ought ordinarely to bee reſident
at Roome, that the ſayd Towne and
Caſtle be left him, with auctoritie to put
in Captaines that may bee thereof prouided,
as alſo in the Towne and Caſtle of
Diepe depending of the demaynes of his
Archbiſhopricke.
            To the Lorde Duke of Mercure in his
gouernment of Brittain two places, ſuch
as he ſhall nominate to his Maieſtie, with
the Admiraltie ouer all Seafaring places
within the ſayd gouernment, according
to ſuch inſtructions as heretofore haue
vnto him bene made.
            In aſmuch alſo as throughout all the
Townes within the gouernment of Champagne,
there is neuer a Caſtle ſufficient for
the aſſuraunce and ſafegarde of the Lorde
Duke of Guyze, who is gouernor thereof,
it may pleaſe his Maieſtie to graunt vnto
him the Towne and Citadell of Metz.
            
            To the Lorde Duke of Mayne gouernor
of Bourgondy, together with the Caſtle
of Digeon which already he houldeth, the
Caſtle of Beaeune or the Citadel of Chaalon.
            
            To the Lorde Cardinall of Guyze the

Towne of Rheimes, together with ſome
reaſonable extent which may bee to that
ende taken out of the gouernement of
Champagne.
            
            To the Lord Duke of Aumale auctoritie
to commaund in the Holdes and gouernement
of Picardie, being of the fame
partie.
            To the Lorde Marquiſe of Elboeuf the
gouernement of Anieow.
            
            To the Lord of Antragues the gouernement
of Orleans in chiefe together with
whatſoeuer therevpon depended at the
time that the late King prouided him of
the Lieutenancy generall of the ſayd gouernment.
            To the Lord of O. the gouernement of
the Bayliwickes of Caen and Conſtance according
as heretofore hee hath enioyed
them.
            To the Lord of Briſſac the Lieutenancy
generall of the gouernment of A
                     〈…〉
                  cow, alſo
the ſtate of Coronell generall of Piedmont
to enioy as others haue done before
him and in time paſt it was accuſtomed.
            To the Lord Coūtie of Saux the Lieutenancy
generall of the gouernment of Prouince
               
during the abſence of the Lord great
Pryor of Fraunce.
            
            To the Lorde of Mandelot as Gouernor
of Lyons the Citadell thereof.
            To the Lord of Chastre, his gouernmēt
of Bourges with his companie maintained
vpon the firſt leauy of the receipt of Bourges.
            
            To the Lord of Vaillac the Capteynſhip
of Castle Trompet in Bourdeaux.
            
            Alſo vpon the vacation of any the ſayd
Gouernments, Lieutenancies, or Captenſhips,
if any happen before the full execution
of the ſayde Edict, it maye pleaſe his
Maieſtie vpon the humble ſupplication
which vnto him ſhall be made on the behalfe
of the Princes and principals of the
ſaid partie, to prouide for the ſame accordingly.
            That all Garriſons neceſſary for the defence
and keeping of the ſayd places in
his Maieſties aſſurance and to the preſeruation
of thoſe of the ſayde partie, maye
monthly be payd with the appointments
by order of the Gouernors and Officers
out of the treaſurie of the generall receipts
of euery the ſayd gouernments, by

whoſe order the ſame ſhall bee deducted
out of the receipt at the beginning of the
yeere.
            That the compagnies of men of armes
in the Prouinces, gouernments and generall
Lieutenancies of the Prouinces, may
in euery of their gouernments haue their
paye out of the leauye of the fines or amercements
in their generall receipts eſtabliſhed
which ſhall expreſſely be thereto
reſerued and not to be conuerted to any
other vſe. Alſo the dueties and penſions
of the ſayde Prouinces, Gouernors
and Lieutenants, to be raiſed vpon other
the coyne of the ſayde receipts, whereof
quarterly there ſhall a certeyne be left for
that vſe.
            The ſayd Holds & Caſtles of the which,
the parties to who
                  •
               e his Maieſtie ſhall
leaue them for their ſafegarde, were not
prouided of before, they ſhall holde vnder
his aucthoritie, and for his ſeruice, and of
the ſame ſhall be to him accomptable.
            They ſhal alſo promiſe ioyntly together
and each one ſeuerally for himſelfe, alſo
the principall Captaines of the ſayd party
in the name of all to reſtore the ſame into

his Maieſties handes ſo ſoone as the ſayd
Edict which it ſhall pleaſe his Maieſtie to
make, be put in execution and obſerued.
And this ſhall they ſweare vpon perrill of
their liues and honors faithfully to performe.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
                  depiction of dragon and crown
               
            
         
      
   