
      
         
            
            
            ORDINANCES
Set foorth by the King,
for the rule and gouernement
of his Maieſties
men of warre.
            Read and publiſhed at Caen the
30. of March. 1591.
            Faithfully translated out of the
French Coppie Printed at
Caen by E. A.
            
            
               LONDON
Printed by Iohn Wolfe, and are to be ſolde at his
ſhop right ouer-againſt the great ſouth
doore of Paules. 1591.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            Ordinances ſet foorth by the
King, for the rule and gouernement
of his men of
warre.
            
               
                  HEnry by the grace of God king of France and
Nauarre, to our welbeloued and truſty, the
Gouernours of our Prouinces, our Lieu
                  •
               enants
general in the ſame, our Captains and
particular Gouernours of our towns and caſtels,
alſo to our Bailifes and Stewards, and
other our Iuſtices, Officers and ſubiects, gréeting.
Vpon the complaints and lamentations which daily out
of ſundry parts of our realme we do receiue concerning ſuch exceſſe
and violences as are ſtill offered againſt our poore ſubiectes
of the plaine champion by our men of warre, and their bad behauiours,
and vpon a ſingular deſire that we haue to preſerue and
warrant them from the ſame: We with the aduice of our princes,
officers of our crowne, and other notable perſons of our priuy
counſaile about vs, haue made and decréede the Ordinances
hereunto affixed vnder the counterſeale of our Chancery, which
we intend to cauſe diligently to be kept and obſerued. And in
as much as the execution of the ſame dependeth wholly vppon
you, we will and commaund, and expreſſely do enioine euery of
you whome it m
                  •
               y any way concerne, ſo exactly to execute the
ſaid decrée, that our ſaide ſubiectes may reape that reliefe which
we wiſh vnto them, to our owne content and the diſcharge of
our conſciences, in fréeing them from ſuch oppreſſions as vniuſtly
are practiſed againſt them, as alſo that the care and affection
which for your partes you ſhall employ, may iuſtifie you as
vnguiltie of ſuch tranſgreſſions as through toleration are growen
ſo common, and withall ſo offenſiue to God, that we are to
beléeue that the ſame doth moſt procure his wrath againſt this
eſtate, which he will neuer turne away vntill they that are poſſeſſed
of the power and gouernments do take into their protection
the poore inhabitants of the ſaid Champion, who in al reaſon
are the moſt innocent, and to whome we ſtand moſt bound, as

being next vnto God and chiefe workmen and miniſters of ſuch
fruits as the earth bringeth forth for the ſuſtenance and noriſhment
of others. Faile ye not therfore hereof as ye will anſwer
vs at your owne and particular perill. We alſo enioyne our
Bailifes and Stewards to cauſe the ſaid ordinaunces to be publiſhed
and enroled in the ſeaze of our Bailiwikes and Stewardſhips,
and beſides to proclaime them throughout all the pariſhes
in their precincts. As alſo we will that to the ſame effecte vpon
the ſight thereof, and of theſe preſents duly collationed togither,
they be beléeued euen as theſe preſents originall, for ſuch is our
pleaſure.
            
               Giuen at our Camp before Chartres,
March 8. 1591. and of our raigne
the ſecond.
               
               Signed Henry,
               
and vnderneath 

                  Potier,
                and
ſealed in yellow waxe with his Maieſties broade
ſeale vpon a ſingle labell.
         
         
            THe King meaning to take order againſt ſuch complaints as
are vſually made vnto him concerning the infinite oppreſſions
wherewith his poore ſubiects of the plaine Champion are ouerlaid,
beſides the charges that they beare, by tallages and other
impoſtes, leuyed among them vpon his Maieſties commiſſions,
through the enterpriſes of ſundry men of warre, who of
their owne authoritie do force them to contribute mony, meate,
and munition, notwithſtanding the moſt of them haue neyther
charge nor commiſſion from his Maieſtie to make any leauy of
ſouldiors: whereby the ſaid poore ſubiects being thus layde open
to the diſcretion of euery one that liſt to vexe and oppreſſe them,
ſhal be forced to abandon their habitations, and the tilth of the
earth withall, whereof muſt enſue a generall famine with the
curſe of God againſt the whole eſtate, in caſe ſuch wickedneſſe
be any longer tollerated: doth commaund, will, and enioyne all
and euery the gouernors of his prouinces, and his lientenants
generall in the ſame, exactly to procure the obſeruation of the
contents of the articles enſuing. Whereupon his Maieſtis
proteſteth to charge their perſons in caſe he heareth any further
complaint of their ſlacking of their dueties, in that they can not
enterprize or execute any thing that may more redounde to the

diſcharge of their conſciences and honour, and their duety to
his Maieſty and the common wealth.
            According to the former prohibitions, that no man leauy
any company or troupe of horſemen or footemen wythout his
Maieſties commiſſion, the ſayd gouernours and lieutenantes
of the ſayd prouinces are alſo enioined to ouer runne and cut
in péeces all ſuch as ſhall doe otherwiſe: and where they can
by any meanes apprehend the Captaines and leaders of ſuch
troups, they ſhall hang them wythout further order or forme
of proceſſe.
            If any of the ſayde men of warre doe ſeaze vppon anie
place, whether Towne, Borough Village, Church, Caſtell,
or priuate houſe, to the ende, in the ſame to keepe ſtrength or
garriſon wythout commiſſion from his Maieſty, the gouernour
of the prouince, or the lieutenant general in his abſence,
he alſo enioyneth the ſayde gouernours and lieutenants generall
wyth all ſpéede to beſeege and force them, and all ſuch
as they can take aliue to hang vp wythout other order of proceſſe.
            That it be publiſhed in all Pariſhes, that his Maieſty
meaneth not that his ſubiects be forced to any contribution
of coyne, victuall, hay, ſtraw or other munition wythout expreſſe
commiſſion from his ſayde Maieſty vnder his Letters
patents ſigned by himſelf, and one of his ſecretaries of eſtate,
directed to the treaſurours generall of France, and the elected
to make diuiſion thereof. Alſo in caſe they be forced or
compelled thereto by their particular garriſons, his Maieſty
willeth them to complayne to the lieutenant generall of the
Prouince, whome he enioyneth preſently to repaire vnto the
place where the garriſon remaineth that forceth the leauy of
any ſuch contribution, or to ſend ſtrength ſufficient to apprehend
the Captaine that may haue fayned any ſuch decrée,
whoſe preceſſe he willeth to be framed and finiſhed according
to the ordinances thereupon made. As alſo his Maieſty commaundeth
vpon like paine ſuch inhabitants of the ſayde Villages
as may haue béene forced to the payment of the ſayde
contributions, not to fayle but to make their complaint to the
ſaid gouernors and lieutenants generall by petition to them
exhibited, to the end, if it be not remedied, his Maieſty may
know where the fault is.
            
               
If any of the ſayde men of warre contrary to the former
decrées vnder pretence of going to leauy the tallages to them
appoynted for their pay and maintenaunce ſhall exact of his
Maieſties ſaid ſubiects any more then for his owne reléefe,
during the time of his or their abode in the ſayde village whither
he is ſent, his Maieſty willeth the ſame to be hanged
immediatly.
            If likewiſe it be found that any, whether he be of the company
of thoſe that riſe wythout the commiſſion aforeſayde, or
of ſuch as belong to any garriſon appoynted by his Maieſty,
hath taken from the ſayde peaſants any horſe, mare, oxe, or
cowe vſed to labour, his pleaſure is that the ſame be alſo hanged
and ſtrangled.
            His Maieſty alſo declareth that his will and meaning is
not that any of the ſaid peaſants be denounced a priſoner of
warre, notwithſtanding he hath paid any tallages or contributions
to the rebellious townes, vnleſſe the ſame be taken
bearing armes againſt his Maieſties ſeruice, or be found in
places holden by the ſaid rebels, and haue béene beſéeged or
taken by force, or carrying of Letters or meſſages to ſuch as
be in the ſayd rebellious townes, eyther conueying of victualles
into the ſame, or being met in the high way within two
leagues thitherward and ſo found by good and ſufficiēt proofe.
His Maieſty vnder paine of death forbiddeth the taking or
detaining of them in any other manner, eyther the forcing
of them to pay any ranſome, or ſtopping of them from tranſporting
to market townes, boroughs or villages their cattell
or other merchandize to buy or ſell. As alſo vnder the pains
aforeſaid he forbiddeth the taking priſoners of any children
vnder fiftéene yeares of age, or any maidens or women vpon
any cauſe or occaſion whatſoeuer.
            He alſo forbiddeth vnder paine of death to take priſoners,
or to put to ranſome any Prieſts, religious men, or other eccleſiaſticall
perſons, vnleſſe the ſame he taken bearing arms
againſt his Maieſties ſeruice, and the order of their profeſſion:
or that they be found comming out of the ſaid rebellious
townes wythout paſport from his Maieſty, or the gouernors
or lieutenants generall, eyther carrying of letters or meſſages
to the enemy as is aforeſayd.
            It is likewiſe prohibited vpon like paine of death, not to

robbe any Churches, monaſteries, or other places dedicated
to the diuine ſeruice, or therein to lodge any horſe or other
cattell, or therein to commit any acte contrary vnto the reuerence
due to the ſame.
            That no iudgements of ranſomes of ſuch as haue béene
detayned priſoners ſhall be aſſeſſed but by his Maieſty, the
Marſhals of France, the Gouernours and Lieutenants generall
of the Prouinces, or the Marſhalles of the Campe of
his armies, all others being prohibited and forbidden to
deale in the ſame.
            All men whatſoeuer, whether ſouldiours, peaſants, or
others, are alſo vnder the like paynes prohibited from fortefying
of the ſayd Churches, to the end to vſe them for warre,
the ſayde places in duety being reſerued for prayer and ſupplications
to God, and therefore exempt from al violence and
warlike exerciſe.
            His Maieſty alſo forbiddeth all gouernours or Captaines
of his townes, forts, or caſtels, not to conuert into coyne the
labour that the peſants do owe to the fortifications of the ſaid
places, which he willeth to be ordered by the elect or iudges
of the places, who ſhall appoynt euery pariſh one day at the
moſt in euery moneth to come to worke, yet ſo as the ſayde
Gouernours ſhall not force them wythout the permiſſion of
his Maieſty or his Gouernours for the time limitted in the
Commiſſions which vnto them ſhall be deliuered.
            Alſo in as much as his ſaid Maieſty meaneth to employ
the goodes of the Leaguers vppon his affaires, his pleaſure is
that no man ſhall take the ſame wythout the eſpeciall gifte
of his Maieſty, and that by the handes of his officers of iuſtice
according to the tenure of their giftes, vnleſſe it be the
moueables of ſuch as may be found in thoſe townes and places
which the ſayd rebels do detayne at ſuch tyme as be force
the ſame be recouered out of their handes.
            
               Giuen at our Campe before Chartres the
8. day of March. 1591.
               
               Signed Henry. and beneath
Potier.
            
         
         
            
            IN the yeare 1591. vpon Saturday the thirtieth day of
March in the preſence of vs Iohn Vauquelin Eſquier,
Counſellour to the King, and lieutenant generall of my L.
the Bayliffe of Caen, the Kings letters patents and ordinances
made in his campe before Chartres the eight day of
this moneth and yeare, for the rule and gouernement of hys
men of warre, the audience of the ſayde Bayliwike ſitting,
were read and publiſhed. And vpon the requeſt of the Kings
Procurer it is ordayned that they ſhall be regiſtred vpon the
roll proclaymed in the corner wayes of this ſayd towne, and
at the exhortations in the great parochiall maſſes in the pariſhes
of this vicount, and the ſight thereof ſent to all other
the vicounties of this Bayliwike that the like may be done,
and to that end they ſhall be printed.
            
               Giuen as before.
               Signed VAVQVELIN
de la Serre & Cricquet.
            
            
         
         FINIS.
      
   