
      
         
            
            
            THE
EDICT OR
PROCLAMATION
SET FORTHE BY THE
Frenche Kinge vpon the pacifying
of the troubles in Fraunce, with the
Articles of the same pacification.
            Read and published in the presence
of the sayd King, sitting in his Parlament,
the xiiij. day of May, 1576.
            Translated out of Frenche by
ARTHVR GOLDING.
            CVM PRIVILEGIO.
Imprinted at London by Thomas
Vautrollier dvvelling in the
Blacke Friers.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE KINGES
EDICT VPON THE
pacification of the troubles of his
Realme, containing the order vvhich
his Maiestie purposeth and intendeth
to haue kept for the maintenance
of the same.
            
               HENRY by the grace of God
King of France & Pollande,
To all that are present and to
come, greeting.
            WE haue not desired any thing so
muche since it pleased God to call vs to
this Crovvne, for the singuler good vvill
and loue vvhich vve beare to our Subiects:
as to bring them to a perfect vnion
and concorde, and to set them againe in

good peace, quietnes and rest. For the
bringing whereof to passe, after seeking of
all meanes expedient for the same, and after
aduise had therevpon by graue and
great deliberation, vvith the Queene oure
most honorable Lady, and Mother, vvith
the Princes of our bloud, with the officers
of our crovvne, and vvith other Lordes
and notable personages of our priuie coū
               sell:
We haue by this our continuall and
vnreuocable Edict, sayde, declared, enacted,
and ordained, and do say, declare, enact,
and ordaine, as followeth.
            
               I.
               FIRST. That the Remembrance of all
things past as well on the one side as on
the other, during and since the troubles
that haue hapned in our sayd Realme, and
by occasion of them, shall lie quenched &
deade, as things that had neuer bin done:
And it shall not be lawfull ne sufferable for
our Attorneys generall, or any other persons
publique or priuate what so euer, to
commēce any action, processe, or sute for
them at any time, or for any maner of occasion,

In any of our courtes or places of
Iustice.
            
            
               II.
               WE forbid all our Subiectes, of what
estate or calling so euer they be, to renewe
the remēbrāce of those thīgs any more, or
quarelously to molest, or prouoke one an
other in way of reproche, for ought that is
past, by reasoning, tvvitting, quarelling, or
greeuing one an other in vvord, or deede.
And vve commaund them, to refraine thē
selues, and to liue quietly together, as brethren,
frēds & fellow citesens, vnder paine
of beeing punyshed, as breakers of the
peace, and troublers of the cōmon quiete.
            
            
               III.
               WE ordayne, that the Catholique and
Romane religion shall be set vp and stablished
agayne, in all places and parts of this
our Realme, & of the contryes vnder our
gouernance, vvhere the excercise therof
hath bin lefte of, That it may be freely and
quietly excercised vvithout any trouble or
lette. Forbidding moste expressly all persones,
of vvhatstate, condition or calling

soeuer they be, vnder the payne aforesayd,
to trouble, vexe, or disquyet, the ecclesiasticall
persons, in the celebration of theyr
deuine seruise, or in the inioying & taking
vp of the tythes, frutes, and reuenevves of
their benefices, and of all other rights and
dueties belonging to them. And our vvill
is, that all such as in the time of these present
& former troubles haue entred vpon
the churches, hovvses, landes, & reuenevves,
belonging to the Ecclesiasticall
persons, and do still holde and occupy the
same, shall giue vp the vvhole possession
of them, and let them peaceably inioye
them vvith suche rights, liberties, & assurances,
as they had before they vvere dispossessed
of them.
            
            
               IIII.
               And to take avvay all occasion of trouble,
and disagreemēt among our subiects,
vve haue graunted, and do graunt free open
and generall exercise, of the pretēded
reformed religion, through all cities and
places of our Realme, and through all cō
                  tries
vnder our obedience & protection,
vvithout restraynt of tyme, persō, or place,

condicionally that the same places belōg
vnto themselues, or that it be done vvith
the good vvill & consent of the ovvners,
to vvhome they belonge. In the vvhiche
tovvnes and places, the professors of the
sayde Religion, may preache, praye, singe
Psalmes, minister Baptisme and the Lords
supper, aske the bands of Matrimony, and
solempnize mariages, publiquely cathechize
and reade lectures, vse discipline according
to the sayde Religion, and doo all
other things belonging to the free & full
exercise of the same. Also they may hold
consistories, Sinodes, assemblies or counsells,
as vvell prouinciall as generall, So
they make our officers priuie therevnto
in the places vvhere those Synodes shall
bee called and assembled. And vvee enioyne
our sayde officers or some of them,
to assist those general & prouinciall counsells.
Yet neuerthelesse, vve vvill and ordayne,
That the professors of the sayde Religion
shall forbeare the open excercyse
thereof in our cittie of Paris, & in the suburbes
thereof, and vvithin tvvo leagues about
the same. Whiche tvvo leagues vve

haue limitted, and do limitte to the places
following: That is to witte, Sainct Denis,
Sainct Maure de Fosses, Pont de Charenton▪
Le bourg la Royne, & Port de Nully:
In the whiche places our meaning is that
there shall not be any excercise of the sayd
Religion. Hovvbeeit notvvithstanding,
that the professors of the same Religion
shall not be sowght, or sifted, for any thing
that they doo in their howses as concerning
the sayde Religion, nor their children
or the teachers of them bee compelled to
doo any thing contrary or preiudiciall to
the same. Also they shall abstayne from
the sayde excercise of Religion in oure
Courte, and vvithin two leagues aboute
it. And likevvise in our landes & contries,
vvhich are on that syde the mountaynes,
sauinge that in those contryes they shall
not be sought or sifted for aught that they
doo in their howses concerning the sayde
Religion. And vve hope, that God vvyll
graunt vs the grace, to see all our subiects
knit together agayne in one fayth, Religion,
and beleefe, by the determination of a
free and holy generall counsell, vvhich is

our desier and cheefe intent.
            
            
               V.
               Yt shall not be lawful, to sell any bookes
vvithin oure Realme and the contryes,
landes & Lordships vnder our obedience,
vntill they haue firste bin perused by oure
officers of those places, Or (in respect of
the bookes concerning the sayde Religiō)
by the chambers heereafter to be ordayned
by vs in euery court of iustice, to iudge
the causes and controuersies of the professers
of the Religion: most expresly forbidding
the printing, publishing and selling
of all bookes, libels and writings of
defamation, as well on the one parte as on
the other, vnder the paynes contayned in
our decrees. And wee charge all our Iudges
& officers to take good heede therto.
            
            
               VI.
               We ordayne that for the burying of the
deade among the professers of the sayde
Religion, beeing within our cittie & suburbes
of Paris, there shall bee appoynted
to them the churche yearde of the trinity:
and in all other citties and places, our officers

& magistrates shall out of hande prouide
them places as commodious as may
be: And this we commaunde our officers
to doo, and to take good heede, that no offence
be committed, at or by the sayde burialles,
eyther in our sayde cittie of Paris
or elles where.
            
            
               VII.
               WE intend that the professers of the
sayde religion, shall not in any wyse be cō
                  strayned
or stande bounde by reason of any
abiurations, heeretofore made, or by reason
of any promise, othe, or caution by
them gyuen in cases concerning the Religion,
nor be molested or troubled by any
kinde of way for the same.
            
            
               VIII.
               YT shall be lawfull for the professors of
the Religion, to buylde & erect places for
the excercise thereof, sauing in Paris and
the suburbes thereof, and within two leagues
abovvte the same. And the places
vvhiche haue bin buylded by them alreadie,
shall be restored vnto them in suche
state as they novve be. And vvheras too

serue their ovvne turnes they haue buylded
vp any Churches or houses belōging
to Ecclesiastical or other Catholique persons:
They shall be bound to restore them
againe, but yet they shal not be sought nor
troubled for the stuffe that they haue bestowed
vpon them, though the same stuffe
were taken of the ruines and ouerthrowes
made during the present or former troubles.
            
            
               IX.
               AS concerning the mariage of Priests
and religious persons that haue bin contracted
heertoofore: wee nother will nor
intend (for many good considerations,)
that they shalbee sowght or trubbled for
them: but we forbid our Attorneys generall
and all other our officers too speake
therof. Neuerthelesse, wee declare that the
issewes comming of such mariages, may
succeede alonly in moueables, and in such
landes and possessions as their fathers and
moothers haue gotten by gift or by purchace.
For wee will not that those professed
religious folke, shalbee inabled too inherit
by direct or collaterall descent.
            
            
               
               X.
               THE professers of the Religion shalbe
bound to keepe the lavves that are receyued
in the Catholicke churche, for mariages
contracted or to be contracted within
the degrees of kinred & affinitie, for the auoyding
of strife and sutes that may insew
of it, to the decaye of moste of the good
howses of our Realme, and to the breache
of the bonds of frendship vvhich is gotten
by mariages and alliances among our subiects.
Neuerthelesse, the professers of the
sayde Religion shall not bee troubled for
their mariages made in the third & fourth
degrees, nother shall the sufficiencie of
those mariages bee called in question, nor
the succession be barred, nor any quarell
bee picked to the children descending of
those mariages alreadie made or to bee
made hereafter. And to iudge of the sufficiencie
of mariages made and contracted
by the professers of the Religion, and to
decyde vvhither they be lavvfull or no: if
the professer of the Religion be the defendant,
then shall the cace bee tryed before
the Kings Iudge: but if he be the plaintife

and a Catholike bee the defendant, then
the tryall of the cace shall belong to the
Officiall and ecclesiasticall iudge.
            
            
               XI.
               WE ordeyne that Religion shall make
no difference nor distinction in receyuing
or admitting of Scholers, diseased folkes,
and poore folkes into Vniuersities, Colledges,
Schooles, Hospitals, Spittles, and
publike Almeshovvses.
            
            
               XII.
               THE professers of the Religion shall
pay all dewties at their comming in, as is
woont too bee for the charges and offices
wherby they shalbe prouided for, without
being constreined too bee present at anie
Ceremonie, contrarie too their Religion.
And if they bee called vppon their othe,
they shall not be bound too sweare otherwyze,
than by lifting vp their hand, and by
promizing too God that they will say the
truthe: nother shall they bee bounde too
take dispensation of the othes made by
them in passing of bargaines and bondes.
            
            
               
               XIII.
               WE will and ordeine that all our subiectes,
as well Catholikes as those of the
pretended reformed Religion, of what
state or condition soeuer they be, shalbee
bownde and compelled by all reazonable
meanes, too pay and yeeld their tithes too
Curates and Ecclesiasticall persones, and
too all other too whom those things belong,
according too the vse and customes
of the places, vnder the paines conteined
in our former Edictes made in the same
behalf.
            
            
               XIIII.
               OVR deere and welbeloued cowsin the
Prince of Orendge shalbee set agein in full
possession of all his lands, iurisdictions, and
Lordships which he hath within our Realme,
and within the Countries vnder our
dominion. And likewise loke vvhat rights,
titles, recordes, euidences, and vvritings
haue bin taken from our sayde covvsin, or
bin conueyed avvay by our Liuetenantes
generall & other our officers, in the principalitie
of Orendge, we wil that the same
be restored to him againe, & that they be

set and established ageine in the same state
vvherein they vvere before the troubles,
to be inioyed henceforth by him and his,
according to the prouisions, determinations,
and declarations made and agreed vpon
in that behalfe, by the late King Henry
our moste honorable Lorde and father
vvhome God forgiue, and by other Kings
our predecessors, in like cace as he did inioy
them before the sayde troubles.
            
            
               XV.
               THE professers of the sayde Religion
shall bee bounde to keepe & obserue the
feastes appoynted by the Catholik & Romane
churche, and they shall not vvorke,
sell, nor set forth their vvares in their open
shoppes on those dayes: nother shall the
Shambles be open on the dayes vvherein
the eating of fleshe is forbidden by the
sayd churche.
            
            
               XVI.
               IN all publike Actes and Actions where
any speeche shalbee made of the said Religion,
there shalbee vsed these vvordes, the
pretended reformed Religion.
               
            
            
               
               XVII.
               TOO the end too knit the hartes of our
subiects the better togither according too
our intent, wee inable as well the Catholikes
confederates, as the professers of the
pretēded reformed religiō, to hold & execute
al maner of states, dignities, offices &
charges whatsoeuer, whither they bee of
royaltie and Lordship, or of gouernment
of the Cities of our Realme, and of the
Countries, landes and seniories vnder our
dominion: and wee will that they shalbee
indifferently admitted and receiued vntoo
them, without being bounde too take any
other othe, or too bee tyed too any other
inconuenience, than the good and faithful
behauing of themselues in their callings,
dignities, charges, and offices, and in the
keeping of the ordinances of them. In the
which Estates, dignities, charges, and offices,
whensoeuer they happen too be void▪
wee as in respect of such as shalbee of our
owne gift or disposition, shall prouide indifferently
and without respect of persons▪
too place such as vve may perceiue too be
able men too deale well in the seruice of vs

and of our subiects.
            
            
               XVIII.
               AND forasmuche as the administration
of Iustice is one of the cheefe meanes
to mainteyne our subiects in peace & concorde:
vvee inclining to the request that
hath bin made vnto vs as vvell on the behalf
of the Catholicks cōfederat, as on the
behalfe of the professers of the sayde pretended
reformed Religion, haue ordayned
& doo ordayne, That in our Court of Parliament
at Paris, there shall bee erected a
chamber of tvvo presidents and sixteene
Councellors, the one halfe of Catholicks,
& the other half of the sayd Religion: The
vvhiche officers of the Religion shall bee
created & erected by vs to the sayde ende,
vvith like vvages, honour, auctoritie and
prerogatiues, as our other counsellers of
our saide Court haue: so as, all pleaes and
controuersies, vvherein the sayde Catholickes
confederate, or those of the pretended
reformed Religion shall be principall
parties, either in sevving or in defending,
in all matters as vvell ciuill as criminall,
vvhether the sayde sutes bee made by vvriting,

or by appeale in words, if the parties
thinke it good, & that any of them require
it, shall be hearde and iudged by the same
chamber, with souereintie and definitiue
sentence, excluding all other Courts from
dealing with the same. And the same chā
                  ber
so made and stablished as is sayde before,
shall bee appoynted to our Cittie of
Poictiers, there to sitte & to minister Iustice
to our sayd subiects, the Catholikes
confederate and the professers of the sayd
Religion, in our contries of Poyctou,
Angolesme, Aulny & Rochel, after the
same forme and fashion, as is vsed in the
sessions of the chamber in our Courte of
Parliamēt at Paris: & this to be done three
moneths together euery yeare, namelye
from the first day of August, til the last day
of October.
            
            
               XIX.
               AND for the limitatiō of the iurisdictiō
of our Court of Parliament at Tholouze,
there shalbe erected a Chāber in the cittie
of Mountpellier made of two Presidēts &
eighteene Counsellers, the one halfe Catholicks,
& the other halfe of the sayde Religion.

The which Catholicks shalbe chosen
by vs out of our great Courts of Parliaments
& out of our great Councell: And
those of the Religion shall be created and
erected anewe, with the same wages, honoure,
auctoritie, prerogatiues & preheminences
which the Presidents & Councellers
of our Court of Parliamēt at Tholouze
haue. In the whiche chamber shall
moreouer be appoynted one Aduocate,
one Attorney generall, two Registrers, the
one ciuill & the other criminall, Vsshers,
and all other needefull officers, as well for
the sayde chamber, as for the Chauncery
that we will erect there. All which officers
shall be the one halfe Catholicks, & the other
halfe of the sayde Religion. And the
sayd Chamber shall heare and iudge (with
souereintie, perēptory iudgement, & definitiue
sentence, excluding all other courts
from dealing any further,) of all pleaes &
controuersies mooued or to be mooued,
wherein the sayd Catholicks confederate
or those of the pretended reformed Religion
belonging to the iurisdiction of our
Court of Parliament at Tholouze, shall be

the cheefe parties in challenging & defending,
in all matters as well ciuill as criminall,
whether the sayd pleaes be by writing
or by appeale in wordes: if it seeme good
to the parties, and that one of them doo
require it.
            
            
               XX.
               THE like Chambers, it is our vvill too
haue erected in our Courts of Parliament
at Grenble, Burdeaux, Aix, Dijon, Roan
and Britayne, consisting of the nomber of
two presidentes and tenne Counsellers in
euery Chamber, which shall bee the one
half of Catholicks, and the other half of
the sayd Religion. And those of the foresaid
Religion by vs dewly created to the
said purpose, shall euery of them in respect
of the Chambers where they shall bee set,
haue like iurisdiction, auctoritie & power,
to heare and iudge in maner and forme as
is said heretofore, as in respect of the iurisdiction
of our Parliamēts of Paris & Tholouze.
And in respect of our Countrie of
Dolpheny, the sitting of the said Chamber
shall bee deuided, that is to witt sixe moneths
at Grenoble, and other sixe moneths

at Sainct Marcellyne, beginning to sit first
at Sainct Marcellyne.
            
            
               XXI.
               ALSO wee will (by maner of prouision,
and vntill such time as other order shall be
taken for it by vs in the general assembly of
the states of our Realme, which we intend
to hold) That in all iudgements that shall
be giuen vpon processes mooued or to be
mooued, wherin the said Catholicks Cō
                  federate,
and those of the Religion bee in any
wise principall parties or maintainers
either by Challenging or Defending: The
officers of our Presidiall Courts, or others
to whome wee shall haue giuen power in
certein Cases to iudge with souereintie &
peremptorily, shall in all matters, as well
Ciuill as Criminall, appeale too the sayd
Chambers newly erected in our sayd Parliamēts,
euery one within his iurisdiction,
notwithstanding all the Edictes that concerne
the auctoritie and iurisdiction of the
said Presidials, from whome wee haue derogated,
and do derogate in the respect aforesaid
without preiudicing them in other
things. And the said appeale, in matters

Ciuill pertaining to the Presidialles,
shall haue effect too the recouerie of the
Appellants right, howbeit without stay of
execution of the iudgement geuen on his
aduersaries behalf, vnlesse it were agreed
by the Consent of bothe the parties, that
their case should bee iudged peremptorily
by the Court of the Presidialles. In the
which case the conteint of this present article
shall take no place, nor likewise in the
Courts, where there are a sufficient nōber
of the professers of the Religiō, to iudge of
the said Cases, which thing they may doo
(with equall nomber of Catholicks,) with
souereintie, and without appeale in Cases
of Edicts. Neuerthelesse for certeine
Causes and Consideracions moouing vs
thereto, Wee ordaine that the informacion
and Iudgement of actions Criminal,
commenced or to bee commenced in the
Seneschalles Courte of Tholouze erected
in the said citie of Tholouze, wherein the
Catholicks Confederate, and those of the
foresaid Religion shall bee defenders, shall
not lie in the saide Citie, but in the next
Courte to the said Seneschall, vnto whom

wee haue referred and do referre the same
actions from henceforth in way of appeale
too the Chamber of the saide Cittie of
Mountpellier.
            
            
               XXII.
               THE Prouostes of our right deare and
welbeloued Cuszens the Marshalles of
Fraunce, the vnderbailiffes, the viceseneschalles,
leeuetenauntes, of shorte Cote,
and other like officers, shall iudge according
to the lawes and Iniunctions heretofore
giuen forth for the correction of vagabundes.
And as touching housholders
that are browght before the Prouosts, and
charged with matters belonging to their
office, if they concerne the Catholicks cō
                  federate,
or those of the foresaid Religion,
The said officers shall bee bound to call an
equall nomber of our officers, of sufficient
abillitie, as well of Catholicks as of those
of Religion, to the informacion and iudgement
of the said matters, from oute of the
next Presidiall courtes, or from out of the
Royall Courtes in the prouinces vvhere
there are no Presidiall courtes, if there bee
so many of the sayd Religion there: or elles

in their steades, they shall call as many aduocates,
of the like sorte, if they be to bee
founde there.
            
            
               XXIII.
               IT is our ordinaunce, will & pleasure,
That our right deare & wellbeloued brother
in lawe the king of Nauar, our righte
deare and welbeloued Cousin the Prince
of Condey, our right deare and welbeloued▪
Cousin Monsieur d' Amuile Marshall
of Fraunce, and likewise all other Lordes,
Knights, Gentlemen, and other persons, of
what state or Condition so euer they bee,
as well Catholicks Confederate, as those
of the foresaid Religion: shall enter againe
into their gouernments, charges, roomes,
and offices royall, which they had before
the xxiiij of August. 1572. and bee meintained
in the enioying of them, without
driuing of them too take newe Commissions
or Patents, notwithstanding any sentences
definitiue, and iudgements giuen
against them, and notwithstanding the Patents
that haue bin obtained of those roomes
by other men. Likewise they shall enter
ageine into the inioying of all and singuler

their goods, rights, titles, duetyes &
doings, notwithstanding the iudgements
that haue ensewed by reason of the sayde
trubles: which definitiue sentēces, Iudgementes,
Patentes & all other thinges that
might ensew therof, we haue for the same
purpose denounsed & do denounse to be
vtterly voyde & of no effect nor valew.
            
            
               XXIIII.
               WE meane not by the things aforesaid,
that such as haue resigned their auctoritys
& officies, by vertue of the letters Patents
of vs or of the late Kinge our right deare
Lorde & brother, should recouer the same
and take possession of them againe. Howbeit
that neuertheles wee reserue vnto thē
their actions againste the professors and
holders of the sayd offices, for the paymēt
of suche summes as were agreed vpon betwixt
them for the same resignations. And
as towching those whome priuate persons
haue driuen by force to resigne their
roomes & offices. We giue leaue to them
and to their heires, to make sute by order
of Lawe, as well against them that haue vsed
suche force, as against their heires and

successors.
            
            
               XXV.
               AND if any commaundaries of the order
of S. Iohn of Ierusalem, belonging to
the Catholicks confederate, or to those of
the foresayde Religion be found to be seazed
by the auctoritie of our Iudges: or if by
occasion and vnder pretence of the troubles,
they haue in any wise bin dispossessed
of them by other persons: we or dayne also,
That full and whole surrender of them be
made vnto the sayde Cōmaunders, & that
they shalbe set ageine in the same state and
possessiō of their Cōmmaūdaries, wherin
they were before the 24. day of Aug. 1572.
            
            
               XXVI.
               And as touching those as well of the
Catholicks confederate, as of the sayd Religion,
whiche were prouided of offices &
were not yet admitted vnto them: It is our
will and pleasure, That they shall be receaued
into those rowmes, & that all necessary
furderances therin should be ministred
vnto them out of hande.
            
            
               XXVII.
               LIKEWISE oure will and pleasure is,

that the sayd Catholicks confederate shall
enter againe into the former possession &
inioyment of their benefices, whiche they
had before the sayd xxiiij. day of August:
& that all such as haue taken vp & inioyed
the frutes of the sayd benefices belonging
to the Catholicks confederate, vpon their
owne priuate authoritie withoute commaundement
or graunt from vs, shall bee
driuen & constreyned to yeeld them vp &
to restore them backe ageine.
            
            
               XXVIII.
               AS for all controuersies concerning the
fines & raunsomes of suche as haue bin taken
prizoners on either parte during these
troubles: we reserue them to ourselues &
to our owne person, prohibiting the parties
to commence sute thereof any where
else than before vs, and also forbidding all
our Officers and Magistrates to call any
courte vpon those caces, or to take vpon
them any iurisdiction, intelligence, or information
of the matter.
            
            
               XXIX.
               THE Proclamations, bills, and extents
for the sales of heritages that are sewed by

decree, shall be made and set forth in places
and howres accustomed, if it may bee,
according to our Lawes: or else in open
markets if there be a market where the inheritances
lye: or if there bee none, they
shall be made in the nexte market that is
within the diuision of the hundred where
the adiudgement ought to be made. And
the billes shall be sticked vppon a poste in
the sayde marketsteds, and at the entrie of
the mootehall of the same place: & so shall
the sayd Proclamations be good & auaylable,
& passe on to the prefermēt of the decree,
without staying for any barre in lawe
that may be alledged in that behalfe.
            
            
               XXX.
               THE purchaces which the Catholikes
confederate, or those of the said pretended
reformed Religion shall haue made, by
authoritie of any others than of vs, for vnmoueable
possessions belonging too the
Churche, shalbe voyde and of none effect,
And it is our ordinance, will and pleazure,
that the said Ecclesiasticall persones shall
incontinently and without delay reenter,
and be mainteined in reall and actuall possession

and inioyment of the said possessiōs
so alienated, without rendering the price
that was paid for them, notwithstanding
the said bargaines of sale, which wee haue
broken & reuoked as frustrate in this case,
sauing that the buyers may haue recours
ageinst those too whom it shal apperteine.
And yit neuerthelesse, wee will graunt out
our letters patents of permission to those
of the said Religion, to charge and indifferently
to lay vpō them the summes whervnto
the said Sales shall amount, that the
buyers may be repayed the mony by them
truly and without fraud disbursed, howbeit
that the said purchacers shall not commence
any action for their domages and
losses by their forgoing of the said possessions,
but content themselues with the repaiment
of the monny which they laid out
for the prizes of the said purchaces, reckening
the frutes by them receiued, as parcell
of the price, if the sale be found too
haue bin made too cheape and too farre
vnder foote.
            
            
               XXXI.
               ALL disinheritings or dispossessings,

bee it by conueyance in life time, or by last
will and Testament, done in hatred of religion
or of the troubles, shalbe void as well
in respect of time past, as in respect of time
to come, so as they shall not preiudice the
Catholikes of the Vnion, nor yit those of
the pretended reformed Religion: prouided
that there bee none other cause than
the doings of the same Religion, and the
bearing of armes. And our meaning is also,
that the like be performed in respect of
the disinheritings and dispossessings done
in hatred of the catholike Religion. Neuerthelesse,
the last willes and Testaments
of souldyers, that haue bin made during
the present and former troubles, as well on
the one part as on the other, shall stand in
full force and strength according too the
order of Lawe.
            
            
               XXXII.
               THE disorders and outrages committed
the xxiiij. of August and the dayes next
following, at Paris and in other Cities and
places of our Realme, happened to our
great greef and misliking. Wherfore, too
shew our singular goodnesse and wel meaning

towardes our subiects, bee it knowen
that the widowes and children of all such
as were slaine the same dayes, in what part
of our Realme so euer it were, shalbee exempted
from contribution of any impozitions
that shalbee made by reason of lands
holden in Cheef or by Knights seruis, (if
the husbands or fathers of them were noble.
And if their husbands or fathers were
of the third state, that is too say of the comonaltie,
and therfore taylable: Wee for
the foresaid consideracions doo discharge
their wiues and children of all tallages and
impozitions vtterly, for and during the
space of six yeeres next following: forbidding
all and euery of our officers too leuie
any thing of them in preiudice of this our
present will and intent.
            
            
               XXXIIII.
               ALSO we doo it too bee knowen, that
all sentences, iudgements, arrests, processes,
seizures, attachements, sales, and decrees,
made, giuen, and done ageinst those
of the pretended reformed Religion, as wel
liuing as dead, since the decease of the late
king Hēry our most honorable Lord & father,

by occasion of the said Religion, and
the turmoyles and troubles thervppon insewing,
toogither with the executions of
the same iudgements and decrees, are and
shal from hensforth stand reuersed, repealed,
and adnichilated: and wee ordeine that
they shalbee razed and put out of the Registers
and Courtrolles of our Courtes as
well cheef as inferiour. Likewize wee will
that all signes, tokens, and monuments of
the same executions, and all bookes and
actes of diffamation made ageinst their
persones, names, and posterities, bee vtterly
taken away and defaced: and that whersoeuer
there haue bin any pulling downe,
breaking, or razing of things vppon occasion
aforesaid: the same shalbee made vp
and set in their former state, so as the owners
of them may inioy them, and dispoze
of them at their pleazures. The like doo we
will and ordein too bee done for the Catholikes
Confederate, & namely in respect
of the iudgementes and verdites giuen ageinst
the Lords of Molle, Coconas, and
Hay the Lieuetennāt general of Poyctou.
And generally wee haue reuersed, repealed,

and disanulled all processes and informations
made for any maner of attempts,
offences, and pretended crimes of high
treazon or others: so that as well the sayde
Catholicks confederate, as also they of the
Religion, and their heires, shall enter agein
intoo reall and actuall possession of all and
singular their goods, notwithstanding any
reunion, incorporation, confiscation or
forfeiture, conteined in the said processes,
decrees and iudgements.
            
            
               XXXIIII.
               AND to the intent that by the meanes
of our foresaid declaration, all sentences
& iudgements giuen ageinst the late Lord
of Chastilion Ammirall of Fraunce, and
the executions of them may stand void &
of none effect, as things neuer doone nor
come too passe: Wee according too the
same declaration do will and ordeine, that
all the said sentences, iudgments, proceedings,
& actes done ageinst the same Lord
of Chastilion, shalbee razed, defaced, and
put out of the registers of record, as well of
our Courts of Parliament, as of all other
our courts of Iustice: and that as well the

memoriall of the said Ammirall, as also his
children, shall continew vnappaired in
their honour and lands in that respect, notwithstanding
that the said sentences and
decrees import reunion and incorporation
of the said landes too the demeanes of
our Crowne, wherof wee wil cause a more
ample and speciall declaration to be made
too his said children, if they thinke good.
            
            
               XXXV.
               WE will the like to be done on the behalfe
of the Lordes of Mountgommery,
Mombrun, Briquemault, & Cauaignes.
            
            
               XXXVI.
               WE forbid the making of any solemne
processions, as well in respect of the death
of our late cousin the Prince of Condie, as
in respect of the iorney of S. Bartilmewe,
and of all other dooings that may renewe
the remembrance of troubles.
            
            
               XXXVII.
               ALL Processes made, & all iudgmēts &
sentences giuen against those of the Religiō,
bearing armes, or being absent out of
the Realme, or hauing withdrawen themselues
out of the cities and contries therof

where they dwelt, for any other matter thā
the sayde Religion and troubles: togither
with all barres of pleaes, and all prescriptions
as well by lawe & order as by custome,
and all seizures of fees, & excheats & lapses,
happened, doone, or taken during the
present and former troubles, shal be esteemed
as vndoone, vngiuen, & vnhappened,
& suche haue we declared and doo declare
them to be, vtterly disanulling them, so as
the aduersarie parties cannot in any wise
help themselues by them: insomuch that
althoughe the professers of the reformed
Religion haue bin hearde, and haue made
their defence by their Proctors or Attorneys,
yet shall they bee set againe in their
former state, notwithstanding the sayde
iudgements and the executions of them:
and the possession shall bee giuen them againe
wherein they were, as in respect of
the things done the xxiiij. of August. 1572
And the aboue mentioned ordre shal take
place likewise for the Catholikes of the Vnion,
since they tooke armes or absented
themselues out of the Realme by occasion
of the troubles, and for the children vnder

age of the same sort whose fathers are dead
during the troubles. Also wee declare all
processes made, and all iudgements giuen
during the sayde time, againste the same
parties for defaults in appearance and for
outlaries, toogither with the executions
of the same iudgments, to be voyde and of
none effect: setting the parties in the same
state that they were in before, withoute
yeelding any costes or charges of the law,
or without beeing bounde too allowe any
amendes.
            
            
               XXXVIII.
               ALL prizoners that are hild in warde,
whither it be by authoritie of Lawe, or otherwize,
yea euen in the Gallies, by occasion
of these present and the former troubles,
shall be inlarged and set at libertie as
well on the one side as on the other, without
paying of any raunsome: and all bonds
obligations, & cautions passed in that behalfe
shall stand voide, disanulled, and discharged.
Yit notwithstāding, our mening
is not that the raunsomes whiche haue bin
alredie disbursed & payed by suche only as
haue bin taken prizoners in the warres,

should be redemaūded of them that haue
receiued them. But whatsoeuer else hath
bin doone & taken by waye of hostilitie or
not by waye of hostilitie contrarie to the
publike or particular ordinances of the
cheefe rulers of communalties or prouinces
that had commission, and haue not or
shall not haue bin auowed as well on the
one side as on the other, within two moneths
after the publication of this our Edict:
they may be pursewed by way of ciuill
iustice.
            
            
               XXXIX.
               ALSO wee ordayne that punishment
be executed vpon the crimes & offences
committed amōg the persons of the same
parte in the time of the troubles, truses, or
respite of warre: vnlesse the same dooings
be auowed by the cheefe Rulers of either
parte, within the same time of twoo moneths.
And as tuching the leuying and exacting
of mony, bearing of armes, & other
exploites of warre, done by priuate auctoritie
& without commission: pursute shall
be made thereof by waye of Iustice.
            
            
               
               XL.
               The moouable goods, whiche shall bee
founde in their owne nature and not haue
bin taken by way of hostilitie, shalbe restored
to the owners, if they be stil remaining
(at the publication of this present Edict)
in the handes of them that tooke them, or
of their heires: & the owners of them shall
not paye any thinge for the restitution of
them. And whereas the mouables, as well
of the Catholiques as of the professors of
the Religion, shall haue bene sould & alienated
by order of law, or by other publike
commission or cōmaundement: they may
neuerthelesse bee claimed, so the price of
them be rendred vnto the buyers of them:
doing to vnderstand, that the thing which
was done at Paris and in other places the
xxiiij. of August 1572. & in the dayes next
following the sayde xxiiij. of August, is no
deede of hostilitie.
            
            
               XL.
               AS concerning the frutes of landes &
possessions, euery man on either part shal
enter ageine vpon his owne howses and
landes, & henceforth enioy the frutes that

are gathered of this present yeare, especially
the ecclesiasticall persones: notwithstanding
all seizures and impeachmentes
done to the contrarie, during the present
& former troubles. Likewise also euery mā
shall enioye the arrerages of rents whiche
haue not bene taken by vs or by our commaundement
& graunt, or by order of Iustice,
or by commaundment of the cheefe
Rulers of either part.
            
            
               XLII.
               THE forces and garrisons, which are
or shall bee in the howses, places, townes,
and Castles, belonging to our Subiects, of
what Religion or sorte so euer they bee,
shall departe incontinently vpon the proclaiming
of this present Edict, and leaue
them free and whole, too the inioying of
the owners, as they had them before they
were dispossessed of thē. Notwithstanding
any pretence of right that cā be alleadged
by such as withholde them. For the which
pretences they may haue furder prouision,
by the ordenary meanes of Lawe, after
they haue giuen vp their saide possession.
Which thing our meaning is to haue to

take effect, especially in respect of the benefices,
wherof the incumbents haue bin
dispossessed.
            
            
               XLIII.
               ALL wrytings, papers, euidences, and
assurances which haue bin taken, shall bee
rendred and restored agein on either part,
to those whome they belong vnto, Notvvithstanding
that the same wrytings and
the Castles and howses wherin they were
layed vp, were taken and seized, either by
our speciall Commissions, or by the commaundments
of our leeuetenaunts & gouernours,
or by the auctoritie of the cheef
doers of either parte, or vnder any other
pretext whatsoeuer.
            
            
               XLIIII.
               FREE traffique and passaige shall bee
established ageine through all townes, Cities,
suburbes, bridges and passages of our
Realmes, Contris, landes, and Lordships
vnder our obedience and protection, as
well by sea, as by lande, riuers, and sweete
waters, as they were before these present
and former troubles: and all newe tolles,
taxes, and subsidies imposed by any other

auctoritie than our owne, during the sayd
troubles, shall bee taken away.
            
            
               XLV.
               ALL places, Cities, and Prouinces of
our Realme, and of all Countries, landes
and Lordships vnder our dominion, shall
vse and inioy the same priuiledges, freedomes,
liberties, fraunchises, faires, markets,
Iurisdictions, and courtes of Iustice
which they had before the present troubles,
notwithstanding the remouing of
some of the said Courtes, and all wrytings
contrary hervntoo: and the same Courtes
shalbe set and established agein in the Cities
and Townes where they were before.
            
            
               XLVI.
               AND forasmuch as wee haue heertoofore
inabled the said Catholikes confederate,
and the professers of the Religion too
inioy all maner of roomes, offices, dignities,
and charges whatsoeuer, either imperiall
or of the Cities of our Realme, and
of the Countries, landes and seniories vnder
our obedience, and to be admitted and
receiued too them indifferently: We inable
them likewise too take the charge of

Attorniships, & Syndikships of the Coū
                  tries,
Cities and places, and to bee admitted
too all Counsels, deliberations, and assemblies,
as well which go by election of
states of prouinces, as all other functions
depending vpon those things, & they shall
not be reiected or disabled to inioy them,
inrespect of their Religion or of the sayd
troubles.
            
            
               XLVII.
               THE professers of the Religion shal not
hensfoorth be ouercharged or oppressed
with any ordinarie or extraordinarie charges,
more than the Catholikes, aboue the
portion of their lands and goods. And the
parties that shall pretend themselues to be
ouerburthened, may plead for themselues
before the Iudges to whom the examination
of those caces belongeth: and all our
subiects of what Religion or calling so euer
they be, shall indifferently bee discharged
of all burthens that haue bin layed vpon
the one side or vpon the other in their
absence, whē they inioyed not their goods
by reason of the troubles: sauing that they
may not claime agein the frutes that haue

bin imployed vpon the paiment of the said
charges.
            
            
               XLVIII.
               ALSO our meening is not, that the said
Catholikes confederate, nor those of the
saide Religion, nor any other Catholickes
that dwelt in the cities and places by them
possessed & inuaded, and which were contributaries
to them, shall be sewed for the
paiment of the tallages, helps, graunts, increaces,
gables, preparations, howseholde
implements, and other impositions & subsidies
raized & layde vpon them from the
xxiiij. day of August 1572. vnto this present
time, whether it were by our cōmaundement,
or by the aduice and deliberation
of the states, of gouerners of prouinces, of
courtes of Parliaments, or others: for wee
haue discharged and doo discharge them
thereof, prohibiting all the Treazurers of
Fraunce, all the Barons of our Exchequer,
all our Receiuers as well particular as generall,
all their cōmitties, vnder officers, &
other attendants, and all the officers of our
Reuenewes, to seeke or sifte them for it, or
to trouble or disquiet them for it directly

or indirectly, in any wize howsoeuer it be.
            
            
               XLIX.
               WE protest that we take & accept our
ryght deere & deere beloued brother the
Duke of Alaunson, for our good brother:
our verie deere & intierelye beloued brother
in lawe the Kinge of Nauarre, for our
brotherinlawe & good kinzman: and our
ryght deere and welbeloued Cowsine the
Prince of Condie, for our kinzman, faithful
subiect, and seruant. Likewize also wee
hold and repute our deere & loued cowsin
Mounsieur de Dāuille Marshal of Fraūce,
and all the other Lordes, Knights, Gentlemen,
officers, townedwelllers, commonalties,
cities borowes, and the other places
of our Realme, & of the countries vnder
oure dominion, that haue followed,
succoured, ayded, & fauored them by any
maner of meanes, for our good and loyall
subiects and seruāts. And vpō the heering
of the declaration made by our sayde brother
the Duke of Alaunson, we holde ourselues
well and sufficiently satisfied & informed
of his good meening, and that
nother he, nor any of those that hilde in

with him, or intermedled themselues by any
other meanes with the matter, whither
they be aliue or dead, haue done any thing
but for our seruis. Wherfore we denoūce
all iudgements, informations, and actions
done and giuen in that behalf, too bee vtterly
void and of none effect, as things neuer
done nor come too passe: and our will
is too haue them razed, defaced, and put
out of the Registers bookes of recorde, as
wel of our Courts of Parliaments, as of all
other our iurisdictions wheresoeuer they
haue bin inrolled.
            
            
               L.
               ALSO we hold & repute for our good
kinzmen, neybours and frendes, our right
deere and welbeloued cowsins the Countie
Palatine Elector of the holy Empire,
and Duke Iohn Cazimir his sonne: and
that whatsoeuer hath bin done by them,
hath not bin done but too our seruis.
            
            
               LI.
               LIKEWIZE wee denounce that the leuying
and bringing forth of the Swissers,
and namely of the Erles of New castle and
Valangin, and of others of the Cantons

whatsoeuer they were, was not done but
for our seruis.
            
            
               LII.
               WHERAS diuers haue departed out of
this Realme since the death of the late king
Henry our most honorable Lorde and father,
for Religions sake, and for the troubles:
although their children be borne out
of this our Realme: yet notwithstanding
our will is that they shalbee taken for true
French, and as borne within the Realme,
and such haue wee denounced and do denounce
them to be: so as they shal not nede
to get them any letters of denizon, or any
other prouision at our handes, than this
present Proclamation: notwithstanding
our ordinances to the contrary, which we
haue derogate and do derogate.
            
            
               LIII.
               As well our saide brother the Duke of
Alaunson, the King of Nauarre, and the
Prince of Condie, as the said Mounsieur
de Damuille & the other Lords, Knights,
Gentlemen, Officers, Corporations of
Cities, Commons, and all other persones
that haue aided and succoured them, and

also their heires and successours, shal stand
quit and discharged of all summes of money
that haue bin leuyed and takē by them
or their appoyntments, as well of our receits
and Reuenewes, too what summe so
euer it amount, as of Cities, Commonalties
and particular persones, or of the rēts,
reuenewes, ready coyne or bullyon, sale of
moueable goods belōging to the Church
and Churchmen, and of woodsales of timber
belonging to vs, or by other fines, booties,
raunsoms, or other kindes of raizing
of mony, by occasion of theis present and
the former troubles: insomuch that nother
they thēselues, nor those whom they
did put in trust too leuie the saide monnie.
or the parties that haue deliuered it and
furnished them of it by their appointmēt,
shall not in any wize bee sowght, vexed
or molested for the same, either nowe
or at any time heereafter, but bothe they
them selues and their Deputies, shall
stand cleere of all vse and occupying of the
sayde monie: and in full discharge thereof,
they shall within fower moneths next after
the publishing of this our present proclamation

made in our Courte of Parliament
at Paris, brying in their acquitances
made either by our sayd brother, or by the
King of Nauarre, or by the Prince of Cōdie,
or by the Marshall Damuill, or by such
as haue bin authorized by them, to heere
and cloze vp their accountes, or by some
other cheefe gouerners, & cōmoners of
cities that haue had commission & charge
during the sayd troubles. Likewize the inhabitantes
of the citie of Rochell and the
rest of the commons shall bee discharged
& pardoned of all assemblies of meetings
both generall and particular, of establishment
of Iustice, policie, & orders among
them, and of all iudgments and executions
of iudgments, whither it were in matters
ciuill or criminall: and also of all acts
of hostilitie, of leuying & waging of men
of warre, of coyning of monye by the appoyntment
of their heades, of casting and
taking of ordinance & artillerie, as wel out
of our Storehowses as of their owne priuate
store, of the making of Gunpowldre
and Saltpeeter, of the taking, fortifiyng,
dismantling, and beating downe of cities,

Castles, Townes, and villages, of attempts
&enterprizes in doing therof, of the burning
and beating downe of Churches and
howses, of voyages, intelligēces, dealings,
treaties, and contracts made with any maner
of straunge Princes and Cōmonalties,
of bringing in a Straungers into the Cities
and other places of this our Realme,
and generally of all things that haue bin
done, wrought, or delt in, as well by the
Catholikes confederate as by those of the
said Religion, during the troubles present
or past, since the death of our late Lord &
father, though the same things be not particularly
expressed and specified. And our
intent is, that according too this our present
declaration, the Vidame of Charters
and the Vidame of Bewuoyre, are and shal
continew discharged: and wee discharge
them specially of the treaties and dealings
by them had with the Queene of Ingland
in the yeere 1562: certifying and assuring
our selues that they did nothing in that behalf
but for our seruis, howbeeit that no
expresse mention haue bin made therof in
the former Edicts of pacification: Condicionally

that heervpon the said Catholiks
confederate, and those of the said Religion
forbeare and desist from all the confederacies
which they haue bothe within the
Realme and without, and from hensfoorth
make not any leuyings of monny without
our leaue, nor any mustering of men, nor
any gathering of assemblies, otherwise thā
is graunted them heeretoofore, and that
without weapon: which thing wee prohibit
and forbid them, vpon peine of being
punished seuerely, as despizers and breakers
of our lawes.
            
            
               LIIII.
               NOTHER our Officers of the sayd Citie
of Rochel, nor the Mayres, Shreefes,
Bayliffes, and other inhabitāts shall be vexed,
molested, or disquietted for the Commaundments, or for the decrees fo attaching
mennes bodies as well within the
Citie as without, or for the executing of
their iudgements following thervpon, as
well in respect of certein pretensed enterprises
made ageinst the same towne, in the
mooneth fo December 1573, as also for
a shippe named the Roundell, or for executing

cuting of iustice vpon the folke wherwith
the same was manned, or for any other doings:
for wee haue fully acquit and discharged
them of the same as is said afore.
            
            
               LV.
               ALL pryzes that haue bin taken by vertue
of licences and allowances giuen, and
whiche haue bin iudged by the Iudges of
the Ammiraltie & other Commissioners
therevnto appoynted by the saide Catholikes
confederate and by those of the foresayd
Religion, shall lye deade vnder the benefite
of this oure present Edict, so as no
sute may be commenced for them, nor the
Capteines, Iudges, Officers, or any others
be in any wise troubled or molested for the
same, notwithstanding any attachements,
arrests, or seyzures, hanging vnadiudged,
but our will is that they shall haue writtes
of restitution to set them in full possession
ageine out of hand.
            
            
               LVI.
               THE Cities that haue bin dismantled
in the time of the troubles past & present,
may repayre the same ruines and dismantlings
at the costes & charges of their inhabitants

if they thinke good.
            
            
               LVII.
               SVCHE of the Catholikes confederate
and of the foresayde Religion, as haue before
these present troubles taken to ferme
any Offices, Demeanes, Gables, forreine
Imposts or other ryghts belonginge to vs,
which they could not inioy by cause of the
troubles: shall stande discharged, and wee
discharge them of the thynges whiche
they haue not takē vp by their leases since
the xxiiij. of August, 1572, or whiche they
had payed without fraude elsewhere than
into the receytes of our Exchequer: notwithstandinge
any obligations or bondes
passed by them in that behalfe.
            
            
               LVIII.
               AND forasmuch as the greeuousenesse
and long continuance of troubles within
this our Realme, haue put al things so farre
out of order, that without bringing of thē
to a staie ageine, it were vnpossible to hold
our subiects in so good vniō & agreement
as ought too bee amonge them, that they
may liue in quietnesse & reste, which hath
bin alwayes our cheefe care and indeuour:

cōsidering that to bring the same to good
passe, we coulde not tell how to do better,
than too heere the aduice of our subiectes
through all the prouinces of our Realme:
wee haue euer since our comming too the
crowne, bin mynded too call a generall assemblie
of the States, which thing (to our
greate greefe) we could not yit do by reason
of the troubles. Whereof sith it hathe
pleazed God to gyue an ende, wee continewing
still in our good and holy purpoze
to the welfare of our subiects, do denoūce
and declare how it is our will & pleazure,
that the said States shall generally be summoned
& called togither into our citie of
Bloys, there to make their appearance according
too the good, auncient, and commendable
customes of this Realm, within
sixe monethes next, accounting from the
day of the publishing of our present Edict
in our Courte of parliament at Paris: and
to the same ende shall writts expedient in
that behalfe be by vs dispatched: That vpon
our heering of the informations, complaints
and greefes that shalbee made and
exhibited to vs on their part, we may take

such ordre as wee shall see requisite and
conuenient for the welfare of our Realme.
            
            
               LIX.
               THE sayd Catholikes confederate, and
they of the foresaid Religion, shalbe bound
too cause all Garrisons too auoid incontinently
after the publishing of this our present
Edict, out of the Cities, Townes, Castles,
and hovvses which they hold, belonging
either too vs or too any priuate person,
and namely to any of the Clergie, and
them too leaue, yeeld vp, & set agein freely
in the same state wherin they were in the
time of full peace, before the present and
former troubles. Neuertheles, for certeine
good cōsiderations, we haue gyuē the said
Catholikes confederate & those of the said
Religion, the keeping of these eyght cities
insewing: that is to wit, Aiguesmortes, and
Beaucaire in Languedocke: Perigueus le
Mas de Verdune in Guyenne: Noyons &
Serres bothe the towne and the castle, in
Dolphenie: Ysoire in Awuerne: and Seyne
le graund tour and the circuite about it in
Prouince. And our sayde brother, the king
of Nauarre, the Prince of Condie, the

Marshall Damuille, and they to whom the
keping of those Cities shalbe committed,
shall promis vpon their faith and honor,
to keepe them well and faithfully too our
vse. Also there shall no gouerners nor garrisons
bee sent by vs into the other Cities
which they hold at this present, and are to
be yelded vp as is said afore, other thā such
as haue bin woont to be there at all times,
yea euen in the reigne of the late king Hē
                  ry
our Lord and father. Likewise being desirous
to eaze our subiects of all our other
Cities: we assure thē they shall haue none
other maner of Garrison nor Gouernours
than were wont too bee there in the same
time of our late Lord and father: Nother
also is it our will that there shalbee any other
garrisons in the castles, townes, howses,
or possessions belonging too our particular
subiects, of what state or calling so
euer they bee: than haue bin woont too be
there in the time of peace.
            
            
               LX.
               WE prohibite all Preachers, Readers,
and others that speake openly, too vse any
speeches, discourses, or wordes that tende

to the stirring vp of the people to sedition.
And we haue commaunded and do commaund
them to restreine themselues & to
deale soberly, so as they say not any thinge
that may not be to the instruction & edifying
of their heerers, and to the mainteyning
of the quietnesse and tranquillitie by
vs stablished in this Realme: vpon the penalties
set downe in oure former Edictes.
And we commaund our Attorneys generall
and all other our officers expresly, too
set hand vnto the performance thereof.
            
            
               LXI.
               OVR will, ordinance, and pleazure is,
that all Gouerners of Prouinces, Baylifes,
Stwardes of Courtes, and other ordinarie
Iudges of the cities of this oure Realme,
shall incontinently vpon the receyt of this
our Edict, sweare to cause the same to bee
kept and obserued, euery of them in theyr
iurisdiction: and lykevvyse also shall the
Mayres, Shreefs, Headborovves, and all other
officers of Cities do, vvither they be
continevvall or remouable from yeere to
yeere. Also vvee commaund all our sayde
Baylifes, Stevvards, their deputies, and all

other Iudges, too cause the cheefe inhabitants
of their Cities, as well of the one Religion
as of the other, to bee sworne to the
maintenance of this present Edict, within
eight dayes after the proclaiming thereof,
so as all our subiects may be put in too our
protection and safegard, and one of them
into the keeping of another. The like othe
shalbee made before the Bailiffes and Stewardes
in euery of their diuisions, by the
Lordes and Gentlemen, which shalbee
bound to repaire too them within the said
time, in their owne persons or by their Attourneys.
And as in respect of officers remoueable,
the othe shalbee renewed too
them at their seuerall enterances into their
charge.
            
            
               LXII.
               AND to the end that as wel our Iustices
and Officers, as all other our subiects may
be cleerly and assuredly certified of our wil
and meening, so as al ambiguities & douts
that may rize by meanes of former Edicts,
may be taken away: we haue denoūced &
do denounce that all other Edicts, letters,
declaratiōs, qualificatiōs, Restreints, Interpretations,

Determinatiōs, & Registers, as
well secret as made by deliberation heretofore
in our courts of Parliamēt, & all other
that may haue bin made afterward too the
preiudice of this our present Edict, cōcerning
the cace of Religion and the troubles
that haue happened in this our Realme,
are of none effect nor force: the which togither
with the derogations in them conteined,
wee haue vtterly disanulled, and by
this our present Edict do disanull, & from
hensforth do repeale, reuoke, and adnichilate
the same: expresly declaring that our
will is that this our Edict shall stande sure,
firme, and inuiolable, and bee kept and obserued
as well by our Officers and Iustices,
as by our subiectes, without stopping or
hauing any respect to aught that may bee
to the contrary, or to the derogation of the
same. And for the better performance of
the executiō of this Edict, and for the spedier
hearing of our subiectes Complaints
ageinst the incounterings therof: wee will
that our right deere and welbeloued Cousins
the Marshals of Fraunce, shall euery of
them depart into the Prouinces of his diuision,

and prouide with all speede for all
things requisite for the maintenance and
execution of the same Edict.
            
            
               LXIII.
               ALSO wee commaunde our beloued,
trustie and faithfull officers of our Courts
of Parliament, that immediately vpon the
receit of this present Edict (al other things
set apart and vpon peyne of the adnichilating
of all acts which they shall do otherwise)
they take the like othe as afore, and
cause this our Edict to be published & inrolled
in our courts purely & simply word
for woorde, without vsinge any maner of
qualificatiōns, restreynts, declaratiōs, or secret
registers, & without loking for any other
bidding or commaundment from vs.
And we commaund our Attorneys generall
to inquire thereof, & to sewe the transgressors
of this Edict immediatly & without
delaye, after the proclayminge of the
same. Likewise wee charge oure Lieuetenāts
generall & the Gouerners of our prouinces,
too cause the same to bee proclaymed
out of hande, euery of them in his diuision,
throwghout all places and iurisdictions

of their prouinces, that it may bee
kept & obserued without looking for any
notification from our courts, to the intent
that no man may pretend ignorance, and
that all meanes of hostilitie, all leuying of
monie, and all taking & beating downe of
buyldinges on bothe sides, may ceasse as
soone as is possible. And be it knowen, that
all such leuyings of monie, beatings down
of buyldinges, takinges and catchinges of
goods & cattell, and other deedes of hostilitie,
as shall be done after the sayde publication
and warning made & gyuen by our
Lieuetenants generall, shall be subiect too
restitution, punishment, and amends making.
For performance whereof, it is oure
will that they shal proceede ageinst the incounterers
of this Edict, according as the
cace shall needefullye requyre: that is
too wit, ageinste suche as shall vse force of
armes & violence in the withstanding and
breaking of this our present Edict, to hinder
the effect and execution thereof, they
shall procede by the punishmēt of death,
without hope of fauor or pardon: & as for
others whose incounteringe or withstanding

is not with force of armes or by waye
of violence, they shalbe punished with other
bodily peines, banishments, honorable
amendes, and suche other lyke, according
to the heynowsenesse of the cace, at
the arbitrement and discretion of the Iudges
too whome wee haue committed the
tryall of suche caces. And wee charge
them vppon theyr honours and consciences
in this behalfe, to proceede iustly and
vprightly as becommeth them, withoute
respect or difference of persons or Religion.
Also our wyll is, that all bandes of men
of warre, as well on horse as on foote,
whether they bee Frenchmen or Straungers,
bothe on the one syde and on the other,
(sauinge the companies of our gard,
and the ordinary garrizons vpon the fruntiers
of our Realme) shall get them away
homewarde to their owne countryes and
howses, immediatlye after the proclayming
of this our Edict in oure Courte of
Parliament, behauing themselues gently,
soberly, and with as little incomberinge of
our subiectes as may bee, and vvithoute vsinge
any force, violence, or raunsoming

vppon peyne of deathe. Finally, vve commaunde
our sayde keepers of our Courtes
of Parliament, the Chambers of our Accountes,
the Courtes of our Aydes, oure
Baylifes, Stevvardes, Prouostes, and all other
oure Iustices and Officers to vvhome
it shall apperteyne, and their deputies, to
cause this oure present Edict & ordinance
to bee read, published and inrolled in their
Courtes & iurisdictions, and the same too
maynteyne, keepe and obserue inuiolably
from poynte to poynte: that all men too
vvhome these thinges perteyne, may fully
and quietly inioye and vse the same as
they bee heere set dovvne, ceassinge and
causinge all incomberances and lettes too
the contrary to ceasse. For so is our pleazure.
In vvitnesse vvhereof vvee haue signed
these presents vvith our ovvne hand,
and cavvsed oure seale too bee set and put
thereto, that it may bee a firme and stable
thing for euer. Giuen at Paris in the moneth
of May, the yeere of grace a thovvsand,
fiuehundred; threescore & sixteene,
and the seconde yeere of our Reygne.
               
                  Signed HENRY.
               
            
            
               
               And somevvhat beneath, By the King being
in his Counsell.
               FIZES.
               And on the side.
               Visa.
               And sealed vpon a lace of red silke and greene,
vvith the great Seale in greene vvax.
               Read, Proclaimed, and Registred in the heering at
the request of the Kings Attorney generall, in Parliament
at Paris, in the kings presence sitting there,
the fourteenth day of May. 1576.
               
                  Signed, DV-TILLET.
               Likewise read, proclaimed, and inrolled in the
Chamber of Accounts, in the heering and at the
request of the Kings Attourney generall, the sixteenth
day of May. 1576.
               
                  Signed, DANES.
               THe yeere. 1576. the. 16. day of May the Edict of Pacification
hertofore specified, was read and proclaimed with
loud voyce and open crye by vs Mathurin de Beynes,
Iohn Griffon, Liphard de Canlou, Michel de Pelletier, & Steuen
Iacquet called also la Riuiere, Heraults of armes of Fraūce
vnder the titles of Orleance, Alaunson, Angolesme, Guyenne,
and Champaigne, by the expresse commaundment of the kings
Maiestie, at the marble table in the Palace at Paris, at ten of
the clocke in the morning, at the rizing of the Court: and immediatly
after age in at the same instant, in the Court of the
same Palace, in the Chastelet, in the Townehouse, & in other
accustomed places, beeing assisted by Peter Sudour, Gerault
Chauncel, Gerard Madien called also Mountaine, Frauncis

Chefdefaux, and Michel Noiret the kings ordinarie Trumpetters.
And the same proclamatiō was made afore by vs Alaūson,
Angolesme and Guyenne by the cōmaundment and in the presence
of the Queene his maiesties moother, of my Lordes the
Duke of Alaunson, the Cardinal of Burbō, the Prince of Cōdie,
the Duke de Moūtpensier, the Duke Iohn Casimire, the Duke
Memorancie, and many other Lords and Gentlemen, as well in
the place and Towne of Etigny, the Citie of Sens, & the Camp
of my said Lord the Duke of Alaunson: as in the presence of
the bands of the said Lord the Duke Casimire. Made the day
and yeere aboue mencioned.
               
                  Signed thus.

                        Orleans.
                        Alanson.
                        Angolesme.
                        Guyenne.
                        Champaigne.
                     
                  
               
               
               
            
         
      
   