
      
         
            
            
            The Way of lyfe.
            A Chriſtian, and Catholique Inſtitution comprehending principal poincts of Chriſtian Religion, which are neceſſary to bee knowne of all men, to the atteyning of Saluation.
            First delyuered, in the Daniſh language for the inſtruction of thoſe people, by Doctor Nicolas Hemmingius, Preacher of the Goſpell, and Profeſſor of Diuinitie, for the Kynge of Denmarcke, in his Vniuerſitie of Hafnia: And about three yeares paſt, (for the commoditie of others) tranſlated into Latine, by Andrew Seuerinus Velleius: And now firſt, and newly Engliſhed, for the commodity of Engliſh Readers: By N. Denham, this yeare of our Redemption. 1578.
            Imprinted at London by Richard Jones, and are to bee ſould ouer agaynſt S. Sepulchers Churche.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            To the Right woorſhipful, Maiſter Henry Sadleyre Eſquyer, Sonne of the right Honorable, Sir
                Raphe Sadleyre Knight, (one of her Maieſties, moſt honorable priuie Counſayle, and Chauncellour of her Duchy of Lancaſtre:) And alſo to Miſtriſſe Dorothy, wife of the ſaid Henry: Nicolas Denham: wiſheth the fauour of God, with the increaſe of the knowledge of aſſured ſaluation, in IESV CHRIST.
            
               
                  AMongeſt thoſe ſeuen ſpeciall Sages of the Gréeks, there was one, which béeinge deſirous to leaue to a certayne follower of his ſect, ſome ſpeciall token woorthy of remembraunce: commended vnto him (as the ſpecialleſt thing yt hée could deuiſe) this Symbole 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                (that is) Follow thou God. Wherby it is to bée perceiued, that euen the very heathens, indowed onely, with the lighte, and wiſdome of nature, and not able to pearce farther, than their reaſoninges, and argumentes taken of the viſible creatures, which they ſaw, and perceyued with their ſenſes) would ſtretch: did not only conclude, that there was a God, which was the woorkemayſter, and diſpoſer of all thoſe thinges, and that hée was immortall: but alſo that hee was to bee feared, and honoured, and the ſight, and preſence of him, to bée deſired.
            For whileſt that they conſidered, the globe, and compaſſe of the Firmament, and the earth, with all the noble, and variable furniture therof, as the Sunne, the Moone, the

Starres, and vnder them, the varietie of the other creatures in their kindes, and laſtly, the excellencie of the woorkemanſhippe of the frame of the body of man: they were induced to gather therof, this concluſion: that the woorkemayſter, of theſe thinges, was, not onely much more beautifull, and excellent, but that hee was, alſo, to bee honoured, and to bee wiſhed for, by preſence to bee inioyed. Hereof ſpronge vp many contentions, and ſundry deuiſes amonge them, concerninge the way, as well how to woorſhip him, here vpon the earth, as alſo to ſeeke ſome ſhorte, and ready meane, to come to the ſight, and beeholding of him. But notwithſtandinge, in aſmuch as they wanted the direction of him, which is the leader into all trueth:Rom. 1. they tyred themſelues in their owne fonde immaginations, and, not onely in ſteade of the true woorſhippinge of him, frequented Idolatries, moſt horrible, and execrable: but alſo, to come (as they ſuppoſed) to the ſight of him, attempted meanes, moſte pernitious, and dampnable. In ſo much, that diuerſe of them, willinge to hye themſelues apace, to bee in preſence, with that immortality: could finde no better, or readier way, then ſpeedily, to murder, and kill themſelues. Which dooinges of theirs, notwithſtandinge they were heynous, and wicked, and miſſed of the ende, and purpoſe, for which they were doone, (for this is certaine,Ihon. 3. that Hee which beeleeueth not in the Sonne of God, the anger of God doth abyde vpon him: And agayne the Apoſtle ſayth:Heb. 11. & Rom. 14. 
               It is impoſſible without fayth to pleaſe God: yet it is apparaunte thereby, what earneſtneſſe was amongeſt thē, both to ſéeke (according to their owne blinde iudgementes) what this God ſhould bee: and alſo, which ſhould bee the waye, not onely to walke, but rather to make haſte, and ſpeede vnto him. Which, if they that do profeſſe the name of Chriſt, would conſider, and but compare themſelues in theſe circumſtaunces, with theſe

men, beeinge but Heathens, and voyde, both of the true knowledge of God, the creatour, and alſo of him,Ioh. which is the onely way, and would, but ſumwhat conſiderately conferre together, the blynde diligence of the one, with (as it may bee very well termed) the diueliſh, and ſecure necligence of the other: their forwardneſſe in ſeekinge after that, which by all their toylinge, and tyringe of themſelues, they could not truely finde out, with our backwardneſſe, in not keping, and imbracing that which (without our laboures) is fréely geuen vs, and ſayed before our eyes: their feruency, in deſiringe to finde and runne the way, to that which they wiſhed for, with our coldeneſſe in walkinge the right way, which is playnely drawne foorth, and delineated béefore vs: to bee ſhorte, their perſwaſions of themſelues, by this viſible Sunne, with our dulneſſe: who, by that true, and bright ſhining Sunne, which is the brightneſſe and wiſdome of the Father, will not bee inſtructed, nor mooued: If (I ſaye) they would with ſome earneſtnes, conſider theſe things: it were not to bee doubted, but as they doo deteſt, and abhorre, the name and conuerſation of the Heathen: ſo they would loathe (in ſuch matters as ſéeme, to bée the weightieſt of all others) to bee eyther by others accoumpted, or in their owne conſciences to bee condempned, for inferiours vnto them. But, to leaue all other partes of compariſon, and onely to ſpeake of one poyncts, which concerneth our preſent purpoſe: it was taught amongſt them, and practiſed by ſuch as were of the beſt, and moſt reaſonableſt amongeſt them, as a moſte neceſſary, and principall doctrine: that they ſhoulde not alwayes heere continue, But paſſe from hence: and that there was an immortalitie of the Soule, which beeinge ſeperated by death, from the body, should, eyther, for the well, and vertuous walkeinge heere, (accordinge to their accompting of a vertuous lyfe) bee gathered into a certayne place of pleaſure,

with the Goddes, or els, for not followinge the morall preceptes in following vertues, and eſchewing vices, should not inioy the ſight of the Goddes, but should by them bee punished.
            
            This was the Summe of (as I may terme it) their naturall, and blinde religion. Thus much euen nature her ſelfe, in that her corruption, had taught them. And therefore the better to ſtirre vp their hearers, to walke vertuouſly, and with the more deſire, in that path, which they ſuppoſed to bee the right waye: they vttered, and commended vnto them, and their poſterity, many pithy, and ſauoury ſentences, as: Philoſophia continu
                     •
                   mortis meditatio, that is: the loue or ſtudie of wiſdome, is the continuall meditation of Death: And, Ad Ens Entiū ſemper contendendum, that is: Wee muſt euer bee walkeinge towarde the cheefe beeing of beeinges, (whereby is ment, God himſelf,) with infinite ſuch others, to tedious, here to be recyted, as in their bookes dayly handled, are plentifully to bee ſeene. But wee, which do beare the name of Chriſtians, which liue at theſe dayes, in which (by the great mercy of God) ſuch infinite treaſures of Heauenly wiſdome, and knowledge of Chriſtian doctrine, is powred foorth vpon vs: yea wee which haue, for their ſhadowed, and falſe, a cleare, and perfecte religion: for their crooked, and vncertayne by path, a ſtreyght and moſt aſſured highway: for wiſdome naturall, the wiſdome Deuine: for Plato, Ariſtotle, and their Schollars, the Prophetes, Chriſt, and his Apoſtles: for the doubtfull ende of the pathe, which they taught, the certayne, and aſſured ende of the way which wee are inſtucted to walke in: are yet notwithſtanding, in reſpecte of them ſo dull, and ſo careleſſe of all theſe thinges, yea, and ſo litle aſhamed of this compariſon with them: that wee are litle, or nothing pricked forward, with the conſideratiō of our more plentifull bleſſinges; litle, or nothing conſider our owne

contempt, and ingratitude: ſeeme to make leſſe accompt of Chriſt, his Apoſtles, and Miniſters, then the heathen did of Pythagoras, Plato, Ariſtotle, and their Sectaries, and diſciples: ſeeme, neyther by the promiſes of God to bée allured, nor, by his threatninges to bee feared: to be ſhort, ſeeme neither to feare to runne headlong into that path, which leadeth to deſtruction, nor to regarde to walke in that way which guideth to ſaluation. It is therfore to bée feared, leaſt that come to paſſe, in this compariſon, which our Sauiour IESVS CHRIST himſelfe pronounceth in the 12. of S. Math. comparinge, the diligence, and regarde of the Quéene of the South, in comminge from the fartheſt partes of the world, to heare the wiſdome of Salomon, with the negligence, and contempt of the Iewes: in refuſinge to bee taught by Chriſt himſelfe, comming amongeſt them: and likewiſe in comparinge the repentaunce of the Niniuites, at the hearinge of Ionas: with their obſtinacy, and rebellion, in refuſinge to heare the Sonne of God himſelfe: namely, that as hée there cōcludeth of them both: that aſwell the Queene of the South as alſo the Niniuites, béeing prophane people, and heathens: ſhall riſe in the laſt iudgemente, and condempne that adulterous, and obſtinate nation: ſo that theſe heathens, ſhall then alſo ariſe, though not to theyr own ſaluation, yet to the condempnation of thoſe, which (glorying in the name of Chriſtians) haue ſo litle regard to walke the right way of eternall ſaluation. Which way of Saluation, foraſmuch, as it hath beene, by diuerſe woorthy inſtrumentes, of the Church of Chriſt, in theſe our latter times, and ages of the world: tryed, and diſſeuered from that bypath, which leadeth to deſtruction and is (by the woorde of God, wherin that right way is ſet foorth, and offered) ſufficiently cleanſed, from all brambles, and weedes of incombraunce, which both for wante of good huſbandinge, and walkinge in, had ouergrowen,

and hidden the ſame from many: and is now at the length, made ſo playne, and viſible, that it may bee ſeene of all thoſe, which doo not wilfully eyther cloaſe vp their eyes, that they will not ſee it, or if they doo ſee it, yet will not ſuffer their foote once to treade within it: a godly man (conſidering this) may, with ſorow, and gréefe of minde, iuſtly meruayle, why there bee ſo many, which will not know it: ſo fewe, that doo regarde to know it: and why, fewer hauing found it, and beeing ſet into it, do ſo ſclenderly goe forwarde, and continue their courſe in the ſame. That wée may the better conceyue the cauſes of theſe thinges: let vs firſt conſider, wherin this waye of Saluation doth conſiſt. The knowledge therof conſiſteth, in the right vnderſtanding of theſe two thinges, namely of the Law, and the Goſpell. Wheras the Law therefore ſetteth foorth vnto vs the Iuſtice of God, and is ſet before vs, that wee may playnely ſée therein, as it were in a glaſſe, both what God requireth of vs, and alſo how weake, and vnable wée bée to fulfill the ſame, that wee ſeeinge our owne, both deformitie, and imbecillity, ſhould ſeeke for a cleanſer, and a ſtronger, that may hath cleanſe vs, and fulfill it for vs: and by this meanes to bée ledde to the Goſpell, which ſetteth foorth the ſame vnto vs: here, the firſt ſorte, hauinge beene trayned vp, and noozeled in another manner of doctrine, concerning the Lawe and the Goſpell, and hauinge not learned, the true endes, and right vſes of them, for the which they were geuen: are ſo obſtinately bente agaynſt this true knowledge of the right way, which is in them conteined: that they will ſuffer themſelues by no meanes, to bee brought, once to enter their foote into it. The ſeconde ſorte of people, are méere Athaeiſtes, and ſuch as hauinge beene alwayes full fed like Epicures, and thorowly pampered vp, with all kindes of worldly volupteouſnes, and pleaſures of the fleſh: are ſo lulled a ſleape in them, by

the ſubtilty of the Deuill, who holdeth them faſt ſnarled: that they haue no leaſure, once to bethinke themſelues, nor to regarde, eyther what GOD is, or his Lawe, and Goſpell, neyther yet, what nor where they themſelues bée, nor how they came, or for what cauſe they are placed in the worlde, nor how they ſhall departe foorth of it, nor what ſhall become of them after this lyfe, and ſo neyther paſſe for Heauen, or Hell, GOD, or the Deuill: and therefore, no woonder, though they care not, for the inquiringe, and much leſſe for walkinge in this way: beeing (as they ſuppoſe themſelues, (in ſuch a way, as there neyther is, nor can bée any better. The thirde ſorte, which doo finde it, and doo enter, and walke into it, and yet are oftentimes ſtayed, and hyndered in their courſe: are euen the moſt holyeſt in this lyfe, and the very electe of God: who hauing entred into it, and purpoſing with a good Conſcience to walke forwarde in the ſame: are notwithſtandinge oftentimes, through the malice of the Deuill, (continually warring againſt them, and ſéeking to plucke them foorth of that way, into the bypathe of deſtruction with him, and through the frailty of their own fleſh, and the continuall allurementes, and baytes of the world, are oftentimes ſo drawne aſide, and hindered, yea ſo bewitched, and dazeled: that it oftentimes ſéemeth vnto them themſelues: that they néede not ſo earneſtly, and ſo dilligently regard, to continue ſtill their walking in the ſame. Hereof it commeth to paſſe, that, (by the permiſſion of God) they béeing eyther drawne backe, or ſtayed from going forward, or pluckt for a ſeaſon beſide the way: many heynous, and horrible offences, are by them committed: which aduauntage (as long as they héedefully kept themſelues, within the limittes of the right way of Saluation) the Deuil could not haue of them. When Dauid demaūded of the Lord, Wherwithall, a young man should cleanſe his way, and the anſwere of the holy ghoſt within

him was this: By rulinge himſelfe according to the worde of GOD, was then no doubt, both mindefull of this way, and diligently troade, and walked in the ſame: but, beeing a litle ſtayed therin, hée was drawne aſide, and committed the moſt horrible offence of Murther, and Adultrie: but God hauing compaſſion vpon him, and not ſuffering him, vtterly to looſe the right way of his Saluation: ioyning his Mercy, and Iuſtice togeather, and ſending them vnto him, by the Prophet Nathan, did both mercifully ſet him in the right way agayne (after hée had repentauntly acknowledged his declining from the ſame) and alſo therwithal, iuſtly ſcourged him for his wandring & digreſſion. The lyke may bée found of Ezechias, Manaſſes, Peter, and diuerſe others: which (in reading of the holy Scriptures) are almoſt euery where to bee found, and here, for expelling of tediouſneſſe, are omitted. So that albeit, the godly man, or woman, bée ſometimes hindred in the walking of this courſe, from goinge forward, or be plucked backewarde, or ſéemeth (as it were) ſet quite beſide the way, wherby (as the examples aboue recited do declare) many horrible offences, and wicked actes, pleaſant to the Deuill, are by them committed: yet, this hope they haue lefte them: that God will not ſuffer them (with the obſtinate wicked, & careleſſe vngodly,) to periſh vtterly from the right way, but that hée will reatch forth his mercifull hand of direction vnto them: which (they hartily repentinge, and taking holde of) will ſet them in the ſtreyght, and right way agayne: wherin if they ſhall perſeauere, and continue vnto the ende: they ſhalbe ſure (as our Sauiour Chriſt himſelfe hath promiſed) to bée vndoubtedly ſaued. For, ſo hée himſelfe ſayth in Math. Hee that continueth to the ende, shalbe ſaued:
                And agayne: Continue vnto the ende, and I will geue thee a Crowne of lyfe. Thus wée ſée the diuerſity of the people, which lyue, & remaine, euen amongeſt vs which profeſſe the name, and religion

of IESVS CHRISTE, how, and in what manner they bée affected, to the knowledge of this way of eternall lyfe, and Saluation. Whereof, ſome, (by meanes of a former falſe receiued opinion déepely rooted in them) bée obſtinate, and wilfully will not learne it: ſome, are negligente and careleſſe, that they paſſe not for it: the thirde ſorte yet imbracing it, and reioyſing to walke in it: are notwithſtanding (through diuerſe, and infinite impediments, and hinderaunces) either ſtayed, or plucked back, or aſide from it: and yet notwithſtanding, by the mercy of God, are called backe againe by earneſt repentaunce, and are agayne ſet therin: wherein they walke here vpon the earth, and continue their courſe in the ſame vnto the ende, depart this life in walkinge in the ſame, and at the ende of this way, enter into the Citie of eternal reſt, and ſaluation. The true doctrine wherof, béeing in this litle Treatiſe both learnedly, and alſo clearely, & plainly ſet foorth, by this godly learned man, béeing ſuch a one, as by the iudgement, and opinion of diuerſe of the beſt learned of this our time, hath deſerued, not the leaſt cōmendacion, of the Church of Chriſt: when I had peruſed, and conferred with my fréend, I thought very méete, and profitable, to conuert into our vulgare ſpéeche, for the commodity, & comfortable inſtruction of all thoſe, to whom it ſhall pleaſe God, to geue eyes to ſée, eares to heare, hearts to conceiue, and féete to walke aright, in the ready way to lyfe, therin ſet downe, and deliuered: as in the diligente reading, and meditating of the ſame, ſhall (I hope) to the comfort & ſound inſtruction of the Chriſtian Conſcience, more playnely appeare. For, as the Doctrine therein conteyned, is, both neceſſary (and as touchinge the ſubſtaunce therof) is ſuch, that the true Chriſtian man, or woman, may not bée without the knowledge, and practiſe therof, in this life, if they deſire to attayne to the knowledge, and vnderſtanding of their ſaluation in the lyfe to

come: ſo is it (aſmuch as is requiſite therunto) both pithily, very playnely, and alſo familyarly, aſwell in plain ſpéech as eaſy Methode, ſet downe, and deliuered: & further, with good aduiſement, and deliberation handled, and diuulged. Touching the Author himſelfe, it is ſufficiently knowne amongeſt the learned, what hée is: as béeinge ſuch a one, which hath not the loweſt roome, amongſt the beſt, and moſte approoued Chriſtian writers of this our age: brought vp from his infancy, in the ſtudies, and exerciſes of learning, and godlyneſſe, notably qualified, and furniſhed aſwell with liberall artes, and languages: as principally in the ſtudy, & profeſſion of Diuinitie: which profeſſion hée hath woorthely and diligently executed (as by his owne teſtimony ſet downe in his Epiſtle before this booke, is to bée ſéene) by the ſpace, and continuance of thyrtie yeares: béeinge therunto called, by the Kinge of Denmarcke, to ſupply the place of his publique reader, and profeſſour of Diuinitic, in his vniuerſitie of Hafnia, where with great fame (as I heare) hee at this day continueth. Touching the perticuler matters, conteyned, and handled in the booke, ther are ſuch (as I haue already ſayd, and in the diligente peruſinge therof ſhalbe better perceiued) that the knowledge of them in a Chriſtian, may not bée wanting. And I doubt not but the Chriſtian reader (if hée haue any deſire to aſpire to the knowledge of Ieſus Chriſt) hauing a while buſied himſelfe therin: ſhall freely in his owne conſcience confeſſe, as much as I haue héere ſpoken. For, if hée deſire (in ſhort ſumme, and bréefely, and yet ſufficiently) the perfecte, and right vnderſtanding of the Law of God, what it is, how many, and what the true vſes therof bée, to what end it is geuē vnto men: alſo, what the Goſpell is, and to what ende it is geuen, what wée muſt neceſſarily beléeue of Chriſt, (as it is conſonant to our common fayth:) How hée is our Mediatour, Redeemer, and Sanctifier: by what meanes

hée declareth and ſetteth foorth his benefites vnto mankinde, what his benefits be toward vs: what is to be conſidered & learned of the Sacraments, aſwel of Baptiſme, as of the Supper of the Lorde: beſides diuerſe other neceſſary doctrines, of the right woorſhippinge, and ſeruice of God, of prayer, and diuerſe other places which (as I haue ſayd) in the diligent peruſing of the ſame, ſhall more euidently appeare, to the Chriſtian reader. If hee deſire (I ſay) to bee inſtructed, exhorted, or comforted, in theſe thinges, hee may here finde them, both ſoundly, & plainly expounded. All which poinctes, being by other moſt godly, & learned paſtoures of the Church of Chriſte, notably, and pithily in theſe latter times ſet abroade vnto the beholding of the worlde, to no ſmall benefit of the Congregation of Chriſt: yet by reaſon of their buckling with the aduerſaries of the trueth, in refelling their corruptions, and cauilling obiections, they were forced, to write with greater ſtile of woordes, and more Schoolelyke, whereby their woorkes became more conuenient (in ſome poincts) for ſtudentes in Diuinitie, then for the common peoples perceauerance, and Capacitie. Which things I ſpeake, not that I would dehorte any from the reading, and dilygent exerciſinge of them: yea I doo rather moſt hartely exhorte them therunto: but this I ſay, to the ende, to take away the offence, which (as I my ſelfe haue heard (ſome haue taken (though vndeſeruedly) when they perceyue thē in ſome places (for the cauſes afore recyted) to write eyther ſomewhat longer then they thinke méete, or ſumwhat more artificially then they doo conceyue. Which offence, (not geuen, but vniuſtly taken,) they ſhould eaſily let fall, if they woulde conſider the cauſes aforeſayde, which violently drew thoſe learned men, and by an ineuitable neceſſity, enforced them ſo to doo. From which tediouſneſſe, (if they will needes ſo accompte it) they

are in this ſmall treatiſe delyuered: where ſo ſundry great occaſions were not geuen to the Author: For as hée aunſwereth here but to few obiections, ſo, writinge his booke for the common ſort, hée frameth his anſweres and ſolutions, bothe ſhorte, and eaſie. Which woorke (after ſundry other learned, and fruictfull laboures written of Diuinitie, by him, which are extant, and ſet abroade in the Latin tongue:) the ſayde Author wrote, and deliuered abroad, at the firſt, in the Danish language, for the inſtruction, and conſolation of the people of that nation, and ſpecially for ſuch of them, as could not gather ye knowledge of godlyneſſe, foorth of other languages, wherein it was written: which béeing ſo written, and ſet abroad, it was, by diuerſe learned men of the ſame Region concluded vpon, for the woorthyneſſe thereof, to bée turned into the Latin ſpéeche, to the ende, that other faithfull heades, and teachers of the Church of Chriſt, ſéeing theſame, and perceiuing it to bée, both ſound, and comfortable, might the ſooner conuerte, or cauſe the ſame to bée conuerted, into their owne ſeuerall languages: and commend the ſame, to thoſe porcions of the Church, and flock of Chriſt which are to their ſeuerall charges committed.
            Which Treatiſe béeing now at the laſt, conuerted into our common language, by mée, for the cauſes aboue rehearſed: I here dedicate, and preſent (Right worſhipfull) vnto you both: beſéeching you to accept the ſame, as an argument, and teſtimony of that well willing affection, which (by ſundry your gentleneſſes exhibited, and ſhewed) you haue, deſeruedly, rayſed vp in mee. And albeit, I can not iuſtly auouche it, to bée any recompence for any parte of the ſame: neither yet doo proffer it to that ende: yet rather then I would incurre the compaſſe of that ſentence of the Philoſopher, Perit quod facis ingrato: That is loſte which is doone to an vnthankefull perſon:
                I had leiffer by proferinge that litle, that I may make

auoydaunce therof. I beſeeche almighty God preſerue you bothe, and confirme, and increaſe in you, vnto the end, thoſe good giftes of his grace which hée hath already béegun in you: and ſo illuminate you with the light of his holy ſpirit, that yée may both ſée the right way, and ſeeing it, you may haue a deſire to walke in the ſame: and that walkeing daily forwarde in the ſame, and ſo continuing vnto the end: you may paſſe, in at that gate, which leadeth from the ſourginge, and daungerous Sea of this tranſitorie lyfe, into the Hauen of perpetuall reſt, and quietneſſe, there quietly, peaceably, & ioyfully, to beholde the glorious face of IESVS CHRISTE to whom with the Father, and the holy Ghoſt, bée prayſe and dominion for euer. Amen.
            
               Your Woorships humble at commaundement: N. Denham.
                
               From London this XXV. of October, the yeare of our Redemption. 1578.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            To the Chriſtian Reader.
            WHeras in this booke (good Chriſtian Reader,) certaine faults are committed in the Printinge thereof, though they bee not many: which haue come to paſse, for want of directing the Printer, in ſome ſuch places of the written copie, which were eyther blotted, or obſcurely penned: & in reading might be ſome trouble, or hinderance vnto thee: my counſayle is, that (beefore thou ſetle thy ſelfe, to the diligent reading thereof) thou shouldeſt looke vpon theſe faultes here followinge, and as thou findeſt them here ſet downe, and noted by the Pages, & lynes: ſo thou shouldeſt turn vnto them, and with thy pen, amend them, which beeing doone, thou shalt reade it (I hope) to thy inſtruction, and comforte. I ceaſſe here to ſpeake further of the dignitie, of the woorke: wishinge thee, firſt to reade it, and then after, to reporte the dignitie therof to others: and in my ſimple Iudgemente thou shalt finde in thy conſcience, cauſe ſufficient to commend it, and thanke God for it.
            
               So fare well.
            
         
         
            Faultes eſcaped in Hemmingius his Epiſtle.
            
               
                  
                     
                        Page.
                     
                     
                        Lyne.
                     
                     
                        Faulte.
                     
                     
                        Correction.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        8.
                     
                     
                        25.
                     
                     
                        appeerations,
                     
                     
                        apparitions.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        9.
                     
                     
                        3.
                     
                     
                        Aegypticall,
                     
                     
                        Aegyptiacall.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Eodem.
                     
                     
                        30.
                     
                     
                        varitie,
                     
                     
                        varietie.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        12.
                     
                     
                        23.
                     
                     
                        Prophet,
                     
                     
                        Prophetes.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Eodem.
                     
                     
                        26.
                     
                     
                        vnifosme,
                     
                     
                        vniforme.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Eodem.
                     
                     
                        31.
                     
                     
                        althefull,
                     
                     
                        healthefull.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Faultes eſcaped in the Booke.
                  
                     
                        Page.
                     
                     
                        Lyne.
                     
                     
                        Faulte.
                     
                     
                        Correction.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        17.
                     
                     
                        13.
                     
                     
                        admoniſh,
                     
                     
                        admoniſhed.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        19.
                     
                     
                        23.
                     
                     
                        Ceremonicall,
                     
                     
                        Ceremoniall.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        22.
                     
                     
                        30.
                     
                     
                        natiue,
                     
                     
                        natiuitie.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        25.
                     
                     
                        9.
                     
                     
                        firſt,
                     
                     
                        fifte.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        28.
                     
                     
                        12.
                     
                     
                        as,
                     
                     
                        all.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        35.
                     
                     
                        27.
                     
                     
                        puniſhed,
                     
                     
                        vnpuniſhed.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        44.
                     
                     
                        23.
                     
                     
                        cleane,
                     
                     
                        cleaue.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶To the magnificent, and worthy Gentleman, excellent in wisdome, vertue & godlineſſe, Biornone Kaaes, Lord of Starupgaarde, moſt prudent Senatour of the kingdome of Denmarke, preſident for the King in the Tower of Malinogien: And to his welbeloued wife, the noble, chaſte & godlie Lady Chriſtine Nicolai Fil. Nicolas Hemmingius wiſheth grace and peace from God the father, through our Lord IESVS CHRIST.
            
            
               OF all the things which are in the worlde, there is nothing either more better, or more precious, either yet more profitable: than to know God, & his will aright, and to worſhip and reuerence the ſame. For, as this whole world is momentanie, and ſhall paſſe away: ſo in like manner the treaſures thereof, with how ſoeuer beautiful and magnificent titles they be named: Yet (to be all fleeting & falling away) dayly experience may ſhew and teache vs: vnleſſe we would ſuffer our ſelues to be blinded, or (as it were) to be bewitched of the ſame. But, to knowe God (Aright) and (hauing gotten the knowledge of him) to worſhip him aright, according to his will, reuealed in his word: that continueth for euer, and leadeth man (from the vnſtedfaſtnes of this vnconſtant world) the right way to eternall life and ſaluation. Therefore in Iohn, Chriſt ſaith:Iohn. 17, verſe. 3, 
               This is eternall

life, to knowe thee to be the onely true God: and Ieſus Chriſt whome thou haſte ſent. And in another place: What doth it profit a man to gaine the whole worlde, and looſe his owne ſoule? Therefore Dauid iudgeth aright, in Pſal. 84.Pſal. 84. where he ſaithe One day in thy courts, is better than a thouſand: I had rather bee 
                     〈◊〉
                   doore keeper in the houſe of my God, than to dwel in the tents of vngodlyneſse. For the Lord God is a light and defence, the Lord wil giue grace and glorie: and no good thing will he withholde from them, which walke in innocencie. In theſe wordes, Dauid putteth a difference betwene thoſe, which are without the church, and thoſe (whiche beeing within the Church of CHRISTE) haue the true vnderſtanding of the BEEING and VVILL of God.
            This difference, he placeth in fiue thinges, moſte ſpecially to bee remembred: by the contraries of which, both doe appeare the more euident: namely, bothe how great, the honour, and high bleſſed eſtate of the children of GOD is: and contrarywiſe, how great the miſerie and calamitie is, euen of the moſte mightie of this world, which be not citizens of the Church of God.
            The firſt good thing, and commoditie of the children of God, or of the Church is, That God himſelfe is in her as a moſte lightſome Sun. For, euen as from this viſible Sunne, there commeth vnto the worlde, Light, Heate, and Shining beames, wherby al things are quickened and cheriſhed: ſo, frō God, (which is the Sun inuiſible) there cometh vnto the Church, Light, (that is to ſay) cleere knowledge of GOD: there commeth Heate,
               1, Cor. 13. that is, affections burning with Faith, Hope, and Loue: and ſhining beames, which are the manifolde

conſolations, whereby the faithfull ſoule is releeued, cheriſhed, and comforted. This Sunne, as it riſeth to ſuch as feare God: ſo it ſetteth to the negligent, the wicked lyuer, and the careleſſe. It is therfore (with great diligence) to be taken heede of: that the godlie (through a certaine ſluggiſhnes of their owne, in hearing, or reading the word of God, wherin this Sunne brightly ſhineth) doe not ſuffer this Sunne to be, either darkened, or hidden from them. For, as this viſible Sunne, if it ſhall ſeeme to a ſicke body in his dreame, to be hid, or darkened, there is daunger (as Hippocrates affirmeth) of moſte certaine death, to the ſicke body, to be at hand; ſo, if our Sunne Chriſte be darkened vnto vs (his doctrine beeing either aboliſhed, or obſcured) not onely darcknes hangeth ouer vs, but alſo the death of the ſoule, and moſte aſſured eternall condemnation.
            Furthermore, we may heereby perceiue, the miſery of them, as many as are deſtitute of this Sunne the worde of GOD. For, they beeing blinde, doe, bothe grope in the darkneſſe of ignorance: and beeing ignoraunt of God, are ſtricken with dreadfull amaſedneſſe of minde, when ſinne ſheweth foorth it ſelfe in their conſciences. And albeit, that Conſcience ſeemeth in many, to be (as it were with an hot yron) feared, as though it were voyd of all feeling of ſinne: yet notwithſtanding it will at ſometime be wakened vp, at the leaſt in the extreame agonie of death, and will driue the miſerable ſoule into deſperation: than the whiche thing, nothing may happen vnto manne, either more heauy, or more bytter: as hauing leather, that hee had neuer beene created

and brought vnto light.
            The ſecond good thing, or commoditie of them which knowe the Eſſence and will of GOD, and yeelde themſelues obedient to the ſame, is: that God is a defence, or ſheeld vnto them, wherwith they are compaſſed, defended, and ſheelded, againſt the kingdome of darckneſſe. Of this ſheeld ſpeaketh Dauid in Pſal. 5.Pſal. 5. when he ſaith: All they which hope in thee shall reioyce, they shall euer be giuing thanks, and thou shalt dwell in them: all they which loue thy name, shall reioyce in thee. For thou Lord shalt bleſse the righteous, and with thy fauourable kindeneſse, shalt thou compaſse vs as with a sheelde. Item Pſal. 18.Pſal. 18. 
               And thou haſte giuen me the defence or sheelde of thy ſaluation, and thy right hand doth vpholde me. In this manner, it is the good pleaſure of God, that he wil not only, (with the crowne of his fauourable kindeneſſe) compaſſe his about: but alſo, will haue them to bee happie, with perpetuall bleſſedneſſe. Paule, when he writeth to the Epheſians, thus: (Take vnto you the sheeld of Faith,
               1, Tim. 1. 
               wherewith ye may quench all the fiery dartes of the wicked:) Signifying, that we are thē compaſſed about with the ſheeld of faith, when we fight a good fight, holdeing a ſtedfaſt beleefe of the doctrine, with a ſure confidence of mercy, & a good conſcience. This sheelde, foraſmuch as the enemies of God doe want: what (I pray ye) can be more miſerable then they? For in aſmuch as they be naked and vnarmed, they are not able to reſiſt the diuel the prince of darkenes: but he obteineth ful dominion in them, & throweth them headlong out of one wickednes into an other, vntill he haue brought them to vtter deſtruction.
            The third good thing or commoditie, which the

godly haue by the healthfull knowledge, and feare of the true God: is called of Dauid Grace.
            
            This Grace, is the fauour of God, forgiuing ſinne to the beleeuers, for the death of his ſonne,What this grace is. and garniſhing them with a moſt pure garment, which is, The obedience or righteouſneſſe of Chriſte:
               Roma. 5. VVhereby they are in ſuch wiſe reputed righteous in the ſight of God, as if they them ſelues had fulfilled the lawe. But they which are out of the congregation, are voide of this grace of ſaluation: and doe remaine vnder ſinne, the wrath of God, and eternall damnation, for their iniquitie.
            The fourth commoditie which they (that know and feare God) doe inioy: is called of Dauid, Glory,
               What this glory is, and wherein it conſiſteth. This Glory is, The adoption of the adopted ſonnes of GOD: The inhabiting of the holy ghoſte, and the hereditary Poſſeſsion of eternall bleſſedneſſe, by Ieſus Chriſte. But contrarywiſe, they whiche doe not knowe God, are the bondſlaues, and dwelling places of the diuell, are mooued by his ſpirit, and to eternall ignominie, are they reſerued.
            The fifth good thing or commoditie, which God (by the Pſalmiſt) promiſeth vnto the godly, is cōteined in theſe wordes: He will withholde no good thing from them which walke in innocencie. O, how great is this promiſe? It is all one as if he ſhould ſay: They which walke in innocencie, (that is to ſay) they which by faith doe yeelde obedience vnto God, ſhall be abundantly indewed with all good thinges: ſo, that they may perpetually inioy them, and ſhall neuer ſtand in feare of any euill to come vnto them. And albeit, that all the Children of God, ſhal in this world ſuffer

perſecution: yet notwithſtanding they are certaine of the good things promiſed, which heere they obtaine by hope, and in the life to come, ſhall (without all impediment) for euer poſſeſſe. But contrarywiſe, they (which haue neither learned to knowe God by his worde, neither yet to feare him according to his will: vnto them ignominies, ſorowes, and calamities, ſhall neuer be wanting: but vnto the Diuell, (whome they haue ſerued) they ſhall be thrall and ſubiect for euer.
            Heereby now euery one may eaſely vnderſtand that to be moſte true which I propounded in the beginning, namely: That of all things which are in the world there is nothing either more better or more precious, neither yet more profitable, than rightly to know the ESSENCE and WIL of God: and that this knowledge is drawne forth of the word of God, in the which word, he hath opened bothe him ſelf and his wil. But leaſt any man ſhould ſuffer himſelfe to be ſeduced by the deuill & his members: it is to bee knowne, that the worde of GOD is not any other where to be ſought, than in the writinges of Moſes the Prophetes, the Euangeliſtes and Apoſtles, whiche are beautified with the teſtimonie of the omnipotent God, which is the eternall veritie, and can not lye,Rom. 3. as Paule ſpeaketh. But ſome may obiect, or, at the leaſt thinke with himſelfe in his heart, (as many doe, although they expreſſe it not by their mouth) after this manner: If wee were certaine, that that worde were in very deede, the worde of God him ſelf, doutleſſe, it were of all things farre the moſt preciouſeſt: but, the world, for a great parte therof, is againſt the ſame, and fewe there be which imbrace it,

& feweſt of thoſe which liue according to the ſame: yea, there be alſo very many, which verely with their mouth confeſſe the ſame to be the word of God, but yet by their liues and manners (contrary to the ſame worde, whereof they doe ſo commonly boaſt) they deny the ſame. This (without all dout) is that temptation, which the Diuell breathed into our firſt Parents, whereby he alſo ſeduced them, neither doth he at this day ceaſſe with vnwearied ſtudy, by this his olde deceitfull ſubtiltie, to circumuent and deſtroy very many. It is therefore cheefely neceſſary for all Chriſtians, to haue in a readineſſe; (touching the certitude of the word of God) firme arguments & ſure demonſtrations, which (in the olde and new Teſtament) are euery where to be found.
            There be in generall two kindes of teſtimonies, by which it is cōuinced, that the doctrine of the church in the bookes of the Prophets and Apoſtles deliuered: is verely proceeded and inſpired of GOD him ſelfe. Of theſe, the firſt is, An outwarde teſtimonie: but the other is Inwarde in the heartes of eche of the godly.
            I call that the Outwarde Teſtimonie, which runneth into the ſences of men, that it may ſend to the minde,
               What the out warde teſtimonie is. 
               the brightneſſe of the Heauenly veritie. Of this, there be ſix partes, of which partes, albeit euery one by it ſelfe, might ſuffice, to euince the infallible certitude of the doctrine of the Church: yet not withſtanding it pleaſed the moſte mercifull God, by ſo many meanes to ſuſtaine our infirmitie.
            The firſte parte therefore, of the Outwarde teſtimonie is, The Diuine manifeſtation, by the whiche God him ſelfe, (proceeding from his ſecret ſeat) hath,

(with his owne voyce) reuealed his wil, touching the doctrine of the Lawe and the Goſpell. And, albeit that God hath often, and at diuerſe times manifeſted himſelf, repeating with other, & other words, the ſelfe ſame doctrine: we notwithſtanding, wil recite certaine of the more ſelected appearings of God.
            Firſt of all therefore, hee appeared to Adam after the fall, and deliuered firſt with his owne voyce, the doctrine of the Lawe and the Goſpell. For in that that he layd puniſhments vpon our firſt parentes, for their rebellion (in perpetuall teſtimonie of his anger againſt ſinners) it perteineth to the lawe: and in that that he promiſed:Gen. 3. 
               The ſeede of the woman, to crush the Serpents head, it is the voyce of the Goſpell.
            Furthermore, God appeared vnto Noah, and by a wounderful deede confirmed bothe the doctrine of the law & the Goſpel. For, when with the flood, he deſtroyed the vnrepentant: he executed the ſentence of his lawe: but when he deliuered Noah beleeuing his word, & (by faith) beeing obedient vnto him, he eſtabliſhed a teſtimonie of the promiſe of his grace reſerued, which is of the Goſpell.
            
            After the flood, GOD appeered vnto Abraham ten times, to Iſaach his ſonne twiſe: and to his Nephew Iacob, ſeuen times. In which app
                  •
               ritions, was propounded not diuers, but one, and the ſame doctrine alwayes, of the Seede of the woman, (that is to ſay) of Chriſte Ieſus our Sauiour.
            
            After theſe thinges, God appeered to Moſes in Aegypt, repeating bothe the doctrine of the lawe and the Goſpell, and with wonderfull doings confirming the ſame. For the iuſt plague & calamitie of Pharao,
               
and his miniſters, is to be referred to the Lawe: but, that glorious deliuerance of the people, with Moſes, foorth of that Aegypticall houſe of ſeruitude: is to bee referred to the Goſpell. All which things are, figures of the laſt Iudgement, wherein God will condemne the Diuell, with all his traine: and receiue to himſelf, into euerlaſting Tabernacles, as many, as with a true, and liuely faith, ſhall conſtantly cleaue vnto Chriſte.
            In the new Teſtament alſo, the ſame GOD hath ſounded his word from Heauen, and hath commended vnto vs Chriſte the teacher, with his owne mouth, ſaying; This is my beloued ſonne, in whom I am well pleaſed: heare him. As if he ſhould ſay: In time paſte,
               Matth. 3. I promiſed the Seede of the woman to cruſh the head of the ſerpent, & to repaire againe my image in man, (the curſſe of the Lawe beeing taken away) beholde, he is heere preſent, heare ye him, which hartely loue life, and ſaluation: for in him am I wel pleaſed (that is to ſay) by this my ſonne, am I reconciled to the world, that is, to all them, which (by faith) ſhall receiue him. Let vs oppoſe all theſe apparitions, with many others (in which one, and the ſame doctrine is alwayes repeated) againſt the Deuill, and all wicked Sophiſters, Mahometiſtes, vnbeleeuing Iewes, and prophane nations: and to conclude, againſt our owne prudence, and carnall wiſdome, aſcrybing vnto God alone, the praiſe of the veritie.
            The ſecond parte of the Outwarde teſtimonie is, The varitie of miracles, (that is to ſay) of the peculiare, and extraordinarie workes of God, which can not bee doone, by any creature. All theſe thinges hath God

done, that he might help our imbecillitie: that when theſe outwarde miracles ſhould preſent themſelues to our eyes, we ſhould decree in our minde, that to be the doctrine of God, which (with ſuch manner of woorkes,) as with ſeales is confirmed.
            And, albeit that theſe miracles (from the beginning of the worlde, foorth vntill the times of the Apoſtles) be innumerable: yet notwithſtanding the ſcope, and end of them all, is one: namely, that they might confirme the trueth of God, (that is to ſay) the doctrine of the Lawe, and the Goſpell.
            In the olde Teſtament are found miracles done be fore the flood, in the flood, and after the flood. Likewiſe in Aegypt, and after the gooing out of Aegypt, and in the wilderneſſe, by the ſpace of 40. yeeres. In like manner, in the time of Ioſua, of the Iudges, of the Kings, of the Captiuitie of Babylon, and of the Macchabees, vnto the comming of Chriſte: all which, did ſeale the ſame doctrine, beeing oftentimes repeated.
            The miracles alſo, of the new Teſtamēt, wrought by Chriſte, are no leſſe wounderfull: concerning which, he ſaith to the Iewes: If ye beleeue not mee, beleeue my woorkes. Cheefly this is woorthy to be conſidered, that Chriſte the third day roſe again from death, and afterwarde, in the beholding of fiue hundred breethren, did aſcend viſibly into heauen: and ſo accompliſhed the firſt promiſe made vnto Adam.
               Gen. 3. All theſe, yea or one of theſe miracles might be ſufficient for vs, that we ſhould beleeue the word of God: but it ſo ſeemed good vnto God, by the varietie of theſe, to ſuſtaine our infirmitie.
            The third parte of the Outwarde teſtimonie, is

               The moſte certaine fulfilling, (or accompliſhment) of the Prophets: which witneſſeth, that God himſelfe ſpake, by the mouth of his miniſters. For, we haue an vnmoueable foundation of our faith, when (to the foreſayings concerning the Meſſias, or Chriſte, prophecied by Moſes, Dauid, Daniell, and other Prophets) we ſee the Hiſtory Euangelicall, to aunſwere. The ſtedfaſtneſse of faith (ſaith Auguſtine) conſiſteth in this: that all thinges which came to paſse in Chriſte, were tolde of before. Heereof our faith concludeth on this manner.
            
               He alone, without all doubt, is the true, and onely Meſſias and Sauiour of the worlde, in whome alone doe meete together whatſoeuer hath beene foretolde, touching the Meſſias, by Moſes, and all others the Prophets of God.
            
            
               In Ieſus, the ſonne of Mary alone, meeteth together, whatſoeuer hath beene (touching the Meſſias) foretolde by Moſes, and all the rest of the Prophets of God:
            
            
               Therefore: Ieſus alone, the ſonne of the virgin Mary, is, (without al doubt) the Sole, true, and only Meſſias, and Sauiour of the worlde.
            
            Vpon this foundation, the Apoſtles of Chriſte, Peeter and Paule, builded the faith of the Gentiles: whiche would neuer haue beleeued in Chriſte, vnleſſe they had ſhewed them, this agreemente of the foreſayinges, and their fulfillinges in Chriſte. Touching this matter,

let the 17. Act: and 2. Peter. 1. bee reade.
            In like manner alſo, the foretellings of the Prophets (touching the moſte greeuous perſecutions of the Church, which at this day, we finde that Romiſh Antichriſt, and Mahomet, to fulfil) are extant. Heere, let vs comforte and lifte vpp our ſelues againſt the kingdome of the Pope, & the raging of Mahomet, when we confer the euent, with the Prophecies ſhewed long time before. Of the tyrannie of the Roomiſh Biſhop, and Mahomet: Ieremie, and Daniel, foreſhewed: when we therefore doe ſee theſe things to haue come to paſſe, what letteth, that we ſhould not thorowly perſwade our ſelues, that thoſe thinges ſhall come to paſſe, which are foretolde of the Aduent, or comming of the kingdome of IESVS CHRISTE, wherein, namely in the laſt day, he will appeere, and will raiſe vp all people from death, thoſe whiche haue doone good, to the Reſurrection of life: but thoſe which haue done euil, vnto the Reſurrection of damnation, as the whole ſacred Scripture, touching this matter, doth euery where moſte plentifully teach vs.
            The fourth parte of the Outwarde teſtimonie, is, the conſent of Moſes, the Prophetes Chriſte, the Apoſtles, and of the whole vniuerſall Church, in doctrine and worſhipping of God. For, all theſe, with one vniforme agreement, haue holden the ſame doctrine of The Lawe, and The Goſpell, and the ſame manner of worſhipping God. Neither hath the diuerſitie of ceremonies (which for the cōſideratiō of times, haue beene changed) troubled this agreement, one, & the ſame foundation of the true and althfehull doctrine, euery where remaining. But if this doctrine had not

beene inſpired by God, ſo greate an agreement had neuer beene in theſe Miniſters of God: whome, (both in teaching, and propounding the ſame matters, it is conuenient, that their ſucceſſours ſhould imitate.
            VVhere that thing is accompliſhed, there muſt needs be the true Church of Chriſte, and without this not elſe where.
            The fifth parte of the Outwarde teſtimoninie, is, The Induraunce, and conſeruation of the Churche, from the beginning of the world, vnto this time, and ſo farther, vnto the laſt day of Iudgement. Heerunto appertaineth that, which is in Acts. 5. when the Scribes, and Phariſes roſe vp and went together to counſaile, to ſuppreſſe the Apoſtles of Chriſte: that auncient Gamaliell, a Doctor of the Lawe roſe vp, and ſaid:Acts. 5. 
               If this counſell, or this woork, be of men, it shall be diſsolued: but, if it be of GOD, ye cannot diſsolue it. This is it which Chriſt him ſelfe affirmeth, that againſt his Church,Matth. 16. 
               The gates of Hel shall not preuaile.
            
            The ſixth parte of the Outwarde teſtimonie, is, The bloody confeſſion of many Martyres, from Abell vnto this preſent day. For, they are called Martyers, becauſe they beare witneſſe to the trueth of the Heauenly doctrine, not onely with their mouth, but alſo with their blood. A matter worthy to bee remembred, is reported of Ignatius the Scholer of Saint Iohn: that, when at a certaine time, the Tyrant would by threatnings haue conſtrayned him to deny Chriſte, hee anſwered: How can I deny him, whoſe name I doe beare written in my heart? VVhich thing beeing heard, the Tirant commanded the body of Ignatius, to be cut in ſunder, and the heart beeing taken out, to be deuided

into ſmall peeces: which thing when it was accompliſhed, in euery peece ſo cut of the heart, the name of Ieſus was found manifeſtly diſcrybed.
            The other kinde of teſtimonies, wherby the certaintie of the doctrine of the Church is confirmed, is: The inwarde certification (or aſſurance made) by the holie Ghoſte, ſealing the heartes of faithfull people, touching the veritie of the Goſpell. Of this thing, Paule 2. Cor. 1. ſpeaketh: It is God (ſaith he) which hath annointed vs, and ſealed vs in Chriſte, and hath giuen the earneſt of the ſpirit in our heartes. This Certification, the godly doe feele, cheefely, in feruent & earneſt prayer vnto God. For, when Prayers doe proceede from a true faith: we feele in our heartes the anſwere of God, whereby we are made the more aſſured of the diuine promiſes.
            Hetherto, I haue numbred breefely, the teſtimonyes whereupon, as vpon foundations, the vnmouable certaintie of the Chriſtian doctrine, is ſtayed. God graunt, that theſe things may be effectually confirmed in the mindes of He vſeth this phraſe of ſpeeche as S. Paule doth when hee ſaith, Many became ſinners. Rom. 5. many, that they wauer not any more, but that they may dayly, more, and more abound, in all ſence, and knowledge. This word of God, beeing by ſo ſure teſtimonyes approued: God hath commaunded to be ſpread abroade, through the whole compaſſe of the world, and by the Miniſterie of the ſame, gathereth out of all mankinde, a Church vnto himſelfe: which (through Chriſte) he hath predeſtinated to eternall life and ſaluation.Ephe. 1. & 5. It, therefore becommeth godly Magiſtrates, to promote this ſelfe ſame worde, that it may be purely, and ſincerely deliuered in Schooles, and Churches, and ſet ouer to the poſteritie. The charge whereof, when the moſte

godly, and wiſe Princes, and Kings of Denmark, perceiued to appertain vnto them: they founded this noble vniuerſitie of Hafnia, and moreouer enriched the ſame, with moſte bountifull ſtipendes: that in the ſame, they (which in deliuering the pure doctrine of the Goſpel, might in time to come, with fruite, ſerue their countrie) might be inſtructed and learned.
            I, beeing called vnto this Vniuerſitie, that with my laboures, I might aſſiſt the ſtudyes of Learners: foraſmuche as I had hethervnto, bothe with liuely voyce taught, and alſo committed to open monuments of letters, many things of the moſte ſacred diuinitie, in Lattin: it ſeemed good to me now, by this writing, ſet foorth in the common language, to ſet forwarde the ſtudyes of godlineſſe in them, whiche are ignorant of the Lattine ſpeech. I haue drawen together, into this litle boke, out of the writings of the Prophets, and Apoſtles, all thoſe things which are neceſſary to be knowne of a Chriſtian man to the atteyning of ſaluation. And I will, this ſame little booke to remaine in place of my confeſſion of euery article of the Chriſtian Religion, which hetherto, about the ſpace of 30. yeeres, I haue, in the Church &, Schoole of Hafnia, openly propounded.
            That it hath ſemed beſt to me, to eſtabliſh the ſame (moſte woorthy Gentleman) vnder your name: that thing is doone, that I might declare my ſelf to be mindeful of very many benefits, which haue beene by you, to mewards perfourmed, theſe 21. yeeres now together, from that time, wherin, that magnificent, and gentle Gentleman your brother Nicolas Kaaes, was firſt committed to my fidelitie, and diſcipline.
            
               I beſeeche God, that for his only begotten ſonne our Lorde IESVS CHRISTE, he will conſerue the puritie of his worde, in this Kingdome of Denmarke, to the glory of his name, and the ſaluation of many: and that, with his holy ſpirit, he would gouerne the indeuours of thoſe which, either in the eccleſiaſticall, or politicall eſtate, which ſhall go about to ſet forewarde his Goſpell: that the kingdome of the Deuill beeing deſtroyed, the Temple of Chriſte, may in our hearts be builded, Amen. That ye alſo, (by the fauour, and goodneſſe of GOD) may long time be preſerued ſafe, and in good health, I wiſh of God from my whole heart, through Ieſus Chriſte our Lord.
            
               
                  From Haffnia 
                     the feaſt day of Martin, in the yeere of our Lord. 1570.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A CHRISTIAN AND Catholike Inſtitution, comprehending, principall pointes of Chriſtian Religion, which are neceſſarie
                to be knowen of man, to the attayning of ſaluation.
            
            
               
                  THe Princely, and diuine Prophete Dauid, in the 119. Pſalme, (ſheweth, that al mankind is ſo blinded with the darckneſſe of ignorance, that he cannot perceiue the right way of ſaluation, vnleſſe he bee, of God himſelf, by his healthfull worde, brought into this right path,) in theſe words: Thy word is a Lanterne vnto my feete: as though he would ſay, euen as without thy word (O LORD) I muſt of neceſſitie goe aſtray: ſo by the benefite of thy word, (whiche I eſteeme to be as a Lanterne to me, to my ſaluation) I tread the right way, and as long as I followe this light going before me, that is to ſay Thy worde, I cannot goe aſtray or be deceiued. Which thing happeneth alike to al other people in the world. For which cauſe alſo they are not amiſſe compared vnto ſtraying Sheepe, which wandring farre from the Shephearde, & ſheepfolde, muſt (if they will be brought back againe) heare the voice of their Shepheard, and (as a

burning light) followe the ſame.
            Foraſmuch therfore, as I haue determined, in this preſent writing, to diſpute of the VVay of Saluation, it ſeemeth good vnto mee, firſt of all, to followe this counſell of Dauid, and to ſhewe foorth this healthſome Lanterne, whiche leadeth all people into eternall ioy, and ſaluation, as many as perſeuering vnto the laſt hower of death, ſhall followe the ſame, going before them. And becauſe this ſame Laterne, whiche we call The worde of God, is diuided into two partes, namely into the Law and the Goſpel: I will in the beginning ſet downe a text out of the 22. Chapter of S. Matthew, which, (as it were in a Tableture) ſhall ſet before our eyes, theſe two kindes of doctrines, which are moſte ſpecially needefull to be knowen, vnto ſaluation. Moreouer I will in ſuch wiſe declare theſe two principall fountaines, with the other articles comprehended vnder theſe, (particularly, but yet ſomewhat plentifully & plainely,) that nothing at all may be let paſſe, which is behouefull for them to knowe, beleeue, or doe, which deſire to be made partakers of eternall ſaluation.
            
               The wordes of the Euangeliſt are theſe.
               
                  Matth. 22.
               
               
                  THE Phariſes (hearing that he had put the Saduces to ſilence) they came together, & one of them, a certaine Doctour of the Lawe,
                  The queſtion of the Phariſie. 
                  aſked him a queſtion, tempting him, and ſaying: Maiſter, which is the

greateſt commaundement in the lawe?
                  The anſwere of Chriſte. 
                  IESVS ſaith vnto him, THOV ſhalte looue the LORDE thy GOD, with all thy hearte, and with all thy minde, and with all thy ſoule: This is the firſte, and the greateſt commaundement, and the ſecond is like like vnto this: THOV ſhalt loue thy neighbour as thy ſelf: In theſe two commaundements hang all the LAW, & the PROPHETS. VVhilſt the Phariſes were gathered together, Ieſus asked them ſaying,
                  The queſtion of Chriſte. 
                  what think ye of CHRISTE? whoſe Sonne is he? They ſay vnto him, The ſonne of DAVID:
                  The anſwere of the Phariſies. 
                  He ſaith vnto them, How then doth Dauid in ſpirit call him LORD ſaying, The Lord ſaid vnto my Lorde, Sit thou on my right hand, vntill I make thine enemies thy footeſtoole: If Dauid therefore cal him LORD, how is he then his SONNE? And no man was able to aunſwere him any thinge, neither durſt any man from that day foorth, aske him any moe queſtions.
               
            
            In this text of the Goſpell recited, are contained two queſtions, moſt cheefe and weightie of all others, which may be brought forth of the ſcripture, touching the attayning of ſaluation.
            The firſt queſtion is propounded by the Phariſies, the other by our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte.
            
            The Phariſies, through notable malice of hart, and vnmeaſurable hatred, wherwith they purſued Chriſte, doe mooue a queſtion concerning the lawe, and demaund of Ieſus, which is the greateſt commaundement in the Lawe: for in aſmuch as Chriſt condempned the Phariſies, which eſteemed them ſelues to liue according to the lawe, and would bring in Baptiſme, whereof

there was no mention made in the Lawe: they thought that he would ſpeake ſomthing, raſhly againſt the Lawe of Moſes, that they, (by this meanes) might haue occaſion to accuſe him, and take him out of the way.
            
               CHRIST, on the other ſide, hauing cōpaſſion on the great blindenes of the Phariſes, aſketh thē, what they thought of Chriſt, & whoſe ſonne he is? and that thing he doth, with this intent, that an occaſion might bee giuen him, wherby he might inſtruct, and teach them forth of the Scripture, what they ſhould eſteeme of Chriſt, (that is to ſay) of him, whom God promiſed to Adam, Abraham, and the reſt of the holy fathers, to be the Sauiour of the worlde.
            Furthermore, that theſe queſtiōs of the Law, and of Chriſte, may the more cōmodiouſly ſerue vs to the furtheraunce, & inſtruction of ſaluation: I wil chuſe frō hence three doctrines, which (the grace of GOD aſſiſting) I will declare in order.
            
               
                  
                     FIRST, of the cauſes, by whiche the Phariſies beeing mooued go about to take Chriſte out of the way, and what crafts they vſe, to bring this wicked purpoſe to effect.
                  
                  
                     SECONDLY, of the true vnderſtanding, and vſe of the Lawe.
                  
                  
                     THE THIRD, of CHRISTE, namely, what we ought to eſteeme of him: And howe wee obtaine ſaluation through him.
                  
               
            
            
               
               The firſt Doctrine.
               
                  THE IEVVES, and cheefly the Phariſes, went about this thing with great indeuor,Matth. 22. 
                  That they might tangle Chriſt in his wordes, & being caught, they might quarell with him, and, at the length deliuer him to death. Behold therfore how great the diuerſitie of minde is of the one towards the other, in Chriſte & in the Phariſes. IESVS ſought this only thing, yt they beeing deliuered from ſin, he might ſaue them: but the Phariſes craftely catch his words, wherby they might accuſe, and oppreſſe him. This waywardnes of mindes is at this daye (alas for ſorowe) found in many, which perſecute thoſe, which wiſh well vnto them, and ſhew them ſelues very carefull of their ſaluation. But wherof commeth this ſo fyery and inſatiable hatred of the Phariſes towarde Chriſte?
               
                  CHRIST reprehended their great & manifolde ſinnes, namely, Arrogancie, Hypocriſie, Couetouſnes, & erronious Doctrine, wherby they led awry both them ſelues & others. Arrogant, and proude people, are of ſuch malice of minde, that they take it greeuouſly, that they ſhould be admoniſhed, & do with great contention perſecute thoſe, which dare be ſo bold as once to miniſh or hinder their falſe conceiued opinion of the great eſtimation of thēſelues. Wherfore it is the leſſe to be meruailed, that theſe ſo proude & arrogant Phariſies doe with hatred perſecute Chriſte: which euery where, and continually, tolde them to their teeth, and condempning them, obiected

vnto them, this their filthy pride: eſpecially whē as they in the meane time, conſidered not, that this was doone of Chriſte, for their profit, and ſaluation. But, foraſmuch as theſe are Hypocrites, which repute thēſelues to be righteous before God, and man, albeit they bee inwardly filled with all filthyneſſe and malice, yea altogether like vnto dead mennes graues, whiche although they ſhewe outwardly whited, and garniſhed, yet inwardly they abounde with poyſoned, and abhominable filthyneſſe: therfore, they doe not gladly ſuffer thoſe, whiche reprehende, and condemne them of ſinne. And, for this cauſe theſe Hypocrites, will not graunt vnto Ieſus Chriſt this glory, (That he alone is righteous, and that whoſoeuer wil be made righteous, doe obtaine the ſame, by this our onely Lorde Ieſus Chriſte. Therefore, in the 21. of S. Matthew, Chriſte ſaith vnto them: Publicanes, and ſinners, ſhall enter into the kingdome of God, before you.
               
               Moreouer, if you inquire, why theſe things be ſo? the cauſe is in a redyneſſe: for Hypocrites doe preſume, that they are without all ſinne, and truſt to their owne righteouſneſſe whiche they haue not: but Publicanes, and ſinners doe knowe and confeſſe them ſelues to haue ſinned, and to haue no righteouſneſſe of their owne, wherby beeing vpholden, they may make their boaſt. When they therefore doe heare ſinne reprooued, they doe foorthwith very eaſily (in compariſon of the Hypocrites) acknowledge their ſinnes, and imbracing with ioy the preaching of

grace, doe repent, forſake the conuerſation of their former life, conuert them ſelues vnto God, by faith in Ieſus Chriſte, & bring foorth fruites of faith. An example of this thing is to be ſeene in Luke Chap. 18. in the Publicane, & the Phariſie, of the which two, the Publicane ſtanding in the Churche afarre of prayed: the Phariſie with great pride boaſted of his owne righteouſneſſe. Likewiſe Luke 7. In Simeon that hooſte of Chriſte, and in that ſinfull woman, whiche, there hauing waſhed the feete of Chriſte with her teares, wiped them with the heary lockes of her head.
               This waywardneſſe is moreouer very like vnto couetouſneſſe, for that it ſuffereth it ſelfe to be reprehended of no body, but indeuoureth to couer it ſelfe, with the cloke of wiſdome, ſedulitie, and ſparefulneſſe: when as notwithſtanding it is in very deed, (as Paul teacheth) meere Idolatrie: for, the couetous man repoſeth more hope, in theſe momentanie goods of the world, than in the liuing God. Therefore, it is not to be meruailed, that the Phariſies hated Chriſte, and with all their power perſecuted him, which iuſtly reproued their wicked couetouſneſſe, and execrable Idolatrie. That Chriſte alſo did in like manner reprehende their errours about the heauenly doctrine, neither did they take yt with quiet mindes: For they dreamed that the keyes of wiſdome, were in their powers alone, wherewith, euery of them ſuppoſed, that he might open, and ſhut vp heauen at his pleaſure: wheras

they notwithſtandinge were, in the meane time, voyde, both of the true vnderſtandinge of the Lawe, and of the true knowledge of the Meſsias: this their blindeneſſe, they could at no hand ſuffer, to bee reprooued of Chriſte.
               
               
                  LASTLY. The Phariſes toke this thinge alſo greeuouſly in Chriſt: that hee not onely reprooued them of their owne wandringe out of the way: but that they alſo, (through their erronious Doctrine) did leade other awrye, from the true ſhepheard, and way of Saluation.
               Of theſe ſo great offences, Chriſt accuſed the Phariſes, that either (amending themſelues) they might bee ſaued: or els (continuing in their ſinnes,) they ſhould looke for, both here in this worlde, the iuſte puniſhmentes of God: as alſo after this life, euerlaſtinge dampnation. But, howe did the Phariſes take theſe thinges of Chriſte? Euen altogeather after the ſame manner, as a madde man is affected agaynſt him: which goeth about to delyuer him from his diſeaſe, and madneſſe. For, euen as a man diſtraught of minde, doth with feete, nayles, and byting, enemylike aſſayle him, which laboureth to laye medicinable handes vpon him: ſo the Phariſes with handes, and feete applye to this thinge: that they maye ſclaunder Chriſte, and take him out of the waye: and therfore they ſolempnely ſent their meſſengers thriſe vnto him, the tueſday next beefore they crucifyed him. In the firſt Embaſſage were the Phariſes, with the Herodians, which demaunded whether it

were lawfull to giue tribute to Caeſar, or not? And that thing they doe with this intent, that if Chriſte did affirme the queſtion propounded, the common people might forſake him, and ſo it might be eaſily lawful, to deliuer him to death: but if he did deny it, he might fal into the hands of Herodes ſeruaunts, who hauing taken him, might kill him as a ſeditious man: But in vaine doth the craftineſſe of man wery it ſelfe, againſt the wiſdome of God. Chriſte anſwereth neither affirmatiuely, nor negatiuely, but the coyne being ſhewed by them, he ſaith, whoſe Image, and inſcription is this? They anſwered him Caeſars: And hee ſaid vnto them: Giue vnto Caeſar, the things which are Caeſars, and vnto GOD, thoſe things whiche are Gods: ſo, that of this anſwere of Chriſte, neither ye 
                  Herodians, nor the common people found, why they might iuſtly be offended.
               
                  THE SECOND Embaſſage was of the Saduces, which deny the reſurrectiō of the dead. Theſe men thought that (out of the doctrine of Chriſte, teaching that all people ſhould riſe againe in the laſt day) they might inferre ſome abſurditie, in this maner: There were (ſay they) with vs ſeuen bretheren, and the firſte hauing maryed a wife, deceaſed: and hauing no ſeede, left his wife vnto his brother: likewiſe the ſecond, and the thirde, vnto the ſeuenth: laſte of all the woman alſo dyed: In the reſurrection therefore, whoſe wife ſhall ſhe be of the ſeuen?
               They ſuppoſed now that Chriſte would appointe

her either to one of them, or to al of them together, whiche if hee had doone, they would haue cryed out, that ye coulde not be conuenient, for the coutentions, hatreds, and abhominable filthyneſſes, that would followe therof. By this way, they hoped, that they ſhould confute the doctrine of Chriſte, & to deliuer Chriſt to iudgement,Matth. 22. as gilty of vntruth, to be puniſhed. Let vs heare what Chriſt anſwereth vnto them: Ye erre (ſaith he) not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God and are ignorant what is the difference to come, betweene the condition of this life, and of the life euerlaſting. In theſe words Chriſte ſheweth three cauſes of the erronious Doctrine of the Saduces.
               
               
                  THE FIRST IS, that they knew not the Scriptures, which alone teacheth vs to try the trueth, from falſhod, in all thoſe matters, which concerne the buſineſſe of ſaluation. Therefore Dauid faith,Pſal. 119. 
                  Thy word is a lanterne vnto my feete.
               
               
                  THE SECOND CAVSE, that they knewe not the vertue and power of God, by the which, he was able as eaſily to raiſe vp ye dead, in the laſt day, as it was not hard to him, to create all things, of nothing, in the firſt day. Therfore, when we thinke vpon the reſurrection of the dead, reaſon is not to be admitted into counſail, which is onely occupyed about theſe corporall things: but we muſt looke back to the ſcripture, and knowe that nothing is impoſſible before God, the omnipotent creator of all things.
               
                  THE THIRD CAVSE of the error of

the Saduces, Chriſte aſſigneth to bee this, that they did not conſider the difference of the condition of man in this worlde, and in the life eternall. In this life there is neede of wedlock: but in the life eternall they ſhal neither mary nor be maryed: for they ſhalbe as the Angels of God, in heauen. And the loue of the other life, doth by a thouſand degrees excel the loue of this world, yea, that will darken this: euen as the ſunne riſing in the morning, taketh away the light from all the other ſtarres, and alone with his owne brightneſſe lightneth the world.
               
                  THE THIRD EMBASSAGE was of the Iewes, beeing made vnto Chriſte the very ſame day: this is the ſame, whereof the preſent text of the Goſpell maketh mention.
               
                  VVhen the Phariſes had heard that Ieſus had in this wiſe ſtopped the mouthes of the Saduces,
                  Matth, 22. 
                  they came vnto him, and asked him which was the greateſt comaundement in the Lawe?
               
               That was doone of them, not becauſe they would learne, but that they might haue ſome occation to deſtroy him. For they thought thus with them ſelues: becauſe this fellowe bringeth in Baptiſme, and accuſeth vs, which liuing according to the Lawe, doe boaſt our ſelues to be righteous by the woorks of the Lawe: ſurely, and without al doubt he contemneth the Law, and doth far leſſe eſteeme it thē his Baptiſme which if he doe, there wil lye a iuſt action for vs againſt him, as againſt one blaſphemouſe againſt God himſelf, as one which hath the law

of God, in no eſtimation, which the Lorde him ſelfe gaue vnto vs by his ſeruaunt Moſes. To theſe things Chriſt anſwereth, ſaying: the greateſt, and the firſt commaundement is:
Thou ſhalt loue the Lorde thy God, with all thy heart, with al thy ſoule, and with all thy mynde.
               
               And the ſeconde is like vnto this.
               Thou ſhalt loue thy neighbour as thy ſelfe: In theſe two Commaundements hang all the Lawe and the Prophets.
               Doubtleſſe the Phariſes looked not for ſuch an anſwere to be giuen them, therefore none of them could ſay any thing againſt him. And ſo we ſee, that neither wiſdome nor prudence can preuaile againſt the Lorde, which bringeth to naught the wiſdome of the wiſe, and confoundeth the vnderſtanding of the prudent, as it is in Eſay. Chap. 29.
            
            
               The ſeconde Doctrine.
               TOVCHING THE LAVVE I will explicate theſe three things.
               
                  
                     FIRST, I wil ſpeake in generall of the two cheefe Commaundements and heads of the Law, (that is to ſay) Thou shalt loue the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy ſoule, and with all thy minde: And: Thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy ſelfe.
                     
                     SECONDLY, of the foure principall errours about the doctrine of the Lawe.
                     THIRDLY, of the true vſe of the Lawe.
                  
               
            
            
               
               ¶ Of the firſt.
               
                  
                     THE Lawe in this place ſetteth beefore vs, the two cheefeſt commaundements: the firſt of the louing of God: the other of louing our neighbour. And in what manner God is to be loued, it expoundeth ſaying: Thou ſhalt loue the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy ſoule, and with al thy minde: In what manner alſo thy Neighbour is to bee loued, it by and by addeth: Thou ſhalt loue thy neighbour (As thy ſelfe.)
               
               But what is it to loue God, with all thy hart, with all thy ſoule, and with all thy minde? This word of (LOVE) comprehēdeth three things.Ignoti nulla cupido. Firſte, it comprehendeth a knowledge of the thing that is to be loued: for of a thing vnknowen there is no deſire. Moreouer it comprehendeth all the affections and motions of the hart, which do accompany pure loue. Thirdly, it comprehendeth all workes whiche are required to this loue. Therefore the lawe of God ioyneth theſe three together, when it ſaith: Thou ſhalt loue the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy ſoule, and with all thy minde: ſo that there be in the heart, that is to ſay, in the vnderſtanding of man, a cleere light and knowledge of GOD. Whome (he aſſuredly perſwadeth him ſelfe) to bee the moſte beſte, and moſte excellente, namely the Fountaine of all goodneſſe.
               
                  Moreouer, VVith all thy ſoule, that is, all the affections, motions, and deſires of the heart, ſhoulde tende to this end: that thou maieſt loue God, cleaue vnto him, & place in him the ſoundneſſe of thy loue, whereby thou mayeſt keepe him moſte ſure in thy heart, and, for euer inioy him.
               
                  LASTLY: thou ſhouldeſt loue him, VVith all thy minde, or, with all thy ſtrength: ſo that thou ſhouldeſt conuert all thy cogitations, indeuours, and ſtudies, to ſet forwarde, and defend whatſoeuer thinges doe appertaine vnto God, and to fight againſt thoſe thinges, whiche are contrary vnto GOD, namely, by reſiſting the Deuill, Sinne, and all their troupe, and garriſon.
               And ſo we ſee here, in what manner the three cheefe naturall powers, or abilities, ingrafted into the ſoule of man, namely, REASON, APPETITE, and or Zeale. 
                  ANGER doe ſhewe foorth thier ſtrengthes. For, REASON inquireth for the cheefeſt good (that is to ſay.) GOD: APPETITE, deſireth that ſame principall good, and by loue ioyneth it ſelfe vnto it. ANGER (or Zeale) is kindled to vpholde, and defende that principalleſt good, GOD, and enemy like fighteth againſt the Deuill, ſinne, and the occaſions thereof, and all other things what ſoeuer are contrary vnto God.
               
                  MOREOVER, when thou heareſt, that thou art commaunded, to loue God, with all thy heart, with all thy ſoule, and with all thy minde:

heere thou muſt conſider that God doth require a loue, PVRE, and PERFECT, ETERNALL, and SPIRITVALL, ſo, that thy loue ſhould bee, pure, without ſpotte: perfecte, with out all faulte: eternall, without all intermiſſion: and ſpirituall, without all affection, and leuen of fleſhly concupiſcence.
               
                  THE OTHER great Commaundement is this. (Thou ſhalt loue thy Neighbour, as thy ſelfe.) Heere God appointeth the rule of the loue of our neighbour, to bee, the loue of our owne ſelfe. But, that this may be the rightlyer vnderſtanded, two thinges doe come to bee conſidered. FIRST, we muſt diſcerne betweene two manners, after which man loueth himſelfe: for, of theſe two, the one is dampnable, and vnlawfull, the other is accompted good, and lawfull. Furthermore, wee muſt diſcerne alſo, betweene the perſon of man, and that corruption whiche ſticketh in man. Man is ſometime affected towardes him ſelfe, with a blinde, vnwiſe, and hurtfull loue, ſpringing from the corrupte and depraued nature, (that is to ſay) from the fountaine of ſinne, which by our ſinne of heritage dwelleth in vs. This loue ſhall not be the rule of the loue of thy neighbour: for, to loue him after this maner, were plainly before God to hate thy neighbour.
               There is beſides this, a nother manner of louing him ſelfe, and the ſame is lawfull, and graunted, whiche ſpringeth from the holie Ghoſte, and faith in IESVS CHRISTE:
                  
when a man directeth all his counſailes to that end, that he may doe thoſe things which are acceptable vnto God and healthſome to himſelfe. This loue beeing lawfull, and lawdable, ſhalbe the rule, of the loue, wherewith we ſhould loue our neighbour: ſo that from the very heart we ſhould reioyce with him, ouer all thoſe things, which may redounde, to his profit, and ſaluation, by godly deſires wiſhing him, all goodneſſe, and, by faithfull counſailes, labour, goods, and prayers, ſetting him forwarde: and on the other parte, by turning away ſtudiouſly with all the minde, and heart, what ſoeuer, either to his life, or ſoule: or, (to be ſhort) either to his goods or fame: may be hurtful. In another Iohn. 13. & 15. place, our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſte, ſetteth beefore vs his owne example, in place of a rule to be followed: Loue ye (ſaith he) one another, euen as I haue loued you: And therfore Chriſt calleth this, (A newe Commaundement.) Whereby he would teach vs, that we ſhould helpe our neighbour, if neceſſitie require, euen with the peril of our life: not hauing ſo great regarde of our owne commodities, as of the health, & profit of our neighbour. In what manner Chriſte hath loued vs, Paule ſheweth in the 5. Chap. to the Romaines: as heereafter, in the thirde Doctrine, ſhalbe ſaide more at large.
               The ſecond thing, which I gaue warning of, to be conſidered, in this chiefe commaundement of the loue of our neighbour, is, The difference betweene the perſon of the man, and that corruption

which cleaueth vnto him. The corrupt and wicked man, (as much as appertaineth to his corruption, and wickedneſſe it ſelfe) it is lawfull to hate: but, as much as appertayneth to the perſon, as farre foorth as it is man, partaker of humane nature with vs, the ſame is to be loued: ſo, that what we hate in him, namely ſinne, and corruption it ſelfe, that wee ſhould reprehende: and againe, we ſhould loue in him, that whiche deſerueth loue, that is, yt beeing man, he might be conſerued, as Auguſtine teacheth. Let theſe things ſuffiſe touching the firſt member, which I admoniſh in the beginning to be obſerued concerning the law.
            
            
               Of the ſecond.
               
                  ANother thinge which I propounded, was touching the errours, which falſe teachers ſowe abrode, aboute the doctrine of the lawe. Of theſe, there be foure ſortes. In the firſt order are they, whiche flatly reiect the lawe, and vtterly deny it, to be taught in Chriſtian Churches. In the ſeconde are they, which in deede retaine the Lawe: but they teache, that man is able through his owne power to ſatiſfye the law. Next vnto theſe are they, which affirme, that man is not able to fulfill the whole lawe: but yet ſome parte thereof. They occupy the fourth rome, which ſay, that euery religion hath her law, which is ſufficient to ſaluation, to him that fulfilleth it.
               
                  Theeſe foure errours, through their poyſoned contagion, are very miſchieuous: neither are they ſtaied vpon any other foundation, then vpon the deceiptes, and lyinge ſubtilties of the Diuell, which ſtirreth vp men, to ſeduce one another, from the puritye of the true Doctrine of the Lawe and the Goſpell. I will therfore refute theſe erroures one by one, in the ſame order as they were beefore, of mee rehearſed.
               
                  THE ANTINOMIANS which flatlye reiecte the Lawe, and denye it to bee taught in the congregations of Chriſtians, are ſcant worthy, that their opinion ſhould bee refuted with many wordes, as agaynſt whom not only, true reaſon of man: but alſo CHRIST himſelfe, and his Apoſtles, and as many as haue beene faythfull teachers in the Church of Chriſt, doe reſiſt. The Argumentes wherwith they vphold their opinion, are theſe.
               Chriſtians (ſay they) haue nothing to do with 
                     Argument 1
                  Moſes: Therfore, neither are they ſubiect to his Lawe.
               
                  
                     Argument 2 Item: Chriſtians are made free by Chriſte: Therfore: Chriſte commaunded the Goſpell to bee preached to all creatures, of preachinge the lawe hee commaunded nothing at all. Laſtly: The holy Ghoſte (ſay they) is the teacher of Chriſtians: what vſe then ſhall there bee of the law, amongeſt them? With theſe, and other like reaſons, they ſuppoſe themſelues to proue, that the Law is neither to bee reteyned, nor taught in the congregation of Chriſtians.
               
                  But a man may firſt demaund of theſe men: Doth it beecome Chriſtians, to loue GOD, and their neighbour? I beleeue, there is none ſo poſſeſſed of the Diuell, that hee dare denye this.
               Seeinge then that Chriſtians muſt loue GOD and their Neighbour, why ſhall it not bee alſo lawfull for them to knowe, in what ſorte they ought to perfourme the ſame? For, what thing ſhall the woorke of loue bee, vnleſſe it bee directed by ſome certayne manner? But, foraſmuch as the Lawe of God, (that is to ſay, the tenne Commaundements) doth teach vs both: namely, that wee ſhould loue GOD, and our Neighbour, and alſo, in what manner the ſame ſhould bee doone of vs: what is hee that ſeeth not theſe men manifeſtlye to erre, which would aboliſhe the Lawe of God, and forbidde that it ſhould not ſounde in the Chriſtian congregations.
               
                  1. Where as they obiect, and ſay:
Chriſtians haue nothing to doo with Moſes,
                  
that is true, as farre as apperteyneth to the ceremoni
                     •
                  all, and forenſicall lawes of Moſes, the ſacrifices, Circumciſion, and ſuch like outward ceremonies, which ought to endure vntill the comminge of Chriſte onely, and afterwarde to ceaſe: but it is not true, as touchinge the lawe of GOD, that is to ſay, the Decalogus, which was giuen vnto man in his firſt creation, and afterwarde repeated, and written in two tables of Stone, that the remembraunce therof might bee perpetuall.
               
                  I will ceaſſe heere to ſpeake, howe that Chriſte him ſelfe bothe taught the lawe and expounded it at large: as did alſo the holy Prophets, and their ſucceſſors.
               2 But, that which the Antinomians affirme in the ſecond place: Chriſtians not to bee vnder the lawe but vnder Grace: I graunt this alſo, ſo that it be rightly vnderſtoode, as Saint Paule himſelfe expoundeth it: Chriſtians are not vnder the Lawe: that is to ſay, they which beleeue in IESVS CHRIST are not vnder the condemnatory ſentence of the law, becauſe there is no condemnation to them which are ingraffed into Ieſus Chriſt, Rom. 8. But the Chriſtian hath neede of the Doctrine of the lawe, whiche muſt bee the rule of his life; ſhewing him what doth pleaſe God, and what is contrary to his godly will.
               Furthermore, where they ſay:
Chriſtians are made free:
Therfore, They are not vnder the Lawe.
               
               To that, I anſwere thus: True it is, Chriſtians are made free, from the Condemnation of the Lawe, from ſinne, and hell: but not ſo, that in the meane ſeaſon, it may be lawfull for them to doe what they liſt: they are for this cauſe made free, that they ſhould ſerue God alone, loue him, and their neighbour aſmuche as lyeth in their whole powers, as the Lawe exhorteth, and teacheth.
               If moreouer they go forwarde to ſay: Chriſte gaue commaundement touching the preaching of the Goſpel to euery creature: but, touching the Law

he commaunded nothing at all: I anſwere, Chriſt commaunded forgiueneſſe of ſinnes to be preached, but what is ſinne, but tranſgreſſion of the lawe? Now then, If Chriſtians haue no lawe, then it muſt needs be, that they neither haue any ſinne. Beſide this, Chriſte himſelfe, and the Apoſtles doe exhorte all Chriſtians, to bringe foorth frutes of repentance, (that is to ſay) good works, according to the lawe of God.
               The laſte argument of the Antinomians is ſuch: The holie Ghoſt (ſay they) teacheth Chriſtians: Therfore, They neede not the lawe:
               
               O, how fooliſhe, and friuolous an argument is this? They ſhould rather haue cōcluded thus: The holie Ghoſte teacheth Chriſtians, Therefore we neede teachers, and the worde, namely The Lawe, and The Goſpell. For, the holie Ghoſte, doth then teache, and mooue the heart of man, when the word is receiued by ye eares, in which word the Holie Ghoſte will be of force, in thoſe which heare it, and by faith imbrace the ſame.
               We ſee then, how, not onely foliſhly, but wickedly they doe, whiche dare ſnatch away from vs the lawe of GOD, and throwe it out of the Chriſtian congregations, and affirme, that the ſame is not to be taught. Leauing therefore, the contagions miſcheefe of this errour, let vs giue thanks vnto God, for communicating vnto vs his Holie Lawe, and let vs further beſeech him, that he would giue vnto vs his holie ſpirite, by the which, many thinges acceptable, and pleaſing vnto him, may be doone of vs. For if the

Diuell had obteined this victory of vs, that hee had ſpoyled vs of the lawe of GOD, as hee had ſucceſſe therin, in Paradiſe: what ſhould let, yt hee ſhould not againe, make vs giltie of death and eternall dampnation? For, hee which learneth not to acknowledge his ſinnes, by the Law, the ſame, doubtleſſe, knoweth not how to embrace, grace by the Goſpell. Hee which can not eſteeme his ſickeneſſe, or the greeuouſneſſe of his diſeaſe: the ſame, muſt of neceſſitye haue a negligente care, of ſeekinge foorth a holſome medicine.
               
                  IN THE SECOND ORDER of thoſe which erre about the doctrine of the lawe; are they, which, in deede, doo reteyne the lawe, and doo rightlye affirme, that it is to bee taught in the Churches of Chriſtians, but this they falſely affirme, That whoſoeuer will, may by his owne power, and minde fulfill the Law: & by this meanes attaine righteouſneſſe beefore GOD, and merite eternall life. The falſeneſſe of this opinion, I will in ſuch wiſe ſhewe by manifeſt demonſtrations, that euery one may eaſily perceyue, that no man amongeſt all men (the onely man Ieſu Chriſte excepted) is able to fulfill the Lawe of GOD.
               
               The Condition of humane nature in all men yeeldeth vnto vs, the firſt argument of this our aſſeueration. The ſame is ſuch, that all men euen frō the very natiuity, are vnpure, vncleane, and thrall vnto ſinne. Foraſmuch then, as it is euident, that from a rotten, and ſtinking fountayne,

no water can bee drawne, but rotten, and ſtinking: it is manifeſt that man beeing vnpure and defiled with ſin, cannot yeeld pure, ſyncere, and vndefiled obedience, vnto GOD. Therefore Salomon ſayth Eccle. Cap. 7. There is not a man righteous vpon the earth, which dooth good, and ſinneth not.
                  
               
               And Iob. Chap. 14. VVho can make that cleane, which commeth of an vncleane ſeede? truely no mortall man can bring this to paſſe.
                   For wee do all draw our beginning, from a ſinfull lumpe, and an vncleane roote: and is it poſſible that the fruicte ſhould bee better, than the Tree it ſelfe? therfore, this demonſtration of the proofe ſtandeth ſure.
               
                  VVhoſoeuer are vncleane, can not yeeld cleane, and pure obedience to the lawe of God.
                  But, all men, (only IESV CHRIST excepted, which from the lawes of byrthe cuſtomable, and common to nature, is exempted) are by nature vncleane:
                  Therfore, No mortall man can fulfill the lawe of GOD.
               
               The ſecond argument wherby it is conuinced, that no man can fulfill the lawe of GOD, is taken of the vniuerſall experience of man. For, there is no man found in the vniuerſall worlde, who (aſkinge his owne heart, and examining his owne conſcience,) ſhall not ſtraighte waye finde himſelfe to bee farre of from that perfection, which the Lawe requireth.
               
                  Who perceiueth not him ſelfe, to haue doone oftentimes things not to be doone, and againe, to haue left vndoone, things to be doone? And albeit ſome dare boaſte much of fulfilling the law, doone by themſelues, or by others: yet notwithſtanding the iudgement of their owne heartes, is againſt them ſelues, whiche although it lye hid from the ſight of men, yet it is euident, and lyeth open vnto God, which ſeeth, weyeth, and tryeth, all the cogitations, and affections of the heart of man.
               The third argument, whereby it is proued, that no mortall man can fulfill the lawe of God, is required, Of the iuſte Iudgement of God, who condemneth onely the giltie, and the tranſgreſſors of his diuine lawe, and commaundements. Foraſmuche then, as no man is free, from the iudgement of God, and puniſhmentes, namely, ſickneſſes, aduerſities, and at the laſte death it ſelfe: which do all fal in, by reaſon of ſinne: (that is to ſay) for tranſgreſſion of the law of God: who doth not heereby eaſily perceiue, and without doubt concludeth, that al men are giltie, and tranſgreſſours of the law of God, ſo that by the workes of the Law they can attaine no righteouſneſſe?
               The fourth argument is taken, Of the contrarietie of the Lawe, and the nature of man. For, the lawe is Spirituall, but the nature of man is Carnal, which thing Paul proueth Rom. 7. where he ſaith: VVe knowe that the lawe is ſpirituall, but I am carnall ſolde vnder ſinne: that is to ſay, I am

ſo ſubiect vnto Sinne, that I am neuer ſo free from it, that I may fulfill the ſpirituall lawe of God: but I giue thankes vnto God, by IESVS CHRIST, which for my ſake hath aboundauntly perfourmed all that, which I my ſelfe coulde not perfourme. This argumente Paule handleth at large, in the Chapter euen now cited of vs.
               The firſt argument wherby it is prooued, that no mortall man can fulfill the lawe of God, The voyce of GOD himſelfe doth offer vs, in Moſes, the Pſalmes, and the Prophetes, and ſo foorth in the whole Euangelicall, and Apoſtolical Scripture.
               
                  Geneſ. 6. GOD ſaw, that the mallice of man was greate vpon the earth, and all the thoughtes of his hearte were alwayes bente vnto euill.
               
               
                  Iob. 9. I know for a truth, that it is ſo, that manne ſhall not bee iuſtified in the ſighte of GOD, if hee would contende with him, hee ſhall not bee able to aunſwere him one for a thouſande. And a litle after Iobe ſayth of himſelfe, If I would iuſtifie my ſelfe, my mouth will condempne mee.
               
               
                  Pſalm. 14. They are beecome corrupt,
                  Verſe. 2. 
                  and abhominable in their dooings, there is none which doth good, no, not one.
               
               
                  The Lorde looked downe from Heauen vpon the children of men, that hee might ſee if any did vnderſtand, and inquire after GOD.
               
               
                  They haue all gone out of the way, they are altogeather become vnprofitable, there is not one that dooth good, no, not one.
               
               
                  
                  Pſalm. 130. If thou, Lorde, ſhalte marke our iniquities, (O LORDE) who, may abide it?
                   For this cauſe Dauid, in the 143. Pſalme, prayeth on this manner: Enter not into Iudgement with thy ſeruaunt O LORDE, for none lyuinge ſhalbee found righteous in thy ſight.
               
               
                  Poruerb. 20. VVho can ſay my heart is cleane, I am cleare from ſinne?
                  
               
               
                  Eſaye. 64. VVee are beecome vncleane all the ſorte of vs, and our righteouſneſſe is as a ſteyned Cloath: VVee haue all fallen awaye as a leafe, and our iniquities haue, as the winde, ſnatched vs away.
                  
               
               
                  CHRISTE in the thirde of Iohn ſayth: That which is borne of the fleſhe, is fleſh.
               
               
                  Paule. Rom. 3. VVee haue ſhewed (cauſes beeing rendred) that both Iewes, and Greekes are all vnder ſinne.
                  
               
               
                  Ephe. 2. VVee are by nature the Children of wrath.
                  
               
               Out of theeſe now recyted, and many other teſtimonies of the Scripture, it is manyfeſtlye conuinced: That no mortall man can fulfill the Law of GOD.
               
               The ſixte Argument of this our aſſeueration is ſet downe by Paule, to the Galathians. Chap. 2. In theſe woordes: If righteouſneſſe come by the Law: then CHRIST dyed in vayne. For, Chriſte came into the worlde, to fulfill the Lawe, which was impoſſible for all menne in the whole world to perfourme: But as many

as beeleeue in him, to them ſhalbee imputed the righteouſneſſe of the Lawe, which, Chriſt, in his owne perſon, hath doone, and obteyned.
               Thus I haue prooued, by ſixe moſte firme, and euident Argumentes, the opinion of the Papiſtes to bee falſe, who, in teachinge, writing, and declayming, dare affirme, againſt their owne conſcience, that, man is able to fulfill the lawe of God, and ſo, by woorkes, to bee reputed righteous in the ſight of GOD.
               
               
                  AMONGEST THOSE, which teache not rightly of the Lawe, they are to bee placed in the thirde roome, which doo graunte, that man can not in parte ſatiſfie the Lawe of God: yet notwithſtandinge hee may in many thinges perfourme obedyence to the Lawe. And therfore (ſay they) by how much, the more ſtoare of good woorkes bee doone accordinge to the Lawe, by ſo much the greater ſhalbee mannes righteouſneſſe by the Lawe, and that which lacketh, is to bee borrowed by Prayer, of Chriſte.
               This opinion, although it ſticke in manye, chiefely in politique menne, it is, notwithſtanding, falſe, and contumelious agaynſt the ſonne of God, our Lorde IESVS CHRISTE, who alone taketh away the ſinnes of the world, and iuſtifyeth thoſe which beeleeue in him.
               And, that this opinion alſo, was not the leaſte cauſe of the caſtinge awaye the Iewes, Paule teacheth Rom. 10.
               
               
                  
                  They (ſayth hee) beeinge ignoraunt of GOD his rightuouſneſſe, and ſeeking to eſtabliſh their owne righteouſneſſe: haue not been obedient to the righteouſneſſe of GOD: for CHRIST is the ende of the Lawe, to iuſtifie all that beeleeue: (that is to ſay) whoſoeuer beleeueth, hath that thinge which the Lawe requireth: namely, Righteouſneſſe, which Chriſte imputeth to the beleeuer. Likewiſe, Phillip. 3. Paule geueth a difference, beetweene the righteouſneſſe of the Goſpell, and the righteouſneſſe of the Law. The Righteouſneſſe of the Goſpell, as the faythfull do obteyne: but the Righteouſneſſe of the Lawe, none can atteyne by his owne woorkes, Chriſte onely excepted.
               Beſides this, no man can beginne any good woorke according vnto the Lawe, wherby hee may bee able to ſtande ſure beefore the Iudgement ſeate of GOD: beefore hee be made righteous, through fayth in CHRIST. For, (as Paule witneſſeth in an other place,) It is impoſſible to pleaſe God without fayth.
                  Hebr. 11. Some woorcks (in deede) may bee doone, which amonge men haue a ſhewe of goodneſſe, and which are alſo profitable for the life, and conuerſation of man, in this world: but, that rightuouſneſſe ſhould bee atteyned vnto by them, it is impoſſible: for, hee which offendeth agaynſt one Commaundement, hee is made giltye of all, ſayth Iames:
               
               
                  Iacob. 2.Neyther can any thinge pleaſe God, which is doone of him, which is not a member of Chriſt, and made righteous by the obedience of him.
               
                  For, as by the diſobedience of onely Adam, wee are all made gilty of damnation: ſo all wee, as many as beleeue in Ieſus Chriſt, are made righteous, by the onely obedience of him. It is euident therfore, that they doe erre, which wilbee made righteous, partly, by their owne woorkes and partely, by the merite of Chriſte, ſo, that by how much the more, a man doth abounde with good workes: hee may by ſo mutch the more boaſte himſelfe, to bringe of his owne, and to ſeeke at Chriſte, the reſide we which are wanting.
               
                  THOSE VVHOM I haue named in the in the fourth place, to erre about the doctrine of the Lawe, haue ſpronge from the Schoole of Mahomet. Mahomet, (to the ende, that he might the rather keepe his diſciples and vnderlings addicted to his diueliſhe ſubtilties:) did teache,Matth, 22. that euerye man was ſaued by the keepinge of that law, to which hee was a ſubiect: That is, If the Iewe did keepe his Ceremonies, and Circumcſiion: hee ſhould by that his obedience, merite ſaluation. And if the Turcke, or Mahometiſt: (ſayth hee) dooth keepe his law, by the ſame reaſon, hee alſo ſhalbe ſaued. So in like caſe, the Chriſtian, obteyneth ſaluation, by the Law of the Goſpell. Some politique men there bee, which are full ſtuffed with this wicked opinion, which neither rightlye conſider the heauye weighte of ſinne, nor the benefites of CHRIST.
               
               Agaynſt all theſe, which in this manner, doe

ſeeke ſaluation, by their Lawe, to which they bee ſubiecte, in what place ſo euer they leade their lyues, I ſet theeſe playne woordes of the vnmooueable veritie. Iohn 3. Hee which beeleeueth in the ſonne, hath eternall lyfe: but hee which beeleeueth not in the ſonne ſhall not ſee lyfe, but the wrath of GOD abydeth vpon him.
               
            
            
               Of the thirde.
               
                  
                     THE THIRDE THINGE followeth which I propounded concerninge the Lawe: namely: to what ende, the lawe auayleth, and what ye true vſe therof is: amonge menne chiefly in the Chriſtian congregation? Wee haue hearde beefore, what the lawe requireth, and, that none is able to fulfill: It is therfore, thirdly demaunded, what the vſe thereof is? ſeeinge no man can fulfil it, nor any man, by the works therof, can obteyne righteouſneſſe in the ſight of GOD.
               
               The vſe of the Law is of three ſortes: namely, Externall, Internall, and Spirituall.
               
            
            
               Of the Externall (or outward) vſe of the Lawe.
               
               
                  
                  
                     THE EXTERNAL, (or outward) VSE of the Law, is, by diſcipline to gouerne ye people, that in outward honeſti of manners, they might liue quietly, according to the Law, and that they ſhould not commit any heynous wickednes, openly, which is forbidden in the law of God. Here, Parents, Magiſtrates, Mayſters, and Tutors, yea, and the Miniſters of the woorde of GOD alſo, muſt dillygently take heede, that ſuch as bee committed to their charge, doo liue, in outwarde honeſtye of life, ſoundly, and ſhamefaſtly. For, the law of GOD is therfore called, MORAL, bycauſe it is a certaine common rule, according vnto which euery manne ſhould direct, and frame his manners.
               
                  FIRST OF AL, this externall diſcipline of the Law, is commaunded vnto parents, that with the ſame they may inſtruct their children, and keepe them, vnder outwarde honeſtye of manners. And, that they may the more eaſily bringe that thinge to paſſe, let them vſe, doctrine, examples, quyet, and alſo ſeuere admonitions, yea, and moreouer (if the matter ſo require) the rodde: which thinge whoſoeuer ſhall not doo, let them looke for the iuſte plagues of God, as deſpiſers of the moſt ſeuere commaundementes of GOD, which hath commaunded Parentes, that they ſhoulde, (accordinge vnto the leuell of the Decalogus,) godlily, and honeſtly bring vp, and inſtruct their Children.
               Firſt, let them vſe doctrine, that is ſo ſay, let thē accuſtome their children (ſo ſone as they can

ſpeake, and vſe reaſon) to learne thorowly, and with a memorable minde to recite morning, and eueninge all the partes of the Chriſtian inſtruction.
               Moreouer they themſelues ſhould walke before their children, with their owne example of an honeſt led lyfe, ſo that the life of the parents may bee aunſweareable to the doctrine which they taught, which life, the Children might afterwardes follow. For, they which laboure with woords onely in the education of children, doo ſeeme, (in my iudgement) to doo very fooliſhlye, and I can not tell, whether I may call this a teachinge, or rather a hindering of them. For that thinge which by teachinge, by their woord, they buylde vp: the ſame through euill lyuinge; by their deedes, they pull downe. And what a ſincke of myſchiefes doo followe hereof, as well in the eccleſiaſticall, as in the politicall eſtate, who is it, which ſeeth not, and hath dailye experience. Beſides this, parentes ſhould ſomtime, vſe gentiller woordes vnto their Children, that by them, as by entiſementes, their mindes might the more eaſely, bee allured, and ſtirred vp to the dueties of vertue.
               But if the children will not obey the fatherly admonitions, here the parentes muſt prouoke them with more ſeuere ſpeach, & countenaunce, and with wiſedome, and grauitye forewarne them, what puniſhments for their diſobedience, they ſhall at the length ſuſteyne.
               Fiftlye, when as the parentes, can (neyther

by gentle, or ſharpe admonitions) profitte any thing at all, and that no hope of amendment of manners is ſeene in the Children: here at the length as the laſt meane of the fatherly remedy, the rod is to bee added. With the ſame they ſhall correcte them, when they accuſtome themſelues to ſwearing, lying, theeuing, filthy, or, by any wayes, vnhoneſt talkinge. For Syrach ſayth Chap. 30. Hee that loueth his Childe, doth often mooue the rodde toward him: that in the laſt dayes of his life hee may reioyce. And Salom. Pro. 23. VVithholde not diſcipline from the childe: for if thou ſtrikeſt him with the rodde, hee ſhall not die: ſtrike him with the rod, and thou ſhalt delyuer his ſoule from Hell.
                  
               
               They which doo ouermuch cocker their children, and winckinge at euery of their faultes, do ſuffer them to liue as they liſt: are to bee eſteemed the authors of their deſtruction. Pontanus ſheweth, that a certayne wanton beeing ſpilled, through to much licentiouſnes graunted by the Mother, at the length (beeing of ripe age) was, (for a heynous offence committed) adiudged to dye: when hee was brought by the tormentor to the place of puniſhmente, hee, with a lowde voyce, mournefully vttered theſe woordes: Thinke not (O ye beeholders) this tormentor to haue brought me to this ſo infamous a kinde of puniſhment, but rather mine owne Mother. It ſtandeth Parentes therfore greatly vpon, to accuſtome their Children, to direct the courſe of their life, according to the leuell of the Decalogus.
                  
By this meanes they ſhall make a way of more eaſy inſtruction for thoſe, to whoſe fidelitye, and diſcipline, they ſhall afterward committe their children.
               This outwarde diſcipline of Moſes lawe, is likewiſe committed to the Magiſtrate: For Paule calleth the Magiſtrate, The Miniſter of GOD,
                  Rom. 13. to the promoting of goodneſſe, and to the puniſhing of euill. And foraſmuch as Magiſtrates are ordeyned of God: therefore they are bound to ſet forwarde the glorye of GOD, and to turne backe, whatſoeuer thinges are againſt God: as far forth as apperteineth to the outward conuerſation of men. The Magiſtrate is alſo called, a keeper of both lawes, bicauſe he ſhould with a diligent care, conteyn his ſubiects vnder an honeſt diſcipline of māners, according to the Decalogus: and alſo trade ouer the courſe of his owne life in ſuch ſorte: that hee may be a patterne, and a glaſſe, into which his ſubiects liuing godly may looke into. Hee muſt alſo haue a diligent care, that his poſitiue lawes, and al his decrees may agree with the Decalogus, and bee as walles, and fortreſſes of the ſame. The Magiſtrate ſhould moreouer puniſhe, the manifeſt tranſgreſſions of the lawe diuine: as are, blaſphemings of GOD, Idolatries, periuries, vſual ſwearings, contempt of the woord of God, diſobedience, murthers, Adulteries, lying, falſe witneſſe bearing, theftes, and ſuch like vices, which fight directlye againſt the woord of GOD: ſo, that if the Magiſtrate neglect his office in theſe

thinges, hee becommeth partaker, and giltye of all thoſe offences, the not puniſhment of which hee hath graunted vnto others. There is tolde an Hiſtorye, of a certaine murtherer, which had ſlayn ſeuen men, whē hee was perforce brought vnto the Law, and was ſet beefore the Iudgement ſeate, & accuſed of manſlaughter, anſwere was made, that hee onely, had killed but one onely man, the other ſixe the Maieſtrate had killed, which did not puniſh that firſt murther in him. And verely the Magiſtrate is gilty before God, whē hee puniſheth not ſuch as ſtubbornly breake the law of God, & by his giuing of liberty, hee oppeneth a window to others to offend. It is an vnmercifull pitty, to ſpare one, with the loſſe, and deſtruction of many.
               To the bringers vp of youth, this ſame care, doth alſo belong, that they ſhould inſtruct thoſe which are committed to their diſcipline, in ſuch ſorte, by doctrine, by example, by often admonitions, and corrections, that in their outwarde manners, nothing might be ſeene, out of ſquare, or contrary to the law of GOD. Which thing if they neglect to do, they ſin againſt God, againſt the parents of the children, and the whole common wealth, neither ſhall they (for euer) beare this puniſhed. For if (by right) hee bee hanged, which ſtealeth an Oxe, or a Cow from another: how much more is he worthy of a thouſād hangings, which committing this kinde of thefte, far more greeuous: doth vnfaythfully inſtruct the youth, vpon good truſt committed vnto him.
               
                  Tutors, or gouernours alſo, which are in the ſteede of parentes, ſhould wholy frame themſelues, according to the rule, preſcribed beefore to parentes. Therfore, they ſhould not onely haue a regarde and ſtudious care to keepe the goods of their pupilles, which fall to them by way of heritage: but they ſhould haue a ſpecial care, that they might bee well, and honeſtly inſtructed, knowing, that they themſelues, are as ſtreightly bound, before the iudgement ſeate of GOD, by the promiſe which they made to the parentes of thoſe children, as if they had couenaunted with God himſelfe, that they would bee faythfull tutors, and patrones of thoſe pupilles. For this cauſe, GOD calleth himſelfe, a father of the fatherleſſe, and a defender of the Widdowes. But what is doone at theſe dayes by the common ſorte of tutors, is euidente to all men, and the miſerable pupilles, and widdowes (alas for ſorow) to their great greefe haue experience.
               Laſt of all alſo, the Miniſters of the woorde of GOD, are bound, to exhort their hearers to outward honeſty of lyfe according to the law of God, by doctrine, examples, by admoniſhments togeather with chaſtiſements ſet beefore them, as Chriſte himſelfe did, and the holye Apoſtle Paule. But if they ſhall lay aſide this due care of their duety, and deceiptfully doo the buſineſſe of the Lorde, they ſhal not eſcape the iuſt iudgemente and puniſhmente, in that laſte day of the Lorde. But how manye may wee ſee now a

dayes, which follow that verſe of the Poet.
               
               
                  The rauening Crow, is pardoned ſtill:
                  The ſimple Dooue, ſuſteynes much yll.
               
               When as notwithſtanding, God would haue thee to reſpecte the perſon of no man: ſo that thou bee moderate, after the example of moſt excellēt Nathan: It is better for the Miniſter of the woord of God, with Iohn, to bee beheaded: then with Herode to bee feaſted: for there ought to bee had greater regarde heere, to the glory of God, and the ſaluation of man, than to our owne liues, and commodities. Let theſe things ſuffiſe to bee ſpoken, touchinge, the externall vſe of the Lawe, and how farre the ſame ſtretcheth.
               There bee foure moſt weighty cauſes why, this outwarde diſcipline ſhould bee exerciſed:
               
                  
                     Firſt: The commaundement of GOD.
                     
                     Secondly: That the puniſhmentes might bee auoyded.
                     Thirdly: That wee might liue peaceably, and quietly amongeſt our ſelues.
                     Fourthly: That the ſame might bee an Inſtruction, makinge vs the more apte, to heare the healthſome doctrine of ye Goſpel of IESVS CHRISTE.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Of the Internall (or inwarde) vſe of the Lawe.
               
               
                  
                  
                     AS THE FIRST VSE OF THE LAVV, is externall, and concerneth the ſocietie of man, ſo, that whoſoeuer expreſſeth, in outwarde conuerſation, in woord, and deede, the letter of the Lawe, is Iudged of the people, to bee good, and honeſt: ſo, the ſeconde vſe of the Lawe is, INTERNALL in the heart, and Conſcience of man, that hee might bee ſtaied before the Iudgement ſeate of GOD, and render a reaſon, whether with all his power hee hath fulfilled the lawe of God, or no? Here, if hee can boaſt of the fulfilling of the Law, which is impoſſible for all men, (Chriſte onely excepted:) hee may then vnderſtand, that vnto him belongeth, bleſſinge, and mercy vnto thouſandes, accordinge to the promiſe annexed to the Lawe: but if hee perceyue himſelfe to bee a tranſgreſſour of the Law: hee heareth the vengeaunce, and iudgement of God propounded agaynſt him, vnto the thirde, and fourth generation.
               
                  Deut. 27.Likewiſe, hee heareth: Curſed is euery one which fulfilleth not whatſoeuer things are written in this booke of the Lawe.
                  Gala. 3.
               
               This ſentence was firſt giuen in Paradiſe, and moreouer, in manifeſte woordes expreſſed by Moſes. Beſides this, the conſcience of each man confirmeth the ſame, and in like manner, all the calamities of this life, and at the laſt, death it ſelfe prooueth the ſame: Laſtly, the eternal tormentes of Hell ſhal puniſh as many, as ſhal not be deliuered, by our Lord IESVS CHRIST.
               
               
                  
                  Caine, when hee weighed his ſinne in an euen Ballance according to the Law, ſayde:Gen. 4. 
                  My iniquitie is greater, than may be forgiuen. The ſame thinge befell vnto Saule alſo, deſpairinge,1. Reg. 31. and throwinge himſelfe into eternall damnation.
               But Dauid when hee examined his deed, by the Lawe, and knewe his ſinne, ſayde: If thou (O Lorde) ſhalt marke what is doone amiſſe: O Lorde who ſhall abide it? But there is mercye with thee,
                  Pſalm. 130. 
                  therfore ſhalt thou bee feared.
               
               
                  Manaſſes, likewiſe, Mary Magdalene, and the Theefe vpon the Croſſe, confeſſing their ſinnes, repented, and did flye to the mercy of GOD.
               
               And thus wee ſee, what the INTERNALL (or inward) VSE OF THE LAVV is, namely, to examine the deedes of our liues, by euery precept of the Law of GOD, &, as often as we finde our ſelues to haue offended: ſo often wee ſhould holde for a ſuretie, that the curſe of the Law, and the puniſhmentes of God his anger, are denounced againſt vs. What counſayle ſhall wee take in this caſe? onely two wayes are ſet beefore vs: the one, by deſperation, to eternall death, and malediction: the other, by the throne of grace, to eternall life, and benediction.
               
                  THE THRONE OF GRACE is CHRIST IESVS, which reconcileth vs to his father, and giueth lyfe euerlaſting. For hee which beeleeueth in Ieſus Chriſte, obteyneth by him, both righteouſneſſe, and forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, by which righteouſnes he entreth into euerlaſting life. For, Chriſte hath fulfilled the

lawe, to iuſtifie all that beeleeue in him. This Fayth in Chriſte, is the foundation of our ſaluation,Rom. 10. as all Chriſtians do confeſſe in the Creed, when they ſay: I beleeue the forgiuenes of ſinnes: that is to ſay, although my ſinnes bee innumerable, and the greatneſſe of Gods anger is infinite, and the puniſhmentes which fall in, by reaſon of ſinne, be horrible: yet notwithſtanding foraſmuch as I am vnder grace, and not vnder the Law, I doo aſſuredly beleeue the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, through the merite of the death and paſſion of Ieſus Chriſte, who, not onely clenſeth mee from all Sinne, by his precious bloud, but alſo imputeth vnto mee his righteouſneſſe: ſo, that the Lawe, with her ſentence of condemnation, hath no right ouer mee at all.
               This fayth ſpringeth out of the knowledge of the Goſpell, which offereth to all the faythfull, GRACE in Ieſu Chriſt: Wherfore Auguſtine ſayth: Chriſte hath made our ſinnes his: that hee might make his righteouſneſſe oures. Alſo, when Caine ſayde:Gen. 4. 
                  My iniquitie is greater, then that I may bee forgiuen: Auguſtine anſwereth: Thou lyeſt Caine, for the mercy of GOD is greater, than the wretchedneſſe of all Sinners. This is that which Iohn ſayth: Beholde the Lambe of GOD, which taketh away the ſinnes of the world:
                  Iohn. 1. 
                  Item: CHRIST is the propitiation, not only for our ſinnes but alſo for the ſinnes of the whole worlde. This fayth reſteth in the obedience of GOD alone, and truſteth to no creature beſide, eyther in heauen, or in earth. But, concerning the nature of

fayth, it ſhalbee ſayd more at large, beneath in the third doctrine: now let vs paſſe to the third vſe of the Law.
            
            
               Of the ſpirituall vſe of the Lawe.
               
               
                  
                     THE THIRDE VSE of the Law which is called SPIRITVALL, hath place in the regenerate, which beleeuing in Chriſte, haue obteyned (by the death, and interceſſion of Chriſte) remiſſion of their ſinnes, and are counted righteous in the ſight of GOD, through the righteouſnes of Chriſt, imputed vnto them. Where this faith is liuely, and voyde of hypocriſie, there withall dwelleth the holie ghoſt, which both worketh faith in the harts of men, by hearing the healthfull doctrine of the Goſpell, and regenerateth man, and ſtirreth him vp, to thank fulneſſe towards God, whereby, it commeth to paſſe that man more eſteemeth the will of God, and his commaundements, then all the goods of the whole world, how beawtifull, and precious ſo euer they may be eſteemed, and continueth in purpoſing good, keeping faith, and a good conſcience. Then, becauſe the man that is borne anew, would ſhew obedience vnto God,1. Tim. 1. he looketh againe into the lawe, and ſetteth the ſame as an infallible rule before him, that he may vnderſtand, what hee ſhoulde doe, and what hee

ſhould leaue vndone, in ye right ſeruing of God.
               And although no man doth fulfill the Lawe by his owne woorks, yet notwithſtanding, the obedience of the faithful pleaſeth God, becauſe he is ſet free from the malediction of the Lawe, and is,Rom. 8. (by the meanes of Chriſte) vnder grace. For ſo Paul ſaith: There is no damnation to them, which are in Ieſu Chriſte, which walke not after the fleſhe but after the ſpirit.
               
               This obedience is 
                     〈◊〉
                   onely acceptable vnto God, as who of his fatherly goodnes, cōmaundeth, & willeth the faithfull, to loue him, and, to exerciſe charity toward their neighbour: but hee alſo, addeth a promiſe of rewarde, that hee will recompence all good doinges, ſo, that he which ſhall giue a cuppe of colde water, in the name of Chriſte, ſhall not bee voyde of his reward.
               Hereof it commeth to paſſe, that examples do remayne of many of the godlye, which for their obedience perfourmed to God, through fayth: haue receyued, both ſpirituall, and corporall bleſſinges. But they which ſay, they do beleeue, and yet notwithſtandinge, purpoſe not, to eſchue ſinne, but ſuffer them ſelues to bee ruled, by their owne corrupt concupiſcence, and to bee drawne away of the deſires of the fleſhe: theſe treade not in the ſteppes of Abraham, which had leiffer kill his onely Sonne, and heyre, then by turninge backe, to commit any thinge, againſt the commaundement of God. They doo alſo, agaynſt the doctrine of Sainct Paule, which commaundeth the beleeuers, and ſuch, as with Abraham
                  
would bee made partakers of the grace of God: that they ſhould declare their fayth, by obedience towardes God, which hath ſet foorth his vnmeaſurable grace towardes all men, in that, that hee hath deliuered his only begotten Sonne for them. But how wicked, and not to bee vttered is this argument, which ſome (beeinge gone forwarde vnto that ſtate of vngodlyneſſe) dare vtter.
               
                  VVee are Iuſtified, and made free, freely by fayth: to what end then ſhall we neede to apply our ſelues to doe good woorks?
               
               Hearken what Paule anſwereth to theſe people, whoſe damnation (ſaith hee) is iuſt yea, truely,
                  Rom. 3. 
                  Iuſt, foraſmuch as they, by this errour, doe draw ſinnes, vnto them ſelues (as dark cloudes). For, firſt, they are coutemelious againſt God: moreouer, they treade vnder their feete. the precious blood of Chriſt. Furthermore, they expell the holie ghoſt. Beſides this, they reproue themſelues of vntrueth. Laſtly, by giuing offēce, they offend many and inſtraunging their mindes from the doctrine of the Goſpel: obediēce them foreward to perdition, and deſtruction. Firſt of all (I ſay) they are cōtumelious againſt God, which by his infinite mercy deſireth to haue them free from ſinne and condemnation. Theſe 
                     •
                  ontruely, are to be compared, as it ſeemeth to me, to diſobedient children, which hauing beene ſometime; (for their manifolde malice & wickedneſſes) excluded frō all hope of ſucceſſiō in their fathers riches: & yet notwithſtāding, being againe becōe ſuppliāt,

and receiued into fauoure, haue returned backe againe to their former diſpoſition, and contemning their fathers commaundement, haue againe abuſed his goodneſſe, and gentleneſſe: what other thing heere ſhall the father put in practiſe, but to deale with them, by extreme iuſtice, euen as their ſtubberneſſe requireth?
               Moreouer, theſe do tread vnder their feete, the pricious blood of CHRIST, which was ſhed vpon the croſſe, for the remiſſion of ſinnes. As though Chriſt, had therfore ſhed his blood, and ſtretched foorth his hands, armes, and feete, yea and his whole body imbrewed with blood vpon the gibbet of the croſſe: that it might bee lawfull for vs to proſtitute our hartes, our handes, our feete, and our whole body, to all filthineſſe, wantonnes, tyranny, vnrighteouſnes, craftines, deceipt, ſubtiltie, & (as I may ſpeak in one word,) to all theſe together, to the which, the corruption of the world, and the luſt of the fleſh prouoketh vs: and yet notwithſtanding in the meane time to ſay: CHRISTE is my ſauiour, I will beleeue in him, and I will wholy cleaue vnto him. Who ſo in ſuch ſorte frameth his life, is altogether like to an vnfaithfull traitour, which doeth his buſineſſe hypocritically, vnto his Lorde, whoſe wages he taketh: and in the meane time fauoureth his enemie, and laboureth by all the meanes that hee may to pleaſe him, and with his diligence to ſerue him. Euen in like manner, to boaſte of faith in Chriſte, and in the meane time, to liue loocely and wickedly: what other

thinge is it, then to ſpeake outwardely, thoſe things with our mouthes, from which, both the heart it ſelfe, and all the ſtudyes and actions of our whole life doe diſagree. The Iewes boaſted them ſelues to be the ſonnes of GOD, and the ſeede of Abraham: but what ſaide Chriſte to theſe things? Ye (ſaith he) are of the Deuil,
                  Iohn. 8. 
                  becauſe ye doe the woorkes of him, from which Abraham was farre of. It is therefore, an horrible thing, and ioyned with extreame daunger of damnation, to cary Chriſte outwardly in our mouth, and priuely to hide his enemie in our heart, and with all our members aſwell inwarde, as outwarde, to frame our ſelues to obey him. What is this els (I ſay) then to ſpurne with our feete, the precious blood of Chriſte, & to ſet at nought his bitter paſſion, and death, which he ſuffered for our ſinnes, not that there might lye open for vs a libertie to ſinne: but, that we (by faith) receiuing forgiueneſſe of our ſinnes, might keepe him in our hearts: and denying the diuell with all his woorkes, namely, ſinne, and iniquitie, ſhould yeelde pure, and continuall obedience to this our onely Lord and redeemer.
               Thirdly, whoſoeuer (by hearing of the healthfull doctrine of the Goſpel,) are iuſtified by faith in CHRISTE, and doe againe fall back into manifeſt wickedneſſes, & are led and gouerned by the rule of the fleſh, the world, and the Diuel, theſe doe make ſorowfull the holie Ghoſte, and expell him foorth of their heartes, and admit, and receiue into his place, the ſpirit of the deuil,

whoſe dwelling places they are become againe, as they were before. What other thinge is heere to be looked for, than that which Chriſte hath pronounced in the 12. of Matthewe. and in the 11. of Luke: VVhen the vncleane ſpirit is gone foorth of a manne, hee walketh through dry places ſeking reſt, and findeth none, and then hee ſaith: I will returne into my houſe, whence I came foorth: and when he commeth, he findeth it ſwept, and garniſhed: The
                        •
                      goeth he, and taketh with him, ſeuen other ſpirits worſe then him ſelfe, and they enter in, and dwell there, and the ende of this man becommeth worſe, then the beginning.
               
               Heereby it may be eaſily perceiued, of howe great importaunce it is, either, to imbrace, and beleeue the worde of GOD: or, in our heart, and lyfe to decline againe ſhamefully from it, and to expell the holie Ghoſte beeing ſorowfull, from his habitation.
               Furthermore, whoſoeuer doe boaſte of fayth, and yet doe in the meane ſeaſon liue wickedly: doe moſte impudently, reprooue, and conuince themſelues of vntrueth. For inaſmuch as they boaſt thoſe thinges whiche they haue not, they are like vnto babling Thraſoos, which ſtick not with their mouthes to promiſe golden mountaines, when is very deede, they, of all other, be moſte bare, and needie.
               The errour of theſe people is confirmed by this, that they thinke, that GOD doeth not more inwardely ſearche, and looke into the

heartes of men, then men them ſelues.
               But they are much deceiued: For man ſeeth onely the outwarde appearaunces, but GOD ſeeth not thoſe thinges onely, but hee alſo looketh into the hearte it ſelfe. GOD, therefore can not bee deceiued, although thy heart thinketh otherwiſe then thy mouth ſpeaketh.
               Therfore it is, that Iames requireth an agreement of the woorde, and thought, ſo that the outwarde works of the life, ſhould bee aunſwerable the faith, which is ſaide to be in the heart: euen as it is to bee ſeene in the example of Abraham.
               
               For it is certaine, that the hearte, and the woorkes doe agree, and are aunſwerable one to the other: ſo, that whereſoeuer there is an euill heart, the woorkes of the ſame muſt in like caſe, of neceſſitie followe euill, according to the rule of Chriſte: A good tree bringeth foorth good fruites.
               
               Wee ſee therefore manifeſtly, how impudently they reproue them ſelues of vntrueth, which boaſtinge of faythe, in the meane time neither haue, nor paſſe for good woorkes: dooing therein, as if a man had a Crowne ſet vpon his head, hee would therefore ſtraightway bee eſteemed, and called a King. Theſe are ſuch, whome in name onely, (but not in very trueth, and deede) a man may call Chriſtians.
               To conclude: who ſoeuer boaſteth of Chriſte, and will bee accoumpted, and called a

Chriſtian, whiche is baptized, and boſteth his faith, and vſeth the Supper of Lorde, and notwithſtanding doth in the meane ſeaſon liue wickedly: the ſame doth, by open offence, plucke away the mindes of many from the GOSPEL and is vnto them an occaſion of damnation.
               
                  Paule in the 1. Corin. 8. where he intreateth of thoſe, which abuſe Chriſtian libertie in thinges lawfull to the offence of others, affirmeth, that they, by abuſing of their knowledge, and Chriſtian libertie doe deſtroy the weake brother, for whome Chriſte dyed.
               Howe much more then ſhall he bee in faulte, which, through his corrupte wickedneſſe giueth occaſion to others to think euilly, and to ſpeake blaſphemouſly of the moſte holie Goſpell, and Chriſtian Religion? In Rom. 2. Paule accuſeth the Iewes of the wickedneſſe of their life, and ſaith, that through them, the name of God is therefore blaſphemed among the Gentiles.
               And in the 1. Timo. 6. He giueth commaundement to ſeruants, which are beleeuing, and regenerate, that they ſhould eſteeme their mayſters (not yet cōuerted, nor beleeuing) worthy of all honour, That the name of God, & his doctrine be not euill ſpoken of. And, that there ſhoulde come ſuch people in the laſte times, the holie Apoſtle Peeter foretolde, in the 2. Pet. 2.
               Thou feeſt therefore, howe great the heuyneſſe of this ſinne is, whereby, a man is author, not onely of his owne deſtruction: and alſo giueth occaſion to many, (with the hurte of their

owne ſaluation, and blaſpheming of the name, and doctrine of God,) to refuſe and contemne the GOSPELL of Chriſte.
               There is no doubte, but many amonge the Turkes, at this day, doe for this cauſe alſo, purſue with hatred the Goſpell of Chriſte, for that, they ſee Chriſtian people to liue ſo looſely, and and wickedly. And who may doubt, that there be not many amongſt the Papiſts, which perſecute the Goſpell of Chriſte, or nothing at all eſteeme it: for that there bee ſo many, whiche boaſt of the Goſpell, but ſo fewe which liue according to the Goſpell? But what ſhould I ſay of thoſe, which haue receiued with vs the pure doctrine of the Goſpell, whoſe mindes are yet weake, and wauering? Doubtleſſe, thou mayſt ſee many of theſe, either to withdrawe their mindes, or, to preferre the manners, and times, vnder whiche wee liued in the Papacie: before the manners of this age, ſo wanton, and laciuious. What other thinge thinkeſt thou would theſe doe, if any perſecution, or chaunge of Religion ſhould fall in, then, that (not vnwillingly) they would ſuffer Idolatrie, and the olde mockeryes of the Roomiſh Antichriſte to be againe thruſt vppon vs? But through whoſe faulte commeth this to paſſe, but only of thoſe, which ſhould be as leaders, and lightes vnto others, and according to the counſaile of Paule, ſhoulde in all things, (that is to ſay) in woorde, woorke, and life, ſet foorth the doctrine of the Lorde, and our Sauiour Ieſu Chriſte. Heereof therefore

wee conclude, that it becommeth all thoſe which beleeue in Chriſte, to ſet the Lawe of GOD before them, as the glaſſe of their liues, according vnto which, they ſhould direct al their doings, to the glory of God, their owne commoditie, and the edification of others: whereby it may be brought to paſſe, that the woorks of the deuil might be deſtroyed, and the woorkes of God might increaſe, to the glory of God the father euerlaſting, who of his owne meere mercy, through faith, without any our deſertes, or works, hath ſaued, & regenerated vs, that we ſhould liue vnto him, & walke in all good works. Ephe. 2.
            
            
               The thirde Doctrine.
               
                  
                     THE THIRD DOCTRINE whiche in the beginning of this little boke I proponed to bee explicated is, concerning, Our Lord Ieſu Chriſt, in the true knowledge of whom alone, conſiſteth life euerlaſting, as he himſelfe ſaith Iohn. 17. This is euerlaſting life, to knowe thee to be the true God, and whome thou haſte ſent, IESVS CHRISTE.
               
               After that Chriſte had anſwered the Phariſes to the queſtion propounded by them, to him: hee againe demaundeth of them, what they thought of Chriſte. This queſtion he moueth, that occaſion might be giuen to them, to ſearche the ſcriptures, out of which they might learne, what they ſhould certainly holde, concerning Chriſt. Beholde therfore with how great diuerſitie

of minde theſe things are doone, on either part. The Phariſes goe about this buſines, not becauſe they would learne, but with a deſire to quarel, and to deſtroy: but Chriſt, by his queſtion, intendeth this thing, that he might thorowly bring them to the knowledge and poſſeſſion of aſſured ſaluation.
               Let vs heare therfore, what is done on either ſide. Chriſte demaundeth: VVhat think yee of CHRISTE? whoſe Sonne is he? They fay vnto him,
                  Matth. 22, 
                  The Sonne of Dauid: this anſwere they gaue, becauſe they knew yt Chriſte ſhould be borne of the ſeed of Dauid, according to ye promiſe made vnto him. But foraſmuch as this ſuffiſed not to the true knowing of Chriſt: Chriſt, by this queſtion inferreth another, by the which hee indeuoreth to lead them into a fuller knowledge of Chriſte. Therfore he ſaith: How then doth Dauid in ſpirit call him LORD? ſaying, The Lorde ſaide vnto my Lord, ſit thou on my right hand, vntill I make thine enemies the footeſtole of thy feet: If Dauid therfore call him (Lorde) how is he then his (Sonne?)
               
               As if Chriſt would ſay: The father is ſuperiour to the ſonne, and, the ſonne muſt bee ſubiect to the father: And, the Lord is ſuperiour to the ſeruant, and, the ſeruant muſt be ſubiect to his Lord: How then commeth it to paſſe, that Dauid acknowledgeth Chriſte to be his Lorde, to whome with all lowlineſſe of minde, he wholly ſubmitteth himſelf? Heere, if the Iewes had admitted to counſaile the holye Scripture declaring of Chriſt, and had a little while conſidered

with them ſelues, what the office of Chriſte ſhould be in the worlde: they had eaſily founde this anſwere: Chriſte in reſpect of the humane nature which he tooke vnto him, is, the ſonne of Dauid: but, in reſpect of the deuine nature, he is the ſonne of GOD. As farre foorth therefore, as appertaineth to the humane nature, he is in appearance baſe, and poore: but as farre foorth as appertaineth to the deuine nature, hee is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, to whome Dauid muſt giue place, and humbly bowe his knees: yea, of him only, and by this onely one, receiue forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, righteouſneſſe, and life euerlaſting.
               Of this CHRISTE his Lord, Dauid ſpeaketh in the Pſalme. 51. where he ſaith: Thou ſhalt purge me with Hiſope, and I ſhall be cleane, Thou ſhalt waſh me, and I ſhalbe whiter then ſnowe.
               
               Likewiſe, Pſal. 130. If thou Lord, wilt marke what is done amiſſe. O Lord who ſhal abide it? But there is mercy with thee, therefore ſhalt thou be feared.
               
               By this MERCYE (or peopitiation) hee vnderſtandeth Chriſte, which after the humane nature ſhould be borne of him: but after the deuine nature, very GOD, from euerlaſting.
               After this manner, Chriſte, (by the queſtion propounded by him) would reduce the Iewes, to the true knowledge of Chriſte, wherein (as I haue ſaide) conſiſteth eternall life, and the wiſdome of ſaluation: as Paule teacheth, 1. Corin. 1. where he ſaith: For aſmuch as the worlde, knewe not GOD, through wiſdome: (that is to ſaye

through vnderſtanding and reaſon, naturally ingraffed in man, by God): In the wiſedome of God, (that is, in the meruelous woorks of God, which are wrought by him): It pleaſed God, by the fooliſhneſſe of preaching, to ſaue thoſe whiche beeleeue. For the Iewes require ſignes, and the Greekes ſeeke wiſdome, but wee preache Chriſte crucifyed, vnto the Iewes an offence, and vnto the Greekes, fooliſhneſſe: but vnto bothe Iewes, and Greekes which are called, we preache Chriſt, the power of GOD and the wiſdome of GOD.
               
               
                  Paule in this place diſſeuereth the wiſdome of the worlde, or mans wiſdome, from the wiſdome of GOD. For in that, that GOD ſent his ſonne, borne of a woman, made bonde vnto the Lawe, and ſubiecte to moſte bitter paſſion, and death: it ſeemed vnto men, not wiſdome, but fooliſhneſſe: foraſmuch as GOD, by his omnipotencie, could eaſily finde another way to ſaue mankinde. But it ſeemeth farre otherwiſe vnto God, yea, that which men eſteemed fooliſhneſſe, that GOD eſteemeth and accompteth for wiſdome.
               But, that wee may more fully vnderſtande theſe things, let vs ſeek As farre as the holie ſcriptures ſet foorth the ſame vnto vs. the foundation of this the ſo wounderfull counſaile of GOD, wherevpon we may builde ſafely.
               Although, GOD, if we conſider the greatneſſe of his power, coulde doe whatſoeuer hee would: yet notwithſtanding, it ſeemed good to him, to attempte nothing in this matter, but that whiche was agreeable to the iuſtice, and

glorye of his maieſtie diuine, (that is to ſaye) that, whiche all Angels, aſwell good as euill, and all people, yea, and all creatures ſhoulde acknowledge to bee in very deede, iuſte, and praiſe worthy:Luke. 2. ſaying: Glory bee to GOD on hyghe.
               
               For, euen as any Kinge, or Tyrant, when he graunteth vnto one, that which hee hath taken away from another, may be ſaid to play, the part, partely of an vniuſte, and partely of a lyberall man: Euen ſo, GOD, if vſing his power only, he had reſtored man, it had beene, on the one parte derogation to his Iuſtice: and on the other parte too muche had beene graunted to mercy: therefore it was needefull to finde ſuche a way to ſaue man, that theſe foure properties in GOD, (without the whiche GOD coulde not (BEE), or be called GOD), might ſtande together, and conſent in the hyeſt degrees, namely, MOSTE HIGH, or PERFECT POVVER, PERFECTE RIGHTEOVSNESSE: PERFECT MERCIE, and PERFECT VVISDOME. Suche a ſecret purpoſe, pleaſeth God therefore, That his onely begotten ſonne ſhould take vnto him mans nature, and dye: to the ende, that who ſo beleeueth in him may obtaine ſaluation, and life euerlaſting. So, that if GOD had vſed his omnipotencie, and Iuſtice, hee had for euer condemned all men, who through their rebellion, had offended the eternall maieſtie of God, and were therefore ſubiect, & giltie of eternall death,

and Hel. But what had then beene the praiſe of his mercy? Where then ſhoulde the glory of his wiſedome haue had place? Man, without all fauour condempned, had periſhed: and the wiſdome of GOD, of the ende of his counſaile, (whereby, hee had appoynted manne, beeing made according to his owne Image, to eternall ſaluation) had beene voyde, and fruſtrate.
               That nothing at all therefore might be derogated, from the PERFECT IVSTICE of God. It pleaſed him, that euen as by the diſobedience of one man, wee are all made giltie: ſo by the obedience of one, many ſhould be made righteous: God him ſelfe ſhould bee ſatiſfyed: and, wee beeing deliuered from guiltyneſſe, ſhoulde bee indowed with life euerlaſtynge.
               Heere alſo ſhineth foorth the PERFECT and great MERCIE of GOD, whiche ſo loued the worlde, that he would giue his owne onely begotten Sonne, that All which beleeue in him, ſhould not periſhe,Iohn. 3. but haue life euerlaſting. Heere withall is alſo ſeene the PERFECTE POVVER OF GOD, in that, that by the death of his Sonne, hee hath ouercome Death, Hell, Sinne, and all the power of the Deuil. Heere alſo appeareth the PERFECTE VVISDOME of God: in this thinge cheefely, that by his Sonne, whiche is the naturall Image of him ſelfe, and coeternall with him: hee reneweth his owne Image in vs, and giueth vnto vs eternall life,

wherevnto wee beeing in the beginning by his eternall wiſedome apopoynted) hee hath created vs.
               All which things are offered, with this condition.1. Ioh, 3.36. 
                  IF VVE BELEEVE IN HIM. For ſo ſaith Iohn Baptiſt: He that beleeueth in the Sonne hath eternall life, but hee that beleeueth not in the ſonne, ſhall not ſee life, but the wrath of God abideth vpon him. This is that wiſdome of ſaluation, which all the Prophets, Chriſte himſelf, and the Apoſtles, and their ſucceſſors, haue hetherto taught, and doe yet at this day teache: but the wiſe of this worlde, whome fortune foſtereth as it were in her boſome, haue the ſame in deriſion, and contemne it, to their owne damnation.
               Foraſmuch therfore, as the whole wiſdome of the Church of Chriſte is founded in this only IESV CHRIST: I wil ſet downe, what euery one of vs ought to eſteeme, and knowe of him, as many as deſire to obtaine ſaluation by him. Which thing that it might the more commodiouſly be doone, theſe ſix poynts, with their queſtions and anſweres, are to bee diligently conſidered.
               
                  
                     Firſte, that IESVS the ſonne of Marye, is, that promiſed Meſſias: (that is to ſay) CHRISTE.
                     Seconde, That this CHRISTE is, very GOD, and, why it was needefull he ſhould be GOD.
                     Thirde, That this CHRISTE is, very Man, And, why it was needfull he ſhould be Man.
                     In the fourth place is, to bee conſidered in this

CHRISTE, the vnitie of Perſon, wherein, albeit there bee two natures, yet notwithſtanding, not two perſons, but one onely, and why it was needefull it ſhould be ſo.
                     Fiftly: That this CHRISTE is, the Sauiour of the worlde, and by what meanes he declareth him ſelfe to be the Sauiour of the worlde.
                     Sixt: Howe we are made partakers of the benefites  of CHRISTE, and obtaine euerlaſtinge life, through him.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  ❧Of the firſte point or Chapter.
               
               
                  
                     THE FIRST THING which I haue ſet downe concerning Chriſte,
                  1. is, that IESVS the ſonne of the virgin Mary, borne in Bethlehē, is Chriſt, and that Sauiour, which God promiſed to Adam and Eue our firſt Parentes. The ſame thing all Chriſtians doe beleeue, and with one minde confeſſe, when as in the articles of the Symbole we ſay: I beleeue in IESVS CHRISTE, the onely begotten ſonne of GOD, which was conceiued by the holie Ghoſte, borne of the virgin Mary, ſuffered vnder Pontius Pilate, &c. Of this our faith we haue this immoouable foundation, againſt the which, no not the gates of Hell are not able to preuaile: viz.
               
               
                  Hee onely, (without all doubt, and truer than trueth it ſelfe, and ſo by the confeſſion of all) is the true, and onely Meſſias, in whome all

the Prophecies of the Prophetes doe meete together, and to whome only agreeth, what ſoeuer hath beene foretolde touching the Meſſias, by the holie Prophets, Moſes, and others.
                  In IESVS the Sonne of the virgin Marie, the Prophecies of all the Prophetes doe meete together, and agree, to this IESVS alone, whatſoeuer hath beene foretolde touching the Meſſias, by the holie Prophets of GOD, Moſes, and others.
                  
                     Ergo: Onely IESVS the ſonne of the virgin Mary, is the true and onely Meſſias, that is to ſay, Chriſte, the Sauiour, and redeemer of the worlde.
               
               This is the foundation of the Chriſtian Church, firme, and vnmoueable, whereof Auguſtine ſpeaketh on this manner. The ſtedfaſtneſſe of faith is in this, that all thoſe thinges which haue come to paſſe in Chriſt, were ſpoken of before.
               
               Of this foundation, Paule diſputed with the Theſſalonians (as it is written in the 17. Acts) three dayes together, and proued IESVS to be CHRIST, whome it behoued to ſuffer, and to riſe againe from death, according to the ſcriptures. In which place Luke addeth, that a great multitude of the nobler ſorte aſwell men as women, did with great greedineſſe receiue the goſpel, dayly ſearching ye ſcriptures, whither thoſe things were ſo or not, (that is to ſay) they cōferred together thoſe things, which in Moſes and the Prophetes were foretolde of Chriſte,
                  
with all thoſe things which came to paſſe in Ieſu the ſonne of Marye, and prooued in euery of thoſe things, in both, a moſt iuſt agrement. And hereof it commeth, that wherſoeuer in the hiſtory of the Goſpel, we reade any thing concerning Chriſt, it is alwaies added: So was it long before, foretolde of him. If therefore, we haue reſpect to the place, and time of his birth, to his mother, and to his miracles, to the ingratitude of the Iewes againſt him, to be ſhort, to his death, reſurrection, and aſcention, and to the ſending of the HOLIE GHOST accompliſhed in the day of Pentecoſte, and to the ſtate of the church of Chriſte, and ſo foorth, to the perſecution, and diſcorde in the ſame: wee ſhall finde all theſe things to bee foretolde by the holie Prophetes of God, foure thouſand yeeres back, before that Ieſus was borne in Bethlehem.
               
               Touchinge whiche thinges, who ſo will knowe more, let him reade our Commentaryes vppon the 84. Pſalme. I thought it good to note theſe thinges on this wiſe, breefely at the leaſte, that euery one might haue occaſion to conferre betweene themſelues, the olde Teſtamente, (that is to ſaye) the Prophetes: and the newe, (that is to ſaye) the Euagelicall Hiſtorye, of IESV CHRISTE: whiche thinge, who ſoeuer ſhall doe diligently, ſhall, not a little, ſtrengthen his fayth, againſt the contempners of GOD, the Iewes, againſt the forſakers of the fayth, the Mahometiſtes, and to bee ſhorte, agaynſte all Idolatrous

nations, yea, againſt mans owne reaſon, which cannot comprehend, this ſo infinite a benefite of Chriſte,1. Cor. 2.24 as Paule ſaith: The naturall man perceiueth not the thinges whiche are of GOD. Let vs ſtick faſt therefore, with a firme faith vnto the word of God, and captiuing our reaſon, let vs yeelde vnto God this glory, that he is farre wiſer than all creatures, and that he is able to performe his promiſes, albeit to our reaſon, it ſeeme otherwiſe.
               A certaine man ſaide wiſely: That there is a greate ſtrife, betweene FAITH, and REASON, and that neither of them, will leaue of, or giue place, before that the eye of one of them is plucked out. Foraſmuch therefore, as faith, hath her eye, of the woorde of God, and of the holy Ghoſte: and, Reaſon hath her eye of the fleſhly wiſdome: euery Chriſtian muſt indeuour with all ſtudy, and diligence, by the holy Scripture, & by feruent praier vnto God, ſo to ſtrengthen his faith: that with the ſame alone he may ſee, in the matter of ſaluation: and that the eye of Reaſon might bee ſhut vp, leaſt it leade vs away, from the fountaine of our ſaluation, that is, from our Lord Ieſu Chriſte, our onely redeemer, and Sauiour.
               Let theſe thinges ſuffice to be ſpoken, in the firſt place, concerning Chriſte, whome I beſeech with my whole heart, to illuminate vs with his holie ſpirite, and leade, and keepe vs in his veritie. Amen.
               
            
            
               
               Of the ſecond Chapter.
               
                  
                     THE SECOND THING which I proponed concerning Chriſte our Mediatoure, and Sauiour, is, that hee is verye GOD, and why, it was needeful, that the Mediatour ſhould be God. There bee many euident, and firme teſtimonyes, whereby the diuine nature of our Sauiour is prooued. The firſt of which teſtimonies, is taken of the manifeſt worde of God, in which, he is called GOD.
               
               The ſecond is taken, of his diuine woorkes.
               The third, of the worſhip, which is deſeruedly giuen vnto him, by all creatures. The fourth, of the vnited conſente, and experience of the whole Church of Chriſte.
               
                  FIRST, by the manifeſt teſtimonies of holie Scripture, it is prooued, that our Mediatour, and Sauiour, is, true, eternall, and omnipotent GOD.
               
               
                  
                     Eſaie. 54.
                  The Lord of hoſtes is his name, and thy redeemer, the holie one of Iſrael, ſhalbe called GOD of all the earth.
               
               
                  
                     Iere. 23.
                  This is the name whiche they ſhall call him, IEHOVAH our righteouſneſſe.
               
               
                  
                     Pſal. 6.8.
                  IEHOVAH is his name, reioyce ye before him.
               
               
                  
                     Iohn. 1.
                  In the beginning was the VVORDE, and the worde was with GOD, and GOD VVAS THE VVORDE. Heere, he calleth Chriſte, the worde of God, becauſe the worde of God doth ſounde of him.
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     Rom. 9.
                  Of whome (according to the fleſhe) Chriſte came, which is abooue all, GOD bleſſed for euer.
               
               
                  1. Iohn. 5.
                  And wee are in the trueth, in his ſonne, the ſame is very GOD, and life eternall.
               
               It is to be noted, that as often as Chriſte is called the onely begotten Sonne of GOD: ſo often he is prooued to bee very God together with the father, and the holie Ghoſte: beeing three perſons, in one diuine eſſence, euen as all Chriſtians, according to the diuine manifeſtation, doe confeſſe, one God, and three perſons of the Godhead.
               
                  THE SECOND kinde of teſtimonies, wherby the deuine nature of our ſauiour is proued, is taken, of his diuine works. For, theſe are the works of God alone, viz. to create, to quicken the creature, to conteine all thinges vnder the hand of his power, by his owne power to raiſe the dead againe, to ſee ye hearts of men, to heare the inward mournings, and deſires of the heart of man, to be preſent euery where, and to be, at one, and the ſame time, in the hearts of all Chriſtians. Theſe diuine woorkes and properties, are in the holie Scriptures, attributed to Ieſu Chriſte: wherefore, it is heereof rightly concluded, that he is true and eſſentiall God. This argument is of force, by this rule: VVhen ſoeuer any thing, is truely affirmed of ſome thing, and artributed vnto it, which appertaineth to our nature only: then, of neceſſitie, the ſame nature muſt bee alſo attributed, vnto that ſame thing.
               
               
                  
                  THE THIRD kinde of teſtimonies, wherby the diuine nature of the Meſſias is proued, is required of the honor, and worſhip, which is giuen, and aſcrybed to him, in the holie ſcripture.
               God ſaith in the Prophet: My Glorie (that is to ſay) my diuine honor, and worship, which is dewe to me alone, I will giue to none other.
               
               I onely, am that fountaine, from whence all good things doe flowe: I onely am hee whiche wipe out your iniquities: I onely doe iuſtifie, and ſanctifie the people: I onely am the Sauiour, in me alone all people ſhould beleeue, and call vpon me alone: Let all creatures, Heauen, and earth, Angels, and men, honour me alone, yea, and whoſoeuer are in Hell, let them bowe their knees vnto mee: Such honour, and worſhip which is dewe vnto GOD alone, is in the Scriptures attributed to our Lorde Ieſu Chriſte.
               
                  1. Corinth. 1.
                  Chriſte is made vnto vs of GOD, VVISDOME, RIGHTEOVSNESSE, SANCTIFICATION, and REDEMPTION, that hee whiche reioyceth, ſhoulde reioyce in the Lorde, (that is to ſaye) in Ieſu Chriſte.
               
               
                  
                     Hebru. 1.
                  And let all the Angels of God worſhip him, (that is to ſay) Ieſus Chriſte.
               
               
                  Stephen Actes. 7.
                  
                     ſayeth: Lorde Ieſu receiue my ſpirite.
               
               
                  2. Theſsalonians. 2.
                  Our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte, and GOD, and our Father, whiche hath loued vs,

and giuen vs eternall conſolation, and good hope, comforte your hearts in grace, and ſtrengthen you in all good ſaying, and doing.
               
               
                  Paule likewiſe in all his Epiſtles, wiſheth to them to whome he writeth, Grace from our Lord Ieſu Chriſte.
               
               
                  2. Cor. 13.
                  
                     He ſaith: The Grace of our Lorde Ieſu Chriſte, and the loue of GOD, and the felowſhip of the holie Ghoſte, bee with you all.
               
               
                  THE FOVRTH KINDE of teſtimonyes, whereby Chriſte our Lorde is prooued, verye GOD, is, the vnited conſente, of the Chriſtian congregation, and the ſure experience in the harts of all thoſe, which with a true, and liuely faith, doe imbrace Chriſte, our Lord, and Sauiour.
               
                  Athanaſius in his Simbole, ſpeaketh on this manner: This is the Catholike faith, that we worſhip one GOD in trinitie, and trinitie in vnitie:
               
               
                  Neither confounding the perſons, nor deuiding the ſubſtance:
               
               
                  For, there is one perſon of the Father, and another of the Sonne, and another of the holie Ghoſte:
               
               
                  But, the Godhead of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holie Ghoſte is one, the glory equall, the maieſtie coeternall:
               
               
                  Such as the Father is, ſuch is the Sonne, and ſuch is the holie Ghoſte:
               
               
                  The Father vncreate, the Sonne vncreate, and the holie Ghoſte vncreate:
               
               
                  The Father incomprehenſible, the Sonne incomprehenſible, and the holie Ghoſt incomprehenſible:
               
               
                  
                  The Father eternall, the Sonne eternall, and the holie Ghoſte eternall:
               
               
                  And yet they are not three eternals, but one eternall:
               
               
                  As alſo there be not three vncreated, nor three incomprehenſible: but one vncreated, and one incomprehenſible.
               
               
                  Likewiſe, the father is almightie, the Sonne almightie, and the holie Ghoſte almightie:
               
               
                  And yet, they are not three almighties, but one almightie:
               
               
                  So the father is God, the Sonne God, and the holie Ghoſt, God:
               
               
                  And yet, not three Gods, but one God.
               
               
                  So the Father is Lord, the Sonne is Lord, and the holie ghoſte is Lorde:
               
               
                  And yet not three Lords, but one Lorde.
               
               
                  For, like as wee are compelled by the Chriſtian veritie, to acknowledge euery perſon by himſelfe, to be God, and Lorde:
               
               
                  So, are we forbidden by the Catholike Religion, to ſay there be three Gods, or three Lordes.
               
               
                  The Father is made of none, neither created, nor begotten:
               
               
                  The Sonne is of rhe Father alone, neither made, nor created, but begotten:
               
               
                  The holie Ghoſte is of the Father, and of the Sonne, neither made, nor created, nor begotten, but proceeding.
               
               
                  Therefore, there is one Father, not three Fathers, one Sonne, not three Sonnes, one holie Ghoſte, not three holie Ghoſtes.
               
               
                  
                  And in this Trinitie, none is afore, or after other, none is greater, or leſſe then other,
               
               
                  But the whole three perſons, are coeternall together, and coequall.
               
               Agreeable to this in all poyntes, is the confeſſion of the vniuerſall Church, ſet foorth in the Nicene Creede:
               
               
                  I beleeue in one GOD, the father almightie, maker of Heauen, and Earth, and of all thinges viſible, and inuiſible:
               
               
                  And, in one Lorde IESVS CHRISTE, the onely begotten Sonne of God: begotten of the father before all worlds: GOD of GOD, Light of Light, very God, of very God, begotten, not made, beeing of one ſubſtance with the father, by whome all things were made, &c.
               
               That addition to the Himpnes, now vſed many yeeres in the church of Chriſte: (Glory bee to the father, and to the Sonne, and to the holie Ghoſt: As it was in the beginning, is now, and euer ſhalbe world without end:) proueth the ſame thing.
               Likewiſe, the whole Greeke, & Latine church, for continuall agrement ſake, do vſe this Greek Prayer:Lord haue mercy. Chriſte haue mercy. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . And, by this little forme of prayer, Chriſtian people, doe confeſſe one GOD, and three perſons of the Godhead, therefore all whiche are truely Chriſtians, beeing taught by their owne experience: doe knowe, and confeſſe, Ieſus Chriſte, to be very, and omnipotent GOD. For, in the time of their praying, they feele the preſence, and power of God, by whiche he comforteth them,

and, not onely ſealeth the trueth of his moſt holie Goſpel in their hearts: but alſo maketh them couragious, that they may boldely triumph ouer Death, Sinne, Hell, the Deuill, and all his bondſlaues, and members.
               Of this thing, many examples of holy Martyres are extant, of whome euen many noble matrons, and virgins, and innumerable others, dyd, with greater reioyſing, and deſire couet to dye for the name of Chriſte: than to flowe, and abound, with the delicates, honours, riches, and pleaſures of this world. But, from whence proceedeth this ſo great fortitude of minde, and redines to receiue puniſhments: but from that only efficacie, of the power of Ieſus Chriſt, which hath manifeſted his diuine ſtrength, preſent in them.
               Let vs in like manner at this day keepe faſt, this ſame Ieſus Chriſte, whiche will alwayes be at hand, ſo that with a ſure faith, wee craue his ayde, earneſtly, and feruently. And, thus, by ſure, and euident teſtimonies, I haue ſhewed, that IESVS CHRISTE our Sauiour is VERY GOD.
               
               Now let vs ſee, why it was needeful, the mediatour ſhould be GOD? That it was neceſſary, that the Meſſias, and our Sauiour ſhould bee GOD, there bee two moſte weightie cauſes.
               The firſt is: The greatneſſe of the euil, wherwith the nature of man, was preſſed downe, which, by any creature, could not be taken away.
               
               
                  The other is: The weakeneſſe, or infiirmitie of the creatures, to the reſtoring againe of thoſe good things, which were loſt, by ſinne. Of theſe two cauſes, I will ſpeake ſomewhat, that the benefites of Chriſte towarde vs, might the more ſhine forth, and that we may be ſtirred vp therby, to the honouring of his name, with due thankfulneſſe of our whole life, and minde.
               
                  THE GREATNES OF THE EVIL, wherwith the nature of man was oppreſſed, is perceiued in foure things cheefely: namely, In the VVEIGHT OF SINNE, In the IVSTICE OF THE ANGER OF GOD: In the POVVER OF DEATH: and in the MOSTE CRVEL TYRANNIE OF THE DEVILL.
               
               
                  THE VVEIGHT OF SINNE was greater, then that any finite, or bounded power, (ſuch as is the power of Angels, and men) might beare the burthen thereof. For, in aſmuch as ye guiltineſſe was infinite, by reaſon of the infinite good whiche was offended, namely GOD, whoſe maieſtie was offended, by the ſinne of our firſt parentes:Ye iuſticiaries, and meritmōgers, note your owne abilities, and the ſweetnes of your doctrine in this article. It was needefull, that this ſin, ſhould, either with infinite paines, be puniſhed, according to the rule of the deuine Iuſtice: or els that ſatiſfaction, to the deuine iuſtice, ſhould be made for the ſame. But, becauſe this ſatiſfatiō muſt be the price of infinite goodneſſe, and equiualent to the ſame: it coulde not, by any creature, no neither by all creatures together, be accompliſhed. It was needfull therefore,

that the clenſer of ſinne, ſhould bee GOD: for onely GOD, as he is infinite, ſo, he is able to aboliſh, and ouercome infinite euill.
               
                  THE IVSTICE OF GODS ANGER required a proportion of reuengement, according to the offence. Foraſmuch therefore, as the offence was infinite, the anger was alſo infinite: which, the firſt creature, was not able to pacifie, nor ſuſtaine: wherefore it was needeful, that the Mediatour, which ſhoulde pacifie the anger of GOD, ſhould bee GOD. Of this matter Paule Rom. 1. ſpeaketh thus:Rom. 1. 
                  The anger of GOD is reuealed from Heauen, vpon the vngodlyneſſe of all men, &c.
               
               That theſe things could not be taken away, without the mediatour, this ſaying of Iohn Baptiſt, in Iohn. 3. teacheth: Hee which beleeueth not in the Sonne, the wrath of GOD abided vpon him. And, that this anger of GOD is vnmeaſurable, and infinite, by reaſon of ſin (in which theſe euils doe concurre, namely, contempt of the diuine maieſtie: proude rebellion againſt the lawe of God, vnwoorthy of the Image of God, wherevnto man was created, defilyng, following of Sathan the enemie of God, filthy declyning from the tents of God, to the Deuill, and intollerable ingratitude) is knowen by the puniſhments of our firſt Parentes, by the puniſhments following vpon all ye poſterities of Adam, by the threatnings of God, by the calamities wherewith mankinde is kept vnder, by the deuils tyranny againſt man, by the tokens of the

anger of God in Heauen, in earth, in the ſea, by the greatnes of the paines euerlaſting, whiche they ſhall ſuſtaine, which are not conuerted: to be ſhort, by the infinite price paide for the redeeming of the paines for ſinne. Who ſeeth not heere, that it was impoſſible that the anger of GOD could haue beene taken away, but by a Mediatour, whoſe power ſhould be infinite?
               
                  THE POVVER OF DEATH was greater, than that it might be ouercome, by any creature, inſomuch that Plinie ſaide, (how beit falſely) that it was not poſſible vnto God to raiſe vp the dead. Now foraſmuch, as the cheefeſt office of ye mediatour is TO DESTROY DEATH, it was needfull that he ſhould excell with a power diuine, whereby, as to giue life, ſo he might be able to aboliſh death: For with him no word is impoſſible.
               
                  THE MOST CRVEL TYRANNY OF THE DEVIL, (vnder which mankinde was holden captiue, for ſin) was alſo to be ſuppreſſed by ye mediator. But how impoſſible this was to the nature of man, the hiſtory of the worlde, with the experience of all people doth teſtifie: wherfore it was needful, the mediatour ſhould be GOD, which might ſuppreſſe the tyranny of the Deuill, by his owne power. Heereby it is euident, that to the taking away of the greatneſſe of the euil, wherwith mankinde was oppreſſed: it was requiſite, that the Mediatour ſhould be GOD.
               
               Now heerewithall let the greatneſſe of the

loue, in the euerlaſting father, the ſonne, and the holie ghoſt, towards mankinde, bee conſidered:A heauenlye and ioyfull meditation. The Father ſpared not his owne ſonne, but would haue him ſubiect vnto paines, that hee might deliuer vs from euerlaſting paines.Iohn. 
                        •
                     . The Sonne willing, and obedient to the father, is made a ſacrifice, deriuing the guiltineſſe of ſinne into himſelfe. The holie Ghoſte, himſelfe will dwell in the hearts of the reconciled, and kindle in vs motiōs agreeing to the wil of God. Theſe things wil ſtir vp in vs faith, Inuocation, and thankfulneſſe towards God, and will defende our mindes againſt the terrour of death, againſt the tyrannie of the deuil, yea, againſt all things, which are bent to ouerthrowe the hope of our ſaluation, which we haue in our Lord, and Sauiour IESV CHRISTE.
               
               
                  THE SECONDE CAVSE, why it was needefull, that the Mediatour ſhould bee GOD, is, THE VNABILITIE, AND VVEAKENESSE OF THE CREATVRE to the reſtoring againe of thoſe good things, which through ſinne we haue loſte. And albeit in this one woorde of, (THE IMAGE OF GOD,) theſe good thinges be comprehended: yet many things to the reparation of the ſame, are neceſſarilie required, whiche Paule. 1. Cor. 1. reconeth vp, where he ſaith: CHRIST is borne vnto vs of GOD, VVISDOME, RIGHTEOVSNESSE: SANCTIFICATION: and REDEMPTION, that he which reioyceth, ſhould reioyce in the Lord,
               
               
                  Theſe foure kindes of good thinges, no creature, or finite power was able to reſtore againe vnto men: as we ſhal ſe of euery of theſe things in order.
               
                  FIRST, therefore, the Mediatour muſt reſtore VVISDOME, not ſuch as that of the worlde is, whiche is ſhut vp within certaine limites: but ſuch as is hid from the Princes of this world: which wiſdome, is, of Zachary defined to be:Luke. 1.77.78. 
                  The knowledge of ſaluation, for the remiſſion of ſinnes, by the bowels of the mercy of our God. Of this wiſdome ſpeaketh the Euangeliſt Iohn in his firſt Chapter, when he ſayth: No man hath ſeene God at any time: but the ſonne which is in the boſome of the father, he hath declared him vnto vs.
               
               But ſome man may ſaye: Coulde not God haue reuealed this wiſdome vnto men, by Angels, and Prophets? I aunſwere, It is one thing, to giue, and to teach wiſdome as Miniſters: and another thing to bee the wiſedome, (that is to ſay) effectually to bring to paſſe, that the harts of men may receiue,Or the wiſdome of ſaluation. ſauing wiſdome.
               The voice of man ſtriketh the eares of the body: but the Sonne of God, which is the wiſedome it ſelfe, of God, repleniſheth the minde of man, with the wiſdome of ſaluation. For, the worde of the Prophets, and of other Miniſters of the woorde of God, doth then at the length, bring fruite: when as God, by the worde, openeth the hearte, and inſtilleth the ſeedes of true wiſdome, whiche thing doubtleſſe is not in the

power of any creature, but of the Creatour alone: whereof it followeth, that the Mediatoure muſt be GOD.
               
               
                  SECONDLY, The Mediatour muſt reſtore againe RIGHTEOVSNESSE. For, without perfect righteouſneſſe, no man may come foorth into the ſight of GOD. But no man is able to giue, Perfect Righteouſneſſe, which ſhould be ſufficient for all people, except GOD. For, that man might be perfectly righteouſe before God, two things are required: Of which, the firſt is, To be ſet free from vnrighteouſneſſe, and ſinne, which euils men bring with them into the world. The other: To bee indowed and garniſhed, with a full obedience of the lawe of GOD, which is the meaſure of righteouſneſſe, whiche is before God auaylable.
               Of the former we haue ſpoken before, where we ſhewed, the enormitie of ſinne, and the iuſtice of the angre of GOD. Touching the other, which is: To be indowed, and garniſhed with righteouſneſſe, whereby the lawe of GOD is ſatiſfyed: It is euident, that the righteouſneſſe of no creature, foraſmuch as it is (finite): can bee ſufficient to ſaluation, for infinite numbers of people, which thing doubtleſſe in the Mediatour is required. For, as hee muſt with a ſufficient ſacrifice of clenſing, make ſatiſfaction for ſinnes, and ſo take away all guiltineſſe: So muſt hee, by his owne obedience towarde the lawe, ſet all thoſe righteous in the ſight of God, whiche beleeue in him. For ſo Paule ſaith: Him whiche

knew no ſinne,2. Cor. 5. he made ſinne, (that is to ſay, God caſt vpon him the guiltineſſe of all ſinners, that he ſhould ſuffer and die for them:) that we might be made the righteouſneſſe of GOD in him (that is to ſay) that the righteouſneſſe of him, might be imputed to vs, for righteouſneſſe in the ſight of GOD. Therefore in another place Paule ſaieth:Rom. 10.4. 
                  Chriſte is THE ENDE OF THE LAVVE, to ſaue all thoſe whiche beleeue in him. Heereby it may be ſeene, that the Mediatour muſt of neceſſitie be VERY GOD.
               
               In the third place, followeth, SANCTIFICATION, which the Mediatour muſt bring. Which thing, foraſmuch as no creature can performe the Mediatour muſt needes bee GOD. For it is the propertie of God alone, to giue the holie Ghoſte the ſanctifier, without whome our Sanctification, can not bee broughte to paſſe.
               Moreouer, foraſmuch as SANCTIFICATION, is ſet againſt SINNE, and in Sinne are two things, namely, the formalitie, as the guiltineſſe: and the materiall parte, as the corrupt qualities, and actions? the Sanctification muſt be alſo double, one, whiche is ſet againſt guiltineſſe, whiche is, The cleanſing of ſinne, by the blood of Chriſte: the other, whiche is ſet againſt the corrupt 
                     •
                  ualities and actions, which is, aſwell the ſeparation of man from the prophanitie of the nations, by the mortifying of the fleſh, which is doone, by reſiſting

corrupt cogitations, affections, and deſires of the fleſh, and, with the whole power, abſtayning from euill woorkes: as alſo, the ioyning together of man with GOD, by the quickening of the ſpirite, by obeying vnto God, and by following pureneſſe of the minde, of affections, and innocencie of the whole life: breefely, that man, might renounce the Deuill, and and his woorkes, and cleaue with the whole heart vnto GOD alone.
               This Sanctification, is alſo called of Paule Phillip 3. (SPIRITVALL CIRCVMCISION.) VVe (ſayeth hee) are Circumciſion, whiche ſerue GOD in the Spirite, and reioyce in Chriſte, and haue no confidence in the fleſh. Therefore, Spirituall Circumciſion,
                  Spirituall circumciſion what it is. 
                  is a cutting awaye of the truſte of the fleſh, after whiche ſucceedeth a reioycing in CHRIST, and a pure deſire to worſhip GOD. And this, truely, is that SANCTIFICATION, which GOD, and Man, our Mediatour, doth bring.
               
                  THE FOVRTH GOOD THING, which our Mediatour ſhould reſtore vnto vs, is PERFECTE REDEMPTION.
               
               This Redemption requireth, firſte, a continuall preſence of the Mediatoure, in the Churche, (or Congregation:) (that is to ſay) in all the godly euery where diſpearſed, through out the whole worlde. But who can bee together, and alwayes preſent, in ſo many places, excepte he bee GOD?
               
               
                  Secondly, it requireth, a preſeruation of the congregation (that is to ſay) that the Mediatour ſhould be a keeper, or preſeruer, not onely, of the whole Church, but alſo, of euery member of the ſame, againſt infinite ſubtilties, and lyinges in waight, of the Deuil, and man.
               Thirdly: it requireth that, the Mediatour ſhould looke into the heartes of men, leaſt hee ſhould be deceiued, by the outwarde diſguiſing of hypocrites. Now, foraſmuch as it is the propertie of GOD onely, to looke into the hearts of men, and to beholde the inwarde ſecretes of their affections: ſurely, the Mediatour muſt of neceſſitie be GOD. Furthermore, to the office of the Mediatour, this alſo appertaineth: that he doe euery where, heare the gronings of ſuch as doe call vpon him, whiche, doubtleſſe is the propertie, of the diuine power alone.
               Fiftly: it requireth, that, the Mediatour, in the laſt day, ſhould rayſe vp, all the deade: whiche work, is aboue the powers of all creatures. Yea, all the creatures of God, by their owne power, are not able to rayſe vp, a deade Flye againe, muchleſſe all people, whoſe bodyes haue beene by diuerſe meanes, and in diuers places ſcattered abrode: But, foraſmuch as the Mediatour muſt doe this, and that in the twinckling of an eye, he muſt of neceſſitie, be GOD.
               
               Sixtly, and laſtly, it requireth, that, the Mediatour doe giue to thoſe whiche are rayſed vp, (which in the true faith haue departed this life) eternall life, perpetuall glorie, and conformitie

with GOD. But who can bring this to paſſe, but onely GOD? Wee haue therefore aboundantly ſhewed: That our Sauiour, and Mediatour is GOD: And, why it was needefull, that hee ſhould be very GOD.
               
            
            
               Of the third point or Chapter.
               
               
                  
                     IN THE THIRD PLACE, wee haue proponed of Chriſte, that hee is VERY MAN, And, why it was needefull, that the Mediatour ſhould bee man. The whole vniuerſall Churche, as it beleeueth, Chriſte, to be borne, very man: So, that he alſo, at this day, is, and for euer ſhall remaine, very man, it doth, godlyly confeſſe.
               
                  Geneſ. 3. The ſeede of the woman, which ſhall breake the head of the Serpent, is promiſed. By the name of, THE SEEDE OF THE VVOMAN, without all doubt, the nature of man, which our Mediatour, at the time appointed by the father, ſhould take vnto him, is ſignifyed. GOD promiſed to Abraham, that in his ſeede, all nations ſhould be bleſſed.
               Hee promiſed alſo, to Dauid, that his ſonne ſhould ſit vpon his ſeate, and reigne for euer.
               
                  Eſaie. 7. Beholde a virgin ſhall conceiue, and bring foorth a Sonne, and thou ſhalt call his name EMANVEL,
                   (that is to ſay) which ſhalbe GOD and MAN.
               
               
                  
                  Luke. 1.With theſe Prophecies agreeth, the whole Hiſtory Euangelicall. The Angel, beeing ſent to the virgin Marie, ſaith: Beholde, thou ſhalt conceiue in thy wombe, and ſhalt bring foorth a Sonne, and thou ſhalt call his name IESVS, he ſhalbe great, and ſhalbe called the Sonne of the hyeſt. VVhiche thing when ſhe had heard, ſhe meruayled, and ſaide, How can this thing bee, foraſmuch as I knowe not man: And the Angell aunſwered vnto her: The holy Ghoſte ſhall come vppon thee, and the power of the moſte hyeſt, ſhall ouerſhadowe thee: (that is to ſay.) Thou ſhalt conceiue, and bring foorth, not, by the ſeede of man, or, after, the common lawe of nature: but, by the power and wiſe counſaile of GOD. And, ſo the Angell concludeth his oration, with this ſentence worthy to be remembred: with GOD, nothing ſhall bee impoſſible.
               
               The eight day, after his natiuitie, hee was Circumciſed according to the lawe, after, the manner obſerued in other Infantes of the Iewes. He was brought vp, by Ioſeph, and Mary, hee greewe in wiſedome, and in fauour, with GOD, & men, & was he found altogether, a naturall man, hauing body, and ſoule, and all condition and properties of humane nature, ſin onely excepted.
               This is the ſumme of the Chriſtian fayth, touching the manhood of Ieſu Chriſte, as wee confeſſe in the articles of the Symbole, when we ſay: I beleeue in IESVS CHRISTE, our Lorde, which was conceiued by the holy Ghoſt, borne of

the virgin Mary. But why was it needfull,The ſeconde parte of the prepoſtion. that the Mediatour ſhould be VERY MAN. Foure cauſes may be rehearſed, out of the holy Scriptures, why it was needefull, that the Meſſias ſhould bee man.
               
                  
                     1. The Iuſtice of GOD.
                     2. The reſtoring of the Image of GOD, in man agayne, which, through Sinne was loſt.
                     3. The manner of Adoption.
                     4. The aſſurance of our Reſurrection, frō death.
                  
               
               Firſt, THE IVSTICE OF GOD required, that the diſobedience, in our fleſh committed, ſhould bee amended in the ſame. For it was agreeable, to the order of the Iuſtice of GOD, that in aſmuch as mankinde, in one Adam, had firſte offended: ſo ſome body in mankinde, fre from ſinne, ſhould ſuſtaine the paiues, whiche ſhould bee the price for the reſt. Our Lorde therefore tooke mans nature vnto him, & was made man, ſhewing forth, as it were,1. Cor. 15. the perſon of Adam himſelfe, whoſe name is alſo attributed vnto him: yt he might thorowly ſatiſfie the puniſhment of ſinne in the fleſh, beeing in fleſh committed.
               Therefore Paule Rom 5. ſaith: If, by the ſinne of one, death reigned, by the meanes of one, (namely Adam:) much more, they which receiue abundance of Grace, and of the gifte of Righteouſneſſe, ſhall reigne in life, by the meanes of one Ieſus Chriſte. Item: As by the diſobedience of one, (Adam), many, (All men) became ſinners: So, by the obedience of one (of Chriſte) many are made righteous.
               
               
                  
                  Item 1. Corin. 15. For, by a man (Adam) came death: And, by a man (Ieſus Chriſte) came the reſurrection from Death.
               
               
                  
                     Hebr. 2.
                  Foraſmuch as the Children are partakers of fleſh, and blood, he himſelfe alſo, in like caſe tooke parte with them: that through death, he might aboliſh him, which had the rule of death, (that is to ſay) the Deuill.
               
               Heerevnto alſo appertaineth that ſaying of Irenaeus: It behoued him, whiche ſhould begin, to ſlea ſinne, and to redeeme man, which was guiltie of death: to be made the ſelfe ſame thing, (that is to ſay) Man.
               
               And Auguſtine ſaith: fleſh, had blinded thee, fleſh doth heale thee: becauſe Chriſte came in ſuch wiſe: that by fleſhe, he might quench the corruptions of the fleſh.
               The ſecond cauſe is, THE RESTORING OF THE IMAGE OF GOD, according vnto which, man was created: This thing could by no meanes bee doone, but, by the naturall Image of GOD (that is) the euerlaſting and onely begotten ſonne of GOD: which therfore tooke mans nature vnto him, that he might againe reſtore the Image of God, in all thoſe, which, through a liuely faith, are, into his body, ingraffed Whereof Athaniſius ſaieth: It was conuenient, that the Sonne ſhould take man his nature vnto him: that this perſon whiche is the ſubſtantiall Image of the Father, might reſtore againe, the Image of GOD in vs.
               
               The thirde cauſe was, that the reaſon of

our ADOPTION did require the ſame. For the Sonne of God, did therefore take the nature of man vnto him: that hee might make vs the Sonnes of God. He would therfore, by the ſocietie of nature, bee ioyned vnto vs, and become our brother: that we, beeing become his members, might be made the ſonnes of God. For, we are therefore called, and are the Children of God: becauſe wee are, (by faith) in CHRIST, whiche is the naturall ſonne of God. For, in him alone, wee are beloued,Ephe. 1. and Sonnes.
               
                  
                     Iohn. 1.
                  To as many as beleeued on his name, hee gaue power to be made, the Sonnes of GOD.
               
               
                  
                     Gal. 4.
                  VVhen the fulneſſe of time was come, GOD ſent his Sonne, made of a woman, & made bond vnto the lawe, that he might redeeme thoſe, which were vnder the lawe, that we might receiue the Adoption of Sonnes. Becauſe ye are the Sonnes of GOD, therefore GOD hath ſent the Spirit of his Sonne into our hearts, crying Abba Father.
               
               In this ſentence alſo ſpeaketh Irenaeus: VVe could not be (ſaith he) partakers of the Adoption of his Sonnes, vnleſſe, we had receiued the ſame, by his Sonne, (that is to ſay) vnleſſe his Sonne had beene made man.
               
               The fourth cauſe: THE ASSVRANCE,
                  The cauſe & aſſurance of the ryſing againe at the laſt day. force, and efficacie of OVR RESVRRECTION conſiſteth in this, that our Mediatour is man. For, the only hope and aſſurance, which we haue of the Reſurrection of our bodyes, is, that Chriſt our Mediatour, hath taken vnto him

our fleſh. For, the fleſhe which wee doe now beare about vs, ſubiecte to corruption, is already,1. Cor. 15. raiſed vp in Chriſte, as in the firſt frutes: and is entred into the poſſeſſion of the kingdome of heauen, and is there become immortall. By the vertue therefore, of that ſocietie, which we haue with the gloriouſe body of Chriſte, we ſhall be rayſed vp in the laſt day, and ſhalbe indowed Or, in our fleſh. after the fleſh, with immortalitie: ſo, that beeing like vnto Chriſte our brother, wee may enioy with him, eternall ioy, and ſaluation.
               This thing Paule purpoſeth to ſhowe 1. Cor. 15. when he ſayth: CHRISTE is riſen from the dead, the firſt frutes of them which ſleepe: for by a man came death, and by a man came the reſurrection of the dead: for as in Adam all men dye, ſo in Chriſte ſhall all men be made aliue. Therefore when ſoeuer temptation falleth in, willing to driue vs to doubt of the reſurrection of the fleſhe: let vs lifte vp our heartes to Ieſus Chriſte, already rayſed vp from death: hee bothe can, and will raiſe vp vs alſo from the dead, foraſmuch as he is God almightie, and alſo our brother, fellowe of the ſame humane nature with vs.
               Therefore Paule ſayth, Philip. 3. Our conuerſation is in Heauen, from whence alſo wee looke for the Sauiour, euen the Lorde Ieſus Chriſte, whiche ſhall tranſforme our vile bodye, that hee may make it like to his glorious body, by the mightie workeing, whereby he is alſo able to ſubdue all things vnto himſelfe.
                  
               
               Thus, I haue recited, foure moſte weightie

cauſes, whereby it is ſhewed, that it was highly needefull, that the Mediatour betweene GOD and man, ſhould haue beene Man, and haue taken humane nature vnto him, and in the ſame, be made like vnto vs.
               Let vs continually in our heart, beare about with vs theſe cauſes, that we may be ſtirred vp to earneſt thankfulneſſe towards GOD, which would haue his ſonne, whē he was riche, to become man, and verely a pore man: that through his pouertie, wee might be riche, in the poſſeſſion of ſaluation, and life euerlaſting.
            
            
               Of the fourth point or Chapter.
               
               
                  
                     THE FOVRTH THING whiche I ſaid, is to be conſidered in Meſsias, is, that HEE IS ONE PERSON, and why this thing was needefull.
               That our Mediatour is one perſon, (beſide many other) theſe things do confirme.
               
                  Iohn 1. The woord became fleſh:
                   (that is to ſay) Man. But Iohn addeth: And wee ſawe the glorie of it: But if there had beene two perſons, without all doubt, he would haue ſaid: VVe ſawe the glory of (Them): and, not the glory of (It).
               
               In the 3. of Matth. the voice of God ſoūdeth vpon Ieſus ye ſonne of Mary, beeing baptized of Iohn: This is my welbeloued Sonne, in whome I am wel pleaſed. In this place, & (the ſame god) alſo in the moūt, Mat, 17.
                   acknowledgeth this ſonne of Mary,
                  
to be his ſonne alſo, & ſaith: (HEARE HIM,) but if there had beene two perſons, without all doubt, he would haue ſaid (HEARE THEM.)
               
               And in the 4. Chapter to the Epheſians, Paule ſaieth: Hee whiche deſcended, is euen the ſame which alſo aſcended aboue all Heauens, to fulfill all things.
               
               The whole Church alſo confeſſeth the ſame thing, euen as the Symbole of Athanaſius hath, in this manner. The right faith is, that wee beleeue, and confeſſe, that our Lord Ieſus Chriſte, the Sonne of God, IS GOD, and man.
               
               
                  GOD, of the ſubſtance of his father, begotten before the worlde, and MAN of the ſubſtance of his mother, borne in the worlde.
               
               
                  Perfect GOD, and perfect MAN, of a reſonable ſoule, and humane fleſh ſubſiſting.
               
               
                  Equall to the Father, as touching his Godheade, and inferriour to the father, as touching his Manhoode.
               
               
                  VVho, although he bee GOD, and MAN, yet, he is not two, but ONE CHRISTE.
               
               
                  One, not by conuerſion of the Godhead into fleſh: but by taking the manhood into GOD.
               
               
                  One altogether, not by confuſion of ſubſtance: but by vnitie of perſon.
               
               
                  For, as the reſonable ſoule, and fleſh, is one Man: So, GOD, and MAN, is one CHRISTE.
               
               But, why it was neceſſary, that the Mediatour, ſhould be one perſon, and not two, as there be in him two diſtinct natures: there bee many weightie reaſons, certaine of the cheefe of which

it may ſuffiſe to note in this place.
               Firſt, Our Mediatour, GOD and Man, muſt be one perſon, that he might make GOD, and Man (ONE): therfore, he is ioyned to the father, by his true God head, & vnto Man, by true Manhood, that ſo he might couple bothe together.
               The ſeconde cauſe: The Mediatour ſhoulde bring nothing to paſſe, betweene the parties at variance, if he cleaue to the one, and differ from the other: Wherefore, it was needefull, that the Mediatour by a certaine neceſſitie, ſhould be ioyned to bothe parties.
               To GOD therfore (who, by our ſinne was offended:) our Mediatour is ioyned by true diuinitie: And vnto MAN he is aſſociated, by true humanitie: that through the ſocietie, which hee hath with bothe partes, hee might ioyne bothe partes together: according to that ſaying of Irenaeus lib. 3. Cap. 2. where he intreateth of the cauſes, why the worde of God became fleſhe.
               
               
                  It muſt needs bee (ſaith he) that the Mediatour betweene GOD, and MAN, by reaſon of the nighe affinitie to bothe partes: muſte reduce bothe into freendſhip, and concorde: and bringe to paſſe, that God ſhould take man vnto him: and man ſhoulde yeelde ouer himſelfe vnto God.
               
               And Theodoretus ſaith: Euen as he,
                  Dialog 1. 
                  which would reconcile ſome two perſons, ioyning handes beetweene themſelues, putting himſelfe in the middeſt betweene, and holding the one by the right hande, and the other by the lefte, bringeth, & ioyneth them in freendſhip together: So he when hee had vnited

the diuine nature to the humane: made a peace inuiolable, and which cannot bee broken.
               
               The third cauſe: If the Mediatour were not one perſon: then the workes of the redemption, wrought in the humane nature, ſhould not be a ſufficient price for ſinne, through which the infinite goodneſſe was offended. For, Death was due debt for ſinne, but pure GOD coulde not taſte death: neither, Man alone could ouercome death. Therfore GOD became man: that GOD and MAN, bothe ſhould, and might make ſatiſfaction for eternall death, whiche was due to mankinde. The eternall ſonne of God therefore, tooke mans nature vnto him, into the vnitie of perſon: that the works done in the humane nature, might be of infinite power, and merite. For, through the indiuiſible vnion of the diuine, and humane nature in one perſon, the dignitie is infinite, the perfection moſte abſolute, and the price of the blood, death, and ſo of all the actions and ſufferings of Chriſte in his moſte holy humanitie, ineſtimable. And thereof, is the might, and force of blottinge out ſinne, and the power of remitting offences, of iuſtifying, quickening, and ſauing the beleeuers.
               And albeit, Chriſte ſuffered in the fleſh onely, as Peter ſaith: yet notwithſtanding, the ſuffring is attributed to the perſon,1. Pet. 3. by reaſon of that moſte ſtricte vnion of the two natures in one perſon. That theſe things may ſomewhat more eaſily be vnderſtanded, I will ioyne heerevnto

a ſimilitude, whiche the Catholique deuines in the olde Church haue vſed.
               
                  MAN conſiſteth of two ſubſtaunces, of a ſoule, and of a body: and doth many things by the power of the Soule, as, to vnderſtand, to reaſon, to number &c. and againe doth many thinges, by the ſtrength of the bodye, as to builde, to write, to walke, and ſuche other like deedes either well or euill. All theſe things whiche in this manner, hee doeth, either by the power of the ſoule by it ſelfe, or by the ſtrength of the body by it ſelfe, or by the woorke of bothe together: are attributed to the perſon of the man.
               Euen in like manner, Chriſte doth certaine woorkes according to his humane nature, and certaine according to his diuine nature, al which notwithſtāding are attributed to whole Chriſt, which is GOD, and MAN. So, the death of Chriſte which he ſuſtayned according to his humane nature, is aſcrybed to the whole perſon, which is GOD and MAN. Therefore Luke rightly affirmeth,Acts. 20.28. that GOD hath purchaſed a Congregation to him ſelfe, with his owne blood: And againe he ſayth rightly, that IESVS the ſonne of Mary hath created Heauen, and Earth: For, Ieſus, and the eternall ſonne of GOD, is ONE perſon.
               
               In the ſame ſentence alſo, ſpeaketh Cyrell: Beecauſe (ſayth hee) that bodye, which hee made his owne, did ſuffer: therefore it is ſayde, the worde it ſelfe ſuffered for vs.
               
               
                  And heereof it is, that all the workes, and benefites of redemption in Chriſte, are counted diuine, infinite, ſauing, and ſo ineſtimable: that vnto them, nothing, neither in Heauen, or in earth may be compared, as wee haue ſomewhat touched before.
               From this fountaine, an infinite, and vnſpeakable conſolation, to the conſcience afflicted, tremblinge for the multitude of her ſinnes floweth foorth. For, if the death of Chriſte bee ſo precious, that there is no price of equall value, which may be compared to it, much leſſe preferred before it: What ſhould let, that it ſhould not abound farre aboue the heape of my ſinnes, although Or albeit they exceede in number, greatneſſe, &c. Rom. 5. exceeding. Whereof Auguſtine ſaieth: The mercy of GOD is much greater, then the miſery of all ſinnes.
               
               And Paule ſaieth: VVhere ſinne did abounde, there grace did ſuperabound.
               
            
            
               Of the fifte point or Chapter.
               
               
                  
                     IN THE FIFT PLACE, we haue proponed of Chriſte: that he is, the Sauiour of Mankinde: And in what manner, he executeth the buſineſſe of Mannes ſaluation. Although, in the matters before handled, we haue oftentimes touched ſomwhat, concerning this parte: yet notwithſtanding, a iuſt explication of eche article, as it was conuenient, hath not hethervnto

beene accompliſhed. Therefore I will now ſpeake of theſe things more at large: and, firſt, I will recite the teſtymonyes of the ſcripture, which teſtifie, Chriſte to be the Sauiour of the worlde: Furthermore, I will declare, how he is the Sauiour of the worlde.
               
                  Moſes ſaith:Gen. 3. 
                  The ſeede of the woman ſhall cruſh the Serpents head: (that is to ſay) CHRISTE ſhall deſtroy the woorkes of the Deuill, and deliuer man, from Sinne, Death, dampnation, and Hell, and ſhall iuſtifie, quicken, bleſſe, and bring them into the kingdome of GOD.
               
               After the ſame manner, GOD ſpeaketh to Abraham: In thy ſeede ſhall all nations bee bleſſed, (that is to ſay) ſhall bee deliuered from all malediction, and ſaued.
               
               And, the Angell Gabriell ſayth to Ioſeph: Thou ſhalt call his name IESVS, for hee ſhall ſaue his people from their ſinnes.
               
               In like manner, the Angell to the Sheepeheards: Beholde, I ſhewe vnto you great ioy:
                  Luke. 
                        •
                     . 
                  this day is borne vnto you a Sauiour, whiche is Chriſte the Lorde, in the citie of Dauid.
               
               
                  Paule alſo, 1. Timo. 1. ſayth: This is a ſure ſaying, and woorthy of all receiuing: that Ieſus Chriſte came into the worlde, to ſaue ſinners. And what ſhould I bring many teſtimonyes? the whole ſcriptures euery where affirmeth, Ieſus Chriſte to be the Sauiour of the worlde.
               
               But, by what meanes then, doth Chriſte declare himſelfe to be the Sauiour of the worlde, and the redeemer of mankinde?
               
                  This thing is ſeene, cheefely in fiue benefites towardes vs, namely:
               Firſt, in giuing vnto vs, the true vnderſtanding of the wiſdome of ſaluation, of which wee were deſtitute.
               Moreouer, in taking away our ſinnes, wherewith we are laden, and oppreſſed.
               Thirdely, in imputing Righteouſneſſe vnto vs, which, of our ſelues we could not haue.
               Fourthly, in ſanctifying, and regenerating vs, by his holy ſpirite, ſo, that wee which were the children of wrath, may become the children of GOD.
               
               Fiftly: in deliuering vs from the paines of hell, which we had deſerued, and in giuing vnto vs the poſſeſſion of euerlaſting life, which he, by his owne death hath purchaſed for vs.
               Of theſe fiue benefites, wherby Chriſte perfourmeth the whole woorke of our redemption, and bringeth it to perfection: I will breefely, out of the holy Scripture, adioyne a more plentifull explication.
            
            
               The firſte benefite.
               
                  COncerning the firſt benefite of Chriſt, namely, that hee giueth vnto vs the true vnderſtanding of the wiſdome of ſaluation: which, by the ſharpneſſe of our owne wit or reaſon, we are, by no meanes able to attain vnto: the Euangeliſt Iohn ſpeaketh in theſe words:Iohn. 1. 
                  No man hath ſeene GOD, at any time, the only begotten ſonne, which is in the boſome of the

Father, hee hath declared him vnto vs. This wiſdome Zachary calleth: The knowledge of ſaluation, for the remiſſion of ſinnes,
                  Luke. 1. 
                  by the bowels of the mercy of GOD. And Chriſt ſaith:Iohn. 1. 
                  This is eternall life: that they may knowe thee to be very GOD, and whome thou haſt ſent IESVS CHRISTE.
               
               All the wiſedome of the worlde, compared to this wſedome, is none at all, or, as if a man would compare one ſmall drop, with the whole Ocean, or a ſmall grauell ſtone, with the ſands of the whole ſea, or the whole worlde. For what cōpariſon ſhall there be of a thing momentany, to a thing euerlaſting? Or of a thing humane, to that which is deuine? This heauenly wiſdome, namely: The moſte ſacred Goſpel, is that Perfecte VViſdome, which wee boaſte our ſelues to haue, of our Lord, and Sauiour Ieſu Chriſte.
            
            
               The ſeconde benefite.
               
                  TOuching the ſeconde kinde of the benefits of Chriſt, namely: That he taketh away the heape of our ſinnes, wherewith we are oppreſſed: Iohn Baptiſt preacheth Ioh. 1. Beholde the Lambe of GOD, whiche taketh away the ſinnes of the world:
                   (that is to ſay) this IESVS will offer that ſacrifice, wherby he wil make ſatiſfaction, for the ſinnes of the whole worlde.
               But, that we may come to a fuller knowledge of this teſtimony of Iohn, concerning Chriſte: I wil heere vnder ſet downe the queſtions, which the woords them ſelues doe miniſter.
               
                  
                  Firſt, VVhy Chriſte is called a Lambe: And wherfore he is ſurnamed the Lamb of GOD.
                  
                  Secondly, VVhat this Lambe doth.
                  
                  Thirdly, For whoſe cauſe he doth.
                  
               
               
                  1. There be two reaſons, why Chriſte is called A LAMBE: The firſt is, that Iohn might put the Iewes, and vs in minde, of bothe theſe thinges, namely of the ſhadowe, which went before in the olde Teſtament: and the fulfilling of the promiſe (which, Iohn calleth (The Trueth) in the newe Teſtament.
               
                  Hebr. 10. Paule
                   ſayth: The lawe hath the ſhadow of good things to come, but not the very Image of the things themſelues, (that is to ſay) The trueth, or fulfilling of the promiſe.
               
               Therefore, the Lambe of the Iewes Paſſeouer, in the lawe, was, bothe, a putting them in remembrance, of benefites receiued, and alſo a warning, and ſhadowing of a thing to come. For as it admoniſhed the Iewes, that euen as the ſacrifice of the Lambe in Aegypte beeing finiſhed, the people went out of Aegypt, and were deliuered from bondage: ſo it ſignifyed, that by the ſacrifice of Chriſt, mankinde ſhould be reconciled vnto GOD, and brought vnto libertie.
               The name of the ſhadowe, (that is to ſay) of the Lambe, is therefore attributed vnto Chriſte, the Trueth: that it might be knowen that Ieſus Chriſt is he, whom the paſchall Lamb in ye olde Teſtament did ſhadowe. For, it is a thing cuſtomable in the Scriptures, to giue one, and the ſame names, to the ſignes, and the things ſignifyed:

that by conference of the ſhadowe, and the trueth, we way the more fully be inſtructed.
               So, the Rocke, whiche was a ſhadowe of Chriſte, is attributed to Chriſte: becauſe in him, the trueth, which was ſhadowed by the Rocke in the wilderneſſe, is fulfilled.
               The Sacrifice, which was onely a figure of the cleanſing ſacrifice, then to come, was called, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , (that is to ſay) Propitiation, which name, bothe by Iohn, and Paul, is attributed to Chriſt, who alone offered the true propitiatory ſacrifice.
               Moreouer, when Iohn calleth Chriſte a LAMB, he ſignifyeth, that he was to be killed for ſacrifice. And ſo Iohn, in one worde expreſſed the end of all the ſacrifices of the law, namely, that they ſhoulde ſhadowe the ſacrifice of Chriſte: and, which beeing finiſhed, all the ſacrifices of Aaron, ſhould ceaſſe. Therfore, he ſaith: Beholde the Lambe of GOD. As though he ſhould ſay: ye Iewes haue hetherto many yeeres paſt offered the Paſchall Lambe, but, beholde this is, that true, immaculate, and pure Lamb, with out all faulte: whiche is woorthyly called, The Lambe of GOD: becauſe hee is a Sacrifice ſufficient, for the ſinnes of the whole world. Therfore, rightly ſayd Bernard: VVho could better take away ſinne, then hee, in whome ſinne falleth not? He without doubt, is able to waſh mee, who, as it is manifeſt, is not defyled: Let this hand wipe mine eye couered with dyrt: which hand alone, is without duſt.
               
               We haue ſaid, why Chriſte is called a Lambe:
                  
and cheefely, why hee is called the Lambe of GOD. Now it is to be opened in few wordes: VVhat this Lamb hath done. Beholde (ſaith Iohn) the Lambe of GOD,
                  Iohn. 1. 
                  which taketh away the ſinnes of the world: (that is to ſay) That Lamb of God this IESVS, namely, which is to be offered: by his death and paſſion taketh away the ſinne of the world, (that is) diſchargeth the worlde from ſinne, which he tranſlateth into him ſelf, that, by the mirit of his ſacrifice, that is, of his paſſiō and death, he may aboliſh the ſame. And ſo vppon this Lambe of GOD, our Lord Ieſus Chriſte GOD, and MAN, are eaſte the ſinnes of the whole worlde: that as he alone ſhould ſuſtaine the guiltineſſe, ſo the ſame ſhould alſo ſuſteyne the malediction. For albeit that Chriſt was free from fault: yet notwithſtanding, the guiltines, and payne, hee, in very deed, receiued into himſelfe. And this is that which Eſay ſayth: Hee hath layde all our iniquities vpon him.
               
               
                  Eſay. 5. 3.Therfore Paule, calleth CHRIST (ACCVRSED,) or (EXECRATION,) when hee ſayth: Galla. 3. Chriſte hath redeemed vs from the curſſe of the lawe, beeing made ACCVRSED FOR VS.
                   Herevnto alſo it maketh that hee nameth him (Sinne), when he fayth: 2. Cor. 5. Him whiche knewe not ſinne, he made SINNE FOR VS: that is to ſaye: GOD hath ſo embaſed his owne Sonne: that he ſhould be counted, in the ſight of GOD, guiltie of all ſinne: that we might bee indowed with his righteouſneſſe, whereby wee might be reputed righteous, in the ſight of God.
               
                  By theſe things already ſaide, it may eaſily be perceiued, what is to bee thought of the death, and paſſion of our Lord Ieſu Chriſte, which in one word and other, I wil ſhew more at large.
               
                  CHRIST him ſelfe. Iohn 17.
                   with his owne voyce, (beeing now ready to ſuffer,) explicateth, what manner of work his paſſion is, when hee ſaith: I ſanctifie mine owne ſelfe for them, that they alſo might be ſanctified in the truth. I ſanctifie, ſaith he, that is, I beeing ſeperated from ſinners, by perfect pureneſſe: and ioyned vnto God by perfect loue, and obedience, doe offer vp my ſelfe to the father vpon the Altar of the Croſſe,Heb. 10. through the eternall ſpirite, for a ſacrifice of pacification, that by the merit of my ſacrifice: the people beleuing in me, might be ſeperated from the defiling of ye worlde, might be ioyned vnto God, through a liuely faith, and ſo offred, for an holy ſacrifice, that they might be truely ſanctifyed for euer. In this manner CHRIST ſpeaketh in this place, of his paſſion, which he defineth to be a Sanctification: (that is to ſay) A holy oblation, of himſelf for the Diſciples: that is, for. All which ſhall beleeue: that they by the merit of his paſſion may be ſanctified, as an holy ſacrifice offred vnto God.
               Let vs therefore, in fewe woordes conclude, what is to bee conſidered, of the paſſion of Chriſte, namely: That it is a ſacrifice propitiatorie,
                  What the paſſion of Chriſte is. 
                  wherein, the Sonne of GOD offered vp him ſelfe to the Faher: that he might merit for all which beleeue in him, eternall ſanctificatiō, deliuerance from ſinne, and death, eternall, and euerlaſting Saluation.
               
               
                  And ſo, in this definition is contayned, that which may be anſwered, to euery of theſe ſeuerall queſtions: VVho offred? The euerlaſting Prieſt IESVS CHRIST. VVhat offred he? Him ſelfe. VVhere offred he? In the Altar of the Croſſe, by his moſte bitter paſſion and death. To whome offered hee him ſelfe? To the father, whoſe wrath, (by the merite of his precious ſacrifice,) he pacifyed. For whoſe cauſe did hee offer him ſelfe? For man. VVho ſhalbe partakers of this offering? All, which beleeue in him.
               Becauſe we haue heard, what this Lambe hath doone, namely, that he hath receiued into him ſelfe, the ſinnes of men, and hath made ſatiſfaction for them: Let vs nowe diſcuſſe this worde, (OF THE VVORLD). Iohn ſaith not:Iohn. 1. 
                  Beholde the Lambe of GOD, which taketh away the ſinnes of man: but, which taketh away the ſinnes of the VVorlde:
                  He meaneth, that the paſſion and ſacrifice of Chriſt, is (in it ſelfe) infinitly precious & profitable, offered to God the father for all men, extended and proferred to all ſinners and for all ſinnes whatſoeuer (of his parte) indifferently & ſufficiently: though indeed, The elect penitent beleeuer only can, and doe receiue and inioy it effectually and auayleably. According as the Schoolemen ſay (and the beſt learned like, and allowe of it) Chriſtus paſtus pro omnibus ſufficientur, ſed pro electis efficienter &c. To ſay, Chriſte ſuffered for all ſufficiently, but for the elect (only) effectually or auayleably &c. This is the Authors iuſtified meaning, in many places of his worthy woorkes els where. Though here, in wordes, hee ſeemeth ſome-deale harſhe and harde: and is warely to bee readde. that hee might ſignifie, whereunto the price of the oblation of IESV CHRISTE, doth ſtretch it ſelfe.
               There haue beene in time paſt, and are alſo at this day, two ſortes of men, whiche by teaching falſely in this place haue fowlely offended. Of theſe, the firſt are, which are of opinion, that the paſſion, and ſacrifice of Chriſte profiteth not all

men, but a certaine fewe peculiar elected. Another kinde of them is: which ſuppoſe that there be certaine ſinnes, which, euen by the merite of the death, and paſſion of Chriſte, cannot be remitted. Theſe two falſe, and erronious opinions I will in this place breefely refute, and throwe downe by manifeſte teſtimonyes of the woorde of GOD.
               
               They, whom I named in the firſt place, are Stoickes, and ſuch, as going about to fain tables of deſteny out of teſtimonyes of the Scripture, not rightly vnderſtanded, doe teach, that GOD hath created men, appoynted partly, to eternall Saluation: partely, to eternall condempnation, howſoeuer, they either beleeue, or liue. This peruerſe opinion, is, not onely blaſphemous againſt GOD: but alſo ſeduceth many: that either they deſpaire of the forgiueneſſe of their ſinnes, or nouriſh ſecuritie: thinking it to bee a matter of no force, how they liue, foraſmuch as they attaine ſaluation, becauſe, that they are elected. Againſt this opinion is to bee ſet, The mercifull will of GOD, which hath made man, after his owne Image, and hath promiſed to Adam, the reſtoring againe of the ſame.
               Of this will of GOD, the Prophet ſpeaketh in theſe woords: As ſurely as I liue ſaith the Lord GOD, I will not the death of the vngodly, but that the vngodly ſhould bee conuerted, from his way and liue. Therefore, if that theſe woords, that GOD will not the death of a ſinner, bee true, of which thing, there is vtterly no doubt: It muſt,

of neceſſitie, bee falſe, that they ſay, That GOD hath deſtinated certaine to ſaluation, certain to condempnation, and that, if we reſpect the counſaile of the creation, & redemption of mankinde. For, as farre foorth as appertaineth to the rebellion of man: there it is ſaid, that GOD hath created many to condempnation, whome notwithſtanding, hee would, ſhould haue beene conuerted, ſhould haue ſought and obtained ſaluation.
               For, euen as an earthly father, is in ſuch wiſe affected towarde his children, that he woulde haue euery one of them, to come to thriftines, &, be honeſt, and woorthy ſucceſſors to him of his goods, and ſubſtance, and yet notwithſtanding, beeing made fruſtrate of his hope, findeth the ſtubbernneſſe, and diſobediēce of them, whereby they alſo at the length, do caſt them ſelues with great ignominie, into deſtruction, and ſome infamous kinde of puniſhmente: Of this father it may be ſaid, that hee hath brought vp children, kept to this ſo great miſcheef, (not, that the will of his purpoſe, was not farre other) but that the children through their owne rebellion, haue called this miſcheef vnto them ſelues.
               So, GOD verily, would haue all men (made after his owne image) to be ſaued: but, if any of theſe being rebellious wil not imbrace his word, and, by faith, be conuerted, but fauouring ſecuritie, and madneſſe, doe dye in their owne wickedneſſe: thoſe, God, ſuffereth to periſh, that they might ſuſtaine the iuſt puniſhmentes, aſwell of their owne offēces, againſt ye law of God, as alſo

of their contēpt of attayning ſaluation through Chriſte. Here we may ſay, with the ſcripture: That God hath created ſuche rebellious vnthrifts, to eternall condemnation, not, that he is delighted, with their deſtruction: but, that, they through their owne malice haue drawen ye ſame vnto themſelues, preferring the vanitie of this world, before the grace, & mercy of God, in Ieſu Chriſte. Of this eternall & vnmouable will of God: Paule ſpeaketh on this wiſe: GOD would haue all men ſaued, & come to the trueth, for there is one GOD, and one Mediatour between GOD, and MAN, euen the man Ieſus Chriſt, which hath giuen himſelfe a redemption for all men. And Peter ſaith: GOD is longe ſuffering, which would haue no man loſte, but will receyue all men to repentaunce.
               
               What can be more plainly ſpoken? And, what ſhall he be that dare ſet himſelf againſt this? If God therefore, would haue no man periſh, but wold haue all men, by the knowledge of ye truth to be ſaued, their vntruth is manifeſt, which ſay, God would not haue all mē ſaued, but hath created many to euerlaſting damnation. But, that our cōſciences may the more cōmodiouſly be aſſured out of ye word of God, touching this fatherly will of him: I wil ſet downe, foure moſt firme argumēts, which may aboundantly aſſure vs, of the fauour of God, which ſtretcheth it ſelfe to all men, in eueryplace of ye earth, without al reſpect of perſons, regions, ſexes, & outward conditiōs.
               The firſt Argument is, The vniuerſall cōmaundement of GOD: vnto all men: GOD himſelfe

ſpeaketh with his owne voyce from Heauen, and ſayth:Mattth. 3. 
                  This is my beloued Sonne, Heare him. And Chriſt ſendeth foorth his Diſciples into all the world,Mar. 16. with this commaundement: Goe yee into all the world, and proclayme the Goſpell to euery creature, (that is) To all men. Who then is ſo impudent, that hee dare ſay, GOD in deede, hath commaunded all men, that they ſhoulde heare the Goſpell, but in the meane ſeaſon, hee would certaine to be ſaued by faith, but certaine to be hardened, and condempned? They which doe ſo think of God, doe make him worſe, then any Tyrant, whiche ſhoulde commaund thoſe thinges which he neither willeth nor thincketh: and this is to haue two heartes, which GOD him ſelfe, highly deteſteth, and hateth.
               The ſecond argument, is, The free, and vniuerſall promiſe of GOD. Come vnto mee (ſayth Chriſte,Matth. 11.) all which labour and be heauily laden, and I will refreſh you.
                  Mar. 16. Likewiſe, Hee which ſhall beleeue and be baptiſed, ſhalbe ſaued: but he which beleeueth not ſhall be condemned. And Paule ſaith: Euery one whiche beleeueth ſhall not be confounded. Heereunto is to bee referred the whole miniſtery of the Goſpell, which is therefore inſtituted of GOD, to bee in this worlde, that by the ſame, men might be brought vnto ye true knowledge of God. Chriſte him ſelfe confeſſeth, that he came into this worlde, to ſaue ſinners: The Sonne of man (ſaith he) is come to ſeeke, and ſaue that which was loſt.
               
               The third argument is taken, Of the price of

the Paſſion and death of Chriſte, whiche ſufficeth for the ſinnes of all men: He hath giuen him ſelfe,
                  1. Tim. 2. 
                  a redemption for all men. Iohn ſaith:Iohn 1. 
                  Beholde the Lambe of GOD which taketh away the ſinnes of the worlde. And Chriſte himſelfe ſayth: I, when I ſhall be lifte vp from the Earth, will drawe all men vnto me. Therfore Paule ſayth:Rom. 5. 
                  Grace aboundeth aboue ſinne: becauſe the precious ſacrifice of Chriſte, is eſteemed of ſo great force, that it wipeth out all ſinne.
               
                  Iohn ſayth:1. Iohn. 2. 
                  Chriſte is the propitiation for our ſinnes, and not for ours only, but alſo for the ſinnes of the whole worlde.
               
               The fourth argument, whiche aſſureth vs of the will of GOD, is: The ſealing of Grace, which is done by the Sacrament of Baptiſme.
               
                  Goe ye (ſayth Chriſt) and teach all nations,
                  Mar. 16. 
                  baptizing them: In the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holie Ghoſte. This ſealing hee hath confirmed with his power, and preſence in this worlde. Of the firſt he ſayth: All power is giuen vnto mee, in Heauen, & in Earth. Of the laſt, when he ſayth: Beholde I am with you, vnto the ende of the worlde. If therfore, we looke back, to the power of Chriſte: hee is able to bringe to paſſe all thinges, what ſo euer hee will, in Heauen, and in Earth: Againe, if we looke vpon the commaundement: Chriſte willeth, all nations to be baptiſed, that this might bee a teſtimonie, that God will remit ſinnes, to all thoſe whiche beleeue, and turne them ſelues vnto him.
               To conclude, if we faſten our eyes vppon his

preſence: Chriſte himſelfe will appeare heere, who, baptiſing with the holy Ghoſte, woorketh that inwardly, which, the water, outwardly applyed, doth ſignifie.
               By foure vnmouable arguments, therfore, we haue proued, this to be the wil of God: That he would haue all men to be ſaued, as many as turne them ſelues vnto him, by faith in Ieſus Chriſt. Whoſoeuer, therefore inwardly regardeth his ſaluation: let him ſtedfaſtly reſt in this will of GOD, which God hath not onely manifeſted in his woorde: but alſo, by many meanes effectually proued and ſhewed.
               Let vs therfore conclude, that they teach falſely, which to the ſlaūdring of the death, and paſſion of Chriſte: doe ſay, that his ſacrifice made for the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, is not profitable for all men, but for a certaine few elected.
               The ſecond errour is, of thoſe, which defend that there be certaine ſinnes, which cannot bee remitted, for the mirite of the paſſion and death of Chriſte. To this opinion theſe wordes of Paule are contrary:Rom. 5. 
                  VVhere ſinne did abounde: there Grace in Ieſu Chriſte, did ſuperabound. Likewiſe Iohn, when he affirmeth, Chriſte to take away the ſinnes of the worlde: giueth to vnderſtande, that the ſacrifice of Chriſte is of farre greater force to ſaue: then the ſinnes of the whole worlde are to deſtroy. Therefore let vs thinke, that there is no ſinne greater: then to thinke, that there is any ſinne greater then the grace of GOD in Ieſu Chriſte.
               
                  Such was the ſinne of Cayne, who beeing ouercome with the conſcience of his wickedneſſe, and diſpayring ſayde: Greater is myne iniquitie than that it may bee forgiuen.
                  Gen 3. But rightly doeth Auguſtine aunſwere him.Augu. Gen. 
                  Thou lyeſt Cayne, for the mercy of God is greater, than the miſery of all ſinne.
               
               He therefore argueth God of vntrueth, whoſoeuer deſpayreth of forgiueneſſe, for the heape, and greatnes of his ſinnes: he contemneth the othe of GOD, who by an othe confirmeth, That hee will not the death of a ſinner, but that he ſhould be conuerted and liue. For, when GOD beholdeth thy ſinne, he therwithall conſidereth that an infinite price is payde for the ſame, namely, the Lords paſſion.
               From whence alſo peceedeth that voyce of the conſcience, reioycing in Bernarde, concerning the remiſſion of ſinnes: I holde (ſayth hee) a moſte ſtrong argument, THE PASSION OF THE LORD: for his voice was of much more force, than the voyce of the blood of Abell, crying in the heartes of the elect, the forgiueneſſe, of all offences. For, hee was betrayed for our ſinnes, neither is it to be doubted, but that his death is mightyer, and of more force vnto good, then our ſinnes vnto euill.
               
                  I haue ſinned (ſaith Manaſſes) aboue the ſande of the Sea: but thou, (O LORDE) according to thy greate mercie, ſhalt ſaue mee though, vnwoorthye.
               
               But heere ſome body may obiect, and ſay: I

haue oftentimes promiſed amendment of my life, and yet notwithſtanding, wittingly, and willingly, I haue againe oftentimes ſinned: and doone againſt my conſcience.
               To this I aunſwere thus: This kinde of ſin is, in the ſight of God, horrible, and dangerous, and many, for the ſame are condempned, as Saule and many others, who, by ſoudaine death are caught from hence, without repentaunce: but notwithſtanding:Rom. 5. 
                  Grace, in our Lorde Ieſu Chriſte, aboundeth aboue, bothe this, and all the ſinnes of the whole worlde. For, whoſoeuer doe riſe againe from ſin,1. Iohn. 2. by earneſt repentance: they all, for the death, and paſſion ſake of Chriſte, doe obtaine forgiueneſſe of ſinnes. This temptation did ſo aſſaulte the Iewiſhe people, that deſpayringly bruſting foorth into this voyce, they cryed out, in Ezechiel 33. Our ſinnes, and iniquities, are gone ouer vs, and wee are waxed faynt in them, How then can we liue? Tell them, ſayth the mighty Lorde: As truely as I liue, I will not the death of a ſinner,
                  
                  Ezechie. 18. 
                  but that he be conuerted, and liue: Turne ye, turne yee from your moſt wicked offences, O yee houſe of Iſraell, wherefore will ye dye?
               
               Whoſoeuer therfore is afflicted with the conſcience of his owne wickedneſſe: let him remember the greatneſſe of the mercy of GOD, exceeding all ye works of God: Let him conſider, that the will of God is, not to will the death of a ſinner, but his conuerſion, and life: Let him beholde the raunſome, throughly payd by Chriſte, which is farre greater, than the ſink of all the ſinnes of

whole worlde: Let him conſider the examples of ſuche as haue beene turned, after moſte horrible offences: as the example of the Theefe, of Manaſſes, and of many other. Let him beware, leaſte vnto the greatneſſe of his ſinnes, he ad deſperation: wherby, the trueth of God is denied: than the which ſinne doubtleſſe, none can be more greeuous. And ſo let him approche to the Throne of Grace, and with an earneſt heart, for Chriſt his ſake, aſke forgiueneſſe: neither let him ceaſſe, by faithfull prayer to knock, before that he feele in his heart, an aunſwere to be giuen him, by the holie Ghoſte: which thing without all doubt ſhalbe accompliſhed, ſo that he caſt from him, earneſtly, the purpoſe of ſinninge. When the minde is, by this meanes ſtrengthened, perceiuing the aunſwere of God, by the conſolations of the heart: then, a confirmatiō by the voice of ye Miniſters of the Goſpel, and the vſe of the Lordes Supper, is rightly required. But, he which aſketh forgiueneſſe, and neuertheleſſe keepeth ſtill a purpoſe to ſinne: is a damned hypocrite, which thinketh, God to bee like to himſelfe, as which ſhould be mooued, and delighted, or els deceiued through hypocriſie.
               To the ſame as long as he ſhal be ſuch a one: aſwell the abſolution, by the miniſterye of the Church, as alſo the vſe of the Lords Supper, doth ſtretch to his greater dampnation, ſo farre of it is, that he ſhould hope, that any commodity ſhall thereof come vnto him.
            
            
               
               Of the ſinne Jrremiſsible, commonly called the ſinne againſt the holie Ghoſte.
               
                  BUt, what is then to be ſaide, touching Chriſt, which maketh mention, of ye 
                  12. of Matt. of a ſin not to be forgiuen: when he ſaith: All ſinne & baſphemy ſhalbe remitted vnto men: but the blaſphemy againſt the ſpirite, ſhall not be forgiuen, neither in this worlde, neither in the worlde to come.
               
               In like manner Mar. 3. Verely I ſay vnto you, that all ſinnes, and blaſphemies ſhall be forgiuen to the children of men: but he which ſhall blaſpheme againſt the holy Ghoſte, ſhall neuer be forgiuen, but ſhall be guiltie of eternall offence.
                  
               
               
                  1. Iohn. 5. He which knoweth his brother to ſinne, a ſinne not vnto death: let him aske, and life ſhall be giuen him, for him, which ſinneth, not vnto death, there is a ſinne vnto death, for the which (ſay I) not that a man ſhould pray: All vnrighteouſneſſe is ſin, and there is a ſinne not vnto death.
               
               
                  Hebr. 6. It is impoſsible, that they whiche haue beene once lightened, and haue taſted of the heauenly gift, and haue beene made partakers of the holie Ghoſt, and haue taſted of the good worde of GOD, & of the power of the world to come: If they fall aaway, (and as touching thē ſelues crucifie the ſonne of God againe, and make a mock of him) that they ſhould be renued againe by repentance.
                  
               
               
                  Heb. 10. If we ſinne wilfully,
                   (that is to ſay, If

any doe fall away from Chriſte) after the knowledge of the trueth receiued: there remaineth now no more ſacrifice for ſinne.
               
               
                  1. Tim. 1.
                  I, which before was a blaſphemer, and a perſecuter, & reprochful, haue obtained the mercy of GOD, becauſe I did it ignorantly through vnbeleef.
               
               Theſe teſtimonyes of the holy Scripture, doe ſpeake of a certaine kinde of ſinne, which, (neither in this world, neither in the world to come) is forgiuen.
               This ſinne is commonly called, THE SIN AGAINST THE HOLY GHOSTE. Of the ſame, diuerſe, doe ſpeake diuerſly, and do therby driue many into deſperation: whileſt beeing vncertaine, they knowe not, what they ſhall beleeue, or doe. Yea, many ſuppoſing themſelues to bee guiltie of this ſinne, are vexed in their mindes, and beeing intangled, in horrible ſorowes of conſcience, doe liue without repentaunce. But, he whiche ſhall diligently conſider the ſcripture, and conferre amongſt themſelues, thoſe things, which in the holy Scriptures are expreſſed, touching this ſinne: he ſhal eaſely vnderſtand, what the ſubſtance, and difference of this ſinne is. I will therfore explicate, the places of Scripture euen nowe cited, and thereout I will conclude, and drawe foorth, a plaine, and full definition of this ſinne.
               
                  EIRST, the ſaying of S. Iohn diſtingwiſheth, THE SINNE VNTO DEATH,
                  1. Iohn. 8. (which is otherwiſe called, the ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſte) from other ſinnes.
               
                  
                  All vnrighteouſneſſe (ſaith hee) is ſinne, but not vnto death.
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Item: If any man ſinne, wee haue an aduocate with the father, which is Ieſus Chriſte the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our ſinnes, and not for ours onely, but alſo for the ſinnes of the whole worlde. Whiche two teſtimonyes, doe aboundantly teach vs, that the Sinne againſt the holy Ghoſte, is not, a tranſgreſſion of the Lawe of God, (that is to ſay) of the Decalogus. For,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . the word of (VNRIGHTEOVSNES) which Iohn, in this place, vſeth: doeth ſignifie, what ſoeuer is committed againſt the lawe, which, Iohn, verely, calleth ſinne: but, not vnto death, that is, not againſt the holie Ghoſt.
               Therefore, heere hence we conclude: That, the ſinne againſt the holie Ghoſte, is not any tranſgreſſion of the lawe of God, neither vniuerſall, nor particular, albeit, otherwiſe, the leaſte offence whiche is committed againſt the lawe (through his owne nature and malice) deſerueth death euerlaſting.
               
                  Matth. 12. Mar. 3. Luke. 16·But Matthew and Marke doe ſhewe, that the matter of the ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſte, is THE CONTEMPT OF CHRISTE, AND HIS GOSPEL. But yet in that, this ſinne is not finiſhed: For Peter in the day of Pentecoſt,
                  Actes. 2. receiued 3000. men repenting, which, had before perſecuted Chriſte, vnto the death of the Croſſe.
               
                  Paule therfore maketh a difference, betweene two ſortes of men perſecuting Chriſte: One, of thoſe whiche doe it ignorauntly: The other of

thoſe, whiche knowe, them ſelues to doe euilly, and wickedly. I (ſaith Paule) was a perſecuter,
                  1. Tim. 1. 
                  and blaſphemous againſt Chriſte: becauſe beeing ignorant, I did it through vnbeleefe. After this manner, others alſo, haue perſecuted Chriſte, and his Goſpell, and yet notwanding haue obtayned mercy, becauſe they doe it ignorauntly, through vnbeleefe.
               Furthermore, Paule, to the Hebrues ſheweth,Heb. 6, 10. what goeth before this ſin, before it be committed: namely, To haue bene illuminated by the holy Ghoſte: To haue had the true knowledge of the perſon, and office of Chriſte: To haue taſted the good worde of GOD: And to haue beene partaker of the holy Ghoſt. The Turke, & the Pope, which otherwiſe are execrable ſinners: (foraſmuch as they neuer poſſeſſed the holie Ghoſte,) haue no ſuch ſinne, whereby the teſtimony of the holie Ghoſt, by whome the trueth of the Goſpel was ſealed: is caſte foorth of their hearts.
               Therfore Paule alſo ſheweth in whome this ſinne is: ſo, that he is to be ſayd guiltie thereof, which hath not onely, beene abundantly taught, and lightned in the true doctrine of the Goſpell of ſaluation: But alſo, which manifeſtly ſetteth himſelfe againſt Chriſte, and obiecting againſt him, the reproch of his croſſe deſpiſeth him, and with all his power perſecuteth his doctrine, neither can abyde the name of him: but aſcrybeth the woorkes of Chriſte vnto the Deuill, as the Phariſes did, to whome Chriſte imputeth this ſinne of blaſphemie, againſt the illumination of

the holie Ghoſte. For the Phariſes, albeit, they had beene taught, concerning Chriſte, by many prophecies, and were moreouer conuicted, by the doctrine, & miracles of Chriſte: yet notwithſtanding they witting, and willing, did perſecute Chriſt, and his goſpel, which, by the lightening of the holy Ghoſt, they knew to be of God: and, that which is more, they beeing rebellious, did not only oppungne Chriſte, by quarrellinges, tyranny, and hypocriſie, ſetting themſelues againſt his word, which to be true, their owne hearts did teſtifie: but alſo truſted to their owne righteouſneſſe, and heape of ſacrifices, reiecting the righteouſneſſe, and ſacrifice of Chriſte, which ſacrifice alone, taketh away ye ſinnes of the world.
               
                  What the ſin againſt the holy ghoſt isHeereof therfore, we conclude, that the ſinne againſt the holie Ghoſt, is not a tranſgreſſion of the Decalogus, nor the cōtempt, or perſecution of Chriſt, and the Goſpell, through ignorance & incredulitie: but, one is then ſaid to ſin againſt the holy Ghoſt: VVhen (through wilfull rebellion) he ſetteth himſelf againſt Chriſt, being truely knowen beefore: and departeth from the Goſpel, which (by the holy Ghoſt illuminating him) was ſealed in his heart: And perſecuteth the Church: with a cōfidence of his owne righteouſneſſe, and ſacrifices, the ſacrifice of Chriſte (which alone is the cleanſer of ſinne) beeing FINALLY reiected and contemned.
               
               
                  Why it is called the ſin againſt the holy Ghoſt,This is the ful definition of the ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſte: which hath therefore obtained this name: becauſe, that the man whoſe heart was before illuminated in the true knowledge

of Chriſte, by the holy Ghoſt: doth now ſet himſelfe againſt the holy Ghoſte, and expelleth him, from him, and attributeth his workes vnto the deuil. For what cauſe this ſinne is not forgiuen. Paule ſheweth to ye 
                  Hebrues, when he ſaith: There remaineth no other ſacrifice for ſinne: than that of Chriſte alone. Foraſmuch therefore as theſe haue FINALLY renounced Chriſte, deſpiſing his ſacrifice, and truſting to other ſacrifices: It is no merual, though they obtain not grace, which only is giuen by ye ſacrifice of our Lord Ieſu Chriſt,
               
               Furthermore: If any man demaund, and ſay: VVhat if a man beeing guiltie of this ſinne againſt the holie Ghoſte, doth againe turne him ſelfe vnto Chriſte, & doth earneſtly repent him of his former rebellion, and with his whole hart aske forgiueneſſe for the merit of the paſſion, & death of the Sonne of GOD. To this, I anſwere thus with Paule:
                  Rom. 5. 
                  Grace aboundeth aboue ſinne. Neither is the hugeneſſe of this ſinne ſo great, but the grace of GOD in our Lord Ieſu Chriſt, is a thouſand folde greater. And foraſmuch as it is moſte certaine, that, GOD would not the death of a ſinner,
                  Ezechic. 28. 
                  but that hee ſhould be cōuerted & liue. I affirme, this ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſt to be forgiuen, to all thoſe whiche doe earneſtly repent, and deſire forgiueneſſe, for the merite of Chriſte.
               But heere it may bee obiected, that Chriſte doth manyfeſtly teache: this ſinne not to bee remitted, neither in this worlde, neither in the world to come: therfore, this ſinne ſeemeth to be greater, than the Grace of God, GOD forbid,
                  
yea, farre of be that: It is moſte firmely to bee beleeued, that ye 
                  Grace of God, doth farre abound aboue the ſinnes of the worlde. Why then is it not forgiuen?
               To this, Paule Hebr. 6. maketh aunſwere: Becauſe they cannot be renewed againe by repentance. And that, for this cauſe: becauſe they haue vtterly denyed the true foundation of repentance, namely, The ſacrifice of Chriſte: without the which, neither any healthfull repentance, or conuerſion by faith, can be made vnto GOD: neither is there any other ſacrifice, which (without this alone) is able to take away ſinne.
               Repentance, and Remiſſion of ſinnes (ſayth Chriſte) muſt bee preached in MY NAME. Wherefore, whoſoeuer doth repent, and, with a ſure faith, embrace Chriſt, and his ſacrifice, doth moſte aſſuredly by faith, obtaine forgiueneſſe.
               This ſinne is therefore called IRREMISSIBLE, becauſe, that they which commit the ſame, doe, for the moſte parte continue in their wicked purpoſe, and neuer flye to the Grace of God, by Ieſus Chriſt our Lord. For, he which imbraceth the grace of GOD: hath not FINALLY renounced the ſacrifice of Chriſte: which alone remaineth the cleanſer away of all ſinne. Theſe thinges I purpoſed, breefely to ſpeake concerning the ſinne againſt the holie Ghoſt, becauſe I perceiued, many in this behalf, to be not rightly inſtructed: and fewe, hetherunto to haue rightly iudged, and plainly to haue written, of this matter.
            
            
               
               The thirde benefite.
               
                  IT hath bene ſpoken hethervnto, of the ſeconde benefite of Chriſte, namely: That hee cleanſeth vs from all ſinne: but this ſufficeth not, vnleſſe: VVee alſo become Righteouſe For, inaſmuch as (Righteouſneſſe) is, the very way to euerlaſting life: no man euer obteyneth the ſame, but he which is Righteous. Therefore Chriſte ſaith: If thou wilte enter into life, keepe the Commaundements. But, to keepe the Commaundementes is, to declare him ſelfe Righteous, according to the Lawe.
               
               And albeit, no man fulfilleth the law of God, as we, before haue ſhewed: neither obtayneth Righteouſneſſe by the workes of the lawe: yet, the will of GOD remaineth vnmouable: That none is admitted to the poſſeſſion of eternall life, but he which hath that righteouſneſſe, whiche the Lawe requireth.
               
               The Sonne of GOD therefore, came into this worlde, and tooke mans nature of the virgin Mary, and made himſelfe ſubiect to the lawe, and fulfilled the ſame: ſo, that he hath obtayned Righteouſneſſe by the woorkes of the lawe. This Righteouſneſſe of Chriſte, GOD and MAN, ſufficeth in the ſight of GOD, beeing imputed to all thoſe, which beleeue in him.
               
                  For as by the diſobedience of one, we all are giltie:
                  Rom. 7. 
                  ſo, we all, as many as beleeue in Chriſte, by the righteouſneſſe of one, are reputed Righteous.
               
               
                  This is the ſame thing which Paul ſaith, Rom. 10. Chriſt is the end of the law, to ſaue all thoſe which beleeue in him.
                   The ende of the lawe, is called, THE FINAL VVIL OF THE LAVV, that thoſe things may be done, which ſhee willeth, and commaundeth: She willeth Righteouſneſſe, which, when ſhe hath gotten, ſhee reſteth: neither condemneth ſhe any man, whiche obtayneth the ſame.
               Chriſte is the ende of the Lawe, not for his owne cauſe: but for theirs which could not fulfil the lawe: ſo that he imputeth his owne righteouſnes, which he hath obtayned by the law, to all thoſe which beleeue in him: that the lawe can not by any right, either accuſe, or condemne them. Therfore Paule ſaith: Chriſte is the ende of the Lawe, to ſaue all which beleeue: (that is to ſay) whoſoeuer beleeueth, hath that whiche the Lawe requireth: namely Righteouſneſſe, which is the way of ſaluation.
               Heerevnto it maketh, which Auguſtine ſaith: That which the lawe commaundeth: Faith obtayneth. And againe: Chriſte hath made our ſinnes his: that hee might make his righteouſneſſe ours. Therefore, there is now no condempnation (as Paule ſaith) in them, whiche are in Ieſu Chriſte, becauſe in them, ſatiſfaction is made to the Righteouſneſſe of the lawe. It is therfore diligently to be obſerued, that we fulfil the law, but not by our woorks, but by the works of Chriſte, which imputeth the righteouſneſſe of the law to vs which beleeue. For this cauſe Paul ſaith: VVe

are not vnder the law: but vnder grace. Vnder the law, wee are not, becauſe, the law findeth not in vs, what ſhe may accuſe: foraſmuch as we are in dowed with the righteouſneſſe, which ſhe requireth. Chriſt hath redemed vs from ye curſe of the law, firſt, by deriuing into himſelf, the paines, vpō the Altar of the croſſe, which wee had deſerued.
               Furthermore, by fulfilling the law: and imputing vnto vs his owne righteouſneſſe, with the which, we beeing indowed, may appeare, in the laſt day righteouſe, when Chriſt cōmeth a righteous iudge of the quick and the dead. Of this Righteouſneſſe Paul intreateth 2 Cor. 5. Him which knew no ſin, God made ſinne for vs: that we might be made the righteouſneſſe of God in him.
                  Rom. 5. This Righteouſneſſe of GOD, is, The obedience of Chriſte, whereby, he ſatiſfyeth the lawe for vs.
               Therfore, when we heare, or read, That man is iuſtified by faith, without the workes of the law: in the ſight of GOD: that is ſo to be taken, not, that man by ye works of the law, done of himſelfe, is iuſtified: but, that by faith he imbraceth Chriſte, who, by his own obedience, or works, is perfectly righteous in ye ſight of God, & imputeth this his righteouſneſſe of the lawe, to all thoſe which beleeue in him. Moreouer, this righteouſneſſe is called the Righteouſneſſe of faith, becauſe it is imputed to the beleuing: Of Chriſt, becauſe he hath ſatiſfied the lawe: Of GOD, becauſe, with the ſame, he is pleaſed, and contented.
               Let theſe things ſuffice to be ſpoken, concerning the third benefite of Chriſte: namely, his

                  Righteouſneſſe which he imputeth to the faithfull, whereof mention is alſo made before, where we haue diſputed of the true vſe of the Lawe.
            
            
               The fourth benefite of Chriſt.
               
                  THe fourth benefite of Chriſte, is, HOLINESSE, or SANCTIFICATION. For, when Chriſte forgiueth vs our ſinnes, and taketh vs out of the Kingdome of the Deuill, and imputeth vnto vs his owne Righteouſneſſe, hee doth alſo therewith, ſanctifie vs, and imputeth his holineſſe vnto vs, which are made ye mēbers of his body. For this cauſe it is, that Iohn: 1. Iohn. 1. calleth the comany of all ſuch as beleeue in Ieſus (THE COMMVNION, OF THE SAINCTS.) Whereon alſo dependeth the article of the Symbole, when we ſay: I beleeue in the holie Church, The Communion of Sainctes.
               
               
                  But not idle talkers of Chriſtianitie.Of this Sanctification, Chriſtians may boaſt, againſt, the kingdome, and members of the Deuill, ſo that they may worthyly ſay: that they haue fellowſhip with GOD the father, the ſonne, and the holy Ghoſte, and are ſeperated from the Prince of darckneſſe (that is to ſay) from the Deuill, and his members. VVee declare vnto you (ſaith Iohn) that yee alſo haue felowſhip with vs: and our fellowſhip is with the father, and with the ſonne IESV CHRISTE.
               
               With this Sanctification Dauid comforteth him ſelfe, Pſal. 86.
                   where he prayeth in this maner:

                  Keepe thou my Soule, for I am holie: O my GOD, ſaue thy ſeruant, which hopeth in thee.
               
               Heere, firſt of all, Dauid affirmeth himſelfe to be Holie. Furthermore, how this Santification commeth, he ſheweth: namely, when, by a ſure faith we reſt in GOD, and truſt in him alone.
               For he which doth this: hee is ſpiritually ingraffed into our Lord Ieſu Chriſte, of whome he obteineth, perfecte, and perſonall Sanctifycation of the whole man. For, as I haue ſaid, the Sanctifycation of Chriſte is imputed to the beleuer, as Chriſte himſelfe teacheth in Iohn. 17. I Sanctifie my ſelfe
                   (ſaith he) for them: that they alſo might bee holie. This HOLYNESSE therefore, conſiſteth, in the forgiuenes of ſinnes: in the imputation of the righteouſneſſe of Chriſt in renouncing the Deuil: breefely, in faith it ſelf: whiche taketh faſt holde of Chriſte, with his RIGHTEOVSNES, and HOLINESSE.
               
               With this holyneſſe of man, is alſo ioyned, the holyneſſe of the thing it ſelfe, which, for the meaſure of faith, hath alſo her increaſements, and, in ſome is founde greater, in ſome leſſer, euen as faith it ſelfe is greater, and leſſer. For, when man conceiueth faith by the holy Ghoſte, by whoſe woorkmanſhip he is alſo borne anew, there foorthwith is felt the efficacie of the holie Ghoſte, whiche dayly innouateth the minde, the affections, the hearte, and to bee ſhorte, by little, and little, the whole life of the man. He deliuereth the minde, by the woorde, from the darckneſſe of ignorance, from errours, and corrupt

cogitations: and afterwarde, ſhineth into, and lighteneth the ſame, with the true knowledge of GOD, with the doctrine of ſaluation, and good cogitations: whereby it commeth to paſſe, that the affections beeing purged, doe by little and little, free themſelues, frō the vncleane deſires of the fleſh, and, by ye effectuall working of the holy ghoſt, are inflamed to good motions, according, as the mind it ſelf, ſhalbe illuminated.
               The heart of man in like caſe, waxeth meeke, and beginneth to molifie, and putting away that naturall ſtubberneſſe, ſprong from originall ſin: it beginneth to yeeld, and obey vnto God, according to the knowledge, infuſed, into the hart, by the holy ghoſt. To this obedience of the hart, alſo, aſwel the inwarde, as the outwarde workes of the man, are anſwerable. Breefely, this Sanctification conſiſteth, in true repentance, and in a right holy purpoſe: ſo, that the man doth to this ende direct, all the indeuours of his heart, and minde, that hee might obay God, & not to commit any thing vpon knowledge, and wilfulnes, which is forbidden of GOD: more eſteeming the will of GOD, then all other matters of the whole worlde.
               Furthermore, this Sanctification, is ſharply aſſaulted with moſte greeuous temtations, as being that thing, which of moſte mightie enemies, the deuill,The ſecret helpe of the holy ghoſt in our ſtranglings. the fleſh, and the world, is oppugned: wherby it commeth to paſſe, that oftentimes in this ſpirituall battail, of the ſpirit, and the fleſh, the Chriſtian feeleth the weakenes of his owne

power, ſo that ſomtimes he ſemeth to fal vnder, yea rather to be caſt downe to the grounde, and vtterly as it were thrown downe proſtrate: but, in the meane time, by the ayde, preſence, and power of the holy ghoſt, he is lifted vp againe. After this maner Dauid beeing ouercome of ye fleſh was ſubdued: & defiled himſelfe with adulterie, and murther: but when hee heard the admonitions of the Prophet Nathan (by the working of the holy Ghoſte) hee was lifted vp. The ſame thing doth in like caſe happen to many other the holy ones of GOD: ſo that Paule ſaide not in vaine: Let him which ſtandeth take heede leaſt hee fall.
                  1. Cor. 10. Therefore hee exhorteth the Galathians Chapter 5. ſaying: VValke in the ſpirit, and fulfill not the luſtes of the fleſh: for the fleſh luſteth contrary to the ſpirite, and the ſpirite, contrary to the fleſhe. And ſo, the life of a true faithfull Chriſtian, is nothing elſe, then a perpetuall warfare:Proſper. as Proſper ſhoweth in his Epigrammes, when he ſayth:

                     Vnto the good, both battails ſharpe,
                     and daungers great, are alwayes rife:
                     The godly minde, eke euer hath,
                     with whome to fight, and holde the ſtrife.
                  
               
               The whiche thing dayly experience witneſſeth, and alſo Chriſt himſelf, when he commaundeth vs dayly to pray: Forgiue vs our treſpaſſes,
                  Matth. 6. 
                  as we forgiue them that treſpaſſe againſt vs. Salomon ſayth: The iuſte man ſinneth ſeuen times in a day, and ryſeth againe. For this difference is betwene, the children of God, & the children of the deuil.

The children of the Deuill through ſtubbernneſſe doe ſinne, and continue in their ſinnes: but the children of GOD, doe ſinne through infirmitie, and are ſometime ſeduced, by the worlde, by their owne fleſh, and by the Deuill: but they riſe againe, and apprehende the right hande of GOD the father: that is to ſay, they imbrace, with a ſtedfaſt faith Ieſus Chriſte.
               
            
            
               The fifte benefite of Chriſte.
               
                  THe fifte benefite of Chriſte, wherevnto al theſe former are directed, is, FINALL, DELIVERANCE, and REDEMPTION, ſo, that afterwarde no manner of euill, either of the worlde, the fleſh, the deuill, or any other thing, either in Heauen, in earth, or in hel, is to be feared. This finall Redemption is called in the Scripture, SALVATION, wherevnto, GOD, in the beginning created man, and afterwarde, by the death, and paſſion of his Sonne, redeemed him. This Saluation hath foure conditions.
               
                  
                     
                        The firſte is: That wee are vtterly deliuered, from all miſerie, aduerſitie, and euils.
                     
                        The ſecond is: That heereafter, wee may not feare of any euill to come vnto vs.
                     
                        The third is: That wee obtaine ſo great good things, that we are not able to wiſh greater.
                     
                        The fourth is: That wee inioye theſe good things FOR EVER: without all impediment

and mutation.
                  
               
               This Saluation with her Conditions, we obtaine in Chriſte alone.
               Theſe fiue benefites of Ieſu Chriſte already rekened: theſe two names, IESVS, and CHRIST, do contain. The firſt name, ſheweth him to be GOD and MAN, and the Sauiour of the worlde. The other ſheweth, by what meanes he is the Sauiour. For CHRIST, that is to ſay, annointed: ſheweth that Chriſt, is A PRIEST, A KING, and A PROPHET. A Prieſte, which by his ſacrifice wipeth out our ſinnes, by his prayer maketh interceſſion to our heauenly father for vs: and by his innocencie ſanctifyeth vs. A Prophet, whiche teacheth vs the way of ſaluation: And laſtly, a King, which taketh vs out of the kingdome of the Deuill, and leadeth vs into ſaluation, and ioy of life euerlaſtinge.
            
            
               Of the ſixt point or Chapter.
               
                  
                     THE ſixte thinge which I proponed, to bee knowen, of our Lorde Ieſu Chriſte, is, of the applycation of his benefits: namely, How wee (beeing made partakers of them) are brought vnto euerlaſtinge bleſſedneſſe.
               
               Our Lord, and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſte, being moued, through his deuine goodneſſe towarde vs, and with a feruent care of our ſaluation: maketh vs partakers of his benefits: By the Goſpell: by Faith, and By the holy Sacraments,
                  
with whiche the holy Ghoſte is effectually preſent, and giuen. Of theſe three inſtruments ordeyned by GOD, I will ſpeake in order.
               The firſt is THE GOSPEL, which he hath commaunded to be promulged through ye whole circle of the worlde: by the miniſtery wherof he is effectuall, through the holy Ghoſt, and (out of all mankinde) gathereth vnto himſelfe, a church, which he gouerneth, and conſerueth, by the doctrine of the Goſpel, the Sacraments, Diſcipline, and Ceremonies: ſo, that wherſoeuer theſe foure (the foūdation beeing vncorrupt) are found ſound, & perfect, there muſt of neceſſitie, be the Chriſtian congregation, although in that outward company, certaine dead members be adioyned, whiche doe boaſt of the title of the Church in vaine.
               In this his Church, Chriſte offereth, (by the miniſtery of the goſpel) his Grace to all men, according to this his commaundement: Go yee into all the world,
                  Mar. 16. 
                  & preach the goſpel to al creatures. Item: Luke. 24. Repentance and remiſſion of ſinnes muſt be preached in my name, to all nations.
                   Therfore, when thou heareſt (by this voice of the goſpel) forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, and life euerlaſting through Chriſte, to be offred vnto thee, thinke thus in thy minde with thy ſelfe: Heere Chriſte offreth me Grace, and Saluation in his woorde, which he himſelfe, by the voyce of a man ſpeaketh vnto me: If I therfore ſhall obey vnto the ſame, it turneth to may ſaluatiō: but if I ſhal ſhew my ſelfe diſobedient to this his voyce: this hearing (vnleſſe I repēt) turneth to my deſtruction)

and condempnation. For, euen as a murtherer guiltie of death, contemning the fauour, whiche he heareth to be offered vnto him, of a moſt merciful king, calleth vnto himſelf ye more greeuous puniſhment: ſo in likecaſe if, any hearing the goſpel of grace, imbraceth not ye ſame, is to himſelfe the author, of heauier puniſhment, and condemnation. Diligence is therfore to be giuen of all Chriſtians, that with high reuerence, and attention they may heare, the healthfull Goſpell of Chriſt, and by faith imbracing the ſame, declare themſelues thankful, towardes our Lorde and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſte. I will in this place ſet downe, a breefe definition of the Goſpel.
               
                  The GOSPEL (as I may ſpeake in fewe words) is, a vniuerſall preaching of Repentaunce,
                  What the Goſpel is. 
                  and remiſſion of ſinnes, in the name of Chriſte. As he himſelfe ſaith: So it is written,
                  Luke. 24. 
                  & ſo it behoued Chriſt to ſuffer, and riſe againe, from death the third day, and repentance, and remiſſion of ſinnes among all nations to be preached in his name.
               
               This preaching, Chriſte calleth, The Gopell, (that is to ſay) A ioyfull meſſage, by the which are offered vnto all men beleeuing in him, aſwel Iewes, as Gentiles, theſe good things: namely, deliuerance from the curſe of the law, and the wrath of GOD: Remiſſion of ſinnes: ſaluation, and life euerlaſting, and that without all merite of man, for his death, & paſſion, that whoſoeuer are made partakers of theſe benefites, might with heart, mouth, and life, ſet forth the honour of GOD.
               
               
                  This definition of the GOSPEL, contayneth  foure members: The firſt is: The vniuerſal commaundement of GOD, to all men, which who ſo will not heare, contemneth God, and maketh himſelfe giltie againe, of death euerlaſting.
               
                   The ſecond is: That as the Goſpel doth offer vnto men, forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, righteouſneſſe, ſaluation, and eternall life: ſo they, whoſoeuer ſhall not receiue the ſame, doe remaine in ſinne, vnrighteouſneſſe, condemnation, and eternall death.
               
                   The thirde is: That theſe benefits are offered freely vnto all men, without al reſpect of perſons, nations, and humane conditions. For Chriſte would haue all men ſaued, as many as deſyre to obtayne ſaluation, leaſte any ſhoulde deſpayre, eyther for his owne vnworthynes, or multitude of his ſinnes.
               
                   The fourth ſheweth, To whome theſe good things doe come: namely, to thoſe, which in a true fayth, turne them ſelues vnto GOD, as now ſhalbe further ſaid touching the ſame. Let theſe things ſuffice concerning the firſte inſtrument, namely, the GOSPELL, by the miniſterye whereof GOD offereth ſaluation to all men. It is at large ſaide before, How the lawe is to vs,Galla. 3. a Scholemaiſter vnto Chriſte, whiche deliuereth vs from the curſe of the lawe.
               The ſeconde meane whereby Chriſte applyeth his benefits vnto vs is FAITH. For, euen as on Chriſtes part, the Goſpell is in ſteade of a hand, by which he reacheth foorth his benefits

vnto vs: ſo, on our parte, Faith is in place of a hand, whiche receiueth Chriſte, beeing offred, with all his benefits.
               But, that it may bee vnderſtoode, what the true nature of Faith is, I will firſt ſet downe ſo manifeſt a definition of the ſame, that doubte may be lefte vnto no man, what the true, and Chriſtian faith is.
               Furthermore, I will rehearce, the naturall properties of Faith, by whiche euery one may eaſely perceiue, whether he hath the true, and naturall fayth, or no. When Iohn Baptiſt pronounceth him which beleeueth in the Sonne,Iohn. 3. to haue eternall life, he giueth warning, that the ſame is not els where to be ſought. For hee which hath the ſonne, hath the way to euerlaſting life. The ſonne is the VVay, as he himſelf ſaith: I am the way. Moreouer, He which hath the Sonne, hath the gate of life, according to that ſaying: I am the doore. Furthermore, hee which hath the ſonne, hath the merit of eternall life. For, the ſonne did not merit eternall life for himſelfe, to whom, by right, it was due: but for his, (that is to ſay) for thoſe whiche beleeue in him. Beſides this, he which hath the Sonne, hath, with the Sonne all things. For,Rom. 8. he which ſpared not his owne ſonne, but gaue him for vs all: how ſhould hee not alſo giue vs all things with him? To conclude, hee whiche hath the ſonne, is one with him: therfore, it can not bee, but he is veryly, and with the Sonne heyre of eternall life. He which hath the ſonne, hath eternall

life it ſelfe, as hee himſelfe ſayth, I am the lyfe.
               
               Therefore, whether thou ſeekeſt the way of life, or, the Doore, or, the merite, or, the Fountaine, and Lord, or euerlaſting life it ſelfe: thou haſte euery one of theſe in the Sonne,Iohn. 3. when thou beleeueſt in him. And contrarywiſe: Hee which beleeueth not in the Sonne, ſhall not ſee life, but the wrath of GOD abydeth vpon him.
               
               Heereby we may eſteeme, what the excellencie, and vtilitie of Fayth is, whiche no man can obtayne, but hee, whiche beeing firſt admoniſhed (by the Lawe) of his ſinne: doth feele the greatneſſe of the anger of GOD, and iuſte condempnation.
               Therefore, the Scripture teacheth vs to be ſory for our ſinne, ſo that we would, that we had neuer ſinned, or offended GOD: and that we ſhould feele, a true greefe, & ſorrowe of heart for our ſinnes committed. Hee which is gone ſo farre forwarde, hee at the length rightly acknowledgeth, how ioyfull that meſſage of the Goſpell is, which offereth to the beleeuers, Remiſſion of ſinnes, the fauour of GOD, Righteouſneſſe, and life euerlaſting.
               But, what is FAITH? Theſe two manners of ſpeaking, namely: To beeleeue in Chriſt: And, To beleeue in the name of Chriſte, will plainly declare vnto vs, the ſubſtance of Fayth.
               
               The former ſentence, namely, To beleeue in Chriſte, ſheweth, Chriſte onely to be the obiect of Fayth, or ſure confidence: ſo, that Saluation is

not to be hoped for, but in him alone.
               The latter, namely, To beleeue in the name of Chriſte, ſheweth the qualitie of Fayth, (that is to ſay) that our confidence in Chriſte, ſhould be ſuch, as his name is in the Goſpell, and as his doinges are, which teſtifie of him.
               When as Chriſte therefore, is, in the Goſpell named the Sauiour of all whiche beleeue in him, very GOD, very MAN, one true and eternall perſon, and, the Lambe of GOD, taking away the ſinnes of the worlde: And many examples doe teſtifye, that the dooinges of Chriſte, doe aunſwere vnto this honourable name, (as the example of the Theefe vpon the Croſſe, the example of Mary Magdalen, of Paule, Peeter, and innumerable others) it appeareth: that, true Fayth in CHRISTE is, A liuely,
                  The definition of the liuely and iuſtifying Fayth. 
                  and conſtant confidence of the heart, whereby it is ſurely decreede, that CHRISTE is the Sauiour of all thoſe whiche beleeue in him, as hee whiche is able to bring to paſſe all thinges whiche hee will, as GOD: whiche wylleth the beſte vnto vs, as MAN, by the ſocietie of nature ioyned vnto vs: whiche muſte, as the Mediatour betwene GOD, and vs, appointed of the Father: whiche hath giuen himſelfe a pryce of redemption for vs, that euery one whiche beleeueth, might bee cleanſed from Sinne by his bloode, might bee iuſtifyed by his obedyence, regenerated to euerlaſtinge lyfe, by his ſpirite, through the vnmeaſurable mercie of GOD the Father, which ſo loued the worlde,
                  Iohn. 3. 
                  that hee woulde giue his onely begotten Sonne,

that ALL VVHICHE BELEEVE IN HIM, ſhould not periſh, but haue life euerlaſting.
               
               This fuller deſcription of a conſtant faythe, may bee drawne more narowe, and that out of the words of Iohn Baptiſt: (Hee which beleeueth in the Sonne, hath eternall life): in this manner: Faith is a knowledge of Chriſte, and a ſure cōfidence of obtayning eternall life through him.
               
               Such was the faith of the Theefe vpon the croſſe,Luke. 23. which from a ſure truſt ſayde: Remember me Lorde, when thou commeſt into thy kingdome: To whom it was anſwered of the Lord: This day ſhalt thou be with me in Paradice. Such was the faith of the ſinfull woman in the 7. of Luke, which heard of the Lord: Thy faith hath ſaued thee. In like manner of the Publicane, Luke the 18. praying on this wiſe: God bee mercifull vnto me a ſinner: And of Dauid, Pſal. 25. Be mercifull vnto my ſinne (O Lord) for thy name ſake.
                  A generall rule. All theſe doe agree to the rule in Pſal. 2. Bleſſed are all they which put their truſt in him.
               
               Now, after that we haue deſcribed FAITH, we wil recite fiue properties of ye ſame: by which, as by infallible notes, euery one may knowe, whether he hath the True Faith, or no.
               
                  
                     
                        The firſt propertie of faith is: That it is felte in the heart.
                     
                        The ſecond is: That it offereth it ſelfe to bee ſeene, in the outwarde deedes.
                     
                        The third is: That it ſuffereth it ſelfe to be tryed vnder the Croſſe.
                     
                        The fourth: That it ouercōmeth the world.
                     
                        
                        The fift: That it perſeuereth vnto the ende,1. Pet. 
                              •
                           . 
                        which is (as Peter witneſſeth) The ſaluation of Soules.
                  
               
               The firſt propertie of Faith is this: That it liueth in the heart of man, ſo, that there may bee felte, an vnſpeakeable conſolation, againſt the malediction of the lawe, the power of death, and the tyranny of the Deuill: that there may bee felte, a ioy, vnable to be tolde, of the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, and a ſpirituall ſecuritie, of the fauour, and freendſhip of God: that the dwelling of the holy Ghoſte, and his preſence in the heart of the man, may be perceiued: that the force of the holy Ghoſte, ſtirring vp fayth to call vpon God, may be perceiued: that a burning deſire, to obey the will of God, and to reſiſt the Deuil may bee perceiued: that a ſpirituall ioy of the beginning of the life eternall may bee felte: that thankfulneſſe towarde God, may be perceiued: Breefely, whereſoeuer a Chriſtian faith is in man, there it muſt needes be, that ſhe muſt ſhew foorth her ſelfe, by true godlyneſſe, by a holy porpoſe of lyuing well, and by reioycing in the holy ghoſt.
               Secondly, I affirme this to be the property of Faith: That in outwarde woorkes ſhee offereth her ſelfe, to be ſeene: For the outwarde woorkes doe beare witneſſe of the affections of the heart. Therefore Chriſte ſayth: By their frutes ye ſhall know them. It is therfore impoſſible, that wherſoeuer true faith floriſheth in the heart, by the holy Ghoſte dwelling in the heart of man, that there ſhould not therewithall bee preſent, good

woorks teſtifying of the hart. Theſe workes of faith, are in generall, to eſchue euil, and to doe good: ſo, that faith be the foundation, the beginning, the leader, and gouerneſſe, of all vertues, and good actions. For firſt of all, Fayth is the piller, or foundation wherupon is ſtayed, and vpon the whiche is builded all obedience, vertue, and euery good woorke. Furthermore, it is the beginning, from which, as from a liuing fountain, the riuers of all honeſt workes, and doings, doe flowe out. Moreouer, It is the leader, whiche holdeth man in the right way, leaſt hee ſhoulde decline either to the right hand, (that is to ſay) to good intentions of men (as they call them) which wil worſhip God according to their owne wiſedome, and traditions: or, vnto the left, that is to ſay, to the workes of the Deuill, whereunto this worlde, with the members of the Deuil, hath wholy giuen, and bound it ſelfe.
               Yea, Eayth beeing the Captaine of all vertue, and Chriſtian works, neuer reſteth it ſelf, in any deede obiected, or ſet before it, before yt it heare this worde: So the mouth of the Lorde ſpeaketh: Therfore Dauid through fayth prayeth in the 25. Pſal. Shew me thy wayes (O Lord) and teach me thy pathes: And Pſal. 119. he ſayth: Bleſſed are the vndefiled in the way: that is, they whiche through faith ſhew obedience vnto GOD, ſo that they goe forward in the right way, declining neither to the right hand nor to the left. Laſt of all, faith is alſo the Gouerneſſe, directing the whole life of man, and all his works, to this marke: namely,

to the glory of God, the edificatiō of the church, and ye vtilitie of his neighbour. All theſe works of Faith, already remembred, may bee called backe, to theſe foure pointes following.
               The firſt is, a declaration of godlyneſſe in the outward workes of this life: namely, in the congregatiō, & felowſhip of the Chriſtians, to heare the word of God, and to cal vpon him, openly to profeſſe thy faith, & vſe the ſacraments: In like maner with thy counſail, ſubſtance, and diligēce to ſet forwarde the glory of GOD, in ſuch ſorte, that thou maiſt be knowne, to bee earneſtly affected in the buſineſſe, & cauſe of God. This is that, which Dauid ſaith Pſal. 122. I was glad, when they ſaid vnto me, we will go into the houſe of the Lorde. Item: Becauſe of the houſe of the Lorde our GOD, I will ſeeke to doe thee good. In which wordes Dauid ſheweth, that hee bent himſelfe wholy vnto this thing, that his ſubiectes might vnderſtand, that he went about this thing, with greateſt indeuor: that he might ſhew himſelf to be a miniſter of God, in the publique congregation of the godly, Which example of Dauid, it becōmeth Kings, & princes, magiſtrats, & ſubiects, to imitate, that by this meanes, they might declare, their faith and pietie, towardes God.
               The ſeconde is: The innocencie of the priuate life, ſo, that euery one of vs, euen when he is alone, doe thinke himſelfe, to be conuerſaunte in the ſight of God, and therefore, to abſtayne from all wantonneſſe, and iniquitie. Hereof it is,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . that God ſayd to Abraham: VValke before mee.
               
               
                  For, God doth not onely ſee thoſe thinges, which are ſet foorth to the ſunne light: but, hee alſo looketh into the inwarde cogitations of the hearte.
               The third is, Iuſtice, and Loue, to be exerciſed indifferently, towardes all men: So that euery man doe, with a good conſcience, the dutie of his vocation, that the inferiours to their magiſtrate, and to others placed in authoritie, doe yeelde due reuerence, and obedience: againe, the ſuperiours and potentates, doe, with counſaile, and diligence, aſſiſt their equals, and with a fatherly care, and diſcipline defend their ſubiects: and moreouer, as much as in them is, comforte the afflicted, and releeue, with their plentie, the poores neceſſitie: yea, doubtleſſe, they ſhould eſteeme al men, to be members with them in our Lord Ieſu Chriſte. And, therefore, let them be of this minde towardes others, that whatſoeuer they would to be doone to them ſelues, the ſame they ſhould do to them: and neuer wittingly, and willingly, by any meanes, through iniury and iniuſtice oppreſſe others: Breefely: that thou doe liue in ſuch wiſe among men, that thou maiſt haue among all men, an honeſt teſtimonie of the fayth, and life of a Chriſtian.
               The fourth is: Diligence in eche mans vocacation, whether it bee in the Church, or in the houſeholde, or in the common wealth, or in what ſoeuer kinde of office, which beeing, with fedelitie, and honeſtie performed, doth ſerue to the commoditie of the weale publique, and common

ſocietie. In this behalfe, the rule of Paule Rom. 12 is to be followed, by whiche he commaundeth euery man, to ſhewe in his office, faithfulneſſe, and diligence. And, that no man ſhould forſake, his lawfull vocation, bothe Paule and Iohn Baptiſt doe giue counſaile: the Commandement of Paule is this: Let euery man abide in that vocation,
                  1. Cor. 7. 
                  to the which he is called. Iohn counſayleth: that euery one bee iuſt in his calling: When the Romane ſouldiers flocked together vnto him, that they might be baptized of him, and demaunded, what they ſhould doe: he had them not forſake their offices of warfare, or withdrawe themſelues into the wilderneſſe, or, to put a Coule vpon them, the common couering of ſlouthfull vnthrifts: but he anſwered vnto them: Hurte not,
                  Luke. 1. 
                  nor quarell with no man, and be content with your wages.
               
               Beholde here, what fruites of faith among men, Iohn requireth of the Souldiers? Let euery Chriſtian ſet before himſelfe this example, euery one in his kinde of life: neither let them vniuſtly oppreſſe any man, but rather beſtow their diligence, to doe iuſtly the works of their vocation, which may be accomplyſhed, with the commoditie and, and vtilitie of others. I wil therfore collect fiue things, as it were poynts, to the whiche euery one ought to haue reſpect, in his vocation, that he wander not out of the way.
               
                  FIRST: Let the vocation be grounded vpon the worde of GOD, according vnto this rule: Euery office promoting the glory of GOD, and

making to the vpholding & beautifiyng of the ſtates ordayned by God, (as the politicall, oeconomicall and Eccleſiaſtical ſtates) is commaunded by the firſt and fourth Commaundements.
               Secondly: Fayth and Charitie, are the rules of all actions, in eche vocation.
               Thirdly: If any aduerſitie chaunce: we muſt looke back to the word of God, where vpon the vocation is founded, and from thence conſolation is to be required.
               Fourthly: let the vocation, be alwayes referred to the glorye of God, and the profit of the common wealth, wherein eche man liueth.
               Fiftly: God is to be continually called vpon, for, whether the vocation be more honorable, or more profitable: without the ayde of God, nothing can be either hapily begun, or brought to perfection.Some read Et victum quere honeſte. All theſe things Dauid in the 37. Pſal. comprehendeth, in theſe wordes: Hope thou in the Lorde, and be doing good, dwell in the land, and verely, thou ſhalt be fedde.
               
               The thirde inſtrument, or meane, whereby Chriſte applyeth his benefits vnto vs, are, the Sacraments, and ſeales of his grace, and will. But, before that I come to ye handling of the ſacraments of the new Teſtament, I will weigh two things, moſte neceſſary to be knowne. The firſt is, What the cuſtome of God hath beene, in opening his will vnto men. The other: Why God hath giuen to the ſignes, and ſacraments inſtituted by him, their names.
               Firſt, therfore, it is to be knowne, that God,

from the beginning of the worlde, hath accoſtomed to make open his wil, vnto men, by two meanes, namely, By manifeſt VVord, and By outward Signe: that by this meanes, he might aſſiſt the ſaluation of man.
               When God had created Adam, and placed him in Paradiſe, he opened his will vnto him, by expreſſe worde, to the which he added, a double ſigne, namely, the tree of life, & the tree of knowledge of good, and euil: ſo that if he did obay the worde, he ſhould not waxe olde, but ſhould eate of the tree of life, & liue bleſſed for euer: but if he did tranſgreſſe the cōmandement of God, & eate of the forbidden tre of knowledge, he ſhould die.
               To Abraham likewiſe he proponed his worde, wherunto he adioyned the externall ſigne of circumciſiō, which he called his couenant. Furthermore, he promiſed vnto Moſes, yt he would bring his people out of the ſeruitude of Egypt into the land of promiſe: to this his promiſe, he added a ſigne: namely, the paſchall Lamb. Afterwarde God promiſed, yt he would giue vnto his people the lande of Canaan to poſſeſſe, as long as they ſhuld obey him, & kepe his teſtament, & his couenant: to this his word, he alſo added an outward ſigne, namely, ye blood of the red Cow, wherwith the Prieſt ſprinkled the people, and many other ſignes which he named by ye name of couenant. Altogether after the ſame manner, Chriſt in the new Teſtament, promiſeth to the beleuers, forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, and regeneratiō by the holy ghoſt, & addeth an outwarde ſigne, which in the ſcripture is called The Baptiſme of Repentance.
               
               
                  He promiſeth alſo that he would offer his body, vpon the Altar of the Croſſe, and ſhed his blood for the remiſſion of ſinnes: and heere hee alſo adioyneth an outwarde ſigne, which he nameth his body, and blood, and the newe Teſtament. And ſo it is manifeſt, what cuſtome God hath kept, in opening his wil vnto men, namely, BY VVORDE, and BY SIGNE: bothe which he hath ſet foorth, to be perceiued with the minde, and ſences, that we might be the eaſilyer and fullier of his wil inſtructed.
               Secondly: It is to be conſidered, why God hath giuen to the Sacramentall Signes, the names of the thinges themſelues, for whoſe cauſe the Sacraments are inſtituted. Doubtleſſe, for this cauſe: that when wee doe vſe the outwarde ſignes, wee ſhould lift vp the eyes of Faith, to the cōtemplation of ye heauenly things, of which the outwarde ſignes haue obtayned their names. When Abraham circumciſed his ſonne, the name ſet vpon Circumciſion, by God, (wherwith, he named the ſame, his couenaunt with Abraham, and his ſeedes,) came into his minde. And Moſes when he ſprinkled the people with the blood of the red Cowe, thought vpon the name of TESTAMENT: whiche God had giuen vnto this ſigne. So in like manner, our Baptiſme, is called, The Baptiſme of Repentance: that wee might lifte vp the eyes of our hart, from the element of water, to the promiſe, wherewith GOD ſealeth vnto the repentant, his MERCIE and GRACE. For whiche

cauſe, Baptiſme is called, the Fountaine of Regeneration: that we might conſider,Iohn. 3. that thoſe which are baptized, are ſpiritually borne again, by the holy Ghoſte. After the ſame manner Bread is named, the body of Chriſte, and wine the blood of Chriſt, in the Lords his ſupper: becauſe they doe note foorth, that ſecret meate, which Chriſte, reacheth foorth, vnder the bread, and wine. To be ſhort: God of his infintie wiſdome hath giuen to the Signes, and Sacramentes, the names of the ſpirituall things, and giftes which by the Sacraments are ſignifyed: that wee ſhould not ſtick in thoſe things, which are ſeene with the eyes only, but in thoſe things rather, whiche Fayth ſeeth, and beholdeth in the Sacraments.
               After that wee haue expounded theſe two things of the ſubſtance of the Sacramentes in generall: wee may now be the eaſilyer brought vnto the knowledge of the Sacraments of the new Teſtament, of which I will now ſpeake in order.
            
            
               Of the Sacrament of Baptiſme.
               
               
                  THat wee may the more profitably vnderſtand the reaſon of our Baptiſme: let vs heere in the beginning, ſee the cauſe why our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte would be baptized.
               Why Chriſte would be baptized, aſwell the

voice of the father from heauen vpon him, doth ſhew: as alſo, the appearing of the holy Ghoſt, doone in the ſhape of a Doue.Matth 3.
               
               The voyce of the Father vpon Chriſte, nowe newly baptized, was this: This is my beeloued Sonne, in whome I am well pleaſed. Of this voice, Baptiſme witneſſeth. For, this is the cheefe, and principall end of baptiſme: that it is a teſtimonie, or ſeale of the fauour of GOD, towarde the Baptized. It is therefore to be noted, that wee which are cloathed with Chriſte, through Baptiſme: are gratefull, and acceptable vnto God, through Chriſt. Wherunto Paule alſo hath reſpect, Ephe. 1. when hee ſayth: VVee are beloued,
                  Matth. 3. 
                  in the beloued: Yea, God himſelfe ſayth: In him I am pleaſed.
               
               
                  CHRISTE therefore, would be baptized, and vſe this outwarde ſeale of the grace of God: that (according to the voyce of the father) we which are baptized, and ingraffed into his body, by Baptiſme, may knowe, that we haue GOD mercifull, and pleaſed, through Chriſte. Therefore all the efficacie of our Baptiſme dependeth on Chriſte.
               The appearing of the holy Ghoſt, in the ſhape of a Doue, ſignifieth that ſpirituall Baptiſme, wherwith Chriſt doth inwardly baptize: When the miniſter of God worketh the outward Baptiſme of water, according to the commaundement of Chriſt. This is that which Iohn Baptiſt ſaith: I baptize you with water: but amongſt you ſtandeth one, which baptizeth with the holy Ghoſt.
               
               
                  That the holy Ghoſte appeareth in the ſhape of a Doue: the ſame is a ſhewing of peace, and reconciliation, made betweene God, & the partie baptized: that therewithall we might be admoniſhed, what the Arke of Noah did ſignifye, out of which the Doue beeing ſent, returned, bringing a Braunche of an Oliue. Heereof, therefore wee make vp the definition of Baptiſme, in this manner:
               
                  BAPTISME is an outwarde ſigne,
                  What Bapt. is. 
                  ſignifying the inwarde Baptiſme, which Chriſte woorketh by his holie Spirite, to ſeale in VS, THE MERCY, and GRACE of God.
               
               Furthermore, that we may, with the more frute, be occupyed, in the meditation of this our Baptiſme: a threfolde ſignifycation of the ſame is to be obſerued.
               
                  The firſt is: that Baptiſme is, A teſtimony of Grace.
                  
                  The ſecond is: that it is, A Symbole, (or token) of ſecret and ſpirituall things.
                  The third is: that it is the Cogniſance of our outwarde profeſſion, and Chriſtianitie. Of this threefolde ſignifycation of Baptiſme, I will ſpeake in order.
               
               Firſte, that Baptiſme is A teſtimonie of Grace, wee haue proued before. For, it is an outwarde ſeale of the grace of God, teſtifying, that the partie which is baptized, is ſanctifyed, and (as a ſacrifice) conſecrated vnto GOD: who regenerateth vs, beeing cleanſed and ſeperated, from the deuil, & his ſocietie, that we may

be made new men, yea, the ſonnes of God himſelfe, whome he adopteth in his beloued ſonne, our Lorde Ieſu Chriſte.
               Secondly: Baptiſme is A Symbole, (or token) of things, which by his proportion, or compariſon teacheth vs.Auguſt. Epiſt. 13. Whereof Auguſtine ſaith: If Sacraments had not a certaine cōpariſon with thoſe things whereof they be Sacramentes, they were no Sacramentes at all. So our Baptiſme, in the which, man is dipped vnder the water, and is drawne foorth againe, hath his ſpirituall ſignification, for whiche, it is called, A Symbole, or token of things.
               Baptiſme is A Symbole or token of two thinges, cheefely: namely, Of the doinges of Chriſte: And of our dutie.
               
               Concerning the doinges of Chriſte, it teacheth vs foure things: namely.
               
                  VVhat hee hath doone:
               
               
                  VVhy hee hath doone:
               
               
                  VVhat he doth to them which are baptized:
               
               
                  And moreouer, what he wil doe vnto them.
               
               How then, doth Baptiſme teache vs, VVhat Chriſt hath doone? It putteth vs in minde of the hiſtory of the three dayes,Paraſceues. namely, of the day of the preparation, in which Chriſte ſuffred: And of the Saboth, in whiche Chriſte reſted in the Sepulchre: And of the day of Eaſter, in the which, Chriſte, (hauing ouercome death) roſe from the dead.
               Therefore, Chriſte calleth, his death, buriall, and Reſurrection, BAPTISME, Marke. 10.
                  
where the ſonnes of Zebedee, Iames, and Iohn, required, that the one might ſit on the righte hand of Chriſte, the other on the left, in his glory: to whome Chriſte anſwereth: Are ye able to drinke of the Cup, which I ſhall drinke of, and to be baptized with the Baptiſme, wherewith I am baptized? As though the Lorde ſhoulde ſay: yee all aſpire to ioy, and glory, but ye muſt of neceſſitie ſuffer ſomewhat, before that it ſhalbe lawful to inioy this glory, and gladneſſe. Moſte bitter death falleth in, ouer whome we muſt triumph, before we come vnto this glory. Therfore, to be ſprinkled with the water in Baptiſme, noteth foorth the death of Chriſte: to tary vnder the water, ſhadoweth foorth his buriall. To bee drawne from the water: repreſenteth the glorious Reſurrection of Chriſte. As often therfore, as we remember our baptiſme, or be preſent at the Baptiſme of others: let vs call to minde the hiſtory of the three dayes, Of the Death, Buriall, and Reſurrection of Chriſte.
               But if you demaunde, VVhy Chriſte hath doone this? Paul aunſwereth, and in two words knitteth together the whole matter, in Rom. 4. Chriſte (ſayth he) dyed FOR OVR SINNES, and was raiſed againe, FOR OVR IVSTIFICATION. For, as Chriſte, by the merite of his death, wypeth out our iniquities: and by his blood cleanſeth our conſciences from all mortall, ſinne: So, in like manner, by his reſurrectiō from death, he declareth himſelfe to be righteous, and in all reſpectes perfectly pure, according to the lawe of

God. Therfore Dauid in the 16. Pſal. ſayth: Thou ſhalt not leaue my ſoule in hel, neither ſhalt thou ſuffer thine holy one, to ſee corruption. Chriſte alſo meaneth the ſame thing, when he ſaith in Ioh. 16 The holy Ghoſt ſhall reprehend the world of Righteouſneſſe, becauſe I go to the father: that is to ſay, Herode, Pilate, and the Iewes, deny me to be righteous, and without all ſinne: but when they ſhall ſee me, not to be ouercome of death: my reſurrectiō from death, ſhalbe a teſtimony of my righteouſneſſe, before them. For that cauſe Paule ſaith:Rom. 4. 
                  Hee was rayſed againe for our iuſtifycation: that is to ſay: that by his riſing againe he might declare his owne righteouſneſſe, which righteouſneſſe, he giueth, and imputeth vnto all thoſe which beleeue in him.
               Furthermore, VVhat Chriſte doth in Baptiſme Iohn ſheweth ſaying: He baptizeth with the holy Ghoſte,
                  Mat. 3. 
                  and with fyer. And Paule, when he ſaith: He cleanſeth vs in the fountaine of water,
                  Ephe. 5. 
                  through the worde. Whereas Iohn affirmeth, Chriſte, to baptiſe, VVith the HOLIE GHOST, and VVith FYER: he ſheweth that Chriſte giueth in Baptiſme, the holye Ghoſte: who, by his preſence is effectuall, in the worde, and Baptiſme.
               What the holy Ghoſt woorketh in the partie which is baptized, according to the commandement of Chriſt: is ſhewed by the word, Fyer: For as the Fyer altereth things ſometimes by burning out, ſometimes by inflaming: So the holy Ghoſt, altereth man by regenerating, burneth out by mortifying the olde man: inflameth by

quickening, and rayſing vp the new man. And heereof it is, that Paule ſayth: Chriſte clenſeth vs in the fountaine of water, through the word of life.
                  Ephe. 5.
               
               In which words hee ioyneth together three things, namely, Outwarde Baptiſme, which hee calleth The fountaine of water. Then, Chriſte, who cleanſeth vs inwardly with his blood, and holy ſpirit: And laſtly, The VVorde, that is, The promiſe of Chriſte, whereupon the whole efficatie of Baptiſme doth depend.
               For, Baptiſme is not effectuall, for the water which the Miniſter of God ſprinckleth, neither for the words, which are recited by him: but all the force of Baptiſme floweth from the moſte ample promiſe of Chriſt: who (with his holy ſpirit, and with fier) baptizeth him, which, with the externall element of water, is ſprinkled.
               But although this be the inſtitution, and ordinaunce of Chriſte: yet notwithſtanding, let vs not thinke, his hand to be ſhortened, to baptize ſpiritually without water, thoſe which are partakers of his promiſe, (that is to ſay) all the Infantes of the Chriſtians: and thoſe cheefely, whiche departing in the mothers wombe, doe not touche the outwarde Baptiſme. Therefore godly Parents ſhould not deſpayre of the ſaluation of ſuch Infantes, neither with vncomelyneſſe, and contempt, bury them in a grounde (which the common people call) not conſecrated: but let them ſurely perſuade themſelues, yt theſe are in the ſame couenāt, with the children of Abraham, as Paule in Gallath. 3. plainely teacheth.

Therfore, as Such as came of his fleſh. the fleſhely children of Abraham, which departed this life, before the eight day of Circumciſion: were not condemned: but by the vertue of the promiſe, and couenaunt of GOD, were ſaued: ſo, alſo after the ſame manner, the ſpirituall Children of Abraham, (that is to ſay) the infantes of all the Chriſtians, are not condemned, if they deceaſe before baptiſme: but are ſaued by the efficatie of the promiſe of God, and by inuiſible baptiſme, wherewith Chriſte baptizeth them, who, (by his death, and precious blood) hath redeemed them.
               With this conſolation, let chriſtian Parents lifte vp themſelues, whoſe Children, departe hence, either in the mothers wombe, or foorthwith after the birth, before they be made partakers of Baptiſme. Yet, I would not, that any ſhould heereof take occaſion to protract to Baptiſme of Infants: yea rather, I am an exhorter, that aſſoone as they be newe borne, they ſhould haue a regarde to haue them ſealed, with this outwarde Symbole (or token) of ſaluation, and therewithall to be aſſiſted, with the prayers of the godly, whiche ſhall bee preſent at the Baptiſme.
               It remayneth now to be explycated, VVhat Chriſte wil doe to thoſe which are Baptized. This thing he himſelfe ſheweth in his laſt comaundement, which, aſcending vnto heauen, he gaue to his Apoſtles in theſe wordes: Go, and Baptiſe all nations, whoſoeuer beleueth, and is Baptized, ſhalbe ſaued, but he that beleeueth not, ſhalbe condemned.
                  
For, euen as they whiche were in the Arke of Noah, were preſerued from the floud: ſo, whoſoeuer doth earneſtly ſtick to the couenant of this outwarde Baptiſme, are deliuered from the euerlaſting floud, (that is to ſay) from the paines and torments of Hel, by IESVS CHRIST. Breefely, as he which is baptized is drawen frō the water, ſo Chriſte will take vs from all calamities, and bring vs into his kingdome, where, with him we ſhall reigne in all eternitie.
               After that we haue ſayd, How our Baptiſme, is a Symbole, (or token) of the actions of Chriſt: we will now ſee, Howe it alſo admoniſheth vs of our dutie (that is to ſay) what we ſhuld perfourme vnto GOD: what we owe vnto our ſelues, what we muſt ſuffer: And what we muſt looke for: How we muſt paſſe from miſeryes to ſaluation: For of euery of theſe partes of our duetie, our Baptiſme doth admoniſh vs.
               But, VVhat ſhall we performe vnto GOD? This Chriſte teacheth vs, when hee ſayth: Baptize them, In the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghoſte. In which woordes, hee comprehendeth the principall end of Baptiſme: which, (it were conuenient) we ſhould alwayes, and continually haue in remembrance. For, this is the moſte ſimple, and plaine meaning of theſe wordes: I Baptize thee, in the name of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghoſt: that is to ſay: I Baptize thee to this ende cheefely: that thou ſhouldeſt acknowledge, confeſſe, inuocate, worſhip, and honour, this only true GOD, namely:

                  The Father, the Sonne and the holy Ghoſte: The Father, which ſo loued thee, yt hee hath deliuered his owne only begotten ſonne, to death for thee: The Sonne, whiche dying for thee, clenſeth thee from all ſinne, by his precious blood, ſhed vpon the Altar of the croſſe, for the forgiueneſſe of thy ſinnes, and, which, moreouer clothed thee with his righteouſnes, yea, maketh thee a member of his owne body, ſo that by his meanes, thou art called the ſonne of God. The holy Ghoſt alſo, who regenerateth, and ſanctifyeth thee vnto life eternall: that, thou beeing knit vnto God, mayſt with him inioy ſaluation, without end. This is the moſt ſimple (and plaine) ſentence, of ye words of Baptiſme, which beeing gathered out of the holy ſcriptures, I comprehend in this one little forme of ſpeech: I Baptize thee, In the name. For in the worde (NAME) is contayned, bothe, a confeſſing of GOD: and beſide, whatſoeuer this Confeſſion requireth of man.
               By theſe thinges it is eaſye to bee perceiued, what manner of couenant betweene God, and man, baptiſme is God promiſeth vnto man, forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, righteouſneſſe and euerlaſting life, and this his promiſe he ſealeth by Baptiſme, the partie which is baptized, doth againe, by faith, binde himſelf vnto God, and promiſeth that he will deny the Deuil, with all his works: and, by a ſure faith, inuocatiō, worſhipping, fear, and, in all things, by due obedience, cleaue vnto GOD.
                  1. Pet. 3. For this cauſe Peter calleth Baptiſme, A COVENANT, wherin a mutuall promiſe is

made, of God demaunding, and promiſing grace to the partie baptized: and againe of him which is Baptized, anſwering and affirming, that hee will conſtantly abyde, in the mutuall knot and couenant.
               In the ſeconde place Baptiſme warneth vs, VVhat we ſhoulde doe to our ſelues.
               
               As we are dipped in the water of Baptiſme, and tary vnder the water, and are drawen from thence againe: ſo we ſhould mortifye ſinne, and choke the vitious affections, deſyres of ſinne and corrupt concupiſcences in vs, & riſe againe in newneſſe of life. Of this thing Paule Rom. 6. doth admoniſh vs, where he inueigheth againſt thoſe, which ſuppoſed, that libertie to ſinne was graunted, becauſe that Paule had ſayd, VVhere ſinne did abounde, there Grace did more abounde: Whom hee confuteth with theſe words: VVhat ſhall we ſay then, ſhall wee abide in ſinne, that Grace may abounde? God forbidde.
                  Rom. 6. 
                  Howe ſhall we which are deade to ſinne, (that is to ſay) (whoſe ſinne is deade) liue any longer therein? Knowe yee not, that wee whiche are Baptized into IESVS CHRISTE, are Baptized to dye with him? (that is to ſay, we which are baptized doe, in Baptiſme put on Chriſte, whoſe death doth effectually, kill, and keepe vnder ſinne in vs, that it ſhoulde not reigne in vs.) VVee are therefore buryed together with him by Baptiſme, for to dye, (that is, that ſinne might bee deade in vs,) that euen as Chriſt was rayſed vp frō death, by the glory of the father, ſo we alſo ſhoulde walke in newneſſe of life.
               
               
                  
                  For, if we be ingraffed into death, like vnto him, ſo ſhall wee alſo bee partakers of his reſurrection. Knowing this, that our olde man, (that is, the corrupt nature) is crucifyed with him, that the body of ſinne might be aboliſhed, (that is, the corrupte affections) that wee ſhould no more bee ſeruants vnto ſinne.
               
               And ſo it appeareth, how Paule, by the reaſon of our Baptiſme teacheth vs, to mortifye ſinne, to deſtroy the wicked concupiſcences, and to walke in a new life. Whereunto he alſo directeth the ſcope of his whole diſputatiō, which he ſetteth downe in theſe wordes: And ſo doe ye alſo eſteeme your ſelues to be dead vnto ſinne: But, to liue vnto GOD, in Chriſte Ieſu our Lorde. Let not ſinne therefore reigne in your mortall bodyes, that ye ſhould obay thereunto by the luſtes thereof. As often therefore as the corruption of our nature, ſhall prouoke vs to ſinne, let vs call to remembraunce our Baptiſme, which admoniſheth vs of innocencie of manners, and newneſſe of life, to the glorye of GOD, through IESVS CHRISTE.
               
               
                  THIRDLY, Baptiſme teacheth vs, VVhat we muſt ſuffer. For, euen as Chriſte, (whome, in Baptiſme wee doe put on) was baptized with the croſſe: ſo we alſo, as long as we remaine in this worlde, let vs prepare our ſelues, to the Croſſe and aduerſities.
               Yea, GOD will by this meanes haue his adopted ſonnes, to be made like to his onely begottē ſonne: that they may reign together with

him in his glory. This is that which Paule ſaith in Rom. 8. If wee be ſonnes, then are we alſo heyres,
                  Rom. 8. 
                  the heyres I meane of God, and heyres annexed with Chriſte, ſo that if we ſuffer together with him, we ſhall alſo bee gloryfyed together with him.
               
               And Paule addeth there this conſolation, that the Croſſe worketh for the beſt, to ſuch as loue GOD. Of this croſſe of the godly, he alſo ſpeaketh in the Epiſtle to Timothie: VVhoſoeuer (ſaith he) will liue godly, in our Lord Ieſu Chriſte,
                  Time. 
                  ſhall ſuffer perſecution.
               
               The hiſtory of the Paſſion of our Lord Ieſu Chriſt, ſetteth before vs, three kindes of croſſes, vnto which may be referred, the diuerſe ſortes of all calamities, which may happen vnto man in this life.
               
                  The firſt Croſſe, is the croſſe of Chriſt, which is ſeene in the middle, betwene two others.
                  The ſecond, is, of the Theefe, hanging on the right hand.
                  The third, of the Theefe hanging on the left hand.
               
               Chriſte, (aſmuch as concerneth his owne perſon) ſuffered, beeing innocent: but bothe theſe Theeues, ſuffred iuſtly, for their offences. But he which hanged at the right hand: repented vnder the Croſſe, and beeing conuerted vnto Chriſte, obtayned comforte, and ſaluation. The other at the left hand, continued ſtifly in his malice, and dying without repentaunce was condempned.
               After this ſame manner, it alſo goeth at

this day. The greateſt parte of the godly Chriſtians, doe ſuffer perſecution for righteouſneſſe ſake, which happeneth to many holie Martyrs, whome Chriſte pronounceth, bleſſed, in Matth. 5. Bleſſed (ſaith he) are they, which ſuffer perſecution for righteouſneſſe ſake, for theirs is the kingdome of heauen: Bleſſed are ye when men reuile you, and perſecute you, and ſhall falſely ſay all manner of euill againſt you for my ſake: Reioyce, and bee glad, for great is your reward in heauen: for ſo did they perſecute the prophets which haue beene before you.
               
               Many doe alſo ſuffer, as the theefe, vpon the right hand. Theſe are they, which, for their certaine offences are puniſhed of God, namely, by taking away their goodes, Children, powers, helth, body: or els doe fall into the hands of the Magiſtrate, and are drawen vnto puniſhment, as alſo vnto this Theefe, it happened.
               Theſe beeing oppreſſed with calamities, and puniſhments, do confeſſe, themſelues to be iuſtly puniſhed for their ſinnes, and flying vnto Chriſt, doe (with a firme faith) deſire forgiuenes of their offences. And by this meanes they obtaine pardon of God, whiche accepteth their croſſe as a ſacrifice pleaſant vnto him, through Ieſus Chriſte. The example of this Theefe, is, by the ſingular wiſdome of God, ſet downe before, all wretched ſinners, theeues, murtherers, and others whatſoeuer: whiche for their euill deedes are puniſhed: that the ſame might be an euident teſtimony of the fauour of God, wherewith he receiueth al, with howſoeuer infamous

kinde of puniſhment, they bee puniſhed in the ſight of the worlde, ſo that they, with a conſtant fayth, doe flye vnto Ieſus Chriſte.
               But, that the wretched offenders, whiche are to be puniſhed for their offences, may know by what meane they may obtaine the fauoure of GOD: I will ſet downe certaine ſure Articles according vnto whiche, they may directe their cogitations.
               
                  FIRST of all, the wretched ſinner, which is to be puniſhed for his manifeſt offences, ſhall not hypocritically make ſclender his ſinne, neither by conferring of his ſinne, with ye ſinnes of other offenders, deceiue himſelfe: but rather, he ſhall examine himſelfe, and weigh (not in deceitful ballances) the heuineſſe of his iniquitie. Let him conſider who it is, whom he hath offended, namely, GOD, a righteous Iudge, from whom nothing can be hid: therefore, let him eſteeme himſelfe worthy, who deſeruedly, (for the inormitie, and fylthyneſſe of his ſinne) is vnwoorthy, the name of a man.
               Such manner of cogitations do breed in man, a knowledge of himſelfe, and ſtirre vp a feeling, and taſte, of the bitterneſſe of death, and hell.
               
                  SECONDLY: Leaſt (feeling the ſorrows of Hel,) he ſhould deſpayre of the grace of God, for the greatneſſe of his ſinne: as Cayne, Iudas, Saule, and many others haue doone: theſe fiue things are to be thought vpon.
               Firſt: The promiſe, and good will of God, ſaying: I will not the death of a ſinner, but that

hee may bee conuerted, and liue.
               
               Furthermore: the commaundement of God, earneſtly commaunding repentance, vnder the rigour of obedience, whiche all creatures are bounde to performe vnto him. O yee Sonnes of men (ſayth he) turne ye vnto me. Item: Let euery one be turned from his wicked wayes. And Chriſt ſayth:Matth. 11. 
                  Come vnto mee, all yee which labour, and be heauily loden, and I will refreſhe you.
               
               Thirdly: Let him ſet before him, the death and paſſion of Ieſus Chriſt, who, with his ſufficient raunſome, hath made ſatiſfaction, for the ſinnes of all men. Auguſtine ſayth: The mercy of GOD is greater, than the miſerye of all ſinnes.
               
               Fourthly: Let him ſet before his eyes, the examples of thoſe, whiche beeing conuerted, haue beene receiued into grace: as Adam, Dauid, Manaſſes, the Theefe, and as many as euer haue required pardon: ſo, that God hath neuer reiected any, earneſtly repenting.
               Fifthly: Let him conſider, the teſtimonie of Grace, namely: Baptiſme: whereby God teſtifyeth that he will remit ſinne to all thoſe, whiche (by faith) turne themſelues vnto him. It is written Marck. 1. that Iohn preached the Baptiſme of Repentance, for the remiſſion of ſinnes: that is, he taught, Baptiſme to be a teſtimonye, and ſeale, by whiche GOD teſtifyeth, that hee (without all reſpect of perſons) remitteth ſinne, to all thoſe (whiche by faith) turne themſelues vnto Ieſus Chriſte.
               
                  THIRDLY: the wretched offender beeing

exerciſed, with theſe fiue conſiderations, let him now giue place to the worde of God: by the efficatie wherof, (the holy Ghoſt working) the ſparkle of Faith, is conceiued, in the heart of man.
               
                  FOVRTHLY: Faith beeing conceiued: forgiueneſſe of ſinnes is to bee deſyred, for the precious blood of Chriſte, whiche he ſhed vppon the Altar of the Croſſe, for the ſinnes of the whole worlde. In this praying, faith (by little, and little) increaſeth, and together therewith, man feeleth in his heart the anſwere of the holy Ghoſte, which bringeth to paſſe that he moſt aſſuredly perſuadeth himſelfe that all his offences are forgiuen him.
               
                  FIFTLY: Pardon of ſinne in the ſight of GOD, beeing obtayned: let him with a quiet minde ſubmit himſelfe, to the puniſhment deſerued: and together therewith, let him deſire of God, fortitude of minde, that he may patiently ſuffer the paines, layde iuſtly vpon him, for his wicked deedes: yea, let him alſo giue thankes vnto God, whiche hath drawen him to tempoporall puniſhments in this world: that he ſhuld flye from eternall condemnation: and that he ſhould heere in the body be puniſhed, that with the Theefe hee may commende his ſoule vnto God.
               
                  The thirde kinde of Croſſe, whereof the hiſtory of the paſſion of Chriſte maketh mention is, The Croſſe of the Theefe hanging at the lefte hand. After this manner they doe ſuffer, which repent not, neither call vpon God: but contemning

the grace, and ſacrifice of Chriſte, do dye in deſperation, and are for euer condemned. They which in ſuch ſorte doo ſuffer for their offences, and fly not, by a ſure fayth, vnto God: this temporarie Croſſe, is vnto them, as foreſhowinges of the paynes eternall, wherewith they ſhalbee plagued, without all mitigation, and comforte in Hell with the Deuilles, and all the company of the condemned. Hetherto, we haue intreated of the three ſortes of Croſſes, wherof the hiſtory of the Paſſion of Chriſte, maketh mention.
               Now, let vs moreouer ioyne heerevnto, a generall admonition: whiche may profit all the godly, in what ſoeuer manner they ſhalbe afflicted in this worlde.
               Whoſoeuer is oppreſſed with the croſſe or calamitie, let him reſpecte theſe foure thinges in order.
               
                  
                     In the Deuill, let him conſider, Lying and Murther.
                     In himſelfe let him weigh, Sinne, and VVretchedneſſe.
                     In GOD, let him reuerence, Iudgement and Mercie.
                     In the Goſpel let him ſeeke counſaile, & helpe.
                  
               
               Firſt: Let him conſider in the Deuill, Lying, and Tyranny, who as by lying he ſlewe our firſt Parents: ſo now euery moment, with lying, and tyranny, hee lyeth in waite for all mankinde.
               
                  Peter.For, (as Peter ſayth) Hee goeth aboute like a roring Lyon, ſeking whom he may deuoure. He verely ſeketh all, but he deuoureth only thoſe, whōe

he intangleth in his ſnares of Lying. For this vncleane ſpirite continually indeuoureth, to make all other vncleane with him. Hee infecteth the minde with lying, and erronious doctrine: He ſhaketh the hearte, with the tempeſts of corrupt deſyres: He bewitcheth the will, with the ſhadowe of commodytie: to conclude, he indeuoreth to defile, with wicked actes, the whole life of man, that he, that he at the length might haue man (beeing ſpiritually ſlaine) fellowe, and partaker of eternall damnation. This conſideration of the ſtudy of this wicked ſpirite, the enemye of GOD, and mankinde: ſhoulde ſtirre vp an hatred of ſinne, and breede in the mindes of men, an abhorring of the filthyneſſe thereof.
               Secondly: Let him weigh Sinne, and wretchedneſſe in himſelfe, in euen ballances, and let him thinke that the miſery whiche he ſuffereth, is a deſerued puniſhment, for his ſinne. And, by the greatneſſe of the miſery, let him eſteeme the enormitie, turpitude, & multitude of his ſinnes. Let him conſider, that hee by his ſinne, hath offended the cheefeſt, and infinite goodneſſe: wher of let him conclude, the preſent calamitie, to bee away to euerlaſting miſery, vnleſſe he be otherwayes holpen. In this cogitation the whole man treembleth, of whiche thing we may ſee many examples, in many Pſalmes, cheefely in thoſe, whiche they call, the Penitentiall Pſalmes, in whiche, Dauid plainely expreſſeth, the great dolors, and vexations, wherewith,

as with tempeſtes, he is ouerwelmed for his ſinnes.
               Thirdly, Let him reuerence in God, Iudgement and Mercy. It is the parte of the moſt iuſt iudgement of God, to puniſh ſinne in all men: but of his Mercy to puniſh, not to deſtroy, but yt he might ſaue: ſo that we do not contempne the Medicine. Whereof Eſaie ſaith: Trouble giueth vnderſtanding. Item: The diſtreſſe wherein they cry, is a doctrine vnto them. Breefely, God puniſheth By IVDGEMENT, that hee might ſaue By MERCIE: as it may bee ſeene in Pſal. 51.
               
               In the word of ye Goſpel, Let him ſeeke counſail and remedyes. The Goſpell ſendeth all afflicted ſinners to this onely Phyſition Ieſus Chriſte, which calleth vnto him, and ſaueth all offenders. This counſaile is moſte excellent, becauſe neither in Heauen, nor in earth, any is founde, which is able to heale the wounds of ſin beſide this onely Ieſus Chriſte.
               Furthermore: this very worde which giueth vs counſaile, doth alſo miniſter helpe vnto vs, and healeth the woundes of ſinne, in ſuch wiſe, that we may be holpen by Chriſt, ſo that we beleeue in him, and with a conſtant Fayth, pray with Dauid, ſaying: Heale me Lorde, and I ſhall be whole. In this place againe, are to be called back into our mindes, the fiue Articles, of whome mention is made a little before.
               The Finall cauſes, wherefore GOD will haue his Church to bee ſubiecte to the Croſſe,

are many, of which theſe are the cheefe.
               Firſt, that wee may learne, that thoſe good things whiche God hath promiſed to his Children, are not to be looked for in this worlde: but that we ſhould think of the true countrie, to the which we are called: ſo that wee might eaſe all the aduerſities of this life, by the meditation of the ioy to come, and life euerlaſting. For, if all things ſhould ſucceed vnto the godly, in this life, according vnto their deſires: they would not be affectioned with the deſire of the good thinges promiſed by Chriſte.
               Secondly: that, man, (by the Croſſe, as by a bridle) may be reſtrayned: who, through the corruption of nature, is otherwiſe prone to ſinne. Heereof the Pſalmiſt ſayth: Holde their chawes with bit, and bridle, which drawe not nigh vnto thee.
               
               Thirdly: that the Croſſe might be a ſenſible preaching of repentance. For, euen as the conſcience aſſenteth to the law, reprouing ſinne: ſo alſo by the Croſſe, we are admoniſhed to repent, that we may be ſaued.
               Fourthly: That the croſſe may ouerthrowe al mans preſumption, and confidence of the fleſh, and teach vs to cleaue with a firme fayth vnto GOD alone, and to call vpon him,Pſalm. according to his Commaundement: Call vpon me (ſayth he) in the day of tribulation, and I will deliuer thee, and thou ſhalt glorifie mee. Let theſe things ſuffice to be ſpoken touching the Croſſe or calamitie, of which our Baptiſme doth admoniſh vs.
               
                  
                  IN THE FOVRTH PLACE Baptiſme teacheth vs what wee ſhould looke for. For euen as the partie Baptiſed, (beeing ſprinkled with the water) is drawen from the water, and as Chriſte himſelfe (after his paſſion and death) entred into his glory: ſo wee alſo doe take our iourney from the ſtraunge wandring of this world, vnto ſaluation, & life euerlaſting: a moſte euident teſtimonie wherof, Chriſte hath giuen, namely Baptiſme, to all the beleeuers.
               
                  IN THE FIFT PLACE, Baptiſme teacheth vs, that our life in this worlde, is nothing els than a Pilgrimage of three dayes. Wee ſuffer, we are buryed, and we ſhall ryſe againe, at the ſound of the laſt Trumpet, when Chriſte ſhall ſay, Aryſe yee Deade.
               
               
                  THE third ſignifycation, of Baptiſme, wherof wee haue made mention aboue, is, that it is a Souldierly marcke (or Cogniſance) whereby the Souldiours of Chriſte are knowen, whiche haue giuen their names vnto him, and taken an othe, that they will fight vnder his ſtanderde, agaynſt the Deuill, and his kingdome, namely, Sinne.
               The Souldiours of Chriſte, are diſcerned, by foure notes, cheefely, from thoſe whiche are in wages vnder their Captaine, the Deuill.
               The firſt, and moſte ſureſt note of the Children of God is, Faith, inuiſible, and onely knowen vnto God, with her priuy, and inwarde frutes in the heart of the man.
               The ſeconde is, The open profeſſion of Faith
                  
in the mouth, before all the worlde.
               The thirde is ſeene, In Godlyneſſe, and Honeſtie of life, when the Chriſtian doth ſo order his life, that ye ſame may be a manifeſt teſtimony of the faith which lyeth hid, in the heart of man.
               The fourth is, the note of the body, namely, Baptiſme, whereby we profeſſe our ſelues, to be the ſeruāts of Chriſt. Heervnto alſo maketh the ſacrament of the Lorde his Supper, whereof we will now ſpeake a fewe wordes.
            
            
               Of the ſupper of the Lord.
               
                  I Haue ſayd before, that the Sacramentes of the new Teſtament, doe occupy the third place accommodating, or applying of the benefites of Chriſte. Foraſmuch as we haue hetherto ſpoken of Baptiſme, it remaineth now that we intreate of the other Sacrament, namely of The ſupper of the Lorde. God graunt that it may be to the glory of his name, and the wholeſome inſtruction and profite of all the godly. I will remoue all, vnprofitable queſtions, and diuerſities of opinions, which doe more hurte, then profit: and ſet downe onely thoſe things, touching the moſt holy Supper of the Lorde, which I haue learned, and drawen out of the fountaines of the ſacred Scripture. And that the ſame may be done to the greater fruit, & profit of the chriſtian Reader: I will comprehend this whole doctrine, in a fewe, and certaine aſſured poyntes, & Articles.
               
                  The firſte, and cheefeſt thing, that wee muſt knowe, concerning the Supper of the Lorde, inſtituted of Chriſte himſelfe, vnder the viſible Symboles of Bread and Wine, is: That Chriſte, (in the ſame night in which hee was betrayed) did inſtitute this Sacramente, that the ſame might bee (amongſt all his) an euerlaſting monument of his Paſſion, in whiche hee deliuered his body to death, and ſhed his blood vpon the Altar of the Croſſe, for many, for the remiſſion of ſinnes, as he himſelf ſaith: This is my body, whiche is giuen for you: This is my blood, which is ſhed for many, for the remiſſion of ſinnes. Item: Doe ye this in REMEMBRANCE of mee.
               
               Secondly: The Supper of the Lorde teſtifyeth, that they which vſe the ſame rightly, are vnited, and as it were incorporated into Chriſt, and that ſpiritually, according to the woords of Paul.
                  1. Cor. 10. 
                  The Cup of bleſſing which we bleſſe, is it not the partaking of the blood of Chriſte? The Breade which wee breake is it not the participating of the body of Chriſt? That is to ſay, whoſoeuer doth eate the body of Chriſte, and drinke his blood, he (ſo that a lyuing fayth be not wanting) abydeth in Chriſte, and Chriſte in him.
               Thirdly: the Supper of the Lord teacheth, a ſpirituall education in the body of Chriſte, which is accomplyſhed, whilſt we vſe his Supper. For euen as we are, by the blood of Chriſte, cleanſed, and, by the holy Ghoſt in Baptiſme, regenerated: ſo wee beeing cleanſed, and regenerated, are ſpiritually fed, and nouriſhed, by the

benefite of the body, and blood of Chriſt: rightly vſing the Supper of the Lord, according to his owne inſtitution.
               Fourthly: the Supper of the Lord is, a teſtimonie of the new Teſtamente, (that is to ſay) of A NEVV COVENANT, betweene God, and man, touching remiſſion of ſinnes, wherby God teſtifyeth that hee will receiue into fauour, and forgiue ſinners, (for the merite of the death, & paſſion of Chriſt) to All which beleeue in HIM. Therfore he himſelfe ſayth: This Cup is the new Teſtament in my blood: that is, This Cuppe is a firme, and vnmoueable ſeale of the moſte ample promiſe of god cōcerning ye forgiuenes of ſinnes.
               Whoſoeuer therefore, (with a true, and liuely faith) vſeth this Sacrament: receiueth the teſtimonie of God himſelfe: whereby he teſtifyeth, that he hath deliuered his ſonne, ſhedding his blood vpon the Altar of the Croſſe, for the remiſſion of ſinnes, that through him, as many as beleeue in him, may obtaine ſaluation.
               Fiftly: The Supper of the Lord, admoniſheth vs of the ſecret, and ſpirituall communion, whereby we, whiche doe partake this Sacrament together: are vnited, (as it were) into one body. Of which thing Paule ſaith:1. Cor. 10. 
                  Becauſe wee beeing many, are one bread, and ONE BODY: inaſmuch as we are all partakers of one breade. This knitting of the Chriſtians into one body, dependeth heereon: that we all, (as it is already ſaid) are vnited to the body of Chriſte, by the partaking of his body, and blood.
               
                  Sixtly: The Supper of the Lord requireth, mutuall loue betweene the Communicantes: whereby the miſticall members of the ſame body, (as we haue ſaid) ſhoulde, with heart, word, and worke, performe duetyes one towardes the other. This Loue of Chriſtian people, which, (from the head CHRISTE) floweth into the reſt of the members (that is to ſay, the Citizens of his Church) doth not take away the degrees of perſons, but rather confirmeth the diuerſities of callings in the Congregation: of all whiche, there is one marke, namely, The Glory of God, and the commoditie of thy neighbour. Whoſoeuer feeleth, not in his heart, the ſparckle of this mutiall dilection, and, (without a purpoſe of well dooing to his member, (that is to ſay to his neighbour) commeth to the Supper of the Lorde: it were better for him, to abſtaine vtterly from the Sacrament. For who would not affirme that manne to bee mad, and out of his minde, whiche would ſet his owne members at ſtrife one with another amongeſt themſelues, ſo that the handes might plucke, out the eyes, or cut of the feete? I woulde to GOD, that Chriſtians could, after the ſame manner, marke their owne madneſſe, whiche they doe manifeſtly betray, and ſhowe forth, whilſte (through mutuall hatreds, and contentions of minde,) they ſet themſelues, one againſt another.
               Seuenthly: The Supper of the Lord is a pledge, and ſignification of our reſurrection, life, and eternall ſaluation, and that by the power of

Chriſte riſen againe from the dead. For, whatſoeuer hath beene hetherto ſpoken, of the Supper of the Lord, are al to be referred to this principall end: that they may bee vnto vs in ſteade of a pledge, & ſealing of life euerlaſting through Chriſte, whoſe members we are made. And ſo that is fulfilled which Chriſt ſaith:Iohn. 6. 
                  He which eateth my fleſh, and drincketh my blood, hath eternall life, and I will rayſe him vp in the laſt day.
               
               By theſe Articles, which we haue brought abroade out of the holy Scripture, to the declaring of this doctrine of the ſupper of the Lorde: euery man may eaſily vnderſtand, how needeful it is (with a hygh godlyneſſe of minde, and reuerence) to approch to this ſupper, & to proue him ſelfe, before he eate of this bread, or drinke of the Cup of the Lorde. For,1. Cor. 10. (as Paule ſaith) He which eateth, and drincketh vnworthyly, eateth and drincketh his owne damnation, becauſe he diſcerneth not the Lords body.
                  Mar. 16. Chriſt affirmeth the ſame thing of the Goſpell: Hee which beleeueth not (ſayth he) ſhalbe condemned.
               
               And Auguſtine ſayth of Baptiſme: Euen as he whiche vnworthyly eateth the body of the Lorde, and drinketh his blood, eateth, and drincketh his omne damnation: ſo he which receiueth Baptiſme vnwoorthily (which thing many Iewes doe at this day) receiueth to himſelf damnatiō, & not ſaluation.
               
               Furthermore, Leaſt any man ſhoulde communicate the Supper of the Lord, vnworthyly, let him followe, the counſayle of Paule 1. Corinth. 11. Let a man proue himſelfe,
                  1. Cor. 11. 
                  and ſo let

him eate of that Bread and drinke of that Cuppe, for he which eateth and drinketh vnworthyly, eateth, and drinketh damnation to himſelf, not deſcerning the Lords body: (that is to ſay) hee calleth vnto himſelfe the puniſhment, and Iudgement of GOD.
               
               What therefore is the true manner of prouing himſelfe? The ſame Paule preſcrybeth, 2. Cor. 13. when he ſaith: Try your ſelues whether ye be in faith or no, proue your owne ſelues. Knowe yee not your ſelues, that Ieſus Chriſte is in you? Heereby it appeareth that the true tryall of proouing conſiſteth in this, that a liuely faith bee truely felt, and the preſence of Chriſte in vs, by the vertue of his ſpirit, ſtirring vs vp to the ſtudy of godlyneſſe. Breifely: he is truely prooued, which (reuerently in the feare of GOD, in true repentance, in true confidence, and with an holy purpoſe,) commeth to this Supper. And contrarywiſe, he which is without the true feare of God, and earneſt repentance, and wanteth liuely fayth, and an holy purpoſe: the ſame eateth, and drinketh iudgement to himſelfe bothe temporall, and eternall, vnleſſe he be againe (by faith in Ieſus Chriſte) conuerted. And I nothing doubt, but the greateſt parte of moſte heauy calamities, euery where reigning in many places, is therefore ſente: becauſe they bee ſo common which participate the ſupper of the Lord, without true, and earneſt repentance.
               
                  Paule writeth, that the Corinthyans were plagued, becauſe they touched vnreuerently the

holy Supper:1. Cor. 11. 
                  For this cauſe (ſayth he) many are feeble and weake among you, and many are fallen a ſleep: For if wee had iudged our ſelues, wee ſhould not haue beene iudged: but when we are iudged of the Lorde, we are inſtructed, that we ſhould not bee damned, with the worlde. I would to God, that many at this day, would not builde vpon a feeble foundation, and be much deceiued with their owne opinion: which then ſuppoſe themſelues to come woorthyly to the Supper of Chriſt, when they haue confeſſed their ſinnes before the preiſt and obtayned abſolution of him. He which beleeueth, him God abſolueth for the death, and paſſion of Ieſus Chriſte. For, he which beleeueth (ſaith Iohn) hath eternall life.Iohn. 3. If therefore the beleeuer hath eternall life, hee is alſo (without all doubt) abſolued from all his ſinnes. For, Abſolution, is no other thing, than a deliuerance from ſin, which is in the power of GOD alone.
               Therefore, the Miniſters of the woord, cannot abſolue him, (which is without the feare of God, a liuely faith, and a purpoſe of good liuing) from the leaſt offence. And he which is ſuch a one, & yet notwithſtanding, dare require abſolution of the Miniſter of the worde: to him (foraſmuch as hee is before God a lyer, and before the Miniſter of God, and hypocrite) the abſolution turneth vnto damnation. For, this outwarde abſolution anſwereth to the faith, and purpoſe of the innermoſte heart. The Prieſt is the miniſter of God, therefore let him behaue himſelfe according to the commaundement of his Lord,

neither let him arrogate greater power vnto himſelfe, then hee hath receiued of the Lorde. He hath power to ſhew foorth, aſwell, remiſſion of ſinnes to all the beleeuers, as alſo euerlaſting condempnation to thoſe whiche turne not themſelues vnto God. Theſe are the keyes of the Church of Chriſte, ſo that if any Miniſter of the Goſpel, ſhould goe beyond theſe bounds, he ſhall not cary this raſhnes, vnpuniſhed of God.
               What is then to be thought, of priuate confeſſion, and outwarde abſolution? There be many, and weightie cauſes, why the holy fathers did inſtitute this talke, or Colloquie, whiche is had betweene the partie confeſſing, and the Miniſter of the woorde.
               The firſt: that the rude, and ignoraunt, might be the more profitably inſtructed, beeing demanded,Meaning aſwel the hearinge of the holye Scriptures, as the interpretatiō of them. of euery principle of the Chriſtian Religion. For, when as many, doe many yeeres, heare the holy preachings, & yet doe very little or nothing at all profit: ſuch, verely ſhal with greater profit, talke together with the learned, and godlye miniſter of the woorde, whiche may inquire of what matters they ſtande in doubte, and may teache them thoſe thinges, whereof they bee ignoraunt.
               Secondly: That in this talking together, the profiting of the youth, and younge perſons might bee tryed. For it is the parte of a good Paſtour, not onely to teach openly: but alſo (accordinge to the example of Paule,) to make a tryall at home, how farre euery one of his hearers

haue gone forwarde in the courſe of godlyneſſe.
               Thirdly: that a reaſon of the fayth might be required of thoſe, of whoſe Fayth, and Religion, iuſt doubte might be had: and that vnto ſuch as in any hereſie were ſtubbernely obſtinate, the Supper of the Lord ſhould be prohibited.
               Fourthly: that in this Colloquie, the doubtful conſciences, and ſuch as for the ſcruple of their ſinnes were vnquieted, might by doctrine, counſaile, and conſolation, be releeued.
               Fifthly: that in this priuate talke, they might heare the voyce of the Goſpell, pronouncing forgiuenes of ſinnes to thoſe which beleeue in Chriſte. For in aſmuch as Chriſte ſayth: Hee that heareth you, heareth mee: it is much auayleable to heare the Miniſter of the worde, (in the name of Chriſt according to his cōmandement) ſhewing foorth the remiſſion of ſinnnes.
               ¶ Priuate Abſolution may be made in this manner.
               
               
                  Becauſe (my Brother) thou dooſt not only confeſſe thy ſelfe to be a ſinner, and guiltie in the ſight of God, And art ſory that thou haſte offended God, but alſo beleeueſt the promiſe of the Goſpel, concerning forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, namely, That vnto the beleeuer is giuen eternall life: I declare vnto thee (in the name of Chriſte) the forgiueneſſe of thyne offences, In the name of the Father, of the Sonne,
                  Iohn. 8. 
                  and of the holy Ghoſte, Amen. Goe in peace, and ſinne no more.
               
               
                  Hetherto we haue heard, of the laſt thing, which I propounded was to bee conſidered in the Meſſiah, our Lorde IESV CHRISTE, namely: How we are made partakers of his benefites But becauſe there be many founde, whiche protract repentance vnto the laſt breath of lyfe, I will yet ad hereunto, and declare two things.
               Firſt: touching the cauſes, whiche ſhould inuite vs, to the ripening (or haſtening) of Repentaunce.
               
               The other, by what meane a Chriſtian may perſeuer vnto the ende, that hee looſe not faith, and the benefites of Chriſte.
               VVhat then ſhall inuite vs to the haſtening of Repentaunce.
               Albeit there bee many, and moſte weightie cauſes, which ſhould mooue vs, that we ſhould not delay repentance, which (alas for ſorowe) many doe at theſe dayes with great ſecuritie: yet notwithſtanding, I will at this ſeaſon bring foorth tenne Argumentes at the leaſte, wherby euery man may woorthyly bee moued, betymes to repent.
               The firſt is, The vncertaine end of this life, For, no man knoweth in what hower, in what moment, or in what manner he ſhall departe from hence. This vncertaintie ſhoulde woorthyly mooue vs to haſten repentaunce. Chriſte going about to exhorte his diſciples to watchfulneſſe, taketh an Argument hereof, when he ſayeth: VVatch, and pray, becauſe yee knowe neither the day nor the howre. And in Luke the 12. the Lorde

propoundeth a Parable of a rich man beeing careleſſe, and delaying Repentance.
               
                  The ground (ſaith he) of a certaine rich man,
                  Luke. 12. 
                  brought forth plentiful fruites, therfore he thought with himſelfe ſaying, what ſhall I doe, becauſe I haue not rowme wherein to gather my fruites together? and he ſayde, thus will I doe, I will deſtroy my Barnes, and builde greater, and thither will I gather together my fruites and my goods, and I will ſay vnto my ſoule: Soule, thou haſte much goodes layde vp in ſtore for many yeeres, take thine eaſe, eate, drincke, and be mery. But God ſayd vnto him, Thou foole, this night will they require againe thy ſoule from thee, whoſe then ſhall thoſe thinges bee which thou haſt prepared? So is it with him that hoordeth vp riches to himſelfe, and is not riche towards GOD. Heereof afterwarde the Lord inferreth this: But rather ſeeke yee the kingdome of GOD, and the righteouſneſſe thereof, and afterwards all other things ſhall be giuen vnto you.
               
               Item: In ſuch an hower as ye think not, will the Sonne of man come. And Auguſtine ſaith: God giueth thee a ſpace of amendement, but thou more loueſt delayment, than amendement: Thou draweſt the time a long, and of the mercy of GOD, thou promiſeſt vnto thy ſelfe many things: as though he whiche hath promiſed thee ſaluation through repentaunce, had alſo promiſed thee long lyfe, How knoweſt thou what the morrowe day will bringe foorth? Thou ſayeſt well in thine heart, when I ſhal amende me, God wil forgiue me all mine offences: VVe cannot deny, but that vnto the amended, and

conuerted, God hath promiſed fauour: But in what Prophet readeſt thou, that becauſe God hath promiſed fauoure to the amended, dooſt thou alſo reade, that he hath promiſed thee long lyfe?
               
               This vncertaintie therefore of the tearme of this life, ſhould admoniſh vs of the ripening (or haſtening of repentance, leaſte ſooner then wee thinke, we fall vpon the darcke mountaines, as Ieremie ſpeaketh, and ſo be ouerwhelmed with the iuſte Iudgement of GOD. There haue been many which hoped, that they might continewe foorth their life vnto olde age: but in the middle flower of their age, they haue fallen downe flat. Many haue looked for a quiet ende of life: but haue periſhed in exile. Many haue purpoſed to haue the comforts of their freendes and acquayntaunce in the agonie of death: but they haue miſerablye periſhed amonge enemyes.
               Many haue promiſed to themſelues a time, in which, (lying in their bed they would mourne, & repent: but they haue beene ſoudainly taken foorth of this life. Seneca very notably admoniſheth: when he ſayth: Truſte not to this quiet calme, for the Sea is turned backe agayne in a moment: and in the ſame day, where the ſhippes haue played, they haue beene drowned. Briefely: ſeeing no man knoweth whether he may call backe againe the breath ſente foorth of his noſethrils: they doe very fooliſhly, whiche (with the contumely of God) doe procraſtinate repentaunce,

as if they had the momentes of time in their hands.
               The ſeconde is: A moſte pernitious heape of wicked offences, of the anger of God, and of puniſhmentes, is, (by delaying of repentaunce) gathered together. Whereof Paule Rom. 2. ſayth: But thou after thy hardneſſe, and heart which cannot repent, heapeſt vnto thy ſelfe, wrath, againſt the day of vengeaunce. For, the ſinne, which is not ſuppreſſed by repentaunce, foorthwith, by the weight thereof, draweth into another, and againe from that into another: vntill an infinite heape of ſinnes be layde together.
               And as a moſte naughtie roote, beeinge not plucked vp out of the grounde, doth continually growe, and budde, more, and more: Euen ſo ſinne, when thou cheriſheſt it, dooth get dayly new ſtrength vnto it, vntill a monſtrous floud of ſinnes haue ouercome thee.
               For he whiche in this ſorte abuſeth the mercie of GOD: is wicked agaynſt GOD: as he which hath purpoſed to ſerue the Deuill a lōger time, than GOD. By this his ſecuritie he alſo offendeth the Aungels of GOD. For as they doe reioyce at the repetaunce of the vngodly: ſo with out doubte they are ſorowfull for their vnrepentaunce. It greeueth them that ſo noble a Creature of God ſhould periſh through her owne faulte.
               Hee is alſo cruell againſt himſelfe. For hee will rather bee euill than good, or rather bee ſicke than ſounde, or rather bee the bondſlaue

of Sathan, than the freeman of Chriſte, or rather be a begger in heauenly good things, than rich: Briefly, he wil rather periſh, than be ſaued, than the which crueltie, doubtleſſe none can bee greater. I ceaſſe to ſpeake, that he is iniurious againſt the creatures of God:Rom. 8. Whereof Paule affirmeth, that the creatures doe mourne, becauſe the wicked doe abuſe them, and doe wait for the freedome of the glory of the Children of God.
               
                  Oedipus perceiuing the inceſt committed with his owne mother, plucked out his owne eyes, that by this meanes he might at ye leaſt, auoyde the ſight of the Sunne, and all the creatures. For he ſawe that all the creatures of God, were beholders of his vnſpeakeable, and moſte filthy wicked acte: and that they all, with one conſent did condemne him. In like manner at this day whoſoeuer doe liue wickedly, do perceiue themſelues to bee accuſed of all the creatures before the tribunall ſeate of God.
               The third is: The enſtraunging of the minde from God, And finall Induration. For by howe much ye longerrepentāce is differed: by ſo much is it become the harder. For euen as the matter goeth in the diſeaſes of the body: ſo is it alſo in the diſeaſe of the minde, which is ſinne. For, by how much the longer the medicine of the body is differed: by ſo much the diſeaſe is made the more daungerous, and is the hardlyar cured, yea ſometime, through continuance it becommeth vncureable, as it appeereth in the diſeaſe

of a Canker: where if the malady bee not forthwith in the beginning kepte vnder by fire, or iron: it is to bee feared, leaſt by little, and little, it will growe ſo ſtrong, that it will vtterly take the man away. This is the ſame thing whiche Salomon ſayth: A young man walking after his owne wayes, when he is olde, ſhall not goe backe from the ſame. And Ieremie ſayth: If the man of India may chaunge his skinne, and the Cat of the Mountaine her ſpottes:
                  Conſuetudo diuturna, altera fit natura. 
                  ye alſo may doe well when yee haue doone euil. For dayly cuſtome is made another nature. This daunger of Induration ſhould woorthyly mooue vs to the ripening, (or haſtening) of repentance.
               The fourth is: An euill conſcience, than the which, there is nothing more greeuous, nothing more heauy, nothing more miſerable. They whiche are delighted in the myre of ſinne: are compelled, to beare about with them, this witneſſe of their owne wickedneſſe. An euill conſcience (ſayth Bernarde) is her ſelfe a witneſſe of our offences, ſhe is the Iudge, ſhe is the tormentour, ſhe accuſeth, ſhe Iudgeth, ſhe puniſheth, ſhe condemneth. Albeit the ſame be cut of for a time, and as it were, ſeared with an hot iron: yet notwithſtanding ſhe will ſometimes ſhew foorth her ſelfe, and (if not before) yet (at the leaſte) in the agonie of death, ſhe wil be preſent as a thouſand witneſſes: ſhe will accuſe, ſhe will condemne, ſhe will puniſh. For, an euill conſcience is a certaine diuine teſtimony, imprinted in the mindes of men, of the Iudgement heereafter to come vppon the obſtinate,

and of the puniſhments which they ſhall iuſtly ſuſtayne.
               The fifth is: Offence, and guiltineſſe of the ſinnes of others. For in an offence giuen, there is a double euill, namely, The deede, and the example. As through the fact by it ſelfe, the lawe of God is violated: ſo by the example thy neighboure is hurt, for immitation, or following therof. Heereof proceedeth that lamentable exclamation of Chriſt: VVo be vnto the man, by whom the offence cōmeth. And againe: He which offendeth one of theſe little ones, which beleeue in me: it were better for him, that a milſtone were hanged about his neck, & that he were drowned in the depth of the ſea. Paule pronounceth thoſe to ſin againſt Chriſte, & to deſtroy the weake brethren, which vſe indifferent thinges with offence. But what is to be thought of him which (either through erronious doctrine, or wicked life) leadeth many into deſtruction? That ſo great wickedneſſes doe abounde in the worlde at this day, commeth it not hereof, that one thincketh that lawfull for him, which he ſeeth another doe? whom by and by another immitateth, and him another, vntill (through the ſcabbedneſſe of one member) the whole body almoſte of the Church beeing infected is deformed.
               The ſixth is: The priuation of ſpirituall riches, of which, onely the holie in the Church of Chriſt are partakers. For, ſo longe as manne lyueth without repentance, hee is without the ioy of the holie Ghoſte, hee is deſtitute of the peace of

conſcience, hee is depriued of ſpirituall conſolations, in his miſery: neither is hee partaker of the prayers of the godly Chriſtians.
               The ſeuenth is: The delicates (or daynties) of the Diuell. For, as the Aungels in heauen, doe reioyce ouer man when hee repenteth: ſo the Diuell is throughly imbrewed, with higheſt delights, and (as it were) with moſte pleaſant pleaſures, when he ſeeth men, (ſpecially thoſe which haue giuen their names vnto Chriſte) to liue without repentaunce. For, the ſinnes of men are (as certayne of the fathers ſay) the delicate diſhes of wicked Diuels.
               The eight is:
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  The conſideration of the tragicall examples of many menne, whiche, for their contumacie haue beene caſte, of GOD into paines eternall. In the number of whome, are Cayne, Pharao, Saule, Achitophell, Iudas, Iulianus, and infinite others. We ſee alſo how many nations, which haue heard Chriſte, and his Apoſtles haue periſhed: beeing turned away to pernitious errours of the Deuill, the Turke, and the Romaine Antichriſte.
               Ninthly: Let this cogitation alſo enter into thy minde: That Repentaunce is not ſo the worke of man, as the the gifte of GOD: which if thou contemneſt, whiles it is, (day from day, and often) offered vnto thee, of God: it is to be feared, that hee dooth oftentimes caſte his precious pearles before ſwine.
               The tenth is: The condition of late Repentaunce: For it is oftentimes rightly ſayde:Sera peenitentia raro vera. 
                  Late

Repentaunce is ſeldome true. Hee is not to bee iudged to repent, whiche after he is not able to ſinne, doth feigne repentaunce. And Auguſtine ſayth: The repentaunce whiche is required of him, onely which is about to dye: I feare mee leaſte that ſame repentance doe alſo dye. I ſay this, (not that I doe denye the mercy of God to be giuen vnto thoſe, which beeing about to departe forth of this life) doe repent: but that we may conſider how daungerous it is to protracte repentaunce vnto the laſte gaſpe of this lyfe.
               It ſeemeth good vnto me to collect breefely, theſe reaſons: the conſideration of whiche, will keepe euery of vs in the feare of God, that wee abuſe not the greatneſſe of his mercie to our owne deſtruction.
               
                  Almightie GOD bende our heartes vnto true, conſtant, and healthfull Repentaunce, that wee may be the Children of God: and that wee may all, and ſinguler (with olde Symeon, from the botom of our heartes, when wee ſhall departe foorth of this lyfe,) ioyfully ſing: Now Lorde let thy ſeruaunt departe in peace, according to thy worde, &c.
               
               Howe ſhall a Chriſtian perſeuer vnto the ende, that he looſe not Faith: and the grace obtayned in our Lorde Ieſu Chriſte.
               Wiſe, and prudent Phyſitians, beeing called to the ſick patient: doe apply themſelues to doe two thinges. Firſt, they bend all their diligence, (by their arte, and counſayle) to take away the preſent diſeaſe. Furthermore, that

(vnto the patient reſtored to his former health,) they may preſcribe an order of liuing: leaſt they fall back againe into their diſeaſe, & ſo become the authours of their owne deſtruction. The examples of theſe, wil I follow: & becauſe I haue hetherto brought (forth of the worde of God, the worde of ſaluation) remedy againſt ſinne, death, & damnation: I 
                     ••
                  al now alſo beſtow counſayle, by what meane it may bee accōpliſhed, That hee which hath receiued Chriſte with his benefits, may alſo continue, and obtayne thoſe euerlaſting good thinges, whiche Chriſte hath merited for all thoſe which repoſe their confidence in him. If I ſhall therefore ſaye with Paule: (Fight thou a good fight, holding fayth and a good conſcience:
                  1. Tim, 1.) I haue comprehended the whole matter. But if any man goe forwarde further, to ſaye: Nowe is Fayth and a good Conſcience to bee retayned?
               I aunſwere: The Scripture nameth The feare of God, The hyeſte, and cheefeſt,
                  Eccleae, 1. 
                  wiſdome of the Children of God. For, this feare contayneth vs in duety, and obedyence towardes GOD: in whoſe ſight wee walke. It hath foure conditions.
               
                  
                     Firſt: It is heedeful, leaſte it ſhould offend God.
                  
                     Secondly: It doth diligently execute the things which are commaunded it.
                  
                     Thirdly: It carefully auoydeth all lyinges in waite, deceiptes, and ſubtilties.
                  
                     Fourthly: It ſeeketh and imploreth ayde, againſt his enemyes.
               
               Firſt of all, he which feareth God, doth buſily

take heed, that by any meanes, hee offend not GOD. For this cauſe The feare of the Lorde is called in the 19. Pſalme; PVRE: becauſe that he whiche feareth God, conſidereth what euils he was ſubiect vnto by reaſon of ſinne: hee conſidereth, ye Chriſt hath ſuffered his moſt bitter death, to take a way ſinne: hee conſidereth that whether hee wake, or ſle
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  o, or walke, eate, or drinke &c. he is cōuerſ at harthe ſight of God.
               Furthermore hee remembreth that infinite glory, whereby he is adopted into the ſocietie of the Sonnes of God, that hee might ſhew himſelfe in all things obedient, to his moſte louing father: he conſidereth that ſinne is the marke of the Children of the Deuil: he conſidereth himſelfe to bee a member of Chriſte, and partaker of that holy fellowſhip with GOD the father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghoſte, and ſo foorth with all the electe of God: hee conſidereth that Sinne is ſpirituall Adultery, breaking the mariage knotte, whiche is betweene the Soule of man, with her Bridegroome our Lorde Ieſu Chriſte: hee conſidereth, that it is not comely, that hee ſhoulde turne the Temple of GOD, into the habitation of the Deuill: neither that hee oughte to expell the holy Ghoſte foorth of his hearte, whoſe benefites ſo exceeding, and many he hath effectually prooued: Hee is at a point, that he wil not deale traiterouſly againſt his Lorde and redeemer Chriſte, to gratifie the Deuill: Hee conſidereth that hee muſt ſo trade ouer his life: that (through any manifeſt wickedneſſe)

he bee not an offence to any, or that through him, the Goſpell be not euill ſpoken of.
               Theſe, and ſuche other conſiderations will breede in the hearte of man, the feare of God, and a ſtudy to auoyde ſinnes, and fallinges agaynſt the conſcience. GOD graunt that euery one of vs, may continually beare aboute with vs, in our heartes, theſe conſiderations.
               Secondly: He which feareth GOD, Obeyeth the Commaundements of the Lorde: For, as the Pſalme ſayth: He hath great delight in his commaundements: (that is to ſay:) He yeeldeth due reuerence, and obedience vnto GOD, acccording to his Commaundements, with his greateſt pleaſure of minde. From this true worſhip, (or ſeruice) of GOD, the Papiſts haue many yeeres hether vnto, fowlye erred: whiche doe raſhly teache, that God is to bee worſhipped with the precepts of men: and doe bynde all the worſhipping of GOD, to the Prieſtes, and Monckes of their order: whom (with manifeſt deceiptes, notwithſtanding and for lucre ſake) they doe bouldely affirme, to ſerue God aright, only: and to haue alſo ſaleable works of ſupererogation.
               I will therefore adde ſomewhat concerning this matter, whereby euery man may learne, rightly to frame his iudgement: touchinge the true worſhip (or ſeruice) of God.
            
            
               
               Of the worſhip (or ſeruice) of GOD.
               
                  The definition of the true ſeruice of God.
                  
                     THE VVORSHIP, (or ſeruice) of God is, A woorke commaunded of GOD, wrought through Faith, (principally) to the ſetting foorth of the glory of God. In this definition, there bee three thinges, whiche in the true worſhip of God, are neceſſaryly ioyned together.
               
                  
                     Firſt: The matter (or materiall parte) which is, A worke commaunded of God.
                     
                     Secondly: The cauſe namely, That the ſame worke be doone of faith, in Ieſus Chriſte.
                     
                     Thirdly: The end, namely, The glory of God, which the worker reſpecteth, that by this meanes he may declare himſelfe obedient, to his heauenly father.
                  
               
               That this worſhip muſt bee, A worke commaunded of God,
                  The proofe of the definition. he himſelfe in the 20. Chapter of Ieremie teacheth vs: VValke yee in my Commaundements, and not in the Commaundementes of your Fathers. And Chriſte when he ſayth: In vaine doe they worſhip me, teaching the doctrines, and Commaundements of men. That is to ſay: They thinke mee to bee worſhipped, when they goe buſily aboute thoſe thinges, wherein man iudgeth the worſhip of God to conſiſte: but they wander farre wide, and looſe all their laboure.
               And Paule manifeſtly condemneth all wil worſhippings,Collo. 2.23. that is to ſay, all thoſe worſhippings, which men inuent, of a good intention, as they

call it. Heereby, this rule is eſtabliſhed: That no worſhip, (or ſeruice) is acceptable vnto God,
                  A generall rule to bee obſerued. 
                  but that which GOD himſelfe, in his owne word, doth ordayne, and commende vnto man. For, on the worde dependeth the pureneſſe, and holyneſſe, of eche woorke.
               Furthermore, that Fayth is neceſſaryly required, to the ſubſtaunce of this worſhip, is euident heerby: becauſe God requireth a pure, and ſincere worſhip: which cannot be yeelded of any man, whoſe hearte is with all abhominable filthyneſſe defyled and corrupted in the ſighte of God. Paule affirmeth, the hearts of the vnfaithfull to be vncleane, and defyled: therfore it muſt needes be, that their works (albeit they appeare fayre, and beautifull in the ſight of the worlde) are abhominable in the preſence of God.Rom. 15. Wherfore, to the Romanes Paule ſayth: VVhatſoeuer is not of Fayth, is ſinne. And to the Hebrues. It is impoſſible, without Faith, to pleaſe God. But,Heb. 11. what then woorketh Fayth? Fayth purifyeth the heart of man: for ſo ſayth the Apoſtle: By Fayth purifying your heartes. But this thinge commeth to paſſe, (not that Fayth of her owne nature obtayneth that efficatie:) but that the conſciences of the faythfull (as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh) are ſprinckled with the blood of Ieſu Chriſt:1. Pet. 
                        •
                     
                   wherwith they are cleanſed from all their deadlye offences,
               Moreouer, that the worſhip (or ſeruice) muſt (principally) reſpect the glory of God: Paule teacheth ſaying: Doe ye all things to the glory of God
                  
For, inaſmuch as we are created, and alſo moreouer redeemed, that wee ſhould worſhip God: doubtleſſe it becommeth vs to yeelde due worſhip vnto God, for his commaundement ſake. A woorke therfore which is doone after this manner, (According to the commaundement of God,) (proceeding from Fayth) and (vnto the glory of God): is called a holy, a pure, & ſo a worſhip, (or ſeruice) pleaſing God. Whether therefore, this ſorte of worke, be inwarde, or outwarde, a high kinde of worke, or a baſe: it is notwithſtanding iudged a ſpirituall ſeruice of God, becauſe it proceedeth not from the fleſh, but from the ſpirit of faith, which hath reſpect to ye glory of God. But whereſoeuer any one of theſe three is wanting: there the worke of man deſerueth not to be called a ſeruice, or worſhip grateful, and acceptable vnto God. That Phariſie of whome the Goſpell maketh mention, & that Courtior Cornelius, of whom it is written in the Actes of the Apoſtles, gaue almes: by the benefit wherof, many were releeued and comforted. Heere, bothe of them do one & the ſame workes, yet notwithſtanding of ye almoſe of theſe twaine, ye differēce is great. The almoſe of the Phariſie, were not ye worſhipping of god, becauſe they neither proceeded from Fayth, neither tended to the glory of God.
               But Cornelius, albeit he was not fully inſtructed in the knowledge of Chriſte: yet notwithſtanding, foraſmuch as he beleeued, & hoped for ſaluation, and beſtowed his almes through the commaundement of God, vnto God his glory,

and the comforte of the poore): his almes were, a pure, holy, and acceptable worſhip, (or ſeruice) vnto God. Therefore the Angel ſayth, to Cornelius Acts. 10. Thy prayers and thy almes are come vp into remembraunce in the ſight of GOD. Dauid, and Scipio, doe bothe fight agaynſt their enemyes: the warre of Dauid was a worſhip, or ſeruice of GOD, but not the warre of Scipio.
               
               For Dauid hauing the Commaundemente of God, beleueth, and holdeth battayle, to the glory of God, and the defence of his people. But Scipio (inaſmuch as he wanted both the commaundement of God, and Faith, neither ſought the glory of God) his battails were only wicked, and cruell butcheryes of men, in the ſight of God.
               After the like manner two Maydens (of the which two, one fearing God, the other indewed with no feare of God (albeit they two bee occupyed about one, and the ſame woorke, as cleanſing of garments, yea, or wyping of ſhooes, or doing any other commandement of their Maiſtreſſe: yet notwithſtanding, onely the works of the maiden which feareth God, are the worſhipping or ſeruices of God, foraſmuch as they are doone of fayth, according to the precept of God, commaunding obedience of ſeruants towards their Mayſters: but the woorkes of the other, beeing the woorks of a wicked life, (albeit they doe outwardly appeere more excellent) are not the worſhippings (or ſeruices) of God, foraſmuch as they are defyled, with the vncleaneſſe of the heart, and inwarde filthyneſſe.
               
                  The like iudgement is alſo to bee had of other dooings. And verely, no worke (albeit it be glorious, & beautifull) may bee called The worſhip, or ſeruice, of God, vnleſſe, the ſame be 1. Commaunded by GOD, and 2. be doone of him whiche beleeueth, and feareth God, 3. vnto the honouring of his name. Let this ſuffice to be ſpoken concerning The woſhip (or ſeruice) of God: whereby it is eaſye to vnderſtand, what is to bee thought of the Maſſes, Vigilles, Roſaryes, and many ſuche innumerable trifles, and inuentions of that Antichriſte of Rome: which he dare vtter, vnder the title of holyneſſe, and the worſhip of GOD, againſt the manifeſt veritie of the whole Scripture.
               
                  THE third condition of The feare of God, is, that he which feareth God, Doth ſtudiouſly beware of deceipts, and lyings in waite for him. Herevnto maketh that ſayinge of Syrach, Chapter. 33. No euill ſhall come agaynſt him, that feareth the Lorde, but in the time of temptation, GOD wil vpholde him, and deliuer him from euill. Amongſt many enemyes, with whome a Chriſtian muſt haue conflict, there be three cheefe, which bend themſelues to hinder his ſaluation, namely, The Fleſh, The worlde, and the Deuill.
               
               
                  The Fleſh, (that is to ſay) The prudence, and wiſdome of man, will take in hand, either to reforme God himſelfe, and preſcribe a manner of worſhipping him: or els by her concupiſcences, & pleaſures, goeth about this thing, yt ſhee may vtterly turne away the whole man from God.
               
                  
                  Fleſhe, and Bloude is ſayde, to will to reforme God, and to preſcribe an order of worſhippinge him: when man appoynteth anye woorſhip for God, which is not commaunded of God, as it is doone in the papacie: and will haue this to be obſerued, as a rule vnmoueable. (That whatſoeuer is doone of a good intente, pleaſeth GOD.
                  A common rule of the Papiſtes.
               
               Agaynſt theſe, the feare of God doth ſet it ſelfe: and conſidering ſuch manner of ſuggeſtions, to be deceipts of the Deuil: acknowledgeth GOD to bee wiſer, than that hee needeth, or will bee taught of duſte, and aſhes. Hee therfore, which feareth God, thinketh thus, of good intention, as they call it: If ſo bee, that good intention be directed by the woorde of GOD, it proffiteth: but if not, it is daungerous, & if it fight agaynſt the woorde of God, it is then, playnely hurtfull, and pernitious. Whoſoeuer therfore inſtituteth a woorſhippe, (or ſeruice) diuerſe from the commaundement of God, hee ſinneth fower folde.
               Firſt, hee becommeth guilty of declininge away from God, becauſe hee forſaketh the rule of the true woorſhip of God, namely, the woord of God.
               Furthermore: Hee incurreth the faulte of raſhneſſe: for that he dare bee ſo bould, to bring in a woorſhip not commaunded by God.
               Thirdely: Hee imprinteth into himſelf a note of horrible preſumption: in that hee ſuppoſeth himſelfe to increaſe the woorſhip of God, beeyond that which god himſelf hath cōmaunded.
               Fourthly: Hee ſinneth in giuinge example,

whereby others are inuited to the lyke ſuperſtitions. If any man doth require examples of of this matter: hee may finde great plenty, not onely among the Papiſtes, but alſo, peraduenture, among our ſelues. Let euery man therfore take heed, that hee attempt not, or inſtitute any thing, without the cōmaundement of God.
               Furthermore, Fleſh, and Bloud do alſo vſe the Counſaile of their inward, and houſehold gueſt, and the ſundry delightes, and pleaſures of the body. Intemperantie, and Incontinentie indeuoureth to turne away the whole man from God.
               But againſt theſe things, THE FEARE OF GOD oppoſeth it ſelfe, and on the one part, repeateth often the examples of our Lorde Ieſu Chriſt, and his holy ones, and on the other part reconeth vp the vnhappy falles, and miſeries of thoſe which haue declyned from God: of which matter, wee haue euen at theſe dayes manifeſt examples.
               
                  THE VVORLDE in like manner, lyeth in wayt for the Children of GOD, whom, (by wicked counſailes, and examples, by honoures, pleaſures, ritches, and proſperity of thinges) it goeth about to ſeduce from God: and vpbraydeth to the Churche of Chriſte, not onely her Croſſe, and tribulations: but alſo perſecuteth, and killeth as many as doo confeſſe Chriſte.
               
               Agaynſt the priuy deceiptes, and open iniuries of the world: the feare of GOD, ſetteth, The Counſayle of GOD, The example, and will of Chriſt, Efficatie, and ioy in the holy Ghoſt, The

heauenly ritches of lyfe euerlaſtinge, The Conſolations of the holy Ghoſte, vnder the Croſſe, and the victory of ſaluation in Chriſte Ieſu: which all the godly ſhall fully obteyne, when Sathan with his members ſhal bee caſt into the paynes, of Hell, euerlaſting.
               Moreouer THE DEVILL, with lyinge, and murther aſſayleth Chriſtian people.
               Agaynſt him fighteth the feare of GOD, with the ſwearde of the Spirite, namely the woorde of God: beeinge aſſured to obteyne the victory through our Lord IESVS CHRIST, as in this fourth member ſhall now further bee ſayde.
               
                  THE FOVRTH Condition of the feare of God is, That it requireth ayde agaynſt theſe his enemies, The Fleſh, The VVorlde, and the Deuill.
               
               Of this matter Syrach: in Chapter 40. maketh mention: The Feare of the Lorde (ſaith hee) wanteth nothinge, neyther needeth it any helpe. The moſt notable, and chiefeſt refuge agaynſt all the enemyes of the Chriſtians, is earneſte, and feruente inuocation of the true, and omnipotent GOD. Which thinge Salomon confeſſeth, when hee ſayth: The name of the Lord is a moſt ſtronge Tower, the righteous flyeth vnto it, and ſhalbee exalted. And GOD himſelfe in the Pſalme ſayth:Pſalm. 50. 
                  Call vpon mee in the day of tribulation, and I will delyuer thee, and thou ſhalte glorifie mee.
               
               
                  Becauſe therefore the cheefeſt forte of Chriſtians, in all aduerſities is, faythfull Prayer: I will ſhewe in few woordes, what is to be eſteemed of CHRISTIAN PRAYER. Neither doe I thinke it to bee needefull to refute that deueliſhe errour, whiche the Pope hath brought in, of the Inuocation of Sainctes, which is nothinge els, than a meere blaſphemy of Ieſus CHRISTE, the Sonne of GOD. For inaſmuch as GOD in his woord, hath expreſſely commaunded, that wee ſhould truſt vnto him alone, and call onely vpon him, and that wee ſhould not giue this honour vnto any creature: doubtleſſe they which doe otherwiſe, doe greeuouſly offend, and ſuffer themſelues to bee fowly ſeduced, by the inſtigation of the Deuill, from the true Mediatoure, and Interceſſour, IESV CHRISTE. But hee which feareth GOD,
                  Ihon. obeyeth the commaundemente of GOD, (whereby hee chargeth, that hee himſelfe onely, be called vpon,) and truſteth to the promyſes of God, and firſt of all to that of Chriſte, promiſing that VVhatſoeuer wee ſhall aske in his name, wee ſhall receyue it, ſo that wee aſke in a ſure fayth, nothing at all doubting of his promiſes.
            
            
               
               Of Chriſtian Prayer.
               VVhat then is Chriſtian Prayer?
               
                  
                     CHRISTIAN PRAYER (is not a bablinge of many wordes,The true definition of Chriſtian Prayer. or much talke, as Chriſt in Math. 6. ſheweth, that the hipocrites falſely ſuppoſed:) but, It is an inwarde groninge of the heart, wherby the minde of man is lifted vp vnto GOD: And eyther geueth thankes vnto him, for benefits (through Chriſte) receyued: Or requireth ſomewhat in the name of the onely Mediatoure Ieſu Chriſte, ſurely perſwadinge himſelfe to bee hearde of God.
               
               
                  Moſes prayeth, his handes beeinge lifted vp vnto Heauen,
                   no moouing of his lippes beeing ſeene. For, hee cryed in heart, and the Lord anſwered him ſaying: VVhy cryeſt thou vnto mee? And Dauid ſayth: Vnto thee (O Lorde) haue I lifte vp my ſoule. By theſe two examples it appeareth, that true prayer is not a vayne noyſe of the lips: but a feruent groninge of the heart, requiringe helpe of GOD.
               
               To what ende then doe wee vſe a recitall of wordes, wee bende the knees, knocke the breſt, and in the time of praying, lifte vp our eyes vnto Heauen? Wee vſe theſe outward geſtures, that the heart of man may bee ſtirred vp to pray earneſtly: that our cogitations maye bee the more bente, to the requiring of the things: that GOD, with ſoule, and body togeather might

bee honoured: and that publiquely, (with body, and mouth) wee might profeſſe our fayth in GOD. Wherof Auguſtine ſayth: Although the inuiſible will of him which prayeth be knowne vnto God, neyther needeth hee any tokens to open the minde of man vnto him, which knoweth the ſpeaking of the heart: yet notwithſtanding, man vſeth the voyces, and members of his body, that by prayinge in ſuch ſorte, the affections of man maye grow the more humbler, deuouter, and feruenter.
               
               
                  How is the heart of man in the time of prayinge lifted vp vnto God? That is doone (as it were) by two winges: of the whiche two, one is THE CONSIDERATION OF THE MERCY OF GOD,
                  The two winges wherby wee are lifted vp in prayinge. the other is, THE SVRE CONFIDENCE IN THE MEDIATOVRE our Lorde IESV CHRISTE.
               
               The Conſideration of the Mercy of God conſiſteth in this, that GOD himſelfe hath commaunded this woorſhip of Inuocation, and hath promiſed, that hee will heare them which call vpon him: and alſo (after his hearinge, and delyueraunce) requireth thankfulneſſe.
               Theſe three poinctes are ioyned together in the ſaying of the 50. Pſalme: Call vpon mee in the day of tribulation (that is the Commaundemente) And I will deliuer thee, (the promiſe of hearinge) And thou ſhalte glorifie mee, (whereby thankfulneſſe is required). Therefore, when wee pray, wee muſt not only haue reſpect to the Commaundement, and promiſe of GOD: but wee muſt alſo thinke vpon thankes geuinge, which

conſiſteth in yeelding obedience vnto God.
               Hereby it is euidente, that whoſoeuer prayeth, keepinge a purpoſe to ſinne: the ſame may not thinke, that hee ſhal obteyne any goodneſſe: but rather, by his prayer to call vpon himſelfe the plagues of God, for his vnthankfulneſſe. For ſo ſayth the Pſal. 66. If I had inclined vnto wickedneſſe with my heart, the Lorde had not heard mee.
               
               And in the 1. Iohn. 3.
                  1. Iohn. 3. 
                  If our heart reprooue vs not (that is to ſay, if wee bee free from an euill conſcience and purpoſe of dooinge euill,) VVee haue truſt to Godwarde, and whatſoeuer wee aske, wee ſhall receiue of him. Iames t
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Yee aske, and receiue not, becauſe yee aske
                        •
                      
                     
                        ••
                     e, euen that yee may conſume it vpon your c
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        •••
                     ſcences.
               
               Therfore, let the Chriſtian w
                     〈…〉
                   about to pray, follow the rule geuen of Paule in the 2. of Timoth. 2. viz. Let euery one which calleth vpon the name of the Lord, depart from iniquitie.
               
               
                  THE OTHER VVINGE wherby in the tyme of prayinge, the heart of man is lifted vp vnto GOD, is, ASVRE CONFIDENCE, in the Mediatour our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte, which hath Or layed downe, viz. in the 16. of Iohn. geuen vnto his Diſciples this moſte ſweete promiſe: VVhatſoeuer yee ſhall aske the Father in my name, hee will geue it you.
               
               In this moſte ample promiſe of Chriſte, two things are chiefely to bee obſerued namely, the vniuerſal ſigne (VVHATSOEVER) and the māner of Inuocation, (IN MY NAME.)
               
               The vniuerſal promiſe is to be reſtreyned, to a

certayne kinde, that the ſentence of Chriſte may bee this: VVhatſoeuer yee ſhall aske, (that is,) Whatſoeuer yee, beeing the Children of GOD ſhall aſke of your heauenly Father, (that may be proffitable for your ſaluation, and Commoditye) the ſame hee will geue vnto you. So S. Ihon alſo declareth the ſame, in the 1. Ihon 5. when he ſayth: VVhatſoeuer wee ſhall aske ACCORDINGE TO HIS VVILL, hee heareth vs. For, it beeſeemeth not good Children, to require any thinge of their Father, which might bee contrary to the fatherly will. For, if a ſonne doth require of his Father a Scorpion, or a ſerpent, or, a thinge any way hurtfull, ſurely it is agaynſt the will of a father, neyther will the father giue that thing, which the ſonne requyreth. Let the Children of God therfore, keepe theſe two rules: The firſt is this: VVhen wee require of GOD, thoſe good thinges, which we may vſe eyther well, or yll: let vs aske thoſe things, with Condition, ſaying: Graunt mee (O Lorde) this, or that thinge, (if it bee, auayleable for mee,) and if it hinder not, thoſe thinges, which are far more better, and excellent. So in times paſt, the holy Martyres prayed, and wee alſo at this day, after the ſame manner, doo ſubmit our ſelues to the diuine pleaſure: when wee pray agaynſt, eyther peſtilence, war, or other puniſhments of GOD: or beſeech God, for the obteyning of health, and the neceſſaries of this lyfe.
               The ſeconde rule is this: VVhen wee deſire of GOD thoſe good thinges, which wee can not abuſe:

thoſe thinges are to bee required without all Condition. Of this ſorte of good thinges, are, The knowledge of God, the increaſe of fayth, true godlynes, patience vnder the Croſſe, & other giftes like vnto theſe. The foundation of this rule, is, the knowledge of the will of God, who would haue al men to be ſaued, and come to the knowledge of the truth,1. Tim. 2. as it is at large ſhewed beefore.
               
                  THE OTHER THINGE which I ſaid was to bee noted, in that moſt ſweet promiſe of Chriſt, is, THE MANNER OF INVOCATION, which is expreſſed when he ſaith: (In my Name,) that is to ſay, VVhatſoeuer yee ſhall aske in the knowledge, and Confidence in mee: the ſame, the Father will geue you, for my ſake, which am your aduocate, interceſſour, and Mediatoure, with my Father, and your Father: yea, the Father loueth you, for my ſake, becauſe yee are my members, yea rather, my brethren, and his adopted ſonnes.
               
               Furthermore, of what ſorte the knowledge of Chriſte ſhould bee, and what manner of Confidence, our cōfidence in him ſhould bee, wee haue declared before: therfore, I will now, only giue admonition of this thinge, namely, How wee ſhould be affected, as often as we do heare this promiſe of Chriſte: (VVhatſoeuer yee ſhall aske the Father in my name, hee will geue it you:) For it conteyneth, both, manifolde doctrine, holſome admonitions, and effectuall conſolations.
               The Doctrine is manifolde: For, firſt, it

teacheth, that all immagination of our owne woorthyneſſe, is to bee excluded from our praiers. For, when, wee praye in the name of Chriſte: wee acknowledge, Chriſte to bee only woorthy, for whoſe ſake wee are heard of God. Moreouer, wee learne a difference, betweene a Chriſtian Prayer: and the prayers of all other ſectes. For, Chriſtian Prayer is grounded vpon the Confidence in the Mediatour: whom, foraſmuch as prophane men doo not confeſſe, their praier is voyd, & deſtitute of al foundation.
               The admonitions are theſe: that this manner of prayinge, admoniſheth vs, of our blindeneſſe. For, when wee muſt aſke in the name of Chriſt: it is not to bee doubted, but, that thoſe thinges are very great, which muſt bee aſked. Wee muſt therefore open our eyes, and looke diligently about vs, what thinges publiquely, what priuately, are greeuous vnto vs: what inwarde, what outwarde, what Corporall, what ſpirituall thinges are lackinge: that in all theſe thinges, wee may lifte vp our heartes to our moſt mercifull Father, and aſke of him, in the name of our Mediatour IESV CHRISTE ſurely, and without doubt, truſting, that he wil giue vs thoſe things which are neceſſary for vs (ſo that wee praye in a firme fayth,) and that thoſe thinges which wee require, may be holeſome for vs, as it is already ſayd.
               The Conſolations are: that this manner of praying comforteth thoſe which praye, agaynſt two moſt great impedimentes of Inuocation:

namely: Fleſhly Diſtruſt: and, Our owne vnworthyneſſe. For, vnleſſe when wee pray, we were ſtayed vpon the confidence of the Mediatour: our Fleſhly diſtruſt, (which the remembraunce of the manifolde ſinnes of our whole lyfe, dooth augment) would feare vs away from praying, and wee ſhould all the ſorte of vs, be eaſily ſubdued, beeinge throwne downe proſtrate with the conſideration of our vnwoorthyneſſe, who of our ſelues are vnwoorthy to come into the preſence of GOD, but the confidence in the Mediatour, healeth theſe maladies. For, it both ouercommeth fleſhly diſtruſt, and boaſteth not her own woorthyneſſe, but the woorthyneſſe of Chriſte. Hereunto apperteyneth that ſayinge of Paule Rom. 5. By fayth we haue peace with God, through our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte, by whom alſo wee haue acceſſe, through fayth, vnto this grace, wherin wee ſtande. &c
               
               With theſe thinges notably agreeth, the anſwere of our Lorde, geuen to the Woman of Samaria, in Iohn 4. For, ſo hee ſayth: The hower commeth, and now it is, when the true woorſhippers, ſhall woorſhip the father, in Spirite, and in the truth, for ſuch the father ſeeketh to woorſhip him. The Woman of Somaria thought, that the efficatie of Prayer, depended vpon the dignitye of the place: for, (ſayth ſhee) Our Fathers woorſhipped in this Mounteyne, and yee ſaye, that at Ieruſalem is the place, where menne ought to woorſhip.
               
               
                  From this opinion, Chriſte calleth backe the Woman, and propoundeth vnto her, the true manner of woorſhippinge, namely: That ſhee muſt worſhip the Father, in Spirit, and in the truth. When hee ſayth, IN THE SPIRITE, hee maketh a difference, beetweene that prayer, which proceedeth, onely from the mouth, and that which proceedeth from the Spirite: which Spirite worketh fayth in the heart of man, whervpon dependeth and from which proceedeth, true adoration. When hee ſayth IN THE TRVETH: he interpreteth two old figures: the former of the mountayne, in which Iacob prayed: the latter, of the place, which was at Ieruſalem and was called THE PROPITIATORIE. For, that Mountayne of Iacob did put vs in minde, that when wee praye, wee ſhould not reſpecte anye dignity of places in the worlde: but, that (from all the lowe valleyes of this world) wee ſhould lifte vp our heartes, vnto the Hilles, that is to ſay, vnto Heauen. And Chriſte willeth the ſame thinge, when hee commaundeth thoſe that praye, to ſay: Our Father which art IN HEAVEN.
               
               The latter figure Chriſte expoundeth, when hee ſayth: They ſhall woorſhip the Father IN THE TRVETH. This Trueth is ſet againſt this place at Ieruſalem, which was called THE PROPITIATORIE. For this place was a figure of the true propitiatorie Ieſus Chriſte our onely Mediatoure, without whom, there is no entraunce open for anye to enter into the

                  Holy of Holyes, that is to ſay, into Saluation, and lyfe euerlaſting. By this reaſon is alſo excluded from Chriſtian prayer all hypocriſie, and therewithall is neceſſarily required, true, and feruent Zeale of minde in the time of prayer: ſo that there muſt bee a conſonancie, and agreement of the heart, and mouth, that the one ſay or ſpeake not otherwiſe thā the other thinketh.
               Thus it is ſhewed, that THE FEARE OF GOD, is the beſte keeper of fayth, and of a good Conſcience in vs: as beeing that thinge, which ſtudiouſly auoydeth Sinne, obeyeth the Commaundementes of God, dilygently bewareth the deceiptes of the fleſh, the worlde, and the Deuill: and, (beefore all thinges,) ſeeketh (in theſe manifolde daungers of the worlde,) helpe at the handes of GOD, by earneſt, and Chriſtian prayer: and, by this meanes, perſeuereth conſtaunt vnto the ende, (that is to ſay) endureth ſo longe vntill GOD calleth vs from this vale of miſery, and receyueth into Heauen to himſelf, the ſoules of the godly, which depart from hence, in the inuocation of Chriſte: their bodyes in the meane ſeaſon reſtinge in the duſte of the earth, ſubiect to corruption, in teſtimonye of the iuſte Iudgemente of God: which ſhall rayſe vp agayne our bodyes in the laſt day, and (beeinge agayne reſtored to their ſoules) ſhall quicken them, that we his Children may enioy eternall lyfe: and beeinge finally taken awaye from all chaunges, and daungers of this world, may remaine in perpetual ioyes, with the Lord,

and our only Sauiour IESV CHRIST, to whom, with the Father and the holy ghoſt, bee prayſe, honour, and glory for euer, and euer, Amen.
               
               Theſe thinges I purpoſed to write, of the principal poinctes of our religion, for their ſakes which do vnderſtand, our common Language. Which I alſo will to remayne, in place of the Confeſſion of my fayth, and doctrine, which I haue taught, and profeſſed in this Schoole of Hafnia, about the ſpace of 30. yeares. I beeſeeche the Chriſtian Readers, that of this, and other my writinges, they would iudge, not by the quarellings of vnlearned, & prowd ſpirites, but by the woord of GOD.
               
                  GOD bee mercifull vnto his Church, and with clemency turne away the diſſentions, and corruptions of the pure Doctrine; and aſſiſt vs all with his holy ſpirite: by whoſe aſſiſtaunce, wee may in ſuch ſort daily increaſe in the knowledge of the true God, in fayth and newneſſe of lyfe: that in the laſt day wee may bee founde in the number of the elect children of God, through IESVS CHRISTE our Lorde. Amen.
               
            
            
               
               A ſmall forme of Daily Prayer, to bee daily vſed.
               
               
                  A Thankeſgeuing for all God his giftes, and Benefites in generall.
                  
                     O Eternall God, and mercifull Father, I giue thee thankes, by thy welbeloued Sonne our only Mediatour, Lorde, and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, for all thy giftes and benefites, aſwel Corporall, as Spirituall, temporall, and eternall, which are moe, and farre greater, than that they may bée, either in minde cōceiued, or with woords expreſſed.
               
               
                  For the preſeruation of the Church, or Congregation of Chriſte.
                  
                     I I béeſéeche thée, moſt mercifull God, and heauenly Father, by the name of thine onely begotten ſonne, to defend thy Church, and Congregation in all partes of the worlde, and conſerue the purity of thy woorde: that the kingedome of thy Sonne may bee increaſed throughout all the worlde, and that many may declare thy goodneſſe, and mercy for euer.
               
               
                  For the Realme, Prince, Counſayllours, and euery eſtate of lyfe.
                  
                     O Almighty God, and heauenly Father, geue vnto this Land, ſafe, and peaceable gouernaunce, vnder thy protection: gouerne with thy holy ſpirte,1. Tim. 2. our moſt mercifull Soueraigne, the Counſayllours of the Realme, and euery one in his eſtate of lyfe: that wée may leade a quiet lyfe, in all godlyneſſe, and honeſty, to thy glory.
               
               
                  For the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, and obteyninge of grace.
                  
                     WIpe out (O Father of mercies) all mine iniquities, through, and for thy Sonne his ſake, crucified and rayſed vp agayne for vs▪ (with the righteouſneſſe of thine onely begotten Sonne) make mée righteous: cleanſe my hearte with thy holy Spirite: teache mée thy waies, and lead mée in thy trueth: make clean my minde, that all wicked cogitations, corrupt affections, and vnhappy counſayles, careleſſe ſtubbernes, and (to conclude) all wicked factes, may departe farre from the ſame: illuminate the ſame with the light of thy grace, that it may couet, will, deſire and doo thoſe thinges only, which are pleaſaunt vnto thée, and holeſome, and proffitable for the Church of Chriſt.
               
               
                  For the ayde of God in the needefull buſineſſes of our vocation.
                  GIue mée vnderſtanding (O Lorde) and aſſiſte mine indeuoures, that I may faithfully, and diligently perfourme the woorkes of my vocation, to the glory of thy name, the edification of thy Church, and the commodity of my neyghbour.
               
               
                  For the grace of God to lyue well, and dye well.
                  GRaunt mercifully (O Lord) that, (by thy aſſiſtance) I may perſeuere in holding faſt a liuely fayth, and a good conſcience, vnto the laſt breath of this lyfe: that when my hower ſhal come, I may quietly ſléepe in the Inuocation of my Lord Ieſu Chriſte, and that I may obteyne eternall life through him: in the which life, I may (with all the electe) for euer, honour, and glorifie thée: To thée alone bee honour, prayſe, and glory with thy Sonne, which lyueth with thee in the vnity of the holy Ghoſt, one God, world without ende. Amen.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   