
      
         
            
            
            A
LETTER
FROM THE KING,
to his Court of Parliament of Burdeaux,
touching the death of the Duke of Guyſe.
            
            (***)
AT BVRD EAVX
By S. Milanges, ordinary Printer vnto the King, 1589.
            By commaundement of the ſaid Court.
            Newly tranſlated according to the French Coppie.
            
               CANTABO IEHVAE QUIA BENEFECIT MIHI
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            Printed for Thomas Woodcocke, dwelling in Pauls
Church yard at the ſigne of the Black Beare.
1589.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The King his letter vnto his Court
of Parliament of Burdeaux.
            
               Truſty and welbeloued, although
you are ſufficiently enformed of
the occaſions which the Duke
of Guiſe now deceaſed hath giuen
vs, to reuenge our ſelues of
thoſe troubles which hee hath
ſpread in our Realme, and of
the enterpriſes and attempts which hee hath made of
later yeares againſt our ſtate and Crowne, yea our honour
and life: neuertheleſſe (expecting vntill we geue
you more perticularlie to vnderſtand how he hath vſed
himſelfe ingratefully towardes vs inſteede of a
mendes, whereas wee pardoned him all thinges paſſed,
in hope that our gentleneſſe, and the good turnes
and honour which ſince then wee haue done vnto
him, and did euerie day, to the miſliking of our good
and Loyall ſeruantes and Subiectes, which were ſtill
offended with it, might bring him to the right way
agayne.) Wee will onelie ſignifie vnto you, that of
late his inſolencie was growen ſo farre, that deſpiſing
our Authoritie, hee hath omitted nothing of that
which hee might doe, to bring vs into trouble, and to

take our crowne from vs, yea our owne life. And if he
hath not done it, it is becauſe hee coulde not doe
it, which hath geuen vs iuſt occaſion to make him
knowe that GOD hath geuen vs the Authoritie, the
meanes, and the courage to chaſtice him, according
to his deſart, by the loſſe of his life. Whereof wee
haue not thought amiſſe to aduertiſe you by theſe
preſentes, to the ende you may knowe the truth of
it, leaſt by ſalſe reportes it be colourably altred vnto
you, geuing you moreouer to vnderſtand, that we
will by no meanes leaue our holy entrpriſe to make
warre againſt the Heritickes, and to roote them out:
but rather, as it was not grounded eyther vppon the
late deceaſed Duke of Guyſe his life or death, nor his
ambition; but vppon the zeale and affection which
we haue allwaies borne, and will alwayes haue engraued
in the bottome of our hearte, to the glory of
GOD, and the encreaſe of our Catholicke, Apoſtolicke,
and Romane Religion; ſo likewiſe it cannot be
by any occaſions whatſoeuer remooued from vs. Our
will therefore is, that our Subiectes of our iuriſdiction
be enformed of the iuſt cauſes of the puniſhment
which they haue receiued, and of our good and holy
purpoſes. And that likewiſe, you endeuour your
ſelues to keepe euery one in their obedience which
they owe vnto vs, whereby they may aſſure themſelues
to be eaſed as much as we can, and whiles they
ſhall continewe in their duty, they ſhall finde vs alwayes
their gratious King, readie to gratifie them as
farr as their fidelitie ſhall deſerue; and likewiſe to
chaſtice them if they forget their dutie, and withdrawe

themſelues from the reſpecte and obedience
which GOD hath commaunded them to geue vs.
            
               Geuen at Bloys, 
                  the 24. day of December. 1588.
               
Sygned thus, HENRY.
And lower, REVOS.
            
            
               Preſented the ſecond of Ianuary 1589.
               
                  And on the backe ſide
               
            
            To our truſtie and welbeloued of our Court
of Parliament at BVRDEAVX.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            Drawen out of the Regeſters of
the Court.
            
               THe Court and Chambers
thereof being aſſembled by
requeſt made vnto them
by word of mouth from
the King his general Attorney,
hath, and by theſe
preſentes doth make ſpeciall inhibition vnto all
manner of perſons of what eſtate, qualitie, or
condition ſoeuer they be, and vnder what pretence
ſoeuer it bee; to make or renewe anie
league or aſſociation, to withdrawe and entice
the Subiectes of our ſayd Lorde the King from
his ſeruice, nor ſpread or vſe any wordes tending
to withdrawe them from the Loyall heart,
fidelitie, and obedience which they owe vnto
him, vppon daunger to bee accounted as Rebells
and guiltie of high treaſon. Enioyning all
Bayliffes, Stewards, Vnderwardens, their deputies,

and all others to whom it ſhall belong, to
make enquirie of them that oppoſe themſelues
herevnto, and to proceede againſt the offenders,
according to the rigor of the Kings edicts,
and to ſignfiie vnto the ſame Court of their
endeuour done in that behalfe within one
moneth vnder payne to anſwere it
themſelues at their owne perill
and daunger.
            
               Enacted at Burdeaux at the Parliament, in the
Chambers thereof being aſſembled, the
2 of Ianuarie. 1589.
                Sygned thus D. ARNAL.
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
   