
      
         
            
            
            
            
            THE ORATION AND DECLARATION OF THE FRENCH KING, HENRIE the fourth of that name, and by the grace of God King of Nauarre.
            
               Vttered out of his owne mouth, to the Lords and Gentlemen of his Armie, before the Citie of Paris, the eight day of this preſent moneth of August 1590.
            LONDON Printed by Richard Field for Iohn B. and are to be ſold by Humfrey Lownes at the Weſt dore of Paules. 1590.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
            
            THE ORATION AND DECLAration of the French king, Henrie the fourth of that name, and by the grace of God, King of Nauarre.
            
               Vttered out of his owne mouth to the Lords and Gentlemen of his armie, before the Citie of Paris the 8. day of this preſent moneth of Auguſt. 1590.
            
               MY Lords, I do not doubt, but the moſt part of you do well remember the precepts and ſolemne othes which my L. the late king deceaſed (my predeceſſor) cauſed me to make in the preſence of you all, for the tranquilitie and peace of this Realme, that day wherein he was hurt, ſeeing himſelfe néere his end. If you be remembred, among many other matters, he chiefely charged me with this one principall point, that I ſhould maintaine all my ſubiects in frée libertie to vſe their conſcience in both religions: that is to ſay, the reformed religion, and the Romiſh religion, vntil that by a generall, or nationall Councel a better reſolution might be made thereupon. Inſomuch as his Maieſtie ſaw there was no other meanes to pacifie the troubles & diſſentions of this Realme, but that if God had granted him the grace to haue raigned longer, he would haue vſed this readie and ſingular remedie aforeſaid. Thus I tell you my Lords, and alſo I pray you to beleeue that I haue nothing in ſo great care as to kéepe all my othes and vowes, which I haue already done and ſhall doe hereafter:

               
and ſpecially this ſame, for that it is of great importance.
            Nowe I am informed that ſome of the Nobilitie of this armie do ſpread abroade that they cannot doe mee ſeruice, vnleſſe I make profeſſion of the Romiſh Religion: and thereupon they will forſake mine armie. Meaning thereby to trie whether I ſhoulde be ſo impudent as to giue ouer and recant that which is deareſt vnto me in this worlde, that is to ſay, my religion and mine othe.
            Therefore (my Lords) at this preſent I haue cauſed you to be aſſembled, to the end I might declare in your preſence that I am reſolued (and I pray vnto God, rather to take me out of this world, then it ſhould be otherwiſe) not to varie nor chaunge in any wiſe my religion, neither do any thing contrarie vnto mine othe, before I be inſtructed by a holy Councell, the which I will heartily yéeld vnto, and vow to follow the ſame: wiſhing nothing more then that ſuch men ſhould depart from mine armie, chooſing rather to haue one hundred of faithful Frenchmē on my ſide, then two hundred of ſuch fained friends: becauſe I am ſure that God is alwayes with them that be godlie.
            Two cauſes there be (as I beleuee) that moue theſe men to ſow this Darnell: the one is the oth which they haue made long ſince vnto the enimies of this realme: the other is the ſmal vertue and aſſurance which do appeare in places of valor and honor. Therefore let not ſuch men be afraid to demand our licence to depart: for I opēly declare vnto them that they are not ſo readie to requeſt it, as I am willing to grant it vnto them. Notwithſtanding I am very ſory, that they be no better Frenchmē only for their owne profit, and for no other cauſe. For although generally at ſhould forſake me (which thing I cannot beleeue)

               
I haue friends inough at may commandemēt for to maintaine me to their ſhame in mine authoritie. And if all thoſe meanes ſhould faile me, yet God is my ſure ſtrength and ſhield: who hath accompanied me with his holy & myraculous bleſſings from my birth to this preſent: whereof all ye are witneſſe. For Dauid neuer came better into his kingdome of Iſrael without all hope and force of men, nor with more labour and perill, then I am come into this ſame my kingdome, in ſuch a ſort that I confeſſe in very deed that God hath myraculouſly brought me into it, and eſtabliſhed me therein. Moreouer if all mans help ſhould faile me, for to maintaine me therein, yet I knowe, that the almightie God will neuer fayle me: aſſuring my ſelfe that he hath not begun ſuch a myraculous worke for to leaue it vnperfect, and not onely for my ſake, but alſo for his holy name, and for ſo manie perſons that are afflicted in diuers ſortes in this mine owne kingdome, who crie for mercie: whome alſo I deſire to ſuccour: and I doe promiſe as a king to performe it as ſoone as God will giue me leaue.
            Let then this companie of euill ſpeakers ceaſe, and let them truely beleeue that neyther this Crowne, nor the Empire of all the whole earth were able to make me chaunge the Religion wherein I have bene brought vppe and inſtructed from my mothers pappes, and the which I vphold to be true: and alſo that I acknowledge nothing but the onely word of God to be my guide and to reforme me to a holy councell as I haue ſaid heretofore.
            All ye, my Lords, doe know, that I am a true and naturall Frenchman: and I am ſuch a one as men need not to doubt of me. For my actions in time paſt may teſtifie how I haue vſed my ſelfe in the behauiour of that which

               
I haue done within theſe ſixtéene or ſeuentéene yéeres that I haue raigned in my kingdome of Nauarre, being a countrie vnder mine obedience. It is eaſie to be iudged what I am, though I haue great occaſion to féele my ſelfe offended for the wrong done vnto me of the enemies of this crowne.
            Moreouer, my Lords, I leaue you to thinke how hard it is for me, being your king, and leauing yon in libertie for the exerciſe of your religion, to forbeare, that there ſhould be ſome among you, yea of the baſer ſort, who would endeuour themſelues to rule me according to their vaine opinion. For this cauſe I pray all good men of this aſſemblie and others of this realme to be iudges thereupon. And foraſmuch as none can be perfect, I pray you al my Lords, if I haue forgotten anie thing concerning my dutie, to pray with me vnto the Lord God continually to conduct and aſſiſt me hereafter with his holy ſpirite, for the increaſing of the kingdome of his ſonne Ieſus Chriſt, and for the entertainment of mine eſtate, and alſo for the comfort of mine owne ſubiects.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London by Richard Field, for I.B. and are to be ſold by Humfrey Lownes at the Weſt dore of Paules.
            
            
         
      
   