
      
         
            
            
            THE PREAcher, or Methode of preaching, vvrytten in Latine by Nicholas Hemminge, and tranſlated into Engliſhe by I. H. Very neceſſary for al thoſe that by the true preaching of the word of God, labour to pull downe the Sinagoge of Sathan, and buylde vp the Temple of GOD.
            
            
               1. Corinth. 1.18.
               The preaching of the Croſſe, is to thē that periſhe fooliſhneſſe: but vnto vs vvhich are ſaued, it is the povver of God.
            
            
               Seene and alowed according to the Queenes Maieſties Iniunction.
            
            ¶ Imprinted at London by Thomas Marſhe.
            Anno. 1574.
            Cum Priuilegio.
         
         
            
            
            To the right Honourable Dougles Lady Sheffeld, late wyfe of Lord Iohn Sheffeld diſceaſed: Iohn Horſfall, her moſt humble and faithfull ſeruaunt wiſheth all health and godlines long to continue vvith increaſe of vertue and zeale in Religion. (⁂)
            
               AFter that I had by the good aduiſe and earneſt perſuation of certaine of my brethren Miniſters of this citty of London trāſlate out of latine into our vulgar tongue 
                  •••
               s litle booke intituled The preacher or Methode of preaching &c. neceſſary for all thoſe yt by the true & ſincere preaching of the worde, labour to pull downe the ſinagogue of Satan and to build vp the temple of God, I thought

it my bounden duty (right Honourable and my ſinguler good Lady) to dedicate ye ſame vnto your honour, and that for diuers and ſondrye cauſes. VVherof the firſt and chiefeſt is that zeale and godlines in the true religiō & fayth of our ſauiour Chriſt, which I by experience haue noted and foūd to be ſuch in you, that you do not onely your ſelfe dailye ſerue God by prayer, but do alſo ſtraightly commaunde all your family and ſee them do the ſame. Imitating herein the example of the faythfull father of all the Sonnes of God Abrahā, who did not onely himſelfe but alſo appointed his whole family which was greate to ſerue God daily. The ſecond cauſe is ye correctiō of ſinne, by displacinge and puttinge cleane out of your houſe al ſuch which

by their vngodlines might either brīg vppon themſelues the iuste plague of Almighty God, or els be an euill exā
               ple vnto others to cōmit the like. The third is your honours gret meekenes, patience and modeſtye towardes all mē and in all your affayres. The laſt cauſe is for yt it pleaſed your honour of your goodnes & mere liberality to accepte and take me to be your houſehold Chaplaine, & as it were a guide and helper of that godly zeale of calling vpon the name of God, & receiuing of his Sacraments. Theſe cauſes therefore diligentlye conſidered, I thought it my duty to dedicate ye first fruits of this my labour vnto your honour, partly to declare vnto you mine obedient thanckfulnes of minde, and partlye that both honourable and all

others in this lande, beholdinge your honours vertuous and Godlye lyfe, might not onelye imitate and followe the ſame, but alſo glorifie God the father of our Lord Ieſus Christe. To whom I commende your honour, hartely beſeechinge him to encreaſe in you daily more and more al maner of vertue and godlines, to bleſſe and enriche you with all maner of prosperity, and to graunt that for our good enſample and to the ſettinge forth of Gods honour and glorie, you maye liue longe many quiet and happy yeares amongeſt vs, and after this lyfe, to liue with Christ for euer. Amen,
         
         
            
            
               To his brethren and fellowe Miniſters of the Churche of Chriſte in Englād, the interpretour wiſheth peace, & true knowledge, to the honour & glory of God, and to the edification of the ſayde Churche, by true vnderſtanding and ſince preaching of the woorde of GOD.
            
               THis little booke intituled Eccleſiaſtes, and firſt written in Latyne by Hemminge, was thought meete, and very profitable to be tranſlated, and turned into Engliſhe, not onely by mee, but alſo by the iudgement of diuers others of my brethren, godly and zealous Miniſters of this citi of London, who cōſidering ye great profite that hereby might come, firſte vnto the Churche of Chriſte, and nexte vnto them ſelues, and to all their other brethren and fellowe Miniſters throughout this little realme of Englande, according to their calling, whiche do or ought to thriſte and hunger, after the increaſe and aduauncement of

Chriſte his kingdome, to the ouerthrowe & vtter diſtruction of blindnes, error, Popery, ſuperſtition, and of all the tyrannie of Anti-chriſte, haue perſwaded me to accomplyſhe their great and earneſt deſire, and to tranſlate into our vulgare tongue, this little and neceſſary treatiſe of Himmenge, called Eccleſiaſtes, wherein what paynes I haue taken, I had rather a great deale the learned in reading ſhould iudge, then that I would ſpeake any one worde of my ſelfe. This only (as I truſt) without offence of any, I maye truely ſaye, that it would haue bene a great deale eaſier for me, to haue medled rather with ſome one whole and continuall commētarie, thē with this little treatiſe, which in my iudgement may not vnfitly be termed Chriſtiana Rhetorica, that is to ſay, an arte out of the whiche the true and faithfull Miniſters of Chriſte, may learne playnely, and orderly, to breake and diſtribute the worde of God vnto the people, and flocke committed to their charge. Nowe it is not vnknowen howe harde a thing it is to tranſlate any arte written, either in the Latyne, or in the Greeke tongue, eſpecially into our Englyſhe and vulgare tongue, in the which we

haue wordes, neither ſufficient, nor yet apte enough to declare & expreſſe the ſame: that is to ſaye, the termes and proper names of arte: as Genus, differentia, ſpecies, adiuncta, exordium, enarratio, genus didaſcalicum, paraeneticum. &c. not withſtanding this great difficultie whiche might altogether ſeeme to haue bene ſufficient to diſſwade, hinder, and diſcourage mee, to haue taken this little harde, and profitable woorke in hande: yet the examples of other wyſe & learned men (who before me haue brought into our tongue the artes of Grammer, Logike, Rhetoricke, Arithmeticke, Aſtronomie, Geographie. &c. did not a little encourage and bolden mee hereunto: ſo that I thought if other graue, wyſe, and learned men, before me, both Romaynes, Italians, Germaines, Frenchemen, and Engliſhmē, haue thought good for the aduauncement of Philoſophie, and humaine knowledge, to bring into their mother tongue thoſe and other like artes firſte written in the Greeke tongue, though they could not always finde out proper wordes euery one in their owne tongue to declare ye proper termes of arte. I with muche more bouldnes might take in

hand to interprete this little arte of Chriſtian Rhetoricke, eſpecially ſeing that the ſame doth ſo farre paſſe the arte of Rhetoricke, as ye holy worde of God doth exceede the knowledge of all manner of humaine philoſophie. For that arte doth teache thee, cunningly to handle, & eloquently to ſpeake of worldly thinges, and of mens matters: & that either in prayſe, or diſprayſe, either in defending and prouing, or els in reprouing, impugning, diſcōmending, and diſalowing, wherof we haue examples in Demoſthenes, and Creſiphon, among the Greecians: in M. T. Cicero, and Mar. Antonius among the Romaines, and in diuers other Oratours, who floriſhed in their time. But this doth inſtructe and teache thee, the true deuiſion of the ſcriptures, home they haue bene diuerſly of diuers godlye wryters diuided: What the vſe and profite thereof is: what tongues are neceſſary for thee to learne and vnderſtande the ſcriptures: what the vſe of them are. Howe thou muſt ſtudie diligently and aboue all other writers the holy ſcriptures. Howe thou muſt, for thy better vnderſtanding, conferre them together, not leauing altogether, either to thyne owne or yet

to other mens opinions: And to conclude, how thou mayſt orderly and with profite of thy hearers preache, & expounde the worde of God, whether mē are to be lifted vp, and comforted with the ſwete promiſes of God, or els to be beaten, and caſt downe, with his dreadfull minaces, and threatninges: whether wickednes be to be defaced and troden vnderfoote, or vertue to be prayſed, and exhorted vnto: But all theſe and many ſuche others, thou ſhalte more at large better learne out of the treatiſe it ſelfe, and therefore I referre thee vnto the diligēt reading thereof, and do exhorte thee, ſo to reade, that thou maieſt not only hereby learne to know a ready and eaſy Methode, or waye of preaching out of the worde of God vnto others, orderly for the helpe both of thine own memorie, and alſo of thy hearears: but alſo, and that eſpecially that with the ſtudye of this arte and Methode, thou alwayes make thy prayers vnto almighty God, for ye aſſiſtance and helpe of his holy ſpirite, whiche maye teache thee, the true ende, and right vſe of ye ſame. For as arte helpeth nature, & nature arte, ſo that arte can doe nothing without nature, ſo muſt we alwayes remember that

the Methode or arte of preaching, ſhall littell, or nothing at all profite vs, vnleſſe the the ſpirite of God bee ioyned thereunto, whiche is, as it were the true nature vnto it, and without the which the arte it ſelfe is able to doe nothing: for this holy ſpirite of God, doth not onely make vs apte, and able to learne this arte, or Methode, but doth alſo teache vs that the true ende, and right vſe hereof, is not onely to preache learnedly, orderly or cunningly the woorde of God vnto others, but alſo and that eſpecially vnto ourſelues, that our audiēce ſeing our wiſe & holy ſayinges to agre together, with our good and godly dedes may by our example frame alſo their life, and conuerſation according to our preaching out of the worde of God, & ſo together with vs both in word and deede glorifie God the father of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte, to whom bee prayſe and glory for euer and euer. Amen.
         
         
            I haue to deſire thee (Chriſtian Reader) to beare with ſome faultes eſcaped in the Printing, yt which are theſe as followeth.
            Fol. 4. pag. 2. lin. 12. for therfore, reade there are. Fol. 7. pag, 1. lin. 3. Cathechiſts, read Cathecheſis. Fol. 39. pa. 1. lin. 27. for fractificat, reade 
                  •
               ructificat.
         
         
            
            
               The contentes of this booke.
            
               THe deuiſion of the holye Scripture. Fol. 1.
               The firſt deuiſion Fol. 1.
               The ſubdiuiſion 1.
               The ſecond deuiſion 3.
               The third deuiſion 4
               The fourth deuiſion 6
               The formes and kinds of Narrations. 7.
               The aydes or helpes of an interpretour. 7
               The cauſes of interpretation 10
               The kindes of interpretation 11
               The Grammarian his kinde of interpretation 11
               The Logitian his kinde of interpretinge 12.
               The firſt Canon. 12
               The ſecond Canon. 12.
               The thirde Canon. 13.
               The fourth Canon. 13
               The Oratour hys kinde of interpretinge 14.
               The mixt kinde of interpreting. 14.
               The vſe of commentaries. 14.
               The way to frame or make holy Sermons. 15.
               
                  The kindes of Sermons 15.
               The kinde of teaching. 18.
               Of the ſimple kind of teaching which belongeth vnto perſons. 19.
               Of that treatiſe of perſons vvhich belonge to examples. 19.
               Of that kinde of treatiſe of perſons which belongeth to demonſtration. 22.
               Of that ſimple teaching which belongeth vnto thinges 24.
               Of the ſimple kind of teaching of thinges by a figure called Diçreſis, that is to ſay, diuiſion. 24
               Of definition. 25
               Of diuiſion and partition 30.
               Of cauſes. 31.
               Of the effect. 32.
               Of the vſe and abuſe. 32.
               Of Contraries. 33.
               Of the ſimple kind of teaching called Sintheticall. 33.
               Of the ſimple kinde of teaching called Analiticall. 33.
               Of the compound kinde of teaching. 35.
               Of the inuentiō or findinge out of cōmon places. 37.
               The firſt Rule. 37
               
                  The ſecond Rule. 38.
               The third Rule 38.
               The fourth rule to make abſtractes. 39.
               The fift Rule. 39.
               The ſixt Rule. 40.
               The ſeuenth Rule. 41.
               The eight Rule. 42.
               Of the maner of handling of places inuē
                  ted, both plentifully and profitably. 43.
               Of the diduction of queſtions. 44.
               Of plentious confirmation 45.
               Of the kindes of proofe 46.
               Of the heaping of arguments. 47
               Of the expolition or dilating of argumēts 48.
               Of the confutation. 50.
               Of Digreſſion. 51.
               Of Artificiall concluſion. 52.
               Of that kinde of Sermon which conſiſteth in exhortation called Pareneticall. 53.
               Of the perſwaſible Sermon. 53.
               The exāple of the perſwaſible Sermō. 54.
               Of the Conſolatorie Sermon, or which cō
                  ſiſteth in comforting. 58
               The Methode of geeuing of comfort. 59.
               Of the chidinge Sermon. 64.
               Of Memorie. 65.
            
            The end of the Contentes.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ The deuiſion of the Holy Scriptures.
            
            
               THe holy Scriptures is not after one ſorte but diuerſly of diuers writers deuided, which thinge ought not to ſeme ſtraūg, or vnſeemelye vnto anye man, for ſometines euen of one and the ſelfe ſame thinges, there are manye differences according to the diuerſity whereof, the diuerſityes of deuiſion may be taken, and authors haue beene accuſtomed, to appointe ſuch kindes of deuiſions, which do ſeeme to ſerue beſt for theyr purpoſe. Wherefore ſeinge that the Scripture is diuerſly deuided, I will recite in order the chiefe and principall deuiſions of the ſame and wil alſo declare the vſe of them, to the ende that the profite of this varietye and difference may appeare vnto all men.
            
               ¶ The firſt deuiſion.
               THe moſt common deuiſion of the Scripture is this, whereas it is deuided into the old and newe Teſtamente, which being ioyned together, are in the Greeke tongue

by a certaine figure called Antonomaſia) named the Bible, which alſo is therefore ſometimes called an Inſtrumente, becauſe that by it, as by an Inſtrument, or readye meane, the holy will and woorde of God is broughte and declared vnto vs. Nowe the Epithetes, or names of old and newe, are taken from the crycumſtāces of tymes. For it is called the old Teſtament, becauſe in reſpecte of the tyme it was the firſt. Againe it is called the newe, for that according to the time, it was the laſt. But if any man ſhould thincke this difference to be taken from the diuerſitye of couenauntes, it were no great matter: yet the firſt reaſon is crewer and fitter for this place. Notwythſtanding they which call the olde and the newe Teſtamente, by the name of bookes, do vſe the word Teſtament contrary to the common vſe.
            
            
               ¶ The ſubdiuiſion.
               THE olde Teſtamente is called of the Iewes, [Eſrim veorba] and that of his number of Bookes. For they doe receyue xxiiii. Bookes of vndoubted aucthority,

which they deuide into foure partes, or orders. The firſt is called of theym Thora, that is to ſaye, the Lawe or doctrine, and it doth contayne fiue Bookes, to witte Geneſis, Exodus, Leuiticus, Numeri and Deuteronomium, which the Grecians call alſo 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that is to ſay, A volume contayning fiue bookes. The ſecond parte is called of them Rheſconim Nebiim, that is to ſaye, the former Prophetes, and this part hath foure bookes, to witte, the booke of Ioſua, the booke of Iudges, the booke of Samuell and the bookes of the kinges.
               The thirde parte is, Acharonim Nebijm, that is to ſaye, of the latter Prophetes, and it doth comprehende foure bookes, Eſaye, Ieremye, Ezechiell, and the booke of the twelue Prophetes, which they call the leſſer, as are Oſee, Ioell, Amos, Abdias, Ionas, Micheas, Nahum, Baruch, Sophomas, Haggeus, Zacharie, and Malachie. The fourthe parte is Chetubim, that is to ſaye, of the holye writers, and it doth contayne eleuen bookes, Paralippominon, the Pſalter, the Prouerbes of Salomon, Iob, Ruthe, Eccleſiaſtes, the Lamentation of Ieremye, the Songe of Songes,

Haſter, Daniell, Eſoras, and Nehemiah, which two latter, are taken for one booke. So that wee haue 24. bookes of the olde Teſtamente of vndoubted auctority, deuided into 4. partes, or orders. Notwythſtāding beſides theſe bookes they haue certaine, alſo which they do call Apocrypha, that is to ſaye, ſecrete or hidden Scriptures, therefore ſo called, becauſe they were not brought forth into the light, to confirme any opinion or doctrine. Of this ſorte are Ieſus the ſonne of Syrach, Iudeth, Tobias, the bookes of Machabees, the wiſedome of Salomon, Baruch, ye ſcribe of Ieremie, and this is the deuiſion of the olde Teſtament, after the maner of the Hebrewes and the Greatians.
               The new Teſtamente is deuided into 4. partes. The firſt contayneth the foure Euangeliſtes. The ſecond the actes of the Apoſtles. The third, the 21. Epiſtles of the Apoſtles, that is to ſaye, 14. of Paule, 3. of Iohn, 2 of Peter, one of Iames, and one of Iudas. The fourth part contayneth the Apocalips of S. Iohn. Moreouer all the bookes of the newe Teſtament, are founde in the Cannon, excepte the ſeconde Epiſtle

of S. Peter, the ſeconde and thirde Epiſtle of Iohn, and the Epiſtles of Iames, and Iude, with the Apocalipſe. Some alſo do put the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes out of the Cannon.
               
               Now ſomwhat ſeemeth to be added, cō
                  cerning the vſe and profite of this diſtinctiō rehearſed: for it little auayleth dilligently to diſtinguiſhe, vnleſſe thou perceyue alſo what profite proceedeth thereof. Firſt of all therefore the diſtinction profitely much to iudge truly of the auctoritie of Holye bookes: for all the bookes of the olde and new Teſtament, are of an vndoubted fayth, and are of great force to cōfirme opinions: except thoſe which I ſayde before were called Apocrypha, which truly may be reade wyth profite. But in diſputations of opinious they are not to be alleaged. For thoſe bookes only are of an vndoubted auctority, which are truly attributed to Moſes, to the Prophetes, to the Euangeliſtes, and to the Apoſtles. Wherefore ſince that the Primatiue and pure Church, hath doubted of the auctors of the ſecrete Scriptures, called Apocrypha, they are of right reiected, when as they are alleaged by the aduerſarye

againſt the wrytinges of the Prophets and the Apoſtles. There is alſo another commoditie of this diſtinction, for it is commodious to haue a certain order of bookes, that. Students may diſtribute the reading of the Bible into certayne times, as it ſhal ſeeme to be profitable for theym, to learne the holy bookes. The third commoditye is that a certaine waye or meanes maye be had (whether thou preach or interprete the ſacred Scriptures in the ſcholes) of recyting or alledging ye Taſtimonyes of Scriptures, that the place of the teſtimonye, may be ſhewed as it were wyth the finger, when as the aucthour of the wrytinge, and the Chapter of the Booke is named and rehearſed.
            
            
               ¶ The ſecond deuiſion.
               THe deuines in the ſcholes, do deuide the bookes both of the old and newe Teſtament, into Legall, Hiſtoricall, Sapientiall, and Propheticall bookes. As of the olde Teſtamente, the fiue bookes of Moſes are Legall: the bookes called Hiſtoricall are Ioſua, the booke of Iudges, Ruth, the 4.

bookes of the Kings, Iob, the two bookes of the Machabees. The Pſalter, ye Prouerbes, Eccleſiaſtes, ye Song of Songes, the booke of Wiſedome, Eccleſiaſticus, are Sapiential. And the xvii. Prophetes before rehearſed are Propheticall: In like manner alſo, to the ende theyr ignoraunce might the more euidently appeare, they deuide the bookes of the newe Teſtamente, ſo that the bookes of the Euangeliſtes maye be Legall: the Actes of the Apoſtles Hiſtoricall: the xxi. Epiſtles of the Apoſtles Sapiential: and the Apocalipſe of S. Iohn to be Propheticall. This by no colour maye bee excuſed: for it is altogether abſurde in as much as it is of them applyed to bookes. But if they woulde applye this theyr ſubtile deuiſion to the thinges (as I thincke) auncient wryters haue done, it mighte peraduenture be borne wythall: but becauſe it is manifeſtlye falſe, as it is applyed to bookes, I wil not in ſo euident a matter, make anye longer confutation. Furthermore the vſe of this deuiſion as it is applyed to thinges, perhappes maye be heare in, that learners in readinge maye wyſelye put

a difference betweene hiſtories and lawes, the Prophetes, and the ſayinges of wyſe men, that is to ſay, Gnomas, worthy and approued Sentences.
            
            
               ¶ The third deuiſion.
               THe whole Scripture, if thou conſider ye thinges ſubiecte, are fitlie deuided into Hiſtory and Doctrine, which two the dilligente reader will ſearch oute ſtudiouſly in reading of holy bookes. Nowe therefore two kinds of Hiſtories, ye old and the newe, the old contayneth all Hiſtories, euen from the beginning of the creation of the world, vntil the conception of our Lord, or the beginning of the Euangelicall hiſtorie. This Hiſtorye taketh his originall (as I haue ſaid) from the firſt condition of things, and ſo continueth vntill the Monarchie of Cyrus. The weekes of Daniel follow after, vntill Chriſte crucifyed Moreouer I haue made a computatiō of yeares for memories ſake, in theſe Verſes which I will putte downe in Latine.
               
                  M.D.C.L.V.I. poſt Adam mundus inundat.
                  Poſt vndas ad Abram, ducent nonaginta duo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     .
                  
                     Exodus hunc ſequitur, quingentos quin
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ꝑ Annos.
                  Exodus ad Babylon, nongent, decem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      recenſet.
                  Poſt Babel ad Chriſtū, D. & L. tribus, X. datur vnus.
               
               Engliſhed thus.

                     The world a thouſand ſixe hundreth fifty ſixe yeares is found,
                     After Adam our father by Noes floud drownd.
                     And from Noes floud to Abram againe,
                     Wee find two hundred yeares ninety and twaine.
                     Exodus doth follow him, v. hundred yeres & fiue,
                     Exodus to Babilon ix. hūdreth and x. cōtriue.
                     And to our Sauiour Chriſt from Babilon,
                     Are fiue hundreth foure ſcore yeares and one.
                  
               
               If thou ioyne theſe yeares together, thou ſhalte haue 3944. yeares from the firſt beginning of thinges, vntil Chriſtes his comminge, the which nomber I am wonte to comprehende in theſe Verſes.
               
                  Ter mille, & nōgent, quater, X. duo bis numeratur,
                  Chriſtus adeſt nobis, gloria vita ſalus.
               
               In Engliſhe thus:

                     After three thouſand nine hundreth 44. yeares,
                     Chriſt our glory, life and health to vs appeares.
                  
               
               Furthermore the new hiſtory, is diſcribed

of the Euangeliſtes, which intreateth of the Conception, Natiuitye Cyrcumciſion, Offering, Baniſhmēt, Diſputation, Baptiſme, Faſtinge, Temptation, Doctrine, Myracles, Death, Reſurrection, and Aſcention of Chriſte into Heauen. Alſo it intreateth of the geuinge of the holy Ghoſte in the daye of Penticoſt, and of the Primatiue Church, and his perſecutions: for vnto theſe Chapters and poinctes, the newe hiſtorie ſhalbe reduced. And thus much cō
                  cerning the Hiſtorye.
               The doctrine is diſperſed throughout al the bookes of the olde and newe Teſtamēt, and is deuided into doctrine of things, and of ſignes. The doctrine of thinges is afterwards deuided into the Lawe and the Goſpell. The doctrine of ſignes doth contayne the Ceremonyes and Sacramentes, whereof wee haue heare no time to intreat at large, notwithſtandinge the vſe of this diſtinction is not ſimple, and of one ſorte.
               For the holy hiſtorye ought to be the glaſſe of a Chriſtian lyfe. For it doth contayne many examples of true godlyneſſe, of confeſſion, of Fayth, of Patience, of calling &c.

It recyteth the rewardes and puniſhmentes, both of obedience and diſobedience towardes GOD, and comprehendeth manye teſtimonyes and witneſſes of GOD. The difference of doctrine verelye, dothe cauſe vs not to confounde raſhlye wyth the Papiſtes the Lawe and the Goſpell, who dreame the Goſpell to be the newe Lawe, but they are deceyued: For neyther the Prophetes, nor the Apoſtles, teache anye other thinge then Moſes doth, althoughe in their manner of teachinge there is great difference. For Moyſes committeth to wrytinge the doctrine delyuered, as it were by hande from GOD, and the fathers: whiche doth contayne the perfecte worſhippinge of GOD, but hee is more obſcure and darke then the Prophetes.
               The Prophetes are the interpretours of Moſes, for that which Moſes doth note, as it were wyth certayne Aphoriſmes, that is to ſaye, briefely and ſummarilye, the Prophetes doe expounde in whole Sermons. But becauſe that thing which the Prophetes did foretell, the Apoſtles ſawe before their eyes, therefore are the Apoſtles made plainer interpreters of Moſes, and of the

Prophetes. Who ſo obſerueth this difference, ſhall reade with greater profite, the wrytinges of Moſes, of the Prophetes and of the Apoſtles. But in what eſtimation the ſcholers of the Apoſtles and other holy interpretours of the Scriptures are to bee had, I will declare hereafter, where I ſhal intreat of the maner of Interpretacion.
            
            
               ¶ The fourth deuiſion.
               THere is yet another deuiſion deliuered or giuen vs by the Gretians, which wee maye not ouerpaſſe: For the worde of God bringinge ſaluation vnto mā, is deuided into Protrepticō, that is to ſay, appertayning to exhortacion: Gnoſticon, that is to ſaye, appertayning to knowledge, Practicon, yt is to ſaye, appertayninge vnto that whiche they call practiſe. And vnto that which is called Protrepticon, doe appertaine exhortatiōs, cōſolations, threatnings, chydings, which all are certaine prouocatiōs, or ſterrers vppe, to heare the word of God, to embrace and to obey it. Gnoſticon, is a part of knowledge which doth cōtayne the worſhipping of God, ye knowledge of the Law,

of the Goſpell, and of the Sacraments, the Epitome and briefe ſumme whereof is Cathechiſis, that is to ſay Inſtruction. The laſt appertayneth vnto practiſe, for it is cō
                  uenient that the obedience of the harte, and innocencie of life ſhould follow knowledge: For fayth as S. Paule witneſſeth, oughte to be vnfayned, and effectual through loue.
               This deuiſion ſerueth to this ende, that thou maiſt know the vſe of the holy Scriptures, that is to ſay, that thou mayeſt obeye the exhorter, beleeue the teacher, and doe according as thou beleeueſt. For he is worthy (ſayth Agapetus) of God who doth nothing vnworthy of God, but thinketh thoſe thinges which are of God, and ſpeaketh the things which he thincketh, & doth the thing which he ſpeaketh.
            
            
               ¶ Of the formes and kindes of Narrations.
               
                  IN ſpeakinge of the formes of a Narration, I will declare foure thinges in order. Firſt with what helpes he ought to be inſtructed, that will become a profitable interpretour. Secondly which are the cauſes of Narrations.

Thirdly what be the kindes of interpreting, and laſt of all what is the vſe of cō
                  mentaryes, or expoſitions.
            
            
               ¶ The aydes or helpes of an interpretour.
               THat a profitable interpretour oughte to be inſtructed with liberal doctrine, and eſpeciallye wyth the knowledge of Rhetoricke and Logicke, there is no man which will doubt thereof. Wherefore I will come to certaine other helpes by which heede is taken, that the interpretour go not aſtraye from Godlines. Therefore in intreating of holye miſteryes, foure kindes of care eſpecially do belong vnto him, who deſireth reth to be free from erroure, and ſafe from the deceites of hereticks: Let the firſt care be to ſeeke God and his will in the Scriptures, wyth feare and humilitie, that hee may knowe him truly in oure Lord Ieſus Chriſte: Let the ſecond care be to haue the ſacred worde of God for a rule. This care ioyned wyth the former ſhall cauſe thee to be conuerſaunt in the Scriptures without arrogancy or contention, and that thou bee

not puffed vppe wyth fooliſhe raſhnes, but rather craue his helpe with humility, whō in the Scriptures thou ſeekeſt faythfully: ye ſeconde care cauſeth thee alſo, that thou be not carefull of thoſe thinges which are not founde written in the woorde of the Lorde. For thou oughteſt to be content wyth that lighte, which the Lord hath ſhewed thee to be followed. Let the third care be diligentlye to conferte the Scriptures, to thende that the conſente of Moſes, of the Prophetes, of Chriſte, and of the Apoſtles, maye euidentlye appeare, and that ſuche ſentences as ſeeme to diſagree, throughe conference maye be reconcyled, the cyrcumſtaunces of the places beinge dilligentlye obſerued.
               This care cauſeth thee not raſhlye to take houlde of anye one ſentence of the Scriptures to aſſaulte or repugne another therewyth, from whence no doubt all the ſectes of hereſye haue ſpronge vppe, which thing that it maye the more euidentlye appeare, wee ſhall openlye declare by examples.
               
                  Arrius doothe heare the Sonne ſayinge: The Father is greater thenne I. This Sentence hee ſnatcheth, and therewyth,

is girded, and armed to vanquiſh and ouercome the deuinitie of Chriſte: Cōtrariwyſe, Manichaeus to the ende hee mighte take away ye humanity of Chriſt, ſnatcheth the ſayinge of S. Paule in his firſt Epiſtle to the Corinthians, the 15. Chapter, where Chriſt is called the ſecond Adam from heauen heauenlye. Againe there are ſome which acknowledge the deuinitie, and confeſſe the humanity, but they make two perſons in Chriſte, the worde, and the ſonne of the Virgin. Oſiander, becauſe it is written yt Lord is our righteouſnes: doth aſcribe iuſtification to the deuine nature alone, as thoughe the humanity were of no force at all, to the benefite of ſaluation. Stancharus on the contrary ſyde (becauſe the worde of promiſe, is of the ſeede of a woman, and Paule calleth Ieſus Chriſte, beinge man a mediatour) wyth draweth the benefite of redemption from the deuinitie, and doth attribute the ſame to the onelye humanitye. Here if there had beene ye feare of our Lord, and true humilitie, and if the deſire of contention and pride had beene abſente, they might eaſly haue iudged of theſe miſteries, by conference of the Scriptures. Let the

firſt care be to referre euery interpretation to the proportion of fayth, from the which if the interpretation doe diſagree, it ſhal be accompted falſe. But contrarywiſe, if it do agree with it althoughe ſometimes it erreth from the marke, and minde of the aucthore, yet oughte ye to knowe, that this is done without the daūger of ſaluation. But what is it to call an interpretation to the proportion of fayth: it is ſo to ordaine it, yt it maye be coreſpondente to the firſt principles of fayth, and that it maye ſeeme to be as it were builded vppon them. For thoſe thinges are ſayde to be done accordinge to the proportion which are made by compariſon to another thinge, or els when other thinges are framed by the compariſon of others. Wherevppon when Paule doth commaunde that Prophecye, that is to ſay, the interpretation of the Scriptures, ought to be proportionable to fayth, hee wylleth that the interpretour ſhoulde haue reſpecte to the firſte principles of Religion, which are plaine and manifeſt, as conſerninge the lawe and the promiſes of the Goſpell, with the which euery interpretation oughte to agree. Wherefore the Papiſtes in the expoſition

of this ſaying: (If thou wilt enter into life keepe the commaundementes) Do departe from the proportion of fayth, when they do conclude of this ſayinge, That men may obtaine ſaluation by their owne proper workes, for this interpretation doth ſtriue with cleare and manifeſt principles: As are theſe, The ſeede of the woman ſhall breake the Serpentes heade, alſo, The Lambe of God, that taketh awaye the ſinnes of the worlde: and againe, If righteouſnes be of the law Chriſte dyed in vaine.
               And alwayes after this maner the mind of the interpretour ought to be bent, to the firſte principles of our Religion, from the which hee ſhall not ſuffer hymſelfe to be drawne awaye by any Sophiſticall reaſon: For hee that countemneth this proportion of Fayth, commended of S. Paule to the interpretour, and els where doth ſeeke an interpretation contrary to the rule of faith, let him be aſſured that hee ſhalbe plagued of GOD. For like as in tymes paſte vnder the olde Teſtamente, fyer oughte alwayes to be taken from the fier of the Aulter, wherewith their Sacrifice ſhoulde be burned: ſo euery interpretation of ye Scriptures,

ſhould depend vppon the euerlaſting word of God. And euen as Nadab and Abihu, for putting ſtraunge fier in theyr Cenſors, which they were commaunded to doe, were puniſhed of the Lorde: ſo heretickes bringing in the deuiſion of reaſon, and the deceites of Philoſophie, in ſteede of true religion, are to be iudged worthye of puniſhmente. And thus muche concerninge the helpes of an interpretour: nowe will I declare that which in ye ſecond place was propounded.
            
            
               ¶ The cauſes of interpretation.
               IN ye preface of Philip Melancthons places, foure cauſes of interpretatiōs are rehearſed, whereof this is the firſt, yt the kind of ſpeache may be vnderſtode: for hearers or readers do not in euery place vnderſtand the phraſes of a ſtraunge tongue, yea ſometimes men of ſinguler learning take greate paines in this thinge: for oftentimes it happeneth that a ſentence being expoūded w
                     •••
                   the word of a ſtraung tongue, which tho
                     •
                  
                  ghe they aunſwering truly in ſignificat
                     •••
                   yet notwithſtandinge they keepe not 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſame ſence in both tongues, and th
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
the difference of the phraſe, or manner of ſpeache. Therefore leaſte here vnwares wee may be deceyued, oftentimes a learned interpretour is needeful. The ſecond cauſe, is the iudgement of ye order of thinges: For he yt perceyueth not the maner of the handling, ſhal certainly very oftē times be deceiued: as they are which recyte out of Paule, this ſaying againſt ye Iuſtification of faith: Not the hearers of the Law but the doers ſhalbe iuſtifyed. Here if they had conſidered the maner of the handling they might haue ſeene Paule in that place, not to haue preached of the iuſtification of works, yt is to ſay, ye men ſhoulde be coūted iuſtifyed throughe woorkes before God, when as Paule there laboureth to confute this opinion againſt ye doctrine of fayth. Therefore an interpretour is needeful, which may ſhew cunninglye an order, and the partes thereof: the profite of which thing is greater then that it cā be declared in few wordes. The third cauſe ought to be the witnes of a true interpretation, for when the hearers perceiue the interpretations to be brought frō the word of God, & do ſee the agreement of the word of God, and of the pure Church with ye interpretation:

they loue the doctrine more earneſtly, and do learne it more greedely. The fourth cauſe, is the confutation of falſe opiniōs, leaſt learners ſhould be infected with the poyſons of heretickes Theſe cauſes are ſufficiently greate enough for yt which God wyll haue the myniſterye of his woorde both in ſcholes, and in Churches to be preſerued.
            
            
               ¶ The kinds of interpretinge.
               ALthough by thoſe things, which I haue ſayd alreadye, concerning the cauſes of interpretations, the kindes of interpreting may after a ſorte be vnderſtode, yet becauſe it is needeful to haue them ſeperated, I wil intreate of them as plainly as I can, accordinge as before I haue promiſed: wherefore I haue noted foure kindes of expounding holy thinges in reading the commentaryes of diuers aucthours.
            
            
               ¶ The Grammarian his kind of interpreting.
               SOme nothinge carefull of the Methode of a treatiſe, do onely expounde the wordes

and ye phraſes after a familiar & plaine manner, which kinde of interpretation, becauſe it conſiſteth of a certaine expoſition of Grammer, it ſhalbe called Grammaticall: This kinde did Athanaſius, Theophilacte, Ambroſe, and many others followe: trulye this is prayſe worthie, that ſuche excellente men which were able both aboundantly, & eloquently to make long diſputations, and orations of euery matter: that notwithſtā
                  ding hath ſubmitted themſelues, to ye Grā
                  mariās. For they knew wel that frō thence a true ſentence ſhoulde be taken. Furthermore this kinde of an interpretour, oughte to be inſtructed with liberall learning. For firſt he ought to haue the knowledge of that tongue, which ye authore of the wryting vſeth: vnleſſe he deſire to ſee rather wyth other mens eyes thē wt his owne. Althoughe a perfect knowledge is not here requyred, yet there ought to be ſo much ſkill yt hee be able to cōferre together theſe thre tōgues, the Hebrewe, Greeke and Latin. For a deuine interpretour hath neede of theſe three tongues, the conference whereof, he that is ſtudious ſhall perceyue to yeld more profite then the tedious commētaries of great mē.

Againe to thende hee maye interprete that thing aptly, which he vnderſtandeth truly, Logicke is neceſſary, which oftētimes to a Grammarian interpretour, doth put to her willing hand. He ſhal alſo be not a litle holpen with the commentaries of variety, frō whence he may learne diuers formes of varying one and the ſelfe ſame ſentence.
            
            
               ¶ The Logician his kinde of interpreting.
               OThers when they ſee, that order obtayneth the chiefeſt partes in all thinges, they ſeeke oute and declare the Methode & order of a treatiſe, & do put forth queſtiōs, argumentes, collations, and do briefely reduce the argumēts to certaine chapters, or common places, as thoughe they were conſultations. This is a moſt eſpeciall care to this kinde of interpretour, yt all things may be expounded openly, and declared diſtinctlye. But becauſe this kinde is moſt profitable in the ſcholes, I will briefely ſhewe the way, which ye interpretour in this kind may ſafely follow, which thing yt it may be done more plainly, I wil cōprehend al the whole matter in foure Canons, or general rules.
            
            
               
               ¶ The firſt Cannon.
               IN the beginning of ye reading of any holy Scripture, he ought firſt of all things to ſpeake of the kinde of doctrine, and yt (as it ſeemeth to mee) maye fitlye be done after this maner. Firſt, he oughte to expounde what kind of doctrine it is, from whence he may fall into the cōmendation therof. Secōdly, he ſhould ſhew auctority. Thirdly, he ſhould ſignifye of what certainty it is, & frō whence it ſhould be taken. Fourthly, what is the neceſſity. Fiftlye, he ſhoulde declare what profite and cōmodity ſhould proceede from thence to the hearers. Theſe fiue pointes in the beginning of any holye booke (in my iudgemente) are verye profitable to be handled. Neither do I diſalowe it, if either hee adde ſome thinges to theſe, or take otherſome awaye, ſo that he deceiue not the hearers, who when they learne, doe alſo greedelye ſeeke for the Methode of immitation.
            
            
               ¶ The ſecond Cannon.
               WHeras according to this firſt Cannon, we haue generally ſpoken of the kinde of doctrine, wee may profitablie diſcende to

                  Hypotheſis, that is to ſay, to the particuler wrytinge, which is layed before vs to be expounded, in which place, theſe thinges are needefull to bee ſpoken off, by him which followeth the Logicians kinde of interpreting. Firſt, who and what maner of mā, the aucthour of the wrytinge is, and from whence the aucthoritye of the wrytinge doth depende. Secondly, what was his occaſion of wryting, the obſeruation wherof helpeth to vnderſtande the order of the treatiſe. Thirdly, what is the ſtate of the matter or principall queſtion, whether one or many from whene, Iudgement may be giuen of the kinde of the cauſe, and the endeuour of the whole writing, that is to ſay, the ende and verye laſte ſcope, maye be perceiued and knowne. Fourthly what is the Methode of this preſent wryting, or (which is all one) what is the order of the treatiſe, whiche excepte it bee obſerued, the laboure of the teacher ſhalbe little or nothinge profitable.
            
            
               ¶The thirde Cannon.
               WE muſt diligently obſerue this, in al ye writinges of the Prophets and ye Apoſtles,

that whilſt they teach, they oftētimes fall into admonitions, reprehenſions, prayſes, threatnings, comforts, &c. wherewith they applye their doctrine to the hearers, & do pricke them forwardes, to receiue their doctrine. They that conſider not this, can neither obſerue the order of ye treatiſe themſelues, nor yet ſhewe the way well to any others. But I will ſpeake more of this Canon hereafter, wheras I ſhal intreat of the large and ample treatiſe of cōmon places.
            
            
               ¶ The fourth Canon.
               AN expoſitiō of euery chapter may very fitly be made after this maner, in ye firſt place the whole chapter muſte be gathered into a certaine briefe collection or ſumme, which none may cōueniētly do, vnles he be ſkilful in Logicke. For thoſe things which are ſpoken ſpecially & by parts, he ſhall reduce to generalities & to the whole, and cut of thoſe thinges which are acceſſaries & of leſſe value, neither ſhal he adde to al maner arguments of things, but ſhalbe contēt only with a ſume of things: and all other matters which are added for amplification, or deduction of thinges muſt be remoued.
               
                  In the ſecond place hee ſhall declare the order of the chapter, in ſhewing how it agreeth with that which wente before, (if anye thinge wente before) and ſhall declare the chiefe partes, and giue admonitiō how they follow. In the thirde place the expoſition of the texte ſhall enſue, the common places ſhalbe noted, that all things may be conuerted to profite. But the waye of the inuention of places, ſhalbe taughte hereafter, where wee ſhall intreate of the places that belonge to a preacher: at this time it ſuffiſeth briefely to haue ſhewed what is needefull to be done.
            
            
               ¶ The oratour his kind of interpreting.
               THere is alſo a kind of interpretatiō pertayning to Oratours, moſt profitable in Churches & ſcholes, wherein the greateſte wits haue exerciſed themſelues: as Baſile, Gregory Naziāzene, Chriſoſtome, Auguſtine, & many other Greekes & Latins, for theſe do expoſio euery queſtion more at larg after the maner of Rhethoritians, of which thinge wee muſte ſpeake againe when wee come to the treatiſe of common places.
            
            
               
               ¶ The mixt kinde of interpreting.
               THe mixt kinde of interpreting is, when ye interpretour either mingleth all thinges aboue rehearſed, or els ioyneth certaine of them together, which thing not a few in our time, are wont to do with great profite, in whoſe nomber Philip Melancthon, wt
                  out doubte is the chiefe, whom manye worthie men: as Bucer, Caluine, Brentius, Beza, & diuers others, do immitate & follow.
            
            
               ¶ The vſe of Commentaries.
               MAny do abuſe Commentaries, whileſt they labour continually in them, litle or nothing eſteeming the text of the Bible, who do like vnto him that trauayling ſome whither, determineth to abide alwayes in his iourneye. For Commentaries are like to the Image of Mercurie. For like as they are ſet vp of purpoſe to ſhew the right way to trauelers, leaſt they ſhould goe out of the waye, ſo commentaries do leade, as it were by the hande, the vnexerciſed reader: which he ſhoulde not alwayes vſe, but ſo as ye trauaylour doth vſe the Images of Mercurie. For the trauaylour loketh not vpon them,

when by often times goinge that waye, hee knoweth the way perfectly. Here firſt of all ye interpretour is admoniſhed of his dutie, that is to ſay, that he thincke he oughte to ſhew a way, and that a moſt ready waye to the hearers, and not to hinder ſuche as make haſt to go forward. Moreouer euen heare it is euidence in what eſtimation the diſciples of the Apoſtles, and their ſucceſſours being interpretours of the Scriptures are to be had. For all theſe are to be followed in ſo much as they haue the ſcriptures of the Prophetes and of the Apoſtles going before them, but if ſomtimes they do erre from this, let vs acknowledge our cō
                  mon facility and readines in falling, & pray to God earneſtly, that he ſuffer vs not to fal into daungerous errours.
            
            
               ¶The waye to frame or make holy Sermons.
               THe Methode or making of Sermons, is a ſure way and meanes ſhewing a reaſō of making ſacred Sermons. And becauſe thoſe thinges which are needefull to be declared in the Church, are not of one kinde, nor can be handled after one ſorte: It were

verye profitable firſt to ſhewe the kindes of Sermons, afterwards the meanes whereby euery thinge maye be intreated of wyth profite, to thend there may be a certaine preſcript & compendious way of making Sermons. For ſuch as ſhalbe miniſters of the moſt holye miniſtery of the worde (then the which nothing can be more holy) which beinge confirmed with vſe and exerciſe, they may encreaſe with preceptes of Logicke, & Rhetoricke. I do not forge new precepts, but do applie the common rules of Logitians and Rhetoritians, to a certaine matter, and doe ioyne together with preceptes the practiſe of learned men, whō I haue heard preache, that the immitation mighte be the more eaſye, which truly would be but very weake: vnleſſe it were holpen wyth preceptes, as I haue ſaid before in the preface.
            
            
               ¶ The kinds of Sermons.
               BEfore I come to the kinds of Sermons I will briefely touche the partes, which may very well be counted foure in nomber, the Exordium or beginninge, the Treatiſe, the Digreſſion end the Concluſion. The

Exordium in this place, is the beginning of the ſermon, after inuocation and prayer is made, and the holye leſſon, or text read and recited, which wee purpoſe to handle and to intreate of. This may very aptly ſomtimes be taken vppon the occaſion, or oportunity, ſomtimes from other cyrcumſtaunces. And it ſhould be ſo handled that it might be, as it were a certaine way, to that thing which we minde to intreate of. It muſt be modeſt, briefe and graue to thende it maye obtaine the good will of the hearers, maye ſtyrre them vppe by eaſines of teaching, and maye keepe theym attentiue. The treatiſe or manner of handlinge, doth alter throughe diuerſity of theames, wherby it happeneth that ſometimes it is contente with a deuiſion, and an expoſition: and that when it is a ſimple theame. Diuiſion is a ſentence by the which we briefely declare what things wee will ſpeake of, this is commended for the breuitye, the perfectnes and fewnes of words, for the which aſke counſaile & helpe of the precepts of Oratours. Expoſition is a ſentēce, wherin the parts of a diuiſion are declared, and it is three fould. Synthetical, Dicretical, and Analyticall, of which hereafter

wee ſhall intreate more at large.
               This expoſition is ſometimes ſimple, when as no argumentes are added: ſometimes mixte, when the reaſons of the partes of an expoſition are intermingled: ſometimes wyth deuiſion. Ye may ſeeke out the confirmation of the partes of deuiſion, and the cō
                  futation of the opinions of others ſtryuing with ours, and that ſo often as the theame is compounded. The Wyſedome of the preacher ſhal eaſlye iudge, when the confutation ſhould go before the confirmation, & when it ſhould follow: it muſt go before of neceſſitye when the mindes of the hearers are before hande poſſeſſed and holden wyth errour: for they cannot receiue the truth before they are deliuered from the errour and falſehode. Digreſſion is a ſentēce, wherby the doctrine is applyed to ye hearers, by cōforting, chiding, fearing & admoniſhing. In this ye beginning, the end, & the place are ſpecially to be cōſidered: the beginning is yt it may ſeeme of his owne accord to flow out of ye doctrine. The end yt it may go together and agree with the doctrine following, if anye doctrine be expounded: The place yt it maye be put to thende of euery member of

a diuiſion or partition, leſt the iudgement of learners, ſhould be troubled with interruption of doctrine, more ſhalbe ſpoken of digreſſion hereafter. Peroration, is the concluſion of the treatiſe. This doth both briefly rehearſe the ſumme of the thinges which are handled, and doth alſo fiere vp the mindes of the hearers with the commendation of the doctrine expounded, and by ſhewyng the vſe thereof. Now let vs come to ſpeake of the kindes of a ſermon. There are generally tw
                     •
                  o kyndes of preachinges, the one appertayneth to teaching: the other to exhortation. That whiche appertayneth to teaching, is of ſimple places, and thoſe as well of perſones as of thinges, and of places compounded, of generall ſentences, and particuler argumentes. The other whiche appertayneth to exhortation, is diuided into three partes, for either it perſuadeth, or rebuketh, or comforteth. This difference or diſtinction of ſermons may be proued. Firſt of the diuerſitie of hearers, to whome the ſermon ſhalbe applied. For either they are altogether rude, and muſt bee taughte, to whome the firſt kinde dothe appertayne, or els they are not rude, but rather feble and

faint harted, and muſt be lifted vp with conſolations: or els ſlowe, and they muſt bee pricked forwarde: or els contemners, and are to be chaſtened with threatninges. To theſe foure kindes of hearers al the ſermōs of Chriſte are to be derected, for ſometyme hee teacheth the ignoraunt whiche are deſirous to learne, and ſometime it comforteth, and ſtyrreth vp the faint harted: nowe hee exhorteth the ſlower ſorte, and nowe with threatninges, he terrifieth ſuche as are prophane, and vngodly. Hereof we may euerywhere eaſelye finde exāples in the hiſtorie of the Goſpell. Agayne, the ſame is proued by the vſe and cuſtome of the holy Scripture: For Paule wryteth thus in his ſeconde epipiſtle to Timothe, and the thyrde chapter. All ſcripture geuen by inſpiration of God, is profitable to improue, to amende, and to inſtructe in righteouſnes that the name of God may be perfecte and prepared vnto all good workes. Here the foure folde vſe of the ſcripture is declared, and that with foure woordes whiche are in the Greeke tongue named Didaſcalia, Elenchos, Epanorthoſis, and Paidia. Didaſcalia, is to be handled in the firſt kinde, that is to ſay, in that whiche

appertaineth to teaching. Elenchos, hath chiding. Epanorthoſis is when the fal is lifted vp, and made ſtedfaſt, whiche manifeſtly appeareth to bee done with conſolations and comfortes. Paidia, is the teaching of children, whoſe chiefeſt office is, to perſwade to goodnes, and honeſtie, and to diſſuade from wicked and filthie thynges. Our diſtinction therefore agreeth with the varietie of the hearers, with the enſample of Chriſte, and with the tradition of Paule. But becauſe the hearers are mixed in publicke aſſemblies it cōmeth to paſſe, that the prophetes, Chriſt, thapoſtles, & all the godly miniſters of the worde doe oftentimes builde & frame out of doctrine, conſolations, perſwaſions, and chidings, all which the force of doctrine hathe as it were ioyned with it: euen as I haue ſayde before, is done in the wrytinges of the Prophetes and Apoſtles: whoſe examples it becommeth godlye miniſters to folowe in makyng of Sermones. Neyther is our diſtinction to bee diſallowed whiche doth appertayne to the nature of teachynge of thynges, and doth ſhewe what order and waye is to be obſerued in makyng of Sermones, although ſometymes thoſe thynges

whiche I haue named as acceſſaries, and impertinent, are applied by the figure of digreſſion, which thing who ſo euer doth not obſerue, can neyther make their owne ſermons well, neyther iudge of other mens, nor yet beare them awaye in mynde. Wherfore the kyndes of ſermons muſt firſt be diſtinguiſhed, and then thoſe thinges whiche are added, maye verye well bee formed and framed.
            
            
               ¶ The kynde of teaching.
               THat part of ſermon which appertaineth to teaching, is that whoſe ende is, to teache the ignoraunte hearers. In this kynde of ſermon the godly preacher ſhall imploye his whole ſtrengthe firſt that he himſelfe do perfectly vnderſtande the thing that is to be taught: Next that hee frame with him ſelfe a full and perfecte order of the ſame in wryting. Thirdly, that hee expounde the ſame in a plaine and common ſpeache, not hauing any reſpecte to his owne commendation for his eloquence, but rather to aduaunce the glory of God, and helpe the capacitie of the preſent hearers, whiche if hee doe, he may hope that the hearer ſhall not

wauer in opinions any more, but conſent to the true and cleare doctrine. And becauſe there are two kyndes as before in diuiſion I haue declared, that ſermon which appertaineth vnto teaching, to wytte, Simple or of ſimple places: and compounde or of compounde places: The order of teaching requireth that in the firſt place, wee ſpeake of the ſimple manner of teaching, but becauſe in the ſimple kind of teaching, ſometimes the perſons, ſome times the thinges are intreated of, it ſeemeth beſt firſt to ſpeake of the treatiſe of perſons.
            
            
               ¶ Of the ſimple kinde of teaching which belongeth vnto perſones.
               THere are twoo kindes of the treatiſe of perſones, the one belōgeth to examples the other vnto demonſtration. For if anye deede of the perſone is layde before vs, it is an example: but if the whole perſone be diſcribed it is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that is to ſay, demonſtration of the perſone.
            
            
               Of that treatiſe of perſons whiche belong to examples.
               
                  VVhen any perſone therfore is ſet before vs out of the holy hiſtories, whoſe whole life is not deſcribed, but ſome deede of ye perſone is brought forth, & that for the cauſe either of the doctrine, or of ye immitatiō, or els of the admonition, it ſhalbe a treatiſe Paradigmatical, yt is to ſay, belonging vnto exā
                  ples. After this māner Paule doth ſet forth Abraham to the Romaines, & to the Galathians, after this manner the epiſtle to the Hebrewes, chap. xi. reciteth a great ſcroule, & number of prophets & of kings. By Abrahā his deede, the doctrine & nature of faithe is taught, the immitation cōmended, yt exerciſes of vocation, & the fruites and workes of true godlines are cōfirmed. The repētaūce of Manaſſes doth teache vs yt ſuch as do fal, are receiued againe, & therfore is profitably ſet before vs for immitatiōs ſake: it putteth vs in minde of ye mercy of God, which of his mere goodnes, receiueth into fauour ſo cruell a perſecutour of his churche, & ſo vile an Idolater. But here we muſt ſpeake againſt thoſe men, who oftentimes do abuſe the exā
                  ples of ſainctes For there ar ſome who had rather immitate ye wicked deedes of ſaincts then their vertues: & do defend thē ſelues wt the exāples of ſainctes. There are ſome alſo

which out of the perſonal deedes of ſainctes and extraordinary cōmaundements, do il fauoredly frame a forme of an act, & do cōmēd the ſame as a generall lawe: they are not worthy of any anſwer. Theſe ar to be called againe into the right way by an abmonitiō. For it behoueth vs to kepe a difference betwene ye cōmon & perſonal cōmaundemēts, or precepts of godlines, which only do touch one people, or one mā. The Hebrewes were cōmaunded to robbe the Egiptiās. Abrahā by Gods cōmaundement maketh him-ſelfe ready to ſlaye his ſonne, for a ſacrifice in the moūte Moria. Theſe perſonal actes are not to be applied particularly, but onely generally: For out of both theſe exāples we muſt learne obedience vnto God in thoſe thinges which he requireth of vs in his worde. Alſo in this treatiſe of thexāples of perſons, it is manifeſt, yt the papiſtes, & eſpecially ye mōkes haue daūgerouſly erred: who & their ſermōs haue laide before vs I know not what counterfait petie ſainctes, & haue fained them to haue liued al their life long ſo blameles, yt they neuer offēded, no not in the leaſt thing. Such a fained deſcriptiō of perſōs, maketh rather to diſperatiō thē to ye edifieng of ye cō
                  ſcience, wraſtling wt the greatnes of ſinne, & of the wrath of God.
               
                  Therfore let vs take vnto vs true examples, and let vs leaue fayned examples for the Poetes, whiche are not to be handled of thē whiche are called by ſaint Paule the Stewardes of the miſteries of God. The ſacred ſcripture and the true hiſtorie doth miniſter examples ſufficiently: as of Abraham, Iob, of Ioſeph, of Manaſſes, of Mary Magdalene, of the theefe which was cōuerted, & of ſuch like: for out of ſuch as theſe ar, we may not onely reache the hearers true godlines, but alſo ye forme of liuing according to their kynde of calling. Therfore the godly preacher muſt remember to ſhewe forthe examples profitable vnto godlines, and not thoſe whiche ſeeme to cauſe diſperation. Nowe it is time that we declare thoſe thinges wherof wee haue ſpoken with a playne example. And becauſe none can be more famouſe thē the example of Abraham, I wil lay that before you to be examined. Paule ſayth, Abraham beleued God, and it was imputed to him for righteouſnes. In this place Paule bringeth forth the example of Abraham, eſpecially for doctrines ſake, and from thēce draweth foorth not only the firme and ſure doctrine of righteouſnes, but alſo ye nature

of ſaith: and frō thence doth ſhewe of what holines of life the beleuing man oughte to be. After this manner let vs learne, by the immitatiō of Paule to obſerue two thinges in examples to witte, the facte in it ſelfe, and then the circumſtances of the perſone, and of the facte. The facte in it ſelfe doth teache that true righteouſnes doth conſiſt of faith, in the promiſes of God. The circumſtances of the perſone, and of the facte, doe put vs in minde of many thinges. Firſt that Circumciſion of neceſſitie is not required to iuſtification: For Abraham was iuſtified before Circumciſion, but afterwards circumciſion was added, as a ſeale of righteouſnes whiche is of faith. Secondly, the profeſſion of Abraham, his life before iuſtificatiō, witneſſeth yt he was receiued of God, not for his owne proper merites, or workes going before, but by the onely goodnes of God.
               Thirdly, in this example of Abraham is declared that iuſtification of faith, pertaineth equally to all. For Abraham was iuſtified before men were diſcerned by any outward workes. Out of this circumſtance the Prophets without doubt haue drawen and framed their ſermons, of the callinge of the

Gentiles. Fourthly, that the ceremonies of Moyſes are not required of them that are to be iuſtified: for euen as Abraham was iuſtified without them, ſo they that ſhalbe iuſtified after his example, muſt not require them to the accompliſhement of their iuſtificatiō. Fiftly, that righteouſnes doth come without the morall lawe, and the workes commaūded in the decaloge or two tables, for if we be iuſtified according to Abraham his example, & he was iuſtified many yeares that is to ſay, 430. yeares before the lawe: truly it can not bee that righteouſnes is of the lawe. But if any mā ſhould obiecte that the morall lawe was from the beginning, & that Abraham did not wante it, the anſwer is eaſye: for no rewarde is due to workes without the couenaunt of God. For workes are not meritorious of their owne worthynes, but by the acceptation of God and by reaſon of the couenaunt: Therefore the cō
                  cluſion of Paule abideth firme and ſtedfaſt: Abraham is iuſtified by the fayth of promiſe before the couenaunt of woorkes was publiſhed: to wytte, the man that dothe them ſhall liue in them. Wherefore he is iuſtified by fayth & not by workes. Sixtly, that the

true and iuſtifieng fayth, is a certayne full aſſuraunce, whiche is not ſubdued by argumētes of reaſon, but ſtedfaſtly beleueth that he whiche promyſeth cannot lie, how ſoeuer the whole nature of thynges may ſeeme to gayne ſaye it. And that fayth hath good workes, and obedience towardes God ioyned with it, and that nothing ought to bee eſtemed dearer to a Chriſtian man, then to be obedient to the will of God. And ſo the Prophetes, godly kynges, Apoſtles, and in like manner all godly men after Abraham, firſt by example haue learned the true waye of iuſtification, and afterwardes by the circumſtaunces of the perſone, and the facte, haue bene admoniſhed of moſte weyghtye things. By this meanes the godly preacher by the example of Paule, may applye other examples, both in them ſelues and alſo in the varietie of circumſtaunces, and all ways in his application, he muſt remēber to haue a regarde to the proportion of fayth.
            
            
               ¶ Of that kynde of treatiſe of perſones whiche belongeth to demonſtration.
               
                  THat kynde of treatiſe of perſons whiche belongeth vnto demonſtratiō doth handle the whole life, and alſo euery parte of ye life of any perſone, and that in the ſame order, as the places of perſones are rehearſed in the queſtions of Philip Melancton. For that order is not only naturall but alſo profitable to the ſpeaker and to the hearer. But firſt of al this is to be obſerued in this kinde of treatiſe of perſones, that thoſe members eſpecially are to bee adourned, and beautefied, from whome theſe three aboue rehearſed, doctrine, immitation, & admonitiō may be taken. For Paule in the .xv. chapter to the Romaines, doth admoniſhe vs of this of application, when he ſayth: what ſoeuer thinges are written, are writtē for our learning. &c. Therefore ſuche members ought to be applied to the whole body of ye church whiche thing is done when wee tranſferre aright the particuler to the generall ſentences: as if the life of Iohn Baptiſte, were to be handled after the manner of demonſtration: to obſerue the naturall order, wee ſhould intreate of his parentes, of his conception, of his natiuitie, of his education, of his vocation, of his office, of the teſtimonie

of Chriſte, of his death and of thoſe thinges that happened both about & after his death. In the member of his parētes, theſe things are contained, that the continual prayers of all godly are heard at the length, that the afflicted whiche beleue do obtayne comforte at the laſte, and that God dothe allowe the marriage of prieſtes. In the member of his conception firſt the office of Aungels is to be conſidered, that they are the Embaſſadours of God, & the miniſters of ye churche. Secondly, that God is myndefull of his promiſes. Thirdly, that the power or worke of God is not hindred by naturall impediment, that is to ſaye, through barrenneſſe & wante of nature. Laſt of all, becauſe Iohn as yet in his mothers wombe did acknoweledge Chriſte, it teacheth vs, that children are receyued of God, and that God wyll be acknowledged & honoured of children. In the member of his natiuitie, thankefulnes towardes God, for his benefites receiued is commended, the mutuall office of the godly is ſhewed, that they ought to reioyce with them, on whom God poureth his bleſſing: & to conclude, that the godly ought to bringe and offer their children vnto God. Againe

his ſtraightnes of life doth commende vnto vs, not a monkiſhe or ſolitary lyfe, but ſobrietie and obedience vnto God. After all theſe things in his office, & in the circūſtaū
                  ces of his perſone, and office, not onely his doctrine, but alſo his conſolation, his conſtā
                  cie in his office, his confeſſion, his croſſe, and loue of the truth, with other innumerable vertues are ſet forth vnto the godly His cō
                  fort or conſolation, is in that he did ſhewe, or point out wt his finger our ſauiour Chriſtes his conſtancie in that cōtemning the threatninges of Herode and of the Phariſeis: hee caught the Goſpell without any feare: his confeſſion, in that he confeſſed him ſelf to be the voyce of a crier in the wyldernes. His croſſe, in that according to his vocation, hee did not onely wander abroade without any certayne manſion place: but alſo doubted not to ſuffer death. All theſe thinges which are ſo drawen forth of the circumſtaunces of the perſone and of his office, are firſt layd before godly miniſters of the worde, for the cauſe of doctrine, of immitation, and of admonitiō, and afterwardes generally to the whole vniuerſall churche, ſo farre forth as it belongeth to the common duties of godlines.

ſimple teaching, and alſo of other Logiciās diligently declared: yet I thinke it profitable in this place, to preſcribe a waye of intreating, whiche ſhalbe commodious to newe beginning preachers. Firſt therefore I will ſet downe the chiefe chapters, and next declare the Methode of the of the treatiſe. The chapters or chiefe pointes ar theſe.
               
                  1 Definition.
                  2 Diuiſion or partition.
                  3 Cauſes.
                  4 Effectes.
                  5 The vſe and the abuſe.
                  6 Contrarieties.
               
            
            
               ¶ Of definition.
               OF definition ſome are ours, and ſome ar our aduerſaries. Thoſe which ar ours, we muſt expounde as true, we muſt proue, confirme, and gather together: The others we muſt confute as falſe. In bothe kindes there is a peculier Methode, but firſt we wil ſpeake of the former. The definitiō therfore wich the godlye preacher ſhall declare as true and immouable, muſt haue foure parts in the treatiſe, Expoſition, Reaſon, Confirmation

& concluſion. Expoſition is a ſentēce wherby we expounde our own diffinition of any thing with manifeſt & playne woordes. And there is two kindes of definitiōs, pertaining to a deuine, the one ſhort & briefe, ye other copiouſe & large, that is content with the kinde & with the difference. This doth applie to the kinde, & to the differēce, cauſes, things adioyning, or annexed proprieties, & ſometimes circumſtaunces.
               The reaſon is the proofe of the definition. Confirmatiō, is that wherby we confirme & declare the reaſon, either by examples, or by any other manner of declaration.
               Concluſion is a briefe comprehenſion of ye expoſition of the reaſon, & of the confirmation. Furthermore, I would haue yt whiche is ſpoken of the reaſon, & of the confirmatiō to be ſo vnderſtanded, not that a ſimple reaſon, or a ſimple confirmation onely, but that alſo both many reaſons, & cōfirmatiōs, may bee added, as ſhall ſeeme proffitable to the hearers, & to the thing yt is to be intreated of. Furthermore, this is to be obſerued, that a large definition which is to be cōfirmed, & proued, muſt firſt bee reſolued into propoſitions, ſomtimes alſo into boſides or termes,

then afterwardes by litle & little, ye partes muſt be ioyned together by cōpoſition, & the neceſſitie of the definition muſt be ſhewed: & all theſe are to be added to the māner & way of definitiō. Now by one or two exāples, let vs make our preceptes manifeſt, & let vs take Matrimonie in hande, for to be firſt of all defined. Matrimonie is a lawful cōiunction of a man & womā (this is the expoſitiō of the definitiō ye reaſon followeth) for it is writte, wherfore let ye man forſake father & mother and cleaue vnto his wife (the cōfirmation foloweth) if theſe wordes were truly examined, we ſhould finde in them, yt which we did put in the definition. For firſt they teſtifie that there ought to be a coniunctiō which is lawful, when it is done according to ye word and will of God. Furthermore where as he ſaith: they ſhalbe two in one fleſh, he would haue the copulatiō of one man & one womā, not of one huſband & many wiues, neither of one wife & many huſbandes, euen as the firſt wedlocke of Adam and Eue doth witnes & declare vnto vs. (Complexion foloweth.) Therfore ſince God hath cōmaūded by his own law yt two perſōs ſhould be lawfully coupled together, & yt there ſhould bee no mo perſons in matrimonie thē two. It foloweth

that Matrimonie is a lawfull cōiunction of man & wife: By this exāple the treatiſe of a ſimple definition may after a ſort be vnderſtanded, whiche if thou wilt applie to the lawes & rules of Logicke, the firſt parte is called the queſtion: the ſecond, the reaſon, the thirde the confirmation of the reaſon, or the ſhewynge of the cauſe of the reaſon: the fourth is the concluſion, wherin by a particular forme the reaſon is repeated with the queſtion. Notwithſtāding the names of the members whiche I haue aboue rehearſed, do ſerue rather the popular & vulgar treatiſe, & are more eaſy to be vnderſtanded Let vs alſo adde an other example, of a large definitiō, which we wil declare more at large. And let vs take the Goſpell to bee defined. The Goſpell is a doctrine reuealed from God, wherin deliueraunce frō ſinne, & from the curſe of the lawe, & the wrath of God is preached & remiſſion of ſinnes, ſaluation, & life euerlaſting is proclamed, to al beleuers in the ſonne of God for his ſacrifice, that the goodnes and mercie of God towardes men might be preached, and that being deliuered by ye ſonne, they might declare forth fruites worthy of the Goſpell. Thus farre goeth

the expoſition of the definition, whiche is to be reſolued by reſolution into theſe propoſitions, whereof the firſt is yt the Goſpell is a doctrine reuealed frō God. The ſecond, that the Goſpell doth declare deliuerance from ſinne, frō the curſe of the lawe & the wrath of God. &c. The third, that it proclaimeth remiſſiō of ſinnes, ſaluation, & life euerlaſting. The fourth, that thoſe benefites happen to them that beleue in Chriſt. The fift that the force of the Goſpell doth reſt in the ſacrifice of Chriſte. The ſixt, that out of the Goſpell God is to be preached. The ſeuenth, that man oughte to ſhewe his thankefulnes to God, in godly liuing. Theſe propoſitions muſt be in order cōfirmed. The reaſon therfore of the firſt propoſition doth follow, that the Goſpell is a doctrine reuealed frō God. Paule doth reache manifeſtlye calling the Goſpell a ſecret miſterie, frō the beginning of the world. (The confirmation) by whiche wordes he teacheth openly, that the Goſpel dependeth not of mans reaſon. For if reaſon by any meanes were able to knowe this doctrine of his own ſtrēgth, it had not bene called a ſecrete miſterie from the beginning of the worlde. (The reaſon of the ſeconde

propoſition (furthermore that deliueraunce from ſinne, from the curſe of the lawe, and the wrath of God is declared in the Goſpell many teſtimonies of the Prophetes and of the Apoſtles do teach vs. Daniel ſaith plainly that Chriſt ſhal take away ſinnes. Paule teacheth that the curſe of the lawe is aboliſhed by Chriſt his cōming. The father crieth from heauen that he is pleaſed by his ſonne, (the confirmation) that this is true al godly men haue experience, hauing the teſtimonie of the holy ghoſt, by whome they crie Abba father, whiche certainly they would not do, vnleſſe they did ſtedfaſtly beleue that ſinne is taken away, the curſe of the lawe aboliſhed, the wrath of God pacified, (the reaſon of ye third propoſition) furthermore yt the remiſſion of ſinnes, ſaluatiō, & life euerlaſting, is proclaimed in the Goſpel, theſe teſtimonies beare witnes. The lorde himſelf ſaith, it is thus written, that repentaunce & remiſſiō of ſinnes ought to be preached in his name, the ſame preaching beginning at Hieruſalē. In the laſt of ſaint Marke ſaluatiō is promiſed to all beleuers. Likewyſe in the x. chap. to the Romains: Furthermore the lorde him ſelf doth promiſe euerlaſting life to al them

that beleue in him. what nedeth many wordes. The vniuerſall ſcripture doth promiſe remiſſion of ſinnes, ſaluation & euerlaſting life, to al people embracing the Goſpel. (the confirmatiō.) For it cannot be choſen, but yt the wrath of God, the curſe of ye law, & ſinne being taken away: ſaluatiō, righteouſnes, & life muſt needes bee obtained. But becauſe theſe things happē not to al men. For Caine Iudas, Saule & many others haue periſhed, & at this day a great part of the world (a grief to heare) do fal into euerlaſting deſtruction. In the definitiō fourthly is added yt theſe benefites do happen to them yt beleue (the reaſon) for the lord ſaith plainly, he yt beleueth in me, ſhal not periſhe, but haue euerlaſting life. (The confirmation) and leſt any man ſhould thinke that this doth depend vpō the condition of workes, Paule wryteth that a man is iuſtified by faith without workes, & with lōg diſputatiōs cōfirmeth the ſame in his epiſtle both to ye Romains, & to ye Galathians. Moreouer in the fift place is added, that the force of the Goſpel doth conſiſte in the ſacrifice of Chriſte, (the reaſon) for ſo Paule ſayth: by the redemption whiche is in Chriſte Ieſus (The comprobatiō) for the

worde which Paule vſeth here is Apolytroſis, that is to ſaye, redemptiō which is done when by death the price is payd. For Lytrō
                   properly is the price of redemption. Such a price Chriſte payd for vs whē he was made ſinne for vs, that we may be made the righteouſnes of God. In the ſixt place, is added that God ſhould be preached for his goodnes & mercy, (the reaſon) whiche thing the multitude of Angels do ſufficiently proue, & conuince, ſinging this himne to God, at our Lordes birthe, Glorie be to God on high, & peace on the earth, & vnto men good will. (The confirmation) for we ought to thinke that this thing done therfore yt al mē which do acknowledge this Chriſt, may learne by the exāple of the Angels, to preache ye goodnes & mercy of God, eſpecially when nature it ſelfe doth crye out & teache vs, ye thankes ought to be geuē for benefites, or good turnes. In ye laſt place, is added ye fruites which they ought to ſhew, who are deliuered by ye Goſpel (ye reaſon) which thing is confirmed by the teſtimonie of Paule, ſaying wee are created in Chriſte Ieſus to good woorkes, in the whiche the Lorde woulde haue vs to walke (the Confirmatiō) for how may theſe

two agre that we are deliuered from ſinne, and yet fulfill the deſires of ſinne, when Paule affirmeth that the healthfull grace of God appeared to all men, that we denying vngodlines and worldly luſtes, ſhoulde liue godlye, ſoberlye and righteouſly. &c. Seinge therefore that wee haue ſhewed by ſtronge reaſons, that ſinne, the curſe of the Law, and the wrath of God is taken away by the Goſpell, and that in theyr place doe ſuccede Righteouſnes, Saluation and life thorow Chriſte, which whilſt wee beleue in him, and that God would that wee ſhoulde preach his goodnes for this his benefits, & in all our life time be thanckfull: that followeth which before we propounded that the Goſpell is a doctrine reuealed from God, wherein is ſhewed. &c. Now when our definition is after this maner handled, if there be any of a contrary opinion, they are to be confuted with the Methode of confutation, which conſiſteth of propoſition, ſublation, the oppoſite, contrarye, or propoſition, and the ſolution. The propoſition in this place is the promiſe of the ſublation, ſublation is the propoſition of our aduerſaries. The oppoſite propoſition, is the promiſe of the ſolution.

The ſolution is the confirmation oppoſite propoſition. But the matter ſhalbe made manifeſt, by a briefe exāple. Neither am I ignoraunt that oure aduerſaryes the Papiſtes, do bable (this is the propoſition of the confutation, ſublation foloweth) that the Goſpel is the new law of not reuēging, of caſting awaye of ryches of not ſwearinge &c. The oppoſite propoſition foloweth, but how vaine a thing that is, may eaſely be declared (the ſolution followeth:) For that which they affirme is directlye againſt the ſacrifice of Chriſte, yea and againſt ye whole Scripture, which plainly ſheweth that we obtaine the benefits of the Goſpel by fayth. What? are not Paule his woordes manifeſt? If righteouſnes be by the law, Chriſt dyed in vaine: this confirmation of the oppoſite propoſition is to be taken oute of the places of confirmation, that is to ſay, out of the places of Logicke, of which thing I wil ſpeake in the compoūd Methode of places. But what generally both in confirmatiōs, and confutations is to be obſerued, heare thoſe yt are ſtudious are to be admoniſhed. Firſt therefore after that wyth manifeſt & plaine arguments, thou haſt confirmed the

cōtrary propoſition in order, the argumēts of our aduerſaryes are to be refelled, and if the matter ſuffer it ſo to be, firſte of all the firſt kind is to be taken, and afterwards we muſt come to the ſpeciall arguments: as in this preſente cauſe. Firſt wee muſt confute this that the Goſpell is a Law. Secondlye that it is not a law of forbidding of reueng, of caſtīg away of riches, of not ſwearing &c. Furthermore this alſo both in the cōfirmation of our owne opinion, & in the confutation of the contrary part is diligently to be noted and marked, that thou preuent thoſe thinges which eyther the wiſedome of the fleſhe or els the contrary part may obiecte againſt thoſe things which thou ſayeſt and confute them. This ſeemeth to be oftentimes vſed of Paule in his wrytinges, as in this confutation layed before vs of ye opiniō of ye Papiſtes, yt the Goſpell is ye new Law: the fleſh vnthanckful to God, frō thence taketh weapons vnto himſelfe againſt the doctrine of works, & inferreth or cōcludeth after this maner: If the Goſpel doth deliuer vs wtout our workes, wherefore ſhould wee worke well? This obiection is to be taken away by preuention. And after this maner

the faythfull preacher muſt haue a reſpecte what maye be ſayd on the contrary part. But the preceptes of a large confutation, & confirmatiō, are to be handled afterwards.
            
            
               ¶Of Diuiſion and partition.
               THis member of the Methode may be hā
                  dled verye profitablie after this maner. Firſt if thou expounde thine owne diuiſion, or partition. Secondlye if thou proue it. Thirdly if thou cōfirme it. Fourthly if thou gather it againe together. Let this be ye example of diuiſion: wee haue heard what the Law is, it remayneth now that wee declare into how many parts it is deuided (for ſuch a forme of tranſition is to be vſed, when we go from one thing to another.) The Lawe of God therefore is three folde, Morall, Ceremoniall and Iudiciall. This was the expoſition (The reaſon) For all the Lawes of God eyther teacheth manners, or commendeth Ceremonies, or practiſeth iudgemēts. (The confirmation) for by theſe mans life is very well conſerued and gouerned. For in a ciuill life there is neede of iudgements, in the publicke aſſemble of the Church Cerimonies

are neceſſary, and that religion of the minde towardes God, and godlines towardes men (in the ſpirituall kingdome of God) do conſiſt in the preceptes of maners It is moſt euident (the collection) Therefore that is moſt ſure which we haue ſayd, that the Lawe of God is threefold, Moral, Ceremoniall, and Iudiciall. Eſpeciallye ſince the true gouernment of lyfe conſiſteth of theſe three, whether thou conſider the common life, or the Church or the ſpiritual kingdome of God. If theſe members of diuiſion be darcke and obſcure, they are to be expounded by definitions, and ſubdiuiſions, & are to be made manifeſſe by reaſons and examples. But if the aduerſary do obtrude or bringe in any other diuiſion that is falſe, it is to be ouerthrowne by ye Methode of cōfutation. There needeth no enſamples in a manifeſt thing. Moreouer partition, is to be framed after the ſame ſorte. As the parts of repentaunce are, contrition, faith, and a deſyre to leade a godly life: (the reaſō) for it becōmeth vs to be ſory for our ſinnes, and becauſe the contrition is of no force vnleſſe there be alſo fayth in Chriſte, this is of neceſſity requyred. And becauſe neither of

theſe is true, vnleſſe the deſire to liue a good and godly life doth follow, a good purpoſe of neceſſitye is ioyned with the former (the comprobation) for wee ſee both the Scriptures and the examples do ioyne theſe three together: Dauid being fallen was ſorye yt he had ſinned, he fled by fayth to mercy, and the reſt of his life withall the endeuour hee might he kept innocente. Theſe members of partition if they be ioyned wyth definitions, deuiſions and their reaſons, a greate, profitable, and plentiful Oration wil enſue and ariſe thereof.
            
            
               ¶ Of cauſes.
               NOw we muſt ad ye cauſes of a thing altogether after a naturall order, & muſt ſeclude or ſet a part thoſe thīgs which ſeme to be the cauſes of a thinge, and yet are not. To euerye kinde of cauſe their reaſons are to be added out of the word of the Lorde.
               Compounded cauſes do runne together in their actions, and doe ſtande with mutuall helpes, and euerye one hath a certaine proprietye in actions. Wherefore the orders of cauſes are diligentlye to bee conſidered, leaſt there ſhoulde be a confuſion of cauſes,

from whence afterwardes great darcknes might aryſe. Furthermore this is alſo to be obſerued, when any thing is commaunded or forbidden, al coordinate cauſes are commaunded and forbidden. As whē the ſanctification of the name of God is commaunded, which cannot be withoute Fayth, neyther without the knowledge of God, which knowledge of God cannot be withoute the preachinge of the worde of God. Therefore when wee are commaunded to praye for the ſanctification of the name of God, wee aſke and praye for theſe thinges in order, for the preaching of the word, for the knowledge of God, for Fayth, and for the ſanctification it ſelfe of the name of God. Nowe I will brieflye ſhew an example hereof. The cauſes of repentaunce are not the free will of man (this is the ſeperation) but firſte the worde of God, next the holy Ghoſt, who inwardlye reproueth ſinne, & ſtirreth vp a hatred of ſinne in the harte of man, and laſt of all a will not reſiſtinge the deuine motion, and the worde. The endes are the glorye of God, and the ſaluation of the penitente perſonne. Theſe are compounde cauſes, and doe ſtande wyth mutuall helpes in

theyr actions, and it eaſelye appeareth that euerye of them hath a certaine propriety in theyr order to the effect. Moreouer, how theſe are to be declared by definitions, and confirmed by teſtimonies, maye by the former preceptes be vnderſtanded.
            
            
               ¶ Of the effect.
               THe effects are to be expounded, proued, confirmed and gathered to gether, and they which are attributed to a thing falſly, are to be ouerthrowne by the Methode of confutation. As if a man ſhoulde affirme ye contrition deſerueth remiſſion of ſinnes, he is to be confuted after the ſame manner, as before I haue declared.
            
            
               ¶ Of the vſe and abuſe.
               IF the thing haue bene abuſed, firſt the abuſe muſte be confuted by the Methode of confutation. Secondlye the true and righte vſe, muſte be expounded proued and confirmed.
            
            
               ¶ Of contarries.
               
                  COntraryes haue no certaine place, neither in this Methode, nor in others, but are to be diſperſed heare and there, for illuſtration and amplifications ſake. For Rhetoritians do thincke that nothing maketh a thing ſo plaine and eaſye, as the conferring of thinges which are contrary.
            
            
               ¶ Of the ſimple kinde of teaching called Sintheticall.
               THe Sintheticall expoſition is, when we begin with thoſe thinges that go before the matter, and by little and little, by certaine ſteppes and degrees do put them together, and lay them on a heape, vntil al thoſe thinges do ſeeme to be gathered, which are ſufficient to diſcuſſe the nature of the thing: As if we ſhould intreat of that peace which we haue in God by fayth, theſe things may be expoūded by the figure called Syntheſis, that is to ſay, compoſition. Firſt we muſt declare what the offence is. Secondlye the partes of the offence. Thirdly the mediatour. Fourthlye the recompence and ſatiſfaction of the iniurye and hurt. Fiftly the reconſiliation. Sixtlye the couenaunt of reconciliation.

Seuenthly the declaration, or publiſhing of peace. Eightly the fruites of peace. If theſe were proued one after another, cōfirmed and examplifyed by teſtimonyes and examples, there would ſpring and ariſe a large and plentifull Oration. On this wiſe Syntheſis doth followe the order of nature, and findeth out, expoundeth, proueth and confirmeth all thoſe queſtions, yt naturally go before, and doth by cōtraries, examples, ſimilitudes, and diſſimilitudes, examplifye them. Furthermore this alſo is to be obſerued that large and plentifull definitions by this Methode are made and framed as before ye may ſee in the definition of the Goſpell.
            
            
               ¶ Of the ſimple kinde of teaching called Analyticall.
               THe Analyticall expoſition is when wee begin from the whole, or from the ende, and afterwards finde out the partes, & thoſe thinges which are required to the ende by an order, cleane contrary to the former, as if we ſhoulde intreate of prayer in this Methode, wee muſt expounde what inuocation

is (for a definition contayneth the reaſon of the whole) and what is the ende thereof: After that we muſt number and coūt thoſe thinges which appertaine to prayer, as though they were neceſſary members therof, as are the affections of the minde, the cauſes, wherefore wee praye, who is to be prayed vnto, by whom, and what wee muſt praye for. Which for memoryes ſake, I am wont to comprehende in this litle Verſe:
Affectus cauſae, quis per quem quid
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     , petendum.
               
               That is to ſaye: In prayer theſe thinges are chiefely to be obſerued.
Affections, cauſes, who, by whom, and what is to be aſked.
Laſt of al indifferent circumſtances may be added: as the indifferent circumſtaunces of prayer, are place, time, and geſture. If theſe trulye were proued and made manifeſte by the Scriptures, and by examples, a greate and profitable copie of Oratiō would grow thereof. Moreouer, what ſo euer wee haue hyther to ſpoken of the ſimple treatiſe of thinges, or places, ought ſo to be vnderſtāded, yt they ought al to be done according to the artificial maner of diuers Methodes, of ſimple queſtions. But becauſe varietye

delighteth them that are exerciſed, ſome times learned Preachers do not follow the lawes of this Methode exactlye, but do call the hearers as it were to counſell, and to chuſe thoſe thinges of greate pleney, which they thinke moſt profitable for to be known of the preſente hearers. And this reaſon of intreating of thinges, ſome do call the Methode of Prudence, which conſidereth the weight of thinges and the cyrcumſtaunces of the preſent hearers. As if a man woulde intreate of the Lawe of God. Heare firſt he ſhould behould the hearers, and then conſider the waighte of the thinges, and then he ſhould more eaſely reduce the treatiſe vnto a fewe Chapters, eaſye to be vnderſtoode & borne awaye. And firſte perchaunce hee ſhould expound what the Law is: Secondlye whether any man may fulfil the Law of God: Thirdly what is the vſe thereof whē no man fulfilleth it: Fourthly what maner of abrogation of the Lawe is to be vnderſtanded. The like maye bee done in other ſimple queſtions. And althoughe theſe thinges he ſo, yet ſhall the Methode of this art which I haue expoūded, profite the new preachers which are not as yet practiſed, &

that both to ſtrengthen their memorie, and alſo beinge longe time and muche practiſed therein, that they may afterwards luckely folow both kindes. Philip Melancthon of moſt holye memorye, applyinge himſelfe to the common capacitye of men in the explication of any ſimple matter, iudgeth that theſe foure are to be propounded, declared, and amplifyed. The definition of the thing, the cauſes, the partes, and the duties.
               The definition being drawne out of the cō
                  ference of manye ſayinges, and noble examples, dothe gather the whole matter as it were in one bundle, and propoūdeth briefly the ſumme of the matter: the explication of cauſes doth fortifye the definitiō, the reherſal of partes doth more diſtinctly ſet the nature of the thinge before our eyes. In the worde offices, the vſe, the effectes, and the finall cauſes of the thinge are comprehended
               Moreouer this is alſo to be admoniſhed yt in handling of places, whether they be ſimple or compounde, if there be many places, wee muſte diligentlye take heede that that place which naturally goeth before, do alſo go before in the treatiſe: And if we ſhould make an Oration of ſinnne and grace, firſt

wee ſhould ſpeake of ſinne before grace, but if the places be vtterly ſeperated, it ſkilleth not in what order thou do expounde them, vnleſſe perhappes in confirmation, the one do myniſter helpe to the other, for then that is to be expounded in the firſt place, which being done the other muſt be holpen.
            
            
               ¶ Of the compound kinde of teachinge.
               THe Sermon which cōſiſteth of the compound kind of teaching, or of compound places, is when certaine compound places, that is to ſay propoſitions, and general and particuler ſentences are handled, which thing althoughe it be properly done by the Methode of confirmation, and of confutation: yet moſt commonly it chaunceth that a mixt Methode is added, for if the partes of a propoſition be obſcure, and darke, reſolution ſhall vnfoulde them, and ſet downe the partes eche part by him ſelfe. Deuiſion ſhal expound the partes ſet downe. Compoſitiō afterwards ſhall compounde them: and the Methode of confirmation & confutatiō ſhal proue the compound, and ſhall confute that which ſtryueth with it. As if the firſt petitiō ſhould be propounded to be intreated of

(halowed be thy name) here of neceſſity, firſt reſolution muſt be added, which might vnfould this ſimple propoſitiō into two parts, into the name of God, & the word halowing. Secōdly deuiſion would expreſſe both partes, one after another, with definitions & deuiſions. Thirdly compoſition would compound the parts againe. Now frō hence cō
                  firmation & confutation mighte be added in their due time. And this precept is alwayes to be folowed, when the parts of a propoſition haue neede of an explication, otherwiſe not at al. Furthermore in parables, reſolutiō is to be added ye firſt thou maiſt put down the parts vnfoulded, & thē apply ye ſame by the cōpariſon of ye thing, to the which the parable doth appertaine, & afterwards frame the leſſons and exhortacions, as in the parable which is in ye Goſpell of the ſeede: there be fiue partes of that parable. The ſower, ye ſeede, the ſowinge, the earth, and the fruite. To ye ſower, God: to the ſeede, the word: to ye ſowing, the preacher of ye word: to ye earth, the hearers of the word: & to the fruit of the ſeede, the fruite of ye word may be cōpared. Theſe beīg once declared thou maiſt frame leſſons & exhortations as the leſſons of this

preſent parable are. The firſt ye great care of Almighty God in procuring oure ſaluation. For heare the Lorde is compared to the diligent huſband man. The ſeconde the dignity of the word. The third, the worthines of the myniſterye. The fourth, that if ye word bring not fourth good fruit, it ſhalbe imputed to vs and the deuil. Furthermore exhortations are to be drawen oute of the end of the parable, for the endes of this preſente parable are: That the Lorde mighte ſtorre vp ye bearers to the loue of the word: That he mighte reproue the negligent, and might comforte the obedient. But in this kinde of preachinge there is yet a greater force and wiſedome of ye Preacher to be requyred. Wherrfore to thende that in this part (which otherwyſe is harde enoughe) I maye ſomewhat ayde and helpe the newe Preachers. I wyl intreate of two thinges in order. Firſt I will ſhewe the Methode of finding out of places, & then I will declare a waye to handle them eloquently and profitablie, in which two chapters this whole facultye ſeemeth to conſiſt.
            
            
               ¶ Of the inuention or findinge out of common places.
               
                  LEſt any man ſhoulde take that for a common place which is ſpoken at all aduē
                  tures, euen as they are wont to do, who almoſt out of euery worde do hunte out ſome thinge, little regardinge whether the ſame appertaine to the purpoſe or no, for that they only ſeeke this that they may ſeeme to be greate deuiſors and no leſſe ſkilfull craftes men of common places: Rules are neceſſarye, within the limittes whereof, the minde of the Inquiſitour maye be comprehended. And although the matter be greater then that it may be accompliſhed in few preceptes, yet is it profitable for yonge beginners to keepe certaine common Rules, which they may ſafely folow to theyr benefite whō they ſhal inſtruct. Firſt of al therefore when any text is read, & vnderſtanded, the occaſion, the briefe ſumme, & comprehenſiō, and the ende, and the vſe of ye texte muſt be ſought out, which thinge, how and in what order it oughte to be done, in the Logitiā his kinde of interpreting before is declared. Secondlye the partes, or the propoſitiōs of the text muſt be ſought out. And laſt of al out of theſe according to the rules following, cōmon places muſt be drawne,

which ſeeme to conduce to the ende of that matter which we haue compounded.
            
            
               ¶ The firſt Rule.
               IF the ſubiecte of the propoſition be a ſinguler bonde, or ende, in ſteede thereof put by degree and in order his ſuperiours, that is to ſaye, the forme in the firſt place. Secondly ye kind next. Thirdly if you ſo thincke good, the ſuperiour and higher kinde. And let theſe be compounded in order with the predicate of the propoſition. Pſal. 122. in the beginning this is the propoſition: I reioyce (ſayth Dauid) when it is ſayd to mee, let vs goe into the houſe of the Lord. Firſt make a permutatiō of the perſon, after this maner: Dauid reioyſeth when it is ſayde vnto him, Let vs goe into the houſe of the Lord. Here according to the rule, firſt put the name of a kinge. Secondlye of a magiſtrate. Laſtlye of a man. This beinge done, ioyne theſe in order with the predicate after this maner: It is the dutie of kinges to reioyce in that they haue ſubiectes which agree with them in Religion: It ought to be a comforte to all men to agree in the worſhipping

of God. Behold how many generall ſentences, this firſt and childiſhe rule doth miniſter vnto vs, whereof the laſte is moſt common, and may be ſpread into many particuler arguments: of ye certainty wherof we muſt iudge oute of ye rule followinge. The example being confirmed in ye ſubiect, the thing is confirmed in the kinde. Therefore when this facte is approued in Dauid, the thing in the kinde ought not to be diſalowed. And on the contrarye ſyde: the example in the ſubiect being reproued, in matter is reproued in the kinde. As for example: Ozias the king of Iuda taking an other mās office vpon him diſpleaſed God. Therfore kinges, yea all men which meddle with other mens matters do diſpleaſe God: for it was ye office of the prieſtes, not of kinges, to offer the inſence of a ſweete perfewme.
            
            
               ¶ The ſecond Rule.
               IF in ſteede of the predicate, ſuperiours bee by degree and in order ſubſtituted, as ye next formes: & afterwards other, & other kindes, a plētiful inuentiō or finding out of places will enſue thereof. This rule certeinly moſt oftē is to be folowed in other

thinges, but alwayes in the Hiſtoryes of Chriſte. As for example: Chriſte healeth ye Samaritan Leper calling vpon him. Becauſe this Samaritane is an Ethnicke and a man afflicted. Gather thou from hence ye Chriſte will helpe the afflicted Ethnickes, and all men which cal vppon him. And becauſe out of the particuler actes of Chriſt, his office generally is gathered, it is lawful to frame a place after this maner. That it is the office of Chriſt, or of Meſſias, to helpe the miſerable and afflicted callinge vppon him.
            
            
               ¶ The thirde Rule.
               IF in ſteede of the ſubiecte and predicate, thou ſubſtitute by order formes & kinds: plenty of common propoſitions will growe therof. As for example: Dauid committing adulterie was baniſhed ought of his kingdome, Therefore kinges greeuouſlye offending and generally all men which liue wickedlye, ſhall ſome times or other ſuffer due puniſhmente. The filthines of wicked men was drowned in an vniuerſall floud, Therfore wicked men at one time or other ſhalbe puniſhed.
            
            
               
               ¶ The fourth rule to make abſtractes.
               SOmetimes it is profitable oute of the cō
                  cretes, as the beleeuing woman of a Cananite (Mat. 15.) in her neceſſitye came to Chriſte, called vppon him, woulde ſuffer no repulſe, but was more earneſt, euen as alſo the ruler of the Synagoge who beleeuing, did alſo conuert his whole family vnto the Lord. From hence gather thou the proprieties of Fayth, that is to ſaye, that fayth inforceth a mā, in neceſſity to come to Chriſt, to call vppon him for ſuccour, and maketh him earneſt to thende he maye obtaine it: & then he proueth the encreaſe and receyueth it, and at length bringeth forth moſt acceptable fruictes vnto God. This rule hath his force oute of that place which is called Comugata, that is to ſay, things ioyned together. But becauſe thoſe things, which I haue rehearſed concerninge Fayth, are the principall partes of fayth, I haue encluded them in two Verſes after this maner.
               
                  Vera fides Chriſtū petit, & rogat, inſtat, ab ipſo,
                  Impetrat, & creſcit, fractificat
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſimul.
               
               
                  In Engliſhe thus.

                     True fayth doth ſeeke for Chriſt, doth aſke and maketh earneſt ſute:
                     Obtaynes of him, and doth encreaſe and alſo bringes forth fruite.
                  
An other example this is. The man is bleſſed that feareth the Lorde. The common place is. True felicity cōſiſteth in the feare of the Lord: the vſe of this rule is greate, not onely in inuenting of places, but alſo in defining of Concretes. For as Ariſtotle & Rodulphe do teache oute of the diſcription of Concretes, ye definitions of Abſtracts are gathered. As for example: if thou wouldeſt define what godlines is, take firſt the Concrete in a notable example: As, godly Abraham did feare the Lord, and did worſhippe him in true fayth and obedience: Therefore godlines is the feare of the Lord, fayth and obedience towardes him. By this waye Ariſtotle founde out the differences of many vertues, which they that are ſtudeous in diuinitye, ſhal eaſely perceyue, not to be vnprofitable for them.
            
            
               ¶ The fift Rule.
               THoſe thinges are dilligently to be conſidered which goe before the matter propounded,

which are ioyned alſo wt the ſame, and which of neceſſitye do followe the ſame, and are to be included into common places, As Pſal 2. Bleſſed are al they that put their truſt in him. Firſt here it followeth oute of the antecedents, yt without Chriſt none are bleſſed. For if they be then bleſſed whē they put theyr truſt in Chriſt, without this confidence al men are miſerable. This place alſo, by a contrary ſence is cōcluded after this maner: all yt put their confidence in Chriſt are bleſſed. Therefore all that put not their confidēce in him are not bleſſed. If they are not bleſſed, certainly they are myſerable.
               Heare thou ſeeſt how this place doth myniſter occaſiō to reaſon of the wretchednes of mankind. The ſecond place is of things adioyning, which is framed according to ye .4. rule to wit, ye true felicity & bleſſednes conſiſteth in ye cōfidēce which we haue in Chriſt. The third place that the benefite is vniuerſal. For a general propoſition is not reſtrained to any nation or man, but the benefit is offered vnto al which refuſe not to put their truſt in him. The fourth place, that fayth in Chriſt is a meane, whereby men are made the partakers of the benefites of Chriſte.
               
                  The fift place of the diuinity of Chriſt, doth follow out of this place: For if fayth is only to be repoſed in God, & bee is pronounced bleſſed that putteth his cōfidence in Chriſt, it followeth of neceſſitye that Chriſte is true God.
            
            
               ¶ The ſixt Rule.
               THe neceſſary conſequence of cauſes and of effectes, is not to be neglected. For if the cauſe be ſet downe, ye effecte is ſuppoſed to be concluded: as in our Creede, whē we acknowledge God to be omnipotent, Faith from thence draweth forth a double effecte, the one is that God doth beſtowe his benefits vppon whom he wil, the other that hee hath power to defend them whom he hath taken into his cuſtodye. But let vs adde a more famous exāple. In the Lords Supper, as oute of a conſequence of cauſes & effects, particuler ſentences are to be gathered oute of a true meditation of the Sacrament: Therfore ſeing that the Lords Supper is a Sacramente of our redemption by the death of Chriſt. Firſt the celebration of the Supper, both by little and little put into oure mindes the thoughte of ſinne:

For the Lorde died for ſinne. Secondlye, it admoniſhed vs of the ſacrifice accomplyſhed for the redemption of mankynde from the lawe of ſinne. Thirdly, the dignitie and excellencie of this ſacrifice, doth miniſter vnto godly myndes, the thought, not onely of the greatnes of the wrath of God in ſtriking his ſonne for our ſinnes, and of the vnſpeakeable mercie of God, receyuinge vs vnto his grace, for the ſacrifice of his ſonne: but alſo, of the loue of his ſonne, making his interceſſion for vs, and takyng or deryuing his fathers wrath and diſpleaſure vppon hymſelfe. Fourthly, contrition ſpringeth out of the thought of ſynne, and of the wrathe of God. Faythe verely is ſtyrred vp by the vnſpeakeable mercie of God, and the loue of his ſonne, payinge the pryce of redemption for vs. Fiftlye, this fayth is confirmed and encreaſed by the vſe of the Sacramente ſo great a thing. Sixtly, faith being confirmed and augmented, doth ſhewe it ſelfe acceptable to God, and doth beginne a godlye, honeſt, and iuſt lyfe, and loueth his neighbour, with whome hee hath the price of redemption common. Beholde what doctrine and leſſons, what plentie, howe godly a meditation

of the holy ſupper, the conſequence of cauſes and effectes doth miniſter vnto vs an other example. Chriſte remitteth ſinnes of his owne authoritie. Here the effecte doth declare the diuinitie of Chriſte. The theefe rebuketh his fellowe who was a blaſphemer, and calleth vpon Chriſte, out of which effectes, the contrition, the faith & the newe life of the thefe is to be gathered.
            
            
               ¶ The ſeuenth Rule.
               LEt the repugnauncie of a ſayinge, or worde, and the repugnancie of a conſequent bee ſought out: from whence twoo kyndes of places doe ariſe. Let the ſaying be, he that doth teache any other Goſpell, is accurſed. The repugnancie of this ſaying is this: hee that teacheth the ſame Goſpell, is not accurſed, the conſequence of the ſaying is, that the Pope is accurſed, becauſe he teacheth an other Goſpell. The repugnancie of this ſaying is ouerthrowen. As the Pope is not the head of the churche, and we muſt not obey the Pope.
            
            
               ¶ The eight Rule.
               
                  IT is good ſometimes by the contrary ſenſe, to frame a place when the termes or boundes be equall, as for example. The iuſt man liueth by fayth, ergo, hee that is not iuſte liueth not by faythe. Whereof it followeth that neither righteouſnes nor life, is of woorkes. For ſo Paule dothe gather it. Gal. 3. That no man is iuſtified by the lawe in the ſight of God it is euidēt, becauſe it is written the iuſt man liueth by faith. In like manner a forme by conterpoſitiō doth ſome times miniſter places, as, euery one that is of God doth heare Gods worde. Here the place by conterpoſition doth gather, that he whiche heareth not Gods woorde, is not of God. Theſe be the principal rules of inuention of places, whoſe fountaines are places of Logike, & rules of conſequences, & there may be more added to them, but I thinke yt theſe are ſufficient to newe beginning preachers, which if they wil vouchſafe to folow, they may both haue a ready way to ſeke out theſe cōmon places, & alſo they may iudge well of thoſe places which are obſerued by others. Furthermore, hereby they may alſo iudge what is ye cauſe, why diuers autors do not alwayes ſhew forth yt ſelfe ſame places.

The reaſon of the difference is as well the diuerſitie of inuention, as alſo that other places, do more contente, or pleaſe our aucthours. After that the godly preacher hath founde out places, he muſt enter into a multitude or ſwarme of places. To this he ſhall applie a threefolde inſtrument. For firſt hee ſhall diligently conſider, whether the place founde out, may expreſſely, worde for word, be ſeene in anye place of the Scripture.
               Secondarely, the place muſt bee examined by demonſtration to an impoſſible thing, if it be not expreſſed in the woorde of God.
               Thirdly, the place muſt be concluded with ſome ſillogiſme, and by a ſillogiſticall conuerſion, it muſt bee tried as it were with a toucheſtone. Let this be an example of a demonſtration, to an impoſſible thing. The place to be proued is, that Chriſtians may poſſeſſe that whiche is their owne, take the oppoſite of this place. No Chriſtians may poſſeſſe that whiche is their owne. Nowe ſeke out the propoſition whiche is manifeſtly true, whiche with the oppoſite ſayinge, may be one of the premiſſes in the ſillogiſme as for example: all that doe geue Almes, ought to poſſeſſe their owne, of which twoo premiſſes

a moſte falſe concluſion doth follow, to witte, that no Chriſtian man ſhall giue almes. By the manifeſt falſenes of this the other of the premiſſes is to be ouerthrowne, wherfore ſince ye Maior is manifeſtly true, it followeth that the Minor is falſe: front hence nowe is inferred the truthe of the place, propounded by the lawe of contraditions. Nowe let vs gather together that whiche we haue ſayde. All that ſhould geue almes, ought to poſſeſſe their owne. No Chriſtians may poſſeſſe their owne: Ergo, no Chriſtian ſhall geue almes. But the cō
                  cluſion is falſe, ergo, one of the premiſſes: not the Maior, ergo the Minor, which ſaith that: No Chriſtians maye poſſeſſe their owne. Let this be the example of a ſillogiſticall conuerſion. The place, ſome hearing Gods worde are not godly. The ſillogiſme. None that walke after the fleſhe are godly, ſome hearing Gods worde walke after the fleſhe: Ergo, ſome hearing Gods worde are not godly. conuerte it after this manner. If none that walke after the fleſhe are godly, and ſome that here the worde, walke after the fleſhe: ergo, ſome that heare the worde are not godly. For al they that heare

the worde are not godly. For all they that heare the worde are godly, or els none that walke after the fleſhe are godly. None that heare the worde ſhall walke after the fleſh, or els ſome men that heare the woorde, walke after the fleſhe: certaynely ſome that walke after the fleſhe ſhalbe godlye. but none that do walke after the fleſhe are godlye, and ſome whiche heare the woorde walke after the fleſhe. The concluſion therefore remayneth firme and ſure, that ſome whiche heare the woorde are not godlie.
            
            
               ¶ Of the manner of handling of places inuented, both plentifully and profitably.
               TO the plentifull and profitable handling of places, foure thynges are chiefly requyred, whereof the firſte is, the diductions of queſtions, that is to ſaye, of the places inuented. (The ſeconde a plentiful confirmation. The thirde, the digreſſion to an other matter. (The laſte is the artificiall concluſion. I wyll intreate of theſe

foure after that order as they are ſet downe before your eyes declaryng euerye one of them playnelye with preceptes and examples.
            
            
               ¶ Of the diduction of queſtions.
               HEre wee muſt ſpeake not of the inuentions of Common places, whereof now we haue intreated, but of ye diduction of cō
                  mon places inuented, that is to ſay, of multiplying them into manye queſtions or places. Therefore the place inuented is diducted, either into ſimple places, or into compounde places: as for example. If the fifte commaundement were ſayde before vs, to be expounded. Firſt here, thou ſhalt ſeeke the common place according to the precept of the firſte rule after this manner. Fathers are to be honoured, parentes are ſuperiours, ergo ſuperiours are to be honoured. This common place in the handling of the fifth cōmaundement, is the principall, & chiefly to be touched. But yet yt it may plentifully be intreated of, it ſhalbe expedient to diduct or reduce it into other places, eyther

ſimple, which the very wordes them ſelues do geue: or compounde, which either do cō
                  ſiſte of them which are neceſſarely included in the wordes them ſelues, as the formes or particular ſentences, are included in their kyndes: or generall ſentences, and what thinges ſoeuer are neceſſarely ioyned with the matter: or els are taken out of them, which are annexed and ioyned to the condicion and ſtate of the matter, as in this example layde before vs, are included two ſimple places, one of honour, the other of ſuperiours. Theſe are to be handled a ſunder, by the ſimple kinde of teaching of thinges, after the ſame ſorte, as I haue hādled before. Secondly, out of the diuiſion of this generall ſentence: ſuperiours are to bee honoured, many particular ſentences do ariſe, according to the contrary diuiſion, of the ſubiecte and predicate. The ſubiect may be deuided into theſe formes that of ſuperiours, ſome are priuate, which are either natural, as parentes: or els not naturall as ſcholemaiſters, patrones, and houſholders: ſome are publike, as the ciuill and eccleſiaſticall magiſtrate, with their differences. Further more the predicate (to be honoured) may be

deuided into partes of honour, for he which honoureth an other, doth reuerence him, obey him, and is thankefull vnto him. So there are three partes, or differences of the predicate. From hence as out of a groue, we may gather particular ſentences. As we muſt reuerence our parentes, we muſt obey our parentes, we muſt bee thankefull to our parentes, wee muſt reuerence oure maiſters, wee muſt obey our maiſters, wee muſt bee thankefull to oure maiſters, wee muſt reuerence patrones, wee muſt obaye patrones, wee muſt bee thankefull to patrones. After the ſame manner particular ſentences are to bee framed, out of the reſt whiche I haue declared, from whence may enſue a moſte great plentie of needeful queſtions. Ouer and beſides this, places oftentymes, are proffitably taken out of thē whiche conſiſt of the ſtate and condition, as: if parentes, ſcholemaiſters, patrones, are frowarde, or ouerthwarte, harde, or cruell, whether then wee ſhould ſhewe them any reuerence, obedience, or kyndnes? and to what ende? and ſo out of other conditiōs, queſtions, are multiplied. But this laſte kynde of queſtions, whiche doth growe out

of the cōdition may be handled very fitly by a figure called occupation. Beholde if thou wilt vnfolde theſe particular ſentences, by reſolution and wilt handle them by diuiſiō, and confirme, and garniſhe them with the methode of confirmation: not one ſermone, but ſoe manye as there are particular ſentences, may be made, and framed. I confeſſe that all common places, doe not ſhewe ſo great plentie of particular ſentences, not withſtanding there is none ſo barraine, but at the leaſt, it may miniſter ſome ſentences, which ye may frame out of a commō place, by the ſame reaſō which is declared, which thinge that thou maieſt doe cunninglye, it woulde muche profite thee if thou haddeſt ſailfull knowledge in the doctrine of predicables, predicamentes, and propoſitions.
            
            
               ¶ Of a plentious confirmation.
               
                  A Plentious confirmation conſiſteth in the kindes of proofes, in heapinge and in dilating of arguments, and in confutation of the contrary opinion of which we wil ſpeake in order.
            
            
               
               ¶Of the kindes of Proofe.
               THere is a three fould kinde of proofes in Diuinity. The firſt and moſt ſafeſt kind, is when proofe is brought out of the euidēt and cleare propoſitions of the Scripture. As for example, Parentes are to be honoured, becauſe the 5. Comaundemēt, euidentlye and plainly commaundeth: Honour thy father and thy mother. In like c
                     •••
                  , Righteouſnes is of fayth & not of works, becauſe the word of the Lord doth ſo pronoūce. We hould that a man is iuſtifyed by fayth wtout workes. The ſecond kind is reaſoning as oftentimes as it is not pronoūced by plaine woordes, but is gathered by a ſtronge and vnmouable conſequence. And this kinde is double, ſtreight and indirect. The ſtreight is when that which is to bee proued, is gathered plainly in the firſt concluſion, which kinde is borowed from ye place of inuentiō, of the kinde, of the forme, of the definition, of ye cauſes, of ye deſtinates, & of things, adioyning. As if this queſtiō were aſked, whether ſcholemaſters are to be honoured? out of ye kinde, or general, thou maieſt conclude well that all ſuperiours are to be honored, ergo ſcholemaſters alſo, but ye indirect kind

concludeth not ſimplie, that whiche is ſet downe to be proued: but doth gather an inconuenience out of the oppoſite or contrary, wherwith he ouerthroweth the Antecedent which being ouerthrowen the truthe of the oppoſite immediatly floweth: as if ſuperiours are not to be honoured, neither parēts are to be honoured, but this is falſe, ergo, ye alſo. Therefore it followeth ſuperiours are to be honoured. The third kinde is, of leſſe reputation, when we laboure in the teſtimonies, & examples of thē, which ſeme to haue floriſhed in ye church, which kinde is diſproued, if it be depriued of the former proofes. Let vs propounde an other exāple. And let the queſtion bee whether Chriſte bee God. This is firſt proued by a ſaying, or by ye firſt kind of proofe. For thus is it ſpokē of Chriſt in the firſt of Iohn, chap. 5. he is true God & life euerlaſting. Secondlye by reaſoning, Chriſte hath done the workes pertaining to God of his own proper power, & the honour of God is attributed to Chriſte, ergo, he is God by the indirect waye: If Chriſte were only a creature, euery one only were accurſed, that would put their confidence in him: but nowe Gods woorde pronounceth them

bleſſed which put their truſt in him, ergo, he is no creature, but true God. Thirdly, ye teſtimonie of the church, as the crede of Athanaſius, and the voyce of all the people, in geuing their conſent, do teſtifie Chriſte to bee God. Furthermore this our diſtinction of proofes wāteth neither reaſon, nor exāple. The reaſon is this, whatſoeuer is proued, or diſproued in ſacred thinges, it is needefull yt the ſame be done, either by teſtimony of the ſcripture, or of the churche. If it be done by the ſcripture, it ſhalbe either by the expreſſe woordes from whence the firſte kinde doth growe, or els intricatly, or obſcurely, & that either in ye generall, or in the particular ſentence, from whence the ſecond kind of proofe is taken. But if any thing be proued by the teſtimonie of the churche, it ſhalbe the third kind of proofe. Hereof truly we haue an example of Paule, who in his wryting as it is wel knowē, hath vſed this threefolde kinde of proofe. That righteouſnes is of faith: by ſaying or wordes he proueth it when as hee ſaith: The iuſt man liueth by faith, by reaſoning thus. If righteouſnes be of woorkes, Chriſte died in vayne. From hence now that followeth whiche he propounded, that righteouſnes

is of fayth. By example: Abraham beleeued God, and it was imputed to him for righteouſnes. Alſo wee beleeue in Chriſte, that wee may be iuſtifyed by fayth. If theſe kindes be delated or ſpoken of at large, there wil aryſe great plenty of proofes, but yet a meane is to be kept, leſt plenty come out of ſeaſon, & ſo breede lothſomnes.
            
            
               ¶ Of the heaping of arguments.
               COngeries, or Heape in this place is when in prouing the propoſition or cō
                  mon place the Chapters of principal argumentes are added, and as it were gathered together into one bundell, as if this propoſition were to be handled. No man is able of his owne ſtrength to fulfil Gods Lawes, the Chapters which followe of the Argumentes, may by heape, be added after this maner: For the experience of all men doth proue this manifeſtlye. This our wounded nature groning doth acknowledge this, the vniuerſall Scripture cryeth oute of this. To conclude the Sacrifyce of the ſonne of God, torne after a moſt horrible maner vppon the gibbet of the Croſſe, doth proue vnto

vs. After this maner, Cicero ioyneth to the propoſition, a heape of Arguments, whom in diſpoſinge of Argumentes all the beſt learned men are wont to immitate and follow. Notwithſtanding although Cicero ſometimes beginneth frō the laſt Chapter, a dilatinge of Argumentes put in the Heape, wherunto he ioyneth firſt, and after goeth forwarde vnto the laſte, which is the laſt in the treatiſe. Yet for the Deuine and the Preacher, it is the ſureſt way to follow an order in the Heape put in the Expolition.
            
            
               ¶ Of the Expolition or dilating of Argumentes.
               EXpolition or dilatinge, is by the which an Argument propounded is confirmed and beutifyed. But a copious Expolition conſiſteth of a propoſition, of a reaſon, of a ſhewing, the cauſe of the reaſon of Exornation, and of Concluſion. The Propoſition is that, which ſetteth before oure eyes ſome Chapter of an Argument, as though it were the propoſition of a confirmation.

The reaſon alloweth the propoſition, and it ought to be ſuch a one, as maye be the minor of a ſillogiſme. Aetiologia, doth ſhew the cauſe of the reaſon, and it is meete, that it be ſuch a one as maye eyther be the maior of a ſillogiſme, or els the proufe therof: So that a whole ſillogiſme is made of a propoſition, of a reaſon, and of the cauſe of the Reaſon. After the cauſe of the reaſon, Exornation ſhall followe, which is to be borowed of ſentences, comparates, contraryes, ſimilitudes, examples. The laſte ſhalbe the concluſion, which gathereth together the ſumme of the former, and concludeth the principall propoſition. Theſe are the preceptes of an expolition, neyther doth that which I haue ſayd, ſtriue againſt the opinion or iudgemente of them which haue nombred ſeuen parts of an expolicion. For there is not onelye one kinde of expolition, but I haue choſen ye onely which I thought to be moſt meete for preachers, that are but new beginners. But to the ende the preceptes of an expolition may be vnderſtanded. I wil put downe one example. I haue before propounded this common place: No man of his owne power or ſtrengthe is able to

fulfill the lawes of God. Furthermore to this place I haue added foure Chapters of proofe, by a heaping of arguments. Wherof the firſt was, that the experience of al mē did proue that to be true. Let this Chapter be the propoſition of an expolition after this maner. The experience of all men conuinceth this, that no man is able to fulfill the Lawe of God. (the reaſon) For all men doe eaſelye perceiue in themſelues, howe farre they are from the perfecte and perpetuall obedience of the Lawe of God. (The reaſon of the cauſe) For they ſee that the Lawe of God is holye, and a rule of perfect life: and that they themſelues are altogether wicked by nature, and alſo feeble, and weake (the exornation from ye ſentēce.) So that is true whereof the Prophet ſpeaketh, that all oure righteouſnes is as the cloth of a menſtruous woman: which ſentence how cold it conſiſt, if the experience of any wiſe man had proued the cōtrary. (the exornation from the cōpariſons) For euen as a tree whoſe roote is rotten, and infected with a poyſoned ſappe cā neuer bring forth but poyſoned fruite: ſo man whoſe harte is infected with the poyſon of ſinne, cannot

ſhewe a pure and perfecte obedience to the law of God. (The exornation from the examples what: did not holye Abell confeſſe this in his Sacrifice: trulye it is euen ſo: For God had neuer allowed the Sacrifice of Abell, vnleſſe that holy man had knowē Chriſt to be him which was promiſed, that ſhould iuſtifye all beleeuers, & vnderſtoode his owne ſinne: whereby hee knew himſelfe to be hindred, that he coulde not fulfill the lawe of God. For if hee had thoughte himſelfe able to fulfill the lawe, he could neuer haue ſacrificed a right, that is to ſaye haue declared in his ſacrifice, that the promiſed ſeede, ſhoulde be the fulfiller of the Lawe. Hereunto Dauid alſo as a moſte ſufficiente witnes may be added, who crying vnto the Lorde, confeſſeth openly, that no man is iuſtifyed in ye ſight of God. For hee complayneth yt all haue erred, and are made vnprofitable, &c. The concluſion) Since therfore wee haue Dauid as a witnes: ſince wee acknowledge the poyſon of ſinne, ſince we behould the purity of the Law, and our owne vncleannes, who I praye you, (vnleſſe hee weare a mad man woulde denye this: that

hee telleth his owne weakenes, and imbecillitye in rendringe obedience to the Lawe of GOD. In this example after a ſorte yee maye ſee the vſe of expolition: whiche if I had determined to haue handled at large, euerye parte beinge dilated and multiplyed, a whole Oration euen oute of the firſt Chapter of the proofe, woulde plentifullye haue proceeded. After the ſame order the other three Chapters, which conſiſte in the heape of Argumentes, muſt bee handled. From hence ſtudious yonge men maye eaſelye iudge, that greate profyte commeth of this Expolition. Wherfore they ſhall take a moſte profitable woorke in hande, if they will buſilye practiſe themſelues in the handlinge of an Expolition. For from hence they ſhall obtaine ſuche a facultye and facilitye, that hereafter when they ſhall haue occaſion, eyther to ſpeake of weightye matters, or to preache the woorde of GOD, theſe preceptes of an Expolition ſhall come into theyr mindes, euen as it were vppon a ſodaine.
            
            
               
               ¶ Of the confutation.
               THe Methode of confutation, which conſiſteth of propoſition, of ſublacion, of an oppoſite propoſition, and of the ſolution, is before declared and made manifeſt by examples: Wherefore in this place I will onely ſhew the bea
                     •
                  ers the place of a confutation. The proper place for a confutation is aſſigned immediatly after the confirmation, which place notwithſtanding he hath not alwayes. For ſo often as any other opinion beſydes oure owne dothe occupye the mindes of the hearers, the Exordium or beginninge maye be taken from the confutation: which rule not onely Ariſtotle and Cicero, but alſo S. Paule followeth in his Epiſtle to the Romaynes, for there labouringe to confirme this propoſition: that righteouſnes is of Fayth. Firſt hee confuteth the preiudices or fore iudgementes of the Gentiles, and of the Iewes: Of the Gentiles whiche thoughte that they wen iuſtifyed by the lawe of Nature. And of the Iewes who boaſted that they were iuſtifyed by the Lawe giuen vnto theym by

God. Oute of this confutation of preiudices S Paule falleth into a propoſition, which hee firſte repeateth, and after ioyneth to it a iuſt confirmation. My iudgement is that this example of S. Paule is to be folowed, ſo oftentimes as the hearers mindes are occupied with any other opinions then with their owne.
            
            
               ¶ Of digreſſion.
               THe preceptes of digreſſion maye be reduced to fiue pointes, which are, Place, meane, matter, time, and the retourne frō the digreſſion. As cōcerning the place, this is to be obſerued that digreſſion oughte to be added vnto anye propoſition that is proued. For that is a digreſſion oute of ſeaſon which is made when the matter is not as yet confirmed. Suche a meane is to bee added, which may not interrupt the memorye of learners, wyth troubleſome tediouſnes: For they teache vnluckelye, whoe neglectinge the doctrine, and beinge vexed with ſome ſmall iniurye, doe declaime, and ſpende whole houres againſte ſome one or other, whom they thincke haue offended

theym. The matter of digreſſion appertayneth to exhortations, conſolations, chidinges, but not to euerye ſorte. For ſuch oughte the matter of Digreſſion to bee, that of his owne accorde, it maye ſeeme to flowe oute of the Doctrine, and not to bee fetched anye where els. For excepte the force, and nature of Learninge, do offer the matter of digreſſion, it can make nothinge to edification at all. This precepte is therefore more dilligentlye to be obſerued, becauſe often tymes they that are vnexerciſed offende againſte it, not withoute great iniurye of the woord of GOD, and hurte of the hearers. In the fourth place I haue put downe Tyme, which of neceſſitye requireth a Digreſſion, for when the hearers doe eyther abhorie the Doctrine, eyther are ſomewhat more ſlouthfull, or els be faint harted, then are they to be chidden, prouoked, and comforted. The retourne from the Digreſſion, oughte not to be violente, but the ende thereof oughte to bee applyed, that it maye bee ioyned with that parte of the Sentence, from whence the Digreſſion was made, whiche canne be ſcarcelye broughte to paſſe, vnleſſe

the force of the doctrine haue ſhewed the matter of the Digreſſiō: or ſome figure beinge added, it maye haue recourſe to the doctrine.
               As ſone as bleſſed LVTHER began to defende the doctrine of the Goſpell againſte the tyrannye of the Pope, there was neede of more ſharper prickes, and therefore hee was more oftner occupied in Digreſſions, as maye appeare by his writinges. But now (the doctrine is fortifyed and eſtablyſhed, and a more peaceable eſtate reſtored to oure Churches) wee muſte vſe theſe ſharper prickes more ſparinglye. Furthermore becauſe neyther the vocation is a like, neither the aucthoritye of all men equall, newe Preachers wyll thincke it to be a parte of modeſtye, ſeldome to wander beyonde the marke. Notwithſtandinge if any ſhal require examples of the Digreſſion of theſe preceptes, let him reade the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, for that onelye wyll myniſter a greate nomber of examples.
            
            
               ¶ Of Artificiall concluſion.
               
                  I Haue toulde you before, what manner of concluſion, oughte to be added in the expolition of euerye argumente. In this place wee muſte ſpeake of the concluſion of any place or whole Sermon, where in theſe thinges are to be obſerued. Firſt the place explicated, is to be repeated in one propoſition. Secondlye a ſhort reconinge of Argumentes is to be ordayned, and eſpeciallye of the chiefeſte Chapters. Thirdlye the illation, or inference maye followe in the which three thinges maye bee ioyned which are to be finiſhed in three propoſitions: what the preſente place teacheth, what it confuteth, and what it admoniſheth vs of. Fourthlye, al thinges are ſo to be diſpoſed, that the paſſage maye be more eaſye into the place followinge, if manye are to be expounded: as for example, the place which I proponed aboue beinge declared: That no man of his owne power is able to fulfil the Lawe of God, this cōcluſion were not vnprofitable (the repetition of the place) whoe nowe after this will thincke himſelfe to be able of his owne power to fulfill the lawe of God (the enumeration

of argumentes) when as not onelye experience and nature do deny it, the ſcripture in euery corner by manifeſt teſtimonies doth confute it: but alſo the ſacrifice of the ſame doth teache a farre contrary thing (the Illation) wherefore this place teacheth vs all to acknowledge our weakenes and ſynne, confuteth the Iuſticiaries, whiche do boaſte of the righteouſnes of the lawe, and admoniſheth vs all, that confeſſing our ſinnes & weakenes, wee ſhoulde flie vnto Chriſte, (the tranſition) whome the Goſpell offereth vnto vs, whereof wee muſt ſpeake preſentlye.
            
            
               ¶ Of that kynde of Sermon whiche conſiſteth in exhortation called Parainetical kinde.
               THe firſt kinde of preaching being expoſided after a ſorte (whiche becauſe it conſiſteth in teaching, I haue named, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Now followeth the other the pareneticall kinde whiche therefore I will more briefly handle, for that very ſeldome it is had alone, and by it ſelfe, for moſte commonly it

is wonte to be myngled with the doctrinall kynde. The parenetical kynde is that wherby we perſwade or diſſwade, wee comforte or rebuke the hearers. From hence ſpringeth a three foulde pareneticall Sermone, to witte perſwaſible, comfortable, and rebukeable, of the whiche theſe thinges in order are to bee declared. Firſt the difinition, next the inuention, and afterwardes the treatiſe, to whome I wyll ioyne moſte briefe examples, to the intente the preceptes more eaſelye maye bee vnderſtanded.
            
            
               ¶ Of the perſwaſible Sermon.
               THe perſwaſible Sermone is, whereby wee perſwade the hearers, either to doe, to ſuffer, or to forſake ſome thinge. The places of inuention in this kinde are theſe eſpecially: the neceſſitie of the cauſe, of the commaundement, of the vocation, the priuate and publique commoditie, the dignitie of the perſone and the thing. Examples olde, newe, Chriſtian, Ethnicke: Alſo parables, and ſentences, the profes, confirmations, and exornations, of all theſe maye be ſprincled

here, and there, and as I haue ſayde before in the Logicke Methode, the exhortations, conſolations, and rebukes, muſt be myngled with the figure of digreſſion So here with the Methode of Confirmation, the pareneticall places oughte to bee confirmed. Moreouer, in this treatyſe, fower thynges mete together, the occaſion, the propoſition, the confirmation, and the concluſion: The occaſion reciteth the cauſe of the exhortation. The propoſition muſt bee amplified, and multiplied, and oftentimes with other wordes, and figures muſt be iterated. The cōfirmation is to be ſought for, out of the places nowe rehearſed, in whiche confirmation moreouer, there are twoo thynges, to be conſidered, the degree or ſteere, and the figure. The degree maketh vs by little and little, to aſcende from lighter, and leſſer matters to weyghtier thynges, and of more importaunce, and ſo to moſte weyghtie and greate matters. Otherwyſe exhortation is of no eſtimation, or pryce. The figure dothe not onelye ſerue the affections, but alſo (yf I may ſo tearme yt, maketh the oration more ſharpe and wyttye, to the ende it may

altogether pearce into the myndes of the hearers, and ſo poſſeſſe the whole harte it ſelfe. Hereunto interrogation, ſubiection, exclamation, admiration, dubitation, hypotypoſis, dialogiſme, A
                        •
                     topo
                        •
                     a, and others of the like ſorte, whiche are named and expounded of Rhethoricians ought to be referred. The concluſion, which I haue made the fourth part of the treatiſe, hath no neede of newe preceptes, but is to be confirmed by the ſame meanes, whiche is aboue declared, notwithſtanding to the ende that the vſe of the preceptes, may be ſeene, I wil ſet down one example onely.
            
            
               The example of the perſuaſible ſermon.
               THe occaſion, becauſe I ſee many ſlacke & ſlowe to heare the worde of God (propoſition) I haue determined brieflye to ſtirre you vp to the loue of the heauenlye woorde, whereby ye are compelled to the more dilligent hearinge and kepinge of the doctrine brought vnto vs from heauen. (the paſſion of the mynde) although it is to be lamented that mortall men be ſo vnmindefull of their

ſaluation, that they haue nede of prickes, to the ende they may make ſpede thether, whether they ought to be caried with al violēce. (The neceſſitie of the cauſe) for therfore ſuch a ſlothfull heauines is rooted in our mindes becauſe we do not conſider, as wee ought to do, what is the neceſſitie of the heauenlye worde: can any man vnderſtande the will of God without his worde? verely if the wiſdō of the worlde as Paule truely affirmeth) is but fooliſhnes before God, it can not come to paſſe that wee ſhould knowe the wylll of God, vntil we haue vnderſtoode, the fooliſhnes of the fleaſhe. (The neceſſitie of the commaundement) truely the commaundement of God the father, doth ſeme to ſlippe out of our myndes, whoſe wordes do ſounde from heauen: This is my welbeloued ſonne heare him. The ſonne him ſelfe doth deſire, that his woorde may be heard of them that are his: My ſheepe here my voyce: whereof it followeth: that thoſe whiche do contempne the voyce of Chriſte, whiche he ſoundeth by his miniſters, are not his ſheape. The holy ghoſte, by the voyce of the Prophetes, and of the Apoſtles, dothe inuite and call vs to the lawe, and the teſtimonie. Therfore who

arte thou whiche deſpiſeſt the commaundement of the eternall father? Who art thou that deſpiſeſt the ſonne whiche ſuffered for thee, calling thee to the hearing of his word? Who art thou that refuſeſt the dominion & rule of the holy ghoſt? (the neceſſitie of the vocation) we are ſo forgetfull from whence, and wherto we are called: are we not by the worde brought out of the darkenes of Sathan into ye marueylous light of God? This worde hath called vs, this worde hath made vs Chriſtians, but wee in the meane ſeaſon being vnmindefull of ſo glorious a name, haue contemned the miſterie of ſaluation. (the profit) but and if this royall and noble vocation moueth vs not truely, the reaſon of our proper cōmoditie ought to moue vs: where withall we perceiue that euen ye very brute beaſtes are touched. But who is able by any reaſon of man or of Aungels, to recite at the leaſt but certen porcions of this cō
                  moditie, ſpecially when Paule after Eſaye ſayth, the eye of man hath not ſeene, neither the eare hath hearde, neyther hath it aſcended into the harte of man what thynges God hath prepared for them whiche loue hym. Neyther yet is there any cauſe, why

anye man ſhoulde dreame that hee loueth God, whiche doth not heare his woorde nor meditate it, neither compareth it together, that the miſſerie which lieth hidde therein, may by little and little be of him the better vnderſtanded, for Chriſte the euerlaſtinge worde of God, ſayth: He that loueth me wil kepe my ſayinges, and my father will loue him. To this loue of ye father, & of the ſonne there are annexed greater good thinges, then whiche by mans capacitie maye bee perceiued. Although Paule hath comprehended, the ſumme of them in theſe wordes: The Goſpell is the power of God vnto ſaluation to all beleuers. O fooliſhe man, O ſtony harte, that deſpyleth, reiecteth and treadeth vnderfoote ſo great a ſaluation offered. That wee may prouide for the belly. What do we not? do we not learne artes? do wee not ſayle vpon the Seas? wee flye no froſte, wee refuſe no heate, we ſlomber at no tyme, to the ende wee maye prouide for our miſerable bellye. When theſe thynges are readye to peryſhe, wee are moued, and in the meane ſeaſon wee leaue our ſaluation. So great is our madnes, ſo greate is our peruerſnes, & wickednes, we poore miſerable

wretches are ſo muche infected, with the poyſon of ſathan, that we would with more willing mindes dye in our wickednes, then take holde of the ſtretched out arme of God and ſo to be ſaued. But when wee haue nothing els to do, then wee heare the worde of the Lorde, and that with leſſe reuerence truly, thē thoſe three halfpeny ſeruaūtes which in times paſt did heare Eſope reciting of his fables. Would to God this our negligence were not an euident ſigne of the puniſhmēt of our ingratitude. (The dignitie of the perſone & of ye thing) who would haue thought at any time that men are ſo obliuious, that they ſhould be vnmindefull of their promiſe made in baptiſme, for there they are conſecrated to the bodie of Chriſte, and are made his members, that they may be fellowe cō
                  paignions with him of heauenlye thinges: neither can we by any other meanes abyde in the body of Chriſte, then by faythe which commeth by hearing: here, not without a good cauſe a mā may doubte, whether this may be aſcribed to our madnes, or dulnes, that wee oftentymes, moſte vngratefullye do reiecte, ſo greate a dignitie whiche wee haue in the body of Chriſte, and ſo greate a

treaſure of heauenly goodes, which we poſſeſſe by Chriſt. (examples.) It is maruell that we are not made more wary by other mennes harmes. It is a wonderfull thinge that it ſinketh not into our myndes, howe all the worlde periſhed in the floode, for the contempte of Godswoorde. Wee are not moued by the examples of the holye patriarches, Abell, Seth, Enoch, Noe, Abraham, and of a greate ſorte, who nowe enioye the moſte ioyfull preſence of God in heauen. I reioyce ſaythe Dauid when it is ſayde to mee, let vs goe into the houſe of the Lorde. But we on the contrarie ſide reioyce, whē the worlde dothe inuite vs to pleaſures, wherewith not withſtandyng wee are bayted tyll at the lengthe we hange, ſnared and taken vppon the hooke. Bleſſed is hee ſayth the ſame Dauid, whiche dothe meditate in the Lawe of God daye and nyghte. But wee (O griefe to tell) do not otherwyſe flye from the meditation of the heauenly worde, then if all theſe thinges which are ſet before vs in the worde were but fearfull thynges to feare chyldren withall. The Tomuri prieſtes of Dodonae, neuer departed out of the temple whiche notwithſtanding

did embrace deueliſhe ſuperſtition, in ſtede of the worde of God: wee neuer, or ſeldome, do enter into the churches, who are not withſtanding enſtructed by the worde, & by manifoulde teſtimonies, in our religion, but woulde to God wee weare inſtructed, woulde to God wee woulde thynke, that in our hartes, whiche wee profeſſe with oure mouthe and tongue: whiche if wee woulde do, wee would not ſo obſtinatly cōtemne the miniſtrie of the worde. What aunſwere I praye thee, wilt thou make to the ſonne of God, when he in ye laſt day ſhal ſhew to thee his woundes? when hee ſhall accuſe and condemne thee, for his bloude cruellye troden vnder thy foote, then ſhall that verelye happen vnto thee, whiche the Lorde hath fore ſpoken ſhall comme to paſſe: that for ſhame and the iuſt iudgement of God, with the wicked companie of the damned, thou ſhalt ſay to the mountaynes fall vpon vs, & that for this cauſe, leaſte thou ſhouldeſt beholde the face of the ſonne of God, whome here thou haſte deſpyſed, whoſe worde thou haſte here reiected, whoſe bloude thou haſt cruelly trodden vnder foote, whome ſtretching out his armes, wette and beſpotted

with bloude, and deſyrous to delyuer thee out of the mydle of death, and the Iawes of Hell, thou wretche haſte deſpyſed: A wretche in deede, and ſuche a one, as the iuſt iudge, (vnleſſe thou repent) wyll caſt into euerlaſting darkeneſſe, and pryſon. (The concluſion.) Let vs praye vnto God therefore, that hee woulde conuerte vs, by whom beinge conuerted, wee mighte bee moued with the ſweetenes of the woorde of God, that hee woulde ſtyre vs vp with his ſpirite, to heare the worde of ſaluation, by the whiche wee maye learne, the wyll and true worſhipping of God, by the whiche ſo many cōmodities, come to vs, by yt which ſo many Patriarches, Prophetes, Apoſtles, Sainctes, Martyres, and manye other godlye men, haue obtayned ſaluation, by the which the righte waye is ſhewed to vs, by Ieſus Chriſte our Lord: to whom with the father and the holy ghoſte, be prayſe honour & glory, worlde without ende. Amen.
               This example of a treatiſe, after a ſorte, doth ſhewe the vſe of the places of inuention: I haue myngled a fewe figures, I haue ſome what more often touched the propoſition, neyther am I ignoraunte, that

this my treatiſe of example, is farre inferiour vnto the dignitie of the matter. Where fore, I councell them that are ſtudious that whyle they maye, they often exerciſe them ſelues, in declayming in wryting that hereafter they may come the more furniſhed to the function, of the moſte ſacred miniſterie, the whiche to defile with longe pattering, and vnlearned bablinge, is a thing moſte wicked.
            
            
               ¶ Of the conſolatorie Sermone or whiche conſiſteth in comforting.
               THe Conſolatorie or comfortable ſermon is, wherein the preacher, doth lift vp the man afflicted, and ſtriuing vnder the croſſe, leaſte being ouercome with impatience, he ſhould be ſubdued, and ouercomme with ſorowe. Theſe are eſpeciallye the commune comfortable places. The firſte is the wyll of the heauenly father. The ſeconde, the condicion. The thirde, the promiſe of deliueraunce. The fourth, the nececeſſitie of the conformitie of Chriſte, and his mēbers. The fifth, the commoditie whiche is manifould.

For by the croſſe the preſumption of a mans owne power, is ouerthrowen, hipocriſie is diſcloſed, confidence in the fleſhe is ſhaken of, obedience is confirmed, pacience is proued, contempte of the worlde followeth, humilitie enſueth, erroure paſte is corrected, euill to come is taken hede of before hande, faythe is exerciſed, hope is taughte to be repoſed in oure God. Reade more concerning this matter in the places of Philip Melancthon. The treatiſe conſiſteth of occaſion, propoſition, confirmation, and concluſion, euen as in the perſwaſible kynde, to whiche it is lyke, moreouer becauſe it is profitable to knowe a certayne waye of applying of comfortes, I wyll brifly declare the Methode of comforting.
            
            
               The Methode of geuinge of comforte.
               BVt leaſte conſolation ſhoulde be applyed out of ſeaſon, or vnſaylfully, wee wyll diſtinguiſhe. Firſte, betweene pryuate, and publique comfortes, and afterwarde deſcribe the iuſte forme of them both. I call that a priuate conſolation, whiche happeneth to

one alone oppreſſed with ſome griefe or croſſe. I call that commune whiche in the tyme, either of perſecution or of any plagne ſent from God, falleth vpon the whole congregation: But firſte, wee wyll entreate of the priuate, in whiche threateninges are generallye to bee obſerued. Firſte, who it is that is to be lifted vp with conſolations. Secondlye, what it is that doth grieue him. Thyrdlye, a fitte application of the medicine to the preſent griefe. Hee that feeleth payne or griefe, eyther is godlye or vngodlye: If hee bee godlye, ſtreightwaye the cō
                  mon inheritaunce of the ſonnes of God being ſhewed, bee is to be lifted vp, to be comforted, and cheriſhed with conſolations, and that by the places aboue reherſed, and here with muche profite the eight chapter to the Romaines, may be alledged. But if hee be vngodly, it is nedefull as in a greeuous diſeaſe, that a greater care bee applyed, for ſuche a one is not to bee lyfted vp ſtreyghtwaye, but is ſo muche the more to bee caſte downe, with the thundryng of the Lawe of God, and to bee beate downe with threateninges, vntyll hee acknoweledge his owne vngodlynes without hipocriſie, vntyll hee

vnderſtande the wrath of God to bee ſtyrred vp agaynſt hym, vntyll hee crye wyth Manaſſes, that hee is gyltie manye wayes. For hee that applyeth comforte by and by, to a wycked man, eyther ſycke, or otherwyſe oppreſſed with anye calamitie dothe applye a moſte daungerous an vnſeaſonable, and a deadlye poyſon. And doth much lyke to that Phiſicion whiche healeth the wounde outwardlye, the matter of putrifaction remayning within, from whence afterwarde a greater wicked and deadly miſchief burſteth out. Wherfore as the ſkilfull Phiſition, the tent being put in often, draweth out the corrupt matter, whiche beiynge drawen foorth, couereth the wounde ouer with a mollifying playſter: So the godlye preacher, ſhould firſte touche the byle of the wycked man, by the threatening of the law, that his diſeaſe beynge knowen, maye the more eaſelye bee cured, for it is truelye ſayde, that the firſte ſteppe to healthe, is to knowe the diſeaſe. The ſeconde thynge, which in conſolations I haue ſayde, ſhould be conſidered, is the thyng whiche cauſeth the grief, or ye thing which doth greue him, whiche I thinke needefull to bee examined,

for the righte application of the medicine, for hee is otherwyſe to be lifted vp, whiche by his owne faulte hath brought a miſchiefe vpon hym ſelfe. And he alſo otherwyſe to whome by an other mans faulte, euill happeneth. For if any man by his owne faulte hath brought a croſſe vpon him ſelfe, as infamine, pouertie, ſickenes, death, &c. The medicine or comforte is not to bee applied forthwith vnles thou ſee the guiltie perſon earneſtlye touched with the feeling of his ſynnes, for then this feeling of ſynnes, is to be confirmed with the worde of God, and to be augmented, if neede ſhall require. Then wee muſte deſcende to conſolations: but if hee bee either an hipocrite, or otherwyſe wycked, ſo longe the curſe of the Lawe, and the wrath of God are to bee ſet before his eyes, vntyll hee knowe the greuouſnes of his ſynnes, and confeſſe the ſame to hym ſelfe oute of the gryefe of hys mynde.
               But if hee cannot bee broughte thereunto by the Lawe of God, and threatenynges, a precious ſtone is not to bee caſte before Swyne. On the contrary parte: If the guyltie perſone, ſhall bee broughte to the knoweledge of hym ſelfe, and bee touched

with the true feeling of griefe, for his ſinne committed: then at length the arte of Phiſicke is to be applyed, and theſe three in order are to be expounded. Firſt his fall, next the puniſhment, and laſtly the ende of both. The fall is to be taughte firſt to proceede of this, in that he did caſte from him the feare of the Lorde: and that may be confirmed fitlye and plentifully out of the firſt Chapter of S. Paule to the Romaynes. Secondlye that nowe the deceites of the deuill, the filthines of the fleſhe, and the wantonnes of the worlde, mighte more eaſelye preuaile againſt him, being as it were vnarmed. The fall beinge declared, and confirmed wyth theſe cauſes. In the ſeconde place, wee muſt declare, that the puniſhment, is in no wiſe equal with the offence committed, but is a teſtimonye of two moſt contrarye thinges that is to ſaye of the wrathe of GOD and alſo of his fatherlye good will and clemencye: of the wrathe of God, if the guiltye perſon will not repence, and not ſuffer himſelfe to be corrected, with the ſcourge of God: Of his fatherlye good will and clemencye, if hee being corrected, be made better by the puniſhmente, and will flye to the

hauen of repentaunce. After this in the thirde place, the ende both of the fall, and alſo of the puniſhment, is to be declared. Of the fall to thend afterward he may be more circumſpecte and warier. Of the puniſhmente in that by the ſinguler councell and purpoſe of God (when in the meane tyme hee ſpareth manye wicked and miſcheuous men) hee is chaſtened, not to the ende hee ſhould periſhe, but that he may haue a ready teſtimonye of his fatherly good will towardes him. But becauſe this will verye hardly perſwade him that laboureth vnder the Croſſe, witneſſes and examples are to be broughte forth oute of Gods worde, ſuch teſtimonies verelie as theſe are: Paule the 1. Epiſtle to the Corinthiās ye 11. Chapter ſaith, that we are chaſtened with aduerſity of the Lord: leaſt we ſhould be damned with the world. See, the end of the Croſſe is, leaſt we ſhould be damned, if to witte being admoniſhed by the Croſſe we repent againe.Pro. 16. My ſonne (ſayth Salomon) do not refuſe the correction of the Lord, neither be thou weary whē thou art reproued of him, for whom God loueth hee chaſteneth, & yet embraceth him as ye father doth his ſonne.

The aucthour of ye Epiſtle to the Hebrues the 12. Chapter ſayth that we are baſtards and not ſonnes, if wee be without diſcipline and correction, ſuche like places are moſte fitte, wherewith the minde of the guiltye perſon now beinge penitent, maye be lifted vp, that nowe he woulde ſuffer any kinde of puniſhmente as one readye to obeye Gode let the examples be Manaſſes, Dauid, the ſiſter of Moſes, Kinge Vſias, the people ledde into Captiuitye, and manye others, whiche were puniſhed for certaine ſinnes, and after throughe repentaunce, haue retourned home againe. The example of the theefe in compariſon of others is famous, who hath ſet foorth a notable example of patience and fayth. Hee did not therfore compte himſelfe an abiecte becauſe hee ſuffered ſoe ſhamefull a death for his wickedneſſe, but pacientlye ſuſtayned the deſerued puniſhmente, by Faythe repoſed in CHRISTE. After ſuche like teſtimonies & examples, wherwith the iudgemēts of God are to be made knowne, in cōparing the manners of men in oure age, with the maners of the people in the olde time: For God is alwayes like to himſelfe: (whether

thou haſt reſpect to puniſhment or mercy) the common places before mencioned maye be added. But if that which greeueth him doe come through an others mans faulte, that order in applyinge of comforte is to be folowed, which in a common comfort I am aboute to declare, whereto we muſt ſpeake at this time. That common comfort therefore maye be rightlye framed, three thinges are to be obſerued. Firſt from whence cō
                  mon calamitie procedeth. Secondly which be cauſes thereof. Thirdly the applyinge of the Comforte according to the difference of the calamity and of the cauſes. The calamity is eyther ſent frō God, or els brought in by the ennemyes of our Common weale. If the calamitye be of God, as the plague, wante of foode and vittaile, droughte and tempeſtes, the cauſes are not to be ſoughte for without vs, but in our owne houſes, and within our ſelues, for the ſinnes of perticuler men are the cauſes of common calamities, and oftentimes for one mans fault the whole common wealth is plagued: whereof Acham, Dauid, Oedipus, and manye others are witneſſes, who by their owne wickednes haue brought in a common calamitye.

Here it is no harde matter to applye a comfort, if wee will followe the examples of the holy Prophetes: for the examples of them do teache vs, what is to be done: for they are wont openly to rebuke wickednes, and that after three ſortes or kindes of wickednes, to witte: The forſaking of God, hypocriſye, iniurye done to the neighboure and ſuch like, as moſt chiefelye ſeeme to abounde amonge the people. Examples are extant heare and there in the wrytinges of the Prophetes. Againe they are wonte to call publickly together al the congregation to repentaunce, faſtinge and prayer, Certaine notable examples of theſe two thinges are of late yeares ſet forthe, at the commaundement of our moſt noble King, by the myniſters of oure Churches, not withoute greate profite and mittigation, of deſerued puniſhmentes. Laſt of al the Prophetes were wont to admoniſhe them, whō they perceyued to bee defiled with wickednes, more then others, leauing an example to oure myniſters of the worde, that they ſhould admoniſhe, rebuke and correct them priuatelye) whom they perceiue, by theyr idolatry, vſurie, adulterye, tirannye, deceites,

couetouſnes &c. to bring in a plague to ye whole cōmon wealth. Tyreſias, although he were an Ethenicke prieſt did call Oedipus the tyraunte, (for whoſe miſcheuous deede, the Theban cōmon wealth was puniſhed with the peſtilence,) to painefull penaunce. And after this maner Eſaye and Ieremye haue corrected and reprehended the kinges of their time, and haue aſcribed common calamities vnto theym. And the miniſters of the word ought to knowe that this is not the leaſt part of their function & duty, which if they neglect eyther for feare or ſluggiſhnes, they ſhall ſuffer greeuous puniſhments of God, as in the threatnings of Ezechiell is declared, and els where.
               But if either priuate or publicke calamitye doe come from men, it is either for Iuſtice or not. If for Iuſtice, wee muſte then take the comforte from the common condition of the ſonnes of God in this worlde, & declare of how great honour God reputeth vs worthie, yt hee hath marked vs with a peculier proper marke of his warfare and exerciſe. Wherefore the Apoſtles being ſcourged do reioyce for that they are counted worthye to ſuffer reproche for the name of Chriſte:

For this kinde of croſſe is moſt proper vnto the faithfull, wherewith Chriſte wilbe glorifyed in vs, euen as S. Peter teacheth in the fourth Chapter of his firſt Epiſtle.
               But if not for Iuſtice the common calamity be broupht vs from men, then the cauſes are to be ſoughte oute in our ſelues, and as before I haue ſaid wheras I haue ſpoken of the Croſſe or affliction ſent from God: the comforte is to be applied. Out of theſe I thincke it is manifeſt by what waye & meanes both priuate and publicke comforts are to be applyed.
            
            
               ¶ Of the chidinge Sermon.
               THe Chidinge Sermon is that in the which the preacher chydeth eyther the loytring or the offendinge, or the ſtubburne and diſobediente hearer. The ende of this oughte to be the correction and the amendment of him which is rebuked. Here theſe places are chiefely to be conſidered. The firſt, the filthines of the thinge committed. The ſeconde, thinges adioyninge or appertayning: as are an euill, conſcience, the peril

of reiection, or to be a caſte a waye, and the feare of God, his iudgement hanging ouer our head, and of the preſent and euerlaſting paynes. The third a conference together of the dignity of the perſon and of the filthines of the thing. The fourth, examples. The fifthe the knitting or ioyning together of the perſon, as Chriſte our head and king, the Church which is the ſpiritual country, our body which is dedicated to God, that it may be ye tēple of God, hereunto the cōmon weale the houſe the familye &c. maye be referred. When I recken theſe places, I doe not thincke that all are to be applyed in euery chiding, but now theſe, ſometimes the other, euen as the wiſe Preacher ſhall ſee to be expedient. Let the example be taken out of the firſt Epiſtle to the Corinthians & the 6 Chapter, where S. Paule rebuketh fornicatours. The Methode of a treatiſe is not vnlike to the treatiſe of an exhortation. Wherfore I thincke it not needeful to adde any example: eſpecially, whē the places are ſo plaine, and it is knowen that all thinges are to be proued, allowed, and garniſhed by the Methode of confirmation. But here I thoughte it needefull to adde twō thinges.

The firſt that the minde of him which is to be chidden, muſt bee mollifyed to heare chidinges paciently, which thing may very fitlye be done, if the myniſter declare his dutye towardes the giltye perſon, and ſhewe the common neceſſity layed vpon him to do the ſame, leaſt the chiding ſhoulde ſeeme to proceede of ſome noughtye affection: So S. Paule did before hand mollify the mindes of the Corinthians, before hee vſed ſower and bitter chidings. The ſecond that conditions of repentaunce may be mingled, leaſt any being diſcouraged, with ſomwhat more rougher chidinges, ſhoulde fall into deſperation or wilfullye kill himſelfe.
               Theſe are the things good audience which I haue thoughte needefull to be declared, to newe Preachers, and I truſte (vnleſſe my opinion do foulye beguile mee) that yonge men ſhal not be a little holpen by declaring this Methode. For all the preceptes which are recited by mee are taken oute of the fountaines of Logitians and Rethoriciās, and are applied to the vſe of the Preacher profitable both to the expoſition of the holy writers, and alſo to the makinge of ſacred Sermons, wyth the which if yonge men

will ſuffer themſelues to be ruled, I doubts not to promiſe them an eaſier proceeding in deuine ſtudies, and makinge of Sermons. But becauſe it is not ſufficiente to haue inuented fitly, or to haue ordered and diſpoſed thoſe things which we are about to ſpeake of wiſelye, vnleſſe bleſſed Memorie be alſo preſent. I will adde a few thinges of Memerie in ſteede of a concluſion to this Methode: and that not after the maner of the olde fathers 
                     〈◊〉
                   did inuente Images and ſignes, which 
                     ••
                  re as certaine notes and helpes of Memorie, (for this ſubtiltye of witte, I willinglye leaue to theym) but I will gather thoſe thinges onelye, wherewith they yt are deſirous to learne to make Sermons, ſhall perceiue themſelues to be much holpen.
            
            
               ¶ Of Memorie.
               LEt vs appointe two maner of wayes of helpinge the memorie, whereof the former is more artificiall, ye latter more rude, and ruſticall: that which is more artificiall doth conſiſt of two thinges, that is to witte, of order and nomber, for by theſe it is manifeſt

that artes are both taught and learned. For as order placeth euerye thinge in his proper place, & conſidereth the beginnings, proceedinges, and markes or ends: ſo doth nomber meaſure thinges together, & their partes and porcions. Becauſe therefore the Methode which I haue taught, doth ſhewe an order of things and as it were nombreth the partes, the beſt way of learning by hart is diligently to conſider the ſame order in ye minde, for it cannot bee, that he which hath conningly framed an order of thinges, and hath obſerued the leaſt pointes of thinges & as it were nombered them, but that he may eaſelye kepe the ſame in minde, and require the ſame againe of it, when and as often as he ſhall haue occaſion to ſpeake: whereby it maye ſeeme a fooliſhe thinge to preſcribe any other way of learning by hart, eſpeciall to thoſe men which are taughte and exerciſed in the art of eloquent ſpeakinge. Notwithſtanding although theſe thinges in very deede be thus, yet are they not forthwith perceiued of all men. Wherefore that theſe may be vnderſtode more orderly, and maye be applied more nearer to the vſe of ye preacher, I will deuide this whole reaſon of

learning by hart which I haue ſaid, to conſiſte of order and nomber, into foure members or preceptes. The firſt is that he vnderſtand the matter perfectly, and minding to preach, do kepe in minde a certaine briefe comprehenſion of the whole matter. The ſecond member is, that he haue the places, that is to ſaye 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   as the Greekes do terme it) by nomber. The third member is, that he make deuiſions of the places, that are to be handled, which is needefull to be comprehended in a certaine nomber, which if it may be done by any Verſe, fit for the ſame, it ſhall not be vnprofitable: as if the vſe of the lawe weare to be expounded. Firſt hee mighte not vnfitly make a thirde deuiſion, which hee mighte comprehende in this Verſe.
               Inſtruit, & damnat ſontes, docet atque renatos.
               In Engliſh thus.
               
                  It doth inſtruct, and eke condemne,
                  all ſuch as godly are:
                  And to enforme the newe borne men,
                  it hath as equall eare.
               
               And becauſe the firſt part of this diuiſiō,

hath many parcelles, and cauſes, he might, comprehende them alſo in this verſe:
Man datum, poenae, pax publica, dux ad Ieſum.
The paynes and the commaundement, and alſo publike peace:
               The guide and leader vnto Chriſte.
               The trewe meditation of the Law (Doctor Peter Palladius, oure moſte watchfull Biſhop, very muche deſeruing of the churches of the Danes, of Noruegia, and Iſelandia) hath comprehended in this verſe: Lex quid eram, quid ſum, quid ero, per quem manifeſtat.
               
               In Engliſhe thus:

                     The Lawe doth make apparant what I
                     was, and what I am:
                     What I ſhalbe it doth declare,
                     and eke by whome it came.
                  
The fourth mēber is, that in certaine places digreſſions into threateninges, conſolations, and exhortations be placed, leaſte in making digreſſion to an other matter, the memory be hindered, and the preacher with drawen from the matter propoūded, which commōly is wonte to happen, to thē which do not obſerue this precept. Nowe when as according to theſe fower preceptes, hee that

will preache hath diſpoſed his Oration, and as it were reconed it. Hee muſt ſettle him ſelfe to learne it accordinge to the order of his diſpoſition. And firſte of all, hee muſt commit to memorie the briefe, and ſummarie comprehenſion, for that is firſt to be recited. Secondly, he muſt learne the places, or the chapters a ſonder. And thirdlye the treatiſe or handlindling of the places with their diuiſions and the parcels of them. I doubte not but this waye of learninge by harte, is the beſt of all, whiche all learned men without doubt do followe. Furthermore, the latter reaſon whiche I ſayde is more rude and ruſtical, is profitable to men vnlearned, which haue not taſted of the arte of Rhethoricke. And this whether it be framed with notes of nūbers, or with letters, it is all one, and it may be done in this mā
                  ner. Firſt, thoſe thinges whiche a preacher ignoraunt of artes will learne by harte, hee ſhall deuide with notes of number, or with euery letter. Afterwarde in repeting, hee ſhall ſee what he hath ſette downe at euery note or letter. Laſt of all, he ſhall learne by harte according to the diſtinctions whiche he hath made, and ſhall demaunde agayne

of euery note or letter, as a thing committed to their cuſtody that whiche before hee had cōmitted vnto them. It will not a litle profite him if firſte hee wryte out his Sermone, and afterwarde according to the preſcript rules do diuide, and learne it by harte. For the minde doth more eaſelye retayne and kepe that whiche the hande before hathe noted.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
            
         
      
   