
      
         
            
            
            A LEARNED AND fruitefull Commentarie vpon the Epiſtle of Iames the Apoſtle, vvherein are diligently and profitably entreated all ſuch matters and chiefe common places of Religion as are touched in the ſame Epistle:
            Written in Latine by the learned Clerke Nicholas Hemminge, profeſſour of Diuinitie in the Vniuerſitie of Hafnie, and nevvly tranſlated into English by VV. G.
            ¶JMPRINTED AT London by Thomas Woodcocke, and Gregorie Seton, and are to be ſolde at the ſigne of the blacke Beare in Paules Churchyarde.
            
               ANNO. 1577.
            
         
         
            
            
            To the godly and reuerend Father, and faythfull Miniſter of Chriſt, M. Alexander Novvell, Deane of the Cathedrall Church of S. Paule in London, W. Gace wiſheth grace and peace from God the father through Christ Ieſus our Lorde.
            
               GOD FROM THE BEGINNING, hath as in a moſt cleare and euident glaſſe, ſette forth himſelfe to be beholden and knowne of vs, euen in his creatures, & in the orderly courſe of the worlde. For when we ſee and conſider the vnmeaſurable greatnes of the worlde, and the partes thereof to be ſo framed, as they could not poſsibly in beautie be fayrer, nor for profit better: we vnderſtande thereby the omnipotent power of God in creating them, his diuine wiſedome in ordering and diſpoſing them, his infinite goodnes in continually preſeruing them, that they runne not to ruine and vtter decay, but are by him vpholden, euen to the neceſſarie vſe and ſuſtentation of mans lyfe. Although this creation of the worlde, and the maruaylous ordering and preſeruing thereof were ſufficient whereby men might knowe God, and worſhip him being knovvne, or elſe be without excuſe: yet it hath pleaſed God of his great mercie to giue vnto vs his worde, wherein he hath more plainly and fully reuealed himſelfe, and his will, to our moſt ſingular commoditie and comfort. For we through the fall of our firſt parentes being become blinde in vnderſtanding, corrupt in deſiring, and wicked in working, are by the worde of God fruitefully of vs receyued, lightned in our myndes, reformed in our affections, and ordered aright in our doings: in ſo much as the Princely Prophet Dauid ſayth, that the meanes whereby a yong man ſhall clenſe his waye, is to rule himſelfe after this worde, which worde alſo he pronounceth to be his delight and his counſeller, yea he perceyued it to be of ſuch vertue and excellencie, that he preferreth it before all worldly treaſures whatſoeuer: I loue, ſayth he, thy commaundements aboue golde and precious ſtone. Agayne, thy lawe is dearer vnto me then thouſandes of golde and ſiluer. But I mynde not to enter here into the worthye commendation of this worde, or to rehearſe the manifolde and moſt ſingular commodities, which redounde to the godly thereby. Onely that which I haue mentioned out of Dauid may ſuffice to declare that it is a treaſure of all other moſt precious.
            Foraſmuch then as the worde of God is a treaſure ſo excellent, what

ſhall we thinke or ſay of the true and ſyncere Preachers and expounders thereof? VVe acknowledge great friendſhip in them, by whoſe meanes we attayne to an earthly commoditie, and howe ſhall we be affected towarde them, which open to vs the way to an heauenly treaſure? VVe thinke our ſelues much beholden to thoſe, which miniſter vnto vs the foode of this fraile life: but vvhat recompence ſhall we render vnto them, by whoſe meanes we come to enioy the foode of euerlaſting lyfe? VVherefore right worſhipfull, if I ſhould render a reaſon of my labour beſtowed in tranſlating this treatiſe into the engliſh tongue, I thinke it were ſufficient if I ſhould ſay no more, but that the word of God is therein ſoundly and ſyncerely expounded. Although I may deſcend vnto particular pointes, and ſhew other weightie cauſes thereof. For you are not ignoraunt howe the Papiſts both haue bine and alſo be grieuous enemies to the doctrine of iuſtification by faythe onely in Chriſt, pretending for their chiefe defence the teſtimonie of S. Iames, where he ſeemeth to attribute iuſtification to workes and not to fayth onely, whoſe authoritie they haue wrongfully wreſted and miſinterpreted. VVhereby they haue not onely erred themſelues, but alſo haue cauſed many other to erre. VVhich falſe interpretation of theirs is in this treatiſe very learnedly and throughly improued, and the meaning of the Apoſtle truly and playnely declared.
            Againe, your wiſedome doth well know, that the myſteries of God are wiſely and diſcretely to be diſpoſed, and not onely the doctrine of fayth faithfully to be taught, but alſo the doctrine of workes diligently to be vrged, both to ſtoppe the ſclaunderous mouthes of many prating Papiſts, and alſo to remedie many abuſes very rife among vs. For whereas the ſyncere preachers of Gods worde doe according to the Scriptures teach, that the bloud of Chriſt is a ſufficient ſalue for the ſore of ſinne, and that we are iuſtified by fayth alone in him, without mens merits, workes, or ſatiſfactions: many ſclaundering Papiſts are not aſhamed moſt falſly to affirme, that they are louers of luſts, preachers of preſent pleaſure, and giuers of libertie to all licentious liuing, and making no ſtore of good workes, doe caſt onely fayth vnder mens elbowes to leane vpon. VVhen as the true preachers haue alway preached, and all the writinges of the godly haue moſt diligently taught, that that fayth, which is not liuely and fruitefull of good works did neuer profite any but to the increaſe of their owne damnation: and contrariwiſe, that that fayth, whereby alone according to the Scriptures, they teach that we are iuſtified, hath good workes neceſſarily accompanying it, not as cauſes of our ſaluation, but as neceſſarie fruites of a liuely fayth, as is alſo in this treatiſe of S. Iames very learnedly and diligently declared. VVhereby not onely the Papiſts are admoniſhed,

that they doe not open their lying lips ſo wrongfully to rayle vpon the true preachers of Gods word, but alſo many other are aduertiſed of their dutie, who by profeſſion are Chriſtians, but in life more then prophane, who are not aſhamed to ſay: if faith iuſtifie without works, then let vs worke nothing, but let vs onely beleeue and doe what we liſt, and ſo like carnall and careleſſe liuers they turne the libertie of the Spirite into wantonnes and fleſhly libertie. But let theſe men vnderſtand, that ſuch prophane profeſſion and careleſſe contempt dooth highly diſpleaſe almightie God, and is diligently detected and ſharpely reproued of his faythfull miniſters, both in wordes and writings, whoſe wholeſome admonitions let them carefully regard, and be aduertiſed and brought thereby to follow in workes that vvhich they profes in vvords, leaſt they deceiue them ſelues, and at the laſt reape moſt bitter fruites of their fayned fayth.
            Not onely theſe are in this preſent treatiſe admoniſhed of their dutie, but many other moſt profitable poyntes of Chriſtian doctrine and godly inſtructions are learnedly handled and liuely ſet forth therin, vvhereby the Chriſtian readers may learne to direct their doinges, and order their life according to the preſcript rule of Gods vvorde. As for them vvhich obſtinately refuſe, or at the leaſt vviſe little regarde ſuch godly inſtructions as God hath in theſe dayes (his name be highlye prayſed therefore) by his faythfull Miniſters both by preaching and vvriting offered vnto them: let them remember that they that are of God heare and receiue Gods vvord, and if they doe the contrarie that they are not of God: let them knovv, if they be novv vvearie of it and come to the lothing of it, that their ſoule is fallen into a daungerous diſeaſe. For as a good appetite to naturall foode is a token of the helth of the body, and to refuſe and loth the ſame is a ſure ſigne of ſome ſickenes or diſeaſe: ſo is it likevviſe in the ſoule refuſing or lothing the heauenly foode of Gods vvord. Againe let them call to minde, that it vvas aunſvvered to the rich glutton being tormented in hell, vvhen he vvould haue one ſent from the dead to admoniſh his brethren, leaſt they came into that torment, that his brethren had Moſes and the Prophets, vvhom they ought to heare, if they vvould auoyde the like fierie flames and helliſh torments. Let them aſſure themſelues that the day vvill come, vvhen Chriſt Ieſus ſhall vvith vnſpeakable maieſtie and infinite power come to iudge the quicke and the dead, vvhen from the furtheſt corners of the vvorld ſhal be heard the ſound of the trumpet, vvherevvith all ſhalbe called to the iudgement ſeate, then the ſecretes of all heartes ſhall be layde open, and the doinges of euery man playnely diſcouered. Then the vngodly and vvicked ones, vvhich haue in this life deſpiſed the vvord of God,

neglected his commaundements and will contayned therein, and not repented them of their wickednes, ſhall in ſtede of comfort on euerye ſide feele extreme dread and horrour. If they looke behinde them they ſhall ſee the world conſuming with fire, if they looke on the right hand, they ſhall perceiue a ſinnefull conſcience accuſing them, if they turne to the left, there ſhall be the deuel readye to receiue them into endeles paynes, if they looke before them, they ſhall ſee a terrible and iuſt iudge comming to iudge them according to their wicked works. VVhereas the godly voyde of all theſe dreadefull terrours, ſhall ſee a moſt louing Sauiour, who ſhall then admitte them wholy into the ful fruition of eternall ioy and bleſſednes.
            Seing then the caſe thus ſtandeth, it is requiſite that all men, which minde to be ſaued, doe ſearch the Scriptures which teſtifie of this Sauiour, doe diligently heare and reade the worde of God, doe vſe ſuch meanes as God hath appoynted to come to the knowledge thereof, and knowing it, doe follow it in their life and conuerſation, yea and doe become moſt heartely thankefull vnto God, that it hath pleaſed him in mercy to ſende to reigne ouer vs, not a tyrannicall Herod to oppreſſe vs, but a moſt gracious Princes ſo in peace and godlynes to gouerne vs, that the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt hath not in any age had freer paſſage, nor hath bin more abundantly and truly preached and ſet forth, which God for his Chriſtes ſake graunt long to cō
               tinue. So farre then ought all to be of from deſpiſing or neglecting the worde and the Preachers and Miniſters thereof, that they ought to acknowledge the enioying of it to be an ineſtimable benefite of God, and to ſhewe themſelues thankfull for ſo great a benefite, not onely in hearing, reading, and meditating of it, but alſo according to their abilitie and power it ſetting in forth and making it knowne vnto other. VVherefore I, according to that ſmall talent, which God hath beſtowed vpon me, haue employed my trauell in tranſlating this treatiſe into our mother toung, that thoſe my godly country men, vvhich are ignorant of the Latine tongue may become partakers of ſuch Chriſtian doctrine, wholeſome admonitions, and godly inſtructions as are contayned therein: VVhich treatiſe, reuerend Father, I thought good to publishe the rather vnder the protection of your name, that therby it might be the more vvillingly accepted, and the better lyked of many, vvho haue of a long time knovvne you to be a learned and faythfull preacher of Gods vvorde, and an earneſt furtherer of all godlynes vvhich God graunt that you may long be, to the great aduauncement of his glory, the ſingular commoditie of his Church, and the dayly comfort of your ovvne conſcience.
            
               Your worships humbly at commaundement, VV. Gace.
            
         
         
            
            ¶Faultes eſcaped in the printing of this treatiſe gentle reader correct as followeth.
            Fol. 17. pag. 2. lin. 5. for tabernanacle, reade, tabernacle.
            Fol. 55. pag. 1. lin. 11.14.16. Paſſe ouer this worde (part) as being ſuperfluous.
            Fol. 62. pag. 2. lin. 21. for dutie, reade, benefite.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The Argument of the Epiſtle of Iames the Apostle.
            
               FOVRE THINGES IN MY IVDGEment are diligently to be vveighed and conſidered in the beginning of the expoſition of euery treatiſe of the holye Scripture, to vvit, vvho is the author of it, vvhat occaſion there vvas to vvrite it, vvhat is the ende and purpoſe of it, and vvhat is the maner, methode, or order of handling it. For theſe four being aptly and rightly declared are as it vvere a certaine light before the reader to guide him to the entrance of euery treatiſe of the holy Scripture. Of theſe therefore I vvill ſpeake in order, vvhereby the argument of this Epiſtle may be the better vnderſtande.
            The author of this Epiſtle vvas Iames the Apoſtle,The author of this Epiſtle vvho & vvhat he vvas. vvho is called the brother of the Lord. He, togither with the reſt of the Apoſtles, vvas not onely the ſpace of three yeares inſtructed by the voyce and ſpirite of the Lorde: but alſo after the reſurrection of Chriſt vvith the other Apoſtles receiued the holye Ghoſt, and a commaundement to preach the Goſpell to all nations, and on the day of Pentecoſt vvas againe by a viſible ſigne authoriſed and confirmed in his Apoſtleſhip. Hereof it appeareth vvhat is to be iudged of this Epiſtle, to vvit,Of vvhat authoritie this Epiſtle is, and from vvhence the ſame authoritie is taken. that vve muſt giue no leſſe credit to it, then to the voyce of God, for the author thereof is the Apoſtle of Ieſus Chriſt, vvho at the laſt ſealed the Goſpell of Chriſt vvith his blood. For vvhen he taught Chriſt to bee the conquerer of death, and to ſit at the right hand of God in heauen, the Ievves did caſt ſtones at him, and at the length he kneeling vpon his knees, and praying for his perſecutours, vvas ſlayne vvith a fullers clubbe, and that not long before the citie vvas aſſaulted by Veſpaſian. VVhether therefore thou conſidereſt the miniſterie of God, vvherin this man did labour, eyther his life, eyther his confeſſion, or his ende, thou haſt a teſtimonie of the infallible truth of his doctrine.
            The occaſiō which Iames had to write, ſeemeth to be double,The occaſion vvhich moued Iames to vvrite this Epiſtle, is of tvvo ſortes. one the perſecutiō of the Church, an other the hypocriſie in many. Hovv great the perſecution of the Church vvas in the time of Iames, the Eccleſiaſticall hiſtorie doth teache at large. For the Ievves were not onelye afflicted by being diſperſed through the vvhole vvorld: but alſo they vvere euen almoſt ouervvhelmed vvith diuers tentations of heretikes and deuels. For as invvardly they vvere moleſted by falſe brethren: ſo outvvardly by tyranes they vvere prouoked to forſake their profeſſiō, ſometime vvith threatninges ſometime vvith promiſes. Hypocriſie alſo did not a litle offend them. For many did profeſſe Chriſt, and acknovvledging him to be a ſauiour, did extoll his benefites, but they liued vvithout a liuely fayth and repentance. VVith theſe troubles vvas the Church then toſſed, vvith theſe vexations vvas the ſpouſe of Chriſt

then afflicted, vvhich vvhen Iames did ſee, he tooke therupon occaſion to vvrite, that by ſome meanes he might remedy theſe euils.
            
               The end and purpoſe of the Apoſtle.Of this occaſion the ſcope and purpoſe of Iames in this Epiſtle may be eaſily vnderſtande. For all which he here ſayth, tendeth vnto this ende, not onely to confirme and ſtrengthen Chriſtians and thoſe that be godly in deede, agaynſt the offence of affliction, vvhom he exhorteth vnto patience, that they ſhould not, being ouercome vvith tē
               tations, giue ouer their confeſſion, but rather looke to the euent and end of affliction: but alſo that he may call backe hypocrites from their errour, whom as he teacheth hovv vayne the boſting of fayth is vvithout a liuely confidence in God and the true fruites of faith: ſo he exhorteth them vnto maners vvorthy of a Chriſtian profeſſion, and dehorteth them from the vices contrarie thereunto, except they had rather ſuffer iuſt puniſhment for their ſtubburnneſſe and diſobedience. The maner or order of handling is ſomevvhat free and bold, as is vvont to be in exhorting and reprouing,The maner and order. vvhich I vvill diligently ſhevv in the expoſition of euerie chapter.
            
               The profite & vſe of this Epiſtle.But hovv neceſſarie this Epiſtle is in our churches at this daye, he may eaſily vnderſtand: vvhich ſeeth that the moſt part that vvil be called Chriſtians, doe boſt of a vayne and a dead faith: VVhich fooliſhneſſe our Apoſtle doth diſcouer and moſt iuſtly condemne. Agayne, he vvhich dayly beholdeth vvith hovv many and ſundry vices (diſcipline more and more decaying) chriſtian people are polluted and defiled, will without all dout confeſſe, that there is neede of ſome Iames, who may freely and boldly reprehend and condemne theſe ſins which are ſo common and rife among vs.The author of this Epiſtle is a glaſſe of godlineſſe & why. Beſides all this the author of this Epiſtle deſerueth to be called a glaſſe of godlineſſe. For whether thou conſidereſt his office, eyther beholdeſt his life, eyther thinkeſt vpon the conſtancie in his confeſſion, or weyeſt the ende of his life, thou haſt both whereat greatly to maruell, and alſo vvhich thou mayeſt deſire to imitate and follow, if thou wilt be counted a true Chriſtian. Thus much concerning the argument,VVhy this Epiſtle & certaine other in the newe Teſtament are called Generall. profit, and vſe of this Epiſtle. Now it remaineth to declare why it is called Generall. The Epiſtles of the Apoſtles, of Peter two, of Iohn the firſt, one of Iude, and this of Iames are called Generall, bicauſe they were not appoynted and written to certayne cities and perſons (as all the Epiſtles of Paule and the ſecond and third of Iohn were) but were giuen to all the godly indifferently, diſperſed in diuers places through the whole world. Some doe call theſe Epiſtles Canonicall, thereby to put a difference betweene them and the Epiſtles of Paule, who are in a manifeſt errour. For the Epiſtles of Paule are no leſſe Canonicall then the Epiſtles of Iames, the Epiſtles of Peter, or of Iohn, bicauſe that whatſoeuer we read in the Epiſtles of the Apoſtles, we ought to embrace it as a canon or rule of the truth.
         
         
            
            
               CHAP. 1. ¶The ſumme of the fyrſt Chapter.
               
               HE exhorteth Christians that they faynte not vnder the heauie burden of tentations, and that by ſhewing the rewarde of ouercomming tentation. And least any impute the beginning of tentation to God, he teacheth both from whēce tentation proceedeth, and alſo that all good thinges are of God, who hath begotten vs agayne by his word.
            
            
               The order and partes of the firſt Chapter.
               THe first part of this chapter is an inſcription.The partes of this chapter are ſix, which are here in order rehearſed. The ſecond a propoſition, wherin he perſwadeth Christians not to be ouercome with tentations. In the third bicauſe it may ſometime be, that ſome being ſeduced with errour doe yeelde vnto tentation, he admoniſheth that wiſedome is to be aſked of God by fayth without wauering. In the fourth, least anye being diſcouraged with pouertie and contempt, doe yeeld vnto tentations he exhorteth both rich and poore vnto true humilitie. In the fift is ſet forth the reward of ouercomming tentation, and the beginning thereof is alſo ſhewed, that the deceites of it may be the better auoyded. The ſixt is an admonition taken of contraries, that God is not the author of tentation, but rather of all goodneſſe, which he confirmeth as it were by a testimony of the goodneſſe of God, ſetting forth the benefite of our regeneration. And ſo this chapter tendeth to one ende and purpoſe, to wit, that we ſuffer not our ſelues to be ouerwhelmed with the heauy burden of tentations. To this ende alſo ſerue the rest.
            
            
               
               
                  The expoſition of the fyrſt chapter with an obſeruation of the Doctrine.
               
               1 Iames a ſeruant of God, and of the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, to the tvvelue tribes vvhich are ſcattered abroade, ſalutation.
               
                  THis inſcription conteyneth three thinges. For firſt it hath the name of the author of this Epiſtle, with a deſcription thereof, and alſo his office. Secondly, the Apoſtle maketh mention of them to whom he writeth. Laſtly he addeth a ſalutation. The author of the Epiſtle is Iames, who by profeſſion was the ſeruant of God, but by office the ſeruant of Ieſus Chriſte, that is,To vvhom the Apoſtle vvriteth this Epiſtle. an Apoſtle. He did write to the twelue tribes ſcattered abroade, and as Peter hath mentioned, diſperſed through the world. In hiſtories mention is made of the manifolde ſcattering abroade of the Iewes. For firſt the ten tribes were diſperſed through the kingdome of Babylon, then the two that remained were leade away into Babylonicall captiuitie, and the captiuitie being ended onely the leaſt part of the tribe of Iuda and Beniamin did returne. To theſe Iewes therefore dwelling here and there, and conuerted to the fayth of Chriſte, Iames doth write, and in the beginning ſaluteth them, or as it is in the Greeke, biddeth them reioyce, ſignifying that the ſureſt way vnto true ioye is fayth in Chriſte. The ſcattering abroad of the Iewes declareth an exceeding great differēce betweene the kingdome of Chriſt, and the kingdomes of the worlde.The kingdom of Chriſt, and the kingdomes of the vvorlde doe greatly differ. The kingdome of Chriſte is not incloſed or compaſſed with certaine boundes in this worlde, but it conſiſteth in a good conſcience, in righteouſneſſe and ioye in the holy Ghoſt, as Paule ſaith. In this kingdome are all euen as many as truely beleeue in Chriſt, whether they be nere at hande or far of. Againe this ſcattering abroade

doth admoniſh vs, that the Church of Chriſt in this world is not tyed (as the Pope thinketh) to any certaine place or ſucceſſion, but rather to the word of God, to the ſacramentes, and to obedience toward the Goſpell.
               2 My brethren, count it all ioy, vvhen ye fall into diuers tentations.
               The propoſition of the firſt exhortation, to witte, that the beleeuing Iewes be not ouercome of tentations. This exhortation is worthely made firſt vnto them, who being driuen out of their countrye, were oppreſſed with diuers iniuries of their neighbours. Whereas he ſaith not ſimply, be not ouercome of tentatiōs, or ſome ſuch like thing, but count it all, that is, full ioye, when you fall into diuers tentations: he putteth a difference betweene the effectes of the tentation of the godly and of the vngodly.The ends of the tentation of the godlye and of the vngodly are diuers. For as the ende of the tentation of the vngodly is ſorrowfulnes and deſperation: ſo the ende of the tentation of the godly is ioye and victorie ouer tentation. When he ſayth diuers, he ſignifieth that the beleuers are not tried with one kinde of tentation, but with many and diuers, wherefore it becommeth Chriſtians to watch, leaſt that they being compaſſed about with diuerſitie of tentations, doe fall into the handes of the aduerſarie.
               3 Knovving that the trying of your fayth bringeth forth patience.
               A reaſon of the propoſition taken of the effectes of the tentations of the godly. For firſt tentation is,The effectes of the tentation of the godly. as it were a touchſtone, whereby the faith of Chriſtians is tryed, we haue an example in Abraham. For they whoſe faithe is not true, in the time of tentation doe depart, according to the parable in the Goſpell, Matth. 15. Contrariwiſe they, whoſe faith is firme and ſure, are made ſtronger throughe tentations, for they are vphelde by the ſpirite of God. Moreouer, fayth being tryed worketh patience, that is, maketh that we doe patiently ſuffer affliction, for hope of

our deliuerance: Wherupon Paule ſaith, that experience bringeth forth hope, and hope maketh not aſhamed, that is, faileth vs not, that at the length we ſhoulde be aſhamed in the ſight of the ſonne of God.
               4 And let patience haue her perfect vvorke.
               
                  We muſt continue conſtant vnto the ende. Matth. 10.22.This is an exhortation to perſeuerance in ſuffering, for the Apoſtle will haue the godly to continue conſtant in patience euen vnto the ende, bicauſe he is bleſſed that indureth to the ende. The word patience in this place ſignifieth conſtancie and perſeuerance in patience. The effecte therefore of patience is conſtant perſeuerance.
               That ye may be perfect and entire lacking nothing.
               
                  The finall effect of the croſſe of the godly.The ende and effect of the affliction of the godly is here declared, which is the perfecting of vs in Chriſt. For all our life time we ought to endeuour to come vnto this perfection, which is dayly poliſhed and fined with affliction as with the inſtrument of God, vntill ſuche time as it be fully finiſhed. This place doth admoniſh vs to ſpeake ſome what of Chriſtian perfection, which Iames defineth here to be entirenes. But bicauſe the Papiſts doe but trifle and dally concerning Chriſtian perfection, it is expedient rightly to inſtruct the godly, that they may know what they ought to thinke concerning the ſame. We muſt vnderſtand therefore,Two kinds of perfection mentioned in the ſcripture. that there is a double perfection commended to vs in the Scripture, whereof the one is abſolute, and is an imputation of the perfect righteouſneſſe and obedience of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte. For as Chriſt by his obedience on the Croſſe doth make a full ſatiſfaction for ſinnes: ſo his obedience to the law imputeth righteouſneſſe, ſo that euerie one that beleeueth, may appeare perfect and righteous in the ſighte of God through the perfection and righteouſneſſe of Chriſt. We hauing confidence in this perfection, doe looke for the glory of immortalitie. An other perfectiō there is in the regenerate

which the word of God commendeth to all the godlye: walke before me (ſaithe the Lorde vnto our father Abraham) and be thou perfect. Chriſt ſaith:Gen. 17.1. ye ſhall therefore be perfect,Matth. 5.48. as your father which is in heauen is perfect. There is no doubt, thou wilt ſay, concerning the commaundement, but it is demaunded wherin that perfection doth conſiſt. We muſt vnderſtand that Paule Philip. 3.
                   vſeth the word of perfection after two ſortes. For he ſayth thus: Not as though I had already attained to it,
                  Philip. 3.12.13.14.15. 
                  neyther were alredy perfect: but I follow if I may comprehend that for whoſe ſake alſo I am comprehended of Christ Ieſus. Brethren I count not my ſelfe that I haue attained to it, but one thing I doe: I forget that which is behind, and endeuor my ſelfe vnto that which is before, and follow hard towarde the marke, for the price of the hie calling of God in Christe Ieſus. Let vs therefore as many as be perfect, be thus minded. In theſe wordes of Paule there is a moſt manifeſt contradiction, vnleſſe we will admitte, that there be more kindes of perfection then one. Firſt he ſaith that he is not perfecte, afterwarde hee numbreth him ſelfe among them that be perfect. There is therefore a double vſe of this worde, for ſometime one is ſayd to be perfect in ſubſtance, as we ſay that a childe is a perfect man, that is in ſubſtance. Sometimie one is ſaid to be perfect in quantitie or degrees, as when we ſay: no man hath perfect obedience according to the lawe of God. After the firſt maner Abraham, Dauid, Paule, the theefe on the croſſe. &c. were perfect. According to the latter maner no man in this life hath bin found perfect, beſide Chriſt Ieſus alone, but that perfection we ſhal obtaine in the lyfe euerlaſting, where we ſhall be made like vnto Chriſte. But that the ſtate of grace in this life is perfection after a ſorte,Definitions of chriſtian perfection taken out of the wordes of Paule. it may be taught partly by deſcriptions, partly by examples. Of the wordes of Paule which I haue rehearſed, this definition may be gathered, that Chriſtian perfection is to forſake

ſinne, to reſt vpon Chriſt by fayth, and to preaſe toward the marke for the price of the hie calling of God in Chriſt Ieſus. Or as Paul defineth it in the Epiſtle to Timothe:VVho may be ſayd to be perfect according to the vſe of the Scriptures. Chriſtian perfection is to fight a good fight, to haue faith and a good conſcience. Whoſoeuer therefore forſaketh ſinne, renounceth lewd and wycked deſires, comforteth himſelfe with confidence & truſt in the mediatour, and endeuoureth to approue his whole lyfe before God, yt his conſcience be not defiled: according to the vſe of the Scripture he is called perfect, and that in ſubſtance, not in degrees. For Chriſt onely was perfect both in ſubſtance and in degrees. But this may more euidentlye be perceiued by examples. It was ſayd vnto Abraham Geneſ. 17. walke before me and be thou perfect.A liuely example of chriſtian perfection. How Abraham obeyed this precept, and how he walked before God and was perfect, it is playnely declared Geneſ. 22. by the commaundement of God, and the obedience of Abraham. But that this may be the better vnderſtande, let vs annex the wordes of Moſes:Gen. 22.2.3.4.6.9. 
                  Behold therfore, ſaith the Lord to Abraham,The commandement of God to Abraham. 
                  take now thine onely ſonne Iſaac whom thou louest, and gette thee vnto the land of Moriah, and offer him there for a burnt offring vpon one of the mountains, which I will ſhew thee. Here thou haſt the precept, the obedience followeth.The obedience of Abraham tovvarde God. 
                  Then Abraham roſe vp early in the morning, and ſadled his Aſſe, and tooke two of his ſeruants with him, and Iſaac his ſonne, and cloue wood for the burnt offring, and roſe vp and went to the place which God had tolde him. And a little after: Then Abraham tooke the wood of the burnt offring, and layde it vpon Iſaac. And afterwarde it followeth: And he bound Iſaac his ſonne, and layd him on the altar vpon the wood, and Abraham stretching forth his hand, tooke the knife to kill his ſonne. By this example of Abraham it plainely appeareth, what that perfection is, which the Lord requireth of his ſeruaunts in this life. God commaunded that Abraham, who was iuſtified before by

faith, ſhould kill his ſonne. Abraham had nothing more deare vnto him then this his ſonne, nothing more ſweete and pleaſant. For he was the onely comfort of life to the olde man Abraham, and to the moſt holy matron Sara. What doth Abraham here? He beholdeth and conſidereth two things, God commanding, and his ſonne, then whom nothing was more deare vnto him in this life. But he preferreth the commaundement of God before the life of his ſonne. Hereupon therfore I conclude, that the perfection of the Saintes in this life is, by faith ſo to obey God,VVhat vve muſt doe if vve vvill be counted perfect in this life. that they preferre obedience towarde God before all worldlye thinges, whatſoeuer. They which are ſo affected, are by good right counted perfect. But they which at the commaundement of God will not kill ſo much as one of their affections, how can they boaſt of this perfection? Let vs propound an other example out of the newe Teſtament.Another example vvhere by perfection and the partes thereof may be perceiued. Matth. 19.21. Chriſt Matth. 19. ſaith to the yong man of whom he was aſked concerning the obtaining of eternall life: If thou wilt be perfect, go, ſel that thou hast and giue it to the poore, and thou ſhalt haue treaſure in heauen, and come and follow me. Chriſt knew that this rich yong man was to muche addicted to riches, and that he could not eaſily turne his minde from them. That therefore this yong man may vnderſtand how farre he is of from the true perfection of obedience toward the lawe, the Lorde biddeth him forſake his riches and follow him. The Lord ſeemeth here to make two partes of perfection, to wit, to leaue and forſake riches, and to follow Chriſt. But we muſt know that as it was a perſonall precept, in the which Abraham was commaunded to kill his ſonne: ſo is this perſonall which is here giuen to this yong man. Wherefore neither of them particularly is to be tranſferred to the generall definition of perfection, but generally onely, otherwiſe neither Noe, neyther Dauid, nor Paule had bine perfect. Wherefore we will applye theſe examples to the generall definition

after this manner: As Abraham, bicauſe by fayth he preferred obedience toward God before the life of his moſte deare and onely ſonne, is ſayd to be perfect, and the yong man following Chriſt, if he had preferred pouertie and liberalitie toward the poore before his riches, had bine perfect according to the ſentence of Chriſte:VVho is ſayde to be perfect and who to be vnperfect. ſo euerye one which by a true faith preferreth obedience toward God, before all thinges of this world, is ſayde in the Scripture to be perfect. And on the contrarie. They which preferre worldly thinges, their owne affections, honour, glorie, pleaſures, and diuers other deceits, before obedience toward God, are vnperfect, yea, they doe but in vaine glorye of the name of Chriſtians. Theſe thinges agree with thoſe which we haue before mentioned out of Paule, of which alſo we gather this definition of Chriſtian perfection:
               
                  The definition of chriſtian perfection.Chriſtian perfection is, imperfection being acknowledged, to preferre obedience towarde God by fayth in Chriſt before all worldly things, and to make good and allowable the whole lyfe before God.Two parts of chriſtian perfection. Of this chriſtian perfection, Chriſt maketh two partes, to wit: to followe him, which is done by true conuerſion: and to preferre obedience towarde him, before thoſe things which are euen moſt deare vnto vs. And hitherto of chriſtian perfection concerning the ſubſtance. But we ſhall then be perfect in degrees when the ſonne of God ſhall appeare, to whome we ſhall be like, bicauſe we ſhall ſee him as he is, and euery one that hath his hope repoſed in him, doth purifie him ſelfe, euen as he is pure.
               5 If any of you lacke vviſedom, let him aske of God, vvhich giueth to all men liberally, and reprocheth no man, and it shall be giuen him.
               Leaſt that any man pretende ignoraunce, whereby he endureth not tentation,To what ende wiſedome is to be asked of God. the Apoſtle biddeth that he which hath not wiſedome, doe aſke it of God, and that vnto this ende, that he may not onely vnderſtande howe to behaue

himſelfe in tentations, leaſt that being preſſed downe with the heauie burden of them, he doe faint and be ouercome: but alſo that he may knowe for what ende and purpoſe God ſuffreth his to be tried with affliction, leaſt that he be depriued of the fruite thereof. God (ſaith he) giueth liberally, for he ſeeketh not any recompence, but onely is liberall of his mere goodneſſe and bounteouſneſſe, and doth not after the maner of men, vpbrayde any with the benefites whiche he hath bountifully beſtowed,VViſedome that teacheth to be patient in affliction conſiſteth in two poyntes. ſo as hee continew thankfull. If thou demaund what wiſedome that is, by which we are taught and inſtructed to beare tentations paciently: I aunſwere that it conſiſteth in knowledge and ſenſe or feeling,The firſt point knowledge is to vnderſtand by the word of God that in all tentation and affliction both the iudgement and mercie of God are to be conſidered.Howe the iudgement of God is to be conſidered in afflictions. Pſalm. 39.11. The iudgement is, that we vnderſtand that we are tempted and oppreſſed with diuers afflictions bicauſe of our ſinnes. Thou doest chasten man, ſaith the pſalmiſt, rebuking him for ſinne.
                  VVhat we muſt know concerning the mercy of God in affliction. Mercy is that we may know that it is the will of God, that we ſhould be vexed with tentations and afflictions, that we may repent vs of our ſinnes, and not periſh with the wicked world. For the Apoſtle ſpeaketh thus, 1. Cor. 11. When we are iudged, we are chastened of the Lord, bicauſe we ſhoulde not be condemned with the worlde. The ſenſe or feeling of wiſedome,The ſecond point of wiſedome in affliction. is to feele comfort and conſolation in the minde, throughe the holye Ghoſte, who ſupporteth vs in affliction, that we fall not, and vpholdeth vs with hope of our deliuerance to come, as we ſee in Iob, who when he was oppreſſed with affliction,Iob. 19.25. did comforte himſelfe with this truſt and confidence: I am ſure that my redemer liueth, and that I ſhall riſe out of the earth in the latter day. Hereupon Paule writeth to Timothe: Remember that Ieſus Christ was raiſed againe from the dead.
                  2. Tim. 2.8.
               
               6 But let him aske in fayth, and vvauer not.
               He preſcribeth howe wiſedome is to be aſked of God, to

wit, in faith without wauering. This place conteineth many poyntes of doctrine:God the fountaine of vviſedome and all goodneſſe. for firſt it teacheth that God is the fountaine of all wiſedome, yea and of all goodneſſe. Secondly, it ſheweth that he is liberall to communicate of the fountaine of his goodneſſe to them that doe aſke. Alſo it declareth that prayer proceeding from faith,Hovv al good things are to be obtayned at the handes of God. is the ordinarie meane by whiche we may obteine and receiue good thinges at the hand of God. Agayne, it giueth to vnderſtand that in prayer is required faith, which reſteth vpon the goodneſſe of the mediatour. Furthermore of this place is gathered, that all douting is farre to be remoued from prayer: for he which douteth or wauereth when he prayeth, doth onely poure out wordes vnprofitably, and prayeth not effectually, whereupon this alſo followeth, that if we muſt not wauer nor dout in prayer, it is but in vayne to make more mediatours.A vaine thing to ſeeke after more mediatoures. For they which ſeeke after more mediatours, doe thinke that they are not heard for the one and onely mediatour Chriſt. Moreouer with this ſaying of Iames diſagreeth the opinion of the Papiſts, who goe about to make faith and douting to agree togither. To theſe may be added that all things that pertaine to the ſaluation of our ſoules, are to be aſked without any conditiō. Finally, the opinion of the Stoicks is here confuted, concerning the neceſſitie of the falling out of thinges: for as wiſedome is here promiſed to him that aſketh it by faith, ſo the wiſedome wherof mention is here made, is not giuen to him that doth not aſke it.
               
                  For he that vvauereth, is like a vvaue of the ſea, toſt of the vvinde, and caried avvay.
                  7 Neither let that man thinke that he shall receyue any thing of the Lorde.
               
               
                  Our faith muſt not vvauer in prayer and vvhy.This is a reaſon, why in prayer he requireth fayth without wauering: for he which wauereth, ſaythe he, is compared to a waue of the ſea, that is, he is vnconſtant. For as the waue of the ſea is driuen ſometime into this

coaſt, ſometime into that, according as the winde and the raging of the ſea is: ſo a man douting now thinketh this thing, ſhortly after his minde being changed, he thinketh an other thing, euen as he is driuen on with erroneous doctrine and blinde affections. Such a man praieth in vayne, bicauſe he is deſtitute of true faith. Theſe thinges ought to admoniſh vs of conſtancie, both in doctrine and alſo in godly exerciſes.An obiection. But perhaps ſome man will obiect and ſaye: there is douting in euerie man therefore there is a firme and conſtant fayth without wauering in no man.The aunſvver. I aunſwere that according to diuers principles both may be, both ſtedfaſt faith and doubting. For if thou doeſt reſpect the ſpirite in the regenerate,Both faith & vvauering are in the regenerate in diuers reſpects fayth is a firme conſent nothing wauering: But if thou lokeſt vnto the fleſh, doubts do oftentimes ariſe, which are the works of ye fleſh, agaynſt which the works of the ſpirit do ſtriue. We haue an exāple of eyther of theſe in Abraham. Ro. 4.
               8 A double minded man is vnſtable in all his vvayes.
               He is here ſayde to be a double minded man,VVho is double minded. which doubteth of the doctrine or wyll of God, ſuch a one bicauſe he is vnconſtant in all his doinges, therefore hath he no ſtableneſſe, or conſtancie in his prayer.The foundation of all godly doings. Let vs therefore in this place note that the foundation of all godly actions, yea and of that moſt excellent worke of prayer, is conſtancie in the doctrine concerning the will of God, & in fayth.
               
                  9 Let the brother of lovv degree reioyce in that he is exalted:
                  10 Againe, he that is rich, in that he is made lovv: for as the floure of the graſſe, shall he vanish avvay.
               
               Bicauſe both pouertie by which all kinde of calamitie as by a particular or an example, is ſignified, and alſo riches, by the name whereof all proſperous ſucces in this lyfe is vnderſtande, may miniſter matter of tentation: he doth very conueniently preuent an obiection, and teacheth both,The poore mans leſſon. that is, the poore man and alſo the rich. He teacheth the

poore man not to faſten his eyes vpō the calamitie of this preſent life, but rather to cōſider that he is exalted, whereby hereafter he being made the ſon of God, ſhall be aduanced vnto the glory of immortality.The rich mans leſſon. He teacheth the rich mā to thinke with himſelfe how fraile and deceitfull the riches of this world are, which as they do not make him bleſſed that poſſeſſeth them, ſo doe they ſone vaniſh away euen as the floure of the herbe. What? doth not Paul ſay, Let him that reioyceth,
                  2. Cor. 10.17. An obiection. 
                  reioyce in the Lorde? Wherfore thē doth Iames bid him that is poore & of low degree, reioyce in that he is exalted, and him that is rich, in that he is made low.
               The Apoſtles doe nothing diſagree the one with the other.The aunſwer. For both of them doe place the foundation of true reioycing in the Lord. Wherfore theſe exceptions are to be held: firſt what good thing ſoeuer we haue, let vs acknowledge that we haue receiued it of God, attributing nothing to our ſelues. Secondly let vs holde faſt this foundation that we truſt to be ſaued through the onely mercy of God. Finally let vs reſt in the onely author of all goodneſſe: with theſe exceptions we may reioyce and that godly in euery kinde of thing that is good.
               11 For as vvhen the ſunne riſeth vvith heate, then the graſſe vvithereth, and his floure falleth avvay, and the goodly shape of it perisheth: euen ſo shall the rich man vvither avvay in all his vvayes.
               He amplifieth the compariſon wherein he compareth the glory of riches to the fading floure,The glorie of riches fitlye compared to the floure that ſoone fadeth away. which when the heate of the Sunne increaſeth, is wythered, falleth away and periſheth. As therefore it is a fooliſh thing to reioyce in vayne riches: ſo the godly man ſhould do prepoſterouſly, if he being diſcouraged with the grieuouſneſſe of his pouertie, ſhoulde be ouercome of tentation.
               12 Bleſſed is the mā that endureth tentation: for vvhē he is tried, he shall receiue the croune of life, vvhich the Lord hath promiſed to them that loue him.
               
                  Before he willed that chriſtians doe reioyce when they ſhall fall into diuers tentations, now hauing confuted thoſe thinges, that ſeemed to be agaynſt his purpoſe, hee rendreth a reaſon of his exhortation. The argument is concluded after this ſort: Bleſſed is the man that endureth tentation,The reaſon why the godly ought to reioyce in tentations. that is which fainteth not vnder the burden of tentation: therefore the godly oughte with good cauſe to reioyce, when they fall into diuers tentations. The antecedent he proueth by the ende of tentation being ouercome after this maner: when he that is tempted, is tried, he ſhall receiue a crowne of life,The bleſſed ende of the tentations of the godly. therefore he may well be called bleſſed. The antecedent is grounded vpon the promiſes of God, vvhich crovvne, ſayth he, God hath promiſed to them that loue him.
                  The Papiſtes abuſe of this place, and the confutation thereof. This place ye Papiſts abuſe to confirme their opinion concerning merites of workes. But the very circumſtance of the place confuteth them. For the Apoſtle dealeth here with them that are conuerted, who being iuſtified before by fayth, do go thorow diuers tentations to the hauen of bleſſedneſſe: Agayne, it is one thing to ſpeake of the cauſe of ſaluation, and another thing to ſpeake of the way, by which we muſt come vnto ſaluation which is free. Neyther is the crowne of life a rewarde due to our fighte, but a free recompence of our labour. For we doe not deſerue a crowne by fighting, but the father giueth it vnto his children of his mere goodneſſe, who conſidereth not ſo much what the children doe deſerue, as what he hath promiſed them of his fatherly loue. Furthermore, if any man obiect:An obiection. the crowne of life is promiſed to them that loue, therfore loue is a merit or deſert of the crowne:The aunſvver. We muſt aunſwere that there is committed a fallacion of that which is not the cauſe as of the cauſe. For the antecedent doth not contayne the cauſe of the crowne, but the qualitie or maner of crowning. And bicauſe there be two principles of things, one that the thinges be, the other that they maye be

knowne what they be,The very principles vvhereby vve are iuſtified and ſaued. we muſt vnderſtand ye concerning God, his mere good will and pleaſure, and the redemption which his ſonne hath wrought, and fayth concerning our ſelues are the very principles, which doe iuſtifie and ſaue vs. But if thou conſidereſt the knowledge of righteouſneſſe and ſaluation,The meanes vvhereby vve are knovvne to be righteous & ſaued. the principles thereof are rightly ſayd to be patience vnder the Croſſe, loue, mercy towarde the poore, and other vertues. For theſe doe make that thou maieſt be knowne to be righteous, and ſaued. Wherupon the Lord ſayth:Matth. 25.35.36. 
                  I was an hungred and ye gaue me meate, I was naked and ye clothed me. By theſe fruites of fayth the angels of God and men ſhall iudge the tree in the laſt day, and thereby ſhall account the righteouſneſſe and ſaluation of the elect. But here of more in the ſecond chapter, where ſhall be entreated of a liuely and of a dead fayth.
               13 Let no man ſay, vvhen he is tempted: I am tempted of God: for God can not be tempted vvith euell, neither tempteth he any man.
               He being about to entreate of the cauſes of tentation, firſt taketh away the error of them which thought God to be the author of tentation,God is not the author of tentation, or of ſinne. and forbiddeth that any man, when he is tempted (that is, when he is prouoked to doe euill) ſay that he is tempted of the Lorde. For God wyll not haue ſinne, therefore he prouoketh not to ſinne, neither is delighted with the perdition of men. Wherfore as God himſelfe is voyde of tentation: ſo doth he tempt no man, that is, he doth not moue him forwardes to ſinne. Thys place doth plainly make agaynſt thoſe that make God the author of ſinne.
               14 But euery man is tempted vvhen he is dravvne avvay by his ovvne concupiſcence, and is entiſed.
               He ſheweth the cauſe and fountayne of tentation, that is,From vvhence tentation proceedeth, and the maner hovve. of prouoking to doe euill. This fountayne or ſpring he maketh to be euery mans own concupiſcence, to the which he attributeth a double effect. For the firſt, it withdraweth

the cogitation of man from that which is good. Secondly, it entiſeth the affection of man, and ouerwhelmeth him vnwares. We muſt therfore ſtriue agaynſt the firſt motions, leaſt that being entiſed by our concupiſcence, we fall into ſinne.
               
                  Of tentation, and the remedie agaynst it.
                  TEntation is a driuing forward or perſwading of a mā to enterpriſe ſome thing, that is, either to commit,VVhat tentation is. or to omit. Hereof there are dyuers ſorts, whych take their differences of their endes.Three kindes of tentation. For there is one tentation of ſeducing or beguyling, there is another of preſumption, another of triall. Of theſe three I wyll ſpeake in order, and ſhewe the remedyes agaynſt euery of them.Tentation of ſeducing what it is. Tentation of ſeducing, is that, the ende whereof is ſeducing or beguiling. By this man is prouoked to enterpryſe ſomething agaynſt the law of God, whereby he being deceiued, is miſerably excluded out of the familie of God, falleth from grace, and becommeth guiltye of eternall death, vntyll ſuch tyme as he repent. For fayth can not abide and and remaine, when man giueth place to ſuch tentation, and knowing and willing doth diſobediently deſpiſe the commaundement of God.Two kindes of tentation of ſeducing. This tentation of ſeducing is of two ſortes if thou conſidereſt the cauſes thereof. For it is eyther outward or inwarde. I call that inward,Inward tentation of ſeducing. whoſe beginning and cauſe is in man himſelfe, to wit, euel concupiſcence: which fighteth togither with a domeſticall tyranne, that is originall ſinne: and driueth a man to offend, that by this meanes the olde man, that is, originall ſinne may obtaine the rule in man. But concupiſcence in euery man is of two ſortes, one naturall, an other of the fleſh. Naturall concupiſcence is that,Naturall concupiſcence what it is and how farre to be approued. by which we do naturally deſire thoſe thinges, which by the right iudgement of reaſon we iudge eyther honeſt, eyther profitable, eyther pleaſant. This by it ſelfe is the worke of God in man, and

by no meanes to be condemned, as long as it keepeth it ſelfe within it owne boundes, that is, whiles it deſireth thoſe thinges that are ſhewed by the right iudgement of reaſon, to wit, thoſe thinges whiche are in very deede honeſt, profitable and pleaſant, by which nature is not defiled but preſerued. Concupiſcence of the fleſh is, when by the corruption of the fleſh we deſire thoſe thinges, whiche pleaſe the fleſh and diſpleaſe God,Concupiſcence of the flesh, and the deſcription thereof. as when we couet after any thing, which is forbidden vs by the law of God. This of Plato is worthely called a beaſt with many heads, of which it is ſpoken prouerbially, Concupiſcence is the firſt beginning of all euells. For it is a moſt fruitefull mother of pernicious children: to this Marcus the Heremite did attribute ſelfe loue.The plentifull frutes of fleshly concupiſcence. Of this do ſpring ſurfetting and drunkenneſſe, couetouſneſſe, thirſt after vayne glorye. Of this ſurfetting come vnlawfull luſtes and all kindes of pernicious pleaſures. Of couetouſneſſe commeth fraud, guile, iniurye, lying, violence, manſlaughter. Of thirſt after vayne glory ſpringeth pride, wicked ambition, diuers ill practiſes, briefly contempt of God and of our neighbour. Thou ſeeſt what a fruitefull mother of all vices the concupiſcence of the fleſh is, which one hath called, and not vnworthely,Fleshly concupiſcence the roote of all miſchiefe. the fountayne of all euel, in aſmuch as it is not onely the euident cauſe of all iniquitie and hatred of God, but alſo it calleth men from that which is good and honeſt. For when men doe ſtudy vpon heauenly thinges, and meditate vpon diuine matters, this commeth, and with entiſements as with certayne cordes draweth them backe. Wherefore Iames doth not without good cauſe affirme, that men are entiſed by their owne concupiſcence. But how ſhal we ouercome the concupiſcence of the fleſh? This beaſt is to be bounde with ſingular art and cunning,By what meanes concupiſcence of the flesh may be ouercome. and to be mortified: but it is bound, not by mans ſtrength, but by a diuine power, that is, by the ſpirite of fayth, which in the man that is regenerate doth ingender

a certayne newe concupiſcence, which is called the concupiſcence of the ſpirite. This, when it is firſt conceyued by the ſpirite of fayth,The flesh in the godly fighteth agaynſt the ſpirite. Gal. 5.17. ſetteth it ſelfe agaynſt the concupyſcence of the fleſh, whereupon there riſeth in all the godly a very ſore conflict betweene the fleſh and the ſpirite. Hereupon is that which Paule ſayth: The fleſh lusteth agaynst the ſpirite, and the ſpirite agaynst the fleſh. But from whence is that concupyſcence of the ſpirite?Concupiſcence of the ſpirite from whence it commeth. It proceedeth from the vertue of the death, buriall, and reſurrection of the Lord, which in time paſt was repreſented in the olde ſacrifices which were firſt bound and then kylled, but all the whole vertue is in the Croſſe of Chriſt. Therefore to bynde the concupyſcence of the fleſh, is to faſten it to the croſſe of Chriſt, that in it it may be mortified, that it be not effectuall to worke. Wherefore this beaſt is then bound, when thou doeſt not thoſe thinges which it commaundeth, it is wholy mortified, when the force thereof is not felt, which commeth not to paſſe before we haue changed this lyfe with death, which is a paſſage to the true lyfe. To the bynding and mortifying of this beaſt,Meanes to bynde and mortifie fleshly concupiſcence. all the exerciſes of godlineſſe muſt be referred, as prayer, reading meditation, ſobrietie, diligence in our dutye, flying of euell occaſions, thinking on the prouidence of God, conſideration of the euell of concupyſcence, the gloryous end of victorye, the ſhame and diſhoneſtye that accompanieth them, whiche ſubmytte them ſelues to this beaſt.The outvvard tentation of ſeducing, which is of three ſortes according to the cauſes therof, which are the world, the deuel, the things that are about vs. Thus much briefly concerning the inward tentation of ſeducing or beguiling, and of the remedy agaynſt it. The outwarde tentation of beguyling, is whoſe beginning and cauſe is without a man, and this may be diſtinguiſhed according to the diuerſitye of the cauſes. Wherefore, ſeeing that ſome time the worlde, ſomtime the deuel, ſometime the thinges that are about vs are the cauſes thereof,VVhen and howe the worlde tempteth vs. it commeth to paſſe that there be three differences of this outward tentation. The world therefore tempteth when it prouoketh to

ſinne by it vanitie and wickedneſſe. Many are ouercome by this kind of tentation. For when they beholde the moſt corrupt maners of men, and ſee them alſo vnpuniſhed, many are allured by this example. Whereupon it is ſayde that an euill cuſtome is the nouriſhing of euel.Remedies againſt the tentation of the world. Agaynſt this kinde of tentation we muſt ſette the glory of the kingdome of Chriſt, wherewith the vanitie of the world being compared is as a ſmoke ſone vaniſhing away. Secondly let vs think vpon the ſhortnes of mans life, which although it maye be filled with the vanitie of the worlde, yet thoſe continuall delightes in the kingdome of God are by infinite degrees to be preferred before it. Alſo let vs conſider how Chriſt the Lord, and many of the ſayntes of God deſpiſed the vanitie and wickednes of the world, looking vnto the price that is ſet before them that runne lawfully.
                  
                     To what ende the deuell tempteth vs.The deuill tempteth men after diuers ſortes, and that vnto this ende, that he may hinder them from being gathered togither into the folde of Chriſt, or that, when they are gathered togither, he may caſt them out agayne, that they ſhould not be ſaued. For there is nothing more pleaſant vnto him than the deſtruction of all men.The engines of the deuell which he vſeth in tempting the godly. And for this cauſe he vſeth eſpecially three engines to inuade the folde of Chriſt. For eyther he corrupteth the doctrine, or raiſeth vp offences, or elſe giueth occaſions of infinite miſchiefes, that I may in the meane ſeaſon ſay nothing of his hypocriſie, tyrannie, and craftineſſe, which he continually vſeth to aſſayle the Church of Chriſt. He entreth into the heart of man, and with ſpeede taketh out the worde of God from thence,Examples of ſuch as were led with the tentations of the deuell. that a ſecure contempt of God maye follow, as in Rabſhakeh: or hatred and wrath agaynſt God, as in Saul: or a furious defending of a wicked opinion, as in the Papiſtes. Such were the tentations of Cain, Saul, Iudas, Samoſatenus, Arius, and in our time of Seruetus, and of very manye other, and at thys

time Satan doth rage much more, than euer he did at any other. For he knoweth that the end of his furie is at hand,VVhy Satan rageth more now then heretofore. and that the ſonne of God will ſhortlye come, who ſhall iudge him with all his members to euerlaſting torments. What remedie is here? the aduerſarie is mightie, the companie of his warriours is great, we haue neede therefore of a moſt ſtrong defence. What I pray you is that? This is the victorie, ſayeth Iohn,1. Iohn. 5.4. 
                     that ouercommeth the worlde, euen our fayth. And Salomon ſayth:Prou. 18.10. 
                     the name of the Lorde is a strong tower, the righteous runneth vnto it,
and is in ſafegarde.
                     How the tentations of Satan maye be reſiſted and ouercome. For ſeeing there is no other waye to ouercome this tentation of the deuel, then a liuely fayth in Chriſt the cōquerour of Satan, yt this liuely fayth may be kindled with earneſt prayer, let vs with exceding care and ſtudie kepe ye puritie of doctrine, wheron fayth dependeth. Alſo agaynſt offences and other practiſes of Satan, let vs fortifie and ſtrengthen our ſelues with the examples of the Saintes, and encourage our ſelues with the hope of our deliuerance, which ſhall be through Ieſus Chriſt, whom we looke for to come ſhortly to iudge the quick and the deade. More defences agaynſt the aſſaultes of Satan, Paule numbreth vp Eph. 6. which ought from thence to be taken.
                  The things that are about vs,Tentation that commeth of the thinges that are about vs. doe aboue meaſure alſo tempt vs. Before vs death, the iudgement of God, hell. Behinde vs our ſinnes that are paſt, many things committed and omitted. On our right hande, power, riches, honour. On our left hand perils, perſecutions, offences, the moſt ſorrowfull ſtate of the Church of God outwardly in this world.Remedies preſcribed. Theſe euels Ieſus Chriſt onely doth remedy, whiles he is poſſeſſed by fayth. For if thou beholdeſt thoſe thinges that are before vs, he hath ouercome death with life, he hath ſatiſfied the iudgement of God, paying the ranſome for our ſinnes, he hath ſpoyled hell. If thou lookeſt vnto thoſe thinges that are behind vs,

it is he onely, which maketh a full ſatiſfaction for ſinnes. If thou ſetteſt the treaſures of all good things in him, the power, riches, and honour of the worlde ſhall not eaſilye drawe thee from Chriſt, neither ſhalt thou giue ouer being diſcouraged with any euils, ſo as thou poſſeſſeſt him by a liuely fayth, and deſireſt his helpe agaynſt all things that doe annoy or hurt thee.
                  
                     The ſeconde kinde of tentation which is of preſumption.Tentation of preſumption is, when a man is prouoked to tempt God by abuſing his long ſufferance, iuſtice, mercie, liberalitie, and many other benefites. This tentation truly is daungerous, for if any man be ouercome of it, he ſinneth more freely and boldly, bicauſe he determineth with himſelfe that God is good and mercifull, and ſlowe to anger,Remedies againſt the tentation of preſumption. as the Pſalme ſayth. This tentation theſe thinges doe chiefly remedie: firſt, a thinking on the ſhortneſſe of lyfe: ſecondly, a conſideration of tragicall and lamentable examples. For many ſinning ſecurely, haue bene ſodenly preuented by the wrath of God, and taken from hence without repentance: thirdly, the very vnworthynes it ſelfe. For what is a more vnworthie thing, than for the chylde to deſpiſe the father, bicauſe he is good to him and mercifull towarde him. Let euery one therefore walke carefully in the ſight of the Lorde, and knowe that it is a deueliſhe furie and madneſſe, to ſinne aduiſedlye and of a ſette purpoſe, or to deferre repentance, bicauſe GOD is ſayde to be long ſuffering, gentle, and mercifull. For he is ſayde alſo to be a iuſt Iudge, which is angrye with ſinnes, and is determined ſeuerelye to puniſhe the vnrepentant.
                  
                     The thirde kinde of tentation, which is of triall.Tentation of triall is, whereby the fayth of man toward God is tried, to wit, eyther when any worke is committed to a man heauie and grieuous to the fleſh, or any affliction commeth to him from God for his trials ſake,Abraham tried with tentation. or when any hereſie agaynſt the articles of our fayth is ſuffred to ariſe. Abraham receiueth a commaundement from

God, wherein he is commaunded to kill for a burnt offering his ſonne Iſaac, his onely heire, which Sara a free and noble matron brought foorth vnto him. This commaundement without all doubt was heauie and grieuous to the fleſh: but what doth Abraham here? He preferreth obedience toward God before this his moſt tender ſonne, then whom nothing was more precious vnto him in this world, and prepareth himſelfe to execute the commaundement of God, Geneſ. 22.Iob tried with tentation. Iob is oppreſſed with affliction in his body, and with many other miſeries, but in patience he preferreth obedience toward God before his owne life and all other thinges whatſoeuer. I am ſure, ſayth he,Iob. 19.25.
                     that my redeemer liueth, & that I ſhall riſe out of the earth in the latter day. Alſo,Iob. 2.10. 
                     shall we receiue good at the hands of God, and not receiue euel? The primitiue Church was tempted with many and diuers hereſies,The primitiue Church tried with tentation. as we are at this day, but as they did, ſo let vs ſet the fountaine of our ſauiour agaynſt all the ceſterns of Heretikes full of deueliſh ſtinch and filthines. Of this kinde of tentation Moſes ſpeaketh, Deut. 13. The Lorde your God proueth you, to knowe whether ye loue the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your ſoule.How we muſt behaue our ſelues in tentation of triall. Agaynſt this kind of tentation let vs ſtrengthen our ſelues with two thinges: with holding faſt the puritie of the Goſpell, and with conſtant obedience toward God both in proſperitie and alſo in aduerſitie,
               
               
                  15. Then vvhen luſt hath conceiued, it bringeth forth ſinne, and ſinne vvhen it is finished bringeth forth death.
                  In the former verſe the Apoſtle compareth concupiſcence to a bayt, wherewith the fiſher couereth his hooke, that he may deceiue and catch the fiſhes: here he compareth the ſame to a woman that bringeth forth children, that he may thereby ſignifie that it is the mother and fountayne of all ſinnes, yea and of all euel. Concupiſcence is then ſayd to

haue conceiued,VVhen concupiſcence conceyueth. when it poſſeſſeth the affection and will, which when it is done, forthwith it bringeth forth actuall ſinne, whereof as it were a certayne iſſue commeth death and damnation. Here therefore is mention made of two kindes of ſinne, to wit, originall and actuall. Originall ſinne is ſignified by the name of concupiſcence,Originall ſin. the proper and next effect thereof. This, although by it ſelfe and of it owne nature it is a mortall ſinne, yet in the regenerate it is pardoned, ſo that it bringeth not death, except firſt it begin to reigne through the euel deſires thereof. Whereupon Paule Rom. 6.
                      ſayth: Let not ſinne reigne therefore in your mortall body, that ye ſhould obey it in the lusts therof.
                     Actuall ſinne. Actuall ſinne is, when we doe voluntarily ſubmit our ſelues to concupiſcence to obey it, and ſuffer it to haue the whole rule in vs.
                  16 Erre not my deare brethren.
                  
                     VVe muſt in no wiſe think that God tempteth any man to doe euill.Bicauſe that many had perſwaded themſelues, that men are tempted of God to doe that which is euel: he doth agayne admoniſh and exhort them, that they ſuffer not themſelues to be entangled with this errour, ſignifying that many abſurd thinges and vnworthy of God doe follow this opinion. But that they may more attentiuelye and gently here the moſt ſtrong reaſon thereof, he doth as it were prepare them, by calling them by the name of brethren, and by a ſignification of his loue, wherwith he embraceth them. For we doe more willingly heare them, whoſe goodwill we perceiue toward vs, when as contrariwiſe we feare the deceites of them, whoſe minds we vnderſtand to be eſtraunged from vs.
                  
                     17 Euerie good giuing and euery perfect gift is from aboue, and commeth dovvne from the Father of lights, vvith vvhome is no variablenes, neyther shadovv of turning.
                     18 Of his ovvne vvill begat he vs vvith the vvord of truth, that vve should be as the firſt fruites of his

creatures.
                  
                  This is a moſt ſtrong reaſon, wherin the Apoſtle doth confute the errour of them, which did contend that God doth tempt men to doe euel, yea and that he is the author of ſinne. But that the partes of this reaſon may be the better perceiued, and the benefits of God toward vs may be more manifeſtly acknowledged,Six reaſons follow in order, which do moſt firmely prooue that God doth in no caſe tempt any to doe euell. I will make a reſolution of the wordes, and will diuide them into ſixe partes, in euery of which I will bring in the propoſition of the Apoſtle, that it may be vnderſtand of what great force this reaſon is to confute the errour of the aduerſaries. Firſt therefore he ſaith: Euery good giuing and euery perfect gift, (that is, nothing at all counterfait) is frō aboue.
                     The firſt reaſon. By which ſaying he ſignifieth that ſolliciting or mouing to doe euell is in no wiſe from aboue, for how ſhould it agree that good thinges and euell ſhoulde flowe out of the ſame fountayne? But if any man doe except that the euell of puniſhment is from aboue, let him againe knowe, that the cauſe, that is, the euel of offence is in man, which God being iuſt doth iuſtly puniſh. Wherefore if thou conſidereſt the iuſtice of God, the puniſhment is not to be called euell but good.
                  Secondly he ſayth:The ſeconde reaſon. 
                     Comming dovvne from the Father of lightes. As Father here ſignifieth the author and fountayne: ſo by the word lights is ment all good things, euen as by the word darkeneſſe calamities of euerye ſorte are to be vnderſtand. Whereof is made this reaſon: God is the father of lightes, that is, the author of all good thinges, therefore he is not the author of darkneſſe, that tentation to euell ſhould be attributed to him. Let this teſtification of the prayſe of God be marked, which belongeth onely vnto him, to wit, that he is the fountayne and author of all good thinges, which ought to admoniſh vs of prayer wherein we maye aſke thoſe thinges which are

good of him who is the fountayne of all goodnes. We ought hereby alſo to be admoniſhed of thankefulnes, that we may ſhewe our ſelues thankefull towards him.The thirde reaſon. Thirdly he addeth: vvith vvhom is no variableneſſe. Theſe wordes ſeeme to be a preuenting of an obiection. For leaſt anye man ſhould ſaye that he is the authour both of good thinges and of euell, he ſetteth againſt that his conſtancie, whereby he is immutable in his doings. Seing therfore variablenes hath not place with God, and that he is manifeſtly proued to be the author of all goodnes, who can without blaſphemie attribute vnto him thoſe thinges that be euel?The fourth reaſon. Fourthly he addeth: or shadovv of turning. Theſe wordes alſo ſeeme to be a preuenting of an obiection. We ſee that the turning and chaunge of the heauenly lights is diuers and manifold. For the ſunne ſomtime ſhineth bright & cleare, ſometime agayne it being as it were darkened is hidden from vs. Leaſt that anye attribute vnto God anye ſuch ſhadowe, he prooueth, that he is free from all ſhadowe of turning. Wherevpon it maye be gathered ſeeing he is alwaye like himſelfe, that nothing but that which is good doth proceede from him. Fiftly he ſayth:The fift reaſon. 
                     of his ovvne good vvill begate he vs vvith the vvorde of truth. This he addeth for examples ſake. For God when we were by our firſt natiuitie the children of wrath and damnation, of his mere fatherly goodwill made vs his children by the word of truth, that is, by the Goſpell. For he which beleeueth the Goſpell, is made the ſonne of God by the ſpirite of Chriſt. Seing therefore God doth vouchſafe vs ſo great honour, who beleeueth that he doth prouoke any man to doe euell?The ſixt reaſon. Sixtly is added an argument of the ende of our regeneration when he ſaith: that vve should be as the firſt fruites of his creatures, that is, that we ſhould be holy. Inaſmuch therfore as he hath begat vs that we ſhould be holy, it is an abſurd thing to thinke that he maketh vs defiled by

prouoking vs to doe euell. When as he calleth the ſaintes the firſt fruites, he alludeth vnto the cuſtome of the lawe, wherby the firſt fruites were conſecrated vnto God, whervpon we are admoniſhed continually to meditate on true holines.The Church and the world differ much. Here alſo he putteth a difference betweene the Church and the reſt of the world. For as the Church is holy and dedicated to God: ſo the reſt of the world wrapped in it filthines is prophane and wicked. Furthermore, vpon this doctrine of regeneration the Apoſtle maketh theſe exhortations following:
19 VVherefore my deare brethren, let euery man be ſvvift to heare, ſlovve to ſpeake, and ſlovve to vvrath.
By the example of Chriſt, Paule, Peter, yea, and of all the Prophetes and Apoſtles, he, by the vertue of regeneration maketh a neceſſitie of liuing godly and holily, for godlyneſſe and holyneſſe is the proper effect of regeneration.The circumciſion of the eares and lips wherein it conſiſteth. And bicauſe God requireth a certayne circumciſion of the eares and of the lips, Iames vrgeth the ſame, and will haue him that is regenerate, ſwift to heare and learn thoſe things which are good and healthfull, but ſlowe to ſpeake. By which ſaying, he will haue firſt that the toung doe not runne before the witte. Secondly, that we doe flie trifling, vayne, and rayling ſpeaches. Thirdlye, that we ſpeake only things neceſſarie, whiche tende to edifying and honeſtie. Herewith very well agreeth the ſaying: Either ſpeake that which is better than ſilence, or elſe altogither keepe ſilence.
                  20 For the vvrath of man doth not accomplishe the righteouſnes of God.
                  What kynde of wrath is here forbidden, is to be gathered both by the reaſon which is vnder annexed, and alſo by the concluſion, yea, by the whole circumſtance of this place. The vvrath of man, ſayth he, doth not accomplish the righteouſnes of God, that is, it doth not execute that,

which God ſpeaketh and preſcribeth,VVhat kinde of wrath the Apoſtle forbiddeth. nay it maketh that thou doeſt in vaine heare God ſpeaking. Wherfore wrath in this place is taken for that wrath, which proceedeth of a deſire to contende, whereby the audience is hindred. The Apoſtle therfore wil haue one to heare another, their affections being appeaſed and quieted. For where tumults and contentions haue place, the righteouſneſſe of God is baniſhed, that is, thoſe thinges are nothing accounted of, which God preſcribeth to vs, and requireth of vs.
                  21 VVherefore lay apart all filthineſſe and ſuperfluitie of malitiouſnes, and receyue vvith meekeneſſe the vvord that is graffed in you, vvhich is able to ſaue your ſoules.
                  This is the concluſion of the exhortation, in which he exhorteth vs that we be ſwift to heare without wrath. This place doth verye well teach what hearers the worde of God requireth.A deſcription of the true hearers of the word of God. Firſt, filthineſſe and ſuperfluitie of malitiouſneſſe ought to be away, that is, the affections of the fleſhe and reaſon ought to giue place to the word of God, that they ſtirre not vp contentions, wherevpon wrath ariſeth. Secondly, meekeneſſe ought to be preſent, which ſuccedeth in ye place of wrath. Mekeneſſe here is as much as modeſtie or aptnes to learne. Thirdly, the mind being thus ordered & prepared, the word which is graffed in vs is to be receiued, that is, ye word is to be receiued by faith which is graffed & implanted in vs by the labour and trauell of the Miniſters. Fourthly, ye effect of the word receyued is added,The effect of the worde of God faithfully receyued. yt by it as by a pricke we ſhould be ſtirred vp to heare more diligently: vvhich, ſayth he, is able to ſaue your ſoules, and that bicauſe fayth is conceyued by hearing the worde of God, whereby man being iuſtified, is enforced to giue himſelfe to newneſſe of lyfe, wherevpon it followeth:
22 And be ye doers of the vvord and not hearers only, deceyuing your ovvne ſelues.
                     
What kynde of hearer the Apoſtle requireth, he declareth in theſe wordes. He will haue that we be not only hearers of the word, as the greateſt part of men is, but doers alſo,VVhat it is not only to heare the word, but alſo to doe it. that is, ſuch, as in whom the word being engraffed, doth take roote, which commeth to paſſe when fayth is conceyued by the worde, and our obedience doth witneſſe our fayth. This Chriſt calleth to keepe the worde, when he ſayth: Bleſſed are they that heare the worde of God,
                     Luk. 11.28. 
                     and keepe it. Moreouer, we muſt note,Two ſorts of doers of the word. that one is ſayde to be a doer of the worde, after two ſortes, to wit, according to the rule of the lawe, and according to the grace of the Goſpell.A doer of the word according to the lawe. According to the rule of the lawe he is ſayde to be a doer of the worde, which doth perfectlye fulfill the lawe, which Paule Rom. 1.2.3. ſheweth by foure moſt euident reaſons, that no man liuing is able to performe. He is ſayde to be a doer of the worde according to grace,A doer of the word according to grace. who by true godlyneſſe doth witneſſe his fayth conceyued by the worde, and doth all his lyfe long as much as maye be in this corrupt nature, meditate vpon true repentaunce. Although he falleth ſometime eyther knowing or through ignorance, he doth by and by through true repentance returne to the Lorde, as infinite examples of the Saints do witneſſe. Why he will haue men doers of the worde,The reaſon why we muſt be not only hearers, but alſo doers of the word. and not hearers onely, he ſheweth when he addeth: deceiuing your ſelues, that is, beguyling your ſelues through deceytfull imaginations, or through your owne ſubtiltie, as not only hypocrites doe, which put truſt and confidence in outwarde workes without true repentance: but alſo many, who vnder the name of Chriſtians beare a Turkiſhe minde. Theſe alway haue fayth in their mouthes, they alway glorie of the benefites of the mediatour although they neuer thinke vpon true repentance.
                  
                     23 For if any heare the vvord and doe it not, he is like vnto a man that beholdeth his naturall face in a glaſſe.
                     
                        24 For vvhen he hath conſidered himſelfe, he goeth his vvay, and forgetteth immediatly vvhat maner of one he vvas.
                  
                  
                     VVhy wee muſt not bee hearers onely he proueth by a worthie ſimilitude.By a very excellent ſimilitude he rendreth a reaſon why he will not haue a hearer of the word onely. The which ſimilitude is thus much in effect: Euen as he that beholdeth his image or ſhape in a glaſſe, doth retayne in his minde a knowledge which ſoone paſſeth away, and a weake memory of his forme, and therefore ſuch a contemplation profiteth nothing: ſo a hearer of the word onelye retayneth no firme and ſure knowledge. For forthwith after he hath heard it, it vaniſheth away, and therefore ſuch knowledge is vnprofitable, and nothing auayleth the hearer.The workes of hypocrites fitly compared to an image appearing in a glaſſe Hypocriſie is verie properly and fitly compared to an image appearing in a glaſſe. For as in a glaſſe although there appeare a certaine ſimilitude, yet it is falſe, inaſmuch as thoſe thinges are repreſented in the glaſſe on the left hand, which are in deede on the right, and thoſe that are on the right hand, are ſhewed to be on the left, and by this meanes there is a counterfayting of the truth: ſo in the workes of hypocrites although there be a fayre ſhewe outwardly in the ſight of men, yet it is falſe, for that thoſe thinges which are vngodly and wicked are counted holy and true. If any man demaund how it commeth to paſſe that there is ſuch a ſlender knowledge and ſo weake a memorye by the beholding of the glaſſe, let him know that the maner of doing according to the philoſophers doth follow the maner of being. For, bicauſe ye image or ſhape in a glaſſe doth but only ſeeme to be, & is not in dede, it commeth to paſſe yt it maketh ſo weake & ſlender an impreſſion in ye mind, as we ſee to be done in certain dreames alſo.
                  25 But vvho ſo looketh in the perfect lavv of libertie, and continueth therein, he not being a forgetfull hearer, but a doer of the vvorke, shall be bleſſed in his deede.
                  
                     He declareth who is to be counted a doer of the word, and that, as I admoniſhed before according to grace,VVhy the law is called perfect. and not according to the rigour of the law. He calleth the law perfect, bicauſe it preſcribeth a perfect rule to liue by:VVherefore he calleth it a law of libertie he calleth it of libertie, bicauſe that how much more a man is giuen and addicted to it, ſo that he beleeue in Chriſt, ſo much the more he declareth himſelfe to be free. For to ſerue God is to reigne. He that looketh in this law,VVho is not a forgetfull hearer. to the intent he may throughly knowe it and expreſſe it in his life, he, ſayth the Apoſtle, is not a forgetfull hearer of the word, but a doer of it, who alſo ſhal be bleſſed in his deede. For fayth is knowne by the effects as a tree by the fruits,1. Cor. 1.30. which fayth onely doth apprehend Chriſt, who alcne of God is made vnto vs wiſedome, and righteouſneſſe, and ſanctification, and redemption, that he that reioyceth ſhould reioyce in the Lord. Iames therefore ſpeaketh here of the qualitie of them that are iuſtified, and of the rewardes of their obedience, and not of the cauſes of their iuſtifying. Bernard ſayth: Good workes are not the cauſes of reigning, but the way to the kingdome.
                  26 If any man among you ſeemeth religious and refraineth not his tongue, but deceiueth his ovvne heart, this mans religion is vayne.
                  He reprehendeth hypocrites which did boaſt that they did religiouſly obſerue the lawe, and yet in the meane time were giuen to backbyting and ſclaundering,An vſuall vice among hypocrites. which vice is common among all hypocrites, as the hiſtorye of the Goſpell doth ſhewe in the Phariſe, who gloried of his religion, and in the meane ſeaſon accuſed other men with his ſclaunderous tongue. From whence this vice proceedeth he ſheweth when he addeth: but deceiueth his ovvn heart, that is, is a louer of him ſelfe. For he iudgeth that he is godly and religious, but his religion is in vayne, as is proued by the reaſon following:
27 Pure religion and vndefiled before God euen the

father, is this, to viſit the fatherles and vviddovves in their aduerſitie, and to keepe himſelfe vnſpotted of the vvorld.
                  
                  He proueth by certayne properties of religion that hypocrites which are giuen to ſclaundering and euel ſpeaking are not truly religious the concludeth his argument after this ſort:Certayne properties of them that are truly religious They that are truly religious doe keepe them ſelues vnſpotted of the world, and do ſhew mercy to the afflicted. Hypocrites which will ſeeme to be religious, doe not keepe themſelues vnſpotted of the world, neither ſhew mercy to the afflicted. Wherefore they are not religious, but rather vaine boaſters of religion. It was not the purpoſe of Iames perfectly to define religion, but onely to ſet downe certayne properties thereof diſagreeing with the vanitie of hipocrites. Wherefore they are not to be heard, which here ſharply reproue and find fault with Iames as a man ignorant of true religion. For it is one thing to define a thing and an other to ſignifie or ſhew it by certayne ſignes and tokens. Which, it is an vnſeemely thing and a ſhame, for the ſharpe reprouers and taunters of Iames not to know. But this is a full and perfect definition of Chriſtian religion:A full and perfect definition of chriſtian religion. Chriſtian religion is a liuely fayth in Ieſus Chriſt, and a confeſſion thereof, wherto is ioyned a pure ſtudy of worſhipping God, and ſincere charity towards men togither with a hope of immortality promiſed. The ſubſtantiall partes therefore of Chriſtian religion by nature ioyned togither, are fayth, the worſhip of God, charitie towarde our neighbour, and hope of ſaluation promiſed by Chriſt.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               Chap. 2. The ſumme of the ſecond Chapter.
               
               AS he doth dehort thoſe that are conuerted from deſpiſing and diſdayning the poore, and from accepting of perſons: ſo he doth condemne a vayne boasting of fayth, which is voyde and destitute of it right and true fruites.
            
            
               The order and partes of the ſecond Chapter.
               THere are two partes of this Chapter, the fyrst whereof contayneth a dehorting or diſwading. For he doth therein dehort Christians from accepting of perſons. This parte conſisteth of a propoſitiō and a confirmation. The latter part contayneth a teaching or instructing. For therein he teacheth that that fayth is vayne which wanteth works. This part alſo conſisteth of a propoſition and a confirmation.
            
            
               
                  The expoſition of the ſecond Chapter with an obſeruation of the Doctrine.
               
               1 My brethren, haue not the fayth of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt the Lorde of glory in reſpecte of perſones.
               
                  THis is the firſt propoſition of this Chapter contayning a certayne hidden reaſon which is thus to be reſolued and made manifeſt: Brethren doe not accept perſons. This is the bare propoſition.To haue reſpect of perſons is not agreable to the chriſtian fayth. The reaſon of the propoſition is this, for that the fayth of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt and the accepting of perſons doe ſo diſagree, that they cannot ſtand togither. Why ſo? Bicauſe the glory of Chriſt requireth, that we

reuerence all thoſe, in whom Chriſt dwelleth. So the word of glory, was not added in vayne. It is an hebrue kind of ſpeach, wherby the Genitiue caſes of nounes appellatiues are put oftentimes in the place of Epithites.An obiection. What? doth not the Pſalme place him amōg the dwellers in ye tabernanacle of ye Lord,Pſal. 15.4. that is, among the heires of eternall life, which contemneth a vile perſon, and honoureth them that feare the Lorde? Whether is this accepting of perſons or no?The aunſwer. Accepting of perſons is properly, when as the true cauſe, by the which wee ought to pronounce of the perſon, being neglected, we doe conſider in the perſons ſome other thing without the cauſe, for which eyther we pronounce falſe ſentence agaynſt the perſon, or otherwiſe doe accept and fauour the perſon. Wherefore this precept of the Apoſtle doth not ſubuert and ouerthrowe the order of God eſtabliſhed in the The fift according to the diuiſion receiued among vs, for all do not diuide the commaundements alike, which notwithſtanding is a thing indifferent: he foloweth here the cuſtome of their Churches. fourth commaundement concerning the honor of ſuperiours. But if any mā ſhould deſpiſe a poore man that is godly, and preferre a rich man that is wicked, he, leauing the true cauſe ſhoulde iudge amiſſe, as Iames ſheweth when he ſayth:

                     2 For if there come into your company a man vvith a gold ring, and in goodly apparel, and there come in alſo a poore man in vile rayment,
                     3 And ye haue reſpect to him that vveareth the gaye clothing, and ſay vnto him, ſit thou here in a goodly place, and ſay vnto the poore, ſtande thou there, or ſit here vnder my footeſtoole:
                     4 Are ye not partiall in your ſelues, and are become iudges of euill thoughtes?
                  
               
               By this example he declareth what maner of accepting of perſons he condemneth,What maner of accepting of perſons the Apoſtle diſalloweth. to wit, that, which followeth a falſe iudgement for a true in iudging men. For he which doth that, is not onely condemned by the iudgement of his owne conſcience, but alſo his iudgement is peruerſe and naughtie, which taketh riches for a rule of difference.

He doth not therfore ſimply forbid to honor the rich, but he ſpeaketh by the way of compariſon, and condemneth him which honoureth wicked rich men with the contempt of godly poore men. Wherefore that accepting of perſons is here condemned, which followeth a falſe difference for a true, which keepeth not a right maner, which erreth from the right ende. If any man therfore preferreth a rich man before a poore, bicauſe he is rich, his iudgement is peruerſe and corrupt. Agayne, if thou doeſt ſo preferre a rich man before a poore, that thou handle the poore man reprochfully, there is ſinne in the maner thereof. Finally, if thou preferre a rich man before a poore to winne fauor thereby, thou haſt erred from the right ende. For what thing is more vnworthie than to deſpiſe the poore man which is godly and learned, and honourably to receyue and entertayne the rich man which is vngodly and vnlearned? He which maketh ſuch a difference with himſelfe betweene the poore man and the riche, is become a iudge of euill thoughtes, that is, is not rightly affected, but iudgeth peruerſly agaynſt the rule of godlyneſſe and charitie.
               5 Hearken my beloued brethren, hath not God choſen the poore of this vvorlde that they shoulde be rich in fayth, and heires of the kingdome vvhich he promiſed to them that loue him?
               He doth in a ſhort entrance or preface ſtirre vp the hearers to be attentiue to the argument which he afterwarde annexeth. God hath choſen the poore of this world,VVhy the poore of this vvorlde are not to be deſpiſed. which are rich in fayth, that they ſhould be heyres of the kingdome, which he hath promiſed to them that loue him. Therefore the poore of this world are not to be contemned.The order of the reſtoring agayne of mankinde. In this argument note the order of our reſtoring againe. In the firſt place is ſet election, which is noe where els to be ſought but in Chriſt. Epheſ. 1.
                   In the ſecond is ſet fayth, whereby generall election is applyed to the hearers

of the Goſpel. For God hath choſen on this condition if men be engraffed by fayth in his ſonne without whom is no election but mere reprobation. In the third is put inheritance, whereby is ſignified adoption, by which the beleeuers receiue prerogatiue to be the ſonnes of God. In the fourth is added loue, for that is the true fruite of fayth, and an affection proper to the ſonnes of God. It is no maruayle therefore if God hath promiſed a kingdome to them that loue him. For they by fayth haue obtayned power to be the ſonnes of God, yea and to be called heires of the heauenly kingdome. For it is manifeſt out of Paule that loue is not the cauſe of reigning when he ſayth:Rom. 6.23. 
                  The gift of God is eternall life, through Ieſus Christ our Lord.
               
               
                  Of Election.
                  THis place doth admoniſh that I ſpeake ſomething concerning election. For I ſee not a fewe to erre from the true cauſe thereof. Paule ſayth. 1. Cor. 1.26. Brethren you ſee your calling, how that not many wiſe men after the fleſh, not many mighty, not many noble are called, but God hath choſen the fooliſh thinges of the world. &c.
                      And here Iames ſaith: God hath choſen the poore of this vvorld. Hereupon ſome do not rightly gather,Howe farre ſome are deceiued in the doctrine of election. yt wiſe, mighty, noble and rich men are reprobates, & on the contrary, the ignorant, weake, vnnoble and poore are choſen. For if wiſedome, power, noblenes and riches, which all are the giftes of God, were the cauſe of reprobation, and contrariwiſe, fooliſhnes weakenes, vnnobleneſſe and pouertie were the cauſe of election, it ſhould follow that all rich men are reprobates, and all poore men choſen, but both is falſe. For not a few rich and noble men are godly, choſen, and ſaued, and many poore men are vngodly, reprobates, and condemned. Why therfore doth Paule ſay: Not many wiſe men, not many mighty, not many noble? Paule doth not ſpeake of the counſel of God, who will that al men ſhall be

ſaued and come vnto the acknowledging of the truth. 1. Timoth. 2. Which would haue no man to periſh, but would all men to come to repentaunce. 2. Pet. 3. But he accuſeth the naughtines of men, which abuſe the giftes of God to their owne deſtruction. The Goſpell calleth all,VVhy ſo fewe come, when as God calleth all by his worde. but ſome pretend one thing, ſome an other, wherby they doe not come. Many being entiſed, and as it were made druncken with wiſedome, many with might, many with noblenes, many with riches, many alſo with other thinges cannot abide the ſweete ſauour of the Goſpell. Whereby it commeth to paſſe that not by the counſell of God, which hath created no man to certayne damnation, but by their owne fault they are not elect. For God will haue all at length to be ſaued if ſo be that they doe embrace by fayth the author of their ſaluation. They which contemne him, doe worthely fall away from ſaluation. For God will caſt awaye thoſe and condemne them, no otherwiſe then an earthly father doth caſt of and diſherit an obſtinate and diſobedient ſonne, which he woulde not haue done if he had obeyed his father.God will haue al to be ſaued, but yet by ſuch meanes as he hath appoīted, which they that refuſe, are iuſtly condemned. Matth. 20.16. If therefore we conſider the counſell or purpoſe of our creation and reſtoring againe by Chriſt: God in deede will haue all men to be ſaued, but yet by ſaluation and life, that is by Chriſt the mediatour. But if thou marke the euent or ende, he will condemne all, which haue not obeyed him calling by his Goſpell. This is confirmed by the ſaying of ye Lord in Matthew: many be called, but few be choſen. Of this ſaying there are two parts,Many be called, but fewe be choſen, howe it is to be vnderſtand. the firſt commendeth vnto vs the goodnes of God, which calleth many by his Goſpel that they may be ſaued. For we muſt not thinke that God calleth them whom he will not haue ſaued. The latter part is a complaint of the greateſt parte of men, which contemne the Goſpell, and will not liue worthy of ſo noble a calling. Wherof Chriſt complayneth in Matthew, where he is reprehended which had not a wedding garment, to the which reprehenſion afterward

is ioyned this complaynt of Chriſte:Matth. 22.12. few are choſen. This complaynt he alſo ſheweth with teares. Matth. 23. whē he ſaith. How often would I haue gathered thy children togither, as the hen gathereth the chickens vnder her wings and ye would not? Behold Chriſt will, Hieruſalē
                      will not. The meaning therefore of the ſaying of the Lord is: many be called, to wit, to obtayne ſaluation by Chriſt, ſo that they will beleeue the Goſpell. But fewe be choſen, that is, fewe haue the wedding garment, that is, fewe doe beleeue and are godly in deede. That this is the ſignification of the word election, it is manifeſt out of the pſalme, where elect and peruerſe or frowarde are ſet one againſt the other,Pſal. 18.25. for he ſayth thus: with the elect thou ſhalt be elect, and with the froward thou ſhalt be froward. Therefore he is ſayd to be elect which is in deede a godly and ſincere worſhipper of God, keeping fayth and a good conſcience. Wherefore there is no cauſe that any man ſhould be troubled with thinking of his election, as though God had appoynted ſome certayne men to ſaluation, and the greateſt part of men to certaine damnation: but rather let him thinke,VVhom God will ſaue and whom he will condemne. that this is the vnmoueable will of God, that as he will ſaue without difference all that be penitent: ſo on the contrarie he will condemne all that be impenitent. And theſe are ſaide not to be elect, becauſe of the euent or ende. For they haue ſhutte from them ſelues the way of ſaluation.VVhat al they muſt doe which mynde and deſire to attayne ſaluation through Chriſt. Let vs therefore obey the Goſpell, let vs liue in true repentance, let vs not ſuffer our ſelues to be caried away from Chriſt with the cares of this world. But rather let vs preferre obedience toward the Goſpell before al things of the world, whereby we may obtayne the ſaluation promiſed through our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, in whom God hath choſen the beleuers before ye foūdations of the world.
               
               
                  6 But ye haue deſpiſed the poore.
                  By this ſetting of one contrarie againſt the other,The poore in no wiſe to be contemned. he ſheweth the grieuouſneſſe of the ſinne. God doth honour

the poore that beleeue, but you do deſpiſe the poore. Your ſinne therefore is grieuous and vnworthie of the heires of the kingdome of God.
                  
                     Doe not the rich oppreſſe you by tyrannie, and doe they not dravve you before the iudgement ſeates?
                     7 Doe not they blaſpheme the vvorthye name, after vvhich ye be named?
                  
                  In theſe wordes are conteyned two plaine arguments. It is a fooliſh thing for men to honor them of whom they are oppreſſed and tormented, and to contemne them that excell in true godlyneſſe.Vngodly rich men muſt not be honoured with contempt of godly pore men. You doe that when you doe honour your rich men which are tyrannes with the reproche and diſdayne of the pore. The vngodly rich men do blaſpheme that worthy name of Chriſt, whereby you will be named, and whereof you are called Chriſtians, therefore it is an vnworthie thing that you ſhoulde honour them with the contempt of the poore.
                  
                     8 But if ye fulfill the royall lavve according to the Scripture, vvhich ſayth: Thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy ſelfe, ye doe vvell.
                     9 But if ye regarde the perſons, ye commit ſinne, and are rebuked of the lavve as tranſgreſſours.
                  
                  This is a preuenting of an obiection. For he preuenteth the obiection of hypocrites, by the which they might excuſe themſelues, that they did well in honouring rich men, ſeeing that honour is included in the loue which the lawe doth require toward our neighbour. He aunſwereth by a double condition: If you fulfill (that is, if you endeuer by true fayth and integritie of mynde to performe it without colouring or hypocriſie. For here the worde of fufilling is to be referred not to the degrees, but to the ſubſtance of obedience, or to the parts therof) the royall lavve, (that is, the lawe which is like the kings hie way, that is, ſtreight and playne, which leadeth the wayfaring man without turnings to the place appointed. But that kings hie way

is to loue our neighbour, and to conſider this only in him, that he is our neighbour, and to haue reſpect to no other things in him, ye doe vvell, that is, your defence is iuſt. But if ye regarde the perſon, ye commit ſinne, but that you regarde the perſon, it is manifeſt by your deede. For you honor wicked rich men, and deſpiſe godly poore men, which truly is not to go in the kings hie way to the loue of your neighbour.
                  
                     10 For vvhoſoeuer shall keepe the vvhole lavv and yet faileth in one poynt, he is giltie of all.
                     11 For he that ſayd, thou shalt not commit adulterie, ſayd alſo, Thou shalt not kill. Novv though thou doeſt none adulterie, yet if thou killeſt, thou art a tranſgreſſour of the lavve.
                  
                  He doth more forcibly vrge the hypocrites, which did flatter them ſelues when as in one poynt of the law they had done their duty well,He that faileth in one poynt of the lawe is guiltie of the whole lawe. whoſe hypocriſie he reprehendeth by this argument: he which breaketh ſome one point of the law, is a tranſgreſſor of the lawe and giltie by the iudgement of the lawe. For he hath broken the whole law. This is declared by propounding an example of the The ſixt and ſeuenth according to our diuiſion. fift and ſixe commaundement. He which of this place doth contend either that all ſins are alike, or that the giltines of euery tranſgreſſion is equale, doth wrongfully vnderſtande and take the wordes of the Apoſtle, who in this place doth deale only with hypocrites which did iudge the perfection of the lawe in part, agaynſt whome the Apoſtle ſetteth tranſgreſſion in part.Diuers reaſons which proue that all ſinnes are not alike, as the Stoicks doe falſly affirme. But that ſinnes be not alike or equall, as the Stoickes woulde haue them, firſt it is euident by the cauſes. For who doth not perceyue that it is more grieuous to ſinne of maliciouſnes, than of infirmitie or ignorance. Secondly, the euent proueth the ſame. He which ſinneth wittingly and willingly, doth as it were ſhake of the holy ghoſt, but he that falleth through weakeneſſe, doth not ſo. Thirdly, the vnequalitie of the puniſhment,

wherewith God the iuſt iudge puniſheth, doth conclude the vnequalitie of ſinnes.Luk. 12.47. 
                     That ſeruant that knewe his maisters will, and prepared not himſelfe, neyther did according to his will, ſhall be beaten with many stripes. Fourthly, euery mans owne conſcience doth naturally vnderſtande the degrees of ſinnes, for they are vexed with ſome more, with ſome leſſe. Fiftly, the lawe of God and all ciuill lawes doe acknowledge degrees of ſinnes according to which they doe moderate puniſhments. The arguments of the Stoickes haue a fayre ſhewe, but they are grounded on a falſe foundation, agaynſt which let thoſe reaſons be ſet which I haue rehearſed.
                  
                     12 So ſpeake ye, and ſo doe, as they that shall be iudged by the lavve of libertie.
                     13 For there shal be condemnation mercileſſe to him that shevveth not mercie, and mercie reioyceth againſt iudgement.
                  
                  He bringeth in a generall exhortation to liue godly and holily, by an argument taken of the ſentence of the laſt iudgement, which is recited Matth. 25. For when as the Apoſtle ſayth: as they that shall bee iudged by the lavve of libertie, he hath relation to the ſentence of the Lorde, who when he iudgeth the worlde, ſhall ſaye vnto them on his right hand: Come ye bleſſed of my father,
                     Matth. 25.34. The ſentence of the laſt iudgement, and the maner, thereof. 
                     take the inheritance of the kingdome prepared for you from the foundations of the worlde. For I was an hungred, and ye gaue me meate. &c. Contrariwiſe he ſhall ſay to them on the left hande: Depart from me ye curſed into euerlasting fire. I was an hungred, and ye gaue me no meate. &c. To this pertayneth that ſaying: Iohn. 5. The houre shall come in the which all that are in the graues, ſhal heare his voice,
                     Iohn. 5.28.
                     and they ſhall come forth, that haue done good vnto the reſurrection of life: but they that haue done euell vnto the reſurrection of condemnation. And 2. Cor. 5. We must all appeare before the iudgement ſeate of Christ, that euery man

may receiue the things which are done in his bodie, according to that he hath done whether it be good or euill.
                      That theſe ſayings and ſuch like are to be vnderſtand of the qualitie of thē that ſhal be ſaued, & not of the cauſes of ſaluation, the whole conſent of ye ſcripture, yea, the precious bloud of Chriſt doth ſhew, as ſhortly after I will more diſtinctly declare.VVhy the Apoſtle calleth as the lawe of libertie. But why doth he call it ye law of libertie? That by that name he may ſhew yt the fruites of libertie are by good right required of chriſtians. For as he which doth commit ſinne, is the ſeruant of ſinne: ſo he which is deliuered by Chriſt, will be no more bonde but free, & therefore will not take vpon him the yoke of bondage. He ſheweth a cauſe or reaſon when he ſayth: for there shall be condemnation mercileſſe to him that shevveth not mercie, but he that ſheweth mercie, is ſo farre of from being condemned, yt he ſhal reioyce againſt cōdemnation, triumphing ouer death, ſin, and the deuill. Theſe things doe teach, how neceſſary continuall repentance and a perpetuall ſtudie of godlyneſſe and righteouſneſſe is among Chriſtians, leaſt by their owne fault they loſe the free benefit of ſaluation. But bicauſe the aduerſaries of free ſaluation doe abuſe this place and ſuch like, and make the cauſes of ſaluation of the tokens and qualities of them which ſhall be ſaued, I will briefly gather an aunſwere, whereby the godly reader may haue, wherewith he maye be able throughly and truly to anſwere to this falſe cauill. Seing therefore that the Scripture doth expreſſely ſay,Matth. 16.27. 
                     that the Lord ſhall giue to euery man according to his deedes. Or as Paule ſpeaketh to the Corinthians:2. Cor. 5.10. 
                     according to that euery man hath done whether it be good or euill: Firſt of all, this is to be helde,How the ſentence of the laſt iudgement is to be applied to the wicked, and howe to the godly. that this generall ſentence which is the very voyce of God himſelfe, ought to be applied vnto two ſortes of men, according to the proportion of fayth, that is, to the wicked, according to the lawe, to the godly, according to the Goſpell after this maner: when the Lord giueth vnto

the wicked according to their dedes, without all doubt he giueth vnto them hel and condemnation. For thoſe are the merits of the dedes of vngodlines. But cōcerning ye godly or regenerate, there are mo things to be conſidered. For firſt it is euident out of the infallible worde of God, that eternall life is not the wages of ſeruantes, but the inheritance of children, and the free gift of God. Rom. 4.5.6.8. Iohn. 1.3.5. Secondly, the proportion betwene the heauēly father and an earthly father is to be conſidered: for as an earthly father doth giue vnto his childrē according to their deedes, that is, inheritance to them that are obedient, and diſheriteth them that are diſobedient: ſo God the father promiſeth inheritance to his children, but thoſe which of children are made obſtinate and enemies, he ſuffreth not to enioy the inheritance. But nowe it is manifeſt that the childrē of an earthly father are neither children nor heires through deſert of their works.VVe are heires not through workes but through grace After the ſame ſort the children of God are neyther made children nor heires bicauſe of their works, but through the grace of adoption, which is receyued by fayth alone, notwithſtanding eyther of them doth giue vnto his children according to their dedes. But yt this may yet be more plainly vnderſtand, how God ſhall giue to euery mā according to his dedes, foure circū
                     ſtances are to be weighed of vs, the firſt wherof is, that the rigour of the law is takē away from ye godly, according to ye ſaying Galat. 3. Christ hath redemed vs from the curſe of the lawe. The ſeconde is, that the perſon nowe beleeuing doth by fayth pleaſe God and is heire of eternall life. Iohn. 1.
                      The thirde, that God doth not onely require obedience of the perſon that beleeueth, but alſo doth promiſe him a rewarde, and that not of debt for the worthineſſe of the worke, but of grace for his fatherly promiſe ſake: The fourth, that workes ſo done by fayth, are teſtimonies of fayth, as proper effectes are moſt certaine tokens of their cauſe. And therefore it is ſayde that God ſhall giue vnto

euery man according to his dedes,VVhy it is ſayd that euery man shall be iudged according to his deedes. both becauſe dedes are the true tokens of the feare of God & of fayth, and alſo that the whole creature maye beare witneſſe of the iuſtice of God in iudging. This anſwere is taken from the conferring of the Scripture, which we muſt of neceſſitie ſurely hold, leſt that with the Papiſtes we attribute ſaluation to the merits of works, or with the Antinomians and Libertines we lay aſide all care and ſtudye to do well. This ſolution is made manifeſt by an euident example. Mat. 18.
                      where ye Lord ſaith that ye kingdome of heauen is likened vnto a certayne king, that is, that there is the ſame reaſon of the ſpiritual ſtate of the Church, which is betweene an earthly king and his ſeruants in the affaires of this preſent life. For euen as the king, his ſeruant owing him ten thouſand talents, yet when he fell downe and beſought him, he forgaue him the whole dette freely and of his mere liberalitie: ſo God the father doth freely forgiue them all debtes, that is, ſinnes, which flie vnto him for ſuccour with truſt and confidence in Chriſt. Hereof it is manifeſt that remiſſion of ſinnes is free. But euen as the king called agayne vnto puniſhment that ſeruant, being vnthankefull and cruell toward his fellowſeruants, and that which before he forgaue him when he humbly beſought him, nowe he requireth agayne of him being ſtubborne and cruel toward his fellowes: So God, after he hath receiued vs being ſorie for our ſinne, into fauour, will haue vs imitate his example in liberalitie and goodnes toward our neighbour. This the Lord teacheth Luke. 7.
                      propounding an example of two detters, the one whereof ought vnto the lender fiue hundred pence, and the other fiftie: who when they had nothing to pay, he forgaue them both. Here the Lord aſked the Phariſes whether of them will loue the lender moſt, to whom when the Phariſe had made aunſwere, he to whom he forgaue moſt, the Lorde ſayd, thou haſt truly iudged: ſignifying that God doth require

thankfulneſſe of them, whom he hath freely receiued into fauour. Hereof are gathered two thinges, to wit, both that forgiueneſſe is free, and alſo that they which haue obtayned forgiueneſſe, doe owe thankfulnes vnto God.
                  14 VVhat auayleth it my brethren though a man ſayth he hath fayth, vvhen he hath no vvorkes, can that faith ſaue him?
                  Bicauſe there were among them to whom the Apoſtles did write, hypocrites, which when they were touched with no true repentance, yet they did boaſt that they were ſaued by faith, when as they had no true and liuely faith in dede:That fayth which bringeth not forth good workes, is not true, but vayne, and cannot ſaue. he maketh a confutation of their erroneous opinion, and teacheth that that faith is vayne, which doth not bring forth it true fruites. This propoſition is diligently to be marked, faith which hath not workes is vneffectuall and vayne, or as Iames ſpeaketh, cannot ſaue. This onely propoſition is confirmed euen vnto the end of the chapter.Paule and Iames ſpeake diuerſly of fayth. Wherefore they are fowly deceiued which compare Iames with Paule, when as Iames diſputeth onely of the vayne boaſting of hypocrites, Paule of a liuely fayth. And therfore let vs diligently marke in this place, what faith the Apoſtle calleth vayne, to wit that, which hath no obedience toward God accompanying it, in aſmuch as it neither worſhippeth God nor dooth wel to it neighboure, wherevpon it manifeſtly followeth that Iames doth not ſpeake of a liuely and a right fayth, from which the ſpirit of Chriſt cā not be ſeparate. For where the ſpirit of Chriſt is, there are newe actions of the newe man, although not perfect, yet vnperfect, by which the force and vertue of fayth is acknowledged and brought forth. What therfore is that vaine faith? is it altogither vneffectuall?VVhat fruites a vayne and falſe fayth bringeth forth. It bringeth forth no good fruites, (for it is voyde of life) but it bringeth forth the bitter fruites of hell and death. For it is a moſt fruitefull mother of vanitie, ſuperſtition, and hypocriſie, it is a fooliſh boaſting, it is but an image of faith,

it is a ſtoppe or let from ſaluation, it is a guider or leader vnto death, briefly it hath it portion with hypocrites and deuels.
                  
                     15 For if a brother or a ſiſter be naked and deſtitute of dayly foode,
                     16 And one of you ſaye vnto them, depart in peace, vvarme your ſelues, and fil your bellies, notvvithſtanding ye giue them not thoſe thinges, vvhich are needeful to the body, vvhat helpeth it?
                     17 Euen ſo the faith, if it haue no vvorkes, is dead in it ſelfe.
                  
                  
                     He proueth by a very fit ſimilitude that fayth without good workes is vaine.He maketh manifeſt the propoſition by a moſt apt ſimilitude. Euen as that ſpeech is vayne, wherein it is ſayde to the needy, warme your ſelues and fill your bellies, when as helping handes are not alſo put to: ſo that fayth is vayne and dead which is in the mouth without the fruite of works. Note here the name of faith, (which he calleth vaine) for when it is called deade, it is compared to a carkas, wherefore it deſerueth no better to be called faith, thē a carkas deſerueth to be called a liuing creature. This vſing of one word for another doth ſufficiently ſhew yt Iames doth diſpute of a vayne opiniō, which of ye hypocrites was called faith, according therfore to the opinion yt they had of fayth, ye Apoſtle ſpeaketh by a licence of rhetoricke.
                  18 But ſome man might ſay, thou haſt the faith and I haue vvorkes: shevv me thy faith out of thy vvorks, and I vvill shevve thee my faith by my vvorkes.
                  
                     Another reaſon prouing fayth which is without good workes to be vayne.An other reaſon that faith which is voyde of it fruites is vayne, as if he ſayde: ſome godly man, O thou hypocrite, may repreſſe thy vanitie by obiecting thus vnto thee: thou hypocrite haſt faith, as thou ſayeſt, (for it is a licence of ſcorning) I haue workes, thou, if thou can, ſhew me thy faith by thy works, which truly thou canſt not doe, bicauſe thou haſt none: I will ſhewe thee my fayth by my works. Wherefore it is manifeſt that thy faith is like vnto a dead

carkas, but that myne is liuely, which appeareth by the fruites and liuely motion therof.A proper ſimilitude. For euen as the ſpirite which is inwardly in a liuing creature quicke and luſty doth bewray it ſelfe by mouing and feeling and by the outward actions: ſo a liuely fayth doth ſhewe it ſelfe by good workes. The word faith is here vſed in diuers ſignifications. For in the firſt place it ſignifieth a boaſting of fayth, but in the latter place a liuely faith.
                  19 Thou beleeueſt that there is one God: thou doeſt vvell: the deuils alſo beleeue it and tremble.
                  He teacheth both what the fayth of hyprocrites is,Another reaſon prouing the fayth of hypocrites to be vayne and not able to ſaue. alſo how vaine it is, yea and that it doth not ſaue. He affirmeth therefore that there fayth is only a knowledge of the hyſtory. For they beleeue that there is a God. That this is vaine, he proueth by this reaſon: the faith of the deuils doth not ſaue. For the deuils are not ſaued. The boaſting of hypocrites is the fayth of the deuils: for it hath nothing in it, which the fayth of the deuils hath not. Therefore the boaſting of the hypocrites which they falſly cal fayth, doth not ſaue, and therefore is vayne. Whereas the Apoſtle in this place doth acknowledge no other fayth in hypocrites, then is in the deuils, it is no meruaile, becauſe he taketh from it the power of iuſtifying.What kynde of faith Paule ſpeaketh of. But of what ſort fayth is in the diſputations of Paule, it is taught Rom. 4.
                      by a manifeſt example propounded, to wit, that it is not onely a knowledge of the mercy promiſed, but alſo a truſt and confidence, whereby a man determineth with himſelfe that the promes doth appertaine vnto him, wherwith is ioyned as an vnſeparable companion thankfulneſſe of mind toward God, prayer, patience, mortifying of the olde man,Fruites of true fayth. ſtirring vp of the newe man, and other fruites of the righteouſnes of fayth, which frutes although they doe not iuſtifie, yet that is the nature of a iuſtifying fayth that it alwayes bringeth foorth thoſe fruites ſometime more, ſometime leſſe, euen as it hath receiued increaſe.
                  
                     
                     20 But vvilt thou vnderſtand, O thou vaine man, that the faith vvhich is vvithout vvorkes is dead?
                     21 VVas not Abraham our father iuſtified through vvorks, vvhen he offred Iſaac his ſon vpō the alter?
                     22 Seeſt thou not that the faith vvrought vvith his vvorkes? and through the vvorks vvas the fayth made perfect.
                     23 And the Scripture vvas fulfilled vvhich ſayth: Abraham beleeued God and it vvas imputed vnto him for righteouſnes: and he vvas called the frend of God.
                     24 Ye ſee then hovv that of vvorkes a man is iuſtified and not of faith onely.
                  
                  The ſumme of this reaſon is this: Such as the fayth of Abraham was,That our faith ought to haue good workes ioyned with it, it is proued by the example of Abraham. ought alſo the fayth of other beleeuers to be. (For he is therefore called the father of the beleeuers, bicauſe that they that beleeue ought to imitate and follow his fayth): but the faith of Abraham had workes ioyned with it (which is thereby proued, bicauſe he did ſo much eſteeme obedience toward God, that he would rather kill his onely ſonne, then not obey God) Therfore the fayth of other alſo ought to haue workes ioyned with it, which if it haue not, it is worthely to be accounted vaine and dead.VVhat Iames meaneth by this word iuſtified, which the Scholmen haue wreſted, as it is proued by three firme and ſtrong reaſons. The firſt reaſon. This is the ſumme of the argument. Now let vs wey the wordes of the Apoſtle, which are wreſted of the Schoolemen againſt free iuſtification. Firſt the word iuſtified is to be diſcuſſed, which is as much, as if he had ſayd, was declared to be iuſt, or was knowen to be iuſtified and that this is ſo I proue by three neceſſarie arguments. The firſt is taken of the ſcope and end of this preſent diſputatiō. For Iames hath not purpoſed a diſputation of the cauſes of iuſtification, but onely doth ſhew by what effects iuſtification may be gathered, and as it were ſet before the eyes of men. Seing therefore it is an exceeding great errour, of effects to make cauſes in reſpect of the ſame

thing, they are by no meanes to be borne, which forgetting the ſcope & ende of the diſputation & propoſition that is to be proued, preſume very high, & go about to diſproue the doctrine of Paul concerning free iuſtification,Paule and Iames are nothing contrarie the one to the other, but there is difference onely in the purpoſe of them both. when as the purpoſe of Paul was far otherwiſe thā of Iames. For Paul ſeketh the cauſe of iuſtification: Iames the effects of the ſame: Paul deſcendeth frō ye cauſes to ye effects: Iames contrariwiſe aſcendeth frō the effects to ye cauſes. Paul ſeketh how we are iuſtified: Iames how we are declared to be iuſtified. Paule excludeth works as cauſes of iuſtification: Iames includeth the ſame, as the effectes of iuſtification. Seing there is ſo great difference betwene the purpoſe of Paule and Iames, who ſeeth not the vanitie of the Scholemen, which ſay that the Apoſtles are contrary the one to the other.The ſecond reaſon concerning the taking of this word iuſtified The ſeconde neceſſarie argument is taken of the order of the cauſes and the effects, Geneſ. 15.
                      Abraham is pronounced to be iuſtified. Abraham beleeued the Lord, and he counted that to him for righteouſneſse. But this came to paſſe thirtie yeares at the leaſt, before he receyued a commaundement concerning the offering of his ſonne Iſaac. Geneſ. 22.
                      Howe therefore can it be that he ſhoulde be ſayde to be iuſtified by that worke, which he did the thirtie yere after yt he was by the voyce of God ſaid to be iuſtified. It is neceſſarie therfore that to be iuſtified in Iames doe ſignifie to be declared iuſtified.
                  The thirde neceſſarie argument is taken of the wordes of the Angell, Geneſ. 22.
                     
                     The third infallible argument concerning the taking of this word iuſtified After that Abraham had purpoſed to kil his ſonne at the commaundement of God, & was called back from his purpoſe by the voice of the Angel, he heareth of the Angell: Now I know that thou fearest God,
                     Gen. 22.12. 
                     ſeing for my ſake thou hast not ſpared thine only ſon. What other thing, I pray you, do theſe words meane, than that ye voluntarie obedience of Abraham was a teſtimonie of the feare of God, & a certaine declaration of the iuſtification of Abraham. And thus briefly it is declared, what the word

of iuſtification doth ſignifie in this diſputation of Iames. Afterwarde when he ſayth that the fayth vvrought vvith his vvorkes, he expreſſeth the nature of a liuely fayth, to wit, that it is effectuall and full of good workes. Seing that the fayth of hypocrites hath not this nature, it is in no caſe to be iudged a true and liuely fayth. This ſaying therefore of Iames doth teach nothing elſe, but that good workes doe proceede of fayth. That which Iames addeth: through the vvorkes,
                     VVhat it meaneth that Abrahams faith was made perfect thorow workes. 
                     the fayth vvas made perfect, is nothing els than yt the fayth of Abraham was declared by his workes, not to haue bene counterfait or hypocriticall, but true and ſincere. For if thou doeſt cal that perfect here, which is in it degrees abſolute, no mortall man liuing at any time hath had a perfect fayth. Moreouer, when he ſayth that the ſcripture was fulfilled which ſaith: Abraham beleeued God, and it vvas imputed vnto him for righteouſneſſe, that is not to be referred vnto the cauſe, but vnto the effect. For by that deede Abraham declared that he was in very deede iuſtified before by fayth. This fulfilling therefore ought to be referred to the experience of men, and not to the iudgement of God.
                  25 Likevviſe alſo vvas not Rahab the harlot iuſtified through vvorks, vvhen she had receyued the meſſengers, and ſent them out another vvay?
                  
                     Another example that true fayth is not deſtitute of good workes.He proueth by another example yt a true & a liuely faith is not without works. Rahab by her dede or works declared hir ſelfe to be iuſtified by fayth, when with the perill of her life ſhe ſent away ye meſſengers of the people of God, leaſt they ſhoulde come into the hands of them that ſought them.
                  26 For as the bodie vvithout the ſpirit is dead: euen ſo the fayth vvithout vvorkes is deade.
                  
                     Hypocrites fayth is vaine.By a moſt apt ſimilitude propounded, he proueth that the fayth of hypocrites is vayne, in as much as it is like a deade bodie or carkas, wherein is no liuely ſpirite, and

therefore no mouing or ſenſe of a liuing creature is founde in it. And thus Iames by ſixe firme reaſons hath proued that a true fayth is frutefull in good workes, and that the fayth of hypocrites, which is voyd of workes, is a vayne boaſting rather than fayth.
               
               
                  A declaration of the doctrine of repentance.
                  WHen as Chriſt doth define the Goſpel to be preaching of repentance and forgiueneſſe of ſinnes in his name:The Goſpell is the preaching of repentance and forgiueneſſe of ſinnes. he ſetteth forth two things vnto bs, whereof one is the benefite which the Goſpell offereth, the other, the meanes by which the benefite is applyed vnto men. The benefite which is offered, is forgiueneſſe of ſinnes. The meanes is repentance. For they onely which repent, are made partakers of the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, wherewith is ioyned iuſtification, ſaluation, and eternall lyfe. Hereof it eaſily appeareth, that nothing is more neceſſarye for a man in this life, than to vnderſtande wherein true repentance conſiſteth, without the which forgiueneſſe of ſinnes commeth vnto no man. Of this wholſome and true repentance I will ſpeake, and will ſo declare the matter by the worde of God, and manifeſt examples, that euerye man may acknowledge the truth and playnnes thereof.
                  The foundation therfore of the preaching of repentance without all doubt is the mercie and grace of God,The firſt foundation of the preaching of repentance. Matth. 3.2. according to theſe ſayings: Repent, for the kingdome of God is at hande. Nowe the kingdome of God is the kingdome of grace, in which Chriſt being a King and Prieſt doth reygne. Ierem. 36. Returne euery man from his euill waye,
                     Ierem. 36.3.
                     that I may forgiue their iniquitie and their ſinnes.
                     Ezech. 33.11. Againe, I deſire not the death of the wicked, returne and come agayne. Alſo,Ierem. 3.22. 
                     O ye diſobedient children returne and I will heale your rebellions. And Chriſt ſaith:Matth. 9.13. 
                     I am not come to call the righteous, but the ſinners to repentance.
                  
                  Theſe teſtimonies doe ſufficiently proue that mercye

through Chriſt is the foundation of the preaching of repentance. For without all doubt, repent, or as the Prophetes ſpeake, returne, is not the voyce of the lawe condemning, but of God hauing mercie, and offering ſaluation, life and deliuerance from the ſentence of the law that condemneth. Wherefore there is no doubt but the preaching of repentance is a part of the preaching of the Goſpell, eſpeciallye ſince it is manifeſt that the lawe doth preach vnto ſinners eternall puniſhment: and Chriſt being rayſed vp from the dead, doth affirme that repentance and forgiueneſſe of ſinnes is to be preached in his name. But bicauſe there are two things in man which doe hinder him that he cannot ſee his euilles,Two thinges ther be which hinder repentance in vs, wherunto the Lord addeth remedies. and repent and amende at the voyce of the Goſpell, to wit, ignorance and dulneſſe or ſluggiſhneſſe. The Lorde doth giue a remedie for both theſe euils.A remedie agaynſt our ignorance. He remedieth ignorance by the law. For by the preaching of the lawe he bringeth vs to the knowledge of ſinne, whereof the Goſpell biddeth vs repent,Rom. 3.20. that we may be ſaued. By the lawe, as Paule ſayth, commeth the knowledge of ſinne. Dulneſſe or ſluggiſhneſſe he ſhaketh of by diuers meanes:How the Lord driueth away our ſluggishneſſe he ſetteth forth threatenings of eternall death, he denounceth wrath and diſpleaſure agaynſt them that doe not amende. He chaſteneth the impenitent with corporal puniſhments, with diſeaſes, and by diuers other meanes, he ſetteth tragicall and lamentable examples before their eyes, as of Cain, Iudas, Saule, Achitophel, and diuers others, which examples Chriſt doth applie vnto all,Luke. 13.3. when he ſayth: Except ye amende your liues, ye shall all likewiſe perishe. He witneſſeth his wrath and diſpleaſure by diuers ſignes in the heauen, the earth, and in the ſea, ſometime by peſtilence, ſometime by warres he ſtirreth vs vp to obey the voyce of the Goſpell: he ſetteth forth the death of his ſonne, which doth witneſſe of the wrath of God agaynſt ſinners, except they repent, Act. 2. Chriſt which calleth all that he weary and laden,

vnto him, yt they being conuerted by repentance, may be eaſed of their burden, doth ſende the Lawyer, that doth not acknowledge his euill, vnto the law. We haue a moſt excellent and liuely example hereof Luk. 15.A liuely example. in the prodigall ſonne. He being firſt pinched with hunger, doth perceyue his euill. Then a hope of a better ſtate if he did returne to his father, gaue to the yong man a mynde to repent, for he is encouraged by confidence in his fathers gentleneſſe, to ſeeke for reconciliation. This example doth teach plainly, that the beginning of repentance is an acknowledging of the mercy of God, which ſtirreth vs up to hope well, which doe ſee and perceyue our owne euils and perils. For as this yong man through truſt in his fathers clemencie, doth returne vnto his father, after that, he being taught by hunger did perceiue his euils: ſo we with confidence of mercy in Chriſt, doe returne vnto God, after that by the preaching of the lawe we haue come into the knowledge of our ſelues, & by feeling the curſe and wrath of God doe ſhake of our dulneſſe and ſluggiſhneſſe.
                  Nowe what wholeſome and true repentance is, and of what parres it conſiſteth, we will declare by teſtimonies of the Scripture, and by examples. Ieremie ſayth: Let euery man returne from his euill way, and I will forgiue your iniquitie and your ſinnes. This ſaying conteyneth two things, a commaundement and a promiſe. The commandement is, that the vngodly doe returne from his euill wayes. The promiſe is of reconciliation and attonement for ſinne. Herevpon it is gathered,VVhat true repentance is that repentance is a conuerſion or a turning of man vnto God, in the which conuerſion, he doth depart from euill, he beleueth the promiſe of reconciliation, and ſtudieth to leade a newe lyfe according to the will of God.
                  Adam hauing fallen into ſinne, did hyde himſelfe with the leaues which he tooke of the tree, and did not ſee his euill, neyther as yet did knowe the promiſe concerning the

ſeede:Howe Adam by little and little came vnto true repentance. but when he is accuſed by the voyce of God threatning death vnto him, he acknowledgeth his ſinne, which alſo did exceedingly diſpleaſe him, ſo that there was in him a miſliking of his fact, but not true repentance. But when he heareth the promiſe concerning the ſeede of the woman, which ſhoulde come, and breake the heade of the ſerpent and aboliſhe ſinne: he returneth vnto the Lorde with true repentance, he is ſorie for his ſinne, he comforteth himſelfe with the fayth of the promiſe, calleth vppon God, and taketh heede leaſt that agayne he doth agaynſt his conſcience offende God.Dauid an example wherin the partes of true repentance are liuely ſet forth. Dauid hauing fallen into adulterie, being as it were lulled a ſleepe with a certayne drowſineſſe, doth liue ſecurely, but when he is reprehended of the Prophet, he begynneth to lament his ſinne, and there were in him horrible terrours and extreme feare which he himſelfe deſcribeth in the Pſalmes:Pſal. 38.3. 
                     There is no rest in my bones bicauſe of my ſinne: for he did feare euerlaſting puniſhment. But hearing this voyce of the Prophet by the commaundement of God:2. Sam. 12.13. 
                     Thou ſhalt not die, the Lorde hath put away thy ſinne: He turneth agayne vnto the Lorde and repenteth, he hateth his ſinne, he flieth vnto mercie by fayth,Pſal. 51.1. ſaying: Haue mercie vpon me O God, according to thy louing kindeneſſe. He promiſeth obedience in time to come:verſ. 15. 
                     My mouth ſhall ſhewe forth thy prayſe.
                     verſ. 13. Alſo, I ſhall teach thy wayes vnto the wicked, and ſinners ſhall be conuerted vnto thee. In this example alſo we ſee what conuerſion is, what is the foundation and partes thereof. Lyke vnto this were the examples of Manaſſes, of the ſinfull woman, of the theefe, of Peter, of Paule: which examples when we doe applie them to the rule, they doe moſt plainly ſet before vs the liuely formes of true repentance. But bicauſe the doctrine of repentance is chiefe in the Church, and bicauſe it is very profitable for men to be well inſtructed concerning it: we will briefly declare by definitions the partes thereof, as

they are taught in our Churches oute of the word of God and by famous and well knowne examples.The parts of true repentance. The partes thereof as is ſayd before are contrition, fayth, and newe obedience.
                  Contrition is not a miſliking of the fact,Contrition the firſt part of repentance what it is. as was in Iudas, but it is the beginning of true repentance, to wit, an extreme feare of conſcience for ſinne, a true hatred of ſinne, and an auoyding of ſinne not without hope of pardon, as appeareth in the prodigall ſonne. For a knowledge of mercy muſt of neceſſitie goe before true repentance, according to the ſaying of Ambroſe: No man can repent except firſt he hopeth for pardon: and that of Auguſtine. The mercye of God is neceſſary not onely when we doe repent, but alſo that we may repent.
                  Fayth is a knowledge, conſent,What fayth is, which is the ſeconde part of true repentance. and deſire of the promiſed mercy, and a ſure confidence in Chriſt the mediatour. Although the former examples and the fourth chap. to the Rom. doe confirme this definition, yet let vs adde more reaſons concerning the properties of fayth. Chriſt pronounceth them ſaued that beleeue, therfore it muſt needes be that fayth doth ſignifie a truſt in the promiſe, ſeeing that no man is ſaued by knowledge alone. Agayne, Paule doth ſometime call this fayth a ſure truſt or confidence, ſometime a perſwaſion, whereby a man doth certaynely perſwade himſelfe, that God both will, and alſo is able to performe that which he hath promiſed. This therfore is that fayth, by which alone without the workes of the law the Apoſtle affirmeth that a man is iuſtified before God. For ſuch a fayth onely as we haue deſcribed, doth apprehende Chriſt and poſſeſſe him with all his benefites. I will therfore ſet forth a playne and manifeſt doctrine concerning this iuſtification which commeth by fayth in Chriſt, and will briefly confute the errours with the which this doctrine both in time paſt and alſo in our age, is darkned and made obſcure.
                  
                     
                     The definition of iuſtification.Iuſtification is a deliuerance from ſinne of the man that doth beleeue in Chriſt, an imputation of the righteouſneſſe of Chriſt, and an accepting of him being iuſtified to life euerlaſting, freely for Chriſtes ſake. In this definition fiue principall poynts are to be conſidered. Firſt fayth by which the grace which is offred,Fayth. is receyued, wherevpon Paule ſayth:Rom. 3.28. 
                     we are iustified by fayth. For fayth is as it were a certayne hande, wherewith we receyue Chriſt offered vnto vs, with his obedience, that it may be our righteouſneſſe.Deliuerance from ſinne. The ſeconde is a clenſing or deliuerance from ſinne through the ſatiſfaction made by Ieſus Chriſt, according to that ſaying of Iohn: The bloude of Ieſus Christ clenſeth vs from all ſinne.
                     1. Iohn. 1.7. To this alſo belongeth that ſaying of Dauid:Pſal. 32.1.2. 
                     Bleſſed is he, whoſe wickednes is forgiuen, Alſo, Bleſſed is the man vnto whome the Lorde imputeth not iniquitie. What deliuerance is, it is to be gathered by ye definition of ſinne. For as ſinne is a defect or reuolting from the lawe and will of God, with a bonde vnto eternall death and condemnation: ſo deliuerance is the diſcharging or ſetting free of a man from the bonde of death and condemnation. But that this deliuerance doth come vnto him that beleeueth in Chriſt, many teſtimonies doe witnes.Iohn. 3.36. Imputation of righteouſneſſe. 
                     He that beleeueth in the ſon, hath euerlasting life. The third is the imputation of ye righteouſnes of Chriſt. For his obedience, death, paſſion, and reſurrection are the matter & foundation of our iuſtification. 2. Cor. 5. He hath made him to be ſinne for vs, which knew no ſinne, that we ſhoulde be made the righteouſneſſe of God in him. This righteouſnes, which he ſayth that we are made in him, the Apoſtle defineth Rom. 5. when he ſayth: As by one mans diſobedience many were made ſinners: ſo by the obedience of one ſhall many alſo be made righteous. Chriſtian righteouſneſſe therefore is the obedience of Chriſt imputed to the beleeuer. For fayth is imputed to hym for righteouſneſſe, which beleeueth in him that iuſtifieth

the wicked. Of theſe this alſo followeth,Howe we are righteous before God. that the qualitie of righteouſnes is in Chriſt, but is imputed vnto vs which is proper vnto him. For we are ſo iuſt before God as Chriſt was a ſinner. As he after a ſort tooke vpon him our perſon, whereby he might be made guiltie in our name, and might be iudged as a ſinner, not for his owne ſinnes, but for the ſinnes of other, ſeing that he himſelfe was pure and cleane frō all ſinne, and might ſuffer puniſhment due vnto vs and not vnto him: So we nowe are iuſt in him, not bicauſe we do ſatiſfie the iudgement of God with our workes, but bicauſe we are accounted righteous with the righteouſneſſe of Chriſt, which by fayth alone we doe put on, that it might be made ours.Accepting of vs vnto eternall lyfe. The fourth is an accepting of the perſon vnto eternall life. For Paule ſetteth this degree after iuſtification. Rom. 8. Whom he iustified, them be alſo glorified. To this belongeth the ſaying of the Lorde: He that beleeueth in me shall not perish, but shall haue euerlasting lyfe. The fift, freely for Chriſtes ſake: freely that all the merites of men maye be excluded: for Chriſtes ſake, that the redemption of the onely begotten ſonne of God may be acknowledged to be the merit of ſo great a treaſure.
                  Although this doctrine of our Churches is grounded vpon the iuſt, ſounde, and perfite worde of God:Diuers errours in the doctrine of iuſtification. yet there be diuerſe and ſundrie errors ſpred abrode agaynſt it. For there be ſome which place this iuſtification of man in the workes done of men: other ſome will needes haue it to conſiſt of fayth and workes togither: ſome go about to eſtabliſhe a certayne eſſentiall righteouſneſſe. Although theſe things which we haue ſpoken,The firſt errour of them which ſaye that we are iuſtified by works, with a confutation thereof. Pſal. 143.2. doe confute the errours of theſe, yet we will ſpeake ſomewhat ſeuerally of them. They which affirme that mā is iuſtified by works, are more eaſily confuted, ſeeing that the moſt manifeſt oracles of God doe crie out agaynſt this errour. Dauid cryeth out openly: Enter not into iudgement with thy ſeruant:

for in thy ſight ſhall none that liueth be iustified. And Paule Rom. 3. Therefore by the workes of the lawe shal no fleshe be iustified.
                     Gal. 3.10. And to the Galath. As manye as are of the workes of the lawe, are vnder the curſe. Agayne: If righteouſneſſe be by the lawe,
                     Gal. 2.21. 
                     then Christ died without a cauſe. Their opinion therefore is manifeſtly falſe, which affirme that a man is iuſtified, that is, made iuſt by workes. But we acknowledge with Iames, that good workes are required to the declaring of this iuſtification, that the good tree may be knowne by it fruites, neyther is there any diſagreeing betweene Paule and Iames. For when Paul ſayth that a mā is not iuſtified by works, he ſignifieth that he is not made iuſt and without fault before God by workes. When Iames ſayth that men are iuſtified by workes, he meaneth that men are by workes declared to be iuſt.The ſeconde error of them which affirme that wee are iuſtified by ſayth and workes togither, and the ſame cōfuted. But the ſaying of them hath ſomewhat a fayrer ſhewe, which affirme that the righteouſneſſe whereby the wicked man is iuſtified before God, doth conſiſt of fayth and works togither. For they ſaye that fayth is the beginning of righteouſneſſe, and workes the perfection thereof, whoſe errour S. Paule confuteth by theſe reaſons. Rom. 10. I beare them recorde that they haue the zeale of God, but not according to knowledge. For they being ignorant of the righteouſnes of God, and going about to stabliſhe their owne righteouſnes, haue not ſubmitted themſelues to the righteouſnes of God. For Christ is the ende of the lawe for righteouſnes vnto euerye one that beleeueth. Here Paule maketh this to be the cauſe of the caſting of of the Iewes, for that they woulde ioyne their owne righteouſneſſe with the righteouſneſſe of God which is by fayth, and of both ioyned togither make one forme of righteouſneſſe.Verſe. 6. Alſo Rom. 11. he reaſoneth thus: If it be of grace, it is no more of workes, or elſe were grace no more grace: but if it be of works, it is no more grace, or elſe were worke no more worke. Paule here firſt ſetteth downe two

contrarie propoſitions without any meane betwene them: If election and ſaluation be of workes, it is not of grace: If it be of grace, it is not of workes, bicauſe that debt and gift are ſo contrarie, that neither of them may rightly be ſayde one of the other, or both of them of any thirde. Eyther therefore we are iuſtified and ſaued by fayth alone, or by workes: but the teſtimonies before alledged doe proue that no man is iuſtified by workes. Agayne, if chriſtian righteouſneſſe did conſiſt of fayth and works togither, the reaſoning of Paule were fonde and vayne. Rom. 4. To him that worketh, the wages is not counted by fauour but by debt: but to him that worketh not, but beleueth in him that iustifieth the vngodly, his fayth is counted for righteouſneſſe. Here Paule maketh two ſortes of righteouſneſſe, which differ the one from the other. For they haue contrarie cauſes. For the righteouſneſſe of fayth,Two kindes of righteouſneſſe. by which he that beleeueth is iuſtified, is imputed and giuen freely, but the righteouſneſſe of works is not free. Furthermore, if one part is to be attributed to fayth, the other part to workes in the iuſtification of man, two abſurdities ſhould followe thereof: one that the promiſe ſhoulde be made vncertaine which ought to be certaine. Another, that the ſatiſfaction of Chriſt coulde not ſuffice, except it were ſtabliſhed by our workes. Wherefore we embrace the ſaying of Augustine, which ſayth: It is grace in no poynt, except it be free in all poyntes. But the occaſion of the errour of the Papiſtes was a Philoſophicall imagination,The errour concerning iuſtification by fayth and workes togither, from whence it proceeded. which knoweth no righteouſneſſe except it be a certayne qualitie in vs. For it vnderſtandeth not that a man may be iuſtified by the imputation of the righteouſneſſe of another.
                  Nowe let vs come to eſſentiall righteouſneſſe, concerning which firſt it is to be vnderſtand,The thirde errour in the doctrine of iuſtification confuted. yt we are in no wiſe righteous before God by ye eſſential righteouſnes of God, but in reſpect of the principall efficient cauſe. For the formall righteouſneſſe, by which we are righteous before

God, is no other than the obedience of Chriſt, as Paule plainly teacheth Rom. 5. By the obedience of one, many ſhall be made righteous.
                     The obedience of Chriſt is double. But the obedience of Chriſt is of two ſortes, of the croſſe, and of the lawe. By the obedience of the croſſe (whereby he humbled himſelfe, and became obedient vnto the death, euen the death of the croſſe. Philip. 3.) the Lorde doth make a full ſatiſfaction for our ſinne. The obedience of the lawe he imputeth vnto vs that beleeue, that by it we maye appeare righteous in the ſight of God. Paule ſayth that this righteouſneſſe or obedience of Chriſt is imputed to them that beleeue, therfore it is neyther ſubſtance nor qualitie abyding in them, whereby a man is made righteous formally. Wherefore this affirmance is ſurely to be helde,Chriſtian righteouſnes. that chriſtian righteouſnes is the obedience of the ſonne of God imputed to him that beleeueth. But in the meane ſeaſon we muſt alſo vnderſtande this, that the Scripture maketh mention of three kindes of righteouſneſſe of man,Three kindes of righteouſnes of man. whereof one is of fayth, by which we ſtande before God, and this is perfect, as the obedience of Chriſt is perfect,Perfect righteouſneſſe in this lyfe. neyther is it diminiſhed or increaſed by the diminiſhing or increaſing of fayth. For the Publicane had this full and perfect as well as Peter, although the fayth of Peter was much more manifeſt and knowne.Vnperfect righteouſnes. Another is the beginning of obedience, which is alſo called the righteouſneſſe of a good conſcience. This is not ſet agaynſt the wrath of God, bicauſe it is not perfect obedience of the lawe, yet it is neceſſary, in as much as it is the proper fruite of fayth. An other there is,Righteouſnes perfect and abſolute in the lyfe to come. which is as yet looked for, whereof Paule ſpeaketh Galat. 5. For we through the ſpirite wayte for the hope of righteouſneſſe through fayth. And 1. Iohn. 3. Dearly beloued, nowe are we the ſonnes of God, but yet it doth not appeare what we ſhall be: and we knowe that when we ſhall appeare, we ſhall be like him: for we shall ſee him as he is: and euery man that hath this hope in him, purgeth himſelfe

euen as he is pure. This righteouſneſſe therefore is a making of vs lyke vnto God, a dwelling of God in vs, a full fruition of God, an abſolute and perfect loue. And although we muſt confeſſe, that the heartes of them that beleeue are the temples of the holy ghoſt, and Chriſt ſayth Iohn. 14. If any man loue me, he will keepe my worde, and my father will loue him, and we will come vnto him, and wil dwell with him: yet it doth not followe that this dwelling of God in vs is the righteouſneſſe whereby we ſtande before God, but it is a diuine preſence in vs, by which we are renued, doe feele comfort, and begyn to approch to eternall life. Furthermore, if men were iuſtified here by eſſentiall righteouſneſſe, there ſhoulde be no difference betweene the righteouſneſſe by which we are righteous in this lyfe, and that by which we ſhall be like vnto God in all eternitie. But Paule putteth a manifeſt difference betweene theſe two. For he ſayth that we haue the righteouſneſſe of fayth, nowe here in this lyfe, but that we doe looke for another righteouſneſſe, which Iohn defineth to be a framing or faſhioning, whereby we ſhall be faſhioned lyke vnto God, which faſhioning ſhall proceede from hence, in that we ſhall ſee him as he is.Newe obedience doth neceſſarily accompanye ſaith. Newe obedience is neceſſarily ioyned with fayth. For regeneration, which cannot be abſent from a iuſtifying fayth, doth neceſſarily bring forth it fruites which are ſeene in newe obedience. For after that a man through the grace of regeneration is made a newe tree, he ought to bring forth newe, that is, good fruites, which Paule in his Epiſtle to the Philip. calleth the frutes of ye righteouſnes of fayth. Iames pronounceth in his own peculiar and proper phraſe that men are iuſtified by the ſame, that is, acknowledged and declared iuſt. This newe obedience is ſometime called ſanctification, which conſiſteth of the mortifying of the fleſhe, and of the quickening of the ſpirit. For Paule ſayth thus: Christ is made vnto vs wiſedome, and righteouſneſſe,
                     1. Cor. 1.30. 
                     and

ſanctification,
                     Howe Chriſt is made our wiſedome, righteouſnes, ſanctification. &c. 
                     and redemption. He is made our wiſedome in the preaching of the Goſpell. He is made our righteouſneſſe by the attonement for ſinne, and imputation of righteouſneſſe. He is made our ſanctification, when he giueth vs the holy ghoſt, which doth after a ſort turne our nature, and make it, that the olde man being by little and little mortified, we maye liue after the ſpirite, that is, we may giue our myndes to godlyneſſe towarde God, charitie towarde our neyghbour, to holyneſſe of lyfe, and diligence in our vocation, briefly, that we maye ſubmit our ſelues wholy to the rule of the ſpirit. In what man ſoeuer the force and vertue of this regeneration, or of this ſanctification is not felt, there of neceſſitie fayth cannot be. For a true and a right fayth is feruent in ſpirite, and endeuoureth to bring forth it true fruites, and deſireth nothing more than to ſerue God in ſpirit, and to abounde in all knowledge and vnderſtanding. Seing that this is in very deede the propertie of a iuſtifying fayth and of regeneration: who can beare or abyde the ſaying of them, which with all their might in words and writings do impugne the neceſſitie of good workes? which truly we ſay are neceſſary,Howe good workes are neceſſarie to ſaluation. not as merits and cauſes of ſaluation. For ye ſaying of Paul is firme and vnmoueable. Ephe. 2. By grace are ye ſaued through fayth, and that not of your ſelues, it is the gift of God, not of woorkes, least any man shoulde boast himſelfe: but as neceſſarilye accompanying a iuſtifying fayth, and as the effectes of the ſpirite which doth regenerate vs. Furthermore, that the reaſon and maner of good workes may be the better vnderſtande, I will declare in order ſixe queſtions concerning good works.Sixe queſtions to be handled concerning good works. The queſtions are theſe. The firſt, what workes are to be taught, and to be done. The ſeconde, howe they maye be done. The thirde, howe they doe pleaſe. The fourth, what are the cauſes of good works. The fift, why promiſes are added to good works. The ſixt, bicauſe all men haue ſinne,

it is not without cauſe demaunded, whoſe obedience doth pleaſe, and whoſe doth not pleaſe.The firſt queſtion what good workes are to bee taught and done. When it is enquired what workes are to be taught and done, two thinges are to be weyed of vs, whoe we be, and whome he is vnto whom obedience is to be giuen by workes. When we beholde our ſelues conſidering our owne corruption, we are admoniſhed that we our ſelues doe not imagine workes by which we thinke to worſhip God. For by our ſelues we do not vnderſtand, what eyther pleaſeth or diſpleaſeth God, and the Lorde pronounceth that he is worſhipped in vayne with the commaundements of men: Let vs therfore certaynly thinke that workes, albeit fayre and goodly, which haue bene inuented of men, are in no wiſe good.
                  But if we conſider God, we are admoniſhed of reuerence toward him, whereby it commeth to paſſe that we thinke that that onely pleaſeth him, which he preſcribeth in his word. For he onely is our law giuer.Such workes are to bee taught and done, as God hath commended to vs in his worde. 
                     Ezechiel comprehendeth both in chap. 20. walke ye not in the ordinances of your fathers, neyther obſerue their maners, nor defile your ſelues with their Idols, I am the Lord your God: walke in my statutes, and keepe my iudgements and doe them. Alſo, 33. I haue made thee a watchman vnto the houſe of Iſraell: therefore thou shalt heare the word at my mouth, and admonish them from me. Hereof therefore it manifeſtly followeth that no other workes are to be taught and done but thoſe which are commended vnto vs by the word of God.
                  After that the mind of the godly man knoweth,The ſeconde queſtion. what workes are to be done forth with,Howe thoſe works which God hath preſcribed, may be done. Heb. 11.6. Iohn. 15.5. it inquireth how they may be done. The diſſoluing of this queſtion is to be taken out of two ſayinges of the Scripture. The Apoſtle ſayth to the Hebr. without fayth it is vnpoſible to pleaſe God. And Chriſt ſayth: without me can ye doe nothing. Wherefore theſe thinges are required in order. Firſt, the knowledge of Chriſt. Secondly truſt and confidence in

Chriſt. Thirdly viuification, whereby Chriſt doth quicken vs by the Goſpell, and poureth his holy ſpirite vpon vs. Herevnto maketh ye ſaying of Eſay, chap. 40. But they that wayt vpon the Lord shall renue their strength: they ſhall lift vp the wings as the Egles: they shall runne, and not be wearie, and they shall walke and not faint. For there can be no loue, no obedience, except mercy and reconcilation for the mediatours ſake be firſt apprehended. In this conſolation the diuinitie doth dwell in the heart. For the eternall father is effectuall in deede by his ſonne which comforteth by the voyce of the Goſpell, and the holye Ghoſt is giuen of the father and the Sonne which ſtirreth vp in vs ioye and calling vpon God, according to theſe ſayings:Zach. 12.10. 
                     I will poure vpon them the ſpirite of grace and compaſſion,
                     Iohn. 14.23. 
                     &c. And in Iohn: We will come vnto him and dwel with him. 2. Cor. 3. We beholding the glory of the Lord with open face, are changed into the ſame image, that is, we beholding the word which is the image of the eternall father, and in conſolatiō doth ſhew the preſence and goodnes of God, are made like vnto his image, the holy Ghoſt inflaming our hearts.
                  
                     The thirde queſtion how good workes which are done of vs do pleaſe God.After that the mind is taught how good workes may be done, it inquireth furthermore how they pleaſe, for they are done in vayne, except they pleaſe. Scipio fighteth for his countrey, Dauid alſo fighteth, but the workes of both of them doe not pleaſe God. It is fitly therefore demaunded, how good workes may pleaſe. To the which queſtion we aunſwere in generall, that they pleaſe in the regenerate. The workes of Scipio did not pleaſe bicauſe he was not regenerate. But the warfare of Dauid did pleaſe bicauſe Dauid was accepted by fayth. But here are three thinges to be conſidered in order. Firſt we muſt certainly thinke concerning the perſon, that he is reconciled by fayth and iuſt for Chriſtes ſake freely. Then we muſt confeſſe that the perſon iuſtified by fayth, cannot as yet ſatiſfie

the lawe. For many inward ſinnes doe abide and ſticke euen in the Godly. This vncleanneſſe is to be lamented and doubts and euil affections are to be reſiſted and ſtriuen againſt, and alſo we ought to pray with true ſighes of the heart, that God will not impute vnto vs this filthines wherein we are wrapped. Thirdly, although we acknowledge this our filthines, notwithſtanding we muſt certaynly thinke that God doth require a certayne vnperfect obedience in vs, & that this vnperfect obedience doth pleaſe for Chriſts ſake. For ſo Peter doth playnly teach: Offer vp ſpirituall ſacrifices acceptable to God by Ieſus Christ, which is our reconciliation and now maketh interceſſion for vs.
                     How our obedience pleaſeth God. Our obedience therefore doth not pleaſe God for the worthines or perfection thereof. For by it ſelfe it is vnworthy to come into the ſight of God, neyther doth it fulfill the law, as it is ſayd, but it pleaſeth bicauſe of the perſon reconciled, which for Chriſts ſake is counted righteous: ſo alſo doth he pleaſe, although he carie about in the fleſh ſinne and great infirmitie. Seing it is euident that a man is in no wiſe iuſtified by workes:Three ſpeciall cauſes which ought to moue vs to doe good workes. it may fitly alſo may be demaunded, what are the cauſes of good workes by which men ought to be ſtirred vp and pricked forward to worke well. There are numbred three moſt weyghty cauſes, neceſſitie, dignitie, and reward.
                  Neceſſitie may be made to be of fiue ſorts:Fiue kindes of neceſſitie which oughte much to ſtirre vs vp vnto the doing of good workes. of ye cōmāndemēt, of worſhip, of det, of holding faſt ye fayth, of auoyding puniſhmēt, & of cōuerſion or regeueratiō. Neceſſitie of the commaundemēt is, bicauſe God doth ſeriouſly and ſeuerely commaund obedience toward his lawe. Keepe mine ordinances ſayth he, and walke therein, & Paul ſayth:Leuit. 18.4.
                     This is the will of God euen your ſanctification.
                     1. Theſſ. 4.3. Neceſſity of dette or dutie that we owe is declared Rom. 8. We are detters not to the fleſh but to the ſpirite, for we are not our owne, but his that hath redemed vs with his bloud. Neceſſitie of holding faſt the fayth is commaunded to vs of

Paule.1. Timo. 5.8. 
                     If there be any that prouideth not for his owne, and namely for them of his housholde, he denieth the fayth, and is worſe than an infidel.
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Timo. 1.18.29. And agayne: Fight a good fight, hauing fayth and a good conſcience, neyther of which is kept while we giue our ſelues to ſinne. Neceſſitie of auoyding puniſhment is confirmed by the teſtimonie of Dauid. For iniquitie, ſayth he, thou doest chastice the children of men. Neceſſitie of conuerſion is affirmed in this ſaying:Ezech. 33.11. 
                     As I liue, ſayth the Lord God, I deſire not the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turne from his waye and liue. When therefore conuerſion is made, man is alſo quickened by fayth through the holy Ghoſt. Moreouer, vnto conuerſion is ioined regeneration, which is a beginning of a newe lyfe, a newe light, wiſedome, righteouſneſſe, and a renuing of the image of God in vs.
                  
                     The ſecond ſpeciall cauſe which ought so moue vs to worke well.The ſeconde cauſe is dignitie, which conſiſteth in this, that the man conuerted or regenerate, is nowe the ſonne of God, according to that ſaying: He gaue power to be the ſonnes of God to them that beleeue in his name.
                     Iohn. 1.12. Howe great a dignitie is it, that they which beleeue, are the temple of the holy ghoſt liuing? that Chriſt dwelleth in them by fayth? that the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghoſt, doe come vnto them, and will dwell with them? that they are the members of Chriſt. On the contrarie, wey what a wickednes it is for the children of God to reſemble the image of the enimie: howe great a daunger it is, that the temple of God ſhoulde be polluted with the filthineſſe of Satan, what a cruell thing it is to driue God out of his dwelling place. Wherefore it becommeth the children of God to imitate their heauenly father, which ſayth:
                        
                           •
                        . Pet. 1.16. 
                     Be ye holy, for I am holy. Herevpon Paule ſayeth that we are called to ſanctification,The third ſpeciall cauſe which ought to ſtirre vs vp to good workes. and not to vncleannes.
                  The thirde cauſe is a rewarde, that is, a recompence of the pacience and obedience of them that beleeue. This rewarde is not giuen for the worthineſſe of the worke, but

for the promiſe of grace. Seing that the good workes that are done of the godly, are the bounden duties of ſeruants,Fiue cauſes wherefore God hath added promiſes to good workes. and vnperfect and defiled: it may be demaunded why God hath added promiſes to good workes. And there may be numbred fiue cauſes hereof. The firſt, that they may be teſtimonies of the prouidence of God.The firſt. For God will haue it knowne that good things pertayning to the bodye, are created of him, and are not ſpreade abroade by chaunce, but are of him giuen to the Church, and preſerued according to the ſaying: He is thy life and the length of thy dayes, in the dayes of hunger they ſhall be ſatiſfied, the rich haue ſuffred hunger, but no good thing shall be wanting to him that feareth the Lorde. The ſeconde,The ſecond. that they may be teſtimonies, that God will, yea euen in this lyfe keepe and preſerue his Church. Wherefore Paule ſayth 1. Tim. 4. Godlyneſſe hath the promiſe of the lyfe preſent, and of that that is to come. Bicauſe God will of his infinite goodneſſe gather his Church for his ſonnes ſake the mediatour, he keepeth this order of nature, he maketh the earth fruitefull, that he may feede and nouriſhe his Church euen in this life, and bicauſe for his Churches ſake he doth feede alſo the reſt, it becommeth vs eſpecially to be thankfull. The thirde,The third. bicauſe God will haue corporall neceſſitie to be a moniſhment & warning concerning fayth, prayer, hope, giuing of thankes: therefore hath he ſet forth his promiſes, & wil haue theſe good things to be aſked & loked for by fayth, & by this aſking and looking for he will haue fayth, hope and pacience to increaſe. The fourth,The fourth. that they may be warnings of the promiſe of grace, bicauſe that fayth which acknowledgeth the ſonne, and receyueth reconciliation, ought alwayes to go before in the aſking of corporall things, and for the ſonnes ſake the other promiſes were ſet forth and ratified. All theſe things are comprehended in the ſaying:Ioh. 15.16. 
                     Whatſoeuer he shall aske the father in my name, he will giue it you. The fift,The fift. bicauſe God

will haue both theſe things to be knowne, both that the Church is ſubiect to the croſſe, and yet nowithſtanding that it is marueylouſly preſerued in this lyfe, euen among perils and daungers, that all the maruaylous preſeruations of the Church, and al the wonderfull deliuerances of the ſame, may be teſtimonies of the preſence of God in his Church, as it is ſayde Num. 14. That the Egyptians maye knowe, that thou, O Lorde art among this people. Ioſu. 3. Ye shall knowe that the Lorde God is in the middest of you. 1. Kings. 17. That all the earth may knowe, that there is a God in Iſrael. Eſay. 37. Nowe O Lorde our God, ſaue thou vs out of the hande of Zenacherib, that all the kingdomes of the earth may knowe, that thou onely art the Lorde. Seing that al men haue ſinne, it is rightly demaunded, whoſe obedience doth pleaſe, and whoſe doth not pleaſe. To this queſtion I doe aunſwere thus:Two generall ſorts of ſinnes Sinnes are of two ſorts: ſome are committed of them which know and are willing agaynſt their conſcience, ſuch ſinnes are not in them that beleeue. For if he that beleueth, doth fall agaynſt his conſcience,VVhat followeth ſinne agaynſt the conſcience. he doth as it were ſhake of the holy ghoſt, renounce the fayth, and is made guiltie of the wrath of God, and except he repenteth, he falleth headlong into eternal puniſhment. Moreouer they, which being deceyued by the deluſions of the deuill, doe reuolt from the foundation, that is, doe renounce and forſake any article of the fayth, whether they vnderſtande it, or vnderſtande it not, doe ceaſe to be holy, doe ſhake of the holy ghoſt, and become guiltie of eternal wrath and diſpleaſure, as Cherinthus, Ebion, Arius, Fotinus,
                     The ſinnes of the godly. and ſuch lyke heretikes. Other ſome ſinnes are not committed agaynſt the conſcience, as blindneſſe, and ignorance, doubting, many omittings of our dutie, and vicious affections, agaynſt which euilles the godlye doe ſtriue, and doe beleeue that they are put away for the mediators ſake. Although this vncleanneſſe is in the godly, yet they doe pleaſe God for the mediatours ſake, receiuing

by fayth forgiueneſſe of their ſinnes, according to that ſaiyng: Bleſſed are they whoſe ſinnes are couered.
                     Pſal. 32.
                           •
                        . And Paule ſayth: If ye mortifye the deedes of the flesh by the ſpirite,
                     Rom. 8.13.
                     ye ſhall liue. Theſe things I thought good to ſpeake more at large concerning true and wholeſome repentance, and the partes thereof, that the maner of true repentance or turning vnto God, may be plainly vnderſtande of euerye one, and the order of the partes of repentance may be conſidered, that that which is proper to euery of them may be giuen vnto it, that we doe not confounde the properties of the partes, that we may vnderſtande that iuſtification and ſaluation is free, that we may not depriue fayth of it properties. Briefly, that we being iuſtified by fayth freely for Chriſtes ſake, may giue to God his glorie and worſhip, and exerciſe our ſelues in all kindes of good works whiles that we ſhall be ſtraungers in this lyfe, which a full and perfite redemption through Chriſt our only ſauiour ſhall follow, to whome be prayſe for euer. Amen.
               
            
         
         
            
               Chap. 3. The ſumme of the thirde Chapter.
               
               AS he perſwadeth that none doe rashly vſurpe vnto him ſelfe authoritie of maistership & gouernment, but rather that he bridle his owne tōgue: ſo he requireth that wiſedome be shewed by modest conuerſation, rather than by contention and enuie, whereof many miſchiefes doe come.
            
            
               The order and partes of the thirde Chapter.
               THere are two partes of this Chapter: the first concerning maistership not to be rashly vſurped ouer other, but rather that the tongue is to be bridled. The ſecond of the vſe of wiſedome and giftes without enuie and contention. Either part hath it reaſons by which it is proued.
            
            
               
               The expoſition of the third Chapter with an obſeruation of the Doctrine.
               1 My brethren be not many maiſters.
               
                  THe meaning of this propoſition conſidered by it ſelfe is doubtfull, but if it be reſtrayned, as it needes muſt be, to the reaſons by which the propoſition is confirmed, the meaning is eaſye. Seeing therefore that all the reaſons whiche are afterwarde added, doe contayne the diſcommodities of an intemperate tongue, we muſt of neceſſitie here take maiſters for them, which take vnto them ſelues authoritie to refourme and cenſure others, and doe ſeuerly and rigorouſly call other mens deedes vnto examination, and in the meane ſeaſon doe not ſee there owne faultes.What the Apoſtle condemneth in the former wordes. He doth not therefore condemne here brotherly admonition, which proceedeth of fayth and loue, which hath the commandement of Chriſt, and is the foundation of Eccleſiaſticall diſcipline: but he condemneth the lightnes, ambition and pride of them, which doe not ſo much regarde edifying, as they doe giue them ſelues to ſclaunder and backbite. Chriſt ſayth: Matth. 23. Be not ye called Rabbi: for one is your maister, to wit, Christ, and all ye are brethren And call no man your father vpon the earth, for there is but one your father which is in heauen. &c. If any contende vpon theſe wordes, that it is not lawfull for any godly man to take vpon him the title of maiſter or teacher:The names maiſters and teachers are not taken away by the words of Iames. I obiect agaynſt him the forbydding of the name of a father. For here we are no leſſe prohibited to be called fathers then maiſters. Wherefore as it is not ſimply forbidden to be called fathers, but in this or that reſpect: ſo neither are we ſimplie forbidden to be called maiſters or teachers.

This meaning therfore is to be conſidered. Chriſt doth not eſteme by what name or title thou art called, ſo as thou abideſt vnder his gouernment, and maintayneſt brotherly concord without ambition and contempt of others. Paule calleth himſelfe the maiſter and teacher of the Gentils, yet he hath not broken this commaundement of Chriſt, but rather obeyed it. For his maiſterſhip did tende vnto this ende, that he might bring all vnder the gouernement and rule of Chriſt. They therfore which eyther vpon the wordes of Iames or the prohibition of the Lorde doe condemne ſcholaſticall promotions, doe miſtake and falſly apply the Scripture, and appayre and diminiſh the profitable gouernment of a common wealth concerning learning. Let ambition be farre from vs, let vs ſubmit oure ſelues to the maiſterſhip and gouernement of Chriſt, and let vs reuerently retayne and keepe ſcholaſticall order.
               Knovving that vve shall receiue the greater condemnation.
               The firſt reaſon is taken of puniſhment: they which are ready to condemne others, who notwithſtanding them ſelues, are in the ſame faults or greater, doe prouoke the wrath of God agaynſt themſelues. For ſeing that loue doth couer a multitude of ſinnes, and they are deſirous to diſcouer the ſinnes of others, they doe ſufficiently declare, that they are voyde of loue.
               2 For in many thinges vve ſinne all.
               The ſecond reaſon taken of our common imbecillitie and weaknes. For our common infirmitie and readines to ſin ought to admoniſh vs that we be not ouer rigorous agaynſt others.The greateſt cauſes which moue men to ſinne ſo often as they doe. The chiefe cauſes of our falling into ſinne are theſe, 1. Sin dwelling or abiding in vs. 2. The manifold craftes and aſſaultes of the deuil. 3. The examples of the greateſt part of the worlde, and thoſe exceeding euill. 4. Negligence of gouernours of maners and diſcipline, as in parents, miniſters of the Goſpell and ciuill rulers.
               
                  If any man ſinne not in vvord, he is a perfect man, and able to bridle all the body.
               The third reaſon taken of the profite of a bridled tongue. He that can temper his tongue is a perfect man, that is vpright or entire, and endued with many other vertues. Therefore he that doth vſe his tongue vnruly and diſhoneſtly is no whit vpright or entire: for he is polluted with many vices. Wherefore we muſt not raſhly take vnto vs authoritie to iudge and refourme the maners of others.
               
                  3 Behold vve put bittes into the horſes mouthes, that they should obey vs, and vve turne about all theyr body.
                  4 Behold alſo the shippes, vvhich though they be ſo great, and are driuen of fierce vvindes, yet are they turned about vvith a very ſmal rudder, vvhitherſoeuer the gouernour liſteth.
                  5 Euen ſo the tongue is a little member, and boaſteth of great things.
               
               
                  The tongue is compared to the bit of a bridle, and to the rudder of a ship.The fourth reaſon likewiſe is taken of the profit and commoditie of a well ordered tongue. For as a bitte put into the horſes mouth, doth turne about all the body of the horſe, and as the rudder of a ſhip doth guide the whole ſhip: ſo a well ordered tongue boaſteth of great thinges, that is, it bringeth to paſſe great matters, and doth as it were direct the whole man into the way of perfection: when as contrariwiſe a diſordered and an vnruly tongue is like to a bitte that is lewſe, and a rudder that is ſet at libertie.
               
                  Behold hovv great a thing a little fire kindleth.
                  6 And the tongue is a fire, yea a vvorld of vvickednes: ſo is the tongue ſet among our members, that it defileth the vvhole body, and ſetteth on fire the courſe of nature, and it is ſet on fire of hel.
               
               The fift reaſon taken of the diſcommodities of an vnbridled

and an vnruly tongue.The diſcommodities which ariſe of an vnruly and an vntemperate tongue. As, ſayth he, a little fire dooth with burning conſume the whole wood: ſo the litle tongue is as it were the kindling of many vices, which although it be but ſmal, yet it is a world of iniquitie that is, a gathering togither or an heape of all wickednes, as therfore in a little fire there is powre to kindle the whole wood: ſo in the ſmall tongue, there is power to defile the whole body of man, and to ſet on fire the courſe of nature, when as it ſelfe is firſt ſet on fire of hell. But what is the courſe of nature, and what is it for the tongue to be ſet on fire of hell? As the courſe of nature is the world it ſelfe: ſo the tongue to be ſet on fire of hell is aſmuch, as to be breathed vpon of Satan himſelfe, wherby it is made a ſit inſtrument to ſtirre vp all miſchiefe in the worlde. Hereunto may be referred that ſaying of Menander: the tongue is the cauſe of many euills. How true this is the tongue of Mahomet and other heretikes doth witnes.
               
                  7 For the vvhole nature of beaſtes and of birdes, and of creeping thinges, and thinges of the ſea is tamed and hath bene tamed of the nature of man:
                  8 But the tongue can no man tame, it is an vnruly euil
               
               The ſixt reaſon taken from a compariſon: beaſtes byrdes, and fiſhes of the ſea may be tamed,A hard thing to rule the tongue, and therefore it muſt be bridled in time. but the tongue that is vnbrideled and accuſtomed to ſpeak ill, can by no meanes be tamed. It is therfore an exceeding great euill. Wherefore we muſt moſt diligently take heede, that we doe not giue it to much libertie.
               
                  Full of deadly poyſon.
                  9 Therevvith bleſſe vve God euen the father, & therevvith curſe vve men, vvhich are made after the ſimilitude of God.
                  10 Out of one mouth procedeth bleſſing and curſing.
               
               The ſeuenth reaſon taken of the wonderfull inconſtancie of the venimous tongue. For it fayneth ye it bleſſeth God, and by and by it curſeth him in his image, then which

wickednes what can be greater?
               My brethren, theſe things ought not ſo to be.
               The eyght reaſon taken of an inconuenience: this diſorder of the tongue and reprochfull ſpeaking doth not become Chriſtians, wherefore it is eſpecially to be auoyded.
               
                  11 Doth a fountaine ſende forth at one place ſvveete vvater and bitter?
                  12 Can the fig tree, my brethren, bring forth oliues, eyther a vyne figges? ſo can no fountayne make both ſalt vvater and ſvveete.
               
               The ninth reaſon taken of that which is vnpoſſible. As it is vnpoſſible that a fountayne ſhould be able to ſende forth at one place ſwete water and bitter.Vnpoſsible it is for a tongue accuſtomed to ſpeake yll, to vtter that which is good & vndefiled. For that can no more be, than that a figge tree ſhoulde be able to bring forth olyues, or a vine figges: ſo it can not be, that that tongue which is giuen to euil ſpeaking and ſclandering, ſhould be able to bring forth any good thing not defiled wt the venim of the tongue & the heart. Wherfore ſeing that it is ſo, let euery one applie his tongue only to ſpeak well, which will be counted godly & among the children of God. Wherfore let no man raſhly vſurpe vnto himſelfe authoritie to controll and finde fault with others.
               13 VVho is a vviſe man, and endued vvith knovvledge among you? let him shevve by good conuerſation his vvorkes, in meekeneſſe of vviſedom.
               Hitherto he hath beaten downe the ſtatelyneſſe of proude controllers of other, and hath with firme reaſons bridled the vnrulineſſe and ſaucineſſe of the tongue. Now bicauſe this euill did proceede of an opinion of wiſedome, he commendeth the true moderation of wiſedome, and teacheth the vſe thereof in our lyfe and conuerſation. The propoſition is this:True vviſdom will shewe it ſelfe by honeſt conuerſation. He that is endued with true wiſedome and knowledge, let him ſhewe it by the workes of an honeſt and meeke conuerſation, as by the true and continuall

fruites thereof.
               14 But if ye haue bitter enuying and ſtrife in your heartes, reioyce not, neyther be lyers agaynſt the truth.
               The firſt reaſon of the propoſition taken of diſagreeing or contrarie effects.A man cannot be full of enuy and ſtrife, and alſo wiſe. He which is full of bitter enuying & contētion, doth boaſt in vayne that he is a wiſe man. For theſe wicked affections are contrarie to the nature of true wiſedome, which loueth honeſtie and meekeneſſe. To be a lyer agaynſt the truth in this place, is falſly to vſurpe vnto himſelfe the name of wiſedome.
               15 This vviſedome deſcendeth not from aboue, but is earthly, ſenſuall, and deuilish.
               The ſeconde reaſon of contrarie cauſes.Contention and true wiſedome can not ſtande togither. Wiſedome wherwith bitterneſſe of mynde, and deſire of contention are ioyned, is earthly, ſenſuall, and deueliſhe: Therefore it is not true wiſedome. For true wiſedome is heauenly, ſpirituall, and diuine. Iames in this place doth not condemne naturall wiſedome, which is the good gyft of God by it ſelfe, whereof he maketh here no mention, but he condemneth the wicked affections of men, and the vayne boaſting of diuine wiſedome.
               16 For vvhere ennying and ſtrife is, there is ſedition, and all maner of euill vvorkes.
               The thirde reaſon of the diſcommoditie of enuy and contention, which followe a vayne opinion of wiſedome.Enuie & ſtrife open the gate to ſedition & wickedneſſe. Experience doth ſufficiently proue, that when men are full of bitter enuie, and deſirous of contention, the gate is open to them vnto ſedition and all wickednes, wherof Germanie being afflicted at this day, hath to much experience.
               17 But the vviſedome that is from aboue, is firſt pure, then peaceable, gentle, eaſie to be entreated, full of mercie and good fruites, vvithout iudging, and vvithout hypocriſie.
               The fourth reaſon taken of things annexed or ioyned vnto

true and heauenly wiſedome.An excellent comparing togither of earthly and heauenly wiſdom, wherein is shewed howe the one differeth from the other. Which things we will declare by ſetting one contrarie agaynſt the other. Earthly wiſedome is corrupted with affections: heauenly wiſedome is pure, vndefiled, and not polluted with affections. Earthly wiſedom is deſirous of cōtention: heauenly wiſedome is peaceable, that is, diligent to make peace and quietneſſe among men. Earthly wiſedome is rigorous and cruell: heauenly wiſedome is gentle, and giueth place to rigour. Earthly wiſedome will yeelde to no man: heauenly wiſedome is tractable, and doth eaſily obey him that commaundeth thoſe things that be good and right. Earthly wiſedome is vnmercifull: heauenly wiſedome is mercifull, and full of good fruites. Earthly wiſedome doth accept perſons omitting the cauſe: heauenly wiſedome doth in no caſe regarde the perſons, but the cauſes. Earthly wiſedome hath hypocriſie ioyned with it: heauenly wiſedome is voyde of all hypocriſie.
               18 And the fruite of righteouſnes is ſovven in peace, of them that make peace.
               The fift reaſon taken of the fruite, which commeth vnto them that vſe wiſedome and other giftes of God peaceably vnto edifying,The vſe of wiſedom and all other good gifts receyued of God. alſo he teacheth a generall rule concerning the vſe, not only of wiſedome, but alſo of other giftes. For he will haue vs vſe both wiſedome and other giftes as the fruites of righteouſneſſe peaceably vnto edifying, which if we ſhall doe, we ſhall at the length ioyfully reape the fruites of our righteouſneſſe.
            
         
         
            
               Chap 4. The ſumme of the fourth Chapter.
               
               AS the Apostle exhorteth them, that vnlawfull lustes from whence contentions doe come, and humane deſires being excluded, they doe cleaue vnto God, and liue rather

in mourning thē in the vaine ioy of the world: ſo he doth earnestly admonish them, that laying aſyde backbiting and ſpeaking euill one of another, they preſume to doe nothing rashly.
            
            
               The order and partes of the fourth Chapter.
               ALthough the ſcope and drift of this Chapter is one, that the faythfull doe not any thing couetouſly, deceitfully and rashly, following their owne lustes and deſires, yet I make foure partes hereof,The fourth Chapter conſiſteth of four Partes. that the first may be a sharpe dehortation from the deſire of priuate things thorow lustes and concupiſcence, from whence many miſchiefs doe ſpring, whervnto is added a confirmation. In the ſecond is ſet forth counſayle or remedie agaynst the fire of lustes. The thirde is a diſſuaſion from the deſire of backbiting and condemning other. The fourth is a correction of rashe preſumption in the purpoſing and doing of things.
            
            
               
                  The expoſition of the fourth Chapter with an obſeruation of the Doctrine.
               
               1 From vvhence are vvarres and contentions among you? are they not hence, euen of your pleaſures that fight in your members?
               
                  HE ſheweth that the luſtes of the minde are the fountayne of all contention and miſchiefe amōg men,How men are led to ſinne through the luſtes of their own mindes. by the which men are caried to deſire thoſe thinges which they iudge acceptable and pleaſaunt vnto them ſelues. When he ſayth that pleaſures doe fight in the members, he hath relation to the kingdome of originall ſinne, which is ſayde of the Apoſtle Paul then to reigne, when we doe obey it through the luſtes thereof, which are as it were certayne ſouldiers of it. Theſe he ſayth, doe fight in the members, bicauſe the members of

the body are inſtruments by the which ſinne that dwelleth in vs, doth finiſh it worke, and which allſo men doe vſe to commit wickednes. The ſumme of the whole matter is this: The fountayne of concupiſcence is originall ſinne, paſſiue concupiſcence which is vnwilling is ſtirred vp and prouoked of originall ſinne, and that by the miniſterie eyther of the ſenſe or of the complexion, or of the memorie. The will is moued to conſent, whereof ariſeth actiue concupiſcence which is willing. To this nowe bearing rule the members of the body are obedient, and doe prepare them ſelues to doe the worke, which when it is done, originall ſinne is ſayde to reigne and concupiſcence to fight, obeying the tyranne ſinne, and vſing the members of the body as inſtruments in their fight. But that this be not done Paule forbiddeth when he ſayth.Rom. 6.12. 
                  Let not ſinne reigne therefore in your mortall bodie, that ye ſhould obey it in the lustes thereof.
               
               
                  2 Ye luſt and haue not, ye enuie and deſire immoderatly, and cannot obtayne: ye fight and vvarre and get nothing, becauſe ye aske not.
                  3 Ye aske and receiue not, bicauſe ye aske amiſſe, that ye might laye the ſame out on your pleaſures.
               
               He liuely deſcribeth the wicked motions and trauayle of them,The inordinate carefulneſſe of couetous men deſcribed. which endeuour gredily to increaſe their ſubſtance, that they may prouide for their pleaſures. They luſt after thoſe things that are other mens, they enuie them which haue, they deſire immoderately, that is, they doe marueilouſly couet, and are vehemently caried, they doe earneſtly followe contentions, that by right and wrong they may obtayne thoſe things which they deſire. Sometime alſo they call vpon God by prayer, but in vayne, bicauſe they aſke amiſſe, euen thoſe things which woulde turne to their owne deſtruction if they ſhoulde receyue them. We ſee howe aptly he doth here deſcribe the carefulneſſe of couetous men in doing their buſineſſe.
               
                  4 Ye adulterers and adultereſſes, knovv ye not that the amitie of the vvorld is the enimitie of God? Who ſoeuer therefore vvill be a friende of the vvorld, maketh himſelfe the enimie of God.
               The firſt reaſon of the propoſition whereby he confuteth the peruerſe opinion of them,We can not ſerue tvvo maiſters, we can not pleaſe both God and the worlde. which woulde both be godly, and alſo followe the pleaſures of this worlde: but he ſheweth that it is vnpoſſible for that to be. For one thing pleaſeth God, another thing pleaſeth the worlde, and God and the worlde doe commaunde things cleane contrarie. Seing therefore that euery one muſt be eyther a friende of the worlde and an enimie of God, or a friende of God, and an enimie of the worlde, it is meete that euery one, which deſireth to be a Chriſtian, doe renounce the frendſhip of the worlde, that is, the wicked luſtes therof, and cleaue vnto God, and obey him. This place agreeth with that ſaying of Chriſt: No man can ſerue two maisters.
                  Math. 6.24. Hereof it is manifeſt, that many at this daye doe boaſt of the name of Chriſtians, which in deede are prophane enimies of God, and abhominable before God. Tit. 1. They profeſſe that they knowe God, but by workes they denie him, and are abhominable and diſobedient, and vnto euery good worke reprobate.
                  Spirituall adulterie. Finally he calleth here adulterers and adultereſſes forſakers of God, in as much as they leauing God, to whome they ought to cleaue as vnto a huſbande, doe ioyne themſelues vnto other louers.
               5 Doe ye thinke that the Scripture ſaith in vayne: The ſpirit that dvvelleth in vs luſteth after enuie?
               He proueth that friendſhippe cannot ſtande betweene the worlde and God, and that by the teſtimonie of the Scripture, which teſtimonie, although in theſe wordes it is not founde in the Bibles, yet as much as appertayneth to the ſenſe thereof, it commeth very often. For it agreeth with that ſaying, Geneſ .6. God ſawe that all the imaginations of the thoughtes of mans heart were onely euill continuallye.
                  
And with that Geneſ. 8.
                  
                  The heart and thoughts of the vnregenerate are euill continually. 
                  The imagination of mans heart is euill, euen from his youth. By theſe teſtimonies is ſignified, that men which are not regenerate, are caried hedlong vnto euil, which ſeing it is contrarie to God, who is moſt gracious and good, who doth both will and alſo thinke thoſe thinges that be good: it cannot otherwiſe be, but that there ſhould be a certayne enimitie of the world and of God.
               6 But the Scripture offereth more grace and therefore ſayth: God reſiſteth the proude, and giueth grace to the humble.
               
                  To whome God giueth his grace.The ſecond reaſon is taken of a reward. God hath promiſed to the humble, that is to the poore in ſpirite, and to them that deſpiſe the vaine luſtes of the world, grace, which is better then all the delites and riches of the world. Let Chriſtians therefore ſeeke this rather, then that fauour of the world and the pleaſures thereof, which the proude doe diligently ſeeke after. But as he giueth grace to the humble: ſo he reſiſteth the proude as a moſt ſore and grieuous enemie.
               7 Submit your ſelues to God: reſiſt the deuill and he vvill flee from you.
               Now he teacheth remedies againſt the euil of luſt or concupiſcence.VVhat it is to ſubmit himſelfe to God. To ſubmit himſelfe to God, is to ſet before himſelfe the word of God as a rule of his life, and according to it to ſubmit himſelfe in all obedience.To reſiſt the deuill. To reſiſt the deuil, is to ſtriue agaynſt vnlawfull luſtes, which are the inſtruments of Satan, by the which he draweth men vnto deſtruction. To this he addeth a promiſe: And he vvill flee from you, that is, he will not hurt you, he will not ouerthrow you with his ſubtleties and deluſions.
               8 Dravv neare to God, and he vvill dravv neare to you, clenſe you handes, ye ſinners, and purge your heartes, ye double minded.
               He commandeth and promiſeth. He commaundeth that

we drawe neare vnto God, to wit,VVho is ſayde to draw nere vnto God and who to drawe nere vnto the deuel. by fayth and true obedience. For as he is ſayd to depart from God which doth abandon and giue himſelfe to the luſtes of the worlde, by which he draweth neare vnto the deuill: ſo he which departeth from theſe, is ſayd to draw neare vnto God. He promiſeth when he ſayth: And he vvill dravv neare vnto you. This promiſe is grounded vpon the continuall loue of God towards mankind, whereby he deſireth not the death of a ſinner. He doth here call them ſinners, which exerciſe manifeſt impietie, and them double minded, which ſayde in wordes, that they did worſhip God, and in the meane ſeaſon did follow their owne luſts and concupiſcence.
               9 Suffer afflictions and ſorovve ye, and vveepe: Let your laughter be turned into mourning, and your ioy into heauines.
               He ſetteth this agaynſt the pleaſures of them,VVe muſt not reioyce in our owne luſtes, but be ashamed for our ſinne. which follow their owne luſtes, and laugh and reioyce in them. For it becommeth the godly rather to mourne and ſuffer affliction, and ſo to be aſhamed for the ſinnes which they haue committed, that they caſt their countenance downe to the earth for ſhame. For that the greeke word ſignifieth, which ye Apoſtle here vſeth.
               10 Caſt dovvne your ſelues before the Lorde, and he vvill lift you vp.
               Bicauſe the godly are contēned and diſpiſed in the world,Though the godly be long caſt downe, yet the Lorde at length will raiſe them vp and comfort them. the Apoſtle doth encourage theē, & bid theē remaine in that ſubiectiō, wherby they are ſubiect to God in true feare: alſo he doth comfort thē, when he ſaith, yt it wil come to paſſe that God at the length will lift them vp, and wipe away the teares from their face. For by the word of lifting vp is ſignified comfort agaynſt the ſorrow of this preſent life, and deliuerance from all the miſeries and troubles of this life.
               11 Speake not euil one of an other, brethren. He that

ſpeaketh euill of his brother, or he that condemneth his brother, ſpeaketh euil of the lavv and condemneth the lavv: & if thou condemneſt the lavv, thou arte not an obſeruer of the lavv, but a iudge.
               He doth againe repreſſe the intemperance of the tongue in accuſing and condemning other, adding a moſt ſtrong reaſon taken of the grieuouſnes of the deed. No man ought to ſpeake againſt the law and condemne it. He that ſpeaketh agaynſt his brother and condemneth him,VVe muſt not be rash to reproue and condemne our brethren. ſpeaketh againſt the law, and condemneth it. Therefore no man ought to ſpeake againſt his brother and condemne him. The Minor or ſecond propoſition of the argumēt he proueth, becauſe he that condemneth the law, is not an obſeruer of the law,To condemne the law what it is. but a iudge. Now, to condemne the law, is to reiect the authoritie thereof, and to challenge vnto himſelfe that right which is due to the law, and ſo to peruert the order of thinges.The office of the law For it is the office of the lawe to preſcribe a rule of life, and to iudge of thoſe thinges that are done. But it is the dutie of man to ſubmit himſelfe to the authoritie of the lawe, and to obſerue it. But he which doth the contrarie, that is, he that vſurpeth authoritie to iudge and cenſure others, doth with ſacrilege chalenge that to himſelfe which is proper to the law.All iudging of our brethren is not condemned of the Apoſtle Iames in this place ſpeaketh onely agaynſt thoſe, which of a peruerſe and corrupt iudgement ſpeake againſt their brethren, that they may diſtaine their good name, and get vnto them ſelues an opinion of holines: he doth not reprehend thoſe which iudge of duetie, ſo as they follow the authoritie and rule of the law in iudgeing. For he that doth this, is to be ſayd not ſo much to iudge himſelfe, as to pronounce the iudgement of God, which we ſee Iames here often times to haue done.
               12 There is one lavv giuer vvhich is able to ſaue and to deſtroy. VVho art thou that iudgeſt ā other mā?
               That which is proper vnto God, no man without ſacrilege

can vſurpe vnto himſelfe.Another reaſon againſt rash iudgers of their brethren. It is proper vnto God to be a Lawgiuer and a Iudge, which hereby is manifeſt, bicauſe he only hath power to ſaue and to deſtroy. Therfore no man can take vpon him ſelfe this authoritie without ſacrilege. Iames ſpeaketh here alſo, as I admoniſhed before, of raſhe iudgement proceeding from a deſire of deprauing and ſclaundering.
               
                  13 Go to novve ye that ſay: to day or to morovv vve vvill go into ſuch a citie, and continue there a yere, and buye and ſell, and get gaine,
                  14 (And yet ye cannot tell vvhat shall be to morrovv. For vvhat is your life? It is euen a vapour that appeareth for a litle time, and aftervvarde vanisheth avvay)
                  15 For that ye ought to ſay: If the Lorde vvill, and, if vve liue, vve vvill do this or that.
               
               This is a correction of raſhe preſumption in determining vpon things to be done,Two neceſſarie conditions to be obſerued in determining and purpoſing to doe thinges. and he preſcribeth two conditions which he requireth in all deliberations. The firſt is, that we giue place to the will of God, and that we attempt nothing without calling vpon him. The cauſe of this condition is, for that the will of God ought to be vnto the godly a rule to worke by. The other condition is, that we doe alwayes thinke vpon the frayleneſſe of our lyfe, which ſeing it is lyke vnto a vapour that continueth but a ſmall time: he is vnwiſe, which promiſeth vnto himſelfe things that are to come and vncertaine: Wherefore we are admoniſhed in this place, that we doe ſo behaue our ſelues in all our doings, that we may be ready whenſoeuer we ſhall depart from hence.
               16 But novve ye reioyce in your boaſtings: all ſuch reioycing is euill.
               He ſheweth frō whence this preſumption in doing things doth come, to wit, of an arrogant reioycing, which ſeing it is euill and alwayes to be auoyded: that alſo which

ſpringeth thereof, is not without good cauſe to be eſchewed.
               17 Therefore to him that knovveth hovve to do vvell, and doth it not, to him it is ſinne.
               The concluſion directly brought in of that which went before ſhoulde be this: No man therefore of a vayne reioycing ought raſhly to purpoſe with himſelfe to doe anye thing, as though the euent or falling out thereof did lye in his owne handes. But in the place of this concluſion he putteth an exaggerating or amplifying of that ſin which he reprehendeth.To ſinne of will is farre more grieuous then to ſinne, of ignorance. He ſinneth more grieuouſly, which ſinneth willingly and knowing thereof, than he which offendeth of ignorance. Wherefore he cannot be excuſed, which knoweth what is to be done, and howe it is to be done, and yet doth it not.
            
         
         
            
               Chap. 5. The ſumme of the fift Chapter.
               
               AS he forbiddeth a rashe othe, and giueth counſayle to the afflicted, hauing first sharply rebuked the rich, and stirred vp the poore vnto patience: ſo he requireth pardoning of one anothers offences, praying one for another, and diligence in calling backe their brethren from going astray.
            
            
               The order and partes of the fift Chapter.
               OF this Chapter there are fiue partes. The first is a sharpe rebuking of the rich. The ſeconde, an encouraging of the poore vnto patience. The third, a forbidding of a rash othe. The fourth, an instruction what is to be done in diuers caſes. The fift, a commendation of mutuall duties.
            
            
               
               
                  The expoſition of the fift Chapter, with an obſeruation of the doctrine.
               
               1 Go to novve ye rich men: vveepe and hovvle for your miſeries that shall come vpon you.
               
                  HE ſpeaketh not vnto all rich men,To what rich men the Apoſtle ſpeaketh but only vnto them, which were vnmercifull towarde the poore, and eyther abuſed their riches couetouſly, or elſe ſpent them lewdly vpon delites and pleaſures. When he biddeth them weepe, he will haue them call to mynde the miſeries which in time to come they ſhall ſuffer for their crueltie and couetouſneſſe. In theſe wordes therfore this propoſition is contayned: Let not rich men abuſe their riches vnto their own deſtructiō.
               
                  2 Your riches are corrupt, and your garmentes are moth eaten.
                  3 Your golde and ſiluerſs cankred, and the ruſt of thē shall be a vvitneſſe againſt you, and shall eate your flesh as it vvere fire. Ye haue heaped vp treaſure for the laſt dayes.
               
               Theſe wordes of the Apoſtle containe three things.The exceding couetouſnes of many rich men. Firſt, he ſheweth by a ſigne the vnſatiable couetouſneſſe of rich men, which had rather that their treaſures ſhoulde be corrupt and periſh in their coffers and cheſtes, than that they woulde beſtowe any whit of them to ſupplie the neede of them that be in miſerie. Secondly, he declareth their crueltie towards the poore, whom they ought with their riches to cheriſhe and helpe. Thirdly,Vngodly richmen at the laſt shall not eſcape vnpunished. he threatneth puniſhment vnto them, in as much as they gather vnto them ſelues the treaſure of iniquitie, couetouſneſſe, and crueltie againſt the day of wrath, who in time to come ſhall be ſo eaten of hell fire, that is, they ſhall be tormented with euerlaſting flames, as nowe their treaſure is eaten of the ruſt.
               
                  4 Behold, the hire of the labourers vvhich haue reaped your feeldes (vvhich is of you kept back by fraude) crieth, and the cries of them vvhich haue reaped, are entred into the eares of the Lorde of hoſtes.
               
                  Pay the true labourer his peny for his payne.He accuſeth the vniuſtice of rich men, denying labourers their due hire, and threatneth puniſhment vnto them. For by the worde of crying he ſignifieth, that this iniurie doth as it were ſounde in the eares of the Lord, and cal for vengeance.
               5 Ye haue liued in pleaſure on the earth, and in vvantonneſſe. Ye haue nourished your hearts, as in a day of ſlaughter.
               He reprehendeth the pleaſures, laſciuiouſnes, and wantonnes, wherein the riche men did delicately pamper vp themſelues. He calleth the day appoynted for ſumptuous and delicate bankets, the day of ſlaughter.
               6 Ye haue condemned and haue killed the iuſt, and he hath not reſiſted you.
               This may be referred both vnto crueltie againſt the pore, whom the rich men are ſayde to haue condemned and killed, when as they did not relieue their neede with their abundance, whereof is that ſaying of Augustine: If thou haſt not fed, thou haſt killed: And alſo to the rigorous extortion, whereby they haue in iudgementes exacted their debts of their debtors, and haue oppreſſed them with ſeruitude that did not pay.
               
                  Of riches and contracts or bargaines.
                  SEing that Iames ſeemeth in this place to deale ſomewhat hardly agaynſt the rich men of this world, it ſeemeth vnto me a thing worthie the labour to adde ſomething herevnto concerning riches and contractes or bargaines, which ſerue to increaſe our ſubſtance, and that vnto this ende, that the godly may be admoniſhed, how farre it is lawfull for them to vſe ſuch ſtayes of their life.
                  
                     Foraſmuch therfore as ſome godly men doe get riches by the bleſſing of the Lorde, and alſo the ſocietie of man cannot want bargaines, it appeareth ſufficiently, that neither to haue riches, neyther to bargayne by it ſelfe is ſin. For we muſt not thinke that the Goſpell doth eyther breake the lawfull bonds of humane ſocietie or take away thoſe things which are neceſſarie to the maintayning of the life of man. But bicauſe it is often times offended in the getting of riches, likewiſe in the poſſeſſion and vſe of them, and alſo many faults are incident in bargaynes: it is needefull that the godly minde be rightly inſtructed, whereby it may know, both how to get riches without offence to God, how to vſe them being gotten, and alſo how farre it may exerciſe vſuall bargaines with a good conſcience.
                  Wherefore firſt of all let this rule of Chriſte be moſte ſurely kept: Seeke ye fyrst the kingdome of God and his righteouſnes, and other thinges ſhall be ministred vnto you. Matth. 6. This rule of Chriſt conteyneth two thinges,The rule of Chriſt conſiſteth of two principall poynts, the firſt whereof is a commandement. to wit, a commaundement of Chriſt, and a promiſe ioyned with obedience toward the commaundement. The commaundement is: Seeke fyrst the kingdome of God and his righteouſnes. He which will not obey this commaundement, as he is not partaker of the grace of Chriſt: ſo he abideth in the kingdome of ſinne, and ſerueth Satan, to whom euerlaſting death is reſerued for his ſtipend. Let therfore obedience toward this commandement of Chriſt haue the principall place, that is,The prōiſe annexed to the commandement. let the care of our ſaluation be firſt and chiefe. The promiſe is: And other thinges ſhall be ministred vnto you. This promiſe will both haue fayth, to wit, that we doe aſſure our ſelues that Chriſte is true, and will haue a care of vs, if we will obey his commaundement: and alſo it ſecretly requireth, that euery one by fayth doe diligently in the feare of God thoſe thinges which are agreable to his calling, Heatheniſh and prophane

carefulnes being excluded. For we muſt not thinke that the promiſe of Chriſt doth commend ſlouthfulnes vnto vs. Wherefore let him that is endued with the faith of Chriſt, know, that it is a part of godlynes, without which fayth cannot be ſound, diligently to doe that dutie, to the which euerie man is called. To this pertayneth that ſaying of the Apoſtle:1 Tim. 5, 8. 
                     He that prouideth not for his owne, & namely for them of his houſhold, denieth the fayth, and is worſe then an infidel. The promiſe therefore of Chriſt requireth a holy diligence and an earneſt labour of euerye man in his calling. But leaſt that any man doth here by and by as it were in the entrie ſtumble, and doubt whether his calling be lawfull or no:A lawfull calling. I will briefly touch, what is required to a lawfull calling or function. Two thinges generally are to be conſidered, to wit, the kind of office, and the execution thereof. Concerning the kinde, this rule is to be obſerued.VVhat offices are lawful & to be allowed Euery office that maketh for the maintayning and furniſhing of the ſtates ordained of God, as are, the ciuil ſtate, the ſtate concerning the gouerning of an houſe, the eccleſiaſticall ſtate, is commaunded in the firſt and fourth commaundement, as the dutie of the miniſters of the word, the function of the magiſtrats, the ſeruice of them which helpe the magiſtrate, the care and charge of maiſters of houſholds, the occupations of them whoſe helpe is profitable and neceſſarie in the ſtates ordayned of God, the traffique of Marchants, which bring in profitable marchandice: briefly, all offices which ſerue eyther for the order of the Church of God, or of an houſe, or of ye common weale, are lawfull in them ſelues, and alſo in the perſons, when they are lawfully called vnto them. And although it be free for euery man to chooſe any kinde of life, to the which he ſhall feele himſelfe apt: yet we muſt put a difference betweene a publike and a priuate office. To a publike office is required ordinarie authoritie. For no man may take vnto himſelfe a publike office either in

the Church, or in the common weale, except he be appointed thereunto by ordinary authoritie, he that doth the contrarie, doth ſume, and in affliction can haue no certayne comfort. Wherefore here the godly man will eſpecially take heede, that he doe not enter into a publike office without a lawfull calling.Howe euery man may take a priuate office vpon him ſelfe. A priuate office euery man may chooſe vnto himſelfe, yet the authoritie of parents ought not here to be contemned. He may applie his minde to the trade of marchandice, whom this kind of life doth pleaſe: he may follow huſbandry, which thinketh that it is commodious for him: he may chooſe ſome arte or occupation, which is perſwaded that it will be profitable vnto him. An idle life belongeth not vnto a godly man but vnto an Epicure rather, wherefore of that I will ſay nothing.
                  In the execution of the office or dutie more things are to be cōſidered.Moſt excellent rules to be obſerued of euery man in perfourming his office and dutie. Firſt let faith & loue be rules of the actions. Faith taketh hede that it offendeth not God, & referreth al things to ye glory of God. Loue admoniſheth yt there be no iniurie done to any man, & that ye cōmodities of our neighbour be furthered. Faith deſireth God to work with it, & to be it helper. Loue embraceth our neighbor in God. Faith kepeth him that worketh, in the feare of God.VVhat wee muſt doe if God bleſſe vs with increaſe of riches. Loue kepeth him in charitie toward his neyghbour. Here if riches by ye bleſſing of ye Lord come vnto him yt laboureth in his lawfull calling, ſingular heede is to be taken, yt our riches be not made vnto vs through our own fault, thornes & ſnares. For they that are rich haue inſtruments both vnto vertues & alſo vnto vices, euē as their minds are affected which poſſeſſe thē. Therfore Plato in my iudgemēt hath rightly ſaid, ye riches wtout wiſedom are blind, but yt the ſame do quickly ſee whē they folow true wiſedom. For true is this ſaying:

                        Riches of euill and miſchiefe much
                        are ministers with ſpeede:
                        Which doe alſo contention
                        amongst vs often breede.
                     
                     
And for that cauſe the Lord ſayth:Math. 19.23. 
                     That a rich man ſhall hardly enter into the kingdome of heauen. For the moſt parte vſe their riches ill, which they might vſe well if they woulde take the counſayle of godly wiſedome.How the rich of the worlde ought to be affected. Firſt of all therefore, let the godly man knowe how he ought to be affected in his riches, this may very well be knowne both by the wordes of Dauid and alſo of Paule.Pſal. 62.10. Dauid ſayth: If riches increaſe ſet not your hearts thereon. Paule ſayth: Charge them that are rich in this world,
                     1. Tim. 6.17. 
                     that they be not high minded, and that they trust not in vncertaine riches but in the liuing God. Theſe two ſayings doe preach both of the minde or affection of a rich man, and alſo of the vſe of riches. The mind ought not to be ſet vpon riches, or vpon a deſire to haue, a godly man ought not to meaſure his felicitie with the deceitfull meaſure of riches, but he ought to vſe them well, leaſt that he himſelfe layeth ſnares for himſelfe. Nazianzenus doth very well deſcribe the mind of a godly man toward riches ſaying:

                        
                           The minde of the godlye concerning riches.One droppe or little portion,
                        of wiſedome I wiſh more:
                        Then of riches and worldly wealth,
                        abundance and great store.
                     
When as the couetous and vngodly man contrariewiſe ſayth:Howe the wicked and couetous are affected towarde riches.
                     
                        One droppe of fortunes pleaſant cuppe,
                        I doe much rather craue:
                        Then great increaſe, yea euen a tunne,
                        of wiſedome for to haue.
                     
Whoſoeuer therfore wil be godly,How the godly man muſt behaue himſelfe concerning his riches. let him caſt away truſt & confidence in riches, leaſt that they be made ſnares vnto him, leaſt that they doe ſhutte from him the paſſage to the kingdome of heauen. Let a ſure hope be repoſed in God alone, whether riches be increaſed or diminiſhed, yea or quite taken away, let vs hold faſt the true treaſure which is Chriſt Ieſus. For he that hath him is rich in deede, although

with Lazarus he doth beg his breade. Moreouer, when thy mynde is thus affected toward riches, this care ſhall come into it, that thou doe rightly diſpoſe the riches beſtowed vpon thee of God, and that thou be a faythfull ſtewarde of them. Wherefore I will herevnto adde a few wordes concerning the lawfull vſe of riches. Iſchomachus in Xenophon being aſked concerning the lawfull vſe of riches, aunſwered in theſe wordes: I ought with my riches to honour the Gods royally, to helpe my frendes wherein they haue neede, and to ſuffer the Citie to be vnadorned in nothing wherein I am able.The vſe of riches diuided into three parts. This man being ignorant of true religion, maketh three partes of the vſe of riches, the firſt part he attributeth to the worſhip of God, the ſeconde to his friends being in nede, the thirde to the maintaining and adorning of the common weale, wherein he liueth. But although this ſentence of a prophane Philoſopher is to be prayſed, and worthie to be commended to the godly: yet I will ſhewe more diſtinctly and plainly the godly and true vſe of ſubſtance and riches, which conſiſteth in foure poyntes.
                  The firſt and principall vſe of riches ought to be,The chiefe & principall vſe whervnto riches ought to ſerue. that they ſerue to the maintayning and increaſing of the glorie of God. This vſe is confirmed by the ende of man. Man was firſt made, and afterwardes regenerate by the holy ghoſt, that he ſhoulde glorifie God. Therefore what gifts ſo euer we haue, they ought to be referred to this ende of our creation and reſtoring agayne.How the firſt and principall vſe of riches is vtterly neglected of many. Here many being miſerably deceiued, do ſin. For there are ſome which beſtow nothing at all to the mayntaining of the miniſterie. There are ſome which doe wickedly take away thoſe things that were appoynted of our auncetors for the ſeruice of God. There are ſome which with their riches doe encreaſe the power of tyrannes, to the oppreſſing of the church & aboliſhing of religion, for whom it were better, if they had neuer bene borne. For their portion ſhall be with the deuill

whoſe members they are. Let the godly man therfore vnto whome riches haue chaunced in this worlde, loke vnto this ende of his creation, and beſtowe part of his goodes vpon this vſe, that he may ſet forth the glorie of God, and maintayne true religion.Examples of ſuch as haue vſed their riches chiefly to the glorie of God. Let him ſet before himſelfe the examples of godlye men, as of Dauid, Ioſias, Ezechias, Constantine, Theodoſius, Iohn Fredericke Duke of Saxonie, Christierne the thirde king of Denmarke, and other Princes and godly men, which deſired nothing more, than according to their abilitie to ſet forth the glorie of God, to helpe them which taught and learned religion, to maintaine ſchooles, and honeſt priuileges of ſchooles, to defende the teachers of godlyneſſe agaynſt the crueltie and iniurie of wicked men, to whom nothing was more pleaſant, than to inuent diuers craftes and wayes, whereby they might oppreſſe both teachers and learners, the caſe of which men I do with all my heart lament. For by their reprobate mynde they doe more and more plunge themſelues in hell.
                  
                     The ſeconde right & lawfull vſe of riches.The ſeconde true and lawfull vſe of riches ought to be, that we helpe and adorne the common weales in which we liue, according to the meaſure of our riches. For this cauſe tributes are inioyned, that by them as by ſinewes the cōmon weale may be kept and preſerued, that is, that they may be ornaments of peace, helpes of lawfull warre, the rewardes of them which gouerne the common weale. But here two kyndes of men doe not a little offende.Two ſorts of men do chiefly offende in the ſeconde right vſe of riches. For there are ſome, which although they abounde with wealth, renoume, and glorie in the time of peace: yet when anye thing is to be layde out to the vſe of the common weale, this they craftily put of from them ſelues to the ſilly and ſimple people who are compelled beyonde their ſtrength and abilitie to beſtowe thoſe things which are required. Here although the ſimple people doe rightly obey: yet theſe inuentors of miſchiefes are reſerued for their iudgement.

There are alſo perhappes ſome, who being not content with their ordinarie rents, doe lay newe exactions vppon the ſubiects, which are condemned by the teſtimonie of Iohn the Baptiſt, in as much as they doe not bring forth the fruites of repentance. Chriſt ſayth:Matth. 22.11. 
                     Giue to Caeſar the things which are Caeſars, and giue vnto God thoſe things which are Gods. But let Caeſar knowe that there is a certaine rule which the lawes doe preſcribe vnto him. If he ſhall offende againſt this, he is made guiltie of the wrath of God. But thou wilt ſay,A queſtion. is it neuer therefore lawfull for the magiſtrate to exact of his ſubiectes anye thing beſide the ordinarie taxe?The anſwere. We muſt put a difference betweene the times of peace and warre. In the time of peace let him be content with his ordinarie reuenues, leaſt that he ſinne agaynſt God: In the time of warre the ſubiectes doe owe not only their goods, but alſo their bodies to the magiſtrate making iuſt warre, and the godly magiſtrate may exact vnaccuſtomed tributes, and require the helpe of the Citizens againſt the enimies. There may alſo neceſſities be incident in the time of peace, that ordinarie ſtipendes are not ſufficient for the magiſtrate. When this commeth to paſſe, godly ſubiectes ought to helpe the preſent neceſſities, and the godly magiſtrate may require ſo much increaſe as ſhall be needefull. But they which do therevpon by litle and litle bring in a cuſtome to oppreſſe ſubiects, ſhall as inſidels looke for their puniſhment at the handes of the iuſt Iudge, which knoweth howe to bowe downe the neckes of the proude and tyrannes.
                  The thirde right and lawfull vſe of riches is, that euery man finde himſelfe things neceſſarie, & do maintayne his familie according to the ſtate of his calling.The thirde lawfull vſe of riches, wherein are twoo things eſpecially to be taken heede of. But here two vices are to be taken heede of, couetouſneſſe or vile faſhions, & prodigalitie. Couetouſneſſe or filthie behauiour is vnworthie of a mā. Prodigalitie doth raſhly waſte riches, oftē times vpon brauerie altogither vnmete for that ſtate

or calling. Wherefore a meane, which in euery thing is commended, is here alſo to be kept. An honeſt citizen therfore may with his goodes maintayne that which becommeth his eſtate, let him beware that he take not vpon him that honour that belongeth vnto another, let him leaue to the nobilitie their nobleneſſe and reputation, ſo let an honeſt noble man maintayne his ſtate, and leaue vnto the Princes their magnificence and ſumptuouſneſſe. After the ſame ſort let teachers of godlynes in ſcholes and temples modeſtly maintayne their ſtate. Brieflye let euerye one thinke what is agreeable to his perſon and condition.
                  
                     The fourth & laſt lawful vſe of riches.The fourth and laſt right and lawful vſe of riches ought to be, that we ſhould be moued alſo with the calamitie of the needy,VVhy God will haue the poore to be among vs. and hold this for moſt certayne, that God doth ſuffer the poore and needy to be in the mydſt of vs, that he may trie of what redines we are to obey his commaundement, (for he doth commaund vs that we ſhoulde reach forth our hande to the needy) and how mercifull we are toward the members of the ſonne of God, which if we doe contemne, we doe deſpiſe alſo the head. For it cannot be that he ſhould loue the head which cauſeth paine & griefe to the members. But of this vſe more hereafter.
               
               
                  Of contractes or bargaines.
                  
                     Mutuall ſocietie and bargaines are very neceſſarie among men.FOraſmuch therefore as men are ſo created, that they muſt of neceſſitie liue in ſocietie, and their condition is ſuch, that they cannot mayntayne their ſtate without mutual labour and duties: the life of man truly hath neede of contractes or bargaines, by which is made a certayne interchangeable courſe of laboures and offices. And the ſocietie of men among them ſelues can no more want the commoditie of bargaynes, then water and fire. Wherfore ſeing that the godly and vngodly are wont to bargayne one with an other, and there is oftentimes no ſmall offence made in bargayning through the naughtines of

men: it is a thing neceſſary that the godly be inſtructed whereby they may knowe how farre it is lawfull to bargaine with a good conſcience and without offence to God, that they doe not attempt to doe any thing, their conſcience eyther douting, eyther being deceiued, eyther ſtriuing agaynſt them. And although a full and abſolute doctrine concerning bargayning doth pertayne to the lawyers, who of purpoſe doe very often teach of bargaynes: yet becauſe ciuil rules often times doe not ſatiſfie mens conſciences, I will gather a certayne briefe aduertiſement which the godly minde may ſafely follow in bargaining. Firſt therefore I will laye two foundations, vpon which all thoſe things which I am about to ſpeake ſhall depend. Secondly I will declare the chiefe kindes of bargaynes, and will ſhewe how they agree with the foundation.The firſt foundation of all contracts and bargaynes. The firſt foundation ſhalbe this, taken from the lawe of nature: That which thou wilt not haue done to thy ſelfe, doe not thou to another, and contrarywiſe, that which thou wilt haue rightly done to thy ſelfe, thou mayſt doe to another. Nazianzenus vttereth this foundation after this ſort:

                        To doe thoſe things to other men
                        ſee that thou doe refraine:
                        Which thou thy ſelfe vnwilling art
                        to take of them agayne.
                     
Vpon this foundation Chriſt will haue all duties among men, yea and all actions and bargaynes to be buylded.The confirmation of the firſt foundation of bargaynes. For thus he ſayth: Matth. 7. Whatſoeuer ye woulde that men ſhoulde do to you, euen ſo doe ye to them. He addeth the reaſon of this foundation. This, ſayth he, is the lawe and the Prophetes, that is, this is the ſcope and ende of the Lawe and the Prophetes, or whatſoeuer the lawe and the Prophetes doe commaunde, it is contayned in this common poynt. And Paul ſayth: He that loueth another,
                     Rom. 13.
                           •
                        . 
                     hath fulfilled the lawe. Alſo:1. Tim. 1.5. 
                     The ende of the commaundement is loue out of a pure heart, ſignifying that all duties among

men are to be tried and examined by loue as by a touchſtone.The effects of true loue. This loue as it doth not to any other that which it will not haue done to it ſelfe: ſo it doth rightly to euerye man that which it would haue done to it ſelfe. This foundation as it doth in euery bargayne require true dealing and exclude deceite: ſo it will haue equalitie betweene them that bargaine according to the proportion of an Arithmetick, which doth meaſure, number and wey all chaunging equally, and therefore the bargaine which is grounded on this foundation is to be accounted equal and lawfull.Bargaines grounded vppon the foundation aforeſayd are both equall and lawfull. Equall, bicauſe an Arithmeticall proportion is obſerued therein. Lawfull, bicauſe it is agreeable to the law of nature, which a wiſe lawyer in the doctrine of bargaines doth ſet before his eyes. Whereupon it commeth to paſſe that it is called lawfull alſo, bicauſe it is confirmed eyther by a law made, or by the decree of wiſemen not diſagreing with the ten commaundements, which are an abridgment of the law of nature.
                  
                     The ſeconde foundation of contracts and bargaynes.Let the ſecond foundation be this taken from the nature of the Goſpell: The Goſpell doth approue ciuil ordinaunces, which the wiſe magiſtrate doth iudge to be profitable to his common weale. This is manifeſt, bicauſe the Apoſtles of Chriſte did neuer change the forme of ciuil ordinances, where they taught the Goſpell: which without doubt they would haue done, if they coulde not haue ſtand with the Goſpell. The Apoſtle knew that there was a difference to be put betweene the kingdomes of the world and the kingdome of Chriſt. They, bicauſe they are worldly, are ruled by ciuil lawes and ordinances, this, bicauſe it is ſpirituall, is gouerned ſpiritually. Vpon this foundation it followeth, that as a godly man may vſe the ciuill ordinances of that common weale wherin he liueth: ſo it is lawfull for a wiſe magiſtrate to make lawes profitable to his common weale, by which bargaines and offices of a ciuil life are gouerned. But I would haue theſe

thinges ſo to be taken, that the law giuer doe not ſwarue from the firſt foundation, and the tenne commandements, that is, that he make no law diſagreing with the loue of God and charitie towardes our neyghbours. Theſe two foundations I will haue applied to all bargaynes, as conſultations by which it ſhall be pronounced as often as a queſtion is moued concerning any bargayne.
                  The kindes of ciuil bargaynes,He purpoſeth to ſpeake of ſixe ſeuerall kindes of bargaines. of which we haue determined in this place to ſpeake are theſe: 1. Exchange of thinges. 2. Bying and ſelling. 3. Borowing. 4. Lending 5. Letting forth and hyring 6. Contracts of ſocietie. If there be any other kindes of bargaynes, let them be learned out of the writinges of wiſe lawyers, whom the godly mind may ſafely follow, except it ſeeth them contrary to the loue of God and charitie toward our neighbour. There are ſome which make two chiefe kinds of bargaynes: one whereby the dominion of a thing togither with the vſe is tranſlated from ones poſſeſſion to an others, the other, wherby ye only vſe of a thing is graunted. Aristotle taught that the exchange of thinges is diuided into three partes The firſt, whereby thinges are changed with thinges, the ſecond, whereby things are changed with mony, the third wherby mony is changed with mony. I confeſſe yt eyther diuiſion is learned & perfect, yet I do prefer before others this cōmon diuiſion which I haue ſet downe, not bicauſe it is more perfect or learned, but bicauſe it commeth nerer to the capacitie of the people, and is more vſuall. Wherefore I leaue both that diuiſion of two partes, and alſo that of three partes of Aristotle to the lawyers and philoſophers to be diſputed vpon, being about to ſpeake in order of thoſe ſixe kindes which I haue propounded.
               
               
                  Of the Exchange of thinges.
                  CHaunging of one thinge for an other before money was inuented was moſt vſuall and profitable, as without

which the ſocietie of man coulde not be mayntayned. But the vſe of money being inuented, it was not ſo vſuall amongſt all.How exchang of thinges is made and when it is lawfull. Now exchange of thinges is then made, whē things are changed not with mony but with other things, as when wine is changed with corne, or hides with butter. This exchange of thinges is then lawfull, when it doth not depart from thoſe two foundations which we haue made concerning euery honeſt bargaine. In the chaunging of things therfore equalitie is to be kept wt out deceit. For deceit may be here committed many wayes,In changing of thinges chiefly three kindes of deceit may be vſed. but eſpecially after three ſortes, in ſubſtance, in quantitie, in qualitie. In ſubſtance, if mingled wine be giuen for pure wine, if graine or corne mingled with cockle or darnel, or with the ſeede of any ſuch corrupt and naughtie weedes, be vttered for good grayne. In quantitie, if equalitie be not kept in weight, meaſure, and number. In qualitie, when naughtie and corrupt things be vttered for pure and ſound thinges. Whoſoeuer vſeth deceit in theſe, as he doth ouerthrow ye foundatiōs of iuſtice, ſo if he do it knowing it and willingly, he ſinneth againſt God, paſſeth ye rule of charity and is made giltie of ye breaking of humane ſocietie. Many men doe flatter & as it were tickle themſelues, when in exchange of thinges they doe deceiue any, but it falleth out with theſe as with yt fiſhes, which togither with ye bait deuoure alſo ye hooke. For the gaine is pleaſant, but they being held faſt wt the hoke of Satan, ſhal not eſcape puniſhment. But I am not ignorant what good men do perhaps ſpeake againſt theſe things. For deceitful mē haue a thouſād wils & crafts, by which they do deceiue thēſelues & not God, who equitie requireth tēpered with ſincere charitie.
               
               
                  Of bying and ſelling.
                  
                     Bying and ſelling neyther very auncient nor yet common among all nations.Bying and ſelling are properly ſayd to be, as often as thinges are changed not with things but with money. This kinde of bargayning is neyther moſt auncient, nor

moſt common. For both it was vnknowne to thoſe men that liued in the former ages of the worlde, and alſo at this day it is not in vſe among manye nations. But it was brought in among many onely through the neceſſitie of mans lyfe, wherevpon alſo it hath the name of mony. For it is called in Latine Namus, as it were of the Greeke worde Nomos, which ſignifieth a lawe, bicauſe it hath oftentimes it vſe and value by the iudgement, determination, and lawe of men.A ſeller. In this kynde of bargayne he that tranſlateth a thing into the dominion and poſſeſſion of another receyuing mony for it, doth ſell, and the thing that is tranſlated is ware or merchandice. On the contrarye,A byer. he which giuing mony receyueth ware or marchandi
                        •
                     e, is ſayde to buye. Here we muſt not regarde what the monye is worth in it ſelfe, but publike authoritie, vſe, or iudgement is to be conſidered. For the value of the mony is by lawe rather than by nature. Wherefore equalitie is not here to be conſidered in the ſubſtance of the mony, but in the vſe thereof. This kinde of trade according to the foundations before layde, requireth equalitie without deceyte betwene the byer and the ſeller: He which here wittingly and willingly doth oppreſſe or defraude his brother in any matter,1. Theſſal. 4.6. hath contrary to the precept of Paule broken the equalitie of iuſtice required in contracts and bargaynes.The office & duty of him that ſelleth. Wherefore the godly muſt take eſpeciall heede, that they doe vſe no deceyte eyther in the wares or in the price. Let the ware be ſayde of the ſeller to be ſuch as it is in deede, or at the leaſt, ſuch as it is thought to be, without falſhode and deceite, let the due price be aunſwereable therevnto, that the proportion of an Arithmeticke maye be obſerued. But here it may not without a cauſe be demaunded what the due or reaſonable price is. To this I doe thus ſimplye aunſwere.VVhat is to be obſerued concerning the price of thinges. Euery pryce is not due and reaſonable which the byer & the ſeller do agree vpon betweene themſelues by their priuate iudgement: but yt which eyther is named

and ſet of the iuſt and publike priſers of thinges ordayned of the magiſtrate, or which is priced according to the common value of the thing, at that time when the bargayne is made. He therefore which to day doth buy a buſſhell of corne according to the common price for three ſhillings, may afterward, a certayne time being betwene, ſell the ſame for ſixe ſhillings, if this then be the common price. Cōtrariwiſe, if after certayne moneths it be bought commonly for one ſhilling, he offendeth which aſketh thre for it, although he bought it for three. For here regard is to be had of the time and place, and the plentie and ſcarcitie of the thinges which are ſolde, is to be conſidered.Three kindes of men eſpecially do offend in bying and ſelling. But here three ſortes of men doe moſt grieuouſly offende, as they that ingroſſe all into their owne hands, that no man may ſell or gayne but they, huckſters commonly called regraters, and they which doe firſt ſet a price of things according to their owne priuate iudgement, that their couetouſneſſe maye be ſatiſfied. In the number of theſe are they which haue plentie of Butter, Oxen, wine, corne, or other things through the yerely profites of their rents. When as ſome hauing neede doe buye of theſe they are compelled, whether they will or no, to giue ſo much as is aſked: Whereby oftentimes it commeth to paſſe, that the ſeller of corne or other things, the common price being not yet ſet and confirmed, doth ſell exceding deare. Whoſe example when other alſo which haue plentie of the lyke things, doe followe, it falleth out that a buſhell of corne, which perhaps otherwiſe might be ſold for two ſhillings, is ſolde for eyght.An obiection. But thou wilt ſay, the ware is myne, why is it not lawfull for me to ſell it as I can? the buyer is free, he may eyther buye or not buye, what doe I therefore offend?The aunſwere Thy ſinne is exceding great, cloke it by what name or title ſoeuer thou wilt.How greuouſly they ſinne, which enhance and rayſe the price of thinges without cauſe For thou doſte not ſo much offende agaynſt thy buyer, as agaynſt the whole common weale, which thou doeſt wounde worſe, than if thou didſt

inuade it with robberie. For through thy couetouſneſſe it commeth to paſſe that many are pyned with miſerie and famine. He which is iniurious agaynſt one man doth deſerue euerlaſting paynes: what ſhall be thought concerning thee, which killeſt ſo many families with hunger, or at the leaſt art the cauſe that they liue in greater miſerie? Thou mayſt excuſe thy ſelfe before the iudgement ſeat of men, but God doth not eſteme ſuch craftie euaſions, neyther is he deceyued with the peruerſe interpretation of his lawe. For his iudgement ſeat is iuſt, which doth not regarde the perſon. The buyers alſo doe here oftentimes offende. For it falleth out ſometimes that they buye dearer, eyther bicauſe the payment is deferred, or that they may procure the fauour of great men, of whom they buye, that the gayne which is nothing at all hoped for by the things that are bought, may be recompenced by ſome other meanes. Here more things might be ſayde, but theſe may be ſufficient for them that haue vnderſtanding. For I doe looke to preuayle little with them,To loue godlines with Aiax, is ſo long onely to be godly while nothing is required of vs contrary to our owne affections, in which number are too too many at this day. which loue godlineſſe with Aiax. Aiax would ſeeme deuout towarde God ſo long as he perceyued nothing to bee required of him which was contrary to his affections: but when he was commaunded to ſpare Vlyſſes: In other things, ſayth he, I will obey thee, but not in this thing. Of this ſort is the religion of many at this day, they will be louers of godlyneſſe ſo that it doth not diſagree with their affections, which they will haue wholye to be ſatiſfied, yea though God be angrie therewithall. What I pray you, is more horrible than to preferre their owne affections before the commaundement of God? But this is ſufficient, for theſe men will not heare vs. The queſtion concerning the redeming of a bargayne, is diſſolued out of Leuiticus, where the Lorde doth commende vnto his people the lawe concerning the redeeming of bargaynes.Redeming of bargaines. But then onely I iudge this kynde of bargayning to be allowed, when it

doth not diſagree with the foundation before taught: Do not that to another which thou wilt not haue done to thy ſelfe. As the conſcience of a godly man maye truſt vnto this onely foundation in all bargaynes: ſo alſo in that bargayne wherein is made a couenant for the redeeming thereof.
               
               
                  Of Borowing.
                  
                     VVhat borowing is.Borowing is a contract or bargayne whereby the dominion of a thing is tranſlated vnto an other, no price being put betweene, but with a couenant that the ſame thing be reſtored agayne in the ſame kind of ſort. But here are two thinges to be conſidered of the godly, equalitie, and a bond.Two thinges to be marked in borowing. Equalitie, if in equal number, meaſure and weight thou reſtore that which thou haſt receyued with out deceit: deceit excludeth fault in the ſubſtance, quantitie, and qualitie of the thing. To this belongeth that precept of Heſiodus:
                     A precept of Heſiodus concerning borowing and reſtoring that which is borowed. Borowe of thy neyghbour by righte meaſure, and reſtore agayne by the ſame right meaſure, and by greater alſo if thou art able. Where as he ſayth: & by greater if thou art able, it may apertayne vnto thankfulnes, although the Poet maketh an other cauſe, to wit this: that thou mayeſt find thy neighbour ready to lende thee,VVe are bound by a double bond to lend vnto others. if at any other time thou haſt neede. Let there be a double bond obſerued, a naturall and a chriſtian bond. The naturall bond is that, by which we are bound by the law of nature to lend vnto others, which doe neede that thing that is ours. Of this bond the precept of Heſiodus may be vnderſtand. The chriſtian bond is, by which the Lord doth bind thoſe that are his to lend all that neede, that is, not onely them, of whom we hope for the like agayne, but euen thoſe, of whom we looke for no ſuch good turne or benefite.Luke. 6.35. 
                     Lend, ſayth Chriſt looking for nothing agayne. Chriſt doth not ſpeake here of free giuing or of almes, whereby he which hath borowed any thing, is bound

to reſtore the ſame agayne, without deceit in the ſame kind or ſort: But this commaundement of Chriſt is ſet agaynſt the malice of the Iewes, and the corrupting of the lawe of Moſes. The lawe commaundeth to lende,How the Iewes corrupted the law concerning lending. but the Iewes tooke it to be ſpoken with this exception: lende not indifferently to all that haue neede, but onely to them, of whom the like benefite may be looked for agayne. This errour and corrupting of the lawe of God the Lorde doth correct, and commaundeth them that be his, not onely to lende them which are able to render the like good turne agayne, but alſo others, to wit them, of whom they neuer looke for the lyke benefite agayne. Let vs make this manifeſt by an example: Some fiſher deſireth to borow ſomething of thee, nowe thou thinkeſt with thy ſelfe, that he may at ſome time or other pleaſure thee agayne eyther in the lyke, or in ſome other kynde of dutie. If thou haſt lent him with hope of the lyke benefit agayne, thou haſt offended nothing. For what doth he offende which for a good turne looketh for thankfulneſſe. There commeth another hauing neede, whoſe ſtate is ſuch that thou mayeſt looke for no recompence at all of him. If thou wilt not lend this man, thou breakeſt the rule of Chriſt, following rather the wicked cuſtome of the heathen, than the commaundement of Chriſt, whereby thou ſheweſt that thou doeſt contemne the voyce of Chriſt.The meaning of the ſaying of Chriſt before mentioned concerning lending. Wherefore Chriſt doth not here commaunde that thou ſhouldeſt not looke that that ſhoulde be reſtored which thou haſt lent, as ſome do vnwiſely interprete this ſaying, for then it ſhoulde not be called lending, but almes rather: but he hath regarde to the perſons, to wit, that the godly doe helpe them by lending, of whome they loke for no cōmodity or benefite agayne. This my interpretation ye circumſtāces of ye place do confirme, for in that place the Lord correcteth ye corruptions of the Phariſes, by which they ſeruing their owne affections, had maliciouſly corrupted the lawe of God. They did interprete

the precept concerning lending, as I haue alſo touched before, after this ſort. Lend, but lend him which is able to lende thee agayne when thou doeſt neede, or by ſome other kinde of dutie to recompence the benefite and to ſhew thankfulnes. This reſtraynt Chriſte taketh away by this foundation:Luke. 6.33.
                           •
                        4. 
                     If ye doe good for them which doe good for you what thanke ſhall ye haue? and if ye lend to them of whom ye hope to receiue, what thanke ſhall ye haue? for euen the ſinners lend to ſinners to receiue the like, that is, that they may at ſome other time ſhewe the like pleaſure to them agayne, eyther particularly or generally. The ſumme therefore of the precept of Chriſt is, that we doe not lend them only which are able to requite the ſame, but alſo others of whom we looke for no recompence of a benefite beſtowed. Hereunto pertayneth the ſaying of the Pſalmiſt:Pſal. 112.5. 
                     A good man is mercifull and lendeth. Here the Pſalmiſt numbreth the duty of lending among the fruites of the feare of God.The lending of the godly and of the vngodly doe much differ. And although the vngodly alſo doe ſometimes lend, yet we muſt diligently put a difference betweene the lending of the vngodly and of the godly. The vngodly doe onely regard their owne commoditie, but the godly doe meditate and thinke vpon theſe thinges in order.VVhat the godly conſider and regard in their lending. Firſt they haue regarde to the commandement of God, by which they know they are bound, and therfore they lend with a cheerfull mind and a ready will, bicauſe God hath ſo commaunded, and they iudge the duty of lending whereby they doe releeue the needy, to be a neceſſary worke and a ſeruice which God doth earneſtly require of them that be his. Secondly they doe adioyne fayth by which they behold the promiſe of God who promiſeth recompence of obedience as the Pſalmiſt ſayth:Pſal. 15.1.2. 
                     Bleſſed is the man that feareth the Lord. &c. Alſo, who ſhall dwel in thy tabernacle? he that worketh righteouſnes. Moreouer the godly doe conſider the obiects, they weigh with themſelues that they are the members of Chriſt which require

their helpe. Wherefore they doe lend them that they may comfort and refreſhe the members of Chriſt. By theſe differences the lending of the godly is diſtinguiſhed from the lending of the vngodly, who regard onely them ſelues and their owne commoditie.
               
               
                  Of Vſurie.
                  THat borowing is done after two ſortes euen experience it ſelfe doth witnes.Two ſorts of borowing. For ſometime it is done with a couenant, yt ſo much, equal weight, meaſure, & nūber being kept, as was receiued, be reſtored, & nothing more. Of which kind of borowing it hath bene hitherto ſpoken of vs. Sometime it is done with a couenant, that ſomewhat more then the principall, as they call it, be giuen for the dutie of lending. The taking of this exceſſe or ouerplus is an offence, eſpecially when it commeth for the duty of lending which we owe to our neighboure by Gods law and by the law of nature. And it is called vſurie of this, bicauſe it commeth to the principall for the vſe of euery thing.VVherin Vſurie conſiſteth. Neyther muſt we thinke that vſurie hath place in the lending of money onely. For in the lending of all thinges that is ſayd to be vſurie, which for the bounden dutie of lending is giuen, more then that that was receyued, as the lawe doth playnely ſhewe, and Ambroſe witneſſeth, when he ſayth: Meate is vſurie, and a garment is vſurie, & giue it what name thou wilt, it is vſurie. Now I call that the boūden dutie of lending to the which we are ſo bound by Gods law and by the law of nature, that vnles we doe lend him that deſireth vs and doth neede in deede, we do ſinne againſt God, & violate the charitie due to our neighbour. And although it may after a ſort be vnderſtand by thoſe thinges which haue bene ſayd concerning borowing, what is to be iudged of vſurie: yet for plainer inſtructions ſake I thinke it meete and expedient to adde hereunto ſomething concerning vſurie. But that there

may be a due order of the handling therof,The chiefe points which he meaneth to handle concerning vſury. we will intreat of theſe things in order. Firſt we will declare what prohibitions or forbiddings there be of vſurie, and what be the cauſes of theſe prohibitions. Secondly, we will note the puniſhments of vſurers, that the thinking of the puniſhments maye ſomewhat repreſſe the couetouſneſſe of vſurers. Then we will make diligent inquiſition whether there be any contract or bargayne like vnto vſurie in part, which is not forbidden by the law of God. And if there be any ſuch, howe farre the godly man maye vſe it with a good conſcience, and without offence to God. Moreouer we will gather certaine admonitions, vnto which as vnto certaine conſultations, and rules to take counſell by, it ſhalbe profitable to haue regard in euery kinde of bargaines and buſineſſe. Finally we will admoniſh how the ſtewards of the myſteryes of God, that is, the preachers of the Goſpel maye behaue themſelues in the matter of vſurie, that they do neyther communicate with other mens offences, nor attempt any thing that may turne to their deſtruction.
               
               
                  Of the first.
                  
                     Foure prohibitions of vſurie.THe prohibitions or forbiddings of vſurie are foure, into which if we will godlye and earneſtly looke, we ſhall perceyue more clearely than the daye what is to be iudged concerning this whole trade of vſurie. Wherefore I will rehearſe them diſtinctly and in order.
                  
                     The firſt prohibition of vſurie.The firſt is ſayde to be naturall. For Aristotle without controuerſie the chiefe of Philoſophers, doth teach that vſurie is agaynſt nature, being moued by this argument: Mony by nature cannot bring forth,The very heathen Philoſophers did diſallow vſurie and affirme it to be contrarie to nature. therefore to take vſurie of mony is contrary to nature. And for this cauſe vſurie is thought to be called of the Grecians Tocos, of bringing forth, as though there were a certaine birth of mony, that euen by the very name it may be infamous. Aristophanes calleth vſurie a beaſt, which in proceſſe of time

doth bring forth mony in more abundant increaſe. Plato alſo doth caſt vſurie out of his common weale. For thus he ſayth in his fift booke of lawes: Let it be lawful if any taketh mony vpō intereſt, to rēder neither the intereſt, nor the principall. This prohibition of Plato is grounded vppon a naturall principle, to wit, that that is in no caſe to be ſuffred in a citie, whatſoeuer it be, which is agaynſt the lawe of nature and mutuall charitie, and is the cauſe of the ruine of families and common weales, which nature biddeth to be preſerued and maintayned. Plutarch concludeth that vſurie is contrary to nature by this principle: Of nothing nothing is made. Cicero compareth vſurie to man ſlaughter. Wherefore it is manifeſt that as manſlaughter is contrarye to nature, ſo alſo vſurie is contrarie therevnto. Moreouer,Other reaſons prouing vſury to be againſt nature. inequalitie in bargaining is agaynſt nature. For the worke thereof is the deſtruction of nature. Gayne therfore that is giuen for the bounden dutie of lending is agaynſt nature. For it doth manifeſtly bring inequalitie. Finally, ſeing that the ciuill ſocietie is eſpecially according to nature, trulye it muſt be that vſurie is an enimie to nature, inaſmuch as it doth appayre and diminiſhe humane ſocietie.
                  The ſeconde prohibition is diuine. For Moſes,The ſecond prohibition of vſurie out of the word of God. the Prophetes and the Pſalmes doe forbid and condemne vſurie. The cauſe of this forbidding is expreſſely added in many places, to wit, that our neighbour be not oppreſſed with vſurie. Exod. 22. If thou lend mony to my people,
                     Verſe. 25. 
                     that is, to the poore with thee, thou shalt not be as an vſurer vnto him: thou ſhalt not oppreſſe him with vſurie. Leuit. 25.
                     Verſe. 37. 
                     Thou ſhalt not giue him thy monie to vſurie, nor lende him thy vittayles for increaſe. The cauſe of the precept goeth before: that thy brother may liue with thee, to wit, not oppreſſed with vſurie.Verſe 19.20. 
                     Deut. 23. Thou ſhalt not giue to vſurie to thy brother: as vſurie of mony, vſurie of meat, vſurie of any thing that is put to vſurie. Vnto a straunger thou

mayst lende vpon vſurie, but thou ſhalt not lende vpon vſurie vnto thy brother, that the Lorde thy God may bleſſe thee in all that thou ſettest thine hande to. Moſes ſpeaketh here alſo of the vſurie that oppreſſeth our neighbour. For out of the Hebrue text it may thus be tranſlated: Thou mayst byte a straunger with vſurie,
                     Verſe. 8. 
                     but thy brother thou ſhalt not byte. Ezech. 18. He that hath not giuen forth vpon vſurie, neyther hath taken any increaſe, is iust, and ſhall ſurely liue. Herevpon it followeth in the contrarie ſenſe, that he is vniuſt and ſhall die which hath giuen vpon vſurie and taken increaſe. In the 15. Pſalme it is ſayde that he ſhall dwell in the tabernacle of the Lord which giueth not his mony vpon vſurie. And that this Pſalme alſo ſpeaketh of vſurie which byteth and oppreſſeth our neyghbour, it is manifeſt. For the Pſalmiſt vſeth the worde Neſec, which hath it name of biting. Agayne, there is no doubt, but that vſurie is here prohibited, which before was forbidden in Moſes, to wit, that which biteth and oppreſſeth our neighbour. For the Prophetes bring no newe doctrine, but only are interpreters of Moſes.
                  
                     The third prohibition of vſurie taken from ciuil ordinances & lawes of common weales.The thirde prohibition is politike or ciuill. For among the moſt auncient Romanes there was no maner, no permiſſion of vſurie, but publike curſing and puniſhing therof. But in proceſſe of time, when togither with rule and riches, couetouſneſſe and riot did increaſe, vſurie began by little & little, and was oftentimes more & more increaſed, vntill the matter of vſurie came vnto ſedicion and diſcord, for which cauſe the gouernours of cōmon weales, bicauſe they coulde not vtterly aboliſhe vſurie, did with lawes repreſſe it as much as they coulde. The citie of Athens did commit wholy vnto Solon that he ſhoulde moderate the vſurie by which the Athenians were almoſt oppreſſed. For when there was a ſedition riſen for the crueltie of vſurers, which did compell the ſonnes and daughters of their debters to be brought into bondage, and to be ſolde, that the

intereſt might be payde: Solon, the Citizens requeſting him, made the firſt lawe, that it ſhoulde not afterward be lawfull that any free bodie ſhoulde be brought into ſeruitude for debtes or vſury.How Solon did moderate vſurie among the Athenians And this meaſure of vſury did Solon ordayne, that no more ſhoulde be demaunded than the hundreth part, that is, ſo much as did counteruayle the principall in the hundreth moueth, that is, of an hundreth crownes euery moneth one crowne.The moderation of vſurie which the ancient Emperours made. But the Emperours did forbid the hundreth part to be receyued for intereſt, except it were in things caried ouer the ſea, but in other lawfull trades they did permit the eyght part of the hundreth, that is, of an hundred crownes euery yere eyght crownes. But to the Noble men in euery contract or bargaine they did not permit aboue the fourth part of the hundreth, that is, euery yeare of an hundreth crownes, foure crownes, but to the cōmon people the ſixt part of the hundreth was permitted, that is, euery yeare of an hundreth crownes, ſixe crownes. This moderation of the Emperours was highly to be prayſed, which did both repreſſe the vniuſt exaction of vſurie, and alſo prouided that the goodes of priuate men were not waſted by vnmeaſurable vſurie.
                  The fourth prohibition is eccleſiaſticall.The fourth prohibition of vſurie whiche is taken out of the decrees of Synodes and the ſayings of holy fathers. Now I call an eccleſiaſticall prohibition, not the decrees of the Pope, whom we doe acknowledge neither the head, nor the taile of the Church, but of holy Synodes, by which vſurie was ſtreightly prohibited. Alſo the ſayings of holy fathers againſt vſurie. In the 47. decrees there is mention made of the canons of the Apoſtle, in which vſurie is condemned. The Nicene Synod, in which were 318. fathers did alſo condemne vſurie.Gratianus againſt vſurie. And Gratianus againſt the vſurie of Clergie men, doth adde theſe wordes out of the decrees of the Nicene councell. Becauſe many of the clergie for couetouſnes ſake, ſeeking after filthy lucre,Pſalm. 15.5. haue forgotten the diuine precept, wherein it is ſayd: He that giueth not his money vpon vſurie, this holy councell hath decreed, that, if

any be found after this decree to take vſurie, or by anye ſuch trade to ſeeke after filthie lucre, &c. he be throwne out of the Clergie, and counted voyde of all eccleſiaſticall decree or office.Hierome againſt vſurie. 
                     Hierome ſayth: To ſeeke vſurie, or to defraude or to take violently doe nothing differ. Lend to thy brother, and take that that thou haſt lent and ſeeke for no ouerplus,Auguſtine againſt vſurie. becauſe the ouerplus is counted for vſurie. Augustine ſayth: what ſhall I ſay of vſurie, which euen the verie lawes and iudges themſelues doe commaund to be rendred? whether is he crueller which ſtealeth or taketh away any thing from a rich man, or he which killeth a poore man with vſurie? Theſe thinges verily and ſuch like are poſſeſſed ill, and I would that they were reſtored, but there is none who being Iudge they ſhalbe required agayne. But now let vs wiſely conſider what is written: To a faythfull man the whole world is riches, but to an vnfaithfull man not ſomuch as a halfepeny. Doe we not conuince all men, which ſeeme to themſelues to reioyce in the goods that they haue gotten, and know not how to vſe them, to poſſeſſe that which belongeth to an other? For that truly belongeth not to an other which is poſſeſſed rightly. But that is poſſeſſed rightly which is poſſeſſed iuſtly. And that is poſſeſſed iuſtly, which is poſſeſſed well. Euery thing therefore that is poſſeſſed ill, belongeth to another.Ambroſe againſt vſurie. Theſe wordes ſayth Augustine. Ambroſe ſayth: Why doſte thou turue the induſtrie of nature into deceyt? Why doſte thou deſire that there ſhoulde be lack of things neceſſarye? Why doſte thou make ſcarcitie to be wiſhed for to the poore, and doſte lament common plentie. Thou doeſt eſpie when there is ſmall increaſe. Thou calleſt that induſtrie, which is the practiſe of ſubtiltie, and that which thou calleſt a remedie, is a deuiſe of miſchiefe. But may I call vſurie theft (thoſe are taken for the tymes of theft, in which thou being a cruell deceyuer, doſte creepe into the bowels of men) vnto whom the vſurie of corne layde vp is

multiplied? Why doeſt thou wiſh euill to all men? thy gaine is publicke loſſe. The ſame ſayth alſo in an other place: He fighteth without a weapon which exacteth vſurie: he reuengeth himſelfe of his enemie without a ſweard which is a receiuer of vſurie. Chryſostome ſayth:Chryſoſtome againſt vſurie. Lende, take greater vſurie, but lend ſo, that thou ſhalt receiue there where as is no enuie, no accuſation, no deceit, no terrour. Lend nothing to them that be in neede but vnto Chriſt who both ſuffred neede and hunger for thee, and alſo nouriſheth all men. For this vſurie doth prepare a kingdome, but the other prepareth hel fire: this is a point of godlines and mercie, the other of crueltie and couetouſnes. The ſame ſayth in an other place: there is nothing more filthy then vſurie, nothing more cruel. An vſurer procureth the miſeries of others and his lucre maketh the aduerſitie of an other. Such a one doth as it wrre lift vp his hand and thruſt into ſhipwrecke. The ſame ſaith in an other place:The money of an vſurer very fitly compared to the poiſon of an Aſpe The money of an vſurer is like to the ſting of an Aſpe. For he that is ſtong of an Aſpe being as it were delighted, doth fall into a ſleepe and through the ſoundnes of ſleepe doth dye, becauſe then the venim doth priuily runne through all his members: So he which taketh vpon vſurie, doth for the time feele as it were a benefite, but the vſurie doth runne through all his ſubſtance, and conuerteth all into dette.Lactantius againſt vſurie. 
                     Lactantius ſayth: If a man hath lent any money let him not take vſurie, that the benefite may be ſafe and perfect, which releeueth neceſſitie, and let him altogither abſtaine himſelfe from that that is an other mans. For in this kinde of dutye he ought to be content with his owne, whom it behoueth otherwiſe not to ſpare that that is his owne that he may doe good. But to take more then he gaue is vniuſt, which he that doth, doth after a ſort practiſe deceit, that he may get his pray by the neceſſitie of an other.Bernard againſt vſurie. 
                     Bernard ſaith: What is vſurie? the poyſon of a Patrimonie. What is vſurie according to the

law? a theefe foretelling what he intendeth, (to wit, to rauin). Luther doth moſt greuouſly inueigh againſt vſurers, whoſe writings, becauſe they are in the handes of many, I will not here make mention of any thing out of them. Hitherto we haue ſpoken of the prohibitions of vſurie, and of the cauſes of the prohibitions, of all which this ſentence is concluded:The chiefe cauſes wherfore vſurie is forbidden. that vſurie is therfore forbidden, that by it our neighbour be not hurt, that charitie among men be not broken, that humane ſocietie be not diſturbed, that the goods of priuate men be not waſted to the deſtruction of families and common weales. As often as therfore we read that vſurie is prohibited, let vs looke vnto theſe endes of the prohibition, leaſt that vnder a pretence of vſurie that is forbidden, we doe iudge to ſharply of other contractes and bargaines which the lawes doe allow.
               
               
                  Of the ſecond.
                  
                     Three kinds of punishment of vſurers.
                     J Find that the puniſhment of vſurers is of three ſorts, to wit, ciuil, ſpirituall, and eccleſiaſticall. The ciuil puniſhment according to the auncient lawes of the Romans, as Cato witneſſeth,How the auncient Romains punished vſurers and what they iudged of them was, that vſurers ſhould be puniſhed with paying foure times as much, theeues with paying onelye twiſe as much. Surely the auncients did ſufficiently declare by this ſentence, that they did iudge vſurers to be worſe and more hurtfull then common theeues. And for this cauſe they were not ſuffred to come to publike dignities and offices as men vnworthy of them.The corruption of our time is great. But, alas, ſo great at this day is the corruption of chriſtian maners, that they which were infamous among the prophane nations, and counted worſe then theeues, are iudged worthy of very hie honour, yea and that among Chriſtians. I remē
                     ber being a child when there were onely two vſurers in this realme which wer commonly knowne: of whom one being one of the common ſort did dwell in Morea in Denmark.
                     An example worthie to be noted of all, but ſpecially of vngodly, vſurers. This mā although he was exceding rich through vſurie,

yet after his death his children which he left were brought vnto ſuch pouertie, that we haue ſeene in this citie a certaine daughter of his, not onely in a torne and filthy garment, and that ſcarce couering thoſe partes of the body which nature biddeth to be couered: but alſo following, in the ſight of many, a moſt filthie trade, whereby notwithſtanding ſhe could not keepe her ſelfe from beggerie. There was an other which came of a better familie,Another example of an vſurer. vnto whom no ſmall ſubſtance had come by inheritance. This man, greedy deſire of money pricking him forward, doth apply his mind to vſurie, and by little and little doth ſo heape vp gaine gotten by vſury, that he became exceeding rich in money. But what commeth here to paſſe? riches vniuſtly heaped vp went partly to the kinges Eſcheker, I cannot tell for what cauſes, and partly doe yet ſerue to maintaine gluttony and riot. Wherby it is eaſie to coniecture, what the ende of them will be, which as yet doe enioy any of thoſe riches, vnleſſe they doe in time repent.
                  But thou wilt ſay, what doe theſe thinges pertayne to ciuil puniſhment? very much in euery reſpect. For this is the order of the iuſtice of God,Though vſurers are not punished of men, yet they shall not eſcape the punishment of God. when the ciuil magiſtrate doth negligently execute the office committed vnto him, God, as the chiefe monarch and prince is wont to put to his hand, and to puniſh euen ciuil tranſgreſſions with corporall puniſhments, that men may thinke that they ſhall not therefore eſcape their due puniſhments, eyther becauſe their doinges are hid from the ciuil magiſtrate, or becauſe the magiſtrate him ſelfe eyther through feare, or ſlouthfulnes, or ignorance, or to much parcialitie doth not his office, nor calleth all offences to diligent examination.
                  Let not men therfore hereupon promiſe themſelues to eſcape vnpuniſhed, bicauſe they ſeeme that they can eaſily auoyde the handes of the ciuil magiſtrate, neither herevpon, becauſe puniſhments doe not ſtrayght way followe

their deedes, God himſelfe not puniſhing by and by, but deferring the puniſhment by his wyſe counſayle.Though puniſhment be deferred, yet it is not therfore taken awaye. For puniſhment is not therefore taken awaye bicauſe it is deferred, ſith that the Lorde is wont with ſlowneſſe of vengeance to recompence the grieuouſneſſe of puniſhment. God doth oftentimes mitigate the puniſhment for repentance ſake, yet ſo, that he leaueth euident teſtimonies of hys iudgement.
                  
                     A profitable admonition to vngodly vſurers.Wherefore I doe admoniſhe all Vſurers that they doe ſpeedily repent, and rather folow penitent Zachaeus, whoſe repentance the Goſpel commendeth vnto vs, than Iudas, who by his theft was at the laſt brought to hang himſelf. Although they doe litle feare the iudgement of God them ſelues, yet at the leaſt let them take pitie vpon their children, leaſt that the poyſon of Vſurie which the parents do gather, be deadly vnto the very children. Let them knowe that it is a moſt true ſaying:

                        The riches that with wrong are got,
                        to the thirde heire continue not.
                     
                  
                  
                     The ſpirituall punishment of vſurers though little eſteemed of many, yet truly exceeding grieuous.The ſpirituall puniſhment of Vſurers although it be moſt grieuous, yet many doe contemne it as ridiculous. For whoſoeuer doth practiſe Vſurie, he is without all doubt, out of the familie of God, out of the bodie of Chriſt. For howe can he be the member of Chriſt, which with Vſurie killeth Chriſt in his members? Howe can he be counted to be of the familie of God,Note. which fighteth vnder Satan? which mocketh and ſcorneth at the worde of God? Now they that are not of the bodie of Chriſt haue nothing to doe with the treaſure of the Saints, which is farre more precious than all the riches of this worlde. What treaſure can be greater than to poſſeſſe Chriſt? What riches more excellent than the inheritance of the kingdome of God? Theſe treaſures, theſe riches hath Lazarus being full of ſores, & pore, but fearing God, which the rich glutton ſhall want for euer, and with him, as many as caſting

aſide the feare of God doe ſeeke after vniuſt gaine. What, I pray thee, is it, if thou be able with thy vſurie to gayne the riches of Croeſus, and in the meane ſeaſon to loſe thine owne ſoule? O peruerſe iudgement. Thou haſt exceeding great care of this time which ſhall ſhortly come to an end, but there doth not ſo much as a thought come into thy mynde concerning the time to come, whereof there ſhall be no ende. I therfore, if my admonition may any thing preuayle, doe exhort all them which doe thinke verily that there is a God, which doe acknowledge God to be a iuſt iudge, and which do beleeue that there is any lyfe remaining after theſe aſhes, that they doe ſpeedily repent, that when the Lorde ſhall come ſooner than they thinke for, he may finde them apparelled with a wedding garment, and not with an helliſh garment which they haue got vnto themſelues by their vſurie.
                  Eccleſiaſticall puniſhment agaynſt vſurers was in time paſt of this ſort:How vſurers were punished heretofore according to the cenſure of the Church. Firſt they were not admitted to the ſolemne ceremonie of the offering. Alſo they were put back from the communion of the bodie and bloude of the Lord. Moreouer, they were excluded from Chriſtian buriall. This puniſhment agaynſt Vſurers was moſt grieuous, neuertheleſſe, moſt iuſt.Vſurers were very iuſtly prohibited from the ceremonie of offring. For firſt concerning the ceremonie of the offering, or the almes giuen to the vſe of the miniſters of the Goſpell, or to the releeuing of the poore, we muſt vnderſtande that almes giuen of goodes gotten by Vſurie is abhominable to God. For no ſacrifices (for liberalitie towarde the poore being rightly done, is a certaine kynde of ſacrifice) can pleaſe God, but thoſe which being iuſtly gotten, doe come from a pure mynde and right will, fayth ſhyning before. For this is moſt true, that no mans worke can pleaſe God, before that the mynde doth pleaſe him, but the mynde doth in no wyſe pleaſe except it doth before in the ſpirite of fayth humble it ſelfe before God. Both of thē is confirmed by this ſaying of Eſay. chap. 66.

                     To him will I looke (ſayth the Lorde) that is humble and of a contrite ſpirite, and trembleth at my wordes. He that killeth a bullocke (to wit, without humilitie of ſpirit) is as if he ſlewe a man, he that ſacrificeth a shepe, as if he cut of a dogges necke. By theſe words (that I may ſpeake briefly) the Prophet ſignifieth, that to the vncleane all things are vncleane, and that nothing doth pleaſe God, but that which proceeding from the true feare of God, is done iuſtly and of them that be iuſt. But I ſee what is obiected againſt me:An obiection. Vſurers, ſay ſome, doe profeſſe one Chriſtian fayth with vs, why therefore is it not lawfull for them to communicate with the godly in outwarde things onely? I graunt in dede that Vſurers doe profeſſe the Chriſtian fayth with vs,The aunſwere but they doe that onely in wordes, and in the meane ſeaſon they doe moſt wickedly denie it in their deedes, whereby it commeth to paſſe, that both their profeſſion is abhominable before God, and alſo they themſelues, ſuch is their obſtinacie and diſobedience, are reprobate vnto euery good worke.Vſurers were in time paſt put back from the holy communion, and that for moſt weightie cauſes & reaſons. Agayne, where as Vſurers were put backe from the holy ſupper of the Lorde, it was moſt iuſt reaſon: For what participation haue ſwine with the bodie and bloude of Chriſt? what haue they to do with the meate of the children of God, which are the bond ſlaues of Satan?Matth. 7.6. 
                     Giue ye not, ſayth the Lord, that which is holy to dogges, neyther cast ye your pearles before ſwine. Howe, I pray you, is the table of the Lorde meete for them, who being filled with the foode of the deuill, that is,An admonition to the miniſters of the Goſpell. with Vſurie, doe exceſſiuely abounde? Wherefore the Miniſters of the Goſpel whoſoeuer they be, that knowing and priue therevnto, do offer the moſt holy bodie and bloud of ye Lord vnto Vſurers, do not onely wickedly communicate with other mens ſinnes, whereof they ſhall alſo at the length ſuffer the puniſhment: But alſo as much as in them is, they doe with ſacrilege caſt the body and bloude of the Lorde, into a moſt vile and filthie ſinke of Satan,

of which wickedneſſe they ſhall in no wiſe auoyde the puniſhment. But thou wilt ſay, many which are as euill as Vſurers doe come to the ſupper of the Lorde. I beleeue this truly. For euen Iudas alſo the brother of Vſurers did come to the table of the Lord, but what did it profite him? did he not togither with the breade ſwalowe the ſpirite of Satan, and that not through the fault of him that offred, but through his owne proper fault receyuing it? The Lorde truly offred ſaluation, but he infected with the venim of couetouſneſſe, did wickedly refuſe that which the Lorde offered, and all that Satan gaue, he ſwallowed quite vp.
                  But concerning the puniſhment of Burial,
                        Vſurers in time paſt wer excluded frō chriſtian buriall, and that by the iuſt cenſure of the Church.
                        VVhy we ſolemniſe the burials of holy men.
                      the cenſure and iudgement of our auncetours did not want moſt iuſt reaſon. But this he ſhall beſt vnderſtand, which ſhall perceiue the cauſe why we do ſolemniſe the funerals of ſaints and holy men with ceremonies and obſequies. But what is the cauſe? The hope of a glorious reſurrection. For it is a moſt worthy thing that we ſhould beſtow honeſt buriall vpō thoſe bodyes, which we hope in time to come ſhall be made like to the glorious body of Chriſt. For when we ſee the bodies of the faintes to be committed to the duſt, we doe lift vp our mindes to him, which in time to come, the voyce of the Archangel going before, ſhall ſay: Ariſe ye dead. And to the dead being raiſed vp he ſhall giue the glorie of immortalitie. But now ſeing that the vngodly,Reaſons and teſtimonies wherfore vſurers haue bene excluded from chriſtian buriall. among whom are vſurers as the chiefe ſouldiers and hierlinges of Satan occupying the firſt place ſhal riſe againe, as Daniel witneſſeth, to euerlaſting ignominie and confuſion, what godly man will iudge them worthie of the honour of Chriſtian buriall? The 15. Pſalme numbreth him among the godly Who in his eyes deſpiſeth a vile perſon, and honoureth them that feare the Lord: How therefore ſhall he cauſe him to be buried in glorious and honorable buriall whom he doth abhorre? Ieremie foretelleth

that a tyranne ſhall be buried with the buriall of an Aſſe,Ier
                           •
                        . 22.19. and that by the iuſt iudgement of God: What ſhall we determine by the ſame iudgement of God cōcerning Vſurers, which are crueller then any tyrannes? I doe not paſſe or eſteme though ſome champion doe falſly attribute vnto himſelfe the ſpirite of prophecie and ſay, that it may come to paſſe, that many which are the enemies of Vſurers may be buried with the buriall of an Aſſe, and in the meane time Vſurers may be brought to buriall with great pompe, the bells ringing and torches caried light before them. I will make no other aunſwere to theſe, but that euen as in the ſighte of the Lorde the death of his ſaints is precious:Pſal. 116.15. ſo is their buriall alſo honourable before God. Wherefore that which we haue witneſſed concerning the honeſt buriall of the Saints doth pertayne to Eccleſiaſticall diſcipline, and not to the iudgement of God whoſe wayes are vnſearchable. What will here come to paſſe? whome ſhall I not haue reſiſters and ſtriuers agaynſt this moſt iuſt cenſure and iudgement of the Church? ſurely they wil not be wanting which with their colours and fayre gloſes will mitigate the euill of Vſurie. Many will crie (the Serpent which deceyued our firſt parentes,VVith what fayre gloſes ſome will ſeke to diminishe the heynouſneſſe of vſury. being their maiſter) that the lawe of Moſes many yeares ago by the comming of Chriſt was repealed, made voyde, and aboliſhed, and doth nothing pertayne to chriſtian people, who enioy their libertie, & do not ſuffer them ſelues to be ſtraitly bound with the prohibition of Moſes. This ſpeach truly is plauſible, but it is reproued by the teſtimonie of the conſcience. For they which paynt their couetouſnes with this colour, being deceiued of their Their owne naturall corruption. domeſticall Eue, which was miſerably ſeduced by the ſerpent, doe fall headlong into their owne deſtruction, and deceyue themſelues by their owne ſubtiltie. For theſe men doe not weygh aright the prohibition of Moſes, neyther doe they conferre the forbidding of Vſurie with

the lawe of charitie as they ſhoulde doe, which if they did, they ſhould plainly ſee that vſurie being eſtabliſhed,VVhere vſury is eſtablished, there charitie is ouerthrown the rule of charitie is ouerthrowne, which God will haue to be perpetuall. Seing therefore that charitie ſhall be aboliſhed neither in this life nor in the life to come as much as pertayneth to the commaundement and will of God and obedience perpetually due to the ſame: who doth not ſee that Vſurie, which is quite contrarie to charitie, is condemned? But of this thing ſufficient. For before it was ſhewed of vs at large when we did intreate of the cauſes of forbidding Vſurie, that the forbidding of Vſurie did proceede from the lawe of charitie. Wherefore without al doubt they ſhalbe foūd naked before God the iudge, which vſe this leafe already perced through, to hide their filthines.
                  Perhaps ſome will yet except and ſay:An obiection in the behalfe of vſurers. There is no iniurie done to him that is willing. He which doth humbly deſire to borow money of an Vſurer, doth couenant to pay Vſurie, not compelled thereunto, but willingly, therfore an Vſurer which helpeth a man that humbly intreateth him, is not to be ſaide to doe againſt charitie.The aunſwer. The principle from whence this reaſon is taken, is doutfull, in as much as it fayleth in two partes, of which one is true, the other falſe.Euery will is not without conſtraint, as it is shewed by examples. For euerie will is not without conſtraint and of it ſelfe, which we may eaſily ſee in examples. The wayfaring man doth willingly deliuer his treaſure to the theefe, which he would not doe, if he did not feare the ſweard of the theefe. The mariner doth make loſſe of his marchandiſe and that willingly when ſhipwracke is at hand, but from whence I pray you, doth that will come? truly not of election or choice without conſtraint, but of feare of the ſhipwracke which is at hand. For the mariner doth therfore caſt away his marchandiſe willingly leaſte that he himſelfe periſh togither with his marchandiſe. Wherefore, two euils being ſet before him, he will willingly

chooſe that euill which ſeemeth to be the leſſe. After the ſame maner is the will of him that boroweth money vpon Vſurie, affected concerning the couenant and promiſe to pay intereſt, which truly he promiſeth willingly, which he would not doe, if he were not conſtrained by pouertie, therby to auoyde a greater euil.
                  
                     Another obiection in the behalfe of vſurers.Furthermore where as ſome doe obiect that families and common weales cannot ſtand without Vſurie: this ſurely I confes to be true in this corruption of the worlde and in the baniſhment of manly vertue which was in our auncetours.The aunſwer. But from whence I pray you, commeth that commoditie by which thou crieſt that families & common weales are maintained? doth it come of Vſurie? no truly. For no good thing can come of Vſurie by it ſelf, but rather a ſea of euils. Now if perhaps any good ſeeme to come of Vſury, that is not to be attributed to vſurie, but to the lending, which lending if it were done wtout Vſurie, it would more profit families & common weales.Vſurers are Idolaters, and why. But thou wilt ſay, thou loſeſt labour in ſpeaking which goeſt about to call Vſurers, being Idolaters (for Vſurers in ſteede of God do worſhip riches as God) into the right way. But be it ſo, inaſmuch as they as adders are deafe at ye word of ye Lord. For they heare nothing with ſo great indignatiō of mind as that their Vſurie is condemned. That moſt filthie lucre is more pleaſant vnto them then that they would want it euen with any perill ſet before them. And ſurely hereupon it is, that not a few, which might liue welthily enough for the maner of their calling, of the profites of their owne land,Vſurie which ſome affirme to be the vpholding of families and common weales, is in deede in the ende oft times the vtter ruin of them. doe ſell their inheritance, that a certaine ſūme of money being ſcraped togither and put out to Vſurie, they may liue idlely vpon their Vſurie, and inuent diuers ſubtile deuiſes, by which they may hold their detters not without vſurie vpon vſurie, vntil they haue vtterly vndone them, not without the exceding great loſſe of families and common weales. But although theſe perhaps will not allow

of our ſentence, yet it is our duty to admoniſh them, that at the leaſt they thinke that the day will come vnlooked for, in which they ſhall render an account to the iuſt iudge, who as he is corrupted with no accepting of perſons, ſo is he deceiued with no ſophiſtrie or ſubtiltie. And then at the length Vſurers ſhall perceiue that we did aduertiſe them of good and profitable things, and that that heathen Poet Heſiodus did ſay true, who being no vaine Poet writeth after this ſorte:

                        Vſe not ill meanes to gaine for gaine ill got
                        from verie loſſe and damage diffreth not.
                     
                  
                  From whence had Heſiodus this: had he it out of the word of God which Vſurers doe contemne? no truly. For that ſillie man did not ſee at any time the writinges eyther of the Prophets or of the Apoſtles. From whence therefore had he it? experience and nature being his teachers he ſet forth in writing this moſt true oracle verye well agreeing with the voyce of the Prophets and Apoſtles. With Heſiodus agreeth Pindarus that moſt auncient Poet of ye 
                     Thebans, whom for his ſingular wiſedome Alexander the great is ſayde to haue embraced: for he ſaith thus much in effect:

                        The mindes of men are redier,
                        to praiſe deceitfull gaine:
                        Then iustice to embrace and eke,
                        true dealing to maintayne:
                        Although they creepe to that ſharpe daye,
                        their life being nigh ſpent:
                        When for vniustice done they ſhall,
                        receiue due puniſhment.
                     
                  
                  That day, which ſhal follow the delightes and pleaſurs that the vngodly take of their vniuſt gaine, Pindarus calleth a day appoynted for puniſhment. For as in the next day after the feſtiuall dayes (in which the moſt part doe more freely without conſideration giue ouer themſelues

to all kind of pleaſures and delites) men are wont to call to remembrance wherin they did offend more licentiouſly through drunkennes: ſo the day of death and of the laſt iudgement ſhall be to Vſurers as the next day after feſtiual dayes, in which they doe at the laſt repent them of their ſinnes, but in vaine. For he is by no meanes thought truly to repent, which abſtaineth from ſin againſt his will. Theſe thinges I thought good to write ſomwhat more at large, that I might aduertiſe Vſurers of the wrath of God and of the puniſhment that hangeth ouer their heades,VVhat vſurers ought to doe, to whom God hath giuen grace to repent and to forſake ſo deteſtable a ſin. which they ſhall no way eſcape, except they doe repent in time, and for a teſtimony of their repentance do iuſtly reſtore againe, if they ſhall be able, that which they haue vniuſtly taken. But if they ſhall not be able, let them at the leaſt doe what they can, let them craue of God pardon of their fault, let them aſke them whom they haue hurt with their vſurie, forgiuenes of the iniurie that they haue done, and let them be reconciled to the Churche by publicke ſatiſfaction, leaſt that their portion be with Iudas. But if any ſhall contemne and deride theſe our counſels and admonitions, which I dout not but it will come to paſſe, it maketh no matter to me. I ſeeke the ſaluation of wretched men, I tell out the truth which he that will not obey, ſhall in his time finde a iuſt iudge who will moſt iuſtly puniſh both his contempt and the contempt of his fauourers.
               
               
                  Of the third.
                  AFter we haue now ſpoken of the prohibitions of Vſurie and of the cauſes thereof, and alſo of the puniſhments of them, who deſpiſing the law both of God and of man doe practiſe Vſurie which is prohibited: the place requireth that we ſee whether there be any contract or bargaine like vnto Vſurie in part, yet not diſagreeing with the charitie toward our neighbour, and if there be anye

ſuch, how farre a godly man may vſe the ſame with a good conſcience and without offence to God. Firſt of all this is to be helde as moſt certayne that Vſurie condemned by the worde of God, is therfore vnlawfull, prohibited and condemned becauſe it is contrarie to the foundation which proceedeth from the lawe of charitie: that which thou wilt not haue done to thy ſelfe doe not thou to an other. But that this our foundatiō is vnmoueable we haue declared before, where we haue layde the foundations of contracts and bargaines. For there we ſhewed that charitie is the ſcope and end of all duties in this humane ſocietie.No bargain is diſallowed, which is not contrarie to charitie. Of this foundation an vnmoueable conſequent is concluded, that no contract is condemned which is not repugnant to the charitie toward our neyghbour. Wherefore if any ſuch can be ſhewed, it ſhalbe without doubt accounted lawfull, although it ſhall appeare much like vnto Vſurie. For it is not iuſt and meete that we doe condemne al profitable contractes and bargaines in a common weale vnder a pretence of Vſurie, becauſe of the likenes. And although many ſuch contracts are wiſely condemned of the lawyers, yet we will ſpeake of them of which the greateſt controuerſie is, eſpecially in this realme. But that we may iudge of theſe contracts without errour, and find out that which with a good conſcience and without offending God it is lawfull to follow: it ſhall be needeful to ſpeake of diuers ſortes of men, that it may be vnderſtād to whom we are bound to lend, and to whom we are not, for there Vſurie is properly committed. Here the lawes of magiſtrates may determine of thoſe thinges, which they ſhall wiſely know to be good and profitable for their common weale.A profitable rule concerning bargains For this is to be marked as a profitable rule in the ſocietie of man: that bargaynes allowed by the lawes and by the authoritie of the magiſtrate, that is, of a good and wiſe iudge or lawyer, are permitted to a chriſtian man. For it is lawfull for a chriſtian to vſe ciuil

ordinances, & theſe ordināces are of force not only for reaſons ſake, but alſo becauſe of the authority of ye magiſtrate. Let a chriſtian man therfore ſo inſtruct his conſcience, yt it may vnderſtand yt theſe things are permitted, bicauſe God doth allow lawes and magiſtrates, and will haue vs to vſe ciuil ordinances, and in bargaynes let him be content with that meane, with that equalitie, that the lawes and the magiſtrates doe appoynt, except they doe playnely varye from the ten commaundements and from the law of nature. This rule doth firſt admoniſh vs, that we do iudge reuerently of ye lawes and ordinances of a good magiſtrat. Secondly that we iudge not raſhly & too ſharply of ye bargaines which the lawes do approue. Now, as we haue purpoſed let vs ſee ye orders and ſtates of men. In the firſt ſtate may be the poore and beggers, whiche being hindred with old age, or grieued with ſickneſſe, or otherwiſe with ſome great calamitie oppreſſed, are not able to liue without the almes of other,The dutie of charity which we owe to the poore and impotent. no nor to make any gaine. To theſe we doe by bond owe the duties of charitie and almes. Wherefore we muſt giue vnto theſe without al expectation of recompence or dutie agayne, for the commaundements ſake of God, and for charities ſake, which by nature we owe one to an other. And this det is ſo neceſſary, that he that doth refuſe to pay it, doth obſtinatly violate the commaundement of God, doth vngodly refuſe to obey the precept of Chriſt, doth cruelly oppreſſe the members of Chriſt, doth wickedly reiect the lawe of charitie, and purchaſeth vnto himſelfe certayne deſtruction. Hereuppon therefore it may eaſily be knowne, how neceſſarye a duty it is to giue almes, and to relieue with his abilitie thoſe that doe in very deede ſtand in neede.Diuers cauſes which hinder men that they are ſo ſlacke in the neceſſary dutie of giuing almes. But becauſe I ſee that there are many cauſes by which the moſt parte are hindred, whereby they are not occupyed in this neceſſary and dutiful office, as in many there is a ſtudie of couetouſnes, ignorance of the prouidence of God, heatheniſh

diffidence, riot, abuſe of thinges, to much folly, much vnprofitable ſpending, and (alas) cruel vnmercifulnes in the moſt parte, whereby it commeth to paſſe that they are not moued with the neede of them that be in miſerie: I will here ſomwhat at large handle the place of almes and that for this purpoſe, that both the neceſſitie of our dutye,VVhy he purpoſeth to intreat of almes more at large. whereby we are bound to them that neede in deede, may be vnderſtand, and alſo we being admoniſhed, may more wyllingly and readyly doe our dutie, and be made more liberall toward the poore.
                  Firſt therefore I will ſhew where almes is to be giuen and what are the kindes therof.VVhat chiefe poyntes he meaneth to handle concerning almes
                  
                  Secondly I will rehearſe the cauſes, with which the godly ought to be ſtirred vp to giue almes.
                  Thirdly I will note the affection of him that giueth almes, and I will alſo preſcribe a maner and meaſure to be obſerued in giuing almes.
                  Laſtly I will intreate of the endes of almes which is godly beſtowed, and of the fruite that commeth vnto them, that giue almes with a cherefull mind according to the commaundement of Chriſt.
               
               
                  Of Almes.
                  WHo ſoeuer hath determined to giue almes, let him giue his almes in this order. Firſt of all,VVe muſt beſtow the firſt almes vpon our ſelues. let him be mercifull to himſelfe, that is, let him giue the firſt almes to himſelfe, which then is done when a man leauing his owne euill wayes, doth turne himſelfe vnto the Lorde by true repentance. For no mercy (for ſo the word almes doth ſignifie) can be ſhewed of him, which as yet is not vnder the mercie of God. Wherefore Ieſus the ſonne of Syrach doth well admoniſhe when he ſayth, Chap. 30. Haue mercie on thine owne ſoule pleaſing God,
                     VVherein the mercy conſiſteth which we ought to shew firſt to our owne ſelues. 
                     and comfort thine heart: driue ſorrowe farre from thee. When he ſayth: Haue mercie on thy ſoule pleaſing God, he ſheweth in what thing that mercy doth conſiſt, which we ought to

ſhewe to our ſelues, to wit, in turning vnto God, and in fayth, without which it is vnpoſſible to pleaſe God. After this ſort Abraham did begyn his almes, according to whoſe example all the reſt of the godly haue begun their almes at them ſelues. To this pertayneth that ſaying of Augustine: If thou wilt giue almes, begyn at thy ſelfe. For howe can he be mercifull to another which is cruell to himſelfe? He that hath begon his almes after this maner, will forthwith turne himſelfe to his neighbour, and will ſhewe mercy vnto him.The firſt diſtinction of almes. Herevpon riſeth the firſt diſtinction of almes, that there is one kynde of almes which euery one beſtoweth vpon himſelfe, which is by nature the former, another which euerye man giueth to other, which is by nature the latter.Two kindes of almes which is beſtowed vpon other. Nowe this latter may alſo be made to be of two ſortes, one ſpirituall, another ciuill. That which is ſpirituall, pertayneth to the ſpirite, which he beſtoweth, which calleth him into the right way that erreth from the folde of Chriſt,Spiritual almes what it is, how diuine and paſsing al other kinds of almes. and bringeth him into Chriſtes ſhepefolde. There is no almes more diuine than this, none more profitable, finally, none more neceſſarye. For as the ſoule doth excell the bodie, ſo almes whereby the ſoule is refreſhed, is by many degrees to be preferred before the almes with which the neceſſities of this frayle bodie are relieued, and as eternall good things are more to be eſteemed than all the commodities of this lyfe which continue but a ſhort time: ſo the almes which helpeth to the attayning of eternall life, is more to be eſteemed, than the almes that ſerueth for this frayle life. There is great commendation hereof in Iames the Apoſtle, who ſayth: Brethren,
                     Iam. 5.19.20. 
                     if any of you hath erred from the truth, and ſome man hath conuerted him, let him knowe that he which hath conuerted the ſinner from going astray out of his way, ſhall ſaue a ſoule from death,
                     Ciuil almes what it is. 
                     & ſhal hyde a multitude of ſins. Ciuill almes doth belong to this preſent lyfe, to wit, when we being touched with pitie, doe ſuccour the neede of the

poore. To eyther kynde of mercie Chriſt doth exhort vs by the example of his father, when he ſayth:Luke. 6.36 
                     Be ye mercifull, as your heauenly father alſo is mercifull. Let euerye one remember this precept, which acknowledgeth Chriſt for his maiſter.
                  The cauſes with which the godlye ought to be ſtirred vp to giue almes, are very many, among which theſe are the chiefe. The firſt cauſe is Chriſtianitie it ſelfe,The firſt cauſe yea and that moſt weighty which ought to ſtirre vp all chriſtians to be diligent in giuing almes. or the profeſſion of Chriſtian religion. For this doth require, that we abounde in euerye good worke, and that we embrace and cheriſhe one another as the members of one body, the head whereof is Chriſt. When this is done of faith in Chriſt, we doe, in the feare of God practize true chriſtianitie, that is, we do truly imitate the diuine nature. For ſeeing God, whom chriſtianitie biddeth vs follow, is rich in mercy, we by following his mercy are after a ſort ſayde to be followers of the diuine nature. But they that are not occupyed in this following, doe falſly attribute to themſelues a chriſtian name. Furthermore they are not counted the lawfull ſonnes of God but baſtardes rather. For God acknowledgeth none among his ſonnes, but whom he ſeeth at the leaſt to endeauour to imitate his fathers vertues. To this pertayneth that ſaying of the Lord in the Prophet. If I be a father where is mine honour?
                     Malac. 1.6. But the cheefeſt parte of honour, which children can doe to their parents, is to imitate their vertues. Whoſoeuer earneſtly looketh for the glorye of chriſtianitie, let him ſet before himſelfe this cauſe of ſhewing mercy to his neighbour, and let him not ſuffer himſelfe to be led away with euil examples from this neceſſary and due worſhip of God.
                  The ſecond cauſe is the commaundement of God,The ſecond cauſe which ought to moue vs to the giuing of almes. vnto which all creatures ought to obey. Of this cauſe Ieſus the ſonne of Sirach maketh mention. chap. 29: Helpe the poore for the commandements ſake, and turne him not away

becauſe of his pouertie. And a little after: Bestow thy treaſure after the commaundement of the most high, and it ſhal bring thee more profite then Gold. Our treaſure that doth neuer fayle we muſt lay vp and keepe in heauen, but yet it is in this life beſtowed vpon the poore, vpon whom the benefites that be beſtowed the Lord ſo accepteth as if we had beſtowed them vpon himſelfe. All the teſtimonies of the Scripture which doe commend vnto vs the loue of our neighbour, doe require eſpecially liberalitie towarde the nedie. For this is the chiefe part of true loue. Hereunto belongeth that ſaying of the Lorde, Deut. 15. I commaund thee, ſaying,
                     He cannot rightly feare the Lorde which is not mercifull to the poore. 1. Iohn. 3.17. 
                     thou ſhalt open thine hand vnto thy brother that is needy. He that contemneth this precept of the Lord, how can he loue God? how can he feare him? for thus ſayth Iohn: Whoſoeuer hath this worldes good, and ſeeth his brother haue neede, and shutteth vp his compaſsion from him, how dwelleth the loue of God in him? And Iob 6. He that taketh away mercie from his neighbour, hath forſaken the feare of the Lord. Whoſoeuer therefore determineth to loue God and to feare him from his heart, let him thinke that he doth owe obedience to God commaunding. Of which thing Micheas ſpeaketh after this ſort: I will shew thee, O man, what is good, and what the Lord requireth of thee, ſurely to doe iustly, and to loue mercy and to humble thy ſelfe to walke with thy God.
                  
                  
                     The third cauſe which ought to prouoke vs to be liberall in giuing almes.The thirde cauſe is the imitation of examples, of Chriſt our Lord firſt, and then of his members. Chriſt was made poore for vs, that he might enrich vs. What therefore do we agayne, owe to the members of Chriſt: eſpecially ſeing he witneſſeth that that is done to himſelfe whatſoeuer we doe to the leaſt of his members. Matth. 25. The holy fathers deſired nothing more than to relieue the poore Saints. Abraham doth reuerence ſtrangers, and biddeth them to eate with him, that he may ſhewe liberalitie vnto them. Lot deſired the Angels to come into his houſe,

whom he thought to be poore ſtraungers. Cornelius the courtier is written to haue giuen himſelfe to continuall prayer and almes, which the ſcripture witneſſeth to haue come vp into remembrance before God.
                  The fourth cauſe is the dignitie and eſtimation of almes godly beſtowed before God. Prouerb. 21.The fourth cauſe which ought to ſtirre vs vp diligently to diſtribute our almes to the poore. 
                     To do mercie and iudgement is more acceptable to the Lorde then ſacrifice. Chriſt ſayth Matth. 9. I will haue mercie and not ſacrifice. Heb. 13. To doe good and to distribute forget not: for with ſuch ſacrifice God is pleaſed. So great dignitie, ſo great eſtimation is there before God,Almes rightly beſtowed is a thing much accepted and eſteemed before God. of the almes godly beſtowed. It is preferred before ſacrifice: God is ſayd to be ſingularly moued and delighted therewith. This dignitie ought worthily to admoniſhe them which abounde in this worldes good, that they indeuour, according to the counſell of Paule, to be rich in good workes.
                  The fift cauſe is our neighbour himſelfe.The fift cauſe of giuing almes. But that euery man is neighbour one to another, the Parable of the Samaritane doth teach, although this neighbourhode is greater with ſome than with other ſome.A triple bond wherwith all men are ioyned in neighbourhoode one with another. Euery man both godly and alſo vngodly is neighbour vnto me, and that firſt by reaſon of our creation. Secondly for likenes ſake. Thirdly in reſpect of our common life and humane ſocietie. And although this triple bonde wherewith men are bounde among themſelues, is a great cauſe wherefore men ought to doe good vnto men: neuertheleſſe there is yet a farre greater bonde wherewith Chriſtians are knit togither with Chriſtians.Other exceeding neare bonds wherewith Chriſtians are knit togither, which alſo ought not a little to moue vs vnto liberall almes toward our nedy brethren. For firſt one vocation is common to all Chriſtians, whereby we are called to the vnitie of ſpirit in the bonde of peace. Agayne, by the ſame ſpirit we are begotten agayne to be the ſonnes of God, whereby it commeth to paſſe that both we haue one father which is God, and alſo we are brethren among our ſelues. Moreouer, we are members of the ſame myſticall bodye, the heade whereof is Chriſt. Finally, we haue the ſame hope

of the glorie to come, for we are heyres of eternall lyfe in Chriſt Ieſus our Lorde. If we doe earneſtly thinke vppon this fift cauſe of mercie towarde our neighbour, there is none that doth not acknowledge howe neceſſarily liberalitie is to be ſhewed to them that be in neede. I do not make mention of that bond by which al men in this world are debters one to another. Who wil ſeme to be a contemner of the vnitie of the ſpirite, whereunto the Goſpell calleth vs? Who can abide to heare that he is a denier of ſpirituall brotherhoode? Who dare ſo deſpyſe the members of Chriſt, that he will ſuffer them to be tormented wyth colde, hunger, and nakedneſſe? Who will not worthilye ſuffer him to be partaker with him of the things of this worlde which ſoone fade awaye, whom he aſſuredly thinketh ſhall be heyre with him of the heauenly treaſures? If this cauſe of liberalitie and mercie were eſteemed of many according to the worthineſſe thereof, they woulde not ſet their mindes ſo much vpon deceyte and vniuſt gayne, they woulde not ſo much ſpoyle and rob the needie members of Chriſt, and they would thinke more of cheriſhing and making much of their owne fleſhe. As often as we ſee any that is in miſerie crauing our helpe and ſuccour, let vs,Eſay. 58.7. I pray you, remember the ſaying of Eſay: Hide not thy ſelfe from thine owne flesh.
                  
                  
                     The ſixt cauſe that ought to moue vs to giue almes, is the ſundrye punishments which shall light vppon them that are vnmercifull towarde the poore.The ſixt cauſe is the puniſhment, yea and that manifold of them which are hard toward the poore. The firſt is the wrath of God, Eccleſiasticus 4. Turne not thine eyes aſide from the poore, becauſe of anger. The ſecond is the curſe. In the ſame place it is ſayd: For if the curſe thee in the bitternes of his ſoule, his prayer shall be heard of him that made him. The third is the refuſing of thy prayer which thou makeſt in thy neceſſitie. Prouerb. 21. He that stoppeth his eare at the crying of the poore, he shall alſo crye and not be heard. A horrible puniſhment truly, then which none can be more grieuous: and it is no maruel that he

is not heard of God, which doth not heare the Sonne of God crying in his members. The fourth is a depriuing them of their giftes. For it is written:Matth. 25.23. 
                     From him that hath not, euen that he hath shalbe taken away. But he is ſayde not to haue, which doth not vſe his giftes and goods to the glorie of God, and the relieuing of them that be in miſerie. To this pertaineth that ſaying, Prouerb. 3. He that deſpiſeth the prayer of the poore shall ſuffer pouertie. The fift is the begging of their children, or their moſt wicked life which is farre more grieuous then all neede and pouertie. I haue ſpoken of the puniſhments of them that are cruell toward the poore, and that not out of philoſophie which may erre, but out of the verye oracles of God, which cannot deceiue or lye. He that ſhall contemne theſe, ſhall in ſhort time finde a iuſt iudge. Now we will ſpeake of affection, of what ſort we require it to be in him which hath purpoſed to giue almes, and of the due and conuenient maner of almes.Two things diligently to be taken hede of in giuing almes. Chriſt will haue two vices to be excluded from almes Matth. 6. which are hypocriſie and vaine glorie. For theſe two doe as pernicious poyſons, infect whatſoeuer they touch. Neyther is that any maruel. For where hypocriſie is, there is no fayth: where vaine glorie is, there is no loue of God, no feare of God. Let therefore phariſaicall Hypocriſie and fooliſh boaſting be farre of from our almes.VVhat affections ought to be in him that beſtoweth almes. What affections then do you require in almes? loue of God, charitie of our neighbour, ſyncere gentleneſſe and cherefulneſſe. For with theſe affections as with a certaine heauenly ſalt, our almes ought to be ſprinkled, whereby it ought to be a ſacrifice acceptable to God. Furthermore, with almes fayth is to be ioyned, by which we doe not only aſſure our ſelues that our almes doth pleaſe God, but alſo that he hath a care ouer our whole lyfe, that he doth furniſhe vs with neceſſary defence and liuing. And bicauſe he requireth that we ſhould helpe others, and hath promiſed rewardes, we ſhall for

Gods ſake beſtowe benefites, and agayne by fayth looke for the help of God.Quantitie in almes how to be conſidered. In ye maner of our almes we ſhall conſider the quantitie, according to the counſel of Tobias, who ſayth:Tob. 4.9. 
                     If thou hast much, giue plenteouſly, if thou hast little, doe thy diligence gladly to giue of that little: Equalitie,Equalitie in almes. that thou of bounden dutie doe beſtowe thy almes on the needy,Readines and chearefulnes in giuing almes. and he againe with a thankful minde receyue it and wiſhe well vnto thee: Readynes of mynde, according to that ſaying of Paule. 2. Cor. 8. If there be a willing minde, it is accepted according to that a man hath, and not according to that he hath not.
                     Vpon whome eſpecially almes is to be beſtowed. Difference of ſtrangers and them that be of the houſholde of fayth, according to the counſell of Paul Gal. 6. While we haue time, let vs do good vnto all men, but eſpecially vnto them, which are of the housholde of fayth, that is, them which by fayth are in the ſame familie of God that we be:Prouer. 5.16. Poſſeſſion, according to the ſaying of Salomon: Let thy fountaines flow forth, but be thou maister of them.
                  
                  Nowe it remayneth that we ſpeake of the endes of godly almes, and of the fruite thereof. And although both the endes, and alſo the fruite of holy almes may eaſily be gathered of thoſe things which go before, yet that I maye the more ſtirre vp the godly reader to this neceſſarie, holy, and dutifull office, I will adde ſomewhat of the endes and fruites of almes godly beſtowed.The endes of godly almes are foure. The ends are foure: The firſt, the relieuing of our needy neighbour, and the refreſhing of the members of Chriſt. The ſeconde, the prouoking of others to liberalitie toward the poore, according to that ſaying: 2. Cor. 9. Your zeale hath prouoked many. The thirde, the witneſſing of our fayth and of the feare of God. For the duties of charitie are directed vnto this ende, that by them we doe witnes that we feare God, whoſe commaundement we obey. The fourth, the glorie of God. Diuers and manifolde fruites do followe liberalitie towardes the poore.
                        
                           •
                        . Cor. 9.8. Paule witneſſeth that it wyll

come to paſſe that they which haue bene liberall and bountifull towarde the poore, ſhall abounde in euerye good worke. For ſo it pleaſeth the Lorde to recompence obedience towarde him with newe graces. And this is it which ye Lord ſayth Matth. 6. The Lord shal reward thee openly. And Pſal. Bleſſed is he that iudgeth wiſely of the poore:
                     Pſal. 41.1.
                     the Lorde shall deliuer him in the time of trouble. Salomon: He that hath mercie vpon the poore, lendeth vnto the Lorde.
                     Prouer. 19.17. Paule ſayth: He that ſoweth liberally shall reape alſo liberally. Eſay. 58. If thou poure out thy ſoule to the hungry, and refresh the troubled ſoule: then shall thy light ſpring out in the darkeneſſe, and thy darkeneſſe shall be as the noone day. Eccleſiasticus. 29. Lay vp thine almes in thy ſecret chambers, and it shall keepe thee from all affliction, it shall fight for thee against thine enimie, better than the shielde of a strong man, or ſpeare of the mightie. Here the wiſe man calleth the neceſſities of our neighbours ſecret chambers, in which benefites are to be layde vp and kept, wherevpon one of the holy fathers hath ſayde elegantlye and well: the hande of the poore is a treaſure houſe of Chriſt. Then the wyſe man addeth the exceeding great fruite of the bounteouſneſſe layde vp in thoſe ſecret chambers to be deliuerance from euils, and a moſt ſtrong fortreſſe and defence agaynſt our enimies. For a man can by nothing be more defended & protected againſt perils, than by bounteouſnes & mercie. But I ſpeak of ye almes which proceedeth of fayth, as it ſufficiently appeareth by thoſe things that I haue before ſpoken, leaſt that any man think that I agree with the Papiſtes, which value their almes without Chriſt, and without fayth. Theſe things concerning liberall and godly almes, I thought therfore to adde, that I might admoniſhe eſpecially them that are of the richer ſort, of their dutie, that they may vnderſtande that they are bounde by the law of God to beſtow part of their ſubſtance vpon the poore, and that freely for the commandements

ſake of God, and for many other cauſes which I haue rehearſed. Furthermore that, if they ſhall refuſe to obey the commaundement of God, they may know that they are giltie of diſobedience towarde God. Of theſe thinges that is playnly concluded which I propounded, to wit, that none may without great ſacrilege take gaine of this That is, ſuch as eyther through pouertie, age, or for ſome other cauſe are not able to helpe themſelues. firſt kind of men. In the ſecond order or ſtate of men I place artificers, and thoſe which get their liuing with the labour of their handes. To theſe, according to the precept of Chriſt, we muſt lend, and looke for nothing agayne. For as the Apoſtle forbiddeth to giue vnto theſe freely when he ſayth: He that laboureth let him eate. As charitie dooth not require that we ſhoulde giue of our goods freely to them that are ſtrong and able to laboure:How we muſt behaue our ſelues in lending to artificers and labourers. ſo if neceſſitie vrging them, they deſire to borowe anye thing of thee, obey the rule of Chriſt and lend without looking for a recompence in the like or in any other kind of dutye. The reaſon of the rule is, becauſe that they, which in the ſweate of their browes and in the laboure of their handes doe gette their liuing, are wont to gaine little more then their liuing and their clothing. If ſuch therfore ſhould be grieued with Vſurie, they ſhould be plainely oppreſſed, not without the greate hurt of common weales and families, and ſo the foundation of the contractes and bargaines which we haue layd before, ſhould be vtterlye ouerthrowne. But I cannot with ſilence paſſe ouer what I iudge moſt iuſtly to be found fault with in this kind of men.Three great faults in many artificers and labourers. For beſide that many of this ſorte of men doe ſeeme to haue caſt aſide the feare of God, Iudge thre moſt grieuous vices to be reſtrained in them, which are: more then barbarous drinking, exceſſe of apparrell altogither vnmeete for this kind of men, and fraude and falſe dealing in their workmanſhip and labour.The firſt fault founde in artificers and workemen. Many artificers & workmen, whatſoeuer they gayne the whole weeke, this on the holy dayes they ſpend in drinking, hauing no regarde of

their ſilly wyues or of their poore children. Whereby it falleth out, that artificers and workemen doe more often want, and are more often conſtrayned to borow. If ſuch were reſtrayned by lawes and by puniſhment, it ſhould be better prouided not onely for them but alſo for the common weale. If any thing be remayning more then wil ſuffice for their drinking,The ſeconde fault. this they turne into exceſſe of apparell.He ſpeaketh not of our countrie Englande, but of his owne countrie Denmarke, whether the ſame may be ſayde of our countrie, that I leaue to the iudgement of others. For a man may ſee often times a peltmonger or a ſhoomaker or ſome other craftes man to be more finely appareled, then a Knight hath bene when I was a childe, when as yet the noble vertue of our auncetors was in any eſtimation. They are not contented with common cloth, which was very much ſet by among our elders, but they imitating noble men and princes, doe ſeeke for garments of ſilke. And they whoſe abilitie doth not permit that doe gard the hemmes of their ſleeues and ſkirts of their garments with cleane ſilke, that as by a certayne ſigne or token they may bewray the pride of their mind. Here I iudge the magiſtrate to offend moſt grieuouſly which doth not reſtrayne this lightnes with lawes and puniſhment.An obiection. Here perhaps wil riſe vp agaynſt me ſome prating workman & will except after this ſort: What? is it not lawfull for me to vſe my owne thinges as it ſhall pleaſe me? am I not maiſter of mine owne thinges?The aunſwer. A ſeemelines is to be kept in euery kind of life, wherfore it is in no wiſe lawfull for thee to abuſe thy things contrary to that which beſeemeth thee, which if thou ſhalt do, it is the dutye of the magiſtrate, that he do correct thee & teach thee what kind of apparell doth become a ſhoomaker or a peltmonger. Thou thinkeſt that thou art made more trimme and commendable before men with thy ornamentes of ſilke: but wiſe men doe iudge farre otherwiſe of thee. For of the exceſſe of apparell they do gather an exceſſiue and a riotous minde.The thirde fault in many artificers and workemen. What ſhall I ſay of the fraude and falſe dealing of workemen? what of their newe colours, wherwith they

doe paynt and ſet forth their workes? who doth not complayne of the deceit of artificers and workemen? Let me ſpeake ſomewhat more freely what I thinke. In euerye kinde of trade they haue a gods name, their ouerſeers after the maner of the auncient Athenians. But what I pray you, doe theſe ouerſeers? there are perhaps ſome among thē, which, that they may receiue part of the gaine or may get of them thoſe thinges that are neceſſarie for them at a lower price: will winke at many faultes of the workemen (which they ought to correct, if they woulde rightly execute the office of ouerſeers) hauing litle regard of the helth of the body, that is of the common weale. It is the dutie therfore of wiſe gouernoures, that they bring into order both the artificers them ſelues and alſo their ouerſeers or aſſiſtents. That which I haue ſayde of ſhoomakers and peltmongers, I will haue to be vnderſtand of all workemen and labourers whoſe occupation and practiſe is neceſſarye in the common weale.
                  In the third order or ſtate of men may huſbandmen be placed, who alſo doe get their liuing with the labours of their handes. If theſe did there dutie in the feare of God, and tilled the earth diligently, truly they ſhould leſſe ſtand in neede, eſpecially they which haue but ſmall fields. For the earth which they labour doth render with increaſe that which it receiueth,Very vniuſt vſury practiced among husbandmen. ſo as the labour of the huſband man be watered with the feare of the Lord. Among this kind of men moſt vniuſt Vſurie is vſed, and ſuch Vſurie truly as the Turkes and other prophane heathen woulde without dout abhorre. Some man peraduēture boroweth a quarter of graine in the time of ſowing, but with a couenant, that eyther he reſtore the ſame double at the yeares end to him of whom he borowed it, or els that he ſowe of his owne charges freely ſo much as he borowed. I ſpeake not of the vſurie of money, which is farre more vniuſt then the former. It behoueth the godly magiſtrate

to correct this vniuſtice, and it is the dutie of godly paſtours to prouoke the huſbandmen to doe pleaſures and good turnes one to another without all vſurie in the feare of the Lorde, and to paynt out that curſed vſurie in it colours, that they maye learne to eſchue it as a certayne plague or peſtilence. I woulde wiſhe alſo in this ſtate of men both exceſſe of apparell to be reſtrayned, and alſo vnprofitable expences at mariages, and at the birth of their children. For it is wont oftentimes to come to paſſe that they are deſtitute of things neceſſarie, which forgetting the maner of their ſtate, doe not keepe a meane.
                  In the fourth ſtate of men may be placed nice and delicate yong men, of whome Horace writeth in this maner:Nice and delicate yong men.
                     
                        The yong man not yet ripe in yeares,
                        from keeper once ſet free:
                        Doth ſet delight in horſe and dogges,
                        and in greene fielde to be:
                        Soone led to vice, is ſharpe to them
                        that warne him as his frends:
                        For profite ſlowly doth prouide,
                        in waste his mony ſpendes.
                        Is loftie eke and couetous,
                        and ſoone doth that forſake:
                        Which he once loued, and wherein
                        his pleaſure he did take.
                     
                  
                  To this order therefore I thought good to adde the welthier yong men, which are not yet maried, whether they be noble, or the ſonnes of citizens, who being nowe ſet free from their tutors & gouernours of their maners, are caried more freely according to the luſt of their minde. It often falleth out with theſe, yt by reaſon of their prodigall ſpending of things (for it is wont to come to paſſe for the moſt part, that they which are borne vnto welth, or come eaſily by it, are more waſtfull of their things) doe deſire to borowe money of others. But how we muſt deale with

theſe I will declare, when I ſhall firſt ſhewe what I finde wanting in them, & what I would haue to be reformed in thē. Although I feare yt the ſame wil happen to me, which in time paſt chaunced to the Hares that gaue lawes to the lions,Ill bringing vp is a cauſe of marring many, which are of a good towardnes and wit. neuertheles ye truth is to be preferred before al peril. Firſt not a few which are of good towardnes are marred with euil bringing vp, & get thoſe vices from their tender yeares, which all their age after doe for the moſt part accompanie them. For whē parents do eyther too much cocker their children, or by their owne example allure them to naughtineſſe, or neglect due inſtruction, what other thing,An apt ſimilitude. I pray you, can come to paſſe, than which we ſee in trees, which from the beginning being neglected, become crooked and vnfruitfull. Contrariwiſe, they that are pruned, erected and watered with the hande and cunning of the huſbande man, are made ſtreight, fertile, and frutefull.How much bringing vp preuaileth either vnto vertue or vice it is declared by an excellent example. But howe much it ſkilleth to accuſtome from tender yeares, Lycurgus taught his Lacedemonians by this example: he tooke in hand to bring vp two whelps which came of the ſame ſyre and damme, of which one he ſuffered to be pampered and well fedde, the other he applyed to hunting. Theſe thus brought vp, he brought vnto the commō theater or ſtage of the Lacedemonians, and placed them in the middeſt thereof, and togither in the ſight of the whelps he ſet a pot of fleſhe and a liue Hare. This being done, he let them both loſe, the Lacedemonians beholding him, of which the one with great vehemencie runneth after the Hare, the other thruſteth his heade into the fleſh pot. But when the Lacedimonians marueyled, what this ſight did meane, Lycurgus aunſwereth: both theſe whelpes came of the ſame ſyre and damme, but you ſee the one giuen to the belly, the other to be delighted with hunting. This diuers diſpoſition is long of the bringing vp. Know ye therfore, O ye Lacedemonians, that the maner of lyfe, education, and cuſtome, are of great importance to vertue. The

auncient Crates alſo aſcending the higheſt part of the citie did wiſely cry out: whither are ye caried O ye citizens? is it meete that you ſhould be wholy occupied in getting riches, and to be nothing carefull for your children, for whoſe ſake riches are gottē? Beleue me, ſaith he,Good education a moſt profitable patrimonie. there can none more precious and better heritage be left vnto your children, thē if they be well brought vpp from their tender age, and be rightly inſtructed vnto vertue from their infancye. This patrimony remaineth with them continually nothing at al ſubiect to the ſtormes and troubles of fortune.Two thinges which much hinder good education. But I ſee two eſpeciall cauſes why certayne parents doe more negligently prouide that their children be inſtructed, to much cockering and nigardſhip.
                  In cockering mothers doe more often offende, and eſpecially thoſe which haue not very many children.A very apt ſimilitude. Theſe do like as if ſome huſbandman ſhoulde refuſe to till his fielde bicauſe he hath but one only. Who could ſuffer this mans folly and peruerſeneſſe of iudgement? is it not much more to be tilled bicauſe it is onely one? It is ſo truly, that the profite and increaſe of one may recompence the want of many:The fewer the children the more diligently to be cared for that they be well brought vp. After the ſame ſort I iudge it to be the dutie of mothers, ſo much more diligently to bring vp their children, by howe much they are fewer. But I ſee what doth let mothers, they loue their children more dearely than that they can ſuffer them to be an houre out of their ſight, but it is cruell loue ſo to loue their children,Cruell loue in many mothers that thinke them ſelues to loue their children moſt dearely. that they ſhoulde be as it were giuen ouer of their mothers vnto all naughtineſſe, of which peruerſe and cruell loue, not a fewe ſhall ſuffer the iuſt puniſhment, which with great griefe of mynde and with teares ſhall be compelled to ſee the vnbridled wantonneſſe and vngraciouſneſſe of their children, vnto which they doe nowe all to late go about to prouide a remedy.
                  On the other ſide niggardſhip is oftentimes greater,The ſecond cauſe which hindreth good education. than that parents will beſtowe the coſte. Whatſoeuer is

ſpent vpon horſe breakers, or horſe keepers, fooles, minſtrels, dogs, &c. that they thinke wel beſtowed, but if they ſee any thing to be ſpent about inſtructing their children, they thinke all that yll beſtowed, and are much more carefull that an horſe be wel framed to vaunting and leaping, than that their childe be well inſtructed to vertue. Plutarch declareth a very goodly hyſtorie making hereunto: Aristippus,
                     The diſcommoditie of euill bringing vp is properly shewed. ſayth he, being demaunded of a certayne fooliſhe father howe great a rewarde he woulde aſke for inſtructing his ſonne, aunſwered, a thouſande grotes. This aunſwere being hearde, the father with indignation cryeth out: O good God, ſayth he, I can buye a bondman or ſlaue for a thouſande grotes, to whom Aristippus: buy, ſayth he, a bondman, and ſo thou ſhalt haue two bondmen, both the ſeruant whom thou haſt bought, and the chylde whom thou haſt begot: ſignifying that the mindes of children, honeſt diſcipline being neglected, doe become ſeruile, and open vnto all naughtineſſe. For the Poet truly ſayth:

                        The vntild and neglected field,
                        the fruiteles fearne for fruite doth yelde.
                     
                  
                  For ſo it is altogither, if thou leaue a field vntilled, thou ſhalt find it to haue plentifully brought forth fearne and thiſtles: after the ſame ſort, if thou ſhalt leaue the wites of children vnlooked vnto and vnexerciſed, thou ſhalt reape moſt aboundant fruite of wantonnes and vngraciouſnes. We haue what be the beginninges of vnbridled and wanton youth, wherevnto afterward come the verye euill examples of them which are taught after the ſame maner. What other thing I praye you, can be looked for here, then that which is reported of a certaine kinde of chalkie clay, which as Plinie ſaith, hath ſo great affinitie with the fire, that the flame doth paſſe vnto it from what place ſoeuer it be ſeene: for whatſoeuer vice is in others whoſe acquaintance they vſe, this commeth vpon them as a certayne

flame, and if there be any vertue left, it conſumeth it, ſo greate a nouriſhing of all naughtines and vnbrideled ſenſualitie is the acquaintance and conuerſation of euill men. In this felowſhip, vertue being baniſhed they begin to ſtriue who ſhall paſſe other in pleaſure.Contending who shall paſſe one an other in quaffing and drunkennes. Here it is a goodly thing to contend in drinking and to ouercome. It is thought to be greater glorie not to be ouercome in quaffing, then valiantly to driue backe the enemie. They that ouercome in this ſtriuing are no leſſe praiſed them Achilles was in time paſt, becauſe he ouercam Hector in a ſingular combat. Briefly, according to the ſaying of Eſay, they ſhew them ſelues men in dronkenneſſe, and ſo they carie away the ſpoyles of Sarmacis without bloude and ſweat. There is alſo an other kind of ſtriuing wherin one contendeth to ouercome an other in vanitie, in ſtrāgenes,Contending in vanitie and exceſſe of apparell. in price and exceſſe of apparell. Here when none wilbe the laſt, O good God, what vnprofitable expenſes are made? as this ſtriuing is exceeding gainefull to marchantes: ſo is it a moſt ready way to empty the purſes of vnwiſe men. I ſay nothing of other ſtriuings not worthy to be remembred, vnto which there are no ſmall charges required. What at the laſt will here come to paſſe? their purſes being emptied, they runne vnto their friends, they deſire to borrowe mony, that nothing may be wanting to the ſouldiers of Epicure.How we muſt behaue our ſelues in lending to them which are prodigall and riotous. Here if any denie that which is aſked, he getteth vnto himſelfe an enimie, if he lende, he addeth oyle to fire. What, I pray you, muſt a godly man doe here? ought he to giue mony freely vnto theſe, or ought he to lende it them? No wiſe man will giue it freely, bicauſe almes is due not to riot, not to drinking, not to dyce, &c. but to neceſſitie. Parents and kinſemen which will ſeeme here to be more liberall,To lend a prodigall man money is to reach a ſword in to a madde mans hand. and do miniſter mony which is the inſtrument of naughtines, to them yt aſke it, doe as it were reach a ſword vnto a mad man. Ought they to lende theſe any thing? No truly. For thou art bounde

by no lawe neyther of God, nor of nature nor of man to lend money to them,VVe muſt not lend mony to prodigal perſons. which abuſe it to their owne deſtruction, yea thou dooſt not a little offend if thou doe it. For he that hath giuen an occaſion of loſſe, ſeemeth to haue giuen the loſſe, wherefore he is made giltie of an other mans fault, as though his owne proper burthen were not enough for him. For when theſe nice and delicate yong men doe find where they may readily borow money vpon Vſurie, they ſpend more prodigally, till their ſubſtance being quite waſted they be brought vnto pouertie not without ſhame and reproch to the familie whereof they come. Wherefore ſithence it is profitable alſo to the common weale that honeſt and eſpecially noble and auncient families be mayntained, he doth not a little offend againſt the common weale, who by lending doth giue occaſion of vtter decay of honeſt families. Wherefore let a wiſe and godly man be nothing moued with the offence of theſe light men, neither let him communicate with other mens faultes, neither let him giue occaſion of greater ſpending, but let him feare God rather and helpe them by lending vnto them, whome the Lorde commaundeth to be holpen.
                  Vnto the firſt order or ſort of men they may be referred, which are come to their full and perfect age, whoſe ſtudye of life the Poet deſcribeth in theſe verſes.
                  
                     The manly minde and age now ripe,
                     olde studies doth forſake:
                     And frendſhip, welth and honour eke,
                     to get it meanes doth make.
                  
                  
                     VVhat men of full and perfect age are moſt commonly enclined vnto.Theſe leauing the fond toyes of youth, as the Poet witneſſeth, are occupyed with newe ſtudyes: they ſeeke riches, they deſire frendſhip, they are tickled with honour. Who if they would enter into a iuſt trade of life, and call their libertie to an account, they ſhould haue ſufficient to mayntaine their ſtate. But they being not contented with

their meane ſtate doe ſeeke after higher matters, and hauing no regard of the meanes of their calling they ſtreyne them ſelues to doe greater thinges then their abilitie doth beare. Such therfore whē as they are deſtitute of fethers, neuertheles they enterpriſe to ſtriue with the egle in flying: they had neede ſome otherwhere to borow fethers, which they them ſelues haue not at home. What I praye you, is more fond or fooliſh then theſe? what is more vnaduiſed or raſhe? they ſee other much richer then themſelues to weare coſtly garments. What doe our countrye men heare? yt they may not ſeme leſſe noble thē they, they deſire to borow mony vpon Vſurie, that they may haue wherby they may maintaine and increaſe their brauerie. They maruel at the ſumptuous houſes of others, in which thing when they will not giue place to them that are of the richer ſorte, they muſt by all meanes ſeeke to get money wherby they may build the like houſes.VVe muſt not preſume aboue our abilitie. Should they not doe much better if meaſuring themſelues by their owne foote, they did prepare a neſt fit and agreable for themſelues and for their chickens? Were it not a ridiculous thing if the Larke ſeing the neſt of the Swanne, ſhould make an account that the like were to be prepared for her ſelfe.A worthy ſaiing of Frances King of the frenchmen, wherein is shewed that we muſt not goe beyond the limites of our ſtate There is reported a very pretie ſaying of Frances King of the Frenchmen concerning the houſe of a certayne noble man builded and ſet forth ſumptuouſlye and after a princely ſort. For when as the King was brought into the houſe, and the noble man did looke for the Kinges voyce concerning the ſumptuouſnes of the building: at the laſt the King being aſked his iudgement of the houſe, aunſwered, that al things were faire and ſumptuous, but that it was to greate a neſt for ſo little a byrde. The King did very well truly and ſufficient wittily in fewe wordes reprehend the folly of the man, and alſo by his aunſwere admoniſhed, that it behoueth euery man to abide within the limites of his ſtate and calling, beyond

or beſide which nothing can well conſiſt.
                  
                     He deſcribeth at large the preſumptuous prodigalitie of diuers of his owne country men the Danes, but all other whoſoeuer that be in the ſame fault, may be therby alſo admonished.They doe furthermore behold others to weare great chaynes of gold as tokens of their nobilitie and authority to whom if they be not made like euen in this thing, they thinke that there honour is ill prouided for. What muſt they needes doe heare? their abilitie is more ſlender then that it doth ſuffize to bye ſo coſtly and greate chaynes: wherfore they muſt ſeke to borow gold ſome other where, for which eyther their fermes are to be morgaged, or money is to be borowed vpon vſurie. For no man giueth vnto them freely, no man ought to lend them for naught. For free lending, as Chriſt witneſſeth is due only to them that neede. Eccleſiasticus. 29. Lend vnto thy neighbour in the time of his neede. Here the wiſe man doth playnly reſtraine the dutie of lending vnto the time of neede. Herevpon it falleth out that ſometimes their rents are ſcarce ſufficient to pay the vſurie. The huſband firſt wearing a chayne doth in vayne deſire the friendly countenance of his wife, before ſhee alſo be adorned with chaynes and other innumerable ornaments. Then the daughters ſeking to haue the like trimming and decking that their mother hath, doe not ceaſſe to prouoke their father by intreatie, till they alſo weare chaynes.
                  They ſee moreouer in the families of great perſonages noble and honourable furniture, in which thing they doe not ſuffer themſelues to be the laſt. Here gilded cuppes, coſtly wynes, precious hanginges of houſes and ſumptuous ornaments muſt be gotten. Theſe thinges being gotten, great feaſts are made that this excellencie and brauerie may be knowne vnto others. There are alſo in this ſort of men who being not content with their fermes and fields whereupon they might liue honeſtly enough according to their ſtate, doe thinke of the bying of other mens fields and fearmes, that they may leaue their children a greater patrimonie, but when theſe alſo doe want abilitie

they muſt ſeeke mony ſome where or other, that they may haue wherewith to ſuffice their auarice. What ſhall he doe here which hath mony, wherewith he is able to ſatiſfie their deſire? Perhaps it will be an vnciuile thing to deny, and to giue frely or to lend, neither the law of God, nor the rule of charitie doth compell thee. What therfore wilt thou ſay, ſhall I do? He knoweth yt I haue mony, which if he ſhal not receiue, he wil cry out that he is forſaken of his friend, and ſo by deniyng that which is aſked, for a friend I get to my ſelf an enemy. Is it lawful therfore for me, for ye benefit of lending to couenant for vſury, eſpecially ſeing yt I do not owe to him that aſketh neyther by Gods law nor by the law of nature, that which he aſketh? I owe almes to the poore by the law of God and of nature. To him that needeth, but is ſtrong and able to thriue with that he boroweth, I ought to lende by Gods lawe and by the lawe of nature. Here if I doe not render that which I owe, I do offende, and if I aſke a rewarde for my bounden dutie, I breake the rule of Chriſt, and peruert the lawe of nature. But here I am not bounde neyther by Gods lawe nor by the lawe of nature.All taking of more than the principall is not condemned, neyther properly to be called vſurie. Wherefore if here I ſhewe any benefite which is not due, what forbiddeth that I may not bargayne to haue a rewarde for my benefit? and according to the receyued cuſtome, to receyue fiue of the hundred euery yeare? I ſay that Vſurie is not here properly committed, bicauſe that this benefite was free, wherevnto thou waſt not bounde neyther by the lawe of God nor of nature. For Vſurie condemned by the worde of God is properly committed, when for the lending which thou oweſt freely by the lawe of God and of nature, thou requireſt ſome thing more then the principall for the bounden dutie of lending. Hereunto pertayneth the rule of Gerſon:
                     VVhen it is vſurie to take more than the principall, and when it is not vſurie. Euery contract or bargayne, which by it owne kynde, or by the circumſtances ought to be free, if a couenant of receyuing more than the principall, commeth betweene, it is named Vſurie,

and properly ſuch only is named Vſurie. Of this rule of Gerſon it followeth, that it is not a bargaine of Vſurie, which by the circumſtances ought not to be free. Wherefore if I take any thing according to the appointment and limitation of the lawes, for the benefite of lending which is not due, that there may be equalitie, I doe not commit Vſurie. I owe almes to the poore, I ought to lende to the needie. Wherefore? Bicauſe the ordinance of God and the lawe of nature doth require this. But to him that needeth not I ought of dutie by no lawe to lende. If therefore I deale or bargayne with him, a couenant being made betwene vs concerning receyuing ſomewhat more than the principall, Vſurie is not properly committed, eſpecially if the equalitie be kept which the Magiſtrate hath appointed. Wherefore in this kynde of dealing I allow the ſentence of D. Aepinus, who writing vpon the 15. Pſalme, rehearſeth three ſortes of men, to wit, of beggers, of them that doe in very deede ſtande in neede (who notwithſtanding are able to thriue with the mony that they borowe) and of them which are welthie, and haue whereupon they might liue honeſtly with their familie ſo that they were content with their meane. Of theſe three kindes of men Aepinus doth learnedly diſpute, and at length concludeth, that in the thirde kynde Vſurie is not committed, ſo that otherwiſe there be no departing frō equalitie.It is naturall equitie to render one good turne for another. Now it is naturall equitie that for a benefite, which by right we doe not owe, a benefite be rendred, that there may be equalitie. Concerning this equalitie, the determination of the Magiſtrate is to be hearde. The King of moſt commendable memorie Christierne the third, did prouide by a law, that no man ſhoulde receyue aboue fiue euery yeare of the hundred. Theſe limites and bondes he that doth paſſe, departeth from equalitie. But I woulde haue the godly alwayes to haue certayne ſure aduertiſements in their ſight, which a little after I will annexe.
                  
                     In the ſixt order of men I place marchauntes, to wi
                        •
                      them, which haue not ſo great ſubſtance whereby they are able to maintayne themſelues honeſtlye, but doe liue by trade of marchandiſe, and doe get gayne by the chaunging, carying out and bringing in of things, whereby often times they doe not a little gayne. It falleth out often with theſe, that they ſeeke to borowe mony, without which they cannot exerciſe their meane trade of marchandice. Here it is demaunded whether it be lawfull for the creditour to couenant for vſurie. I aunſwere plainly that it is not lawfull. For both by the lawe of God and of nature thou doſte owe to thy brother being in neede the dutie of lending. For when he doth in deede ſtande in neede, and thou art able without thy certayne hinderance to helpe him, thou doeſt offende if thou doe not helpe him, and thou doeſt alſo offende, if thou take any thing more than the principall for the bounden dutie of lending. But here are foure obſeruations to be marked. The firſt concerneth marchants that are not content with their meane. The ſeconde pertayneth vnto ſocietie. The thirde to the inheritance of wardes. The fourth is referred to the intereſt. Nowe as concerning the firſt obſeruation, we muſt vnderſtande, that no man ought by the lawe of God and of nature to lende vnto a verye riche marchant, whoſe great welth and ſubſtance is well knowne. For that which is lent is due to neceſſitie, and ought not to ſerue vnſatiable couetouſneſſe. Wherfore we may deale with this kynde of men, according to the rule which we gaue when we intreated of the fift ſort of men. The ſeconde obſeruation, which we ſayd to pertayne vnto ſocietie, is after this ſort: a marchant boroweth money of thee,How we may lawfully couenant for part of the gayne of that which wee lende. and thou dooſt agree with him for parte of the gaine vpon this condition, if he ſhall get any gaine by thy money. Here it is demaunded, whether it be lawfull for thee to couenant for parte of the gayne. I aunſwere, it is lawfull ſo that thou wilt take

part of the perill vpon thy ſelfe. For when this is done it doth not become vſurie. Thou maieſt therefore for a yeare require fiue of the hundred as part of the gaine, ſo that thou againe wilt ſuffer fiue of the hundred to be abated of the principall, if he ſuffer damage. For he that couenaunteth onely with condition of the gayne and wilbe free from the loſſe, doth in very deede commit Vſurie. Wherfore he is found giltie by the lawe of God and of nature. But as concerning wardes,Howe Gardians may lende the mony of the wardes committed vnto them. the Gardians of the wardes, that the inheritance wherewith they are put in truſt be not by little and little waſted, may lend the money of the wardes to them that deſire it eſpecially to them that are of the richer ſort, and for the benefit of lending and the vſe of the money require that which is reaſonable, that is, according to the limitation of the magiſtrate, fiue of the hundred euery yeare. This kind of dealing is not to be counted vſurie. For neyther Gardians are bound to lende of that which is another mans, neither they which borow, when as neyther diuine nor naturall bond or dette went before, can iuſtly refuſe to be thankfull for a benefite receiued. The obſeruation which pertayneth to the intereſt, doth alſo hinder the maner of vſurie. For if by deferring the payment of that which is borowed the creditour be endamaged,Intereſt wherof it is ſayd to come. equitie doth require that the dettour make a recompence for the damage. And this they cal the intereſt which they ſay doth ariſe, eyther becauſe of the loſſe that commeth or becauſe of the gaine that ceaſeth. For if the dettour ſhall not paye that which he borrowed, at the time appoynted for the payment, naturall equitie requireth, that the dettour make recompence for the loſſe that came to the creditour thereby. The like is to be ſayde of the gayne ceaſing. But here let the lender beware that he vſe not deceytfull ballances.Charitie moſt neceſſarie in all kyndes of bargaynes. Wherefore charitie is to be added, which is the moſt iuſt rule of all contractes and bargaynes. This if it be ſyncere, will eaſilye finde equalitie.

If other ſortes of men be offered beſide thoſe that are rehearſed, it ſhall not be harde by the former rules to iudge, what is to be determined concerning them. For there ſhal eaſily be founde ſome likeneſſe in them with the former kyndes, which may diſſolue the queſtion.
               
               
                  Of the fourth.
                  IT followeth that we ſpeake of the fourth member of our partition, which ſhall contayne certayne admonitions, which may be vnto the godly as certayne conſultations not only in this trade concerning vſurie, whereof we haue ſpoken now ſufficiently: but alſo in euery kinde of contract or bargayne ſhall kepe vs in our dutie, ſo that we will giue godly eares vnto them.
                  The firſt, Paule. 1. Tim. 1. fayth:The firſt rule wherby we ought to examine our doings. 
                     The ende of the commaundement is loue out of a pure heart, and of a good conſcience, and of fayth vnfayned. We ſayde before that vſurie is therfore forbidden by the worde of God, that charitie may not be hurt among men.VVhat things are required in loue that it may be true and ſincere. Nowe this rule of Paul willeth, that charitie proceede from a pure fountayne of the heart. Thou muſt take heede therefore, leaſt that while thou doeſt outwardly pretende charitie towarde thy neighbour, thy heart be vncleane, with the filthines wherof the dutie is defiled, which thou ſeemeſt to perfourme to thy neyghbour. Charitie moreouer requireth a good conſcience, to wit, that thou mayſt truly witnes before God, that in all thy actions thou ſeekeſt the glorie of God, and the profite of thy neighbour without falſhoode or diſſimulation. For whereas falſhoode and diſſimulation is, there charitie is baniſhed, the conſcience is ſpoyled, and fayth periſheth. Whereupon it followeth, that nothing is well done. Let this rule therefore of Paule be alwayes in our ſight, whereby we may trie all our doings, as examined with a touchſtone.
                  The ſeconde, Abstayne, ſayth the Apoſtle, 1. Theſſ. 5.The ſeconde rule of our actions.
                     
                     from all appearance of euill. This rule is exceeding neceſſarye. For it admoniſheth that we doe flie not onely thoſe thinges that are euill in very deede, but alſo that we abſtaine altogither from the appearance of euil, that is, that we auoyde whatſoeuer pretendeth any outward ſhewe of euill. Let this rule admoniſh the godly, that they doe abſtaine not onely from thoſe bargaines which are in deede euill and vnlawfull: but alſo from thoſe which haue anye appearance of euill.
                  
                     The third admonition concerning our doings.The third, Paule. Hebr. 13. ſayth: Let your conuerſation be without couetouſnes. This precept doth not belong only to the mind, to wit, that the minde be not prophaned with the moſt filthy idol of couetouſnes:Our mynde muſt in no wi
                           •
                        e be prophaned with the filthy Idol of auarice. but alſo to outward maners. For he will haue vs ſo to liue, that no man may lay vpon vs the fault of couetouſnes. For when the conuerſation beareth witnes of the couetouſneſſe of the heart, godlynes and fayth without all dout are baniſhed. Wherefore it is not without good aduiſement which Dauid prayeth when he ſayth:Pſal. 119.36. 
                     Encline my heart vnto thy testimonies, and not vnto couetouſnes.
                     The feare of God and couetouſnes can not agree togither. Here Dauid ſetteth obedience toward God and couetouſnes one agaynſt the other, ſignifying that their condition is ſuch, that where the one is the other cannot be. If therefore the heart bee infected with the vice of couetouſnes, ſincere religion toward God can in no wiſe be there. If a couetous mā doth ſometime pretend ſome obedience toward God, it is mere hypocriſie. But contrariwiſe, if the hearte be ſeruent in the loue of God and in his religion, couetouſnes hath no place there. For what agreement hath the idoll of auarice with the temple of God? Furthermore becauſe the moſt holy King Dauid deſireth of the Lord that his heart may be inclined to the teſtimonyes of God, and not vnto couetouſnes,Our heart of it ſelf is prone vnto couetouſnes. he doth manifeſtly ſhew, that the heart of it owne accord is caried to couetouſnes, and cannot deliuer it ſelfe from couetouſnes except God putteth to his hand.

The precept therefore of Paule: Let your conuerſation be without couetouſnes, I would haue the godly to haue alwaye before their eyes, and this prayer of Dauid: Incline my heart to thy testimonies and not to couetouſnes. I woulde haue earneſtly to be made, which if it were done, there would be leſſe ſtriuing amōg the godly about vſury.
                  The fourth, Paule will haue Chriſtians ſo to liue,The fourth admonition concerning our actions ſpecially in bargaining. that our commoditie be not euil ſpoken of among the heathen. Now it is certaine, yt the trade of vſury is infamous amōg the Turks, and all prophane nations. What therfore will they ſay of Chriſtians, if they ſhall heare that we doe contend with the moſt prophane nations, and exceede them in vniuſt bargaines? Theſe thinges trulye ought worthely to admoniſh all godly men, that they would rather liue after a meaner ſort, then that they woulde giue occaſion that the name of God and the Goſpell of Chriſt ſhould be euill ſpoken of among prophane men. We ought with all examples of godlines & honeſty to allure and prouoke them, that they woulde togither with vs worſhip Chriſt and be ſaued, but, O good God, what is done? vnder a Chriſtian name in manye lurketh a Turkiſh heart.
                  The fift, Paule commaundeth vs to auoyde offence,The fift admonition. leaſt that the weake being offended at our doings doe ſtumble. And he will not haue this only that we abſteine from thinges that are euill by them ſelues, but alſo from thinges lawfull. It was lawfull for Paule by chriſtian libertie to eate fleſh, but what ſayth he?1. Cor. 8.13. 
                     before I will offend my brother, I will not eate fleſhe while the worlde standeth. So farre doth the dutie of thoſe which are godly in deede extend, not onely to beware that they doe not defile themſelues with any ſpot of ſinne, but alſo that they be not by any meanes a cauſe to other of falling, whereby they may haue occaſion not to iudge ſo well of vs.
                  The ſixt,The ſixt admonition which ought to moue vs to deale truly & to doe well. let the dignitie of a Chriſtian name come into our mind. Which name ought truly not without moſt

iuſt cauſe to be holy among Chriſtians.to moue vs to deale truly & to doe well. It is a ſhamefull and an vnſeemely thing for a man that is borne of a noble and famous houſe to follow trades that are ſeruile and contemptible, leaſt that he doth any whit diſtaine the nobilitie of the houſe whereof he commeth: much more vnſeemely is it that the children of God doe defile themſelues with any blemiſh which afterwarde may ſpread ouer the whole familie of God.
                  
                     The ſeuenth admonition which ought to feare vs from doing vniuſtly.The ſeuenth, puniſhment in the heires is to be feared. For if any man by vniuſt gaine heapeth vp much goods for his heires, he ſhall not eſcape puniſhment. For God doth eyther in the ſight of them take out of the worlde them who they hoped ſhould haue bene their heires, that they may ſee their owne vanitie and amend, or els he puniſheth the heires by forſaking them, ſuffering them to runne headlong into ſundrie vices, that thoſe thinges which were vniuſtly gotten may moſt diſhoneſtly be diſperſed and periſh, vnto the certayne deſtruction of the heires.
                  
                     The eyght admonition which ought to withdrawe vs frō wrongfull getting of riches.The eyght, let this cogitation come into the mind: that oftentimes the children of poore and honeſt parents haue come vnto verie great dignities, & that not by the meanes of riches, which they had not, but by the benefite of excellent ſciences of honeſtie, of wiſedome, of prudence. I could name euen domeſticall examples, but becauſe they are knowne, I let them paſſe. But contrariwiſe that many, to whom great riches were left of their forefathers, haue bin eyther brought vnto extreeme pouertie through their owne fault, or els haue bine as painted tables profitable to nothing in the common weale, altogither like to the wooers of Penelope and the ſwine of Epicure, borne to conſume the fruite of the earth. Let this cogitation admoniſh the godly, that they doe rather leaue vnto their children vertue and a good name, then without vertue many riches, which children are ſeldome wont to vſe but to

their owne deſtruction. This ſaying of Cicero is worthie of remembrance:The glory of vertue on excellent patrimonie. the beſt inheritance which is giuen of fathers to their children, and more excellent then euerye patrimonie, is the glorie of vertue and noble actes. And agayne: a father can leaue no monument more notable or famous, than a ſonne which is the image of his maners, of his vertue, conſtancie, godlynes and witte. I hope that I haue profitably added theſe admonitions to the diſputation of vſurie, nowe I deſire the godly reader that he will weigh them godly, and take them into his counſell in all his buſines.
               
               
                  Of the fift.
                  IT remayneth, which in the laſt place we propounded,Aduertiſements to the miniſters of Gods word, what they ought to do concerning vſurie and bargaines. to ſpeake of the office of the miniſters of the worde, whoſe dutie is in the ſteade of God, as Preachers ſent of him, to lift vp their voyce as a trumpet, and to accuſe the ſinnes of men hauing no regard of perſons: yet not without ſpirituall wiſedome, which taketh heede that nothing be done vnſeemely or amiſſe. Firſt therefore let the Miniſters of the worde earneſtly and ſharply condenme euery vniuſt bargayne, yea and that vſurie which is condemned by the worde of God, and let them ſhewe that no vniuſt bargayne can ſtande with true godlynes. Then lette them diligently ſee, that they iudge not too raſhlye or too ſharply of bargaynes which the magiſtrate approueth. Let them put a difference betwene thoſe bargaines which God in his manifeſt worde hath prohibited, and thoſe which the lawes doe wiſely ordeyne for the maintaining of humane ſocietie,It is the miniſters dutie as much as they are a
                           •
                        le rightly to reforme manifeſt errours in contracts and bargains. and let them not vnder a pretence of vſurie condemne thoſe bargaynes in which in deede there is no vſurie. Moreouer let them reforme as much as they can, manifeſt errours in bargaynes, by Eccleſiaſticall diſcipline, and that not of any priuate affection, but with ſage and wyſe counſell, leaſt that correction out of due

ſeaſon doth hurt more than profite. Furthermore, although the Preachers of God can not correct all faultes in bargaynes,The Church muſt be troubled as little as may be. yet let them not trouble the Church, but commende the thing vnto God, and pray that he will put to his hande. For where there is any perill of ſchiſme, the ſentence of excommunication being already pronounced againſt many, I iudge that they ought altogither to abſtayne from excommunication. The tares truly are to be rooted out (as Augustine ſayth) ſo that the wheate be not pulled vp togither with them.A moderation to be obſerued of godly miniſters in reforming maners. Wherefore in amending maners let them followe this moderation: let them correct the horrible ſinnes of many, not with might, but with counſell, let them reforme them not with threatening but with admoniſhing. But contrariwiſe, let them chaſtyce the ſinnes of a fewe with ſeueritie, leaſt that they take force and inuade the multitude. Which when it is done, they are more hardly corrected.How the miniſters of God ought to admonish concerning the right vſe of riches. Finally, let them moſt diligently admoniſhe the rich men that they ſuffer not them ſelues to be deceyued by their riches, and that they take heede leaſt that they being beguyled by the deceytfull reaſons of the fooliſhe fleſhe, doe loſe the fayth, and fall into the ſnares of Satan. Let them admoniſhe alſo that the Lorde did not ſay in vayne: that it is an harde thing for a rich man to enter into the kingdome of heauen. Let them nowe and then commend the true vſe of riches vnto them: Let them ſhewe that Chriſt woulde therefore haue in his Church certayne needie and naked members of his bodie, that he might trie the rich men whether they did by a true fayth loue him in his members or no. Theſe aduertiſements we haue giuen to the Miniſters of the Goſpell which are of the ſimpler ſorte, the other, eſpecially they that are more exerciſed in the miniſterie, doe eaſily vnderſtande by themſelues howe the worde of God is to be decided and applied.
               
               
                  
                  Of Lending.
                  LEnding doth followe,Lending what it is. which doth not alienate a thing into the proper poſſeſſion of the receyuer, as it is done in the former bargaynes, but doth only alienate the vſe of the thing, and that for a time, that the very ſame thing in due time may be reſtored agayne. This contract hath the name of the vſe of it, bicauſe the things that we borowe, doe bring vnto vs ſome commoditie and profite. Let this kynde of contract be without deceyt both in the lender and alſo in the borower, and let it be ſubiect to the lawe of charitie.
               
               
                  Of hyring and letting out.
                  LEt the bargaynes of hyring and letting out be ſubiect to the cuſtome and condition of the time and place,VVhat is to be obſerued in hyring and letting out. yet ſo, that there be no departing from the lawe of charitie. He therefore which letteth out the vſe of his thing or his labour, according to the cuſtome of the Realme, and other circumſtances, maye require a pryce or rewarde of him that hireth it. He which will not paye it, is vniuſt. Herevnto me thinketh pertayneth the bargayne which the Lawyers call emphuteuſis, that is, planting or graffing, therefore ſo called, bicauſe they that in times paſt did hire barren fields, did make them better by planting and graffing, that is, by good ordering and vſage, and did pay to the owners a certayne yerely rent for the vſe of the fields, the right neuertheles of the poſſeſſion remayning in the letter of them out. This particular was afterwarde tranſlated to a generall, that is, to the letting out of all fieldes and houſes. This contract therefore concerning tilling and planting, conſiſteth in the dealing with the grounde and lande only, wherin fruite commeth to him that hyreth, by tilling and due ordering: but the letter of it out doth remayne the true owner of the lande, and therefore according

to the lawes and cuſtomes of countries, he doth iuſtly receyue part of the fruite by the bargayne.
               
               
                  Of the contract of ſocietie.
                  
                     The contract of ſocietie wherein it conſiſteth.IN that which they call the contract of ſocietie, that is, whereas one beſtoweth money only, and another onely labour, or one beſtoweth money and labour, another only money or labour, or both beſtow money and labour, but not equally: we muſt follow the foundation without deceite: doe not that to an other which thou wilt not haue done to thy ſelfe. He which contrarie to this foundation ſhall deceiue his felow is vniuſt, and hath broken the lawes of brotherly ſocietie. Theſe things I thought good to adde concerning contracts and bargaines that I might herein haue conſideration of the conſciences of the godly. A full and perfect doctrine of bargaines may be taken out of the writinges of the lawyers, who of purpoſe as cunning and ſkilfull in theſe matters, doe write of them moſt copiouſly, neither is there any cauſe, that any man ſhould thinke that the ordinances or decrees of wiſe gouernoures concerning bargaines or other offices profitable in the life of man, are againſt the Goſpell. For, as before we haue witneſſed, the Goſpell doth not aboliſh ciuill ordinances.Ioh. 18.36. For the Lorde ſayth: My kingdome is not of this worlde. The Goſpell therfore leaueth to euery nation the lawes therof, which varying not from the tenne commaundements do tend to the mayntayning of commō weales and families.A rule which the godly may ſafely follow in all kindes of bargains. Wherfore the godly may moſt ſafely follow this rule: All bargaynes approued of the lawfull magiſtrate, which hath the chiefe gouernment, are lawfull vnto Chriſtians, ſo as they doe not playnely diſagree with the lawe of nature and the ten commaundements. And therefore the godly may vſe them freely with a good conſcience without offending God, no otherwiſe then theſe elements, which are common both to the godly and vngodly.
               
               
                  
                  A Question concerning the goods of the Church.
                  Whether it be lawfull for heires to require againe the goods, which their forefathers haue bestowed vpon the Church for the celebrating of Maſſes: the Maſſes nowe ceaſing, ye being quite aboliſhed.
               
               
                  The Aunſwere.
                  
                     A Difference muſt be put betweene the next ende of the giuing and the laſt ende.Two endes to be conſidered in the giuing of goods to the celebrating of maſſes. &c. The next ende of the giuing was the celebrating of the Maſſe, which, ſeeing it is vngodlye, they doe well, which aboliſhe the cuſtome thereof. The laſt ende was the mayntaining of the worſhippe and ſeruice of God. To this ende, bicauſe it is good and holye, ought all the goodes to be referred, which in time paſt were giuen to the celebrating of Maſſes.
               
               
                  An obiection.
                  They obiect, that in many of their deedes of gift this clauſe is expreſſed: If ſuch custome of celebrating Maſſe or of ſinging ſhall ceaſe, let the heires haue power to receyue againe thoſe goods which their forefathers haue giuen to the celebrating of Maſſes. &c.
               
               
                  The Aunſwere.
                  THey that beſtowed thoſe goods vpon the Church, did erre in the particular, and not in the general. The particular is the celebration of the Maſſe. The generall is the worſhip and ſeruice of God. The heyres therefore being better inſtructed, ought to correct the faultes of their forefathers, and conuert that to the true worſhip of God, which was appoynted for the prophaning of the ſupper of the Lorde.Flora an harlot of Rome how she bequethed her goods and to what end they were afterward employed. Yea I thinke that this is rather the office of the godly magiſtrate, that theſe goodes be not ſuffered to ſerue the auarice of priuate men. Flora an harlot of Rome beſtowed the ſubſtance that ſhe had, which was verye great, to the maintayning of a yearely pageant or play at

Rome. When the moſt graue cenſor Cato thought good that this play ſhould be aboliſhed for the diſhoneſtie thereof, and for the filthie geſtures and behauiour of harlots, the heires of Flora, the playes of Flora being aboliſhed, do require againe the goods that Flora had giuen. But the Senate of Rome did moſt wiſely iudge, that theſe goods ought not to returne to the heires, but that the purpoſe of Flora which gaue them was to be conſidered, whoſe laſt will was, that the goods which ſhe had giuen ſhould ſerue the common weale of Rome. For Flora although ſhee erred in the particular, yet did ſhe not erre in the generall. Wherefore that the generall might be kept, the Senate of Rome did moſt rightly iudge that thoſe goods which Flora had giuen ſhould not be reſtored to the heires which required them, bicauſe the playes of Flora were aboliſhed. After the ſame maner thoſe goods that are giuen to the maintayning of maſſes, ought not to be reſtored to the heires,Howe ſuch goods ought to be beſtowod which in times paſt haue bine giuen to the maintaining of ſuperſtition The iudgement of Bartolus a ſingular lawyer. the maſſes ceaſſing, but are to be conuerted to the generall end, that they may ſerue the Church of God, that is, that they may be giuen to them that teach, to them that learne, to them that haue deſerued, to them that are keepers and defenders of the Church. They ought not to ſerue the pleaſures of men, but the neceſſities of ye Church. So alſo dooth Bartolus a moſt excellent lawyer iudge, which toucheth this very caſe concerning maſſes, in his commentaries vpon the law. Of that which is giuen to the citie. The wordes of Bartolus are theſe: If he that maketh his laſt will and teſtament hath left an hundred poundes for ſinging maſſes, which maſſes cannot be ſong becauſe of the commaundement to the contrarye, that which was left ought to be conuerted to an other vſe. The ſame Bartolus doth a little before ſet downe the generall ſentence: If, ſayth he, he that maketh his laſt will, addeth a maner or condition which is vnpoſſible (to wit by reaſon of the prohibition) for ſome lawfull and honeſt ende,

then if it can not be fulfilled after that ſort, which he hath fayd, it is conuerted to ſome other lawfull vſe.
               
               
                  The grieuouſnes of the ſinne of them which couetouſly and greedily get into their handes the goods of the Church.
                  THey which couetouſlye and greedilye get into theyr handes the goods of the Church,They which wrōgfully enioy the goods of the church are giltie of both tables. doe violate both tables. For they are both vngodly againſt God, and alſo cruell toward the Church and the members thereof. Inaſmuch as they doe both with ſacriledge vſurpe vnto them ſelues thoſe things that are giuen to the worſhip of God, & alſo doe ſpoyle the needie members of the Church of their liuing. Cicero affirmeth that he doth more grieuouſlye offend, which wrongfully taketh any thing out of the common treaſurie, then he which ſtealeth the treaſure of a priuate men. Wherefore it is certayne that they doe farre more grieuouſlye ſinne which wrongfullye poſſeſſe the goods of the Church. The Lord condemneth them, which doe not beſtow ſomewhat vpon the poore of that ſubſtance which they haue: how ſhall we thinke that they ſhall eſcape the iudgement of God, which greedily get vnto themſelues thoſe thinges that belong to others? He is reproued by the voyce of God, which doth not ſuffer iniurie with a patient minde: how may it be that he ſhoulde ſcape vnpuniſhed which doeth iniurie to the members of Chriſt? God is not deceiued with ſubtiltie, he doth not receiue vniuſt excuſes. Whereſoeuer theſe couetous and greedy getters into their hands of the goods of the church doe turne them ſelues they cannot auoyde but that they are giltie of the Note that he followeth not the ſame diuiſion of the commandements which we commonly do ſeuenth precept. For when the Lorde ſaith: Thou ſhalt not ſteale, he forbiddeth vs by anye pretence of right to chalenge to our ſelues vniuſtly any thing which belongeth to an other. But although many at this day wrongfully poſſeſſing the goods of the Church, doe

ſeeme pleaſantly to enioy them, yet they cary about with them their conſcience as a witnes, which although it being as it were ſeared with an hote iron, doth for a time reſt ſecurely: neuertheles at length, and that at the point of death,The teſtimonie of a mans owne conſcience againſt himſelfe a thing moſt grieuous. being as it were raiſed out of a dead ſleepe, it ſhall be in ſtede of a thouſand witneſſes, and ſhall more grieuouſly afflict the heart, then any renting or tearing of the body can vexe and torment the body. Then they ſhall truly perceiue, that it was not for nothing which in time paſt was ſayde of Eſay. chap. 33. Wo to thee that ſpoylest, and wast not ſpoyled: and doest wickedly and they did not wickedly against thee: when thou ſhalt ceaſe to ſpoyle, thou ſhalt be ſpoyled: when thou ſhalt make an end of doing wickedly, they ſhall doe wickedly against thee. They ſhal at length perceiue that theſe wordes of the Prophet doe not vaniſh away into the aer. Theſe men thinke that there is no daunger, becauſe they doe not feele the preſent hand of God, whom notwithſtanding the hiſtorie of the Iewiſh people doth ſufficiently teach, that the puniſhment of thē that commit ſacrilege is not taken away although it be deferred for a time for their ſakes, whom the Lord by his goodnes dooth call vnto repentance.Sacrilege shall not eſcape vnpunished with out earneſt and heartie repentance. The Iewiſh people contemned the voice of the Prophets, but at the laſt, the meaſure of their ſinnes being filled vp, they came to vtter deſtruction. At this day the voyce of the Lord doth ſounde in our eares, and we ſleepe ſecurely on eyther ſide without repentance, but our ſinnes being come to the full, the Lord will poure out his wrath alſo vpon vs, and ſo that will come to paſſe which Ieremie hath foretold: As a theefe that is taken with the deede commeth to ſhame: euen ſo shalt thou come to confuſion. By which word the ſpirite of God doth ſignifie,God will in his time iuſtly punish the ſcorners and deſpiſers of his worde. that it will come to paſſe, that they at length ſhal ſuffer due puniſhment, which mocking and ſcorning at the word of God, do thinke that al things are lawfull vnto them which the luſt and ſenſualitie of the

minde doth perſwade.
               
               
                  A Question of the right vſe of the goods of the Church
                  BEcauſe the goodes of the Church haue bin a long time in great abuſe, it is with good cauſe enquired, what is the true and lawfull vſe of the goods of the Church, and vpon whom theſe goods ought to be beſtowed. For one doth not therefore by good right poſſeſſe the goods of the Church eyther becauſe he weareth a hoode, or becauſe his voice ſoundeth in the church, ye or becauſe he vnderſtandeth the Latine tongue, in which errour many haue hithereto bin: But here the holy fathers are to be heard, which can iudge with a ſincere iudgement.The ſentence of Auguſtine concerning the right diſtribution of the goodes of the Church. 
                     Gratian rehearſing the ſētence of Augustine, doth witnes that the ſtipends of the Church, that is, the yearely reuenews and giftes, ought to be diſtributed into four partes. Whereof the firſt ought to be giuen to the Byſhop and his familie, for maintayning his office and hoſpitalitie,The firſt part of the Church goodes. not to mayntaine riot, pride, chaines of gold, ringes of gold, not to feede palfreys, not to keepe a courtly rout: but to neceſſarie and honeſt ſuſtentation, leaſt that he being deceiued and caried away with the riches of this worlde, doe forget his dutie, as it is ſufficiently knowne to haue come to paſſe in this realme in time paſt.The ſeconde part of the goods of the Church, howe it ought to be beſtowed. The ſecond part ought to be giuen to the clergie, whereof I make three orders or ſorts. In the firſt are they which teach and learne in the church, to whom ſtipendes and exhibition is due, leaſt that being compelled with pouertie they forſake their office. In the ſecond are they which in time paſt haue ſerued the Church, but now eyther grieued with ſicknes or waſted with old age, not able to execute their office. To theſe liberall ſuſtentation of the goods of the Church is due. In the third order or ſort are they, which doe deſerue it by their labour and trauail in the ſtudies which are profitable to the Church, theſe ought as ſouldiers to be maintained

to the vſe of the Church.The right beſtowing of the third part of the goodes of the Church. The thirde part ought to be beſtowed vpon the poore, which are ſuch in dede, whoſe lyfe paſt hath ben honeſt. For they that haue ſpent their goodes in hunting and companying with harlots, are vnworthie to be nouriſhed or maintayned with the goods of the Church.The fourth part of the goodes of the Church howe to be employed. Let theſe begge for their liuing. The fourth part ought to be reſerued for the building and repayring of temples and houſes. This ſentence of Augustine is a godly and a true partition of the goodes of the Church. That holy man will not haue dogges and harlots to be maintayned with the goodes of the Church,Abuſes of the goods of the Church. he will not haue ydle bellies and ſluggiſhe drones to become fatte by the goodes of the Church. He will not haue ſwarmes of Monks, moſt vnprofitable lumps of earth, to liue delicately of the goodes of the Church, he will not haue ſmoke and vayne ſoundes of wordes to be ſolde for the treaſure of the Church, but he requireth a iuſt diſtribution according to the proportion of Geometrie, which hath regarde both of the office and alſo of the labour in aſſigning ſtipendes. And although I allowe this ſentence of Augustine, concerning the partition of the goods of the Church, neuertheles, this with good reaſon I adde: Firſt, bicauſe ciuil gouernement is not meete for Biſhops, it is lawfull for godly Kings and Princes to tranſferre gouernement, rule, ciuil iuriſdiction, furniture and riches of Biſhoppes vnto themſelues, ſo that they conuert them to the preſeruing of the Church of God, that is, it is lawfull for godly Kings and Princes to fence and fortifie themſelues with theſe goodes, that they may haue wherewith they may defende the Church agaynſt enemies, and whereby they may be bountifull towarde the godly exiles and others that haue well deſerued of the Church and of the common weale.Ciuil gouernment not meete for the miniſterie. But that we doe rightly ſay that ciuil gouernment is not meete for Biſhops, thoſe ſayings doe ſufficientlye ſhewe, which put a difference betweene the miniſterie of

the Goſpell and ciuill gouernement.Ioh. 20.21. 
                           •
                         18.36. 
                     As my father ſent me (ſayth the Lorde) ſo ſende I you. My kingdome is not of this worlde. The kings of the Gentiles reigne ouer them,
                     Luke. 22.25.
                     but ye shall not be ſo.
                     2. Cor. 10.4. 
                     The weapons of our warfare are not carnall. But the Papiſtes obiect that certayne Prouinces were giuen to the Romane Biſhoppe of Constantine. If we graunt this to be true, though it be moſt falſe, yet though that power was giuen to Syluester, it was not lawfull for him to receyue it in that function in which he was, and to deliuer it to his ſucceſſours. Bicauſe euerye one ought to doe the duties of his vocation, according to the ſaying: Studie to be quiet,
                     1. Theſſ. 4.11. 
                     and to meddle with your owne buſineſſe. The Biſhop ought to teach, the King to gouerne and ouerſee armies, ſtipends, warres, the peace of the bodies. Theſe things therefore are not to be committed to a paſtour,Euery one muſt meddle with his own buſines. but let euery one in his calling be mindefull of his rule: Doe your owne buſineſſe. Agayne, let euery one walke as God hath called him. Agayne, doe thoſe things deuoutly which God hath commaunded thee. The ſaying therefore, but it ſhall not be ſo with you, maye not onely be vnderſtande thus, that Chriſt doth not giue ciuill power with the miniſterie of the Goſpell, but alſo that it be not taken or exerciſed of him that is in ye miniſterie. When as the Papiſts obiect the aunſwere of the Lorde to the ſaying: Beholde here are two ſwordes, they doe ſufficiently declare that they deale Sophiſtically and ſubtilly. For when he aunſwereth that it is ynough, he ſignifieth the complaynt concerning the two ſortes of enimies. It is ynough that the ſwords both of the high Prieſts and alſo of Pilate are drawne againſt you. Hereof without all doubt is concluded that ciuil gouernement is not meete for Biſhoppes and Paſtours. Wherefore Christierne the thirde, king of Denmarke, did well and godly, when he tranſferred the dominion and rule of Biſhops vnto himſelfe, to preſerue and maintaine

the ſtudies neceſſarie to the Church, and to repreſſe the enemies of the Goſpell. Moreouer, whereſoeuer the reuenues of the Church are as yet more plentifull, as where it is well looked vnto them, of whome it is ſayde, a godly King or Prince ought as a ſtewarde and nouriſher of the Church, to haue regarde of the goods that remayne, and eſpecially to take heede that the goodes of the Church be not poſſeſſed of ydle bellies, which neyther haue ſerued the Church at any time, neyther doe ſerue it, neyther are able to ſerue eyther it or the cōmon weale. For as the Lorde aboue is the defender of other publike goods: ſo is he alſo the defender of the goods of the Church. And as it belongeth to the king, if a citie doe beſtowe the goodes of the treaſure yll and amiſſe, to prouide and ſee that they be more diligently and profitably beſtowed: ſo alſo doth it belong to Kings and Princes to haue a care of the goods of the Church, that thoſe things which haue hitherto ſerued ſuperſtition, may nowe be applyed to their true vſes. But in the meane ſeaſon let euery one take hede, leaſt that vnder a pretence of godlynes he conuert the goodes of the Church to riot and prophane vſes.
               
               
                  7 Be pacient therefore, brethren, vnto the comming of the Lorde.
                  Vpon the rebuking of rich men he bringeth in an exhortation to godly poore men,An exhortation to the pore to be pacient. that when they ſee what kynde of ende there ſhall be of them, which abuſe their riches in this lyfe, they may rather paciently beare the preſent miſeries, then that they will deſire the riches of rich men with perill of their ſaluation. And this is the propoſition of the exhortation.

                        Beholde the huſbandman vvaiteth for the precious fruite of the earth, and hath long pacience for it, vntill he receyue the earely and the latter rayne.
                        8 Be ye alſo pacient therefore, and ſettle your hearts: for the comming of the Lorde dravveth neare.
                     
                     
The firſt reaſon of the propoſition is taken of the example of huſbandmen.The firſt reaſon of the exhortation to pacience. Euen as huſbandmen labouring in tilling and ſowing their fieldes, doe paciently looke for frute: ſo the godly ought by pacience to looke for the ende of faith,The ende of our fayth. which is the ſaluation of their ſoules. That is called former rayne, which falleth in the Spring time, the ſeede being nowe newly caſt into the earth. That is called latter rayne, which falleth in the Autumne, when the eares of corne are full, whereby the graines do ſwell and are made bigger. The reaſon of the calling thereof is, bicauſe the whole time that the ſeede is in the ground, is compared to one day, ye beginning whereof is the Spring time and the ende the Autumne.
9 Grudge not one againſt an other, brethren, leaſt ye be condemned: beholde, the Iudge ſtandeth before the doore.
The ſeconde reaſon taken from the puniſhment of impacience.The ſeconde reaſon of the exhortation to pacience. By the name of grudging is ſignified an inwarde complaynt, which proceedeth from impacience. To ſtand before the doore, is to be neare at hande.
10 Take, my brethren, the Prophets for an enſample of ſuffring aduerſitie, and of long pacience, vvhich haue ſpoken in the name of the Lorde.
The thirde reaſon of the example of the Prophetes,The third reaſon of the exhortation to pacience. who though they did ſupplie the place of the Lorde in preaching the worde, yet they were not free from affliction, wherein they declared exceeding great pacience. See the 11. Chap. of the Epiſtle to the Hebrues.
11 Behold vve count them bleſſed vvhich endure.
The fourth reaſon taken from thinges that are adiacent or adioyned one to an other.The fourth reaſon of the exhortation to pacience. They are ſayde to be bleſſed which ſuffer, Matth. 5. Therfore it behoueth vs patiently to ſuffer preſent afflictions. But they are bleſſed two maner of wayes, by feeling and by the euent or ende. By feeling, becauſe they doe in deede vnder the Croſſe feele the

preſence of God comforting them. By euent or ende, becauſe they ſhal in deede be deliuered, according to the promiſe of Chriſt, Matth. 5.
Ye haue heard of the patiēce of Iob, and haue knovven vvhat ende the Lord made.
The fift reaſon taken of the ende of preſent remedies,The fift reaſon of the exhortation to pacience. which he ſheweth by propounding the famous example of holy Iob. Iob was afflicted aboue meaſure, but the ende which the Lord gaue was moſt ioyfull. For the time of affliction being ouercome, he receyued cōfort, and was gloriouſly deliuered from all his afflictions. And ſo in our preſent troubles and miſeries, our eyes are to be faſtened not ſo much vpon theſe miſeries, as vpon the ioyfull ende of them.
For the Lorde is very pitifull and mercifull.
The confirmation of the fift reaſon taken from the affection of God toward them, which doe beare afflictions patiently in fayth. Becauſe oftentimes mention is made in the Scripture of the mercy of God and that for moſt iuſt cauſe,Howe God is mercifull and how he sheweth mercie. and God is ſaide to be mercifull, and to ſhew mercy and compaſſion. (He is mercifull inaſmuch as he is in deede moued with our miſeries, and doth as it were ſuffer with vs. He ſheweth mercy and compaſſion becauſe he reacheth his hand to vs being in miſerie, and deliuereth vs out of miſerie) I will briefly reherſe what thinges ought to come into our mind,Moſt worthye cogitations which ought to come into our myndes as often as we heare the mercie of God towarde vs mentioned. as often as mention is made of the mercy of God toward vs. Firſt ye obiect of mercy is to be thought vpon, which is ye miſerie of mākind wherby ye whole race of mankind is in it ſelfe moſt miſerably loſt, ſubiect to the tyrāny of ye deuil, in danger of al calamities, ſpirituall & corporall. Secondly, the cauſe of this miſerie is to be conſidered, which is ſin, the moſt horrible and moſt filthie thing of all things, The ſeconde cogitation. The thirde cogitation. ye moſt iuſt puniſhment whereof is euerlaſting torment of ſoules & bodies. Thirdly, the infinite loue of God toward mākind is to be reuolued in the

minde, that God hath not vtterly caſt away mankind for ſo great filthines and vncleannes.The fourth. Fourthly let the ſacrifice of the ſonne of God be thought vpon, whereby he helpeth our miſerie, and maketh a full ſatiſfaction for ſinne. By thinking vpon this ſacrifice the holy fathers haue comforted themſelues in their ſacrifices. To this ſacrifice Dauid hath regard, as often as in the Pſalmes he earneſtly deſireth the mercye of God, which pſalme 51. doth ſufficiently ſhew, where he maketh his prayer in theſe wordes: Haue mercy on me, O Lorde, according to thy louing kindenes, according vnto the multitude of thy mercies wipe away my wickednes. Whē he ſaith, wipe away, he hath reſpect vnto the bloud of the mediatour as he doth more plainly ſhewe in the ſeuenth verſe, where he maketh mention of the ſatiſfaction for ſinne, for ſo he ſaith: Purge thou me with hyſop and I shall be cleane Fiftly,The fift cogitation concerning the mercy of God repentance or conuerſiion is here required, without which we are not made partakers of this vnſpeakable price, of the ſacrifiee of the ſonne of God. Hereunto pertayne many ſayinges of the Prophets. 2. Paral. 30. The Lord your God is gratious and mercifull, and will not turne away his face from you, if ye conuert vnto him. Iere. 3. Turne againe ye children, and ſo shall I heare your backturninges. Againe chap. 18. Let euery man turne from his euil way, and take vpon him the thing that is good and right, and your iniquitie shal not turne to your destruction: To this conuerſion the Goſpell calleth vs: Repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand. And Chriſt him ſelfe ſaith: I cam no to call the iust but ſinners to repentance. Sixtly,The ſixth cogitation or rather meditation. a continuall thankfulnes in our whole life with extolling and ſetting forth the glorie of God is required, and a certayne holy carefullnes is to be had in gouerning our maners that we may ſeeme in heart, mouth, tongue, and in our whole conuerſation to extoll the mercy of God. Seuenthly,The ſeuenth cogitation. becauſe our weakenes is great, which is increaſed by thinking ſometime vpon

our particularitie, ſometime vpon our vnworthines, we muſt thinke that the mercy of God is not contayned within narrow bounds,The Lord is moſt abundant and rich in mercie. neither that the greatnes of our ſinnes doe exceede it, but that it is extended to all the endes of the world, and doth by infinite meanes abound aboue ſinne. The bleſſed Virgin ſayth:Luke. 1.50. 
                     The mercy of God is from generation to generation on them that feare him. And Peter ſayth:2. Pet. 3.9. 
                     The Lord is patient towarde vs, and would haue no man to perish, but would all men to come to repentance. Of this moſt rich mercy of God S. Cyrill writeth in this maner. The mount of Oliues doth ſignifie the heigth and aboundance of the diuine mercy plentifully ſhewed vnto vs by the comming of the ſonne of God in the fleſhe.VVhy the mercy of God is in the ſcripture compared to oyle. The mercy of God is often times in the Scriptures expreſſed by the name of oyle, becauſe the nature of oyle doth agree with the maner and condition thereof. For oyle is caried aboue other licours and ſwimmeth aboue them, ſo the mercy of God is aboue all his workes, and doth more appeare vnto men then the reſt. For mercy exceedeth iudgement: and, his mercy is ouer all his workes. Moreouer, oyle doth mitigate the griefes of woundes, and doth heale ſwellings and ſores: but the mercy of God doth heale the ſores of our ſoules, and driueth away all faintnes of ſinne, as the Prophet ſayth:Pſal. 103.3.4. 
                     Who forgiueth all thy wickednes and healeth all thine infirmities, who ſatisfieth thy mouth with good things, and crowneth thee with mercy and louing kindnes. Finally they that ſhould come into the place of wraſtling or ſtriuing, did come forth into the middeſt being annoynted with oyle, whereby their bodyes might be more pliable and fitte for that kinde of exerciſe: ſo the Lord ſheweth vnto them his mercy which are about to ſtriue againſt the ayrie powers, with it he preuenteth vs and giueth vs ſtrength, whereby we being fortified in ſo harde a fight with his helpe, maye at the laſt goe awaye conquerers.Pſal. 18.28. 
                     In thee ſaith the Prophet, I shall be deliuered

from tentation, and with the helpe of my God I ſhall leape ouer the wall, And agayne:Pſal. 27.1.5. 
                     God is my light and ſaluation, whom then shall I feare? God is the strength of my life, of whom then shall I be afrayde? Though an hoste of men were layde in campe agaynst me, yet shall not myne heart be afrayde: and though there roſe vp warre agaynst me, yet I will put my trust in him. Laſtly in another place: My strength will I aſcribe vnto thee:
                     Pſal. 59.9.10. 
                     for thou art the God of my refuge. My mercifull God will preuent me.
                  
                  
                     Augustine in a certayne ſermon ſayth:A deſcription of the great mercy of God toward man. His mercye is moſt abundant, and his beneuolence large, which hath redeemed vs with the bloud of his ſonne, when becauſe of our ſinnes we were nothing. For he did ſome great thing, when he created man to his owne image and ſimilitude. But becauſe we woulde be made nothing by ſinning, and tooke the iſſue of mortalitie of our parents, & were made a maſſe of ſinne (a maſſe of wrath) neuertheles it pleaſed him by his mercie to redeeme vs with ſo great a price, he gaue for vs the bloude of his only ſonne innocently borne, innocently liuing, innocently dying, who hath redemed vs with ſo great a price. He wil not haue them periſh whō he hath bought, he hath not bought them whō he wil deſtroy, but he hath bought thē whō he will quicken & make aliue.
12 But before al things, my brethrē, ſvveare not, neyther by heauen, nor by earth, nor by any other oth: but let you yea be yea, and your nay, nay, leaſt ye fall into condemnation.
As he condemneth a raſhe cuſtome of ſwearing, ſetting down the puniſhment therof: ſo he preſcribeth a maner of affirming and denying, when he ſayth: Let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay, that is, that which is to be affirmed ſimply and without an oth, affirme, and that which is ſimply to be denied, denie.
               
               
                  
                  Of an Othe.
                  BIcauſe the Anabaptiſtes abuſe this ſaying to aboliſhe euery othe, I iudge it expedient to declare this place more at large, that it may be euident howe farre it is lawfull to ſweare and howe farre not, and that I may keepe a certayne maner in the handling hereof, I will ſpeake of theſe things in order.VVhat points he meaneth to entreat of concerning an oth. Firſt I will generally ſhewe that it is lawfull ſometime to ſweare. Then I will inquire out thoſe things, which are required to a lawfull oth, that it may appeare which is lawfull, and which is vnlawfull. Moreouer, whom we muſt beleue when they haue ſworn, for we muſt not beleue euery one that hath ſworne. In the laſt place I will refell the argumentes of the Anabaptiſts.
               
               
                  Of the first.
                  
                     Six firme reaſons that it is lawfull ſometime to take an oth.THat othes are ſometime lawfull, it is taught by the ſixe arguments following. The firſt, the ſeconde precept of the ten commaundements, doth manifeſtly require the religion or right vſing of an othe. For when it forbiddeth the abuſe of the name of God, it requireth the lawfull vſe thereof, to wit, inuocation of God, part whereof is a religious othe. The ſecond, the declaration of the They diuide not the commandements after the ſame maner that we do, which neuertheles is a thing indifferent.ſecond precept Deut. 6. doth proue the ſame, for there Moſes ſayth: Thou shalt ſweare by his name, this ſaying doth both witnes that an othe is lawfull, and alſo doth ſhewe a maner of ſwearing. For God will not haue, that the Iſraelites ſweare by the names of Deuils, after the maner of the Gentiles, but by his name. The thirde, Exod. 22. The commaundement of the Lorde is this, when there is controuerſie concerning a thing committed to another to keepe, if the thing be taken awaye, God hath commaunded, that he to whom it was committed to keepe, do purge himſelfe with an oth. The fourth, the many examples of

ſaints and holy men, as of Abraham, Iſaac, Iacob, and of many others, who in no caſe woulde haue eyther ſworn themſelues or required othes of other, except they had thought that it had bene lawfull to ſweare. But the othes of them doe make a rule of a lawfull othe, as I will afterwarde declare. The fift, the example of Chriſt and of the Apoſtles in the newe teſtament. Howe often doth Chriſt vſe this maner of ſwearing? Verily, verily. &c. Howe often doth Paule ſweare, and alſo the other Apoſtles. Theſe things the Apoſtles had in no wiſe done, and much leſſe Chriſt, if euery othe had bene vnlawfull. The ſixt, the end of an oth, Heb. 6. And an oth, ſayth he, for confirmation is among men an ende of all strife. We haue firme reaſons, by which it is plainly ſhewed that euerye othe is not vnlawfull, as the Anabaptiſtes crie out: Nowe let vs go to that which we propounded in the ſeconde place.
               
               
                  Of the ſeconde.
                  IN an othe which is an affirming or denying of ſome thing, with a calling to witnes of the name of God,VVhat an oth is. or of ſome other thing, which ought to be vnto vs ſacred and vnuiolate, foure things are required,Foure things to be conſidered in an oth. which are diligently to be conſidered in euery othe: as the partes of the othe, the cauſes, the affection of him that ſweareth, and the ende of ſwearing. The partes are two,The firſt parte of an oth. the one is the calling of God to witnes about the thing which we affirme or denie. For he that ſweareth, when he hath no other witneſſes, appealeth to God, from whome nothing is hidde, and deſireth his teſtimonie, and confirmeth by an othe that that which he ſayth proceedeth from God as a witnes. Hereupon it followeth, that we muſt not flie to the diuine teſtimonie, but when as both other witneſſes can not be had, and the matter is ſo knowne to him that ſweareth, that he knoweth that he doth not raſhly appeale to ſo great a witnes.The ſecond part of an oth. The other is the condition of the vengeance

of God againſt him which ſweareth and deceyueth in ſwearing. For if he doth not eſcape puniſhment, which doth falſly alledge the teſtimonie of an earthly king, what ſhall be done to him which maketh God a lyer? This condition ought to call backe all men not onely from periurie,Two principall cauſes of an oth. but alſo from lightnes of ſwearing. The cauſes of ſwearing are two, the former is the ignorance of the thing which is in hande, the latter the weyghtines thereof. For in trifling matters, and of none or ſmall importance, we muſt not flie to an othe. For the name of God ought to be more ſacred and holy vnto vs, than that we ſhould flie vnto it by ſwearing, except exceeding great neceſſitie doth vrge vs.The affections which ought to be in him that ſweareth. The affection of him that ſweareth ought to be double, for he ought to be moued thereunto both wt hatred of a lie, and with the loue of the truth. Whereſoeuer this affection is not, the name of God is taken in vayne. The ende of ſwearing is alſo double,Two endes of ſwearing. one, that the truth may be known, another, that God maye be honoured, by whome it is ſworne. Of theſe foure rightly conferred togither, it ſhall eaſily appeare, when it is lawful to ſweare, and when not. Certayne doe allowe this diſtinction, that a publike othe only, that is, required of the lawfull magiſtrate, is lawful, but not a priuate othe, that is, which one maketh of his owne accorde, eyther in his owne or in another mans cauſe. But bicauſe many examples do proue euen priuate othes,The definition of a lawfull othe. I do not receyue this diſtinction. Nowe I define that to be a lawfull othe which is taken in the feare of God to confirme the truth of that thing, the ignorance whereof woulde eyther hinder the glorie of God, or hurt the ſafegarde or good name of our neyghbours.
               
               
                  Of the third.
                  NOw is to be declared whom we muſt beleeue, when they haue ſworne.The othes of wicked men are vayne and not to be beleeued. For we muſt not beleeue euerye one, no though he haue ſworne. The Poet Menander ſaith:

write the oth of wicked men in the water. He ſignifieth therefore by this ſigne, that it is vayne that wicked men ſweare. For he which doth playnly tranſgreſſe the other commaundements of God, as with idolatrie, vniuſtice, tyrannie, dronkennes, adulterie, haunting the companye of harlots, and with ſuch like: he will eaſily alſo contemne God with ſwearing. Wherefore let neyther the godly magiſtrate nor any other eaſily approue ſuch men hauing ſworne. Paule ſwearing in theſe wordes:Rom. 1.9. 
                     God is my witnes. Forthwith addeth, Whom I ſerue in my ſpirite,
                     VVhom we muſt beleeue when they ſweare. ſignifying that we muſt beleeue them that feare God if they ſhall ſweare concerning any thing. For they that being voyde of fayth can not worſhip God, howe are they to be thought to worſhip him with the religion or right vſing of an oth? Howe wilt thou giue part to him, from whom thou haſt taken the whole?
               
               
                  Of the fourth.
                  NOw let vs ſee what foundations the Anabaptiſts reſt vpon.The foundations which the Anabaptiſts leane vnto in taking away al othes and ſwearing. Firſt they bring the ſaying of the Lorde Matth. 5. I ſay vnto you, ſweare not at all. Secondly they vrge the wordes of Iames: Sweare not my brethren, neyther by heauen, nor by earth, nor by any other oth. Let, ſaith the Lord, your communication be yea, yea: Nay, nay. For whatſoeuer is more then theſe, commeth of euil. Theſe foundations the Anabaptiſts leane vnto, to whom I would yeeld,A declaration of the ſaying of Chriſt, wherein the Anabaptiſtes affirme that he doth forbid all kynde of ſwearing. if that the former reaſons did not better inſtruct me. But that it may be vnderſtand what the prohibition of the Lorde meaneth, which ſeemeth to be vniuerſall, we muſt mark the purpoſe of Chriſt in this whole ſermon of workes. It is not the purpoſe of the Lorde to correct the lawe of his father, but to diſcloſe and reproue the errours of the interpreters of the lawe. The law of the father is: thou ſhalt ſweare by my name. This lawe the Lord doth not aboliſh, but doth rather mayntaine it, whiles that he reprehendeth the corrupting thereof. The

Phariſes of this lawe concluded after this ſort:How the Phariſes corrupted the lawe of God concerning ſwearing. God hath commaunded that we ſweare by his name, therefore we may ſweare for euery cauſe and after euery ſort. This erroneous conſequent the Lord reprehendeth when he ſaith: Thou shalt not forſweare thy ſelfe, but shalt performe thine othes to the Lord. But I ſay vnto you, ſweare not at all, neyther by heauen. &c. The generall word at al ought to be referred to the maner of ſwearing then receiued, to wit, to ſweare for euery cauſe and after euery ſorte according to the maner of prophane men. Here therefore Chriſte prohibiteth his Diſciples and them that trulye feare the Lorde to ſweare raſhly for euerie cauſe and after euerie ſort. For he will haue the name of God to be reuerenſed and worſhipped more religiouſly then that it be taken in vayne. Iames likewiſe doth not aboliſh the commaundement of God concerning the religion or right vſing of an oth,How Iames is to be vnderſtand when he forbiddeth ſwearing. but he doth onely correct the cuſtome of ſwearing raſhly and after euery ſort. For the lawfull maner of ſwearing is reckened among the promiſes of the Goſpell: Iere, 4. Thou shalt ſweare, The Lord liueth, in truth, in equitie, and righteouſnes. This is not a ſaying of commaunding but of promiſing, that the true Iſraell may become a true worſhipper of God, and that the Gentiles may embrace the true religion of God. A proofe whereof ſhall be, that they ſhall ſweare after this maner: the Lord liueth, and not after this: Baal, Saturne or Iupiter liueth, But that which is ſayde Oſee. 4.The ſaying of Oſee expounded wherein he ſemeth to forbid ſwearing. 
                     Neyther shall ye ſweare the Lorde liueth: is a voyce of threatning. For he threatneth the vnthankfull Iewes, that their countrie ſhall be made deſolate for their ſtubbornnes and diſobedience againſt God, that in the place of the true worſhip of God ſhall be ſet the worſhip of Idoles, whereupon it ſhal come to paſſe, that they ſhall not ſweare any more: the Lorde liueth, but Baal liueth, &c. The Anabaptiſts vrge the forme preſcribed of the Lorde: Let your communication be

yea, yea: nay, nay. What meaneth the Lorde by theſe wordes? that in ſtede of a raſh oth they vſe conſtant & aduiſed talke. The Lord therefore requireth conſtancie in our ſayings, that our yea be yea, and our nay be nay. He doth not forbid but that it is lawfull for vs to flie to a religious oth, when the weightines of the cauſe doth ſo require: but they do more forcibly vrge that which followeth. For, ſayth Chriſt, Whatſoeuer is added more then theſe commeth of euil, That is, that which is raſhly added more then a ſimple affirming or denying, no weightie cauſe requiring, it commeth of euill, that is, of an euill affection of the minde, or of an euill conſcience, or of the deuel himſelfe. He ſayth not that a lawfull oth commeth of euel,A rash oth but a raſh oth onely which is taken with a certayne lightnes, of an euel cuſtome, and for euery light cauſe. Againe, it may ſometime fall out that an oth commeth not of the euel of him that ſweareth but of him that doth not beleue a bare and ſimple affirmation, which when it commeth to paſſe a religious oth ſhall not therefore be euell. For euery thing is not euill which commeth of euil, in aſmuch as it falleth out often times, that thoſe thinges that are euell are the occaſions of thoſe thinges that are good: as when we ſay, that good lawes doe come of euell maners and conditions, to wit, by occaſion not by effect.
               
               
                  13 Is any among you afflicted, let him pray.
                  Briefe admonitions are annexed, and firſt that he which is afflicted and ſuffreth perſecution, doe pray.Prayer a ſpeciall remedy in affliction. For there is no more preſent remedie agaynſt the miſeries of this world then prayer proceeding from fayth. Whatſoeuer ſayth the Lord, ye deſire when ye pray,
                     Mar. 11.24. 
                     beleeue that ye ſhall haue it, and it shall be done vnto you. And the reaſon thereof is very wel noted in the booke of Iudith chap. 9. where the moſt holy woman doth thus ſay in her prayer: In the prayer of the humble and meeke hath thy pleaſure bin euermore. And Pſalm. 49: Call vpon me in the day of trouble

and I will deliuer thee.
                     Is any merie? let him ſing.
He counſeleth him that is in proſperitie, to ſing: by which counſel the Apoſtle teacheth three thinges.VVhat it is to ſing when we are merie and in proſperitie. For firſt, when he biddeth vs ſing, he will haue vs acknowledge God to be the author of our proſperitie. Secondly, he will haue vs extoll and prayſe him, giuing him thankes for his benefites. Thirdly that we doe not with the world abuſe our proſperitie to the contempt of God, but that we doe rather reſt in the author thereof ſinging vnto him, and not attributing any thing to our ſelues. But the worlde dooth contrary: for it neyther acknowledgeth God to be the author of the felicitie which it enioyeth, neyther is it thankefull to him, ſo farre is it of that it ſingeth vnto God, yea it doth rather furiouſly triumph with prophane ioye and gladnes.

                        14 Is any ſicke among you? Let him call for the elders of the Church, and let them pray for him, and anoynt him vvith oyle in the name of the Lord:
                        15 And the prayer of fayth shall ſaue the ſicke, and the Lord shall raiſe him vp: and if he haue committed ſinnes, they shalbe forgiuen him.
                     
He counſeleth him that is ſicke, what he muſt doe. Firſt let him ſend for the elders as Phiſitions of his ſoule. Then let the elders being called pray for the ſicke and anoint him with oyle, not that he may die, but that he may miraculouſly be reſtored to health, as ye Apoſtle here plainly ſpeaketh.VVhy annointing the ſick with oyle is not nowe vſed, but taken away. But ſeing that oyle was an outward ſigne of the gift of healing, which gift continued for a time to confirme the doctrine in the primitiue Church, and nowe the Church hath not that gift: It were fond and fooliſh to keepe ſtill the ſigne without the thing ſignified by the ſigne. That I may in the meane ſeaſon ſay nothing concerning the idolatrous adiurations and truſt in the anointing, wherein was thought to be a moſt ſure aide and defence

agaynſt the deuel, which kind of things they doe retayne as yet in the papacie. Wherfore let vs leaue to the papiſts their colour wherewith they may ſinere their dead to be ſent into hell. Moreouer this place doth moſt manifeſtly confute the opinion of the Nauatians, which denied them returning to grace that had fallen after they knew the truth. Wherefore this teſtimonie of Iames is eſpecially to be marked. For he ſayth playnely: If they haue committed ſinnes, that is, (if they haue committed any thing agaynſt their conſcience) they shalbe forgiuen them.
                     16 Acknovvledge your faults one to an other. An other briefe admonition concerning pardoning one an others faults that hapned among them.VVe muſt pardon one anothers offences. For it cannot otherwiſe be, but that in this weakenes of nature and in this moſt corrupt and as it were doting olde age of the worlde, many offences be incident, which the Apoſtle will that we both acknowledge, & alſo pardō one an other.Auricular cō
                        feſsion falſly gathered of the Papiſtes. The Papiſts interpret this place of the confeſſion and rehearſall of our ſinnes, which is made to the Prieſt, which fayned deuiſe of theirs is not only contrary to the cuſtome of the Church, in the Apoſtles time (for ſuch kind of confeſſion was vnknowne to Iames and the other Apoſtles) but alſo it is playnly confuted by the words of Iames, who ſayth: Acknovvledge your faults one to an other. For if the interpretation of the Papiſts were good, then not onely the lay man ſhoulde confes his ſinnes to the prieſt, but alſo the prieſt ſhould confes his ſinnes to the lay man, which their prieſtly dignitie can in no caſe away with.
And pray one for another that ye may be healed.
Another briefe admonition concerning mutuall prayers.VVee muſt pray one for another, and why. For he biddeth vs pray one for another that we maye be healed, that is, that there maye be as fewe offences amongſt vs as may be. For I referre this to the health of

the mindes and affections, which being ſicke, many times offences doe as it were certaine little ſores burſt forth.
For the prayer of a righteous man auayleth much, if it be feruent.
A reaſon of that which went before, taken of the effect of godly prayer. And note that as he requireth one thing in him that prayeth: ſo he requireth an other in the prayer it ſelfe.VVhat the Apoſtle requireth in him that prayeth. In him that prayeth, he requireth righteouſnes: wherefore Paule alſo biddeth vs lift vp pure hands. This righteouſnes cōſiſteth in two things, to wit, that he which is about to praye, doth fully perſwade himſelfe that his ſin is forgiuen him, and that he caſt of all purpoſe of ſinning. For he that doth not this,VVhat is required in the prayer of the righteous. doth loſe his labour. In the prayer he requireth efficacie, that is, a ſingular feruentneſſe which proceedeth from fayth, whereby a man determineth that he is heard through the merit and interceſſion of the Lorde his mediatour.

                        17 Helias vvas a man vnderinfirmities euen as vve are, and he prayed earneſtlye that it might not rayne, and it rayned not on the earth by the ſpace of three yeares, and ſixe moneths.
                        18 And he prayed agayne, and the heauen gaue raine, and the earth brought forth her fruite.
                     
A confirmation of the laſt reaſon by an example:A reaſon confirming the prayer of the righteous to be effectuall.
                     
                        Helias prayed effectually.
                        Helias vvas righteous,
                        Therefore the prayer of the righteous is effectuall.
                     
In ſteade of the Maior or firſt propoſition of this argument the confirmation thereof is ſet downe, whereof reade 17. Chap. lib. 3 of Kings. But leaſt any man except and ſay that that was done becauſe of the ſingular holynes and merits of the man, he preuenteth them and ſayth that he was ſubiect to like paſſions as we are, inaſmuch as he was ſubiect to the ſame affections and infirmities of the corrupt nature, that we are.

                        
                        19 Brethren, if any of you hath erred from the truth, and ſome man hath conuerted him.
                        20 Let him knovv that he vvhich hath conuerted the ſinner from going aſtray out of his vvay, shall ſaue a ſoule from death, and shall hyde a multitude of ſinnes.
                     
Diligence in furthering the ſaluation of their brethren is commended to the godlye,VVe muſt as much as in vs is, call our brethren from errour both of doctrine and lyfe. that one call another from the errour of his way, that is, of doctrine and of life. Which he that doth, firſt ſaueth the ſoule of him that did erre: ſecondly, hideth a multitude of ſinnes, in as much as a ſinner being conuerted by his admonition is reconciled to God, and his ſins are couered with God and are throughly forgotten.Howe a man may ſaue the ſoule of a mā. But howe can a man ſaue the ſoule of a man from death? And how ſhall he hide a multitude of ſinnes? By the miniſterie, and not by his owne proper power. So Paule ſayth that he did beget the Galathians, and writing vnto Timothe he ſayth:1. Tim. 4.16. 
                     In doing this thou shalt both ſaue thy ſelfe and them that heare thee. Although it belongeth to God only to ſaue, yet he adioyneth vs vnto him as it were aſſociates, and aſcribeth vnto vs for the miniſteries ſake, that, which in very dede belongeth only vnto himſelfe. This ought to make ye dignity of ye miniſterie of the word more commendable vnto vs, when we heare that we in procuring the ſaluation of men, are workers togither with God, to whom he doth impart alſo diuine honour after a ſorte. Howe a man doth hide a multitude of ſinnes I haue nowe declared: he doth it not by power,Howe a man hideth a multitude of ſins. but by doctrine and pardon. By doctrine he cauſeth the ſinner to turne himſelfe vnto God, who onely clenſeth ſin: by pardon while he hideth the faults of his brother. Herevnto pertayneth that ſaying:1. Pet. 4.
                           •
                        . 
                     Loue couereth the multitude of ſinnes. The Papiſtes, which of this ſaying doe gather, that man by his loue doth merite remiſſion of ſinnes, are deceyued, as the ſetting of one contrarie agaynſt the other

                     
                        〈…〉
                      for there hatred 
                        〈…〉
                      agaynſt another, as contrarie cauſes 
                        〈…〉
                      
                     Hatred (ſayth he) stirreth vp strifes: 
                     
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     ereth the multitude of ſinnes. For as ha
                     
                        •
                      is the cauſe of contentions among men, ſo loue couereth faultes, eyther by reforming them, or by winking at them.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   