
      
         
            
            
               ❧ 
               THE COPIE OF THE Pblication of the trewſe made betwene the moſt Criſtien Kynge Henry ſecond of that name Themperour: and the Kyng of Ingland his ſonne publiſhed at roan on thurſday the xx. daye of Februarry.
            
            
               Tranſlated out of Frenche into ingliſhe.
            
            
               
                  
                     DIEV ET MON DROIT
                  
               
               To the readers.
               
                  Sythens thes warres ſo hearde and durats
                  Is now ceaſſed betwene princes and Kynges
                  Let vs praye to our lorde Immaculate
                  To graunte vs peace in eternall thinges.
                  That we may taſte of his bleſſed wel ſpringes
                  whiche is free for them that dothe it craue.
                  For he ſayeth aſke, and gratis ye ſhall haue.
               
               
                  IT is to be vnderſtande that all good ſewer: treue and loyal trewſe communicatiue and marchant eſtat: abſtinence of warre and ceſſation of armes is eſtabliſhed: accorded: agreed & paſte: betwen the moſt excellent and puiſſant Princes: the Kyng our ſoueraine Lord: the Emperour Charles the fyfte of that name: and Philip his ſonne Kyng of Englād their heris: ſucceſſours: Royalmes: countreis: landes and ſeigneuries what ſo euer they be: aſwel on this ſyde the mounteynes as be yonde: for the terme & ſpace of fyue yeres nexte enſuyng: to begynne on the fyfte daye of February: the which trewſe oure ſayde ſouereigne Kynge willeth and commandeth this to be inuiolatly obſerued and kepte: and that al contradictours and geyne ſayers to be chaſtiſed and examplairely punyſhed as infractors and brekers of the treuſe and peace: and alſo the ſubiectes on thone ſyde and of the other: to go: comme: ſeiourne traffique: by and ſell in all places aſwel from the Occident as Orient: by ſea: lande: and freſhe waters: ſaufly and franckly: payinge alwayes the dueties and ſubſydes dewe and accouſtomed: as in tyme of good and entier peace: with out cōtradiction or empechement.
                  
                     Made at Bloyes the xiii. daye of February in the yere of our Lorde.
M. D. L. V.
                     
                     Signed by
Henry
the Frenche Kynge.
                  
               
            
            
               PVbliſhed at Roan (folowinge the kynges letters and cōmandements) by the ordounance of that noble man Maiſtre Iacques Breuedent one of the Kynges coūcell and Lieutenant generall Ciuil at the Bailliage of Roan: by Maiſter william Fautrell Greffier to the ſayd Bailly: accompagned with the Cinquantaine of the ſayd towne: and with a greate nombre of Sergentes of the ſame all being on horſbacke: the ſaid publicatiō was made in al ſtretes of the ſame Towne and places accouſtumed to make ſemblable proclamations: and lykewyſe on all the Keyes and warfes of the ſame: wyth .xii. trompettes: and xii. drommes and phiffres. Alſo it was commanded that fyers of ioye ſhulde be made: whiche hath ben don wyth great ioye and gladnes of all the enhabitants of the ſame. On thurſdaye the .xx. day of Februarye. M. D. L. V.
               
               God ſaue the Kynge and Queene.
            
         
      
   