
      
         
            
            
            A boke of the propreties of Herbes called an herball, wherunto is added the time yt herbes, Floures and Sedes shold be gathered to be kept the whole yere, wyth the vertue of ye Herbes when they are stilled. Also a generall rule of all maner of Herbes drawen out of an auncyent booke of Phisyck by W.C. ☞
            
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶De virtutibus herbarum e
                  •
                primo de littera .A.
            
               ¶Agnus castus.
               
                  THys herbe Agnus castus that men do cal Tutsayne, and other wyse Parke leues, this hath leues somdel red lyke vnto the leues of Orage, and thys herbe hath senowes on hys leues as hath Plan
                  
                     •
                  ayne, and it hath yelowe flowers & bereth blacke beris & it groweth in dry wodes, yt vertu of this herbe is, it wyl kepe men & women chast For as Discolidion & Placens do say, this herbe is called Agnus castus for ye knowledge & the vse of thys herbe maketh men chast, and thys herbe wyll open the pores of man and let out wycked humou
                     •
                  s and sprytes of his body, this herbe

destroyeth the moysture of mānes fede. Also ye same auctor sayth that yf thys be sodē with Fenel, in Asel it is good to destroy ye dropsi. Also if this herbe be sodē with smalage, and Sage, in salt water, and afterwarde the hynder parte of a mannes hed be well wasshed 
                     •
                  herwyth it heleth it and vnbyndeth an euyl that is called Lytargy. Also thys herbe destroyeth the foule luste of Lechery and it be dronk
                     •
                  n, or yf it be borne a bout hym, therfore somtyme they do eat it rosted, bycause it shall kepe them chast, for yf this herbe be eaten rawe, it wil engēder head ache. Thys he
                     •
                  be is good to defie the hardnes and stoppyng of the Mylte. Also a playster of thys herbe is good to do awaye ache of a mannes heed, that is engendred of wycked humours. Thys herbe is hote & drye in the seconde degre.
            
            
               ☞Apium.
               
                  This herbe Apium, is a herbe that mē do cal Smalage, or stāmarche, the vertue of this herbe is this. It wyll make a man to pysse, & opyn the stoppinge of the lyuer, also the sede of the herbe hardneth a mannes wombes, and it draweth wycked humours of a mannes bodye vnto the head & to ye stomake and the wombe, and therfore it noyeth them that haue the fallinge euyl, & to women that be with chylde, for whan it draweth suche humours to the wombe and engendreth that be the cause of pestilence, and therfore it is cōmaunded of leches that women that be with chylde & they that kepe suckynge chyldrē shulde nat eat nor drinke of this herbe for dred of yt fallyng euyl, for it is hote and drye, & there be speces therof, y• ioye is good for colde playsters tempered with flower, and for scalding, this herbe is hote in ye .i. degre
            
            
               
               ¶Anetum.
               ☞This herbe Anetum that men do call Anete otherwyse Dyl, thys herbe hath leues lyke to Fenel but the sede is somdel brode as Orage sede is, the vertue of thys herbe is thus. It wil make a man pysse, also it swageth rumblinge in a mannes wombe, and wycked wyndes in the wombe, also it distroyeth the vexinge, the sede of this herbe brēt and layde vpon a woūde it heleth soone & namely yf a mā be scalded in hys membres or on hys yarde, strowe the powder therof & it shall hele, or what maner of euil that riseth in a mannes yarde it shalbe hole in the same maner, a playster made with the same pouder, & shepes talow and blacke sope, is good for ye Emaraude this herbe is hote and drye in the seconde degre.
            
            
               ¶Apiume risus.
               This herbe Apiume risus is called

Cerfoy or Che
                     •
                  uile, the vertue of thys herbe is and it be dronken wyth wyne it shall make a man to pysse well and it delyuereth a man of ache in the rayne & in the bladder, and it be dronken with wyne it letteth out and vnbyndeth the wicked wyndes and vnsloppethe the wombe and the lyuer of all maner wodnes. Thys herbe with holdeth castyng. Also a plaister made with this herbe tempered with Aisel destroyeth wylde fyre and heleth the Canker and al other woūdes, thys herbe is one of the Smalaches, & it is hote and dry.
            
            
               ¶Absynthium.
               ☞Thys herbe is called Wormewode. The vertue of this herbe is. It is good to comforte the her
                     •
                  e & clēseth the stomake. Balien sayeth that the herbe hath .ii. vertues one is laxatyue, and the other is cōstypulatyue. Therfore Galien sayeth

that if thys Herbe be geuen to an euyl, of the which the matter is not fully defyed, it shall harde the stomake, and let the d
                     •
                  gestion, and yf the matter be ryped, it shal make a man laxayue, and esily put away the matter, if this herbe be dronke with Spyconarde, it swageth the stomake and of the wombe that is engēdred of wycked wyndes. Also if this herbe be tēpered wyth hony it wyll ease the swellyng in a mannes mouthe. Also it doeth awaye the blacke myste in a mann
                     •
                  s eyes and clereth the syghte, and yf thys herbe be powned wyth the gal of a Bull and afterwarde putte into a mannes eyes, it putteth awaye all maner impedymētes of the syghte.
            
            
               Arthamesia.
               Thys herbe is called Mugworte, the vertue of thys herbe is this. If a mā bere this herbe about hym he shal not be wery of trauelynge

in hys way, also if thys herbe be powned wyth talowe, it healeth the sornes of a mānes fete and a kynge also. And if it be within a house, there shall no wycked spyryte abyde. Also if this herbe be stamped and tempered wyth runnynge water it healeth the akynge of a mannes guttes & many other euylles, thys herbe is hote and dry in the seconde degre.
            
            
               Affodylius.
               Thys herbe is called Affodyl, The vertue of this herbe is that ye leues ben good to hele the dropsy, and the leues of ye flowers begood to be dronken to hele venim of wicked bestes, also the ioyce of this herbe and Myrre, and Saffron tempered togyther in whyte wyne & a lytell boyled ouer the fyer & clensed thoroughe a clothe is good to hele rinnynge eyes, also the rote of this herbe brēt to powder, is good

to heale sore eares and restore thē agayne, also take an harde cloth yt is roughe and wete it in the ioyce of the herbe, and rubbe the morphewe therwith syttinge againste the soone and it shal do awaye the morphewe, thys herbe is hote and drye in the seconde degre.
            
            
               Aristologia longa.
               Thys herbe men do cal it Red mader, the vertue of thys herbe is thus. It wyll vnbynde the stoppyng of the lyuer & let passe wycked wyndes that be stopped wyth in mannes body, also if it be dronken with wine it clenseth and purgeth al men of al maner of venym that is in a mannes body. Also it clenseth and purgeth all maner of dyseases that be roted within and wythout in the vaynes, and in the teath, that ben rotten. Thys herbe is hote and drye, and it muste be gathered in herueste, there be two

speces therof.
            
            
               Aristologia rotunda.
               Thys herbe aristologia rotunda men do call it Galingale meke, the vertue of this herbe is thus as Apocras dothe saye, yf the sayde herbe be dronken wyth hote water then it is medicinable and curable for those men that bestoppped in the breast, and for the swellynge euyl, and for the Podagar, and for the Cramp
                     •
                  , thys herbe is hote & drye and it must be gathered in haruest and it is a spece of the reed Madder.
            
            
               ¶Abrotanum.
               This herbe abrotanum mē cal it Sothernewode. The vertue of this herbe is thus, yt yf they breake the sede and drynke it wyth water it healeth mē that haue ben bytten with any venemous beaste. Also thys herbe destroyeth wormes in a mannes wōbe, also pouder of this

herbe medled wyth barly mele vnbyndeth and breketh harde postumes, also thys herbe brente and the asshes medlyd wyth oyle, it restoreth there as man lacketh here, this herbe is hote and drye.
            
            
               ¶Ameos.
               ¶Thys herbe Ameos hath leues lyke vnto Eldren, but they be lesse and the sede is lyke persly sede, the vertu of thys herbe is thus, if it be tempered with honye it sle
                     •
                  th wormes that be in a mānes bodye, and it vnbindeth the greate stoppynge of windes, and it breketh the stone, and it chafeth a mannes stomake that is colde, it chafeth the lyuer & the raynes, and it heleth woundes and the bytynge of venemous bestes, this herbe is hote and drye.
            
            
               ¶Alleluya.
               Thys herbe Alleluya men cal it wodsore or s
                     •
                  ub worte, this herbe hath thre leues of the whiche two

be rounde a lytle departed aboue, and it hathe a whyte flower, but it hath no longe stalkes, & it is wynsore, and it is lyke .iii. leued grasse the vertue of this herbe is thus. If it be rosted in the asshes in, Reed docke leues, or in reed worte leues, it freteth awaye deade flesshe of A wounde, this herbe groweth muche in woodes.
            
            
               ¶Asterion.
               ☞Thys herbe Asterion groweth amonge stones and in hyghe places, this herbe sheweth by nyght, thys herbe hathe yelowe flowers hole and rounde as a Kockebel, or els lyke to Foxegloues, the leues of thys herbe be round, and blewe, & they haue the marke of the mone in the myddest, as it were .iii. leued grasse, but ye leues therof be more and they be rounde as a peny, and the stalke of this herbe is reed and this herbe semeth as it wer muske

and the ioyce therof is yelow. And thys herbe growethe in the newe moone without lefe and euery day spryngeth a new lefe to the ende of xv. days, and after .xv. dayes it loseth euery day a lefe as the moone waneth, and it spryngeth and waneth as doth the moone, and where y• it groweth there groweth greate quātyte. The vertue of thys herpe is thus, they that eate of the berys or of the herbe in wanynge of the moone whan he is in sygno virgines, yf he haue the fallyng euill he shalbe hole therof, or if he bere this herbe boute hys necke he shalbe holpen without doubt, and it hath many other good vertues.
            
            
               ¶Agrimonia.
                
                  ❧ This herbe Agrimonia mē cal it Egrymonye. The vertue of this herbe is thus, & it be eatē the herbe and the roote grene, it healeth the akynge of the wombe. Also yf the

herbe be dryed and poūned to pouder
                     •
                   & drōke with water it is good for the same euyll, also the sayde herbe tēpered with Aysell is good to hele a wounde that is hurt wyth yron, also this herbe vsed in metes is good to hele the akynge of sores in the mylte & it is good for Treytes.
            
            
               ☞Auencia.
               This auencia is called Auen, the vertue of this herbe is thus yf it be dryed and pouder made therof wyth wyte wyne warmed or els luke warme water & gyue it to thē that hath the feuers, & it shal helpe him much and ease him, also it heleth woundes & Cankers yf it be dronken.
            
            
               Altea.
               Thys herbe is called holy hocke or the wylde malowe, the vertue of thys herbe is thus, take and stampe it & frye it with shepes talowe

and make a plaister and laye it to a podagar mā, & it shal helpe hym within thre dayes by experymente al auctours do saye and affyrme that thys herbe soden wyth Uineger and Linsede. and a playster made therof & layde to the side of any person, it departed and helpeth wycked gatherynges that be engendred in a mannes body, thys herbe groweth in gardens & moist places.
            
            
               ¶Amarisca.
               ☞This herbe is colled Dogge fenel, or Maithē, this herbe is muche lyke to Camamyle for it hathe a white flower as Camamyle, but it stinketh, the vertue of this herbe is good to drynke the ioyce therof for to hele the Canker and the pypes of the Emeraudes, and there be .ii. speces therof, the one hathe a white flower, & the other hath a yelowe flower, & it groweth in corne.
            
            
               
               ¶Auticula muris.
               Thys herbe is called Mousere The vertue of this herbe is, yf it be dronken it helpeth the Quinsy, also the ioyce is good to hele al maner of woundes.
            
            
               ☞Apium Emoroidarum.
               This herbe is called crowfote thys herbe hath leues departed as it were Rāmes fete, thys herbe hathe a longe stalke in the myddes, & groweth in watery places, & hathe yelowe flowres.
            
            
               Apium ranarum.
               Thys herbe Apium ranarum that men call water crowfote, thys herbe hath yelow flowres as hath crowefote and of the same shape, but the leues are more departed, & it hath a longe stalke, and out of that one stalke groweth many stalkes small by the sydes, thys herbe groweth in watery places.
            
            
               Triplex domestica.
               
                  Thys herbe Atriplex domestica, men call it Orage, or medolious.
            
            
               Anabulla.
               Thys h
                     •
                  rbe Anabulla men call Spourge.
            
            
               Acus demonis.
               Thys herbe Acus demonis is an herbe that men call Poukenel.
            
            
               Argentilla.
               This herbe Argentilla that mē cal Argentyl, thys herbe hath litel leues somdele rounde, and wythin they be ragged, as it were ye leues of Eufra
                     •
                  y, and it growith moche amonge whete, and ther be .ii. speces therof, the more and the lesse.
            
            
               Acus mustela.
               Thys herbe Acus mustela is called Groundeswelye, it is good for playsters.
            
            
               Allium.
               Thys herbe Allium is called Garleke, the vertue of thys herbe is this. It wyl vnbinde all wicked

wyndes wythin a mannes bodye, and it helpeth a man to make water, but it noyeth a mannes eyes, bycause of the great byndyng and drynkynge, he that hath voluptuosly it drinketh and destroyeth the syght, and it destroyeth and heleth venim within aman. Also it heleth all colde sores as it were tryacle. Also it heleth the scabbes and morphewes or bladders in what maner place they be in a mānes body, so that it be well froted therwyth, thys herbe is hote and drye.
            
            
               Amsum.
               Thys herbe is called anise, the vertue of thys herbe is this, it vnbyndeth the stoppyng of the liuer, and of wicked wyndes, & of greate humoures and encloseth the milte, also it stereth a man to make water and to swete, also this herbe maketh a mannes wombe laxatyue if it be to harde and the sede must be

parched or rosted in al maner medecynes, that it wyll worke the rather, thys herbe is hote and drye.
            
         
         
            
               ❧ Hic incipit litiera .B.
            
               Et primo de Bethonia.
               
                  BEtyn men do call this herbe, ye vertue of thys 
                     •
                  erbe is thys, yf it be stamped and thā layd to a wounde in ye head that is smiten with a stroke it shal heale the wound fayre, and drawe out the brokē bones if ther be any as leches do say, also yf a mannes eyes do ake, take the water or the ioyce therof, & it shal amende 
                     •
                  hem greatlye. Take Betin and stampe hym and temper hym wyth water or with wyne warmed and drynke it .x. dayes and it shal destroye any webbe in the eyes of any persone. Also if your eies be waterye, eate euery daye a lyttell betayne, and it

shal do the much good, also if you haue akynge eares, take the ioyce therof & temper it with rose water, and warme it a lytle and droppe it in thy eares and stoppe them wyth wolle, and thou shalt be hole. Also yf thou do blede much at the nose, 
                     •
                  ake and stampe Betine with salte and stoppe thy nose ther wyth and it wyll staunche. And if thou haue sore tethe, wyth Uyneger or wyth Aysel let it sethe well 
                     •
                  yl it be more than halfe wasted, than as hote as yu mayst suffer it suppe therof, and holde it in thy mouth tyl it be cold, than spyte, it out and do thus ofte and thou shalt be hole. Also for the coughe take the ioyce or pouder of Betyne and medyl it with hony, & make therof a lectuary, and vse it. ix. dayes and thou shalte be hole. And if a man maye not holde hys meat within him take the same me decyne and gyue him .iii. sponeful

therof with a sponefull of water. Also yf a mannes yarde be swolen or that it be sore, take Beteyne and stampe it with white wyne tempered and it shalbe hole. Also if a mā be Podagat, take Betayne &, sethe it well in water and gyue to hym to drynke and wasshe hys fete ther with and lay the herbe aboute hys fete on a clothe, and it wyl amend hym much. Also take and eate Betayne or pouder therof. & you shal nat be dronken that daye, all these medicines haue ben proued of this herbe. It is hote and drye.
            
            
               Balsaminta.
               Thys herbe Balsaminta called horse mynte or water wyne or brokemynte, and also thys herbe doth growe in waterye places, the vertue of this herbe is to cōforte a mānes stomake and maketh a mā wel to defie hys meat. Also y• 
                  
                     •
                  oyce and clarifyed honye, & Reed wyne

boyled togyther, & it shal do away the cold fro a mānes stomake and wycked wyndes within hym, also the ioyce or els the powder of the herbe dronken wyth Redde wyne hote, maketh women that be wyth chylde soone and esely to be deliuered of theyr childrē, Thys herbe is hote and drye.
            
            
               Bl
                     •
                  ta.
               This herbe Bleta is called Be
                  
                     •
                  es, a
                     •
                  d there be .ii. speces therof as Diascorides sayeth, the one is whyte and the other blacke, ye vertue of this herbe is thys yf ye ioyce therof be put in the nosestrylles of a man it clenseth a mannes heade. Also it swageth the akynge of the eyes of euery person, it clenseth the heade from nyttes & frō other vermyne. Also it repayreth and amendeth a mannes heare of hys heade also this herbe destroieth botches & 
                     •
                  ils, also Diascorides sayeth, yf a

man vse ouer muche of thys herb y• it norysheth wycked humoures in a man for it is hote.
            
            
               Borago.
               Borago is a comon herbe, the ver
                     •
                  ue of it is thus. It wyll clense the reed colour of a man. Also this herbe is good to destroye the Cardyacle, and the postumes that be gathered of the blacke colour. Also the water dronke wyth wyne maketh a man glad and merye, thys herbe is hote and moyste.
            
            
               Bugla.
               Thys herbe Bugla is called Brounwort this herbe hath leues lyke a browne colour with a blew flower, and somwhat boistous, the v
                     •
                  rtue of this herbe is thus. It wyll heale woundes in a mannes head, and if thys herbe be dronken it heleth & streng
                     •
                  hn
                     •
                  th the bones that be broken in ye mannes heade thys herbe breketh and destroyeth

the rew
                     •
                  ne and the akynge of the hed, this herbe groweth in woodes muche and it is hote and drye.
            
            
               Burneta.
               This herbe Burneta is called burnet, the herbe hath blewe flowers as hathe Hayhoue, and smale ragged leues lyke Tan
                     •
                  ye leues, y• vertu of this herbe is thus. It wil destroye the greate humours and laxatyue within a man. Also it openeth the stoppynge within a mannes lyuer, & maketh a man to pysse wel. Also it maketh one to auoyde the yelowe euyl. Also a porcion of this herbe medled wyth honye and whyte wyne helpeth & vnbyndeth sore stytches of the rybbes & in the tetes, there be ii. speces therof the one groweth on hylles and ye other in medowes.
            
            
               Bursa pastoris.
               This herbe Bursa pastoris is called sheperdes pu
                     •
                  s, thys herbe

hath a smal stalke and ful of braū
                  ches and ragged leues & a whyte flower, the coddes therof be lyke a purse, the vertue of thys herbe is thus, drynke it wyth reed wyne, or with mylke and it wyll staunche ye blody menson, it is hote and drye.
            
            
               Borago siluestris.
               This herbe Borago siluestrys is lyke to comen borage, but the leues be somwhat smaller and it groweth in feldes and in wayes.
            
            
               Billire.
               This is called byller, The vertue therof is good to rype botches and it is hote and drye.
            
         
         
            
               Camomilla.
               Thys herbe is called Camomyl the vertue of thys herbe is thus yf it be dronke with wine it wyl breke the stone, and it destroyeth the yelowe euyll. It helpeth the akynge and the desease of the lyuer, yf it be

strayned it helpeth & swageth the sores in amānes mouth, it is good for akynge in a mannes head and for the megrym, thys herbe is hote and drye.
            
            
               Calamintum.
               Thys herbe is called Calamint the vertue of this herbe is thus, it destroyeth a mānes talent, as ypocras saieth, the be .iii. spyces therof, one that is stonye, another that is of the erth, and the .iii. of the water and all they be hote and dry, it that is wateri maketh a mā moist, it that is stony maketh a man hole yf ye drynke it, yf he haue dronke any venemous drynke, thys herbe made in a playster & lay it to a venemes wounde it draweth out venym soone. Also who so drinke the thys herbe .iii. dayes, it shall helpe hym of the yelowe euell. The other is erthly it is helpynge for lepery, the ioyce of thys herbe and

it be put into the eares of a man it wyll slee wormes in a mannes hed and comforteth the stomake, and helpeth to defy it, and it wythdraweth castynge.
            
            
               Crassula maior.
               This herbe is much like vnto Orpyn, the vertue of this herbe is thus, yf it be layde to a wounde by it selfe it shall hele it without anye other helpe.
            
            
               Crassula minor.
               Thys herbe is called stonchore or Stonecroppe, the leues of thys herbe be sūwhat lyke vnto Orpin and it groweth on houses and walles, the vertu of this herbe is thus it wyll make a man to cast.
            
            
               Cicuta.
               This herbe is called Hemlocke or herbe Benet, the vertue of thys herbe is thus, the ioyce of this herbe kepeht maydes tetes smal, also

thys herbe ofte dronke kepeth and destroyeth the great appetyte of lecherye. Also the ioyce tempered wyth Swynes grece, destroyethe the hote Podagre, and swage the the great swellynge, for it is colde and drye.
            
            
               Centaurea maior.
               Thys is named the more Centory or earth galle, his flowers be yelowe in the croppe, his vertue is yf it be sodden in good wine it wil hele the syckenes in the liuer, it draweth out wycked humours in the mylt, thys hath ben proued, and it be soden in water it is good to h
                     •
                  le a wounde, yf there be a canker & it be anoynted ther wyth it wyl make it hole, thys herbe is hote and drie.
            
            
               Centauria minor.
               Thys he
                     •
                  be is the lesse Centory, it hath .iii. braunches cōmynge out of a rounde more wyth a 
                     •
                  eed

                  
                     •
                  lower. His vertue is this, the pouder or ioyce therof is good, for bitinge of an adder or any venemus beaste yf it be droken with wyne and the ioyce is good to anoynte sores therwith yf ye haue any venym within you, powne it small & temper it wyth Aysell and drynke it and you shall cast out al the venym within you.
            
            
               Caruo.
               This herbe is called Caraway thys herbe hathe leues somewhat lyke to Fenell with a longe stalke, and a round sede more than persly sede. The vertue of this herbe is to destroye wycked wyndes and the coughe and it is good for the Frē
                  sye, and for bytynge of venemous beastes. Also thys herbe medled is good for scabbes, and Tetters. Also it restoreth heare there as it is fallen away, this herbe groweth in moyste places.
            
            
               
               
                  ❧ Celidonia.
               Thys herbe is called Celondy or Tetterwort, his vertue is as poliminus sayeth yf the byrdes of ye swalowe be blynde, the damme of the byrdes fetcheth of this herbe & healeth theyr eyes therwyth, it is good for ye cāker in a mans mouth it is good for the toth ache & to clē
                  se a mānes head, this herbe is hote and drye.
            
            
               Culamen.
               Thys is called Hertnote, Dylnote, Skycte or holy wort: he hath leues lyke Fenell with whyte flowers & a smale stalke it growethe in wodes and medowes, hys vertue is to eate awaye deade flesshe this he
                     •
                  b put to a sore that lacketh heare, it wyll restore the heare and heale the place.
            
            
               Colewortes.
               This herbe is good to clēse fresshe woūdes, the canker, to norysshe synowes, & to heal
                     •
                   sore eyes that

be almoste syghteles, it encreseth a womans mylcke the ioyce tēpered with Alume and Asell, it swageth the Leper, and it is good to kepe a man frō dronkenes it is hot & dry.
            
            
               Coliandrum.
               Thys herbe is called Colyandrum the vertue of thys herbe is thys, yf the ioyce therof be dronkē wyth hony it wyl slee wormes in a mannes body, and hardeth a mannes wombe, the sede is good to do awaye the Feuers that come thre dayes, thys herbe is hote and dry.
            
            
               Capillus veneris.
               Thys herbe is called mayden here or waterwort. This herbe hath leues lyke vnto ferne; but ye leues be smaller, & it groweth on walles & stones & in ye middes af ye lefe is as it were black here, ye vertue of this herbe is this it wyl br
                     •
                  ke ye stone, & it be drōkē with wine it dstroyeeth venym and it is colde and drye.
            
            
               
               Crocus.
               This herbe is called Saffron, the vertue of this herbe is thus, it wyl destroy all maner of abhomynacyons of mannes stomake, and wyll make a mā to slepe, it is good for many medecynes
                     •
                   and namely for cokes to colour their meat their with, it groweth in gardens, and it is hote and drye.
            
            
               Centinodium.
               Thys herbe is called Sparowe tonge, the vertue of thys herbe is to breke the stone, and it is hote and drye.
            
            
               Caprifolium.
               This herbe is called wodbynd and it hath a whyte flower, ye vertue of thys herbe is good to heale Cankered woundes, bladers, and akinge tethe and sores in the toos of a man
                     •
                   Also it is good for the swellynge in a mānes body that is venimed, thys herbe is hote & dry.
            
            
               
               Canabaria.
               This herbe is called wyld hēpe or holy roppe, it is lyke vnto hēpe his vertue is if a man haue the feuer frete well his pounce therwyth and he shalbe hole, and it groweth in watery places.
            
            
               Costus.
               Thys is named Cost or lesse Detyn, hys vertue is to heale the sicknes of the breste & of the longes & it wyll breke the postume.
               Also it draweth out euil humours of a mannes heade, it is good for a mannes stomake.
            
            
               Cepe.
               Is named an Onion, hys vertue is to cōfort a mannes stomake it purgeth somwhat the fleume it nessheth somwhat the wombe. Also and it be stamped and tempered with honye and Aseyll, it is good for the bytyng of a hoūde, Also the ioyce tēpered with womans milke

is good to hele the akynge of eres, Also the ioyce tempered with anye lycoure is good to drynke for any mā that hath lost hys speche. Also the ioyce put in ye nosethrylles breketh oute the wycked rewme and ye stoypyng of a mannes head.
            
            
               Columbina.
               Thys is named Columbyne, hys vertue is good for hym yt hath the quynsy. Thys herbe muste be gathered in August.
            
            
               Cominum.
               Thys is called Comyn, the leues therof be much lyke vnto Colyādre, it hath many braūches commyng out of one stalke, it is strōg of sauour, hys vertue is to destroy wycked wynde and other euilles, in a mannes stomake, it helpeth to make water, it is hote and drye.
            
            
               Cardiaca.
               Thys is named Cardyacle, it hath leues lyke to blynde nettels &

it hath lytell coddes with sede, hys vertue is good for the falling euil.
            
            
               ¶ Cisara.
               Thys is called a Frence peas, it hath leues and coddes like vnto other pees but y• leues be nat so gret nor so longe, and there be .ii. spyces therof.
            
            
               Camelon.
               ¶Thys is called a woluisshe thistell or a wylde thystell. He hathe whyte leues great & brode & a reed flower, it groweth by wayes, the vertue of this herb is yf thou take this herbe whan the sone is in Capricorne, and the moone be newe: while thou berest it aboute y• there shal no myschefe the befall.
            
            
               Cauda pulli.
               ☞Thys is named Coltes tayle, this herbe hath leues lyke to wyld comin, but they be nat stalked like
            
            
               Cabachis.
               ☞This is named Frēche wortes it is hote and drye.
            
            
               
               Caulus gallica.
               ☞Thys is named wylde Tansy
            
            
               Caulus agrestis.
               Thys is an herbe that men call Gland, or kouratum, the leues be lyke vnto plantine but they be nat so muche, it hath a white flower & groweth in waters.
            
            
               Cimbaria.
               Thys herbe men do cal it Peny worte, thys herbe hath rounde leues, if groweth on walles.
            
            
               Consolida maior.
               This is named Cōfery, it hathe leues lyke to Horshelme, but they be nat so white, there be two speces therof One wyth a whyte flower, the other with a reed, His vertue is yf a man be brosen or broken with in take the rotes of this herbe and toste them in the asshes and let the sycke eate therof fastynge .iii. and he shalbe hole. Also it helpeth to gather broken bones, it is hote and

moyste, and it bereth blacke sede.
            
            
               Consolida minor
               Thys is called daysy or Brousworte, hys vertue is yf it be stamped and layde to a botche, it shall hele it and breke it, for it is a spyce of the Confery.
            
            
               Consolida media.
               Thys herbe is called Methyn, thys herbe hath longe leues and a lytel endented and a white flower and the flower is somwhat lyke to the Daysy.
            
         
         
            ¶Hic incipit lettera D.
            
               Et primo de Dragantia.
               
                  DRagaunce or Serpentine this herbe is called. The vertue of this herbe is this if it be stamped and dronckē wyth wyne, it dothe awaye all maner of venym. Also it doth awaye the akynge of eres yf they be anoynted therwith. Also the pouder therof blowen in a mannes nose, shall clē
                  se

a man of the Rewme, and it is good to destroye the coughe, and to destroye the canker and the fretyng of wycked windes this herbe is hote and moyste it muste be gathered in Iune and Iuly.
            
            
               Diptanum.
               Thys is called Detander or detayne. The vertue of thys herbe is thus, yf it be dronken it wyll delyuer a woman of a dead chyld Also thys herbe wyll draw out a thorne or an yron out of a mans body, it is hote and drye.
            
            
               Dancus asinius.
               This is called Danke, his vertue is to heale the dropsy, & bytyng of venemous beastes. Also it openeth the stoppyng of the lyuer and of the mylte. Also it vnbyndeth the wombe and maketh it laxatiue it is hote and drye.
            
            
               Dens leonis.
               Thys herbe is called Dandelyon,

the vertue of thys herbe is, the More is good for the feuer quotidian.
            
            
               Dens canis
               Thys is named houndest othe it hath leues like to dandelion but they be lesse and the braunches be nat lyke and they droppe mylke.
            
            
               Daucus creticus.
               Thys herbe hath leues lyke to wylde popy, but the leues be more whyte, it hathe a flower of purple coloure and it growethe in wheate thys herbe is hote and drye.
            
            
               Dragancia.
               
                  ❧ This is named Drag
                     ••••
                  e femell, it hath leaues lyke to Re
                     ••
                  , but it hath whyte spectes it hath an euen stalke the length of .ii. cabites, and it berethe 
                     〈◊〉
                   as it 
                     ••
                  re a cluster of Grapes, and they be yelowe it growethe in moyst places, the vertue is yf it be stamped, and medled wyth Oyle and

                  
                     •
                  ut into the eyes of a man it shall do awaye the akynge therof. Also the more therof and the more of the whyte Onion stamped therewyth and tempered with honi, it healeth all woūdes that the Canker hathe be rysen in. Also who froteth hys hādes with y• more, yf it be ī May without doute he may take adders they shall nat venim him. Also the ioyce destroyeth y• darkenes about a mannes eyes, yf they be anoynted therwith. Also yf the ioyce be dronken with wine it destroieth lechery, and it is moyst and colde.
            
         
         
            ¶Hi
                  •
                
               
                  •
               ncipit littera .E.
            
               Et primo de Enulacampana.
               
                  ENulacāpana is called 
                     •
                  orshelme, the vertue 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  his herbe is thys yf a man haue wagginge teth and he eate of thys herbe, they shall fasten agayne, it helpeth a man to make water yf it be dronken

it deliuereth a womā of a dead chylde, it is good for the chough it hardeth a mās wōbe it is hote and moyst.
            
            
               Endiuia.
               Thys herbe is called endiue or southystle, hys vertue is yf ye ioyce therof be medled wyth hote water & dronken it helpeth the stoppynge of the mylte and of the lyuer. It is good to heale the 
                     •
                  elowe euyll and y• feuer tercian. It is good for hole postumes and for to swage greate hetes of the lyuer & of the stomake and it is colde and moyste.
            
            
               ¶ Eru
                     •
                  a.
               ¶Thys herbe is named Skyrwyte, This herbe hathe leues lyke to Byllerin but they be not so lōge & it hath a greatter more, hys vertue is the leues be good to heale a mannes mouthe, yf it be holden longe therin. Also the ioyce of thys herbe sodden & afterwarde drōken

it destroyeth the blacke colour. Also this herbe oft vsed styrreth a man to lechery and to make water, Also the more stamped and medled with oyle and hony clenseth aman
                  
                     •
                  es chynne yf it be anoynted therwith. Also the ioyce therof dronkē delyuereth men and women of the coughe, for it is hote and drye.
            
            
               Eufrasia.
               Thys herbe is called Eufrasy
                     •
                   it is good for eyes and hath a lyttell ragged lefe.
            
            
               Ehullus.
               This herbe is called walwort, it hath leaues lyke to Elder leaues it hath a longe stalke, the vertue of thys herbe is good to destroye the dropsy, scabbes and 
                     •
                  etters and it draweth 
                     •
                  waye wicked humours out of a man, thys herbe is hote and drye.
            
            
               Edera.
               
                  Thys herbe is called Iuy, thys herb is lyke to brayn, y• vertue ther of is. If it be sodden in wine, tyl it be thycke, & then lay it al hote to a bot
                     •
                  h and it shal breke it. Also if y• haue ōny aking in the head take ye ioyce therof & oyle of roses & white wyne & medle it together & anoynt thyhead therwith and thou shalbe hole therof.
            
            
               Edera terrestris.
               Thys is an earth Iuy, it hathe leues lyke to Catmynt but they be not so muche, and hath a reddy flower, ye vertue of thys is yf it be soden in Swynes grece, it is a good oyntment for al maner aches.
            
            
               Enforbium.
               Thys is called 
                     •
                  lary, this her be hath leues like to Sauge but y• leues be broder & 
                     •
                  ounder, his vertue is if he be put in potage it wyll make the fleshe tender.
            
            
               Elleboras albus.
               Thys Pellyter of spayne, or

lunge worte. Thys herbe hathe leues much like to pedelion, but thei be not so much slyt without and it hathe a flower as it were a Parsneb, hys vertue is if he be put into the nosethrylles of a man, it wyll make hym to nese. Also it healethe scabbe, the morphewe, and tetters. Also it purgethe a man of wycked coloures of the flewme, and of the Emerodes yf he be layd to ye place that is deseased. Also for the tothe ache it is good yf it be sodden in A sell and kepe it as hote as he maye suffer in hys mouthe and it good to purge a mannes stomake and wombe. Also the powder therof putte in grewell shal slee wormes and the ioyce medled wyth mylke sleeth flyes, it is hote and drye.
            
            
               ¶Elleborus niger.
               ¶Thys is called Pedelyon hys leues be muche lyke to lunge wort but they be not so white, & it hathe

a brode flower & a blacke rote, hys vertue is if it be made in pouder it wyl destroye and slee rattes & thys herbe is hote and drye.
            
            
               ☞Epatica.
               ¶ This herb is called lyuerwort, hys vertue is to destroye & clense ye hardnes of ye lyuer. Also if it be medled wt fresh grece it wyl hele woū
                  des and it is good to hele the feuer quartayne.
            
            
               Erpina
               Thys herbe is named Foxgloues.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Ebulus minor.
               ☞This is the lesse Walwort. It is somwhat lyke to Walwort and the leues be a lytell redde.
            
         
         
            ¶Hic incipit li
                  •
               tera .F.
            
               Et primo de Flāmula.
               
                  FLammula is called Sperewort or Launcell it is muche lyke to a spere and in the crop of the stalke commeth many fayre & smal braunches and

it hath a white flower and it groweth in waters, his vertu is yf a mā haue the feuers and the poūces of him anoynted therwyth he shalbe hole, & it is good to breake botches and byles and it is hote and drye.
            
            
               ☞Fumus terre.
               
                  ❧ Thys herbe is called Fumitory or erth Gall, hys vertue is to cō
                  forte a manes stomake. Also it gyueth a man appetyte to meate and it helpeth a man to make water, & it openeth the lyuer, and it clerethe a mānes blode. Also yf any drinke therof with whei, it destroieth scabbes, ytches, bladders, and wycked humours, it is hote and drye,
            
            
               Fumicretum.
               ¶Thys is called Fumicrete, this herbe hathe is a longe stalke, and it hath leues lyke to thre leued gras and it hath 
                     •
                  oddes, hys vertue is yf it soddē in water it maketh a man laxat
                     •
                  ue without anye perell

and is hote and drye.
            
            
               Fragra.
               Thys is called Strauberye, the vertue of this herb is good for blered mē. Also it is good to destroye the webbe in a mannes eyes. Also the ioyce of it medled wyth hony & dronken heleth the mylte.
            
            
               Fabaria maior.
               Thys herbe is called Brock
                     •
                  
                  lēpe, thys herbe hath leues lyke vnto Bēstede, & it groweth in waters
            
            
               Fabaria minor.
               Thys is the lesse Brockelempe it hath leaues in maner longe and somewhat rounde lyke to myntes This is good to lay to a place that is brosed or to be wellynge yf it be fryed with shepes talowe.
            
            
               Filix.
               Thys herbe is named Ferne, of his be .iii. speces. The fyrste is Pompody the secōde is Osmunde and it groweth in dyches and woddes,

and it hathe a greate more, as pynapples, it is good to heale broken bones. The thyrd is Euferne, and it groweth in walles, & Polpody groweth in Okes, it is good to make a man laxatyue. This ferne groweth in woodes, it is good to heale the Podager. And it maketh synowes stronge.
            
            
               Filipendula.
               This herbe is called dropwor
                     •
                   the vertue of it wyll destroye the wycked wyndes aboute a mannes lyuer and hys mylte and it is good to destroye the stone, it is hote and drye.
            
            
               Feniculum.
               Thys herbe is called Fenel or Fenkel, the vertue of thys herbe is this, yf the sede be dryed it is good and comforteth the stomake it openeth the stoppynge of the raynes of the blader. Also ye ioyce is good to do awaye the webbe of the eyes

of a manne, and it be dronken with wyne, and water, it is good to do a way all maner of venym. Also the ioyce dropped in the eres of a man, it wyl slee wormes in a man. And also if it be dronken with wyne yt wyll breake the dropsye and al maner swellyng, and kepeth hym frō castynge, and if it be dronken with wyne and water, it maketh a womans mylke to encrease. Also if yt be medled wyth oyle it ys good to hele a mannes yarde that is swollen. And this herbe is hote & drye.
            
            
               Faxinus.
               Thys herbe is named Hertwod, hys vertue is if he be powned and layde to a sore, it wyll heale it.
            
            
               Feniculus poeticus.
               Thys is called wormesede. It is good to destroy wormes in a mā
                  nes body, this herbe is hote & dry.
            
            
               Febrifuga.
               Thys named Fetherfoye, hys

vertue is to comfort a mannes stomake it is good to aswage ye axes cotidian, the cramp, and to temper it that commeth of colde stomakes Also it is good to lay to a sore that is bitten wyth venemous bests I
                     •
                   wyl hele it shortely and it be layde therto. Also if it be tempered wyth Aysell it wyll do a waye the Morphewe. Also if it be stamped and layd to a wounde in the whiche be broken bones, it shal bring the broken bones togyther and heale thē & the rote therof is good to stoppe the blody mension. And this herbe is hote and drye.
            
            
               Filago.
               Thys herbe is called Feldwort or Hore worte it is a lytell herbe, & it groweth in whete.
            
            
               Flamenula.
               Thys is called the lesse Sper
                     •
                  
                  worte, this herbe hath smal leaues lyke gras, but it is sharpe lyke a

spere and it groweth in feldes, hys vertue is yt a head be cutte it wyll heale it anone.
            
         
         
            Hic incipit littera .G.
            
               et primo de gratia dei maior.
               
                  GRatia dei maior, this herbe is called the more Gratia dei.
            
            
               Granum.
               This is Gromel or Lyche wale the vertue therof is good for the stone, and for al euilles in the bladder. Thys herbe is hote and drye.
            
            
               Genestula.
               This herbe men do call it Genestre or brome it hathe leues lyke to Spyngeruell, and it hath a yelowe flower his vertue is to knyte bones and synowes to gyther.
            
            
               Gencianus.
               Thys herbe that mē do cal Felworte or Balmoyne, hys vertue is yf it be dronken with water and

and hony it helpeth the swellynge in a mannes body, in hys stomake & it is god for venemous beastes, & it delyuereth a woman of a dead chylde, it is hote and drye.
            
            
               Galanga.
               Thys is named Galingale, the vertue of thys herbe is thus, it cō
                  forteth the stomake & maketh hym well to degeste hys meate, and vnbyndeth and letteth oute wycked wyndes of a mannes body.
            
            
               Granum solis agrestis.
               Thys is called wyld Gromel, it is somewhat lyke to other Gromell, but ye sede therof is somwhat graye it groweth in dyches, & it is good for the stone.
            
            
               Gladiolus.
               Thys herbe is called Gladon, the vertue of it is good to make a man to cast.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ Hic incipit littera .H.
            
               Et primo de herba cruciata.
               
                  HErba Cruciata is a herbe y• men cal Crō
                  worte this herbe hath litle leues and asmal stalke wyth white flowers, and it is like to a crosse, thys is good to heale woundes.
            
            
               Herba cristofori masculi.
               Thys is called Cristofer, the male it hath leues like to the Crousope, but they be more whyt and nat fully so longe, it hathe yelowe flowers, hys vertue is to heale the Epylence and the frensy.
            
            
               Herba Cristofori femini.
               Thys is named Cristofer female it hath leues lyke to herbe Peter, but they be nat in all so whyte and it growethe muche by the waters syde it hath a longe stalke.
            
            
               Herba walteri.
               Thys is herbe walter, it hathe

leues lyke to Persly and the leues be sūwhat chycke fatte and thēder.
            
            
               Herba Rob
                     •
                  rti.
               Thys is named herbe Robert, it hathe leues lyke to herbe Benet and it hath small flowers lyke to purple coloure, and it hath a strōg sauour, hys vertue is to hele woū
                  des, ye pouder of it wyl slee cākers.
            
            
               Herba Martis.
               Thys is called Mortagon. It hathe leues like to the capitall letter .M. and some braūches hath, ix leues and some .x. and some more.
            
            
               Hastucaregia.
               Thys is named Wooderoso yf the more therof be stamped & dronken wyth wyne, it wyl heale a sore in the mouth. Also ye sede stamped and dronken wyth stronge Aysell wyll staunche the Flyx and make the wombe harde.
            
            
               Herbe Petri.
               
                  ❧ Thys is named the Couslope
            
            
               
               Herba Iohannis.
               This is called saint Iohānes worte the vertue of it is thus, yf it be put in a mānes house, ther shall come no wycked spirite therin.
            
         
         
            Hic incipit littera .I.
            
               Et primo de Iusqbiamus.
               
                  IUquiamus is called Henbane, his vertu is good for ye gout, & nam
                     •
                  lye those yt come of melācoli. Also the sede therof and the sede of Humlocke medled to gyther & a candell made therof, or brent vpon a tyle stoone, and let the smoke go vp īto a mannes mouth in especial amonge the teth, and it wyll slee wormes. Also the rotes be good for the toth ache, Also the ioyce therof is good for al woundes. Also it swagethe the coughe and the hote postume, and the hote Podager. Also the sede of

thys herbe shulde be gathered in ye moneth of August. Thys herbe is colde and drye.
            
            
               Isopus.
               Thys herbe is called Isope, his vertue is if a manne take the ioyce therof, and put it in hys mouth, it will heale all maner of euils in the mouth. Also it sleeth wormes in a mannes wombe & maketh it nessh Also if it be drōken grene or ī pouder it maketh a man wel coloured it is hote and drye.
            
            
               Ireos.
               This herbe is called Saue, it hath leues much lyke vnto the flowerdelyce, and it hath a whyte flower, it growethe in water, the vertue of it is good to heale the aking of synowes. Also if it be dronken wyth wyne or ale, it wyll destroye wicked humours in a mānes brest and the coughe. Also it destroyeth

the crampe, it healeth the bytynge of venemous beastes. Also if a woman haue a dead childe within her it wyll delyuer her wythout peryl, it is hote and drye.
            
            
               ☞Iris.
               Thys herbe is called Flower-delyce, thys is lyke to an herb that is called Saue, almost in al fetures, but the flower is more ynde blewe, thys herbe groweth in water and gardyns. It is of the same vertue that Saue is of.
            
            
               Iarus.
               Thys herbe is named Cockopyntell thys herbe hath leues lyke Mercury, & a flower lyke to Dragaunte, and it is bytter and pryckynge vpon the tonge, hys vertue is yf a mā haue any swellyng vpō the tonge or any swellynge aboute hys eres, take the herbe and sethe it wyth Tuberosetatibus in wine and oyle and wyth comyn & make

a playster therof and laye it to hys 
                     •
                  ares & it will make him hole. Also take the knobbes of the rote, and drye them and clense thē, and they haue vertue to make a man laxatiue yf it be constypulatyue. Also yf thou wyll make thy face whyte & clere take the powder of the rotes and laye it in rose water, and set it agaynste the sonne, tyll it be consumed, do so twise or thrise, than rub thy face wyth the powder or what other place thou wylte, to frete awaye the super
                     •
                  luite of the flesshe Thys herbe is hote and drye.
            
            
               Iasia nigra.
               Thys is called Madefelon or bulwede or knapwede.
            
            
               Iasia alba.
               Thys is called Golegras or wyld 
                     •
                  ansy, it is good for clensing of a mans lymmes.
            
            
               Ipia maior.
               Thys is named Pympernel, it

hath leues like to Cheken meate i
                     •
                   is good to heale woundes and to destroye venym and to hele a man of the postume & to heale sore eyes
            
            
               Ipia minor.
               This herb is called Chekē meat.
            
            
               ¶ Ia
                     •
                  metus rusticus.
               ¶ Thys herbe is called Blewche tyme or andode or Ka
                     •
                  bowe.
            
         
         
            Hic incipit littera .L.
            
               Et primo de herba Lanisticum.
               
                  LOuage thys herbe is called, his vertu is muche in the sede the more therof is good to bedrō
                  ken wt wyne to heale a manes stomake, & for other cuylles wythin a man, and for to make good deg
                     •
                  sstyon, it is hate and drye.
            
            
               Lingua ceruina.
               This is called Hertis tonge, ye vertue of it is good to ripe a postume

& breke it yf it be sodē wyth oyle of Roses and a playster made therof and yf it be dronken wyth wine or ale, it wyll harden a mannes wombe and it is hote and drye.
            
            
               Lilium.
               Thys is called the Lylie, ye vertue of thys is yf it be stāped wyth talowe & oyle and a playster made therof and layde to a place there as the postume is, it shall rype it & make it to breke. Also take a great quantyte of the rotes and the sede of the Docke, & the more of Louache and putte al these in wine, and oyle, the space of .ix. dayes and afterwarde sethe it and clense it, and do therto wexe and make therof an oyntment, and that is good to hele the sore & the hardnes of the mylte. Also ye ioyce therof is good to hele the venym of adders. Also laye the ioyce therof to a wounde that is

bytten and it wyll hele it, also take the rotes and roste them and temper them with oyle of Olyue, and laye it to a place that is brent, and it wyll heale it. Also this herbe is good for many other thynges and deseases yf it be dronken wyth ale, wyne or water. Also it healeth and comforteth muche a mannes sinowes. The vertue of thys herbe is in the Mores, and thys herbe is hote and drye.
            
            
               Ligustum.
               Thys herbe is called Primrose, thys herbe is good to potage. Also the ioyce putte in a mannes nose it wyll destroye Megrym.
            
            
               Lingua bouis.
               
                  ❧ This is called langdebefe the vertue of thys herbe is good to do away ye redde colour of a mā. Also yf it be dronken it dothe away the Cardyacle and other wycked humoures in a mannes longes. Also

the ioyce of this herb drōken wyth hote water, maketh a man to haue a good minde and good witte, this must be gathered in Iune or Iuly, it is hote and drye.
            
            
               Lingua serpentis maior.
               Thys is calley Adders tonge, this herbe hath leues lyke to Affodyl, but they be more grene, and also more sharpe in the ende, thys must be gathered in Apryll.
            
            
               Lengua serpentes minor.
               Thys is called the lesse Addertong, thys herbe hathe leues somewhat lyke to Pygyll, and it hathe a yelowe flower and out of the stalke cōmeth many branuches and it groweth in wodes.
            
            
               Lingua canis
               This is is called hundestonge, it is good to destroye the couge & the possume, & it wyl type a boche
            
            
               Lingua hiccina.
               This is called Buck
                     •
                  shorn of

Swyneskerce thys herbe hath leues faltred as it were an Hertes horne, and growethe crepynge by the grounde, and it hathe a lyttell whyte flower, it groweth in watery places.
            
            
               Lupinus.
               Thys is called Lupyne, thys herbe hath leues like to fyue leued gras, the Lupine hathe .vi
                     •
                   leaues and it hathe a whyte flower, and a whyte seede that is somwhat lyke and it bereth coddes somwhat like vnto Bene coddes, the vertue of thys herbe is thus, yf a man haue wormes in hys wombe, take the sed
                     •
                   and make mele therof and the ioyce of wormewod and hony and make a cake therof and eate it and it vnbyndethe the stopynge of the liuer & of the mylt. Also it is good to destroy ye dropsye. Also take the same mele & the ioyce of Arsmerte and make therof past and lay it to

thy eares and it shall kyl the wormes within them, or if thou make a cake & hete it, it wyll do the same Also if thou wyll take the ioyce of Lekes and temper it with the mele and put it in thy eres, it shal clense them fro al wycked humours and stynkyng. Also take the same mele and temper it with oyle and it wyll breke and rype al maner of postumes, thys herbe is hote and drye.
            
            
               Labrum veneris.
               Thys is called Southystel, the vertue of thys herbe is thys, yf a man haue a hote feuer, take the ioyce therof & temper it wyth hote water and let hym drinke it and he shalbe hole. Also if a man haue venym within him, take thys herbe and drye it and make pouder therof and do the pouder in good wine and let slym drynke it and it wyll cast vp all the venym, it is hote & drye.
            
            
               
               Lauendula.
               Thys is called Lauēder, yf this be soden in water gyue that water to a man that hath the palsy and it wyll hele hym, it is hote and drye.
            
            
               Lactuca.
               Thys herbe is called Lettyse or stope worte, the vertue of thys herbe is thus. If it be eaten rawe, or soden it engendreth good blod. Also thys herbe soden with a lyttl A
                     •
                  sell and Saffron and than drō
                  ken, it helpeth a man that is stopped in the lyuer and in the myl
                     •
                  e. Also yf a man may nat slepe, take the sede of thys herbe and stampe it to powder and temper it wt womans mylke and make a playster therof on lynte, and laye it to ye temples of thy heade, and thou shalte slepe well, or els drynke the pouder therof with mylke.
               Also take the sede & temper it with oyle of Roses, and make a plaster

and lay it to the stomake, and it is good to destroye the hote postume Also drinke the ioyce of thys herb or pouder of the sede for it is good to hele the Flixe. But who yt vseth thys herbe ouermuche, it wyll destroy theyr syght, this herb is colde and sumwhat moyste.
            
            
               Lactuca siluatica.
               Thys is call
                     •
                  d wylde Lettyse, thys herbe hath leaues lyke to the thysbell, and they be sharpe & kene and it hath a flower of purple colour
                     •
                   and it groweth in Feldes and in whe
                     •
                  e, Thys herbe is hote and drye.
            
            
               Lactuca leporina.
               This herb is called Harchys
                     •
                  ell this herb hath leu
                     •
                  s lyke to Sowthystell, but ye leues be nat so endered, it droppeth mylke, the vertu of this herbe is thus, yf a hare eate of thys herbe in Somer whan he is mad he shalbe hole also take thys

herbe and ley it to a mannes syde whan he slepeth or els yt he knowe nat therof, and it wyll hele hym of the feuers.
            
            
               ¶Lollium.
               This herbe is called Cockle this herbe hath vertue yf it be dronken wyth Raddysshe and a lytell salte, it is good to hel
                     •
                   the Canker or other woundes in peryll. Also it is good to comforte the stomake and the lyuer. Also it wyl vnbinde wormes in a mannes stomake. Also it helpeth a man to make water, and it is good for sore eyes. Also subtumigacion therof wyl make a woman to bere her chylde withoute any peryll or harme. Also it wyl asswage the great paynes of akynge of the lyuer it is hote and drye.
            
            
               Lapacium rubeum.
               This is called the reed Docke, if ye a man take the ioyce therof & hold

it in hys mouth, it wyl aswage the toth ache. Also yf a man haue the kynges euyl, take this herbe & seth it in wyne and strayne it and giue hym to drynke and he shalbe hole yf he vse it ofte. Also yf a man rub hym wyth the ioyce, it doth awaye euyll ytchynges. Also thys herbe is good to delyuer wyndes that be stopped in a mannes stomake balkyng. Also thys herbe is good to make scabbes and botches ripe. Also it is good to make a mā to haue a harde wombe, it is hote and dry.
            
            
               ¶Linum.
               This is called Flex, it is good yf a man take the sede therof & seth it in water, it maketh a man laxatiue, and it is good to make a playster therof for akynge sores. Also ther is another spece therof that is called Custula, it is named in Englyshe dodure, and it groweth amonge Flexe, the vertue of this is

good to purge a man of the colour Also yf it be takē and a great quā
                  tyte therof sodden in Myrre and oyle togyther, and a playster made therof, it is good for the raynes & for the brest, and for other akynge lymmes.
            
            
               Lauriola.
               Thys is called Lawrell, it wyl make a man laxatyue & it is good to purge a man of flewme and of the colour, it is good for a mā that may not eate, for if the ioyce therof be put in hys eres, or if ye sayd herbe be stamped and a suppositorye be made therof and layd on cotten it wyl hele, it is hote and drye.
            
            
               Liquiritia.
               ¶Thys is named Lycoryse, the 
                     •
                  oote of thys herbe is swete and it moysteth y• kyndely hete of a man and it is good for the coughe. Also yf it be sodden in water, it wyll destroy a mannes thurste. Also it maketh

a mannes breste, hys throte & hys longes, moyst and in good tē
                  per. Thys is colde and moyst.
            
            
               ☞Lappa.
               Thys is called Clote, or Burres
            
            
               Lappa ameria.
                
                  ❧ Thys is called a clote.
            
         
         
            ¶:De littera .M.
            
               et primo de Millefolio minore,
               Mylfoyle ye lesse this herbe is called. There is no dyfference of kynde nor vertu betwene milfoly the lesse, and mylfoly the more, saue the more groweth in gardens, & the lesse in wylde place they be both of one strength hys vertue shalbe declared in Milfoyle the more folowyng by letter.
            
            
               Mercurialis.
               ☞Thys is called Mercurye, hys vertue is good if a mā haue akīge in hys wombe, gyue him to drinke

the ioyce and he shalbe hole, it wyl clēse the stomake and the sede wyll do the same. Also the ioyce tempered with whyte wyne is good to heale sore eyes, and yf a worme or other venym haue bytten a man. take the ioyce and warme it, and wasshe it. Also yf there be any wormes c
                     •
                  open into a mannes ea
                     •
                  es, take ye ioyce and warme it and put it into hys eres and he shalbe hole Thys herbe is hote and drye.
            
            
               Menta.
               ☞Thys herbe is called Minte, hys vertue is yf it be ofte eaten, it will slee wormes in a mānes wōbe Also if a mā haue botches or other rennynges or swellynge in hys heade, take thys herbe and stampe it and lay it to the sore and it wyll hele it. Also yf a mānes tothe or the flesshe of ye tothe ake or stinke, take thys herbe & sethe it in white wyne and in Aylell, and take ye lycoure &

wasshe his mouthe therwith, than take the pouder of the herbe and tube well hys tethe therwyth, & he shall haue a swete smelling mouth Also take thou thys herbe & Aisell and make sauce, and it wyll make the to haue a talēt to thy mete, also whē there shalbe gyuen any medecyne to destroye venym, it wyll be good to be gyuen with the ioyce of thys herbe, for it hath many vertues and namely for venī, there be manye spyces therof and it is hote and drye.
            
            
               Menta romana.
               Thys is named white Mynt, the vertue therof is the ioyce, it wyl slee wormes in a mannes wombe. Also the ioyce wyll slee wormes in the nosethrylles of a man. Also the pouder therof caste in a mannes meate, it shal make hym wel to defye hys meate.
            
            
               Malua.
               
                  Thys herbe is called Malow the vertue of it is good yf the leaues be stamped and layd to a mannes stomake it wyll breake a hote postume in the begynnynge, or els medle thy herbe wyth fre
                     •
                  she swynes grece and laye it on a hote tyle and lay it al hote to the postume & it shal rype it and breake it. Also it is good to destroye the hardenes of a mannes liuer and mylte. Also it wyll make a man laxatyue, and it is good for playsters, it is colde and moyste.
            
            
               ¶Morell or nyght shadowe.
               ¶ Thys herbe is colde & dry in ye ii. degre, the leues, the braūches & the frute therof be ryght good and beste whan they be grene, they be good for stoppinge of the Splene and the lyuer, & beste for the Iandesse to drynke the ioyce of it wyth a lytell Ruberbe. Also for a postume in the stomake, in the bowelles

or in the lyuer seth the ioyce therof with barly water and drynke it.
            
            
               ¶Mastyke.
               ☞Thys gūm is hote & dry, in the secōde degre It is a gūme of a tree growinge in a parte of the countre of Grece in the latter ende of Uere the men of that countre slit the trees and than make the grouude clene aboute and lay clothes rounde aboute the trees, or some other conninge to kepe the gumme from the grounde in closynge of it, to know whiche is beste to take, the beste is whyte and clere, the whyt coloure is nexte the best & yt is medled with erth & sūwhat da
                     •
                  ke, y• beste mastyke he hath vertue of cōstraynīg, cō
                  fortīg clēsīg & losing of humours descendynde fro the head aboue to the eyes and to the tethe, and for the deseses of the temples made of and ascendynge wynde fro the stomake

to the head. Take pouder of Mastike, wyth whyte swete wyne and the whyte of an egge & medle them wel togyther and ye wyll ye may put in frankensence and playster it to the themples. Also sethe Mastike in water and drinke it & it wyll comforte well the stomake, and make good dygestyon, and it comforteth and relaxeth ye stomake and put to it Fenel sede, and it putteth out wynde out of the stomake Also a playster made of Mastyke and Bole Armoniake & the whyte of an egge and vyneger and lay it on the forke of the stomake or brest it wyll cōstrayne well the coloryke vanite. Also seth Mastike in rayn water and drynke it wt warme water and thys medecyne is good for the Flux of ye wombe that cōmeth of a sharpe laxe that was taken before to stoppe hym. And boyle Mastyke in rayne water, or Rosewater

with two or thre cloues and drynke it warme and that comforteth the vomyte and ye Flux of the wombe that cōmeth of sharpenes and violence of the medecine. Also Mastike must haue but lytel boylynge for hurtyng of his vertue & it shulde be gyuen warme, for it cō
                  strayneth more whan that it is giuen warme, Than whan it is ouer much hote.
            
            
               Magerum.
               This herbe is hote and drye in the seconde degre, the flowers and leues be vsed in medicines, it shuld be gathered in somer whā it flowreth, and drye it in the shadow, It may be kept a yeare, it hath vertue of confortyng, of losynge, yf consumynge, and of clensynge. Yf the powder of it be dronke in wyne, or els boyle the pouder of it in wyne & it wyll hete well a stomake. Also it comforteth the degestyon. Also

take ye leues and flowers of margerum and powne thē a lytell & mak them hote in a panne, and lay it to the greuaūce and it taketh awaye the desease in the stomake that cometh of wynde. Also for the rewm in the head, take thys herbe & bind it warme aboute thy heade. Also it dryeth the mother and consumethe the superfluyte of it.
            
            
               Millefolium maior, or yarowe.
               ☞Kynge Achilles foūd thys her be, & wyth it he heled his men that were woūded wyth yron, for woū
                  des stampe thys herb with swines grece, and playster it to the woūde and it shall hele it, and the same is good for an ache in ye breste or side it ys good for them that maye not pysse, take the ioyce of thys herbe and vyneger & drynke it, and meruelously it helpeth a wounde that hath tokē colde. Stamp thys herbe in butter and lay it to the woūd

and it wyll heale it well. Also to degest the stomake or that lyeth there in, take the ioyce of it and medle it with water and honye and drynke it warme. Also for deseases in the body take the pouder and medle it wyth wyne or wyth good ale and drynk it and it helpeth much. Also it is good for hart breimyng. Also for the head ache stampe thys herbe and playster it to the head. Also for bytyng of a wood dogge, stampe this herbe wyth the graynes of where au
                     •
                   it heleth it. Also for him that may not holde his meat, stāpe thys herbe wyth wyne and drynke it warme.
            
            
               Motherworte or Mugworte,
               
                  ❧ Thys herbe in latyne is called Artemesia, and it is hote and drye in the .iii. degre, thys herbe helpeth a woman to cōceyue a chylde, and clen
                     •
                  ethe the mother and makethe a woman to haue her flowers and to

destroyeth the Emeroydes on this maner, Fyrste they muste be gathered, thē take pouder of Motherworte and of Horehounde to gyther and strawe it on ye pappes. Also yf a childe be dead in the Mothers wombe take Motherworte & stampe it small & make a playster therof and laye it to her wombe al cold, and with the grace of god she shall haue haue deliueraunce with out perell, It is good for the stone and the grauell in the raynes of a man or of a woman, yf a mon bere thys herbe vpon him there shal no venemous beste greue hym. It is good for the yelowe yaundes and yf it be dronken wyth wyne, for, it comforteth the stomake & makethe a man or woman to haue good coloure.
            
            
               Maces.
               This spyce is hote & drye in the .ii. degre maces be ryndes or huskes

it groweth aboute the Nutmegge as ye rinde groweth about the Hasel mutte, it maye be kepte .x. yere ī his vertue it is confortynge, dissoluynge, and consuminge, the knowlege of fine maces is thus, it shuld be in coloure lyke to fyne golde or els like to golde, that syluer is gylt with, the whiche hath a sharpe talage with a bytternes, & it lokethe lyke to earthe, & it is to be refused, for it hath no sharpe sauour, for a colde stomake that maye nat defye nor degeste well, take maces and boyle them in wyne and drynke it, Also a good plaster the whyche is best for a feble stomake, make 
                     •
                  ouder of Mastyke and of maces and medele them with oile of roses and wexe and make a playster therof & lay it on the stomake of ye seke person. Also to clense the braine of superfluous humours, take a quantyte of Maces and chewe thē well

in thy mouth and holde them there a whyle, and that shal lose the fumosite of humours that ryse vp to the braynes and purge the superfluite of it. Also for feblenes of the stomake & ye lyuer of a colde cause and for ye colyke, and for the deseases of the spyrytuall membres, or flewme, boile maces in the ioyce of Fenell and in the ende of the boylynge, put in a lytell wyne, than strayne it and drinke it for it is the beste remedy for the fore said deseases. And for the ache of the herte, vse powder of maces in thy metes and drynkes.
            
            
               Menta.
               ¶Thys is named ye reed Mynte it is hote and drye in the .ii. degre, and there be, ii. other myntes, but I meane house mintes, the whyche properly is sayde garden myntes, for that moste comonly is in medecines bothe grene & drye, for great

holsomnes it shulde be dryed in a shadowe place, & so it wyll be kept a yere in great vertue, to dyssolue or lese to cōsum of his proper qualite and to comforte of hys swet sauour, for ye stynkyng of the mouth and filthe in the gūmes and of the teth washe thy mouthe and gummes wyth vyneger that mintes besodenin, and after rubbe him with the powder of myntes or with drye myntes to prouoke the appeti
                     •
                  e, whā an impedyment of the stomake that cometh of colde humours beynge in the mouth of the stomake make a salue of Myntes and vyneger with a lyttell Synamun and peper and vse it well agaynst vomytes that comethe of feblenes of the stomake or of colde causes. Sethe myntes in Sauge water & vyneger and dype it to and laye it on the mouth of the stomake wyth the myntes that be sodden therin.

Also gyue to the paciente to eat of the same Myntes for the syncopyne and feblenes in Feuers, and with out feuers, or of medecyne, or of what cause it be, stamped Myntes with vyneger and a lytle wyne yf the pacyent be wythoute Feuer, and yf he be with Feuer, stampe Myntes with 
                     •
                  ynege
                     •
                   alone, thā make a toste of sower breade and toste it well tyl it be almost brente than put it in that lycoure and let it lye there in tyll it be well soked, than put it in to hys nose and rub hys lyppes, gummes, teth and temples therwyth and bynde it to the pulse vaynes of his armes. and let the pacyent eate the moystnes that is lefte and swalowe it in. For to clense the mother, take the tender croppes of Myntes and seth them in water or wyne and playster it to the share, and to the raynes agaynst the cōgelyng in a womāns

brest take the smal stalkes of mine eies and sethe them in wyne & oyle and playster it aboute ye tetes Also be it knowen that whan any medecyne shuld be gyuen a gaynste venym it shoulde be gyuen wyth the ioyce of myntes for myntes haue a maner of strengthe of drawynge out of venym, or els it shulde be wyth wyne that myntes hath bensodden in, for stopping of the splen and the lyuer and of the wayes of the vryne of a cold humour and of a hote withoute Feuer, Take the ioyce of myntes alone, or myntes soden in wyne, or the ioyce of myntes medled with hony, and gyue it to the pacyent. To slee wormes in the bellye, take the ioyce of myntes and drynke it, & thou shalte be hole Also ye ioyce of myntes fleeth wormes in thy eares. For a tetter take the ioyce of myntes and put therto brimstone and vynegre and medle

them well togyther, & anoynte the tetter therwyth and thou shalte be hole. For a wounde in the heade, stampe mintes and laye thē on the wounde. &c. For payne in the syde take myntes and seth them in olde wyne or ale & with it stampe .xviii. graynes of Peper and drinke it in the night, there be but lyttell dyfference betwene thys mynte and the romayne mynte, thys is the gardē mynte.
            
         
         
            ¶N. littera
            
               et primo de nux muscata.
               
                  NUtmygge is hote & drye in the .ii. degre, ye best groweth in ynde and in the time of his ripinge, it is gathered and .vii. yeer it maye be kepte, they that be playne & heuye after theyr kynde be beste to be chosen. Also whan they be broken they fall nat to powder, but they haue a swete

and sharpe sauoure, yf they lacke any of these aforesayd, they be nat good for medecynes, he hathe vertue of comfortynge by his swete sauoure, or coldnes and feblenes of degestyon of the stomake, take in the mornynge halfe a Nutmige or a hole Nutmegge and eate it. Also for a colde stomake that is feble of degestyon and for the lyuer gyue hym wyne that the Nutmegges is boyled in. Also for the same boyle Nutmegges, and Mastyke ī wine and drynke it, thys is good for the deseases in the stomake, and in the bowelles to breake in wynde. Also in the recoueryng of a syckenes to cōforte the spyrytual mēbres boile Nutmegges and mastike in wyne and drinke it. Also take a Nutmeg and smell to it, and it wyll cōforte the spyrytuall membres.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Napo.
               Thys is named Nauewe, it desyreth

grounde that is fattye, and sandy, it growethe beste in suche grounde. The propertie of the Nauewes is he changeth and turneth into rape, and after that it turneth into nauewe. The beste do growe in grounde well dōged and turned Also it proueth weil in places that stuble of corne hath bene in y• same yere. If they growe to thycke plucke some vp here and there, so that the other maye proue yt better and those that ye plucke vp set thē in voyde places. They shulde be sowen in the ende of Iulye and in Auguste, the beste sauored Nauewes be they yt be longe & strayghte and nat ouer great nor braunches in the rootes, bu
                     •
                   a strayght roote, Also of Nauewes maye be made a passyng good meate wyth a lyttell salte and vyneger, hony and mustarde and with swete spices and it maye be made wythout spyces Nauewes

be hote in the second degre and they noryshe muche, but they be hard of degestion, they make the flesh softe & wyndy but lesse wynd than rapes. Therfore whan ye seth them in water, cast that water away, and seth them in another water and so hys hard substaunce is tempered by that, and so menely betwene good and euell they engē
                  der noryshīg, for they that be thus sodden be nat harde of degestyon, they make one wyndye, and they make stoppynge of vaynes and of poores but yet they be profytable yf they be sodden twyse and bothe the waters to be caste away, & they to be sodden wyth the thyrde wyth fatte flesh.
            
         
         
            
               ❧ Hic incipit littera .O.
            
               et primo de Olibano.
               OLibanum is called Frankē
                  sence, This is hote and drye in the .iii. degre, it is gumme of

a tre in Inde, the cleneste is the beste Also there be trees of that kynde growyng in Bama
                     •
                  ke, but nat so clere nor good, for it is darker of coloure, therfore it is to be refused in medecine, it hath vertue of comfortinge by hys swete sauoure Also of closynge and cōstraynyng for the tothache that cōmeth of superfluyte of humours of the heade and specially by the vaynes, make a plaister of pouder of frākensence with wyne & the whyte of an egge, medle them togyther and playster them aboute the templ
                     •
                  s, Also to stoppe the wayes of the vaynes aboue, take Frankensence and chewe it well in thy mouthe and that shall stoppe and let the flux of humours comyng downe to the nosethrilles. Take pilles of frākensēce & swalow them downe in the mornynge, then boyle frankensence in wyne and at euē dryncke that whā
                  
thou goest to bedde. Also these py
                     •
                  
                  les be good to helpe the degestyon of the stomake, and good agaynst sore bolkinges. Also to the confortynge and clensynge of the Meryce, and helpynge of conception in y• receyuynge the fume of frākensēce bynethe. Also boyle pouder of it in wyne and whan it is me
                     •
                  ely warm dippe a cloth in it and lay it so warme to the share of the pacyent, and greatly it comforteth the Matrice.
            
         
         
            Hic incipit littera .P.
            
               Et primo de Pruna.
               
                  AL plumines be colde & moyste, some be whyte some be blacke & some be redde. They that be blacke and some what harde be the beste, they be called Damsons, and whan they be rype gather thē and slet them & sprynge

Uyneger vpon them, and so they may be kept
                     •
                   in a vessell of woode a yere, and fyrste whan they be cu
                     •
                   they must be layde in the sonne .xv dayes to dry, these Damsons haue vertue of coldnes and clensyng of the inwarde partes wherfore they be good in feuers that be sharpe & for costyfenes of the belye that cō
                  meth of drynes or of Colorike humours dryenge, if it be newe gyue it hym to eat, if it be dry boyle it in water & gyue ye pacyente to drynke therof, thys is good for the Feuer tertian, for stoppynge of the lyuer, for the yaundes and sharpe feuers it soteth the bely, it is good for defaute of appetyte, and for many other deseases.
            
            
               ☞ Peper.
               ¶This is called Peper, it is hote and drye in the .iiii. degre. There be thre maners of Peper. Blacke whyte, and longe. Diascorydes

and Constantyne sayeth that they be frutes of tres growing in Inde and some saye that Peper is made blacke with brennynge in the fyre for whan it is gathered there be a great multitude of serpētes about it, & therfore they put it in the fyre to brenne the serpentes yt be about it, the Sarysyns drye it in an ouē bycause it shall nat encrese in another lande. But of al the Pepers, the blacke is the beste and the most holsome. Take peper and put it in to the nosethrylles & it wyll make the to nese, and sethe peper and figges in wyne and drynke it, and it wyll clense the spyritual membres of tough humours, and it is good for the pose that is taken of colde. Also for the same eat pouder of peper with fygges. Also powder of peper put in a mannes meat comforteth the degestion of ye stomake also put lōg peper ī a rosted apple

and eate it, and it shal comforte the degestyon. Also pouder of Peper wyll freate awaye deade fleshe or proude flesshe, & longe, Peper cō
                  forteth more thā blacke. Also blacke Peper hath vertue of losynge, comfortynge, and of drawynge, i
                     •
                   clenseth the spyrytual membres of colde flewme & vycyous humours and beste whan the pouder of it is eatē with fygges for he hath great strengthe of heatinge and comfortynge the stomake prouokynge appetyte, but to Sanguyne and Colorike persōs, it is nat good to vse peper, for it dryeth & brēneth blode and it engendreth leprye and other euyll syckenes. Plato sayeth that Peper is foule to se in syghte, with out blacke, & within with a sharpe sauour and a swete odour, littell in quantyte and muche in vertue.
            
            
               Pympernell.
               Thys herbe is good to hele woū
                  des

and to destroye venym, and to hele a postume and sore eyes.
            
            
               Pulegium.
               
                  ❧ This is named Puleol royall it is hote and drye in the .iii. degre In the tyme of flowring it shulde be gathered, and it maye be kepte in his vertue a yere, whan it shall be vsed in medecynes, take ye leues wyth the flowers and strype them fro the stalke, and it hathe vertue of losynge and consumynge, for ye cold humours in ye head take pouder of it and hete it wel in a Skellet, and al hote bynde it to the greuance without any lycoure. Also for a great cold taken in the head, and for a tough humor or a watery humoure make a garg
                     •
                  rysme, sethe 
                     •
                  ulyoll royal & 
                     •
                  rye fygges in a tarte vyneger, & take a good sponful therof as hote as ye maye suffre it, and holde it in thy mouth tyll it be almost colde, than put it

out and take asmuch more, and do so thre or .iiii. tymes and that shall purge thy head wel of flewme. also sethe it in wyne and drynke it and it is good for the desease of the stomake & guttes, and for colde causes, or for wynde in the stomake. Also it is good for toughe flewme in the brest, yf thou take pouder of it, and medle it with claryfied hony and make a lectuarye therof and vse to eate therof, or take the herbe therof & boyle it with wyne, honye or water and vse to drynke therof. Also for the blacke coloure drynke y• ioyce of it, or boyle it wyth wyne & thou shalt be hole. Also for a itchynge byle, laye this herbe in water, and vse to wasshe the ytchynge therin warme & thou shalt be hole. Also for ache take this herbe al grene and stampe it & plaister it to the ache and it wil ease it. Also against

the cough boyle thys herb in wine and drynke it luke warm and this wyll make one to pysse well. For the desease in the bely stampe this herbe wyth comyn and water and lay it hote to the nauel and lightly it shall be hole, for the diseases in ye lyuer stampe thys herbe and temper it with water and vineger and drynke the ioyce therof, and thou shalbe hole. For an ache in ye legs or armes take the leues of elders & Pulioll royall of euery lyke much and stampe them togither wel and playster it to the greuannce, and it is good for ye feuer tercian, yf thou take the braunches of thys herbe & wrappe it in a good locke of wolle and gyue it to the pacyent and let hym smell therto, before the feuer come on hym, and that shall do hī great ease. For the heade ache take thys herbe & bynde it fast round about thy hed and anone it ceasethe

the ache. Also yf a woman haue a dead chylde in her wombe stampe thys herbe and gyue her to drynke with olde wyne, and she shalbe delyuered of it, by the grace of God.
               For the crampe drynke the ioyce with vyneger fastynge and it wyl put it away.
            
            
               Pencedanum vel Feniculus porcinus.
               ☞ This herb is call maysh Hogges fenel or mayden wede thys herbe is hote and drye in the .iii. degre whan thys herbe is gathered for medecynes the roote is better than the herbe whan the rotes be gathered they may be kepte all a yere, it hath a purginge vertue, it is good for the strangulyō or the flyxe and good for stoppynge of the splene & the lyuer, boyle this herbe in wyne or water and gyue it to the paciēte to drynke. Also sethe it in oyle and wyne and playster it to the share &

it wyll helpe the strangulion or the flix. Also the same playster is good for hardnes of the splen it molyfieth that. Also agaynst the cold humours of the spyrytuall membres gyue hym to drynke water wt barly and thys herbe sodden to gyther and if it be a feruent cold humour than sethe the Barly and the herbe in wyne, and gyue it to the pacyēte to drynke with Lycoryce.
            
            
               Petrocilium.
               Thys is called perslye, thys is hote and moyst in the thyrde degre It multyplyeth greatelye mannes blode and doth away the Tysyke, it helpeth well to destroy the Feuer tertian, it is good for the syde and the dropsy, it comforteth the herte and the stomake, and it is good in potage and to stoppe chyckens.
            
            
               Peritorium.
               Thys herbe is called peritory &

it is hote and dry, ye vertue of thys herbe is thus. If a man haue an euyll stomake or els akynge within hym, take thys herbe and sethe it in thy potage and eate therof and thou shalt do well. Also thys herbe is good to hele one of the stone, yf he be bathed with it.
            
            
               ¶Pastinaca.
               Thys is called a perseneppe, it is hote and moyste in the seconde degre. Ther be two maner of persneppes, the one is the Persneppe of the garden, and the other is the wylde persneppe. They be more vsed to meate thā to medecyne hys vertue is to engēdre thycke blod & much, wherfore it styrreth the luste of the body yf it be much vsed therfore it is good for amā that is newly recouered out of hys great sykenes to vse to eate of it a whyle. Also they be good to be eaten rawe or sodden for y• melācoly humours

grene and not drye. To make a serope to styrre the lust of the bodye and for to comforte the, degestyon take rootes of Parsneppes & sethe them well in water, thā take them o
                     •
                  t and caste away the water, and the rotes that be in gobbets, boyle thē agayne ī water thā put therto hony well clarifyed and lette them boyle vnto the thyckenes of hony, and cōtinually styre it, that it cleue not to the vessell and in the mydle of the boylynge, put in almondes yf ye haue them, in the end of the boylynge, put in gynger, galengale, and a lytell peper & nutmegges & other swete sauored spyces. Also Parsneppes may be so wen in December, Ianuarye, and March, in fat grounde depe doluen and lose groūde and beste digged, and they be somwhat wyndye. Boyle them in two waters but caste awaye the fyrst water. Also there is Parseneppes

that is somwhat redde, the whiche maye be eaten both rawe & soden, & with thē and Nauewes to gyther ye maye make a very good meate and faire and rede in colour the whiche be sodden as Parsneppes be.
            
            
               Plantago.
               ☞This is called Plantaine, it is colde and drye in the .ii. degre, for head ache take Plantayne & bynd it aboute thy necke, & the ache shal go out of thy head. Also for deseases in the body, sethe thys herbe in good lycour what ye wyll and vse to drynke it and it shall clense the mawe & the other inwardes. Also for him yt bledeth at the nose gyue hym to drynke the ioyce of it and it shal cease lightly. Also yf ye body of any man be wexen hard. stampe thys herbe with grece and make a playster of it & laye it on the hardnes and lyghtly it shalbe softe and

make it hole. Also for byting of a serpēt, take thys herbe and drynke it wyth wyne. Also for the desease in the mouth take the ioyce of thys herbe & holde it long in thy mouth and eat the leaues of thys he
                     •
                  b for hym that maye not wel pysse sethe this herbe and drinke it. Also for a rotten humour in the breast and aboute the harte take the ioyce of thys herbe the wayght of .x. d. and medle it with honye and giue hym to eate a sponfull at one tyme and that shal purge the breste, for ache in the r
                     •
                  te take thys herbe with vyneger and drynke it. Also it heleth woundes and clēseth the fylth out of woundes. Also it swadgeth ran kelynge and staunchethe the mencyons both with drinke and wyth playsters made with pouder of Armoniake and of sandragoune and Barly medled wt the whyte of egges made in a playster & layd to ye
                  
sore for the Canker and the payne in the gūmes, take the ioyce therof and medle it with hony and vyneger and pouder of Alume and that shal slee the Canker in the mouth. Also for the feuers, stampe .iii. Rotes of Plantayne, & tempre it with water and gyue it hym to drynke that hath the feuers and he shalbe hole, for the Iaundes stampe Plā
                  tayne and Lettyse togyther & temper them wyth vyneger and make a plaster there of and laye it to thy ryght syde & vse it tyl thou be hole, and it is good for the bytyng of an adder, drynke ye ioyce of it & lay the substaunce of the herbe to the sore, for the same hange the rote of plantayne aboute the necke of the pacient and meruelously it helpeth, for the potager, and for the disease in y• synowes stāpe the leues of it wyth a lyttell salte and playster it well therto, and meruelously it helpeth.
            
            
               
               Portum.
               
                  ❧ Thys is called a leke, it is hote and dry in the .ii. degre, it desyrethe lou
                     •
                  e ground and fat and wel dū
                  ged in that they shall beste profyte in hote places and tēperate. They may be sowen in Decembre in temperate places & colde. They maye be sowen in Ianuary, February & Marche, whan the grounde is wel dygged and dyghte, and it may be sowen by it selfe or medled with other sedes of herbes in good fatte grounde well dygged and turned aboue it with good dōge, this sede wolde be sowen somewhat thycke and whan they be somwhat sprōg take vp the greatest lekes & plante them in forowes, but take a waye none of theyr roote whan ye set thē in ye forowes, but whan ye set them wyth a dyble, than cutte a way the rotes almoste vp to the leke head & awaye the vppermost of the leues

they may be planted in Iulie, Auguste, September & October, they be much profitable in March, and in Apryll nexte folowynge, but in your plantynge you shall nat seke after fate softe ground for menely groūde that is beste & that groūde that is almoste drye is beste, there is two maner at settynge of lekes, one is in forowes, as is the maner in Bonony and the forowe muste be fro the other a spanne large, and the lekes mast be set in the forowe iiii. fyngers brede eche fro other, & whan ye mnke nexte forowe caste the earth on the lekes and treade it downe softely with thy fote. The ii. maner is thus whā the groūd is well dygged & raked than make holes with a great dyble & euery hole fro other a large spā more ī which the lekes must be set in, but fyl nat thy holes nor put earth on thē but let thē be voyde, iii. wekes whā wedes

growe amonge them pul them vp & kepe thē clene fro wedes. Diuers auctours saye that the Lekes that be thus planted be better thā any other, or they may be well plā
                  ted amonge great onyons & whan the onyons be taken awaye, wede the leke and you shall fynde them fayre and good and whā ye plucke vp, leue some in a place, & leue som for sede, y• whych sede may be kept iii. yere, and it be hanged vp in the hulles, Lekes be beste soden, or .iii. tymes wasshed before they be eatē. For a woūde take lekes and stampe them wel with hony, and laye it to the wounde, and it wyll heale it, for the coughe take ye ioyce of lekes vse to drīke it, for y• same take ye ioyce of lekes & medle it with womās mylke and vse to drinke it, & it wyl clense the longes of al vyces.
            
            
               ¶Fracturas sotidat duritiasque relaxat.
               
                  vulnusque appositum ceto cū sale claudit.
            
            
               ☞Diretrum.
               Thys is called Pellyter, it is hote & dri in ye .iii. degre, the rote is vsed in medecynes, fyue yere he may be kept in his vertu, & know ye wel y• hs sharpnes is not knowē, it shold be powned & holdē in ye mouth, He hath vertu of losīg & drawīg & of cōsumīg. To make a gargarisme take pelleter & fygges & boyle thē ī vyneger or swete wyne & it wil clē
                  se y• brain of superflute of flume also if it be chewed in ye mouth it helpeth ye palsy in ye tonge. Also for ye Palsye & podagar stāpe it & sethe it in wine & oyle & plaister it to the greuāce this plaster helpeth much therfor if thou may haue grene peliter stāpe it & lay it soking ī wyne xv. dayes, & after boile it wel & put therto wexe & oile for this is ye best oyntment for al ye foresayd desease
            
            
               
               
                  ❧ Papauer.
               Thys is called Popy, it is cold and drye, There is two maners of them. The whyte Popye is colde and moyste and it is good to cause one to slepe. The sede therof well gathered maye be kept ten yeare, it hath vertue of clensyng. It is put in medecynes wyth a determynacyon as the sede maye be receyued of white popy or black. For to prouoke a slepe
                     •
                   make ye a playster of eche of them or one of them wyth womans mylke and the whyte of an egge and laye it to the temples. The woman of Salerne gaue to yonge chyldred the popye but they wolde gyue them no blacke popye for it made them to much heuy. Also for a hote postume in the begynnynge and for chafynge of the lyuer take the sede of whyte popye or els the herbe of it and stampe it and medle it wyth oyle of Roses

and playster it to ye greuaūce. Also for drynes in feuer e
                     •
                  yke, and in other feuers take & hete oyle of vyolet medled wyth powder of poppye sede, and annoynte the small of the backe therwyth.
            
            
               ☞Pollipodium.
               Thys is called pollipodye, it is hote in the .iiii. degre and dry in the seconde degre. Thys Pollypodye is ferne that groweth vpon Okes or on walles, or stones but the pollypodye that growethe on okes is the best. Gather the rotes of it and lay it a day in the sonne, chose that is grene, and that which appereth dry whan it is broken it is to be refused, he hath vertue of dissoluing of drawyng of purging flewme & specially melancoly, wherfore communely he is put in boylynge and to sleumatyke and melancolyous hole men, he is gyuen to preserue theyr health, and knowe well that

in ye boylynge of pollypody shuld be put in some thynge to exclude & put out ventuosyte as Anyse sede fenell sede, or Comin or els al these a foresayd sedes for thei exclud out muche wynd and vnbynde the humours. Also for the E
                     •
                  tidian and for Ilica passio and to kepe a mannes helth, do thus stampe halfe an vnce of polypody or an vnce yf ye wyll haue it muche laxatyue, than boyle it with Prunes nnd vyolettes in Fenell water or Anyse, in a great quantyte than strayne it and gyue it the pacyente at mornynge and euenynge. Also stāpe it & sethe it in water with Fenell sede and wt water, & make a broth wt a chekin therin with swet sauored spyces & gyue ye pacyēt to eate. Also make a drynk therof after this maner stāp it & boyle it ī wine & after put mor wyne therto and so make vp your drynke with swete sauored spyces
            
            
               
               Pionium.
               Thys is called Pyony, it is hote and drye in the seconde degre, so sayth Ypocras & Galyen the good phylosophers, thei say that ye roote therof groweth to dyuers medecynes and it wyll laste ten yeres, and it is colde for the palsy, dry the rote and drinke pouder with Caster sodden in wine. Also the same is good for the Stone. Also yf a man be costyue and maye not goo to the draught, take and strowe the powder therof on Cotten and put it in to hys foundement, and drynke ye powder in whyte wyne. Also for a man or woman that hath the fallynge euyll eate it and drynke it in wyne. Also hange the rote aboute hys necke and it wyll saue hym withoute doubte wythin .xv. dayes. Also it helpeth the sores in the mouth. Also yf thou sethe it in wyne, it helpeth the splene. Also

drynke Pyony with water & hony and do therto powder of Colyander and thys is good for the stomake, for the mylte and for grauell in the raynes. Also it is good for women for dyuerse deseases, Also sethe it in whyte wyne and gyue a woman to drynke therof & it wyll hele her bledder & make her to pisse the stone, and it will hele her of the Marris. Also Pyony sede whan it is blacke it maketh delyueraunce of the bed of the childe in her wōbe and at euerye tyme whan he shall vse to drynke it, she muste drynke xv. sedes an tyme.
            
         
         
            ☞Q. Littera.
            
               Et primo de Qui
                     •
                  quefolia.
               QUynckfolie is colde & dry ī ye secōde degre, this herbe is good for ache in a mannes limmes & for ache of ye head, mouth, tonge, and throte, that be sore, take & sethe

thys herbe in wyne & gyue the pacyent to drynke therof thre dayes, fyrst and last and he shalbe hole. Also stampe it, and drinke the ioyce of it in ale & it wyll cease the akynge and ye gnawynge of a man or womā. Also yf a man blede sore at the nose, gyue hym to drinke the ioyce of it with wine, and anoynte his head wel with the ioyce of thys hethe, and anone the bloode shall staunche. For to sle a Canker, seth it in wyde and the grece of a swine and make a plaster therof and lay it on the Canker and it shall sle it, Also take pouder of quyncke foyle and medle it with hony and ther with rubbe thy mouth, tonge, and throte, and the chekes wythin and it wyll purge it well. Also for poyson and bitynge of a serpente take the ioyce of ye Quynckefoyle, and drynke it with wyne & merueloslye it resysteth venym.
            
         
         
            
            Hic incipit littera .R.
            
               and fyrst of Rybeworte.
               
                  RYbeworte is good for ye feuer quartayne, take the ioyce of thys herbe and drynke it two houres before ye thynke the disease shall come to you and by ye grace of God it shal go from you.
            
            
               Rednetle.
               ¶Take Redde Netels, and stāpe thē small & sethe thē in an earthen pot with a porcyon of whyte wyne til halfe be wasted, and giue the pacyent to drynke fyrst and last warme, and laye the herbes to the foū
                  demēt, as hote as the pacyent may suffer it, and vse thys medecyne til he be hole.
            
            
               ¶Rosa.
               
                  ❧ Thys is the red Rose, it is cold in the fyrst degre and dry in the seconde degre. Dry roses and grene

roses be vsed in medecynes, and of grene roses be made many confeccions. Also dry roses be put in medecynes, whan a receyte of roses is made, for they be soone made in powder of roses is made Mell roset, Suger roset, syrop of Roses alectuary of Roses, water of Roses and oyle of roses. Mell roset is made thus, take fayre purified hony, & newe redde roses the white endes of thē clipped away than choppe them small and put them into the hony and boile them menely togyther, to knowe whā it is boyled ynoughe, ye shall knowe it by the swete odoure and the coloure ruffe Fyue yeres he may be kepte in his vertue, by the roses he hath vertue of cōfortyng, & by the hony he hath vertue of clēsynge. In winter & in somer, it maye be gyuen competently to feble sycke slumatyke melancolye, and Colorike people
                     •
                   also

Mulsa is made of water and mell roset, and it may be geuē after the iii. day yt it cōmeth out of the bath for to clense toe stomake of cold humour gyue him mel roset wyth water that fenell sede is boyled in puttynge therein .iii. graynes of salte, yf the sycke may take it this shuld be the quantyte of roses and hony. In .vii. pound of hony put a poū
                  de of Roses, Suger roset is made thus. Take newe gathered Roses and stampe them ryght small with Suger than put it in a glasse and xxx. dayes let it stande in the sonne and styrre it well and medle it wel togyther & so it maye be kepte thre yeres in his vertue. The quantyte of Suger & Roses shulde be thus in .iiii. pound of Suger a pounde of Roses, he hath vertu of cōstraynynge and comfortyng of the flux in the wome. Take Suger roset and powder of Mastyke of euery

one a drame, and medle thē wel togyther and giue it to the sycke oft, than geue him rosewater that Mastyke and cloues be sodden in. Syrope of Roses is made thus, some do take roses dyght, as it is before sayde and boyle them ī water, and in the water strayned they put Suger and make a syrope therof, and some do make it better for thei put roses in a vessel hauyng a strayght mouth & they put to the roses hote water, and they let it stande a day and a nyght and of that water puttyng to it Suger they make syrop and some do put more of roses in the foresayd vessell & more of hote water, and let it stand as is before sayde and so they make a reed water, and make therof a syrope. And some do stampe newe Roses and then strayne out the ioyce of it and Suger therwyth they make syrope and thys is the best makinge of

syrope & knowe it well that syrope made of fresshe and newe Roses, fyrst somwhat meanli thei laxe, in ye ende they bynd, but syrope made of drye Roses fyrste and laste they bynde Syrope of Roses hath vertue of comfortynge and constraynyng against the flux of the wōbe and the vomyte, gyue it to hym with rayne water or with rose water in a feuer. After letting of blod gyue it him wyth cold water. Also the same for the Sincopyne. Oyle of roses is made thus, some boyle Roses in oyle and kepe it. Some do fyll a glasse wyth Roses & oyle and they boyle it in a caudron full of water & thys oyle is good, some stampe freshe roses with oyle and they put it in a vessel of glasse, and set it in the sonne x. dayes and this oyle is good agaynste chafyng of the lyuer, yf it be anoynted therewyth. Also it is good for ye desease

in the head that cōmeth of hete, anoynt the forhead and the temples with oyle of roses. The water of Roses hath vertue of comfortyng and constraynynge agaynste the flux of the wōbe and vomyte. Also gyue him Rosewater boyled wyth Mastyke and cloues it is beste against the flux and feblenes of vertue, yf it come of a flux by a sharp medecyne. Also rose water is good for the Syncopyne and the Cardiacle gyue it hī to drynke & sprynge the water on hys face and y• water is good for eyes and in oyntmētes for the face, for it taketh awaye the wemmes and the superfluyte and strayneth not the skynne. Also dry Roses put to the nose to smell do comforte the brayne and the herbe and quencheth the spyryte. Also agaynste the flux of the wombe of coloure gyue hym Roses boyled in rayne water. Also a playster

made of roses and the whyte of an egge and vyneger & dyp a sponge in it and lay it on the mouth of the stomake agaynste the syncopyne, gyue hym to drynke water that roses haue ben boyled in, and gyue hym pouder of roses in a rere egge to make oyle of roses, take .ii. li. of oyle a .li. and an halfe of roses and put all in a glas, and put the glas in a Caud
                     •
                  ron full of water and hange it therin and boyle it tyl the thyrde parte be wasted, and after strayne it thorough a linen cloth & kepe it for your vse, for this oyle is losyng and serueth for many thinges. Some do put rose water in a glas and they put roses with there dewe therto, & they make it to boyle in water, than they set it in the sonne tyl it be reed, and thys waier is beste, thys hathe vertue of comfortynge and constraynynge and for the fluxe of the wombe, and agaynst

the vomyt.
            
            
               Rosemary.
               ¶Thys herbe is hote and drye, take the flowers and put them in a linen clothe and so boyle them in fayre clene water to the halfe and coole it, & drynke it for it is mouch worthe agaynste all euylles in the body. Take the flowers and make powder therof and bynde it to the ryght arme in a lynen cloth and it shal make y• linght and mery Also eate ye flowers with hony fastynge with sower breade & ther shall ryse in the none euyll swellynges. Also take the flouers and put them in a cheste amonge your clothes, or amonge bokes and moughtes shal not hurt thē, boyle ye flowers in gotes mylke and thā let thē stande al a nyght vnder the ayre fayre couered after y• gyue him to drinke therof that hath the tysyke & it shall delyuer hī, boyle the leues in whyte

wine and wassh thy face therwith thy bearde and thy browes & there shall honorne grow out, and thou shall haue a fayre face. Put the leues vnder thy beddes head & thou shalbe deliuered of al euel dremes, Breke the leaues small to pouder and lay them on a cāker and it shal sle it. Take the leues and put them into a vessel of wyne and it shall preserue it fro tartnes and euel sauoure, and yf thou sell that wyne thou shalte haue good lucke in the sale. If thou be feble with vnkynely swete, take and boyle the leaues in clene water and whan the water is colde, do thereto as muche of whyte wyne, and thā make therein soppes & eate wel therof, and thou shall recouer appetyde. If thou haue the fluxe byole the leaues in stronge Aysell and bynde them in a lynen clothe and bynde it to the wombe and anone ye flu
                     •
                  e shal

withdrawe. If thy legges be blowen with the gout, boyle the leues in water, and than take the leaues and bynde them in a lynnen clothe about thy legges and it shall do the good. Take the leues and boyle thē 
                  
                     •
                  n stronge Aysel and bynde them in a clothe to thy stomake, & it shall delyuer the of all euylles, If thou haue the coughe, drynke the water of the leaues boyled in whyte wyne, and it wyll heale the Take the rynde of Rosemary and make powder therof and drinke it for the pose and it shal helpe the, Take the tember therof and brēne it to coles and make pouder therof and than put it in a lynen clothe, & rubbe thy tethe therewith, and yf her be any wormes therin it shall sle thē & kepe thy tethe frō euylles. Also make the a boxe of the wod & smell to it and it shall preserue thy youthe. Also pu
                     •
                   therof in thy dores

or in thy house and thou shalte be withoute danger of adoers and other venemous serpentes. Make the a barell therof and drinke thou of the drynke that standeth therin and thou nede not to feare no poyson that shal hurt the and yf thou set it in thy gardyn kepe it honestli for it is much profytable. Also if a man haue lost his smellyng of the ayre, or els he maye nat drawe hys breth make fier of the wood & take hys breth therwyth and geue it hī to ease and he shalbe hole.
            
            
               Ruta.
               ¶ Thys is called Rewe, thys is hote and drye in the .ii. degre, the leues and the sedes be vsed in medecynes ye sedes may be kept ten yere and the leues a yere, he hath vertu of purginge, dissoluynge and consumynge, for the head ache take ye ioyce of rewe and hete it and put it into his nosethrylle for it purgeth

out fleum and clensēth the brayne, the ioyce soden with wyne is good for the same. For feblenes of sight put Rewe in a pot with ale and let the pacient vse to drynke of it. For stoppynge of the splen and lyuer, the stranguri & the fluxe, seth Rew in wyne wyth rootes of Fenell, or pouder of Rewe, with the ioyce of Fenell, and drynke it warme. Also for and ache or fretyng, stāpe Rewe with powder of Comin and playster it to the greuaunce. Also agaynste venym, drinke ye ioyce of Rewe. For bytynge of venemous best or worme, playster Rewe to ye bytynge. For feblenes of eye sight styll water of Rewe, and roses, together and put therof in your eies Also an oyntmēt for sore eyes, stā
                  pe Rewe and Fenell togyther of yche lyke muche by weyghte and medle thē with hony, and Eufrose and it is good oymente for eyes.

Take Rewe, Comyn, and Peper, of yche like much by weyght, and grynde them small to gyther and medle them wyth hony and veneger and it is good for the ache in ye breast and in the raynes.
            
         
         
            ☞Hic incepit liriera. S.
            
               Et primo de Sinapio.
               SImapum is called mustarde, it is hote and drie, in the medle of the .iii. degre, and nat the herbe, but the sede, is put in medecynes. Fyue yeare he maye be kepte in hys vertue. He hath vertue losynge, of drawynge, of makynge thyne, and of consumynge. For the palsy of the tōge take and chewe the sede in your mouth, and holde it vnder the tōge and it shall do you good. Also for the Palsye in other membres sethe the sede in wyne and laye it to the sore place

and is beste in the begynnynge of the dysease. Also take the pouder of it, and put it into your nosethrilles and it will make you to nese and it clenseth the brayne and superfluite flume. Also sethe it in wine and figges & holde it warme in your mouthe tyll it be al most colde thā take as much and do so .v. or .vi. times a day asmuche another day & this is good for an olde pose of chough and flumy humour in the the head Also for stopping of the splen and the lyuer sethe the sede in water wt rotes of Fenel, than strayne it and put therto hony and gyue it to the sicke to drinke. For hardnes of the splē sethe the herbe of it in wyne & playster it to the greuaunce for to rype and breke a postume, stampe thys herbe well with hogges grece and laye it to the postume. Also for Strangury take the herbe of thys

and sethe it in oyle and wyne and playster it to the greuance, and it wyll louse it. Also for the Ciaticaand for other olde sores take mustarde sede and the thyrde parte of crōmes of white brede, and figges, hony, and vineger, after as the ach of the sore requyreth the more of ye fygges and the hony that is there the more sharper is the strength of the sede, and the more bread and vineger that is in it, the more weker is the sede, but I say nat yt ye shall put thys confection to al sores but to great and olde sores. Hys vertu if yf he be eaten it sharpeth a mannes wyt, it clenseth the bely, it breketh the stone it purgeth the vryne menstrosite, and comforteth the stomake.
            
            
               ¶Smalage.
               Take Smalage sede Rewe sede, Peper and salte and grynde them wel togyther and tempre thē with

wyne and drynke it, for it is good for colde and wycked humours in the stomake and comforteth the stomake the lyuer and the longes, it is good for woundes. For rankelynge and to cease the brennynge and akinge, and to bringe them to theyr kynd againe. Also it is good to drynke for the feuer tercian.
            
            
               Saluia.
               Sage is hote in the fyrste degre and drye in the seconde degre the leues onely be taken in medecynes both grene and dry, he may be kepte a yere, there be two manners of Sages, the garden and ye wilde Sage, yf thou wilt haue Sage in for medecynes take ye leues of garden Sage, for that cōsumeth more and comforteth more thā the other dothe. For the palsy, sethe the leues of sage ī wine & vse to drīke it. For the same sethe ye leues ī wine & plaister it to ye greuaūce, also it is good

to put in sauce, for the strangury, ye flux, & the matrice it clenseth, sethe the leues in water & let the pacient set ouer it & receyue ye hote fume of it and it shall do hym much good. Also it is good for venym or poyson, sethe Sage in ale or wine and vse to drinke it .iii. dayes and thou shalt be hole, bi ye grace of god. for the stomake drynke ye ioyce of sage with water and honye, & it is good to clense a mannes bodye to vse it bothe rype and grene, it wyll make a mānes bodye clene, therfore who that vseth to eate of thys herbe, or drynke it, it is meruayle that anye inconuenyence shulde greue them that vse it, If ye haue an ytchinge on you, wasshe it wel wyth ye ioyce of this herbe & it shal slee ytchyng. Also drinke sage with wyne & a litell worme wode and it shall cease the ache vnder the sydes, the wōbe and the stomake, it is good for the

palsy and dropsy.
            
            
               ☞Sytureia.
               Thys is called Sauery, it is hote and dry in the .iiii. degre, sethe it in wyne or water, and dryncke it and it purgeth the raynes, ye bladder, the menstruosyte in the bowelles, it purgeth the longes, and loseth great humoures and compellethe and putteth hym out by the mouth by spytynge, therfore he is brennynge and styrrethe hym that vseth lechery, therfore it is forbyde to vse it muche in meates. Soke it in vyneger or wyne and drynke it and it shall make the haue a meke stomake. Also whan it flowereth it shuld be gathered and dried & pouder made therof. Also take ye pouder of sauery & boile it wt clarified honi & vse to eate therof, or boile it in wyne, & drinke it, and it wyl lose coughe flum in ye brest. Also for fretynge in thy bely drynke pouder of

it in warme wyne and thou shalbe hole. Also if ye take the lesse sauery it hath the same vertue & strengthe that the other Sauery hath. Also make grewell with water and fluwer, and pouder of Sauery & eate therof & that shall clense all ye spirituall membres of a man.
            
            
               Saxfrage.
               ☞Thys is hote and dry in the .iii degre, for the stone, sethe the rote of it in wyne and drynke it. Also it is good for the desease of the colyke & the strangury, and the pouder of it be eatē with an egge, it is good for the same. It maye be kepe in hys vertue .iii. yere.
            
            
               Scabiosa.
               Thys is called Scabias, it is hote and dry in the .iii. degre, to dri it ther is no profyte in it, for scabbes take ioyce of it, Uyneger and oyle, and boyle them to gyther tyll they we
                     •
                  e thycke, and kepe it for it

is good for scabbes. For the Emerawdes sethe them in water, than set ouer it and take the flume of it and vse it & thou shalbe hole, stāpe it and sethe it wyne & that drynke, is good to dystroy humours in the stomake, and drynke it euery daye fastyng wyth Eurose & thou shal
                     •
                   be hole, and thou shall neuer haue the pestelence bredynge wythin the whyle thou do vse it. For the leuer stampe it and sethe it in wyne and drynke it.
            
            
               ¶Sothernwode.
               Thys herbe is good for the coughe and for byting in the bely and in the breste, and for disease in the bones, and good for thē that maye nat well pysse take the sede of thys herbe and stampe it and drynke it wyth water, & it is good for all the aforesayde. Also for the desseases ī the syde, stampe thys herbe wyth Betayne and drynke it and it helpeth

well. Also for the bytyng of a serpēt and for venym, stāpe thys herb and drinke it with wyne, and it is good. Also for the colde feuer stampe thys herbe wyth wyne and drnycke it and thou shalte be hole.
            
            
               Syngrene.
               Thys is colde and moyste in the thyrde degre ye ioyce of thys herbe and also the same herbe is ryghte necessary for many deseases, stampe thys herbe wyth grece and playster it to the desease & maruelously it helpeth. For desease and darkenes of eyes, stampe this herbe and put of the ioyce in ye sore eyes For chafyng of the lyuer take the ioyce of it and vyneger & dyppe a cloth therin, and playster it to the greuaunce. For bytynge or scalding make an oyntment of the ioyce of thys herbe and oyle of Roses, and waxe, but laye it nat to tyl after the thre fyrst dayes, but fyrste anoynt

it with grece and such other. Also for a disease of a hote cause thys herbe is good to be layde therto.
            
            
               Stycheworte.
               
                  ❧ Thys is called Stycheworte or birollōg this is hote & moyst ī ye fyrst degre, ye vertu of this herb is, it is good to hele woūdes & sore eis
            
            
               Scamony.
               Scamony is hote and drye in the .iii. degre ye leues onely be beste in medecenes it may be kept a yere in hys vertue or two for nede. For the disease in the stomake boyle leues of it in wyne, & drynke it. Also the aforesayd drynke is good for ye bely, & for the strangury, and flux. Also astewe made with boyling of it ī water, or wine is good for y• for sayd, if it be boyled in oyle & playster it to ye aforsayd, for it is better.
            
            
               Sene.
               
                  ❧ Sene is hote & drye in the .iiii. degre, it groweth in y• other syde y•
                  
see and most aboute Babylon: the best be the floures and the braunches of it, It is good for many deseases as the fallynge euell: for ye Sinacop, for ye splen, for the Emerawdes, and for the quartayne, syrop made of it boiled in water and suger, is good for al the aforesayd. Syrop made with the ioyce of Borage is good for the forsayd. Also D
                     •
                  ascorides cōmaundeth to make Exmel of the aforesayd with boylyng of vyneger and honye and it wyl be good for the aforsayd, And thys herbe may be kept ten yere.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Selondyne.
               Thys is hote and dry in the .iiii. degre, & Galen saythe yt it is good for sore eyes, take ye ioyce of selondyne and boyle them wel togyther in a panne & whā it is cold anoynt the eyes therwith. Take Selōdine and wryng out the ioyce & medle it with whyte wyne and anoynte thy

vysage therwith & it shal do away frekeles of y• vysage, ye ioyce of selondine & gotes dōg medled to gyther small in a morter, thā if yu lay it to a cāker in a womans pappe, it shal sle the cāker. Also take ye ioyce of selōdyne & pouder of brimstone and medle them well togyther & it wil helpe to do away ye Morphew And sethe the rote in wyne, & whā ye pot is takē downe let hī hold his mouth opē ouer it yt the breth mai go into his body, & that shal slee ye canker in the mouth, it is good for hym yt hath dronken venym wyth his owne stale & that wil saue him
            
            
               
                  ❧ Sauayne.
               ¶Thys is hote and dry in the seconde degre, it is good to slee wormes in the wombe and to brīge thē out yf it be soden in wyne & gyuen to the pacyēt to drynke. It is good wyth butter or greace to make an oyntment for ye scabbe that rēneth

to hele it & dry it vp, and it is good for the head ache, yf it be stamped and tempered wyth Uyneger and make a playster therof and laye it in the temples and vpon the molde of thy hende.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Scabiose.
               Thys is colde and moyste in the ii. degre, stampe it and sethe it in wyne and that drynke is good for the lyuer. And it will destroy wycked humours in the stomake, and drynke it euery day fastyng wyth Eurose & thou shalt neuer haue postume bredinge within the as lōge as thou doste vse thys medecyne.
            
         
         
            ¶Littera .T.
            
               Et primo de Tapsu ba
                     •
                  basto.
               
                  THys is called Molen, it is colde and dry. It is good for the Emerawdes & it be sodden in wyne and scommed clene. Also it is good to wasshe the

greuaunce therwith, it is good Also for the flux in the belly.
            
            
               Towne cresses.
               Thys herbe is hote and drye in the .iii. degre, the sede wyll endure good fyue yere. It is good to staū
                  che the flux & the mencyon, yf thou take the sede and bruse it in a morter of brase & giue the sike to drink therof thre dayes euerye daye peny weyght at ons wyth reed wyne warmed and ī those thre dayes he shalbe staūched, or els he shal dye, of that euyl, it is good for the palsi and for the male flanke, take ye sede and sethe it wyth wyne & do it in a poket & bynde it to the side ther as y• greuaunce is. Also it is good for hī yt maye nat well pisse, take yt sede & seth it ī wyne & oyle olyue & bind it to thi share. It is good for a mā
                  nes fundamēt y• goeth out, yf it be take of cold, thā it must be put in agayne and strawe ye pouder on the

fundament thy rayne wyth Honye and than strowe the pouder aboue with the powder of Comē or powder of Calafyne, for al these be kīdly for it. Also take the stalkes of towne Cresses, and brenne them and there shall no venemous beaste ne worme abyde the sauour nor smell therof but he shall dye or fly awai
            
         
         
            Littera .U.
            
               Et primo de herba Uiole.
               
                  VIolet is colde in the fyrst degre, and moyst in the seconde. For blaste in the eyes, take ye rotes of Uiolettes and stampe them wt Myrre & Saffron and at nyght laye it to ye sore eyes. Also for wounde in the head stampe the leues of Uiolettes with hony and vyneger, and playster it to the wound and it shal bele it. And for them that may nat slepe for syckenes sethe thys herbe in water and at euē let hym soke wel

his fete in the water to the ancles, whan he goeth to bed binde of this herbe to his temples & he shal slepe well bi ye grace of God. Take Uiolettes Myrre and Saffron, & make a playster and laye to the sore eyes that be swollen and it shall cease akynge & bate the swellynge.
            
            
               Uua suauis.
               Thys is called the swete Raysen, it is hote and moyst it hath vertue of clensynge, scourynge or smothynge. Raysens eaten or boyled in wyne is good for ye cold coughe Sethe them in wyne and they be good to playster on the cold postume and good for a colde stomake.
            
            
               Ueruayne.
               Ueruayne it hote and dry in the seconde degre. It is good agaynst al maner of euyls, of venym yf the pacyent drynke it & tempered with wyne and stampe the herbe & lay it

on euery maner of bytyng of venymous beste, and it wyll drawe out the venym and saue the sore, who yt vseth it, it wyll make good breth and do a way stinke of the mouth. Also who that hath ye feuer tercyā take .iii. rotes, and thre croppes of the same herbe and stampe them & temper thē with fayre clene water and gyue it to the pacyent to drīke Also who that hath the feuer quartayne, let him take the same drinke Also it is good for the stomake, the lyuer, & lōges. Also take veruayne Betayne, & Saxfrage & of euerye of them like muche and stampe thē wyth wyne tempered, and thys is good for them that hath the stone. Also they that bere veruayne vpō thē they shall haue loue and grace of greate maysters and they shall graunt him his askynge of his askynge be good and ryghtfull.
            
         
         
            
            Hic incipit littera .W.
            
               Et primo de Watercresses.
               
                  WAter cresses be hote & dri in the seconde degre seth them in water, by them selfe and drynke it or sethe it ī flesshe and sup of the broth, and it wyl clense well the inwarde membres. Also it is good agaynst the Strangulion and the flyxe of the same.
            
            
               Wild neppe or wodbynd.
               ¶This herbe bereth a flower like to the Hop, and after the flower he bereth a grene berye, and it hath a great rote, the vertue of the herbe is moste in the roote, it is good for sinowes that be shronken or cut to make them sople and to haue their owen course in theyr proper kynde Go to ye rotofe wylde Neppe, that is lyke wodbynde and make a hole in the myddes of the rote tha thā couer it well agayne that no ayer go out

nor that no rayne go in nor water, powder nor the sonne come nat to muche to it, let it stāde so a night & a day, thā after that go to it, & thou shalt fynd therin a certayne lycour take out that lycoure with a spone and put it into a clene glas and do so euery daye as longe as thou findest ought in the hole & thys must be done in the moneth of Apryll or Maye, than anoynte the sore therwith agaynst the fyre than wete a lynen cloth in the same lycour and lappe it aboute ye sore and it shalbe hole in shorte space, on warantyse by the grace of God. For the goute a soueraygne medecyne. Take the rote of wylde Neppe, and the rote of ye wylde Docke soden by it selfe and cut thē in thyn peces & pare awaye the vtter 
                     •
                  inde and cut thē in quarters, thā boile thē in clene water .ii. or .iii. houres, than stāpe thē in a morter as small as can be, thē
                  
put therof a quantite of soote of a chymny, and temper them with y• mylke of a cowe, that the herbe is of one coloure, than take the pysse of a man that is fasting and make a playster therof, and boyle it togyther and as hote as ye maye suffer laye it to the greuaunce a day, and a nyght and so do nyne tymes, & it shal heale the on warantyse, by the grace of God.
            
            
               Wormewode.
               ☞This is hote & dry in the secōd degre, it is good for wormes in the wombe if it be stamped, & the ioyce wronge out & myngled with swete milke, and gyuē to the pacyente to dryncke, & sethe this herbe in wyne and make a plaister to the wombe, Make pouder of wormwode, Centory, Bettayne, of eche lyke, muche by wayghte and medle all well togyther, and the pouder wyll slee wormes in the wombe both whan

it is eaten in potage and dronken. Also for the mylte that is swollen of a colde mater, sethe it in wyne & let the sycke dryncke therof, and yt shall heale hym, & make a playster of the substance of the herbe & laye it all hote to thy wombe agaynste the greuance. Also temper wormewode & temper it with vīeger and with rosted sower breade, grounde therwyth, & with the ioyce of Mintes, and the ioyce of Plantayne, of euer ych lyke much, and frye them well togither, than make a plaister & lay it to the mouth of ye stomake and this shall staunche breking or castynge. For wormes in a mānes eares be it serpent, or erewyke, take the ioyce of wormewode & put it in the eare. Also for the dropsy seth it in wyne and gyue the sycke to drynke at morninge and euenynge and it shal helpe hym.
            
         
         
            
            ¶The vertues of Waters stylled.
            
               WAter of Wormwode, for ye stomacke, lyuer & the spleene, for wormes in the bodye, for the Iaundyce, & drūckennes, and for the syght.
            Water of Sentory, for Appetite for the Lyuer & the Milt, wormes, and Sauceflewme.
            Water of Mugwort, for the matryce.
            Water of Dyttayne, for poyson, Uenome and Pestylence.
            Water of Fumitory, for y• Morphew, Lepry, Scabbe, Dropsy, lyuer, Splene, Costyfnes and the Matrcie.
            Water of Ysope, for the Coughe Lunges, brest, the stomake, for the Pose and the guttes.
            
               Water of Horehoūd, for the Cough, lunges, brest and colica passio.
            Water of Bawme, for the Mother, the Matrice lyuer, and splene
            Water of Calamint, Mugwort, Ysope, Brookmynt, Fumytorye, & Bawme of eche a lyke muche, and of Wormwood, a les parte. These are good waters for the Matrice, & for the reteynyng the floures.
            Water of Calamynt, is good for the stomake.
            Water of Plantayne for ye Flixe and hote Dropsye.
            Water of Fenel is good for a sweling, and for sore Eyen.
            Water of Endyue for the dropsi, liuer Iaundice and Stomacke.
            Water of Borage, for the stomake, Colica passio, and other sicknes of the bodye.
            Water of Saugle, is good for ye Palsye.
            Water of Bytayne, is good for

the hearynge and for all maner of syckenes in the body, for ryght as musterd is sauce for most kynd of meates: so is Bytayne to all other herbes.
         
         
            ¶The tyme of gathering Sedes Floures Herbes and Rootes.
            SEdes shoulde be gathered whē they be fully ripe, and the moystnes therof sōthyng dried awaye.
            Floures sholde be taken when they begyn to faule or fade.
            Herbes shold be gathered when they be full of moystnes, before they begyn to shrynke.
            Rootes sholde be gathered whē the leaues faule.
            Frutes sholde be gathered and taken at theyr ful greatnes before they faule, and the heuyer, and the sadder, that the frutes be: the better they are. And those that be greate &

lyght: be not so good. And they be better yt be gathered infaire wether than they be yt be gatherd in foule or Raynye wether.
            Herbes that grow in the Feeldes: be better than those that growe in gardeines
                  •
                And those yt grow on y• hilles be best. And cōmōli feeld herbes be smaller than towne herbes.
            Many herbes there be that haue a speciall time to be gathered in, in whyche tyme, yf they be gathered: they haue theyr vertue in ful strē
               gthe, more than they should haue, yf they were gathered in any other tyme. Some helpe, whēsoeuer they be gathered, & some be nought, yf they be not gathered in theyr due tyme ☞ Bytayne, shal principall
                  •
                be gathered in August, wt the seedes & rotes wt ye Iuce. And it shalbe dried in the shadow, or in the sō
               
               
                  •
               e, for need. For medicen, it may be gathered in any time: but euer yt is

better y• is gathered, wythout moysture, & before the Sonne risinge.
            Swyne grasse, may be gathered when so euer you need.
            Camomil, shalbe gathered in april
            Perytory, should be gathered in Iune, before the Sonne ryse.
            Red Dock, may be gathered whē need is. Lāgdebefe shalbe gathered in Iune and Iuly.
            Peniwort, shalbe gathered in the begynnyng of wynter.
            Germander, shalbe gathered in Lammas Moone.
            Dragāce, shalbe gathered in Iune and Iuly.
            Columbine, shalbe gathered in Lammas moone.
            Adders tōgue, shalbe gathered in April.
            Pedelion, shalbe gathered after ye mid day, when ye lyst.
            Groundsil, shalbe gathered after myd daye.
            
               Walwort shalbe gathered when ye wyll.
            Uiolet shalbe gathered in Marche, and in thys moneth shold Suger Uiolet be made and Sirup, also Oyle of Roses, of Camomyl, of Lillyes, and of Chesboll heades, yt is called Popy. And Rosemary flo
               
                  •
               res, in Maye.
            Centorye when it begynneth to floryshe.
            Organ in the moneth of Iune. Calamint in the moneth of Iune,
            Hartes tounge, in Nouember,
            Aristologia rotunda in heruest, & the other in the same tyme.
            Garlycke when ye wyl, wild Garlycke when it florisheth.
            Agnus Castus, whē it florisheth.
            Gourdes in thend of September or in October, when they be rype, they shold be dried in such aplace yt the Sonne maye come to them all the daye.
            
               Wylde Neppe beryes sholde be gatherd when they be yelowe.
            Cucumers sholde gathered whē the Fruite is rype, & the frute shold be layd vnder Uynes, where as ye sonne hath not his ful strength, vpon it, and in a moyst place that it may rotte, for than sholde ye sede be good and full of Kernelles.
            Citrull sholde be gathered when the frute is ripe and it shold be dried, in a drye place in the sonne.
            Water of Calamynt, shold be gathered when it floureth and dryed in the shadow, and it wilbe good a yere & no longer.
            Saffron, shold be gathered before the Sonne ryse.
            Dodour groweth amōge Flaxe, shold be gathered in sommer when it begynneth to floure, & it may be kept thre yere.
            Drauke sholde be gathered whē it floryshith and sholde be dried in

the shadowe and wyll last a yere.
            Elebor, shold be gathered in heruest tyme.
            Fenyl, sholde be gathered in the begynnyng of Heruest, and a yere it may be kept, and the rotes of fenell, shold de gathered in the beginnyng of the yere, and wyl endure a yere.
            Baldemonye, otherwyse called Gencyane, shoulde be gathered in the last ende of the yere, and maye be kept .iiii. yeres, the Rootes of it is vsed. And for to know it: one is, it is right bitter, for the lesse bitter it is, the wors it is, another is, it is somwhat yelow, and not clean yelow, but sad.
            Galyngall yt is called in Phisycke, Syperus, it maye be gathered in eche tyme of ye yere. The best tyme is in the ende of Uere, it must be laied .iii. dayes in the sonne, that the moysture therof rot it not lytely,

and then kepe it in the shadow.
            Floure Deluce, shold gathered in thend of Uere, and dried in the sonne, and it wyl last .ii. yere.
            Sisalido, is the Roote of Philipendula, and that serueth to medycen, and shalbe taken out of the erth, in the ende of Heruest.
            Auence leaues serueth more to medicens then the Rootes, the vertue of it is best, whiles it is greene, and his vertue is to dissolue, consume and open.
            Take Grapes before they be ripe, and wring the youce out of thē, and than drye theym in the Sō
               ne, and make pouder of them. That pouder is good to be vsed in meates for casttyng y• cōmeth of Colericke humours and for the Flyxe.
         
         
            
            ¶A generall rule of all maner of herbes.
            
               IT is a generall Rule, that from the eyghte: Kalendes of the moneth of Aprell: vnto ye moneth of Iulye, all maner of leaues of herbes be best, and from the .viii. Kalendes of Iuly vnto the .viii. Kalendes of October: the stalkes haue mooste vertue. And from the .viii. Kalendes of October: vnto the .viii. kalendes of Aprell: all maner of Rootes of Herbes be in their ful strēgth.
            Finis.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶Here beginneth the table of thys boke.
            
               AGnus castus
               Apium.
               Auetum.
               Apumeresus.
               Absentium.
               A
                     •
                  tamasa.
               Affodillus.
               Aristologialou.
               Aristolegia rot.
               Abrotinum.
               Ameos.
               Alleluya.
               Asterion.
               Agrimonia.
               Auentia.
               Altea.
               Amarisca.
               Auricula muris
               Apium emo.
               Apium canarus
               Axtiplex do.
               Anabula.
               Acus demonis.
               Argentila.
               Acus mustela.
               Allium.
               Amusm.
            
            
               B.
               ¶Betonia.
               Bl
                     ••
                  om
                     ••
                  te
               Bete.
               Borago.
               Bugla.
               Burneta
               Bursa pastoris.
               Borago sy
                     •
                  ues.
               Byllyre.
            
            
               C.
               ¶Camamilla.
               Calamintum.
               Crassula maior
               Crassula minor
               Citura.
               Centauriama.
               Centaurinmi
               Cura
               Celidonia.
               Culamen.
               Colewortes.
               Coliandrum
               Capillus 
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  e.
               Corcus
                     •
                  
               
               Centonodium
               Caprifolium
               Canabaria.
               Costus.
               Cepe.
               Columbina.
               Cominum.
               Cardiaca.
               Cerasa.
               
                  Camelon.
               Cauda pulli.
               Cabochis,
               Caluus gallica
                     •
                  
               
               Caluus agrestis.
               Cimbaria.
               Consolida maior
               Consolida minor.
               Consolida m
                     •
                  d.
            
            
               D
               Diaptanum.
               Dragantia ma
               Dancus arininus.
               Dens leonis.
               Dens canis.
               Dens creticus.
               Dragantia fe.
            
            
               E
               Elena campana.
               Endua.
               Eruca.
               Enfrasia.
               Ebulos
               Edera.
               Ederaterrestris.
               Euforbium.
               Elleborus albus
               Elleborus niger.
               Epatica.
               Erpina.
               Epulus minor
            
            
               F
               Flaminula.
               Fumus terre.
               Fumicretum.
               Fragra.
               Fabaria magor.
               Fabaria minor.
               Filix.
               Filipendula.
               Finiculum.
               Faxinus.
               Finiculus poet
               Febrifuga.
               Filago.
               Flaminula miū.
            
            
               G
               Gracia die ma.
               Granum.
               Genestula.
               Gencianus
               Galanga.
               Granum solis agitu
                     •
                  
               
               Gladiolus.
            
            
               H
               Herba crutiata.
               Herba Christofory masculi.
               Herba Christofori femi ni
               Herba wal
                     •
                  eri
               Herba Robarti
               Herba Marcia.
               Hastuca regia
               Herba Petri
               Herba Iohannes.
            
            
               I
               Iusquiamus
               Isopus
               Ireos
               Iris.
               Iarus
               
                  Iasia alba
               Iasia nigra
               Ipia maior
               Ipia minor
               Iacenitus rusti.
            
            
               L
               Lanisticum.
               Langua cecui
               Liliium.
               Ligustum
               Lingua bouis
               Lingus serpentes maior.
               Lingua serpentis mi.
               Lingua Canis
               Lingua Hercina
               Lupinus
               Labrum veneris
               Lauendula,
               Lactuca
               Lactuca Siluat
               Lactuca Lepo
               Lollium.
               Laparium rust
               Linum.
               Lauriola.
               Licorisa.
               Lappa.
            
            
               M
               ¶Millefol
                     •
                  um
               Mercurialis.
               Menta.
               Menta romana
               Malua.
               Morel or nyght-shadowe.
               Mastyke.
               Magerum.
               Millefolium maor Yarowe.
               Motherwort or
               Mogwort.
               Maces.
               Meuta rubea.
            
            
               N.
               Nux muscata.
               Napus
            
            
               O
               ¶Olibanum.
            
            
               P
               ¶Pruna.
               Peper.
               Pinpernella.
               Pul
                     •
                  gium
               Peucedanum vel
                     •
                  . Feniculus por
               Peorocilium.
               Peritorium.
               Pastina
                     •
                  a.
               Plantago.
               Porrum.
               Pireteum.
               
                  Papauer
               Polipodium
               Pienium.
            
            
               Q
               Quinque foliū
               
            
            
               R
               ¶Rybworte.
               Reed nettell.
               Rose rube
                     •
                  .
               Rosemary.
               Ruta.
            
            
               S
               ¶Sinapium.
               Smalage.
               Salua.
               Statureia.
               Saxfrage.
               Scabioso.
               Sothernewode.
               Syn grene
               Styche worte
               Scamony,
               Sene.
               Selondine,
               Sauayne.
               Scabiosa.
            
            
               T
               ¶Tapsu barba.
               Towne cresses.
            
            
               U
               ¶Uyolet.
               Uua suauis.
               Ueruayne.
            
            
               W
               ¶Water cresses.
               Wylde neppe.
               Wormewode.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            ¶Imprynted at London in the Fletestrete at the sygne of the Rose Garland by me Wyllyam Copland. for Iohn wyght
            
         
      
   